1
A NEW BEGINNING
I
t wasn’t a very likely place for disappearances, at least at first glance. Mrs. Baird’s was like a thousand other Highland bed-and-breakfast
establishments in 1945; clean and quiet, with fading floral wallpaper, gleaming floors, and a coin-operated hot-water geyser in the lavatory. Mrs.
Baird herself was squat and easygoing, and made no objection to Frank lining her tiny rose-sprigged parlor with the dozens of books and papers
with which he always traveled.
I met Mrs. Baird in the front hall on my way out. She stopped me with a pudgy hand on my arm and patted at my hair.
“Dear me, Mrs. Randall, ye canna go out like that! Here, just let me tuck that bit in for ye. There! That’s better. Ye know, my cousin was tellin’ me
about a new perm she tried, comes out beautiful and holds like a dream; perhaps ye should try that kind next time.”
I hadn’t the heart to tell her that the waywardness of my light brown curls was strictly the fault of nature, and not due to any dereliction on the part of
the permanent-wave manufacturers. Her own tightly marceled waves suffered from no such perversity.
“Yes, I’ll do that, Mrs. Baird,” I lied. “I’m just going down to the village to meet Frank. We’ll be back for tea.” I ducked out the door and down the
path before she could detect any further defects in my undisciplined appearance. After four years as a Royal Army nurse, I was enjoying the escape
from uniforms and rationing by indulging in brightly printed light cotton dresses, totally unsuited for rough walking through the heather.
Not that I had originally planned to do a lot of that; my thoughts ran more on the lines of sleeping late in the mornings, and long, lazy afternoons in
bed with Frank, not sleeping. However, it was difficult to maintain the proper mood of languorous romance with Mrs. Baird industriously Hoovering
away outside our door.
“That must be the dirtiest bit of carpet in the entire Scottish Highlands,” Frank had observed that morning as we lay in bed listening to the
ferocious roar of the vacuum in the hallway.
“Nearly as dirty as our landlady’s mind,” I agreed. “Perhaps we should have gone to Brighton after all.” We had chosen the Highlands as a place
to holiday before Frank took up his appointment as a history professor at Oxford, on the grounds that Scotland had been somewhat less touched by
the physical horrors of war than the rest of Britain, and was less susceptible to the frenetic postwar gaiety that infected more popular vacation
spots.
And without discussing it, I think we both felt that it was a symbolic place to reestablish our marriage; we had been married and spent a two-day
honeymoon in the Highlands, shortly before the outbreak of war seven years before. A peaceful refuge in which to rediscover each other, we
thought, not realizing that, while golf and fishing are Scotland’s most popular outdoor sports, gossip is the most popular indoor sport. And when it
rains as much as it does in Scotland, people spend a lot of time indoors.
“Where are you going?” I asked, as Frank swung his feet out of bed.
“I’d hate the dear old thing to be disappointed in us,” he answered. Sitting up on the side of the ancient bed, he bounced gently up and down,
creating a piercing rhythmic squeak. The Hoovering in the hall stopped abruptly. After a minute or two of bouncing, he gave a loud, theatrical groan
and collapsed backward with a twang of protesting springs. I giggled helplessly into a pillow, so as not to disturb the breathless silence outside.
Frank waggled his eyebrows at me. “You’re supposed to moan ecstatically, not giggle,” he admonished in a whisper. “She’ll think I’m not a good
lover.”
“You’ll have to keep it up for longer than that, if you expect ecstatic moans,” I answered. “Two minutes doesn’t deserve any more than a giggle.”
“Inconsiderate little wench. I came here for a rest, remember?”
“Lazybones. You’ll never manage the next branch on your family tree unless you show a bit more industry than that.”
Frank’s passion for genealogy was yet another reason for choosing the Highlands. According to one of the filthy scraps of paper he lugged to
and fro, some tiresome ancestor of his had had something to do with something or other in this region back in the middle of the eighteenth—or was
it seventeenth?—century.
“If I end as a childless stub on my family tree, it will undoubtedly be the fault of our untiring hostess out there. After all, we’ve been married almost
eight years. Little Frank Jr. will be quite legitimate without being conceived in the presence of a witness.”
“If he’s conceived at all,” I said pessimistically. We had been disappointed yet again the week before leaving for our Highland retreat.
“With all this bracing fresh air and healthy diet? How could we help but manage here?” Dinner the night before had been herring, fried. Lunch had
been herring, pickled. And the pungent scent now wafting up the stairwell strongly intimated that breakfast was to be herring, kippered.AN INTERVIEW WITH DIANA GABALDON
Q: Where did you get the idea for a time travel novel?
A: I had meant 
Outlander
 to be a straight historical novel, but when I introduced Claire Beauchamp
Randall (around the third day of writing—it was the scene where she meets Dougal and the others
in the cottage), she wouldn’t cooperate. Dougal asked her who she was, and without my stopping to
think who she 
should
 be, she drew herself up, stared belligerently at him, and said “Claire Elizabeth
Beauchamp. And who the hell are you?” She promptly took over the story and began telling it
herself, making smart-ass modern remarks about everything.
    At this point I shrugged and said, “Fine. Nobody’s ever going to see this book, so it doesn’t matter
what
 bizarre thing I do—go ahead and 
be
 modern, and I’ll figure out how you got there later.” So the
time travel was entirely Claire’s fault.
Q: Why did you choose Scotland during the Jacobite period as the setting for your books?
A: Well, like almost everything else about these books, it was an accident. I was looking for a time in
which to set a historical novel, because I thought that would be the easiest kind of book to write for
practice. While pondering, I happened to see a rerun of an ancient 
Doctor Who
 episode on PBS—
one in which the Doctor had a young Scottish sidekick, picked up in 1745. The sidekick was a cute
little guy, about seventeen, named Jamie MacCrimmon, and he looked rather nice in his kilt.
    I was sitting in church the next day thinking about it, and thought, Well, you’ve got to start
somewhere, and it doesn’t really matter where, since no one’s ever going to see this—so why not?
Scotland, eighteenth century. And that is where I started—no outline, no characters, no plot—just a
place and time.
Q: Have you ever been to Scotland?
A: I had never been there when I wrote 
Outlander
, and did that book entirely from library research
(since at the time, I thought the book was purely for practice, I hardly thought I could tell my
husband I had to go to Scotland to do research). I did take part of the advance money from the
sale of 
Outlander
 and go to Scotland for two weeks, though, while working on 
Dragonfly
. It was
(luckily!) just as I’d been imagining it. I’ve been back several times since, for book tours and the
like, and would go back like a shot, at the slightest opportunity.
Q: Why is 
Outlander
 written in the first person point of view?
A: My initial impulse is to say, “Why on earth shouldn’t it be?” However, I do get this question quite
often at writers conferences, so I’ll try to go into a bit more detail.
    I like to experiment and try new and interesting things in terms of structure and literary technique
(not that writing in the first person is what you’d call madly adventurous). However, the answer is
simply that a first person narrative was the easiest and most comfortable for me to use at the time,
and since I was writing the book for practice, I saw no reason to make things complicated.
    Now that I know more about writing, there are other good reasons to have done it, but that’s why I
did it at the time; it felt natural to me. I think I may have felt most comfortable with this (aside from