P A R T  O N EThrough a
Looking Glass,
Darkly
Inverness, 19681  M U S T E R I N G  T H E  R O L L
R oger W akefield stood in the cen ter of the room, feeling
surrounded. He thought the feeling lar gely justified, insofar as
he was  s urrounded: by tables covered  with bric-a-brac and
mementos, by heavy V ictorian-style furniture, replete with
antimacassars, plush and afghan s, by tiny braided rugs that lay
on the polished wood, craftily a waiting an opportunity to skid
beneath an unsuspecting foot. Surrounded by twelve rooms of
furniture and clothing and papers. And the books – my God,
the books!
The stu dy where he stood wa s lined on three sides by
bookshelves, every one cra mmed past bursting point.
Paperback mystery novels lay in bright, tatty piles in front of
calf-bound tom es, jammed cheek by jowl with book-club
selections, ancie nt volumes pilfered from extinct libraries, and
thousands upon thousands of pamphlets, leaflets, and hand-
sewn manuscripts.
A simil ar situation prevailed in the rest of the house.
Books and papers cluttered every horizontal surface, and every
closet groaned and squeaked at the seams. His late adoptive
father had lived a long, full li fe, a good ten years past his
biblically allotted threescore and ten. And in eighty-odd years,
the Reverend Mr . Reginald W akefield had never thrown
anything away .
Roger repressed  the ur ge to run out of the front door , leap
into his Morris Minor , and head  back to Oxford, abandoning
the manse and its contents to  the mercy of weather and
vandals. Be calm, he told himself, inhaling deeply . Y ou can
deal wit h this. The books are the easy part; nothing more than
a ma tter of sorti ng through them and then calling someone to
come and haul them away . Granted, they’ll need a lorry the
size of a railcar , but it can be done. Clothes – no problem.
Oxfam gets the lot.
He d idn’ t know what Oxfam was going to do with a lot of
vested b lack ser ge suits, circa 1948, but perhaps the deservingpoor we ren’ t all that picky . He began to breathe a little easier .
He h ad taken a month’ s leave from the History department at
Oxford in order to clear up the R everend’ s af fairs. Perhaps that
would be enough, after all. In h is more depressed moments, it
had seemed as though the task might take years.
He mov ed towa rd one of the tables and picked up a small
china dish. It was filled with small metal rectangles; lead
“gaberlunzies,” badges issued to eighteenth-century beggars
by parishes as a sort of license. A collection of stoneware
bottles s tood by the lamp, a ramshorn snuf f mull, banded in
silver , next to them. Give the m to a museum? he thought
dubiously . The house was filled with Jacobite artifacts; the
Reverend had been an amateur historian, the eighteenth
century his favorite hunting ground.
His fingers reached involuntarily to caress the surface of
the s nuf f mull, t racing the black lines of the inscriptions – the
names and dates of the Deacons and T reasurers of the
Incorporation of T ailors of the Canongate, from Edinbur gh,
1726. Pe rhaps he should keep a few of the Reverend’ s choicer
acquisitions… but then he drew back, shaking his head
decidedly . “Noth ing doing, cock,” he said aloud, “this way lies
madness.” Or at least the incipient life of a pack rat. Get
started s aving things, and he’d end up keeping the lot, living in
this monstrosity of a house, surrounded by generations of
rubbish. “T alking to yourself, too,” he muttered.
The thought of generations of ru bbish reminded him of the
garage, and he sagged a bit at the knees. The Reverend, who
was in fact Roge r ’ s great-uncle,  had adopted him at the age of
five when his p arents had been killed in W orld W ar II; his
mother i n the Blitz, his father o ut over the dark waters of the
Channel. W ith his usual preser vative instincts, the Reverend
had kep t all of Roger ’ s parents ’ ef fects, sealed in crates and
cartons in the back of the garage. Roger knew for a fact that no
one had opened one of those crates in the past twenty years.
Roger uttered an Old T estament groan at the thought of
pawing through his parents’ memorabilia. “Oh, God,” he said
aloud. “Anything but that!”The remark had not been intend ed precisely as prayer , but
the doorbell pealed as though in answer , making Roger bite his
tongue in startlement.
The door of the  manse had a tendency to stick in damp
weather , which meant that it was stuck most of the time. Roger
freed it with a  rending screech, to find a woman on the
doorstep.
“Can I help you?”
She was  middle height and very  pretty . He had an overall
impression of fine bones and wh ite linen, topped with a wealth
of curly brown hair in a sort of half-tamed chignon. And in the
middle of it all, the most extraordinary pair of light eyes, just
the color of well-aged sherry .
The eyes swept up from his size-eleven plimsolls to the
face a foot above her . The sidelong smile grew wider . “I hate
to start right of f with a cliché,” she said, “but my , how you
have grown, young Roger!”
Roger felt himself flushing. T he woman laughed and
extended a hand. “Y ou ar e  Roger , aren’ t you? My name’ s
Claire Randall; I was an old fr iend of the Reverend’ s. But I
haven’ t seen you since you were five years old.”
“Er , you said you wer e  a fr iend of my father ’ s? Then, you
know already…”
The smile vanished, replaced by a look of regret.
“Y es, I was awfully sorry to hear about it. Heart, was it?”
“Um, yes. V ery sudden. I’ve only just come up from
Oxford to start dealing with… everything.” He waved vaguely ,
encompassing the Reverend’ s death, the house behind him,
and all its contents.
“From what I recall of your father ’ s library , that little chore
ought to last you ’ til next Christmas,” Claire observed.
“In that case, ma ybe we shouldn’ t be disturbing you,” said
a soft American voice.
“Oh, I for got,” s aid Claire, half-turning to the girl who had
stood out of sigh t in the corner of the porch. “Roger W akefield– my daughter , Brianna.”
Brianna Randall  stepped forward, a shy smile on her face.
Roger st ared for  a moment, then  remembered his manners. He
stepped back and swung the door open wide, momentarily
wondering just when he had last changed his shirt.
“Not at all, not a t all!” he said heartily . “I was just wanting
a break. W on’ t you come in?”
He wav ed the two women down the hall toward the
Reverend’ s study , noting that as well as being moderately
attractive, the daughter was one  of the tallest girls he’d ever
seen close-to. She had to be easily six feet, he thought, seeing
her head even w ith the top of the hall stand as she passed. He
unconsciously straightened himself as he followed, drawing up
to his full six f eet three. At th e last moment, he ducked, to
avoid banging his head on the s tudy lintel as he followed the
women into the room.
 
“I’d meant to come before,” said Claire, settling herself
deeper in the huge wing ch air . The fourth wall of the
Reverend’ s stud y was equipped with floor -to-ceiling windows,
and the sunlight winked of f the pearl clip in her light-brown
hair . The curls were beginning to escape from their
confinement, an d she tucked one absently behind an ear as she
talked.
“I’d arra nged to  come last year , in fact, and then there was
an emer gency at the hospital in Boston – I’m a doctor ,” she
explained, mouth curling a little at the look of surprise Roger
hadn’ t quite managed to conceal. “But I’m sorry that we
didn’ t; I would have liked so much to see your father again.”
Roger rather wondered why they had come now , knowing
the R everend was dead, but it se emed impolite to ask. Instead,
he asked, “Enjoying a bit of sightseeing, are you?”
“Y es, we drove up from London,” Claire answered. She
smiled at her da ughter . “I wanted Bree to see the country; you
wouldn’ t think it to hear her talk, but she’ s as English as I am,
though she’ s never lived here.”“Really?” Roger glanced at Brianna. She didn’ t really look
English, he thought; aside from the height, she had thick red
hair , worn loose over her shoulders, and strong, sharp-angled
bones in  her face, with the nos e long and straight – maybe a
touch too long.
“I was born in America,” Brianna explained, “but both
Mother and Daddy are – were – English.”
“W ere?”
“My husband died two years ago,” Claire explained. “Y ou
knew him, I think – Frank Randall.”
“ Frank  Randall! Of course!” Roger s macked himself on
the f orehead, and felt his cheeks  grow hot at Brianna’ s giggle.
“Y ou’re going to think me a co mplete fool, but I’ve only just
realized who you are.”
The name explained a lot; Fr ank Randall had been an
eminent historia n, and a good friend of the Reverend’ s; they
had exchanged bits of Jacobite a rcana for years, though it was
at least ten yea rs since Frank Randall had last visited the
manse.
“So – you’ll be visiting the historical sites near Inverness?”
Roger hazarded. “Have you been to Culloden yet?”
“Not yet,” Brianna answered. “W e thought we’d go later
this week.” Her answering smile was polite, but nothing more.
“W e’re b ooked for a trip down Loch Ness this afternoon,”
Claire explained. “And perhaps we’ll drive down to Fort
W illiam tomorrow , or just poke about in Inverness; the place
has grown a lot since I was last here.”
“When was that?” Roger wondered whether he ought to
volunteer his services as tour guide. He really shouldn’ t take
the time, but t he Randalls had been good friends of the
Reverend’ s. Bes ides, a car trip to Fort W illiam in company
with two attractive women seemed a much more appealing
prospect than cleaning out the g arage, which was next on his
list.
“Oh, mo re than twenty years ag o. It’ s been a long time.”
There was an odd note in Claire’ s voice that made Rogerglance at her , but she met his eyes with a smile.
“W ell,” he ventured, “if there’ s anything I can do for you,
while you’re in the Highlands…”
Claire was still smiling, but something in her face changed.
He coul d almost think she had  been waiting for an opening.
She glanced at Brianna, then back to Roger .
“Since you mention it,” she said, her smile broadening.
“Oh, Mother!” Brianna said, sit ting up in her chair . “Y ou
don’ t want to b other Mr . W akefield! Look at all he’ s got to
do!” She waved a hand at the crowded study , with its
overflowing cartons and endless stacks of books.
“Oh, no bother at all!” Roger protested. “Er… what is it?”
Claire shot her daughter a quelling look. “I wasn’ t
planning to knock him on the head and drag him of f,” she said
tartly . “But he m ight well know someone who could help. It’ s
a small historic al project,” she explained to Roger . “I need
someone who’ s fairly well versed in the eighteenth-century
Jacobites – Bonnie Prince Charlie and all that lot.”
Roger leaned forward, interested. “Jacobites?” he said.
“That pe riod’ s not one of my specialties, but I do know a bit –
hard not to, livin g so close to Culloden. That’ s where the final
battle was, you know ,” he expl ained to Brianna. “Where the
Bonnie Prince’ s lot ran up aga inst the Duke of Cumberland
and got slaughtered for their pains.”
“Right,” said Claire. “And that, in fact, has to do with what
I wa nt to  find out.” She reached into her handbag and drew out
a folded paper .
Roger o pened it and scanned the  contents quickly . It was a
list of names – maybe thirty , al l men. At the top of the sheet
was a heading: “JACOBITE RISING, 1745 – CULLODEN”
“Oh, the ’45?” Roger said. “These men fought at Culloden,
did they?”
“They d id,” Claire replied. “What I want to find out is –
how many of the men on this list survived that battle?”Roger r ubbed his chin as he perused the list. “That’ s a
simple question ,” he said, “but the answer might be hard to
find. So many of the Highland clansmen who followed Prince
Charles were killed on Culloden  Field that they weren’ t buried
individually . Th ey were put into mass graves, with no more
than a single stone bearing the clan name as a marker .”
“I know ,” Claire said. “Brianna hasn’ t been there, but I
have – a long time ago.” He thought he saw a fleeting shadow
in her eyes, thou gh it was quick ly hidden as she reached into
her hand bag. N o wonder if the re was, he thought. Culloden
Field wa s an af fecting place; it brought tears to his own eyes,
to look out over that expanse of moorland and remember the
gallantry and courage of the Scottish Highlanders who lay
slaughtered beneath the grass.
She unfolded several more typed sheets and handed them
to hi m. A  long white finger ran down the mar gin of one sheet.
Beautiful hands, Roger noted; delicately molded, carefully
kept, with a single ring on each hand. The silver one on her
right hand was especially striking; a wide Jacobean band in the
Highland interlace pattern, embellished with thistle blossoms.
“These a re the names of the wives, so far as I know them. I
thought that might help, since if the husbands were killed at
Culloden, you’ d likely find these women remarrying or
emigrating afterward. Those records would surely be in the
parish re gister? They’re all from the same parish; the church
was in Broch Mordha – it’ s a good bit south of here.”
“That’ s a very helpful idea,” Roger said, mildly surprised.
“It’ s the sort of thing an historian would think of.”
“I’m hardly an historian,” Claire Randall said dryly . “On
the other hand, when you live with one, you do pick up the
occasional odd thought.”
“Of cou rse.” A thought struck R oger , and he rose from his
chair . “I’m being a terrible host; please, let me get you a drink,
and then  you can tell me a bit more about this. Perhaps I could
help you with it myself.”
Despite the disorder , he knew where the decanters were
kept, an d quick ly had his guest s supplied with whisky . He’dput q uite a lot of soda in Briann a’ s, but noticed that she sipped
at it as though her glass contai ned ant spray , rather than the
best Gle nfiddich single malt. Claire, who took her whisky neat
by request, seemed to enjoy it much more.
“W ell.” Roger resumed his seat and picked up the paper
again. “It’ s an interesting problem, in terms of historical
research. Y ou said these men c ame from the same parish? I
suppose they came from a singl e clan or sept – I see a number
of them were named Fraser .”
Claire n odded, hands folded in her lap. “They came from
the same  estate; a small Highlan d farm called Broch T uarach –
it was known lo cally as Lallybroch. They were part of clan
Fraser , though they never gave a formal allegiance to Lord
Lovat as chief. These men joined the Rising early; they fought
in th e Battle of Prestonpans – while Lovat’ s men didn’ t come
until just before Culloden.”
“Really? That’ s interesting.” Under normal eighteenth-
century conditio ns, such small te nant-farmers would have died
where t hey lived, and be file d tidily away in the village
churchyard, nea tly docketed in the parish register . However ,
Bonnie Prince Charlie’ s attempt to regain the throne of
Scotland in 1745 had disrupted the normal course of things in
no uncertain terms.
In the famine after the disaster of Culloden, many
Highlanders had emigrated to the New W orld; others had
drifted f rom the glens and moors toward the cities, in search of
food and employment. A few sta yed on, stubbornly clinging to
their land and traditions.
“It would make a fascinating article,” Roger said, thinking
aloud. “Follow the fate of a nu mber of individuals, see what
happened to them all. Less inter esting if they all wer e  killed at
Culloden, but chances were that  a few made it out.” He would
be inclin ed to take on the project as a welcome break even
were it not Claire Randall who asked.
“Y es, I think I c an help you w ith this,” he said, and was
gratified at the warm smile she bestowed on him.
“W ould you really? That’ s wonderful!” she said.“My ple asure,” Roger said. He f olded the paper and laid it
on the table. “I’ ll start in on it directly . But tell me, how did
you enjoy your drive up from London?”
The conversatio n became general as the Randalls regaled
him with  tales of their transatlan tic journey , and the drive from
London. Roger ’ s attention drifted slightly , as he began to plan
the resea rch for this project. He felt mildly guilty about taking
it on; he really shouldn’ t take t he time. On the other hand, it
was an interestin g question. And it was possible that he could
combine the project with some of the necessary clearing-up of
the Reverend’ s material; he kn ew for a fact that there were
forty-eight carto ns in the gara ge, all labeled JACOBITES,
MISCELLANEOUS. The thought of it was enough to make
him feel faint.
W ith a wrench, he tore his mind  away from the garage, to
find tha t the conversation had made an abrupt change of
subject.
“Druids?” Roger felt dazed. He peered suspiciously into
his glass, checking to see that he really had added soda.
“Y ou hadn’ t heard about them?” Claire looked slightly
disappointed. “Y our father – th e Reverend – he knew about
them, though only unof ficially . Perhaps he didn’ t think it
worth telling you; he thought it something of a joke.”
Roger scratched his head, ruf fling the thick black hair .
“No, I really don’ t recall. But you’re right, he may not have
thought it anything serious.”
“W ell, I don’ t know that it is.” She crossed her legs at the
knee. A streak of sunlight gle amed down the shin of her
stockings, emphasizing the delicacy of the long bone beneath.
“When I was he re last with Frank – God, that was twenty-
three ye ars ago!  – the Reverend told him that there was a local
group of – well, modern Druids, I suppose you’d call them.
I’ve no idea ho w authentic they might be; most likely not
very .” Brianna was leaning forward now , interested, the glass
of whisky for gotten between her hands.“The Reverend couldn’ t take of ficial notice of them –
paganism and all that, you know  – but his housekeeper , Mrs.
Graham, was involved with the group, so he got wind of their
doings f rom time to time, and he tipped Frank that there would
be a ceremony of some kind o n the dawn of Beltane – May
Day , that is.”
Roger n odded, trying to adjust to the idea of elderly Mrs.
Graham, that extremely proper person, engaging in pagan rites
and dancing round stone circle s in the dawn. All he could
remember of Druid ceremonies himself was that some of them
involved burning sacrificial vic tims in wicker cages, which
seemed still more unlikely behavior for a Scottish Presbyterian
lady of advanced years.
“There’ s a circle of standing sto nes on top of a hill, fairly
nearby . So we w ent up there be fore dawn to, well, to spy on
them,” she continued, shrugging apologetically . “Y ou know
what scholars are like; no conscience at all when it comes to
their own field, let alone a sense of social delicacy .” Roger
winced slightly at this, but nodded in wry agreement.
“And there they were,” she said. “Mrs. Graham included,
all wearing bedsheets, chanting things and dancing in the
midst of  the stone circle. Frank was fascinated,” she added,
with a smile. “And it was  impressive, even to me.”
She paused for a moment, eyeing Roger rather
speculatively .
“I’d heard that M rs. Graham had passed away a few years
ago. But I wonder… do you know if she had any family? I
believe membership in such groups is often hereditary; maybe
there’ s a daughter or granddaughter who could tell me a bit.”
“W ell,” Roger said slowly . “There is a granddaughter –
Fiona’ s her name, Fiona Graham. In fact, she came to help out
here at the manse after her gra ndmother died; the Reverend
was really too elderly to be left all on his own.”
If anything could displace his vision of Mrs. Graham
dancing in a bed sheet, it was th e thought of nineteen-year -old
Fiona as  a guardian of ancient mystic knowledge, but Roger
rallied gamely and went on.“She isn ’ t here just now , I’m afraid. I could ask her for
you, though.”
Claire waved a slender hand in dismissal. “Don’ t trouble
yourself. Another time will do. W e’ve taken up too much of
your time already .”
T o R oger ’ s dismay , she set dow n her empty glass on the
small table between the chairs a nd Brianna added her own full
one with  what looked like alacrity . He noticed that Brianna
Randall bit her nails. This small evidence of imperfection gave
him the nerve to take the next step. She intrigued him, and he
didn’ t want her to go, with no assurance that he would see her
again.
“Speaking of stone circles,” he said quickly . “I believe I
know th e one you mentioned. It’ s quite scenic, and not too far
from town.” He smiled directly at Brianna Randall, registering
automatically th e fact that she had three small freckles high on
one cheekbone.  “I thought per haps I’d start on this project
with a trip down  to Broch T uarach. It’ s in the same direction
as the stone circle, so maybe… aaagh!”
W ith a sudden jerk of her bulky handbag, Claire Randall
had bumped both whisky glasses of f the table, showering
Roger ’ s lap and thighs with sing le malt whisky and quite a lot
of soda.
“I’m terribly sorry ,” she apologized, obviously flustered.
She bent and began picking u p pieces of shattered crystal,
despite Roger ’ s half-coherent attempts to stop her .
Brianna, coming to assist with a handful of linen napkins
seized from the sideboard, was saying “Really , Mother , how
they eve r let you do sur gery , I don’ t know . Y ou’re just not safe
with anything smaller than a br ead-box. Look, you’ve got his
shoes so aked with whisky!” She knelt on the floor , and began
busily mopping up spilled Scotch and fragments of crystal.
“And his pants, too.”
Whipping a fresh napkin from t he stack over her arm, she
industriously polished Roger ’ s toes, her red mane floating
deliriously arou nd his knees. Her head was rising, as she
peered at his thighs, dabbing ener getically at damp spots onthe c orduroy . Roger closed his eyes and thought frantically of
terrible car crashes on the motorway and tax forms for the
Inland Revenue  and the Blob from Outer Space – anything
that might stop him disgracing himself utterly as Brianna
Randall’ s warm breath misted s oftly through the wet fabric of
his trousers.
“Er , maybe you’d like to do the  rest yourself?” The voice
came from somewhere around the level of his nose, and he
opened his eyes to find a pair of deep blue eyes facing him
above a wide grin. He rather weakly took the napkin she was
of fering him, breathing as thoug h he had just been chased by a
train.
Lowering his head to scrub at his trousers, he caught sight
of C laire Randall watching him with an expression of mingled
sympathy and amusement. There was nothing else visible in
her expression; nothing of that flash he thought he’d seen in
her eyes just before the catastrophe. Flustered as he was, it was
probably his imagination, he thought. For why on earth should
she have done it on purpose?
 
“Since when ar e you inter es ted in Druids, Mama?”
Brianna seemed disposed to find something hilarious in the
idea; I had noticed her biting the insides of her cheeks while I
was chatting with Roger W akefi eld, and the grin she had been
hiding th en was now plaster ed a cr oss her face. “Y ou going to
get your own bedsheet and join up?”
“Bound to be mor e entertai ning than hospital staff
meetings every Thursday ,” I said. “Bit drafty , though.” She
hooted w ith laughter , startling two chickadees off the walk in
fr ont of us.
“No,” I said, sw itching to seriousness. “It isn’ t the Druid
ladies I’ m after , so much. Ther e’ s someone I used to know in
Scotland that I wanted to find, if I can. I haven’ t an addr ess for
her – I haven’ t been in touch with her for mor e than twenty
years – but sh e had an inter est in odd things like that:
witchcraft, old beliefs, folklor e. All that sort of thing. She oncelived near her e; I thought if she was still her e, she might be
involved with a gr oup like that.”
“What’ s her name?”
I sho ok my head, grabbing at the loosened clip as it slid
fr om my curls. I t slipped thr ough my fingers and bounced into
the deep grass along the walk.
“Damn!” I said, stooping for it. My fingers wer e unsteady
as I gr oped thr o ugh the dense st alks, and I had tr ouble picking
up t he clip, slip pery with moistur e fr om the wet grass. The
thought of Geillis Duncan tended to unnerve me, even now .
“I don’ t  know ,” I said, brushi ng the curls back off my
flushed face. “I mean – it’ s been such a long time, I’m sur e
she’d ha ve a differ ent name by  now . She was widowed; she
might have married again, or be using her maiden name.”
“Oh.” Brianna lost inter est in th e topic, and walked along
in si lence for a little. Suddenly she said, “What did you think
of Roger W akefield, Mama?”
I glanced at her; her cheeks wer e pink, but it might be fr om
the spring wind.
“He seems a very nice young man,” I said car efully . “He’ s
certainly intelligent; he’ s one of the youngest pr ofessors at
Oxfor d.” The intelligence I had known about; I wonder ed
whether he had any imagination. So often scholarly types
didn’ t. But imagination would be helpful.
“He’ s got the gr ooviest eyes,” Brianna said, dr eamily
ignoring the question of his brain. “Ar en’ t they the gr eenest
you’ve ever seen?”
“Y es, they’r e very striking,” I agr eed. “They’ve always
been like that; I  r emember noticing them when I first met him
as a child.”
Brianna looked down at me, fr owning.
“Y es, M other , r eally! Did you ha ve to say ‘My , how you’ve
gr own?’ when he answer ed the door? How embarrassing!”
I laughed.“W ell, w hen you’ve last seen someone hovering r ound
your na vel, and suddenly you find yourself looking up his
nose,” I defended myself, “you can’ t help r emarking the
differ ence.”
“Mother!” But she fizzed with laughter .
“He has a very nice bottom, too,” I r emarked, just to keep
her going. “I noticed when he bent over to get the whisky .”
“Mo-THERRR! They’ll hear you!”
W e wer e  nearly at the bus stop. Ther e wer e two or thr ee
women and an elderly gentleman in tweeds standing by the
sign; they turned to star e at us as we came up.
“Is this the place for the Loch-side T ours bus?” I asked,
scanning the bewildering array  of notices and advertisements
posted on the signboar d.
“Och, aye,” one of the ladies said kindly . “The bus will be
comin’ a long in ten minutes or so.” She scanned Brianna, so
clearly American in blue jeans and white windbr eaker . The
final patriotic note was added by the flushed face, r ed with
suppr essed laug hter . “Y ou’ll be going to see Loch Ness? Y our
first time, is it?”
I smiled at her . “I sailed down the loch with my husband
twenty-odd years ago, but this is my daughter ’ s first trip to
Scotland.”
“Oh, is it?” Thi s attracted the attention of the other ladies
and they cr owded ar ound, sudd enly friendly , offering advice
and asking questions until the big yellow bus came chugging
r ound the corner .
Brianna paused  befor e climbing the steps, admiring the
pictur esque dra wing of gr een serpentine loops, undulating
thr ough a blue-paint lake, edged with black pines.
“This will be fun ,” she said, laughing. “Think we’ll see the
monster?”
“Y ou never know ,” I said.
 Roger spent the rest of the day  in a state of abstraction,
wandering absen tly from one task to another . The books to be
packed for donation to the Society for the Preservation of
Antiquities lay spilling out of their carton, the Reverend’ s
ancient flatbed lorry sat in the drive with its bonnet up,
halfway through a motor check, and a cup of tea sat half-drunk
and milk -scummed at his elbow as he gazed blankly out at the
falling rain of early evening.
What h e should do, he knew , was get at the job of
dismantling the heart of the Reverend’ s study . Not the books;
massive as that job was, it was only a matter of deciding which
to keep himself,  and which shou ld be dispatched to the SP A or
the Reverend’ s old college lib rary . No, sooner or later he
would have to tackle the enorm ous desk, which had papers
filling each huge drawer to the  brim and protruding from its
dozens of pigeonholes. And h e’d have to take down and
dispose of all of  the miscellany decorating the cork wall that
filled one side of the room; a task to daunt the stoutest heart.
Aside from a general disinclination to start the tedious job,
Roger was hampered by something else. He didn’ t want  to be
doing these things, necessary as they were; he wanted to be
working on Claire Randall’ s project, tracking down the
clansmen of Culloden.
It w as an interesting enough p roject in its way , though
probably a minor research job. But that wasn’ t it. No, he
thought, if he w ere being honest with himself, he wanted to
tackle C laire Randall’ s project because he wanted to go round
to M rs. Thomas’ s guesthouse and lay his results at the feet of
Brianna Randall , as knights wer e supposed to have done with
the head s of dragons. Even if he didn’ t get results on that
scale, he  ur gentl y wanted some excuse to see her and talk with
her again.
It was a Bronzino painting she reminded him of, he
decided. She and her mother bo th gave that odd impression of
having been outlined somehow , drawn with such vivid strokes
and deli cate det ail that they sto od out from their background
as thoug h they’d been engraved on it. But Brianna had that
brilliant coloring, and that air of absolute physical presencethat made Bronzino’ s sitters seem to follow you with their
eyes, to be about to speak from their frames. He’d never seen a
Bronzino painti ng making faces at a glass of whisky , but if
there had been one, he was sure it would have looked precisely
like Brianna Randall.
“W ell, b loody hell,” he said aloud. “It won’ t take a lot of
time just to look over the records at Culloden House
tomorrow , will it? Y ou,” he sai d, addressing the desk and its
multiple burden s, “can wait for a day . So can you,” he said to
the wall , and defiantly plucked a  mystery novel from the shelf.
He glanced around belligerently , as though daring any of the
furnishings to object, but there w as no sound but the whirring
of th e el ectric fi re. He switched it of f and, book under his arm,
left the study , flicking of f the light.
A minu te later , he came back,  crossing the room in the
dark, and retrieved the list of names from the table.
“W ell, bloody hell anyway!” he said, and tucked it into the
pocket o f his shirt. “Don’ t want to for get the damn thing in the
morning.” He patted the pocket,  feeling the soft crackle of the
paper just over his heart, and went up to bed.
 
W e h ad come b ack fr om Loch Ness blown with wind and
chilled w ith rain , to the warm comfort of a hot supper and an
open fir e in the parlor . Brianna  had begun to yawn over the
scrambled eggs, and soon excused herself to go and take a hot
bath. I stayed do wnstairs for a b it, chatting with Mrs. Thomas,
the land lady , and it was nearly ten o’clock befor e I made my
way up to my own bath and nightgown.
Brianna was an early riser and  an early sleeper; her soft
br eathing gr eeted me as I pushe d open the bedr oom door . An
early sleeper , she was also a sound one; I moved car efully
ar ound the r oom, hanging up my clothes and tidying things
away , but ther e was little dang er of waking her . The house
gr ew quiet as I went about my work, so that the rustle of my
own movements seemed loud in my ears.
I h ad br ought se veral of Frank’ s books with me, intending
to donat e them to the Inverness Library . They wer e laid neatlyin the bottom o f my suitcase, forming a foundation for the
mor e sq uashable items above. I took them out one by one,
laying them on the bed. Five h ar dbound volumes, glossy in
bright dust covers. Nice, substantial things; five or six hundr ed
pages each, not counting index and illustrations.
My late husband’ s Collected W orks, in the Fully Annotated
editions. Inches of admiring r eviews cover ed the jacket flaps,
comments fr om every r ecognized expert in the historical field.
Not bad for a Life’ s W ork, I thou ght. An accomplishment to be
pr oud of. Compact, weighty , authoritative.
I sta cked the bo oks neatly on th e table next to my bag, so
as not to for get them in the morning. The titles on the spines
wer e differ ent, of course, but I stacked them so that the
uniform “Frank  W . Randall” ’ s at the ends lined up, one above
the other . They glowed jewel-bright in the small pool of light
fr om the bedside lamp.
The bed -and-br eakfast was quiet; it was early in the year
for g uests, and t hose ther e wer e had long since gone to sleep.
In the other twi n bed, Brianna made a small whuffling noise
and r olled over in her sleep, le aving long strands of r ed hair
draped acr oss her dr eaming face. One long, bar e foot
pr otruded fr om the bedclothes, and I pulled the blanket gently
over it.
The impulse to touch a sleepi ng child never fades, no
matter that the child is a good deal lar ger than her mother ,
and a woman – if a young one – in her own right. I smoothed
the h air back fr o m her face and str oked the cr own of her head.
She smiled in he r sleep, a brief r eflex of contentment, gone as
soon as it appear ed. My own smile linger ed as I watched her ,
and whisper ed to her sleep-deaf ears, as I had so many times
befor e, “God, you ar e so like him.”
I swallowed the faint thickening in my thr oat – it was
nearly habit, by now – and too k my dr essing gown fr om the
chairback. It was bloody cold at night in the Scottish
Highlands in April, but I wasn’ t yet r eady to seek the warm
sanctuary of my own twin bed.I h ad asked the  landlady to lea ve the fir e burning in the
sitting r oom, assuring her that I would bank it befor e r etiring.
I c losed  the door softly , still seeing the sprawl of long limbs,
the splash and tumble of r ed silk acr oss the quilted blue
spr ead.
“Not ba d for a Life’ s W ork, either ,” I whisper ed to the dark
hallway . “Maybe not so compact, but damned authoritative.”
The sma ll parlor  was dark and cozy , the fir e burnt down to
a steady glow of flame along the backbone of the main log. I
pulled a small a rmchair up befor e the fir e and pr opped my feet
on t he fender . I could hear all the small usual sounds of
modern life ar ound me; the faint whirr of the r efrigerator in
the bas ement below , the hum and whoosh of the central
heating that made the fir e a comfort rather than a necessity;
the passing rush of an occasional car outside.
But und er every thing was the d eep silence of a Highland
night. I sat very still, r eaching f or it. It had been twenty years
since I last felt it, but the soothing power of the dark was still
ther e, cradled between the mountains.
I r eache d into the pocket of my dr essing gown and pulled
out the folded paper – a copy of the list I had given Roger
W akefield. It was too dark to r ea d by fir elight, but I didn’ t need
to se e the name s. I unfolded the paper on my silk-clad knee
and sat blindly staring at the lines of illegible type. I ran my
finger sl owly ac r oss each line, m urmuring each man’ s name to
myself like a prayer . They belonged to the cold spring night,
mor e than I did. But I kept looking into the flames, letting the
dark outside come to fill the empty places inside me.
And speaking their names as t hough to summon them, I
began th e first steps back, cr os sing the empty dark to wher e
they waited.2  T H E  P L O T  T H I C K E N S
R oger left Culloden House nex t morning with twelve
pages of notes and a growing feeling of baf flement. What had
at first seemed a fairly straightforward job of historical
research was turning up some odd twists, and no mistake.
He had  found only three of the names from Claire
Randall’ s list among the rolls of the dead of Culloden. This in
itself w as nothing remarkable. Charles Stuart’ s army had
rarely had a coherent roll of enlistment, as some clan
chieftains had joined the Bonnie Prince apparently on whim,
and man y had left for even less reason, before the names of
their men could be inscribed o n any of ficial document. The
Highland army’ s record-keeping, haphazard at best, had
disintegrated almost completely toward the end; there was
little po int in keeping a payroll , after all, if you had nothing
with which to pay the men on it.
He carefully folded his lanky frame and inserted himself
into his ancient Morris, auto matically ducking to avoid
bumping his head. T aking the f older from under his arm, he
opened it and fr owned at the pages he had copied. What was
odd about it was  that nearly all of the men on Claire’ s list had
been shown on another army list.
W ithin the ranks of a given clan  regiment, men might have
deserted as the dimensions of the coming disaster became
clearer; that would have been no thing unusual. No, what made
the whole thing so incomprehe nsible was that the names on
Claire’ s list had shown up – en tire and complete – as part of
the Mas ter of Lovat’ s regiment, sent late in the campaign to
fulfill a  promise of support m ade to the Stuarts by Simon
Fraser , Lord Lovat.
Y et Clai re had definitely said – a nd a glance at her original
sheets co nfirmed it – that these men had all come from a small
estate called Broch T uarach, we ll to the south and west of the
Fraser la nds – on the border of the MacKenzie clan lands, in
fact. Mo re than that, she had sai d these men had been with theHighland army since the Battle of Prestonpans, which had
occurred near the beginning of the campaign.
Roger shook his head. This made no kind of sense.
Granted, Claire might have mistaken the timing – she had said
herself that she was no historian . But not the location, surely?
And how  could men from the estate of Broch T uarach, who
had give n no oath of allegianc e to the chief of clan Fraser ,
have been at the  disposal of Simon Fraser? T rue, Lord Lovat
had bee n known as “the Old Fox,” and for good reason, but
Roger d oubted that even that redoubtable old Earl had had
suf ficient wiliness to pull of f something like this.
Frowning to himself, Roger sta rted the car and pulled out
of the parking lot. The archiv es at Culloden House were
depressingly incomplete; mostly a lot of picturesque letters
from Lord Geor ge Murray , beefing about supply problems,
and things that looked good in  the museum displays for the
tourists. He needed a lot more than that.
“Hold on, cock,” he reminded himself, squinting in the
rearview mirror at the turn. “Y ou’re meant to be finding out
what happened to the ones that didn’ t  cark it at Culloden. What
does it matter ho w they got there , so long as they left the battle
in one piece?”
But he couldn’ t leave it alone. It was such an odd
circumstance. Names got muddled with enormous frequency ,
especially in the Highlands, where half the population at any
given momen t seemed to be named “Alexander .”
Consequently , men had customarily been known by their
place-names, as well as their clan or surnames. Sometimes
instead  of the surnames . “Lochiel,” one of the most prominent
Jacobite chieftains, was in fact Donald Cameron, of  Lochiel,
which distinguished him nicely from the hundreds of other
Camerons named Donald.
And all the High land men who hadn’ t been named Donald
or Alec had bee n named John. Of the three names that he’d
found on the death rolls that matched Claire’ s list, one was
Donald Murray , one was Alexander MacKenzie Fraser , and
one was John Graham Fraser . All without place-names
attached; just the plain name, an d the regiment to which they’dbelonged. The Master of Lovat’ s regiment, the Fraser
regiment.
But without the place-name, he  couldn’ t be sure that they
wer e  the same men as the names on Claire’ s list. There were at
least six John F rasers on the death roll, and even that was
incomplete; the English had  given little attention to
completeness or accuracy – most of the records had been
compiled after the fact, by clan chieftains counting noses and
determining who  hadn’ t come home. Frequently the chieftains
themselves hadn’ t come home, which complicated matters.
He r ubbed his h and hard through his hair with frustration,
as thoug h scalp massage might stimulate his brain. And if the
three names wer en’ t  the same men, the mystery only deepened.
A go od half of Charles Stuart’ s army had been slaughtered at
Culloden. And Lovat’ s men had  been in the thick of it, right in
the cent er of the battle. It was inconceivable that a group of
thirty m en had survived in that position without one fatality .
The Master of L ovat’ s men had come late to the Rising; while
desertion had been rife in other regiments, who had served
long enough to have some idea what they were in for , the
Frasers had been remarkably loyal – and suf fered in
consequence.
A lo ud horn-blast from behind startled him out of his
concentration, a nd he pulled to the side to let a lar ge, annoyed
lorry rumble past. Thinking and driving were not compatible
activities, he decided. End up sm ashed against a stone wall, if
he kept this up.
He sat still for a moment, pondering. His natural impulse
was to go to Mr s. Thomas’ s bed-and-breakfast, and tell Claire
what he had fo und to date. Th e fact that this might involve
basking for a few moments in the presence of Brianna Randall
enhanced the appeal of this idea.
On the other han d, all his histor ian’ s instincts cried out for
more data. And he wasn’ t at all sure that Claire was the person
to provide it. He  couldn’ t imagine why she should commission
him to do this p roject, and at th e same time, interfere with its
completion by giving him inaccurate information. It wasn’ tsensible, and Claire Randall struck him as an eminently
sensible person.
Still, the re was that business with the whisky . His cheeks
grew ho t in memory . He was po sitive she’d done it on purpose
– an d as  she didn’ t really seem the sort for practical jokes, he
was compelled to assume she’d done it to stop him inviting
Brianna to Broch T uarach. Did she want to keep him away
from the place, or only to stop him taking Brianna there? The
more he thought about the inc ident, the more convinced he
became that Claire Randall was keeping something from her
daughter , but what it was, he co uldn’ t imagine. Still less could
he th ink what co nnection it had with him, or the project he had
undertaken.
He’d giv e it up, were it not fo r two things. Brianna, and
simple c uriosity . He wanted to know what was going on, and
he bloody well intended to find out.
He rapped his fist softly against the wheel, thinking,
ignoring the rush of passing traf fic. At last, decision made, he
started t he engine again and pulled into the road. At the next
roundabout, he went three-qu arters round the circle and
headed for the town center o f Inverness, and the railroad
station.
The Flying Scotsman could have him in Edinbur gh in three
hours. T he curator in char ge of  the Stuart Papers had been a
close friend of the Reverend. And he had one clue to start
with, pu zzling a s it was. The roll that had listed the names in
the M aster of Lo vat’ s regiment had shown those thirty men as
being u nder the command of a Captain James Fraser – of
Broch T uarach. This man was t he only apparent link between
Broch T uarach and the Frasers of Lovat. He wondered why
James Fraser had not appeared on Claire’ s list.
 
The sun was ou t; a rare event for mid-April, and Roger
made th e most of it by cranking  down the tiny window on the
driver ’ s side, to let the bright wind blow past his ear .
He h ad had to stay overnight in Edinbur gh, and coming
back late the next day , had been so tired from the long trainride that he had done little more than eat the hot supper Fiona
insisted on fixing him before he fell into bed. But today he had
risen full of renewed ener gy and determination, and motored
down to  the small village of Bro ch Mordha, near the site of the
estate called Broch T uarach. If h er mother didn’ t want Brianna
Randall going to Broch T uarach, there was nothing stopping
him  from having a look at the place.
He had actually  found Broch T uarach itself, or at least he
assumed so; there was an en ormous pile of fallen stone,
surrounding the collapsed remnant of one of the ancient
circular brochs,  or towers, used in the distant past both for
living and for defense. He had suf ficient Gaelic to know that
the nam e meant “north-facing tower ,” and had wondered
briefly j ust how a circular towe r could have come by such a
name.
There was a ma nor house and its outbuildings nearby , also
in ruins, though a good deal more of it was left. An estate
agent’ s s ign, we athered almost to illegibility , stood tacked to a
stake in the dooryard. Roger stood on the slope above the
house, looking around. At a glance, he could see nothing that
would explain Claire’ s wanting to keep her daughter from
coming here.
He parked the Morris in the dooryard, and climbed out. It
was a beautiful site, but very re mote; it had taken him nearly
forty-five minutes of careful maneuvering to get his Morris
down the rutted country lane fr om the main highway without
fracturing his oil pan.
He didn ’ t go into the house; it w as plainly abandoned, and
possibly dangero us – there would be nothing there. The name
FRASER was carved into the lintel, though, and the same
name adorned most of the small  tombstones in what must have
been the family graveyard – th ose that were legible. Not a
great help, that, he reflected. None of these stones bore the
names o f men on his list. He’d have to go on along the road;
according to the AA map, the village of Broch Mhorda was
three miles farther on.
As he’d  feared, the small village church had fallen into
disuse and been knocked down years ago. Persistent knockingson doors elicited blank stares , dour looks, and finally a
doubtful speculation from an aged farmer that the old parish
records might have gone to the  museum in Fort W illiam, or
maybe u p to Inverness; there was a minister up that way who
collected such rubbish.
T ired and dusty , but not yet discouraged, Roger trudged
back to his car , sheltering in the lane by the village pub. This
was the sort of setback that so often attended historical field
research, and he was used to it. A quick pint – well, two,
maybe, it was a n unusually warm day – and then on to Fort
W illiam.
Serve him right, he reflected wryly , if the records he was
looking for turned out to be in the Reverend’ s archives all
along. T hat’ s what he got for neglecting his work to go on
wild-goose chases to impress a girl. His trip to Edinbur gh had
done little more than serve to eliminate the three names he’d
found at  Culloden House; all th ree men proved to have come
from dif ferent regiments, not the Broch T uarach group.
The Stuart Papers took up thre e entire rooms, as well as
untold p acking cases in the ba sement of the museum, so he
could hardly claim to have mad e an exhaustive study . Still, he
had found a duplicate of the payroll he’d seen at Culloden
House, listing the joining of th e men as part of a regiment
under th e overall command of the Master of Lovat – the Old
Fox’ s so n, that would have been, Y oung Simon. Cagy old
bastard split his vote, Roger thought; sent the heir to fight for
the Stuarts, and stayed home himself, claiming to have been a
loyal subject of King Geordie all along. Much good it did him.
That document had listed Simon Fraser the Y ounger as
commander , and  made no mention of James Fraser . A James
Fraser was mentioned in a number of army dispatches,
memoranda, and other documents, though. If it was the same
man, he’d been fairly active in the campaign. Still, with only
the n ame “James Fraser ,” it was impossible to tell if it was the
Broch T uarach one; James was as common a Highland name
as Duncan or R obert. In only one spot was a James Fraser
listed with additional middle names that might help in
identification, but that document made no mention of his men.He shrugged, irritably waving of f a sudden cloud of
voracious midges. T o go through those records in coherent
fashion would take several years. Unable to shake the
attentions of the midges, he d ucked into the dark, brewery
atmosphere of the pub, leaving them to mill outside in a
frenzied cloud of inquiry .
Sipping the cool, bitter ale, he m entally reviewed the steps
taken so  far , and the options ope n to him. He had time to go to
Fort W i lliam today , though it would mean getting back to
Inverness late. And if the For t W illiam museum turned up
nothing, then a good rumm age through the Reverend’ s
archives was the logical, if ironic, next step.
And aft er that? He drained the  last drops of bitter , and
signaled the landlord for anothe r glass. W ell, if it came down
to it , a tramp round every kirkyard and burying ground in the
general vicinity of Broch T uarach was likely the best he could
do in  the short term. He doubted that the Randalls would stay
in Invern ess for the next two or three years, patiently awaiting
results.
He felt in his po cket for the note book that is the historian’ s
constant companion. Before he left Broch Mhorda, he should
at least have a l ook at what was left of the old kirkyard. Y ou
never knew what might turn up, and it would at least save him
coming back.
 
The next afternoon, the Randalls came to take tea at
Roger ’ s invitation, and to hear his progress report.
“I’ve fo und several of the nam es on your list,” he told
Claire, leading the way into the study . “It’ s very odd; I haven’ t
yet f ound any w ho died for sur e at Culloden. I thought I had
three, bu t they turned out to be dif ferent men with the same
names.” He glanced at Dr . Randall; she was standing quite
still, one hand c lasping the back of a wing chair , as though
she’d for gotten where she was.
“Er , won’ t you s it down?” Roger invited, and with a small,
startled jerk, she nodded and sa t abruptly on the edge of theseat. Ro ger eyed her curiously , but went on, pulling out his
folder of research notes and handing it to her .
“As I say , it’ s od d. I haven’ t trac ked down all the names; I
think I’ll need to go nose about among the parish registers and
graveyards near Broch T uarach. I found most of these records
among m y father ’ s papers. But y ou’d think I’d have turned up
one or two batt le-deaths at least, given that they were all at
Culloden. Espec ially if, as you say , they were with one of the
Fraser regiment s; those were nearly all in the center of the
battle, where the fighting was thickest.”
“I know .” There was something in her voice that made him
look at her , puzzled, but her face was invisible as she bent over
the desk. Most of the records w ere copies, made in Roger ’ s
own han d, as the exotic technology of photocopying had not
yet penetrated to the government archive that guarded the
Stuart P apers, b ut there were a few original sheets, unearthed
from the late Reverend W ake field’ s hoard of eighteenth-
century docume nts. She turned over the records with a gentle
finger , careful not to touch the fragile paper more than
necessary .
“Y ou’re right; that is  odd.” Now he recognized the emotion
in her voice – it  was excitement, but mingled with satisfaction
and relief. She had been in some way expecting this – or
hoping for it.
“T ell me…” She hesitated. “The names you’ve found.
What happened to them, if they didn’ t die at Culloden?”
He was faintly surprised that it should seem to matter so
much to her , but obligingly pull ed out the folder that held his
research notes and opened it. “T wo of them were on a ship’ s
roll; they emigrated to America soon after Culloden. Four died
of natura l causes about a year later – not surprising, there was
a ter rible famine after Culloden,  and a lot of people died in the
Highlands. And  this one I found in a parish register – but not
the parish he came from. I’m fairly sure it’ s one of your men,
though.”
It w as o nly as the tension went o ut of her shoulders that he
noticed it had been there.“Do you  want me to look for the rest, still?” he asked,
hoping that the answer would  be “yes.” He was watching
Brianna over her mother ’ s shoulder . She was standing by the
cork wall, half-turned as though uninterested in her mother ’ s
project, but he could see a small vertical crease between her
brows.
Perhaps she sensed the same th ing he did, the odd air of
suppressed excitement that surr ounded Claire like an electric
field. He  had been aware of it from the moment she walked
into the room, a nd his revelations had only increased it. He
imagined that if he touched her , a great spark of static
electricity would leap between them.
A knock  on the study door interrupted his thoughts. The
door op ened and Fiona Graham came in, pushing a tea cart,
fully equipped with teapot, cups, doilies, three kinds of
sandwiches, cream-cakes, sponge cake, jam tarts, and scones
with clotted cream.
“Y um!” said Brianna at the sight. “Is that all for us, or are
you expecting ten other people?”
Claire R andall looked over the tea preparations, smiling.
The elec tric field was still there , but damped down by major
ef fort. Roger could see one of h er hands, clenched so hard in
the folds of her skirt that the edge of her ring cut into the flesh.
“That te a is so h igh, we won’ t n eed to eat for weeks,” she
said. “It looks wonderful!”
Fiona beamed. She was short, plump and pretty as a small
brown h en. Roger sighed internally . While he was pleased to
be a ble to of fer his guests hospitality , he was well aware that
the lavi sh nature of the refreshments was intended for his
appreciation, not theirs. Fiona, aged nineteen, had one burning
ambition in life. T o be a wife . Preferably of a professional
man. Sh e had taken one look at Roger when he arrived a week
earlier t o tidy up the Reverend ’ s af fairs, and decided that an
assistant professor of history was the best prospect Inverness
of fered.
Since th en, he had been stuf fed like a Christmas goose,
had his shoes po lished, his slippers and toothbrush laid out, hisbed turn ed down, his coat brushed, the evening paper bought
for him and laid  alongside his p late, his neck rubbed when he
had been  working over his desk  for long hours, and constant
inquiries made concerning his bodily comfort, state of mind,
and general health. He had never before been exposed to such
a barrage of domesticity .
In short, Fiona was driving him mad. His current state of
unshaven dishabille was more a reaction to her relentless
pursuit than it was a descent into that natural squalor enjoyed
by men temporarily freed from the demands of job and society .
The thou ght of being united in bonds of holy wedlock with
Fiona Graham was one that fr oze him to the marrow . She
would drive him insane withi n a year , with her constant
pestering. Aside from that, though, there was Brianna Randall,
now gazing contemplatively at the tea cart, as though
wondering where to start.
He h ad been keeping his attent ion firmly fixed on Claire
Randall and her project this afternoon, avoiding looking at her
daughter . Claire Randall was lovely , with the sort of fine bones
and translucent skin that would make her look much the same
at sixty as she h ad at twenty . But looking at Brianna Randall
made him feel slightly breathless.
She carried herself like a queen, not slumping as tall girls
so o ften do. Noting her mothe r ’ s straight back and graceful
posture, he could see where that particular attribute had come
from. But not the remarkable height, the cascade of waist-
length r ed hair , sparked with gold and copper , streaked with
amber and cinnamon, curling  casually around face and
shoulders like a mantle. The eyes, so dark a blue as almost to
be b lack in some  lights. Nor that wide, generous mouth, with a
full lower lip th at invited nibbling kisses and biting passion.
Those things must have come from her father .
Roger was on the whole rather glad that her father was not
present, since he would certainly have taken paternal umbrage
at th e sorts of thoughts Roger was thinking; thoughts he was
desperately afraid showed on his face.“T ea, eh ?” he said heartily . “Sp lendid. W onderful. Looks
delicious, Fiona. Er , thanks, Fiona. I, um, don’ t think we need
anything else.”
Ignoring the broad hint to depart, Fiona nodded graciously
at the complime nts from the g uests, laid out the doilies and
cups with deft economy of m otion, poured the tea, passed
round th e first plate of cake, and seemed prepared to stay
indefinitely , presiding as lady of the house.
“Have some cream on your sc ones, Rog – I mean, Mr .
W akefield,” she suggested, ladling it on without waiting for
his reply . “Y ou’re much too thi n; you want feeding up.” She
glanced conspir atorially at Brianna Randall, saying, “Y ou
know w hat men are; never eat properly without a woman to
look after them.”
“How lucky that he’ s got you to  take care of him,” Brianna
answered politely .
Roger took a de ep breath, and flexed his fingers several
times, until the ur ge to strangle Fiona had passed.
“Fiona,” he said. “W ould you, um, could you possibly do
me a small favor?”
She lit up like a small jack-o’-lantern, mouth stretched in
an e ager grin at  the thought of doing something for him. “Of
course, Rog – Mr . W akefield! Anything at all!”
Roger f elt vagu ely ashamed of himself, but after all, he
ar gued, it was for her good as m uch as his. If she didn’ t leave,
he was shortly going to cease b eing responsible and commit
some act they would both regret.
“Oh, thanks, Fiona. It’ s nothing much; only that I’d
ordered some… some” – he thought frantically , trying to
remember the name of one of t he village merchants – “some
tobacco, from Mr . Buchan in the High Street. I wonder if
you’d be  willing to go and fetch it for me; I could just do with
a good pipe after such a wonderful tea.”
Fiona was already untying her apron – the frilly , lace-
trimmed one, Roger noted grimly . He closed his eyes briefly in
relief as the study door shut behind her , dismissing for themoment the fact that he didn’ t s moke. W ith a sigh of relief, he
turned to conversation with his guests.
“Y ou we re asking whether I wanted you to look for the rest
of th e names on my list,” Claire said, almost at once. Roger
had the odd im pression that she shared his relief at Fiona’ s
departure. “Y es, I do – if it wouldn’ t be too much trouble?”
“No, no! Not at all,” Roge r said, with only slight
mendacity . “Glad to do it.”
Roger ’ s hand hovered uncertainly amid the lar gesse of the
tea cart, then sn aked down to grasp the crystal decanter of
twelve-year -old Muir Breame w hisky . After the skirmish with
Fiona, he felt he owed it to himself.
“W ill yo u have a bit of this?” he asked his guests politely .
Catching the look of distaste on Brianna’ s face, he quickly
added, “Or maybe some tea?”
“T ea,” Brianna said with relief.
“Y ou don’ t know what you’re missing,” Claire told her
daughter , inhaling the whisky fumes with rapture.
“Oh yes  I do,” Brianna replied. “That’ s why I’m missing
it.” She shrugged and quirked an eyebrow at Roger .
“Y ou have to be twenty-one before you can drink legally in
Massachusetts,” Claire explained to Roger . “Bree has another
eight months to go, so she really isn’ t used to whisky .”
“Y ou act as though not liking whisky was a crime,”
Brianna protested, smiling at Roger above her teacup.
He raise d his own brows in response. “My dear woman,”
he s aid severely . “This is Scotland . Of course not liking
whisky is a crime!”
“Oh, ay e?” said Brianna sweetly , in a perfect imitation of
his own  slight Scots burr . “W e ll, we’ll hope it’ s no a capital
of fense like murrderrr , shall we?”
T aken by surprise, he swallowed a laugh with his whisky
and cho ked. Co ughing and pounding himself on the chest, he
glanced at Claire to share the joke. A forced smile hung on herlips, but her face had gone quite pale. Then she blinked, the
smile came back more naturally , and the moment passed.
Roger was surprised at how easily conversation flowed
among them – both about trivialities, and about Claire’ s
project. Brianna clearly had been interested in her father ’ s
work, and knew a great deal more about the Jacobites than did
her mother .
“It’ s amazing they ever made it as far as Culloden,” she
said. “Did you know the Hi ghlanders won the battle of
Prestonpans wi th barely two thousand men? Against an
English army of eight thousand? Incredible!”
“W ell, a nd the Battle of Falkir k was nearly that way as
well,” Roger chimed in. “Outnumbered, outarmed, marching
on f oot… they should never ha ve been able to do what they
did… but they did!”
“Um-hm,” said Claire, taking a deep gulp of her whisky .
“They did!”
“I w as thinking,” Roger said to  Brianna, with an assumed
air o f casualness. “Perhaps yo u’d like to come with me to
some of  the places – the battle sites and other places? They’re
interesting, and I’m sure you’d be a tremendous help with the
research.”
Brianna laughed  and smoothed back her hair , which had a
tendency to drop into her tea. “ I don’ t know about the help,
but I’d love to come.”
“T errific!” Surprised and elated with her agreement, he
fumbled for the decanter and nearly dropped it. Claire fielded
it neatly , and filled his glass with precision.
“The lea st I can do, after spilling  it the last time,” she said,
smiling in answer to his thanks.
Seeing h er now ,  poised and rela xed, Roger was inclined to
doubt his earlier suspicions. Maybe it had been an accident
after all? That lovely cool face told him nothing.
A half-hour later , the tea tab le lay in shambles, the
decanter stood empty , and the three of them sat in a sharedstupor of content. Brianna shifted once or twice, glanced at
Roger , and finally asked if she might use his “rest room.”
“Oh, the  W .C.? Of course.” He heaved himself to his feet,
ponderous with Dundee cake an d almond sponge. If he didn’ t
get away from Fiona soon, he’d weigh three hundred pounds
before he got back to Oxford.
“It’ s one of the old-fashioned kind,” he explained, pointing
down the hall in the direction of the bathroom. “W ith a tank on
the ceiling and a pull-chain.”
“I s aw some of those in the B ritish Museum,” Brianna
said, nodding. “Only they were n’ t in with the exhibits, they
were in the lad ies’ room.” She hesitated, then asked, “Y ou
haven’ t got the same sort of toilet paper they have in the
British M useum, do you? Because if you do, I’ve got some
Kleenex in my purse.”
Roger closed one eye and looked at her with the other .
“Either that’ s a very odd non sequitur ,” he said, “or I’ve drunk
a good deal more than I though t.” In fact, he and Claire had
accounted very satisfactorily f or the Muir Breame, though
Brianna had confined herself to tea.
Claire laughed, overhearing the exchange, and got up to
hand Br ianna several folded facial tissues from her own bag.
“It w on’ t be waxed paper stam ped with ‘Property of H.M.
Government,’ like the Museum’ s, but it likely won’ t be much
better ,” she told her daughter . “British toilet paper is
commonly rather a stif f article.”
“Thanks.” Brianna took the tissues and turned to the door ,
but then turned back. “Why on earth would people deliberately
make toilet paper that feels like tinfoil?” she demanded.
“Hearts of oak are our men,” Roger intoned, “stainless
steel are their bums. It builds the national character .”
“In the case o f Scots, I expect it’ s hereditary nerve-
deadening,” Claire added. “The  sort of men who could ride
horse-back wearing a kilt have bottoms like saddle leather .”
Brianna fizzed with laughter . “I’d hate to see what they
used for toilet paper then ,” she said.“Actually , it wasn’ t bad,” Claire said, surprisingly .
“Mullein leaves are really very nice; quite as good as two-ply
bathroom tissue. And in the win ter or indoors, it was usually a
bit of damp rag; not very sanitary , but comfortable enough.”
Roger and Brianna both gawked at her for a moment.
“Er… read it in a book,” she said, and blushed amazingly .
As B rianna, still giggling, mad e her way of f in search of
the facilities, Claire remained standing by the door .
“It w as awfully nice of you to en tertain us so grandly ,” she
said, sm iling at Roger . The momentary discomposure had
vanished, replaced by her usual poise. “And remarkably kind
of you to have found out about those names for me.”
“My pleasure entirely ,” Roger assured her . “It’ s made a
nice cha nge from cobwebs and mothballs. I’ll let you know as
soon as I’ve found out anything else about your Jacobites.”
“Thank you.” Claire hesitated, glanced over her shoulder ,
and lowered her voice. “Actually , since Bree’ s gone for the
moment… there’ s something I wanted to ask you, in private.”
Roger cleared his throat and s traightened the tie he had
donned in honor of the occasion.
“Ask away ,” he said, feeling cheerfully expansive with the
success of the tea party . “I’m completely at your service.”
“Y ou were asking Bree if she’d go with you to do field
research. I wanted to ask you…  there’ s a place I’d rather you
didn’ t take her , if you don’ t mind.”
Alarm b ells went of f at once in Roger ’ s head. W as he
going to find out what the secret was about Broch T uarach?
“The ci rcle of standing stones – they call it Craigh na
Dun.” C laire’ s f ace was earnest as she leaned slightly closer .
“There’ s an important reason, or I wouldn’ t ask. I want to take
Brianna to the circle myself, b ut I’m afraid I can’ t tell you
why , just now . I will, in time , but not quite yet. W ill you
promise me?”
Thoughts were chasing themselves through Roger ’ s mind.
So it hadn’ t bee n Broch T uarach she wanted to keep the girlaway from, after all! One my stery was explained, only to
deepen another .
“If you like,” he said at last. “Of course.”
“Thank you.” She touched his arm once, lightly , and
turned to  go. Seeing her silhou etted against the light, he was
suddenly remin ded of something. Perhaps it wasn’ t the
moment to ask, but it couldn’ t do any harm.
“Oh, Dr . Randall – Claire?”
Claire turned back to face him . W ith the distractions of
Brianna remove d, he could see that Claire Randall was a very
beautiful woman  in her own right. Her face was flushed from
the w hisky , and her eyes were t he most unusual light golden-
brown color , he thought – like amber in crystal.
“In all the reco rds that I found dealing with these men,”
Roger said, choosing his words carefully , “there was a mention
of a Captain Ja mes Fraser , who seems to have been their
leader . But he wasn’ t on your list. I only wondered; did you
know about him?”
She stood stock-still for a mom ent, reminding him of the
way she had beh aved upon her arrival that afternoon. But after
a moment, she shook herself slightly , and answered with
apparent equanimity .
“Y es, I knew ab out him.” She spoke calmly , but all the
color had left h er face, and Roger could see a small pulse
beating rapidly at the base of her throat.
“I d idn’ t put him  on the list because I already knew what
happened to him. Jamie Fraser died at Culloden.”
“Are you sure?”
As though anxious to leave, Claire scooped up her
handbag, and glanced down the hall toward the bathroom,
where the rattling of the ancient knob indicated Brianna’ s
attempts to get out.
“Y es,” she said, not looking bac k. “I’m quite sure. Oh, Mr .
W akefield… Roger , I mean.” She swung back now , fixing
those oddly colored eyes on h im. In this light, they lookedalmost yellow , he thought; the eyes of a big cat, a leopard’ s
eyes.
“Please,” she said, “don’ t mention Jamie Fraser to my
daughter .”
 
It was late, and he should have  been abed long since, but
Roger found himself unable to sleep. Whether from the
aggravations of Fiona, the puzzling contradictions of Claire
Randall, or from exaltation over the prospect of doing field
research with Brianna Randall, he was wide-awake, and likely
to r emain so. Rather than to ss, turn, or count sheep, he
resolved to put his wakefulne ss to good use. A rummage
through the Reverend’ s papers would probably put him to
sleep in no time.
Fiona’ s light down the hall wa s still on, but he tiptoed
down th e stair , not to disturb her . Then, snapping on the study
light, he stood for a moment, contemplating the magnitude of
the task before him.
The wall exemplified the Rev erend W akefield’ s mind.
Completely cov ering one side of the study , it was an expanse
of corkboard measuring nearly twenty feet by twelve. V irtually
none of the original cork was visible under the layers upon
layers of papers, notes, photog raphs, mimeographed sheets,
bills, receipts, bird feathers, torn-of f corners of envelopes
containing inter esting postage stamps, address labels, key
rings, p ostcards, rubber bands, and other impedimenta, all
tacked up or attached by bits of string.
The trivia lay tw elve layers deep in spots, yet the Reverend
had always been able to set his hand unerringly on the bit he
wanted. Roger thought that the w all must have been or ganized
according to some underlying pr inciple so subtle that not even
American NASA scientists could discern it.
Roger viewed the wall dubiously . There was no logical
point a t which to start. He reached tentatively for a
mimeographed list of General Assembly meeting dates sent
out by the bish op’ s of fice, but was distracted by the sight
underneath of a crayoned dragon, complete with artistic puf fsof sm oke from t he flaring nostrils, and green flames shooting
from the gaping mouth.
ROGER was written in lar ge, straggling capitals at the
bottom of the sheet. He vaguely remembered explaining that
the dragon breathed green fire because it ate nothing but
spinach. He let the General Assembly list fall back into place,
and turned away from the wall. He could tackle that lot later .
The desk, an e normous oak rolltop with at least forty
stuf fed-to-bursting pigeonhole s, seemed like pie by
comparison. W i th a sigh, Roge r pulled up the battered of fice
chair an d sat down to make sense of all the documents the
Reverend thought worth keeping.
One stack of b ills yet to be paid. Another of of ficial-
looking docum ents: automobile titles, surveyor ’ s reports,
building-inspection certificates.  Another for historical notes
and records. Another for family keepsakes. Another – by far
the lar gest – for rubbish.
Deep in his task , he didn’ t hear the door open behind him,
or the approaching footsteps. Suddenly a lar ge teapot appeared
on the desk next to him.
“Eh?” He straightened up, blinking.
“Thought you might do with som e tea, Mr . W ake – I mean,
Roger .” Fiona set down a sma ll tray containing a cup and
saucer and a plate of biscuits.
“Oh, thanks.” He was in fact hungry , and gave Fiona a
friendly smile that sent the blood rushing into her round, fair
cheeks. Seeming ly encouraged by this, she didn’ t go away , but
perched on the corner of the desk, watching him raptly as he
went about his job between bites of chocolate biscuit.
Feeling obscure ly that he ou ght to acknowledge her
presence in some way , Roger held up a half-eaten biscuit and
mumbled, “Good.”
“Are they? I m ade them, ye know .” Fiona’ s flush grew
deeper . An attractive little girl, Fiona. Small, rounded, with
dark cu rly hair and wide brown eyes. He found himselfwondering sudd enly whether Brianna Randall could cook, and
shook his head to clear the image.
Apparently taking this as a gesture of disbelief, Fiona
leaned closer . “No, really ,” sh e insisted. “A recipe of my
gran’ s, it is. Sh e always said they were a favorite of the
Reverend’ s.” Th e wide brown e yes grew a trifle misty . “She
left me all her  cookbooks and things. Me being the only
granddaughter , ye see.”
“I w as sorry about your g randmother ,” Roger said
sincerely . “Quick, was it?”
Fiona nodded mournfully . “Oh,  aye. Right as rain all day ,
then she  said after supper as she felt a bit tired, and went up to
her bed.” The g irl lifted her sho ulders and let them fall. “She
went to sleep, and never woke up.”
“A good way to  go,” Roger sa id. “I’m glad of it.” Mrs.
Graham had been a fixture in the manse since before Roger
himself had come, a frightened, newly orphaned five-year -old.
Middle-aged even then, and widowed with grown children,
still she had prov ided an abundant supply of firm, no-nonsense
maternal af fection during school holidays when Roger came
home to the manse. She and the Reverend made an odd pair ,
and yet between  them they had made the old house definitely a
home.
Moved by his memories, Roger reached out and squeezed
Fiona’ s hand. She squeezed back, brown eyes suddenly
melting. The small rosebud mouth parted slightly , and she
leaned toward Roger , her breath warm on his ear .
“Uh, thank you,” Roger blurted. He pulled his hand out of
her gras p as though scorched. “Thanks very much. For the…
the… er , tea a nd things. Good. It was good. V ery good.
Thanks.” He turned and reached hastily for another stack of
papers t o cover his confusion, snatching a rolled bundle of
newspaper clippings from a pigeonhole chosen at random.
He u nrolled the yellowed clippin gs and spread them on the
desk, holding them down between his palms. Frowning in
apparent deep concentration, he bent his head lower over the
smudged text. After a moment  Fiona rose with a deep sigh,and her footsteps receded toward the door . Roger didn’ t look
up.
Letting out a deep sigh of his own, he closed his eyes
briefly a nd of fered a quick pra yer of thanks for the narrow
escape. Y es, Fiona was attractive. Y es, she was undoubtedly a
fine coo k. She was also nosy , in terfering, irritating, and firmly
bent on marriage. Lay one hand  on that rosy flesh again, and
they’d be calling the banns by next month. But if there was
any bann-calling to be done, the name linked with Roger
W akefield in the parish register was going to be Brianna
Randall’ s, if Roger had anything to say about it.
W ondering just how much he would  have to say about it,
Roger opened his eyes and then  blinked. For there in front of
him wa s the name he had been envisioning on a wedding
license – Randall.
Not, of course, Brianna Randall. Claire Randall. The
headline read RETURNED FRO M THE DEAD. Beneath was
a picture of Claire Randall, twenty years younger , but looking
little dif ferent than she did now , bar the expression on her face.
She had  been photographed sitting bolt upright in a hospital
bed, hair tousled and flying like banners, delicate mouth set
like a steel trap,  and those extraordinary eyes glaring straight
into the camera.
W ith a sense of shock, Roger th umbed rapidly through the
bundle o f clippin gs, then returned to read them more carefully .
Though the papers had made as  much sensation as possible of
the story , the facts were sparse.
Claire R andall, wife of the noted historian Dr . Franklin W .
Randall, had disappeared during a Scottish holiday in
Inverness, late in the spring of 1946. A car she had been
driving had been found, but t he woman herself was gone
without trace. All searches havin g proved futile, the police and
bereaved husband had at length concluded that Claire Randall
must have been murdered, perha ps by a roving tramp, and her
body concealed somewhere in the rocky crags of the area.
And in 1948, nearly three year s later , Claire Randall had
returned. She had been found, d isheveled and dressed in rags,wandering near the spot at which she had disappeared. While
appearing to be in good physical health, though slightly
malnourished, Mrs. Randall was disoriented and incoherent.
Raising his eyebrows slightly at the thought of Claire
Randall ever being incoherent, Roger thumbed through the rest
of the clippings. They contained little more than the
information that Mrs. Randall was being treated for exposure
and shoc k at a local hospital. There were photographs of the
presumably ove rjoyed husband , Frank Randall. He looked
stunned rather than overjoyed,  Roger thought critically , not
that one could blame him.
He examined the pictures curiously . Frank Randall had
been a slender , handsome, aristocratic-looking man. Dark,
with a rakish grace that showed in the angle of his body as he
stood poised in the door of the hospital, surprised by the
photographer on his way to visit his newly restored wife.
He traced the line of the long, narrow jaw , and the curve of
the head , and realized that he  was searching for traces of
Brianna in her father . Intrigued by the thought, he rose and
fetched one of Frank Randall’ s books from the shelves.
T urning to the back jacket, he  found a better picture. The
jacket photograph showed Frank Randall in color , in full-face
view . No, the hair was definitely dark brown, not red. That
blazing glory must have come from a grandparent, along with
the deep  blue eyes, slanted as a cat’ s. Beautiful they were, but
nothing like her mother ’ s. And n ot like her father ’ s either . T ry
as he might, he could see nothing of the flaming goddess in the
face of the famous historian.
W ith a sigh, h e closed the b ook and gathered up the
clippings. He really must stop t his mooning about and get on
with the job, or he’d be sitting here for the next twelvemonth.
He was about to  put the clippin gs into the keepsake pile,
when o ne, hea dlined KIDNA PPED BY THE F AIRIES?,
caught h is eye. Or rather , not the clipping, but the date that
appeared just above the headline. May 6, 1948.
He s et the clippi ng down gently , as though it were a bomb
that mig ht go of f in his hand. H e closed his eyes and tried tosummon up that first conversation with the Randalls. “Y ou
have to be twen ty-one to drink in Massachusetts,” Claire had
said. “Brianna still has eight months to go.” T wenty , then.
Brianna Randall was twenty .
Unable to count backward fast enough, he rose and
scrabbled through the perpetual calendar that the vicar had
kept, in a clear space to itself on his cluttered wall. He found
the date and sto od with his fing er pressed to the paper , blood
draining from his face.
Claire Randall had returned  from her mysterious
disappearance disheveled, malnourished, incoherent – and
pregnant.
 
In t he fullness of time, Rog er slept at last, but in
consequence of his wakefulnes s, woke late and heavy-eyed,
with an incipien t headache, which neither a cold shower nor
Fiona’ s chirpiness over breakfast did much to dispel.
The feeling was so oppressive that he abandoned his work
and left the house for a walk. Striding through a light rain, he
found the fresh air improved his headache, but unfortunately
cleared his mind enough to s tart thinking again about the
implications of last night’ s discovery .
Brianna didn’ t know . That was c lear enough, from the way
she spok e about  her late father – or about the man she thought
was her father , Frank Randall. And presumably Claire didn’ t
mean he r to know , or she would have told the girl herself.
Unless t his Scot tish trip were m eant to be a prelude to such a
confession? The  real father must have been a Scot; after all,
Claire had disappeared – and rea ppeared – in Scotland. W as he
still here?
That was a staggering thought. Had Claire brought her
daughter to Scotland in order to introduce her to her real
father? Roger shook his head do ubtfully . Bloody risky , a thing
like that. Bound to be confusing  to Brianna, and painful as hell
to Claire  herself. Scare the shoes and socks of f the father , too.
And the girl pla inly was devoted to Frank Randall. What wasshe goin g to feel like, realizing that the man she’d loved and
idolized all her life in fact had no blood ties to her at all?
Roger felt bad for all concerned, including himself. He
hadn’ t asked to have any part of this, and wished himself in
the same state of blissful igno rance as yesterday . He liked
Claire R andall, liked her very m uch, and he found the thought
of her committing adultery distasteful. At the same time, he
jeered a t himself for his old-fashioned sentimentality . Who
knew wh at her life with Frank Randall had been like? Perhaps
she’d had good reason for goin g of f with another man. But
then why had she come back?
Sweating and moody , Roger wandered back to the house.
He shed  his jacket in the hallwa y and went up to have a bath.
Sometimes bath ing helped to soothe him, and he felt much in
need of soothing.
He ran a hand along the row  of hangers in his closet,
groping for the fuzzy shoulder of his worn white toweling
robe. Th en, pausing for a mom ent, he reached instead far to
the back of the closet, sweeping the hangers along the rod until
he could grasp the one he wanted.
He viewed the shabby old dressing gown with af fection.
The yellow silk of the background had faded to ochre, but the
multicolored peacocks were bold as ever , spreading their tails
with lordly insouciance, regarding the viewer with eyes like
black beads. He brought the soft  fabric to his nose and inhaled
deeply , closing his eyes. The fa int whif f of Borkum Rif f and
spilled whisky brought back the Reverend W akefield as not
even his father ’ s wall of trivia could do.
Many w ere the times he had smelled just that comforting
aroma, with its upper note of Old Spice cologne, his face
pressed against the smooth slickness of this silk, the
Reverend’ s chu bby arms wrapped protectively around him,
promising him refuge. He had  given the old man’ s other
clothes t o Oxfam, but somehow he couldn’ t bear to part with
this.
On impulse, he slipped the rob e over his bare shoulders,
mildly surprised  at the light warmth of it, like the caress offingers across his skin. He shifted his shoulders pleasurably
under th e silk, then wrapped it  closely about his body , tying
the belt in a careless knot.
Keeping a wary eye out in case of raids by Fiona, he made
his w ay along t he upper hall to the bathroom. The hot-water
geyser s tood aga inst the head of  the bath like the guardian of a
sacred spring, squat and eternal. Another of his youthful
memories was the weekly terror of trying to light the geyser
with a flint striker in order to heat the water for his bath, the
gas esca ping pa st his head with  a menacing hiss as his hands,
sweaty with the fear of explosio n and imminent death, slipped
inef fectively on the metal of the striker .
Long since rendered automatic by an operation on its
mysterious innards, the geyser now gur gled quietly to itself,
the g as ring at its base rumbling and whooshing with unseen
flame beneath the metal shield. Roger twisted the cracked
“Hot” tap as far as it would go, added a half-turn of the
“Cold,” then stood to study hims elf in the mirror while waiting
for his bath to fill.
Nothing much wrong with him, he reflected, sucking in his
stomach and pulling himself u pright before the full-length
reflection on the back of the do or . Firm. T rim. Long-legged,
but not spindle-shanked. Possibly a bit scrawny through the
shoulders? He frowned critically , twisting his lean body back
and forth.
He ran a hand through his thick black hair , until it stood on
end like a shaving brush, trying to envision himself with a
beard an d long hair , like some o f his students. W ould he look
dashing, or merely moth-eaten? Possibly an earring, while he
was abo ut it. He might look piratical then, like Edward T each
or Henry  Mor gan. He drew his  brows together and bared his
teeth.
“Grrrrr ,” he said to his reflection.
“Mr . W akefield?” said the reflection.
Roger leaped back, startled, and stubbed his toe painfully
against the protruding claw-foot of the ancient bath.“Ow!”
“Are yo u all right, Mr . W akefield?” the mirror said. The
porcelain doorknob rattled.
“Of cou rse I am!” he snapped testily , glaring at the door .
“Go away , Fiona, I’m bathing!”
There was a giggle from the other side of the door .
“Ooh, tw ice in one day . Ar en’ t  we the dandy , though? Do
you want some of the bay-rum  soap? It’ s in the cupboard
there, if you do.”
“No, I don’ t,” he snarled. Th e water level had risen
midway in the tub, and he cut of f the taps. The sudden silence
was soothing, and he drew a d eep breath of steam into his
lungs. W incing slightly at the h eat, he stepped into the water
and low ered himself gingerly , feeling a light sweat break out
on his face as the heat rushed up his body .
“Mr . W akefield?” The voice was back, chirping on the
other side of the door like a hectoring robin.
“Go away , Fiona,” he gritted, easing himself back in the
tub. The steaming water rose around him, comforting as a
lover ’ s arms. “I have everything I want.”
“No, you haven’ t,” said the voice.
“Y es, I have.” His eye swept the impressive lineup of
bottles, jars, and implements a rrayed on the shelf above the
tub. “Shampoo, three kinds. Hair conditioner . Shaving cream.
Razor . Body soap. Facial soap. After -shave. Cologne.
Deodorant stick. I don’ t lack a thing, Fiona.”
“What about towels?” said the voice, sweetly .
After a  wild glance about t he completely towel-less
confines of the b athroom, Roger closed his eyes, clenched his
teeth and counted slowly to ten. This proving insuf ficient, he
made it twenty . Then, feeling h imself able to answer without
foaming at the mouth, he said calmly .
“All rig ht, Fion a. Set them out side the door , please. And
then, please… please, Fiona… go .”A ru stle outside was succeeded by the sound of reluctantly
receding footste ps, and Roger , with a sigh of relief, gave
himself up to the joys of privacy . Peace. Quiet. No Fiona.
Now , able to think more objectively about his upsetting
discovery , he found himself more than curious about Brianna’ s
mysterious real father . Judging from the daughter , the man
must have had a rare degree of physical attractiveness; would
that alon e have been suf ficient to lure a woman like Claire
Randall?
He had wondere d already whether Brianna’ s father might
have been a Sco t. Did he live – or had  he lived  – in In verness?
He sup posed s uch proximity might account for Claire’ s
nervousness, and the air she had of keeping secrets. But did it
account for the puzzling requests she had made of him? She
didn’ t want him to take Brian na to Craigh na Dun, nor to
mention the captain of the Broch  T uarach men to her daughter .
Why on earth not?
A su dden thought made him si t upright in the tub, water
sloshing heedlessly against the cast-iron sides. What if it were
not t he eighteenth-century Jacob ite soldier she was concerned
about, but only his name?  What if the man who had fathered
her daughter in 1947 was also named James Fraser? It was a
common enough name in the Highlands.
Y es, he thought , that might ve ry well explain it. As for
Claire’ s desire to show her daughter the stone circle herself,
perhaps that was also connec ted with the mystery of her
father; m aybe that’ s where she’d met the man, or perhaps
that’ s where Brianna had been conceived. Roger was well
aware that the s tone circle was commonly used as a trysting
spot; he’d taken girls there him self in high school, relying on
the circl e’ s air of pagan myste ry to loosen their reserve. It
always worked.
He had a sudde n startling vision of Claire Randall’ s fine
white limbs, locked in wild aba ndon with the naked, straining
body of a red-haired man, the two bodies slick with rain and
stained with crushed grass, twisting in ecstasy among the
standing stones. The vision was so shocking in its specificitythat it left him trembling, sweat running down his chest to
vanish into the steaming water of the bath.
Christ! How was he going to m eet Claire Randall’ s eyes,
next tim e they met? What was h e going to say to Brianna, for
that mat ter? “Re ad any good b ooks lately?” “Seen any good
flicks?” “D’you know you’re illegitimate?”
He s hook his he ad, trying to cle ar it. The truth was that he
didn’ t know what to do next. It was a messy situation. He
wanted no part in it, and yet he did. He liked Claire Randall;
he liked Brianna Randall, too – much more than liked her ,
truth be told. He  wanted to protect her , and save her whatever
pain he could. And yet there see med no way to do that. All he
could do was keep his mouth shut until Claire Randall did
whatever it was she planned to do. And then be there to pick
up the pieces.3  M O T H E R S  A N D
D A U G H T E R S
I  wo ndered just how many tiny  tea shops there were in
Inverness. The High Street is l ined on both sides with small
cafes and tourist shops, as far as the eye can see. Once Queen
V ictoria had made the Highland s safe for travelers by giving
her Roy al approval of the place , tourists had flocked north in
ever -increasing numbers. The Scots, unaccustomed to
receiving anything from the South but armed invasions and
political interference, had risen to the challenge magnificently .
Y ou cou ldn’ t walk more than a few feet on the main street
of any Highland town without encountering a shop selling
shortbread, Edin bur gh rock, handkerchiefs embroidered with
thistles, toy bagpipes, clan badges of cast aluminum, letter -
openers shaped  like claymores, coin purses shaped like
sporrans (some with an anato mically correct “Scotchman”
attached undern eath), and an eye-jangling assortment of
spurious clan tartans, adorning every conceivable object made
of f abric, from caps, neckties, and serviettes down to a
particularly horrid yellow “Buchanan” sett used to make men’ s
nylon Y -front underpants.
Looking over an assortment of tea towels stenciled with a
wildly inaccurate depiction of the Loch Ness monster singing
“Auld Lang Syne,” I thought V ictoria had a lot to answer for .
Brianna was wandering slowly down the narrow aisle of
the shop , head tilted back as she stared in amazement at the
assortment of merchandise hanging from the rafters.
“Do you think those are r eal ?” she said, pointing upward
at a set of m ounted stag’ s antlers, poking their tines
inquisitively through an absolute forest of bagpipe drones.
“The antlers? Oh, yes. I don’ t imagine plastics
technology’ s go t quite that  good, yet,” I replied. “Besides,
look at the price . Anything over one hundred pounds is very
likely real.”Brianna’ s eyes widened, and she lowered her head.
“Jeez. I think I’ll get Jane a skirt-length of tartan instead.”
“Good-quality wool tartan won’ t cost a lot less,” I said
dryly , “but it will be a lot easier to get home on the plane.
Let’ s go across to the Kiltmaker store, then; they’ll have the
best quality .”
It had begun to r ain – of course – and we tucked our paper -
wrapped parcels underneath th e raincoats I had prudently
insisted we wear . Brianna snorted with sudden amusement.
“Y ou ge t so used to calling these things ‘macs,’ you for get
what they’re really called. I’m not surprised it was a Scot that
invented them,” she added, looking up at the water sheeting
down from the e dge of the cano py overhead. “Does it rain all
the time here?”
“Pretty much,” I said, peering up and down through the
downpour for oncoming traf fic. “Though I’ve always
supposed Mr . Macintosh was rather a lily-livered sort; most
Scots I’ve known were relativel y impervious to rain.” I bit my
lip suddenly , but Brianna hadn’ t noticed the slip, minor as it
was; she was eyeing the ankle-d eep freshet running down the
gutter .
“T ell you what, Mama, maybe  we’d better go up to the
crossing. W e aren’ t going to make it jaywalking here.”
Nodding assent, I followed her up the street, heart
pounding with adrenaline under the clammy cover of my mac.
When ar e you going to get it over with?  my mind demanded.
Y ou can’ t keep w atching your wor ds and swallowing half the
things you start to say . Why not just tell her?
Not yet,  I thought to myself. I’m  not a coward – or if I am,
it doesn’ t matter . But it isn’ t quite time yet. I wanted her to see
Scotland first. Not this lot – as  we passed a shop of fering a
display of tartan baby booties – but the countryside. And
Culloden. Most of all, I want to  be able to tell her the end of
the story . And for that, I need Roger W akefield.
As t hough my thought had sum moned it into being, the
bright orange top of a battered  Morris caught my eye in theparking lot to t he left, glowing like a traf fic beacon in the
foggy wet.
Brianna had seen it too – there couldn’ t be many cars in
Inverness of that specific color and disreputability – and
pointed at it, saying, “Look, Mama, isn’ t that Roger
W akefield’ s car?”
“Y es, I think so,” I said. There  was a cafe on the right,
from wh ich the scent of fresh scones, stale toast, and cof fee
drifted to mingle with the fresh,  rainy air . I grabbed Brianna’ s
arm and pulled her into the cafe.
“I th ink I’m hungry after all,”  I explained. “Let’ s have
some cocoa and biscuits.”
Still child enough to be tempted by chocolate, and young
enough to be willing to eat at any time, Bree of fered no
ar gument, but sat down at once  and picked up the tea-stained
sheet of green paper that served as the daily menu.
I d idn’ t particul arly want cocoa, but I did want a moment
or tw o to  think. There was a lar ge sign on the concrete wall of
the parking lot across the street, reading P ARKING FOR
SCOTRAIL ON L Y , followed by various lowercase threats as
to what would h appen to the v ehicles of people who parked
there without being train riders. Unless Roger knew something
about the forces of law and order in Inverness that I didn’ t
know , chances were that he had taken a train. Granted that he
could h ave go ne anywhere, either Edinbur gh or London
seemed most likely . He was taking this research project
seriously , dear lad.
W e had come up on the train from Edinbur gh ourselves. I
tried to  remember what the schedule was like, with no
particular success.
“I wond er if Roger will be back on the evening train?”
Bree sai d, echoing my thoughts with an uncanniness that made
me choke on m y cocoa. The fact that she wondered about
Roger ’ s reappea rance made me  wonder just ho w much notice
she had taken of young Mr . W akefield.
A fair amount, apparently .“I was thinking,” she said casua lly , “maybe we should get
something for Roger W akefield while we’re out – like a thank-
you for that project he’ s doing for you?”
“Good idea,” I said, amused. “What do you think he’d
like?”
She frowned into her cocoa as though looking for
inspiration. “I don’ t know . Something nice; it looks like that
project could be a lot of work.” She glanced up at me
suddenly , brows raised.
“Why di d you ask him?” she said. “If you wanted to trace
people from the eighteenth century , there’re companies that do
that. Genealogies and like that, I mean. Daddy always used
Scot-Search, if he had to figur e out a genealogy and didn’ t
have time to do it himself.”
“Y es, I know ,” I said, and took a deep breath. W e were on
shaky g round here. “This project – it was something special
to… to your fath er . He would have wanted Roger W akefield to
do it.”
“Oh.” She was s ilent for a while, watching the rain spatter
and pearl on the cafe window .
“Do you miss D addy?” she asked suddenly , nose buried in
her cup, lashes lowered to avoid looking at me.
“Y es,” I said. I ran a forefinger up the edge of my own
untouched cup, wiping of f a dri p of spilled cocoa. “W e didn’ t
always get on, you know that, but… yes. W e respected each
other; th at count s for a lot. And we liked each other , in spite of
everything. Y es, I do miss him.”
She nodded, wordless, and put her hand over mine with a
little squ eeze. I curled my finger s around hers, long and warm,
and we sat linked for a little while, sipping cocoa in silence.
“Y ou know ,” I s aid at last, pushing back my chair with a
squeak of metal on linoleum, “I’d for gotten something. I need
to post a letter to the hospital. I’d meant to do it on the way
into town, but I for got. If I hurry , I think I can just catch the
outgoing post. Why don’ t you go to the Kiltmaker ’ s – it’ s justdown the street, on the other side – and I’ll join you there after
I’ve been to the post of fice?”
Bree looked surprised, but nodded readily enough.
“Oh. Ok ay . Isn’ t the post of fice a long way , though? Y ou’ll
get soaked.”
“That’ s all right. I’ll take a cab.” I left a pound note on the
table to pay for the meal, and shrugged back into my raincoat.
In most cities, the usual response of taxicabs to rain is to
disappear , as though they were soluble. In Inverness, though,
such behavior would render the species rapidly extinct. I’d
walked less than a block before finding two squatty black cabs
lurking outside a hotel, and I slid into the warm, tobacco-
scented interior with a cozy feeling of familiarity . Besides the
greater leg room and comfort, British cabs smelled dif ferent
than American ones; one of t hose tiny things I had never
realized I’d missed during the last twenty years.
“Number sixty-four? Tha’ s the auld manse, aye?” In spite
of the ef ficiency  of the cab’ s heater , the driver was muf fled to
the ears in a scarf and thick jack et, with a flat cap guarding the
top o f hi s head from errant drafts. Modern Scots had gone a bit
soft, I reflected; a long way from the days when sturdy
Highlanders had slept in the heather in nothing but shirt and
plaid. O n the other hand, I wasn ’ t all that eager to go sleep in
the heather in a wet plaid, either . I nodded to the driver , and
we set of f in a splash.
I fel t a bit subversive, sneaking round to interview Roger ’ s
housekeeper while he was out, and fooling Bree into the
bar gain. On the other hand, it would be dif ficult to explain to
either of them ju st what I was doing. I hadn’ t yet determined
exactly h ow or when I would tell them what I had to say , but I
knew it wasn’ t time yet.
My fingers probed the inner po cket of my mac, reassured
by the scrunch of the envelop e from Scot-Search. While I
hadn’ t paid a g reat deal of attention to Frank’ s work, I did
know about the firm, which maintained a staf f of half a dozen
professional researchers specializing in Scottish genealogy;not the sort of place that gave you a family tree showing your
relationship to Robert the Bruce and had done with it.
They’d done their usual thorough, discreet job on Roger
W akefield. I knew who his pare nts and grandparents had been,
back som e seven or eight genera tions. What I didn’ t know was
what he might be made of. T ime would tell me that.
I paid of f the cab and splashed up the flooded path to the
steps of the old m inister ’ s house . It was dry on the porch, and I
had a chance to shake of f the worst of the wet before the door
was opened to my ring.
Fiona beamed in welcome; she had the sort of round,
cheerful face whose natural expression was a smile. She was
attired in jeans and a frilly apron, and the scent of lemon
polish and fresh baking wafted from its folds like incense.
“Why , Mrs. Randall!” she excla imed. “Can I be helpin’ ye
at all, then?”
“I think  perhaps you might, Fi ona,” I said. “I wanted to
talk to you about your grandmother .”
 
“Are you sure y ou’re all right, Mama? I could call Roger
and ask  him to go tomorrow , if you’d like me to stay with
you.” Brianna hovered in the doorway of the guesthouse
bedroom, an anxious frown creasing her brow . She was
dressed for walking, in boots, jeans, and sweater , but she’d
added the brilliant orange and blue silk scarf Frank had
brought her from Paris, just before his death two years before.
“Just th e color of your eyes, little beauty ,” he’d said,
smiling as he draped the scarf around her shoulders, “ –
orange.” It was a joke between  them now , the “little beauty ,”
as Bree had topp ed Frank’ s modest five feet ten since she was
fifteen. It was what he’d called her since babyhood, though,
and the tenderness of the old na me lingered as he reached up
to touch the tip of her nose.
The scarf – the  blue part – was in fact the color of her
eyes; of Scottish lochs and summer skies, and the misty blue
of distan t mountains. I knew sh e treasured it, and revised myassessment of her interest in Roger W akefield upward by
several notches.
“No, I’l l be fine,” I assured her . I gestured toward the
bedside table, adorned with a small teapot, carefully keeping
warm under a k nitted cozy , and a silver -plated toast rack, just
as carefully keeping the toast nice and cold. “Mrs. Thomas
brought me tea and toast; perhaps I’ll be able to nibble a little
later on. ” I hoped she couldn’ t h ear the rumbling of my empty
stomach under the bedclothes, r egistering appalled disbelief at
this prospect.
“W ell, all right.” She turned relu ctantly to the door . “W e’ll
come right back after Culloden, though.”
“Don’ t hurry on my account,” I called after her .
I waited until I heard the sound of the door closing below ,
and was  sure she was on her w ay . Only then did I reach into
the drawer of t he bedtable for the lar ge Hershey bar with
almonds that I had hidden there the night before.
Cordial relations with my stomach reestablished, I lay back
against the pillow , idly watchin g the gray haze thicken in the
sky out side. The tip of a budding lime branch flicked
intermittently against the window; the wind was rising. It was
warm enough in the bedroom, with the central-heating vent
roaring away at the foot of the b ed, but I shivered nonetheless.
It would be cold on Culloden Field.
Not, per haps, as  cold as it had been in the April of 1746,
when B onnie Prince Charlie led his men onto that field, to
stand in the fac e of freezing sleet and the roar of English
cannon fire. Accounts of the da y reported that it was bitterly
cold, an d the Highland wounded had lain heaped with the
dead, soaked in blood and rain,  awaiting the mercies of their
English victors. The Duke of Cumberland, in command of the
English army , had given no quarter to the fallen.
The dea d were heaped up like cordwood and burned to
prevent the spread of disease, and history said that many of the
wounded had gone to a simila r fate, without the grace of a
final bul let. All of them lay no w beyond the reach of war or
weather , under the greensward of Culloden Field.I had  seen the place once, nearly thirty years before, when
Frank had taken me there on ou r honeymoon. Now Frank was
dead, too, and I  had brought my  daughter back to Scotland. I
wanted Brianna to see Culloden , but no power on earth would
make me set foot again on that deadly moor .
I suppos ed I had better stay in bed, to maintain credence in
the sudd en indis position that had prevented me accompanying
Brianna and Roger on their expedition; Mrs. Thomas might
blab if I got up a nd put in an order for lunch. I peeked into the
drawer; three more candy bars a nd a mystery novel. W ith luck,
those would get me through the day .
The nov el was good enough, but the rush of the rising
wind outside was hypnotic, and  the embrace of the warm bed
welcoming. I dropped peacefull y into sleep, to dream of kilted
Highland men, and the sound of soft-spoken Scots, burring
round a fire like the sound of bees in the heather .4  C U L L O D E N
“W hat a mean little  piggy face!” Brianna stooped to peer
fascinated at the red-coated mannequin that stood menacingly
to one side of t he foyer in the Culloden V isitors Centre. He
stood a few in ches over five feet, powdered wig thrust
belligerently forward over a low brow and pendulous, pink-
tinged cheeks.
“W ell, he was a  fat little fellow ,” Roger agreed, amused.
“Hell of a gener al, though, at least as compared to his elegant
cousin o ver there.” He waved a hand at the taller figure of
Charles Edward Stuart on the other side of the foyer , gazing
nobly of f into the distance und er his blue velvet bonnet with
its white cockade, loftily ignoring the Duke of Cumberland.
“They called him ‘Butcher Billy .’ ” Roger gestured at the
Duke, stolid in white knee breeches and gold-braided coat.
“For exc ellent reason. Aside from what they did here” – he
waved toward the expanse of the spring-green moor outside,
dulled by the lowering sky – “Cumberland’ s men were
responsible for the worst reign of English terror ever seen in
the High lands. They chased the survivors of the battle back
into the hills, bu rning and looting as they went. W omen and
children were turned out to starve, and the men shot down
where they stood – with no ef f ort to find out whether they’d
ever fought for Charlie. One of the Duke’ s contemporaries
said of him, ‘He created a desert  and called it peace’ – and I’m
afraid the Duke of Cumberland is still rather noticeably
unpopular hereabouts.”
This was true; th e curator of the visitors’ museum, a friend
of R oger ’ s, had told him that while the figure of the Bonnie
Prince was treated with reveren t respect, the buttons of f the
Duke’ s jacket were subject to constant disappearance, while
the figure itself had been the butt of more than one rude joke.
“He said one morning he came in early and turned on the
light, to  find a genuine Highlan d dirk sticking in His Grace’ sbelly ,” Roger said, nodding at t he podgy little figure. “Said it
gave him a right turn.”
“I’d think so,” Brianna murmured, looking at the Duke
with raised brows. “People still take it that seriously?”
“Oh, aye. Scots have long mem ories, and they’re not the
most for giving of people.”
“Really?” She looked at him curiously . “Are you Scottish,
Roger? W akefield doesn’ t sound like a Scottish name, but
there’ s s omething about the way you talk about the Duke of
Cumberland…” There was the  hint of a smile around her
mouth, a nd he wasn’ t sure whether he was being teased, but he
answered her seriously enough.
“Oh, aye .” He smiled as he said it. “I’m Scots. W akefield’ s
not my own name, see; the R everend gave it me when he
adopted me. He was my mothe r ’ s uncle – when my parents
were killed in th e W ar , he took me to live with him. But my
own name is M acKenzie. As for the Duke of Cumberland” –
he nodded at the plate-glass window , through which the
monuments of Culloden Field were plainly visible. “There’ s a
clan stone out th ere, with the name of MacKenzie carved on it,
and a good many of my relatives under it.”
He reached out and flicked a gold epaulet, leaving it
swinging. “I don’ t feel quite so p ersonal about it as some, but I
haven’ t for gotten , either .” He he ld out a hand to her . “Shall we
go outside?”
It was cold outside, with a gusty wind that lashed two
pennons, flying atop the poles set at either side of the moor .
One yellow , one red, they marke d the positions where the two
commanders had stood behind their troops, awaiting the
outcome of the battle.
“W ell back out o f the way , I see,” Brianna observed dryly .
“No chance of getting in the way of a stray bullet.”
Roger noticed her shivering, and drew her hand further
through his arm, bringing her clo se. He thought he might burst
from the  sudden swell of happin ess touching her gave him, but
tried to disguise  it with a retreat into historical monologue.“W ell, t hat was how generals le d, back then – from the rear .
Especially Char lie; he ran of f so fast at the end of the battle
that he left behind his sterling silver picnic set.”
“A picnic  set? He brought a picnic to the battle?”
“Oh, aye.” Roger found that he  quite liked being Scottish
for Brianna. He usually took pains to keep his accent
modulated unde r the all-purpose Oxbridge speech that served
him at the university , but now h e was letting it have free rein
for t he s ake of the smile that cr ossed her face when she heard
it.
“D’ye know why they called him ‘Prince Charlie’?” Roger
asked. “English people always think it was a nickname,
showing how much his men loved him.”
“It wasn’ t?”
Roger shook his head. “No, in deed. His men called him
Prince T charlach”  – he spelled it carefully – “which is the
Gaelic for Charles. T charlach mac Seamus , ‘ Charl es, son of
James.’ V ery formal and respectful indeed. It’ s only that
T charlach  i n Gael ic sounds the hell of a lot like ‘Charlie’ in
English.”
Brianna grinned. “So he never was ‘Bonnie Prince
Charlie’?”
“Not then.” Roger shrugged. “N ow he is, of course. One of
those little historical mistakes that get passed on for fact.
There are a lot of them.”
“And you a historian!” Brianna said, teasing.
Roger smiled wryly . “That’ s how I know .”
They wandered slowly down the graveled paths that led
through the battlefield, Roger pointing out the positions of the
dif ferent regiments that had fought there, explaining the order
of battle, recounting small anecdotes of the commanders.
As t hey walked, the wind died d own, and the silence of the
field began to assert itself. Gradually their conversation died
away as  well, until they were talking only now and then, in
low voices, almost whispers. T he sky was gray with cloudfrom horizon to horizon, and everything beneath its bowl
seemed muted, with only the whisper of the moor plants
speaking in the voices of the men who fed them.
“This is  the place they call the W ell of Death.” Roger
stooped by the small spring. Barely a foot square, it was a tiny
pool of dark water , welling under a ridge of stone. “One of the
Highland chieftains died here; his followers washed the blood
from his face with the water from this spring. And over there
are the graves of the clans.”
The clan stones were lar ge boulders of gray granite,
rounded by weather and blotched with lichens. They sat on
patches of smooth grass, widely scattered near the edge of the
moor . Each one bore a single name, the carving so faded by
weather as to be nearly illegible  in some cases. MacGillivray .
MacDonald. Fraser . Grant. Chisholm. MacKenzie.
“Look,” Brianna  said, almost in  a whisper . She pointed at
one of the stones. A small heap of greenish-gray twigs lay
there; a few early spring flow ers mingled, wilted, with the
twigs.
“Heather ,” Roger said. “It’ s more common in the summer ,
when th e heather is blooming – then you’ll see heaps like that
in front of every clan stone. Purple, and here and there a
branch of the white heather – the white is for luck, and for
kingship; it was Charlie’ s emblem, that and the white rose.”
“Who leaves them?” Brianna sq uatted on her heels next to
the path, touching the twigs with a gentle finger .
“V isitors.” Roger squatted next to her . He traced the faded
letters on the stone – FRASER . “People descended from the
families of the m en who were killed here. Or just those who
like to remember them.”
She looked sidelong at him, hai r drifting around her face.
“Have you ever done it?”
He looked down, smiling at his hands as they hung
between his knees.
“Y es. I suppose it’ s very sentimental, but I do.”Brianna turned to the thicket of moor plants that edged the
path on the other side.
“Show me which is heather ,” she said.
On the way hom e, the melancholy of Culloden lifted, but
the feeli ng of shared sentiment lingered, and they talked and
laughed together like old friends.
“It’ s too bad Mother couldn’ t come with us,” Brianna
remarked as they turned into the road where the Randalls’ bed-
and-breakfast was.
Much as  he liked Claire Randal l, Roger didn’ t agree at all
that it was too bad she hadn’ t come. Three, he thought, would
have been a crowd, and n o mistake. But he grunted
noncommitally , and a momen t later asked, “How is  your
mother? I hope she’ s not terribly ill.”
“Oh, no, it’ s just an upset stomach – at least that’ s what she
says.” B rianna frowned to herself for a moment, then turned to
Roger , laying a hand lightly on  his leg. He felt the muscles
quiver from knee to groin, and  had a hard time keeping his
mind on  what she was saying. S he was still talking about her
mother .
“…think she’ s all right?” she fin ished. She shook her head,
and copper glinted from the waves of her hair , even in the dull
light of the car . “ I don’ t know; s he seems awfully preoccupied.
Not ill, exactly – more as thoug h she’ s kind of worried about
something.”
Roger felt a sudden heaviness in the pit of his stomach.
“Mphm,” he said. “Maybe just b eing away from her work.
I’m sure  it will be all right.” Brianna smiled gratefully at him
as they pulled up in front of Mrs. Thomas’ s small stone house.
“It w as great, Ro ger ,” she said, touching him lightly on the
shoulder . “But there wasn’ t much here to help with Mama’ s
project. Can’ t I help you with some of the grubby stuf f?”
Roger ’ s spirits lightened considerably , and he smiled up at
her . “I think tha t might be arran ged. W ant to come tomorrow
and have a go at the garage with  me? If it’ s filth you want, you
can’ t get much grubbier than that.”“Great.” She smiled, leaning on the car to look back in at
him. “Maybe Mother will want to come along and help.”
He could feel his face stif fen, but kept gallantly smiling.
“Right,” he said. “Great. I hope so.”
 
In the event, it was Brianna alone who came to the manse
the next day .
“Mama’ s at the public library ,” she explained. “Looking up
old phon e directories. She’ s trying to find someone she used to
know .”
Roger ’ s heart skipped a beat at  that. He had checked the
Reverend’ s phonebook the night before. There were three local
listings under the name “James Fraser ,” and two more with
dif ferent first names, but the middle initial “J.”
“W ell, I hope she finds him,”  he said, still trying for
casualness. “Y ou’re really sure you want to help? It’ s boring,
filthy work.” Roger looked at Brianna dubiously , but she
nodded, not at all discomposed at the prospect.
“I k now . I used  to help my father sometimes, dredging
through old records and find ing footnotes. Besides, it’ s
Mama’ s project; the least I can do is help you with it.”
“All right.” Roger glanced down at his white shirt. “Let me
change, and we’ll go have a look.”
The garage door creaked, groaned, then surrendered to the
inevitable and sur ged suddenly upward, amid the twanging of
springs and clouds of dust.
Brianna waved her hands back and forth in front of her
face, coughing. “Gack!” she said. “How long since anyone’ s
been in this place?”
“Eons, I expect.” Roger replied absently . He shone his
torch around the inside of the garage, briefly lighting stacks of
cardboard cartons and wooden crates, old steamer trunks
smeared with peeling labels, and amorphous tarpaulin-draped
shapes. Here and there, the upt urned legs of furniture pokedthrough the gloom like the skeletons of small dinosaurs,
protruding from their native rock formations.
There was a sor t of fissure in the junk; Roger edged into
this and  prompt ly disappeared into a tunnel bounded by dust
and shadows, his progress mark ed by the pale spot of his torch
as it shone intermittently on the ceiling. At last, with a cry of
triumph, he seized the dangling tail of a string hanging from
above, and the g arage was suddenly illuminated in the glare of
an oversized bulb.
“This way ,” Roger said, reappe aring abruptly and taking
Brianna by the hand. “There’ s sort of a clear space in back.”
An ancient table stood against the back wall. Perhaps
originally the centerpiece of the  Reverend W akefield’ s dining
room, it had evidently gone through several successive
incarnations as kitchen block, toolbench, sawhorse, and
painting table, before coming to rest in this dusty sanctuary . A
heavily cobwebbed window overlooked it, through which a
dim light shone on the nicked, paint-splattered surface.
“W e can work h ere,” Roger said, yanking a stool out of the
mess and dusting it perfunctorily with a lar ge handkerchief.
“Have a seat, and I’ll see if I can pry the window open;
otherwise, we’ll suf focate.”
Brianna nodded,  but instead of sitting down, began to poke
curiously through the nearer piles of junk, as Roger heaved at
the warped window frame. He  could hear her behind him,
reading the labels on some of the boxes. “Here’ s 1930-33,” she
said, “And here’ s 1942-46. What are these?”
“Journals,” said Roger , grunting as he braced his elbows
on the grimy sill. “My father – the Reverend, I mean – he
always kept a journal. W rote it up every night after supper .”
“Looks like he found plenty to write about.” Brianna
hoisted down several of the bo xes, and stacked them to the
side, in order to inspect the next layer . “Here’ s a bunch of
boxes with names on them – ‘Kerse,’ ‘Livingston,’ ‘Balnain.’
Parishioners?”“No. V i llages.” Roger paused in his labors for a moment,
panting. He wiped his brow , leaving a streak of dirt down the
sleeve of his sh irt. Luckily both of them were dressed in old
clothes, suitable for rootling in filth. “Those will be notes on
the history of va rious Highland villages. Some of those boxes
ended up as books, in fact; you’ll see them in some of the local
tourist shops through the Highlands.”
He turne d to a pegboard from which hung a selection of
dilapidated tools, and selected a lar ge screwdriver to aid his
assault on the window .
“Look fo r the ones that say ‘Parish Registers,’ he advised.
“Or for village names in the area of Broch T uarach.”
“I don’ t know any of the villages in the area,” Brianna
pointed out.
“Oh, aye, I was for getting.” Roger inserted the point of the
screwdriver between the edges of the window frame, grimly
chiseling through layers of ancient paint. “Look for the names
Broch Mordha… um, Mariannan, and… oh, St. Kilda. There’ s
others, but those are ones I kno w had fair -sized churches that
have been closed or knocked down.”
“Okay .” Pushing aside a hanging flap of tarpaulin, Brianna
suddenly leaped backward with a sharp cry .
“What? What is it?” Roger whirled from the window ,
screwdriver at the ready .
“I don’ t know . Something skittered away when I touched
that tarp.” Brianna pointed, and Roger lowered his weapon,
relieved.
“Oh, that all? Mouse, most like. Maybe a rat.”
“A rat!  Y ou have rats  in  here?” Brian na’ s agitation was
noticeable.
“W ell, I hope no t, because if so, they’ll have been chewing
up t he records we’re looking fo r ,” Roger replied. He handed
her t he t orch. “H ere, shine this i n any dark places; at least you
won’ t be taken by surprise.”“Thanks a lot.” Brianna accepte d the torch, but still eyed
the stacks of cartons with some reluctance.
“W ell, g o on then,” Roger said. “Or did you want me to do
you a rat satire on the spot?”
Brianna’ s face split in a wide g rin. “A rat satire? What’ s
that?”
Roger delayed his answer , long  enough for another try at
the wind ow . He pushed until he  could feel his biceps straining
against the fabric of his shirt, but at last, with a rending
screech, the window gave way , and a reviving draft of cool air
whooshed in through the six-inch gap he’d created.
“God, that’ s better .” He fann ed himself exaggeratedly ,
grinning at Brianna. “Now , shall we get on with it?”
She han ded him  the torch, and stepped back. “How about
you  find the boxes, and I’ll  sort through them? And what’ s a
rat satire?”
“Coward,” he said, bending to rummage beneath the
tarpaulin. “A rat satire is an old Scottish custom; if you had
rats or mice in y our house or yo ur barn, you could make them
go away  by composing a poem – or you could sing it – telling
the rats how po or the eating w as where they were, and how
good it was elsewhere. Y ou told them where to go, and how to
get there, and p resumably , if the satire was good enough –
they’d go.”
He pulled out a carton  labeled JACOBITES,
MISCELLANEOUS, and carried it to the table, singing,
“Y e rats, ye ar e too many ,
If ye would dine in plenty ,
Y e mun go, ye mun go.”
Lowering the box with a thump , he bowed in response to
Brianna’ s giggli ng and turned ba ck to the stacks, continuing in
stentorian voice.
“Go to Campbell’ s gar den,
Wher e nae cat stands war den,And the kale, it gr ows gr een.
Go and fill your bellies,
Dinna stay and gnaw my wellies –
Go, ye rats, go!”
Brianna snorted appreciatively . “Did you just make that
up?”
“Of course.” Roger deposited another box on the table
with a flourish. “A good rat sa tire must always be original.”
He cast a glance at the serried  ranks of cartons. “After that
performance, there shouldn’ t b e a rat within miles of this
place.”
“Good.” Brianna pulled a jackknife from her pocket and
slit t he tape that  sealed the topmost carton. “Y ou should come
do one at the be d-and-breakfast place; Mama says she’ s sure
there’ s mice in the bathroom. S omething chewed on her soap
case.”
“God knows what it would t ake to dislodge a mouse
capable of eating bars of soap; far beyond my feeble powers, I
expect.” He rolled a tattered rou nd hassock out from behind a
teetering stack of obsolete encyclopedias, and plumped down
next to Brianna. “Here, you take  the parish registers, they’re a
bit easier to read.”
They worked through the morning in amiable
companionship, turning up occa sional interesting passages, the
odd silverfish, and recurrent clouds of dust, but little of value
to the project at hand.
“W e’d b etter stop for lunch soo n,” Roger said at last. He
felt a strong rel uctance to go back into the house, where he
would once more be at Fiona’ s mercy , but Brianna’ s stomach
had begun to growl almost as loudly as his own.
“Okay . W e can do some more after we eat, if you’re not
worn ou t.” Brian na stood and st retched herself, her curled fists
almost r eaching the rafters of t he old garage. She wiped her
hands on the legs of her jeans, and ducked between the stacks
of boxes.“Hey!” She stopped short, near the door . Roger , following
her , was  brought up sharp, his nose almost touching, the back
of her head.
“What is it?” he asked. “Not another rat?” He noted with
approval that the sun lit her th ick single braid with glints of
copper and gold. W ith a small golden nimbus of dust
surrounding her , and the light of noon silhouetting her long-
nosed profile, he thought she loo ked quite medieval; Our Lady
of the Archives.
“No. Look at t his, Roger!” She pointed at a cardboard
carton n ear the middle of a stack. On the side, in the
Reverend’ s strong black hand, was a label with the single word
“Randall.”
Roger felt a stab of mingled excitement and apprehension.
Brianna’ s excitement was unalloyed.
“Maybe that’ s got the stuf f we’re looking for!” she
exclaimed. “Mama said it was something my father was
interested in; maybe he’d already asked the Reverend about
it.”
“Could be.” Roger forced down the sudden feeling of
dread th at had struck him at si ght of the name. He knelt to
extract t he box from its restin g place. “Let’ s take it in the
house; we can look in it after lunch.”
 
The box , once opened in the Reverend’ s study , held an odd
assortment of things. There were old photostats of pages from
several parish registers, two or three army muster lists, a
number of letters and scattered papers, a small, thin notebook,
bound in gray cardboard covers, a packet of elderly
photographs, curling at the edges, and a stif f folder , with the
name “Randall” printed on the cover .
Brianna picked up the folder and opened it. “Why , it’ s
daddy’ s family tree!” she exclaimed. “Look.” She passed the
folder to Roger . Inside were tw o sheets of thick parchment,
with lines of d escent neatly ruled across and down. The
beginning date was 1633; the final entry , at the foot of the
second page, showed 
Frank W olve rton Randall m. Clair e Elizabeth
Beauchamp, 1937
 
“Done before you were born,” Roger murmured.
Brianna peered over his shoulder as his finger passed
slowly down the lines of the ge nealogical table. “I’ve seen it
before; d addy had a copy in his study . He used to show it to
me all the time. His had me at th e bottom, though; this must be
an early copy .”
“Maybe the Reverend did some  of the research for him.”
Roger h anded Brianna back the folder , and picked up one of
the papers from the stack on the desk.
“Now h ere’ s an heirloom for yo u,” he said. He traced the
coat of arms embossed at the h ead of the sheet. “A letter of
commission in the army , signed by His Royal Majesty , King
Geor ge II.”
“Geor ge the Second?  Jeez, that’ s even before the American
Revolution.”
“Considerably before. It’ s dated 1735. In the name of
Jonathan W olverton Randall. Know that name?”
“Y eah.” Brianna nodded, stray wisps of hair falling in her
face. She wiped them back c arelessly and took the letter .
“daddy u sed to talk about him e very now and then; one of the
few ancestors he knew much a bout. He was a captain in the
army that fought Bonnie Prince Charlie at Culloden.” She
looked u p at Roger , blinking. “I think maybe he was killed in
that batt le, in fact. He wouldn’ t have been buried there, would
he?”
Roger shook his head. “I shou ldn’ t think so. It was the
English who cleared up after th e battle. They shipped most of
their own dead back home for burial – the of ficers, anyway .”
He was prevented from further observation by the sudden
appearance in the doorway of Fiona, bearing a feather duster
like a battle standard.“Mr . W akefield,” she called. “There’ s the man come to
take awa’ the Re verend’ s truck, but he canna get it started. He
says will ye be givin’ him a hand, like?”
Roger st arted guiltily . He had ta ken the battery to a garage
for testin g, and it was still sitti ng in the backseat of his own
Morris. No wonder the Reverend’ s truck wasn’ t starting.
“I’ll hav e to go sort this out,” he told Brianna. “I’m afraid
it might take a while.”
“That’ s okay .” She smiled at him, blue eyes narrowing to
triangles. “I should go too. Mama will be back by now; we
thought we might go out to the Clava Cairns, if there was time.
Thanks for the lunch.”
“My ple asure – and Fiona’ s.” Roger felt a stab of regret at
being unable to of fer to go with her , but duty called. He
glanced at the papers spread o ut on the desk, then scooped
them up and deposited them back in the box.
“Here,” he said. “This is all you r family records. Y ou take
it. Maybe your mother would be interested.”
“Really? W ell, thanks, Roger . Are you sure?”
“Absolutely ,” he said, carefully laying the folder with the
genealogical chart on top. “Oh, wait. Maybe not all of it.” The
corner of the gra y notebook stuck out from under the letter of
commission; he pulled it free, a nd tidied the disturbed papers
back into the b ox. “This looks like one of the Reverend’ s
journals. Can’ t think what it’ s do ing in there, but I suppose I’d
better put it wit h the others; the historical society says they
want the whole lot.”
“Oh, sur e.” Brianna had risen t o go, clutching the box to
her chest, but hesitated, looking at him. “Do you – would you
like me to come back?”
Roger sm iled at her . There were cobwebs in her hair , and a
long streak of dirt down the bridge of her nose.
“Nothing I’d like better ,” he said. “See you tomorrow , eh?”
 The thought of the Reverend’ s journal stayed with Roger ,
all d uring the t edious business  of getting the ancient truck
started, a nd the subsequent visit  of the furniture appraiser who
came to  sort the valuable antiques from the rubbish, and set a
value on the Reverend’ s furnishings for auction.
This disposition of the Reverend’ s ef fects gave Roger a
sense of restless melancholy . It was, after all, a dismantling of
his o wn youth, as much as the c learing away of useless bric-a-
brac. By the time he sat down in the study after dinner , he
could not have said whether  it was curiosity about the
Randalls that compelled him to pick up the journal, or simply
the ur ge somehow to regain a tenuous connection with the
man who had been his father for so many years.
The journals were kept meticulo usly , the even lines of ink
recording all major events of th e parish and the community of
which t he Reverend Mr . W akefield had been a part for so
many years. The feel of the plai n gray notebook and the sight
of it s pages con jured up for Roger an immediate vision of the
Reverend, bald head gleaming i n the glow of his desk lamp as
he industriously inscribed the day’ s happenings.
“It’ s a discipline,” he had explained once to Roger .
“There’ s a great benefit to doing regularly something that
orders the mind, you know . Ca tholic monks have services at
set t imes every day , priests hav e their breviaries. I’m afraid I
haven’ t the knack of such immediate devotion, but writing out
the happenings of the day helps to clear my mind; then I can
say my evening prayers with a calm heart.”
A ca lm heart. Roger wished he could manage that himself,
but calmness hadn’ t visited him since he’d found those
clippings in the Reverend’ s desk.
He open ed the book at random, and slowly turned the
pages, looking for a mention of the name “Randall.” The dates
on the notebook’ s cover were January-June, 1948. While what
he had told Brianna about the historical society was true, that
had not been his chief motive in keeping the book. In May of
1948, Claire Randall had returned from her mysterious
disappearance. T he Reverend had known the Randalls well;
such an event was sure to have found mention in his journal.Sure enough, the entry for May 7:
 
“V isit w . Frank Randall this evening; this business about
his wife.  So distr essing! Saw her yester day – so frail, but those
eyes sta ring – made me uneasy to sit w . her , poor woman,
though she talked sensibly .
Enough to unhinge anyone, what she’ s been thr ough –
whatever it was. T errible gossip about it all – so car eless of
Dr . Bartholomew to let on that she’ s pr egnant. So har d for
Frank –  and for her , of course ! My heart goes out to them
both.
Mrs. Graham ill this week – she could have chosen a
better ti me; jumble sale next w eek, and the por ch full of old
clothes…”
 
Roger flipped rapidly through the pages, looking for the
next mention of the Randalls, and found it, later the same
week.
 
“  May 10  – Frank Randall to dinner . Doing my best to
associate public ly both w . him and his wife; I sit with her for
an hour most days, in hopes of quelling some of the gossip. It’ s
almost pitying now; wor d’ s gone r ound that she’ s demented.
Knowing Clair e Randall, I’m not sur e that she would not be
mor e offended at being thought insane than at being
consider ed immoral – must be one or the other though?
T ried r e peatedly to talk to her about her experiences, but
she says  nothing of that. T alks all right about anything else,
but always a sense that she’ s thinking of something else.
Must make a note to pr each this Sunday on the evils of
gossip –  though I’m afraid calling attention to the case with a
sermon will only make it worse.”
 
“  May 12  -…Can’ t get fr ee of the notion that Clair e
Randall is not d eranged. Have hear d the gossip, of course, butsee nothing in her behaviour that seems unstable in the
slightest.
Do think she carries some terrible secr et; one she’ s
determined to keep. Spoke – cau tiously – to Frank of this; he’ s
r eticent, but I’m convinced she  has said something to him.
Have tried to make it clear I wish to help, in any way I can.”
 
“  May 14  – A visit fr om Frank Randall. V ery puzzling. He
has asked my he lp, but I can’ t see why he asked what he has.
Seems very important to him, th ough; he keeps himself under
close r ei n, but wound tight as a watch. I fear the r elease – if it
comes.
Clair e w ell enou gh to travel – he means to take her back to
London this week. Assur ed him I would communicate any
r esults to  him by letter at his University addr ess; no hint to his
wife.
Have several items of inter est on Jonathan Randall,
though I  can’ t imagine the significance of Frank’ s ancestor to
this sorry business. Of James Fraser , as I told Frank – no
inkling; a complete mystery .”
 
A complete mystery . In more ways than one, Roger
thought. What had Frank Rand all asked the Reverend to do?
T o find out wha t he could abou t Jonathan Randall and about
James Fraser , apparently . So Cla ire had told her husband about
James Fraser – told him something, at least, if not everything.
But what conceivable connection could there be between
an English army captain who had died at Culloden in 1746,
and the man wh ose name seemed inextricably bound up with
the mystery of Claire’ s disappearance in 1945 – and the further
mystery of Brianna’ s parentage?
The rest of the journal was filled with the usual miscellany
of p arish happenings; the chronic drunkenness of Derick
Gowan, culmin ating in that pa rishioner ’ s removal from the
River Ness as a water -logged corpse in late May; the hasty
wedding of Maggie Brown and W illiam Dundee, a monthbefore the christening of their daughter , June; Mrs. Graham’ s
appendectomy , and the Reverend’ s attempts to cope with the
resultant influx of covered dishes from the generous ladies of
the parish – He rbert, the Reverend’ s current dog, seemed to
have been the beneficiary of most of them.
Reading through  the pages, Roger found himself smiling,
hearing the Reverend’ s lively interest in his flock come to life
once more in the old minister ’ s words. Browsing and
skimming, he nearly missed it  – the last entry concerning
Frank Randall’ s request.
 
“  June 18  – Had a brief note fr om Fr ank Randall,
advising me that his wife’ s health is somewhat pr ecarious; the
pr egnancy is danger ous and he asks my prayers.
Replied with assurances of prayers and good wishes for
both him  and his wife. Enclosed also the information I had so
far found for him; can’ t say what use it will be to him, but that
must be  his own judgement. T old him of the surprising
discovery of Jonathan Randall’ s  grave at St. Kilda; asked if he
wishes me to photograph the stone.”
 
And that was all. There was no further mention of the
Randalls, or of James Fraser . R oger laid the book down and
massaged his temples; reading the slanting lines of
handwriting had given him a mild headache.
Aside from confirming his suspicions that a man named
James Fraser was mixed up in a ll this, the matter remained as
impenetrable as  ever . What in the name of God did Jonathan
Randall have to do with it, an d why on earth was the man
buried at St. K ilda? The letter of commission had given
Jonathan Randa ll’ s place of birth as an estate in Sussex; how
did h e en d up in a remote Scotti sh kirkyard? T rue, it wasn’ t all
that far from Cu lloden – but wh y hadn’ t he been shipped back
to Sussex?
“W ill ye be needin’ anything else tonight, Mr . W akefield?”
Fiona’ s voice roused him from h is fruitless meditations. He sat
up, blinking, to see her holding a broom and a polishing cloth.“What? Er , no. No, thanks, Fiona. But what are you doing
with all that clobber? Not still cleaning at this time of night?”
“W ell, i t’ s the church ladies,” Fiona explained. “Y ou
remember , ye told them they could hold their regular monthly
meeting here tomorrow? I thought I’d best tidy up a bit.”
The church ladies? Roger quail ed at the thought of forty
housewives, oozing sympathy , descending on the manse in an
avalanche of tweeds, twin-sets, and cultured pearls.
“W ill ye be takin’ tea with the ladies?” Fiona was asking.
“The Reverend always did.”
The thought of entertaining Brianna Randall and the
church ladies simultaneously was more than Roger could
contemplate with equanimity .
“Er , no,” he said abruptly . “I’ve… I’ve an engagement
tomorrow .”
His hand fell on the telephone, half-buried in the debris of
the R everend’ s desk. “If you’ll excuse me, Fiona, I’ve got to
make a call.”
 
Brianna wande red back into the bedroom, smiling to
herself. I looked up from my book and arched a brow in
inquiry .
“Phone call from Roger?” I said.
“How’d you know?” She looked startled for a moment,
then grinned, shucking of f her  robe. “Oh, because he’ s the
only guy I know in Inverness?”
“I didn’ t think any of your bo yfriends would be calling
long-distance fro m Boston,” I said. I peered at the clock on the
table. “N ot at this hour , anyw ay; they’ll all be at football
practice.”
Brianna ignored  this, and shoved  her feet under the covers.
“Roger ’ s invite d us to go up to a place called St. Kilda
tomorrow . He says it’ s an interesting old church.”“I’ve he ard of it,” I said, yawnin g. “All right, why not? I’ll
take my plant press; maybe I can find some crown vetch – I
promised some to Dr . Abernathy for his research. But if we’re
going to spend the day tramping round reading old
gravestones, I’m turning in now . Digging up the past is
strenuous work.”
There was a bri ef flicker in Brianna’ s face, and I thought
she was  about to say something . But she merely nodded, and
reached to turn out the light, the secretive smile still lurking in
the corners of her mouth.
I la y looking up into the darkness, hearing her small
tossings and turnings fade into the regular cadences of her
sleeping breath. St. Kilda, eh? I had never been there, but I
knew of  the place; it was an old church, as Brianna had said,
long deserted and out of the way for tourists – only the
occasional researcher ever went there. Perhaps this was the
opportunity I had been waiting for , then?
I wo uld have Ro ger and Brianna together there, and alone,
with little fear of interruption. And perhaps it was a suitable
place to tell them  – there among  the long-dead parishioners of
St. Kild a. Roger had not yet verified the whereabouts of the
rest of the Lallybroch men, but it seemed fairly sure that they
had at least left Culloden Field alive, and that was really all I
needed to know , now . I could tell Bree the end of it, then.
My mouth grew dry at the thought of the coming
interview . Where was I to find the words for this? I tried to
visualize how it might go; wh at I might say , and how they
might react, but imagination failed me. More than ever , I
regretted my promise to Frank that had kept me from writing
to th e Reverend W akefield. If  I had, Roger at least might
already know . Or perhaps not; the Reverend might not have
believed me.
I turned restless ly , seeking inspiration, but weariness crept
over me. And at last I gave up and turned onto my back,
closing my eyes on the dark abo ve me. As though my thinking
of him had summoned the Reverend’ s spirit, a biblical
quotation drifted  into my fading  consciousness: Sufficient untothe day , the Reverend’ s voice seemed to murmur to me,
sufficient unto the day is the evil ther eof . And then I slept.
 
I wo ke up in the shadowed dark, hands clenched in the
bedclothes, heart beating with a force that shook me like the
skin of a kettledrum. “Jesus!” I said.
The silk  of my nightgown was hot and clinging; looking
down, I could d imly see my nip ples thrusting through it, hard
as marbles. The quivering spasms were still rippling through
wrists and thighs, like the aft ershocks of an earthquake. I
hoped I hadn’ t c ried out. Probably not; I could hear Brianna’ s
breathing, untroubled and regular across the room.
I fell back on the pillow , sha king with weakness, the
sudden flush washing my temples with damp.
“Jesus H . Roose velt Christ,” I muttered, breathing deeply
as my heart slowly returned to normal.
One of the ef fects of a disturb ed sleep cycle is that one
stops dreaming coherently . Through the long years of early
motherhood, and then of internship, residency , and nights on-
call, I had got u sed to falling at once into oblivion when I lay
down, with such dreams as occurred nothing more than
fragments and flashes, restless flickers in the dark as synapses
fired at random,  rechar ging themselves for the work of the day
that would come too soon.
In more recent years, with the resumption of something
resembling a normal schedule, I had begun to dream again.
The usual kinds of dreams, whe ther nightmare or good dream
– long sequence s of images, w anderings in the wood of the
mind. And I was familiar with this kind of dream, too; it was
common to what might politely be called periods of
deprivation.
Usually , though, such dreams came floating, soft as the
touch of satin sh eets, and if they woke me, I fell at once back
into sleep, glowing dimly with a memory that would not last
’ til morning.This was dif ferent. Not that I remembered much about it,
but I had a vague impression of hands that gripped me, rough
and ur gent, not wooing but compelling. And a voice, nearly
shouting, that echoed in the cha mbers of my inner ear , along
with the sound of my fading heartbeat.
I put my hand o n my chest ove r the leaping pulse, feeling
the s oft fullness of my breast be neath the silk. Brianna’ s breath
caught in a so ft snore, then resumed its even cadence. I
remembered list ening for that s ound when she was small; the
slow , stertorous rhythm of reas surance, sounding through the
darkened nursery , even as a heartbeat.
My own  heartbe at was slowing under my hand, under the
deep rose silk, the color of a baby’ s sleep-flushed cheek. When
you hold a child  to your breast to nurse, the curve of the little
head echoes exactly the curve of the breast it suckles, as
though this new person truly mirrors the flesh from which it
sprang.
Babies are soft. Anyone looking at them can see the tender ,
fragile skin and know it for the r ose-leaf softness that invites a
finger ’ s touch. But when you l ive with them and love them,
you feel the softness going inward, the round-checked flesh
wobbly as custard, the boneless splay of the tiny hands. Their
joints are melted rubber , and even when you kiss them hard, in
the p assion of lo ving their existence, your lips sink down and
seem never to find bone. Holding them against you, they melt
and mol d, as though they might at any moment flow back into
your body .
But from the ve ry start, there i s that small streak of steel
within e ach child. That thing that says “I am,” and forms the
core of personality .
In the second year , the bone hardens and the child stands
upright, skull wide and solid, a helmet protecting the softness
within. And “I am” grows, to o. Looking at them, you can
almost see it, sturdy as heartwood, glowing through the
translucent flesh.
The bon es of the face emer ge at  six, and the soul within is
fixed at seven. The process of encapsulation goes on, to reachits peak in the g lossy shell of a dolescence, when all softness
then is hidden u nder the nacreous layers of the multiple new
personalities that teenagers try on to guard themselves.
In th e next years , the hardening spreads from the center , as
one finds and fixes the facets of the soul, until “I am” is set,
delicate and detailed as an insect in amber .
I ha d thought I was well beyond that stage, had lost all
trace of softness  and was well set on my way to a middle age
of stainless steel. But now I thought that Frank’ s death had
cracked me in some way . And the cracks were widening, so
that I could no longer patch them with denial. I had brought
my daug hter back to Scotland, s he with those bones strong as
the ribs of High land mountains, in the hope that her shell was
strong enough to hold her together , while the center of her “I
am” might still be reachable.
But my own core held no longer in the isolation of “I am,”
and I had no protection to shield me from the softness from
within. I  no longer knew what I was or what she would be;
only what I must do.
For I had come b ack, and I dream ed once more, in the cool
air of the Highla nds. And the v oice of my dream still echoed
through ears and heart, repeated with the sound of Brianna’ s
sleeping breath.
“Y ou are mine,” it had said. “Mine! And I will not let you
go.”5  B E L O V E D  W I F E
T he k irkyard of S t. Kilda lay quiet in the sun. Not entirely
flat, it occupied  a plateau carve d from the side of the hill by
some geological freak. The land sloped and curved, so that the
gravestones lay hidden in small hollows or jutted suddenly
from the crest of a rise. The shifting of the earth had moved
many , tilting them drunkenly or toppling them altogether , to lie
flattened and broken in the long grass.
“It’ s a bit untidy ,” Roger said, apologetically . They paused
in the kirkyard gate, looking over the small collection of
ancient stones, over grown and shadowed by the row of giant
yews, planted long ago as a win dbreak against the storms that
rolled in from the northern sea. Clouds massed there now , far
out o ver the dist ant firth, but the  sun shone on the hilltop, and
the air was still and warm.
“My fat her used to get together a gang of men from the
church once or twice a year , and bring them up to keep the
place in  order , but I’m afraid it’ s rather gone to seed lately .”
He swu ng the lych-gate experimentally , noting the cracked
hinge and the latch-fitting, dangling by one nail.
“It’ s a lovely , quiet place.” Brianna edged carefully past
the splintery gate. “Really old, isn’ t it?”
“A ye, it is. dad thought the kirk  itself was built on the site
of an  ear ly churc h or an even older temple of some kind; that’ s
why it’ s up here in such an i nconvenient spot. One of his
friends from Oxford was always threatening to come up and
excavate the place to see what was under it, but of course he
couldn’ t get clearance from t he Church authorities, even
though the place has been deconsecrated for years.”
“It’ s kind of a climb.” The flush of exertion was beginning
to fade from Brianna’ s face as she fanned her cheeks with a
guidebook. “Beautiful, though.” She eyed the facade of the
kirk with appreciation. Built into  a natural opening in the crag,
the s tones and ti mbers of the kir k had been fitted by hand, the
chinks caulked with peat and mud, so that it seemed to havegrown there, a natural part of the clif f face. Ancient carvings
decorated door sill and window frame, some showing the
symbols of Christianity , some obviously much older .
“Is Jonathan Randall’ s stone over there?” She waved
toward the kirkyard, visible beyond the gate. “Mother will be
so surprised!”
“A ye, I expect s o. Haven’ t seen it myself.” He hoped the
surprise would be a pleasant on e; when he had mentioned the
stone ca utiously to Brianna over the phone the night before,
she had been enthusiastic.
“I know about Jonathan Randall,” she was telling Roger .
“Daddy always admired him; said he was one of the few
interesting peop le in the family tree. I guess he was a good
soldier; Daddy had lots of commendations and things he’d
gotten.”
“Really?” Roger looked back, in search of Claire. “Does
your mother need help with that plant press?”
Brianna shook her head. “Nah.  She just found a plant by
the path she couldn’ t resist. She’ll be up in a minute.”
It w as a silent place. Even the b irds were quiet as midday
approached, and the dark ever greens that edged the plateau
were still, with no breeze to stir their branches. W ithout the
raw scars of rec ent graves or t he flags of plastic flowers as
testimony to still-fresh grief, the kirkyard breathed only the
peace of the long-dead. Removed from strife and trouble, only
the fact of their life remained to give the comfort of a human
presence on the lonely heights of an empty land.
The progress of the three visitor s was slow; they wandered
their way casually through the old kirkyard, Roger and
Brianna pausing to read aloud quaint inscriptions from the
weathered stones, Claire, on her own, stooping now and then
to clip a vine or uproot a small flowering plant.
Roger bent over one stone, and grinning, beckoned
Brianna to read the inscription.
“ ‘Approach and read, not with your hats on,’ ” she read. “
‘For her e lies Bailie W illiam W atson/Who was famous for histhinking/And moderation in his drinking.’ ” Brianna rose from
examining the stone, her face flushed with laughter . “No dates
– I wonder when W illiam W atson lived.”
“Eighteenth ce ntury , most likely ,” Roger said. “The
seventeenth-century stones are mostly too weathered to read,
and no one’ s b een buried here in two hundred years; the
church was deconsecrated in 1800.”
A m oment later , Brianna let out  a muf fled whoop. “Here it
is!” She  stood up and waved to Claire, who was standing on
the far side of th e kirkyard, peering inquisitively at a length of
greenery she held in one hand. “Mama! Come look at this!”
Claire w aved back, and made he r way to where they stood
beside the flat, square stone, stepping carefully across the
crowded graves.
“What is it?” she asked. “Find an interesting grave?”
“I th ink so. Recognize this name ?” Roger stepped back, so
she could have a clear view .
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Mildly startled, Roger
glanced at Claire, and was alarmed to see how pale she was.
She stared down at the weathered stone, and the muscles of
her throat moved in a convulsive swallow . The plant she had
pulled was crushed in her hand, unregarded.
“Dr . Randall – Claire – are you all right?”
The amber eyes were blank, an d she appeared not to hear
him for a mome nt. Then she blinked, and looked up. She was
still pale, but seemed better now; back in control.
“I’m fine,” she said, voice flat.  She stooped, and ran her
fingers over the letters of the st one as though reading them in
Braille.
“Jonathan W olv erton Randall,”  she said softly , “1705-
1746. I told you, didn’ t I? Y ou b astard, I told  you !” H er voice ,
so flat an instant before, was suddenly vibrant, filled with a
restrained fury .
“Mama! Are you all right?” Brianna, obviously upset,
pulled at her mother ’ s arm.Roger thought it was as thou gh a shade had dropped
behind Claire’ s eyes; the feeling that had shone there was
suddenly hidden , as she snapped back to a realization of the
two peo ple staring at her , aghast. She smiled, a brief,
mechanical grimace, and nodded.
“Y es. Y es, of course. I’m fine.” Her hand opened, and the
stalk of limp greenery dropped to the ground.
“I thoug ht you’d be surprised.” Brianna was looking
worriedly at her mother . “Isn’ t this Daddy’ s ancestor? The
soldier who died at Culloden?”
Claire glanced down at the gravestone near her feet.
“Y es, it is,” she said. “And he is  dead, isn’ t he?”
Roger a nd Brian na exchanged looks. Feeling responsible,
Roger touched Claire on the shoulder .
“It’ s rath er a hot day ,” he said, trying for a note of casual
matter -of-factness. “Perhaps we should go into the church for
a l ittle shade. Th ere are some v ery interesting carvings on the
font; well worth seeing.”
Claire smiled at him. A real smile this time, a little tired,
but eminently sane.
“Y ou go ,” she said, including Brianna with a tilt of her
head. “I need a little air . I’ll stay out here for a bit.”
“I’ll stay with you.” Brianna was hovering, clearly
unwilling to leave her mother on her own, but Claire had
recovered both her equanimity and her air of command.
“Nonsense,” she said briskly . “I’m perfectly all right. I’ll
go s it in  the shade of the trees over there. Y ou go along. I’d
rather be by my self for a bit,” she added firmly , seeing Roger
opening his mouth to protest.
W ith no further ado, she turned and walked of f, toward the
line of dark ye w trees that edged the kirkyard to the west.
Brianna hesitated, looking after her , but Roger took the girl by
the elbow , and drew her toward the church.
“Best leave her alone,” he murmured. “After all, your
mother ’ s a doctor , isn’ t she? She’ll know if it’ s all right.”“Y eah… I suppose so.” W ith a final troubled glance after
Claire’ s retreating figure, Brianna allowed him to lead her
away .
 
The kirk  was no more than an empty wood-floored room,
with the abandoned font left in place only because it could not
be r emoved. The shallow basin  had been scooped out of the
stone le dge that ran along one  side of the room. Above the
basin, th e carved visage of St. Kilda gazed emptily toward the
ceiling, eyes piously upturned.
“It w as probably one of the p agan gods to start with,”
Roger sa id, trac ing the line of the carving with a finger . “Y ou
can see where t hey added the veil and wimple to the original
figure – not to mention the eyes.”
“Like poached eggs,” Brianna agreed, rolling her own up
in imitation. “What’ s this carvin g over here? It looks a lot like
the patterns on those Pictish stones outside Clava.”
They strolled casually around the walls of the kirk,
breathing the dusty air , examining the ancient carvings in the
stone walls, and reading the sm all wooden plaques af fixed by
long-vanished p arishioners in memory of ancestors gone still
longer . T hey spoke quietly , both keeping an ear out for any
sounds from the kirkyard, but all was quiet, and slowly they
began to relax again.
Roger followed Brianna toward the front of the room,
watching the curling tendrils that escaped from her braid to
coil damply on her neck.
All that remaine d now at the front of the kirk was a plain
wooden ledge above the hole w here the altarstone had been
removed. Still, Roger felt something of a quiver up his spine
as he stood beside Brianna, facing the vanished altar .
The sheer intensity of his feelin gs seemed to echo in the
empty place. He hoped she couldn’ t hear them. They had
known each other barely a w eek, after all, and had had
scarcely any private conversation. She would be taken aback,
surely , o r frightened, if she knew what he felt. Or worse yet,
she would laugh.Y et, whe n he stole a glance at her , her face was calm and
serious. It was a lso looking back at him, with an expression in
the d ark blue of her eyes that tu rned him toward her and made
him reach for her without conscious thought.
The kiss was brief and gentle , scarcely more than the
formality that concludes a we dding, yet as striking in its
impact as though they had this minute plighted a troth.
Roger ’ s hands fell away , but the  warmth of her lingered, in
hands an d lips and body , so that he felt as though he held her
still. They stood a moment, bodies grazing, breathing each
other ’ s a ir , and then she stepped back. He could still feel the
touch of  her on the palms of his hands. He curled his fingers
into fists, seeking to hold the feeling.
The still  air of the church shivered suddenly into bits, the
echoes of a scream scattering the dust motes. W ithout
conscious thoug ht, Roger was outside, running, stumbling and
scrambling over the tumbled stones, heading for the dark line
of t he yews. He pushed his way between the over grown
branches, not bothering to ho ld back the scaly twigs for
Brianna, hot on his heels.
Pale in the shadows, he saw Claire Randall’ s face.
Completely drained of color , she looked like a wraith against
the dark branches of the yew . She stood for a moment,
swaying, then sank to her knees in the grass, as though her
legs would no longer support her .
“Mother!” Bria nna dropped to her knees beside the
crouching figure, chafing one of the limp hands. “Mama, what
is it? Are you faint? Y ou should put your head between your
knees. Here, why don’ t you lie down?”
Claire resisted the helpful proddings of her of fspring, and
the drooping head came upright on its slender neck once more.
“I don’ t want to lie down,” she g asped. “I want… oh, God.
Oh, dear holy God.” Kneeling a mong the unmowed grass she
stretched out a trembling hand to the surface of the stone. It
was carved of granite, a simple slab.“Dr . Randall! Er , Claire?” Roge r dropped to one knee on
her other side, putting a hand under her other arm to support
her . He was trul y alarmed at her appearance. A fine sweat had
broken out on her temples and she looked as though she might
keel over at any moment. “Claire,” he said again, ur gently ,
trying to rouse h er from the star ing trance she had fallen into.
“What is it? Is it a name you know?” Even as he spoke, his
own wo rds were ringing in his ears. No one’ s been buried her e
since the eighteenth century , he’d told Brianna. No one’ s been
buried her e in two hundr ed years .
Claire’ s fingers brushed his own away , and touched the
stone, caressing, as though touching flesh, gently tracing the
letters, the grooves worn shallow , but still clear .
“ ‘JAMES ALEXANDER MALCOLM MACKENZIE
FRASER,’ ” she read aloud. “Y es, I know him.” Her hand
dropped lower , brushing back the grass that grew thickly about
the stone, obscuring the line of smaller letters at its base.
“ ‘Beloved husband of Claire,’ ” she read.
“Y es, I knew hi m,” she said ag ain, so softly Roger could
scarcely hear her . “I’m Claire . He was my husband.” She
looked up then, into the face  of her daughter , white and
shocked above her . “And your father ,” she said.
Roger and Brianna stared down at her , and the kirkyard
was silent, save for the rustle of the yews above.
 
“No!” I said, quite crossly . “For the fifth time – no! I don’ t
want a drink of water . I have not got a touch of the sun. I am
not faint. I am not ill. And I haven’ t lost my mind, either ,
though I imagine that’ s what you’re thinking.”
Roger and Brianna exchanged glances that made it clear
that that  was precisely what they were thinking. They had,
between them, got me out of th e kirkyard and into the car . I
had refused to be taken to hospital, so we had gone back to the
manse. Roger had administered medicinal whisky for shock,
but his eyes d arted toward the telephone now as though
wondering whether to dial for additional help – like a
straitjacket, I supposed.“Mama.” Brianna spoke soothingly , reaching out to try to
smooth the hair back from my face. “Y ou’re upset.”
“Of course I’m upset!” I snapped. I took a long, quivering
breath and clamped my lips tig ht together , until I could trust
myself to speak calmly .
“I am certainly upset,” I began, “but I’m not mad.” I
stopped, struggling for control. This wasn’ t the way I’d
intended to do it . I didn’ t know quite what I had  intended, but
not this, blurting out the truth w ithout preparation or time to
or ganize my own thoughts. Seeing that bloody grave had
disrupted any plan I might have formed.
“Damn you, Jamie Fraser!” I said, furious. “What are you
doing there anyway; it’ s miles  from Culloden!”
Brianna’ s eyes were halfway out on stalks, and Roger ’ s
hand wa s hover ing near the tele phone. I stopped abruptly and
tried to get a grip on myself.
Be c alm, Beauchamp, I instructed myself. Breathe deeply .
Once… twice…  once more. Be tter . Now . It’ s very simple; all
you hav e to do is tell them the truth. That’ s what you came to
Scotland for , isn’ t it?
I op ened my mo uth, but no sound came out. I closed my
mouth, and my eyes as well, hoping that my nerve would
return, if I couldn’ t see the two ashen faces in front of me.
Just… let… me… tell… the…  truth, I prayed, with no idea
who I was talking to. Jamie, I thought.
I’d told the truth once before. It hadn’ t gone well.
I pre ssed my ey elids shut more tightly . Once more I could
smell th e carbolic surroundings of a hospital, and feel the
unfamiliar starched pillowcase beneath my cheek. From the
corridor outside came Frank’ s voice, choked with baf fled rage.
“What do you mean, don’ t press her? Don’ t pr ess  her? My
wife’ s b een gone for nearly thre e years, and come back filthy ,
abused, and pr egnant , for God’ s sake, and I’m not to ask
questions ?”
And the doctor ’ s voice, murmuring soothingly . I caught the
words “delusion ,” and “traumatic state,” and “leave it for later ,old man – just for a bit” as Frank’ s voice, still ar guing and
interrupting, was gently but firmly eased down the hall. That
so-familiar voice, which raised  anew the storm of grief and
rage and terror inside me.
I h ad curled my body into a defensive ball, pillow clutched
to my chest, and bitten it, as h ard as I could, until I felt the
cotton c asing give way and the  silky grit of feathers grinding
between my teeth.
I wa s grinding them now , to the detriment of a new filling.
I stopped, and opened my eyes.
“Look,” I said, as reasonably as I could. “I’m sorry , I know
how it sounds. But it’ s true, and nothing I can do about it.”
This speech did nothing to reassure Brianna, who edged
closer to Roger . Roger himself had lost that green-about-the-
gills look, though, and was exhibiting signs of cautious
interest. Could it be possible that he really did have enough
imagination to be able to grasp the truth?
I took hope from his expression, and unclenched my fists.
“It’ s the  bloody stones,” I said. “Y ou know , the standing
stone circle, on the fairies’ hill, to the west?”
“Craigh na Dun,” Roger murmured. “That one?”
“Right.” I exhaled consciously . “Y ou may know the
legends about fairy hills – do you? About people who get
trapped in rocky hills and wake up two hundred years later?”
Brianna was looking more alarmed by the moment.
“Mother , I really think you oug ht to go up and lie down,”
she said. She half-rose from her seat. “I could go get Fiona…”
Roger put a hand on her arm to stop her .
“No, wait,” he said. He looke d at me, with the sort of
suppressed curiosity a scientist shows when putting a new
slide under the microscope. “Go ahead,” he said to me.
“Thanks,” I said dryly . “Don’ t w orry , I’m not going to start
driveling about fairies; I just thought you’d like to know
there’ s s ome basis to the legen ds. I haven’ t any idea what itactually is up th ere, or how it works, but the fact is…” I took a
deep bre ath, “W ell, the fact is, that I walked through a bloody
cleft sto ne in that circle in 1945, and I ended up on the hillside
below in 1743.”
I’d said  exactly that to Frank.  He’d glared at me for a
moment, picked up a vase of flowers from my bedside table,
and smashed it on the floor .
Roger looked like a scientist wh ose new microbe has come
through a winner . I wondered w hy , but was too engrossed in
the struggle to find words that sounded halfway sane.
 
“The first person I ran into was an English dragoon in full
fig,” I said. “Wh ich rather gave me a hint that something was
wrong.”
A sudden smile lighted Roger ’ s face, though Brianna went
on looking horrified. “I should think it might,” he said.
“The dif ficulty was that I coul dn’ t get back, you see.” I
thought I’d better address my remarks to Roger , who at least
seemed disposed to listen, whether he believed me or not.
“The th ing is, ladies then didn’ t go about the place
unescorted, and if they did, th ey didn’ t do it wearing print
dresses and oxford loafers,” I explained. “Everyone I met,
starting with that dragoon captain, knew there was something
wrong about me – but they d idn’ t know what. How could
they? I couldn’ t explain then any better than I can now – and
lunatic asylums back then were much less pleasant places than
they are now . No basket weaving,” I added, with an ef fort at a
joke. It wasn’ t noticeably succ essful; Brianna grimaced and
looked more worried than ever .
“That dr agoon,” I said, and a brief shudder went over me
at the memory o f Jonathan W olverton Randall, Captain of His
Majesty’ s Eighth Dragoons. “I thought I was hallucinating at
first, because the man looked  so very like Frank; at first
glance, I thought it was he.” I  glanced at the table where a
copy of one o f Frank’ s books lay , with its back-cover
photograph of a dark and handsome lean-faced man.“That’ s quite a coincidence,” Roger said. His eyes were
alert, fixed on mine.
“W ell, it was and it wasn’ t,” I told him, wrenching my eyes
with an ef fort f rom the stack o f books. “Y ou know he was
Frank’ s ancestor . All the men in that family have a strong
family resemblance – physically , at least,” I added, thinking of
the rather striking nonphysical dif ferences.
“What –  what was he like?” Brianna seemed to be coming
out of her stupor , at least slightly .
“He was a blood y filthy pervert,” I said. T wo pairs of eyes
snapped open wide and turned to each other with an identical
look of consternation.
“Y ou ne edn’ t lo ok like that,” I said. “They had perversion
in th e eighteenth century; it isn’ t anything new , you know .
Only it was wor se then, maybe, since no one really cared, so
long as things w ere kept quiet and decent on the surface. And
Black Jack Randall was a soldier; he captained a garrison in
the High lands, char ged with keeping the clans under control –
he had considerable scope for his activities, all of ficially
sanctioned.” I took a restorative  gulp from the whisky glass I
still held.
“He liked to hurt people,” I said. “He liked it a lot.”
“Did he… hurt you?” Roger put the question with some
delicacy , after a rather noticeable pause. Bree seemed to be
drawing into herself, the skin tightening across her
cheekbones.
“Not directly . Or not much, at least.” I shook my head. I
could feel a cold spot in the pit of my stomach, which the
whisky was doing little to thaw . Jack Randall had hit me there,
once. I felt it in memory , like the ache of a long-healed wound.
“He had  fairly eclectic tastes. B ut it was Jamie that he…
wanted.” Under no circumstances would I have used the word
“loved.” My throat felt thick, an d I swallowed the last drops of
whisky . Roger held up the decanter , one brow raised
questioningly , and I nodded and held out my glass.
“Jamie. That’ s Jamie Fraser? And he was…”“He was my husband,” I said.
Brianna shook her head like a horse driving of f flies.
“But you had  a husba nd,” she said. “Y ou couldn’ t… even
if… I mean… you couldn’ t .”
“I had to,” I sa id flatly . “I did n’ t do it on purpose, after
all.”
“Mother , you can’ t get married accidentally!” Brianna was
losing her kindly-nurse-with-me ntal-patient attitude. I thought
this was probably a good thing , even if the alternative was
anger .
“W ell, it  wasn’ t precisely an ac cident,” I said. “It was the
best alternative to being handed  over to Jack Randall, though.
Jamie m arried me to protect me – and bloody generous of him,
too,” I finished, glaring at Bree o ver my glass. “He didn’ t have
to do it, but he did.”
I f ought  back the memory of our wedding night. He was a
vir gin; his hands had trembled  when he touched me. I had
been afraid too – with better reason. And then in the dawn he
had held me, na ked back against bare chest, his thighs warm
and strong behind my own, mu rmuring into the clouds of my
hair , “Dinna be afraid. There’ s the two of us now .”
“See,” I turned to Roger again, “I couldn’ t get back. I was
running away from Captain Randall when the Scots found me.
A party of cattle -raiders. Jamie was with them, they were his
mother ’ s people, the MacKenzies of Leoch. They didn’ t know
what to make of  me, but they took me with them as a captive.
And I couldn’ t get away again.”
I remembered my abortive ef forts to escape from Castle
Leoch. And then the day when I had told Jamie the truth, and
he – not believ ing, any more than Frank had, but at least
willing to act as  though he did – had taken me back to the hill
and the stones.
“He thought I w as a witch, perhaps,” I said, eyes closed,
smiling just a bit at the thought. “Now they think you’re mad;
then they thought you were a witch. Cultural mores,” I
explained, opening my eyes. “Psychology is just what they callit these days instead of magic. Not the hell of a lot of
dif ference.” Roger nodded, seeming a little stunned.
“They tried me for witchcraft,” I said. “In the village of
Cranesmuir , just below the castle. Jamie saved me, though,
and then I told him. And he took  me to the hill, and told me to
go back . Back to Frank.” I paused and drew a deep breath,
remembering that October afte rnoon, where control of my
destiny , taken from me for so long, had been suddenly thrust
back into my hands, and the choice not given, but demanded
of me.
“Go back!” he had said. “There’ s nothing here for ye!
Nothing save danger .”
“Is there  really nothing here fo r me?” I had asked. T oo
honorable to speak, he had answered nonetheless, and I had
made my choice.
“It was too late, ” I said, staring down at my hands, lying
open on my knees. The day was darkening to rain, but my two
wedding rings still gleamed in th e fading light, gold and silver .
I h adn’ t  taken Frank’ s gold band from my left hand when I
married Jamie, but had worn Jamie’ s silver ring on the fourth
finger of  my right hand, for eve ry day of the twenty-odd years
since he put it there.
“I lo ved Frank,” I said quietly , not looking at Bree. “I
loved him a lot. But by that time, Jamie was my heart and the
breath of my body . I couldn’ t leave him. I couldn’ t ,” I said,
raising m y head  suddenly to Bre e in appeal. She stared back at
me, stone-faced.
I looked down at my hands again, and went on.
“He took  me to his own home – Lallybroch, it was called.
A be autiful place.” I shut my ey es again, to get away from the
look on Brianna’ s face, and deliberately summoned the image
of th e estate of Broch T uarach – Lallybroch, to the people who
lived there. A beautiful Highland farm, with woods and
streams; even a bit of fertile gro und – rare for the Highlands.
A lo vely , peaceful place, sealed within high hills above a
mountain pass that kept it remot e from the recurrent strife thattroubled the Highlands. But even Lallybroch had proved only
a temporary sanctuary .
“Jamie was an outlaw ,” I said,  seeing behind my closed
eyelids the scars of flogging that the English had left on his
back. A network of thin white lines that webbed the broad
shoulders like a branded grid. “There was a price on his head.
One of his own  tenants betrayed him to the English. They
captured him, and took him to W entworth Prison – to hang
him.”
Roger gave a long, low whistle.
“Hell of  a place,” he remarked . “Have you seen it? The
walls must be ten feet thick!”
I o pened  my eyes. “They are,”  I said wryly . “I’ve been
inside th em. But even the thickest walls have doors.” I felt a
small fli cker of the blaze of desperate courage that had taken
me insid e W entworth Prison, in pursuit of my heart. If I could
do that for you, I told Jamie sile ntly , I can do this as well. But
help me, you bloody big Scot – help me!
“I got him out,” I said, taking a deep breath. “What was
left of him. Jack Randall commanded the garrison at
W entworth.” Now I didn’ t want to remember the images that
my words brought back, but the y wouldn’ t stop. Jamie, naked
and bloody , on the floor of El dridge Manor , where we had
found sanctuary .
“I wilna let the m take me back again, Sassenach,” he’d
said to me, teeth clenched ag ainst the pain as I’d set the
crushed bones of his hand and cleansed his wounds.
“Sassenach.” He had called me that from the first; the Gaelic
word for an outl ander , a stranger . An Englishman. First in jest,
and then in af fection.
And I hadn’ t l et them find him; with the help of his
kinsman, a little Fraser clansman called Murtagh, I’d gotten
him across the C hannel to France, and to refuge in the Abbey
of Ste. Anne de  Beaupré, where one of his Fraser uncles was
abbot. B ut once there in safety , I had found that saving his life
was not the end of the task set me.What Ja ck Randall had done to him had sunk into his soul
as surely  as the flails of the lash  had sunk in his back, and had
left scar s every bit as permanent. I was not sure, even now ,
what I had done, when I had summoned his demons and
fought them single-handed, in the dark of his mind; there is
very little dif ference between medicine and magic, when it
comes to some kinds of healing.
I co uld still feel  the cold, hard stone that bruised me, and
the s trength of t he fury that I had drawn from him, the hands
that closed round my neck and the burning creature who had
hunted me through the dark.
“But I did heal him,” I said softly . “He came back to me.”
Brianna was shaking her head slowly back and forth,
bewildered, but with a stubbor n set to her head that I knew
very well indeed. “Grahams are stupid, Campbells are
deceitful, MacKenzies are charming but sly , and Frasers are
stubborn,” Jamie  had told me once, giving me his view of the
general characteristics of the clans. He hadn’ t been far wrong,
either; Frasers wer e  ext remely stubborn, not least him. Nor
Bree.
“I don’ t  believe it,” she said flatly . She sat up straighter ,
eyeing m e closely . “I think maybe you’ve been thinking too
much about those men at Cu lloden,” she said. “After all,
you’ve been under a strain lately , and maybe Daddy’ s
death…”
“Frank wasn’ t your father ,” I said bluntly .
“He was !” She flashed back with it immediately , so fast
that it startled both of us.
Frank had, in ti me, bowed to the doctors’ insistence that
any attem pt to “force me to acce pt reality ,” as one of them put
it, might be harmful to my pregnancy . There had been a lot of
murmuring in corridors – and shouting, now and then – but he
had given up ask ing me for the truth. And I, in frail health and
sick at heart, had given up telling it to him.
I wasn’ t going to give up, this time.“I prom ised Frank,” I said. “T wenty years ago, when you
were born. I tried to leave him, and he wouldn’ t let me go. He
loved you.” I felt my voice soften as I looked at Brianna. “He
couldn’ t believe  the truth, but he knew – of course – that he
wasn’ t y our fath er . He asked me not to tell you – to let him be
your on ly father – as long as he lived. After that, he said, it
was up to me.” I swallowed, licking dry lips.
“I ow ed him that,” I said. “Because he loved you. But now
Frank’ s dead – and you have a right to know who you are.”
“If you doubt it,” I said, “go to the National Portrait
Gallery . They’ve a picture there of Ellen MacKenzie; Jamie’ s
mother . She’ s wearing these.” I touched the pearl necklace at
my t hroat. A str ing of baroque f reshwater pearls from Scottish
rivers, strung with roundels of p ierced gold. “Jamie gave them
to me on our wedding day .”
I l ooked  at Brianna, sitting tall and stif f, the bones of her
face star k in protest. “T ake along a hand mirror ,” I said. “T ake
a good look at t he portrait and then in the mirror . It’ s not an
exact likeness, but you’re very like your grandmother .”
Roger stared at Brianna as though he’d never seen her
before. He glanced back and for th between us, then, as though
making up his mind, suddenly s quared his shoulders and rose
from the sofa where he had been sitting beside her .
“I’ve something  I think you should see,” he said firmly . He
crossed quickly to the Reverend ’ s old rolltop desk and pulled a
rubber -banded b undle of yellowed newspaper clippings from
one of the pigeonholes.
“When you’ve read them, look at the dates,” he told
Brianna, handing them to her . Th en, still standing, he turned to
me a nd looked m e over , with the long, dispassionate gaze that
I rec ognized as a that of a schol ar , schooled in objectivity . He
didn’ t yet believe, but he had the imagination to doubt.
“Seventeen forty-three,” he said, as though to himself. He
shook his head, marveling. “And I thought it was a man you’d
met here, in 19 45. God, I wou ld never  have thought – well,
Christ, who would?”I was surprised. “Y ou knew? About Brianna’ s father?”
He nodded at th e clippings in Brianna’ s hands. She hadn’ t
yet looked at the m, but was staring at Roger , half-bewildered,
half-angry . I could see the storm gathering in her eyes, and so,
I th ought, could Roger . He looked hastily away from her ,
turning back to me in question.
“Then th ose men whose names y ou gave me, the ones who
fought at Culloden – you knew  them?”
I relaxed, ever so slightly . “Y es, I knew them.” There was a
grumble of thunder to the east, and the rain broke in a spatter
against the long windows that lined the study from floor to
ceiling on one side. Brianna ’ s head was bent over the
clippings, the wings of her hair hiding everything but the tip of
her nose, which was bright red.  Jamie always went red when
he w as furious o r upset. I was all too familiar with the sight of
a Fraser on the ver ge of explosion.
“And you were in France,” Rog er murmured as though to
himself, still studying me closely . The shock in his face was
fading into surmise, and a kind o f excitement. “I don’ t suppose
you knew…”
“Y es, I did,” I told him. “That’ s why we went to Paris. I’d
told Jam ie about Culloden – the  ’45, and what would happen.
W e went to Paris to try to stop Charles Stuart.”P A R T  T W OThe Pretenders
Le Havre, France
February 17446  M A K I N G  W A V E S
“B read,” I muttered feebly , keeping my eyes tightly
closed. There was no response  from the lar ge, warm object
next to me, other than the faint sigh of his breathing.
“Bread!” I said, a little louder . T here was a sudden startled
heave of  the bedclothes, and I gr asped the edge of the mattress
and tightened all my muscles, hoping to stabilize the pitch and
yaw of my internal or gans.
Fumbling noises came from the far side of the bed,
followed by the sliding of a dra wer , a muf fled exclamation in
Gaelic, the soft thud of a bare f oot stamping planks, and then
the sinking of the mattress under the weight of a heavy body .
“Here, Sassenach,” said an anxious voice, and I felt the
touch of a dry bread crust against my lower lip. Groping
blindly without opening my ey es, I grasped it and began to
chew gingerly , forcing each choking bite down a parched
throat. I knew better than to ask for water .
The dessicated wads of bread crumbs gradually made their
way dow n my throat and took up residence in my stomach,
where they lay like small heaps of ballast. The nauseating roll
of m y in ner wav es slowly calmed, and at last my innards lay at
anchor . I opened my eyes, to s ee the anxious face of Jamie
Fraser hovering a few inches above me.
“Ak!” I said, startled.
“All right, then?” he asked. When I nodded and feebly
began to  sit up, he put an arm  around my back to help me.
Sitting d own beside me on the rough inn bed, he pulled me
gently against him and stroked my sleep-tousled hair .
“Poor love,” he said. “W ould a bit of wine help? There’ s a
flask of hock in my saddlebag.”
“No. No, thank you.” I shuddered briefly at the thought of
drinking hock – I seemed to sm ell the dark, fruity fumes, just
at the mention of it – and pushed myself upright.“I’ll be fine in a  moment,” I said , with forced cheerfulness.
“Don’ t worry , it’ s quite norma l for pregnant women to feel
sick in the morning.”
W ith a dubious look at me, Jami e rose and went to retrieve
his cloth es from the stool near the window . France in February
is co ld as hell frozen over , and the bubbled-glass panes of the
window were coated thick with frost.
He was naked, and a ripple of gooseflesh brushed his
shoulders and raised the red-gold hairs on his arms and legs.
Accustomed to cold, though, he neither shivered nor hurried as
he pulle d on stockings and shir t. Pausing in his dressing, he
came back to the bed and hugged me briefly .
“Go back to bed,” he sugg ested. “I’ll send up the
chambermaid to light the fire. Perhaps ye can rest a bit, now
you’ve eaten. Y ou won’ t be sick  now?” I wasn’ t entirely sure,
but nodded reassuringly .
“I don’ t think so.” I cast an eye back at the bed; the quilts,
like mo st cover ings supplied by public inns, were none too
clean. Still, the s ilver in Jamie’ s purse had procured us the best
room in  the inn, and the narrow bed was stuf fed with goose
feathers rather than with chaf f or wool.
“Um, pe rhaps I will  j ust  lie down a moment,” I murmured,
pulling my feet of f the freezing floor and thrusting them under
the quilts, in s earch of the last remnants of warmth. My
stomach seemed to have settled suf ficiently to risk a sip of
water , and I poured a cupful from the cracked bedroom ewer .
“What were you stamping on?” I asked, sipping carefully .
“There aren’ t spiders up here, are there?”
Fastening his kilt about his waist, Jamie shook his head.
“Och, no ,” he said. Hands busy , he tilted his head toward
the table. “Just a rat. After the bread, I expect.”
Glancing down, I saw the limp  gray form on the floor , a
small pearl of blood glistening on the snout. I made it out of
bed just in time.
“It’ s all right,” I said faintly ,  a bit later . “There isn’ t
anything left to throw up.”“Rinse your mouth, Sassenach, but don’ t swallow , for
God’ s sa ke.” Jam ie held the cup  for me, wiped my mouth with
a c loth as though I were a small and messy child, then lifted
me and laid m e carefully back in the bed. He frowned
worriedly down at me.
“Perhaps I’d better stay here,” he said. “I could send
word.”
“No, no, I’m all right,” I said. A nd I was. Fight as I would
to keep from vo miting in the m ornings, I could hold nothing
down fo r long. Y et once the bout was over , I felt entirely
restored. Aside from a sour tas te in my mouth, and a slight
soreness in the a bdominal muscles, I felt quite my normal self.
I threw back the covers and stood up, to demonstrate.
“See? I’ll be fine. And you have to go; it wouldn’ t do to
keep your cousin waiting, after all.”
I was beginning to feel cheerful again, despite the chilly air
rushing under the door and beneath the folds of my nightgown.
Jamie w as still hesitating, reluctant to leave me, and I went to
him and  hugged him tightly , both in reassurance and because
he was delightfully warm.
“Brrr ,” I said. “ How on earth can you be warm as toast,
dressed in nothing but a kilt?”
“I’ve a shirt on as well,” he protested, smiling down at me.
W e clun g togeth er for a bit, enjoying each other ’ s warmth
in th e quiet cold of the early Fr ench morning. In the corridor ,
the clash and shuf fle of the chambermaid with her scuttle of
kindling grew nearer .
Jamie sh ifted a bit, pressing against me. Because of the
dif ficulties of traveling in the winter , we had been nearly a
week on  the road from Ste. Anne to Le Havre. And between
the late arrivals at dismal inns, wet, filthy , and shivering with
fatigue and cold, and the increasingly unsettled wakenings as
my m orning sickness got worse, we had scarcely touched each
other since our last night at the Abbey .
“Come to bed with me?” I invited, softly .He hesitated. The strength of his desire was obvious
through the fabric of his kilt, and his hands were warm on the
cool fles h of my own, but he d idn’ t move to take me in his
arms.
“W ell…” he said doubtfully .
“Y ou w ant to, don’ t you?” I said, sliding a chilly hand
under his kilt to make sure.
“Oh! er…  aye. A ye, I do.” The  evidence at hand bore out
this stat ement. He groaned faintly as I cupped my hand
between his legs. “Oh, Lord. Do n’ t do that, Sassenach; I canna
keep my hands from ye.”
He d id hug me  then, wrapping long arms about me and
pulling my face into the snowy tucks of his shirt, smelling
faintly of the l aundry starch Brother Alfonse used at the
Abbey .
“Why should you?” I said, muf f led in his linen. “Y ou’ve a
bit of time to spare, surely? It’ s only a short ride to the docks.”
“It isna that,” he said, smoothing my riotous hair .
“Oh, I’m  too fat?” In fact, my stomach was still nearly flat,
and I was thinn er than usual b ecause of the sickness. “Or is
it…?”
“No,” he said, s miling. “Y e talk too much.” He bent and
kissed me, then scooped me up and sat down on the bed,
holding me on his lap. I lay down and pulled him determinedly
down on top of me.
“Claire, no!” he protested as I started unbuckling his kilt.
I stared at him. “Whyever not?”
“W ell,” he said awkwardly , blus hing a bit. “The child… I
mean, I dinna want to hurt it.”
I laughed.
“Jamie, you can’ t hurt it. It’ s no  bigger than the tip of my
finger yet.” I held up a finger in illustration, then used it to
trace the  full, curving line of his  lower lip. He seized my handand ben t to kiss me abruptly , a s though to erase the tickle of
my touch.
“Y ou’re sure?” he asked. “I mean… I keep thinking he
wouldna like being jounced about…”
“He’ll n ever not ice,” I assured h im, hands once more busy
with the buckle of his kilt.
“W ell… if you’re sure of it.”
There was a peremptory rap at the door , and with
impeccable Gallic timing, the chambermaid pushed her way in
backward, carelessly gouging th e door with a billet of wood as
she turn ed. From the scarred s urfaces of door and jamb, it
appeared that this was her usual method of operations.
“ Bonjour , Mo nsieur , Madame,” she muttered, with a curt
nod tow ard the bed as she shuf fl ed toward the hearth. All right
for some  people, said her attitude, louder than words. Used by
this time to the matter -of-factness with which servants treated
the sigh t of inn patrons in any form of dishabille, I merely
murmured “ Bonjour , Mademoiselle,” in return and let it go at
that. I also let g o of Jamie’ s k ilt, and slid under the covers,
pulling the quilt up to hide my scarlet cheeks.
Possessed of somewhat greater sang-froid, Jamie placed
one of the bolsters strategically across his lap, parked his
elbows on it, rested his chin on upturned palms, and made
pleasant conversation with the maid, praising the cuisine of the
house.
“And from where do you procure the wine,
Mademoiselle?” he asked politely .
“From here, from there.” She s hrugged, stuf fing kindling
rapidly under the sticks with a practiced hand. “Wherever it’ s
cheapest.” The woman’ s plump face creased slightly as she
gave Jamie a sidelong look from the hearth.
“I gathe red as much,” he said , grinning at her , and she
gave a brief snort of amusement.
“I’ll wager I can match the price you’re getting, and
double the quality ,” he of fered. “T ell your mistress.”One eyebrow rose skeptically . “And what’ s your own
price, Monsieur?”
He mad e an altogether Gallic gesture of self-abnegation.
“Nothing, Mademoiselle. I go to call upon a kinsman who
sells wine. Perhaps I can bring him some new business to
ensure my welcome, no?”
She nod ded, seeing the wisdom of this, and grunted as she
rose from her knees.
“W ell enough, Monsieur . I’ll speak to the patr onne .”
The doo r thumped to behind th e maid, aided by a skillful
swing of her hi p in passing. Putting the bolster aside, Jamie
stood up and began to rebuckle his kilt.
“Where do you think you’re going?” I protested.
He g lanced down at me, and a reluctant smile curved the
wide mouth.
“Oh. W ell… you’re sure you’re up to it, Sassenach?”
“I am if you are,” I said, unable to resist.
He eyed me austerely .
“Just fo r that, I should go at o nce,” he said. “Still, I’ve
heard that ye ought to humor expectant mothers.” He let the
kilt fall to the floor and sat dow n beside me in his shirt, the
bed creaking beneath his weight.
His breath rose in a faint cloud as he turned back the quilt
and spread the front of the nightdress to expose my breasts.
Bending his head, he kissed each one, touching the nipple
delicately with his tongue, so it rose as though by magic, a
swelling dark pink against the white skin of my breast.
“God, t hey’re so lovely ,” he murmured, repeating the
process on the other side. He cupped both breasts, admiring
them.
“They’re heavie r ,” he said, “just a bit. And the nipples are
darker , t oo.” On e forefinger traced the springing curve of a
single fine hair that rose near the dark areola, silver in the
frosted light of the morning.Lifting the quilt, he rolled next to me and I turned into his
arms, cl asping the solid curves of his back, letting my hands
cup the firm rou nds of his butto cks. His bare flesh was chilled
by the morning a ir , but the goos e bumps smoothed away under
the warmth of my touch.
I tri ed to bring  him to me at once, but he resisted me
gently , f orcing me down onto the pillow as he nibbled the
edges of neck and ear . One hand slid up my thigh, the thin
material of the nightgown gliding in waves before it.
His hea d dipped  lower , and hi s hands gently spread my
thighs apart. I sh ivered momentarily as the cold air hit the bare
skin of my legs, then relaxe d completely into the warm
demand of his mouth.
His hair  was loose, not yet lace d back for the day , and the
soft red tickle of it brushed my thighs. The solid weight of his
body rested comfortably between my legs, broad hands cupped
on the roundness of my hips.
“Mmmm?” came a interrogative sound from below .
I a rched  my hips slightly in response, and a brief chuckle
grazed my skin with warmth.
The hands slid beneath my hips and raised me, and I
relaxed into deliquescence as the tiny shudder grew and
spread, rising in seconds to a fulfillment that left me limp and
gasping, Jamie’ s head resting on my thigh. He waited a
moment for me to recover , ca ressing the slope of my leg,
before returning to his self-appointed task.
I smooth ed the tumbled hair back, caressing those ears, so
incongruously s mall and neat for such a lar ge, blunt man. The
upper curve glowed with a faint, translucent pink, and I ran my
thumb along the edge of the curve.
“They’re pointe d at the tips,” I said. “Just a bit. Like a
faun’ s.”
“Oh, aye?” he s aid, interrupting his labors for a moment.
“Like a small deer , ye mean, or  the things ye see in classical
paintings wi’ goat’ s legs, chasing naked women?”I lifted my he ad and peered down across the roil of
bedclothes, nigh tgown, and naked flesh, to the deep blue cat-
eyes, gleaming above damp curls of brown hair .
“If the shoe fits,” I said, “wear  it.” And let my head fall
back on the pil low as the resultant muf fled laugh vibrated
against my all too sensitive flesh.
“Oh,” I said, straining upward. “Oh, my . Jamie, come
here.”
“Not yet,” he s aid, doing something with the tip of his
tongue that made me squirm uncontrollably .
“Now ,” I said.
He didn’ t bother to reply , and  I had no more breath to
speak with.
“Oh,” I said, a bit later . “That’ s…”
“Mmmm?”
“Good,” I murmured. “Come here.”
“No, I’ll do,” he said, face invisible behind the tangle of
roan and cinnamon. “W ould ye like it if I…”
“Jamie,” I said. “I want you. Come her e .”
Sighing in resignation, he rose to his knees and let me pull
him upward, settling at last with his weight balanced on his
elbows, but comfortingly solid o n top of me, belly to belly and
lips to lips. He opened his mouth to protest further , but I
promptly kissed him, and he slid  between my thighs before he
could stop himself. He moaned slightly in involuntary pleasure
as he entered me, muscles tensing as he gripped my shoulders.
He was gentle and slow , pausing now and then to kiss me
deeply , moving again only at my silent ur ging. I ran my hands
softly do wn the  slope of his back, careful not to press on the
healing ridges of the fresh scars. The long muscles of his thigh
trembled briefly  against my ow n, but he held back, unwilling
to move as quickly as he needed to.
I moved my hips against him, to bring him deeper .He closed his eyes, and his brow furrowed slightly in
concentration. His mouth was open, and his breath came hard.
“I c an’ t…” he said. “Oh, Go d, I canna help it.” His
buttocks clenched suddenly , taut beneath my hands.
I sighed with deep satisfaction, and pulled him hard
against me.
“Y ou’re all right?” he asked, a few moments later .
“I won’ t break, you know ,” I said, smiling into his eyes.
He laughed huskily . “Maybe not, Sassenach, but I  may .”
He g athered me close against h im, his cheek pressed against
my hair . I flipped the quilt up and tucked it around his
shoulders, sealing us in a pock et of warmth. The heat of the
fire had  not yet reached the be d, but the ice on the window
was thawing, the crusted edge of the rime melted into glowing
diamonds.
W e lay quiet for  a time, listening  to the occasional crack of
the burn ing applewood in the h earth and the faint sounds of
the i nn a s the guests stirred to li fe. There were callings to and
fro from  the balconies across the  courtyard, the swish and clop
of hoov es on the slushy stones  outside, and the odd squeal
now and then fr om below , from the piglets the landlady was
raising in the kitchen behind the stove.
“T rès fr ançais, n ’est-ce pas?”  I  said, smiling a t the sounds
of an altercation drifting up through the floorboards, an
amiable settling of accounts between the innkeeper ’ s wife and
the local vintner .
“Diseased son of a pox-ridden whore,” the female voice
remarked. “The brandy from last week tasted like horse-piss.”
I di dn’ t need to see the rep ly to imagine the one-
shouldered shrug that went with it.
“How would you know , Madame? After the sixth glass, it
all tastes the same, is it not so?”
The bed shook slightly as Jamie laughed with me. He lifted
his head  from the pillow and snif fed appreciatively at the scentof f rying ham t hat filtered through the drafty chinks of the
floorboards.
“A ye, it’ s France,” he agreed. “Food, and drink – and
love.” H e patted my bare hip before tugging the wrinkled
gown down over it.
“Jamie,” I said softly , “are you happy about it? About the
baby?” Outlawed in Scotland, barred from his own home, and
with only vague prospects in France, he could pardonably
have been less than enthused about acquiring an additional
obligation.
He w as silent fo r a moment, only hugging me harder , then
sighed briefly before answering.
“A ye, Sassenach.” His hand strayed downward, gently
rubbing my belly . “I’m happy . And proud as a stallion. But I
am most awfully afraid, too.”
“About the birth? I’ll be all rig ht.” I could hardly blame
him for apprehe nsion; his own mother had died in childbirth,
and birth and its  complications were the leading cause of death
for w omen in th ese times. Still, I knew a thing or two myself,
and I had no in tention whateve r of exposing myself to what
passed for medical care here.
“A ye, that – an d everything,” he said softly . “I want to
protect ye, Sassenach – spread m yself over ye like a cloak and
shield yo u and the child wi’ my  body .” His voice was soft and
husky , w ith a slight catch in it. “I would do anything for ye…
and yet…  there’ s nothing I can  do.  It doesna matter how
strong I am, or how willing; I canna go with you where ye
must go… nor even help ye at all. And to think of the things
that mig ht happen, and me help less to stop them… aye, I’m
afraid, Sassenach.
“And yet” – he turned me toward him, hand closing gently
over one  breast – “yet when I think of you wi’ my child at
your bre ast… th en I feel as though I’ve gone hollow as a soap
bubble, and perhaps I shall burst with joy .”
He pres sed me tight against his  chest, and I hugged him
with all my might.“Oh, Claire, ye do break my heart wi’ loving you.”
 
I s lept for some  time, and woke  slowly , hearing the clang
of a church bell ringing in the nearby square. Fresh from the
Abbey of Ste. Anne, where all the day’ s activities took place to
the rhyth m of bells, I automatic ally glanced at the window , to
gauge th e intensity of the ligh t and guess the time of day .
Bright, c lear ligh t, and a window  free of ice. The bells rang for
the Angelus then, and it was noon.
I stretched, enjoying the blissful knowledge that I needn’ t
get up at once. Early pregnancy  made me tired, and the strain
of tr avel had added to my fatigue, making the long rest doubly
welcome.
It ha d rained and  snowed unceasingly on the journey as the
winter s torms b attered the French coast. Still, it could have
been wo rse. W e had originally intended to go to Rome, not Le
Havre. That would have been t hree or four weeks’ travel, in
this weather .
Faced with the prospect of earn ing a living abroad, Jamie
had obtained a recommendation as a translator to James
Francis Edward Stuart, exiled King of Scotland – or merely
the Chevalier St. Geor ge, Pretender to the Throne, depending
on your  loyalties – and we had determined to join the
Pretender ’ s court near Rome.
It had been a ne ar thing, at that; we had been on the point
of leaving for It aly , when Jamie’ s uncle Alexander , Abbot of
Ste. Anne’ s, had summoned us to his study .
“I have heard from His Majesty ,” he announced without
preamble.
“Which one?” Jamie asked. The  slight family resemblance
between the two men was exaggerated by their posture – both
sat bolt upright in their chairs, shoulders squared. On the
abbot’ s part, the posture was due to natural asceticism; on
Jamie’ s, to reluctance to let the newly healed scars on his back
contact the wood of the chair .“His Majesty King James,” his uncle replied, frowning
slightly at me. I was careful to keep my face blank; my
presence in Abbot Alexander ’ s study was a mark of trust, and
I didn’ t want to do anything to jeopardize it. He had known me
a bare six week s, since the day after Christmas, when I had
appeared at his gate with Jam ie, who was near death from
torture and imprisonment. S ubsequent acquaintance had
presumably give n the abbot some confidence in me. On the
other hand, I wa s still English. And the English King’ s name
was Geor ge, not James.
“A ye? Is  he not in need of a translator , then?” Jamie was
still thin , but he had been working outdoors with the Brothers
who minded the stables and fields of the Abbey , and his face
was regaining tinges of its normal healthy color .
“He is in need of a loyal servant – and a friend.” Abbot
Alexander tappe d his fingers on  a folded letter that lay on his
desk, the crested seal broken. He pursed his lips, glancing
from me to his nephew and back.
“What I tell you now must not be repeated,” he said
sternly . “It will be common kno wledge soon, but for now-” I
had tried to look trustworthy and close-mouthed; Jamie merely
nodded, with a touch of impatience.
“His Highness, Prince Charles Edward, has left Rome, and
will arrive in France within the week,” the Abbot said, leaning
slightly forward as though to emphasize the importance of
what he was saying.
And it was important. James Stuart had mounted an
abortive attemp t to regain his throne in 1715 – an ill-
considered military operation that had failed almost
immediately for  lack of support. Since then – according to
Alexander – the exiled James of Scotland had worked
tirelessly , writing ceaselessly to his fellow monarchs, and
particularly to his cousin, Louis of France, reiterating the
legitimacy of his claim to the throne of Scotland and England,
and the position  of his son, Prince Charles, as heir to that
throne.“His royal cousin Louis has been distressingly deaf to
these entirely proper claims,” th e Abbot had said, frowning at
the letter as tho ugh it were Lo uis. “If he’ s now come to a
realization of his responsibilities in the matter , it’ s cause for
great rej oicing among those who hold dear the sacred right of
kingship.”
Among the Jacobites, that was, James’ s supporters. Of
whom Abbot Alexander of the Abbey of Ste. Anne – born
Alexander Frase r of Scotland – was one. Jamie had told me
that Ale xander was one of the exiled King’ s most frequent
correspondents, in touch with all that touched the Stuart cause.
“He’ s well placed for it,” Jamie had explained to me,
discussing the endeavor on which we were about to embark.
“The papal messenger system crosses Italy , France, and Spain
faster th an almo st any other . An d the papal messengers canna
be interfered with by government customs of ficers, so the
letters they carry are less likely to be intercepted.”
James of Scotland, exiled in Ro me, was supported in lar ge
part by the Pope, in whose interest it very much was to have a
Catholic monarchy restored to England and Scotland.
Therefore, the lar gest part of Ja mes’ s private mail was carried
by papal messenger – and passed through the hands of loyal
supporters withi n the Church hi erarchy , like Abbot Alexander
of S te. Anne d e Beaupré, who could be depended on to
communicate with the King’ s supporters in Scotland, with less
risk than sending letters openly from Rome to Edinbur gh and
the Highlands.
I watched Alexander with interest, as he expounded the
importance of Prince Charles’ s visit to France. A stocky man
of ab out my own  height, he was dark, and considerably shorter
than his  nephew , but shared wit h him the faintly slanted eyes,
the sharp intelligence, and the talent for discerning hidden
motive that seemed to characterize the Frasers I had met.
“So,” he finished, stroking his full, dark-brown beard, “I
cannot say whether His High ness is in France at Louis’ s
invitation, or has come uninvited, on behalf of his father .”“It makes a wee  bit of dif ference,” Jamie remarked, raising
one eyebrow skeptically .
His uncl e nodded, and a wry smile showed briefly in the
thicket of his beard.
“T rue, lad,” he s aid, letting a fa int hint of his native Scots
emer ge from his usual formal English. “V ery true. And that’ s
where you and your wife may be of service, if ye will.”
The proposal was simple; His Majesty King James would
provide travel expenses and a s mall stipend, if the nephew of
his most loyal and most esteemed friend Alexander would
agree to travel to Paris, there to assist his son, His Highness
Prince Charles Edward, in whatever ways the latter might
require.
I wa s stunned. W e had meant originally to go to Rome
because that seemed the best place to embark on our quest: the
prevention of the second Jacobite Rising – the ’45. From my
own knowledge of history , I k new that the Rising, financed
from Fra nce and carried out by Charles Edward Stuart, would
go much farther than had his father ’ s attempt in 1715 – but not
nearly f ar enough. If matters progressed as I thought they
would, then the troops under Bonnie Prince Charlie would
meet w ith disastrous defeat at Culloden in 1746, and the
people of the Highlands would suf fer the repercussions of
defeat for two centuries thereafter .
Now , in  1744 , apparently Charles himself was just
beginning his search for support in France. Where better to try
to stop a rebellion, than at the side of its leader?
I glanced at Ja mie, who was looking over his uncle’ s
shoulder at a small shrine set into the wall. His eyes rested on
the g ilded figure of Ste. Anne herself and the small sheaf of
hothouse flowers laid at her feet, while his thoughts worked
behind an expressionless face. At last he blinked once, and
smiled at his uncle.
“Whatever assistance His Highness might require? A ye,”
he said quietly , “I think I can do that. W e’ll go.”And we had. Instead of proceeding directly to Paris,
though, we had come down the coast from Ste. Anne to Le
Havre, to meet first with Jamie’ s cousin, Jared Fraser .
A prosperous Scottish émigré, Jared was an importer of
wines and spirits, with a small warehouse and lar ge town
house in Paris, a nd a very lar ge warehouse indeed here in Le
Havre, where he had asked Jam ie to meet him, when Jamie
had written to say we were en route to Paris.
Suf ficiently rest ed by now , I was beginning to feel hungry .
There w as food on the table ; Jamie must have told the
chambermaid to bring it while I slept.
I ha d no dressi ng gown, but m y heavy velvet traveling
cloak was handy; I sat up and pulled the warm weight of it
over my shoulders before rising  to relieve myself, add another
stick of wood to the fire, and sit down to my late breakfast.
I chewed hard rolls and baked ham contentedly , washing
them down with the jug of milk provided. I hoped Jamie was
being ad equately fed as well; he  insisted that Jared was a good
friend, but I had my doubts about the hospitality of some of
Jamie’ s relatives, having met a few of them by now . T rue,
Abbot Alexander had welcomed us – insofar as a man in the
abbot’ s position could be said to welcome having an outlaw
nephew with a suspect wife descend upon him unexpectedly .
But our sojourn with Jamie’ s mother ’ s people, the MacKenzies
of L eoch, had c ome within inches of killing me the autumn
before, when I had been arrested and tried as a witch.
“Granted,” I’d said, “this Jared’ s a Fraser , and they seem a
trifle safer than your MacKenzie relatives. But have you
actually met him before?”
“I lived with him for a time when I was eighteen,” he told
me, dribbling candle-wax onto his reply and pressing his
father ’ s wedding ring on the resultant greenish-gray puddle. A
small ca bochon ruby , its mount was engraved with the Fraser
clan motto, je suis pr est : “I am ready .”
“He had  me to stay with him wh en I came to Paris to finish
my s chooling, and learn a bit of  the world. He was verra kind
to me; a good friend of my father ’ s. And there’ s no one knowsmore ab out Parisian society than the man who sells it drink,”
he added, cracking the ring loose from the hardened wax. “I
want to talk to Jared before I walk into Louis’ s court by the
side of Charles Stuart; I should like to feel that I have some
chance of getting out again,” he finished wryly .
“Why? Do you think there’ll be trouble?” I asked.
“Whatever assis tance His Highness might require” seemed to
of fer quite a bit of latitude.
He smiled at my worried look.
“No, I dinna expect any dif ficulty . But what is it the Bible
says, Sassenach? ‘Put not your trust in princes’?” He rose and
kissed me quickly on the brow , tucking the ring back in his
sporran. “Who am I to ignore the word of God, eh?”
 
I spent the afternoon in reading one of the herbals that my
friend Brother Ambrose had pre ssed upon me as a parting gift,
then in necessary repairs with ne edle and thread. Neither of us
owned many clothes, and while there were advantages in
traveling light, it meant that h oley socks and undone hems
demanded imme diate attention.  My needlecase was nearly as
precious to me as the small chest in which I carried herbs and
medicines.
The needle dipped in and out of  the fabric, winking in the
light from the window . I won dered how Jamie’ s visit with
Jared w as going. I wondered still more what Prince Charles
would be like. He would be the first historically famous person
I ha d met, and while I knew better than to believe all the
legends that had (not had, would , I reminded myself) sprung
up arou nd him, the reality of the man was a mystery . The
Rising of the ’45 would depend almost entirely on the
personality of this one young man – its failure or success.
Whether it took place at all mig ht depend upon the ef forts of
another young man – Jamie Fraser . And me.
I w as still absorb ed in my mend ing and my thoughts, when
heavy fo otsteps in the corridor aroused me to the realization
that it was late i n the day; the drip of water from the eaves had
slowed as the temperature dro pped, and the flames of thesinking sun glowed in the ice spears hanging from the roof.
The door opened, and Jamie came in.
He smiled vaguely in my direction, then stopped dead by
the t able, face ab sorbed as though he were trying to remember
something. He took his cloak of f, folded it, and hung it neatly
over the foot of the bed, straightened, marched over to the
other sto ol, sat down on it with great precision, and closed his
eyes.
I sat  still, my mending for gotten in my lap, watching this
performance with considerable interest. After a moment, he
opened his eyes and smiled at m e, but didn’ t say anything. He
leaned forward, studying my face with great attention, as
though he hadn’ t seen me in w eeks. At last, an expression of
profound revelation passed over his face, and he relaxed,
shoulders slumping as he rested his elbows on his knees.
“Whisky ,” he said, with immense satisfaction.
“I see,” I said cautiously . “A lot of it?”
He s hook his head slowly from  side to side, as though it
were very heavy . I could almost hear the contents sloshing.
“Not me,” he said, very distinctly . “Y ou.”
“Me?”  I said indignantly .
“Y our ey es,” he said. He smiled beatifically . His own eyes
were soft and dreamy , cloudy as a trout pool in the rain.
“My eyes? What have my eyes got to do with…”
“They’re the color of verra fine whisky , wi’ the sun
shining through them from behind. I thought this morning they
looked like sherry , but I was w rong. Not sherry . Not brandy .
It’ s whisky . That’ s what it is.” He looked so gratified as he
said this that I couldn’ t help laughing.
“Jamie, you’re terribly drunk . What have you been
doing?”
His expression altered to a slight frown.
“I’m not drunk.”“Oh, no ?” I laid the mending as ide and came over to lay a
hand on his fore head. It was cool and damp, though his face
was flushed. He at once put his arms about my waist and
pulled me close, nuzzling af fectionately at my bosom. The
smell of  mingle d spirits rose fro m him like a fog, so thick as
almost to be visible.
“Come here to me, Sassenac h,” he murmured. “My
whisky-eyed lass, my love. Let me take ye to bed.”
I t hough t it a d ebatable point as to who was likely to be
taking whom to bed, but didn’ t ar gue. It didn’ t matter why he
thought he was going to bed, af ter all, provided he got there. I
bent and  got a shoulder under his armpit to help him up, but he
leaned away , rising slowly and majestically under his own
power .
“I dinna  need help,” he said, reaching for the cord at the
neck of his shirt. “I told ye, I’m not drunk.”
“Y ou’re right,” I said. “ ‘Drunk’ isn’ t anywhere near
suf ficient to describe your current state. Jamie, you’re
completely pissed.”
His eye s traveled down the fr ont of his kilt, across the
floor , and up the front of my gown.
“No, I’m not,” he said, with great dignity . “I did that
outside.” He took a step tow ard me, glowing with ardor .
“Come here to me, Sassenach; I’m ready .”
I tho ught “ready” was a bit of  an overstatement in one
regard; h e’d gotten his buttons h alf undone, and his shirt hung
askew on his sh oulders, but that was as far as he was likely to
make it unaided.
In other respects, though… the broad expanse of his chest
was exp osed, showing the small hollow in the center where I
was acc ustomed to rest my ch in, and the small curly hairs
sprang u p joyous around his n ipples. He saw me looking at
him, and  reached  for one of my hands, clasping it to his breast.
He was startlingly warm, and I moved instinctively toward
him. The  other arm swept round  me and he bent to kiss me. Hemade su ch a thorough job of it that I felt mildly intoxicated,
merely from sharing his breath.
“All righ t,” I said, laughing. “If you’re ready , so am I. Let
me undress you first, though – I’ve had enough mending
today .”
He stood  still as I stripped him, scarcely moving. He didn’ t
move, either , as I attended to my  own clothes and turned down
the bed.
I cl imbed in a nd turned to look at him, ruddy and
magnificent in the sunset glow . H e was finely made as a Greek
statue, l ong-nosed and high-cheeked as a profile on a Roman
coin. Th e wide, soft mouth was set in a dreamy smile, and the
slanted eyes looked far away . He was perfectly immobile.
I viewed him with some concern.
“Jamie,” I said, “how , exactly , do you decide whether
you’re drunk?”
Aroused by my voice, he swayed alarmingly to one side,
but caug ht himself on the edge  of the mantelpiece. His eyes
drifted around the room, then fix ed on my face. For an instant,
they blazed clear and pellucid with intelligence.
“Och, easy , Sassenach. If ye can stand up, you’re not
drunk.” He let go of the mantelpiece, took a step toward me,
and crumpled slowly onto the hearth, eyes blank, and a wide,
sweet smile on his dreaming face.
“Oh,” I said.
 
The yod eling of  roosters outside and the clashing of pots
below woke me just after dawn  the next morning. The figure
next to me jerke d, waking abruptly , then froze as the sudden
movement jarred his head.
I rai sed up on one elbow to exa mine the remains. Not too
bad, I thought critically . His eyes were screwed tightly shut
against stray beams of sunlight , and his hair stuck out in all
directions like a hedgehog’ s spines, but his skin was pale and
clear , and the hands clutching the coverlet were steady .I p ried up one eyelid, peered w ithin, and said playfully ,
“Anybody home?”
The twin  to the eye I was looking at opened slowly , to add
its b aleful glare to the first. I dropped my hand and smiled
charmingly at him.
“Good morning.”
“That, S assenach, is entirely a matter of opinion,” he said,
and closed both eyes again.
“Have y ou got any idea how much you weigh?” I asked
conversationally .
“No.”
The abruptness of the reply suggested that he not only
didn’ t know , he didn’ t care, but I persisted in my ef forts.
“Something arou nd fifteen stone, I make it. About as much
as a  good-sized boar . Unfortunately , I didn’ t have any beaters
to ha ng you ups ide down from a spear and carry you home to
the smoking shed.”
One eye opened again, and looked consideringly at me,
then at the hearthstone on the fa r side of the room. One corner
of his mouth lifted in a reluctant smile.
“How did you get me in bed?”
“I didn’ t. I couldn’ t budge you, so I just laid a quilt over
you and left you on the hearth. Y ou came to life and crawled in
under your own power , somewhere in the middle of the night.”
He seemed surprised, and opened the other eye again.
“I did?”
I no dded and tried to smooth down the hair that spiked out
over his left ear .
“Oh, yes. V ery single-minded, you were.”
“Single-minded?” He frowned, thinking, and stretched,
thrusting his arms up over his head. Then he looked startled.
“No. I couldn’ t have.”
“Y es, you could. T wice.”He squinted down his chest, as though looking for
confirmation of this improbable statement, then looked back at
me.
“Really? W ell, that’ s hardly fair ; I dinna remember a thing
about it.” He hesitated for a moment, looking shy . “W as it all
right, then? I didna do anything foolish?”
I flo pped down next to him and snuggled my head into the
curve of his shoulder .
“No, I wouldn’ t call it foolish. Y ou weren’ t very
conversational, though.”
“Thank the Lord for small blessings,” he said, and a small
chuckle rumbled through his chest.
“Mm. Y ou’d for gotten how to s ay anything except ‘I love
you,’ but you said that a lot.”
The chuckle came back, louder this time. “Oh, aye? W ell,
could have been worse, I suppose.”
He drew in his breath, then paused. He turned his head and
snif fed suspiciously at the soft tuft of cinnamon under his
raised arm.
“Christ!” he said. He tried to push me away . “Y e dinna
want to put your head near my oxter , Sassenach. I smell like a
boar that’ s been dead a week.”
“And pickled in brandy after ,” I agreed, snuggling closer .
“How o n earth did you get so – ahem – stinking drunk,
anyway?”
“Jared’ s hospitality .” He settled himself in the pillows with
a deep sigh, arm round my shoulder .
“He took  me down to show me his warehouse at the docks.
And the storeroom there where he keeps the rare vintages and
the Portuguese brandy and the Jamaican rum.” He grimaced
slightly , recalling. “The wine wasna so bad, for that you just
taste, and spit it on the floor when you’ve done wi’ a
mouthful. But neither of us could see wasting the brandy that
way . Be sides, Ja red said ye need  to let it trickle down the back
of your throat, to appreciate it fully .”“How much of it did you appreciate?” I asked curiously .
“I lost count in the middle of th e second bottle.” Just then,
a ch urch bell s tarted to ring nearby; the summons to early
Mass. Ja mie sat bolt upright, staring at the windowpane, bright
with sun.
“Christ, Sassenach! What time is it?”
“About six, I suppose,” I said, puzzled. “Why?”
He relaxed slightly , though he stayed sitting up.
“Oh, tha t’ s all right, then. I was  afraid it was the Angelus
bell. I’d lost all track of time.”
“I’d say so. Does it matter?”
In a burst of ener gy , he threw back the quilts and stood up.
He staggered a moment, but k ept his balance, though both
hands went to his head, to make sure it was still attached.
“A ye,” he said, gasping a bit. “W e’ve an appointment this
morning down at the docks, at J ared’ s warehouse. The two of
us.”
“Really?” I clambered out of b ed myself, and groped for
the c hamber pot under the bed. “If he’ s planning to finish the
job, I shouldn’ t think he’d want witnesses.”
Jamie’ s head popped through the neck of his shirt,
eyebrows raised.
“Finish the job?”
“W ell, most of your other relatives seem to want to kill you
or m e; why not  Jared? He’ s made a good start at poisoning
you, seems to me.”
“V erra funny , Sassenach,” he  said dryly . “Have ye
something decent to wear?”
I had been wearing a serviceable gray ser ge gown on our
travels, acquired  through the good of fices of the almoner at the
Abbey o f Ste. Anne, but I did a lso have the gown in which I
had escaped from Scotland, a gift from Lady Annabelle
MacRannoch. A pretty leaf-green velvet, it made me look
rather pale, but was stylish enough.“I think so, if there aren’ t too many saltwater stains on it.”
I kn elt by the small traveling chest, unfolding the green
velvet. Kneeling  next to me, Jamie flipped back the lid of my
medicine box, studying the layers of bottles and boxes and bits
of gauze-wrapped herbs.
“Have ye got anything in h ere for a verra vicious
headache, Sassenach?”
I p eered  over his shoulder , then reached in and touched
one bottle.
“Horehound might help, though it’ s not the best. And
willow-bark tea with sow fennel  works fairly well, but it takes
some time to bre w . T ell you wha t – why don’ t I make you up a
recipe for hobnailed liver? W onderful hangover cure.”
He bent a suspicious blue eye on me.
“That sounds nasty .”
“It i s,” I said cheerfully . “But you’ll feel lots better after
you throw up.”
“Mphm.” He stood up and nudg ed the chamber pot toward
me with one toe.
“V omiting in the morning is your  job, Sassenach,” he said.
“Get it over with and get dressed. I’ll stand the headache.”
 
Jared Munro Fraser was a small, spare, black-eyed man,
who bo re more than a passing resemblance to his distant
cousin Murtagh, the Fraser clansman who had accompanied us
to L e Havre. W hen I first saw Jared, standing majestically in
the gap ing doors of his warehouse, so that streams of
longshoremen carrying casks were forced to go around him,
the r esemblance was strong enough that I blinked and rubbed
my eyes. Murtagh, so far as I knew , was still at the inn,
attending a lame horse.
Jared ha d the same lank, dark hair and piercing eyes; the
same sin ewy , monkey-like frame. But there all resemblance
stopped, and as we drew closer , Jamie gallantly clearing a path
for me through the mob with elbows and shoulders, I could seethe dif ferences as well. Jared’ s  face was oblong, rather than
hatchet-shaped, with a cheerfu l snub nose that ef fectively
ruined the dignified air conferred at a distance by his excellent
tailoring and upright carriage.
A successful merchant rather than a cattle-raider , he also
knew how to smile – unlike Murtagh, whose natural
expression was one of unrelieve d dourness – and a broad grin
of welcome broke out on his face as we were jostled and
shoved up the ramp into his presence.
“My dear!” he exclaimed, clut ching me by the arm and
yanking me deftly out of the way of two burly stevedores
rolling a gigantic cask through the huge door . “So pleased to
see y ou at last!”  The cask bump ed noisily on the boards of the
ramp, an d I could hear the roll ing slosh of its contents as it
passed me.
“Y ou can treat ru m like that,” Jared observed, watching the
ungainly progr ess of the enormous barrel through the
obstructions of the warehouse, “but not port. I always fetch
that up myself, along with the b ottled wines. In fact, I was just
setting of f to s ee to a new shipment of Belle Rouge port.
W ould you perhaps be interested in accompanying me?”
I gla nced at Jam ie, who nodded, and we set of f at once in
Jared’ s wake, sidestepping the rumbling traf fic of casks and
hogsheads, cart s and barrows, and men and boys of all
descriptions carrying bolts of fabric, boxes of grain and
foodstuf fs, rolls of hammered copper , sacks of flour , and
anything else that could be transported by ship.
Le H avre was a n important center of shipping traf fic, and
the dock s were the heart of the  city . A long, solid wharf ran
nearly a quarter -mile round t he edge of the harbor , with
smaller docks protruding from it, along which were anchored
three-masted barks and brigantines, dories and small galleys; a
full range of the ships that provisioned France.
Jamie ke pt a firm hold on my elbow , the better to yank me
out of the way  of oncoming handcarts, rolling casks, and
careless merchan ts and seamen, who were inclined not to lookwhere t hey we re going but rather to depend on sheer
momentum to see them through the scrum of the docks.
As we made o ur way down the quay , Jared shouted
genteelly into my ear on the oth er side, pointing out objects of
interest as we passed, and explaining the history and
ownership of the various ships in a staccato, disjointed
manner . The Arianna , wh ich we were on our way to  see, was
in f act one of Jared’ s own ships. Ships, I gathered, might
belong to a single owner , m ore often to a company of
merchants who owned them collectively , or , occasionally , to a
captain who contracted his ves sel, crew , and services for a
voyage. Seeing the number of company-owned vessels,
compared to the relatively few owned by individuals, I began
to form a very respectful idea of Jared’ s worth.
The Arianna  was  in the middle of the anchored row , near a
lar ge warehouse with the name FRASER painted on it in
sloping, whitewashed letters. Se eing the name gave me an odd
little thrill, a sudden feeling of alliance and belonging, with the
realization that I shared that name, and with it, an
acknowledged kinship with those who bore it.
The Arianna  was a three-masted ship, perh aps sixty feet
long, wi th a wide bow . There w ere two cannon on the side of
the ship that faced the dock; in case of robbery on the high
seas, I supposed . Men were sw arming all over the deck with
what I assumed was some pu rpose, though it looked like
nothing so much as an ant’ s nest under attack.
All sails  were reefed and tied, but the rising tide shifted the
vessel slightly , swinging the bowsprit toward us. It was
decorated with a rather grim-visaged figurehead; with her
formidable bare bosom and tangled curls all spangled with
salt, the lady looked as though s he didn’ t enjoy sea air all that
much.
“Sweet little beauty , is she not ?” Jared asked, waving a
hand expansive ly . I assumed he meant the ship, not the
figurehead.
“V erra nice,” said Jamie politely . I caught his uneasy
glance a t the boat’ s waterline, where the small waves lappeddark gray against the hull. I could see that he was hoping we
would n ot be obliged to go on board. A gallant warrior ,
brilliant, bold, and courageous i n battle, Jamie Fraser was also
a landlubber .
Definitely not one of the hardy , seafaring Scots who
hunted whales from T arwathie or voyaged the world in search
of w ealth, he s uf fered from a seasickness so acute that our
journey across the Channel in December had nearly killed
him, weakened as he then was by the ef fects of torture and
imprisonment. And while yester day’ s drinking or gy with Jared
wasn’ t i n the same league, it wasn’ t likely to have made him
any more seaworthy .
I c ould see dark  memories crossing his face as he listened
to his cousin ext olling the sturdiness and speed of the Arianna ,
and drew near enough to whisper to him.
“Surely not while it’ s at anchor?”
“I don’ t know , Sassenach,” he replied, with a look at the
ship in which loathing and resignation were nicely mingled.
“But I suppose we’ll find out.” Jared was already halfway up
the gangplank, greeting the captain with loud cries of
welcome. “If I turn green, can ye pretend to faint or
something? It will make a po or impression if I vomit on
Jared’ s shoes.”
I patted his arm reassuringly . “Don’ t worry . I have faith in
you.”
“It isna me ,” he said, with a last, lingering  glance at terra
firma, “it’ s my stomach.”
The ship stayed comfortingly  level under our shoes,
however , and both Jamie and his stomach acquitted
themselves nobly – assisted, perhaps, by the brandy poured out
for us by the captain.
“A nice make,” Jamie said, passing the glass briefly under
his nose and closing his eyes in approval of the rich, aromatic
fumes. “Portuguese, isn’ t it?”
Jared laughed delightedly and nudged the captain.“Y ou se e, Portis? I told you he had a natural palate! He’ s
only tasted it once before!”
I bit the inside o f my cheek and  avoided Jamie’ s eye. The
captain, a lar ge, scruf fy-looking  specimen, looked bored, but
grimaced polite ly in Jamie’ s di rection, exhibiting three gold
teeth. A man who liked to keep his wealth portable.
“Ung,” he said. “This the lad’ s going to keep your bilges
dry , is it?”
Jared lo oked suddenly embarrassed, a slight flush rising
under the leathery skin of his face. I noticed with fascination
that one ear wa s pierced for an earring, and wondered just
what sort of background had led to his present success.
“A ye, well,” he said, betraying for the first time a hint of
Scots ac cent, “that’ s to be seen yet. But I think-” He glanced
through the port at the activity taking place on the dock, then
back at the captain’ s glass, drained in three gulps while the rest
of u s we re sippi ng. “Um, I say , Portis, would you allow me to
use your  cabin for a moment? I  should like to confer with my
nephew and his wife – and I se e that the aft hold seems to be
having a bit of trouble with the car go nets, from the sound of
it.” This craftily added observation was enough to send
Captain Portis out of the cabin like a char ging boar , hoarse
voice up lifted in a Spanish-French patois that I luckily didn’ t
understand.
Jared stepped delicately to the door and closed it firmly
after the captain’ s bulky form, cutting down the noise level
substantially . He returned to the tiny captain’ s table and
ceremoniously refilled all our glasses before speaking. Then
he l ooked from Jamie to me  and smiled once more, in
charming deprecation.
“It’ s a bit more precipitous than  I’d meant to make such a
request,” he said. “But I see the good captain has rather given
away my  hand. The truth of the matter is” – he raised his glass
so the watery re flections from the port shivered through the
brandy , striking patches of wavering light from the brass
fittings of the c abin – “I need a man.” He tipped the cup in
Jamie’ s direction, then brought it to his lips and drank.“A g ood man,” he amplified, low ering the glass. “Y ou see,
my d ear ,” bowing to me, “I have the opportunity of making an
exceptional inve stment in a new  winery in the Moselle region.
But the evaluati on of it is not on e I should feel comfortable in
entrusting to a s ubordinate; I should need to see the facilities
myself, and advise in their development. The undertaking
would require several months.”
He gazed thoughtfully into his glass, gently swirling the
fragrant brown liquid so its perfume filled the tiny cabin. I had
drunk no more than a few sips from my own glass, but began
to fe el slightly g iddy , more from a rising excitement than from
drink.
“It’ s too good a  chance to be missed,” Jared said. “And
there’ s t he chan ce of making se veral good contracts with the
wineries along the Rhône; the p roducts there are excellent, but
relatively rare in Paris. God, they’d sell among the nobility
like snow in summer!” His shrewd black eyes gleamed
momentarily with visions of avarice, then sparkled with humor
as he looked at me.
“But-” he said.
“But,” I finished for him, “you  can’ t leave your business
here without a guiding hand.”
“Intelligence as well as beauty and charm. I congratulate
you, Cousin.” He tilted a well-groomed head toward Jamie,
one eyebrow cocked in humorous approval.
“I confess that I was at something of a loss to see how I
was to proceed,” he said, settin g the glass down on the small
table wi th the air of a man putting aside social frivolity for the
sake of serious business. “Bu t when you wrote from Ste.
Anne, saying you intended to visit Paris…” He hesitated a
moment, then smiled at Jamie, with an odd little flutter of the
hands.
“Knowing that you, my lad” – he nodded to Jamie – “have
a he ad for figur es, I was strongly inclined to consider your
arrival an answer to prayer . Still, I thought that perhaps we
should m eet and become reacquainted before I took the step of
making you a definite proposal.”Y ou mean you thought you’d be tter see how presentable I
was, I thought cynically , but smiled at him nonetheless. I
caught J amie’ s eye, and one o f his brows twitched upward.
This was our we ek for proposals, evidently . For a dispossessed
outlaw and a sus pected English spy , our services seemed to be
rather in demand.
Jared’ s proposal was more than generous; in return for
Jamie’ s running the French end of the business during the next
six m onths, Jared would not on ly pay him a salary but would
leave his Paris town house, complete with staf f, at our
disposal.
“Not at all, not a t all,” he said, when Jamie tried to protest
this pro vision. He pressed a finger on the end of his nose,
grinning charmingly at me. “A pretty woman to host dinner
parties i s a great asset in the wine business, Cousin. Y ou have
no idea how much wine you can sell, if you let the customers
taste it first.” He shook his hea d decidedly . “No, it will be a
great se rvice to me, if your wife would allow herself to be
troubled by entertaining.”
The thought of hosting supper parties for Parisian society
was in fact a trifle daunting. Jamie looked at me, eyebrows
raised in  questio n, but I swallow ed hard and smiled, nodding.
It w as a good of fer; if he fel t competent to take over the
running of an importing business, the least I could do was
order dinner and brush up my sprightly conversational French.
“Not at  all,” I murmured, but Jared had taken my
agreement for granted, and wa s going on, intent black eyes
fixed on Jamie.
“And then, I thought perhaps you’d be needing an
establishment of sorts – for the  benefit of the other interests
which bring you to Paris.”
Jamie smiled noncommittally , at which Jared uttered a
short lau gh and picked up his brandy glass. W e had each been
provided a glass of water as w ell, for cleansing the palate
between sips, and he pulled one  of these close with the other
hand.“W ell, a toast!” he exclaimed. “T o our association, Cousin
– an d to His Majesty!” He lifted the brandy glass in salute,
then passed it ostentatiously over the glass of water and
brought it to his lips.
I wa tched this odd behavior in surprise, but it apparently
meant something to Jamie, for he smiled at Jared, picked up
his own glass and passed it over the water .
“T o His Majesty ,” he repeated. Then, seeing me staring at
him in bewilderment, he smiled and explained, “T o His
Majesty – over the water , Sassenach.”
“Oh?” I said, then, realization dawning, “oh!” The king
over the water – King James. Which did a bit to explain this
sudden u r ge on the part of everyone to see Jamie and myself
established in Paris, which would otherwise have seemed an
improbable coincidence.
If Ja red were also a Jacobite, then his correspondence with
Abbot Alexander was very likely more than coincidental;
chances were that Jamie’ s letter announcing our arrival had
come together with one from  Alexander , explaining the
commission from King James. And if our presence in Paris
fitted in  with Jared’ s own plans – then so much the better .
W ith a sudden appreciation for the complexities of the
Jacobite networ k, I raised my own glass, and drank to His
Majesty across the water – and our new partnership with Jared.
Jared an d Jamie then settled do wn to a discussion of the
business, and were soon head to head, bent over inky sheets of
paper , e vidently manifests and bills of lading. The tiny cabin
reeked of tobacco, brandy fume s, and unwashed sailor , and I
began to  feel a trifle queasy again. Seeing that I wouldn’ t be
needed for a while, I stood up quietly and found my way out
on deck.
I wa s careful to avoid the altercation still going on around
the rear car go ha tch, and picked my way through coils of rope,
objects which I assumed to be belaying pins, and tumbled piles
of sail fabric, to  a quiet spot in the bow . From here, I had an
unobstructed view over the harbor .I sat on a ches t against the t af frail, enjoying the salty
breeze and the t arry , fishy smells of ships and harbor . It was
still cold, but w ith my cloak p ulled tight around me, I was
warm enough. The ship rocked slowly , rising on the incoming
tide; I could see  the beards of algae on nearby dock pilings
lifting and swirling, obscuring the shiny black patches of
mussels between them.
The thought of mussels reminded me of the steamed
mussels with butter I had had for dinner the night before, and I
was sud denly starving. The absurd contrasts of pregnancy
seemed to keep me always co nscious of my digestion; if I
wasn’ t vomiting, I was ravenously hungry . The thought of
food led me to  the thought of  menus, which led back to a
contemplation o f the entertaining Jared had mentioned. Dinner
parties, hm? It s eemed an odd w ay to begin the job of saving
Scotland, but then, I couldn’ t really think of anything better .
At least if I had Charles Stuart across a dinner table from
me, I could keep  an eye on him, I thought, smiling to myself at
the j oke. If he showed signs of hopping a ship for Scotland,
maybe I could slip something into his soup.
Perhaps that wasn’ t so funny , after all. The thought
reminded me of Geillis Duncan , and my smile faded. W ife of
the procurator fiscal in Cranesmuir , she had murdered her
husband by dropping powdered cyanide into his food at a
banquet. Accused as a witch s oon afterward, she had been
arrested while I was with her , and I had been taken to trial
myself; a trial from which J amie had rescued me. The
memories of several days spent in the cold dark of the thieves’
hole at Cranesmuir were all too fresh, and the wind seemed
suddenly very cold.
I s hivere d, but not altogether fr om chill. I could not think
of Geilli s Duncan without that c old finger down my spine. Not
so much  because of what she had done, but because of who
she had been. A Jacobite, too; one whose support of the Stuart
cause ha d been more than slightly tinged with madness. W orse
than that, she was what I was – a traveler through the standing
stones.I did n’ t know w hether she had come to the past as I had,
by accident, or whether her journey had been deliberate.
Neither did I kn ow precisely wher e  s he  had come from. But
my last vision of her , screaming defiance at the judges who
would c ondemn her to burn, w as of a tall, fair woman, arms
stretched high, showing on one arm the telltale round of a
vaccination scar . I felt automatically for the small patch of
roughened skin on my own uppe r arm, beneath the comforting
folds of my cloak, and shuddered when I found it.
I was distracted from these unhappy memories by a
growing commotion on the next quay . A lar ge knot of men had
gathered by a ship’ s gangway , and there was considerable
shouting and pushing going on. Not a fight; I peered over at
the alter cation, shading my eyes with my hand, but could see
no blows exchanged. Instead, an ef fort seemed to be under
way to clear a pathway through the milling crowd to the doors
of a lar g e wareh ouse on the upp er end of the quay . The crowd
was stub bornly resisting all such ef forts, sur ging back like the
tide after each push.
Jamie suddenly appeared behin d me, closely followed by
Jared, who squinted at the mob scene below . Absorbed by the
shouting, I hadn’ t heard them come up.
“What is it?” I stood and leaned back into Jamie, bracing
myself against the increasing sw ay of the ship underfoot. I was
aware at  close quarters of his s cent; he had bathed at the inn
and he smelled clean and warm, with a faint hint of sun and
dust. A sharpeni ng of the sense of smell was another ef fect of
pregnancy , apparently; I could smell him even among the
myriad stenches and scents of the seaport, much as you can
hear a low-pitched voice close by in a noisy crowd.
“I d on’ t know . Some trouble with the other ship, looks
like.” He  reache d down and put a hand on my elbow , to steady
me. Jared turned and barked an order in gutteral French to one
of th e sailors ne arby . The man promptly hopped over the rail
and slid  down one of the ropes to the quay , tarred pigtail
dangling toward the water . W e watched from the deck as he
joined the crowd, prodded another seaman in the ribs, and
received an answer , complete with expressive gesticulations.Jared was frowning, as the pigtailed man scrambled back
up the crowded gangplank. The sailor said something to him in
that sam e thick-sounding Frenc h, too fast for me to follow it.
After a few more words’ conversation, Jared swung abruptly
around and came to stand next to me, lean hands gripping the
rail.
“He says there’ s sickness aboard the Patagonia .”
“What sort of sickness?” I hadn’ t thought of bringing my
medicine box with me, so there was little I could do in any
case, but I was curious. Jared looked worried and unhappy .
“They’re afraid it might be smallpox, but they don’ t know .
The port’ s inspector and the harbor master have been called.”
“W ould you like me to have a look?” I of fered. “I might at
least be able to tell you whether it’ s a contagious disease or
not.”
Jared’ s s ketchy eyebrows disapp eared under the lank black
fringe of his hair . Jamie looked mildly embarrassed.
“My wife’ s well known as a healer , Cousin,” he explained,
but then turned and shook his head at me.
“No, Sassenach. It wouldna be safe.”
I could see the Patagonia ’ s gangway easily; now the
gathered crowd moved suddenly back, jostling and stepping on
each other ’ s toes. T wo seamen stepped down from the deck, a
length of canvas slung between them as a stretcher . The white
sail-fabric sagge d heavily under the weight of the man they
carried, and a bare, sun-darkened arm lolled from the
makeshift hammock.
The seam en wore strips of cloth  tied round their noses and
mouths, and kept their faces tu rned away from the stretcher ,
jerking t heir hea ds as they grow led at each other , maneuvering
their bur den over the splintered planks. The pair passed under
the fascinated noses of the crowd and disappeared into a
nearby warehouse.
Making a quick decision, I turned and headed for the rear
gangplank of the Arianna .“Don’ t w orry ,” I  called to Jamie  over one shoulder , “if it is
smallpox, I can’ t get that.” On e of the seamen, hearing me,
paused and gaped, but I just smiled at him and brushed past.
The crow d was still now , no lon ger sur ging to and fro, and
it wa s not so dif ficult to make my way between the muttering
clusters of seamen, many of whom frowned or looked startled
as I ducked past them. The warehouse was disused; no bales or
casks filled the echoing shadows of the huge room, but the
scents o f sawn lumber , smoked meat, and fish lingered, easily
distinguishable from the host of other smells.
The sick man ha d been hastily dumped near the door , on a
pile of discarded straw packing. His attendants pushed past me
as I entered, eager to get away .
I a pproached him cautiously , sto pping a few feet away . He
was flus hed with fever , his sk in a queer dark red, scabbed
thick with white pustules. He moaned and tossed his head
restlessly from side to side, cracked mouth working as though
in search of water .
“Get me some w ater ,” I said to one of the sailors standing
nearby . The man, a short, mu scular fellow with his beard
tarred into ornamental spikes, merely stared as though he had
found himself suddenly addressed by a fish.
T urning my back on him impat iently , I sank to my knees
by the sick m an and opened his filthy shirt. He stank
abominably; pro bably none too clean to start with, he had been
left to lie in his own filth, his fellows afraid to touch him. His
arms were relatively clear , but the pustules clustered thickly
down hi s chest and stomach, and his skin was burning to the
touch.
Jamie had come in while I made my examination,
accompanied by Jared. W ith them was a small, pear -shaped
man in a gold-sw agged of ficial’ s coat and two other men, one
a nobleman or a rich bour geois by his dress; the other a tall,
lean ind ividual, clearly a seafarer from his complexion.
Probably the captain of the plague ship, if that’ s what it was.
And that’ s what it appeared to  be. I had seen smallpox
many times before, in the uncivilized parts of the world towhich my uncle Lamb, an eminent archaeologist, had taken
me durin g my early years. This fellow wasn’ t pissing blood, as
sometimes happened when the disease attacked the kidneys,
but otherwise he had every classic symptom.
“I’m afraid it is smallpox,” I said.
The Patagonia ’ s captai n gave a sudden howl of anguish,
and step ped toward me, face contorted, raising his hand as
though to strike me.
“No!” he shouted. “Fool of a wo man! Salope! Femme sans
cervelle!  Do you want to ruin me?”
The last word was cut of f in a gur gle as Jamie’ s hand
closed on his throat. The other hand twisted hard in the man’ s
shirtfront, lifting him onto his toes.
“I s hould prefer you to addre ss my wife with respect,
Monsieur ,” Jamie said, rather mildly . The captain, face turning
purple, m anaged a short, jerky nod, and Jamie dropped him.
He took a step back, wheezing, and sidled behind his
companion as though for refuge, rubbing his throat.
The tubby little of ficial was bending cautiously over the
sick man , holdin g a lar ge silver  pomander on a chain close to
his nose  as he did so. Outside, the level of noise dropped
suddenly as the crowd pulled back from the warehouse doors
to admit another canvas stretcher .
The man before us sat up suddenly , startling the little
of ficial so that he nearly fell over . The man stared wildly
around the warehouse, then his eyes rolled back in his head,
and he fell back onto the straw as though he’d been poleaxed.
He hadn’ t, but the end result was much the same.
“He’ s dead,” I said, unnecessarily .
The of ficial, recovering his dignity along with his
pomander , stepp ed in once mor e, looked closely at the body ,
straightened up  and announced, “Smallpox. The lady is
correct. I’m sorry , Monsieur le Comte, but you know the law
as well as anyone.”
The man he addressed sighed impatiently . He glanced at
me, frowning, then jerked his head at the of ficial.“I’m sure this c an be arranged, Monsieur Pamplemousse.
Please, a moment’ s private conversation…” He motioned
toward the deserted foreman’ s hut that stood some distance
away , a small derelict structure inside the lar ger building. A
nobleman by dress as well as by title, Monsieur le Comte was
a slende r , elegant sort, with he avy brows and thin lips. His
entire attitude proclaimed that he was used to getting his way .
But the little of ficial was back ing away , hands held out
before him as though in self-defense.
“ Non , Monsieur le Comte,” he said, “ Je le r egr ette, mais
c’est impossible … It cannot be done. T oo many people know
about it already .  The news will be all over the docks by now .”
He glanced helplessly at Jamie a nd Jared, then waved vaguely
at the warehouse door , where the featureless heads of
spectators show ed in silhouette, the late afternoon sun
rimming them with gold halos.
“No,” he said again, his pudgy features hardening with
resolve. “Y ou will excuse me, Monsieur – and Madame,” he
added b elatedly , as though noticing me for the first time. “I
must go  and institute proceedin gs for the destruction of the
ship.”
The captain uttered another choked howl at this, and
clutched at his s leeve, but he pulled away , and hurried out of
the building.
The atmospher e following his departure was a trifle
strained, what with Monsieur le Comte and his captain both
glaring at me, J amie glowering menacingly at them, and the
dead man staring sightlessly up at the ceiling forty feet above.
The Com te took a step toward me, eyes glittering. “Have
you any notion what you have done?” he snarled. “Be warned,
Madame; you will pay for this day’ s work!”
Jamie moved suddenly in the Comte’ s direction, but Jared
was even faster , tugging at Jam ie’ s sleeve, pushing me gently
in the direction of the door , and murmuring something
unintelligible to the stricken captain, who merely shook his
head dumbly in response.“Poor bugger ,” Jared said outside, shaking his head.
“Phew!” It was chilly on the quay , with a cold gray wind that
rocked t he ships at anchor , but Jared mopped his face and neck
with a lar ge, incongruous red sailcloth handkerchief pulled
from the  pocket of his coat. “Come on, laddie, let’ s find a
tavern. I’m needing a drink.”
Safely ensconced in the upper room of one of the quayside
taverns, with a pitcher of wine on the table, Jared collapsed
into a chair , fanning himself, and exhaled noisily .
“God, w hat luck!” He poured a  lar ge dollop of wine into
his cup, tossed it of f, and poured  another . Seeing me staring at
him, he grinned and pushed the pitcher in my direction.
“W ell, there’ s wine, lassie,” he explained, “and then there’ s
stuf f you drink to wash the du st away . T oss it back quick,
before y ou have  time to taste it, and it does the job handily .”
T aking his own advice, he drained the cup and reached for the
pitcher again. I began to see exactly what had happened to
Jamie the day before.
“Good l uck or bad?” I asked Jared curiously . I would have
assumed the answer to be “bad,” but the little merchant’ s air of
jovial ex hilaration seemed much  too pronounced to be due to
the red wine, which strongly resembled battery acid. I set
down m y own cup, hoping th e enamel on my molars was
intact.
“Bad for  St. Germain, good for me,” he said succinctly . He
rose from his chair and peered out the window .
“Good,” he said, sitting down again with a satisfied air .
“They’ll have the wine of f and into the warehouse by sunset.
Safe and sound.”
Jamie leaned back in his chair , surveying his cousin with
one eyebrow raised, a smile on his lips.
“Do we take it that Monsieur le Comte St. Germain’ s ship
also carried spirits, Cousin?”
An ear -t o-ear grin in reply displ ayed two gold teeth in the
lower jaw , which made Jared look still more piratical.“The be st aged port from Pinhão,” he said happily . “Cost
him a fortune. H alf the vintage from the Noval vineyards, and
no more available for a year .”
“And I suppose  the other half of the Noval port is what’ s
being unloaded into your warehouse?” I began to understand
his delight.
“Right, my lassie, right as rain!” Jared chortled, almost
hugging himself at the thought. “D’ye know what that will sell
for in Paris?” he  demanded, rocking forward and banging his
cup down on the table. “A limited supply , and me with the
monopoly? God, my profit’ s made for the year!”
I rose and looked out the window myself. The Arianna
rode at anchor , already noticeab ly higher in the water , as the
huge car go nets swung down fr om the boom mounted on the
rear dec k, to be carefully unloaded, bottle by bottle, into
handcarts for the trip to the warehouse.
“Not to impair the general r ejoicing,” I said, a little
dif fidently , “but did you say that your port came from the same
place as St. Germain’ s shipment?”
“A ye, I did.” Ja red came to st and next to me, squinting
down at  the procession of loaders below . “Noval makes the
best por t in the w hole of Spain and Portugal; I’d have liked to
take the whole bottling, but hadn’ t the capital. What of it?”
“Only th at if the ships are coming from the same port,
there’ s a chance that some of your seamen might have
smallpox too,” I said.
The thought blanched the wine flush from Jared’ s lean
cheeks, and he reached for a restorative gulp.
“God, what a thought!” he said , gasping as he set the cup
down. “But I think it’ s all right,” he said, reassuring himself.
“The po rt’ s half unloaded already . But I’d best speak to the
captain, anyway ,” he added, frowning. “I’ll have him pay the
men of f as soon as the loading’ s  finished – and if anyone looks
ill, they can hav e their wages a nd leave at once.” He turned
decisively and shot out of the room, pausing at the door just
long enough to call over his shoulder , “Order some supper!”before disappea ring down the stair with a clatter like a small
herd of elephants.
I turned to Jam ie, who was staring bemusedly into his
undrunk cup of wine.
“He shouldn’ t do that!” I exclaimed. “If he has got
smallpox on board, he could s pread it all over the city by
sending men of f with it.”
Jamie nodded slowly .
“Then I suppose  we’ll hope he hasna got it,” he observed
mildly .
I turned uncertainly toward the door . “But… shouldn’ t we
do something? I could at least g o have a look at his men. And
tell t hem what to  do with the bodies of the men from the other
ship…”
“Sassenach.” The deep voice was still mild, but held an
unmistakable note of warning.
“What?” I turned back to find him leaning forward,
regarding me levelly over the rim of his cup. He looked at me
thoughtfully for a minute before speaking.
“D’ye think what we’ve set ou rselves to do is important,
Sassenach?”
My hand dropped from the door handle.
“Stopping the Stuarts from starting a rising in Scotland?
Y es, of course I do. Why do you ask?”
He nodded, patient as an instructor with a slow pupil.
“A ye, w ell. If ye do, then you’ll come here, sit yourself
down, and drink wine wi’ me u ntil Jared comes back. And if
ye don’ t …” He paused and blew out a long breath that stirred
the ruddy wave of hair above his forehead.
“If ye don’ t, then you’ll go down to a quay full of seamen
and mer chants who think women near ships are the height of
ill luck,  who are already sprea ding gossip that you’ve put a
curse on  St. Germain’ s ship, an d you’ll tell them what they
must do . W ith luck, they’ll be too afraid of ye to rape youbefore they cut your throat and toss you in the harbor , and me
after you . If St. Germain himself  doesna strangle you first. Did
ye no see the look on his face?”
I came b ack to the table and sat down, a little abruptly . My
knees were a trifle wobbly .
“I saw it,” I said. “But could he… he wouldn’ t…”
Jamie raised his brows and pushed a cup of wine across the
table to me.
“He cou ld, and he would if he thought it could be managed
inconspicuously . For the Lord’ s  sake, Sassenach, you’ve cost
the man close on a year ’ s income! And he doesna look the sort
to take such a loss philosophically . Had ye not told the harbor
master i t was smallpox, out loud in front of witnesses, a few
discreet bribes would have taken care of the matter . As it is,
why do ye think Jared brought us up here so fast? For the
quality of the drink?”
My lips felt stif f, as though I’d actually drunk a good bit of
the vitriol from the pitcher .
“Y ou mean… we’re in danger?”
He sat back, nodding.
“Now you’ve got it,” he said kindly . “I dinna suppose
Jared wanted to alarm you. I expect he’ s gone to arrange a
guard of some k ind for us, as well as to see to his crew . He’ll
likely be safe en ough – everyone knows him, and his crew and
loaders are right outside.”
I r ubbed  my hands over the gooseflesh that rippled up my
forearms. There was a cheerful fire in the hearth, and the room
was warm and smoky , but I felt cold.
“How d o you know so much about what the Comte St.
Germain might do?” I didn’ t doubt Jamie at all – I
remembered all too well the ma levolent black glare the Comte
had shot at me in the warehouse – but I did wonder how he
knew the man.
Jamie to ok a small sip of the w ine, made a face and put it
down.“For the  one thing, he’ s some reputation for ruthlessness –
and othe r things. I heard a bit a bout him when I lived in Paris
before, t hough I  had the luck never to run afoul of the man
then. For another , Jared spent some time yesterday warning
me about him; he’ s Jared’ s chief business rival in Paris.”
I res ted my elbo ws on the battered table, and parked my
chin on my folded hands.
“I’ve made rather a mess of things, haven’ t I?” I said
ruefully . “Got you of f on a fine footing in business.”
He smil ed, then got up and came behind me, bending to
put his arms around me. I was still rather unnerved from his
sudden revelations, but felt much better to feel the strength and
the bulk of him behind me. He kissed me lightly on top of the
head.
“Dinna worry , Sassenach,” he said. “I can take care of
myself. And I can take care of you, too – and you’ll let me.”
There w as a smile in his voice,  but a question as well, and I
nodded, letting my head fall back against his chest.
“I’ll let you,” I said. “The citizens of Le Havre will just
have to take their chances with the pox.”
 
It was nearly an hour before  Jared came back, ears
reddened with cold, but throat u nslit, and apparently none the
worse for wear . I was happy to see him.
“It’ s all right,” he announced, beaming. “Nothing but
scurvy and the usual fluxes an d chills aboard. No pox.” He
looked around the room, rubbing his hands together . “Where’ s
supper?”
His cheeks were wind-reddene d and he looked cheerful
and capable. Apparently dealing with business rivals who
settled contentio ns by assassination was all in a day’ s work to
this merchant. And why not? I thought cynically . He was a
bloody Scot, after all.
As if to confirm this view , Jared ordered the meal,
acquired an excellent wine to  go with it by the simple
expedient of sending to his ow n warehouse for it, and satdown to a genia l postprandial discussion with Jamie on ways
and means of dealing with French merchants.
“Bandits,” he said. “Every man jack o’ them would stab ye
in the back as s oon as look at ye. Filthy thieves. Don’ t trust
them an  inch. Half on deposit, h alf on delivery , and never let a
nobleman pay on credit.”
Despite Jared’ s assurances that he had left two men below
on watch, I was still a bit nervous, and after supper , I placed
myself n ear the window , where I could see the comings and
goings along the pier . Not that my watching out was likely to
do a lot of good, I thought; every second man on the dock
looked like an assassin to me.
The clouds were closing in over the harbor; it was going to
snow ag ain tonight. The reefed sails fluttered wildly in the
rising w ind, rattling against the spars with a noise that nearly
overwhelmed the shouts of the loaders. The harbor glowed
with a moment of dull green ligh t as the setting sun was driven
into the water by the pressing clouds.
As it grew dark er , the bustle to and fro died down, the
loaders with their handcarts disappearing up the streets into the
town, an d the sailors disappearing into the lighted doors of
establishments l ike the one in which I sat. Still, the place was
far from  deserted; in particular , there was a small crowd still
gathered near the ill-fated Patagonia . M en in some sort of
uniform formed a cordon at th e foot of the gangplank; no
doubt to  prevent anyone going aboard or bringing the car go
of f. Jared had ex plained that the healthy members of the crew
would be allowed to come asho re, but not permitted to bring
anything of f the ship save the clothes that they wore.
“Better than they’d do under the Dutch,” he said,
scratching the rough black stubble that was beginning to
emer ge along his jaw . “If a s hip’ s coming in from a port
known t o have plague of some kind, the damned Hollanders
make the sailors swim ashore naked.”
“What do they do for clothes once they get ashore?” I
asked curiously .“I don’ t know ,” said Jared absen tly , “but since they’ll find
a b rothe l within moments of ste pping on land, I don’ t suppose
they’d need any – begging yo ur pardon, m’dear ,” he added
hastily , suddenly remembering that he was talking to a lady .
Covering his momentary confusion with heartiness, he
rose and came to peer out of the window beside me.
“Ah,” he said. “They’re gettin g ready to fire the ship.
Given w hat she’ s carrying, they’d best tow it a good way out
into the harbor first.”
T owropes had been attached to t he doomed Patagonia , and
a numbe r of small boats manned by oarsmen were standing
ready , waiting for a signal. T his was given by the harbor
master , w hose g old braid was b arely visible as a gleam in the
dying light of th e day . He shouted, waving both hands slowly
back and forth above his head like a semaphore.
His shou t was echoed by the captains of the rowboats and
galleys, and the towropes slowly lifted from the water as they
tautened, water sluicing down t he heavy hemp spirals with a
splash a udible in the sudden sile nce that struck the docks. The
shouts fr om the towboats were the only sound as the dark hulk
of th e co ndemned ship creaked,  quivered, and turned into the
wind, shrouds groaning as she set out on her last brief voyage.
They left her in the middle of the harbor , a safe distance
away from the other ships. Her  decks had been soaked with
oil, and as the towropes were cast of f and the galleys pulled
away , th e small round figure o f the harbor master rose from
the seat of the dinghy that had rowed him out. He bent down,
head close to o ne of the seated figures, then rose with the
bright sudden flame of a torch in one hand.
The rower behind him leaned away as he drew back his
arm and threw the torch. A heavy club wrapped with oil-
soaked r ags, it turned end over e nd, the fire shrinking to a blue
glow , an d landed out of sight behind the railing. The harbor
master d idn’ t wa it to see the ef fects of his action; he sat down
at once, gesturing madly to the r ower , who heaved on the oars,
and the small boat shot away across the dark water .For long  moments, nothing happened, but the crowd on the
dock stood still, murmuring quietly . I could see the pale
reflection of Jamie’ s face, floating above my own in the dark
glass of the wi ndow . The glass was cold, and misted over
quickly with our breath; I rubbed it clear with the edge of my
cloak.
“There,” Jamie said softly . The flame ran suddenly behind
the railin g, a small blue glowing line. Then a flicker , and the
forward shrouds sprang out, orange-red lines against the sky .
A silent  leap, and the tongues of fire danced along the oil-
drenched rails, and one furled  sail sparked and burst into
flame.
In less than a minute, the shrouds of the mizzen had
caught, and the mainsail unfurled, its moorings burnt through,
a falling  sheet of flame. The fire spread too rapidly then to
watch its progress; everything seemed alight at once.
“Now ,” Jared said suddenly . “Come downstairs. The hold
will catc h in a minute, and that will be the best time to make
away . No one will notice us.”
He w as right; as  we crept cautiously out of the tavern door ,
two men materialized beside Ja red – his own seamen, armed
with pistols and marlinspikes – but no one else noticed our
appearance. Everyone was turned toward the harbor , where the
superstructure o f the Patagonia  w as visible now as a black
skeleton inside a body of rippling flame. There was a series of
pops, so close together they sounded like machine-gun fire,
and then an almi ghty explosion that rose from the center of the
ship in a fountain of sparks and burning timbers.
“Let’ s g o.” Jamie’ s hand was firm on my arm, and I made
no p rotest. Following Jared, guarded by the sailors, we stole
away from the q uay , surreptitious as though we had started the
fire.7  R O Y A L  A U D I E N C E
J ared’ s house in P aris stood in the Rue T remoulins. It was
a wealth y district, with stone-faced houses of three, four , and
five stories crowded cheek by j owl together . Here and there a
very lar g e house  stood alone in its own park, but for the most
part, a reasonably athletic bur glar could have leaped from
rooftop to rooftop with no dif ficulty .
“Mmphm” was Murtagh’ s so litary observation, upon
beholding Jared’ s house. “I’ll find my own lodging.”
“And it makes ye nervous to have a decent roof above your
head, m an, ye can sleep in the stables,” Jamie suggested. He
grinned down at his small, dour godfather . “W e’ll ha’ the
footman bring ye out your parritch on a silver tray .”
Inside, t he house  was furnished with comfortable elegance,
though as I was  later to realize,  it was Spartan by comparison
with most of the houses of the nobility and the wealthy
bour geois. I supposed that this w as at least in part because the
house had no lad y; Jared had never married, though he showed
no signs of feeling the lack of a wife.
“W ell, h e has a mistress, of course,” Jamie had explained
when I speculated about his cousin’ s private life.
“Oh, of course,” I murmured.
“But she’ s married. Jared told  me once that a man of
business should  never form e ntanglements with unmarried
ladies – he said they demand too much in terms of expense
and time. And if ye marry th em, they’ll run through your
money and you’ll end up a pauper .”
“Fine op inion he’ s got of wive s,” I said. “What does he
think of your marrying, in spite of all this helpful advice?”
Jamie laughed. “W ell, I havena got any money to start
with, so I can hardly be worse of f. He thinks you’re verra
decorative; he says I must buy ye a new gown, though.”I s pread  the skirt of the apple-green velvet, more than a
little the worse for wear .
“I suppo se so,” I agreed. “Or I’ll go round wrapped in a
bedsheet after a while; this is already tight in the waist.”
“Elsewhere, too ,” he said, grinn ing as he looked me over .
“Got your appetite back, have ye, Sassenach?”
“Oaf,” I said coldly . “Y ou know perfectly well that
Annabelle MacR annoch is the general size and shape of a
shovel handle, whereas I am not.”
“Y ou are not,” he agreed, eyeing me with appreciation.
“Thank God.” He patted me familiarly on the bottom.
“I’m to join Jare d at the warehouse this morning to go over
the ledgers, then we’re going to call on some of his clients, to
introduce me. W ill ye be all right by yourself?”
“Y es, of course,” I said. “I’ll explore the house a bit, and
get acquainted with the servants.” I had met the servants en
masse when we had arrived late  in the previous afternoon, but
since w e had dined simply in our room, I had seen no one
since bu t the footman who brought the food, and the maid who
had com e in early in the mornin g to put back the curtains, lay
and ligh t the fire, and carry awa y the chamber pot. I quailed a
bit a t the  though t of suddenly b eing in char ge of a “staf f,” but
reassured myself by thinking that it couldn’ t be much dif ferent
from dir ecting orderlies and junior nurses, and I’d done that
before, as a senior nurse at a French field station in 1943.
After Jamie’ s departure, I took  my time in making what
toilette could be made with a co mb and water , which were the
only grooming implements available. If Jared was serious
about my holding dinner parties, I could see that a new gown
was going to be merely the start of it.
I did have, in the side pocket of my medicine chest, the
frayed willow twigs with which I cleaned my teeth, and I got
one of these a nd set to work, thinking over the amazing
fortune which had brought us here.
Essentially barred from Scotland, we would have had to
find a place to make our future, either in Europe or byemigrating to America. And given what I now knew about
Jamie’ s attitude toward ships, I wasn’ t at all surprised that he
should have looked to France from the start.
The Frasers had strong ties wi th France; many of them,
like Abbot Alexander and Jared Fraser , had made lives here,
seldom if ever returning to the ir native Scotland. And there
were many Jacobites as well, J amie had told me, those who
had followed their king into exi le, and now lived as best they
could in France or Italy while awaiting his restoration.
“There’ s always  talk of it,” he had said. “In the houses,
mostly , not the taverns. And th at’ s why nothing’ s come of it.
When it gets to the taverns, you’ll know it’ s serious.”
“T ell me,” I sai d, watching him brush the dust from his
coat, “are all Sc ots born knowing about politics, or is it just
you?”
He laughed, but quickly sobere d as he opened the huge
armoire and hung up the coa t. It looked worn and rather
pathetic, hanging by itself in the enormous, cedar -scented
space.
“W ell, I ’ll tell ye, Sassenach, I ’d as soon not know . But
born as I was, b etween the MacKenzies and the Frasers, I’d
little cho ice in the matter . And y e don’ t spend a year in French
society and two years in an army without learning how to
listen to what’ s being said, and  what’ s being meant, and how
to te ll the dif ference between the two. Given these times,
though, it isna just me; there’ s neither laird nor cottar in the
Highlands who can stand aside from what’ s to come.”
“What’ s to come.” What was  t o come ? I wondered. What
would  come, if we were not successful in our ef forts here, was
an armed rebellion, an attemp t at restoration of the Stuart
monarchy , led by the son of th e exiled king, Prince Charles
Edward (Casimir Maria Sylvester) Stuart.
“Bonnie Prince Charlie,” I said softly to myself, looking
over my  reflecti on in the lar ge pier glass. He was here, now , in
the same city , perhaps not too far away . What would he be
like? I could think of him only in terms of his usual historical
portrait, which showed a handsome, slightly ef feminate youthof si xteen or so,  with soft pink lips and powdered hair , in the
fashion of the times. Or the imagined paintings, showing a
more robust version of the same thing, brandishing a
broadsword as he stepped out of a boat onto the shore of
Scotland.
A Scotland he would ruin and lay waste in the ef fort to
reclaim it for h is father and himself. Doomed to failure, he
would attract enough support to cleave the country , and lead
his f ollowers through civil war to a bloody end on the field of
Culloden. Then he would flee ba ck to safety in France, but the
retribution of his enemies would be exacted upon those he left
behind.
It was to prevent such a disas ter that we had come. It
seemed incredib le, thinking about it in the peace and luxury of
Jared’ s house. How did one sto p a rebellion? W ell, if risings
were fomented in taverns, perhaps they could be stopped over
dinner tables. I shrugged at myself in the mirror , blew an
errant curl out of one eye, and went down to cozen the cook.
 
The staf f, at fi rst inclined to view me with frightened
suspicion, soon realized that I h ad no intention of interfering
with their work, and relaxed into a mood of wary obligingness.
I h ad thought at first, in my blu r of fatigue, that there were at
least a dozen servants lined up in the hallway for my
inspection. In fact, there were sixteen of them, counting the
groom, the stable-lad and the knife-boy , whom I hadn’ t
noticed in the g eneral scrum. I was still more impressed at
Jared’ s success in business, until I realized just how little the
servants were paid: a new pair o f shoes and two livres per year
for the footme n, a trifle less for the housemaids and
kitchenmaids, a little more for such exalted personages as
Madame V ionnet, the cook, and the butler , Magnus.
While I explored the mechanics of the household and
stored up what information I c ould glean at home from the
gossip of the par lormaids, Jamie was out with Jared every day ,
calling upon customers, meeting people, preparing himself to
“assist His Highness” by making those social connections thatmight p rove of value to an exiled prince. It was among the
dinner guests that we might find allies – or enemies.
“St. Germain?” I said, suddenly catching a familiar name
in the midst of M ar guerite’ s cha tter as she polished the parquet
floor . “The Comte St. Germain?”
“ Oui , Madame.” She was a small, fat girl, with an oddly
flattened face and popeyes that made her look like a turbot, but
she was friendly and eager to  please. Now she pursed her
mouth up into a tiny circle, portending the imparting of some
really scandalous tidbit. I looked as encouraging as possible.
“The Comte, Madame, has a ver y bad reputation,” she said
portentously .
Since th is was true – according to Mar guerite – of virtually
everyone who came to dinner , I  arched my brows and waited
for further details.
“He has  sold his soul to the Devil, you know ,” she
confided, lowering her voice and glancing around as though
that gentleman might be lurking behind the chimney breast.
“He cele brates the Black Mass, at which the blood and flesh of
innocent children are shared amongst the wicked!”
A f ine specimen you picked to make an enemy of, I
thought to myself.
“Oh, ev eryone k nows, Madame ,” Mar guerite assured me.
“But it does not  matter; the women are mad for him, anyway;
wherever he goes, they throw th emselves at his head. But then,
he is  rich.” Plain ly this last qualification was at least suf ficient
to balan ce, if not to outweigh, the blood-drinking and flesh-
eating.
“How interesting,” I said. “But I thought that Monsieur le
Comte was a co mpetitor of Monsieur Jared; doesn’ t he also
import wines? Why does Monsieur Jared invite him here,
then?”
Mar guerite looked up from her floor -polishing and
laughed.
“Why , Madame! It is so that Monsieur Jared can serve the
best Beaune at d inner , tell Monsieur le Comte that he has justacquired ten cases, and at the conclusion of the meal,
generously of fer him a bottle to take home!”
“I see,” I said, grinning. “And is Monsieur Jared similarly
invited to dine with Monsieur le Comte?”
She nodded, white kerchief bobbing over her oil-bottle and
rag. “Oh, yes, Madame. But not as often!”
The Com te St. Germain was fortunately not invited for this
evening. W e dined simply en famille, so that Jared could
rehearse Jamie in the few detail s left to be arranged before his
departure. Of these, the most im portant was the King’ s lever  at
V ersailles.
Being in vited to  attend the King ’ s lever  was  a considerable
mark of favor , Jared explained over dinner .
“Not to you, lad ,” he said kindl y , waving a fork at Jamie.
“T o me.  The King wants to mak e sure I’m coming back from
Germany – or Duverney , the Minister of Finance, does, at
least. Th e latest wave of taxes hit the merchants hard, and a
good many of the foreigners left – with the ill ef fects on the
Royal T reasury you can imagine.” He grimaced at the thought
of taxes, scowling at the baby eel on his fork.
“I m ean to be gone by Monday-week. I’m waiting only for
word th at the W ilhelmina ’ s come in safe to Calais; then I’m
of f.” Jared took another bite of eel and nodded at Jamie,
talking around the mouthful of f ood. “I’m leaving the business
in go od hands, l ad; I’ve no worr y on that score. W e might talk
a bit before I go about other matters, though. I’ve arranged
with the  Earl Marischal that we ’ll go with him to Montmartre
two day s hence, for you to pay your respects to His Highness,
Prince Charles Edward.”
I felt a sudden thump of exc itement in the pit of my
stomach, and exchanged a quick glance with Jamie. He
nodded at Jared, as though this were nothing startling, but his
eyes spa rkled with anticipation as he looked at me. So this was
the start of it.
“His Highness lives a very retired life in Paris,” Jared was
saying a s he chased the last eels , slick with butter , around theedge of the plate . “It wouldn’ t be appropriate for him to appear
in so ciety , until and unless the K ing receives him of ficially . So
His Hig hness se ldom leaves his house, and sees few people,
save tho se supporters of his f ather who come to pay their
respects.”
“That isn’ t what I’ve heard,” I interjected.
“What?” T wo pairs of startled eyes turned in my direction,
and Jared laid d own his fork, a bandoning the final eel to its
fate.
Jamie arched an eyebrow at m e. “What have ye heard,
Sassenach, and from whom?”
“From the servants,” I said, con centrating on my own eels.
Seeing J ared’ s fr own, it occurred to me for the first time that it
might n ot be considered quite the thing for the lady of the
house to  be gossiping with parlormaids. W ell, the hell with it, I
thought rebelliously . There wasn’ t much else for me to do.
“The parlormaid says that His Highness Prince Charles has
been paying calls on the Princesse Louise de La T our de
Rohan,” I said, plucking a single eel of f the fork and chewing
slowly . They were delicious, but felt rather disconcerting if
swallowed whole, as though the creature were still alive. I
swallowed carefully . So far , so good.
“In the absence of the lady’ s husband,” I added delicately .
Jamie looked amused, Jared horrified.
“The Princesse de Rohan?” Jared said. “Marie-Louise-
Henriette-Jeanne de La T our d’Auver gne? Her husband’ s
family are very close to the King.” He rubbed his fingers
across his lips, leaving a buttery shine around his mouth. “That
could be  very dangerous,” he muttered, as though to himself.
“I wond er if the wee fool… but no. Surely he’ s more sense
than that. It mus t be only inexperience; he’ s not been so much
in socie ty , and things are dif fer ent in Rome. Still…” He left
of f muttering and turned to Jamie with decision.
“That will be y our first task, lad, in the service of His
Majesty . Y ou’re  much of an age with His Highness, but you
have the experience and the jud gment of your time in Paris –and my training, I flatter myself .” He smiled briefly at Jamie.
“Y ou can befriend his Highness ; smooth his path as much as
may be with those men that will be of use to him; you’ve met
most of them b y now . And explain to His Highness – as
tactfully as ye can – that gallantry in the wrong direction may
do considerable damage to the aims of his father .”
Jamie nodded absently , plainly thinking of something else.
“How does our parlormaid come to know about His
Highness’ s vists, Sassenach?” he asked. “She doesna leave the
house more than once a week, to go to Mass, does she?”
I shook my head, and swallowed the next mouthful in
order to reply .
“So far as I’ve  worked it out, our kitchenmaid heard it
from the knife-boy , who heard i t from the stable-lad, who got
it from the groo m next door . I don’ t know how many people
there are  in between, but the Ro han house is three doors down
the stree t. I’d imagine the Princesse knows all about us, too,” I
added cheerfully . “At least she does, if she talks to her
kitchenmaid.”
“Ladies do not  gos sip w ith the ir kitchenmaids, ” Jared said
coldly . He narrowed his eyes at  Jamie in a silent adjuration to
keep his wife in better order .
I could see the corner of Jamie’ s mouth twitching, but he
merely sipped his Montrachet and changed the subject to a
discussion of Jared’ s latest vent ure; a shipment of rum, on its
way from Jamaica.
When Ja red rang the bell for the dishes to be cleared and
the brandy brought out, I excused myself. One of Jared’ s
idiosyncrasies was the enjoyment of long black cheroots with
his bran dy , and I had the distinct feeling that, carefully chewed
or not, the eel s I had eaten wouldn’ t benefit from being
smoked.
I l ay on my be d and tried, with limited success, not to
think ab out eels.  I closed my eyes and tried to think of Jamaica
– pl easant white beaches under tropical sun. But thoughts of
Jamaica led to th oughts of the W ilhelmina  and thought of shipsmade me think of the sea, which led directly back to images of
giant eels, coiling and writhing through the heaving green
waves. I greeted the distraction of Jamie’ s appearance with
relief, sitting up as he came in.
“Phew!” He leaned against t he closed door , fanning
himself with the loose end of h is jabot. “I feel like a smoked
sausage. I’m fond of Jared, but  I shall be verra pleased when
he’ s taken his damned cheroots to Germany .”
“W ell, don’ t come near me, if y ou smell like a cheroot,” I
said. “The eels don’ t like smoke.”
“I dinna  blame them a bit.” He took of f his coat and
unbuttoned his shirt. “I think it’ s a plan, ye ken,” he confided,
tossing h is head  toward the door  as he took his shirt of f. “Like
the bees.”
“Bees?”
“How ye move a hive of bees,”  he explained, opening the
window and hanging his shirt outside from the crank of the
casement. “Y ou get a pipe full of the strongest tobacco ye can
find, stick it into the hive and blow smoke up into the combs.
The bees all fall down stunned,  and you can take them where
ye l ike. I think  that’ s what Jared does to his customers; he
smokes them into insensibility , and they’ve signed orders for
three tim es more wine than they  meant to before they recover
their senses.”
I giggled and he grinned, putting a finger to his lips as the
sound of Jared’ s light footsteps came down the corridor ,
passing our door on his way to his own room.
Danger of discovery past, he came and stretched out beside
me, wearing only his kilt and stockings.
“Not too  bad?” he asked. “I can sleep in the dressing room,
if it is. Or put my head out of the window for airing.”
I sn if fed his hair , where the scent of tobacco lingered
among the ruddy waves. The candlelight shot the red with
strands o f gold, and I ruf fled my fingers through it, enjoying
the thick  softne ss of it, and the hard, solid feel of the bone
beneath.“No, it’ s not too bad. Y ou’re not worried about Jared
leaving so soon, then?”
He kisse d my forehead and lay down, head on the bolster .
He smiled up at me, shaking his head.
“No. I’v e met all the chief customers and the captains, I
know all the warehousemen and the of ficials, I’ve the price
lists and  the inventories commi tted to memory . What’ s left to
learn ab out the business I mu st just learn by trying; Jared
canna teach me more.”
“And Prince Charles?”
He half-closed his eyes and gave a small grunt of
resignation. “A y e, well. For that, I must trust to the mercy of
God, not Jared. And I daresay it will be easier if Jared isn’ t
here to see what I’m doing.”
I lay down beside him, and he turned toward me, sliding an
arm around my waist so that we lay close together .
“What shall  we do?” I asked. “Have you any idea, Jamie?”
His brea th was warm on my face, scented with brandy , and
I tilt ed m y head  up to kiss him. His soft, wide mouth opened
on mine , and he lingered in the kiss for a moment before
answering.
“Oh, I’ve ideas,” he said, drawi ng back with a sigh. “God
knows what they’ll amount to, but I’ve ideas.”
“T ell me.”
“Mmphm.” He settled himself more comfortably , turning
on his back and cradling me in one arm, head on his shoulder .
“W ell,” he began, “as I see it, it’ s a matter of money ,
Sassenach.”
“Money? I should have thought  it was a matter of politics.
Don’ t th e French want James res tored because it will cause the
English trouble?  From the little I recall, Louis wanted – will
want” – I correc ted myself – “Charles Stuart to distract King
Geor ge from what Louis is up to in Brussels.”“I dares ay he does,” he said, “but restoring kings takes
money . And Louis hasna got so much himself that he can be
using it on the one hand to figh t wars in Brussels, and on the
other to finance invasions of E ngland. Y ou heard what Jared
said about the Royal T reasury and the taxes?”
“Y es, but…”
“No, it isna Lo uis that will make it happen,” he said,
instructing me. “Though he’ s s omething to say about it, of
course. No, there are other sou rces of money that James and
Charles will be trying as wel l, and those are the French
banking families, the V atican, and the Spanish Court.”
“James covering the V atican and the Spanish, and Charles
the French bankers, you think?” I asked, interested.
He n odded, staring up at the ca rved panels of the ceiling.
The walnut panels were a soft, light brown in the flickering
candle-glow , darker rosettes and ribbons twining from each
corner .
“A ye, I do. Uncle Alex showed me correspondence from
His Maj esty King James, and I should say the Spanish are his
best opportunity , judging from that. The Pope’ s compelled to
support him, ye ken, as a Cath olic monarch; Pope Clement
supported James  for a good many years, and now Clement’ s
dead, Benedict continues it, but  not at such a high level. But
both Ph ilip of Spain and Louis  are James’ s cousins; it’ s the
obligation of Bourbon blood he calls on there.” He smiled
wryly at me, sid elong. “And from the things I’ve seen, I can
tell ye that Royal blood runs damn thin when it comes to
money , Sassenach.”
Lifting one foot at a time, he str ipped of f his stockings one
handed and tossed them onto the bedroom stool.
“James got some money from Spain thirty years ago,” he
observed. “A small fleet of ship s, and some men as well. That
was the Rising in 1715. But he had ill luck, and James’ s forces
were defeated at Sherif fsmuir – before James himself even
arrived. So I’d say the Spanish  are maybe none too eager to
finance a second try at the Stuart restoration – not without a
verra good idea that it might succeed.”“So Charles has come to France  to work on Louis and the
bankers,” I mused. “And accord ing to what I know of history ,
he’ll succeed. Which leaves us where?”
Jamie’ s arm left my shoulders as he stretched, the shift of
his weight tilting the mattress under me.
“It leaves me se lling wine to bankers, Sassenach,” he said,
yawning. “And you talking to parlormaids. And if we blow
enough smoke, perhaps we’ll stun the bees.”
 
Just before Jared’ s departure, he took Jamie to the small
house in  Montmartre where His Highness, Prince Charles
Edward Louis Philip Casimir , etc. Stuart was residing, biding
his time  while waiting to see w hat Louis would or would not
do for an impecunious cousin with aspirations to a throne.
I ha d seen them  of f, both dressed in their best, and spent
the t ime while t hey were gone picturing the encounter in my
mind, wondering how it had gone.
“How d id it go?” I asked Jamie, the moment I got him
alone upon his return. “What was he like?”
He scratched his head, thinking.
“W ell,” he said at last, “he had a toothache.”
“What?”
“He said so. An d it looked verr a painful; he kept his face
screwed up to o ne side with his jaw puf fed a bit. I canna say
whether he’ s stif f in his manner usually , or if it was only that it
hurt him to talk, but he didna say much.”
After the formal introductions, in fact, the older men,
Jared, the Earl Marischal, and a rather seedy-looking specimen
referred to casually as “Balhaldy ,” had gravitated together and
begun talking Scottish politics, leaving Jamie and His
Highness more or less to themselves.
“W e had a cup of brandywine each,” Jamie obediently
reported, under my goading. “A nd I asked him how he found
Paris, and he said he was finding it rather tiresomely
confining, as he couldna get any hunting. And so then wetalked of hunting. He prefers hu nting wi’ dogs to hunting with
beaters, and I s aid I did, too. Then he told me how many
pheasants he’d shot on one hu nting trip in Italy . He talked
about Italy until he said the cold air coming in through the
window was hurting his tooth – it’ s no a verra well-built
house; just a small villa. T hen he drank some more
brandywine for his tooth, and I told him about stag-hunting in
the H ighlands, and he said he’d  like to try that sometime, and
was I a good shot with a bow? And I said I was, and he said he
hoped h e would  have the opport unity to invite me to hunt with
him in Scotland . And then Jared  said he needed to stop at the
warehouse on the way back, s o His Highness gave me his
hand and I kissed it and we left.”
“Hmm,” I said. While reason asserted that naturally the
famous – or about-to-be-famou s, or possibly-famous, at any
rate – were bound to be much like everyone else in their daily
behavior , I had to admit that I found this report of the Bonnie
Prince a bit of a letdown. Still, Jamie had been invited back.
The important thing, as he p ointed out, was to become
acquainted with  His Highness, in order to keep an eye on his
plans as any developed. I wondered whether the King of
France would be a trifle more impressive in person.
 
W e were not lon g in finding out. A week later , Jamie rose
in th e co ld, blac k dark and dress ed himself for the long ride to
V ersailles, to attend the King’ s lever . Lo uis a woke p unctually
at si x o’clock e very morning. At this hour , the favored few
chosen to attend the King’ s toile tte should be assembled in the
antechamber , ready to join the procession of nobles and
attendants who were necessary to assist the monarch in
greeting the new day .
W akened in the small hours by Magnus the butler , Jamie
stumbled sleepily out of bed and made ready , yawning and
muttering. At this hour , my insides were tranquil, and I
luxuriated in that delightful feeling that comes when we
observe someone having to do something unpleasant that we
are not required to do ourselves.“W atch carefully ,” I said, my vo ice husky with sleep. “So
you can tell me everything.”
W ith a sleepy g runt of assent, h e leaned over to kiss me,
then shu f fled of f, candle in hand , to see to the saddling of his
horse. The last I heard before s inking back under the surface
of sleep was Jamie’ s voice downstairs, suddenly clear and alert
in th e crisp nigh t air , exchanging farewells with the groom in
the street outside.
Given th e distance to V ersailles, and the chance – of which
Jared h ad warned – of being  invited to lunch, I wasn’ t
surprised when he didn’ t return  before noon, but I couldn’ t
help being curious, and waited in increasing impatience until
his arrival – finally – near teatime.
“And ho w was the King’ s lever ?” I aske d, com ing to help
Jamie re move h is coat. W earing the tight pigskin gloves de
rigueur at Court, he couldn’ t ma nage the crested silver buttons
on the slippery velvet.
“Oh, that feels b etter ,” he said, flexing his broad shoulders
in relief  as the buttons sprang free. The coat was much too
tight in the shou lders; peeling him out of it was like shelling
an egg.
“Interesting, Sa ssenach,” he said, in answer to my
question, “at least for the first hour or so.”
As the procession of nobles came into the Royal
Bedchamber , each bearing his ceremonial implement – towel,
razor , a lecup, royal seal, etc. – the gentlemen of the
bedchamber dre w back the heavy curtains that kept out the
dawn, u nveiled the draperies of the great bed of state, and
exposed the face of le r oi Louis  to  the interested eye of the
rising sun.
Assisted to a sitting position on the edge of his bed, the
King had sat yawning and scratching his stubbled chin while
his atten dants pulled a silk robe, heavy with embroidery of
silver an d gold, over the royal shoulders, and knelt to strip of f
the heav y felt stockings in which the King slept, to be replaced
with hose of lighter silk, and soft slippers lined with rabbit fur .One by one, the nobles of the court came to kneel at the
feet of their sov ereign, to greet him respectfully and ask how
His Majesty had passed the night?
“Not ve rra well, I should say ,” Jamie broke of f to observe
here. “He looked like he’d slept little more than an hour or
two, and bad dreams with it.”
Despite bloodshot eyes and drooping jowls, His Majesty
had nodded graciously to his cou rtiers, then risen slowly to his
feet and bowed t o those favored guests hovering in the back of
the chamber . A dispirited wave of the hand summoned a
gentleman of the bedchamber , who led His Majesty to the
waiting chair , where he sat with closed eyes, enjoying the
ministrations of his attendants, while the visitors were led
forward one at a time by the D uc d’Orléans, to kneel before
the K ing and of fer a few words of greeting. Formal petitions
would b e of fered a little later , when there was a chance of
Louis being awake enough to hear them.
“I wasna there for petitioning, but only as a mark of
favor ,” Jamie explained, “so I just knelt and said, ‘Good
morning, Y our Majesty ,’ while the Duc told the King who I
was.”
“Did the King say anything to you?” I asked.
Jamie grinned, hands linked behind his head as he
stretched. “Oh, aye. He opened  one eye and looked at me as
though he didna believe it.”
One eye still op en, Louis had surveyed his visitor with a
sort of dim interest, then remarked, “Big, aren’ t you?”
“I said, ‘Y es, Y o ur Majesty ,’ ” Jamie said. “Then he said,
‘Can you dance?’ and I said I could. Then he shut his eye
again, and the Duc motioned me back.”
Introductions complete, the gentlemen of the bedchamber ,
ceremoniously assisted by the chief nobles, had then
proceeded to make the King’ s  toilette. As they did so, the
various petitioners came forwar d at the beckoning of the Duc
d’Orléans, to murmur into the King’ s ear as he twisted hishead to accommodate the razor , or bent his neck to have his
wig adjusted.
“Oh? An d were you honored by  being allowed to blow His
Majesty’ s nose for him?” I asked.
Jamie grinned, stretching his  linked hands until the
knuckles cracked.
“No, thank God. I skulked about against the wardrobe,
trying to  look like part of the furniture, wi’ the bitty wee
comtes and ducs all glancing at me out of the sides of their
eyes as though Scottishness were catching.”
“W ell, at least you were tall enough to see everything?”
“Oh, aye. That I did, even when he eased himself on his
chaise per cée .”
“He really did that? In fron t of everyone?” I was
fascinated. I’d read about it, of c ourse, but found it dif ficult to
believe.
“Oh, aye, and everyone behaving just as they did when he
washed his face and blew his no se. The Duc de Neve had the
unspeakable honor ,” he added ironically , “of wiping His
Majesty’ s arse for him. I didna notice what they did wi’ the
towel; took it out and had it gilded, no doubt.
“A verra wearisome business it was, too,” he added,
bending over and setting his hands on the floor to stretch the
muscles of his legs. “T ook forever; the man’ s tight as an owl.”
“T ight as an owl?” I asked, amused at the simile.
“Constipated, do you mean?”
“A ye, costive. And no wonder , the things they eat at
Court,” he added censoriously , stretching backward. “T errible
diet, all cream and butter . H e should eat parritch every
morning for breakfast – that’d take care of it. V erra good for
the bowels, ye ken.”
If Scotsm en we re stubborn about anything – and, in fact,
they ten ded to be stubborn abo ut quite a number of things,
truth be known – it was the v irtues of oatmeal parritch for
breakfast. Throu gh eons of livin g in a land so poor there waslittle to eat but oats, they had as  usual converted necessity into
a virtue, and insisted that they liked the stuf f.
Jamie had by now thrown himself on the floor and was
doing the Royal Air Force exe rcises I had recommended to
strengthen the muscles of his back.
Returning to his earlier remark,  I said, “Why did you say
‘tight as  an owl’? I’ve heard that before, to mean drunk, but
not costive. Are owls constipated, then?”
Completing his course, he flippe d over and lay on the rug,
panting.
“Oh, aye.” He b lew out a long sigh, and caught his breath.
He sat up and pushed the hair o ut of his eyes. “Or not really ,
but t hat’ s the sto ry ye hear . Folk  will tell ye that owls havena
got an arsehole, so they canna pass the things they eat – like
mice, ay e? So the bones and the hairs and such are all made up
into a ball, and the owl vomits them out, not bein’ able to get
rid of them out the other end.”
“Really?”
“Oh, aye, that’ s true enough, they do. That’ s how ye find
an owl-tree; look underneath f or the pellets on the ground.
Make a terrible mess, owls do, ” he added, pulling his collar
away from his neck to let air in.
“But the y have got arseholes,” he informed me. “I knocked
one out of a tree once wi’ a slingshot and looked.”
“A lad with an inquiring mind, eh?” I said, laughing.
“T o be sure, Sa ssenach.” He grinned. “And they do pass
things th at way , too. I spent a whole day sitting under an owl-
tree with Ian, once, just to make sure.”
“Christ, you must  have been curious,” I remarked.
“W ell, I wanted to know . Ian did na want to sit still so long,
and I had to pound on him a bit to make him stop fidgeting.”
Jamie la ughed, remembering. “ So he sat still wi’ me until it
happened, and then he snatched up a handful of owl pellets,
jammed them down the neck of my shirt, and was of f like a
shot. God, he c ould run like th e wind.” A tinge of sadnesscrossed his face, his memory o f the fleet-footed friend of his
youth clashing with more recent memories of his brother -in-
law , hob bling stif fly , if good-naturedly , on the wooden leg a
round of grapeshot taken in a foreign battle had left him with.
“That sounds an awful way to live,” I remarked, wanting
to di stract him. “Not watching o wls, I don’ t mean – the King.
No privacy , ever , not even in the loo.”
“I w ouldna care for it myself,”  Jamie agreed. “But then
he’ s the King.”
“Mmm. And I suppose all the power and luxury and so
forth makes up for a lot.”
He s hrugged. “W ell, if it does o r no, it’ s the bar gain God’ s
made for him, and he’ s little choice but to make the best of it.”
He picked up his plaid and drew the tail of it through his belt
and up to his shoulder .
“Here, let me.” I took the silver  ring-brooch from him and
fastened the flaming fabric at the crest of his shoulder . He
arranged the drape, smoothing the vivid wool between his
fingers.
“I’ve a bar gain like that myself, Sassenach,” he said
quietly , looking down at me. He  smiled briefly . “Though thank
God it doesna m ean inviting Ian to wipe my arse for me. But I
was born laird. I’m the steward of that land and the people on
it, and I must make the best of my own bar gain wi’ them.”
He reached out and touched my hair lightly .
“That’ s why I was glad when ye said we’d come, to try and
see w hat we might do. For there’ s a part of me would like no
better than to tak e you and the bairn and go far away , to spend
the rest of my life working the fields and the beasts, to come in
in the evenings and lie beside ye, quiet through the night.”
The dee p blue eyes were hood ed in thought, as his hand
returned to the f olds of his plaid, stroking the bright checks of
the F raser tartan, with the faint white stripe that distinguished
Lallybroch from the other septs and families.
“But if I did,” he went on, as  though speaking more to
himself than to me, “there’ s a part of my soul would feelforsworn, and I think – I think I would always hear the voices
of the people that are mine, calling out behind me.”
I l aid a hand o n his shoulder , and he looked up, a faint
lopsided smile on the wide mouth.
“I think you would, too,” I said. “Jamie… whatever
happens, whatever we’re able to do…” I stopped, looking for
words. A s so often before, the sheer enormity of the task we
had taken on sta ggered me and left me speechless. Who were
we, to alter the  course of history , to change the course of
events n ot for ourselves, but fo r princes and peasants, for the
entire country of Scotland?
Jamie laid his hand over mine and squeezed it reassuringly .
“No one can ask more of us than  our best, Sassenach. Nay ,
if there’ s blood shed, it wilna lie on our hands at least, and
pray God it may not come to that.”
I though t of the lonely gray clanstones on Culloden Moor ,
and the Highlan d men who might lie under them, if we were
unsuccessful.
“Pray God,” I echoed.8  U N L A I D  G H O S T S  A N D
C R O C O D I L E S
B etween Royal audiences and the daily demands of Jared’ s
business, Jamie seemed to be finding life full. He disappeared
with Murtagh soon after breakfa st each morning, to check new
deliveries to the warehouse, make inventories, visit the docks
on t he Seine, a nd conduct tours of what sounded from his
description to be extremely unsavory taverns.
“W ell, at least y ou’ve got Murtagh with you,” I remarked,
taking c omfort f rom the fact, “a nd the two of you can’ t get in
too m uch trouble in broad daylight.” The wiry little clansman
was unimpressive to look at, his  attire varying from that of the
ne’er -do-wells on the docks only by the fact that the lower half
was tartan plaid, but I had ridden through half of Scotland with
Murtagh to rescue Jamie from W entworth Prison, and there
was no one in the world whom I would sooner have trusted
with his welfare.
After lu ncheon, Jamie would make his rounds of calls –
social and business, and an inc reasing number of both – and
then retire into his study for an hour or two with the ledgers
and account books before dinner . He was busy .
I w as not. A few  days of polite skirmishing with Madame
V ionnet, the head-cook, had left it clear who was in char ge of
the hous ehold, and it wasn’ t me . Madame came to my sitting
room each morning, to consult  me on the menu for the day ,
and to present me with the list of expenditures deemed
necessary for the provisioning of the kitchen-fruit, vegetables,
butter , a nd milk from a farm just outside the city , delivered
fresh ea ch morning, fish caught from the Seine and sold from
a ba rrow in the  street, along with fresh mussels that poked
their sea led blac k curves from heaps of wilting waterweed. I
looked over the lists for form’ s sake, approved everything,
praised the dinner of the night before, and that was that. Aside
from the occasional call to open  the linen cupboard, the wine
cellar , th e root cellar , or the pan try with a key from my bunch,my time was then my own, until the hour came to dress for
dinner .
The social life of Jared’ s establishment continued much as
it had when he  was in residen ce. I was still cautious about
entertaining on a lar ge scale, bu t we held small dinners every
night, to which came nobles, chevaliers, and ladies, poor
Jacobites in exile, wealthy merchants and their wives.
However , I found that eating and  drinking and preparing to
eat and drink wa s not really suf f icient occupation. I fidgeted to
the point that Ja mie at last sugg ested I come and copy ledger
entries for him.
“Better d o that than be gnawin’ yourself,” he said, looking
critically at my bitten nails. “B eside, ye write a fairer hand
than the warehouse clerks.”
So i t was that I was in the study , crouched industriously
over the enormous ledger books, when Mr . Silas Hawkins
came lat e one afternoon, with an order for two tuns of Flemish
brandy . Mr . Hawkins was stout a nd prosperous; an émigré like
Jared, he  was an Englishman w ho specialized in the export of
French brandies to his homeland.
I s uppos ed that  a merchant wh o looked like a teetotaler
would find it rat her dif ficult to sell people wines and spirits in
quantity . Mr . Hawkins was fortunate in this regard, in that he
had the permanently flushed cheeks and jolly smile of a
reveler , though Jamie had told me that the man never tasted his
own wares, and in fact seldom drank anything beyond rough
ale, thou gh his appetite for food was a legend in the taverns he
visited. A n expression of alert ca lculation lurked at the back of
his bright brown eyes, behind the smooth bonhomie that oiled
his transactions.
“My bes t suppliers, I do declare,” he declared, signing a
lar ge ord er with  a flourish. “Alw ays dependable, always of the
first qua lity . I shall miss your co usin sorely in his absence,” he
said, bowing to Jamie, “but he’ s done well in his choice of a
substitute. T rust a Scotsman to keep the business in the
family .”The sma ll, brigh t eyes lingered on Jamie’ s kilt, the Fraser
red of it bright a gainst the dark wood paneling of the drawing
room.
“Just over from Scotland recently?” Mr . Hawkins asked
casually , feeling inside his coat.
“Nay , I’ve been in France for a time.” Jamie smiled,
turning the question away . He took the quill pen from Mr .
Hawkins, but finding it too bl unted for his taste, tossed it
aside, pulling a fresh one from the bouquet of goose feathers
that sprouted from a small glass jug on the sideboard.
“Ah. I see from your dress that you are a Highland Scot; I
had thought perhaps you would be able to advise me as to the
current sentimen ts prevailing in that part of the country . One
hears such rumors, you know .” Mr . Hawkins subsided into a
chair at the wave of Jamie’ s hand, his round, rosy face
apparently intent on the fat leather purse he had drawn from
his pocket.
“As for rumors – well, that’ s th e normal state of af fairs in
Scotland, no?” Jamie said, studiously sharpening the fresh
quill. “B ut sentiments? Nay , if ye mean politics, I’m afraid
I’ve little attention for such things myself.” The small
penknife made a sharp snickin g sound as the horny slivers
shaved of f the thick stem of the quill.
Mr . Hawkins brought out several silver pieces from his
purse, stacking them neatly in a  tidy column between the two
men.
“ ’Strew th?” he  said, almost a bsently . “If so, you’re the
first Highlander I’ve met who hadn’ t.”
Jamie fi nished his sharpening and held the point of the
quill up, squinting to judge its angle.
“Mm?” he said vaguely . “A ye, w ell, I’ve other matters that
concern me; the running of a business such as this is time-
consuming, as you’ll know yourself, I imagine.”
“So it is.” Mr . Hawkins counted over the coins in his
column once more and removed one, replacing it with two
smaller ones. “I’ve heard that Charles Stuart has recentlyarrived i n Paris,” he said. His round tippler ’ s face showed no
more than mild interest, but the eyes were alert in their pockets
of fat.
“Oh, aye,” Jamie muttered, his  tone of voice leaving it
open wh ether this was acknowledgment of fact, or merely an
expression of polite indif ference . He had the order before him,
and was signing each page wit h excessive care, crafting the
letters ra ther than scribbling them, as was his usual habit. A
left-handed man forced as a boy to write right-handed, he
always found letters dif ficult, bu t he seldom made such a fuss
of it.
“Y ou do not share your cousin’ s sympathies in that
direction, then?”  Hawkins sat back a little, watching the crown
of Jamie’ s bent head, which was naturally rather noncommital.
“Is that any concern of yours, sir?” Jamie raised his head,
and fixed Mr . Hawkins with a mild blue stare. The plump
merchant returned the look for a moment, then waved a podgy
hand in airy dismissal.
“Not at all,” he  said smoothly . “Still, I am familiar with
your cousin’ s Jacobite leanings – he makes no secret of them. I
wondered only whether all Scots were of one mind on this
matter of the Stuart pretensions to the throne.”
“If y ou’ve had m uch to do wi’ Highland Scots,” Jamie said
dryly , handing across a copy of the order , “then ye’ll know that
it’ s rare to find two of them in agreement on anything much
beyond the color of the sky – an d even that is open to question
from time to time.”
Mr . Hawkins laughed, his com fortable paunch shaking
under hi s waistcoat, and tucked the folded paper away in his
coat. Se eing that Jamie was n ot eager to have this line of
inquiry pursued , I stepped in at this point with a hospitable
of fer of Madeira and biscuits.
Mr . Haw kins looked tempted for a moment, but then shook
his head regretfully , pushing back his chair to rise.
“No, no, I thank  you, milady , but no. The Arabella  docks
this Thursday , and I must be at Calais to meet her . And thedevil of a lot there is to do before I set foot in the carriage to
leave.” He grimaced at a lar ge s heaf of orders and receipts he
had pulled from his pocket, added Jamie’ s receipt to the heap,
and stuf fed them back into a lar ge leather traveling wallet.
“Still,” h e said, brightening, “I can do a bit of business on
the w ay; I shall call in at the inns and public houses between
here and Calais.”
“If y e call in at all  the  taverns ’ twixt here and the coast,
you’ll no reach Calais ’ til next  month,” observed Jamie. He
fished his own purse from his sporran and scooped the small
column of silver into it.
“T oo tru e, milo rd,” Mr . Hawkins said, frowning ruefully .
“I su ppose I mu st give one or two the miss, and catch them up
on my way back.”
“Surely you could send someon e to Calais in your place, if
your time is so valuable?” I suggested.
He rolled his eyes expressively , pursing his jolly little
mouth into something as close to mournfulness as could be
managed within the limitations of its shape.
“W ould that I could, milady . But the shipment the Arabella
carries i s, alas, nothing I can co nsign to the good of fices of a
functionary . My niece Mary is aboard,” he confided, “bound
even as we speak for the French  coast. She is but fifteen, and
has never been away from her home before. I am afraid I could
scarce leave her to find her way to Paris alone.”
“I shouldn’ t think so,” I agreed politely . The name seemed
familiar , but I couldn’ t think why . Mary Hawkins.
Undistinguished enough; I couldn’ t connect it with anything in
particular . I was still musing o ver it when Jamie rose to see
Mr . Hawkins to the door .
“I trust your niece’ s journey will be pleasant,” he said
politely . “Does she come for schooling, then? Or to visit
relatives?”
“For marriage,” said her uncle with satisfaction. “My
brother has been fortunate in securing a most advantageous
match f or her , with a member  of the French nobility .” Heseemed to expand with pride a t this, the plain gold buttons
straining the fabric of his wais tcoat. “My elder brother is a
baronet, you know .”
“She’ s fifteen?” I said, uneasily . I knew that early
marriages were not uncommon,  but fifteen? Still, I had been
married at nineteen – and again  at twenty-seven. I knew the
hell of a lot more at twenty-seven.
“Er , has your n iece been acquainted with her fiancé for
very long?” I asked cautiously .
“Never met him. In fact” – M r . Hawkins leaned close,
laying a finger next to his lips and lowering his voice – “she
doesn’ t yet know about the marriage. The negotiations are not
quite complete, you see.”
I was appalled at this, and opened my mouth to say
something, but Jamie clutched my elbow tightly in warning.
“W ell, if the gentleman is of the nobility , perhaps we shall
see your niece at Court, then,” he suggested, shoving me
firmly t oward the door like th e blade of a bulldozer . Mr .
Hawkins, moving perforce to avoid my stepping on him,
backed away , still talking.
“Indeed you may , milord Broch T uarach. Indeed, I should
deem it a great honor for yours elf and your lady to meet my
niece. I am sure she would derive great comfort from the
society of a countrywoman,” he added with a smarmy smile at
me. “Not that I would presume upon what is merely a business
acquaintance, to be sure.”
The hel l you wouldn’ t presume, I thought indignantly .
Y ou’d d o anything you could to  squeeze your family into the
French nobility , including marrying your niece to… to…
“Er , who is  your niece’ s fiancé?” I asked bluntly .
Mr . Hawkins’ s face grew cunning, and he leaned close
enough to whisper hoarsely into my ear .
“I really should not say until the contracts have been
signed, but seeing as it is your l adyship… I can tell you that it
is a member of the House of Gascogne. And a very high-
ranking member indeed!”“Indeed,” I said.
Mr . Haw kins went of f rubbing his hands together in a
perfect frenzy of anticipation, and I turned at once to Jamie.
“Gascogne! He must mean… but he can’ t, can he? That
revolting old beast with the snuf f stains on his chin who came
to dinner last week?”
“The V icomte Marigny?” Jamie said, smiling at my
description. “I suppose so; he’ s a widower , and the only single
male of that hou se, so far as I know . I dinna think it’ s snuf f,
though; it’ s only the way his beard grows. A bit moth-eaten,”
he admitted, “but it’ s bound to be a hellish shave, wi’ all those
warts.”
“He can’ t marry a fifteen-year -old girl to… to… that ! And
without even asking her!”
“Oh, I expect he can,” Jamie said, with infuriating
calmness. “In any case, Sassenac h, it isna your af fair .” He took
me firmly by both arms and gave me a little shake.
“D’ye hear me? I know it’ s strange to ye, but that’ s how
matters are. After all” – the long mouth curled up at one corner
– “you,  were made to wed against your will. Reconciled
yourself to it yet, have ye?”
“Sometimes I wonder!” I yanke d, trying to pull my arms
free, but he mer ely gathered me in, laughing, and kissed me.
After a moment, I gave up fighti ng. I relaxed into his embrace,
admitting surren der , if only tem porarily . I would  meet with
Mary Ha wkins, I thought, and w e’d see just what she thought
about this proposed marriage. If she didn’ t want to see her
name on a marriage contract, linked with the V icomte
Marigny , then… Suddenly I stif fened, pushing away from
Jamie’ s embrace.
“What is it?” he  looked alarmed. “Are ye ill, lass? Y ou’ve
gone all white!”
And little wonder if I had. For I had suddenly remembered
where I  had seen the name of Mary Hawkins. Jamie was
wrong. This was  my af fair . For I had seen the name, written in
a co pperplate hand at the top of  a genealogy chart, the ink oldand faded by time to a sepia b rown. Mary Hawkins was not
meant to be the  wife of the decrepit V icomte Marigny . She
was to marry Jonathan Randall, in the year of our Lord 1745.
 
“W ell, she can’ t, can she?” Jam ie said. “Jack Randall is
dead.” He finished pouring the glass of brandy , and held it out
to me. His hand was steady on t he crystal stem, but the line of
his mouth was set and his vo ice clipped the word “dead,”
giving it a vicious finality .
“Put your feet up, Sassenach,” he said. “Y ou’re still pale.”
At his motion, I obediently pulle d up my feet and stretched out
on the sofa. Jamie sat down nea r my head, and absently rested
a ha nd on my shoulder . His fingers felt warm and strong,
gently massaging the small hollow of the joint.
“Marcus MacRannoch told me he’d seen Randall trampled
to death  by cattle in the dungeons of W entworth Prison,” he
said aga in, as though seeking to reassure himself by repetition.
“A ‘ rag doll, rolled in blood.’ That’ s what Sir Marcus said. He
was verra sure about it.”
“Y es.” I  sipped my brandy , feeling the warmth come back
into my cheeks. “He told me  that, too. No, you’re right,
Captain Randall is dead. It ju st gave me a turn, suddenly
remembering about Mary Hawkins. Because of Frank.” I
glanced down at my left hand, resting on my stomach. There
was a small fire burning on the hearth, and the light of it
caught t he smooth gold band of my first wedding ring. Jamie’ s
ring, of Scottish silver , circled the fourth finger of my other
hand.
“Ah.” Jamie’ s touch on my sho ulder stilled. His head was
bent, bu t he glanced up to meet  my gaze. W e had not spoken
of F rank since I  had rescued Jamie from W entworth, nor had
Jonathan Randall’ s death been mentioned between us. At the
time it had seemed of little importance, except insofar as it
meant that no more danger me naced us from that direction.
And since then, I had been reluctant to bring back any memory
of W entworth to Jamie.“Y ou know he is dead, do ye not, mo duinne ?” Jamie
spoke so ftly , his fingers resting on my wrist, and I knew he
spoke of Frank, not Jonathan.
“Maybe not,” I said, my eyes  still fixed on the ring. I
raised my hand, so the metal gleamed in the fading afternoon
light. “If he’ s dead, Jamie –  if he won’ t exist, because
Jonathan is dead – then why do I still have the ring he gave
me?”
He s tared at the ring, and I saw a small muscle twitch near
his mouth. His face was pale, too, I saw . I didn’ t know whether
it would  do him harm to think of Jonathan Randall now , but
there seemed little choice.
“Y ou’re sure that Randall had no  children before he died?”
he asked. “That would be an answer .”
“It would,” I sa id, “but no, I’m sure not. Frank” – my
voice tre mbled a  bit on the name, and Jamie’ s grip on my wrist
tightened – “Frank made quite a  bit of the tragic circumstances
of Jo nathan Randall’ s death. He said that he – Jack Randall –
had died  at Culloden Field, in th e last battle of the Rising, and
his son – that w ould be Frank’ s five-times great-grandfather –
was bor n a few months after his father ’ s death. His widow
married again, a few years l ater . Even if there were an
illegitimate child, it wouldn’ t be in Frank’ s line of descent.”
Jamie’ s forehead was creased, and a thin vertical line ran
between his brows. “Could it be a mistake, then – that the
child was not R andall’ s at all? F rank may come only of Mary
Hawkins’ s line – for we know she still lives.”
I shook my head helplessly .
“I do n’ t see how . If you’d known  Frank – but no, I suppose
I’ve never told you. When I first met Jonathan Randall, I
thought for the first moment that he was  Frank – they weren’ t
the s ame, of course, but the resemblance was… startling. No,
Jack Randall was Frank’ s ancestor , all right.”
“I see.” Jamie’ s  fingers had grown damp; he took them
away and wiped them absently on his kilt.“Then… perhap s the ring mean s nothing, mo duinne ,” he
suggested gently .
“Perhaps not.” I touched the me tal, warm as my own flesh,
then dropped my hand helplessly . “Oh, Jamie, I don’ t know! I
don’ t know anything!”
He rubbed his k nuckles tiredly on the crease between his
eyes. “Neither do I, Sassenach.”  He dropped his hand and tried
to smile at me.
“There’ s the one thing,” he said. “Y ou said that Frank told
you Jonathan Randall would die at Culloden?”
“Y es. In  fact, I told Jack Randall that myself, to scare him
– at W entworth , when he put me out in the snow , before…
before going back to you.” His eyes and mouth clamped shut
in sudden spasm, and I swung my feet down, alarmed.
“Jamie! Are you all right?” I t ried to put a hand on his
head, bu t he pulled away from my touch, rising and going to
the window .
“No. Y es. It’ s all right, Sassenac h. I’ve been writing letters
all the morning , and my head ’ s fit to burst. Dinna worry
yourself.” He waved me away , pressing his forehead against
the cold pane of the window , eyes tight closed. He went on
speaking, as though to distract himself from the pain.
“Then, if you – and Frank – kne w that Jack Randall would
die a t Cu lloden, but we know that he shall not… then it can be
done, Claire.”
“What can be do ne?” I hovered anxiously , wanting to help,
but not knowin g what to do. Clearly he didn’ t want to be
touched.
“What you know will happen c an be changed.” He raised
his head  from the window and smiled tiredly at me. His face
was still white, but the traces o f that momentary spasm were
gone. “Jack Randall died before  he ought, and Mary Hawkins
will wed  another man. Even i f that means that your Frank
wilna be born – or perhaps will be born some other way ,” he
added, to be co mforting, “then it also means that we have a
chance of succeeding in what  we’ve set ourselves to do.Perhaps Jack Randall didna die at Culloden Field, because the
battle there will never happen.”
I cou ld s ee him make the ef fort to stir himself, to come to
me and put his arms around me. I held him about the waist,
lightly , not moving. He bent his head, resting his forehead on
my hair .
“I know it must grieve ye, mo duinne . But may it not ease
ye, to know that good may come of it?”
“Y es,” I whispered at last, int o the folds of his shirt. I
disengaged myself gently from  his arms and laid my hand
along his cheek. The line between his eyes was deeper , and his
eyes slightly unfocused, but he smiled at me.
“Jamie,” I said, “go and lie down. I’ll send a note to the
d’Arbanvilles, to say we can’ t come tonight.”
“Och, n o,” he protested. “I’ll be fine. I know this kind of
headache, Sassenach; it’ s only from the writing, and an hour ’ s
sleep will cure it. I’ll go up now .” He turned toward the door ,
then hesitated and turned back, half-smiling.
“And if I should call out in my sleep, Sassenach, just lay
your hand upon me, and say to m e, ‘Jack Randall’ s dead.’ And
it will aye be well wi’ me.”
 
Both food and company at the d’Arbanvilles were good.
W e cam e home late, and I fell into a sound sleep the instant
my head hit t he pillow . I slept dreamlessly , but waked
suddenly in the middle of the n ight, knowing something was
wrong.
The nig ht was cold, and the down quilt had slithered of f
onto the  floor , as was its sneaky habit, leaving only the thin
woolen blanket over me. I rolled over , half-asleep, reaching
for Jamie’ s warmth. He was gone.
I s at up in bed,  looking for him , and saw him almost at
once, sitting on the window seat, head in his hands.
“Jamie! What is it? Have you got headache again?” I
groped f or the candle, meaning to find my medicine box, butsomething in the way he sat made me abandon the search and
go to him at once.
He was breathing hard, as though he had been running, and
cold as it was, his body was dr enched with sweat. I touched
his shoulder and found it hard and cold as a metal statue.
He jerke d back at my touch and sprang to his feet, eyes
wide and black in the night-filled room.
“I didn’ t mean to startle you,” I said. “Are you all right?”
I wondered briefly if he were sleepwalking, for his
expression didn’ t change; he looked straight through me, and
whatever he saw , he didn’ t like it.
“Jamie!” I said sharply . “Jamie, wake up!”
He blinked then, and saw me, th ough his expression stayed
fixed in the desperate lines of a hunted beast.
“I’m all right,” he said. “I’m aw ake.” He spoke as though
wanting to convince himself of the fact.
“What is it? Did you have a nightmare?”
“A dream. A ye. It was a dream.”
I stepped forward and put a hand on his arm.
“T ell me. It will go away if you tell me about it.”
He grasp ed me hard by the fore arms, as much to keep me
from touching him as for suppo rt. The moon was full, and I
could see that every muscle of his body was tensed, hard and
motionless as stone, but pulsing  with furious ener gy , ready to
explode into action.
“No,” he said, still sounding dazed.
“Y es,” I  said. “Jamie, talk to me. T ell me. T ell me what
you see.”
“I canna… see anything. Nothing. I can’ t see.”
I pu lled, turning him from the shadows of the room to face
the brig ht moon light from the window . The light seemed to
help, for his bre athing slowed, and in halting, painful bits, the
words came out.It w as the stone s of W entworth Prison that he dreamed of.
And as he spok e, the shape of Jonathan Randall walked the
room. And lay naked in my bed, atop the woolen blanket.
There had been the sound of hoarse breathing close behind
him, and the fe el of sweat-drenched skin, sliding against his
own. He gritted his teeth in an agony of frustration. The man
behind him sensed the small movement and laughed.
“Oh, we ’ve some time yet befor e they hang you, my boy ,”
he w hispered. “Plenty of time to enjoy it.” Randall moved
suddenly , hard and abrupt, and he made a small involuntary
sound.
Randall’ s hand stroked back the hair from his brow and
smoothed it around his ear . The hot breath was close to his ear
and he turned his head to e scape, but it followed him,
breathing words.
“Have you ever seen a man ha nged, Fraser?” The words
went on , not waiting for him to  reply , and a long, slim hand
came around his waist, gently stroking the slope of his belly ,
teasing its way lower with each word.
“Y es, of course you have; you were in France, you’ll have
seen des erters hanged now and then. A hanged man looses his
bowels, doesn’ t he? As the rope  tightens fast round his neck.”
The hand was gripping him, lightly , firmly , rubbing and
stroking. He clenched his good hand tight around the edge of
the bed and turn ed his face hard into the scratchy blanket, but
the words pursued him.
“That will happen to you, Fraser . Just a few more hours,
and you ’ll feel the noose.” The voice laughed, pleased with
itself. “Y ou’ll go to your death  with your arse burning from
my pleasure, and when you lose your bowels, it will be my
spunk running down your legs  and dripping on the ground
below the gallows.”
He mad e no sound. He could s mell himself, crusted with
filth from his im prisonment, acrid with the sweat of fear and
anger . And the man behind him, the rank stench of the animal
breaking through the delicate scent of the lavender toilet water .“The bla nket,” h e said. His eyes  were closed, face strained
in the moonlight. “It was rough under my face, and all I could
see w ere the stones of the wall before me. There was nothing
there to fix my mind to… noth ing I could see. So I kept my
eyes clo sed and thought of the b lanket under my cheek. It was
all I could feel besides the pain… and him. I… held to it.”
“Jamie. Let me hold you.” I sp oke quietly , trying to calm
the frenz y I could feel running through his blood. His grip on
my a rms was tig ht enough to numb them. But he wouldn’ t let
me move closer; he held me away as surely as he clung to me.
Suddenly he freed me, jerking away and turning toward
the moon-filled window . He st ood tense and quivering as a
bowstring just fired, but his voice was calm.
“No. I willna use ye that way , lassie. Y e shallna be part of
it.”
I too k a  step toward him, but h e stopped me with a quick
motion. He turned his face back  to the window , calm now , and
blank as the glass he looked through.
“Get ye  to bed, lassie. Leave m e to myself a bit; I’ll be
well enough presently . There’ s naught to worry ye now .”
He stretched his arms out, grasping the window frame,
blotting out the light with his body . His shoulders swelled with
ef fort, a nd I could tell that he w as pushing against the wood
with all his might.
“It was only a dream. Jack Randall is dead.”
 
I had  at length fallen asleep, with Jamie still poised at the
window , staring out into the face of the moon. When I woke at
dawn, t hough, he was asleep, curled in the window seat,
wrapped in his p laid, with my c loak dragged over his legs for
warmth.
He woke to my stirring, and seemed his normal, irritatingly
cheerful morning self. But I was not likely to for get the
happenings of the night, and w ent to my medicine box after
breakfast.T o m y annoyance, I lacked sev eral of the herbs I needed
for t he sleeping tonic I had in mind. But then I remembered
the man Mar guerite had told m e about. Raymond the herb-
seller , in  the Rue de V arennes. A  wizard, she had said. A place
worth seeing. W ell, then. Jamie would be at the warehouse all
the mor ning. I had a coach and  a footman at my disposal; I
would go and see it.
A cl ean wooden counter ran the  length of the shop on both
sides, with shelves twice the height of a man extending from
floor to ceiling behind it. Some  of the shelves were enclosed
with folding glass doors, protecting the rarer and more
expensive substa nces, I supposed. Fat gilded cupids sprawled
abandonedly abo ve the cupboards, tooting horns, waving their
draperies, and generally looking as though they had been
imbibing some of the more alcoholic wares of the shop.
“Monsieur Raym ond?” I inquired politely of the young
woman behind the counter .
“ Maîtr e  Raymond,” she corrected. She wiped a red nose
inelegantly on her sleeve and g estured toward the end of the
shop, where sinister clouds of a brownish smoke floated out
over the transom of a half-door .
W izard o r not, Raymond had the  right setting for it. Smoke
drifted up from a black slate h earth to coil beneath the low
black beams of the roof. Above  the fire, a stone table pierced
with holes held glass alembics, c opper “pelicans” – metal cans
with long noses from which sinister substances dripped into
cups – and what appeared to be  a small but serviceable still. I
snif fed c autiously . Among the other strong odors in the shop, a
heady alcoholic  note was clea rly distinguishable from the
direction of the fire. A neat lineup of clean bottles along the
sideboard reinfo rced my original suspicions. Whatever his
trade in charms  and potions, M aster Raymond plainly did a
roaring business in high-quality cherry brandy .
The distiller himself was crouched over the fire, poking
errant bits of ch arcoal back into the grate. Hearing me come
in, he straightened up and turned to greet me with a pleasant
smile.“How do  you do?” I said politely to the top of his head. So
strong was the impression that I had stepped into an
enchanter ’ s den that I would no t have been surprised to hear a
croak in reply .
For Master Raymond resembled nothing so, much as a
lar ge, ge nial frog. A touch over four feet tall, barrel-chested
and bandy-legged, he had the thick, clammy skin of a swamp
dweller , and slightly bulbous, friendly black eyes. Aside from
the minor fact that he wasn’ t green, all he lacked was warts.
“Madonna!” he said, beaming expansively . “What may I
have the pleasure of doing for you?” He lacked teeth
altogether , enhancing the froggy impression still more, and I
stared at him in fascination.
“Madonna?” he said, peering up at me questioningly .
Snapped abruptly to a realization of how rudely I had been
staring, I blushed and said without thinking, “I was just
wondering whether you’d ever been kissed by a beautiful
young girl.”
I went still red der as he shou ted with laughter . W ith a
broad grin, he s aid “Many times, madonna. But alas, it does
not help. As you see. Ribbit .”
W e dissolved in helpless laughter , attracting the notice of
the shop girl, wh o peered over t he half-door in alarm. Master
Raymond waved her away , then hobbled to the window ,
coughing and clutching his sides, to open the leaded panes and
allow some of the smoke to escape.
“Oh, that’ s better!” he said, inhaling deeply as the cold
spring air rushed in. He turned t o me, smoothing back the long
silver hair that brushed his shoulders. “Now , madonna. Since
we a re friends, p erhaps you will wait a moment while I attend
to something?”
Still blushing, I agreed at once, and he turned to his firing
shelf, still hiccupping with laug hter as he refilled the canister
of t he still. T ak ing the opportunity to restore my poise, I
strolled about the workroom, looking at the amazing array of
clutter .A fa irly good-sized crocodile, presumably stuf fed, hung
from the ceiling. I gazed up at  the yellow belly-scutes, hard
and shiny as pressed wax.
“Real, is it?” I asked, taking a seat at the scarred oak table.
Master Raymond glanced upward, smiling.
“My cr ocodile ? Oh, to be sure, madonna. Gives the
customers confidence.” He jerked his head toward the shelf
that ran along the wall just abov e eye height. It was lined with
white f ired-porcelain jars, ea ch ornamented with gilded
curlicues, painted flowers and beasts, and a label, written in
elaborate black script. Three o f the jars closest to me were
labeled in Latin, which I translated with some dif ficulty –
crocodile’ s bloo d, and the liver and bile of the same beast,
presumably the one swinging sinisterly overhead in the draft
from the main shop.
I pi cked up on e of the jars, removed the stopper and
snif fed delicately .
“Mustard,” I said, wrinkling my nose, “and thyme. In
walnut o il, I think, but what did  you use to make it nasty?” I
tilted the jar , critically examining the sludgy black liquid
within.
“Ah, so your no se is not purely decorative, madonna!” A
wide grin split the toadlike face, revealing hard blue gums.
“The black stuf f is the rotted pulp of a gourd,” he confided,
leaning closer and lowering hi s voice. “As for the smell…
well, that actually is blood.”
“Not from a crocodile,” I said, glancing upward.
“Such cynicism in one so you ng,” Raymond mourned.
“The lad ies and  gentlemen of t he Court are fortunately more
trusting in nature, not that trus t is the emotion that springs
immediately to mind when one thinks of an aristocrat. No, in
fact it is pig’ s blood, madonna. Pigs being so much more
available than crocodiles.”
“Mm, yes,” I agreed. “That one must have cost you a
pretty penny .”“Fortunately , I inherited it, along  with much of my present
stock, fr om the previous owner .”  I thought I saw a faint flicker
of u nease in th e depths of th e soft black eyes, but I had
become oversensitive to nuances of expression of late, from
watching the faces at parties for tiny clues that might be useful
to Jamie in his manipulations.
The stocky little proprietor leaned still closer , laying a
hand confidentially on mine.
“A p rofessional,  are you?” he said. “I must say , you don’ t
look it.”
My first  impulse  was to jerk my hand away , but his touch
was oddly comfortable; quite impersonal, but unexpectedly
warm and soothing. I glanced at the frost riming the edge of
the leaded-glass  panes, and thought that that was it; his
ungloved hands were warm, a highly unusual condition for
anyone’ s hands at this time of year .
“That de pends e ntirely upon what you mean by the term
‘professional,’ ” I said primly . “I’m a healer .”
“Ah, a healer?” He tilted back in his chair , looking me
over wit h intere st. “Y es, I thoug ht so. Anything else, though?
No fortune-telling, no love philtres?”
I f elt a tw inge of conscience, rec alling my days on the road
with Murtagh, when we had sought Jamie through the
Highlands of Scotland, telling fortunes and singing for our
suppers like a couple of Gypsies.
“Nothing like that,” I said, blushing only slightly .
“Not a professio nal liar , at any rate,” he said, eyeing me in
amusement. “Rather a pity . Still, how may I have the pleasure
of serving you, madonna?”
I exp lained my n eeds, and he nodded sagely as he listened,
the thick  gray hair swinging forward over his shoulders. He
wore no wig w ithin the sanctum of his shop, nor did he
powder his hair . It was brushed back from a high, wide
forehead, and fell straight as a s tick to his shoulders, where it
ended abruptly , as though cut with a blunt pair of scissors.He was easy to talk to, and v ery knowledgeable indeed
about the uses of herbs and botanicals. He took down small
jars of this and t hat, shaking bits out and crushing the leaves in
his palm for me to smell or taste.
Our conversation was interrupted by the sound of raised
voices in the shop. A nattily-dressed footman was leaning
across th e count er , saying something to the shopgirl. Or rather ,
trying to say something. His feeble attempts were being
thrown back in his teeth by a gale of withering Provençale
from the  other side of the count er . It was too idiomatic for me
to fo llow entirely , but I caught th e general drift of her remarks.
Something invo lving cabbages and sausages, none of it
complimentary .
I was musing on the odd tendency of the French to bring
food into  virtually any kind of discussion, when the shop door
banged suddenly open. Reinforcements swept in behind the
footman, in the guise of a rouged and flounced Personage of
some sort.
“Ah,” m urmured Raymond, pe ering interestedly beneath
my arm at the drama unfolding in his shop. “ La V icomtesse
de Rambeau.”
“Y ou know her?” The shopgirl evidently did, for she
abandoned her attack on the footman and shrank back against
the cabinet of pur ges.
“Y es, madonna,” said Raymond, nodding. “She’ s rather
expensive.”
I saw what he meant, as the lady in question picked up the
evident source of altercation, a small jar containing a pickled
plant of some k ind, took aim, and flung it with considerable
force and accuracy into the glass front of the cabinet.
The crash silenced the commotion at once. The V icomtesse
pointed one long, bony finger at the girl.
“Y ou,” she said, in a voice like metal shavings, “fetch me
the black potion. At once.”
The girl opened her mouth as  though to protest, then,
seeing the V icomtesse reaching for another missile, shut it andfled for the back room.
Anticipating he r entrance, Raymond reached resignedly
above h is head and thrust a bot tle into her hand as she came
through the door .
“Give it  to her ,” he said, shrug ging. “Before she breaks
something else.”
As the shopgirl  timidly returned to deliver the bottle, he
turned to me, pulling a wry face.
“Poison for a rival,” he said. “Or at least she thinks so.”
“Oh?” I said. “And what is it really? Bitter cascara?”
He looked at me in pleased surprise.
“Y ou’re very good at this,” he said. “A natural talent, or
were you taught? W ell, no mat ter .” He waved a broad palm,
dismissing the matter . “Y es, that ’ s right, cascara. The rival will
fall sick tomorrow , suf fer visibly in order to satisfy the
V icomtesse’ s desire for revenge and convince her that her
purchase was a good one, and then she will recover , with no
permanent harm done, and the V icomtesse will attribute the
recovery to the intervention of the priest or a counterspell done
by a sorcerer employed by the victim.”
“Mm,” I said. “And the damage to your shop?” The late-
afternoon sun glinted on the shards of glass on the counter , and
on the single silver écu that the V icomtesse had flung down in
payment.
Raymond tilted a palm from side to side, in the
immemorial custom of a man indicating equivocation.
“It evens out,” he said calmly . “When she comes in next
month fo r an abortifacient, I sha ll char ge her enough not only
to repair the dam age but to buil d three new cases. And she’ll
pay without ar gument.” He smiled briefly , but without the
humor he had p reviously shown. “It’ s all in the timing, you
know .”
I was consc ious of the black eyes flickering
knowledgeably over my figure. I didn’ t show at all yet, but I
was quite sure he knew .“And does the medicine you’ll give the V icomtesse next
month work?” I asked.
“It’ s all in the t iming,” he replied again, tilting his head
quizzically to one side. “Early enough, and all is well. But it is
dangerous to wait too long.”
The note  of warning in his voice  was clear , and I smiled at
him.
“Not for me,” I said. “For reference only .”
He relaxed again.
“Ah. I didn’ t think so.”
A ru mble from the street below proclaimed the passing of
the V icomtesse’ s blue-and-silver  carriage. The footman waved
and shouted from behind as pedestrians were forced to
scramble for the shelter of doors  and alleyways to avoid being
crushed.
“A la lanterne,”  I murmured under my breath. It was rare
that my unusual perspective on current af fairs af forded me
much sa tisfaction, but this was certainly one occasion when it
did.
“Ask not for wh om the tumbril calls,” I remarked, turning
to Raymond. “It calls for thee.”
He looked mildly bewildered.
“Oh? W ell, in any case, you were saying that black betony
is what you use for pur ging? I would use the white, myself.”
“Really? Why is that?”
And wit h no further reference to the recent V icomtesse, we
sat down to complete our business.9  T H E  S P L E N D O R S  O F
V E R S A I L L E S
I  closed the door  of the drawing room quietly behind me
and stood still a moment, ga thering courage. I essayed a
restorative deep breath, but the tightness of the whalebone
corseting made it come out as a strangled gasp.
Jamie, immersed in a handful of shipping orders, glanced
up at the sound and froze, eyes  wide. His mouth opened, but
he made no sound.
“How do you li ke it?” Handling the train a bit gingerly , I
stepped down into the room, swaying gently as the seamstress
had instructed, to show of f the filmy gussets of silk plissé let
into the overskirt.
Jamie shut his mouth and blinked several times.
“It’ s… ah… red, isn’ t it?” he observed.
“Rather .” Sang-du-Christ , to be exact. Christ’ s blood, the
most fas hionable color of the se ason, or so I had been given to
understand.
“Not e very woman could wear it, Madame,” the
seamstress had declared, speech unhampered by a mouthful of
pins. “B ut you, with that skin!  Mother of God, you’ll have
men crawling under your skirt all night!”
“If one tries, I’ll stamp on his fingers,” I said. That, after
all, was not at all the intended ef fect. But I did mean to be
visible. Jamie had ur ged me to have something made that
would m ake me stand out in the crowd. Early-morning fog
notwithstanding, the King had evidently remembered him
from his  appearance at the lever , and we had be en invited to a
ball at V ersailles.
“I’ll need to get the ears of t he men with the money ,”
Jamie h ad said, making plans w ith me earlier . “And as I’ve
neither great position nor pow er myself, it will have to be
managed by making them seek my company .” He heaved asigh, looking at me, decidedly unglamorous in my woolen
bedgown.
“And I’m  afraid  in Paris that means we’ll have to go out a
bit in society; appear at Court, if it can be managed. They’ll
know I’m a Sco t; it will be natural for folk to ask me about
Prince Charles, and whether Scotland is eagerly awaiting the
return o f the Stuarts. Then I can assure them discreetly that
most Scots would pay a good price not  to have the Stuarts
back again – though it goes against the grain a bit to say so.”
“Y es, you’d better be discreet,” I agreed. “Or the Bonnie
Prince may set t he dogs on you  next time you go to visit.” In
accordance with his plan to keep abreast of Charles’ s
activities, Jamie had been paying weekly duty calls on the
small house at Montmartre.
Jamie sm iled br iefly . “A ye. W ell, so far as His Highness,
and the Jacobite supporters are concerned, I’m a loyal
upholder of the Stuart cause. An d so long as Charles Stuart is
not received at Court and I am, the chances of his finding out
what I’m saying there are not great. The Jacobites in Paris
keep to themselves, as a rule. F or the one thing, they haven’ t
the money to a ppear in fashionable circles. But we have,
thanks to Jared.”
Jared ha d concu rred – for enti rely dif ferent reasons – in
Jamie’ s proposal that we widen the scope of Jared’ s usual
business entertai ning, so that the French nobility and the heads
of the wealthy b anking families might beat a path to our door ,
there to be seduc ed and cozened with Rhenish wine, good talk,
fine entertainment, and lar ge quantities of the good Scotch
whisky that Murtagh had spent t he last two weeks shepherding
across the Channel and overland to our cellars.
“It’ s entertainment of one kind o r another that draws them,
ye ken,” Jamie had said, sketching out plans on the back of a
broadsheet poem describing the  scurrilous af fair between the
Comte de Sévigny and the wife of the Minister of Agriculture.
“All the nobility care about is appearances. So to start with, we
must of fer them something interesting to look at.”Judging from the stunned look on his face now , I had made
a g ood beginnin g. I sashayed a bit, making the huge overskirt
swing like a bell.
“Not bad, is it?” I asked. “V ery visible, at any rate.”
He found his voice at last.
“V isible?” he croaked. “ V isible ? God, I can see every inch
of ye, down to the third rib!”
I peered downward.
“No, you can’ t. That isn’ t me under the lace, it’ s a fining of
white charmeuse.”
“A ye we ll, it looks  l ike you!” He c ame closer , bending to
inspect the bodice of the dress. He peered into my cleavage.
“Christ, I can see down to your navel! Surely ye dinna
mean to go out in public like that!”
I bristled a bit at this. I had been feeling a trifle nervous
myself over the general revealingness of the dress, the
fashionable sketches the seamstress had shown me
notwithstanding. But Jamie’ s r eaction was making me feel
defensive, and thus rebellious.
“ Y ou  told  me to be v isible,” I reminded him. “And this is
absolutely nothing, compared to the latest Court fashions.
Believe me, I shall be modesty personified, in comparison
with Madame de Pérignon and t he Duchesse de Rouen.” I put
my hands on my hips and surveyed him coldly . “Or do you
want me to appear at Court in my green velvet?”
Jamie averted his eyes from my décolletage and tightened
his lips.
“Mphm,” he said, looking as Scotch as possible.
T rying to be con ciliatory , I came closer and laid a hand on
his arm.
“Come n ow ,” I said. “Y ou’ve been at Court before; surely
you know what ladies dress lik e. Y ou know this isn’ t terribly
extreme by those standards.”
He glanced down at me and smiled, a trifle shamefaced.“A ye,” he said. “A ye, that’ s tru e. It’ s only… well, you’re
my wife, Sassenach. I dinna want other men to look at you the
way I’ve looked at those ladies.”
I laughed and put my hands behind his neck, pulling him
down to  kiss me. He held me around the waist, his thumbs
unconsciously stroking the softness of the red silk where it
sheathed my torso. His touch traveled upward, sliding across
the slipperiness of the fabric to the nape of my neck. His other
hand grasped the soft roundness of my breast, swelling up
above th e tethering grip of the corsets, voluptuously free under
a sin gle layer of  sheer silk. He let go at last and straightened
up, shaking his head doubtfully .
“I su ppose ye’ll have to wear it, Sassenach, but for Christ’ s
sake be careful.”
“Careful? Of what?”
His mouth twisted in a rueful smile.
“Lord, woman, have ye no notio n what ye look like in that
gown? It makes me want to c ommit rape on the spot. And
these damned frog-eaters havena got my restraint.” He
frowned slightly . “Y ou couldna… cover it up at bit at the top?”
He w aved a lar g e hand vaguely in the direction of his own lace
jabot, se cured with a ruby stickpin. “A… ruf fle or something?
A handkerchief?”
“Men,” I told hi m, “have no no tion of fashion. But not to
worry . The seamstress says that’ s what the fan is for .” I flipped
the matching lace-trimmed fan open with a gesture that had
taken fifteen minutes’ practice to perfect, and fluttered it
enticingly over my bosom.
Jamie blinked meditatively at this performance, then
turned to take my cloak from the wardrobe.
“Do me the on e favor , Sassenach,” he said, draping the
heavy velvet over my shoulders. “T ake a lar ger fan.”
 
In terms of attra cting notice, the dress was an unqualified
success. In terms of the ef fects  on Jamie’ s blood pressure, it
was somewhat more equivocal.He h overed protectively at my elbow , glaring ferociously
at any male wh o glanced in m y direction, until Annalise de
Marillac, spottin g us from acro ss the room, came floating in
our direction, her delicate features wreathed in a welcoming
smile. I felt the smile freezing on my own face. Annalise de
Marillac was an “acquaintance”  – he said – of Jamie’ s, from
his former residence in Paris. She was also beautiful,
charming, and exquisitely tiny .
“Mon petit sauvage!”  s he  gree ted Jam ie. “I have som eone
you must meet. Several someon es, in fact.” She tilted a head
like a china doll in the direction  of a group of men, gathered
around a chess table in the corner , ar guing heatedly about
something. I recognized the Duc d’Orléans, and Gérard
Gobelin, a prominent banker . An influential group, then.
“Come and play chess for them,” Annalise ur ged, placing a
mothlike hand on Jamie’ s arm. “It will be a good place for His
Majesty to meet you, later .”
The Kin g was expected to appe ar after the supper he was
attending, sometime in the next hour or two. In the meantime,
the guests wandered to and fro, conversing, admiring the
paintings on the walls, flirting behind fans, consuming confits,
tartlets, and wine, and disappearing at more or less discreet
intervals into the odd little curtained alcoves. These were
cleverly fitted into the paneling of the rooms, so that you
scarcely noticed them, unless you got close enough to hear the
sounds inside.
Jamie hesitated, and Annalise pulled a bit harder .
“Come a long,” she ur ged. “Have no fear for your lady” –
she cast an appreciative glance at my gown – “she won’ t be
alone long.”
“That’ s what I’m afraid of,” Jamie muttered under his
breath. “All right, then, in a mo ment.” He disengaged himself
momentarily fro m Annalise’ s grasp and bent to whisper in my
ear .
“If I find ye in one of those alcoves, Sassenach, the man
you’re with is d ead. And as for you…” His hands twitched
unconsciously in the direction of his swordbelt.“Oh no you don ’ t,” I said. “Y ou swore on your dirk you’d
never beat me again. What price the Holy Iron, eh?”
A reluctant grin tugged at his mouth.
“No, I wilna beat ye, much as I’d like to.”
“Good. What do you mean to do, then?” I asked, teasing.
“I’ll think of something,” he replied, with a certain
grimness. “I dinna ken what, but ye wilna like it.”
And with a fina l glare round and a proprietary squeeze of
my shou lder , he allowed Annalise to lead him away , like a
small but enthusiastic tug towing a reluctant bar ge.
Annalise was right. No longer deterred by Jamie’ s
glowering presence, the gentlemen of the Court descended
upon me like a flock of parrots on a ripe passion fruit.
My hand was kissed repeate dly and held lingeringly ,
dozens of flowery compliments were paid me, and cups of
spiced w ine wer e brought me in  endless procession. After half
an hour of this, my feet began to hurt. So did my face, from
smiling. And my hand, from fan-wielding.
I had to admit some gratitude to Jamie for his
intransigence in  the matter of the fan. Bowing to his
sensibilities, I had brought the l ar gest I possessed, a foot-long
whopper painted with what purported to be Scottish stags
leaping through the heather . Jamie had been critical of the
artistry , but approving of the size. Graciously fanning away the
attentions of an ardent young man in purple, I then spread the
thing inconspic uously beneath  my chin to deflect crumbs
while I nibbled at a piece of toast with salmon on it.
And not only to ast crumbs. While Jamie, from his vantage
point a foot abov e me, had claimed to be able to see my navel,
my umbilicus was by and lar g e safe from scrutiny by the
French c ourtiers, most of whom were shorter than I was. On
the other hand…
I h ad often enjo yed snuggling into Jamie’ s chest, my nose
fitting comfortab ly into the small hollow in the center . A few
of th e shorter and bolder souls  among my admirers seemed
bent on enjoyin g a similar exp erience, and I was kept busy ,flapping my fan hard enough to blow their curls back from
their faces, or if that didn’ t suf fice to discourage them,
snapping the fan shut and rapp ing them smartly on the head
with it.
It ca me as a considerable relief to hear the footman at the
door suddenly draw himself up and intone, “Sa Majesté, Le
Roi Louis!”
While the King might rise at dawn, apparently he
blossomed at night. Not much taller than my own five feet six,
Louis entered with the carriage of a much taller man, glancing
left and right, nodding in gracious acknowledgment of his
bowing subjects.
Now this, I tho ught, looking him over , was a good deal
more in line with my ideas of what a king ought  t o look like.
Not particularly handsome, he acted as though he were; an
impression enhanced not only by the richness of his clothes,
but by the attitude of those around him. He wore the latest
backswept wig, and his coat was cut velvet, embroidered all
over with hundreds of frivolou s silk butterflies. It was cut
away at the m iddle to display a waistcoat of voluptuous
cream-colored s ilk with diamond buttons, matching the wide,
butterfly-shaped buckles on his shoes.
The dark, hooded eyes swept restlessly over the crowd,
and the haughty  Bourbon nose lifted as though smelling out
any item of interest.
Dressed in kilt a nd plaid, but w ith a coat and waistcoat of
stif fened yellow  silk, and with his flaming hair loose to his
shoulders, a single small braid down one side in ancient Scots
fashion, Jamie definitely qualified. At least I thought it was
Jamie who had attracted the King’ s attention, as Le Roi Louis
purposefully changed direction and swerved toward us, parting
the crowd before him like the waves of the Red Sea. Madame
Nesle de La T o urelle, whom I recognized from a previous
party , followed close behind him like a dinghy in his wake.
I h ad for gotten t he red dress; Hi s Majesty halted directly in
front of me and bowed extravagantly , hand over his waist.
“Chèr e Madame!”  he said. “W e are enchanted!”I h eard a deep intake of breath  from Jamie, and then he
stepped forward and bowed to the King.
“May I present my wife, Y our Majesty – my lady Broch
T uarach.” He rose and stepped back. Attracted by a quick
flutter of Jamie’ s fingers, I sta red at him for a moment of
incomprehension, before suddenly realizing that he was
signaling me to curtsy .
I d ipped automatically , strugglin g to keep my eyes on the
floor and wondering where I w ould look when I bobbed up
again. Madame Nesle de la T ou relle was standing just behind
Louis, w atching the introduction with a slightly bored look on
her face.  Gossip said that “Nesle” was Louis’ s current favorite.
She was , in current vogue, wearing a gown cut below  both
breasts, with a bit of superced ent gauze which was clearly
meant for the sa ke of fashion, as it couldn’ t possibly function
for either warmth or concealment.
It w as neither t he gown nor the prospect it revealed that
had rattled me, though. The breasts of “Nesle,” while
reasonably adequate in size, pleasant in proportion, and tipped
with lar ge brownish areolae, were further adorned with a pair
of nipple jewels that caused their settings to recede into
insignificance. A  pair of diamo nd-encrusted swans with ruby
eyes str etched their necks toward each other , swinging
precariously in their gold-hooped perches. The workmanship
was sup erb and the materials stunning, but it was the fact that
each gold hoop passed thr ough  h er nipple that made me feel
rather faint. The nipples themselves were rather seriously
inverted, but this fact was disg uised by the lar ge pearl that
covered each one, dangling on a thin gold chain that looped
from side to side of the main hoop.
I rose, red-faced and coughing, and managed to excuse
myself, hacking politely into a h andkerchief as I backed away .
I felt a presence  in my rear and stopped just in time to avoid
backing into Jamie, who was watching the King’ s mistress
with no pretense whatever of tactful obliviousness.
“She told Marie d’Arbanville that Master Raymond did the
piercing for her ,” I remarked under my breath. His fascinated
gaze didn’ t waver .“Shall I make a n appointment?” I asked. “I imagine he’d
do it for me if I gave him the recipe for caraway tonic.”
Jamie g lanced down at me at last. T aking my elbow , he
steered me toward a refreshment alcove.
“If you so much  as speak  t o Mas ter Raym ond again,” he
said, ou t of the corner of his mouth, “I’ll pierce them for ye
myself – wi’ my teeth.”
The Kin g had by now wandere d of f toward the Salon of
Apollo, the space left by his passage quickly filled by others
coming from the supper room. Seeing Jamie distracted into
conversation with a Monsieur Genet, head of a wealthy
shipping family , I looked surre ptitiously about for a place in
which to remove my shoes for a moment.
One of the alcoves was at hand and, from the sounds of it,
unoccupied. I sent a lingering a dmirer of f to fetch some more
wine, then, with a quick glance round, slid into the alcove.
It w as fu rnished rather suggesti vely with a couch, a small
table, an d a pair of chairs – more suitable for laying aside
garments than for sitting upon, I thought critically . I sat down
nonetheless, pried my shoes of f, and with a sigh of relief,
propped my feet up on the other chair .
A fa int jingling of curtain rings  behind me announced the
fact that my departure had not been unnoticed after all.
“Madame! At last we are alone!”
“Y es, more’ s the pity ,” I said, sighing. It was one of the
countless Comte s, I thought. Or no, this one was a V icomte;
someone had introduced him to  me earlier as the V icomte de
Rambeau. One of the short ones. I seemed to recall his beady
little eye s gleaming up at me in appreciation from below the
edge of my fan.
W asting no time, he slid adro itly onto the other chair ,
lifting m y feet into his lap. He c lasped my silk-stockinged toes
fervently against his crotch.
“Ah, ma petite ! Such delicacy! Y our beauty distracts me!”I thought it must, if he was under the delusion that my feet
were particularly delicate. Raising one to his lips, he nibbled at
my toes.
“C’est un cochon qui vit dans la  ville, c’est un cochon qui
vit…”
I jerked my foot from his grasp and stood up hastily , rather
impeded by my voluminous petticoats.
“Speaking of cochons  who live in the city ,” I said, rather
nervously , “I don’ t think my hu sband would be at all pleased
to find you here.”
“Y our husband? Pah!” He dismissed Jamie with an airy
wave of  the hand. “He will be occupied for some time, I am
sure. And while the cat’ s away… come to me, ma petite
souris ; let me hear you squeak a bit.”
Presumably intending to fortify himself for the fray , the
V icomte produced an enameled snuf fbox from his pocket,
deftly sprinkled  a line of dark grains along the back of his
hand, and wiped it delicately against his nostrils.
He t ook a deep breath, eyes glistening in anticipation, then
jerked h is head as the curtain wa s suddenly thrust aside with a
jangling of brass rings. His aim distracted by the intrusion, the
V icomte sneezed directly into my bosom with considerable
vigor .
I shrieked.
“Y ou disgusting  man!” I said, and walloped him across the
face with my closed fan.
The V icomte staggered back, eyes watering. He tripped
over my size-nine shoes, which lay on the floor , and fell
headfirst into the arms of Jam ie, who was standing in the
doorway .
 
“W ell, you did  attr act a  certain  amount of notic e,” I said at
last.
“Bah,” he said. “The salaud ’ s lucky I didna tear of f his
head and make him swallow it.”“W ell, that would have provided  an interesting spectacle,”
I agreed dryly . “Sousing him in the fountain was nearly as
good, though.”
He looked up, his frown replaced with a reluctant grin.
“A ye, well. I didna drown the man, after all.”
“I trust the V icomte appreciates your restraint.”
He s norted again. He was standi ng in the center of a sitting
room, part of a small appartement  in the palace, to which the
King, on ce he had stopped laughing, had assigned us, insisting
that we should not undertake  the return journey to Paris
tonight.
“After all, mon chevalier ,” he had said,  eyeing Jamie’ s
lar ge, dripping form on the terrace, “we should dislike
exceedingly for you to take a c hill. I feel sure that the Court
would be deprived of a great d eal of entertainment in such a
case, and Madame would never for give me. W ould you,
sweetheart?” He reached out and pinched Madame de La
T ourelle playfully on one nipple.
His mistress looked mildly annoyed, but smiled obediently .
I notice d, though, that once the King’ s attention had been
distracted, it was Jamie on who m her gaze lingered. W ell, he
was impressive , I had to admit, standing dripping in the
torchlight with his clothes plastered to his body . That didn’ t
mean I liked her doing it.
He peeled his w et shirt of f and dropped it in a sodden
heap. He looked even better without it.
“As for you,” he said, eyeing m e in a sinister manner , “did
I not tell ye to stay away from those alcoves?”
“Y es. But aside from that, Mrs. Lincoln, how did you
enjoy the play?” I asked politely .
“What?” He stared at me as tho ugh I had lost my mind on
the spot.
“Never mind; it’ s a bit out of your frame of reference. I
only meant, did you meet anyone useful before you came to
defend your marital rights?”He rubbed his h air vigorously with a towel plucked from
the was hstand. “Oh, aye. I p layed a game of chess with
Monsieur Duverney . Beat him, too, and made him angry .”
“Oh, th at sounds promising . And who’ s Monsieur
Duverney?”
He t ossed me the towel, grinnin g. “The French Minister of
Finance, Sassenach.”
“Oh. And you’re pleased because you made him angry?”
“He was angry at himself for losing, Sassenach,” Jamie
explained. “Now  he won’ t res t until he’ s beaten me. He’ s
coming round to the house on Sunday to play again.”
“Oh, we ll done!” I said. “And  in the process, you can
assure him that the Stuarts’ prospects are exceedingly dim, and
convince him that Louis doesn’ t want to assist them
financially , blood kin or not.”
He nodd ed, combing back his wet hair with both hands.
The fire had not yet been lit, and he shivered slightly .
“Where did you learn to play chess?” I asked curiously . “I
didn’ t know you knew how .”
“Colum MacKenzie taught me,” he said. “When I was
sixteen, and spent a year at Castle Leoch. I had tutors for
French and German and mathem atics and such, but I’d go up
to C olum’ s room for an hour ev ery evening to play chess. Not
that it usually took him an hour to beat me,” he added ruefully .
“No wonder you’re good,” I said. Jamie’ s uncle Colum,
the victim of a deforming disease that had deprived him of
most of his mobility , made up for it with a mind that would
have put Machiavelli to shame.
Jamie stood up and unbuckled his swordbelt, narrowing his
eyes at me. “D inna think I don’ t know what you’re up to,
Sassenach. Changing the subject and flattering me like a
courtesan. Did I not tell ye about those alcoves?”
“Y ou said you didn’ t mean to beat me,” I reminded him,
sitting a bit farther back in my chair , just to be on the safe side.He snor ted agai n, tossing the s wordbelt onto the chest of
drawers and dropping his kilt next to the sodden shirt.
“Do I look the sort of man would beat a woman who’ s
with child?” he demanded.
I e yed him doub tfully . Stark naked, with his hair in damp
red snarls and the white scars  still visible on his body , he
looked a s though  he had just leaped of f a V iking ship, rape and
pillage on his mind.
“Actually , you look capable of just about anything,” I told
him. “A s for the alcoves, yes, y ou told me. I suppose I should
have gon e outside to take my shoes of f, but how was I to know
that idiot would follow me in an d begin nibbling on my toes?
And if you don’ t mean to beat me, just what did you have in
mind?” I took a firm grip on the arms of my chair .
He lay down on the bed and grinned at me.
“T ake of f that whore’ s dress, Sassenach, and come to bed.”
“Why?”
“W ell, I canna wallop you, or drench ye in the fountain.”
He shru gged. “I meant to give ye a terrible scolding, but I
dinna think I can keep my eyes open long enough.” He gave a
terrific yawn, then blinked and grinned at me again. “Remind
me to do it in the morning, eh?”
 
“Better , is it?” Jamie’ s dark-blue eyes were clouded with
worry . “Is it right for ye to be sick so much, Sassenach?”
I pushe d the hair back from my sweaty temples and
dabbed a damp towel over my face.
“I don’ t  know whether it’ s right ,” I said weakly , “but at
least I believe it’ s normal. Some women are sick all through.”
Not a pleasant thought at the moment.
Jamie glanced, not at the gaily painted clock on the table,
but as usual, out the window at the sun.
“Do ye  feel well enough to go down to breakfast,
Sassenach, or ought I to tell t he chambermaid to bring upsomething on a tray?”
“No. I’m quite all right now .” And I was. In the odd way
of morn ing sickness, once the inexorable nausea had had its
way with me, I felt perfectly fine within a moment or two.
“Let me just rinse my mouth.”
As I bent over th e basin, sluicing cool water over my face,
there was a rap at the door of the appartement . Likely the
servant who had been dispatched to the house in Paris to bring
us fresh clothes, I thought.
T o m y surprise, though, it was  a courtier , with a written
invitation to lunch.
“His Majesty is dining today with an English nobleman,”
the courtier explained, “newly arrived in Paris. His Majesty
has summoned several of the prominent English merchants
from the  Cité to lunch, for the purpose of providing His Grace
the Duke with the company of some of his countrymen. And
someone pointed out to His Majesty that Madame your wife is
an English lady , too, and thus should be invited to attend.”
“All rig ht,” Jamie said, after a quick glance at me. “Y ou
may tell His Majesty that we will be honored to remain.”
Soon thereafter , Murtagh had arrived, dour as ever , bearing
a l ar ge bundle o f fresh clothes, and my medicine box, which I
had aske d for . Jamie took him in to the sitting room to give him
instructions for the day , while I hastily struggled into my fresh
gown, for the first time rather regretting my refusal to employ
a la dy’ s maid. Always unruly , the state of my hair had not
been improved by sleeping in close embrace with a lar ge,
damp Scot; wild tangles shot of f  in several directions, resisting
all attempts to tame them with brush and comb.
At lengt h I emer ged, pink and cross with ef fort, but with
my hair in some  semblance of o rder . Jamie looked at me and
murmured some thing about hedgehogs under his breath, but
caught a searing glance in return and had the good sense to
shut up.
A stroll among the parterres and fountains of the palace
gardens did a go od bit to restore my equanimity . Most of thetrees we re still leafless, but the day was unexpectedly warm
for l ate M arch, a nd the smell of the swelling buds on the twigs
was green and p ungent. Y ou could almost feel the sap rising in
the towering chestnuts and pop lars that edged the paths and
sheltered the hundreds of white marble statues.
I pa used beside a statue of a ha lf-draped man with grapes
in h is ha ir and a flute at his lips. A lar ge, silky goat nibbled
hungrily at more grapes that were cascading from the marble
folds of the draperies.
“Who’ s this?” I asked, “Pan?”
Jamie shook his head, smiling. He was dressed in his old
kilt and a worn, if comfortable coat, but he looked much better
to me than did t he luxuriously clad courtiers who passed us in
chattering groups.
“No, I think the re is a statue of Pan about, but it isna that
one. That’ s one of the Four Humors of Man.”
“W ell, h e looks fairly humorous,” I said, glancing up at the
goat’ s smiling friend.
Jamie laughed.
“And you a physician, Sassenach! Not that sort of humor .
Do ye not know  the four humors that make up the human
body? T hat one ’ s Blood” – he  motioned at the flute-player ,
then poi nted down the path – “and there’ s Melancholy .” This
was a tall man in a sort of toga, holding an open book.
Jamie pointed across the path. “ And over there is Choler”
– a nude and muscular young man, who certainly was
scowling ferociously , without regard to the marble lion that
was about to bite him smartly in the leg – “and that’ s Phlegm.”
“Is it, by Jove?”  Phlegm, a bear ded gent with a folded hat,
had both arms crossed on his chest, and a tortoise at his feet.
“Hum,” I remarked.
“Do physicians not learn about humors in your time?”
Jamie asked curiously .
“No,” I said. “W e have germs, instead.”“Really? Germs,” he said to himself, trying the word over ,
rolling it on his tongue with a Scottish burr , which made it
sound sinister in the extreme. “ Gerrrms. And what do germs
look like?”
I glance d up at a representation of “America,” a nubile
young maiden in a feathered skirt and headdress, with a
crocodile at her feet.
“W ell, they wouldn’ t make nearly such picturesque
statues,” I said.
The crocodile at America’ s feet reminded me of Master
Raymond’ s shop.
“Did you mean it about not wa nting me to go to Master
Raymond’ s?” I asked. “Or do you just not want me to pierce
my nipples?”
“I most definitely dinna want ye to pierce your nipples,” he
said firmly , taking me by the el bow and hurrying me onward,
lest I derive any untoward inspiration from America’ s bare
breasts. “But no, I dinna want y e to go to Master Raymond’ s,
either . There are rumors about the man.”
“There are rumors about everyone in Paris,” I observed,
“and I’d  be willing to bet that Master Raymond knows all of
them.”
Jamie nodded, hair glinting in the pale spring sunshine.
“Oh, aye, I ex pect so. But I think I can learn what’ s
needful in the taverns and drawing rooms. Master Raymond’ s
said to be at the center of a particular circle, but it isna
Jacobite sympathizers.”
“Really? Who, then?”
“Cabalists and occultists. W itches, maybe.”
“Jamie, you aren’ t seriously worried about witches and
demons, are you?”
W e had arrived at the part of the gardens known as the
“Green Carpet.” This early in th e spring, the green of the huge
lawn wa s only a faint tinge, but people were lounging on it,
taking advantage of the rare balmy day .“Not witches, no,” he said at l ast, finding a place near a
hedge of  forsythia and sitting do wn on the grass. “The Comte
St. Germain, possibly .”
I r emembered the look in the C omte St. Germain’ s dark
eyes at Le Havre, and shivered, in spite of the sunshine and the
woolen shawl I wore.
“Y ou think he’ s associated with Master Raymond?”
Jamie shrugged.  “I don’ t know . But it was you told me the
rumors a bout St. Germain, no? A nd if Master Raymond is part
of that circle – then I think you should keep the hell away from
him, Sassenach. ” He gave me a wry half-smile. “After all, I’d
as soon not have to save ye from burning again.”
The sha dows under the trees reminded me of the cold
gloom of the th ieves’ hole in Cranesmuir , and I shivered and
moved closer to Jamie, farther into the sunlight.
“I’d as soon you didn’ t, either .”
The pige ons were courting on the grass below a flowering
forsythia bush. The ladies and gentlemen of the Court were
performing similar activities on  the paths that led through the
sculpture gardens. The major dif ference was that the pigeons
were quieter about it.
A vi sion in wate red aqua silk hove abaft our resting place,
in loud raptures  over the divinit y of the play the night before.
The thre e ladies with him, while  not so spectacular , echoed his
opinions faithfully .
“Superb! Quite superb, the voice of La Couelle!”
“Oh, superb! Y es, wonderful!”
“Delightful, delightful! Superb is the only word for it!”
“Oh, yes, superb!”
The voices – all four of them – were shrill as nails being
pulled from wood. By contrast, the gentleman pigeon doing
his turn a few f eet from my no se had a low and mellifluous
coo, rising from a deep, amatory rumble to a breathy whistle
as h e puf fed his  breast and bowed repeatedly , laying his heartat the feet of his  ladylove, who looked rather unimpressed so
far .
I lo oked beyond the pigeon toward the aqua-satined
courtier , who had hastened bac k to snatch up a lace-trimmed
handkerchief, coyly dropped as  bait by one of his erstwhile
companions.
“The lad ies call that one ‘L ’Andouille,’ ” I remarked. “I
wonder why?”
Jamie grunted sleepily , and ope ned one eye to look after
the departing courtier .
“Mm? O h, ‘The Sausage.’ It means he canna keep his
roger in his bre eches. Y ou know the sort… ladies, footmen,
courtesans, pageboys. Lapdogs, too, if rumor is right,” he
added, s quinting in the direction of the vanished aqua silk,
where a lady of the court was now approaching, a fluf fy white
bundle clasped protectively to her ample bosom. “Reckless,
that. I wouldna  risk mine anyw here near one o’ those wee
yapping hairballs.”
“Y our roger?” I said, amused.  “I used to hear it called
peter , now and again. And th e Y anks, for some peculiar
reason, used to call theirs a dick. I once called a patient who
was tea sing me a ‘Clever Di ck,’ and he nearly burst his
stitches laughing.”
Jamie laughed himself, stretching luxuriously in the
warming spring sun. He blinked  once or twice and rolled over ,
grinning at me upside down.
“Y ou have much the same ef fe ct on me, Sassenach,” he
said. I stroked b ack the hair from his forehead, kissing him
between the eyes.
“Why do men c all it names?” I asked. “John Thomas, I
mean. Or Roger , for that matter . W omen don’ t do that.”
“They don’ t?” Jamie asked, interested.
“No, of course not. I’d as soon call my nose Jane.”
His ches t moved up and down as he laughed. I rolled on
top of him, enjoying the solid feel of him beneath me. Ipressed my hips downward, but the layers of intervening
petticoats rendered it more of a gesture than anything else.
“W ell,” Jamie said logically , “yours doesna go up and
down by itself, after all, nor go carryin’ on regardless of your
own wishes in the matter . So far as I know , anyway ,” he
added, cocking one eyebrow questioningly .
“No, it doesn’ t,  thank God. I wonder if Frenchmen call
theirs ‘Pierre,’ ” I said, glancing at a passing dandy in green
velvet-faced moiré.
Jamie burst into a laugh that startled the pigeons out of the
forsythia bush. They flapped of f in a ruf fle of indignation,
scattering wisps  of gray down in their wake. The fluf fy white
lapdog, hitherto  content to loll in its mistress’ s arms like a
bundle of rags, awoke at on ce to an awareness of its
responsibilities. It popped out of its warm nest like a Ping-
Pong ball and galloped of f i n enthusiastic pursuit of the
pigeons, barking dementedly , its mistress in similar cry behind
it.
“I dinna ken, Sassenach,” he said, recovering enough to
wipe the tears from his eyes. “The only Frenchman I ever
heard call it a name called his ‘Geor ges.’ ”
“Geor ges!”  I  said, loudly en ough to attract the attention of
a sm all knot of passing courtiers. One, a short but vivacious
specimen in dramatic black slashed with white satin, stopped
alongside and bowed deeply , sweeping the ground at my feet
with his  hat. One eye was still swelled shut, and a livid welt
showed across the bridge of his nose, but his style was
unimpaired.
“ A votr e service , Madame,” he said.
 
I might have managed if it weren’ t for the bloody
nightingales. The dining salon was hot and crowded with
courtiers and onlookers, one of the stays in my dress frame
had come loose and was stabbin g me viciously beneath the left
kidney each time I drew breath, and I was suf fering from that
most ubiquitous plague of pregnancy , the ur ge to urinate every
few min utes. Still, I might have  managed. It was, after all, aserious breach of manners to le ave the table before the King,
even though luncheon was a cas ual af fair , in comparison with
the formal dinners customary at V ersailles – or so I was given
to understand. “Casual,” however , is a relative term.
T rue, there were only three varieties of spiced pickle, not
eight. And one soup, clear , not thick. The venison was merely
roasted, not presented en br ochette , a nd the fish, w hile tastily
poached in wine, was served fileted, not whole and riding on a
sea of aspic filled with shrimp.
As though frustrated by so much rustic simplicity , though,
one of the chefs had provided a charming hors d’oeuvre – a
nest, cunningly built from strips of pastry , ornamented with
real spri gs of flowering apple, on the edge of which perched
two nightingales, skinned and roasted, stuf fed with apple and
cinnamon, then redressed in their feathers. And in the nest was
the entire family of baby bird s, tiny stubs of outstretched
wings brown and crispy , tender bare skins glazed with honey ,
blackened mou ths agape to show the merest hint of the
almond-paste stuf fing within.
After a triumph al tour of the table to show it of f – to the
accompaniment of murmurs of admiration all round – the
dainty dish was set before the King, who turned from his
conversation with Madame de La T ourelle long enough to
pluck on e of the nestlings from its place and pop it into his
mouth.
Crunch, crunch, crunch went Louis’ s teeth. Mesmerized, I
watched the muscles of his throat ripple, and felt the rubble of
small bones slide down my own  gullet. Brown fingers reached
casually for another baby .
At this point, I concluded that there were probably worse
things than insulting His Maje sty by leaving the table, and
bolted.
Rising f rom my  knees amid the  shrubbery a few minutes
later , I heard a sound behind me. Expecting to meet the eye of
a justifiably irate gardener , I turned guiltily to meet the eye of
an irate husband.“Damn it, Claire, d’ye have to  do this all the time?” he
demanded.
“In a word – yes ,” I said, sinkin g exhaustedly onto the rim
of an ornamen tal fountain. My hands were damp, and I
smoothed them over my skirt. “Did you think I did it for fun?”
I fel t light-headed, and closed my eyes, trying to regain my
internal balance before I fell into the fountain.
Suddenly there was a hand at th e small of my back, and I
half-leaned, half-fell into his arms as he sat beside me and
gathered me in.
“Oh, God. I’m sorry , mo duinne . Are ye all right, Claire?”
I pushed away enough to look up at him and smile.
“I’m all right. Just a bit light-headed, is all.” I reached up
and tried to sm ooth away the deep line of concern on his
forehead. He smiled back, but the line stayed, a thin vertical
crease b etween the thick sandy curves of his eye-brows. He
swished a hand in the founta in and smoothed it over my
cheeks. I must have looked rather pale.
“I’m sorry ,” I added. “Really , Jamie, I couldn’ t help it.”
His damp hand s queezed the back of my neck reassuringly ,
strong an d stead y . A fine spray of droplets from the mouth of a
bug-eyed dolphin misted my hair .
“Och, dinna mind me, Sassenac h. I didna mean to snap at
ye. It’ s only…” He made a helpl ess gesture with one hand. “…
only tha t I feel such a thick-hei ded clot. I see ye in a misery ,
and I know I’ve  done it to ye, and there isna the slightest thing
I can do to aid you. So I blame ye for it instead, and act cross
and grow l at you… why do ye no just tell me to go to the
devil, Sassenach?” he burst out.
I lau ghed until my sides hurt under the tight corseting,
holding on to his arm.
“Go to hell, Jam ie,” I said at last, wiping my eyes. “Go
directly to hell. Do not pass Go . Do not collect two hundred
dollars. There. Do you feel better now?”“A ye, I do,” he said, his expres sion lightening. “When ye
start to talk daft , I know you’re all right. Do you  feel better ,
Sassenach?”
“Y es,” I said, sitting up and beginning to take notice of my
surroundings. The grounds of V ersailles were open to the
public, and small groups of merchants and laborers mingled
oddly w ith the brightly colored nobles, all enjoying the good
weather .
Suddenly the nearby door onto the terrace burst open,
spilling the King’ s guests out into the garden in a tide of
chatter . The exodus from luncheon had been augmented by a
new deputation, apparently just decanted from the two lar ge
coaches I could see driving past  the edge of the garden toward
distant stables.
It was a lar ge group of people, men and women, soberly
clad by comparison with the bright colors of the courtiers
around them. It was the sound of them, though, rather than the
appearance, that  had caught my attention. French, spoken by a
number of people at a distance, strongly resembles the
quacking conversation of ducks and geese, with its nasal
elements. Englis h, on the other hand, has a slower pace, and
much less rise a nd fall in its intonations. Spoken at a distance
where individual voices are impossible to distinguish, it has
the gruf f, friendly monotony of a sheepdog’ s barking. And the
general ef fect of the mass exodus presently coming in our
direction was of a gaggle of gee se being driven to market by a
pack of dogs.
The English party had arrived , somewhat belatedly . No
doubt th ey were being tactfully shooed into the garden while
the kitchen staf f hastily prepare d another dinner and reset the
massive table for them.
I sca nned the group curiously . T he Duke of Sandringham I
knew , of course, having met hi m once before in Scotland at
Castle Leoch. His barrelchested  figure was easy to pick out,
walking side by side with Loui s, modish wig tilted in polite
attention.Most of the other people were strangers, though I thought
the styli sh lady of middle age just coming through the doors
must be  the Duchess of Claym ore, whom I had heard was
expected. The Queen, normally left behind at some country
house to  amuse herself as best she could, had been trotted out
for the occasion. She was talk ing to the visitor , her sweet,
anxious face flushed with the unaccustomed excitement of the
occasion.
The you ng girl just behind the Duchess caught my eye.
Quite plainly dressed, she had the sort of beauty that would
make he r stand out in any crowd. She was small, fine-boned
but nicely rounded in figure, with dark, shiny , unpowdered
hair and  the most extraordinary  white skin, flushed across the
cheeks with a clear deep pink that made her look exactly like a
flower petal.
Her coloring reminded me of a dress I’d once had in my
own time, a light cotton frock decorated with red poppies. The
thought for some reason struck me with a sudden unexpected
wave of homesickness, and I g ripped the edge of the marble
bench, e yelids p rickling with longing. It must be hearing plain
bluf f English spoken, I thought, after so many months among
the lilt of Scotl and and the quacking of France. The visitors
sounded like home.
Then I saw him. I could feel all of the blood draining from
my head  as my eye traced disbelievingly over the elegant
curve of  the skull, dark-haired and bold amid the powdered
wigs aro und it. Alarms rang in my head like air -raid sirens, as
I f ought  to accept and repel the impressions that assaulted me.
My subc onscious saw the line of the nose, thought “Frank,”
and turned my body to fly to ward him in welcome. “Not-
Frank,” came the slightly higher , rational center of my brain,
freezing me in m y tracks as I saw the familiar curve of a half-
smiling mouth, repeating, “Y ou know  it ’ s not Frank”  as the
muscles of my calves knotted. And then the lurch into panic
and the clenching of hands and stomach, as the slower
processes of logical thought came doggedly on the trail of
instinct and knowledge, seeing t he high brow and the arrogant
tilt of the head, assuring me of the unthinkable. It could not be
Frank. And if it were not, then it could only be…“Jack Ra ndall.” It wasn’ t my vo ice that spoke, but Jamie’ s,
sounding oddly calm and detached. Attention attracted by my
peculiar behavior , he had looked where I was looking, and had
seen what I had seen.
He didn’ t move. So far as I could tell through the
increasing haze of panic, he did n’ t breathe. I was dimly aware
of a nearby serv ant peering curiously upward at the towering
form of the fro zen Scottish warrior next to me, silent as a
statue of Mars. But all my concern was for Jamie.
He w as entirely still. Still as a lion is still, part of the grass
of th e pl ain, its stare hot and un blinking as the sun that burns
the v eldt. And I saw something move in the depths of his eyes.
The tellt ale twitch of the stalking  cat, the tiny jerk of the tuft at
the end of the tail, precursor to carnage.
T o d raw arms in the presence  of the King was death.
Murtagh was on the far side of the garden, much too far away
to help. T wo more paces would bring Randall within hearing
distance. W ithin  sword’ s reach. I laid a hand on his arm. It was
rigid as the steel of the swordhilt under his hand. The blood
roared in my ears.
“Jamie,” I said. “Jamie!” And fainted.1 0  A  L A D Y ,  W I T H  B R O W N
H A I R  C U R L I N G
L U X U R I A N T L Y
I  swam up out o f a flickering y ellow haze composed of
sunlight, dust, and fragmented memories, feeling completely
disoriented.
Frank w as leaning over me, face creased in concern. He
was hold ing my  hand, except th at he wasn’ t. The hand I held
was much lar ger than Frank’ s, and my fingers brushed the
wiriness of coarse hairs on the wrist. Frank’ s hands were
smooth as a girl’ s.
“Are you all r ight?” The voice was Frank’ s, low and
cultured.
“Claire!” That voice, deeper and rougher , wasn’ t Frank’ s at
all. Neither was it cultured. It was full of fright and anguish.
“Jamie.” I found the name at last to match the mental
image fo r which I had been seeking. “Jamie! Don’ t…” I sat
bolt upr ight, staring wildly from one face to the other . I was
surrounded by a circle of curiou s faces, courtiers two and three
deep aro und me, with a small clear space left for His Majesty ,
who was  leaning over , peering d own at me with an expression
of sympathetic interest.
T wo men knelt in the dust beside me. Jamie on the right,
eyes wide and face pale as the hawthorn blossoms above him.
And on my left…
“Are yo u all right, Madame?” The light hazel eyes held
only res pectful concern, the fine dark brows arched over them
in in quiry . It wa sn’ t Frank, of course. Neither was it Jonathan
Randall. This man was younger than the Captain by a good ten
years, pe rhaps close to my own age, his face pale and unlined
by exposure to weather . His lips had the same chiseled lines,
but lacked the marks of ruthlessness that bracketed the
Captain’ s mouth.“Y ou…” I croaked, leaning away from him. “Y ou’re…”
“Alexander Randall, Esquire, Madame,” he answered
quickly , making an abortive gesture toward his head, as though
to d of f a hat he wasn’ t wearing. “I don’ t believe we have
met?” he said, with a hint of doubt.
“I, e r , that is, no, we haven’ t,” I said, sagging back against
Jamie’ s arm. The arm was steady as an iron railing, but the
hand holding mine was trembl ing, and I pulled our clasped
hands into the fold of my skirt to hide it.
“Rather an informal introduction, Mrs., er , no… it’ s Lady
Broch T uarach, is it not?” The high, piping voice pulled my
attention back above me, to the flushed, cherubic countenance
of the Duke of Sandringham peering interestedly over the
shoulders of the Comte de Sévigny and the Duc d’Orléans. He
pushed his ungainly body t hrough the narrow opening
af forded, and extended a hand to help me to my feet. Still
holding my sweaty palm in his own, he bowed in the direction
of Alexa nder Randall, Esquire, who was frowning in a puzzled
sort of way .
“Mr . Ra ndall is  in my employ  as secretary , Lady Broch
T uarach. Holy Orders is a noble calling, but unfortunately
nobility of purpose does not p ay the cobbler ’ s bill, does it,
Alex?” The young man flushed slightly at this barb, but he
inclined his head civilly tow ard me, acknowledging his
employer ’ s introduction. Only then did I notice the sober dark
suit and high white stock that marked him as a junior cleric of
some sort.
“His Grace is co rrect, my lady . And that being so, I must
hold his of fer of  employment in the deepest gratitude.” A faint
tightening of the lips at this spee ch seemed to indicate that the
gratitude felt might not perhaps go so deep as all that, pleasant
words notwithst anding. I glanced at the Duke, to find his small
blue eyes creased against the sun, his expression blandly
impenetrable.
This little tableau was broken by a clap of the King’ s hands
summoning two footmen, who, at Louis’ s direction, graspedme by both arm s and lifted me forcibly into a sedan chair ,
despite my protests.
“Certainly not, Madame,” he s aid, graciously dismissing
both pro tests an d thanks. “Go h ome and rest; we do not wish
you to be indisposed for the ball tomorrow , non ?” His lar ge
brown e yes twin kled at me as he raised my hand to his lips.
Not taking his e yes from my face, he bowed formally toward
Jamie, who had gathered his wits suf ficiently to be making a
gracious speech of thanks, and said, “I shall perhaps accept
your thanks, my lord, in the form of your permission to request
a dance from your lovely wife.”
Jamie’ s lips tightened at this, b ut he bowed in return and
said, “My wife shares my honor at your attention, Y our
Majesty .” He glanced in my dir ection. “If she is well enough
to attend  the ball tomorrow eve ning, I am sure she will look
forward to dancing with Y our Majesty .” He turned without
waiting for formal dismissal, an d jerked his head toward the
chair -bearers.
“Home,” he said.
 
Home at last af ter a hot, jolting ride through streets that
smelled of flowers and open se wers, I shed my heavy dress
and its uncomfortable frame in favor of a silk dressing gown.
I fo und Jamie s itting by the e mpty hearth, eyes closed,
hands on his kn ees as though thinking. He was pale as his
linen shi rt, glimmering in the sh adow of the mantelpiece like a
ghost.
“Holy Mother ,” he muttered, shaking his head. “Dear God
and saints, so clo se. I came within a hairsbreadth of murdering
that man. Do ye realize, Claire,  if ye hadna fainted… Jesus, I
meant to kill him , with every last morsel of wil l I had.” He
broke of f, shuddering again with reaction.
“Here, y ou’d be tter put your fee t up,” I ur ged, tugging at a
heavy carved footstool.
“No, I’m all right now ,” he said, waving it away . “He’ s…
Jack Randall’ s brother , then?”“I shoul d think it likely in the extreme,” I said dryly . “He
could scarcely be anyone else, after all.”
“Mm. Did ye know he worked for Sandringham?”
I sho ok my head . “I didn’ t – don’ t – know anything about
him other than his name and the fact that he’ s a curate. F-
Frank wasn’ t particularly inter ested in him, as he wasn’ t a
direct an cestor of his.” The slight quaver of my voice as I
spoke Frank’ s name gave me away .
Jamie pu t down  the flask and came toward me. Stooping
purposefully , he picked me up and cradled me against his
chest. The smell of the garden s of V ersailles rose sharp and
fresh fro m the folds of his shirt. He kissed the top of my head
and turned toward the bed.
“Come lay your head, Claire,” he said quietly . “It’ s been a
long day for us both.”
 
I had been afraid that the encounter with Alexander
Randall would set Jamie dream ing again. It did not happen
often, bu t now and again, I would feel him wake beside me,
body ten sed in sudden battle. He would lurch out of bed then,
and spen d the night by the window as though it of fered escape,
refusing any form of solace or interference. And by the
morning, Jack Randall and the o ther demons of the dark hours
had been forced back into their  box, battened down and held
fast by the steel bands of Jamie’ s will, and all was well again.
But Jamie fell a sleep quickly , and the stresses of the day
had already fled from his face, leaving it peaceful and smooth
by the time I put out the candle.
It w as bliss to lie unmoving, with the warmth growing
about my cold limbs, the myriad  small aches of back and neck
and knee s fading into the softne ss of oncoming sleep. But my
mind, released from watchfulness, replayed a thousand times
that scen e outsid e the palace – a quick glimpse of a dark head
and a high brow , close-set ears and a fine-edged jaw – that first
harsh flash of mistaken recognition, which struck my heart
with a blow of joy and anguish. Frank, I had thought. Frank.
And it was Frank’ s face I saw as I sank into sleep.The lecture room was one of th ose at London University;
ancient timbered ceiling and modern floors, lino scuf fed by
restless feet. The seats were the old smooth benches; new
desks were saved for the science lectures. History could make
do with sixty-year -old scarred w ood; after all, the subject was
fixed and would not change – why should its accommodation?
“Objects of vertu ,” F rank’ s voice said, “and objects of
use.” His long fingers touched the rim of a silver candlestick,
and the sun fro m the window sparked from the metal, as
though his touch were electric.
The objects, all borrowed from the collections of the
British Museum, were lined up along the edge of the table,
close en ough fo r the students in  the front row to see the tiny
cracks in  the yellowed ivory of the French counterbox, and the
stains of  tobacco smoked long a go that browned the edges of
the white clay p ipe. An English gold-mounted scent bottle, a
gilt-bronze inkstand with gadrooned lid, a cracked horn spoon,
and a small marble clock topped with two swans drinking.
And be hind the row of objects, a row of painted
miniatures, laid flat on the table , features obscured by the light
reflecting of f their surfaces.
Frank’ s dark head bent over the objects, absorbed. The
afternoon sun picked up a stray reddish gleam in his hair . He
lifted the clay pipe, cupped onehanded like an eggshell.
“For some periods of history ,” he said, “we have history
itself; th e written testimony of t he people who lived then. For
others, we have only the objects of the period, to show us how
men lived.”
He p ut t he pipe to his mouth and  pursed his lips around the
stem, puf fing out his cheeks, brows raised comically . There
was a muf fled g iggle from the audience, and he smiled and
laid the pipe down.
“The art , and the objects of vertu ” – he waved a hand over
the glitt ering array – “these are  what we most often see, the
decorations of a society . And  why not?” He picked an
intelligent-looking brown-haired boy to address. An
accomplished l ecturer ’ s trick;  pick one member of theaudience to talk to as though you were alone with him. A
moment later , shift to another . A nd everyone in the room will
feel the focus of your remarks.
“These are pretty things, after all.” A finger ’ s touch set the
swans on the clo ck revolving, curved necks stately in twofold
procession. “W orth preserving. But who’d bother keeping an
old, patc hed tea cozy , or a worn-out automobile-tire?” A pretty
blonde in glasses this time, who  smiled and tittered briefly in
response.
“But it’ s  the useful objects, the things that aren’ t noted in
documents, which are used and broken and discarded without
a second thought, that tell you how the common man lived.
The numbers of these pipes, fo r example, tell us something
about th e frequency and types of tobacco use among the
classes of society , from high” – a finger tap on the lid of the
enameled snuf fbox – “to low .” T he finger moved to stroke the
long, straight pipestem with af fectionate familiarity .
Now a middle-a ged woman, scribbling frantically to catch
every w ord, hardly aware of the  singular regard upon her . The
lines creased beside smiling hazel eyes.
“Y ou needn’ t take down everything , M iss Smith,” he
chided. “It’ s an hour ’ s lecture, after all – your pencil will never
last.”
The woman blushed and dropped her pencil, but smiled
shyly in answer to the friendly grin on Frank’ s lean, dark face.
He had them now , everyone warmed by the glow of good
humor , attention attracted by the small flashes of gilt and
glitter . Now they would follow him without flagging or
complaint, alon g the path of logic and into the thickets of
discussion. A certain tenseness  left his neck as he felt the
students’ attention settle and fix on him.
“The be st witne ss to history is the man – or woman” – a
nod to the pretty  blonde – “who’ s lived it, right?” He smiled
and pick ed up the cracked horn spoon. “W ell, perhaps. After
all, i t’ s h uman n ature to put the  best face on things when you
know someone will read what you’ve written. People tend to
concentrate on the things they think important, and oftenenough, they tidy it up a bit for public consumption. It’ s rare to
find a Pepys who records with equal interest the details of a
Royal pr ocession, and the number of times each night that he’ s
obliged to use his chamber pot.”
The laug h this time was general, and he relaxed, leaning
casually back against the table, gesturing with the spoon.
“Similarly , the lovely objects, the artful artifacts, are the
ones most often preserved. Bu t the chamber pots and the
spoons and the cheap clay pipes can tell us as much or more
about the people who used them.
“And what about those people? W e think of historical
persons as something dif ferent than ourselves, sometimes
halfway mythological. But someone played games with this” –
the slend er index finger stroked the counter -box – “a lady used
this” – nudged the scent bottle – “dabbing scent behind her
ears, on her wrists… where else do you ladies dab scent?”
Lifting his head suddenly , he sm iled at the plump blond girl in
the front row , who blushed, giggled, and touched herself
demurely just above the V of her blouse.
“Ah, yes. Just there. W ell, so did the lady who owned
this.”
Still smi ling at the girl, he unstoppered the scent bottle and
passed it gently under his nose.
“What i s it, Professor? Arpège? ” Not so shy , this student;
dark-haired, like Frank, with gray eyes that held more than a
hint of flirtation.
He c losed his eyes and inhaled deeply , nostrils flaring over
the mouth of the bottle.
“No. It’ s L ’Heure Bleu. My favorite.”
He turned back to the table, ha ir falling over his brow in
concentration as his hand hovered over the row of miniatures.
“And then there’ s a special clas s of objects – portraits. A
bit o f art, and at the same time, as much as we can see of the
people themselves. But how real are they to us?”He lifted a tiny oval and turned it to face the class, reading
from the small gummed label af fixed to its back.
“A Lady , by Nathaniel Plimer , signed with initials and
dated 1786, with curled brown h air piled high, wearing a pink
dress a nd a ruf fle-collared chemise, cloud and sky
background.” He held up a square beside it.
“A Gentleman, by Horace Hon e, signed with monogram
and dated 1780, with powdere d hair en queue , wearing a
brown c oat, blue  waistcoat, lawn jabot, and an Order , possibly
the Most Honorable Order of the Bath.”
The min iature showed a round-faced man, mouth rosily
pursed in the formal pose of eighteenth-century portraits.
“The artists we know ,” he said , laying the portrait down.
“They signed their work, or the y left clues to their identity in
the techniques and the subjects they used. But the people they
painted? W e see them, and yet we know nothing of them. The
strange hairstyles, the odd clothes – they don’ t seem people
that you’d know , do they? And the way so many artists painted
them, th e faces are all alike; pudding-faced and pale, most of
them, an d not a lot more you can say about them. Here and
there, o ne stands out…” Hand hovering over the row , he
selected another oval.
“A Gentleman…”
He h eld up the miniature, and Jamie’ s blue eyes blazed out
under th e fiery thatch of his hair , combed for once, braided
and ribboned into an unaccustomed formal order . The knife-
edged no se was bold above the lace of his stock, and the long
mouth seemed about to speak, half-curled at one corner .
“But they wer e  real people,” Frank’ s voice insisted. “They
did muc h the same things you do – give or take a few small
details like going to the pic tures or driving down the
motorway” – there were appreciative titters amongst the class
– “but they ca red about their children, they loved their
husbands or wives… well, sometimes they did…” More
laughter .“A Lady ,” he said softly , cradling the last of the portraits in
his palm, shielding it for the  moment. “W ith brown hair
curling l uxuriantly to her shoulders, and a necklace of pearls.
Undated. The artist unknown.”
It w as a mirror , not a miniature. My cheeks were flushed,
and my lips trembled as Frank’ s finger gently traced the edge
of my jaw , the graceful line of my neck. The tears welled in
my e yes and spi lled down my ch eeks as I heard his voice, still
lecturing, as he laid down the miniature, and I stared upward at
the timbered ceiling.
“Undated. Unknown. But once… once, she was real.”
I w as having tro uble breathing,  and thought at first that I
was being smothered by the gla ss over the miniature. But the
material pressing  on my nose was soft and damp, and I twisted
my head  away and came awake , feeling the linen pillow wet
with tears beneath my cheek. Jamie’ s hand was lar ge and
warm on my shoulder , gently shaking me.
“Hush, lassie. Hush! Y ou’re but dreaming – I’m here.”
I turned my face into the warmth of his naked shoulder ,
feeling the tears slick between cheek and skin. I clung tightly
to his solidness, and the small night sounds of the Paris house
came slo wly to my ears, bringing me back to the life that was
mine.
“I’m sorry ,” I whispered. “I  was dreaming about…
about…”
He patted my back, and reached under the pillow for a
handkerchief.
“I know . Y e were calling his name.” He sounded resigned.
I lai d my head back on his shou lder . He smelled warm and
rumpled, his own sleepy scent b lending with the smell of the
down-filled quilt and the clean linen sheets.
“I’m sorry ,” I said again.
He snorted briefly , not quite a laugh.
“W ell, I’ll no sa y I’m not wicked jealous of the man,” he
said ruef ully , “b ecause I am. Bu t I can hardly grudge him yourdreams. Or your tears.” His finger gently traced the wet track
down one cheek, then blotted it with the handkerchief.
“Y ou don’ t?”
His smile in the dimness was lopsided.
“No. Y e loved h im. I canna hold it against either of you
that ye mourn him. And it gives me some comfort to know…”
He h esitated, and I reached up t o smooth the rumpled hair of f
his face.
“T o know what?”
“That should the need come, yo u might mourn for me that
way ,” he said softly .
I p ressed  my face fiercely into his chest, so my words were
muf fled.
“I won’ t  m ourn you, bec ause I won’ t ha ve to. I won’ t lose
you, I won’ t!” A thought struck me, and I looked up at him,
the faint roughness of his beard stubble a shadow on his face.
“Y ou ar en’ t afraid I would go back, are you? Y ou don’ t
think that because I… think of Frank…”
“No.” His voice was quick and soft, a response fast as the
possessive tightening of his arms around me.
“No,” he said ag ain, more softly . “W e are bound, you and
I, an d no thing on  this earth shall  part me from you.” One lar ge
hand ros e to stroke my hair . “D ’ye mind the blood vow that I
swore ye when we wed?”
“Y es, I think so. ‘Blood of my blood, bone of my bone…’
”
“I give ye my body , that we may be one,” he finished.
“A ye, and I hav e kept that vow , Sassenach, and so have you.”
He turne d me slightly , and one hand cupped itself gently over
the tiny swell of my stomach.
“Blood of my blood,” he whispered, “and bone of my
bone. Y o u carry  me within ye, Claire, and ye canna leave me
now , no matter what happens. Y ou are mine, always, if ye will
it or no, if ye want me or nay . Mine, and I wilna let ye go.”I put a hand over his, pressing it against me.
“No,” I said softly , “nor can you leave me.”
“No,” he said, half-smiling. “For I have kept the last of the
vow as well.” He clasped both hands about me, and bowed his
head on  my shoulder , so I coul d feel the warm breath of the
words upon my ear , whispered to the dark.
“For I give ye my spirit, ’ til our life shall be done.”1 1  U S E F U L  O C C U P A T I O N S
“W ho is  tha t peculi ar little man?” I  asked Jamie curiously .
The man  in question was makin g his way slowly through the
groups of guests gathered in the main salon of the de Rohans’
house. H e would pause a mome nt, scanning the group with a
critical eye, then either shrug a bony shoulder and pass on, or
suddenly step in close to a man  or woman, hold something to
their face and issue some sort of command. Whatever he was
doing, h is actions appeared to be the occasion of considerable
hilarity .
Before Jamie could answer , the man, a small, wizened
specimen in gray ser ge, spotted us, and his face lit up. He
swooped down on Jamie like a tiny bird of prey suddenly
descending upon a lar ge and startled rabbit.
“Sing,” he commanded.
“Eh?” Jamie blinked down at the little figure in
astonishment.
“I said ‘Sing,’ ”  answered the man, patiently . He prodded
Jamie admiringl y in the chest. “W ith a resonating cavity like
that, you should have a wonderful volume.”
“Oh, he  has volume,” I said, amused. “Y ou can hear him
across three squares of the city when he’ s roused.”
Jamie shot me a dirty look. T he little man was circling
him, me asuring the breadth of his back and tapping on him
like a woodpecker sampling a prime tree.
“I can’ t sing,” he protested.
“Nonsense, nonsense. Of course you can. A nice, deep
baritone, too,” the little man murmured approvingly .
“Excellent. Just what we need. Here, a bit of help for you. T ry
to match this tone.”
Deftly whipping a small tuning fork from his pocket, he
struck it smartly against a pillar and held it next to Jamie’ s left
ear .Jamie rolled his eyes heaven ward, but shrugged and
obligingly sang a note. The little man jerked back as though
he’d been shot.
“No,” he said disbelievingly .
“I’m afraid so,” I said sympathetically . “He’ s right, you
know . He really can’ t  sing.”
The little  man squinted accusingly at Jamie, then struck his
fork once more and held it out invitingly .
“Once m ore,” he  coaxed. “Just l isten to it, and let the same
sound come out.”
Patient as ever , Jamie listened carefully to the “A” of the
fork, and  sang again, producing a sound wedged somewhere in
the crack between E-flat and D-sharp.
“Not possible,”  said the little man, looking thoroughly
disillusioned. “No one could be that dissonant even on
purpose.”
“ I  c an,” said Jam ie cheerfully , and bowed politely to the
little ma n. W e had by now begu n to collect a small crowd of
interested onlookers. Louise de Rohan was a great hostess, and
her salons attracted the cream of Parisian society .
“Y es, he can,” I assured our visitor . “He’ s tone-deaf, you
see.”
“Y es, I do see, ” the little man  said, looking thoroughly
depressed. Then he began to eye me speculatively .
“Not me!” I said, laughing.
“Y ou surely aren’ t tone-deaf as well, Madame?” Eyes
glittering like a snake slithering toward a paralyzed bird, the
little man began to move toward  me, tuning fork twitching like
the flicking tongue of a viper .
“W ait a minute,” I said, holdi ng out a repressive hand.
“Just who ar e  you?”
“This is  Herr Johannes Gerstm ann, Sassenach.” Looking
amused, Jamie bowed again to the little man. “The King’ s
singing-master . May I present you to my wife, Lady BrochT uarach, Herr Gerstmann?” T rust Jamie to know every last
member of the Court, no matter how insignificant.
Johannes Gerstmann. W ell, that accounted for the faint
accent I had de tected under the formality of Court French.
German, I wondered, or Austrian?
“I am assembling a small impromptu chorus,” the little
singing-master explained. “The voices need not be trained, but
they must be strong and tr ue.” He cast a glance of
disillusionment at Jamie, who merely grinned in response. He
took the tuning fork from H err Gerstmann and held it
inquiringly in my direction.
“Oh, all right,” I said, and sang.
Whatever he heard appeared to encourage Herr
Gerstmann, for he put away the  tuning fork and peered at me
interestedly . His  wig was a trifle too big, and tended to slide
forward when he nodded. He did so now , then pushed the wig
carelessly back, and said “Excellent tone, Madame! Really
very nice, very nice indeed. Are  you acquainted perhaps with
Le Papillon ?” He hummed a few bars.
“W ell, I’ve heard it at least,” I re plied cautiously . “Um, the
melody , I mean; I don’ t know the words.”
“Ah! No dif ficulty , Madame. The chorus is simplicity; like
this…”
My arm trapped in the singing-master ’ s grip, I found
myself being ineluctably drawn away toward the sound of
harpsichord music in a distant room, Herr Gerstmann
humming in my ear like a demented bumblebee.
I cas t a helpless glance back at Jamie, who merely grinned
and raise d his cup of sorbet in a farewell salute before turning
to take up a conversation with Monsieur Duverney the
younger , the son of the Minister of Finance.
The Roh ans’ house – if you could use a mere word like
“house” in description of such  a place – was alight with
lanterns strung through the back garden and edging the terrace.
As Herr Gerstmann towed me through the corridors, I could
see servants hurrying in and out of the supper rooms, layinglinen and  silver for the dining that would take place later . Most
“salons” were small, intimate af fairs, but the Princesse Louise
de La T our de Rohan was an expansive personality .
I had  met the Princesse a week before, at another evening
party , and had f ound her something of a surprise. Plump and
rather pl ain, she  had a round face with a small round chin, pale
lashless blue eyes, and a star -sha ped false beauty mark that did
very litt le to fulfill its function in life. So this was the lady
who enticed Prince Charles into ignoring the dictates of
propriety? I thought, curtsying in the receiving line.
Still, she  had an air of lively animation about her that was
quite attractive, and a lovely so ft pink mouth. Her mouth was
the most animated part of her , in fact.
“But I am charmed!” she had exclaimed, grabbing my
hand as I was pr esented to her . “ How wonderful to meet you at
last! My  husband and my father have both sung the praises of
milord Broch T uarach unendingly , but of his delightful wife
they have said nothing. I am enchanted beyond measure by
your coming, my dear , sweet la dy – must I really say Broch
T uarach, or won’ t it do if I only say Lady T uarach? I’m not
sure I could remember all of it,  but one word, surely , even if
such a strange-sounding word – is it Scottish? How
enchanting!”
In fact, Broch T uarach meant “the north-facing tower ,” but
if sh e wanted to call me “Lady North-facing,” it was all right
with me. In the event, she quickly gave up trying to remember
“T uarach,” and had since called me only “ma chèr e Clair e.”
Louise h erself was with the gro up of singers in the music
room, fluttering plumply from one to another , talking and
laughing. When  she saw me, she dashed across the room as
fast as her drap eries would allow , her plain face alight with
animation.
“Ma chèr e Clair e!”  s he exclaimed, ruthlessly
commandeering me from Herr Gerstmann. “Y ou are just in
time! Come, you must talk to this silly English child for me.”
The “silly English child” was in fact very young; a girl of
not more than f ifteen, with dark, shiny ringlets, and cheeksflushed so hotly with embarrass ment that she reminded me of
a brilliant poppy . In fact, it was the cheeks that recalled her to
me; the girl I had glimpsed in the garden at V ersailles, just
before the unsettling appearance of Alexander Randall.
“Madame Fraser is English, too,” Louise was explaining to
the girl.  “She will soon make you feel at home. She’ s shy ,”
Louise explained, turning to me without pausing to draw
breath. “ T alk to  her; persuade h er to sing with us. She has a
delightful voice, I am assured. There, mes enfants , enjoy
yourselves!” An d with a pat of benediction, she was of f to the
other sid e of the room, exclaiming, cajoling, marveling at a
new arrival’ s gown, pausing to fondle the overweight youth
who sat at the h arpsichord, twis ting ringlets of his hair around
her finger as she chattered to the Duc di Castellotti.
“Makes you rather tired just to  watch her , doesn’ t it?” I
said in English,  smiling at the girl. A tiny smile appeared on
her o wn lips and  she bobbed her head briefly , but didn’ t speak.
I thought this must all be rather overwhelming; Louise’ s
parties tended to make my own head spin, and the little poppy
girl could scarcely be out of the schoolroom.
“I’m Cla ire Fras er ,” I said, “but Louise didn’ t remember to
tell me your nam e.” I paused in vitingly , but she didn’ t reply .
Her face got red der and redder , lips pressed tight together , and
her fists  clenche d at her sides.  I was a trifle alarmed at her
appearance, but she finally sum moned the will to speak. She
took a deep breath, and raised he r chin like one about to mount
the scaf fold.
“M-m-my-name is… M-M-M,” she began, and at once I
understood her silence and her p ainful shyness. She closed her
eyes, biting her lip savagely , the n opened her eyes and gamely
had another try . “M-M-Mary Hawkins,” she managed at last.
“I d-d-don’ t sing,” she added defiantly .
If I had found he r interesting before, I was fascinated now .
So t his w as Sila s Hawkins’ s niece, the baronet’ s daughter , the
intended fiancée of the V icomte Marigny! It seemed a
considerable weight of male expectation for such a young girl
to b ear . I glanced around to see whether the V icomte was in
evidence, and was relieved to find that he wasn’ t.“Don’ t worry about it,” I said, stepping in front of her , to
shield h er from the waves of people now filling the music
room. “Y ou needn’ t talk if you don’ t want to. Though perhaps
you sho uld try to sing,” I said, s truck by a thought. “I knew a
physician once  who specialized in the treatment of
stammering; he said that people who stammer don’ t do it when
they sing.”
Mary Hawkins’ s eyes grew wide with astonishment at this.
I l ooked around and saw a near by alcove, curtained to hide a
cozy bench.
“Here,” I said, ta king her by the  hand. “Y ou can sit in here,
so you don’ t have to talk to people. If you want to sing, you
can come out when we start; if not, just stay in here ’ til the
party’ s over .” She stared at me for a minute, then gave me a
sudden blinding smile of gratitude, and ducked into the alcove.
I loitered outside, to prevent any nosy servants from
disturbing her hiding place, chatting with passersby .
“How lo vely you look tonight, ma chèr e !” It was Madame
de R amage, one of the Queen ’ s ladies. An older , dignified
woman, she had come to supper in the Rue T remoulins once or
twice. S he embraced me warmly , then looked around to be
sure that we were unobserved.
“I had hoped to see you here, my dear ,” she said, leaning a
bit closer and lowering her voice. “I wished to advise you to
take care concerning the Comte St. Germain.”
Half-turning in the direction of her gaze, I saw the lean-
faced m an from the docks of Le Havre, entering the music
room wi th a younger , elegantly dressed woman on his arm. He
hadn’ t s een me, apparently , and I hastily turned back to
Madame de Remage.
“What… has he… I mean…” I could feel myself flushing
still more deeply , rattled by th e appearance of the saturnine
Comte.
“W ell, y es, he has been heard to speak of you,” Madame
de Ramage said, kindly helping me out of my confusion. “I
gather that there was some small dif ficulty in Le Havre?”“Something of the kind,” I said. “All I did was to
recognize a case of smallpox, but it resulted in the destruction
of his ship, and … he wasn’ t p leased about it,” I concluded
weakly .
“Ah, so that was  it.” Madame de  Ramage looked pleased. I
imagined having  the inside story , so to speak, would give her
an advan tage in the trade of gossip and information that was
the commerce of Parisian social life.
“He has  been going about telling people that he believes
you to be a witch,” she said, smiling and waving at a friend
across the room. “A fine story!  Oh, no one believes it,” she
assured me. “Everyone knows that if anyone is mixed up in
such matters, it is Monsieur le Comte himself.”
“Really?” I wanted to ask just what she meant by this, but
just then  Herr Gerstmann bustl ed up, clapping his hands as
though shooing a flock of hens.
“Come, come, mesdames!” he said. “W e are all complete;
the singing commences!”
As the chorale hastily assembled near the harpsichord, I
looked back toward the alcove where I had left Mary Hawkins.
I thought I saw the curtain twitch, but wasn’ t sure. And as the
music b egan, and the joined vo ices rose, I thought I heard a
clear , high soprano from the d irection of the alcove – but
again, I wasn’ t sure.
 
“V erra nice, Sassenach,” Jamie said when I rejoined him,
flushed and breathless, after the singing. He grinned down at
me and patted my shoulder .
“How w ould you know?” I said,  accepting a glass of wine-
punch fr om a passing servant. “ Y ou can’ t tell one song from
another .”
“W ell, ye were loud, anyway ,” he said, unperturbed. “I
could hear every word.” I felt h im stif fen slightly beside me,
and turned to see what – or whom – he was looking at.
The woman who had just entered was tiny , scarcely as high
as J amie’ s lowest rib, with han ds and feet like a doll’ s, andbrows delicate as Chinese tracery , over eyes the deep black of
sloes. She advanced with a step that mocked its own lightness,
so s he looked as though she were dancing just above the
ground.
“There’ s Annal ise de Marillac,” I said, admiring her .
“Doesn’ t she look lovely?”
“Oh, aye.” Something in his voi ce made me glance sharply
upward. A faint pink tinged the tips of his ears.
“And here I thought you spent your years in France
fighting, not making romantic conquests,” I said tartly .
T o my surprise, he laughed at this. Catching the sound, the
woman turned toward us. A brilliant smile lit her face as she
saw Jam ie looming among the c rowd. She turned as though to
come in  our direction, but was distracted by a gentleman,
wigged and resplendent in lavender satin, who laid an
importuning ha nd on her frag ile arm. She flicked her fan
charmingly at Jamie in a gesture of regretful coquetry before
devoting her attention to her new companion.
“What’ s so funny?” I asked, seeing him still grinning
broadly after the lady’ s gently oscillating lace skirts.
He snapped suddenly back to an awareness of my
presence, and smiled down at me.
“Oh, nothing, Sassenach. Only what ye said about fighting.
I fought my fir st duel – well, the only one, in fact – over
Annalise de Marillac. When I was eighteen.”
His tone  was mildly dreamy , watching the sleek, dark head
bob away through the crowd, su rrounded wherever it went by
white cl usters of wigs and powd ered hair , with here and there
a fashionably pink-tinged peruke for variety .
“A duel? W ith whom?” I asked, glancing around warily for
any male attachments to the China doll who might feel
inclined to follow up an old quarrel.
“Och, he isna here,” Jamie said, catching and correctly
interpreting my glance. “He’ s dead.”“Y ou killed  him?” Agitate d, I spoke rather louder than
intended. As a few nearby heads turned curiously in our
direction, Jamie took me by the elbow and steered me hastily
toward the nearest French doors.
“Mind y our voice, Sassenach,” he said, mildly enough.
“No, I didna ki ll him. W anted to,” he added ruefully , “but
didn’ t. H e died two years ago, o f the morbid sore throat. Jared
told me.”
He g uided me do wn one of the garden paths, lit by lantern-
bearing servants, who stood like bollards at five-yard intervals
from the terrace to the fountain at the bottom of the path. In
the m idst of a big reflecting pool, four dolphins sprayed sheets
of w ater over an annoyed-looking T riton in the center , who
brandished a trident rather inef fectually at them.
“W ell, don’ t keep me in suspen se,” I ur ged as we passed
out of hearing of the groups on the terrace. “What happened?”
“All right, then,” he said, resigned. “W ell, ye will have
observed that Annalise is rather pretty?”
“Oh, rea lly? W ell, perhaps, now that you mention it, I can
see something of the kind,” I answered sweetly , provoking a
sudden sharp look, followed by a lopsided smile.
“A ye. W ell, I wasna the only young gallant in Paris to be
of the same opin ion, nor the only one to lose his head over her ,
either . W ent about in a daze, tripping over my feet. W aited in
the stree t, in hopes of seeing her come out of her house to the
carriage. For got to eat, even; Jared said my coat hung on me
like a scarecrow’ s, and the state of my hair didna much help
the r esemblance .” His hand wen t absently to his head, patting
the imm aculate queue that lay clubbed tight against his neck,
bound with blue ribbon.
“For got to eat? Christ, you did  have it bad,” I remarked.
He chuc kled. “Oh, aye. And stil l worse when she began to
flirt wi’ Charles Gauloise. Mind ye,” he added fairly , “she
flirted w ith ever yone – that was  all right – but she chose him
for her supper partner ower -of ten for my taste, and danced
with him too much at the parties, and… well, the long and theshort of it, Sassenach, is that I caught him kissing her in the
moonlight on her father ’ s terrace one night, and challenged
him.”
By this  time, we had reached the fountain in our
promenade. Jamie drew to a sto p and we sat on the rim of the
fountain, upwind of the spray from the puf f-lipped dolphins.
Jamie drew a hand through the dark water and lifted it
dripping, abstractedly watching the silver drops run down his
fingers.
“Dueling was illegal in Paris then – as it is now . But there
were pla ces; there always are. It was his to choose, and he
picked a  spot in the Bois de Boulogne. Close by the road of
the Seve n Saints, but hidden by a screen of oaks. The choice
of w eapon was his, too. I ex pected pistols, but he chose
swords.”
“Why w ould he do that? Y ou must have had a six-inch
reach on  him – or more.” I was no expert, but was perforce
learning a small bit about the strategy and tactics of
swordfighting; Jamie and Murtagh took each other on every
two or three da ys to keep in practice, clashing and parrying
and lunging up and down the  garden, to the untrammeled
delight of the se rvants, male and female alike, who all sur ged
out onto the balconies to watch.
“Why did he choose smallswords? Because he was bloody
good with one. Also, I suspected he thought I might kill him
accidentally with a pistol, while he knew I’d be satisfied only
to draw blood w ith a blade. I didna mean to kill him, ye ken,”
he explained. “Only to humiliate him. And he knew it. No
fool, was our Charles,” he said, ruefully shaking his head.
The mist from the fountain was making ringlets escape
from my coif fure, to curl aroun d my face. I brushed back a
wisp of hair , asking, “And did you humiliate him?”
“W ell, I wounded him, at least. ” I was surprised to hear a
small no te of satisfaction in his  voice, and raised an eyebrow
at him. “He’d l earnt his craft from LeJeune, one of the best
swordmasters in France.” Jamie explained. “Like fighting a
damn flea, it w as, and I fought him right-handed, too.” Hepushed a hand through his hair once more, as though checking
the binding.
“My hair came loose, midway through,” he said. “The
thong ho lding it broke, and the wind was blowing it into my
eyes, so  all I could see was the wee white shape of Charles in
his shirt , darting  to and fro like a minnow . And that’ s how I
got him, finally – the way ye spear a fish with a dirk.” He
snorted through his nose.
“He let out a skelloch as though I’d run him through,
though I  knew I’d but pinked him in one arm. I got the hair out
of m y face at last and looked beyond him to see Annalise
standing there at the edge of the clearing, wi’ her eyes wide
and dark  as yon pool.” He gestured out over the silver -black
surface beside us.
“So I sheathed my blade and smoothed back my hair , and
stood there – ha lf-expectin’ her to come and throw herself into
my arms, I suppose.”
“Um,” I said, delicately . “I gather she didn’ t?”
“W ell, I  didna ken anything abo ut women then, did I?” he
demanded. “No, she came and threw herself on him , of
course.” He made a Scottish no ise deep in his throat, one of
self-derision and humorous disgust. “Married him a month
later , I heard.”
“A ye, well.” He shrugged suddenly , with a rueful smile.
“So my heart w as broken. W ent home to Scotland and moped
about for weeks, until my fath er lost patience wi’ me.” He
laughed. “I even thought of turning monk over it. Said to my
father ov er supp er one night as I thought perhaps in the spring
I’d go across to the Abbey and become a novice.”
I l aughed at the  thought. “W ell, you’d have no dif ficulty
with the vow of poverty; chastity and obedience might come a
bit harder . What did your father say?”
He grinned, teeth white in a d ark face. “He was eating
brose. H e laid down the spoon a nd looked at me for a moment.
Then he sighed and shook his head, and said, ‘It’ s been a longday , Jam ie.’ The n he picked up the spoon again and went back
to his supper , and I never said another word about it.”
He looked up t he slope to the terrace, where those not
dancing strolled to and fro, cooling of f between dances,
sipping wine and flirting behind fans. He sighed nostalgically .
“A ye, a verra pretty lass, Annalise de Marillac. Graceful as
the w ind, and so  small that ye wanted to tuck her inside your
shirt and carry her like a kitten.”
I w as silent, lis tening to the f aint music from the open
doors ab ove, as I contemplated the gleaming satin slipper that
encased my size-nine foot.
After a moment, Jamie became aware of my silence.
“What is it, Sassenach?” he asked, laying a hand on my
arm.
“Oh, no thing,” I said with a sigh. “Only thinking that I
rather do ubt anyone will ever d escribe me as ‘graceful as the
wind.’ ”
“Ah.” H is head was half-turned, the long, straight nose and
firm chin lighted from behind by the glow of the nearest
lantern. I could s ee the half-smile on his lips as he turned back
toward me.
“W ell, I’ ll tell ye, Sassenach, ‘graceful’ is possibly not the
first wor d that springs to mind a t thought of you.” He slipped
an a rm behind me, one hand lar ge and warm around my silk-
clad shoulder .
“But I talk to you as I talk to my own soul,” he said,
turning me to fa ce him. He reached up and cupped my cheek,
fingers light on my temple.
“And, Sassenach,” he whispered, “your face is my heart.”
It was the shifting of the wind, several minutes later , that
parted us at last with a fine spray from the fountain. W e broke
apart and rose hastily , laughing at the sudden chill of the water .
Jamie in clined h is head inquiringly toward the terrace, and I
took his arm, nodding.“So,” I observed , as we made our way slowly up the wide
steps to the ball room, “you’ve learnt a bit more about women
now , I see.”
He laughed, low and deep, tig htening his grasp on my
waist.
“The most important thing I’ve learned about women,
Sassenach, is which one to choose.” He stepped away , bowing
to me, and gest uring through the open doors to the brilliant
scene inside. “May I have this dance, milady?”
 
I s pent the next  afternoon at the d’Arbanvilles’, where I
met the King’ s s inging-master once again. This time, we found
time for a con versation, whic h I recounted to Jamie after
supper .
“Y ou what?” Jamie squinted at m e, as though he suspected
me of pulling some practical joke.
“I said, Herr Gerstmann suggested that I might be
interested in meeting a friend o f his. Mother Hildegarde is in
char ge of L ’Hôpital des Anges – you know , the charity
hospital down near the cathedral.”
“I know where it is.” His voice was marked by a general
lack of enthusiasm.
“He had a sore throat, and that led to me telling him what
to take for it, and a bit about medicines in general, and how I
was inte rested in diseases and, w ell, you know how one thing
leads to another .”
“W ith y ou, it customarily does,” he agreed, sounding
distinctly cynical. I ignored his tone and went on.
“So, I’m going t o go to the hospital tomorrow .” I stretched
on tiptoe to reach down my medicine box from its shelf.
“Maybe I won’ t take it along w ith me the first time,” I said,
scanning the contents medita tively . “It might seem too
pushing. Do you think?”
“Pushing?” He sounded stunned. “Are ye meaning to visit
the place, or move into it?”“Er , well,” I said. I took a de ep breath. “I, er , thought
perhaps I could work there regularly . Herr Gerstmann says that
all the physicians and healers who go there donate their time.
Most of them don’ t turn up every day , but I have plenty of
time, and I could-”
“Plenty of time?”
“Stop repeating everything I sa y ,” I said. “Y es, plenty of
time. I know it’ s important to g o to salons and supper parties
and all that, but it doesn’ t take all day – at least it needn’ t. I
could-”
“Sassenach, you’re with child! Y e dinna mean to go out to
nurse beggars and criminals?” He sounded rather helpless
now , as though wondering how to deal with someone who had
suddenly gone mad in front of him.
“I hadn’ t for gotten,” I assured him. I pressed my hands
against my belly , squinting down.
“It i sn’ t really noticeable yet; w ith a loose gown I can get
away with it for a time. And th ere’ s nothing wrong with me
except the morning sickness; no reason why I shouldn’ t work
for some months yet.”
“No reason, except I wilna have  ye doing it!” Expecting no
company this evening, he had t aken of f his stock and opened
his colla r when he came home. I could see the tide of dusky
red advancing up his throat.
“Jamie,” I said, striving for re asonableness. “Y ou know
what I am.”
“Y ou’re my wife!”
“W ell, that, too.” I flicked the i dea aside with my fingers.
“I’m a nurse, Jamie. A healer . Y ou have reason to know it.”
He flushed hotly . “A ye, I do. A nd because ye’ve mended
me when I’m wounded, I should think it right for ye to tend
beggars and prostitutes? Sassenach, do ye no ken the sort of
people that L ’Hôpital des Anges takes in?” He looked
pleadingly at me, as though e xpecting me to return to my
senses any minute.“What dif ference does that make?”
He looked wildly around the room, imploring witness from
the portrait over the mantelpiece as to my unreasonableness.
“Y ou co uld catc h a filthy disea se, for God’ s sake! D’ye
have no regard for your child, even if ye have none for me?”
Reasonableness was seeming a less desirable goal by the
moment.
“Of course I have! What kind of careless, irresponsible
person do you think I am?”
“The kind who w ould abandon her husband to go and play
with scu m in the gutter!” he sna pped. “Since you ask.” He ran
a big hand through his hair , making it stick up at the crown.
“Abandon you? Since when is it abandoning you to
suggest really doing something,  instead of rotting away in the
d’Arbanvilles’ s alon, watching Louise de Rohan stuf f herself
with pas try , and listening to ba d poetry and worse music? I
want to be useful!”
“T aking care of your own household isna useful? Being
married to me isna useful?” Th e lacing round his hair broke
under the stress, and the thick lo cks fluf fed out like a flaming
halo. He glared down his nose at me like an avenging angel.
“Sauce for the gander ,” I retorte d coldly . “Is being married
to me  suf ficient occupation for you ? I don’ t notice you hanging
round the house all day , adoring me. And as for the household,
bosh.”
“Bosh? What’ s bosh?” he demanded.
“Stuf f a nd nonsense. Rot. Horsefeathers. In other words,
don’ t be ridiculous. Madame V ionnet does everything, and
does it several dozen times better than I could.”
This was so pate ntly true that it stopped him for a moment.
He glared down at me, jaw working.
“Oh, aye? And if I forbid ye to go?”
This stopped me for a moment. I drew myself up and
looked him up a nd down. His ey es were the color of rain-darkslate, the wide, generous mout h clamped in a straight line.
Shoulders broad and back erect, arms folded across his chest
like a cast-iron statue, “forbidding” was precisely the word
that best described him.
“ Do  you  forbid me?” The tension crackled between us. I
wanted to blink, but wouldn’ t give him the satisfaction of
breaking of f my own steely gaze. What would  I do if he
forbade me to go? Alternatives raced through my mind,
everything from planting the ivory letter -opener between his
ribs to burning d own the house with him in it. The only idea I
rejected absolutely was that of giving in.
He paused, and drew a deep b reath before speaking. His
hands were curled into fists at h is sides, and he uncurled them
with conscious ef fort.
“No,” he said. “ No, I dinna forbid ye.” His voice shook
slightly with the ef fort to control it. “But if I asked you?”
I lo oked down then, and stare d at his reflection in the
polished tabletop. At first, the idea of visiting L ’Hôpital des
Anges had seemed merely an interesting idea, an attractive
alternative to the endless gossip and petty intrigues of Parisian
society . But now… I could feel the muscles of my arms swell
as I clenched my own fists. I didn’ t just want  to work again; I
needed  to.
“I don’ t know ,” I said at last.
He took a deep breath, and let it out slowly .
“W ill ye  think about it, Claire? ” I could feel his eyes on
me. After what seemed a long time, I nodded.
“I’ll think about it.”
“Good.” His tension broken, he turned restlessly away . He
wandered round the drawing room, picking up small objects
and putting them down at rando m, finally coming to roost by
the bookshelf, where he leaned, staring unseeingly at the
leather -bound tit les. I came tent atively up beside him, and laid
a hand on his arm.
“Jamie, I didn’ t mean to upset you.”He glanced down at me and gave me a sidelong smile.
“A ye, well. I didna mean t o fight wi’ you, either ,
Sassenach. I’m short-tempered a nd over -touchy , I expect.” He
patted my hand in apology , then  moved aside, to stand looking
down at his desk.
“Y ou’ve been working hard,” I said soothingly , following
him.
“It’ s not that.” H e shook his he ad, and reached out to flip
open the  pages of the huge ledg er that lay in the center of the
desk.
“The wi ne business; that’ s all right. It’ s a great deal of
work, aye, but I dinna mind it. I t’ s the other .” He gestured at a
small sta ck of letters, held down by an alabaster paperweight.
One of Jared’ s, it was carved in the shape of a white rose – the
Stuarts’ emblem. The letters it secured were from Abbot
Alexander , from the Earl of Mar , from other prominent
Jacobites. All filled with veiled inquiry , misty promises,
contradictory expectations.
“I feel as though I’m fighting feathers!” Jamie said,
violently . “A real fight, something I could get my hands on,
that I could do.  But this…” H e snatched up the handful of
letters fr om the desk, and tossed them into the air . The room
was drafty , and the papers zigzagged wildly , sliding under
furniture and fluttering on the carpet.
“There’ s nothing to get hold of,” he said helplessly . “I can
talk to a thousa nd people, write a hundred letters, drink wi’
Charles ’ til I’m blind, and nev er know if I’m getting on or
not.”
I let the scattered letters lie; one of the maids could retrieve
them later .
“Jamie,” I said softly . “W e can’ t do anything but try .”
He smil ed faintly , hands braced on the desk. “A ye. I’m
glad you said ‘w e,’ Sassenach. I do feel verra much alone with
it all sometimes.”
I pu t my arms around his waist and laid my face against
his back.“Y ou know I wo uldn’ t leave you alone with it,” I said. “I
got you into it in the first place, after all.”
I could feel the small vibration of a laugh under my cheek.
“A ye, you did. I  wilna hold it against ye, Sassenach.” He
turned, leaned down, and kissed me lightly on the forehead.
“Y ou look tired, mo duinne . G o up to bed, n ow . I’ve a bit more
work to do, but I’ll join ye soon.”
“All right.” I was  tired tonight, though the chronic
sleepiness of early pregnancy was giving way to new ener gy; I
was beginning to feel alert in th e daytime, brimming with the
ur ge to be active.
I paused at the door on my way out. He was still standing
by the desk, staring down into the pages of the open ledger .
“Jamie?” I said.
“A ye?”
“The hospital – I said I’d think about it. Y ou think, too,
hm?”
He turned his h ead, one brow sharply arched. Then he
smiled, and nodded briefly .
“I’ll come to ye soon, Sassenach,” he said.
 
It w as still sleeti ng, and tiny particles of frozen rain rattled
against the windows and hissed into the fire when the night
wind turned to d rive them down the flue. The wind was high,
and it moaned and grumbled among the chimneys, making the
bedroom seem all the cozier by contrast. The bed itself was an
oasis of  warmth and comfort, equipped with goose-down
quilts, huge fluf fy pillows, and Jamie, faithfully putting out
British Thermal Units like an electric storage heater .
His lar ge hand stroked lightly across my stomach, warm
through the thin silk of my nightdress.
“No, the re. Y ou have to press a little harder .” I took his
hand and pressed the fingers do wnward, just above my pubicbone, where the uterus had begun to make itself obvious, a
round, hard swelling a little lar ger than a grapefruit.
“A ye, I feel it,” he murmured. “He’ s really there.” A tiny
smile of awed delight tugged at the corner of his mouth, and
he lo oked up at me, eyes sparkling. “Can ye feel him move,
yet?”
I sho ok my hea d. “Not yet. Another month or so, I think,
from what your sister Jenny said.”
“Mmm,” he said, kissing the tin y bulge. “What d’ye think
of ‘Dalhousie,’ Sassenach?”
“What do I think of ‘Dalhousie’ as what ?” I inquired.
“W ell, as a name,” he said. He patted my stomach. “He’ll
need a name.”
“T rue,” I said. “ Though what makes you think it’ s a boy?
It might just as easily be a girl.”
“Oh? O h, aye, that’ s true,” he admitted, as though the
possibility had just occurred to him. “Still, why not start with
the boys ’ names? W e could na me him for your uncle who
raised you.”
“Umm.” I frowned at my mid section. Dearly as I had
loved my uncle Lamb, I didn’ t  know that I wanted to inflict
either “Lambert” or “Quentin”  on a helpless infant. “No, I
don’ t th ink so. On the other ha nd, I don’ t think I’d want to
name him for one of your  uncles, either .”
Jamie stroked my stomach absently , thinking.
“What was your father ’ s name, Sassenach?” he asked.
I had to think for a moment to remember .
“Henry ,” I said. “Henry Montmorency Beauchamp. Jamie,
I am not  having a child named ‘Montmorency Fraser ,’ no
matter w hat. I’m not so keen on ‘Henry ,’ either , though it’ s
better than Lambert. How about W illiam?” I suggested. “For
your brother?” His older broth er , W illiam, had died in late
childhood, but had lived long enough for Jamie to remember
him with great af fection.His brow was furrowed in thoug ht. “Hmm,” he said. “A ye,
maybe. Or we could call him…”
“James,” said a hollow , sepulchral voice from the flue.
“What?”  I said, sitting straight up in bed.
“James,” said the fireplace, impatiently . “James, James!”
“Sweet bleeding Jesus,” said Jamie, staring at the leaping
flames on the hearth. I could feel the hair standing up on his
forearm, stif f as wire. He sat frozen for a moment; then, a
thought occurring to him, he jumped to his feet and went to the
dormer window , not bothering  to put anything on over his
shirt.
He flung  up the sash, admitting a blast of frigid air , and
thrust hi s head out into the nigh t. I heard a muf fled shout, and
then a scrabbling sound across the slates of the roof. Jamie
leaned f ar out, rising on his toe s to reach, then backed slowly
into the room, rain-dampened and grunting with ef fort. He
dragged with him, arms clasped  about his neck, the form of a
handsome boy in dark clothing, thoroughly soaked, with a
bloodstained cloth wrapped around one hand.
The visitor caught his foot on the sill and landed clumsily ,
sprawling on the floor . He scram bled up at once, though, and
bowed to me, snatching of f his slouch hat.
“Madame,” he said, in thickly accented French. “I must
beg you r pardon , I arrive so without ceremony . I intrude, but it
is of necessity that I call upon  my friend James at such an
unsocial hour .”
He was a sturdy , good-looking lad, with thick, light-brown
hair curling loose upon his sho ulders, and a fair face, cheeks
flushed red with cold and exertion. His nose was running
slightly , and he wiped it with the back of his wrapped hand,
wincing slightly as he did so.
Jamie, both eyebrows raised, bowed politely to the visitor .
“My ho use is at your service, Y our Highness,” he said,
with a glance that took in the g eneral disorder of the visitor ’ s
attire. His stock was undone and hung loosely around his neck,
half his  buttons were done up awry , and the flies of hisbreeches flopped  partially open. I saw Jamie frown slightly at
this, and he mov ed unobtrusivel y in front of the boy , to screen
me from the indelicate sight.
“If I may present my wife, Y our Highness?” he said.
“Claire, my lady Broch T uarach . Claire, this is His Highness,
Prince Charles, son of King James of Scotland.”
“Um, y es,” I said. “I’d rather gathered that. Er , good
evening, Y our Highness.” I no dded graciously , pulling the
bedclothes up around me. I supposed that under the
circumstances, I could dispense with the usual curtsy .
The Prince had taken advantag e of Jamie’ s long-winded
introduction to fumble his trousers into better order , and now
nodded back at me, full of Royal dignity .
“It is my pleas ure, Madame,” he said, and bowed once
more, making a much more elegant production of it. He
straightened and  stood turning h is hat in his hands, obviously
trying to think what to say next. Jamie, standing bare-legged in
his s hirt alongside, glanced from  me to Charles, seemingly at
an equal loss for words.
“Er…” I said, to break the silence. “Have you had an
accident, Y our Highness?” I nodded at the handkerchief
wrapped around his hand, and he glanced down as though
noticing it for the first time.
“Y es,” he said, “ah… no. I mean… it is nothing, my lady .”
He flush ed redder , staring at hi s hand. His manner was odd;
something between embarrassment and anger . I could see the
stain on  the cloth spreading, though, and put my feet out of
bed, groping for my dressing gown.
“Y ou’d better let me have a look at it,” I said.
The injury , exposed with some reluctance by the Prince,
was not serious, but it was unusual.
“That looks like an animal bite,” I said incredulously ,
dabbing at the small semicircl e of puncture wounds in the
webbing between thumb and forefinger . Prince Charles winced
as I squeezed the flesh around it, meaning to cleanse the
wound by bleeding before binding it.“Y es,” h e said. “A monkey bite. Disgusting, flea-ridden
beast!” he burst out. “I told her she must dispose of it.
Undoubtedly the animal is diseased!”
I h ad found my medicine box, an d now applied a thin layer
of genti an ointment. “I don’ t th ink you need worry ,” I said,
intent on my work. “So long as it isn’ t rabid, that is.”
“Rabid?” The Prince went quite pale. “Do you think it
could be ?” Plainly he had no idea what “rabid” might mean,
but wanted no part of it.
“Anything’ s pos sible,” I said ch eerfully . Surprised by his
sudden appearan ce, it was just beginning to dawn on me that it
would sa ve ever yone a great de al of trouble in the long run, if
this young man would succumb gracefully to some quick and
deadly disease. Still, I couldn’ t quite find it in my heart to
wish him gangrene or rabies, and I tied up his hand neatly in a
fresh linen bandage.
He smile d, bowed again, and th anked me very prettily in a
mixture of French and Italian. Still apologizing ef fusively for
his unti mely v isit, he was t owed away by Jamie, now
respectably kilted, for a drink downstairs.
Feeling the chill of the room seep through gown and robe,
I crawled back into bed and drew the quilts up under my chin.
So this was Prin ce Charles! Bonnie enough, to be sure; at least
to look at. He se emed very young – much younger than Jamie,
though I knew Jamie was on ly a year or two older . His
Highness did have considerable charm of manner , though, and
quite a bit of self-important dignity , despite his disordered
dress. W as that really enough t o take him to Scotland, at the
head of an army of restoration?  As I drifted of f, I wondered
exactly what the heir to the thron e of Scotland had been doing,
wandering over the Paris roofto ps in the middle of the night,
with a monkey bite on one hand.
The question was still on my mind when Jamie woke me
sometime later by sliding into b ed and planting his lar ge, ice-
cold feet directly behind my knees.
“Don’ t scream like that,” he said, “you’ll wake the
servants.”“What i n hell was Charles Stuart doing running about the
rooftops with monkeys?” I dem anded, taking evasive action.
“T ake those bloody ice cubes of f me.”
“V isiting his mistress,” said Jamie succinctly . “All right,
then; stop kicking me.” He rem oved the feet and embraced
me, shivering, as I turned to him.
“He has a mistress? Who?” Sti mulated by whif fs of cold
and scandal, I was quickly waking up.
It’ s Louise de La T our ,” Jamie explained reluctantly , in
response to my prodding. His n ose looked longer and sharper
than usual, with the thick bro ws drawn together above it.
Having a mistress was bad eno ugh, in his Scottish Catholic
view , but it was well known that royalty had certain privileges
in this regard. T he Princesse Louise de La T our was married,
however . And royalty or not, taking a married woman as one’ s
mistress was positively immoral, his cousin Jared’ s example
notwithstanding.
“Ha,” I said with satisfaction. “I knew it!”
“He say s he’ s in love with her ,” he reported tersely ,
yanking the quilts up over his shoulders. “He insists she loves
him too;  says she’ s been faithful only to him for the last three
months. T cha!”
“W ell, it’ s been known to happe n,” I said, amused. “So he
was visi ting her?  How did he get out on the roof, though? Did
he tell you that?”
“Oh, aye. He told me.”
Charles, fortified against the night with several glasses of
Jared’ s best aged port, had been quite forthcoming. The
strength of true love had been tried severely this evening,
according to Charles, by his ina morata’ s devotion to her pet, a
rather ill-tempered monkey that reciprocated His Highness’ s
dislike and had more concrete means of demonstrating its
opinions. Snapping his fingers under the monkey’ s nose in
derision, His Highness had suf fered first a sharp bite in the
hand, and then the sharper b ite of his mistress’ s tongue,
exercised in bitter reproach. The  couple had quarreled hotly , tothe point that Lo uise, Princesse de Rohan, had ordered Charles
from her presence. He had expr essed himself only too willing
to go – never , he emphasized dramatically , to return.
The Prince’ s departure, however , had been considerably
hampered by the discovery that the Princesse’ s husband had
returned early from his evening of gaming, and was
comfortably ensconced in the anteroom with a bottle of
brandy .
“So,” said Jamie, smiling despite himself at the thought,
“he wouldna stay with the lassie, but he couldna go out of the
door – so he thre w up the sash and jumped out on the roof. He
got down almost to the street , he said, along the drainage
pipes; b ut then the City guard came along, and he had to
scramble back up to stay out of their sight. He had a rare time
of it, he said, do dging about the chimneys and slipping on the
wet slat es, until it occurred to him that our house was only
three houses down the row , and  the rooftops close enough to
hop them like lily pads.”
“Mm,” I said, feeling warmth reestablish itself around my
toes. “Did you send him home in the coach?”
“No, he took one of the horses from the stable.”
“If he’ s been dri nking Jared’ s port, I hope they both make
it to Montmartre,” I remarked. “It’ s a good long way .”
“W ell, it will be a cold, wet journey , no doubt,” said Jamie,
with the smugness of a man virtuously tucked up in a warm
bed with  his lawfully wedded wife. He blew out the candle
and pulled me close against his chest, spoon-fashion.
“Serve him right,” he murmur ed. “A man ought to be
married.”
 
The servants were up before dawn, polishing and cleaning
in preparation for entertaining Monsieur Duverney at a small,
private supper in the evening.
“I don’ t know w hy they bother ,” I told Jamie, lying in bed
with my  eyes closed, listening to the bustle downstairs. “Allthey need do is dust of f the ch ess set and put out a bottle of
brandy; he won’ t notice anything else.”
He laugh ed and bent to kiss me goodbye. “That’ s all right;
I’ll need a good supper if I’m to go on beating him.” He patted
my shoulder in farewell. “I’m going to the warehouse,
Sassenach; I’ll be home in time to dress, though.”
In se arch of som ething to do tha t would take me out of the
servants’ way , I finally decided to have a footman escort me
down to the Roh ans’. Perhaps Louise could use a bit of solace,
I thoug ht, afte r her quarrel of the night before. V ulgar
curiosity , I told myself primly , had nothing whatsoever to do
with it.
 
When I returned in the late afternoon, I found Jamie
slouched in a c hair near the bedroom window with his feet
propped on the table, collar un done and hair rumpled as he
pored ov er a sheaf of scribbled papers. He looked up at the
sound of  the door closing, and t he absorbed expression melted
into a broad grin.
“Sassenach! There you are!” He swung his long legs down
and came across to embrace me. He buried his face in my hair ,
nuzzling, then drew back and sn eezed. He sneezed again, and
let go of me to grope in his sleeve for the handkerchief he
carried there, military style.
“What do ye smell like, Sa ssenach?” he demanded,
pressing the linen square to his nose just in time to muf fle the
results of another explosive sneeze.
I reache d into the bosom of my dress and plucked the
small sachet from between my breasts.
“Jasmine, roses , hyacinth, and lily of the valley…
ragweed, too, apparently ,” I add ed as he snorted and wheezed
into the capacious depths of th e handkerchief. “Are you all
right?” I looked around for some means of disposal, and
settled f or dropping the sachet into a stationery box on my
desk at the far side of the room.
“A ye, I’ll do. It’ s the hya… hya… hyaCHOO!”“Goodness!” I hastily flung the window open, and
motioned to him. He obligingly stuck his head and shoulders
out into the wet drizzle of the morning, breathing in gusts of
fresh, hyacinth-free air .
“Och, th at’ s better ,” he said with  relief, pulling in his head
a fe w minutes l ater . His eyes widened. “What are ye doing
now , Sassenach?”
“W ashing,” I explained, struggling with the back laces of
my gown. “Or g etting ready to, at least. I’m covered with oil
of hy acinth,” I e xplained, as he blinked. “If I don’ t wash it of f,
you’re liable to explode.”
He dabbed meditatively at his nose and nodded.
“Y ou’ve a point there, Sassenach. Shall I have the footman
fetch up some hot water?”
“No, do n’ t bother . A quick rin se should take most of it
of f,” I assured him, unbuttoning and unlacing as quickly as
possible. I raised my arms, reac hing behind my head to gather
my hair into a  bun. Suddenly Jamie leaned forward and
grasped my wrist, pulling my arm into the air .
“What are you doing?” I said, startled.
“What have you  done, Sassenach?” he demanded. He was
staring under my arm.
“Shaved,” I said proudly . “Or rather , waxed. Louise had
her servante aux petits soins  – you know , her personal
groomer? – there this morning, and she did me, too.”
“W axed?” Jamie looked rather wildly at the candlestick by
the ewer , then back at me. “Y ou put wax in your oxters?”
“Not tha t kind of wax,” I assure d him. “Scented beeswax.
The gro oming lady heated it, t hen spread the warm wax on.
Once it’ s cooled , you just jerk it of f,” I winced momentarily in
recollection, “and Bob’ s your uncle.”
“My uncle Bob wouldna countenance any such goings-
on,” said Jamie severely . “What  in hell would ye do that for?”
He p eered closely at the site, stil l holding my wrist up. “Didn’ tit hur… hurt… choof!” He dropped my hand and backed up
rapidly .
“Didn’ t it hurt?” he asked, handkerchief to nose once
more.
“W ell, a  bit,” I admitted. “W orth it, though, don’ t you
think?” I asked, raising both arm s like a ballerina and turning
slightly to and fro. “First tim e I’ve felt entirely clean in
months.”
“W orth it?” he said, sounding a  little dazed. “What’ s it to
do w i’ c lean, tha t you’ve pulled all of the hairs out from under
your arms?”
A li ttle belatedly , I realized that none of the Scottish
women I had encountered employed any form of depilation.
Furthermore, Ja mie had almost certainly never been in
suf ficiently close contact with an upper -class Parisienne to
know th at many of them did . “ W ell,”  I said, suddenly realizi ng
the d if ficulty an anthropologist faces in trying to interpret the
more singular customs of a pri mitive tribe. “It smells much
less,” I of fered.
“And what’ s wrong wi’ the way ye smell?” he said
heatedly . “At least ye smelt like  a woman, not a damn flower
garden. What d’ye think I am, a man or a bumblebee? W ould
ye wash  yoursel f, Sassenach, so I can get within less than ten
feet of ye?”
I picked up a cloth and began sponging my torso. Madame
Laserre, Louise’ s groomer , had applied scented oil all over my
body; I rather hoped it wou ld come of f easily . It was
disconcerting to have him hovering just outside snif fing range,
glaring at me like a wolf circling its prey .
I t urned  my back to dip the cloth into the bowl, and said
of fhandedly over my shoulder , “Er , I did my legs, too.”
I sto le a quick glance over my shoulder . The original shock
was fading into a look of total bewilderment.
“Y our legs dinna smell like anything,” he said. “Unless
you’ve been walkin’ knee-deep in the cow-byre.”I turned around and pulled my skirt up to my knees,
pointing one toe forward to disp lay the delicate curves of calf
and shin.
“But they look s o much nicer ,” I  pointed out. “All nice and
smooth; not like Harry the hairy ape.”
He glanced down at his own fuzzy knees, of fended.
“An ape, am I?”
“Not you, me!” I said, getting exasperated.
“My legs are any amount hairier than yours ever were!”
“W ell, they’re supposed  to be; you’re a man!”
He drew in breath as though about to reply , then let it out
again, shaking his head and mut tering something to himself in
Gaelic. He flung himself back into the chair and sat back,
watching me through narrowed eyes, every now and then
muttering to himself again. I  decided not to ask for a
translation.
After most of my bath had been accomplished in what
might best be described as a char ged atmosphere, I decided to
attempt conciliation.
“It might have been worse, you know ,” I said, sponging the
inside of one thigh. “Louise had all  her body hair removed.”
That startled him back into English, at least temporarily .
“What, she’ s taken the hairs of f her honeypot?” he said,
horrified into uncharacteristic vulgarity .
“Mm-hm,” I replied, pleased that this vision had at least
distracted him from my own distressingly hairless condition.
“Every hair . Madame Laserre plucked out the stray ones.”
“Mary , Michael, and Bride!” He closed his eyes tightly ,
either in avoidance, or the bette r to contemplate the prospect I
had described.
Evidently the latter , for he opened his eyes again and
glared at me, d emanding, “She’ s goin’ about now bare as a
wee lassie?”“She says,” I replied delicately , “that men find it erotic.”
His eyebrows nearly met his hairline, a neat trick for
someone with such a classically high brow .
“I do wish you  would stop that muttering,” I remarked,
hanging the cloth over a chairback to dry . “I can’ t understand a
word you say .”
“On the whole, Sassenach,” he replied, “that’ s as well.”1 2  L ’ H ô P I T A L  D E S  A N G E S
“A ll ri ght,” Jamie said resignedly over breakfast. He
pointed a spoon at me in warnin g. “Go ahead, then. But you’ll
take Mu rtagh as escort, besides the footman; it’ s a poor
neighborhood near the cathedral.”
“Escort?” I sat up straight, p ushing back the bowl of
parritch which I had been eyeing with something less than
enthusiasm. “Jamie! Do you mean you don’ t mind if I visit.
L ’Hôpital des Anges?”
“I do n’ t know if I mean that, ex actly ,” he said, spooning in
his own parritch in a businesslike way . “But I expect I’ll mind
a lot more if ye don’ t. And if ye work at the Hôpital, at least it
will keep ye from spending all your time with Louise de
Rohan. I suppose there are wor se things than associating wi’
beggars and criminals,” he said darkly . “At least I don’ t expect
you’ll come home from a hosp ital wi’ your privates plucked
bare.”
“I’ll try not,” I assured him.
 
I h ad seen a num ber of good hospital matrons in my time,
and a few of the really excellent ones, who had exalted a job
into a vocation. W ith Mother Hildegarde, the process had been
reversed, with impressive results.
Hildegarde de Gascogne was the most suitable person I
could imagine to be in char ge of a place like L ’Hôpital des
Anges. Nearly six feet tall, her gaunt, rawboned frame
swathed in yards of black wool , she loomed over her nursing
sisters like a broomstick scarecrow guarding a field of
pumpkins. Porte rs, patients, sisters, orderlies, novices, visitors,
apothecaries, all were swept up by the force of her presence, to
be tidied away into neat heaps, wherever Mother Hildegarde
might decree.
W ith that height, plus a face of an ugliness so transcendant
as to be grotesq uely beautiful, it was obvious why she hadembraced a religious life – Ch rist was the only man from
whom she might expect embrace in return.
Her voice was d eep and resonant; with its nasal Gascony
accent, it bonged through the co rridors of the hospital like the
echo of the church bells next do or . I could hear her sometime
before I  saw her , the powerful voice increasing in volume as
she came down the hall toward  the of fice where six ladies of
the Cou rt and I huddled behind Herr Gerstmann, like island
dwellers awaiting the arrival of a hurricane behind a flimsy
barricade.
She fille d the narrow doorway with a swoosh of batwings,
and des cended upon Herr Gerstmann with a cry of rapture,
kissing him soundly on both cheeks.
“ Mon cher ami!  How unexpected a pleasure – and so much
the mor e sweet for its unexpectedness. What brings you to
me?”
Straightening, she turned a wide smile on the rest of us.
The smile remained wide as Herr Gerstmann explained our
mission, though a less experienced fortune-teller than I could
have seen the tightening cheek muscles that turned it from a
social grace to a rictus of necessity .
“W e are most appreciative of your thoughts and your
generosity , mesdames.” The deep, bell-like voice went on with
a gr acious speech of gratitude. Meanwhile, I could see the
small, intelligent eyes, set deep beneath bony brow ridges,
darting back and forth, decidin g how best to dispose of this
nuisance in short order , while s till extracting such money as
these pious ladies might be ind uced to part with for the good
of their souls.
Having come to a decision, she clapped her hands sharply .
A short nun, on the general orde r of Cock-Robin, popped up in
the doorway like a jack-in-the-box.
“Sister Angelique, be so kind as to take these ladies to the
dispensary ,” she  ordered. “Give them some suitable garments
and then  show them the ward s. They may assist with the
distribution of food to the patients – if they are so inclined.” A
slight twitch of the wide, thin mouth made it evident thatMother Hildegarde did not expect the ladies’ pious inclination
to survive the tour of the wards.
Mother Hildegarde was a shrewd judge of human nature.
Three of the la dies made it through the first ward, with its
cases of scrofula, scabies, eczema, defluxions, and stinking
pyemia, before deciding that the ir charitable inclinations could
be e ntirely satisfied by a dona tion to L ’Hôpital, and fleeing
back to the dispensary to shed the rough hopsacking gowns
with which we had been furnished.
In the center of the next ward, a tall, gangly man in a dark
frock coat was carrying out wh at appeared to be the skillful
amputation of a leg; particularly skillful in that the patient was
not seda ted in any visible way , a nd was being restrained at the
moment by the ef forts of two husky orderlies and a solidly
built nun who w as sitting upon the patient’ s chest, her flowing
draperies fortunately obscuring the man’ s face.
One of the ladie s behind me made a small gagging sound;
when I looked round, all I saw was the rather wide rear aspect
of two of the w ould-be Samaritans, jammed hip to hip in the
narrow doorway leading toward  the dispensary and freedom.
W ith a last desperate tug and the rending of silk, they burst
through and fled precipitately down the dark hallway , nearly
knocking over an orderly comin g on the trot with a tray piled
high with linens and sur gical instruments.
I gl anced to th e side, and was amused to find Mary
Hawkins still there. Somewhat whiter than the sur gical linens
– wh ich were qu ite a disgraceful shade of gray , truth be told –
and a bit green about the gills, but still there.
“V ite! Dépêchez-vous!”  th e sur geon utt ered a peremptory
shout, aimed presumably at the shaken orderly , who hastily
reassembled his  tray and came on the gallop to the spot where
the tall, dark man was poised, bone saw in hand, ready to sever
an expo sed thigh bone. The orderly bent to tie a second
tourniquet above  the site of operation, the saw descended with
an i ndescribable grating sound , and I took pity on Mary
Hawkins, turnin g her in the other direction. Her arm trembled
under my hand, and the peony lips were blanched and pinched
as a frostbitten flower .“W ould you like to leave?” I asked politely . “I’m sure
Mother Hildegarde could summon a carriage for you.” I
glanced over one shoulder to  the vacant darkness of the
hallway . “I’m afraid the Comtesse and Madame Lambert have
left already .”
Mary gulped audibly , but tighte ned an already firm jaw in
determination.
“N-no,” she said. “If you stay , I’ll stay .”
I definitely intended staying; curiosity and the ur ge to
worm my way into the operations of L ’Hôpital des Anges were
much too strong to weigh aga inst any pity I might feel for
Mary’ s sensibilities.
Sister Angelique  had gone som e distance before noticing
that we had stop ped. Returning, she stood patiently waiting, a
small smile on her plump face, as though expecting that we,
too, would turn and run. I bent over a pallet at the edge of the
floor . A very thi n woman lay listlessly under a single blanket,
her eyes drifting dully over us without interest. It wasn’ t the
woman who had attracted my a ttention, so much as the oddly
shaped glass vessel standing on the floor alongside her pallet.
The vessel was brimming wit h a yellow fluid – urine,
undoubtedly . I was mildly surprised; without chemical tests, or
even litmus paper , what conceiv able use could a urine sample
be? Thinking over the various  things one tested urine for ,
though, I had an idea.
I picked up the vessel carefully , ignoring Sister
Angelique’ s exclamation of alarmed protest. I snif fed
carefully . Sure enough; half-obscured by sour ammoniac
fumes, the fluid smelled sickl y sweet – rather like soured
honey . I  hesitated, but there was only one way to make sure.
W ith a moue of distaste, I ginge rly dipped the tip of one finger
into the liquid and touched it delicately to my tongue.
Mary , watching bug-eyed at my side, choked slightly , but
Sister Angelique  was watching with sudden interest. I placed a
hand on the woman’ s forehead; it was cool – no fever to
account for the wasting.“Are yo u thirsty , Madame?” I as ked the patient. I knew the
answer before she spoke, seein g the empty carafe near her
head.
“Always, Madame,” she replied . “And always hungry , as
well. Y e t no flesh gathers on my  bones, no matter how much I
eat.” Sh e raised a stick-thin arm , displaying a bony wrist, then
let it fall as though the ef fort had exhausted her .
I patted the skinny hand gently , and murmured something
in farewell, my exhilaration at having made a correct diagnosis
substantially quenched by the knowledge that there was no
possible cure for diabetes mellitus in this day; the woman
before me was doomed.
In subdued spirits, I rose to foll ow Sister Angelique, who
slowed her bustling steps to walk next to me.
“Could you tell from what she s uf fers, Madame?” the nun
asked curiously . “Only from the urine?”
“Not only from that,” I answer ed. “But yes, I know . She
has-” Drat. What would they ha ve called it now? “She has…
um, sugar sickness. She gets no nourishment from the food she
eats, and has a tremendous thirst. Consequently , she produces
lar ge quantities of urine.”
Sister Angelique was nodding, a look of intense curiosity
stamped on her pudgy features.
“And can you tell whether she will recover , Madame?”
“No, she won’ t,” I said bluntly . “She’ s far gone already;
she may not last out the month.”
“Ah.” The fair b rows lifted, and the look of curiosity was
replaced by one of respect. “That’ s what Monsieur Parnelle
said.”
“And who’ s he, when he’ s at home?” I asked flippantly .
The plump nun frowned in bewilderment. “W ell, at his
own establishme nt, I believe he is a maker of trusses, and a
jeweler . When he comes here,  though, he acts usually as a
urinoscopist.”I fe lt my own brows rising. “A urinoscopist?” I said
unbelievingly . “There actually are such things?”
“ Oui , Ma dame. And he said just wh at you said, about the
poor thin lady . I have never seen a woman who knew about the
science of urinoscopy ,” Sister Angelique said, staring at me in
frank fascination.
“W ell, there are more things in  heaven and on earth than
are dreamt of i n your philosophy , Sister ,” I said graciously .
She nodded seriously , making me feel rather ashamed of my
facetiousness.
“That is true, Madame. W ill you have a look at the
gentleman in the end bed? He h as a complaint of the liver , we
believe.”
W e continued, from one bed to another , making the
complete circuit of the enormous hall. W e saw examples of
diseases I had seen only in t extbooks, and every kind of
traumatic injury , from head wounds inflicted in drunken
brawls t o a carter whose chest had been crushed by a rolling
wine barrel.
I pa used by som e beds, asking questions of those patients
who seemed able to answer . I could hear Mary breathing
through her mouth behind my sh oulder , but didn’ t check to see
whether she was in fact holding her nose.
At the conclusion of the tour , S ister Angelique turned to
me with an ironic smile.
“W ell, Madame ? Do you still desire to serve the Lord by
helping his unfortunates?”
I was already rolling up the sleeves of my gown.
“Bring me a basin of hot water , Sister ,” I said, “and some
soap.”
 
“How was it, Sassenach?” Jamie asked.
“Horrible!” I answered, beaming broadly .He raised one eyebrow , smili ng down at me as I lay
sprawled on the chaise.
“Oh, enjoyed yourself, did ye?”
“Oh, Jam ie, it was so nice to be useful again! I mopped
floors and I fe d people gruel, and when Sister Angelique
wasn’ t looking, I managed to change a couple of filthy
dressings and lance an abscess.”
“Oh, goo d,” he said. “Did ye rem ember to eat, in the midst
of all this frivolity?”
“Er , no,  as a ma tter of fact, I didn’ t,” I said guiltily . “On
the othe r hand, I for got to be sick, too.” As though reminded
of d elinquency , the walls of my  stomach took a sudden lurch
inward. I pressed a fist unde r my breastbone. “Perhaps I
should have a bite.”
“Perhaps ye should,” he agreed, a little grimly , reaching
for the bell.
He watched as I obediently downed meat pie and cheese,
describing L ’Hôpital des Anges and its inmates in enthusiastic
detail between bites as I ate.
“It’ s ver y crowd ed in some of the wards – two or three to a
bed, which is awful, but – don’ t you want some of this?” I
broke of f to ask. “It’ s very good.”
He eyed the piece of pastry I was holding out to him.
“If ye think ye c an keep from te lling me about gangrenous
toenails long enough for a bite to make it from my gullet to my
stomach, then yes.”
Belatedly , I noticed the slight pa llor on his cheeks, and the
faint pinching of his nostrils. I poured a cup of wine and
handed it to him before picking up my own plate again.
“And how was your  day , my dear?” I asked demurely .
 
L ’Hôpital des Anges became a  refuge for me. The blunt
and unsophisticated directness of nuns and patients was a
wonderful refreshment from the continual chattering intriguesof th e Court la dies and gentlemen. I was also positive that
without the relief of allowing m y facial muscles to relax into
their normal expressions at the Hôpital, my face would quickly
have fr ozen in to an expression of permanent simpering
vapidity .
Seeing that I appeared to know what I was doing, and
required nothing  of them beyon d a few bandages and linens,
the nuns  quickl y accepted my presence. And after an initial
shock a t my accent and title , so did the patients. Social
prejudice is a strong force, but no match for simple
competence when skill is in ur gent demand and short supply .
Mother Hildegarde, busy as she was, took somewhat more
time to make he r own assessment of me. She never spoke to
me at first, beyond a simple “ Bonjour , Madam e,” in passing,
but I often felt t he weight of th ose small, shrewd eyes boring
into my back as I stooped over t he bed of an elderly man with
shingles, or smeared aloe ointm ent on the blisters of a child
burned i n one of the frequent house fires that beset the poorer
quarters of the city .
She never gave the appearance o f hurrying, but covered an
immense amount of ground during the day , pacing the flat gray
stones o f the Hôpital wards with a stride that covered a yard at
a time, her sma ll white dog Bouton hurrying at her heels to
keep up.
A far cry from th e fluf fy lapdogs so popular with the ladies
of the Court, he looked vaguely like a cross between a poodle
and a dachshund, with a roug h, kinky coat whose fringes
fluttered along the edges of a wide belly and stumpy , bowed
legs. His feet, splay-toed and black-nailed, clicked frantically
over the stones of the floor as he trotted after Mother
Hildegarde, poi nted muzzle almost touching the sweeping
black folds of her habit.
“Is that a dog ?” I had asked one of the orderlies in
amazement, when I first beheld Bouton, passing through the
Hôpital at the heels of his mistress.
He paused in h is floor -sweeping to look after the curly ,
plumed tail, disappearing into the next ward.“W ell,” he said doubtfully , “Mother Hildegarde says he’ s a
dog. I wouldn’ t like to be the one to say he isn’ t.”
As I became m ore friendly with the nuns, orderlies, and
visiting physicians of the Hôpital, I heard various other
opinions of Bouton, ranging from the tolerant to the
superstitious. N o one knew qu ite where Mother Hildegarde
had got him, nor why . He had been a member of the Hôpital
staf f for several years, with a r ank – in Mother Hildegarde’ s
opinion, which was the only o ne that counted – well above
that of the nursing sisters, and equal to that of most of the
visiting physicians and apothecaries.
Some of the latter regarded him with suspicious aversion,
others with jocular af fability . One chirur geon referred to him
routinely – out of Mother ’ s hea ring – as “that revolting rat,”
another as “the smelly rabbit,” and one small, tubby truss-
maker greeted him quite openly as “Monsieur le Dishcloth.”
The nuns considered him some thing between a mascot and a
totem, while the junior priest from the cathedral next door ,
who had  been bitten in the leg when he came to administer the
sacraments to the patients, confided to me his own opinion that
Bouton was one of the lesser demons, disguised as a dog for
his own fell purposes.
In s pite of the unflattering tone of the priest’ s remarks, I
thought that he had perhaps com e the closest to the truth. For
after sev eral weeks of observing the pair , I had come to the
conclusion that Bouton was in fact Mother Hildegarde’ s
familiar .
She spok e to him often, not in the tone one generally uses
for dogs, but a s one discussing important matters with an
equal. As she p aused beside this bed or that, often Bouton
would spring onto the mattress , nuzzling and snif fing at the
startled patient. He would sit do wn, often on the patient’ s legs,
bark once, and glance up inqui ringly at Mother , wagging his
silky plu med tail as though askin g her opinion of his diagnosis
– which she always gave.
Though I was rather curious abo ut this behavior , I had had
no o pportunity of closely observ ing the odd pair at work until
one dark, rainy morning in Mar ch. I was standing by the bedof a middle-aged carter , making casual conversation with him
while I tried to f igure out what in bloody hell was wrong with
the man.
It was a case tha t had come in the week before. He had had
his l ower leg ca ught in the whe el of a cart when he carelessly
dismounted befo re the vehicle had stopped moving. It was a
compound fracture, but a fairly uncomplicated one. I had reset
the bone , and the wound seem ed to be healing nicely . The
tissue was a hea lthy pink, with good granulation, no bad smell,
no te lltale red st reaks, no extreme tenderness, nothing at all to
explain why the man still smold ered with fever and produced
the dark, odorous urine of a lingering infection.
“ Bonjour , Madam e.” The deep, rich voice spoke above
me, and  I glanced up at the towering form of Mother
Hildegarde. There was a whish  p ast my elbow , and Bouton
landed o n the mattress with a thump that made the patient
groan slightly .
“What do you think?” said Mother Hildegarde. I wasn’ t at
all sure whether  she was addre ssing me or Bouton, but took
the benefit of the doubt and explained my observations.
“So, the re must be a secondary source of infection,” I
concluded, “but  I can’ t find it. I’m wondering now whether
perhaps he has a n internal infection that’ s not related to the leg
wound. A mild appendicitis, or a bladder infection, perhaps,
though I don’ t find any abdominal tenderness, either .”
Mother Hildegarde nodded. “A possibility , certainly .
Bouton!” The dog cocked his h ead toward his mistress, who
jerked an oblong chin in the d irection of the patient. “ A la
bouche , Bouton ,” she ordered. W ith a mincing step, the dog
pushed the round black nose that presumably gave him his
name in to the carter ’ s face. The man’ s eyes, heavy-lidded with
fever , s prang open at this in trusion, but a glance at the
imposing presence of Mother Hildegarde stopped whatever
complaint he might have been forming.
“Open your mouth,” Mother Hildegarde instructed, and
such was her force of character that he did so, even though hislips twitched at the nearness of Bouton’ s. Dog-kissing plainly
wasn’ t on his agenda of desirable activities.
“No,” s aid Mother Hildegard e thoughtfully , watching
Bouton. “That isn’ t it. Have a  look elsewhere, Bouton, but
carefully . The man has a broken leg, remember .”
As though he had in fact understood every word, the dog
began to snif f cu riously at the patient, nosing into his armpits,
putting stubby feet on his chest in order to investigate, nudging
gently a long the crease of the  groin. When it came to the
injured leg, he stepped carefully over the limb before putting
his nose to the surface of the bandages round it.
He returned to the groin area – well, what else, I thought
impatiently , he’ s a dog, after all – nudged at the top of the
thigh, then sat down and barked once, wagging triumphantly .
“There it is,” sa id Mother Hildegarde, pointing to a small
brown scab just below the inguinal crease.
“But that’ s almost healed,” I protested. “It isn’ t infected.”
“No?” The tall nun placed a ha nd on the man’ s thigh and
pressed hard. Her muscular fingers dented the pale, clammy
flesh, and the carter screamed like a banshee.
“Ah,” she said in satisfaction, observing the deep prints
left by her touch. “A pocket of putrefaction.”
It wa s; t he scab had loosened at one edge, and a thick ooze
of yellow pus showed under it. A little probing, with Mother
Hildegarde hold ing the man by leg and shoulder , revealed the
problem. A long sliver of wood , flying free of the splintered
cartwheel, had driven upward, deep into the thigh. Disregarded
because of the apparently insignificant entrance wound, it had
gone unnoticed by the patient himself, to whom the whole leg
was one  giant pain. While the tiny entrance wound had healed
cleanly , the deeper wound had fe stered and formed a pocket of
pus arou nd the intrusion, buried in the muscle tissue where no
surface symptoms were visible – to human senses, at least.
A little scalpel work to enlar g e the entrance wound, a
quick grip with a pair of lo ng-nosed forceps, a smooth,forceful pull – and I held up a three-inch sliver of wood,
coated with blood and slime.
“Not bad, Bouton,” I said, with a nod of acknowledgment.
A long pink tongue lolled ha ppily , and the black nostrils
snif fed in my direction.
“Y es, sh e’ s a good one,” said M other Hildegarde, and this
time the re was no doubt which of us she was speaking to,
Bouton being male. Bouton leaned forward and snif fed
politely at my hand, then licked my knuckles once in
reciprocal acknowledgment of a fellow professional. I
repressed the ur ge to wipe my hand on my gown.
“Amazing,” I said, meaning it.
“Y es,” said Mother Hildegard e, casually , but with an
unmistakable note of pride. “He’ s very good at locating tumors
beneath the skin, as well. And while I cannot always tell what
he finds in the odors of breath and urine, he has a certain tone
of bark that indicates unmistakably the presence of a
derangement of the stomach.”
Under t he circumstances, I saw no reason to doubt it. I
bowed to Bouton, and picked up a vial of powdered St.-
John’ s-wort to dress the infection.
“Pleased to have your assistance, Bouton. Y ou can work
with me anytime.”
“V ery sensible of you,” said Mother Hildegarde, with a
flash of strong teeth. “Many of the physicians and chirur giens
who work here are less inclin ed to take advantage of his
skills.”
“Er , well…” I didn’ t want to disparage anyone’ s
reputation, but my glance across the hall at Monsieur V oleru
must have been transparent.
Mother Hildegarde laughed. “W ell, we take what God
sends us, though occasionally I wonder whether He sends
them to us only in order to keep them out of greater trouble
elsewhere. Still, the bulk of our physicians are better than
nothing – even if only mar gin ally so. Y ou” – and the teethflashed once more, reminding m e of a genial draft horse – “are
a great deal better than nothing, Madame.”
“Thanks.”
“I have wondered, though,” Mother Hildegarde went on,
watching as I applied the medicated dressing, “why you see
only the patients with wounds and broken bones? Y ou avoid
those with spots and coughs and  fevers, yet it is more common
for les maîtr esses  t o deal with suc h things. I don’ t think I have
ever seen a female chirur gien  before.” Les maîtr esses  were the
unlicensed healers, mostly from the provinces, who dealt in
herbals, poultices, and charms. Les maîtr esses sage-femme
were the midwives, the top o f the heap so far as popular
healers were concerned. Many  were accorded more respect
than the licensed practitioners, and were much preferred by the
lower -class patients, as they were likely to be both more
capable and much less expensive.
I w asn’ t surprised that she had o bserved my proclivities; I
had gat hered long since that very little about her Hôpital
escaped Mother Hildegarde’ s notice.
“It i sn’ t lack of interest,” I assured her . “It’ s only that I’m
with chi ld, so I can’ t expose myself to anything contagious,
for the child’ s sake. Broken bones aren’ t catching.”
“Sometimes I wonder ,” said M other Hildegarde, with a
glance a t an incoming stretcher . “W e’re having a plague of
them this week. No, don’ t go.” S he motioned me back. “Sister
Cecile will see to it. She’ll call you if there’ s need.”
The nun’ s small gray eyes regarded me with curiosity ,
mingled with appraisal.
“So, you  are not only a milady , you are with child, but
your hus band does not object to  your coming here? He must
be a most unusual man.”
“W ell, h e’ s Sco ttish,” I said, b y way of explanation, not
wishing to go into the subject of my husband’ s objections.
“Oh, Scottish.” Mother Hildegarde nodded
understandingly . “Just so.”The bed  tremble d against my t high as Bouton leaped of f
and trotted toward the door .
“He smells a stranger ,” Moth er Hildegarde remarked.
“Bouton assists the doorkeeper  as well as the physicians –
with no more gratitude for his ef forts, I fear .”
The sounds of p eremptory barks and a high voice raised in
terror came through the double doors of the entryway .
“Oh, it’ s Father Balmain again ! Curse the man, can’ t he
learn to  stand still and let Bouton smell him?” Mother
Hildegarde turned in haste to the succor of her companion,
turning back at the last moment to smile engagingly at me.
“Perhaps I will send him to assist you with your tasks,
Madame, while  I soothe Father Balmain. While no doubt a
most ho ly man, he lacks true appreciation for the work of an
artist.”
She strode toward the doors with her long, unhurried
stride, a nd with  a last word for the carter , I turned to Sister
Cecile and the latest stretcher case.
 
Jamie was lying on the carpet i n the sitting room when I
came back to th e house, with a small boy sitting cross-legged
on the floor beside him. Jamie was holding a bilboquet in one
hand, and had the other poised over one eye.
“Of cou rse I can,” he was saying. “Anyday and twice on
Sundays. W atch.”
Placing the hand over his eye, he fixed the other piercingly
on t he bilboquet and gave the ivory cup a toss. The tethered
ball leap ed from its socket into an arc, and dropped as though
guided by radar , landing back in its cup with a snug little plop.
“See?” h e said, removing the hand from his eye. He sat up
and han ded the cup to the boy . “Here, you try it.” He grinned
at me, and slid a hand under the hem of my skirt, clasping my
green silk ankle in greeting.
“Having fun?” I inquired.“Not yet,” he replied, giving the ankle a squeeze. “I was
waiting for you, Sassenach.” The long, warm fingers curled
around m y ankle slid higher , playfully stroking the curve of
my calf , as a pair of limpid b lue eyes gazed up at me, all
innocence. His face had a streak  of dried mud down one side,
and there were dirty blotches on his shirt and kilt.
“Is t hat so?” I said, trying to pull my leg free of his grasp
inconspicuously . “I should have thought your little playmate
would have been all the company you needed.”
The boy , understanding none of the English in which these
exchanges were conducted, ignored them, intent on trying to
work the bilboquet with one eye  closed. The first two attempts
having failed, he opened the sec ond eye and glared at the toy ,
as though daring it not to work.  The second eye closed again,
but not all the way; a small slit remained, gleaming alertly
below the thick fringe of dark lashes.
Jamie clicked his tongue disapprovingly , and the eye
hastily snapped tight shut.
“Nah, th en, Fer g us, we’ll have nay cheatin’, if ye please,”
he said. “Fair ’ s fair .” The boy o bviously caught the meaning,
if not the words; he grinned sheepishly , displaying a pair of
lar ge, white, gleamingly perfect front teeth, square as a
squirrel’ s.
Jamie’ s hand exerted an invisible pull, obliging me to
move closer to him to avoid be ing toppled of f my moroccan
heels.
“Ah,” he said. “W ell, Fer gus here is a man of many talents,
and a boon com panion for the idle hours when a man’ s wife
has deserted him and left him to  seek his own pursuits amidst
the wickedness of the city” – the long fingers curled delicately
into the hollow behind my kne e, tickling suggestively – “but
he isna qualified as a partner for the pastime I had in mind.”
“Fer gus?” I said, eyeing the bo y , and trying to ignore the
goings-on below . The lad was possibly nine or ten, but small
for h is age, and fine-boned as a ferret. Clad in clean, worn
clothes s everal s izes too big for  him, he was also as French asthey com e, with  the pale, sallow  skin and big, dark eyes of a
Parisian street child.
“W ell, his name is really Claudel, but we decided that
didna sound verra manly , so he’ s to be called Fer gus instead. A
suitable warrior ’ s name, that.” Catching the sound of his name
– or names – the boy glanced up and grinned shyly at me.
“This is Madame,” Jamie explained to the boy , gesturing to
me w ith his free  hand. “Y ou ma y call her milady . I dinna think
he could manage ‘Broch T uarac h,’ ” he added to me, “or even
Fraser , for that matter .”
“ ‘ Milady’ will be fine,” I said, smiling. I wriggled my leg
harder , t rying to shake of f the leechlike grip. “Er , why , if I may
ask?”
“Why what? Oh, why Fer gus, ye mean?”
“That’ s what I mean, all right.”  I wasn’ t sure just how far
his arm would r each, but the hand was creeping slowly up the
back of my thigh. “Jamie, take your hand away this minute!”
The fingers darted to one side, and deftly pulled loose the
ribbon g arter that held up my stocking. The stocking slithered
down my leg to puddle round my ankle.
“Y ou beast!” I kicked at him, but he dodged aside,
laughing.
“Oh, beast, is it? What kind?”
“A cur! ” I snapped, trying to bend over to pull up my
stocking without falling of f my heels. The child Fer gus, after a
brief, in curious glance at us, ha d resumed his trials with the
bilboquet.
“As for the lad, ” he continued b lithely , “Fer gus is now in
my employ .”
“T o do what?” I  asked. “W e already have a boy who cleans
the knives and boots, and a stable-lad.”
Jamie nodded. “A ye, that’ s true. W e havena got a
pickpocket, though. Or rather , we hadn’ t; we have, now .”
I drew in my breath and blew it out again slowly .“I see. I suppose it would be dense of me to ask exactly
why we need to add a pickpocket to the household?”
“T o steal letters, Sassenach,” Jamie said calmly .
“Oh,” I said, light beginning to dawn.
“I ca nna get any thing sensible out of His Highness; when
he’ s with me, he wilna do anything but moan about Louise de
La T our , or gri nd his teeth and curse because they’ve been
quarreling again . In either case , all he wants to do is to get
drunk as quickly as possible. M ar is losing all patience with
him, for  he’ s haughty and sull en by turns. And I canna get
anything out of Sheridan.”
The Earl of Mar was the most respected of the exiled
Scottish Jacobites in Paris. A man whose long and illustrious
prime was only now beginning t o edge into elderliness, he had
been the primary supporter of King James at the abortive
Rising i n 1715, and had followed his king into exile after the
defeat a t Sherif fsmuir . I had met the Earl and liked him; an
elderly , courtly man with a p ersonality as straight as his
backbone. He was now doing h is best – with little reward, it
seemed – for his lord’ s son. I h ad met Thomas Sheridan, too;
the Prince’ s tutor – an elde rly man who handled His
Highness’ s correspondence, translating impatience and
illiteracy into courtly French and English.
I sat down and pulled my s tocking back up. Fer gus,
apparently hardened to the sight of female limbs, ignored me
altogether , concentrating grimly on the bilboquet.
“Letters, Sassenach,” he said. “I need the letters. Letters
from Rome, sealed with the Stu art crest. Letters from France,
letters from England, letters fr om Spain. W e can get them
either fr om the Prince’ s house – Fer gus can go with me, as a
page – or possib ly from the papa l messenger who brings them;
that would be a  bit better , as we’d have the information in
advance.”
“So, we ’ve made the bar gain,” Jamie said, nodding at his
new serv ant. “Fe r gus will do his best to get what I need, and I
will pro vide him with clothes and lodging and thirty écus a
year . If he’ s caught while doing my service, I’ll do my best tobuy him of f. If it canna be done , and he loses a hand or an ear ,
then I maintain him for the rest of his life, as he wilna be able
to pu rsue his pr ofession. And if he’ s hanged, then I guarantee
to ha ve Masses said for his soul for the space of a year . I think
that’ s fair , no?”
I felt a cold hand pass down my spine.
“Jesus Christ, Jamie” was all I could find to say .
He shook his head, and reached out a hand for the
bilboquet. “Not our Lord, Sasse nach. Pray to St. Dismas. The
patron saint of thieves and traitors.”
Jamie re ached o ver and took th e bilboquet from the boy .
He f licked his w rist sharply and the ivory ball rose in a perfect
parabola, to descend into its cup with an inevitable plop.
“I see,” I said. I eyed the new employee with interest as he
took the  toy Jamie of fered him and started in on it once more,
dark eyes gleaming with concentration. “Where did you get
him?” I asked curiously .
“I found him in a brothel.”
“Oh, of course,”  I said. “T o be sure.” I eyed the dirt and
smears on his c lothes. “Which  you were visiting for some
really excellent reason, I expect?”
“Oh, aye,” he said. He sat back, arms wrapped about his
knees, grinning as he watched me make repairs to my garter . “I
thought you’d prefer me to be found in such an establishment,
to the alternative of bein’ found in a dark alleyway , wi’ my
head bashed in.”
I saw the boy Fer gus’ s eyes focus at a spot somewhat past
the b ilboquet, where a tray of ic ed cakes stood on a table near
the wall. A sma ll, pointed pink tongue darted out across his
lower lip.
“I think your protégé is hungry ,” I said. “Why don’ t you
feed him , and then you can tel l me just what in bloody hell
happened this afternoon.”
“W ell, I was on my way to the docks,” he began,
obediently rising  to his feet, “and just past the Rue Eglantine, Ibegan to have a queer feeling up the back of my neck.”
Jamie F raser had spent two yea rs in the army of France,
fought and stolen with a gang of Scottish “broken men,” and
been hun ted as an outlaw throug h the moors and mountains of
his native land. All of which h ad left him with an extreme
sensitivity to the sensation of being followed.
He couldn’ t have said whethe r it was the sound of a
footfall, too close behind, or the sight of a shadow that
shouldn’ t be there, or somethin g less tangible – the scent of
evil on the air , perhaps – but he  had learned that the prickle of
warning among the short hairs of his neck was something to be
ignored at his peril.
Promptly obeying the dictates of his cervical vertebrae, he
turned le ft instead of right at the next corner , ducked around a
whelk-seller ’ s stall, cut between a barrow filled with steamed
puddings and another of fresh v egetable marrows, and into a
small charcuterie.
Pressed against the wall near th e doorway , he peered out
through a screen of hanging duck carcasses. T wo men entered
the stree t no more than a second later , walking close together ,
glancing quickly from side to side.
Every workingm an in Paris carried the marks of his trade
upon his  person,  and it didn’ t take much of a nose to detect the
whif f of  sea-sal t on these two. If the small gold hoop in the
shorter man’ s ear had not been a dead giveaway , the deep
reddish-brown o f their faces w ould have made it clear they
were deep-water sailors.
Accustomed to the cramped quarters of shipboard and
quay tav erns, se amen seldom walked in a straight line. These
two slid  through the crowded alley like eels through rocks,
eyes flicking past beggars, servingmaids, housewives,
merchants; sea wolves assessing potential prey .
“I let them get well past the shop ,” Jamie explained, “and I
was just  about to step out and g o back the other way , when I
saw another of them at the mouth of the alley .”This man wore the same uniform as the other two;
sidelocks heavily coated with grease, a fish knife at his side
and a marlinspike the length of a  man’ s forearm thrust through
his belt. Short an d thickset, the m an stood still at the end of the
alley , holding his ground against the buf feting waves of
commerce that ebbed and flowed through the narrow passage.
Clearly he had been left on guard, while his fellows quested
ahead.
“So I was left wondering what best to do,” Jamie said,
rubbing his nose. “I was safe enough where I was, but there
was no back wa y from the shop, and the moment I stepped
from the  doorwa y , I’d be seen.”  He glanced down reflectively ,
smoothing the crimson fabric o f his kilt across his thigh. An
enormous red barbarian was going to be conspicuous, no
matter how thick the crowd.
“So what did you do?” I asked. Fer gus, ignoring the
conversation, w as stuf fing his pockets methodically with
cakes, pausing for a hasty bite every so often in the process.
Jamie caught my glance at the boy and shrugged.
“He’ll not have been in the hab it of eating regularly ,” he
said. “Let him be.”
“All right,” I said. “But go on – what did you do?”
“Bought a sausage,” he said promptly .
A D unedin, to be exact. Made  of spiced duck, ham and
venison, boiled, stuf fed and sun-dried, a Dunedin sausage
measured eighte en inches from end to end and was as hard as
seasoned oakwood.
“I couldna step out wi’ my sword drawn,” Jamie
explained, “but I didna like the idea of stepping past the fellow
in the alleyway wi’ no one at my back, and empty hands.”
Bearing the Dunedin at port arms, and keeping a weather
eye on the passi ng crowd, Jamie had stepped boldly down the
alley , toward the watcher at its mouth.
The man had m et his gaze quite calmly , showing no sign
of any malign intent. Jamie might have thought his original
premonition mis taken, had he not seen the watcher ’ s eyes flickbriefly to something over Jamie’ s shoulder . Obeying the
instincts that had kept him a live thus far , he had dived
forward, knocki ng the watcher down and sliding on his face
across the filthy cobbles of the street.
The crowd scattered before him  with shrieks of alarm, and
he ro lled to his feet to see the flung knife that had missed him,
quivering in the boards of a ribbon stall.
“If I’d had a bit of doubt it was me they wanted, I didna
fret about it longer ,” he said dryly .
He h ad k ept hol d of the sausage , and now found use for it,
swinging it smartly across the face of one attacker .
“I broke his nos e, I think,” he said meditatively . “Anyway ,
he re eled back, and I shoved past and took of f running, down
the Rue Pelletier .”
The inhabitants of the street scattered before him like
geese, startled by the sight of a hurtling Scotsman, kilts flying
around his churning knees. He didn’ t stop to look behind; by
the shouts of indignant passersby , he could tell that the
assailants were still in pursuit.
This part of the  city was seldom patrolled by the King’ s
Guard, and the c rowd itself of fered little protection other than
a s imple  obstruction that might slow his pursuers. No one was
likely to interfere in a matter of violence on a foreigner ’ s
behalf.
“There are no al leys of f the Rue  Pelletier . I needed at least
to get to a place where I could draw my sword and have a wall
at my back,” Jamie explained. “So I pushed at the doors as I
passed, ’ til I hit one that opened.”
Dashing into a gloomy hallway , past a startled porter , and
through a hanging drape, he had shot into the center of a lar ge,
well-lighted room, and come to a screeching halt in the middle
of o ne Madame Elise’ s salon, t he scent of perfume heavy in
his nostrils.
“I se e,” I said, biting my lip. “I,  um, trust you didn’ t draw
your sword in there?”Jamie narrowed  his eyes at me, but didn’ t deign to reply
directly .
“I’ll leave it to you, Sassenach,” he said dryly , “to imagine
what it feels li ke to arrive unexpectedly in the midst of a
brothel, in possession of a verra lar ge sausage.”
My imag ination proved fully equal to this task, and I burst
out laughing.
“God, I wish I could have seen you!” I said.
“Thank God ye didn’ t!” he said fervently . A furious blush
glowed on his cheekbones.
Ignoring remark s from the fasc inated inmates, Jamie had
made his way awkwardly through what he described,
shuddering, as “tangles o’ bare limbs,” until he had spotted
Fer gus against one wall, regarding the intruder with a round-
eyed astonishment.
Seizing upon this unexpected manifestation of maleness,
Jamie h ad gripped the lad by the shoulder , and fervently
implored him to show the way t o the nearest exit, without loss
of a moment.
“I could  hear a hurly-burly break in’ out in the hallway ,” he
explained, “and I kent they were in after me. I didna want to
be having to figh t for my life wi’ a lot of naked women getting
in the way .”
“I ca n see that the prospect might be daunting,” I agreed,
rubbing my upper lip. “But obviously he got you out.”
“A ye. H e didna hesitate a mome nt, the dear lad. ‘This way ,
Monsieur!’ he says, and it was up the stair , and through a
room, an d out a window onto th e roof, and awa’ wi’ us both.”
Jamie cast a fond glance at his new employee.
“Y ou know ,” I observed, “the re are some  wives who
wouldn’ t believe one word of a story like that.”
Jamie’ s eyes opened wide in astonishment.
“They wouldna? Whyever not?”“Possibly ,” I said dryly , “because they aren’ t married to
you . I’m pleased that you escaped with your virtue intact, but
for the moment,  I’m rather mor e interested in the chaps who
chased you in there.”
“I didna have a great deal of lei sure to think about it at the
time,” Jamie replied. “And now  that I have, I still couldna say
who they were, or why they were hunting me.”
“Robbery , do you think?” The cash receipts of the wine
business were conveyed between the Fraser warehouse, the
Rue T remoulins, and Jared’ s bank by strongbox, under heavy
guard. Still, Jamie was very visi ble among the crowds near the
river docks, and was undoubtedly known to be a wealthy
foreign merchant – wealthy by contrast with most of the
denizens of that neighborhood, at any rate.
He shoo k his head, flicking cru mbs of dried mud of f his
shirtfront.
“It m ight be, I suppose. But they didna try to accost me; it
was straightout murder they meant.”
His tone was qu ite matter -of-fact, but it gave me rather a
wobbly feeling in the knees, and I sank down onto a settee. I
licked my lips, gone suddenly dry .
“Who – who do you think…?”
He s hrugged, frowning as he s cooped up a dab of icing
from the plate and licked it of f his finger .
“The on ly man I could think of who’ s threatened me is the
Comte St. Germain. But I cann a think what he’d gain from
having me killed.”
“He’ s Jared’ s business rival, you said.”
“Oh, ay e. But the Comte’ s no interest in German wines,
and I canna see him going to the  trouble of killing me, only to
ruin Jared’ s new enterprise by br inging him back to Paris. That
seems a trifle extreme,” he said dryly , “even for a man wi’ the
Comte’ s temper .”
“W ell, d o you think…” The idea made me mildly ill, and I
swallowed twice  before going on. “Do you think it might havebeen… revenge? For the Patagonia  being burned?”
Jamie shook his head, baf fled.
“I suppo se it could be, but it seems a long time to wait.
And why me, come to that?” he added. “It’ s you annoyed him,
Sassenach. Why not kill you, if that’ s what he meant?”
The sick feeling got slightly worse.
“Do you have to be so bloody logical?” I said.
He s aw the look  on my face, and smiled suddenly , putting
an arm around me for comfort.
“Nay , mo duinne . The Comte’ s a quick temper , but I canna
see him  going to the trouble and expense of killing either of
us, only  for revenge. If it migh t get him his ship back, then
yes,” he added, “but as it is, I ex pect he’d only think the price
of three hired assassins throwing good money after bad.”
He patted my shoulder and stood up.
“Nay , I expect it was only a try at robbery , after all. Dinna
trouble yourself about it. I’ll take Murtagh with me to the
docks from now on, to be safe.”
He stretc hed himself, and brushed the last of the crumbling
dirt from his kilt. “Am I decent to go in to supper?” he asked,
looking critically down his chest. “It must be nearly ready by
now .”
“What’ s ready?”
He o pened the door , and a rich, spicy scent wafted up at
once from the dining room below .
“Why , the sausage, of course,” he said, with a grin over
one shoulder . “Y e dinna think I’d let it go to waste?”1 3  D E C E P T I O N S
“B arberry leaves, three handfuls in a decoction, steeped
overnight, poured over half a h andful of black hellebore.” I
laid the list of… ingredients down on the inlaid table as though
it were slightly  slimy to the touch. “I got it from Madame
Rouleaux. She’ s  the best of the angel-makers, but even she
says it’ s dangerous. Louise, are you sure you want to do this?”
Her roun d pink face was blotche d, and the plump lower lip
had a tendency to quiver .
“What choice do I have?” She p icked up the recipe for the
abortifacient and gazed at it in repulsed fascination.
“Black hellebor e,” she said, a nd shuddered. “The very
name of it sounds evil!”
“W ell, it’ s bloody nasty stuf f,” I  said bluntly . “It will make
you feel  as though your insides are coming out. But the baby
may com e, too. It doesn’ t always work.” I remembered Master
Raymond’ s warning – It is danger ous to wait too long  – and
wondered how far gone she might be. Surely no more than six
weeks or so; she had told me the instant she suspected.
She glanced at me, startled, with red-rimmed eyes.
“Y ou have used it yourself?”
“God, no!” I st artled myself with the vehemence of my
exclamation, and took a deep breath.
“No. I’v e seen women who have, though – at L ’Hôpital
des Anges.” The abortionists – the angel-makers – practiced
lar gely i n the privacy of home s, their own or their clients’.
Their successes were not the on es that came to the hospital. I
laid a hand uno btrusively over my own abdomen, as though
for protection of its helpless occupant. Louise caught the
gesture and hurled herself into the sofa, burying her head in
her hands.
“Oh, I wish I were dead!” she moaned. “Why , why
couldn’ t I be as fortunate as you – to be bearing the child of ahusband I loved?” She clutched her own plump stomach with
both hands, staring down at it as  though expecting the child to
peek out between her fingers.
There were any number of answers to that particular
question, but I didn’ t think she  really wanted to hear any of
them. I took a d eep breath and sat down beside her , patting a
heaving damask shoulder .
“Louise,” I said. “Do you want the child?”
She lifted her head and stared at me in astonishment.
“But of course I want it!” she exclaimed. “It’ s his – it’ s
Charles’ s! It’ s…” Her face crumpled, and she bowed her head
once mo re over her hands, clas ped so tightly over her belly .
“It’ s min e,” she whispered. After a long moment, she raised
her s treaming face, and with a p athetic attempt to pull herself
together , wiped her nose on a trailing sleeve.
“But it’ s no goo d,” she said. “If I don’ t…” She glanced at
the recipe on the table and swallowed heavily . “Then Jules will
divorce me – he’ll cast me out. There would be the most
terrible scandal. I might be excommunicated! Not even Father
could protect me.”
“Y es,” I said. “But…” I hesitated, then cast caution to the
winds. “ Is there any chance Jule s might be convinced the child
is his?” I asked bluntly .
She looked blank for a moment, and I wanted to shake her .
“I don’ t  see how , unless – oh!” Light dawned, and she
looked at me, horrified.
“Sleep with Jules, you mean? But Charles would be
furious!”
“Charles,” I said through my teeth, “is not pregnant!”
“W ell, but he’ s… that is… I couldn’ t!” The look of horror
was fading, though, being slowly replaced with the growing
realization of possibility .
I d idn’ t want to push her; still,  I saw no good reason for
her to risk her life for the sake of Charles Stuart’ s pride, either .“Do you suppose Charles would want you to endanger
yourself?” I said. “For that mat ter – does he know about the
child?”
She nod ded, mo uth slightly open as she thought about it,
hands still clenched together over her stomach.
“Y es. That’ s what we quarreled about last time.” She
snif fed. “He was angry; he said it was all my fault, that I
should h ave wai ted until he had  reclaimed his father ’ s throne.
Then he would be king someda y , and he could come and take
me awa y from Jules, and have the Pope annul my marriage,
and his sons could be heirs to England and Scotlan…” She
gave way once m ore, sniveling and wailing incoherently into a
fold of her skirt.
I rolled my eyes in exasperation.
“Oh, do be qu iet, Louise!” I snapped. It shocked her
enough to make her stop weepin g, at least momentarily , and I
took advantage of the hiatus to press my point.
“Look,” I said, as persuasively as possible, “you don’ t
suppose Charles would want you to sacrifice his son, do you?
Legitimate or not?” Actually , I rather thought Charles would
be in favor of a ny step that rem oved inconvenience from his
own pat h, regardless of the ef f ects on Louise or his putative
of fspring. On the other hand, the Prince did have a marked
streak of romanticism; perhaps he could be induced to view
this as the sort of temporary adversity common to exiled
monarchs. Obvi ously , I was going to need Jamie’ s help. I
grimaced at the thought of what he was likely to say about it.
“W ell…” Louise was wavering,  wanting desperately to be
convinced. I had a momentary p ang of pity for Jules, Prince de
Rohan, but the vision of a young servant-girl, dying in
protracted, blood-smeared agony on a pallet spread in the
stone hallway of L ’Hôpital des A nges was brutally clear in my
mind.
It was nearly su nset when I left  the de Rohans’, footsteps
dragging. Louise , palpitating with nervousness, was upstairs in
her boudoir , her maid putting up her hair and arraying her in
her most daring gown before she went down to a privatesupper with her husband. I felt completely drained, and hoped
that Jam ie hadn’ t brought anyone home for supper; I could use
a spot of privacy , too.
He hadn ’ t; when I entered the study , he was seated at the
desk, poring over three or four sheets of close-written paper .
“Do you think ‘the fur merchant’ is more likely to be Louis
of France, or his minister Duverney?” he asked, without
looking up.
“Fine, thank you, darling, and how are you ?” I said.
“All right,” he said absently . The cowlicks on the top of his
head were sticking up straight; he massaged his scalp
vigorously as I watched, scowling down his long nose at the
paper .
“I’m sure ‘the tailor from V endôme’ must be Monsieur
Geyer ,” he said, running a finge r along the lines of the letter ,
“and ‘our mutual friend’ – that could be either the Earl of Mar ,
or possibly the papal envoy . I think the Earl, from the rest of it,
but the-”
“What on earth is that?” I peered over his shoulder , and
gasped w hen I saw the signature at the foot of the letter . James
Stuart, by the grace of God King of England and Scotland.
“Bloody Christ! It worked, then!” Swinging around, I
spotted Fer gus, crouched on a stool in front of the fire,
industriously stuf fing pastries in to his face. “Good lad,” I said,
smiling at him. He grinned bac k at me, cheeks puf fed like a
chipmunk’ s with chestnut tart.
“W e got it from the papal messenger ,” Jamie explained,
coming to the surface long en ough to realize I was there.
“Fer gus took it from the bag w hile he was eating supper in a
tavern. He’ll spend the night there, so we’ll have to put this
back before morning. No dif ficulties there, Fer gus?”
The boy swallowed and shook his head. “No, milord. He
sleeps alone – not trusting his bedmates not to steal the
contents of his bag.” He grin ned derisively at this. “The
second window on the left, abo ve the stables.” He waved anairy hand, the de ft, grubby fingers reaching for another pie. “It
is nothing, milord.”
I had a sudden vision of th at fine-boned hand held
squirming on a block, with an executioner ’ s blade raised
above th e broom stick wrist. I gu lped, forcing down the sudden
lurch of my stomach. Fer gus wore a small greenish copper
medal on a string about his neck; the image of St. Dismas, I
hoped.
“W ell,” I said, taking a deep breath to steady myself,
“what’ s all this about fur merchants?”
 
There w as no time then for leisurely inspection. In the end,
I made a quick fair copy of the letter , and the original was
carefully refolded and its original seal replaced with the aid of
a knife blade heated in a candle flame.
W atching this operation critically , Fer gus shook his head at
Jamie. “Y ou have the touch, milord. It is a pity that the one
hand is crippled.”
Jamie glanced dispassionately at his right hand. It really
wasn’ t too bad; a couple of fingers set slightly askew , a thick
scar dow n the length of the middle finger . The only major
damage had been to the fourth finger , which stuck out stif fly ,
its s econd joint so badly crush ed that the healing had fused
two fingerbones together . The hand had been broken in
W entworth Prison, less than four months ago, by Jack Randall.
“Never mind,” he said, smiling . He flexed the hand and
flicked the fingers playfully at F er gus. “My great paws are too
big to make a  living picking pockets, anyway .” He had
regained an astounding degree of movement, I thought. He
still carried the soft ball of rags I had made for him, squeezing
it unobtr usively hundreds of times a day as he went about his
business. And if the knitting  bones hurt him, he never
complained.
“Of f with ye, th en,” he told Fer gus. “Come and find me
when you’re safe back, so I’ll know ye havena been taken up
by the police or the landlord of the tavern.”Fer gus wrinkled  his nose scornfully at such an idea, but
nodded, tucking the letter carefully inside his smock before
disappearing do wn the back stair toward the night that was
both natural element and protection for him.
Jamie looked after him for a lo ng minute, then turned to
me. He truly looked at me for the first time, and his brows
flew up.
“Christ, Sassenach!” he said. “Y ou’re pale as my sark! Are
ye all right?”
“Just hungry ,” I said.
He rang  at once for supper , and  we ate it before the fire,
while I told him about Louise. Rather to my surprise, while he
knit his brows over the situation and muttered
uncomplimentary things under his breath in Gaelic about both
Louise and Charles Stuart, he agreed with my solution to the
problem.
“I thoug ht you’d be upset,” I said, scooping up a mouthful
of su cculent cassoulet with a bi t of bread. The warm, bacon-
spiced beans soothed me, filling  me with a sense of peaceful
well-being. It was cold and dark outside, and loud with the
rushing of the wind, but it was warm and quiet here by the fire
together .
“Oh, ab out Louise de La T our  foisting a bastard on her
husband?” Jamie frowned at his own dish, running a finger
around the edge to pick up the last of the juice.
“W ell, I ’m no verra much in  favor of it, I’ll tell ye,
Sassenach. It’ s a filthy trick to play on a man, but what’ s the
poor bloody woman to do otherw ise?” He shook his head, then
glanced at the desk across the room and smiled wryly .
“Besides, it doesna become me to be takin’ a high moral
stand about other people’ s behavior . Stealing letters and spying
and tryi ng generally to subvert a man my family holds as
King? I  shouldna like to have  someone judging me on the
grounds of the things I’m doing, Sassenach.”
“Y ou ha ve a damn good reason  for what you’re doing!” I
objected.He shrugged. The firelight flickering on his face hollowed
his c heeks and threw shadows into the orbits of his eyes. It
made hi m look older than he w as; I tended to for get that he
was not quite twenty-four .
“A ye, well. And Louise de La T our has a reason, too,” he
said. “She wants to save one life, I want ten thousand. Does
that excuse my risking wee Fe r gus – and Jared’ s business –
and you?” He turned his head  and smiled at me, the light
gleaming from the long, straight bridge of his nose, glowing
like sapphire in the one eye turned toward the fire.
“Nay , I think I wilna lose my sleep over the need for
opening another man’ s letters,” he said. “It may come to much
worse than that before we’ve d one, Claire, and I canna say
ahead of time what my conscience will stand; it’ s best not to
test it too soon.”
There was nothing to be said to that; it was all true. I
reached out and laid my hand against his cheek. He laid his
own han d over mine, cradling it for a moment, then turned his
head and gently kissed my palm.
“W ell,” he said, drawing a dee p breath and returning to
business. “Now that we’ve eaten, shall we have a look at this
letter?”
The letter was coded; that mu ch was obvious. T o foil
possible interceptors, Jamie explained.
“Who would want to intercept His Highness’ s mail?” I
asked. “Besides us, I mean.”
Jamie snorted with amusement at my naiveté.
“Almost anyone, Sassenach. L ouis’ s spies, Duverney’ s
spies, Philip of Spain’ s spies. The Jacobite lords and the ones
who think they might turn Ja cobite if the wind sets right.
Dealers in information, who din na care a fart in a breeze who
lives or dies by  it. The Pope himself; the Holy See’ s been
supporting the Stuarts in exile for fifty years – I imagine he
keeps an eye on what they’re doing.” He tapped a finger on the
copy I’d made of James’ s letter to his son.“The seal on th is letter had be en removed maybe three
times before I took it of f myself,” he said.
“I see,” I said. “ No wonder James codes his letters. Do you
think you can make out what he says?”
Jamie picked up the sheets, frowning.
“I don’ t know; s ome, yes. Some other things, I’ve no idea.
I think perhaps I can work it o ut, though, if I can see some
other letters King James has sen t. I’ll see what Fer gus can do
for m e t here.” H e folded the cop y and put it carefully away in
a drawer , which he locked.
“Y e canna trust anyone, Sassen ach,” he explained, seeing
my eyes widen. “W e might easily have spies among the
servants.” He dropped the small  key in the pocket of his coat,
and held out his arm to me.
I t ook the candle in one hand an d his arm in the other , and
we turne d toward the stairs. Th e rest of the house was dark,
the servants – all but Fer gus – virtuously asleep. I felt a trifle
creepy , with the realization that one or more of the silent
sleepers below or above might not be what they seemed.
“Doesn’ t it make you feel a bi t nervous?” I asked as we
went up the stairs. “Never being able to trust anyone?”
He laughed softly . “W ell, I wouldna say anyone ,
Sassenach. There’ s you – and Murtagh, and my sister Jenny
and her husband Ian. I’d trust t he four of you wi’ my life – I
have, for that matter , more than once.”
I shivered as he pulled back the drapes of the big bed. The
fire had been ba nked for the night, and the room was growing
cold.
“Four people you can trust doesn’ t seem like all that
many ,” I said, unlacing my gown.
He p ulled his sh irt over his head  and tossed it on the chair .
The scar s on his back shone sil ver in the faint light from the
night sky outside.
“A ye, well,” he said matter -of-factly . “It’ s four more than
Charles Stuart has.” 
There was a bird singing outside, though it was long before
first light. A mo ckingbird, practicing his trills and runs over
and over , perched on a rain g utter somewhere in the dark
nearby .
Moving sleepil y , Jamie rubbed his cheek against the
smooth skin of my freshly waxed underarm, then turned his
head an d plante d a soft kiss in the warm hollow that sent a
small, delicious shudder down my side.
“Mm,” h e murmured, running a light hand over my ribs. “I
like it when ye come out all gooseflesh like that, Sassenach.”
“Like th is?” I answered, running the nails of my right hand
gently over the skin of his back, which obligingly rippled into
goose bumps under the teasing of the touch.
“Ah.”
“Ah, yourself, then,” I answered softly , doing it some
more.
“Mmmm.” W ith  a luxurious groan, he rolled to the side,
wrapping his arms around me  as I followed, enjoying the
sudden contact of every inch of our naked skins, all down the
front from head to toe. He was warm as a smothered fire, the
heat of him safely banked for t he night, to kindle again to a
blaze in the black cold of dawn.
His lips fastened gently on o ne nipple, and I groaned
myself, arching slightly to encourage him to take it deeper into
the warm th of his mouth. My breasts were growing fuller , and
more se nsitive by the day; my nipples ached and tingled
sometimes under the tight binding of my gowns, wanting to be
suckled.
“W ill ye  let me do this later?” he murmured, with a soft
bite. “When the child’ s come, and your breasts fill wi’ milk?
W ill ye feed me, too, then, next to your heart?”
I cla sped his hea d and cradled it, fingers deep in the baby-
soft hair that grew thick at the base of his skull.
“Always,” I whispered.1 4  M E D I T A T I O N S  O N  T H E
F L E S H
F er gus w as more than adept at his profession, and nearly
every day brought in a new selection of His Highness’ s
correspondence; sometimes I was hard pressed to copy
everything before Fer gus’ s next expedition, when he would
replace the items abstracted, before stealing the new letters.
Some of these were further co ded communications from
King James in R ome; Jamie put aside the copies of these, to
puzzle over at leisure. The bulk of His Highness’ s
correspondence was innocuous – notes from friends in Italy ,
an in creasing number of bills from local merchants – Charles
had a taste for gaudy clothing and fine boots, as well as for
brandywine – and the occasional note from Louise de La T our
de Rohan. These were fairly easy to pick out; aside from the
tiny , ma nnered handwriting she employed, that made her
letters look as th ough a small b ird had been making tracks on
them, she invariably saturated the paper with her trademark
hyacinth scent. Jamie resolutely refused to read these.
“I w illna be read ing the man’ s love letters,” he said firmly .
“Even a  plotter must scruple at something .” He sneezed, and
dropped the latest missive back into Fer gus’ s pocket.
“Besides,” he added more practically , “Louise tells ye
everything, anyway .”
This wa s true; Louise had becom e a close friend, and spent
nearly as much time in my drawing room as she did in her
own, wringing her hands over C harles, then for getting him in
the f ascination of discussing the marvels of pregnancy – she
never had morning sickness, curse her! Scatterbrained as she
was, I liked her very much; still, it was a great relief to escape
from her company to L ’Hôpital des Anges every afternoon.
While Louise was unlikely ever to set foot within
L ’Hôpital des Anges, I was not without company when I went
there. Undaunte d by her first exposure to the Hôpital, MaryHawkins summoned up the courage to accompany me again.
And yet  again. While she could n’ t quite bring herself to look
directly at a wou nd yet, she wa s useful at spooning gruel into
people and sweeping floors. Ap parently she considered these
activities a welcome change fro m either the gatherings of the
Court or the life at her uncle’ s house.
While she was f requently shocked at some of the behavior
she saw at Cour t – not that she saw much, but she was easily
shocked – she didn’ t betray any  particular distaste or horror at
the s ight of the V icomte Marigny , which led me to conclude
that her wretched family had not yet completed the
negotiations for her marriage – and therefore hadn’ t told her
about it.
This con clusion was borne out o ne day in late April, when,
en route  to L ’Hôpital des Anges, she blushingly confided to
me that she was in love.
“Oh, he ’ s so handsome!” she  enthused, her stammer
entirely for gotten. “And so… well, so spiritual , as well.”
“Spiritual?” I said. “Mm, yes, very nice.” Privately I
thought that that particular quality was not one which would
have topped my own list of des irable attributes in a lover , but
then tastes dif fered.
“And who is the  favored gentleman, then?” I teased gently .
“Anyone I know?”
The rosy  blush deepened. “No, I shouldn’ t think so.” She
looked up then, eyes sparkling. “But – oh, I shouldn’ t tell you
this, but I can’ t help myself. He wrote to my father . He’ s
coming back to Paris next week!”
“Really?” This was interesting news. “I’d heard that the
Comte de Palles is expected at  Court next week,” I said. “Is
your , um, intended, one of his party?”
Mary looked aghast at the suggestion.
“A F renchman! Oh, no, Claire; r eally , how could I marry a
Frenchman?”
“Is ther e something wrong with Frenchmen?” I asked,
rather su rprised at her vehemence. “Y ou do speak French, afterall.” Perhaps that was the trou ble, though; while Mary did
speak French very nicely , her sh yness made her stammer even
worse in that la nguage than in English. I had come across a
couple of kitchen-boys only the day before, entertaining each
other with cruel imitations of “la petite Anglaise maladr oite.”
“Y ou don’ t know about Frenchmen?” she whispered, eyes
wide an d horrif ied. “Oh, but o f course, you wouldn’ t. Y our
husband is so gentle and so kind… he wouldn’ t, I m-mean I
know he d-doesn’ t trouble yo u that way…” Her face was
suf fused with a rich peony that reached from chin to hairline,
and the stammer was about to strangle her .
“Do you mean…” I began, trying to think of some tactful
way of extricating her without entangling myself in
speculations about the habit s of Frenchmen. However ,
considering what Mr . Hawkins had told me about Mary’ s
father and his plans for her marriage, I rather thought perhaps I
should try to di sabuse her of the notions that she had clearly
picked up from the gossip of salon and dressing room. I didn’ t
want her to die of fright if she did  e nd up marrie d to a
Frenchman.
“What they d-do… in… in bed !” she whispered hoarsely .
“W ell,” I said matter -of-factly , “there are only so many
things you can  do in bed with a man, after all. And since I see
quite a lar ge num ber of children about the city , I’d assume that
even Frenchmen are fairly well versed in the orthodox
methods.”
“Oh! Ch ildren… well, yes, of co urse,” she said vaguely , as
though not seeing much connec tion. “B-b-but they said” – she
cast her eyes down, embarrassed, and her voice sank even
lower – “th-that he… a Frenchm-man’ s thing , you know…”
“Y es, I know ,” I said, striving for patience. “So far as I
know , they’re much like any other man’ s. Englishmen and
Scotsmen are quite similarly endowed.”
“Y es, but they , they… p-p-put it between a lady’ s l-l-legs! I
mean, right up inside  h er!” This bit of stop-press news finally
out, she took a deep breath, which seemed to steady her , for
the violent crimson of her face receded slightly . “AnEnglishman, or even a Scot… oh, I didn’ t m-mean it that
way…” Her hand flew to her mouth in embarrassment. “But a
decent man like your husband; s urely he would n-never dream
of forcing a wife to endure s-something like that!”
I placed a hand on my slightly bloated stomach and
regarded her thoughtfully . I began to see why spirituality
ranked so highly in Mary Hawkins’ s catalog of manly virtues.
“Mary ,” I said, “I think we must have a small talk.”
 
I w as still smili ng privately to myself when I walked out
into the Great H all of the Hôpital, my own dress covered with
the drab, sturdy fabric of a novice’ s habit.
A goo d many of the chirur giens , urinoscopists,
bonesetters, phy sicians, and other healers were donating their
time and services as a charity; others came to learn or refine
their skills. The hapless patients of L ’Hôpital des Anges were
in no  position to  protest being the subjects of assorted medical
experiments.
Aside from the nuns themselves, the medical staf f changed
almost daily , depending upon who found themselves without
paying patients that day , or who had a new technique that
needed t rial. Still, most of the free-lance medicos came often
enough that I learned to recognize the regulars in short order .
One of the most interesting was the tall, gaunt man whom I
had seen  amputating a leg on my first visit to the Hôpital.
Upon inquiry , I determined that his name was Monsieur Forez.
Primarily a bonesetter , occasio nally he would attempt the
trickier types of amputation, particularly when a whole limb,
rather than a joint, was involved. The nuns and orderlies
seemed a bit in  awe of Monsieur Forez; they never chaf fed
him or exchanged rude jokes, as they did with most of the
other volunteer medical help.
Monsieur Forez was at work today . I approached quietly ,
to see what he w as doing. The patient, a young workman, lay
white-faced and gasping on a pallet. He had fallen from the
scaf folding on the cathedral – always under construction – and
broken b oth an arm and a leg. I  could see that the arm was noparticular challenge to a professional bonesetter – only a
simple fracture of the radius. Th e leg, though, was something
else; an impressive double com pound fracture, involving both
the mid-femur and the tibia. Sharp bone fragments protruded
through the skin of both thigh and shin, and the lacerated flesh
was blue with tr aumatic bruising over most of the upper aspect
of the leg.
I d idn’ t wish to  distract the bonesetter ’ s attention to his
case, but Monsieur Forez appeared sunk in thought, slowly
circling the patient, sidling back and forth like a lar ge carrion
crow , cautious lest the victim not be really dead yet. He did
look rath er like a crow , I thought, with that prominent beak of
a nose, and the smooth black hair that he wore unpowdered,
slicked back to a wispy knot at the nape of his neck. His
clothes, too, were black and somber , though of good quality –
evidently he had a profitable practice outside the Hôpital.
At last deciding on his course of action, Monsieur Forez
lifted h is chin from his hand and glanced around for
assistance. His eye lighted on  me, and he beckoned me
forward. I was dressed in a coarse linen novice’ s gown, and
lost in his concentration, he did not notice that I didn’ t wear
the wimple and veil of a nursing sister .
“Here, ma soeur ,” he directed, ta king hold of th e patient’ s
ankle. “Grasp it tightly just be hind the heel. Do not apply
pressure until I tell you, but wh en I give the word, draw the
foot dire ctly tow ard you. Pull v ery slowly , but with force – it
will take considerable strength, you understand.”
“I understand.” I grasped the foot as directed, while
Monsieur Forez  made his slow and gangling way toward the
other end of the pallet, glancing contemplatively at the
fractured leg.
“I ha ve a stimula nt here to assist,” he said, drawing a small
vial out of his coat pocket and setting it beside the patient’ s
head. “It constricts the blood ve ssels of the surface skin, and
drives th e blood  inward, where it may be of more use to our
young friend.” So speaking, he grasped the patient by the hair
and thrust the vial into the young man’ s mouth, skillfullydecanting the medicine down his throat without spilling a
drop.
“Ah,” he said ap provingly as the man gulped and breathed
deeply . “That will help. Now , as to the pain – yes, it is better if
we can numb th e leg, so he will be less inclined to resist our
ef forts as we straighten it.”
He reached into his capacious pocket once more, this time
coming out with a small brass pin, some three inches in length,
with a wide, flat head. One bony , thick-jointed hand tenderly
explored the inside of the pa tient’ s thigh near the groin,
following the thin blue line of a lar ge vein beneath the skin.
The groping fingers hesitated, paused, palpated in a small
circle, then settled on a point. Digging a sharp forefinger into
the skin  as though to mark his p lace, Monsieur Forez brought
the point of the brass pin to bear in the same place. Another
quick reach into the pocket of marvels produced a small brass
hammer , with which he drove th e pin straight into the leg with
one blow .
The leg twitched violently , then seemed to relax into
limpness. The vaso-constrictor a dministered earlier did in fact
seem to be working; the ooze of blood from the severed tissues
was markedly less.
“That’ s amazing!” I exclaimed. “What did you do?”
Monsieur Forez smiled shyly , a faint rosiness staining his
blue-shadowed cheeks with pleasure at my admiration.
“W ell, it  does not always work quite so well,” he admitted
modestly . “Luck  was with me this time.” He pointed at the
brass pin, explaining, “There is a lar ge bundle of nerve
endings there, Sister , what I ha ve heard the anatomists call a
plexus . I f you are fo rtunate enough to pierce it directly , it
numbs a great d eal of the sensations in the lower extremity .”
He s traightened abruptly , realizi ng that he was wasting time in
talk that might better be spent in action.
“Come, ma soeur ,” he ordered. “Back to your post! The
action of the stim ulant is not long-lasting; we must work now ,
while the bleeding is suppressed.”Almost limp, the leg straightened easily , the splintered
ends of bone drawing back through the skin. Following
Monsieur Forez ’ s orders, I now  grasped the young man about
the torso, while he maneuvered the foot and lower leg, so that
we applied a constant traction while the final small
adjustments were made.
“That will do, S ister . Now , if you will but hold the foot
steady for a moment.” A shout summoned an orderly with a
couple o f stout sticks and som e rags for binding, and in no
time we had th e limb neatly splinted and the open wounds
firmly dressed with pressure bandages.
Monsieur Forez and I exchanged a broad smile of
congratulation over the body of our patient.
“Lovely work, that,” I praised, s hoving back a lock of hair
that had come u nbound during our exertions. I saw Monsieur
Forez’ s face change suddenly , as he realized that I wore no
veil, and just then the loud bonging of the V espers bell rang
from the  adjacent church. I glanced openmouthed at the tall
window at the end of the w ard, left unglassed to allow
unwholesome vapors to pass out. Sure enough, the oblong of
sky was the deep half-indigo of early evening.
“Excuse me,” I said, starting to wriggle out of the covering
gown. “I must g o at once; my husband will be worried about
me coming home so late. I’m so glad to have had the chance
of assisting you, Monsieur Forez.” The tall bonesetter watched
this disrobing act in patent astonishment.
“But you … wel l, no, of course you are not a nun, I should
have realized that before… but y ou… who are you?” he asked
curiously .
“My nam e’ s Fra ser ,” I told him  briefly . “Look, I must  go,
or my husband…”
He d rew himself up to his full gawky height, and bowed
with deep seriousness.
“I sh ould esteem it a privilege if you would allow me to
see you home, Madame Fraser .”“Oh… why , thank you,” I said, touched at his
thoughtfulness. “I have an escort, though,” I said, looking
vaguely around the hall for Fer g us, who had taken over escort
duty fro m Mu rtagh, when he was not needed to steal
something. He was there, leaning against the doorjamb,
twitching with impatience. I wo ndered how long he had been
there – the sisters wouldn’ t allow him into the main hall or the
wards, always insisting that he wait for me by the door .
Monsieur Forez eyed my escort dubiously , then took me
firmly by the elbow .
“I w ill see you to your door , Madame,” he declared. “This
section of the ci ty is much too dangerous in the evening hours
for you to be abroad with no more than a child for protection.”
I could see Fer gus swelling with indignation at being
called a child, an d hastened to p rotest that he was an excellent
escort, a lways taking care to g uide me by the safest streets.
Monsieur Forez  paid no atten tion to either of us, merely
nodding in a sta tely manner to Sister Angelique as he steered
me through the huge double doors of the Hôpital.
Fer gus trotted at my heels, plucking at my sleeve.
“Madame!” he said in a ur gent whisper . “Madame! I promised
the master that I would see you safely home each day , that I
would not allow you to associate with undesirable-”
“Ah, here we a re. Madame, you sit here; your boy may
have the other seat.” Ignoring Fer gus’ s yapping, Monsieur
Forez pi cked him up and tossed  him casually into the waiting
carriage.
The carr iage was a small open one, but elegantly equipped,
with deep blue velvet seats and  a small canopy to protect the
passengers from sudden inclem encies of weather or slops
flung from above. There was  no coat of arms or other
decoration on the equipage’ s do or; Monsieur Forez was not of
the nobility – must be a rich bour geois, I thought.
W e made polite conversation on the way home, discussing
medical matters, while Fer gus sulked in the corner , glowering
under the ragged thatch of his hair . When we pulled up in the
Rue T remoulins, he leaped over the side without waiting forthe coachman to open the door , and sprinted inside. I stared
after him , wondering what ailed him, then turned to take my
farewell of Monsieur Forez.
“Really , it is nothing,” he assured me graciously , in
response to my profuse thanks. “Y our residence lies along the
path I take to my own house, in any case. And I could not have
trusted t he perso n of such a gracious lady to the Paris streets at
this hour .” He h anded me down from the carriage, and was
opening his mouth to say more, when the gate slammed open
behind us.
I tur ned in time  to see Jamie’ s expression change from
mild annoyance to startled surprise.
“Oh!” he said. “Good evening, Monsieur .” He bowed to
Monsieur Forez, who returned the salute with great solemnity .
“Y our w ife has allowed me the g reat pleasure of delivering
her safely to your door , milord. As for her late arrival, I beg
you will lay the blame for that on my own shoulders; she was
most no bly assisting me in a small endeavor at L ’Hôpital des
Anges.”
“I ex pect she w as,” said Jamie in a resigned tone. “After
all,” he added in English, rai sing an eyebrow at me, “ye
couldna expect a mere husband to hold the same sort of appeal
as an inflamed bowel or a case of bilious spots, could ye?” The
corner o f his mouth twitched, t hough, and I knew he wasn’ t
really annoyed, only concerned that I hadn’ t come home; I felt
a twinge of regret at having worried him.
Bowing once more to Monsieur Forez, he grasped me by
the upper arm and hustled me through the gate.
“Where’ s Fer gus ?” I asked, as soon as the gate was closed
behind us. Jamie snorted.
“In the kitchen, awaiting retribution, I expect.”
“Retribution? What do you mean by that?” I demanded.
Unexpectedly , he laughed.
“W ell,” he said, “I was sittin’ in the study , wondering
where in  bloody  hell you’d got  to, and on the ver ge of going
down to  the Hôpital myself, w hen the door flew open, andyoung Fer gus shot in and threw  himself on the floor at my
feet, begging me to kill him on the spot.”
“Kill him? Whatever for?”
“W ell, that’ s what I asked him myself, Sassenach. I
thought perhaps you and he h ad been waylaid by footpads
along the way –  there are dangerous gangs of ruf fians about
the s treets, ye ke n, and I though t losin’ you that way would be
the only thing w ould make him behave so. But he said you
were at the gate, so I came tearing along to see were ye all
right, w ith Fer gus at my heels, babbling about betraying my
trust and  being unworthy to call me master , and begging me to
beat him  to death. I found it a bit dif ficult to think, what wi’ all
that going on, s o I told him I’d attend to him later , and sent
him to the kitchen.”
“Oh, bloody hell!” I said. “D oes he really think he’ s
betrayed your trust, just because I’ve come home a bit late?”
Jamie glanced aside at me.
“A ye, he does. And so he did, for that matter , letting ye
ride in company  with a stranger . He swears that he would ha’
thrown himself in front of the horses before he would let ye
enter the  carriage, save that you ,” he added pointedly , “seemed
on good terms wi’ the man.”
“W ell, of course I was on good terms with him,” I said
indignantly . “I’d just been helping him set a leg.”
“Mphm.” This line of ar gument  appeared to strike him as
unconvincing.
“Oh, all right,” I agreed relucta ntly . “Perhaps it was a bit
unwise. But he really did seem entirely respectable, and I was
in a hurry to get  home – I knew you’d be worried.” Still, I was
now wi shing I had paid a little more attention to Fer gus’ s
frantic mumblin gs and pluckings at my sleeve. At the time, I
had been concerned only to reach home as soon as possible.
“Y ou aren’ t really going to beat  him, are you?” I asked in
some ala rm. “It wasn’ t his fault in the slightest – I insisted on
going with Monsieur . Forez. I mean, if anyone deserves
beating, it’ s me.”T urning in the direction of the  kitchen, Jamie cocked a
sardonic eyebrow at me.
“A ye, it is,” he agreed. “Having sworn to refrain from any
such actions, though, I may have to settle for Fer gus.”
“Jamie! Y ou wouldn’ t!” I stopped dead, yanking on his
arm. “Jamie! Please!” Then I saw the smile hidden in the
corner of his mouth, and sighed in relief.
“No,” he said, letting the smile become visible. “I dinna
mean to  kill him – or even be at him, for that matter . I may
have to go clout  him over the ear a time or two, though, if only
to s ave his hon or ,” he added. “He thinks he’ s committed a
major cr ime by not following my orders to guard ye – I can
hardly let it pass without some sign of of ficial displeasure.”
He paused outside the baize door to the kitchens to fasten
his cuf fs and rewind the stock about his throat.
“Am I decent?” he inquired, smoothing back his thick,
unruly h air . “Pe rhaps I should g o and fetch my coat – I’m not
sure what’ s proper for administering rebukes.”
“Y ou look fine,” I said, suppressing a smile. “V ery severe.”
“Oh, that’ s good,” he said, straightening his shoulders and
compressing his lips. “I hope I don’ t laugh, that wouldna do at
all,” he muttered, pushing open the door to the kitchen stair .
The atmosphere in the kitchen was far from hilarious,
though. At our entrance, the customary gabble ceased at once,
and ther e was a hasty drawing u p of the staf f at one side of the
room. Everyone stood stock-stil l for a moment, then there was
a sm all stir between two kitchen maids, and Fer gus stepped out
into the open space before us.
The boy’ s face was white and tracked with tears, but he
was not weeping now . W ith considerable dignity , he bowed,
first to me and then Jamie, in turn.
“Madame, Monsieur , I am ashamed,” he said, low-voiced
but distinct. “I am unworthy to  be in your employment, but
still I beg that you will not dismiss me.” His high-pitched
voice quavered a little at the thought, and I bit my lip. Fer gus
glanced aside at the ranks of the servants, as though for moralsupport, and received a nod of encouragement from Fernand
the coachman. Drawing a deep breath for courage, he
straightened up and addressed Jamie directly .
“I a m ready to suf fer my punishment now , milord,” he
said. As though this had been t he signal, one of the footmen
stepped out of the rigid crowd , led the boy to the scrubbed
plank ta ble, and passing on the  other side, took hold of the
lad’ s hands, pulling him half across the surface of the table and
holding him so extended.
“But…” Jamie began, taken aba ck by the speed of events.
He got no further before Magnus, the elderly butler , stepped
gravely up and presented him w ith the leather strop used for
sharpening the kitchen knives, laid ceremonially atop the meat
platter .
“Er ,” Jamie said, looking helplessly at me.
“Um,” I said, an d took one step back. Eyes narrowed, he
grabbed my hand, squeezing it tightly .
“No, ye don’ t, Sassenach,” he muttered in English. “If I
have to do it, you have to watch it!”
Glancing desperately back and forth between his would-be
victim and the prof fered instrument of execution, he hesitated
for a moment longer , then gave up.
“Oh, blo ody fuc king hell,” he m uttered under his breath in
English, grabbin g the strop from  Magnus. He flexed the broad
strap dubiously between his hands; three inches wide and a
quarter -inch thi ck, it was a formidable weapon. Clearly
wishing himself anywhere else, he advanced upon the prone
body of Fer gus.
“All right, then,” he said, glaring ferociously round the
room. “T en strokes, and I don’ t wish to hear a fuss about it.”
Several of the female servants blanched visibly at this, and
clung to  each other for support, but there was dead silence in
the big room as he raised the strap.
The resu ltant crack at impact made me jump, and there
were small squeaks of alarm f rom the kitchenmaids, but no
sound from Fer gus. The small body quivered, and Jamieclosed h is eyes briefly , then s et his lips and proceeded to
inflict th e remai nder of the sent ence, strokes evenly spaced. I
felt sick, and s urreptitiously w iped my damp palms on my
skirt. At  the same time, I felt an  unhinged ur ge to laugh at the
terrible farce of the situation.
Fer gus endured everything in total silence, and when Jamie
had finished and stepped back, pale and sweating, the small
body lay so stil l that I was afraid for a moment that he had
died – of shock, if not from the actual ef fects of the beating.
But then a deep  shudder seemed to run over the small frame,
and the boy slid  backward and raised himself stif fly of f the
table.
Jamie leaped forward to grasp him by an arm, anxiously
smoothing back the sweat-drenched hair from his forehead.
“Are ye all right, man?” he asked. “God, Fer gus, tell me
you’re all right!”
The boy was white to the lips, and his eyes were the size of
saucers, but he smiled at this evidence of goodwill on the part
of his employer , buck teeth gleaming in the lamplight.
“Oh yes, milord,” he gasped. “Am I for given?”
“Jesus Christ,” Jamie muttered, and clasped the boy tightly
against his chest. “Y es, of course ye are, fool.” He held the boy
at arm’ s length and shook him slightly . “I dinna want to do that
ever again, d’ye hear me?”
Fer gus n odded, eyes glowing, then broke away and fell to
his knees before me.
“Do you for give me also, Madame?” he asked, folding his
hands formally in front of him, and looking trustfully up, like a
chipmunk begging for nuts.
I tho ught I wou ld expire on the spot of mortification, but
mustered suf ficient self-possession to reach down and raise the
boy to his feet.
“There is nothing to for give,” I told him firmly , my cheeks
burning. “Y ou’re a very courageous lad, Fer gus. Why… er ,
why don’ t you go and have some supper now?”At t his, the atmosphere of the kitchen relaxed, as though
everyone had drawn a massive s igh of relief at once. The other
servants push ed forward, babbling concern and
congratulations, and Fer gus was swept of f to a hero’ s
reception, while Jamie and I be at a precipitous retreat back to
our quarters abovestairs.
“Oh, Go d,” Jamie said, collapsing into his chair as though
completely drai ned. “Sweet bleeding Jesus. Mary , Michael,
and Bride. Lord, I need a drink. Don’ t ring!” he exclaimed in
alarm, th ough I hadn’ t made a move toward the bell rope. “I
couldna bear to face one of the servants just now .”
He got up and rummaged in the cupboard. “I think I’ve a
bottle in here, though.”
He had indeed, a nice aged Scotch. Removing the cork
unceremoniously with his teeth , he lowered the level of the
spirit by  an inch or so, then hand ed the bottle to me. I followed
his example without hesitation.
“Jesus Christ,” I said, when I had recovered breath enough
to speak.
“Y es,” he said, taking the bottl e back and taking another
gulp. Setting the bottle down, he clutched his head, running his
fingers t hrough his hair until it stood on end in wild disarray .
He laughed weakly .
“I’ve ne ver felt so foolish in m y entire life. God, I felt a
clot-heid!”
“So did I,” I said, taking my turn at the bottle. “Even more
than you , I imagine. After all, it was all my fault. Jamie, I
can’ t tell you how sorry I am; I never imagined…”
“Ah, din na wor ry yourself.” The tension of the last half-
hour released, he squeezed my shoulder af fectionately . “Y ou
couldna have any idea. Neither did I, for that matter ,” he added
reflectively . “I suppose he thou ght I’d dismiss him, and he’d
be b ack in the streets… poor little bugger . No wonder he
thought himself lucky to take a beating instead.”
I shuddered briefly , remembering the streets through which
Monsieur Forez ’ s carriage had traveled. Beggars dressed inrags and sores clung stubbornly to their territories, sleeping on
the g round even on the coldest nights, lest some rival steal a
profitable corner from them. Children much smaller than
Fer gus darted through the market crowds like hungry mice,
eyes always watching for the dropped crumb, the unguarded
pocket. And for those too unhealthy to work, too unattractive
to sell to the brothels, or simpl y too unlucky – it would be a
short lif e indeed, and far from  merry . Little wonder if the
prospect of being thrust from the luxury of three meals a day
and clean clothes back into that sordid stew had been suf ficient
to send Fer gus into paroxysms of needless guilt.
“I su ppose so,” I said. My man ner of intake had declined
from gu lps to a more genteel sipping by this time. I sipped
genteelly , then handed the bottle back, noting in a rather
detached manner that it was m ore than half empty . “Still, I
hope you didn’ t hurt him.”
“W eel, nay doubt he’ll be a bi t sore.” His Scots accent,
usually faint, always grew more  pronounced when he drank a
lot. He shook his head, squinting through the bottle to judge
the leve l of spirit remaining. “D’ye know , Sassenach, I never
’ til t onight realized just how dif ficult it must ha’ been for my
father to beat me? I always thought it was me had the hardest
part of that parti cular transaction.” He tilted his head back and
drank ag ain, then set down the bottle and stared owl-eyed into
the fire. “Being a father might be a bit more complicated than
I’d thought. I’ll have to think about it.”
“W ell, don’ t think too hard,” I said. “Y ou’ve had a lot to
drink.”
“Och, don’ t worry ,” he said ch eerfully . “There’ s another
bottle in the cupboard.”1 5  I N  W H I C H  M U S I C  P L A Y S
A  P A R T
W e stayed up late with the second bottle, going over and
over the latest o f the abstracted letters from the Chevalier de
St. Geor ge – otherwise known as His Majesty , James III – and
the letters to Prince Charles from Jacobite supporters.
“Fer gus got a lar ge packet, bound for His Highness,”
Jamie e xplained. “There was a lot of stuf f in it, and we
couldna copy it all quickly enough, so I kept some to go back
the next time.”
“See,” he said, extracting one sheet from the pile and
laying it on my knee, “the majority of the letters are in code,
like this one – ‘I hear that the prospects for grouse seem most
favorable this year in the hills above Salerno; hunters in that
region should find themselves successful.’ That’ s easy; it’ s a
reference to Manzetti, the Italian banker; he’ s from Salerno. I
found that Charles had been din ing with him, and managed to
borrow fifteen thousand livres – apparently James’ s advice
was good. But here-” He shuf fled through the stack, pulling
out another sheet.
“Look a t this,” Jamie said, handing me a sheet covered
with his lopsided scrawls.
I squinted obediently at the paper , from which I could pick
out single letters, connected with a network of arrows and
question marks.
“What language  is that?” I asked, peering at it. “Polish?”
Charles Stuart’ s mother , the late Clementina Sobieski, had
been Polish, after all.
“No, it’ s in English,” Jamie said, grinning. “Y ou canna
read it?”
“Y ou can?”
“Oh, aye,” he said smugly . “It’ s a cipher , Sassenach, and
no a verra complicated one. See, all ye must do is break theletters up into gr oups of five, to start – only ye don’ t count the
letters Q  or X. The X’ s are meant as breaks between sentences,
and the Q’ s are only stuck in here and there to make it more
confusing.”
“If you  say so,” I said, looking from the extremely
confusing-looking letter , which began “Mrti ocruti dlopro
qahstmin…” to the sheet in Jam ie’ s hand, with a series of five-
letter gr oups written on one line, single letters printed in
carefully above them, one at a time.
“So, one letter is only substitu ted for another , but in the
same or der ,” Jamie was explaining, “so if you have a fair
amount of text to work from, and you can guess a word here or
there, then all ye need do is to translate from one alphabet to
the othe r – see?” He waved a long strip of paper under my
nose, with two alphabets printed one above the other , slightly
of fset.
“W ell, m ore or less,” I said. “I gather you do, though,
which is what’ s important. What does it say?”
The expression of lively interest with which Jamie greeted
all manner of puzzles faded a bit, and he let the sheet of paper
fall to his knee. He looked at me, lower lip caught between his
teeth in introspection.
“W ell,” he said, “that’ s what’ s odd. And yet I dinna see
how I can be mi staken. The tone of James’ s letters overall tend
one way , and this ciphered one spells it out clearly .”
Blue eyes met mine under thick, ruddy brows.
“James wants Charles to find favor with Louis,” he said
slowly , “but he isna looking fo r support for an invasion of
Scotland. James has no interest in seeking restoration to the
throne.”
“What?” I snatched the sheaf of  letters from his hand, my
eyes feverishly scanning the scribbled text.
Jamie was right; while the letters from supporters spoke
hopefully of the impending restoration, James’ s letters to his
son mentioned no such thing, but were all concerned with
Charles’ s making a good impression upon Louis. Even theloan from Manzetti of Salerno had been sought to enable
Charles to live with the appear ance of a gentleman in Paris;
not to support any military end.
“W ell, I’ m thinking James is a canny wee man,” Jamie had
said, tapping one of the letters. “ For see, Sassenach, he’ s verra
little mo ney of his own; his wi fe had a great deal, but Uncle
Alex tol d me that she left it all  to the church when she died.
The Pope has been maintaining James’ s establishment – after
all, h e’ s a Catho lic monarch, and the Pope is bound to uphold
his interests against those of the Elector of Hanover .”
He clasped his hands around one knee, gazing meditatively
at the pile of papers now laid between us on the sofa.
“Philip o f Spain  and Louis – the Old King, I mean – gave
him a small number of troops and a few ships, thirty years ago,
with wh ich to try to regain his throne. But it all went wrong;
bad wea ther san k some of the ships, and the rest had no pilots
and land ed in the wrong place – everything went awry , and in
the end, the Fre nch simply sailed of f again, with James not
even set ting foo t upon the soil of Scotland. So perhaps in the
years since, he gave up any thought of getting back his throne.
But still, he had two sons coming to manhood, and no way to
see them properly settled in life.
“So I ask myself, Sassenach” – he rocked backward a bit –
“what w ould I do, in such a situation? The answer being, that I
might tr y and see if my good cousin Louis – who’ s King of
France, after all – might maybe  see one son established in a
good position; given a military appointment, maybe, and men
to lead. A General of France is no bad position in life.”
“Mm.” I nodded, thinking. “Y es, but if I were a very smart
man, I might n ot just come t o Louis and beg, as a poor
relation. I might send my son to  Paris, and try to shame Louis
into accepting him at Court. A nd meanwhile keep alive the
illusion that I was actively seeking restoration.”
“For once James admits openly that the Stuarts will never
rule Sco tland again,” Jamie added softly , “then he has no more
value to Louis.”And without the possibility of an armed Jacobite invasion
to occup y the English, Louis w ould have little reason to give
his young cousin Charles anything beyond the pittance that
decency and public opinion would force him to provide.
It wasn’ t certain; the letters Jamie had been able to get, a
few at a time, went back only  as far as last January , when
Charles had arrived in France. And, couched in code, cipher ,
and guarded language generally , the situation was far from
clear . But taken all in all, the evidence did point in that
direction.
And if Jamie’ s guess as to the Chevalier ’ s motives was
correct – then ou r task was accomplished already; had never in
fact existed at all.
 
Thinking over the events of the night before, I was
abstracted all the next day , through a visit to Marie
d’Arbanville’ s morning salon to hear a Hungarian poet,
through a visit t o a neighborhood herbalist’ s to pick up some
valerian and orris root, and through my rounds at L ’Hôpital
des Anges in the afternoon.
Finally , I abandoned my work, afraid that I might
accidentally dam age someone while wool-gathering. Neither
Murtagh nor Fer gus had yet ar rived to escort me home, so I
changed out of my covering g own and sat down in Mother
Hildegarde’ s vacant of fice to wait, just inside the vestibule of
the Hôpital.
I h ad been there  for perhaps half an hour , idly pleating the
stuf f of my gow n between my fingers, when I heard the dog
outside.
The port er was absent, as he often was. Gone to buy food,
no doubt, or run  an errand for one of the nuns. As usual in his
absence, the guardianship of the Hôpital’ s portals was given
into the capable paws – and teeth – of Bouton.
The first warning yip was followed by a low , burring growl
that warned the intruder to sta y where he was, on pain of
instant dismemb erment. I rose and stuck my head out of the
of fice do or , to see whether Father Balmain might be bravingthe p eril of the demon once more, in pursuit of his sacramental
duties. But the figure outlined against the huge stained-glass
window of the e ntry hall was n ot the spare form of the junior
priest. I t was a tall figure, whose silhouetted kilts swayed
gracefully around his legs as h e drew back from the small,
toothed animal at his feet.
Jamie bl inked, b rought up short by the assault. Shading his
eyes aga inst the dazzle from the  window , he peered down into
the shadows.
“Oh, hallo there, wee dog,” he  said politely , and took a
step forward, knuckles stretched out. Bouton raised the growl
a few decibels, and he took a step back.
“Oh, like that, is it?” Jamie said. He eyed the dog
narrowly .
“Think it over , laddie,” he advised, squinting down his
long, straight nose. “I’m a damn sight bigger than you. I
wouldna undertake any rash ventures, if I were you.”
Bouton shifted his ground slightly , still making a noise like
a distant Fokker .
“Faster , too,” said Jamie, mak ing a feint to one side.
Bouton’ s teeth snapped together a few inches from Jamie’ s
calf, and  he stepped back hastily . Leaning back against the
wall, he folded his arms and nodded down at the dog.
“W ell, y ou’ve a point there, I’l l admit. When it comes to
teeth, ye’ve the edge on me, an d no mistake.” Bouton cocked
an e ar suspiciously at this grac ious speech, but went back to
the low-pitched growl.
Jamie ho oked one foot over the other , like one prepared to
pass the  time of day indefinitely . The multicolored light from
the wind ow washed his face wi th blue, making him look like
one of the chilly marble statues in the cathedral next door .
“Surely you’ve better things to do than harry innocent
visitors?” he asked, conversationally . “I’ve heard of you –
you’re the famous fellow that snif fs out sickness, no? W eel,
then, w hy are they wastin’ y e on silly things like door -
guarding, when ye might be makin’ yourself useful smellinggouty to es and pustulant arseholes? Answer me that, if ye
will!”
A sh arp bark in response to his uncrossing his feet was the
only answer .
There was a stir  of robes behind me as Mother Hildegarde
entered from the inner of fice.
“What is it?” s he asked, seeing me peering round the
corner . “Have we visitors?”
“Bouton seems to be having a dif ference of opinion with
my husband,” I said.
“I don’ t have t o put up wi’ this, ye ken,” Jamie was
threatening. One hand was stealing toward the brooch that
held his plaid at the shoulder . “One quick spring wi’ my plaid,
and I’ll have ye trussed like a – oh, bonjour , Madame!” he
said, changing swiftly to French at sight of Mother Hildegarde.
“ Bonjour , Mons ieur Fraser .” She inclined her veil
gracefully , more to hide the broad smile on her face than in
greeting, I thought. “I see you h ave made the acquaintance of
Bouton. Are you perhaps in search of your wife?”
This seeming to be my cue, I sidled out of the of fice
behind h er . My  devoted spouse glanced from Bouton to the
of fice door , plainly drawing conclusions.
“And just how long have ye been standin’ there,
Sassenach?” he asked dryly .
“Long enough,” I said, with the smug self-assurance of one
in Bouto n’ s good books. “What would you have done with
him, once you’d got him wrapped up in your plaid?”
“Thrown him out the window and run like hell,” he
answered, with a brief glance o f awe at Mother Hildegarde’ s
imposing form. “Does she by chance speak English?”
“No, luckily for you,” I answere d. I switched to French for
the introductions. “Ma mèr e, je vous présente m on mari, le
seigneur de Br och T uarach.”
“Milord.” Mother Hildegarde h ad by now mastered her
sense of humor , and greeted him  with her usual expression offormidable geniality . “W e shall miss your wife, but if you
require her , of course-”
“I didn’ t  come for my wife,” Jamie interrupted. “I came to
see you, ma mèr e .”
 
Seated in Mother Hildegarde ’ s of fice, Jamie laid the
bundle of papers he carried on the shining wood of her desk.
Bouton, keeping a wary eye on  the intruder , lay down at his
mistress’ s feet. He laid his nose upon his feet, but kept his ears
cocked, lip raised over one eyetooth in case he should be
called upon to rend the visitor limb from limb.
Jamie narrowed his eyes at Bouton, pointedly pulling his
feet away from the twitching black nose. “Herr Gerstmann
recommended that I consult you, Mother , about these
documents,” he said, unrolling t he thick sheaf and flattening it
beneath his palms.
Mother Hildega rde regarded Jamie for a moment, one
heavy brow raised quizzically . T hen she turned her attention to
the s heaf of papers, with that administrator ’ s trick of seeming
to focus  entirely on the matter at hand, while still keeping her
sensitive antennae tuned to catch the faintest vibration of
emer gency from the far -of f reaches of the Hôpital.
“Y es?” s he said. One blunt finge r ran lightly over the lines
of scribbled music, one by one, as though she heard the notes
by touching them. A flick of the finger , and the sheet slid
aside, half-exposing the next.
“What is it that you wish to know , Monsieur Fraser?” she
asked.
“I don’ t know , Mother .” Jamie was leaning forward, intent.
He touched the black lines hi mself, dabbing gently at the
smear where the writer ’ s hand had carelessly brushed the
staves before the ink had dried.
“There is something odd about this music, Mother .”
The nun ’ s wide mouth moved slightly in what might have
been a smile.“Really , Monsieur Fraser? And yet I understand – you will
not be of fended, I trust – that to you, music is… a lock to
which you have no key?”
Jamie laughed, and a sister pass ing in the hallways turned,
startled b y such a sound in the c onfines of the Hôpital. It was a
noisy place, but laughter was unusual.
“That is  a very t actful descriptio n of my disability , Mother .
And alto gether true. W ere you to sing one of these pieces” –
his f inger , longer and more slend er , but nearly the same size as
Mother Hildegarde’ s, tapped the parchment with a soft rustling
noise – “I could  not tell it from the Kyrie Eleison or from ‘ La
Dame fait bien’ – except by the words,” he added, with a grin.
Now it was Mother Hildegarde’ s turn to laugh.
“Indeed, Monsieur Fraser ,” she said. “W ell, at least you
listen to the words!” She took the sheaf of papers into her
hands, rif fling the tops. I could  see the faint swelling of her
throat a bove the tight band of her wimple as she read, as
though she was singing silently  to herself, and one lar ge foot
twitched slightly , keeping time.
Jamie sa t very still upon his stool, good hand folded over
the crooked one on his knee, w atching her . The slanted blue
eyes were intent, and he paid no attention to the ongoing noise
from the  depths of the Hôpital behind him. Patients cried out,
orderlies and nuns shouted back and forth, family members
shrieked in sorrow or dismay , and the muted clang of metal
instruments echo ed of f the ancient stones of the building, but
neither Jamie nor Mother Hildegarde moved.
At la st she lowe red the pages, peering at him over the tops.
Her eyes were sparkling, and she looked suddenly like a young
girl.
“I th ink you are right!” she said. “I cannot take time to
think it over carefully just now” – she glanced toward the
doorway , momentarily darkened by the form of an orderly
dashing past with a lar ge sack of lint – “but there is something
odd her e.” She tapped the pages on the desk, straightening
them into an orderly stack.“How extraordinary ,” she said.
“Be tha t as it may , Mother – can you, with your gift,
discern what this particular pattern is? It would be dif ficult; I
have rea son to suppose that it is a cipher , and that the language
of the message is English, though the text of the songs is in
German.”
Mother Hildegarde uttered a small grunt of surprise.
“English? Y ou are sure?”
Jamie shook his head. “Not sure, no, but I think so. For
one reason, there is the country of origin; the songs were sent
from England.”
“W ell, Monsieur ,” she said, arching one eyebrow . “Y our
wife speaks English, does she not? And I imagine that you
would b e willing to sacrifice her company to assist me in
performing this endeavor for you?”
Jamie eyed her , the half-smile o n his face the mirror image
of hers. He glanced down at his feet, where Bouton’ s whiskers
quivered with the ghost of a growl.
“I’ll mak e ye a bar gain, Mother ,” he said. “If your wee dog
doesna bite me in the arse on t he way out, you can have my
wife.”
 
And so, that evening, instead of returning home to Jared’ s
house in  the Rue T remoulins, I took supper with the sisters of
the C ouvent des Anges at their long refectory table, and then
retired for the evening’ s work to Mother Hildegarde’ s private
rooms.
There were three rooms in the Superior ’ s suite. The outer
one was furnished as a sitting  room, with a fair degree of
richness. This, after all, was where she must often receive
of ficial visitors. The second room was something of a shock,
simply because  I wasn’ t expecting it. At first, I had the
impression that there was nothing in the small room but a lar ge
harpsichord, made of gleam ing, polished walnut, and
decorated with small, hand-pain ted flowers sprouting from atwisting vine that ran along the sounding board above glowing
ebony keys.
On second look, I saw a few other bits of furniture in the
room, including a set of bookshe lves that ran the length of one
wall, stu f fed with works on musicology and hand-stitched
manuscripts muc h like the one Mother Hildegarde now laid on
the harpsichord’ s rack.
She mot ioned me to a chair placed before a small secretary
against one wall.
“Y ou will find blank paper and ink there, milady . Now , let
us see what this little piece of music may tell us.”
The music was written on heavy parchment, the lines of
the s taves cleanly ruled across the page. The notes themselves,
the clef signs, rests, and acci dentals, were all drawn with
considerable car e; this was plainly a final clean copy , not a
draft or a hastily scribbled tune. Across the top of the page was
the title “Lied des Landes.” A Song of the Country .
“The title, you see, suggests something simple, like a
volkslied ,” M other Hildegarde said, pointing one long, bony
forefinger at the page. “And yet the form of the composition is
something quite  dif ferent. Can you read music at sight?” The
big r ight hand, lar ge-knuckled and short-nailed, descended on
the keys with an impossibly delicate touch.
Leaning over Mother Hildegarde’ s black-clad shoulder , I
sang the  first three lines of the piece, making the best I could
of the German pronunciation. Then she stopped playing, and
twisted to look up at me.
“That is the b asic melody . It then repeats itself in
variations – but such  var iations! Y ou know , I have seen some
things re miniscent of this. By a little old German named Bach;
he sends me things now and again-” She waved carelessly at
the shelf of manuscripts. “He calls them ‘Inventions,’ and
they’re really quite clever; playi ng of f the variations in two or
three melodic lines simultaneously . This ” – she p ursed h er lips
at th e ‘Lied’ bef ore us – “is like a clumsy imitation of one of
his t hings. In fac t, I would swear that…” Muttering to herself,she pushed back the walnut bench and went to the shelf,
running a finger rapidly down the rows of manuscripts.
She fou nd what she was lookin g for , and returned to the
bench with three bound pieces of music.
“Here a re the Bach pieces. They’re fairly old, I haven’ t
looked at them in several years.  Still, I’m almost sure…” She
lapsed into silence, flipping qui ckly through the pages of the
Bach scripts on her knee, one at a time, glancing back now and
then at the “Lied” on the rack.
“Ha!” she let ou t a cry of triumph, and held out one of the
Bach pieces to me. “See there?”
The paper was titled “Goldber g V ariations,” in a crabbed,
smeared hand. I touched the paper with some awe, swallowed
hard, and looked back at the “L ied.” It took only a moment’ s
comparison to see what she meant.
“Y ou’re right, it’ s the same!” I said. “A note dif ferent here
and ther e, but basically it’ s exa ctly the same as the original
theme of the Bach piece. How very peculiar!”
“Isn’ t it?” she said, in tones of deep satisfaction. “Now ,
why is this anonymous composer stealing melodies and
treating them in such an odd fashion?”
This was clearly a rhetorical qu estion, and I didn’ t bother
with an answer , but asked one of my own.
“Is Bach’ s music much in vog ue these days, Mother?” I
certainly hadn’ t heard any at the musical salons I attended.
“No,” s he said, shaking her h ead as she peered at the
music. “Herr Bach is not well k nown in France; I believe he
had som e small popularity in Germany and in Austria fifteen
or tw enty years ago, but even there his music is not performed
much pu blicly . I  am afraid his music is not the sort to endure;
clever , but no heart. Hmph. Now , see here?” The blunt
forefinger tapped here, and here, and here, turning pages
rapidly .
“He has  repeated the same melo dy – almost – but changed
the key each time. I think this is perhaps what attracted your
husband’ s notice ; it is obvious even to someone who doesn’ tread music, because of the changing signatures – the note
tonique .”
It w as; each key  change was marked by a double vertical
line foll owed by a new treble clef sign and the signature of
sharps or flats.
“Five key changes in such a sho rt piece,” she said, tapping
the last one aga in for emphasis. “And changes that make no
sense at all, in te rms of music. L ook, the basic line is precisely
the same , yet we move from the  key of two flats, which is B-
flat majo r , to A-major , with thre e sharps. Stranger yet, now he
goes to a signature of two sharps, and yet he uses the G-sharp
accidental!”
“How very peculiar ,” I said. Adding a G-sharp accidental
to the section in  D-major had th e ef fect of making the musical
line identical with the A-major section. In other words, there
was no reason whatsoever to have changed the key signature.
“I don’ t  know German,” I said.  “Can you read the words,
Mother?”
She nodded, the folds of her black veil rustling with the
movement, small eyes intent on the manuscript.
“What truly execrable lyrics!” she murmured to herself.
“Not that one e xpects great poetry from Germans in general,
but r eally… still-” She broke of f with a shake of her veil. “W e
must assume that if your husban d is correct in assuming this to
be a cipher of some sort, that t he message lies embedded in
these w ords. They may therefore not be of great import in
themselves.”
“What does it say?” I asked.
“ ‘My shepherdess frolics with her lambs among the
verdant hills,’ ” she read. “Horrible grammar , though of course
liberties are often taken in writing songs, if the lyricist insists
upon the lines rhyming, which they nearly always do if it is a
love song.”
“Y ou know a lot  about love songs?” I asked curiously . Full
of surprises tonight, was Mother Hildegarde.“Any pi ece of good music is in  essence a love song,” she
replied matter -o f-factly . “But as for what you mean – yes, I
have seen a great many . When I was a young girl” – she
flashed her lar ge white teeth in  a smile, acknowledging the
dif ficulty of imagining her as a child – “I was something of a
prodigy , you understand. I could  play from memory anything I
heard, and I wro te my first composition at the age of seven.”
She gestured at the harpsichord , the rich veneer shining with
polish.
“My fam ily has wealth; had I  been a man, no doubt I
would have been a musician.” She spoke simply , with no trace
of regret.
“Surely you could still have composed music, if you’d
married?” I asked curiously .
Mother Hildegarde spread her  hands, grotesque in the
lamplight. I had seen those hands wrench loose a dagger
embedded in bone, guide a displaced joint back into
alignment, cup the blood-smeared head of a child emer ging
from bet ween its mother ’ s thighs. And I had seen those fingers
linger on the ebony keys with the delicacy of moths’ feet.
“W ell,” she said, after a momen t’ s contemplation, “it is the
fault of St. Anselm.”
“It is?”
She grinned at my expression, her ugly face quite
transformed from its stern public facade.
“Oh, yes. My g odfather – the Old Sun King,” she added
casually , “gave to me a book of  the Lives of the Saints for my
own Saint’ s Day when I was ei ght. It was a beautiful book,”
she said reminiscently , “with gilded pages and a jeweled
cover; in tended more as a work of art than a work of literature.
Still, I read it.  And while I enjoyed all of the stories –
particularly those of the martyrs – still there was one phrase in
the s tory of St. Anselm that seemed to strike a response in my
soul.”
She closed her eyes and tilted back her head, recalling.“St. Anselm was a man of great wisdom and great
learning, a Doctor of the Chur ch. But also a bishop, a man
who cared for the people of his flock, and looked after their
temporal needs as well as those of the spirit. The story detailed
all o f hi s works,  and then conclu ded in these words – ‘And so
he died, at the c onclusion of an eminently useful life, and thus
obtained his crown in Paradise.’ ” She paused, flexing her
hands lightly on her knees.
“There was something about that that appealed most
strongly to me. ‘An eminently u seful life.’ ” She smiled at me.
“I could think of many worse epitaphs than that, milady .” She
spread her hands suddenly and shrugged, an oddly graceful
gesture.
“I wishe d to be useful,” she said. Then, dismissing idle
conversation, sh e turned abruptly back to the music on the
rack.
“So,” she said. “Plainly the change in the key signatures –
the note tonique  – that i s the oddity . Where can we go with
that?”
My mouth dropped open with a small exclamation.
Speaking in French as we had been, I hadn’ t noticed before.
But observing Mother Hildegarde as she told her story , I had
been thinking in English, and when I glanced back at the
music it hit me.
“What is it?” the nun asked. “Y ou have thought of
something?”
“The key!” I sai d, half-laughing. “In French, a musical key
is the note tonique , but the word for an object that unlocks…”
I po inted to the lar ge bunch of k eys – normally carried on her
girdle – that Mother Hildegarde had laid aside on the
bookshelf when we came in. “That is a passe-partout , isn’ t
it?”
“Y es,” she said, watching me in puzzlement. She touched
the skeleton key in turn. “ Une passe-partout . That one,” she
said, pointing to a key with bar rel and wards, “is more likely
called a clef .”“A clef!” I exclaimed joyously . “Perfect!” I stabbed a
finger a t the sheet of music before us. “See, ma mèr e , in
English, the words are the same. A ‘key’ gives the basis of a
piece of  music, and a ‘key’ unlocks. In French, the clef  is a
key , and in En glish, the ‘clef ’ is also part of the musical
signature. And the key of the music is also the key to the
cipher . Jamie said  he thought it was an English cipher! Made
by a n Englishman with a real ly diabolical sense of humor ,
too,” I added.
W ith tha t small insight, the cipher proved not too dif ficult
to unrav el. If the maker was E nglish, the ciphered message
likely was in English, too, which meant that the German words
were provided only as a sourc e of letters. And having seen
Jamie’ s earlier ef forts with alphabets and shifting letters, it
took only a few tries to determine the pattern of the cipher .
“T wo flats means you must take every second letter ,
starting from the beginning of the section,” I said, frantically
scribbling down the results. “And three sharps means to take
every third letter , beginning at the end of the section. I suppose
he used German both for concealment and because it’ s so
bloody w ordy; i t takes nearly tw ice as many words to say the
same thing as it would in English.”
“Y ou have got ink on your nose,” Mother Hildegarde
observed. She peered over my shoulder . “Does it make sense?”
“Y es,” I said, my mouth gone suddenly dry . “Y es, it makes
sense.”
Deciphered, the message was brief and simple. Also
deeply disturbing.
“His Majesty’ s loyal subjects of England await his lawful
restoration. The sum of fifty thousand pounds is at your
disposal. As an earnest of good faith, this will be paid only in
person, upon His Highness’ s arr ival on the soil of England,” I
read. “And there’ s a letter left over , an ‘S.’ I don’ t know if
that’ s a signature  of sorts, or only something the maker needed
to make the German word come out right.”
“Hmph.” Moth er Hildegarde glanced curiously at the
scribbled messa ge, then at me . “Y ou will know already , ofcourse,” she said, with a nod, “but you may assure your
husband that I will keep this in confidence.”
“He wou ldn’ t have asked your h elp if he didn’ t trust you,”
I protested.
The sketchy brows rose to the edge of her wimple, and she
tapped the scribbled paper firmly .
“If this is the sort of endeavo r in which your husband
engages, he takes considerable risk in trusting anyone. Assure
him that I am sensible of the honor ,” she added dryly .
“I’ll do that,” I said, smiling.
“Why , chèr e Madame ,” she said, catching sight of me,
“you are looking quite pale! I myself often stay awake far into
the n ight when I am working on a new piece, so I tend to pay
little att ention t o the hour , but it must be late for you.” She
glanced at the hour -candle burning on the little table near the
door .
“Gracious! It is  gro wing late. Shall I summon Sister
Madeleine to take you to your chamber?” Jamie had agreed,
reluctantly , with  Mother Hildegarde’ s suggestion that I spend
the night at the Couvent des Anges, so that I need not return
home through the dark streets late at night.
I shook my head. I was tired, and my back ached from
sitting on the stool, but I didn’ t want to go to bed. The
implications of the musical message were too disturbing to
permit me to sleep right away , in any case.
“W ell, th en, let us take a little refreshment, in celebration
of your accomplishment.” Mother Hildegarde rose and went to
the o uter room, w here I heard th e ringing of a bell. Shortly one
of the serving s isters came, bearing a tray of hot milk and
small, ic ed cake s, and followed by Bouton. The serving sister
placed a  cake on a small china  plate and set it on the floor
before h im as a matter of cour se, laying beside it a bowl of
milk.
While I sipped my own hot mi lk, Mother Hildegarde set
aside the source of our labors, laying it on the secretary , andinstead placed a loose sheaf of music manuscript on the rack
of the harpsichord.
“I s hall play fo r you,” she announced. “It will help to
compose your mind for sleep.”
The mus ic was light and soothing, with a singing melody
that wov e back and forth from t reble voice to bass in a pattern
of pleasing complexity , but without the driving force of Bach.
“Is t hat yours?” I asked, choosin g a pause as she lifted her
hands at the conclusion of the piece.
She shook her head without turning around.
“No. A friend of mine, Jean Philippe Rameau. A good
theorist, but he does not write with great passion.”
I must have dozed, the music lu lling my senses, for I woke
suddenly to the murmur of Sister Madeleine’ s voice in my ear ,
and her warm, firm grip under my arm, lifting me to my feet
and leading me away .
Looking back, I could see the broad span of Mother
Hildegarde’ s black-swathed back, and the flex of powerful
shoulders bene ath the drape of her veil as she played,
oblivious now to the world beyond the sanctum of her
chamber . On the boards near he r feet lay Bouton, nose on his
paws, small body laid straight as the needle of a compass.
 
“So,” Jamie said, “it’ s gone a little further than talk –
maybe.”
“Maybe?” I echoed. “An of fer of fifty thousand pounds
sounds fairly definite.” Fifty thousand pounds, by current
standards, was the yearly income of a good-sized duchy .
He raised one eyebrow cynically at the musical manuscript
I had brought back with me from the convent.
“A ye, w ell. An of fer like th at is fairly safe, it it’ s
contingent on either Charles or James setting foot in England.
If Charles is i n England, it means he’ s gotten suf ficient
backing from other places to get him to Scotland, first. No,” he
said, rub bing hi s chin thoughtfully , “what’ s interesting aboutthis of fe r is that it’ s the first definite sign we’ve seen that the
Stuarts – or on e of them, at least – are actually making an
ef fort at mounting a restoration attempt.”
“One of them?” I caught the e mphasis. “Y ou mean you
think James isn’ t in on this?” I looked at the coded message
with even more interest.
“The message came to Charles,” Jamie reminded me, “and
it came from England – not through Rome. Fer gus got it from
a regula r messenger , in a packet marked with English seals;
not from a pap al messenger . And everything I’ve seen in
James’ s letters-” He shook his head, frowning. He hadn’ t yet
shaved, and the morning light ca ught random sparks of copper
among the auburn stubble of his beard.
“The packet had been opened; Charles has seen this
manuscript. The re was no date on it, so I dinna ken how long
ago it came to h im. And of cou rse, we don’ t have the letters
Charles has sent to his father . B ut there’ s no reference in any
of James’ s letters to anyone who could possibly be the
composer , let alone to any definite promises of support from
England.”
I could see the direction in which he was heading.
“And Louise de La T our was babbling about how Charles
meant to have he r marriage annulled and claim her as his wife,
once he was kin g. So you think perhaps Charles wasn’ t just
talking through his hat to impress her?”
“Maybe not,” he said. He poured water from the bedroom
ewer int o the basin and laved his face with water , preparatory
to shaving.
“So it’ s possible  that Charles is acting on his own?” I said,
horrified and intrigued by the p ossibility . “That James has set
him up for a masquerade of pretending to start a restoration
attempt, in order to keep Louis impressed with the Stuarts’
potential value, but-”
“But Ch arles is n’ t pretending?”  Jamie interrupted. “A ye,
that’ s how it seems. Is there a towel there, Sassenach?” Eyes
screwed shut and face dripping , he was patting about on thesurface of the table. I moved the manuscript to safety and
found the towel, draped over the foot of the bed.
He e xamined his razor critically , decided it would do, and
leaned over my dressing table  to look in the mirror as he
applied shaving soap to his cheeks.
“Why is it barbaric of me to tak e the hair of f my legs and
armpits, and it is n’ t barbaric for you to take it of f your face?” I
asked, watching him draw his u pper lip down over his teeth as
he scraped under his nose with tiny , delicate strokes.
“It is,” he replied, squinting at himself in the mirror . “But
it itches like a fiend if I don’ t.”
“Have you ever grown a beard?” I asked curiously .
“Not on purpose,” he replied, half-smiling as he scraped
one che ek, “but I’ve had one now and then when I couldna
help it – when I  lived as an outlaw in Scotland. When it came
to a choice between shaving in a cold burn with a dull razor
every morning or itching, I chose to itch.”
I lau ghed, watching him draw t he razor along the edge of
his jawbone with one long sweep.
“I can’ t imagine  what you’d lo ok like with a full beard.
I’ve only seen you in the stubbly stage.”
He smil ed on one side of his mouth, drawing the other up
as he scraped under the high, broad cheekbone on that side.
“Next time we’re invited to V ersailles, Sassenach, I’ll ask
if w e m ay visit the Royal zoo. Louis has a creature there that
one of his sea-captains brough t him from Borneo, called an
orang-utan. Ever seen one?”
“Y es,” I said, “the zoo in London had a pair before the
war .”
“Then you’ll know what I look  like in a beard,” he said,
smiling at me as he finishe d his shave with a careful
negotiation of the curve of his chin. “Scraggly and moth-eaten.
Rather like the V icomte Marigny ,” he added, “only red.”
As thou gh the name had remind ed him, he returned to the
main top ic of discussion, wiping the remains of soap of f hisface with the linen towel.
“So I suppose w hat we must do  now , Sassenach,” he said,
“is to keep a sharp eye out for Englishmen in Paris.” He
picked u p the manuscript of f the bed and rif fled the pages
thoughtfully . “I f anyone is ac tually willing to contemplate
support on this scale, I think th ey might be sending an envoy
to Charl es. If I were risking fifty thousand pounds, I might like
to see what I was getting for my money , wouldn’ t you?”
“Y es, I would,” I answered. “And speaking of Englishmen
– does His Highness patriotically buy his brandywine from
you and Jared, or does he by ch ance patronize the services of
Mr . Silas Hawkins?”
“Mr . Silas Hawkins, who is so eager to know what the
political climate is like in the Scottish Highlands?” Jamie
shook h is head at me admiri ngly . “And here I thought I
married you because ye had a fair face and a fine fat arse. T o
think yo u’ve a brain as well!” He neatly dodged the blow I
aimed at his ear , and grinned at me.
“I don’ t know , Sassenach, but I will before the day is out.”1 6  T H E  N A T U R E  O F  S U L F U R
P rince Charles did  pur chase his brandywine fro m Mr .
Hawkins. Beyond that discovery , though, we made little
progress over the course of the next four weeks. Things
continued much as before. Louis of France continued to ignore
Charles Stuart. Jamie continued to run the wine business and
to visit Prince Charles. Fer gus continued to steal letters.
Louise, Princess e de Rohan, appeared in public on the arm of
her husband, looking doleful, but blooming. I continued to
throw u p in the mornings, w ork at the Hôpital in the
afternoons, and smile graciousl y over the supper table in the
evenings.
T wo things happened, though, that looked like being
progress toward our goal. Charles, bored at confinement,
began to  invite Jamie to go to taverns with him in the evenings
– often without the restraining and discretionary presence of
his t utor , Mr . Sheridan, who pr ofessed himself much too old
for such revels.
“God, the man drinks like a fis h!” Jamie had exclaimed,
returning from one of these jau nts reeking of cheap wine. He
examined a lar ge stain on the front of his shirt critically .
“I’ll have to order a new shirt,” he said.
“W orth it,” I said, “if he tells you anything while he’ s
drinking. What does he talk about?”
“Hunting and women,” Jamie said succinctly , and declined
firmly to elaborate further . Eit her politics did not weigh as
heavily on Charles’ s mind as did Louise de La T our , or else he
was cap able of discretion, even in the absence of his tutor Mr .
Sheridan.
The second thing that happened was that Monsieur
Duverney , the Minister of Finan ce, lost at chess to Jamie. Not
once, but repeatedly . As Jami e had foreseen, the ef fect of
losing was merely to make Monsieur Duverney more
determined to win, and we were invited frequently toV ersailles, wher e I circulated, c ollecting gossip and avoiding
alcoves, and Jamie played chess, generally collecting an
admiring crowd to watch, though I didn’ t myself consider it
much of a spectator sport.
Jamie and the M inister of Finance, a small, round man
with stooped shoulders, were bent over the chessboard, both
apparently so intent on the game as to be oblivious to their
surroundings, despite the murmur of voices and the clink of
glasses just beyond their shoulders.
“I have seldom seen anything so wearisome as chess,”
murmured one of the ladies to a nother . “Amusement, they call
it! I sho uld be more amused watching my maid pick fleas of f
the black pageboys. At least they squeal and giggle a bit.”
“I shouldn’ t mind making the red-haired lad squeal and
giggle a bit,” said her companion, smiling charmingly at
Jamie, who had lifted his head and was gazing absently past
Monsieur Duverney . Her companion caught sight of me, and
dug the lady , a luscious blonde, in the ribs.
I sm iled pleasantly at her , rather nastily enjoying the deep
flush tha t rose from her low neckline, leaving her complexion
in rosy blotche s. As for Jamie , she could have twined her
plump fi ngers in  his hair for all the notice he would have paid,
so abstracted did he seem.
I wondered just what was occupying his concentration.
Surely it wasn’ t the game; Monsieur Duverney played a
dogged game of cautious positioning, but used the same
gambits repeatedly . The middle two fingers of Jamie’ s right
hand mo ved slightly against his thigh, a brief flutter of quickly
masked impatien ce, and I knew that whatever he was thinking
of, i t wasn’ t the game. It might take another half-hour , but he
held Monsieur Duverney’ s king in the palm of his hand.
The Duc  de Neve was standing next to me. I saw his dark
little eyes fix on  Jamie’ s fingers, then flick away . He paused
meditatively for a moment, surveying the board, then glided
away to increase his wager .
A footman paused by my shoulder and dipped
obsequiously , of fering me yet another glass of wine. I wavedhim away; I had  had enough du ring the evening that my head
was feeling light and my feet dangerously far away .
T urning to look for a place to sit down, I caught sight of
the C omte St. G ermain across the room. Perhaps he was what
Jamie had been looking at. The  Comte in turn was looking at
me; staring at me, in fact, with a smile on his face. It wasn’ t
his normal expression, and it didn’ t suit him. I didn’ t care for it
at all, in fact, but bowed as graciously as I could in his
direction, and then pushed of f into the throng of ladies,
chatting of this and that, but try ing wherever possible to lead
the conversation  in the directio n of Scotland and its exiled
king.
By a nd lar ge, th e prospects for a Stuart restoration did not
seem to be preoccupying the a ristocracy of France. When I
mentioned Charles Stuart now and then, the usual response
was a rolling of the eyes or a s hrug of dismissal. Despite the
good of f ices of the Earl of Mar  and the other Paris Jacobites,
Louis was stubbornly refusing to receive Charles at Court.
And a penniless  exile who was not in the King’ s favor was not
going to find himself invited out in society to make the
acquaintance of wealthy bankers.
“The King is not particularly pleased that his cousin should
have arrived in France without seeking his permission,” the
Comtesse de Brabant told me when I had introduced the topic.
“He has  been heard to say that England can stay Protestant, so
far a s he himse lf is concerned,” she confided. “And if the
English burn in hell with Geo r ge of Hanover , so much the
better .” She pursed her lips in sy mpathy; she was a kindly sort.
“I am  sorry ,” sh e said. “I know that must be disappointing to
you and your husband, but really…” She shrugged.
I t hough t we might be able to accommodate this sort of
disappointment, and scouted eagerly for further bits of gossip
along th ese lines, but met with little success this evening.
Jacobites, I was given to understand, were a bore.
“Rook to queen’ s pawn five,” Jamie mumbled later that
evening as we p repared for bed. W e were staying as guests in
the pala ce once more. As the ch ess game had lasted well past
midnight, and the Minister wou ld not hear of our undertakingthe jour ney back to Paris at such an hour , we had been
accommodated in a small appartement  –  this o ne a notch or
two abo ve the first, I noted. It had a featherbed, and a window
overlooking the south parterre.
“Rooks, eh?” I said, sliding into  the bed and stretching out
with a groan. “Are you going to dream about chess tonight?”
Jamie nodded, with a jaw-cracking yawn that made his
eyes water .
“A ye, I ’m sure I will. I hope it willna disturb ye,
Sassenach, if I castle in my sleep.”
My feet  curled in the sheer joy of being unfettered and
relieved of my i ncreasing weight, and my lower spine sent out
sharp jolts of a mildly pleasant  pain as it readjusted to lying
down.
“Y ou ca n stand on your head in  your sleep if you want,” I
said, yawning myself. “Nothing will bother me tonight.”
I have seldom been more wrong.
I was dreaming of the baby . Grown almost to the birthing,
it ki cked and he aved in my swollen belly . My hands went to
the mound, massaging the stretched skin, trying to quiet the
turmoil within. But the squirming went on, and in the
unexcited fashio n of dreams, I realized that it was not a baby ,
but a  sna ke that writhed in my b elly . I doubled, drawing up my
knees as I wrestled the serpent, my hands groping and
pummeling, searching for the head of the beast that darted and
thrust un der my  skin. My skin was hot to the touch, and my
intestines coiled, turning into snakes themselves, biting and
thrashing as they twined together .
“Claire! W ake up, lass! What’ s amiss?” The shaking and
calling roused me at last to a fuzzy apprehension of my
surroundings. I was in bed, an d it was Jamie’ s hand on my
shoulder , and the linen sheets over me. But the snakes
continued to writhe in my bel ly , and I moaned loudly , the
sound alarming me almost as much as it did Jamie.
He flung back the sheets and rolled me onto my back,
trying to  push my knees down. I stayed stubbornly rolled intoa ba ll, clutching my stomach, t rying to contain the pangs of
sharp agony that stabbed through me.
He y anked the quilt back over me and rushed out of the
room, barely pausing to snatch his kilt from the stool.
I had little attention to spare for anything other than my
inner turmoil. My ears were ringing, and a cold sweat soaked
my face.
“Madame? Madame!”
I o pened my ey es enough to se e the maid assigned to our
appartement , eye s frantic and hair awry , bending over the bed.
Jamie, half-naked and still more frantic, was behind her . I shut
my e yes, groaning, but not before I saw him grab the maid by
the shoulder , hard enough to shake her curls loose from her
nightcap.
“Is she losing the child? Is she?”
It se emed extremely likely . I tw isted on the bed, grunting,
and doubled tighter , as though to protect the burden of pain I
contained.
There was an i ncreasing babb le of voices in the room,
mostly female, and a number o f hands poked and prodded at
me. I heard a male voice speaking amid the babble; not Jamie,
someone French. At the voice’ s direction, a number of hands
fastened themselves to my ankles and shoulders and stretched
me flat upon the bed.
A hand reached under my night dress and probed my belly .
I opened my eyes, panting, and saw Monsieur Flèche, the
Royal Physicia n, kneeling by the bed as he frowned in
concentration. I  should have fe lt flattered at this evidence of
the King’ s favor , but had little attention to spare for it. The
character of the pain seemed t o be changing; while it grew
stronger in spasms, it was mor e or less constant, and yet it
seemed to be almost moving , traveling from somewhere high
up in my abdomen to a lower spot.
“Not a miscarriage,” Monsieur F lèche was assuring Jamie,
who hovered anxiously over his shoulder . “There is no
bleeding.” I saw one of the attending ladies staring in rapthorror at the sca rs on his back.  She grasped a companion by
the sleeve, calling her attention to them.
“Perhaps an inflammation of t he gallbladder ,” Monsieur
Flèche was saying. “Or a sudden chill of the liver .”
“Idiot,” I said through clenched teeth.
Monsieur Flèche stared haught ily down his rather lar ge
nose at me, belatedly adding his gold-rimmed pince-nez to
increase the ef fect. He laid a h and upon my clammy brow ,
incidentally covering my eyes so that I could no longer glare at
him.
“Most likely the liver ,” he was saying to Jamie. “Impaction
of the gallbladder causes this accumulation of bilious humors
in th e bl ood, wh ich cause pain –  and temporary derangement,”
he a dded authoritatively , pressin g down harder as I thrashed to
and fro. “She should be bled at once. Plato, the basin!”
I y anked  one hand free and batted the restraining hand of f
my head.
“Get away from me, you blood y quack! Jamie! Don’ t let
them touch me with that!” Plato, Monsieur Flèche’ s assistant,
was adv ancing upon me with lan cet and basin, while the ladies
in the backgrou nd gasped and f anned each other , lest they be
overcome with excitement at this drama.
Jamie, white-fa ced, glanced helplessly between me and
Monsieur Flèche. Coming to a sudden decision, he grabbed the
hapless Plato and pulled him b ack from the bed, turned him
and prop elled him toward the do or , lancet stabbing the air . The
maids and ladies fell back shrieking before him.
“Monsieur! Monsieur le chevalier !” T he physician was
expostulating. He had clapped his wig professionally upon his
head when called, but had not  taken time to dress, and the
sleeves of his bedgown flapped like wings as he followed
Jamie across the room, waving his arms like a demented
scarecrow .
The pain increased once more, a vise squeezing my
insides, and I gasped and doubled up once more. As it eased a
bit, I opened my eyes and saw o ne of the ladies, her eyes fixedalertly on my fa ce. A look of dawning realization passed over
her feat ures, and still looking at me, she leaned over to
whisper to one of her companio ns. There was too much noise
in the room to hear , but I read her lips clearly .
“Poison,” she said.
The pain shifted abruptly lower with an ominous interior
gur gle, and I realized finally what it was. Not a miscarriage.
Not app endicitis, still less a ch illed liver . Nor was it poison,
precisely . It was bitter cascara.
 
“Y ou,” I said, advancing menacingly on Master Raymond,
crouched defensively behind his worktable, beneath the
protective aegis of his stuf fed crocodile. “Y ou! Y ou bloody
frog-faced little worm!”
“Me, madonna? I have done you no harm, have I?”
“Aside from causing me to have violent diarrhea in the
presence of thirty-odd people, making me think I was having a
miscarriage, and scaring my husband out of his skin, no harm
at all!”
“Oh, you r husband was present?” Master Raymond looked
uneasy .
“He was,” I ass ured him. It was in fact with considerable
dif ficulty that I had succeeded in preventing Jamie from
coming up to th e apothecary’ s shop and extracting, by force,
such information as Master Raymond possessed. I had finally
persuaded him to wait with the c oach outside, while I talked to
the amphibious proprietor .
“But you aren’ t dead, madonna,” the little herbalist pointed
out. He had no brows to speak of, but one side of his wide,
heavy forehead crinkled upward. “Y ou could have been, you
know .”
In the stress of t he evening and the physical shakiness that
followed, I had rather overlooked this fact.
“So it wasn’ t just a practical joke?” I said, a little weakly .
“Someone really meant to poison me, and I’m not dead onlybecause you have scruples?”
“Perhaps my scruples are not entirely responsible for your
survival, madon na; it is possible  that it was a joke – I imagine
there are  other purveyors from whom one might obtain bitter
cascara. But I h ave sold that substance to two persons within
the last month – and neither of them asked for it.”
“I se e.” I drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration
from my brow with my glove. So we had two  potential
poisoners loose; just what I needed.
“W ill you tell me who?” I asked bluntly . “They might buy
from so meone else, next time. Someone without your
scruples.”
He nodded, his wide, froggy mouth twitching in thought.
“It is  a possibilit y , madonna. As for the actual purchasers, I
doubt that information would help you. They were servants;
plainly a cting on  the orders of a master . One was maid to the
V icomtesse de Rambeau; the other a man I did not recognize.”
I drumm ed my fingers on the counter . The only person
who had  made threats against m e was the Comte St. Germain.
Could he have hired an anonymous servant to procure what he
thought was poison, and then sli pped it into my glass himself?
Casting my mind back to the gathering at V ersailles, I thought
it certai nly possible. The goblets of wine had been passed
around on trays by servants; w hile the Comte had not come
within a rm’ s length of me himself, it would have been no great
problem to bribe a servant to give me a particular glass.
Raymond was eyeing me curiously . “I would ask you,
madonna, have you done something to antagonize la
V icomtesse? Sh e is a very jealous woman; this would not be
the first time she has sought my aid in disposing of a rival,
though fortunately her jealousies are short-lived. The V icomte
has a roving eye, you understand – there is always a new rival
to displace her thoughts of the last one.”
I sat down, uninvited.
“Rambeau?” I said, trying to a ttach the name to a face.
Then the mists of memory cleared, revealing a stylishlydressed body and a homely round face, both liberally splashed
with snuf f.
“Rambeau!” I exclaimed. “W ell, yes, I’ve met the man, but
all I  did  was to smack him across the face with my fan when
he bit my toes.”
“In some moods, that would be suf ficient provocation for
la V icomtesse,” Master Raymond observed. “And if so, then I
believe you are likely safe from further attacks.”
“Thanks,” I said dryly . “And if it wasn’ t the V icomtesse?”
The little apothecary hesitated for a moment, his eyes
narrowed against the glare of the morning sun that shone
through the lozenged panes behind me. Then he made up his
mind, and turned toward the st one table where his alembics
simmered, jerking his head at me to follow .
“Come with me, madonna. I have something for you.”
T o my surprise, he ducked beneath the table and
disappeared. As he didn’ t come back, I bent down and peered
under th e table myself. A bed of charcoal was glowing on the
hearth, but there was space to either side of it. And in the wall
beneath the table, concealed by  the shadows, was the darker
space of an opening.
W ith only a lit tle hesitation, I kilted up my skirts and
waddled under the table after him.
On t he o ther sid e of the wall, there was room to stand up,
though the room was quite small. The building’ s outer
structure gave no hint of it.
T wo wa lls of the hidden roo m were taken up by a
honeycomb of shelves, each c ell dustless and immaculate,
each dis playing the skull of a beast. The impact of the wall
was enough to m ake me take a step backward; all the empty
eyes seemed trained on me, teeth bared in gleaming welcome.
I bl inked several times before I was able to locate
Raymond, crouched cautiously at the foot of this ossuary like
the resident acolyte. He held his  arms raised nervously before
him, eying me rather as though he expected me either to
scream o r to throw myself upon him. But I had seen sights agood deal more grisly than a m ere rank of polished bone, and
walked forward calmly to examine them more closely .
He had everythi ng, it seemed. T iny skulls, of bat, mouse
and shrew , the bones transparent, little teeth spiked in
pinpoints of carnivorous ferocity . Horses, from the huge
Percherons, wi th massive scimitar -shaped jaws looking
eminently suitable for flattening  platoons of Philistines, down
to t he skulls of donkeys, as stubbornly enduring in their
miniature curves as those of the enormous draft horses.
They ha d a certain appeal, so  still and so beautiful, as
though e ach obj ect held still the  essence of its owner , as if the
lines of bone held the ghost of t he flesh and fur that once they
had borne.
I reached out and touched one of the skulls, the bone not
cold as I would have expected, but strangely inert, as though
the vanished warmth, long gone, hovered not far of f.
I ha d se en huma n remains treated with far less reverence;
the skul ls of early Christian martyrs jammed cheek by bony
jowl together in heaps in the catacombs, thigh bones tossed in
a pile like jackstraws underneath.
“A b ear?” I said , speaking softly . A big skull, this one, the
canine teeth curved for ripping, but the molars oddly flattened.
“Y es, madonna.” Seeing that I was not afraid, Raymond
relaxed. His hand floated out, b arely skimming the curves of
the blunt, solid skull. “Y ou see the teeth? An eater of fish, of
meat” – a smal l finger traced the long, wicked curve of the
canine, the flat s errations of molar – “but a grinder of berries,
of grubs. They seldom starve, because they will eat anything.”
I turned slowly from side to side, admiring, touching one
here and there.
“They’re lovely ,” I said. W e spoke in quiet tones, as
though to speak loudly might rouse the silent sleepers.
“Y es.” Raymon d’ s fingers touched them as mine did,
stroking the long frontal bones, tracing the delicate squamosal
arch of the chee k. “They hold the character of the animal, yousee. Y ou  can tell much about what was, only from what is
left.”
He turne d over one of the smaller skulls, pointing out the
swelling bulges on the underside, like small, thin-walled
balloons.
“Here – the canal of the ear enters into these, so that the
sounds echo within the skull. Hence the sharp ears of the rat,
madonna.”
“T ympanic bullae,” I said, nodding.
“Ah? I have bu t little Latin. My names for such things
are… my own.”
“Those…” I gestured upward. “Those are special, aren’ t
they?”
“Ah. Y es, madonna. They are wolves. V ery old wolves.”
He lifted down one of the sku lls, handling it with reverent
care. The snout was long and c anid, with heavy canines and
broad carnassial teeth. The sagittal crest rose stark and
commanding from the back of the skull, testimony to the
heavy muscles of the brawny neck that had once supported it.
Not a soft dull  white like the  other skulls, these were
stained and streaked with brown, and shone glossy with much
polishing.
“Such beasts are no more, madonna.”
“No more? Extinct, you mean?” I touched it once more,
fascinated. “Where on earth did you get them?”
“Not on  t he earth, mado nna. Under it. They came from a
peat bog, buried many feet down.”
Looking closely , I could see the dif ferences between these
skulls and the n ewer , whiter ones on the opposite wall. These
animals had been lar ger than ordinary wolves, with jaws that
might ha ve crac ked the leg bon es of a running elk or torn the
throat from a fallen deer .
I s hudde red slightly at the touc h, reminded of the wolf I
had killed outside W entworth Prison, and its pack-mates who
had stalked me in the icy twilight, barely six months ago.“Y ou do not care for wolves, madonna?” Raymond asked.
“Y et the  bears and the foxes do not trouble you? They also are
hunters, eaters of flesh.”
“Y es, but not mine,” I said wryly , handing him back the
age-dark skull. “I feel a good deal more sympathy with our
friend t he elk.” I patted the high jutting nose with some
af fection.
“Sympathy?” Th e soft black ey es regarded me curiously .
“It is an unusual emotion to feel for a bone, madonna.”
“W ell… yes,” I said, slightly embarrassed, “but they don’ t
really seem like just bones, you know . I mean, you can tell
something about them, and get a feeling for what the animal
was like, looking at these. They aren’ t just inanimate objects.”
Raymond’ s toothless mouth str etched wide, as though I
had inadvertentl y said something that pleased him, but he said
nothing in reply .
“Why do you h ave all these?” I asked abruptly , suddenly
realizing that racks of animal skulls were hardly the usual
appurtenances o f an apothecary’ s shop. Stuf fed crocodiles,
possibly , but not all this lot.
He shrugged good-naturedly .
“W ell, t hey are company , of a  sort, while I pursue my
work.” He gestured toward a cluttered workbench in one
corner . “And while they may talk to me of many things, they
are not so noisy as to attract the attention of the neighbors.
Come here,” he said, changing subjects abruptly . “I have
something for you.”
I fol lowed him t oward a tall cab inet at the end of the room,
wondering.
He was  not a naturalist, certa inly not a scientist, as I
understood the term. He kept no  notes, made no drawings, no
records that others might consult and learn from. And yet I had
the o dd conviction that he want ed very much to teach me the
things that he knew – a sympathy for bones, perhaps?
The cab inet was painted with a number of odd signs, tailed
and whorled, among what appeared to be pentagons andcircles; Cabbalistic symbols. I recognized one or two, from
some of Uncle Lamb’ s historical references.
“Interested in the Cabbala, are you?” I asked, eyeing the
symbols with some amusement. That would account for the
hidden w orkroom. While there was a strong interest in occult
matters among some of the French literati and the aristocracy ,
it w as an inter est kept highly clandestine, for fear of the
Church’ s cleansing wrath.
T o my surprise, Raymond laugh ed. His blunt, short-nailed
fingers pressed here and there  on the front of the cabinet,
touching the center of one symbol, the tail of another .
“W ell, no, madonna. Most Cabbalists tend to be rather
poor , so I do not  seek their comp any often. But the symbols do
keep curious people out of my cabinet. Which, if you think of
it, is no small power for a bit of paint to exercise. So perhaps
the Cabbalists are right, after a ll, when they say these signs
hold power?”
He s miled mischievously at me,  as the cabinet door swung
open. I could se e that it was in f act a double cabinet; if a nosy
person ignored the warning of th e symbols and merely opened
the door , he or she would no doubt see only the harmless
contents of an apothecary’ s closet. But if the proper sequence
of h idden catches was pressed, then the inner shelves swung
out as well, revealing a deep cavity behind them.
He pulled out one of the small drawers that lined the
cavity , and upended it into his hand. Stirring the contents, he
plucked out a single lar ge white crystalline stone and handed it
to me.
“For you,” he said. “For protection.”
“What? Magic?” I asked cynically , tilting the crystal from
side to side in my palm.
Raymond laughed. He held his hand over the desk and let
a h andfu l of small colored stone s trickle through his fingers, to
bounce on the stained felt blotting-pad.
“I suppo se you can call it so, madonna. Certainly I can
char ge m ore for it when I do.” One fingertip nudged a palegreenish crystal free from the pile of colored stones.
“They h ave no more – and sure ly no less – magic than the
skulls. Call them the bones of the earth. They hold the essence
of th e matrix in  which they grew , and whatever powers that
held, you may find here as well.” He flicked a small yellowish
nodule in my direction.
“Sulfur . Grind it with a few o ther small things, touch it
with a match, an d it will explode. Gunpowder . Is that magic?
Or is it only the nature of sulfur?”
“I suppo se it depends who you’re talking to,” I observed,
and his face split in a delighted grin.
“If you ever seek to leave you r husband, madonna,” he
said, chu ckling, “be assured that you won’ t starve. I said  you
were a professional, did I not?”
“My husband!” I exclaimed, paling. My mind suddenly
made sense of the muf fled noises coming from the distant
shop. There was a loud thump, as of a lar ge fist brought down
with con siderable force on a co untertop, and the deep rumble
of a  voice inclin ed to brook no interference made itself heard
amid the babble of other sounds.
“Bloody Christ! I for got Jamie!”
“Y our husband is here?” Raymond’ s eyes went wider even
than usual, and had he not already been so pale, I imagine he
would have gone white, too.
“I le ft him outside,” I explaine d, stooping to cross back
through the secret opening. “ He must have got tired of
waiting.”
“W ait, madonna !” Raymond’ s hand gripped my elbow ,
stopping me. He put his other hand over mine, the one that
held the white crystal.
“That crystal, madonna. I said it is for your protection.”
“Y es, yes,” I said impatiently , hearing my name being
shouted outside with increasing volume. “What does it do,
then?”“It is sensitive to  poison, madonna. It will change color , in
the presence of several harmful compounds.”
That stopped me. I straightened up and stared at him.
“Poison?” I said, slowly . “Then…”
“Y es, madonna. Y ou may be still in some danger .”
Raymond’ s frog like face was grim. “I cannot say for sure, or
from which direction, for I do not know . If I find out, be
assured I will tell you.” His eyes flicked uneasily toward the
entrance through  the hearth. A thunder of blows sounded on
the outer wall. “Assure your husband as well, please,
madonna.”
“Don’ t w orry ,” I told him, duc king under the low lintel.
“Jamie doesn’ t bite – I don’ t think.”
“I was not worried about his teeth , m adon na” cam e from
behind me as I walked duckfooted over the ashes of the hearth.
Jamie, in  the act of raising his d agger -hilt to hammer again
on the paneling, caught sight  of me emer ging from the
fireplace and lowered it.
“Och, th ere ye are,” he observed  mildly . He tilted his head
to on e si de, watc hing me brush s oot and ashes from the hem of
my gown, then scowled at th e sight of Raymond peeping
cautiously out from under the drying table.
“Ah, and there’ s our wee toadl ing, as well. Has he some
explanation, Sassenach, or had I best pin him up wi’ the rest?”
Not taki ng his eyes of f Raymon d, he nodded toward the wall
of th e outer wo rkshop, where a number of dried toads and
frogs were pinned to a long strip of hanging felt.
“No, no,” I said hastily as Raymond made to duck back
into his sanctuar y . “He’ s told me  everything. In fact, he’ s been
most  helpful.”
W ith some reluctance, Jamie put up his dirk, and I reached
down a hand to  draw Raymond out of hiding. He flinched
slightly at the sight of Jamie.
“This man is yo ur husband, madonna?” he asked, in the
tones of someone hoping the answer would be “no.”“Y es, of course,” I answered. “My husband, James Fraser ,
my lord  Broch T uarach,” I sai d, waving at Jamie, though I
could scarcely have been referring to anyone else. I waved in
the other direction. “Master Raymond.”
“So I gathered,”  said Jamie dryly . He bowed and extended
a ha nd toward Raymond, whose head reached a few inches
past Jamie’ s waist. Raymond touched the outstretched hand
briefly a nd yanked his own ba ck, unable to repress a mild
shiver . I stared at him in amazement.
Jamie merely raised one eyebrow , then leaned back and
settled h imself against the edge of the table. He crossed his
arms across his chest.
“All right, then,” he said. “What about it?”
I made most of the explanations, Raymond contributing
only monosyllables of confirmation from time to time. The
little apothecary  seemed deprived of all his normal sly wit, and
huddled on a stool near the  fire, shoulders hunched in
wariness. Only when I had finis hed with an explanation of the
white crystal – a nd the presumed need for it – did he stir and
seem to take on a little life once more.
“It is true, milord,” he assured Jamie. “I do not know , in
fact, whether it is your wife or yourself that may be in danger ,
or perhaps the two of you together . I have heard nothing
specific; only the name ‘Fraser ,’ spoken in a place where
names are seldom named in blessing.”
Jamie glanced sharply at him. “A ye? And you frequent
such pla ces, do  you, Master R aymond? Are the people you
speak of associates of yours?”
Raymond smiled, a little wanly . “I should be inclined to
describe them more as a business rivals, milord.”
Jamie grunted. “Mmmphm. A y e, well, and anyone who
tries something may get a bit more of a blessing than he’ s
bar gained for .” He touched the dirk at his belt, and
straightened up.
“Still, I thank ye for the warni ng, Master Raymond.” He
bowed t o the apothecary , but di dn’ t of fer his hand again. “Asfor the other” – he cocked an ey ebrow at me – “if my wife is
disposed to for give your actions, then it isna my place to say
more ab out it. Not,” he added, “that I wouldna advise ye to
pop bac k in your wee hole, the next time the V icomtesse
comes into your shop. Come along then, Sassenach.”
As we rattled toward the Rue T remoulins, Jamie was
silent, staring out the window o f the coach as the stif f fingers
of his right hand tapped against his thigh.
“A p lace where names are seldom named in blessing,” he
murmured as the coach turned into the Rue Gamboge. “What
might that be, I wonder?”
I rem embered the Cabbalistic signs on Raymond’ s cabinet,
and a small shiver raised the hairs on my forearms. I
remembered Mar guerite’ s gossip about the Comte St.
Germain, and Madame de Ramage’ s warning. I told Jamie
about them, and what Raymond had said.
“ He  may regard it as paint and window dressing,” I
finished, “but plainly he knows people who don’ t, or who is he
looking to keep out of his cabinet?”
Jamie no dded. “ A ye. I’ve heard a bit – only a bit – about
such go ings-on around the Court. I paid no attention at the
time, th inking it only silliness, but now I’ll find out a bit
more.” He laughed, suddenly , a nd drew me close to his side.
“I’ll set Murtagh to follow the  Comte St. Germain. That’ll
give the Comte a r eal  demon to play with.”1 7  P O S S E S S I O N
M urtagh was duly set to watch the  comings and goings of
the Comte St. G ermain, but beyond reporting that the Comte
entertained a remarkable numbe r of persons in his home – of
both sexes and all classes – detected nothing particularly
mysterious. The Comte did have one visitor of note, though –
Charles Stuart, who came one afternoon, stayed for an hour ,
and left.
Charles had begun to require  Jamie’ s company more
frequently on his expeditions through the taverns and low
places of the city . I personally  thought this had more to do
with Jul es de La T our de Rohan’ s party , held to celebrate the
announcement of his wife’ s pregnancy , than it did with any
sinister influence of the Comte’ s.
These expeditions sometimes l asted well into the night,
and I became accustomed to going to bed without Jamie,
waking when he crawled in bes ide me, his body chilled with
walking through  the evening fog, and the smell of tobacco
smoke and liquor clinging to his hair and skin.
“He’ s so  distraught about that w oman that I dinna think he
even remembers  he’ s the heir to the thrones of Scotland and
England,” Jamie said, returning from one of these expeditions.
“Goodness, he must  be upset,” I said, sarcastically . “Let’ s
hope he stays that way .”
A w eek later , tho ugh, I woke to the cold gray light of dawn
to find the bed beside me still vacant, the coverlet flat and
undisturbed.
“Is milord Broch T uarach in his study?” I leaned over the
banister in my nightgown, startling Magnus, who was passing
through the lower hall. Perhaps  Jamie had chosen to sleep on
the sofa in the study , so as not to disturb me.
“No, mi lady ,” he answered, staring up at me. “I came to
unbolt th e front door , and found that it had never been bolted.
Milord did not come home last night.”I sa t down heav ily on the top step. I must have looked
rather alarming, because the elderly butler nearly sprinted up
the stairs to me.
“Madame,” he said, anxiously chafing one of my hands.
“Madame, are you all right?”
“I’ve been better , but it isn’ t im portant. Magnus, send one
of th e footmen to Prince Charles’ s house in Montmartre at
once. Have him see if my husband is there.”
“At once , milady . And I will send Mar guerite up to attend
you, as well.” He turned and hu rried down the stairs, the soft
felt slippers he wore for his m orning duties making a soft,
shushing noise on the polished wood.
“And Murtagh!” I called after Magnus’ s departing back.
“My husband’ s kinsman. Bring  him to me, please!” The first
thought that had sprung into m y mind was that Jamie had
perhaps stayed the night at Charles’ s villa; the second, that
something had happened to him, whether by accident or by
someone’ s deliberate intent.
“Where is he?” Murtagh’ s crack ed voice spoke at the foot
of the stair . He  had obviously just awakened; his face was
creased from whatever he had been lying on, and there were
bits of straw in the folds of his ratty shirt.
“How should I know?” I snapped. Murtagh always looked
as though he suspected everyone of something, and being
rudely wakened had not improved his habitual scowl. The
sight of him was  nonetheless reassuring; if anything rough was
in the of fing, Murtagh looked the person to be dealing with it.
“He we nt out with Prince Charles last night, and didn’ t
come ba ck. That’ s all I know .” I pulled myself up by the
banister railing and smoothed down the silk folds of my
nightgown. The fires had been li t, but hadn’ t had time to warm
the house, and I was shivering.
Murtagh rubbed a hand over his face to assist thought.
“Mphm. Has someone gone to Montmartre?”
“Y es.”“Then I’ ll wait ’ til they come back with word. If Jamie’ s
there, well and g ood. If he isn’ t, mayhap they’ll know when he
parted company with His Highness, and where.”
“And wh at if they’re both gone ? What if the Prince didn’ t
come home either?” I asked. If there were Jacobites in Paris,
there were also t hose who opposed the restoration of the Stuart
line. And while assassinating Charles Stuart might not assure
the failu re of a potential Scott ish Rising – he did, after all,
have a younger brother , Henry – it might go some way toward
damping James’ s enthusiasm for such a venture – if he had any
to start with, I thought distractedly .
I remembered vividly the story Jamie had told me, of the
attempt on his life during which he had met Fer gus. Street
assassinations were far from uncommon, and there were gangs
of ruf fians who hunted the Paris streets after dark.
“Y ou’d best go dress yourself, l assie,” Murtagh remarked.
“I can see the gooseflesh from here.”
“Oh! Y e s, I suppose so.” I glanc ed down at my arms; I had
been hugging myself as suppositions raced through my mind,
but to little ef fect; my teeth were beginning to chatter .
“Madame! Y ou will give yourself a chill, surely!”
Mar guerite came  stumping rapidly up the stairs, and I allowed
her to shoo m e into the bed room, glancing back to see
Murtagh below , carefully examining the point of his dirk
before ramming it home in its sheath.
“Y ou should be in bed, Madame!” Mar guerite scolded. “It
isn’ t goo d for the child, for you  to let yourself be chilled like
that. I will fetch a warming pan at once; where is your
nightrobe? Get into it at once, y es, that’ s right…” I shrugged
the heavy woolen nightrobe over the thin silk of my
nightgown, but ignored Mar guerite’ s clucking to go to the
window and open the shutters.
The street outside was beginnin g to glow as the rising sun
struck th e upper facades of the  stone houses along the Rue
T remoulins. The re was a good deal of activity on the street,
early as it was; maids and footmen engaged in scrubbing steps
or polishing brass gate-fittings, barrowmen selling fruit,vegetables, and fresh seafood, crying their wares along the
street, and the cooks of the great houses popping up from their
basement doors like so many jin ni, summoned by the cries of
the barrowmen. A delivery cart loaded with coal clopped
slowly a long the street, pulled b y an elderly horse who looked
as though he would much rather be in his stable. But no sign
of Jamie.
I at last allowed an anxious Mar guerite to persuade me into
bed, for the sake of warmth, but couldn’ t go back to sleep.
Every sound from below broug ht me to the alert, hoping that
each foo tstep on the pavement outside would be followed by
Jamie’ s voice in the hall below . The face of the Comte St.
Germain kept coming between me and sleep. Alone among the
French nobility , he had some connection with Charles Stuart.
He had,  in all likelihood, been behind the earlier attempt on
Jamie’ s life… and on mine. He  was known to have unsavory
associations. W a s it possible that he had arranged to have both
Charles and Jamie removed? Whether his purposes were
political or personal made little dif ference, at this point.
When at  last the sound of steps  below did come, I was so
occupied with visions of Jamie lying in a gutter with his throat
cut, that I didn’ t realize he was  home until the bedroom door
opened.
“Jamie!” I sat up in bed with a cry of joy .
He smiled at me, then yawned immensely , making no
ef fort to  cover his mouth. I cou ld see a goodly distance down
his throa t, and observed with relief that it wasn’ t cut. On the
other hand, he looked distinctl y the worse for wear . He lay
down on the bed  next to me and stretched, long and rackingly ,
then settled with a half-contented groan.
“What,” I demanded, “happened to you ?”
He opened one red-rimmed eye.
“I need a bath,” he said, and closed it again.
I leaned toward him and snif fed delicately . The nose
detected the usual smoky sme ll of closed rooms and damp
wool, underlying a truly remarkable combination of alcoholicstenches – ale, wine, whisky , an d brandy – which matched the
variety o f stains  on his shirt. And forming a high note to the
mixture, a horrible cheap cologne, of a particularly penetrating
and noxious pungency .
“Y ou do,” I agreed. I scrambled  out of bed and leaning out
into the corridor , shouted for Mar guerite, sending her on
arrival for a hip bath and suf ficient water to fill it. As a parting
gift from Brother Ambrose, I had several cakes of a fine-
milled h ard soap, made with attar of roses, and told her to
fetch those, as well.
As the maid set  about the tedio us business of bringing up
the huge  copper bath-cans, I turned my attention to the hulk on
the bed.
I str ipped of f his shoes and stockings, then loosening the
buckle of his kilt, I flipped it op en. His hands went reflexively
to his crotch, but my eyes were focused elsewhere.
“What,”  I said again, “happened to you?”
Several long scratches marked his thighs, angry red welts
against t he pale  skin. And high  on the inside of one leg was
what co uld be nothing other tha n a bite; the toothmarks were
plainly visible.
The mai d, pouring hot water , ca st an interested eye at the
evidence and thought fit to put in her tuppence at this delicate
moment.
“Un petit chien?”  she  asked. A little dog? Or so mething
else. While I was far from fluent in the idiom of the times, I
had  learned that les petits chiens  ofte n walked t he street on
two legs with painted faces.
“Out,” I said briefly in French, with a Head Matron
intonation. The maid picked up the cans and left the room,
pouting slightly . I turned back t o Jamie, who opened one eye,
and after a glance at my face, closed it again.
“W ell?” I asked.
Instead of answering, he shuddered. After a moment, he
sat up and rubbed his hands over his face, the stubble making a
rasping noise. He cocked one r uddy eyebrow interrogatively .“I woul dna suppose a gently reared young lady such as
yourself would be familiar wi’ an alternate meaning for the
term soixante-neuf? ”
“I’ve he ard the term,” I said, folding my arms across my
chest an d regarding him with a certain amount of suspicion.
“And may I as k just where you  encountered that particular
interesting number?”
“It w as s uggested to me – with some force – as a desirable
activity by a lady I happened to meet last night.”
“W as that by a ny chance the lady who bit you in the
thigh?”
He glanced down and rubbed the mark meditatively .
“Mm, no. As a matter of fact, it wasn’ t. That lady seemed
preoccupied wi’  rather lower n umbers. I think she meant to
settle for the six, and the nine could go hang.”
“Jamie,” I said, tapping my f oot in a marked manner ,
“ wher e  have you been all night?”
He scooped up a handful of water from the basin and
splashed it over his face, letting  the rivulets run down among
the dark red hairs on his chest.
“Mm,” he said, b linking drops from his thick lashes, “well,
let me see. Fi rst there was supper at a tavern. W e met
Glengarry and Millefleurs there .” Monsieur Millefleurs was a
Parisian banker , while Glengarry was one of the younger
Jacobites, chief of one sept of th e MacDonell clan. A visitor in
Paris, rather than a resident, he  had been much in Charles’ s
company lately , by Jamie’ s repo rt. “And after supper , we went
to the Duc di Castellotti’ s, for cards.”
“And then?” I asked.
A tavern, apparently . And then another tavern. And then an
establishment which appeared to share some of the
characteristics of a tavern, but was embellished by the addition
of several ladies of interesting appearance and even more
interesting talents.
“T alents, eh?” I said, with a glance at the marks on his leg.“God, th ey did it in public,” he said, with a reminiscent
shudder . “T wo of them, on the table. Right between the saddle
of mutton and the boiled potatoes. W ith the quince jelly .”
“Mon dieu,”  said the newly  returned maid, setting down
the fresh bathcan long enough to cross herself.
“Y ou be  quiet,” I said, scow ling at her . I turned my
attention back to my husband. “And then what?”
Then, apparentl y , the action ha d become somewhat more
general, though  still accomplished in fairly public fashion.
W ith du e regard to Mar guerite’ s sensibilities, Jamie waited
until she had lef t for another round of water before elaborating
further .
“…and then Castellotti took the  fat one with red hair and
the small blond one of f to a corner , and-”
“And wh at were  you  doing all this time?” I broke in on the
fascinating recitative.
“W atching,” he said, as though surprised. “It didna seem
decent, but there wasna much  choice about it, under the
circumstances.”
I h ad been grop ing in his sporran as he talked, and now
fished out not only a small purse, but a wide metal ring,
embellished wit h a coat of arms. I tried it curiously on a
finger; i t was much lar ger than a ny normal ring, and hung like
a quoit on a stick.
“Whoever does this belong to?” I asked, holding it out. “It
looks like the D uc di Castellotti’ s coat of arms, but whoever it
belongs to must have fingers lik e sausages.” Castellotti was an
etiolated Italian stringbean, with the pinched face of a man
with chronic dyspepsia – no wonder , judging from Jamie’ s
story . Quince jelly , forsooth!
I glanced up to find Jamie blushing from navel to hairline.
“Er ,” he said, taking an exaggerated interest in a mud stain
on one knee, “it… doesna go on a man’ s finger .”
“Then what… oh.” I looked a t the circular object with
renewed interest. “Goodness. I’ve heard of them before…”“Y ou have?” said Jamie, thoroughly scandalized.
“But I’ve never seen one. Does it fit you?” I reached out to
try it. He clasped his hands reflexively over his private parts.
Mar guerite, arri ving with more water , assured him, “ Ne
vous en faîtes pas , Monsieur . J’en ai déjà vu un .” Don’ t worry
yourself, monsieur; I’ve already seen one.
Dividing a glare between me a nd the maid, he pulled a
quilt across his lap.
“Bad en ough to  spend all night  defending my virtue,” he
remarked with some asperity , “without havin’ it subjected to
comment in the morning.”
“Defending you r virtue, hm?” I  tossed the ring idly from
hand to hand, c atching it on op posing index fingers. “A gift,
was it?” I asked, “or a loan?”
“A gift. Don’ t d o that, Sassenach,” he said, wincing. “It
brings back memories.”
“Ah yes,” I said, eying h im. “Now about  those
memories…”
“Not me !” he  protested. “Surely ye dinna  think I’d do such
things? I’m a married man!”
“Monsieur Millefleurs isn’ t married?”
“He’ s not only married, he has two mistresses,” Jamie said.
“But he’ s French – that’ s dif ferent.”
“The Duc di Castellotti isn’ t French – he’ s Italian.”
“But he’ s a duke. That’ s dif ferent, too.”
“Oh, it is, is it? I wonder if the Duchess thinks so.”
“Considering a few things the D uc claimed he learnt from
the Duchess, I would imagine so. Isn’ t that bath ready yet?”
Clutching the quilt about him, h e lumbered from the bed to
the stea ming tub and stepped in. He dropped the quilt and
lowered himself quickly , but not quite quickly enough.
“Enorme!”  said the maid, crossing herself.“C’est tout,”  I said repressively . “Mer ci bien.”  She
dropped her eyes, blushed, and scuttled out.
As the door closed behind the maid, Jamie relaxed into the
tub, high at the back to allow for lounging; the feeling of the
times se emed to be that once having gone to the trouble of
filling a bath, o ne might as we ll enjoy it. His stubbled face
assumed an expression of bliss a s he sank gradually lower into
the steaming water , a flush of he at reddening his fair skin. His
eyes were closed, and a faint m ist of moisture gleamed across
the h igh, broad cheekbones and  shone in the hollows beneath
his eyesockets.
“Soap?” he asked hopefully , opening his eyes.
“Y es, indeed.” I fetched a cake and handed it to him, then
sat down on a stool alongside the bath. I watched for some
time as he scrubbed industriously , fetching him a cloth and a
pumice stone, with which he painstakingly rasped the soles of
his feet and his elbows.
“Jamie,” I said at last.
“A ye?”
“I d on’ t mean to  quarrel with your methods,” I said, “and
we a greed that you might have  to go to some lengths, but…
did you r eally  have to…”
“T o what, Sassenach?” He had stopped washing and was
watching me intently , head on one side.
“T o… to…” T o my annoyance, I was flushing as deeply as
he was, but without the excuse of hot water .
A lar ge hand rose dripping out of the water and rested on
my arm . The wet heat burned through the thin fabric of my
sleeve.
“Sassenach,” he said, “what do ye think I’ve been doing?”
“Er , wel l,” I said, trying and failing to keep my eyes away
from the marks on his thigh. H e laughed, though he didn’ t
sound truly amused.
“O ye of little faith!” he said sardonically .I withdrew beyond his reach.
“W ell,” I said, “when one’ s husband comes home covered
with bites and sc ratches and reeking with perfume, admits he’ s
spent the night in a bawdy house, and…”
“And tells ye flat-out he’ s spen t the night watching, not
doing?”
“Y ou didn’ t get those marks on your leg from watching!” I
snapped suddenly , then clamped my lips together . I felt like a
jealous biddy , and I didn’ t care f or it. I had vowed to take it all
calmly , like a w oman of the w orld, telling myself that I had
complete faith in Jamie and – just in case – that you can’ t
make omelets without breaking eggs. Even if something had
happened…
I smoothed the wet spot on my sleeve, feeling the air chill
through the cooling silk. I strug gled to regain my former light
tone.
“Or are those t he scars of hon orable combat, gained in
defending your virtue?” Somehow the light tone didn’ t quite
come of f. Listening to myself, I had to admit that the overall
tone was really quite nasty . I was rapidly ceasing to care.
No slou ch at reading tones of voice, Jamie narrowed his
eyes at me and seemed about to  reply . He drew in his breath,
then apparently thought better of whatever he had been going
to say and let it out again.
“Y es,” he said calmly . He fished about in the tub between
his l egs, coming up at length w ith the cake of soap, a roughly
shaped ball of white slickness. He held it out on his palm.
“W ill ye  help me to wash my h air? His Highness vomited
on me in the coach coming hom e, and I reek a bit, all things
considered.”
I hesitated a moment, but accepted the olive branch,
temporarily at least.
I could feel the solid curve of his skull under the thick,
soapy hair , and the welt of the healed scar across the back of
his head. I dug my thumbs firmly into his neck muscles, and
he relaxed slightly under my hands.The soap bubbles ran down across the wet, gleaming
curves of his shoulders, and my hands followed them,
spreading the slickness so that my fingers seemed to float on
the surface of his skin.
He was  big, I thought. Near him so much, I tended to
for get h is size, until I saw him suddenly from a distance,
towering among smaller men, and I would be struck anew by
his g race and th e beauty of his body . But he sat now with his
knees ne arly underneath his chin, and his shoulders filled the
tub from one si de to the other . He leaned forward slightly to
assist my ministrations, exposing the hideous scars on his
back. Th e thick red welts of Jack Randall’ s Christmas gift lay
heavily over the thin white lines of the earlier floggings.
I tou ched the sc ars gently , my heart squeezed by the sight.
I ha d seen thos e wounds when they were fresh, seen him
driven to  the edge of madness b y torture and abuse. But I had
healed h im, and  he had fought with all the power of a gallant
heart to be whole once more, to  come back to me. Moved by
tenderness, I brushed the trailing ends of his hair aside, and
bent to kiss the back of his neck.
I straightened abruptly . He felt my movement and turned
his head slightly .
“What is  it, Sassenach?” he asked, voice slow with drowsy
contentment.
“Not a thing,” I said, staring at t he dark-red blotches on the
side of his neck. The nurses in the quarters at Pembroke used
to conce al them with jaunty sca rves tied about their necks the
morning after their dates with soldiers from the nearby base. I
always t hought the scarves were really meant as a means of
advertisement, rather than concealment.
“No, not a thing,” I said again, reaching for the ewer on the
stand. Placed near the window , it was ice-cold to the touch. I
stepped behind Jamie and upended it on his head.
I l ifted the silk skirts of my nigh tdress to avoid the sudden
wave that spilled over the side of the bath. He was sputtering
from the  cold, but too shocked yet to form any of the words I
could see gathering force on his lips. I beat him to it.“Just watched, did you?” I asked coldly . “I wouldn’ t
suppose you enjoyed it a bit, did you, poor thing?”
He t hrust himself back in the tub  with a violence that made
the water slosh over the sides, splattering on the stone floor ,
and twisted around to look up at me.
“What d’ye want me to say?” he  demanded. “Did I want to
rut with them? A ye, I did! Enough to make my balls ache with
not doing it. And enough to make me feel sick wi’ the thought
of touching one of the sluts.”
He s hoved the sopping mass o f his hair out of his eyes,
glaring at me.
“Is that what ye wanted to know? Are ye satisfied now?”
“Not really ,” I said. My face w as hot, and I pressed my
cheek ag ainst the icy pane of the window , hands clenched on
the sill.
“Who l ooks on a woman wi th lust in his heart hath
committed adultery with her already . Is that how ye see it?”
“Is it how you  see it?”
“No,” he  said shortly . “I don’ t. And what would ye do if I
had  la in wi’ a whore, Sassenach? Slap my face? Order me out
of your chamber? Keep yourself from my bed?”
I turned and looked at him.
“I’d kill you,” I said through my teeth.
Both eyebrows shot up, and his mouth dropped slightly
with incredulity .
“Kill me ? God, if I foun d you wi’ ano ther man, I’d kill
him .” He paused, and one corner of his mouth quirked wryly .
“Mind ye,” he said, “I’d no b e verra pleased wi’ you ,
either , but still, it’ s him I’d kill.”
“T ypical man,” I said. “Always missing the point.”
He snorted with a bitter humor .
“Am I, then? So you dinna believe me. W ant me to prove it
to y e, Sassenach, that I’ve lain wi’ no one in the last fewhours?” He stood up, water cascading down the stretches of
his long legs. The light from  the window highlighted the
reddish-gold hairs of his body and the steam rose of f his flesh
in wisps. He looked like a figure of freshly molten gold. I
glanced briefly down.
“Ha,” I said, with the maximum  of scorn it was possible to
infuse into one syllable.
“Hot water ,” he said briefly , stepping out of the tub.
“Dinna worry yourself, it won’ t take long.”
“That,” I said, with delicate precision, “is what you  think.”
His face  flushed  still more dee ply , and his hands curled
involuntarily into fists.
“No reasoning wi’ you, is ther e?” he demanded. “God, I
spend the night torn between disgust and agony , bein’
tormented by my companions for being unmanly , then come
home to be tormented for being unchaste! Mallaichte bàs! ”
Looking wildly about, he spotted his discarded clothing on
the floor near the bed and lunged for it.
“Here, then!” he said, scrabbli ng for his belt. “Here! If
lusting is adultery and you’ll k ill me for adultery , then ye’d
best do it, hadn’ t ye!” He cam e up with his dirk, a ten-inch
piece of  dark steel, and thrust i t at me, haft first. He squared
his s houlders, presenting the bro ad expanse of his chest to me,
and glared belligerently .
“Go ahead,” he insisted. “Y e din na mean to be forsworn, I
hope? Being so sensitive to your honor as a wife and all?”
It was a real temptation. My clenched hands quivered at
my sides with the longing to take the dagger and plant it firmly
between his ribs. Only the knowledge that, all his dramatizing
aside, he  certainly wouldn’ t allow me to stab him, stopped me
from trying. I fe lt suf ficiently ridiculous, without humiliating
myself further . I whirled away from him in a flurry of silk.
After a moment, I heard the clank of the dirk on the
floorboards. I stood without moving, staring out of the window
at th e back courtyard below . I heard faint rustling sounds
behind me, and glanced into the faint reflections of thewindow . My face showed in th e windowpane as a smudged
oval in a nimbu s of sleep-snarled brown hair . Jamie’ s naked
figure moved dimly in the glass like someone seen underwater ,
searching for a towel.
“The to wel is on the bottom shelf of the ewer -stand,” I
said, turning around.
“Thank you.” He dropped the di rty shirt with which he had
begun g ingerly d abbing himself  and reached for the towel, not
looking at me.
He wiped his face, then seemed to make some decision. He
lowered the towel and looked d irectly at me. I could see the
emotions strugg ling for mastery on his face, and felt as though
I were still looking into the mirror of the window . Sense
triumphed in both of us at once.
“I’m sorry ,” we said, in unison. And laughed.
The damp of hi s skin soaked through the thin silk, but I
didn’ t care.
Minutes later , he mumbled something into my hair .
“What?”
“T oo clo se,” he repeated, moving back a bit. “It was too
damn close, Sassenach, and it scared me.”
I glanced down at the dirk, lying for gotten on the floor .
“Scared? I’ve never seen anyo ne less scared in my life.
Y ou knew damned well I wouldn’ t do it.”
“Oh, that.” He grinned. “No, I didna think you’d kill me,
much as ye mig ht like to.” He sobered quickly . “No, it was…
well, those women. What I felt  like with them. I didna want
them, truly not…”
“Y es, I know ,” I said, reaching for him, but he wasn’ t
stopping there. He held back from me, looking troubled.
“But the… the l usting, I suppose ye’d call it… that was…
too clos e to what I feel someti mes for you, and it… well, it
doesna seem right to me.”He turne d away , rubbing at his hair with the linen towel, so
his voice came half-muf fled.
“I always thought it would be a simple matter to lie wi’ a
woman,” he said softly . “And yet… I want to fall on my face
at your feet and worship you” – he dropped the towel and
reached out, taking me by the s houlders – “and still I want to
force ye  to your knees before m e, and hold ye there wi’ my
hands ta ngled in your hair , and  your mouth at my service…
and I want both  things at the same time , S assen ach.” H e ran
his hand s up under my hair and gripped my face between
them, hard.
“I dinna understand myself at all, Sassenach! Or maybe I
do.” He released  me and turned away . His face had long since
dried, bu t he picked up the falle n towel and wiped the skin of
his jaw with it, over and over . The stubble made a faint rasping
sound ag ainst the fine linen. Hi s voice was still quiet, barely
audible from a few feet away .
“Such th ings – the knowledge of them, I mean – it came to
me soon after… after W entworth.” W entworth. Where he had
given hi s soul to save my life, and suf fered the tortures of the
damned in retrieving it.
“I th ought at the  first that Jack Randall had stolen a bit of
my s oul, and then I knew it was  worse than that. All of it was
my own, and had been all along; it was only he’d shown it to
me, and made m e know it for myself. That’ s what he did that I
canna for give, and may his own soul rot for it!”
He lowe red the towel and looked at me, face worn with the
strains of the night, but eyes bright with ur gency .
“Claire. T o feel the small bones  of your neck beneath my
hands, and that f ine, thin skin on your breasts and your arms…
Lord, you are m y wife, whom I  cherish and I love wi’ all my
life, and  still I want to kiss ye hard enough to bruise your
tender lips, and see the marks of my fingers on your skin.”
He drop ped the towel. He raise d his hands and held them
trembling in the air before his face, then very slowly brought
them down to rest on my head as though in benediction.“I w ant to hold you like a kitte n in my shirt, mo duinne ,
and still I want to spread your thighs and plow ye like a rutting
bull.” H is finge rs tightened in my hair . “I dinna understand
myself!”
I p ulled my head  back, freeing m yself, and took a half-step
backward. The blood seemed a ll to be on the surface of my
skin, and a chill ran down my body at the brief separation.
“Do you  think it’ s dif ferent for me? Do you think I don’ t
feel the same?” I demanded. “That I don’ t sometimes want to
bite you hard enough to taste blood, or claw you ’ til you cry
out?”
I r eache d out slowly to touch him. The skin of his breast
was damp and warm. Only the nail of my forefinger touched
him, jus t below the nipple. Ligh tly , barely touching, I drew the
nail upward, downward, circling round, watching the tiny nub
rise hard amid the curling ruddy hairs.
The nail pressed slightly harder , sliding down, leaving a
faint red streak o n the fair skin of his chest. I was trembling all
over by this time, but did not turn away .
“Sometimes I want to ride you like a wild horse, and bring
you to the tamin g – did you know that? I can do it, you know I
can. Dra g you over the edge and  drain you to a gasping husk. I
can drive you to  the edge of collapse and sometimes I delight
in it, Jamie, I do! And yet so often I want” – my voice broke
suddenly and I had to swallow  hard before continuing – “I
want… to hold your head agai nst my breast and cradle you
like a child and comfort you to sleep.”
My eyes were so full of tears that I couldn’ t see his face
clearly; couldn’ t see if he wept  as well. His arms went tight
around me and the damp heat of him engulfed me like the
breath of a monsoon.
“Claire, ye do k ill me, knife or no,” he whispered, face
buried in my hair . He bent and picked me up, carrying me to
the bed. He san k to his knees,  laying me amid the rumpled
quilts.“Y ou’ll lie wi’ m e now ,” he sai d quietly . “And I shall use
ye as I m ust. And if you’ll have your revenge for it, then take
it an d w elcome, for my soul is yours, in all the black corners
of it.”
The skin of his shoulders was warm with the heat of the
bath, bu t he shivered as with co ld as my hands traveled up to
his neck, and I pulled him down to me.
And wh en I had at length taken  my last revenge of him, I
did cradle him, stroking back the roughened, half-dry locks.
“And so metimes,” I whispered to him, “I wish it could be
you insi de me. That I could ta ke you into me and keep you
safe always.”
His hand , lar ge and warm, lifte d slowly from the bed and
cupped the small round swell  of my belly , sheltering and
caressing.
“Y ou do, my own,” he said. “Y ou do.”
 
I felt it for the first time while lying in bed the next
morning, watch ing Jamie dress for the day . A tiny fluttering
sensation, at once entirely familiar and completely new . Jamie
had his back tur ned to me, as he wriggled into his knee-length
shirt and stretched his arms, se ttling the folds of white linen
across the breadth of his shoulders.
I lay quite still, waiting, hoping for it to come again. It did,
this time as a series of infinitesimal quick movements, like the
bursting of bubbles rising to the surface of a carbonated liquid.
I had  a sudden memory of Coca-Cola; that odd, dark, fizzy
American drink. I had tasted it once, while having supper with
an A merican colonel, who served it as a delicacy – which it
was, in wartime. It came in thick greenish bottles, smooth-
ribbed and tapered, with a high-waisted nip to the glass, so that
the bottle was roughly woman-shaped, with a rounded bulge
just below the neck, swelling to a broader one farther down.
I rem embered how the millions of tiny bubbles had rushed
into the narrow neck when the bottle was opened, smaller and
finer than the b ubbles of champagne, bursting joyous in theair . I  laid  one hand very gently o n my abdomen, just above the
womb.
There it  was. There was no sen se of him, or her , as I had
thought there might be – but there was certainly a sense of
Someone. I wondered whether perhaps babies had no gender –
physical characteristics aside –  until birth, when the act of
exposure to the outside world s et them forever as one or the
other .
“Jamie,” I said. He was tying back his hair , gathering it
into a thick handful at the base of his neck and winding a
leather lace about it. Head bent in the task, he looked up at me
from under his brows and smiled.
“A wake, are ye? It’ s early yet, mo duinne . Go back to sleep
for a bit.”
I had been going to tell him, but something stopped me. He
couldn’ t feel it, of course, not yet. It wasn’ t that I thought he
wouldn’ t care, but there was something about that first
awareness that seemed sudden ly private; the second shared
secret between me and the child – the first being our
knowledge of its existence, mine a conscious knowing, the
embryo’ s a simple being. The sharing of that knowledge
linked us close as did the blood that passed through both of us.
“Do you  want me to braid your hair for you?” I asked.
When he went to the docks, so metimes he would ask me to
plait his ruddy m ane in a tight queue, proof against the tugging
winds on  deck and quay . He alw ays teased that he would have
it dippe d in tar , as the sailors did, to solve the problem
permanently .
He shook his head, and reached for his kilt.
“No, I’m going to call on His  Highness Prince Charles
today . And drafty as his house is, I think it wilna be blowing
my hair in my e yes.” He smiled at me, coming to stand by the
bed. He saw my hand lying on my stomach, and put his own
lightly over it.
“Feeling all right, are ye, Sassenach? The sickness is
better?”“Much.” The morning sickness had in fact abated, though
waves of nausea still assailed m e at odd moments. I found I
could not bear t he smell of frying tripe with onions, and had
had to ban this popular dish from the servants’ menu, since the
smell cr ept from  the basement k itchen like a ghost up the back
stairs, to pop out at me unexpectedly when I opened the door
of my sitting room.
“Good.” He raised my hand, a nd bent over to kiss my
knuckles in farewell. “Go back to sleep, mo duinne ,” he
repeated.
He c losed the d oor gently behind him, as though I were
already sleeping, leaving me to the early morning silence of
the chamber , with the small busy noises of the household
safely barred by paneled oak.
Squares of pale sunlight from the casement window lay
bright on the opposite wall. It would be a beautiful day , I could
tell, the  spring air ripening with warmth, and the plum
blossoms bursting pink and white and bee-rich in the gardens
of V ersa illes. T he courtiers would be outside in the gardens
today , rejoicing in the weather a s much as the barrowmen who
wheeled their wares through the streets.
So did I rejoic e, alone and n ot alone, in my peaceful
cocoon of warmth and quiet.
“Hello,” I said softly , one hand over the butterfly wings
that beat inside me.P A R T  T H R E EMalchance1 8  R A P E  I N  P A R I S
T here was an ex plosion at the Royal Armory , near the
beginning of May . I heard later that a careless porter had put
down a torch in the wrong place , and a minute later , the lar gest
assortment of gunpowder and firearms in Paris had gone up
with a noise that startled the pigeons of f Notre Dame.
At wor k in L ’Hôpital des Anges, I didn’ t hear the
explosion itself, but I certainly n oticed the echoes. Though the
Hôpital was on the opposite sid e of the city from the Armory ,
there were suf ficient victims of the explosion that a good
many of  them overflowed the other hospitals and were brought
to us, mangled, burned, and moaning in the backs of wagons,
or suppo rted on  pallets by frien ds who carried them through
the streets.
It was full dark  before the last of the victims had been
attended to, and the last bandage-swathed body laid gently
down among the grubby , anonymous ranks of the Hôpital’ s
patients.
I h ad dispatched  Fer gus home with word that I would be
late, when I saw  the magnitude of the task awaiting the sisters
of de s A nges. H e had come back  with Murtagh, and the two of
them were lounging on the step s outside, waiting to escort us
home.
Mary an d I emer ged wearily fro m the double doors, to find
Murtagh demonstrating the art of knife-throwing to Fer gus.
“Go on then,” h e was saying, back turned to us. “Straight
as ye can, on the count of three. One… two… three!” At
“three,” Fer gus bowled the lar ge white onion he was holding,
letting it bounce and hop over the uneven ground.
Murtagh stood relaxed, arm drawn back at a negligent
cock, di rk held by the tip between his fingers. As the onion
spun past, his wrist flicked once, quick and sharp. Nothing else
moved, not so much as a stir of  his kilts, but the onion leapedsideways, transfixed by the dirk, and fell mortally wounded,
rolling feebly in the dirt at his feet.
“B-bravo, Mr . Murtagh!” Mary called, smiling. Startled,
Murtagh turned, and I could see the flush rising on his lean
cheeks in the light from the double doors behind us.
“Mmmphm,” he said.
“Sorry to take so long,” I sai d apologetically . “It took
rather a time to get everyone squared away .”
“Och, aye,” the little clansman answered laconically . He
turned to  Fer gus . “W e’ll do bes t to find a coach, lad; it’ s late
for the ladies to be walking.”
“There aren’ t any here,” Fer gus said, shrugging. “I’ve been
up a nd d own th e street for the last hour; every spare coach in
the Cité  has gone to the Armory . W e might get something in
the R ue du Faubour g St. Hono ré, though.” He pointed down
the street, at a  dark, narrow gap between buildings that
betrayed the presence of a passageway through to the next
street. “It’ s quick through there.”
After a short, frowning pause for thought, Murtagh nodded
agreement. “All right, lad. Let’ s go, then.”
It was cold in the alleyway , and I could see my breath in
small white puf fs, despite the m oonless night. No matter how
dark it got in P aris, there was always light somewhere; the
glow of lamps and candles seeped through shutters and chinks
in the walls of w ooden building s, and light pooled around the
stalls of  the street vendors and scattered from the small horn
and metal lanterns that swung from cart tails and coach trees.
The next street was one of merchants, and here and there
the p roprietors of the various bu sinesses had hung lanterns of
pierced metal above their doors and shopyard entrances. Not
content to rely upon the police to protect their property , often
several businessmen would join together and hire a watchman
to gu ard their pr emises at night. When I saw one such figure in
front of the sailmaker ’ s shop, sitting hunched in the shadows
atop a pile of fo lded canvas, I n odded in response to his gruf f
“ Bonsoir , Monsieur , mesdames.”As we passed the sailmaker ’ s  shop, though, I heard a
sudden cry of alarm from the watchman.
“Monsieur! Madame!”
Murtagh swung round at once to meet the challenge, sword
already hissing from its scabbard . Slower in my reflexes, I was
only hal fway turned as he steppe d forward, and my eye caught
the flicker of movement from the doorway behind him. The
blow took Murtagh from behind before I could shout a
warning, and he went sprawling facedown in the street, arms
and legs  gone loose and nervele ss, sword and dirk flying from
his hands to clatter on the stones.
I stooped quickly for the dirk as  it slid past my foot, but a
pair of hands seized my arms from behind.
“T ake c are of the man,” ordered a voice behind me.
“Quickly!”
I wr enched at m y captor ’ s grip; the hands dropped to my
wrists a nd twisted them sharply , making me cry out. There
was a billow of white, ghost-like in the dim street, and the
“watchman” bent over Murtagh’ s prone body , a length of
white fabric trailing from his hands.
“Help!” I shrieked. “Leave him alone! Help! Brigands!
Assassins! HELP!”
“Be still!” A qu ick clout over the ear made my head spin
for a  moment. W hen my eyes stopped watering, I could make
out a long, white sausage-shape in the gutter; Murtagh,
shrouded and neatly secured in a canvas sail-bag. The false
watchman was crouched over him; he rose, grinning, and I
could see that he was masked, a dark strip of fabric extending
from forehead to upper lip.
A thin strip of l ight from the ne arby chandler ’ s fell across
his body as he  rose. In spite of the cold evening, he was
wearing no more than a shirt that glowed momentarily emerald
green in the pas sing light. A pair of breeches, buckled at the
knee, and what amazingly appeared to be silk hose and leather
shoes, n ot the bare feet or sabots I had expected. Not ordinary
bandits, then.I cau ght a quick  glimpse of Ma ry , at one side. One of the
masked figures had her in a tight grip from behind, one arm
clasped across her midrif f, the o ther rummaging its way under
her skirts like a burrowing animal.
The one in front  of me put a han d ingratiatingly behind my
head and pulled me close. The mask covered him from
forehead to upper lip, leaving  his mouth free for obvious
reasons. His tongue thrust into my mouth, tasting strongly of
drink an d onion s. I gagged, bit it, and spat as it was removed.
He cuf fed me heavily , knocking me to my knees in the gutter .
Mary’ s silver -b uckled shoes were kicking dangerously
near my nose as the ruf fian holding her unceremoniously
yanked her skirt above her wais t. There was a tearing of satin,
and a loud scree ch from above a s his fingers plunged between
her struggling thighs.
“A vir gi n! I’ve got a vir gin!” he crowed. One of the men
bowed mockingly to Mary .
“Mademoiselle, my congratulations! Y our husband will
have ca use to thank us on his wedding night, as he will
encounter no awkward obstructions to hinder his pleasure. But
we a re s elfless –  we ask for no thanks for the performance of
our duties. The doing of service is pleasure in itself.”
If I had needed  anything beyond the silk hose to tell me
that our assailants were not s treet ruf fians, this speech –
greeted with howls of laughter – would have done it. Fitting
names to the masked faces was something else again.
The han ds that grasped my arm to haul me to my feet were
manicured, with  a small beauty mark just above the fork of the
thumb. I  must remember that, I thought grimly . If they let us
live afterward, it might be useful.
Someone else grabbed my arms from behind, yanking
them ba ck so strongly that I cried out. The posture thus
induced made my breasts stand out in the low-cut bodice as
though they were being of fered on a platter .
The man who seemed in char ge of operations wore a loose
shirt of  some pale color , decorated with darker spots –embroidery perhaps. It gave him an imprecise outline in the
shadows, making it dif ficult to look at him closely . As he
leaned forward and ran a finger  appraisingly over the tops of
my b reasts, though, I could see t he dark hair greased flat to his
head and smell the heavy pomade. He had lar ge ears, the better
to hold up the strings of his mask.
“Do not  worry yourselves, mes dames,” Spotted-shirt said.
“W e me an you no harm; we in tend only to give you a little
gentle exercise – your husbands  or fiancés need never know –
and then we shall release you.”
“Firstly , you may honor us with your sweet lips,
mesdames,” he announced, stepping back and tugging at the
lacings of his breeches.
“Not that one,” protested Green-shirt, pointing at me. “She
bites.”
“Not if she wants to keep her teeth,” replied his
companion. “On your knees, Madame, if you please.” He
shoved down strongly on my shoulders, and I jerked back,
stumbling. He grabbed me to keep me from getting away , and
the full hood of my cloak fel l back, freeing my hair . Pins
loosened in the struggle, it fell over my shoulders, strands
flying like banners in the nigh t wind, blinding me as they
whipped across my face.
I stagge red backward, pulling away from my assailant,
shaking my head to clear my ey es. The street was dark, but I
could see a few  things in the faint gleam of lanterns through
the shut tered shop windows, or in the glow of starlight that
struck through the shadows to the street.
Mary’ s silver shoe buckles caught the light, kicking. She
was on her back , struggling, with one of the men on top of her ,
swearing as he fought to get his breeches down and to control
her a t th e same time. There was the sound of tearing cloth, and
his butto cks gleamed white in a shaft of light from a court-
yard gate.
Someone’ s arms seized me round the waist and dragged
me backward, raising my feet of f the ground. I scraped my
heel down the length of his shin, and he squealed in outrage.“Hold her!” ordered Spotted-shirt, coming out of the
shadows.
“Y ou hold her!” My captor thrust me unceremoniously into
the a rms of his friend, and the l ight from the courtyard shone
into my eyes, temporarily blinding me.
“Mother of God!” The hands clutching my arms slackened
their grip, and I yanked loose, to see Spotted-shirt, mouth
hanging open in horrified amazement below the mask. He
backed away from me, crossing himself as he went.
“In nom ine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti,”  he babbled,
crossing and recrossing. “ La Dame Blanche!”
“ La  Dame Blan che!” The man behind me echoed the cry ,
in tones of terror .
Spotted-shirt was still backing away , now making signs in
the air which we re considerably  less Christian than the sign of
the C ross, but which presumably had the same intent. Pointing
index and little f ingers at me in the ancient horned sign against
evil, he was wo rking his way s teadily down a list of spiritual
authorities, from  the T rinity to powers on a considerably lower
level, muttering the Latin names so fast that the syllables
blurred together .
I stood in the street, shaken a nd dazed, until a terrible
shriek from the ground near my  feet recalled me to my senses.
T oo occ upied with his own bu siness to pay any attention to
matters above him, the man on  top of Mary made a gutteral
sound of satisfaction and began to move his hips rhythmically ,
to the accompaniment of throat-tearing screams from Mary .
Acting p urely from instinct, I took a step toward them,
drew ba ck my leg, and kicked him as hard as I could in the
ribs. The breath exploded from  his lungs in a startled “Oof!”
and he rocked to one side.
One of his frien ds darted forward and seized him by the
arm, shouting ur gently , “Up! Up! It’ s La Dame Blanche!
Run!”
Still sun k in the frenzy of rape, the man stared stupidly and
tried to turn back to Mary , who was frantically writhing andtwisting, trying to free the folds of her skirts from the weight
that held her trapped. Both Green-shirt and Spotted-shirt were
now pul ling on her assailant’ s arms, and succeeded in getting
him to his feet. His torn breeches drooped about his thighs, the
blood-smeared rod of his erection trembling with mindless
eagerness between the dangling shirttails.
The clatter of running feet approaching seemed finally to
rouse hi m. His two helpers, hearing the sound, dropped his
arms and fled precipitately , leaving him to his fate. W ith a
muf fled curse, he made his way down the nearest alley ,
hopping and hobbling as he t ried to yank his breeches up
around his waist.
“Au secours! Au secours! Gendarmes!”  A breat hless vo ice
was shouting down the alley way for help, as its owner
fumbled his way in our direction, stumbling over rubbish in
the dark. I hardly thought a footpad or other miscreant would
be staggering down an alleyway shouting for the gendarmerie,
though in my present state of shock, almost nothing would
have surprised me.
I was  surprised, though, when the black shape that flapped
out of the alley  proved to be Alexander Randall, swathed in
black cape and s louch hat. He glanced wildly around the small
cul-de-sac, from Murtagh, masquerading as a bag of rubbish,
to me, standing frozen and gasping against a wall, to the
huddled shape of Mary , nearly invisible among the other
shadows. He stood helpless for a moment, then whirled and
clambered up the iron gate from which our assailants had
emer ged. From the top of this, he could just reach the lantern
suspended from the rafter above.
The lig ht was a comfort; pit iful as was the sight it
revealed, at least it banished the lurking shadows that
threatened at any moment to turn into new dangers.
Mary was on her knees, curled into herself. Head buried in
her a rms, she wa s shaking, in to tal silence. One shoe lay on its
side on the cobbles, silver buckle winking in the swaying light
of the lantern.
Like a bird of ill omen, Alex swooped down beside her .“Miss Hawkins! Mary! Miss Hawkins! Are you all right?”
“Of all the damn -fool questions,” I said with some asperity
as she moaned a nd shrank away from him. “Naturally she isn’ t
all r ight. She’ s j ust been raped.” W ith a considerable ef fort, I
pried my self from the comforting wall at my back, and started
toward them, noting with clinical detachment that my knees
were wobbling.
They ga ve way altogether in th e next moment as a huge,
batlike s hape swooped down a foot in front of me, landing on
the cobbles with a substantial thud.
“W ell, w ell, look who’ s dropped in!” I said, and started to
laugh in an un hinged sort of way . A lar ge pair of hands
grabbed me by the shoulders and administered a good shake.
“Be quiet, Sassenach,” said Jamie, blue eyes gleaming
black and dangerous in the lanternlight. He straightened up,
the folds of his blue velvet cloak falling back over his
shoulders as he stretched his arm s toward the roof from which
he had jumped. He could just grasp the edge of it, standing on
his toes.
“W ell, come down, then!” he said impatiently , looking up.
“Put your feet o ver the edge onto my shoulders, and ye can
slide down my back.” W ith a grating of loose roof slates, a
small black figure wriggled its way cautiously backward, then
swarmed down the tall figure like a monkey on a stick.
“Good man, Fer gus.” Jamie clapped the boy casually on
the shou lder , and  even in the dim light I could see the glow of
pleasure that rose in his cheeks. Jamie surveyed the landscape
with a tactician’ s eye, and with  a muttered word, sent the lad
down th e alley to keep watch fo r approaching gendarmes. The
essentials taken care of, he sq uatted down before me once
more.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” he inquired.
“Nice o f you to ask,” I said po litely . “Y es, thanks. She’ s
not so well, thou gh.” I waved va guely in Mary’ s direction. She
was still rolled into a ball, shuddering and quaking like a jelly ,
oozing away from Alex’ s fumbling ef forts to pat her .Jamie spared no more than a glance at her . “So I see.
Where in hell is Murtagh?”
“Over there,” I answered. “Help me up.”
I s tagge red over to the gutter , where the sack that held
Murtagh was heaving to and f ro like an agitated caterpillar ,
emitting a startling mixture of muf fled profanities in three
languages.
Jamie drew his dirk, and with w hat seemed to be a rather
callous disregar d for the contents, slit the sack from end to
end. Mu rtagh po pped out of the  opening like a Jack out of its
box. Ha lf his spiky black hai r was pasted to his head by
whatever noisome liquid the bag had rested in. The rest stood
on end,  lending a fiercer cas t to a face rendered already
suf ficiently warlike by a lar ge purple knot on the forehead and
a rapidly darkening eye.
“Who hit me?” he barked.
“W ell, it wasn’ t me,” answ ered Jamie, raising one
eyebrow . “Come along, man, we havena got all night.”
 
“This is never going to work,” I muttered, stabbing pins
decorated with brilliants at random through my hair . “She
ought to have medical care, for one thing. She needs a doctor!”
“She has one,” Jamie pointed  out, lifting his chin and
peering down his nose into the  mirror as he tied his stock.
“Y ou.” Stock tied, he grabbed a  comb and pulled it hurriedly
through the thick, ruddy waves of his hair .
“No time to br aid it,” he muttered, holding a thick tail
behind his head as he rummaged  in a drawer . “Have ye a bit of
ribbon, Sassenach?”
“Let me .” I moved swiftly behind him, folding under the
ends of the hair and wrapping the club in a length of green
ribbon. “Of all the bloody nights to have a dinner party on!”
And no t just any dinner party , either . The Duke of
Sandringham wa s to be guest of honor , with a small but select
party to greet hi m. Monsieur Duverney was coming, with hiseldest son, a prominent banker . Louise and Jules de La T our
were coming, and the d’Arbanvilles. Just to make things
interesting, the Comte St. Germain had also been invited.
“St. Ger main!” I had said in astonishment, when Jamie had
told me the week before. “Whatever for?”
“I do  business w ith the man,” Jamie had pointed out. “He’ s
been to dinner here before, with Jared. But what I want is to
have the  opportunity of watching him talk to you over dinner .
From w hat I’ve  seen of him in business, he’ s not the man to
hide his thoughts.” He picked up the white crystal that Master
Raymond had given me and w eighed it thoughtfully in his
palm.
“It’ s pre tty enou gh,” he had said . “I’ll have it set in a gold
mounting, so you can wear it a bout your neck. T oy with it at
dinner u ntil som eone asks ye a bout it, Sassenach. Then tell
them wh at it’ s for , and make sure to watch St. Germain’ s face
when ye  do. If it was him gave  ye the poison at V ersailles, I
think we’ll see some sign of it.”
What I wanted at the moment w as peace, quiet, and total
privacy in which to shake like a rabbit. What I had was a
dinner party with a duke who  might be a Jacobite or an
English agent, a Comte who m ight be a poisoner , and a rape
victim h idden upstairs. My hands shook so that I couldn’ t
fasten th e chain that held the mounted crystal; Jamie stepped
behind me and snicked the catch with one flick of his thumb.
“Haven’ t you got any nerves?” I demanded of him. He
grimaced at me in the mirror  and put his hands over his
stomach.
“A ye, I have. But it takes me in the belly , not the hands.
Have ye some of that stuf f for cramp?”
“Over th ere.” I waved at the medicine box on the table, left
open from my d osing of Mary . “The little green bottle. One
spoonful.”
Ignoring the spoon, he tilted th e bottle and took several
healthy gulps. He lowered it and squinted at the liquid within.“God, that’ s foul stuf f! Are ye nearly ready , Sassenach?
The guests will be here any minute.”
Mary w as concealed for the m oment in a spare room on
the second floor . I had checked her carefully for injuries,
which s eemed limited to bruises and shock, then dosed her
quickly with as lar ge a slug of poppy syrup as seemed feasible.
Alex Randall had resisted all Ja mie’ s attempts to send him
home, and instead had been left to stand guard over Mary , with
strict instructions to fetch me if she woke.
“How on  earth did that idiot happen to be there?” I asked,
scrabbling in the drawer for a box of powder .
“I asked  him that,” Jamie replied. “Seems the poor fool’ s
in love with Ma ry Hawkins. He’ s been following her to and
fro abou t the town, drooping li ke a wilted flower because he
knows she’ s to wed Marigny .”
I dropped the box of powder .
“ H-h-he’ s  in love with her ?” I wheezed, w aving away the
cloud of floating particles.
“So he says, and I see nay reason to doubt it,” Jamie said,
brushing powde r briskly of f the bosom of my dress. “He was a
bit distraught when he told me.”
“I should imagine so.” T o the conflicting welter of
emotions that filled me, I now a dded pity for Alex Randall. Of
course he wouldn’ t have spoken to Mary , thinking the
devotion of an impoverished secretary nothing compared to
the wealth and position of a  match with the House of
Gascogne. And now what must he feel, seeing her subjected to
brutal attack, virtually under his nose?
“Why in  hell didn’ t he speak up ? She would have run of f
with him in a moment.” For the pale English curate, of course,
must be the “spiritual” object of Mary’ s speechless devotion.
“Randall’ s a gentleman,” Jamie replied, handing me a
feather and the pot of rouge.
“Y ou mean he’ s a silly ass,” I said uncharitably .Jamie’ s lip twitched. “W ell, perhaps,” he agreed. “He’ s
also a poor one; he hasna the income to support a wife, should
her family cast her of f – which  they certainly would, if she
eloped with him. And his health is feeble; he’d find it hard to
find another position, for the D uke would likely dismiss him
without a character .”
“One of  the servants is bound to  find her ,” I said, returning
to an  earlier worry in order to a void thinking about this latest
manifestation of tragedy .
“No, the y won’ t. They’ll all be  busy serving. And by the
morning, she may be recovered enough to go back to her
uncle’ s h ouse. I sent round a not e,” he added, “to tell them she
was staying the night with a friend, as it was late. Didna want
them searching for her .”
“Y es, but-”
“Sassenach.” His hands on my shoulders stopped me, and
he peere d over my shoulder to  meet my eyes in the mirror .
“W e canna let her be seen by anyone, until she’ s able to speak
and to act as us ual. Let it be known what’ s happened to her ,
and her reputation will be ruined entirely .”
“Her rep utation! It’ s hardly her fault she was raped!” My
voice shook slightly , and his grip on my shoulders tightened.
“It isna right, Sassenach, but it’ s how it is. Let it be known
that she’ s a maid  no more, and no man will take her – she’ll be
disgraced, and live a spinster to the end of her days.” His hand
squeezed my shoulder , left it, and returned to help guide a pin
into the precariously anchored hair .
“It’ s all we can d o for her , Claire ,” he said. “Keep her from
harm, h eal her as best we can – and find the filthy bastards
who did it.” He turned away and groped in my casket for his
stick pin . “Chri st,” he added s oftly , speaking into the green
velvet lining, “d’ye think I don’ t know what it is to her? Or to
him?”
I l aid my hand on his groping fingers and squeezed. He
squeezed back, then lifted my hand and kissed it briefly .“Lord, Sassenach! Y our fingers are cold as snow .” He
turned me around to look earnes tly into my face. “Are you  all
right, lass?”
Whatever he saw in my face m ade him mutter “Christ”
again, sink to his knees, and pull me against his ruf fled
shirtfront. I gave up the pretense  of courage, and clung to him,
burying my face in the starchy warmth.
“Oh, God, Jamie. I was so scared. I am  so scared. Oh, God,
I wish you could make love to me now .”
His chest vibrated under my cheek with his laugh, but he
hugged me closer .
“Y ou think that would help?”
“Y es.”
In fact, I thought that I would not feel safe again, until I lay
in the security o f our bed, with the sheltering silence of the
house al l about us, feeling the strength and the heat of him
around and within me, buttressi ng my courage with the joy of
our joining, wiping out the ho rror of helplessness and near -
rape with the sureness of mutual possession.
He h eld my face between his hands and kissed me, and for
a m oment, the fear of the future and the terror of the night fell
away . Then he drew back and smiled. I could see his own
worry etched in the lines of his face, but there was nothing in
his eyes but the small reflection of my face.
“On account, then,” he said softly .
 
W e had reached the second cou rse without incident, and I
was beginning to relax slightly , though my hand still had a
tendency to tremble over the consommé.
“How perfectly fascinating!” I said, in response to a story
of the younger Monsieur Duverney’ s, to which I wasn’ t
listening, my ears being tuned for any suspicious noises
abovestairs. “Do tell me more.”
I ca ught Magnus’ s eye as h e served the Comte St.
Germain, seated  across from m e, and beamed congratulationsat him as well as I could with a mouthful of fish. T oo well
trained to smile in public, he inclined his head a respectful
quarter -inch and went on with the service. My hand went to
the crystal at m y neck, and I stroked it ostentatiously as the
Comte, with no sign of perturba tion on his saturnine features,
dug into the trout with almonds.
Jamie and the elder Duverney were close in conversation
at the other end  of the table, food ignored as Jamie scribbled
left-handed figures on a scrap o f paper with a stub of chalk.
Chess, or business? I wondered.
As g uest of hon or , the Duke sa t at the center of the table.
He had enjoyed  the first course s with the gusto of a natural-
born tr encherman, and was now engaged in animated
conversation with Madame d’Arbanville, on his right. As the
Duke was the most obviously prominent Englishman in Paris
at th e time, Jamie had thought  it worthwhile cultivating his
acquaintance, in hopes of uncovering any rumors that might
lead to the send er of the musical message to Charles Stuart.
My attention, though, kept str aying from the Duke to the
gentleman seated across from him – Silas Hawkins.
I had thought I might just die on the spot and save trouble
all round when the Duke ha d walked through the door ,
gesturing casually over his shoulder , and saying, “I say , Mrs.
Fraser , you do know Hawkins here, don’ t you?”
The Duk e’ s small, merry blue eyes had met mine with a
look of guileless confidence that his whims would be
accommodated, and I had had no choice but to smile and nod,
and tell Magnus to be sure another place was set. Jamie, seeing
Mr . Haw kins as he came thro ugh the door of the drawing
room, ha d looke d as though he were in need of another dose of
stomach medicine, but had pulled himself together enough to
extend a hand to Mr . Hawkins and start a conversation about
the quality of the inns on the road to Calais.
I gla nced at the carriage clock over the mantelpiece. How
long before they would all be  gone? I mentally tallied the
courses already served, and thos e to come. Nearly to the sweet
course. Then the salad and chee se. Brandy and cof fee, port for
the men,  liqueurs for the ladies. An hour or two for stimulatingconversation. Not too stimulating, please God, or they would
linger ’ til dawn.
Now they were talking of the menace of street gangs. I
abandoned the fish and picked up a roll.
“And I have he ard that some of these roving bands are
composed not of rabble, as you  would expect, but of some of
the youn ger members of the nobility!” General d’Arbanville
puf fed out his li ps at the monstr ousness of the idea. “They do
it fo r sp ort – sport! As though t he robbery of decent men and
the outraging of ladies were nothing more than a cockfight!”
“How extraordinary ,” said the Duke, with the indif ference
of a  man who never went anywhere without a substantial
escort. T he platter of savouries hovered near his chin, and he
scooped half a dozen onto his plate.
Jamie glanced at me, and rose from the table.
“If you’ll excuse me, mesdames, messieurs,” he said with
a bo w , “ I have something rather  special in the way of port that
I wo uld like to  have His Grac e taste. I’ll fetch it from the
cellar .”
“It m ust be the  Belle Rouge,” said Jules de La T our ,
licking his lips i n anticipation. “Y ou have a rare treat in store,
Y our Grace. I have never tasted such a wine anywhere else.”
“Ah? W ell, you soon will, Mons ieur le Prince,” the Comte
St. Germain broke in. “Something even better .”
“Surely there is nothing better than Belle Rouge!” General
d’Arbanville exclaimed.
“Y es, th ere is,” the Comte declared, looking smug. “I have
found a new port, made and bo ttled on the island of Gostos,
of f the coast of Portugal. A color rich as rubies, and a flavor
that makes Belle Rouge taste like colored water . I have a
contract for delivery of the entire vintage in August.”
“Indeed, Monsie ur le Comte?” Silas Hawkins raised thick,
graying brows toward our end of the table. “Have you found a
new partner for investment, then? I understood that your own
resources were… depleted, shall we say? following the saddestruction of the Patagonia .” He took a cheese savoury from
the plate and popped it delicately into his mouth.
The Comte’ s jaw muscles bulged, and a sudden chill
descended on our end of the table. From Mr . Hawkins’ s
sidelong glance at me, and the t iny smile that lurked about his
busily chewing mouth, it was clear that he knew all about my
role in the destruction of the unfortunate Patagonia .
My han d went again to the crystal at my neck, but the
Comte didn’ t look at me. A hot flush had risen from his lacy
stock, and he gl ared at Mr . Hawkins with open dislike. Jamie
was right; not a man to hide his emotions.
“Fortunately , Mo nsieur ,” he said, mastering his choler with
an apparent ef fort, “I have  fou nd a partne r who wishes to
invest in  this venture. A fellow  countryman, in fact, of our
gracious host.” He nodded sardonically toward the doorway ,
where Jamie had just appeared, followed by Magnus, who
bore an enormous decanter of the Belle Rouge port.
Hawkins stopp ed chewing for a moment, his mouth
unattractively open with interest. “A Scotsman? Who? I didn’ t
think there were any Scots in the wine business in Paris
besides the house of Fraser .”
A de finite gleam of amusement  lit the Comte’ s eyes as he
glanced from Mr . Hawkins to Ja mie. “I suppose it is debatable
whether the investor in question could be considered Scottish
at the moment; nonetheless, he is milord Broch T uarach’ s
fellow countryman. Charles Stuart is his name.”
This bit of news had all the impact the Comte might have
hoped fo r . Silas Hawkins sat bolt upright with an exclamation
that made him choke on the remnants of his mouthful. Jamie,
who had  been about to speak, closed his mouth and sat down,
regarding the Comte thoughtful ly . Jules de La T our began to
spray exclamations and glo bules of spit, and both
d’Arbanvilles m ade ejaculatio ns of amazement. Even the
Duke to ok his eyes of f his plat e and blinked at the Comte in
interest.
“Really?” he said. “I understood the Stuarts were poor as
church mice. Y ou’re sure he’ s not gulling you?”“I have no wish  to cast aspersions, or arouse suspicions,”
chipped in Jules de La T our , “but it is well known at Court that
the Stuarts have no money . It is true that several of the
Jacobite supporters have been seeking funds lately , but without
luck, so far as I have heard.”
“That’ s true,” interjected the y ounger Duverney , leaning
forward with interest. “Charle s Stuart himself has spoken
privately with two bankers of m y acquaintance, but no one is
willing to advance him any substantial sum in his present
circumstances.”
I sh ot a quick glance at Jamie, who answered with an
almost imperceptible nod. This came under the heading of
good news. But then what about the Comte’ s story of an
investment?
“It is true,” he said belligerently . “His Highness has
secured a loan of fifteen thousa nd livres from an Italian bank,
and has placed the entire sum at my disposal, to be used in
commissioning a ship and purchasing the bottling of the
Gostos vineyard . I have the signed letter right here.” He
tapped the breast of his coat with satisfaction, then sat back
and looked triumphantly around the table, stopping at Jamie.
“W ell, milord,” he said, with a wave at the decanter that sat
on the white clo th in front of Jamie, “are you going to allow us
to taste this famous wine?”
“Y es, of course,” Jamie murmured. He reached
mechanically for the first glass.
Louise, who had sat quietly ea ting through most of the
dinner , n oted Ja mie’ s discomfor t. A kind friend, she turned to
me in an obv ious ef fort to change the course of the
conversation to a neutral topic.
“That is a beau tiful stone you wear about your neck, ma
chèr e ,” she said, gest uring at my cry stal. “Where did you get
it?”
“Oh, this?” I said. “W ell, in fact-”
I was interrupted by a piercing scream. It stopped all
conversation, an d the brittle echoes of it chimed in the crystalsof the chandelier overhead.
“ Mon Dieu ,” said the Comte St. Germain, into the silence.
“What-”
The scream was repeated, and then repeated again. The
noise spilled down the wide stairway and into the foyer .
The guests, rising from the din ner table like a covey of
flushed quail, also spilled into the foyer , in time to see Mary
Hawkins, clad in the shredded remnants of her shift, lurch into
view at the top of the stair . There she stood, as though for
maximum ef fect , mouth stretched wide, hands splayed across
her boso m, where the ripped fabric all too clearly displayed
the bruises left by grappling hands on her breasts and arms.
Her pupils shrunk to pinpoi nts in the light of the
candelabra, her eyes seemed blank pools in which horror was
reflected. She looked down, but plainly saw neither stairway
nor crowd of gaping onlookers.
“No!” she shrieked. “No! Let me go! Please, I beg you!
DON’T T OUCH ME!” Blinde d by the drug as she was,
apparently she sensed some movement behind her , for she
turned a nd flailed wildly , hands clawing at the figure of Alex
Randall, who was trying vainly to get hold of her , to calm her .
Unfortunately , from below , his attempts looked rather like
those of a rejected seducer bent on further attack.
“Nom de Dieu,”  burst out General d’Arbanville.
“ Racaille!  Let  her go at once!” The old soldier leaped for the
stair with an agility belying his years, hand reaching
instinctively for his sword – wh ich, luckily , he had laid aside
at the door .
I has tily thrust m yself and my voluminous skirts in front of
the Comte and the younger Duverney , who showed symptoms
of following the General to the rescue, but I could do nothing
about Mary’ s uncle, Silas Hawkins. Eyes popping from his
head, the wine merchant stood stunned for a moment, then
lowered his head and char ged like a bull, forcing his way
through the onlookers.I l ooked  wildly about for Jam ie, and found him on the
edge of the crowd. I caught his eye and raised my brows in
silent question; in any case, no thing I said could have been
heard above the hubbub in the  foyer , punctuated by Mary’ s
steam-whistle shrieks from above.
Jamie shrugged at me, then glan ced around him. I saw his
eyes light for a moment on a th ree-legged table near the wall,
holding a tall vase of chrysanthemums. He glanced up,
measuring the distance, closed his eyes briefly as though
commending his soul to God, then moved with decision.
He spran g from the floor to the table, grasped the banister
railing and vaulted over it, ont o the stairway , a few feet in
advance of the G eneral. It was s uch an acrobatic feat that one
or two ladies gasped, little cries of admiration intermingled
with their exclamations of horror .
The exclamations grew louder as Jamie bounded up the
remaining stairs, elbowed his way between Mary and Alex,
and seiz ing the latter by the shoulder , took careful aim and hit
him solidly on the point of the jaw .
Alex, who had been staring a t his employer below in
openmouthed amazement, folded gently at the knees and
crumpled into a heap, eyes still wide, but gone suddenly blank
and empty as Mary’ s.1 9  A N  O A T H  I S  S W O R N
T he c lock on the mantelpiece had  an annoyingly loud tick.
It was the only sound in the house, other than the creakings of
the boards, and the far -of f thumps of servants working late in
the kitchens below . I had had e nough noise to last me some
time, though, and wanted only silence to mend my frazzled
nerves. I opened the clock’ s case and removed the
counterweight, and the tick ceased at once.
It had undeniab ly been the dinner party of the season.
People not fortunate enough to have been present would be
claiming for months that they h ad been, bolstering their case
with bits of repeated gossip and distorted description.
I ha d finally go t my hands on Mary long enough to force
another strong dose of poppy  juice down her throat. She
collapsed in a pitiful heap of bloodstained clothes, leaving me
free to turn my attention to the three-sided ar gument going on
among J amie, the General, and Mr . Hawkins. Alex had the
good sense to stay unconscious, and I arranged his limp form
neatly alongside  Mary’ s on the landing, like a couple of dead
mackerel. They looked like Romeo and Juliet laid out in the
public square as a reproach  to their relatives, but the
resemblance was lost on Mr . Hawkins.
“Ruined!” he kept shrieking. “Y ou’ve ruined my niece!
The V ic omte wi ll never have h er now! Filthy Scottish prick!
Y ou an d your strumpet” – h e swung on me – “whore!
Procuress! Sedu cing innocent young girls into your vile
clutches for the pleasure of bastardly scum! Y ou-” Jamie, with
a certain long-suf fering grimness, put a hand on Mr .
Hawkins’ s shoulders, turned him about, and hit him, just under
the f leshy jaw . Then he stood abstractedly rubbing his abused
knuckles, watching as the stout wine merchant’ s eyes rolled
upward. Mr . Hawkins fell back against the paneling and slid
gently down the wall into a sitting position.
Jamie turned a cold blue gaze on General d’Arbanville,
who, observing the fate of the fallen, wisely put down the winebottle he had been waving, and took a step back.
“Oh, go ahead,” ur ged a voice behind my shoulder . “Why
stop now , T uarach? Hit all three  of them! Make a clean sweep
of i t!” The Ge neral and Jamie focused a glance of united
dislike on the dapper form behind me.
“Go away , St. G ermain,” Jamie said. “This is none of your
af fair .” He sounded weary , but raised his voice in order to be
heard above the uproar below . T he shoulder seams of his coat
had bee n split, and folds of his linen shirt showed white
through the rents.
St. Germain’ s thin lips curved up ward in a charming smile.
Plainly the Comte was having the time of his life.
“Not my  af fair? How can such happenings not be the af fair
of every public-spirited man?” His amused gaze swept the
landing, littered  with bodies. “After all, if a guest of His
Majesty has so perverted the meaning of hospitality as to
maintain a brothel in his house, is that not the – no, you
don’ t!” he said, as Jamie took a step toward him. A blade
gleamed suddenly in his hand, appearing as though by magic
from the ruf fled lace cascading  over his wrist. I saw Jamie’ s
lip curl slightly , and he shifted h is shoulders inside the ruins of
his coat, settling himself for battle.
“Stop it  at once!” said an imperious voice, and the two
Duverneys, older and younger , pushed their way onto the
already overcro wded landing. Duverney the younger turned
and wav ed his arms commandingly at the herd of people on
the stair s, who were suf ficiently cowed by his scowl to move
back a step.
“Y ou,” said the elder Duverney , pointing at St. Germain.
“If you have an y feeling of public spirit, as you suggest, you
will employ yourself usefully in removing some of those
below .”
St. Germain locked eyes with the banker , but after a
moment, the noble shrugged, and the dagger disappeared. St.
Germain turned without comment and made his way
downstairs, pushing those before him and loudly ur ging them
to leave.Despite his exhortations, and those of Gérard, the younger
Duverney , behind him, the bulk of the dinner guests departed,
brimming with scandal, only u pon the arrival of the King’ s
Guard.
Mr . Hawkins, recovered by this time, at once lodged a
char ge of kidnapping and pandering against Jamie. For a
moment, I really thought Jamie was going to hit him again; his
muscles bunched  under the azure velvet, but then relaxed as he
thought better of it.
After a conside rable amount of confused ar gument and
explanation, Jamie agreed to go to the Guard’ s headquarters in
the Bastille, there – perhaps – to explain himself.
Alex Randall, white-faced, sweating, and clearly having no
idea wh at was going on, was t aken, too – the Duke had not
waited to see the fate of his secretary , but had discreetly
summoned his coach and left b efore the arrival of the Guard.
Whatever his diplomatic mission, being involved in a scandal
wouldn’ t help it. Mary Hawkins, still insensible, was removed
to her uncle’ s house, wrapped in a blanket.
I had narrowly avoided being included in the roundup
when Ja mie flat ly refused to all ow it, insisting that I was in a
delicate condition and could on no account be removed to a
prison. A t last, seeing that Jamie was more than willing to start
hitting p eople again in order t o prove his point, the Guard
Captain relented, on condition that I agreed not to leave the
city . While the thought of fleei ng Paris had its attractions, I
could hardly leave without Jamie, and gave my par ole
d’honneur  with no reservations.
As the group milled confusedly about the foyer , lighting
lanterns and gathering hats and cloaks, I saw Murtagh, bruised
face set grimly , hovering on the  outskirts of the mob. Plainly
he inten ded to accompany Jamie, wherever he was going, and
I fel t a quick sta b of relief. At least my husband wouldn’ t be
alone.
“Dinna w orry yourself, Sassena ch.” He hugged me briefly ,
whispering in my ear . “I’ll be back in no time. If anything goeswrong…” He hesitated, then said firmly , “It wilna be
necessary , but if ye need a friend, go to Louise de La T our .”
“I will.” I had no time for more than a glancing kiss,
before the Guardsmen closed in about him.
The doo rs of the house swun g open, and I saw Jamie
glance behind him, catch sight of Murtagh, and open his
mouth as though to say someth ing. Murtagh, setting hands to
his swordbelt, glared fiercely and pushed his way toward
Jamie, nearly shoving the young er Duverney into the street. A
short, silent battle of wills ensued, conducted entirely by
means of ferocious glares, and th en Jamie shrugged and tossed
up his hands in resignation.
He stepped out into the street, ignoring the Guardsmen
who pre ssed clo se on all sides, but stopped at sight of a small
figure st anding near the gate. H e stooped and said something,
then straightened, turned toward the house and gave me a
smile, clearly visible in the lanternlight. Then, with a nod to
the elder Monsieur Duverney , he stepped into the waiting
coach and was borne away , Mur tagh clinging to the rear of the
carriage.
Fer gus s tood in the street, looki ng after the coach as long
as it was in sight. Then, mounting the steps with a firm tread,
he took me by the hand and led me inside.
“Come, milady ,”  he said. “Milo rd has said I am to care for
you, ’ til his return.”
 
Now Fer gus slipped into the salon, the door closing
silently behind him.
“I have made the rounds of  the house, milady ,” he
whispered. “All buttoned up.” Despite the worry , I smiled at
his tone, so obviously an imitation of Jamie’ s. His idol had
entrusted him with a responsibility , and he plainly took his
duties seriously .
Having escorted me to the sitting room, he had gone to
make th e rounds of the hous e as Jamie did each night,
checking the fastenings of the shutters, the bars on the outerdoors – which I knew he could b arely lift – and the banking of
the fires . He had a smudge of soot from forehead to cheekbone
on one side, but  had rubbed his eye with a fist at one point, so
his eye blinked out of a clear white ring, like a small raccoon.
“Y ou should rest, milady ,” he said. “Don’ t worry , I’ll be
here.”
I didn’ t laugh, but smiled at him. “I couldn’ t sleep, Fer gus.
I’ll just sit here for a bit. Perhaps you should go to bed,
though; you’ve had an awfully long night of it.” I was
reluctant to order him to bed, not wanting to impair his new
dignity as temporary man of t he house, but he was clearly
exhausted. The  small, bony s houlders drooped, and dark
smudges showed beneath his eyes, darker even than the
coating of soot.
He yawned unashamedly , but shook his head.
“No, milady . I w ill stay with you… if you do not mind?”
he added hastily .
“I don’ t mind.” In fact, he was t oo tired either to talk or to
fidget in his usual manner , and his sleepy presence on the
hassock was comforting, like that of a cat or a dog.
I s at gazing into  the low-burning flames, trying to conjure
up some semblance of serenity . I tried summoning images of
still poo ls, forest glades, even the dark peace of the Abbey
chapel, b ut nothing seemed to b e working; over all the images
of peace lay those of the evening: hard hands and gleaming
teeth, coming out of a darkness  filled with fear; Mary’ s white
and stricken face, a twin to Alex Randall’ s; the flare of hatred
in Mr . Hawkins’ s piggy eyes; th e sudden mistrust on the faces
of the General and the Duverneys; St. Germain’ s ill-concealed
delight in scandal, shimmering with malice like the crystal
drops of the c handeliers. And  last of all, Jamie’ s smile,
reassurance and uncertainty mingled in the shifting light of
jostling lanterns.
What if he didn ’ t come back? T hat was the thought I had
been trying to s uppress, ever since they took him away . If he
was una ble to clear himself of  the char ge? If the magistrate
was one of th ose suspicious of foreigners – well, moresuspicious than usual, I amended – he could easily be
imprisoned indefinitely . And above and beyond the fear that
this unlo oked- fo r crisis could u ndo all the careful work of the
last weeks, was the image of Jamie in a cell like the one where
I had found him at W entworth. In light of the present crisis, the
news that Charles Stuart was investing in wine seemed trivial.
Left alone, I no w had plenty of time to think, but my
thoughts didn’ t seem to be gettin g me anywhere. Who or what
was “ La Dame Blanche ”? What sort of “white lady ,” and
why had the mention of that name made the attackers run of f?
Thinking back over the subsequent events of the dinner
party , I remembered the General’ s remarks about the criminal
gangs that roamed the streets of Paris, and how some of them
included membe rs of the nobilit y . That was consistent with the
speech and the dress of the leader of the men who had attacked
me and Mary , though his com panions seemed a good deal
rougher in aspect. I tried to think whether the man reminded
me of anyone I knew , but the memory of him was indistinct,
clouded by darkness and the receding haze of shock.
In general form, he had been not unlike the Comte St.
Germain, though surely the voice was dif ferent. But then, if
the Comte was involved, surely he would take pains to
disguise his voice as well as h is face? At the same time, I
found it almost impossible to believe that the Comte could
have taken part in such an attac k, and then sat calmly across
the table from me two hours later , sipping soup.
I ran  my fingers  through my hair in frustration. There was
nothing that could be done befo re morning. If morning came,
and Jam ie didn’ t, then I could begin to make the rounds of
acquaintances and presumed friends, one of whom might have
news or help to of fer . But for the hours of the night, I was
helpless; powerless to move as a dragonfly in amber .
My fingers jammed against one of the decorated hairpins,
and I yanked at it impatiently . T angled in my hair , it stuck.
“Ouch!”
“Here, milady . I’ll get it.”I hadn’ t  heard him pass behin d me, but I felt Fer gus’ s
small, clever fingers in my hair , disentangling the tiny
ornament. He laid it aside, then, hesitating, said, “The others,
milady?”
“Oh, thank you, Fer gus,” I said, grateful. “If you wouldn’ t
mind.”
His pick pocket’ s touch was light and sure, and the thick
locks began to fall around m y face, released from their
moorings. Little  by little, my breathing slowed as my hair
came down.
“Y ou are worried, milady?” said the small, soft voice
behind me.
“Y es,” I said, too tired to keep up a false bravado.
“Me, too,” he said simply .
The last of the hairpins clinked on the table, and I slumped
in th e ch air , eyes  closed. Then I felt a touch again, and realized
that he was brushing my hair , gently combing out the tangles.
“Y ou permit, milady?” he said, feeling it as I tensed in
surprise. “The ladies used to say it helped them, if they were
feeling worried or upset.”
I relaxed again under the soothing touch.
“I permit,” I said. “Thank you.” After a moment, I said,
“What ladies, Fer gus?”
There was a momentary hesitation, as of a spider disturbed
in the building of a web, and then the delicate ordering of
strands resumed.
“At the place w here I used to  sleep, milady . I couldn’ t
come ou t becau se of the custom ers, but Madame Elise would
let me sleep in a closet under the stairs, if I was quiet. And
after all the men  had gone, near morning, then I would come
out and sometimes the ladies w ould share their breakfast with
me. I would hel p them with the  fastening of their underthings
– they said I had the best touch of anyone,” he added, with
some pride, “and I would comb their hair , if they liked.”“Mm.” T he soft whisper of the brush through my hair was
hypnotic. W itho ut the clock on the mantel, there was no telling
time, bu t the silence of the street  outside meant it was very late
indeed.
“How did you come to sleep at Madame Elise’ s, Fer gus?” I
asked, barely suppressing a yawn.
“I was born there, milady ,” he answered. The strokes of the
brush grew slower , and his voice  was growing drowsy . “I used
to wond er which of the ladies was my mother , but I never
found out.”
 
The opening of the sitting-room door woke me. Jamie
stood there, red-eyed and white-faced with fatigue, but smiling
in the first gray light of the day .
“I w as afraid yo u weren’ t coming back,” I said, a moment
later , into the top  of his head. His hair had the faint acrid scent
of stale smoke and tallow , and his coat had completed its
descent into total disreputability , but he was warm and solid,
and I wasn’ t disposed to be criti cal about the smell of the head
I was cradling next my bosom.
“So was  I,” he said, somewhat  muf fled, and I could feel
his smil e. The arms around my waist tightened and released,
and he sat back, smoothing my hair out of my eyes.
“God, you are s o beautiful,” he said softly . “Unkempt and
unslept, wi’ the waves of your h air all about your face. Bonny
love. Have ye sat here all night long, then?”
“I wasn ’ t the only one.” I motioned toward the floor ,
where Fer gus lay curled up on the carpet, head on a cushion by
my feet. He shifted slightly in his sleep, mouth open a bit, soft
pink and full-lipped as the baby he so nearly was.
Jamie laid a big hand gently on his shoulder .
“Come on, then, laddie. Y e’ve done well to guard your
mistress.” He scooped the boy up and laid him against his
shoulder , mumb ling and sleepy-eyed. “Y ou’re a good man,
Fer gus, and ye’ve earned your rest. Come on to your bed.” Isaw Fer g us’ s eyes flare wide in  surprise, then half-close as he
relaxed, nodding in Jamie’ s arms.
I had opened the  shutters and rek indled the fire by the time
Jamie returned to the sitting ro om. He had shed his ruined
coat, but still wore the rest of last night’ s finery .
“Here.” I handed him a glass of wine, and he drank it
standing, in three gulps, shuddered, then collapsed onto the
small sofa, and held out the cup for more.
“Not a drop,” I said, “until you  tell me what’ s going on.
Y ou aren’ t in prison, so I assume everything’ s all right, but-”
“Not all right, S assenach,” he interrupted, “but it could be
worse.”
After a great dea l of ar gument to  and fro – a good deal of it
Mr . Hawkins’ s reiterations of his original impressions – the
judge-magistrate who had been hustled out of his cozy bed to
preside over this impromptu inv estigation had ruled grumpily
that since Alex Randall was one of the accused, he could
hardly be considered an imparti al witness. Nor could I, as the
wife and possible accomplice of the other accused. Murtagh
had been, by his own testimony , insensible during the alleged
attack, and the child Claudel was not legally capable of
bearing witness.
Clearly , Monsie ur le Juge had said, aiming a vicious glare
at the Guard Captain, the only person capable of providing the
truth of  the matter was Mary  Hawkins, who was by all
accounts incapa ble of doing so at the present time. Therefore,
all the accused should be locked up in the Bastille until such
time as Madem oiselle Hawkins could be interviewed, and
surely M onsieur le Capitaine should have been able to think
that out for himself?
“Then why aren’ t you locked up in the Bastille?” I asked.
“Monsieur Duverney the elder of fered security for me,”
Jamie replied, pulling me down  onto the sofa beside him. “He
sat rolled up in  the corner like  a hedgehog, all through the
clishmaclaver . Then when the judge made his decision, he
stood up and s aid that, having had the opportunity to playchess wi th me on several occasions, he didna feel that I was of
a m oral character so dissolute  as to permit of my having
conspired in the commission of an act so depraved-” He broke
of f and shrugged.
“W ell, ye ken w hat he talks like, once he’ s got going. The
general idea was that a man who could take him at chess six
times in seven wouldna lure innocent young lasses to his
house to be defiled.”
“V ery logical,” I said dryly . “ I imagine what he really
meant w as, if they locked you up , you wouldn’ t be able to play
with him anymore.”
“I expect so,” he agreed. He stretched, yawned, and
blinked at me, smiling.
“But I’m  home, and right now ,  I don’ t greatly care why .
Come h ere to me, Sassenach.” Grasping my waist with both
hands, h e boosted me onto his lap, wrapped his arms around
me, and sighed with pleasure.
“All I want to do,” he murmured in my ear , “is to shed
these fil thy clouts, and lie wi’ you on the hearthrug, go to
sleep str aight after , with my he ad on your shoulder , and stay
that way ’ til tomorrow .”
“Rather an inconvenience to the servants,” I remarked.
“They’ll have to sweep round us.”
“Damn the servants,” he said comfortably . “What are
doors for?”
“T o be knocked on, evidently ,” I  said as a soft rap sounded
outside.
Jamie paused a moment, nose buried in my hair , then
sighed, and raised his head, sl iding me of f his lap onto the
sofa.
“Thirty seconds,” he promised me in an undertone, then
said, “Entr ez!”  in a louder voice.
The door swung open and Murtagh stepped into the room.
I ha d ra ther ove rlooked Murtag h in the bustles and confusionof the night be fore, and now thought to myself that his
appearance had not been improved by neglect.
He l acked as m uch sleep as Jamie; the one eye that was
open was red-rimmed and bloodshot. The other had darkened
to th e co lor of a rotten banana, a  slit of glittering black visible
in the puf fed flesh. The knot on his forehead had now achieved
full prom inence: a purple goose-egg just over one brow , with a
nasty split through it.
The little clansman had said barely a word since his release
from the  bag the night before. B eyond a brief inquiry as to the
whereabouts of his knives – retrieved by Fer gus, who,
questing in his usual rat-terrier fashion, had found both dirk
and sgian dhu  beh ind a pile of rubbish – he had preserved a
grim silence through the exigencies of our getaway , guarding
the rear as we hurried on foot through the dim Paris alleys.
And once arrived at the house , a piercing glance from his
operating eye had been suf ficient to quell any injudicious
questions from the kitchen servants.
I supposed he must have said something at the
commissariat de police  if only to bear witness to the good
character of his employer – though I did wonder just how
much cr edibility I would be incl ined to place in Murtagh, were
I a  French judge. But now he was silent as the gar goyles on
Notre Dame, one of which he strongly resembled.
However disreputable his app earance, though, Murtagh
never seemed to lack for dignity , nor did he now . Back straight
as a ram rod, he advanced across the carpet, and knelt formally
before Jamie, who looked nonplussed at this behavior .
The wiry little man drew the d irk from his belt, without
flourishes, but with a good deal  of deliberateness, and held it
out, haft  first. The bony , seamed face was expressionless, but
the one black eye rested unwaveringly on Jamie’ s face.
“I’ve failed ye,” the little man said quietly . “And I’ll ask
ye, as my chief, to take my life now , so I needna live longer
wi’ the shame of it.”
Jamie drew himself slowly upright, and I felt him push
away hi s own tiredness as he b rought his gaze to bear on hisretainer . He was quite still for a  moment, hands resting on his
knees. T hen he reached out and  placed one hand gently over
the purple knot on Murtagh’ s head.
“There’ s nay shame to ha’ fallen in battle, mo caraidh ,” he
said softly . “The greatest of warriors may be overcome.”
But the little man shook his head stubbornly , black eye
unwinking.
“Nay ,” h e said. “I didna fall in battle. Y e gave me your
trust; yo ur own lady and your child unborn to guard, and the
wee English lassie as well. And I gave the task sae little heed
that I had nay c hance to strike a  blow when the danger came.
T ruth to tell, I didna even see the hand that struck me down.”
He did blink then, once.
“T reachery-” Jamie began.
“And no w see what’ s come of it,” Murtagh interrupted. I
had never heard him speak so m any words in a row in all the
time I had know n him. “Y our good name smirched, your wife
attacked, and the wee lass…” The thin line of his mouth
clamped tight for a moment, and his stringy throat bobbed
once as he swallowed. “For that alone, the bitter sorrow
chokes me.”
“A ye.” J amie spoke softly , nodding. “A ye, I do see, man. I
feel it, too.” He  touched his chest briefly , over his heart. The
two men might have been alone together , their heads inches
apart as Jamie b ent toward the o lder man. Hands folded in my
lap, I neither moved nor spoke; it was not my af fair .
“But I’m  no your chief, man,” Jamie went on, in a firmer
tone. “Y e’ve sworn me no vow , and I hold nay power ower
ye.”
“A ye, that ye do.” Murtagh’ s voice was firm as well, and
the haft of the dirk never trembled.
“But-”
“I sw ore ye my oath, Jamie Fraser , when ye were no more
than a week old, and a bonny lad at your mother ’ s breast.”I co uld feel the tiny start of astonishment as Jamie’ s eyes
opened wide.
“I kn elt at Ellen ’ s feet, as I kneel now by yours,” the little
clansman went on, narrow chin held high. “And I swore to her
by the name o’ the threefold God, that I would follow ye
always, to do your bidding, and guard your back, when ye
became a man g rown, and needing such service.” The harsh
voice softened then, and the eye lid drooped over the one tired
eye.
“A ye, la d. I do cherish ye as the son of my own loins. But I
have betrayed your service.”
“That ye havena and never could .” Jamie’ s hands rested on
Murtagh’ s shou lders, squeezing  firmly . “Nay , I wilna have
your life from ye, for I’ve need of ye still. But I will lay an
oath on ye, and you’ll take it.”
There was a long moment’ s hesitation, then the spiky black
head nodded imperceptibly .
Jamie’ s voice dropped still f urther , but it was not a
whisper . Holding the middle three fingers of his right hand
stif f, he laid th em together over the hilt of the dirk, at the
juncture of haft and tang.
“I char g e ye, then, by your oat h to me and your word to
my mot her – find the men. Hunt them, and when they be
found, I do char ge ye wi’ the vengeance due my wife’ s honor
– and the blood of Mary Hawkins’ s innocence.”
He paused a moment, then took his hand from the knife.
The clansman raised it, holdi ng it upright by the blade.
Acknowledging my presence for the first time, he bowed his
head toward me and said, “As the laird has spoken, lady , so I
will do. I will lay vengeance at your feet.”
I lic ked dry lip s, not knowing what to say . No response
seemed necessary , though; he brought the dirk to his lips and
kissed it , then straightened with decision and thrust it home in
its sheath.2 0  L A  D A M E  B L A N C H E
T he dawn had broadened into day by the time we had
changed our clothes, and breakfa st was on its way up the stairs
from the kitchen.
“What I  want to know ,” I said, pouring out the chocolate,
“is who in bloody hell is La Dame Blanche?”
“ La Dame Blanche?” Magnus, leaning over my shoulder
with a basket of hot bread, star ted so abruptly that one of the
rolls fell  out of the basket. I fielded it neatly and turned round
to look up at the butler , who was looking rather shaken.
“Y es, that’ s right,” I said. “Y ou’ve heard the name,
Magnus?”
“Why , yes, milady ,” the old man answered. “ La Dame
Blanche is une sor cièr e .”
“A sorceress?” I said incredulously .
Magnus shrugged, tucking in the napkin around the rolls
with excessive care, not looking at me.
“The White Lady ,” he murmured. “She is called a
wisewoman, a healer . And yet… she sees to the center of a
man, and can tu rn his soul to ashes, if evil be found there.” He
bobbed his head, turned, and shuf fled of f hastily in the
direction of the kitchen. I saw his elbow bob, and realized that
he was crossing himself as he went.
“Jesus H. Christ,” I said, turnin g back to Jamie. “Did you
ever hear of La Dame Blanche?”
“Um? Oh? Oh, aye, I’ve… hear d the stories.” Jamie’ s eyes
were hidden by long auburn lashes as he buried his nose in his
cup of chocolate , but the blush on his cheeks was too deep to
be put down to the heat of the rising steam.
I lea ned back in  my chair , crossed my arms, and regarded
him narrowly .“Oh, you have?” I said. “W ould  it surprise you to hear that
the men  who attacked Mary and me last night referred to me
as La Dame Blanche?”
“They did?” He looked up quickly at that, startled.
I no dded. “They took one look a t me in the light, shouted ‘
La D ame Blanche,’ and then ran of f as though they’d just
noticed I had plague.”
Jamie took a de ep breath and let it out slowly . The red
color wa s fading from his face , leaving it pale as the white
china plate before him.
“God in heaven,” he said, half  to himself. “God… in…
heaven!”
I leaned across the table and took the cup from his hand.
“W ould you like to tell me just  what you know about La
Dame Blanche?” I suggested gently .
“W ell…” He hesitated, but then looked at me sheepishly .
“It’ s only… I told Glengarry  that you were La Dame
Blanche.”
“Y ou tol d Gleng arry what ?” I choked on the bite of roll I
had taken. Jamie pounded me helpfully on the back.
“W ell, it was Glengarry and Ca stellotti, was what it was,”
he said defensiv ely . “I mean, pl aying at cards and dice is one
thing, but they wouldna leave it at that. And they thought it
verra funny that I’d wish to be faithful to my wife. They
said… w ell, they  said a number  of things, and I… I got rather
tired of it.” He looked away , the tips of his ears burning.
“Mm,” I said, sipping tea. H aving heard Castellotti’ s
tongue i n action, I could imagin e the sort of merciless teasing
Jamie had taken.
He drained his own cup at on e swallow , then occupied
himself with carefully refilling it, keeping his eyes fixed on the
pot to avoid me eting mine. “But I couldna just walk out and
leave the m, either , could I?” he demanded. “I had to stay with
His High ness th rough the evening, and it would do no good to
have him thinkin’ me unmanly .”“So you told them I was La Dame Blanche,” I said, trying
hard to keep any  hint of laughte r out of my voice. “And if you
tried any funny business with ladies of the evening, I’d shrivel
your private parts.”
“Er , well…”
“My God, they believed  it?”  I could feel my own fac e
flushing as hotly as Jamie’ s, with the ef fort to control myself.
“I w as verra co nvincing about it,” he said, one corner of
his m outh beginning to twitch. “Swore them all to secrecy on
their mothers’ lives.”
“And how much did you all have to drink before this?”
“Oh, a fair bit. I waited ’ til the fourth bottle.”
I gave up the struggle and burst out laughing.
“Oh, Jamie!” I said. “Y ou darling!” I leaned over and
kissed his furiously blushing cheek.
“W ell,” he said awkwardly , slathering butter over a chunk
of bread . “It was the best I cou ld think of. And they did stop
pushing trollops into my arms.”
“Good,” I said. I took the bread from him, added honey ,
and gave it back.
“I c an hardly c omplain about it,” I observed. “Since in
addition to guarding your virtue, it seems to have kept me
from being raped.”
“A ye, th ank God.” He set dow n the roll and grasped my
hand. “Christ, if anything had happened to you, Sassenach,
I’d-”
“Y es,” I interrupted, “but if the m en who attacked us knew
I was supposed to be La Dame Blanche…”
“A ye, Sa ssenach.” He nodded down at me. “It canna have
been either Glengarry nor Castellotti, for they were with me at
the house where Fer gus came to fetch me when you were
attacked. But it must have been someone they told of it.”
I co uldn’ t repress a slight shiv er at the memory of the
white mask and the mocking voice behind it.W ith a sigh, h e let go of my hand. “Which means, I
suppose, that I’d best go and se e Glengarry , and find out just
how many people he’ s been reg aling wi’ tales of my married
life.” He rubbed a hand through  his hair in exasperation. “And
then I must go c all on His High ness, and find out what in hell
he means by this arrangement with the Comte St. Germain.”
“I s uppose so,” I said thoug htfully , “though knowing
Glengarry , he’ s probably told half of Paris by now . I have
some calls to make this afternoon, myself.”
“Oh, ay e? An d who are y ou going to call upon,
Sassenach?” he  asked, eyeing me narrowly . I took a deep
breath, bracing myself at the thought of the ordeal that lay
ahead.
“First, on Master Raymond,” I said. “And then, on Mary
Hawkins.”
 
“Lavender , perhaps?” Raymond stood on tiptoe to take a
jar from  the shelf. “Not for application, but the aroma is
soothing; it calms the nerves.”
“W ell, that depends on whose n erves are involved,” I said,
recalling Jamie’ s reaction to the scent of lavender . It was the
scent Jack Randall had favored,  and Jamie found exposure to
the herb’ s perfume anything but soothing. “In this case,
though, it might help. Do no harm, at any rate.”
“Do no harm,” he quoted thoughtfully . “A very sound
principle.”
“That’ s the first bit of the Hippocratic Oath, you know ,” I
said, watching him as he bent to rummage in his drawers and
bins. “The oath a physician swears. ‘First, do no harm.’ ”
“Ah? And have you sworn this oath yourself, madonna?”
The bright, amphibious eyes bl inked at me over the edge of
the high counter .
I felt myself flushing before that unblinking gaze.
“Er , well, no. N ot actually . I’m not a real physician. Not
yet.” I couldn’ t have said what made me add that last sentence.“No? Y et you are seeking to mend that which a ‘real’
physician would  never try , know ing that a lost maidenhead is
not restorable.” His irony was evident.
“Oh, isn’ t it?” I answered dryly . Fer gus had, with
encouragement, told me quite  a bit about the “ladies” at
Madame Elise’ s house. “What’ s that bit with the shoat’ s
bladder full of c hicken blood, hm? Or do you claim that things
like that  fall into an apothecary’ s realm of competence, but not
a physician’ s?”
He had no eyebrows to speak of, but the heavy shelf of his
forehead lifted slightly when he was amused.
“And who is h armed by that, madonna? Surely not the
seller . N ot the buyer , either – he is likely to get more
enjoyment for his money than the purchaser of the genuine
article. N ot even the maidenhead itself is harmed! Surely a
very moral and Hippocratic endeavor , which any physician
might be pleased to assist?”
I l aughed. “And I expect you k now more than a few who
do?” I said. “I’ ll take the matter up with the next Medical
Review Board I see. In the me antime, short of manufactured
miracles, what can we do in the present case?”
“Mm.” He laid out a gauze s quare on the counter and
poured a handful of finely sh redded dried leaves into the
center of it. A sharp, pleasant tang rose from the small heap of
grayish-green vegetation.
“This is Saracen’ s consound,” he said, skilfully folding the
gauze in to a tidy square with the ends tucked in. “Good for
soothing irritated skin, minor lacerations, and sores of the
privy parts. Useful, I think?”
“Y es, indeed,” I said, a little grimly . “As an infusion or a
decoction?”
“Infusion. W arm, probably , under the circumstances.” He
turned to another shelf and abstracted one of the lar ge white
jars of painted porcelain. This one said CHELIDONIUM on
the side.“For the inducement of sleep,” he explained. His lipless
mouth s tretched back at the cor ners. “I think perhaps you had
better avoid the use of the opium-poppy derivatives; this
particular patient appears to have an unpredictable response to
them.”
“Heard all about it already , have  you?” I said resignedly . I
could h ardly have hoped he h adn’ t. I was well aware that
information was one of the more important commodities he
sold; consequen tly the little shop was a nexus for gossip from
dozens of sources, from street vendors to gentlemen of the
Royal Bedchamber .
“From three separate sources,” Raymond replied. He
glanced out the window , crani ng his neck to see the huge
horloge  t hat hung from  the wall of the building near the
corner . “And it’ s barely two o ’clock. I expect I will hear
several more versions of the events at your dinner before
nightfall.” The wide, gummy mouth opened, and a soft
chuckle emer ged. “I particularly liked the version in which
your husband challenged Genera l d’Arbanville to a duel in the
street, while you more pragm atically of fered Monsieur le
Comte the enjoyment of the u nconscious girl’ s body , if he
would refrain from calling the King’ s Guard.”
“Mmphm,” I said, sounding self-consciously Scottish.
“Have y ou any particular interest in knowing what actually did
happen?”
The horned-poppy tonic, a pale amber in the afternoon
sunlight, sparkled as he poured it into a small vial.
“The tru th is always of use, ma donna,” he answered, eyes
fixed on the slender stream. “I t has the value of rarity , you
know .” He set the porcelain ja r on the counter with a soft
thump. “ And thu s is worth a fair price in exchange,” he added.
The money for the medicines I  had bought was lying on the
counter , the coins gleaming in the sun. I narrowed my eyes at
him, bu t he merely smiled bla ndly , as though he had never
heard of froglegs in garlic butter .
The horloge  outside struck two. I calculated the distance to
the Haw kins’ s house in Rue Malory . Barely half an hour , if Icould get a carriage. Plenty of time.
“In that case,” I said, “shall we step into your private room
for a bit?”
 
“And that’ s it,” I said, taking a long sip of cherry brandy .
The fum es in the workroom w ere nearly as strong as those
rising fr om my glass, and I could feel my head expanding
under th eir influ ence, rather like a lar ge, cheerful red balloon.
“They let Jamie go, but we’re  still under suspicion. I can’ t
imagine that will last long, though, do you?”
Raymond shook his head. A draft stirred the crocodile
overhead, and he rose to shut the window .
“No. A nuisance, nothing mor e. Monsieur Hawkins has
money and friends, and of course he is distraught, but still.
Plainly you and your husband were guilty of nothing more
than excessive kindness, in trying to keep the girl’ s misfortune
a secret.” He took a deep swallow from his own glass.
“And that is your concern at present, of course. The girl?”
I nodded. “One of them. There’ s nothing I can do about her
reputation at this point. All I can do is try to help her to heal.”
A sardonic black eye peered over the rim of the metal
goblet he was holding.
“Most p hysicians of my acquaintance would say , ‘All I can
do is  try  to heal her .’ Y ou will help her to heal? It’ s interesting
that you perceive the dif ference, madonna. I thought you
would.”
I set down the cup, feeling that I had had enough. Heat was
radiating from my cheeks, and I had the distinct feeling that
the tip of my nose was pink.
“I told you I’m not a real physician.” I closed my eyes
briefly , determined that I could still tell which way was up,
and opened them again. “Beside s, I’ve… er , dealt with a case
of rape once b efore. There isn’ t a great deal you can do,
externally . Maybe there isn’ t a great deal you can do, period,”
I added. I changed my mind and picked up the cup again.“Perhaps not,” Raymond agreed. “But if anyone is capable
of re aching the patient’ s center , surely it would be La Dame
Blanche?”
I set the cup down, staring at him. My mouth was
unbecomingly open, and I closed it. Thoughts, suspicions, and
realizations were rioting through my head, colliding with each
other in tangles of conjecture. T emporarily sidestepping the
traf fic jam, I sei zed on the other  half of his remark, to give me
time to think.
“The patient’ s center?”
He reach ed into an open jar on the table, withdrew a pinch
of white powder , and dropped it into his goblet. The deep
amber of the br andy immediately turned the color of blood,
and began to boil.
“Dragon’ s blood,” he remarked, casually waving at the
bubbling liquid. “It only works in a vessel lined with silver . It
ruins the cup, of course, but it’ s most ef fective, done under the
proper circumstances.”
I made a small, gur gling noise.
“Oh, the patient’ s center ,” he said, as though recalling
something we had talked abo ut many days ago. “Y es, of
course. All healing is done essentially by reaching the… what
shall we  call it? the soul? the essence? say , the center . By
reaching the patient’ s center , from which they can heal
themselves. Surely you have seen it, madonna. The cases so ill
or so  wo unded that plainly they will die – but they don’ t. Or
those who suf fer from someth ing so slight that surely they
must recover , with the proper ca re. But they slip away , despite
all you can do for them.”
“Everyone who minds the sick h as seen things like that,” I
replied cautiously .
“Y es,” he agreed. “And the pri de of the physician being
what it is, most often he blames  himself for those that die, and
congratulates hi mself upon the triumph of his skill for those
that live . But La Dame Blanche sees the essence of a man, and
turns it to healin g – or to death. So an evildoer may well fearto look upon he r face.” He picked up the cup, raised it in a
toast to me, and drained the bubbling liquid. It left a faint pink
stain on his lips.
“Thanks,” I said dryly . “I think. So it wasn’ t just
Glengarry’ s gullibility?”
Raymond shrugged, looking pleased with himself. “The
inspiration was your husband’ s,” he said modestly . “And a
really excellent idea, too. But o f course, while your husband
has the respect of men for his own natural gifts, he would not
be considered an authority on supernatural manifestations.”
“Y ou, of course, would .”
The massive shoulders lifted slightly under the gray velvet
robe. There were several small holes in one sleeve, charred
around t he edge s, as though a number of tiny coals had burned
their way through. Carelessness while conjuring, I supposed.
“Y ou ha ve been seen in my shop,” he pointed out. “Y our
background is a mystery . And a s your husband noted, my own
reputation is somewhat suspect. I do move in… circles, shall
we say?” – the lipless mouth broadened in a grin – “where a
speculation as to your true iden tity may be taken with undue
seriousness. And  you know how  people talk,” he added with
an air of prim disapproval that made me burst out laughing.
He set down the cup and leaned forward.
“Y ou sa id that Mademoiselle Hawkins’ s health was one
concern, madonna. Have you others?”
“I ha ve.” I took  a small sip of b randy . “I’d guess that you
hear a great deal about what goes on in Paris, don’ t you?”
He smiled, black eyes sharp and genial. “Oh, yes,
madonna. What is it that you want to know?”
“Have you heard anything about Charles Stuart? Do you
know who he is, for that matter?”
That sur prised him; the shelf of his forehead lifted briefly .
Then he  picked up a small glas s bottle from the table in front
of him, rolling it meditatively between his palms.“Y es, madonna,” he said. “His father is – or should be –
King of Scotland, is he not?”
“W ell, th at depe nds on your per spective,” I said, stifling a
small be lch. “He ’ s either the Ki ng of Scotland in exile, or the
Pretender to the throne, but that’ s of no great concern to me.
What I want to know is… is Charles Stuart doing anything that
would make one think he might be planning an armed invasion
of Scotland or England?”
He laughed out loud.
“Goodness, mad onna! Y ou are a most uncommon woman.
Have you any idea how rare such directness is?”
“Y es,” I  admitted, “but there is n’ t really any help for it.
I’m not good at beating round bushes.” I reached out and took
the bottle from him. “ Have  you heard anything?”
He glanced instinctively toward the half-door , but the
shopgirl was occupied in mixing perfume for a voluble
customer .
“Something small, madonna, only a casual mention in a
letter from a friend – but the answer is most definitely yes.”
I co uld see him  hesitating in ho w much to tell me. I kept
my eyes on the bottle in my han d, to give him time to make up
his mind. The contents rolled with a pleasant sensation as the
little via l twisted  in my palm. It was oddly heavy for its size,
and had a strange, dense, fluid feel to it, as though it was filled
with liquid metal.
“It’ s quicksilver ,” Master Raymond said, answering my
unspoken question. Apparently whatever mind-reading he had
been doing had decided him in my favor , for he took back the
bottle, poured it out in a shimmering silver puddle on the table
before us, and sat back to tell me what he knew .
“One of His Highness’ s agents has made inquiries in
Holland,” he said. “A man named O’Brien – and a man more
inept at his job I hope never to employ ,” he added. “A secret
agent who drinks to excess?”
“Everyone around Charles Stuart drinks to excess,” I said.
“What was O’Brien doing?”“He wished to open negotiations for a shipment of
broadswords. T wo thousand bro adswords, to be purchased in
Spain, and sent through Holland, so as to conceal their place of
origin.”
“Why would he do that?” I aske d. I wasn’ t sure whether I
was naturally stupid, or merely fuddled with cherry brandy ,
but it seemed a pointless undertaking, even for Charles Stuart.
Raymond shrug ged, prodding the puddle of quicksilver
with a blunt forefinger .
“One can guess, madonna. The Spanish king is a cousin of
the Scottish king, is he not? A s well as of our good King
Louis?”
“Y es, but…”
“Might it not be that he is willi ng to help the cause of the
Stuarts, but not openly?”
The brandy haze was receding from my brain.
“It might.”
Raymond tapped  his finger shar ply downward, making the
puddle of quicksilver shiver into several small round globules,
that shimmied wildly over the tabletop.
“One he ars,” he said mildly , ey es still on the droplets of
mercury , “that King Louis entertains an English duke at
V ersailles. One hears also that the Duke is there to seek some
arrangements of trade. But then it is rare to hear everything ,
madonna.”
I sta red at the rippling drops of mercury , fitting all this
together . Jamie, too, had heard the rumor that Sandringham’ s
embassage concerned more than trade rights. What if the
Duke’ s visit really concerned the possibilities of an agreement
between France and England – perhaps with regard to the
future of Brussels? And if Louis  was negotiating secretly with
England for support for his inv asion of Brussels – then what
might P hilip of Spain be inclin ed to do, if approached by an
impecunious cousin with the power to distract the English
most thoroughly from any attention to foreign ventures?“Three Bourbon cousins,” Raymond murmured to himself.
He shepherded one of the drops toward another; as the
droplets touched, they mer ged at once, a single shining drop
springing into rounded life as th ough by magic. The prodding
finger u r ged ano ther droplet inward, and the single drop grew
lar ger . “One blood. But one interest?”
The finger struck down again, and glittering fragments ran
over the tabletop in every direction.
“I think not, madonna,” Raymond said calmly .
“I se e,” I said, with a deep breat h. “And what do you think
about Charles Stuart’ s new partnership with the Comte St.
Germain?”
The wide amphibian smile grew broader .
“I have heard that His Highness goes often to the docks
these da ys – to talk with his new partner , of course. And he
looks at the ships at anchor – so fine and quick, so…
expensive. The land of Scotland does  li e across the w ater , does
it not?”
“It does  indeed,” I said. A ray of light hit the quicksilver
with a flash, attracting my attention to the lowering sun. I
would have to go.
“Thank you,” I said. “W ill you  send word? If you hear
anything more?”
He inclined his massive head graciously , the swinging hair
the color of mercury in the sun, then jerked it up abruptly .
“Ah! Do not touch the quicksilver , madonna!” he warned
as I reached tow ard a droplet th at had rolled toward my edge
of th e ta ble. “It bonds at once w ith any metal it touches.” He
reached across and tenderly scooped the tiny pellet toward
him. “Y ou do not wish to spoil your lovely rings.”
“Right,” I said. “W ell, I’ll admit you’ve been helpful so
far . N o o ne’ s trie d to poison me lately . I don’ t suppose you and
Jamie be tween you are likely to get me burnt for witchcraft in
the Plac e de la Bastille, do you?” I spoke lightly , but my
memories of the thieves’ hole and the trial at Cranesmuir were
still fresh.“Certainly not,” he said, with dignity . “No one’ s been
burnt for witchcraft in Paris in … oh, twenty years, at least.
Y ou’re p erfectly safe. As long as you don’ t kill anyone,” he
added.
“I’ll do my best,” I said, and rose to go.
 
Fer gus found me a carriage with no dif ficulty , and I spent
the short trip to the Hawkins house musing over recent
developments. I supposed that Raymond had in fact done me a
service by expanding on Jami e’ s original wild story to his
more superstitious clients, though the thought of having my
name ba ndied about in séances or Black Masses left me with
some misgivings.
It also occurred to me that, rush ed for time, and beset with
speculations of kings and swords and ships, I had not had time
to as k Master Raymond where – if anywhere – the Comte St.
Germain entered into his own realm of influence.
Public opinion seemed to place the Comte firmly in the
center of the mysterious “circles” to which Raymond referred.
But as a participant – or a rival ? And did the ripples of these
circles spread as far as the King’ s chamber? Louis was
rumored to take interest in as trology; could there be some
connection, thro ugh the dark channels of Cabbalism and
sorcery , among Louis, the Comte, and Charles Stuart?
I shook my head impatiently , to clear it of brandy fumes
and poin tless questions. The only thing that could be said for
certain was that he had entered  into a dangerous partnership
with Charles Stuart, and that was concern enough for the
present.
The Hawkins residence on the Rue Malory was a solid,
respectable-looking house of t hree stories, but its internal
disruption was apparent even to the casual observer . The day
was warm, but all the shutters were still sealed tight against
any intrusion of prying eyes. The steps had not been scrubbed
this morning, and the marks of  dirty feet smeared the white
stone. N o sign of cook or housemaid out front to bar gain forfresh meat and gossip with the  barrowmen. It was a house
battened down against the coming of disaster .
Feeling not a little like a harbinger of doom myself, despite
my relat ively cheerful yellow gown, I sent Fer gus up the steps
to knock for me. There was some give-and-take between
Fer gus and whoever opened the door , but one of Fer gus’ s
better character traits was an inability to take “no” for an
answer , and shortly I found myself face-to-face with a woman
who appeared to be the lady of  the house, and therefore Mrs.
Hawkins, Mary’ s aunt.
I wa s forced to draw my own conclusions, as the woman
seemed much too distraught to assist me by of fering any sort
of tangible information, such as her name.
“But we can’ t see anybody!” she kept exclaiming, glancing
furtively over her shoulder , as though expecting the bulky
form of Mr . Hawkins suddenly to materialize accusingly
behind her . “W e’re… we have… that is…”
“I don’ t want to see you,” I said  firmly . “I want to see your
niece, Mary .”
The nam e seem ed to throw he r into fresh paroxysms of
alarm.
“She… but… Mary? No! She’ s… she’ s not well!”
“I do n’ t suppose she is,” I said p atiently . I lifted my basket
into view . “I’ve brought some medicines for her .”
“Oh! But… but… she… you… aren’ t you…?”
“Havers, woman ,” said Fer gus i n his best Scots accent. He
viewed this spectacle of deran gement disapprovingly . “The
maid says the young mistress is upstairs in her room.”
“Just so, ” I said. “Lead on, Fer gus.” W aiting for no further
encouragement, he ducked unde r the outstretched forearm that
barred our way , and made of f into the gloomy depths of the
house. Mrs. Hawkins turned after him with an incoherent cry ,
allowing me to slip past her .
There was a m aid on duty outside Mary’ s door , a stout
party in  a striped apron, but she of fered no resistance to mystatement that I intended to go in. She shook her head
mournfully . “I can do nothing with her , Madame. Perhaps you
will have better luck.”
This didn’ t sound at all promising, but there was little
choice. At least I wasn’ t li kely to do further harm. I
straightened my gown and pushed open the door .
It was like walking into a cave. The windows were covered
with heavy brown velvet draperies, drawn tight against the
daylight, and what chinks of light seeped through were
immediately quenched in the hovering layer of smoke from the
hearth.
I too k a deep br eath and let it out again at once, coughing.
There w as no stir from the figure on the bed; a pathetically
small, hunched shape under a goose-feather duvet. Surely the
drug had  worn of f by now , and she couldn’ t be asleep, after all
the racket there had been in the hallway . Probably playing
possum, in case it was her aunt come back for further
blithering haran gues. I would have done the same, in her
place.
I turned and s hut the door firmly in Mrs. Hawkins’ s
wretched face, then walked over to the bed.
“It’ s me ,” I said. “Why don’ t you come out, before you
suf focate in there?”
There w as a sudden upheaval of bedclothes, and Mary shot
out of the quilts like a dolphin rising from the sea waves, and
clutched me round the neck.
“Claire! Oh, Claire! Thank God! I thought I’d n-never see
you again! Uncle said you were in prison! He s-said you-”
“Let go!” I managed to detach her grip, and force her back
enough to get a look at her . She was red-faced, sweaty , and
disheveled from  hiding beneath the covers, but otherwise
looked f ine. Her brown eyes w ere wide and bright, with no
sign of opium in toxication, and while she looked excited and
alarmed, apparently a night’ s rest, coupled with the resilience
of y outh, had taken care of most of her physical injuries. The
others were what worried me.“No, I’m  not in prison,” I said, trying to stem her eager
questions. “Obv iously not, though it isn’ t for any lack of
trying on your uncle’ s part.”
“B-but I told  him-” she began, then stammered and let her
eyes fall. “ – at least I t-t-tried  to tell him, but he – but I…”
“Don’ t w orry about it,” I assur ed her . “He’ s so upset he
wouldn’ t listen to anything you  said, no matter how you said
it. It  doesn’ t ma tter , anyway . The important thing is you. How
do you feel?” I  pushed the heavy dark hair back from her
forehead and looked her over searchingly .
“All right,” she answered, and g ulped. “I… bled a little bit,
but it stopped.” The blood rose still higher in her fair cheeks,
but she didn’ t d rop her eyes. “I… it’ s… sore. D-does that go
away?”
“Y es, it does,” I said gently . “I b rought some herbs for you.
They’re to be b rewed in hot water , and as the infusion cools,
you can  apply it with a cloth, or sit in it in a tub, if one’ s
handy . I t will help.” I got the bundles of herbs from my
reticule and laid them on her side table.
She nodded, biting her lip. Plainly there was something
more sh e wanted to say , her native shyness battling her need
for confidence.
“What is it?” I asked, as matter -of-factly as I could.
“Am I going to have a baby?” she blurted out, looking up
fearfully . “Y ou said…”
“No,” I said, as  firmly as I could. “Y ou aren’ t. He wasn’ t
able to…  finish. ” In the folds of my skirt, I crossed both pairs
of fi ngers, hoping fervently that  I was right. The chances were
very sm all indeed, but such frea ks had been known to happen.
Still, there was no point in alarming her further over the faint
possibility . The thought made me faintly ill. Could such an
accident be the possible answer to the riddle of Frank’ s
existence? I put the notion aside ; a month’ s wait would prove
or dispel it.
“It’ s hot as a bloody oven in h ere,” I said, loosening the
ties at my throa t in order to breathe. “And smoky as hell’ svestibule, as my old uncle used to say .” Unsure what on earth
to say to her ne xt, I rose and went round the room throwing
back drapes and opening windows.
“Aunt Helen said I mustn’ t let a nyone see me,” Mary said,
kneeling up in bed as she watched me. “She says I’m d-
disgraced, and people will point at me in the street if I go out.”
“They might, the ghouls.” I fin ished my airing and came
back to her . “Th at doesn’ t mean you need bury yourself alive
and suf focate in the process.”  I sat down beside her , and
leaned back in my chair , fee ling the cool fresh air blow
through my hair as it swept the smoke from the room.
She was silent for a long time, toying with the bundles of
herbs on the ta ble. Finally she looked up at me, smiling
bravely , though her lower lip trembled slightly .
“At leas t I won’ t have to m-marry the V icomte. Uncle says
he’ll n-never have me now .”
“No, I don’ t suppose so.”
She nodded, looking down at th e gauze wrapped square on
her k nee. Her fi ngers fiddled restlessly with the string, so that
one end came l oose and a few crumbs of goldenrod fell out
onto the coverlet.
“I… use d to th-think about it;  what you told me, about
how a m-man…” She stopped  and swallowed, and I saw a
single te ar fall onto the gauze. “ I didn’ t think I could stand to
let the V icomte do that to me. N-now it’ s been done… and n-
nobody can undo it and I’ll never have to d-do it again…
and… a nd… oh, Claire, Alex w ill never speak to me again!
I’ll never see him again, never!”
She collapsed into my arms, weeping hysterically and
scattering herbs. I clutched her a gainst my shoulder and patted
her , making small shushing noises, though I shed a few tears
myself that fell unnoticed into the dark shininess of her hair .
“Y ou’ll see him again,” I whisp ered. “Of course you will.
It won’ t make a dif ference to him. He’ s a good man.”
But I knew it would. I had seen the anguish on Alex
Randall’ s face the night before, and at the time thought it onlythe sam e helpless pity for suf fering that I saw in Jamie and
Murtagh. But since I had learne d of Alex Randall’ s professed
love for Mary , I had realized how much deeper his own pain
must go – and his fear .
He seemed a good man. But he was also a poor , younger
son, in ill health  and with little chance of advancement; what
position he did have was entire ly dependent on the Duke of
Sandringham’ s g oodwill. And I had little hope that the Duke
would look kindly on the idea o f his secretary’ s union with a
disgraced and ruined girl, who had now neither social
connections nor dowry to bless herself with.
And if Alex fou nd somewhere the courage to wed her in
spite of everything – what chance would they have, penniless,
cast out of polite society , and with the hideous fact of the rape
overshadowing their knowledge of each other?
There w as nothing I could do but hold her , and weep with
her for what was lost.
 
It wa s tw ilight b y the time I left, with the first stars coming
out in faint spec kles over the chimneypots. In my pocket was a
letter w ritten by Mary , properly witnessed, containing her
statement of the events of the night before. Once this was
delivered to the proper authorities, we should at least have no
further trouble from the law . Ju st as well; there was plenty of
trouble pending from other quarters.
Mindful, this time, of danger , I made no objection to Mrs.
Hawkins’ s unwilling of fer to have me and Fer gus transported
home in the family carriage.
I tossed  my hat on the card table in the vestibule,
observing the lar ge number of notes and small nosegays that
overflowed the salver there. Apparently we weren’ t yet
pariahs, though the news of the  scandal must long since have
spread through the social strata of Paris.
I wa ved away the anxious inqu iries of the servants, and
drifted upward toward the bedchamber , shedding my outer
garments carele ssly along the way . I felt too drained to care
about anything.But when I pushed open the bedchamber door and saw
Jamie, ly ing back in a chair by the fire, my apathy was at once
supplanted by a sur ge of tendern ess. His eyes were closed and
his hair sticking up in all directions, sure sign of mental
turmoil at some point. But he opened his eyes at the slight
noise of  my entrance and smiled at me, eyes clear and blue in
the warm light of the candelabrum.
“It’ s all right” was all he whispered to me as he gathered
me i nto his arm s. “Y ou’re home.” Then we were silent, as we
undressed each other and went finally to earth, each finding
delayed and wordless sanctuary in the other ’ s embrace.2 1  U N T I M E L Y
R E S U R R E C T I O N
M y mind was still on bankers whe n our coach pulled up to
the Duke’ s rented residence on the Rue St. Anne. It was a
lar ge, ha ndsome house, with a long, curving drive lined with
poplar trees, and extensive grounds. A wealthy man, the Duke.
“Do yo u suppo se it was the  loan Charles got from
Manzetti that he’ s investing with St. Germain?” I asked.
“It mus t be,” Jamie replied. He pulled on the pigskin
gloves suitable for a formal c all, grimacing slightly as he
smoothed the tight leather over the stif f fourth finger of his
right hand. “The money his father thinks he’ s spending to
maintain himself in Paris.”
“So Cha rles really is trying to raise money for an army ,” I
said, feeling a reluctant admiration for Charles Stuart. The
coach came to a  halt, and the footman hopped down to open
the door .
“W ell, he’ s trying to raise money , at least,” Jamie
corrected, handi ng me out of the coach. “For all I ken, he
wants it to elope with Louise de La T our and his bastard.”
I s hook my head . “I don’ t think so. Not from what Master
Raymond told me yesterday . Besides, Louise says she hasn’ t
seen him since she and Jules… well…”
Jamie snorted briefly . “At leas t she’ s got some sense of
honor , then.”
“I don’ t know w hether that’ s it,” I observed, taking his arm
as w e cl imbed t he steps to the door . “She said Charles was so
furious at her for sleeping with  her husband that he stormed
of f, and she has n’ t seen him since. He writes her passionate
letters from time to time, swearing to come and take her and
the c hild away w ith him as soon  as he comes into his rightful
place in the wor ld, but she won’ t let him come to see her; she’ s
too afraid of Jules finding out the truth.”Jamie made a disapproving Scottish noise.
“God, is there any man safe from cuckoldry?”
I touched his arm lightly . “Likely some more than others.”
“Y e think so?” he said, but smiled down at me.
The door swung open to reveal a  short, tubby butler , with a
bald head, a spotless uniform, and immense dignity .
“Milord,” he said, bowing to Ja mie, “and milady . Y ou are
expected. Please come in.”
 
The Duk e was charm itself as he received us in the main
drawing room.
“Nonsense, nonsense,” he s aid, dismissing Jamie’ s
apologies for the contretemps of the dinner party . “Damned
excitable fellows, the French. Make an ungodly fuss over
everything. Now , do let us lo ok over all these fascinating
propositions, shall we? And perhaps your good lady would
like to… um, a muse herself with a perusal of… eh?” He
waved an arm vaguely in the direction of the wall, leaving it
open to question  whether I migh t amuse myself by looking at
the seve ral lar ge paintings, the well-furnished bookshelf, or
the seve ral glass cases in which the Duke’ s collection of
snuf fboxes resided.
“Thank you,” I murmured, with a charming smile, and
wandered over to the wall, pretending to be absorbed in a lar ge
Boucher , featuring the backview of an amply endowed nude
woman seated on a rock in t he wilderness. If this was a
reflection of current tastes in  female anatomy , it was no
wonder that Jamie appeared to think so highly of my bottom.
“Ha,” I said. “What price foundation garments, eh?”
“Eh?” Jamie and the Duke, sta rtled, looked up from the
portfolio of investment papers that formed the ostensible
reason for our visit.
“Never mind me,” I said, wavi ng a gracious hand. “Just
enjoying the art.”“I’m deeply gratified, ma’am,” said the Duke politely , and
at once reimmersed himself in the papers, as Jamie began the
tedious and painstaking real business of the visit – the
inconspicuous extraction of such information as the Duke
might be willing to part with re garding his own sympathies –
or otherwise – toward the Stuart cause.
I had my own agenda for this visit, as well. As the men
became more immersed in their discussions, I edged my way
toward the door , pretending to look through the well-furnished
shelves. As soon as the coast looked clear , I meant to slip out
into the hallway  and try to find Alex Randall. I had done what
I could to repair the damage done to Mary Hawkins; anything
further would have to come f rom him. Under the rules of
social etiquette, he couldn’ t call  upon her at her uncle’ s house,
nor could she contact him. B ut I could easily make an
opportunity for them to meet at the Rue T remoulins.
The conversation behind me had dropped to a confidential
murmur . I stuck my head int o the hall, but didn’ t see a
footman immed iately . Still, one couldn’ t be far away; a house
of this size mu st have a staf f numbering in the dozens. As
lar ge as it was,  I would need directions in order to locate
Alexander Rand all. I chose a direction at random and walked
along the hallway , looking for a servant of whom to inquire.
I s aw a flicker of motion at the end of the hall, and called
out. Whoever it was made no answer , but I heard a
surreptitious scuttle of feet on polished boards.
That see med curious behavior for a servant. I stopped at
the e nd of the hall and looked around. Another hall extended
at right angles to the one I stood in, lined on one side with
doors, on the o ther with long windows that opened on the
drive and the ga rden. Most of the doors were closed, but the
one closest to me was slightly ajar .
Moving quietly ,  I stepped up to it and put my ear next to
the paneling. Hearing nothing, I took hold of the handle and
boldly pushed the door open.
“What in the name of God are you  doing here?” I
exclaimed in astonishment.“Oh, you scared me! Gracious, I thought I was g-going to
die.” Mary Hawkins pressed both hands against her bodice.
Her face was blanched white, an d her eyes dark and wide with
terror .
“Y ou’re not,” I said. “Unless y our uncle finds out you’re
here; then he’ll probably kill you. Or does he know?”
She sho ok her head. “No. I didn’ t t-tell anyone. I took a
public fiacre.”
“ Why , for God’ s sake?”
She glan ced aro und like a frigh tened rabbit looking for a
bolthole, but failing to find one, instead drew herself up and
tightened her jaw .
“I had to find Alex. I had to t-talk to him. T o see if he – if
he…” Her hands were wringing  together , and I could see the
ef fort it cost her to get the words out.
“Never mind,” I said, resigned. “I understand. Y our uncle
won’ t, though, and neither will  the Duke. His Grace doesn’ t
know you’re here, either?”
She shook her head, mute.
“All righ t,” I said, thinking. “W ell, the first thing we must
do is-”
“Madame? May I assist you?”
Mary started like a hare, and I felt my own heart leap
uncomfortably into the back of my throat. Bloody footmen;
never in the right place at the right time.
There was nothing to do now but brazen it out. I turned to
the footman, who was standing stif f as a ramrod in the
doorway , looking dignified and suspicious.
“Y es,” I said, with as much hauteur as I could summon on
short notice. “W ill you please te ll Mr . Alexander Randall that
he has visitors.”
“I regret  that I cannot do so, M adame,” said the footman,
with remote formality .
“And why not?” I demanded.“Because, Madame,” he answered, “Mr . Alexander
Randall is no longer in His Grace’ s employ . He was
dismissed.” The footman glanced at Mary , then lowered his
nose an inch and  unbent suf ficiently to say , “I understand that
Monsieur Randall has taken ship back to England.”
“No! He can’ t be gone, he can’ t!”
Mary darted toward the door , and nearly cannoned into
Jamie as  he entered. She drew up short with a startled gasp,
and he stared at her in astonishment.
“What-” he began, then saw me  behind her . “Oh, there ye
are, Sas senach. I made an excu se to come and find ye – His
Grace just told me that Alex Randall-”
“I know ,” I interrupted. “He’ s gone.”
“No!” Mary moaned. “No!” She darted toward the door ,
and was through it before either of us could stop her , her heels
clattering on the polished parquet.
“Bloody fool!” I kicked of f my  own shoes, picked up my
skirts, and whizzed after her . Stocking-footed, I was much
faster than she in her high-heeled slippers. Maybe I could
catch he r before she ran into someone else and was caught,
with the concomitant scandal that  would involve.
I f ollow ed the whisk of her dis appearing skirts round the
bend of the hall. The floor here was carpeted; if I didn’ t hurry ,
I might lose her at an intersec tion, unable to hear from the
footsteps which  way she had gone. I put my head down,
char ged round the last corner , an d crashed head-on into a man
coming the other way .
He l et out a startled “Whoof!” as I struck him amidships,
and clutched me by the arms to keep upright as we swayed and
staggered together .
“I’m sor ry ,” I began, breathless ly . “I thought you were –
oh, Jesus H. fucking Christ!”
My initial impression – that I had encountered Alexander
Randall – had la sted no more than the split second necessary
to see the eyes above that finely chiseled mouth. The mouthwas much like A lex’ s, bar the d eep lines around it. But those
cold eyes could belong to only one man.
The shock was so great that for a moment everything
seemed paradoxically normal; I had an impulse to apologize,
dust him of f, and continue my pursuit, leaving him for gotten in
the corr idor , as just a chance encounter . My adrenal glands
hastened to remedy this impression, dumping such a dose of
adrenaline into my bloodstream that my heart contracted like a
squeezed fist.
He was recovering his own breath by now , along with his
momentarily shattered self-possession.
“I am  inclined to concur with your sentiments, Madam, if
not precisely with their manner of expression.” Still clutching
me by the elb ows, he held me slightly away from him,
squinting to see my face in the shadowed hall. I saw the shock
of re cognition blanch his featu res as my face came into the
light. “Bloody hell, it’ s you!” he exclaimed.
“I thought you were dead!” I wrenched at my arms, trying
to free them from the iron-tight grip of Jonathan Randall.
He l et g o of one arm, in order to rub his middle, surveying
me coldly . The thin, fine-cut features were bronzed and
healthy; he gave no outward sig n of having been trampled five
months before by thirty quarter -ton beasts. Not so much as a
hoofprint on his forehead.
“Once more, Madam, I find myself sharing your
sentiments. I was under a v ery similar misapprehension
concerning your  stat e of health. Possibly you are a witch, after
all – what did y ou do, turn you rself into a wolf?” The wary
dislike stamped  on his face was mingled with a touch of
superstitious aw e. After all, wh en you turn someone out into
the mids t of a p ack of wolves o n a cold winter evening, you
rather ex pect them to cooperate by being eaten forthwith. The
sweatiness of my own palms an d the drumlike beating of my
heart were testimony to the unsettling ef fect of having
someone you thought safely dead suddenly rise up in front of
you. I supposed he must be feeling a trifle queasy as well.“W ouldn’ t you  l ike  to know?” The ur ge to annoy him – to
disturb that icy calm – was the  first emotion to surface from
the seething mass of feelings that had erupted within me at
sight of his face. His fingers tigh tened on my arm, and his lips
thinned. I could see his mind working, starting to tick of f
possibilities.
“If i t wasn’ t you rs, whose body did Sir Fletcher ’ s men take
out of the dunge on?” I demanded, trying to take advantage of
any brea k in his composure. An eyewitness had described to
me the removal of “a rag doll, rolled in blood” – presumably
Randall – from the scene of the cattle stampede that had
masked Jamie’ s escape from that same dungeon.
Randall smiled, without much h umor . If he was as rattled
as I, he didn’ t s how it. His bre athing was a trifle faster than
usual, and the lines that edged mouth and eyes cut deeper than
I r emembered, but he wasn’ t gasping like a landed fish. I was.
I took in as muc h oxygen as my lungs would allow and tried to
breathe through my nose.
“It was my orderly , Marley . Though if you aren’ t
answering my questions, why should I answer yours?” He
looked me up and down, carefully evaluating my appearance:
silk gown, hair ornaments, jewelry , and stockinged feet.
“Married a Frenchman, did you?” he asked. “I always did
think you were a French spy . I trust your new husband keeps
you in better order than…”
The words died in his throat as he looked up to see the
source of the footsteps that had just turned into the hall behind
me. If I had wanted to discom pose him, that ur ge was now
fully gratified. No Hamlet on th e stage had ever reacted to the
appearance of a ghost with mor e convincing terror than I saw
stamped on that aristocratic fac e. The hand still holding my
arm clawed deep into my flesh, and I felt the jolt of shock that
sur ged through him like an electric char ge.
I knew what he saw behind m e, and was afraid to turn.
There was a deep silence in the hall; even the wash of the
cypress branches against the windows seemed part of the
quiet, like the ear -roaring silence that waves make, at thebottom of the sea. V ery slowly , I disengaged my arm from his
grasp, and his h and fell nerveless to his side. There was no
sound behind me, though I could hear voices start up from the
room at the end  of the hall. I pr ayed that the door would stay
closed, and tried desperately to remember how Jamie was
armed.
My mind went blank, then blazed with the reassuring
vision o f his small-sword, hung  by its belt from a hook on the
wardrobe, sun glowing on the e nameled hilt. But he still had
his dirk,  of course, and the smal l knife he habitually carried in
his s tocking. Come to that, I wa s entirely sure that in a pinch,
he would consider his bare han ds perfectly adequate. And if
you cared to describe my present situation, standing between
the two of them , as a pinch… I swallowed once and slowly
turned around.
He was standin g quite still, no  more than a yard behind
me. One  of the t all, paned casements opened near him, and the
dark shadows of the cypress n eedles rippled over him like
water ov er a sunken rock. He showed no more expression than
a rock, either . W hatever lived behind those eyes was hidden;
they wer e wide and blank as windowpanes, as though the soul
they mirrored were long since flown.
He d idn’ t speak, but after a mom ent, reached out one hand
to me. It floated open in the air , and I finally summoned the
presence of mind to take it. It was cool and hard, and I clung
to it like the wood of a raft.
He d rew me in, close to his sid e, took my arm and turned
me, all without speaking or changing expression. As we
reached the turning of the hall, Randall spoke behind us.
“Jamie,” he said. The voice was hoarse with shock, and
held a note halfway between disbelief and pleading.
Jamie st opped t hen, and turned to look at him. Randall’ s
face was  a ghastly white, with a  small red patch livid on each
cheekbone. He had taken of f h is wig, clenched in his hands,
and sweat pasted the fine dark hair to his temples.
“No.” The voice that spoke ab ove me was soft, almost
expressionless. Looking up, I could see that the face stillmatched it, but a quick, hot pu lse beat in his neck, and the
small, triangular scar above his collar flushed red with heat.
“I am  called Lord Broch T uarac h for formality’ s sake,” the
soft Scottish voice above me said. “And beyond the
requirements of formality , you w ill never speak to me again –
until you  beg for your life at the point of my sword. Then, you
may use my name, for it will be the last word you ever speak.”
W ith sudden violence, he swept around, and his flaring
plaid swung wide, blocking my  view of Randall as we turned
the corner of the hall.
 
The carriage was still waiting by  the gate. Afraid to look at
Jamie, I climbed in and absorbe d myself in tucking the folds
of yellow silk a round my legs. The click of the carriage door
shutting made me look up abruptly , but before I could reach
the handle, the carriage started with a jerk that threw me back
in my seat.
Struggling and swearing, I fough t my way to my knees and
peered out of the back window . He was gone. Nothing moved
on the drive but the swaying shadows of cypress and poplar .
I hammered frenziedly on the ro of of the carriage, but the
coachman merely shouted to the horses and ur ged them on
faster . There was little traf fic at this hour , and we hurtled
through the narrow streets as though the devil were after us.
When w e drew up in the Rue T remoulins, I sprang out of
the coach, at once panicked and furious.
“Why didn’ t you stop?” I dema nded of the coachman. He
shrugged, safely impervious atop his perch.
“The ma ster ord ered me to driv e you home without delay ,
Madame.” He picked up the wh ip and touched it lightly to the
of f-horse’ s rump.
“W ait!” I shouted. “I want to  go back!” But he only
hunched himsel f turtle-like into his shoulders, pretending not
to hear me, as the coach rattled of f.Fuming with impotence, I turned toward the door , where
the small figure of Fer gus appeared, thin brows raised
questioningly at my appearance.
“Where’ s Murta gh?” I snapped. The little clansman was
the only person I could think of who might be able first, to
find Jamie, and secondly , to stop him.
“I don’ t know , Madame. Maybe down there.” The boy
nodded in the di rection of the Rue Gamboge, where there were
several taverns, ranging in respectability from those where a
traveling lady might dine with her husband, to the dens near
the river , which even an armed man might hesitate to enter
alone.
I l aid a hand on Fer gus’ s shoulder , as much for support as
in exhortation.
“Run and find him, Fer gus. Quickly as you can!”
Alarmed by my tone, he leaped of f the step and was gone,
before I could add “Be carefu l!” Still, he knew the lower
levels of Paris life much better than I did; no one was better
adapted to eeling through a tavern crowd than an ex-
pickpocket. At least I hoped he was an ex-pickpocket.
But I could wo rry ef fectively about only one thing at a
time, and visions of Fer gus bein g captured and hanged for his
activities receded before the vision Jamie’ s final words to
Randall had evoked.
Surely , sur ely  he would not have gone back into the
Duke’ s house? No, I reassured myself. He had no sword.
Whatever he might be feeling – and my soul sank within me to
think of  what he felt – he wou ldn’ t act precipitously . I had
seen him in ba ttle before, mind working in an icy calm,
severed from the emotions that c ould cloud his judgment. And
for this, above all things, surely he would adhere to the
formalities. He would seek the rigid prescriptions, the
formulae for the satisfaction of h onor , as a refuge – something
to cling  to against the tides that shook him, the bone-deep
sur ge of bloodlust and revenge.I stopped in the hallway , mechanically shedding my cloak
and pausing by the mirror to  straighten my hair . Think,
Beauchamp , I silently ur ged my pale reflection. If he’ s going
to fight a duel, what’ s the first thing he’ll need?
A sw ord? No, couldn’ t be. His own was upstairs, hanging
on the armoire. While he might easily borrow one, I couldn’ t
imagine his setting out to fight the most important duel of his
life armed with any but hi s own. His uncle, Dougal
MacKenzie, ha d given it to him at seventeen, seen him
schooled in its use, taught him the tricks and the strengths of a
left-handed swordsman, using t hat sword. Dougal had made
him practice, left hand against  left hand, for hours on end,
until, he told m e, he felt the length of Spanish metal come
alive, an extension of his arm, h ilt welded to his palm. Jamie
had said he felt naked without it. And this was not a fight to
which he would go naked.
No, if he had needed the sword at once, he would have
come ho me to fetch it. I ran my hand impatiently through my
hair , try ing to think. Damn i t, what was the protocol of
dueling? Before it came to swords, what happened? A
challenge, of course. Had Jamie’ s words in the hallway
constituted that?  I had vague ideas of people being slapped
across the face with gloves, but  had no idea whether that was
really the custom, or merely an  artifact of memory , born of a
film-maker ’ s imagination.
Then it came to  me. First the challenge, then a place must
be arranged – a suitably circumspect place, unlikely to come to
the n otice of the  police or the King’ s Guard. And to deliver the
challenge, to arrange the place , a second was required. Ah.
That was where he had gone, then; to find his second.
Murtagh.
Even if Jamie fo und Murtagh before Fer gus did, still there
would b e the formalities to arrange. I began to breathe a little
easier , th ough my heart was stil l pounding, and my laces still
seemed too tight. None of the servants was visible; I yanked
the laces loose and drew a deep, expanding breath.
“I didna  know ye were in the habit of undressing in the
hallways, or I would ha’ stayed in the drawing room,” said anironic Scots voice behind me.
I wh irled, my he art leaping high enough to choke me. The
man standing stretched in the drawing room doorway , arms
outspread to brace him casually against the frame, was big,
nearly as lar ge as Jamie, w ith the same taut grace of
movement, the same air of cool  self-possession. The hair was
dark, though, and the deep-set eyes a cloudy green. Dougal
MacKenzie, appearing suddenly in my home as though called
by my thought. Speak of the devil.
“What in God’ s name are you d oing here?” The shock of
seeing h im was  subsiding, though my heart still pounded. I
hadn’ t e aten since breakfast, and a sudden wave of queasiness
washed over me. He stepped fo rward and grasped me by the
arm, pulling me toward a chair .
“Sit ye down, la ss,” he said. “Y e’ll no be feeling just the
thing, it looks like.”
“V ery observant  of you,” I said. Black spots floated at the
edge of my visio n, and small br ight flashes danced before my
eyes. “Excuse me,” I said polit ely , and put my head between
my knees.
Jamie. Frank. Randall. Dougal. The faces flickered in my
mind, the names seemed to rin g in my ears. My palms were
sweating, and I pressed them un der my arms, hugging myself
to try to stop t he tremblings of shock. Jamie wouldn’ t be
facing Randall immediately; that was the important thing.
There w as a little time, in which to think, to take preventive
action. But what action? Leaving my subconscious to wrestle
with this question, I forced my breathing to slow and turned
my attention to matters closer to hand.
“I repeat,” I said, sitting up and smoothing back my hair ,
“what are you doing here?”
The dark brows flickered upward.
“Do I need a reason to visit a kinsman?”
I c ould still taste the bile at the back of my throat, but my
hands had stopped trembling, at least.“Under the circumstances, yes,” I said. I drew myself up,
grandly ignoring  my untied laces, and reached for the brandy
decanter . Antici pating me, Dougal took a glass from the tray
and poured out a teaspoonful. T hen, after a considering glance
at me, he doubled the dose.
“Thanks,” I said dryly , accepting the glass.
“Circumstances, eh? And wh ich circumstances would
those be ?” Not waiting for answer or permission, he calmly
poured o ut another glass for hi mself and lifted it in a casual
toast. “T o His Majesty .”
I f elt my mouth  twist sideways. “King James, I suppose?”
I t ook a small sip of my own drink, and felt the hot aromatic
fumes se ar the membranes behind my eyes. “And does the fact
that you ’re in Paris mean that you’ve converted Colum to your
way of thinking?” For while Dougal MacKenzie might be a
Jacobite, it was his brother Colu m who led the MacKenzies of
Leoch a s chiefta in. Legs crippled and twisted by a deforming
disease, Colum no longer led hi s clan into battle; Dougal was
the war chieftain. But while Dougal might lead men into
battle, it  was Colum who held the power to say whether the
battle would take place.
Dougal ignored my question, and having drained his glass,
immediately pou red out another drink. He savored the first sip
of th is one, rolling it visibly around his mouth and licking a
final drop from his lips as he swallowed.
“Not bad,” he sa id. “I must take  some back for Colum. He
needs something a bit stronger than the wine, to help him sleep
nights.”
This was indeed an oblique answer to my question.
Colum’ s condition was degenerating, then. Always in some
pain from the d isease that eroded his body , Colum had taken
fortified wine in the evenings, to help him to sleep. Now he
needed straight brandy . I won dered how long it would be
before he might be forced to resort to opium for relief.
For whe n he did, that would b e the end of his reign as
chieftain of his clan. Deprived of physical resources, still he
commanded by sheer force of c haracter . But if the strength ofColum’ s mind were lost to pa in and drugs, the clan would
have a new leader – Dougal.
I g azed at him o ver the rim of my glass. He returned my
stare with no si gn of abashment, a slight smile on that wide
MacKenzie mou th. His face was much like his brother ’ s – and
his nephew’ s – strong and bold ly modeled, with broad, high
cheekbones and a long, straight nose like the blade of a knife.
Sworn as a boy of eighteen to support his brother ’ s
chieftainship, he  had kept that vow for nearly thirty years. And
would k eep it, I knew , until the  day that Colum died or could
lead no longer . But on that day , the mantle of chief would
descend on his shoulders, and the men of clan MacKenzie
would fo llow w here he led – after the saltire of Scotland, and
the banner of King James, in the vanguard of Bonnie Prince
Charlie.
“Circumstances?” I said, turnin g to his earlier question.
“W ell, I don’ t suppose one wo uld consider it in the best of
taste to come calling on a man whom you’d left for dead and
whose wife you’d tried to seduce.”
Being Dougal MacKenzie, he laughed. I didn’ t know quite
what it would take to disconcert the man, but I certainly hoped
I was there to see it when it finally happened.
“Seduction?” he said, lips quirked in amusement. “I
of fered ye marriage.”
“Y ou of f ered to rape me, as I recall,” I snapped. He had, in
fact, of f ered to marry me – by force – after declining to help
me in rescuing Jamie from W entworth Prison the winter
before. While his principal moti ve had been the possession of
Jamie’ s estate of Lallybroch – w hich would belong to me upon
Jamie’ s death – he hadn’ t been at all averse to the thought of
the minor emoluments of marriage, such as the regular
enjoyment of my body .
“As for leaving Jamie in the prison,” he went on, ignoring
me as usual, “there seemed no way to get him out, and no
sense in  risking good men in a vain attempt. He’d be the first
to un derstand that. And it was m y duty as his kinsman to of ferhis w ife my prot ection, if he die d. I was the lad’ s foster father ,
no?” He tilted back his head and drained his glass.
I t ook a good gulp of my own, and swallowed quickly so
as not to choke. The spirit burn ed down my throat and gullet,
matching the heat that was rising in my cheeks. He was right;
Jamie hadn’ t blamed him for his reluctance to break into
W entworth Prison – he hadn’ t expected me  t o do it,  either , and
it was only by a miracle that I had succeeded. But while I had
told Jamie, briefly , of Dougal’ s intention of marrying me, I
hadn’ t t ried to convey the carn al aspects of that intention. I
had, after all, never expected to see Dougal MacKenzie again.
I knew from past experience that he was a seizer of
opportunities; w ith Jamie about to be hanged, he had not even
waited for execution of the sentence before trying to secure me
and my about-to-be-inherited property . If – no, I corrected
myself, when  – Colum died or became incompetent, Dougal
would be in full  command of clan MacKenzie within a week.
And if Charles Stuart found the backing he was seeking,
Dougal would be there. He had  some experience in being a
power behind the throne, after all.
I tipped up the glass, considering. Colum had business
interests in France; wine and timber , mostly . These
undoubtedly we re the pretext fo r Dougal’ s visit to Paris, might
even be his majo r ostensible reason. But he had other reasons,
I wa s sure. An d the presence in the city of Prince Charles
Edward Stuart was almost certainly one of them.
One thing to be  said for Dougal MacKenzie was that an
encounter with him stimulated the mental processes, out of the
sheer necessity of trying to figu re out what he was actually up
to at  any given moment. Under the inspiration of his presence
and a good slug  of Portuguese brandy , my subconscious was
stirring with the birth of an idea.
“W ell, b e that as it may , I’m glad you’re here now ,” I said,
replacing my empty glass on the tray .
“Y ou are?” The thick dark brows rose incredulously .
“Y es.” I rose a nd gestured toward the hall. “Fetch my
cloak while I do up my laces. I need you to come to thecommissariat de police  with me.”
Seeing h is jaw drop, I felt the first tiny upsur ge of hope. If
I h ad managed t o take Dougal M acKenzie by surprise, surely I
could stop a duel?
 
“D’ye want to tell me what you think you’re doing?”
Dougal inquired, as the coach b umped around the Cirque du
Mireille, narrowly avoiding an oncoming barouche and a cart
full of vegetable marrows.
“No,” I said briefly , “but I suppose I’ll have to. Did you
know that Jack Randall is still alive?”
“I’d not heard he was dead,” Dougal said reasonably .
That too k me up short for a moment. But of course he was
right; w e had thought Randall dead only because Sir Marcus
MacRannoch had mistaken the trampled body of Randall’ s
orderly for the of ficer himself, during Jamie’ s rescue from
W entworth Prison. Naturally no news of Randall’ s death
would have gone round the Highlands, since it hadn’ t
occurred. I tried to gather my scattered thoughts.
“He isn’ t  dead,” I said. “But he is in Paris.”
“In Paris?” That got his attention; his brows went up, and
then his eyes widened with the next thought.
“Where’ s Jamie?” he asked sharply .
I wa s glad to see he appreciated the main point. While he
didn’ t know what had passed between Jamie and Randall in
W entworth Prison – no one was ever going to know that, save
Jamie, Randall, and, to some ex tent, me – he knew more than
enough about Randall’ s previo us actions to realize exactly
what Jamie’ s first impulse woul d be on meeting the man here,
away from the sanctuary of England.
“I don’ t  know ,” I said, looking out the window . W e were
passing Les Halles, and the smell of fish was ripe in my
nostrils. I pulled out a scented handkerchief and covered my
nose and mouth. The strong, s harp tang of the winter green
with which I scented it was no match for the reek of a dozeneel-sellers’ stalls , but it helped a bit. I spoke through the spicy
linen folds.
“W e met Randall unexpectedly at the Duke of
Sandringham’ s t oday . Jamie sent me home in the coach, and I
haven’ t seen him since.”
Dougal ignored  both the stench and the raucous cries of
fishwives calling their wares. He frowned at me.
“He’ll mean to kill the man, surely?”
I shook my head, and explaine d my reasoning about the
sword.
“I can’ t let a duel happen,” I said, dropping the
handkerchief in order to speak more clearly . “I won’ t!”
Dougal nodded abstractedly .
“A ye, th at would be dangerous. Not that the lad couldna
take Randall with ease – I taught him, ye ken,” he added with
some boastfulness, “but the sentence for dueling…”
“Got it in one,” I said.
“All right,” he said slowly . “But why the police? Y ou
dinna m ean to have the lad lock ed up beforehand, do ye? Y our
own husband?”
“Not Jamie,” I said. “Randall.”
A broad  grin broke out on his face, not unmixed with
skepticism.
“Oh, aye? And how d’ye mean to work that one?”
“A frien d and I were… attacked on the street a few nights
ago,” I said, swallowing at t he memory . “The men were
masked; I couldn’ t tell who the y were. But one of them was
about the same height and build as Jonathan Randall. I mean
to sa y th at I met Randall at a house today and recognized him
as one of the men who attacked us.”
Dougal’ s brows  shot up and then drew together . His cool
gaze flickered over me. Suddenl y there was a new speculation
in his appraisal.“Christ, you’ve the devil’ s own nerve. Robbery , was it?”
he asked softly . Against my will, I could feel the rage rising in
my cheeks.
“No,” I said, clipping the word between my teeth.
“Ah.” He sat ba ck against the coach’ s squabs, still looking
at me. “Y e’ll hav e taken no harm , though?” I glanced aside, at
the p assing street, but could feel his eyes, prying at the neck of
my gown, sliding over the curve of my hips.
“Not me,” I said. “But my friend…”
“I see.” He was quiet for a moment, then said meditatively ,
“Ever heard of ‘Les Disciples,’ have you?”
I jer ked my head back around to him. He lounged in the
corner like a crouching cat, watching me through eyes
narrowed against the sun.
“No. What are they?” I demanded.
He shru gged and sat upright, peering past me at the
approaching bulk of the Quai des Orfèvres, hovering gray and
dreary above the glitter of the Seine.
“A society – of a sort. Y oung men of family , with an
interest in things… unwholesome, shall we say?”
“Let’ s,” I said. “And just wha t do you know about Les
Disciples?”
“Only what I heard in a tavern in the Cité,” he said. “That
the society demands a good de al from its members, and the
price of initiation is high… by some standards.”
“That being?” I dared him with my eyes. He smiled rather
grimly before replying.
“A maid enhead, for one thing. The nipples of a married
woman, for another .” He shot a quick glance at my bosom.
“Y our friend’ s a vir gin, is she? Or was?”
I fel t hot and cold by turns. I  wiped my face with the
handkerchief and tucked it into the pocket of my cloak. I had
to try twice, for my hand trembled.“She wa s. What else have you heard? Do you know who’ s
involved with Les Disciples?”
Dougal shook his head. There w ere threads of silver in the
russet hair over his temples, that caught the light of the
afternoon.
“Only ru mors. The V icomte de Busca, the youngest of the
Charmisse sons – perhaps. The Comte St. Germain. Eh! Are
ye all right, lass?”
He leaned forward in some consternation, peering at me.
“Fine,” I said, breathing deeply through my nose. “Bloody
fine.” I pulled o ut the handkerchief and wiped the cold sweat
of f my brow .
“W e mean you no harm, mesdames.” The ironic voice
echoed i n the dark of my memory . The green-shirted man was
medium-height and dark, slim and narrow-shouldered. If that
description fit Jonathan Randall, it also fit the Comte St.
Germain. W ould I have recognized his voice, though? Could
any nor mal man conceivably have sat across from me at
dinner , eating salmon mousse and making genteel
conversation, barely two hours after the incident in the Rue du
Faubour g St.-Honoré?
Considered logically , though, w hy not? I  had , after all.
And I had no particular reason for supposing the Comte to be a
normal man – by my standards – if rumor were true.
The coach was d rawing to a hal t, and there was little time
for con templation. W as I about to ensure that the man
responsible for Mary’ s violation went free, while I also
ensured the safety of Jamie’ s m ost loathed enemy? I took a
deep, quivering breath. Damn little choice about it, I thought.
Life was paramount; justice would just have to wait its turn.
The coachman had alighted and  was reaching for the door
handle. I bit my lip and glanced at Dougal MacKenzie. He met
my gaze with a slight shrug. What did I want of him?
“W ill you back my story?” I asked abruptly .
He looked up at the towering bulk of the Quai des
Orfèvres. Brillia nt afternoon light blazed through the opendoor .
“Y ou’re sure?” he asked.
“Y es.” My mouth was dry .
He slid across the seat and extended a hand to me.
“Pray God we dinna both end in a cell, then,” he said.
 
An hour  later , we stepped into the empty street outside the
commissariat de police . I had sent the coach home, lest anyone
who kn ew us should see it standing outside the Quai des
Orfèvres. Dougal of fered me an arm, and I took it perforce.
The ground here was muddy un derfoot, and the cobbles in the
street made uncertain going in high-heeled slippers.
“Les Disciples,”  I said as we made our way slowly along
the banks of the Seine toward the towers of Notre Dame. “Do
you real ly think the Comte St. Germain might have been one
of the men who… who stopped us in the Rue du Faubour g St.-
Honoré?” I was beginning to tremble with reaction and fatigue
– an d with hunger; I had had no thing since breakfast, and the
lack was making itself felt. Sheer nerve had kept me going
through the interview with the police. Now the need to think
was passing, and with it, the ability to do so.
Dougal’ s arm was hard under m y hand, but I couldn’ t look
up at him; I needed all my attention to keep my footing. W e
had turn ed into the Rue Elise and the cobbles were shiny with
damp and smeared with vario us kinds of filth. A porter
lugging a crate p aused in our pa th to clear his throat and hawk
noisily into the street at my feet. The greenish glob clung to
the curve of a stone, finally slipping of f to float sluggishly
onto the surface of a small mud puddle that lay in the hollow
of a missing cobble.
“Mphm.” Douga l was looking up and down the street for a
carriage, brow creased in thought. “I canna say; I’ve heard
worse th an that  of the man, but I havena had the honor of
meeting him.” He glanced down at me.
“Y ou’ve managed brawly so far ,” he said. “They’ll have
Jack Randall in the Bastille within the hour . But they’ll have tolet the man go sooner or later , and I wouldna wager much on
the chances of J amie’ s temper cooling in the meantime. D’ye
want me to sp eak to him – convince him to do nothing
foolish?”
“No! Fo r God’ s sake, stay ou t of it!” The thunder of
carriage wheels was loud on th e cobbles, but my voice was
rose high enough to make Dougal brows lift in surprise.
“All rig ht, then,” he said, mildly . “I’ll leave it to you to
manage him. He’ s stubborn as a stone… but I suppose you
have yo ur ways, no?” This wa s said with a sidelong glance
and knowing smirk.
“I’ll manage.” I would. I would  have to. For everything I
had told  Douga l was true. All true. And yet so far from the
truth. Fo r I would send Charles Stuart and his father ’ s cause to
the devi l gladly , sacrifice any h ope of stopping his headlong
dash to folly , ev en risk the chance of Jamie’ s imprisonment,
for t he sake of healing the breach Randall’ s resurrection had
opened i n Jamie’ s mind. I would help him to kill Randall, and
feel only joy in the doing of it, except for the one thing. The
one consideration strong enough to outweigh Jamie’ s pride,
loom lar ger than his sense of manhood, than his threatened
soul’ s peace. Frank.
That was the si ngle idea that had driven me through this
day , sus tained me well past th e point where I would have
welcomed collapse. For months I had thought Randall dead
and childless, and feared for Fr ank’ s life. But for those same
months I had be en comforted by the presence of the plain gold
ring on the fourth finger of my left hand.
The twi n of Jamie’ s silver ring  upon my right, it was a
talisman in the dark hours of the night, when doubts came on
the heels  of dreams. If I wore h is ring still, then the man who
had given it to me would live. I had told myself that a
thousand times. No matter that I  didn’ t know how a man dead
without issue could sire a line o f descent that led to Frank; the
ring was there, and Frank would live.
Now I knew why the ring still shone on my hand, metal
chilly as my own cold finger . Randall was alive, could stillmarry , could still father the chi ld who would pass life on to
Frank. Unless Jamie killed him first.
I had  tak en wha t steps I could for the moment, but the fact
I had faced in the Duke’ s cor ridor remained. The price of
Frank’ s life was Jamie’ s soul , and how was I to choose
between them?
The oncoming fiacre, ignoring D ougal’ s hail, barreled past
without stopping, wheels pass ing close enough to splash
muddy water on Dougal’ s silk hose and the hem of my gown.
Desisting from a volley of heartfelt Gaelic, Dougal shook a
fist after the retreating coach.
“W ell, and now what?” he demanded rhetorically .
The blob  of mucus-streaked spit tle floated on the puddle at
my feet,  reflecting gray light. I could feel its cold slime viscid
on my tongue. I put out a hand and grasped Dougal’ s arm,
hard as a smooth-skinned sycamore branch. Hard, but it
seemed to be swaying dizzily , swinging me far out over the
cold and glittering, fish-smellin g, slimy water nearby . Black
spots floated before my eyes.
“Now ,” I said, “I’m going to be sick.”
 
It was nearly sunset when I returned to the Rue
T remoulins. My knees trembled, and it was an ef fort to put one
foot in front of the other on th e stairs. I went directly to the
bedroom to shed my cloak, wondering whether Jamie had
returned yet.
He had. I stopped dead in the doorway , surveying the
room. My medicine box lay op en on the table. The scissors I
used for  cutting  bandages lay h alf-open on my dressing table.
They were fanciful things, given to me by a knifemaker who
worked now and then at L ’Hô pital des Anges; the handles
were gilt, worked in the shape of storks’ heads, with the long
bills form ing the silver blades of  the scissors. They gleamed in
the r ays of the setting sun, lying amid a cloud of reddish gold
silk threads.I took several steps toward th e dressing table, and the
silky , shimmering strands lifted in the disturbed air of my
movement, drifting across the tabletop.
“Jesus b loody C hrist,” I breathed. He had been here, all
right, and now he was gone. So was his sword.
The hair  lay in thick, gleaming strands where it had fallen,
littering dressing table, stool and floor . I plucked a shorn lock
from the table and held it, feeling the fine, soft hairs separate
between my fingers like the thre ads of embroidery silk. I felt a
cold panic that started somewhere between my shoulder blades
and prickled down my spine. I remembered Jamie, sitting on
the f ountain behind the Rohans’  house, telling me how he had
fought his first duel in Paris.
“The la ce that held my hair back br oke, and the wind
whipped it into my face so I could scar cely see what I was
doing.”
He was taking n o chance of that happening again. Seeing
the evid ence left behind, feeling the lock of hair in my hand,
soft and alive-feeling still, I could imagine the cold
deliberation wit h which he had done it; the snick of metal
blades against his skull as he cut away all softness that might
obscure his vision. Nothing wou ld stand between him and the
killing of Jonathan Randall.
Nothing but me. Still holding the lock of his hair , I went to
the w indow and stared out, as th ough hoping to see him in the
street. B ut the Rue T remoulins was quiet, nothing moving but
the flick ering shadows of the poplar trees by the gates and the
small movement of a servant, st anding at the gate of the house
to th e left, talkin g to a watchman who brandished his pipe to
emphasize a point.
The house hummed quietly around me, with dinner
preparations ta king place belowstairs. No company was
expected tonight, so the usual bustle was subdued; we ate
simply when alone.
I s at down on the bed and clo sed my eyes, folding my
hands ac ross m y swelling stomach, the lock of hair grippedtight, as though I could keep hi m safe, so long as I didn’ t let
go.
Had I been in time? Had the police found Jack Randall
before J amie di d? What if they  had arrived concurrently , or
just in time to find Jamie cha llenging Randall to a formal
duel? I rubbed t he lock of hair between thumb and forefinger ,
splaying the cut ends in a small spray of roan and amber . W ell,
if so, at least they would both be safe. In prison, perhaps, but
that was a minor consideration by contrast to other dangers.
And if Jamie ha d found Randall first? I glanced outside;
the light was fading fast. Duel s were traditionally fought at
dawn, b ut I didn’ t know whethe r Jamie would have waited for
morning. They might at this moment be facing each other ,
somewhere in seclusion, where the clash of steel and the cry of
mortal wounding would attract no attention.
For a mortal figh t it would be. What lay between those two
men would be settled only by death. And whose death would it
be? Jamie’ s? Or Randall’ s – and  with him, Frank’ s? Jamie was
likely the better swordsman, but as the challenged, Randall
would h ave the choice of weapons. And success with pistols
lay less with the skill of the user than with his fortune; only the
best-made pistols aimed true, and even those were prone to
misfire o r other accidents. I had a sudden vision of Jamie, limp
and quiet on th e grass, blood welling from an empty eye
socket, and the s mell of black powder strong among the scents
of spring in the Boìs de Boulogne.
“What in hell are you doing, Claire?”
My head snapped up, so hard I bit my tongue. Both his
eyes were present and in their correct positions, staring at me
from either side of the knife-edged nose. I had never seen him
with his  hair so close-clipped before. It made him look like a
stranger , the strong bones of h is face stark beneath the skin
and the dome of his skull visibl e under the short, thick turf of
his hair .
“What am I doing?” I echoed. I swallowed, working some
moisture back into my dry mo uth. “What am I doing? I’msitting here with a lock of you r hair in my hand, wondering
whether you were dead or not! That’ s what I’m doing!”
“I’m not dead.” He crossed to the armoire and opened it.
He wore his swo rd, but had cha nged clothes since our visit to
Sandringham’ s house; now he was dressed in his old coat – the
one that allowed him free movement of his arms.
“Y es, I noticed, ” I said. “Thou ghtful of you to come tell
me.”
“I ca me to fetch  my clothes.” He pulled out two shirts and
his full-length cloak and laid them across a stool while he went
to rummage in the chest of drawers for clean linen.
“Y our c lothes? Where on earth are you going?” I hadn’ t
known w hat to expect when I saw him again, but I certainly
hadn’ t expected this.
“T o an inn.” He  glanced at me, then apparently decided I
deserved more than a three-word explanation. He turned and
looked at me, his eyes blue and opaque as azurite.
“When I sent ye home in the coach, I walked for a bit, until
I had a grip on m yself once more. Then I came home to fetch
my swor d, and returned to the Duke’ s house to give Randall a
formal challenge. The butler told me Randall had been
arrested.”
His gaze rested on me, remot e as the ocean depths. I
swallowed once more.
“I went to the B astille. They told me you’d sworn to an
accusation against Randall, saying he’d attacked you and Mary
Hawkins the other night. Why , Claire?”
My hands were shaking, and I dropped the lock of hair I
had been holding. Its cohesion disturbed by handling, it
disintegrated, and the fine red hairs spilled loose across my
lap.
“Jamie,” I said, and my voice was shaking, too, “Jamie,
you can’ t kill Jack Randall.”
One corner of his mouth twitched, very slightly .“I di nna ken whether to be touched at your concern for my
safety , or to be of fended at your lack of confidence. But in
either case, you needna worry . I can kill him. Easily .” The last
word was spoken quietly , with an underlying tone that mingled
venom with satisfaction.
“That isn’ t what I mean! Jamie-”
“Fortunately ,” he went on, as though not hearing me,
“Randall has proof that he wa s at the Duke’ s residence all
during t he evening of the rape. As soon as the police finish
interviewing the guests who were present, and satisfy
themselves that Randall is innoc ent – of that  char ge, at least –
then he’ ll be let go. I shall stay  at the inn until he’ s free. And
then I shall find  him.” His eyes  were fixed on the wardrobe,
but p lainly he w as seeing something else. “He’ll be waiting for
me,” he said softly .
He stuf fed the shirts and linen into a traveling-bag and
slung hi s cloak over his arm. He  was turning to go through the
door wh en I sprang up from th e bed and caught him by the
sleeve.
“Jamie! For God’ s sake, Jamie, listen to me! Y ou can’ t kill
Jack Randall because I won’ t let you!”
He stared down at me in utter astonishment.
“Because of Frank,” I said. I let go of his sleeve and
stepped back.
“Frank,” he repeated, shaking his head slightly as though
to clear a buzzing in his ears. “Frank.”
“Y es,” I  said. “If you kill Jack R andall now , then Frank…
he won’ t exist. He won’ t be born. Jamie, you can’ t kill an
innocent man!”
His face, normally a pale, ruddy bronze, had faded to a
blotchy white as I spoke. Now the red began to rise again,
burning the tips of his ears and flaming in his cheeks.
“An innocent man?”
“Frank is an i nnocent man! I don’ t care about Jack
Randall-”“W ell, I do!” He  snatched up the bag and strode toward the
door , clo ak streaming over one arm. “Jesus God, Claire! Y ou’d
try t o sto p me taking my vengeance on the man who made me
play wh ore to him? Who forced me to my knees and made me
suck his cock, smeared with my own blood? Christ , Claire!”
He flung the door open with a cr ash and was in the hallway by
the time I could reach him.
It had grown dark by now , bu t the servants had lit the
candles, and the hallway was ag low with soft light. I grasped
him by the arm and yanked at him.
“Jamie! Please!”
He jerk ed his arm impatiently out of my grasp. I was
almost crying, but held back the tears. I caught the bag and
pulled it out of his hand.
“Please, Jamie! W ait, just for a year! The child – Randall’ s
– it will be co nceived next December . After that, it won’ t
matter . But please – for my sake, Jamie – wait that long!”
The candelabra on the gilt-edged table threw his shadow
huge an d wavering against the far wall. He stared up at it,
hands clenched, as though facing a giant, blank-faced and
menacing, that towered above him.
“A ye,” he whispered, as though to himself, “I’m a big
chap. Bi g and strong. I can stand a lot. Y es, I can stand it.” He
whirled on me, shouting.
“I can stand a lo t! But just because I can, does that mean I
must? Do I have  to bear everyone’ s weakness? Can I not have
my own?”
He bega n to pace up and down the hall, the shadow
following in silent frenzy .
“Y ou cannot ask it of me! Y ou, you of all people! Y ou,
who know what… what…” He choked, speechless with rage.
He hit the ston e wall of the passage repeatedly as he
walked, smashi ng the side of his fist viciously into the
limestone wall. The stone swallowed each blow in soundless
violence.He turne d back and came to a halt facing me, breathing
heavily . I stood stock-still, afraid to move or speak. He nodded
once or twice, rapidly , as though making up his mind about
something, then drew the dirk from his belt with a hiss and
held it in front of my nose. W ith a visible ef fort, he spoke
calmly .
“Y ou may have your choice, Claire. Him, or me.” The
candle flames danced in the po lished metal as he turned the
knife slowly . “I cannot live while he lives. If ye wilna have me
kill him,  then kill me now , yourself!” He grabbed my hand and
forced m y fingers around the h andle of the dirk. Ripping the
lacy jab ot open, he bared his throat and yanked my hand
upward, fingers hard around my own.
I pulled back with all my strength, but he forced the tip of
the blad e against the soft hollow above the collarbone, just
below the livid cicatrice that Randall’ s own knife had left there
years before.
“Jamie! Stop it! Stop it right now!” I brought my other
hand do wn on his wrist as har d as I could, jarring his grip
enough to jerk m y fingers free. T he knife clattered to the floor ,
bouncing from the stones to a q uiet landing on a corner of the
leafy Au busson carpet. W ith that clarity of vision for small
details t hat af flicts life’ s most a wful moments, I saw that the
blade lay stark across the curling stem of a bunch of fat green
grapes, as though about to sever it and cut them free of the
weft to roll at our feet.
He stood frozen before me, face white as bone, eyes
burning. I gripped his arm, hard as wood beneath my fingers.
“Please believe me, please. I wo uldn’ t do this if there were
any other way .” I took a deep, quivering breath to quell the
leaping pulse beneath my ribs.
“Y ou ow e me your life, Jamie . Not once, twice over . I
saved you from hanging at W entworth, and when you had
fever at the Abbey . Y ou owe me a life, Jamie!”
He star ed down at me for a long moment before
answering. When he did, his voice was quiet again, with an
edge of bitterness.“I se e. And ye’l l claim your debt now?” His eyes burned
with the clear , deep blue that burns in the heart of a flame.
“I have to! I can’ t make you see reason any other way!”
“Reason. Ah, reason. No, I canna say that reason is
anything I see ju st now .” He fol ded his arms behind his back,
gripping the stif f fingers of his r ight hand with the curled ones
of h is left. He walked slowly away from me, down the endless
hall, head bowed.
The passage was lined with paintings, some lighted from
below b y torchere or candelabra, some from above by the
gilded s conces; a few less favored, skulked in the darkness
between. Jamie walked slowly between them, glancing up now
and agai n as though in converse  with the wigged and painted
gallery .
The hall  ran the length of the second floor , carpeted and
tapestried, with enormous stained-glass windows set into the
walls at either end of the corridor . He walked all the way to the
far end,  then, wheeling with t he precision of a soldier on
parade, a ll the way back, still at a slow and formal pace. Down
and back, down and back, again and again.
My legs trembling, I subsided i nto a fauteuil near the end
of the passage. Once one of the omnipresent servants
approached obsequiously to ask if Madame required wine, or
perhaps a biscuit? I waved him  away with what politeness I
could muster , and waited.
At last he came to a halt before me, feet planted wide apart
in silver -buckled shoes, hands still clasped behind his back. He
waited f or me to look up at him before he spoke. His face was
set, with no twitch of agitation to betray him, though the lines
near his eyes were deep with strain.
“A y ear , then” w as all he said. He turned at once and was
several feet away by the time I struggled out of the deep
green-velvet chair . I had barely gained my feet when he
suddenly whirled back past me, reached the huge stained-glass
window in three strides, and smashed his right hand through it.The win dow was made up of thousands of tiny colored
panes, held in pl ace by strips of melted lead. Though the entire
window , a mythological scene of the Judgment of Paris,
shuddered in its frame, the lea ding held most of the panes
intact; in spite o f the crash and tinkle, only a jagged hole at the
feet of Aphrodite let in the soft spring air .
Jamie stood a m oment, pressing both hands tight into his
midrif f. A dark red stain grew on the frilled cuf f, lacy as a
bridal shirt. He brushed past me  once again as I moved toward
him, and stalked away unspeaking.
 
I collaps ed once more into the armchair , hard enough to
make a small pu f f of dust rise from the plush. I lay there limp,
eyes clo sed, feeling the cool nig ht breeze wash over me. The
hair was  damp at my temples, an d I could feel my pulse, quick
as a bird’ s, racing at the base of my throat.
W ould he ever for give me? My heart clenched like a fist at
the memory of the knowledge of betrayal in his eyes. “How
could yo u ask it?”  he had said. “Y ou, yo u who know…”  Y es, I
knew , and I thou ght the knowing might tear me from Jamie as
I had been torn from Frank.
But whether Jamie could for giv e me or not, I could never
for give myself, if I condemned  an innocent man – and one I
had once loved.
“The sin s of the fathers,” I murmured to myself. “The sins
of the fathers shall not be visited upon the children.”
“Madame?”
I ju mped, opening my eyes to find an equally startled
chambermaid backing away . I put a hand to my pounding
heart, gasping for air .
“Madame, you are unwell? Shall I fetch-”
“No,” I said, as firmly as I could. “I am quite well. I wish
to sit here for a time. Please go away .”
The girl seemed only too anxious to oblige. “ Qui ,
Madame!” she said, and vanished down the corridor , leavingme gazi ng blankly at a scene of amorous love in a garden,
hanging on the opposite wall. Suddenly cold, I drew up the
folds of the cloa k I had had no time to shed, and closed my
eyes again.
 
It was past midnight when I went at last to our bedroom.
Jamie was there, seated before a small table, apparently
watching a pair of lacewings fluttering dangerously around the
single candlestick which was all the light there was in the
room. I dropped my cape on the floor and went toward him.
“Don’ t touch me,” he said. “Go  to bed.” He spoke almost
abstractedly , but I halted in my tracks.
“But your hand-” I started.
“It doesn’ t matter . Go to bed,” he repeated.
The knuckles of his right hand were laced with blood, and
the cuf f of his shirt was stif f w ith it, but I would not have
dared to uch him then had he had a knife stuck in his belly . I
left him  staring at the death-dan ce of the lacewings and went
to bed.
I wo ke sometime near dawn, with the first light of the
coming day fuzzing the outlines of the furniture in the room.
Through the double doors to th e anteroom, I could see Jamie
as I had left him, still seated at the table. Now the candle was
burnt out, the lacewings gone, and he sat with his head in his
hands, f ingers furrowed in the brutally cropped hair . The light
stole all  color from the room; even the hair spiking up like
flames between his fingers was quenched to the color of ashes.
I sli d out of bed, cold in the thin embroidered nightdress.
He didn’ t turn as I came up be hind him, but he knew I was
there. When I to uched his hand he let it drop to the table, and
allowed his head to fall back until it rested just below my
breasts. He sighed deeply as I r ubbed it, and I felt the tension
begin to  go out o f him. My hand s worked their way down over
neck and shoulders, feeling the chill of his flesh through the
thin linen. Finally I came aroun d in front of him. He reached
up and grasped me around the waist, pulling me to him andburying his head in my nightdre ss, just above the round swell
of the unborn child.
“I’m cold,” I said at last, very s oftly . “W ill you come and
warm me?”
After a moment, he nodded, and stumbled blindly to his
feet. I led him t o bed, stripped him as he sat unresisting, and
tucked him under the quilts. I lay in the curve of his arm,
pressed tight against him, until the chill of his skin had faded
and we lay ensconced in a pocket of soft warmth.
T entatively , I laid a hand on his chest, stroking lightly back
and forth until the nipple stood up, a tiny nub of desire. He laid
his hand over mine, stilling it. I was afraid he would push me
away , and he did, but only so that he could roll toward me.
The light was g rowing stronger , and he spent a long time
just look ing down at my face, stroking it from temple to chin,
drawing his thumb down the line of my throat and out along
the wing of my collarbone.
“God, I do love  you,” he whisp ered, as though to himself.
He kissed me, preventing response, and circling one breast
with his maimed right hand, prepared to take me.
“But your hand-” I said, for the second time that night.
“It doesn’ t matter ,” he said, for the second time that night.P A R T  F O U RScandale2 2  T H E  R O Y A L  S T U D
T he coach bumped slowly over a particularly bad stretch
of road, one left pitted and holed by the winter freeze and the
beating of spring rains. It had been a wet year; even now , in
early summer , there were moist, boggy patches under the lush
growth of gooseberry bushes by the sides of the road.
Jamie sat beside me on the narrow , padded bench that
formed one seat of the coach. Fer gus sprawled in the corner of
the othe r bench, asleep, and the motion of the coach made his
head roc k and sway like the hea d of a mechanical doll with a
spring for its neck. The air in the coach was warm, and dust
came through the windows in small golden spurts whenever
we hit a patch of dry earth.
W e had talked desultorily at first of the surrounding
countryside, of the Royal stabl es at Ar gentan for which we
were he aded, of the small bits  of gossip that composed the
daily fare of co nversation in Court and business circles. I
might have slept, too, lulled b y the coach’ s rhythm and the
warmth of the day , but the changing contours of my body
made sitting in one position uncomfortable, and my back
ached from the jolting. The baby was becoming increasingly
active, too, and the small flutte rs of the first movements had
developed into definite small pokes and proddings; pleasant in
their own fashion, but distracting.
“Perhaps ye should have stayed at home, Sassenach,”
Jamie said, frowning slightly as I twisted, adjusting my
position yet again.
“I’m all  right,” I said with a sm ile. “Just twitchy . And it
would h ave bee n a shame to miss all this.” I waved at the
coach w indow , where the broad sweep of fields shone green as
emeralds between the windb reak rows of dark, straight
poplars. Dusty or not, the fresh air of the countryside was rich
and intoxicating after the close, fetid smells of the city and the
medicinal stenches of L ’Hôpital des Anges.Louis had agreed, as a gesture of cautious amity toward the
English diplomatic overtures, to allow the Duke of
Sandringham to purchase four Percheron broodmares from the
Royal stud at A r gentan, with which to improve the bloodlines
of th e small her d of draft horses which His Grace maintained
in England. His Grace was therefore visiting Ar gentan today ,
and had invited Jamie along to  give advice on which mares
should be chosen. The invitati on was given at an evening
party , an d one thing leading to another , the visit had ended up
as a full-scale picnic expedition, involving four coaches and
several of the ladies and gentlemen of the Court.
“It’ s a good si gn, don’ t you think?” I asked, with a
cautious glance to be sure our companions were indeed fast
asleep. “ Louis giving the Duke permission to buy horses, I
mean. If he’ s making gestures toward the English, then he’ s
presumably not inclined to be sy mpathetic to James Stuart – at
least not openly .”
Jamie shook his head. He decl ined absolutely to wear a
wig, and the b old, clean shape of his polled head had
occasioned no little excitement at Court. It had its advantages
at the present moment; while a faint sheen of perspiration
glowed on the bridge of his l ong, straight nose, he wasn’ t
nearly as wilted as I.
“No, I’m fairly sure now that Louis means to have nothing
to do with the Stuarts – at lea st so far as any move toward
restoration goes. Monsieur Duverney assures me that the
Council is entirely opposed to any such thing; while Louis
may eve ntually yield to the Pope’ s ur gings so far as to make
Charles a small allowance, he  isna disposed to bring the
Stuarts into any kind of prominence in France, wi’ Geordie of
England looking  over his shoulder .” He wore his plaid today
pinned with a brooch at the shoulder – a beautiful thing his
sister ha d sent him from Scotla nd, made in the shape of two
running stags, bodies bent so that they joined in a circle, heads
and tails  touchin g. He pulled up  a fold of the plaid and wiped
his face with it.
“I th ink I’ve sp oken with every banker in Paris of any
substance over the last months , and they’re united in basicdisinterest.” He smiled wryly . “Money’ s none so plentiful that
anyone wants to back a dice y proposition like the Stuart
restoration.”
“And that,” I said, stretching  my back with a groan,
“leaves Spain.”
Jamie nodded. “It does. And Dougal MacKenzie.” He
looked smug, and I sat up, intrigued.
“Have you heard from him?” Despite an initial wariness,
Dougal had accepted Jamie as a  devoted fellow Jacobite, and
the u sual crop of coded letters had been augmented by a series
of discreet communications sent by Dougal from Spain, meant
to be read by Jamie and passed on to Charles Stuart.
“I ha ve indeed.” I could tell from  his expression that it was
good news, and it was – though not for the Stuarts.
“Philip h as declined to lend any assistance to the Stuarts,”
Jamie sa id. “He’ s had word from  the papal of fice, ye ken; he’ s
to keep awa’ from the whole question of the Scottish throne.”
“Do we know w hy?” The latest interception from a papal
messenger had contained severa l letters, but as these were all
addressed to James or Charles S tuart, they might well contain
no reference to His Holiness’ s conversations with Spain.
“Dougal thinks he knows.” Jamie laughed. “He’ s fair
disgusted, is Dougal. Said he’d been kept cooling his heels in
T oledo for nearly a month, and sent awa’ at last with no more
than a vague p romise of aid ‘in the fullness of time, Deo
volente .’ ” His deep voice captured a pious intonation
perfectly , and I laughed myself.
“Benedict wants to avoid friction between Spain and
France; he doesna want Philip and Louis wasting money that
he migh t have a use for , ye ken,” he added cynically . “It’ s
hardly fi tting for  a pope to say s o, but Benedict has his doubts
as to whether a  Catholic king could hold England anymore.
Scotland’ s got its Catholic chiefs among the Highland clans,
but it’ s some ti me since England owned a Catholic king –
likely to be the hell of a lot longer before they do again – Deo
volente ,” he added, grinning.He scratched his head, ruf fling the short red-gold hair
above h is tem ple. “It looks verra dim for the Stuarts,
Sassenach, and that’ s good news. No, there’ll be no aid from
the B ourbon monarchs. The onl y thing that concerns me now
is this investment Charles Stua rt’ s made with the Comte St.
Germain.”
“Y ou don’ t think it’ s just a business arrangement, then?”
“W ell, it is,” he said, frownin g, “and yet there’ s more
behind it. I’ve heard talk, aye?”
While th e banking families of Paris were not inclined to
take the Y oung Pretender to the  throne of Scotland with any
seriousness, tha t situation might easily change, were Charles
Stuart suddenly to have money to invest.
“His Highness tells me he’ s been talking to the Gobelins,”
Jamie said. “St. Germain introduced him; otherwise they’d not
give him the time o’ day . And old Gobelin thinks him a
wastrel and a fo ol, and so does  one of the Gobelin sons. The
other , th ough – he says that he’ll wait and see; if Charles
succeeds with this venture, then perhaps he can put other
opportunities in his way .”
“Not at all good,” I observed.
Jamie shook his head. “No. Mo ney breeds money , ye ken.
Let him succeed at one or two lar ge ventures, and the bankers
will begin to lis ten to him. Th e man’ s no great thinker ,” he
said, wit h a wry twist of his mouth, “but he’ s verra charming
in p erson; he can persuade pe ople into things against their
better judgment . Even so, he’ll make no headway without a
small bit of cap ital to his name – but he’ll have that, if this
investment succeeds.”
“Mm.” I  shifted my position once more, wriggling my toes
in their hot leat her prison. The shoes had fit when made for
me, but my feet were beginning to swell a bit, and my silk
stockings were damp with sweat. “Is there anything we can do
about it?”
Jamie shrugged, with a lopsided smile. “Pray for bad
weather of f Portugal, I suppos e. Beyond the ship sinking, Idinna see much way for the venture to fail, truth be told. St.
Germain has contracts already for the sale of the entire car go.
Both he and Charles Stuart stand to triple their money .”
I shivered briefly at the mention of the Comte. I couldn’ t
help recalling Dougal’ s speculations. I had not told Jamie
about D ougal’ s visit, nor about his speculations as to the
Comte’ s nocturnal activities. I didn’ t like keeping secrets from
him, but Dougal had demande d my silence as his price for
helping me in the matter of Jonathan Randall, and I had had
little choice but to agree.
Jamie smiled suddenly at me, and stretched out a hand.
“I’ll thin k of something, Sassenach. For now , give me your
feet. Jenny said it helped to have me rub her feet when she was
wi’ child.”
I did n’ t ar gue, b ut slipped my fe et out of the hot shoes and
swung th em up onto his lap with a sigh of relief as the air from
the window cooled the damp silk over my toes.
His han ds were big, and his fingers at once strong and
gentle. H e rubbe d his knuckles d own the arch of my foot and I
leaned back with a soft moan. W e rode silently for several
minutes, while I relaxed into a state of mindless bliss.
Head bent over my green silk toes, Jamie remarked
casually , “It wasna really a debt, ye ken.”
“What w asn’ t?” Fogged as I w as by warm sun and foot
massage, I hadn’ t any idea what he meant.
Not sto pping h is rubbing, he looked up at me. His
expression was serious, though the hint of a smile lit his eyes.
“Y ou said that I  owed ye a life, Sassenach, because you’d
saved m ine for me.” He took ho ld of one big toe and wiggled
it. “But I’ve bee n reckoning, and I’m none so sure that’ s true.
Seems to me that it’ s nearly even, taken all in all.”
“What you do m ean, even?” I t ried to pull my foot loose,
but he held tight.
“If y ou’ve saved my life – and ye have – well, I’ve saved
yours as well, and at least as often. I saved ye from JackRandall at Fort W illiam, you’ll recall – and I took ye from the
mob at Cranesmuir , no?”
“Y es,” I said cautiously . I had no idea where he was going,
but he wasn’ t just making idle conversation. “I’m grateful for
it, of course.”
He m ade a sma ll Scottish noise of dismissal, deep in his
throat. “It isna a matter for gratitude, Sassenach, on your part
or  min e – my point is only that it’ s no a matter of obligation,
either .” The smile had vanished from his eyes, and he was
entirely serious.
“I didna  give ye Randall’ s life as an exchange for my own
– it wou ldna be  a fair trade, for one thing. Close your mouth,
Sassenach,” he added practically , “flies will get in.” There
were in fact a number of the inse cts present; three were resting
on the Fer gus’ s shirtfront, undis turbed by its constant rise and
fall.
“Why did you agree, then?” I stopped struggling, and he
wrapped both hands around my feet, running his thumbs
slowly over the curves of my heels.
“W ell, it wasna for any of the reasons you tried to make
me s ee. As for Frank,” he said, “ well, it’ s true enough that I’ve
taken his wife, and I do pity him  for it – more sometimes than
others,” he added, with an impudent quirk of one eyebrow .
“Still, is it any dif ferent than if he were my rival here? Y ou
had free choice between us, and you chose me – even with
such luxuries as hot baths thrown in on his side. Oof!” I jerked
one foot loose a nd drove it int o his ribs. He straightened up
and grabbed it, in time to prevent me repeating the blow .
“Regretting your choice, are you?”
“Not ye t,” I said, struggling to  repossess my foot, “but I
may any minute. Keep talking.”
“W ell then. I couldna see that the fact that you picked me
entitled Frank Randall to particu lar consideration. Besides,” he
said frankly , “I’ll admit to bein’ just a wee bit jealous of the
man.”I kic ked with m y other foot, aiming lower . He caught that
one before it landed, twisting my ankle skillfully .
“As for owing him his life, on general principles,” he
continued, ignoring my attem pts to escape, “that’ s an
ar gument Brother Anselm at the Abbey could answer better
than I. Certainly  I wouldna kill an innocent man in cold blood.
But there again, I’ve killed men in battle, and is this
dif ferent?”
I rem embered the soldier , and the boy in the snow that I
had kill ed in our escape from W entworth. I no longer
tormented myse lf with memories of them, but I knew they
would never leave me.
He shoo k his head. “No, there are a good many ar guments
ye might make about that, but in the end, such choices come
down to one: Y o u kill when ye must, and ye live with it after . I
remember the face of every ma n I’ve killed, and always will.
But the fact remains, I am alive  and they are not, and that is
my only justification, whether it be right or no.”
“But tha t’ s not true in this case ,” I pointed out. “It isn’ t a
case of kill or be killed.”
He shoo k his head, dislodging a fly that had settled on his
hair . “Now there you’re wrong, Sassenach. What it is that lies
between Jack Randall and me w ill be settled only when one of
us is dead – an d maybe not th en. There are ways of killing
other than with a knife or a gun, and there are things worse
than physical death.” His tone softened. “In Ste. Anne, you
pulled me back from more than  one kind of death, mo duinne ,
and never think I don’ t know it. ” He shook his head. “Perhaps
I do owe you more than you owe me, after all.”
He l et go my feet and rearranged his long legs. “And that
leads me to con sider your conscience as well as mine. After
all, you had no idea what would happen when ye made your
choice, and it’ s one thing to abandon a man, and another to
condemn him to death.”
I d id not at all l ike this manner of describing my actions,
but I couldn’ t sh irk the facts. I had in fact abandoned Frank,
and while I cou ld not regret the  choice I had made, still I didand always would regret its necessity . Jamie’ s next words
echoed my thoughts eerily .
He cont inued, “If ye had know n it might mean Frank’ s –
well, his death, shall we say – p erhaps you would have chosen
dif ferently . Give n that ye did choose me, have I the right to
make your actions of more consequence than you intended?”
Absorbed in his ar gument, he had been oblivious of its
ef fect on me. C atching sight of my face now , he stopped
suddenly , watch ing me in silence as we jostled our way
through the greens of the countryside.
“I di nna see how  it can have been a sin for you to do as ye
did, Claire,” he said at last, reac hing out to lay a hand on my
stockinged foot. “I am your lawful husband, as much as he
ever was – or will be. Y ou do not even know that ye could
have returned to him; mo duinne , ye  might have  gone still
further back, or gone forward to a dif ferent time altogether .
Y ou acted as ye thought ye must, and no one can do better than
that.” He looked up, and the look in his eyes pierced my soul.
“I’m honest enough to say that I dinna care what the right
and wrong of i t may be, so long as you are here wi’ me,
Claire,” he said softly . “If it was  a sin for you to choose me…
then I would go to the Devil himself and bless him for
tempting ye to i t.” He lifted my  foot and gently kissed the tip
of my big toe.
I l aid my hand on his head; the short hair felt bristly but
soft, like a very young hedgehog.
“I do n’ t think it was wrong,” I s aid softly . “But if it was…
then I’ll go to the Devil with you, Jamie Fraser .”
He close d his eyes and bowed his head over my foot. He
held it so tightly  that I could feel the long, slender metatarsals
pressed together ; still, I didn’ t pull back. I dug my fingers into
his scalp and tugged his hair gently .
“Why th en, Jamie? Why did you  decide to let Jack Randall
live?”
He still gripped my foot, but ope ned his eyes and smiled at
me.“W ell, I thought a number of things, Sassenach, as I
walked up and down that evening. For one thing, I thought that
you would suf fer , if I did kill the filthy scut. I would do, or not
do, quite  a few things to spare you distress, Sassenach, but –
how heavily does your conscience weigh, against my honor?
“No.” He shook his head again, disposing of another point.
“Each o ne of us can be responsible only for his own actions
and his own co nscience. What I do canna be laid to your
account, no matter what the ef fects.” He blinked, eyes
watering from the dusty wind, and passed a hand across his
hair in a vain attempt to smooth the disheveled ends. Clipped
short, the spikes of a cowlick sto od up on the crest of his skull
in a defiant spray .
“Why , then?” I demanded, leaning forward. “Y ou’ve told
me all the reasons why not; what’ s left?”
He hesitated for a moment, but then met my eyes squarely .
“Because of Charles Stuart, Sassenach. So far we have
stopped all the earths, but with this investment of his – well,
he might yet su cceed in leading an army in Scotland. And if
so… well, ye ken better than I do what may come, Sassenach.”
I did , and the thought turned me cold. I could not help
remembering one historian’ s description of the Highlanders’
fate at Culloden  – “the dead lay four deep, soaking in rain and
their own blood.”
The Hig hlanders, mismanaged a nd starving, but ferocious
to the end, wou ld be wasted in  one decisive half-hour . They
would b e left to lie in heaps, ble eding in a cold April rain, the
cause th ey had cherished for a hundred years dead along with
them.
Jamie reached forward suddenly and took my hands.
“I th ink it will not happen, Claire; I think we will stop him.
And if not, then still I dinna expect anything to happen to me.
But if it should …” He was in deadly earnest now , speaking
soft and  ur gently . “If it does, then I want there to be a place for
you; I want someone for you to  go to if I am… not there to
care for you. If it canna be me, then I would have it be a manwho loves you.” His grasp on m y fingers grew tighter; I could
feel both  rings digging into my flesh, and felt the ur gency in
his hands.
“Claire, ye know what it cost m e to do this for you – to
spare Randall’ s life. Promise me  that if the time should come,
you’ll g o back to Frank.” His eyes searched my face, deep
blue as the sky in the window b ehind him. “I tried to send ye
back tw ice befo re. And I thank  God ye wouldna go. But if it
comes to  a third time – then pr omise me you will go back to
him – back to Frank. For that is why I spare Jack Randall for a
year – for your sake. Promise me, Claire?”
“Allez! Allez! Montez!”  the coachman shouted from
above, encouraging the team up a slope. W e were nearly there.
“All right,” I said at last. “I promise.”
 
The stables at A r gentan were clean and airy , redolent of
summer and the smell of horse s. In an open box stall, Jamie
circled a Percheron mare, enamored as a horsefly .
“Ooh, w hat a bonnie wee lass ye are! Come here,
sweetheart, let me see that beautiful fat rump. Mm, aye, that’ s
grand!”
“I wish my husb and would talk that way to me ,” remarked
the Duch esse de Neve, provoking giggles from the other ladies
of the party , w ho stood in the straw of the central aisle,
watching.
“Perhaps he would, Madame, if your own back view
provided such stimulation. But then, perhaps your husband
does not share my lord Broch T uarach’ s appreciation for a
finely sh aped ru mp.” The Comte St. Germain allowed his eyes
to drift over me  with a hint of contemptuous amusement. I
tried to imagine  those black eye s gleaming through the slits of
a mask, and suc ceeded only too well. Unfortunately , the lace
of h is w rist frills  fell well past his knuckles; I couldn’ t see the
fork of his thumb.
Catching the byplay , Jamie le aned comfortably on the
mare’ s broad back, only his head, shoulders and forearmsshowing above the bulk of the Percheron.
“My lord Broch T uarach appreciates beauty wherever it
may be encounte red, Monsieur le Comte; in animal or woman.
Unlike some I might name, thou gh, I am capable of telling the
dif ference between the two.” He grinned maliciously at St.
Germain, then patted the mare’ s neck in farewell as the party
broke out laughing.
Jamie took my arm to lead m e toward the next stable,
followed more slowly by the rest of the party .
“Ah,” he said, inhaling the mixture of horse, harness,
manure, and hay as though it were incense. “I do miss the
smell o f a stable. And the country makes me sick for
Scotland.”
“Doesn’ t look a lot like Scotland,” I said, squinting in the
bright sun as we emer ged from the dimness of the stable.
“No, bu t it’ s country ,” he said, “it’ s clean, and it’ s green,
and there’ s nay smoke in the air , or sewage underfoot – unless
ye count horse dung, which I don’ t.”
The sun  of early summer shone  on the roofs of Ar gentan,
nestled among gently rolling green hills. The Royal stud was
just outs ide the town, much more solidly constructed than the
houses o f the King’ s subjects nearby . The barns and stables
were o f quarr ied stone, stone-floored, slate-roofed, and
maintained in a condition of cleanliness that surpassed that of
L ’Hôpital des Anges by a fair degree.
A loud whooping came from behind the corner of the
stable, and Jamie stopped short , just in time to avoid Fer gus,
who shot out in front of us as though fired from a slingshot,
hotly pu rsued by two stable-lads, both a good deal bigger . A
dirty gre en streak of fresh man ure down the side of the first
boy’ s face gave some clue as to the cause of the altercation.
W ith considerable presence of mind, Fer gus doubled on his
tracks, s hot past his pursuers, a nd whizzed into the middle of
the party , whence he took refuge behind the bulwark of
Jamie’ s kilted hips. Seeing their  prey thus safely gone to earth,
his pursuers glanced fearfully at the oncoming phalanx ofcourtiers and gowns, exchanged a look of decision, and, as
one, turned and loped of f.
Seeing t hem go, Fer gus stuck hi s head out from behind my
skirt and  yelled something in gu tter French that earned him a
sharp cuf f on the ear from Jamie.
“Of f wi’ ye,” he said brusquely . “And for God’ s sake,
dinna be throwin’ horse apples at people bigger than you are.
Now , go  and keep out of trouble.” He followed up this advice
with a healthy smack on the s eat of the breeches that sent
Fer gus staggerin g of f in the opposite direction to that taken by
his erstwhile assailants.
I had  be en of two minds as to the wisdom of taking Fer gus
with us  on this expedition, b ut most of the ladies were
bringing pageboys with them, to run errands and carry the
baskets of food and other parap hernalia deemed essential to a
day’ s ou ting. An d Jamie had w anted to show the lad a bit of
country , feeling that he’d earned  a holiday . All well and good,
except that Fer gus, who had ne ver been outside Paris in his
life, had got the  exhilaration of air , light, and beautiful huge
animals right up his nose, and, d emented with excitement, had
been in constant trouble since our arrival.
“God kn ows what he’ll do next,” I said darkly , looking
after Fer gus’ s retreating form. “Set one of the hayricks on fire,
I expect.”
Jamie was unperturbed at the suggestion.
“He’ll be all right. All lads get into manure fights.”
“They do?” I turned around, scrutinizing St. Germain,
immaculate in white linen, white ser ge, and white silk,
bending courteously to listen to the Duchesse, as she minced
slowly across the straw-strewn yard.
“Maybe you  di d,” I said. “Not him. Not the Bishop, either ,
I d on’ t think.” I was wondering whether this excursion had
been a good idea , at least on my part. Jamie was in his element
with the giant Pe rcherons, and the Duke was clearly impressed
with him , which  was all to the good. On the other hand, my
back ached miserably from the carriage ride, and my feet felthot and swollen , pressing painfully against the tight leather of
my shoes.
Jamie looked down at me and smiled, pressing my hand
where it lay on his arm.
“None s o long now , Sassenach. The guide wants to show
us th e br eeding s heds, and then y ou and the other ladies can go
and sit down wi’ the food, whil e the men stand about makin’
crude jests about the size of each other ’ s cock.”
“Is that the gen eral ef fect of watching horses bred?” I
asked, fascinated.
“W ell, on men it is; I dinna ken what it does to ladies.
Keep an ear out, and ye can tell me later .”
There was in fa ct an air of suppressed excitement among
the members of the party as we all pressed into the rather
cramped quarte rs of a breeding shed. Stone, like the other
buildings, this one was equipped not with partitioned stalls
down bo th sides, but with a small fenced pen, with holding
stalls at either side, and a sort of chute or runway along the
back, with several gates that c ould be opened or closed to
control a horse’ s movement.
The building itself was light and airy , owing to huge,
unglazed windows that opened at either end, giving a view of
a gra ssy paddock outside. I cou ld see several of the enormous
Percheron mares grazing near the edge of this; one or two
seemed restless , breaking into a rocking gallop for a few
paces, th en dropping back to a trot or a walk, shaking heads
and manes with a high, whinnying noise. Once, when this
happened, there  was a loud, nasal scream from one of the
holding stalls at the end of the shed, and the paneling shook
with the thud of a mighty kick from its inhabitant.
“ He’ s  r eady ,” a voice murmured appr eciatively behind me.
“I wonder which is the lucky mademoiselle?”
“The on e near est the gate,” the Duchesse suggested,
always ready to wager . “Five livres on that one.”
“Ah, no!  Y ou’re wrong, Madame, she’ s too calm. It will be
the little one, u nder the apple tree, rolling her eyes like acoquette. See how she tosses her head? That one’ s my choice.”
The mares had all stopped at the sound of the stallion’ s cry ,
lifting inquiring noses and flicking their ears nervously . The
restless ones tossed their heads and whickered; one stretched
her neck and let out a long, high call.
“That one,” Jamie said quietly , nodding at her . “Hear her
call him?”
“And what is sh e saying, my lord?” the Bishop asked, a
glint in his eye.
Jamie shook his head solemnly .
“It is a song, m y lord, but one that a man of the cloth is
deaf to – or should be,” he added, to gales of laughter .
Sure enough, it was the mare who had called who was
chosen. Once inside, she stopped dead, head up, and stood
testing t he air with flaring nostrils. The stallion could smell
her; his cries echoed eerily of f t he timbered roof, so loud that
conversation was impossible.
No one wanted to talk now , an yway . Uncomfortable as I
was, I could fe el the quick tingle of arousal through my
breasts, and a tig htening of my s wollen belly as the mare once
more answered the stallion’ s call.
Percherons are very lar ge horses. A big one stands over
five feet  at the shoulder , and th e rump of a well-fed mare is
almost a  yard across, a pale, dappled gray or shining black,
adorned with a waterfall of black hair , thick as my arm at the
root of it.
The stallion burst from his stal l toward the tethered mare
with a suddenness that made everyone fall back from the
fence. Puf fs of dust flew up in clouds as the huge hooves
struck th e packe d dirt of the pen, and drops of saliva flew from
his open  mouth. The groom w ho had opened his stall door
jumped aside, tiny and insignific ant next to the magnicent fury
let loose in the pen.
The mare curvetted and squealed  in alarm, but then he was
on her , and his teeth closed on the sturdy arch of her neck,forcing her head down into sub mission. The great swathe of
her tail swept high, leaving her naked, exposed to his lust.
“Jésus,”  whispered Monsieur Prudhomme.
It took very little time, but it seemed a lot longer , watching
the heaving of sweat-darkened flanks, and the play of light on
swirling hair and the sheen of great muscles, tense and
straining in the flexible agony of mating.
Everyone was very quiet as we  left the shed. Finally the
Duke laughed, nudged Jamie, and said, “Y ou are accustomed
to such sights, my lord Broch T uarach?”
“A ye,” Jamie answered. “I’ve seen it a good many times.”
“Ah?” th e Duke  said. “And tell me, my lord, how does the
sight make you feel, after so many times?”
One cor ner of Jamie’ s mouth tw itched as he replied, but he
remained otherwise straight-faced.
“V erra modest, Y our Grace,” he said.
 
“What a sight!” the Duchesse de Neve said. She broke a
biscuit, dreamy-eyed, and munched it slowly . “So arousing,
was it not?”
“What a prick, you mean,” said Madame Prudhomme,
rather co arsely . “I wish Philibert had one like that. As it is…”
She coc ked an eyebrow toward a plate of tiny sausages, each
perhaps two inches long, and t he ladies seated on the picnic
cloth broke into giggles.
“A bit of chicken, please, Pau l,” said the Comtesse St.
Germain to her pageboy . She was young, and the bawdy
conversation of  the older ladi es was making her blush. I
wondered just what sort of marr iage she had with St. Germain;
he neve r took her out in public, save on occasions like this,
where the presence of the Bisho p prevented his appearing with
one of his mistresses.
“Bah,” said Madame Montresor , one of the ladies-in-
waiting, whose husband was a  friend of the Bishop’ s. “Size
isn’ t everything. What dif ference if it’ s the size of a stallion’ s,if he lasts no lo nger than one? Less than two minutes? I ask
you, what good is that?” She held up a cornichon between two
fingers and delicately licked the tiny pale-green pickle, the
pink tip of her tongue pointed and dainty . “It isn’ t what they
have in their breeches, I say; it’ s what they do with it.”
Madame Prudhomme snorted. “W ell, if you find one who
knows how to do anything with it but poke it into the nearest
hole, tell me. I would be interested to see what else can be
done with a thing like that.”
“At least you h ave one who’ s interested,” broke in the
Duchesse de Neve. She cast a glance of disgust at her husband,
huddled with the other men near one of the paddocks,
watching a harnessed mare being put through her paces.
“Not tonight, my dearest,” she imitated the sonorous, nasal
tones of her husband to perfection. “I am fatigued .” Sh e p ut a
hand to her br ow and rolled her eyes up. “The press of
business is so wearing.” Encouraged by the giggles, she went
on with her imi tation, now widening her eyes in horror and
crossing her hands protectively over her lap. “What, again ?
Do you not know  that to expend  the male essence gratuitously
is to  court ill-he alth? Is it not enough that your demands have
worn me to a nubbin, Mathilde? Do you wish me to have an
attack ?”
The ladies cackled and screeched with laughter , loud
enough to attract the attention o f the Bishop, who waved at us
and smiled indulgently , provoking further gales of hilarity .
“W ell, at least he is not expending all his male essence in
brothels – or elsewhere,” said Madame Prudhomme, with an
eloquently pitying glance at the Comtesse St. Germain.
“No,” said Mathilde gloomily . “He hoards it as though it
were go ld. Y ou’ d think there w as no more to be had, the way
he… oh, Y our Grace! W ill you not have a cup of wine?” She
smiled charmingly up at the Duke, who had approached
quietly f rom behind. He stood smiling at the ladies, one fair
brow slightly arched. If he had heard the subject of our
conversation, he gave no sign of it.Seating himself beside me on the cloth, His Grace made
casual, witty conversation with the ladies, his oddly high-
pitched voice forming no contrast to theirs. While he seemed
to pay close att ention to the co nversation, I noticed that his
eyes strayed periodically to the small cluster of men who stood
by t he paddock fence. Jamie’ s kilt was bright even amid the
gor geous cut velvets and stif fened silk.
I h ad had some h esitation in meeting the Duke again. After
all, o ur last visi t had ended in the arrest of Jonathan Randall,
upon my accusation of attempte d rape. But the Duke had been
all c harming urbanity on this ou ting, with no mention of either
of th e Randall brothers. Neither had there been any public
mention of the arrest; whatever the Duke’ s diplomatic
activities, they seemed to rank h ighly enough to merit a Royal
seal of silence.
On the whole, I welcomed the  Duke’ s appearance at the
picnic cloth. For one thing, his presence kept the ladies from
asking me – as some bold souls did every so often, at parties –
whether it was true about what  Scotsmen wore beneath their
kilts. Given the mood of the present party , I didn’ t think my
customary reply of “Oh, the usual” would suf fice.
“Y our h usband has a fine eye for horses,” the Duke
observed to me, freed for a moment when the Duchesse de
Neve, on his o ther side, leaned across the cloth to talk to
Madame Prudho mme. “He tells me that both his father and his
uncle kept small but quite fine stables in the Highlands.”
“Y es, that’ s true.” I sipped my wine. “But you’ve visited
Colum MacKenzie at Castle Leoch; surely you’ve seen his
stable fo r yourse lf.” I had in fact first met the Duke at Leoch
the y ear before, though the meet ing had been brief; he had left
on a hunting expedition shortly before I was arrested for
witchcraft. I thought surely he must have known about that,
but if so, he gave no sign of it.
“Of course.” The Duke’ s small, shrewd blue eyes darted
left, then right, to see whether he was observed, then shifted
into Eng lish. “At the time, your  husband informed me that he
did not reside up on his own esta tes, owing to an unfortunate –
and mistaken – char ge of mu rder laid against him by theEnglish Crown. I wondered, my  lady , whether that char ge of
outlawry still holds?”
“There’ s still a price on his head,” I said bluntly .
The Duke’ s expression of polite interest didn’ t change. He
reached absently for one of the small sausages on the platter .
“That is not an irremediable matter ,” he said quietly . “After
my enc ounter with your husband at Leoch, I made some
inquiries – oh, suitably discree t, I assure you, my dear lady .
And I think that  the matter might be arranged without undue
dif ficulty , given  a word in the right ear – from the right
sources.”
This was interesting. Jamie had first told the Duke of
Sandringham a bout his outlawry at Colum MacKenzie’ s
suggestion, in the hopes that th e Duke might be persuaded to
intervene in the case. As Jamie had not in fact committed the
crime in question, there could be little evidence against him; it
was quit e possible that the Duk e, a powerful voice among the
nobles of England, could indeed arrange to have the char ges
dismissed.
“Why?” I said. “What do you want in return?”
The sketchy blond brows shot upward, and he smiled,
showing small white even teeth.
“My wo rd, you  ar e  direct, are you not? Might it not be
only that I appreciate your husband’ s expertise and assistance
in the selection of horses, and would like to see him restored to
a place where that skill mig ht once again be profitably
exercised?”
“It mig ht be, but it isn’ t,” I said. I caught Madame
Prudhomme’ s sharp eyes on us, and smiled pleasantly at him.
“Why?”
He popped the sausage whole into his mouth and chewed it
slowly , his bland round face reflecting nothing more than
enjoyment of the day and the meal. At last he swallowed and
patted his mouth delicately with one of the linen napkins.
“W ell,” he said, “as a matter of supposition only , you
understand-”I nodded, and he went on. “ As  a matter of supposition,
then, perhaps we may suppose that your husband’ s recent
friendship with – a certain personage recently arrived from
Rome? Ah, I see you understand me. Y es. Let us suppose that
that frien dship has become a ma tter of some concern to certain
parties who would prefer this pe rsonage to return peaceably to
Rome – or alternatively , to settle in France, though Rome
would be better – safer , you know?”
“I se e.” I took a sausage myself. They were richly spiced,
and little bursts of garlic wafted up my nose at each bite. “And
these pa rties take a suf ficiently serious view of this friendship
to o f fer a dism issal of the char ges against my husband in
return fo r its severance? Again, why? My husband is no one of
great importance.”
“Not now ,” the Duke agreed. “B ut he may be in future. He
has linkages to several powerful interests among the French
banking familie s, and more am ong the merchants. He is also
received at Court, and has some access to Louis’ s ear . In short,
if he does not at present hold the power to command
substantial sums of money and influence, he is likely to do so
soon. He is also a member of not one but two  o f the more
powerful Highland clans. And the parties who wish the
personage in question to return to Rome harbor a not
unreasonable fear that this influence might be exerted in
undesirable dire ctions. So much better if your husband were to
return – his good name restored – to his lands in Scotland, do
you not think?”
“It’ s a thought,” I said. It was also a bribe, and an attractive
one. Sever all c onnection with Charles Stuart, and be free to
return to  Scotland and Lallybroch, without the risk of being
hanged. The removal of a possibly troublesome supporter of
the Stua rts, at no expense to the Crown, was an attractive
proposition from the English side, too.
I ey ed the Duke, trying to figure out just where he fitted
into the scheme of things. Oste nsibly an envoy from Geor ge
II, E lector of H anover and King – so long as James Stuart
remained in Rome – of Englan d, he could well have a dual
purpose in his visit to France. T o engage with Louis in thedelicate exchange of civility and threat that constituted
diplomacy , and simultaneously to quash the specter of a fresh
Jacobite rising? Several of Charles’ s usual coterie had
disappeared of late, pleading the press of ur gent business
abroad. Bought of f or scared away? I wondered.
The bland countenance gave no clue to his thoughts. He
pushed back the wig from a ba lding brow and scratched his
head unselfconsciously .
“Do think about it, my dear ,” he ur ged. “And when you
have thought – speak to your husband.”
“Why don’ t you speak to him yourself?”
He shrugged and took more sausages, three this time. “I
find that so ofte n men are mor e amenable to a word spoken
from the home q uarter , from one they trust, rather than to what
they ma y perceive as pressure from an outside source.” He
smiled. “There is the matter o f pride to be considered; that
must be handled delicately . And for delicate handling – well,
they do talk of ‘the woman’ s touch,’ do they not?”
I ha dn’ t time to respond to this, when a shout from the
main stable jerked all heads in that direction.
A horse  was coming toward us, up the narrow alley
between the main stable and the long, open shed that held the
for ge. A Percheron colt, and a young one, no more than two or
three, judging from the dappling of his hide. Even young
Percherons are big, and the colt  seemed huge, as he blundered
to and fro at a slow trot, tail las hing from side to side. Plainly
the colt was not  yet broken to a saddle; the massive shoulders
twitched in an e f fort to dislodge the small form that straddled
his neck, both hands buried deep in the thick black mane.
“Bloody hell, it’ s Fer gus!” The ladies, disturbed by the
shouting, had all gotten to their feet by now , and were peering
interestedly at the sight.
I did n’ t realize t hat the men had joined us until one woman
said, “But how dangerous it seems! Surely the boy will be
injured if he falls!”“W ell, if he doe sna hurt himself falling of f, I’ll attend to it
directly , once I’ve got my hand s on the wee bugger ,” said a
grim vo ice behi nd me. I turned to see Jamie peering over my
head at the rapidly approaching horse.
“Should you get him of f?” I asked.
He shook his head. “No, let the horse take care of it.”
In fact, the horse seemed more bewildered than frightened
by t he strange weight on his back. The dappled gray skin
twitched and shivered as though beset by hordes of flies, and
the c olt shook its head confused ly , as though wondering what
was going on.
As for Fer gus, his legs were stretched nearly at right angles
across t he Perch eron’ s broad back; clearly the only hold he
had on the horse was his death -grip on the mane. At that, he
might have managed to slide down or at least tumble of f
unscathed, had the victims of the manure fight not completed
their plan to exact a measure of revenge.
T wo or three grooms were f ollowing the horse at a
cautious distanc e, blocking the alleyway behind it. Another
had succeeded in running ahea d, and opening the gate to an
empty paddock that stood near us. The gate was between the
group of visiting picnickers and the end of the alleyway
between the buildings; clearly the intention was to nudge the
horse quietly into the paddock, where it could trample Fer gus
or not as it chose, but at least would itself be safe from escape
or injury .
Before this could be accomplished, though, a lithe form
popped its head through a smal l loft window , high above the
alleyway . The spectators intent on the horse, no one noticed
but me. The boy in the loft observed, withdrew , and
reappeared almost at once, holding a lar ge flake of hay in both
hands. J udging the moment to a nicety , he dropped it as Fer gus
and his mount passed directly beneath.
The ef fect was m uch like a bomb going of f. There was an
explosion of hay where Fer gus had been, and the colt gave a
panicked whinn y , got its hindq uarters under it, and took of f
like a Derby w inner , heading straight for the little knot ofcourtiers, who scattered to the four winds, screeching like
geese.
Jamie had flung himself on me, pushing me out of the way
and knoc king m e to the ground in the process. Now he rose of f
my supine form, cursing fluently  in Gaelic. W ithout pausing to
inquire after my welfare, he race d of f in the direction taken by
Fer gus.
The hor se was rearing and twisting, altogether spooked,
churning foreleg s keeping at bay a small gang of grooms and
stable-lads, all of whom were rapidly losing their professional
calm at  the thought of one of the King’ s valuable horses
damaging itself before their eyes.
By some miracle of stubbornne ss or fear , Fer gus was still
in place , skinny legs flailing as  he slithered and bounced on
the heaving back. The grooms were all shouting at him to let
go, but he ignor ed this advice, eyes squeezed tight shut as he
clung to the two  handfuls of ho rsehair like a lifeline. One of
the grooms was carrying a pitchfork; he waved this
menacingly in the air , causin g a shriek of dismay from
Madame Montresor , who plainly thought he meant to skewer
the child.
The shriek didn’ t ease the col t’ s nerves to any marked
extent. I t danced  and skittered, backing away from the people
who were beginning to surround it. While I didn’ t think the
groom a ctually intended to stab Fer gus of f the horse’ s back,
there was a real danger that the child would be trampled if he
fell of f – and I didn’ t see how he was going to avoid that fate
for m uch longer . The horse ma de a sudden dash for a small
clump of trees that grew near  the paddock, either seeking
shelter f rom the mob, or possibly having concluded that the
incubus on its back might be scraped of f on a branch.
As i t passed ben eath the first branches, I caught a glimpse
of re d ta rtan am ong the greenery , and then there was a flash of
red as Jamie lau nched himself from the shelter of a tree. His
body struck the colt a glancing  blow and he tumbled to the
ground in a flu rry of plaid and bare legs that would have
revealed to a discerning observer that this particular Scotsman
wasn’ t wearing anything under his kilt at the moment.The party of courtiers rushed up as one, concentrating on
the fallen Lord Broch T uarach , as the grooms pursued the
disappearing horse on the other side of the trees.
Jamie la y flat on his back under  the beech trees, his face a
dead greenish-white, both eyes and mouth wide open. Both
arms we re locked tight around F er gus, who clung to his chest
like a leech. Jamie blinked at m e as I dashed up to him, and
made a faint ef f ort at a smile. The faint wheezings from his
open mo uth deepened into a sha llow panting, and I relaxed in
relief; he’d only had his wind knocked out.
Finally realizing that he was no longer moving, Fer gus
raised a cautious head. Then  he sat bolt upright on his
employer ’ s stom ach and said en thusiastically , “That was fun,
milord! Can we do it again?”
 
Jamie had pulled a muscle in his thigh during the rescue at
Ar gentan, and was limping badly by the time we returned to
Paris. He sent F er gus – none the  worse either for the escapade
or th e sc olding that followed it – down to the kitchen to seek
his supp er , and sank into a chair by the hearth, rubbing the
swollen leg.
“Hurt much?” I asked sympathetically .
“A bit. All it n eeds is rest, though.” He stood up and
stretched luxuriously , long arms  nearly reaching the blackened
oak beam s above the mantel. “Cramped in that coach; I’d’ve
sooner ridden.”
“Mmm. So would I.” I rubbed the small of my back,
aching w ith the strain of the trip. The ache seemed to press
downward throu gh my pelvis to my legs – joints loosening
from pregnancy , I supposed.
I ran an exploratory hand over Jamie’ s leg, then gestured to
the chaise.
“Come a nd lie on your side. I’v e some nice ointment I can
rub your leg with; it might ease the ache a bit.”
“W ell, if ye dinna mind.” He rose stif fly and lay down on
his left side, kilt pulled above his knee.I opened my medicine box and rummaged through the
boxes and jars. Agrimony , slippery elm, pellitory-of-the-
wall… a h, there  it was. I pulled out the small blue glass jar
Monsieur Forez had given me a nd unscrewed the lid. I snif fed
cautiously; salves went rancid easily , but this one appeared to
have a good proportion of salt mixed in for preservation. It had
a nice mellow scent, and was a beautiful color – the rich
yellow-white of fresh cream.
I s coope d out a good bit of the salve and spread it down
the long muscle of the thigh, pushing Jamie’ s kilt above his
hip to keep out of the way . The flesh of his leg was warm; not
the heat of infe ction, only the normal heat of a young male
body , flu shed with exercise and the glowing pulse of health. I
massaged the cream gently into  the skin, feeling the swell of
the hard muscle, probing the divisions of quadriceps and
hamstring. Jami e made a small grunting sound as I rubbed
harder .
“Hurt?” I asked.
“A ye, a bit, but don’ t stop,” he answered. “Feels as though
it’ s doin g me good.” He chuckled. “I wouldna admit it to any
but you,  Sassenach, but it was  f un . I havena m oved like that in
months.”
“Glad you enjoyed yourself,” I said dryly , taking another
dab of cream. “I  had an interesting time myself.” Not pausing
in the massage, I told him of Sandringham’ s of fer .
He grun ted in response, wincing slightly as I hit a tender
spot. “So Colum was right, whe n he thought the man might be
able to help with the char ges against me.”
“So it would seem. I suppose the  question is – do you want
to take him up o n it?” I tried not to hold my breath, as I waited
for his answer . For one thing, I knew what it would be; the
Frasers as a family were renowned for stubbornness, and
despite his mother ’ s having bee n a MacKenzie, Jamie was a
Fraser through and through. Having made up his mind to
stopping Charles Stuart, he was hardly likely to abandon the
ef fort. S till, it was tempting bait  – to me, as well as to him. T o
be able to go back to Scotland, to his home; to live in peace.But ther e was another rub, of course. If we did go back,
leaving Charles’ s plans to run their course into the future I
knew , then any peace in Scotland would be short-lived indeed.
Jamie gave a small snort, apparently having followed my
own thought processes. “W ell,  I’ll tell ye, Sassenach. If I
thought that Charles Stuart might succeed – might free
Scotland from English rule – then I would give my lands, my
liberty , and life itself to help him. Fool he might be, but a royal
fool, and not an ungallant one, I think.” He sighed.
“But I know the man, and I’ve talked with him – and with
all the Jacobites  that fought wi th his father . And given what
you tell me will happen if it com es to a Rising again… I dinna
see that I’ve any choice but to stay , Sassenach.
Once he  is stopped, then there m ay be a chance to go back
– or there may not. But for now , I must decline His Grace’ s
of fer wi’ thanks.”
I patted  his thigh gently . “That’ s what I thought you’d
say .”
He smiled at m e, then glanced down at the yellowish
cream that coated my fingers. “What’ s that stuf f?”
“Something Monsieur Forez gave me. He didn’ t say what
it’ s calle d. I don’ t think it’ s got any active ingredients, but it’ s
a nice, greasy sort of cream.”
The body under my hands stif fened and Jamie glanced
over his shoulder at the blue jar .
“Monsieur Forez gave it ye?” he said uneasily .
“Y es,” I answered, surprised. “What’ s the matter?” For he
had put aside m y cream-smeared hands and, swinging his legs
over the side of the chaise longue, was reaching for a towel.
“Has that jar a  fleur -de-lys on the lid, Sassenach?” he
asked, wiping the ointment from his leg.
“Y es, it  has,” I said. “Jamie, what’ s wrong with that
salve?” The look on his face w as peculiar in the extreme; it
kept vacillating between dismay and amusement.“Oh, I wouldna say there’ s anything wr ong  about it,
Sassenach,” he answered finally . Having rubbed his leg hard
enough to leave the curly red-gold hair bristling above
reddened skin, he tossed the towel aside and looked
thoughtfully at the jar .
“Monsieur Forez must think rather highly of ye,
Sassenach,” he said. “It’ s expensive stuf f, that.”
“But-”
“It’ s not that I dinna appreciate it,” he assured me hastily .
“It’ s only that h avin’ come within a day’ s length of being one
of the ingredients myself, it makes me feel a bit queer .”
“Jamie!” I felt my voice rising. “ What  is that stuf f?” I
grabbed the towel, hastily swabbing my salve-coated hands.
“Hanged-men’ s grease,” he answered reluctantly .
“H-h-h…” I couldn’ t even get the word out, and started
over . “Y ou mean…” Goose bum ps rippled up my arms, raising
the fine hairs like pins in a cushion.
“Er , aye. Rendered fat from hanged criminals.” He spoke
cheerfully , regaining his composure as quickly as I was losing
mine. “V erra good for the rheumatism and joint-ill, they say .”
I recalle d the tidy way in which Monsieur Forez had
gathered up the results of his operations in L ’Hôpital des
Anges, a nd the odd look on Jam ie’ s face when he had seen the
tall chirur gien  escort me hom e. My knees were watery , and I
felt my stomach flip like a pancake.
“Jamie! Who in bloody fucking hell  is Monsieur For ez?”  I
nearly screamed.
Amusement was definitely getting the upper hand in his
expression.
“He’ s the public hangman for the Fifth Arondissement,
Sassenach. I thought ye knew .”
 
Jamie r eturned damp and chilled from the stableyard,
where he had gone to scrub himself, the required ablutionsbeing on a scale greater than the bedroom basin could provide.
“Don’ t w orry , it’ s all of f,” he assured me, skinning out of
his shirt  and sliding naked bene ath the covers. His flesh was
rough an d chilly with gooseflesh, and he shivered briefly as he
took me in his arms.
“What is it, Sassenach? I don’ t still smell of it, do I?” he
asked, as I huddled stif f under the bedclothes, hugging myself
with my arms.
“No,” I said. “I’m scared. Jamie, I’m bleeding.”
“Jesus,” he said softly . I could feel the sudden thrill of fear
that ran through him at my words, identical to the one that ran
through me. He held me close t o him, smoothing my hair and
stroking my back, but both of u s felt the awful helplessness in
the face of ph ysical disaster that made his actions futile.
Strong as he wa s, he couldn’ t pr otect me; willing he might be,
but he couldn’ t help. For the first time, I wasn’ t safe in his
arms, and the knowledge terrified both of us.
“D’ye think-” he began, then b roke of f and swallowed. I
could fe el the tremor run down his throat and hear the gulp as
he swallowed his fear . “Is it bad, Sassenach? Can ye tell?”
“No,” I said. I held him tighter , trying to find an
anchorage. “I don’ t know . It isn’ t heavy bleeding; not yet,
anyway .”
The can dle was still alight. He  looked down at me, eyes
dark with worry .
“Had I better fetch someone to y e, Claire? A healer , one of
the women from the Hôpital?”
I shook my head and licked dry lips.
“No. I don’ t… I don’ t think there’ s anything they could
do.” It was the last thing I wanted to say; more than anything, I
wanted there to be someone we could find who knew how to
make it all right . But I remembe red my early nurse’ s training,
the f ew days I had spent on the obstetrical ward, and the words
of one of the doctors, shrugging as he left the bed of a patient
who’d had a miscarriage. “There’ s really nothing you can do,”
he’d said. “If they’re going to lose a child, they generally do,no matter what you try . Bed rest is really the only thing, and
even that often won’ t do it.”
“It may be nothing,” I said, trying to hearten both of us. “It
isn’ t unusual for women to have slight bleeding sometimes
during pregnanc y .” It wasn’ t unusual – during the first three
months. I was m ore than five months along, and this was by
no mean s usual. Still, there were  many things that could cause
bleeding, and not all of them were serious.
“It m ay be all right,” I said. I laid a hand on my stomach,
pressing gently . I felt an immediate response from the
occupant, a lazy , stretching push that at once made me feel
better . I felt a rush of passionate gratitude that made tears
come to my eyes.
“Sassenach, what can I do?” Jamie whispered. His hand
came ar ound m e and lay over mine, cupping my threatened
abdomen.
I put my other hand on top of his, and held on.
“Just pray ,” I said. “Pray for us, Jamie.”2 3  T H E  B E S T - L A I D  P L A N S  O F
M I C E  A N D  M E N …
T he bleeding had stopped by the morning. I rose very
cautiously , but all remained wel l. Still, it was obvious that the
time had  come for me to stop working at L ’Hôpital des Anges,
and I sent Fer gu s with a note of explanation and apology to
Mother Hildegarde. He returned with her prayers and good
wishes, and a b ottle of a brownish elixir much esteemed –
according to the accompanying note – by les maîtr esses sage-
femme  for the prevention of misca rriage. After Monsieur
Forez’ s salve, I was more than a little dubious about using any
medication I hadn’ t prepared myself, but a careful snif f
reassured me that at least the ingredients were purely
botanical.
After considerable hesitation, I drank a spoonful. The
liquid w as bitte r and left a nasty taste in my mouth, but the
simple act of d oing something – even something I thought
likely to  be useless – made me feel better . I spent the greater
part of each day now lying on the chaise longue in my room,
reading, dozing,  sewing, or simply staring into space with my
hands over my belly .
When I was alon e, that is. When he was home, Jamie spent
most of his time  with me, talking over the day’ s business, or
discussing the most recent Jacobite letters. King James had
apparently been  told of his son’ s proposed investment in port
wine, and approved it wholeheartedly as “…a very sounde
scheme, which I cannot but feel will go a great way in
providing for you as I should wish to see you established in
France.”
“So James thinks the money’ s intended merely to establish
Charles as a gen tleman, and give him some position here,” I
said. “Do you think that could be all he has in mind? Louise
was here this af ternoon; she says Charles came to see her last
week – insisted on seeing her , though she refused to receive
him at first. She says he was very excited and puf fed up aboutsomething, but he wouldn’ t te ll her what; just kept hinting
mysteriously about something great he was about to do. ‘A
great ad venture’ is what she say s he said. That doesn’ t sound
like a simple investment in port, does it?”
“It doesn’ t.” Jamie looked grim at the thought.
“Hm,” I said. “ W ell, all things taken together , it seems a
good bet that C harles isn’ t meaning just to settle down upon
the profits of his venture and become an upstanding Paris
merchant.”
“If I were a wa gering man, I’d lay my last garter on it,”
Jamie said. “The question now is, how do we stop him?”
 
The ans wer cam e several days later , after any amount of
discussion and useless suggestions. Murtagh was with us in
my b edroom, having brought up  several bolts of cloth from the
docks for me.
“They say there’ s been an outbreak of pox in Portugal,” he
observed, dump ing the expensive watered silk on the bed as
though it were a load of used burlap. “There was a ship
carrying iron from Lisbon came in this morning, and the
harbor master was over it with  a toothcomb, him and three
assistants. Foun d naught, though.” Spotting the brandy bottle
on my table, he  poured a tumbler half-full and drank it like
water , in lar ge, healthy swallows. I watched this performance
openmouthed, p ulled from the spectacle only by Jamie’ s
exclamation.
“Pox?”
“A ye,” said Murtagh, paus ing between swallows.
“Smallpox.” He lifted the glass again and resumed his
systematic refreshment.
“Pox,” Jamie muttered to himself. “Pox.”
Slowly , the frown left his fac e and the vertical crease
between his eyebrows disappeared. A deeply contemplative
look cam e over him, and he lay back in his chair , hands linked
behind his neck, staring fixedly at Murtagh. The hint of a
smile twitched his wide mouth sideways.Murtagh observ ed this process w ith considerable skeptical
resignation. He drained his cup a nd sat stolidly hunched on his
stool as Jamie sprang to his fee t and began circling the little
clansman, whistling tunelessly through his teeth.
“I take it you have an idea?” I said.
“Oh, aye,” he s aid, and began to laugh softly to himself.
“Oh, aye, that I have.”
He turned to me, eyes alight with mischief and inspiration.
“Have y e anyth ing in your box  of medicines that would
make a man feverish? Or give him flux? Or spots?”
“W ell, yes,” I said slowly , thinking. “There’ s rosemary . Or
cayenne. And cascara, of course, for diarrhea. Why?”
He look ed at Murtagh, grinning widely , then, overcome
with his idea, cackled and ruf fled his kinsman’ s hair , so it
stuck up in blac k spikes. Murtagh glared at him, exhibiting a
strong resemblance to Louise’ s pet monkey .
“Listen,” Jamie said, bending toward us conspiratorially .
“What if the C omte St. Germain’ s ship comes back from
Portugal wi’ pox aboard?”
I sta red at him.  “Have you lost your mind?” I inquired
politely . “What if it did?”
“If it did,” Murt agh interrupted, “they’d lose the car go. It
would be burnt or dumped in the harbor , by law .” A gleam of
interest showed in the small bla ck eyes. “And how d’ye mean
to manage that, lad?”
Jamie’ s exhilara tion dropped slightly , though the light in
his eyes remained.
“W ell,” he admitted, “I havena  got it thought out all the
way as yet, but for a start…”
The plan  took several days of discussion and research to
refine, but was at last settled. C ascara to cause flux had been
rejected as being too debilitating  in action. However , I’d found
some good substitutes in one of  the herbals Master Raymond
had lent me.Murtagh, armed with a pouch full of rosemary essence,
nettle juice, and madder root, would set out at the end of the
week for Lisbon, where he would gossip among the sailors’
taverns, find out the ship charter ed by the Comte St. Germain,
and arrange to take passage on it, meanwhile sending back
word of the ship’ s name and sailing date to Paris.
“No, that’ s common,” said Jamie, in answer to my
question as to whether the captain might not find this behavior
fishy . “Almost all car go ships ca rry a few passengers; however
many they can squeeze between decks. And Murtagh will have
enough money to make him a welcome addition, even if they
have to  give him the captain’ s cabin.” He wagged an
admonitory finger at Murtagh.
“And get a cabin, d’ye hear? I don’ t care what it costs;
ye’ll need privacy for taking the  herbs, and we dinna want the
chance of someone seeing ye, if you’ve naught but a hammock
slung in the bilg es.” He surveyed his godfather with a critical
eye. “Have ye a decent coat? If you go aboard looking like a
beggar , they’re like to hurl ye of f into the harbor before they
find out what ye’ve got in your sporran.”
“Mmphm,” said  Murtagh. The little clansman usually
contributed little to the discussion, but what he did say was
cogent a nd to the point. “And when do I take the stuf f?” he
asked.
I pu lled out the sheet of paper o n which I had written the
instructions and dosages.
“T wo spoonfuls of the rose ma dder – that’ s this one” – I
tapped the small clear -glass bottle, filled with a dark pinkish
fluid – “to be taken four hours before you plan to demonstrate
your symptoms. T ake another spoonful every two hours after
the f irst dose – we don’ t know h ow long you’ll have to keep it
up.”
I handed him the second bottle, this one of green glass
filled with a purplish-black liquor . “This is concentrated
essence of rosemary leaves. This one acts faster . Drink about
one-quarter of the bottle half an hour before you mean to show
yourself; you should start flushing within half an hour . It wearsof f q uickly , so you’ll need to take more when you can manage
inconspicuously .” I took ano ther , smaller vial from my
medicine box. “And once you’re well advanced with the
‘fever ,’ then you can rub the nettle juice on your arms and
face, to raise blisters. Do you want to keep these instructions?”
He shook his head decidedly . “Nay , I’ll remember . There’ s
more ri sk to being found wi’  the paper than there is to
for getting how much to take.” He turned to Jamie.
“And you’ll meet the ship at Orvieto, lad?”
Jamie n odded. “ A ye. She’ s bound to make port there; all
the wine  haulers  do, to take on fresh water . If by chance she
doesna d o so, then-” He shrugged. “I shall hire a boat and try
to catch her up.  So long as I board her before we reach Le
Havre, it should be all right, but best if we can do it while
we’re st ill close  of f the coast of Spain. I dinna mean to spend
longer a t sea than I must.” He  pointed with his chin at the
bottle in Murtagh’ s hand.
“Y e’d best wait to take the stuf f ’ til ye see me come on
board. W ith no witnesses, the ca ptain might take the easy way
out and just put ye astern in the night.”
Murtagh grunted . “A ye, he might try .” He touched the hilt
of h is dirk, and there was the faintest ironic emphasis on the
word “try .”
Jamie frowned at him. “Dinna for get yourself. Y ou’re
meant to be suf fering from the pox. W ith luck, they’ll be afraid
to touch  ye, but just in case…  wait ’ til I’m within call and
we’re well of fshore.”
“Mmphm.”
I l ooked from o ne to the other of the two men. Farfetched
as it  was , it might conceivably work. If the captain of the ship
could be  convin ced that one o f his passengers was infected
with sm allpox, he would under no circumstances take his ship
into the harbor at Le Havre , where the French health
restrictions would require its destruction. And, faced with the
necessity of sailing back with h is car go to Lisbon and losing
all profi t on the voyage, or losing two weeks at Orvieto whileword was sent to Paris, he might very well instead consent to
sell the car go to  the wealthy Scottish merchant who had just
come aboard.
The impersonation of a smallpox victim was the crucial
role in this masquerade. Jami e had volunteered to be the
guinea pig for testing the h erbs, and they had worked
magnificently on him. His fair skin had flushed dark red
within minutes, and the nettle juice raised immediate blisters
that could easily be mistaken for those of pox by a ship’ s
doctor or a pan icked captain. And should any doubt remain,
the madder -stained urine gave an absolutely perfect illusion of
a man pissing blood as the smallpox attacked his kidneys.
“Christ!” Jamie had exclaimed, startled despite himself at
the first demonstration of the herb’ s ef ficacy .
“Oh, jolly good!” I said, peerin g over his shoulder at the
white porcelain chamber pot and its crimson contents. “That’ s
better than I expected.”
“Oh, aye? How long does it take  to wear of f, then?” Jamie
had asked, looking down rather nervously .
“A few hours, I think,” I told him. “Why? Does it feel
odd?”
“Not odd, exactly ,” he said, rubbing. “It itches a bit.”
“That’ s no the herb,” Murtagh interjected dourly . “It’ s just
the natural condition for a lad of your age.”
Jamie grinned at his godfather . “Remember back that far ,
do ye?”
“Farther back than you were bo rn or thought of, laddie,”
Murtagh had said, shaking his head.
The little clansman now stowe d the vials in his sporran,
methodically wrapping each on e in a bit of soft leather to
prevent breakage.
“I’ll send word of the ship and her sailing so soon as I
may . And I’ll se e ye within the month of f Spain. Y ou’ll have
the money before then?”Jamie nodded. “Oh, aye. By nex t week, I imagine.” Jared’ s
business had prospered under Jamie’ s stewardship, but the
cash reserves were not suf ficient to purchase entire shiploads
of port, while still fulfilling the other commitments of the
House of Fraser . The chess gam es had borne fruit in more than
one regard, though, and Monsieur Duverney the younger , a
prominent banker , had willingly guaranteed a sizable loan for
his father ’ s friend.
“It’ s a pity we can’ t bring the s tuf f into Paris,” Jamie had
remarked during the planning, “but St. Germain would be sure
to find out. I expect we’ll do be st to sell it through a broker in
Spain – I know a good man in Bilbao. The profit will be much
smaller than it would be in France, and the taxes are higher ,
but ye canna have everything, can ye?”
“I’ll settle for pa ying back Duverney’ s loan,” I said. “And
speaking of loans, what’ s Signore Manzetti going to do about
the money he’ s loaned Charles Stuart?”
“Whistle for it, I  expect,” said Jamie cheerfully . “And ruin
the Stuarts’ reputation with every banker on the Continent
while he’ s about it.”
“Seems a bit hard on poor old Manzetti,” I observed.
“A ye well. Y e canna make an omelet wi’out breakin’ eggs,
as my auld grannie says.”
“Y ou haven’ t got an auld grannie,” I pointed out.
“No,” he admitted, “but if I had,  that’ s what she’d say .” He
had dropped the playfulness then, momentarily . “It’ s no verra
fair to the Stuar ts, forbye. In fact, should any of the Jacobite
lords come to kn ow what I’ve b een doing, I expect they’d call
it treaso n, and they’d be right. ” He rubbed a hand over his
brow , and shook his head, and  I saw the deadly seriousness
that his playfulness covered.
“It cann a be helped, Sassenach. If you’re right – and I’ve
staked my life so far on it – then it’ s a choice between the
aspirations of Charles Stuart and the lives of a hell of a lot of
Scotsmen. I’ve no love for King Geordie – me, wi’ a price on
my head? – but I dinna see that I can do otherwise.”He frow ned, running a hand thr ough his hair , as he always
did whe n thinkin g or upset. “If there were a chance of Charles
succeeding… ay e, well, that might be dif ferent. T o take a risk
in an honorable cause – but your history says he willna
succeed, and I must say , all I kn ow of the man makes it seem
likely th at you’re right. They’re my folk and my family at
stake, an d if the cost of their lives is a banker ’ s gold… well, it
doesna seem more a sacrifice than that of my own honor .”
He shrugged in half-humorous despair . “So now I’ve gone
from ste aling H is Highness’ s mail to bank robbery and piracy
on the high seas, and it seems there’ s nay help for it.”
He w as silent f or a moment, looking down at his hands,
clenched togethe r on the desk. Then he turned his head to me
and smiled.
“I alway s wante d to be a pirate, when I was a bairn,” he
said. “Pity I canna wear a cutlass.”
 
I lay in bed, head and shoulders propped on pillows, hands
clasped lightly over my stomach, thinking. Since the first
alarm, there had been very little  bleeding, and I felt well. Still,
any sor t of bleeding at this stage was cause for alarm. I
wondered priva tely what would happen if any emer gency
arose wh ile Jam ie was gone to Spain, but there was little to be
gained by worrying. He had to go; there was too much riding
on that particular shipload of wine for any private concerns to
intrude. And if everything went all right, he should be back
well before the baby was due.
As it was, all personal concerns would have to be put
aside, danger or no. Charles,  unable to contain his own
excitement, had confided to Jamie that he would shortly
require t wo ship s – possibly mo re – and had asked his advice
on h ull design a nd the mounting of deck cannon. His father ’ s
most recent letters from Rome had betrayed a slight tone of
questioning – with his acute Bourbon nose for politics, James
Stuart smelled a rat, but plainly  hadn’ t yet been informed of
what his son was up to. Jamie, hip-deep in decoded letters,
thought it likely that Philip of Spain had not yet mentionedCharles’ s overtures or the Pope’ s interest, but James Stuart had
his spies, as well.
After a little wh ile, I became aw are of some slight change
in Jamie ’ s attitude. Glancing toward him, I saw that while he
was still  holding  a book open on his knee, he had ceased to
turn the pages – or to look at t hem, for that matter . His eyes
were fixed on me instead; or , to be specific, on the spot where
my nightrobe parted, several inches lower than strict modesty
might dictate, strict modesty hardly seeming necessary in bed
with one’ s husband.
His gaze was abstracted, dark blue with longing, and I
realized that if not socially required, modesty in bed with one’ s
husband might be at least considerate, under the
circumstances. There were alternatives, of course.
Catching me looking at him, Jamie blushed slightly and
hastily r eturned to an exaggerated interest in his book. I rolled
onto my side and rested a hand on his thigh.
“Interesting book?” I asked, idly caressing him.
“Mphm. Oh, aye.” The blush de epened, but he didn’ t take
his eyes from the page.
Grinning to myself, I slipped my hand under the
bedclothes. He dropped the book.
“Sassenach!” he said. “Y e know you canna…”
“No,” I said, “but you can. Or rather , I can for you.”
He firmly detached my hand and gave it back to me.
“No, Sassenach. It wouldna be right.”
“It wouldn’ t?” I said, surprised. “Whyever not?”
He squirmed uncomfortably , avoiding my eyes.
“W ell, I … I wouldna feel right, Sassenach. T o take my
pleasure from ye, and not be abl e to give ye… well, I wouldna
feel right about it, is all.”
I burst into laughter , laying my head on his thigh.
“Jamie, you are too sweet for words!”“I am  not sweet,” he said indignantly . “But I’m no such a
selfish – Claire, stop that!”
“Y ou were planning to wait several more months?” I
asked, not stopping.
“I could ,” he said, with what dignity was possible under
the circ umstances. “I waited tw-twenty-two years, and I
can…”
“No, you can’ t,” I said, pulling  back the bedclothes and
admiring the shape so clearly visible beneath his nightshirt. I
touched it, and it moved slightly , eager against my hand.
“Whatever God  meant you to be, Jamie Fraser , it wasn’ t a
monk.”
W ith a sure hand, I pulled up his nightshirt.
“But…” he began.
“T wo against one,” I said, leaning down. “Y ou lose.”
 
Jamie worked hard for the next few days, readying the
wine business to look after itse lf during his absence. Still, he
found time to come up and sit with me for a short time after
lunch most days, and so it was  that he was with me when a
visitor was announced. V isitors were not uncommon; Louise
came every other day or so, to chatter about pregnancy or to
moan over her lost love – though I privately thought she
enjoyed Charles  a great deal more as the object of noble
renunciation tha n she did as a present lover . She had promised
to b ring me some T urkish swee tmeats, and I rather expected
her plump pink face to peek through the door .
T o my surprise, though, the visitor was Monsieur Forez.
Magnus himself  showed him into my sitting room, taking his
hat and cloak with an almost superstitious reverence.
Jamie looked surprised at this visitation, but rose to his feet
to greet the hangman politely and of fer him refreshment.
“As a general ru le, I take no spirits,” Monsieur Forez said
with a smile. “B ut I would no t insult the hospitality of my
esteemed colleague.” He bowed ceremoniously in thedirection of the chaise where I reclined. “Y ou are well, I trust,
Madame Fraser?”
“Y es,” I said cautiously . “Thank you.” I wondered to what
we owe d the honor of the visit. For while Monsieur Forez
enjoyed conside rable prestige and a fair amount of wealth in
return for his of ficial duties, I didn’ t think his job got him
many d inner invitations. I wondered suddenly whether
hangmen had any social life to speak of.
He crossed the room and laid  a small package on the
chaise b eside m e, rather like a fatherly vulture bringing home
dinner for his chicks. Keeping in mind the hanged-men’ s
grease, I picked the package up gingerly and weighed it in my
hand; light for its size, and smelling faintly astringent.
“A sma ll reme mbrance from Mother Hildegarde,” he
explained. “I understand it i s a favorite remedy of les
maîtr esses sage-femme . She has written directions for its use,
as well. ” He withdrew a folde d, sealed note from his inner
pocket and handed it over .
I snif fed  the package. Raspberry leaves and saxifrage;
something else I didn’ t recognize. I hoped Mother Hildegarde
had included a list of the ingredients as well.
“Please thank Mother Hildegarde for me,” I said. “And
how is everyon e at the Hôpital ?” I greatly missed my work
there, as well as  the nuns and the odd assortment of medical
practitioners. W e gossiped for some time about the Hôpital and
its personnel, with Jamie contributing the occasional comment,
but usually just listening with a polite smile, or – when the
subject t urned to  the clinical – burying his nose in his glass of
wine.
“What a pity ,” I said regretfully , as Monsieur Forez
finished his description of the repair of a crushed shoulder
blade. “I’ve never seen that done. I do miss the sur gical work.”
“Y es, I will miss it as well,” Monsieur Forez nodded,
taking a  small sip from his wineglass. It was still more than
half-full; apparently he hadn’ t been joking about his abstention
from spirits.“Y ou’re leaving Paris?” Jamie said in some surprise.
Monsieur Forez shrugged, the folds of his long coat
rustling like feathers.
“Only for a time ,” he said. “Stil l, I will be gone for at least
two mon ths. In fact, Madame,” he bowed his head toward me
again, “that is the main reason for my visit today .”
“It is?”
“Y es. I am go ing to England, you understand, and it
occurred to me that if you wish ed it, Madame, it would be a
matter of the gr eatest simplicity for me to carry any message
that you desired. Should there  be anyone with whom you
wished to communicate, that is,” he added, with his usual
precision.
I g lanced at Jam ie, whose face had suddenly altered, from
an open expression of polite interest to that pleasantly smiling
mask th at hid all thoughts. A s tranger wouldn’ t have noticed
the dif ference, but I did.
“No,” I said he sitantly . “I have no friends or relatives in
England; I’m afraid I have no c onnections there at all, since I
was – widowed. ” I felt the usual small stab at this reference to
Frank, but suppressed it.
If this seemed odd to Monsieur Forez, he didn’ t show it.
He merely nodded, and set down his half-drunk glass of wine.
“I see. It is fortunate indeed that you have friends here,
then.” His voice seemed to hold  a warning of some kind, but
he d idn’ t look at me as he be nt to straighten his stocking
before r ising. “I shall call upon  you on my return, then, and
hope to find you again in good health.”
“What is the business that takes you to England,
Monsieur?” Jamie said bluntly .
Monsieur Forez  turned to him  with a faint smile. He
cocked his head, eyes bright, an d I was struck once more by
his rese mblance to a lar ge bir d. Not a carrion crow at the
moment, though, but a raptor , a bird of prey .“And w hat busi ness should a m an of my profession travel
on, M onsieur Fraser?” he asked.  “I have been hired to perform
my usual duties, at Smithfield.”
“An important occasion, I take it,” said Jamie. “T o justify
the s ummoning of a man of you r skill, I mean.” His eyes were
watchful, though his expression showed nothing beyond polite
inquiry .
Monsieur Forez’ s eyes grew brighter . He rose slowly to his
feet, looking down at Jamie where he sat near the window .
“That is true, M onsieur Fraser ,”  he said softly . “For it is a
matter o f skill, make no mistake. T o choke a man to death at
the end of a rope – pah! Anyon e can do that. T o break a neck
cleanly , with one quick fall, that requires some calculation in
terms of weight and drop, and a certain amount of practice in
the p lacing of th e rope, as well.  But to walk the line between
these methods, to properly exec ute the sentence of a traitor ’ s
death; that requires great skill indeed.”
My mouth felt suddenly dry , and I reached for my own
glass. “A  traitor ’ s death?” I sa id, feeling as though I really
didn’ t want to hear the answer .
“Hanging, drawing, and quartering,” Jamie said briefly .
“That’ s what you mean, of course, Monsieur Forez?”
The han gman nodded. Jamie rose to his feet, as though
against h is will, facing the gaunt, black-clad visitor . They were
much o f a height, and could look each other in the face
without dif ficulty . Monsieur Forez took a step toward Jamie,
expression suddenly abstracted, as though he were about to
make a demonstration of some medical point.
“Oh, yes,” he s aid. “Y es, that is the traitor ’ s death. First,
the m an must be  hanged, as you  say , but with a nice judgment,
so t hat the neck  is not broken, nor the windpipe crushed –
suf focation is not the desired result, you understand.”
“Oh, I understan d.” Jamie’ s voice was soft, with an almost
mocking edge, and I glanced at him in bewilderment.
“Do you , Mons ieur?” Monsieur Forez smiled faintly , but
went on  without waiting for an answer . “It is a matter oftiming th en; you judge by the eyes. The face will darken with
blood almost immediately – mo re quickly if the subject is of
fair complexion – and as cho king proceeds, the tongue is
forced f rom the mouth. That is  what delights the crowds, of
course, as well as the popping  eyes. But you watch for the
signs of  redness  at the corners of the eyes, as the small blood
vessels burst. When that happens, you must give at once the
signal for the subject to be cut down – a dependable assistant
is in dispensable, you understan d,” he half-turned, to include
me in this macabre conversation, and I nodded, despite myself.
“Then,” he continued, turning back to Jamie, “you must
administer at once a stimulant, to revive the subject while the
shirt is being removed – you m ust insist that a shirt opening
down th e front is provided; often it is dif ficult to get them of f
over the head.” One long, slender finger reached out, pointing
at the middle bu tton of Jamie’ s shirt, but not quite touching the
fresh-starched linen.
“I would suppose so,” Jamie said.
Monsieur Forez retracted the finger , nodding in approval at
this evidence of comprehension.
“Just so. The assistant will have kindled the fire
beforehand; this  is beneath the dignity of the executioner . And
then the time of the knife is at hand.”
There w as a dead silence in the room. Jamie’ s face was
still set in inscru tability , but a slight moisture gleamed on the
side of his neck.
“It is here that the utmost of skill is required,” Monsieur
Forez explained, raising a finger in admonition. “Y ou must
work qu ickly , lest the subject expire before you have finished.
Mixing a dose w ith the stimulant which constricts the blood
vessels will give you a few moments’ grace, but not much.”
Spotting a silver letter -opener on the table, he crossed to it
and pick ed it up. He held it with his hand wrapped about the
hilt, forefinger braced on top of the blade, pointed down at the
shining walnut of the tabletop.“Just the re,” he said, almost dre amily . “At the base of the
breastbone. And  quickly , to the crest of the groin. Y ou can see
the bone  easily in most cases. Again” – and the letter opener
flashed to one side and then the other , quick and delicate as the
zigzag f light of a hummingbird – “following the arch of the
ribs. Y ou must not cut deeply , for you do not wish to puncture
the s ac which en closes the entrails. Still, you must get through
skin, fat , and muscle, and do it with one stroke. This,” he said
with satisfaction, gazing down  at his own reflection in the
tabletop, “is artistry .”
He laid the knife gently on the  table, and turned back to
Jamie. He shrugged pleasantly .
“After th at, it is a matter of speed and some dexterity , but
if yo u have been exact in your methods, it will present little
dif ficulty . The entrails are sealed  within a membrane, you see,
resembling a bag. If you have not severed this by accident, it is
a simple matter , needing only a little strength, to force your
hands be neath the muscular layer and pull free the entire mass.
A qu ick cut at stomach and anus” – he glanced disparagingly
at the letter opener – “and the n the entrails may be thrown
upon the fire.”
“Now” – he rai sed an admonitory finger – “if you have
been sw ift and delicate in your w ork, there is now a moment’ s
leisure, for mark you, as yet no lar ge vessels will have been
severed.”
I fel t quite faint , although I was sitting down, and I was
sure that my face was as white as Jamie’ s. Pale as he was,
Jamie smiled, as though humoring a guest in conversation.
“So the… subject… can live a bit longer?”
“ Mais oui , Monsi eur .” Th e hangman’ s bright black eyes
swept over Jamie’ s powerful frame, taking in the width of
shoulder and the muscular legs. “The ef fects of such shock are
unpredictable, b ut I have seen a strong man live for more than
a quarter of an hour in this state.”
“I im agine it see ms a lot longer to the subject,” Jamie said
dryly .Monsieur Forez  appeared not to  hear this, picking up the
letter opener again and flourishing it as he spoke.
“As dea th appro aches, then, you must reach up into the
cavity of the body to grasp the heart. Here skill is called upon
again. The heart retracts, you see, without the downward
anchorage of the viscera, and often it is surprisingly far up. In
addition, it is m ost slippery .” He wiped one hand on the skirt
of h is coat in pantomime. “But the major dif ficulty lies in
severing the lar ge vessels above very quickly , so that the or gan
may be pulled fo rth while still beating. Y ou wish to please the
crowd,” he explained. “It mak es a great dif ference to the
remuneration. As to the rest-” He shrugged a lean, disdainful
shoulder . “Mere  butchery . Once life is extinct, there is no
further need of skill.”
“No, I suppose not,” I said faintly .
“But yo u are pale, Madame! I have detained you far too
long in tedious conversation!” he exclaimed. He reached for
my hand , and I resisted the ver y strong ur ge to yank it back.
His own hand was cool, but the warmth of his lips as he
brushed his mouth lightly acros s my hand was so unexpected
that I tightened my own grasp in surprise. He gave my hand a
slight, invisible squeeze, and turned to bow formally to Jamie.
“I must take my leave, Monsieur Fraser . I shall hope to
meet yo u and your charming wife again… under such pleasant
circumstances as we have enjoyed today .” The eyes of the two
men me t for a second. Then Monsieur Forez appeared to recall
the letter opener he was still h olding in one hand. W ith an
exclamation of surprise, he held  it out on his open palm. Jamie
arched o ne brow , and picked t he knife up delicately by the
point.
“ Bon voyage , Monsieur Forez,” he said. “And I thank you”
– his mouth twisted wryly – “for your most instructive visit.”
He insis ted upon seeing our visitor to the door himself.
Left alone, I got up and went to the window , where I stood
practicing deep-breathing exercises until the dark-blue
carriage disappeared around the corner of the Rue Gamboge.The door opened behind me, and Jamie stepped in. He still
held the  letter opener . He crossed deliberately to the lar ge
famille r ose jar that stood by the  hearth and dropped the paper
knife int o it with a clang, then t urned to me, doing his best to
smile.
“W ell, as warnings go,” he s aid, “that one was verra
ef fective.”
I shuddered briefly .
“W asn’ t it, though?”
“Who do you think sent him?” Jamie asked. “Mother
Hildegarde?”
“I expect so. She warned me, when we decoded the music.
She said what you were doing was dangerous.” The fact of just
how  dan gerous had been lost upon  me, until the hangman’ s
visit. I hadn’ t suf fered from morning nausea for some time, but
I felt my gor ge rising now . If the Jacobite lor ds knew what I
was doin g, they’d call it tr easo n . An d what step s might they
take, if they did find out?
T o all outward intents, Jamie was an avowed Jacobite
supporter; in that guise, he visited Charles, entertained the Earl
Marischal to dinner , and attended court. And so far , he had
been ski llful enough, in his ches s games, his tavern visits, and
his drinking parties, to undercut the Stuart cause while
seeming outwardly to support it. Besides the two of us, only
Murtagh knew that we sought to thwart a Stuart rising – and
even he didn’ t know why , mere ly accepting his chief ’ s word
that it was right. That pretense was necessary , while operating
in F rance. But t he same pretense would brand Jamie a traitor ,
should he ever set foot on English soil.
I ha d known th at, of course, but in my ignorance, had
thought that there was little dif ference between being hanged
as an outlaw , an d executed as a  traitor . Monsieur Forez’ s visit
had taken care of that  bit of naiveté.
“Y ou’re bloody calm about it,” I said. My own heart was
still thum ping er ratically , and my palms were cold, but sweaty .I wiped them on my gown, and tucked them between my
knees to warm them.
Jamie shrugged slightly and gave me a lopsided smile.
“W ell, t here’ s the hell of a lot of unpleasant ways to die,
Sassenach. And if one of them s hould fall to my lot, I wouldna
like it much. But the question is: Am I scairt enough of the
possibility that I would stop what I’m doing to avoid it?” He
sat down on the chaise beside me, and took one of my hands
between his own. His palms were warm, and the solid bulk of
him next to me was reassuring.
“I thought that over for some time, Sassenach, in those
weeks a t the Abbey while I heal ed. And again, when we came
to P aris. And ag ain, when I met Charles Stuart.” He shook his
head, bent over our linked hands.
“A ye, I can see  myself standing on a scaf fold. I saw the
gallows at W entworth – did I tell ye that?”
“No. No, you didn’ t.”
He nodded, eyes gone blank in remembrance.
“They marched us down to the courtyard; those of us in the
condemned cell. And made us s tand in rows on the stones, to
watch an execution. They hanged six men that day , men I
knew . I watched each man mo unt the steps – twelve steps,
there were – and  stand, hands bound behind his back, looking
down at  the yard as they put the rope around his neck. And I
wondered then, how I would manage come my turn to mount
those steps. W ould I weep and pray , like John Sutter , or could I
stand straight like W illie MacLe od, and smile at a friend in the
yard below?”
He shoo k his head suddenly , lik e a dog flinging of f drops
of w ater , and sm iled at me a little grimly . “Anyway , Monsieur
Forez di dna tell me anything I hadna thought of before. But
it’ s too late, mo duinne .” He laid a hand over mine. “A ye, I’m
afraid. B ut if I would not turn ba ck for the chance of home and
freedom, I shallna do it for fear . No, mo duinne . It’ s too late.”2 4  T H E  B O I S  D E  B O U L O G N E
M onsieur Forez’ s visit proved me rely to be the first of a
series of unusual disruptions.
“There is an Italian person downstairs, Madame,” Magnus
informed me. “He would not gi ve me his name.” There was a
pinched look about the butler ’ s mouth; I gathered that if the
visitor would not give his na me, he had been more than
willing to give the butler a number of other words.
That, coupled with the “iian person” designation, was
enough to give m e a clue as to t he visitor ’ s identity , and it was
with relatively little surprise that I entered the drawing room to
find Charles Stuart standing by the window .
He s wung about at my entrance , hat in his hands. He was
plainly surprised to see me ; his mouth dropped open for a
second, then he caught himself and gave me a quick, brief bow
of acknowledgment.
“Milord Broch T uarach is not at home?” he inquired. His
brows drew together in displeasure.
“No, he isn’ t,” I  said. “W ill you take a little refreshment,
Y our Highness?”
He look ed aroun d the richly appointed drawing-room with
interest, but shook his head. So far as I knew , he had been in
the house only once before, when he had come over the
rooftops from his rendezvous with Louise. Neither he nor
Jamie h ad thought it appropriate for him to be invited to the
dinners here; without of ficial recognition by Louis, the French
nobility scorned him.
“No. I thank yo u, Madame Fraser . I shall not stay; my
servant waits outside, and it is a long ride to return to my
lodgings. I wished only to m ake a request of my friend
James.”
“Er… well, I’m sure that my husband would be happy to
oblige Y our Highness – if he can,” I answered cautiously ,wondering just what the request was. A loan, probably;
Fer gus’ s gleanings of late had included quite a number of
impatient letters from tailors, bootmakers, and other creditors.
Charles smiled, his expression altering to one of surprising
sweetness.
“I kn ow; I cann ot tell you, Madame, how greatly I esteem
the devo tion and service of your husband; the sight of his loyal
face warms my heart amid the loneliness of my present
surroundings.”
“Oh?” I said.
“It is not a dif fic ult thing I ask,” he assured me. “It is only
that I have made a small investment; a car go of bottled port.”
“Really?” I said. “How interesting.” Murtagh had left for
Lisbon t hat morning, vials of n ettle juice and madder root in
his pouch.
“It is a small thing,” Charles flipped a lordly hand,
disdaining the investment of every cent he had been able to
borrow . “But I wish that my friend James shall accomplish the
task of disposing of the car go, once it shall arrive. It is not
appropriate, you know” – and here he straightened his
shoulders and elevated his nose just a trifle, quite
unconsciously – “for a – a person such as myself, to be seen to
engage in trade.”
“Y es, I quite see , Y our Highness,” I said, biting my lip. I
wondered whether he had expressed this point of view to his
business partner , St. Germain – who undoubtedly regarded the
young p retender to the Scottish throne as a person of less
consequence tha n any of the French nobles – who engaged in
“trade” with both hands, whenever the chance of profit
of fered.
“Is Y our Highness quite alone in this enterprise?” I
inquired innocently .
He frow ned slightly . “No, I have a partner; but he is a
Frenchman. I should much prefer to entrust the proceeds of my
venture to the hands of a countryman. Besides,” he added
thoughtfully , “I have heard that my dear James is a most astuteand capa ble merchant; it is pos sible that he might be able to
increase the value of my investment by means of judicious
sale.”
I supposed whoever had told him of Jamie’ s capability
hadn’ t b othered to add the inform ation that there was probably
no wine merchant in Paris who m St. Germain more disliked.
Still, if everything worked out as planned, that shouldn’ t
matter . And if it didn’ t, it was po ssible that St. Germain would
solve all of our problems by strangling Charles Stuart, once he
found o ut that the latter had contracted delivery of half his
exclusive Gostos port to his most hated rival.
“I’m sure that my husband will do his utmost to dispose of
Y our Highness’ s merchandise to the maximum benefit of all
concerned,” I said, with complete truth.
His Highness thanked me graciously , as befitting a prince
accepting the service of a loyal subject. He bowed, kissed my
hand with great formality , an d departed with continuing
protestations of  gratitude to Ja mie. Magnus, looking dourly
unimpressed by the Royal visit, closed the door upon him.
In th e event, Ja mie didn’ t come home until after I had
fallen asleep, but I told him over breakfast of Charles’ s visit,
and his request.
“God, I wonder if His Highnes s will tell the Comte?” he
said. Ha ving ensured the health of his bowels by disposing of
his parr itch in short order , he  proceeded to add a French
breakfast of buttered rolls and s teaming chocolate on top of it.
A broad  grin spread across his  face in contemplation of the
Comte’ s reaction, as he sipped his cocoa.
“I wonder is it lèse-majesté  t o ham mer an exiled prince?
For if it’ s not, I hope His Highness has Sheridan or Balhaldy
close by when St. Germain hears about it.”
Further speculation along these lines was curtailed by the
sudden sound of voices in th e hallway . A moment later ,
Magnus appeared in the door , a note borne on his silver tray .
“Y our pardon, milord,” he said, bowing. “The messenger
who bro ught this desired most ur gently that it be brought toyour attention at once.”
Brows r aised, Jamie took the note from the tray , opened
and read it.
“Oh, bloody hell!” he said in disgust.
“What is it?” I asked. “Not word from Murtagh already?”
He shoo k his head. “No. It’ s from the foreman of the
warehouse.”
“T rouble at the docks?”
An odd mixture of emotions w as visible on Jamie’ s face;
impatience struggling with amusement.
“W ell, not precisely . The man’ s got himself into a coil at a
brothel, it seems. He humbly b egs my pardon” – he waved
ironically at the note – “but hopes I’ll see fit to come round
and assist him. In other words, ” he translated, crumpling his
napkin as he rose, “will I pay his bill?”
“W ill you?” I said, amused.
He snorted briefly and dusted crumbs from his lap.
“I s uppose I’ll have to, unless  I want to supervise the
warehouse myse lf – and I havena time for that.” His brow
creased as he m entally reviewed the duties of the day . This
was a task that might take som e little time, and there were
orders waiting on his desk, ship’ s captains waiting on the
docks, and casks waiting in the warehouse.
“I’d best take F er gus wi’ me to carry messages,” he said,
resigned. “He can maybe go to Montmartre wi’ a letter , if I’m
too short of time.”
“Kind hearts are more than cor onets,” I told Jamie as he
stood by  his desk, ruefully flipping through the impressive pile
of waiting paperwork.
“Oh, aye?” he said. “And whose opinion is that?”
“Alfred, Lord T ennyson, I think ,” I said. “I don’ t believe
he’ s com e along  yet, but he’ s a poet. Uncle Lamb had a book
of fa mous British poets. There was a bit from Burns in there,too, I recall – he’ s a Scot,” I explained. “He said, ‘Freedom
and Whisky gang tegither .’ ”
Jamie snorted. “I canna say if he’ s a poet, but he’ s a Scot,
at le ast.” He sm iled then, and be nt to kiss me on the forehead.
“I’ll be home to my supper , mo duinne . Keep ye well.”
 
I finished my own breakfast, and thriftily polished of f
Jamie’ s toast as well, then wad dled upstairs for my morning
nap. I had had small episodes of bleeding since the first alarm,
though no more than a spot o r two, and nothing at all for
several w eeks. S till, I kept to my bed or the chaise as much as
possible, only venturing down to the salon to receive visitors,
or to  the dining room for meals with Jamie. When I descended
for lunch, though, I found the table laid for one.
“Milord has not come back yet? ” I asked in some surprise.
The elderly butler shook his head.
“No, milady .”
“W ell, I imagine he’ll be back  soon; make sure there’ s
food wa iting for him when he arrives.” I was too hungry to
wait for  Jamie; the nausea tended to return if I went too long
without eating.
After lunch, I lay down to rest again. Conjugal relations
being temporarily in abeyance, there wasn’ t that much one
could do  in bed, other than rea d or sleep, which meant I did
quite a lot of bo th. Sleeping on my stomach was impossible,
sleeping on my back uncomfort able, as it tended to make the
baby squirm. Consequently , I la y on my side, curling around
my grow ing abdomen like a co cktail shrimp round a caper . I
seldom slept deeply , but tended rather to doze, letting my mind
drift to the gentle random movements of the child.
Somewhere in my dreams, I thought I felt Jamie near me,
but when I opened my eyes the room was empty , and I closed
them ag ain, lulled as though I , too, floated weightless in a
blood-warm sea.
I was wakened a t length, somewhere in the late afternoon,
by a soft tap on the bedroom door .“Entr ez,”  I said, blinking as I came aw ake. It was the
butler , Magnus, apologetically announcing more visitors.
“It i s the Princ esse de Rohan, Madame,” he said. “The
Princesse wished to wait until you awakened, but when
Madame d’Arbanville also arrived, I thought perhaps…”
“That’ s all right, Magnus,” I said, struggling upright and
swinging my feet over the side of the bed. “I’ll come down.”
I looked forward to the visitors. W e had stopped
entertaining during the last month, and I rather missed the
bustle and conversation, silly as much of it was. Louise came
frequently to sit with me and re gale me with the latest doings
of the Court, bu t I hadn’ t seen  Marie d’Arbanville in some
time. I wondered what brought her here today .
I was ungainly enough to ta ke the stairs slowly , my
increased weigh t jarring upward from the soles of my feet on
each step. The paneled door of the drawing room was closed,
but I heard the voice inside clearly .
“Do you think she knows ?”
The question, asked in the lowered tones that portended
the j uiciest of g ossip, reached me just as I was about to enter
the drawing room. Instead, I paused at the threshold, just out
of sight.
It w as Marie d’Arbanville who had spoken. W elcome
everywhere bec ause of her eld erly husband’ s position, and
gregarious even by French standards, Marie heard everything
worth hearing within the environs of Paris.
“Does she know what?” The reply was Louise’ s; her high,
carrying voice had the perfect self-confidence of the born
aristocrat, who doesn’ t care who hears what.
“Oh, you haven’ t heard!” Marie pounced on the opening
like a kitten, d elighted to find a new mouse to play with.
“Goodness! Of course, I only heard myself an hour ago.”
And rac ed directly over here to tell me about it, I thought.
Whatever “it” was. I thought I s tood a better chance of hearing
the unexpur gated version from my position in the hallway .“It is my lord B roch T uarach,”  Marie said, and I didn’ t
need to see her , to imagine he r leaning forward, green eyes
darting b ack and  forth, snapping with enjoyment of her news.
“Only this morning, he challenged an Englishman to a duel –
over a whore!”
“What!” Louise’ s cry of astonishment drowned out my
own gas p. I grabbed hold of a small table and held on, black
spots whirling before my eyes a s the world came apart at the
seams.
“Oh, yes!” Marie was saying. “Jacques V incennes was
there; he  told my husband all a bout it! It was in that brothel
down ne ar the fish market – ima gine going to a brothel at that
hour of the mor ning! Men are so odd. Anyway , Jacques was
having a drink with Madame Elise, who runs the place, when
all of a sudden there was the most frightful outcry upstairs,
and all kinds of thumping and shouting.”
She paused for breath – and dramatic ef fect – and I heard
the sound of liquid being poured.
“So, Jacques of course raced to the stairs – well, that’ s
what he says , anyway ; I expect he actually hid behind the sofa,
he’ s suc h a coward – and after more shouting and thumping,
there wa s a terrible crash, and an English of ficer came hurtling
down the stairs, half-undressed, with his wig of f, staggering
and smashing into the walls. An d who should appear at the top
of the stairs, loo king like the ve ngeance of God, but our own
petit  James!”
“No! An d I would have sworn h e was the last… but go on!
What happened then?”
A teacup chimed softly against its saucer , followed by
Marie’ s voice, released by excitement from the modulations of
secrecy .
“W ell – the man reached the foot of the stairs still on his
feet, by some miracle, and he turned at once, and looked up at
Lord T uarach. Jacques says the man was very self-possessed,
for someone who’d just been kicked downstairs with his
breeches undone . He smiled – not a real smile, you know , the
nasty sort – and said, ‘There’ s no need for violence, Fraser;you could have waited for you r turn, surely? I should have
thought you get enough at hom e. But then, some men derive
pleasure from paying for it.’ ”
Louise made shocked noises. “ How awful! The canaille !
But of course, i t is no reproach to milord T uarach-” I could
hear the strain in  her voice as friendship warred with the ur ge
to gossip. Not surprisingly , gossip won.
“Milord T uarach cannot enjoy his wife’ s favors at the
moment; she carries a child, and the pregnancy is dangerous.
So of course he  would relieve his needs at a brothel; what
gentleman would do otherwise? But go on, Marie! What
happened then?”
“W ell.” Marie drew breath as she approached the high
point of  the story . “Milord T uarach rushed down the stairs,
seized the Englishman by the throat, and shook him like a rat!”
“Non! Ce n’est pas vrai!”
“Oh, yes! It too k three of Madame’ s servants to restrain
him – such a wonderful big man, isn’ t he? So fierce-looking!”
“Y es, but then what?”
“Oh – well, Jacq ues said the Englishman gasped for a bit,
then stra ightened up and said to milord T uarach, ‘That’ s twice
you’ve come near killing me, Fraser . Someday you may
succeed.’ And then milord T uarach cursed in that terrible
Scottish tongue – I don’ t understand a word, do you? – and
then he wrenched himself free  from the men holding him,
struck th e Englishman across the face with his bare hand” –
Louise gasped at the insult – “ and said, ‘T omorrow’ s dawn
will see you dead!’ Then he turn ed about and ran up the stairs,
and the Englishman left. John sa id he looked quite white – and
no wonder! Just imagine!”
I imagined, all right.
“Are y ou wel l, Madame?” Magnus’ s anxious voice
drowned out Louise’ s further ex clamations. I put out a hand,
groping, and he took it at once , putting his other hand under
my elbow in support.“No. I’m  not well. Please… tell the ladies?” I waved
weakly toward the drawing room.
“Of cour se, Madame. In a moment; but now let me see you
to your chambe r . This way , chèr e Madame …” He led me up
the stairs, murmuring consolingly as he supported me. He
escorted me to the bedroom  chaise, where he left me,
promising to send up a maid at once to attend me.
I d idn’ t wait for  assistance; the first shock passing, I could
navigate well enough, and I sto od and made my way across
the r oom to whe re my small medicine box sat on the dressing
table. I didn’ t th ink I was going to faint now , but there was a
bottle of spirits of ammonia in there that I wanted handy , just
in case.
I turned  back the lid and stood still, staring into the box.
For a moment, my mind refused  to register what my eyes saw;
the folded white square of paper , carefully wedged upright
between the multicolored bottle s. I noted rather abstractedly
that my fingers shook as I took the paper out; it took several
tries to unfold it.
I am sorry . The words were bold and black, the letters
carefully formed in the center of  the sheet, the single letter “J”
written with equal care below . And below that, two more
words, these scrawled hastily , done as a postscript of
desperation: I must!
“Y ou must,” I murmured to myself, and then my knees
buckled. L ying on the floor , w ith the carved panels of the
ceiling f lickering dimly above, I found myself thinking that I
had always heretofore assumed that the tendency of
eighteenth-century ladies to swo on was due to tight stays; now
I rather thought it might be due to the idiocy of eighteenth-
century men.
There w as a cry of dismay from somewhere nearby , and
then hel pful hands were lifting me, and I felt the yielding
softness of the wool-stuf fed mattress under me, and cool
cloths on my brow and wrists, smelling of vinegar .
I was soon rest ored to what s enses I had, but strongly
disinclined to talk. I reassured the maids that I was in fact allright, shooed them out of the  room, and lay back on the
pillows, trying to think.
It was Jack Ran dall, of course, and Jamie had gone to kill
him. That was the only clear thought in the morass of whirling
horror and speculation that filled my mind. Why , though?
What could have made him break the promise he had made
me?
T rying to consider carefully the events Marie had related –
third-hand as they were – I thought there had to have been
something more than just the shock of an unexpected
encounter . I knew the Captain, knew him a great deal better
than I wanted to. And if there was one thing of which I was
reasonably sure, it was that he would not have been purchasing
the usual services of a brothel – the simple enjoyment of a
woman was not in his nature. W hat he enjoyed – needed – was
pain, fear , humiliation.
These commodities, of course, could also be purchased, if
at a somewhat higher price. I had seen enough, in my work at
L ’Hôpital des Anges, to know that there were les putains
whose c hief stock in trade lay not between their legs, but in
strong bones overlaid with expensive fragile skin that bruised
at once, and showed the marks of whips and blows.
And if Jamie, h is own fair skin  scarred with the marks of
Randall’ s favor , had come upon the Captain, enjoying himself
in si milar fashion with one of the ladies of the establishment –
That, I thought,  could have car ried him past any thought of
promises or restraint. There w as a small mark on his left
breast, just below the nipple; a tiny whitish pucker , where he
had cut from his  skin the brand ed mark of Jonathan Randall’ s
heated signet ring. The rage that had led him to suf fer
mutilation rather than bear that shameful mark could easily
break forth again, to destroy i ts inflictor – and his hapless
progeny .
“Frank,” I said, and my left han d curled involuntarily over
the s himmer of m y gold wedding ring. “Oh, dear God. Frank.”
For Jam ie, Frank was no more than a ghost, the dim possibility
of a refuge for me, in the unlikely event of necessity . For me,
Frank was the man I had lived with, had shared my bed andbody with – ha d abandoned, at the last, to stay with Jamie
Fraser .
“I can’ t ,” I whispered, to the  empty air , to the small
companion who  stretched and twisted lazily within me,
undisturbed by my own distress. “I can’ t let him do it!”
The afte rnoon light had faded in to the gray shades of dusk,
and the room se emed filled with all the despair of the world’ s
ending. T omorr ow’ s dawn will see you dead . Th ere was no
hope of finding Jamie tonight. I  knew he would not return to
the R ue T remoulins; he wouldn’ t have left that note if he were
coming back. He could never li e beside me through the night,
knowing what he intended doing in the morning. No, he had
undoubtedly sought refuge in some inn or tavern, there to
ready hi mself in solitude for th e execution of justice that he
had sworn.
I t hough t I knew where the place of execution would be.
W ith the memory of his first d uel strong in his mind, Jamie
had sho rn his hair in preparation. The memory would have
come to him again, I was sure, when choosing a spot to meet
his e nemy . The Bois de Boulog ne, near the path of the Seven
Saints. T he Bois  was a popular place for illicit duels, its dense
growth shelterin g the participants from detection. T omorrow ,
one of its shad y clearings would see the meeting of Jamie
Fraser and Jack Randall. And me.
I lay on the bed, not bothering to undress or cover myself,
hands clasped across my belly . I watched the twilight fade to
black, and knew I would not sleep tonight. I took what comfort
I could in the small movements of my unseen inhabitant, with
the echo of Jamie’ s words rin ging in my ears: T omorr ow’ s
dawn will see you dead .
 
The Bois de Boulogne was a small patch of almost-vir gin
forest, p erched incongruously on  the edge of Paris. It was said
that wolves as well as foxes and badgers were still to be found
lurking in its depths, but this story did nothing to discourage
the amo rous couples that dallied under the branches on the
grassy earth of the forest. It was an escape from the noise anddirt of the city , and only its location kept it from becoming a
playground for the nobility . As it was, it was patronized
lar gely by those who lived ne arby , who found a moment’ s
respite in the shade of the lar ge oaks and pale birches of the
Bois, and by those from farther away who sought privacy .
It w as a  small wood, but still to o lar ge to quarter on foot,
looking for a cle aring lar ge enough to hold a pair of duelists. It
had beg un to rain during the night, and the dawn had come
reluctantly , glow ing sullen through a cloud-dark sky . The
forest w hispered to itself, the faint patter of rain on the leaves
blending with the subdued rustle and rub of leaf and branches.
The carriage pulled to a stop on  the road that led through
the B ois, near th e last small cluster of ramshackle buildings. I
had told  the coachman what to  do; he swung down from his
seat, tethered the horses, and disappeared among the buildings.
The folk who li ved near the B ois knew what went on there.
There could not be that many spots suitable for dueling; those
there were would be known.
I sat  back and pulled the heavy cloak tighter around me,
shivering in the cold of the early  dawn. I felt terrible, with the
fatigue of a sle epless night dragging at me, and the leaden
weight of fear and grief restin g in the pit of my stomach.
Overlying everything was a seething anger that I tried to push
away , lest it interfere with the job at hand.
It kept creeping back, though, bubbling up whenever my
guard was down, as it was now . How could he do this? my
mind ke pt muttering, in a cold  fury . I shouldn’ t be here; I
should be home, resting quietly  by Jamie’ s side. I shouldn’ t
have to be pursu ing him, preventing him, fighting both anger
and illness. A nagging pain from the coach ride knotted at the
base of my spine. Y es, he m ight well be upset; I could
understand that.  But it was a m an’ s life  at stake, for God’ s
sake. How could his bloody pride be more important than that?
And to leave me, with no word of explanation! T o leave me to
find out from the gossip of neighbors what had happened.
“Y ou promised me, Jamie, damn  you, you pr omised  me!” I
whispered, under my breath. The wood was quiet, drippingand mist-shrouded. W ere they here already? W ould they be
here? W as I wrong in my guess about the place?
The coachman reappeared, accompanied by a young lad,
perhaps fourteen, who hopped nimbly up on the seat beside the
coachman, and waved his hand, gesturing ahead and to the
left. W it h a brief crack of the whip and a click of the tongue,
the c oachman ur ged the horses i nto a slow trot, and we turned
down the road into the shadows of the wakening wood.
W e s topped twice, pausing while the lad hopped down and
darted into the under growth, each time reappearing within a
moment or two, shaking his head in negation. The third time,
he came tearing back, the excitement on his face so evident
that I had the ca rriage door open before he got near enough to
call out to the coachman.
I ha d money ready in my h and; I thrust it at him,
simultaneously clutching at hi s sleeve, saying, “Show me
where! Quickly , quickly!”
I scarcely noticed either the clutching branches that laced
across t he path, nor the sudden wetness that soaked my
clothing as I brushed them. The path was soft with fallen
leaves, a nd neither my shoes nor those of my guide made any
sound as I followed the shadow  of his ragged, damp-spotted
shirt.
I heard them before I saw them; they had started. The clash
of m etal was mu f fled by the wet shrubbery , but clear enough,
nonetheless. No birds sang in the wet dawn, but the deadly
voice of battle rang in my ears.
It was a lar ge cl earing, deep in the Bois, but accessible by
path and road. Lar ge enough to accommodate the footwork
needed for a serious duel. They were stripped to their shirts,
fighting in the rain, the wet fabric clinging, showing the
outline of shoulder and backbone.
Jamie ha d said he was the bette r fighter; he might be, but
Jonathan Randall was no mean swordsman, either . He wove
and dodged, lithe as a snake, sword striking like a silver fang.
Jamie w as just as fast, amazing grace in such a tall man, light-
footed and sure-handed. I watched, rooted to the ground,afraid to cry out for fear of distracting Jamie’ s attention. They
spun in a tight circle of stroke a nd parry , feet touching lightly
as a dance on the turf.
I stood stock-stil l, watching. I had come through the fading
night to find this, to stop them. And having found them, now I
could not intervene, for fear of c ausing a fatal interruption. All
I could do was wait, to see which of my men would die.
Randall had his blade up and in place to deflect the stroke,
but not quickly enough to brace it against the savagery that
sent his sword flying.
I o pened  my mouth to scream. I had meant to call Jamie’ s
name, to stop h im now , in that moment’ s grace between the
disarming of his opponent and  the killing stroke that must
come next. I did  scream, in fact , but the sound emer ged weak
and strangled. As I had stood there, watching, the nagging pain
in my back had deepened, clenching like a fist. Now I felt a
sudden breaking  somewhere, as though the fist had torn loose
what it held.
I groped wildly , clutching at a nearby branch. I saw
Jamie’ s face, set in a sort of calm exultance, and realized that
he could hear nothing through the haze of violence that
enveloped him. He would see n othing but his goal, until the
fight was ended. Randall, retr eating before the inexorable
blade, sl ipped on the wet grass and went down. He arched his
back, attempting  to rise, but the grass was slippery . The fabric
of h is st ock was  torn, and his head was thrown back, dark hair
rain-soaked, throat exposed like that of a wolf begging mercy .
But vengeance knows no merc y , and it was not the exposed
throat that the descending blade sought.
Through a blackening mist, I saw Jamie’ s sword come
down, g raceful and deadly , cold as death. The point touched
the w aist of the  doeskin breeches, pierced and cut down in a
twisting wrench  that darkened the fawn with a sudden flood of
black-red blood.
The bloo d was a hot rush down my thighs, and the chill of
my skin  moved inward, toward the bone. The bone where my
pelvis jo ined my  back was brea king; I could feel the strain aseach pain came on, a stroke of lightning flashing down my
backbone to explode and flame in the basin of my hips, a
stroke o f destruction, leaving burnt and blackened fields
behind.
My body as well as my senses seemed to fragment. I saw
nothing, but could not tell wh ether my eyes were open or
closed; everything was spinning dark, patched now and then
with the  shifting  patterns you se e at night as a child, when you
press your fists against shut eyelids.
The raindrops beat on my face, on my throat and
shoulders. Each  heavy drop stru ck cold, then dissolved into a
tiny warm stream, coursing across my chilled skin. The
sensation was quite distinct, apart from the wrenching agony
that adv anced and retreated, lower down. I tried to focus my
mind on that, to  force my attention from the small, detached
voice in the ce nter of my brain, the one saying, as though
making notes on a clinical record: “Y ou’re having a
hemorrhage, of course. Probably a ruptured placenta, judging
from the amount of blood. Generally fatal. The loss of blood
accounts for the numbness in ha nds and feet, and the darkened
vision. They say that the sense o f hearing is the last to go; that
seems to be true.”
Whether it were the last of my senses to be left to me or
not, hearing I still had. And it was voices I heard, most
agitated, some striving for calmness, all speaking in French.
There was one word I could he ar and understand – my own
name, shouted over and over , but at a distance. “Claire!
Claire!”
“Jamie,” I tried to say , but my  lips were stif f and numb
with cold. Movement of any  kind was beyond me. The
commotion near me was settling to a steadier level; someone
had arri ved who was at least willing to act as though they
knew what to do.
Perhaps they did. The soaked wad of my skirt was lifted
gently from between my thighs, and a thick pad of cloth thrust
firmly in to plac e instead. Helpful hands turned me onto my
left side, and drew my knees up toward my chest.“T ake her to the Hôpital,” sug gested one voice near my
ear .
“She won’ t live that long,” said another , pessimistically .
“Might as well wait a few min utes, then send for the meat
wagon.”
“No,” insisted another . “The bleeding is slowing; she may
live. Besides, I know her; I’v e seen her at L ’Hôpital des
Anges. T ake her to Mother Hildegarde.”
I s umm oned all the strength I had left, and managed to
whisper , “Moth er .” Then I gave up the struggle, and let the
darkness take me.2 5  R A Y M O N D  T H E  H E R E T I C
T he high, vaulted ceiling over me was supported by
ogives, those fourteenth-centu ry architectural features in
which four ribs rise from the tops of pillars, to join in double
crossing arches.
My bed was set  under one of these, gauze curtains drawn
around me for p rivacy . The central point of the ogive was not
directly above me, though; my bed had been placed a few feet
of f-center . This bothered me whenever I glanced upward; I
kept wan ting to move the bed by  force of will, as though being
centered beneat h the roof would help to center me within
myself.
If I had a center any longer . My body felt bruised and
tender , a s thoug h I had been beaten. My joints ached and felt
loose, like teeth undermined by scurvy . Several thick blankets
covered me, but they could do no more than trap heat, and I
had none  to save. The chill of th e rainy dawn had settled in my
bones.
All these physical symptoms I noted objectively , as though
they belonged to someone else;  otherwise I felt nothing. The
small, cold, logical center of my brain was still there, but the
envelope of feeling through which its utterances were usually
filtered was gone; dead, or paralyzed, or simply no longer
there. I neither knew nor cared . I had been in L ’Hôpital des
Anges for five days.
Mother Hildega rde’ s long fingers probed in relentless
gentleness throu gh the cotton of the bedgown I wore, probing
the d epths of my belly , seeking the hard edges of a contracting
uterus. T he flesh was soft as ripe fruit, though, and tender
beneath her fingers. I winced as her fingers sank deep, and she
frowned, muttering something under her breath that might
have been a prayer .
I caught a name in the murmurings, and asked, “Raymond?
Y ou kno w Master Raymond?” I could think of few less likelypairings than this redoubtable nun and the little gnome of the
cavern of skulls.
Mother Hildegarde’ s thick brows shot up, astonished.
“Master Raymo nd, you say? That heretical charlatan? Que
Dieu nous en gar de! ” May God protect us.
“Oh. I thought I heard you say ‘Raymond.’ ”
“Ah.” T he finge rs had returned to their work, probing the
crease of my groin in search of the lumps of enlar ged lymph
nodes th at would signal infection. They were there, I knew; I
had felt them my self, moving my hands in restless misery over
my emp ty body .  I could feel the fever , an ache and a chill deep
in my bones, th at would burst i nto flame when it reached the
surface of my skin.
“I was invoking the aid of St. Raymond Nonnatus,”
Mother Hildegarde explained, wringing out a cloth in cold
water . “He is a n aid most invaluable in the assistance of
expectant mothers.”
“Of which I am no longer one.” I noticed remotely the
brief stab of pain  that creased her brows; it disappeared almost
at on ce as she busied herself in mopping my brow , smoothing
the c old water briskly over the rounds of my cheeks and down
into the hot, damp creases of my neck.
I s hivere d suddenly at the touch of the cold water , and she
stopped at once, laying a considering hand on my forehead.
“St. Raymond is not one to be  picky ,” she said, absently
reproving. “I myself take help w here it can be found; a course
I would recommend to you.”
“Mmm.” I shut my eyes, retreating into the haven of gray
fog. No w there seemed to be faint lights in the fog, brief
cracklings like the scatter of sheet lightning on a summer
horizon.
I heard  the clicking of jet rosary beads as Mother
Hildegarde straightened up, and the soft voice of one of the
sisters in  the doorway , summoning her to another in the day’ s
string of emer gencies. She had almost reached the door when athought struck her . She turned with a swish of heavy skirts,
pointing at the foot of my bed with an authoritative finger .
“Bouton!” she said. “Au pied, r este!”
The dog, as unh esitating as his mistress, whirled smartly in
mid-step and leaped to the foot o f the bed. Once there, he took
a m omen t to knead the bedclothes with his paws and turn three
times widdershi ns, as though taking the curse of f his resting
place, before lying down at my feet, resting his nose on his
paws with a deep sigh.
Satisfied, Mother Hildegarde murmured, “Que Dieu vous
bénisse, mon enfant,”  in farewell, and disappeared.
Through the gathering fog and the icy numbness that
wrapped me, I dimly appreciated her gesture. W ith no child to
lay in my arms, she had given me her own best substitute.
The shaggy weight on my feet was in fact a small bodily
comfort. Bouton  lay still as the dogs beneath the feet of the
kings carved on the lids of their tombs at St. Denis, his warmth
denying the marble chill of my feet, his presence an
improvement on either solitude or the company of humans, as
he r equired nothing of me. Noth ing was precisely what I felt,
and all I had to give.
Bouton emitted a small, popping dog-fart and settled into
sleep. I drew the covers over my nose and tried to do likewise.
I slept, eventually . And I dreamed. Fever dreams of
weariness and desolation, of  an impossible task done
endlessly . Unceasing painful ef fort, carried out in a stony ,
barren place. Of thick gray fog, through which loss pursued
me like a demon in the mist.
I wo ke, quite suddenly , to find that Bouton was gone, but I
was not alone.
Raymond’ s hairline was completely level, a flat line drawn
across the wide brow as though with a rule. He wore his thick,
graying hair swept back and hanging straight to the shoulder ,
so t he massive forehead protruded like a block of stone,
completely overshadowing the r est of his face. It hovered overme now , looking to my fevered eyes like the slab of a
tombstone.
The line s and furrows moved s lightly as he spoke to the
sisters, and I thought they seemed like letters, written just
below the surface of the stone, trying to burrow their way to
the surface so that the name of the dead could be read. I was
convinced that in another moment, my name would be legible
on that white slab, and at that moment, I would truly die. I
arched my back and screamed.
“Now , s ee there ! She doesn’ t wa nt you, you disgusting old
creature – you’re disturbing her rest. Come away at once!”
Mother Hildegarde clutched Raymond imperatively by the
arm, tug ging him away from the bed. He resisted, standing
rooted like a stone gnome in a lawn, but Sister Celeste added
her not inconsiderable ef forts to Mother Hildegarde’ s, and they
lifted him clean of f his feet and bore him away between them,
the clog  dropping from one frantically kicking foot as they
went.
The clog  lay where it had fallen , on its side, square in the
center o f a scrubbed flagstone. W ith the intense fixation of
fever , I was un able to take m y eyes of f it. I traced the
impossibly smooth curve of the worn edge over and over , each
time pulling back my gaze from  the impenetrable darkness of
the i nside. If I let myself enter that blackness, my soul would
be s ucked out into chaos. As my eyes rested on it, I could hear
again the sounds of the time passage through the circle of
stones, and I flu ng out my arms, clutching frantically at the
wadded bedding, seeking some anchorage against confusion.
Suddenly an arm shot through the draperies, and a work-
reddened hand snatched up the shoe and disappeared.
Deprived of focus, my heat-addled mind spun round the
grooves of the fl ags for a time, then, soothed by the geometric
regularity , turned inward and wobbled into sleep like a dying
top.
There was no stillness in my  dreams, though, and I
stumbled wearily through mazes of repeating figures, endless
loopings and whorls. It was w ith a sense of profound relief
that I saw at last the irregularities of a human face.And an irregula r face it was, to be sure, screwed up as it
was in a ferocious frown, lips pu rsed in adjuration. It was only
as I felt the pres sure of the hand  over my mouth that I realized
I was no longer asleep.
The long, lipless mouth of the gar goyle hovered next to my
ear .
“Be still, ma chèr e ! If they find me here again, I’m done
for!” Th e lar ge, dark eyes dart ed from side to side, keeping
watch for any movement of the drapes.
I n odde d slowly , and he releas ed my mouth, his fingers
leaving a faint whif f of ammoni um and sulfur behind. He had
somewhere foun d – or stolen, I thought dimly – a ragged gray
friar ’ s g own to cover the grimy velvet of his apothecary’ s
robe, an d the depths of the hood concealed both the telltale
silver hair and that monstrous forehead.
The feve red del usions receded slightly , displaced by what
remnants of curiosity remained to me. I was too weak to say
more th an “What…” when he placed a finger once more
across my lips, and threw back the sheet covering me.
I watche d in some bemusement as he rapidly unknotted the
strings of my shift and opened the garment to the waist. His
movements were swift and businesslike, completely lacking in
lechery . Not that I could imagin e anyone capable of trying to
ravish a fever -wracked carcas s like mine, particularly not
within hearing of Mother Hildegarde. But still…
I watched with remote fascination as he placed his cupped
hands on  my breasts. They were  broad and almost square, the
fingers all of a length, with unusually long and supple thumbs
that curved around my brea sts with amazing delicacy .
W atching them,  I had an unusually vivid memory of Marian
Jenkinson, a girl with whom  I had trained at Pembroke
Hospital, telling  the rapt inmates of the nurses’ quarters that
the s ize and shap e of a man’ s thumbs were a sure indication of
the quality of his more intimate appendage.
“And it’ s true, I swear it,” Mari an would declare, shaking
back her blond hair dramatically . But when pressed for
examples, she would only giggle and dimple, rolling her eyestoward Lieutena nt Hanley , who strongly resembled a gorilla,
opposable – and sizable – thumbs notwithstanding.
The lar g e thumb s were pressing gently but firmly into my
flesh, and I cou ld feel my swollen nipples rising against the
hard palms, cold by comparison with my own heated skin.
“Jamie,” I said, and a shiver passed over me.
“Hush, madonna,” said Raymond. His voice was low , kind
but somehow abstracted, as though he were paying no
attention to me, in spite of what he was doing.
The shiver came back; it was as though the heat passed
from m e to him, but his hands did not warm. His fingers
stayed c ool, and I chilled and shook as the fever ebbed and
flowed, draining from my bones.
The afternoon light was dim thro ugh the thick gauze of the
drapes a round my bed, and Raym ond’ s hands were dark on the
white fl esh of my breasts. The shadows between the thick,
grimy fi ngers were not black, though. They were… blue, I
thought.
I closed my ey es, looking at the particolored swirl of
patterns that immediately appeared behind my lids. When I
opened them again, it was as t hough something of the color
remained behind, coating Raymond’ s hands.
As the fever ebbed, leaving my mind clearer , I blinked,
trying to raise m y head for a better look. Raymond pressed
slightly harder , ur ging me to lie back, and I let my head fall on
the pillow , peering slantwise over my chest.
I w asn’ t imagining it after all – or was I? While
Raymond’ s hands weren’ t mov ing themselves, a faint flicker
of colored light seemed to move over them, shedding a glow
of rose and a pallor of blue across my own white skin.
My breasts were warming now , but warming with the
natural h eat of health, not the gn awing burn of fever . The draft
from the open archway outsid e found a way through the
drapes a nd lifted the damp hair at my temples, but I wasn’ t
chilled now .Raymond’ s head  was bent, face hidden by the cowl of his
borrowed robe. After what seemed a long time, he moved his
hands from my breasts, very s lowly over my arms, pausing
and squeezing gently at the j oints of shoulder and elbow ,
wrists and fingers. The sorenes s eased, and I thought I could
see brief ly a faint blue line within my upper arm, the glowing
ghost of the bone.
Always touching, never hurrying, he brought his hands
back over the s hallow curve of my collarbone and down the
meridian of my body , splaying his palms across my ribs.
The odd est thin g about all this  was that I was not at all
astonished. It seemed an infinitely natural thing, and my
tortured body relaxed gratefull y into the hard mold of his
hands, melting and reforming lik e molded wax. Only the lines
of my skeleton held firm.
An odd feeling of warmth now emanated from those
broad, square, workman’ s hands. They moved with
painstaking slowness over my body , and I could feel  the tiny
deaths of the bacteria that inhabited my blood, small
explosions as each scintilla of infection disappeared. I could
feel each  interio r or gan, complete and three-dimensional, and
see it as well, as though it sat on a table before me. There the
hollow-walled stomach, here the lobed solidness of my liver ,
and each convolution and twist  of intestine, turned in and on
and aro und itself, neatly packed in the shining web of its
mesentery mem brane. The warmth glowed and spread within
each or gan, illuminating it like  a small sun within me, then
died and moved on.
Raymond paused, hands pressed side by side on my
swollen belly . I thought he frowned, but it was hard to tell. The
cowled head turned, listening, but the usual noises of the
hospital continued in the distance, with no warning heeltaps
coming our way .
I gasped and moved involuntarily , as one hand moved
lower , cupped briefly between my legs. An increase in
pressure from the other hand w arned me to be silent, and the
blunt fingers eased their way inside me.I clo sed my eyes  and waited, feeling my inner walls adjust
to th is odd intru sion, the inflammation subsiding bit by bit as
he probed gently deeper .
Now he touched the center of my loss, and a spasm of pain
contracted the heavy walls of my inflamed uterus. I breathed a
small moan, then clamped my lips as he shook his head.
The other hand s lid down to rest comfortingly on my belly
as the groping fi ngers of the other touched my womb. He was
still then, holding the source of my pain between his two
hands as though it were a sphere of crystal, heavy and fragile.
“Now ,” he said softly . “Call hi m. Call the red man. Call
him.”
The pre ssure of  the fingers wi thin and the palm without
grew ha rder , and I pressed m y legs against the the bed,
fighting it. But there was no str ength left in me to resist, and
the inexorable pressure went on, cracking the crystal sphere,
freeing the chaos within.
My mind filled with images, wo rse than the misery of the
fever -dreams, because more real. Grief and loss and fear
racked m e, and the dusty scent of death and white chalk filled
my nost rils. Casting about in th e random patterns of my mind
for h elp, I heard  the voice still muttering, patiently but firmly ,
“Call him,” and I sought my anchor .
“Jamie! JAMIE!”
A bo lt o f heat shot through my belly , from one hand to the
other , li ke an arrow through th e center of the basin of my
bones. T he pressing grip relaxed, slid free, and the lightness of
harmony filled me.
The bedframe quivered as he du cked beneath it, barely in
time.
“Milady! Are you all right?” Sister Angelique shoved
through the drapes, round face c reased with worry beneath her
wimple. The concern in her eyes was underlaid with
resignation; the sisters knew I w ould die soon – if this looked
to be my last struggle, she was prepared to summon the priest.Her small, hard hand rested briefly against my cheek,
moved quickly to my brow , then back. The sheet still lay
crumpled around my thighs, and my gown lay open. Her hands
slid inside it, into my armpits, where they remained for a
moment before withdrawing.
“God be praised!” she cried, eyes moistening. “The fever
is gone! ” She bent close, peering in sudden alarm, to be sure
that the disappearance of the fever was not due to the fact that
I was dead. I smiled at her weakly .
“I’m all right,” I said. “T ell Mother .”
She nod ded eagerly , and pausing only long enough to draw
the sheet modestly over me, she hurried from the room. The
drapes had hardly swung closed behind her when Raymond
emer ged from under the bed.
“I must go,” he said. He laid a hand upon my head. “Be
well, madonna.”
W eak as  I was, I rose up, graspi ng his arm. I slid my hand
up t he length of for ge-tough mu scle, seeking, but not finding.
The smo othness of his skin was unblemished, clear to the crest
of the shoulder . He stared down at me in astonishment.
“What are you doing, madonna?”
“Nothing.” I sank back, disappointed. I was too weak and
too light-headed to be careful of my words.
“I wanted to see whether you had a vaccination scar .”
“V accination?” Skilled as I was at reading faces by now , I
would have seen the slightest twitch of comprehension, no
matter how swiftly it was concealed. But there was none.
“Why do you ca ll me madonna still?” I asked. My hands
rested on the slig ht concavity of my stomach, gently as though
not to disturb the shattering emptiness. “I’ve lost my child.”
He looked mildly surprised.
“Ah. I did not call you madonna because you were with
child, my lady .”“Why , th en?” I didn’ t really exp ect him to answer , but he
did. T ire d and drained as we bo th were, it was as though we
were suspended  together in a place where neither time nor
consequence existed; there was room for nothing but truth
between us.
He sighed.
“Everyone has a color about th em,” he said simply . “All
around t hem, like a cloud. Y ou rs is blue, madonna. Like the
V ir gin’ s cloak. Like my own.”
The gauze curtain fluttered briefly and he was gone.2 6  F O N T A I N E B L E A U
F or se veral days, I slept. Whether  this was a necessary part
of ph ysical recovery , or a stubborn retreat from waking reality ,
I do  not know , but I woke only reluctantly to take a little food,
falling a t once back into a stupor of oblivion, as though the
small, w arm weight of broth in  my stomach were an anchor
that pull ed me after it, down through the murky fathoms of
sleep.
A fe w days late r I woke to the sound of insistent voices
near my ear , and the touch of hands lifting me from the bed.
The arm s that held me were strong and masculine, and for a
moment, I felt afloat in joy .  Then I woke all the way ,
struggling feebly against a wave of tobacco and cheap wine, to
find myself in the grasp of H ugo, Louise de La T our ’ s
enormous footman.
“Put me down!” I said, batting at him weakly . He looked
startled at this s udden resurrection from the dead, and nearly
dropped me, but a high, commanding voice stopped both of us.
“Claire, my dear friend! Do not be afraid, ma chèr e , it’ s all
right. I am taking you to Fontainebleau. The air , and good food
– it’ s what you need. And rest, you need rest…”
I bli nked against the light like a newborn lamb. Louise’ s
face, round, pink, and anxious, floated nearby like a cherub on
a clo ud. Mother Hildegarde stoo d behind her , tall and stern as
the ange l at the gates of Eden, t he heavenly illusion enhanced
by th e fa ct that they were both s tanding in front of the stained-
glass window in the vestibule of the Hôpital.
“Y es,” s he said,  her deep voice making the simplest word
more emphatic than all Louise’ s  twittering. “It will be good for
you. Au r evoir , my dear .”
And wit h that, I was borne down the steps of the Hôpital
and stuf fed willy-nilly into Louise’ s coach, with neither
strength nor will to protest.The bumping of the coach over  potholes and ruts kept me
awake on the journey to Fontainebleau. That, and Louise’ s
constant conversation, aimed at reassurance. At first I made
some da zed attempt to respond, but soon realized that she
required no answers, and in fact, talked more easily without
them.
After da ys in the cool gray stone  vault of the Hôpital, I felt
like a freshly unwrapped mumm y , and shrank from the assault
of so  mu ch brig htness and color . I found it easier to deal with
if I drew back a  bit, and let it all wash past me without trying
to distinguish its elements.
This strategy worked until we reached a small wood just
outside Fontaine bleau. The trunks of the oaks were dark and
thick, with low , spreading canopies that shadowed the ground
beneath with shifting light, so th at the whole wood seemed to
be movi ng slightly in the wind . I was vaguely admiring the
ef fect, w hen I noticed that some of what I had assumed to be
tree trunks wer e  in fact moving, turning very slowly to and fro.
“Louise!” My exclamation and my grip on her arm stopped
her chatter in mid-word.
She lung ed heav ily across me to  see what I was looking at,
then flo pped back to her side of the carriage and thrust her
head out of the window , shouting at the coachman.
W e cam e to a slithering, dusty halt just opposite the wood.
There were three of them, two  men and a woman. Louise’ s
high, agitated voice went on, expostulating and questioning,
punctuated by the coachman’ s attempts to explain or
apologize, but I paid no attention.
In spite of their turning and the small fluttering of their
clothing, they were very still, more inert than the trees that
held them. The faces were black with suf focation; Monsieur
Forez wouldn’ t have approved at all, I thought, through the
haze of shock. An amateur execution, but ef fective, for all that.
The wind shifted, and a faint, gassy stink blew over us.
Louise s hrieked and pounded on the window frame in a
frenzy of indignation, and the c arriage started with a jerk that
rocked her back in the seat.“Mer de!”  she said, rapidly fanning her flushed face. “The
idiocy of that fool, stopping like that right there! What
recklessness! Th e shock of it is bad for the baby , I am sure,
and you, my po or dear… oh, dear , my poor Claire! I’m so
sorry , I didn’ t mean to remind you… how can you for give me,
I’m so tactless…”
Luckily her agitation at possibly having upset me made her
for get h er own upset at sight o f the bodies, but it was very
wearying, trying  to stem her apologies. At last, in desperation,
I changed the subject back to the hanged ones.
“Who?” The distraction wo rked; she blinked, and
remembering the shock to her système , p ulled out a b ottle of
ammoniac spirit s and took a hearty snif f that made her sneeze
in reflex.
“Hugue… choo! Huguenots,” she got out, snorting and
wheezing. “Protestant heretics. That’ s what the coachman
says.”
“They hang them? Still?” Somehow , I had thought such
religious persecution a relic of earlier times.
“W ell, not just for being Protestants usually , though that’ s
enough,” Louise said, snif fing. She dabbed her nose delicately
with an  embro idered handker chief, examined the results
critically , then reapplied the clot h to her nose and blew it with
a satisfying honk.
“Ah, that’ s better .” She tucked the handkerchief back in
her pock et and leaned back with a sigh. “Now I am restored.
What a shock! If they have to hang them, that’ s all well, but
must the y do so by a public tho roughfare, where ladies must
be e xposed to such disgustingness? Did you smell  them?
Pheew! This is the Comte Medard’ s land; I’ll send him a very
nasty letter about it, see if I don’ t.”
“But why did they hang these people?” I asked,
interrupting in the brutal manner that was the only possible
way of actually conversing with Louise.
“Oh, witchcraft,  most likely . There was a woman, you saw .
Usually it’ s witchcraft when the women are involved. If it’ sonly me n, most  often it’ s just preaching sedition and heresy ,
but the women d on’ t preach. Did you see the ugly dark clothes
she had on? Horrible! So depressing only to wear dark colors
all the time; wh at kind of relig ion would make its followers
wear su ch plain  clothes all the  time? Obviously the Devil’ s
work, anyone can see that. The y are afraid of women, that’ s
what it is, so they…”
I c losed  my eyes and leaned b ack in the seat. I hoped it
wasn’ t very far to Louise’ s country house.
 
In a ddition to th e monkey , from whom she would not be
parted, Louise’ s country house contained a number of other
decorations of dubious taste. In Paris, her husband’ s taste and
her fath er ’ s must be consulted, and the rooms of the house
there were consequently done ri chly , but in subdued tones. But
Jules seldom came to the countr y house, being too busy in the
city , and so Louise’ s taste was allowed free rein.
“This is  my newest toy; is it not lovely?” she cooed,
running her hand lovingly over the carved dark wood of a tiny
house that sprouted incongruously from the wall next to a gilt-
bronze sconce in the shape of Eurydice.
“That looks like a cuckoo clock,” I said disbelievingly .
“Y ou ha ve seen one before? I didn’ t think there were any
to be found any where in Paris!” Louise pouted slightly at the
thought that her toy might not be  unique, but brightened as she
twisted the hands of the clock to the next hour . She stood back,
beaming proudly as the tiny clockwork bird stuck its head out
and emitted several shrill Cuckoo! s in succession.
“Isn’ t it precious?” She touched the bird’ s head briefly as it
disappeared back into its hidey-hole. “Berta, the housekeeper
here, got it for me; her brother brought it all the way from
Switzerland. Wh atever you want to say about the Swiss, they
are clever woodcarvers, no?”
I wanted to say no, but instead merely murmured
something tactfully admiring.Louise’ s grasshopper mind leaped nimbly to a new topic,
possibly triggered by thoughts of Swiss servants.
“Y ou know , Claire,” she said, with a touch of reproof, “you
ought really to come to Mass in the chapel each morning.”
“Why?”
She toss ed her head in the direction of the doorway , where
one of the maids was passing with a tray .
“I don’ t care at all, myself, but the servants – they’re very
superstitious out here in the countryside, you know . And one
of th e footmen from the Paris house was foolish enough to tell
the cook  all about that silly story of your being La Dame
Blanche. I have told them that’ s all nonsense, of course, and
threatened to dismiss anyone I catch spreading such gossip,
but… well, it might help if you came to Mass. Or at least
prayed out loud now and then, so they could hear you.”
Unbeliever that I was, I thought  daily Mass in the house’ s
chapel might be going a bit far , but with vague amusement,
agreed to do what I could to allay the servants’ fears;
consequently , Lo uise and I spent the next hour reading psalms
aloud to  each other , and reciting the Lord’ s Prayer in unison –
loudly . I  had no idea what ef fect this performance might have
on the servants, but it did at least exhaust me suf ficiently that I
went up to my room for a nap , and slept without dreaming
until the next morning.
I often had dif ficulty sleepin g, possibly because my
waking state was little dif feren t from an uneasy doze. I lay
awake at night, gazing at the white-gesso ceiling with its
furbishes of fruit and flowers. It hung above me like a dim
gray shape in the darkness, the personification of the
depression that clouded my mind by day . When I did close my
eyes at night, I  dreamed. I co uldn’ t block the dreams with
grayness; they came in vivid co lors to assault me in the dark.
And so I seldom slept.
 
There was no word from Jamie – or of him. Whether it was
guilt or injury that had kept hi m from coming to me at theHôpital, I didn’ t know . But he ha dn’ t come, nor did he come to
Fontainebleau. By now he likely had left for Orvieto.
Sometimes I found myself wond ering when – or whether –
I would see him  again, and what – if anything – we might say
to each other . But for the most  part, I preferred not to think
about it, letting the days come and go, one by one, avoiding
thoughts of both the future and the past by living only in the
present.
Deprived of his idol, Fer gus dr ooped. Again and again, I
saw him from my window , sitting disconsolately beneath a
hawthorn bush in the garden, h ugging his knees and looking
down th e road toward Paris. At last, I stirred myself to go out
to him, making  my way heavily downstairs and down the
garden path.
“Can’ t y ou find anything to do, Fer gus?” I asked him.
“Surely one of the stable-lads could use a hand, or something.”
“Y es, milady ,” he agreed doubtfully . He scratched
absentmindedly at his buttocks. I observed this behavior with
deep suspicion.
“Fer gus,” I said, folding my arm s, “have you got lice?” He
snatched his hand back as though burned.
“Oh, no, milady!”
I re ached down and pulled him to his feet, snif fed
delicately in his general vicinity , and put a finger inside his
collar , far enough to reveal the grimy ring around his neck.
“Bath,” I said succinctly .
“No!” He jerked away , but I grabbed him by the shoulder . I
was surprised by his vehemence; while no fonder of bathing
than the normal Parisian – w ho regarded the prospect of
immersion with  a repugnance akin to horror – still, I could
scarcely reconcile the usually obliging child I knew with the
little fury that suddenly squirmed and twisted under my hand.
There was a ri pping noise, and he was free, bounding
through the black-berry bushe s like a rabbit pursued by a
weasel. There was a rustle of leaves and a scrabble of stones,and he was g one, over the wall and headed for the
outbuildings at the back of the estate.
I m ade my way  through the maze of rickety outbuildings
behind the château, cursing und er my breath as I skirted mud
puddles and heaps of filth. Suddenly , there was a high-pitched
whining buzz and a cloud of flie s rose from the pile a few feet
ahead of me, bodies sparking blue in the sunlight.
I wasn’ t close enough to have disturbed them; there must
have been some movement from the darkened doorway beside
the dungheap.
“Aha!” I said out loud. “Got you, you filthy little son of a
whatnot! Come out of there this instant!”
No one emer ged, but there was  an audible stir inside the
shed, an d I thought I caught a glimpse of white in the
shadowed interior . Holding my nose, I stepped over the
manure pile into the shed.
There were two gasps of horror; mine, at beholding
something that looked like the W ild Man of Borneo flattened
against the back wall, and his, at beholding me.
The sunlight trickled through the cracks between the
boards, giving enough light for us to see each other clearly ,
once my  eyes had adapted to the relative dark. He wasn’ t, after
all, quite  as awful-looking as I’d thought at first, but he wasn’ t
a lot better , either . His beard w as as filthy and matted as his
hair , flowing past his shoulders onto a shirt ragged as any
beggar ’ s. He was barefoot, and if the term sans-culottes  wasn’ t
yet in common use, it wasn’ t for lack of trying on his part.
I wa sn’ t afraid o f him, because he was so obviously afraid
of me . He was pressing himself aga inst the wall as though
trying to get through it by osmosis.
“It’ s all right,” I said soothingly . “I won’ t hurt you.”
Instead of being soothed, he drew himself abruptly upright,
reached into the bosom of his shirt and pulled out a wooden
crucifix on a leather thong. He held this out toward me and
started praying, in a voice shaking with terror .“Oh, bo ther ,” I said crossly . “N ot another one!” I took a
deep breath. “Pater -Noster -qui-es-in-coeliset-in-terra…”  His
eyes bugged out, and he kept ho lding the crucifix, but at least
he stopped his own praying in response to this performance.
“…Amen!” I concluded with a gasp. I held up both hands
and wag gled them in front of his face. “See? Not a word
backward, not a single quotidianus da nobis hodie  out of
place, right? Didn’ t even have my fingers crossed. So I can’ t
be a witch, can I?”
The man slowly lowered his cr ucifix and stood gaping at
me. “A witch?” he said. He lo oked as though he thought I
were crazy , which I felt was a bit thick under the
circumstances.
“Y ou didn’ t think I was a witch?” I said, beginning to feel
a trifle foolish.
Something that looked like a smile twitched into existence
and out again among the tangles of his beard.
“No, Madame,” he said. “I am accustomed to people
saying such things of me .”
“Y ou are ?” I eyed him closely . Besides the rags and filth,
the man was obv iously starving; the wrists that stuck out of his
shirt were scrawny as a child’ s.  At the same time, his French
was graceful and educated, if oddly accented.
“If you’r e a witch,” I said, “you aren’ t very successful at it.
Who the hell are you?”
At this, the frigh t came back into his eyes again. He looked
from side to sid e, seeking escape, but the shed was solidly
built, if old, with  no entrance oth er than the one in which I was
standing. At last, calling on som e hidden reserve of courage,
he drew  himself up to his full height – some three inches
below my own – and with great dignity , said “I am the
Reverend W alter Laurent, of Geneva.”
“Y ou’re a priest ?” I was  thunde rstruck. I couldn’ t imagine
what might have brought a priest – Swiss or not – to this state.
Father Laurent looked nearly as horror -struck as I.“A priest?” he echoed. “A papist? Never!”
Suddenly the truth struck me.
“A Huguenot!” I said. “That’ s  it – you’re a Protestant,
aren’ t you?” I r emembered the bodies I had seen hanging in
the forest. That, I thought, explained rather a lot.
His lips quivere d, but he presse d them tightly together for
a moment before opening them to reply .
“Y es, Madame. I am a pastor; I h ave been preaching in this
district for a month.” He licke d his lips briefly , eyeing me.
“Y our pardon, Madame – I think you are not French?”
“I’m English,” I said, and he relaxed suddenly , as though
someone had taken all the stif fening out of his spine.
“Great Father in Heaven,” he said, prayerfully . “Y ou are
then a Protestant also?”
“No, I’m  a Catholic,” I answ ered. “But I’m not at all
vicious about it,” I added hast ily , seeing the look of alarm
spring back into his light-brown eyes. “Don’ t worry , I won’ t
tell anyone you’re here. I suppose you came to try to steal a
little food?” I asked sympathetically .
“T o steal is a sin!” he said, horrified. “No, Madame.
But…” He clamped his lips shut, but his glance in the
direction of the château gave him away .
“So one of the servants brings you food,” I said. “So you
let them do the stealing for you. But then I suppose you can
absolve them from the sin, so it all works out. Rather thin
moral ice you’re on, if you ask  me,” I said reprovingly , “but
then it isn’ t any of my business, I suppose.”
A light of hope shone in his eyes. “Y ou mean – you will
not have me arrested, Madame?”
“No, of course not. I’ve a sort of fellow-feeling for
fugitives from the law , having co me rather close to being burnt
at the stake once myself.” I didn’ t know quite why I was being
so chatty; the relief of meeting someone who seemed
intelligent, I supposed. Louise was sweet, devoted and kind,
and had  precisely as much brain as the cuckoo clock in herdrawing room. Thinking of the Swiss clock, I suddenly
realized who Pastor Laurent’ s secret parishioners must be.
“Look,” I said, “if you want to stay here, I’ll go up to the
château and tell Berta or Maurice that you’re here.”
The poor man was nothing b ut skin, bones, and eyes.
Everything he thought was reflected in those lar ge, gentle
brown o rbs. Rig ht now , he was  plainly thinking that whoever
had tried to burn me at the stake had been on the right track.
“I h ave heard,” he began slowly , reaching for a fresh grip
on his crucifix, “of an Englishwoman whom the Parisians call
‘ La Dame Blanche.’ An associate of Raymond the Heretic.”
I sighed . “That’ s me. Though I’m not an associate of
Master Raymond’ s, I don’ t think. He’ s just a friend.” Seeing
him squint doubtfully at me, I inhaled again. “Pater Noster…”
“No, no,  Madame, please.” T o my surprise, he had lowered
the crucifix, and was smiling.
“I also am an acquaintance of Master Raymond’ s, whom I
knew in Geneva. There he w as a reputable physician and
herbalist. Now ,  alas, I fear that he has turned to darker
pursuits, though of course nothing was proved.”
“Proved? About what? And what’ s all this about Raymond
the Heretic?”
“Y ou di d not know?” Thin brows lifted over the brown
eyes. “Ah. Then you are not associated with Master
Raymond’ s… activities.” He relaxed noticeably .
“Activity” seem ed like a poor description for the way in
which Raymond had healed me, so I shook my head.
“No, bu t I wish you’d tell me. Oh, but I shouldn’ t be
standing here talking; I should go and send Berta with food.”
He waved a hand, with some dignity .
“It is of no ur g ency , Madame. The appetites of the body
are of no impor tance when weighed against the appetites of
the soul. And Catholic or not, you have been kind to me. If
you are not now associated with Master Raymond’ s occult
activities, then it is right that you should be warned in time.”And ignoring the dirt and the splintered boards of the floor ,
he folde d his legs and sat down  against the wall of the shed,
gracefully motioning me also to sit. Intrigued, I collapsed
opposite him, tucking up the folds of my skirt to keep them
from dragging in the manure.
“Have you heard of a man named du Carrefours,
Madame?” the Pastor said. “No? W ell, his name is well known
in Paris,  I assure you, but you would do well not to speak it.
This man was the or ganizer and the leader of a ring of
unspeakable vice and depravity , in association with the most
debased occult practices. I cannot bring myself to mention to
you some of the ceremonies t hat were performed in secret
among the nobility . And they call me  a witch!” he muttered,
almost under his breath.
He raised one bony forefinger , as though to forestall my
unspoken objection.
“I am aware, Madame, of the sort of gossip that is
commonly spread, without reference to fact – who should
know it better than we? But the activities of du Carrefours and
his follo wers – these are a matter of common knowledge, for
he was tried for  them, imprisoned, and eventually burned in
the Place de la Bastille as punishment for his crimes.”
I r emembered Raymond’ s light remark, “No one’ s been
burned i n Paris in – oh, twenty years at least,” and shuddered,
in spite of the warm weather .
“And you say that Master Raymond was associated with
this du Carrefours?”
The Pastor frowned, scratchin g absently at his matted
beard. H e likely  had both lice and fleas, I thought, and tried to
move back imperceptibly .
“W ell, it is dif fi cult to say . No one knows where Master
Raymond came from; he speaks several tongues, all without
noticeable accen t. A very myst erious man, Master Raymond,
but – I would swear by the name of my God – a good one.”
I smiled at him. “I think so, too.”He nodd ed, smiling, but then grew serious as he resumed
his story . “Just so, Madame. S till, he corresponded with du
Carrefours from Geneva; I know this, for he told me so
himself – he supplied various substances to order: plants,
elixirs, t he dried  skins of animals. Even a sort of fish – a most
peculiar and frightening thing, w hich he told me was brought
up f rom the da rkest depths of the sea; a horrible thing, all
teeth, w ith almost no flesh – but with the most horrifying
small… lights … like tiny lanterns, beneath its eyes.”
“Really ,” I said, fascinated.
Pastor Laurent shrugged. “All this may be quite innocent,
of co urse, a mer e matter of business. But he disappeared from
Geneva at the sa me time that du  Carrefours came at first under
suspicion – and within weeks of du Carrefours’ s execution, I
had begun to hear stories that Master Raymond had
established his business in Paris , and that he had taken over a
number of du Carre-fours’ s clandestine activities as well.”
“Hmm,” I said. I was thinking of Raymond’ s inner room,
and the cabinet painted with C abbalistic signs. T o keep out
those who believed in them. “Anything else?”
The Reverend Laurent’ s eyebrows arched skyward.
“No, Madame,” he said, rather weakly . “Nothing else, to
my knowledge.”
“W ell, I’m really not given to that sort of thing myself,” I
assured him.
“Oh? G ood,” he said, hesitantly . He sat silently for a
moment, as though making up h is mind about something, then
inclined his head courteously toward me.
“Y ou w ill pardon me if I intrude, Madame? Berta and
Maurice have told me someth ing of your loss. I am sorry ,
Madame.”
“Thank you,” I said, staring at the stripes of sunlight on the
floor .
There w as ano ther silence, then Pastor Laurent said
delicately , “Y our husband, Madame? He is not here with you?”“No,” I  said, still keeping my  eyes on the floor . Flies
lighted momentarily , then zoomed of f, finding no nourishment.
“I don’ t know where he is.”
I d idn’ t mean to  say any more , but something made me
look up at the ragged little preacher .
“He car ed more  for his honor than he did for me or his
child or an inno cent man,” I said bitterly . “I don’ t car e  where
he is; I never want to see him again!”
I stoppe d abruptly , shaken. I h ad not put it into words
before, even to myself. But it was true. There had been a great
trust between us, and Jamie h ad broken it, for the sake of
revenge. I understood; I had seen the power of the thing that
drove him, and knew it couldn’ t be denied forever . But I had
asked fo r a few months’ grace , which he had promised me.
And the n, unabl e to wait, he had broken his word, and by so
doing, sacrificed everything that  lay between him and me. Not
only tha t: He had jeopardized the undertaking in which we
were engaged. I could understand, but I would not for give.
Pastor L aurent laid a hand on  mine. It was grimy with
crusted dirt, and his nails were broken and black-edged, but I
didn’ t draw away . I expected platitudes or a homily , but he
didn’ t speak, either; just held my hand, very gently , for a long
time, as the sun moved across the floor and the flies buzzed
slow and heavy past our heads.
“Y ou had better go,” he said at last, releasing my hand.
“Y ou will be missed.”
“I supp ose so.” I drew a deep breath, feeling at least
steadier , if not b etter . I felt in the pocket of my gown; I had a
small purse with me.
I h esitat ed, not wanting to of fe nd him. After all, by his
lights I was a heretic, even if not a witch.
“W ill you let me give you some money?” I asked carefully .
He thought for a moment, then smiled, the light-brown
eyes glowing.
“On one  condition, Madame. If you will allow me to pray
for you?”“A bar gain,” I said, and gave him the purse.2 7  A N  A U D I E N C E  W I T H  H I S
M A J E S T Y
A s the days passed at Fontainebleau, I gradually regained
my bodily strength, though my mind continued to drift, my
thoughts shying away from any sort of memory or action.
There w ere few  visitors; the co untry house was a refuge,
where the frenetic social life of Paris seemed like one more of
the unea sy dreams that haunted me. I was surprised, then, to
have a maid summon me to the drawing room to meet a
visitor . T he thought crossed my mind that it might be Jamie,
and I felt a sur ge of dizzy sickn ess. But then reason reasserted
itself; Jamie must have left for Spain by now; he could not
possibly return before late August. And when he did?
I cou ldn’ t think of it. I pushed the idea into the back of my
mind, b ut my hands shook as I fastened my laces to go
downstairs.
Much to  my surprise, the “visitor” was Magnus, the butler
from Jared’ s Paris house.
“Y our pardon, Madame,” he said, bowing deeply when he
saw me. “I did not wish to presume… but I could not tell
whether perhaps  the matter was of importance… and with the
master g one…” Lordly in his ow n sphere of influence, the old
man wa s badly discomposed by being so far afield. It took
some tim e to extract a coherent story from him, but at length a
note was produced, folded and sealed, addressed to me.
“The hand is that of Monsieur Murtagh,” Magnus said, in a
tone of half-repugnant awe. That explained his hesitance, I
thought. The servants in the Par is house all regarded Murtagh
with a sort of respectful horror , which had been exaggerated
by reports of the events in the Rue du Faubour g St.-Honoré.
It ha d come to the Paris house two weeks earlier , Magnus
explained. Unsu re what to do with it, the servants had dithered
and conferred, but at length, h e had decided that it must be
brought to my attention.“The m aster being gone,” he repeated. This time I paid
attention to what he was saying.
“Gone?” I said. The note was crumpled and stained from
its journ ey , ligh t as a leaf in m y hand. “Y ou mean Jamie left
befor e  this  note arrive d?” I could make no sense of this; this
must be Murtagh’ s note giving the name and sailing date of the
ship that would bear Charles St uart’ s port from Lisbon. Jamie
could not have left for Spain before receiving the information.
As thoug h to verify this, I broke the seal and unfolded the
note. It was add ressed to me, be cause Jamie had thought there
was less chance of my mail bei ng intercepted than his. From
Lisbon, dated nearly a month before, the letter boasted no
signature, but didn’ t need one.
“The Scalamandr e  sails from Lisbon on the 18th of July”
was all the note said. I was surprised to see what a small, neat
hand Murtagh wrote; somehow I had been expecting a
formless scrawl.
I looked  up from the paper to see Magnus and Louise
exchanging a very odd kind of look.
“What is it?” I said abruptly . “Where’ s Jamie?” I had put
down his absence from L ’Hôpital des Anges after the
miscarriage to his guilt at the knowledge that his reckless
action had killed our child, had  killed Frank, and had nearly
cost me my life . At that point, I didn’ t care; I didn’ t want to
see h im, either . Now I began to think of another , more sinister
explanation for his absence.
It w as Louise who spoke at last, squaring her plump
shoulders to the task.
“He’ s in  the Bastille,” she said, taking a deep breath. “For
dueling.”
My kne es felt watery , and I sat down on the nearest
available surface.
“Why in  hell didn’ t you tell me ?” I wasn’ t sure what I felt
at this news; shock, or horror – fear? or a small sense of
satisfaction?“I – I didn’ t want to upset you, chérie ,” Louise stammered,
taken ab ack at my apparent distr ess. “Y ou were so weak… and
there wa s nothin g you could do,  after all. And you didn’ t ask,”
she pointed out.
“But what… how… how long is the sentence?” I
demanded. Whatever my initial emotion, it was superseded by
a su dden rush o f ur gency . Murtagh’ s note had arrived at the
Rue T remoulins two weeks ago. Jamie should have left upon
its receipt – but he hadn’ t.
Louise was summoning servants and ordering wine and
ammoniac spirit s and burnt feathers, all at once; I must look
rather alarming.
“It is a contravention of the King’ s order ,” she said,
pausing in her flutter . “He will remain in prison at the King’ s
pleasure.”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I muttered, wishing I had
something stronger to say .
“It is fortunate that le petit  James did not kill his
opponent,” Louise hastened to add. “In that case, the penalty
would h ave been  much more… eek!” She twitched her striped
skirts aside just in time to avoid the cascade of chocolate and
biscuits as I kno cked over the newly arrived refreshments. The
tray clanged to the floor unrega rded as I stared down at her .
My han ds were clasped tightly against my ribs, the right
protectively cur led over the gold ring on my left hand. The
thin metal seemed to burn against my skin.
“He isn ’ t dead, then?” I aske d, like one in a dream.
“Captain Randall… he’ s alive?”
“Why , y es,” she said, peering cu riously up at me. “Y ou did
not k now? He is  badly wounded, but it is said that he recovers.
Are you  quite well, Claire? Y ou look…” But the rest of what
she was saying was lost in the roaring that filled my ears.
 
“Y ou did too much, too soon,” Louise said severely ,
pulling back the curtains. “I said so, didn’ t I?”“I imagine so,” I said. I sat up and swung my legs out of
bed, checking cautiously for any residual signs of faintness.
No swim ming of head, ringing of ears, double vision, or
inclination to fall on the floor . V ital signs all right.
“I ne ed my yello w gown, and then would you send for the
carriage, Louise?” I asked.
Louise l ooked a t me in horror . “Y ou are not meaning to go
out? No nsense! Monsieur Clouseau is coming to attend you! I
have sent a messenger to fetch him here at once!”
The news that Monsieur Clou seau, a prominent society
physician, was coming from Par is to examine me, would have
been suf ficient grounds to get me on my feet, had I needed
them.
The eighteenth of July was ten days away . W ith a fast
horse, g ood wea ther , and a disr egard for bodily comfort, the
journey from Paris to Orvieto could be made in six. That left
me f our days to  contrive Jamie’ s release from the Bastille; no
time to fiddle about with Monsieur Clouseau.
“Hmm,” I said, looking round the room thoughtfully .
“W ell, call the maid to dress me, at any rate. I don’ t want
Monsieur Clouseau to find me in my shift.”
Though she still looked suspicio us, this sounded plausible;
most ladies of the Court would rise from a deathbed in order to
make sure they were dressed appropriately for the occasion.
“All right,” she agreed, turning to go. “But you stay in bed
until Y vonne arrives, you hear?”
The yellow gown was one of my best, a loose, graceful
thing made in the modish sacq ue style, with a wide rolled
collar , full sleeves, and a beaded closure down the front.
Powdered, com bed, stockinge d, and perfumed at last, I
surveyed the pair of shoes Y vonne had laid out for me to step
into. I turned my head thi s way and that, frowning
appraisingly .
“Mm, n o,” I said at last. “I don’ t think so. I’ll wear the
others, the ones with the red morocco heels, instead.”The maid looked dubiously at my dress, as though
mentally assessing the ef fect of red morocco with yellow
moiré si lk, but obediently turned  to rummage in the foot of the
huge armoire.
T iptoeing silent ly up behind he r in my stockinged feet, I
shoved her headfirst into the ar moire, and slammed the door
on the heaving, shrieking mass beneath the pile of fallen
dresses within. T urning the key in the door , I dropped it neatly
into my pocket, mentally shakin g hands with myself. Neat job,
Beauchamp, I thought. All this political intrigue is teaching
you things they never dreamt o f in nursing school, no doubt
about it.
“Don’ t worry ,” I told the shaking armoire soothingly .
“Someone will be along to let you out soon, I imagine. And
you can tell La Princesse that you didn’ t let  me go anywhere.”
A despa iring w ail from inside the armoire seemed to be
mentioning Monsieur Clouseau’ s name.
“T ell him to have a look at the monkey ,” I called over my
shoulder , “It’ s got mange.”
 
The success of my encounter with Y vonne buoyed my
mood. Once ensconced in the carriage, rattling back toward
Paris, though, my spirits sank appreciably .
While I was no longer quite so  angry at Jamie, I still did
not wish to see  him. My feelings were in complete turmoil,
and I had no intention of examining them closely; it hurt too
much. Grief was there, and a horrible sense of failure, and
over all, the sense of betrayal; his and mine. He should never
have gone to the  Bois de Boulogne; I should never have gone
after him.
But we both did  as our natures  and our feelings dictated,
and toge ther we  had – perhaps – caused the death of our child.
I h ad no wish to meet my par tner in the crime, still less to
expose my grief to him, to match  my guilt with his. I fled from
anything that reminded me of the dripping morning in the
Bois; certainly I fled from any memory of Jamie, caught as I
had last  seen him, rising from the body of his victim, faceglowing with the vengeance tha t would shortly claim his own
family .
I co uld not think of it even in passing, without a terrible
clenching in my stomach, that brought back the ghost of the
pain of premature labor . I pressed my fists into the blue velvet
of t he carriage seat, raising myself to ease the imagined
pressure on my back.
I t urned to look out the window , hoping to distract myself,
but t he sights we nt blindly by , as my mind returned, unbidden,
to thoug hts of my journey . Whatever my feelings for Jamie,
whether we would ever see eac h other again, what we might
be, or not be, to one another – still the fact remained that he
was in prison. And I rather  thought I knew just what
imprisonment might mean to him, with the memories of
W entworth that he carried; the groping hands that fondled him
in dreams, the stone walls he hammered in his sleep.
More im portantly , there was the matter of Charles and the
ship from Portugal; the loan from Monsieur Duverney , and
Murtagh, about to take ship from  Lisbon for a rendezvous of f
Orvieto. The stakes were too high to allow my own emotions
any play . For the  sake of the Scottish clans, and the Highlands
themselves, for Jamie’ s family and tenants at Lallybroch, for
the thou sands who would die at  Culloden and in its aftermath
– it had to be tried. And to try , J amie would have to be free; it
wasn’ t something I could undertake myself.
No, there was no question. I would have to do whatever I
must to have him released from the Bastille.
And just what could I do?
I watched the beggars scramble and gesture toward the
windows as we entered the Rue du Faubour g St.-Honoré.
When in  doubt, I thought, see k the assistance of a Higher
Authority .
I rapped  on the panel beside the  driver ’ s seat. It slid back
with a grating noise, and the  mustached face of Louise’ s
coachman peered down at me.
“Madame?”“Left,” I said. “T o L ’Hôpital des Anges.”
 
Mother Hildega rde tapped her blunt fingers thoughtfully
on a sheet of music paper , as though drumming out a
troublesome sequence. She sat at the mosaic table in her
private of fice, across from Herr Gerstmann, summoned to join
us in ur gent council.
“W ell, y es,” said Herr Gerstmann doubtfully . “Y es, I
believe I can arrange a private  audience with His Majesty ,
but… yo u are certain that your husband… um…” The music
master seemed to be having unusual trouble in expressing
himself, which made me suspec t that petitioning the King for
Jamie’ s release might be just a trifle more complicated than I
had thought. Mother Hildegard e verified this suspicion with
her own reaction.
“Johannes!” she exclaimed, so agitated as to drop her usual
formal manner of address. “She cannot do that! After all,
Madame Fraser is not one of the  Court ladies – she is a person
of virtue!”
“Er , thank you,” I said polit ely . “If you don’ t mind,
though… what, precisely , would my state of virtue have to do
with my seeing the King to ask for Jamie’ s release?”
The nun and the singing-master exchanged looks in which
horror at my nai veté was mingled with a general reluctance to
remedy it. At last Mother Hildegarde, braver of the two, bit the
bullet.
“If y ou go alone  to ask such a fa vor from the King, he will
expect to lie wit h you,” she said bluntly . After all the carry-on
over tell ing me, I was hardly surprised, but I glanced at Herr
Gerstmann for confirmation, which he gave in the form of a
reluctant nod.
“His Majesty is susceptible to requests from ladies of a
certain personal charm,” he said delicately , taking a sudden
interest in one of the ornaments on the desk.
“But there is a  price to such  requests,” added Mother
Hildegarde, not nearly so delica te. “Most of the courtiers areonly too pleased when their wives find Royal favor; the gain to
them is well worth the sacrifice of their wives’ virtue.” The
wide mouth curled with scorn at  the thought, then straightened
into its usual grimly humorous line.
“But your husband,” she said, “d oes not appear to me to be
the s ort who makes a complaisa nt cuckold.” The heavy arched
brows su pplied the question mark at the end of the sentence,
and I shook my head in response.
“I sh ouldn’ t think so.” In fact, this was one of the grosser
understatements I had ever heard. If “complaisant” was not the
very last word that came to m ind at the thought of Jamie
Fraser , i t was certainly well do wn toward the bottom of the
list. I tried to imagine just what Jamie would think, say , or do,
if he  ever learne d that I had lain with another man, up to and
including the King of France.
The thought made me remember the trust that had existed
between us, almost since the day of our marriage, and a
sudden feeling of desolation swe pt over me. I shut my eyes for
a moment, fighting illness, but the prospect had to be faced.
“W ell,” I said, taking a deep breath, “is there another
way?”
Mother Hildegarde knitted her  brows, frowning at Herr
Gerstmann, as though expecting him to produce the answer .
The little music master shrugged, though, frowning in his turn.
“If there  were a friend of some importance, who might
intercede for your husband with His Majesty?” he asked
tentatively .
“Not likely .” I had examined all such alternatives myself,
in the coach fro m Fontainebleau, and been forced to conclude
that there was no one whom I could reasonably ask to
undertake such an ambassage. Owing to the illegal and
scandalous natu re of the du el – for of course Marie
d’Arbanville had  spread her gos sip all over Paris – none of the
Frenchmen of our acquaintance could very well af ford to take
an intere st in it. Monsieur Duv erney , who had agreed to see
me, had been kind, but discouraging. W ait, had been hisadvice. In a few months, when the scandal has died down a bit,
then His Majesty might be approached. But now…
Likewise the Duke of Sandringham, so bound by the
delicate proprieties of diplomacy that he had dismissed his
private secretary for only the appearance of involvement in
scandal, was in no position to petition Louis for a favor of this
sort.
I stared down at the inlaid tabletop, scarcely seeing the
complex curves of enamel that swept through abstractions of
geometry and color . My forefing er traced the loops and whorls
before me, providing a precarious anchor for my racing
thoughts. If it w as indeed necessary for Jamie to be released
from prison, in order to prev ent the Jacobite invasion of
Scotland, then it seemed that I w ould have to do the releasing,
whatever the method, and whatever its consequences.
At last I looked up, meeting the  music master ’ s eyes. “I’ll
have to,” I said softly . “There’ s no other way .”
There was a moment of silence. Then Herr Gerstmann
glanced at Mother Hildegarde.
“She wi ll stay here,” Mother H ildegarde declared firmly .
“Y ou ma y send to tell her the time of the audience, Johannes,
once you have arranged it.”
She turned to me. “After all, if you are really set upon this
course, my dear friend…” Her lips pressed tightly together ,
then opened to say , “It may be a sin to assist you in
committing immorality . Still, I will do it. I know that your
reasons seem good to you, whatever they may be. And perhaps
the sin will be outweighed by the grace of your friendship.”
“Oh, M other .” I thought I mig ht cry if I said more, so
contented myse lf with merely squeezing the big, work-
roughened hand  that rested on my shoulder . I had a sudden
longing to fling myself into her arms and bury my face against
the comforting black ser ge bo som, but her hand left my
shoulder and went to the long jet rosary that clicked among the
folds of her skirt as she walked.“I will pray for you,” she said, smiling what would have
been a tremulous smile on a face less solidly carved. Her
expression changed suddenly to one of deep consideration.
“Though I do wonder ,” she added meditatively , “exactly who
would be the proper patron saint to invoke in the
circumstances?”
 
Mary Magdalen e was the name that came to mind as I
raised my hands overhead in a simulation of prayer , to allow
the small wicker dress frame t o slip over my shoulders and
settle on to my hips. Or Mata H ari, but I was quite sure she’d
never m ake the Calendar of S aints. I wasn’ t sure about the
Magdalene, for that matter , but a reformed prostitute seemed
the most likely among the heavenly host to be sympathetic to
the venture being now undertaken.
I r eflect ed that the Convent of the Angels had probably
never before seen a robing such  as this. While the postulants
about to  take their final vows were most splendidly arrayed as
brides of Christ, red silk and rice powder probably didn’ t
figure heavily in the ceremonies.
V ery symbolic, I thought, as the  rich scarlet folds slithered
over my upturned face. White for purity , and red for…
whatever this was. Sister Minèrve, a young sister from a
wealthy noble family , had been selected to assist me in my
toilette; with considerable skill and aplomb, she dressed my
hair , tucking in the merest scra p of ostrich feather trimmed
with seed pearls. She combed my brows carefully , darkening
them wi th the small lead comb s, and painted my lips with a
feather dipped in a pot of roug e. The feel of it on my lips
tickled unbearab ly , exaggeratin g my tendency to break into
unhinged giggles. Not hilarity; hysteria.
Sister Minèrve reached for the hand mirror . I stopped her
with a gesture; I  didn’ t want to look myself in the eye. I took a
deep breath, and nodded.
“I’m ready ,” I said. “Send for the coach.”
 I had never been in this part of the palace before. In fact,
after the multiple twists and turnings through the candle-lit
corridors of mirrors, I was no longer sure exactly how many of
me there were, let alone where any of them were going.
The discreet and anonymous Gentleman of the
Bedchamber led  me to a small paneled door in an alcove. He
rapped once, then bowed to m e, whirled, and left without
waiting for an answer . The door swung inward, and I entered.
The King still had his breeches on. The realization slowed
my heartbeat to something like  a tolerable rate, and I ceased
feeling as though I might throw up any minute.
I did n’ t know q uite what I had been expecting, but the
reality was mildly reassuring. He was informally dressed, in
shirt and breeches, with a dressi ng gown of brown silk draped
across his shoulders for warmth. His Majesty smiled, and
ur ged m e to rise with a hand under my arm. His palm was
warm – I had subconsciously expected his touch to be clammy
– and I smiled back, as best I could.
The attempt must not have been altogether successful, for
he p atted my a rm kindly , and said “Don’ t be afraid of me,
chèr e  Madame. I don’ t bite.”
“No,” I said. “Of course not.”
He w as a lot more poised than I  was. W ell, of course he is,
I though t to myself, he does this all the time. I took a deep
breath and tried to relax.
“Y ou wi ll have a little wine, Madame?” he asked. W e were
alone; t here were no servants, but the wine was already
poured, in a pair of goblets that stood on the table, glowing
like rub ies in the candlelight. The chamber was ornate, but
very sm all, and aside from the table and a pair of oval-backed
chairs, held only a luxuriously padded green-velvet chaise
longue. I tried to avoid looking at it as I took my goblet, with a
murmur of thanks.
“Sit, please.” Louis sank down upon one of the chairs,
gesturing to me to take the o ther . “Now please,” he said,
smiling at me, “tell me what it is that I may do for you.”“M-my husban d,” I began, stammering a little from
nervousness. “He’ s in the Bastille.”
“Of course,” the King murmured. “For dueling. I recall.”
He t ook my free  hand in his own, fingers resting lightly on my
pulse. “ What would you have me do, chèr e  Madame? Y ou
know it is a serious of fense; your husband has broken my own
decree.” One finger stroked the underside of my wrist, sending
small tickling sensations up my arm.
“Y -yes, I understand that. But he was… provoked.” I had
an idea. “Y ou know he’ s a Scot; men of that country are” – I
tried to think of  a good synonym  for “berserk” – “most fierce
where questions of their honor are concerned.”
Louis nodded, head bent in apparent absorption over the
hand he held. I could see the fai nt greasy shine to his skin, and
smell his perfume. V iolets. A strong, sweet smell, but not
enough to completely mask his own acrid maleness.
He d rained his wine in two long swallows and discarded
the goblet, the better to clasp my hand in both his own. One
short-nailed fing er traced the li nes of my wedding ring, with
its interlaced links and thistle blossoms.
“Quite s o,” he said, bringing my  hand closer , as though to
examine the ring. “Quite so, Madame. However…”
“I’d be… most grateful, Y our Majesty ,” I interrupted. His
head ros e and I m et his eyes, da rk and quizzical. My heart was
going like a trip-hammer . “Most… grateful.”
He had thin lip s and bad teeth; I could smell his breath,
thick wi th onion  and decay . I tried holding my own breath, but
this could hardly be more than a temporary expedient.
“W ell…” he said slowly , as th ough thinking it over . “I
would myself be inclined toward mercy , Madame…”
I releas ed my breath in a short gasp, and his fingers
tightened on mine in warning. “But you see, there are
complications.”
“There are?” I said faintly .He nodded, eyes still fixed on my face. His fingers
wandered lightly over the back of my hand, tracing the veins.
“The Englishman who was so unfortunate as to have
of fended milord Broch T uarac h,” he said. “He was in the
employ of… a certain man –  an English noble of some
importance.”
Sandringham. My heart lurched at the mention of him,
indirect as it was.
“This n oble is engaged in – shall we say , certain
negotiations which entitle him to consideration?” The thin lips
smiled, emphasizing the imperious prow of the nose above.
“And th is nobleman has interested himself in the matter of the
duel between your husband and the English Captain Randall. I
am afraid that he was most exigent in demanding that your
husband suf fer the full penalty of his indiscretion, Madame.”
Bloody tub of lard, I thought. Of course – since Jamie had
refused the bribe of a pardon, what better way to prevent his
“involving himself” in the Stuarts’ af fairs than to ensure
Jamie’ s staying safely jugged in  the Bastille for the next few
years? Sure, discreet, and inexpensive; a method bound to
appeal to the Duke.
On t he other han d, Louis was still breathing heavily on my
hand, wh ich I took as a sign that  all was not necessarily lost. If
he w asn’ t going to grant my req uest, he could scarcely expect
me t o go to bed with him – or if he did, he was in for a rude
surprise.
I girded my loins for another try .
“And does Y our Majesty take o rders from the English?” I
asked boldly .
Louis’ s eyes flew open with momentary shock. Then he
smiled wryly , seeing what I in tended. Still, I had touched a
nerve; I saw the  small twitch of his shoulders as he resettled
his conviction of power like an invisible mantle.
“No, Madame, I do not,” he said with some dryness. “I do,
however , take account of… various factors.” The heavy lids
drooped over his eyes for a moment, but he still held my hand.“I h ave heard that your husban d interests himself in the
af fairs of my cousin,” he said.
“Y our Majesty is well informed,” I said politely . “But since
that is so, you w ill know that my  husband does not support the
restoration of the Stuarts to the throne of Scotland.” I prayed
that this was what he wanted to hear .
Apparently it was; he smiled, raised my hand to his lips,
and kissed it briefly .
“Ah? I had heard… conflicting stories about your
husband.”
I took a deep breath and resisted the impulse to snatch my
hand back.
“W ell, it’ s a mat ter of business,” I said, trying to sound as
matter -of-fact as  possible. “My husband’ s cousin, Jared Fraser ,
is an  avowed Jacobite; Jamie – my husband – can’ t very well
go abou t letting his real views be made public, when he’ s in
partnership with  Jared.” Seeing the doubt begin to fade from
his face, I hur ried it along. “ Ask Monsieur Duverney ,” I
suggested. “He’ s well acquainted with my husband’ s true
sympathies.”
“I have. ” Louis paused for a long moment, watching his
own fingers, dark and stubby , tr acing delicate circles over the
back of my hand.
“So very  pale,” he murmured. “So fine. I believe I could
see the blood flow beneath your skin.”
He let go of m y hand then an d sat regarding me. I was
extremely good at reading faces, but Louis’ s was quite
impenetrable at the moment. I realized suddenly that he’d been
a king since the age of five; the ability to hide his thoughts was
as much a part of him as his Bourbon nose or the sleepy black
eyes.
This thought brought another in  its wake, with a chill that
struck me deep in the pit of the stomach. He was the King. The
Citizens of Paris would not rise for forty years or more; until
that day , his rule within France was absolute. He could free
Jamie w ith a word – or kill him . He could do with me as heliked; there was no recourse. One nod of his head, and the
cof fers of France could spill the gold that would launch
Charles Stuart, loosing him like a deadly bolt of lightning to
strike through the heart of Scotland.
He was the Ki ng. He would do as he wished. And I
watched his dark eyes, clouded with thought, and waited,
trembling, to see what the Royal pleasure might be.
“T ell me, ma chèr e  Madame,” he said at last, stirring from
his intro spection. “If I were to grant your request, to free your
husband…” he paused, considering.
“Y es?”
“He would have to leave Fran ce,” Louis said, one thick
brow raised in warning. “That  would be a condition of his
release.”
“I unde rstand.” My heart was pounding so hard that it
nearly drowned out his words. J amie leaving France was, after
all, precisely the point. “But he’ s exiled from Scotland…”
“I think that might be arranged.”
I h esitat ed, but there seemed lit tle choice but to agree on
Jamie’ s behalf. “All right.”
“Good.” The King nodded, pleased. Then his eyes returned
to m e, rested on  my face, glided down my neck, my breasts,
my body . “I w ould ask a small service of you in return,
Madame,” he said softly .
I me t his eyes squarely for one second. Then I bowed my
head. “I am at Y our Majesty’ s complete disposal,” I said.
“Ah.” H e rose and threw of f the dressing gown, leaving it
flung carelessly over the back of his armchair . He smiled and
held out  a hand to me. “ T rès bien, ma chèr e . Come with me,
then.”
I clo sed my eyes  briefly , willing my knees to work. Y ou’ve
been ma rried twice, for heaven’ s sake, I thought to myself.
Quit making such a bloody fuss about it.
I r ose to my fe et and took his  hand. T o my surprise, he
didn’ t turn toward the velvet cha ise, but instead led me towardthe door at the far side of the room.
I had one moment of ice-cold clarity as he let go my hand
to open the door .
Damn you, Jamie Fraser , I thought. Damn you to hell!
 
I stood quite still on the threshold, blinking. My
meditations on the protocol of Royal disrobing faded into
sheer astonishment.
The room was quite dark, lit only by numerous tiny oil-
lamps, set in g roups of five i n alcoves in the wall of the
chamber . The room itself was round, and so was the huge table
that stoo d in its center , the dark wood gleaming with pinpoint
reflections. There were people sitting at the table, no more
than hunched dark blurs against the blackness of the room.
There w as a murmur at my entrance, quickly stilled at the
King’ s a ppearance. As my eyes grew more accustomed to the
murk, I realized with a sense of shock that the people seated at
the t able wore hoods; the neares t man turned toward me, and I
caught the faint gleam of eyes through holes in the velvet. It
looked like a convention of hangmen.
Apparently I was the guest of honor . I wondered for a
nervous moment just what might be expected of me. From
Raymond’ s hints, and Mar guerite’ s, I had nightmare visions of
occult c eremonies involving inf ant sacrifice, ceremonial rape,
and general-purpose satanic rites. It is, however , quite rare for
the supe rnatural actually to live up to its billing, and I hoped
this occasion would be no exception.
“W e hav e heard of your great skill, Madame, and your…
reputation.” Lou is smiled, but there was a tinge of caution in
his eyes as he looked at me, as though not quite certain what I
might do. “W e should be most obliged, my dear Madame,
should y ou be willing to give us  the benefits of such skill this
evening.”
I no dded. Most obliged, eh? W e ll, that was all to the good;
I wa nted him ob liged to me. Wh at was he expecting me to do,
though? A servant placed a huge wax candle on the table andlighted it, shedding a pool of mellow light on the polished
wood. T he candle was decorated with symbols like those I had
seen in Master Raymond’ s secret chamber .
“ Regar dez , Madame.” The King’ s hand was under my
elbow , directing  my attention beyond the table. Now that the
candle was lighted, I could se e the two figures who stood
silently among the flickering shadows. I started at the sight,
and the King’ s hand tightened on my arm.
The Comte St. Germain and Master Raymond stood there,
side by  side, separated by a distance of six feet or so.
Raymond gave no sign of acknowledgment, but stood quietly ,
staring of f to one side with the pupil-less black eyes of a frog
in a bottomless well.
The Comte saw me, and his eyes widened in disbelief; then
he s cowled at m e. He was dress ed in his finest, all in white, as
usual; a white stif fened satin coat over cream-colored silk vest
and breeches. A tracery of seed  pearls decorated his cuf fs and
lapels, gleaming  in the candlel ight. Sartorial splendor aside,
the Comte looked rather the w orse for wear , I thought – his
face wa s drawn with strain, a nd the lace of his stock was
wilted, his collar darkened with sweat.
Raymond, conversely , looked calm as a turbot on ice,
standing stolidly with both hands folded into the sleeves of his
usual scruf fy velvet robe, broad, flat face placid and
inscrutable.
“These two men stand accused, Madame,” said Louis, with
a gestu re at Raymond and the Comte. “Of sorcery , of
witchcraft, of the perversion of the legitimate search for
knowledge into an exploration of arcane arts.” His voice was
cold and grim. “Such practices flourished during the reign of
my gran dfather; but we shall not  suf fer such wickedness in our
realm.”
The King flicked his fingers at one of the hooded figures,
who sat with pen and ink befor e a sheaf of papers. “Read the
indictments, if you please,” he said.
The hooded man rose obedientl y to his feet and began to
read fro m one of the papers: char ges of bestiality and foulsacrifice, of the spilling of the blood of innocents, the
profanation of the most holy rite of the Mass by desecration of
the Host, the pe rformance of amatory rites upon the altar of
God – I had a quick flash of just what the healing Raymond
had performed on me at L ’Hôpital des Anges must have
looked like, and felt profound ly grateful that no one had
discovered him.
I heard the n ame “du Carrefours” mentioned, and
swallowed a sudden rising of bile. What had Pastor Laurent
said? Th e sorcerer du Carrefours had been burned in Paris,
only twe nty yea rs before, on ju st such char ges as those I was
hearing: “ – t he summoning of demons and powers of
darkness, the procurement of illness and death for payment” –
I pu t a hand to my stomach, in vivid memory of bitter cascara
– “th e ill-wishing of members o f the Court, the defilement of
vir gins-” I shot a quick look at  the Comte, but his face was
stony , lips pressed tight as he listened.
Raymond stood  quite still, silver hair brushing his
shoulders, as though listening to  something as inconsequential
as the song of a thrush in the bushes. I had seen the Cabbalistic
symbols on his cabinet, but I could hardly reconcile the man I
knew – the compassionate poisoner , the practical apothecary –
with the list of vileness being read.
At la st the indictments ceased. T he hooded man glanced at
the King, and at a signal, sank back into his chair .
“Extensive inquiry has been made,” the King said, turning
to me. “Evidence has been presented, and the testimony of
many witnesses taken. It seems clear” – he turned a cold gaze
on the two accu sed magic – “th at both men have undertaken
investigations into the writings of ancient philosophers, and
have em ployed the art of divina tions, using calculation of the
movements of heavenly bodies. Still…” He shrugged. “This is
not o f it self a crime. I am given to understand” – he glanced at
a heavyset man in a hood, whom I suspected of being the
Bishop of Paris – “that this is n ot necessarily at variance with
the teachings of the Church; ev en the blessed St. Augustine
was known to have made inq uiries into the mysteries of
astrology .”I rather dimly recalled that St. Augustine had indeed
looked into astrology , and had ra ther scornfully dismissed it as
a lo ad of rubb ish. Still, I doubted that Louis had read
Augustine’ s Confessions , and this line of ar gument was
undoubtedly a good one for an accused sorcerer; star -gazing
seemed fairly harmless, by comparison with infant sacrifice
and nameless or gies.
I w as beginning to won der , with considerable
apprehension, just what I was d oing in this assemblage. Had
someone seen Master Raymond  with me in the Hôpital after
all?
“W e have no quarrel with the proper use of knowledge, nor
the s earch for w isdom,” the King went on in measured tones.
“There is much that can be lea rned from the writings of the
ancient philoso phers, if they are approached with proper
caution and humility of spirit. But it is true that while much
good may be found in such writings, so, too, may evil be
discovered, and the pure search  for wisdom be perverted into
the desire for power and wealth – the things of this world.”
He glanced back and forth between the two accused
sorcerers once more, obviously drawing conclusions as to who
might be more i nclined to that  s ort  of perversi on. The Comte
was still  sweating, damp patches showing dark on the white
silk of his coat.
“No, Y o ur Majesty!” he said, shaking back his dark hair
and fixing burning eyes on Ma ster Raymond. “It is true that
there are dark f orces at work in the land – the vileness of
which y ou speak  walks among us! But such wickedness does
not dwell in the breast of your most loyal subject” – he smote
himself on the breast, lest we have missed the point – “no,
Y our Ma jesty! For the perversion of knowledge and the use of
forbidden arts, you must look beyond your own Court.” He
didn’ t accuse Master Raymond directly , but the direction of his
pointed gaze was obvious.
The King was unmoved by this outburst. “Such
abominations flo urished during the reign of my grandfather ,”
he said softly . “ W e have rooted them out wherever they have
been found; destroyed the thre at of such evil where it shallexist in our real m. Sorcerers, witches, those who pervert the
teachings of the Church… Monsieurs, we shall not suf fer such
wickedness to arise again.”
“So.” H e slapped both palms lightly against the table and
straightened himself. Still staring at the Raymond and the
Comte, he held out a hand in my direction.
“W e have brought here a witness,” he declared. “An
infallible judge of truth, of purity of heart.”
I ma de a small, gur gling noise, which made the King turn
to look at me.
“A Whit e Lady ,” he said softly . “ La Dame Blanche cannot
lie; she sees the heart and the soul of a man, and may turn that
truth to good… or to destruction.”
The air of unreality that had  hung over the evening
vanished in a pop. The faint wine-buzz was gone, and I was
suddenly stone-cold sober . I opened my mouth, and then shut
it, realizing that there was precisely nothing I could say .
Horror snaked down my backbone and coiled in my belly
as the King made his dispositions. T wo pentagrams were to be
drawn on the floor , within which the two sorcerers would
stand. Each would then bear wi tness to his own activities and
motives. And the White Lady would judge the truth of what
was said.
“Jesus H. Christ,” I said, under my breath.
“Monsieur le Comte?” The King gestured to the first
pentagram, chal ked on the carpet. Only a king would treat a
genuine Aubusson with that kind of cavalier disregard.
The Comte brushed close to me as he went to take his
place. As he passed me, I caught the faintest whisper: “Be
warned, Madam e. I do not work alone.” He took up his spot
and turned to face me with  an ironic bow , outwardly
composed.
The imp lication was reasonably clear; I condemned him,
and his minions would be round promptly to cut of f my
nipples and burn Jared’ s wareho use. I licked dry lips, cursing
Louis. Why couldn’ t he just have wanted my body?Raymond stepp ed casually into his own chalk-limned
space, a nd nodded cordially in my direction. No hint of
guidance in those round black eyes.
I ha dn’ t the fa intest idea what to do next. The King
motioned to me to stand opp osite him, between the two
pentagrams. The  hooded men rose to stand behind the King; a
blank-faced crowd of menace.
Everything was extremely quiet. Candle smoke hung in a
pall near the gilded ceiling, w isps drifting the languid air
currents. All eyes were train ed on me. Finally , out of
desperation, I turned to the Comte and nodded.
“Y ou may begin, Monsieur le Comte,” I said.
He smiled – at least I assumed it  was meant to be a smile –
and began, starting out with an explication of the foundation of
the Cabbala and moving right  along to an exegesis on the
twenty-three letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and the profound
symbolism of it all. It sounded thoroughly scholarly ,
completely innocuous, and terribly dull. The King yawned, not
bothering to cover his mouth.
Meanwhile, I was turning over alternatives in my mind.
This man had t hreatened and attacked me, and tried to have
Jamie assassinated – whether for personal or political reasons,
it made  little dif ference. He h ad in all likelihood been the
ringleader of the gang of rapists who had waylaid me and
Mary . B eyond all this, and beyond the rumors I had heard of
his other activities, he was a major threat to the success of our
attempt at stopping Charles Stu art. W as I going to let him get
away? L et him go on to exert his influence with the King on
the Stua rts’ behalf, and to go on roaming the darkened streets
of Paris with his band of masked bullies?
I could see my  nipples, erect with fright, standing out
boldly a gainst th e silk of my dress. But I drew myself up and
glared at him anyway .
“Just on e minut e,” I said. “All that you say so far is true,
Monsieur le Comte, but I see a shadow behind your words.”The Com te’ s mo uth fell open. Louis, suddenly interested,
ceased slouching  against the table and stood upright. I closed
my eyes and laid my fingers against my lids, as though
looking inward.
“I se e a name in  your mind, Mo nsieur le Comte,” I said. I
sounded breathless and half-choked with fright, but there was
no help for it. I dropped my hands and looked straight at him.
“Les Dis ciples d u Mal,” I said. “What have you to do with Les
Disciples, Monsieur le Comte?”
He reall y wasn’ t good at hiding his emotions. His eyes
bulged a nd his face went white, and I felt a small fierce sur ge
of satisfaction under my fear .
The name of L es Disciples du Mal was familiar to the
King as well; the sleepy dark eyes narrowed suddenly to slits.
The Com te may have been a crook and a charlatan, but he
wasn’ t a  coward . Summoning his resources, he glared at me
and flung back his head.
“This w oman lies,” he said, sou nding as definite as he had
when informing the audience that the letter aleph was
symbolic of the font of Christ’ s blood. “She is no true White
Lady , but the servant of Satan! In league with her master , the
notorious sorcer er , du Carrefours’ s apprentice!” He pointed
dramatically at Raymond, who looked mildly surprised.
One of the hood ed men crossed himself, and I heard the
soft whisper of a brief prayer among the shadows.
“I ca n prove wh at I say ,” the Comte declared, not letting
anyone else get a word in edgew ise. He reached into the breast
of his coat. I rem embered the dagger he had produced from his
sleeve on the night of the dinner party , and tensed myself to
duck. It wasn’ t a knife that he brought out, though.
“The Holy Bible says, ‘The y shall handle serpents
unharmed,’ ” he thundered. “ ‘And by such signs shall ye
know the servants of the true God!’ ”
I t hough t it was probably a small python. It was nearly
three feet long, a smooth, gleaming length of gold and brown,slick and sinuous as oiled rope, with a pair of disconcerting
golden eyes.
There was a concerted gasp at its appearance, and two of
the hood ed judges took a quick  step back. Louis himself was
more than slightly taken aback , and looked hastily about for
his bodyguard, who stood gog gle-eyed by the door of the
chamber .
The snake flicked its tongue on ce or twice, tasting the air .
Apparently deci ding that the m ix of candle wax and incense
wasn’ t e dible, it turned and ma de an attempt to burrow back
into the warm pocket from w hich it had been so rudely
removed. The Comte caught it expertly behind the head, and
shoved it toward me.
“Y ou see?” he said triumphan tly . “The woman shrinks
away in fear! She is a witch!”
Actually , comp ared to one ju dge, who was huddling
against t he far wall, I was a monument of fortitude, but I must
admit that I had  taken an involuntary step backward when the
snake appeared. Now I stepped forward again, intending to
take it away from him. The bloody thing wasn’ t poisonous,
after all. Maybe we’d see how harmless it was if I wrapped it
round his neck.
Before I could reach him, though, Master Raymond spoke
behind me. What with all the commotion, I’d rather for gotten
him.
“That is not a ll the Bible sa ys, Monsieur le Comte,”
Raymond observed. He didn’ t raise his voice, and the wide
amphibian face was bland as pu dding. Still, the buzz of voices
stopped, and the King turned to listen.
“Y es, Monsieur?” he said.
Raymond nodded in polite acknowledgment of having the
floor , and reached into his robe with both hands. From one
pocket he produced a flask, from the other a small cup.
“ ‘They shall h andle serpents unharmed,’ ” he quoted, “
‘and if they drink any deadly po ison, they shall not die.’ ” He
held the cup ou t on the palm of his hand, its silver lininggleaming in the candlelight. Th e flask was poised above it,
ready to pour .
“Since both milady Broch T uarach and myself have been
accused,” Raymond said, with a quick glance at me, “I would
suggest that all three of us partake of this test. W ith your
permission, Y our Majesty?”
Louis looked rather stunned by the rapid progress of
events, but he nodded, and a thin stream of amber liquid
splashed into the cup, which at once turned red and began to
bubble, as though the contents were boiling.
“Dragon’ s blood ,” Raymond said informatively , waving at
the cup.  “Entire ly harmless to th e pure of heart.” He smiled a
toothless, encouraging smile, and handed me the cup.
There di dn’ t seem much to do but drink it. Dragon’ s blood
appeared to be some form of sodium bicarbonate; it tasted like
brandy with seltzer . I took two or three medium-sized
swallows and handed it back.
W ith due ceremony , Raymond drank as well. He lowered
the cup, exhibiting pink-stained lips, and turned to the King.
“If La Dame B lanche may be asked to give the cup to
Monsieur le Comte?” he said. H e gestured to the chalk lines at
his feet , to indicate that he might not step outside the
protection of the pentagram.
At the King’ s nod, I took the cup and turned mechanically
toward the Comte. Perhaps six feet of carpeting to cross. I took
the f irst step, an d then another , k nees trembling more violently
than they had in the small anteroom, alone with the King.
The Wh ite Lady sees a man’ s true nature. Did I? Did I
really know about either of them, Raymond or the Comte?
Could I  have stopped it? I asked myself that a hundred
times, a thousand times – later . Could I have done otherwise?
I remembered my errant thou ght on meeting Charles
Stuart; how convenient for ever yone if he should die. But one
cannot k ill a man for his beliefs , even if the exercise of those
beliefs means the death of innocents – or can one?I d idn’ t know . I  didn’ t know that the Comte was guilty , I
didn’ t know that Raymond was innocent. I didn’ t know
whether the pursuit of an honor able cause justified the use of
dishonorable me ans. I didn’ t know what one life was worth –
or a thousand. I didn’ t know the true cost of revenge.
I d id know that the cup I held in  my hands was death. The
white cr ystal hung around my n eck, its weight a reminder of
poison. I  hadn’ t seen Raymond add anything to it; no one had,
I w as sure. Bu t I didn’ t need  to dip the crystal into the
bloodred liquid to know what it now contained.
The Co mte saw the knowledge in my face; La Dame
Blanche cannot lie. He hesitated, looking at the bubbling cup.
“Drink, Monsieur ,” said the King. The dark eyes were
hooded once more, showing nothing. “Or are you afraid?”
The Com te might have a numbe r of things to his discredit,
but cowardice wasn’ t one of the m. His face was pale and set,
but he met the King’ s eyes squarely , with a slight smile.
“No, Majesty ,” he said.
He took  the cup from my hand and drained it, his eyes
fixed on  mine. They stayed fixed, staring into my face, even as
they glazed with the knowledge of death. The White Lady may
turn a man’ s nature to good, or to destruction.
The Com te’ s body hit the floor ,  writhing, and a chorus of
shouts and cries rose from the hooded watchers, drowning any
sound he might have made. His  heels drummed briefly , silent
on t he flowered carpet; his bo dy arched, then subsided into
limpness. The snake, thoroughly disgruntled, struggled free of
the d isordered folds of white satin and slithered rapidly away ,
heading for the sanctuary of Louis’ s feet.
All was pandemonium.2 8  T H E  C O M I N G  O F  T H E
L I G H T
I  re turned from P aris to Louise’ s house at Fontainebleau. I
didn’ t want to go to the Rue T remoulins – or anywhere else
that Jam ie might  find me. He would have little time to look; he
would have to leave for Spain  virtually at once, or risk the
failure of his scheme.
Louise, good friend that she was, for gave my subterfuge,
and – to her credit – forbore to  ask me where I had gone, or
what I had don e there. I didn’ t speak much to anyone, but
stayed in my ro om, eating little, and staring at the fat, naked
putti  th at decorated the white ceiling. The sheer necessity of
the t rip to Paris had roused me for a time, but now there was
nothing I must do, no daily routine to support me. Rudderless,
I began to drift again.
Still, I tried sometimes to ma ke an ef fort. Prodded by
Louise, I would come down to a social dinner , or join her for
tea with a visiting friend. An d I tried to pay attention to
Fer gus, the only person in the w orld for whom I had still some
sense of responsibility .
So, when I heard his voice raised in altercation on the
other sid e of an outbuilding as I dutifully took my afternoon
walk, I felt obliged to go and see what was the matter .
He w as face to face with one o f the stable-lads, a bigger
boy with a sullen expression and broad shoulders.
“Shut your mouth, ignorant toad,” the stable-lad was
saying. “Y ou don’ t know what you’re talking about!”
“I know  better than you – you, whose mother mated with a
pig!” Fe r gus put  two fingers in his nostrils, pushed his nose up
and danced to and fro, shouting “Oink, oink!” repeatedly .
The stable-lad, who did have a rather noticeably upturned
proboscis, wasted no time in id le repartee, but waded in with
both fists clenched and swinging. W ithin seconds, the twowere rolling on the muddy ground, squalling like cats and
ripping at each other ’ s clothes.
While I was still debating whet her to interfere, the stable-
lad rolle d on top of Fer gus, go t his neck in both hands, and
began to  bang his head on the  ground. On the one hand, I
rather considered that Fer gus had been inviting some such
attention. On the other , his face was turning a dark, dusky red,
and I had some reservations about seeing him cut of f in his
prime. W ith a certain amount of deliberation, I walked up
behind the struggling pair .
The stable-lad was kneeling astr ide Fer gus’ s body , choking
him, and  the seat of his breeches was stretched tight before
me. I drew back my foot and booted him smartly in the trouser
seam. Precariously balanced, he fell forward with a startled
cry , atop  the body of his erstwhi le victim. He rolled to the side
and bounced to his feet, fists cl enched. Then he saw me, and
fled without a word.
“What do you think you’re pl aying at?” I demanded. I
yanked Fer gus, gasping and spl uttering, to his feet, and began
to be at his cloth es, knocking the worst of the mud clumps and
hay wisps of f of him.
“Look at that,” I said accusing ly . “Y ou’ve torn not only
your shirt, but your breeches as  well. W e’ll have to ask Berta
to mend them.” I turned him aro und and fingered the torn flap
of fa bric. The s table-lad had apparently gotten a hand in the
waistband of the breeches, and ripped them down the side
seam; th e buckram fabric drooped from his slender hips, all
but baring one buttock.
I stopped talking suddenly , and stared. It wasn’ t the
disgraceful expa nse of bare flesh that riveted me, but a small
red mark that ad orned it. About the size of a halfpenny piece,
it w as the dark,  purplish-red color of a freshly healed burn.
Disbelievingly , I  touched it, mak ing Fer gus start in alarm. The
edges of the mark were incised; whatever had made it had
sunk int o the flesh. I grabbed the boy by the arm to stop him
running away , and bent to examine the mark more closely .At a  distance o f six inches, the shape of the mark was
clear; it was an oval, carrying within it smudged shapes that
must have been letters.
“Who did this to you, Fer gus?” I asked. My voice sounded
queer to my own ears; preternaturally calm and detached.
Fer gus yanked, trying to pull away , but I held on.
“Who, Fer gus?” I demanded, giving him a little shake.
“It’ s not hing, Madame; I hurt myself sliding of f the fence.
It’ s just a splinter .” His lar ge black eyes darted to and fro,
seeking a refuge.
“That’ s not a spl inter . I know wh at it is, Fer gus. But I want
to know  who did it.” I had seen something like it only once
before, and that wound freshly inflicted, while this had had
some time to heal. But the mark of a brand is unmistakable.
Seeing t hat I meant it, he quit struggling. He licked his
lips, hesitating, but his shoulders slumped, and I knew I had
him now .
“It was… an Englishman, milady . W ith a ring.”
“When?”
“A long time ago, Madame! In May .”
I drew a deep breath, calculating. Three months. Three
months earlier when Jamie had l eft the house to visit a brothel,
in search of his warehouse foreman. In Fer gus’ s company .
Three months since Jamie had encountered Jack Randall in
Madame Elise’ s establishment, and seen something that made
all promises null and void, t hat had formed in him the
determination to kill Jack Randall. Three months since he had
left – never to return.
It took considerable patience, supplemented by a firm grip
on Fer gu s’ s upp er arm, but I succeeded at last in extracting the
story from him.
When th ey arriv ed at Madame Elise’ s establishment, Jamie
had told Fer gus to wait for him while he went upstairs to make
the financial arrangements. Judging from prior experience that
this mig ht take some time, Fer g us had wandered into the lar gesalon, where a number of you ng ladies that he knew were
“resting,” chattering together and fixing each other ’ s hair in
anticipation of customers.
“Business is sometimes slow in the mornings,” he
explained to me. “But on T uesdays and Fridays, the fishermen
come up the Seine to sell their catch at the morning market.
Then th ey have money , and Madame Elise does a fine
business, so les jeunes filles  must be ready right after
breakfast.”
Most of the “girls” were in fact the older inhabitants of the
establishment; f ishermen were not considered the choicest of
clients, and so w ent by default to the less desirable prostitutes.
Among these were most of Fer gus’ s former friends, though,
and he passed an agreeable quarter of an hour in the salon,
being petted and teased. A few  early clients appeared, made
their cho ice, and departed for the upstairs rooms – Madame
Elise’ s house boasted four narrow stories – without disturbing
the conversation of the remaining ladies.
“And then the Englishman came in, with Madame Elise.”
Fer gus stopped  and swallowed, the lar ge Adam’ s apple
bobbing uneasily in his skinny throat.
It was obvious t o Fer gus, who h ad seen men in every state
of inebri ation and arousal, that t he Captain had been making a
night of it. He was flushed and untidy , and his eyes were
bloodshot. Ignoring Madame Elise’ s attempts to guide him
toward one of the prostitutes, he had broken away and
wandered through the room, restlessly scanning the wares on
display . Then his eye had lighted on Fer gus.
“He said , ‘Y ou. Come along,’ a nd took me by the arm. I
held bac k, Madame – I told him my employer was above, and
that I couldn’ t – but he wouldn’ t listen. Madame Elise
whispered in my ear that I shou ld go with him, and she would
split the money with me afterward.” Fer gus shrugged, and
looked at me he lplessly . “I knew the ones who like little boys
don’ t usually take very long; I thought he would be finished
long before milord was ready to leave.”“Jesus bloody Christ,” I said. M y fingers relaxed their grip
and slid nervele ssly down his sl eeve. “Do you mean – Fer gus,
had you done it before?”
He looked as though he wanted to cry . So did I.
“Not very often, Madame,” he said, and it was almost a
plea for understanding. “There  are houses where that is the
specialty , and usually the men  who like that go there. But
sometimes a customer would see me and take a fancy…” His
nose was starting to run and he  wiped it with the back of his
hand.
I rummaged in m y pocket for a handkerchief and gave it to
him. He  was beginning to snif fle as he recalled that Friday
morning.
“He was  much bigger than I tho ught. I asked him if I could
take it in my mouth, but he… but he wanted to…”
I p ulled him to me and pressed  his head tight against my
shoulder , muf fli ng his voice in the cloth of my gown. The frail
blades o f his shoulder bones were like a bird’ s wings under my
hand.
“Don’ t tell me any more,” I said. “Don’ t. It’ s all right,
Fer gus; I’m not angry . But don’ t tell me any more.”
This was a futil e order; he couldn’ t stop talking, after so
many days of fear and silence.
“But it’ s all m y fault, Madame!” he burst out, pulling
away . H is lip was trembling, an d tears welled in his eyes. “I
should have kept quiet; I sho uldn’ t have cried out! But I
couldn’ t help it, and milord heard me, and… and he burst in…
and… o h, Mada me, I shouldn’ t have, but I was so glad to see
him, and I ran to him, and he put me behind him and hit the
Englishman in the face. And then the Englishman came up
from the floor with the stool in his hand, and threw it, and I
was so afraid, I ran out of the room and hid in the closet at the
end of the hall. Then there was s o much shouting and banging,
and a terrible cr ash, and more shouting. And then it stopped,
and soo n milord opened the door of the closet and took meout. He had my clothes, and he dressed me himself, because I
couldn’ t fasten the buttons – my fingers shook.”
He grabbed my skirt with bot h hands, the necessity of
making me believe him tightening his face into a monkey
mask of grief.
“It’ s my fault, M adame, but I didn’ t know! I didn’ t know
he would go to fight the Englishman. And now milord is gone,
and he’ll never come back, and it’ s all my fault!”
W ailing now , he fell facedown on the ground at my feet.
He was crying so loudly that I didn’ t think he heard me as I
bent to lift him up, but I said it anyway .
“It isn’ t your fault, Fer gus. It isn’ t mine, either – but you’re
right; he’ s gone.”
 
Following Fer gus’ s revelation, I sank ever deeper into
apathy . The gray cloud that had surrounded me since the
miscarriage seemed to draw closer , wrapping me in swaddling
folds that dimmed the light of the brightest day . Sounds
seemed to reach me faintly , like the far -of f ringing of a buoy
through fog at sea.
Louise s tood in front of me, frowning worriedly as she
looked down at me.
“Y ou’re much too thin,” she sco lded. “And white as a plate
of tripes. Y vonne said you didn’ t eat any breakfast again!”
I c ouldn ’ t remember when I had  last been hungry . It hardly
seemed important. Long before the Bois de Boulogne, long
before my trip to Paris. I fixed my gaze on the mantelpiece and
drifted of f into the curlicues of the rococo carving. Louise’ s
voice went on, but I didn’ t pay a ttention; it was only a noise in
the r oom, like th e brushing of a tree branch against the stone
wall of the château, or the humm ing of the flies that had been
drawn in by the smell of my discarded breakfast.
I w atched one of them, rising  of f the eggs in sudden
motion as Louise clapped her hands. It buzzed in short,
irritable circles before settling back to its feeding spot. The
sound of hurrying footsteps came behind me, there was a sharporder from Louise, a submiss ive “ Oui , M adame,” and the
sudden thwap!  o f a flywhisk as the maid set about removing
the flies,  one by one. She dropped each small black corpse into
her pock et, plucking it of f the table and polishing the smear
left behind with a corner of her apron.
Louise bent down, thrusting her face suddenly into my
field of view .
“I can see all the bones in your face! If you won’ t eat, at
least go  outside for a bit!” she said impatiently . “The rain’ s
stopped; come along, and we’l l see if there are any muscats
left in the arbor . Maybe you’ll eat some of those.”
Outside or inside was much t he same to me; the soft,
numbing grayness was still with me, blurring outlines and
making every place seem like every other . But it seemed to
matter to Louise, so I rose obediently to go with her .
Near the garden door , though, she was waylaid by the
cook, with a list of questions and complaints about the menu
for dinner . Guests had been i nvited, with the intention of
distracting me, and the bustle of preparation had been causing
small explosions of domestic discord all morning.
Louise emitted a martyred sigh, then patted me on the
back.
“Y ou go on,” she said, ur ging me toward the door . “I’ll
send a footman with your cloak.”
It was a cool day for August because of the rain that had
been coming down since the night before. Pools of water lay
in the graveled p aths, and the dr ipping from the drenched trees
was nearly as incessant as the rain itself.
The sky  was still filled with gray , but it had faded from the
angry black of water -logged cloud. I folded my arms around
my e lbows; it lo oked as though the sun might come out soon,
but it was still cold enough to want a cloak.
When I heard steps behind me o n the path, I turned to find
François, the second footman, but he carried nothing. He
looked oddly hesitant, peering as though to make sure I was
the person he was looking for .“Madame,” he said, “there is a visitor for you.”
I sig hed internally; I didn’ t wa nt to be bothered with the
ef fort of rousing myself to be civil to company .
“T ell them I’m indisposed, please,” I said, turning to
continue my walk. “And when  they’ve gone, bring me my
cloak.”
“But Madame,” he said behind m e, “it is le seigneur Broch
T uarach – your husband.”
Startled, I whirled to look at the  house. It was true; I could
see Jamie’ s tall figure, already coming around the corner of the
house. I turned, pretending I ha dn’ t seen him, and walked of f
toward the arbor . The shrubbery was thick down there;
perhaps I could hide.
“Claire!” Preten ding was useless; he had seen me as well,
and was  coming  down the path after me. I walked faster , but I
was no match for those long le gs. I was puf fing before I had
covered half the distance to the arbor , and had to slow down; I
was in no condition for strenuous exercise.
“W ait, Claire!”
I ha lf-turned; he was almost upon me. The soft gray
numbness aroun d me quivered, and I felt a sort of frozen panic
at th e th ought that the sight of him might rip it away from me.
If it did, I would die, I thought , like a grub dug up from the
soil and tossed onto a rock to shrivel, naked and defenseless in
the sun.
“No!” I said. “I don’ t want to talk to you. Go away .” He
hesitated for a moment, and I turned away from him and began
to w alk rapidly down the path toward the arbor . I heard his
steps on the gravel of the path behind me, but kept my back
turned, and walked faster , almost running.
As I paused to duck under the  arbor , he made a sudden
lunge forward and grasped my w rist. I tried to pull away from
him, but he held on tight.
“Claire!” he said again. I stru ggled, but kept my face
turned a way; if I didn’ t look at him, I could pretend he wasn’ t
there. I could stay safe.He let go of my wrist, but grabbed me by both shoulders
instead, so that I had to lift my head to keep my balance. His
face was sunburned and thin, w ith harsh lines cut beside his
mouth, a nd his eyes above wer e dark with pain. “Claire,” he
said more softly , now that he could see me looking at him.
“Claire – it was my child, too.”
“Y es, it was – a nd you killed it! ” I ripped away from him,
flinging myself through the narrow arch. I stopped inside,
panting like a terrified dog. I hadn’ t realized that the arch led
into a tiny vine-covered folly . Latticed walls surrounded me on
all sides  – I wa s trapped. The light behind me failed as his
body blocked the arch.
“Don’ t touch me.” I backed away , staring at the ground.
Go away!  I thought frantically . Please, for God’ s sake, leave
me in peace!  I could feel my gray wrappings being inexorably
stripped away , and small, bright streaks of pain shot through
me like lightning bolts piercing cloud.
He stopp ed, a few feet away . I s tumbled blindly toward the
latticed wall and half-sat, half-fell onto a wooden bench. I
closed my eyes and sat shivering. While it was no longer
raining, there was a cold, dam p wind coming through the
lattice to chill my neck.
He didn’ t come closer . I could  feel him, standing there,
looking down at me. I could  hear the raggedness of his
breathing.
“Claire,” he said once more, with something like despair in
his voic e, “Claire, do ye not see… Claire, you must speak to
me! For  God’ s sake, Claire, I don’ t know even was it a girl or
a boy!”
I sat  frozen, han ds gripping the rough wood of the bench.
After a moment, there was a heavy , crunching noise on the
ground in front of me. I cracked my eyes open, and saw that he
had sat down, just as he was, on  the wet gravel at my feet. He
sat with  bowed head, and the rain had left spangles in his
damp-darkened hair .
“W ill ye make me beg?” he said.“It w as a girl,” I said after a moment. My voice sounded
funny; hoarse and husky . “Mother Hildegarde baptized her .
Faith. Faith Fraser . Mother Hildegarde has a very odd sense of
humor .”
The bowed head didn’ t move. After a moment, he said
quietly , “Did you see the child?”
My eyes  were open all the way now . I stared at my knees,
where b lown drops of water fr om the vines behind me were
making wet spots on the silk.
“Y es. The mâitr esse sage-femme  said I ought, so they
made me.” I could hear in memory the low , matter -of-fact
tones of  Madam e Bonheur , most senior and respected of the
midwives who gave of their time at L ’Hôpital des Anges.
“Give h er the child; it’ s alway s better if they see. Then
they don’ t imagine things.”
So I didn’ t imagine. I remembered.
“She was perfect,” I said softly , as though to myself. “So
small. I could cu p her head in the palm of my hand. Her ears
stuck out just a little – I could see the light shine through them.
The ligh t had shone through he r skin as well, glowing in
the roun dness of cheek and but tock with the light that pearls
have; still and c ool, with the str ange touch of the water world
still on them.
“Mother Hildegarde wrapped her in a length of white
satin,” I said, looking down at my fists, clenched in my lap.
“Her eyes were closed. She hadn ’ t any lashes yet, but her eyes
were sla nted. I said they were like yours, but they said all
babies’ eyes are like that.”
T en fingers, and ten toes. No n ails, but the gleam of tiny
joints, kneecaps and fingerbones like opals, like the jeweled
bones of the earth itself. Remember man, that thou art dust…
I r emembered the far -of f clatter  of the Hôpital, where life
still wen t on, and the subdued murmur of Mother Hildegarde
and Madame Bonheur , closer by , talking of the priest who
would say a special Mass at Mother Hildegarde’ s request. I
remembered the look of calm appraisal in Madame Bonheur ’ seyes as she tur ned to look me over , seeing my weakness.
Perhaps she saw also the telltale  brightness of the approaching
fever; she had turned again to Mother Hildegarde and her
voice had dropped further – perh aps suggesting that they wait;
two funerals might be needed.
And unto dust thou shalt return.
But I had come back from the d ead. Only Jamie’ s hold on
my body had be en strong enough to pull me back from that
final barrier , and Master Raymo nd had known it. I knew that
only Jam ie hims elf could pull m e back the rest of the way , into
the land  of the l iving. That was why I had run from him, done
all I could to k eep him away , to make sure he would never
come near me a gain. I had no wish to come back, no desire to
feel aga in. I didn’ t want to kno w love, only to have it ripped
away once more.
But it was too late. I knew that, even as I fought to hold the
gray shroud around me. Fighting only hastened its dissolution;
it wa s like grasping shreds of cloud, that vanished in cold mist
between my fingers. I could feel the light coming, blinding
and searing.
He had risen, was standing over me. His shadow fell
across m y knees; surely that m eant the cloud had broken; a
shadow doesn’ t fall without light.
“Claire,” he whispered. “Please. Let me give ye comfort.”
“Comfort?” I said. “And how w ill you do that? Can you
give me back my child?”
He s ank to his knees before me, but I kept my head down,
staring into my upturned hands, laid empty on my lap. I felt
his m ovement as he reached to t ouch me, hesitated, drew back,
reached again.
“No,” he said, h is voice scarcely audible. “No, I canna do
that. But… with the grace of God… I might give ye another?”
His hand hovered over mine, close enough that I felt the
warmth of his skin. I felt other t hings as well: the grief that he
held tight under rein, the anger and the fear that choked him,
and the courage  that made him speak in spite of it. I gatheredmy own  courage around me, a flimsy substitute for the thick
gray shroud. Then I took his h and and lifted my head, and
looked full into the face of the sun.
 
W e sat, hands clasped and pressed together on the bench,
unmoving, unspeaking, for what seemed like hours, with the
cool rain-breeze whispering our thoughts in the grape leaves
above. W ater drops scattered over us with the passing of the
wind, weeping for loss and separation.
“Y ou’re cold,” Jamie murmured at last, and pulled a fold
of his cloak aro und me, bringing with it the warmth of his
skin. I came slowly against hi m under its shelter , shivering
more at the star tling solidness, the sudden heat of him, than
from the cold.
I l aid my hand on his chest, ten tative as though the touch
of him might burn me in truth, a nd so we sat for a good while
longer , letting the grape leaves talk for us.
“Jamie,” I said softly , at last. “Oh, Jamie. Where were
you?”
His arm tightened about me, bu t it was some time before
he answered.
“I thought ye were dead, mo duinne ,” he  said, so softly I
could hardly hear him above the rustling of the arbor .
“I saw ye there – on the ground, at the last. God! Y e were
so white , and your skirts all soaked wi’ blood… I tried to go to
ye, Claire, so soon as I saw – I ran to ye, but it was then the
Guard took me.”
He s wallowed hard; I could feel  the tremor pass down him,
through the long curve of his backbone.
“I fough t them… I fought, and  aye I pleaded… but they
wouldna stay , and they carried me awa’ wi’ them. And they
put me in a cell , and left me there… thinking ye were dead,
Claire; knowing that I’d killed you.”
The fine tremor went on, and I knew he was weeping,
though I could not see his face a bove me. How long had he satalone in  the dark of the Bastil le, alone but for the scent of
blood and the empty husk of vengeance?
“It’ s all right,” I  said, and pressed my hand harder against
his chest, as th ough to still the hasty beating of his heart.
“Jamie, it’ s all right. It… it wasn’ t your fault.”
“I tried to bash my head again st the wall – only to stop
thinking,” he said, nearly in a w hisper . “So they tied me, hand
and foot. And next day , de Rohan found me, and told me that
ye lived, though likely not for long.”
He was silent then, but I could feel the pain inside him,
sharp as crystal spears of ice.
“Claire,” he murmured at last. “I am sorry .”
I am sorry . Th e words we re those of the note he had left
me, before the world shattered. But now I understood them.
“I know ,” I said. “Jamie, I know . F er gus  told me. I know
why you went.”
He drew a deep, shuddering breath.
“A ye, well…” he said, and stopped.
I let  my  hand fall to his thigh; chilled and damp from the
rain, his riding breeches were rough under my palm.
“Did the y tell you – when they let you go – why you were
released?” I tried to keep my own breathing steady , but failed.
His thigh tensed under my hand , but his voice was under
better control now .
“No,” he said. “Only that it was… His Majesty’ s
pleasure.” The word “pleasure” was ever so faintly underlined,
spoken with a delicate ferocity that made it abundantly clear
that he did indee d know the means of his release, whether the
warders had told him or not.
I bit my lower li p hard, trying to  make up my mind what to
tell him now .
“It was Mother Hildegarde,” he  went on, voice steady . “I
went at once to  L ’Hôpital des Anges, in search of you. Andfound Mother Hildegarde, and the wee note ye’d left for me.
She… told me.”
“Y es,” I said, swallowing. “I went to see the King…”
“I know !” His hand tightened on  mine, and from the sound
of his breathing, I could tell that his teeth were clenched
together .
“But Jamie… when I went…”
“Christ!” he said, and sat up suddenly , turning to face me.
“Do ye not know  what I… Claire.” He closed his eyes briefly ,
and took  a deep breath. “I rode all the way to Orvieto, seeing
it; seeing  his hands on the white of your skin, his lips on your
neck, hi s – his cock – I saw it at the lever  – I saw the damn
filthy , stubby thing sliding up…  God, Claire! I sat in prison
thinking ye dead, and then I rode to Spain, wishing to Christ
ye were!”
The knu ckles of the hand holdi ng mine were white, and I
could feel the small bones of my fingers crackle in his grip.
I jerked my hand free.
“Jamie, listen to me!”
“No!” he said. “No, I dinna want to hear…”
“Listen, damn you!”
There w as enou gh force in my voice to shut him up for an
instant, and while he was mute, I began rapidly to tell him the
story of  the King’ s chamber ; the hooded men, and the
shadowed room , the sorcerers’ duel, and the death of the
Comte St. Germain.
As I talked, the  high color faded from his wind-brisked
cheeks, and his expression softe ned from anguish and fury to
bewilderment, and gradually , to astonished belief.
“Jesus,” he breathed at last. “Oh, holy God.”
“Didn’ t know what you were st arting with that silly story ,
did you?” I felt exhausted, but managed a smile. “So… so the
Comte… it’ s all right, Jamie. He’ s… gone.”He didn’ t say anything in reply , but drew me gently to him,
so m y forehead rested on his s houlder , and my tears soaked
into the fabric of  his shirt. After a minute, though, I sat up, and
stared at him, wiping my nose.
“I just thought, Jamie! The port – Charles Stuart’ s
investment! If the Comte is dead…”
He shook his head, smiling faintly .
“No, mo duinne . It’ s safe.”
I felt a flood of relief.
“Oh, thank God. Y ou managed, then? Did the medicines
work on Murtagh?”
“W ell, no,” he s aid, the smile broadening, “but they did on
me.”
Relieved at once of fear and ang er , I felt light-headed, and
half-giddy . The smell of the rain-swept grapes was strong and
sweet, a nd it was a blessed relief to lean against him, feeling
his w armth as c omfort, not as th reat, as I listened to the story
of the port-wine piracy .
“There are men that are born t o the sea, Sassenach,” he
began, “but I’m afraid I’m no one of them.”
“I know ,” I said. “W ere you sick?”
“I have seldom been sicker ,” he assured me wryly .
The seas of f Orvieto had been rough, and within an hour it
became clear that Jamie was not going to be able to carry out
his original part in the plan.
“I co uldna do an ything but lie in my hammock and groan,
in any case,” he said, shrugging, “so it seemed I might as well
have pox, too.”
He and Murtagh had hastily changed roles, and twenty-
four ho urs of f the coast of  Spain, the master of the
Scalamandr e  had discovered to his horror that plague had
broken out below .
Jamie scratched his neck reflectively , as though still
feeling the ef fects of the nettle juice.“They thought of throwing me overboard when they found
out,” he said, “a nd I must say it seemed a verra fine idea to
me.” He gave me a lopside d grin. “Have ye ever had
seasickness while covered wi’ nettle rash, Sassenach?”
“No, thank God.” I shuddered at the thought. “Did
Murtagh stop them?”
“Oh, aye . He’ s verra fierce, is Murtagh. He slept across the
threshold wi’ his hand on his dirk, until we came safe to port
at Bilbao.”
T rue to forecast, the Scalamandr e ’ s captain, faced with the
unprofitable choice of proceeding to Le Havre and forfeiting
his car g o, or returning to Spain  and cooling his heels while
word was sent to Paris, had leaped at the opportunity to
dispose of his hold’ s worth o f port to the new purchaser
chance had thrown in his way .
“Not that he didna drive a hard bar gain,” Jamie observed,
scratching his forearm. “He hag gled for half a day – and me
dying in my ha mmock, pissing blood and puking my guts
out!”
But the bar gain had been concluded, both port and
smallpox patient unloaded with dispatch at Bilbao, and – aside
from a lingering tendency to urinate vermilion – Jamie’ s
recovery had been rapid.
“W e sold the port to a broker there in Bilbao,” he said. “I
sent Mu rtagh at once to Paris, to repay Monsieur Duverney’ s
loan – and then… I came here.”
He look ed down at his hands, lying quiet in his lap. “I
couldna decide,” he said softly . “T o come or no. I walked, ye
ken, to give myself time to thin k. I walked all the way from
Paris to Fontain ebleau. And nearly all the way back. I turned
back half a dozen times, thinking myself a murderer and a
fool, not knowing if I would rather kill myself or you…”
He sighed then, and looked u p at me, eyes dark with
reflections of the fluttering leaves.
“I had to come,” he said simply .I d idn’ t say any thing, but laid my hand over his and sat
beside him. Fallen grapes littere d the ground under the arbor ,
the pungent scent of their fermentation promising the
for getfulness of wine.
The cloud-streaked sun was setting, and a blur of gold
silhouetted the respectful form of Hugo, looming black in the
entrance to the arbor .
“Y our pardon, Madame,” he said. “My mistress wishes to
know – will le seigneur  be staying for supper?”
I l ooked at Jami e. He sat still, waiting, the sun through the
grape le aves streaking his hair with a tiger ’ s blaze, shadows
falling across his face.
“I think you’d better ,” I said. “Y ou’re awfully thin.”
He looked me over with a half-smile. “So are you,
Sassenach.”
He rose and of fered me his arm . I took it and we went in
together to supper , leaving the grape leaves to their muted
conversation.
 
I lay  next to Jamie, close against him, his hand resting on
my thigh  as he slept. I stared upward into the darkness of the
bedroom, listeni ng to the peacef ul sigh of his sleeping breath,
breathing myself the fresh-wash ed scent of the damp night air ,
tinged with the smell of wisteria.
The collapse of the Comte St. Germain had been the end of
the even ing, so far as all were concerned save Louis. As the
company made to depart, murmuring excitedly among
themselves, he took my arm, an d led me out through the same
small door by w hich I had entered. Good with words when
required, he had no need of them here.
I was led to the green silk chaise, laid on my back and my
skirts ge ntly lifte d before I could  speak. He did not kiss me; he
did not desire m e. This was the ritual claiming of the payment
agreed upon. Louis was a shrewd bar gainer , and not one to
for give a debt h e thought owed to him, whether the payment
had value to him  or not. And perhaps it did, after all; there wasmore than a hin t of half-fearful excitement in his preparations
– wh o but a king would dare to  take La Dame Blanche in his
embrace?
I was closed and dry , unready . Impatient, he seized a
flagon o f rose-scented oil from the table, and massaged it
briefly between my legs. I lay unmoving, soundless, as the
hastily p robing f inger withdrew ,  replaced at once by a member
little lar ger , and – “suf fered” is the wrong word, there was
neither pain nor humiliation involved; it was a transaction – I
waited, then, through the quick thrusting, and then he was on
his feet, face flushed with excitement, hands fumbling to
refasten his breeches over the sm all swelling within. He would
not r isk the possibility of a half-Royal, half-magic bastard; not
with Madame de La T ourelle ready – a good deal readier than
I, I hoped – and waiting in her own chambers down the hall.
I h ad given what was implicitly promised; now he could
with honor accede to my request, feeling no virtu  had gone
forth fro m him. As for me, I met his courteous bow with my
own, took my el bow from the grip with which he had gallantly
escorted me to t he door , and left the audience chamber only a
few minutes after entering it, with the King’ s assurance that
the order for Jamie’ s freedom would be given in the morning.
The Gentleman of the Bedchamber was standing in the
hall, wa iting. He bowed to m e, and I bowed back, then
followed him down the Hall of Mirrors, feeling the
slipperiness of my oily thighs a s they brushed each other , and
smelling the strong scent of roses between my legs.
Hearing the gate of the palace shut behind me, I had closed
my eyes  and thought that I would never see Jamie again. And
if by  chance I did, I would rub his nose in the scent of roses,
until his soul sickened and died.
But now instead I held his hand  on my thigh, listening to
his b reathing, deep and even in the dark beside me. And I let
the door close forever on His Majesty’ s audience.2 9  T O  G R A S P  T H E  N E T T L E
“S cotland.” I sighed, thinking of the cool brown streams
and dark pines of Lallybroch, J amie’ s estate. “Can we really
go home?”
“I ex pect we’ll have to,” he ans wered wryly . “The King’ s
pardon says I leave France by mid-September , or I’m back in
the Bast ille. Presumably , His Majesty has arranged a pardon as
well from  the English Crown, so I willna be hanged directly I
get of f the ship in Inverness.”
“I supp ose we could go to Rome, or to Germany ,” I
suggested, tenta tively . I wanted nothing more than to go home
to Lally broch, and heal in the  quiet peace of the Scottish
Highlands. My heart sank at th e thought of royal courts and
intrigue, the constant press of danger and insecurity . But if
Jamie felt we must…
He shook his h ead, red hair falling over his face as he
stooped to pull on his stockings.
“Nay , it’ s Scotla nd or the Bastil le,” he said. “Our passage
is al ready booked, just to make sure.” He straightened and
brushed the hair out of his eyes with a wry smile. “I imagine
the D uke of San dringham – and possibly King Geor ge – want
me safe at hom e, where they can keep an eye on me. Not
spying in Rome, or raising money in Germany . The three
weeks’ grace, I gather , is a cour tesy to Jared, giving him time
to come home before I leave.”
I w as sitting in the window sea t of my bedroom, looking
out over the tumbled green sea of the Fontainebleau woods.
The hot,  languid air of summer seemed to press down, sapping
all ener gy .
“I can’ t say I’m  not glad.” I sighed, pressing my cheek
against the glass in search of a moment’ s coolness. The legacy
of yesterday’ s chill rain was a b lanketing humidity that made
hair and clothes cling to my skin, itching and damp. “Do youthink it’ s safe, though? I mean, will Charles give up, now that
the Comte is dead, and the money from Manzetti lost?”
Jamie frowned, rubbing his hand  along the edge of his jaw
to judge the growth of the stubble.
“I wish I knew whether he’d had a letter from Rome in the
last two weeks,” he said, “and if so, what was in it. But aye, I
think we’ve managed. No banker in Europe will advance
anyone of the n ame of Stuart a brass centime, that’ s for sure.
Philip of Spain h as other fish to  fry , and Louis-” He shrugged,
his m outh twisting wryly . “Between Monsieur Duverney and
the Duke of Sandringham, I’d say Charles’ s expectations in
that direction are somewhat less  than poor . Shall I shave, d’ye
think?”
“Not on  my account,” I said. The casual intimacy of the
question made me suddenly shy . W e had shared a bed the night
before, but we h ad both been exhausted, and the delicate web
woven b etween us in the arbo r had seemed too fragile to
support the stress of attempting  to make love. I had spent the
night in a terrib le consciousness of his warm proximity , but
thought I must, under the circum stances, leave the first move
to him.
Now I caught th e play of light across his shoulders as he
turned to  find his shirt, and was seized with the desire to touch
him; to feel him, smooth and hard and eager against me once
more.
His head popped through the nec k of his shirt, and his eyes
met min e, sudde nly and unguarded. He paused for a moment,
looking at me, but not speaking . The morning sounds of the
château were clearly audible, ou tside the bubble of silence that
surrounded us; the bustling of servants, the high thin sound of
Louise’ s voice, raised in some sort of altercation.
Not her e , Jamie’ s eyes said. Not in the midst of so many
people .
He looked down, carefully fastening his shirt buttons.
“Does Louise keep horses for r iding?” he asked, eyes on his
task. “T here are some clif fs a  few miles away; I thought
perhaps we might ride there – the air may be cooler .”“I think she does,” I said. “I’ll ask.”
 
W e reac hed the clif fs just befor e noon. Not clif fs so much
as juttin g pillars and ridges of limestone that sat among the
yellowing grass  of the surrounding hills like the ruins of an
ancient city . The pale ridges were split and fissured from time
and weather , spattered with thousands of strange, tiny plants
that had found a foothold in the merest scrape of eroded soil.
W e left the hor ses hobbled in the grass, and climbed on
foot to a wide, flat shelf of lim estone covered with tufts of
rough grass, just below the highest tumble of stone. There was
little shade from the scruf fy bush es, but up this high, there was
a small breeze.
“God, it’ s hot!” Jamie said. He flipped loose the buckle of
his kilt, so it fell around his feet, and started to wriggle out of
his shirt.
“What are you doing, Jamie?” I said, half-laughing.
“Stripping,” he replied, matter -of-factly . “Why don’ t ye do
the same, Sassenach? Y ou’re more soaked than I am, and
there’ s none here to see.”
After a moment ’ s hesitation, I d id as he suggested. It was
entirely isolated here; too craggy and rocky for sheep, the
chance of even a stray shepherd coming upon us was remote.
And alone, naked together , away from Louise and her throngs
of intrusive servants… Jamie s pread his plaid on the rough
ground as I peeled out of my sweat-clinging garments.
He s tretched lazily and settled back, arms behind his head,
completely obliv ious to curious ants, stray bits of gravel and
the stubs of prickly vegetation.
“Y ou must have the hide of a go at,” I remarked. “How can
you lie on the ba re ground like that?” As bare as he, I reposed
more comfortab ly on a thick fold of the plaid he had
thoughtfully spread out for me.
He shrugged, eyes closed against the warm afternoon sun.
The ligh t gilded  him in the hollow where he lay , making him
glow red-gold against the dark of the rough grass beneath him.“I’ll do,” he said comfortably , a nd lapsed into silence, the
sound of his bre athing near enough to reach me over the faint
whine of the wind that crossed the ridges above us.
I r olled onto m y belly and laid  my chin on my crossed
forearms, watching him. He was wide at the shoulder and
narrow at the hip, with long, powerful haunches slightly
dented by muscles held taut ev en as he relaxed. The small,
warm breeze stirred the drying  tufts of soft cinnamon hair
beneath his arms, and ruf fled th e copper and gold that waved
gently over his wrists, where they braced his head. The slight
breeze w as welc ome, for the ear ly autumn sun was still hot on
my shoulders and calves.
“I lo ve y ou,” I said softly , not m eaning him to hear me, but
only for the pleasure of saying it.
He d id h ear , tho ugh, for the hint  of a smile curved the wide
mouth. After a moment, he rol led over onto his belly on the
plaid beside me. A few blades of grass clung to his back and
buttocks. I brushed one lightly away , and his skin shivered
briefly at my touch.
I leaned to kiss his shoulder , enjoying the warm scent of
his skin and the faint salty taste of him.
Instead of kissing me back, though, he pulled away a bit,
and lay propped on one elbow , looking at me. There was
something in his expression that I didn’ t understand, and it
made me faintly uneasy .
“Penny for your thoughts,” I said, running a finger down
the deep  groove  of his backbone . He moved just far enough to
avoid my touch, and took a deep breath.
“W ell, I was wondering-” he be gan, and then stopped. He
was look ing down, fiddling with a tiny flower that sprang out
of the grass.
“Y ou were wondering what?”
“What it was like… with Louis.”
I thought my heart had stopped for a moment. I knew all
the blood had left my face, because I could feel the numbness
of my lips as I forced the words out.“What… it… was like?”
He looked up then, making only a passing-fair attempt at a
lopsided smile.
“W ell,” he said. “He is  a k ing. Y ou’d think it would b e…
dif ferent, somehow . Y ou know… special, maybe?”
The smile was s lipping, and his face had gone as white as
my own. He looked down again, avoiding my stricken gaze.
“I suppose all I was wondering,” he murmured, “was…
was he…  was he dif ferent from  me?” I saw him bite his lip as
though w ishing the words unsaid, but it was far too late for
that.
“How in  hell did you know?”  I said. I felt dizzy and
exposed, and rolled onto my stomach, pressing myself hard to
the short turf.
He shoo k his head, teeth still clenched in his lower lip.
When he  finally  released it, a deep red mark showed where he
had bitten it.
“Claire,” he said softly . “Oh, Claire. Y ou gave me all
yourself from the first time, an d held nothing back from me.
Y ou nev er did. When I asked ye  for honesty , I told ye then that
it isna in you to lie. When I tou ched ye so-” His hand moved,
cupping my buttock, and I flinched, not expecting it.
“How lo ng have I loved you?” he asked, very quietly . “A
year? Since the moment I saw y ou. And loved your body how
often – half a th ousand times or more?” One finger touched
me then, gently as a moth’ s foot, tracing the line of arm and
shoulder , gliding down my rib cage ’ til I shivered at the touch
and rolled away , facing him now .
“Y ou never shrank from my tou ch,” he said, eyes intent on
the p ath his fing er took, dipping down to follow the curve of
my b reast. “Not even at the first , when ye might have done so,
and no surprise to me if ye had.  But you didn’ t. Y ou gave me
everything from the very first time; held nothing back, denied
me no part of you.”
“But now…” he said, drawing b ack his hand. “I thought at
first it was only that you’d lost the child, and maybe were shyof m e, o r feelin g strange after s o long apart. But then I knew
that wasn’ t it.”
There was a very  long silence, then. I could feel the steady ,
painful thudding  of my heart against the cold ground, and hear
the c onversation  of the wind in the pines down below . Small
birds cal led, far away . I wished I  were one. Or far away , at any
rate.
“Why?” he asked softly . “Why lie to me? When I had
come to you thinking I knew , anyway?”
I s tared down a t my hands, lin ked beneath my chin, and
swallowed.
“If…” I began, and swallowed again. “If I told you that I
had let Louis… you would have  asked about it. I thought you
couldn’ t for get… maybe you could for give me, but you’d
never fo r get, and it would alw ays be there between us.” I
swallowed once  more, hard. M y hands were cold despite the
heat, and I felt a ball of ice in m y stomach. But if I was telling
him the truth now , I must tell him all of it.
“If y ou’d asked – and you did , Jamie, you did! I would
have had to talk  about it, live it over , and I was afraid…” I
trailed of f, unable to speak, but he wasn’ t going to let me of f.
“Afraid of what?” he prodded.
I tur ned my hea d slightly , not meeting his eye, but enough
to see his outlin e dark against the sun, looming through the
sun-sparked curtain of my hair .
“Afraid I’d tell you why I did it,” I said softly . “Jamie… I
had to, to get you freed from the Bastille – I would have done
worse, if I’d had to. But then… and afterward… I half-hoped
someone would  tell you, that you’d find out. I was so angry ,
Jamie – for the duel, and the ba by . And because you’d forced
me to do it… to go to Louis. I wanted to do something to drive
you away , to m ake sure I nev er saw you again. I did it…
partly… because I wanted to hurt you,” I whispered.
A muscle contracted near the corner of his mouth, but he
went on  staring  downward at h is clasped hands. The chasmbetween us, so perilously b ridged, gaped yawning and
impassable once more.
“A ye. W ell, you did.”
His mouth clamped shut in a tig ht line, and he didn’ t speak
for s ome time. F inally he turned his head and looked directly
at me. I would have liked to avoid his eyes, but couldn’ t.
“Claire,” he said softly . “What did ye feel – when I gave
my body to Ja ck Randall? When I let him take me, at
W entworth?”
A tiny shock ran through me, fro m scalp to toenails. It was
the last question I had expected to hear . I opened and closed
my mouth several times before finding an answer .
“I… don ’ t know ,” I said weakly . “I hadn’ t thought. Angry ,
of cours e. I was furious – outraged. And sick. And frightened
for you. And… sorry for you.”
“W ere ye jealous? When I told  you about it later – that
he’d roused me, though I didna want it?”
I drew a deep breath, feeling the grass tickle my breasts.
“No. At least I don’ t think so; I didn’ t think so then. After
all, it wasn’ t as though you’d… wanted to do it.” I bit my lip,
looking down. His voice was quiet and matter -of-fact at my
shoulder .
“I dinna think you wanted to bed Louis – did you?”
“No!”
“A ye, w ell,” he said. He put his thumbs together on either
side of a blade  of grass, and concentrated on pulling it up
slowly by the ro ots. “I was angry , too. And sick and sorry .”
The grass blade came free of its sheath with a tiny squeaking
sound.
“When it was me,” he went on, almost whispering, “I
thought you could not bear the thought of it, and I would not
have bla med you. I knew ye must turn from me, and I tried to
send you  away , so I wouldna h ave to see the disgust and the
hurt in your fac e.” He closed his eyes and raised the grass
blade between his thumbs, barely brushing his lips.“But yo u wouldna go. Y ou too k me to your breast and
cherished me. Y ou healed me, i nstead. Y ou loved me, in spite
of it.” He took a deep, unsteady breath and turned his head to
me again. His eyes were bright with tears, but no wetness
escaped to slide down his cheeks.
“I th ought, maybe, that I could bring myself to do that for
you, as you did it for me. And that is why I came to
Fontainebleau, at last.”
He blinked once, hard, and his eyes cleared.
“Then when ye told me that not hing had happened – for a
bit, I believed you, because I wanted to so much. But then… I
could tell, Claire. I couldna hid e it from myself, and I knew
you had  lied to me. I thought you wouldna trust me to love
you, or… that you had  wanted him, and were afraid to let me
see it.”
He d ropped the grass, and his head sank forward to rest on
his knuckles.
“Y e said  you wanted to hurt me . W ell, the thought of you
lying wi th the King hurt worse t han the brand on my breast, or
the cut of the lash on my naked back. But the knowledge that
ye th ought ye co uldna trust me t o love you is like waking from
the hang man’ s noose to feel the gutting knife sunk in my belly .
Claire-” His mouth opened soun dlessly , then closed tight for a
moment, until he found the strength to go on.
“I d o no t know if the wound is mortal, but Claire – I do
feel my heart’ s blood leave me, when I look at you.”
The silence between us grew and deepened. The small
buzz of an insect calling in the rocks vibrated in the air .
Jamie was still as a rock, his face blank as he stared down
at th e ground be low him. I couldn’ t bear that blank face, and
the t hought of w hat must lie con cealed behind it. I had seen a
hint of his desp airing fury in the arbor , and my heart felt
hollow at the th ought of that rage, mastered at such fearful
cost, now  held under an iron con trol that kept in not only rage,
but trust and joy .I wis hed desperately for some w ay to break the silence that
parted u s; some act that could restore the lost truth between us.
Jamie sat up th en, arms folded tight about his thighs, and
turned away as he gazed out over the peaceful valley .
Better violence, I thought, than silence. I reached across
the c hasm between us and laid a hand on his arm. It was warm
from the sun, live to my touch.
“Jamie,” I whispered. “Please.”
His head  turned  slowly toward me. His face seemed still
calm, though the cat-eyes narrow ed further as he looked at me
in si lence. He r eached out, finally , and one hand gripped me
by the wrist.
“Do ye wish m e to beat you, then?” he said softly . His
grasp tig htened hard, so that I jerked unconsciously , trying to
pull awa y from him. He pulled  back, yanking me across the
rough grass, bringing my body against him.
I felt myself tre mbling, and gooseflesh lifted the hairs on
my forearms, but I managed to speak.
“Y es,” I said.
His expression was unfathomab le. Still holding my eyes
with his own, he  reached out his free hand, fumbling over the
rocks un til he touched a bunch of nettles. He drew in his
breath as his fin gers touched the prickly stems, but his jaw
clenched; he closed his fist an d ripped the plants up by the
roots.
“The peasants of Gascony beat a faithless wife wi’
nettles,” he said. He lowered t he spiky bunch of leaves and
brushed the flower heads lightly across one breast. I gasped
from th e sudden sting, and a faint red blotch appeared as
though by magic on my skin.
“W ill ye have m e do so?” he asked. “Shall I punish you
that way?”
“If y ou… if you like.” My lips were trembling so hard I
could barely get out the words.  A few crumbs of earth from
the nettl es’ root s had fallen be tween my breasts; one rolled
down the slope of my ribs, dislodged by my pounding heart, Iimagined. The welt on my breast burned like fire. I closed my
eyes, imagining in vivid detail exactly what being thrashed
with a bunch of nettles would feel like.
Suddenly the viselike grip on my wrist relaxed. I opened
my eyes to find  Jamie sitting cross-legged by me, the plants
thrown aside and scattered on the ground. He had a faint,
rueful smile on his lips.
“I be at you once  in justice, Sassenach, and ye threatened to
disembowel me with my own di rk. Now you’ll ask me to whip
ye wi’ nettles?” He shook his he ad slowly , wondering, and his
hand reached as though by its o wn volition to cup my cheek.
“Is my pride worth so much to you, then?”
“Y es! Y es, it bloody is!” I sat up myself, and grasped him
by th e s houlders, taking both of us by surprise as I kissed him
hard and awkwardly .
I fel t his first involuntary start,  and then he pulled me to
him, arm  tight around my back, mouth answering mine. Then
he h ad me pres sed flat to the earth, his weight holding me
immobile beneath him. His shoulders darkened the bright sky
above, a nd his hands held my arms against my sides, keeping
me prisoner .
“All righ t,” he whispered. His eyes bored into mine, daring
me to close them, forcing me to hold his gaze. “All right. And
ye wish it, I shall punish you.” He moved his hips against me
in imper ious command, and I f elt my legs open for him, my
gates thrown wide to welcome ravishment.
“Never ,” he whispered to me. “ Never . Never another but
me! Loo k at me! T ell me! Look at me, Clair e! ” He moved in
me, strongly , and I moaned and  would have turned my head,
but h e h eld my face between his hands, forcing me to meet his
eyes, to see his wide, sweet mouth, twisted in pain.
“Never ,” he said, more softly . “F or you are mine. My wife,
my hear t, my soul.” The weight of him held me still, like a
boulder on my chest, but the friction of our flesh made me
thrust against him, wanting more. And more.“My body ,” he s aid, gasping for breath as he gave me what
I sou ght. I bucked beneath him as though I wanted to escape,
my b ack arching like a bow , pre ssing me into him. He lay then
at full length o n me, scarcely moving, so that our most
intimate connection seemed barely closer than the marriage of
our skins.
The grass was harsh and prickly under me, the pungence of
crushed stems sharp as the smell of the man who took me. My
breasts w ere flattened under him, and I felt the small tickle of
the h airs on his chest as we rub bed together , back and forth. I
squirmed, ur gin g him to violence, feeling the swell of his
thighs as he pressed me down.
“Never ,” he whispered to me, face only inches from mine.
“Never ,” I said, and turned my  head, closing my eyes to
escape the intensity of his gaze.
A ge ntle, inexorable pressure tu rned me back to face him,
as the small, rhythmic movements went on.
“No, my Sassenach,” he said softly . “Open your eyes.
Look at  me. For that is your punishment, as it is mine. See
what you have d one to me, as I know what I have done to you.
Look at me.”
And I looked, h eld prisoner , bound to him. Looked, as he
dropped the last of his masks, and showed me the depths of
himself, and the wounds of his soul. I would have wept for his
hurt, and  for mine, had I been able. But his eyes held mine,
tearless and open, boundless as the salt sea. His body held
mine captive, driving me before his strength, like the west
wind in the sails of a bark.
And I voyaged into him, as he into me, so that when the
last small storms of love began to shake me, he cried out, and
we rode  the waves together as one flesh, and saw ourselves in
each other ’ s eyes.
 
The afternoon sun was hot on the white limestone rocks,
casting d eep shadows into the cl efts and hollows. I found what
I was looking for at last, growing from a narrow crack in agiant bo ulder , in  gay defiance of the lack of soil. I broke a
stalk of aloe fro m its clump, sp lit the fleshy leaf, and spread
the cool green gel inside across the welts on Jamie’ s palm.
“Better?” I said.
“Much.” Jamie flexed his hand , grimacing. “Christ, those
nettles sting!”
“They d o.” I pulled down the  neck of my bodice and
spread a  little aloe juice on my breast with a gingerly touch.
The coolness brought relief at once.
“I’m rat her glad  you didn’ t take  me up on my of fer ,” I said
wryly , with a glance at a nearby bunch of blooming nettle.
He grin ned and patted me on the bottom with his good
hand.
“W ell, it was a near thing, Sassenach. Y e shouldna tempt
me like that.” Then, sobering, he bent and kissed me gently .
“No, mo duinne . I swore  to ye th e once, and I was meaning
it. I sha llna rais e a hand to you in anger , ever . After all,” he
added softly , turning away , “I have done enough to hurt you.”
I shr ank from the pain of memory , but I owed him justice
as well.
“Jamie,” I said, lips trembling a bit. “The… baby . It wasn’ t
your fault. I felt as though it was, but it wasn’ t. I think… I
think it would have happened anyway , whether you’d fought
Jack Randall or not.”
“A ye? Ah… well.” His arm was warm and comforting
about m e, and he pressed my head into the curve of his
shoulder . “It eases me a bit to hear ye say so. It wasna the
child so much as Frank that I meant, though. D’ye think you
can for give me for that?” The blue eyes were troubled as he
looked down at me.
“Frank?” I felt a shock of surprise. “But… there’ s nothing
to fo r give.” Then a thought struc k me; perhaps he really didn’ t
know that Jack Randall was still alive – after all, he had been
arrested immediately after the duel. But if he didn’ t know… Itook a deep breath. He would have to find it out in any case;
perhaps better from me.
“Y ou didn’ t kill Jack Randall, Jamie,” I said.
T o my puzzlement, he didn’ t seem shocked or surprised.
He s hook his he ad, the afternoon sun striking sparks from his
hair . Not yet lo ng enough to l ace back again, it had grown
considerably in prison, and he had to brush it out of his eyes
continuously .
“I know that, Sassenach,” he said.
“Y ou do? But… what…” I was at a loss.
“Y ou… dinna know about it?” he said hesitantly .
A cold feeling c rept up my arm s, despite the heat of the
sun.
“Know what?”
He chew ed his lower lip, eyeing  me reluctantly . At last he
took a deep breath and let it out with a sigh.
“No, I didna kill him. But I wounded him.”
“Y es, Louise said you wounded him badly . But she said he
was recovering. ” Suddenly , I saw again in memory that last
scene in the Bois de Boulogne; the last thing I had seen before
the black ness took me. The shar p tip of Jamie’ s sword, slicing
through the rain-spattered doeskin. The sudden red stain that
darkened the fabric… and the an gle of the blade, glinting with
the force that drove it downward.
“Jamie!” I said, eyes widening with horror . “Y ou didn’ t…
Jamie, what have you done!”
He look ed down, rubbing his welted palm against the side
of his kilt. He shook his head, wondering at himself.
“I w as such a fool, Sassenach. I couldna think myself a
man and let him go unpunished for what he’d done to the wee
lad, and  yet… all the time, I kept thinking to myself, ‘Y e
canna ki ll the bastard outright, you’ve promised. Y e canna kill
him.’ ” He smile d faintly , without humor , looking down at the
marks on his palm.“My mind was boiling over lik e a pot of parritch on the
flame, y et I held to that though t. ‘Y e canna kill him.’ And I
didn’ t. But I was half-mad wi’ the fury of the fighting, and the
blood singing in my ears – an d I didna stop a moment to
remember why it was I must n ot kill him, beyond that I had
promised you. And when I had h im there on the ground before
me, and the mem ory of W entworth and Fer gus, and the blade
live in my hand-” He broke of f suddenly .
I felt the blood  draining from my head and sat down
heavily on a rock outcropping.
“Jamie,” I said. He shrugged helplessly .
“W ell, Sassenach,” he said, still avoiding my gaze, “all I
can say is, it’ s a hell of a place to be wounded.”
“Jesus.” I sat still, stunned by this revelation. Jamie sat
quiet beside me, studying the br oad backs of his hands. There
was still a small  pink mark on the back of the right one. Jack
Randall had driven a nail through it, in W entworth.
“D’ye hate me f or it, Claire?” His voice was soft, almost
tentative.
I shook my head, eyes closed.
“No.” I opened them, and saw h is face close by , wearing a
troubled frown. “I don’ t know what  I think now , Jamie. I really
don’ t. B ut I don’ t hate you.” I put a hand on his, and squeezed
it gently . “Just… let me be by myself for a minute, all right?”
 
Clad on ce more in my now-dry  gown, I spread my hands
flat on my thig hs. One silver , one gold. Both my wedding
rings were still there, and I had no idea what that meant.
Jack Randall would never father a child. Jamie seemed
sure of it, and I wasn’ t inclined to question him. And yet I still
wore Frank’ s ring, I still remem bered the man who had been
my first husband, could summon at will thoughts and
memories of who he had been, w hat he would do. How was it
possible, then, that he would not exist?I shook my head, thrusting back the wind-dried curls
behind my ears. I didn’ t know .  Chances were, I never would
know . But whether one could change the future or not – and it
seemed we had – I was certain that I couldn’ t change the
immediate past. What had been done had been done, and
nothing I could do now would alter it. Jack Randall would sire
no children.
A stone  rolled down the slope behind me, bouncing and
setting o f f small slides of gravel. I turned and glanced up, to
where Jamie, dressed once more, was exploring.
The rockfall above was recent. Fresh white surfaces
showed where the stained brown of the weathered limestone
had fractured, and only the sma llest of plants had yet gained a
foothold in this tumbled pile of  rock, unlike the thick growth
of shrubs that blanketed the rest of the hillside.
Jamie inched to one side, absorbed in finding handholds
through the intricacies of the f all. I saw him edge around a
giant boulder , hugging the rock, and the faint scrape of his dirk
against the stone came to me through the still afternoon air .
Then he disappeared. Expecting him to reappear round the
other si de of the rock, I waited, enjoying the sun on my
shoulders. But he didn’ t come back into sight, and after a few
moments, I grew worried. He m ight have slipped and fallen or
banged his head on a rock.
I t ook what see med forever to undo the fastenings of my
heeled b oots aga in, and still he had not come back. I rucked up
my skir ts, and started up the hill, bare toes cautious on the
rough warm rocks.
“Jamie!”
“Here, Sassenach.” He spoke behind me, startling me, and
I ne arly lost my  balance. He ca ught me by the arm and lifted
me down to a small clear space between the jagged fallen
stones.
He turned me toward the limestone wall, stained with
water rust, and smoke. And something more.
“Look,” he said softly .I looked where he pointed, up across the smooth expanse
of the cave wall, and gasped at the sight.
Painted beasts galloped across the rock face above me,
hooves spurning the air as they leaped toward the light above.
There were bison, and deer , grouped together in tail-raised
flight, and at the end of the rock shelf, a tracing of delicate
birds, w ings spread as they hov ered above the char ge of the
earthbound beasts.
Done in  red and black and ochre with a delicate grace that
used the  lines of the rock itself for emphasis, they thundered
soundlessly , haunches rounded with ef fort, wings taking flight
through the crevices of stone. They had lived once in the dark
of a cave, lit o nly by the flam es of those who made them.
Exposed to the sun by the fall of their sheltering roof, they
seemed alive as anything that walked upon the earth.
Lost in contemplation of the massive shoulders that thrust
their way from the rock, I didn’ t miss Jamie until he called me.
“Sassenach! Co me here, will y e?” There was something
odd abo ut his voice, and I hurrie d toward him. He stood at the
entrance of a small side-cave, looking down.
They lay behind an outcrop of th e rock, as though they had
sought shelter from the wind that chased the bison.
There were two of them, lying together on the packed earth
of the cave floo r . Sealed in the dry air of the cave, the bones
had endured, though flesh had long since dried to dust. A tiny
remnant of brown-parchment skin clung to the round curve of
one skul l, a strand of hair gone  red with age stirring softly in
the draft of our presence.
“My God,” I sai d, softly , as though I might disturb them. I
moved closer to Jamie, and his hand slid around my waist.
“Do you think… were they… killed here? A sacrifice,
perhaps?”
Jamie shook his head, staring p ensively down at the small
heap of delicate, friable bones.
“No,” he said. He, too, spoke  softly , as though in the
sanctuary of a church. He turned and lifted a hand to the wallbehind us, where the deer leaped and the cranes soared into
space beyond the stone.
“No,” he said again. “The folk  that made such beasts…
they cou ldna do such things.” He turned again then to the two
skeletons, entwined at our feet. He crouched over them,
tracing t he line of the bones with  a gentle finger , careful not to
touch the ivory surface.
“See how they l ie,” he said. “Th ey didna fall here, and no
one laid out their bodies. The y lay down themselves.” His
hand gli ded above the long arm bones of the lar ger skeleton, a
dark sha dow fluttering like a lar ge moth as it crossed the
jackstraw pile of ribs.
“He had  his arms around her ,”  he said. “He cupped his
thighs behind her own, and held her tight to him, and his head
is resting on her shoulder .”
His han d mad e passes over the bones, illuminating,
indicating, clothing them once more with the flesh of
imagination, so I could see them  as they had been, embraced
for the last time , for always. The small bones of the fingers
had fall en apart, but a vestig e of gristle still joined the
metacarpals of the hands. The tiny phalanges overlay each
other; they had linked hands in their last waiting.
Jamie had risen and was surv eying the interior of the
cavern, the late afternoon sun painting the walls with splashes
of crimson and ochre.
“There.” He pointed to a spot near the cavern entrance.
The rocks there were brown wi th dust and age, but not rusty
with water and erosion, like those deeper in the cave.
“That was the entrance, once,”  he said. “The rocks fell
once bef ore, and sealed this plac e.” He turned back and rested
a ha nd on the rocky outcrop that shielded the lovers from the
light.
“They must have felt their way around the cave, hand in
hand,” I said. “ Looking for a way out, in the dust and the
dark.”“A ye.” He rested his forehead against the stone, eyes
closed. “ And the  light was gone , and the air failed them. And
so they lay down in the dark to die.” The tears made wet tracks
through the dust on his cheeks. I brushed a hand beneath my
own eyes, and took his free hand, carefully weaving my
fingers with his.
He turne d to me, wordless, and the breath rushed from him
as h e pulled me hard against him. Our hands groped in the
dying light of the setting sun, ur gent in the touch of warmth,
the reassurance of flesh, reminded by the hardness of the
invisible bone beneath the skin, how short life is.P A R T  F I V E“I Am Come Home”3 0  L A L L Y B R O C H
I t wa s called Broch T uarach, fo r the ancient cylinder of
stone, bu ilt some hundreds of ye ars before, that poked up from
the hillside behind the manor . The people who lived on the
estate ca lled it “Lallybroch.” Insofar as I could gather , this
meant “lazy tower ,” which ma de at least as much sense as
applying the term “North-fac ing T ower” to a cylindrical
structure.
“How ca n something that’ s round face north?” I asked as
we mad e our way slowly down a long slope of heather and
granite, leading the horses in single file down the narrow ,
twisting path the red deer had trampled through the springy
growth. “It hasn’ t got  a face.”
“It has a door ,” Jamie said reasonably . “The door faces
north.” He dug i n his feet as the slope dropped sharply , hissing
through his teeth in signal to the  horse he led behind him. The
muscular hindqu arters in front o f me bunched suddenly , as the
cautious stride altered to a tentat ive mincing, each hoof sliding
a few inches in the damp earth before another step was risked.
The ho rses, purchased in Inverness, were good-sized,
handsome beasts. The wiry little Highland ponies would have
made much better work of the st eep slope, but these horses, all
mares, were meant for breeding, not work.
“All righ t,” I said, stepping care fully over a tiny runnel of
water that crossed the deer path . “Good enough. What about
‘Lallybroch,’ though? Why is it a lazy tower?”
“It l eans a bit,” Jamie replied. I could see the back of his
head, bent in concentration on the footing, a few tendrils of
red-gold hair lifting from the crown in the afternoon breeze
that blew  up the slope. “Y e cann a see it much from the house,
but if you stand  on the west side, you’ll see it leans to the
north a bit. And if ye look from one of the slits on the top floor
over the door , ye canna see the wall beneath you because of
the slant.”“W ell, I suppose no one had h eard of plumb lines in the
thirteenth century ,” I observed. “It’ s a wonder it hasn’ t fallen
down by now .”
“Oh, it’ s fallen down a numb er of times,” Jamie said,
raising h is voice slightly as the wind freshened. “The folk who
lived there just put it back up again; that’ s likely why it leans.”
“I see it! I see i t!” Fer gus’ s voice, shrill with excitement,
came fr om behind me. He had  been allowed to stay on his
mount, as his negligible weight was unlikely to cause the horse
any great dif ficulty , bad footin g notwithstanding. Glancing
back, I could see him kneeling o n his saddle, bouncing up and
down with excitement. His horse, a patient, good-natured bay
mare, gave a gr unt at this, but kindly refrained from flinging
him of f into th e heather . Ever since his adventure with the
Percheron colt at Ar gentan, Fer g us had seized every chance to
get o n a horse, and Jamie, amused and sympathetic to a fellow
horse-lover , had  indulged him, taking him up behind his own
saddle when he rode through the Paris streets, allowing him
now and  then to get up alone on one of Jared’ s coach horses,
lar ge sto lid creatures that merely flicked their ears in a puzzled
sort of way at Fer gus’ s kicks and shouts.
I shaded my e yes, looking in the direction where he
pointed. He was right; from his  higher vantage point, he had
spotted the dark form of the ol d stone broch, perched on its
hill. The  modern manor -house below was harder to see; it was
built of white-ha rled stone, and the sun reflected from its walls
as from  the surrounding fields. Set in a hollow of sloping
barley fi elds, it was still partly o bscured to our view by a row
of trees that formed the windbreak at the foot of a field.
I saw Jamie’ s head rise, and fix as he saw the home farm
of Lally broch below . He stood quite still for a minute, not
speaking, but I saw his shoulders lift and set themselves
square. The wind caught his hair and the folds of his plaid and
lifted them, as though he might rise in the air , joyous as a kite.
It re minded me of the way the sails of the ships had filled,
turning past the headland into t he shipping roads as they left
the harbor of Le Havre. I had stood on the end of the quay ,
watching the bustle and the co mings and goings of shippingand commerce. The gulls dived and shrieked among the masts,
their voices raucous as the shouting of the seamen.
Jared Munro Fraser had stood by me, watching benignly
the f low of pass ing seaborne wealth, some of it his. It was one
of his ships, the Portia , t hat would carr y us to Scotland . Jamie
had told me that all Jared’ s ships were named for his
mistresses, the figureheads carved in the likenesses of the
ladies in question. I squinted against the wind at the prow of
the ship,  trying to decide wheth er Jamie had been teasing me.
If not, I concluded, Jared preferred his women well endowed.
“I shall miss yo u both,” Jared said, for the fourth time in
half an hour . He  looked truly regretful, even his cheerful nose
seeming less upturned and optimistic than usual. The trip to
Germany had been a success; h e sported a lar ge diamond in
his s tock, and the coat he wore was a rich bottle-green velvet
with silver buttons.
“Ah, well,” he s aid, shaking his head. “Much as I should
like to keep the laddie with me,  I canna grudge him joy of his
homecoming. P erhaps I shall c ome to visit ye someday , my
dear; it’ s been long since I set foot in Scotland.”
“W e’ll miss you, too,” I told him, truthfully . There were
other people I would miss – Louise, Mother Hildegarde, Herr
Gerstmann. Mas ter Raymond most of all. Y et I looked forward
to returning to Scotland, to Lallybroch. I had no wish to go
back to Paris, and there were people there I most certainly had
no desire to see again – Louis of France, for one.
Charles Stuart, for another . Cau tious probing amongst the
Jacobites in Paris had confirmed Jamie’ s initial impression; the
small bu rst of optimism fired by Charles’ s boasting of his
“grand venture”  had faded, and while the loyal supporters of
King James held true to their  sovereign, there seemed no
chance that this stolid loyalty of stubborn endurance would
lead to action.
Let Charles make his own p eace with exile, then, I
thought. Our own was over . W e were going home.
“The baggage is aboard,” said a dour Scots voice in my
ear . “Th e master  of the ship says come ye along now; we sailwi’ the tide.”
Jared tu rned to Murtagh, then glanced right and left down
the quay . “Where’ s the laddie, then?” he asked.
Murtagh jerked his head down t he pier . “In the tavern yon.
Gettin’ stinkin’ drunk.”
I had wondered just how Jamie had planned to weather the
Channel crossin g. He had taken one look at the lowering red
sky of dawn tha t threatened later storms, excused himself to
Jared, and disappeared. Looking in the direction of Murtagh’ s
nod, I saw Fer gus, sitting on a piling near the entrance to one
grogshop, plainly doing sentry duty .
Jared, who had exhibited first disbelief and then hilarity
when informed of his nephew’ s disability , grinned widely at
this news.
“Oh, aye?” he said. “W ell, I hope he’ s left the last quart ’ til
we come  for him. He’ll be hell t o carry up the gangplank, if he
hasn’ t.”
“What d id he do that for?” I demanded of Murtagh, in
some exasperati on. “I told him I had some laudanum for him.”
I pa tted the silk  reticule I carrie d. “It would knock him out a
good deal faster .”
Murtagh merely  blinked once. “A ye. He said if he was
goin’ to  have a headache, he’d as soon enjoy the gettin’ of it.
And the whisky tastes a good bit better goin’ down than yon
filthy black stuf f.” He nodded at my reticule, then at Jared.
“Come on, then, if ye mean to help me wi’ him.”
In the forward cabin of the Portia , I had sat on  the
captain’ s bunk,  watching the steady rise and fall of the
receding shoreline, my husband’ s head cradled on my knees.
One eye  opened  a slit and looked up at me. I stroked the
heavy damp hair of f his brow . The scent of ale and whisky
hung about him like perfume.
“Y ou are going to feel exactly li ke hell when you wake up
in Scotland,” I told him.The other eye opened, and rega rded the dancing waves of
light reflected across the timber ed ceiling. Then they fixed on
me, deep pools of limpid blue.
“Between hell now , and hell later , Sassenach,” he said, his
speech m easured and precise, “I will take later , every time.”
His eyes closed. He belched so ftly , once, and the long body
relaxed, rocked at ease on the cradle of the deep.
 
The hors es seemed as eager as we; sensing the nearness of
stables a nd food , they began to  push the pace a bit, heads up
and ears cocked forward in anticipation.
I was just reflec ting that I could  do with a wash and a bite
to eat, myself, when my horse, slightly in the lead, dug in its
feet and  came to a slithering halt, hooves buried fetlock deep
in the reddish dust. The mare shook her head violently from
side to side, snorting and whooshing.
“Hey , la ss, what’ s amiss? Got a  bee up your nose?” Jamie
swung d own fro m his own mou nt and hurried to grab the gray
mare’ s bridle. Feeling the broad back shiver and twitch
beneath me, I slid down as well.
“Whatever is the matter with he r?” I gazed curiously at the
horse, which was pulling backward against Jamie’ s grip on the
bridle, shaking her mane, with e yes bugging. The other horses,
as th ough infected by her uneas e, began to stamp and shift as
well.
Jamie glanced briefly over his shoulder at the empty road.
“She sees something.”
Fer gus raised himself in his shortened stirrups and shaded
his e yes, staring over the mare’ s back. Lowering his hand, he
looked at me and shrugged.
I shr ugged back; there seemed to be nothing whatever to
cause th e mare’ s distress – the road and the fields lay vacant
all a round us, grain-heads rip ening and drying in the late
summer sun. The nearest grov e of trees was more than a
hundred yards away , beyond a s mall heap of stones that might
have been the remnants of a tumbled chimneystack. W olveswere alm ost unh eard of in cleare d land like this, and surely no
fox or badger would disturb a horse at this distance.
Giving u p the attempt to coax the mare forward, Jamie led
her in a half-ci rcle; she went w illingly enough, back in the
direction we had come.
He moti oned to Murtagh to lead the other horses out of the
way , the n swung himself into the saddle, and leaning forward,
one hand clutched in the ma re’ s mane, ur ged her slowly
forward, speaking softly in her ear . She came hesitantly , but
without resistan ce, until she rea ched the point of her previous
stopping. There she halted again and stood shivering, and
nothing would persuade her to move a step farther .
“All righ t, then,”  said Jamie, res igned. “Have it your way .”
He turn ed the horse’ s head and led her into the field, the
yellow g rain-heads brushing the shaggy hairs of her belly . W e
rustled after them, the horses b ending their necks to snatch a
mouthful of grain here and there as we passed through the
field.
As we rounded a small granite outcrop just below the crest
of t he hill, I heard a brief w arning bark just ahead. W e
emer ged onto the road to find a black and white shepherd dog
on guard, head up and tail stif f as he kept a wary eye on us.
He u ttered another short yap, a nd a matching black and
white figure shot out of a clu mp of alders, followed more
slowly by a tall , slender figure wrapped in a brown hunting
plaid.
“Ian!”
“Jamie!”
Jamie tossed the mare’ s reins back to me, and met his
brother -in-law in the middle of the road, where the two men
clutched each other round t he shoulders, laughing and
pounding each other on the back. Released from suspicion, the
dogs frolicked happily around them, tails wagging, darting
aside now and then to snif f at the legs of the horses.
“W e didna expect ye ’ til tomorrow at the earliest,” Ian was
saying, his long, homely face beaming.“W e had a good wind crossing ,” Jamie explained. “Or at
least Cl aire tells me we did; I wasna taking much notice,
myself.” He cast a glance back at me, grinning, and Ian came
up to grasp my hand.
“Good-sister ,” he said in formal greeting. Then he smiled,
the warmth of it lighting his  soft brown eyes. “Claire.”
Impulsively , he kissed my fingers, and I squeezed his hand.
“Jenny’ s gone daft wi’ cleaning and cooking,” he said, still
smiling at me. “Y ou’ll be lucky to have a bed to sleep in
tonight; she’ s got all the mattresses outside, being beaten.”
“After three nights in the heather , I wouldn’ t mind sleeping
on the floor ,” I assured him. “A re Jenny and the children all
well?”
“Oh, aye. She’ s breeding again,” he added. “Due in
February .”
“Again?”  Jamie and I spoke together , and a rich blush rose
in Ian’ s lean cheeks.
“God, man, wee Maggie’ s less than a year old,” Jamie
said, wi th a censorious cock of one brow . “Have ye no sense
of restraint?”
“Me?”  Ia n said indigna ntly . “Y e think I  had anything to do
with it?”
“W ell, if ye didn ’ t, I should think ye’d be interested in who
did,” Jamie said, the corner of his mouth twitching.
The blus h deepened to a rich rose color , contrasting nicely
with Ian’ s smooth brown hair . “Y e know damn well what I
mean,” he said. “I slept on the trundle bed wi’ Y oung Jamie
for two months, but then Jenny…”
“Oh, you’re saying my sister ’ s a wanton, eh?”
“I’m say ing she’ s as stubborn as  her brother when it comes
to gettin g what she wants,” Ian  said. He feinted to one side,
dodged neatly back and landed  a blow in the pit of Jamie’ s
stomach. Jamie doubled over , laughing.
“Just as well I’v e come home, then,” he said. “I’ll help ye
keep her under control.”“Oh, aye?” Ian said skeptically .  “I’ll call all the tenants to
watch.”
“Lost a few sheep, have ye?” Jamie changed the subject
with a gesture that took in the dogs and Ian’ s long crook,
dropped in the dust of the roadway .
“Fifteen yows and a ram,” Ian sa id, nodding. “Jenny’ s own
flock of merinos, that she kee ps for the special wool. The
ram’ s a right bastard; broke down the gate. I thought they
might have been in the grain up here, but nay sign o’ them.”
“W e didn’ t see them up above,” I said.
“Oh, they wouldna be up th ere,” Ian said, waving a
dismissive hand. “None o’ the beasts will go past the cottage.”
“Cottage?” Fer g us, growing impatient with this exchange
of c ivilities, had kicked his mo unt up alongside mine. “I saw
no cottage, milord. Only a pile of stones.”
“That’ s all that’ s left of MacNab’ s cottage, laddie,” said
Ian. He squinted up at Fer gus , silhouetted against the late
afternoon sun. “And ye’d be we ll-advised to keep away from
there yourself.”
The hair  prickled on the back of my neck, despite the heat
of the day . Rona ld MacNab was the tenant who had betrayed
Jamie to  the men of the W atch a year before, the man who had
died for  his treachery within a  day of its being found out.
Died, I rememb ered, among the ashes of his home, burned
over hi s head by the men of Lallybroch. The pile of
chimneystones, so innocent when we had passed them a
moment ago, had now the grim look of a cairn. I swallowed,
forcing back the bitter taste that rose at the back of my throat.
“MacNab?” Jamie said softly . His expression was at once
alert. “Ronnie MacNab?”
I had  told Jamie of MacNab’ s betrayal, and his death, but I
hadn’ t told him the means of it.
Ian nodded. “A ye. He died there, the night the English took
ye, J amie. The t hatch must ha’ caught from a spark, and him
too far gone in d rink to get out in time.” He met Jamie’ s eyes
straight on, all teasing gone.“Ah? And his wife and child?” Jamie’ s look was the same
as Ian’ s; cool and inscrutable.
“Safe. Mary MacNab’ s kitchen-maid at the house, and
Rabbie works in the stables.” Ian glanced involuntarily over
his shoulder in the direction o f the ruined cottage. “Mary
comes u p here now and again; s he’ s the only one on the place
will go there.”
“W as sh e fond of him, then?” J amie had turned to look in
the direction of the cottage, so his face was hidden from me,
but there was tension in the line of his back.
Ian shrugged. “I shouldna think so. A drunkard, and
vicious with it, was Ronnie; n ot even his auld mother had
much us e for him. No, I think Mary feels it her duty to pray
for his soul – much good it’ll do him,” he added.
“Ah.” Ja mie paused a moment as though in thought, then
tossed his horse’ s reins over its neck and turned up the hill.
“Jamie,” I said, but he was already walking back up the
road, toward the small clearing beside the grove. I handed the
reins I was holding to a surprised Fer gus.
“Stay here with the horses,” I said. “I have to go with
him.” Ia n moved to come with me, but Murtagh stopped him
with a shake of t he head, and I went on alone, following Jamie
up over the crest of the hill.
He h ad the long , tireless stride of a hill-walker , and had
reached the small clearing befor e I caught him up. He stood at
the e dge of wha t had been the outer wall. The square shape of
the cottage’ s earth floor was still barely visible, the new
growth t hat cov ered it sparser t han the nearby barley , greener
and wild in the shade of the trees.
There was little trace of the f ire left; a few chunks of
charred wood poked through the grass near the stone hearth
that lay open no w , flat and exp osed as a tombstone. Careful
not to step with in the outlines of the vanished walls, Jamie
began to walk around the cleari ng. He circled the hearthstone
three times, walking always wid dershins, left, and left, and left
again, to confound any evil that might follow .I sto od to one  side and watched. This was a private
confrontation, but I couldn’ t leave him to face it alone, and
though he didn’ t glance at me, s till I knew he was glad of my
presence.
At l ast he stopp ed by the fallen pile of stones. Reaching
out, he laid a hand gingerly on it and closed his eyes for a
moment, as though in prayer . Then, stooping, he picked up a
stone the  size of his fist, and pla ced it carefully on the pile, as
though it might weigh down the  uneasy soul of the ghost. He
crossed himself, turned and came toward me with a firm,
unhurried step.
“Don’ t look back,” he said quietly , taking me by the arm as
we turned toward the road.
I didn’ t.
 
Jamie, Fer gus, and Murtagh wen t with Ian and the dogs in
search o f the sheep, leaving m e to take the string of horses
down t o the house alone. I was far from being an
accomplished horse-handler , but thought I could manage half a
mile, so long as nothing popped out at me unexpectedly .
This was very dif ferent from our first homecoming to
Lallybroch; then, we had been in flight, both of us. Me from
the f uture, Jamie from his past.  Our residence then had been
happy , b ut tenuo us and insecure; always there was the chance
of d iscovery , of Jamie’ s arrest.  Now , thanks to the Duke of
Sandringham’ s intervention, Jamie had come to take
possession of his birthright, and I, my lawful place beside him
as his wife.
Then, w e had arrived disheveled, unexpected, a violent
disruption in the household. This time, we had come
announced, with due ceremony , bearing presents from France.
While I was sure our reception w ould be cordial, I did wonder
how Ian and Jamie’ s sister Jenny would take our permanent
return. A fter all, they had lived as master and mistress of the
estate for the last several years, ever since the death of Jamie’ s
father , and the disastrous events that had precipitated him into
a life of outlawry and exile.I t opped  the last hill without incident, and the manor house
and its outbuildings lay below me, slate roofs darkening as the
first banks of rain clouds rolled in. Suddenly , my mare started,
and so did I, struggling to keep a hold on the reins as she
curvetted and plunged in alarm.
Not that I could blame her; from around the corner of the
house ha d emer ged two huge, p uf fy objects, rolling along the
ground like overweight clouds.
“Stop that!” I shouted “Whoa!” All the horses were now
swerving and pulling, and I was  inches away from a stampede.
Fine homecoming, I thought, if I let all Jamie’ s new breeding
stock break their collective legs.
One of the clo uds rose slightly , then sank flat to the
ground, and Jenny Fraser Murray , released from the burden of
the f eather mattress she had bee n carrying, raced for the road,
dark curls flying.
W ithout a moment’ s hesitation, she leaped for the bridle of
the nearest animal, and jerked down, hard.
“Whoa!” she said. The horse, obviously recognizing the
voice of authority , did whoa. W ith a little ef fort, the other
horses were calmed, and by the  time I could slide down from
my saddle, we had been joined by another woman and a boy of
nine or ten, who  lent an experienced hand with the remaining
beasts.
I recognized young Rabbie MacNab, and deduced that the
woman must be his mother , M ary . The bustle and shuf fle of
horses, b undles and mattresses precluded much conversation,
but I had time for a quick hug of greeting with Jenny . She
smelled of cinnamon and hon ey and the clean sweat of
exertion, with an undertone of  baby-scent, that paradoxical
smell co mposed of spit-up milk, soft feces, and the ultimate
cleanliness of fresh, smooth skin.
W e clung together for a moment, hugging tight,
remembering our last embrace, when we had parted on the
edge of a night-dark wood – me to go in search of Jamie, she
to return to a newborn daughter .“How’ s little Maggie?” I asked, breaking away at last.
Jenny made a face, wryness mingled with pride. “She’ s
just wal king, an d the terror o’ the house.” She glanced up the
empty road. “Met Ian, did ye?”
“Y es, Jamie, Murtagh, and Fer g us went with him to find
the sheep.”
“Better them than us,” she said, with a quick gesture
toward t he sky . “It’ s coming on to rain any minute. Let Rabbie
stable th e horses  and you come lend a hand wi’ the mattresses,
or we’ll all sleep wet tonight.”
A fr enzy of activ ity ensued, but when the rain came, Jenny
and I were snu g in the parlor , undoing the parcels we had
brought from France, and admiring the size and precocity of
wee Maggie, a sprightly miss of some ten months, with round
blue eyes and a head of strawberry fuzz, and her elder brother ,
Y oung Jamie, a sturdy almost-four -year -old. The impending
arrival w as no more than a tiny bulge beneath their mother ’ s
apron, b ut I saw her hand rest tenderly there from time to time,
and felt a small pang to see it.
“Y ou mentioned Fer gus,” Jenny said, as we talked. “Who’ s
that?”
“Oh, Fe r gus? He’ s – well, he’ s-”  I hesitated, not sure quite
how to describe Fer gus. A pickpocket’ s prospects for
employment on a farm seemed limited. “He’ s Jamie’ s,” I said
at last.
“Oh, aye? W ell, I suppose he can sleep in the stable,” said
Jenny , resigned.  “Speaking of Jamie” – she glanced at the
window , where the rain was st reaming down – “I hope they
find those sheep soon. I’ve a good dinner planned, and I dinna
want it to spoil with keeping.”
In fact, darkness had fallen, an d Mary MacNab had laid
the t able before the men returned. I watched her at her work; a
small, fine-boned woman with dark-brown hair and a faintly
worried look that faded into a smile when Rabbie returned
from the  stables and went to the kitchen, hungrily asking when
dinner would be.“When the men are back, mo luaidh ,” she said, “Y e know
that. Go and wash, so you’ll be ready .”
When the men f inally did appear , they seemed a good deal
more in need of a wash than did Rabbie. Rain-soaked,
draggled, and muddy to the knees, they trailed slowly into the
parlor . Ia n unwound the wet plai d from his shoulders and hung
it ov er the firescreen, where it dripped and steamed in the heat
of the fire. Fer gus, worn out by his abrupt introduction to farm
life, sim ply sat down where he was and stared numbly at the
floor between his legs.
Jenny lo oked up at the brother she had not seen for nearly
a year . Glancing from his rain-drenched hair to his mud-
crusted feet, she pointed to the door .
“Outside, and of f wi’ your boots ,” she said firmly . “And if
ye’ve been in the high field, remember to piss on the doorposts
on y our way bac k in. That’ s how  ye keep a ghost from comin’
in the house,” she explained to me in a lowered tone, with a
quick look at t he door through which Mary MacNab had
disappeared to fetch the dinner .
Jamie, s lumped into a chair , op ened one eye and gave his
sister a dark-blue look.
“I land in Scotla nd near dead wi’ the crossing, ride for four
days over the hi lls to get here, and when I arrive, I canna even
come in  the house for a drop to wet my parched throat; instead
I’m of f through the mud, huntin ’ lost sheep. And once I do  get
here, ye  want to send me out in the dark again to piss on
doorposts. T cha!” He closed the eye again, crossed his hands
across h is stomach, and sank lower in his chair , a study in
stubborn negation.
“Jamie, my dearie,” his sister said sweetly . “D’ye want
your dinner , or shall I feed it to the dogs?”
He remained motionless for a long moment, eyes closed.
Then, w ith a hissing sigh of resignation, he got laboriously to
his feet.  W ith a moody twitch of his shoulder , he summoned
Ian and the two  of them turned, following Murtagh, who was
already out the d oor . As he pass ed, Jamie reached down a longarm, hau led Fer gus to his feet, and dragged the boy sleepily
along.
“W elcome home,” Jamie said morosely , and with a last
wistful glance at fire and whis ky , trudged out into the night
once more.3 1  M A I L  C A L L
A fter this inauspicious homec oming, matters rapidly
improved. Lallybroch absorbed Jamie at once, as though he
had nev er left, and I found myself pulled ef fortlessly into the
current o f farm life as well. It was an unsettled autumn, with
frequent rain, but with fair , bri ght days that made the blood
sing, too. The place bustled with life, everyone hurrying
through the harvest time and the preparations that must be
made for the coming winter .
Lallybroch was remote, even for a Highland farm. No real
roads led there, but the post still reached us by messenger ,
over the crags and the heather -clad slopes, a connection with
the world outside. It was a w orld that sometimes seemed
unreal in memory , as though I had never danced among the
mirrors of V ersailles. But the le tters brought back France, and
reading them, I could see the  poplar trees along the Rue
T remoulins, or hear the reverberating bong of the cathedral
bell that hung above L ’Hôpital des Anges.
Louise’ s child was born safely; a son. Her letters, rife with
exclamations a nd underlinings, overflowed with besotted
descriptions of the angelic Henri. Of his father , putative or
real, there was no mention.
Charles Stuart’ s letter , arriving a month later , made no
mention of the c hild, but according to Jamie, was even more
incoherent than  usual, seething with vague plans and
grandiosities.
The Ear l of Mar wrote soberly and circumspectly , but his
general annoyance with Charles was clear . The Bonnie Prince
was not  behaving. He was rude  and overbearing to his most
loyal fo llowers, ignored those who might be of help to him,
insulted whom he should not, talked wildly , and – reading
between the lines – drank to ex cess. Given the attitude of the
times re garding alcoholic intak e on the part of gentlemen, I
thought Charles’ s performance must have been fairlyspectacular , to occasion such comment. I supposed the birth of
his son had not, in fact, escaped his notice.
Mother Hildegarde wrote fro m time to time, brief,
informative note s squeezed into a few minutes that could be
snatched from her daily schedu le. Each letter ended with the
same words; “Bouton also sends his regards.”
Master R aymond did not write, but every so often, a parcel
would come addressed to me, unsigned and unmarked, but
containing odd things: rare herb s and small, faceted crystals; a
collection of stones, each the size of Jamie’ s thumbnail,
smooth and disc-shaped. Each one had a tiny figure carved
into one side, so me with lettering above or on the reverse. And
then the re were the bones – a bear ’ s digit, with the great
curved c law stil l attached; the complete vertebrae of a small
snake, articulate d and strung on a leather thong, so the whole
string flexed in a lifelike manner; an assortment of teeth,
ranging from a string of round, peglike things that Jamie said
came fr om a seal, through the high-crowned, scythe-cusped
teeth of  deer , to something that looked suspiciously like a
human molar .
From tim e to time, I carried some of the smooth, carved
stones in  my pocket, enjoying the feel of them between my
fingers. They were old; I knew that much. From Roman times
at least; perhaps even earlier . And from the look of some of the
creatures on them, whoever had carved them had meant them
to be magic. Whether they were like the herbs – having some
actual vi rtue – or only a symbol , like the signs of the Cabbala,
I didn’ t know . They seemed benign, though, and I kept them.
While I enjoyed the daily round of domestic tasks, what I
liked be st were the long walks to the various cottages on the
estate. I always carried a lar ge b asket with me on these visits,
containing an assortment of things, from small treats for the
children to the most commonly needed medicines. These were
called for frequently , for poverty and poor hygiene made
illness common , and there were no physicians north of Fort
W illiam or south of Inverness.
Some ailments I could treat read ily , like the bleeding gums
and skin eruptions characteristic of mild scurvy . Other thingswere beyond my power to heal.
 
I laid a hand on Rabbie MacNab’ s head. The shaggy hair
was damp at h is temples, but his jaw hung open, slack,
relaxed, and the pulse in his neck beat slowly .
“He’ s all right n ow ,” I said. His mother could see that as
well as I could;  he lay sprawled in the peaceful abandon of
sleep, cheeks flushed from the heat of the nearby fire. Still, she
stayed te nse and watchful, hovering over the bedstead until I
spoke. Once I had given absolut ion to the evidence of her own
eyes, she was willing to believe, though; her bunched
shoulders slumped under her shawl.
“Thank the Blessed Mother ,” M ary MacNab murmured,
crossing herself briefly , “and you, my lady .”
“I didn’ t do anything,” I protested. This was quite literally
true; the only service I had been able to render young Rabbie
was to make his  mother let him alone. It had, in fact, taken a
certain a mount of forcefulness to discourage her ef forts to feed
him bran mixed with cock’ s blood, wave burning feathers
under hi s nose, or dash cold w ater over him – none of these
remedies being of marked use to someone suf fering an
epileptic seizure. When I arrived, his mother had been volubly
regretting her inability to administer the most ef fective of
remedies: spring water drunk from the skull of a suicide.
“It frichts me so when he’ s taen like that,” Mary MacNab
said, ga zing longingly at the b ed where her son lay . “I had
Father MacMur try to him the last time, and he prayed a
terrible l ong tim e, and sprinkled holy water on the lad to drive
the de’ils out. B ut noo they’ve come back.” She clasped her
hands ti ght together , as though she wished to touch her son,
but couldn’ t bring herself to do so.
“It isn’ t devils,” I said. “It’ s only a sickness, and not all
that bed a one, at that.”
“A ye, my lady , a n’ ye say so,” she murmured, unwilling to
contradict me, but plainly unconvinced.“He’ll be all right.” I tried to reassure the woman, without
raising hopes that couldn’ t be m et. “He always recovers from
these fits, doesn’ t he?” The fits had come on two years ago –
probably the result of head injury from beatings administered
by his late father , I thought –  and while the seizures were
infrequent, they were undeniably terrifying to his mother when
they occurred.
She nodded reluctantly , plainly unconvinced.
“A ye… though he bangs his heid something fearful now
and then, thrashin’ as he does.”
“Y es, that’ s a ri sk,” I said patiently . “If he does it again,
just pull  him away from anything hard, and let him alone. I
know it looks bad, but really , h e’ll be quite all right. Just let
the fit run its course, and when i t’ s over , put him to bed and let
him sleep.” I kn ew that words w ere of limited value, no matter
how true  they might be. Something more concrete was needed
for reassurance.
As I turned to g o, I heard a small click in the deep pocket
of my skirt, and had a sudden inspiration. Reaching in, I pulled
out two or three  of the small smooth charmstones Raymond
had sent me. I selected the milky white one – chalcedony ,
perhaps – with the tiny figure of a writhing man carved into
one side. So that’ s what it’ s for , I thought.
“Sew this into h is pocket,” I said, laying the tiny charm
ceremoniously in the woman’ s hand. “It will protect him
from… from devils.” I cleared my throat. “Y ou needn’ t worry
about him, then, even if he has another fit; he’ll come out of it
all right.”
I l eft then, feeli ng at once extremely foolish and halfway
pleased, amidst an eager flood o f relieved thanks. I wasn’ t sure
whether I was becoming a better physician or merely a more
practiced charlatan. Still, if I co uldn’ t do much for Rabbie, I
could help his mother – or let her help herself, at least. Healing
comes from the healed; not fro m the physician. That much,
Raymond had taught me.
 I lef t the  house then, to do my errands for the day , calling
on tw o o f the cottages near the west end of the farm. All was
well at the Kirbys and the W est on Frasers, and I was soon on
my way  back to the house. At the top of a slope, I sat down
under a lar ge beech tree to rest for a moment before the long
walk back. The sun was coming  down the sky , but hadn’ t yet
reached the row of pines that top ped the ridge on the west side
of Lally broch. It was still late afternoon, and the world glowed
with the colors of late autumn.
The fallen beechmast was cool and slippery under me, but
a good many le aves still clung, yellowed and curling, to the
tree abo ve. I leaned back against the smooth-barked trunk and
closed my eyes, dimming the br ight glare of ripe barley fields
to a dark red glow behind my eyelids.
The stifling confines of the croft ers’ cottages had given me
a he adache. I le aned my head against the birch’ s smooth bark
and began to breathe slowly and deeply , letting the fresh
outdoor air fill my lungs, beginning what I always thought of
as “turning in.”
This was my own imperfect attempt to duplicate the
feeling of the process Master Raymond had shown me in
L ’Hôpital des Anges; a summo ning of the look and feel of
each bit  of myself, imagining exactly what the various or gans
and syst ems looked and felt like when they were functioning
properly .
I sat quietly , hands loose in my lap, and listened to the beat
of my heart. Beating fast from the exertion of the climb, it
slowed q uickly to a resting pace . The autumn breeze lifted the
tendrils of hair from my neck  and cooled my fire-flushed
cheeks.
I sat, eyes closed, and traced th e path of my blood, from
the secret, thick-walled chambers of my heart, blue-purple
through the pulmonary artery , reddening swiftly as the sacs of
the lung s dumped their burden of oxygen. Then out in a
bursting sur ge through the arch of the aorta, and the tumbling
race upward and down and out, through carotids, renals,
subclavians. T o the smallest capillaries, blooming beneath the
surface of the sk in, I traced the  path of my blood through thesystems of my body , remembe ring the feel of perfection, of
health. Of peace.
I sat still, breathing slowly , feeling languorous and heavy
as th ough I had  just risen from  the act of love. My skin felt
thin, my  lips slightly swollen, a nd the pressure of my clothes
was like  the touch of Jamie’ s ha nds. It was no random choice
that had invoked his name to cu re me. Whether it was health
of mind or body , the love of him was necessary to me as
breath o r blood. My mind reac hed out for him, sleeping or
waking, and finding him, was satisfied. My body flushed and
glowed, and as it came to full life, it hungered for his.
The hea dache was gone. I sat a moment longer , breathing.
Then I got to my feet and walked down the hill toward home.
 
I ha d never actu ally had a home. Orphaned at five, I had
lived the life of a academic vagabond with my uncle Lamb for
the next thirteen  years. In tents on a dusty plain, in caves in the
hills, in the sw ept and garnished chambers of an empty
pyramid, Quentin Lambert Beauchamp, M.S., Ph.D., F .R.A.S.,
etc., had  set up the series of temporary camps in which he did
the archaeological work that would make him famous long
before a  car crash ended his brother ’ s life and threw me into
his. Not one to dither over petty details like an orphaned niece,
Uncle Lamb had promptly enrolled me in a boarding school.
Not one  to accept the vagaries  of fate without a fight, I
declined absolutely to go there. And, recognizing something in
me t hat he had himself in abundant measure, Uncle Lamb had
shrugged, and on the decision of a heartbeat, had taken me
forever from the world of orde r and routine, of sums, clean
sheets, and daily baths, to follow him into vagabondage.
The roving life had continued with Frank, though with a
shift fro m field to universities, as the digging of a historian is
usually conducted within walls . So, when the war came in
1939, it was less a disruption to me than to most.
I ha d moved f rom our latest hired flat into the junior
nurses’ quarters at Pembroke Hospital, and from there to a
field sta tion in France, and back again to Pembroke beforewar ’ s end. And then, those fe w brief months with Frank,
before w e came to Scotland, see king to find each other again.
Only to lose each other once and for all, when I had walked
into a stone circle, through madness, and out the other side,
into the past that was my present.
It w as strange, t hen, and rather wonderful, to wake in the
upper bedroom at Lallybroch, n ext to Jamie, and realize, as I
watched the dawn touch his sl eeping face, that he had been
born in this bed. All the sounds of the house, from the creak of
the back stair under an earl y-rising maid’ s foot, to the
drumming rain on the roofslates, were sounds he had heard a
thousand times before; heard s o often, he didn’ t hear them
anymore. I did.
His mot her , Elle n, had planted the late-blooming rosebush
by the door . Its faint, rich scent still wafted up the walls of the
house to  the bedroom window . It was as though she reached in
herself, to touch him lightly in passing. T o touch me, too, in
welcome.
Beyond the house itself lay Lallybroch; fields and barns
and villa ge and crofts. He had  fished in the stream that ran
down from the hills, climbed t he oaks and towering larches,
eaten by the hearthstone of every croft. It was his place.
But he, too, had lived with disr uption and change. Arrest,
and the flight o f outlawry; the rootless life of a mercenary
soldier . Arrest again, imprisonment and torture, and the flight
into exil e so recently ended. But he had lived in one place for
his first  fourteen years. And ev en at that age, when he had
been sen t, as was the custom, to  foster for two years with his
mother ’ s brother , Dougal MacKenzie, it was part and parcel of
the life expected for a man who would return to live forever on
his land , to care for his tenants  and estate, to be a part of a
lar ger or ganism. Permanence was his destiny .
But there had been that space of absence, and the
experience of things beyond t he boundaries of Lallybroch,
even beyond the rocky coasts o f Scotland. Jamie had spoken
with kings, had touched law , and commerce, seen adventure
and violence and magic. Once the boundaries of home hadbeen transgressed, could destin y be enough to hold him? I
wondered.
As I  came dow n from the cre st of the hill, I saw him
below , heaving boulders into place as he repaired a rift in a
drystone dike that bordered one of the smaller fields. Near him
on the ground lay a pair of rabbits, neatly gutted but not yet
skinned.
“ ‘Home  is the sailor , home from the sea, and the hunter
home fr om the hill,’ ” I quoted, smiling at him as I came up
beside him.
He grinned back, wiped the sweat from his brow , then
pretended to shudder .
“Dinna mention  the sea to me, Sassenach. I saw two wee
laddies sailing a bit of wood in the millpond this morning and
nearly heaved up my breakfast at the sight.”
I lau ghed. “Y ou haven’ t any u r ge to go back to France,
then?”
“God, no. Not e ven for the brandy .” He heaved one last
stone to  the top of the wall and settled it into place. “Going
back to the house?”
“Y es. Do you want me to take the rabbits?”
He s hook his head, and bent to pick them up. “No need;
I’m going back myself. Ian nee ds a hand wi’ the new storage
cellar for the potatoes.”
The first potato crop ever plant ed on Lallybroch was due
for harvest within a few days, and – on my timorous and
inexpert advice – a small root-c ellar was being dug to house
them. I had disti nctly mixed feelings, whenever I looked at the
potato fi eld. On the one hand, I felt considerable pride in the
sprawling, leafy vines that covered it. On the other , I felt
complete panic at the thought th at sixty families might depend
on w hat lay under those vine s for sustenance through the
winter . It was on  my advice – given hastily a year ago – that a
prime ba rley field had been plan ted in potatoes, a crop hitherto
unknown in the Highlands.I kn ew that in the fullness of time, potatoes would become
an im portant staple of life in the  Highlands, less susceptible to
blight and failure than the crop s of oats and barley . Knowing
that from a para graph read in a geography book long ago was
a far  cry from deliberately taking responsibility for the lives of
the people who would eat the crop.
I wondered if th e taking of risks  for other people got easier
with pra ctice. Jamie did it routinely , managing the af fairs of
the estate and the tenants as though he had been born to it. But,
of course, he had  been born to it.
“Is the cellar nearly ready?” I asked.
“Oh, aye . Ian’ s got the doors built, and the pit’ s nearly dug.
It’ s only there’ s a soft bit of earth near the back, and his peg
gets stuck in wh en he stands there.” While Ian managed very
well on the woo den peg he wore in substitute for his lower
right leg, there were the occasional awkwardnesses such as
this.
Jamie glanced thoughtfully up the hill behind us. “W e’ll
need the cellar finished and cov ered by tonight; it’ s going to
rain again before dawn.”
I turned  to look in the direction of his gaze. Nothing
showed on the slope but grass and heather , a few trees, and the
rocky seams of granite that poked bony ridges through the
scruf fy over growth.
“How in hell can you tell that?”
He s miled, pointing uphill with his chin. “See the small
oak tree? And the ash nearby?”
I glanced at the trees, baf fled. “Y es. What about them?”
“The leaves, Sassenach. See how both trees look lighter
than usual? When there’ s damp in the air , the leaves of an oak
or an ash will t urn, so ye see the underside. The whole tree
looks several shades lighter .”
“I suppose it does,” I agreed doubtfully . “If you happen to
know what color the tree is normally .”Jamie laughed and took my arm . “I may not have an ear
for musi c, Sasse nach, but I’ve e yes in my head. And I’ve seen
those trees maybe ten thousand times, in every weather there
is.”
It was some wa y from the field  to the farmhouse, and we
walked in silence for the most part, enjoying the brief warmth
of the afternoon sun on our backs. I snif fed the air , and thought
that Jam ie was probably right a bout the coming rain; all the
normal autumn smells seemed intensified, from the sharp pine
resins to  the dusty smell of ripe grain. I thought that I must be
learning, myself; becoming attuned to the rhythms and sights
and sme lls of Lallybroch. Maybe in time, I would come to
know it as well as Jamie did. I squeezed his arm briefly , and
felt the pressure of his hand on mine in response.
“D’ye miss France, Sassenach?” he said suddenly .
“No,” I said, startled. “Why?”
He shru gged, not looking at m e. “W ell, it’ s only I was
thinking, seeing ye come down the hill wi’ the basket on your
arm, how  bonny  ye looked wi’ the sun on your brown hair . I
thought you looked as though y e grew there, like one of the
saplings – like ye’d always been a part of this place. And then
it str uck me, tha t to you, Lallybroch’ s maybe a poor wee spot.
There’ s no grand life, like th ere was in France; not even
interesting work, as ye had at the Hôpital.” He glanced down
at me shyly .
“I s uppose I w orry you’ll grow bored wi’ it here – in
time.”
I paused before answering, though it wasn’ t something I
hadn’ t thought about.
“In time ,” I said carefully . “Ja mie – I’ve seen a lot of
things in my lif e, and been in a lot of places. Where I came
from – there were things there that I miss sometimes. I’d like
to ri de a London omnibus agai n, or pick up a telephone and
talk to someone  far away . I’d like to turn a tap, and have hot
water , not carry it from the wel l and heat it in a cauldron. I’d
like all that – but I don’ t need i t. As for a grand life, I didn’ t
want it when I had it. Nice clo thes are all very well, but ifgossip and scheming and worry and silly parties and tiny rules
of etiquette go with them… no. I’d as soon live in my shift and
say what I like.”
He laughed at that, and I squeezed his arm once more.
“As for the work… there’ s work for me here.” I glanced
down into the b asket of herbs and medicines on my arm. “I
can be useful. A nd if I miss Mother Hildegarde, or my other
friends – well, it isn’ t as fast as a telephone, but there are
always letters.”
I s toppe d, holding his arm, and looked up at him. The sun
was setting, and the light gilded  one side of his face, throwing
the strong bones into relief.
“Jamie… I only want to be where you are. Nothing else.”
He stood still for a moment, then leaned forward and
kissed me very gently on the forehead.
 
“It’ s funny ,” I said as we came over the crest of the last
small h ill that led down to the house. “I had just been
wondering the same kinds of thi ngs about you . Whether you’d
be happy here, after the things you did in France.”
He smiled, half-ruefully , and looked toward the house, its
three stories of w hite-harled stone glowing gold and umber in
the sunset.
“W ell, it’ s home, Sassenach. It’ s my place.”
I tou ched him ge ntly on the arm . “And you were born to it,
you mean?”
He drew a deep breath, and reached out to rest a hand on
the w ooden fence-rail that sepa rated this lower field from the
grounds near the house.
“W ell, i n fact I wasna born to it, Sassenach. By rights, it
should have been W illie was lairdie here. Had he lived, I
expect I  would have been a soldier – or maybe a merchant,
like Jared.”W illie, J amie’ s elder brother , had died of the smallpox at
the age of eleven, leaving his s mall brother , aged six, as the
heir to Lallybroch.
He made an odd half-shrugging gesture, as though seeking
to e ase the pres sure of his shirt across his shoulders. It was
something he did when feeling awkward or unsure; I hadn’ t
seen him do it in months.
“But W i llie died . And so I am l aird.” He glanced at me, a
little shy ly , then  reached into his  sporran and pulled something
out. A little che rrywood snake that W illie had carved for him
as a  birthday gift lay on his p alm, head twisted as though
surprised to see the tail following it.
Jamie stroked the little snake gently; the wood was shiny
and seasoned with handling, the  curves of the body gleaming
like scales in early twilight.
“I talk to W illie, sometimes, in my mind,” Jamie said. He
tilted the  snake on his palm. “If you’d lived, Brother , if ye’d
been laird as you were meant to be, would ye do what I’ve
done? or would ye find a better way?” He glanced down at me,
flushing slightly . “Does that sound daft?”
“No.” I touched the snake’ s sm ooth head with a fingertip.
The high  clear call of a meadowlark came from the far field,
thin as crystal in the evening air .
“I do  the same,” I said softly , af ter a moment. “W ith Uncle
Lamb. And my parents. My m other especially . I – I didn’ t
think of her often, when I was young, just every now and then
I’d dream  about someone soft an d warm, with a lovely singing
voice. But when I was sick, after… Faith – sometimes I
imagined she was there. W ith me.” A sudden wave of grief
swept over me, remembrance of losses recent and long past.
Jamie touched my face gently , wiping away the tear that
had formed at the corner of one eye but not quite fallen.
“I th ink sometimes the dead che rish us, as we do them,” he
said softly . “Come on, Sassenach . Let’ s walk a bit; there’ s time
before dinner .”He linke d my arm in his, tight against his side, and we
turned along the fence, walking  slowly , the dry grass rustling
against my skirt.
“I k en what ye mean, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “I hear my
father ’ s voice sometimes, in the barn, or in the field. When I’m
not even  thinkin ’ of him, usuall y . But all at once I’ll turn my
head, as though I’d just heard hi m outside, laughing wi’ one of
the tenants, or behind me, gentling a horse.”
He l aughed suddenly , and nodded toward a corner of the
pasture before us.
“It’ s a wonder I dinna hear him here, but I never have.”
It was a thoroughly unremarkable spot, a wood-railed gate
in the stone fence that paralleled the road.
“Really? What did he used to say here?”
“Usually it was ‘If ye’re through  talkin’, Jamie, turn about
and bend ower .’ ”
W e laug hed, pausing to lean o n the fence. I bent closer ,
squinting at the wood.
“So this is wh ere you got smacked? I don’ t see any
toothmarks,” I said.
“No, it wasna all that bad,” he said, laughing. He ran a
hand af fectionately along the worn ash fence rail.
“W e used to get splinters in our fingers, sometimes, Ian
and me.  W e’d go up to the house after , and Mrs. Crook or
Jenny would pick them out for us – scolding all the time.”
He glanced toward the manor , where all the first-floor
windows glowed with light against the gathering night. Dark
forms m oved br iefly past the windows; small, quick-moving
shadows in the kitchen window s, where Mrs. Crook and the
maids were at the dinner preparations. A lar ger form, tall and
slender as a fenc e rail, loomed s uddenly in one of the drawing
room windows. Ian stood a mom ent, silhouetted in the light as
though called by Jamie’ s reminiscence. Then he drew the
curtains and the window dulled to a softer , shrouded glow .“I was always glad when Ian was with me,” Jamie said,
still looking toward the house. “ When we got caught at some
devilry and got thrashed for it, I mean.”
“Misery loves company?” I said, smiling.
“A b it. I didna feel quite so wi cked when there were the
two of us to sh are the guilt between. But it was more that I
could always count on him to make a lot of noise.”
“What, to cry out, you mean?”
“A ye. He’d always howl and carry on something awful,
and I knew he would do it, so I didna feel so ashamed of my
own noise, if I had to cry out.” It was too dark to see his face
anymore, but I could still see the half-shrugging gesture he
made when embarrassed or uncomfortable.
“I a lways tried not to, of cou rse, but I couldna always
manage. If my da thought it worth thrashing me over , he
thought it worth doing a proper job. And Ian’ s father had a
right arm like a tree bole.”
“Y ou know ,” I s aid, glancing down at the house, “I never
thought of it particularly before, but why on earth did your
father thrash you out here, Jami e? Surely there’ s enough room
in the house – or the barn.”
Jamie was silent for a moment, then shrugged again.
“I d idna ever as k. But I reckon it was something like the
King of France.”
“The Ki ng of France.” This apparent non sequitur took me
aback a bit.
“A ye. I dinna ken,” he said dry ly , “quite what it’ s like to
have to wash and dress and mov e your bowels in public, but I
can tell ye that  it’ s a verra humbling experience to have to
stand there and explain to one  of your father ’ s tenants just
what ye did that’ s about to get your arse scalded for ye.”
“I imagine it must be,” I said, sympathy mingled with the
ur ge to laugh. “B ecause you were going to be laird, you mean?
That’ s why he made you do it here?”“I expect so. The tenants would know I understood justice
– at least, from the receiving end.”3 2  F I E L D  O F  D R E A M S
T he fi eld had bee n plowed in the usual “rigs,” high ridges
of piled  earth, with deep furrows drawn between them. The
rigs rose knee-high, so a man walking down the furrows could
sow his seed easily by hand along the top of the rig beside
him. Designed for the planting of barley or oats, no reason had
been seen to alter them for the planting of potatoes.
“It said ‘hills,’ ”  Ian said, peering over the leafy expanse of
the potato field, “but I thought the rigs would do as well. The
point of the hills seemed to be to keep the things from rotting
wi’ too much water , and an old field wi’ high rigs seemed like
to do that as well.”
“That seems sensible,” Jamie agreed. “The top parts seem
to be flourishing , anyway . Does the man say how ye ken when
to dig the things up, though?”
Char ged with the planting of po tatoes in a land where no
potato h ad ever been seen, Ian had proceeded with method and
logic, sending to Edinbur gh bot h for seed potatoes, and for a
book on  the subject of planting. In due course, A Scientific
T r eatise on Methods of Farming , by Sir W alter O’Bannion
Reilly had made its appearance, with a small section on potato
planting as presently practiced in Ireland.
Ian was carrying this substantia l volume under one arm –
Jenny h ad told me that he wouldn’ t go near the potato field
without it, lest some knotty question of philosophy or
technique occur to him while there – and now flipped it open,
bracing it on one forearm as he groped in his sporran for the
spectacles he wore when reading. These had belonged to his
late father; small circles of g lass, set in wire rims, and
customarily wor n on the end of his nose, they made him look
like a very earnest young stork.
“Harvesting o f the crop should be undertaken
simultaneously with the appearance of the first winter goose,”
he read, then looked up, squinting accusingly over hisspectacles at the potato field, as though expecting an indicative
goose to stick its head up among the furrowed rigs.
“W inter goose?” Jamie peered frowning at the book over
Ian’ s shoulder . “What sort of go ose does he mean? Greylags?
But ye see those all year . That canna be right.”
Ian shrugged. “Maybe ye only see them in the winter in
Ireland. Or maybe it’ s some kind of Irish goose he means, and
not greylags at all.”
Jamie sn orted. “ W ell, the fat lot of good that does us. Does
he say anything useful?”
Ian ran a finger  down the line s of type, moving his lips
silently . W e had by now collected a small crowd of cottars, all
fascinated by this novel approach to agriculture.
“Y e dinna dig potatoes when i t’ s wet,” Ian informed us,
eliciting a louder snort from Jamie.
“Hmm,” Ian murmured to himself. “Potato rot, potato bugs
– we  did na ha’ any potato bugs, I suppose that’ s lucky – potato
vines… umm, no, that’ s only what to do if the vines wilt.
Potato b light – we canna tell if  we have that until we see the
potatoes. Seed potatoes, potato storage-”
Impatient, Jamie turned away from Ian, hands on his hips.
“Scientific farming, eh?” he demanded. He glared at the
field of darkgreen, leafy vine s. “I suppose it’ s too damn
scientific to explain how ye tel l when the bloody things are
ready to eat!”
Fer gus, who had been tagging along behind Jamie as usual,
looked up from a caterpillar , in ching its slow and fuzzy way
along his forefinger .
“Why don’ t you just dig one up and see?” he asked.
Jamie stared at Fer gus for a moment. His mouth opened,
but n o sound em er ged. He shut it, patted Fer gus gently on the
head, and went to fetch a pitchf ork from its place against the
fence.
The cottars, all men who had helped to plant and tend the
field und er Ian’ s direction – ass isted by Sir W alter – clusteredround to see the results of their labor .
Jamie chose a la r ge and flourishing vine near the edge of
the field  and poised the fork carefully near its roots. V isibly
holding his breath, he put a foot on the heel of the fork and
pushed. The tines slid slowly into the damp brown dirt.
I wa s holding my own breath. There was a good deal more
depending on this experiment than the reputation of Sir W alter
O’Bannion Reilly . Or my own, for that matter .
Jamie and Ian h ad confirmed that the barley crop this year
was sma ller than normal, though still suf ficient for the needs
of th e Lallybroch tenants. Another bad year would exhaust the
meager reserves of grain, though. For a Highland estate,
Lallybroch was prosperous; but that was saying something
only by comparison with othe r Highland farms. Successful
potato planting could well make the dif ference between hunger
and plenty for the folk of Lallybroch over the next two years.
Jamie’ s heel pressed down and he leaned back on the
handle of the for k. The earth crumbled and cracked around the
vine, an d with a sudden, rending pop  th e potato vine lifted up
and the earth revealed its bounty .
A co llective “Ah!” went up from  the spectators, at sight of
the myr iad brown globules clinging to the roots of the
uprooted vine. Ian and I both fell to our knees in the dirt,
scrabbling in the loosened soil for potatoes severed from the
parent vine.
“It w orked!” Ian kept saying as he pulled potato after
potato out of the ground. “Look at that! See the size of it?”
“Y es, look at this one!” I exclaimed in delight, brandishing
one the size of my two fists held together .
At le ngth, we ha d the produce o f our sample vine laid in a
basket; perhaps ten good-sized potatoes, twenty-five or so fist-
size spe cimens, and a number o f small things the size of golf
balls.
“What d’ye think?” Jamie s crutinized our collection
quizzically . “Ou ght we to leave the rest, so the little ones will
grow more? Or take them now , before the cold comes?”Ian groped absently for his spe ctacles, then remembered
that Sir W alter was over by t he fence, and abandoned the
ef fort. He shook his head.
“No, I think this is right,” he said. “The book says ye keep
the b ittie ones fo r the seed potat oes for next year . W e’ll want a
lot o f th ose.” H e gave me a grin of relieved delight, his hank
of thick, straight brown hair dropping across his forehead.
There was a smudge of dirt down the side of his face.
One of the cottars’ wives was  bending over the basket,
peering at its contents. She reac hed out a tentative finger and
prodded one of the potatoes.
“Y e eat them, ye say?” Her brow creased skeptically . “I
dinna se e how ye’d ever grind them in a quern for bread or
parritch.”
“W ell, I dinna believe ye grind them, Mistress Murray ,”
Jamie explained courteously .
“Och, aye?” The woman squinted censoriously at the
basket. “W ell, what d’ye do wi’ them, then?”
“W ell, you…” Jamie started, and then stopped. It occurred
to me, as it no doubt had to him, that while he had eaten
potatoes in France, he had neve r seen one prepared for eating.
I hid a smile as he stared helplessly at the dirt-crusted potato in
his hand. Ian als o stared at it; apparently Sir W alter was mute
on the subject of potato cooking.
“Y ou ro ast them .” Fer gus came to the rescue once more,
bobbing up under Jamie’ s arm. He smacked his lips at the
sight of the pota toes. “Put them in the coals of the fire. Y ou eat
them with salt. Butter ’ s good, if you have it.”
“W e have it,” said Jamie, with an air of relief. He thrust the
potato a t Mrs. Murray , as though anxious to be rid of it. “Y ou
roast them,” he informed her firmly .
“Y ou ca n boil them, too,” I co ntributed. “Or mash them
with milk. Or fry them. Or chop them up and put them in soup.
A very versatile vegetable, the potato.”
“That’ s what the book says,” Ian murmured, with
satisfaction.Jamie looked at me, the corner  of his mouth curling in a
smile.
“Y e never told me you could cook, Sassenach.”
“I w ouldn’ t call it cooking, exac tly ,” I said, “but I probably
can boil a potato.”
“Good.” Jamie cast an eye at the  group of tenants and their
wives, w ho were passing the potatoes from hand to hand,
looking them over rather dubiously . He clapped his hands
loudly to attract attention.
“W e’ll be having supper here b y the field,” he told them.
“Let’ s be fetching a bit of wood for a fire, T om and W illie, and
Mrs. W illie, if y e’d be so kind as to bring your big kettle? A ye,
that’ s good, one of the men will  help ye to bring it down. Y ou,
Kincaid-” He turned to one of th e younger men, and waved of f
in th e direction of the small cluster of cottages under the trees.
“Go and tell everyone – it’ s potatoes for supper!”
And so, with the  assistance of Jenny , ten pails of milk from
the dairy shed, three chickens caught from the coop, and four
dozen lar ge leeks from the kailyard, I presided over the
preparation of cock-a-leekie soup and roasted potatoes for the
laird and tenants of Lallybroch.
The sun  was below the horizon by the time the food was
ready , but the sky was still alight, with streaks of red and gold
that lanced through the dark bra nches of the pine grove on the
hill. There was a little hesitation when the tenants came face-
to-face with the proposed addition to their diet, but the party-
like atmosphere  – helped along by a judicious keg of home-
brewed whisky – overcame any misgivings, and soon the
ground near the potato field w as littered with the forms of
impromptu diners, hunched over bowls held on their knees.
“What d’ye think, Dorcas?” I ov erheard one woman say to
her neighbor . “It’ s a wee bit queer -tasting, no?”
Dorcas, so addressed, nodded and swallowed before
replying.
“A ye, it is. But t he laird’ s eaten six o’ the things so far , and
they havena kilt him yet.”The resp onse from the men and  children was a good deal
more enthusiastic, likely owing to the generous quantities of
butter supplied with the potatoes.
“Men would eat horse droppings, if ye served them wi’
butter ,” Jenny said, in answer to an observation along these
lines. “M en! A full belly , and a place to lie down when they’re
drunk, and that’ s all they ask o’ life.”
“A wonder ye put up wi’ Jam ie and me,” Ian teased,
hearing her , “seein’ ye’ve such a low opinion of men.”
Jenny waved her soup ladle dismissively at husband and
brother , seated side by side on the ground near the kettle.
“Och, you two aren’ t ‘men.’ ”
Ian’ s feathery brows shot upward, and Jamie’ s thicker red
ones matched them.
“Oh, we’re not? W ell, what are we, then?” Ian demanded.
Jenny turned toward him with a  smile, white teeth flashing
in th e firelight. She patted Jam ie on the head, and dropped a
kiss on Ian’ s forehead.
“Y ou’re mine,” she said.
 
After supper , one of the men  began to sing. Another
brought out a w ooden flute and accompanied him, the sound
thin but piercing in the cold aut umn night. The air was chilly ,
but there was n o wind, and it was cozy enough, wrapped in
shawls and blankets, huddled in small family clusters round
the fire. The bl aze had been b uilt up after the cooking, and
now made a substantial dent in the darkness.
It was warm, if a trifle active, in our own family huddle.
Ian had gone to  fetch another armload of wood, and baby
Maggie clung to her mother , forcing her elder brother to seek
refuge and body warmth elsewhere.
“I’m going to sti ck ye upside down in yonder kettle, an’ ye
dinna le ave of f pokin’ me in the balls,” Jamie informed his
nephew , who was squirming vigorously on his uncle’ s lap.
“What’ s the matter , then – have ye got ants in your drawers?”This query was greeted with a gale of giggles and a
marked ef fort to burrow into his host’ s midsection. Jamie
groped i n the dark, making deliberately clumsy grabs at his
namesake’ s arms and legs, then wrapped his arms around the
boy and  rolled suddenly over on top of him, forcing a startled
whoop of delight from small Jamie.
Jamie pinned his nephew forcib ly to the ground and held
him there with one hand while he groped blindly on the
ground i n the dark. Seizing a ha ndful of wet grass with a grunt
of sa tisfaction, he raised himself  enough to jam the grass down
the neck  of small Jamie’ s shir t, changing the giggling to a
high-pitched squeal, no less delighted.
“There, then,” Jamie said, rollin g of f the small form. “Go
plague your auntie for a bit.”
Small Ja mie obligingly scrambled over to me on hands and
knees, still giggling, and nestled on my lap among the folds of
my c loak. He sa t as still as is po ssible for an almost four -year -
old boy – which  is not very still, all things considered – and let
me remove the bulk of the grass from his shirt.
“Y ou smell nice, Auntie,” he said, buf fing my chin
af fectionately with his mop of black curls. “Like food.”
“W ell, thank you,” I said. “Ought I to take that to mean
you’re hungry again?”
“A ye. Is there milk?”
“There is.” I could just reach the stoneware jug by
stretching out my fingers. I shoo k the bottle, decided there was
not e nough left t o make it worth while to fetch a cup, and tilted
the jug, holding it for the little boy to drink from.
T emporarily absorbed in the taking of nourishment, he was
still, the small, sturdy body hea vy on my thigh, back braced
against my arm as he wrapped  his own pudgy hands around
the jug.
The last drops of milk gur gled from the jug. Small Jamie
relaxed all at once, and emitted a soft burp of repletion. I could
feel the heat g lowing from him, with that sudden rise of
temperature which presages f alling asleep in very youngchildren. I wrapped a fold of the  cloak around him, and rocked
him slowly back and forth, hum ming softly to the tune of the
song beyond the fire. The small bumps of his vertebrae were
round and hard as marbles under my fingers.
“Gone t o sleep, has he?” The lar ger Jamie’ s bulk loomed
near my shoulder , the firelight picking out the hilt of his dirk,
and the gleam of copper in his hair .
“Y es,” I said. “ At least he’ s not squirming, so he must
have. It’ s rather like holding a lar ge ham.”
Jamie laughed, then was still himself. I could feel the
hardness of his arm just brushing mine, and the warmth of his
body through the folds of plaid and arisaid.
A night breeze brushed a strand of hair across my face. I
brushed it back, and discovered that small Jamie was right; my
hands smelled of leeks and butter , and the starchy smell of cut
potatoes. Asleep , he was a dead weight, and while holding him
was com forting, he was cutting of f the circulation in my left
leg. I twisted a bit, intending to lay him across my lap.
“Don’ t move, Sassenach,” Jami e’ s voice came softly , next
to me. “Just for a moment, mo duinne  – be still.”
I obligingly froze, until he touched me on the shoulder .
“That’ s all right, Sassenach,” h e said, with a smile in his
voice. “It’ s only that ye looked  so beautiful, wi’ the fire on
your fac e, and your hair waving in the wind. I wanted to
remember it.”
I t urned to face  him, then, and  smiled at him, across the
body of the chi ld. The night was dark and cold, alive with
people a ll around, but there was nothing where we sat but light
and warmth – and each other .3 3  T H Y  B R O T H E R ’ S  K E E P E R
F er gus, after an initial period of silent watchfulness from
corners, had become a part of the household, taking on the
of ficial position  of stable-lad, along with young Rabbie
MacNab.
While Rabbie was a year or two younger than Fer gus, he
was as big as th e slight French lad, and they quickly became
inseparable friends, except on the occasions when they ar gued
– which  was two or three times a day – and then attempted to
kill each other . A fter a fight one  morning had escalated into a
punching, kicking, fist-swinging brawl that rolled through the
dairy shed and s pilled two pannikins of cream set out to sour ,
Jamie took a hand.
W ith an  air of l ong-suf fering gr imness, he had taken each
miscreant by the scruf f of a skinny neck, and removed them to
the privacy of t he barn, where, I assumed, he overcame any
lingering scruples he might have had about the administration
of physi cal retribution. He strode out of the barn, shaking his
head and buckling his belt back on, and left with Ian to ride up
the v alley to Bro ch Mordha. The boys had emer ged some time
later , su bstantially subdued and – united in tribulation – once
more the best of friends.
Suf ficiently subdued, in fact, to allow young Jamie to tag
along w ith them  as they did their chores. As I glanced out the
window later in the morning, I saw the three of them playing
in th e dooryard with a ball mad e of rags. It was a cold, misty
day , and  the boys’ breath rose i n soft clouds as they galloped
and shouted.
“Nice sturdy little lad you’ve got there,” I remarked to
Jenny , who was sorting through her mending basket in search
of a button. She glanced up, sa w what I was looking at, and
smiled.
“Oh, aye, wee Jamie’ s a dear lad.” She came to join me by
the window , peering out at the game below .“He’ s th e spit of his da,” she r emarked fondly , “but he’ s
going to be a good bit wider through the shoulder , I think.
He’ll ma ybe be the size of his uncle; see those legs?” I thought
she was  probab ly right; while small Jamie, nearly four , still
had the chunky roundness of a toddler , his legs were long, and
the sma ll back was wide and flat with muscle. He had the
long, gr aceful bones of his uncle, and the same air his lar ger
namesake projected, of bein g composed of something
altogether tougher and springier than mere flesh.
I watched the little boy pounce on the ball, scoop it up with
a de ft sn atch, and throw it hard enough to sail past the head of
Rabbie MacNab, who raced of f, shouting, to retrieve it.
“Something else  is like his uncle,” I said. “I think he’ s
maybe going to be left-handed, too.”
“Oh, Go d!” said Jenny , brow fur rowed as she peered at her
of fspring. “I hope not, but you’r e maybe right.” She shook her
head, sighing.
“Lord, w hen I think of the trouble poor Jamie had, from
being ca urry-fisted! Everybody tried to break him of it, from
my p arents to th e schoolmaster , but he always was stubborn as
a lo g, and wou ldna budge. Everybody but Ian’ s father , at
least,” she added, as an afterthought.
“He didn’ t think being left-handed was wrong?” I asked
curiously , aware  that the general opinion of the times was that
left-handedness was at the best unlucky , and at the worst, a
symptom of demonic possession. Jamie wrote – with dif ficulty
– with his right hand, because he had been beaten regularly at
school for picking up the quill with his left.
Jenny shook her head, black curls bobbing under her
kertch.
“No, he was a q ueer man, auld J ohn Murray . He said if the
Lord ha d chosen to strengthen Jamie’ s left arm so, then
’ twould be a sin  to spurn the gift. And he was a rare man wi’ a
sword, a uld John , so my father listened, and he let Jamie learn
to fight left-handed.”“I thought Dougal MacKenzie taught Jamie to fight left-
handed,” I said. I rather wonde red what Jenny thought of her
uncle Dougal.
She nod ded, licking the end of  a thread before putting it
through the eye of her needle with one quick poke.
“A ye, it  was, but that was later , when Jamie was grown,
and went to fos ter wi’ Dougal. It was Ian’ s father taught him
his first strokes.” She smiled, eyes on the shirt in her lap.
“I remem ber , when they were y oung, auld John told Ian it
was his job to stand to Jamie’ s  right, for he must guard his
chief ’ s weaker side in a fight. And he did – they took it verra
seriously , the two of them. And I suppose auld John was right,
at that,”  she added, snipping o f f the excess thread. “After a
time, nobody would fight them, not even the MacNab lads.
Jamie an d Ian were both fair -sized, and bonny fighters, and
when th ey stood shoulder to sho ulder , there was no one could
take the pair o’ them down, even if they were outnumbered.”
She laughed suddenly , and smo othed back a lock of hair
behind her ear .
“W atch them sometime, when they’re walking the fields
together . I dinna suppose they e ven realize they do it still, but
they do. Jamie a lways moves to the left, so Ian can take up his
place on the right, guardin’ the weak side.”
Jenny gazed out the window , the shirt momentarily
for gotten in her lap, and laid a hand over the small swelling of
her stomach.
“I h ope it’ s a boy ,” she said, looking at her black-haired
son belo w . “Lef t-handed or no, it’ s good for a man to have a
brother to help him.” I caught her glance at the picture on the
wall – a very yo ung Jamie, standing between the knees of his
elder brother , W illie. Both young faces were snub-nosed and
solemn; W illie’ s hand rested protectively on his little brother ’ s
shoulder .
“Jamie’ s lucky to have Ian,” I said.
Jenny lo oked away from the picture, and blinked once. She
was two years o lder than Jamie; she would have been threeyears younger than W illiam.
“A ye, he  is. And so am I,” she said softly , picking up the
shirt once more.
I too k a child’ s smock from the mending basket and turned
it inside out, to get at the ripped seam beneath the armhole. It
was too cold ou t for anyone but small boys at play or men at
work, b ut it was warm and cozy in the parlor; the windows
fogged over quickly as we wor ked, isolating us from the icy
world outside.
“Speaking of brothers,” I said, squinting as I threaded my
own needle, “did you see Dougal and Colum MacKenzie
much, as you were growing up?”
Jenny shook her head. “I’ve never met Colum. Dougal
came he re a time or two, bringing Jamie home for Hogmanay
or such, but I canna say I know him well.” She looked up from
her mending, slanted eyes bright with interest. “Y ou’ll know
them, though. T ell me, what’ s Colum MacKenzie like? I
always wondere d, from the b its of things I’d hear from
visitors, but my parents never would speak of him.” She
paused a moment, a crease between her brows.
“No, I’m wrong; my da did say something about him,
once. ’T was just after Doug al had left, to go back to
Beannachd wi’ Jamie. Da was leaning on the fence outside,
watching them ride out o’ sight, and I came up to wave to
Jamie – it alway s grieved me sor e when he left, for I didna ken
how long he’d be gone. Anyway , we watched them over the
crest of the hill, and then Da stirred a bit, and grunted, and
said, ‘God help Dougal MacKenzie when his brother Colum
dies.’ Then he s eemed to remember I was there, for he turned
round an d smiled at me, and said, ‘W ell, lassie, what’ s for our
dinner , then?’ and wouldna say more about it.” The black
brows, fine and bold as the st rokes of calligraphy , lifted in
puzzled inquiry .
“I thoug ht that odd, for I’d heard – who hasn’ t? – that
Colum is sore crippled, and Dougal does the chief ’ s work for
him, collecting rents and settling claims – and leading the clan
to battle, when needs be.”“He does. But-” I hesitated, un sure how to describe that
odd sym biotic relationship. “W ell,” I said with a smile, “the
closest I  can come is to tell you that once I overheard them
ar guing, and Colum said to Dou gal, ‘I’ll tell ye, if the brothers
MacKenzie have but one cock and one brain between them,
then I’m glad of my half of the bar gain!’ ”
Jenny gave a sudden laugh of surprise, then stared at me, a
speculative gleam deep in her blue eyes, so like her brother ’ s.
“Och, so  that’ s the way of it, is it? I did wonder once,
hearing Dougal talk about Colum’ s son, wee Hamish; he
seemed a bit fonder than an uncle might be.”
“Y ou’re quick, Jenny ,” I said, staring back at her . “V ery
quick. It  took me a long time to  work that out, and I saw them
every day for months.”
She shrugged modestly , but a sm all smile played about her
lips.
“I listen,” she s aid simply . “T o what folk say – and what
they don ’ t. And people do gossip something terrible here in
the High lands. So” – she bit of f a thread and spat the ends
neatly in to the palm of her hand  – “tell me about Leoch. Folk
say it’ s big, but not so grand as Beauly or Kilravock.”
W e worked and talked through the morning, moving from
mending to winding wool for kn itting, to laying out the pattern
for a  new baby dress for Maggie. The shouts from the boys
outside ceased, to be replaced by murmurous noises and
banging from the back of th e house, suggesting that the
younger male element had gotten cold and come to infest the
kitchens, instead.
“I w onder will i t snow soon?” Jenny said, with a glance at
the w indow . “There’ s wetness in the air; did ye see the haze
over the loch this morning?”
I s hook my head. “I hope not. That will make it hard for
Jamie and Ian, coming back.” The village of Broch Mordha
was less than ten miles from Lallybroch, but the way lay over
steadily rising hills, with steep a nd rocky slopes, and the road
was little more than a deer track.In th e event, it did snow , soon after noon, and the flakes
kept swirling down long past nightfall.
“They’ll have stayed in Broc h Mordha,” Jenny said,
pulling her nightcapped head in from an inspection of the
cloudy s ky , with its snow-pink glow . “Dinna worry for them;
they’ll b e tucked up cozy in someone’ s cottage for the night.”
She smi led reas suringly at me a s she pulled the shutters to. A
sudden wail came from down t he hall, and she picked up the
skirts of her nightrobe with a muf fled exclamation.
“Good night, Claire,” she called, already hurrying of f on
her maternal errand of mercy . “Sleep well.”
I usu ally did sleep well; in spite of the cold, damp climate,
the house was tightly constructed, and the goosefeather bed
was plentifully supplied with quilts. T onight, though, I found
myself restless without Jamie. The bed seemed vast and
clammy , my legs twitchy , and my feet cold.
I t ried lying on my back, hands  lightly clasped across my
ribs, eyes closed, breathing dee p, to summon up a picture of
Jamie; if I could imagine him there, breathing deeply in the
dark beside me, perhaps I could fall asleep.
The sou nd of a cock crowing at  full blast lifted me of f the
pillow , a s though a stick of dynamite had been touched of f
beneath the bed.
“Idiot!” I said, e very nerve in my body twanging from the
shock. I got u p and cracked the shutter . It had stopped
snowing, but the sky was still pale with cloud, a uniform color
from ho rizon to  horizon. The ro oster let loose another bellow
in the hen-coop below .
“Shut u p!” I said. “It’ s the middle of the night, you
feathered bastard!” The avian equivalent of a raspberry echoed
through the still night, and down the hall, a child began to cry ,
followed by a r ich but muf fled Gaelic expletive in Jenny’ s
voice.
“Y ou,” I said to the invisibl e rooster , “are living on
borrowed time.” There was no response to this, and after apause to  make certain that the rooster had in fact called it a
night, I closed the shutters and did the same.
The commotion had derailed any coherent train of thought.
Instead of trying to start anot her , I decided to try turning
inward, in the hopes that physical contemplation would relax
me enough to sleep.
It worke d. As I began to hover  on the edge of sleep, my
mind fixed somewhere around my pancreas, I could dimly
hear the sounds of small Jamie pattering down the hall to his
mother ’ s bedroom – roused from sleep by a full bladder , he
seldom had the presence of mind to take the obvious step, and
would f requently blunder down  the stair from the nursery in
search of assistance instead.
I had wondered, coming to Lallybroch, whether I might
find it dif ficult t o be near Jenny ; if I would be envious of her
easy fru itfulness. And I might have been, had I not seen that
abundant motherhood had its price as well.
“There’ s a pot right by your bed, clot-heid,” Jenny’ s
exasperated voic e came outside my door as she steered small
Jamie back to his bed. “Y e must have stepped in it on your
way out; why c an ye no get it through your heid to use that
one? W hy have ye got to come use mine, every night in
creation?” Her voice faded as she turned up the stair , and I
smiled, visualization moving down the sweeping curve of my
intestines.
There was another reason I did not envy Jenny . I had at
first feared that the birth of Faith had done me some internal
damage, but that fear had disappeared with Raymond’ s touch.
As I  com pleted t he inventory of my body , and felt my spine go
slack on  the edge of sleep, I cou ld feel that all was well there.
It ha d happened once, it could  happen again. All that was
needed was time. And Jamie.
Jenny’ s footsteps sounded on the boards of the hallway ,
quickening in response to a sleepy squawk from Maggie, at the
far end of the house.
“Bairns are certain joy , but nay sma’ care,” I murmured to
myself, and fell asleep. 
Through the next day , we wai ted, doing our chores and
going th rough the daily routine with one ear cocked for the
sound of horses in the dooryard.
“They’ll have stayed to do some business,” Jenny said,
outwardly confident. But I saw her pause every time she
passed the window that overlooked the lane leading to the
house.
As for me, I had a hard time controlling my imagination.
The letter , signed by King Geor ge, confirming Jamie’ s pardon,
was locked in the drawer of the desk in the laird’ s study . Jamie
regarded it as a  humiliation, and would have burned it, but I
had insisted it be kept, just in c ase. Now , listening for sounds
through the rush of winter wind, I kept having visions of it
having all been a mistake, or a hoax of some kind – of Jamie
once more arrested by red-coated dragoons, taken away again
to th e misery o f prison, and the impending danger of the
hangman’ s noose.
The men  returned at last just before nightfall, horses laden
with bags containing the salt, needles, pickling spice, and
other small items that Lallybroch could not produce for itself.
I heard one of the horses wh inny as it came into the
stableyard, and ran downstairs, meeting Jenny on her way out
through the kitchens.
Relief s wept through me as I saw Jamie’ s tall figure,
shadowed against the barn. I ran through the yard,
disregarding the  light covering of snow that lingered on the
ground, and flung myself into his arms.
“Where the hell have you been?” I demanded.
He t ook time to kiss me before r eplying. His face was cold
against mine, and his lips tasted faintly and pleasantly of
whisky .
“Mm, sausage for supper?” he said approvingly , snif fing at
my hair , which smelled of kit chen smoke. “Good, I’m fair
starved.”
“Bangers and mash,” I said. “Where have you been?”He laughed, shaking out his plaid to get the blown snow
of f. “Bangers and mash? That’ s food, is it?”
“Sausages with mashed potatoes,” I translated. “A nice
traditional English dish, hither to unknown in the benighted
reaches of Scotland. Now , you b loody Scot, where in hell have
you been for the last two days? Jenny and I were worried!”
“W ell, we had a wee accident -” Jamie began, when he
spotted the small figure of Fer gus, bearing a lantern. “Och,
ye’ve brought a light, then, Fe r gus? Good lad. Set it there,
where y e won’ t  set fire to the straw , and then take this poor
beast int o her stall. When ye’ve got her settled, come along to
your own supper . Y ou’ll be able to sit to it by now , I expect?”
He aimed a frien dly cuf f at Fer g us’ s ear . The boy dodged and
grinned back; apparently whatever had happened in the barn
yesterday had left no hard feelings.
“Jamie,” I said, in measured tones. “If you don’ t stop
talking about horses and sausages and tell me what sort of
accident you had, I am going to kick you in the shins. Which
will be very h ard on my toes, because I’m only wearing
slippers, but I warn you, I’ll do it anyway .”
“That’ s a threat, is it?” he said, laughing. “It wasna serious,
Sassenach, only that-”
“Ian!” Jenny , delayed moment arily by Maggie, had just
arrived, in time to see her husband step into the circle of
lanternlight. Startled by the shock in her voice, I turned to see
her dart forward and put a hand to Ian’ s face.
“Whatever happened to ye, man?” she said. Plainly ,
whatever the accident had been , Ian had borne the brunt of it.
One eye was blackened and swollen half-shut, and there was a
long, raw scrape down the slope of one cheekbone.
“I’m all right, mi dhu ,” he  sai d, patting Jenny gently as she
embraced him, little Maggie squ eezed uncomfortably between
them. “Only a bit bruised here and there.”
“W e we re comin’ down the sl ope of the hill two miles
outside the village, leading the h orses because the footing wasbad, and Ian ste pped in a moleh ole and broke his leg,” Jamie
explained.
“The wooden one,” Ian amplified. He grinned, a little
sheepishly . “The mole had a bit the best o’ that encounter .”
“So we stayed at a cottage nea rby long enough to carve
him a new one ,” Jamie ended the story . “Can we eat? The
sides of my belly are flapping together .”
W e wen t in without further ad o, and Mrs. Crook and I
served t he supp er while Jenny bathed Ian’ s face with witch
hazel and made anxious inquiries about other injuries.
“It’ s nothing,” he assured her . “Only bruises here and
there.” I had wa tched him coming into the house, though, and
seen that his normal limp was badly exaggerated. I had a few
quiet words with Jenny as we c leared away the supper plates,
and once we were settled in the parlor , the contents of the
saddlebags safely disposed of, she knelt on the rug beside Ian
and took hold of the new leg.
“Let’ s h ave it of f, then,” she said firmly . “Y ou’ve hurt
yourself, and I w ant Claire to lo ok it over . She can maybe help
ye more than I can.”
The original amputation had been done with some skill,
and greater luck; the army sur geon who had taken the lower
leg of f had been able to save th e knee joint. This gave Ian a
great deal more flexibility of movement than he might
otherwise have had. For the moment, though, the knee joint
was more a liability than an advantage.
The fall  had twisted his leg cruelly; the end of the stump
was blue with b ruising, and lacerated where the sharp edge of
the cuf f had pressed through the skin. It must have been agony
to se t any weigh t on it, even had all else been normal. As it
was, the  knee had twisted, too, and the flesh on the inside of
the joint was swollen, red and hot.
Ian’ s lo ng, good-natured face was nearly as red as the
injured joint. While perfectly matter -of-fact about his
disability , I knew he hated the occasional helplessness itimposed. His embarrassment at being so exposed now was
likely as painful to him as my touching of his leg.
“Y ou’ve torn a l igament through  here,” I told him, tracing
the swel ling inside his knee with a gentle finger . “I can’ t tell
how bad  it is, but bad enough. Y ou’ve got fluid inside the
joint; that’ s why it’ s swollen.”
“Can ye  help it, Sassenach?” Jamie was leaning over my
shoulder , frowning worriedly at the angry-looking limb.
I sho ok my head. “Not a lot I can do for it, beyond cold
compresses to reduce the swelli ng.” I looked up at Ian, fixing
him with my best approximation of a Mother Hildegarde look.
“What you  can  do,” I said, “is stay in bed. Y ou can have
whisky f or the pain tomorrow; tonight, I’ll give you laudanum
so y ou c an sleep. Keep of f it for  a week, at least, and we’ll see
how it does.”
“I canna  do that!” Ian protested. “There’ s the stable wall
needs m ending, two dikes down in the upper field, and the
ploughshares to be sharpened, and-”
“And a leg to mend, too,” said Jamie, firmly . He gave Ian
what I privately called his “laird’ s look,” a piercing blue glare
that caused most people to leap to his bidding. Ian, who had
shared meals, toys, hunting expeditions, fights, and thrashings
with Jamie, was a good deal less susceptible than most people.
“The hell I will ,” he said flatly . His hot brown eyes met
Jamie’ s with a look in which pain and anger mingled with
resentment – and something else I didn’ t recognize. “D’ye
think ye can order me?”
Jamie sa t back on his heels, flushing as though he’d been
slapped. He bit back several obvious retorts, finally saying
quietly , “No. I wilna try to order ye. May I ask ye, though – to
care for yourself?”
A long look passed between the men, containing some
message I couldn’ t read. At last,  Ian’ s shoulders slumped as he
relaxed, and he nodded, with a crooked smile.
“Y ou ca n ask.” He sighed, and rubbed at the scrape on his
cheekbone, wincing as he touched the abraded skin. He took adeep breath, steeling himself, then held out a hand to Jamie.
“Help me up, then?”
It w as a n awkwa rd job, getting a man with one leg up two
flights o f stairs, but it was managed at last. At the bedroom
door , Jamie left Ian to Jenny . As he stepped back, Ian said
something soft and quick to Ja mie in Gaelic. I still was not
proficient in the tongue, but I t hought he had said, “Be well,
brother .”
Jamie paused, looking back, and smiled, the candle
lighting his eyes with warmth.
“Y ou, too, mo brathair .”
I f ollow ed Jamie down the hall to our own room. I could
tell from the slum p of his shoulders that he was tired, but I had
a few questions I wanted to ask before he fell asleep.
“It’ s onl y bruise s here and there ,” Ian had said, reassuring
Jenny . It  was. Here and there. B esides the bruises on his face
and leg,  I had seen the darkened marks that lay half-hidden
under the collar of his shirt. No matter how much Ian’ s
intrusion had been resented, I c ouldn’ t imagine a mole trying
to strangle him in retaliation.
 
In the event, Jamie didn’ t want to sleep at once.
“Oh, absence makes the heart gr ow fonder , does it?” I said.
The bed , so vast the night before, now seemed scarcely big
enough.
“Mm?” he said, eyes half-closed in content. “Oh, the
heart? A ye, that, too. Oh, God, don’ t stop; that feels
wonderful.”
“Don’ t w orry , I’ll do it some more,” I assured him. “Let
me put out the c andle, though.” I rose and blew it out; with the
shutters left open, there was ple nty of light reflected into the
room from the s nowy sky , even without the candle’ s flame. I
could see Jamie clearly , the long shape of his body relaxed
beneath the quilts, hands curled half-open at his side. I crawled
in beside him a nd took up his right hand, resuming my slow
massage of his fingers and palm.He g ave a long sigh, almost a g roan, as I rubbed a thumb
in firm circles over the pads  at the base of his fingers.
Stif fened by hours of clenching  around his horse’ s reins, the
fingers warmed and relaxed slowly under my touch. The house
was quiet, and the room cold, outside the sanctuary of the bed.
It was pleasant to feel the len gth of his body warming the
space beside me, and enjoy the intimacy of touch, with no
immediate feeling of demand. In time, this touch might token
more; it was winter , and the nigh ts were long. He was there; so
was I, and content with things as they were for the moment.
“Jamie,” I said, after a time, “who hurt Ian?”
He didn’ t open his eyes, but gave a long sigh before
answering. He didn’ t stif fen in r esistance, though; he had been
expecting the question.
“I did,” he said.
“What?” I dropped his hand in shock. He closed his fist
and opened it, t esting the movement of his fingers. Then he
laid his left han d on the counte r -pane beside it, showing me
the knuckles, slightly puf fed by contact with the protuberances
of Ian’ s bony countenance.
“Why?” I said, appalled. I c ould tell that there was
something new and edgy between Jamie and Ian, though it
didn’ t look exactly like hostility . I couldn’ t imagine what
might have made Jamie strike Ian; his brother -in-law was
nearly as close to him as was his sister , Jenny .
Jamie’ s eyes were open now , b ut not looking at me. He
rubbed his knuckles restlessly , looking down at them. Aside
from the mild bruising of his knuckles, there were no marks on
Jamie; apparently Ian hadn’ t fought back.
“W ell, Ian’ s been married too long,” he said defensively .
“I’d say  you’d been out in the sun too long,” I remarked,
staring at him, “except that the re isn’ t any . Have you got a
fever?”
“No,” h e said, evading my attempts to feel his forehead.
“No, it’ s only – stop that, Sassenach, I’m all right.” He pressed
his lips together , but then gave up and told me the whole story .Ian had in fact broken his wooden leg by stepping into a
molehole near Broch Mordha.
“It w as n ear evening – we’d had a lot to do in the village –
and snow ing. An d I could see Ian’ s leg was paining him a lot,
even though he kept insisting he could ride. Anyway , there
were two or three cottages near , so I got him up on one of the
ponies, and brought him up th e slope to beg shelter for the
night.”
W ith characteristic Highland hospitality , both shelter and
supper were of fered with alacri ty , and after a warm bowl of
brose and fresh oatcake, both visitors had been accommodated
with a pallet before the fire.
“There was scarce room to lay  a quilt by the hearth, and
we were  squeez ed a bit, but we lay down side by side and
made ourselves as comfortable as might be.” He drew a deep
breath, and looked at me half-shyly .
“W ell, I was worn out by the journey , and slept deep, and I
suppose Ian did the same. But he’ s slept every night wi’ Jenny
for the last five years, and I suppose, havin’ a warm body next
to him in the b ed – well, some where in the night, he rolled
toward me, put his arm about me and kissed me on the back o’
the neck. And I” – he hesitated, and I could see the deep color
flood his face, even in the grayish light of the snow-lit room –
“I woke from a sound sleep, thinking he was Jack Randall.”
I h ad been holdi ng my breath through this story; now I let
it out slowly .
“That must have been the hell of a shock,” I said.
One side of Jam ie’ s mouth twitched. “It was the hell of a
shock to  Ian, I’ll tell ye,” he said. “I rolled over and punched
him in the face, and by the time I came all the way to myself, I
was on top of him, throttling him, wi’ his tongue sticking out
of his head. Hell of a shock to th e Murrays in the bed, too,” he
added reflectively . “I told them I’d had a nightmare – well, I
had, in a way – but it caused the hell of a stramash, what wi’
the bairns shriekin’, and Ian choking in the corner , and Mrs.
Murray sittin’ bolt upright in b ed, sayin’ ‘Who, who?’ like a
wee fat owl.”I laughed despite myself at the image.
“Oh God, Jamie. W as Ian all right?”
Jamie sh rugged a little. “W ell, y e saw him. Everyone went
back to sleep, after a time, and I  just lay before the fire for the
rest of the night, staring at the roof beams.” He didn’ t resist as
I pic ked up his left hand, gently stroking the bruised knuckles.
His fingers closed over mine, holding them.
“So whe n we left the next morn ing,” he went on, “I waited
’ til we’d come to a spot where  ye can sit and look over the
valley below . And then” – h e swallowed, and his hand
tightened slightl y on mine – “I told him. About Randall. And
everything that happened.”
I began to understand the ambiguity of the look Ian had
given Ja mie. And I now unde rstood the look of strain on
Jamie’ s face, and the smudges under his eyes. Not knowing
what to say , I just squeezed his hands.
“I hadna  thought I’d ever tell anyone – anyone but you,”
he a dded, returning the squeeze. He smiled briefly , then pulled
one hand away to rub his face.
“But Ian … well, he’ s…” He groped for the right word.
“He knows  me, d’ye see?”
“I think so. Y ou’ve known him all your life, haven’ t you?”
He nodded, looking sightlessly out the window . The
swirling snow had begun to fa ll again, small flakes dancing
against the pane, whiter than the sky .
“He’ s only a yea r older than me . When I was growing, he
was alw ays there. Until I was fourteen, there wasna a day went
by when I didna see Ian. And even later , after I’d gone to
foster w i’ Douga l, and to Leoch , and then later still to Paris, to
university – when I’d come bac k, I’d walk round a corner and
there he would be, and it would be like I’d never left. He’d just
smile when he saw me, like he always did, and then we’d be
walkin’ away together , side by side, ower the fields and the
streams, talkin’ of everything.” He sighed deeply , and rubbed
a hand through his hair .“Ian… he’ s the part of me that belongs here, that never
left,” he said, struggling to explain. “I thought… I must tell
him; I didna wa nt to feel… apart. From Ian. From here.” He
gestured toward  the window , then turned toward me, eyes dark
in the dim light. “D’ye see why?”
“I think so,” I said again, softly . “Did Ian?”
He mad e that small, uncomfort able shrugging motion, as
though easing a shirt too tig ht across his back. “W ell, I
couldna tell. At first, when I began to tell him, he just kept
shaking his head, as though he couldna believe me, and then
when he did-” He paused and licked his lips, and I had some
idea of just how much that confession in the snow had cost
him. “I could see  he wanted to jump to his feet and stamp back
and forth, but he couldn’ t, beca use of his leg. His fists were
knotted up, and his face was white, and he kept saying ‘How?
Damn ye, Jamie, how  could ye let him do it?’ ”
He shoo k his head. “I dinna remember what I said. Or
what he said. W e shouted at each other , I know that much. And
I wanted to hit him, but I couldn’ t, because of his leg. And he
wanted to hit me , but couldn’ t – because of his leg.” He gave a
brief sno rt of laughter . “Christ, we must ha’ looked a rare pair
of fools , wavin’ our arms and shouting at each other . But I
shouted longer , and finally he shut up and listened to the end
of it.
“Then a ll of a sudden, I couldna go on talking; it just
seemed like no use. And I sat d own all at once on a rock, and
put my head in m y hands. Then after a time, Ian said we’d best
be going on. And I nodded, and got up, and helped him on his
horse, and we started of f again, not speakin’ to each other .”
Jamie seemed suddenly to realize how tightly he was
holding my hand. He released h is grip, but continued to hold
my hand, turning my wedding ring between his thumb and
forefinger .
“W e rode for a  long time,” he said softly . “And then I
heard a small sound behind me, and reined up so Ian’ s horse
came alongside,  and I could see he’d been weeping – still was,
wi’ the tears streaming down his face. And he saw me look athim, and shook his head hard, a s if he was still angry , but then
he h eld out his hand to me. I took it, and he gave me a
squeeze, hard enough to break t he bones. Then he let go, and
we came on home.”
I co uld feel the tension go out of him, with the ending of
the s tory . “Be well, brother ,” Ian  had said, balanced on his one
leg in the bedroom door .
“It’ s all right, then?” I asked.
“It will be.” He relaxed complet ely now , sinking back into
the goos e-down pillows. I slid down under the quilts beside
him, an d lay close, fitted agai nst his side. W e watched the
snow fall, hissing softly against the glass.
“I’m glad you’re safe home,” I said.
 
I woke to the same gray ligh t in the morning. Jamie,
already dressed for the day , was standing by the window .
“Oh, you’re awake, Sassenach?”  he said, seeing me lift my
head from the pillow . “That’ s good. I brought ye a present.”
He r eached into his sporran and  pulled out several copper
doits, two or th ree small rocks, a short stick wrapped with
fishline, a crumpled letter , and a tangle of hair ribbons.
“Hair ribbons?” I said. “Thank you; they’re lovely .”
“No, th ose aren’ t for you,” he said, frowning as he
disentanged the blue strands from  the mole’ s foot he carried as
a charm against rheumatism. “They’re for wee Maggie.” He
squinted dubiou sly at the rocks remaining in his palm. T o my
astonishment, he picked one up and licked it.
“No, no t that one,” he muttered , and dived back into his
sporran.
“What o n earth do you think you’re doing?” I inquired
with interest, watching this performance. He didn’ t answer , but
came ou t with another handful of rocks, which he snif fed at,
discarding them  one by one until he came to a nodule that
struck h is fancy . This one he licked once, for certainty , then
dropped it into my hand, beaming.“Amber ,” he said, with satisfaction, as I turned the
irregular lump over with a fore finger . It seemed warm to the
touch, and I closed my hand over it, almost unconsciously .
“It needs polishing, of course,” he explained. “But I
thought it would make ye a bonny necklace.” He flushed
slightly , watching me. “It’ s… it’ s a gift for our first year of
marriage. When  I saw it, I wa s minded of the bit of amber
Hugh Munro gave ye, when we wed.”
“I s till have tha t,” I said softly , caressing the odd little
lump of petrified tree sap. Hug h’ s chunk of amber , one side
sheared of f and polished into a small window , had a dragonfly
embedded in the matrix, suspended in eternal flight. I kept it in
my medicine box, the most powerful of my charms.
A gift for our fir st anniversary . W e had married in June, of
course, not in December . But on the date of our first
anniversary , Jam ie had been in the Bastille, and I… I had been
in th e arms of the King of Franc e. No time for a celebration of
wedded bliss, that.
“It’ s nearly Hogmanay ,” Jam ie said, looking out the
window at the soft snowfall that blanketed the fields of
Lallybroch. “It seems a good time for beginnings, I thought.”
“I think so, too.” I got out of b ed and came to him at the
window , putting my arms around his waist. W e stayed locked
together , not speaking, until my  eye suddenly fell on the other
small, yellowish lumps that Jamie had removed from his
sporran.
“What o n earth are those things, Jamie?” I asked, letting
go of him long enough to point.
“Och, those? They’re honey balls, Sassenach.” He picked
up one of the objects, dusting at it with his fingers. “Mrs.
Gibson in the v illage gave them to me. V erra good, though
they got a bit dusty in my sporra n, I’m afraid.” He held out his
open hand to me, smiling. “W ant one?”3 4  T H E  P O S T M A N  A L W A Y S
R I N G S  T W I C E
I  didn’ t know wh at – or how much – Ian had told Jenny of
his c onversation  in the snow with Jamie. She behaved toward
her brother just as always, mat ter -of-fact and acerbic, with a
slight touch of af fectionate tea sing. I had known her long
enough, though , to realize that  one of Jenny’ s greatest gifts
was her ability to see something with utter clarity – and then to
look straight through it, as though it wasn’ t there.
The dynamics of feeling and behavior shifted among the
four of us during the months, an d settled into a pattern of solid
strength, based on friendship and founded in work. Mutual
respect and trust were simply a  necessity; there was so much
to be done.
As Jenny’ s pregnancy progressed, I took on more and
more of the do mestic duties, and she deferred to me more
often. I would never try to usurp her place; she had been the
axis of the household since the death of her mother , and it was
to he r that the servants or tenants most frequently came. Still,
they grew used to me, treatin g me with a friendly respect
which bordered sometimes on acceptance, and sometimes on
awe.
The spr ing was marked first by the planting of an
enormous crop of potatoes; over half the available land was
given to  the new crop – a decision justified within weeks by a
hailstorm that flattened the ne w-sprung barley . The potato
vines, creeping low and stolid over the ground, survived.
The second event of the spring  was the birth of a second
daughter , Katherine Mary , to Jenny and Ian. She arrived with a
suddenness that  startled everyone, including Jenny . One day
Jenny complained of an aching back and went to lie down.
V ery shortly it became clear w hat was really happening, and
Jamie w ent post haste for Mrs. M artins, the midwife. The two
of th em arrived back just in time  to share in a celebratory glassof w ine as the thin, high squalls of the new arrival echoed
through the halls of the house.
And so the year bur geoned and greened, and I bloomed,
the last of my hurts healing in the heart of love and work.
Letters arrived irregularly; sometimes there would be mail
once a week, so metimes nothing would come for a month or
more. C onsidering the lengths to which messengers had to go
to delive r mail in the Highland s, I thought it incredible that
anything ever arrived.
T oday , though, there was a la r ge packet of letters and
books, wrapped against the weather in a sheet of oiled
parchment, tied with twine. Sending the postal messenger to
the kitchen for refreshment, Jenny untied the string carefully
and thriftily stowed it in her poc ket. She thumbed through the
small pile of letters, putting aside for the moment an enticing-
looking package addressed from Paris.
“A letter  for Ian – that’ll be the  bill for the seed, I expect,
and one from Au ntie Jocasta – o h, good, we’ve not heard from
her in months, I thought she mig ht be ill, but I see her hand is
firm on the pen-”
A letter addressed with bold bla ck strokes fell onto Jenny’ s
pile, followed by a note from one of Jocasta’ s married
daughters. Then another for Ian from Edinbur gh, one for Jamie
from Jared – I recognized the spidery , half-legible writing –
and anot her , a thick, creamy she et, sealed with the Royal crest
of the House of Stuart. Another of Charles’ s complaints about
the rigo rs of life in Paris, and the pains of intermittently
requited love, I imagined. At least this one looked short;
usually he went on for several pages, unburdening his soul to
“ cher  James,” in a misspelled quadrilingual patois that at least
made it clear h e sought no sec retarial help for his personal
letters.
“Ooh, three French novels and a book of poetry from
Paris!” Jenny said in excitement, opening the paper -wrapped
package. “ C’est un embarras de richesse , hm? Which shall we
read tonight?” She lifted the small stack of books from their
wrappings, strok ing the soft leather cover of the top one with aforefinger that trembled with delight. Jenny loved books with
the same  passio n her brother re served for horses. The manor
boasted a small library , in fac t, and if the evening leisure
between work and bed was sho rt, still it usually included at
least a few minutes’ reading.
“It gives ye som ething to think on as ye go about your
work,” Jenny explained, when I  found her one night swaying
with we ariness, and ur ged her to  go to bed, rather than stay up
to read aloud to Ian, Jamie, and myself. She yawned, fist to her
mouth. “ Even if  I’m sae tired I hardly see the words on the
page, they’ll come back to me next day , churning or spinning
or waulkin’ wool, and I can turn them over in my mind.”
I hi d a smile at the mention of wool waulking. Alone
among the Highland farms, I was sure, the women of
Lallybroch waulked their wool not only to the old traditional
chants but also to the rhythms of Molière and Piron.
I ha d a sudden memory of the waulking shed, where the
women sat in two facing rows, barefooted and bare-armed in
their oldest clothes, bracing themselves against the walls as
they thrust with their feet again st the long, sodden worm of
woolen cloth, battering it into the tight, felted weave that
would r epel Highland mists and even light rain, keeping the
wearer safe from the chill.
Every so often one woman wou ld rise and go outside, to
fetch the  kettle of steaming uri ne from the fire. Skirts kilted
high, sh e would walk spraddle-legged down the center of the
shed, drenching the cloth betwe en her legs, and the hot fumes
rose fres h and suf focating from the soaking wool, while the
waulkers pulled back their feet from random splashes, and
made crude jokes.
“Hot piss sets the dye fast,”  one of the women had
explained to me as I blinked, eyes watering, on my first
entrance to the shed. The other women had watched at first, to
see if I would shrink back from the work, but wool-waulking
was no great shock, after the t hings I had seen and done in
France, both in the war of 1944 and the hospital of 1744. T ime
makes v ery little dif ference to the basic realities of life. And
smell aside, the waulking shed was a warm, cozy place, wherethe w omen of Lallybroch visited and joked between bolts of
cloth, and sang together in the working, hands moving
rhythmically acr oss a table, or bare feet sinking deep into the
steaming fabric  as we sat on the floor , thrusting against a
partner thrusting back.
I wa s pu lled bac k from my mem ories of wool-waulking by
the noise of heavy boots in the hallway , and a gust of cool,
rainy air as the door opened. Jamie, and Ian with him, talking
together in Gaelic, in the comfortable, unemphatic manner that
meant they were discussing farm matters.
“That field’ s going to need draining next year ,” Jamie was
saying a s he came past the door . Jenny , seeing them, had put
down th e mail and gone to fetch fresh linen towels from the
chest in the hallway .
“Dry yourselves  before ye come drip on the rug,” she
ordered, handing one to each of the men. “And tak’ of f your
filthy boots, too. The post’ s come, Ian – there’ s a letter for ye
from tha t man in Perth, the on e ye wrote to about the seed
potatoes.”
“Oh, aye ? I’ll come read it, the n, but is there aught to eat
while I do it?” Ian asked, rubbing his wet head with the towel
until the thick b rown hair stood up in spikes. “I’m famished,
and I can hear Jamie’ s belly garbeling from here.”
Jamie shook himself like a wet d og, making his sister emit
a sm all s creech as the cold drop s flew about the hall. His shirt
was pas ted to his shoulders and loose strands of rain-soaked
hair hung in his eyes, the color of rusted iron.
I dra ped a towe l around his neck. “Finish drying of f, and
I’ll go fetch you something.”
I was in the kitchen when I heard him cry out. I had never
heard such a sou nd from him before. Shock and horror were in
it, and something else – a note of finality , like the cry of a man
who find s himse lf seized in a tiger ’ s jaws. I was down the hall
and running for the drawing room without conscious thought,
a tray of oatcakes still clutched in my hands.When I burst through the door , I saw him standing by the
table wh ere Jenny had laid the mail. His face was dead white,
and he swayed slightly where he  stood, like a tree cut through,
waiting for someone to shout “T imber” before falling.
“What?” I said, scared to death by the look on his face.
“Jamie, what? What is it?!”
W ith a visible ef fort, he picked up one of the letters on the
table and handed it to me.
I set down the  oatcakes and took the sheet of paper ,
scanning it rapidly . It was from  Jared; I recognized the thin,
scrawly handwriting at once. “ ‘Dear Nephew ,’ ” I read to
myself, “ ‘…so pleased… words cannot express my
admiration… your boldness and courage will be an
inspiration… cannot fail of success… my prayers shall be with
you…’ ” I looked up from the paper , bewildered. “What on
earth is he talking about? What have you done, Jamie?”
The skin was st retched tight across the bones of his face,
and he grinned,  mirthless as a death’ s-head, as he picked up
another sheet of paper , this one a cheaply printed handbill.
“It’ s no t what  I’ve  do ne, Sassenach,” he said. The
broadsheet was headed by the crest of the Royal House of
Stuart. The message beneath was brief, couched in stately
language.
It st ated that by the ordination  of Almighty God, King
James, VIII of Scotland and III of England and Ireland
asserted herewith his just rights to claim the throne of three
kingdoms. And herewith ackno wledged the support of these
divine rights by the chieftains  of the Highland clans, the
Jacobite lords, and “various other such loyal subjects of His
Majesty , King James, as have subscribed their names upon this
Bill of Association in token thereof.”
My fingers grew icy as I read, and I was conscious of a
feeling of terror so acute that it was a real ef fort to keep on
breathing. My ears rang with po unding blood, and there were
dark spots before my eyes.At the bottom of the sheet wer e signed the names of the
Scottish chieftai ns who had declared their loyalty to the world,
and staked their lives and reputations on the success of Charles
Stuart. Clanranald was there, and Glengarry . Stewart of Appin,
Alexander Mac Donald of Keppoch, Angus MacDonald of
Scotus.
And at the bo ttom of the list was written, “James
Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser , of Broch T uarach.”
“Jesus bloody fucking Christ,” I whispered, wishing there
were som ething stronger I could say , as a form of relief. “The
filthy bastard’ s signed your name to it!”
Jamie, still pale and tight-faced, was beginning to recover .
“A ye, he has,” he said briefly . His hand snaked out for the
unopened letter remaining on th e table – a heavy vellum, with
the S tuart crest showing plainly  in the wax seal. Jamie ripped
the letter open impatiently , tearing the paper . He read it
quickly , then dropped it on the  table as though it burned his
hands.
“An apo logy ,” he said hoarsely . “For lacking the time to
send me the do cument, in order that I might sign it myself.
And his  gratitude, for my loyal support. Jesus, Claire! What
am I going to do?”
It w as a cry from the heart, an d one to which I had no
answer . I watched helplessly as he sank onto a hassock and sat
staring, rigid, at the fire.
Jenny , tr ansfixed by all this dra ma, moved now to take up
the letters and the broadsheet. She read them over carefully ,
her lips moving slightly as she did so, then set them gently
down on the pol ished tabletop. She looked at them, frowning,
then crossed to her brother , and laid a hand on his shoulder .
“Jamie,” she said. Her face was very pale. “There’ s only
the one thing ye can  d o, my dearie. Y e must go and fight for
Charles Stuart. Y e must help him win.”
The truth of her words penetrated slowly through the
layers of shock that wrapped me. The publication of this Bond
of A ssociation branded those w ho signed it as rebels, and astraitors to the En glish crown. It didn’ t matter now how Charles
had managed, or where he had  gotten the funds to begin; he
was well and t ruly launched on the seas of rebellion, and
Jamie – and I – were launched with him, willy-nilly . There
was, as Jenny had said, no choice.
My eye caught Charles’ s letter , where it had fallen from
Jamie’ s hand. “…Though there  be manie who tell me I am
foolish to embark in this werk without the support of Louis –
or at least of his bankes! – I will entertain no notion at all of
returning to that place from whe nce I come,” it read. “Rejoice
with me, my deare frend, for I am come Home.”3 5  M O O N L I G H T
A s the  pre parations for leaving went forward, a current of
excitement and speculation ran all through the estate. W eapons
hoarded since the Rising of t he ’15 were excavated from
thatch and hayrick and hearth, burnished and sharpened. Men
met in passing and paused to talk in earnest groups, heads
together under the hot August sun. And the women grew quiet,
watching them.
Jenny sh ared with her brother th e capacity to be opaque, to
give no clue of what she was th inking. T ransparent as a pane
of glass myself, I rather envied t his ability . So, when she asked
me one  morning if I would  fetch Jamie to her in the
brewhouse, I had no notion of what she might want with him.
Jamie stepped in behind me and  stood just within the door
of th e brewhouse, waiting as his  eyes adjusted to the dimness.
He took a deep breath, inhaling the bitter , damp pungency with
evident enjoyment.
“Ahh,” he said, sighing dreamily . “I could get drunk in
here just by breathing.”
“W eel, hold your breath, then, f or a moment, for I need ye
sober ,” his sister advised.
He obligingly inflated his lungs  and puf fed out his cheeks,
waiting. Jenny poked him briskly in the stomach with the
handle of her ma sher , making him double over in an explosion
of breath.
“Clown,” she said, without rancor . “I wanted to talk to ye
about Ian.”
Jamie took an e mpty bucket from the shelf, and upturning
it, sat down on it. A faint glow  from the oiled-paper window
above him lit his hair with a deep copper gleam.
“What about Ian?” he asked.
Now it was Jenny’ s turn to tak e a deep breath. The wide
bran tub  before her gave of f a d amp warmth of fermentation,filled with the yeasty aroma of grain, hops, and alcohol.
“I want ye to take Ian with you, when ye go.”
Jamie’ s eyebrows flew up, but he didn’ t say anything
immediately . Je nny’ s eyes were fixed on the motions of the
masher , watching the smooth roil of the mixture. He looked at
her thoughtfully , big hands hanging loose between his thighs.
“T ired o f marriage, are ye?” he asked conversationally .
“Likely it would be easier just for me to take him out in the
wood an d shoot  him for ye.” There was a quick flash of blue
eyes over the mash tub.
“If I  want anyone shot, Jamie Fraser , I’ll do it myself. And
Ian wouldna be my first choice as tar get, either .”
He snorted briefly , and one co rner of his mouth quirked
up.
“Oh, aye? Why , then?”
Her shoulders moved in a seamless rhythm, one motion
fading into the next.
“Because I’m asking ye.”
Jamie spread his right hand o ut on his knee, absently
stroking the jagged scar that zigzagged its way down his
middle finger .
“It’ s dangerous, Jenny ,” he said quietly .
“I know that.”
He s hook his he ad slowly , still gazing down at his hand. It
had heal ed well, and he had good use of it, but the stif f fourth
finger and the roughened patch of scar tissue on the back gave
it an odd, crooked appearance.
“Y ou think ye know .”
“I know , Jamie.”
His head came up, then. He l ooked impatient, but was
striving to stay reasonable.
“A ye, I know Ia n will ha’ told ye stories, about fighting in
France, and all. But you’ve no notion how it really is, Jenny .Mo cridh , i t isna a matter of a cattle raid. It’ s a war , and likely
to be a damn bloody shambles of one, too. It’ s-”
The mas her stru ck the side of the tub with a clack and fell
back into the mash.
“Don’ t t ell me I dinna ken what it’ s like!” Jenny blazed at
him. “St ories, is it? Who d’ye think nursed Ian when he came
home fro m Fran ce wi’ half a leg and a fever that nearly killed
him?”
She slapped her hand flat on the bench. The stretched
nerves had snapped.
“Don’ t know? I  don’ t know? I  picked the maggots out of
the raw flesh of  his stump, because his own mother couldna
bring herself to do it! I  held the hot kni fe against his leg to seal
the wound! I  smelled his fle sh searing like a roasted pig and
listened to him scream while I did it! D’ye dare to stand there
and tell me I… don’ t… KNOW how it is!”
Angry t ears ran  down her chee ks. She brushed at them,
groping in her pocket for a handkerchief.
Lips pressed tight together ,  Jamie rose, pulled a
handkerchief fro m his sleeve, and handed it to her . He knew
better th an to touch or try to comfort her . He stood staring at
her for a mom ent as she wiped furiously at her eyes and
dripping nose.
“A ye, well, ye k now , then,” he said. “And yet you want me
to take him?”
“I do.” She blew  her nose and wiped it briskly , then tucked
the handkerchief in her pocket.
“He ken s well enough that he’ s  crippled, Jamie. Kens it a
good bit too we ll. But he coul d manage with ye. There’ s a
horse for him; he wouldna have to walk.”
He made an impatient gesture with one hand.
“Could he manage is no the question, is it? A man can do
what he thinks he must – why do you  think he must?”
Composed once more, she fished the tool out of the mash
and shook it. Brown droplets spattered into the tub.“He has na asked ye, has he? Whether ye’ll need him or
no?”
“No.”
She stabbed the masher back into the tub and resumed her
work.
“He thin ks ye wilna want him because he’ s lame, and that
he’d be no use to ye.” She looked up then, troubled dark-blue
eyes the twins of her brother ’ s. “Y e knew Ian before, Jamie.
He’ s dif ferent now .”
He nodded reluctantly , resuming his seat on the bucket.
“A ye. W ell, but ye’d expect it , no? And he seems well
enough.” He looked up at his sister and smiled.
“He’ s happy wi’ ye, Jenny . Y ou and the bairns.”
She nodded, black curls bobbing.
“A ye, he is,” sh e said softly . “But that’ s because he’ s a
whole man to m e, and always will be.” She looked directly at
her b rother . “But if he thinks he’ s of no use to you, he wilna be
whole to himself. And that’ s why I’ll have ye take him.”
Jamie laced his hands together , elbows braced on his
knees, and rested his chin on his linked knuckles.
“This wilna be like France,” he said quietly . “Fighting
there, ye risk n o more than yo ur life in battle. Here…” He
hesitated, then went on. “Jenny , this is treason. If it goes
wrong, those that follow the Stuarts are like to end on a
scaf fold.”
Her normally pale complexion went a shade whiter , but her
motions didn’ t slow .
“There’ s nay choice for me,” h e went on, eyes steady on
her . “Bu t will ye risk us both?  W ill ye have Ian look down
from the  gallows on the fire waiting for his entrails? Y ou’ll
chance raising your bairns wi’ out their father – to save his
pride?” His face was nearly as pale as hers, glimmering in the
darkness of the brewhouse.The strokes of the masher were slower now , without the
fierce velocity of her earlier movements, but her voice held all
the conviction of her slow , inexorable mashing.
“I’ll have a whole man,” she said steadily . “Or none.”
Jamie sa t withou t moving for a long moment, watching his
sister ’ s dark head bent over her work.
“All rig ht,” he said at last, quietly . She didn’ t look up or
vary her movements, but the white kertch seemed to incline
slightly toward him.
He sighed explosively , then rose and turned abruptly to
me.
“Come o n out of here, Sassenac h,” he said. “Christ, I must
be drunk.”
 
“What makes ye think you can order me about?” The vein
in Ian’ s temple throbbed fiercely . Jenny’ s hand squeezed mine
tighter .
Jamie’ s assertion that Ian would accompany him to join the
Stuart a rmy had been met first with incredulity , then with
suspicion, and – as Jamie persisted – anger .
“Y ou’re a fool,” Ian declared fla tly . “I’m a cripple, and ye
ken it well enough.”
“I k en you’re a bonny fighter , and there’ s none I’d rather
have by my side in a battle,” Jamie said firmly . His face gave
no sign of doubts or hesitation; he had agreed to Jenny’ s
request, and would carry it out, no matter what. “Y ou’ve
fought there often enough; will ye desert me now?”
Ian wav ed an impatient hand, dismissing this flattery .
“That’ s as may be. If my leg comes of f or gives way , there’ s
precious little fighting I’ll do – I’ll be lyin’ on the ground like
a worm, waiting for the first Redcoat who comes by to spit
me. And beyond that” – he sc owled at his brother -in-law –
“who d’ ye think will mind this place for ye until you come
back, and I’m of f to the wars with ye?”“Jenny ,” Jamie replied prompt ly . “I shall leave enough
men behind that they can be seeing to the work; she can
manage the accounts well enough.”
Ian’ s bro ws shot up, and he said something very rude in
Gaelic.
“ Pog ma mahon!  Y ou ’ll ha’ me leave her to run the place
alone, w i’ three small bairns at h er apron, and but half the men
needed? Man, ye’ve taken leave  o’ your senses!” Flinging up
both hands, Ian swung around  to the sideboard where the
whisky was kept.
Jenny , se ated ne xt to me on the sofa with Katherine on her
lap, made a sm all sound under her breath. Her hand sought
mine un der cover of our mingl ed skirts, and I squeezed her
fingers.
“What makes ye think ye can order me about?”
Jamie eyed his brother -in-law’ s tense back for a moment,
scowling. Sudd enly , a muscle at the corner of his mouth
twitched.
“Because I’m bigger than you are,” he said belligerently ,
still scowling.
Ian rounded on him, incredulity stamped on his face.
Indecision play ed in his eyes for less than a second. His
shoulders squared up and his chin lifted.
“I’m older than you,” he answered, with an identical
scowl.
“I’m stronger .”
“No, you’re not!”
“A ye, I am!”
“No, I  am!”
A ve in of dead seriousness und erlay the laughter in their
voices; w hile this little confrontation might be passed of f as all
in fu n, they wer e as intent on each other as they had ever been
in youth or childhood, and the echoes of challenge rang inJamie’ s voice as he ripped loose his cuf f and jerked back the
sleeve of his shirt.
“Prove it,” he said. He cleare d the chess table with a
careless sweep of the hand, sat down and braced his elbow on
the i nlaid surface, fingers flexed for an of fensive. Deep blue
eyes gla red up into Ian’ s dark-b rown ones, hot with the same
anger .
Ian took  half a second to appraise the situation, then jerked
his head in a brief nod of accep tance, making his heavy sheaf
of dark hair flop into his eyes.
W ith calm deliberation, he brushed it back, unfastened his
cuf f, and rolled his sleeve to the shoulder , turn by turn, never
taking his eyes from his brother -in-law .
From where I st ood, I could see  Ian’ s face, a little flushed
under his tan, long, narrow chin set in determination. I
couldn’ t see Jamie’ s face, but the determination was
eloquently expressed by the line of back and shoulders.
The two men set their elbows carefully , maneuvering to
find a good spot, rubbing back and forth with the point of the
elbow to be sure the surface was not slippery .
W ith due ritual, Jamie spread hi s fingers, palm toward Ian.
Ian carefully placed his own palm against it. The fingers
matched, touching for a moment in a mirror image, then
shifted, one to the right and one to the left, linked and
clasping.
“Ready?” Jamie asked.
“Ready .” Ian’ s voice was calm, b ut his eyes gleamed under
the feathery brows.
The muscles tensed at once, all along the length of the two
arms, sp ringing into sharp definition as they shifted in their
seats, seeking leverage.
Jenny caught my eye and rolled her eyes heavenward.
Whatever she had been expecting of Jamie, it wasn’ t this.
Both me n were focused on the straining knot of fingers, to
the exclusion of everything els e. Both faces were deep redwith exertion, sweat damping the hair on their temples, eyes
bulging slightly with ef fort. Suddenly I saw Jamie’ s gaze
break fr om its concentration on the clenched fists as he saw
Ian’ s lips clamp tighter . Ian felt the shift, looked up, met
Jamie’ s eyes… and the two men burst into laughter .
The han ds clun g for a momen t longer , locked in spasm,
then fell apart.
“A draw , then,” said Jamie, pushing back a strand of
sweat-damp hair . He shook his head good-naturedly at Ian.
“All right, man. If I could order  ye, I wouldna do it. But I
can ask, no? W ill ye come with me?”
Ian dabbed at the side of his neck, where a runnel of sweat
dampened his collar . His gaze roamed about the room, resting
for a moment on Jenny . Her face  was no paler than usual, but I
could see the ha sty pulse, beating just below the angle of her
jaw . Ian  stared at her intently as he rolled his sleeve down
again, in careful turns. I could see a deep pink flush begin to
rise from the neck of her gown.
Ian rubbed his j aw as though thinking, then turned toward
Jamie and shook his head.
“No, my  jo,” he said softly . “Y e  need me here, and here I
shall stay .” His eyes rested on  Jenny , with Katherine held
against her shoulder , and on small Maggie, clutching her
mother ’ s skirt with grubby ha nds. And on me. Ian’ s long
mouth curled in a slight smile. “I shall stay here,” he repeated.
“Guardin’ your weak side, man.”
 
“Jamie?”
“A ye?” The answer came at on ce; I knew he hadn’ t been
asleep, though he lay still as a f igure carved on a tomb. It was
moon-bright in the room, and I could see his face when I rose
on my elbow; h e was staring up ward, as though he could see
beyond the heavy beams to t he open night and the stars
beyond.
“Y ou aren’ t going to try to leave me behind, are you?” I
wouldn’ t have thought of asking  were it not for the scene withIan, earlier in the evening. For once it was settled that Ian
would stay , Jamie had sat dow n with him to issue orders –
choosing who would march wi th the laird to the aid of the
Prince, w ho would stay behind to tend to animals and pasture
and the maintenance of Lallybroch.
I knew it had been a wrenching process of decision, though
he g ave no sign of it, calmly dis cussing with Ian whether Ross
the smit h could be spared to go and deciding that he could,
though the ploughshares needed  for the spring must all be in
good re pair before leaving. Whether Joseph Fraser Kirby
might go , and deciding that he s hould not, as he was the main
support not only of his own family but that of his widowed
sister . B rendan was the oldest boy of both families, and at
nine, ill- prepared to replace his father , should Joseph not come
home.
It w as a matter for the most delicate planning. How many
men sho uld go, to have some im pact on the course of the war?
For Jenny was right, Jamie had no choice now – no choice but
to help Charles Stuart win. And to that end, as many men and
arms as could p ossibly be summoned should be thrown into
the cause.
But on the other side was me, and my deadly knowledge –
and lack  of it. W e had succeeded in preventing Charles Stuart
from ge tting money to finance his rebellion; and still the
Bonnie Prince, reckless, feckless, and determined to claim his
legacy , had landed to rally the  clans at Glenfinnan. From a
further letter from Jared, we had learned that Charles had
crossed the Channel with two small frigates, provided by one
Antoine W alsh, a sometime-slaver with an eye for opportunity .
Apparently , he saw Charles’ s venture as less risky than a
slaving expediti on, a gamble in which he might or might not
be ju stified. One frigate had bee n waylaid by the English; the
other had landed Charles safe on the isle of Eriskay .
Charles had landed with only seven companions, including
the own er of a small bank named Aeneas MacDonald. Unable
to finance an entire expedition, MacDonald had provided the
funds for a small stock of broadswords, which constituted
Charles’ s entire armament. Jared sounded simultaneouslyadmiring and horrified by the recklessness of the venture, but,
loyal Ja cobite that he was, d id his best to swallow his
misgivings.
And so far , Charles had succeeded. From the Highland
grapevine, we learned that he ha d landed at Eriskay , crossed to
Glenfinnan, and  there waited, accompanied only by several
lar ge casks of b randywine, to see whether the clans would
answer t he call to his standard. A nd after what must have been
several nerve-r acking hours, three hundred men of clan
Cameron had come down the d efiles of the steep green hills,
led n ot b y their chieftain, who was away from his home – but
by his sister , Jenny Cameron.
The Cam erons had been the firs t, but they had been joined
by others, as the Bill of Association showed.
If Charles should now proceed to disaster , despite all
ef forts, then how many men of Lallybroch could be spared,
left at home to save something from the wreck?
Ian hims elf would be safe; that much was sure, and some
balm to Jamie’ s spirit. But the o thers – the sixty families who
lived on  Lallybroch? Choosing who would go and who would
stay mus t seem in some lights like choosing men for sacrifice.
I ha d seen comm anders before; the men whom war forced to
make such choices – and I knew what it cost them.
Jamie ha d done it – he had no c hoice – but on two matters
he had held firm ; no women wo uld accompany his troop, and
no lads under ei ghteen years of age would go. Ian had looked
mildly s urprised at this – while most women with young
children would normally stay b ehind, it was far from unusual
for High land wives to follow th eir men to battle, cooking and
caring for them, and sharing the  army’ s rations. And the lads,
who considered themselves men at fourteen, would be grossly
humiliated at being omitted fr om the tally . But Jamie had
given hi s orders  in a tone that b rooked no ar gument, and Ian,
after a moment’ s hesitation, had merely nodded and written
them down.
I h adn’ t  wanted to ask him, in the presence of Ian and
Jenny , whether his ban on wome nfolk was intended to includeme. Because, whether it was or not, I was going with him, and
that, I thought, was bloody all about it.
“Leave you behind?” he said n ow , and I saw his mouth
curl into a sidew ays grin. “D’ye think I’d stand a chance of
it?”
“No,” I said, snu ggling next to him in sudden relief. “Y ou
wouldn’ t. But I thought you might think about it.”
He gave  a small snort, and drew me down, head on his
shoulder . “Oh, aye. And if I thou ght I could leave ye, I’d chain
ye to  the  baniste r; not much els e would stop ye.” I could feel
his head shake above me, in negation. “No. I must take ye wi’
me, Sassenach, whether I will or no. There are things you’ll
maybe k now along the way – even if they dinna seem like
anything now , they may later . A nd you’re a rare fine healer ,
Sassenach – I canna deny th e men your skill, and it be
needed.”
His hand patted my shoulder , and he sighed. “I would give
anything, mo duinne , cou ld I leave ye here safe, but  I cannot.
So you will go with me – you and Fer gus.”
“Fer gus?” I was surprised by this. “But I thought you
wouldn’ t take any of the younger lads!”
He sighed again, and I put my hand flat on the center of his
chest, w here his heart beat bene ath the small hollow , slow and
steady .
“W ell, F er gus is a bit dif ferent.  The other lads – I willna
take the m, because they belong here; if it all goes to smash,
they’ll be left to  keep their fami lies from starving, to work the
fields an d tend beasts. They’ll likely need to grow up fast, if it
happens, but at l east they’ll be h ere to do it. But Fer gus… this
isna his place, Sassenach. Nor is France, or I would send him
back. But he has no place there, either .”
“His pla ce is with you,” I said softly , understanding. “Like
mine.”
He was silent fo r a long time, then his hand squeezed me
gently .“A ye, that’ s so,” he said quietly . “Sleep now , mo duinne ,
it’ s late.”
 
The fretful wail pulled me toward the surface of
wakefulness for the third time. Baby Katherine was teething,
and didn ’ t care who knew it. Fro m their room down the hall, I
heard I an’ s sl eepy mumble, and Jenny’ s higher voice,
resigned, as she got out of bed and went to soothe the infant.
Then I heard th e soft, heavy footfalls in the corridor , and
realized that Jamie, still wakeful, was walking barefoot
through the house.
“Jenny?” His voice, low-pitched  to avoid disturbance, was
still plainly audible in the creaking silence of the manor house,
“I h eard the we e lassie greetin’,” he said. “If she canna
sleep, neither can I, but you can. If she’ s fed and dry , perhaps
we c an b ear eac h other company for a bit, while you go back
to your bed.”
Jenny smothered  a yawn, and I could hear the smile in her
voice.
“Jamie d ear , you ’re a mother ’ s blessing. A ye, she’ s full as
a drum,  and a dry clout on her  this minute. T ake her , and I
wish ye  joy of each other .” A door closed, and I heard the
heavy fo otfall a gain, heading back toward our room, and the
low murmur of Jamie’ s voice as  he muttered soothingly to the
baby .
I s nuggled deeper into the comf ort of the goose-down bed
and turned toward sleep again, hearing with half an ear the
baby’ s w hining, interspersed with hiccuping sobs, and Jamie’ s
deep, tuneless humming, the sound as comforting as the
thought of beehives in the sun.
“Eh, w ee Kitty , ciamar a tha thu? Much, mo
naoidheachan, much .”
The sound of th em went up an d down the passage, and I
dropped further toward sleep , but kept half-wakeful on
purpose to hear them. One day perhaps he would hold his own
child so,  small round head cradled in the big hands, small solidbody cupped and held firm against his shoulder . And thus he
would sing to hi s own daughter , a tuneless song, a warm, soft
chant in the dark.
The con stant small ache in my heart was submer ged in a
flood of  tendern ess. I had conce ived once; I could do so again.
Faith ha d given me the gift of that knowledge, Jamie the
courage and means to use it. My hands rested lightly on my
breasts, cupping the deep swell of them, knowing beyond
doubt that one day they would nourish the child of my heart. I
drifted into sleep with the sound of Jamie’ s singing in my ears.
Sometime later I drifted near the surface again, and opened
my eyes  to the light-filled room. The moon had risen, full and
beaming, and all the objects in the room were plainly visible,
in that flat, two-dimensional way of things seen without
shadow .
The baby had qu ieted, but I could hear Jamie’ s voice in the
hall, stil l speaking, but much mo re quietly , hardly more than a
murmur . And the tone of it had changed; it wasn’ t the
rhythmic, half-nonsense way one talks to babies, but the
broken, halting speech of a man  seeking the way through the
wilderness of his own heart.
Curious, I slipped out of bed and crept quietly to the door .
I could see them  there at the end of the hall. Jamie sat leaning
back against the side of the w indow seat, wearing only his
shirt. His bare le gs were raised, forming a back against which
small K atherine Mary rested as she sat facing him in his lap,
her own chubby legs kicking restlessly over his stomach.
The baby’ s face was blank and  light as the moon’ s, her
eyes dark pools absorbing his w ords. He traced the curve of
her chee k with one finger , again and again, whispering with
heartbreaking gentleness.
He s poke in Ga elic, and so low  that I could not have told
what he said, even had I known the words. But the whispering
voice w as thick,  and the moonli ght from the casement behind
him sho wed the tracks of the tears that slid unregarded down
his own cheeks.It was not a scene that bore intrusion. I came back to the
still-warm bed, holding in my m ind the picture of the laird of
Lallybroch, half-naked in the moonlight, pouring out his heart
to a n unknown future, holding in his lap the promise of his
blood.
 
When I woke in the morning, there was a warm, unfamiliar
scent next to me, and something  tangled in my hair . I opened
my eyes to find Katherine Mary’ s rosebud lips smacking
dreamily an inch from my nose,  her fat fingers clutched in the
hair above my le ft ear . I cautiously disengaged myself, and she
stirred, b ut flopped over onto he r stomach, drew her knees up
and went back to sleep.
Jamie w as lying on the other side of the child, face half-
buried i n his pillow . He opene d one eye, clear blue as the
morning sky .
“Good morning, Sassenach,” he  said, speaking quietly so
as not to disturb the small sleep er . He smiled at me as I sat up
in be d. “Y e looked verra sweet, the two of you, asleep face-to-
face like that.”
I ran a h and thro ugh my tangled hair , and smiled myself at
Kitty’ s upturned bottom, jutting absurdly into the air .
“That doesn’ t look at all comfortable,” I observed. “But
she’ s still asleep, so it can’ t be that bad. How late were you up
with her last night? I didn’ t hear you come to bed.”
He yawned and ran a hand through his hair , smoothing it
away fro m his face. There were  shadows under his eyes, but
he seemed peacefully content.
“Oh, some time. Before moonset, at least. I didna want to
wake Je nny by taking the wean back to her , so I laid her in the
bed between us, and she didna twitch once, the rest of the
night.”
The baby was kneading the mattress with elbows and
knees, ro otling in the bedclothes with a low grunting noise. It
must be close to  time for her morning feed. This supposition
was borne out in the next moment, when she raised her head,eyes still tight shut, and let o ut a healthy howl. I reached
hastily for her and picked her up.
“There-there-there,” I soothed, patting the straining little
back. I swung my legs out of  bed, then reached back and
patted Jamie on the head. The  rough bright hair was warm
under my hand.
“I’ll take her to Jenny ,” I said. “It’ s early yet; you sleep
some more.”
“I may do that,  Sassenach,” Jamie said, flinching at the
noise. “I’ll see ye at breakfast, shall I?” He rolled onto his
back, crossed his hands on his chest in his favorite sleeping
posture, and was breathing deeply again by the time Katherine
Mary and I had reached the door .
The baby squirmed vigorously , rooting for a nipple and
squawking in frustration wh en none was immediately
forthcoming. Hurrying along the hall, I met Jenny , hurrying
out of her bedro om in response to her of fspring’ s cries, pulling
on a green dressing gown as she came. I held out the baby ,
waving little fists in ur gent demand.
“There, mo mùirninn , hush now , hush,” Jenny soothed.
W ith a cock of the eyebrow in invitation, she took the child
from me and turned back into her room.
I followed her in and sat on the rumpled bed as she sat
down on a nursing stool by the hearth and hastily bared one
breast. T he yowling little mouth clamped at once on to a
nipple and we all relaxed in relief as sudden silence
descended.
“Ah,” Jenny sighed. Her shoulders slumped a fraction as
the flow  of milk started. “That’ s better , my wee piggie, no?”
She opened her eyes and smiled at me, eyes clear and blue as
her brother ’ s.
“ ’T was kind of ye to keep the lassie all night; I slept like
the dead.”
I shrugged, smiling at the pic ture of mother and child,
relaxed together  in total content. The curve of the baby’ s head
exactly echoed the high, round curve of Jenny’ s breast andsmall, sl urping noises came from the little bundle as her body
sagged against her mother ’ s, fi tting easily into the curve of
Jenny’ s lap.
“It w as Jamie, n ot me,” I said. “He and his niece seem to
have go t on well together .” The picture of them came back to
me, Jamie talking in earnest, low tones to the child, tears
slipping down his face.
Jenny nodded, watching my face.
“A ye. I thought perhaps they’d comfort each other a bit.
He doesna sleep well these days?” Her voice held a question.
“No,” I answered softly . “He has a lot on his mind.”
“W ell he might,” she said, glancing at the bed behind me.
Ian was gone already , risen at dawn to see to the stock in the
barn. The horses that could be spared from the farming – and
some that couldn’ t – needed shoeing, needed harness, in
preparation for their journey to rebellion.
“Y ou ca n talk to a babe, ye ken,” she said suddenly ,
breaking into my thought. “Re ally talk, I mean. Y e can tell
them anything, no matter how foolish it would sound did ye
say it to a soul could understand ye.”
“Oh. Y ou heard him, then?” I a sked. She nodded, eyes on
the curv e of Katherine’ s cheek, where the tiny dark lashes lay
against the fair skin, eyes closed in ecstasy .
“A ye. Y e shouldna worrit you rself,” she added, smiling
gently a t me. “It isna that he f eels he canna talk to you; he
knows he can. But it’ s dif ferent to talk to a babe that way . It’ s a
person; ye ken t hat you’re not a lone. But they dinna ken your
words, a nd ye don’ t worry a b it what they’ll think of ye, or
what they may feel they must do. Y ou can pour out your heart
to them wi’out c hoosing your words, or keeping anything back
at all – and that’ s a comfort to the soul.”
She spoke matter -of-factly , as though this were something
that everyone knew . I wondered whether she spoke that way
often to her ch ild. The generous wide mouth, so like her
brother ’ s, lifted slightly at one side.“It’ s the way ye talk to them bef ore they’re born,” she said
softly . “Y ou’ll know?”
I p laced my han ds gently over my belly , one atop the other ,
remembering.
“Y es, I know .”
She pressed a thumb against the baby’ s cheek, breaking the
suction, and with a deft movement, shifted the small body to
bring the full breast within reach.
“I’ve tho ught th at perhaps that’ s why women are so often
sad, once the child’ s born,” she said meditatively , as though
thinking aloud. “Y e think of them while ye talk, and you have
a knowledge of them as they are inside ye, the way you think
they are. And then they’re born,  and they’re dif ferent – not the
way ye thought of them inside, at all. And ye love them, o’
course, and get to know them the way they are… but still,
there’ s the thought of the child ye once talked to in your heart,
and that child is  gone. So I think it’ s the grievin’ for the child
unborn that ye feel, even as y e hold the born one in your
arms.” She dipped her head and  kissed her daughter ’ s downy
skull.
“Y es,” I  said. “Before… it’ s al l possibility . It might be a
son, or a daughter . A plain child, a bonny one. And then it’ s
born, an d all the things it might have been are gone, because
now it is .”
She rocked gently back and for th, and the small clutching
hand that seized the folds of gr een silk over her breast began
to loose its grip.
“And a daughter is born, and th e son that she might have
been is dead,” s he said quietly . “And the bonny lad at your
breast has killed the wee lassie ye thought ye carried. And ye
weep for what y ou didn’ t know , that’ s gone for good, until you
know th e child you have, and t hen at last it’ s as though they
could never have been other than they are, and ye feel naught
but joy in them. But ’ til then, ye weep easy .”
“And men…” I said, thinking of Jamie, whispering secrets
to the unhearing ears of the child.“A ye. They hold their bairns, and they feel all the things
that might be, and the things that will never be. But it isna so
easy for a man to weep for the things he doesna ken.”P A R T  S I XThe Flames of Rebellion3 6  P R E S T O N P A N S
Scotland, September 1745
 
F our day s’ march found us on the crest of a hill near
Calder . A  sizabl e moor stretched out at the foot of the hill, but
we set up camp  within the shelter of the trees above. There
were two small streams cutting through the moss-covered rock
of th e hi llside, a nd the crisp wea ther of early fall made it seem
much more like picnicking than a march to war .
But it was the seventeenth of September , and if my sketchy
knowledge of Jacobite history was correct, war it would be, in
a matter of days.
“T ell it to me again, Sassenach,” Jamie had said, for the
dozenth time, as we made our way along the winding trails
and dirt  roads. I rode Donas, while Jamie walked alongside,
but now  slid down to walk beside him, to make conversation
easier . While Donas and I had  reached an understanding of
sorts, he was the kind of horse that demanded your full
concentration to ride; he was all too fond of scraping an
unwary rider of f by walking under low branches, for example.
“I to ld you before, I don’ t know that much,” I said. “There
was very little written about i t in the history books, and I
didn’ t p ay a great deal of atten tion at the time. All I can tell
you is that the b attle was fought – er , will  be foug ht – near the
town of Preston , and so it’ s called the Battle of Prestonpans,
though the Scots called – call – it the Battle of Gladsmuir ,
because of an old prophecy th at the returning king will be
victorious at Gladsmuir . Heaven knows where the real
Gladsmuir is, if there is one.”
“A ye. And?”
I furrowed my brow , trying to recall every last scrap of
information. I could conjure a mental picture of the small,
tattered brown copy of A Child’ s History of England , read by
the flick ering light of a kero sene lantern in a mud hutsomewhere in Persia. Mentally flicking the pages, I could just
recall the two-page section that was all the author had seen fit
to devot e to the second Jacobite  Rising, known to historians as
“the ’45.” And within that two-page section, the single
paragraph dealing with the battle we were about to fight.
“The Scots win,” I said helpfully .
“W ell, that’ s the important point,” he agreed, a bit
sarcastically , “b ut it would be a bit of help to know a little
more.”
“If you wanted prophecy , you should have gotten a seer ,” I
snapped, then relented. “I’m so rry . It’ s only that I don’ t know
much, and it’ s very frustrating.”
“A ye, i t is.” He reached down and took my hand,
squeezing it as he smiled at  me. “Dinna fash yourself,
Sassenach. Y e canna say more than ye know , but tell me it all,
just once more.”
“All right.” I sq ueezed back, and we walked on, hand in
hand. “I t was a remarkable victo ry ,” I began, reading from my
mental page, “because the Jacobites were so greatly
outnumbered. They surprised General Cope’ s army at dawn –
they cha r ged ou t of the rising sun, I remember that – and it
was a rout. The re were hundreds of casualties on the English
side, and  only a few from the Jacobite side – thirty men, that
was it. Only thirty men killed.”
Jamie glanced behind us, at the straggling tail of the
Lallybroch men , strung out as  they walked along the road,
chatting and singing in small gro ups. Thirty men was what we
had brought from Lallybroch. It didn’ t seem that small a
number , looking  at them. But I had seen the battlefields of
Alsace-Lorraine, and the acres of meadowland converted to
muddy boneyards by the burial of the thousands slain.
“T aken all in al l,” I said, feeling faintly apologetic, “I’m
afraid it was really rather… unimportant, historically
speaking.”
Jamie bl ew out his breath through pursed lips, and looked
down at me rather bleakly .“Unimportant. A ye, well.”
“I’m sorry ,” I said.
“Not your fault, Sassenach.”
But I couldn’ t help feeling that it was, somehow .
 
The men sat around the fire after their supper , lazily
enjoying the feeling of full stomachs, exchanging stories and
scratching. The scratching was endemic; close quarters and
lack of hygiene made body lice so common as to excite no
remark when one man detached a representative specimen
from a fold of his plaid and tossed it into the fire. The louse
flamed f or an instant, one among the sparks of the fire, and
then was gone.
The young man they called Kincaid – his name was
Alexander , but there were so m any Alexanders that most of
them ended up b eing called by nicknames or middle names –
seemed particularly af flicted with the scour ge this evening. He
dug viciously under one arm, in to his curly brown hair , then –
with a quick g lance to see whether I was looking in his
direction – at his crotch.
“Got ’em bad, have ye, lad?” Ross the smith observed
sympathetically .
“A ye,” he answered, “the wee buggers are eatin’ me alive.”
“Bloody hell to get out of your c ock hairs,” W allace Fraser
observed, scratching himself in sympathy . “Gives me the yeuk
to watch ye, laddie.”
“D’ye ken the best way to rid yourself o’ the wee
beasties?” Sorley McClure ask ed helpfully , and at Kincaid’ s
negative shake of the head, leaned forward and carefully
pulled a flaming stick from the fire.
“Lift yo ur kilt a moment, laddi e, and I’ll smoke ’em out
for ye,” he of fe red, to catcalls and jeers of laughter from the
men.
“Bloody farmer ,” Murtagh grum bled. “And what would ye
know about it?”“Y ou know a better way?” W allace raised thick brows
skeptically , wrinkling the tanned skin of his balding forehead.
“O’ course.” He drew his dirk with a flourish. “The
laddie’ s a soldier now; let him do it like a soldier does.”
Kincaid’ s open face was guileless and eager . “How’ s that?”
“W eel, v erra simple. Y e take your dirk, lift your plaidie,
and shav e of f half the hairs on your crutch.” He raised the dirk
warningly . “Only half, mind.”
“Half? A ye, well…” Kincaid looked doubtful, but was
paying c lose attention. I could see the grins of anticipation
broadening on the faces of the men around the fire, but no one
was laughing yet.
“Then…” Murtagh gestured at Sorley and his stick. “ Then ,
laddie, ye set the other half on fire, and when the beasties rush
out, ye spear them wi’ your dirk.”
Kincaid blushed  hotly enough t o be seen even by firelight
as the circle of men erupted in  hoots and roars. There was a
good de al of rude shoving as a couple of the men pretended to
try the fire cure  on each other , brandishing flaming billets of
wood. Just as it  seemed that the horseplay was getting out of
hand, and likely to lead to blo ws in earnest, Jamie returned
from hobbling the animals. He stepped into the circle, and
tossed a stone b ottle from under one arm to Kincaid. Another
went to Murtagh, and the shoving died down.
“Y e’re f ools, the lot o’ ye,” he d eclared. “The second best
way to rid yours elf of lice is to pour whisky on them and get
them dru nk. When they’ve fallen down snoring, then ye stand
up and they’ll drop straight of f.”
“Second best, eh?” said Ross. “ And what’ s the best way ,
sir , and I might ask?”
Jamie smiled indulgently round the circle, like a parent
amused by the antics of his children.
“Why , l et your wife pick them  of f ye, one by one.” He
cocked an elbow and bowed to me, one eyebrow raised. “If
you’d oblige me, my lady?” 
While put forward as a joke, i ndividual removal was in
fact the only ef fe ctive method of ridding oneself of lice. I fine-
combed my own hair – all of it – morning and evening,
washed it with yarrow whenever we paused near water deep
enough to bathe in, and had so far avoided any serious
infestations. A ware that I would remain louseless only so long
as Jamie did, I administered the same treatment to him,
whenever I could get him to sit still long enough.
“Baboons do this all the time,” I remarked, delicately
disentangling a foxtail from his thick red mane. “But I believe
they eat the fruits of their labors.”
“Dinna let me prevent ye, S assenach, and ye feel so
inclined,” he responded. He hunched his shoulders slightly in
pleasure as the comb slid thro ugh the thick, glossy strands.
The firelight filled my hands w ith a cascade of sparks and
golden s treaks o f fire. “Mm. Y e wouldna think it felt so nice to
have someone comb your hair for ye.”
“W ait ’ til I get  to the rest of it,” I said, tweaking him
familiarly and making him gigg le. “T empted though I am to
try Murtagh’ s suggestion instead.”
“T ouch my cock hairs wi’ a torch, and you’ll get the same
treatment,” he threatened. “What was it Louise de La T our
says bald lassies are?”
“Erotic.” I leaned forward and nipped the upper flange of
one ear between my teeth.
“Mmmphm.”
“W ell, tastes dif fer ,” I said. “ Chacun à son gout , and all
that.”
“A bloody French sentiment, and I ever heard one.”
“Isn’ t it, though?”
A loud, rolling growl interrupte d my labors. I laid down
the comb and peered ostentatiously into the tree-filled
shadows.“Either ,” I said, “there are bear s in this wood, or… why
haven’ t you eaten?”
“I w as busy wi ’ the beasts,” he answered. “One of the
ponies h as a cracked hoof and I had to bind it with a poultice.
Not that I’ve so much appetite, what wi’ all this talk of eating
lice.”
“What sort of poultice do you use on a horse’ s hoof?” I
asked, ignoring this remark.
“Dif ferent things; fresh dung will do in a pinch. I used
chewed vetch leaves mixed wi’ honey this time.”
The sadd lebags had been dumped by our private fire, near
the edge of the small clearing where the men had erected my
tent. While I wo uld have been willing to sleep under the stars,
as th ey did, I admitted to a certain thankfulness for the small
privacy af forded  me by the sheet of canvas. And, as Murtagh
had pointed out with his customary bluntness, when I thanked
him for his assistance in erecting the shelter , the arrangement
was not solely for my  benefit.
“And if he takes his ease between your thighs of a night,
there’ s none will grudge it to him,” the little clansman had
said, w ith a jerk of the head toward Jamie, deep in
conversation wi th several of th e other men. “But there’ s nay
need to make th e lads think ow er -much o’ things they canna
have, now is there?”
“Quite,” I said, with an edge to m y voice. “V ery thoughtful
of you.”
One of his rare smiles curled the corner of the thin-lipped
mouth.
“Och, quite,” he said.
A quick rummage through the s addlebags turned up a heel
of c heese and several apples. I gave these to Jamie, who
examined them dubiously .
“No bread?” he asked.
“There may be some in the other bag. Eat those first,
though; they’re good for you.” He shared the Highlanders’innate suspicion  of fresh fruit and vegetables, though his great
appetite made him willing to eat almost anything in extremity .
“Mm,” h e said, taking a bite of  one apple. “If ye say so,
Sassenach.”
“I do say so. Look.” I pulled my lips back, baring my
teeth. “H ow many women of m y age do you know who still
have all their teeth?”
A grin bared his own excellent teeth.
“W ell, I’ll admit you’re verra well preserved, Sassenach,
for such an auld crone.”
“W ell nourished , is what I am,” I retorted. “Half the people
on your estate a re suf fering from mild scurvy , and from what
I’ve seen on the road, it’ s even worse elsewhere. It’ s vitamin C
that prevents scurvy , and apples are full of it.”
He t ook the apple away from his mouth and frowned at it
suspiciously .
“They are?”
“Y es, they are,” I said firmly . “So are most other kinds of
plants – oranges and lemons are  best, but of course you can’ t
get those here –  but onions, cabbage, apples… eat something
like that every day , and you won’ t get scurvy . Even green
herbs and meadow grass have vitamin C.”
“Mmphm. And that’ s why deer dinna lose their teeth as
they get old?”
“I daresay .”
He turned the apple to and fro, examining it critically , then
shrugged.
“A ye, well,” he said, and took another bite.
I had  just turned to fetch the br ead when a faint crackling
sound drew my attention. I caug ht sight from the corner of my
eye of shadowy movement in the darkness and the firelight
flashed from something near Jamie’ s head. I whirled toward
him, sho uting, just in time to see him topple backward of f the
log and disappear into the void of the night.There was no moon, and the  only clue to what was
happening was a tremendous scuf fling sound in the dry alder
leaves, and the noise of men locked in ef fortful but silent
conflict, with grunts, gasps, and the occasional muf fled curse.
There was a short, sharp cry , and then complete quiet. It lasted,
I suppos e, only a few seconds , though it seemed to go on
forever .
I was still stan ding by the fi re, frozen in my original
position, when Jamie reemer ged from the Stygian dark of the
forest, a captive before him, on e arm twisted behind its back.
Loosing his grip, he whirled the  dark figure around and gave it
an abrupt shove that sent it cras hing backward into a tree. The
man hit the trun k hard, loosing a shower of leaves and acorns,
and slid slowly down to lie dazed in the leaf-meal.
Attracted by the noise, Murtagh , Ross, and a couple of the
other Fr aser men  materialized by the fire. Hauling the intruder
to his feet, they pulled him roug hly into the circle of firelight.
Murtagh grabbe d the captive by the hair and jerked his head
backward, bringing his face into view .
It was a small, fine-boned face, with big, long-lashed eyes
that blinked dazedly at the crowding faces.
“But he’ s only a boy!” I exclaimed. “He can’ t be more than
fifteen!”
“Sixteen!” said the boy . He shook his head, senses
returning. “Not that that makes any dif ference,” he added
haughtily , in an English accent. Hampshire, I thought. He was
a long way from home.
“It doesn’ t,” Jamie grimly agreed. “Sixteen or sixty , he’ s
just made a ver ra creditable attempt at cutting my throat.” I
noticed then the reddened han dkerchief pressed against the
side of his neck.
“I shan’ t tell you anything,” th e boy said. His eyes were
dark pools in th e pale face, though the firelight shone on the
gleam o f fair hair . He was clutch ing one arm tightly in front of
him; I thought perhaps it was injured. The boy was clearly
making a major ef fort to stand  upright among the men, lips
compressed against any wayward expression of fear or pain.“Some things you don’ t need to tell me,” said Jamie,
looking the lad o ver carefully . “One, you’re an Englishman, so
likely you’ve come with troops nearby . And two, you’re
alone.”
The boy seemed startled. “How do you know that?”
Jamie ra ised his  eyebrows. “I s uppose that ye’d not have
attacked me unless you thought that the lady and I were alone.
If you were wi th someone else who also thought that, they
would presumab ly have come to your assistance just now – is
your arm broken, by the way? I  thought I felt something snap.
If yo u were with someone else who knew we were not alone,
they would ha’ stopped ye from  trying anything so foolish.”
Despite this diagnosis, I noti ced three of the men fade
discreetly into the forest in res ponse to a signal from Jamie,
presumably to check for other intruders.
The boy’ s expression hardened at hearing his act described
as foolish. Jamie dabbed at his neck, then inspected the
handkerchief critically .
“If you’re tryin’ to kill someone  from behind, laddie, pick
a man who’ s not sitting in a pile of dry leaves,” he advised.
“And if you’re using a knife on someone lar ger than you, pick
a su rer spot; throat-cutting’ s chancy unless your victim will sit
still for ye.”
“Thank you for the valuable ad vice,” the boy sneered. He
was doing a fai r job at maintaining his bravado, though his
eyes flicked nervously from one threatening, whiskered face to
another . None of the Highlanders would have won any beauty
prizes in  broad daylight; by ni ght, they weren’ t the sort of
thing you wanted to meet in a dark place.
Jamie an swered courteously , “Y ou’re quite welcome. It’ s
unfortunate that  ye won’ t get the chance to apply it in future.
Why did  you attack me, since I think to ask?”
Men, attracted by the noise, had  begun filtering in from the
surrounding cam psites, sliding wraithlike out of the woods.
The boy ’ s glanc e flickered around the growing circle of men,
resting at length on me. He hesitated for a moment, butanswered, “I was hoping to release the lady from your
custody .”
A small stir of suppressed amusement ran around the
circle, only to b e quelled by a  brief gesture from Jamie. “I
see,” he said noncommittally . “Y ou heard us talking and
determined that the lady is English and well-born. Whereas I-”
“Whereas you, sir , are a conscienceless outlaw , with a
reputation for thievery and violence! Y our face and description
are on broadsh eets throughout Hampshire and Sussex! I
recognized you at once; you’re  a rebel and an unprincipled
voluptuary!” the boy burst out hotly , face stained a deeper red
even than the firelight.
I b it my lip and  looked down at my shoes, so as not to
meet Jamie’ s eye.
“A ye, w ell. Just as ye say ,” Jamie agreed cordially . “That
being the case, perhaps you can advance some reason why I
shouldna kill ye immediately?” Drawing the dirk smoothly
from its  sheath, he twisted it delicately , making the fire jump
from the blade.
The bloo d had faded from the young man’ s face, leaving
him ghostly in the shadows, bu t he drew himself upright at
this, pulling against the captors o n either side. “I expected that.
I am quite prepared to die,” he said, stif fening his shoulders.
Jamie n odded th oughtfully , then, stooping, laid the blade
of h is dirk in the fire. A plum e of smoke rose around the
blackening metal, smelling strongly of the for ge. W e all
watched in silent fascination as the flame, spectral blue where
it touched the blade, seemed to bring the deadly iron to life in
a flush of deep red heat.
W rapping his hand in the b loodstained cloth, Jamie
cautiously pulled the dirk from the fire. He advanced slowly
toward the boy , letting the blade fall, as though of its own
volition, until it touched the lad ’ s jerkin. There was a strong
smell of singed cloth from the handkerchief wrapped around
the h aft of the knife, which grew stronger as a narrow burnt
line trac ed its way up the front  of the jerkin in the dagger ’ s
path. The point, darkening as it  cooled, stopped just short ofthe upw ardly straining chin. I could see thin lines of sweat
shining in the stretched hollows of the slender neck.
“A ye, w ell, I’m afraid that I’m n o prepared to kill ye – just
yet.” Jam ie’ s voice was soft, filled with a quiet menace all the
more frightening for its control.
“Who d’ye march with?” The question snapped like a
whip, making its hearers flinch. The knife point hovered
slightly nearer , smoking in the night wind.
“I’ll – I’ll not tell you!” The boy’ s lips closed tight on the
stammered answer , and a tremor ran down the delicate throat.
“Nor how far aw ay your comrades lie? Nor their number?
Nor their direction of march?” T he questions were put lightly
again, with a finicking touch of the blade along the edge of the
boy’ s ja w . His eyes showed wh ite all around, like a panicked
horse, b ut he shook his head violently , making the golden hair
fly . Ross and Kincaid tightened their grip against the pull of
the boy’ s arms.
The darkened blade pressed suddenly flat along its length,
hard under the angle of the jaw . There was a thin and breathy
scream, and the stink of burning skin.
“Jamie!” I said, shocked beyond bearing. He did not turn
to look at me, b ut kept his eye s fixed on his prisoner , who,
released from the grip on his arms, had sunk to his knees in the
drift of dead leaves, hand clutched to his neck.
“This is no conc ern of yours, Madam,” he said between his
teeth. Reaching down, he grabbed the boy by the shirtfront and
jerked him to hi s feet. W avering, the knife blade rose between
them, and poised itself just under the lad’ s left eye. Jamie tilted
his h ead in silen t question, to receive a minimal but definite
negative shake in return.
The boy’ s voice was no more th an a shaky whisper; he had
to clear his thro at to make him self heard. “N-no,” he said.
“No. Th ere is nothing you can do to me that will make me tell
you anything.”
Jamie held him for a moment l onger , eye to eye, then let
go of the bunc hed fabric and stepped back. “No,” he saidslowly , “I dinna suppose there i s. Not to you. But what about
the lady?”
I didn’ t at first r ealize that he m eant me, until he grabbed
me by the wrist  and yanked m e to him, making me stumble
slightly on the rough ground. I fell toward him, and he twisted
my arm roughly behind my back.
“Y ou ma y be indif ferent to your  own welfare, but ye might
perhaps have some concern for the lady’ s honor , since you
were at such pai ns to rescue her .” T urning me toward himself,
he twine d his fingers in my hair , forced my head back and
kissed me with a deliberate br utality that made me squirm
involuntarily in protest.
Freeing my hair , he pulled me hard against him, facing the
boy on the oth er side of the fire. The boy’ s eyes were
enormous, aghast with reflections of flame in the wide dark
pupils.
“Let her go!” he demanded hoarsely . “What are you
proposing to do with her?”
Jamie’ s hands reached to the n eck of my gown. W ith a
sudden j erk, he tore the fabric o f gown and shift, baring most
of m y bosom. R eacting instinctively , I kicked him in the shin.
The boy  made an inarticulate sound and jerked forward, but
was stopped short once more by Ross and Kincaid.
“Since you ask,” said Jamie’ s voice pleasantly behind me,
“I am proposing  to ravish this lady before your eyes. I shall
then give her to my men, to do what they will with. Perhaps ye
would like to ha ve a turn before  I kill you? A man should no
die a vir gin, do ye think?”
I w as struggling in good earnest now , my arm held in an
iron grip behind my back, my protests muf fled by Jamie’ s
lar ge, w arm palm clapped over my mouth. I sank my teeth
hard into  the heel of his hand, tasting blood. He took his hand
sharply away with a smothered exclamation, but returned it
almost i mmediately , forcing a wadded piece of cloth past my
teeth. I made strangled sounds around the gag as Jamie’ s hands
darted to my sh oulders, forcing the torn pieces of my gown
farther apart. W ith a rending of linen and fustian, he bared meto the waist, pinning my arms at my sides. I saw Ross glance
at me and quick ly away , fixing h is gaze with dogged intent on
the prisoner , a slow flush staining his cheekbones. Kincaid,
himself no more than nineteen , stared in shock, his mouth
open as a flytrap.
“Stop it!” The boy’ s voice was trembling, but with outrage
now rather than fear . “Y ou – yo u unspeakable poltroon! How
dare you dishonor a lady , you Scottish jackal!” He stood for a
moment, chest heaving with em otion, then made up his mind.
He raised his jaw and thrust out his chin.
“V ery w ell. I do not see that in honor I have any choice.
Release the lady and I will tell you what you want to know .”
One of Jamie’ s hands left my shoulder momentarily . I
didn’ t see his gesture, but Ross released the boy’ s injured arm
and went quickly to fetch m y cloak, which had fallen
unheeded to the ground during the excitement of the boy’ s
capture. Jamie pulled both my hands behind me, and, yanking
of f m y belt, used it to bind th em securely behind my back.
T aking t he cloak from Ross, he swirled it around my shoulders
and fastened it carefully . Stepping back, he bowed ironically to
me, then turned to face his captive.
“Y ou have my word that the lady will be safe from my
advances,” he said. The note in his voice could have been due
to the strain of anger and frustrated lust; I recognized it as the
agonized restraint of an overwhelming impulse to laugh, and
could cheerfully have killed him.
Face like stone, the boy gave the required information,
speaking in brief syllables.
His name was W illiam Grey , second son of V iscount
Melton. He accompanied a troop of two hundred men,
traveling to Dunbar , intending to join there with General
Cope’ s army . His fellows were presently encamped some three
miles to the wes t. He, W illiam, out walking through the forest,
had seen the light of our fire, and come to investigate. No, he
had no compan ion with him. Y es, the troop carried heavy
armament, sixte en carriage-mounted “galloper” cannon, andtwo sixt een-inch mortars. Most of the troop were armed with
muskets, and there was one company of thirty horse.
The boy  was beginning to wilt under the combined strain
of th e questioning and his injure d arm, but refused an of fer to
be seated. Instead, he leaned against the tree, cradling his
elbow in his left palm.
The que stions went on for nearly an hour , covering the
same g round over and over , pinpointing discrepancies,
enlar ging details, searching out the telltale omission, the point
evaded. Satisfied at last, Jamie sighed deeply and turned from
the boy , who slu mped in the wa vering shadows of the oak. He
held out  a hand without speaking; Murtagh, as usual divining
his intent, handed him a pistol.
He turned back to the prisoner , busying himself in
checking the priming and loading of the pistol. The twelve
inches of heart-butted metal gleamed dark, the firelight
picking out sparks of silver at trigger and priming pin. “Head
or heart?” Jamie asked casually , raising his head at last.
“Eh?” The boy’ s mouth hung open in blank
incomprehension.
“I am going to shoot you,” Jamie explained patiently .
“Spies are usually hanged, but in consideration of your
gallantry , I am w illing to give y ou a quick, clean death. Do ye
prefer to take the ball in the head, or the heart?”
The boy straightened quickly , sq uaring his shoulders. “Oh,
ah, yes,  of course.” He licked  his lips and swallowed. “I
think… in the –  in the heart. Thank you,” he added, as an
obvious afterthought. He raised his chin, compressing lips that
still held a suggestion of their soft, childish curve.
Nodding, Jamie cocked the pist ol with a click that echoed
in the silence under the oak trees.
“W ait!” said the prisoner . Jamie looked at him inquiringly ,
pistol leveled at the thin chest.
“What assurance have I that the lady will remain
unmolested after I am – after I have gone?” the boy demanded,
looking belligerently around the circle of men. His singleworking hand was clenched hard, but shook nonetheless. Ross
made a sound which he skillfully converted into a sneeze.
Jamie lowered the pistol, and with an iron control, kept his
face carefully composed in an expression of solemn gravity .
“W eel,” he said, the Scots accent growing broader under
the s train, “ye h a’ my own word , of course, though I quite see
that ye might h ave some hesitation in accepting the word of
a…” – his lip twitched despite himself – “of a Scottish
poltroon. Perhaps ye would accept the assurances of the lady
herself?” He raised an eyebrow  in my direction and Kincaid
sprang at once to free me, fumbling awkwardly with the gag.
“Jamie!” I exclaimed furiously , mouth freed at last. “This
is u nconscionab le! How could you do such a thing? Y ou –
you-”
“Poltroon,” he supplied helpfull y . “Or jackal, if ye like that
better . What d’ye say , Murtagh,” turning to his lieutenant, “am
I a poltroon or a jackal?”
Murtagh’ s seam of a mouth twisted sourly . “I’d say ye’re
dogsmeat, if you untie yon lass wi’out a dirk in yer hand.”
Jamie turned apologetically t o his prisoner . “I must
apologize to my wife for forc ing her to take part in this
deception. I assure you that her participation was entirely
unwilling.” He ruefully examin ed his bitten hand in the light
from the fire.
“Y our wife!” The boy stared wildly from me to Jamie.
“I’ll ass ure ye likewise that while the lady on occasion
honors my bed with her presenc e, she has never done so under
duress. And won’ t now ,” he added pointedly , “but let’ s no
untie her just yet, Kincaid.”
“James Fraser ,” I hissed between clenched teeth. “If you
touch that boy , you’ll certainly never share my bed again!”
Jamie raised one eyebrow . His canines gleamed briefly in
the firelight. “W ell, that’ s a ser ious threat, to an unprincipled
voluptuary such as myself, but I  dinna suppose I can consider
my o wn interests in such a situation. W ar ’ s war , after all.” Thepistol, which had been allowe d to fall, began to rise once
more.
“Jamie!” I screamed.
He lowered the pistol again, and turned to me with an
expression of exaggerated patience. “Y es?”
I too k a deep breath, to keep m y voice from shaking with
rage. I could on ly guess what he was up to, and hoped I was
doing the right thing. Right or  not, when this was over… I
choked of f an in tensely pleasin g vision of Jamie writhing on
the grou nd with my foot on his Adam’ s apple, in order to
concentrate on my present role.
“Y ou ha ven’ t any evidence whatever that he’ s a spy ,” I
said. “He says h e stumbled on you by accident. Who wouldn’ t
be curious if they saw a fire out in the woods?”
Jamie nodded, following the a r gument. “A ye, and what
about attempted  murder? Spy or no, he tried to kill me, and
admits as much.” He tenderly f ingered the raw scratch at the
side of his throat.
“W ell, o f course he did,” I said hotly . “He says he knew
you were an outlaw . There’ s a bloody price on your head, for
heaven’ s sake!”
Jamie rubbed his chin dubiou sly , at last turning to the
prisoner . “W ell, it’ s a point,” he said. “W illiam Grey , your
advocate makes a good case for ye. It’ s no the policy either of
His Highness Prince Charles or myself to execute persons
unlawfully , enemy or no.” He su mmoned Kincaid with a wave
of the hand.
“Kincaid, you and Ross take th is man in the direction he
says his  camp lies. If the inform ation he gave us proves to be
true, tie him to a tree a mile from the camp in the line of
march. H is friends will find hi m there tomorrow . If what he
told us is not  true…” – he paused, cold eyes bent on the
prisoner – “cut his throat.”
He l ooked the boy in the face a nd said, without a shadow
of mockery , “I give you your life. I hope ye’ll use it well.”Moving behind me, he cut the cloth binding my wrists. As
I t urned  furiously , he motioned toward the boy , who had sat
down suddenly on the ground b eneath the oak. “Perhaps ye’d
be g ood enough to tend the boy’ s arm before he goes?” The
scowl of pretended ferocity had  left his face, leaving it blank
as a wall. His eyelids were l owered, preventing me from
meeting his gaze.
W ithout a word, I went to the boy and sank to my knees
beside him. He seemed dazed, and didn’ t protest my
examination, or the subsequent manipulations, though the
handling must have been painful.
The split bodice of my gown kept sliding of f my shoulders,
and I muttered b eneath my breath as I irritably hitched up one
side or the other for the dozenth  time. The bones of the boy’ s
forearm were light and angular under the skin, hardly thicker
than my  own. I splinted the arm  and slung it, using my own
kerchief. “It’ s a clean break,” I told him, keeping my voice
impersonal. “T ry to keep it stil l for two weeks, at least.” He
nodded, not looking at me.
Jamie had been sitting quietly  on a log watching my
ministrations. My breath coming  unevenly , I walked up to him
and slap ped him  as hard as I could. The blow left a white
patch on one cheek and made his eyes water , but he didn’ t
move or change expression.
Kincaid pulled the boy to his fee t and propelled him to the
edge of the clear ing with a hand  at his back. At the edge of the
shadows he halted and turned back. A voiding looking at me,
he spoke only to Jamie.
“I owe you my  life,” he said formally . “I should greatly
prefer n ot to, but since you ha ve forced the gift upon me, I
must regard it as  a debt of honor . I shall hope to dischar ge that
debt in the futu re, and once i t is dischar ged…” The boy’ s
voice shook slightly with suppressed hatred, losing all its
assumed formality in the utter sincerity of his feelings. “…I’ll
kill you!”
Jamie ro se from the log to his full height. His face was
calm, fr ee of any taint of amusement. He inclined his headgravely to his de parting prisoner . “In that case, sir , I must hope
that we do not meet again.”
The boy straightened his shoulders and returned the bow
stif fly . “A Grey does not for get a n obligation, sir ,” he said, and
vanished into the darkness, Kincaid at his elbow .
There w as a discreet interval of breathless waiting, as the
leaf-shuf fling sounds of feet moved of f through the darkness.
Then the laughter started, firs t with a soft, fizzing noise
through the nostrils of one man , then a tentative chuckle from
another . Never raucous, still it gathered volume, spiraling
round the circle of men.
Jamie to ok one step into the circle, face turned toward his
men. Th e laughter stopped abruptly . Glancing down at me, he
said briefly , “Go to the tent.”
W arned by my expression, he gripped my wrist before I
could raise my hand.
“If y ou’re going to slap me aga in, at least let me turn the
other cheek,” he said dryly . “Besides, I think I can save ye the
trouble. But I’d advise you to go to the tent, just the same.”
Dropping my hand, he strode o ut to the edge of the fire,
and with one peremptory jerk  of the head, gathered the
scattered men into a reluctant, half-wary clump before him.
Their faces were big-eyed, orbits scooped with darkness by the
shadows.
I did n’ t understand everything he said, as he spoke in an
odd mixture of Gaelic and English, but I gathered suf ficient
sense to  realize that he was inqu iring, in a soft, level tone that
seemed to turn his listeners to s tone, as to the identity of the
sentinels on duty for the evening.
There w as a furtive glancing to and fro, and uneasy
movement among the men, who seemed to clump more
strongly togethe r in the face of danger . But then the closed
ranks pa rted, and two men step ped out, glanced up – once –
then has tily down, and stood sh oulder to shoulder , eyes on the
ground, outside the protection of their fellows.It was the McC lure brothers, Geor ge and Sorley . Close in
age, somewhere in their thirties, they stood hang-dog near
each other , fingers of the work-toughened hands twitching as
though longing to link and clasp together , as some small
protection before the coming storm.
There was a brie f, wordless pause as Jamie looked over the
two delinquent sentinels. Then followed five solid minutes of
unpleasantness, all conducted in that same soft, level voice.
There w asn’ t a sound from the grouped men, and the
McClures, both burly men, seemed to dwindle and shrink
under th e weigh t of it. I wiped m y sweating palms on my skirt,
glad that I didn’ t understand it all, and beginning to regret not
following Jamie’ s order to return to the tent.
I regretted it still more in the next moment, when Jamie
turned suddenly to Murtagh, who, expecting the command,
was ready with a leather strip, some two feet long, knotted at
one end to provide a rough grip.
“Strip and stand to me, the bo th of ye.” The McClures
moved at once, thick fingers fum bling with shirt fastenings, as
though eager to obey , relieved th at the preliminaries were over
and the reckoning arrived.
I tho ught perhaps I would be si ck, though I gathered that
the punishment was light enoug h, by the standards applied to
such thin gs. There was no sound in the clearing, save the slap
of the lash and  an occasional gasp or groan from the man
being flogged.
At the last stroke, Jamie let the  thong fall to his side. He
was swe ating heavily , and the grimed linen of his shirt was
pasted to his ba ck. He nodded to the McClures in dismissal,
and wipe d his wet face on his sleeve as one man bent painfully
to retrieve the discarded shirts, his brother , shaky himself,
bracing him on the other side.
The me n in the clearing seemed to have ceased even
breathing, during the punishment. Now there was a tremor
through the group, as though a collective breath had been
released in a sigh of relief.Jamie ey ed them, shaking his head slightly . The night wind
was rising, stirring and lifting the hair on his crown.
“W e canna af ford carelessness, mo duinnen ,” he said
softly . “ Not from anyone.” He took a deep breath and his
mouth t wisted wryly . “And that includes me. It was my
unshielded fire drew the lad to us.” Fresh sweat had sprung out
on his brow , an d he wiped a hand roughly across his face,
drying it on his  kilt. He nodd ed toward Murtagh, standing
grimly apart from the other men , and held the leather strap out
toward him.
“If ye’ll oblige me, sir?”
After a moment’ s hesitation, Murtagh’ s gnarled hand
reached out and took the strap. An expression that might have
been amusement flickered in the little clansman’ s bright black
eyes.
“W i’ pleasure… sir .”
Jamie tu rned his back to his men, and began to unfasten
his shirt . His eye caught me, standing frozen between the tree
trunks, and one eyebrow lifted in ironic question. Did I want to
watch? I shook my head frantically , whirled, and blundered
away through the trees, belatedly taking his advice.
 
In fact, I didn’ t return to the tent. I couldn’ t bear the
thought of its stifling enclosure; my chest felt tight and I
needed air .
I fou nd i t on the crest of a small rise, just beyond the tent. I
stumbled to a s top in a small open space, flung myself full-
length o n the ground, and put bo th arms over my head. I didn’ t
want to hear the faintest echo o f the drama’ s final act, down
behind me by the fire.
The rough grass beneath me wa s cold on bare skin, and I
hunched to wrap the cloak around me. Cocooned and
insulated, I lay quiet, listening to the pounding of my heart,
waiting for the turmoil inside me to calm.
Sometime later , I heard men pas sing by in small groups of
four or five, returning to their sleeping spots. Muf fled by foldsof cloth, I could n’ t distinguish their words, but they sounded
subdued, perhaps a little awed. Some time passed before I
realized that he was there. He didn’ t speak or make a noise,
but I suddenly knew that he was nearby . When I rolled over
and sat up, I could see his bulk shadowed on a stone, head
resting on forearms, folded across his knees.
T orn between the impulse to str oke his head, and the ur ge
to cave it in with a rock, I did neither .
“Are you all right?” I asked, after a moment’ s pause, voice
neutral as I could make it.
“A ye, I’ll do.” He unfolded himself slowly , and stretched,
moving gingerly , with a deep sigh.
“I’m sorry for your gown,” h e said, a minute later . I
realized that he could see my bare flesh shining dim-white in
the darkness, and pulled the edges of my cloak sharply
together .
“Oh, for the gown? ” I said,  more than a slight edge  to my
voice.
He sighed again. “A ye, and fo r the rest of it, too.” He
paused, then said, “I thought p erhaps ye might be willing to
sacrifice your modesty to prev ent my havin’ to damage the
lad, but  under the circumstances, I hadna time to ask your
permission. If I was wrong, then I’ll ask your pardon, lady .”
“Y ou mean you would have tortured him further?”
He was irritated , and didn’ t trouble to hide it. “T orture,
forbye! I didna hurt the lad.”
I dre w the folds of my cloak mo re tightly around me. “Oh,
you don’ t consider breaking his arm and branding him with a
hot knife as hurting him, then?”
“No, I don’ t.” He scooted across the few feet of grass
between us, and grasped me by  the elbow , pulling me around
to fa ce h im. “Li sten to me. He broke his own silly arm, trying
to force his way out of an unbreakable lock. He’ s brave as any
man I’ve got, but he’ s no experience at hand-to-hand fighting.”
“And the knife?”Jamie snorted. “T cha! He’ s a sm all sore spot under one ear ,
that won ’ t pain him much past  dinner tomorrow . I expect it
hurt a bit, but I meant to scare him, not wound him.”
“Oh.” I pulled away and turne d back to the dark wood,
looking for our tent. His voice followed me.
“I co uld have br oken him, Sassenach. It would have been
messy , though, and likely permanent. I’d rather not use such
means if I dinn a have to. Mind ye, Sassenach” – his voice
reached me from the shadows,  holding a note of warning –
“sometime I may have to. I had to know where his fellows
were, their arms and the rest of it. I couldna scare him into it;
it was trick him or break him.”
“He said  you couldn’ t do anything that would make him
talk.”
Jamie’ s voice was weary . “Christ, Sassenach, of course I
could. Y e can break anyone if you’re prepared to hurt them
enough. I know that, if anyone does.”
“Y es,” I said quietly , “I suppose you do.”
Neither of us mo ved for a time, nor spoke. I could hear the
murmurs of men bedding down  for the night, the occasional
stamp of boots on hard earth and the rustle of leaves heaped up
as a barrier against the autumn chill. My eyes had adjusted
suf ficiently to the dark that I co uld now see the outline of our
tent, some thirty feet away in th e shelter of a big larch. I could
see Jami e, too, his figure black against the lighter darkness of
the night.
“All right,” I said at last. “All right. Given the choice
between what you did, and wha t you might have done… yes,
all right.”
“Thank you.” I c ouldn’ t tell whether he was smiling or not,
but it sounded like it.
“Y ou were taking the hell of a chance with the rest of it,” I
said. “If  I hadn’ t given you an excuse for not killing him, what
would you have done?”
The lar g e figure stirred and shru gged, and there was a faint
chuckle in the shadows.“I don’ t know , Sassenach. I reckoned as how you’d think
of so mething. If ye hadn’ t – we ll, I suppose I would have had
to s hoot the lad . Couldna very well disappoint him by just
lettin’ him go, could I?”
“Y ou bloody Scottish bastard,” I said without heat.
He heaved a deep exasperated sigh. “Sassenach, I’ve been
stabbed, bitten, slapped, and whipped since supper – which I
didna ge t to finish. I dinna like  to scare children and I dinna
like to flog men, and I’ve had to do both. I’ve two hundred
English camped three miles away , and no idea what to do
about them. I’m tired, I’m hungry , and I’m sore. If you’ve
anything like womanly sympathy about ye, I could use a bit!”
He s ounded so a ggrieved that I laughed in spite of myself.
I got up and walked toward him.
“I suppose you could, at that. Come here, and I’ll see if I
can find  a bit fo r you.” He had put his shirt back on loose over
his shoulders, not troubling to do it up. I slid my hands under it
and over  the hot, tender skin of his back. “Didn’ t cut the skin,”
I said, feeling gently upward.
“A strap doesn’ t; it just stings.”
I rem oved the s hirt and sat him down to have his back
sponged with cold water from the stream.
“Better?” I asked.
“Mmmm.” The muscles of his shoulders relaxed, but he
flinched slightly as I touched a particularly tender spot.
I tur ned my att ention to the scratch under his ear . “Y ou
wouldn’ t really have shot him, would you?”
“What d’ye take me for , Sasse nach?” he said, in mock
outrage.
“A Scottish poltroon. Or at best, a conscienceless outlaw .
Who kn ows what a fellow like that would do? Let alone an
unprincipled voluptuary .”
He laughed with me, and his shoulder shook under my
hand. “T urn you r head. If you want womanly sympathy , you’ll
have to keep still while I apply it.”“Mmm.” There was a moment o f silence. “No,” he said at
last, “I wouldna  have shot him . But I had to save his pride
somehow , after making him fee l ridiculous over you. He’ s a
brave lad; he deserved to feel he was worth killing.”
I shook  my head. “I will never understand men,” I
muttered, smoothing marigold ointment over the scratch.
He r eached back for my hands and brought them together
under his chin.
“Y ou dinna need to understand me, Sassenach,” he said
quietly . “So long as ye love me .” His head tilted forward and
he gently kissed my clasped hands.
“And feed me,” he added, releasing them.
“Oh, womanly sympathy , love and  food?” I said, laughing.
“Don’ t want a lot, do you?”
There were cold bannocks in the  saddlebags, cheese, and a
bit o f cold baco n as well. The tensions and absurdities of the
last two hours had been more draining than I realized, and I
hungrily joined in the meal.
The sounds of th e men surrounding us had now died down,
and there was n either sound nor any flicker of an unguarded
fire to indicate that we were not a thousand miles from any
human s oul. Only the wind rattled busily among the leaves,
sending the odd twig bouncing down through the branches.
Jamie le aned back against a tree , face dim in the starlight,
but body instinct with mischief.
“I gave your cha mpion my word that I’d no molest ye wi’
my loathsome advances. I suppo se that means unless ye invite
me to share your bed, I shall hav e to go and sleep wi’ Murtagh
or Kincaid. And Murtagh snores.”
“So do you,” I said.
I looked at him for a moment, then shrugged, letting half
my ruined gown slide of f my shoulder . “W ell, you’ve made a
good sta rt at ravishing me.” I dropped the other shoulder , and
the torn  cloth fell free to my waist. “Y ou may as well come
and finish the job properly .”The warmth of his arms was lik e heated silk, sliding over
my cold skin.
“A ye, well,” he murmured into my hair , “war ’ s war , no?”
 
“I’m very bad at dates,” I s aid to the star -thick sky
sometime later . “Has Miguel de Cervantes been born yet?”
Jamie was lying – perforce – o n his stomach next to me,
head and shoulders protruding f rom the tent’ s shelter . One eye
slowly opened,  and swiveled toward the eastern horizon.
Finding no trace of dawn, it traveled slowly back and rested on
my face, with an expression of jaundiced resignation.
“Y ou’ve a sudden ur ge to discuss Spanish novels?” he
said, a little hoarsely .
“Not pa rticularly ,” I said. “I just wondered whether
perhaps you were familiar with the term ‘quixotic.’ ”
He heaved himself onto his elbows, scrubbed at his scalp
with bot h hands to wake himsel f fully , then turned toward me,
blinking but alert.
“Cervantes was  born almost two hundred years ago,
Sassenach, and, me having had the benefit of a thorough
education, aye, I’m familiar with the gentleman. Y e wouldna
be implying anything personal by that last remark, would ye?”
“Does your back hurt?”
He hunc hed his shoulders experimentally . “Not much. A
wee bit bruised, I expect.”
“Jamie, why , for God’ s sake?” I burst out.
He r ested his ch in on his folded forearms, the sidelong turn
of his head emphasizing the slant of his eyes. The one I could
see narrowed still further with his smile.
“W ell, M urtagh enjoyed it. He’ s owed me a hiding since I
was nine and pu t pieces of honeycomb in his boots while he
had them of f to cool his feet. He  couldna catch me at the time,
but I learned a good many interesting new words whilst he was
chasing me barefoot. He-”I pu t a stop to this by punching  him as hard as I could on
the point of the  shoulder . Surprised, he let the arm collapse
under him with a sharp “Oof!” and rolled onto his side, back
toward me.
I bro ught my k nees up behind him and wrapped an arm
around his waist. His back bl otted out the stars, wide and
smoothly muscled, still gleaming faintly with the moisture of
exertion. I kissed him between the shoulder blades, then drew
back an d blew gently , for the  pleasure of feeling his skin
shiver u nder my fingertips and the tiny fine hairs stand up in
goose bumps down the furrow of his spine.
“Why?” I said again. I rested my face against his warm,
damp back. Shadowed by the darkness, the scars were
invisible, but I could feel them , faint tough lines hard under
my cheek.
He was  quiet for a moment, his ribs rising and falling
under my arm with each deep, slow breath.
“A ye, well,” he said, then fell silent again, thinking.
“I dinna ken exactly , Sassenach,” he said finally . “Could be
I thought I owed it to you. Or maybe to myself.”
I laid a light pal m across the wi dth of one shoulder blade,
broad an d flat, the edges of the bone clear -drawn beneath the
skin.
“Not to me.”
“A ye? Is it the act of a gentleman to unclothe his wife in
the prese nce of thirty men?” His  tone was suddenly bitter , and
my han ds stilled, pressing against him. “Is it the act of a
gallant m an to use violence ag ainst a captive enemy , and a
child to boot? T o consider doing worse?”
“W ould it have been better to spare me – or him – and lose
half your men in two days’ t ime? Y ou had to know . Y ou
couldn’ t – you can’ t  af f ord to let notions of gentlemanly
conduct sway you.”
“No,” he  said softly , “I can’ t. An d so I must ride wi’ a man
– wi th the son of my King – whom duty and honor call me to
follow –  and seek meanwhiles to pervert his cause that I amsworn to uphold. I am forsworn for the lives of those I love – I
betray the name of honor that those I honor may survive.”
“Honor has killed one bloody hell of a lot of men,” I said
to the dark groo ve of his bruise d back. “Honor without sense
is… fo olishness. A gallant foolishness, but foolishness
nonetheless.”
“A ye, it is. And  it will change – you’ve told me. But if I
shall be among the first who sac rifice honor for expedience…
shall I feel nay shame in the doing of it?” He rolled suddenly
to face me, eyes troubled in the starlight.
“I willn a turn back – I cannot, now – but Sassenach,
sometimes I do sorrow for that bit of myself I have left
behind.”
“It’ s my fault,” I said softly . I touched his face, the thick
brows, w ide mouth, and the sprouting stubble along the clean,
long jaw . “Mine. If I hadn’ t come… and told you what would
happen…” I felt a true sorrow f or his corruption, and shared a
sense of loss for the naive, gallant lad he had been. And yet…
what ch oice had  either of us truly had, being who we were? I
had had  to tell him, and he had had to act on it. An Old
T estament line drifted through m y mind: “When I kept silence,
my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.”
As though he had picked up this biblical strain of thought,
he smiled faintly .
“A ye, well,” he said. “I dinna re call Adam’ s asking God to
take back Eve – and look what she did to him .” He leaned
forward and kissed my forehea d as I laughed, then drew the
blanket up over my bare shoulders. “Go to sleep, my wee rib. I
shall be needin’ a helpmeet in the morning.”
 
An odd metallic noise woke me. I poked my head out of
the blanket and blinked in the direction of the noise, to find my
nose a foot from Jamie’ s plaid-covered knee.
“A wake, are ye?” Something silvery and chinking
suddenly descen ded in front of my face, and a heavy weight
settled around my neck.“What on earth is this?” I asked , sitting up in astonishment
and pee ring downward. I seemed to be wearing a necklace
composed of a l ar ge number of three-inch metal objects, each
with a divided shank and a hooped top, strung together on a
leather bootlace . Some of the objects were rusted at the tops,
others brand-new . All showed scratches along the length of the
shanks, as though they had be en wrenched by force out of
some lar ger object.
“T rophies of war , Sassenach,” said Jamie.
I looked up at him, and uttered a small shriek at the sight.
“Oh,” he said, putting a hand to his face. “I for got. I hadna
time to wash it of f.”
“Y ou scared me to death,” I said, hand pressed to my
palpitating heart. “What is  it?”
“Charcoal,” he said, voice mu f fled in the cloth he was
rubbing over his face. He let it down and grinned at me. The
rubbing had removed some of the blackening from nose, chin
and for ehead, which glowed pinkish-bronze through the
remaining smears, but his eyes were still ringed black as a
raccoon’ s, and charcoal lines bracketed his mouth. It was
barely d awn, and  in the dim light of the tent, his darkened face
and hair tended to fade into the drab background of the canvas
wall behind him, giving the distinctly unsettling impression
that I was speaking to a headless body .
“It was your idea,” he said.
“ My  i dea ? Y ou look like the end man  in a minstrel show ,” I
replied. “What the hell have you been doing?”
His teeth gleamed a brilliant wh ite amid the sooty creases
of his face.
“Commando ra id,” he said, w ith immense satisfaction.
“Commando? Is that the right word?”
“Oh, God,” I said. “Y ou’ve be en in the English camp?
Christ! Not alone, I hope?”
“I couldna leave my men out of the fun, could I? I left
three of  them to guard you, and the rest of us had a verraprofitable night.” He gestured at my necklace with pride.
“Cotter pins from the cannon carriages. W e couldna take
the c annon, or d amage them without noise, but they’ll no be
goin’ far , wi’ no  wheels to them . And the hell of a lot of good
sixteen galloper s will do Gene ral Cope, stranded out on the
moor .”
I examined my necklace critically .
“That’ s well and good, but can’ t they contrive new cotter
pins? It looks li ke you could m ake something like this from
heavy wire.”
He nodded, his air of smugness abating not a whit.
“Oh, aye . They could. But nay b it o’ good it will do them,
wi’ no new wheels to put them to.” He lifted the tent flap, and
gestured down toward the foot of the hill, where I could now
see Murtagh, black as a wizened demon, supervising the
activities of several similarly decorated subdemons, who were
gaily fee ding the last of thirty-tw o lar ge wooden wheels into a
roaring fire. The iron rims of th e wheels lay in a stack to one
side; Fer gus, Kincaid, and one  of the other young men had
improvised a game with one of them, rolling it to and fro with
sticks. R oss sat on a log nearby , sipping at a horn cup and idly
twirling another round his burly forearm.
I laughed at the sight.
“Jamie, you ar e  clever!”
“I m ay be clever ,” he replied, “but you’r e  half-naked, and
we’re le aving no w . Have ye som ething to put on? W e left the
sentinels tied up in an abandon ed sheep-pen, but the rest of
them will be up by now , and none so far behind us. W e’d best
be of f.”
As though to emphasize his words, the tent suddenly shook
above me, as someone jerked free the lines on one side. I
uttered an alarmed squeak and dived for the saddlebags as
Jamie left to superintend the details of departure.
 It was midafternoon before we reached the village of
T ranent. Perche d on the hills above the seaside, the usually
tranquil hamlet was reeling und er the impact of the Highland
army . The main bulk of the a rmy was visible on the hills
beyond, overlooking the small plain that stretched toward the
shore. But with the usual disor ganized comings and goings,
there were as many men in T ranent as out of it, with
detachments coming and going in more or less military
formation, mess engers galloping to and fro – some on ponies,
some by shanks’ mare – and t he wives, children, and camp
followers, who overflowed th e cottages and sat outside,
leaning on stone walls and nur sing babies in the intermittent
sun, calling to p assing messengers for word of the most recent
action.
W e halted at the edge of this se ethe of activity , and Jamie
sent Murtagh to discover the whereabouts of Lord Geor ge
Murray , the army’ s commande r in chief, while he made a
hasty toilet in one of the cottages.
My own appearance left a good bit to be desired; while not
deliberately cov ered with charcoal, my face undoubtedly
sported a few st reaks of grime l eft as tokens of several nights
spent sleeping out-of-doors. The goodwife kindly lent me a
towel an d a comb, and I was seated at her table, doing battle
with my  ungove rnable locks, when the door opened and Lord
Geor ge himself burst in without ceremony .
His usua lly imp eccable dress was disheveled, with several
buttons of his waistcoat undone, his stock slipped loose, and
one garter come untied. His wig had been thrust
unceremoniously into his pocket, and his own thinning brown
curls sto od on end, as though h e had been tugging at them in
frustration.
“Thank God!” he said. “A san e face, at last!” Then he
leaned f orward, squinting as he peered at Jamie. Most of the
charcoal dust had been rinsed f rom the blazing hair , but gray
rivulets ran down his face and dripped on his shirtfront, and
his e ars, which had been overl ooked in the hastiness of his
ablutions, were still coal-black.“What-” began a startled Lord Geor ge, but he broke of f,
shook h is head rapidly once o r twice as though to dismiss
some figment of his imagination, and resumed his
conversation as  though he had  noticed nothing out of the
ordinary .
“How does it go, sir?” said Jamie respectfully , also
af fecting not to notice the ribbo ned tail of the periwig which
hung out of Lor d Geor ge’ s pocket, wagging like the tail of a
small dog as His Lordship gestured violently .
“How does it g o?” he echoed. “Why , I’ll tell you, sir! It
goes to the east, and then it goes to the west, and then half of it
comes downhill to have luncheon, while the other half
marches of f to devil-knows-where! That’ s  how it goes!”
“ ‘It,’ ”  he said , momentarily relieved by his outburst,
“being His Highness’ s loyal Highland army .” Somewhat
calmer , he began to tell us of the events transpiring since the
army’ s first arrival in T ranent the day before.
Arriving with the army , Lord G eor ge had left the bulk of
the men in the village and rushed with a small detachment to
take pos session of the ridge ab ove the plain. Prince Charles,
coming along somewhat later , had been displeased with this
action and said so – loudly an d publicly . His Highness had
then taken half the army and marched of f westward, the Duke
of Perth  – nominally the other c ommander in chief – tamely in
tow , presumably to assess the possibilities of attacking through
Preston.
W ith the army divided, and His Lordship occupied in
conferring with villagemen who  knew the hell of a lot more
about the surrounding terrain th an did either His Highness or
His Lordship, O’Sullivan, one of the Prince’ s Irish confidants,
had taken it upo n himself to order a contingent of Lochiel’ s
Cameron clansmen to the T ranent churchyard.
“Cope, of course, brought up a  pair of galloper guns and
bombarded them,” Lord Geor ge said grimly . “And I’ve had the
devil of a time with Lochiel this afternoon. He was rather
understandably upset at having a number of his men wounded
for no evident purpose. He as ked that they be withdrawn,which request I naturally acceded to. Whereupon here comes
His Highness’ s frog-spawn, O’Sullivan – pest! Simply because
he landed at Eriskay with His Highness, the man thinks he –
well, an yway , he comes whining that the presence of the
Camerons in the churchyard is e ssential – essential , mind you!
– if we are to a ttack from the west. T old him in no uncertain
terms th at we attack from the ea st, if at all. Which prospect is
exceedingly doubtful at the moment, insofar as we do not
presently know exactly where half of our men are – nor His
Highness, come to that,” he added, in a tone that made it clear
that he consider ed the whereabouts of Prince Charles a matter
of academic interest only .
“And the chiefs! Lochiel’ s Camerons drew the lot that
gives them the honor of fighting on the right hand in the battle
– if there is one  – but the MacDonalds, having agreed to the
arrangement, now ener getically deny having done any such
thing, and insist that they will not fight at all if they’re denied
their traditional privilege of fighting on the right.”
Having started this recitation calmly enough, Lord Geor ge
had grown heated again in the telling, and at this point sprang
to h is feet agai n, rubbing his scalp ener getically with both
hands.
“The Camerons have been drille d all day . By now , they’ve
been marched to and fro so much that they can’ t tell their
pricks from their arseholes – sa ving your presence, mum,” he
added, w ith a distracted glance at me, “and Clanranald’ s men
have be en having fistfights with Glengarry’ s.” He paused,
lower ja w thrust  out, face red. “If Glengarry wasn’ t who he is,
I’d… ah , well.” He dismissed Glengarry with a flip of the
hand and resumed his pacing.
“The on ly saving grace of the matter ,” he said, “is that the
English have been forced to tur n themselves about as well, in
response to our movements. They’ve turned Cope’ s entire
force no less th an four times, and now he’ s strung his right
flank out nearly to the sea, no d oubt wondering what in God’ s
name we’ll do next.” He bent and peered out the window , as
though expectin g to see Gene ral Cope himself advancing
down the main road to inquire.“Er… where exactly is  your half of the army at present,
sir?” Jamie made a move as though to join His Lordship in his
random peregrinations about the cottage, but was restrained by
my g rip on his collar . Armed with a towel and a bowl of warm
water , I had occupied myself during His Lordship’ s exegesis
with removing the soot from m y husband’ s ears. They stood
out now , glowing pinkly with earnestness.
“On the ridge just south of town.”
“W e still hold the high ground, then?”
“Y es, it sounds good, doesn’ t it?” His Lordship smiled
bleakly . “However , occupation of the high ground profits us
relatively little, in consideration  of the fact that the ground just
below the ridge is riddled with pools and boggy marsh. God’ s
eyes! There’ s a six-foot ditch filled with water that runs a
hundred feet along the base of that ridge! There’ s scarce five
hundred yards between the arm ies this moment, and it might
as w ell b e five hundred miles, for all we can do.” Lord Geor ge
plunged a hand into his pocket  in search of a handkerchief,
brought it out, and stood staring  blankly at the wig with which
he had been about to wipe his face.
I delicately of fered him the sooty handkerchief. He closed
his eyes, inhaled strongly through both nostrils, then opened
them and bowed to me with his usual courtly manner .
“Y our servant, mum.” He polished his face thoroughly
with the  filthy rag, handed it politely back to me, and clapped
the tousled wig on his head.
“Damn my liver ,” he said distinctly , “if I let that fool lose
this engagement for us.” He turned to Jamie with decision.
“How many men have you, Fraser?”
“Thirty , sir .”
“Horses?”
“Six, sir . And four ponies for pack animals.”
“Pack animals? Ah. Carrying provisions for your men?”
“Y es, sir . And sixty sacks of meal abstracted from an
English detachm ent last night. Oh, and one sixteen-inchmortar , sir .”
Jamie imparted this last bit of information with an air of
such perfect of fhand casualnes s that I wanted to cram the
handkerchief down his throat. Lord Geor ge stared at him for a
moment, then one corner of his mouth twitched upward in a
smile.
“Ah? W ell, come with me, Fr aser . Y ou can tell me all
about it on the w ay .” He wheeled toward the door , and Jamie,
with a wide-eyed glance at me, caught up his hat and followed.
At the cottage door , Lord Geor ge stopped suddenly , and
turned b ack. He glanced up at Jamie’ s towering form, shirt
collar undone and coat flung hastily over one arm.
“I may be in a hurry , Fraser , but we have still suf ficient
time to observe the civilities. Go and kiss your wife goodbye,
man. Meet me outside.”
T urning on his heel, he made a leg to me, bowing deeply ,
so that the tail of his wig flopped forward.
“Y our servant, mum.”
 
I knew enough about armies to realize that nothing
apparent was likely to happen fo r some time, and sure enough,
it didn’ t . Random parties of m en marched up and down the
single main street of T ranent. W ives, camp followers, and the
displaced citize ns of T ranent milled aimlessly , uncertain
whether to stay or go. Messengers darted sideways through the
crowd, carrying notes.
I had met Lord Geor ge before, in Paris. He was not a man
to st and on cere mony when action would better suit, though I
thought it likely that the fray ing of his temper at Prince
Charles’ s actions, and a desire to escape the company of
O’Sullivan, were more responsi ble for his coming in person to
meet Jamie than any desire either for expeditiousness or
confidentiality . When the total strength of the Highland army
stood so mewhere between fifteen hundred and two thousand,
thirty men were neither to be regarded as a gift from the gods,
nor sneered at altogether .I gla nced at Fe r gus, fidgeting to and fro like a hoptoad
with St. V itus’ s dance, and decided that I might as well send a
few messages myself. There is a saying, “In the kingdom of
the b lind, the on e-eyed man is king.” I promptly invented its
analogy , based on experience: “When no one knows what to
do, anyo ne with a sensible sugg estion is going to be listened
to.”
There w as paper and ink in the saddlebags. I sat down,
watched with an almost superstitious awe by the goodwife,
who had  likely never seen a woman write anything before, and
composed a note to Jenny Cam eron. It was she who had led
three hundred Cameron clansmen across the mountains to join
Prince C harles, when he had ra ised his banner at Glenfinnan
on t he coast. Her brother Hugh , arriving home belatedly and
hearing what had happened, had ridden posthaste to
Glenfinnan to take the chieftain’ s place at the head of his men,
but Jenny had declined to go home and miss the fun. She had
thoroughly enjoyed the brief stop in Edinbur gh, where Charles
received the plaudits of his loy al subjects, but she had been
equally willing to accompany her Prince on his way to battle.
I hadn’ t a signet, but Jamie’ s bonnet was in one of the
bags, be aring a badge with the Fraser clan crest and motto. I
dug it out and pressed it into the splodge of warm candle wax
with which I had sealed the note. It looked very of ficial.
“For the Scottish milady with the freckles,” I instructed
Fer gus, and with satisfaction sa w him dart out the door and
into the melee in the street. I had no idea where Jenny
Cameron was at the moment, but the of ficers were quartered in
the m anse near the kirk, and tha t was as good a place to start
as any . At least the search would keep Fer gus out of mischief.
That errand out of the way , I turned to the cottage wife.
“Now , t hen,” I said. “What ha ve you got in the way of
blankets, napkins, and petticoats?”
 
I soon found that I had been correct in my surmise as to the
force of Jenny Cameron’ s personality . A woman who could
raise three hundred men and lead  them across the mountains tofight for an iian -accented fop with a taste for brandywine was
bound to have both a low thre shold of boredom and a rare
talent for bullying people into doing what she wanted.
“V erra sensible,” she said, having heard my plan. “Cousin
Archie’ s made some arrangements, I expect, but of course he’ s
wanting to be w ith the army just  now .” Her firm chin stuck out
a little farther . “That’ s where the fun is, after all,” she said
wryly .
“I’m surprised you didn’ t insist on going along,” I said.
She laughed, her small, homely face with its undershot jaw
making her look like a good-humored bulldog.
“I woul d if I could, but I can ’ t,” she admitted frankly .
“Now th at Hugh’ s come, he keeps trying to make me go home.
T old him I was” – she glanced around to be sure we weren’ t
overheard, and lowered her voi ce conspiratorially – “ damned
if I’d go home and sit. Not while I can be of use here.”
Standing on the cottage doorste p, she looked thoughtfully
up and down the street.
“I d idn’ t think they’d listen to me,” I said. “Being
English.”
“A ye, you’re right,” she said, “b ut they will to me. I don’ t
know how many the wounded w ill be – pray God not many ,”
and she crossed herself unobtrusively . “But we’d best start
with the  houses near the manse ; it’ll be less trouble to carry
water from the well.” W ith decision, she stepped of f the
doorstep and headed down the street, me following close
behind.
W e wer e aided  not only by  the persuasion of Miss
Cameron’ s position and person but by the fact that sitting and
waiting is one of the most mis erable occupations known to
man – not that it usually is known to men; women do it much
more often. By the time the sun  sank behind T ranent kirk, we
had the bare rudiments of a hospital brigade or ganized.
 
The leaves were beginning to f all from larch and alder in
the near by wood, lying loose, flat and yellow on the sandyground. Here and there a leaf ha d crisped and curled to brown,
and took of f scudding in the wind like a small boat over rough
seas.
One of these sp iraled past me, settling gently as its wind
current failed. I caught it on my palm and held it for a
moment, admiri ng the perfection of midribs and veins, a lacy
skeleton that would remain past  the rotting of the blade. There
was a sudden p uf f of wind, and the cup-curled leaf lifted of f
my hand, to tumble to the ground and go rolling along, down
the empty street.
Shading my eyes against the setting sun, I could see the
ridge be yond the town where the Highland army was camped.
His Highness’ s half of the army  had returned an hour before,
sweeping the last stragglers from  the village as they marched
to jo in L ord Geo r ge. At this dis tance, I could only pick out an
occasional tiny figure, black against the graying sky , as here
and ther e a man came over the  crest of the ridge. A quarter -
mile past the end of the street, I  could see the first lighting of
the English fires, burning pale in the dying light. The thick
smell of burning peat from the cottages joined the sharper
scent of the English wood fires, overlying the tang of the
nearby sea.
Such pre parations as could be m ade were under way . The
wives and families of the Highland soldiers had been
welcomed with generous hospitality , and were now mostly
housed in the cottages along the main street, sharing their
hosts’ p lain supper of brose and  salt herring. My own supper
was waiting inside, though I had little appetite.
A smal l form appeared at my elbow , quiet as the
lengthening shadows.
“W ill you come and eat, Madame? The goodwife is
keeping food for you.”
“Oh? Oh , yes, Fer gus. Y es, I’ll come.” I cast a last glance
toward the ridge, then turned back to the cottages.
“Are you coming, Fer gus?” I asked, seeing him still
standing in the street. He was s hading his eyes, trying to see
the a ctivities on the ridge beyon d the town. Firmly ordered byJamie to stay with me, he was plainly longing to be with the
fighting men, preparing for battle on the morrow .
“Uh? Oh , yes, Madame.” He turned with a sigh, resigned
for the moment to a life of boring peace.
 
The long days of summer were yielding quickly to
darkness, and the lamps were li t well before we had finished
our preparations. The night outside was restless with constant
movement and the glow of fires on the horizon. Fer gus, unable
to keep still, flitted in and out of the cottages, carrying
messages, collecting rumors and bobbing up out of the
shadows periodically like a small, dark ghost, eyes gleaming
with excitement.
“Madame,” he said, plucking at my sleeve as I ripped
linens into strips and threw them into a pile for sterilization.
“Madame!”
“What is it this time, Fer gus?” I was mildly irritated at the
intrusion; I had been in the middle of a lecture to a group of
housewives on the importance of washing the hands frequently
while treating the wounded.
“A man, Madame. He is wa nting to speak with the
commander of His Highness’ s army . He has important
information, he says.”
“W ell, I’m not stopping him , am I?” I tugged at a
recalcitrant shirt  seam, then used my teeth to wrench loose the
end, and yanked. It tore clean ly , with a satisfying ripping
sound.
I spit out a thread or two. He was still there, waiting
patiently .
“All righ t,” I said, resigned. “Wh at do you – or he – think I
can do about it?”
“If you will give me permission, Madame,” he said
eagerly , “I could guide him to my master . He  cou ld ar range fo r
the man to speak to the commander .”“He,”  of cour se, coul d do anything, so far as Fer gus was
concerned; incl uding, no doubt, walking on water , turning
water into wine, and inducin g Lord Geor ge to talk to
mysterious stran gers who materialized out of the darkness
with important information.
I bru shed the hair out of my eye s; I had tied it back under a
kertch, but curly strands kept escaping.
“Is this man somewhere nearby?”
That was all the encouragement he needed; he disappeared
through the open door , returning momentarily with a thin
young man whose eager gaze fastened at once on my face.
“Mrs. Fraser?” He bowed awkwardly at my nod, wiping
his hand s on his breeches as tho ugh he didn’ t know quite what
to d o with the m, but wanted to be ready if something
suggested itself.
“I – I’m Richard Anderson, of Whitbur gh.”
“Oh? W ell, good for you,” I said politely . “My servant says
you have some valuable information for Lord Geor ge
Murray .”
He nodd ed, bobbing his head li ke a water ouzel. “Y e see,
Mrs. Fraser , I’ve lived in these p arts all my life. I – I know all
of that ground where the armies are, know it like the back o’
my hand. And there’ s a way down from the ridge where the
Highland troops are camped – a trail that will lead them past
the ditch at the bottom.”
“I see.” I felt a hollowing of the stomach at these words. If
the Highlanders  were to char ge out of the rising sun next
morning, they would have to leave the high ground of the
ridge during the night watches. And if a char ge was to be
successful, plainly that ditch must be crossed or bypassed.
While I thought  I knew what was to come, I had no
certainty at all about it. I had been married to an historian –
and the usual faint stab came at the thought of Frank – and
knew just how unreliable historical sources often were. For
that matter , I had no surety that my own presence couldn’ t or
wouldn’ t change anything.For the space of a moment, I wondered wildly what might
happen if I tried  to keep Richard Anderson from speaking to
Lord Geor ge. W ould the outcome of tomorrow’ s battle be
changed? W ould  the Highland army – including Jamie and his
men – be slaugh tered as they ran downhill over boggy ground
and into  a ditch? W ould Lord Geor ge come up with another
plan that would work? Or would  Richard Anderson merely go
of f on his own and find a way of speaking to Lord Geor ge
himself, regardless of what I did?
It wasn’ t a risk I cared to take for experiment’ s sake. I
looked down at Fer gus, fidgeting with impatience to be gone.
“Do you think you can find your master? It’ s black as the
inside of  a coal hole up on that ridge. I wouldn’ t like either of
you to be shot by mistake, traipsing around up there.”
“I can find him, Madame,” Fer gus said confidently . He
probably could, I thought. He seemed to have a sort of radar
where Jamie was concerned.
“All right, then,” I conceded. “But for God’ s sake, be
careful.”
“ Oui , Ma dame!” In a flash, he was at the door , vibrating
with eagerness to be gone.
It was half an h our after they had left that I noticed the
knife I had left on the table wa s gone as well. And only then
did I remember , with a sickeni ng lurch of my stomach, that
while I had told Fer gus to be car eful, I had for gotten altogether
to tell him to come back.
 
The sound of the first canno n came in the lightening
predawn, a dull, booming noise that seemed to echo through
the plank boards on which I slept. My buttocks tightened, the
involuntary flatt ening of a tail I didn’ t possess, and my fingers
clasped those of the woman ly ing under the blanket next to
me. The  knowle dge that something is going to happen should
be some defense, but somehow it never is.
There was a faint moan from one corner of the cottage, and
the wom an next to me muttered, “Mary , Michael, and Bridepreserve us,” under her breath. There was a stirring over the
floor as the wo men began to rise. There was little talk, as
though all ears were pricked to catch the sounds of battle from
the plain below .
I c aught  sight of one of the H ighlanders’ wives, a Mrs.
MacPherson, as she folded her blanket next to the graying
window . Her face was blank with fear , and she closed her eyes
with a small sh udder as another muf fled boom came from
below .
I r evised  my opinion as to the uselessness of knowledge.
These women had no knowledge of secret trails, sunrise
char ges, and surprise routs. All these women knew was that
their husbands and sons were now facing the cannon and
musket fire of an English army four times their number .
Prediction is a risky business at the best of times, and I
knew th ey woul d pay me no mind. The best thing I could do
for them  was to keep them busy . A fleeting image crossed my
mind, of the rising sun shining bright of f blazing hair , making
a pe rfect tar get of its owner . A s econd image followed hard on
its heels ; a squirrel-toothed boy , armed with a stolen butcher
knife and a bright-eyed belief in the glories of war . I closed my
own eyes and swallowed hard. Keeping busy was the best
thing I could do for myself.
“Ladies!” I said. “W e’ve done a lot, but there’ s a lot more
to do. W e shall be needing boiling water . Cauldrons for
boiling, cream pans for soaking. Parritch for those who can
eat; milk  for those who can’ t. T allow and garlic for dressings.
W ood la ths for splints. Bottles and jugs, cups and spoons.
Sewing needles and stout thread. Mrs. MacPherson, if you
would be so kind…”
 
I kn ew little of the battle, except which side was supposed
to win, and that the casualties of the Jacobite army were to be
“light.” From the far -of f, blurry page of the textbook, I again
retrieved that tiny bit of information: “…while the Jacobites
triumphed, with only thirty casualties.”Casualties. Fatalities, I corrected. Any injury is a casualty ,
in nu rsing terms, and there were  a good many more than thirty
in m y cottage as the sun burned its way upward through the
sea mist toward noon. Slowly , the victors of the battle were
making their way in triumph back toward T ranent, the sound
of body helping their wounded comrades.
Oddly enough, His Highness had ordered that the English
wounded be retrieved first fr om the field of battle and
carefully tended. “They are my Father ’ s subjects,” he said
firmly , m aking t he capital “F” t horoughly audible, “and I will
have them well cared for .” The fact that the Highlanders who
had just won t he battle for him were also presumably his
Father ’ s subject s seemed to ha ve escaped his notice for the
moment.
“Given the behavior of the Fathe r and the Son,” I muttered
to Je nny Cameron on hearing this, “the Highland army had
better hope that the Holy Ghost doesn’ t choose to descend
today .”
A look of shock at this blasphemous observation crossed
the face of Mrs. MacPherson, but Jenny laughed.
The whoops and shrieks of Gaelic celebration
overwhelmed the faint groans of the wounded, borne in on
makeshift stretchers made o f planks or bound-together
muskets, or more often, leaning on the arms of friends for
support. Some of the casualties  staggered in under their own
power , b eaming and drunk on t heir own exuberance, the pain
of their wounds seeming a minor inconvenience in the face of
glorious vindication of their faith. Despite the injuries that
brought them here to be tended, the intoxicating knowledge of
victory filled the house with a mood of hilarious exhilaration.
“Christ, did ye see ’em scutter like wee mousies wi’ a cat
on their tails?” said one patient to another , seemingly oblivious
of th e nasty powder burn that had singed his left arm from
knuckles to shoulder .
“And a  rare good many of ’em missin’ their tails,”
answered his friend, with a chortle.Joy was not quite universal; here and there, small parties of
subdued Highlanders could be seen making their way across
the hills, carrying the still form of a friend, plaid’ s end
covering a face gone blank and empty with heaven’ s seeing.
It w as the first test of my chose n assistants, and they rose
to the challenge as well as had the warriors of the field. That
is, they balked and complained and made nuisances of
themselves, and  then, when nece ssity struck, threw themselves
into battle with unparalleled fierceness.
Not that they stopped complaining while they did it.
Mrs. McMurdo returned with yet another full bottle, which
she hung in the  assigned place on the cottage wall, before
stooping to rummage in the tub  that held the bottles of honey
water . The elderly wife of a T ranent fisherman pressed into
army se rvice, she was the wate rer on this shift; in char ge of
going fr om man  to man, ur gin g each to sip as much of the
sweetened fluid  as could be tolerated – and then making a
second round to deal with the results, equipped with two or
three empty bottles.
“If ye didna gie them so much to drink, they’d no piss sae
much,” she complained – not for the first time.
“They n eed the water ,” I explai ned patiently – not for the
first time. “It keeps their blood pressure up, and replaces some
of th e fluids they’ve lost, and helps avoid shock – well, look,
woman, do you see many of them dying?” I demanded,
suddenly losing a good deal of m y patience in the face of Mrs.
McMurdo’ s continuing dubiousness and complaints; her
nearly toothless mouth lent a note of mournfulness to an
already dour expression – all i s lost, it seemed to say; why
trouble further?
“Mphm,” she said. Since she took the water and returned
to her rounds w ithout further remonstrance, I took this sound
for at least temporary assent.
I steppe d outside to escape both Mrs. McMurdo and the
atmosphere in the cottage. It wa s thick with smoke, heat, and
the fug of unwashed bodies, and I felt a bit dizzy .The streets were filled with men, drunk, celebrating, laden
with plu nder from the battlefield. One group of men in the
reddish tartan of the MacGillivrays pulled an English cannon,
tethered with ropes like a dangerous wild beast. The
resemblance w as enhanced by the fanciful carvings of
crouching wolves that decorate d the touch-hole and muzzle.
One of General Cope’ s showpieces, I supposed.
Then I recogniz ed the small black figure riding astride the
cannon’ s muzzle, hair sticking up like a bottle brush. I closed
my eyes in momentary thankfulness, then opened them and
hastened down the street to drag him of f the cannon.
“W retch!” I said, giving him a shake and then a hug.
“What d o you mean sneaking of f like that? If I weren’ t so
busy , I’d box your ears ’ til your head rattled!”
“Madame,” he said, blinking stupidly in the afternoon sun.
“Madame.”
I r ealized he ha dn’ t heard a w ord I’d said. “Are you all
right?” I asked, more gently .
A look of puzzl ement crossed his face, smeared with mud
and powder -sta ins. He nodded, and a sort of dazed smile
appeared through the grime.
“I killed an English soldier , Madame.”
“Oh?” I was unsure whether he wanted congratulation, or
needed comfort. He was ten.
His brow wrinkled, and his fa ce screwed up as though
trying very hard to remember something.
“I think  I ki lled him. He fell down, an d I stuck him with
my knif e.” He looked at me in bewilderment, as though I
could supply the answer .
“Come along, Fer gus,” I said. “W e’ll find you some food
and a place to sleep. Don’ t think about it anymore.”
“ Oui , Madam e.” He stumbled obedie ntly along beside me,
but with in mom ents, I could se e that he was about to fall flat
on h is face. I picked him up, with some dif ficulty , and lugged
him tow ard the cottages near th e church where I had centeredour hosp ital operation. I had intended to feed him first, but he
was sound asleep by the time I reached the spot where
O’Sullivan was attempting – with little success – to or ganize
his commissary wagons.
Instead, I left h im curled in th e box bed in one of the
cottages, where a woman was looking after assorted children
while th eir mothers tended wounded men. It seemed the best
place for him.
 
The cottage had filled up with twenty or thirty men by
midafternoon, and my two-wo man staf f was hopping. The
house no rmally held a family o f five or six, and the men able
to st and were standing on the plaids of those lying down. In
the dista nce across the small fla t, I could see of ficers coming
and going to the manse, the minister ’ s residence
commandeered by the High Command. I kept an eye on the
battered door , which hung constantly ajar , but didn’ t see Jamie
among those arriving to report casualties and receive
congratulations.
I b atted away t he recurrent small gnat of worry , telling
myself t hat I didn’ t see him among the wounded, either . I had
not had time since early on to v isit the small tent up the slope,
where the dead of the battle w ere being laid out in orderly
rows, as though awaiting a last inspection. But surely he could
not be there.
Surely not, I told myself.
The door swung open and Jamie walked in.
I f elt my knees give slightly at sight of him, and put out a
hand to steady myself on the c ottage’ s wooden chimney . He
had bee n looking for me; his eyes darted around the room
before t hey lighted on me, and  a heart-stopping smile lit his
face.
He was filthy , grimed with black -powder smoke, splattered
with blo od, and barefoot, legs and feet caked with mud. But he
was who le, and standing. I wasn ’ t inclined to quibble with the
details.Cries of greeting from some of  the wounded men on the
floor dragged his gaze away from me. He glanced down,
smiled at Geor ge McClure, grinning up at his commander
despite a n ear that hung from his head by a sliver of flesh, then
looked quickly back at me.
Thank God , h is dark-blue eyes said, and Thank God , my
own echoed back.
There was no time for more;  wounded men were still
coming in, and every able-bodied nonmilitary person in the
village had been pressed into se rvice to care for them. Archie
Cameron, Loch iel’ s doctor brother , bustled back and forth
among the cottages, nominally in char ge, and actually doing
some good here and there.
I had arranged th at any Fraser men from Lallybroch should
be brought to the cottage where I was conducting my own
triage, quickly evaluating the severity of wounds, sending the
still-mobile down the street to be dealt with by Jenny
Cameron, the dying across to Archie Cameron’ s headquarters
in the church – I did think him competent to dispense
laudanum, and the surround ings might provide some
consolation.
Serious wounds I dealt with as I could. Broken bones next
door , where two sur geons from the Macintosh regiment could
apply splints and bandages. Nonfatal chest wounds propped as
comfortably as possible against one wall in a half-sitting
position to assist breathing; lacking oxygen or facilities for
sur gical repair , there was little else I could do for them.
Serious head wounds were disp atched to the church with the
obviously dying; I had nothing to of fer them, and they were
better of f in the hands of God, if not Archie Cameron.
Shattered and missing limbs and abdominal wounds were
the w orst. There was no possib ility of sterility; all I could do
was to cleanse my own hands between patients, browbeat my
assistants into doing the same – so long as they were under my
direct scrutiny , anyway – and tr y to ensure that the dressings
we applied had all been boiled before application. I knew ,
beyond doubt, that similar preca utions were being ignored as a
waste of time in  the other cottages, despite my lectures. If Icouldn’ t convince the sisters and physicians of L ’Hôpital des
Anges of the existence of germs, I was unlikely to succeed
with a mixed bag of Scottish h ousewives and army sur geons
who doubled as farriers.
I blo cked my mi nd to the thought of the men with treatable
injuries who would die from inf ection. I could give the men of
Lallybroch, and  a few more, the benefit of clean hands and
bandages; I couldn’ t worry about the rest. One dictum I had
learned on the b attlefields of France in a far distant war: Y ou
cannot save the world, but you might save the man in front of
you, if you work fast enough.
Jamie stood a moment in the doorway , assessing the
situation, then moved to help w ith the heavy work, shifting
patients, lifting cauldrons of hot water , fetching buckets of
clean wa ter from the well in T ranent square. Relieved of fear
for him, and caught up in the whirlwind of work and detail, I
for got about him for the most part.
The triage station of any field  hospital always bears a
strong resemblance to an abattoir , and this was no exception.
The floo r was pounded dirt, no t a bad surface, insofar as it
absorbed blood and other liquid s. On the other hand, saturated
spots did become muddy , making the footing hazardous.
Steam billowed from the boiling cauldron over the fire,
adding to the heat of exertion. Everyone streamed with
moisture; the workers with the sticky wash of exercise, the
wounded men with the stinking  sweat of fear and long-spent
rage. The dissipating fog of black-powder smoke from the
battlefield below  drifted through the streets of T ranent and in
through the open doors, its eye-stinging haze threatening the
purity of the freshly boiled lin ens, hung dripping from the
mackeral-drying rack by the fire.
The flow  of the wounded came in waves, washing into the
cottage like surf-scour , churning everything into confusion
with the arrival of each fresh sur ge. W e thrashed about,
fighting the pull of the tide, an d were left at last, gasping, to
deal with the new flotsam left behind as each wave ebbed.There are lulls, of course, in the most frantic activity .
These began to come more fre quently in the afternoon, and
toward s undown, as the flow of  wounded dropped to a trickle,
we b egan to sett le into a routine  of caring for the patients who
remained with us. It was still bu sy , but there was at last time to
draw br eath, to stand in one place for a moment and look
around.
I was standing  by the open  door , breathing in the
freshening breeze of the of fshore wind, when Jamie came back
into the cottage,  carrying an armload of firewood. Dumping it
by th e h earth, h e came back to stand by me, one hand resting
briefly on my sh oulder . T rickles of sweat ran down the edge of
his j aw , and I reached up to dab them with a corner of my
apron.
“Have you been to the other cottages?” I asked.
He nodded, breath beginning to slow . His face was so
blotched with smoke and blood that I couldn’ t tell for sure, but
thought he looked pale.
“A ye. There’ s still looting going  on in the field, and a good
many m en still missing. All of  our own wounded are here,
though – none elsewhere.” He nodded at the far end of the
cottage where the three wounded men from Lallybroch lay or
sat com panionably near the hearth, trading good-natured
insults w ith the other Scots. The  few English wounded in this
cottage lay by t hemselves, nea r the door . They talked much
less, content to contemplate the bleak prospects of captivity .
“None bad?” he asked me, looking at the three.
I s hook my hea d. “Geor ge McClure might lose the ear; I
can’ t tell. But no; I think they’ll be all right.”
“Good.” He gave me a tired sm ile, and wiped his hot face
on the end of his plaid. I saw he had wrapped it carelessly
around his body instead of d raping it over one shoulder .
Probably to keep it out of the way , but it must have been hot.
T urning to go, he reached for the water bottle hanging
from the door peg.
“Not that one!” I said.“Why not?” he asked, puzzled. He shook the wide-
mouthed flask, with a faint sloshing sound. “It’ s full.”
“I know it is,” I said. “That’ s what I’ve been using as a
urinal.”
“Oh.” Holding the bottle by tw o fingers, he reached to
replace it, but I stopped him.
“No, go ahead and take it,” I suggested. “Y ou can empty it
outside, and fill this one at the well.” I handed him another
gray stone bottle, identical with the first.
“T ry not to get them mixed up,” I said helpfully .
“Mmphm,” he replied, giving me a Scottish look to go
along with the noise, and turned toward the door .
“Hey!” I said, s eeing him clearly from the back. “What’ s
that?”
“What?” he said, startled, trying to peer over one shoulder .
“That!” My fingers traced the muddy shape I had spotted
above th e sagging plaid, printed on the grubby linen of his
shirt wit h the clarity of a stencil . “It looks like a horseshoe,” I
said disbelievingly .
“Oh, that,” he said, shrugging.
“A horse  stepped on you?”
“W ell, not on purpose,” he said , defensive on the horse’ s
behalf. “Horses dinna like to ste p on people; I suppose it feels
a wee bit squashy underfoot.”
“I would suppose it does,” I agreed, preventing his
attempts to escape by holding on to one sleeve. “Stand still.
How the hell did this happen?”
“It’ s no matter ,” he protested. “T he ribs don’ t feel broken,
only a trifle bruised.”
“Oh, jus t a trifle,” I agreed sarcastically . I had worked the
stained fabric free in back, an d could see the clear , sharp
imprint of a curved horseshoe, embedded in the fair flesh of
his back, just above the waist. “Christ, you can see thehorseshoe nails. ” He winced in voluntarily as I ran my finger
over the marks.
It ha d happened during one b rief sally by the mounted
dragoons, he explained. The Highlanders, mostly
unaccustomed to horses other than the small, shaggy Highland
ponies, were convinced that the English cavalry horses had
been trained to attack them with hooves and teeth. Panicked at
the h orses’ char ge, they had di ved under the horses’ hooves,
slashing ferociously at legs and bellies with swords and
scythes and axes.
“And you think they aren’ t?”
“Of course not, Sassenach,” he said impatiently . “He
wasna tr ying to attack me. The rider wanted to get away , but
he was sealed in on either side.  There was noplace to go but
over me.”
Seeing this realization dawn in the eyes of the horse’ s
rider , a split sec ond before the dragoon applied spurs to his
mount’ s sides, Jamie had flung himself flat on his face, arms
over his head.
“Then the next w as the breath bursting from my lungs,” he
explained. “I felt the dunt of it, b ut it didna hurt. Not then.” He
reached back and rubbed a hand absently over the mark,
grimacing slightly .
“Right,” I said, dropping the ed ge of the shirt. “Have you
had a piss since then?”
He stared at me as though I had gone suddenly barmy .
“Y ou’ve had four -hundredweight of horse step smack on
one of your kidneys,” I explain ed, a trifle impatiently . There
were wo unded men waiting. “I want to know if there’ s blood
in your urine.”
“Oh,” he said, his expression clearing. “I don’ t know .”
“W ell, let’ s find out, shall we?” I had placed my big
medicine box out of the way in  one corner; now I rummaged
about in  it and withdrew one of the small glass urinoscopy
cups I had acquired from L ’Hôpital des Anges.“Fill it up and give it back to me.” I handed it to him and
turned b ack toward the hearth, w here a cauldron full of boiling
linens awaited my attention.
I g lanced back to find him stil l regarding the cup with a
slightly quizzical expression.
“Need h elp, lad?” A big Englis h soldier on the floor was
peering up from his pallet, grinning at Jamie.
A fl ash of white teeth showed in the filth of Jamie’ s face.
“Oh, aye,” he s aid. He leaned down, of fering the cup to the
Englishman. “Here, hold this for me while I aim.”
A ripple of mirth passed through the men nearby ,
distracting them momentarily from their distress.
After a moment’ s hesitation, the Englishman’ s big fist
closed a round the fragile cup. The man had taken a dose of
shrapnel in one hip, and his gri p was none too steady , but he
still smiled, despite the sweat dewing his upper lip.
“Sixpence says you can’ t make it,” he said. He moved the
cup, so it stood on the floor three or four feet from Jamie’ s
bare toes. “From where you stand now .”
Jamie looked down thoughtfully , rubbing his chin with one
hand as he measured the distance. The man whose arm I was
dressing had stopped groaning, absorbed in the developing
drama.
“W eel, I’ll no sa y it would be easy ,” Jamie said, letting his
Scots br oaden on purpose. “But for sixpence? A ye, weel, that’ s
a sum might make it worth the  ef fort, eh?” His eyes, always
faintly slanted, turned catlike with his grin.
“Easy m oney , lad,” said the Eng lishman, breathing heavily
but still grinning. “For me.”
“T wo silver pennies on the lad,” called one of the
MacDonald clansmen in the chimney corner .
An English soldier , coat turned inside-out to denote his
prisoner status, fumbled inside the skirts, searching for the
opening of his pocket.“Ha! A pouch of weed against!” he called, triumphantly
holding up a small cloth bag of tobacco.
Shouted wagers and rude remark s began to fly through the
air as Jamie s quatted down and made a great show of
estimating the distance to the cup.
“All right,” he s aid at last, standing up and throwing back
his shoulders. “Are ye set, then?”
The Englishman on the floor chuckled. “Oh, I’m  set, lad.”
“W ell, then.”
An e xpectant hush fell over the room. Men raised on their
elbows t o watch, ignoring both discomfort and enmity in their
interest.
Jamie glanced around the room, nodded at his Lallybroch
men, th en slowly raised the h em of his kilt and reached
beneath it. He frowned in concentration, groping randomly ,
then let an expression of doubt flit across his countenance.
“I h ad it  when I went out,” he said, and the room erupted
in laughter .
Grinning at the success of hi s joke, he raised his kilt
further , grasped his clearly visible weapon and took careful
aim. He squinted his eyes, bent his knees slightly , and his
fingers tightened their grip.
Nothing happened.
“It’ s a misfire!” crowed one of the English.
“His powder ’ s wet!” Another hooted.
“No balls to you r pistol, lad?” jibed his accomplice on the
floor .
Jamie squinted dubiously at his equipment, bringing on a
fresh riot of howls and catcalls. Then his face cleared.
“Ha! My  chamber ’ s empty , that’ s all!” He snaked an arm
toward the array of bottles on the wall, cocked an eyebrow at
me, and when I  nodded, took o ne down and upended it over
his o pen mouth. The water splas hed over his chin and onto his
shirt, and his Adam’ s apple bobbed theatrically as he drank.“Ahhh.” He lowered the bottle, swabbed some of the grime
from his face with a sleeve, and bowed to his audience.
“Now , th en,” he began, reaching down. He caught sight of
my face, though, and stopped in  mid-motion. He couldn’ t see
the open door a t his back, nor the man standing in it, but the
sudden q uiet that fell upon the room must have told him that
all bets were of f.
 
His Highness Prince Charles Edward bent his head under
the lintel to enter the cottage. Come to visit the wounded, he
was dressed for the occasion in plum velvet breeches with
stockings to match, immaculate linen, and – to show solidarity
with the troops, no doubt – a c oat and waistcoat in Cameron
tartan, with a subsidiary plaid looped over one shoulder
through a cairngorm brooch. His hair was freshly powdered,
and the Order of St. Andrew glittered brilliantly upon his
breast.
He s tood in the doorway , nobly inspiring everyone in sight
and noticeably impeding the ent rance of those behind him. He
looked slowly about him, taking in the twenty-five men
crammed cheek  by jowl on the floor , the helpers crouching
over them, the mess of bloodied dressings tossed into the
corner , the scatter of medicines and instruments across the
table, and me, standing behind it.
His Highness didn’ t care overmuch for women with the
army in general, but he was tho roughly grounded in the rules
of courtesy . I was  a woman, despite the smears of blood and
vomit that streaked my skirt, a nd the fact that my hair was
shooting out from under my k ertch in half a dozen random
sprays.
“Madame Fraser ,” he said, bowing graciously to me.
“Y our Highness.” I bobbed a cu rtsy back, hoping he didn’ t
intend to stay long.
“Y our labors in our behalf are very much appreciate,
Madame,” he said, his soft Italian accent stronger than usual.“Er , thank you,” I said. “Mind t he blood. It’ s slippery just
there.”
The deli cate mouth tightened a bit as he skirted the puddle
I had pointed out. The doorway freed, Sheridan, O’Sullivan,
and Lord Balmerino came in, a dding to the congestion in the
cottage. Now that the demands of courtesy had been attended
to, Charles crouched carefully between two pallets.
He laid a gentle hand on the shoulder of one man.
“What is your name, my brave fellow?”
“Gilbert Munro… erm, Y our Highness,” added the man,
hastily , awed at the sight of the Prince.
The manicured fingers touched the bandage and splints
that swathed what was left of Gilbert Munro’ s right arm.
“Y our s acrifice was great, Gilbert Munro,” Charles said
simply . “I promise you it will  not be for gotten.” The hand
brushed across a whiskered cheek, and Munro reddened with
embarassed pleasure.
I ha d a man before me with a  scalp wound that needed
stitching, but was able to watch from the corner of my eye as
Charles made the rounds of the cottage. Moving slowly , he
went from bed to bed, missing no one, stopping to inquire each
man’ s name and home, to of fer thanks and af fection,
congratulations, and condolence.
The men were stunned into silence, English and
Highlander alike, barely managing to answer His Highness in
soft mur murs. At last he stood and stretched, with an audible
creaking of ligaments. An end of his plaid had trailed in the
mud, but he didn’ t seem to notice.
“I bring you the blessing and the thanks of my Father ,” he
said. “Y our deeds of today will always be remembered.” The
men on the floor were not in the proper mood to cheer , but
there were smiles, and a general murmur of appreciation.
T urning to go, Charles caught sight of Jamie, standing out
of the way in the corner , so as not to have his bare toes
trampled by Sheridan’ s boots. His Highness’ s face lighted with
pleasure.“Mon cher!  I had not seen you today . I  feared some
malchance had overtaken you.” A look of reproach crossed the
handsome, ruddy face. “Why did you not come to supper at
the manse with the other of ficers?”
Jamie smiled and bowed respectfully .
“My men are here, Highness.”
The Prince’ s brows shot up at this, and he opened his
mouth as though to say something, but Lord Balmerino
stepped forward and whispered something in his ear . Charles’ s
expression changed to one of concern.
“But wh at this is I hear?” he said to Jamie, losing control
of his syntax as he did in moments of emotion. “His Lordship
tells me that you have yourself suf fered a wound.”
Jamie looked mildly discomfited. He shot a quick glance
my way , to see if I had heard, and seeing that I most certainly
had, jerked his eyes back to the Prince.
“It’ s nothing, Highness. Only a scratch.”
“Show me.” It was simply spoken, but unmistakably an
order , and the stained plaid fell away without protest.
The fold s of dark tartan were nearly black on the inner
side. His shirt beneath was reddened from armpit to hip, with
stif f brown patches where the blood had begun to dry .
Leaving my head injury to min d himself for a moment, I
stepped forward  and opened th e shirt, pulling it gently away
from the injured side. Despite th e quantity of blood, I knew it
must no t be a s erious wound; he stood like a rock, and the
blood no longer flowed.
It was a saber - slash, slanting across the ribs. A lucky
angle; straight in and it would have gone deep into the
intercostal musc les between the ribs. As it was, an eight-inch
flap of skin ga ped loose, red beginning to ooze beneath it
again w ith the release of pres sure. It would take a goodly
number of stitches to repair , but aside from the constant
danger of infection, the wound was in no way serious.T urning to report this to His Highness, I halted, stopped by
the odd look on his face. For a split second, I thought it was
“rookie’ s tremor s,” the shock of a person unaccustomed to the
sight of wounds and blood. Man y a trainee nurse at the combat
station had removed a field dressing, taken one look and
bolted, t o vomi t quietly outside before returning to tend the
patient. Battle wounds have a peculiarly nasty look to them.
But it couldn’ t be that. By no means a natural warrior , still
Charles had been blooded, like Jamie, at the age of fourteen, in
his first battle at  Gaeta. No, I decided, even as the momentary
expression of shock faded from the soft brown eyes. He would
not be startled by blood or wounds.
This wasn’ t a co ttar or a herder that stood before him. Not
a na meless subject, whose dut y was to fight for the Stuart
cause. T his was a friend. And I thought that perhaps Jamie’ s
wound h ad suddenly brought it home to him; that blood was
shed on his  order , men wounded for his  cause – little wonder if
the realization struck him, deep as a sword-cut.
He look ed at Jamie’ s side for a long moment, then looked
up to  me et his eyes. He grasped Jamie by the hand, and bowed
his own head.
“Thank you,” he said softly .
And jus t for that one moment, I thought perhaps he might
have made a king, after all.
 
On a small slo pe behind the church, a tent had been
erected at His Highness’ s order , for the last shelter of those
dead in battle. Given preference in treatment, the English
soldiers receive d none here; t he men lay in rows, cloths
covering their faces, Highlande rs distinguished only by their
dress, all awaiting burial on the morrow . MacDonald of
Keppoch had brought a Frenc h priest with him; the man,
shoulders sagging with wea riness, purple stole worn
incongruously over a stained Highland plaid, moved slowly
through the tent, pausing to pray  at the foot of each recumbent
figure.“Perpetual rest grant unto him, O Lord, and let perpetual
light shine upon him.” He crossed himself mechanically , and
moved on to another corpse.
I had seen the tent earlier , and – heart in mouth – counted
the bodies of t he Highland dead. T wenty-two. Now , as I
entered the tent, I found the toll had risen to twenty-six.
A twent y-seventh lay in the near by church, on the last mile
of h is journey . Alexander Kincaid Fraser , dying slowly of the
wounds that riddled his belly and chest, of a slow internal
seepage that couldn’ t be halted. I had seen him when they
brought him in, bleached white from an afternoon of bleeding
slowly to death, alone in the f ield among the bodies of his
foes.
He h ad tried to smile at me, an d I had wetted his cracked
lips with water and coated them  with tallow . T o give him a
drink was to kill him at once, as the liquid would rush through
his perforated intestines and cause fatal shock. I hesitated,
seeing th e seriousness of his wo unds, and thinking that a quick
death m ight be better… but then I had stopped. I realized that
he would want to see a priest and make his confession, at least.
And so I had dispatched him to the church, where Father
Benin tended the dying as I tended the living.
Jamie ha d made  short visits to the church every half-hour
or so , but Kincaid held his own for an amazingly long time,
clinging to life despite the con stant ebbing of its substance.
But Jam ie had not come back fr om his latest visit. I knew that
the figh t was ending now at last, and went to see if I could
help.
The spac e under the windows where Kincaid had lain was
empty , s ave for a lar ge, dark stain. He wasn’ t in the tent of the
dead, either , and neither was Jamie anywhere in sight.
I found them at length some dist ance up the hill behind the
church. Jamie was sitting on a rock, the form of Alexander
Kincaid cradled in his arms, curly head resting on his shoulder ,
the long, hairy legs trailing limp to one side. Both were still as
the r ock on whic h they sat. Still  as death, though only one was
dead.I tou ched the white, slack hand , to be sure, and rested my
hand on the thick brown hair , feeling still so incongruously
alive. A man should not die a vir gin, but this one did.
“He’ s gone, Jamie,” I whispered.
He d idn’ t move for a moment, but then nodded, opening
his eyes as though reluctant to face the realities of the night.
“I kn ow . He die d soon after I brought him out, but I didna
want to let him go.”
I t ook the shou lders and we l owered him gently to the
ground. It was grassy here, an d the night wind stirred the
stems around him, brushing them lightly across his face, a
welcome to the caress of the earth.
“Y ou didn’ t want him to die under a roof,” I said,
understanding. T he sky swept over us, cozy with cloud, but
endless in its promise of refuge.
He nodd ed slowly , then knelt b y the body and kissed the
wide, pale forehead.
“I woul d have someone do th e same for me,” he said
softly . H e drew a fold of the plai d up over the brown curls, and
murmured something in Gaelic that I didn’ t understand.
A medical casualties station is no place for tears; there is
much too much to be done. I had not wept all day , despite the
things I had seen, but now gave  way , if only for a moment. I
leaned my face against Jamie’ s shoulder for strength, and he
patted me briefly . When I looked up, wiping the tears from my
face, I saw him s till staring, dry-eyed, at the quiet figure on the
ground. He felt me watching him and looked down at me.
“I w ept for him while he was still alive to know it,
Sassenach,” he said quietly . “Now , how is it in the house?”
I sni f fed, wiped my nose, and took his arm as we turned
back to the cottage.
“I need your help with one.”
“Which is it?”
“Hamish MacBeth.”Jamie’ s face, strained for so many hours, relaxed a bit
under the stains and smudges.
“He’ s back, then? I’m glad. How bad is he, though?”
I rolled my eyes. “Y ou’ll see.”
MacBeth was one of Jamie’ s favorites. A massive man
with a curly bro wn beard and a reticent manner , he had been
always there within Jamie’ s call, ready when something was
needed on the j ourney . Seldom speaking, he had a slow , shy
smile that blossomed out of his beard like a night-blooming
flower , rare but radiant.
I kn ew the big man’ s absence after the battle had been
worrying Jamie,  even among the other details and stresses. As
the day wore on and the stragg lers came back one by one, I
had been  keeping an eye out for MacBeth. But sundown came
and the fires sprang up amid the army camp, with no Hamish
MacBeth, and I had begun to fe ar we would find him among
the dead, too.
But he had com e into the casualties station half an hour
before, moving slowly , but unde r his own power . One leg was
stained with blood down to the  ankle, and he walked with a
ginger , spraddle d gait, but he would on no account let a
“wumman” lay hands on him to see what was the matter .
The big man was lying on a blanket near a lantern, hands
clasped across the swell of his belly , eyes fastened patiently on
the raftered ceiling. He swiveled his eyes around as Jamie
knelt down beside him, but did n’ t move otherwise. I lingered
tactfully in the background, hidden from view by Jamie’ s
broad back.
“All rig ht, then,  MacBeth,” said Jamie, laying a hand on
the thick wrist in greeting. “How is it, man?”
“I’ll do, sir ,” the giant rumbled . “I’ll do. Just that it’ s a
bit…” He hesitated.
“W ell, t hen, let’ s have a look at it.” MacBeth made no
protest a s Jamie flipped back the edge of the kilt. Peeking
through a crack between Jamie’ s  arm and body , I could see the
cause of MacBeth’ s hesitations.A sword  or pike had caught him high in the groin and
ripped it s way downward. The scrotum was torn jaggedly on
one side, and on e testicle hung halfway out, its smooth pink
surface shiny as a peeled egg.
Jamie and the tw o or three other men who saw the wound
turned pale, and I saw one of the aides touch himself
reflexively , as though to assu re that his own parts were
unscathed.
Despite the horrid look of the  wound, the testicle itself
seemed undamaged, and there was no excessive bleeding. I
touched Jamie on the shoulder and shook my head to signify
that the wound was not serious , no matter what its ef fect on
the male  psyche. Catching my gesture with the tail of his eye,
Jamie patted MacBeth on the knee.
“Och, it’ s none so bad, MacBeth. Nay worry , ye’ll be a
father yet.”
The big man had  been looking down apprehensively , but at
these words, transferred his gaze to his commander . “W eel,
that’ s no  such a consairn to me,  sir , me already havin’ the six
bairns. It’ s just what my wife’d  say , if I…” MacBeth blushed
crimson as the men surrounding him laughed and hooted.
Casting an eye back at me for confirmation, Jamie
suppressed his own grin and sa id firmly , “That’ll be all right,
too, MacBeth.”
“Thank ye, sir ,” the man breathed gratefully , with complete
trust in his commander ’ s assurance.
“Still,” Jamie went on briskly , “ it’ll need to be stitched up,
man. Now , ye’ve your choice about that.”
He reac hed into the open kit for one of my handmade
suture needles. Appalled by the  crude objects barber -sur geons
customarily used to sew up th eir customers, I’d made three
dozen of my ow n, by selecting the finest embroidery needles I
could ge t, and heating them in forceps over the flame of an
alcohol lamp, bending them gently until I had the proper half-
moon curve needed for stitching severed tissues. Likewise, I’dmade my own ca tgut sutures; a messy , disgusting business, but
at least I was sure of the sterility of my materials.
The tiny suture needle looked ridiculous, pinched between
Jamie’ s lar ge thumb and index finger . The illusion of medical
competence was not furthered by Jamie’ s cross-eyed attempts
to thread the needle.
“Either I’ll do it myself,” he said, tongue-tip protruding
slightly in his concentration, “or -” He broke of f as he dropped
the needle and fumbled about in the folds of MacBeth’ s plaid
for it. “Or ,” he resumed, holding it up triumphantly before his
patient’ s appreh ensive eyes, “my wife can do it for ye.” A
slight je rk of the head summoned me into view . I did my best
to look as matter -of-fact as pos sible, taking the needle from
Jamie’ s incompetent grasp and threading it neatly with one
thrust.
MacBeth’ s lar g e brown eyes traveled slowly between
Jamie’ s big paws, which he con trived to make look as clumsy
as p ossible by se tting the crooked right hand atop the left, and
my own small, swift hands. At last he lay back with a dismal
sigh, and mumbled his consent to let a “wumman” lay hands
on his private parts.
“Dinna worry yourself, man,”  Jamie said, patting him
companionably on the shoulder . “After all, she’ s had the
handling of my own for som e time now , and she’ s not
unmanned me yet.” Amid the la ughter of the aides and nearby
patients, he started to rise, but I stopped him by thrusting a
small flask into his hands.
“What’ s this?” he asked.
“Alcohol and water ,” I said. “Disinfectant solution. If he’ s
not t o have feve r or pustulence or something worse, the wound
will have to be washed out.” MacBeth had plainly walked
some wa y from where the injury  had occurred, and there were
smears of dirt as  well as blood near the wound. Grain alcohol
was a harsh disinfectant, even cut 50/50 with distilled sterile
water as I used it. Still, it was the single most ef fective tool I
had against infection, and I wa s adamant about its usage, inspite of complaints from the a ides and screams of anguish
from the patients who were subjected to it.
Jamie glanced from the alcohol flask to the gaping wound
and shuddered slightly . He’d had  his own dose when I stitched
his side, earlier in the evening.
“W eel, MacBeth, better you than me,” he said, and, placing
his knee  firmly in the man’ s midrif f, sloshed the contents of
the flask over the exposed tissues.
A dr eadful roar shook the walls,  and MacBeth writhed like
a cu t sna ke. Wh en the noise at last subsided, his face had gone
a mottled greenish color , and he made no objection at all as I
began th e routine, if painful, jo b of stitching up the scrotum.
Most of the pati ents, even those horribly wounded, were stoic
about the primitive treatment to which we subjected them, and
MacBeth was no exception. He lay unmoving in hideous
embarrassment, eyes fixed on the lantern flame, and didn’ t
move a muscle a s I made my repairs. Only the changing colors
of h is face, from green to white to red and back again,
betrayed his emotions.
At the last, how ever , he went purple. As I finished the
stitching, the limp penis began to stif fen slightly , brushed in
passing by my h and. Thoroughly  rattled by this justification of
his faith  in Jamie’ s word, MacB eth snatched down his kilts the
instant I  was finished, lurched t o his feet, and staggered away
into the darkness, leaving me giggling over my kit.
 
I f ound a corner  where a chest of medical supplies made a
seat, and  leaned  against the wal l. A sur ge of pain shot up my
calves; the sudden release of ten sion, and the nerves’ reaction
to it . I slipped o f f my shoes and  leaned back against the wall,
reveling in the s maller spasms that shot up backbone and neck
as the strain of standing was relieved.
Every square inch of skin seems  newly sensitive in such a
state of fatigue; when the necessity of forcing the body to
perform is suddenly suspended, the lingering impetus seems to
force th e blood to the perimete r of the body , as though thenervous system is reluctant to believe what the muscles have
already gratefully accepted; you need not move, just now .
The air in the cottage was warm and noisy with breathing;
not t he healthy r acket of snoring men, but the shallow gasps of
men for  whom breathing hurts, and the moans of those who
have found a temporary oblivion that frees them from the
manly obligation of suf fering in silence.
The men  in this cottage were those badly wounded, but in
no imme diate danger . I knew , th ough, that death walks at night
in the aisles of a sick ward, searching for those whose defenses
are lowe red, who may stray unwittingly into its path through
loneliness and fear . Some of the  wounded had wives who slept
next to them, to comfort them in the dark, but none in this
cottage.
They ha d me. If I could do little  to heal them or stop their
pain, I could at least let them know that they didn’ t lie alone;
that someone stood here, between them and the shadow .
Beyond anything I could do, it was my job only to be there.
I r ose and made  my way slow ly once again through the
pallets on the f loor , stooping at each one, murmuring and
touching, straig htening a blanket, smoothing tangled hair ,
rubbing the knots that form in c ramped limbs. A sip of water
here, a change o f dressing there, the reading of an attitude of
tense em barrassment that meant a urinal was needed, and the
matter -of-fact presentation that allowed the man to ease
himself, the stone bottle growing warm and heavy in my hand.
I s tepped outdoors to empty one of these, and paused for a
moment, gathering the cool, rainy night to myself, letting the
soft moisture wipe away the to uch of coarse, hairy skin and
the smell of sweating men.
“Y e dinna sleep much, Sassenach.” The soft Scottish voice
came from the direction of the road. The other hospital
cottages lay in t hat direction; the of ficers’ quarters, the other
way , in the village manse.
“Y ou dinna sleep much, either ,” I responded dryly . How
long had he gone without sleep? I wondered.“I slept in the field last night, with the men.”
“Oh, yes? V ery r estful,” I said, with an edge that made him
laugh. Six hours’ sleep in a wet field, followed by a battle in
which he’d been stepped on by a horse, wounded by a sword,
and done God knows what else. Then he had gathered his men,
collected the wounded, tended the hurt, mourned his dead, and
served h is Princ e. And through n one of it had I seen him pause
for food, drink, or rest.
I didn’ t bother scolding. It wasn’ t even worth mentioning
that he ought to have been amo ng the patients on the floor . It
was his job to be here, as well.
“There are other women, Sas senach,” he said gently .
“Shall I have Archie Cameron send someone down?”
It was a temptation, but one I pushed away before I could
think about it t oo long, for fear that if I acknowledged my
fatigue, I would never move again.
I stretched, hands against the small of my back.
“No,” I said. “I’ll manage ’ til the dawn. Then someone
else can take over for a time.” S omehow I felt that I must get
them through the night; at dawn they would be safe.
He didn’ t scold, either; just laid a hand on my shoulder and
drew me to lean against him for a moment. W e shared what
strength we had, unspeaking.
“I’ll stay with y e, then,” he said, drawing away at last. “I
canna sleep before light, myself.”
“The other men from Lallybroch?”
He m oved his h ead toward the fields near the town where
the army was camped.
“Murtagh’ s in char ge.”
“Oh, well, then. Nothing to wor ry about,” I said, and saw
him smile in the light from the window . There was a bench
outside the cottage, where the goodwife would sit on sunny
days to clean fish or mend clo thes. I drew him down to sit
beside me, and he sagged back against the wall of the housewith a sigh. His patent exhaustion reminded me of Fer gus, and
the boy’ s expression of confused bewilderment after the battle.
I rea ched to caress the back of J amie’ s neck, and he turned
his head blindly toward me, resting his brow against my own.
“How w as it, Jamie?” I asked s oftly , fingers rubbing hard
and slow over the tight-ridged muscles of his neck and
shoulders. “What was it like? T ell me.”
There was a short silence, then he sighed, and began to
talk, haltingly at first, and then faster , as if wanting to get it
out.
“W e had no fire , for Lord Geor ge thought we must move
of f t he ridge bef ore daylight, and wanted no hint of movement
to be seen below . W e sat in the dark for a time. Couldna even
talk, for the sound would carry to the plain. So we sat.
“Then I felt something grab my thigh in the dark, and near
jumped out of m y skin.” He inse rted a finger in his mouth and
rubbed g ingerly . “Nearly bit my tongue of f.” I felt the shift of
his muscles as he smiled, though his face was hidden.
“Fer gus?”
The ghost of a laugh floated through the dark.
“A ye, Fer gus. Crawled through the grass on his belly , the
little bastard, and I thought h e was a snake, at that. He
whispered to me about Anderso n, and I crawled of f after him
and took Anderson to see Lord Geor ge.”
His voic e was slow and dreamy , talking under the spell of
my touch.
“And then the order came that we’d move, following
Anderson’ s trail . And the whole  of the army got to its feet, and
set of f in the dark.”
 
The night was c lear black and moonless, without the usual
cover of  cloud that trapped starl ight and dif fused it toward the
earth. A s the Highland army made its way in silence down the
narrow path behind Richard An derson, each man could see nofarther than the shuf fling heels of the man before him, each
step widening the trodden path through wet grass.
The army moved almost wit hout noise. Orders were
relayed in murmurs from man to man, not shouted.
Broadswords and axes were muf fled in the folds of their
plaids, p owder f lasks tucked inside shirts against fast-beating
hearts.
Once on sound footing, still in total silence, the
Highlanders sat down, made themselves as comfortable as was
possible without fire, ate what cold rations there were, and
composed thems elves to rest, w rapped in their plaids, in sight
of the enemy’ s campfires.
“W e could hear them talking,” Jamie said. His eyes were
closed, h ands clasped behind his head, as he leaned against the
cottage w all. “O dd, to hear men  laughing over a jest, or asking
for a pinch of salt or a turn at th e wineskin – and know that in
a fe w h ours, ye may kill them – or them you. Y e can’ t help
wondering, ye ken; what does t he face behind that voice look
like? W ill you know the fellow if ye meet him in the
morning?”
Still, the  tremors of anticipated battle were no match for
sheer fat igue, and the “Black Frasers” – so called for the traces
of charcoal that still adorned their features – and their chief
had been  awake  for more than thirty-six hours by then. He had
picked a sheaf o f marrow-grass for a pillow , tucked the plaid
around his shoulders, and lain down in the waving grass beside
his men.
During his time with the French army , years before, one of
the ser geants had explained to the younger mercenaries the
trick of falling asleep the night before a battle.
“Make yourself comfortable, e xamine your conscience,
and make a goo d Act of Contrition. Father Hugo says that in
time of war , eve n if there is no priest to shrive you, your sins
can be for given this way . Since you cannot commit sins while
asleep – not even you , Simenon! – you will awake in a state of
grace, ready to fall on the bastards. And with nothing to look
forward to but victory or heaven – how can you be afraid?”While privately noting a few fla ws in this ar gument, Jamie
had foun d it still good advice; freeing the conscience eased the
soul, and the comforting repetition of prayer distracted the
mind from fearful imaginings and lulled it toward sleep.
He gazed upward into the bla ck vault of the sky , and
willed t he tightness of neck an d shoulders to relax into the
ground’ s hard embrace. The stars were faint and hazy tonight,
no match for the nearby glow of the English fires.
His mind reached out to the men around him, resting
briefly on each, one by one. The stain of sin was small weight
on his conscien ce, compared with these. Ross, McMurdo,
Kincaid, Kent, McClure… he p aused to give brief thanks that
his wife and th e boy Fer gus at least were safe. His mind
lingered on his wife, wanting t o bask in the memory of her
reassuring smile, the solid, wonderful warmth of her in his
arms, pr essed tight against him as he had kissed her goodbye
that afternoon. Despite his own weariness and the waiting
presence of Lord Geor ge outside , he had wanted to tumble her
onto the waiting mattress right then and take her quickly , at
once, w ithout undressing. Strange how the imminence of
fighting made him so ready , always. Even now…
But he hadn’ t yet finished his m ental roster , and he felt his
eyelids closing already , as tiredness sought to pull him under .
He d ismissed the faint tightenin g of his testicles that came at
thought of her , and resumed his roll call, a shepherd
treacherously lulled to sleep by counting the sheep he was
leading to slaughter .
But it wouldn’ t be a slaughter , h e tried to reassure himself.
Light casualties for the Jacobite side. Thirty men killed. Out of
two thou sand, only a slim chanc e that some of the Lallybroch
men would be among that number , surely? If she was right.
He shuddered faintly under the plaid, and fought down the
momentary doubt that wrenche d his bowels. If. God, if. Still
he had trouble believing it, though he had seen her by that
cursed rock, face dissolving in terror around the panic-wide
gold ey es, the very outlines of her body blurring as he,
panicked also, had clutched at her , pulling her back, feeling
little mo re than the frail double bone of her forearm under hishand. Perhaps he should have let her go, back to her own
place. No, no p erhaps. He knew that he should. But he had
pulled h er back. Given her the choice, but kept her with him
by t he s heer for ce of his wantin g her . And so she had stayed.
And given him  the choice – to believe her , or not. T o act, or to
run. And the ch oice was made now , and no power on earth
could stop the dawn from coming.
His hear t beat heavily , pulse echoing in wrists and groin
and the pit of hi s stomach. He s ought to calm it, resuming his
count, one name to each heartbeat. W illie McNab, Bobby
McNab, Geordie McNab… than k God, young Rabbie McNab
was safe, left at  home… W ill Fraser , Ewan Fraser , Geof frey
McClure… McClure… had he touched on both Geor ge and
Sorley? Shifted  slightly , smiling faintly , feeling for the
soreness left along his ribs. Mur tagh. A ye, Murtagh, tough old
boot… my mind is no trouble d on your account, at least.
W illiam Murray , Rufus Murray , Geordie, W allace, Simon…
And at last, had closed his eyes,  commended all of them to
the care of the  black sky above, and lost himself in the
murmured words that came to him still most naturally in
French – “Mon Dieu, je r egr ette…”
 
I m ade my rounds inside the c ottage, changing a blood-
soaked dressing  on one man’ s leg. The bleeding should have
stopped by now , but it hadn’ t. Poor nutrition and brittle bones.
If th e bleeding hadn’ t stopped b efore cockcrow , I would have
to fetch Archie Cameron or o ne of the farrier -sur geons to
amputate the leg, and cauterize the stump.
I ha ted the thought of it. Life w as suf ficiently hard for a
man with all his limbs in good working order . Hoping for the
best, I coated th e new dressing with a light sprinkling of alum
and sulfur . If it didn’ t help, it wouldn’ t hinder . Likely it would
hurt, but that couldn’ t be helped.
“It w ill burn a bit,” I murmured to the man, as I wrapped
his leg in the layers of cloth.
“Dinna worry yourself, Mistress,” he whispered. He
smiled a t me, in spite of the sweat that ran down his cheeks,shiny in the light of my candle. “I’ll stand it.”
“Good.” I patted his shoulder , smoothed the hair of f his
brow , an d gave him a drink of water . “I’ll check again in an
hour , if you can bear it that long.”
“I’ll stand it,” he said again.
 
Outside once more, I thought Jamie had fallen asleep. His
face rested on his folded forearms, crossed on his knees. But
he looke d up at the sound of m y step, and took my hand as I
sat beside him.
“I h eard the can non at dawn,” I said, thinking of the man
inside, leg broken by a cannonball. “I was afraid for you.”
He laughed softly . “So was I, Sassenach. So were we all.”
Quiet as wisps of mist, the Highlanders advanced through
the sea grass, one foot at a time. There was no sense of
darkness lesseni ng, but the feel of the night had changed. The
wind had changed, that was it; it blew from the sea over the
cold dawning land, and the fain t thunder of waves on distant
sand could be heard.
Despite his impression of continued dark, the light was
coming. He saw the man at his feet just in time; one more step
and he would have been head long across the man’ s curled
body .
Heart pounding from the shock of the near -meeting, he
dropped to his haunches to get a better look. A Redcoat, and
sleeping, not dead or wounded . He squinted hard into the
darkness aroun d them, willing his ears to listen for the
breathing of other sleeping men.  Nothing but sea sounds, grass
and win d sounds, the tiny swish  of stealthy feet almost hidden
in their muted roar .
He glan ced hastily back, licking lips gone dry despite the
moist air . There were men clo se behind him; he dared not
hesitate long. The next man mig ht not be so careful where he
stepped, and they could risk no outcry .He set hand to his dirk, but hesitated. W ar was war , but it
went ag ainst the grain to slay  a sleeping enemy . The man
seemed to be alo ne, some distance from his companions. Not a
sentinel; not even the slackest o f guards would sleep, knowing
the Highlanders to be camped on the ridge above. Perhaps the
soldier had gotten up to relieve himself, thoughtfully come
some di stance from his fellows to do it, then, losing his
direction in the dark, lain down to sleep where he was.
The metal of his  musket was slick from his sweating palm.
He rubb ed his hand on his plaid , then stood, grasped the barrel
of th e m usket, a nd swung the b utt in a vicious arc, down and
around. The shock of impact jol ted him to the shoulder blades;
an im mobile head is solid. The man’ s arms had flown out with
the force  of the impact, but beyond an explosion of breath, he
had mad e no noise, and now lay  sprawled on his face, limp as
a clout.
Palms tingling, he stooped again and groped beneath the
man’ s jaw , looking for a pulse. He found one, and reassured,
stood up . There was a muf fled cry of startlement from behind,
and he swung a round, musket already at his shoulder , to find
its barre l poking into the face of one of Keppoch’ s MacDonald
clansmen.
“Mon Dieu!”  the man whispered, crossing himself, and
Jamie clenched his teeth with aggravation. It was Keppoch’ s
bloody F rench priest, dressed, at O’Sullivan’ s suggestion, in
shirt and plaid like the fighting men.
“The man insisted that it wa s his duty to bring the
sacraments to the wounded and dying on the field,” Jamie
explained to me, hitching his  stained plaid higher on his
shoulder . The night was growi ng colder . “O’Sullivan’ s idea
was that if the English caught him on the battlefield in his
cassock, they’d  tear him to pieces. As to that, maybe so,
maybe n o. But he looked a rig ht fool in a plaid,” he added
censoriously .
Nor had the priest’ s behavior done anything to ameliorate
the impression caused by his attire. Realizing belatedly that his
assailant was a Scot, he had sighed in relief, and then openedhis m outh. Moving quickly , Jam ie had clapped a hand over it
before any ill-advised questions could emer ge.
“What are ye doing here, Father?” he growled, mouth
pressed to the priest’ s ear . “Y o u’re meant to be behind the
lines.”
A w idening of t he priest’ s eyes at this told Jamie the truth
– the man of God, lost in the darkness, had thought he was
behind t he lines, and the belat ed realization that he was, in
fact, in the vang uard of the advancing Highlanders, made him
buckle slightly at the knees.
Jamie glanced backward; he didn’ t dare send the priest
back through the lines. In the  misty dark, he could easily
stumble into an advancing Highlander , be mistaken for an
enemy , and be killed on the spot. Gripping the smaller man by
the back of the neck, he pushed him to his knees.
“Lie flat  and stay that way until the firing stops,” he hissed
into the man’ s ea r . The priest nodded frantically , then suddenly
saw the body of the English sold ier , lying on the ground a few
feet awa y . He glanced up at Jam ie in awed horror , and reached
for the bottles of  chrism and holy water that he wore at his belt
in lieu of a dirk.
Rolling his eyes in exasperation, Jamie made a series of
violent motions,  meant to indicate that the man was not dead,
and thus in no need of the prie st’ s services. These failing to
make their point, he bent, seized the priest’ s hand, and pressed
the fingers on th e Englishman’ s neck, as the simplest method
of illustr ating th at the man was  not in fact the first victim of
the battl e. Caught in this ludicrous position, he froze as a voice
cut through the mist behind him.
“Halt!” it said. “Who goes there?”
 
“Have ye got a  bit of water , Sassenach?” asked Jamie.
“I’m gettin’ a bit dry with the talking.”
“Bastard!” I said. “Y ou can’ t stop there! What happened?”
“W ater ,” he said, grinning, “and I’ll tell ye.”“All right,” I said, handing him a water bottle and
watching as he tilted it into his mouth. “What happened then?”
“Nothing,” he said, lowering the bottle and wiping his
mouth on his s leeve. “What did ye think, I was going to
answer him?” He grinned impudently at me and ducked as I
aimed a slap at his ear .
“Now , now ,” he reproved. “N o way to treat a man
wounded in the service of his King, now is it?”
“W ounded, are you?” I said. “B elieve me, Jamie Fraser , a
mere sab er slash  is as nothing compared to what I will do to
you if…”
“Oh, threats, too, is it? What w as that poem ye told me
about, ‘When pain and anguish wring the brow , a ministering
angel’… ow!”
“Next time, I twist it right of f at the roots,” I said, releasing
the ear . “Get on with it, I have to go back in a minute.”
He rubb ed the ear gingerly , but leaned back against the
wall and resumed his story .
“W ell, we just s at there on our haunches, the padre and I,
staring at each other and listenin g to the sentries six feet away .
“What’ s that?” says the one, and me thinking can I get up in
time to take him  with my dirk before he shoots me in the back,
and wha t about his friend? For  I canna expect help from the
priest, unless maybe it’ s a last prayer over my body .”
There was a long, nerve-racking silence, as the two
Jacobites squatt ed in the grass,  hands still clasped, afraid to
move enough even to let go.
“Ahhh, yer seein’ things,” cam e from the other sentry at
last, and Jamie felt the shudder of relief run through the priest,
as his damp fin gers slid free. “Nothin’ up there but furze
bushes. Never mind, lad,” the sentry said reassuringly , and
Jamie heard the clap of a hand o n a shoulder and the stamp of
booted f eet, trying to keep wa rm. “There’ s the damn lot of
’em, sure, and i n this dark, they could be the whole bloody
Highland army , for all you can  see.” Jamie thought he heardthe brea th of a smothered la ugh from one of the “furze
bushes,” on the hillside within hearing.
He glanced at t he crest of the hill, where the stars were
beginning to dim. Less than t en minutes to first light, he
judged. At which point, Johnnie Cope’ s troops would swiftly
realize that the Highland army  was not, as they thought, an
hour ’ s m arch away in the opposite direction, but already face-
to-face with their front lines.
There w as a noise to the left, in  the direction of the sea. It
was faint, and i ndistinct, but the note of alarm was clear to
battle-trained ears. Someone, he supposed, had tripped over a
furze bush.
“Hey?” The note of alarm was taken up by one of the
sentries nearby . “What’ s happening?”
The prie st would have to take care of himself, he thought.
Jamie dr ew the broadsword as he rose, and with one long step,
was within reach. The man was no more than a shape in the
darkness, but distinct enough. The merciless blade smashed
down w ith all his strength, and split the man’ s skull where he
stood.
“Highlanders!” The shriek broke from the man’ s
companion, and the second sentry sprang out like a rabbit
flushed from a copse, boundin g away into the fading dark
before J amie cou ld free his wea pon from its gory cleft. He put
a fo ot on the fallen man’ s back and jerked, gritting his teeth
against the unpleasant sensation of slack flesh and grating
bone.
Alarm w as spreading up and down the English lines; he
could fe el as much as hear it – an agitation of men rudely
wakened, gropi ng blindly for weapons, searching in all
directions for the unseen threat.
Clanranald’ s pipers were behind to the right, but no signal
as yet came for the char ge. Con tinue the advance, then, heart
pounding and left arm tingling from the death blow , belly
muscles clenched and eyes straining through the waning dark,
the spray of warm blood across his face going cold and sticky
in the chill.“I co uld hear the m first,” he said, staring of f into the night
as though still searching for t he English soldiers. He bent
forward, hugging his knees. “Then I could see, too. The
English, wriggling over the ground like maggots in meat, and
the men behind me. Geor ge M cClure came up with me, and
W allace and Ross on the other s ide, and we were walkin’ still,
one pace at a time, but faster an d faster , seein’ the sassenaches
breaking before us.”
There was a dull boom of f to the right; the firing of a
single cannon. A moment later , another , and then, as though
this were the sig nal, a wavering cry rose from the oncoming
Highlanders.
“The pipes started then,” he s aid, eyes closed. “I didna
remember my musket ’ til I hear d one fire close behind me; I’d
left it in the grass next to the priest. When it’ s like that, ye
dinna see anything but the sm all bit that’ s happening round
you.
“Y e hea r a shout, and of a sudd en, you’re running. Slow ,
for a step or two, while ye free your belt, and then your plaid
falls free  and you’re bounding, w i’ your feet splashing mud up
your leg s and the chill of the we t grass on your feet, and your
shirttails flying of f your bare arse. The wind blows into your
shirt and up your belly and out along your arms… Then the
noise takes ye and you’re screaming, like runnin’ down a hill
yelling i nto the wind when you’re a bairn, to see can ye lift
yourself on the sound.”
They rode the w aves of their own shrieking onto the plain,
and the force of  the Highland char ge crashed onto the shoals
of the English army , smotherin g them in a boiling sur ge of
blood and terror .
“They ra n,” he said softly . “One man stood to face me – all
during the fight, only one. The o thers I took from behind.” He
rubbed a grimy hand over his face, and I could feel a fine
tremor start somewhere deep inside him.
“I re member… everything,” he said, almost whispering.
“Every b low . Every face. The man lying on the ground in front
of me who wet h imself wi’ fear . The horses screaming. All thestinks – black p owder and blood and the smell of my own
sweat. Everything. But it’ s like I was standin’ outside,
watching myself. I wasna really there.” He opened his eyes
and looked sidelong at me. He was bent almost double, head
on his knees, the shivering visible now .
“D’ye know?” he asked.
“I know .”
While I hadn’ t fought with sw ord or knife, I had fought
often en ough with hands and wi ll; getting through the chaos of
death only because there is no other choice. And it did leave
behind that odd feeling of detachment; the brain seemed to rise
above the body , coldly judging and directing, the viscera
obediently subdued until the crisis passed. It was always
sometime later that the shaking started.
I h adn’ t  reached that point yet. I slid the cloak from my
shoulders and covered him before going back into the cottage.
 
The dawn came, and relief wit h it, in the person of two
village women and an army sur geon. The man with the
wounded leg was pale and s haky , but the bleeding had
stopped. Jamie took me by the arm and led me away , down the
street of T ranent.
O’Sullivan’ s con stant dif ficultie s with the commissary had
been temporarily relieved by the captured wagons, and there
was food in ple nty . W e ate quickly , scarcely tasting the hot
porridge, aware  of food only  as a bodily necessity , like
breathing. The feeling of nourishment began to creep through
my body , freeing me to think of the next most pressing need –
sleep.
W ounded men were quartered in every house and cottage,
the soun d of body mostly sleepi ng in the fields outside. While
Jamie could have claimed a place in the manse with the other
of ficers, he instead took my arm  and turned me aside, heading
between the cottages and up a hill, into one of the scattered
small groves that lay outside T ranent.“It’ s a bit of a w alk,” he said ap ologetically , looking down
at me, “but I thought perhaps ye’d rather be private.”
“I would .” Whi le I had been raised under conditions that
would strike most people of m y time as primitive – often
living in tents and mud hou ses on Uncle Lamb’ s field
expeditions – still, I wasn’ t use d to living crowded cheek by
jowl wi th numb ers of other pe ople, as was customary here.
People ate, slept, and frequently copulated, crammed into tiny ,
stifling cottages,  lit and warmed by smoky peat fires. The only
thing they didn’ t do together wa s bathe – lar gely because they
didn’ t bathe.
Jamie led the way under the drooping limbs of a huge
horse ch estnut, and into a small  clearing, thick with the fallen
leaves of ash, al der , and sycamore. The sun was barely up, and
it w as st ill cold under the trees, a faint edge of frost rimming
some of the yellowed leaves.
He scraped a ro ugh trench in th e layer of leaves with one
heel, then stood at one end of the hollow , set his hand to the
buckle of his belt, and smiled at me.
“It’ s a bit undignified to get into, but it’ s verra easy to take
of f.” He  jerked the belt loose, and his plaid dropped around his
ankles, leaving him clad to m id-thigh in only his shirt. He
usually wore the military “little kilt,” which buckled about the
waist, with the plaid a separa te strip of cloth around the
shoulders. But now , his own k ilt rent and stained from the
battle, he had acquired one of the older belted plaids – nothing
more than a long strip of cloth, tucked about the waist and held
in place with no fastening but a belt.
“How do  you get into it?” I asked curiously .
“W ell, ye lay it out on the ground, like this” – he knelt,
spreading the cloth so that it l ined the leaf-strewn hollow –
“and the n ye pleat it every few  inches, lie down on it, and
roll.”
I burst out laughing, and sank to my knees, helping to
smooth the thick tartan wool.“ That , I want to see,”  I told him. “W ake me up before you
get dressed.”
He sho ok his head good-nat uredly , and the sunlight
filtering through the leaves glinted of f his hair .
“Sassenach, the  chances of me wakin’ before you do are
less than  those of a worm in a h enyard. I dinna care if another
horse steps on m e, I’ll no be moving ’ til tomorrow .” He lay
down carefully , pushing back the leaves.
“Come lie wi’ m e.” He extended an inviting hand upward.
“W e’ll cover ourselves with your cloak.”
The leaves beneath the smooth wool made a surprisingly
comfortable mattress, though at this point I would cheerfully
have slept on a bed of nails. I relaxed bonelessly against him,
reveling in the exquisite delight of simply lying down.
The initial chill faded quickly as our bodies warmed the
pocket where we lay . W e were far enough from the town that
the soun ds of its occupation reached us only in wind-borne
snatches, and I thought with drowsy satisfaction that it might
well be  tomorrow before anyone looking for Jamie found us.
I ha d removed my petticoats and torn them up for
additional bandages the night before, and there was nothing
between us but the thin fabric o f skirt and shirt. A hard, solid
warmth stirred briefly against my stomach.
“Surely not?” I said, amused despite my tiredness. “Jamie,
you must be half-dead.”
He l aughed tiredly , holding me close with one lar ge, warm
hand on the small of my back.
“A lot more tha n half, Sassenach. I’m knackered, and my
cock’ s th e only thing too stupid to know it. I canna lie wi’ ye
without wanting you, but wanting’ s all I’m like to do.”
I fumbled with the hem of his shirt, then pushed it up and
wrapped my hand gently aroun d him. Even warmer than the
skin of his belly , his penis was  silken under the touch of my
stroking thumb, pulsing strongly with each beat of his heart.He m ade a smal l sound of half- painful content, and rolled
slowly onto his back, letting his  legs sprawl loosely outward,
half-covered by my cloak.
The sun had reached our pile of leaves, and my shoulders
relaxed under the warming touch of the light. Everything
seemed slightly tinged with gold, the mingled result of early
autumn and extreme fatigue. I felt languid and vaguely
disembodied, watching the small stirrings of his flesh under
my fingers. All the terror and the tiredness and the noise of the
two days past ebbed slowly away , leaving us alone together .
The haz e of fatigue seemed to act as a magnifying glass,
exaggerating tiny details and sensations. The tail of his saber
wound was visible beneath the rucked-up shirt, crusted black
against the fair skin. T wo or three small flies buzzed low ,
investigating, and I waved them away . My ears rang with the
silence, the breath of the trees n o match for the echoes of the
town.
I lai d my cheek against him, feeling the hard, smooth
curve o f his hip bone, close under the skin. His skin was
transparent in the crease of his groin, the branching veins blue
and delicate as a child’ s.
His han d rose slowly , floating like the leaves, and rested
lightly on my head.
“Claire. I need you,” he whispered. “I need ye so.”
W ithout the hampering petticoats, it was easy . I felt as
though I were floating myself, rising without volition, drifting
my skirts up the length of his body , settling over him like a
cloud on a hilltop, sheltering his need.
His eyes were c losed, head laid back, the red gold of his
hair tumbled coarsely in the leaves. But his hands rose
together and settled surely on my waist, resting without weight
on the curve of my hips.
My eyes closed as well, and I felt the shapes of his mind,
as s urely as I felt those of hi s body under me; exhaustion
blocked our every thought and memory; every sensation but
the knowledge of each other .“Not… long,” he whispered. I nodded, knowing he felt
what he did not see, and rose ab ove him, thighs powerful and
sure under the stained fabric of my gown.
Once, and twice, and again, and once again, and the tremor
rose through him and through  me, like the rising of water
through the roots of a plant and into its leaves.
The breath left him in a sigh, and I felt his descent into
unconsciousness like the dimmin g of a lamp. I fell beside him,
with bar ely time  to draw the heavy folds of the cloak up over
us before the d arkness filled me, and I lay weighted to the
earth by the heavy warmth of his seed in my belly . W e slept.3 7  H O L Y R O O D
Edinbur gh, October 1745
 
T he knock  on my door surprised me from an inspection of
my newly replenished medica l boxes. After the stunning
victory at Prestonpans, Charles had led his triumphant army
back to  Edinbur gh, to bask in adulation. While he was
basking, his generals and chieftains labored, rallying their men
and proc uring w hat equipment was to be had, in preparation
for whatever was coming next.
Buoyed by early success, Charles talked freely of taking
Stirling, then Carlyle, and then, perhaps, of advancing south,
even to London  itself. I spent my spare time counting suture
needles, hoarded  willow bark, and stole every spare ounce of
alcohol I could find, to be brewed into disinfectant.
“What i s it?” I asked, opening the door . The messenger
was a young boy , scarcely older than Fer gus. He was trying to
look grave and deferential, but couldn’ t suppress his natural
curiosity . I saw his eyes dart around the room, resting on the
lar ge me dicine c hest in the corn er with fascination. Clearly the
rumors concerning me had spread through the palace of
Holyrood.
“His Highness has asked for ye, Mistress Fraser ,” he
answered. Bright brown eyes scanned me closely , no doubt
looking for signs of supernatural possession. He seemed
slightly disappointed at my depressingly normal appearance.
“Oh, has he?” I said. “W ell, all right. Where is he, then?”
“In the morning drawing room , Mistress. I’m to take ye.
Oh…” T he thought struck him as he turned, and he swung
back before I could close the door . “Y ou’re to bring your box
of medicines, if ye’d be so kind.”
My escort brimmed with self-importance at his mission as
he e scorted me down the long hallway to the Royal wing ofthe palace. Plainly someone had been schooling him in the
behavior appropriate to a Royal page, but an occasional
exuberant skip in his step betrayed his newness to the job.
What on earth did Charles wa nt with me? I wondered.
While h e tolerated me on Jam ie’ s account, the story of La
Dame Blanche had plainly disconcerted him and made him
uneasy . More than once, I had surprised him crossing himself
surreptitiously in my presence, or making the quick two-
fingered “horns”  sign against evil. The idea that he would ask
me to treat him medically was unlikely in the extreme.
When the heavy cross-timbered door swung open into the
small morning drawing room, it seemed still more unlikely .
The Prince, plainly in good heal th, was leaning on the painted
harpsichord, pic king out a hesitant tune with one finger . His
delicate skin was mildly flushed, but with excitement, not
fever , an d his eyes were clear an d attentive when he looked up
at me.
“Mistress Fraser! How kind of you to attend me so
shortly!” He was dressed this morning with even more
lavishness than usual, bewigged and wearing a new cream-
colored silk waistcoat, embroidered with flowers. He must be
excited about something, I thought; his English went to pot
whenever he became agitated.
“My pleasure, Y our Highness,” I said demurely , dropping a
brief cur tsy . He was alone, an unusual state of af fairs. Could
he want my medical services for himself after all?
He mad e a quick, nervous gestu re toward one of the gold
damask chairs, ur ging me to b e seated. A second chair was
pulled up, facing it, but he walke d up and down in front of me,
too restless to sit.
“I need your help,” he said abruptly .
“Um?” I made a politely inquiring noise. Gonorrhea? I
wondered, scanning him covertly . I hadn’ t heard of any
women since Louise de La T our , but then, it only took once.
He worked his lips in and out, as though searching for some
alternative to telling me, but finally gave it up.“I have a capo  – a chie f, you understand? – her e. He thinks
of joining my Father ’ s cause, but has still some doubt.”
“A clan chieftain, you mean?” He nodded, brow furrowed
beneath the careful curls of his wig.
“ Oui , Madam e. He is of course in su pport of my Father ’ s
claims…”
“Oh, of course,” I murmured.
“…but h e is wishing to speak to you, Madame, before he
will commit his men to follow me.”
He sounded incredulous, hearing his own words, and I
realized that the flush on his che eks came from a combination
of baf flement and suppressed fury .
I wa s more than a little baf fled myself. My imagination
promptly visualized a clan chieftain with some dread disease,
whose adherence to the cause d epended on my performing a
miraculous cure.
“Y ou’re sure he wants to speak  to me?” I said. Surely my
reputation hadn’ t gone that  far .
Charles inclined his head coldly in my direction. “So he
says, Madame.”
“But I don’ t know  any  clan chie ftains,” I said. “Bar
Glengarry and Lochiel, of course. Oh, and Clanranald and
Keppoch, of course. But they’ve all committed themselves to
you already . And why on earth…”
“W ell, he is of the opinion you are knowing him,” the
Prince interrupt ed, syntax becoming more mangled with his
rising temper . He clenched h is hands, obviously forcing
himself to speak courteously . “It is of importance – most
importance, Madame, that he should become convinced to join
me. I require… I r equest … y ou therefore, that you… con vince
him.”
I r ubbed my no se thoughtfully , looking at him. One more
point of decision . One more opportunity to make events move
in th e pa th I chose. And once m ore, the inability to know what
best to do.He was right; it was important to convince this chieftain to
commit his resources to the Jacobite cause. W ith the
Camerons, the various MacDonalds, and the others so far
committed, the Jacobite army n umbered barely two thousand
men, an d those the most ill-assorted lot of ragtag and
draggletail that any general had ever been lumbered with. And
yet, that ragged-arsed lot had taken the city of Edinbur gh,
routed a greatly superior English  force at Preston, and showed
every di sposition to continue going through the countryside
like a dose of salts.
W e had  been unable to stop Charles; perhaps, as Jamie
said, the only w ay to avert calam ity was now to do everything
possible to help him. The ad dition of an important clan
chieftain to the roster of supporters would greatly influence the
odds of others j oining. This might be a turning point, where
the Jacobite forces could be increased to the level of a true
army , actually capable of the proposed invasion of England.
And if so, what in bloody hell would happen then?
I sig hed. No matter what I decided to do, I couldn’ t make
any dec ision until I saw this mysterious person. I glanced
down to  make sure my gown was suitable for interviewing
clan chieftains, infected or otherwise, and rose, tucking the
medicine box under my arm.
“I’ll try , Y our Highness,” I said.
The clenched hands relaxed, showing the bitten nails, and
his frown lessened.
“Ah, good,” he said. He turne d toward the door of the
lar ger afternoon drawing room. “Come, I shall take you
myself.”
 
The gua rd at the door jumped back in surprise as Charles
flung th e door open and strode past him without a glance. On
the far side of th e long, tapestry-hung room was an enormous
marble fireplace, lined with white Delft tiles, painted with
Dutch country scenes in shades of blue and mulberry . A small
sofa was drawn up before the fir e, and a big, broad-shouldered
man in Highland dress stood beside it.In a room less imposing, he would have bulked huge, legs
like tree trunks in their checker ed stockings beneath the kilt.
As it was, in this  immense room with its high gessoed ceilings,
he w as m erely b ig – quite in keeping with the heroic figures of
mythology that decorated the tapestries at either end of the
room.
I s toppe d dead at sight of the e normous visitor , the shock
of recog nition s till mingled with absolute incredulity . Charles
had kep t on, and now glanced back with some impatience,
beckoning me to join him before the fire. I nodded to the big
man. Then I walked slowly ar ound the end of the sofa and
gazed down at the man who lay upon it.
He smil ed faintly when he saw me, the dove-gray eyes
lighting with a spark of amusement.
“Y es,” he said, answering my expression. “I hadn’ t really
expected to meet you  aga in, e ither . O ne might almost believe
we a re f ated.” H e turned his hea d and lifted a hand toward his
enormous body-servant.
“Angus. W ill ye fetch a drop of the brandy for Mistress
Claire? I’m afraid the surpri se of seeing me may have
somewhat discomposed her .”
That, I thought, was putting it m ildly . I sank into a splay-
footed chair and accepted the cr ystal goblet Angus Mhor held
out to me.
Colum M acKenzie’ s eyes hadn’ t changed; neither had his
voice. Both held the essence o f the man who had led clan
MacKenzie for thirty years, despite the disease that had
crippled him in his teens. Every thing else had changed sadly
for the worse, though; the bla ck hair streaked heavily with
gray , the lines of his face cut deep into skin that had fallen
slack over the s harp outlines of bone. Even the broad chest
was sunken and the powerful shoulders hunched, flesh fallen
away from the fragile skeleton beneath.
He already held a glass half-filled with amber liquid,
glowing in the firelight. He raise d himself painfully to a sitting
position and lifted the cup in ironic salute.“Y ou’re looking very well… niece.” From the corner of
my eye, I saw Charles’ s mouth drop open.
“Y ou aren’ t,” I said bluntly .
He glanced dispassionately down at the bowed and twisted
legs. In a hund red years’ time, they would call this disease
after its most famous suf ferer – the T oulouse-Lautrec
syndrome.
“No,” he said. “B ut then, it’ s been two years since you saw
me last.  Mrs. Duncan estimated my survival at less than two
years, then.”
I took a swallow of the brandy . One of the best. Charles
was  anxious.
“I s houldn’ t have thought you ’d put much stock in a
witch’ s curse,” I said.
A smile twitche d the fine-cut lip s. He had the bold beauty
of h is br other D ougal, ruined as it was, and when he lifted the
veil of detachm ent from his eyes, the power of the man
overshone the wreck of his body .
“Not in curses, no. I had the d istinct impression that the
lady was dealing in observatio n, however , not malediction.
And I have seld om met a more acute observer than Geillis
Duncan – with one exception.” He inclined his head gracefully
toward me, making his meaning clear .
“Thanks,” I said.
Colum glanced up at Charles, who was gaping in
bewilderment at these exchanges.
“I thank  you for your graciousn ess in permitting me to use
your premises for my meeting with Mrs. Fraser , Y our
Highness,” he said, with a slight bow . The words were
suf ficiently civil, but the tone made it an obvious dismissal.
Charles, who was by no mea ns used to being dismissed,
flushed hotly and opened his mouth. Then, recalling himself,
he snapped it shut, bowed shortly , and turned on his heel.
“W e wo n’ t need the guard, eith er ,” I called after him. His
shoulders hunch ed and the back of his neck grew red beneaththe tail of his wig, but he gestured abruptly , and the guard at
the door , with an astonished glance at me, followed him out.
“Hm.” C olum cast a brief glance of disapproval at the
door , then returned his attention to me.
“I as ked to see you because I ow e ye an apology ,” he said,
without preamble.
I l eaned back in  my chair , goblet resting nonchalantly on
my stomach.
“Oh, an apology?” I said, with as much sarcasm as could
be m ustered on short notice. “F or trying to have me burnt for
witchcraft, I suppose you mean?” I flipped a hand in gracious
dismissal. “Pra y think nothing of it.” I glared at him.
“Apology?!”
He smiled, not disconcerted in the slightest.
“I suppose it seems a trifle inadequate,” he began.
“Inadequate?! For having me arrested and thrown into a
thieves’ hole for three days with out decent food or water? For
having me stripped half-naked and whipped before every
person in Cranesmuir? For leaving me a hairsbreadth away
from a barrel of pitch and a bundle of faggots?” I stopped and
took a deep breath. “Now that y ou mention it,” I said, a little
more calmly , “ ‘inadequate’ is precisely what I’d call it.”
The smile had vanished.
“I beg your pard on for my appa rent levity ,” he said softly .
“I had no intent to mock you.”
I looked at him, but could see no lingering gleam of
amusement in the black-lashed eyes.
“No,” I said, with another deep  breath. “I don’ t suppose
you did. I suppose you’re going to say that you had no intent
to have me arrested for witchcraft, either .”
The gray eyes sharpened. “Y ou knew that?”
“Geilie said so. While we were  in the thieves’ hole. She
said it was her you meant to dispose of; I was an accident.”“Y ou were.” He looked suddenly very tired. “Had ye been
in the castle, I could have protected you. What in the name of
God led ye to go down to the village?”
“I was told that Geilie Duncan w as ill and asking for me,”
I replied shortly .
“Ah,” he  said softly . “Y ou were told. By whom, and I may
ask?”
“Laoghaire.” Even now , I could not repress a brief spurt of
rage at the girl ’ s name. Out o f thwarted jealousy over my
having married Jamie, she had deliberately tried to have me
killed. Consider able depths of malice for a sixteen-year -old
girl. And even now , mingled with the rage was that tiny spark
of grim satisfaction; he’ s mine, I thought, almost
subconsciously . Mine. Y ou’ll never take him from me. Never .
“Ah,” Colum said again, staring thoughtfully at my flushed
countenance. “I thought perhap s that was the way of it. T ell
me,” he continued, raising one dark brow , “if a mere apology
strikes you as inadequate, will ye have vengeance instead?”
“V engeance?” I must have looked startled at the idea, for
he smiled faintly , though without humor .
“A ye. The lass was wed six  months ago, to Hugh
MacKenzie of Muldaur , one of  my tacksmen. He’ll do with
her as I say , and ye want her punished. What will ye have me
do?”
I bli nked, taken aback by his of fer . He appeared in no
hurry fo r an answer; he sat quietly , sipping the fresh glass of
brandy t hat Angus Mhor poured for him. He wasn’ t staring at
me, but I got up and moved away toward the windows,
wanting to be alone for a moment.
The walls here were five feet thick; by leaning forward
into the  deep window embrasure I could assure myself of
privacy . The bright sun illuminated the fine blond hairs on my
forearms as I rested them on the sill. It made me think of the
thieves’ hole, that damp, reeking pit, and the single bar of
sunlight that had shone through an opening above, making the
dark hole below seem that much more like a grave by contrast.I had spent my first day there in cold and dirt, full of
stunned disbelief; the second in shivering misery and growing
fear as I discovered the full extent of Geillis Duncan’ s
treachery and Colum’ s measure s against it. And on the third
day , the y had taken me to trial . And I had stood, filled with
shame and terror , under the clou ds of a lowering autumn sky ,
feeling the jaws of Colum’ s trap  close round me, sprung by a
word from the girl Laoghaire.
Laoghaire. Fair -skinned and blue-eyed, with a round,
pretty face, but nothing much to distinguish her from the other
girls at Leoch. I  had thought about her – in the pit with Geillis
Duncan, I had had time to think of a lot of things. But furious
and terrified as I had been, furi ous as I remained, I couldn’ t,
either then or now , bring myself to see her as intrinsically evil.
“She was only sixteen, for God’ s sake!”
“Old enough to marry ,” said a sardonic voice behind me,
and I realized that I had spoken aloud.
“Y es, she wanted Jamie,” I said, turning around. Colum
was still sitting on the sofa, stu mpy legs covered with a rug.
Angus Mhor stood silent behind him, heavy-lidded eyes fixed
on his master . “Perhaps she thought she loved him.”
Men were drilling in the courtyard, amid shouts and
clashing of arms. The sun glanced of f the metal of swords and
muskets, the brass studding of tar ges – and of f the red-gold of
Jamie’ s hair , flying in the breeze as he wiped a hand across his
face, flu shed an d sweating from the exercise, laughing at one
of Murtagh’ s deadpan remarks.
I had perhaps d one Laoghaire an injustice, after all, in
assuming her feelings to be les s than my own. Whether she
had acted from immature spite or from a true passion, I could
never know . In either case, she had failed. I had survived. And
Jamie w as mine. As I watched, he rucked up his kilt and
casually scratch ed his bottom, the sunlight catching the
reddish-gold fuzz that softened the iron-hard curve of his
thigh. I smiled, and went back to my seat near Colum.
“I’ll take the apology ,” I said.He nodded, gray eyes thoughtful.
“Y ou’ve a belief in mercy , then, Mistress?”
“More in justice,” I said. “Sp eaking of which, I don’ t
imagine you traveled all the w ay from Leoch to Edinbur gh
merely to apologize to me. I t must have been a hellish
journey .”
“A ye, it was.” T he huge, silent bulk of Angus Mhor shifted
an inch or two behind him, and the massive head bent toward
his l aird in eloquent witness. Co lum sensed the movement and
raised a hand briefly – it’ s all right, the gesture said, I’m all
right for the present.
“No,” Colum went on. “I did not know ye were in
Edinbur gh, in fact, until His Highness mentioned Jamie Fraser ,
and I asked.” A sudden smile gr ew on his face. “His Highness
isn’ t ove r fond of you, Mistress Claire. But I suppose ye knew
that?”
I ignored this. “So you really are considering joining
Prince Charles?”
Colum, Dougal,  and Jamie all had the capacity for hiding
what the y were thinking when they chose to, but of the three,
Colum was undoubtedly best at it. Y ou’d get more from one of
the c arved heads on the fountai n in the front courtyard, if he
was feeling uncommunicative.
“I’ve come to see him” was all he said.
I sat  a moment, wondering wha t, if anything, I could – or
should – say in Charles’ s behalf. Perhaps I would do better to
leave it to Jamie. After all, the fact that Colum felt regret over
nearly k illing me by accident didn’ t mean he was necessarily
inclined to trust me. And while the fact that I was here, part of
Charles’ s entourage, surely ar gued against my being an
English spy , it wasn’ t impossible that I was.
I w as still debat ing with myself when Colum suddenly put
down his glass of brandy and looked straight at me.
“D’ye know how much of this I’ve had since morning?”“No.” His hands were steady , calloused and roughened
from his  disease, but well kept. The reddened lids and slightly
bloodshot eyes could as easily be from the rigors of travel as
from drink. There was no slurring of speech, and no more than
a certain  deliberateness of movement to indicate that he wasn’ t
sober as a judge . But I had seen Colum drink before, and had a
very respectful idea of his capacity .
He waved away Angus Mhor ’ s hand, hovering above the
decanter . “Half a bottle. I’ll have finished it by tonight.”
“Ah.” So that w as why I had been asked to bring my
medicine box. I reached for it, where I had set it on the floor .
“If you’re needing that much brandy , there isn’ t much that
will help you b esides some form of opium,” I said, flicking
through my assortment of vials and jars. “I think I have some
laudanum here, but I can get you some-”
“That isn’ t what I want from you .” The tone of authority in
his voic e stoppe d me, and I looked up. If he could keep his
thoughts to himself, he could also let them show when he
chose.
“I could get laud anum easily enough,” he said. “I imagine
there’ s an apothecarist in the city who sells it – or poppy
syrup, or undiluted opium, for that matter .”
I l et the lid of the small chest fall shut and rested my hands
on top of it. So he didn’ t mean to waste away in a drugged
state, leaving the leadership of  the clan uncertain. And if it
were no t a temporary oblivion h e sought from me, what else?
A permanent one, perhaps. I knew Colum MacKenzie. And
the clear , ruthless mind that had planned Geillis Duncan’ s
destruction would not hesitate over his own.
Now it was clea r . He had com e to see Charles Stuart, to
make th e final decision whether  to commit the MacKenzies of
Leoch to the Ja cobite cause. Once committed, it would be
Dougal who led the clan. And then…
“I w as u nder the  impression that suicide was considered a
mortal sin,” I said.“I imagine it is,” he said, undisturbed. “A sin of pride, at
least, that I shou ld choose a clea n death at the time of my own
devising, as best suits my purpo se. I don’ t, however , expect to
suf fer unduly for my sin, hav ing put no credence in the
existence of God since I was nineteen or so.”
It w as q uiet in the room, beyond the crackle of the fire and
the m uf fled shouts of mock batt le from below . I could hear his
breathing, a slow and steady sigh.
“Why a sk me?” I said. “Y ou’re right, you could get
laudanum where you liked, so l ong as you have money – and
you do. Surely you know that enough of it will kill you. It’ s an
easy death, at that.”
“T oo easy .” He s hook his head. “I have had little to depend
on in life, save my wits. I would keep them, even to meet
death. A s for ease…” He shifte d slightly on the sofa, making
no ef fort to hide his discom fort. “I shall have enough,
presently .”
He nodded toward my box. “Y ou shared Mrs. Duncan’ s
knowledge of medicines. I thou ght it possible that you knew
what sh e used to kill her husband. That seemed quick and
certain. And appropriate,” he added wryly .
“She used witchcraft, according to the verdict of the
court.” T he cou rt that condemned her to death, in accordance
with your plan, I thought. “ Or do you not believe in
witchcraft?” I asked.
He l aughed, a p ure, carefree sound in the sunlit room. “A
man who doesn’ t believe in Go d can scarce credit power to
Satan, can he?”
I still hesitated, but he was a man who judged others as
shrewdly as he did himself. He had asked my pardon before
asking my favor , and satisfied himself that I had a sense of
justice –  or of mercy . And it was, as he said, appropriate. I
opened the box and took out th e small vial of cyanide that I
kept to kill rats.
“I thank ye, Mis tress Claire,” he said, formal again, though
the smile still lingered in his eyes. “Had my nephew notproved your innocence with suc h flamboyance at Cranesmuir ,
still I would never believe you a  witch. I have no more notion
now than I had at our first meet ing, as to who you are, or why
you are here, but a witch is not one of the possibilities I’ve
ever considered.” He paused, one brow raised. “I don’ t
suppose you’d be inclined to tell me who – or what – you
are?”
I hesitat ed for a moment. But a  man with belief in neither
God nor Devil was not likely  to believe the truth of my
presence here, either . I squeezed his fingers lightly and
released them.
“Better call me a witch,” I sai d. “It’ s as close as you’re
likely to get.”
 
On my way out to the courtyard next morning, I met Lord
Balmerino on the stairs.
“Oh, Mi stress Fraser!” he greeted me jovially . “Just who I
was looking for .”
I sm iled at him; a chubby , cheerful man, he was one of the
refreshing features of life in Holyrood.
“If it isn’ t fever , flux, or French pox,” I said, “can it wait
for a moment? My husband and his uncle are giving a
demonstration of Highland swo rd-fighting for the benefit of
Don Francisco de la Quintana.”
“Oh, rea lly? I must say , I should like to see that myself.”
Balmerino fell into step beside me, head bobbing cheerfully at
the level of my shoulder . “I do like a pretty man with a
sword,” he said. “And anything that will sweeten the
Spaniards has my most devout approval.”
“Mine, t oo.” Deeming it too dangerous for Fer gus to lift
His Highness’ s correspondence  inside Holyrood, Jamie was
dependent for information on what he learned from Charles
himself. This seemed to be quite a lot, though; Charles
considered Jamie one of his intimates – virtually the only
Highland chief to be accorded such a mark of favor , small as
was his contribution in men and money .So far as money went, though, Charles had confided that
he had high ho pes of support from Philip of Spain, whose
latest letter to James in Rome had been distinctly encouraging.
Don Francisco, while not quit e an envoy , was certainly a
member of the Spanish Court, and might be relied upon to
carry back his report of how matters stood with the Stuart
rising. This was Charles’ s oppo rtunity to see how far his own
belief in his des tiny would carry him, in convincing Highland
chiefs and foreign kings to join him.
“What did you want to see me for?” I asked as we came
out onto the walkway that edged the courtyard of Holyrood. A
small crowd of spectators was assembling, but neither Don
Francisco nor the two combatants were yet in sight.
“Oh!” R eminded, Lord Balmerino groped inside his coat.
“Nothing of great importance, m y dear lady . I received these
from one of m y messengers, who obtained them from a
kinsman to the South. I tho ught you might find them
amusing.”
He handed me a thin sheaf of crudely printed papers. I
recognized them as broadsh eets, the popular circulars
distributed in taverns or that fluttered from doorposts and
hedges through towns and villages.
 
“Charles Edward Stuart, known to all as The Y ounge
Pretender” read  one. “Be it Known to all Present that this
Depraved and Dangerous Person, having landed Unlawfully
upon the shores of Scotland , hath Incited to Riot the
Population of that Country , and hath Unleashed upon Innocent
Citizens the Fury of an Unjust  W ar .” There was quite a lot
more of it, all in  the same vein, concluding with an exhortation
to the Innocent Citizens reading this indictment “to do all in
their Power to Deliver ye this Person to the Justice which he
so Richly Deserves.” The sheet was decorated at the top with
what I supposed was meant as a drawing of Charles; it didn’ t
bear much resemblance to the original, but definitely looked
Depraved and Dangerous, which I supposed was the general
idea.“That o ne’ s qu ite fairly restrained,” said Balmerino,
peering over my elbow . “Som e of the others show a most
impressive range both of imagination and invective, though;
look at this one. That’ s me,” he said, pointing at the paper with
evident delight.
The broadsheet showed a raw boned Highlander , thickly
bewhiskered, with beetling brows and eyes that glared wildly
under th e shadow of a Scotch bonnet. I looked askance at Lord
Balmerino, clad , as was his habit, in breeches and coat in the
best of taste; made of fine stuf f, but subdued both in cut and
color , t o flatter his tubby li ttle form. He stared at the
broadsheet, me ditatively stroking his round, clean-shaven
cheeks.
“I don’ t know ,” he said. “The whiskers do lend me a most
romantic air , do they not? Still, a beard itches most infernally;
I’m not sure I could bear it, even for the sake of being
picturesque.”
I t urned  to the next page, and nearly dropped the whole
sheaf.
“They d id a slightly better job in rendering a likeness of
your husband,” Balmerino observed, “but of course our dear
Jamie does actually look somewhat like the popular English
conception of a Highland thug  – begging your pardon, my
dear , I mean no of fense. He is  lar ge, though, isn’ t he?”
“Y es,” I said faintly , perusing the broadsheet’ s char ges.
“Didn’ t realize your husband w as in the habit of roasting
and eating small children, did you?” said Balmerino, chortling.
“I alway s thought his size was due to something special in his
diet.”
The little earl’ s i rreverent attitude did a good deal to steady
me. I could alm ost smile myself at the ridiculous char ges and
descriptions, though I wondered just how much credence the
readers of the broadsheets placed in them. Rather a lot, I was
afraid; p eople so often seemed not only willing but eager to
believe the worst – and the worse, the better .“It’ s the last o ne I thought you’d be interested in.”
Balmerino interrupted my thoug hts, flipping over the next-to-
last sheet.
“The Stuart witch” proclaimed the heading. A long-nosed
female with pinpoint pupils stared back at me, over a text
which accused Charles Stuart of invoking “ye Pow’rs of
Darkeness” in support of his unlawful cause. By retaining
among his intimate entourage a well-known witch – one
holding power of life and death over men, as well as the more
usual power of blighting crops,  drying up cattle, and causing
blindness – Charles gave evidence of the fact that he had sold
his own soul to the devil, and thus would “Frye in Hell
Forever!” as the tract gleefully concluded.
“I assume it m ust be you,” Balmerino said. “Though I
assure you, my dear , the picture hardly does you justice.”
“V ery e ntertaining,” I said. I g ave the sheaf back to his
lordship, restraining the ur ge to wipe my hand on my skirt. I
felt a trifle ill, but did my be st to smile at Balmerino. He
glanced at me shrewdly , then took my elbow with a reassuring
squeeze.
“Don’ t trouble yourself, my dear ,” he said. “Once His
Majesty has regained his crown, all this nonsense will be
for gotten in short order . Y esterday’ s villain is tomorrow’ s hero
in the eyes of the populace; I’ve seen it time and again.”
“Plus ça change, plus c’est la m ême chose,”  I murmured.
And if His Majesty King James didn’ t  regain his crown…
“And if our ef forts should by misfortune be unsuccessful,”
Balmerino said,  echoing my th oughts, “what the broadsheets
say will be the least of our worries.”
 
“En gar de.”  W it h the formal French openin g, Dougal fell
into a classic dueler ’ s stance, si de-on to his opponent, sword-
arm bent with the blade at the ready , back arm raised in a
graceful arc, hand dropping from the wrist in open
demonstration that no dagger was held in reserve.Jamie’ s blade crossed Dougal’ s, the metal meeting with the
whisper of a clash.
“Je suis pr est.”  Jamie caught my eye, and I co uld see the
flicker of humor cross his face. The customary dueler ’ s
response was his own clan motto. Je suis pr est . “I am ready .”
For a moment, I thought he might not be, and gasped
involuntarily as  Dougal’ s sword shot out in a lunging flash.
But Jam ie had seen the motion s tart, and by the time the blade
crossed the place where he ha d been standing, he was no
longer there.
Sidestep, a quick beat of the blade, and a counter -lunge
that brought the blades screeching together along their lengths.
The two  swords  held fast togeth er at the hilt for only a second,
then the swordsmen broke, stepped back, circled and returned
to the attack.
W ith a clash and a beat, a parry and a lunge in tier ce ,
Jamie came within an inch of Dougal’ s hip, swung adroitly
aside with a flare of green kilt. A parry and a dodge and a
quick up ward be at that knocked the pressing blade aside, and
Dougal stepped forward, forcing Jamie back a pace.
I c ould see Don Francisco, standing on the opposite side of
the cour tyard wi th Charles, Sheridan, the elderly T ullibardine,
and a few others. A small smile curved the Spaniard’ s lips
under a wisp of waxed mustach e, but I couldn’ t tell whether it
was adm iration for the fighters, or merely a variation on his
normally supercilious expression. Colum was nowhere in
sight. I wasn’ t s urprised; aside from his normal reluctance to
appear i n public, he must have been exhausted by the journey
to Edinbur gh.
Both gifted swordsmen, and both left-handed, uncle and
nephew were putting on a skille d display – a show made more
impressive by the fact that they were fighting in accordance
with the most exacting rules of French dueling, but using
neither the rapier -like smallsword that formed part of a
gentleman’ s costume , nor the saber of a soldier . Instead, both
men wielded Highland broadswords, each a full yard of
tempered steel, with a flat blade that could cleave a man fromcrown to neck. They handled t he enormous weapons with a
grace and an ir ony that could not have been managed by
smaller men.
I saw Charles murmur in Don  Francisco’ s ear , and the
Spaniard nod, never taking his eyes of f the flash and clang of
the battle in the  grass-lined court. W ell matched in size and
agility , Jamie and his uncle gave every appearance of
intending to kill each other . Dougal had been Jamie’ s teacher
in the art of swo rdsmanship, and  they had fought back to back
and shou lder to shoulder many times before; each man knew
the s ubtleties of the other ’ s style as well as he knew his own –
or at least I hoped so.
Dougal pressed his advantage with a double lunge, forcing
Jamie back toward the edge of the courtyard. Jamie stepped
quickly to one s ide, struck Dougal’ s blade away with one beat,
then slashed back the other wa y , with a speed that sent the
blade of  his broadsword through the cloth of Dougal’ s right
sleeve. There was a loud ripping noise, and a strip of white
linen hung free, fluttering in the breeze.
“Oh, nicely fought, sir!” I turne d to see who had spoken,
and found Lord Kilmarnock standing at my shoulder . A
serious, plain-faced man in his e arly thirties, he and his young
son Johnny were also house d in the guest quarters of
Holyrood.
The son was se ldom far from his father , and I glanced
around i n search  of him. I hadn’ t far to look; he was standing
on the other side of his fath er , jaw slightly agape as he
watched the swordplay . My eye caught a faint movement from
the f ar side of a pillar: Fer gus, black eyes fixed unblinkingly
on John ny . I lowered my brows and glowered at him
menacingly .
Johnny , rather overconscious of being Kilmarnock’ s heir ,
and still more conscious of his privilege in going to war with
his father at the age of twelve, tended to lord it over the other
lads. In  the manner of lads, most of them either avoided
Johnny , or bided their time, waiting for him to step out of his
father ’ s protective shadow .Fer gus most definitely fell into the latter group. T aking
umbrage at a disparaging remark of Johnny’ s about “bonnet
lairds,” which he had – quite accurately – interpreted as an
insult to Jamie, Fer gus had been forcibly prevented from
assaulting Johnn y in the rock garden a few days before. Jamie
had administered swift justice on a physical level, and then
pointed out to Fer gus that while loyalty was an admirable
virtue, and highly prized by its recipient, stupidity was not.
“That la d is two years older than you, and two stone
heavier ,” he had said, shaking Fer gus gently by the shoulder .
“D’ye think you’ll help me by g etting your own head knocked
in? T here’ s times to fight wi’ou t counting the cost, but there’ s
times ye  bite your tongue and b ide your time. “Ne pétez plus
haut que votr e cul , eh?”
Fer gus had nodded, wiping his tear -stained cheeks with the
tail of his shirt, but I had my doubts as to whether Jamie’ s
words h ad made much impression on him. I didn’ t like the
speculative look I saw now in  those wide black eyes, and
thought that had Johnny been a  trifle brighter , he would have
been standing between me and his father .
Jamie dropped halfway to one k nee, with a murderous jab
upward that brought his blade w hizzing past Dougal’ s ear . The
MacKenzie jerked back, looking startled for a moment, then
grinned with a f lash of white teeth, and banged his blade flat
on top of Jamie’ s head, with a resounding clong .
I h eard the soun d of applause fr om across the square. The
fight was degenerating from elegant French duel into Highland
brawl, and the spectators were th oroughly enjoying the joke of
it.
Lord Kilmarnoc k, also hearing the sound, looked across
the square and grimaced sourly .
“His Highness’ s advisers are summoned to meet the
Spaniard,” he observed sarcastically . “O’Sullivan, and that
ancient fop T ullibardine. Does h e take advice of Lord Elcho?
Balmerino, Lochiel, or even my humble self?”
This was plainly a rhetorical question, and I contented
myself w ith a faint murmur of sympathy , keeping my eyes onthe fighters. The clash of stee l rang of f the stones, nearly
drowning out Kilmarnock’ s words. Once having started,
though, he seemed unable to contain his bitterness.
“No, indeed!” he said. “O’Sullivan and O’Brien and the
rest of the Irish ; they risk nothing! If the worst should ever
happen, they can plead immunity from prosecution by reason
of th eir nationality . But we – we who are risking property ,
honor – life itself! W e are ignored and treated like common
dragoons. I said good morning to His Highness yesterday , and
he s wept by me , nose in the air , as though I had committed a
breach in etiquette by so addressing him!”
Kilmarnock was plainly furious, and with good reason.
Ignoring the men whom he had charmed and courted into
providing the men and money f or his adventure, Charles then
had rejected them, turning to the comfort of his old advisers
from the Continent – most of whom regarded Scotland as a
howling wilderness, and its inhabitants as little more than
savages.
There w as a whoop of surprise  from Dougal, and a wild
laugh from Jamie. Dougal’ s left sleeve hung free from the
shoulder , the flesh beneath brow n and smooth, unmarred by a
scratch or a drop of blood.
“I’ll pay ye for  that, wee Jamie,” Dougal said, grinning.
Droplets of sweat ran down his face.
“W ill ye , Uncle?” Jamie panted. “W ith what?” A flash of
metal, judged to a nicety , and D ougal’ s sporran flew jingling
across the stones, clipped free from the belt.
I caugh t a movement from th e corner of my eye, and
turned my head sharply .
“Fer gus!” I said.
Kilmarnock turned in the direction I was looking, and saw
Fer gus. The boy carried a lar ge stick in one hand, with a
casualness so assumed as to be laughable, if it weren’ t for the
implicit threat.
“Don’ t trouble yourself, my la dy Broch T uarach,” said
Lord Ki lmarnock, after a brief g lance. “Y ou may depend uponmy son to defend himself hono rably , if the occasion demands
it.” H e beamed indulgently at Jo hnny , then turned back to the
swordsmen. I turned back, too, but kept an ear cocked in
Johnny’ s directi on. It wasn’ t that I thought Fer gus lacked a
sense of honor; I just had the impression that it diver ged rather
sharply from Lord Kilmarnock’ s notion of that virtue.
“Gu leoir!”  At the cry from Dougal, the fight stopped
abruptly . Sweating freely , both swordsmen bowed toward the
applause of the Royal party , and stepped forward to accept
congratulations and be introduced to Don Francisco.
“Milord!” called  a high voice from the pillars. “Please – le
parabola !”
Jamie tu rned, half-frowning at the interruption, but then
shrugged, smiled, and stepped  back into the center of the
courtyard. Le parabola  w as the name Fer gus had given this
particular trick.
W ith a quick bow to His H ighness, Jamie took the
broadsword carefully by the tip of the blade, stooped slightly ,
and with a tremendous heave, s ent the blade whirling straight
up in to the air . Every eye fixed o n the basket-hilted sword, the
tempered length  of it glinting in the sun as it turned end over
end over  end, with such inertia that it seemed to hang in the air
for a moment before plunging earthward.
The essence of the trick, of course, was to hurl the weapon
so that it buried itself point-first in the earth as it came down.
Jamie’ s refinement of this was to stand directly under the arc
of d escent, stepping back at th e last moment to avoid being
skewered by the falling blade.
The swo rd chun ked home at his  feet to the accompaniment
of a collective “ ah!” from the spectators. It was only as Jamie
bent to pull the sword from its grassy sheath that I noticed the
ranks of the spectators had been reduced by two.
One, th e twelv e-year -old Ma ster of Kilmarnock, lay
facedown on the grassy ver ge, t he swelling bump on his head
already apparent  through the lank brown hair . The second was
nowhere visible,  but I caught a faint whisper from the shadows
behind me.“Ne pé tez plu s haut que v otr e cul,”  i t said, with
satisfaction. Don’ t fart above your arsehole.
 
The wea ther wa s unseasonably warm for November , and
the omnipresent clouds had broken, letting a fugitive autumn
sun shin e briefly on the grayne ss of Edinbur gh. I had taken
advantage of the transient warmth to be outside, however
briefly , and was crawling on my knees through the rock garden
behind Holyrood, much to the amusement of several
Highlanders han ging about the g rounds, enjoying the sunshine
in their own manner , with a jug of homebrewed whisky .
“Art huntin’ burras , Mistress?” called one man.
“Nay , it’ll be fairies, surely , not caterpillars,” joked
another .
“Y ou’re more likely to find fai ries in that jug than I am
under rocks,” I called back.
The man held the jug up, closed one eye and squinted
theatrically into its depths.
“A ye, well, so long as it isna caterpillars in my jug,” he
replied, and took a deep swig.
In fact, what I was hunting wo uld make as little – or as
much – sense to  them as caterp illars, I reflected, shoving one
boulder a few in ches to the side to expose the orange-brown
lichen on its s urface. A delicate scraping with the small
penknife, and several flakes of the odd symbiont fell into my
palm, to  be transferred with due care to the cheap tin snuf fbox
that held my painfully acquired hoard.
Something of the relatively cosmopolitan attitude of
Edinbur gh had rubbed of f on the visiting Highlanders; while in
the remote mountain villages,  such behavior would have
gotten me viewed with suspicion, if not downright hostility ,
here it seemed no more than a harmless quirk. While the
Highlanders treated me with great respect, I was relieved to
find that there was no fear mingled with it.
Even my basic Englishness was for given, once it was
known who my husband was. I supposed I was never going toknow more than Jamie had told me about what he had done at
the Battle of Prestonpans, but whatever it was, it had mightily
impressed the Scots, and “Red Jamie” drew shouts and hails
whenever he ventured outside Holyrood.
In fact, a shout from the nearby Highlanders drew my
attention at this point, and I looked up to see Red Jamie
himself, strolling  across the grass, waving absently to the men
as he scanned the serried rocks behind the palace.
His face lightened as he saw m e, and he came across the
grass to where I knelt in the rockery .
“There you are,” he said. “Can ye come with me for a bit?
And bring your wee basket along, if ye will.”
I scr ambled to my feet, dusting  the dried grass from the
knees of  my gown, and droppe d my scraping knife into the
basket.
“All right. Where are we going?”
“Colum’ s sent word he wishes to speak with us. Both of
us.”
“Where?” I asked, stretching my  steps to keep up with his
long stride down the path.
“The kirk in the Canongate.”
This was interesting. Whatever Colum wished to see us
about, he clearly didn’ t want th e fact that he had spoken with
us privately to be known in Holyrood.
Neither did Jamie; hence the basket. Passing arm in arm
through the gate, my basket ga ve an apparent excuse for our
venturing up the Royal Mile,  whether it were to convey
purchases home or distribute medicines to the men and their
families quartered in the wynds and closes of Edinbur gh.
Edinbur gh sloped upward steeply along its one main street.
Holyrood sat in dignity at the f oot, the creaking Abbey vault
alongside conferring a spurious air of gracious security . It
loftily ignored the glowering presence of Edinbur gh Castle,
perched high on the crest of the  rocky hill above. In between
the t wo castles, the Royal Mile rose at a rough angle of forty-five degrees. Puf fing redfaced at  Jamie’ s side, I wondered how
in hell Colum MacKenzie had ever negotiated the quarter -mile
of cobbled slope from the palace to the kirk.
W e found Colum in the kirkyar d, sitting on a stone bench
where the late afternoon sun  could warm his back. His
blackthorn stick lay on the bench beside him, and his short,
bowed legs dangled a few inche s above the ground. Shoulders
hunched and head bowed in tho ught, at a distance he looked
like a gnome, a natural inhabitant of this man-made rock
garden, with its tilted stones a nd creeping lichens. I eyed a
prime specimen  on a weathered vault, but supposed we had
better not stop.
The grass was soundless under our feet, but Colum raised
his head while we were still some distance away . There was
nothing wrong with his senses, at least.
The shad ow under a nearby lime  tree moved slightly at our
approach. There was nothing wrong with Angus Mhor ’ s
senses, either . Satisfied of our identity , the big servant resumed
his silent guardianship, becoming again part of the landscape.
Colum n odded in greeting and motioned to the seat beside
him. Near at hand, there was no suggestion of the gnomish,
despite h is twisted body . Face-to-face, you saw nothing but the
man within.
Jamie fo und me a seat on a nearby stone, before taking up
the place indicated next to Colum. The marble was
surprisingly cold, even through my thick skirts, and I shifted a
bit, the carved skull and crossbo nes atop the memorial lumpy
and uncomfortable under me. I saw the epitaph carved below it
and grinned:
 
Her e lies Martin Elginbr od,
Have mer cie on my soul, Lor d God,
As I would do wer e I Lor d God,
And thou wert Martin Elginbr od.
 Jamie ra ised one brow at me in warning, then turned back
to Colum. “Y ou asked to see us, Uncle?”
“I’ve a question for ye, Jamie Fr aser ,” Colum said, without
preamble. “D’ye hold me as your kinsman?”
Jamie w as silent for a moment, studying his uncle’ s face.
Then he smiled faintly .
“Y ou’ve my mother ’ s eyes,” he said. “Shall I deny that?”
Colum looked startled for a m oment. His eyes were the
clear , so ft gray of a dove’ s wing, fringed thick with black
lashes. For all their beauty , they  could gleam cold as steel, and
I wondered, not for the first time, just what Jamie’ s mother had
been like.
“Y ou remember  your mother? Y ou were no more than a
wee laddie when she died.”
Jamie’ s mouth twisted slightly at this, but he answered
calmly .
“Old enough. For that matter , my father ’ s house had a
looking glass; I’m told I favor her a bit.”
Colum laughed shortly . “More than a bit.” He peered
closely a t Jamie, eyes squinting slightly in the bright sun. “Oh,
aye, lad; you’re Ellen’ s son, not a doubt of it. That hair , for the
one thing…” He gestured v aguely toward Jamie’ s hair ,
glinting auburn and amber , roa n and cinnabar , a thick, wavy
mass with a th ousand colors of red and gold. “…And that
mouth.” Colum’ s own mouth rose at one side, as though in
reluctant reminiscence. “W ide a s a nightjar ’ s, I used to tease
her . Y e could ca tch bugs like a toad, I’d say to her , had ye no
but a sticky tongue.”
T aken by surprise, Jamie laughed.
“W illie said that once, to me,” he said, and then the full
lips clam ped shut; he spoke rar ely of his dead elder brother ,
and never , I imagined, had he mentioned W illie to Colum
before.
If Colum noticed the slip, he gave no sign of it.“I wrote  to her then,” he said, l ooking abstractedly at one
of the tilted ston es nearby . “When your brother and the babe
died of the pox. That was the first time, since she left Leoch.”
“Since she wed my father , ye mean.”
Colum nodded slowly , still looking away .
“A ye. She was older than me, ye ken, by two years or so;
about th e same as between your  sister and you.” The deep-set
gray eyes swiveled back and fixed on Jamie.
“I’ve never met your sister . W ere ye close, the two of
you?”
Jamie didn’ t speak, but nodded slightly , studying his uncle
closely , as though looking for the answer to a puzzle in the
worn face before him.
Colum nodded, too. “It was that way between Ellen and
myself. I was a sickly wee thing, and she nursed me often. I
remember the sun shining through her hair , and she telling me
tales as I lay in bed. Even later” – the fine-cut lips lifted in a
slight smile – “when my legs first gave way; she’d come and
go, all about Leoch, and stop each morning and night in my
chamber , to tell me who she’d  seen and what they’d said.
W e’d talk, about the tenants and the tacksmen, and how things
might be arranged. I was marrie d then, but Letitia had no mind
for such  matters, and less interest.” He flipped a hand,
dismissing his wife.
“W e ta lked be tween us – sometimes with Dougal,
sometimes alone – of how the fortunes of the clan might best
be m aintained; how peace mig ht be kept among the septs,
which alliances could be made with other clans, how the lands
and the timber should be managed… And then she left,” he
said abruptly , looking down at the broad hands folded on his
knee. “W ith no asking of leave nor word of farewell. She was
gone. And I heard of her from others now and then, but from
herself – nothing.”
“She didn’ t answer your letter?” I asked softly , not wanting
to intrude. He shook his head, still looking down.“She was ill; she’d lost a child, as well as having the pox.
And per haps sh e meant to write  later; it’ s an easy task to put
of f.” He smiled briefly , witho ut humor , and then his face
relaxed into somberness. “But by Christmas twelve-month, she
was dead.”
He looked directly at Jamie, who met his gaze squarely .
“I was a bit surp rised, then, when your father wrote to tell
me h e w as takin g you to Douga l, and wished ye then to come
to me at Leoch for your schooling.”
“It w as agreed so, when they wed,” Jamie answered. “That
I should foster with Dougal, and then come to you for a time.”
The dry twigs of a larch rattled in a passing wind, and he and
Colum both hunched their shoulders against the sudden chill
of it , their family resemblance e xaggerated by the similarity of
the gesture.
Colum s aw my smile at their resemblance, and one corner
of his mouth turned up in answer .
“Oh, aye,” he said to Jamie. “But agreements are worth as
much as the men who make them, and nay more. And I didna
know your father then.”
He ope ned his mouth to go on, but then seemed to
reconsider what  he had been about to say . The silence of the
kirkyard flowed back into the space their conversation had
made, filling in the gap as though no word were ever spoken.
It was Jamie, finally , who broke the silence once more.
“What did ye think of my father?” he asked, and I
glimpsed in his tone that curiosity of a child who has lost his
parents early , seeking clues to the identity of these people
known only from a child’ s restricted point of view . I
understood the impulse; what little I knew of my own parents
came almost entirely from Uncle Lamb’ s brief and
unsatisfactory answers to my questions – he was not a man
given to character analysis.
Colum, on the other hand, was.
“What was he like, d’ye mean ?” He looked his nephew
over carefully , then gave a short grunt of amusement.“Look y e in the mirror , lad,” he said, a half-grudging smile
lingering on his face. “If it’ s your mother ’ s face ye see, it’ s
your fat her looking back at ye through those damned Fraser
cat-eyes.” He stretched and shifted his position, easing his
bones on the lich ened stone bench. His lips were pressed tight,
by h abit, against any exclamation of discomfort, and I could
see wha t had made those deep creases between nose and
mouth.
“T o answer ye, though,” he went on, once more
comfortably settled, “I didn’ t like the man overmuch – nor he
me –  but I knew him at once for a man of honor .” He paused,
then sai d, very softly , “I kno w you for the same, Jamie
MacKenzie Fraser .”
Jamie didn’ t change expression, but there was a faint
quiver to  his eyelids; only one as familiar with him as I was –
or as observant as Colum was – would have noticed.
Colum let out his breath in a long sigh.
“So, lad, that’ s why I wished to talk with you. I must
decide, ye see, w hether the MacKenzies of Leoch go for King
James or King Geordie.” He smiled sourly . “It’ s a case, I think,
of th e devil ye know , or the dev il ye don’ t, but it’ s a choice I
must make.”
“Dougal-” Jamie began, but his uncle cut him of f with a
sharp motion of his hand.
“A ye, I know wh at Dougal thinks – I’ve had little rest from
it, th ese two ye ars past,” he said impatiently . “But I am the
MacKenzie of Leoch, and it’ s mine to decide. Dougal will
abide by what I say . I’d know what you’d advise me to do –
for the sake of the clan whose blood runs in your veins.”
Jamie glanced up, eyes dark blue and impervious, hooded
against the afternoon sun that shone in his face.
“I a m here, and  my men with me,” he said. “Surely my
choice is plain?”
Colum shifted himself again, head cocked attentively to his
nephew , as though to catch any nuances of voice or expression
that might give him a clue.“Is it?” he asked. “Men give  their allegiance for any
number of reasons, lad, and few of them have much to do with
the reasons they speak aloud. I’ve talked with Lochiel, and
Clanranald, and Angus and Alex MacDonald of Scotus. D’ye
think they’re here only because they feel James Stuart their
rightful king? Now I would talk with you – and hear the truth,
for the sake of your father ’ s honor .”
Seeing Jamie hesitate, Colum went on, still watching his
nephew keenly .
“I don’ t ask for myself; if you’ve eyes, ye can see that the
matter isn’ t one that will troubl e me long. But for Hamish –
the lad is your c ousin, remember . If there’ s to be a clan for him
to lead, once he’ s of age – then I must choose rightly , now .”
He stopped speaking and sat still, the usual caution now
relaxed from his features, the gray eyes open and listening.
Jamie sa t as still as Colum, froz en like the marble angel on
the tomb behind him. I knew the dilemma that preoccupied
him, tho ugh no trace of it showe d on the stern, chiseled face. It
was the same one we had faced before, choosing to come with
the men from L allybroch. Charles’ s Rising was balanced on a
knife ed ge; the allegiance of a lar ge clan such as the
MacKenzies of Leoch might encourage others to join the brash
Y oung Pretende r , and lead to his success. But if it ended in
failure nonetheless, the MacKenzies of Leoch could well end
with it.
At last Jamie turned his head deliberately , and looked at
me, blue  eyes holding my own. Y ou have some say in this , his
look said. What shall I do?
I c ould feel Co lum’ s eyes upon me, too, and felt rather
than saw the questioning lift of the thick, dark brows above
them. B ut what I saw in my mind’ s eye was young Hamish, a
redheaded ten-year -old who looked enough like Jamie to be
his s on, rather th an his cousin. A nd what life might be for him,
and the rest of h is clan, if the MacKenzies of Leoch fell with
Charles at Culloden. The men o f Lallybroch had Jamie to save
them from final slaughter , if it came to that. The men of Leoch
would not. And yet the choice could not be mine. I shruggedand bow ed my head. Jamie took a deep breath, and made up
his mind.
“Go home to Le och, Uncle,” he said. “And keep your men
there.”
Colum sat motionless for a long  minute, looking straight at
me. Finally , his mouth curled u pward, but the expression was
not quite a smile.
“I n early stopped Ned Gowan, when he went to keep you
from burning,” he said to me. “I suppose I’m glad I didn’ t.”
“Thanks,” I said, my tone matching his.
He sighe d, rubbing the back of  his neck with a calloused
hand, as though it ached under the weight of leadership.
“W ell, then. I shall see His Highness in the morning, and
tell h im my dec ision.” The hand descended, lying inert on the
stone be nch, ha lfway between him and his nephew . “I thank
ye, Jam ie, for your advice.” He hesitated, then added, “And
may God go with you.”
Jamie le aned fo rward and laid h is hand over Colum’ s. He
smiled his mother ’ s wide, swe et smile and said, “And with
you, too, mo caraidh .”
 
The Royal Mile was busy , thronged with people taking
advantage of the brief hours of warmth. W e walked in silence
through the crowd, my hand tucked deep into the crook of
Jamie’ s elbow . Finally he shook his head, muttering something
to himself in Gaelic.
“Y ou did right,” I said to him, an swering the thought rather
than the words. “I would hav e done the same. Whatever
happens, at least the MacKenzies will be safe.”
“A ye, pe rhaps.” He nodded to a greeting from a passing
of ficer , jostling through the crowd that surrounded the W orld’ s
End. “But what of the rest – the MacDonalds and
MacGillivrays, and the others that have come? W ill they be
destroyed now , where maybe they wouldn’ t, had I had thenerve to tell Co lum to join them?” He shook his head, face
clouded. “There’ s no knowing, is there, Sassenach?”
“No,” I said softly , squeezing his arm. “Never enough. Or
maybe too much. But we can’ t do nothing on that account,
surely?”
He gave me a half-smile bac k, and pressed my hand
against his side.
“No, Sa ssenach. I dinna suppose we can. And it’ s done
now , and naught can change it, so it’ s no good worrying. The
MacKenzies will stay out of it.”
The sentry at th e gate of Holyrood was a MacDonald, one
of G lengarry’ s men. He recogni zed Jamie and nodded us into
the courtyard, barely looking up from his louse-searching. The
warm weather made the vermin active, and as they left their
cozy nes ts in crotch and armpit,  often they could be surprised
while c rossing the perilous terrain of shirt or tartan and
removed from the body of their host.
Jamie sa id something to him in Gaelic, smiling. The man
laughed, picked  something from his shirt, and flicked it at
Jamie, who pretended to catch it, eyed the imaginary beastie
critically , then, with a wink at me, popped it into his mouth.
 
“Er , how is your son’ s head, Lord Kilmarnock?” I inquired
politely as we stepped out together onto the floor of
Holyrood’ s Great Gallery . I didn’ t care greatly , but I thought as
the t opic couldn’ t be avoided al together , it was perhaps better
to air it in a place where hostility was unlikely to be openly
exhibited.
The Gal lery met that criterion, I thought. The long, high-
ceiled ro om with  its two vast fireplaces and towering windows
had been the scene of frequent balls and parties since Charles’ s
triumphant entry  into Edinbur gh in September . Now , crowded
with the luminaries of Edinbur gh’ s upper class, all anxious to
do h onor to the ir Prince – once it appeared that he might
actually win – the room positively glittered. Don Francisco,
the guest of ho nor , stood at t he far end of the room with
Charles, dressed in the depressing Spanish style, with baggydark pantaloons , shapeless coat, and even a small ruf f, which
seemed to provoke consider able suppressed amusement
among the younger and more fashionable element.
“Oh, well enough, Mistress Fr aser ,” replied Kilmarnock
imperturbably . “A dunt on the sk ull will not discommode a lad
of that age for long; though h is pride may take a bit more
mending,” he added, with a sudden humorous twist to his long
mouth.
I smiled at him, relieved to see it.
“Y ou’re not angry?”
He shoo k his head, looking dow n to be sure that his feet
were clear of my sweeping skirt.
“I h ave tried to teach John the things he should know as
heir to Kilmarno ck. In teaching him humility I seem to have
signally failed; perhaps your servant may have had more
success.”
“I suppose you didn’ t whack him outside,” I said absently .
“Pardon?”
“Nothing,” I said flushing. “Look, is that Lochiel? I
thought he was ill.”
Dancing required most of my breath, and Lord Kilmarnock
appeared not to wish for conve rsation, so I had time to look
around. Charles was not dancing; though he was a good
dancer , and the young women of Edinbur gh vied for his
attentions, toni ght he was t horoughly engrossed in the
entertainment of his guest. I h ad seen a small cask with a
Portuguese brand-mark burned into its side being rolled into
the kitch ens in the afternoon, a nd glasses of the ruby liquid
kept reappearing by Don Francisco’ s left hand as though by
magic through the evening.
W e cros sed the path of Jamie, propelling one of the Misses
W illiams through the figures of the dance. There were three of
them, nearly indistinguishable from one another – young,
brown-haired, comely , and all “so terribly interested, Mr .
Fraser , i n this noble Cause.” T hey made me quite tired, butJamie, ever the soul of patience, danced with them all, one by
one, and answered the same silly questions over and over .
“W ell, i t’ s a change for them to get out, poor things,” he
explained kindly . “And their fa ther ’ s a rich merchant, so His
Highness would like to encourage the sympathy of the
family .”
The Miss W illiams with him looked enthralled, and I
wondered darkly just how encouraging he was being. Then my
attention shifted, as Balmerino danced by with Lord Geor ge
Murray’ s wife. I saw the Murrays exchange af fectionate
glances as they passed, he with another of the Misses
W illiams, and felt mildly asham ed of my noticing who Jamie
danced with.
Not surprisingly , Colum wasn’ t at the ball. I wondered
whether he had had a chance to  speak to Charles beforehand,
but decided probably not; Charles looked much too cheerful
and animated to have been the recipient of bad news anytime
recently .
At one side of the Gallery , I c aught sight of two stocky
figures, almost identical in unc omfortable and unaccustomed
formal dress. It was John Simpson, Master of the
Swordmakers Guild of Glasgow , and his son, also John
Simpson. Arrived earlier in the week to present His Highness
with one of th e magnificent basket-hilted broadswords for
which they were famed throughout Scotland, the two artisans
had plainly been invited tonight to show Don Francisco the
depth of support that the Stuarts enjoyed.
Both men had thick, dark hair and beards, lightly frosted
with gra y . Simpson senior was salt with a sprinkle of pepper ,
while Simpson junior gave the impression of a dark hillside
with a rim of s now crusted lightly round its frostline, white
hairs confined to the temples an d upper cheeks. As I watched,
the older swordmaker poked his son sharply in the back and
nodded with significance tow ard one of the merchants’
daughters, hovering near the edge of the floor under her
father ’ s protection.Simpson junior gave his father a  skeptical glance, but then
shrugged, steppe d out, and of fered his arm with a bow to the
third Miss W illiams.
I watched with amusement and fascination as they whirled
out into  the steps of the dance , for Jamie, who had met the
Simpsons earlier , had told me t hat Simpson junior was quite
deaf.
“From a ll the hammering at the  for ge, I should think,” he
had said , showing me with prid e the beautiful sword he had
bought f rom the artisans. “Deaf as a stone; his father does the
talkin’, but the young one sees everything.”
I sa w the sharp  dark eyes flick rapidly across the floor
now , jud ging to a nicety the distance from one couple to the
next. Th e young swordmaster trod a little heavily , but kept the
measure of the dance well enough – at least as well as I did.
Closing my eyes, I felt the thrum of the music vibrating
through the wooden floor , from the cellos resting on it, and
assumed that was what he follow ed. Then, opening my eyes so
as not to crash into anyone, I saw Junior wince at a screeching
miscue among the violins. Perh aps he did hear some sounds,
then.
The circling of the dancers brought Kilmarnock and
myself close to the place wher e Charles and Don Francisco
stood, w arming their coattails before the huge, tile-lined
fireplace. T o my surprise, Cha rles scowled at me over Don
Francisco’ s shou lder , motioning  me away with a surreptitious
movement of one hand. Seeing  it as we turned, Kilmarnock
gave a short laugh.
“So His  Highness is afraid to have you introduced to the
Spaniard!” he said.
“Really?” I looked back over my shoulder as we whirled
away , bu t Charle s had returned t o his conversation, waving his
hands with expressive Italian gestures as he talked.
“I expect so.” Lord Kilmarnock danced skillfully , and I
was beginning to relax enough  to be able to speak, without
worrying incessantly about tripping over my skirts.“Did you see that silly broadsheet Balmerino was showing
everyone?” he asked, and when I nodded, went on, “I imagine
His Highness saw it, too. And the Spanish are suf ficiently
superstitious to be ridiculously sensitive to idiocies of that
sort. No  person of sense or breeding could take such a thing
seriously ,” he assured me, “but no doubt His Highness thinks
it b est to be safe. Spanish gold is worth a considerable
sacrifice, after all,” he adde d. Apparently including the
sacrifice of his own pride; Charles still treated the Scottish
earls and the H ighland chiefta ins like beggars at his table,
though they had at least been inv ited to the festivities tonight –
no doubt to impress Don Francisco.
“Have you noticed the pictures?” I asked, wanting to
change the subject. There were more than a hundred of them
lining th e walls of the Great Ga llery , all portraits, all of kings
and queens. And all with a most striking similarity .
“Oh, the nose?” he said, an am used smile replacing the
grim exp ression that had taken possession of his face at sight
of C harles and th e Spaniard. “Y es, of course. Do you know the
story behind it?”
The por traits, it seemed, were all the work of a single
painter , one Jacob DeW itt, who had been commissioned by
Charles II, upon that worthy’ s restoration, to produce portraits
of all the King’ s  ancestors, from the time of Robert the Bruce
onward.
“T o assu re every one of the anci entness of his lineage, and
the entire appropriateness of his restoration,” Kilmarnock
explained, a wry twist to his mouth. “I wonder if King James
will undertake a similar project when he regains the throne?”
In any case, he continued, DeW itt had painted furiously ,
completing one portrait every t wo weeks in order to comply
with the monarch’ s demand. The dif ficulty , of course, was that
DeW itt had no w ay of knowing what Charles’ s ancestors had
actually looked like, and had therefore used as sitters anyone
he could  drag into his studio, m erely equipping each portrait
with the same prominent nose, by way of ensuring a family
resemblance.“That’ s King Charles himself,” Kilmarnock said, nodding
at a full-length portrait, resplen dent in red velvet and plumed
hat. He cast a c ritical glance at the younger Charles, whose
flushed face gave evidence that he had been hospitably
keeping his guest company in his potations.
“A bette r nose, anyway ,” the Earl murmured, as though to
himself. “His mother was Polish.”
It was growing late, and th e candles in the silver
candelabra were  beginning to gutter and go out before the
gentlefolk of Edinbur gh had had their fill of wine and dancing.
Don Francisco, possibly not as accustomed as Charles to
unrestrained drinking, was nodding into his ruf f.
Jamie, having with an obvious expression of relief restored
the last Miss W illiams to her father for the journey home,
came to  join me in the corner where I had found a seat that
enabled me to slip of f my shoes under cover of my spreading
skirts. I hoped I wouldn’ t have to put them on again in a hurry .
Jamie sat down on a vacant sea t beside me, mopping his
glowing face with a lar ge white handkerchief. He reached past
me t o th e small  table, where a tray with a few leftover cakes
was sitting.
“I’m fair starved,” he said. “D ancing gives ye a terrible
appetite, and the talking’ s worse.” He popped a whole cake
into his  mouth at once, chewe d it briefly , and reached for
another .
I s aw Prince Ch arles bend over the slumped form of the
guest of honor a nd shake him b y the shoulder , to little ef fect.
The Spanish envoy’ s head was fallen back and his mouth was
slack beneath the drooping mustache. His Highness stood,
rather un steadily , and glanced about for help, but Sheridan and
T ullibardine, both elderly ge ntlemen, had fallen asleep
themselves, lean ing companion ably together like a couple of
old village sots in lace and velvet.
“Maybe you’d better give His Highness a hand?” I
suggested.
“Mmphm.”Resigned, Jamie  swallowed the rest of his cake, but before
he could  rise, I saw the younger Simpson, who had taken
quick note of the situation, nudge his father in the ribs.
Senior advance d and bowed ceremoniously to Prince
Charles, then, before the glazed prince could respond, the
swordmakers had the Spanish envoy by wrists and ankles.
W ith a heave of for ge-toughened muscles, they lifted him from
his seat, and bo re him away , gently swinging him between
them like some specimen of big game. They disappeared
through the door at the far end of the hall, followed unsteadily
by His Highness.
This rather unceremonious departure signaled the end of
the ball.
The other guests began to relax and move about, the ladies
disappearing into an anteroom to retrieve shawls and cloaks,
the gen tlemen standing about in small, impatient knots,
exchanging complaints about the time the women were taking
to make ready .
As w e were housed in Holyrood , we left by the other door ,
at the north end of the gallery , g oing through the morning and
evening drawing rooms to the main staircase.
The landing and the soaring stairwell were lined with
tapestries, their figures dim and silvery in candlelight. And
below th em stood the giant form  of Angus Mhor , his shadow
huge on the wall, wavering like  one of the tapestry figures as
they shimmered in the draft.
“My master is dead,” he said.
 
“His Highness said,” Jamie reported, “that perhaps it was
as well.” He spoke with a tone of sarcastic bitterness.
“Because of Dougal,” he ad ded, seeing my shocked
bewilderment at this statement. “Dougal has always been more
than willing to join His Highne ss in the field. Now Colum’ s
gone, Dougal is chief. And so t he MacKenzies of Leoch will
march with the H ighland army ,”  he said softly , “to victory – or
not.”The line s of grief and wearine ss were cut deep into his
face, and he didn’ t resist as I moved behind him and laid my
hands on the br oad swell of hi s shoulders. He made a small
sound of incoherent relief as m y fingertips pressed hard into
the muscles at the base of hi s neck, and let his head fall
forward, resting  on his folded arms. He was seated before the
table in our room, and piles of letters and dispatches lay neatly
stacked around him. Amid the documents lay a small
notebook, rather worn, bound in red morocco leather . Colum’ s
diary , which Jamie had taken fr om his uncle’ s rooms in hopes
that it would contain a recent entry confirming Colum’ s
decision not to support the Jacobite cause.
“Not th at it would likely sway Dougal,” he had said,
grimly thumbing the close-writt en pages, “but there’ s nothing
else to try .”
In the event, though, there had  been nothing in Colum’ s
diary for  the last three days, sav e one brief entry , clearly made
upon his return from the churchyard the day before.
Met with young Jamie and his wife. Have made my peace
with Ellen at last . And that was, of course, important – to
Colum, to Jamie, and possibly to Ellen – but of little use in
swaying the convictions of Dougal MacKenzie.
Jamie straighten ed up after a moment and turned to me.
His eyes were dark with worry and resignation.
“What i t means is that now we are committed to him,
Claire – to Char les, I mean. The re’ s less choice than there ever
was. W e must try to assure his victory .”
My mouth felt dry with too much wine. I licked my lips
before answering, to moisten them.
“I su ppose so. D amn! Why couldn’ t Colum have waited a
little lon ger? Just ’ til the morni ng, when he could have seen
Charles?”
Jamie smiled lopsidedly .
“I dinn a suppose he had so  much to say about it,
Sassenach. Few men get to choose the hour of their death.”“Colum meant to.” I had been o f two minds whether to tell
Jamie what had passed betwee n me and Colum at our first
meeting in Holyrood, but now there was no point in keeping
Colum’ s secrets.
Jamie sh ook his  head in disbelie f and sighed, his shoulders
slumping under the revelation t hat Colum had meant to take
his own life.
“I w onder then,” he murmured,  half to himself. “W as it a
sign, do ye think, Claire?”
“A sign?”
“Colum’ s death now , before he could do as he meant to
and refuse Charles’ s plea for help. Is it a sign that Charles is
destined to win his fight?”
I rem embered my last sight of C olum. Death had come for
him as he sat i n bed, a glass of brandy untouched near his
hand. H e had met it as he wished, then, clearheaded and alert;
his head  had fallen back, but hi s eyes were wide open, dulled
to th e sights he had left behind. His mouth was pressed tight,
the h abitual lines carved deep fr om nose to chin. The pain that
was his constant  companion had accompanied him as far as it
could.
“God knows,” I said at last.
“A ye?” he said, voice once m ore muf fled in his arms.
“A ye, well. I hope somebody does.”3 8  A  B A R G A I N  W I T H  T H E
D E V I L
C atarrh settled on Edinbur gh like the cloud of cold rain
that masked the Castle from sight on its hill. W ater ran day and
night in the stre ets, and if the cobbles were temporarily clean
of sewage, the r elief from stench was more than made up for
by the splatter o f expectorations that slimed every close and
wynd, a nd the choking cloud of fireplace smoke that filled
every room from waist-height to ceiling.
Cold and miserable as the wea ther was outside, I found
myself s pending a good deal of  time walking the grounds of
Holyrood and the Canongate. A faceful of rain seemed
preferable to lungfuls of woo dsmoke and germ-filled air
indoors. The sounds of coughing and sneezing rang through
the Palace, though the constraint of His Highness’ s genteel
presence caused most hawking suf ferers to spit into filthy
handerchiefs or the Delft-lined fireplaces, rather than on the
polished Scotch oak floors.
The ligh t failed early at this time of year , and I turned
back, ha lfway up the High Stre et, in order to reach Holyrood
before dark. I ha d no fear at all of assault in the darkness; even
had I not been known by now to all the Jacobite troops
occupying the city , the prevailing horror of fresh air kept
everyone indoors.
Men sti ll well enough to leave their homes on business
completed their errands with dispatch before diving thankfully
into the smoke-filled sanctuary of Jenny Ha’ s tavern, and
stayed there, nestled cozily into warm airlessness, where the
smell of damp wool, unwashed bodies, whisky , and ale nearly
succeeded in overcoming the reek of the stove.
My only fear w as of losing m y footing in the dark and
breaking an ankle on the slipp ery cobbles. The city was lit
only by the feeb le lanterns of the town watchmen, and these
had a disconcerting habit of ducking from doorway todoorway , appea ring and disappearing like fireflies. And
sometimes disappearing altogether for half an hour at a time,
as t he lantern-bearer darted in to The W orld’ s End at the
bottom of the Canongate for a life-saving draught of hot ale.
I eyed the faint glow over the Canongate kirk, estimating
how mu ch time remained ’ til d ark. W ith luck, I might have
time to stop at Mr . Haugh’ s apothecary’ s shop. While boasting
nothing of the variety to be  found in Raymond’ s Paris
emporium, Mr . Haugh did a sou nd trade in horse chestnuts and
slippery-elm ba rk, and usually was able to provide me with
peppermint and  barberry , as well. At this time of year , his
chief in come was derived from the sale of camphor balls,
considered a sovereign reme dy for colds, catarrh, and
consumption. If it was no more ef fective than modern cold
remedies, I reflected, it was no  worse, and at least smelled
invigoratingly healthy .
Despite the prevalence of red noses and white faces,
parties were held at the palace several nights a week, as the
noblesse of Edinbur gh welcomed their Prince with
enthusiasm. Another two hours, and the lanterns of servants
accompanying ball-goers would start to flicker in the High
Street.
I sighed  at the thought of another ball, attended by
sneezing gallants, paying compliments in phlegm-thickened
voices. P erhaps I’d better add so me garlic to the list; worn in a
silver pomander -locket about the neck, it was supposed to
ward of f  disease. What it actually did do, I supposed, was to
keep disease-ridden companions at a safe distance – equally
satisfactory , from my point of view .
The city was occupied by Charles’ s troops, and the
English, while not besieged, w ere at least sequestered in the
Castle ab ove. Still, news – of dubious veracity – tended to leak
in both direction s. According to Mr . Haugh, the most recent
rumor h eld that the Duke of Cum berland was gathering troops
south of Perth, with the inten t of marching north almost
immediately . I hadn’ t any id ea whether this was true; I
doubted it, in fact, recalling no mention of Cumberland’ sactivities much before the spring of 1746, which hadn’ t
arrived. Still, I could hardly ignore the rumor .
The sentry at the gate nodded me in, coughing. The sound
was taken up by  the guards stationed down the hallways and
on t he landings. Resisting the i mpulse to wave my basket of
garlic at them like a censer a s I passed, I made my way
upstairs to the a fternoon drawing room, where I was admitted
without question.
I fo und His Highness with Ja mie, Aeneas MacDonald,
O’Sullivan, His  Highness’ s secretary , and a saturnine man
named Francis T ownsend, who was lately much in His
Highness’ s good graces. Most of them were red-nosed and
sneezing, and splattered phlegm smeared the hearth before the
gracious mantel. I cast a sharp look at Jamie, who was
slumped wearily in his chair , whitefaced and drooping.
Accustomed to my forays into the city , and eager for any
intelligence regarding the English movements, the men heard
me out with great attention.
“W e are  indebted greatly to you for your news, Mistress
Fraser ,” said His Highness, with  a gracious bow and a smile.
“Y ou must tell me if there some way in which I might repay
your generous service.”
“There i s,” I said, seizing the opportunity . “I want to take
my husband home to bed. Now .”
The Prince’ s eyes bulged slightly , but he recovered himself
quickly . Not so restrained, Aeneas MacDonald broke out into a
fit o f suspiciously strangled coughing. Jamie’ s white face
blazed suddenly crimson. H e sneezed, and buried his
countenance in a handkerchief, blue eyes shooting sparks at
me over its folds.
“Ah… your husband,” said Ch arles, rallying gallantly to
the challenge. “Um…” A soft pink blush began to tint his
cheeks.
“He’ s ill,” I said, with some asperity . “Surely you can see
that? I want him to go to bed and rest.”
“Oh, r est ,” murmured MacDonald, as though to himself.I searched for some suf ficiently courtly words.
“I should be sorr y to deprive Y our Highness temporarily of
my husband’ s attendance, but  if he isn’ t allowed to take
suf ficient rest, he isn’ t likely t o go on attending you much
longer .”
Charles, recovered from his momentary discomposure,
seemed now to be finding Jamie’ s patent discomfiture
entertaining.
“T o be sure,” he said, eyeing Jamie, whose complexion
had faded now i nto a sort of mottled pallor . “W e should dislike
exceedingly the contemplation o f such a prospect as you wish,
Madam.” He inclined his head in my direction. “It shall be as
you wish, Madam. Cher  James is excu sed from attendance
upon ou r person until he shall be recovering. By all means,
take your husband to your rooms at once, and, er… undertake
what cu re seems… ah… fitting.” The corner of the Prince’ s
mouth twitched suddenly , and pulling a lar ge handkerchief
from his  pocket, he followed Jamie’ s example and buried the
lower half of his face, coughing delicately .
“Best ta ke care, Highness,” Mac Donald advised somewhat
caustically . “Y ou may catch Mr . Fraser ’ s ailment.”
“One co uld wish to have half  Mr . Fraser ’ s complaint,”
murmured Francis T ownsend, w ith no attempt at concealing
the sardonic smile that made him look like a fox in a hen coop.
Jamie, now bearing a strong resemblance to a frostbitten
tomato, rose abruptly , bowed to the Prince with a brief “I
thank ye, Highness,” and headed for the door , clutching me by
the arm.
“Let go,” I snarled as we swept past the guards in the
anteroom. “Y ou’re breaking my arm.”
“Good,” he muttered. “As soon  as I’ve got ye in private,
I’m going to break your neck.” But I caught sight of the curl of
his mouth, and knew the gruf fness was only a facade.
Once in our apa rtment, with the door safely shut, he pulled
me to him, lean ed against the door and laughed, his cheek
pressed to the top of my head.“Thank ye, Sassenach,” he said, wheezing slightly .
“Y ou’re not angry?” I asked, voice somewhat muf fled in
his shirtfront. “I didn’ t mean to embarrass you.”
“Nay , I’m no minding it.” he said, releasing me. “God, I
wouldna ha’ cared if ye’d said ye meant to set me on fire in
the Grea t Gallery , so long as I could leave His Highness and
come to rest for  a bit. I’m tired to death of the man, and every
muscle I’ve got is aching.” A sudden spasm of coughing shook
his f rame, and h e leaned against the door once more, this time
for support.
“Are you all rig ht?” I stretched up on tiptoe to feel his
forehead. I wasn’ t surprised, but was somewhat alarmed, to
feel how hot his skin was beneath my palm.
“Y ou,” I said accusingly , “have a fever!”
“A ye well, everyone’ s got a fev er , Sassenach,” he said, a
bit crossly . “Only some are hotter than others, no?”
“Don’ t quibble, ” I said, relieved that he still felt well
enough to chop logic. “T ake of f your clothes. And don’ t say
it,” I added cris ply , seeing the grin forming as he opened his
mouth to reply . “I have no designs whatever on your disease-
ridden carcass, beyond getting it into a nightshirt.”
“Oh, aye? Y e dinna think I’d benefit from the exercise?”
He t eased, beginning to unfaste n his shirt. “I thought ye said
exercise was healthy .” His laugh turned suddenly to an attack
of h oarse coughing that left hi m breathless and flushed. He
dropped the shirt on the floor , and almost immediately began
to shiver with chill.
“Much too healthy for you, my  lad.” I yanked the thick
woolen nightshirt over his head, leaving him to struggle into it
as I got him out of kilt, shoes, and stockings. “Christ, your feet
are like ice!”
“Y ou could… warm them… for  me.” But the words were
forced out between chattering teeth, and he made no protest
when I steered him toward the bed.
He was  shaking too hard to speak by the time I had
snatched a hot brick from the fire with tongs, wrapped it inflannel, and thrust it in at his feet.
The chil l was hard but brief, an d he lay still again by the
time I had set a pan of wate r to steep with a handful of
peppermint and black currant.
“What’ s that?” he asked, suspiciously , snif fing the air as I
opened another jar from my b asket. “Y e dinna mean me to
drink it,  I hope? It smells like a duck that’ s been hung ower -
long.”
“Y ou’re close,” I said. “It’ s goose grease mixed with
camphor . I’m going to rub your chest with it.”
“No!” He snatched the covers protectively up beneath his
chin.
“Y es,” I said firmly , advancing with purpose.
In th e m idst of my labors, I bec ame aware that we had an
audience. Fer gus  stood on the far side of the bed, watching the
proceedings wi th fascination, his nose running freely . I
removed my knee from Jamie’ s abdomen and reached for a
handkerchief.
“And w hat are you  doi ng here?” J amie demanded, trying
to yank the front of his nightshirt back into place.
Not noticeably disconcerted by the unfriendly tone of this
greeting, Fer gus ignored the prof fered handkerchief and wiped
his nose on his sleeve, meanwhile staring with round-eyed
admiration at the broad expanse of muscular , gleaming chest
on display .
“The skinny milord sent me to fetch a packet he says you
have for him. Do all Scotsmen have such quantities of hair
upon their chests, milord?”
“Christ! I for got all about the dispatches. W ait, I’ll take
them to Cameron myself.” Jamie began to struggle up in bed, a
process that brought his nose c lose to the site of my recent
endeavors.
“Phew!” He flapped the nightshirt in an ef fort to dispel the
penetrating aroma, and glared accusingly at me. “How am I toget this reek of f me? D’ye exp ect me to go out in company
smellin’ like a dead goose, Sassenach?”
“No, I don’ t,” I said. “I expect y ou to lie quietly in bed and
rest, or you’ll be  a dead goose.” I uncorked a fairly high-
caliber glare of my own.
“I can carry the package, milord,” Fer gus was assuring
him.
“Y ou will do no thing of the kind,” I said, noting the boy’ s
flushed cheeks and overbright eyes. I put a hand to his
forehead.
“Don’ t tell me,” said Jamie sarcastically . “He’ s got a
fever?”
“Y es, he has.”
“Ha,” he said to Fer gus with gloomy satisfaction. “Now
you’re for it. See how you  like bein’ basted.”
A short period of intense ef fort saw Fer gus tucked up in
his pallet by the fire, goose grease and medicinal hot tea
administered la vishly all round, and a clean handkerchief
deposited beneath the chin of each suf ferer .
“There,” I said, fastidiously rinsing my hands in the basin.
“Now , I  will take this p recious packet of dispatches across to
Mr . Cameron. Y ou  will  both rest, drink hot tea, res t, blow your
nose, and rest, in that order . Got it, troops?”
The tip of a long, reddened nose was barely visible above
the bedclothes. It oscillated slo wly back and forth as Jamie
shook his head.
“Drunk wi’ power ,” he remarked disapprovingly to the
ceiling. “V erra unwomanly attitude, that.”
I droppe d a kiss on his hot forehead and swung my cloak
down from its hook.
“How little you know of women, my love,” I said.
 
Ewan Cameron was in char ge of what passed for
intelligence operations at Holyrood. His quarters were at theend of the wes t wing, tucked away near the kitchens. On
purpose, I suspected, having witnessed the man’ s appetite in
action. Possibly a tapeworm, I thought, viewing the of ficer ’ s
cadaverous countenance as he opened the packet and scanned
the dispatches.
“All in order?” I asked after a moment. I had to repress the
automatic ur ge to add “sir .”
Startled from his train of thoug ht, he jerked his head up
from the dispatches and blinked at me.
“Um? Oh!” Recalled to himself, he smiled and hastened to
make apologies.
“I’m sorry , Mistress Fraser . How  impolite of me to for get
myself and leave you standing there. Y es, everything appears
to be in order –  most interesting,” he murmured to himself.
Then, snapping back to an aware ness of me, “W ould you be so
kind as to tell y our husband that I wish to discuss these with
him as soon as possible? I und erstand that he is unwell,” he
added delicately , carefully avoiding my eye. Apparently it
hadn’ t taken Aeneas MacDonal d long to relay an account of
my interview with the Prince.
“He is,” I said unhelpfully . The last thing I wanted was
Jamie leaving his bed and sittin g up poring over intelligence
dispatches all night with Camero n and Lochiel. That would be
nearly a s bad as staying up danc ing all night with the ladies of
Edinbur gh. W ell, possibly not quite  a s bad, I ame nded to
myself, recalling the three Misses W illiams.
“I’m sur e he will attend upon y ou as soon as he’ s able,” I
said, pu lling the edges of the cloak together . “I’ll tell him.”
And I would – t omorrow . Or possibly the next day . Wherever
the E nglish forces presently we re, I was positive they weren’ t
within a hundred miles of Edinbur gh.
 
A q uick peek into the bedroom  upon my return showed
two lumps, immobile beneath the bedclothes, and the sounds
of b reathing – slow and regula r , if a trifle congested – filled
the room . Reassured, I removed my cloak and sat down in thesitting ro om wit h a preventative cup of hot tea, to which I had
added a fair dollop of medicinal brandy .
Sipping slowly , I felt the liquid heat flow down the center
of my chest, spread comfortably through my abdomen, and
begin working its steady way down toward my toes, quick-
frozen after a dash across the courtyard, undertaken in
preference to the circuitous inside passage with its endless
stairs and turnings.
I hel d the cup below my chin, inhaling the pleasant, bitter
smell, feeling the heated fum es of the brandy clarify my
sinuses. Snif fing, it occurred to me to wonder exactly why , in a
city and a buildi ng plagued with colds and influenza, my own
sinuses remained unclogged.
In fact, aside fr om the childbed fever , I had not been ill
once sin ce my passage through the stone circle. That was  odd,
I t hough t; given  the standards o f hygiene and sanitation, and
the crowded conditions in whic h we frequently lived, I ought
surely to  have come down at le ast with a case of snif fles by
this time. But I remained as disgustingly healthy as always.
Plainly I was not immune to all diseases, or I would not
have had the fever . But the common communicable ones?
Some were explainable on the b asis of vaccination, of course.
I couldn’ t, for example, catch smallpox, typhus, cholera, or
yellow fever . Not that yellow fever was likely , but still. I set
down th e cup and felt my left arm, through the cloth of the
sleeve. T he vaccination scar had faded with time, but was still
prominent enough to be detectable; a roughly circular patch of
pitted skin, perhaps a half-inch in diameter .
I sh uddered briefly , reminded again of Geillis Duncan,
then pushed the thought away , diving back into a
contemplation o f my state of health in order to avoid thinking
either of  the woman who had gone to a death by fire, or of
Colum MacKenzie, the man who had sent her there.
The cup was ne arly empty , and I rose to refill it, thinking.
An acquired immunity , perhaps? I had learned in nurses’
training that colds are caused by innumerable viruses, each
distinct and ever -evolving. Once exposed to a particular virus,the instr uctor had explained, you became immune to it. Y ou
continued to catch cold as you encountered new and dif ferent
viruses, but the c hances of meeting something you hadn’ t been
exposed to before became smaller as you got older . So, he had
said, wh ile children caught an average of six colds per year ,
people in middle age caught only two, and elderly folk might
go f or years betw een colds, only because they had already met
most of the common viruses and become immune.
Now there was a  possibility , I thought. What if some types
of immunity became hereditary , as viruses and people co-
evolved? Antibodies to many diseases could be passed from
mother to child, I knew that. V ia the placenta or the breast
milk, so that th e child was im mune – temporarily – to any
disease to which the mother had been exposed. Perhaps I never
caught cold because I harbo red ancestral antibodies to
eighteenth-century viruses – benefiting from the colds caught
by all my ancestors for the past two hundred years?
I was pondering this entertaining idea, so caught up in it
that I hadn’ t bothered to sit down, but was sipping my tea
standing in the middle of the room, when a soft knock sounded
on the door .
I sighed impatiently , annoyed at being distracted. I didn’ t
bother to  set the cup down, but  came to the door prepared to
receive – and r epel – the expected inquiries about Jamie’ s
health. Likely Cameron had com e across an unclear passage in
a d ispatch, or His Highness had thought better of his
generosity in dismissing Jamie from attendance at the ball.
W ell, they would get him out of bed tonight only over my dead
and trampled body .
I ya nked open the door , and the words of greeting died in
my throat. Jack Randall stood in the shadows of the doorway .
 
The wetness of the spilled tea soaking through my skirt
brought me to my senses, but he had already stepped inside.
He l ooked me u p and down with his usual air of disdainful
appraisal, then glanced at the closed bedroom door .
“Y ou are alone?”“Y es!”
The haz el glance flickered back and forth between me and
the door , assessing my truthfulness. His face was lined from ill
health, pale from poor nutrition and a winter spent indoors, but
showed no diminution of alertness. The quick, ruthless brain
had retreated a bit further back, behind the curtain of those ice-
glazed eyes, but it was still there; no doubt of that.
Making his decision, he grasped me by the arm, scooping
up my discarded cloak with his other hand.
“Come with me.”
I would  have allowed him to chop me in pieces before I
made a sound that would cause the bedroom door to open.
W e were halfway down the corr idor outside before I felt it
safe to speak. There were no  guards stationed within the
confines of the staf f quarters, but the grounds were heavily
patrolled. He couldn’ t hope to g et me through the rockery or
the side gates without detection, let alone through the main
palace entrance. Therefore, whatever he wanted with me, it
must be a bus iness that could be conducted within the
precincts of Holyrood.
Murder , perhaps, in revenge for the injury Jamie had done
him? Stomach lurching at the  thought, I inspected him as
closely as I cou ld as we walked  swiftly through the pools of
light cast from t he candleholders on the wall. Not intended for
decoration or for graciousness, the candles in this part of the
palace w ere small and widely spaced and the flames feeble,
meant only to provide suf ficient light to assist visitors
returning to their chambers.
He wasn ’ t in uniform, and appe ared completely unarmed.
He w as dressed in nondescript homespun, with a thick coat
over plain brown breeks and hose. Nothing but the straightness
of h is carriage a nd the arrogant tilt of his unwigged head gave
evidence of his identity – he co uld easily have slipped inside
the g rounds with one of the part ies arriving for the ball, posing
as a servant.No, I decided, g lancing warily at him as we passed from
dimness to light, he wasn’ t  armed, though his hand clamped
around m y arm was hard as iro n. Still, if it was strangling he
had in mind, he wouldn’ t find m e an easy victim; I was nearly
as tall as he was, and a good deal better nourished.
As t hough he se nsed my thought, he paused near the end
of th e corridor a nd turned me to face him, hands tight above
my elbows.
“I mean you no harm,” he said, low-voiced but firm.
“T ell me another one,” I said, estimating the chances of
anyone h earing m e if I screamed  here. I knew there would be a
guard at the foo t of the stair , but that was on the other side of
two doors, a short landing, and a long staircase.
On the other hand, it was stalem ate. If he couldn’ t take me
farther , neither could I summon  aid where I was. This end of
the corridor was sparsely populated, and such residents as
there we re would undoubtedly be in the other wing now , either
attending the ball or serving at it.
He spoke impatiently .
“Don’ t be idiotic. If I wished to kill you, I could do it here.
It w ould be a great deal safer th an taking you outside. For that
matter ,” he added, “if I meant you harm, inside or out, why
should I  have brought your cloak ?” He lifted the garment from
his arm in illustration.
“How the hell should I know?”  I said, though it seemed a
definite point. “Why did  you bring it?”
“Because I wish you to go outside with me. I have a
proposal to make to you, and I will brook no chance of being
overheard.” He glanced toward the door at the end of the
corridor . Like all the others in H olyrood, it was constructed in
the cross-and-Book style, the upper four panels arranged to
form a cross, th e lower two pan els standing tall, forming the
likeness of an open Bible. Holyrood had once been an abbey .
“W ill you come into the church? W e can speak there
without fear of interruption.” This was true; the church
adjoining the palace, part of the original Abbey , wasabandoned, rendered unsafe by lack of maintenance over the
years. I hesitated, wondering what to do.
“Think, woman!” He gave me a  slight shake, then released
me and stood back. The candlelight silhouetted him, so that his
features were no more than a  dark blur facing me. “Why
should I take the risk of entering the palace?”
This was a good  question. Once he had left the shelter of
the C astle in dis guise, the streets of Edinbur gh were open to
him. He could have lurked abou t the alleys and wynds until he
caught s ight of me on my daily expeditions, and waylaid me
there. The only possible reason not to do so was the one he
gave; he needed to speak to me without risk of being overseen
or overheard.
He saw conclus ion dawn in my face, and his shoulders
relaxed slightly . He spread the cloak, holding it for me.
“Y ou have my word that yo u will return from our
conversation unmolested, Madam.”
I tried to read his expression, but nothing showed on the
thin, chiseled features. The eyes were steady , and told me no
more than would my own, seen in a looking glass.
I reached for the cloak.
“All right,” I said.
W e wen t out into the dimness of the rock garden, passing
the s entry with n o more than a nod. He recognized me, and it
was not unusual for me to go out at night, to attend to an
ur gent case of sickness in the city . The guard glanced sharply
at Jack Randall – it was usuall y Murtagh who accompanied
me, if Jamie could not – but dr essed as he was, there was no
hint of the Captain’ s real iden tity . He returned the guard’ s
glance w ith indif ference, and the door of the palace closed
behind us, leaving us in the chill dark outside.
It had been rain ing earlier , but t he storm was breaking up.
Thick cl ouds shredded and flew overhead, driven by a wind
that whipped aside my cloak and plastered my skirt to my legs.
“This way .” I clutched the heavy velvet close around me,
bent my head a gainst the wind, and followed Jack Randall’ slean figure through the path of the rockery .
W e e mer ged at t he lower end, an d after a pause for a quick
look aro und, crossed rapidly across the grass to the portal of
the church.
The doo r had warped and hung  ajar; it had been disused
for several years because of s tructural faults that made the
building dangerous, and no one had troubled to repair it. I
kicked my way through a barrier of dead leaves and rubbish,
ducking from the flickering moonlight of the palace’ s back
garden into the absolute darkness of the church.
Or n ot quite abs olute; as my eyes grew accustomed to the
dark, I could see the tall lines of the pillars that marched down
each sid e of the nave, and the delicate stonework of the
enormous window at the far end, glass mostly gone.
A movement in the shadows showed me where Randall
had gone; I tur ned between the pillars and found him in a
space w here a recess once used as a baptismal font had left a
stone led ge along the wall. T o either side were pale blotches
on t he walls; t he memorial tablets of those buried in the
church. Others lay flat, embedded in the floor on either side of
the central aisle, the names blurred by the traf fic of feet.
“All right,” I said. “W e can’ t be overheard now . What do
you want of me?”
“Y our sk ill as a physician, and your complete discretion. In
exchange for such information as I possess regarding the
movements and plans of the Elector ’ s troops,” he answered
promptly .
That rather took my breath aw ay . Whatever I had been
expecting, it wasn’ t this. He couldn’ t possibly mean…
“Y ou’re looking for medical treatment?” I asked, making
no ef for t to disguise the mingled  horror and amazement in my
voice. “F rom me? I understood that you… er , I mean…” W ith
a ma jor ef fort o f will, I stopped myself floundering and said
firmly , “Surely you have already received whatever medical
treatment is possible? Y ou app ear to be in reasonably goodcondition.” Exte rnally , at least. I bit my lip, suppressing an
ur ge toward hysteria.
“I am informed that I am fortuna te to be alive, Madam,” he
answered coldly . “The point is debatable.” He set the lantern
in a nich e in the wall, where the scooped basin of a piscina lay
dry and empty in its recess.
“I assume your inquiry to be motivated by medical
curiosity rather than concern for  my welfare,” he went on. The
lanternlight, shed at waist height, illuminated him from the
ribs downward, leaving head an d shoulders hidden. He laid a
hand on the wai stband of his breeches, turning slightly toward
me.
“Do you wish to inspect the injury , in order to judge the
ef fectiveness of treatment?” The shadows hid his face, but the
splinters of ice in his voice were tipped with poison.
“Perhaps later ,” I said, as cool as he. “If not yourself, for
whom do you seek my skill?”
He hesitated, but it was far too late for reticence.
“For my brother .”
“Y our brother?”  I couldn’ t keep the shock from my voice.
“Alexander?”
“Since m y elder brother W illiam is, so far as I know ,
virtuously engaged in stewardship of the family estates in
Sussex, and in need of no assistance,” he said dryly . “Y es, my
brother Alex.”
I spr ead my hands on the cold stone of a sarcophagus to
steady myself.
“T ell me about it,” I said.
 
It was a simple enough story , a nd a sad one. Had it been
anyone other than Jonathan Randall who told it, I might have
found myself prey to sympathy .
Deprived of his employment with the Duke of
Sandringham because of the scandal over Mary Hawkins, andtoo frail of health to secure another appointment, Alexander
Randall had been forced to seek aid from his brothers.
“W illiam sent him two pounds and a letter of earnest
exhortations.” Jack Randall leaned back against the wall,
crossing his ankles. “W illiam is a very earnest sort, I’m afraid.
But he wasn’ t p repared to have Alex come home to Sussex.
W illiam’ s wife is a bit… extreme, shall we say? in her
religious opinions.” There was a wisp of amusement in his
voice that suddenly made me  like him for a moment. In
dif ferent circumstances, might he have been like the great-
grandson he resembled?
The sudden thought of Frank so  unsettled me that I missed
his next remark.
“I’m sor ry . What did you say? ” I clutched my left hand
with my right, fi ngers pinching tight on my gold wedding ring.
Frank was gone. I must stop thinking of him.
“I sa id that I had procured rooms for Alex near the Castle,
so that I might look in on him myself, as my funds did not
stretch far enough to allow of e mploying a proper servant for
him.”
But the occupati on of Edinbur gh had of course made such
attendance dif fic ult, and Alex R andall had been left more or
less to his own  devices for the past month, aside from the
intermittent of fic es of a woman who came in to clean now and
then. In  ill health to start with, his condition had been
worsened by cold weather , poor diet, and squalid conditions
until, ser iously a larmed, Jack Randall had been moved to seek
my help. And to of fer for that help, the betrayal of his King.
“Why would you come to me? ” I asked at last, turning
from the plaque.
He looked faintly surprised.
“Because of who you are.” His l ips curved in a slight, self-
mocking smile. If one seeks to sell one’ s soul, is it not proper
to go to the powers of darkness?”
“Y ou really think that I’m a po wer of darkness, do you?”
Plainly he did; he was more than capable of mockery , but therehad been none in his original proposal.
“Aside f rom the stories about you in Paris, you told me so
yourself,” he pointed out. “When I let you go from
W entworth.” He turned in the dark, shifting himself on the
stone ledge.
“That was a ser ious mistake,” he said softly . “Y ou should
never ha ve left that place alive,  dangerous creature. And yet I
had no choice; your life was the price he set. And I would
have paid still higher stakes than that, for what he gave me.”
I made a slight hissing noise, which I muf fled at once, but
too l ate to stop him hearing me. He half-sat on the ledge, one
hip resting on t he stone, one leg stretched down to balance
him. The moon broke through the scudding clouds outside,
backlighting him through the broken window . In the dimness,
head half-turned and the lines of cruelty around his mouth
erased b y darkness, I could mistake him again, as I had once
before, for a man I had loved. For Frank.
Y et I had betray ed that man; because of my choice, that
man would never be. For the sins of the fathers shall be visited
on the childr en… and thou shalt destr oy him, r oot and branch,
so th at h is name  shall no mor e be known among the tribes of
Israel .
“Did he tell you?” the light, pleasant voice asked from the
shadows. “Did he ever tell yo u all the things that passed
between us, him and me, in tha t small room at W entworth?”
Through my shock and rage, I noticed that he obeyed Jamie’ s
injunction; not once did he use his name. “He.” “Him.” Never
“Jamie.” That was mine.
My teet h were clenched tight, but I forced the words
through them.
“He told me. Everything.”
He made a small sound, half a sigh.
“Whether the idea pleases you or not, my dear , we are
linked, y ou and I. I cannot say it pleases me, but I admit the
truth of it. Y ou k now , as I do, the touch of his skin – so warm,
is he  not? Almost as though he b urned from within. Y ou knowthe smell of his sweat and the roughness of the hairs on his
thighs. Y ou know  the sound that  he makes at the last, when he
has lost himself. So do I.”
“Be quiet,” I said. “Be still!”  He ignored me, leaning back,
speaking thoughtfully , as though to himself. I recognized, with
a fresh burst of rage, the impuls e that led him to this – not the
intention, as I had thought, to upset me, but an overwhelming
ur ge to talk of a beloved; to rehearse aloud and live again
vanished details . For after all, to whom might he speak of
Jamie in this way , but to me?
“I am leaving!” I said loudly , and whirled on my heel.
“W ill you leave?” said the calm voice behind me. “I can
deliver General Hawley into yo ur hands. Or you can let him
take the Scottish army . Y our choice, Madam.”
I had  the strong  ur ge to reply that General Hawley wasn’ t
worth it.  But I thought of the Sc ottish chieftains now quartered
in H olyroodhouse – Kilmarnoc k and Balmerino and Lochiel,
only a few feet away on the other side of the abbey wall. Of
Jamie hi mself. Of the thousands of clansmen they led. W as the
chance o f victory worth the sacr ifice of my feelings? And was
this the turning point, again a  place of choice? If I didn’ t
listen, if  I didn’ t accept the ba r gain Randall proposed, what
then?
I turned, slowly . “T alk, then,” I said. “If you must.” He
seemed unmoved by my anger , and unworried by the
possibility that I would refuse him. The voice in the dark
church was even, controlled as a lecturer ’ s.
“I w onder , you know ,” he said . “Whether you have had
from him as much as I?” He til ted his head to one side, sharp
features coming into focus as he moved out of the shadow .
The fugitive light caught him momentarily from the side,
lighting the pale hazel of his eyes and making them shine, like
those of a beast glimpsed hiding in the bushes.
The note of triumph in hi s voice was faint, but
unmistakable.“I,” he said sof tly , “I have had  him as you could never
have him. Y ou are a woman; you cannot understand, even
witch as you are. I have held the soul of his manhood, have
taken from him what he has take n from me. I know him, as he
now knows me. W e are bound, he and I, by blood.”
I give ye my Body , that we T wo may be One…
“Y ou choose a v ery odd way of  seeking my help,” I said,
my voic e shakin g. My hands we re clenched in the folds of my
skirt, the fabric cold and bunched between my fingers.
“Do I? I think it best you und erstand, Madam. I do not
beseech your pity , do not call up on your power as a man might
seek mercy from a woman, depending upon what people call
womanly sympathy . For that cause, you might come to my
brother on his own account.” A  lock of dark hair fell loose
across his forehead; he brushed it back with one hand.
“I prefer that it be a straight bar gain made between us,
Madam; of service rendered and price paid – for realize,
Madam, that my feelings toward you are much as yours
toward me must be.”
That was a shoc k; while I strug gled to find an answer , he
went on.
“W e are  linked, you and I, throu gh the body of one man –
through him . I would have no such link fo rmed through the
body of my bro ther; I seek you r help to heal his body , but I
take no risk that his soul shall fall prey to you. T ell me, then; is
the price I of fer acceptable to you?”
I turned away from him and wal ked down the center of the
echoing nave. I was shaking so hard that my steps felt
uncertain, and the shock of the  hard stone beneath my soles
jolted m e. The tracery of the great window over the disused
altar sto od black against the wh ite of racing clouds, and dim
shafts of moonlight lit my path.
At the end of the nave, as far as I could get from him, I
stopped and pressed my hands against the wall for support. It
was too dark even to see the letters of the marble tablet under
my h ands, but I could feel the c ool, sharp lines of the carving.The curve of a small skull, resting on crossed thigh bones, a
pious ve rsion of the jolly Roger . I let my head fall forward,
forehead to forehead with the invisible skull, smooth as bone
against my skin.
I waited, eyes closed, for my gor ge to subside, and the
heated pulse that throbbed in my temples to cool.
It m akes no dif fe rence, I told myself. No matter what he is.
No matter what he says.
W e ar e linked, y ou and I, thr ough the body of one man …
Y es, but  not through Jamie. Not thr ough him!  I insisted, to
him, to myself. Y es, you took hi m, you bastard! But I took him
back, I freed him from you. Y ou have no par t of him!  But the
sweat that trickled down my ri bs and the sound of my own
sobbing breath belied my conviction.
W as this  the price I must pay for the loss of Frank? A
thousand lives that might be saved, perhaps, in compensation
for that one loss?
The dark mass of the altar lo omed to my right, and I
wished with all my heart that t here might be some presence
there, w hatever its nature; something to turn to for an answer .
But ther e was no one here in Holyrood; no one but me. The
spirits of the dead kept their own counsel, silent in the stones
of wall and floor .
I tried to put Jack Randall out of my mind. If it weren’ t
him, if it were a ny other man w ho asked, would I go? There
was Alex Randall to be consider ed, all other things aside. “For
that cau se, you might come to my brother on his own
account,” the Captain had sa id. And of course I would.
Whatever I might of fer him in the way of healing, could I
withhold it because of the man who asked it?
It was a long time before I str aightened, pushing myself
wearily erect, my hands damp and slick on the curve of the
skull. I felt drained and weak, my neck aching and my head
heavy , a s though  the sickness in  the city had laid its hand on
me after all.
He was still there, patient in the cold dark.“Y es,” I said ab ruptly , as soon as I came within speaking
distance. “All right. I’ll come tomorrow , in the forenoon.
Where?”
“Ladywalk W ynd,” he said. “Y ou know it?”
“Y es.” Edinbur gh was a small city – no more than the
single H igh Street, with the tiny , ill-lit wynds and closes
opening of f it. Ladywalk W ynd was one of the poorer ones.
“I w ill meet y ou there,” he said. “I shall have the
information for you.” He slid to his feet and took a step
forward, then stood, waiting for me to move. I saw that he
didn’ t want to pass close by me, in order to reach the door .
“Afraid of me, are you?” I said, with a humorless laugh.
“Think I’ll turn you into a toadstool?”
“No,” h e said, surveying me c almly . “I do not fear you,
Madam. Y ou cannot have it both  ways, you know . Y ou sought
to te rrify me at W entworth, by giving me the day of my death.
But hav ing told me that, you ca nnot now threaten me, for if I
shall die  in April of next year , you cannot harm me now , can
you?”
Had I had a knife with me, I might have shown him
otherwise, in a soul-satisfying moment of impulse. But the
doom of  prophecy lay on me, and the weight of a thousand
Scottish lives. He was safe from me.
“I k eep my dista nce, Madam,” he said, “merely because I
would prefer to take no chance of touching you.”
I laughed once more, this time genuinely .
“And tha t, Captain,” I said, “is an impulse with which I am
entirely in sympathy .” I turned and left the church, leaving him
to follow as he would.
I had  no  need to ask or to wonder whether he would keep
his word. He had freed me once from W entworth, because he
had given his word to do so. His word, once given, was his
bond. Jack Randall was a gentleman.
 What di d you feel, when I gave my body to Jack Randall?
Jamie had asked me.
Rage , I had said. Sickness. Horr or .
I lea ned against the door of the  sitting room, feeling them
all again . The fire had died out  and the room was cold. The
smell of  camphorated goose grease tingled in my nostrils. It
was quiet, save for the heavy ra sp of breathing from the bed,
and the faint sound of the wind, passing by the six-foot walls.
I k nelt at the he arth and began to rebuild the fire. It had
gone out completely , and I push ed back the half-burnt log and
brushed the ashes away before  breaking the kindling into a
small heap in the center of the h earthstone. W e had wood fires
in Holyrood, not peat. Unfortunate, I thought; a peat fire
wouldn’ t have gone out so easily .
My hand s shook  a little, and I d ropped the flint box twice
before I  succeeded in striking a spark. The cold, I said to
myself. It was very cold in here.
Did he tell you all the things that passed between us?  said
Jack Randall’ s mocking voice.
“All I need to know ,” I muttered to myself, touching a
paper sp ill to the tiny flame and carrying it from point to point,
setting the tinder aglow in half a dozen spots. One at a time, I
added small sticks, poking each one into the flame and holding
it th ere until the  fire caught. When the pile of kindling was
burning merrily , I reached back and caught the end of the big
log, lifting it c arefully into the heart of the fire. It was
pinewood; green , but with a little sap, bubbling from a split in
the wood in a tiny golden bead.
Crystallized and frozen with age, it would make a drop of
amber , h ard and permanent as g emstone. Now , it glowed for a
moment with the sudden heat, p opped and exploded in a tiny
shower of sparks, gone in an instant.
“All I need to know ,” I whispered. Fer gus’ s pallet was
empty; waking and finding hims elf cold, he had crawled of f in
search of a warm haven.He w as curled u p in Jamie’ s bed , the dark head and the red
one resting side by side on the pillow , mouths slightly open as
they snored peacefully together .  I couldn’ t help smiling at the
sight, but I didn’ t mean to sleep on the floor myself.
“Out you go,” I  murmured to Fer gus, manhandling him to
the edge of the bed, and rolling him into my arms. He was
light-boned and thin for a ten-ye ar -old, but still awfully heavy .
I g ot him to his  pallet without dif ficulty and plunked him in,
still unconscious, then came back to Jamie’ s bed.
I u ndressed slowly , standing by  the bed, looking down at
him. He  had turned onto his side  and curled himself up against
the cold . His lashes lay long and curving against his cheek;
they were a deep auburn, nearly black at the tips, but a pale
blond ne ar the roots. It gave him  an oddly innocent air , despite
the long, straight nose and the firm lines of mouth and chin.
Clad in my chemise, I slid into bed behind him, snuggling
against the wide, warm back in its woolen nightshirt. He
stirred a  little, coughing, and I put a hand on the curve of his
hip to soothe him. He shifted, curling further and thrusting
himself back against me with a small exhalation of awareness.
I put  my  arm around his waist, m y hand brushing the soft mass
of his testicles. I  could rouse him, I knew , sleepy as he was; it
took very little to bring him standing, no more than a few firm
strokes of my fingers.
I did n’ t want to disturb his rest, though, and contented
myself with gently patting his belly . He reached back a lar ge
hand and clumsily patted my thigh in return.
“I love you,” he muttered, half-awake.
“I know ,” I said, and fell asleep at once, holding him.3 9  F A M I L Y  T I E S
I t w as not quite a slum, but the next thing to it. I stepped
gingerly aside to avoid a substantial puddle of filth, left by the
emptying of chamber pots fr om the windows overhead,
awaiting removal by the next hard rain.
Randall caught my elbow to save my slipping on the slimy
cobblestones. I stif fened at the touch, and he withdrew his
hand at once.
He saw my glance at the crumbling doorpost, and said
defensively , “I couldn’ t af ford t o move him to better quarters.
It isn’ t so bad inside.”
It wasn’ t – quite. Some ef fort had been made at furnishing
the room comfortably , at least. There was a lar ge bowl and
ewer , a sturdy ta ble with a loaf,  a cheese, and a bottle of wine
upon it, and the bed was equipped with a feather mattress, and
several thick quilts.
The man who la y on the mattress had thrown of f the quilts,
overheated by the ef fort of coug hing, I assumed. He was quite
red in the face, and the force of his coughing shook the bed
frame, sturdy as it was.
I cr ossed to th e window and threw it up, disregarding
Randall’ s exclamation of protest. Cold air swept into the
stifling room, and the stench of unwashed flesh, unclean linen,
and overflowing chamber pot lightened a bit.
The coughing gradually eased, and Alexander Randall’ s
flushed countenance faded to a pasty white. His lips were
slightly blue, and his chest labored as he fought to recover his
breath.
I gla nced around the room, but d idn’ t see anything suitable
to my purpose. I opened my m edical kit and drew out a stif f
sheet of  parchment. It was a trifle frayed at the edges, but
would st ill serve. I sat down on the edge of the bed, smiling as
reassuringly at Alexander as I could manage.“It was… kind of you… to come,” he said, struggling not
to cough between words.
“Y ou’ll be better in a moment, ” I said. “Don’ t talk, and
don’ t fight the cough. I’ll need to hear it.”
His shirt was unfastened already; I spread it apart to
expose a  shocki ngly sunken chest. It was nearly fleshless; the
ribs were clearly visible from abdomen to clavicle. He had
always been thin, but the las t year ’ s illness had left him
emaciated.
I ro lled the par chment into a tube and placed one end
against his chest, my ear agai nst the other . It was a crude
stethoscope, but amazingly ef fective.
I listened at various spots, instructing him to breathe
deeply . I didn’ t need to tell him to cough, poor boy .
“Roll onto your stomach for a moment.” I pulled up the
shirt and listened, then tapped g ently on his back, testing the
resonance over both lungs. The  bare flesh was clammy with
sweat under my fingers.
“All right. Onto your back aga in. Just lie still, now , and
relax. This won’ t hurt at all.” I kept up the soothing talk as I
checked the whites of his eyes,  the swollen lymph glands in
his neck, the coated tongue and inflamed tonsils.
“Y ou’ve a touch of catarrh,” I said, patting his shoulder .
“I’ll brew you something that will ease the cough.
Meanwhile…” I  pointed a toe distastefully at the lidded china
receptacle under the bed, and g lanced at the man who stood
waiting by the door , back bra ced and rigid as though on
parade.
“Get rid of that,”  I ordered. Randall glared at me, but came
forward and stooped to obey .
“Not out the window!” I said sharply , as he made a move
toward it. “T ake it downstairs.” He about-faced and left
without looking at me.
Alexander drew  a shallow breath as the door closed behind
his b rother . He s miled up at me,  hazel eyes glowing in his paleface. The skin was nearly transp arent, stretched tight over the
bones of his face.
“Y ou’d better hurry , before Johnny comes back. What is
it?”
His dark hair was disordered b y the coughing; trying to
restrain the feelings it roused in me, I smoothed it for him. I
didn’ t want to tell him, but he clearly knew already .
“Y ou have got catarrh. Y ou also have tuberculosis –
consumption.”
“And?”
“And congestive heart failure,” I said, meeting his eyes
straight on.
“Ah. I thought…  something of the kind. It flutters in my
chest so metimes… like a very small bird.” He laid a hand
lightly over his heart.
I c ouldn ’ t bear the look of his chest, heaving under its
impossible burd en, and I gently  closed his shirt and fastened
the tie at the neck. One long, white hand grasped mine.
“How long?” he said. His tone was light, almost
unconcerned, displaying no more than a mild curiosity .
“I don’ t know ,” I said. “That’ s the truth. I don’ t know .”
“But not long,” he said, with certainty .
“No. Not long. Months perhaps, but almost surely less than
a year .”
“Can you… stop the coughing?”
I r eache d for my kit. “Y es. I ca n help it, at least. And the
heart pa lpitations; I can make y ou a digitalin extract that will
help.” I found t he small packet of dried foxglove leaves; it
would take a little time to brew them.
“Y our b rother ,” I said, not look ing at him. “Do you want
me-”
“No,” he said, d efinitely . One corner of his mouth curved
up, a nd he looked so like Frank that I wanted momentarily toweep for him.
“No,” he said. “He’ll know already , I think. W e’ve
always… known things about each other .”
“Have you, then?” I asked, lo oking directly at him. He
didn’ t turn away from my eyes, but smiled faintly .
“Y es,” he said softly . “I know about him. It doesn’ t
matter .”
Oh, doesn’ t it? I thought. Not to you, perhaps. Not trusting
either my face o r my voice, I turned away and busied myself
in lighting the small alcohol lamp I carried.
“He is  m y brother ,” th e soft voice said  behind me. I took a
deep breath and steadied my hands to measure out the leaves.
“Y es,” I said, “at least he’ s that.”
 
Since news had spread of Cope’ s amazing defeat at
Prestonpans, of f ers of support, of men and money , poured in
from the north. In some cases, these of fers even materialized:
Lord Ogilvy , the eldest son of the Earl of Airlie, brought six
hundred of his father ’ s tenants, while Stewart of Appin
appeared at the head of four hu ndred men from the shires of
Aberdeen and Banf f. Lord P itsligo was single-handedly
responsible for most of the Highland cavalry , bringing in a
lar ge number of gentlemen and their servants from the
northeastern counties, all well mounted and well armed – at
least by comparison with some of the miscellaneous clansmen,
who came armed with claymores saved by their grandsires
from the Rising of the ’15, rus ty axes, and pitchforks lately
removed from the more homely tasks of cleaning cow-byres.
They we re a motley crew , but none the less dangerous for
that, I reflected, making my way through a knot of men
gathered round an itinerant knif egrinder , who was sharpening
dirks, razors, and scythes with perfect indif ference. An English
soldier f acing th em might be ris king tetanus rather than instant
death, but the results were likely to be the same.
While Lord Lewis Gordon, the Duke of Gordon’ s younger
brother , had come to do homage to Charles in Holyrood,holding out the glittering prospect of raising the whole of clan
Gordon, it was a long way from hand-kissing to the actual
provisioning of men.
And the Scottish Lowlands, while perfectly willing to
cheer loudly at news of Charles’ s victory , were singularly
unwilling to send men to support him; nearly the whole of the
Stuart army was composed of Highlanders, and likely to
remain s o. The Lowlands hadn’ t been a total washout, though;
Lord Geor ge Murray had told me that levies of food, goods,
and mo ney on the southern b ur ghs had resulted in a very
useful sum being contributed to the army’ s treasury , which
might tide them over for a time.
“W e’ve gotten fifty-five hundred pounds from Glasgow ,
alone. Though it’ s but a pittan ce, compared to the promised
moneys from France and Spain,” His Lordship had confided to
Jamie. “But I’m not inclined to turn up my nose at it,
particularly as His Highness has had nothing from France but
soothing words, and no gold.”
Jamie, who knew just how unlik ely the French gold was to
materialize, had merely nodded.
 
“Have ye found out anything more today , mo duinne? ” he
asked me as I came in. He had a half-written dispatch in front
of him, and stuck his quill into  the inkpot to wet it again. I
pulled the damp hood of f my hair with a crackle of static
electricity , nodding.
“There’ s a rumor that General Hawley is forming cavalry
units in the south. He has orders for the formation of eight
regiments.”
Jamie gr unted. Given the Highlanders’ aversion to cavalry ,
this wasn’ t good news. Absentmindedly , he rubbed his back,
where the hoofprint-shaped bruise from Prestonpans had all
but faded.
“I’ll put  it down for Colonel Cameron, then,” he said.
“How good a r umor do ye think it is, Sassenach?” Almost
automatically , h e glanced over his shoulder , to be sure wewere alo ne. He called me “Sassenach” now only in privacy ,
using the formality of “Claire” in public.
“Y ou can take it to the bank,” I said. “I mean, it’ s good.”
It wasn’ t a rumor at all; it was the latest bit of intelligence
from Jac k Rand all, the latest in stallment payment on the debt
he insisted on assuming for my care of his brother .
Jamie knew , of course, that I visited Alex Randall, as well
as th e sick of the Jacobite army . What he didn’ t know , and
what I could never tell him, was that once a week – sometimes
more of ten – I would meet Jack Randall, to hear what news
seeped into Edinbur gh Castle from the South.
Sometimes he came to Alex’ s  room when I was there;
other tim es, I would be coming  home in the winter twilight,
watching my footing on the slippery cobbles of the Royal
Mile, when suddenly a stick-straight form in brown homespun
would beckon from the mouth of a close, or a quiet voice
come ou t of the mist behind my shoulder . It was unnerving;
like being haunted by Frank’ s ghost.
It w ould have be en simpler in many ways for him to leave
a letter for me at Alex’ s lodgin g, but he would have nothing
put in writing, and I could see his point. If such a letter was
ever found, even unsigned, it co uld implicate not only him but
Alex as well. As it was, Edinbur gh teemed with strangers;
volunteers to King James’ s standard, curious visitors from
south and north, foreign envoys from France and Spain, spies
and informers in plenty . The o nly people not abroad on the
streets were the of ficers and me n of the English garrison, who
remained mewed up in the Castle. So long as no one heard him
speak to  me, no one would recog nize him for what he was, nor
think an ything odd of our enco unters, even were we seen –
and we seldom were, such were his precautions.
For my part, I was just as pleased; I would have had to
destroy anything  put in writing . While I doubted that Jamie
would recognize Randall’ s hand, I couldn’ t explain a regular
source of information without outright lying. Far better to
make it appear that the information he gave me was merely
part of the gleanings of my daily rounds.The drawback, of course, was that by treating Randall’ s
contributions in the same light a s the other rumors I collected,
they mi ght be discounted or ignored. Still, while I believed
that Jack Randall was supplyin g information in good faith –
assuming one could entertain such a concept in conjunction
with the  man – it didn’ t necessa rily follow that it was always
correct. As well to have it regarded skeptically .
I r elayed the ne ws of Hawley’ s new regiments with the
usual faint twinge of guilt at m y quasi deception. However , I
had concluded that while honesty between husband and wife
was essential, there was such a thing as carrying it too bloody
far . And I saw  no reason why the supplying of useful
information to the Jacobites should cause Jamie further pain.
“The Duke of Cumberland is still waiting for his troops to
return from Flanders,” I added. “And the siege of Stirling
Castle is getting nowhere.”
Jamie grunted, scribbling busily . “That much I knew; Lord
Geor ge had a di spatch from Francis T ownsend two days ago;
he holds the tow n, but the ditche s His Highness insisted on are
wasting men and time. There’ s  no need for them; they’d do
better just to batter the Castle from a distance with cannon fire,
and then storm it.”
“So why are they digging ditches?”
Jamie waved a hand distractedly , still concentrating on his
writing. His ears were pink with frustration.
“Because the Italian army dug ditches when they took
V erano Castle, which is the only siege His Highness has seen,
so plainly that’ s how it must be done, aye?”
“Och, aye,” I said.
It w orked; he looked up at m e and laughed, his eyes
slanting half-shut with it.
“That’ s a verra fair try , Sassen ach,” he said. “What else
can ye say?”
“Settle for the Lord’ s Prayer in Gaelic, would you?” I
asked.“No,” he said, scattering sand across his dispatch. He got
up, k issed me br iefly , and reached for his coat. “But I’ll settle
for some supper . Come along, Sassenach. W e’ll find a nice,
cozy tavern and I’ll teach you a lot of things ye mustn’ t say in
public. They’re all fresh in my mind.”
 
Stirling Castle fell at last. The  cost had been high, the
likelihood of holding it low , a nd the benefit in keeping it
dubious. Still, the ef fect on Charles was euphoric – and
disastrous.
“I have succeed ed at last in convincing Murray – such a
stubborn fool as he is!” Charles interjected, frowning. Then he
remembered his victory , and beamed around the room once
more. “I have pr evailed, I say , though. W e march into England
on this day a week, to reclaim all  of my Father ’ s lands!”
The Scottish chieftains gathere d in the morning drawing
room glanced at each other , and there was considerable
coughing and shifting of weight. The overall mood didn’ t
seem to be one of wild enthusiasm at the news.
“Er , Y ou r High ness,” Lord Kilmarnock began, carefully .
“W ould it not be wiser to consider…?”
They tried. They all tried. Scotland, they pointed out,
already belonged  to Charles, loc k, stock, and barrel. Men were
still pouring in from the north, while from the south there
seemed little promise of suppor t. And the Scottish lords were
all too aware th at the Highlanders, while fierce fighters and
loyal fol lowers, were also farmers. Fields needed to be tilled
for the spring p lanting; cattle needed to be provisioned for
overwintering. Many of the men would resist going deeply
into the South in the winter months.
“And th ese men – they are not my subjects? They go not
where I command them? Nonsense,” Charles said firmly . And
that was that. Almost.
“James, my friend! W ait, I spe ak with you a moment in
private, if you p lease.” His Highness turned from a few sharp
words with Lord Pitsligo, his long, stubborn chin softening a
bit as he waved a hand at Jamie.I did n’ t think I was included in t his invitation. I hadn’ t any
intention of leaving, though, an d settled more firmly into one
of th e gold dam ask chairs as the Jacobite lords and chieftains
filed out, muttering to each other .
“Ha!” Charles snapped his fing ers contemptuously in the
direction of the closing door . “O ld women, all of them! They
will see. So will my cousin Louis, so will Philip – do I need
their help? I show them all.” I sa w the pale, manicured fingers
touch briefly at a spot just over  his breast. A faint rectangular
outline s howed through the silk of his coat. He was carrying
Louise’ s miniature; I had seen it.
“I wish Y our Highness every good fortune in the
endeavor ,” Jamie murmured, “but…”
“Ah, I thank you, cher  James! Y ou  at least believe in me!”
Charles threw an arm about Jamie’ s shoulders, massaging his
deltoids af fectionately .
“I am desolated that you will no t accompany me, that you
will not be at my  side to receive  the applause of my subjects as
we march into England,” Charles said, squeezing vigorously .
“I won’ t?” Jamie looked stunned.
“Alas, mon cher ami , duty demands of you a great
sacrifice. I know how much your great heart yearns for the
glories of battle, but I require you for another task.”
“Y ou do?” said Jamie.
“What?” I said bluntly .
Charles cast a glance of well-mannered dislike in my
direction, then turned back to Jamie and resumed the
bonhomie.
“It i s a task of the greatest impo rt, my James, and one that
only you can d o. It is true that men flock to my Father ’ s
standard; more come every day . Still, we must not haste to feel
secure, no? By such luck, your kinsmen the MacKenzies have
come to  my aid. But you have to your family another side,
eh?”
“No,” Jamie said, a look of horror dawning on his face.“But ye s,” said Charles, with a final squeeze. He swung
around to face J amie, beaming. “Y ou will go to the north, to
the land  of your fathers, and return to me at the head of the
men of clan Fraser!”4 0  T H E  F O X ’ S  L A I R
“D o you know your grandfather well?” I asked, waving
away an unseasonable deerfly that seemed unable to make up
its mind whether I or the horse would make a better meal.
Jamie shook his head.
“No. I’ve heard he acts like a terrible auld monster , but ye
shouldna be scairt of him.” He smiled at me as I swatted at the
deerfly with the end of my shawl. “I’ll be with you.”
“Oh, crusty old gentlemen don’ t bother me,” I assured
him. “I’ve seen a good many of those in my time. Soft as
butter underneath, the most of them. I imagine your
grandfather ’ s much the same.”
“Mm, no,” he replied thoughtfully . “He really is  a terrible
auld monster . It’ s only , if ye act scairt of him, it makes him
worse. Like a beast scenting blood, ye ken?”
I c ast a l ook ahead, where the fa r -of f hills that hid Beaufort
Castle suddenly loomed in a rather sinister manner . T aking
advantage of my momentary lack of attention, the deerfly
made a strafing run past my left ear . I squeaked and ducked to
the s ide, and the  horse, taken aback by this sudden movement,
shied in a startled manner .
“Hey! Cuir stad !” Jamie dove sideways to grab my reins,
dropping his own. Better schooled than my own mount, his
horse s norted, but accommod ated this maneuver , merely
flicking its ears in a complacently superior way .
Jamie dug his k nees into his horse’ s sides, pulling mine to
a stop alongside.
“Now then,” he said, narrowed eyes following the zigzag
flight of the humming deerfly . “ Let him light, Sassenach, and
I’ll get him.” H e waited, hands raised at the ready , squinting
slightly in the sunlight.
I s at like a mild ly nervous statue, half-hypnotized by the
menacing buzz. The heavy winged body , deceptively slow ,hummed lazily back and forth between the horse’ s ears and my
own. The horse’ s ears twitched violently , an impulse with
which I was in complete sympathy .
“If t hat thing lands in my ear , Jamie, I’m going to-” I
began.
“Shh!” he ordered, leaning forward in anticipation, left
hand cupped like a panther abo ut to strike. “Another second,
and I’ll have him.”
Just then I saw  the dark blob alight on his shoulder .
Another deerfly , seeking a basking place. I opened my mouth
again.
“Jamie…”
“Hush!” He clapped his hands together triumphantly on
my tormentor , a split second be fore the deerfly on his collar
sank its fangs into his neck.
Scottish clansm en fought according to their ancient
traditions. Disdaining strategy , tactics, and subtlety , their
method of attack was simplicity itself. Spotting the enemy
within range, they dropped their  plaids, drew their swords, and
char ged the foe, shrieking at th e tops of their lungs. Gaelic
shrieking being  what it is, this method was more often
successful than not. A good ma ny enemies, seeing a mass of
hairy , bare-limbed banshees be aring down on them, simply
lost all nerve and fled.
W ell schooled as it might ordinarily be, nothing had
prepared Jamie’ s horse for a grade-A, number one Gaelic
shriek, u ttered at top volume fr om a spot two feet behind its
head. Losing all nerve, it laid back its ears and fled as though
the devil itself were after it.
My mount and I sat transfixed in the road, watching an
outstanding exh ibition of Scottish horsemanship as Jamie,
both stir rups los t and the reins free, flung half out of his saddle
by his horse’ s a brupt departure , heaved himself desperately
forward, grappling for the mane. His plaid fluttered madly
about him, stirred by the wind of his passing, and the horse,thoroughly panicked by this time, took the thrashing mass of
color as an excuse to run even faster .
One han d tangled in the long mane, Jamie was grimly
hauling himself upright, long legs clasping the horse’ s sides,
ignoring the stirrup irons that da nced beneath the beast’ s belly .
Scraps of what even my limited Gaelic recognized as
extremely bad language floated back on the gentle wind.
A slow , clopping sound made me look behind, to where
Murtagh, leading the pack horse, was coming over the small
rise we had just descended. He m ade his careful way down the
road to where I waited. He pu lled his animal to a leisurely
stop, shaded his eyes, and looked ahead, to the spot where
Jamie and his panicked mount were just vanishing over the
next hilltop.
“A deerfly ,” I said, in explanation.
“Late for them. Still, I didna think he’d be in such a hurry
to m eet his grandsire as to leave ye behind,” Murtagh
remarked, with his customary dryness. “Not that I’d say a wife
more or less will make much dif ference in his reception.”
He pick ed up his reins and booted his pony into reluctant
motion, the packhorse amiably coming along for the journey .
My own  mount, cheered by the  company and reassured by a
temporary absence of flies, stepped out quite gaily alongside.
“Not ev en an English wife?” I asked curiously . From the
little I knew , I didn’ t think Lord Lovat’ s relations with
anything English were much to cheer about.
“English, French , Dutch, or Ge rman. It isna like to make
much di f ference; it’ll be the la d’ s liver the Old Fox will be
eatin’ for breakfast, not yours.”
“What d o you mean by that?”  I stared at the dour little
clansman, looking much like one of his own bundles, under
the loose  wrapping of plaid and shirt. Somehow every garment
that Mur tagh put on, no matter how new or how well tailored,
immediately ass umed the appearance of something narrowly
salvaged from a rubbish heap.
“What kind of terms is Jamie on with Lord Lovat?”I cau ght a sidelo ng glance from a small, shrewd black eye,
and then his hea d turned toward Beaufort Castle. He shrugged,
in resignation or anticipation.
“No term s at all, ’ til now . The lad’ s never spoken to his
grandsire in his life.”
 
“But how do yo u know so much  about him if you’ve never
met him?”
At least I was beginning to understand Jamie’ s earlier
reluctance to approach his grandfather for help. Reunited with
Jamie an d his horse, the latter looking rather chastened, and
the former irritable to a degree, Murtagh had gazed
speculatively at  him, and of fered to ride ahead to Beaufort
with the  pack animal, leaving Jamie and me to enjoy lunch at
the side of the road.
Over a restorative ale and oatcake, he had at length told me
that his grandfather , Lord Lovat , had not approved of his son’ s
choice of bride, and had not seen fit either to bless the union or
to communicate  with his son – o r his son’ s children – anytime
since the  marria ge of Brian Fras er and Ellen MacKenzie, more
than thirty years before.
“I’ve he ard a good bit about him, one way and another ,
though.” Jamie replied, chewin g a bite of cheese. “He’ s the
sort of man that makes an impression on folk, ye ken.”
“So I gather .” The elderly T ullibardine, one of the Parisian
Jacobites, had regaled me with a number of uncensored
opinions regarding the leader of clan Fraser , and I thought that
perhaps Brian Fraser had not been desolated at his father ’ s
inattention. I said as much, and Jamie nodded.
“Oh, aye. I can na recall my father having much good to
say of the old man, though he wouldna be disrespectful of him.
He j ust d idna speak of him often.” He rubbed at the side of his
neck, wh ere a red welt from the deerfly bite was beginning to
show . T he weather was freakishly warm, and he had unfolded
his plaid for me to sit on. The deputation to the head of clan
Fraser had been thought worth some investment in dignity , and
Jamie w ore a new kilt, of the buckled military cut, with theplaid a separate strip of cloth. Le ss enveloping for shelter from
the weather than the older , bel ted plaid, it was a good deal
more ef ficient to put on in a hurry .
“I wondered a bit,” he said thoughtfully , “whether my
father was the sort of father he was because of the way old
Simon treated him . I  didna realize it at the time, o f course, but
it’ s no so common for a man to show his feelings for his sons.”
“Y ou’ve thought about it a lot.” I of fered him another flask
of ale, and he took it with a smile that lingered on me, more
warming than the feeble autumn sun.
“A ye, I did. I was wondering, ye see, what sort of father
I’d be to my own bairns, and looking back a bit to see, my
own fath er being  the best examp le I had. Y et I knew , from the
bits that  he said, or that Murtag h told me, that his own father
was noth ing like  him, so I thought as how he must have made
up his mind to do it all dif ferently , once he had the chance.”
I sighed a bit, setting down my bit of cheese.
“Jamie,” I said. “Do you really think we’ll ever -”
“I do,” he said, with certainty , not letting me finish. He
leaned over and kissed my for ehead. “I know it, Sassenach,
and so do you. Y ou were mean t to be a mother , and I surely
dinna intend to let anyone else father your children.”
“W ell, that’ s  good,” I said. “Neither do I.”
He laughed and tilted my chin up to kiss my lips. I kissed
him bac k, then reached up to brush away a breadcrumb that
clung to the stubble around his mouth.
“Ought you to shave, do you think?” I asked. “In honor of
seeing your grandfather for the first time?”
“Oh, I’ve seen him the once before,” he said casually .
“And he’ s seen me, for that matter . As for what he thinks of
my look s now , he can take me  as I am, and be damned to
him.”
“But Murtagh said you’d never met him!”
“Mphm.” He brushed the rest  of the crumbs from his
shirtfront, frown ing slightly as if deciding how much to tellme. Finally he shrugged and lay back in the shade of a gorse
bush, hands clasped behind his head as he stared at the sky .
“W ell, we never have met , as ye’ d say . Or not exactly .
’T was like this…”
At the age of s eventeen, young  Jamie Fraser set sail for
France, to finish his education at the University of Paris, and
to learn further such things as are not taught in books.
“I sa iled from th e harbor at Beauly ,” he said, nodding over
the n ext hill, wh ere a narrow sl ice of gray on the far horizon
marked the edge of the Moray F irth. “There were other ports I
could have gone by – Inverness  would have been most like –
but m y father booked my passag e, and from Beauly it was. He
rode with me, to see me of f into the world, ye might say .”
Brian Fraser had seldom left La llybroch in the years since
his marriage, and took pleasure as they rode in pointing out
various spots to his son, where  he had hunted or traveled as
boy and young man.
“But he grew much quieter as we drew near Beaufort. He
hadna spoken of my grandsire on this trip, and I knew better
than me ntion him  myself. But I kent he had reason for sending
me from Beauly .”
A number of small sparrows edged their way cautiously
nearer , p opping in and out of the low shrubs, ready to dart
back to safety at the slightest hint of danger . Seeing them,
Jamie reached for a remnant of bread, and tossed it with
considerable accuracy into the middle of the flock, which
exploded like shrapnel, all fleeing the sudden intrusion.
“They’ll be back,” he said, motioning toward the scattered
birds. He put an arm across his f ace as though to shield it from
the sun, and went on with his story .
“There was a s ound of horses along the road from the
castle, and when we turned to  see, there was a small party
coming down, six horsemen with a wagon, and one of them
held Lovat’ s banner , so I knew m y grandfather was with them.
I l ooked quick at my father , to s ee did he mean to do anything,but he just smil ed and squeezed my shoulder quick and said,
‘Let’ s go aboard, then, lad.’
“I could feel my grandsire’ s eyes on me as I walked down
the sho re, wi’ my hair and my height fair shriekin’
‘MacKenzie,’ and I was glad I  had my best clothes on and
didna lo ok a beggar . I didna look round, but I stood as tall as I
could, a nd was proud that I had  half a head’ s height above the
tallest man there. My father walked by my side, quiet like he
was, and  he didna look aside, eit her , but I could feel him there,
proud that he’d sired me.”
He smiled at me, lopsided.
“That w as the last time I was sure I’d done well by him,
Sassenach. I wasna so sure, times after , but I was glad of that
one day .”
He lock ed his arms around his knees, staring ahead as
though reliving the scene on the quay .
“W e step ped aboard the ship, an d met the master , then we
stood by the rail, talking a bit about nothing, both of us careful
not to look at the men from Beaufort who were loading the
bundles, or glance to the shor e where the horsemen stood.
Then the  master  gave the order to cast of f. I kissed my father ,
and he jumped over the rail, down to the dock, and walked to
his hors e. He didna look back until he was mounted, and by
then the ship had started out into the harbor .
“I waved, and he waved back, then he turned, leading my
horse, and started on the road back to Lallybroch. And the
party fro m Beaufort turned then, too, and started back. I could
see m y g randsire at the head of the party , sitting straight in his
saddle. And they rode, my father and grandfather , twenty
yards apart, up the hill and over it, out of my sight, and neither
one turn ed to the other , or acted  as though the other one was
there at all.”
He turne d his head down the road, as though looking for
signs of life from the direction of Beaufort.
“I met his eyes,” he said softly . “The once. I waited until
Father re ached h is horse, and th en I turned and looked at LordLovat, b old as I could. I wanted him to know we’d ask nothing
of him, but that I wasna scairt of him.” He smiled at me, one-
sided. “I was, though.”
I put a hand over his, stroking the grooves of his knuckles.
“W as he looking back at you?”
He snorted briefly .
“A ye, he was. Reckon he didna  take his eyes of f me from
the t ime I came down the hill ’ til my ship sailed away; I could
feel them borin’ into my back like an auger . And when I
looked at him, there he was, wi’ his eyes black under his
brows, starin’ into mine.”
He fell silent, still looking a t the castle, ’ til I gently
prodded him.
“How did he look, then?”
He pulle d his eyes from the dark cloud mass on the far
horizon to look down at me, the  customary expression of good
humor m issing f rom the curve o f his mouth, the depths of his
eyes.
“Cold as stone, Sassenach,” he replied. “Cold as the
stone.”
 
W e wer e lucky in the weather; it had been warm all the
way from Edinbur gh.
“It’ s no going to last,” Jamie predicted, squinting toward
the sea ahead. “See the bank o f cloud out there? It will be
inland by tonight.” He snif fed  the air , and pulled his plaid
across his shoulders. “Smell t he air? Y e can feel weather
coming.”
Not so experienced at olfactory meteorology , I still thought
that perh aps I could  smell it; a dampness in the air , sharpening
the usual smells of dried heather and pine resin, with a faint,
moist scent of kelp from the distant shore mixed in.
“I w onder if the  men have got back to Lallybroch yet,” I
said.“I do ubt it.” Jam ie shook his he ad. “They’ve less distance
to go than we’ve had, but they’re all afoot, and it will ha’ been
slow getting them all away .” H e rose in his stirrups, shading
his eyes to peer toward the distant cloud bank. “I hope it’ s just
rain; that willna trouble them ov ermuch. And it might not be a
big storm, in any case. Perhaps it willna reach so far south.”
I p ulled  my arisaid, a warm ta rtan shawl, tighter around
my own shoulders, in respons e to the rising breeze. I had
thought this few days’ stretch of  warm weather a good omen; I
hoped it hadn’ t been deceptive.
Jamie h ad spent an entire nigh t sitting by the window in
Holyrood, after receipt of Charle s’ s order . And in the morning,
he had gone firs t to Charles, to tell His Highness that he and I
would ride alone to Beauly , accompanied only by Murtagh, to
convey H is High ness’ s respects to Lord Lovat, and his request
that Lovat honor his promise of men and aid.
Next, Jamie had summoned Ross the smith to our
chamber , and given him his orders, in a voice so low that I
could not make out the words from my place near the fire. I
had seen the bur ly smith’ s shoulders rise, though, and set firm,
as he absorbed their import.
The Highland army traveled with little discipline, in a
ragtag m ob that could scarcely be dignified as a “column.” In
the course of o ne day’ s movement, the men of Lallybroch
were to  drop away , one by one. Stepping aside into the
shrubbery as though to rest a m oment or relieve themselves,
they we re not to return to the main body , but to steal quietly
away , and make their way , one  by one, to a rendezvous with
the other  men from Lallybroch. And once regathered under the
command of Ross the smith, they were to go home.
“I doubt they’ll be missed for s ome time, if at all,” Jamie
had said, discussing the plan with me beforehand. “Desertion
is ri fe, all throu gh the army . Ewan Cameron told me they’d
lost twe nty men from his regim ent within the last week. It’ s
winter , and men want to be set tling their homes and making
things ready for the spring planting. In any case, it’ s sure
there’ s n o one to spare to go after them, even should their
leavin’ be noticed.”“Have you given up, then, Jamie?” I had asked, laying a
hand on  his arm. He had rubbe d a hand tiredly over his face
before answering.
“I dinna  ken, Sassenach. It may be too late; it may not. I
canna tell. It wa s foolish to go south so near to the winter; and
more foolish still to waste tim e in beseiging Stirling. But
Charles hasna been defeated, and the chiefs – some of them –
are com ing in answer to his summons. The MacKenzies, now ,
and others because of them. He ’ s twice as many men now as
we had at Preston. What will that mean?” He flung up his
hands, frustrated.
“I dinna ken. There’ s no opposition; the English are
terrified. W ell, ye know; you’ve seen the broadsheets.” He
smiled w ithout humor . “W e spit small children and roast them
ower the  fire, and dishonor the wives and daughters of honest
men.” H e gave a snort of wry disgust. While such crimes as
theft and insubordination were common among the Highland
army , rape was virtually unknown.
He sighe d, a brief, angry sound. “Cameron’ s heard a rumor
that Kin g Geordie’ s makin’ ready to flee from London, in fear
that the Prince’ s army will tak e the city soon.” He had – a
rumor that had reached Cameron through me, from Jack
Randall. “And there’ s Kilmarno ck, and Cameron. Lochiel, and
Balmerino, and Dougal, with hi s MacKenzies. Bonny fighters
all. And  should Lovat send th e men he’ s promised – God,
maybe it would be enough. Christ, should we march into
London-” He hunched his shou lders, then stretched suddenly ,
shrugging as though to fight his way out of a strangling shirt.
“But I canna risk it,” he said simply . “I canna go to Beauly ,
and leav e my own men here, to be taken God knows where. If
I were there to head them – that would be something else. But
damned if I’ll le ave them for Ch arles or Dougal to throw at the
English, and me a hundred miles away at Beauly .”
So it was arranged. The Lallybroch men – including
Fer gus, who had protested vociferously , but been overruled –
would desert, and depart inconspicuously for home. Once our
business at Beauly was completed, and we had returned to joinCharles – well, then it would be time enough to see how
matters went.
“That’ s why I’m takin’ Murtagh with us,” Jamie had
explained. “If it looks all right, then I shall send him to
Lallybroch to fetch them back.” A brief smile lightened his
somber face. “He doesna look much on a horse, but he’ s a
braw rider , is Murtagh. Fast as chain lightning.”
He d idn’ t look it at the moment, I reflected, but then, there
was no emer ge ncy at hand. I n fact, he was moving even
slower than usual; as we topped one hill, I could see him at the
bottom, pulling his horse to a ha lt. By the time we had reached
him, he was of f, glaring at the packhorse’ s saddle.
“What’ s amiss, then?” Jamie m ade to get down from his
own saddle, but Murtagh waved him irritably of f.
“Nay , n ay , naught to trouble ye. A binding’ s snapped, is
all. Get ye on.”
W ith no  more than a nod of acknowledgment, Jamie reined
away , and I followed him.
“Not very canty today , is he?” I remarked, with a flip of
the hand back in Murtagh’ s direction. In fact, the small
clansman had grown more testy and irritable with each step in
the direc tion of Beauly . “I take it he’ s not enchanted with the
prospect of visting Lord Lovat?”
Jamie smiled, with a brief back ward glance at the small,
dark figure, bent in absorption over the rope he was splicing.
“Nay , Murtagh’ s no friend of Old Simon. He loved my
father dearly” – his mouth qu irked to one side – “and my
mother , as well. He didna care for Lovat’ s treatment of them.
Or for Lovat’ s methods of get ting wives. Murtagh’ s got an
Irish grandmother , but he’ s related to Primrose Campbell
through his mother ’ s side,” he e xplained, as though this made
everything crystal clear .
“Who’ s Primrose Campbell?” I asked, bewildered.
“Oh.” Jamie scratched his nose, considering. The wind of f
the sea was risi ng steadily , and his hair was being whipped
from its lacing, ruddy wisps flickering past his face.“Primrose Cam bell was Lovat’ s third wife – still is, I
suppose,” he added, “though she’ s left him some years since
and gone back to her father ’ s house.”
“Popular with women, is he?” I murmured.
Jamie snorted. “I suppose ye can call it that. He took his
first wif e by a f orced marriage . Snatched the Dowager Lady
Lovat from her bed in the middle o’ the night, married her then
and there, and w ent straight back to bed with her . Still,” he
added fairly , “she did later decid e she loved him, so maybe he
wasna so bad.”
“Must have been rather specia l in bed, at least,” I said
flippantly . “Runs in the family , I expect.”
He c ast me a mildly shocked look, which dissolved into a
sheepish grin.
“A ye, well,” he said. “If he was or no, it didna help him
much. T he Dow ager ’ s maids spoke up against him, and Simon
was outlawed and had to flee to France.”
Forced marriages and outlawry , hm? I refrained from
further r emark on family resemblances, but privately trusted
that Jamie wouldn’ t follow in his grandfather ’ s footsteps with
regard to subsequent wives. One had apparently been
insuf ficient for Simon.
“He went to visi t King James in Rome and swear his fealty
to th e Stuarts,” Jamie went on , “and then turned round and
went straight to W illiam of Oran ge, King of England, who was
visiting in France. He got James to promise him his title and
estates, should a restoration come about, and then – God
knows h ow – got a full pardon from W illiam, and was able to
come home to Scotland.”
Now it was my turn for raised  eyebrows. Apparently it
wasn’ t just attractiveness to the opposite sex, then.
Simon had continued his adventures by returning later to
France, this time to spy on the Jacobites. Being found out, he
was thrown into prison, but escaped, returned to Scotland,
masterminded the assembling of  the clans under the guise of a
hunting-party on the Braes of Mar in 1715 – and then managedto get full credit  with the English Crown for putting down the
resultant Rising.
“Proper old twister , isn’ t he?” I said, completely intrigued.
“Though I suppose he can’ t have been so old then; only in his
forties.” Having  heard that Lord Lovat was now in his middle
seventies, I had been expecting something fairly doddering
and decrepit, but was rapidly revising my expectations, in
view of these stories.
“My grandsire,” Jamie observed evenly , “has by all reports
got a character that would ena ble him to hide conveniently
behind a  spiral staircase. Anywa y ,” he went on, dismissing his
grandfather ’ s ch aracter with a wave of his hand, “then he
married Mar gare t Grant, the Grant o’ Grant’ s daughter . It was
after she  died that he married Primrose Campbell. She was
maybe eighteen at the time.”
“W as Ol d Simon enough of a catch for her family to force
her into it?” I asked sympathetically .
“By no means, Sassenach.” He paused to brush the hair out
of his face, tuck ing the stray locks back behind his ears. “He
kent well enough that she woul dna have him, no matter if he
was rich as Croe sus – which he  wasn’ t – so he had her sent a
letter , sa ying her mother was fallen sick in Edinbur gh, and
giving the house there she was to go to.”
Hastening to Edinbur gh, the y oung and beautiful Miss
Campbell had found not her mo ther , but the old and ingenious
Simon Fraser , who had infor med her that she was in a
notorious house  of pleasure, and that her only hope of
preserving her good name was to marry him immediately .
“She mu st have  been a right gump, to fall for that one,” I
remarked cynically .
“W ell, she was verra young,” Jamie said defensively , “and
it wa sna an idle threat, either; had she refused him, Old Simon
would ha’ ruined her reputation without a second thought. In
any event, she married him – and regretted it.”
“Hmph.” I was busy doing sums in my head. The
encounter with Primrose Campbell had been only a few yearsago, he’d said. Then… “W as i t the Dowager Lady Lovat or
Mar garet Grant who was your grandmother?” I asked
curiously .
The high cheekbones were chap ped by sun and wind; now
they flushed a sudden, painful red.
“Neither one,” he said. He didn’ t look at me, but kept his
gaze fix ed straight ahead, in the direction of Beaufort Castle.
His lips were pressed tightly together .
“My fat her was a bastard,” he said at last. He sat straight
as a  sword in the saddle, and his knuckles were white, fist
clenched on the reins. “Acknow ledged, but a bastard. By one
of the Castle Downie maids.”
“Oh,” I said. There didn’ t seem a lot to add.
He swallowed hard; I could see the ripple in his throat.
“I should ha’ told ye before,” he said stif fly . “I’m sorry .”
I reached out to touch his arm; it was hard as iron.
“It doesn ’ t matter , Jamie,” I said , knowing even as I spoke
that noth ing I said could make a dif ference. “I don’ t mind in
the slightest.”
“A ye?” he said a t last, still staring straight ahead. “W ell…
I do.”
 
The steadily freshening wind of f Moray Firth rustled its
way thro ugh a hillside of dark pines. The country here was an
odd combination of mountain slope and seashore. Thick
growth of alders, larch, and b irch blanketed the ground on
both sides of the narrow tra ck we followed, but as we
approached the dark bulk of Beaufort Castle, over everything
floated the ef fluvium of mud flats and kelp.
W e were in fact  expected; the kilted, ax-armed sentries at
the g ate made n o challenge as we rode through. They looked
at us curiously enough, but seemingly without enmity . Jamie
sat s traight as a king in his sadd le. He nodded once to the man
on his side, and received a similar nod in return. I had thedistinct feeling that we entered the castle flying a white flag of
truce; how long that state would last was anyone’ s guess.
W e rode unchallenged into the courtyard of Beaufort
Castle, a small edifice as castles went, but suf ficiently
imposing, for all that, built of the native stone. Not so heavily
fortified as some of the castles I had seen to the south, it
looked still capable of withstanding a certain amount of
abrasion. W ide- mouthed gun-h oles gaped at intervals along
the b ase of the outer walls, and the keep still boasted a stable
opening onto the courtyard.
Several of the small Highland p onies were housed in this,
heads poking over the wooden half-door to whicker in
welcome to our own mounts. N ear the wall lay a number of
packs, recently unloaded from the ponies in the stable.
“Lovat’ s summoned a few men to meet us,” Jamie
observed grimly , noting the packs. “Relatives, I expect.” He
shrugged. “At least they’ll be friendly enough to start with.”
“How do you know?”
He slid to the ground and reached up to help me down.
“They’ve left the broadswords wi’ the luggage.”
Jamie handed over the reins to an ostler who came out of
the stables to meet us, dusting his hands on his breeks.
“Er , now  what?” I murmured to Jamie under my breath.
There was no s ign of chatelaine or majordomo; nothing like
the cheery , authoritative figure of Mrs. FitzGibbons that had
welcomed us to Castle Leoch two years before.
The few ostlers and stable-lads  about glanced at us now
and then, but co ntinued about their tasks, as did the servants
who crossed the courtyard, lugging baskets of laundry , bundles
of peat, and all the other cumbrous paraphernalia that living in
a stone castle demanded. I looked approvingly after a burly
manservant sweating under th e burden of two five-gallon
copper cans of water . Whatever its shortcomings in the
hospitality department, Beaufort Castle at least boasted a
bathtub somewhere.Jamie st ood in the center of th e courtyard, arms crossed,
surveying the place like a prosp ective buyer of real estate who
harbors black doubts about the drains.
“Now we wait, Sassenach,” he said. “The sentries will ha’
sent wor d that we’re here. Eithe r someone will come down to
us… or they won’ t.”
“Um,” I  said. “W ell, I hope they make up their minds
about it soon; I’m hungry , and I could do with a wash.”
“A ye, ye could,” Jamie agreed , with a brief smile as he
looked me over . “Y ou’ve a sm ut on your nose, and there’ s
teasel-heads caught in your hair . No, leave them,” he added, as
my hand  went to my head in dismay . “It looks bonny , did ye
do it on purpose or no.”
Definitely no, but I left them.  Still, I sidled over to a
nearby watering trough, to inspect my appearance and remedy
it so far as was possible using nothing but cold water .
It w as something of a delicat e situation, so far as old
Simon Fraser was concerned, I thought, bending over the
trough and trying to make out which blotches on my reflected
complexion were actual smu dges and which caused by
floating bits of hay .
On the one han d, Jamie was a formal emissary from the
Stuarts. Whether Lovat’ s promises of support for the cause
were ho nest, or mere lip service , chances were that he would
feel obliged to welcome the Prin ce’ s representative, if only for
the sake of courtesy .
On the other hand, said representative was an illegitimately
descended grand son who, if not precisely disowned in his own
person, certainly wasn’ t a bosom member of the family , either .
And I knew enough by now of Highland feuds to know that ill
feeling of this sort was unlik ely to be diminished by the
passage of time.
I ran  a wet hand  across my close d eyes and back across my
temples, smoothing down stray wisps of hair . On the whole, I
didn’ t think Lord Lovat would leave us standing in thecourtyard. He might, however , leave us there long enough to
realize fully the dubious nature of our reception.
After th at – well, who knew? W e would most likely be
received by Lady Frances, one o f Jamie’ s aunts, a widow who
– from all we had heard fr om T ullibardine – managed
domestic af fairs  for her father . Or , if he chose to receive us as
a diplomatic ambassage rather than as family connections, I
supposed that Lord Lovat himself might appear to receive us,
supported by the formal panoply of secretary , guards, and
servants.
This last possibility seemed m ost likely , in view of the
time it was taki ng; after all, you wouldn’ t keep a full-dress
entourage standing about – it would take some time to
assemble the necessary personnel. Envisioning the sudden
appearance of a fully equipped  earl, I had second thoughts
about leaving teasel-heads tangl ed in my hair , and leaned over
the trough again.
At th is point, I was interrupted by the sound of footsteps in
the passageway behind the mangers. A squat-bodied elderly
man in open sh irt and unbuckled breeks stepped out into the
courtyard, shoving aside a plump chestnut mare with a sharp
elbow a nd an irritable “T cha!” Despite his age, he had a back
like a ramrod, and shoulders nearly as broad as Jamie’ s.
Pausing by the horse trough, he glanced around the
courtyard as though looking for someone. His eye passed over
me without registering, then suddenly snapped back, clearly
startled. He stepped forward and thrust his face pugnaciously
forward, an unshaven gray beard bristling like a porcupine’ s
quills.
“Who the hell are you?” he demanded.
“Claire Fraser , er , I mean, Lady Broch T uarach,” I said,
belatedly remembering my d ignity . I gathered my self-
possession, and wiped a drop of water of f my chin. “Who the
hell are you? ” I demanded.
A firm hand g ripped my elbow from behind, and a
resigned voice from somewhere above my head said, “That,
Sassenach, is my grandsire. My lord, may I present my wife?” 
“Ah?” said Lord Lovat, giving me the benefit of a cold
blue eye. “I’d heard you’d married an Englishwoman.” His
tone made it clear that this act confirmed all his worst
suspicions about the grandson he’d never met.
He raise d a thick gray brow in my direction, and shifted
the giml et stare to Jamie. “No m ore sense than your father , it
seems.”
I cou ld see Jamie’ s hands twitch  slightly , resisting the ur ge
to clench into fists.
“At the least, I had nay need to take a wife by rape or
trickery ,” he observed evenly .
His gran dfather grunted, unfaze d by the insult. I thought I
saw the corner of his wrinkled mouth twitch, but wasn’ t sure.
“A ye, and ye’ve gained little enough by the bar gain ye
struck,” he observed. “Though at that, this one’ s less
expensive than that MacKenzie harlot Brian fell prey to. If this
sassenach wench brings ye naught, at least she looks as though
she costs ye li ttle.” The slanted blue eyes, so much like
Jamie’ s own, ran over my trav el-stained gown, taking in the
unstitched hem, the burst seam, and the splashes of mud on the
skirt.
I cou ld feel a fine vibration run through Jamie, and wasn’ t
sure whether it was anger or laughter .
“Thanks,” I said, with a friendl y smile at his lordship. “I
don’ t ea t much,  either . But I could use a bit of a wash. Just
water; don’ t bother about the soap, if it comes too dear .”
This time I was sure about the twitch.
“A ye, I see,” his lordship said. “I shall send a maid to see
ye to your rooms, then. And  provide ye with soap. W e shall see
ye in the library before supper… grandson,” he added to
Jamie, and turning on his heel, disappeared back under the
archway .
“Who’ s we? ” I asked.“Y oung Simon, I suppose,”  Jamie answered. “His
lordship’ s heir . A stray cousin or  two, maybe. And some of the
tacksmen, I should imagine, ju dging from the horses in the
courtyard. If Lovat’ s going to consider sending troops to join
the Stuarts, his tacksmen and tenants may have a bit to say
about it.”
 
“Ever seen a small worm in a barnyard, in the middle of a
flock of chickens?” he murmured as we walked down the hall
an hour later behind a servant. “That’ s me – or us, I should
say . Stick close to me, now .”
The var ious co nnections of clan Fraser were indeed
assembled; when we were shown into the Beaufort Castle
library , it was to  find more than  twenty men seated around the
room.
Jamie was formally introduc ed, and gave a formal
statement on behalf of the Stuarts, giving the respects of
Prince Charles and King James to Lord Lovat and appealing
for Lov at’ s he lp, to which t he old man replied briefly ,
eloquently and noncommittally . Etiquette attended to, I was
then br ought forward and introduced, and the general
atmosphere became more relaxed.
I was surrounded by a number of Highland gentlemen,
who took turns exchanging wo rds of welcome with me as
Jamie chatted with someone named Graham, who seemed to
be Lord Lovat’ s  cousin. The tac ksmen eyed me with a certain
amount of reserve, but were all courteous enough – with one
exception.
Y oung Simon, much like his fa ther in squatty outline, but
nearly fifty years younger , came forward and bowed over my
hand. Straighten ing up, he looked me over with an attention
that seemed just barely this side of rudeness.
“Jamie’ s wife, hm?” he asked. H e had the slanted eyes of
his father and half-nephew , but his were brown, muddy as
bogwater . “I suppose that mean s I may call ye ‘niece,’ does it
not?” He was just about Jamie’ s age, clearly a few years
younger than I.“Ha-ha,” I said politely , as he chortled at his own wit. I
tried to retrieve my hand, but he  wasn’ t letting go. Instead, he
smiled jovially , giving me the once-over again.
“I’d hea rd of ye, you know ,” he said. “Y ou’ve a bit of fame
through the Highlands, Mistress.”
“Oh, really? How nice.” I tugged inconspicuously; in
response, his hand tightened around mine in a grip that was
nearly painful.
“Oh, aye. I’ve h eard you’re verra popular with the men of
your husband’ s command,” he said, smiling so hard his eyes
narrowed to dark-brown slits. “They call ye neo-geimnidh
meala , I hear . That means ‘Mistress Honeylips,’ ” he
translated, seeing my look of bewilderment at the unfamiliar
Gaelic.
“Why , thank you…” I began, bu t got no more than the first
words out before Jamie’ s fist cr ashed into Simon Junior ’ s jaw
and sent his half-uncle reeling i nto a piecrust table, scattering
sweetmeats and serving spoons across the polished slates with
a terrific clatter .
He dres sed like a gentleman, but he had a brawler ’ s
instincts. Y oung Simon rolled up onto his knees, fists
clenched, and froze there. Jamie stood over him, fists doubled
but loose, his stillness more menacing than open threat.
“No,” he said evenly , “she doesna have much Gaelic. And
now that ye’ve proved it to everyone’ s satisfaction, ye’ll
kindly a pologize to my wife, b efore I kick your teeth down
your thro at.” Y oung Simon glowered up at Jamie, then glanced
aside a t his father , who no dded imperceptibly , looking
impatient at this interruption. The younger Fraser ’ s shaggy
black hair had c ome loose from its lacing, and hung like tree
moss ab out his face. He eyed Jamie warily , but with a strange
tinge of what looked like amu sement as well, mingled with
respect. He wiped the back of his hand across his mouth and
bowed gravely to me, still on his knees.
“Y our pardon, Mistress Fraser , and my apologies for any
of fense ye may have suf fered.”I could do no more than nod graciously in return, before
Jamie was steering me out into  the corridor . W e had almost
reached the door at the end before I spoke, glancing back to
see that we were not overheard.
“ What  on earth does neo-geimnidh meala  mean?” I said,
jerking on his sl eeve to slow him . He glanced down, as though
I had just been recalled to his wandering attention.
“Ah? Oh, it means honeylips, all right. More or less.”
“But-”
“It’ s no your mouth he was referring to, Sassenach,” Jamie
said dryly .
“Why , t hat-” I made as if to turn back to the study , but
Jamie tightened his grip on my arm.
“Cluck, cluck, cluck,” he murmured in my ear . “Dinna
worry , Sassenach. They’re only tryin’ me. It will be all right.”
I wa s left in the care of Lady Frances, Y oung Simon’ s
sister , while Jamie returned to the library , shoulders squared
for battl e. I hoped he wouldn’ t hit any more of his relatives;
while the Frasers were, on the  whole, not as sizable as the
MacKenzies, the y had a sort of tough watchfulness that boded
ill for anyone trying something on in their immediate vicinity .
Lady F rances was young, perhaps twenty-two, and
inclined to view me with a sort of terrorized fascination, as
though I might s pring upon her if not incessantly placated with
tea and sweetmeats. I exerted myself to be as pleasant and
unthreatening as possible, and after a time, she relaxed
suf ficiently to confess that she had never met an
Englishwoman before. “Englishwoman,” I gathered, was an
exotic and dangerous species.
I wa s ca reful to make no sudden moves, and after a bit, she
grew co mfortable enough to introduce me shyly to her son, a
sturdy l ittle chap of three or so, maintained in a state of
unnatural cleanliness by the constant watchfulness of a stern-
faced maidservant.
I was telling Frances and her younger sister Aline about
Jenny an d her family , whom th ey had never met, when therewas a sudden crash and a cry in the hallway outside. I sprang
to m y fe et, and reached the sitting-room door in time to see a
huddled bundle of cloth struggling to rise to its feet in the
stone corridor . The heavy door to the library stood open, and
the s quat figure of Simon Frase r the elder stood framed in it,
malevolent as a toad.
“Y e’ll get worse than that, my l ass, and ye make no better
job of it,” he s aid. His tone w as not particularly menacing;
only a statement of fact. The b undled figure raised its head,
and I saw an od d, angularly pretty face, dark eyes wide over
the red blotch deepening on her cheekbone. She saw me, but
made no  acknowledgment of my presence, only getting to her
feet and  hurrying away without a word. She was very tall and
extremely thin, and moved with the strange, half-clumsy grace
of a crane, her shadow following her down the stones.
I stood staring at Old Simon, silhouetted against the
firelight from the library behind him. He felt my eyes upon
him, and  turned  his head to look at me. The old blue eyes
rested on me, cold as sapphires.
“Good evening, my dear ,” he said, and closed the door .
I stood looking blankly at the dark wooden door .
“What was that  all about?” I asked Frances, who had come
up behind me.
“Nothing,” she said, licking her lips nervously . “Come
away , Cousin.” I let her pull me away , but resolved to ask
Jamie later what had happened in the library .
 
W e had reached the chamber al lotted us for the night, and
Jamie gr aciously dismissed our small guide with a pat on the
head.
I sank down on the bed, gazing around helplessly .
“ Now  wh at do we do?” I asked. Dinner had passed with
little to remark, but I had felt the  weight of Lovat’ s eyes on me
from time to time.
Jamie shrugged, pulling his shirt over his head.“Damned if I know , Sassenach,” he said. “They asked me
the state  of the Highland army , the condition of the troops,
what I knew of  His Highness’ s plans. I told them. And then
they asked it all again. My grandfather ’ s no inclined to think
anyone could be giving him a straight answer ,” he added dryly .
“He thinks everyone must be as twisted as himself, wi’ a
dozen dif ferent motives; one for every occasion.”
He s hook his he ad and tossed th e shirt onto the bed next to
me.
“He can na tell whether I might be lying about the state of
the Highland army or no. For if I wanted him to join the
Stuarts, then I might say as how things were better than they
are, where if I didna care personally , one way or the other , then
I might tell the truth. And he doesna mean to commit himself
one way or the other until he thinks he knows where I stand.”
“And just how d oes he mean to tell whether you ar e  telling
the truth?” I asked skeptically .
“He has  a seer ,” he replied casually , as though this were
one of the normal furnishings o f a Highland castle. For all I
knew , it was.
“Really?” I sat up on the bed, intrigued. “Is that the odd-
looking woman he threw out into the hall?”
“A ye. H er name’ s Maisri, and sh e’ s had the Sight since she
was born. But she couldna tell him anything – or wouldn’ t,” he
added. “It was clear enough sh e knows something , but she’d
do naug ht but shake her head and say she couldn’ t see. That’ s
when my grandsire lost patience and struck her .”
“Bloody old crumb!” I said, indignant.
“W ell, he’ s no the flower o’ gallantry ,” Jamie agreed.
He poured out a basin of w ater and began to splash
handfuls over his face. He looked up, startled and streaming, at
my gasp.
“Hah?”
“Y our stomach…” I said, pointing. The skin between
breastbone and kilt was mottl ed with a lar ge fresh bruise,spreading like a lar ge, unsightly blossom on his fair skin.
Jamie g lanced down, said “Oh, that,” dismissively , and
returned to his washing.
“Y es, that ,” I said , coming to take a clo ser look. “What
happened?”
“It’ s no matter ,” he said, speech  coming thickly through a
towel. “I spoke a bit hasty this  afternoon, and my grandsire
had Y oung Simon give me a small lesson in respect.”
“So he had a couple of minor Frasers hold you while he
punched you in the belly?” I said, feeling slightly ill.
T ossing the towel aside, Jamie reached for his nightshirt.
“V erra fl attering of you to suppose it took two to hold me,”
he said, grinning as his head popped through the opening.
“Actually , there were three; one was behind, chokin’ me.”
“Jamie!”
He laug hed, shaking his head ruefully as he pulled back
the quilt on the bed.
“I don’ t  know what it is about ye, Sassenach, that always
makes m e want  to show of f for ye. Get myself killed one of
these days, tryin’ to impress ye,  I expect.” He sighed, gingerly
smoothing the woolen shirt ove r his stomach. “It’ s only play-
acting, Sassenach; ye shouldna worry .”
“Play-acting! Good God, Jamie!”
“Have ye no se en a strange dog join a pack, Sassenach?
The others snif f at him, and nip at his legs, and growl, to see
will he cower or  growl back at them. And sometimes it comes
to biting, and so metimes not, but at the end of it, every dog in
the p ack knows his place, and w ho’ s leader . Old Simon wants
to be sure I ken who leads this pack; that’ s all.”
“Oh? An d do you?” I lay down, waiting for him to come to
bed. He  picked up the candle and grinned down at me, the
flickering light picking up a blue gleam in his eyes.
“W oof,” he said, and blew out the candle.
 I saw very little of Jamie for the next two weeks, save at
night. During the day , he was always with his grandfather ,
hunting or riding – for Lovat w as a vigorous man, despite his
age – or drinkin g in the study , as the Old Fox slowly drew his
conclusions and laid his plans.
I spent most o f my time wit h Frances and the other
women. Out of the shadow o f her redoubtable old father ,
Frances gained enough courage to speak her own mind, and
proved an intelligent and interesting companion. She had the
responsibility for the smooth running of the castle and its staf f,
but when her father appeared on the scene, she dwindled into
insignificance, seldom raising her eyes or speaking above a
whisper . I wasn’ t sure I blamed her .
T wo weeks after our arrival, Jam ie came to fetch me from
the d rawing room where I sat w ith Frances and Aline, saying
that Lord Lovat wished to see me.
Old Simon waved a casual hand  at the decanters set on the
table by the wall, then sat down in a wide-seated chair of
carved walnut, with crushed padding in well-worn blue velvet.
The chair fitted his short, stock y form as though it had been
built around him; I wondered whether it had in fact been built
to o rder , or wh ether , from long use, he had grown into the
shape of the chair .
I s at down quietly in a corner with my glass of port, and
kept quiet while Simon questioned Jamie once again about
Charles Stuart’ s situation and prospects.
For the twentieth time in a week , Jamie patiently rehearsed
the num ber of troops available , the structure of command –
insofar as one existed – the armament on hand and its
condition – mostly poor – the prospects of Charles being
joined by Lord Lewis Gordon or the Farquharsons, what
Glengarry had said following Prestonpans, what Cameron
knew or deduced of the move ment of English troops, why
Charles had decided to march south, and so on and so forth. I
found myself nodding over the cup in my hand, and jerked
myself into wakefulness, just in  time to keep the ruby liquid
from tipping onto my skirt.“…and Lord Geor ge Murray a nd Kilmarnock both think
His Highness would be best advised to pull back into the
Highlands for the winter ,” Jami e concluded, yawning widely .
Cramped on the narrow-backed chair he had been given, he
rose and  stretched, his shadow flickering on the pale hangings
that covered the stone walls.
“And what d’ye think, yours elf?” Old Simon’ s eyes
glittered under half-fallen lids as he leaned back in his chair .
The fire  burned high and brigh t on the hearth; Frances had
smoored the fire in the main ha ll, covering it with peats, but
this one had been rekindled at Lovat’ s order , and with wood,
not peat. The sm ell of pine resin from the burning wood was
sharp, mingled with the thicker smell of smoke.
The light cast Jamie’ s shadow high on the wall as he
turned restlessly , not wanting to sit down again. It was close
and dark in the small study , with the window draped against
the nigh t – very dif ferent from  the open, sunny kirkyard in
which Column had asked him  the same question. And the
situation now had shifted; no longer the popular darling to
whom clan chieftains deferred, Charles now was sending to
the c hiefs, grimly calling in his  obligations. But the shape of
the p roblem was the same – a da rk, amorphous shape, hanging
like a shadow over us.
“I’ve told ye what I think – a dozen times or more.” Jamie
spoke abruptly . He moved his shoulders impatiently , shrugging
as though the fit of his coat was too tight.
“Oh, aye. Y ou’ve told me. But  this time I think we shall
have the truth.” The old man set tled more comfortably into his
padded chair , hands linked across his belly .
“W ill ye, then?” Jamie uttered a  short laugh, and turned to
face his grandfather . He leaned back against the table, hands
braced behind him. Despite the dif ferences in posture and
figure, there was a tension betw een the two men that brought
out a fugitive re semblance betw een them. The one tall and the
other squat, but both of them strong, stubborn, and determined
to win this encounter .“Am I not your kinsman? An d your chief? I command
your loyalty , do I not?”
So t hat was the point. Colum, so accustomed to physical
weakness, had known the secret of turning another man’ s
weakness to his own purposes. Simon Fraser , strong and
vigorous even in old age, was accustomed to getting his own
way by more direct means. I co uld see from the sour smile on
Jamie’ s face that he, too, was co ntrasting Colum’ s appeal with
his grandfather ’ s demand.
“Can ye? I dinna recall that I’ve sworn ye an oath.”
Several long stif f hairs grew out of Simon’ s eyebrows, in
the way  of old men. These quivered in the firelight, though I
couldn’ t tell whether with indignation or amusement.
“Oath, is it? And is it not Fraser blood in your veins?”
Jamie’ s mouth twisted wryly as he answered. “They do say
that it’ s a wise child as kens his own father , no? My mother
was a MacKenzie; I know that much.”
Simon’ s face grew dark with blood, and his brows drew
together . Then his mouth fell open, and he shouted with
laughter . He laughed until he was forced to pull himself up in
the chai r and bend forward, sputtering and choking. At last,
beating one hand on the arm of the chair in helpless mirth, he
reached into his mouth with the other and pulled out his false
teeth.
“Dod,” he sputtered, gaspin g and wheezing. Face
streaming with tears and saliva, he groped blindly for the small
table by his cha ir , and dropped the teeth onto the cake plate.
The gnarled fingers closed on a linen napkin, and he pressed it
to his face, still emitting strangled grunts of laughter as he
conducted his mopping up.
“Chritht, laddie, ” he said at last, lisping heavily . “Path me
the whithky .”
Eyebrows raised, Jamie took the decanter from the table
behind h im and passed it to his grandfather , who removed the
stopper and gulped a substantial amount of the contents
without bothering about the formality of a glass.“Y ou th ink you ’re not a Frathe r?” he said, lowering the
decanter and exhaling gustily . “Ha!” He leaned back once
more, be lly rising and falling ra pidly as he caught his breath.
He pointed a long, skinny finger at Jamie.
“Y our own father thtood right where you’re thstanding,
laddie, a nd told me jutht what yo u did, the day he left Beaufort
Cathtle once and for all.” The old man was growing calmer
now; he coughed several times and wiped his face again.
“Did ye know th at I’d tried to thtop your parents’ marriage
by claiming that Ellen MacKenzie’ s child wathn’ t Brian’ s?”
“A ye, I knew .” J amie was leaning back on the table again,
surveying his grandfather through narrowed eyes.
Lord Lovat snorted. “I’ll not thay there’ s been always
goodwill atween  me and mine, but I know my thons. And  my
grandthons,” he added pointedly . “De’il take me and I think
any one of ’em could be a cuckold, nay more than I could.”
Jamie didn’ t turn a hair , but I couldn’ t stop myself from
glancing away from the old man. I found myself staring at his
discarded teeth, the stained beechwood gleaming wetly amid
the cake crumbs. Luckily Lord L ovat hadn’ t noticed my slight
motion.
He went on, serious once more. “Now , then. Dougal
MacKenzie of Leoch hath declared for Charles. D’ye call him
your chief? Is t hat what ye’re telling me – that ye’ve given
him an oath?”
“No. I havena sworn to anyone.”
“Not ev en Char les?” The old m an was fast, pouncing on
this like  a cat on  a mouse. I could almost see his tail twitch as
he watched Jamie, slanted eyes deep-set and gleaming under
crepey lids.
Jamie’ s eyes were fixed on the leaping flames, his shadow
motionless on the wall behind him.
“He hasna asked me.” This was  true. Charles had had no
need to request  an oath from Jamie – having precluded the
necessity by signing Jamie’ s nam e to his Bond of Association.
Still, I knew tha t he had not, in fact, given his word to Charleswas imp ortant to  Jamie. If he must betray the man, let it not be
as an acknowledged chief. Th e idea that the entire world
thought such an oath existed was a matter of much less
concern.
Simon grunted again. W ithout his false teeth, his nose and
chin cam e close together , making the lower half of his face
oddly foreshortened.
“Then n othing hampers you to thwear to me, as chief of
your clan,” he s aid quietly . The twitching tail was less visible,
but still there. I  could almost hear the thoughts in his head,
gliding round on padded feet. W ith Jamie’ s loyalty sworn to
him, rather than Charles, Lovat’ s power would be increased.
As would his wealth, with a share of the income from
Lallybroch that he might claim as his chieftain’ s due. The
prospect of a dukedom drew slightly nearer , gleaming through
the mist.
“Nothing save my own will,”  Jamie agreed pleasantly .
“But tha t’ s some small obstacle, no?” His own eyes creased at
the corners as they narrowed further .
“Mmphm.” Lovat’ s eyes were almost closed, and he shook
his head slowly from side to side. “Oh, aye, lad, you’re your
father ’ s thon. Thtubborn as a b lock, and twith ath thtupid. I
thould h ave known that Brian would thire nothing but fools
from that harlot.”
Jamie reached forward and plucked the beechwood teeth
from the  plate. “Y e’d better put  these back, ye auld gomerel,”
he said rudely . “I canna understand a word ye say .”
His grandfather ’ s mouth widened in a humorless smile that
showed the yellowed stump of a lone broken tooth in the lower
jaw .
“No?” h e said. “W ill ye underth and a bar gain?” He shot a
quick lo ok at me, seeing nothing  more than another counter to
be p ut into pla y . “Y our oath for your wife’ s honor , how’ s
that?”
Jamie laughed out loud, still holding the teeth in one hand.“Oh, ay e? D’ye mean to force her before my eyes, then,
Grandsire?” He  lounged back contemptuously , hand on the
table. “G o ahead , and when she ’ s done wi’ ye, I’ll send Aunt
Frances up to sweep up the pieces.”
His gran dfather looked him over calmly . “Not I, lad.” One
side of the toothless mouth ro se in a lopsided smile as he
turned h is head to look at me. “Though I’ve taken my pleasure
with worthe.” The cold malice in the dark eyes made me want
to pull my cloak  over my breasts  in protection; unfortunately , I
wasn’ t wearing one.
“How many men are there in Beaufort, Jamie? How many ,
who’d b e of a m ind to put your  thathenach wench to the only
uth thee’ s good for? Y ou cannot guard her night and day .”
Jamie straighten ed slowly , the great shadow echoing his
movements on the wall. He st ared down at his grandfather
with no expression on his face.
“Oh, I think I needna worry , Grandsire,” he said softly .
“For my wife’ s a rare woman. A  wisewoman, ye ken. A white
lady , like Dame Aliset.”
I ha d never hear d of Dame Aliset, but Lord Lovat plainly
had; his head je rked round to stare at me, eyes sprung wide
with sho cked al arm. His mouth drooped open, but before he
could speak, Jamie had gone o n, an undercurrent of malice
clearly audible in his smooth speech.
“The ma n that takes her in unholy embrace will have his
privates blasted like a frostbitte n apple,” he said, with relish,
“and his soul will burn forever in hell.” He bared his teeth at
his grandfather ,  and drew back his hand. “Like this.” The
beechwood teeth landed in the midst of the fire with a plop,
and at once began to sizzle.4 1  T H E  S E E R ’ S  C U R S E
M ost of the Lowland Scots had gone over to
Presbyterianism in the two centuries before. Some of the
Highland clans had gone with them, but others, like the
Frasers and MacKenzies, had  kept their Catholic faith.
Especially the Frasers, with their strong family ties to Catholic
France.
There was a small chapel in Beaufort Castle, to serve the
devotional uses of the Earl and his family , but Beauly Priory ,
ruined as it was,  remained the burying place of the Lovats, and
the floor  of the open-roofed cha ncel was paved thick with the
flat tombstones of those who lay under them.
It was a peacefu l place, and I walked there sometimes, in
spite of the cold, blustery weath er . I had no idea whether Old
Simon had meant his threat ag ainst me, or whether Jamie’ s
comparing me to Dame Alise t – who turned out to be a
legendary “white woman” or healer , the Scottish equivalent of
La D ame Blanche – was suf ficient to put a stop to that threat.
But I thought that no one was likely to accost me among the
tombs of extinct Frasers.
One afternoon, a few days after the scene in the study , I
walked through a gap in the ruined Priory wall and found that
for once, I didn’ t have it to mys elf. The tall woman I had seen
outside Lovat’ s study was there, leaning against one of the red-
stone to mbs, arms folded about her for warmth, long legs
thrust out like a stork.
I ma de t o turn aside, but she saw  me, and motioned me to
join her .
“Y ou’ll be my lady Broch T uarach?” she said, though there
was no more than a hint of question in her soft Highland voice.
“I am. And you’re… Maisri?”
A small smile li t her face. She had a most intriguing face,
slightly asymmetrical, like a Modigliani painting, and long
black hair that flowed loose around her shoulders, streakedwith white, though she was plainly still young. A seer , hm? I
thought she looked the part.
“A ye, I have the  Sight,” she said, the smile widening a bit
on her lopsided mouth.
“Do mind-reading, too, do you?” I asked.
She laug hed, the  sound vanishing on the wind that moaned
through the ruined walls.
“No, lady . But I do read faces, and…”
“And mine’ s an open book. I know ,” I said, resigned.
W e stood side by side for a time then, watching tiny
spatters of fine sleet dashing against the sandstone and the
thick brown grass that over grew the kirkyard.
“They do say a s you’re a whi te lady ,” Maisri observed
suddenly . I could feel her watch ing me intently , but with none
of the nervousness that seemed common to such an
observation.
“They do say that,” I agreed.
“Ah.” She didn’ t speak again, just stared down at her feet,
long and elegant, stockinged in wool and clad in leather
sandals. My own toes, rather more sheltered, were growing
numb, a nd I thought hers must be frozen solid, if she’d been
here any time.
“What are you doing up here?”  I asked. The Priory was a
beautiful, peace ful place in good weather , but not much of a
roost in the cold winter sleet.
“I c ome here to  think,” she said. She gave me a slight
smile, b ut was  plainly preoccupied. Whatever she was
thinking, her thoughts weren’ t overly pleasant.
“T o thin k about what?” I asked , hoisting myself up to sit
on th e to mb beside her . The worn figure of a knight lay on the
lid, his claymore clasped to his b osom, the hilt forming a cross
over his heart.
“I want to know  why!” she burst out. Her thin face was
suddenly alight with indignation.“Why what?”
“Why! W hy can I see what will happen, when there’ s no
mortal th ing I can be doin’ to c hange it or stop it? What’ s the
good of  a gift like that? It’ s no  a gift, come to that – it’ s a
damn curse, though I havena do ne anything to be cursed like
this!”
She turned and glared balefully at Thomas Fraser , serene
under his helm, with the hilt of his sword clasped under
crossed hands.
“A ye, and maybe it’ s your  curs e, y e auld gomerel! Y ou and
the rest o’ your  damned family . Did ye ever think that?” she
asked suddenly , turning to me. Her brows arched high over
brown eyes that sparked with furious intelligence.
“Did ye ever think perhaps that it’ s no your own fate at all
that makes you what ye are? That maybe ye have the Sight or
the pow er only because it’ s nece ssary to someone else, and it’ s
nothing to do wi’ you at all – except that it’ s you has it, and
has to suf fer the having of it. Have you?”
“I d on’ t know ,” I said slowly . “ Or yes, since you say it, I
have wondered. Why me? Y ou ask that all the time, of course.
But I’ve never come up with a satisfactory answer . Y ou think
perhaps you have the Sight because it’ s a curse on the Frasers
– to know their deaths ahead of time? That’ s a hell of an idea.”
“A hell is right,” she agreed bitterly . She leaned back
against the sarcophagus of red stone, staring out at the sleet
that sprayed across the top of the broken wall.
“What d’ye think?” she asked suddenly . “Do I tell him?”
I was startled.
“Who? Lord Lovat?”
“A ye, his lordship. He asks wha t I see, and beats me when
I tell him there’ s naught to see. H e knows, ye ken; he sees it in
my face  when I’ve had the Sight. But that’ s the only power
I’ve got; the pow er not to say .” The long white fingers snaked
out from her cloak, playing nervously with the folds of soaked
cloth.“There’ s always  the chance of it, isn’ t there?” she said. Her
head was bent so that the hood of her cloak shielded her face
from my  gaze. “There’ s a chance that my telling would make a
dif ference. It has, now and th en, ye know . I told Lachlan
Gibbons when I saw his son-in -law wrapped in seaweed, and
the eels stirring beneath his shirt. Lachlan listened; he went out
straightaway and stove a hole in his son-in-law’ s boat.” She
laughed, remembering. “Lord, t here was the kebbie-lebbie to
do! But when the great storm c ame the next week, three men
were drowned, and Lachlan’ s son-in-law was safe at hame,
still mending his boat. And wh en I saw him next, his shirt
hung dry on him, and the seaweed was gone from his hair .”
“So it can happen,” I said softly . “Sometimes.”
“Sometimes,” she said, nodding, still staring at the ground.
Lady Sarah Fraser lay at her feet, the lady’ s stone surmounted
with a skull atop crossed bones. Hodie mihi cras tibi , said the
inscription. Sic transit gloria mundi . My turn today , yours
tomorrow . And thus passes away the glory of the world.
“Sometimes not. When I see a man wrapped in his winding
sheet, th e illness  follows – and there’ s naught to be done about
that.”
“Perhaps,” I said. I looked at my own hands, spread on the
stone b eside m e. W ithout medicine, without instruments,
without knowledge – yes, then illness was fate, and naught to
be done. But if a healer was near , and had the things to heal
with… was it po ssible that Maisri saw the shadow of a coming
illness, a s a real – if usually invisible – symptom, much like a
fever or a rash?  And then only  the lack of medical facilities
made th e reading of such sym ptoms a sentence of death? I
would never know .
“W e are n’ t ever going to know ,” I said, turning to her . “W e
can’ t say . W e know things that other people don’ t know , and
we can’ t say why or how . But we have got it – and you’re
right, it’ s a curse. But if you have knowledge, and it may
prevent harm… do you think it could cause  harm?”
She shook her head.“I canna say . If you knew ye were to die soon, are there
things y ou’d do? And would t hey be good things only that
ye’d do,  or would ye take the la st chance ye might have to do
harm to your enemies – harm that might otherwise be left
alone?”
“Damned if I kn ow .” W e were quiet for a time, watching
the s leet turn to snow , and the bl owing flakes whirl up in gusts
through the ruined tracery of the Priory wall.
“Sometimes I know there’ s som ething there, like,” Maisri
said sud denly , “ but I can block  it out of my mind, not look.
’T was li ke that with his lordship ; I knew there was something,
but I’d managed not to see it. B ut then he bade me look, and
say the divining spell to make the vision come clear . And I
did.” The hood of her cloak slipped back as she tilted her head,
looking up at the wall of the Priory as it soared above us,
ochre and white and red, with the mortar crumbling between
its stones. White-streaked black hair spilled down her back,
free in the wind.
“He was  standing there before t he fire, but it was daylight,
and clear to see . A man stood behind him, still as a tree, and
his f ace covered in black. And a cross his lordship’ s face there
fell the shadow of an ax.”
She spoke matter -of-factly , but the shiver ran up my spine
nonetheless. She sighed at last, and turned to me.
“W eel, I will tell him, then, and let him do what he will.
Doom him or save him, that I c anna do. It’ s his choice – and
the Lord Jesus help him.”
She turn ed to go, and I slid of f the tomb, landing on the
Lady Sarah’ s slab.
“Maisri,” I said. She turned back to look at me, eyes black
as the shadows among the tombs.
“A ye?”
“What do you see, Maisri?” I asked, and stood waiting,
facing her , hands dropped to my sides.
She stared at m e hard, above and below , behind and
beside. At last she smiled faintly , nodding.“I se e naught bu t you, lady ,” she said softly . “There’ s only
you.”
She turned and disappeared down the path between the
trees, leaving me among the blowing flakes of snow .
Doom, or save. That I cannot do. For I have no power
beyond that of knowledge, no ability to bend others to my will,
no way to stop them doing what they  will. There is only me.
I sho ok the snow  from the folds  of my cloak, and turned to
follow Maisri down the path, sh aring her bitter knowledge that
there was only me. And I was not enough.
 
Old Simon’ s manner was much as usual over the course of
the next two or  three weeks, but I imagined that Maisri had
kept her intention of telling him about her visions. While he
had seemed on the ver ge of s ummoning the tacksmen and
tenants to march, suddenly he backed of f, saying that there
was no hurry , after all. This shilly-shallying infuriated Y oung
Simon, who was champing at the bit to go to war and cover
himself with glory .
“It’ s not a matt er of ur gency ,” Old Simon said, for the
dozenth time. He lifted an oatcake, snif fed at it, and set it
down again. “Perhaps we’ll do  best to wait for the spring
planting, after all.”
“They could be in London before spring!” Y oung Simon
glowered across the dinner table at his father and reached for
the b utter . “If ye will not go yourself, then let me take the men
to join His Highness!”
Lord Lo vat grunted. “Y ou’ve the Devil’ s own impatience,”
he said,  “but not half his judgment. W ill ye never learn to
wait?”
“The tim e for waiting’ s long since past!” Simon burst out.
“The Camerons,  the MacDonalds, the MacGillivrays – they’ve
all been  there since the first. Ar e we to come meachin’ along
at the finish, to find ourselves beggars, and taking second
place to  Clanran ald and Glengarry? Fat chance you’ll have of
a dukedom then!”Lovat h ad a wide, expressive m outh; even in old age, it
retained some trace of humor and sensuality . Neither was
visible at the moment. He pressed his lips tight together ,
surveying his heir without enthusiasm.
“Marry in haste, repent at leisur e,” he said. “And it’ s more
true whe n choosing a laird than a lass. A woman can be got rid
of.”
Y oung Simon snorted and looked at Jamie for support.
Over the  last two months, his initial suspicious hostility had
faded into a relu ctant respect for his bastard relative’ s obvious
expertise in the art of war .
“Jamie says…” he began.
“I ken well enou gh what he says,” Old Simon interrupted.
“He’ s sa id it often enough. I sh all make up my own mind in
my own time. But bear it in mind, lad – when it comes to
declaring yourself in a war , there’ s little to be lost by waiting.”
“W aiting to see who wins,” Jamie murmured, studiously
wiping his plate with a bit of bread. The old man looked up
sharply , but evidently decided to ignore this contribution.
“Y e gave your word to the Stuarts,” Y oung Simon
continued stubbornly , paying no heed to his father ’ s
displeasure. “Y e  dinna mean to break it, surely? What will
people say of your honor?”
“The same things they said i n ’15,” his father calmly
replied. “Most of those who ‘said things’ then are dead,
bankrupt, or paupers in France. But I am still here.”
“But…” Y oung Simon was red in the face, the usual result
of this sort of conversation with his father .
“That will do,” the old Earl interrupted sharply . He shook
his head as he glared at his son, lips tight with disapproval.
“Christ. Someti mes I could wish that Brian hadna died. He
may have been a fool, too, but at least he knew when to stop
talking.”
Both Y oung Simon and Jamie fl ushed with anger , but after
a w ary glance a t each other , turned their attentions to their
food.“And what are you looking at?” Lord Lovat growled,
catching my eye on him as he turned away from his son.
“Y ou,” I said bluntly . “Y ou don’ t look at all well.” He
didn’ t, even for a man in his sev enties. No more than middle-
height, slumped  and broadened by age, he was normally still a
solid-looking man, giving the impression that his barrel chest
and rounded paunch were firm and healthy under his linen.
Lately h e had begun to look flabby , though, as if he had
shrunk a  bit within his skin. The wrinkled bags beneath his
eyes were darkened, and his skin had a sickly pallor to it.
“Mphm,” he grunted. “And why  not? I get nay rest when I
sleep, nor comfort when I’m aw ake. No wonder if I dinna look
like a bridegroom.”
“Oh, but ye do, Father ,” said Y oung Simon maliciously ,
seeing a chance to get a bit of his own back. “One at the end of
his honeymoon, wi’ all the juice sapped out of him.”
“Simon!” said Lady Frances. Still, there was a ripple of
laughter around the table at this, and even Lord Lovat’ s mouth
twitched slightly .
“A ye?” he said. “W ell, I’d soone r suf fer soreness from that
cause, I’ ll tell ye, lad.” He shifted uncomfortably in his seat,
and pushed away the platter of boiled turnips being of fered.
He reached for his wineglass, raised it to his nose for a snif f,
then morosely put it down again.
“It’ s ill-m annered to stare,” he r emarked coldly to me. “Or
perhaps the English have dif ferent standards of politeness?”
I flu shed slightly , but didn’ t d rop my eyes. “I was just
wondering – you don’ t have an  appetite, and you don’ t drink.
What other symptoms have you?”
“Going to prove yourself some worth, eh?” Lovat leaned
back in his chair , folding his hands across his broad stomach
like an elderly frog. “A healer , my grandson says. A white
lady , aye?” He flicked a basilisk glance at Jamie, who simply
went on eating, ignoring his grandfather . Lovat grunted, and
tilted his head ironically in my direction.“W ell, I  dinna drink, lady , for I canna piss, and I’ve little
wish to blow up  like a pig’ s bladder . And I dinna rest, for I rise
a do zen times a night to make use of my pot, and damn little
use it gets. So what have ye to say to that, Dame Aliset?”
“Father ,” murmured Lady Frances, “really , I don’ t think
you should…”
“Could be an infection of the bladder , but it sounds like
prostatitis to me,” I replied. I picked up my wineglass and took
a mouthful, savoring it before letting it slide down my throat. I
smiled d emurely at his lordship across my glass as I set it
down.
“Oh, it does?” he said, eyebrows raised high. “And what’ s
that, pray?”
I pu shed back m y sleeves and raised my hands, flexing my
fingers like a magician about to perform some act of
prestidigitation. I held up my left forefinger .
“The prostate gland in males,” I said instructively ,
“encircles the tube of the ureth ra – which is the passage that
leads from the bladder to the outside.” I clasped two fingers of
my right hand in a circle ar ound my left forefinger , in
illustration. “When the prostate becomes inflamed or enlar ged
– and that’ s called prostatitis, when it does – it clamps down
on th e u rethra” –  I narrowed the  circle of my fingers – “cutting
of f the flow of urine. V ery common in older men. Do you
see?”
Lady Fra nces, failing to make any impression on her father
with her opinions of proper dinner conversation, was
whispering agitatedly to her younger sister , both of them
watching me with deeper suspicion than usual.
Lord Lovat watched my little demonstration in fascination.
“A ye, I see,” he said. The slanted cat-eyes narrowed,
looking speculatively at my fingers. “What’ s to do about it,
then, if ye’ve so much learning on the subject?”
I tho ught, frowning as I searche d my memory . I had never
actually seen – much less treated – a case of prostatitis, as it
wasn’ t a  condition that much af flicted young soldiers. Still, Ihad read  medica l texts where it  was described; I remembered
the treat ment, b ecause it had ca used such hilarity among the
student nurses, who had pored  in fascinated horror over the
rather graphic illustrations in the text.
“W ell,” I said, “ barring sur gery , there are really only two
things you can do. Y ou can insert a metal rod through the
penis an d up into the bladder , to force the urethra open” – I
jabbed m y forefinger through the constricting circle – “or you
can massage the prostate itself, to reduce the swelling.
Through the rectum,” I added helpfully .
I heard a faint choking noise next to me, and glanced up at
Jamie. His eyes were still fixed on his plate, but the tide of
crimson was creeping upward f rom his collar , and the tips of
his ears blazed red. He quivered slightly . I looked around the
table, to find a phalanx of fascinated gazes fixed on me. The
Lady Frances, Aline, and the ot her women were staring at me
with var ying expressions, ranging from curiosity to disgust,
while the men all wore variations of revolted horror .
The exception to the general reaction was Lord Lovat
himself, who was rubbing his chin thoughtfully , eyes half-
closed.
“Mmphm,” he said. “Hell of a c hoice, there. A stick up the
cock, or a finger up the backside, eh?”
“More like two or three,” I said . “Repeatedly .” I gave him
a small, decorous smile.
“Ah.” A similar small smile decorated Lord Lovat’ s
mouth, a nd he slowly lifted his gaze, fixing deep blue eyes on
mine with an expression of mockery tinged with challenge.
“That s ounds… diverting,” h e observed mildly . The
slanted eyes slid down over my hands, assessing.
“Y ou’ve lovely hands, my dear ,” he said. “Prettily kept,
and such long white slender fingers, aye?”
Jamie br ought both his own han ds down on the table with
a cra sh and stood up. He leaned across the table, bringing his
face within a foot of his grandfather ’ s.“And you’re needing such atten tions, Grandsire,” he said.
“I’ll see to it myself.” He spread out his hands on the tabletop,
broad and massive, each long f inger the rough diameter of a
pistol barrel. “It’ s no pleasure to  me to be stickin’ my fingers
up your hairy a uld arse,” he in formed his grandfather , “but I
expect it’ s my filial duty to save ye from exploding in a
shower of piss, no?”
Frances emitted a faint squeak.
Lord Lo vat eyed  his grandson with considerable disfavor ,
then rose slowly from his seat.
“Don’ t t rouble y ourself,” he said shortly . “I’ll ha’ one of
the maidservants do it.” He waved a hand at the company ,
giving n otice that we might co ntinue the meal, and left the
hall, pau sing to look speculatively at a young serving girl
coming in with a platter of sli ced pheasant. Eyes wide, she
turned sideways to edge past him.
There was a dead silence over the dinner table following
his l ordship’ s exit. Y oung Simon  looked at me and opened his
mouth. Then he glanced at Ja mie, and closed it again. He
cleared his throat.
“I’ll have the salt, if ye please,” he said.
 
“…and in consequence of the regrettable infirmity that
prevents me from personal attendance upon Y our Highness, I
send by the han d of my son and heir a token of the loyalty –
nay , mak e that ‘regard’ – a token of the regard in which I have
long cherished His Majesty and Y our Highness.” Lord Lovat
paused, frowning at the ceiling.
“What shall we send, Gideon?” he asked the secretary .
“Rich-looking, but not so much I can’ t say it was only a
trifling present of no importance.”
Gideon sighed and wiped his fa ce with a handkerchief. A
stout, middle-aged man with thinning hair and round red
cheeks, he plainly found the heat of the bedroom fire
oppressive.“The rin g your lordship had fr om the Earl of Mar?” he
suggested, witho ut hope. A drop of sweat fell from his double
chin onto the let ter he was taking down, and he surreptitiously
blotted it with his sleeve.
“Not ex pensive enough,” his lordship judged, “and too
many p olitical associations.” The mottled fingers tapped
pensively on the coverlet as he thought.
Old Simon had done it up brown, I thought. He was
wearing his best nightshirt, and was propped up in bed with an
impressive panoply of medicines arrayed on the table, attended
by his personal physician, Dr . Menzies, a small man with a
squint who kept eyeing me with considerable doubt. I
supposed the old man simply distrusted Y oung Simon’ s
powers of imagination, and had staged this elaborate tableau
so th at his heir might faithfully report Lord Lovat’ s state of
decrepitude when he presented himself to Charles Stuart.
“Ha,” said his lordship with satisfaction. “W e’ll send the
gold and sterling picnic set. That’ s rich enough, but too
frivolous to be interpreted as political support. Besides,” he
added pr actically , “the spoon’ s dented. All right then,” he said
to the secretary , “let’ s go on with ‘As Y our Highness is
aware…’ ”
I ex changed a glance with Ja mie, who hid a smile in
response.
“I think you’ve given him wha t he needs, Sassenach,” he
had told  me as we undressed after our fateful dinner the week
before.
“And what’ s that?” I asked, “an excuse to molest the
maidservants?”
“I do ubt he both ers greatly wi’ excuses of that sort,” Jamie
said dry ly . “Nay , you’ve given h im a way to walk both sides –
as u sual. If he’ s got an impressive-sounding disease that keeps
him to his bed, then he canna be blamed for not appearing
himself wi’ the men he promi sed. At the same time, if he
sends h is heir to fight, the Stuarts will credit Lovat with
keeping his promise, and if it goes wrong, the Old Fox willclaim to the Eng lish that he didn a intend to give any aid to the
Stuarts, but Y oung Simon went on his own account.”
“Spell ‘ prostatitis’ for Gideon, would ye, lass?” Lord
Lovat called to me, breaking int o my thoughts. “And mind ye
write it out carefully , clot,” he said to his secretary , “I dinna
want His Highness to misread it.”
“P-r -o-s-t-a-t-i-t-i-s,” I spelled slowly , for Gideon’ s
benefit. “And how is it this morning, anyway?” I asked,
coming to stand by his lordship’ s bedside.
“Greatly improv ed, I thank ye,”  the old man said, grinning
up a t me with a fine display of  false teeth. “W ant to see me
piss?”
“Not just now , thanks,” I said politely .
 
It was a clear , icy day in mid-December when we left
Beauly to join Charles Stuart an d the Highland army . Against
all advice, Charles had pressed on into England, defying
weather and common sense, as well as his generals. But at last,
in Derby , the generals had prevailed, the Highland chiefs
refusing to go farther , and the Highland army was returning
northward. An ur gent letter from  Charles to Jamie had ur ged
us t o head south “without del ay ,” to rendezvous with His
Highness upon his return to Edinbur gh. Y oung Simon, looking
every in ch the clan chieftain in his crimson tartan, rode at the
head of a colum n of men. Those men with mounts followed
him, while the lar ger number on foot walked behind.
Being m ounted, we rode with Simon at the head of the
column, until such time as we w ould reach Comar . There we
would part company , Simon and the Fraser troops to go to
Edinbur gh, Jami e ostensibly escorting me to Lallybroch before
returning to Edinbur gh himself. He had, of course, no
intention of so returning, but that was none of Simon’ s
business.
At m idmorning,  I emer ged from  a small wooded clump by
the side of the tr ack, to find Jam ie waiting impatiently . Hot ale
had been served to the departing men, to hearten them for the
journey . And while I had myse lf found that hot ale made asurprisingly good breakfast, I had also found it had a marked
ef fect on the kidneys.
Jamie snorted. “W omen,” he said. “How can ye all take
such the  devil of a time to do s uch a simple thing as piss? Y e
make as much fuss over it as my grandsire.”
“W ell, you can come along next time and watch,” I
suggested acerbically . “Perhaps you’ll have some helpful
suggestions.”
He merely snorted again, and turned back to watch the
column of men filing past, but  he was smiling nonetheless.
The clea r , bright day raised everyone’ s spirits, but Jamie was
in a particularly  good mood this  morning. And no wonder; we
were go ing home. I knew he didn’ t deceive himself that all
would b e well; this war would have its price. But if we had
failed to  stop Charles, it might still be that we could save the
small corner of Scotland that l ay closest to us – Lallybroch.
That much might be still within our power .
I glanced at the trailing column of clansmen.
“T wo hundred men make a fair show .”
“A hun dred a nd seventy ,” Jamie corrected absently ,
reaching for his horse’ s reins.
“Are you sure?” I asked curio usly . “Lord Lovat said he
was sending two hundred. I heard him dictating the letter
saying so.”
“W ell, h e didn’ t.” Jamie swung into the saddle, then stood
up in his stirrups , pointing down the slope ahead, to the distant
spot where the Fraser banner with its stag’ s-head crest
fluttered at the head of the column.
“I count ed them while I waited for you,” he explained.
“Thirty cavalry up there wi’ Simon, then fifty wi’ broadswords
and tar ges – tho se will be the men from the local W atch – and
then the cottars, wi’ everything  from scythes to hammers at
their belts, and there’ s ninety of those.”
“I suppo se your grandfather ’ s betting on Prince Charles
not coun ting the m personally ,” I observed cynically . “T rying
to get credit for more than he’ s sent.”“A ye, but the names will be entered on the army rolls when
they reach Edinbur gh,” Jamie said, frowning. “I’d best see.”
I fo llowed more sedately . I judged my mount to be
approximately tw enty years old, and capable of no more than a
staid amble. Jamie’ s mount was a trifle friskier , though still no
match for Donas. The huge stallion had been left in
Edinbur gh, as Prince Charles wished to ride him on public
occasions. Jamie had acceded to this request, as he harbored
suspicions that Old Simon might well be capable of
appropriating the big horse, should Donas come within reach
of his rapacious grasp.
Judging from the tableau unfo lding before me, Jamie’ s
estimate of his grandfather ’ s character had not been in error .
Jamie ha d first ridden up alongside Y oung Simon’ s clerk, and
what looked from my vantage point like a heated ar gument
ended when Jamie leaned from his saddle, grabbed the clerk’ s
reins, and dragged the indignan t man’ s horse out of line, onto
the ver ge of the muddy track.
The tw o men dismounted and stood face-to-face,
obviously going  at it hammer and tongs. Y oung Simon, seeing
the a ltercation, reined aside himself, motioning the rest of the
column to proceed. A good deal of to and fro then ensued; we
were close enough to see Sim on’ s face, flushed red with
annoyance, the worried grimac e on the clerk’ s countenance,
and a series of rather violent gestures on Jamie’ s part.
I w atched this p antomime in fascination, as the clerk, with
a shrug of resignation, unfastened his saddlebag, scrabbled in
the depths, and came up with several sheets of parchment.
Jamie snatched these and skimmed rapidly through them,
forefinger tracin g the lines of writing. He seized one sheet,
letting t he rest drop to the ground, and shook it in Simon
Fraser ’ s face. The Y oung Fox looked taken aback. He took the
sheet, p eered at it, then looked up in bewilderment. Jamie
grabbed back the sheet, and wi th a sudden ef fort, ripped the
tough pa rchment down, then across, and stuf fed the pieces into
his sporran.
I had  halted my pony , who took advantage of the recess to
nose abo ut among the meager shreds of plant life still to befound. The back of Y oung Simo n’ s neck was bright red as he
turned back to his horse, and I d ecided to keep out of the way .
Jamie, r emounted, came trotting back along the ver ge to join
me, red hair flying like a banner in the wind, eyes gleaming
with anger over tight-set lips.
“The filthy auld arse-wipe,” he said without ceremony .
“What’ s he done?” I inquired.
“Listed the names of my men on his own rolls,” Jamie
said. “Claimed them as part of h is Fraser regiment. Mozie auld
pout-worm!” He glanced back up the track with longing. “Pity
we’ve co me suc h a way; it’ s too far to go back and proddle the
auld mumper .”
I resiste d the temptation to e gg Jamie on to call his
grandfather more names, and asked instead, “Why would he
do that? Just to make it look as though he were making more
of a contribution to the Stuarts?”
Jamie n odded, t he tide of fury receding slightly from his
cheeks.
“A ye, th at. Make himself look better , at no cost. But not
only tha t. The wretched auld ne ttercap wants my land back –
he h as, e ver since he was forced to give it up when my parents
wed. No w he thinks if it all comes right and he’ s made Duke
of Inverness, he can claim Lallybroch has been his all along,
and me just his tenant – the proof being that he’ s raised men
from the estate to answer the Stuarts’ call to the clans.”
“Could he actually get away w ith something like that?” I
asked doubtfully .
Jamie drew in a  deep breath an d released it, the cloud of
vapor ri sing like dragon smoke from his nostrils. He smiled
grimly and patted the sporran at his waist.
“Not now he can’ t,” he said.
 
It was a two-day trip from Beauly to Lallybroch in good
weather , given sound horses and dry ground, pausing for
nothing more than the necessities of eating, sleeping, andpersonal hygiene. As it was, one of the horses went lame six
miles out of Bea uly , it snowed a nd sleeted and blew by turns,
the boggy ground froze in patches of slippery ice, and what
with one thing and another , it was nearly a week before we
made our way down the last slope that led to the farmhouse at
Lallybroch – cold, tired, hungry , and far from hygienic.
W e were alone, just the two of us. Murtagh had been sent
to Edinbur gh with Y oung Simon and the Beaufort men-at-
arms, to judge how matters stood with the Highland army .
The hou se stood  solid among its  outbuildings, white as the
snow-streaked fields that surrou nded it. I remembered vividly
the emotions I had felt when I first saw the place. Granted, I
had seen it first in the glow of a fine autumn day , not through
sheets of blowing, icy snow , but even then it had seemed a
welcoming refuge. The house’ s impression of strength and
serenity was heightened now by the warm lamplight spilling
through the lower windows, soft yellow in the deepening gray
of early evening.
The feeling of welcome grew even stronger when I
followed Jamie through the front door , to be met by the
mouth-watering smell of roasting meat and fresh bread.
“Supper ,” Jamie said, closing his eyes in bliss as he
inhaled the fragrant aromas. “God, I could eat a horse.”
Melting ice dripped from the h em of his cloak, making wet
spots on the wooden floor .
“I thoug ht we were going to have  to  eat o ne of them,” I
remarked, untying the strings of my cloak and brushing
melting snow from my hair . “That poor creature you traded in
Kirkinmill could barely hobble.”
The sound of o ur voices carried through the hall, and a
door ope ned overhead, followed by the sound of small running
feet and a cry  of joy as the younger Jamie spotted his
namesake below .
The racket of their reunion att racted the attention of the
rest of the hou sehold, and before we knew it, we were
enveloped in greetings and emb races as Jenny and the baby ,little Maggie, Ian, Mrs. Crook, and assorted maidservants all
rushed into the hall.
“It’ s so good to see ye, my dearie!” Jenny said for the third
time, sta nding on tiptoe to kiss  Jamie. “Such news as we’ve
heard of  the army , we feared it would be months before ye
came home.”
“A ye,” I an said, “have ye brou ght any of the men back
with ye, or is this only a visit?”
“Brought them back?” Arrested  in the act of greeting his
elder ni ece, Jamie stared at his brother -in-law , momentarily
for getting the little girl in his ar ms. Brought to a realization of
her presence by her yanking hi s hair , he kissed her absently
and handed her to me.
“What d’ye mean, Ian?” he demanded. “The men should
all h a’ returned a month ago. Did some of them not come
home?”
I h eld small Ma ggie tight, a dreadful feeling of foreboding
coming over me as I watched the smile fade from Ian’ s face.
“None o f them came back, Jamie,” he said slowly , his
long, good-humored face suddenly mirroring the grim
expression he saw on Jamie’ s. “W e havena seen hide nor hair
of any of them, since they marched awa’ with you.”
There was a shout from the dooryard outside, where
Rabbie MacNab was putting away the horses. Jamie whirled,
turned to the do or and pushed it open, leaning out into the
storm.
Over his  shoulder , I could see a rider coming through the
blowing snow . V isibility was to o poor to make out his face,
but that small, w iry figure, clinging monkeylike to the saddle,
was unmistakable. “Fast as chain lightning,” Jamie had said,
and clea rly he was right; to make the trip from Beauly to
Edinbur gh, and then to Lallybro ch in a week was a true feat of
endurance. The coming rider was Murtagh, and it didn’ t take
Maisri’ s gift of prophecy to tell us that the news he bore was
ill.4 2  R E U N I O N S
W hite with  rage, Jamie flung back the door of Holyrood’ s
morning drawin g room with a crash. Ewan Cameron leaped to
his feet,  upsetting the inkpot he had been using. Simon Fraser ,
Master o f Lovat, was seated acro ss the table, but merely raised
thick black brows at his half-nephew’ s entrance.
“Damn!” Ewan said, scrabbling in his sleeve for a
handkerchief to mop the spreading puddle with. “What’ s the
matter w i’ ye, Fraser? Oh, good morning to ye, Mistress
Fraser ,” he added, seeing me behind Jamie.
“Where’ s His Highness?” J amie demanded without
preamble.
“Stirling Castle,” Cameron replied, failing to find the
handkerchief he was searching for . “Got a cloth, Fraser?”
“If I  did , I’d choke ye with it,” Jamie said. He had relaxed
slightly , upon finding that Charl es Stuart was not in residence,
but the corners o f his lips were still tight. “Why have ye let my
men be kept in the T olbooth? I’ve just seen them, kept in a
place I wouldna let pigs live! Surely to God you could have
done something!”
Cameron flushed at this, but his clear brown eyes met
Jamie’ s steadily .
“I tried,” he said. “I told his Highness that I was sure it was
a mistake – aye, and the thirty of them ten miles from the army
when th ey were found, some m istake! – and besides, even if
they’d really meant to desert, he didna have such a strength of
men tha t he could af ford to do without them. That’ s all that
kept him  from ordering the lot of them to be hanged on the
spot, ye ken,” he said, beginning to grow angry as the shock of
Jamie’ s entrance wore of f. “God, man, it’ s treason to desert in
time of war!”
“A ye?” Jamie said skeptically . He nodded briefly to Y oung
Simon, and pushed a chair in my direction before sitting downhimself. “And have you sent ord ers to hang the twenty of your
men who’ve gone home, Ewan? Or is it more like forty , now?”
Cameron flushed more deeply and dropped his eyes,
concentrating on mopping up the ink with the cloth Simon
Fraser handed him.
“They weren’ t caught,” he muttered at last. He glanced up
at J amie, his t hin face earnest. “Go to His Highness at
Stirling,” he advised. “He was furious about the desertion, but
after all,  it was his orders sent y e to Beauly and left your men
untended, aye? And he’ s always  thought well of ye, Jamie, and
called ye  friend.  It might be he’ll pardon your men, and ye beg
him for their lives.”
Picking up the ink-soaked cloth, he looked dubiously at it,
then, wi th a muttered excuse, left to dispose of it outside,
obviously eager to get away from Jamie.
Jamie sat sprawled in his chair , breathing through clenched
teeth with a small hissing noise, eyes fixed on the small
embroidered hanging on the wall that showed the Stuart coat
of a rms. The two stif f fingers of his right hand tapped slowly
on the table. He had been in much the same state ever since
Murtagh’ s arriva l at Lallybroch with the news that the thirty
men of Jamie’ s command had b een apprehended in the act of
desertion and imprisoned in Ed inbur gh’ s notorious T olbooth
Prison, under sentence of death.
I didn’ t myself think that Charl es intended to execute the
men. As Ewan Cameron pointe d out, the Highland army had
need of every ab le-bodied man it could muster . The push into
England that Charles had ar gue d for had been costly , and the
influx of support he had foresee n from the English countryside
had not materialized. Not only t hat; to execute Jamie’ s men in
his absence would have been an act of political idiocy and
personal betrayal too great even for Charles Stuart to
contemplate.
No, I imagined that Cameron was right, and the men
would b e pardo ned eventually . Jamie undoubtedly realized it,
too, but the realization was po or consolation to him, faced
with the  matchi ng realization that rather than seeing his mensafely removed from the risks o f a deteriorating campaign, his
orders h ad land ed them in one of the worst prisons in all of
Scotland, branded as cowards and sentenced to a shameful
death by hanging.
This, coupled with the imminent prospect of leaving the
men in their da rk, filthy imprisonment, to go to Stirling and
face the humiliation of pleading  with Charles, was more than
suf ficient to explain the look on Jamie’ s face – that of a man
who has just breakfasted on broken glass.
Y oung S imon also was silent, frowning, wide forehead
creasing with thought.
“I’ll come with ye to His Highness,” he said abruptly .
“Y ou will?” Jamie glanced at his half-uncle in surprise,
then his eyes narrowed at Simon. “Why?”
Simon g ave a half-grin. “Blood’ s blood, after all. Or do ye
think I’d try to claim your men, like Father did?”
“W ould you?
“I m ight,” Simon said frankly , “if I thought there was a
chance of it doing me some good. More likely to cause
trouble, though,  is what I think. I’ve no wish to fight wi’ the
MacKenzies – or you, nevvie,” he added, the grin widening.
“Rich a s Lallybroch might be, it’ s a good long way from
Beauly , and likely to be the devil of a fight to get hold of it,
either by force o r by the courts.  I told Father so, but he hears
what he wants to.”
The young man shook his head  and settled his swordbelt
around his hips.
“There’ s like to be better pickings with the army; certainly
there will be wit h a restored kin g. And-” he concluded, “if that
army’ s going to fight again lik e they did at Preston, they’ll
need every man they can get. I’ll go with ye,” he repeated
firmly .
Jamie nodded, a slow smile daw ning on his face. “I thank
ye, then, Simon. It will be of help.”Simon nodded. “A ye, well. It wo uldna hurt matters any for
ye to ask Dougal MacKenzie to come speak for ye, either . He’ s
in Edinbur gh just now .”
“Dougal MacK enzie?” Jamie’ s brows rose quizzically .
“A ye, I suppose it would do no harm, but…”
“Do no harm? Man, did ye no hear? The MacKenzie’ s
Prince Charles’ s fair -haired boy the noo.” Simon lounged back
in his seat, looking mockingly at his half-nephew .
“What for?” I as ked. “What on earth has he done?” Dougal
had brou ght two hundred and fif ty men-at-arms to fight for the
Stuart cause, but there were a number of chieftains who had
made greater contributions.
“T en thousand pounds,” Simon said, savoring the words as
he rolled  them around on his tongue. “T en thousand pounds in
fine sterling, Dougal MacKenzie ’ s brought to lay at the feet of
his sovereign. And it willna come amiss, either ,” he said
matter -of-factly , dropping his l ounging pose. “Cameron was
just telling me t hat Charles had gone through the last of the
Spanish money , and damn little coming in from the English
supporters he’d counted on. Dougal’ s ten thousand will keep
the a rmy in wea pons and food f or a few more weeks, at least,
and with luck, by then he’ll ha ’ got more from France.” At
last, realizing that his reckless c ousin was providing him with
an excellent distraction for the English, Louis was reluctantly
agreeing to cough up a bit of money . It was a long time
coming, though.
I stared at Jamie , his face reflecting my own bewilderment.
Where on earth would Dougal MacKenzie have gotten ten
thousand pounds? Suddenly I remembered where I had heard
that sum mentioned once befo re – in the thieves’ hole at
Cranesmuir , where I had spent three endless days and nights,
awaiting trial on char ges of witchcraft.
“Geillis Duncan !” I exclaimed. I felt cold at the memory of
that conversation, carried out in the pitch-blackness of a miry
pit, my companion no more th an a voice in the dark. The
drawing-room fire was warm, but I pulled my cloak tighter
around me.“I diver ted near on to ten thousand pounds,” Geillis had
said, boasting of the thefts accomplished by judicious for gery
of her late husb and’ s name. Arthur Duncan, whom she had
killed by poison, had been the procurator fiscal for the district.
“T en thousand pounds for the Jacobite cause. When it comes
to rebellion, I shall know that I helped.”
“She sto le it,” I said, feeling a tremor run up my arms at
the thought of G eillis Duncan, convicted of witchcraft, gone to
a fiery death be neath the branches of a rowan tree. Geillis
Duncan, who had escaped death  just long enough to give birth
to th e child she bore to her lover – Dougal MacKenzie. “She
stole it and she gave it to Doug al; or he took it from her , no
telling w hich, now .” Agitated, I stood up and paced back and
forth before the fire.
“That ba stard!” I said. “That’ s w hat he was doing in Paris
two years ago!”
“What?” Jamie  was frowning at me, Simon staring
openmouthed.
“V isiting Charles Stuart. He came to see whether Charles
were really planning a rebellion. Maybe he promised the
money then, maybe that’ s what encouraged Charles to risk
coming to Scotland – the promi se of Geillis Duncan’ s money .
But Dougal couldn’ t give Charles the money openly while
Colum was alive – Colum would  have asked questions; he was
much too honest a man to have used stolen money , no matter
who stole it in the first place.”
“I see.” Jamie n odded, eyes hooded in thought. “But now
Colum is dead,” he said quietly . “And Dougal MacKenzie is
the Prince’ s favorite.”
“Which is all to the good for you, as I’ve been saying,”
Simon p ut in, impatient with talk of people he didn’ t know and
matters he only half-understood . “Go find him; likely he’ll be
in the W orld’ s End at this time o’ day .”
“Do you think h e’ll speak to th e Prince for you?” I asked
Jamie, worried. Dougal had been Jamie’ s foster father for a
time, bu t the relationship had as suredly had its ups and downs.
Dougal might not want to risk his newfound popularity withthe Prince by speaking out f or a bunch of cowards and
deserters.
The Y oung Fox might lack his father ’ s years, but he had a
good bit  of his sire’ s acumen. The heavy black brows quirked
upward.
“MacKenzie still wants Lallybroch, no? And if he thinks
Father and I mig ht have an eye on reclaiming your land, he’ll
be m ore eager to help you get your men back, aye? Cost him a
lot more  to fight us for it than t o deal wi’ you, once the war ’ s
over .” H e nodded, happily chewing his upper lip as he
contemplated the ramifications of the situation.
“I’ll go wave a copy of Father ’ s list under his nose before
ye s peak to him . Y ou come in and tell him you’ll see me in
hell before ye le t me claim your men, and then we’ll all go to
Stirling together .” He grinned at Jamie complicitously .
“I always thought there was some reason why ‘Scot’
rhymed with ‘plot,’ ” I remarked.
“What?” Both men looked up, startled.
“Never mind,” I said, shaking my head. “Blood will tell.”
 
I sta yed in Edinb ur gh while Jamie and his rival uncles rode
to Stirling to straighten out matters with the Prince. Under the
circumstances, I couldn’ t stay at Holyroodhouse, but found
lodgings in one of the wynds above the Canongate. It was a
small, cold, cramped room, but I wasn’ t in it much.
The T olbooth prisoners couldn’ t come out, but there was
nothing barring visitors who w anted to get in. Fer gus and I
visited t he priso n daily , and a small amount of discriminating
bribery allowed me to pass food  and medicine to the men from
Lallybroch. Theoretically , I wasn’ t allowed to talk privately to
the p risoners, but here again, th e system had a certain amount
of s lip to it, when suitably greased, and I managed to talk
alone with Ross the smith on two or three occasions.
“ ’T was my fault, lady ,” he said at once, the first time I saw
him. “I should ha’ had the sense  to make the men go in small
groups o f three and four , not altogether like we did. I wasafraid of losing some, though;  the most of them had never
been more than five mile from home before.”
“Y ou needn’ t blame yourself,” I assured him. “From what I
heard, it was on ly ill luck that you were caught. Don’ t worry;
Jamie has gone to see the Prince at Stirling; he’ll have you out
of here in no time.”
He nodd ed, tiredly brushing back a lock of hair . He was
filthy and unkempt, and a good bit diminished from the burly ,
robust craftsman  he had been a few months before. Still, he
smiled at me, and thanked me for the food.
“It w illna come amiss,” he said  frankly . “It’ s little we get
but slops. D’ye think…” He he sitated. “D’ye think ye might
manage a few b lankets, my lady? I wouldna ask, only four of
the men have the ague, and…”
“I’ll manage,” I said.
I lef t the  prison , wondering exactly how  I  would  manag e.
While the main army had gone south to invade England,
Edinbur gh was still an occupied city . W ith soldiers, lords, and
hangers-on drifting constantly in and out, goods of all sorts
were high-priced and in short supply . Blankets and warm
clothes could be found, but they would cost a lot, and I had
precisely ten shillings left in my purse.
There was a banker in Edinbur gh, a Mr . W aterford, who
had in the past  handled some of Lallybroch’ s business and
investments, but Jamie had removed all his funds from the
bank some months before, fearing that bank-held assets might
be seized by the Crown. The money had been converted to
gold, some of i t sent to Jared in France for safekeeping, the
rest of it hidden in the farmhouse. All of it equally inaccessible
to me at the moment.
I p aused  on the street to think, passersby jostling past me
on the cobbles. If I didn’ t have money , I had still a few things
of value . The crystal Raymond had given me in Paris – while
the crys tal itself was of no particular value, its gold mounting
and chai n were.  My wedding ri ngs – no, I didn’ t want to part
with those, even temporarily . Bu t the pearls… I felt inside my
pocket, checkin g to see that the pearl necklace Jamie hadgiven me on ou r wedding day was still safely sewn into the
seam of my skirt.
It was; the smal l, irregular beads of the freshwater pearls
were ha rd and smooth under m y fingers. Not as expensive as
oriental pearls, but it was stil l a fine necklace, with gold
pierced-work roundels between the pearls. It had belonged to
Jamie’ s mother , Ellen. I thought  she would have liked to see it
used to comfort his men.
 
“Five pounds,” I said firmly . “It’ s worth ten, and I could
get six for it, if I cared to walk all the way up the hill to
another shop.” I had no idea whether this was true or not, but I
reached out as th ough to pick up the necklace from the counter
anyway , pretending that I was ab out to leave the pawnbroker ’ s
shop. The pawnbroker , Mr . Samuels, placed a quick hand over
the n ecklace, his eagerness lettin g me know that I should have
asked six pounds to start with.
“Three p ound ten, then,” he said. “It’ s beggaring me own
family to do it, but for a fine lady like yourself…”
The small bell o ver the shop door chimed behind me as the
door ope ned, and there was the sound of hesitant footsteps on
the worn boards of the pawnshop floor .
“Excuse me,” began a girl’ s voice, and I whirled around,
pearl necklace for gotten, to see the shadow of the
pawnbroker ’ s balls falling across the face of Mary Hawkins.
She had  grown in the last year , and filled out as well. There
was a new matu rity and dignity in her manner , but she was
still very young. She blinked once, and then fell on me with a
shriek o f joy , her fur collar tickl ing my nose as she hugged me
tight.
“What are you doing here?” I asked, disentangling myself
at last.
“Father ’ s sister lives here,” she replied. “I’m st-staying
with her . Or do you mean why a m I here?” She waved a hand
at the dingy confines of Mr . Samuels’ s emporium.“W ell, that too,” I said. “But that can wait a bit.” I turned
to th e pa wnbroker . “Four pound  six, or I’ll walk up the hill,” I
told him. “Make up your mind, I’m in a hurry .”
Grumbling to himself, Mr . Samuels reached beneath his
counter for the cash box, as I turned back to Mary .
“I have to buy some blankets. Can you come with me?”
She glanced outside, to where a  small man in a footman’ s
livery st ood by the door , clearly waiting for her . “Y es, if you’ll
come with me afterward. Oh, Claire, I’m so  glad to see you!”
“He sent a mess age to me,” Mary confided, as we walked
down th e hill. “Alex. A friend b rought me his letter .” Her face
glowed as she spoke his name, but there was a small frown
between her brows as well.
“When I found he was in Edinbur gh, I m-made Father send
me t o visit Aunt  Mildred. He didn’ t mind,” she added bitterly .
“It m -made him ill to look at me, after what happened in Paris.
He was happy to get me out of his house.”
“So you’ve seen Alex?” I ask ed. I wondered how the
young curate had fared, since I had last seen him. I also
wondered how he had found the courage to write to Mary .
“Y es. He didn’ t ask me to come ,” she added quickly . “I c-
came by myself.” Her chin lifted in defiance, but there was a
small qu iver as she said, “He…  he wouldn’ t have written to
me, but he tho ught he was d-dying, and he wanted me to
know… to know…” I put an arm about her shoulders and
turned q uickly into one of the closes, standing with her out of
the flow of jostling street traf fic.
“It’ s all right,” I said to her , patting her helplessly , knowing
that noth ing I could do would make it right. “Y ou came, and
you’ve seen him, that’ s the important thing.”
She nod ded, speechless, and blew her nose. “Y es,” she said
thickly , at last. “W e’ve had… two months. I k-keep telling
myself that that’ s more than most people ever have, two
months of happiness… but we lost so much time that we might
have h-had, and… it’ s not enough. Claire, it isn’ t enough!”“No,” I said qui etly . “A lifetime isn’ t enough, for that kind
of lo ve.” W ith a  sudden pang, I wondered where Jamie was,
and how he was faring.
Mary , more composed now , clutched me by the sleeve.
“Claire, can you come with me to see him? I know there’ s n-
not muc h you can do…” Her voice faltered, and she steadied it
with a visible ef fort. “But ma ybe you could… help.” She
caught my look at the footman, who stood stolidly outside the
wynd, oblivious  to the passing traf fic. “I pay him,” she said
simply . “My aunt thinks I go w-walking every afternoon. W ill
you come?”
“Y es, o f course.” I glanced between the towering
buildings, judging the level of the sun over the hills outside the
city . It would be dark in an hour; I wanted the blankets
delivered to the prison before ni ght made the damp stone walls
of the T olbooth still colder . Making a sudden decision, I turned
to F er gus, who had been sta nding patiently next to me,
watching Mary with interest. Returned to Edinbur gh with the
rest of the Lally broch men, he had escaped imprisonment by
virtue of his French citizenship, and had survived hardily by
reverting to his customary trade. I had found him faithfully
hanging about near the T olboo th, where he brought bits of
food for his imprisoned companions.
“T ake th is money ,” I said, handing him my purse, “and
find Murtagh. T ell him to get as many blankets as that will
buy , and  see they’re taken to the gaolkeeper at the T olbooth.
He’ s bee n bribed  already , but ke ep back a few shillings, just in
case.”
“But Madame,” he protested, “I promised milord I would
not let you go alone…”
“Milord isn’ t here,” I said firmly , “and I am. Go, Fer gus.”
He glan ced from  me to Mary , evidently decided she was
less a threat to m e than my tem per was to him, and departed,
shrugging his shoulders and muttering in French about the
stubbornness of women.
 The littl e room at the top of the building had changed
considerably since my last visit. It was clean, for one thing,
with polish gleaming on every horizontal surface. There was
food in the hut ch, a down quilt on the bed, and numerous
small comforts provided for the patient. Mary had confided on
the way that she had been quietly pawning her mother ’ s
jewelry , to ensure that Alex Randall was as comfortable as
money could make him.
There were limits to what money could manage, but Alex’ s
face glowed like a candle flame when Mary came through the
door , temporarily obscuring the ravages of illness.
“I’ve br ought Claire, dearest.” Mary dropped her cloak
unheeded onto a chair and kne lt beside him, taking his thin,
blue-veined hands in her own.
“Mrs. Fraser .” His voice was light and breathless, though
he smiled at me. “It’ s good to see a friendly face again.”
“Y es, it is.” I s miled at him, n oting half-consciously the
rapid, fluttering pulse visible in his throat, and the
transparency of his skin. The ha zel eyes were soft and warm,
holding most of the life left in his frail body .
Lacking medicine, there was nothing I could do for him,
but I examined him carefull y , and saw him tucked up
comfortably afterward, his lips slightly blue from the minor
exertion of the examination.
I co vered the an xiety I felt at his condition, and promised
to co me next da y with some medicine to help him sleep more
easily . H e hardl y noticed my as surances; all his attention was
for Mary , sitting  anxiously by hi m, holding his hand. I saw her
glance at the w indow , where light was fading rapidly , and
realized her concern; she would have to return to her aunt’ s
house before nightfall.
“I’ll take  my leave, then,” I told Alex, removing myself as
tactfully as I could, to leave them a few precious moments
alone together .
He g lanced from me to Mary , then smiled back at me in
gratitude.“God bless you, Mrs. Fraser ,” he said.
“I’ll see  you tomorrow ,” I sai d, and left, hoping that I
would.
 
I wa s busy over  the next few days. The men’ s arms had
been confiscated , of course, when they were arrested, and I did
my best to recover what I could, bullying and threatening,
bribing and charming where necessary . I pawned two brooches
that Jared had given me as a farewell present, and bought
enough food to ensure that the men of Lallybroch ate as well
as the army in general – poorly as that might be.
I tal ked my wa y into the cells of the prison, and spent
some time in treating the prisoners’ ailments, ranging from
scurvy and the more generalized malnutrition common in
winter , to chafing sores, chilblains, arthritis, and a variety of
respiratory ailments.
I made the rounds of those chieftains and lords still in
Edinbur gh – not many – who m ight be helpful to Jamie, if his
visit to Stirling should fail. I didn’ t think it would, but it
seemed wise to take precautions.
And among the other activities of my days, I made time to
see Alex Randall once a day . I took pains to come in the
mornings, so as not to use up his time with Mary . Alex slept
little, an d that little, ill; consequently , he tended to be tired and
drooping in the morning, not wanting to talk, but always
smiling in welcome when I arrived. I would give him a light
mixture of mint and lavender , w ith a few drops of poppy syrup
stirred in; this w ould generally allow him a few hours of sleep,
so that he could be alert when Mary arrived in the afternoon.
Aside from me and Mary , I had seen no other visitors at
the t op of the building. I was therefore surprised, coming up
the s tairs to his room one morning, to hear voices behind the
closed door .
I kn ocked once, briefly , as was our agreed custom, and let
myself i n. Jonat han Randall was sitting by his brother ’ s bed,
clad in his captain’ s uniform of red and fawn. He rose at my
entrance and bowed correctly , face cold.“Madam,” he said.
“Captain,” I said. W e then stood awkwardly in the middle
of the room, staring at each other , each unwilling to go further .
“Johnny ,” said Alex’ s hoarse voice from the bed. It had a
note of coaxing , as well as one of command, and his brother
shrugged irritably when he heard it.
“My brother has summoned me to give you a bit of news,”
he said, tightlip ped. He wore n o wig this morning, and with
his dark hair ti ed back, his resemblance to his brother was
startling. Pale and frail as Alex was, he looked like Jonathan’ s
ghost.
“Y ou and Mr . F raser have been kind to my Mary ,” Alex
said, rol ling ont o his side to look at me. “And to me as well.
I… knew  of my brother ’ s bar gain with you” – the faintest of
pinks ro se in his cheeks – “but I know , too, what you and your
husband did for Mary… in Paris.” He licked his lips, cracked
and dry from t he constant heat in the room. “I think you
should hear the news Johnny brought from the Castle
yesterday .”
Jack Ran dall eyed me with dislike, but he was good as his
word.
“Hawley has succeeded Cope, as I told you earlier that he
would,” he said. “Hawley has little gift for leadership, bar a
certain blind confidence in the men under his command.
Whether that will stand him in  better stead than did Cope’ s
cannon-” He shrugged impatiently .
“Be that  as it may , General Hawley has been directed to
march north to recover Stirling Castle.”
“Has he?” I sa id. “Do you know how many troops he
has?”
Randall nodded shortly . “He has eight thousand troops at
the moment, thirteen hundred o f them cavalry . He is also in
daily expectation of the arrival of six thousand Hessians.” He
frowned, thinki ng. “I have heard that the chief of clan
Campbell is sending a thousan d men to join with Hawley’ sforces as well, but I cannot say whether that information is
reliable; there seems no way of predicting what Scots will do.”
“I se e.” This wa s serious; the Highland army at this point
had between six and seven thousand men. Against Hawley ,
minus his expected reinforcem ents, they might manage. T o
wait until his Hessians and Campbells arrived was clearly
madness, to say nothing of th e fact that the Highlanders’
fighting skills were much better suited to attack than defense.
This news had best reach Lord Geor ge Murray at once.
Jack Randall’ s voice called me back from my ruminations.
“Good d ay to you, Madam,” he  said, formal as ever , and
there wa s no trace of humanity on the hard, handsome features
as he bowed to me and took his leave.
“Thank you,” I said to Alex Ra ndall, waiting for Jonathan
to d escend the long, twisting s tair before leaving myself. “I
appreciate it very much.”
He nodded. The shadows under his eyes were pronounced;
another bad night.
“Y ou’re welcome,” he said simply . “I suppose you’ll be
leaving some of the medicine for me? I imagine it may be
some time before I see you again.”
I halted, struck by his assumption that I would go myself
to Stirling. That was what every fiber of my being ur ged me to
do, b ut there wa s the matter of the men in the T olbooth to be
considered.
“I don’ t know ,” I said. “But yes; I’ll leave the medicine.”
 
I walke d slowly back to my lodgings, my mind still
spinning. Obviously , I must get word to Jamie immediately .
Murtagh would have to go, I supposed. Jamie would believe
me, of course, if I wrote him a note. But could he convince
Lord G eor ge, the Duke of Perth, or the other army
commanders?
I couldn’ t tell him where I had come by this knowledge;
would the commanders be willing to believe a woman’ sunsupported, written word? Even the word of a woman
popularly supposed to have supernatural powers? I thought of
Maisri suddenly , and shivered. It’ s a curse , she had said. Y es,
but w hat choice was there? I h ave no power  but the power not
to say what I know . I  had t hat pow er , too, but dar ed not risk
using it.
T o m y surprise, the door to my small room was open, and
there were clashing, banging n oises coming from inside it. I
had been storing the recovere d arms under my bed, and
stacking swords  and assorted blades by the hearth once the
space un der the bed was filled , until there was virtually no
floor space left, save the small  square of floorboards where
Fer gus laid his blankets.
I sto od on the stair , amazed at the scene visible through the
open door above. Murtagh, standing on the bed, was
overseeing the handing-out of weaponry to the men who
crowded the room to overflowing – the men of Lallybroch.
“Madame!” I turned at the cry , to find Fer gus at my elbow ,
beaming up at me, a square-toothed grin on his sallow face.
“Madame! Is it not wonderful? Milord has received pardon
for his men – a  messenger came from Stirling this morning,
with the order to release them, and we are ordered at once to
join milord at Stirling!”
I hugged him, grinning a bit myself. “That is  wonderful,
Fer gus.” A few of the men had noticed me, and were
beginning to turn to me, smilin g and plucking at each other ’ s
sleeves. An air o f exhilaration and excitement filled the small
room. Murtagh, perched on the bedstead like the Gnome King
on a  toadstool, s aw me then, and smiled – an expression which
rendered him virtually unrecognizable, so much did it
transform his face.
“W ill Mr . Murtagh take the men to Stirling?” Fer gus
asked. He had re ceived a whinger , or short sword, as his share
of th e weaponry , and was pract icing drawing and sheathing it
as he spoke.
I m et Murtagh’ s eye and sho ok my head. After all, I
thought, if Jenny Cameron could lead her brother ’ s men toGlenfinnan, I could take my husband’ s troops to Stirling. And
just let Lord G eor ge and His Highness try to disregard my
news, delivered in person.
“No,” I said. “I will.”4 3  F A L K I R K
I  c ould feel the men close by , all around me in the dark.
There w as a piper walking next to me; I could hear the creak
of the bag under his arm and see the outline of the drones,
poking out behind. They moved as he walked, so that he
seemed to be carrying a small, feebly struggling animal.
I knew him, a m an named Labhriunn MacIan. The pipers
of t he clans to ok it in turns to call the dawn at Stirling,
walking to and fro in the e ncampment with the piper ’ s
measured stride , so that the wail of the drones bounced from
the flimsy tents, calling all within to the battle of the new day .
Again in the e vening a single piper would come out,
strolling slow across the yard, and the camp would stop to
listen, voices stilling and the glow of the sunset fading from
the tents’ canvas. The high, w hining notes of the pibroch
called d own the shadows from the moor , and when the piper
was done, the night had come.
Evening or morning, Labhriunn MacIan played with his
eyes closed, stepping sure and s low across the yard and back,
elbow tight on t he bag and his fingers lively on the chanters’
holes. Despite the cold, I sat sometimes to watch in the
evenings, letting the sound drive its spikes through my heart.
MacIan paced to and fro, ignoring everything around him,
making his turns on the ball of his foot, pouring his being out
through his chanter .
There are the small Irish pipes, used indoors for making
music, and the Great Northern pipes, used outdoors for
reveille, and for calling of clans to order , and the spurring of
men to battle. I t was the Northern pipes that MacIan played,
walking to and fro with his eyes shut tight.
Rising from my seat as he finished one evening, I waited
while he  pressed the last of the air from his bag with a dying
wail, and fell in alongside him as he came in through Stirling’ s
gate with a nod to the guard.“Good e ’en to ye, Mistress,” he  said. His voice was soft,
and his eyes, no w open, softer still with the unbroken spell of
his playing still on him.
“Good evening to you, MacIan,” I said. “I wondered,
MacIan, why do you play with your eyes tight shut?”
He smiled and scratched his head, but answered readily
enough.
“I suppo se it is because my grandsire taught me, Mistress,
and he was blind. I see him always when I play , pacing the
shore with his beard flying in the wind and his blind eyes
closed against the sting of the sand, hearing the sound of the
pipes come down to him of f the rocks of the clif fside and
knowing from that where he was in his walk.”
“So you  see him, and you play , too, to the clif fs and the
sea? From where do you come, MacIan?” I asked. His speech
was low  and sibilant, even more than that of most
Highlanders.
“It i s from the Shetlands, Mistre ss,” he replied, making the
last word almost “Zetlands.” “ A long way from here.” He
smiled again, and bowed to m e as we came to the guest
quarters, where I would turn. “B ut then, I am thinking that you
have come farther still, Mistress.”
“That’ s’ true,” I said. “Good night, MacIan.”
 
Later th at week, I wondered whether his skill at playing
unseeing would help him, here in the dark. A lar ge body of
men moving makes a good bit o f noise, no matter how quietly
they go , but I thought any echoes they created would be
drowned in the howl of the rising wind. The night was
moonless, but the sky was light with clouds, and an icy sleet
was falling, stinging my cheeks.
The men of th e Highland army covered the ground in
small groups of ten or twenty , moving in uneven bumps and
patches, as though the earth thr ust up small hillocks here and
there, or as thou gh the groves of larch and alder were walking
through the dark. My news had  not come unsupported; EwanCameron’ s spies had reported Hawley’ s moves as well, and the
Scottish army was now on its way to meet him, somewhere
south of Stirling Castle.
Jamie ha d given  up ur ging me to go back. I had promised
to st ay out of the way , but if there was a battle to be fought,
then the  army’ s physicians must be at hand afterward. I could
tell when his at tention shifted to his men, and the prospects
ahead, b y the sudden cock of hi s head. On Donas, he sat high
enough to be vi sible as a shado w , even in the dark, and when
he threw up an arm, two smaller shadows detached themselves
from the moving mass and cam e up beside his stirrup. There
was a moment’ s whispered conversation; then he straightened
in his saddle and turned to me.
“The scouts say we’ve been seen; English guards have
gone flying for Callendar House, to warn General Hawley . W e
shallna wait longer; I’m taking  my men and circling beyond
Dougal’ s troops to the far side of Falkirk Hill. W e’ll come
down fro m behind as the MacK enzies come in from the west.
There’ s a wee k irk up the hill to your left, maybe a quarter -
mile. Th at’ s your place, Sassenach. Ride there now , and stay .”
He groped for my arm in the darkness, found it, and squeezed.
“I shall come fo r ye when I can, or send Murtagh if I can’ t.
If things should go wrong, go into the kirk and claim sanctuary
there. It’ s the best I can think of.”
“Don’ t worry about me,” I said. My lips were cold, and I
hoped m y voice didn’ t sound as shaky as I felt. I bit back the
“Be careful” that would have  been my next words, and
contented myself with touching him quickly , the cold surface
of h is ch eek hard as metal under my hand, and the brush of a
lock of hair , cold and smooth as a deer ’ s pelt.
I reined  to the left, picking my way slowly as the
oncoming men flowed around me. The gelding was excited by
the stir; he tosse d his head, snorting, and fidgeted under me. I
pulled him up s harply , as Jamie had taught me, and kept a
close rein as the ground slop ed suddenly up beneath the
horse’ s hooves. I glanced back once, but Jamie had
disappeared into  the night, and I needed all my attention to
find the church in the dark.It w as a tiny building, stone with a thatched roof, crouched
in a small depression of the hill, like a cowering animal. I felt
a str ong feeling of kinship with it. The English watchfires
were visible from here, glimmering through the sleet, and I
could h ear shouting in the di stance – Scots or English, I
couldn’ t tell.
Then th e pipes began, a thin, eerie scream in the storm.
There w ere discordant shrieks, rising unearthly from several
dif ferent places on the hill. H aving seen it before at close
hand, I could im agine the pipers blowing up their bags, chests
inflating with quick gasps and blue lips clamped tight on the
chanters’ stems, cold-stif f fin gers fumbling to guide the
blowing into coherence.
I c ould almost f eel the stubborn resistance of the leathern
bag, kept warm and flexible un der a plaid, but reluctant to be
coaxed into fullness, then suddenly springing to life, part of
the piper ’ s body , like a third lung, breathing for him when the
wind stole his b reath, as though the shouting of the clansmen
near him filled it.
The sho uting was louder , now , a nd reached me in waves as
the w ind turned, carrying eddyin g blasts of sleet. There was no
porch to  give shelter , or any tre es on the hillside to break the
wind. M y horse turned and put his head down, facing into the
wind, an d his mane whipped ha rd against my face, rough with
ice.
The chu rch of fe red sanctuary from the elements, as well as
from the English. I pushed the door open and, tugging on the
bridle, led the horse inside after me.
It was dark insi de, with the single oiled-skin window no
more than a dim patch in the blackness over the altar . It
seemed warm, by contrast with  the weather outside, but the
smell of stale sw eat made it suf focating. There were no seats
for the horse to knock over; nothing save a small shrine set
into one  wall, and the altar itself. Oppressed by the strong
smell of people, the horse stood still, snorting and blowing, but
not fidgeting overmuch. Keepin g a wary eye on him, I went
back to the door and thrust my head out.No one could te ll what was happ ening on Falkirk Hill. The
sparks o f gunfire twinkled randomly in the dark. I could hear ,
faint and intermittent, the ring of metal and the thump of an
occasional explosion. Now and  then came the scream of a
wounded man, high as a bagpipe’ s screech, dif ferent from the
Gaelic cries of the warriors. A nd then the wind would turn,
and I would hear nothing, or would imagine I heard voices that
were nothing but the shrieking wind.
I had not seen the fight at Prestonpans; subconsciously
accustomed to the ponderous movements of huge armies
bound to tanks and mortars, I had not realized just how
quickly things could happen in a small pitched battle of hand-
to-hand fighting and small, light arms.
The firs t warning I had was a shout from near at hand.
“T ulacb Ar d!”  D eafened by w ind, I hadn’ t heard them as they
came up the hill. “T ulacb Ar d!”  It  was the battle cry of clan
MacKenzie; some of Dougal’ s troops, forced backward in the
direction of my sanctuary . I du cked back inside, but kept the
door ajar , so that I could peer out.
They were coming up the hill,  a small group of men in
flight. H ighlanders, both from the sound and the sight of them,
plaids and beards and hair flyin g around them, so they looked
like black clouds against the grassy slope, scudding uphill
before the wind.
I jum ped back into the church as the first of them burst
through the door . Dark as it was , I couldn’ t see his face, but I
recognized his voice when he crashed headfirst into my horse.
“Jesus!”
“W illie!” I shouted. “W illie Coulter!”
“Sweet bleeding Jesus! Who’ s that!”
I hadn’ t time to answer before the door crashed against the
wall, and two m ore black forms shot into the tiny church.
Incensed by this noisy intrusion, my horse reared and
whinnied, pawing the air . This g ave rise to cries of alarm from
the int ruders, who clearly had thought the building
unoccupied, and were disconcerted to find otherwise.The entrance of several more men only increased the
confusion, and I gave up any idea of trying to subdue the
horse. Forced to the rear of the church, I squeezed myself into
the s mall space b etween altar and wall and waited for things to
sort themselves out.
They began to show signs of doing so when one of the
confused voices in the darkness rose above the others.
“Be QUIET!” it shouted, in a tone that brooked no
opposition. Everyone but the horse obeyed, and as the racket
died dow n, even the horse subsi ded, backing into a corner and
making snorting noises, mixed with querulous squeals of
disgust.
“It is MacKenzie of Leoch,” said the imperious voice.
“Who else bides here?”
“It is Geordie, Dougal, and my brother with me,” said a
voice nearby , in tones of profound relief. “W e’ve brought
Rupert w ith us, too; he’ s wounded. Christ, I thought it was the
de’il himself in here!”
“Gordon McLeod of Ardsmuir ,” said another voice I didn’ t
recognize.
“And Ewan Cameron of Kinnoch,” said another . “Whose
is the horse?”
“Mine,” I said, sidling cautiously out from behind the altar .
The sou nd of my voice caused another outbreak, but Dougal
put a stop to it once more, raising his own voice above the
racket.
“QUIET , damn the lot of ye! Is that you, Claire Fraser?”
“W ell, it isn’ t the Queen,” I said testily . “W illie Coulter ’ s
in here, too, or he was a minute ago. Hasn’ t anyone got a flint
box?”
“No light!” said Dougal. “Little chance that the English
will overlook this place if they follow us, but little sense in
drawing their attention to it if they don’ t.”
“All right,” I sa id, biting my lip. “Rupert, can you talk?
Say something so I can tell where you are.” I didn’ t know howmuch I could do for him in the d ark; as it was, I couldn’ t even
reach my medicine box. Still, I couldn’ t leave him to bleed to
death on the floor .
There w as a nasty-sounding cough from the side of the
church o pposite me, and a hoars e voice said, “Here, lass,” and
coughed again.
I felt my way ac ross the floor , cursing under my breath. I
could tell merely from the bubb ling sound of that cough that it
was bad; the sort of bad that my medicine box wasn’ t likely to
help. I crouched and duck-walke d the last few feet, waving my
arms in a wide swathe to feel what might be in my way .
One han d struck a warm body , and a big hand fastened on
to m e. It had to be Rupert; I  could hear him breathing, a
stertorous sound with a faint gur gle behind it.
“I’m here,” I said, patting him blindly in what I hoped was
a rea ssuring spot. I supposed it was, because he gave a sort of
gasping chuckle  and arched his hips, pressing my hand down
hard against him.
“Do that again, lass, and I’ll fo r get all about the musket
ball,” he said. I grabbed my hand back.
“Perhaps a bit later ,” I said dryly . I moved my hand
upward, skimming over his body in search of his head. The
thick bri stle of beard told me I’ d reached my goal, and I felt
carefully under the dense grow th for the pulse in his throat.
Fast and light, but still fairly regular . His forehead was slick
with sw eat, thou gh his skin felt  clammy to the touch. The tip
of his nose was cold when I brushed it, chilled from the air
outside.
“Pity I’m no a dog,” he said, a thread of laughter coming
between the gasps for air . “Co ld nose… would be a good
sign.”
“Be a better sign  if you’d quit talking,” I said. “Where did
the ball take you? No, don’ t tel l me, take my hand and put it
on the wound… and if you put it anywhere else, Rupert
MacKenzie, you  can die here like a dog, and good riddance to
you.”I could feel the wide chest vibrate with suppressed laughter
under my hand. He drew my hand slowly under his plaid, and
I pushed back the obstructing fabric with my other hand.
“All right, I’ve got it,” I whispered. I could feel the small
tear in his shirt, damp with blood around the edges, and I put
both han ds to it and ripped it open. I brushed my fingers very
lightly d own his side, feeling the ripple of gooseflesh under
them, and then the small hol e of the entrance wound. It
seemed a remarkably small hole, compared to the bulk of
Rupert, who was a burly man.
“Did it come ou t anywhere?” I whispered. The inside of
the church was quiet, except for the horse, who was moving
restlessly in his own corner . W ith the door closed, the sounds
of battle outside were still audible, but dif fuse; it was
impossible to tell how close they were.
“No,” h e said, and coughed ag ain. I could feel his hand
move to ward hi s mouth, and I followed it with a fold of his
plaid. My eyes were as accustomed to the darkness as they
were lik ely to get, but he was still no more than a hunched
black sh ape on the floor before  me. For some things, though,
touch was enough. There was little bleeding at the site of the
wound, but the cloth I held to his mouth flooded my hand with
sudden damp warmth.
The ball had tak en him through one lung at least, possibly
both, an d his chest was filling w ith blood. He could last a few
hours in this co ndition, perhaps a day if one lung remained
functional. If the pericardium h ad been nicked, he would go
faster . But only sur gery would save him, and that of a kind I
couldn’ t do.
I could feel a warm presence behind me, and heard normal
breathing as someone groped to ward me. I reached back and
felt my hand gripped tight. Dougal MacKenzie.
He made his w ay up beside me, and laid a hand on
Rupert’ s supine body .
“How is  it, man?” he asked softly . “Can ye walk?” My
other hand still on Rupert, I could feel his head shake inanswer to Dougal’ s question. The men in the church behind us
had begun to talk among themselves in whispers.
Dougal’ s hand pressed down on my shoulder .
“What d ’ye nee d to help him? Y our wee box? Is it on the
horse?” He had risen before I could tell him that there was
nothing in the box to help Rupert.
A sudden loud crack from the altar stopped the whispers,
and there was a quick movement all around, as men snatched
up t he weapons they had laid down. Another crack, and a
ripping n oise, and the oiled-skin covering of the window gave
way to a rush of cold, clean air and a few swirling snowflakes.
“Sassenach! Cla ire! Are ye there?” The low voice from the
window brought me to my feet in momentary for getfulness of
Rupert.
“Jamie!” All around me was a collective exhalation, and
the clan k of falling swords an d tar ges. The new faint light
from ou tdoors was blotted out for a moment by the bulk of
Jamie’ s head and shoulders. He dropped down lightly from the
altar , silhouetted against the open window .
“Who’ s here?” he said softly , looking around. “Dougal, is
that you?”
“A ye, it’ s me, lad. Y our wife an d a few more. Did ye see
the sassenach bastards anywhere near outside?”
Jamie uttered a short laugh.
“Why d ’ye thin k I came in through the window? There’ s
maybe twenty of them at the foot of the hill.”
Dougal made a displeased nois e deep in his throat. “The
bastards that cut us of f from the main troop, I’ll be bound.”
“Just so. Ho, mo cridh! Ciamar a tha thu ?” Recognizing a
familiar voice in the midst of madness, my horse had thrust its
nose up with a loud whinny of greeting.
“Hush, ye wee fool!” Dougal said to it violently . “D’ye
want the English to hear?”“I d inna suppose the English would hang him ,” Jamie
observed mildly . “As for them t elling you’re here, they won’ t
need ears, if they’ve eyes in their heads; the slope’ s half mud
outside, and the prints of all your feet show clear .”
“Mmphm.” Dougal cast an eye toward the window , but
Jamie was already shaking his head.
“No goo d, Dougal. The main bo dy’ s to the south, and Lord
Geor ge Murray ’ s gone to meet them, but there’ s the few
English from the party we met still left on this side. A group of
them ch ased me  over the hill; I d odged to the side and crawled
up to  the  church  on my belly through the grass, but I’ll guess
they’re still combing the hillsi de above.” He reached out a
hand in my direc tion, and I took  it. It was cold and damp from
crawling through grass, but I was glad just to touch him, to
have him there.
“Crawled in, eh? And how we re ye planning to get out
again?” Dougal asked.
I cou ld feel Jamie shrug. He tilted his head in the direction
of my horse. “I ’d thought I might burst out and ride them
down; they’ll not know about the horse. That would cause
enough kerfuf fle maybe for Claire to slip free.”
Dougal snorted.  “A ye, and they’d pick ye of f your horse
like a ripe apple.”
“It hardly matters,” Jamie said dryly . “I canna see the lot of
ye to be slippin g out quietly w ith no one noticing, no matter
how much fuss I made over it.”
As thou gh in confirmation of this, Rupert gave a loud
groan by  the wall. Dougal and I dropped onto our knees beside
him at once, followed more slowly by Jamie.
He w asn’ t dead, but wasn’ t doi ng well, either . His hands
were chilly , and his breathing ha d a wheezing, whining note to
it.
“Dougal,” he whispered.
“I’m here, Rupert. Be still, man, you’ll be all right soon.”
The MacKenzie  chieftain quickly pulled of f his own plaid and
folded it into a pillow , which he thrust beneath Rupert’ s headand shoulders. Raised a bit, his breathing seemed easier , but a
touch below his beard showed me wet blotches on his shirt. He
still had  some strength; he rea ched out a hand and grasped
Dougal’ s arm.
“If… they’ll find us anyway…  give me a light,” he said,
gasping. “I’d see your face once more, Dougal.”
Close as  I was t o Dougal, I felt the shock run through him
at these words and their implication. His head turned sharply
toward m e, but of course he couldn’ t see my face. He muttered
an order over his shoulder , and after a bit of shuf fling and
murmuring, someone cut loose a handful of the thatch, which
was twi sted into a torch and lit with a spark from a flint. It
burned fast, but gave enough li ght for me to examine Rupert
while the men worked at chise ling loose a long splinter of
wood fr om the poles of the roo f, to serve as a less temporary
torch.
He w as white as  a fish belly , hair matted with sweat, and a
faint sm ear of blood still showed on the flesh of his full lower
lip. Dar k spots showed on the  glossy black beard, but he
smiled faintly at me as I bent over him to check his pulse
again. L ighter , and very fast, m issing beats now and then. I
smoothed the hair back from his  face, and he touched my hand
in thanks.
I f elt Dougal’ s hand on my el bow , and sat back on my
heels, tu rning to face him. I had faced him once like this
before, over the body of a man  mortally wounded by a boar .
He h ad asked m e then, “Can he  live?” and I saw the memory
of that day cross his face. The same question stood in his eyes
again, but this time in eyes glazed with fear of my answer .
Rupert w as his closest friend, th e kinsman who rode and who
fought on his right-hand side, as Ian did for Jamie.
This time I didn’ t answer; Rupert did it for me.
“Dougal,” he said, and smiled as his friend bent anxiously
over him . He closed his eyes for a moment and breathed as
deeply as he could, gathering strength for the moment.
“Dougal,” he said again, openin g his eyes. “Y e’ll no grieve
for me, man.”Dougal’ s face twitched in the torchlight. I could see the
denial of death c ome to his lips,  but he bit it back and forced it
aside.
“I’m your chief, man,” he sai d, with a quivering half-
smile. “ Y e’ll no t order me; I shall grieve ye and I like.” He
clasped Rupert’ s hand, where it lay across his chest, and held it
tightly .
There was a faint, wheezing chuckle from Rupert, and
another coughing spell.
“W eel, grieve for me and ye wi ll, Dougal,” he said, when
he’d fin ished. “A nd I’m glad fo r it. But ye canna grieve ’ til I
be d eid, can ye?  I would die by your hand, mo caraidh , not in
the hands of the strangers.”
Dougal jerked, and Jamie an d I exchanged appalled
glances behind his back.
“Rupert…” D ougal began helplessly , but Rupert
interrupted him, clasping his hand and shaking it gently .
“Y ou ar e  my chie f, man, and it’ s your du ty ,” he whispered.
“Come now . Do it now . This d ying hurts me, Dougal, and I
would have it over .” His eyes moved restlessly , lighting on me.
“W ill ye  hold my hand while I go, lass?” he asked. “I’d
like it so.”
There seemed nothing else to do. Moving slowly , feeling
that this was all  a dream, I took the broad, black-haired hand
in both of mine, pressing it as though I might force my own
warmth into the cooling flesh.
W ith a grunt, Rupert heaved himself slightly to one side
and glanced up at Jamie, who sat by his head.
“She should ha’ married me, lad, when she had the
choice,” he wheezed. “Y ou’re a poor weed, but do your best.”
One eye  squeezed shut in a massive wink. “Gi’e her a good
one for me, lad.”
The black eyes swiveled back  to me, and a final grin
spread across his face.
“Goodbye, bonnie lassie,” he said softly .Dougal’ s dirk took him under the breastbone, hard and
straight. The burly body convuls ed, turning to the side with an
coughing explosion of air and blood, but the brief sound of
agony came from Dougal.
The MacKenzie chieftain stayed frozen for a moment, eyes
shut, han ds clen ched on the hilt  of the dirk. Then Jamie rose,
took him by the  shoulders, and turned him away , murmuring
something in Gaelic. Jamie glanced at me, and I nodded and
held out my arms. He turned Dougal gently toward me, and I
gathered him to me as we both crouched on the floor , holding
him while he wept.
Jamie’ s own face was streaked w ith tears, and I could hear
the brie f sighs and sobbing breaths of the other men. I
supposed it was better they wept for Rupert than for
themselves. If the English did come for us here, all of us stood
to b e hanged fo r treason. It was easier to mourn for Rupert,
who was safely gone, sped on his way by the hand of a friend.
 
They did not co me anytime in the long winter night. W e
huddled together against one wall, under plaids and cloaks,
waiting. I dozed fitfully , leaning against Jamie’ s shoulder , with
Dougal hunched  and silent on my other side. I thought that
neither of them slept, but kept watch through the night over
Rupert’ s corpse, quiet under his own draped plaid across the
church, on the other side of the abyss that separates the dead
from the living.
W e spoke little, but I knew what they were thinking. They
were wondering, as I was, whether the English troops had left,
regrouping with the main army at Callendar House below , or
whether they still watched outside, waiting for the dawn
before making a move, lest any one in the tiny church escape
under cover of darkness.
The matter was settled with the coming of first light.
“Ho, the  church! Come out and give yourselves up!” The
call came from the slope below , in a strong English voice.
There was a sti r among the m en in the church, and the
horse, who had been dozing in his corner , snapped his head upwith a startled snort at the movement nearby . Jamie and
Dougal exchang ed a glance, then, as though they had planned
it togeth er , rose and stood, shoulder to shoulder , before the
closed door . A j erk of Jamie’ s h ead sent me to the rear of the
church, back to my shelter behind the altar .
Another shout from the outside was met with silence.
Jamie drew the snaphance pistol from his belt and checked the
loading of it, casually , as though there were all the time in the
world. H e sank to one knee and braced the pistol, pointing it at
the door at the level of a man’ s head.
Geordie and W illie guarded the window to the rear , swords
and pisto ls to the ready . But it w as likely from the front that an
attack would come; the hill beh ind the church sloped steeply
up, with barely room between the slope and the wall of the
church for one man to squeeze past.
I heard the squelching of footsteps, approaching the door
through the mud, and the fain t clanking of sidearms. The
sounds stopped at a distance, a nd a voice came again, closer
and louder .
“In the name of  His Majesty King Geor ge, come out and
surrender! W e know you are there!”
Jamie fired. The report inside the tiny church was
deafening. It must have been suf ficiently impressive from
outside as well; I could hear the hasty sounds of slipping
retreat, accompanied by muf fled curses. There was a small
hole in the door , made by the pis tol ball; Dougal sidled up to it
and peered out.
“Damn,” he said under his breath. “There’ s a lot of them.”
Jamie ca st a glance at me, then  set his lips and turned his
attention to reloading his pistol. Clearly , the Scots had no
intention of surrendering. Just as clearly , the English had no
desire to storm the church, given the easily defended
entrances. They couldn’ t mean to starve us out? Surely the
Highland army would be sendi ng out men to search for the
wounded of the battle from the  night before. If they arrived
before the English had opportu nity to bring a cannon to bear
on the church, we might be saved.Unfortunately , there was a thinker outside. The sound of
footsteps came once more, and then a measured English voice,
full of authority .
“Y ou ha ve one minute to come out and give yourselves
up,” it said, “or we fire the thatch.”
I glance d upward in complete horror . The walls of the
church w ere stone, but the that ch would burn in short order ,
even soaked with rain and sleet, and once well caught, would
send flam es and smoking embers raining down to engulf us. I
remembered the  awful speed with which the torch of twisted
reed had burned the night befor e; the charred remnant lay on
the floor near Rupert’ s shrouded corpse, a grisly token in the
gray dawn light.
“No!” I screamed. “Bloody bastards! This is a church!
Have you never heard of sanctuary?”
“Who is  that?” came the sharp voice from outside. “Is that
an English-woman in there?!”
“Y es!” shouted Dougal, springing to the door . He cracked
it ajar and bellowed out at the English soldiers on the hillside
below . “Y es! W e hold an Englis h lady captive! Fire the thatch,
and she dies with us!”
There was an outbreak of voice s at the bottom of the hill,
and a sudden shifting among the men in the church. Jamie
whirled on Dougal with a scowl, saying, “What…!”
“It’ s the only chance!” Dougal h issed back. “Let them take
her , in return for our freedom. They’ll not harm her if they
think she’ s our hostage, and we’ll get her back later , once
we’re free!”
I came out of my hiding space a nd went to Jamie, gripping
his sleeve.
“Do it!”  I said ur gently . “Dou gal is right, it’ s the only
chance!”
He looked down at me helplessly , rage and fear mingled on
his face.  And under it all, a trace of humor at the underlying
irony of the situation.“I am a sassenach, after all,” I said, seeing it.
He touched my face briefly with a rueful smile.
“A ye, mo duinne . Bu t yo u’re my  sassenach.” He turned to
Dougal, squaring his shoulders. He drew in a deep breath, and
nodded.
“All right. T ell them we took her” – he thought quickly ,
rubbing one hand through his h air – “from Falkirk road, late
yesterday .”
Dougal nodded, and without waiting for more, slipped out
of the church do or , a white hand kerchief held high overhead in
signal of truce.
Jamie turned to me, frowning, g lancing at the church door ,
where the sounds of English vo ices were still audible, though
we couldn’ t make out words as they talked.
“I don’ t know what you’re to tell them, Claire; perhaps
ye’d better pretend to be so shocked that ye canna speak of it.
It’ s maybe better than telling a tale; for if they should realize
who you are-” He stopped suddenly and rubbed his hand hard
over his face.
If th ey realized who I was, it w ould be London, and the
T ower – followed quite possibly by swift execution. But while
the broadsheets had made much of “the Stuart W itch,” no one,
so far as I knew , had realized or published the fact that the
witch was English.
“Don’ t worry ,” I said, realizing just what a silly remark
this was, but unable to come up with anything better . I laid a
hand on  his sleeve, feeling the  swift pulse that beat in his
wrist. “Y ou’ll get me back befor e they have a chance to realize
anything. Do you think they’ll take me to Callendar House?”
He nodded, back in control. “A ye, I think so. If ye can, try
to be  alo ne near  a window , just after nightfall. I’ll come for ye
then.”
There w as time for no more. Dougal slipped back through
the door , closing it carefully behind him.“Done,” he said, looking from m e to Jamie. “W e give them
the woman, and we’ll be allow ed to leave unmolested. No
pursuit. W e keep the horse. W e’ ll need it, for Rupert, ye see,”
he said to me, half-apologetically .
“It’ s all right,” I told him. I looked at the door , with its
small da rk spot where the bullet had passed, the same size as
the hole  in Rupert’ s side. My mouth was dry and I swallowed
hard. I was a cu ckoo’ s egg, about to be laid in the wrong nest.
The thre e of us hesitated before the door , all reluctant to take
the final step.
“I’d b-better go,” I said, trying h ard to control my shaking
voice and limbs. “They’ll wonder what’ s keeping us.”
Jamie closed his eyes for a mom ent, nodded, then stepped
toward me.
“I think you’d b etter swoon, Sassenach,” he said. “It will
be easie r that way , maybe.” He stooped, picked me up in his
arms, and carried me through the door that Dougal held open.
His hea rt pounded beneath my ear , and I could feel the
trembling in his arms as he carr ied me. After the stuf finess of
the church, with its smells of sweat, blood, black powder and
horse manure, the cold fresh a ir of early morning took my
breath a way , and I huddled against him, shivering. His hands
tightened under my knees and sh oulders, hard as a promise; he
would never let me go.
“God,” he said once, under his  breath, and then we had
reached them. Sharp questio ns, mumbled answers, the
reluctant loosening of his grip as he laid me on the ground, and
then the  swish of his feet, going away through wet grass. I was
alone, in the hands of the strangers.4 4  I N  W H I C H  Q U I T E  A  L O T
O F  T H I N G S  G A N G  A G L E Y
I  hun ched closer to the fire, holding out my hands to thaw .
They were grimy from holding the reins all day , and I
wondered brief ly whether it was worthwhile walking the
distance to the stream to wash them. Maintaining modern
standards of hygiene in the abs ence of all forms of plumbing
sometimes seem ed a good deal more trouble than it was worth.
No bloody wonder if people got ill and died frequently , I
thought sourly . They died of simple filth and ignorance more
than anything.
The thought of dying in filth w as suf ficient to get me to
my feet,  tired as I was. The tiny streamlet that passed by the
campsite was boggy near the edges, and my shoes sank deep
into the marshy growth. Havin g traded dirty hands for wet
feet, I slogged b ack to the fire, to find Corporal Rowbotham
waiting for me with a bowl of what he said was stew .
“The Captain’ s compliments, Mum,” he said, actually
tugging his forelock as he handed me the bowl, “and he says to
tell yer as we’l l be in T avisto ck tomorrow . There’ s an inn
there.” He hesitated, his roun d, homely , middle-aged face
concerned, then added, “The Captain’ s apologies for the lack
of accommodation, Mum, but we’ve fixed a tent for yer for
tonight. ’S not much, but mebbe’ll keep the rain of f yer .”
“Thank the Captain for me, Corporal,” I said, as graciously
as I could manage. “And thank you , too ,” I added, with more
warmth. I was entirely aware that Captain Mainwaring
considered me a burdensome nuisance, and would have taken
no thou ght at all for my night ’ s shelter . The tent – a spare
length of canvas draped carefully over a tree limb and pegged
at b oth sides –  was undoubtedly the sole idea of Corporal
Rowbotham.
The Cor poral went away and I sat by myself, slowly eating
scorched potatoes and stringy beef. I’d found a late patch ofcharlock near the stream, leaves  wilting and brown around the
edges, a nd had brought back a  handful in my pocket, along
with a few junip er berries picked during a stop earlier in the
day . The mustard leaves were  old and very bitter , but I
managed to get them down by wodging them between bites of
potato. I finished the meal with the juniper berries, biting each
one briefly to avoid choking an d then swallowing the tough,
flattened berry , seed and all. The oily burst of flavor sent
fumes u p the back of my throat  that made my eyes water , but
they did cleanse my tongue of t he taste of grease and scorch,
and would, with the charlock l eaves, maybe be suf ficient to
ward of f scurvy .
I had had a lar ge store of dried fiddleheads, rose hips, dried
apples and dill s eeds in the lar g er of my two medicine chests,
carefully collect ed as a defense  against nutritional deficiency
during the long winter months. I hoped Jamie was eating them.
I p ut my head down on my kn ees; I didn’ t think anyone
was look ing at me, but I didn’ t want my face to show when I
thought of Jamie.
I had stayed in my pretended swoon on Falkirk Hill as long
as I coul d, but was roused before too long by a British dragoon
trying to  force brandy from a pocket flask down my throat.
Unsure q uite wh at to do with me, my “rescuers” had taken me
to Calle ndar Ho use and turned me over to General Hawley’ s
staf f.
So far , all had gone according to plan. W ithin the hour ,
though, things had gone rather s eriously awry . From sitting in
an anter oom and listening to everything that was said around
me, I soon learned that what I had thought was a major battle
during the night had in fact been no more than a small
skirmish between the MacKenzies and a detachment of
English troops on their way to join the main body of the army .
Said arm y was even now assembling itself to meet the
expected Highland char ge on Falkirk Hill; the battle I thought
I had lived through had not, in fact, happened yet!
General Hawley himself was overseeing this process, and
as n o on e seemed to have any idea what ought to be done with
me, I was consi gned to the cust ody of a young private, alongwith a letter de scribing the circumstances of my rescue, and
dispatched to a C olonel Campbell’ s temporary headquarters at
Kerse. The young private, a stocky specimen named Dobbs,
was dist ressingly zealous in his ur ge to perform his duty , and
despite several tries along the w ay , I had been unable to get
away from him.
W e had arrived in Kerse, on ly to find that Colonel
Campbell was not there, but had been summoned to
Livingston.
“Look,” I had suggested to my escorting gaoler , “plainly
Colonel Campbell is not going to have time or inclination to
talk to me, and there’ s nothing I could tell him in any case.
Why do n’ t I just find lodging in the town here, until I can
make some arrangement for continuing my journey to
Edinbur gh?” For lacking any better idea, I had given the
English basically the same story I had given to Colum
MacKenzie, two years earlier; that I was a widowed lady from
Oxford, traveling to visit a rela tive in Scotland, when I had
been set upon and abducted by Highland brigands.
Private Dobbs shook his head, flushing stubbornly . He
couldn’ t be more than twenty , a nd he wasn’ t very bright, but
once he got an idea in his head, he hung on to it.
“I can’ t let you do that, Mrs. Beauchamp,” he said – for I
had used my own maiden n ame as an alias – “Captain
Bledsoe’ll have my liver for it, an’ I don’ t bring you safe to
the Colonel.”
So t o Livingston we had gone , mounted on two of the
sorriest-looking nags I had ever seen. I was finally relieved of
the atten tions of my escort, bu t with no improvement in my
circumstances. Instead, I found myself immured in an upper
room in a house  in Livingston, telling the story once again, to
one Colonel Gordon MacLeish Campbell, a Lowland Scot in
command of one of the Elector ’ s regiments.
“A ye, I see,” he said, in the sort of tone that suggested that
he didn’ t see at all. He was a small, foxy-faced man, with
balding reddish hair brushed back from his temples. Henarrowed his eyes still further , glancing down at the crumpled
letter on his blotter .
“This sa ys,” he said, placing a pair of half-spectacles on
his nose  in order to peer more closely at the sheet of paper ,
“that one of your captors, Mis tress, was a Fraser clansman,
very lar ge, and with red hair . Is this information correct?”
“Y es,” I said, wondering what he was getting at.
He tilted his hea d so the spectac les slid down his nose, the
better to fix me with a piercing stare over the tops.
“The men who rescued you near Falkirk gave it as their
impression that one of your ca ptors was none other than the
notorious Highland chief known as ‘Red Jamie.’ Now , I am
aware, Mrs. Beauchamp, that you were… distressed, shall we
say?” – his lips pulled back from the word, but it wasn’ t a
smile – “during the period of your captivity , and perhaps in no
fit frame of mind to make close observations, but did you
notice at any tim e whether the other men present referred to
this man by name?”
“They did. They called him Jam ie.” I couldn’ t imagine any
harm that could be done by tell ing him this; the broadsheets I
had seen made i t abundantly clear that Jamie was a supporter
of the Stuart c ause. The placing of Jamie at the battle of
Falkirk was possibly of intere st to the English, but could
hardly incriminate him further .
“They c anna very well hang me more than once,” he’d
said. Once would be more th an enough. I glanced at the
window . Night had fallen half an hour ago, and lanterns
glowed in the street below , carr ied by soldiers passing to and
fro. Jamie would be at Callen dar House, searching for the
window where I should be waiting.
I had the absurd certainty , all of a sudden, that he had
followed me, had known some how where I was going, and
would be waiting in the street below , for me to show myself.
I ros e abruptly a nd went to the window . The street below
was emp ty , save for a seller of pickled herrings, seated on a
stool with his lantern at his feet, waiting for the possibility ofcustomers. It wasn’ t Jamie, of course. There was no way for
him to find me. No one in the Stuart camp knew where I was; I
was entirely alone. I pressed m y hands hard against the glass
in sudden panic, not caring that I might shatter it.
“Mistress Beauchamp! Are ye well?” The Colonel’ s voice
behind me was sharp with alarm.
I c lampe d my lips tight together  to stop them shaking and
took several deep breaths, clo uding the glass so the street
below vanished in mist. Outwar dly calm, I turned back to face
the Colonel.
“I’m quite well,” I said. “If you’ve finished asking
questions, I’d like to go now .”
“W ould ye? Mmm.” He looked me over with something
like doubt, then shook his head decidedly .
“Y e’ll stay the n ight here,” he declared. “In the morning, I
shall be sendin’ ye southward.”
I felt a spasm of shock clench my insides. “South! What
the hell for?” I blurted.
His fox-fur eyebrows rose in astonishment and his mouth
fell open. Then he shook himsel f slightly , and clamped it shut,
opening it only a slit to deliver himself of his next words.
“I have orders to send on any information pertaining to the
Highland criminal known as Red Jamie Fraser ,” he said. “Or
any person associated with him.”
“I’m not associated with him!” I said. Unless you wanted
to count marriage, of course.
Colonel Campbell was oblivious. He turned to his desk
and shuf fled through a stack of dispatches.
“A ye, h ere it is. Captain Mainwaring will be the of ficer
who escorts you. He will come to fetch ye here at dawn.” He
rang a small si lver bell shaped like a goblin, and the door
opened to reveal the inquiring face of his private orderly .
“Garvie, ye’ll see the lady to her quarters. Lock the door .” He
turned to me and bowed perfunctorily . “I think we shall notmeet ag ain, Mrs. Beauchamp; I wish ye good rest and God-
speed.” And that was that.
 
I d idn’ t know q uite how fast G od-speed was, but it was
likely f aster th an Captain Mainwaring’ s detachment had
ridden. The Captain was in char ge of a supply train of wagons,
bound for Lanark. After deliver y of these and their drivers, he
was then to pro ceed south with the rest of his detachment,
delivering nonvi tal dispatches as he went. I was apparently in
the category of nonur gent intell igence, for we had been more
than a week on the road, and no sign of reaching whatever
place I was bound for .
“South.” Did that mean London? I wondered, for the
thousandth time. Captain Mainwaring had not told me my
final destination, but I could think of no other possibility .
Lifting m y head, I caught one of the dragoons across the
fire stari ng at me. I stared flatly  back at him, until he flushed
and dropped his eyes to the bowl in his hands. I was
accustomed to such looks, though most were less bold about it.
It had started fr om the beginning, with a certain reserved
embarrassment on the part of the young idiot who had taken
me to Livingsto n. It had taken some little time for me to
realize that what caused the att itude of distant reserve on the
part of the English of ficers was not suspicion, but a mixture of
contempt and horror , mingled w ith a trace of pity and a sense
of of ficial responsibility that kept their true feelings from
showing openly .
I ha d not mer ely been rescued from a band of the
rapacious, marauding Scots. I had been delivered from a
captivity during which I had spent an entire night in a single
room w ith a number of men  who were, to the certain
knowledge of all right-thinking Englishmen, “Little more than
Savage Beasts, guilty of Rapine, Robbery , and countless other
such Hideous Crimes.” Not thinkable, therefore, that a young
Englishwoman had passed a night in the company of such
beasts and emer ged unscathed.I re flected grimly that Jamie’ s carrying me out in an
apparent swoon might have eased matters originally , but had
undoubtedly contributed to the overall impression that he –
and the other as sorted Scots – had been having their forcible
way with me. A nd thanks to th e detailed letter written by the
captain of my o riginal band of rescuers, everyone to whom I
had later been p assed on – and everyone to whom they talked,
I imagined – knew about it. Schooled in Paris, I understood the
mechanics of gossip very well.
Corporal Rowbo tham had certainly heard the stories, but
continued to treat me kindly , with none of the smirking
speculation I occasionally surprised on the faces of the other
soldiers. If I had been inclined to of fer up bedtime prayers, I
would have included his name therein.
I ros e, dusted of f my cloak, and went to my tent. Seeing
me go, Corporal Rowbotham a lso rose, and circling the fire
discreetly , sat down by his com rades again, his back in direct
line with the ent rance to my ten t. When the soldiers retired to
their beds, I knew he would seek a spot at a respectful
distance, but still within call of my resting place. He had done
this for the past three nights, whether we slept in inn or field.
Three ni ghts ear lier I had tried yet another escape. Captain
Mainwaring was well aware that I traveled with him under
compulsion, and while he didn’ t like being burdened with me,
he was too cons cientious a soldier to shirk the responsibility . I
had two guards, who watched me closely , riding on each side
by day .
At night, the guard was relaxed, the Captain evidently
thinking it unlikely that I wo uld strike out on foot over
deserted moors in the dead of w inter . The Captain was correct.
I had no interest in committing suicide.
On the night in question, howev er , we had passed through
a small village about two hours before we stopped for the
night. Ev en on foot, I was sure I could backtrack and reach the
village before dawn. The village boasted a small distillery ,
from which wagons bearing loads of barrels departed for
several towns in the surrounding region. I had seen the
distiller ’ s yard, piled high with  barrels, and thought I had adecent chance of hiding there, and leaving with the first
wagon.
So a fter the cam p was quiet, and the soldiers lumped and
snoring in their blankets round the fire, I had crept out of my
own bla nket, carefully laid near the edge of a willow grove,
and made my w ay through the trailing fronds, with no more
sound than the rustle of the wind.
Leaving the grove, I had thought it was the rustle of the
wind be hind me, too, until a hand clamped down on my
shoulder .
“Don’ t s cream. Y’ don’ t want th e Capting to know yer out
wi’out le ave.” I didn’ t scream, o nly because all the breath had
been sta rtled out of me. The soldier , a tallish man called
“Jessie” by his mates, becaus e of the trouble he took in
combing out his yellow curls, smiled at me, and I smiled a
little uncertainly back at him.
His eyes dropped to my bosom.  He sighed, raised his eyes
to mine,  and took a step towar d me. I took three steps back,
fast.
“It d oesn’ t matter , really , does it, sweet’art?” he said, still
smiling lazily . “Not after what’ s ’appened already . What’ s
once more, eh? A nd I’m an Englishman, too,” he coaxed. “Not
a filthy Scot.”
“Leave the poor woman alone, Jess,” Corporal
Rowbotham said, emer ging silently from the screen of willows
behind him. “She’ s had enough trouble, poor lady .” He spoke
softly enough, but Jessie glared at him, then, thinking better of
whatever he’d had in mind, turned without another word and
disappeared under the willow leaves.
The Corporal had waited, unspe aking, for me to gather up
my fallen cloak, and then had followed me back to the camp.
He h ad gone to pick up his own  blanket, motioned to me to lie
down, and placed himself six feet away , sitting up with his
blanket about his shoulders Indian-style. Whenever I woke
during the night, I had seen him still sitting there, staring
shortsightedly into the fire. 
T avistock did have an inn. I didn’ t have much time to
enjoy it s amenities, though. W e arrived in the village at
midday , and Captain Mainwaring set of f at once to deliver his
current crop of dispatches. He returned within the hour ,
though, and told me to fetch my cloak.
“Why?” I said, bewildered. “Where are we going?”
He glanced at me indif ferently and said “T o Bellhurst
Manor .”
“Right,” I said. It sounded a tr ifle more impressive than
my cur rent sur roundings, wh ich featured several soldiers
playing at chuck-a-luck on the floor , a flea-ridden mongrel
asleep by the fire, and a strong smell of hops.
The manor house, without regard to the natural beauty of
its site, stubborn ly turned its ba ck on the open meadows and
huddled inland instead, facing the stark clif fside.
The drive was straight, short, and unadorned, unlike the
lovely curving approaches to French manors. But the entrance
was equipped with two utilitarian stone pillars, each bearing
the hera ldic dev ice of the own er . I stared at it as my horse
clopped past, trying to place it. A cat – perhaps a leopard? –
couchant, with a lily in its paw . It was familiar , I knew . But
whose?
There was a st ir in the long grass near the gate, and I
caught a  quick glimpse of pale blue eyes as a hunched bundle
of ra gs scuttled into the shadow s, away from the churn of the
horses’ hooves.  Something about the ragged beggar seemed
faintly familiar , too. Perhaps I was merely hallucinating;
grasping at anything that didn’ t remind me of English soldiers.
The escort waited in the dooryard, not bothering to
dismount, whi le I mounted the steps with Captain
Mainwaring, and waited while he hammered at the door , rather
wondering what might be on the other side of it.
“Mrs. Beauchamp?” The butler , if that’ s what he was,
looked r ather as though he susp ected the worst. No doubt he
was right.“Y es,” I said. “Er , whose house is this?”
But even  as I as ked, I raised m y eyes and looked into the
gloom of the inner hall. A face stared back at me, doe-eyes
wide and startled.
Mary Hawkins.
 
As the girl opened her mouth, I opened mine as well. And
screamed as loudly as I could. The butler , taken unprepared,
took a step back , tripped on a settee, and fell over sideways
like a bowls pin. I could hear the startled noises of the soldiers
outside, coming up the steps.
I picked up my skirts, shrieked “A mouse! A mouse!” and
fled toward the parlor , yelling like a banshee.
Infected by my apparent hysteria, Mary shrieked as well,
and clut ched me about the mid dle as I cannoned into her . I
bore her back i nto the recesses of the parlor with me, and
grabbed her by the shoulders.
“Don’ t tell anyone who I am,” I  breathed into her ear . “No
one! My life d epends on it!” I had thought I was being
melodramatic, but it occurred to me, as I spoke the words, that
I co uld very we ll be telling the exact truth. Being married to
Red Jamie Fraser was likely a dicey proposition.
Mary ha d time only to nod in a dazed sort of way , when
the door  at the far side of the room opened, and a man came
in.
“Whatever is all this wretched noise, Mary?” he
demanded. A plump, contented-looking man, he had also the
firm chin and tig htly satisfied lips of the man who is contented
because he generally gets his own way .
“N-nothing, P apa,” said Mary , stuttering in her
nervousness. “Only a m-m-mouse.”
The baronet squeezed his eyes shut and inhaled deeply ,
seeking patience . Having found a simulacrum of that state, he
opened them and gazed at his of fspring.“Say it again, child,” he order ed. “But straight. I’ll not
have you mumbling and blitheri ng. T ake a deep breath, steady
yourself. Now . Again.”
Mary ob eyed, in haling ’ til the l aces of her bodice strained
across the budding chest. Her fi ngers wound themselves in the
silk brocade of her skirt, seeking support.
“It w-w as a mouse, Papa. Mr s. Fr… er , this lady was
frightened by a mouse.”
Dismissing this attempt as barely satisfactory , the baronet
stepped forward, examining me with interest.
“Oh? And who might you be, Madam?”
Captain Mainwa ring, arriving belatedly after the search for
the myth ical mouse, popped up at my elbow and introduced
me, handing over the note of introduction from Colonel
MacLeish.
“Hum. S o, it seems His Grace i s to be your host, Madam,
at least tempora rily .” He handed the note to the waiting butler ,
and took the hat the latter had taken from the nearby rack.
“I regret that o ur acquaintance should be so short, Mrs.
Beauchamp. I was just leaving myself.” He glanced over his
shoulder , to a short stairway th at branched of f the hall. The
butler , dignity restored, was already mounting it, grubby note
reposing on a salver held before him. “I see W almisley has
gone to tell His Grace of your arrival. I must go, or I shall miss
the post-coach. Adieu , Mrs. Beauchamp.”
He turned to Mary , hanging back against the paneled
wainscoting. “Goodbye, daughter . Do try to… well.” The
corners of his m outh turned up in what was meant to be a
fatherly smile. “Goodbye, Mary .”
“Goodbye, Papa,” she murmured, eyes on the ground. I
glanced from one to the othe r . What on earth was Mary
Hawkins, of all people, doing he re? Plainly she was staying at
the hous e; I supposed the owne r must be some connection of
her family’ s.
“Mrs. B eauchamp?” A small, tubby footman was bowing
at my elbow . “His Grace will see you now , Madam.”Mary’ s hands clutched at my sl eeve as I turned to follow
the footman. “B-b-b-but…” she began. In my keyed-up state, I
didn’ t think I could manage suf ficient patience to hear her out.
I smiled vaguely and patted her hand.
“Y es, yes,” I said. “Don’ t worry , it will be all right.”
“B-but it’ s my…”
The footman bowed and pushed  open a door at the end of
the corri dor . Light within fell o n the richness of brocade and
polished wood. The chair I could see to one side had a family
crest embroidere d on its back; a clearer version of the worn
stone shield I had seen outside.
A le opard couchant, holding in its paw a bunch of lilies –
or were they cr ocuses? Alarm bells rang in my mind as the
chair ’ s occupant rose, his shadow falling across the polished
doorsill as he tur ned. Mary’ s final anguished word made it out,
neck and neck with the footman’ s announcement.
“My g-g-godfather !” she said.
“His Grace, the Duke of Sandringham,” said the footman.
“Mrs… Beauch amp?” said the Duke, his mouth dropping
open in astonishment.
“W ell,” I said weakly . “Something like that.”
 
The doo r of the drawing room closed behind me, leaving
me a lone with H is Grace. My l ast sight of Mary had been of
her standing out in the hall, eye s like saucers, mouth opening
and shutting silently like a goldfish.
There were huge Chinese jars flanking the windows, and
inlaid tables under them. A bronze V enus posed coquettishly
on the mantelpiece, companioned by a pair of gold-rimmed
porcelain bowls and silver -gilt candelabra, blazing with
beeswax candles . A close-napped carpet that I recognized as a
very good Kermanshah covered most of the floor and a spinet
crouched in one corner; what little space was left bare was
occupied by marquetried furniture and the odd bit of statuary .“Nice pl ace you have here,” I remarked graciously to the
Duke, who had been standing before the fire, hands folded
beneath his coattail as he watch ed me, an expression of wary
amusement on the broad, florid face.
“Thank you,” he said, in the piping tenor that came so
oddly from that barrel-chested frame. “Y our presence adorns
it, my dear .” A musement won out over wariness, and he
smiled, a bluf f, disarming grin.
“Why Beauchamp?” he asked. “That isn’ t by chance your
real name, is it?”
“My ma iden nam e,” I answered, rattled into the truth. His
thick blond eyebrows shot up.
“ Ar e  you French?”
“No. English. I couldn’ t use Fraser , though, could I?”
“I see.” Brows s till raised, he n odded at a small brocaded
love seat, inviting me to be sea ted. It was richly carved and
beautifully proportioned, a muse um piece, like everything else
in th e ro om. I swept my sodden skirts to one side as gracefully
as I cou ld, igno ring their liberal stains of mud and horsehair ,
and delicately lowered myself onto the primrose satin.
The Duke paced slowly back and forth before the fire,
watching me, still with a slight smile on his features. I fought
the growing warmth and comfort that spread through my
aching legs, threatening to drag  me into the abyss of fatigue
that gaped open at my feet. Thi s was no time to let down my
guard.
“Which are you?” the Duke  inquired suddenly . “An
English hostage, a fervent Jacobite, or a French agent?”
I rub bed two fin gers over the ache between my eyes. The
correct answer was “none of th e above,” but I didn’ t think it
would get me very far .
“The ho spitality of this house seems a trifle lacking by
comparison with its appointme nts,” I said, as haughtily as I
could manage under the circumstances, which wasn’ t all that
much. Still, Louise’ s example of great-ladydom had not been
entirely in vain.The Duke laughed, a high, chit tering sort of laugh, like a
bat that has just heard a good one.
“Y our pardon, Madam. Y ou’re quite right; I should have
thought to of fer you refreshment before presuming to question
you. Most  thoughtless of me.”
He murmured something to the footman who appeared in
answer to his ri ng, then waited calmly before the fire for the
tray to arrive. I sat in silence, glancing around the room,
occasionally ste aling a look at my host. Neither of us was
interested in making small talk. Despite his outward geniality ,
this was an armed truce, and both of us knew it.
What I wanted to know was why . No stranger to people
wondering who in hell I was, I rather wondered myself where
the Duke came into it. Or where he thought I  did. He had met
me twi ce before, as Mrs. F raser , wife of the laird of
Lallybroch. Now I had turned up  on his doorstep, posing as an
English hostage named Beauchamp lately rescued from a gang
of Scottish Jacobites. That was enough to make anyone
wonder . But his attitude toward me went a long way past
simple curiosity .
The tea arrived, complete with scones and cake. The Duke
picked u p his own cup, motioned to mine with a lift of one
brow , and we to ok tea, still both  in silence. Somewhere on the
other side of the house, I could hear a muf fled banging, as of
someone hammering. The soft chime of the Duke’ s cup
against its saucer was the signal for the resumption of
hostilities.
“Now , th en,” he  said, with as much firmness as a man who
sounded like Mickey Mouse could manage. “Let me begin,
Mrs. Fra ser – I may call you so ? Thank you. Let me begin by
saying t hat I know a great deal about you already . I intend to
know more. Y ou will do well to answer me fully and without
hesitations. I must say , Mrs. F raser , that you are amazingly
dif ficult to kill” – he bowed slig htly in my direction, that smile
still on his lips – “but I feel sure that it could be accomplished,
given suf ficient determination.”I stared at him, unmoving; not out of any native sang-froid,
but from simple dumbfoundedness. Adopting another of
Louise’ s manne risms, I raised both eyebrows inquiringly ,
sipped tea, then patted my lips delicately with the
monogrammed serviette provided.
“I am  afraid you will think me dense, Y our Grace,” I said
politely , “but I haven’ t the fain test idea what you’re talking
about.”
“Haven’ t you, my dear?”
The sma ll, jolly blue eyes didn’ t blink. He reached for the
silver -gilt bell on the tray and rang it once.
The man  must have been waiting in the next room for the
summons, for the door opened immediately . A tall, lean man
in the dark hab iliments and good linen of an upper servant
advanced to the Duke’ s side and bowed deeply .
“Y our Grace?” He spoke English, but the French accent
was unmistakable. The face was French, too; long-nosed and
white, w ith thin , tight lips and  a pair of ears that stood out
from his head like small wings on either side, their tips
fiercely red. His lean face grew still paler as he looked up and
spotted me, and he took an involuntary step backward.
Sandringham watched this with a frown of irritation, then
switched his gaze to me.
“Y ou don’ t recognize him?” he asked.
I wa s beginning to shake my h ead, when the man’ s right
hand tw itched s uddenly against  the cloth of his breeches. As
unobtrusively as possible, he was making the sign of the
horns, middle fingers folded down, index and little finger
pointed at me. I  knew , then, an d in the next instant had seen
the conf irmation of my knowledge – the small beauty mark
above the fork of his thumb.
I h adn’ t  the slightest doubt; it was the man in the spotted
shirt who had a ttacked me and Mary in Paris. And all too
obviously in the Duke’ s employ .
“Y ou bloody bastar d !” I said. I leaped to my f eet,
overturning the tea table, and snatched up the nearest object tohand, a carved alabaster tobacc o jar . I hurled it at the man’ s
head, and he t urned and fled precipitately , the heavy jar
missing him by inches to smash against the door frame.
The door slammed to as I started after him, and I stopped
in my tracks, breathing heavily . I glared at Sandringham,
hands braced on my hips.
“Who is he?” I demanded.
“My valet,” said the Duke calmly . “Albert Danton, by
name. A good fellow with ne ckcloths and stockings, but a
trifle excitable, as so many of these Frenchmen are. Incredibly
superstitious, too.” He frowned  disapprovingly at the closed
door . “Bloody papists, with all these saints and smells and
such. Believe anything at all.”
My breathing was slowing, though my heart still banged
against t he whalebones of my b odice. I had trouble drawing a
deep breath.
“Y ou filthy , disgusting, outrageous… pervert !”
The Duke seemed bored by this, and nodded negligently .
“Y es, yes, my d ear . All that, I’ m sure, and more. A trifle
unlucky , too, at least on that occasion.”
“Unlucky? Is that what you’d ca ll it?” Unsteadily , I moved
to th e love seat, and sat down. My hands were shaking with
nerves, a nd I clasped them together , hidden in the folds of my
skirt.
“On several counts, my dear lady . Just look at it.” He
spread out both hands in gracef ul entreaty . “I send Danton to
dispose of you. He and his co mpanions decide to entertain
themselves a bit first; that’ s all well and good, but in the
process, they get a good look at you, leap unaccountably to the
conclusion that you’re a witch of some kind, lose their heads
entirely and run of f. But not before debauching my
goddaughter , who is present by accident, thus ruining all
chance of the excellent marriage I had painstakingly arranged
for her . Consider the irony of it!”
The sho cks were coming thick a nd fast, and I hardly knew
which to respond to first. There seemed one particularlystriking statement in this speech, though.
“What do you m ean ‘dispose of me’?” I demanded. “Do
you mean to say you actually tried to have me killed ?” The
room seemed to be swaying a bi t, and I took a deep gulp of tea
as being the nearest thing to a restorative available. It wasn’ t
terribly ef fective.
“W ell, yes,” Sandringham said pleasantly . “That was the
point I was endeavoring to make. T ell me, my dear , would you
care for a cup of sherry?”
I eyed him narrowly for a moment. Having just stated that
he’d trie d to have me killed, he  now expected me to accept a
cup of sherry from his hands?
“Brandy ,” I said. “Lots of it.”
He g iggled in that high-pitched way again, and made his
way to the sideboard, remarking over his shoulder , “Captain
Randall said you were a mos t diverting woman. Quite an
encomium from the Captain, you know . He hasn’ t much use
for w omen ordinarily , though they swarm over him. His looks,
I suppose; it can’ t be his manner .”
“So Jack  Randa ll does  wo rk for you,” I said, taking the
glass he handed me. I had watched him pour out two glasses,
and was sure that both containe d nothing but brandy . I took a
lar ge and sorely needed swallow .
The Duk e matched me, blinking his eyes at the ef fect of
the pungent liquid.
“Of course,” he said. “Often the best tool is the most
dangerous. One doesn’ t hesitate  to use it on that account; one
merely makes sure to take adequate precautions.”
“Dangerous, eh? Just how much do you know about
Jonathan Randall?” I asked curiously .
The Duke tittered. “Oh, virtu ally everything, I should
think, m y dear . Most likely a gr eat deal more than you do, in
fact. It doesn’ t do to employ a man like that without having a
means at hand to control him, you know . And money is a good
bridle, but a weak rein.”“Unlike blackmail?” I said dryly .
He sat back, hands clasped across his bulging stomach, and
regarded me with bland interest.
“Ah. Y ou are thinking that blackmail might work both
ways, I suppose?” He shook his head, dislodging a few grains
of snuf f that floated down onto the silk waistcoat.
“No, m y dear . For one thing,  there is something of a
dif ference in our stations. While rumor of that sort might
af fect m y reception in some ci rcles of society , that is not a
matter of grave concern to me. While for the good Captain –
well, the army takes a very dim view of such unnatural
predilections. Th e penalty is often death, in fact. No, not much
comparison, rea lly .” He cocked his head to one side, so far as
the multiple chins allowed.
“But it is neithe r the promise o f wealth nor the threat of
exposure that binds John Randall to me,” he said. The small,
watery blue eyes gleamed in their orbits. “He serves me
because I can give him what he desires.”
I eyed the cor pulent frame with unconcealed disgust,
making His Grace shake with laughter .
“No, not that,” he said. “The Captain’ s tastes are somewhat
more refined than that. Unlike my own.”
“What, then?”
“Punishment,” he said softly . “But you know that, don’ t
you? Or at least your husband does.”
I f elt unclean sim ply from being near him, and rose to get
away . The shards of the alabaster tobacco jar lay on the floor ,
and I kicked one inadvertently , so that it pinged of f the wall,
ricocheting and spinning of f und er the love seat, reminding me
of the recent Danton.
I wa sn’ t at all sure that I wante d to discuss the subject of
my aborted murder with him, but it seemed at the moment
preferable to some alternatives.
“What d id you want to kill me for?” I asked abruptly ,
turning to face him. I glanced quickly over the collection ofobjects on a piecrust table, loo king for a suitable weapon of
defense, just in case he still felt the ur ge.
He didn’ t seem to. Instead, he bent laboriously over and
picked up the t eapot – miraculously unbroken – and set it
upright on the restored tea table.
“It s eemed expedient at the tim e,” he said calmly . “I had
learned that you and your husba nd were attempting to thwart a
particular af fair in which I had interested myself. I considered
removing your husband instead, but it seemed too dangerous,
what wi th his close relation to two of the greatest families in
Scotland.”
“Considered removing him?” A light dawned – one of
many that were going of f in my skull like fireworks. “W as it
you who sent the seamen who attacked Jamie in Paris?”
The Duke nodded in of fhand manner .
“That se emed the simplest method, if a bit crude. But then,
Dougal Mac-Kenzie turned up in Paris, and I wondered
whether in fact your husband was in fact working for  the
Stuarts. I became unsure where his interests lay .”
What I was wondering was just where the Duke ’ s interests
lay . This odd speech made it sound very much as though he
was a secret Jacobite – and if so, he’d done a really masterly
job of keeping his secrets.
“And then,” he went on, delicat ely placing the teapot’ s lid
back in place, “there was your growing friendship with Louis
of Franc e. Even had your husband failed with the bankers,
Louis could have supplied Charles Stuart with what he needed
– provided you kept your pretty nose out of the af fair .”
He frow ned closely at the scone  he was holding, flicked a
couple of threads of f it, then decided against eating it and
tossed it onto the table.
“Once it became clear what was really happening, I tried to
lure your husband back to Scotla nd, with the of fer of a pardon;
very expensive, that was,” he said reflectively . “And all for
nothing, too!“But then I recalled your husband’ s apparent devotion to
you – quite touching,” he said, with a benevolent smile that I
particularly disliked. “I supposed that your tragic demise
might w ell distract him from t he endeavor in which he was
engaged without provoking the sort of interest his own murder
would have involved.”
Suddenly thinking of something, I turned to look at the
harpsichord in the corner of the room. Several sheets of music
adorned its rack, written in a fine, clear hand. Fifty thousand
pounds, upon the occasion of Y our Highness’ s setting foot in
Scotland . Signed S. “S,” of course, for Sandringham. The
Duke laughed, in apparent delight.
“That was really very clever of you, my dear . It must have
been you; I’d heard of your husband’ s unfortunate inability
with music.”
“Actually , it wasn’ t,” I replied, turning back from the
piano. The table at my side lack ed anything useful in the way
of le tter openers or blunt obje cts, but I hastily picked up a
vase, and buried my face in th e mass of hothouse flowers it
held. I closed my eyes, feeling t he brush of cool petals against
my sudd enly heated cheeks. I didn’ t dare to look up, for fear
my telltale face would give me away .
For beh ind the Duke’ s shoulder , I had seen a round,
leathery object, shaped like a p umpkin, framed by the green
velvet d raperies like one of th e Duke’ s exotic art objects. I
opened my eyes, peering cautiou sly through the petals, and the
wide, sn aggle-toothed mouth split in a grin like a jack-o’-
lantern’ s.
I was torn between terror and re lief. I had been right, then,
about th e beggar near the gate . It was Hugh Munro, an old
companion from Jamie’ s days as a Highland outlaw . A one-
time schoolmaster , he had been captured by the T urks at sea,
disfigured by torture, and driven to beggary and poaching –
professions he augmented by su ccessful spying. I had heard he
was an agent o f the Highland army , but hadn’ t realized his
activities had brought him so far south.How lon g had he been there, pe rched like a bird on the ivy
outside the second-story window? I didn’ t dare try to
communicate w ith him; it was all I could do to keep my eyes
fixed on a point  just above the Duke’ s shoulder , gazing with
apparent indif ference into space.
The Duke was regarding me with interest. “Really? Not
Gerstmann, surely? I shouldn’ t have thought he had a
suf ficiently devious mind.”
“And you think I do? I’m flattered.” I kept my nose in the
flowers, speaking distractedly into a peony .
The figu re outside released his g rip on the ivy long enough
to br ing one han d up into view . Deprived of his tongue by his
Saracen captors, Hugh Munro’ s hands spoke for him. Staring
intently at me, he pointed del iberately , first at me, then at
himself, then of f to one side. T he broad hand tilted and the
first two  fingers  became a pair of running legs, racing away to
the east. A final wink, a clenched fist in salute, and he was
gone.
I relaxed, trembling slightly with reaction, and took a deep,
restorative breath. I sneezed, and put the flowers down.
“So you’re a Jacobite, are you?” I asked.
“Not ne cessarily ,” the Duke answered genially . “The
question is, my dear – are you?” Completely unselfconscious,
he took of f his w ig and scratched his fair , balding head before
putting it back on.
“Y ou tri ed to stop the ef fort to restore King James to his
throne when you were in Paris.  Failing at that, you and your
husband appear now to be His Highness’ s most loyal
supporters. Why?” The small blue eyes showed nothing more
than a mild interest, but it wasn ’ t a mild interest that had tried
to have me killed.
Ever sin ce findin g out who my host was, I had been trying
as hard as I cou ld to remember what it was that Frank and the
Reverend Mr . W akefield had once said about him. W as  he a
Jacobite? So far as I could recall , the verdict of history – in the
persons of Frank and the Reverend – was uncertain. So was I.“I don’ t believe I’m going to tell you,” I said slowly .
One blond brow arched high,  the Duke took a small
enameled box from his pocket and abstracted a pinch of the
contents.
“Are you sure that’ s wise, my dear? Danton is still within
call, you know .”
“Danton wouldn’ t touch me with a ten-foot pole,” I said
bluntly . “Neithe r would you, f or that matter . Not,” I added
hastily , seeing his mouth open,  “on that account. But if you
want so badly to know which si de I’m on, you aren’ t going to
kill me before finding out, now , are you?”
The Duke choked on his pin ch of snuf f and coughed
heavily , thumping himself on the chest of his embroidered
waistcoat. I drew myself up and stared coldly down my nose at
him as he sneezed and spluttered.
“Y ou’re trying to frighten me in to telling you things, but it
won’ t work,” I said, with a lot more confidence than I felt.
Sandringham dabbed gently at his streaming eyes with a
handkerchief. At last he drew a  deep breath, and blew it out
between plump, pursed lips as he stared at me.
“V ery w ell, then,” he said, quite calmly . “I imagine my
workmen have finished their alterations to your quarters by
now . I shall summon a maid to take you to your room.”
I m ust have gawped foolishly at him, for he smiled
derisively as he hoisted himself out of his chair .
“T o a point, you know , it doesn’ t matter ,” he said.
“Whatever else you may be or whatever information you may
possess, you have one invaluable attribute as a houseguest.”
“And what’ s that?” I demanded . He paused, hand on the
bell, and smiled.
“Y ou’re Red Jamie’ s wife,” he said softly . “And he is  fond
of you, my dear , is he not?”
 As prisons go, I had seen wo rse. The room measured
perhaps thirty feet in each dimension, and was furnished with
a lavishness exceeded only by the sitting room downstairs.
The can opied bed stood on a small dais, with baldachins of
ostrich feathers sprouting from the corners of its damask
drapes, and a pair of matching brocaded chairs squatted
comfortably before a huge fireplace.
The mai dservant who had accompanied me in set down the
basin an d ewer she carried, and  hurried to light the ready-laid
fire. The  footman laid his cover ed supper -tray on the table by
the doo r , then stood stolidly in the doorway , dishing any
thoughts I might have had of trying a quick dash down the
hall. Not that i t would do me much good to try , I thought
gloomily; I’d be hopelessly lost in the house after the first turn
of th e corridor; the bloody plac e was as big as Buckingham
Palace.
“I’m sure His Grace hopes as you’ll be comfortable,
ma’am,” said the servant, curtsying prettily on her way out.
“Oh, I’ll bet he does,” I said, ungraciously .
The doo r closed  behind her with  a depressingly solid thud,
and the grating sound of the big  key turning seemed to scrape
away the last bit of insulation covering my raw nerves.
Shivering in the chill of the v ast room, I clutched my
elbows a nd walk ed to the fire, where I subsided into one of the
chairs. My impulse was to take advantage of the solitude to
have a nice private little fit of hysterics. On the other hand, I
was afraid that i f I allowed my tight-reined emotions any play
at al l, I would ne ver get them in check again. I closed my eyes
tight and  watched the red flicker of the firelight on my inner
eyelids, willing myself to calmness.
After all, I was in no danger for the moment, and Hugh
Munro w as on his way to Jami e. Even if Jamie had lost my
trail over the course of the week’ s travel, Hugh would find him
and lead  him right. Hugh knew  every cottar and tinker , every
farmhouse and manor within four parishes. A message from
the speechless man would trave l through the network of news
and gossip as quickly as the wind-driven clouds passed overthe mountains. If he had made it down from his lofty perch in
the ivy and safely of f the Duke’ s grounds without being
apprehended, that was.
“Don’ t be ridiculous,” I said aloud, “the man’ s a
professional poacher . Of course  he made it.” The echo of my
words against the ornate white -plaster ceiling was somehow
comforting.
“And if so,” I co ntinued firmly , still talking to hear myself,
“then Jamie will come.”
Right, I thought suddenly . And Sandringham’ s men will be
waiting for him, when he does. Y ou’r e R ed Jam ie’ s wife , the
Duke had said. My one invaluable attribute. I was bait.
“I’m a salmon e gg!” I exclaimed, sitting up straight in my
chair . The sheer indignity of the image summoned up a small
but welcome spurt of rage that  pushed the fear back a little
way . I tried to fan the flames of anger by getting up and
striding back and forth, thinki ng of new names to call the
Duke ne xt time we met. I’d got ten as far in my compositions
as “skulking pederast,” when a muf fled shouting from outside
distracted my attention.
Pushing back the heavy velvet drapes from the window , I
found that the Duke had been  as good as his word. Stout
wooden bars crisscrossed the  window frame, latticed so
closely together  that I could scarcely thrust an arm between
them. I could see, though.
Dusk had fallen, and the shadows under the park trees
were bl ack as ink. The shouting was coming from there,
matched by answering cries fr om the stables, where two or
three figures suddenly appeared, bearing lit torches.
The small, dark figures ran toward the wood, the fire of
their pine torches streaming backward, flaring orange in the
cold, damp wind. As they reached the edge of the park, a knot
of vaguely human shapes became visible, tumbling onto the
grass before the house. The gro und was wet, and the force of
their str uggle left deep gashes of black in the winter -dead
lawn.I stood on tiptoe, gripping the bars and pressing my head
against the wood in an ef fort to see more. The light of the day
had failed utterly , and by the tor chlight, I could distinguish no
more than the occasional flailing limb in the riot below .
It co uldn’ t be Ja mie, I told myself, trying to swallow the
lump in my throat that was my heart. Not so soon, not now .
And not alone, surely he woul dn’ t have come alone? For I
could se e by now that the fight centered on one man, now on
his knees, no more than a hunched black shape under the fists
and sticks of the Duke’ s gamekeepers and stable-lads.
Then the hunched figure sprawled flat, and the shouting
died, though a f ew more blows were given for good measure
before the small gang of servants stood back. A few words of
conversation were exchanged, inaudible from my vantage
point, and two of the men st ooped and seized the figure
beneath the arms. As they passed beneath my third-floor
window on their way toward the back of the house, the
torchlight illuminated a pair of dragging, sandal-shod feet, and
the tatters of a grimy smock. Not Jamie.
One of the stable-lads scampere d alongside, triumphantly
carrying a thick leather wallet on a strap. I was too far above
to he ar t he clink  of the tiny metal ornaments on the strap, but
they glittered in the torchlight, and all the strength went from
my arms in a rush of horror and despair .
They we re coins  and buttons, th e small metal objects. And
gaberlunzies. The tiny lead seals that gave a beggar license to
plead hi s poverty through a given parish. Hugh Munro had
four of them, a mark of favor fo r his trials at the hands of the
T urk. Not Jamie, but Hugh.
I w as shaking s o badly that m y legs would hardly carry
me, but  I ran to the door and  pounded on it with all my
strength.
“Let me  out!” I shrieked. “I hav e to see the Duke! Let me
out, I say!”
There was no response to my continued yelling and
pounding, and I dashed back to  the window . The scene below
was eminently peaceful now; a boy stood holding a torch forone of the gard eners, who was kneeling at the edge of the
lawn, tenderly replacing the divots of turf dug up by the fight.
“Hoy!” I roared. Covered as the y were by bars, I couldn’ t
crank the casements outward. I  ran across the room to fetch
one of the heavy silver candlesticks, dashed back, and
smashed a pane of glass, heedless of the flying fragments.
“Help! Ahoy , down there! T ell the Duke I want to see him!
Now! Help!” I thought one o f the figures turned its head
toward me, but neither made any motion toward the house,
going on  with their work as thou gh no more than a night bird’ s
cry disturbed the darkness around them.
Back to the doo r I ran, hammering and shouting, and back
to th e window , a nd back to the door again. I shouted, pleaded,
and threatened until my throat was raw and hoarse, and beat
upon the unyielding door until my fists were red and bruised,
but no one came. I might have been alone in the great house,
for all I could hear . The silence in the hallway was as deep as
that of the night outside; as sile nt as the grave. All check on
my fear  was gone, and I sank at last to my knees before the
door , sobbing without restraint.
 
I w oke, chilled a nd stif f, with a throbbing headache, to feel
something wide  and solid shoving me across the floor . I came
awake w ith a jerk as the opening edge of the heavy door
pinched my thigh against the floor .
“Ow!” I rolled clumsily , then s crabbled to my hands and
knees, hair hanging in my face.
“Claire! Oh, do be quiet, p-please! Darling, are you hurt?”
W ith a rustle o f starched lawn, Mary dropped to her knees
beside me. Behind her , the door swung shut and I heard the
click of the lock above.
“Y es – I mean, no. I’m all rig ht,” I said dazedly . “But
Hugh…” I clamped my lips shu t and shook my head, trying to
clear it. “What in bloody hell are you doing here, Mary?”
“I b-brib ed the housekeeper to let me in,” she whispered.
“Must you talk so loudly?”“It d oesn’ t matter much,” I said,  in a normal tone of voice.
“That do or ’ s so thick, nothing s hort of a football match could
be heard through it.”
“A what?”
“Never mind.” My mind was beginning to clear , though
my eyes  were sticky and swolle n and my head still throbbed
like a drum. I pushed myself to my feet and staggered to the
basin, where I splashed cold water over my face.
“Y ou bri bed the housekeeper?” I said, wiping my face with
a tow el. “But w e’re still locked in, aren’ t we? I heard the key
turn.”
Mary was pale in the dimness of the room. The candle had
guttered out while I slept on the  floor , and there was no light
but the deep red glow of the fireplace embers. She bit her lip.
“It w as the b-be st I could do. Mrs. Gibson was too afraid
of th e Duke to give me a key . All she would do was agree to
lock me in with  you, and let me out in the morning. I thought
you m-might like company ,” she added timidly .
“Oh,” I said. “W ell… thank you. It was a kind thought.” I
took a new candle from the drawer and went to the fireplace to
light it. The cand lestick was clotted with wax from the burned-
out candle; I tipped a small puddle of melted wax onto the
tabletop and set the fresh candl e in it, heedless of damage to
the Duke’ s intaglio.
“Claire,” Mary said. “Are you… are you in trouble?”
I b it my lip to prevent a hasty reply . After all, she was only
seventeen, and her ignorance of politics was probably even
more profound than her lack of knowledge of men had been.
“Er , yes,” I said. “Rather a lot, I’m afraid.” My brain was
starting to work again. Even if M ary was not equipped to be of
much practical help in escaping , she might at least be able to
provide me with information about her godfather and the
doings of his household.
“Did you hear th e racket out by the wood earlier?” I asked.
She shook her h ead. She was beginning to shiver; in such alar ge ro om, the heat of the fire died away long before it
reached the bed dais.
“No, but I heard one of the cookmaids saying the keepers
had caug ht a poacher in the park. It’ s awfully cold. Can’ t we
get into b-bed?”
She was  already crawling across the coverlet, burrowing
beneath the bolster for the edge of the sheet. Her bottom was
round and neat, childlike under the white nightdress.
“That wasn’ t a poacher ,” I said . “Or rather it was, but it
was also a friend. He was on his way to find Jamie, to tell him
I was here. Do you know what happened after the keepers took
him?”
Mary swung around, face a pale blur within the shadows of
the b ed hangings. Even in this light, I could see that the dark
eyes had grown huge.
“Oh, Claire! I’m so sorry!”
“W ell, so am I,” I said impatiently . “Do you know where
the poacher is, though?” If Hugh had been imprisoned
somewhere accessible, like the stables, there was a bare
chance that Mary might be able to release him somehow in the
morning.
The trembling of her lips, maki ng her normal stutter seem
comprehensible by comparison, should have warned me. But
the words, once she got them out, struck through my heart,
sharp and sudden as a thrown dirk.
“Th-they h-h-hanged him,” she said. “At the p-park g-
gate.”
 
It w as so me tim e before I was able to pay attention to my
surroundings. The flood of shock, grief, fear , and shattered
hope washed over me, swamping me utterly . I was dimly
conscious of Mary’ s small hand timidly patting my shoulder ,
and her voice o f fering handkerchiefs and drinks of water , but
remained curled  in a ball, not speaking, but shaking, and
waiting for the relaxation of the wrenching despair thatclenched my stomach like a fist.  Finally I exhausted the panic,
if not myself, and opened my eyes blearily .
“I’ll be all right,” I said at last, sitting up and wiping my
nose inelegantly  on my sleeve. I took the prof fered towel and
blotted my eyes with it. Mary hovered over me, looking
concerned, and I reached out and squeezed her hand
reassuringly .
“Really ,” I said. “I’m all right now . And I’m very glad
you’re here.” A thought struck me, and I dropped the towel,
looking curiously at her .
“Come t o think of it, why ar e  you  her e?” I asked. “In this
house, I mean.”
She looked down, blushing, and picked at the coverlet.
“The D-Duke is my godfather , you know .”
“Y es, so I gath ered,” I said. “Somehow I doubt that he
merely wanted the pleasure of your company , though.”
She smiled a little at the remark. “N-no. But he – the Duke,
I me an – he thinks he’ s found another h-h-husband for me.”
The ef fort to get out “husband” left her red-faced. “Papa
brought me here to meet him.”
I gathered from her demeanor that this wasn’ t news
requiring imme diate congratu lations. “Do you know the
man?”
Only by name, it turned out. A Mr . Isaacson, an importer ,
of Lond on. T oo busy to travel all the way to Edinbur gh to
meet his intended, he had agree d to come to Bellhurst, where
the marriage would take place, all parties being agreeable.
I p icked up the silver -backed hairbrush from the bed table
and abst ractedly began to tidy my hair . So, having failed to
secure an alliance with the Fr ench nobility , the Duke was
intending to sell his goddaughter to a wealthy Jew .
“I have a new trousseau,” Mary said, trying to smile.
“Forty-three em broidered petticoats – two with g-gold thread.”
She broke of f, her lips pressed tight together , staring down
sightlessly at her bare left hand. I put my own hand over it.“W ell.” I tried to  be encouraging. “Perhaps he’ll be a kind
man.”
“That’ s what I’m af-fraid of.” A voiding my questioning
look, she glanced down, twisting her hands together in her lap.
“They didn’ t tell Mr . Isaacson – about P-Paris. And they
say I mustn’ t, either .” Her face crumpled miserably . “They
brought a horrible old woman to tell me how I must act on my
w-w-wedding night, to – to pre tend it’ s the first time, but I…
oh, Clai re, how can I do it?” she  wailed. “And Alex – I didn’ t
tell him;  I couldn’ t! I was such  a coward, I d-didn’ t even say
goodbye!”
She threw herself into my arm s, and I patted her back,
losing a  little of my own grief in the ef fort to comfort her . At
length, s he grew  calmer , and sa t up, hiccuping, to take a little
water .
“Are you  going to go through with it?” I asked. She looked
up at me, her lashes spiked and wet.
“I haven’ t any choice,” she said simply .
“But-” I started, and then stopped, helpless.
She was quite right. Y oung and female, with no resources,
and no man wh o could come to her rescue, there was simply
nothing to do b ut to accede to her father ’ s and godfather ’ s
wishes, and marry the unknown Mr . Isaacson of London.
Heavyhearted, neither of us had any appetite for the food
on the tray . W e crawled under the covers to keep warm, and
Mary , worn out with emotion, was sound asleep within
minutes. No less exhausted, I f ound myself unable to sleep,
grieving for Hugh, worried for Jamie, and curious about the
Duke.
The sheets were chilly , and my feet seemed like chunks of
ice. A voiding the more distressf ul things on my mind, I turned
my thou ghts to Sandringham. What was his place in this
af fair?
T o a ll appearances, the man was  a Jacobite. He had, by his
own admission, been willing to do murder – or pay for it, at
least – in order  to ensure that Charles got the backing heneeded t o launch  his expedition to Scotland. And the evidence
of the musical cipher made it all but certain that it was the
Duke w ho had finally induced Charles to set sail in August,
with his promise of help.
There were certainly men who took pains to conceal their
Jacobite sympathies; given the penalties for treason, it was
hardly peculiar . And the Duke had a good deal more to lose
than some, should he back a failing cause.
Still, Sandringh am hardly struck me as an enthusiastic
supporter of the Stuart monarchy . Given his remarks about
Danton, clearly he wouldn’ t be in sympathy with a Catholic
ruler . And why wait so long to provide support, when Charles
was in desperate need of money now – and had been, in fact,
ever since his arrival in Scotland?
I co uld think of two conceivab le reasons for the Duke’ s
behavior , neithe r particularly creditable to the gentleman, but
both well within the bounds of his character .
He coul d in fact be a Jacobite, willing to countenance an
unpalatable Catholic king in return for the future benefits he
might anticipate as chief backer of the restored Stuart
monarchy . I could see that; “p rinciple” wasn’ t in the man’ s
vocabulary , whereas “self-interest” clearly was a term he knew
well. He might wish to wait until Charles reached England, in
order that the money not be wasted before the Highland
army’ s final, crucial push to London. Anyone familiar with
Charles Stuart could see the co mmon sense in not entrusting
him with too much money at once.
Or , for that matt er , he might hav e wished to ensure that the
Stuarts did in fact have some substantial backing for their
cause before becoming financially involved himself; after all,
contributing to a rebellion is no t the same thing as supporting
an entire army single-handed.
Contrariwise, I could see a much more sinister reason for
the conditions of the Duke’ s of fer . Making support conditional
on the Jacobite army reaching English soil ensured that
Charles would struggle on against the increasing opposition of
his own leaders, dragging his reluctant, straggling army fartherand farther south, away from the sheltering mountains in
which they might find refuge.
If the Duke coul d expect benefits from the Stuarts for help
in re storing them, what might he  expect from the Hanovers, in
return f or luring Charles Stuart within their reach – and
betraying him and his followers  into the hands of the English
army?
History had not been able to say what the Duke’ s true
leanings had been. That struck  me as odd; surely he would
have to reveal his true intent sooner or later . Of course, I
mused, the Old F ox, Lord Lovat, had managed to play of f both
sides of the Jacobite Rising last time, simultaneously
ingratiating himself with the Hanovers and retaining the favor
of th e Stuarts. And Jamie had  done it himself, for a time.
Maybe it wasn’ t all that dif ficult to hide one’ s loyalties, in the
constantly shifting morass of Royal politics.
The chill was c reeping up my f eet, and I moved my legs
restlessly , my skin seeming n umb as I rubbed my calves
together . Legs obviously generated much less friction than dry
sticks; no perceptible warmth resulted from this activity .
L ying sleepless, restless and clammy , I suddenly became
aware of a tiny ,  rhythmic popping noise next to me. I turned
my head, listening, then raised up on one elbow and peered
incredulously at my companion . She was curled on her side,
delicate skin flushed with slee p, so that she looked like a
hothouse flower  in full bloom, thumb tucked securely in the
soft pink recesses of her mout h. Her lower lip moved as I
watched, in the faintest of sucking motions.
I w asn’ t  sure whether to laugh or cry . In the end, I did
neither; merely pulled the thum b gently free and laid the limp
hand curled upon her bosom. I blew out the candle and
cuddled close to Mary .
Whether it was the innocence o f that small gesture, with
the far -o f f memories of trust and  safety it provoked, the simple
comfort of a warm body nearby ,  or only the exhaustion of fear
and grief, my feet thawed, I relaxed at last, and fell asleep.W rapped in a warm cocoon o f quilts, I slept deep and
dreamlessly . It was all the grea ter a shock, then, when I was
jerked a bruptly from the soft, q uiet dark of oblivion. It was
still dark  – black as a coachma n’ s hat, in fact, as the fire had
gone out – but the surroundings were neither soft nor quiet.
Something heav y had landed su ddenly on the bed, striking my
arm in the pro cess, and was apparently in the process of
murdering Mary .
The bed heaved and the mattress tilted sharply under me,
the b edframe shuddering with the force of the struggle taking
place next to me. Agonized grun ts and whispered threats came
from clo se at hand, and a flailin g hand – Mary’ s, I thought –
struck me in the eye.
I rolled hastily out of bed, tripping on the step of the dais
and falli ng flat on the floor . The  sounds of struggle above me
intensified, with a horrible, high-pitched squealing noise that I
took to  be Mary’ s best ef fo rt at a scream while being
strangled.
There w as a sudden startled exclamation, in a deep male
voice, then a further convulsion of bedclothes, and the
squealing stopped abruptly . Moving hastily , I found the flint
box on the table and struck a light for the candle. Its wavering
flame strengthened and rose, revealing what I had suspected
from the sound of that vigoro us Gaelic expletive – Mary ,
invisible save for a pair of w ildly scrabbling hands, face
smothered under a pillow and body flattened by the prostrate
form of my la r ge and agitated husband, who despite his
advantage of size, appeared to have his hands well and truly
full.
Intent on subduing Mary , he hadn’ t glanced up at the
newly l it candle, but went on  trying to capture her hands,
while simultan eously holding  the pillow over her face.
Suppressing the  ur ge to laugh hysterically at the spectacle, I
instead set down the candle, lea ned over the bed, and tapped
him on the shoulder .
“Jamie?” I said.“Jesus!” He leaped like a salmon, springing of f the bed and
coming to rest o n the floor in a crouch, dirk half-drawn. He
saw me then, and sagged in relief, closing his eyes for an
instant.
“Jesus God, Sassenach! Never d o that again, d’ye hear? Be
quiet,” he said briefly to Mary , who had escaped from the
pillow a nd was now sitting bolt  upright in bed, bug-eyed and
spluttering. “I didna mean ye harm; I thought ye were my
wife.” He strode purposefully ro und the bed, took me by both
shoulders and kissed me hard, as though to reassure himself
that he’d  got the right woman n ow . He had, and I kissed him
back wi th considerable fervor , reveling in the scrape of his
unshaven beard and the warm, pungent scent of him; damp
linen and wool, with a strong hint of male sweat.
“Get dressed,” he said, letting go. “The damn house is
crawling wi’ servants. It’ s like an ant’ s nest below .”
“How di d you get in here?” I asked, looking around for my
discarded gown.
“Through the door , of course,” he said impatiently . “Here.”
He seize d my gown from the back of a chair and tossed it at
me. Sure enough, the massive d oor stood open, a great ring of
keys protruding from the lock.
“But how…” I began.
“Later ,” he said brusquely . He spotted Mary , out of bed
and stru ggling into her nightrobe. “Best get back in bed,
lassie,” he advised. “The floor ’ s cold.”
“I’m co ming with you.” The words were muf fled by the
folds of cloth, b ut her determination was evident as her head
popped through  the neck of the robe and emer ged, tousled-
haired and defiant.
“The hell you are,” Jamie said. He glared at her , and I
noticed the fresh, raw scratche s down his cheek. Seeing the
quiver o f her lips, though, he mastered his temper with an
ef fort, and spoke reassuringly . “Dinna mind, lassie. Y ou’ll
have no trouble over it. I’ll lock the door behind us, and ye cantell ever yone in the morning what’ s happened. No one shall
hold ye to blame.”
Ignoring this, Mary thrust her feet hastily into her slippers
and ran toward the door .
“Hey! Where d’ye think you’re going?” Startled, Jamie
swung a round after her , but n ot soon enough to stop her
reaching the door . She stood in the hallway just outside, poised
like a deer .
“I’m going with you!” she said fiercely . “If you don’ t take
me, I shall run down the corridor , screaming as loudly as I can.
So there!”
Jamie stared at her , his hair gleaming copper in the
candlelight and the blood risin g in his face, obviously torn
between the necessity for silenc e and the ur ge to kill her with
his bare hands and damn the noise. Mary glared back, one
hand holding up her skirts, rea dy to run. Now dressed and
shod, I poked him in the ribs, breaking his concentration.
“T ake her ,” I said briefly . “Let’ s go.”
He gave  me a look that was twin to the one he’d been
giving M ary , but hesitated no more than a moment. W ith a
short nod, he too k my arm and the three of us hurried out into
the chill darkness of the corridor .
 
The house was at once deathl y still and full of noises;
boards squeaked loud beneath our feet and our garments
rustled like leaves in a gale. The  walls seemed to breathe with
the s ettlings of wood, and small , half-heard sounds beyond the
corridor suggested the secretive burrowings of animals
under ground. And over all was the deep and frightening
silence o f a great, dark house, su nk in a sleep that must not be
broken.
Mary’ s hand was tight on my arm, as we crept down the
hall beh ind Jamie. He moved lik e a shadow , hugging the wall,
but quickly , for all his silence.
As w e passed on e door , I heard the sound of soft footsteps
on th e other side . Jamie heard them, too, and flattened himselfagainst the wall, motioning Mary and me ahead of him. The
plaster o f the wall was cold aga inst the palms of my hands, as
I tried to press backward into it.
The door opened cautiously , an d a head in a puf fy white
mobcap poked out, peering down the hall in the direction away
from us.
“Hullo?” it said in a whisper . “Is that you, Albert?” A
tickle of cold sweat ran dow n my spine. A housemaid,
apparently expecting a visitation from the Duke’ s valet, who
seemed to be keeping up the reputation of Frenchmen.
I didn’ t think she was goin g to consider an armed
Highlander an adequate substitu te for her absent lover . I could
feel Jam ie tense  beside me, try ing to overcome his scruples
against striking a woman. Anoth er instant, and she would turn,
see him, and scream the house down.
I stepped out from the wall.
“Er , no,” I said apologetically , “I’m afraid it’ s only me.”
The maidservant started convulsively , and I took a swift
step past, so that she was facing me, with Jamie still behind
her .
“Sorry t o alarm you,” I said, smiling cheerily . “I couldn’ t
sleep, you see. Thought I’d try a spot of hot milk. T ell me, am
I headed right for the kitchens?”
“Eh?” T he maid, a plump miss in her early twenties, gaped
unbecomingly , exposing evidence of a distressing lack of
concern for dental hygiene. Luc kily , it wasn’ t the same maid
who had seen m e to my room; she might not realize that I was
a prisoner , not a guest.
“I’m a guest in the house,” I sa id, driving the point home.
Continuing on the principle th at the best defense is a good
of fense, I stared accusingly at her .
“Albert, eh? Does His Grace know that you are in the habit
of en tertaining men in your room  at night?” I demanded. This
seemed to hit a nerve, for the wo man paled and dropped to her
knees, c lutching at my skirt. Th e prospect of exposure was so
alarming that she didn’ t pause to ask exactly why a guestshould b e wandering about the halls in the wee hours of the
morning, wearin g not only gow n and shoes, but a traveling
cloak as well.
“Oh, mum! Please, you won’ t say nothing to His Grace,
will you? I can see you’ve a kind face, mum, surely you’d not
want to see me dismissed from  my place? Have pity on me,
my lady , I’ve six brothers and sisters still at home, and I…”
“Now , now ,” I soothed, patting h er on the shoulder . “Don’ t
worry about it. I won’ t tell the D uke. Y ou just go back to your
bed, and…” T alking in the sort o f voice one uses with children
and mental patients, I eased he r , still volubly protesting her
innocence, back into the small closet of a room.
I s hut the door on her and lea ned against it for support.
Jamie’ s face loomed up from the shadows before me, grinning.
He s aid nothing, but patted me on the head in congratulation,
before taking my arm and ur ging me down the hall once more.
Mary w as waiting under the window on the landing, her
nightrobe glow ing white in the moonlight that beamed
momentarily through scudding clouds outside. A storm was
gathering, from the looks of it,  and I wondered whether this
would help or hinder our escape.
Mary clutched at Jamie’ s plai d as he stepped onto the
landing.
“Shh!” she whispered. “Someone’ s coming!”
Someone was; I could hear th e faint thud of footsteps
coming from below , and the pale wash of a candle lit the
stairwell. Mary and I looked wildly about, but there was
absolutely no place to hide. Th is was a back stair , meant for
the servants’ use, and the land ings were simple squares of
flooring, totally unrelieved by furniture or convenient
hangings.
Jamie sighed in resignation. Then, motioning me and Mary
back into the hallway from which we had come, he drew his
dirk and waited, poised in the shadowed corner of the landing.
Mary’ s fingers clutched and tw ined with mine, squeezing
tight in an agon y of apprehension. Jamie had a pistol hangingfrom his  belt, but plainly couldn’ t use it within the house – and
a se rvant would realize that, m aking it useless for threat. It
would have to be the knife, and my stomach quivered with
pity for the hapless servant who  was just about to come face-
to-face w ith fifteen stone of ke yed-up Scot and the threat of
black steel.
I was taking stock of my appare l, and thinking that I could
spare one of my  petticoats to be used for bindings, when the
bowed head of t he candle-bearer came in sight. The dark hair
was par ted down the middle and slicked with a stinkingly
sweet pomade that at once broug ht back the memory of a dark
Paris street and the curve of thin, cruel lips beneath a mask.
My gasp  of recognition made Danton look up sharply , one
step bel ow the landing. The ne xt instant, he was grasped by
the neck and flung against the wall of the landing with a force
that sent the candlestick flying through the air .
Mary had seen him too.
“That’ s him!” she exclaimed, in her shock for getting either
to whisper or to stutter . “The man in Paris!”
Jamie had the feebly struggling valet squashed against the
wall, held by one muscled forearm pressed across his chest.
The man’ s face, fading in and  out as the light ebbed and
flooded with the passing cloud s, was ghastly pale. It grew
paler in the next moment, as Jamie laid the edge of his blade
against Danton’ s throat.
I stepped onto the landing, no t sure either what Jamie
would do, or w hat I wanted him to do. Danton let out a
strangled moan when he saw me, and made an abortive
attempt to cross himself.
“La Dame Blanche!” he whispered, eyes starting in horror .
Jamie moved with sudden violence, grasping the man’ s
hair and jerking his head back s o hard that it thumped against
the paneling.
“Had I time, mo gar he , ye would die slow ,” he whispered,
and his voice la cked nothing in conviction, quiet as it was.
“Count it God’ s mercy I have not.” He yanked Danton’ s headback ev en further , so I could see the bobbing of his Adam’ s
apple as he swa llowed convulsively , his eyes fixed on me in
fear .
“Y ou ca ll her ‘Dame Blanche,’ ” Jamie said, between his
teeth. “I call her wife! Let her face be the last that ye see,
then!”
The knife ripped across the ma n’ s throat with a violence
that made Jamie grunt with the ef fort, and a dark sheet of
blood sprayed over his shirt. Th e stench of sudden death filled
the landing, with a wheezing, gur gling sound from the
crumpled heap on the floor that seemed to go on for a very
long time.
The sounds behind me brought me finally to my senses:
Mary , being violently sick in t he hallway . My first coherent
thought was that the servants were going to have the hell of a
mess to clean u p in the mornin g. My second was for Jamie,
seen in a flash of the fleeting moon. His face was spattered and
his h air matted with droplets of  blood, and he was breathing
heavily . He looked as though he might be going to be sick, too.
I turned toward Mary , and saw , far beyond her down the
hall, the crack of light behind an opening door . Someone was
coming to investigate the nois e. I grabbed the hem of her
nightrobe, wiped  it roughly across her mouth, and seized her
by the arm, tugging her toward the landing.
“Come on!” I sa id. “Let’ s get out of here!” Starting from
his dazed contemplation of Danton’ s corpse, Jamie shook
himself suddenly , and returning to his senses, turned to the
stair .
He seemed to know where we were going, leading us
through the darkened corridors without hesitation. Mary
stumbled along  beside me, pu f fing, her breath loud as an
engine in my ear .
At the scullery door , Jamie came to a sudden halt, and
gave a low whistle. This was returned immediately , and the
door sw ung ope n on a darkness  inhabited by indistinct forms.
One of these detached itself from the murk and hastened
forward. A few muttered words were exchanged, and the man– wh ichever it w as – reached fo r Mary and pulled her into the
shadows. A cold draft told m e there was an open door
somewhere ahead.
Jamie’ s hand on my shoulder steered me through the
obstacles of the darkened scullery and some smaller chamber
that seem ed to be a lumber roo m of some sort; I barked my
shin against something, but bit back the exclamation of pain.
Out in the free n ight at last, the  wind seized my cloak and
whirled it out in a exuberan t balloon. After the nerve-
stretching trek through the dark ened house, I felt as though I
might take wing, and sail for the sky .
The men  around me seemed to  share the mood of relief;
there was a sma ll outbreak of whispered remarks and muf fled
laughter , quickly shushed by Jamie. One at a time, the men
flitted across the open space be fore the house, no more than
shadows under the dancing moo n. At my side, Jamie watched
as they disappeared into the woods of the park.
“Where’ s Murta gh?” he muttered, as though to himself,
frowning after the last of his m en. “Gone to look for Hugh, I
suppose,” he said, in answer to  his own question. “D’ye ken
where he might be, Sassenach?”
I sw allowed, feeling the wind bite cold beneath my cloak,
memory killing the sudden exhilaration of freedom.
“Y es,” I  said, and told him the  bad news, as briefly as I
could. H is expre ssion darkened  under its mask of blood, and
by the time I had finished, his face was hard as stone.
“D’ye m ean just to stand there all night,” inquired a voice
behind us, “or o ught we to sound an alarm, so they’ll know
where to look first?”
Jamie’ s expressi on lightened slightly as Murtagh appeared
from the shadows beside us, quiet as a wraith. He had a cloth-
wrapped bundle under one arm; a joint from the kitchens, I
thought, seeing the blotch of dark blood on the cloth. This
impression was borne out by the lar ge ham he had tucked
beneath the other arm, and the strings of sausages about his
neck.Jamie wrinkled his nose, with a faint smile.
“Y e smell like a butcher , man. Can ye no go anywhere
without thinkin’ of your stomach?”
Murtagh cocked his head to one side, taking in Jamie’ s
blood-spattered appearance.
“Better to look like the butcher than his wares, lad,” he
said. “Shall we go?”
 
The trip  through the park was dark and frightening. The
trees were tall and widely spaced here, but there were saplings
left to grow be tween them that changed abruptly into the
menacing shapes of gamekeepers in the uncertain light. The
clouds w ere gathering thicker , at least, and the full moon made
fewer appearanc es, which was something to be grateful for . As
we reached the far side of the park, it began to rain.
Three men had b een left with the horses. Mary was already
mounted before one of Jamie’ s men. Plainly embarrassed by
the nece ssity of riding astride, she kept tucking the folds of her
nightrobe under  her thighs, in a vain attempt to hide the fact
that she had legs.
More experience d, but still cursing the heavy folds of my
skirt, I plucked them up and set a foot in Jamie’ s of fered hand,
swinging aboard with a practiced thump. The horse snorted at
the impact and set his ears back.
“Sorry , cully ,” I said without sym pathy . “If you think that’ s
bad, just wait ’ til he  gets back on.”
Glancing around for the “he” in question, I found him
under one of the trees, hand on the shoulder of a strange boy
of about fourteen.
“Who’ s that?” I asked, leaning over to attract the attention
of G eordie Paul Fraser , who was  busy tightening his girth next
to me.
“Eh? Oh , him.” He glanced at  the boy , then back at his
reluctant girth, frowning. “His  name’ s Ewan Gibson. Hugh
Munro’ s eldest stepson. He was wi’ his da, seemingly , whenthe Duk e’ s keepers came on ’em. The lad got awa’, and we
found him near the edge o’ th e moor . He brought us here.”
W ith a final unn ecessary tug, he glared at the girth as though
daring it to say something, then looked up at me.
“D’ye ken where the lad’ s da is?” he asked abruptly .
I no dded, and the answer must have been plain in my face,
for he turned to look at the boy . Jamie was holding the boy ,
hugged hard against his chest, and patting his back. As we
watched, he held the boy away  from him, both hands on his
shoulders, and said something, looking down intently into his
face. I couldn’ t hear what it wa s, but after a moment, the boy
straightened himself and nodded. Jamie nodded as well, and
with a final clap on the shoulder , turned the lad toward one of
the horses, where Geor ge McClure was already reaching down
a ha nd to  him. Jamie strode toward us, head down, and the end
of his plaid flut tering free behind him, despite the cold wind
and the spattering rain.
Geordie spat on the ground. “Poor bugger ,” he said,
without specifying whom he meant, and swung into his own
saddle.
Near the southeast corner of the  park we halted, the horses
stamping and twitching, while two of the men disappeared
back int o the trees. It cannot have been more than twenty
minutes, but it seemed twice as long before they came back.
The men rode d ouble now , and the second horse bore a
long, hu nched shape bound across its saddle, wrapped in a
Fraser p laid. The horses didn’ t like it; mine jerked its head,
nostrils flaring, as the horse bearing Hugh’ s corpse came
alongside. Jamie yanked the rein and said something angrily in
Gaelic, though, and the beast desisted.
I c ould feel Jam ie rise in the stirrups behind me, looking
backward as though counting the remaining members of his
band. Then his arm came around my waist, and we set of f, on
our way north.
 
W e rode  all night, with only brief stops for rest. During
one of these, sheltering under a horse-chestnut tree, Jamiereached to embrace me, then suddenly stopped.
“What i s it?” I said, smiling. “Afraid to kiss your wife in
front of your men?”
“No,” he  said, proving it, then s tepped back, smiling. “No,
I wa s af raid for a moment ye w ere going to scream and claw
my face.” He dabbed gingerly at the marks Mary had left on
his cheek.
“Poor thing,” I said, laughing. “Not the welcome you
expected, was it?”
“W ell, by that ti me, actually it was,” he said, grinning. He
had take n two sausages from one of Murtagh’ s strings, and
now han ded me one. I couldn ’ t remember when I had last
eaten, bu t it must have been qui te some time, for not even my
fears of botulism kept the fa tty , spiced meat from being
delicious.
“What d o you mean by that? Y ou thought I wouldn’ t
recognize you after only a week?”
He shoo k his head, still smiling,  and swallowed the bite of
sausage.
“Nay . It ’ s only ,  when I got in the house to start, I kent
where y e were, more or less, because of the bars on your
windows.” He arched one brow . “From the looks of them, ye
must have made one hell of an impression on His Grace.”
“I did,” I said shortly , not wanting to think about the Duke.
“Go on.”
“W ell,” he said, taking another b ite and shifting it expertly
to his cheek whi le he talked, “I kent the room, but I needed the
key , didn’ t I?”
“Oh, yes,” I said. “Y ou were going to tell me about that.”
He chewed briefly and swallowed.
“I got it from the housekeeper , but not without trouble.”
He rubb ed himself tenderly , a few inches below the belt.
“From appearances, I’d say the woman’ s been waked in her
bed a few times before – and didna care for the experience.”“Oh, ye s,” I said, entertained by the mental picture this
provoked. “W el l, I daresay you  came as rare and refreshing
fruit to her .”
“I doubt it extremely , Sassenach. She screeched like a
banshee and kneed me in the stones, then came altogether too
near to braining me wi’ a candle-stick whilst I was doubled up
groaning.”
“What did you do?”
“Thumped her a good one – I wasna feeling verra
chivalrous just at the moment – and tied her up wi’ the strings
to her nightcap. Then I put a towel in her mouth to put a stop
to the things she was callin’ me, and searched her room ’ til I
found the keys.”
“Good work,” I said, something occurring to me, “but how
did you know where the housekeeper slept?”
“I di dn’ t,” he sa id calmly . “The laundress told me – after I
told her who I was, and threatened to gut her and roast her on a
spit if she didna tell me what I w anted to know .” He gave me a
wry smile. “Like I told ye, S assenach, sometimes it’ s an
advantage to be thought a barba rian. I reckon they’ve all heard
of Red Jamie Fraser by now .”
“W ell, if they hadn’ t, they will,” I said. I looked him over ,
as w ell a s I could in the dim light. “What, didn’ t the laundress
get a lick in?”
“She pu lled my hair ,” he said reflectively . “T ook a clump
of it  out by the roots. I’ll tell ye, Sassenach; if ever I feel the
need to change my manner of e mployment, I dinna think I’ll
take up attacking women – it’ s a bloody hard way to make a
living.”
 
It was beginning  to sleet heavil y near dawn, but we rode
for some time before Ewan Gibson dragged his pony
uncertainly to a stop, rose up clumsily in the stirrups to look
around, then motioned up the hillside that rose to the left.
Dark as it was, it was impossible to ride the horses uphill.
W e had to des cend to the ground and lead them, foot bymuddy , slogging foot, along the nearly invisible track that
zigzagged throu gh heather and granite. Dawn was beginning
to lighten the sky as we paused for breath at the crest of the
hill. The  horizon was hidden, thick with clouds, but a dull gray
of no apparent s ource began to replace the darker gray of the
night. N ow I could at least see the cold streamlets that I sank
in, a nkle-deep, and avoid the worst of the foot-twisting snags
of ro ck and bramble that we encountered on the way down the
hill.
At th e bottom was a small corrie, with six houses – though
“house” was an overdignified word for the rude structures
crouched beneath the larch trees there. The thatched roofs
came do wn with in a few feet of the ground, leaving only a bit
of the stone walls showing.
Outside one bothy , we came to a halt. Ewan looked at
Jamie, h esitating as though lost for direction, then at his nod,
ducked and disappeared beneath  the low rooftree of the hut. I
drew closer to Jamie, putting my hand on his arm.
“This is Hugh M unro’ s house,” he said to me, low-voiced.
“I’ve br ought hi m home to his wife. The lad’ s gone in to tell
her .”
I glance d from the dark, low doorway of the hut to the
limp, plaid-draped bundle that two of the men were now
unstrapping from  the horse. I felt a small tremor run through
Jamie’ s arm. He closed his eyes for a moment, and I saw his
lips move; then he stepped forward and held out his arms for
the b urden. I dr ew a deep breath, brushed my hair back from
my face, and followed him, stooping below the lintel of the
door .
It wasn’ t as bad as I had feared it might be, though bad
enough. The woman, Hugh’ s widow , was quiet, accepting
Jamie’ s soft Gaelic speech of condolence with bowed head,
the tear s slipping down her face like rain. She reached
tentatively for the covering plaid, as though meaning to draw it
down, b ut then her nerve fail ed, and she stood, one hand
resting a wkwardly on the curve of the shroud, while the other
drew a small child close against her thigh.There w ere seve ral children huddled near the fire – Hugh’ s
stepchildren – and a swaddled m ass in the rough cradle nearest
the h earth. I fel t some small comfort, looking at the baby; at
least this much of Hugh was  left. Then the comfort was
overwhelmed w ith a cold fear as I looked at the children,
grimy fa ces blending with the shadows. Hugh had been their
main su pport. Ewan was brave and willing, but he was no
more than fourteen, and the next eldest child was a girl of
twelve or so. How would they manage?
The woman’ s face was worn an d lined, nearly toothless. I
realized with a shock that she could be only a few years older
than I was. She nodded toward the single bed, and Jamie laid
the body  gently  on it. He spoke to her again in Gaelic; she
shook her head h opelessly , still staring down at the long shape
upon her bed.
Jamie knelt down by the bed; b owed his head, and placed
one hand on the corpse. His words were soft, but clearly
spoken, and even my limited Gaelic could follow them.
“I swear  to thee, friend, and may God Almighty bear me
witness. For the sake of your lov e to me, never shall those that
are yours go wa nting, while I have aught to give.” He knelt
unmoving for a long moment, and there was no sound in the
cottage but the crackle of the peat on the hearth and the soft
patter of rain o n the thatch. The wet had darkened Jamie’ s
bowed head; droplets of moisture shone jewel-like in the folds
of h is plaid. Th en his hand tightened once in final farewell,
and he rose.
Jamie b owed to Mrs. Munro an d turned to take my arm.
Before w e could leave, though, the cowhide that hung across
the l ow doorway was thrust asi de, and I stood back to make
way for Mary Hawkins, followed by Murtagh.
Mary lo oked both bedraggled and bewildered, a damp
plaid clasped around her shoulders and her muddy bedroom
slippers protruding under the sodden hem of her nightrobe.
Spotting me, she pressed close to me as though grateful for my
presence.“I didn’ t w-want to come in,” she whispered to me,
glancing shyly at Hugh Munro’ s widow , “but Mr . Murtagh
insisted.”
Jamie’ s brows were raised in inquiry , as Murtagh nodded
respectfully to Mrs. Munro an d said something to her in
Gaelic. T he little clansman looked just as he always did, dour
and competent, but I thought the re was an extra hint of dignity
in hi s demeanor . He carried one  of the saddlebags before him,
bulging heavily with something. Perhaps a parting gift for
Mrs. Munro, I thought.
Murtagh laid the bag on the floor at my feet, then
straightened up and looked from me to Mary , to Hugh Munro’ s
widow , and at l ast to Jamie, wh o looked as puzzled as I felt.
Having thus assured himself of his audience, Murtagh bowed
formally to me, a lock of wet dark hair falling free over his
brow .
“I br ing ye your  vengeance, lady ,” he said, as quietly as I’d
ever hea rd him speak. He straigh tened and inclined his head in
turn to Mary and Mrs. Munro. “And justice for the wrong done
to ye.”
Mary sneezed, and wiped her n ose hastily with a fold of
her plai d. She stared at Murta gh, eyes wide and baf fled. I
gazed down at the bulging saddle-bag, feeling a sudden deep
chill tha t owed nothing to the  weather outside. But it was
Hugh Munro’ s widow who sank to her knees, and with steady
hands o pened th e bag and drew  out the head of the Duke of
Sandringham.4 5  D A M N  A L L  R A N D A L L S
I t w as a torturou s trip northward into Scotland. W e had to
dodge and hide, always afraid of being recognized as
Highlanders, unable to buy or b eg food, needing to steal small
bits from unattended sheds or pluck the few edible roots I
could find in the fields.
Slowly , slowly , we made our way north. There was no
telling where the Scottish army was by now , except that it lay
to th e no rth. W i th no way of telling where the army was, we
decided to make for Edinbur gh ; there at least there would be
news of the cam paign. W e had been out of touch for several
weeks; I knew the relief of Stirling Castle by the English had
failed, Jamie knew the Battle of Falkirk had succeeded, ending
in victory for the Scots. But what had come after?
When w e rode at last into the cobbled gray street of the
Royal M ile, Jam ie went at onc e to the army’ s headquarters,
leaving me to g o with Mary to Alex Randall’ s quarters. W e
hurried u p the street together , barely speaking, both too afraid
of what we might find.
He was there, and I saw Mary ’ s knees give way as she
entered the room and collapsed by his bed. Startled from a
doze, he opened his eyes an d blinked once, then Alex
Randall’ s face blazed as thoug h he had received a heavenly
visitation.
“Oh, God!” he kept muttering brokenly into her hair . “Oh,
God. I thought…  oh, Lord, I had prayed… one more sight of
you. Just one. Oh, Lord!”
Simply averting my gaze seemed insuf ficient; I went out
onto the  landing , and sat on the stairs for half an hour , resting
my weary head on my knees.
When it seemed decent to retu rn, I went back into the
small ro om, grown grimy and c heerless again in the weeks of
Mary’ s absence. I examined him, my hands gentle on thewasted flesh. I was surprised that he had lasted so long; it
couldn’ t be much longer .
He saw the truth in my face, and nodded, unsurprised.
“I waite d,” he said softly , lying  back in exhaustion on his
pillows. “I hoped… she would come once more. I had no
reason… but I p rayed. And now it is answered. I shall die in
peace now .”
“Alex!” Mary’ s cry of anguish burst out of her as though
his w ords had struck her a physical blow , but he smiled and
pressed her hand.
“W e have known it for a long time, my love,” he
whispered to her . “Don’ t despair . I will be with you always,
watching you, loving you. Don’ t cry , my dearest.” She brushed
obediently at her pink-washed c heeks, but could do nothing to
stem the tears that came stream ing down them. Despite her
obvious despair , she had never looked so blooming.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” Alex said, clearly mustering his strength to
ask one more fa vor . “I must ask … tomorrow… will you come
again, and bring your husband? It is important.”
I h esitated for a  moment. Whatever Jamie found out, he
was goin g to want to leave Edinbur gh immediately , to join the
army and find the rest of his men. But surely one more day
could m ake no dif ference to the outcome of the war – and I
could no t deny the appeal in the  two pairs of eyes that looked
at me so hopefully .
“W e’ll come,” I said.
 
“I am a fool,” Ja mie grumbled, climbing the steep, cobbled
streets to  the wynd where Alex Randall had his lodgings. “W e
should h ave left yesterday , at o nce, as soon as we got back
your pearls from the pawnbroker! D’ye no ken how far it is to
Inverness? And we wi’ little more than nags to get us there?”
“I kn ow ,” I said impatiently . “But I promised. And if you’d
seen him… well, you will see him in a moment, and then
you’ll understand.”“Mphm.” But he held the street  door for me and followed
me up the win ding stair of t he decrepit building without
further complaint.
Mary was half-sitting, half-lying on the bed. Still dressed
in her tattered traveling clothes, she was holding Alex,
cradling him fiercely against her bosom. She must have stayed
with him so all night.
Seeing me, he g ently freed himself from her grasp, patting
her hands as he laid them aside. He propped himself on one
elbow , face paler than the linen sheets on which he lay .
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said. He smile d faintly , despite the sheen
of unhea lthy sweat and the gra y pallor that betokened a bad
attack.
“It w as good of you to come,” h e said, gasping a little. He
glanced beyond me. “Y our husband… he is with you?”
As t hough in an swer , Jamie stepped into the room behind
me. Mary , stirred from her mis ery by the noise of our entry ,
glanced from me to Jamie, then rose to her feet, laying a hand
timidly on his arm.
“I… we… n-need you, Lord T ua rach.” I thought it was the
stammer , more than the use o f his title, that touched him.
Though he was still grim-faced,  some of the tension went out
of him. He inclined his head courteously toward her .
“I asked your wife to bring you, my lord. I am dying, as
you see.” Alex R andall had pushed himself upright, sitting on
the edge  of the bed. His slender  shins gleamed white as bone
beneath the frayed hem of his nightshirt. The toes, long, slim,
and bloodless, were shadowed with the bluing of poor
circulation.
I ha d seen death often enough before, in all its forms, but
this was  always the worst – and the best; a man who met death
with kno wledge and courage, while the healer ’ s futile arts fell
aside. F utile or not, I rummage d through the contents of my
case for  the digitalin I had made for him. I had several
infusions, in varying strengths, a  spectrum of brown liquids inglass via ls. I chose the darkest vial without hesitation; I could
hear his breath bubbling through the water in his lungs.
It wasn’ t digitalin, but his purpo se that sustained him now ,
lighting him with a glow as thou gh a candle burned behind the
waxy sk in of his face. I had see n that a few times before, too;
the man – or woman – whose will was strong enough to
override for a time the imperatives of the body .
I tho ught that was perhaps how  some ghosts were made;
where a  will and a purpose had  survived, heedless of the frail
flesh th at fell by the wayside , unable to sustain life long
enough. I didn’ t much want to  be haunted by Alex Randall;
that, among other reasons, was why I had made Jamie come
with me today .
Jamie himself appeared to be coming to similar
conclusions.
“A ye,” he said softly . “I do see. Do ye ask aught of me?”
Alex nodded, closing his eyes b riefly . He lifted the vial I
handed him and drank, shuddering briefly at the bitter taste.
He opened his eyes and smiled at Jamie.
“The ind ulgence of your presence only . I promise I shall
not detain you long. W e are waiting for one more person.”
While w e waited, I did what I could for Alex Randall,
which under the circumstances was not much. The foxglove
infusion again, and a bit of camp hor to help ease his breathing.
He seem ed a little better after the administration of such
medicine as I had, but placing my homemade stethoscope
against the sunken chest, I coul d hear the labored thud of his
heart, interrupted by such frequent flutters and palpitations that
I expected it to stop at any moment.
Mary held his hand throughout, and he kept his eyes fixed
on her , as though memorizing every line of her face. It seemed
almost an intrusion to be in the same room with them.
The door opened, and Jack Rand all stood on the threshold.
He look ed uncomprehendingly at me and Mary for a moment,
then his gaze lig hted on Jamie and he turned to stone. Jamie
met his eyes squarely , then turned, nodding toward the bed.Seeing that haggard face, Jack Randall crossed the room
rapidly and fell on his knees beside the bed.
“Alex!” he said. “My God, Alex…”
“It’ s all right,” his brother s aid. He held Jack’ s face
between frail hands and smiled at him, trying to reassure him.
“It’ s all right, Johnny ,” he said.
I p ut a h and under Mary’ s elbow , gently ur ging her of f the
bed. Wh atever Jack Randall might be, he deserved a few last
words in privacy with his broth er . Stunned with despair , she
didn’ t resist, but came with me to the far side of the room,
where I perched her on a stool. I poured a little water from the
ewer and wet m y handkerchief. I tried to give it to her to swab
her eyes, but sh e simply sat, clutching it lifelessly . Sighing, I
took it and wiped her face, sm oothing her hair as much as I
could.
There was a small, choked sou nd from behind that made
me g lance toward the bed. Jack, still on his knees, had his face
buried in his b rother ’ s lap, while Alex stroked his head,
holding one of his hands.
“John,” he said. “Y ou’ll know th at I do not ask this lightly .
But for the sake of your love for me…” He broke of f to cough,
the ef fort flushing his cheeks with hectic color .
I fel t Jamie’ s bo dy stif fen still further , if such a thing were
possible. Jonathan Randall stif fened, too, as though he felt the
force of Jamie’ s eyes upon him, but didn’ t look up.
“Alex,” he said quietly . He la id a hand on his younger
brother ’ s shoulder , as though to quiet the cough. “Don’ t
trouble your mind, Alex. Y ou k now you needn’ t ask; I’ll do
whatever you wish. Is it the – the girl?” He glanced in Mary’ s
direction, but couldn’ t quite bring himself to look at her .
Alex nodded, still coughing.
“It’ s all right,” John said. He put both hands on Alex’ s
shoulders, trying  to ease him back on the pillow . “I won’ t let
her want for anything. Put your mind at rest.”
Jamie lo oked down at me, eye s wide. I shook my head
slowly , f eeling t he hair prickle fr om my neck to the base of myspine. Everything made sense now; the bloom on Mary’ s
cheeks, despite her distress, and her apparent willingness to
wed the wealthy Jew of London.
“It i sn’ t money ,” I said. “She’ s with child. He wants…” I
stopped, clearing my throat, “I think he wants you to marry
her .”
Alex nodded, eyes still closed. He breathed heavily for a
moment, then opened them, bright pools of hazel, fixed on his
brother ’ s stunned and incomprehending face.
“Y es,” h e said. “John… Johnny , I need you to take care of
her f or m e. I want… my child t o have the Randall name. Y ou
can… g ive them some position in the world – so much more
than I could.” He reached out a hand, groping, and Mary
seized it , clutch ing it to her bosom as though it were a life
preserver . He smiled tenderly at her , and stretched up a hand to
touch the shiny , dark ringlets that fell by her cheek, hiding her
face.
“Mary . I wish… well, you know what I wish, my dear; so
many things. And so many things I am sorry for . But I cannot
regret the love b etween us. Having known such joy , I would
die content, save for my fear that you might be exposed to
shame and disgrace.”
“I don’ t care!” Mary burst out fiercely . “I don’ t care who
knows!”
“But I care for you,” Alex said, softly . He stretched out a
hand to his brot her , who took i t after a moment’ s hesitation.
Then he brought them together , laying Mary’ s hand in
Randall’ s. Mary’ s lay inert, and Jack Randall’ s stif f, like a
dead fish on a wooden slab, but Alex pressed his hands tightly
around the two, pressing them together .
“I give you to each other , my dear ones,” he said softly . He
looked f rom one  face to the other , each reflecting the horror of
the sug gestion, submer ged in the overwhelming grief of
impending loss.
“But…” For the first time in our acquaintance, I saw
Jonathan Randall completely at a loss for words.“Good.” It was almost a whisper . Alex opened his eyes and
let out the breat h he had been holding, smiling at his brother .
“There is not mu ch time. I shall marry you myself. Now . That
is w hy I asked Mrs. Fraser to b ring her husband – if you will
be w itness with your wife, sir?”  He looked up at Jamie, who,
after a moment’ s stunned immo bility , nodded his head like an
automation.
I do  not believe I have ever s een three people look so
entirely wretched.
Alex was so we ak that his broth er , with a face like stone,
had to help him , tying his minister ’ s high white stock about
the pallid throat. Jonathan himself looked little better . Gaunt
from illn ess, the  lines in his face were carved so deep that he
looked years older than his age,  and his eyes peered out from
deep soc kets lik e caves of bone.  Impeccably attired as always,
he looked like a badly made tailor ’ s dummy , features
carelessly hacked from a block of wood.
As for Mary , she sat miserably on the bed, weeping
helplessly into the folds of her c loak, hair disheveled and static
with electricity . I did what I could for her , straightening her
gown an d combing out her hair . She sat drearily snif fling, her
eyes fixed on Alex.
Bracing himself  with a hand on the bureau, Alex groped in
the draw er , coming out at last with his lar ge Book of Common
Prayer . I t was too hea vy for him to hold open before him in
the norm al fashion. He couldn’ t stand, but sat heavily on the
bed, holding the book open on his knees. He closed his eyes,
breathing heavily , and a drop of sweat fell from his face,
making a blot on the page.
“Dearly beloved,” Alex began,  and I hoped for his own
sake, as well as  everyone else’ s, that he was using the short
form of the ceremony .
Mary ha d stopped crying, but h er nose was red and shiny
in he r w hite face , and a small snail track showed on her upper
lip. Jona than saw  it, and expres sionless, pulled a lar ge square
of linen from his sleeve and of fered it to her silently .She took it with a faint nod, not looking at him, and
carelessly mopped her face.
“I will,”  she said, when the time came, as though not
caring at all what she said now .
Jack Randall made his promise s in a firm voice, but one
remote from the scene. It gave me an odd feeling to see a
marriage contracted between two people who were quite
unaware of each other; the co mplete attention of both was
focused on the man who sat b efore them, eyes fixed on the
pages of his book.
It was done. Congratulations to the bridal pair hardly
seemed in order , and there wa s an awkward silence. Jamie
glanced at me questioningly and I shrugged. I had fainted
immediately after marrying him, and Mary looked rather as
though she meant to follow my example.
The act complete, Alex sat quite still for a moment. He
smiled slightly , and looked deliberately round the room, his
eyes res ting for a moment on  each face in turn. Jonathan,
Jamie, Mary , and me. I saw the glow in those soft hazel depths
as his glance met mine. The ca ndle’ s stub grew low , but the
last of the wick blazed up, for a moment bright and strong.
His gaze lingered on Mary’ s fac e, then he closed his eyes
briefly , as though he could not stand to look upon her , and I
could hear the sl ow , labored rasp of his breathing. The glow of
his skin was blanching and fading, the candle guttering.
W ithout opening  his eyes, he reached up a hand, groping
blindly . Jonathan grasped it, caught him behind the shoulders
and ease d him slowly back, ont o the pillows. The long hands,
smooth as a boy’ s, twitched une asily , whiter than the shirt they
lay against.
“Mary .” The blue lips moved in a whisper , and she trapped
the n ervous hands between her own, holding them still against
her bosom.
“I’m here, Alex. Oh, Alex, I’m here!” She bent close to
him, murmuring in his ear . The movement forced JonathanRandall back a bit, so that he stepped away from the bed. He
stood, staring expressionlessly down.
The heavy , domed lids lifted once more, only halfway this
time, seeking a face and finding it.
“Johnny . So… good to me. Always, Johnny .”
Mary bent over him, the shadow of her fallen hair hiding
his f ace. Jonathan Randall stood , still as one of the stones in a
henge, watching  his brother and his wife. There was no sound
in the room but the whisper of the fire and the soft sobbing of
Mary Randall.
I fel t a touch on  my shoulder , a nd looked up at Jamie. He
nodded in Mary’ s direction.
“Stay with her ,” he said quietly . “It wilna be long, will it?”
“No.”
He nodd ed. Then he took a deep breath, let it out slowly ,
and crossed the room to Jonatha n Randall. He took the frozen
figure by one arm and turned him gently toward the door .
“Come, man,” he said quietly . “I’ll see ye safe to your
quarters.”
The crooked door creaked to as he left, assisting Jack
Randall to the place where he would spend his wedding night,
alone.
 
I c losed the doo r of our inn room behind me and leaned
against it, exhausted. It was first dark outside, and the
watchmen’ s cries echoed down the street.
Jamie w as by the window , wat ching for me. He came to
me a t on ce, pull ing me tight aga inst him before I had even got
my cloa k of f. I sagged against  him, grateful for his warmth
and solid strength. He scooped m e up with an arm beneath my
knees and carried me to the window seat.
“Have a  bit of a  drink, Sassenach,” he ur ged. “Y e look all
in, and no won der .” He took the flask from the table andmixed something that appeared to be brandy and water without
the water .
I shoved  a hand tiredly through  my hair . It had been just
after bre akfast when we went to  the room in Ladywalk W ynd;
now it was past six o’clock. It seemed as though I had been
gone for days.
“It w asn’ t long, poor chap. It w as as though he was only
waiting to see her safely taken care of. I sent word to her
aunt’ s house; the aunt and two cousins came to fetch her .
They’ll take care of… him.” I sipped gratefully at the brandy .
It bu rned my thr oat and the fume s rose inside my head like fog
on the moors, but I didn’ t care.
“W ell,” I said, attempting a smil e, “at least we know Frank
is safe, after all.”
Jamie glowered down at me, ruddy brows nearly touching
each other .
“Damn Frank!” he said ferocio usly . “Damn all Randalls!
Damn Jack Randall, and damn Mary Hawkins Randall, and
damn A lex Randall – er , God rest his soul, I mean,” he
amended hastily , crossing himself.
“I thoug ht you didn’ t begrudge -” I started. He glared at
me.
“I lied.”
He g rabbed me by the shoulde rs and shook me slightly ,
holding me at arm’ s length.
“And damn you, too, Claire Ra ndall Fraser , while I’m at
it!” he said. “Damn right I begrudge! I grudge every memory
of yours that do esna hold me, and every tear ye’ve shed for
another , and every second you’ve spent in another man’ s bed!
Damn you!” He knocked the b randy glass from my hand –
accidentally , I think – pulled me to him and kissed me hard.
He drew back enough to shake me again.
“Y ou’re mine, damn ye, Claire Fraser! Mine, and I wilna
share ye, with a man or a mem ory , or anything whatever , so
long as we both  shall live. Y ou’ ll no mention the man’ s nameto me again. D’ye hear?” He kissed me fiercely to emphasize
the point. “Did ye hear me?” he asked, breaking of f.
“Y es,” I said, with some dif ficulty . “If you’d… stop…
shaking me, I might… answer you.”
Rather sheepishly , he released his grip on my shoulders.
“I’m sor ry , Sassenach. It’ s only… God, why did ye… well,
aye, I see why … but did you have to-” I interrupted this
incoherent sputtering by putting my hand behind his head and
drawing him down to me.
“Y es,” I said fir mly , releasing him. “I had to. But it’ s over
now .” I loosened the ties of my cloak and let it fall back of f
my shou lders to  the floor . He bent to pick it up, but I stopped
him.
“Jamie,” I said. “I’m tired. W ill you take me to bed?”
He drew  a deep breath and let it out slowly , staring down
at me, eyes sunk deep with tiredness and strain.
“A ye,” he said softly , at last. “A ye, I will.”
He w as silent, an d rough at the start, the edges of his anger
sharpening his love.
“Ooh!” I said, at one point.
“Christ, I’m sorry , mo duinne . I couldna…”
“It’ s all right.” I  stopped his apo logies with my mouth and
held him tightly , feeling the wra th ebb away as the tenderness
grew between us. He didn’ t break away from the kiss, but held
himself motionless, gently exploring my lips, the tip of his
tongue caressing, barely stroking.
I to uched his t ongue with my own, and held his face
between my hands. He hadn’ t shaved since morning, and the
faint red stubble rasped pleasantly beneath my fingertips.
He lowered himself and rolled slightly to one side, so as
not t o cr ush me with his weight, and we went on, touching all
along our lengths, joined in closeness, speaking in silent
tongues.Alive, a nd one. W e are one, and while we love, death will
never touch us. “The grave’ s a fine and private place/But none,
I think, do there embrace.” Alex Randall lay cold in his bed,
and Mar y Randall alone in her s. But we were here together ,
and no one and nothing mattered beyond that fact.
He g rasped my hips, lar ge han ds warm on my skin, and
pulled me toward him, and the shudder that went through me
went through him, as though we shared one flesh.
I woke in the night, still in his arms, and knew he was not
asleep.
“Go back to sleep, mo duinne .” H is voice wa s soft, low
and soot hing, bu t with a catch that made me reach up to feel
the wetness on his cheeks.
“What is it, love?” I whispered. “Jamie, I do love you.”
“I know it,” he said quietly . “I do know it, my own. Let me
tell ye in your sleep how much I love you. For there’ s no so
much I can be saying to ye whi le ye wake, but the same poor
words, again and again. While ye sleep in my arms, I can say
things to  ye that would be daft and silly waking, and your
dreams will know the truth of them. Go back to sleep, mo
duinne .”
I t urned my hea d, enough that my lips brushed the base of
his throa t, where his pulse beat  slow beneath the small three-
cornered scar . Then I laid my he ad upon his chest and gave my
dreams up to his keeping.4 6  T I M O R  M O R T I S
C O N T U R B A T  M E
T here we re men and their traces  all around, as we made
our way  north, following the ret reat of the Highland army . W e
passed s mall gro ups of men on foot, walking doggedly , heads
down against the windy rain. Others lay in the ditches and
under th e hedge rows, too exhausted to go on. Equipment and
weapons had been abandoned along the way; here a wagon lay
overturned, its sacks of flour split and ruined in the wet, there
a brace of smal l culverin stood beneath a tree, twin barrels
gleaming darkly in the shadows.
The weather had been bad all th e way , delaying us. It was
April 13, and I rode and walked with a constant, gnawing
feeling of dread beneath my he art. Lord Geor ge and the clan
chieftains, the Prince and his chief advisers – all were at
Culloden House , or so we had been told by one of the
MacDonalds tha t we met along the way . He knew little more
than that, and we did not detain him; the man stumbled away
into the mist, m oving like a zo mbie. Rations had been short
when I was capt ured by the English a month gone; matters had
plainly gone from bad to worse. The men we saw moved
slowly , many of them staggering with exhaustion and
starvation. But they moved stubbornly north, all the same,
following their Prince’ s orders. Moving toward the place the
Scots called Drumossie Moor . T oward Culloden.
At o ne point, th e road became too bad for the faltering
ponies. They would have to be led around the outer edge of a
small wood, through the wet spr ing heather , to where the road
became passable, a half-mile beyond.
“It w ill be swift er to walk through the wood,” Jamie told
me, taking the re ins from my numbed hand. He nodded toward
the smal l grove of pine and oak, where the sweet, cool smell
of wet leaves rose from the soak ed ground. “D’ye go that way ,
Sassenach; we’ll meet wi’ ye on the other side.”I was too tired to ar gue. Putting one foot in front of the
other was a distinct ef fort, and the ef fort would undoubtedly
be le ss o n the smooth layer of le aves and fallen pine needles in
the wood than through the boggy , treacherous heather .
It was quiet in the wood, the whine of the wind softened by
the pine boughs overhead. What rain came through the
branches pattere d lightly on the  layers of leathery fallen oak
leaves, rustling and crackled, even when wet.
He lay only a few feet from the far edge of the wood, next
to a big gray bo ulder . The pale green lichens of the rock were
the same color as his tartan, and its browns blended with the
fallen leaves that had drifted h alf across him. He seemed so
much a part of the wood that I might have stumbled over him,
had I not been stopped by the patch of brilliant blue.
Soft as velvet, the strange fungus spread its cloak over the
naked, c old white limbs. It fol lowed the curve of bone and
sinew , sending up small trembling fronds, like the grasses and
trees of a forest, invading barren land.
It was an electri c, vivid blue, stark and alien. I had never
seen it, but had heard of it, from an old soldier I had nursed,
who had fought in the trenches of the first world war .
“W e call ed it corpse-candle,” he  had told me. “Blue, bright
blue. Y o u never  see it anywhere  but on a battlefield – on dead
men.” H e had looked up at me, old eyes puzzled beneath the
white bandage.
“I always wondered where it lives, between wars.”
In the air , perha ps, its invisible spores waiting to seize an
opportunity , I thought. The color was brilliant, incongruous,
bright as the woad with which this man’ s ancestors had
painted themselves before going forth to war .
A br eeze passed through the wood, ruf fling the man’ s hair .
It stirred  and rose, silky and lifelike. There was a crunch of
leaves b ehind me, and I started convulsively from the trance in
which I had stood, staring at the corpse.
Jamie stood beside me, looking down. He said nothing;
only took me by the elbow and led me from the wood, leavingthe dead  man behind, clothed i n the saprophytic hues of war
and sacrifice.
 
It w as mid-morning of April 1 5 by the time we came to
Culloden House, having push ed ourselves and our ponies
unmercifully to reach it. W e a pproached it from the south,
coming first through a cluster of  outbuildings. There was a stir
– alm ost a frenz y – of men on th e road, but the stableyard was
curiously deserted.
Jamie dismounted and handed his reins to Murtagh.
“D’ye wait here a moment,” he said. “Something doesna
seem quite right here.”
Murtagh glanced at the door of the stables, standing
slightly ajar , and nodded. F er gus, mounted behind the
clansman, would  have followed Jamie, but Murtagh prevented
him with a curt word.
Stif f fro m the ride, I slid of f my own horse and followed
Jamie, s lipping in the mud of the stableyard. There was
something odd about the stable yard. Only as I followed him
through the door of the stable building did I realize what it was
– it was too quiet.
Everything inside was still; the b uilding was cold and dim,
without the usual warmth and s tir of a stable. Still, the place
was not  entirely devoid of life; a dark figure stirred in the
gloom, too big to be a rat or a fox.
“Who is that?” Jamie said, ste pping forward to put me
behind him automatically . “Alec? Is it you?”
The figure in the hay raised its head slowly , and the plaid
fell back . The Master of Horse  of Castle Leoch had but one
eye; the  other , lost in an accident many years before, was
patched with black cloth. Normally , one eye suf ficed him;
brisk and snapping blue, it w as enough to command the
obedience of stable-lads and horses, grooms and riders alike.
Now Alec McMahon MacKenzie’ s eye was dull as dusty
slate. Th e broad, once vigorous body was curled in upon itself,and the cheeks  of his face were sunk with the apathy of
starvation.
Knowing the old man suf fered from arthritis in damp
weather , Jamie squatted beside him to prevent him rising.
“What has been happening?” he asked. “W e are newly
come; what is happening here?”
It se emed to ta ke Old Alec a long time to absorb the
question, assimi late it, and form his reply into words; perhaps
it w as only the  stillness of the empty , shadowed stable that
made his words ring hollow when they finally came.
“It has all gone to pot,” he said. “They marched to Nairn
two nights ago, and came fleeing back yesterday . His Highness
has said they w ill take a stand on Culloden; Lord Geor ge is
there now , with what troops he has gathered.”
I couldn ’ t repres s a small moan at the name of Culloden. It
was here, then. Despite everyth ing, it had come to pass, and
we were here.
A sh iver passed through Jamie, as well; I saw the red hairs
standing erect on his forearms, but his voice betrayed nothing
of the anxiety he must feel.
“The tro ops – they are ill-provisioned to fight. Does Lord
Geor ge not realize they must have rest, and food?”
The creaking sound from Old Alec might have been the
shade of a laugh.
“What His Lordship knows makes little dif ference, lad.
His Highness has taken comm and of the army . And His
Highness says we shall stand against the English on
Drumossie. As for food-” His old-man’ s eyebrows were thick
and bush y , gone altogether white in the last year , with coarse
hairs sprouting from them. One brow raised now , heavily , as
though even this small change of expression was an
exhaustion. One gnarled hand stirred in his lap, gesturing
toward the empty stalls.
“They ate the horses last month, ” he said, simply . “There’ s
been little else, since.”Jamie stood abruptly , and leaned against the wall, head
bowed in shock. I couldn’ t see his face, but his body was stif f
as the boards of the stable.
“A ye,” h e said at last. “A ye. My  men – did they have their
fair share of the meat? Donas… he was… a good-sized horse.”
He spok e quietly , but I saw from the sudden sharpness of
Alec’ s one-eyed glance that he heard as well as I did the ef fort
that kept Jamie’ s voice from breaking.
The old man rose slowly from  the hay , crippled body
moving with painful deliberation. He set one gnarled hand on
Jamie’ s shoulde r; the arthritic fingers could not close, but the
hand rested there, a comforting blunt weight.
“They didna take Donas,” he sa id quietly . “They kept him
– fo r Prince T charlach  to ride , on his triumphal return to
Edinbur gh. O’Sullivan said it wouldna be… fitting… for His
Highness to walk.”
Jamie covered his face in his hands and stood shaking
against the boards of the empty stall.
“I am  a fool,” he  said at last, gasping to recover his breath.
“Oh, God, I am  a fool.” He dropped his hands, showing his
face, tears streaking through the  grime of travel. He dashed the
back of his hand  across his cheek, but the moisture continued
to o verflow from his eyes, as though it were a process quite
out of his control.
“The ca use is lost, my men are being taken to slaughter ,
there are dead men rotting in the wood… and I am weeping
for a  hor se! Oh, God,” he whispered, shaking his head. “I am a
fool.”
Old Alec heaved a sigh, and his hand slid heavily down
Jamie’ s arm.
“It’ s as well that ye still can, lad,” he said. “I’m past it,
myself.”
The old man folded one leg awkwardly at the knee and
eased himself down once more . Jamie stood for a moment,
looking down at Old Alec. The tears still streamed unchecked
down hi s face, but it was like rain washing over a sheet ofpolished granite. Then he took my elbow , and turned away
without a word.
I loo ked back at Alec when we r eached the stable door . He
sat q uite still, a dark, hunched shape shawled in his plaid, the
one blue eye unseeing as the other .
 
Men sprawled through the ho use, worn to exhaustion,
seeking oblivion from gnawing hunger and the knowledge of
certain and imminent disaster . There were no women here;
those ch iefs whose womenfolk had accompanied them had
sent the ladies safely away – t he coming doom cast a long
shadow .
Jamie left me w ith a murmured word outside the door that
led to the Prince’ s temporary quarters. My presence would
help nothing. I walked softly through the house, murmurous
with the  heavy breathing of sle eping men, the air thick with
the dullness of despair .
At t he top of the house, I found a small lumber -room.
Crowded with junk and discarded furniture, it was otherwise
unoccupied. I crept into this warren of oddities, feeling much
like a small rode nt, seeking refuge from a world in which huge
and mysterious forces were let loose to destruction.
There was one small window , filled with the misty gray
morning. I rubbed dirt away from one pane with the corner of
my clo ak, but there was n othing to be seen but the
encompassing mist. I leaned my forehead against the cold
glass. Somewhere out there was Culloden Field, but I saw
nothing but the dim silhouette of my own reflection.
News of  the gruesome and mysterious death of the Duke
of Sandringham  had reached Prince Charles, I knew; we had
heard of it from almost everyone we spoke to as we passed to
the n orth and it became safe for us to show ourselves again.
What ex actly had we done? I wondered. Had we doomed the
Jacobite cause for good and all in that one night’ s adventure,
or h ad w e inadv ertently saved Charles Stuart from an English
trap? I drew a sq ueaking finger in a line down the misty glass,
chalking up one more thing I would never find out.It seemed a very long time before I heard a step on the
uncarpeted boards of the stair ou tside my refuge. I came to the
door to find Jamie coming onto  the landing. One look at his
face was enough.
“Alec was right,” he said, without preliminaries. The bones
of his face wer e stark beneath the skin, made prominent by
hunger , sharpened by anger . “The troops are moving to
Culloden – as t hey can. They havena slept or eaten in two
days, there is no ordnance fo r the cannon – but they are
going.” The anger erupted sudd enly and he slammed his fist
down on  a rickety table. A cascade of small brass dishes from
the pile of house hold rubble woke the echoes of the attic with
an ungodly clatter .
W ith an impatient gesture, he s natched the dirk from his
belt and  jabbed it violently in to the table, where it stood,
quivering with the force of the blow .
“The co untry fo lk say that if ye see blood on your dirk, it
means d eath.” He drew in his breath with a hiss, fist clenched
on the table. “W ell, I have seen it! So have they all. They
know – Kilmarnock, Lochiel, an d the rest. And no bit of good
does the seeing of it do!”
He bent his head , hands braced on the table, staring at the
dirk. He seemed much too lar ge  for the confines of the room,
an angry smoldering presence that might break suddenly into
flame. In stead, he flung up his hands, and threw himself onto a
decrepit settle, where he sat, head buried in his hands.
“Jamie,” I said, and swallowed. I could barely speak the
next words, but they had to be sa id. I had known what news he
would b ring, and I had thought of what might still be done.
“Jamie. There’ s only one thing left – only the one possibility .”
His head  was bent, forehead resting on his knuckles. He
shook his head, not looking at me.
“There i s no way ,” he said. “He’ s bent on it. Murray has
tried to turn him , so has Lochiel. Balmerino. Me. But the men
are stand ing on the plain this ho ur . Cumberland has set out for
Drumossie. There is no way .”The healing arts are powerful ones, and any physician
versed in the use of substances that heal knows also the power
of those that harm. I had given Colum the cyanide he had not
had time  to use, and taken back  the deadly vial from the table
by the bed where his body lay . It was in my box now , the
crudely distilled  crystals a dul l brownish-white, deceptively
harmless in appearance.
My mouth was so dry that I cou ldn’ t speak at once. There
was a little wine left in my flask; I drank it, the acid taste like
bile on my tongue.
“There is one way ,” I said. “Only one.”
Jamie’ s head stayed sunk in his hands. It had been a long
ride, and  the shock of Alec’ s new s had added depression to his
tiredness. W e had detoured to find his men, or most of them, a
miserable, ragg ed crew , indistinguishable from the skeletal
Frasers of Lovat who surrounded them. The interview with
Charles was far beyond the last straw .
“A ye?” he said.
I h esitat ed, but had to speak. The possibility had to be
mentioned; whe ther he – or I –  could bring ourselves to it or
not.
“It’ s Charles Stuart,” I said, at last. “It’ s him – everything.
The battle, the war – everything depends on him, do you see?”
“A ye?” Jamie was looking up at me now , bloodshot eyes
quizzical.
“If he were dead…” I whispered at last.
Jamie’ s eyes closed, and the last vestiges of blood drained
from his face.
“If he were to die… now . T oday . Or tonight. Jamie,
without Charles , there’ s nothing to fight for . No one to order
the men to Culloden. There wouldn’ t be a battle.”
The long muscles of his throat rippled briefly as he
swallowed. He opened his eyes and stared at me, appalled.
“Christ,” he whispered. “Christ, ye canna mean it.”My han d closed on the smoky , gold-mounted crystal
around my neck.
They had called me to attend t he Prince, before Falkirk.
O’Sullivan, T ullibardine, and the others. His Highness was ill
– an  indisposition, they said. I  had seen Charles, made him
bare his breast a nd arms, examined his mouth and the whites
of his eyes.
It was scurvy , and several o f the other diseases of
malnutrition. I said as much.
“Nonsense!” sa id Sheridan, outraged. “His Highness
cannot suf fer from the yeuk, like a common peasant!”
“He’ s be en eating like one,” I retorted. “Or rather worse
than on e.” The “peasants” were forced to eat onions and
cabbage, having nothing else. Scorning such poor fare, His
Highness and his advisers ate m eat – and little else. Looking
around the circle of scared, re sentful faces, I saw few that
didn’ t sh ow symptoms of the l ack of fresh food. Loose and
missing teeth, soft, bleeding gums, the pus-filled, itching
follicles of “the yeuk” that so lavishly decorated His
Highness’ s white skin.
I wa s loath to surrender any of my precious supply of rose
hips and  dried berries, but had of fered, reluctantly , to make the
Prince a  tea of them. The of fer had been rejected, with a
minimum of courtesy , and I understood that Archie Cameron
had been summoned, with his b owl of leeches and his lancet,
to see whether a  letting of the Royal blood would relieve the
Royal itch.
“I co uld do it,” I said. My heart  was beating heavily in my
chest, making it hard to breathe. “I could mix him a draught. I
think I could persuade him to take it.”
“And if he should die upon drinking your medicine?
Christ, Claire! They would kill ye on the spot!”
I folded my hands beneath my arms, trying to warm them.
“D-does that matter?” I asked, desperately trying to steady
my voice. The truth was that it did. Just at the moment, my
own life  weighe d a good deal more in the balance than did thehundreds I might save. I clenched my fists, shaking with
terror , a mouse in the jaws of the trap.
Jamie was at my side in an ins tant. My legs didn’ t work
very we ll; he half-carried me to the broken settle and sat down
with me, his arms wrapped tight around me.
“Y ou’ve the courage of a lion, mo duinne ,” he murmured
in my ear . “Of a  bear , a wolf! But you know I willna let ye do
it.”
The shivering eased slightly , th ough I still felt cold, and
sick with the horror of what I was saying.
“There m ight be  another way ,” I said. “There’ s little food,
but what there is goes to the Prince. I think it might not be
dif ficult to add something to h is dish without being noticed;
things a re so disor ganized.” This was true; all over the house,
of ficers lay sleeping on tables and floors, still clad in their
boots, too tired to lay aside t heir arms. The house was in
chaos, w ith constant comings and goings. It would be a simple
matter to distract a servant lo ng enough to add a deadly
powder to the evening dish.
The immediate  terror had r eceded slightly , but the
awfulness of my suggestion lingered like poison, chilling my
own bl ood. Jamie’ s arm tightened briefly around my
shoulders, then fell away as he contemplated the situation.
The dea th of Charles Stuart wo uld not end the matter of
the Rising; things had gone much too far for that. Lord Geor ge
Murray , Balmer ino, Kilmarnock, Lochiel, Clanranald – all of
us w ere traitors, lives and prop erty forfeit to the Crown. The
Highland army was in tatters; without the figurehead of
Charles to rally to, it would dissipate like smoke. The English,
terrorized and humiliated at Preston and Falkirk, would not
hesitate to pursue the fugitives, seeking to retrieve their lost
honor and wash out the insult in blood.
There w as little chance that Henry of Y ork, Charles’ s pious
younger brother , already bound by churchly vows, would take
his b rother ’ s place to continue the fight for restoration. There
was nothing ahead but catastrop he and wreck, and no possibleway to avert it. All that might be salvaged now was the lives
of the men who would die on the moor tomorrow .
It w as Charles who had chosen to fight at Culloden,
Charles whose stubborn, shortsi ghted autocracy had defied the
advice of his ow n generals and gone to invade England. And
whether Sandrin gham had meant his of fer for good or ill, it
had died with him. There was no support from the South; such
English Jacobite s as there were did not rally as expected to the
banner o f their king. Forced aga inst his will to retreat, Charles
had chosen this last stubborn stand, to place ill-armed,
exhausted, starving men in a bat tle line on a rain-soaked moor ,
to face the wra th of Cumberland’ s cannon fire. If Charles
Stuart were dead, the battle of C ulloden might not take place.
One life , against  two thousand. One life – but that life a Royal
one, and taken not in battle, but in cold blood.
The sma ll room  where we sat had a hearth, but a fire had
not been lit – there was no fu el. Jamie sat gazing at it as
though seeking an answer in invisible flames. Murder . Not
only murder , but regicide. Not o nly murder , but the killing of a
sometime friend.
And yet – the clansmen of the Highlands shivered already
on the open moor , shifting in their serried ranks as the plan of
battle was adjusted, rearranged, reordered, as more men drifted
to jo in them. Am ong them were the MacKenzies of Leoch, the
Frasers of Beauly , four hundred men of Jamie’ s blood. And the
thirty men of Lallybroch, his own.
His face  was blank, immobile a s he thought, but the hands
laced together on his knee knott ed tight with the struggle. The
crippled fingers and the straight strove together , twisting. I sat
beside him, scarcely daring to breathe, awaiting his decision.
At l ast the brea th went from him in an almost inaudible
sigh, and  he turned to me, a look of unutterable sadness in his
eyes.
“I cannot,” he whispered. His hand touched my face
briefly , cupping my cheek. “W ould God that I could,
Sassenach. I cannot do it.”The wave of rel ief that washed through me robbed me of
speech, but he s aw what I felt, and grasped my hands between
his own.
“Oh, God, Jamie, I’m glad of it!” I whispered.
He bowed his head over my hands. I turned my head to lay
my cheek against his hair , and froze.
In the doorway , watching me with a look of absolute
revulsion, was Dougal MacKenzie.
The last months had aged him; Rupert’ s death, the
sleepless nights of fruitless ar g ument, the strains of the hard
campaign, and now the bitterness of imminent defeat. There
were gray hairs in the russet beard, a gray look to his skin, and
deep lines in hi s face that had  not been there in November .
W ith a shock, I realized that he looked like his brother , Colum.
He had wanted  to lead, Dougal MacKenzie. Now he had
inherited the chieftainship, and was paying its price.
“Filthy… traitorous… whoring… witch !”
Jamie jerked as though he had been shot, face gone white
as the sleet outside. I sprang to my feet, overturning the bench
with a clatter that echoed through the room.
Dougal MacKenzie advanced on me slowly , putting aside
the f olds of his cloak, so that the  hilt of his sword was freed to
his hand. I hadn’ t heard the door behind me open; it must have
stood ajar . How long had he been on the other side, listening?
“Y ou,” h e said softly . “I should  have known it; from the
first I saw ye, I should have known.” His eyes were fixed on
me, something between horror and fury in the cloudy green
depths.
There was a sud den stir in the air beside me; Jamie was
there, a hand on my arm, ur ging me back behind him.
“Dougal,” he said. “It isna what ye think, man. It’ s-”
“No?” D ougal c ut in. His gaze left me for a second, and I
shrank behind Jamie, grateful for the respite.
“Not what I think?” he said, still speaking softly . “I hear
the woman ur ging ye to foul murder – to the murder of yourPrince! Not only vile murder , but treason as well! And ye tell
me I havena hea rd it?” He shook his head, the tangled russet
curls lan k and greasy on his sho ulders. Like the rest of us, he
was star ving; th e bones jutted in  his face, but his eyes burned
from their shadowy orbits.
“I dinna  blame ye, lad,” he said. His voice was suddenly
weary , a nd I remembered that he was a man in his fifties. “It
isna you r fault, Jamie. She’ s be witched ye – anyone can see
that.” His mouth twisted as he looked again at me.
“A ye, I ken weel enough how it’ s been for ye. She’ s
worked the same sorcery on me,  betimes.” His eyes raked over
me, burning. “A murdering, lying slut, would take a man by
the c ock and lea d him to his doom, wi’ her claws sunk deep in
his balls . That’ s the spell that th ey lay on ye, lad – she and the
other witch. T ake ye to their beds and steal the soul from you
as y e lie sleepin g wi’ your head on their breasts. They take
your soul, and eat your manhood, Jamie.”
His tong ue darted out and we tted his lips. He was still
staring at me, and his hand tightened on the hilt of his sword.
“Stand aside, laddie. I’ll free ye of the sassenach  whore.”
Jamie stepped in front of m e, momentarily blocking
Dougal from my view .
“Y ou’re tired, Dougal,” he said, speaking calmly ,
soothingly . “T ired, and hearin’ things, man. D’ye go down
now . I shall-”
He had no chan ce to finish. D ougal wasn’ t listening to
him; the deep-set green eyes were fixed on my face, and the
MacKenzie chief had drawn the dirk from its sheath at his
waist.
“I sh all cut your  throat,” he said  to me softly . “I should ha’
done it when first I saw ye. It would have saved us all a great
grief.”
I wasn’ t  sure that he wasn’ t right, but that didn’ t mean I
intended to let h im remedy the m atter . I took three quick steps
back, and fetched up hard against the table.“Get back, man!” Jamie thrust himself before me, holding
up a shielding forearm as Dougal advanced on me.
The Ma cKenzie chieftain shook his head, bull-like, red-
rimmed eyes fixed on me.
“She’ s m ine,” he said hoarsely . “W itch. T raitoress. Step
aside, la d. I wouldna harm ye, but by God, if ye shield that
woman, I shall kill you, too, foster son or no.”
He lung ed pas t Jamie, grabbing my arm. Exhausted,
starved, and aging as he was, he was still a formidable man,
and his fingers bit deep into my flesh.
I ye lped with p ain, and kicked frantically at him as he
jerked m e toward him. He snatched at my hair and caught it,
forcing m y head  hard back. His breath was hot and sour on my
face. I shrieked and struck at h im, digging my nails into his
cheek in an ef fort to get free.
The air exploded from his lungs  as Jamie’ s fist struck him
in the ribs, and h is grip on my hair tore loose as Jamie’ s other
fist cam e down in a numbing blow on the point of his
shoulder . Suddenly freed, I fell back against the table,
whimpering with shock and pain.
Dougal whirled to face Jamie then, dropping into a
fighter ’ s crouch, the dirk held blade upward.
“Let it be, then,” he said, brea thing heavily . He swayed
slightly from side to side, shiftin g his weight as he sought the
advantage. “Blood will tell. Y e damned Fraser spawn.
T reachery runs in your blood. C ome here to me, fox cub. I’ll
kill ye quick, for your mother ’ s sake.”
There was little room for mane uver in the small attic. No
room to draw a sword; with his dirk stuck fast in the tabletop,
Jamie w as ef fec tively unarmed. He matched Dougal’ s stance,
eyes watchful, fixed on the point of the menacing dirk.
“Put it down, D ougal,” he said. “If ye bear my mother in
mind, then listen to me, for her sake!”
The MacKenzie made no answer , but jabbed suddenly , a
ripping blow aimed upward.Jamie dodged aside, dodged ag ain the wide-armed sweep
that came from the other side. Jamie had the agility of youth
on his side – but Dougal held the knife.
Dougal closed with a rush, and  the dirk slid up Jamie’ s
side, rip ping his  shirt, scoring a  dark line in his flesh. W ith a
hiss of pain, he jerked back, grabbing for Dougal’ s wrist,
catching it as the blade struck down.
The dull gleam of the blade flashed once, disappeared
between the struggling bodies. They strove together , locked
like lovers, the air filled with the smell of male sweat and fury .
The blade rose a gain, two hands grappling on its rounded hilt.
A shift, and a jerk, a sudden grunt of ef fort, one of pain.
Dougal stepped back, staggering, face congested and pouring
sweat, the hilt of the dagger socketed at the base of his throat.
Jamie half-fell, gasping, and leaned against the table. His
eyes were dark w ith shock, and his hair sweat-soaked, the rent
edges of his shirt tinged with blood from the scratch.
There was a terrible sound from Dougal, a sound of shock
and stifl ed breath. Jamie caught him as he tottered and fell,
Dougal’ s weight bringing him to his knees. Dougal’ s head lay
on Jamie’ s shoulder , Jamie’ s arms locked around his foster
father .
I dr opped to m y knees beside them, reaching to help,
trying to  get hold of Dougal. I t was too late. The big body
went limp, then spasmed, slidin g out of Jamie’ s grasp. Dougal
lay crumpled on the floor , muscles jerking with involuntary
contractions, struggling like a fish out of water .
His head was pillowed on Jamie’ s thigh. One heave
brought his face into view . It wa s contorted, and dark red, eyes
gone to  slits. His mouth moved continuously , saying
something, talking with great force – but without sound, save
the bubbling rasp from his ruined throat.
Jamie’ s face was ashen; apparently he could tell what
Dougal was saying. He struggle d violently , trying to hold the
thrashing body still. There was a final spasm, then a dreadful
rattling sound, and Dougal MacKenzie lay still, Jamie’ s handsclenched tight upon his shoulders, as though to prevent his
rising again.
“Blessed Micha el defend us!” The hoarse whisper came
from the doorway . It was W illie Coulter MacKenzie, one of
Dougal’ s men. He stared in stup efied horror at the body of his
chief. A small p uddle of urine was forming under it, creeping
out from  under the sprawled plaid. The man crossed himself,
still staring.
“W illie.” Jamie rose, passing a trembling hand across his
face. “W illie.” The man seemed struck dumb. He looked at
Jamie in complete bewilderment, mouth open.
“I n eed one ho ur , man.” Jamie had a hand on W illie
Coulter ’ s should er , easing him into the room. “An hour to see
my wife safe. Then I shall come back to answer for this. I give
ye my word, on my honor . But I must have an hour free. One
hour . W ill ye give me one hour , man, before ye speak?”
W illie licked dry lips, looking b ack and forth between the
body of his chie f and his chieftain’ s nephew , clearly frightened
out o f hi s wits. At last he nodde d, plainly having no idea what
to do, choosing  to follow this request because no reasonable
alternative presented itself.
“Good.” Jamie swallowed heavily , and wiped his face on
his p laid. He pa tted W illie on the shoulder . “Stay here, man.
Pray for  his soul” – he nodded  toward the still form on the
floor , no t lookin g at it – “and fo r mine.” He leaned past W illie
to pr y h is dirk from the table, th en pushed me before him, out
the door and down the stairs.
Halfway down, he stopped, leaning against the wall with
his eyes closed. He drew deep, ragged breaths, as though he
were about to faint, and I put my hands on his chest, alarmed.
His heart was b eating like a dru m, and he was trembling, but
after a moment, he drew himself upright, nodded at me, and
took my arm.
“I need Murtagh,” he said.
W e foun d the clansman just outside, cowled in his plaid
against the sleety rain, sitting in  a dry spot beneath the eavesof the house. Fe r gus was curled up next to him, dozing, tired
from the long ride.
Murtagh took one look at Jamie’ s face, and rose to his feet,
dark and dour , ready for anything.
“I’ve killed Dougal MacKenzie,” Jamie said bluntly ,
without preliminary .
Murtagh’ s face went quite blan k for a moment, then his
normal expression of wary grimness reasserted itself.
“A ye,” he said. “What’ s to do, then?”
Jamie groped in his sporran a nd brought out a folded
paper . H is hands shook as he tried to unfold it, and I took it
from him, spreading it out under the shelter of the eaves.
“Deed o f Sasine ” it said, at the top of the sheet. It was a
short document, laid out in a few black lines, conveying title
of th e estate kn own as Broch T uarach to one James Jacob
Fraser Murray ,  said property to be held in trust and
administered by the said James Murray’ s parents, Janet Fraser
Murray and Ian Gordon Murray , until the said James Murray’ s
majority . Jamie’ s signature was at the bottom, and there were
two blank spaces provided below , each with the word
“W itness” written alongside. It  was dated 1 July , 1745 – a
month before Charles Stuart had launched his rebellion on the
shores of Scotland, and made Jamie Fraser a traitor to the
Crown.
“I ne ed ye to sign this, you and Claire,” Jamie said, taking
the note from me and handing it to Murtagh. “But it means
forswearing yourself; I have nay right to ask it.”
Murtagh’ s small black eyes scanned the deed quickly .
“No,” he said dryly . “No right – nor any need, either .” He
nudged Fer gus with a foot, and the boy sat bolt upright,
blinking.
“Nip into the house and fetch your chief ink and a quill,
lad,” Murtagh said. “And quick about it – go!”
Fer gus shook his head once to c lear it, glanced at Jamie for
a confirming nod – and went.W ater w as dripping from the ea ves down the back of my
neck. I shivered and drew the w oolen arisaid closer around my
shoulders. I wondered when Jamie had written the document.
The false date m ade it seem the property had been transferred
before Jamie became a traito r , with his goods and lands
subject to seizure – if it was not questioned, the property
would p ass safely to small Jamie. Jenny’ s family at least
would be safe, still in possession of land and farmhouse.
Jamie had seen the possible need for this; yet he had not
executed the document before we left Lallybroch; he had
hoped somehow  to return, and claim his own place once again.
Now that was i mpossible, but the estate might still be saved
from seizure. There was no one to say when the document had
really been signed – save the witnesses, me and Murtagh.
Fer gus returned, panting, with a small glass inkpot and a
ragged q uill. W e signed one at a time, leaning against the side
of the house, careful to shake the quill first to keep the ink
from dri pping d own. Murtagh went first; his middle name, I
saw , was FitzGibbons.
“W ill ye  have me take it to your sister?” Murtagh asked as
I shook the paper carefully to dry it.
Jamie shook his head. The rain made damp, coin-sized
splotches on his plaid, and glittered on his lashes like tears.
“No. Fer gus will take it.”
“Me?” The boy’ s eyes went round with astonishment.
“Y ou, man.” Jamie took the pap er from me, folded it, then
knelt and tucked it inside Fer gus’ s shirt.
“This m ust reac h my sister – Madame Murray – without
fail. It is worth more than my life, man – or yours.”
Practically bre athless with the enormity of the
responsibility entrusted to him, Fer gus stood up straight, hands
clasped over his middle.
“I will not fail you, milord!”
A faint smile c rossed Jamie’ s lips, and he rested a hand
briefly on the smooth cap of Fer gus’ s hair .“I know  that, man, and I am grateful,” he said. He twisted
the r ing of f his left hand; the cab ochon ruby that had belonged
to hi s fa ther . “H ere,” he said, ha nding it to Fer gus. “Go to the
stables, and show this to the old man ye’ll see there. T ell him I
said you are to  take Donas. T ake the horse, and ride for
Lallybroch. Stop for nothing, except as you must, to sleep, and
when ye do sleep, hide yourself well.”
Fer gus was speechless with alarmed excitement, but
Murtagh frowned dubiously at him.
“D’ye th ink the bairn can manage yon wicked beast?” he
said.
“A ye, he can,” Jamie said f irmly . Overcome, Fer gus
stuttered, then sank to his kn ees and kissed Jamie’ s hand
fervently . Spring ing to his feet, he darted away in the direction
of the stables, his slight figure disappearing in the mist.
Jamie licked dry lips, and clo sed his eyes briefly , then
turned to Murtagh with decision.
“And you – mo caraidh  – I need ye to gather the men.”
Murtagh’ s sketchy brows shot up, but he merely nodded.
“A ye,” he said. “And when I have?”
Jamie gl anced at me, then back at his godfather . “They’ll
be o n the moor now , I think, w ith Y oung Simon. Just gather
them to gether , in one place. I  shall see my wife safe, and
then-” He hesitated, then shrugg ed. “I will find you. W ait my
coming.”
Murtagh nodded once more, and turned to go. Then he
paused, and turned back to face Jamie. The thin mouth
twitched briefly ,  and he said, “I would ask the one thing of ye,
lad – let it be the English. Not your ain folk.”
Jamie flinched slightly , but after a moment, he nodded.
Then, without speaking, he held out his arms to the older man.
They embraced quickly , fiercely , and Murtagh, too, was gone,
in a swirl of ragged tartan.
I was the last bit of business on the agenda.“Come on, Sassenach,” he said , seizing me by the arm.
“W e must go.”
No one stopped  us; there was so much coming and going
by the roads that we were scarce ly noticed while we were near
the m oor . Farther away , when w e left the main road, there was
no one to see.
Jamie was completely silen t, concentrating single-
mindedly on the job at hand.  I said nothing to him, too
occupied with my own shock and dread to wish for
conversation.
“I shall see my wife safe.” I hadn’ t known what he meant
by t hat, but it became obvious within two hours, when he
turned th e head of his horse farther south, and the steep green
hill called Craigh na Dun came in view .
“No!” I said, when I saw it, and realized where we were
headed. “Jamie, no! I won’ t go!”
He d idn’ t answer me, only spur red his horse and galloped
ahead, leaving me no option but to follow .
My feelings were in turmoil; beyond the doom of the
coming battle and the horror of Dougal’ s death, now there was
the p rospect of the stones. That accursed circle, through which
I had  co me here . Plainly Jamie m eant to send me back, back to
my own time – if such a thing was possible.
He could mean a ll he liked, I thought, clenching my jaw as
I follow ed him down the narrow trail through the heather .
There w as no power on earth that could make me leave him
now .
 
W e stood together on the hillsid e, in the small dooryard of
the r uined cottage that stood below the crest of the hill. No one
had lived there for years; the  local folk said the hill was
haunted – a fairy’ s dun.
Jamie had half-ur ged, half-dragged me up the slope,
paying no attention to my pro tests. At the cottage he had
stopped, though, and sunk to th e ground, chest heaving as he
gasped for breath.“It’ s all right,” he said at last. “W e have a bit of time now;
no one will find us here.”
He s at on the ground, his plaid wrapped around him for
warmth. It had stopped raining for the moment, but the wind
blew cold from the mountains n earby , where snow still capped
the peak s and choked the passes. He let his head fall forward
onto his knees, exhausted by the flight.
I s at close by him, huddled within my cloak, and felt his
breathing gradu ally slow as the panic subsided. W e sat in
silence f or a long time, afraid to move from what seemed a
precarious perch above the chaos below . Chaos I felt I had
somehow helped create.
“Jamie,” I said, at last. I reache d out a hand to touch him,
but then drew back and let it fall. “Jamie – I’m sorry .”
He cont inued to look out, into the darkening void of the
moor below . For a moment, I th ought he hadn’ t heard me. He
closed his eyes. Then he shook his head very slightly .
“No,” he said softly . “There is no need.”
“But the re is.” Grief nearly choked me, but I felt as though
I must say it; must tell him that I knew what I had done to him.
“I should have gone back. Jamie – if I had gone, then,
when you brought me here from Cranesmuir… maybe then-”
“A ye, maybe,” he interrupted . He swung toward me
abruptly , and I could see his eyes fixed on me. There was
longing there, and a grief that matched mine, but no anger , no
reproach.
He shook his head again.
“No,” he  said once more. “I ken what ye mean, mo duinne .
But it isna so. Had ye gone then, matters might still have
happened as they have. Maybe s o, maybe no. Perhaps it would
have come sooner . Perhaps dif ferently . Perhaps – just perhaps
– no t at all. But there are more  folk have had a hand in this
than we  two, and I willna hav e ye take the guilt of it upon
yourself.”His hand  touched my hair , smoothing it out of my eyes. A
tear rolled down my cheek, and he caught it on his finger .
“Not that,” I said. I flung a h and out toward the dark,
taking in  the armies, and Charles, and the starved man in the
wood, a nd the slaughter to come. “Not that. What I did to
you.”
He smiled then, with great tenderness, and smoothed his
palm across my cheek, warm on my spring-chilled skin.
“A ye? And what have I done to you, Sassenach? T aken ye
from your own place, led ye into poverty and outlawry , taken
ye t hrough battlefields and ri sked your life. D’ye hold it
against me?”
“Y ou know I don’ t.”
He s miled. “A ye, well; neither do I, my Sassenach.” The
smile fa ded from his face as he glanced up at the crest of the
hill above us. The stones were invisible, but I could feel the
menace of them, close at hand.
“I won’ t go, Jamie,” I repeated stubbornly . “I’m staying
with you.”
“No.” He shook his head. He s poke gently , but his voice
was firm , with no possibility of denial. “I must go back,
Claire.”
“Jamie, you can’ t!” I clutched his arm ur gently . “Jamie,
they wil l have found Dougal by  now! W illie Coulter will have
told someone.”
“A ye, he  will.” He put a hand over my arm and patted it.
He had reached his decision on the ride to the hill; I could see
it in his shad owed face, resignation and determination
mingled. There was grief there, and sadness, too, but those had
been put aside; he had no time for mourning now .
“W e could try t o get away to France,” I said. “Jamie, we
must!” But even as I spoke, I kn ew I could not turn him from
the course he had decided on.
“No,” he said again, softly . He turned and lifted a hand,
gesturing toward the darkening valley below , the shaded hillsbeyond. “The country is roused, Sassenach. The ports are
closed; O’Brien has been trying for the last three months to
bring a ship to rescue the Prince, to take him to safety in
France – Dougal told me… befo re.” A tremor passed over his
face, and  a sudden spasm of grie f knit his brows. He pushed it
aside, though, and went on, explaining in a steady voice.
“It’ s onl y the English who are hunting Charles Stuart. It
will be the Engl ish, and the clan s as well, who hunt me. I am a
traitor twice over , a rebel and a murderer . Claire…” He
paused, rubbing a hand across t he back of his neck, then said
gently , “Claire, I am a dead man.”
The tear s were freezing on my cheeks, leaving icy trails
that burned my skin.
“No,” I said again, but to no ef fect.
“I’m no precisely inconspicuous, ye ken,” he said, trying
to m ake a joke of it as he ran a hand through the rusty locks of
his h air . “Red Ja mie wouldna get far , I think. But you…” He
touched my mouth, tracing the line of my lips. “I can save you,
Claire, and I will. That is the most important thing. But then I
shall go back – for my men.”
“The men from Lallybroch? But how?”
Jamie fr owned, absently fingeri ng the hilt of his sword as
he thought.
“I think  I can g et them away . It will be confused on the
moor , wi’ men and horses mo ving to and fro, and orders
shouted and contradicted; battles are verra messy af fairs. And
even if it’ s kno wn by then wh at I – what I have done,” he
continued, with a momentary catch in his voice, “there are
none wh o would  stop me then, wi’ the English in sight and the
battle ab out to begin. A ye, I can do it,” he said. His voice had
steadied, and his fists clenched at his sides with determination.
“They w ill follow me without question – God help them,
that’ s what’ s brought them here! Murtagh will have gathered
them for  me; I shall take them and lead them from the field. If
anyone t ries to stop me, I shall s ay that I claim the right to leadmy own men in battle; not even Y oung Simon will deny me
that.”
He drew a deep  breath, brows knit as he visualized the
scene on the battlefield come morning.
“I shall bring them safely away . The field is broad enough,
and there are e nough men that no one will realize that we
havena b ut mov ed to a new position. I shall bring them of f the
moor , and see them set on the road toward Lallybroch.”
He fell silent, as though this were as far as he had thought
in his plans.
“And then?” I a sked, not wanting to know the answer , but
unable to stop myself.
“And th en I shall turn back to Culloden,” he said, letting
out his breath. He gave me an u nsteady smile. “I’m no afraid
to die, Sassenac h.” His mouth quirked wryly . “W ell… not a
lot, anyway . But some of the  ways of accomplishing the
fact…” A brief, involuntary shu dder ran through him, but he
tried to keep smiling.
“I d oubt I shou ld be thought worthy of the services of a
true professiona l, but I expect in such a case, both Monsieur
Forez and myself might find it…  awkward. I mean, havin’ my
heart cut out by someone I’ve shared wine with…”
W ith a sound of incoherent distress, I flung my arms
around him, holding him as tightly as I could.
“It’ s all right,” he whispered in to my hair . “It’ s all right,
Sassenach. A musket ball. Maybe a blade. It will be over
quickly .”
I kn ew t his was  a lie; I had see n enough of battle wounds
and the deaths of warriors. All that was true was that it was
better th an waiting for the hangman’ s noose. The terror that
had ridden with me from Sand ringham’ s estate rose now to
high tide , choking, drowning me. My ears rang with my own
pulsebeat, and my throat closed  so tight that I felt I could not
breathe.
Then all at once, the fear left me. I could not leave him,
and I would not.“Jamie,” I said, into the folds of his plaid. “I’m going back
with you.”
He started back, staring down at me.
“The hell you are!” he said.
“I am.” I felt v ery calm, with no trace of doubt. “I can
make a kilt of m y arisaid; there are enough young boys with
the army that I can pass for one. Y ou’ve said yourself it will all
be confusion. No one will notice.”
“No!” he said. “No, Claire!” His jaw was clenched, and he
was glaring at me with a mixture of anger and horror .
“If you’re not afraid, I’m not either ,” I said, firming my
own jaw . “It will… be over quickly . Y ou said so.” My chin
was beginning to quiver , despite  my determination. “Jamie – I
won’ t… I can’ t… I bloody won’ t live without you, and that’ s
all!”
He opened his mouth, speechless, then closed it, shaking
his head . The light over the mountains was failing, painting
the clouds with a dull red glow . At last he reached for me,
drew me close and held me.
“D’ye think I do n’ t know?” he asked softly . “It’ s me that
has the easy part now . For if ye feel for me as I do for you –
then I am asking you to tear out your heart and live without
it.” His hand st roked my hair , the roughness of his knuckles
catching in the blowing strands.
“But ye must d o it, mo duinne . My brave lioness. Y e
must.”
“Why?” I demanded, pulling back to look up at him.
“When y ou took  me from the witch trial at Cranesmuir – you
said then  that you would have d ied with me, you would have
gone to the stake with me, had it come to that!”
He grasped my hands, fixing me with a steady blue gaze.
“A ye, I would,” he said. “But I wasna carrying your child.”
The win d had frozen me; it was the cold that made me
shake, I told myself. The cold that took my breath away .“Y ou ca n’ t tell,”  I said, at last. “It’ s much too soon to be
sure.”
He s norted briefly , and a tiny fl icker of amusement lit his
eyes.
“And me a farmer , too! Sassenach, ye havena been a day
late in your courses, in all the time since ye first took me to
your bed. Y e havena bled now in forty-six days.”
“Y ou bastard!” I said, outraged. “Y ou counted! In the
middle of a bloody war , you counted!”
“Didn’ t you?”
“No!” I hadn’ t; I  had been much  too afraid to acknowledge
the p ossibility of the thing I had  hoped and prayed for so long,
come now so horribly too late.
“Besides,” I went on, trying still to deny the possibility ,
“that doesn’ t mean anything. Starvation could cause that; it
often does.”
He lifted one brow , and cupped a broad hand gently
beneath my breast.
“A ye, you’re thin enough; but  scrawny as ye are, your
breasts a re full – and the nippl es of them gone the color of
Champagne grapes. Y ou for get,” he said, “I’ve seen ye so
before. I have no doubt – and neither have you.”
I tried to fight down the wav es of nausea – so easily
attributable to fright and starv ation – but I felt the small
heaviness, sudd enly burning in my womb. I bit my lip hard,
but the sickness washed over me.
Jamie let go of my hands, and stood before me, hands at
his sides, stark in silhouette against the fading sky .
“Claire,” he said quietly . “T omorrow I will die. This
child… is all that will be left of me – ever . I ask ye, Claire – I
beg you – see it safe.”
I stood still, vision blurring, and in that moment, I heard
my hear t break. It was a small, clean sound, like the snapping
of a flower ’ s stem.At last I bent m y head to him , the wind grieving in my
ears.
“Y es,” I whispered. “Y es. I’ll go.”
It w as nearly d ark. He came behind me and held me,
leaning back against him as he looked over my shoulder , out
over the  valley . The lights of watchfires had begun to spring
up, s mall glowing dots in the far  distance. W e were silent for a
long time, as th e evening deepened. It was very quiet on the
hill; I could hear nothing but Jamie’ s even breathing, each
breath a precious sound.
“I w ill f ind you, ” he whispered in my ear . “I promise. If I
must endure two hundred years of pur gatory , two hundred
years without you – then that is my punishment, which I have
earned for my c rimes. For I have lied, and killed, and stolen;
betrayed and broken trust. But there is the one thing that shall
lie in  the  balanc e. When I shall stand before God, I shall have
one thing to say , to weigh against the rest.”
His voi ce dropped, nearly to a whisper , and his arms
tightened around me.
“Lord, ye gave me a rare wom an, and God! I loved her
well.”
 
He was  slow , and careful; so was I. Each touch, each
moment must be savored, remembered – treasured as a
talisman against a future empty of him.
I tou ched each s oft hollow , the hidden places of his body .
Felt the grace and the strength of each curving bone, the
marvel of his firm-knit muscles, drawn lean and flexible
across the span of his shoulder s, smooth and solid down the
length of his ba ck, hard as seasoned oakwood in the columns
of his thighs.
T asted the salty sweat in the hollow of his throat, smelled
the war m muskiness of the hair between his legs, the
sweetness of the soft, wide mouth, tasting faintly of dried
apple and the bitter tang of juniper berries.“Y ou are so beautiful, my ow n,” he whispered to me,
touching the slipperiness between my legs, the tender skin of
my inner thighs.
His head was n o more than a dark blur against the white
blur of my breasts. The holes in the roof admitted only the
faintest light from the overcast s ky; the soft grumble of spring
thunder muttered constantly in the hills beyond our fragile
walls. He was hard in my hand, so stif f with the wanting that
my touch made him groan in a need close to pain.
When h e could wait no longer , he took me, a knife to its
scabbard, and we moved hard  together , pressing, wanting,
needing so ur gently that moment of ultimate joining, and
fearing t o reach it, for the knowl edge that beyond it lay eternal
separation.
He brou ght me again and again  to the peaks of sensation,
holding back himself, stopping, gasping and shuddering on the
brink. U ntil at last I touched his  face, twined my fingers in his
hair , pre ssed him tight and arch ed my back and hips beneath
him, ur ging, forcing.
“Now ,” I said to him, softly . “Now . Come with me, come
to me, now . Now!”
He yield ed to me, and I to him, despair lending edge to
passion, so the echo of our crie s seemed to die away slowly ,
ringing in the darkness of the cold stone hut.
W e lay pressed together , unmoving, his weight a heavy
blessing, a shield and reassuran ce. A body so solid, so filled
with heat and l ife; how could it be possible that he would
cease to exist within hours?
“Listen,” he said at last, softly . “Do you hear?”
At fi rst I  heard nothing but the r ushing of the wind, and the
trickle of rain, dripping through the holes of the roof. Then I
heard it, the steady , slow thump of his heartbeat, pulsing
against m e, and mine against h is, each matching each, in the
rhythm of life. The blood cour sed through him, and through
our fragile link, through me, and back again.W e lay so, warm beneath the makeshift covering of plaid
and cloak, on a bed of our cloth ing, tangled together . Then at
last he slipped free, and turning me away from him, cupped his
hand across my belly , his breath warm on the nape of my neck.
“Sleep now a bit, mo duinne ,” he whispered. “I would
sleep once more this way – holding you, holding the babe.”
I had  thought I could not sleep, but the pull of exhaustion
was too much, and I slipped beneath the surface with scarcely
a rip ple. Near da wn I woke, Jamie’ s arms still around me, and
lay watching the imperceptible bloom of night into day ,
futilely willing back the friendly shelter of the dark.
I rol led to the side and lifted m yself to watch him, to see
the light touch the bold shape of his face, innocent in sleep, to
see the dawning  sun touch his hair with flame – for the last
time.
A wave of anguish broke through me, so acute that I must
have ma de some sound, for he  opened his eyes. He smiled
when he  saw me, and his eyes searched my face. I knew that
he was memorizing my features, as I was his.
“Jamie,” I said. My voice wa s hoarse with sleep and
swallowed tears. “Jamie. I want you to mark me.”
“What?” he said, startled.
The tiny sgian dhu  h e carried in his stocking was lying
within reach, its handle of carv ed staghorn dark against the
piled clothing. I reached for it and handed it to him.
“Cut me ,” I said ur gently . “Deep enough to leave a scar . I
want to take aw ay your touch with me, to have something of
you that will st ay with me alw ays. I don’ t care if it hurts;
nothing could hurt more than leaving you. At least when I
touch it, wherever I am, I can feel your touch on me.”
His hand was ov er mine where it rested on the knife’ s hilt.
After a moment, he squeezed it and nodded. He hesitated for a
moment, the razor -sharp blade in his hand, and I of fered him
my righ t hand. It was warm beneath our coverings, but his
breath came in wisps, visible in the cold air of the room.He turned my palm upward, examining it carefully , then
raised it to his lips. A soft kiss in the well of the palm, then he
seized th e base of my thumb in a hard, sucking bite. Letting
go, he swiftly cut into the numb ed flesh. I felt no more than a
mild burning sensation, but th e blood welled at once. He
brought the hand quickly to his  mouth again, holding it there
until the flow o f blood slowed. He bound the wound, now
stinging, carefully in a handkerchief, but not before I saw that
the cut was in the shape of a small, slightly crooked letter “J.”
I loo ked up to see that he was holding out the tiny knife to
me. I took it, and somewhat hesitantly , took the hand he
of fered me.
He clos ed his eyes briefly , and set his lips, but a small
grunt of  pain escaped him as I p ressed the tip of the knife into
the flesh y pad at the base of his thumb. The Mount of V enus, a
palm-reader had told me; indicator of passion and love.
It w as only as I completed the s mall semicircular cut that I
realized he had given me his left hand.
“I sh ould have taken the other , ” I said. “Y our sword hilt
will press on it.”
He smiled faintly .
“I could ask no more than to feel your touch on me in my
last fight – wherever it comes.”
Unwrapping the blood-spotted handkerchief, I pressed my
wounded hand tightly against his, fingers gripped together .
The blood was warm and slick , not yet sticky between our
hands.
“Blood of my Blood…” I whispered.
“…and Bone of my Bone,” he a nswered softly . Neither of
us could finish the vow , “so long as we both shall live,” but the
unspoken words hung aching between us. Finally he smiled
crookedly .
“Longer than that,” he said firmly , and pulled me to him
once more.
 “Frank,” he said at last, with a s igh. “W ell, I leave it to you
what ye shall tell him about me . Likely he’ll not want to hear .
But if he does, if ye find ye can talk to him of me, as you have
to me of him – then tell him…  I’m grateful. T ell him I trust
him, because I must. And tell him-” His hands tightened
suddenly on my arms, and he spoke with a mixture of laughter
and absolute sincerity . “T ell him I hate him to his guts and the
marrow of his bones!”
W e w ere dressed, and the dawn light had strengthened into
day . There was no food, nothing with which to break our fast.
Nothing left that must be done… and nothing left to say .
He would have to leave now , to make it to Drumossie
Moor in time. This was our final parting, and we could find no
way to say goodbye.
At last, he smile d crookedly , bent, and kissed me gently on
the lips.
“They say…” he began, and s topped to clear his throat.
“They say , in the old days, when a man would go forth to do a
great de ed – he would find a wisewoman, and ask her to bless
him. He  would stand looking fo rth, in the direction he would
go, a nd she wou ld come behind him, to say the words of the
prayer over him. When she h ad finished, he would walk
straight out, and not look back, for that was ill-luck to his
quest.”
He touched my face once, and  turned away , facing the
open do or . The morning sun streamed in, lighting his hair in a
thousand flames . He straightened his shoulders, broad beneath
his plaid, and drew a deep breath.
“Bless me, then, wisewoman,” he said softly , “and go.”
I laid a h and on his shoulder , gro ping for words. Jenny had
taught m e a few of the ancient Celtic prayers of protection; I
tried to summon the words in my mind.
“Jesus, Thou Son of Mary ,” I started, speaking hoarsely , “I
call upon Thy n ame; and on the name of John the Apostle
beloved, And on the names of all the saints in the red domain,
T o shield thee in the battle to come…”I s topped, interrupted by a soun d from the hillside below .
The sound of voices, and of footsteps.
Jamie froze for a second, shoul der hard beneath my hand,
then wh irled, pushing me toward the rear of the cottage, where
the wall had fallen away .
“That way!” he said. “They are English! Claire, go!”
I ran toward the opening in the wall, heart in my throat, as
he turne d back to the doorway , hand on his sword. I stopped,
just for a moment, for the last sight of him. He turned his head,
caught s ight of me, and suddenly he was with me, pushing me
hard aga inst the wall in an agony of desperation. He gripped
me f iercely to h im. I could feel his erection pressing into my
stomach and the hilt of his dagger dug into my side.
He spok e hoarsely into my hair . “Once more. I must! But
quick!” He pushed me against the wall and I scrabbled up my
skirts as he raise d his kilts. This was not lovemaking; he took
me quic kly and powerfully and it was over in seconds. The
voices were nearer; only a hundred yards away .
He kissed me on ce more, hard e nough to leave the taste of
blood in  my mouth. “Name h im Brian,” he said, “for my
father .” W ith a push, he sent me toward the opening. As I ran
for it, I glanced back to see him  standing in the middle of the
doorway , sword half-drawn, dirk ready in his right hand.
The English, unaware that the cottage was occupied, had
not thou ght to send a scout rou nd the back. The slope behind
the cotta ge was deserted as I dashed across it and into the
thicket of alders below the hillcrest.
I pushed my w ay through the brush and the branches,
stumbling over rocks, blinded by tears. Behind me I could hear
shouts and the c lash of steel from the cottage. My thighs were
slick and  wet with Jamie’ s seed. The crest of the hill seemed
never to  grow nearer; surely I w ould spend the rest of my life
fighting my way through the strangling trees!
There was a crashing in the brush behind me. Someone
had seen  me rush from the cottag e. I dashed aside the tears and
scrabbled upward, groping on all fours as the ground grewsteeper . I was i n the clear spac e now , the shelf of granite I
remembered. The small dogwood growing out of the clif f was
there, and the tumble of small boulders.
I sto pped at the  edge of the stone circle, looking down,
trying desperately to see what was happening. How many
soldiers had come to the cottag e? Could Jamie break free of
them and reach his hobbled hors e below? W ithout it, he would
never reach Culloden in time.
All at once, the brush below me parted with a flash of red.
An English soldier . I turned, ran gasping across the turf of the
circle, and hurled myself through the cleft in the rock.P A R T  S E V E NHindsight4 7  L O O S E  E N D S
“H e was right, of course. Blood y man, he was almost
always r ight.” Claire sounded half-cross as she spoke. A rueful
smile cr ossed he r face, then she  looked at Brianna, who sat on
the hearthrug, gripping her knees, her face completely blank.
Only the  faint stir of her hair , lifting and moving in the rising
heat of the fire, showed any motion at all.
“It w as a dange rous pregnancy – again – and a hazardous
birth. Had I risked it there, it would almost certainly have
killed us  both.” She spoke direc tly to her daughter , as though
they we re alone in the room. Roger , waking slowly from the
spell of the past, felt like an intruder .
“The tru th, then, all of it. I couldn’ t bear to leave him,”
Claire sa id softly . “Even for you … I hated you for a bit, before
you wer e born, because it was for you that he’d made me go. I
didn’ t m ind dyin g – not with him. But to have to go on, to live
without him – h e was right, I had the worst of the bar gain. But
I ke pt it, becau se I loved him . And we lived, you and I,
because he loved you.”
Brianna didn’ t move; didn’ t take her eyes from her
mother ’ s face. Only her lips moved, stif fly , as though
unaccustomed to talking.
“How long… did you hate me?”
Gold eyes met b lue ones, innocent and ruthless as the eyes
of a falcon.
“Until y ou were born. When I  held you and nursed you
and saw you look up at me with your father ’ s eyes.”
Brianna made a faint, strangled sound, but her mother went
on, voice softening a little as she looked at the girl at her feet.
“And th en I began to know you , something separate from
myself or from Jamie. And I lo ved you for yourself, and not
only for the man who fathered you.”There was a blu r of motion on the hearthrug, and Brianna
shot erec t. Her hair bristled out l ike a lion’ s mane, and the blue
eyes blazed like the heart of the flames behind her .
“Frank R andall was my father!” she said. “He was! I know
it!” Fists clenched, she glare d at her mother . Her voice
trembled with rage.
“I don’ t know w hy you’re doing this. Maybe you did hate
me, maybe you still do!” T ears were beginning to make their
way dow n her cheeks, unbidden, and she dashed them angrily
away with the back of one hand.
“Daddy… Daddy loved me – he  couldn’ t have, if I weren’ t
his! Wh y are you trying to make me believe he wasn’ t my
father? W ere you jealous of me? Is that it? Did you mind so
much that he loved me? He didn’ t love you , I know that!” The
blue eye s narrowed, cat-like, blazing in a face gone dead-
white.
Roger felt a stro ng desire to ease behind the door before
she noticed his p resence and turned that molten wrath on him.
But beyond his o wn discomfort he was conscious of a sense of
growing awe. The girl that stood  on the hearthrug, hissing and
spitting in defense of her paternity , flamed with the wild
strength that had brought the Hi ghland warriors down on their
enemies like shrieking banshees. Her long, straight nose
lengthened still further by the shadows, eyes slitted like a
snarling cat’ s, she was the image of her father – and her father
was pate ntly no t the dark, quiet  scholar whose photo adorned
the jacket of the book on the table.
Claire o pened h er mouth once, but then closed it again,
watching her daughter with absorbed fascination. That
powerful tension of the body , the flexing arch of the broad, flat
cheekbones; Ro ger thought that she had seen that many times
before – but not in Brianna.
W ith a suddenness that made them both flinch, Brianna
spun on her heel, grabbed the yellowed news-clippings from
the desk, and thrust them into the fire. She snatched the poker
and jabb ed it viciously into the  tindery mass, heedless of theshower of sparks that flew from  the hearth and hissed about
her booted feet.
Whirling from the rapidly bla ckening mass of glowing
paper , she stamped one foot on the hearth.
“Bitch!” she shouted at her moth er . “Y ou hated me? W ell, I
hate you !” She drew bac k the arm with the poker , and Roger ’ s
muscles tensed instinctively , re ady to lunge for her . But she
turned, arm drawn back like a j avelin thrower , and hurled the
poker through the full-length window , where the panes of
night-dark glass reflected the image of a burning woman for
one last instant before the crash and shiver into empty black.
 
The sile nce in the study was shattering. Roger , who had
leaped to  his feet in pursuit of Brianna, was left standing in the
middle of the ro om, awkwardly frozen. He looked down at his
hands as if not quite sure what t o do with them, then at Claire.
She sat perfectly still in the sanctuary of the wing chair , like an
animal frozen by the passing shadow of a raptor .
After several moments, Roger moved across to the desk
and leaned against it.
“I don’ t know what to say ,” he said.
Claire’ s mouth twitched faintly . “Neither do I.”
They sa t in silence for several minutes. The old house
creaked, settling around them, and a faint noise of banging
pots cam e down  the hallway f rom the kitchen, where Fiona
was doing something about dinner . Roger ’ s feeling of shock
and co nstrained embarrassment gradually gave way to
something else, he wasn’ t sure what. His hands felt icy , and he
rubbed t hem on his legs, feeling the warm rasp of the corduroy
on his palms.
“I…” H e started to speak, then stopped and shook his
head.
Claire d rew a deep breath, and he realized that it was the
first movement he had seen her  make since Brianna had left.
Her gaze was clear and direct.“Do you believe me?” she asked.
Roger looked thoughtfully at her . “I’ll be damned if I
know ,” he said at last.
That provoked a slightly wavering smile. “That’ s what
Jamie sa id,” she  said, “when I asked him at the first where he
thought I’d come from.”
“I ca n’ t say I blame him.” Roger hesitated, then, making
up h is m ind, got of f the desk and came across the room to her .
“May I?” He k nelt and took her unresisting hand in his,
turning it to the light. Y ou can tell real ivory from the
synthetic, he remembered suddenly , because the real kind feels
warm to  the touch. The palm of  her hand was a soft pink, but
the faint line of the “J” at the base of her thumb was white as
bone.
“It doesn ’ t prove anything,” she said, watching his face. “It
could have been an accident; I could have done it myself.”
“But you  didn’ t,  did you?” He laid the hand back in her lap
very gently , as though it were a fragile artifact.
“No. Bu t I can’ t prove it. The pearls” – her hand went to
the shim mer of the necklace at her throat – “they’re authentic;
that can be verified. But can I prove where I got them? No.”
“And the portrait of Ellen MacKenzie-” he began.
“The same. A coincidence. Something to base my delusion
upon. My lies.” There was a fa intly bitter note in her voice,
though she spoke calmly enough. There was a patch of color
in each cheek now , and she wa s losing that utter stillness. It
was like watching a statue come to life, he thought.
Roger g ot to his feet. He paced slowly back and forth,
rubbing a hand through his hair .
“But it’ s important to you, isn’ t it? It’ s very important.”
“Y es.” S he rose herself and we nt to the desk, where the
folder of his research sat. She  laid a hand on the manila
sheeting with reverence, as though it were a gravestone; he
supposed to her it was.“I ha d to  know .”  There was a faint quaver in her voice, but
he saw her chin firm instantly , suppressing it. “I had to know if
he’d done it – if he’d saved his men – or if he’d sacrificed
himself for nothing. And I had to tell Brianna. Even if she
doesn’ t believe it – if she never believes it. Jamie was her
father . I had to tell her .”
“Y es, I see that. And you couldn ’ t do it while Dr . Randall –
your hus – I mean, Frank,” he corrected himself, flushing,
“was alive.”
She smiled faintly . “It’ s all righ t; you can call Frank my
husband. He was, after all, for a  good many years. And Bree’ s
right, in a way – he was her father , as well as Jamie.” She
glanced down at her hands, and spread the fingers of both, so
the l ight gleamed from the two r ings she wore, silver and gold.
Roger was struck by a thought.
“Y our ri ng,” he said, coming to  stand close by her again.
“The silver one. Is there a maker ’ s mark in it? Some of the
eighteenth-century Scottish silversmiths used them. It might
not be proof positive, but it’ s something.”
Claire looked startled. Her left hand covered the right
protectively , fingers rubbing the wide silver band with its
pattern of Highland interlace and thistle blooms.
“I do n’ t know ,” she said. A fain t blush rose in her cheeks.
“I haven’ t seen inside it. I’ve n ever taken it of f.” She twisted
the r ing slowly over the joint of  the knuckle; her fingers were
slender , but from long wearing, the ring had left a groove in
her flesh.
She squinted at the inside of the ring, then rose and
brought it to the table, where she stood next to Roger , tilting
the silver circle to catch the light from the table lamp.
“There are words in it,” she said wonderingly . “I never
realized that he’d… Oh, dear G od.” Her voice broke, and the
ring slip ped from  her fingers, ra ttling on the table with a tiny
metal chime. Roger hurriedly scooped it up, but she had turned
away , fists held tight against he r middle. He knew she didn’ t
want him  to see her face; the control she had kept through thelong hou rs of the day and the scene with Brianna had deserted
her now .
He stood for a minute, feeling unbearably awkward and
out of place. W ith a terrible feeling that he was violating a
privacy that ran deeper than any thing he had ever known, but
not k nowing what else to do, he  lifted the tiny metal circle to
the light and read the words inside.
“Da mi basia mille…”  B ut it was Claire’ s voice that sp oke
the w ords, not h is. Her voice wa s shaky , and he could tell that
she was crying, but it was comin g back under her control. She
couldn’ t let go for long; the power of what she held leashed
could so easily destroy her .
“It’ s Catullus. A bit of a love poem. Hugh… Hugh Munro
– h e gave me the  poem for a wedding present, wrapped around
a bi t of amber with a dragonfly inside it.” Her hands, still
curled in to fists,  had now dropp ed to her sides. “I couldn’ t say
it all, still, but the one bit – I kn ow that much.” Her voice was
growing steadie r as she spoke, but she kept her back turned to
Roger . The small silver circle glowed in his palm, still warm
with the heat of the finger it had left.
“…da mi basia mille…”
Still turned away , she went on, translating,
“Then let amor ous kisses dwell
On our lips, begin and tell
A Thousand and a Hundr ed scor e
A Hundr ed, and a Thousand mor e.”
When she had finished, she s tood still a moment, then
slowly turned to face him again . Her cheeks were flushed and
wet, and her lashes clumped together , but she was superficially
calm.
“A h undred, and a thousand mo re,” she said, with a feeble
attempt at a smi le. “But no mak er ’ s mark. So that isn’ t proof,
either .”
“Y es, it is.” Roger found there  seemed to be something
sticking in his o wn throat, and hastily cleared it. “It’ s absoluteproof. T o me.”
Something lit in the depths of her eyes, and the smile grew
real. Then the te ars welled up and overflowed as she lost her
grip once and for all.
“I’m sorry ,” she said at last. She was sitting on the sofa,
elbows o n her knees, face half- buried in one of the Reverend
Mr . W akefield’ s  huge white ha ndkerchiefs. Roger sat close
beside her , almost touching. She seemed very small and
vulnerable. He wanted to pat th e ash-brown curls, but felt too
shy to do it.
“I never thought… it never occurred to me,” she said,
blowing her nose again. “I did n’ t know how much it would
mean, to have someone believe me.”
“Even if it isn’ t Brianna?”
She grimaced slightly at his words, brushing back her hair
with one hand as she straightened.
“It was a shock,” she defended her daughter . “Naturally ,
she cou ldn’ t – she was so fond of her father – of Frank, I
mean,” she amended hastily . “I knew she might not be able to
take it all in at f irst. But… surely when she’ s had time to think
about it,  ask questions…” Her voice faded, and the shoulders
of her white linen suit slumped under the weight of the words.
As thou gh to distract herself, she glanced at the table,
where the stack of shiny-covered books still sat, undisturbed.
“It’ s odd , isn’ t it? T o live twenty years with a Jacobite
scholar , and to b e so afraid of what I might learn that I could
never be ar to open one of his books?” She shook her head, still
staring at the bo oks. “I don’ t know what happened to many of
them – I couldn’ t stand to find  out. All the men I knew; I
couldn’ t for get them. But I c ould bury them, keep their
memory at bay . For a time.”
And that time n ow was ended, and another begun. Roger
picked u p the book from the top of the stack, weighing it in his
hands, as if it were a responsibility . Perhaps it would take her
mind of f Brianna, at least.
“Do you want me to tell you?” he asked quietly .She hesi tated for a long moment, but then nodded quickly ,
as th ough afraid she would reg ret the action if she paused to
think about it longer .
He licked dry l ips, and began to talk. He didn’ t need to
refer to the book; these were facts known to any scholar of the
period. Still, he held Frank Ran dall’ s book against his chest,
solid as a shield.
“Francis T owns end,” he began. “The man who held
Carlisle for Charles. He was captured. T ried for treason,
hanged and disemboweled.”
He paused, but the white fac e was drained of blood
already , no further change was  possible. She sat across the
table from him, motionless as a pillar of salt.
“MacDonald of Keppoch char ged the field at Culloden on
foot, with his br other Donald. Both of them were cut down by
English cannon fire. Lord Kilmarnock fell on the field of
battle, but Lord Ancrum, scouting the fallen, recognized him
and saved his lif e from Cumberland’ s men. No great favor; he
was beh eaded the next August on T ower Hill, together with
Balmerino.” He  hesitated. “Kilmarnock’ s young son was lost
on the field; his body was never recovered.”
“I always liked Balmerino,” she murmured. “And the Old
Fox? Lord Lovat?” Her voice w as little more than a whisper .
“The shadow of an ax…”
“Y es.” Roger ’ s fingers stroked the slick jacket of the book
unconsciously , as though reading the words within by Braille.
“He was tried fo r treason, and condemned to be beheaded. He
made a good end. All the accou nts say that he met his death
with great dignity .”
A scene flashed through Roger ’ s mind; an anecdote from
Hogarth. He recited from memory , as closely as he could. “
‘Carried through  the shouts and jeers of an English mob on his
way to the T ow er , the old chieftain of clan Fraser appeared
nonchalant, indi f ferent to the mi ssiles that sailed past his head,
and almost good-humored. In re ply to a shout from one elderly
woman – “Y ou’re going to get your head chopped of f, you old
Scotch cur!” – he leaned from his carriage window andshouted jovially  back, “I expect I shall, you ugly old English
bitch!” ’ ”
She was smiling, but the sound she made was a cross
between a laugh and a sob.
“I’ll bet he did, the bloody old bastard.”
“When h e was led to the block,” Roger went on cautiously ,
“he asked to ins pect the blade, and instructed the executioner
to d o a good job . He told the man, ‘Do it right, for I shall be
very angry indeed if you don’ t.’ ”
T ears were running down beneath her closed lids, glittering
like jewels in the firelight. He made a motion toward her , but
she sensed it and shook her head, eyes still closed.
“I’m all right. Go on.”
“There isn’ t much more. Some of them survived, you
know . Lochiel escaped to France.” He carefully refrained from
mention of the chieftain’ s brother , Archibald Cameron. The
doctor h ad been hanged, disemboweled, and beheaded at
T yburn, his heart torn out and g iven to the flames. She did not
seem to notice the omission.
He finis hed the  list rapidly , wa tching her . Her tears had
stopped, but she sat with her head hung forward, the thick
curly hair hiding all expression.
He paus ed for a moment when he had finished speaking,
then got up and took her firmly by the arm.
“Come on,” he said. “Y ou nee d a little air . It’ s stopped
raining; we’ll go outside.”
 
The air outside was fresh and cool, almost intoxicating
after the stuf finess of the Reverend’ s study . The heavy rain had
ceased a bout sunset, and now , in the early evening, only the
pit-a-pat dripping of trees and shrubs echoed the earlier
downpour .
I fel t an almost o verwhelming re lief at being released from
the h ouse. I had feared this for so long, and now it was done.
Even if Bree nev er… but no, sh e would. Even if it took a longtime, sur ely she would recognize the truth. She must; it looked
her in the face every morning in the mirror; it ran in the very
blood of  her veins. For now , I had told her everything, and I
felt the lightnes s of a shriven soul, leaving the confessional,
unburdened as yet by thought of the penance ahead.
Rather l ike giving birth, I thoug ht. A short period of great
dif ficulty and rending pain, and the certain knowledge of
sleepless nights and nerve-racki ng days in future. But for now ,
for a  blessed, pe aceful moment, there was nothing but a quiet
euphoria that filled the soul and  left no room for misgivings.
Even the fresh-felt grief for the  men I had known was muted
out here, softened by the stars that shone through rifts in the
shredding cloud.
The night was damp with early spring, and the tires of cars
passing on the m ain road nearby hissed on the wet pavement.
Roger led me without speaking down the slope behind the
house, u p another past a small, mossy glade, and down again,
where there was a path that l ed to the river . A black iron
railroad bridge spanned the river  here; there was an iron ladder
from the path’ s edge, attached t o one of the girders. Someone
armed w ith a can of white spray-paint had inscribed FREE
SCOTLAND on the span with random boldness.
In spite of the sadness of memory , I felt at peace, or nearly
so. I ’d d one the  hardest part. B ree knew now who she was. I
hoped fe rvently that she would c ome to believe it in time – not
only for  her own sake, I knew , but also for mine. More than I
could ev er have admitted, even to myself, I wanted to have
someone with whom to rememb er Jamie; someone I could talk
to about him.
I felt an overwhelming tiredness, one that touched both
mind an d body . But I straighte ned my spine just once more,
forcing my body past its limits, as I had done so many times
before. S oon, I promised my aching joints, my tender mind,
my f reshly riven heart. Soon, I could rest. I could sit alone in
the s mall, cozy parlor of the bed-and-breakfast, alone by the
fire with my gh osts. I could mourn them in peace, letting the
weariness slip away with my tears, and go at last to seek thetemporary oblivion of sleep, in w hich I might meet them alive
once more.
But not yet. There was one thin g more to be done before I
slept.
 
They walked in silence for some time, with no sound but
the p assing of di stant traf fic, and the closer lapping of the river
at its banks. Roger felt reluctant to start any conversation, lest
he risk remindin g her of things she wished to for get. But the
floodgates had been opened, and  there was no way of holding
back.
She beg an to ask him small ques tions, hesitant and halting.
He answered them as best he could, and hesitant in return,
asked a few questions of his own. The freedom of talking,
suddenly , after so many years of pent-up secrecy , seemed to
act on her like a  drug, and Roger , listening in fascination, drew
her out despite herself. By the time they reached the railroad
bridge, s he had recovered the vigor and strength of character
he had first seen in her .
“He was a fool, and a drunkard, and a weak, silly man,”
she declared passionately . “They were all fools – Lochiel,
Glengarry , and the rest. They d rank too much together , and
filled themselves with Charlie’ s foolish dreams. T alk is cheap,
and Dou gal was  right – it’ s easy to be brave, sitting over a
glass of ale in a warm room. Stu pid with drink, they were, and
then too  proud of their bloody  honor to back down. They
whipped their men and threatened them, bribed them and lured
them – took them all to bloody  ruin… for the sake of honor
and glory .”
She snorted through her nose, and was silent for a moment.
Then, surprisingly , she laughed.
“But do you kno w what’ s really funny? That poor , silly sot
and his greedy , stupid helpers; and the foolish, honorable men
who couldn’ t bring themselves t o turn back… they had the one
tiny virtue among them; they b elieved. And the odd thing is,
that that ’ s all that’ s endured of them – all the silliness, the
incompetence, the cowardice and drunken vainglory; that’ s allgone. All that’ s left now of Charles Stuart and his men is the
glory that they sought for and never found.
“Perhaps Raymo nd was right,” she added in a softer tone;
“it’ s onl y the essence of a thing  that counts. When time strips
everything else away , it’ s only t he hardness of the bone that’ s
left.”
“I suppose you must feel some bitterness against the
historians,” Rog er ventured. “All the writers who got it wrong
– ma de him out a hero. I mean, you can’ t go anywhere in the
Highlands without seeing the Bonnie Prince on tof fee tins and
souvenir tourist mugs.”
Claire shook her head, gazing  of f in the distance. The
evening mist was growing heavier , the bushes beginning to
drip again from the tips of their leaves.
“Not the  historians. No, not them. Their greatest crime is
that they presume to know wha t happened, how things come
about, when they have only what the past chose to leave
behind –  for the most part, they think what they were meant to
think, a nd it’ s a rare one that sees what really happened,
behind the smokescreen of artifacts and paper .”
There was a faint rumble in the distance. The evening
passenger train from London, R oger knew . Y ou could hear the
whistle from the manse on clear nights.
“No, the  fault lies with the artists,” Claire went on. “The
writers, the singers, the tellers of tales. It’ s them that take the
past and re-create it to their liking. Them that could take a fool
and give you back a hero, take a sot and make him a king.”
“Are the y all liars, then?” Roger asked. Claire shrugged. In
spite of the chil ly air , she had taken of f the jacket to her suit;
the damp molded the cotton s hirt to show the fineness of
collarbone and shoulder blades.
“Liars?” she asked, “or sorcerers? Do they see the bones in
the dust  of the e arth, see the essence of a thing that was, and
clothe it in new  flesh, so the plodding beast reemer ges as a
fabulous monster?”“And are they wrong to do it, th en?” Roger asked. The rail
bridge trembled  as the Flying Scotsman hit the switch below .
The wavering white letters shook with vibration – FREE
SCOTLAND.
Claire st ared upward at the lette rs, her face lit by fugitive
starlight.
“Y ou still don’ t understand, do you?” she said. She was
irritated, but the husky voice didn’ t rise above its normal level.
“Y ou don’ t know  why ,” she said. “Y ou don’ t know , and I
don’ t kn ow , and we never will  kno w . C an’ t you  see? Y ou don’ t
know , b ecause y ou can’ t say wh at the end is – there isn’ t any
end. Y o u can’ t say , ‘This particular event’ was ‘destined’ to
happen, and therefore all these other things happened. What
Charles did to the people of Scotland – was that the ‘thing’
that had  to happen? Or was it ‘m eant’ to happen as it did, and
Charles’ s real purpose was to be what he is now – a
figurehead, an icon? W ithout him, would Scotland have
endured two hundred years of u nion with England, and still –
still ” – she waved a  hand at the sprawling letters overhead –
“have kept its own identity?”
“I don’ t know!” said Roger , having to shout as the
swinging searchlight lit the trees and track, and the train roared
over the bridge above them.
There was a solid minute of clash and roar , earthshaking
noise tha t held them rooted to the spot. Then at last it was past,
and the clatter died to a lonely crying wail as the red light of
the end car swept out of sight beyond them.
“W ell, that’ s the hell of it, isn’ t i t?” she said, turning away .
“Y ou never know , but you have to act anyway , don’ t you?”
She spread her hands suddenly , flexing the strong fingers
so her rings flashed in the light.
“Y ou learn it wh en you become a doctor . Not in school –
that isn’ t where you learn, in any  case – but when you lay your
hands on people and presume to  heal them. There are so many
there, beyond your reach. So m any you can never touch, so
many w hose essence you can’ t f ind, so many who slip throughyour fingers. But you can’ t thin k about them. The only thing
you can do – the only  th ing – is to tr y for the one who’ s in
front of you. Act as though this  one patient is the only person
in the world – because to do otherwise is to lose that one, too.
One at a time, that’ s all you can do. And you learn not to
despair over all the ones you c an’ t help, but only to do what
you can.”
She turned back to him, face haggard with fatigue, but
eyes glowing with the rain-ligh t, spangles of water caught in
the tangles of her hair . Her h and rested on Roger ’ s arm,
compelling as the wind that fills a boat’ s sail and drives it on.
“Let’ s g o back to the manse, Roger ,” she said. “I have
something particular to tell you.”
 
Claire w as quiet on the walk back to the manse, avoiding
Roger ’ s tentative queries. She  refused his prof fered arm,
walking alone, head down in thought. Not as though she were
making up her mind, Roger thought; she had already done
that. She was deciding what to say .
Roger himself was wondering. The quiet gave him respite
from the  turmoil of the day’ s revelations – enough to wonder
precisely why Claire had chose n to include him in them. She
could easily have told Brianna alone, had she wished to. W as it
only that she ha d feared what Brianna’ s reaction to the story
might b e, and been reluctant t o meet it alone? Or had she
gambled that he would – as he  had – believe her , and thus
sought t o enlist him as an ally in  the cause of truth – her truth,
and Brianna’ s?
His curiosity had reached near  boiling point by the time
they reached the manse. Still,  there was work to do first;
together , they unloaded one of the tallest bookshelves, and
pushed it in fro nt of the shattered window , shutting out the
cold night air .
Flushed from the exertion, Cla ire sat down on the sofa
while he went to pour a pair of whiskies from the small drinks-
table in the corner . When Mrs. Graham had been alive, she had
always brought drinks on a tray , properly napkined, doilied,and ado rned with accompanying biscuits. Fiona, if allowed,
would willingly have done the same, but Roger much
preferred the simplicity of pouring his own drink in solitude.
Claire th anked him, sipped from the glass, then set it down
and looked up at him, tired but composed.
“Y ou’ll likely be wondering why I wanted you to hear the
whole story ,” she said, with tha t unnerving ability to see into
his thoughts.
“There w ere two  reasons. I’ll tel l you the second presently ,
but as for the first, I thought you had some right to hear it.”
“Me? What right?”
The golden eyes were direct, unsettling as a leopard’ s
guileless stare. “The same as Br ianna. The right to know who
you are.” She moved across the room to the far wall. It was
cork-lined from floor to ceiling, encrusted with layers of
photographs, charts, notes, str ay visiting cards, old parish
schedules, spare keys, and other bits of rubbish pinned to the
cork.
“I remember this wall.” Claire smiled, touching a picture
of P rize Day at  the local grammar school. “Did your father
ever take anything of f it?”
Roger shook his head, bewildered. “No, I don’ t believe he
did. He always said he could n ever find things put away in
drawers; if it was anything important, he wanted it in plain
sight.”
“Then it’ s likely still here. He thought it was important.”
Reaching up, she began to thumb lightly through the
overlapping layers, gently separating the yellowed papers.
“This one, I thin k,” she murmured, after some rif fling back
and forth. Reaching far up unde r the detritus of sermon notes
and car -wash tickets, she detach ed a single sheet of paper and
laid it on the desk.
“Why , it’ s my family tree,” Roger said in surprise. “I
haven’ t seen that old thing in  years. And never paid anyattention to it w hen I did see it, either ,” he added. “If you’re
going to tell me I’m adopted, I already know that.”
Claire nodded, intent on the chart. “Oh, yes. That’ s why
your fat her – Mr . W akefield, I m ean – drew up this chart. He
wanted to be sur e that you would know your real family , even
though he gave you his own name.”
Roger sighed, thinking of the Reverend, and the small
silver -framed picture on his bureau, with the smiling likeness
of an unknown young man, darkhaired in W orld W ar II RAF
uniform.
“Y es, I know that, too. My family name was MacKenzie.
Are you  going to tell me I’m connected to some of the
MacKenzies you… er , knew? I don’ t see any of those names
on this chart.”
Claire a cted as though she hadn’ t heard him, tracing a
finger down the spidery hand-drawn lines of the genealogy .
“Mr . W akefield was a terrible stickler for accuracy ,” she
murmured, as though to herself. “He wouldn’ t want any
mistakes.” Her finger came to a halt on the page.
“Here,” she said. “This is where it happened. Below this
point” – her fing er swept down the page – “everything is right.
These were your parents, and your grandparents, and your
great-grandparents, and so on. But not above.” The finger
swept upward.
Roger bent over the chart, then looked up, moss-green eyes
thoughtful.
“This one? W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie, born 1744, of
W illiam John MacKenzie and Sarah Innes. Died 1782.”
Claire s hook he r head. “Died 1 744, aged two months, of
smallpox.” She looked up, and the golden eyes met his with a
force that sent a  shiver down his  spine. “Y ours wasn’ t the first
adoption in that family , you kno w ,” she said. Her finger tapped
the e ntry . “He needed a wet nurse,” she said. “His own mother
was dead – so he was given to a family that had lost a baby .
They called him by the name o f the child they had lost – that
was com mon – and I don’ t suppose anyone wanted to callattention to his ancestry by recording the new child in the
parish register . He would have b een baptized at birth, after all;
it wasn’ t necessary to do it aga in. Colum told me where they
placed him.”
“Geillis Duncan ’ s son,” he s aid slowly . “The witch’ s
child.”
“That’ s right.” She gazed at him appraisingly , head cocked
to one side. “I kn ew it must be, when I saw you. The eyes, you
know . They’re hers.”
Roger sa t down, feeling suddenly quite cold, in spite of the
bookshelf block ing the draft, and the newly kindled fire on the
hearth.
“Y ou’re sure of this?” he said, b ut of course she was sure.
Assuming that the whole story was not a fabrication, the
elaborate construction of a diseased mind. He glanced up at
her , sitting unruf fled with her whisky , composed as though
about to order cheese straws.
Diseased mind? Dr . Claire Beauchamp-Randall, chief of
staf f at a lar ge, important hospital? Raving insanity , rampant
delusions? Easie r to believe himself insane. In fact, he was
beginning to believe just that.
He took a deep  breath and plac ed both hands flat on the
chart, blotting out the entry for W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie.
“W ell, it ’ s interesting all right, a nd I suppose I’m glad you
told me. But it doesn’ t really change anything, does it? Except
that I suppose I can tear of f the top half of this genealogy and
throw it away . After all, we don’ t know where Geillis Duncan
came from, nor the man who fat hered her child; you seem sure
it wasn’ t poor old Arthur .”
Claire shook her head, a distant look in her eyes.
“Oh, no, it wasn’ t Arthur Duncan. It was Dougal
MacKenzie who fathered Geilie’ s child. That was the real
reason she was killed. Not witchcraft. But Colum MacKenzie
couldn’ t let it be  known that his  brother had had an adulterous
af fair wi th the fiscal’ s wife. And  she wanted to marry Dougal;I think perhaps she threatened t he MacKenzies with the truth
about Hamish.”
“Hamish? Oh, Colum’ s son. Y es, I remember .” Roger
rubbed his forehead. His head was starting to spin.
“Not Colum’ s son,” Claire corrected. “Dougal’ s. Colum
couldn’ t sire children, but Dou gal could – and did. Hamish
was the heir to the chieftainship of clan MacKenzie; Colum
would have killed anyone who threatened Hamish – and did.”
She drew  a deep breath. “And th at,” she said, “leads to the
second reason why I told you the story .”
Roger buried both hands in his hair , staring down at the
table, where the lines of the genealogical chart seemed to
writhe li ke mock ing snakes, forked tongues flickering between
the names.
“Geillis Duncan,” he said hoarsely . “She had a vaccination
scar .”
“Y es. It  was that, finally , that  made me come back to
Scotland. When  I left with Frank, I swore I would never come
back. I knew I could never for get, but I could bury what I
knew; I could stay away , an d never seek to know what
happened after I left. It seemed t he least I could do, for both of
them, for Frank and Jamie. And for the baby coming.” Her lips
pressed tightly together for a moment.
“But Geilie saved my life, at  the trial in Cranesmuir .
Perhaps she was doomed hers elf in any case; I think she
believed so. But she threw away any chance she might have
had, in order to save me. And she left me a message. Dougal
gave it to me, in a cave in the H ighlands, when he brought me
the news that Ja mie was in pris on. There were two pieces to
the message. A sentence, ‘I do n ot know if it is possible, but I
think so ,’ and a sequence of fou r numbers – one, nine, six, and
eight.”
“Nineteen sixty-eight,” Roger said, with the feeling that
this was  a dream. Surely he would be waking soon. “This year .
What did she mean, she thought it was possible?”“T o go back. Th rough the stones. She hadn’ t tried, but she
thought I could. And she was right, of course.” Claire turned
and picked up her whisky from  the table. She stared at Roger
across th e rim of the glass, eyes the same color as the contents.
“This is  1968; the year she went back herself. Except that I
think she hasn’ t yet gone.”
The glass slipped in Roger ’ s ha nd, and he barely caught it
in time.
“What… here? But she… why not… you can’ t tell…” He
was sputtering, thoughts jarred into incoherency .
“I don’ t know ,” Claire pointed out. “But I think so. I’m
fairly su re she was Scots, and th e odds are good that she came
through somewhere in the Highlands. Granted that there are
any num ber of standing stones, we know that Craigh na Dun is
a passage – for those that can use it. Besides,” she added, with
the air of one presenting the final ar gument, “Fiona’ s seen
her .”
“Fiona?”  This, Roger felt, was simply too much. The
crowning absurdity . Anything else he could manage to believe
– time passages, clan treachery , historical revelations – but
bringing Fiona into it was mo re than his reason could be
expected to stand. He looked p leadingly at Claire. “T ell me
you don’ t mean that,” he begged. “Not Fiona.”
Claire’ s mouth twitched at one corner . “I’m afraid so,” she
said, no t without sympathy . “I asked her – about the Druid
group that her gr andmother belonged to, you know . She’ s been
sworn to  secrecy , of course, but  I knew quite a bit about them
already , and well…” She shrugged, mildly apologetic. “It
wasn’ t t oo dif fic ult to get her to talk. She told me that there’d
been another woman asking questions – a tall, fair -haired
woman, with very striking green eyes. Fiona said the woman
reminded her of someone,” she added delicately , carefully not
looking at him, “but she couldn’ t think who.”
Roger merely groaned, and bending at the waist, collapsed
slowly forward until his forehead rested on the table. He
closed his eyes, feeling the coo l hardness of the wood under
his head.“Did Fiona know who she w as?” he asked, eyes still
closed.
“Her nam e is Gillian Edgars,” Claire replied. He heard her
rising, crossing the room, adding another tot of whisky to her
glass. She came back and stood by the table. He could feel her
gaze on the back of his neck.
“I’ll leave it to you.” Claire said quietly . “It’ s your right to
say . Shall I look for her?”
Roger l ifted his head of f the table and blinked at her
incredulously . “ Shall you look for her?” he said. “If this – if
it’ s all true – then we have to find her , don’ t we? If she’ s going
back to be burned alive? Of cou rse you have to find her!” he
burst out. “How could you consider anything else?”
“And if I do find her?” she replied. She placed a slender
hand on the gru bby chart and raised her eyes to his. “What
happens to you?” she asked softly .
 
He looked around helplessly , at the bright, cluttered study ,
with the  wall of miscellanea, t he chipped old teapot on the
ancient oak table. Solid as… H e gripped his thighs, clutching
the rough corduroy as though f or reassurance that he was as
solid as the chair on which he sat.
“But… I’m r eal !” he burst out. “I can’ t just… evaporate!”
Claire raised her brows consideringly . “I don’ t know that
you wou ld. I have no idea what would happen. Perhaps you
would never have existed? In which case, you oughtn’ t to be
too agitated now . Perhaps the part of you that makes you
unique, your soul or whatever you want to call it – perhaps
that’ s fa ted to exist in any case , and you would still be you,
though born of a slightly dif f erent lineage. After all, how
much of  your physical makeup can be due to ancestors six
generations back? Half? T en percent?” She shrugged, and
pursed her lips, looking him over carefully .
“Y our eyes come from Geilie, as I told you. But I see
Dougal in you, too. No specific feature, though you have the
MacKenzie cheekbones; Bree has them, too. No, it’ ssomething more subtle, something in the way you move; a
grace, a suddenness – no…” S he shook her head. “I can’ t
describe it. But it’ s there. Is it something you need , to be who
you are? Could you do without that bit from Dougal?”
She rose  heavily , looking her ag e for the first time since he
had met her .
“I’ve spent more than twenty years looking for answers,
Roger , a nd I can tell you only one thing: There aren’ t any
answers, only choices. I’ve made a number of them myself,
and no one can  tell me whether they were right or wrong.
Master Raymond perhaps, though I don’ t suppose he would;
he was a man who believed in mysteries.
“I can see the right of it only far enough to know that I
must tell you – and leave the choice to you.”
He picked up the glass and drained the rest of the whisky .
The Y ear of our Lord 1968. The year when Geillis Duncan
stepped into the circle of standin g stones. The year she went to
meet her fate beneath the rowan  trees in the hills near Leoch.
An illegitimate child – and death by fire.
He r ose and wandered up and down the rows of books that
lined the study . Books filled w ith history , that mocking and
mutable subject.
No answers, only choices.
Restless, he fingered the books on the top shelf. These
were the histories of the Jacobite movement, the stories of the
Rebellions, the ’15 and the ’45. Claire had known a number of
the men  and women described i n these books. Had fought and
suf fered with them, to save a peo ple strange to her . Had lost all
she held  dear in the ef fort. And in the end, had failed. But the
choice had been hers, as now it was his.
W as the re a chance that this was a dream, a delusion of
some ki nd? He stole a glance a t Claire. She lay back in her
chair , eyes closed, motionless but for the beating of her pulse,
barely v isible in  the hollow of her throat. No. He could, for a
moment, convince himself that it was make-believe, but only
while he looked away from her . However much he wanted tobelieve otherwis e, he could not look at her and doubt a word
of what she said.
He spread his h ands flat on the table, then turned them
over , see ing the maze of lines that crossed his palms. W as it
only his  own fate that lay here in his cupped hands, or did he
hold an unknown woman’ s life as well?
No a nswers. He closed his hand s gently , as though holding
something small trapped inside his fists, and made his choice.
“Let’ s find her ,” he said.
There was no so und from the still figure in the wing chair ,
and no moveme nt save the rise and fall of the rounded breast.
Claire was asleep.4 8  W I T C H - H U N T
T he old- fashioned buzzer whir red somewhere in the
depths o f the flat. It wasn’ t the b est part of town, nor was it the
worst. W orking- class houses, for the most part, some, like this
one, divided into two or three  flats. A hand-lettered notice
under the buzzer read MCH ENR Y UPST AIRS – RING
TWICE. Roger carefully pressed the buzzer once more, then
wiped h is hand on his trousers. His palms were sweating,
which annoyed him considerably .
There w as a trough of yellow jonquils by the doorstep,
half-dead for lack of water . The tips of the blade-shaped leaves
were brown and curling, and th e frilly yellow heads drooped
disconsolately near his shoe.
Claire sa w them, too. “Perhaps no one’ s home,” she said,
stooping to touch the dry soil in the trough. “These haven’ t
been watered in over a week.”
Roger felt a mil d wave of relief at the thought; whether he
believed Geillis Duncan was Gillian Edgars or not, he hadn’ t
been loo king forward to this visit. He was turning to go when
the door suddenly opened beh ind him, with a screech of
sticking wood that brought his heart into his mouth.
“A ye?” The man who answered the door squinted at them,
eyes swo llen in a flushed, heavy face shadowed with unshaven
beard.
“Er… W e’re sorry to disturb yo ur sleep, sir ,” said Roger ,
making an ef fort to calm himself. His stomach felt slightly
hollow . “W e’re looking for a M iss Gillian Edgars. Is this her
residence?”
The man  rubbed  a stubby , black -furred hand over his head,
making the hair stick up in belligerent spikes.
“That’ s Mrs . Edgars to you, jimmy . And what’ s it you want
wi’ my wife?” The alcoholic fumes from the man’ s breath
made Roger want to step backward, but he stood his ground.“W e onl y want to talk with her ,” he said, as conciliatingly
as he could. “Is she at home, please?”
“Is she at home, please?” said the man who must be Mr .
Edgars, squinch ing his mouth in a savage, high-pitched
mockery of Roger ’ s Oxford accent. “No, she’ s not home.
Bugger of f,” he advised, and sw ung the door to with a crash
that left the lace curtain shivering with the vibration.
“I ca n see why she isn’ t  home,” Claire observed, standing
on ti ptoe to peer through the window . “I wouldn’ t be, either , if
that’ s what was waiting for me.”
“Quite,” said Roger shortly . “An d that would appear to be
that. Have you any other suggestions for finding this woman?”
Claire let go of the windowsill.
“He’ s settled in front of the telly ,” she reported. “Let’ s
leave him , at least until after the pub’ s opened. Meanwhile, we
can go try this Institute. Fiona said Gillian Edgars took courses
there.”
 
The Institute for the Study of Highland Folklore and
Antiquities was housed on the to p floor of a narrow house just
outside the business district. The receptionist, a small, plump
woman in a brown cardigan and print dress, seemed delighted
to see them; she mustn’ t get much company up here, Roger
reflected.
“Oh, Mrs. Edgars ,” sh e sa id, upo n hearing their b usiness.
Roger th ought that a sudden note of doubt had crept into Mrs.
Andrews’ s voice, but she remained bright and cheerful. “Y es,”
she said, “she’ s a regular memb er of the Institute, all paid up
for her classes. S he’ s around here quite a bit, is Mrs. Edgars.”
A lo t more than Mrs. Andrews really cared for , from the sound
of it.
“She isn’ t here now , by chance, is she?” Claire asked.
Mrs. Andrews shook her head, m aking the dozens of gray-
streaked pincurls dance on her head.“Oh, no,” she said. “It’ s a M onday . Only me and Dr .
McEwan are here on the Mo nday . He’ s the Director , you
know .” S he look ed reproachfull y at Roger , as though he ought
really to have known that. Then, apparently reassured by their
evident respectability , she relented slightly .
“If you want to ask about Mrs. Edgars, you should see Dr .
McEwan. I’ll just go and tell him you’re here, shall I?”
As she began t o ease out from  behind her desk, Claire
stopped her , leaning forward.
“Have you perhaps got a photog raph of Mrs. Edgars?” she
asked bluntly . At Mrs. Andrews’ s stare of surprise, Claire
smiled charmingly , explaining, “W e wouldn’ t want to waste
the Director ’ s time, if it’ s the wrong person, you see.”
Mrs. A ndrews mouth dropped open slightly , and she
blinked in confusion, but she nodded after a moment, and
began fu ssing ro und her desk, o pening drawers and talking to
herself.
“I know they’re here somewhere. I saw them just
yesterday , so they can’ t have gone far… oh, here!” She bobbed
up with a folder of eight-by-ten black-and-white photographs
in her hand, and sorted rapidly through them.
“There,” she said. “That’ s her , with one of the digging
expeditions, out near town, but you can’ t see her face, can
you? Let me see if there’ s any more…”
She resumed her sorting, muttering to herself, as Roger
peered intereste dly over Claire’ s shoulder at the photograph
Mrs. An drews h ad laid on the desk. It showed a small group of
people s tanding near a Land-Rover , with a number of burlap
sacks and small tools on the g round beside them. It was an
impromptu shot , and several of the people were turned away
from th e camera. Claire’ s finger reached out without
hesitation, touching the image of a tall girl with long, straight,
fair hair hanging halfway dow n her back. She tapped the
photograph and nodded silently to Roger .
“Y ou can’ t possibly be sure,” he  muttered to her under his
breath.“What’ s that, luv?” said Mr s. Andrews, looking up
absently over her spectacles. “O h, you weren’ t talking to me.
That’ s all right, then, I’ve found one a little better . It’ s still not
her whole face – she’ s turned sideways, like – but it’ s better
nor t he o ther .” S he plopped the n ew picture down on top of the
other with a triumphant little splat.
This one showed an older man w ith half-spectacles and the
same fairhaired girl, bent over a table holding what looked like
a collec tion of rusted motor pa rts to Roger , but which were
undoubtedly valuable artifacts. The girl’ s hair swung down
beside her cheek, and her head  was turned toward the older
man, bu t the slant of a short, straight nose, a sweetly rounded
chin, and the cu rve of a beautiful mouth showed clearly . The
eye was  cast down, hidden under long, thick lashes. Roger
repressed the admiring whistle that rose unbidden to his lips.
Ancestress or not, she was a real dolly , he thought irreverently .
He glanced at Claire. She nodded, without speaking. She
was paler even than usual, and he could see the pulse beating
rapidly in her th roat, but she thanked Mrs. Andrews with her
usual composure.
“Y es, that’ s the one. I think perhaps we would  l ike  to talk
to the Director , if he’ s available.”
Mrs. Andrews cast a quick glance at the white-paneled
door behind her desk.
“W ell, I’ll go and ask for you, dearie. Could I tell him what
it’ s for , though?”
Roger was opening his mouth, groping for some excuse,
when Claire stepped smoothly into the breach.
“W e’re from Oxford, actually ,” she said. “Mrs. Edgars has
applied for a study grant with the Department of Antiquities,
and she’ d given the Institute as a reference with the rest of her
credentials. So, if you wouldn’ t mind…?”
“Oh, I see,” s aid Mrs. Andrews, looking impressed.
“Oxford. Just think! I’ll ask Dr . McEwan if he can see you just
now .”As she disappeared behind the white-paneled door , pausing
for no more th an a perfunctory rap before entering, Roger
leaned down to whisper in Claire’ s ear .
“There i s no such thing as a De partment of Antiquities at
Oxford,” he hissed, “and you know it.”
“Y ou know that,” she replied demurely , “and I, as you so
cleverly point out, do too. But there are any number of people
in the world who don’ t, and we’ve just met one of them.”
The white-paneled door was beginning to open.
“Let’ s hope they’re thick on the ground hereabouts,” Roger
said, wiping his brow , “or that you’re a quick liar .”
Claire rose, smiling at the beckoning figure of Mrs.
Andrews as she spoke out of the side of her mouth.
“I? I, who read s ouls for the Kin g of France?” She brushed
down her skirt and set it swinging. “This will be pie.”
Roger b owed iro nically , gesturing toward the door . “ Aprés
vous , Madame.”
As she stepped ahead of him, he added, “Aprés vous, le
déluge,”  under his breath. Her shoulders stif fened, but she
didn’ t turn around.
 
Rather to Roger ’ s surprise, it was  pie. He wasn’ t sure
whether it was Claire’ s skill at misrepresentation, or Dr .
McEwan’ s own preoccupation, but their bona fides went
unquestioned. It  didn’ t seem to occur to the man that it was
highly unlikely for scouting parties from Oxford to penetrate
to t he wilds of Inverness to  make inquiries about the
background of a potential graduate student. But then, Roger
thought, Dr . McEwan appeared to have something on his
mind; perhaps he wasn’ t thinking as clearly as usual.
“W eeeel… yes, Mrs. Edgars unquestionably has a fine
mind. V ery fine,” the Director said, as though convincing
himself. He was a tall, spare man, with a long upper lip like a
camel’ s, which wobbled as he searched hesitantly for each
new word. “Have you… has she… that is…” He trailed of f, liptwitching, then, “Have you ever  actually met  Mrs . Ed gars?” h e
finally burst out.
“No,” said Roger , eyeing Dr . McEwan with some austerity .
“That’ s why we’re asking about her .”
“Is there anything…” Claire p aused delicately , inviting,
“that you think perhaps the committee should know , Dr .
McEwan?” She leaned forward, opening her eyes very wide.
“Y ou kn ow , inqu iries like this ar e completely  confidential. But
it’ s so important that we be full y informed; there is a position
of trust involved.” Her voice  dropped suggestively . “The
Ministry , you know .”
Roger would dearly have love d to strangle her , but Dr .
McEwan was nodding sagely , lip wobbling like mad.
“Oh, yes, dear lady . Y es, of course. The Ministry . I
completely unde rstand. Y es, yes, W ell, I… hm, perhaps – I
shouldn’ t like to mislead you in any respect, you know . And it
is a wonderful chance, no doubt…”
Now Ro ger wanted to throttle both of them. Claire must
have noticed his hands twitchi ng in his lap with irresistible
desire, for she put a firm stop to the Director ’ s maundering.
“W e’re basically interested in two things,” she said briskly ,
opening the notebook she carried and poising it on her knee as
if for reference. Pick up bottle sherry for Mrs. T , Roger read
out of the corner of one eye. Sliced ham for picnic .
“W e want to kn ow , first, your opinion of Mrs. Edgars’ s
scholarship, and secondly , y our opinion of her overall
personality . The  first we have of course evaluated ourselves” –
she made a small tick in the notebook, next to an entry that
read Change traveler ’ s cheques  – “but y ou have  a much more
substantial and detailed grasp, of course.” Dr . McEwan was
nodding away by this time, thoroughly mesmerized.
“Y es, well…” He puf fed a little , then, with a glance at the
door to make su re it was shut, leaned confidentially across his
desk. “The quality of her work – well, about that I think I can
satisfy y ou completely . I’ll show you a few things she’ s been
working on. And the other…” R oger thought he was about togo in for anoth er spot of lip-twitching and leaned forward
menacingly .
Dr . McEwan leaned back abrup tly , looking startled. “It’ s
nothing very much, really ,” he  said. “It’ s only… well, she’ s
such an intense  young lady . Perhaps her interest seems at times
a trifle… obsessive?” His voice went up questioningly . His
eyes darted from Roger to Claire, like a trapped rat’ s.
“W ould the direction of this intense interest perhaps be
focused on the standing stones? The stone circles?” Claire
suggested gently .
“Oh, it showed u p in her application materials, then?” The
Director hauled a lar ge, grubby handkerchief out of his pocket
and mopped his face with it. “Y es, that’ s it. Of course, a lot of
people g et quite  carried away with them,” he of fered. “The
romance of it, th e mystery . Look at those benighted souls out
at Stonehenge on Midsummer ’ s Day , in hoods and robes.
Chanting… all that nonsense. Not that I would compare
Gillian Edgars to…”
There w as quite a lot more of it, but Roger quit listening. It
seemed stifling in the narrow of fice, and his collar was too
tight; he could hear his heart beating, a slow , incessant
thrumping in both ears that was very irritating.
It si mply couldn’ t be!  he thou ght. Positively impossible .
T rue, Claire Randall’ s story was convincing – quite awfully
convincing. But  then, look at the ef fect she was having on this
poor old  dodderer , who wouldn’ t know scholarship if it was
served up on a plate with piccalilli relish. She could obviously
talk a tinker ou t of his pans.  Not that he, Roger , was as
susceptible as Dr . McEwan surely , but…
Beset wi th doubt and dripping with sweat, Roger paid little
attention as Dr . McEwan fetched a set of keys from his drawer
and rose  to lead them out throu gh a second door into a long
hallway studded with doors.
“Study carrels,” the Director explained. He opened one of
the d oors, revealing a cubicle so me four feet on a side, barely
big enough to c ontain a narrow table, a chair , and a small
bookshelf. On the table, neatly stacked, were a series offolders in dif ferent colors. T o the side, Roger saw a lar ge
notebook with gray covers, and  a neat hand-lettered label on
the front – MISC ELLANEOUS. For some reason, the sight of
the handwriting sent a shiver through him.
This was getting more personal by the moment. First
photographs, no w the woman’ s writings. He was assailed by a
moment’ s panic at the thought of actually meeting Geillis
Duncan. Gillian Edgars, he meant. Whoever  the woman was.
The Director was opening various folders, pointing and
explaining to Claire, who was  putting on a good show of
having some idea what he was  talking about. Roger peered
over her shoulder , nodding and saying, “Um-hm, very
interesting,” at intervals, but the slanted lines and loops of the
script were incomprehensible to him.
She wr ote this , he kept thinking. She’ s r eal. Flesh and
blood and lips and long eyelashes . An d if she goes back
through the stone, she’ll burn – crackle and blacken, with her
hair lit like a torch in the black dawn. And if she doesn’ t,
then… I don’ t exist.
He shook his head violently .
“Y ou disagree, Mr . W akefield ?” The Director of the
Institute was peering at him in puzzlement.
He shook his head again, this time in embarrassment.
“No, no. I mean… it’ s only… do you think I could have a
drink of water?”
“Of course, of c ourse! Come with me, there’ s a fountain
just roun d the corner , I’ll show you.” Dr . McEwan bustled him
out of the carrel and down the hall, expressing voluble,
disjointed concern for his state of health.
Once away from the claustrophobic confines of the carrel
and the proximity of Gillian Edgars’ s books and folders, Roger
began to  feel slightly better . St ill, the thought of going back
into that  tiny room, where all Claire’ s words about her past
seemed to echo of f the thin partitions… no. He made up his
mind. Claire could finish with  Dr . McEwan by herself. Hepassed t he carre l quickly , not loo king inside, and went through
the door that led back to the receptionist’ s desk.
Mrs. An drews stared at him as he came in, her spectacles
gleaming with concern and curiosity .
“Dear me, Mr . W akefield. Are ye not feeling just right,
then?” Roger rubbed a hand ove r his face; he must look really
ghastly . He smiled weakly at the plump little secretary .
“No, thanks very much. I just got a bit hot back there;
thought I’d step down for a little fresh air .”
“Oh, aye.” The secretary nodded understandingly . “The
radiators.” She pronounced it “raddiators.” “They get stuck on,
ye know , and won’ t turn of f. I’ d best see about it.” She rose
from her desk, w here the picture of Gillian Edgars still rested.
She glanced down at the picture, then up at Roger .
“Isn’ t that odd?” she said conversationally . “I was just
looking at this a nd wondering what it was about Mrs. Edgars’ s
face that  struck me all of a sudden. And I couldn’ t think what
it was. But she’ s quite a look of you , Mr . W akefield –
especially round the eyes. Isn’ t that a coincidence? Mr .
W akefield?” Mr s. Andrews stared in the direction of the stair ,
where the thump of Roger ’ s footsteps echoed from the wooden
risers.
“T aken a bit short, I expect,” she said kindly . “Poor lad.”
 
The sun  was still above the horizon when Claire rejoined
him on the stree t, but it was late in the day; people were going
home to their tea, and there was a feeling of general relaxation
in th e ai r – a lo oking forward to leisured peace after the long
day’ s work.
Roger h imself had no such feeli ng. He moved to open the
car door for Cla ire, conscious of such a mix of emotions that
he couldn’ t decide what to say first. She got in, glancing up at
him sympathetically .
“Rather a jar , isn’ t it?” was all she said.The fiendish maze of new one-way streets made getting
through the town center a task that demanded all his attention.
They we re well on their way be fore he could take his eyes of f
the road long enough to ask, “What next?”
Claire was leaning back in her seat, eyes closed, the
tendrils of her h air coming loose from their clip. She didn’ t
open her eyes at his question, but stretched slightly , easing
herself in the seat.
“Why don’ t you ask Brianna out for supper somewhere?”
she said . Supper? Somehow it se emed subtly wrong to stop for
supper i n the midst of a life-or -death detective endeavor , but
on the other hand, Roger w as suddenly aware that the
hollowness in his stomach wasn’ t entirely due to the
revelations of the last hour .
“W ell, all right,” he said slowly . “But then tomorrow-”
“Why wait ’ til to morrow?” Claire broke in. She was sitting
up n ow , combing out her hair .  It was thick and unruly , and
loosed swirling on her shoulde rs, Roger thought it made her
look suddenly very young. “Y o u can go talk to Greg Edgars
again after supper , can’ t you?”
“How d o you know his name is Greg?” Roger asked
curiously . “And if he wouldn’ t talk to me this afternoon, why
should he tonight?”
Claire looked at Roger as though suddenly doubting his
basic intelligence.
“I k now his na me because I saw it on a letter in his
mailbox,” she said. “As for why he’ll talk to you tonight, he’ll
talk to you because you’re go ing to take along a bottle of
whisky when you come this time.”
“And you think that will make him invite us in?”
She lifted one b row . “Did you see the collection of empty
bottles in his waste bin? Of course he will. Like a shot.” She
sat b ack, fists th rust into the poc kets of her coat, and stared out
at the passing street.
“Y ou might see if Brianna wi ll go with you,” she said
casually .“She said she isn ’ t having anything to do with this,” Roger
objected.
Claire glanced at him impatiently . The sun was setting
behind her , and it made her eyes glow amber , like a wolf ’ s.
“In that case, I suggest you don’ t tell her what you’re up
to,” she said, in a tone that made Roger remember that she was
chief of staf f at a lar ge hospital.
His ears burned, but he stubbo rnly said, “Y ou can’ t very
well hide it, if you and I-”
“Not me,” Claire interrupted. “Y ou. I have something else
to do.”
This was too much, Roger thought. He pulled the car over
without signalin g and skidded to  a stop at the side of the road.
He glared at her .
“Something else  to do, have you?” he demanded. “I like
that! Y ou’re landing me with the job of trying to entice a
drunken sot who will likely as sault me on sight, and  luring
your daughter along to watch! What, do you think she’ll be
needed to drive me to hospital after Edgars has finished
beating me over the head with a bottle?”
“No,” Claire said, ignoring his tone. “I think you and Greg
Edgars together may succeed where I couldn’ t, in convincing
Bree that Gillian Edgars is th e woman I knew as Geillis
Duncan. She won’ t listen to me.  She likely won’ t listen to you,
either , if you tr y to tell her what we found at the Institute
today . But she’ll listen to Greg E dgars.” Her tone was flat and
grim, and Roger felt his annoyance ebbing slightly . He started
the car once more, and pulled out into the stream of traf fic.
“All right, I’ll try ,” he said grudgingly , not looking at her .
“And just where are you going to be, while I do this?”
There was a small, shuf fling movement alongside as she
groped in her p ocket again. Then she drew out her hand and
opened i t. His eye caught the sil very gleam of a small object in
the darkness of her palm. A key .
“I’m going to bur gle the Institute,” she said calmly . “I want
that notebook.” 
After Claire excused herself to run her unspecified
“errand” – making Roger shudder only slightly – he and
Brianna had driven to the pub, but then decided to wait for
their supper , since the evening was unexpectedly fine. They
strolled down the narrow walk by the River Ness, and he had
for gotten his misgivings about the evening in the pleasure of
Brianna’ s company .
They t alked carefully at first, avoiding anything
controversial. Th en the chat turned to Roger ’ s work, and grew
gradually more animated.
“And how do yo u know so much about it, anyway?” Roger
demanded, breaking of f in the middle of a sentence.
“My fat her taught me,” she replied. At the word “father ,”
she stif f ened a bit, and drew back, as though expecting him to
say something. “My r eal  father ,” she added pointedly .
“W ell, he certainly knew ,” Roger replied mildly , leaving
the chal lenge strictly alone. Plenty of time for that later , my
girl, he thought cynically . But it isn’ t going to be me that
springs the trap.
Just down the st reet, Roger could see a light in the window
of th e Edgars’ s h ouse. The quarry was denned, then. He felt an
unexpected sur g e of adrenaline at the thought of the coming
confrontation.
Adrenaline lost  out to the sur ge of gastric juices that
resulted when they stepped into the pub’ s savory atmosphere,
redolent of shepherd’ s pie. C onversation was general and
friendly , with an unspoken agreement to avoid any reference
to the scene at the manse the day before. Roger had noticed the
coolness betwee n Claire and he r daughter , before he had left
her at the cab stand on their w ay to the pub. Seated side by
side in the back seat, they had reminded him of two strange
cats, ears laid f lat and tails twitching, but both avoiding the
eye-locking stare that would lead to claws and flying fur .
After din ner , Brianna fetched their coats while he paid the
bill.“What’ s that for?” she asked, noticing the bottle of whisky
in his hand. “Planning a rave-up for later on?”
“Rave-up?” he said, grinning at  her . “Y ou ar e  getting on,
aren’ t y ou? And what else h ave you picked up in your
linguistic studies?”
She cast her eyes down in exaggerated demureness.
“Oh, we ll. There’ s a dance in the States, called the Shag. I
gather I shouldn’ t ask you to do it with me here, though.”
“Not unless you mean it,” he sa id. They both laughed, but
he th ought the flush on her cheeks had deepened, and he was
conscious of a c ertain stirring at the suggestion that made him
keep his coat hung over one arm instead of putting it on.
“W ell, after enough of that  stuf f, anything’ s possible,” she
said, indicating the whisky bottle with a mildly malicious
smile. “T errible taste, though.”
“It’ s acquired, lassie,” Roger informed her , letting his
accent broaden. “Only Scots are born wi’ it. I’ll buy ye a bottle
of y our own to  practice with. This one’ s a gift, though –
something I promised to leave of f. W ant to come along, or
shall I do it later?” he asked. He didn’ t know whether he
wanted her to come or not, but felt a sur ge of happiness when
she nodded and shrugged into her own coat.
“Sure, why not?”
“Good.” He reached out and delicately turned down the
flap of her collar , so it lay flat o n her shoulder . “It’ s just down
the street – let’ s walk, shall we?”
 
The neig hborhood looked a little better at night. Some of
its s habbiness was hidden by the darkness, and the lights
glowing from windows into th e tiny front gardens gave the
street an air of coziness that it lacked during the day .
“This won’ t take a minute,” Roger told Brianna as he
pressed the buzzer . He wasn’ t sure whether to hope he was
right or not. His  first fear passed  as the door opened; someone
was home, and still conscious.Edgars had plainly spent the af ternoon in the company of
one of the bottle s lined up along the edge of the swaybacked
buf fet vi sible behind him. Luckily , he appeared not to connect
his even ing visitors with the intrusion of the afternoon. He
squinted at Roger ’ s introduction , composed on the way to the
house.
“Gilly’ s cousin? I didn’ know she had a cousin.”
“W ell, she has,” said Roger , boldly taking advantage of
this adm ission. “I’m him.” He would deal with Gillian herself
when he saw her . If he saw her .
Edgars blinked once or twice, th en rubbed an inflamed eye
with one fist, as  though to get a better look at them. His eyes
focused with some dif ficulty on  Brianna, hovering dif fidently
behind Roger .
“Who’ s that?” he demanded.
“Er… my girlfriend,” Roger improvised. Brianna
narrowed her eyes at him, but said nothing. Plainly she was
beginning to smell a rat, but went ahead of him without protest
as Greg Edgars swung the door wider to admit them.
The flat was small and stuf fy , overfurnished with
secondhand furniture. The air reeked of stale cigarettes and
insuf ficiently taken-out garbage, and the remnants of take-
away meals were scattered hee dlessly over every horizontal
surface in the room. Brianna ga ve Roger a sidelong look that
said Nice r elatives you have , and he shrugged slightly . Not my
fault . T he woman of  the house was  plainly not at home, and
hadn’ t been for some time.
Or not in the physical sense, at least. T urning to take the
chair Edgars of fered him, Roger came face-to-face with a lar ge
studio photograph, framed in brass, standing in the center of
the tiny  mantelpiece. He bit h is tongue to stifle a startled
exclamation.
The wom an seemed to be looking out of the photograph
into his face, a slight smile bar ely creasing the corner of her
mouth. W ings of platinum-fair hair fell thick and glossy pasther shoulders, framing a perfect heart-shaped face. Eyes deep
green as winter moss glowed under thick, dark lashes.
“Good likeness, i’n’ t?” Greg Edgars looked at the photo,
his expression one of mingled hostility and longing.
“Er , yes . Just like her .” Roger felt a little breathless, and
turned to remove a crumpled fish-and-chips paper from his
chair . Brianna was staring at t he portrait with interest. She
glanced from the photo to Rog er and back, clearly drawing
comparisons. Cousins, was it?
“I ta ke it Gillian ’ s not here?” Roger started to wave away
the bottl e Edgars had tilted inquiringly in his direction, then
changed his mind and nodded. Perhaps a shared drink would
gain Edgars’ s confidence. If Gil lian wasn’ t here, he needed to
find out where she was.
Occupied in removing the excise seal with his teeth,
Edgars shook his head, then del icately plucked the bit of wax
and paper of f his lower lip.
“Not ha rdly , mate. ’S not quite so much a slum as this
when she’ s here.” A sweeping g esture took in the overflowing
ashtrays and tumbled paper drinks cups. “Close, maybe, but
not quite this bad.” He took down three wineglasses from the
china cupboard, peering dubiously into each one, as though
checking for dust.
He pour ed the whisky with the exaggerated care of the
very dru nk, taking the glasses one by one across the room to
his g uests. Brianna accepted hers with equal care, but declined
a chair , instead leaning gracefu lly against the corner of the
china cabinet.
Edgars plumped at last onto the rump-sprung sofa,
ignoring the debris, and raised his glass.
“Cheers, mate,”  he said briefly , and took a long, slurping
gulp. “W otcher say yer name is?” he demanded, emer ging
abruptly from his immersion. “Oh, Roger , right. Gilly never
mentioned ye… but then, she wouldn’,” he added moodily .
“Never knew nothin’ about her family , and she wasn’ sayin’.
Think she was ashamed of ’em all… but you don’ t look such anelly ,” h e said, generously . “Y er lass is a looker , at least. A ye,
that sou nds righ t, eh? ‘Y er lass is a looker , at least!’ Hear ’at,
eh?” He laughed uproariously , spraying whisky droplets.
“Y eah,” said Roger . “Thanks.” He took a small sip of his
drink. Brianna, of fended, turned her back on Edgars and
af fected to be examining the contents of the china closet
through the bevel-cut glass doors.
There seemed no point in beati ng around the bush, Roger
decided. Edgars wouldn’ t recognize subtlety if it bit him on
the bum  at this point, and there seemed a substantial danger
that he might pass out soon, at the rate he was going.
“D’you know where Gillian is?” he asked bluntly . Every
time he said her name, it felt strange on his tongue. This time,
he could n’ t help glancing up at the mantelpiece, where the
photo smiled serenely on the debauch below .
Edgars s hook his head, swinging it slowly back and forth
over his glass l ike an ox over  a corncrib. He was a short,
heavyset man, about Roger ’ s age, perhaps, but looking older
because of the heavy growth of unshaved beard and disheveled
black hair .
“Nah,” he said. “Thought maybe you knew . It’ll be the
Nats or the Roses, likely , but I ’ve no kep’ up. I couldny say
who, specially .”
“Nats?” Roger ’ s  heart began to speed up. “Y ou mean the
Scottish Nationalists?”
Edgars’ s eyelids were beginning to droop, but they blinked
open once more.
“Oh, aye. Bloody Nats. ’S where I met Gilly , aye?”
“When was this, Mr . Edgars?”
Roger lo oked up in surprise at the soft voice from above. It
wasn’ t the photograph that had spoken, though, but Brianna,
looking intently down at Greg Edgars. Roger couldn’ t tell
whether she was merely making conversation, or if she
suspected something. Her face showed nothing beyond polite
interest.“Dunno… mayb e two, three ye ars gone. Fun at first, hm?
T oss the  bloody English out, joi n the Common Market on our
own… beer in the pub and a cuddle i’ the back of the van
comin’ home from rallies. Mmm.” Edgars shook his head
again, dreamy-eyed at the vision. Then the smile faded from
his face, and he frowned into his drink. “That’ s before she
went potty .”
“Potty?” Roger took another quick glance at the photo.
Intense, yes. She looked that. B ut not barking mad, surely . Or
could you tell, from a photo?
“A ye. Society o’ the White Rose . Charlie’ s m’ darlin’. W ill
ye n o co me back  again, and all that rot. Lot of jimmies dressed
up in kilts and f ull rig, wi’ swords and all. All right if ye like
it, o’ course,” he added, with a cockeyed attempt at objectivity .
“But Gi lly’d alw ays take a thin g too far . On and on about the
Bonnie P rince, a nd wouldn’ it b e a thing if he’d won the ’45?
Blokes in the kitchen ’ til all hours, drinking up the beer and
ar guing why he hadn’ t. In the G aelic, too.” He rolled his eyes.
“Load o ’ rubbish.” He drained his glass to emphasize this
opinion.
Roger could feel Brianna’ s eyes  boring into the side of his
neck like gimlets. He pulled at his collar to loosen it, though
he wasn’ t wearing a tie and his collar button was undone.
“I don’ t suppose your wife’ s also interested in standing
stones, i s she, Mr . Edgars?” Brianna wasn’ t bothering a lot
with the  polite interest anymore; her voice was sharp enough
to cut cheese. The ef fect was lar gely wasted on Edgars.
“Stones?” He seemed fuddled, and stuck a forefinger into
one ear , screwing it in industr iously , as though in hopes of
improving his hearing.
“The pr ehistoric stone circles. Like the Clava Cairns,”
Roger of fered, naming one of the more famous local
landmarks. In for a penny , in fo r a pound, he thought, with a
mental s igh of resignation. Brian na was plainly never going to
speak to him again, so he might as well find out what he could.
“Oh, those.” Edgars uttered a sh ort laugh. “A ye, and every
other bit  o’ auld rubbish ye coul d name. That’ s the last bit, andthe wors t. Down at that Instite wt day an’ night, spendin’ all
my m oney on co urses… courses! Make a cat laugh, ay? Fairy
tales, they teach ’em there. Y e’ ll learn nothin’ useful in that
place, lass, I told her . Whyna learn to type? Get a job, if she’ s
bored. ’S  what I tell’ t her . So she left,” he said morosely . “Not
seen her in two weeks.” He stared into his wineglass as though
surprised to find it empty .
“Have another?” he of fered, reaching for the bottle, but
Brianna shook her head decidedly .
“Thanks, no. W e have to be going. Don’ t  we, Roger?”
Seeing t he dangerous glint in h er eye, Roger wasn’ t at all
sure tha t he wouldn’ t be better of f staying to split the rest of
the b ottle with G reg Edgars. Still, it was a long walk home, if
he let Brianna take the car . He  rose with a sigh, and shook
Edgars’ s hand in farewell. It was warm and surprisingly firm
in its grip, if a trifle moist.
Edgars followed them to the door , clutching the bottle by
the neck . He peered after them through the screen, suddenly
calling d own the  walk, “If ye see Gilly , tell her to come home,
eh?”
Roger tu rned and waved at the blurry figure in the lighted
rectangle of the door .
“I’ll try ,” he called, the words sticking in his throat.
They made it to the walk and h alf down the street toward
the pub before she rounded on him.
“What in bloody hell are you up to?” she said. She
sounded angry , but not hysterical. “Y ou told me you haven’ t
any family in th e Highlands, so what’ s all this about cousins?
Who is that woman in the picture?”
He looked round the darkened street for inspiration, but
there was no hel p for it. He took a deep breath and took her by
the arm.
“Geillis Duncan,” he said.
She stopped stock-still, and the  shock of it jarred up his
own arm. W ith great deliberation, she detached her elbowfrom his  grip. The delicate tissue of the evening had torn down
the middle.
“Don’ t… touch… me,” she said through her teeth. “Is this
something Mother thought up?”
Despite his resolve to be understanding, Roger felt himself
growing angry in return.
“Look,” he said, “can you not think of anyone but yourself
in th is? I know it’ s been a shoc k to you – God, how could it
not be? And if you cannot bring yourself even to think about
it… well, I’ll not push you to it. But there’ s your mother to
consider . And there’ s me, as well.”
“Y ou? W hat hav e you got to do with it?” It was too dark to
see her face, but the surprise in her voice was evident.
He h ad not mea nt to complicate matters further by telling
her o f his involvement, but it was clearly too late for keeping
secrets. And no doubt Claire had seen that, when she
suggested his taking Brianna out this evening.
In a  flash of revelation, he realized for the first time just
what Cla ire had meant. She did have one means of proving her
story to Brianna, beyond question. She had Gillian Edgars,
who had – perhaps – not yet vanished to meet her fate as
Geillis D uncan, tied to a flaming  stake beneath the rowan trees
of Leoc h. The most stubborn cynic would be convinced, he
supposed, by the sight of someone disappearing into the past
before th eir eyes. No wonder Cl aire had wanted to find Gillian
Edgars.
In a  few words,  he told Brianna his relationship with the
would-be witch of Cranesmuir .
“And so it look s like being my life or hers,” he ended,
shrugging, hideously conscious of how ridiculously
melodramatic it sounded. “Clair e – your mother – she left it to
me. But I thought I had to find her , at the least.”
Brianna had stopped walking t o listen to him. The dim
light from a corner shop caught the gleam of her eyes as she
stared at him.“Y ou be lieve it, then?” she asked. There was no incredulity
or scorn in her voice; she was altogether serious.
He sighed and reached for her arm again. She didn’ t resist,
but fell into step beside him.
“Y es,” he said. “I had to. Y ou  didn’ t see your mother ’ s
face, when she s aw the words written inside her ring. That was
real – real enough to break my heart.”
“Y ou’d better tell me,” she sa id, after a short silence.
“What words?”
By t he time he had finished the story , they had reached the
car -park behind the pub.
“W ell…” Brian na said hesitantly . “If…” She stopped
again, looking into his eyes. She was standing near enough for
him to feel the warmth of her br easts, close to his chest, but he
didn’ t reach for her . The kirk of St. Kilda was a long way of f,
and neither of th em wanted to remember the grave beneath the
yew tree s, where the names o f her parents were written in
stone.
“I don’ t  know , Roger ,” she said, shaking her head. The
neon sign over the pub’ s back d oor made purple glints in her
hair . “I just can’ t… I can’ t thin k about it yet. But…” W ords
failed he r , but she lifted a hand and touched his cheek, light as
the brush of the evening wind. “I’ll think of you,” she
whispered.
 
When you come right down to it, committing bur glary
with a key is not really a dif ficu lt proposition. The chance that
either M rs. Andrews or Dr . McE wan was going to come back
and cop me in the act were va nishingly small. Even if they
had, all I would  have to do is s ay that I’d come back to look
for a lost pocketbook, and found the door open. I was out of
practice, but deception had at on e point been second nature to
me. L ying was like riding a bicycle, I thought; you don’ t for get
how .
So it wasn’ t th e act of getting  hold of Gillian Edgars’ s
notebook that made my heart race and my breath sound loud inmy own ears. It was the book itself.
As M aster Raymond had told m e in Paris, the power and
the d anger of m agic lie in the people who believe it. From the
glimpse I had had of the contents earlier , the actual
information written in this cardboard notebook was an
extraordinary m ishmash of fact, speculation, and flat-out
fantasy that could be of import ance only to the writer . But I
felt an almost ph ysical revulsion at touching it. Knowing who
had written it, I knew it for wh at it likely was: a grimoire, a
magician’ s book of secrets.
Still, if there existed any clue to Geillis Duncan’ s
whereabouts and intentions, it would be here. Suppressing a
shudder at the t ouch of the slic k cover , I tucked it under my
coat, ho lding it in place with m y elbow for the trip down the
stairs.
Safely o ut on the street, still I kept the book under my
elbow , the cover growing clammy with perspiration as I
walked. I felt as  though I were transporting a bomb, something
which must be handled with scrupulous carefulness, in order
to prevent an explosion.
I walke d for some time, finally turning into the front
garden of a sm all Italian restaurant with a terrace near the
river . Th e night was chilly , but a small electric fire made the
terrace tables warm enough for use; I chose one and ordered a
glass of  Chianti. I sipped at it for some time, the notebook
lying on the pap er placemat in front of me, in the concealing
shadow of a basket of garlic bread.
It was late April. Only a few days until May Day – the
Feast of Beltane. That was when I had made my own
impromptu voyage into the past. I supposed it was possible
that there was s omething about the date – or just the general
time of year? It had been mid-April when I returned – that
made that eerie passage possible. Or maybe not; maybe the
time of year had nothing to do with it. I ordered another glass
of wine.
It co uld be tha t only certain people had the ability to
penetrate a barrier that was solid  to everyone else – somethingin the genetic m akeup? Who knew? Jamie had not been able to
enter it, though I could. And G eillis Duncan obviously had –
or would. Or wouldn’ t, depending. I thought of young Roger
W akefield, and felt mildly queasy . I thought perhaps I had
better have some food to go with the wine.
The visi t to the Institute had convinced me that wherever
Gillian/Geillis w as, she had n ot yet made her own fateful
passage. Anyone who had studied the legends of the
Highlands would know that the Feast of Beltane was
approaching; surely anyone planning such an expedition
would u ndertake it then? But I had no idea where she might
be, i f she wasn’ t  at home; in hiding? Performing some peculiar
rite of preparation, picked up from Fiona’ s group of neo-
Druids? The notebook might hold a clue, but God only knew .
God only also knew what my own motives were in this; I
had thought I d id, but was no longer sure. Had I involved
Roger in the search for Geillis because it seemed the only way
of c onvincing Brianna? And y et – even if we found her in
time, m y own purpose would be served only if Gillian
succeeded in going back. And thus, in dying by fire.
When Geillis Duncan had been condemned as a witch,
Jamie ha d said to me, “Dinna grieve for her , Sassenach; she’ s
a wi cked woman.” And whether  she had been wicked or mad,
it ha d m ade littl e dif ference at t he time. Should I not have left
well enough alone, and left her to find her own fate? Still, I
thought, she had once saved my life. In spite of what she was –
would be – did I owe it to her to try to save her life? And thus
perhaps doom Roger? What right did I have to meddle any
further?
It isna a matter of right, Sassenach , I heard Jamie’ s voice
saying, with a tinge of impatience. It’ s a question o f duty . Of
honor .
“Honor , is it?” I said aloud. “And what’ s that?” The waiter
with my plate of tortellini Portofino looked startled.
“Eh?” he said.
“Never mind,” I said, too distra cted to care much what he
thought of me. “Perhaps you’d  better bring the rest of thebottle.”
I finished my meal surrounded by ghosts. Finally , fortified
by food and win e, I pushed my empty plate aside, and opened
Gillian Edgars’ s gray notebook.4 9  B L E S S E D  A R E  T H O S E …
T here’ s no place d arker than a Highland road in the middle
of a moonless ni ght. I could see the flash of passing headlights
now and then, silhouetting Roger ’ s head and shoulders in a
sudden flare of light. They wer e hunched forward, as though
in de fense against oncoming danger . Bree sat hunched as well,
curled in to the corner of the sea t beside me. W e were all three
self-contained, insulated from each other , sealed in small,
individual pocke ts of silence, inside the lar ger silence of the
car and its rushing flight.
My fists curled i n the pockets of  my coat, idly scooping up
coins an d small bits of debris; s hredded tissue, a pencil stub, a
tiny rubber ball left on the fl oor of my of fice by a small
patient. My thumb circled and id entified the milled edge of an
American quarter , the broad embossed face of an English
penny , and the serrated edge of a key – the key to Gillian
Edgars’ s carrel, which I had neglected to return to the Institute.
I had tried again to call Greg Edgars, just before we left the
old manse. The phone had ru ng again and again without
answer .
I s tared at the dark glass of the window beside me, seeing
neither m y own faint reflection nor the massy shapes of stone
walls and scattered trees that rushed by in the night. Instead, I
saw the row of b ooks, arranged on the carrel’ s single shelf in a
line as neat as a row of apoth ecary’ s jars. And below , the
notebook filled with fine cursi ve script, laying out in strict
order conclusio n and delusion, mingling myth and science,
drawing from learned men and legends, all of it based on the
power of dreams. T o any casual observer , it could be either a
muddle of half-thought-out nonsense or , at best, the outline for
a clever -silly novel. Only to me did it have the look of a
careful, deliberate plan.
In a paro dy of the scientific method, the first section of the
book w as title d “Observatio ns.” It contained disjointed
references, tidy drawings, and ca refully numbered tables. “Theposition of sun and moon on the Feast of Beltane” was one,
with a list of m ore than two hundred paired figures laid out
beneath. Similar tables existed for Hogmanay and
Midsummer ’ s Day , and another for Samhainn, the Feast of All
Hallows. The ancient feasts of f ire and sun, and Beltane’ s sun
would rise tomorrow .
The central section of the notebook was titled
“Speculations.” That was accurate, at least, I reflected wryly .
One pag e had borne this entry ,  in neat, slanting script: “The
Druids burnt sacrificial victims in wicker cages shaped like
men, but individuals were killed  by strangling, and the throat
slit t o dr ain the body of blood. W as it fire or blood that was the
necessary eleme nt?” The coldblooded curiosity of the question
brought Geillis Duncan’ s face before me clearly – not the
wide-eyed, strai ght-haired stude nt whose portrait adorned the
Institute, but the secretive, half-smiling fiscal’ s wife, ten years
older , ve rsed in the uses of drug s and the body , who lured men
to her purposes, and killed without passion to achieve her
ends.
And the  last few pages of the book, neatly labeled
“Conclusions,” which had led us to this dark journey , on the
eve of the Feast of Beltane. I curled my fingers around the key ,
wishing with all my heart that Greg Edgars had answered his
phone.
 
Roger s lowed, t urning onto the bumpy dirt lane that led
past the base of the hill called Craigh na Dun.
“I don’ t  see anything,” he said . He hadn’ t spoken in so
long that the statement came out gruf fly , sounding belligerent.
“W ell, of course not,” Brianna said impatiently . “Y ou can’ t
see the stone circle from here.”
Roger grunted in reply , and s lowed the car still more.
Obviously , Brianna’ s nerves were stretched, but so were his
own. Only Claire seemed calm,  unaf fected by the growing air
of tension in the car .
“She’ s here,” Claire said suddenly . Roger slammed on the
brakes so abruptly that both Cl aire and her daughter pitchedforward, thumping into the back of the seat in front of them.
“Be car eful, you idiot!” Brianna snapped furiously at
Roger . She shoved a hand throu gh her hair , pushing it of f her
face with a quick, nervous gesture. A swallow ran visibly
down her throat as she bent to peer through the dark window .
“Where?” she said.
Claire nodded ahead to the right, keeping her hands shoved
deep into her pockets.
“There’ s a car parked, just behind that thicket.”
Roger licked his lips and reached for the door handle.
“It’ s Edgars’ s car . I’ll go and look; you stay here.”
Brianna flung her door open w ith a squeal of metal from
the unoi led hinges. Her silent lo ok of scorn made Roger flush
red in the dim glow of the dome light overhead.
She was  back almost before Ro ger had gotten out of the
car himself.
“No one  there,” she reported. She glanced up at the top of
the hill. “Do you think…?”
Claire fi nished buttoning up her coat, and stepped into the
darkness without answering her daughter ’ s question.
“The path is this way ,” she said.
She led the way , perforce, and Roger , watching the pale
form dr ift ghostlike up the hil l ahead of him, was forcibly
reminded of that earlier trip up a steep hill, to St. Kilda’ s
kirkyard. So was Brianna; she hesitated and he heard her
mutter s omething angrily under her breath, but then her hand
reached for his e lbow , and gave it a hard squeeze – whether as
encouragement or as a plea for support, he couldn’ t tell. It
encouraged him , in any  case, and he patted the hand and
tugged i t throug h the curve of his arm. In spite of his general
doubts, and the undeniable eeriness of the whole expedition,
he felt a sense of excitement as they approached the crest of
the hill.It w as a clear night, moonless and very dark, with no more
than the tiny gle ams of mica flecks in the starlight serving to
distinguish the looming stones of the ancient circle from the
night aro und them. The trio pau sed on the gently rounded top
of the hill, hudd ling together like a misplaced flock of sheep.
Roger ’ s own breath sounded unnaturally loud to himself.
“This,” said Brianna through her teeth, “is silly !”
“No, it isn’ t,” said Roger . He felt suddenly breathless, as
though a constricting band had s queezed the air from his chest.
“There’ s a light over there.”
It w as barely there – no more th an a flicker that promptly
disappeared – but she saw it. He  heard the sharp intake of her
breath.
Now what? Roger wondered. Ought they to shout? Or
would the noise of visitors frighten their quarry into precipitate
action? And if so, what action might that be?
He s aw Claire sh ake her head suddenly , as though trying to
dismiss a buzzing insect. She took a step back, away from the
nearest stone, and blundered into him.
He grabbed her by the arm, murmuring, “Steady , steady
there,” a s one might to a horse. Her face was a dim blur in the
starlight, but he could feel the q uiver that ran through her , like
electricity through a wire. He s tood frozen, holding her arm,
stif f with indecision.
It w as the sudd en stink of petrol that jerked him into
motion. He was vaguely consci ous of Brianna, head flung up
as th e smell me t her nostrils, turning toward the north end of
the circle, and then he had dr opped Claire’ s arm, and was
through the surrounding bushes and the stones themselves,
striding toward the center of the  ring, where a hunched black
figure made an inkblot on the lighter darkness of the grass.
Claire’ s voice came from behind him, strong and ur gent,
shattering the silence.
“Gillian!” she called.
There was a soft, sudden whoo sh, and the night lit up in
brilliance. Dazzled, Roger fell back a pace, stumbling anddropping to his knees.
For a moment, there was noth ing but the sharp pain of
light on his re tinas, and the blaze of brightness that hid
everything behi nd it. He heard a cry beside him, and felt
Brianna’ s hand on his shoulder . He blinked hard, eyes
streaming, and sight began to return.
The slim figure stood between them and the fire,
silhouetted like an hour glass. A s his sight cleared, he realized
that she was dressed in a long, f ull skirt and tight bodice – the
clothes o f anoth er time. She had  turned at the call, and he had
a bri ef impression of wide eyes and fair , flying hair , lifted and
tossed in the hot wind of the fire.
He foun d time, struggling to hi s feet, to wonder how she
had dragged a log of that size up here. Then the smell of
burned h air and  crackled skin h it his face like a blow , and he
remembered. Greg Edgars was not at home tonight. Not
knowing whethe r blood or fire was the necessary element, she
had chosen both.
He p ushed past Brianna, focuse d only on the tall, slim girl
before h im, and the image of a face that mirrored his own. She
saw him coming, turned and r an like the wind for the cleft
stone at the end of the circle. She had a knapsack of rough
canvas, slung over one should er; he heard her grunt as it
swung heavily and struck her in the side.
She pau sed for an instant, hand outstretched to the rock,
and look ed back. He could have sworn that her eyes rested on
him, me t his own and held them, beyond the barrier of the
fire’ s bl aze. He opened his mo uth in a wordless shout. She
whirled then, light as a dancing spark, and vanished in the cleft
of the rock.
The fire, the body , the night itself, disappeared abruptly in
a sh riek of blinding noise. Rog er found himself facedown in
the gras s, clutch ing at the earth  in frantic search of a familiar
sensation to which to anchor hi s sanity . The search was vain;
none of his senses seemed to function – even the touch of the
ground was insubstantial, amorphous as though he lay on
quicksand, not granite.Blinded by whiteness, deafened by the scream of rending
stone, he groped, flailing wildly , out of touch with his own
extremities, cons cious only of an immense pull and the need to
resist it.
There w as no sense of time passing; it felt as though he
had been struggling in emptiness forever , when he at last
became aware of something outside himself. Hands that
gripped his arms with desperate strength, and the smothering
softness of breasts thrust against his face.
Hearing began gradually to retur n, and with it the sound of
a voice calling his name. Calling him  names, in fact, panting
between phrases.
“Y ou idi ot! Y ou… jerk! W ake up , Roger , you… ass!” Her
voice was muf fled, but the sense of it reached him clearly .
W ith a superhum an ef fort, he reached up and got hold of her
wrists. He rolled, feeling ponderous as the start of an
avalanche, and found himself blinking stupidly at the tear -
streaked face of Brianna Randall, eyes dark as caves in the
dying light of the fire.
The smell of petrol and roasting flesh was overwhelming.
He turne d aside and gagged, retching heavily into the damp
grass. He was to o occupied even to be grateful that his sense
of smell had returned.
He w iped his mouth on his sleeve and groped unsteadily
for Brianna’ s arm. She was huddled into herself, shaking.
“Oh, Go d,” she said. “Oh, God. I didn’ t think I could stop
you. Y ou were crawling straight to it. Oh, God.”
She didn’ t resist as he pulled h er to him, but neither did
she respond to him. She mere ly went on shaking, the tears
running from wide, empty eyes, repeating “Oh, God,” at
intervals, like a broken record.
“Hush,” he said, patting her . “I t will be all right. Hush.”
The spin ning sensation in his he ad was easing, though he still
felt as though he had been s plit into several pieces and
scattered violently among the points of the compass.There was a fain t, crackling pop  from the darkening object
on the ground, but beyond that and Brianna’ s mechanical
ejaculations, the  stillness of the night was returning. He put his
hands to  his ears, as though to  still the echoes of the killing
noise.
“Y ou heard it, to o?” he asked. Brianna went on crying, but
nodded her head, jerky as a puppet.
“Did your -” he began, still laboriously assembling his
thoughts piecem eal, then snapped upright as one came to him
full-formed.
“Y our m other!” he exclaimed, gripping Brianna hard by
both arms. “Claire! Where is she?”
Brianna’ s mouth dropped open in shock, and she
scrambled to her feet, wildly scanning the confines of the
empty circle, where the man-high stones loomed stark, half-
seen in the shadows of the dying fire.
“Mother!” she screamed. “Mother , wher e ar e you ?”
 
“It’ s all right,” Roger said, trying to sound authoritatively
reassuring. “She’ll be all right now .”
In tr uth, he had no idea whether Claire Randall would ever
be all right. She  was alive, at least, and that was all he could
vouch for .
They had found her , senseless in  the grass near the edge of
the circle, white as the rising moon above, with nothing but the
slow , da rk seep of blood from he r abraded palms to testify that
her h eart still be at. Of the hellis h journey down the path to the
car , her dead weight slung across his shoulder , bumping
awkwardly as stones rolled und er his feet and twigs snatched
at his clothing, he preferred to remember nothing.
The trip down the cursed hill had exhausted him; it was
Brianna, the bones of her face stark with concentration, who
had driven them back to the m anse, hands clamped to the
wheel like vises. Slumped in th e seat beside her , Roger had
seen in the rear view mirror the last faint glow of the hilltopbehind t hem, where a small, lum inous cloud floated like a puf f
of cannon smoke, mute evidence of battle past.
Brianna hovered  now over the sofa where her mother lay ,
motionless as a tomb figure on a sarcophagus. W ith a shudder ,
Roger had avoided the hearth  where the banked fire lay
sleeping, and had instead pulled  up the small electric fire with
which th e Reverend had warmed his feet on winter nights. Its
bars glo wed orange and hot, and it made a loud, friendly
whirring noise that covered the silence in the study .
Roger sat on a low stool beside the sofa, feeling limp and
starchless. W ith the last remnants of resolve, he reached
toward the telephone table, his hand hovering a few inches
above the instrument.
“Should we-” He had to stop to  clear his throat. “Should
we… call a doctor? The police?”
“No.” Brianna’ s  voice was inten t, almost absentminded, as
she bent over t he still figure on the couch. “She’ s coming
around.”
The domed eyelids stirred, tightened briefly in the
returning memory of pain, then relaxed and opened. Her eyes
were clear and s oft as honey . Th ey drifted to and fro, skimmed
over Brianna, standing tall and stif f at his side, and fixed on
Roger ’ s face.
Claire’ s lips were bloodless as t he rest of her face; it took
more than one try to get the words out, in a hoarse whisper .
“Did she… go back?”
Her fingers were twisted in the  fabric of her skirt, and he
saw the faint, d ark smear of blood they left behind. His own
hands clutched instinctively on his knees, palms tingling. She
had held on, too , then, grappling among the grass and gravel
for any small hold against the engulfment of the past. He
closed his eyes against the memory of that pulling rupture,
nodding.
“Y es,” he said. “She went.”
The clear eyes w ent at once to her daughter ’ s face, brows
above them arched as though in  question. But it was Briannawho asked.
“It was true, then?” she asked hesitantly . “Everything was
true?”
Roger felt the small shudder t hat ran through the girl’ s
body , an d without thinking about it, reached up to take her
hand. He winced involuntarily as she squeezed it, and
suddenly in memory heard one of the Reverend’ s texts:
“Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed.”
And tho se who must  see, in order to believe? The ef fects of
belief w rought b y seeing trembled fearful at his side, terrified
at what else must now be believed.
Even as the girl tightened, bracing herself to meet a truth
she had already seen, the lines of Claire’ s tensed body on the
sofa relaxed. The pale lips curved in the shadow of a smile,
and a look of profound peace  smoothed the strained white
face, and settled glowing in the golden eyes.
“It’ s tru e,” she said. A tinge of color came back into the
pallid c heeks. “W ould your mother lie to you?” And she
closed her eyes once more.
 
Roger reached down to switch of f the electric fire. The
night was cold, but he could stay no longer in the study , his
temporary sanct uary . He still fel t groggy , but he couldn’ t delay
longer . The decision had to be made.
It had been dawn before the police and the doctor had
finished their work the night before, filling in their forms,
taking s tatements and vital signs, doing their best to explain
away the truth. “Blessed are t hey who have not seen,” he
thought again, devoutly , “but w ho have believed.” Especially
in this case.
Finally , they had left, with their forms and badges and cars
with flashing lights, to oversee the removal of Greg Edgars’ s
body from the ri ng of stone, to issue a warrant for the arrest of
his wife, who, having lured her husband to his death, had fled
the scene. T o put it mildly , Roger thought dazedly .Exhausted in mind and body , Roger had left the Randalls
to the care of th e doctor and Fiona, and had gone to bed, not
bothering to undress or turn back the quilts, merely collapsing
into a welcome oblivion. Roused near sunset by gnawing
hunger , he had stumbled downstairs to find his guests,
similarly silent, if less disheveled, helping Fiona with the
preparation of supper .
It ha d been a quiet meal. The atmosphere was not strained;
it was as though  communication ran unseen among the people
at the table. Bria nna sat close to  her mother , touching her now
and then in the passing of food, as though to reassure herself
of her presence.  She had glanced occasionally at Roger , shy
small looks from beneath her lashes, but didn’ t talk to him.
Claire sa id little, and ate almost  nothing, but sat quite still,
quiet and peaceful as a loch in  the sun, her thoughts turned
inward. After dinner , she had excused herself and gone to sit
in th e deep wi ndow seat at the end of the hall, pleading
tiredness. Brianna had cast a quick glance at her mother ,
silhouetted in the last glow of the fading sun as she faced the
window , and gone to help Fiona in the kitchen with the dishes.
Roger h ad gone to the study , Fiona’ s good meal heavy in his
stomach, to think.
T wo hou rs later , he was still thinking, to remarkably little
ef fect. B ooks were stacked untidily on the desk and table, left
half-open on the seats of chairs and the back of the sofa, and
gaping holes in the crowded boo kshelves testified to the ef fort
of his haphazard research.
It had taken some time, but he had found it – the short
passage he remembered from his earlier search on Claire
Randall’ s behalf. Those results had brought her comfort and
peace; this wouldn’ t – if he told  her . And if he were right? But
he must be; it ac counted for that misplaced grave, so far from
Culloden.
He r ubbed a han d over his face,  and felt the rasp of beard.
Not surprising that he had fo r gotten to shave, what with
everything. Wh en he closed h is eyes, he could still smell
smoke a nd bloo d; see the blaze  of fire on dark rock, and the
strands of fair h air , flying just beyond the reach of his fingers.He shuddered at the memory ,  and felt a sudden sur ge of
resentment. Claire had destroyed his own peace of mind; did
he owe her any less? And Brianna – if she knew the truth now ,
should she not know all of it?
Claire w as still there at the end of the hall; feet curled
under her on the window seat, staring out at the blank black
stretch of the night-filled glass.
“Claire?” His voice felt scratchy from disuse, and he
cleared his throat and tried again . “Claire? I… have something
to tell you.”
She turned and looked up at him, no more than the faintest
curiosity visible  on her features. She wore a look of calm, the
look of one who  has borne terror , despair , and mourning, and
the d esperate burden of survival  – and has endured. Looking at
her , he felt suddenly that he couldn’ t do it.
But she had told the truth; he must do likewise.
“I found something.” He raised the book in a brief, futile
gesture. “About … Jamie.” Speaking that name aloud seemed
to brace him, as though the big Scot himself had been conjured
by his calling, to stand solid a nd unmoving in the hallway ,
between his wife and Roger . Roger took a deep breath in
preparation.
“What is it?”
“The last thing he meant to do. I think… I think he failed.”
Her face paled s uddenly , and she glanced wide-eyed at the
book.
“His men? But I thought you found-”
“I did,” Roger interrupted. “No, I’m fairly sure he
succeeded in that. He got the m en of Lallybroch out; he saved
them from Culloden, and set them on the road home.”
“But then…”
“He meant to turn back – back to the battle – and I think he
did that, too.” He was increasingly reluctant, but it had to be
said. Fin ding no  words of his own, he flipped the book open,
and read aloud: 
“After the final battle at Cu lloden, eighteen Jacobite
officers, all wounded, took r efug e in the old house and for two
days, their wounds untended, la y in pain; then they wer e taken
out to be shot. One of them, a F raser of the Master of Lovat’ s
r egiment, escaped the slaughter; the others wer e buried at the
edge of the domestic park.”
 
“One man, a Fraser of the Master of Lovat’ s r egiment,
escaped…”  Roger repeated softly . He looked up from the stark
page to see her e yes, wide and u nseeing as a deer ’ s fixed in the
headlights of an oncoming car .
“He meant to die on Culloden Field,” Roger whispered.
“But he didn’ t.”A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
The author ’ s thanks and best wishes to:
the three Jackies (Jackie Cantor , Jackie LeDonne, and my
mother), guardian angels of my books; the four Johns (John
Myers, John E. Simpson, Jr ., Jo hn W oram, and John Stith) for
Constant Read ership, Scottish miscellanea, and general
enthusiasm; Jan et McConnaughey , Mar garet J. Campbell,
T odd Heimarck, Deb and Dennis Parisek, Holly Heinel, and
all th e o ther LitF orumites who do not begin with the letter J –
especially Robe rt Rif fle, for plantago, French epithets, ebony
keyboards, and his ever -discerning eye; Paul Solyn, for belated
nasturtiums, waltzes, copperplate handwriting, and botanical
advice; Mar garet Ball, for references, useful suggestions, and
great conversation; Fay Zachary , for lunch; Dr . Gary Hof f, for
medical advice and consultation  (he had nothing to do with the
descriptions of how to disembowel someone); the poet Barry
Fogden, for translations from the English; Labhriunn MacIan,
for Gaelic imprecations and the generous use of his most
poetic n ame; Ka thy Allen-W ebber , for general assistance with
the French (if anything is still  in the wrong tense, it’ s my
fault); V onda N. McIntyre, fo r sharing tricks of the trade;
Michael Lee W est, for wonderful comments on the text, and
the s ort of phone  conversations that make my family yell, “Get
of f the phone! W e’re starving!”; Michael Lee’ s mother , for
reading the manuscript, looking up periodically to ask her
critically acclaimed daughter , “Why don’ t you write
something like this?”; and El izabeth Buchan, for queries,
suggestions, and  advice – the ef fort involved was nearly as
enormous as the help provided.