P A R T  O N E
O  B r a v e  N e w  W o r l d1
A  H A N G I N G  I N  E D E N
Charleston, June 1767
I  heard the drums long before the y came in sight. The beating
echoed i n the pit of my stomach , as though I too were hollow .
The soun d traveled through the crowd, a harsh military rhythm
meant to be heard over speech or gunfire. I saw heads turn as
the people fell si lent, looking up the stretch of East Bay Street,
where it ran from the half-built skeleton of the new Customs
House toward White Point Gardens.
It was a hot day , even for Charleston in June. The best
places were on the seawall, where the air moved; here below ,
it w as like being  roasted alive. My shift was soaked through,
and the cotton bodice clung between my breasts. I wiped my
face for the tenth time in as many minutes and lifted the heavy
coil of my hair , hoping vainly for a cooling breeze upon my
neck.
I was morbidly aware of necks at the moment.
Unobtrusively , I put my hand up to the base of my throat,
letting my fingers circle it. I could feel the pulse beat in my
carotid a rteries, along with the drums, and when I breathed,
the hot wet air clogged my throat as though I were choking.
I qu ickly took m y hand down, a nd drew in a breath as deep
as I could manage. That was a mistake. The man in front of me
hadn’ t bathed in a month or more; the edge of the stock about
his t hick neck w as dark with grime and his clothes smelled
sour and musty , pungent even amid the sweaty reek of the
crowd. T he sme ll of hot bread and frying pig fat from the food
vendors’ stalls lay heavy over a  musk of rotting seagrass from
the mars h, only slightly relieved by a whif f of salt-breeze from
the harbor .
There were several children in  front of me, craning and
gawking, runnin g out from und er the oaks and palmettos to
look up the street, being called back by anxious parents. Thegirl near est me had a neck like the white part of a grass stalk,
slender and succulent.
There w as a ripple of excitement through the crowd; the
gallows processi on was in sight at the far end of the street. The
drums grew louder .
“Where is he?” Fer gus muttered beside me, craning his own
neck to see. “I knew I should have gone with him!”
“He’ll b e here.” I wanted to stand on tiptoe, but didn’ t,
feeling that this would be und ignified. I did glance around,
though, searching. I could always spot Jamie in a crowd; he
stood head and shoulders above most men, and his hair caught
the light in a blaze of reddish g old. There was no sign of him
yet, only  a bobbing sea of bon nets and tricornes, sheltering
from the  heat those citizens com e too late to find a place in the
shade.
The flags came first, flutterin g above the heads of the
excited crowd, the banners of G reat Britain and of the Royal
Colony of South Carolina. And another , bearing the family
arms of the Lord Governor of the colony .
Then ca me the drummers, walking two by two in step, their
sticks an alternate beat and blur . It was a slow march, grimly
inexorable. A dead march, I thought they called that particular
cadence; very suitable under the circumstances. All other
noises were drowned by the rattle of the drums.
Then came the platoon of red-coated soldiers and in their
midst, the prisoners.
There w ere three of them, hands bound before them, linked
together by a ch ain that ran through rings on the iron collars
about th eir necks. The first man  was small and elderly , ragged
and disreputable, a shamblin g wreck who lurched and
staggered so that the dark-su ited cler gyman who walked
beside th e prisoners was obliged to grasp his arm to keep him
from falling.
“Is that Gavin Hayes? He looks sick,” I murmured to
Fer gus.“He’ s drunk.” The soft voice c ame from behind me, and I
whirled, to find Jamie standing at my shoulder , eyes fixed on
the pitiful procession.
The sma ll man’ s  disequilibrium was disrupting the progress
of the parade, as  his stumbling forced the two men chained to
him to zig and zag abruptly in order to keep their feet. The
general impression was of three inebriates rolling home from
the local tavern; grossly at od ds with the solemnity of the
occasion. I could hear the rustl e of laughter over the drums,
and shouts and jeers from the crowds on the wrought-iron
balconies of the houses on East Bay Street.
“Y our do ing?” I spoke quietly , so as not to attract notice, but
I could have shouted and waved my arms; no one had eyes for
anything but the scene before us.
I fel t rather than saw Jamie’ s shrug, as he moved forward to
stand beside me.
“It was what he asked of me,” he said. “And the best I could
manage for him.”
“Brandy or whisky?” asked Fer gus, evaluating Hayes’
appearance with a practiced eye.
“The ma n’ s a Scot, wee Fer gus. ” Jamie’ s voice was as calm
as h is fa ce, but I heard the small note of strain in it. “Whisky’ s
what he wanted.”
“A w ise choice. W ith luck, he w on’ t even notice when they
hang him,” Fer gus muttered. Th e small man had slipped from
the preacher ’ s grasp and fallen  flat on his face in the sandy
road, pulling one of his companions to his knees; the last
prisoner , a tall young man, st ayed on his feet but swayed
wildly from side to side, trying desperately to keep his
balance. The crowd on the point roared with glee.
The captain of the guard glowed  crimson between the white
of his wig and the metal of his gor get, flushed with fury as
much as with sun. He barked an order as the drums continued
their som ber roll, and a soldier scrambled hastily to remove
the c hain that bound the prisone rs together . Hayes was jerkedunceremoniously to his feet, a s oldier grasping each arm, and
the procession resumed, in better order .
There w as no laughter by the time they reached the gallows
—a mule-drawn  cart placed beneath the limbs of a huge live
oak. I could fee l the drums beating through the soles of my
feet. I felt slightly sick from the sun and the smells. The drums
stopped abruptly , and my ears rang in the silence.
“Y e dinna need to watch it, Sass enach,” Jamie whispered to
me. “Go back to the wagon. ” His own eyes were fixed
unblinkingly on Hayes, who swayed and mumbled in the
soldiers’ grasp, looking blearily around.
The last thing I  wanted was to  watch. But neither could I
leave Jamie to s ee it through a lone. He had come for Gavin
Hayes; I had come for him. I touched his hand.
“I’ll stay .”
Jamie drew himself straighter , squaring his shoulders. He
moved a  pace forward, making sure that he was visible in the
crowd. If Hayes was still sober enough to see anything, the last
thing he saw on earth would be the face of a friend.
He c ould see; H ayes glared to an d fro as they lifted him into
the cart, twisting his neck, desperately looking.
“Gabhainn! A charaid!”  Jamie shouted suddenly . Hayes’
eyes found him at once, and he ceased struggling.
The little man stood swaying slightly as the char ge was
read: the ft in the amount of six  pounds, ten shillings. He was
covered in reddish dust, and pea rls of sweat clung trembling to
the g ray stubble of his beard. Th e preacher was leaning close,
murmuring ur gently in his ear .
Then the drums began again, in a steady roll. The hangman
guided the noose over the balding head and fixed it tight, knot
positioned preci sely , just under the ear . The captain of the
guard stood poised, saber raised.
Suddenly , the condemned man drew himself up straight.
Eyes on Jamie, he opened his mouth, as though to speak.The saber flashed in the mo rning sun, and the drums
stopped, with a final thunk !
I loo ked at Jami e; he was white  to the lips, eyes fixed wide.
From th e corner  of my eye, I co uld see the twitching rope, and
the fain t, reflexive jerk of the  dangling sack of clothes. A
sharp stink of urine and feces struck through the thick air .
On my other side, Fer gus watched dispassionately .
“I suppose he noticed, after all,” he murmured, with regret.
The body swung slightly , a d ead weight oscillating like a
plumb-bob on its string. There was a sigh from the crowd, of
awe and  release. T erns squawked from the burning sky , and
the harbor sounds came faint an d smothered through the heavy
air , but the poin t was wrapped in silence. From where I stood,
I c ould hear the  small plit…plat…plit  of the drops that fell
from the toe of the corpse’ s dangling shoe.
I had n’ t known Gavin Hayes, a nd felt no personal grief for
his death, but I was glad it had been quick. I stole a glance at
him, wit h an odd feeling of intru sion. It was a most public way
of a ccomplishin g a most priv ate act, and I felt vaguely
embarrassed to be looking.
The hangman had known his b usiness; there had been no
undignified struggle, no staring eyes, no protruding tongue;
Gavin’ s small round head tilted sharply to the side, neck
grotesquely stretched but cleanly broken.
It w as a  clean break in more wa ys than one. The captain of
the guar d, satisf ied that Hayes was dead, motioned with his
saber for the ne xt man to be brought to the gibbet. I saw his
eyes travel down the red-clad file, and then widen in outrage.
At th e sa me mom ent, there was a cry from the crowd, and a
ripple of excitement that quickly spread. Heads turned and
people pushed each against his n eighbor , striving to see where
there was nothing to be seen.
“He’ s gone!”
“There he goes!”“Stop him!”
It wa s the third prisoner , the tall young man, who had seized
the m oment of G avin’ s death to run for his life, sliding past the
guard who should have been watching him, but who had been
unable to resist the gallows’ fascination.
I saw a flicker of movement behind a vendor ’ s stall, a flash
of d irty blond hair . Some of the soldiers saw it, too, and ran in
that dire ction, bu t many more w ere rushing in other directions,
and among the collisions and confusion, nothing was
accomplished.
The cap tain of the guard was shouting, face purple, his
voice barely audible over the uproar . The remaining prisoner ,
looking stunned , was seized and  hustled back in the direction
of th e Court of  Guard as the redcoats began hastily to sort
themselves back  into order und er the lash of their captain’ s
voice.
Jamie snaked an arm around m y waist and dragged me out
of the way of an oncoming wave of humanity . The crowd fell
back before the advance of squa ds of soldiers, who formed up
and marched briskly of f to quart er the area, under the grim and
furious direction of their ser geant.
“W e’d best find Ian,” Jamie sa id, fending of f a group of
excited apprenti ces. He glanced at Fer gus, and jerked his head
toward the gibbet and its melanc holy burden. “Claim the body ,
aye? W e’ll meet at the W illow T ree later .”
“Do you  think they’ll catch him ?” I asked, as we pushed
through the ebbing crowd, threa ding our way down a cobbled
lane toward the merchants’ wharves.
“I expec t so. Where can he go?” He spoke abstractedly , a
narrow line visible between his brows. Plainly the dead man
was still on his mind, and he had little attention to spare for the
living.
“Did Hayes have any family?” I asked. He shook his head.
“I asked him that, when I brought him the whisky . He
thought he might have a brot her left alive, but no notionwhere. The brother was transported soon after the Rising—to
V ir ginia, Hayes thought, but he’d heard nothing since.”
Not surprising if he hadn’ t; an indentured laborer would
have had no facilities for comm unicating with kin left behind
in Scotland, unless the bondsman’ s employer was kind enough
to send a letter on his behalf. And kind or not, it was unlikely
that a letter wou ld have found Gavin Hayes, who had spent ten
years in Ardsmuir prison before being transported in his turn.
“Duncan!” Jami e called out, and a tall, thin man turned and
raised a hand in acknowledgme nt. He made his way through
the c rowd in a corkscrew fashio n, his single arm swinging in a
wide arc that fended of f the passersby .
“Mac Dubh,”  he said, bobbing his head in greeting to
Jamie. “ Mrs. Claire.” His long, narrow face was furrowed with
sadness. He too had once been a prisoner at Ardsmuir , with
Hayes and with Jamie. Only the loss of his arm to a blood
infection had prevented his being transported with the others.
Unfit to be sold  for labor , he had instead been pardoned and
set free to starve—until Jamie had found him.
“God rest poor Gavin,” Duncan said, shaking his head
dolorously .
Jamie muttered  something in response in Gaelic, and
crossed himself. Then he straightened, casting of f the
oppression of the day with a visible ef fort.
“A ye, well. I mu st go to the docks and arrange about Ian’ s
passage, and then we’ll think of burying Gavin. But I must
have the lad settled first.”
W e struggled through the crowd toward the docks,
squeezing our way between knots of excited gossipers, eluding
the drays and b arrows that came and went through the press
with the ponderous indif ference of trade.
A fi le of red-coated soldiers cam e at the quick-march from
the other end o f the quay , splitting the crowd like vinegar
dropped on mayonnaise. The su n glittered hot on the line of
bayonet points and the rhythm of their tramping beat throughthe noise  of the crowd like a muf fled drum. Even the rumbling
sledges and handcarts stopped abruptly to let them pass by .
“Mind your pocket, Sassenach,” Jamie murmured in my ear ,
ushering me through a narrow space between a turban-clad
slave clutching two small children and a street preacher
perched on a box. He was shouting sin and repentance, but
with only one word in three audible through the noise.
“I sewe d it shut,” I assured him, nonetheless reaching to
touch th e small  weight that sw ung against my thigh. “What
about yours?”
He grin ned and tilted his hat forward, dark blue eyes
narrowing against the bright sunlight.
“It’ s wh ere my sporran would be, did I have one. So long as
I dinna meet with a quick-fingered harlot, I’m safe.”
I g lance d at the slightly bulging  front of his breeches, and
then up at him.  Broad-shouldered and tall, with bold, clean
features and a H ighlander ’ s prou d carriage, he drew the glance
of e very woman he passed, eve n with his bright hair covered
by a sober blue tricorne. The br eeches, which were borrowed,
were substantially too tight, and did nothing whatever to
detract from the general ef fect—an ef fect enhanced by the fact
that he himself was totally ignorant of it.
“Y ou’re a walking inducement t o harlots,” I said. “Stick by
me; I’ll protect you.”
He laughed and took my arm a s we emer ged into a small
clear space.
“Ian!” h e shouted, catching sight of his nephew over the
heads of  the crowd. A moment later , a tall, stringy gawk of a
boy popped out of the crowd, p ushing a thatch of brown hair
out of his eyes and grinning widely .
“I thoug ht I should never find ye, Uncle!” he exclaimed.
“Christ, there are more folk here than at the Lawnmarket in
Edinbur gh!” He wiped a coat sleeve across his long, half-
homely face, leaving a streak of grime down one cheek.Jamie eyed his nephew askance.
“Y e’re lookin’ indecently cheerful, Ian, for having just seen
a man go to his death.”
Ian hast ily alter ed his expression into an attempt at decent
solemnity .
“Oh, no, Uncle Jamie,” he said . “I didna see the hanging.”
Duncan raised one brow and Ian  blushed slightly . “I—I wasna
afraid to  see; it was only I had …something else I wanted to
do.”
Jamie smiled slightly and patted his nephew on the back.
“Don’ t t rouble yourself, Ian; I’d as soon not have seen it
myself, only that Gavin was a friend.”
“I know , Uncle. I’m sorry for  it.” A flash of sympathy
showed in the b oy’ s lar ge brown eyes, the only feature of his
face wit h any claim to beauty . He glanced at me. “W as it
awful, Auntie?”
“Y es,” I said. “It’ s over , though.” I pulled the damp
handkerchief ou t of my bosom and stood on tiptoe to rub away
the smudge on his cheek.
Duncan Innes shook his head sorrowfully . “A ye, poor
Gavin. S till, it’ s a quicker death  than starving, and there was
little left for him but that.”
“Let’ s go,” Jamie interrupted, unwilling to spend time in
useless lamentin g. “The Bonnie Mary  should be near the far
end of the quay .” I saw Ian glance at Jamie and draw himself
up a s though a bout to speak, but Jamie had already turned
toward the harbor and was shovi ng his way through the crowd.
Ian glanced at me, shrugged, and of fered me an arm.
W e followed Jamie behind the warehouses that lined the
docks, side-stepping sailors, loaders, slaves, passengers,
customers and merchants of all sorts. Charleston was a major
shipping port, and business was booming, with as many as a
hundred ships a month coming and going from Europe in the
season.The Bonnie Mary  belonged to a friend of Jamie’ s cousin
Jared Fraser , who had gone to France to make his fortune in
the wine business and succeeded brilliantly . W ith luck, the
Bonnie Mary ‘s captain might be persuaded for Jared’ s sake to
take Ian with him  back to Edinbur gh, allowing the boy to work
his passage as a cabin lad.
Ian was  not enthused at the prospect, but Jamie was
determined to ship his errant ne phew back to Scotland at the
earliest opportunity . It was—among other concerns—news of
the Bonnie Mary ‘s presen ce in Charleston that h ad brought us
here from Geor gia, where we had first set foot in America—by
accident—two months before.
As w e passed a tavern, a slatternly barmaid came out with a
bowl of slops. She caught sig ht of Jamie and stood, bowl
braced against her hip, giving him a slanted brow and a
pouting smile. He passed without a glance, intent on his goal.
She toss ed her head, flung the slops to the pig who slept by the
step, and flounced back inside.
He paus ed, shading his eyes to look down the row of
towering ships’ masts, and I cam e up beside him. He twitched
unconsciously a t the front of his breeches, easing the fit, and I
took his arm.
“Family jewels still safe, are they?” I murmured.
“Uncomfortable, but safe,” he assured me. He plucked at
the l acing of his  flies, grimacing. “I would ha’ done better to
hide them up my bum, I think.”
“Better y ou than me, mate,” I said, smiling. “I’d rather risk
robbery , myself.”
The family jewels were just that . W e had been driven ashore
on t he coast o f Geor gia by a hurricane, arriving soaked,
ragged, and destitute—save for a  handful of lar ge and valuable
gemstones.
I ho ped the ca ptain of the Bonnie Mary  thought highly
enough of Jared Fraser to accept Ian as a cabin boy , because ifnot, we were g oing to have a spot of dif ficulty about the
passage.
In theory , Jamie’ s pouch and my pocket contained a sizable
fortune. In practice, the stones m ight have been beach pebbles
so fa r as the good they were to us. While gems were an easy ,
compact way of transporting wealth, the problem was
changing them back into money .
Most trade in the southern colonies was conducted by
means of barter—what wasn’ t, was handled by the exchange
of scrip or bills written on a we althy merchant or banker . And
wealthy bankers were thin on the ground in Geor gia; those
willing t o tie up their available capital in gemstones rarer still.
The pro sperous rice farmer with whom we had stayed in
Savannah had assured us that he  himself could scarcely lay his
hand on two pou nds sterling in cash—indeed, there was likely
not ten pounds in gold and silver to be had in the whole
colony .
Nor was  there any chance of sel ling one of the stones in the
endless stretches of salt marsh and pine forest through which
we had passed on our journey north. Charleston was the first
city we had reac hed of suf ficient size to harbor merchants and
bankers who might help to liquidate a portion of our frozen
assets.
Not that anything was likely  to stay frozen long in
Charleston in summer , I reflected. Rivulets of sweat were
running down my neck and the  linen shift under my bodice
was soa ked and crumpled against my skin. Even so close to
the harbor , there was no wind at this time of day , and the
smells of hot tar , dead fish, and sweating laborers were nearly
overwhelming.
Despite their protestations, Jamie had insisted on giving one
of our gemstone s to Mr . and Mrs. Olivier , the kindly people
who had taken us in when we were shipwrecked virtually on
their doo rstep, as some token of  thanks for their hospitality . In
return, they had provided us wi th a wagon, two horses, freshclothes for traveling, food for the journey north, and a small
amount of money .
Of t his, six shillings and threepe nce remained in my pocket,
constituting the entirety of our disposable fortune.
“This way , Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, turning and beckoning
his uncle eagerly . “I’ve got something to show ye.”
“What is it?” Jamie asked, threading his way through a
throng of sweating slaves, who were loading dusty bricks of
dried indigo into an anchored ca r go ship. “And how did ye get
whatever it is? Y e havena got any money , have you?”
“No, I won it, dicing.” Ian’ s voice floated back, his body
invisible as he skipped around a cartload of corn.
“Dicing! Ian, for God’ s sake, ye canna be gambling when
ye’ve no t a penny to bless yourself with!” Holding my arm,
Jamie s hoved a way through t he crowd to catch up to his
nephew .
“Y ou do it all the time, Uncle J amie,” the boy pointed out,
pausing to wait for us. “Y e’ve been doing it in every tavern
and inn where we’ve stayed.”
“My God, Ian, t hat’ s cards, not dice! And I know what I’m
doing!”
“So do I,” said Ian, looking smug. “I won, no?”
Jamie rolled his eyes toward heaven, imploring patience.
“Jesus, I an, but I’m glad you’re  going home before ye get
your hea d beaten in. Promise m e ye willna be gambling wi’
the sailors, aye? Y e canna get away from them on a ship.”
Ian was paying no attention; he had come to a half-
crumbled piling , around which was tied a stout rope. Here he
stopped and turned to face us, gesturing at an object by his
feet.
“See? It’ s a dog,” Ian said proudly .
I took a quick half-step behind Jamie, grabbing his arm.“Ian,” I said, “that is not a dog. It’ s a wolf. It’ s a bloody big
wolf, an d I think you ought to g et away from it before it takes
a bite out of your arse.”
The wolf twitched one ear negligently in my direction,
dismissed me, and twitched it ba ck. It continued to sit, panting
with the  heat, its big yellow eyes  fixed on Ian with an intensity
that might have been taken for devotion by someone who
hadn’ t met a wolf before. I had.
“Those things are dangerous,” I said. “They’d bite you as
soon as look at you.”
Disregarding this, Jamie stooped to inspect the beast.
“It’ s not quite a  wolf, is it?” Sounding interested, he held
out a loose fist to the so-called  dog, inviting it to smell his
knuckles. I closed my eyes, expecting the imminent
amputation of his hand. Hearing no shrieks, I opened them
again to  find him squatting on  the ground, peering up the
animal’ s nostrils.
“He’ s a handsome creature, Ian,” he said, scratching the
thing familiarly under the chin. The yellow eyes narrowed
slightly , either in pleasure at the attention or—more likely , I
thought—in anticipation of biting of f Jamie’ s nose. “Bigger
than a wolf, tho ugh; it’ s broader through the head and chest,
and a deal longer in the leg.”
“His mother was an Irish wolfhound,” Ian was hunkered
down by Jamie, eagerly explaini ng as he stroked the enormous
gray-brown back. “She got out in heat, into the woods, and
when she came back in whelp—”
“Oh, aye, I see.” Now Jamie was crooning in Gaelic to the
monster while he picked up its h uge foot and fondled its hairy
toes. The curved black claws w ere a good two inches long.
The thin g half closed its eyes,  the faint breeze ruf fling the
thick fur at its neck.
I gl anced at D uncan, who arched his eyebrows at me,
shrugged slightly , and sighed. Duncan didn’ t care for dogs.
“Jamie—” I said.“Balach Boidheach,”  Jamie said to the wolf. “Are ye no the
bonny laddie, then?”
“What w ould he  eat?” I asked, somewhat more loudly than
necessary .
Jamie stopped caressing the beast.
“Oh,” h e said. He looked at the yellow-eyed thing with
some re gret. “W ell.” He rose to his feet, shaking his head
reluctantly .
“I’m afraid your auntie’ s right , Ian. How are we to feed
him?”
“Oh, that’ s no trouble, Uncle Ja mie,” Ian assured him. “He
hunts for himself.”
“Here?” I glanced around at the warehouses, and the
stuccoed row of shops beyond. “What does he hunt, small
children?”
Ian looked mildly hurt.
“Of course not, Auntie. Fish.”
Seeing three skeptical faces sur rounding him, Ian dropped
to his knees an d grabbed the b east’ s muzzle in both hands,
prying his mouth open.
“He does! I sw ear , Uncle Jamie! Here, just smell his
breath!”
Jamie c ast a dubious glance  at the double row of
impressively gleaming fangs on display , and rubbed his chin.
“I—ah, I shall take your word for it, Ian. But even so—for
Christ’ s sake, be careful of you r fingers, lad!” Ian’ s grip had
loosened, and the massive jaws clashed shut, spraying droplets
of saliva over the stone quay .
“I’m all  right, Uncle,” Ian said cheerfully , wiping his hand
on his breeks. “ He wouldn’ t bite me, I’m sure. His name is
Rollo.”
Jamie rubbed his knuckles across his upper lip.“Mmphm. W ell, whatever his name is, and whatever he
eats, I dinna think the captain of the Bonnie Mary  will take
kindly to his presence in the crew’ s quarters.”
Ian didn’ t say anything, but the look of happiness on his
face did n’ t diminish. In fact, it  grew . Jamie glanced at him,
caught sight of his glowing face, and stif fened.
“No,” he said, in horror . “Oh, no.”
“Y es,” s aid Ian. A wide smile of delight split his bony face.
“She sailed three days ago, Uncle. W e’re too late.”
Jamie said something in Gaelic that I didn’ t understand.
Duncan looked scandalized.
“Damn!” Jamie said, reverting to English. “Bloody damn!”
Jamie to ok of f his hat and rubb ed a hand over his face, hard.
He look ed hot, disheveled, and thoroughly disgruntled. He
opened his mouth, thought better of whatever he had been
going to  say , closed it, and ran his fingers roughly through his
hair , jerking loose the ribbon that tied it back.
Ian looked abashed.
“I’m sorry , Uncle. I’ll try not t o be a worry to ye, truly I
will. And I can work; I’ll earn enough for my food.”
Jamie’ s face softened as he look ed at his nephew . He sighed
deeply , and patted Ian’ s shoulder .
“It’ s not  that I d inna want ye, I an. Y ou know I should like
nothing better than to keep ye w ith me. But what in hell will
your mother say?”
The glow returned to Ian’ s face.
“I dinna ken, U ncle,” he said, “but she’ll be saying it in
Scotland, won’ t she? And we’re here.” He put his arms around
Rollo an d hugge d him. The wo lf seemed mildly taken aback
by th e g esture, b ut after a mome nt, put out a long pink tongue
and daintily licked Ian’ s ear . T e sting him for flavor , I thought
cynically .“Besides,” the boy added, “she kens well enough that I’m
safe; you wrote from Geor gia to say I was with you.”
Jamie summoned a wry smile.
“I c anna say th at that particular bit of knowledge will be
ower -comforting to her , Ian. She’ s known me a long time,
aye?”
He sighe d and clapped the hat back on his head, and turned
to me.
“I badly  need a drink, Sassenac h,” he said. “Let’ s find that
tavern.”
The W il low T ree was dark, an d might have been cool, had
there be en fewer  people in it. As it was, the benches and tables
were crowded with sightseers from the hanging and sailors
from the  docks, and the atmos phere was like a sweatbath. I
inhaled as I step ped into the tap room, then let my breath out,
fast. It was like  breathing through a wad of soiled laundry ,
soaked in beer .
Rollo at  once proved his worth , parting the crowd like the
Red Sea as he stalked through the taproom, lips drawn back
from his  teeth in a constant, inaudible growl. He was evidently
no stranger to taverns. Having satisfactorily cleared out a
corner bench, he curled up under the table and appeared to go
to sleep.
Out of the sun, w ith a lar ge pew ter mug of dark ale foaming
gently in front o f him, Jamie quickly regained his normal self-
possession.
“W e’ve the two choices,” he said, brushing back the sweat-
soaked hair from his temples. “W e can stay in Charleston long
enough to maybe find a buyer for one of the stones, and
perhaps book passage for Ian to  Scotland on another ship. Or
we can make our way north to  Cape Fear , and maybe find a
ship for him out of W ilmington or New Bern.”
“I say north,” D uncan said, without hesitation. “Y e’ve kin in
Cape Fear , no? I mislike the thought of staying ower -longamong s trangers. And your kinsman would see we were not
cheated nor robbed. Here—” He lifted one shoulder in
eloquent indica tion of the un -Scottish—and thus patently
dishonest—persons surrounding us.
“Oh, do let’ s go north, Uncle!” Ian said quickly , before
Jamie could reply to this. He wi ped away a small mustache of
ale foam with his sleeve. “The journey might be dangerous;
you’ll need an extra man along for protection, aye?”
Jamie buried his expression in h is own cup, but I was seated
close enough to feel a subterra nean quiver go through him.
Jamie was indeed very fond of his nephew . The fact remained
that Ian  was the sort of person to whom things happened.
Usually through no fault of his own, but still, they happened.
The boy had bee n kidnapped by pirates the year before, and
it w as the neces sity of rescuing him that had brought us by
circuitous and often dangerous  means to America. Nothing
had happened recently , but I knew Jamie was anxious to get
his fifteen-year -old nephew back to Scotland and his mother
before something did.
“Ah…to be sure, Ian,” Jamie said, lowering his cup. He
carefully avoide d meeting my gaze, but I could see the corner
of his mouth twitching. “Y e’d be a great help, I’m sure, but…”
“W e mig ht meet with Red Indian s!” Ian said, eyes wide. His
face, already a r osy brown from the sun, glowed with a flush
of pleasurable anticipation. “Or wild beasts! Dr . Stern told me
that the wildern ess of Carolina is alive wi’ fierce creatures—
bears and wildcats and wicked panthers—and a great foul
thing the Indians call a skunk!”
I choked on my ale.
“Are ye  all right, Auntie?” Ian leaned anxiously across the
table.
“Fine,” I wheezed, wiping my streaming face with my
kerchief. I blotted the drops o f spilled ale of f my bosom,
pulling t he fabric of my bodice discreetly away from my flesh
in hopes of admitting a little air .Then I caught a glimpse of J amie’ s face, on which the
expression of suppressed amuse ment had given way to a small
frown of concern.
“Skunks aren’ t dangerous,” I murmured, laying a hand on
his knee. A skilled and fearless hunter in his native Highlands,
Jamie was inclined to regard the unfamiliar fauna of the New
W orld with caution.
“Mmphm.” The frown eased, but a narrow line remained
between his brows. “Maybe so, but what of the other things? I
canna sa y I wish to be meeting a  bear or a pack o’ savages, wi’
only this to hand.” He touched the lar ge sheathed knife that
hung from his belt.
Our lack of weapons had worrie d Jamie considerably on the
trip from  Geor g ia, and Ian’ s re marks about Indians and wild
animals had brought the concer n to the forefront of his mind
once more. Besides Jamie’ s knif e, Fer gus bore a smaller blade,
suitable for cutting rope and trim ming twigs for kindling. That
was the full ex tent of our ar mory—the Oliviers had had
neither guns nor swords to spare.
On t he journey f rom Geor gia to Charleston, we had had the
company of a g roup of rice and indigo farmers—all bristling
with knives, pistols, and muskets—bringing their produce to
the port to be shipped north to P ennsylvania and New Y ork. If
we l eft for Cape Fear now , we would be alone, unarmed, and
essentially defe nseless against anything that might emer ge
from the thick forests.
At the same tim e, there were pressing reasons to travel
north, our lack o f available capital being one. Cape Fear was
the lar gest settlement of Scottish Highlanders in the American
Colonies, boast ing several towns whose inhabitants had
emigrated from  Scotland during the last twenty years,
following the upheaval after Culloden. And among these
emigrants were Jamie’ s kin, who  I knew would willingly of fer
us re fuge: a roof , a bed, and time to establish ourselves in this
new world.
Jamie took another drink and nodded at Duncan.“I m ust say I’m  of your mind, Duncan.” He leaned back
against the wall of the tavern, glancing casually around the
crowded room. “D’ye no feel the eyes on your back?”
A chill ran dow n my own back, despite the trickle of sweat
doing likewise. Duncan’ s eyes widened fractionally , then
narrowed, but he didn’ t turn around.
“Ah,” he said.
” Whose  eyes?” I asked, looking rather nervously around. I
didn’ t se e anyone taking particular notice of us, though anyone
might be watching surreptitiously; the tavern was seething
with alcohol-soaked humanity , and the babble of voices was
loud enough to drown out all but the closest conversation.
“Anyone’ s, Sassenach,” Jamie answered. He glanced
sideways at me, and smiled. “Dinna look so scairt about it,
aye? W e’re in no danger . Not here.”
“Not yet,” Innes said. He lean ed forward to pour another
cup of ale. “ Mac Dubh  call ed out to Gavin on the ga llows,
d’ye see? There will be those who took notice— Mac Dubh
bein’ the bittie wee fellow he is,” he added dryly .
“And the farmers who came wit h us from Geor gia will have
sold their stores by now , and be takin’ their ease in places like
this,” Jamie said, evidently absorbed in studying the pattern of
his cup. “All of them are honest men—but they’ll talk,
Sassenach. It makes a good story , no? The folk cast away by
the hurr icane? And what are th e chances that at least one of
them kens a bit about what we carry?”
“I see,” I murm ured, and did. W e had attracted public
interest by our association with a criminal, and could no longer
pass as inconspi cuous travelers. If finding a buyer took some
time, as was likely , we risked inviting robbery from
unscrupulous pe rsons, or scrutiny from the English authorities.
Neither pros-pect was appealing.
Jamie lifted his cup and drank d eeply , then set it down with
a sigh.“No. I think it’ s perhaps not wis e to linger in the city . W e’ll
see Gav in buried decently , and then we’ll find a safe spot in
the woo ds outside the town to sleep. T omorrow we can decide
whether to stay or go.”
The thought of spending several more nights in the woods—
with or without skunks—was not appealing. I hadn’ t taken my
dress of f in eigh t days, merely rinsing the outlying portions of
my anatomy whenever we paused in the vicinity of a stream.
I ha d been loo king forward to a real bed, even if flea-
infested, and a chance to scrub of f the grime of the last week’ s
travel. Still, he h ad a point. I sighed, ruefully eyeing the hem
of my sleeve, gray and grubby with wear .
The tavern door flung suddenly open at this point,
distracting me from my contem plation, and four red-coated
soldiers shoved their way into the crowded room. They wore
full uniform, held muskets with bayonets fixed, and were
obviously not in pursuit of ale or dice.
T wo of the so ldiers made a rapid circuit of the room,
glancing under tables, while another disappeared into the
kitchen beyond.  The fourth remained on watch by the door ,
pale eye s flicking over the cro wd. His gaze lighted on our
table, and rested on us for a moment, full of speculation, but
then passed on, restlessly seeking.
Jamie was outwardly tranquil, sipping his ale in apparent
obliviousness, b ut I saw the hand in his lap clench slowly into
a fist. Duncan, less able to control his feelings, bent his head to
hide his express ion. Neither man would ever feel at ease in the
presence of a red coat, and for good reason.
No one else appeared much perturbed by the soldiers’
presence. The little knot of singe rs in the chimney corner went
on with an inter minable version  of “Fill Every Glass,” and a
loud ar gument broke out betwe en the barmaid and a pair of
apprentices.
The sol dier returned from the kitchen, having evidently
found nothing. Stepping rudely  through a dice game on thehearth, he rejoined his fellows  by the door . As the soldiers
shoved their way out of the tavern, Fer gus’ s slight figure
squeezed in, pressing against the doorjamb to avoid swinging
elbows and musket butts.
I saw one soldier ’ s eyes catch t he glint of metal and fasten
with int erest on the hook Fer gu s wore in replacement of his
missing left hand. He glanced sharply at Fer gus, but then
shouldered his musket and hurried after his companions.
Fer gus s hoved through the crowd and plopped down on the
bench beside Ian. He looked hot and irritated.
“Blood-sucking salaud, ” he said, without preamble.
Jamie’ s brows went up.
“The priest,” Fer gus elaborated. He took the mug Ian
pushed in his direction and drained it, lean throat glugging
until the  cup was empty . He lowered it, exhaled heavily , and
sat blinking, looking noticeably happier . He sighed and wiped
his mouth.
“He wants ten s hillings to bury the man in the churchyard,”
he s aid. “An An glican church, of course; there are no Catholic
churches here. W retched usurer!  He knows we have no choice
about it.  The body will scarcely keep till sunset, as it is.” He
ran a finger ins ide his stock, pulling the sweat-wilted cotton
away from his neck, then bange d his fist several times on the
table to attract the attention of the serving maid, who was
being run of f her feet by the press of patrons.
“I told the super -fatted son of a pig that you would decide
whether to pay or not. W e cou ld just bury him in the wood,
after all. Though we should ha ve to purchase a shovel,” he
added, f rowning. “These grasping townsfolk know we are
strangers; they’ll take our last coin if they can.”
Last coin was perilously close t o the truth. I had enough to
pay for a decent meal here and  to buy food for the journey
north; p erhaps enough to pay fo r a couple of nights’ lodging.
That was all. I saw Jamie’ s eyes flick round the room,assessing the possibilities of picking up a little money at
hazard or loo.
Soldiers and sailors were the best prospects for gambling,
but there  were few of either in the taproom—likely most of the
garrison was still searching the  town for the fugitive. In one
corner , a  small group of men was being loudly convivial over
several p itchers of brandywine; two of them were singing, or
trying to, their attempts causing great hilarity among their
comrades. Jamie  gave an almost imperceptible nod at sight of
them, and turned back to Fer gus.
“What have ye done with Gavin for the time being?” Jamie
asked. Fer gus hunched one shoulder .
“Put him  in the wagon. I traded the clothes he was wearing
to a ragw oman f or a shroud, an d she agreed to wash the body
as part of the bar gain.” He gave Jamie a faint smile. “Don’ t
worry , m ilord; he’ s seemly . For now ,” he added, lifting the
fresh mug of ale to his lips.
“Poor Gavin.” Duncan Innes li fted his own mug in a half
salute to his fallen comrade.
“Slainte,”  Jamie replied, and lifted his o wn mug in reply .
He set it down and sighed.
“He wouldna like being buried in the wood,” he said.
“Why not?” I a sked, curious. “I shouldn’ t think it would
matter to him one way or the other .”
“Oh, no, we couldna do that, Mrs. Claire.” Duncan was
shaking his head emphatically . Duncan was normally a most
reserved man, and I was surprised at so much apparent feeling.
“He was afraid of the dark,” Jamie said softly . I turned to
stare at him, and he gave me a lopsided smile. “I lived wi’
Gavin H ayes nearly as long as I’ve lived with you, Sassenach
—and in much closer quarters. I kent him well.”
“A ye, h e was afraid of being alone in the dark,” Duncan
chimed in. “He was most mortally scairt of tannagach —of
spirits, aye?”His long, mournful face bore an  inward look, and I knew he
was see ing in memory the pris on cell that he and Jamie had
shared w ith Gavin Hayes—and with forty other men—for
three long years. “D’ye recall, Mac Dubh,  h ow he told us one
night of the tannasq  he met?”
“I do, Duncan, and could wish I did not.” Jamie shuddered
despite the heat. “I kept awake myself half the night after he
told us that one.”
“What was it, Uncle?” Ian was leaning over his cup of ale,
round-eyed. His cheeks were flushed and streaming, and his
stock crumpled with sweat.
Jamie rubbed a hand across his mouth, thinking.
“Ah. W ell, it w as a time in the late, cold autumn in the
Highlands, just when the season turns, and the feel of the air
tells ye the ground will be shivered wi’ frost come dawn,” he
said. He  settled himself in his seat and sat back, alecup in
hand. He smiled wryly , pluckin g at his own throat. “Not like
now , aye?
“W ell, Gavin’ s son brought ba ck the kine that night, but
there was one beast missing—the lad had hunted up the hills
and dow n the corries, but could na find it anywhere. So Gavin
set t he lad to milk the two othe rs, and set out himself to look
for the lost cow .”
He r olled the pe wter cup slowly between his hands, staring
down into the dark ale as though seeing in it the bulk of the
night-black Sco ttish peaks and the mist that floats in the
autumn glens.
“He went some distance, and the cot behind him
disappeared. When he looked back, he couldna see the light
from the window anymore, and  there was no sound but the
keening of the wind. It was cold, but he went on, tramping
through the mud and the heath er , hearing the crackle of ice
under his boots.
“He saw  a small grove through  the mist, and thinking the
cow might have taken shelter beneath the trees, he wenttoward it. He s aid the trees were birches, standing there all
leafless, but with their branche s grown together so he must
bend his head to squeeze beneath the boughs.
“He came into the grove and saw it was not a grove at all,
but a circle of trees. There were great tall trees, spaced verra
evenly , all around him, and sm aller ones, saplings, grown up
between to make a wall of bran ches. And in the center of the
circle stood a cairn.”
Hot as it was in the tavern, I felt as though a sliver of ice
had slid  melting down my spine. I had seen ancient cairns in
the Highlands myself, and found them eerie enough in the
broad light of day .
Jamie to ok a sip of ale, and wiped away a trickle of sweat
that ran down his temple.
“He felt quite queer , did Gavin. For he kent the place—
everyone did, and kept well away from it. It was a strange
place. A nd it seemed even worse in the dark and the cold,
from what it did in the light of day . It was an auld cairn, the
kind laid wi’ slabs of rock, all h eaped round with stones, and
he could see before him the black opening of the tomb.
“He knew it w as a place no man should come, and he
without a powerful charm. Gavin had naught but a wooden
cross about his neck. So he crossed himself with it and turned
to go.”
Jamie paused to sip his ale.
“But as Gavin went from the grove,” he said softly , “he
heard footsteps behind him.”
I saw  the Adam’ s apple bob in I an’ s throat as he swallowed.
He reac hed mechanically for his own cup, eyes fixed on his
uncle.
“He did na turn to see,” Jamie went on, “but kept walking.
And the  steps kept pace wi’  him, step by step, always
following. And he came through the peat where the water
seeps up, and i t was crusted with ice, the weather bein’ socold. He could hear the peat crackle under his feet, and behind
him the crack! crack! of breaking ice.
“He walked and he walked, th rough the cold, dark night,
watching ahead for the light of his own window , where his
wife had set the candle. But the light never showed, and he
began to  fear he had lost his way among the heather and the
dark hill s. And all the time, the steps kept pace with him, loud
in his ears.
“At last  he could bear it no more, and seizing hold of the
crucifix he wore round his neck, he swung about wi’ a great
cry to face whatever followed.”
“What did he s ee?” Ian’ s pupils were dilated, dark with
drink and wonder . Jamie glanced at the boy , and then at
Duncan, nodding at him to take up the story .
“He said it was  a figure like a man, but with no body ,”
Duncan said quietly . “All white, like as it might have been
made of  the mist. But wi’ great holes where its eyes should be,
and empty black, fit to draw the soul from his body with
dread.”
“But Gavin held up his cross be fore his face, and he prayed
aloud to the Ble ssed V ir gin.” Jamie took up the story , leaning
forward intently , the dim fireligh t outlining his profile in gold.
“And the thing came no nearer , but stayed there, watching
him.
“And so he beg an to walk backward, not daring to face
round again. He walked backward, stumbling and slipping,
fearing e very mo ment as he mig ht tumble into a burn or down
a clif f and break his neck, but fearing worse to turn his back on
the cold thing.
“He couldna tell how long he’d  walked, only that his legs
were trembling  wi’ weariness, when at last he caught a
glimpse of light through the m ist, and there was his own
cottage, wi’ the candle in the wi ndow . He cried out in joy , and
turned t o his door , but the cold thing was quick, and slippit
past him, to stand betwixt him and the door .“His wife had b een watching out for him, and when she
heard him cry out, she came at once to the door . Gavin shouted
to her not to com e out, but for God’ s sake to fetch a charm to
drive away the tannasq . Quick as thought, she snatched the pot
from be neath her bed, and a twig of myrtle bound wi’ red
thread and black, that she’d made to bless the cows. She
dashed the water against the doorposts, and the cold thing
leapt upward, astride the lintel. Gavin rushed in beneath and
barred th e door ,  and stayed insi de in his wife’ s arms until the
dawn. They let t he candle burn all the night, and Gavin Hayes
never again left his house past sunset—until he went to fight
for Prince T earlach .”
Even Du ncan, w ho knew the ta le, sighed as Jamie finished
speaking. Ian crossed himse lf, then looked about self-
consciously , but no one seemed to have noticed.
“So, now  Gavin has gone into the dark,” Jamie said softly .
“But we willna let him lie in unconsecrated ground.”
“Did th ey find the cow?” Fer gus asked, with his usual
practicality . Jam ie quirked one eyebrow at Duncan, who
answered.
“Oh, ay e, they did. The next morning they found the poor
beast, wi’ her h ooves all clogged wi’ mud and stones, staring
mad and lathered about the muz zle, and her sides heavin’ fit to
burst.” H e glanc ed from me to Ian and back to Fer gus. “Gavin
did say ,”  he said precisely , “tha t she looked as though she’d
been ridden to Hell and back.”
“Jesus.” Ian took a deep gulp of  his ale, and I did the same.
In the corner , th e drinking society was making attempts on a
round of “Captain Thunder ,” breaking down each time in
helpless laughter .
Ian put down his cup on the table.
“What h appened to them?” he asked, his face troubled. “T o
Gavin’ s wife, and his son?”
Jamie’ s eyes met mine, and his  hand touched my thigh. I
knew , without being told, what had happened to the Hayesfamily . W ithout  Jamie’ s own c ourage and intransigence, the
same thing would likely have happened to me and to our
daughter Brianna.
“Gavin never knew ,” Jamie said quietly . “He never heard
aught of his wife—she will h ave been starved, maybe, or
driven o ut to die of the cold. His son took the field beside him
at Cullo den. Whenever a man w ho had fought there came into
our cell,  Gavin would ask—’Have ye maybe seen a bold lad
named Archie Hayes, about so tall?’ He measured
automatically , f ive feet from the floor , capturing Hayes’
gesture. ” ‘A lad  about fourteen,’ he’d say , ‘wi’ a green plaidie
and a small gilt brooch.’ But no  one ever came who had seen
him for sure—either seen him fall or seen him run away safe.”
Jamie took a sip of the ale, his eyes fixed on a pair of British
of ficers who had come in and  settled in the corner . It had
grown dark outside, and they were plainly of f duty . Their
leather stocks were unfastened on account of the heat, and they
wore on ly sidearms, glinting under their coats; nearly black in
the dim light save where the firelight touched them with red.
“Sometimes he hoped the lad m ight have been captured and
transported,” he said. “Like his brother .”
“Surely that would be somewhere in the records?” I said.
“Did they—do they—keep lists?”
“They d id,” Jamie said, still watching the soldiers. A small,
bitter sm ile touc hed the corner o f his mouth. “It was such a list
that saved me, after Culloden,  when they asked my name
before s hooting me, so as to add it to their roll. But a man like
Gavin would have no way to see the English deadlists. And if
he c ould have fo und out, I think  he would not.” He glanced at
me. “W ould you choose to know for sure, and it was your
child?”
I sho ok my head , and he gave me a faint smile and squeezed
my hand . Our child was safe, a fter all. He picked up his cup
and drained it, then beckoned to the serving maid.The girl brought the food, skirti ng the table widely in order
to avoid Rollo. The beast lay motionless under the table, his
head protruding into the room and his great hairy tail lying
heavily across my feet, but his yellow eyes were wide open,
watching everything. They followed the girl intently , and she
backed n ervously away , keeping  an eye on him until she was
safely out of biting distance.
Seeing this, Jamie cast a dubious look at the so-called dog.
“Is he hungry? Must I ask for a fish for him?”
“Oh, no, Uncle,” Ian reassured h im. “Rollo catches his own
fish.”
Jamie’ s eyebrows shot up, but he only nodded, and with a
wary gla nce at Rollo, took a pla tter of roasted oysters from the
tray .
“Ah, the pity of  it.” Duncan Innes was quite drunk by now .
He sat slumped against the wa ll, his armless shoulder riding
higher than the other , giving him a strange, hunchbacked
appearance. “Th at a dear man like Gavin should come to such
an end!”  He shook his head lugubriously , swinging it back and
forth over his alecup like the clapper of a funeral bell.
“No fam ily left to mourn him, cast alone into a savage land
—hanged as a felon, and to be buried in an unconsecrated
grave. N ot even a proper lam ent to be sung for him!” He
picked u p the cup, and with some dif ficulty , found his mouth
with it. He drank deep and set it down with a muf fled clang.
“W ell, he shall  hav e a caithris !” He glared belligerently
from Jamie to Fer gus to Ian. “Why not?”
Jamie wasn’ t drunk, but he wasn’ t completely sober either .
He grinned at Duncan and lifted his own cup in salute.
“Why not, indeed?” he said. “O nly it will have to be you
singin’ it, Duncan. None of the rest knew Gavin, and I’m no
singer . I’ll shout along wi’ ye, though.”
Duncan nodded magisterially , bloodshot eyes surveying us.
W ithout warning , he flung back his head and emitted a terriblehowl. I jumped in my seat, spil ling half a cup of ale into my
lap. Ian and Fer gus, who had evidently heard Gaelic laments
before, didn’ t turn a hair .
All o ver the roo m, benches were shoved back, as men leapt
to th eir feet in alarm, reaching for their pistols. The barmaid
leaned out of the serving hatch, eyes big. Rollo came awake
with an explosive “W oof!”  and  glared rou nd wildly , teeth
bared.
“Tha sinn cruinn a chaoidh ar caraid, Gabhainn Hayes,”
Duncan thundered, in a ragged baritone. I had just about
enough Gaelic to translate this as “W e are met to weep and cry
out to heaven for the loss of our friend, Gavin Hayes!”
“Eisd ris!”  Jamie chimed in.
“Rugadh e do Sheumas Immanuel Hayes agus Louisa N’ic a
Liallainn an am baile Chill-Mhartainn, ann an sgir e Dhun
Domhnuill, anns a bhliadhnaseachd ceud deug agus a haon!”
He was born o f Seaumais Emmanuel Hayes and of Louisa
Maclellan, in the village of Kilm artin in the parish of Dodanil,
in the year of our Lord seventeen hundred and one!
“Eisd ris!”  This time Fer gus and Ian joined in on the
chorus, which I translated roughly as “Hear him!”
Rollo appeared not to care for  either verse or refrain; his
ears lay flat aga inst his skull, and his yellow eyes narrowed to
slits. Ian scratched his head in reassurance, and he lay down
again, muttering wolf curses under his breath.
The aud ience, having caught on to it that no actual violence
threatened, and no doubt bored with the inferior vocal ef forts
of the drinking s ociety in the co rner , settled down to enjoy the
show . B y the time Duncan h ad worked his way into an
accounting of the names of the sheep Gavin Hayes had owned
before le aving his croft to follo w his laird to Culloden, many
of those at the surrounding tables were joining enthusiastically
in the chorus, shouting “Eisd ris!”  and banging their mugs on
the t ables, in perfect ignorance of what was being said, and a
good thing too.Duncan, drunker than ever , fixed the soldiers at the next
table with a baleful glare, sweat pouring down his face.
“A Shas unnaich na galladh’ s olc a thig e dhuibh fanaid air
bas gasgaich. Gun toir eadh an diabhul fhein leis anns a bhas
sibh, dir each do  Fhirinn!!”  W ic ked Sassenach dogs, eaters  of
dead flesh! Ill does it become you to laugh and rejoice at the
death of a gallan t man! May the  devil himself seize upon you
in the hour of your death and take you straight to hell!
Ian blanched slightly at this, and Jamie cast Duncan a
narrow l ook, bu t they stoutly sh outed “Eisd ris!”  along with
the rest of the crowd.
Fer gus, seized by inspiration, got up and passed his hat
among t he crow d, who, carried away by ale and excitement,
happily flung coppers into it for the privilege of joining in
their own denunciation.
I had as good a head for drink as most men, but a much
smaller bladder . Head spinning from the noise and fumes as
much as  from alcohol, I got up  and edged my way out from
behind t he table , through the mo b, and into the fresh air of the
early evening.
It was still hot and sultry , thou gh the sun was long since
down. Still, there was a lot mor e air out here, and a lot fewer
people sharing it.
Having relieved the internal pressure, I sat down on the
tavern’ s chopping block with my pewter mug, breathing
deeply . T he night was clear , with a bright half-moon peeping
silver over the harbor ’ s edge. Our wagon stood nearby , no
more than its o utline visible in the light from the tavern
windows. Presu mably , Gavin Hayes’ decently shrouded body
lay within. I trusted he had enjoyed his caithris .
Inside, Duncan’ s  chanting had come to an end. A clear tenor
voice, wobbly with drink, but sweet nonetheless, was singing a
familiar tune, audible over the babble of talk.
“T o Anacr eon in heav’n, wher e he sat in full glee,
 A few sons of harmony sent a petition,That he their inspir er and patr on would be!
 When this answer arrived fr om the jolly old
Gr ecian:
 ‘V oice, fiddle, and flute,
 No longer be mute!
 I’ll lend you my name and inspir e you to boot.’ “
The singer ’ s voice cracked painfully on “voice, fiddle, and
flute,” but he sang stoutly on, despite the laughter from his
audience. I smiled wryly to myself as he hit the final couplet,
” ‘And, besides, I’ll instruct you like me to entwine,
 The Myrtle of V enus with Bacchus’ s vine!’ “
I lif ted my cup  in salute to the wheeled cof fin, softly
echoing the melody of the singer ’ s last lines.
“Oh, say , does that star -spangled banner yet wave
 O’er the land of the fr ee and the home of the
brave?”
I dra ined my cu p and sat still, waiting for the men to come
out.2
I N  W H I C H  W E  M E E T  A  G H O S T
T en, elev en, twelve…and two, and six…one pound, eight
shillings, sixpen ce, two farthings!” Fer gus dropped the last
coin ceremoniously into the cloth pocket, pulled tight the
drawstrings, and  handed it to Jamie. “And three buttons,” he
added, “but I have kept those,” and patted the side of his coat.
“Y e’ve s ettled w ith the landlord for our meal?” Jamie asked
me, weighing the little bag.
“Y es,” I assured him. “I have four shillings and sixpence
left, plus what Fer gus collected.”
Fer gus smiled modestly , square white teeth gleaming in the
faint light from the tavern’ s window .
“W e have the ne cessary money for the burial, then,” he said.
“W ill we take Monsieur Hayes to the priest now , or wait till
morning?”
Jamie frowned at the wagon, standing silent at the edge of
the inn yard.
“I shouldna think the priest will be awake at this hour ,” he
said, with a glance at the rising moon. “Still—”
“I’d just as soon not take him with us,” I said. “Not to be
rude,” I added apologetically to the wagon. “But if we’re
going to  sleep out in the woods, the…er…scent…” It wasn’ t
overpowering, but once away from the smoky reek of the
tavern, a distinct odor was noticeable in the vicinity of the
wagon. It hadn’ t been a gentle death, and it had  been a hot day .
“Auntie Claire is right,” Ian said, brushing his knuckles
inconspicuously under his nose. “W e dinna want to be
attracting wild animals.”
“W e canna be leaving Gavi n here, surely!” Duncan
protested, scandalized at the thought. “What, leave him lying
on th e s tep o’ the inn in his shroud, like a foundling wrappedin swad dling clothes?” He swayed alarmingly , his alcoholic
intake af fecting his always precarious balance.
I saw Jamie’ s wide mouth twitch with amusement, the moon
shining white on the knife-edged bridge of his nose.
“No,” he said. “ W e willna be leaving him here.” He tossed
the little  bag from hand to hand with a faint chinking sound,
then, making his decision, thrust it into his coat.
“W e’ll b ury him ourselves,” he said. “Fer gus, will ye be
stepping into the stable yonder and see can ye buy a spade
verra cheap?”
The short journey to the churc h through the quiet streets of
Charleston was somewhat less dignified than the usual funeral
cortege, marked as it was by Duncan’ s insistence on repeating
the more interesting portions of his lament as a processional.
Jamie dr ove slo wly , shouting occasional encouragement to
the horses; Duncan staggered beside the team, chanting
hoarsely and clutching one anim al by its headstall, while Ian
held the other to prevent bolting . Fer gus and I brought up the
rear in staid respectability , Fer gus holding his newly purchased
shovel at port-arms, and muttering dire predictions as to the
likelihood of us all spending th e night in gaol for disturbing
the peace of Charleston.
As it was, the church stood by itself in a quiet street, some
distance from the nearest house . This was all to the good, in
terms of avoiding notice, but it did mean that the churchyard
was dauntingly dark, with no gl ow of torch or candle to pierce
the blackness.
Great magnolia  trees overhung the gate, leathery leaves
drooping in the heat, and a bord er of pines, meant to provide
shade an d respit e in the day , served at night to block all traces
of moon and sta rlight, leaving the churchyard itself black as
a…well, as a crypt.
W alking through the air felt lik e pushing aside curtains of
black ve lvet, perfumed with an incense of turpentine from thesun-heated pines; endless layers  of soft, pungent smothering.
Nothing could have been farthe r from the cold purity of the
Highlands than this stifling sou thern atmosphere. Still, faint
patches of mist hung under the dark brick walls, and I could
have wis hed not  to recall Jamie’ s story of the tannasq  quite so
vividly .
“W e’ll find a place. Do you stay and hold the horses,
Duncan.” Jamie  slid down from the wagon’ s seat and took me
by the arm.
“W e’ll f ind a nice wee spot by the wall, perhaps,” he said,
guiding me toward the gate. “Ian and I will dig while you hold
the light, and Fer gus can stand guard.”
“What about Duncan?” I asked, with a backward glance.
“W ill he be all right?” The Scotsman was invisible, his tall,
lanky fo rm havi ng faded into the  lar ger blot comprising horses
and wagon, but he was still clearly audible.
“He’ll b e chief mourner ,” Jamie said, with a hint of a smile
in his voice. “Mind your head, Sassenach.” I ducked
automatically beneath a low magnolia branch; I didn’ t know
whether Jamie could actually see in total darkness, or merely
felt things by in stinct, but I ha d never seen him stumble, no
matter how dark the surroundings.
“Don’ t y ou think someone’ s going to notice a fresh grave?”
It w as not comp letely black in the churchyard, after all; once
out f rom under the magnolias, I could make out the dim forms
of grave stones, looking insubstantial but sinister in the dark, a
faint mist rising from the thick grass about their feet.
The sole s of my own feet tingled  as we picked a ginger way
through the stones. I seemed to feel silent waves of reproach at
this uns eemly in trusion wafting  up from below . I barked my
shin on  a tombstone and bit my lip, stifling an ur ge to
apologize to its owner .
“I ex pect they might.” Jamie le t go of my arm to rummage
in his coat. “But if the priest wanted money to bury Gavin, Ishouldna think he’d trouble to dig him up again for nothing,
aye?”
Y oung Ian materialized out of the darkness at my elbow ,
startling me.
“There’ s open space by the no rth wall, Uncle Jamie,” he
said, spe aking so ftly in spite of the obvious fact that there was
no one to hear . He paused, and drew slightly closer to me.
“It’ s verra dark in here, no?” The boy sounded uneasy . He
had had nearly as much to drink as Jamie or Fer gus, but while
the alcohol had imbued the older men with grim humor , it had
clearly had a more depressing ef fect on Ian’ s spirits.
“It i s, ay e. I’ve the bit of a candle I took from the tavern,
though; wait a bit.” Faint rustlings announced Jamie’ s search
for flint and tinderbox.
The encompassing dark made me feel disembodied, like a
ghost myself. I l ooked upward and saw stars, so faintly visible
through the thick air that they s hed no light upon the ground,
but only  gave a feeling of immense distance and infinite
remoteness.
“It’ s like the vigil of Easter .” Jamie’ s voice came softly ,
accompanied by the small scratching sounds of a striking flint.
“I saw the service once, at Notre Dame in Paris. W atch
yourself, Ian, there’ s a stone just there!” A thud and a stifled
grunt announced that Ian had belatedly discovered the stone
for himself.
“The church was all dark,” Jam ie continued, “but the folk
coming for the s ervice would buy small tapers from the crones
at the doors. It was something like this”—I felt, rather than
saw , his motion at the sky above—”a great space above, all
ringing wi’ the silence, and folk  packed in on every side.” Hot
as it was, I gave  an involuntary shiver at these words, which
conjured up a vision of the dead around us, crowding silently
side by side, in anticipation of an imminent resurrection.
“And th en, just when I thought  I couldna bear the silence
and the crowd, there came the priest’ s voice from the door .‘Lumen Christi!’  h e called out, and the acolytes lit the great
candle that he carried. Then from it they took the flame to their
own tapers, and scampered up an d down the aisles, passing the
fire to the candles o’ the faithful.”
I could see his hands, lit faintly by the tiny sparks from his
flint.
“Then the church came alive w i’ a thousand small flames,
but it was that first candle that broke the dark.”
The scratching sounds ceased, and he took away the cupped
hand that had shielded the newborn flame. The flame
strengthened and lit his face from below , gilding the planes of
high cheekbone s and forehead, and shadowing the deep-set
orbits of his eyes.
He lifted the candle, surveying the looming grave markers,
eerie as a circle of standing stones.
“Lumen Christi,”  he said softly , inclining his head toward a
granite p illar sur mounted with a cross, “et r eguiescat in pace,
amice.”  T he half-mocking note had le ft his voice; he spoke
with complete seriousness, and I felt at once oddly comforted,
as though some watchful presence had withdrawn.
He smiled at me then, and handed me the candle.
“See can ye find a bit of wood for a torch, Sassenach,” he
said. “Ian and I will take it in turns to dig.”
I wa s no longer nervous, but still felt like a grave robber ,
standing under a pine tree with my torch, watching Y oung Ian
and Jamie take their turns in t he deepening pit, their naked
backs gleaming with sweat in the torchlight.
“Medical students used to pay men to steal fresh bodies
from churchyards,” I said, handing my soiled kerchief to Jamie
as he hauled hi mself out of th e hole, grunting with ef fort.
“That was the only way they could practice dissection.”
“Did the y?” Jamie said. He wip ed the sweat from his face
and gave me a quick, wry glance. “Or do they?”Luckily , it was too dark for Ian  to notice my flush, despite
the torch light. I t wasn’ t the firs t slip I had made, nor was it
likely to  be the last, but most s uch inadvertencies resulted in
nothing more than a quizzical g lance, were they noticed at all.
The trut h simply was not a possibility that would occur to
anyone.
“I im agine they do it now ,” I ad mitted. I shivered slightly at
the thought of confronting a freshly exhumed and unpreserved
body , st ill smeared with the dirt of its desecrated grave.
Cadavers embalmed and laid on a stainless steel surface were
not particularly pleasant either , but the formality of their
presentation serv ed to keep the corruptive realities of death at
some small distance.
I exh aled strongly through my n ose, trying to rid myself of
odors, imagined and remembered. When I breathed in, my
nostrils were filled with the smell of damp earth and hot pitch
from my pine to rch, and the fai nter , cooler echo of live scent
from the pines overhead.
“They take paupers and criminals from the prisons, too.”
Y oung Ian, who had evidently  heard the exchange, if not
understood it, took the opportunity to stop for a moment,
wiping his brow as he leaned on the shovel.
“Da told  me about one time he was arrested, when they took
him to Edinbur g h, and kept him  in the T olbooth. He was in a
cell wi’ three other men, and o ne of them a fellow with the
consumption, who coughed something dreadful, keeping the
rest awake all night and all day . Then one night the coughing
stopped, and they kent he was d ead. But Da said they were so
tired, they couldna do more th an say a Pater Noster for his
soul, and fall asleep.”
The boy paused and rubbed an itching nose.
“Da said  he woke quite sudden wi’ someone clutching his
legs and another someone takin’ him by the arms, liftin’ him
up. He kicked and cried out, and the one who had his arms
screeched and dropped him, so t hat he cracked his head on the
stones. He sat up  rubbin’ his pate and found himself staring ata d octor  from the hospital and two fellows he’d brought along
to carry awa’ the corpse to the dissecting room.”
Ian grinned broadly at the recollection, wiping his sweat-
soaked hair out of his face.
“Da said he wasna sure who was most horrified, him or the
fellows who’d got the wrong b ody . He did say as the doctor
seemed regretful, though—said Da would have made a more
interesting specimen, what wi’ his leg stump and all.”
Jamie laughed, stretching his arms to ease his shoulders.
W ith face and to rso streaked with red dirt, and his hair bound
back with a kerchief round his forehead, he looked
disreputable as any grave robber .
“A ye, I mind that story ,” he sai d. “Ian did say after that as
all d octors were ghouls, and wo uldna have a thing to do with
them.” He grinned at me; I had been a doctor—a sur geon—in
my own  time, but here I passed as nothing more than a
wisewoman, skilled in the use of herbs.
“Fortunately , I’m no afraid of wee ghoulies, myself,” he
said, and leaned down to kiss m e briefly . His lips were warm,
tasting of ale. I could see droplets of sweat caught in the curly
hairs of his chest, and his nipples, dark buds in the dim light.
A tremo r that had nothing to d o either with cold or with the
eeriness of our surroundings ran down my spine. He saw it and
his e yes met mine. He took a dee p breath, and all at once I was
conscious of the close fit of my bodice, and the weight of my
breasts in the sweat-soaked fabric.
Jamie sh ifted himself slightly , plucking to ease the fit of his
breeches.
“Damn,” he said softly . He lo wered his eyes and turned
away , mouth barely touched by a rueful smile.
I hadn’ t expecte d it, but I recognized it, all right. A sudden
sur ge of lust was a common, if peculiar , response to the
presence of death. Soldiers feel it in the lull after battle; so do
healers who deal in blood and struggle. Perhaps Ian had been
more right than I thought about the ghoulishness of doctors.Jamie’ s hand touched my back and I started, showering
sparks from the blazing torch. H e took it from me and nodded
toward a nearby gravestone.
“Sit down, Sassenach,” he said. “Y e shouldna be standing so
long.” I had cracked the tibia of  my left leg in the shipwreck,
and while it had healed quickly , the leg still ached sometimes.
“I’m all  right.” Still, I moved toward the stone, brushing
against him as I  passed. He rad iated heat, but his naked flesh
was cool to the  touch, the sweat evaporating on his skin. I
could smell him.
I gla nced at him , and saw goose  bumps rise on the fair flesh
where I’ d touch ed him. I swall owed, fighting back a sudden
vision o f tumbling in the dark, to a fierce blind coupling amid
crushed grass and raw earth.
His hand lingered on my elbow as he helped me to a seat on
the stone. Rollo was lying by its  side, drops of saliva gleaming
in the torchlight as he pante d. The slanted yellow eyes
narrowed at me.
“Don’ t even think about it,” I sa id, narrowing my own eyes
back at him. “Bite me, and I’ll cram my shoe down your throat
so far you’ll choke.”
“W uff!”  Rollo said, quite softly . He laid his muzzle on his
paws, b ut the hairy ears were  pricked, turned to catch the
slightest sound.
The spade chunked softly into the earth at Ian’ s feet, and he
straightened up, slicking sweat of f his face with a palm swipe
that left black smears along his j aw . He blew out a deep breath
and glanced up at Jamie, miming exhaustion, tongue lolling
from the corner of his mouth.
“A ye, I expect it’ s deep enough.” Jamie answered the
wordless plea with a nod. “I’ll fetch Gavin along, then.”
Fer gus frowned uneasily , his features sharp in the torchlight.
“W ill yo u not need help to carry the corpse?” His reluctance
was evid ent; still, he had of fered. Jamie gave him a faint, wrysmile.
“I’ll manage well enough,” he s aid. “Gavin was a wee man.
Still, ye might bring the torch to see by .”
“I’ll come too, Uncle!” Y oung I an scrambled hastily out of
the pit, skinny shoulders gleam ing with sweat. “Just in case
you need help,” he added breathlessly .
“Afraid to be left in the dark?” Fer gus asked sarcastically . I
thought that the surroundings must be making him uneasy;
though he occasionally teased Ian, whom he regarded as a
younger brother , he was seldom cruel about it.
“A ye, I am,” Ian said simply . “Aren’ t you?”
Fer gus opened his mouth, brows arched skyward, then shut
it again and turned without a word toward the black opening of
the lych-gate, whence Jamie had disappeared.
“D’ye not think this is a te rrible place, Auntie?” Ian
murmured unea sily at my elbow , sticking close as we made
our way through the looming s tones, following the flicker of
Fer gus’ s torch. “I keep thinking of that story Uncle Jamie told.
And thinking now Gavin’ s dead, maybe the cold thing…I
mean, d o you think would it m aybe…come for him?” There
was an audible s wallow punctua ting this question, and I felt an
icy finger touch me, just at the base of my spine.
“No,” I said, a l ittle too loudly . I grabbed Ian’ s arm, less for
support than for the reassurance of his solidity . “Certainly
not.”
His skin was clammy with evaporating sweat, but the
skinny muscularity of the arm u nder my hand was comforting.
His half-visible presence reminded me faintly of Jamie; he was
nearly as tall as his uncle, and very nearly as strong, though
still lean and gangling with adolescence.
W e emer ged with gratitude in to the little pool of light
thrown by Fer gus’ s torch. The flickering light shone through
the wagon wheels, throwing shadows that lay like spiderwebs
in the dust. It was as hot in  the road as it was in thechurchyard, but the air seemed somehow freer , easier to
breathe, out from under the suf focating trees.
Rather to my surprise, Duncan was still awake, perched
drooping on the wagon’ s seat like a sleepy owl, shoulders
hunched about his ears. He was crooning under his breath, but
stopped when he saw us. Th e long wait seemed to have
sobered him a bit; he got down from the seat steadily enough
and came round to the rear of the wagon to help Jamie.
I smothered a yawn. I would be glad to be done with this
melancholy duty  and on our way to rest, even if the only bed
to look forward to was one of piled leaves.
“Ifrinn an Diabhuil! A Dhia, thoir cobhair!”
“Sacr ee V ier ge!”
My head snapped up. Everyone was shouting, and the
horses, startled, were neighing and jerking frantically against
their hobbles, making the wagon  hop and lurch like a drunken
beetle.
“W uff!”  Rollo said next to me.
“Jesus!” said Ian, goggling at the wagon. “Jesus Christ !”
I swung in the direction he was looking, and screamed. A
pale figu re loomed out of the wagon bed, swaying with the
wagon’ s jerking . I had no time to see more before all hell
broke loose.
Rollo b unched his hindquart ers and launched himself
through the dark with a roar , to the accompaniment of shouts
from Jamie and Ian, and a ter rible scream from the ghost.
Behind me, I co uld hear the sou nd of French cursing as Fer gus
ran back into the churchyard, stumbling and crashing over
tombstones in the dark.
Jamie ha d dropped the torch; it  flickered and hissed on the
dusty road, threatening to go out. I fell to my knees and
grabbed it, blowing on it, desperate to keep it alight.
The cho rus of shouts and growli ng grew to a crescendo, and
I r ose up, torch  in hand, to find Ian struggling with Rollo,trying to keep him away fro m the dim figures wrestling
together in a cloud of dust.
“Arr etes espece  de cochon!”  F er gus gallope d out of the
dark, bra ndishing the spade he had gone to fetch. Finding his
injunction disregarded, he step ped forward and brought it
down one-handed on the intruder ’ s head with a dull clong !
Then he swung toward Ian and Rollo.
“Y ou be quiet, to o!” Fer gus said to the dog, threatening him
with the shovel. “Shut up this minute, foul beast, or I brain
you!”
Rollo snarled, with a show of impressive teeth that I
interpreted roug hly to mean “Y ou and who else?” but was
prevented from mayhem by Ian , who wrapped his arm about
the dog’ s throat and choked of f any further remarks.
“Where did he  come from?” Ian asked in amazement. He
craned his neck, trying to get a look at the fallen figure without
letting go of Rollo.
“From h ell,” Fer gus said briefly . “And I invite him to go
back there at once.” He was trembling with shock and
exertion; the light gleamed dully from his hook as he brushed
a thick lock of black hair out of his eyes.
“Not from hell; from the gallows. Do ye not know him?”
Jamie rose slowly to his feet, d usting his breeches. He was
breathing heavily , and smeared with dirt, but seemed unhurt.
He p icked up hi s fallen kerchief and glanced about, wiping his
face. “Where’ s Duncan?”
“Here, Mac Dubh, ” sa id a gruf f voice from the fro nt of the
wagon. “The beasts werena likin’ Gavin much to start with,
and they’re proper upset to thin k he was a-resurrectin’. Not,”
he a dded fairly , “but what I was  a wee bit startled myself.” He
eyed the  figure on the ground with disfavor , and patted one
skittish horse firmly on the n eck. “Ah, it’ s no but a silly
bugger , luaidh,  hush your noise now , aye?”
I ha d handed Ian the torch and knelt to inspect the damage
to our visitor . T his seemed to be slight; the man was alreadystirring. Jamie was right; it wa s the man who had escaped
hanging earlier in the day . He was young, about thirty ,
muscular and powerfully built, his fair hair matted with sweat
and stif f with filth. He reeked of prison, and the musky-sharp
smell of prolonged fear . Little wonder .
I g ot a hand under his arm an d helped him to sit up. He
grunted and put his hand to  his head, squinting in the
torchlight.
“Are you all right?” I asked.
“Thankin’ ye kindly , ma’am, I will have been better .” He
had a faint Irish accent and a soft, deep voice.
Rollo, upper lip lifted just en ough to show a menacing
eyetooth, shoved his nose into the visitor ’ s armpit, snif fed,
then jerk ed bac k his head and sneezed explosively . A small
tremor o f laughter ran round the  circle, and the tension relaxed
momentarily .
“How long have ye been in the wagon?” Duncan demanded.
“Since midafternoon.” The man rose awkwardly onto his
knees, s waying a bit from the ef fects of the blow . He touched
his h ead again a nd winced. “Oh, Jaysus! I crawled in there just
after the Frenchie loaded up poor old Gavin.”
“Where were you before that?” Ian asked.
“Hidin’ under the gallows car t. It was the only place I
thought they wouldn’ t be looking.” He rose laboriously to his
feet, clo sed his eyes to get his balance, then opened them.
They were a pale green in the t orchlight, the color of shallow
seas. I saw them flick from face  to face, then settle on Jamie.
The man bowed, careful of his head.
“Stephen Bonnet. Y our servant,  sir .” He made no move to
extend a hand in greeting, nor did Jamie.
“Mr . Bonnet.” Jamie nodded back, face carefully blank. I
didn’ t know quite how he contrived to look commanding,
wearing nothing but a pair of damp and dirt-stained breeks, buthe m anaged it. He looked the  visitor over , taking in every
detail of his appearance.
Bonnet was what country people  called “well set up,” with a
tall, powerful frame and a barrel chest, his features heavy-
boned but coarsely handsome. A few inches shorter than
Jamie, he stood easy , balanced  on the balls of his feet, fists
half closed in readiness.
No stran ger to a fight, judging by the slight crookedness of
his nose and a small scar by the corner of his mouth. The small
imperfections did nothing to mar the overall impression of
animal magnetism; he was the sort of man who attracted
women easily . Some women, I amended, as he cast a
speculative glance at me.
“For what crime were ye condemned, Mr . Bonnet?” Jamie
asked. He himself stood easy , b ut with a look of watchfulness
that reminded me forcibly of Bonnet himself. It was the ears-
back look male dogs give each other before deciding whether
to fight.
“Smuggling,” Bonnet said.
Jamie d idn’ t reply , but tilted his head slightly . One brow
rose in inquiry .
“And piracy .” A muscle twitched near Bonnet’ s mouth; a
poor attempt at a smile, or an involuntary quiver of fear?
“And will ye have killed anyone in the commission of your
crimes, Mr . Bonnet?” Jamie’ s face was blank, save for the
watchful eyes. Think twice,  his eye s said plainly . Or maybe
thr ee times .
“None th at were not tryin’ to kill me first,” Bonnet replied.
The wor ds were easy , the tone almost flippant, but belied by
the hand that closed tight into a fist by his side.
It dawne d on me that Bonnet must feel he was facing judge
and jury , as surely as he had faced them once before. He had
no way of knowing that we were nearly as reluctant to go near
the garrison soldiers as he was.Jamie looked at Bonnet for a lo ng moment, peering closely
at hi m in the flickering torchligh t, then nodded and took a half
step back.
“Go, then,” he said quietly . “W e will not hinder ye.”
Bonnet took an audible breath; I could see the big frame
relax, shoulders slumping under the cheap linen shirt.
“Thank you,” he said. He wiped  a hand across his face, and
took another deep breath. The green eyes darted from me to
Fer gus to Duncan. “But will ye help me, maybe?”
Duncan, who had relaxed at Jam ie’ s words, gave a grunt of
surprise.
“Help you? A thief?”
Bonnet’ s head swiveled in Duncan’ s direction. The iron
collar was a d ark line about his neck, giving the eerie
impression that his severed head floated several inches above
his shoulders.
“Help me,” he re peated. “There will be soldiers on the roads
tonight—huntin’ me.” He gestu red toward the wagon. “Y ou
could ta ke me safely past them—if ye will.” He turned back to
Jamie, and straightened his back, shoulders stif f. “I am
begging for your help, sir , in the name of Gavin Hayes, who
was my friend as well as yours—and a thief, as I am.”
The men studied him in silenc e for a moment, digesting
this. Fer gus glanced inquiringly at Jamie; the decision was his.
But Jamie, after a long, conside ring look at Bonnet, turned
to Duncan.
“What say ye, Duncan?” Duncan gave Bonnet the same
kind of look that Jamie himself had used, and finally nodded.
“For Ga vin’ s sa ke,” he said, a nd turned away toward the
lych-gate.
“All righ t, then,” Jamie said. He  sighed and pushed a loose
lock of hair behind his ear .“Help u s to bury Gavin,” he said to our new guest, “and
then we’ll go.”
An hour later , G avin’ s grave was a blank rectangle of fresh-
turned earth, stark among the gray hues of the surrounding
grass.
“He must have his name to mark him by ,” Jamie said.
Painstakingly , he scratched the letters of Gavin’ s name and his
dates upon a pie ce of smooth beach-stone, using the point of
his knife. I rubb ed soot from th e torch into the incised letters,
making a crude but readable g rave marker , and Ian set this
solidly into a small cairn of gathered pebbles. Atop the tiny
monument, Jam ie gently set the stub of candle that he had
taken from the tavern.
Everyone stood awkwardly about the grave for a moment,
not knowing how to take farew ell. Jamie and Duncan stood
close together , looking down. They would have taken final
leave of many such comrades since Culloden, if often with less
ceremony .
Finally J amie nodded to Fer gus, who took a dry pine twig,
and ligh ting it from my torch , bent and touched it to the
candle’ s wick.
“Requiem aeternam dona ei, et lux perpetua luceat ei….”
Jamie said quietly .
“Eternal rest grant unto him, O G od—and let perpetual light
shine up on him.” Y oung Ian ec hoed it softly , his face solemn
in the torchlight.
W ithout a word, we turned and left the churchyard. Behind
us, t he candle b urned without a flicker in the still, heavy air ,
like the sanctuary lamp in an empty church.
The mo on was high in the sky  by the time we reached the
military checkpo int outside the city walls. It was only a half-
moon, but shed enough light for us to see the trampled dirt
track of  the wagon road that ran before us, wide enough for
two wagons to travel abreast.W e had encountered several such points on the road
between Savannah and Charleston, mostly manned by bored
soldiers who waved us through without bothering to check the
passes we had obtained in Geor gia. The checkpoints were
mostly concerne d with the inte rception of smuggled goods,
and with  the capture of the odd bondservant or slave, escaped
from his master .
Even filthy and unkempt, we passed notice for the most
part; few travelers were in bet ter case. Fer gus and Duncan
could not be i ndentured men,  maimed as they were, and
Jamie’ s presence transcended his clothes; shabby coat or not,
no man would take him for a servant.
T onight was dif ferent, though. There were eight soldiers at
the checkpoint, not the usual two, and all were armed and
alert. Musket barrels flashed in the moonlight as the shout of
“Halt! Y our name and your bus iness!” came from the dark. A
lantern w as hoisted up six inch es from my face, blinding me
for a moment.
“James Fraser , bound for W ilmington, with my family and
servants.” Jamie’ s voice was calm, and his hands were steady
as he handed me the reins before reaching for the passes in his
coat.
I kep t my head down, trying to look tired and indif ferent. I
was tired, all ri ght—I could have lain down in the road and
slept—but far from indif ferent.  What did they do to you for
aiding the escape of a fugitive f rom the gallows? I wondered.
A single drop of sweat snaked its way down the back of my
neck.
“Have y ou seen anyone along th e road as you passed, sir?”
The “sir ” came a little reluctantly; the dilapidation of Jamie’ s
coat and my gow n were obvious in the pool of yellow lantern
light.
“A carriage that passed us from the town; I suppose you will
have seen that yourselves,” Jamie answered. The ser geant
replied with a grunt, checking the passes carefully , thensquinting into the dark to cou nt and see that the attendant
bodies matched.
“What goods do you carry?” H e handed back the passes,
motioning to one of his subord inates to search the wagon. I
twitched the reins inadvertently , and the horses snorted and
shook th eir heads. Jamie’ s foot nudged mine, but he didn’ t
look at me.
“Small household goods,” he answered, still calm. “A half
of venison and a bag of salt, for provision. And a body .”
The soldier who had been reach ing for the wagon covering
stopped abruptly . The ser geant looked up sharply .
“A what?”
Jamie took the reins from me and wrapped them casually
about his wrist. From the corner of my eye, I saw Duncan edge
toward the darkness of the wood; Fer gus, with his
pickpocket’ s skill, had already faded from view .
“The corpse of the man who was hanged this afternoon. He
was known to me; I asked permission of Colonel Franklin to
take him  to his kinsmen in the north. That is why we travel by
night,” he added delicately .
“I se e.” The ser geant motioned a lantern bearer closer . He
gave Jamie a long thoughtful look, eyes narrowed, and
nodded. “I remember you,” he s aid. “Y ou called out to him at
the last. A friend, was he?”
“I knew  him once. Some years ago,” he added. The ser geant
nodded to his subordinate, not taking his eyes of f Jamie.
“Have a look, Griswold.”
Griswold, who was perhaps fourteen, betrayed a notable
lack of enthusiasm for the order , but dutifully lifted the canvas
cover an d raised  his lantern to peer into the wagon bed. W ith
an ef fort, I kept myself from turning to look.
The near  horse snorted and tossed its head. If we did have to
bolt, it would ta ke several seconds for the horses to get thewagon moving. I heard Ian shif t behind me, getting his hand
on the club of hickory wood stowed behind the seat.
“Y es, sir , it’ s a body ,” Griswold reported. “In a shroud.” He
dropped the canvas with an air of relief, and exhaled strongly
through his nostrils.
“Fix your bayonet and give it a jab,” the ser geant said, eyes
still on Jamie. I must have made a small noise, for the
ser geant’ s glance shifted to me.
“Y ou’ll soil my wagon,” Jamie objected. “The man’ s fair
ripe, after a day in the sun, aye?”
The ser g eant sn orted impatient ly . “Jab it in the leg, then.
Get on, Griswold!”
W ith a marked air of reluctance, Griswold af fixed his
bayonet, and standing on tiptoe,  began to poke gingerly about
in th e wagon be d. Behind me, Ian had begun to whistle softly .
A Gaelic  tune whose title translated to “In the Morn W e Die,”
which I thought very tasteless of him.
“No, sir , he’ s de ad all right.” Griswold dropped back on his
heels, sounding relieved. “I poked right hard, but not a
twitch.”
“All right, then.” Dismissing th e young soldier with a jerk
of his hand, the ser geant nodded to Jamie. “Drive on then, Mr .
Fraser . But I’d advise you to  choose your friends more
carefully in future.”
I s aw Jamie’ s k nuckles whiten  on the reins, but he only
drew himself up straight and set tled his hat more firmly on his
head. He clicked his tongue an d the horses set of f sharply ,
leaving puf fs of pale dust floating in the lantern light.
The darkness seemed engulfing after the light; despite the
moon, I could see almost nothin g. The night enfolded us. I felt
the relief of a hunted animal that finds safe refuge, and in spite
of the oppressive heat, I breathed more freely .
W e covered a distance of nearly a quarter mile before
anyone spoke.“Are ye wounded, Mr . Bonnet?” Ian spoke in a loud
whisper , just audible over the rattle of the wagon.
“Y es, he’ s pinked me in the  thigh, damn the puppy .”
Bonnet’ s voice was low , but ca lm. “Thank Christ he left of f
before the blood soaked through the shroud. Dead men don’ t
bleed.”
“Are yo u hurt badly? Shall I co me back and have a look at
it?” I twisted around. Bonnet had pushed back the canvas
cover and was sitting up, a vague pale shape in the darkness.
“No, I thank ye , ma’am. I’ve m y stocking wound round it
and ‘twill serve well enough, I expect.” My night vision was
returning; I could see the gleam of fair hair as he bent his head
to his task.
“Can ye walk, d o ye think?” Ja mie slowed the horses to a
walk, and twisted round to inspect our guest. While his tone
was not inhospit able, it was clea r that he would prefer to be rid
of our dangerous car go as soon as possible.
“Not easily , no. I’m that sorry ,  sir .” Bonnet was aware of
Jamie’ s eagerness to be rid of him, too. W ith some dif ficulty ,
he hoist ed himself up in the wagon bed, rising onto his good
knee beh ind the seat. His lower half was invisible in darkness,
but I could smell the blood on him, a sharper scent than the
lingering faint reek of Gavin’ s shroud.
“A s uggestion, Mr . Fraser . In th ree miles, we’ll come to the
Ferry T rail road. A mile past the crossroads, another road leads
toward the coast. It’ s little more than a pair of ruts, but
passable. That will take us to the edge of a creek with an outlet
to the sea. Some associates of mine will be puttin’ in to anchor
there wi thin the week; if ye would grant me some small stock
of provisions, I can await them in reasonable safety , and you
can be on your way , free o’ the taint of my company .”
“Associates? Y e mean pirates?” Ian’ s voice held a certain
amount of wariness. Having been abducted from Scotland by
pirates, he invested such persons  with none of the romanticism
normal to a fifteen-year -old.“That w ould depend upon your perspective, lad.” Bonnet
sounded amused. “Certainly th e governors of the Carolinas
would call them so; the merchants of W ilmington and
Charleston perhaps regard them otherwise.”
Jamie gave a bri ef snort. “Smugglers, aye? And what might
these associates of yours be dealing in, then?”
“Whatever will fetch a price to  make it worth the risk of
carrying.” The amusement had not left Bonnet’ s voice, but was
now ting ed with cynicism. “W ill you be wanting some reward
for your assistance? That can be managed.”
“I d o not.” Jamie’ s voice was cold. “I saved you for Gavin
Hayes’ sake, and for my own. I wouldna seek reward for such
service.”
“I m eant no of fense to ye, si r .” Bonnet’ s head inclined
slightly toward us.
“None taken,” Jamie answered shortly . He shook out the
reins and wrapped them afresh, changing hands.
Conversation la psed after this small clash, though Bonnet
continued to ride kneeling behind us, peering over my
shoulder at the dark road ahead. There were no more soldiers,
though; nothing  moved, not even a breath of wind in the
leaves. Nothing disturbed the sil ence of the summer night save
the o ccasional thin zeek  of a passing night bird, or the hooting
of an owl.
The soft rhythmic thump of the  horses’ hooves in the dust
and the squeak and rattle of th e wagon began to lull me to
sleep. I tried to keep upright, w atching the black shadows of
the t rees along t he road, but fou nd myself gradually inclining
toward Jamie, my eyes falling shut despite my best ef forts.
Jamie transferred the reins to his left hand, and putting his
right ar m around me, drew m e down to rest against his
shoulder . As always, I felt safe when I touched him. I went
limp, ch eek pressed against the dusty ser ge of his coat, and fell
at once into tha t uneasy doze that is the consequence of a
combination of utter exhaustion and the inability to lie down.I op ened my eye s once to see the tall, lean figure of Duncan
Innes, pacing alongside the wagon with his tireless hillman’ s
stride, head bowed as though in  deep thought. Then I closed
them again, and drifted into a doze in which memories of the
day mingled with inchoate fragments of dreams. I dreamt of a
giant sku nk slee ping under a tav ern’ s table, waking to join in a
chorus of “The Star -Spangled Banner ,” and then of a swinging
corpse that raised its lolling head and grinned with empty
eyes…I came awake to find Jamie gently shaking me.
“Y e’d best crawl into the back a nd lie down, Sassenach,” he
said. “Y ou’re craicklin’ in your sleep. Y ou’ll be slippin’ into
the road, next thing.”
Blearily assenting, I clambered awkwardly over the seat
back, changing places with Bon net, and found a place in the
wagonbed next to the slumbering form of Y oung Ian.
It sm elt musty—and worse—in the wagon bed. Ian had his
head pillowed on a packet of roughly butchered venison,
wrapped in the untanned skin of the deer . Rollo had done
somewhat better , his hairy muzzle resting comfortably on Ian’ s
stomach. For myself, I took the leathern bag of salt. The
smooth leather was hard under my cheek, but odorless.
The jolting boards of the wagon  bed couldn’ t by any stretch
of the imaginat ion be called comfortable, but the relief of
being able to st retch out at full length was so overwhelming
that I scarcely noticed the bum ps and jolts. I rolled onto my
back and looked up into the ha zy immensity of the southern
sky , stud ded thic k with blazing s tars. Lumen Christi,  I thought,
and com forted by the thought of  Gavin Hayes finding his way
safe home by the lights of heaven, fell once more fast asleep.
I co uld not tell how long I sl ept, wrapped in a drugged
blanket of heat and exhaustion.  I woke when the pace of the
wagon changed, swimming toward the surface of
consciousness, drenched with sweat.
Bonnet and Jamie were talking , in the low , easy tones of
men who had fo und their way past the early awkwardness of
first acquaintance.“Y ou said that y e saved me for Gavin Hayes’ sake—and for
your own,” Bonnet was saying. His voice was soft, barely
audible above the rumble of the wheels. “What did ye mean by
that, sir , and ye’ll pardon my asking—?”
Jamie d idn’ t answer at once; I nearly fell asleep again
before he spoke, but at last his answer came, floating
disembodied in the warm, dark air .
“Y e wilna have slept much la st night, I think? Knowing
what was to come to ye with the day?”
There was a low laugh from Bonnet, not entirely amused.
“T oo right,” he said. “I doubt I shall for get it in a hurry .”
“Nor wi ll I.” Jamie said some thing soft in Gaelic to the
horses, and they slowed in response. “I once lived through
such a night, knowing I would hang, come morning. And yet I
lived, through the grace of one who risked much to save me.”
“I see,” Bonnet said softly . “So you are an asgina ageli,  are
you?”
“A ye? And what will that be?”
There w as a sound of scraping and brushing leaves against
the side of the wagon, and the spicy sap-scent of the trees grew
suddenly stronger . Something light touched my face—leaves,
falling from above. The horses slowed, and the rhythm of the
wagon changed markedly , the wheels finding an uneven
surface. W e had turned into the small road that led to Bonnet’ s
creek.
” Asgina ageli  is a term that the red savages employ—the
Cherokee of the mountains; I heard it from one I had as guide
one time. It mea ns ‘half-ghost,’ one who should have died by
right, bu t yet remains on the earth; a woman who survives a
mortal i llness, a man fallen into his enemies’ hands who
escapes. They say an asgina ageli  has one foot on the earth
and the other in the spirit world. He can talk to the spirits, and
see the Nunnahee—the Little People.”“Little People? W ill that be like the faeries?” Jamie sounded
surprised.
“Something of the kind.” Bonnet shifted his weight and the
seat creaked as he stretched. “ The Indians do say that the
Nunnahee live inside the rocks o f the mountains, and come out
to help their people in time of war or other evil.”
“Is that so? It wi ll be something like the tales they tell in the
Highlands of Scotland, then—of the Auld Folk.”
“Indeed.” Bonnet sounded amused. “W ell, from what I have
heard of the S cotch Highlanders, there is little to choose
between them and the red men for barbarous conduct.”
“Nonsense,” said Jamie, sounding not the least of fended.
“The red  savage s eat the hearts  of their enemies, or so I have
heard. I prefer a good dish of oatmeal parritch, myself.”
Bonnet made a noise, hastily stifled.
“Y ou are  a Highlander? W ell, I will say that for a barbarian,
I ha ve found y e passing civil, sir ,” he assured Jamie, the
laughter quivering in his voice.
“I am exceedingly obliged for y our kind opinion, sir ,” Jamie
replied, with equal politeness.
Their voices faded into the rhythmic squeaking of the
wheels, and I was asleep again before I could hear more.
The moo n hung low over the trees by the time we came to a
halt. I was rouse d by the movem ents of Y oung Ian, clambering
sleepily over the wagon’ s edge to help Jamie tend to the
horses. I poked my head up to  see a broad stretch of water
flowing past shelving banks of c lay and silt, the stream a shiny
black gl ittering with silver where rif fles purled on the rocks
near shore. Bonnet, with customary New W orld
understatement, might call it a creek, but it would pass for a
decent river among most boatmen, I thought.
The men moved to and fro in  the shadows, carrying out
their tasks with no more than an occasional muttered word.They moved with unaccustomed slowness, seeming to fade
into the night, made insubstantial by fatigue.
“Do ye go and f ind a place to sleep, Sassenach,” Jamie said,
pausing to steady me as I dropped down from the wagon. “I
must just see our guest provisioned and set on his way , and the
beasts wiped down and put to grass.”
The temperature had dropped scarcely at all since nightfall,
but the air seemed fresher here  near the water , and I found
myself reviving somewhat.
“I can’ t sleep un til I’ve bathed,” I said, pulling the soaked
bodice of my gown away from my breasts. “I feel terrible.”
My hair  was pasted to my temples with sweat, and my flesh
felt grim ed and itchy . The dark water looked cool and inviting.
Jamie cast a longing look at it, plucking at his crumpled stock.
“I canna  say I blame ye. Go c areful, though; Bonnet says
the chan nel in midstream is deep enough to float a ketch, and
it’ s a tide-creek; there’ll be a strong current.”
“I’ll stay near the shore.” I pointed downstream, where a
small point of l and marked a bend in the river , its willows
shining dusky silver in the moonlight. “See that little point?
There should be an eddy pool there.”
“A ye. Go careful, then,” he sa id again, and squeezed my
elbow in  farewe ll. As I turned to go, a lar ge pale shape loomed
up befo re me; our erstwhile g uest, one leg of his breeches
stained dark with dried blood.
“Y our servant, ma’am,” he said, making me a creditable
bow , despite the injured leg. “Do I bid you now adieu?” He
was standing a bit closer to me than I quite liked, and I
repressed the ur ge to step backward.
“Y ou do,” I sa id, and nodded to him, brushing back a
dangling lock of hair . “Good luck, Mr . Bonnet.”
“I th ank ye for  your kind wis hes, ma’am,” he answered
softly . “B ut I have found that a man most often makes his own
luck. Good night to ye, ma’am .” He bowed once more and
turned away , limping heavily , like the ghost of a crippled bear .The creek’ s rushing masked most of the ordinary night
sounds. I saw a bat blink through a patch of moonlight over
the w ater , in pur suit of insects to o small to see, and vanish into
the night. If anything else lurked in the dark, it was quiet.
Jamie grunted softly to himself.
“W ell, I’ve my doubts of the man,” he said, as though
answering a question I hadn’ t a sked. “I must hope I’ve only
been softhearted, and not softheaded, by helpin’ him.”
“Y ou couldn’ t leave him to hang, after all,” I said.
“Oh, aye, I coul d,” he said, surp rising me. He saw me look
up at him, and  smiled, the wry twist of his mouth barely
visible in the dark.
“The Cr own do esna always  p ick the wrong man to hang,
Sassenach,” he said. “More ofte n than not, the man on the end
of a rope deserves to be there.  And I shouldna like to think
I’ve helped a vi llain to go free.” He shrugged, and shoved his
hair back out of his face.
“A ye, w ell, it’ s done. Go and have your bath, Sassenach; I’ll
come to ye so soon as I may .”
I sto od on tiptoe to kiss him, an d felt him smile as I did so.
My tongue touched his mouth in  delicate invitation, and he bit
my lower lip gently , in answer .
“Can ye stay awake a wee bit longer , Sassenach?”
“As lon g as it takes,” I assured him. “But do hurry , won’ t
you?”
There w as a patch of thick grass edging the point below the
willows. I undressed slowly , enjoying the feel of the water -
borne breeze through the damp  cloth of shift and stockings,
and the final freedom as the la st bits of clothing fell to the
ground, leaving me naked to the night.
I stepped  gingerly into the water . It was surprisingly cool—
cold, by  contrast  to the hot night air . The bottom under my feetwas mo stly silt,  but it yielded to fine sand within a yard of
shore.
Though it was a  tidal creek, we were far enough upstream
that the water w as fresh and sw eet. I drank and splashed my
face, washing away the dust in throat and nose.
I wa ded in up to mid-thigh, mindful of Jamie’ s cautions
about channels and currents. After the staggering heat of the
day and the smo thering embrace  of the night, the sensation of
coolness on bare skin was an overwhelming relief. I cupped
handfuls of cold water and splashed them on my face and
breasts; the droplets ran down m y stomach and tickled coldly
between my legs.
I co uld feel the slight push of the tide coming in, shoving
gently a gainst m y calves, ur ging me toward shore. I wasn’ t
ready to  come in yet, though. I had no soap, but knelt and
rinsed my hair over and over in the clear dark water , and
scrubbed my body with handfuls of fine sand, until my skin
felt thin and glowing.
Finally , I climbed out onto a rocky shelf and lay languid as a
mermaid in the moonlight, the heat of the air and the sun-
warmed stone now a comfort to my chilled body . I combed out
my thick  curly hair with my fingers, scattering drops of water .
The wet stone smelled like rain, dusty and tingling.
I f elt very tired, but at the same time, very much alive, in
that state of half consciousness where thought is slowed and
small physical sensations magnified. I moved my bare foot
slowly over the sandstone rock, enjoying the slight friction,
and ran a hand l ightly down the inside of my thigh, a ripple of
goose bumps rising in the wake of my touch.
My breasts rose in the moonlight, cool white domes
spangled with clear droplets. I brushed one nipple and watched
it slowly stif fen by itself, rising as if by magic.
Quite a magical place at that, I t hought. The night was quiet
and still, but with a languid atmosphere that was like floating
in a war m sea. So near the coa st, the sky was clear , and thestars shone overhead like diamonds, burning with a fierce,
bright light.
A fa int splash made me look toward the stream. Nothing
moved on the surface but faint coruscations of starlight, caught
like fireflies in a spider ’ s web.
As I  wa tched, a great head broke water in the middle of the
stream, water purling back from  the pointed snout. There was
a fish strugglin g in Rollo’ s jaws; the flap and gleam of its
scales sh owed briefly as he sho ok his head violently to break
its b ack. The huge dog swam slowly to the shore, shook his
coat brie fly , and  stalked away , h is evening meal dangling limp
and shimmering from his jaws.
He paus ed for a moment on the far edge of the creek,
looking at me, the ruf f of his hackles a dark shadow framing
yellow e yes and gleaming fish. Like a primitive painting, I
thought; something from Rousseau, with its contrast of utter
wildness and complete stillness.
Then the dog w as gone, and there was nothing on the far
shore bu t the trees, hiding whatever might lie behind them.
And wh at did? I wondered. More trees, answered the logical
part of my mind.
“A lot  more,” I murmured, looking into the mysterious dark.
Civilization—even of the primitive kind I had grown used to
—was no more than a thin crescent on the edge of the
continent. T wo hundred miles from the coast, you were
beyond the ken of city and farm . And, past that point lay three
thousand miles… of what? W ilderness, surely , and danger .
Adventure, too—and freedom.
It w as a new world, after all, fre e of fear and filled with joy ,
for now Jamie and I were together , for all of our lives before
us. Parting and sorrow lay behind us. Even the thought of
Brianna caused no dreadful regret—I missed her greatly , and
thought of her c onstantly , but I knew she was safe in her own
time, and that knowledge made her absence easier to bear .I lay back on the rock, the trapped heat of the day radiating
from its  surface into my body ,  happy only to be alive. The
drops o f water were drying o n my breasts as I watched,
vanishing to a film of moistness and then disappearing
altogether .
Small clouds of gnats hovered o ver the water; I couldn’ t see
them, but I knew  they were there by the occasional splash of
leaping fish, rising to snatch them from the air .
The bug s had been a ubiquitous plague. I inspected Jamie’ s
skin mi nutely every morning, picking voracious ticks and
wood fleas from his crevices, and anointed all of the men
liberally with the juice of crushed pennyroyal and tobacco
leaves. This kept them from being devoured alive by the
clouds of mosquitoes, gnats, and carnivorous midges that hung
in th e sun-tinged shadows of th e woods, but it didn’ t prevent
the hord es of inquisitive bugs f rom driving them mad with a
constant tickling inquiry into ears, eyes, noses, and mouths.
Oddly enough, the majority of i nsects left me strictly alone.
Ian joked that t he strong scent of herbs that hung about me
must repel them, but I thought i t went further than that—even
when I was fre shly bathed, the insects showed no desire to
bother me.
I though t it might be a manifestation of the evolutionary
oddity th at—I s urmised—protected me from colds and minor
illness h ere. Bloodthirsty bugs, like microbes, evolved very
closely with humans, and were s ensitive to the subtle chemical
signals o f their hosts. Coming f rom another time, I no longer
had precisely the same signals, and consequently the bugs no
longer perceived me as prey .
“Or maybe Ian’ s right, and I jus t smell awful,” I said aloud.
I dipped  my fingers in the water and flicked a spray of drops at
a dr agonfly resting on my rock , no more than a transparent
shadow , its colors drained by darkness.
I h oped Jamie w ould hurry . Riding for days on the wagon
seat nex t to him, watching the subtle shifts of his body as he
drove, se eing the  changing light on the angles of his face as hetalked and smiled, was enough to make my palms tingle with
the u r ge to touc h him. W e had not made love in several days,
owing t o our hurry to reach C harleston, and my inhibitions
about intimacy within earshot of a dozen men.
A br eath of warm breeze slippe d past me, and all the tiny
down ha irs on my body prickl ed with its passing. No hurry
now , and no one  to hear . I drew a hand down the soft curve of
my b elly and the softer skin inside my thighs, where the blood
pulsed slowly to the beat of my heart. I cupped my hand,
feeling the swollen moist ache of ur gent desire.
I clo sed my eyes, rubbing ligh tly , enjoying the feeling of
increasing ur gency .
“And where the hell are you,  Jamie Fraser?” I murmured.
“Here,” came a husky answer .
Startled, my eyes popped open. He was standing in the
stream, six feet away , thigh-deep in the water , his genitals stif f
and dark  against  the pallid glow  of his body . His hair lay loose
around his shoulders, framing a face white as bone, eyes
unblinking and intent as those o f the wolf-dog. Utter wildness,
utter stillness.
Then he stirred and came toward  me, still intent, but still no
longer . His thighs were cold as w ater when he touched me, but
within seconds he warmed and grew hot. Sweat sprang up at
once where his hands touched  my skin, and a flush of hot
moisture dampened my breasts once more, making them round
and slick against the hardness of his chest.
Then his mouth moved to mine and I melted—almost
literally—into him. I didn’ t care how hot it was, or whether the
dampness on my skin was my sw eat or his. Even the clouds of
insects f aded into insignificance . I raised my hips and he slid
home, sl ick and solid, the last faint coolness of him quenched
by my heat, like the cold metal of a sword, slaked in hot blood.
My hands glided on a film of m oisture over the curves of
his back , and my breasts wobb led against his chest, a rivulet
trickling between them to oil the friction of belly and thigh.“Christ, your mouth is slick an d salty as your quim,” he
muttered, and his tongue darted out to taste the tiny beads of
salt on my face, butterfly wings on temple and eyelids.
I wa s vaguely c onscious of the hard rock under me. The
stored h eat of the day rose up and through me, and the rough
surface scraped my back and buttocks, but I didn’ t care.
“I can’ t wait,” he said in my ear , breathless.
“Don’ t,” I said, and wrapped m y legs tight around his hips,
flesh bonded to flesh in the brief madness of dissolution.
“I h ave heard of melting with  passion,” I said, gasping
slightly , “but this is ridiculous.”
He lifted his hea d from my brea st with a faint sticky sound
as his cheek came away . He laughed and slid slowly sideways.
“God, it’ s hot!” he said. He pu shed back the sweat-soaked
hair from his f orehead and blew out his breath, chest still
heaving from exertion. “How d o folk do that when it’ s like
this?”
“The same way we just did,” I p ointed out. I was breathing
heavily myself.
“They can’ t,” he said with certainty . “Not all the time;
they’d die.”
“W ell, maybe they do it slower , ” I said. “Or underwater . Or
wait until the autumn.”
“Autumn?” he said. “Perhaps I dinna want to live in the
south, after all. Is it hot in Boston?”
“It i s at this time  of year ,” I assured him. “And beastly cold
in the winter . I’m sure you’ll g et used to the heat. And the
bugs.”
He brushed a questing mosquito of f his shoulder and
glanced from me to the nearby creek.
“Maybe so,” he said, “and may be no, but for now…” He
wrapped his arms firmly around me, and rolled. W ith theponderous grace  of a rolling log, we fell of f the edge of the
rocky shelf, and into the water .
W e lay damp and cool on the rock, barely touching, the last
drops of water e vaporating on our skins. Across the creek, the
willows trailed their leaves in the water , crowns ruf fled black
against the setting moon. Beyond the willows lay acre upon
acre and mile u pon mile of the vir gin forest, civilization for
now no more than a foothold on the edge of the continent.
Jamie saw the direction of my glance and divined my
thought.
“It will be a goo d bit dif ferent no w than when ye last kent it,
I expect?” He nodded toward the leafy dark.
“Oh, a bit.” I linked my hand with his, my thumb idly
caressing his big, bony knuckl es. “The roads will be paved
then; not cobbled, covered with a hard, smooth stuf f—
invented by a Scotsman called MacAdam, in fact.”
He grunted slightly with amusement.
“So there will be Scots in America, then? That’ s good.”
I ignored him and went on, staring into the wavering
shadows as though I could con jure the bur geoning cities that
would one day rise there.
“There will be a  lot of everyon e in America, then. All the
land will be settled, from here to the far west coast, to a place
called California . But for now”—I shivered slightly , in spite of
the warm, humid air—”it’ s three thousand miles of wilderness.
There’ s nothing there at all.”
“A ye, w ell, nothing save thousands of bloodthirsty
savages,” he said practically . “And the odd vicious beast, to be
sure.”
“W ell, y es,” I agreed. “I suppose  they are.” The thought was
unsettling; I had of course know n, in a vague, academic way ,
that the woods were inhabited  by Indians, bears, and other
forest denizens, but this general notion had suddenly been
replaced by a particular and m ost acute awareness that wemight easily—and unexpectedly—meet any one of these
denizens, face-to-face.
“What h appens to them? T o the wild Indians?” Jamie asked
curiously , peerin g into the dark  as I was, as though trying to
divine the future among the shifting shadows. “They’ll be
defeated and driven back, will they?”
Another small shiver passed over me, and my toes curled.
“Y es, the y will,”  I said. “Killed,  a lot of them. A good many
taken prisoner , locked up.”
“W ell, that’ s good.”
“I ex pect that d epends a lot on your point of view ,” I said,
rather dryly . “I don’ t suppose the Indians will think so.”
“I d aresay ,” he said. “But when  a bloody fiend’ s tryin’ his
best to chop of f the top of my head, I’m no so much concerned
with his point of view , Sassenach.”
“W ell, you can’ t really blame them,” I protested.
“I most certainly can,” he assured me. “If one of the brutes
scalps ye, I shall blame him a great deal.”
“Ah…hmm,” I said. I cleared my throat and had another
stab at it. “W ell, what if a bunch of strangers came round and
tried to kill you and shove you of f the land you’d always lived
on?”
“They have,” he said, very dryly indeed. “If they hadna, I
should still be in Scotland, aye?”
“W ell…” I said, floundering. “But all I mean is—you’d
fight, too, under those circumstances, wouldn’ t you?”
He drew  a deep breath and exhaled strongly through his
nose.
“If a n English d ragoon came round to my house and began
to w orry me,” he  said precisely , “I should certainly fight him. I
would also have not the slightest hesitation in killing him. I
would not  cut of f his hair and wave it about, and I wouldna be
eating his private parts, either . I am not a savage, Sassenach.”“I didn’ t say you were,” I protested. “All I said was—”
“Besides,” he added with inexorable logic, “I dinna mean to
be k illing any In dians. If they keep to themselves, I shallna be
worrying them a bit.”
“I’m sure they’ll be relieved t o know that,” I murmured,
giving up for the present.
W e lay cradled close together in the hollow of the rock,
lightly g lued with sweat, watching the stars. I felt at once
shatteringly hap py and mildly apprehensive. Could this state
of e xaltation possibly last? Once I had taken “forever” for
granted between us, but I was younger , then.
Soon, G od willi ng, we would se ttle; find a place to make a
home an d a life. I wanted noth ing more, and yet at the same
time, I worried. W e had known each other only a few months
since my return. Each touch, each word was still at once tinged
with memory and new with rediscovery . What would happen
when we were thoroughly accustomed to each other , living
day by day in a routine of mundane tasks?
“W ill ye  grow tired of me, do ye think?” he murmured.
“Once we’re settled?”
“I was just wondering the same thing about you.”
“No,” he said, and I could hear the smile in his voice. “That
I willna, Sassenach.”
“How do you know?” I asked.
“I didn’ t,” he p ointed out. “Before. W e were wed three
years, a nd I wanted ye as much on the last day as the first.
More, m aybe,” he added softly , thinking, as I was, of the last
time we had made love before he sent me through the stones.
I leaned down and kissed him. He tasted clean and fresh,
faintly scented with the pungency of sex.
“I did, too.”
“Then dinna trouble yourself about it, Sassenach, and
neither will I.” H e stroked my hair , smoothing damp curls of fmy forehead. “I could know ye all my life, I think, and always
love you . And often as I’ve lain  wi’ you, ye still surprise me
mightily sometimes, like ye did tonight.”
“I d o? Why , w hat have I done?” I stared down at him,
surprised myself.
“Oh…well. I didna mean…that is—”
He sounded suddenly shy , and there was an unaccustomed
stif fness in his body .
“Mm?” I kissed the tip of his ear .
“Ah…when I came upon you…what ye were doing…I
mean—were ye doing what I thought?”
I smiled against his shoulder in the darkness.
“I suppose that depends what you thought, doesn’ t it?”
He l ifted up on one elbow , his s kin coming away from mine
with a small su cking noise. The damp spot where he had
adhered was suddenly cool. He rolled onto his side and
grinned at me.
“Y e ken verra well what I thought, Sassenach.”
I touched his chin, shadowed with sprouting whiskers.
“I d o. And you know perfectly well what I was doing, too,
so why are you asking?”
“W ell, I—I didna think women did that, is all.”
The moon was b right enough for me to see his half-cocked
eyebrow .
“W ell, men do,” I pointed out. “Or you do, at least. Y ou told
me so—when you were in prison, you said you—”
“That w as dif fer ent!” I could se e his mouth twist as he tried
to de cide what t o say . “I—that i s to say , there wasna any help
for it then. After all, I couldna be—”
“Haven’ t you done it other time s?” I sat up and fluf fed out
my damp hair , g lancing sidelong at him over my shoulder . Ablush didn’ t show in the moonli ght, but I thought he had gone
pink.
“A ye, well,” he muttered. “I suppose I have, yes.” A sudden
thought struck him and his eyes widened, looking at me. “Do
you—have ye done that—often?” The last word emer ged in a
croak, and he was obliged to stop and clear his throat.
“I su ppose it dep ends on what y ou mean by ‘often,’ ” I said,
allowing a bit of acerbity to creep into my tone. “I was
widowed for two years, you know .”
He rubbed a knuckle over his lips, eyeing me with interest.
“A ye, that’ s so. It’ s only—well,  I hadna thought of women
doing such a thing, is all.” Growing fascination was
overcoming his surprise. “Y ou can—finish? W ithout a man, I
mean?”
That made me laugh out loud, and soft reverberations
sounded from the trees around us, echoed by the stream.
“Y es, but it’ s much nicer with  a man,” I assured him. I
reached out and touched his chest. I could see the goose
bumps ripple over his chest an d shoulders, and he shivered
slightly as I drew a fingertip in a gentle circle round one
nipple. “Much,” I said softly .
“Oh,” he said, sounding happy . “W ell, that’ s good, aye?”
He w as hot—even hotter than the liquid air—and my first
instinct was to draw back, but I didn’ t follow it. Sweat sprang
up a t on ce wher e his hands rest ed on my skin, and trickles of
sweat ran down my neck.
“I’ve never made love to ye before like this,” he said. “Like
eels, aye? W i’ your body sliding through my hands, all
slippery as seaweed.” Both hands passed slowly down my
back, his thumbs pressing the gr oove of my spine, making the
tiny hairs at the base of my neck prickle with pleasure.
“Mm. T hat’ s because it’ s too co ld in Scotland to sweat like
pigs,” I said. “T hough come to t hat, do pigs really sweat? I’ve
always wondered.”“I c ouldna say; I’ve never mad e love to a pig.” His head
ducked down and his tongue to uched my breast. “But ye do
taste a bit like a trout, Sassenach.”
“I taste like a what ?”
“Fresh and sweet, wi’ a bit of salt,” he explained, lifting his
head for a mom ent. He put it back down, and resumed his
downward course.
“That tickles,” I said, quivering under his tongue, but
making no ef fort to escape.
“W ell, I  mean it to,” he answere d, lifting his wet face for a
breath before returning to his w ork. “I shouldna like to think
ye could do without me entirely .”
“I can’ t,” I assured him. “Oh!”
“Ah?” c ame a thick interrogative. I lay back on the rock, my
back arching as the stars spun dizzily overhead.
“I said… ’oh,’ ” I said faintly . And then didn’ t say anything
coherent for some time, until he lay panting, chin resting
lightly o n my pubic bone. I reached down and stroked the
sweat-drenched hair away from his face, and he turned his
head to kiss my palm.
“I feel like Eve,”  I said softly , watching the moon set behind
him, over the d ark of the fore st. “Just on the edge of the
Garden of Eden.”
There was a small snort of laughter from the vicinity of my
navel.
“A ye, and I su ppose I’m Adam,” Jamie said. “In the
gateway to Paradise.” He turn ed his head to look wistfully
across the creek toward the vast unknown, resting his cheek on
the s lope of my belly . “I only w ish I knew was I coming in, or
going out?”
I l aughe d myself, startling him. I took him by both ears
then, ur g ing him gently up acro ss the slippery expanse of my
naked flesh.“In,” I said. “I d on’ t see an ang el with a fiery sword, after
all.”
He l owered himself upon me, h is own flesh heated as with
fever , and I shivered under him.
“No?” h e murmured. “A ye, well, you’ll no be looking close
enough, I suppose.”
Then the fiery sword severed me from consciousness and
set fire to my b ody . W e blazed up together , bright as stars in
the sum mer night, and then sank back burnt and limbless,
ashes di ssolved in a primordial sea of warm salt, stirring with
the nascent throbbings of life.P A R T  T W O
P a s t  I m p e r f e c t3
T H E  M I N I S T E R ’ S  C A T
Boston, Massachusetts, June 1969
B rianna?”
“Ha?” She sat b olt upright, heart pounding, the sound of her
name ringing in her ear . “Who—wha’?”
“Y ou were asleep. Damn, I kne w I’d got the time wrong!
Sorry , shall I ring of f?”
It was the faint hint of a burr in his voice that belatedly
made the scrambled connections of her nervous system fall
into place. Phone. Ringing phone. She’d snatched it by reflex,
deep in her dream.
“Roger!” The rush of adrenaline from being startled awake
was fad ing, but her heart was still beating fast. “No, don’ t
hang up! It’ s all right, I’m awake.” She scrubbed a hand over
her face, trying at once to dis entangle the phone cord and
straighten the rumpled bedclothes.
“A ye? Y ou’re sure? What time is it there?”
“I don’ t know; it’ s too dark to see the clock,” she said, still
sleep-addled. A reluctant deep chuckle answered her .
“I am  s orry; I tried to calculate the time dif ference, but
must’ve got it backward. Didn’ t mean to wake you.”
“That’ s okay , I had to wake  up to answer the phone
anyway ,” she assured him, and laughed.
“A ye. W ell…” She could hear the answering smile in his
voice, and eased herself back against the pillows, shoving
tangles o f hair out of her eyes, slowly adjusting to the here and
now . The feel of her dream was still with her , more real than
the dark-shrouded shapes of her bedroom.
“It’ s good to hear your voice, Roger ,” she said softly . She
was surprised at just how  good it was. His voice was far awayand yet seemed much more immediate than the far -of f whines
of sirens, and the whish!  of tires on wet pavement outside.
“Y ours, too.” He sounded a little shy . “Look—I’ve got the
chance of a con ference next month, in Boston. I thought of
coming, if—dam n, there’ s no good way to say this. Do you
want to see me?”
Her han d squeezed tight on the receiver , and her heart
jumped.
“I’m sorry ,” he said at once, bef ore she could reply . “That’ s
putting y ou on the spot, isn’ t it? I—look—just say straight out
if you’d rather not.”
“I do. Of course I want to see you!”
“Ah. Y ou don’ t mind, then? Only…you didn’ t answer my
letter . I thought maybe I’d done something—”
“No, you didn’ t. I’m sorry . It was just—”
“It’ s fine, I didn’ t mean—”
Their sentences collided, and they both stopped, stricken
with shyness.
“I didn’ t want to push—”
“I didn’ t mean to be—”
It ha ppened again, and this time  he laughed, a low sound of
Scottish amusement coming over the vast distance of space
and time, comforting as though he’d touched her .
“It’ s all right, then,” he said firmly . “I do understand, aye?”
She didn’ t answer , but closed her eyes, an indefinable
sensation of relief sweeping over her . Roger W akefield was
likely the only person in the world who could  understand;
what she hadn’ t fully realized before was how important that
understanding might be.
“I was dreaming,” she said. “When the phone rang.”
“Mmphm?”“About my father .” Her throat tightened, just a little,
whenever she spoke the word. T he same thing happened when
she said “mother ,” too. She cou ld still smell the sun-warmed
pines of her dream, and feel the crunch of pine needles under
her boots.
“I couldn’ t see his face. I was walking with him, in the
woods s omewhere. I was following him up a trail, and he was
talking to me, b ut I couldn’ t hea r what he was saying—I kept
hurrying, trying to catch up, so  I could hear , but I couldn’ t
quite manage.”
“But you knew the man was your father?”
“Y es—but mayb e I only thought so because of hiking in the
mountains. I used to do that with Dad.”
“Did yo u? I used to do that w ith my dad, as well. If you
come back to Scotland ever , I’ll take ye Munro bagging.”
“Y ou’ll take me what? ”
He l aughed, and she had a sudde n memory of him, brushing
back the  thick black hair that  he didn’ t cut often enough,
moss-green eyes  creased half-shut by his smile. She found she
was rubbing the tip of her thumb slowly across her lower lip,
and stopped herself. He’d kissed her when they parted.
“A Mun ro is any Scottish peak more than three thousand
feet. The re are so many of them , it’ s a sport to see how many
you can climb. Folk collect them, like stamps, or
matchbooks.”
“Where are you now—Scotland or England?” she said, then
interrupted before he could answer . “No, let me see if I can
guess. It’ s…Scotland. Y ou’re in Inverness.”
“That’ s right.” The surprise was evident in his voice. “How
did you know that?”
She stretched, scissoring her long legs slowly under the
sheets.
“Y ou rol l your r ’ s when you’ve been talking to other Scots,”
she said . “Y ou don’ t when y ou talk to English people. Inoticed when we—went to London.” There was no more than
a faint catch in her voice; it was getting easier , she thought.
“And herrrrre I w as beginning to think ye were psychic,” he
said, and laughed.
“I wish you were here now ,” she said impulsively .
“Y ou do?” He sounded surprised, and suddenly shy . “Oh.
W ell…that’ s good, isn’ t it?”
“Roger—why I didn’ t write—”
“Y ou’re not to trouble about it ,” he said quickly . “I’ll be
there in a month; we can talk, then. Bree, I—”
“Y es?”
She heard him d raw breath, and had a vivid memory of the
feel of his chest rising and falling as he breathed, warm and
solid under her hand.
“I’m glad you said yes.”
She cou ldn’ t go back to sleep after hanging up; restless, she
swung her feet out of bed and p added out to the kitchen of the
small apartment  for a glass of milk. It was only after several
minutes of staring blankly into the recesses of the refrigerator
that she realized she wasn’ t se eing ranks of ketchup bottles
and half-used cans. She was seeing standing stones, black
against a pale dawn sky .
She straightened up with a small exclamation of impatience,
and shut the do or with a slam. She shivered slightly , and
rubbed her arms, chilled by th e draft of the air conditioner .
Impulsively , she  reached up and clicked it of f, then went to the
window and raised the sash, lett ing in the warm mugginess of
the rainy summer night.
She should have written. In fac t, she had  written—several
times, all half-finished attempts thrown away in frustration.
She kne w why , or thought she did. Explaining it coherently
to Roger was something else.Part of it was th e simple instinct of a wounded animal; the
ur ge to run away and hide from hurt. What had happened the
year before was in no way Roger ’ s fault, but he was
inextricably wrapped up in it.
He’d been so ten der , and so kind afterward, treating her like
one freshly bereaved—which she was. But such a strange
bereavement! Her mother gone  for good, but certainly—she
hoped—not dea d. And yet it was in some ways just as it had
been when her father died; like believing in a blessed afterlife,
ardently hoping that your loved one was safe and happy—and
being forced to suf fer the p angs of loss and loneliness
nonetheless.
An a mbulance went by , across t he park, red light pulsing in
the dark, its siren muted by distance.
She cro ssed herself from habit, and murmured “Miser er e
nobis”  u nder her brea th. Sister Marie Romaine had told the
fifth grade that the dead and d ying needed their prayers; so
strongly had she inculcated the n otion in her class that none of
the children had ever been a ble to pass the scene of an
emer gency without sending a small silent prayer upward, to
succor the souls of the imminently heaven-bound.
She pray ed for them every day , her mother and her father—
her fathe rs. Tha t was the other part of it. Uncle Joe knew the
truth of  her paternity , too, but only Roger could truly
understand what had happened; only Roger could hear the
stones, too.
No one could pass through an experience like that and not
be mark ed by it. Not him, not her . He’d wanted her to stay ,
after Claire had gone, but she couldn’ t.
There w ere things to do here, she’d told him, things to be
attended to, her schooling to finish. That was true. More
importantly , she’d had to get away—get clear away from
Scotland and stone circles, back to a place where she might
heal, might begin to rebuild her life.If she’d stayed with Roger , there was no way to for get what
had happened, even for a mome nt. And that was the last part
of it, the final piece in her three-sided puzzle.
He had protecte d her , had che rished her . Her mother had
confided her into his care, and he’d kept that trust well. But
had he done it to keep his prom ise to Claire—or because he
truly car ed? Eith er way , it wasn’ t any basis for a shared future,
with the crushing weight of obligation on both sides.
If there might be a future for them…and that was what she
couldn’ t write to him, because how could she say it without
sounding both presumptuous and idiotic?
“Go away , so you can come back and do it right,” she
murmured, and made a face at  the words. The rain was still
pattering down, cooling the air enough to breathe comfortably .
It wa s ju st befor e dawn, she thou ght, but the air was still warm
enough that moisture condensed  on the cool skin of her face;
small beads of water formed and slid tickling down her neck
one by one, dampening the cotton T -shirt she slept in.
She’d w anted to put the events of last November well
behind them; make a clean bre ak. Then, when enough time
had passed, perhaps they could come to each other again. Not
as suppo rting pl ayers in the dram a of her parents’ life, but this
time as the actors in a play of their own choosing.
No, if anything was to happen between her and Roger
W akefield, it would definitely  be by choice. It looked as
though she was going to get the chance to choose now , and the
prospect gave her a small, exc ited flutter in the pit of her
stomach.
She wiped a ha nd over her face, slicking of f the rain-wet,
wiping it casually through her ha ir to tame the floating strands.
If she wasn’ t going to sleep, she might as well work.
She left the win dow open, careless of the rain puddling on
the floo r . She felt too restless  to be sealed in, chilled by
artificial air .Clicking on the lamp on the  desk, she pulled out her
calculus book and opened it. On e small and unexpected bonus
of her change of study was her belated discovery of the
soothing ef fects of mathematics.
When s he had come back to Boston, alone, and back to
school, engineering had seemed a much safer choice than
history; solid, fact-bound, reassuringly immutable. Above all,
controllable. She picked up a pencil, sharpened it slowly ,
enjoying the preparation, then bent her head and read the first
problem.
Slowly , as it alw ays did, the calm inexorable logic of the
figures b uilt its web inside her head, trapping all the random
thoughts, wrapping the distracting emotions up in silken
threads like so many flies. Round the central axis of the
problem, logic spun her web, orderly and beautiful as an orb-
weaver ’ s jeweled confection. Only the one small thought
stayed free of it s strands, hovering in her mind like a bright,
tiny butterfly .
I’m glad you said yes,  he’d said. So was she.
July 1969
“Does he talk like the Beatles? Oh, I’ll just die if he sounds
like Joh n Lennon! Y ou know how he says, ‘It’ s me
grandfather?’ That just knocks me out!”
“He doesn’ t sound anything like John Lennon, for God’ s
sake!” Brianna hissed. She peered cautiously around a
concrete pillar , but the International Arrivals gate was still
empty . “Can’ t you tell the dif ference between a Liverpudlian
and a Scot?”
“No,” h er friend Gayle said blithely , fluf fing out her blond
hair . “All Englishmen sound the same to me. I could listen to
them forever!”
“He’ s not an Englishman! I told you, he’ s a Scot!”
Gayle gave Brianna a look, clearly suggesting that her
friend was crazed.“Scotland’ s part of England; I looked on the map.”
“Scotland’ s part of Great Britain, not England.”
“What’ s the dif ference?” Gayle stuck her head out and
craned around the pillar . “Why are we standing back here?
He’ll never see us.”
Brianna ran a h and over her ha ir to smooth it. They were
standing behind a pillar because she wasn’ t sure she wanted
him to see them . Not much h elp for it, though; disheveled
passengers were beginning to trickle through the double doors,
burdened with luggage.
She let Gayle to w her out into the main reception area, still
babbling. Her friend’ s tongue le d a double life; though Gayle
was capable of c ool and reasoned discourse in class, her chief
social skill was babbling on cue. That was why Bree had asked
Gayle to come with her to the airport to pick up Roger; no
chance of any awkward pauses in the conversation.
“Have you done it with him already?”
She jerked toward Gayle, startled.
“Have I done what ?”
Gayle rolled her eyes.
“Played tiddlywinks. Honestly , Bree!”
“No. Of course not.” She felt the blood rising in her cheeks.
“W ell, are you going  to?”
“Gayle!”
“W ell, I mean, you have your own apartment and
everything, and nobody’ s going to—”
At this awkward moment, Rog er W akefield appeared. He
wore a white sh irt and scruf fy jeans, and Brianna must have
stif fened at the sight of him. G ayle’ s head whipped round to
see where Brianna was looking.
“Ooh,” she said in delight. “Is  that him? He looks like a
pirate !”He did, and Brianna felt the bottom of her stomach drop
another inch or two. Roger w as what her mother called a
Black C elt, with clear olive skin and black hair , and “eyes put
in w ith a sooty thumb”—thick black lashes round eyes you
expected to be blue but that were instead a surprising deep
green. W ith his hair worn lon g enough to brush his collar ,
disheveled and beard-stubbled, he looked not only rakish but
mildly dangerous.
Alarm tingled up her spine at  the sight of him, and she
wiped sweating palms on the sides of her embroidered jeans.
She shouldn’ t have let him come.
Then he  saw her , and his face lit like a candle. In spite of
herself, she felt a  huge, idiotic sm ile break out on her own face
in an swer , and w ithout stopping to think of misgivings, she ran
across the room, dodging stray children and luggage carts.
He met her ha lfway and swept her almost of f her feet,
hugging her hard enough to c rack her ribs. He kissed her ,
stopped, and kissed her again, the stubble of his beard scraping
her face . He smelled of soap and sweat and he tasted like
Scotch whisky and she didn’ t want him to stop.
Then he did and let go, both of them half breathless.
“A-hem,”  said a loud voice near Brianna’ s elbow . She
swung away from Roger , re vealing Gayle, who smiled
angelically up at him under bl ond bangs, and waved like a
child going bye-bye.
“Hell-ooo,” she said. “Y ou must  be Roger , because if you’re
not, Roger ’ s sure in for a shock when he shows up, isn’ t he?”
She looked him up and down with obvious approval.
“All that, and you play the guitar , too?”
Brianna hadn’ t even noticed the case he had dropped. He
stooped and picked it up, swinging it over his shoulder .
“W ell, that’ s my bread and butter , this trip,” he said, with a
smile at  Gayle, who clutched a hand to her heart in simulated
ecstasy .“Ooh, say that again!” she begged.
“Say what?” Roger looked puzzled.
“Bread and butter ,” Brianna to ld him, hoisting one of his
bags onto her s houlder . “She wants to hear you roll the r ’ s
again. Gayle has a thing about British accents. Oh—that’ s
Gayle.” She gestured at her friend in resignation.
“Y es, I gathered. Er…” He clea red his throat, fixed Gayle
with a piercing stare, and dr opped his voice an octave.
“Arround the rrruggged rrrock , the rrragged rrrascals rran.
That do you for a bit?”
“W ould you stop that?” Brianna looked crossly at her friend,
who had  swooned dramatically into one of the plastic seats.
“Ignore her ,” she advised Roger , turning toward the door . W ith
a ca utious glance at Gayle, he to ok her advice, and picking up
a lar ge box tied with string, followed her into the concourse.
“What did you mean about yo ur bread and butter?” she
asked, looking for some way to return the conversation to a
sane footing.
He laughed, a little self-consciously .
“W ell, the historical conference is paying the airfare, but
they couldn’ t manage expenses. So I called round, and
wangled a bit of a job to take care of that end.”
“A job playing the guitar?”
“By day , mild-mannered historian Roger W akefield is a
harmless Oxford  academic. But at night, he dons his secret
tartan rrregali a and becomes the dashing—Roger
MacKenzie!”
“Who?”
He smiled at her surprise. “W ell, I do a bit of Scottish folk-
singing, for festivals and ceilidhs —High Games and the like.
I’m on to do a turn at a Celtic festival up in the mountains at
the end of the week, is all.”“Scottish singing? Do you wear a kilt when you sing?”
Gayle had popped up on Roger ’ s other side.
“I do indeed. How else would they know I was a
Scotsman?”
“I just love fuzz y knees,” Gayle said dreamily . “Now , tell
me, is it true about what a Scotsman—”
“Go get the car ,” Brianna ordere d, hastily thrusting her keys
at Gayle.
Gayle pe rched her chin on the windowsill of the car , watching
Roger make his way into the h otel. “Gee, I hope he doesn’ t
shave before he meets us for dinner . I just love the way men
look when they haven’ t shave d for a while. What do you
think’ s in that big box?”
“His bodhran. I asked.”
“His what ?”
“It’ s a Celtic war drum. He plays it with some of his songs.”
Gayle’ s lips formed a small circle of speculation.
“I don’ t  suppose you want me to drive him to this festival
thing, do you? I mean, you must have lots of things to do, and
—”
“Ha ha. Y ou think I’d let you anywhere around him in a
kilt?”
Gayle sighed wistfully , and pulled her head in as Brianna
started the car .
“W ell, maybe there’d be other men there in kilts.”
“I think that’ s pretty likely .”
“I bet they don’ t have Celtic war drums, though.”
“Maybe not.”
Gayle leaned back in her seat, and glanced at her friend.
“So, are you going to do it?”“How sh ould I know?” But the blood bloomed under her
skin, and her clothes felt too tight.
“W ell, if you don’ t,” Gayle said positively , “you’re crazy .”
“The Minister ’ s cat is an…androgynous cat.”
“The Minister ’ s cat is an…alagruous cat.”
Bree gav e him a lifted brow , tak ing her eyes briefly of f the
road.
“Scots again?”
“It’ s a Scottish game,” Roger said. “Alagruous—’grim or
woebegone.’ Y our turn. Letter ‘B.’ “
She squinted through the windshield at the narrow mountain
road. Th e morning sun was tow ard them, filling the car with
light.
“The Minister ’ s cat is a brindled cat.”
“The Minister ’ s cat is a bonnie cat.”
“W ell, that’ s a soft pitch for both of us. Draw . Okay , the
Minister ’ s cat is a…” He could see the wheels turning in her
mind, th en the gleam in her narrowed blue eyes as inspiration
struck. “…coccygodynious cat.”
Roger narrowed his own eyes, trying to work that one out.
“A cat with a wide backside?”
She laug hed, braking slightly as the car hit a switchback
curve.
“A cat that’ s a pain in the ass.”
“That’ s a real word, is it?”
“Uh-huh.” She accelerated neatly out of the turn. “One of
Mama’ s medical terms. Coccygodynia is a pain in the region
of the tailbone.  She used to call the hospital administration
coccygodynians, all the time.”
“And here I tho ught it was one of your engineering terms.
All right, then…the Minister ’ s  cat is a camstairy cat.” Hegrinned at her li fted eyebrow . “Quarrelsome. Coccygodynians
are camstairy by nature.”
“Okay , I’ll call that one a draw . The Minister ’ s cat is…”
“W ait,” Roger interrupted, pointing. “There’ s the turn.”
Slowing, she pulled of f the narrow highway and onto a still
narrower road, indicated by a  small red-and-white-arrowed
sign that read CEL TIC FESTIV AL .
“Y ou’re a love to bring to me all the way up here,” Roger
said. “I didn’ t realize how far it was, or I’d never have asked.”
She gave him a brief glance of amusement.
“It’ s not that far .”
“It’ s a hundred and fifty miles!”
She smiled, but with a wry edge to it.
“My fat her always said that was the dif ference between an
American and an Englishman. An Englishman thinks a
hundred miles is a long way; an American thinks a hundred
years is a long time.”
Roger laughed, taken by surprise.
“T oo right. Y ou’ll be an American, then, I suppose?”
“I suppose.” But her smile had faded.
So h ad the con versation; they drove in silence for a few
minutes, with no sound but the r ush of tires and wind. It was a
beautiful hot summer ’ s day , the  mugginess of Boston left far
below as they snaked their way upward, into the clearer air of
the mountains.
“The M inister ’ s cat is a distan t cat,” Roger said at last,
softly . “Have I said something wrong?”
She flashed him a quick blue  glance, and a half-curled
mouth.
“The Minister ’ s cat is a daydrea ming cat. No, it’ s not you.”
Her lips compressed as she slo wed behind another car , thenrelaxed. “No, that’ s not right— it is  you , but it’ s not your
fault.”
Roger shifted, turning in his seat to face her .
“The Minister ’ s cat is an enigmatic cat.”
“The Minister ’ s cat is an embarrassed cat—I shouldn’ t have
said anything, sorry .”
Roger was wise enough not to p ress her . Instead, he leaned
forward and dug under the seat for the thermos of hot tea with
lemon.
“W ant s ome?” H e of fered her th e cup, but she made a small
face and shook her head.
“No thanks. I hate tea.”
“Definitely not  an Englishwoman, then,” he said, and
wished h e hadn’ t; her hands squ eezed tight on the wheel. She
didn’ t sa y anything, though, and he drank the tea in silence,
watching her .
She didn’ t look English, he r parentage and coloring
notwithstanding. He couldn’ t tell whether the dif ference was
more than a ma tter of clothes, but he thought so. Americans
seemed so much more…what? V ibrant? Intense? Bigger? Just
mor e . Brianna Randall was definitely more.
The traf fic grew thicker , slowin g to a crawling line of cars
as th ey reached the entrance to  the resort where the festival
was being held.
“Look,” Brianna said abruptly . She didn’ t turn toward him,
but stared out through the windshield at the New Jersey
license plate of the car in front of them. “I have to explain.”
“Not to me.”
She flicked one red eyebrow in brief irritation.
“T o who  else?”  She pressed he r lips together and sighed.
“Y eah, all right, me too. But I do.”Roger could taste the acid from the tea, bitter in the back of
his t hroat. W as this where she t old him it had been a mistake
for h im to come? He’d thought so himself, all the way across
the Atlantic, twitching and cra mped in the tiny airline seat.
Then he ’d seen her across the airport lobby , and all doubt had
vanished on the instant.
It hadn’ t come back during the intervening week, either;
he’d see n her at least briefly every day—even managed a
baseball game with her at Fenway Park on Thursday
afternoon. He’d found the game itself baf fling, but Brianna’ s
enthusiasm for it enchanting. He found himself counting the
hours left before he’d have to leave, and looking forward
nonetheless to this—the only whole day they’d have together .
That did n’ t mean she felt the same. He glanced quickly over
the line of cars;  the gate was visible, but still a quarter -mile
of f. He had maybe three minutes to convince her .
“In Scot land,” s he was saying, “when all—that—happened
with my mother . Y ou were great, Roger—really wonderful.”
She didn ’ t look at him, but he could see a shimmer of moisture
just above the thick auburn lashes.
“It w as no great  thing to do,” he said. He curled his hands
into fists to keep from touching her . “I was interested.”
She laughed shortly .
“Y eah, I bet you were.” She slowed, and turned her head to
look at him, fu ll-on. Even wide open, her eyes had a faint
catlike slant to them.
“Have y ou been back to the stone circle? T o Craigh na
Dun?”
“No,” he said shortly . Then coughed and added, as if
casually , “I don’ t go up to Inverness all that often; it’ s been
term time at College.”
“It isn’ t that the Minister ’ s cat is a fraidycat?” she asked, but
she smiled slightly when she said it.“The Minister ’ s  cat is scared stif f of that place,” he said
frankly . “He wouldn’ t set foot up there if it were knee-deep in
sardines.” She laughed outright, and the tension between them
eased noticeably .
“Me too,” she said, and took a deep breath. “But I
remember . All the trouble you went to, to help—and then,
when it—when she—when Mama went through—” Her teeth
clamped savage ly on her lower lip, and she hit the brake,
harder than necessary .
“Do you  see?” she said, in a small voice. “I can’ t be around
you mor e than half an hour , an d it all comes back. I haven’ t
talked about my parents in m ore than six months, and no
sooner do we start playing that silly game than I’ve mentioned
both of them in  less than a minute. It’ s been happening all
week.”
She thumbed a loose strand of red hair of f her shoulder . She
went a lovely pink when she w as excited or upset, and the
color was burning high in her cheeks.
“I thought it mig ht be something like that—when you didn’ t
answer my letter .”
“It wasn ’ t only that.” She caugh t her lower lip between her
teeth, as though to bite back the  words, but it was too late. A
brilliant tide of red washed up out of the V of her white T -
shirt, turning her the color of the tomato sauce she insisted on
eating with chips.
He reached across the seat and gently brushed the veil of
hair back from her face.
“I ha d a terrible  crush on you,” she blurted, staring straight
ahead th rough th e windshield. “But I didn’ t know whether you
were jus t being nice to me because Mama asked you to, or
whether—”
“Whether ,” he interrupted, and smiled as she risked a tiny
look at him. “Definitely whether .”
“Oh.” S he relax ed fractionally ,  loosening her stranglehold
on the wheel. “W ell. Good.”He w anted to take her hand, but didn’ t want to pry it of f the
wheel a nd cause an accident. I nstead, he laid his arm across
the back of the seat, letting his fingers brush her shoulder .
“Anyway . I didn’ t think—I thought—well, it was either
throw m yself into your arms or get the hell out of Dodge. So I
did, but I could n’ t figure out how to explain without looking
like an idiot, an d then when yo u wrote, it was worse—well,
see, I do  look like an idiot!”
Roger flipped open the catch of his seat belt.
“W ill you drive into that car in front of us if I kiss you?”
“No.”
“Good.” He slid across the seat , took her chin in one hand,
and kiss ed her , fast. They bump ed sedately over the dirt road
and into the parking lot.
She was breathing easier , and her color had receded a little.
She pulled neatly into a parking  slot, killed the motor , and sat
for a moment, looking straight  ahead. Then she opened her
seat belt and turned to him.
It wasn’ t until they got out of the car several minutes later
that it occurred to Roger that s he had mentioned her parents
more than once—but the real p roblem had likely more to do
with the parent she so carefully hadn’ t  mentioned.
Gr eat,  he thought, absently admiring her backside as she
bent to open the trunk. She’ s trying not to think of Ja mie
Fraser , and wher e the hell do  you bring her?  He glanced at the
entrance to the resort, where the Union Jack and the Saltire of
Scotland snapped in the summer breeze. From the
mountainside be yond came the mournful sound of bagpipes
playing.4
A  B L A S T  F R O M  T H E  P A S T
U sed as he was to changing in th e back of someone’ s horse
van or in the Gents’ facilities of a pub, the small backstage
cubicle allotted to Roger ’ s personal use seemed remarkably
luxurious. It was clean, it had hooks for his street clothes, and
there were no drunken patrons snoring on the threshold. Of
course, this was America, he reflected, unbuttoning his jeans
and dropping them on the floor . Dif ferent standards, at least
with regard to material comforts.
He yanked the bell-sleeved shirt over his head, wondering
just what level o f comfort Brianna was accustomed to. He was
no judge of wo men’ s clothing —how expensive could blue
jeans possibly be?—but he knew a bit about cars. Hers was a
brand-new blue Mustang that made him itch to take the wheel.
Plainly h er pare nts had left her enough to live on; he could
trust Cla ire Randall to have seen to that. He only hoped it
wasn’ t so much that she might  think him interested on that
account. Remin ded of her parents, he glanced at the brown
envelope; should he give it to her , after all?
The Minister ’ s cat had nearly jumped out of her skin when
they’d walked through the pe rformers’ entrance and come
face-to-face with  the 78th Frase r Highlanders’ pipe-band from
Canada, practicing at full blast behind the dressing rooms.
She’d ac tually gone pale when h e’d introduced her to the pipe
major , an old acquaintance. Not that Bill Livingstone was
intimidating on his own; it was  the Fraser clan badge on his
chest that had done it.
Je suis pr est,  i t said. I am r eady . Not nearly ready enough,
Roger thought, and wanted to kick himself for bringing her .
Still, she had ass ured him she’d be all right exploring on her
own while he dressed and got himself up for his turn.And he’d best turn his mind to that, too, he thought,
snugging the buckles of his kilt at waist and hip, and reaching
for the long w oolen stocking s. He was on in the early
afternoon, for forty-five minutes , then a shorter solo turn at the
evening ceilidh . He  had a rough lineup of songs in mind, but
you always had to take the crowd into account. Lots of
women, the ballads went well; m ore men, more of the martial
—”Killiecrankie” and “Montrose,” “Guns and Drums.” The
bawdy songs did best when the audience was well warmed up
—preferably after a bit of beer .
He t urned the st ocking tops down neatly , and slid the antler -
handled sgian dhu  inside, tight against his right calf. He laced
the bus kins quickly , hurrying a little. He wanted to find
Brianna again, have a little tim e to walk round with her , get
her something to eat, see she had a good seat for the
performances.
He f lung the plaid over one shoulder , fastened his brooch,
belted o n dirk and sporran, and was ready . Or not quite. He
halted, halfway to the door .
The anc ient olive-drab drawers were military issue, circa
W orld W ar II—one of Roger ’ s f ew mementos of his father . He
didn’ t bother with pants much in the normal course, but
included these with his kilt sometimes as a defensive measure
against the amazing boldness of some female spectators. He’d
been warned by other performers, but wouldn’ t have believed
it, had he not ex perienced it firsthand. German ladies were the
worst, b ut he’d known a few American women run them a
close second for taking liberties in close quarters.
He didn’ t think he’d need such  measures here; the crowd
sounded civil, and he’d seen th at the stage was safely out of
reach. Besides, of fstage he’d have Brianna with him, and if
she sho uld choose to take any liberties of her own…He
dropped the pants back in his bag, on top of the brown
envelope.
“W ish me luck, Dad,” he whispered, and went to find her .“W ow!” She walked round him  in a circle, goggling. “Roger ,
you are gor geous !” S he smiled, a trifle lopsided.  “My mother
always said men in kilts were irresistible. I guess she was
right.”
He saw her swa llow hard, and wanted to hug her for her
bravery , but she had already turned away , gesturing toward the
main food area.
“Are you hungry? I had a look  while you were changing.
W e’ve got our choice between  octopus-on-a-stick, Baja fish
tacos, Polish dogs—”
He took her arm and pulled her round to face him.
“Hey ,” h e said softly . “I’m sorry; I wouldn’ t have brought
you if I’d known it would be a shock.”
“It’ s all right.” Her smile was better this time. “It’ s—I’m
glad you brought me.”
“T ruly?”
“Y eah. Really . It’ s—” She waved helplessly at the tartan
swirl of noise and color all around them. “It’ s so—Scottish.”
He wanted to laugh at that; nothing could be less like
Scotland than this mix of touri st claptrap and the bald-faced
selling of half-faked traditions . At the same time, she was
right, it was  uniquely Scottish; an example of the Scots’ age-
old talen t for survival—the ability to adapt to anything, and
make a profit from it.
He did hug her , then. Her hair smelled clean, like fresh
grass, and he co uld feel her heart beating through the white T -
shirt she wore.
“Y ou’re Scots, too, you know ,” he said in her ear , and let go.
Her eyes  were still bright, but with a dif ferent emotion now , he
thought.
“I guess  you’re right,” she said , and smiled again, a good
one. “Th at does n’ t mean I have  to eat haggis, does it? I saw
some over there, and I think I’d even rather try the octopus-on-
a-stick.”He’d tho ught sh e was joking, b ut she wasn’ t. The resort’ s
sole bus iness, it seemed, was “ethnic fairs,” as one of the food
vendors explained.
“Polacks dancin ’ polkas, Swiss yodelers—Jeez, they musta
had ten million cuckoo clocks here! Spanish, Italian, Japanese
cherry blossom festivals—you wouldn’ t believe all the
cameras them Japs have, you just wouldn’ t believe it.” He
shook hi s head in bemusement, sliding across two paper plates
filled with hambur gers and french fries.
“Anyways, it’ s something dif fer ent, every two weeks. Never
a dull moment. But us food ven dors, we just stay in business,
no m atter what kinda food it is.” The man eyed Roger ’ s kilt
with some interest.
“So, you Scotch, or you just like wearing a skirt?”
Having heard several dozen va riations of that pleasantry ,
Roger gave the man a bland look.
“W ell, as my au ld grand-da used to say ,” he said, thickening
his acce nt atroci ously , “when ye put on yer kilt, laddie, ye ken
for sure yer a man!”
The man doubled up appreciatively , and Brianna rolled her
eyes.
“Kilt jokes,” she muttered. “G od, if you start telling kilt
jokes, I’ll drive of f and leave you, I swear I will.”
Roger grinned at her .
“Och, no w , ye wouldna do that, would ye, lass? Go of f and
leave a man, only because he’ll  tell ye what’ s worn under the
kilt, if ye like?”
Her eyes narrowed into blue triangles.
“Oh, I’d bet nothing at all’ s worn under that  kilt,” she said,
with a nod at Roger ’ s sporran. “Why , I’ll bet everything under
there is in pairrrrrrfect operrrating condition, no?”
Roger choked on a french fry .“Y ou’re s’posed  to say ‘Give us your hand, lassie, and I’ll
show you,’ ” th e food vendor prompted. “Boy , if I’ve heard
that one once, I’ve heard it a hunderd times this week.”
“If h e sa ys it now ,” Brianna put in darkly , “I’ll drive of f and
leave him marooned on this mountain. He can stay here and
eat octopus, for all I care.”
Roger took a gulp of Coca-Cola and wisely kept quiet.
There w as time  for a wander up and down the aisles of the
vendors’ stalls, selling everything from tartan ties to penny
whistles, silver jewelry , clan m aps of Scotland, butterscotch
and shor tbread, letter openers in the shape of claymores, lead
Highlander figures, books, records, and every imaginable
small item on which a clan badge or motto could be imprinted.
Roger a ttracted no more than a brief glance of curiosity;
while of  better quality than mo st, his costume was no oddity
here. Still, most of the crowd w ere tourists, dressed in shorts
and jean s, but breaking out here and there in bits of tartan, like
a rash.
“Why MacKenz ie?” Brianna asked, pausing by one display
of cl an-marked keychains. She f ingered one of the silver disks
that read Luceo non ur o,  the  Latin mott o curved around a
depiction of what looked like a volcano. “Didn’ t W akefield
sound S cottish enough? Or did y ou think the people at Oxford
wouldn’ t like you doing—this?” She waved at the venue
around them.
Roger shrugged.
“Partly that. But it’ s my famil y name, as well. Both my
parents were killed during the war , and my great-uncle
adopted me. He gave me his own name—but I was christened
Roger Jeremiah MacKenzie.”
“Jeremiah?” She didn’ t laugh out loud, but the end of her
nose pinkened as though she wa s trying not to. “Like the Old
T estament prophet?”“Don’ t laugh,” he said, taking her arm. “I was named for my
father—they called him Jerry . My Mum called me Jemmy
when I was small. Old family name. It could have been worse,
after all; I might have been christened Ambrose or Conan.”
The laughter fizzed out of her like Coke bubbles.
“Conan?”
“Perfectly good Celtic name, before the fantasists got hold
of it . An yway , J eremiah seems to have been the pick of the lot
for good cause.”
“Why’ s that?”
They turned and headed slowly back toward the stage,
where a gang of solemnly starched little girls were doing the
Highland fling in perfect unison, every pleat and bow in place.
“Oh, it’ s one of the stories Da d—the Reverend, I always
called h im Dad—used to tell m e, going down my family tree
and pointing out the folk on it.”
Ambr ose MacKenzie, that’ s yo ur gr eat-grandfather , Rog.
He’ll have been a boatwright i n Dingwall. And ther e’ s Mary
Oliphant—I knew your gr eat-grandma Oliphant, did I tell
you? Liv ed to be ninety-seven, and sharp as a tack to her last
br eath; wonderful woman .
She was married six times—all died of natural causes, too,
she assur ed me—but I’ve only put Jer emiah MacKenzie her e,
since he was your ancestor . The only one she had childr en by , I
did wonder about that .
I ask ed her , and  she closed one  eye and nodded at me, and
said,  “Is fhearr an giomach na ‘bhi gun fear tighe.” It’ s an old
Gaelic pr overb—”Better a lobster than no husband.” She said
some wo uld do for marrying, b ut Jer emiah was the only lad
bonny enough to take to her bed every night .
“I wonder what she told the others,” Brianna said,
meditatively .
“W ell, she didn’ t say she didn’ t sleep with them now and
then,” Roger pointed out. “Just not every night.”“Once is enough to get pregnan t,” Brianna said. “Or so my
mother assured my high school health class. She’d draw
pictures of sperm on the black board, all racing toward this
huge egg with le ers on their faces.” She’d gone pink again, but
evidently from amusement rather than distressed memory .
Arm in arm, he could feel the he at of her through the thin T -
shirt, and a stirr ing under his kilt that made him think leaving
the pants of f had been a mistake.
“Putting aside the question of whether sperm have faces,
what has that particular subject got to do with health?”
“Health is an American euphemism for anything to do with
sex,” she explained. “They teach girls and boys separately; the
girls’ cla ss is The Mysteries of Life, and T en W ays to Say No
to a Boy .”
“And the boys’ class?”
“W ell, I don’ t know for sure, because I didn’ t have any
brothers to tell me. Some of my friends had brothers, though—
one of them said  they learned eighteen dif ferent synonyms for
penile erection.”
“Really useful, that,” Roger said, wondering why anyone
required more than one. Luckily , a sporran covered a multitude
of sins.
“I suppo se it might keep the conversation going—under
certain circumstances.”
Her cheeks were red. He could f eel the heat creeping up his
own thro at, and  imagined that they were beginning to attract
curious glances from passersby . He hadn’ t let a girl embarrass
him in public s ince he was seventeen, but she was doing
nicely . She’d started it, though—let her finish it, then.
“Mmphm. I hadn’ t noticed much conversation, under those
particular circumstances.”
“I imagine you’d know .” It was n’ t quite a question. Rather
late, he realized what she was up to. He tightened his arm,
pulling her closer .“If you mean have I, yes. If you mean am I, no.”
“Are you, what?” Her lips were quivering slightly , holding
back the ur ge to laugh.
“Y ou’re asking if I’ve got a girl in England, right?”
“Am I?”
“I d on’ t. Or rat her I do, but nothing serious.” They were
outside t he door  to the dressing rooms; nearly time to fetch his
instruments. He stopped and tur ned to look at her . “Have you?
Got a bloke, I mean.”
She was  tall enough to look him in the eye, and close
enough that her breasts grazed h is forearm when she turned to
face him.
“What was it your great-grandmother said? ‘ Is fhearr an
giomach….’? ”
” ‘…na ‘bhi gun fear tighe.’ “
“Uh-huh. W ell, better a lobster than no boyfriend.” She
lifted a hand and touched his bro och. “So yes, there are people
I go out with. But I don’ t have a bonny lad—yet.”
He caught her fingers and brought them to his mouth.
“Give it time, lass,” he said, and kissed them.
The aud ience was amazingly quiet; not at all like a rock
concert. Of course, they couldn’ t be noisy , she thought; there
weren’ t any electric guitars or amplifiers, only a small
microphone on a stand. But th en, some things didn’ t need
amplifying. Her heart, for one, hammering in her ears.
“Here,” he’d said, appearing abruptly out of the dressing
room w ith guitar and drum. He ’d handed her a small brown
envelope. “I found these, going through my dad’ s old bumf in
Inverness. I thought you’d maybe want them.”
She cou ld tell it was photograp hs, but she hadn’ t looked at
them right away . She’d sat with them burning a hole on her
knee, listening to Roger ’ s set.He w as good—even distracted, she could tell he was good.
He h ad a surpri singly rich deep baritone voice, and he knew
what to do with it. Not just in terms of tone and melody; he
had the  true performer ’ s ability to pull aside the curtain
between singer and audience, to look out into the crowd, meet
someone’ s eyes, and let them se e what lay behind both words
and music.
He’d got them going with “The  Road to the Isles,” a quick
and live ly clap-along song with a rousing chorus, and when
they’d subsided from that, kept them going with “The
Gallowa’ Hills,” and a sweet slide into “The Lewis Bridal
Song,” with a lovely , lilting chorus in Gaelic.
He l et th e last note die away on “Vhair Me Oh,” and smiled,
directly at her , she thought.
“And here’ s one from the ‘45,”  he said. “This one is from
the f amous battle of Prestonpans, at which the Highland Army
of Charl es Stuar t routed a muc h greater English force, under
the command of General Jonathan Cope.”
There was an appreciative murmur from the crowd, for
many of  whom the song was plainly an old favorite, quickly
shushed as Roger ’ s fingers plucked out the marching line.
“Cope sent a challenge fr om Dunbar
 Sayin’ ‘Charlie, meet me, and ye daur
 An’ I’ll learn ye the art o’ war
 If ye’ll meet me in the mornin’.’ “
He bent  his head over the strings, nodding to the crowd to
join in the jeering chorus.
“Hey , Johnnie Cope, ar e ye walkin’ yet?
 And ar e your drums a-beatin’ yet?
 If ye wer e walkin’, I would wait
 T ae gang tae the coals in the mornin’!”
Brianna felt a su dden prickle at the roots of her hair that had
nothing to do with singer or crowd, but with the song itself.“When Charlie looked the letter upon,
 He dr ew his swor d the scabbar d fr om,
 Come, follow me, my merry men,
 And we’ll meet Johnnie Cope in the morning!”
“No,” she whispered, her fingers cold on the smooth brown
envelope. Come follow me, my merry men …They’d been there
—both her parents. It was her fa ther who had char ged the field
at Preston, his broadsword and his tar ge in his hands.
“…For it will be a bluidie morning!”
 “Hey , Johnnie Cope, ar e ye walkin’ yet?
 And ar e your drums a-beatin’ yet?…”
The voices rose around her in a  roar of approbation as they
joined in the cho rus. She had a moment of rising panic, when
she wou ld have fled away like  Johnnie Cope, but it passed,
leaving her buf feted by emotion as much as by the music.
“In faith, quo Johnnie, I got sic flegs,
 W i’ their claymor es an’ philabegs,
 Gin I face them again, de’il brak my legs,
 So I wish you a’ good morning!
 Hey , Johnnie Cope, ar e ye walkin’ yet?…”
Y es, he was. And he would be,  as long as that song lasted.
Some people tried to preserve the past; others, to escape it.
And tha t was by far the greatest gulf between herself and
Roger . Why hadn’ t she seen it before?
She didn’ t know whether Roger had seen her momentary
distress, but he abandoned the dangerous territory of the
Jacobites and went into “MacPherson’ s Lament,” sung with no
more tha n an occasional touch o f the strings. The woman next
to Brianna let out a long sigh and looked doe-eyed at the stage.
“Sae rantingly , sae wantonly , sae dauntingly gaed
he,
 He played a tune and he danced it r oond…alow the
gallows tr ee!”She pick ed up the envelope, we ighing it on her fingers. She
ought to  wait, maybe, until she  got home. But curiosity was
warring with reluctance. Roger hadn’ t been sure he should
give it to her; she’d seen that in his eyes.
“…a bodhran,” Roger was sayi ng. The drum was no more
than a wooden hoop, a few inches wide, with a skin head
stretched over it, some eighteen inches across. He held the
drum balanced on the fingers of one hand, a small double-
headed stick in the other . “One of the oldest known
instruments, thi s is the drum with which the Celtic tribes
scared th e bejesus out of Julius Caesar ’ s troops in 52 BC.” The
audience tittered , and he touche d the wide drumhead with the
stick, back and forth in a soft, quick rhythm like a heartbeat.
“And here’ s ‘The Sherif fmuir Fight,’ from the first Jacobite
Rising, in 1715.”
The drumhead shifted and the beat dropped in pitch, became
martial i n tone, a thundering behind the words. The audience
was still well-behaved, but now  sat up and leaned forward,
hanging on the chant that described the battle of Sherif fmuir ,
and all the clans who had fought in it.
“…then on they rushed, and blo od out-gushed, and many a
puke did fall, man…
They hacked and hashed, while br oadswor ds clashed…”
As the song ended she put her fingers inside the envelope
and pulled out a set of photographs. Old snapshots, black-and-
white fa ded to tones of brown. Her parents. Frank and Claire
Randall, both looking absurdly young—and terribly happy .
They were in a garden somewh ere; there were lawn chairs,
and a table with drinks in a background dappled with the
scattered light of tree leaves. The faces showed clearly , though
—laughing, faces alight with youth, eyes only for each other .
Posing formally , arm in arm, mocking their own formality .
Laughing, Claire half bent over with hilarity at something
Frank ha d said, holding down a wide skirt flying in the wind,
her c urly hair su f fering no such restraint. Frank handing Clairea cu p, she looking up into his f ace as she took it, with such a
look of hope an d trust that Bri anna’ s heart squeezed tight to
see it.
Then she looked at the last of the pictures, and realized what
she was looking  at. The two of them stood by the table, hands
together on a knife, laughing as they cut into an obviously
homemade cake. A wedding cake.
“And for the last, an old favorite that you’ll know . This song
is said to have been sent by a Ja cobite prisoner , on his way to
London to be hanged, to his wife in the Highlands…”
She spr ead her hands out flat on top of the pictures, as
though to keep anyone from se eing them. An icy shock went
through her . W edding pictures. Snapshots of their wedding
day . Of course; they’d been married in Scotland. The
Reverend W ake field wouldn’ t have done the ceremony , not
being a Catholic priest, but he was one of her father ’ s oldest
friends; the reception must have been held at the manse.
Y es. Peeking through her fingers, she could make out
familiar bits of the old house in the background. Then,
reluctantly sliding her hand aside, she looked again at her
mother ’ s young face.
Eighteen. Claire had married Frank Randall at eighteen—
perhaps that explained it. How could anyone know their mind
so young?
“By yon bonnie banks, and by yon bonnie braes,
 Wher e the sun shines bright on Loch Lomond,
 Wher e me and my true love wer e ever wont to
gae…”
But Cla ire had been sure—or she’d thought so. The broad
clear brow and delicate mouth admitted of no doubt; the big,
luminous eyes were fixed on her new husband with no sign of
reservation or misgiving. And yet—
“But me and my true love will never meet again
 On the bonnie, bonnie banks of Loch Lomond.”Oblivious of the toes she stepped on, Brianna blundered out
of the row and fled, before anyone should see the tears.
“I ca n s tay with  you through pa rt of the calling of the clans,”
Roger said, “but I’ve a bit to do at the end of it, so I’ll have to
leave you. W ill you be all right?”
“Y es, of course,” she said firmly . “I’m fine. Don’ t worry .”
He l ooked at her  a little anxious ly , but let it pass. Neither of
them had mentioned her precipitous departure earlier; by the
time he had made his way through the congratulatory well-
wishers and gone to find her , she had had time to find a
Ladies’ and get herself under control with cold water .
They had spent the rest of the afternoon strolling through
the festival, shopping a bit, goi ng outside to watch the pipe-
bands’ competition, coming in half deafened to see a young
man dan ce between two swords crossed on the ground. The
photographs stayed safely out of sight in her handbag.
It was nearly da rk now; people were leaving the eating area
and heading for the open stan ds outside, at the foot of the
mountain.
She had thought the families with young children would
leave, and some did, but there were small bodies and sleepy
heads dr ooping among the older people in the stands. A tiny
girl lay limp, so und asleep on her father ’ s shoulder as they
made their way into one of the upper rows of the stands. There
was a clear , flat space in front  of the bleachers, in which a
huge heap of wood had been piled.
“What’ s the calling of the clans?” she heard a woman ask
her companion in the row ahead. The companion shrugged,
and Brianna looked at Roger for enlightenment, but he only
smiled.
“Y ou’ll see,” he said.
It was full dark, and the moon  not risen; the bulk of the
mountainside ro se up as a darker black against the star -flecked
sky . There was an exclamation from somewhere in the crowd,a scatter ing of more, and then the notes of a single bagpipe
came faintly through the air , silencing everything else.
A pinpo int of light appeared ne ar the top of the mountain.
As they watched, it moved down, and another sprang up
behind i t. The music grew stronger , and another light came
over the  top of the mountain.  For nearly ten minutes, the
anticipation grew , as the music grew louder , and the string of
lights grew longer , a blazing chain down the mountainside.
Near the bottom of the slope, a trail came out from the trees
above; she had seen it during h er earlier exploration. Now a
man stepped out of the trees into sight, holding a blazing torch
above hi s head. Behind him was the piper , and the sound now
was strong enough to drown even the oohs and ahhs of the
crowd.
As t he two mo ved down the trail and toward the cleared
space in front o f the bleachers, Brianna could see that there
were mo re men behind them; a long line of men, each with a
torch, all dressed in the finery of  the Highland chieftains. They
were barbarous and splendid, decked in grouse feathers, the
silver o f swords and dirks gleaming red by the torchlight,
picked out amid the folds of tartan cloth.
The pipes stopped abruptly , and  the first of the men strode
into the clearing and stopped be fore the stands. He raised his
torch above his head and shouted, “The Camerons are here!”
Loud whoops of delight rang o ut from the stands, and he
threw the torch i nto the kerosene-soaked wood, which went up
with a roar , in a pillar of fire ten feet high.
Against the blinding sheet of flame, another man stepped
out, and called, “The MacDonalds are here!”
Screams and yelps from those in the crowd that claimed
kinship with clan MacDonald, and then—
“The MacLachlans are here!”
“The MacGillivrays are here!”She was  so entranced by the spectacle that she was only
dimly aware of Roger . Then another man stepped out and
cried, “The MacKenzies are here!”
“T ulach Ar d!”  bellowed Roger , making her jump.
“What was that? ” she asked.
“That,” he said, grinning, “is the war cry of clan
MacKenzie.”
“Sounded like it.”
“The Ca mpbells are here!” There must have been a lot of
Campbells; the response shook the bleachers. As though that
was the signal h e had been waiting for , Roger stood up and
flung his plaid over his shoulder .
“I’ll me et you afterward by the dressing rooms, all right?”
She nodded, and he bent suddenly and kissed her .
“Just in case,” he said. “The  Frasers’ cry is Caisteal
Dhuni !”
She watched him go, climbing down the bleachers like a
mountain goat. The smell of woodsmoke filled the night air ,
mixing with the smaller fragrance of tobacco from cigarettes
in the crowd.
“The MacKays are here!”
“The MacLeods are here!”
“The Farquarsons are here!”
Her chest felt tight, from the smoke and from emotion. The
clans ha d died at Culloden—or had they? Y es, they had; this
was no more than memory , than the calling up of ghosts; none
of the people shouting so enthusiastically owed kinship to each
other , no ne of them lived any lo nger by the claims of laird and
land, but…
“The Frasers are here!”
Sheer panic gripped her , and h er hand closed tight on the
clasp of her bag.No,  she thought. Oh, no. I’m not .
Then the  moment passed, and she could breathe again, but
jolts of adrenaline still thrilled through her blood.
“The Grahams are here!”
“The Inneses are here!”
The Ogilvys, the Lindsays, the Gordons…and then finally ,
the e choes of th e last shout died . Brianna held the bag on her
lap, grip ped tight, as though to keep its contents from escaping
like the jinn from a lamp.
How could she?  s he thought, and then, seeing R oger come
into the light, fire on his head and his bodhran in his hand,
thought again, How could she help it?5
T W O  H U N D R E D  Y E A R S  F R O M
Y E S T E R D A Y
Y ou d idn’ t wear your kilt!” Gay le’ s mouth turned down in
disappointment.
“W rong century ,” Roger said, smiling down at her . “Drafty
for a moonwalk.”
“Y ou have to teach me to do that.” She bounced on her toes,
leaning toward him.
“Do what?”
“Roll your r ’ s like that.” She puckered her brows and made
an earnest attempt, sounding like a motorboat in low gear .
“V erra nice,” he said, trying n ot to laugh. “Keep it up.
Prractice makes perfect.”
“W ell, did you bring your guit ar , at least?” She stood on
tiptoes, trying to look behind him. “Or that groovy drum?”
“It’ s in the car ,”  Brianna said, putting away her keys as she
came up beside Roger . “W e’re going to the airport from here.”
“Oh, too  bad; I thought we could hang around and have a
hootenanny afterward, to celebrate. Do you know ‘This Land
Is Y our Land,’ Roger? Or are you more into protest songs? But
I g uess you wou ldn’ t be, since you’re English—oops, I mean
Scotch. Y ou guys don’ t have anything to protest about, do
you?”
Brianna gave her friend a look of mild exasperation.
“Where’ s Uncle Joe?”
“In the living ro om, kicking the TV ,” Gayle said. “Shall I
entertain Roger while you find him?” She linked one arm
cosily through Roger ’ s, batting her eyelashes.
“W e got half the  doggone MIT College of Engineering here,
and nobody who can fix a dog gone television? ” Dr . JosephAbernathy glared accusingly at the clusters of young people
scattered around his living room.
“That’ s electrical  engineering, Pop,” his son told him loftily .
“W e’re all mechanical engineers. Ask a mechanical engineer
to fix your color TV , that’ s like asking an Ob-Gyn to look at
the sore on your di—ow!”
“Oh, sorry ,” said his father , peering blandly over gold-
rimmed glasses. “That your foot, Lenny?”
Lenny hopped storklike arou nd the room to general
laughter , clutchi ng one lar ge sn eaker -clad foot in exaggerated
agony .
“Bree, honey!” The doctor spotted her and abandoned the
television, bea ming. He hugged her enthusiastically ,
disregarding the  fact that she topped him by four inches or so,
then let go and looked at Roger , his features rearranged in a
look of wary cordiality .
“This the boyfriend?”
“This is Roger W akefield,” Brianna said, narrowing her
eyes slightly at the doctor . “Roger , Joe Abernathy .”
“Dr . Abernathy .”
“Call me Joe.”
They shook hands in mutual assessment. The doctor looked
him ove r with quick brown ey es, no less shrewd for their
warmth.
“Bree, honey , you want to go lay hands on that piece of
junk, see can you bring it back to life?” He jerked a thumb at
the twenty-four - inch RCA sitting in mute defiance on its wire
stand. “It was working fine last night, then today…pf f ft!”
Brianna looked dubiously at the big color TV , and groped in
the pocket of her jeans, coming out with a Swiss Army knife.
“W ell, I can che ck the connections, I guess.” She flicked out
the screwdriver blade. “How much time do we have?”“Half hour , maybe,” called a crew-cut student from the
kitchen doorway . He glanced at the crowd clustered around the
small black-and-white set on the table. “W e’re still with
Mission Control  in Houston—ET A thirty-four minutes.” The
muted excitement of the TV commentator came in bursts
through the more vivid excitement of the spectators.
“Good, good,” said Dr . Aber nathy . He laid a hand on
Roger ’ s shoulde r . “Plenty of time for a drink, then. Y ou a
Scotch man, Mr . W akefield?”
“Call me Roger .”
Abernathy poured a generous measure of amber nectar and
handed it over .
“Don’ t imagine you take water , do you, Roger?”
“No.” It  was Lagavulin; astonishing to find it in Boston. He
sipped appreciatively , and the doctor smiled.
“Claire gave it to me—Bree’ s mama. Now , there was a
woman with a taste for fine whisky .” He shook his head
nostalgically , and raised his glass in tribute.
“Slainte,”  Roger said quietly , and tipped his own glass
before drinking.
Abernathy closed his eyes in silent appreciation—whether
of the whisky or the woman, Roger couldn’ t tell.
“W ater of life, h uh? I do believe that particular stuf f could
raise the  dead.” He set the bottle back in the liquor cabinet
with reverent hands.
How m uch had Claire told Abernathy? Enough, Roger
supposed. The doctor picked up his tumbler and gave him a
long look of assessment.
“Since B ree’ s da ddy is dead, I guess I get to do the honors.
Reckon we got time for the thi rd degree before they land, or
shall we keep it short?”
Roger raised one eyebrow .
“Y our intentions,” the doctor elaborated.“Oh. Strictly honorable.”
“Y eah? I called Bree last night, to see if she was coming
tonight. No answer .”
“W e’d gone to a Celtic festival, up in the mountains.”
“Uh-huh. I called again, eleven p.m. And midnight. No
answer .” The doctor ’ s eyes wer e still shrewd, but a good deal
less warm. He set his glass down with a small click.
“Bree’ s alone,” he said. “And she’ s lonely . And she’ s lovely .
I w ould n’ t like to see anybody  take advantage of that, Mr .
W akefield.”
“Neither would I—Dr . Abernath y .” Roger drained his glass
and set it down  hard. W armth burned in his cheeks, and it
wasn’ t due to the Lagavulin. “If you think that I—”
“THIS IS HOUST ON,” boomed the television.
“TRANQUILITY BASE, WE HA VE T OUCH-DOWN IN
TWENTY MINUTES.”
The inhabitants of the kitchen came pouring out, waving
Coke bottles and cheering. Brianna, flushed with her labors,
was laug hing and brushing of f their congratulations as she put
away her knife. Abernathy put a  hand on Roger ’ s arm, to keep
him.
“Mind me, Mr . W akefield,” Abernathy said, his voice low
enough not to b e heard over the  crowd. “I don’ t want to hear
that you’ve made that girl unhappy . Ever .”
Roger carefully released his arm from the other ’ s grip.
“D’ye think she looks unhappy?” he asked, as politely as he
could.
“No-oo,” said Abernathy , rocking back on his heels and
squinting hard at him. “On the c ontrary . It’ s the way she looks
tonight that makes me think I sh ould maybe punch you in the
nose, on her daddy’ s behalf.”
Roger c ouldn’ t help turning to look at her himself; it was
true. Sh e had dark circles under her eyes, wisps of hair werecoming down from her ponytail,  and her skin was glowing like
the w ax of a lighted candle. She looked like a woman who’d
had a long night—and enjoyed it.
As thou gh by radar , her head turned and her eyes fixed on
him, ove r Gayle’ s head. She went on talking to Gayle, but her
eyes spoke straight to him.
The doctor cleared his throat loudly . Roger jerked his
attention away from her , to find Abernathy looking up at him,
his expression thoughtful.
“Oh,” the doctor said, in a changed tone. “Like that, is it?”
Roger ’ s collar was unbuttoned , but he felt as though he
were wearing a tie tied too tig ht. He met the doctor ’ s eyes
straight on.
“Y eah,” he said. “Like that.”
Dr . Aber nathy reached for the bottle of Lagavulin, and filled
both glasses.
“Claire did say she liked you,” he said in resignation. He
lifted one glass. “Okay . Slainte .”
“T urn it the other way—W alter Cronkite’ s orange!” Lenny
Abernathy obl igingly twirle d the knob, turning the
commentator green. Unaf fected by his sudden change of
complexion, Cronkite went on talking.
“In ap pr oximately two mi nutes, Commander Neil
Armstr ong and the cr ew of the Apollo 1 1 will make history in
the first manned landing on the moon…”
The living room was darkened and packed with people,
everyone’ s attention riveted on  the big TV as the footage
shifted to a replay of the Apollo’ s launch.
“I’m impressed, ” Roger said in Brianna’ s ear . “How did you
fix it?” He lean ed against the e nd of a bookshelf, and pulled
her snug  agains t him, his hands  on the swell of her hips, his
chin on her shoulder .Her eyes  were on the television, but he felt her cheek move
against his own.
“Somebody kicked the plug out of the wall,” she said. “I
just plugged it back in.”
He laughed and kissed the side of her neck. It was hot in the
room, e ven with  the air condit ioner humming, and her skin
tasted moist and salty .
“Y ou’ve got the roundest arse in the world,” he whispered.
She didn’ t answer , but deliberately nestled her bottom against
him.
A bu zz o f voices  from the screen  and pictures of the flag the
astronauts would plant on the moon.
He glanced across the room, but Joe Abernathy was as
hypnotized as any of them, f ace rapt in the glow of the
television screen . Safe in the darkness, he wrapped his arms
around Brianna,  and felt the soft weight of her breasts on his
forearm. She sighed deeply and relaxed against him, putting
her hand over his and squeezing tight.
They wo uld both  be less bold if there were any danger to it.
But he was leaving in two hou rs; there was no chance of it
going further . The night before, they had known they were
playing with dynamite, and been more cautious. He wondered
if Abernathy would actually have punched him, had he
admitted that Brianna had spent the night in his bed?
He had driven them down the mountain, torn between trying
to stay on the r ight side of the  road, and the excitement of
Brianna’ s soft weight, pressed against him. They’d stopped for
cof fee, t alked lo ng past midnight, touching constantly , hands,
thighs, heads close together . Driven on to Boston in the wee
hours, the conversation dying, Brianna’ s head heavy on his
shoulder .
Unable to keep awake long eno ugh to find his way through
the maze  of unfamiliar streets to  her apartment, he had driven
to his hotel, smuggled her upstairs, and laid her on his bed,
where she had fallen asleep in seconds.He had himself  spent the rest of the night on the chaste
hardness of the floor , Brianna’ s woolly cardigan across his
shoulders for warmth. W ith the  dawn, he’d got up and sat in
the chair , wrapped in her scent, silently watching the light
spread across her sleeping face.
Y eah, it was like that.
“T ranquility Base…the Eagle has landed.”  The silence in
the r oom was br oken by a deep collective sigh, and Roger felt
the hair rise on the back of his neck.
“One…small…step for man,”  said the tinny voice, “one
giant leap…for mankind.”  Th e picture w as fuzzy , but not
through any fault of the television. Heads strained forward,
avid to see the bulky figure making its ginger way down the
ladder , s etting foot for the first time on the lunar soil. T ears
gleamed on one girl’ s cheeks, silver in the glow .
Even Brianna had for gotten everything else; her hand had
fallen from his a rm and she was  leaning forward, caught up in
the moment.
It was a fine day to be an American.
He had a mom entary qualm, seeing them all so fiercely
intent, so fervently proud, and she so much a part of it. It was  a
dif ferent century , two hundred years from yesterday .
Might there be common ground for them, a historian and an
engineer? He facing backward to  the mysteries of the past, she
to the future and its dazzling gleam?
Then the room relaxed in che ers and babbling, and she
turned in  his arms to kiss him hard and cling to him, and he
thought perhaps it didn’ t matter that they faced in opposite
directions—so long as they faced each other .P A R T  T H R E E
P i r a t e s6
I  E N C O U N T E R  A  H E R N I A
June 1767
I  hat e boats,” Ja mie said through clenched teeth. “I loathe
boats. I view boats with the most profound abhorrence.”
Jamie’ s uncle, Hector Cameron, lived on a plantation called
River Run, just above Cross C reek. Cross Creek in turn lay
some way upriver from W ilmington; some two hundred miles,
in fa ct. At this time of year , we  were told, the trip might take
four days to a week by boat, depending on wind. If we chose
rather to  travel overland, the jou rney could take two weeks or
more, depending on such things as washed-out roads, mud,
and broken axles.
“Rivers do not h ave waves,” I said. “And I view the notion
of trudg ing on foot for two hundred miles through the mud
with a lot more  than abhorrrrence.” Ian grinned broadly , but
quickly exchanged the grin for an expression of bland
detachment as Jamie’ s glare moved in his direction.
“Besides,” I said to Jamie, “if you get seasick, I still have
my need les.” I patted the pock et where my tiny set of gold
acupuncture needles rested in their ivory case.
Jamie exhaled strongly through  his nose, but said no more.
That litt le matte r settled, the ma jor problem remaining was to
manage the boat-fare.
W e were  not rich, but did have a little money , as the result
of a spot of good fortune on the road. Gypsying our way north
from Charleston, and camping well of f the road at night, we
had discovered an abandoned homestead in the wood, its
clearing nearly obliterated by new growth.
Cottonwood saplings shot like spears through the beams of
the falle n roof, and a hollybush sprouted through a lar ge crack
in the hearthstone. The walls w ere half collapsed, black with
rot a nd furred w ith green moss and rusty fungus. There was notelling how long the place had  been abandoned, but it was
clear that both cabin and clearing would be swallowed by the
wilderness within a few years, nothing left to mark its
existence save a tumbled cairn of chimney stones.
However , flourishing incongruously among the invading
trees were the remains of a small peach orchard, the fruit of it
burstingly ripe and swarming with bees. W e had eaten as much
as w e co uld, sle pt in the shelter  of the ruins, then risen before
dawn and loaded the wagon with heaping mounds of smooth
gold fruit, all juice and velvet.
W e had sold it as we went, and consequently had arrived in
W ilmington with sticky hands, a bag of coins—mostly pennies
—and a pervasive scent of fer mentation that clung to hair ,
clothes, and skin, as though we had all been dipped in peach
brandy .
“Y ou tak e this,” Jamie advised me, handing me the small
leather sack containing our fortune. “Buy what ye can for
provisions—dinna buy any peaches, aye?—and perhaps a few
bits and pieces s o we dinna loo k quite  such beggars when we
come to my kinsman. A needle and thread, maybe?” He raised
a b row and nodd ed at the lar ge rent in Fer gus’ s coat, incurred
while falling out of a peach tree.
“Duncan and I w ill go about an d see can we sell the wagon
and hors es, and inquire for a bo at. And if there’ s such a thing
as a goldsmith here, I’ll maybe see what he’d of fer for one of
the stones.”
“Be careful, Uncle,” Ian advised, frowning at the motley
crew of humanity coming and going from the harbor nearby .
“Y e dinna want to be taken advantage of, nor yet be robbed in
the street.”
Jamie, g ravely straight-faced, assured his nephew that he
would take due precaution.
“T ake Rollo,” Ian ur ged him. “He’ll protect ye.”
Jamie glanced down at Rollo, who was surveying the
passing crowds with a look of p anting alertness that suggestednot so much social interest as barely restrained appetite.
“Oh, ay e,” he said. “Come along then, wee dog.” He
glanced at me as  he turned to go. “Perhaps ye’d best buy a few
dried fish, as well.”
W ilmington was  a small town,  but because of its fortuitous
situation as a seaport at the mouth of a navigable river , it
boasted not only a farmer ’ s ma rket and a shipping dock, but
several shops that stocked imported luxuries from Europe, as
well as the homegrown necessities of daily life.
“Beans, all right,” Fer gus said. “I like beans, even in lar ge
quantities.” He shifted the burlap sack on his shoulder ,
balancing its unwieldy weight. “And bread, of course we must
have bread—an d flour and salt and lard. Salt beef, dried
cherries, fresh apples, all well and good. Fish, to be sure.
Needles and thread I see also ar e certainly necessary . Even the
hairbrush,” he added, with a sidelong glance at my hair , which,
inspired by the humidity , was making mad ef forts to escape
the confinement of my broad-brimmed hat. “And the
medicines from the apothecary , naturally . But lace? ”
“Lace,” I said firmly . I tucke d the small paper packet
containing three yards of Brussels lace into the lar ge basket he
was carrying. “Likewise ribbon s. One yard each of wide silk
ribbon,” I told the perspiring young girl behind the counter .
“Red—that’ s yours, Fer gus, so don’ t complain—green for Ian,
yellow for Duncan, and the very dark blue for Jamie. And no,
it isn’ t an extravagance; Jamie doesn’ t want us to look like
ragamuf fins when we meet his uncle and aunt.”
“What about you, Auntie?” Ian said, grinning. “Surely ye
willna let us men be dandies, and you go plain as a sparrow?”
Fer gus blew air between his lips, in mingled exasperation
and amusement.
“That one,” he said, pointing to a wide roll of dark pink.
“That’ s a color for a young girl,” I protested.“W omen are never too old to wear pink,” Fer gus replied
firmly . “I have heard les mesdames  s ay  so, many ti mes.” I had
heard les mesdames’  o pinion s before ; Fer gus’ s early life had
been spent in a brothel, and judging from his reminiscences,
not a little of his later life, too . I rather hoped that he could
overcome the habit now that he was married to Jamie’ s
stepdaughter , but with Marsali still in Jamaica awaiting the
birth of their f irst child, I had my doubts. Fer gus was a
Frenchman born, after all.
“I su ppose the M adams would know ,” I said. “All right, the
pink, too.”
Burdened with baskets and bags  of provisions, we made our
way out  into the street. It was hot and thickly humid, but there
was a breeze fro m the river , and after the stifling confines of
the shop, the a ir seemed sweet and refreshing. I glanced
toward the harbor , where the masts of several small ships
poked up, swaying gently to th e rocking of the current, and
saw Jamie’ s tall figure stride ou t between two buildings, Rollo
pacing close behind.
Ian hallooed and waved, and Rollo came bounding down
the street, tail wagging madly at sight of his master . There
were few people out at this time of day; those with business in
the narr ow street prudently flattened themselves against the
nearest wall to avoid the rapturous reunion.
“My Gawd,” said a drawling voice somewhere above me.
“That’ll be the biggest dawg I believe I’ve ever  s een .” I  turned
to see a gentlem an detach himself from the front of a tavern,
and lift his hat politely to me. “Y our servant, ma’am. He ain’ t
partial to human flesh, I do sincerely hope?”
I l ooked  up at the man addressing me—and up. I refrained
from expressing  the opinion that he, of all people, could
scarcely find Rollo a threat.
My interlocutor  was one of the tallest men I’d ever seen;
taller by  several inches even than Jamie. Lanky and rawboned
with it, his huge hands dangled at the level of my elbows, and
the o rnately beaded leather belt  about his midrif f came to mychest. I could h ave pressed my nose into his navel, had the
ur ge struck me, which fortunately it didn’ t.
“No, he eats fish,” I assured my new acquaintance. Seeing
me craning my neck, he courteo usly dropped to his haunches,
his knee joints popping like rifle shots as he did so. His face
thus coming into view , I found his features still obscured by a
bushy black beard. An incongru ous snub nose poked out of the
under growth, surmounted by a pair of wide and gentle hazel
eyes.
“W ell, I’m surely obliged to hear that. W ouldn’ t care to
have a chunk taken out my leg, so early in the day .” He
removed a disreputable slouch hat with a ragged turkey feather
thrust through the brim, and bowed to me, loose snaky black
locks falling forward on his shoulders. “John Quincy Myers,
your servant, ma’am.”
“Claire Fraser ,”  I said, of fering  him a hand in fascination.
He s quinted at it  a moment, brou ght my fingers to his nose and
snif fed t hem, then looked up a nd broke into a broad smile,
nonetheless charming for missing half its teeth.
“Why , you’ll maybe be a yarb-woman, won’ t you?”
“I will?”
He turned my hand gently over , tracing the chlorophyll
stains around my cuticles.
“A green -fingered lady might just be tendin’ her roses, but a
lady who se hands smell of sassafras root and Jesuit bark is like
to know  more than how to make flowers bloom. Don’ t you
reckon that’ s so?” he asked, turning a friendly gaze on Ian,
who was viewing Mr . Myers with unconcealed interest.
“Oh, aye,” Ian assured him. “Auntie Claire’ s a famous
healer . A wise-woman!” He glanced proudly at me.
“That so, boy? W ell, now .” Mr . Myers’ s eyes went round
with inte rest, and swiveled back to focus on me. “Smite me if
this ain’ t Lucifer ’ s own luck! And me thinkin’ I’d have to wait
till I  come to the mountains and find me a shaman  t o take care
of it.”“Are you ill, Mr . Myers?” I asked. He didn’ t look it, but it
was hard  to tell, what with the b eard, the hair , and a thin layer
of g reasy brown dirt that seemed to cover everything not
concealed by his ragged buckskins. The sole exception was his
forehead; normally protected fr om the sun by the black felt
hat, it was now exposed to vie w , a wide flat slab of purest
white.
“Not to say ill, I don’ t reckon,” he replied. He suddenly
stood up , and began to fumble u p the tail of his buckskin shirt.
“It a in’ t the cla p or the French pox, anyhow , ‘cause I seen
those before.” What I had thou ght were trousers were in fact
long bu ckskin leggings, surmounted by a breechclout. Still
talking, Mr . Myers had hold of  the leather thong holding up
this latter garment, and was fumbling with the knot.
“Damnedest thing, though; all of a sudden this great big
swelling come up just along behind of my balls. Purely
inconvenient, as you may imagine, though it don’ t hurt me
none to speak of, save on horseback. Might be you could take
a peep and tell me what I best do for it, hm?”
“Ah….” I said, with a frantic gl ance at Fer gus, who merely
shifted his sack of beans and looked amused, blast him.
“W ould I have the pleasure to make the acquaintance of Mr .
John Myers?” said a polite Scottish voice over my shoulder .
Mr . My ers cea sed fumbling with his breechclout and
glanced up inquiringly .
“Can’ t say whether it’ s a pleasure to you or not, sir ,” he
replied courteously . “But be you lookin’ for Myers, you’ve
found him.”
Jamie stepped up beside me, tactfully inserting his body
between me and Mr . Myers’ s breechclout. He bowed formally ,
hat under his arm.
“James F raser , y our servant, sir . I was told to of fer the name
of Mr . Hector Cameron by way of introduction.”
Mr . Myers looked at Jamie’ s red hair with interest.“Scotch, are you? Be you one of them Highlander fellows?”
“I am a Scotsman, aye, and a Highlander .”
“Be you kin to Old Hector Cameron?”
“He is my uncle by marriage, sir , though I have not met him
myself. I was to ld that he was well known to you, and that you
might consent to guide my party to his plantation.”
The two men were frankly s izing each other up, eyes
flicking head to toe as they talk ed, appraising bearing, dress,
and armament. Jamie’ s eyes rested approvingly on the long
sheath-knife at the woodsman ’ s belt, while Mr . Myers’ s
nostrils flared wide with interest.
“Comme deux chiens,”  Fer gus remarked softly behind me.
Like two  dogs. “…aux culs.”  Nex t th ing you  know , they wil l
be smelling each other ’ s backside.
Mr . Mye rs darte d a glance at Fer gus, and I saw a quick flash
of amus ement in the hazel dep ths before he returned to his
assessment of Jamie. Uncultured the woodsman might be, but
he plainly had some working knowledge of French.
Given Mr . Myers’ s olfactory inclinations and lack of self-
consciousness, I might not have been surprised to see him drop
to all fours and perform in the manner Fer gus had suggested.
As i t was, he contented himself with a careful inspection that
took in not only Jamie but Ian, Fer gus, myself, and Rollo.
“Nice da wg,” he said casually , h olding out a set of massive
knuckles to the latter . Rollo, thus invited, instituted his own
inspection, sni f fing industriously from moccasins to
breechclout as the conversation went on.
“Y our uncle, eh? Does he know you’re coming?”
Jamie shook his head.
“I ca nna say . I sent a letter from  Geor gia, a month ago, but
I’ve no way to tell whether he’ s had it yet.”
“I shouldn’ t think so,” Myers said thoughtfully . His eyes
lingered on Jamie’ s face, then p assed swiftly over the rest ofus.
“I’ve met your wife. This’ll be your son?” He nodded at Ian.
“My nephew , Ian. My foster son, Fer gus.” Jamie made the
introductions wi th a wave of his hand. “And a friend, Duncan
Innes, who’ll be along presently .”
Myers grunted, nodding, and made up his mind.
“W ell, I should reckon I can get  you to Cameron’ s all right.
W anted to be su re you was kin, but you got the look of the
widder Cameron, in the face. The boy some, too.”
Jamie’ s head jerked up sharply .
“The widow  Cameron?”
A sly smile flitted through the thicket of beard.
“Old Hector caught the morbid sore throat, up and died late
last win ter . Don’ t figure they g et much mail, wherever he is
now .”
Abandoning the Camerons for matters of more immediate
personal interest, Myers resumed his interrupted excavations.
“Big purple thing,” he explained to me, fumbling his
loosened thong. “Almost as big  as one o’ my balls. Y ou don’ t
think it might could be as I’ve decided sudden-like to grow an
extry , do you?”
“W ell, no,” I sa id, biting my lip. “I really doubt it.” He
moved very slowly , but had almost got the knot in his thong
undone; people in the street were beginning to pause, staring.
“Please don’ t trouble yourself,” I said. “I do believe I know
what that is—it’ s an inguinal hernia.”
The wide hazel eyes got wider .
“It i s?” He seem ed impressed, and not at all displeased by
the news.
“I’d have to look—somewhere indoors, that is,” I added
hastily “ —to be  sure, but it sounds like it. It’ s quite easy to
repair sur gically , but…” I hesitated, looking up at theColossus. “I really couldn’ t—I m ean, you’d need to be asleep.
Unconscious,” I  amplified. “I’d have to cut you, and sew you
up a gain, you see. Perhaps a truss—a brace—might be better ,
though.”
Myers scratched slowly at his jaw , meditating.
“No, I done tried that, ‘twon’ t do. Cuttin’, though…Y ou
folks be staying here in the town for a spell before you head up
to Cameron’ s?”
“Not long,” Jamie interrupted firmly . “W e shall be sailing
upriver to my aunt’ s estate, as soon as passage can be
arranged.”
“Oh.” T he giant pondered this for a moment, then nodded,
beaming.
“I know the very man for you, sir . I’ll go this minute and
fetch Josh Freeman out the Sailor ’ s Rest. Sun’ s still high, he’ll
be not too drunk to do business yet.” He swept me a bow ,
battered hat to his middle. “And then could be your wife might
have the kindness to meet me in yonder tavern—it’ s a mite
more ge nteel than the Sailor ’ s—and have a look at this…
this…” I saw hi s lips try to form themselves around “inguinal
hernia,” then give up the e f fort and relax. “This yere
obstruction.”
He clap ped the hat back on hi s head, and with a nod to
Jamie, was of f.
Jamie w atched t he mountain man’ s stif f-legged retreat down
the street, slowed by cordial greetings to all he passed.
“What is it about ye, Sassenach, I wonder?” he said
conversationally , eyes still fixed on Myers.
“What is what  about me?”
He turned then, and gave me a narrow eye.
“What i t is that makes every m an ye meet want to take of f
his breeks within five minutes of meetin’ ye.”Fer gus choked slightly , and Ia n went pink. I looked as
demure as possible.
“W ell, if you don’ t know , my dear ,” I said, “no one does. I
seem to have found us a boat. And what have you  bee n up  to
this morning?”
Industrious as always, Jamie had found us a potential gem-
buyer . A nd not only a buyer , but an invitation to dinner with
the Governor .
“Governor T ryon’ s in the town just now ,” he explained.
“Staying at the h ouse of a Mr . Lillington. I talked this morning
wi’ a merchant n amed Mac-Eachern, who put me on to a man
named MacLeod, who—”
“Who in troduced you to MacNeil, who took you to drink
with Ma cGregor , who told you all about his nephew Bethune,
who’ s th e second cousin half re moved of the boy who cleans
the G overnor ’ s boots,” I suggested, familiar by this time with
the Byzantine pathways of Scottish business dealings.
Put two Highland Scots in a ro om together , and within ten
minutes they would know each other ’ s family histories for the
last two hundred years, and have discovered a helpful number
of mutual relatives and acquaintances.
Jamie grinned.
“It was the Governor ’ s wife’ s secretary ,” he corrected, “and
his name’ s Murray . That’ll be your Da’ s cousin Maggie’ s
eldest boy from Loch Linnhe,”  he added, to Ian. “His father
emigrated after the Rising.” Ia n nodded casually , doubtless
docketing the information in his own version of the genetic
encyclopedia, stored against the day it would prove useful.
Edwin Murray , the Governo r ’ s wife’ s secretary , had
welcomed Jamie warmly as a kinsman—if only by marriage—
and had  obtained an invitation for us to dine at Lillington’ s
that night, there ostensibly to acquaint the Governor with
matters of trade in the Indies. In  reality , we were intending to
acquaint ourselv es with Baron P enzler—a well-to-do Germannobleman who would be dining there as well. The Baron was a
man not  only of wealth but of  taste, with a reputation as a
collector of fine objects.
“W ell, it sounds a good idea,” I said dubiously . “But I think
you’d better go a lone. I can’ t be dining with governors looking
like this .”
“Ah, ye look f—” His voice fad ed as he actually looked at
me. His eye ro amed slowly over me, taking in my grimy ,
bedraggled gown, wild hair and ragged bonnet.
He frowned at m e. “No, I want  ye there, Sassenach; I may
need a distraction.”
“Speaking of distraction, how many pints did it take you to
wangle an invitation to dinner?” I asked, mindful of our
dwindling finances. Jamie didn’ t blink, but took my arm,
turning me toward the row of shops.
“Six, bu t he paid half. Come along, Sassenach; dinner ’ s at
seven, and we must find ye something decent to wear .”
“But we can’ t af ford—”
“It’ s an investment,” he said firmly . “And besides, Cousin
Edwin has advanced me a bit against the sale of a stone.”
The gow n was two years out of fashion by the cosmopolitan
standards of Jamaica but it wa s clean, which was the main
thing so far as I was concerned.
“Y ou’re drippin g, madame.” The sempstress’ s voice was
cold. A small, spare woman of middle age, she was the
preeminent dre ssmaker in W ilmington and—I gathered—
accustomed to having her fashion dictates obeyed without
question. My rejection of a fr illed cap in favor of freshly
washed hair had been received with bad grace and predictions
of p leurisy , and the pins she h eld in her mouth bristled like
porcupine quills at my insistence on replacing the normal
heavy co rsetry with light boning, scalloped at the top to lift the
breasts without pinching them.“Sorry .” I tucked up the of fendi ng wet lock inside the linen
towel that wrapped my head.
The guest quarters of Mr . Lillington’ s great house being
fully occ upied by the Governor ’ s party , I had been relegated to
Cousin E dwin’ s tiny attic over t he stable block, and the fitting
of m y gown was being accompl ished to the accompaniment of
muf fled stampings and chewings from below , punctuated by
the m onotonous strains of the gr oom’ s whistling as he mucked
out the stalls.
Still, I was not inclined to complain; Mr . Lillington’ s stables
were a deal cleaner than the inn where Jamie and I had left our
companions, and Mrs. Lillington had very graciously seen me
provided with a lar ge basin of ho t water and a ball of lavender -
scented soap—a consideration more important even than the
fresh dress. I hoped never to see another peach.
I rose slightly on  my toes, trying  to see out of the window in
case Jamie should be coming, bu t desisted at a grunt of protest
from the sempstress, who was t rying to adjust the hem of my
skirt.
The gown itself was not at all bad; it was of cream silk,
half-sleeved and very simple, but with panniers of wine-
striped s ilk over the hips, and a ruching of claret-colored silk
piping t hat ran in two rows from waist to bosom. W ith the
Brussels lace I had purchased  sewn around the sleeves, I
thought it would do, even if the cloth was not quite of the first
quality .
I had at first been surprised at the price, which was
remarkably low ,  but now observed that the fabric of the dress
was coarser than usual, with occasional slubs of thickened
thread that caught the light in shimmers. Curious, I rubbed it
between my fingers. I was no great judge of silk, but a Chinese
acquaintance ha d spent most of one idle afternoon on board a
ship explaining to me the lore of silkworms, and the subtle
variation of their output.
“Where does this silk come fro m?” I asked. “It isn’ t China
silk; is it French?”The sempstress looked up, her crossness temporarily
relieved by interest.
“No, indeed it’ s not. That’ s made in South Carolina, that is.
There’ s a lady , Mrs. Pinckney by name, has gone and put half
her land  to mulberry trees, and  went to raising silkworms on
‘em. Th e cloth’ s maybe not quite so fine as the China,” she
acknowledged reluctantly , “but ‘tisn’ t but half the cost, either .”
She squinted up at me, nodding slowly .
“It’ll do for fit, and the bit o’ piping’ s good; brings out the
color in your cheeks. But beggi ng your pardon, madame, you
do n eed something above the neck, not to look too bare. If you
won’ t have a cap nor a wig, might be you’d have a ribbon?”
“Oh, ribbon!” I said, remembering. “Y es, what a good idea.
Do l ook in my basket over there, and you’ll find a length that
might just do.”
Between us we managed to ge t my hair piled up, loosely
bound with the l ength of dark pink ribbon, damp curly tendrils
coming down— I couldn’ t stop them—around my ears and
brow .
“Not to o much mutton dressed as lamb, is it?” I asked,
suddenly worrie d. I smoothed a hand down the front of the
bodice, but it fit snugly—and trimly—around my waist.
“Oh, no, madame,” the semp stress assured me. “Quite
appropriate, and I say it myself.” She frowned at me,
calculating. “On ly it is a bit bar e  over the bosom, still. Y ou
haven’ t any jewelry , at all?”
“Just thi s.” W e turned in surpris e as Jamie ducked his head
to come in the door; neither of us had heard him coming.
He h ad somewhere managed to  have a bath and procure a
clean shirt and neckcloth; beyond that, someone had combed
and plaited his hair into a smooth queue, bound with the new
blue silk ribbon. His servicea ble coat had not only been
brushed, but improved by the ap plication of a set of silver -gilt
buttons, each delicately engraved with a small flower in the
center .“V ery nice,” I said, touching one.
“Rented from the goldsmith,” h e said. “But they’ll do. So
will this , I think.” He drew out a filthy handkerchief from his
pocket, from the folds of whic h he produced a slender gold
chain.
“He hadna time for any but th e simplest mount,” he said,
frowning in concentration as he  fastened the chain around my
neck. “But I think that’ s best, don’ t you?”
The ruby hung glinting just above the hollow of my breasts,
casting a pale rosy glow against my white skin.
“I’m glad you p icked that one,” I said, touching the stone
gently . I t was warm from his body . “Goes much better with the
dress than the sapphire or the emerald would.” The
sempstress’ s jaw  hung slightly open. She glanced from me to
Jamie, her impression of our social position evidently going up
by leaps and bounds.
Jamie h ad finally taken time to notice the rest of my
costume. His eyes traveled slowly over me from head to hem,
and a smile spread across his face.
“Y e make a verra ornamental jewel box, Sassenach,” he
said. “A fine distraction, aye?”
He glanced out the window , where a pale peach color
stained a hazy evening sky , th en turned to me, bowed and
made a leg. “Might I claim the pleasure of your company for
dinner , madame?”7
G R E A T  P R O S P E C T S  F R A U G H T
W I T H  P E R I L
W hile I was famil iar with the eigh teenth-century willingness
to eat anything that could be physically overpowered and
dragged to the table, I did not subscribe to the mania for
presenting wild  dishes as th ough they had not in fact
under gone the intermediary processes of being killed and
cooked before making their appearance at dinner .
I thu s viewed th e lar ge stur geon with which I sat eyeball-to-
eyeball with a marked lack of appetite. Complete not only with
eyes bu t with scales, fins, and  tail, the three-foot fish rode
majestically on waves of roe in aspic, decorated with a vast
quantity of tiny spiced crabs, which had been boiled whole and
scattered artistically over the platter .
I took another lar ge sip of win e and turned to my dinner
companion, tryin g to keep my eyes of f the bulging glare of the
stur geon by my elbow .
“…the most impertinent fellow!” Mr . Stanhope was saying,
by w ay of desc ribing a gentleman he had encountered in a
post-house whils t on his way to W ilmington from his property
near New Bern.
“Why , i n the very midst of our refreshment, he began to
speak of his piles, and what torment they caused him with the
coach’ s continual bouncing. And then damme if the crude
fellow d id not pull his kerchief  out of his pocket, all spotted
with blood, to s how the company by way of evidence! Quite
destroyed my appetite, ma’am, I assure you,” he assured me,
forking up a substantial mouthful of chicken fricassee. He
chewed it slowly , regarding me  with pale, bulging eyes that
reminded me uncomfortably of the stur geon’ s.
Across the table, Phillip W ylie’ s long mouth twitched with
amusement.“T ake care your conversation doesn’ t incur a similar ef fect,
Stanhope,” he said, with a n od at my untouched plate.
“Though a certain crudeness of c ompany is one of the perils of
public transport, I do admit.”
Stanhope snif fed, brushing crumbs from the folds of his
neckcloth.
“Needn’ t put on airs, W ylie. It’ s  not everyone can af ford to
keep a coachman, ‘specially not with all these fresh taxes.
New one stuck on every time one turns around, I do declare!”
He waved his fork indignantly . “T obacco, wine, brandy , all
very well, but a tax upon newspapers,  have you heard the like?
Why , m y sister ’ s oldest boy wa s awarded a degree from Y ale
University a year past”—he puf fed his chest unconsciously ,
speaking just slightly louder than usual—”and damned if she
was not  required to pay half a shilling, merely to have his
diploma of ficially stamped!”
“But that is no longer the case at present,” Cousin Edwin
said patiently . “Since the repeal of the Stamp Act—”
Stanhope plucked one of the tiny crabs from the platter and
brandished it at Edwin in accusation.
“Get rid  of one t ax, and another pops up in its place directly .
Just like mushrooms!” He popp ed the crab into his mouth and
was heard to mumble something indistinctly about taxing the
air next, he shouldn’ t wonder .
“Y ou ar e come but recently from the Indies, I understand,
Madame Fraser?” Baron Penzler , on my other side, seized the
momentary opportunity to interrupt. “I doubt you will be
familiar with such provincial matters—or interested in them,”
he added, with a nod of benevolent dismissal at Stanhope.
“Oh, surely everyone is interest ed in taxes,” I said, turning
slightly sideway s so as to display my bosom to best ef fect. “Or
don’ t yo u believe that taxes are what we pay for a civilized
society? Thoug h having heard Mr . Stanhope’ s story”—I
nodded to my o ther side—”perhaps he would agree that the
level of civilization isn’ t quite equal to the level of taxation?”“Ha ha!” Stanhope choked on his bread, spewing crumbs.
“Oh, very good! Not equal to—ha ha, no, certainly not!”
Phillip W ylie gave me a look of sardonic acknowledgment.
“Y ou must try n ot to be so amusing, Mrs. Fraser ,” he said.
“It may be the death of poor Stanhope.”
“Er…what is the current rate o f taxation, do you think?” I
asked, tactfully  drawing attention away from Stanhope’ s
spluttering.
W ylie p ursed h is lips, considering. A dandy , he wore the
latest in modish  wigs, and a small patch in the shape of a star
beside h is mouth. Under the powder , though, I thought I
detected both a good-looking face and a very shrewd brain.
“Oh, considering  all incidentals, I should say it can amount
to a s much as two per centum of all income, if one was to
include the taxes on slaves. Add taxes on lands and crops, and
it amounts to a bit more, perhaps.”
“T wo percent!” Stanhope choked, pounding himself on the
chest. “Iniquitous! Simply iniquitous!”
W ith viv id memories of the last IRS form I had signed, I
agreed sympath etically that a two percent tax rate was a
positive outrage, wondering to myself just what had become of
the f iery spirit o f American taxpayers over the intervening two
hundred years.
“But perhaps we should change  the subject,” I said, seeing
that heads were beginning to t urn in our direction from the
upper end of th e table. “After all, speaking of taxes at the
Governor ’ s table  is rather like talking of rope in the house of
the hanged, isn’ t it?”
At t his, Mr . Stanhope swallowed a crab whole, and choked
in good earnest.
His partner on t he other side pounded him helpfully on the
back, an d the small black boy  who had been occupied in
swatting flies near the open windows was sent hastily to fetch
water . I marked  out a sharp, slender knife by the fish platter ,just in case, though I hoped I shouldn’ t be compelled to
perform a tracheotomy on the spot; it wasn’ t the kind of
attention I was hoping to attract.
Luckily such drastic measures weren’ t required; the crab
was disgor ged by a fortunate slap, leaving the victim
empurpled and gasping, but otherwise unharmed.
“Someone had mentioned newspapers,” I said, once Mr .
Stanhope had been thus rescued from his excesses. “W e’ve
been here so sh ort a time that I haven’ t seen any; is there a
regular paper printed in W ilmington?”
I ha d ulterior m otives for asking this, beyond a desire to
allow Mr . Stanhope time to rec over himself. Among the few
worldly goods Jamie possessed was a printing press, presently
in storage in Edinbur gh.
W ilmington, it appeared, had two printers in residence, but
only one of these gentlemen—a Mr . Jonathan Gillette—
produced a regular newspaper .
“And it may so on cease to be so regular ,” Stanhope said
darkly . “I hear t hat Mr . Gillette has received a warning from
the Committee of Safety , that—ah!” He gave a brief
exclamation, his plump face creased in pained surprise.
“Have you a particular interest, Mrs. Fraser?” W ylie
inquired politely , darting a look under his brows at his friend.
“I ha d heard tha t your husband had some connection with the
printing trade in Edinbur gh.”
“Why , yes,” I sa id, rather surprised that he should know so
much about us. “Jamie owned a printing establishment there,
though he didn’ t issue a newspaper—books and pamphlets and
plays and the like.”
W ylie’ s finely arched brow twitched up.
“No political leanings, then, your husband? So often
printers find their skills suborned by those whose passions
seek outlet in print—but then, such passions are not
necessarily shared by the printer .”That rang numerous alarm bells; did W ylie actually know
anything about Jamie’ s political connections in Edinbur gh—
most of whom had been thoroughly seditious—or was this
only no rmal dinner table conversation? Judging from
Stanhope’ s rema rks, newspaper s and politics were evidently
connected in people’ s minds— and little wonder , given the
times.
Jamie, a t the far end of the table, had caught his name and
now turned his head slightly to smile at me, before returning to
an earnest conversation with the Governor , at whose right
hand he sat. I wasn’ t sure whether this placement was the
work of Mr . L illington, who sat on the Governor ’ s left,
following the conversation with the intelligent, slightly
mournful expression of a basset hound, or of Cousin Edwin,
consigned to the seat opposite m e, between Phillip W ylie and
W ylie’ s sister , Judith.
“Oh, a tradesman,” this lady now  remarked, in a meaningful
tone of voice. S he smiled at me, careful not to expose her
teeth. Likely decayed, I thought. “And is this”—she gave a
vague w ave at her head, compar ing my ribbon to the towering
confection of her wig—”the style in Edinbur gh, Mrs. Fraser?
How…charming.”
Her brother gave her a narrowed eye.
“I be lieve I have  also heard that  Mr . Fraser is the nephew of
Mrs. Cameron of River Run,” he  said pleasantly . “Have I been
correctly informed, Mrs. Fraser?”
Cousin Edwin, who had undoub tedly been the source of this
information, buttered his roll with sedulous concentration.
Cousin Edwin looked very little like a secretary , being a tall
and prepossessin g young man with a pair of lively brown eyes
—one of which now gave me the merest suggestion of a wink.
The Baron, as b ored with newspapers as with taxes, perked
up a bit at hearing the name Cameron.
“River R un?” he said. “Y ou have relations with Mrs. Jocasta
Cameron?”“She’ s my husband’ s aunt,” I replied. “Do you know her?”
“Oh, indeed! A charming woman, most charming!” A broad
smile lifted the Baron’ s pendulous cheeks. “Since many years,
I am  the dear friend of Mrs. Cameron and her husband,
unfortunately dead.”
The Baron launched into an enthusiastic recounting of the
delights of River Run, and I took advantage of the lull to
accept a  small wedge of fish pie, full not only of fish, but of
oysters and shrimps in a cream y sauce. Mr . Lillington had
certainly spared no ef fort to impress the Governor .
As I leaned bac k for the footman to ladle more sauce onto
my plate, I caug ht Judith W ylie’ s eyes on me, narrowed in a
look of dislike that she didn’ t trouble to disguise. I smiled
pleasantly at her , displaying my own excellent teeth, and
turned back to the Baron, newly confident.
There h ad been no looking glass in Edwin’ s quarters, and
while J amie had assured me that I looked all right, his
standards were rather dif ferent from those of fashion. I had
received any number of admiring compliments from the
gentlemen at table, true, but this might be no more than
customary politeness; extravagant gallantry was common
among upper -class men.
But Miss W ylie was twenty-five years my junior ,
fashionably gowned and jewele d, and if no great beauty , not
plain, e ither . Her jealousy was a better reflection of my
appearance, I thought, than any looking glass.
“Such a beautifu l stone, Mrs. Fr aser—you will permit me to
look more closely?” The Baron bent toward me, pudgy fingers
delicately poised above my cleavage.
“Oh, certainly ,” I said with alacrity , and quickly unclasped
the chai n, dropping the ruby in to his broad, moist palm. The
Baron looked slightly disappointed not to have been allowed
to examine the stone in situ,  but lifted his hand, squinting at
the glint ing droplet with the air of a connoisseur—which he
evidently was, for he reached  into his watch pocket andwithdrew a small gadget that p roved to be a combination of
optical lenses, including both a magnifying glass and a
jeweler ’ s loupe.
I r elaxed, seeing this, and accep ted a helping of something
hot and savory-s melling from a glass dish being passed by the
butler . W hat possessed people to serve hot food when the
temperature in the room must be at least in the nineties?
“Beautiful,” murmured the Baron, rolling the stone gently in
his palm. “Sehr schon.”
There were not many things a bout which I would have
trusted G eillis D uncan, but I was  sure of her taste in jewels. “It
must be a ston e of the first class,” she had said to me,
explaining her theory of time travel via gems. “Lar ge, and
completely flawless.”
The ruby was lar ge, all right; nearly the size of the pickled
quail’ s eggs surrounding the fully plumed pheasant on the
sideboard. As to its flawlessness, I felt no doubt. Geilie had
trusted this stone to carry her into the future; I thought it
would p robably get us as far as Cross Creek. I took a bite of
the food  on my plate; some sort of ragout, I thought, very
tender and flavorful.
“How delicious  this is,” I said to Mr . Stanhope, lifting
another forkful. “What is this dish, do you know?”
“Oh, it is one of my particular favorites, ma’am,” he said,
inhaling beatifically over his own plate. “Soused hog’ s face.
Delectable, is it not?”
I shut the door o f Cousin Edwin’ s room behind me and leaned
against it, letting my jaw hang open in sheer relief at no longer
being re quired to smile. Now I could take of f the clinging
dress, undo the tight corset, slip of f the sweaty shoes.
Peace, solitude, nakedness, and silence. I couldn’ t think of
anything else required to mak e my life complete for the
moment, save a little fresh air .  I stripped of f, and attired in
nothing but my shift, went to open the window .The air outside w as so thick, I thought I could have stepped
out and floated down through it, like a pebble dropped in a jar
of m olasses. The bugs came at o nce to the flame of my candle,
light-crazed and blood-hungry . I blew it out and sat on the
window seat in the dark, letting  the soft, warm air move over
me.
The ruby still hung at my neck, black as a blood drop
against my skin. I touched it, set it swinging gently between
my breasts; the stone was warm as my own blood, too.
Outside, the guests were begi nning to depart; a line of
waiting carriages was drawn up on the drive. The sounds of
goodbyes, conversations, and soft laughter drifted up to me in
snatches.
“…quite clever , I thought,” came up in Phillip W ylie’ s
cultured drawl.
“Oh, clever ,  certainly it was clever !” His sister ’ s higher -
pitched tones made it quite clear what she thought of
cleverness as a social attribute.
“W ell, c leverness in a woman c an be tolerated, my dear , so
long as she is also pleasant to lo ok upon. By the same token, a
woman who has beauty may perhaps dispense with wit, so
long as she has sense enough to conceal the lack by keeping
her mouth shut.”
Miss W ylie might not be accused of cleverness, but had
certainly adequate sensibility to  perceive the barb in this. She
gave a rather unladylike snort.
“She is a thousa nd years old, at least,” she replied. “Pleasant
to lo ok a t, indee d. Though I will  say it was a handsome trinket
about her neck,” she added grudgingly .
“Oh, quite,” said a deeper voice  that I recognized as Lloyd
Stanhope’ s. “Th ough in my own opinion, it was the setting
rather than the jewel that was striking.”
“Setting?” Miss  W ylie sounded blank. “There was no
setting; the jewel merely rested upon her bosom.”“Really?” Stanhope said blandly . “I hadn’ t noticed.” W ylie
burst ou t laughing, breaking of f abruptly as the door opened to
release more guests.
“W ell, if  you didn’ t, old man, there were others who did,”
he said with sly intonation. “Come, here’ s the carriage.”
I touched the ruby again, watching the W ylies’ handsome
grays dr ive of f. Y es, others had  noticed. I could still feel the
Baron’ s eyes on my bosom, knowingly avaricious. I rather
thought he was a connoisseur of more than gems.
The ston e was warm in my hand; it felt warmer even than
my skin, though that must be ill usion. I did not normally wear
jewelry beyond my wedding rin gs; had never cared much for
it. It would be a relief to be rid of at least part of our dangerous
treasure. And still I sat there holding the stone, cradling it in
my hand, till I almost thought I could feel it beating like a
small separate heart, in time with my blood.
There w as only one carriage lef t, its driver standing by the
horses’ heads. Some twenty minutes later , the occupant came
out, adding to hi s goodbyes a go od-humored “Gute Nacht”  as
he stepp ed into his coach. The Baron. He had waited till last,
and was leaving in a good mood; that seemed a good sign.
One of the footmen, stripped  of his livery coat, was
extinguishing th e torches at the foot of the drive. I could see
the pale blur o f his shirt as he walked back to the house
through the dark, and the sudden flare of light onto the terrace
as a doo r opened  to admit him below . Then that too was gone,
and a night silence settled on the grounds.
I ha d expected Jamie to come up at once, but the minutes
dragged on with no sound of his  step. I glanced at the bed, but
felt no desire to lie down.
At l ast I stood up and slipped the dress back on, not
bothering with shoes or stockings. I left the room, walking
quietly down the hallway in m y bare feet, down the stair ,
through the breezeway to the main house, and in through the
side entrance from the garden. It was dark, save the palesquares of moonlight that came through the casements; most
of the servants must have retir ed, along with household and
guests. There was light glowing through the stairwell’ s
banister , though ; the sconces w ere still alight in the dining
room beyond.
I c ould hear the  murmur of ma sculine voices as I tiptoed
past the polished stair , Jamie’ s d eep soft Scots alternating with
the Gov ernor ’ s English tones, in the intimate cadences of a
tete-a-tete.
The candles had burnt low in their sconces. The air was
sweet w ith melted beeswax, and low clouds of fragrant cigar
smoke hung heavy outside the dining room doors.
Moving quietly , I stopped just short of the door . From this
vantage point I could see the Governor , back to me, neck
stretched forward as he lit a fresh cigar from the candlestick on
the table.
If Jamie saw me, he gave no h int of it. His face bore its
usual ex pression of calm good humor , but the recent lines of
strain around eyes and mouth had eased, and I could tell from
the s lope of his shoulders that he was relaxed and at peace. My
heart lightened at once; he had been successful then.
“A place  called River Run,” he was saying to the Governor .
“W ell up in the hills past Cross Creek.”
“I know the place,” Governor T ryon remarked, a little
surprised. “My wife and I passe d several days in Cross Creek
last year ; we made a tour of the colony , upon the occasion of
my t aking of fice. River Run is well up in the foothills, though,
not in the tow n—why , it is halfway to the mountains, I
believe.”
Jamie smiled and sipped his brandy .
“A ye, w ell,” he said, “my family are Highlanders, sir; the
mountains will be home to us.”
“Indeed.” A small puf f of smoke rose over the Governor ’ s
shoulder . Then he took the ciga r from his mouth and leaned
confidentially toward Jamie.“Since w e are alone, Mr . Frase r , there is another matter I
wished t o put before you. A glas s with you, sir?” He picked up
the decanter without waiting for an answer , and poured more
brandy .
“I thank ye, sir .”
The Governor puf fed fiercely for a moment, sending up blue
clouds, then having got his we ed well alight, sat back, cigar
fuming negligently in one hand.
“Y ou ar e very newly come to the Colonies, young Edwin
tells me. Are you familiar with conditions here?”
Jamie shrugged slightly .
“I have made it my business to learn what I could, sir ,” he
replied. “T o which conditions might ye refer?”
“North Carolina is a land of considerable richness,” the
Governor answered, “and yet it has not reached the same level
of p rosperity as have its neighbo rs—owing mostly to a lack of
laborers to take advantage of its opportunities. W e have no
great harbor for a seaport, yo u see; thus slaves must be
brought overland at great cost fr om South Carolina or V ir ginia
—and we cannot hope to compete with Boston and
Philadelphia for indentured labor .
“It h as long be en the policy both of the Crown and of
myself, Mr . Fraser , to encourage the settlement of land in the
Colony of North Carolina by intelligent, industrious and godly
families, to the furtherance of the prosperity and security of
all.” He  lifted his cigar , took a deep lungful and exhaled
slowly , pausing to cough.
“T o this end, sir , there is established a system of land grants
whereby a lar ge acreage may be given to a gentleman of
means, who will undertake to pe rsuade a number of emigrants
to co me and sett le upon a part of it under his sponsorship. This
policy h as been blessed with suc cess over the last thirty years;
a go od many Highlanders and families from the Isles of
Scotland have been induced to  come and take up residence
here. W hy , whe n I arrived, I was astonished to find the banksof the Cape Fear  River quite thick with MacNeills, Buchanans,
Grahams, and Campbells!”
The Governor tasted his cigar ag ain, but this time the barest
nip; he was anxious to make his point.
“Y et there remains a great de al of desirable land to be
settled, further inland toward the mountains. It is somewhat
remote, and yet, as you say , for men accustomed to the far
reaches of the Scottish Highlands—”
“I did hear men tion of such grants, sir ,” Jamie interrupted.
“Y et is not the w ording that persons holding such grants shall
be white males, Protestant, and above thirty years of age? And
this statement holds the force of law?”
“That is the of ficial wording of the Act, yes.” Mr . T ryon
turned so that I saw him now in profile, tapping the ash from
his cigar  into a small porcelain bowl. The corner of his mouth
was turned up in anticipation; the face of a fisherman who
feels the first twitch on his line.
“The of fer is one of considerable interest,” Jamie said
formally . “I must point out, however , that I am not a
Protestant, nor are most of my kinsmen.”
The Governor pursed his lips in deprecation, lifting one
brow .
“Y ou ar e neithe r a Jew nor a N egro. I may speak as one
gentleman to another , may I not? In all frankness, Mr . Fraser ,
there is the law , and then there is what is done.” He raised his
glass with a s mall smile, setting the hook. “And I am
convinced that you understand that as well as I do.”
“Possibly better ,” Jamie murmured, with a polite smile.
The Governor shot him a sharp look, but then uttered a
quick bark of laughter . He raised his brandy glass in
acknowledgment, and took a sip.
“W e understand each other , Mr . Fraser ,” he said, nodding
with satisfaction. Jamie inclined his head a fraction of an inch.“There would be no dif ficulties raised, then, regarding the
personal qualifications of those who might be persuaded to
take up your of fer?”
“None at all,” said the Governor , setting down his glass with
a sm all thump. “ Provided only that they are able-bodied men,
capable of working the land, I a sk nothing more. And what is
not aske d need not be told, eh? ” One thin brow flicked up in
query .
Jamie tu rned the glass in his hands, as though admiring the
deep color of the liquid.
“Not all who passed through the Stuart Rising were so
fortunate as myself, Y our Excellency ,” he said. “My foster son
suf fered the loss of his hand; a nother of my companions has
but one arm. Y et they are men of good character and industry .
I cou ld not in conscience partak e of a proposal which did not
of fer them some part.”
The Gov ernor d ismissed this with an expansive wave of the
hand.
“Provided that they are able to earn their bread and will not
prove a burden upon the community , they are welcome.”
Then, a s thoug h fearing he had been incautious in his
generosity , he sat up straight , leaving the cigar to burn,
propped on the edge of the bowl.
“Since y ou men tion Jacobites—these men will be required
to swea r an oath of loyalty to  the Crown, if they have not
already done so. If I might pres ume to ask, sir , as you imply
you are Papist…you, yourself…”
Jamie’ s eyes might have narrow ed only against the sting of
the s moke, but I  didn’ t think so. Neither did Governor T ryon,
who was only in his thirties but no mean judge of men. He
swiveled to face the table again, so that I saw only his back,
but I could tell that he was gazing intently at Jamie, eyes
tracing the swift movements of the trout beneath the water .
“I d o not seek to remind you of past indignity ,” he said
quietly . “Nor yet to of fend p resent honor . Still, you willunderstand that it is my duty to ask.”
Jamie smiled, quite without humor .
“And mine to answer , I expect,” he said. “Y es, I am a
pardoned Jacobi te. And aye, I have sworn the oath—like the
others who paid that price for their lives.”
Quite ab ruptly , he set down his still-full glass and pushed
back the heavy chair . He stood and bowed to the Governor .
“It grows late, Y our Excellency . I must beg to take my
leave.”
The Go vernor sat back in his chair , and lifted the cigar
slowly to his lips. He drew heavily on it, making the tip glow
bright, a s he gazed up at Jamie. Then, he nodded, letting a thin
plume of smoke drift from his pursed lips.
“Good night, Mr . Fraser . Do consider my of fer , will you
not?”
I di dn’ t wait t o hear the answer—I didn’ t need to. I
skimmed down the hall in a rust le of skirts, startling a footman
dozing in a dark corner .
I ma de it back to our borrowed room in the stable block
without meeting anyone else, and collapsed. My heart was
pounding; not only from the dash up the stairs but from what I
had heard.
Jamie would consider the Governor ’ s of fer , all right. And
what an  of fer! T o regain in one swoop all that he had lost in
Scotland—and more.
Jamie ha d not been born a laird , but the death of his elder
brother had left him heir to Lallybroch, and from the age of
eight he  had been raised to take responsibility for an estate, to
see to the welfa re of land and tenants, to place that welfare
above his own. Then had come Charles Stuart, and his mad
march to glory; a fiery cross lea ding his followers to shambles
and destruction.
Jamie h ad neve r spoken bitterly of the Stuarts; had never
spoken of Charles Stuart at all . Nor had he often spoken ofwhat that venture had cost him personally .
But now …to ha ve that back. Ne w lands, cultivable and rich
with gam e, and settled by families under his sponsorship and
protection. It was rather like th e Book of Job, I thought—all
those sons and d aughters and camels and houses, destroyed so
casually , and then replaced with such extravagant lar -gesse.
I ha d always viewed that bit of the Bible with some doubt,
myself. One camel was much like another , but children
seemed a dif ferent proposition. And while Job might have
regarded the replacement of his children as simple justice, I
couldn’ t help thinking that the dead children’ s mother might
possibly have been of another mind about it.
Unable to sit, I went again t o the window , gazing out
unseeingly at the dark garden.
It w asn’ t simply excitement tha t was making my heart beat
fast and  my hands perspire; it was fear . W ith matters as they
were in Scotland—as they had been since the Rising—it
would be no dif ficult matter to find willing emigrants.
I had seen ships come into port in the Indies and in Geor gia,
disgor ging their car gos of emigrants, so emaciated and worn
by their passage  that they reminded me of nothing so much as
concentration ca mp victims—sk eletal as living corpses, white
as maggots from two months in the darkness below-decks.
Despite the expense and dif ficulty of the journey , despite the
pain of parting f rom friends and family and homeland forever ,
the immigrants poured in, in hundreds and in thousands,
carrying their children—those who survived the voyage—and
their possessions in small, ragged bundles; fleeing poverty and
hopelessness, se eking not fortune but only a small foothold on
life. Only a chance.
I ha d spent on ly a short time at Lallybroch the winter
before, but I kne w there were tenants there who survived only
by t he goodwill of Ian and Y oung Jamie, their crofts not
yielding enough to live on. While such goodwill was
invariably given, it was not inexhaustible; I knew that theestate’ s slender resources were often stretched to the
maximum.
Beyond Lallybroch, there were the smugglers Jamie had
known in Edinbur gh, and the illegal distillers of Highland
whisky—any number of men, in fact, who had been forced to
turn to lawlessness to feed their families. No, finding willing
emigrants would be no problem at all for Jamie.
The prob lem was that in order to recruit suitable men for the
purpose, he would have to go to Scotland. And in my mind
was the sight of a granite gravestone in a Scottish kirkyard, on
a hill high above the moors and sea.
JAMES ALEXANDER MALCOLM MACKENZIE FRASER , it read,  and
below th at, my own name was carved— Beloved husband of
Clair e .
I wo uld bury him  in Scotland. B ut there had been no date on
the stone when I saw it, two hundred years hence; no notion
when the blow would fall.
“Not yet,” I whispered, clenching my fists in the silk of my
petticoat. “I’ve only had him for a little while—oh, God,
please, not yet!”
As though in answer , the doo r swung open, and James
Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser came in, carrying a
candle.
He smiled at me, loosening his stock.
“Y ou’re verra light on your fe et, Sassenach. I see I must
teach ye to hunt one day , and you such a fine stalker .”
I ma de no apolo gy for eavesdropping, but came to help him
with his  waistcoat buttons. In spite of the late hour and the
brandy , he was clear -eyed and al ert, his body tautly alive when
I touched him.
“Y ou’d best put out the candle,” I said. “The bugs will eat
you aliv e.” I pinched a mosq uito of f his neck by way of
illustration, the fragile body crushed to a smear of blood
between my fingers.Among the scents of brandy and  cigar smoke, I could smell
the nigh t on him, and the faint musky spice of nicotiana; he
had been  walking, then, amid the flowers in the garden. He did
that when he was either distres sed or excited—and he didn’ t
seem distressed.
He s ighed and f lexed his shoulders as I took his coat; his
shirt was damp w ith sweat underneath, and he plucked it away
from his skin with a mild grunt of distaste.
“I ca nna tell how  folk live in such heat, dressed like this. It
makes the savages look quite sensible, to be goin’ about in
loincloths and aprons.”
“It woul d be a lot cheaper ,” I a greed, “if less aesthetically
appealing. Imag ine Baron Penzler in a loincloth, I mean.” The
Baron weighed  perhaps eighteen stone, with a pasty
complexion.
He laug hed, the sound muf fled in his shirt as he pulled it
over his head.
“Y ou, on  the other hand…” I sat down on the window seat,
admiring the view as he stripped of f his breeches, standing on
one leg to roll down his stocking.
W ith the candle extinguished, i t was dark in the room, but
with my eyes ad apted, I could still make him out, long limbs
pale against the velvet night.
“And speaking of the Baron—” I prodded.
“Three hundred pounds sterling,” he replied, in tones of
extreme satisfaction. He straightened up and tossed the rolled
stockings onto a stool, then ben t and kissed me. “Which is in
lar ge part due to you, Sassenach.”
“For my  value as an ornamental  setting, you mean?” I asked
dryly , recalling the W ylies’ conversation.
“No,” h e said, rather shortly . “For keeping W ylie and his
friends o ccupied at dinner , while I talked wi’ the Governor .
Ornamental setting…tcha! Stanhope nearly dropped hiseyeballs into your bosom, the filthy lecher; I’d a mind to call
him out for it, but—”
“Discretion is the better part of valor ,” I said, standing up
and kissing him back. “Not th at I’ve ever met a Scot who
seemed to think so.”
“A ye, well, there was my grand sire, Old Simon. I suppose
ye could say it was discretion that did for him, in the end.” I
could hear both the smile and the edge in his voice. If he
seldom spoke of the Jacobites a nd the events of the Rising, it
didn’ t mean he had for gotten; his conversation with the
Governor had obviously brought them close to the surface of
his mind tonight.
“I’d say that discretion and de ceit are not necessarily the
same things. And your grandfather had been asking for it for
fifty yea rs, at least,” I replied tartly . Simon Fraser , Lord Lovat,
had died by beh eading on T ower Hill—at the age of seventy-
eight, after a lifetime of unparalleled chicanery , both personal
and political. For all of that, I q uite regretted the old rogue’ s
passing.
“Mmphm.” Jam ie didn’ t ar gue with me, but moved to stand
beside me at the window . He breathed in deeply , as though
smelling the thick perfume of the night.
I could see his  face quite clearly in the dim glow of
starlight. It was calm and smooth, but with an inward look, as
though his eyes didn’ t see what was before them, but
something else entirely . The past? I wondered. Or the future?
“What did it say?” I asked suddenly . “The oath you swore.”
I f elt rather tha n saw the move ment of his shoulders, not
quite a shrug.
” ‘I , James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser , do
swear , and as I shall answer to God at the great day of
judgment, I have not, nor shal l have, in my possession any
gun, sw ord, pistol, or arm whatsoever , and never use tartan,
plaid, or any part of the Highland garb; and if I do so, may I becursed i n my undertakings, family , and property .’ ” He took a
deep breath, and went on, speaking precisely .
” ‘M ay I never see my wife and  children, father , mother or
relations. May I be killed in batt le as a coward, and lie without
Christian burial, in a strange land, far from the graves of my
forefathers and kindred; may all  this come across me if I break
my oath.’ “
“And did you mind a lot?” I said, after a moment.
“No,” he said so ftly , still looking out at the night. “Not then.
There are things worth dying or starving for—but not words.”
“Maybe not those words.”
He turned to lo ok at me, featur es dim in starlight, but the
hint of a smile visible on his mouth.
“Y e know of words that are?”
The grav estone had his name, but no date. I could stop him
going back to Scotland, I thought. If I would.
I turned  to face him, leaning back against the window
frame.
“What about—’I love you’?”
He r eached out a hand and touc hed my face. A breath of air
stirred past us, and I saw the small hairs rise along his arm.
“A ye,” he whispered. “That’ll do.”
There was a bird  calling somewhere close at hand. A few clear
notes, succeeded by an answer; a brief twitter , and then
silence. The sky outside was s till thick black, but the stars
were less brilliant than before.
I t urned  over restlessly; I was  naked, covered only by a
linen sh eet, but even in the sm all hours of the night, the air
was warm and s mothering, and the small depression in which I
lay was damp.
I h ad tried to sle ep, and could n ot. Even lovemaking, which
normally could relax me into a bonelessly contented stupor ,had this  time left me only restle ss and sticky . At once excited
and worried by the possibilities of the future—and unable to
confide my disturbed feelings—I had felt separate from Jamie;
estranged and detached, despite the closeness of our bodies.
I t urned  again, this time toward Jamie. He lay in his usual
position, on his back, the sheet crumpled about his hips, hands
gently fo lded over a flat stomach . His head was turned slightly
on t he pillow , h is face relaxed in sleep. W ith the wide mouth
gentled by slumber and the dark lashes long on his cheeks, in
this dim light he looked about fourteen.
I w anted  to touch him, though I wasn’ t sure whether I meant
to c aress or to poke him. While he had given me physical
release, he had t aken my peace of mind, and I was irrationally
envious of his ef fortless repose.
I di d neither , t hough, and merely turned onto my back,
where I lay with my eyes shut,  grimly counting sheep—who
disobliged me by being Scottish sheep, cantering merrily
through a kirkyard, leaping the gravestones with gay abandon.
“Is something troubling ye, Sassenach?” said a sleepy voice
at my shoulder .
My eyes popped open.
“No,” I said, trying to sound equally drowsy . “I’m fine.”
There w as a faint snort and a rustling of the chaf f-filled
mattress as he turned over .
“Y ou’re a terrible liar , Sassenach . Y e’re thinking so loudly , I
can hear ye from here.”
“Y ou can’ t hear people think!”
“A ye, I can. Y ou , at least.” He chuckled and reached out a
hand, which rested lazily on my thigh. “What is it—has the
spiced crab given ye flatulence?”
“It has not!” I tried to twitch my leg away , but his hand
clung like a limpet.“Oh, good. What is it, then—ye’ve finally thought of a witty
riposte to Mr . W ylie’ s remarks about oysters?”
“No,” I said irr itably . “If you must know , I was thinking
about th e of fer Governor T ryon  made you. W ill you let go of
my leg?”
“Ah,” he said, not letting go but sounding less sleepy . “W ell,
come to that, I was thinking on the matter a bit myself.”
“What do  you  think about it?” I gave up trying to detach his
hand and rolled onto my elbow ,  facing him. The window was
still dark, but t he stars had dimmed visibly , faded by the
distant approach of day .
“I wonder why he made it, for the one thing.”
“Really? But I thought he told you why .”
He gave a brief grunt.
“W ell, he’ s no of fering me land  for the sake of my bonny
blue eye s, I’ll tell ye that.” He opened the eyes in question and
cocked one brow at me. “Before I make a bar gain, Sassenach,
I want to know what’ s on both sides of it, aye?”
“Y ou do n’ t think he’ s telling the truth? About Crown grants
to he lp s ettle the land? But he said it’ s been going on for thirty
years,” I protested. “He couldn’ t lie about something like that,
surely .”
“No, tha t’ s the truth,” he agreed. “So far as it goes. But bees
that hae  honey in their mouths hae stings in their tails, aye?”
He scratched at his head and smoothed the loose hair out of his
face, sighing.
“Ask yourself this, Sassenach,” he said. “Why me?”
“W ell—because he wants a gentleman of substance and
authority ,” I said slowly . “He needs a good leader , which
Cousin Edwin has obviously told him you are, and a fairly
wealthy man—”
“Which I am not.”
“He doesn’ t know that, though,” I protested.“Doesn’ t he?” he said cynically . “Cousin Edwin will ha’
told him as much as he knows—and the Governor kens well I
was a Jacobite. T rue, there a re a few who mended their
fortunes in the I ndies after the Rising, and I might be one o’
those—but he has nae reason to think so.”
“He knows you have some  money ,” I pointed out.
“Because of Penzler? A ye,” he said thoughtfully . “What else
does he know about me?”
“Only w hat you told him at dinner , so far as I know . And he
can’ t have heard much about yo u from anyone else; after all,
you’ve b een in town less than a—what, you mean that’ s it?”
My voice rose in incredulity , a nd he smiled, a little grimly .
The light was still far of f, but m oving closer , and his features
were clearcut in the dimness.
“A ye, that’ s it. I’ve connections to the Camerons, who are
not only wealthy but well respe cted in the colony . But at the
same ti me, I’m an incomer , wi’ few ties and no known
loyalties here.”
“Except, perhaps, to the Governor who’ s of fering you a
lar ge tract of land,” I said slowly .
He didn ’ t reply at once, but rolled onto his back, still
keeping a grip on my leg. His eyes were fastened on the dim
whiteness of the plaster ceiling above, with its clouded
garlands and ghostly cupids.
“I’ve kn own a German or two in my time, Sassenach,” he
said, musing. His thumb began t o move slowly , back and forth
upon the tender flesh of my inne r thigh. “I havena found them
careless wi’ their money , be they  Jew or Gentile. And while ye
looked bonny as a white rose this evening, I canna think it was
entirely your charms that mad e the gentleman of fer me a
hundred pounds more than the goldsmith did.”
He glanced at me. “T ryon is a soldier . He’ll ken me for one,
too. And  there was that wee bit of trouble with the Regulators
two year past.”My mind was so  diverted by the possibilities intrinsic in this
speech, that I was nearly unconscious of the increasing
familiarity of the hand between my thighs.
“Who?”
“Oh, I for got; ye wouldna have heard that part of the
conversation—bein’ otherwise occupied with your host of
admirers.”
I le t that one pass in favor of finding out about the
Regulators. These, it appeared, were a loose association of
men, mostly from the rough ba ckcountry of the colony , who
had taken of fense at what they perceived as capricious and
inequitable—and now and then downright illegal—behavior
on the part of the Crown’ s ap pointed of ficials, the sherif fs,
justices, tax collectors, and so on.
Feeling that their complaints we re not suf ficiently addressed
by the Governor and Assembly , they had taken matters into
their own hands. Sherif f ’ s deputies had been assaulted, justices
of th e peace marched from their  houses by mobs and forced to
resign.
A committee of Regulators had written to the Governor ,
imploring him to address the iniquities under which they
suf fered, and T ryon—a man of action and diplomacy—had
replied soothingly , going so far as to replace one or two of the
most corrupt sherif fs, and issue  an of ficial letter to the court
of ficers, regarding seizure of ef fects.
“Stanhope said something about a Committee of Safety ,” I
said, interested. “But it sounded quite recent.”
“The tro uble is damped down but not settled,” Jamie said,
shrugging. “And  damp powder may smolder for a long time,
Sassenach, but once it catches, it goes of f with an almighty
bang.”
W ould T ryon think it worth t he investment, to buy the
loyalty and obligation of an experienced soldier , himself in
turn com manding the loyalty and service of the men under hissponsorship, all settled in a remote and troublesome area of the
colony?
I w ould myself h ave called the prospect cheap, at the cost of
a hundre d pound s and a few measly acres of the King’ s land.
His Majesty had quite a lot of it, after all.
“So you ’re thinking about it.” W e were by this time facing
each oth er , and my hand lay ov er his, not in restraint, but in
acknowledgment.
He smiled lazily .
“I havena lived so long by bel ieving everything I’m told,
Sassenach. So perhaps I’ll take up the Governor ’ s kind of fer ,
and perhaps I w ill not—but I w ant to know the hell of a lot
more about it before I say , one way or the other .”
“Y es, it does se em a little odd —his making you such an
of fer on short acquaintance.”
“I shoul d be surprised to hear I am the only gentleman he’ s
so approached,”  Jamie said. “An d it’ s no great risk, now , is it?
Y e over heard me telling him I am a Catholic? It was no
surprise to him to hear it.”
“Y es. He didn’ t seem to think that was a problem, though.”
“Oh, I daresay it  wouldna be—unless the Governor chose to
make it one.”
“My go odness.” My evaluation of Governor T ryon was
rapidly changing, though I wasn’ t sure whether for the better
or n ot. “ So if things didn’ t work out as he liked, all he would
have to do is let it be known tha t you’re a Catholic, and a court
would t ake back the land on those grounds. Whereas if he
chooses to keep quiet—”
“And if I choose to do as he likes, aye.”
“He’ s much sneakier than I thought,” I said, not without
admiration. “Practically Scottish.”
He l aughed at that, and brushe d the loose hair out of his
face.The long curtains at the window , hitherto hanging limp,
suddenly puf fed inward, letting in a breath of air that smelt of
sandy mud, river water , and th e far -of f hint of fresh pines.
Dawn was coming, borne on the wind.
As though this had been a si gnal, Jamie’ s hand cupped
itself, and a slig ht shiver communicated itself from him to me,
as the coolness struck his bare back.
“I didna  really do myself credit earlier ,” he said softly . “But
if you’re sure there’ s nothing troubling your mind just now…”
“Nothing,” I said, watching the glow from the window
touch the line of his head and neck with gold. His mouth was
still wide and gentle, but he didn’ t look fourteen any longer .
“Not a thing, just now .”8
M A N  O F  W O R T H
G od, I hate boats!”
W ith this heart-felt valediction ringing in my ears, we
swung slowly out into the waters of W ilmington harbor .
T wo days of purchases and preparations found us now
bound fo r Cross Creek. W ith money from the sale of the ruby
in ha nd, there ha d been no need  to sell the horses; Duncan had
been sent with the wagon and the heavier goods, with Myers
aboard t o guide  him, the rest of us to take a quicker , more
comfortable pas sage with Captain Freeman, aboard the Sally
Ann .
A craft of singular and indescribable type, the Sally Ann  was
square-beamed, long, low-sided, and blunt-prowed. She
boasted a tiny cabin that measured roughly six feet square,
leaving a scant two feet on either side for passage, and a
somewhat greater area of deck f ore and aft, this now partially
obscured by bundles, bags, and barrels.
W ith a single sa il mounted on a mast and boom above the
cabin, the Sally Ann  loo ked from a distance like a crab on a
shingle, waving a flag of truce. The peaty brown waters of the
Cape Fear lapped a scant four inches below the rail, and the
boards of the bottom were perpetually damp with slow
leakage.
Still, I was happy . Cramped con ditions or no, it was good to
be on the water , away—if only temporarily—from the
Governor ’ s siren song.
Jamie wasn’ t happy . He did indeed hate boats, with a
profound and undying pass ion, and suf fered from a
seasickness so acute that watchi ng the swirl of water in a glass
could turn him green.
“It’ s dead calm,” I observed. “Maybe you won’ t be sick.”Jamie squinted suspiciously at the chocolate-brown water
around us, then clamped his eyes shut as the wake from
another boat struck the Sally Ann  broadside, rocking her
violently .
“Maybe not,” he said, in tone s indicating that while the
suggestion was a hopeful one, he also thought the possibility
remote.
“Do you  want the needles? It’ s b etter if I put them in before
you vomit.” Resigned, I grope d in the pocket of my skirt,
where I had pl aced the small box containing the Chinese
acupuncture needles that had saved his life on our Atlantic
crossing.
He shuddered briefly and opened his eyes.
“No,” he said. “I’ll maybe do. T alk to me, Sassenach—take
my mind of f my stomach, aye?”
“All right,” I sa id obligingly . “What is your Aunt Jocasta
like?”
“I h avena seen her since I was two years old, so my
impressions are a bit lacking,” he replied absently , eyes fixed
on a  lar ge raft coming down the river , set on an apparent
collision course with us. “D’ye think that Negro can manage?
Perhaps I ought to give him a bit of help.”
“Perhaps you shouldn’ t,” I said, eyeing the oncoming raft
warily . “He seems to know what he’ s doing.” Besides the
captain—a disreputable old wr eck who reeked of tobacco—
the Sally Ann  had a si ngle hand, an elderly bla ck freedman who
was dea ling alon e with the steer age of our craft, by means of a
lar ge pole.
The man’ s lean muscles flexed and bulged in easy rhythm.
Grizzled head bowed in ef fort, he took no apparent notice of
the onco ming bar ge, but plunged and lifted in a liquid motion
that made the long pole seem like a third limb.
“Let him  alone. I suppose you don’ t know much about your
aunt, then?” I ad ded, in hopes of distracting him. The raft was
moving ponderously and inexorably toward us.Some fo rty feet  from end to end, it rode low in the water ,
weighed down with barrels and stacks of hides, tied down
under netting. A pungent wave  of odor preceded it, of musk
and blood and rancid fat, strong enough to overpower
temporarily all the other smells of the river .
“No; sh e wed the Cameron of Erracht and left Leoch the
year before my mother married my father .” He spoke
abstractedly , no t looking at me; his attention was all on the
oncoming bar ge. His knuckles whitened; I could feel his ur ge
to le ap forward, snatch the pole  away from the deckhand, and
stave of f the raft. I laid a restraining hand on his arm.
“And she never came to visit at Lallybroch?”
I could see the gleam of sun on dull iron, where it struck
cleats al ong the edge of the raft, and the half-naked forms of
the three deckhands, sweating e ven in the early morning. One
of them  waved his hat and grinned, shouting something that
sounded like, “Hah, you !” as they came on.
“W ell, J ohn Cameron died of a flux, and she wed his cousin,
Black H ugh Cam eron of Aberfeldy , and then—” He shut his
eyes refl exively as the raft shot past, its hull no more than six
inches from our own, amid a hail of good-natured jeers and
shouts from its crew . Rollo, fr ont paws perched on the low
cabin roof, barked madly , until I an cuf fed him and told him to
stop.
Jamie opened one eye, then seei ng that the danger was past,
opened the other and relaxed, letting go his grip on the roof.
“A ye, well, Black Hugh—they  called him so for a great
black wen on his  knee—he was killed hunting, and so then she
wed Hector Mor Cameron, of Loch Eilean—”
“She see ms to have had quite a taste for Camerons,” I said,
fascinated. “Is there something special about them as a clan—
beyond being accident-prone, I mean?”
“They’ve a way wi’ words, I suppose,” he said, with a
sudden wry grin. “The Camerons are poets—and jesters.
Sometimes both. Y e’ll remember Lochiel, aye?”I sm iled, sharing his bittersweet recollection of Donald
Cameron of Lochiel, one of the chiefs of clan Cameron at the
time of the Ris ing. A handsome man with a soulful gaze,
Lochiel’ s gentle-eyed demeanor and elegant manners hid a
truly great talent for the creat ion of vulgar doggerel, with
which, sotto voce,  he had not infrequently entertained me at
balls in Edinbur gh, during the b rief heyday of Charles Stuart’ s
coup.
Jamie w as leaning on the roo f of the boat’ s tiny cabin,
watching the river traf fic with a wary eye. W e had not yet
cleared W ilmington’ s harbor , and small pirettas and sculls
darted past like water bugs, wh ipping in and out between the
lar ger , slower -moving craft. He was pale, but not green yet.
I l eaned  my elbows on the cabin roof as well, and stretched
my back . Hot as it was, the heavy sunshine was comforting to
the s ore muscles caused by impr omptu sleeping arrangements;
I h ad spent the last night curled up on a hard oak settle in the
taproom of a r iverside tavern , sleeping with my head on
Jamie’ s knee as he completed the arrangements for our
passage.
I groaned and stretched.
“W as Hector Cameron a poet, or a joker?”
“Neither one at the moment,” J amie replied, automatically
gripping the back of my neck an d massaging it with one hand.
“He’ s dead, aye?”
“That’ s wonderful,” I said, groaning with ecstasy as his
thumb sank into a particularly tender spot. “What you’re
doing, I  mean, not that your uncle’ s dead. Ooh, don’ t stop.
How did he get to North Carolina?”
Jamie snorted with amusement, and moved behind me so he
could use both h ands on my neck and shoulders. I nestled my
bottom against him and sighed in bliss.
“Y ou’re a verra noisy woman, Sassenach,” he said, leaning
forward to whisper in my ear . “Y e make the same kind of
sounds when I r ub your neck as  ye do when I—” He thrust hispelvis ag ainst m e in a discreet but explicit motion that made it
quite clear what he meant. “Mm?”
“Mmmm,” I replied, and kick ed him—discreetly—in the
shin. “Fine. If anyone hears me behind closed doors, they’ll
assume you’re rubbing my neck—which is about all you’re
likely to do until we get of f th is floating plank. Now , what
about your late uncle?”
“Oh, hi m.” His fingers dug in on either side of my
backbone, rubbi ng slowly up a nd down as he unraveled yet
another strand in the tangled web of his family history . At least
it was keeping his mind of f his stomach.
Luckier—and ei ther more perceptive or more cynical—than
his famous kinsman, Hector Mor Cameron had cannily
prepared himself against the eventuality of a Stuart disaster .
He had escaped Culloden unwounded and made for home,
where he had promptly loaded wife, servant, and portable
assets in to a coach, in which they fled to Edinbur gh and thence
by ship to North Carolina, narrowly escaping the Crown’ s
pursuit.
Once ar rived in the New W orld, Hector had purchased a
lar ge tra ct of land, cleared the forest, built a house and a
sawmill, bought  slaves to work the place, planted his land in
tobacco and indigo, and—no doubt worn out by so much
industry—succumbed to the morbid sore throat at the ripe old
age of seventy-three.
Having evidently decided that  three times was enough,
Jocasta MacKen zie Cameron Cameron Cameron had—so far
as Myer s knew—declined to wed again, but stayed on alone as
mistress of River Run.
“Do you  think the messenger w ith your letter will get there
before we do?”
“He’d g et there before we do if he crawled on his hands and
knees,” Y oung Ian said, appearing suddenly beside us. He
glanced in mild disgust at the patient deckhand, plunging and
lifting his dripping pole. “It will be weeks  before we get there,at this rate. I to ld ye it would have been best to ride, Uncle
Jamie.”
“Dinna f ret yourself, Ian,” his uncle assured him, letting go
of m y n eck. He  grinned at his nephew . “Y ou’ll have a turn at
the pole  yourself before long—and I expect ye’ll have us in
Cross Creek before nightfall, aye?”
Ian gave his un cle a dirty look and wandered of f to pester
Captain Freeman with questions about Red Indians and wild
animals.
“I h ope the Captain doesn’ t p ut Ian overboard,” I said,
observing Freem an’ s scrawny shoulders draw defensively
toward his ears as Ian approached. My own neck and
shoulders glowed from the attention; so did portions further
south. “Thanks for the rub,” I said, lifting one eyebrow at him.
“I’ll let ye return the favor , Sassenach—after dark.” He
made an unsuccessful attempt at a leer . Unable to close one
eye at a time, his ability to wink lewdly was substantially
impaired, but he managed to convey his meaning nonetheless.
“Indeed,” I said. I fluttered m y lashes at him. “And just
what is it you’d like rubbed after dark?”
“After dark?” Ian asked, poppi ng up again like a jack-in-
the-box before his uncle could answer . “What happens after
dark?”
“That’ s when I drown ye and cut ye up for fish bait,” his
uncle in formed him. “God’ s sake, can ye not settle, Ian? Y e’re
bumpin’ about like a bumblebee in a bottle. Go and sleep in
the sun, like you r beast—there’ s  a sensible dog.” He nodded at
Rollo, sp rawled like a rug on the cabin roof with his eyes half-
closed, twitching an occasional ear against the flies.
“Sleep?” Ian looked at his uncle in amazement. “Sleep?”
“It’ s wh at normal people do wh en they’re tired,” I told him,
stifling a yawn. The growing heat and the boat’ s slow
movement were highly soporific, after the short night—we had
been up before dawn. Unfortunately , the narrow benches andrough d eck planks of the Sally Ann  didn’ t look any more
inviting than the tavern’ s settle had been.
“Oh, I’m not a  scrap tired, Auntie!” Ian assured me. “I
dinna think I’ll sleep for days!”
Jamie eyed his nephew .
“W e’ll see if ye still think so, after a turn at the pole. In the
meantime, perha ps I can find something to occupy your mind.
W ait a bit—” H e broke of f, an d ducked into the low cabin,
where I heard him rootling through the baggage.
“God, it’ s hot!” said Ian, fanning himself. “What’ s Uncle
Jamie after , then?”
“God kn ows,” I said. Jamie had brought aboard a lar ge
crate, about the contents of which he had been most evasive.
He h ad been playing cards whe n I had fallen asleep the night
before, and my best guess wa s that he had acquired some
embarrassing ob ject in the course of gambling, which he was
reluctant to expose to Ian’ s teasing.
Ian was right; it was  hot. I could only hope that there would
be a breeze later; for the moment, the sail above hung limp as
a d ishcloth, and the fabric of m y shift clung damp against my
legs. W ith a mu rmured word to Ian, I edged past and sidled
toward the bow , where the water barrel stood.
Fer gus was standing in the pro w , arms crossed, giving a
splendid impression of a noble figurehead, with his sternly
handsome profile pointed upri ver , thick, dark hair flowing
back from his brow .
“Ah, milady!” He greeted me with a sudden dazzle of white
teeth. “Is this not a splendid country?”
What I could see at the mo ment was not particularly
splendid, the landscape consisting of an extensive mudflat,
reeking in the sun, and a lar ge c ollection of gulls and seabirds,
all raucously excited about something smelly they had found
near the water ’ s edge.“Milord tells me that any man may enter a claim for fifty
acres of land, so long as he builds a house upon it, and
promises to work it for a period of ten years. Imagine—fifty
acres!” He rolled the words a round in his mouth, savoring
them w ith a kind of awe. A French peasant might think
himself well blessed with five.
“W ell, yes,” I sa id, a little doub tfully . “I think you ought to
pick your fifty acres carefully , though. Some parts of this place
aren’ t much good for farming.”  I didn’ t hazard a guess as to
how dif ficult Fer gus might find it to carve a farm and
homestead out of a howling w ilderness with one hand, no
matter how fertile the ground.
He wasn ’ t paying attention in a ny case, his eyes shiny with
dreams.
“I might  perhap s have a small house built by Hogmanay ,”
he m urmured to himself. “Then  I could send for Marsali and
the child  in the spring.” His hand went automatically to the
vacant spot on his chest, whe re the greenish medal of St.
Dismas had hung since his childhood.
He h ad come to  join us in Geor gia, leaving his young and
pregnant wife behind in Jamaica , under the care of friends. He
assured me that he had no fear for her safety , however , for he
had left her also under the protection of his patron saint, with
strict instructions not to remove the battered medal from
around her neck until she was safely delivered.
I w ouldn’ t myself have thought that mothers and babies fell
into the sphere of influence of the patron saint of thieves, but
Fer gus had lived as a pickpocket for all his early life, and his
trust in Dismas was absolute.
“W ill yo u call the baby Disma s, if it’ s a boy?” I asked,
joking.
“No,” he  said in all seriousness.  “I shall call him Germaine.
Germaine James Ian Aloysius Fraser—James Ian for Milord
and Monsieur ,” he explained, for so he always referred to
Jamie and his brother -in-law , Ian Murray .“Marsali liked Aloysius,” he ad ded dismissively , making it
clear that he ha d had nothing to do with the choice of so
undistinguished a name.
“And what if i t’ s a girl?” I asked, with a sudden vivid
memory . T wenty-odd years before, Jamie had sent me back
through the stones, pregnant. And the last thing he had said to
me, convinced the child I carried was a boy , was, “Name him
Brian, for my father .”
“Oh.” Fer gus had clearly not considered this possibility ,
either , for he looked vaguely disconcerted. Then his features
cleared.
“Genevieve,” he said firmly .  “For Madame,” by this
meaning Jenny Murray , Jamie’ s sister . “Genevieve Claire, I
think,” he added, with another dazzling smile.
“Oh,” I said, flustered and oddly flattered. “W ell. Thank
you. Are you su re that you ought not to go back to Jamaica to
be with Marsali, Fer gus?” I asked, changing the subject.
He shook his head decidedly .
“Milord may have need of me,” he said. “And I am of more
use here  than I s hould be there. Babies are women’ s work, and
who kno ws wh at dangers we m ay encounter in this strange
place?”
As t hough in answer to this rhetorical question, the gulls
rose in a squawking cloud, wheeling out over the river and
mudflats, revealing the object of their appetite.
A st out p ine stak e had been driv en into the mud of the bank,
the top of it a foot below the dark, weedy line that marked the
upper reaches of the incoming tide. The tide was still low; it
had reached no higher than halfway up the stake. Above the
lapping waves of silty water hung the figure of a man, fastened
to the stake by a chain around  his chest. Or what had once
been his chest.
I couldn ’ t tell how long he had been there, but quite long
enough, from the looks of hi m. A narrow gash of white
showed the curve of skull where skin and hair had beenstripped of f. Impossible to say what he had looked like; the
birds had been busy .
Beside me, Fer gus said something very obscene in French,
softly under his breath.
“Pirate,” said Captain Freeman laconically , coming up
beside me and p ausing long enough to spit a brown stream of
tobacco juice into the river . “If they ain’ t taken to Charleston
for hangin’, sometimes they sta ke ‘em out at low tide and let
the river have ‘em.”
“Are—are there  a lot of them?” Ian had seen it, too; he was
much to o old to reach for my hand, but he stood close beside
me, his face pale under its tan.
“Not so much, n o more. The Navy does a good job keepin’
‘em dow n. But go back a few years, why , you could see four
or five pirates o ut here at a time. Folk would pay to come out
by boat, to sit and watch ‘em drown. Real pretty out here when
the tide comes in at sunset,” he  said, jaws moving in a slow ,
nostalgic rhythm. “T urns the water red.”
“Look!” Ian, for getting his dign ity , clutched me by the arm.
There was a mo vement near the riverbank, and we saw what
had startled the birds away .
It slid into the water , a long, scaly form some five or six feet
long, carving a deep groove in the soft mud of the bank. On
the far side of the boat, the deckhand muttered something
under his breath, but didn’ t stop his poling.
“It is a crocodi le,” Fer gus said, and made the sign of the
horns in distaste.
“No, I dinna thin k so.” Jamie spoke behind me, and I swung
around to see him peering ove r the cabin roof, at the still
figure in the wa ter and the V -shaped wake moving toward it.
He h eld a book in his hand, thu mb between the pages to hold
his place, and now bent his head to consult the volume.
“I b elieve it is an alligator . They dine upon carrion, it says
here, an d willna  eat fresh meat . When they take a man or a
sheep, they pull the victim beneath the water to drown it, butthen drag it to their den below ground and leave it there until it
has rotted enough to suit their fancy . Of course,” he added,
with a bleak glance at the bank, “they’re sometimes fortunate
enough to find a meal prepared.”
The figure on the stake seem ed to tremble briefly , as
something bumped it from below , and Ian made a small
choking noise beside me.
“Where did you get that book?”  I asked, not taking my eyes
of f the stake. T he top of the wooden pole was vibrating, as
though somethin g under the waves was worrying at it. Then
the pole  was still, and the V -sha ped wake could be seen again,
traveling back toward the riverbank. I turned away before it
could emer ge.
Jamie handed me the book, his eyes still fixed on the black
mudflat and its cloud of screeching birds.
“The Go vernor g ave it to me. He said he thought it might be
of interest on our journey .”
I gla nced down at the book. B ound in plain buckram, the
title was stamped on the spine in gold leaf— The Natural
History of North Car olina .
“Eeugh!” said Ian beside me, watching the scene on shore in
horror . “That’ s the most awful thing I’ve ever—”
“Of interest,” I e choed, eyes fixed firmly on the book. “Y es,
I expect it will be.”
Fer gus, impervious to squeamishness of any kind, was
watching the reptile’ s progress up the mudbank with interest.
“An alligator , you say . Still, it is much the same thing as a
crocodile, is it not?”
“Y es,” I said, sh uddering despite the heat. I turned my back
on the shore. I had met a crocod ile at close range in the Indies,
and wasn’ t anxious to improve my acquaintance with any of
its relatives.
Fer gus wiped sweat from his up per lip, dark eyes intent on
the gruesome thing.“Dr . Ste rn once told Milord and  myself about the travels of
a Frenchman named Sonnini, who visited Egypt and wrote
much of the sights he had witnessed and the customs he was
told of. He said  that in that country , the crocodiles copulate
upon th e muddy banks of the rivers, the female being laid
upon he r back, and in that position, incapable of rising without
the assistance of the male.”
“Oh, aye?” Ian was all ears.
“Indeed. He said that some me n there, hurried on by the
impulses of depravity , would take advantage of this forced
situation of the female, and hunt away the male, whereupon
they would take his place and e njoy the inhuman embrace of
the r eptile, which is said to be a most powerful charm for the
procurement of rank and riches.”
Ian’ s mouth sagged open.
“Y ou’re no serious, man?” he demanded of Fer gus,
incredulous. He turned to Jamie. “Uncle?”
Jamie shrugged, amused.
“I sh ould rather live poor but virtuous, myself.” He cocked
an eyebrow at me. “Besides, I think your auntie wouldna like
it much if I was to forsake her embraces for a reptile’ s.”
The black man, listening to th is from his position in the
bow , shook his head and spoke without looking round.
“Any man what gone frig with an alligator to get rich, he’ s
done earnt it, you ask me.”
“I rather  think you’re right,” I said, with a vivid memory of
the G overnor ’ s charming, toothy  smile. I glanced at Jamie, but
he w as no lon ger paying attention. His eyes were fixed
upriver , intent on possibility , both book and alligator for gotten
for the moment. At least he’d for gotten to be sick.
The tida l sur ge caught us a mil e above W ilmington, allaying
Ian’ s fears for our speed. The Cape Fear was a tidal river ,
whose daily sur ge carried up tw o-thirds of its length, nearly as
far as Cross Creek.I fel t the  river quicken under us, the boat rising an inch or
two, the n beginning slowly to pick up speed as the power of
the inco ming tide was funneled up the harbor and into the
river ’ s narrow channel. The slave sighed with relief and
hoisted the dripping pole free of the water .
There w ould be no need for poli ng until the sur ge ran out, in
five or six hours. Then we wou ld either anchor for the night
and catch the fresh sur ge of the next incoming tide, or use the
sail for further p rogress, wind allowing. Poling, I was given to
understand, was necessary only in case of sandbars or
windless days.
A sense of peaceful somnolence settled over the craft.
Fer gus a nd Ian curled up in the bow to sleep, while Rollo kept
guard on  the roof above, tongu e dripping as he panted, eyes
half closed against the sun. T he Captain and his hand—
commonly addressed as “you, T roklus,” but whose name was
actually Eutroclus—disappeared into the tiny cabin, from
which I could hear the musical sound of liquid being poured.
Jamie was in the  cabin, too, having gone to fetch something
from his mysterious crate. I h oped it was drinkable; even
sitting s till on the stern transom with my feet dangling in the
water , an d with the small breeze  of movement stirring the hair
on m y neck, I could feel sweat forming wherever skin touched
skin.
There were indistinct murmurs in the cabin, and laughter .
Jamie came out and turned toward the stern, stepping
delicately throug h the piles of goods like a Clydesdale stallion
in a field of frogs, a lar ge wooden box held in his arms.
He set this gen tly on my lap, shucked of f his shoes and
stockings, and sat down beside me, putting his feet in the
water with a sigh of pleasure at the coolness.
“What’ s this?” I ran my hand curiously over the box.
“Oh, only a wee present.” He didn’ t look at me, but the tips
of his ears were pink. “Open it, hm?”It w as a heavy b ox, both wide a nd deep. Carved of a dense,
fine-grained dark wood, it bore the marks of heavy use—nicks
and dents that had seasoned but not impaired its polished
beauty . It was hasped for a lock, but there was none; the lid
rose easily on oiled brass hin ges, and a whif f of camphor
floated out, vaporous as a jinn.
The instruments gleamed und er the smoky sun, bright
despite a  hazing of disuse. Each  had its own pocket, carefully
fitted and lined in green velvet.
A smal l, heavy -toothed saw; scissors, three scalpels—
round-bladed, straight-bladed, scoop-bladed; the silver blade
of a tongue depressor , a tenaculum…
“Jamie!” Deligh ted, I lifted out a short ebony rod, to the end
of whic h was af fixed a ball of worsted, wrapped in rather
moth-eaten velvet. I’d seen one before, at V ersailles; the
eighteenth-century version of a reflex hammer . “Oh, Jamie!
How wonderful!”
He wiggled his feet, pleased.
“Oh, ye like it?”
“I love it! Oh, look—there’ s more in the lid, under this flap
—” I stared fo r a moment at the disjointed tubes, screws,
platforms and mirrors, until my  mind’ s eye shuf fled them and
presented me with the neatly assembled vision. “A
microscope!” I touched it reverently . “My God, a microscope.”
“There’ s more,” he pointed out, eager to show me. “The
front opens and there are wee drawers inside.”
There were—co ntaining, amon g other things, a miniature
balance and set of brass weights, a tile for rolling pills, and a
stained marble mortar , its pestle wrapped in cloth to prevent its
being cracked in transit. Inside  the front, above the drawers,
were row upon row of small, corked bottles made of stone or
glass.
“Oh, they’re beautiful!” I said, handling the small scalpel
with reverence. The polished w ood of the handle fit my handas th ough it had  been made for  me, the blade weighted to an
exquisite balance. “Oh, Jamie, thank you!”
“Y e like them, then?” His ears  had gone bright red with
pleasure. “I thought they’d maybe do. I’ve no notion what
they’re meant for , but I could see they were finely made.”
I  had  no notion w hat some of the  pieces were meant for , but
all o f the m were  beautiful in the mselves; made by or for a man
who loved his tools and what they did.
“Who d id they belong to, I wonder?” I breathed heavily on
the rounded surface of a lenticular and brought it to a soft
gleam with a fold of my skirt.
“The wo man wh o sold it to me d idna ken; he left behind his
doctor ’ s book, though, and I too k that, as well—perhaps it will
give his name.”
Lifting the top tray of instruments, he revealed another ,
shallower tray , from which he drew out a fat square-bound
book, some eight inches wide, covered in scuf fed black
leather .
“I thought ye might be wanting a book, too, like the one ye
kept in France,” he explained. “The one where ye kept the
pictures and the notes of the peo ple ye saw at L ’Hopital. He’ s
written a  bit in this one, but ther e’ s a deal of blank pages left at
the back.”
Perhaps a quarter of the book ha d been used; the pages were
covered with a closely written, fine black script, interspersed
with drawings that took my eye  with their clinical familiarity:
an ulcer ated toe, a shattered kneecap, the skin neatly peeled
aside; the grotesque swelling of advanced goiter , and a
dissection of the calf muscles, each neatly labeled.
I t urned back to the inside cover ; sure enough, his name was
written on the first page, adorned with a small, gentlemanly
flourish: Dr . Daniel Rawlings, Esq .
“What h appened to Dr . Rawlings, I wonder? Did the woman
who had the box say?”Jamie nodded, his brow slightly creased.
“The Doctor lodged with her for  a night. He said he’d come
from V ir ginia, where his home was, bound upon some errand,
and his case w ith him. He was looking for a man named
Garver—she tho ught that was the name, at least. But that night
after supper he went out—and never came back.”
I stared at him.
“Never came back? Did she f ind out what happened to
him?”
Jamie shook his head, batting away a small cloud of midges.
The sun  was sinking, painting the surface of the water gold
and orange, and bugs were beginning to gather as the
afternoon cooled into evening.
“No. She went to the sherif f, and to the justice, and the
constable search ed high and lo w—but there was nay sign of
the man. They looked for a week, and then gave up. He had
never told his la ndlady which town it was in V ir ginia, so they
couldna trace him further .”
“How ve ry odd. ” I wiped a droplet of moisture of f my chin.
“When did the Doctor disappear?”
“A y ear past, she said.” He looked at me, a little anxious.
“Y e dinna mind? Using his things, I mean?”
“No.” I closed the lid and stroked it gently , the dark wood
warm and smooth under my fin gers. “If it were me—I’d want
someone to use them.”
I rem embered vividly the feel of my own doctor ’ s bag—
cordovan leather , with my initials stamped in gilt on the
handle. Original ly stamped in gilt on the handle, that is; they
had long  since worn of f, the leather gone smooth and shiny ,
rich with handling. Frank had given me the bag when I
graduated from medical school; I had given it to my friend Joe
Abernathy , wanting it to be u sed by someone who would
treasure it as I had.He saw the sh adow drift across my face—I saw the
reflection of it d arken his—but I took his hand and smiled as I
squeezed it.
“It’ s a wonderful gift. However did you find it?”
He smil ed then, in return. The  sun blazed low , a brilliant
orange ball glimpsed briefly through dark treetops.
“I’d seen the bo x when I went to the goldsmith’ s shop—it
was the goldsmith’ s wife who ’d kept it. Then I went back
yesterday , mean ing to buy ye  a bit of jewelry—maybe a
brooch—and whilst the goodwife was showing me the gauds,
we happened to speak of this and that, and she told me of the
Doctor , and—” He shrugged.
“Why did you want to buy me jewelry?” I looked at him,
puzzled. The sale of the ruby ha d left us with a bit of money ,
but extr avagance was not at all like him, and under the
circumstances—
“Oh! T o make u p for sending all  that money to Laoghaire? I
didn’ t mind; I said I didn’ t.”
He had— with s ome reluctance—arranged to send the bulk
of the proceeds  from the sale of the stone to Scotland, in
payment of a promise made to Laoghaire MacKenzie—damn
her eyes—Fraser , whom he had married at his sister ’ s
persuasion while under the rather logical impression that if I
was not dead, I  was at least not coming back. My apparent
resurrection from the dead had caused any amount of
complications, Laoghaire not least among them.
“A ye, ye said so,” he said, openly cynical.
“I m eant it—more or less,” I said, and laughed. “Y ou
couldn’ t very well let the bea stly woman starve to death,
appealing as the idea is.”
He smiled, faintly .
“No. I shouldna  like to have that on my conscience; there’ s
enough without. But that’ s not why I wished to buy ye a
present.”“Why , then?” The box was heavy; a gracious, substantial,
satisfying weigh t across my legs, its wood a delight under my
hands. H e turned his head to look full at me, then, his hair fire-
struck with the setting sun, face dark in silhouette.
“T wenty-four years ago today , I married ye, Sassenach,” he
said softly . “I hope ye willna have cause yet to regret it.”
The river ’ s edge was settled, rimmed with plantations from
W ilmington to Cross Creek. Still, the banks were thickly
forested, with only the occasional glimpse of fields where a
break in the tr ees showed plantings, or every so often, a
wooden dock, half-hidden in the foliage.
W e proceeded slowly upriver , following the tidal sur ge so
long as it lasted,  tying up for the night when it ran out. W e ate
dinner b y a small fire on shore, but slept on the boat, Eutroclus
having casually mentioned the p revalence of water moccasins,
who—he said— inhabited dens beneath the riverbank but were
much inclined to come and war m their cold blood next to the
bodies of unwary sleepers.
I aw oke soon be fore dawn, stif f and sore from sleeping on
boards, hearing the soft rush of  a vessel passing on the river
nearby , feeling the push of its wake against our hull. Jamie
stirred in his sl eep when he fe lt me move, turned over , and
clasped me to his bosom.
I c ould feel his body curled beh ind mine, in its paradoxical
morning state of sleep and arou sal. He made a drowsy noise
and moved against me in inqu iry , his hand fumbling at the
hem of my rumpled shift.
“Stop,” I said under my breath, batting his hand away .
“Remember where we are, for God’ s sake!”
I could hear th e shouts and barking of Ian and Rollo,
galumphing to and fro on the shore, and small stirrings in the
cabin, featuring hawking and spitting noises, indicating the
imminent emer gence of Captain Freeman.“Oh,” said Jamie, coming to the surface of consciousness.
“Oh, aye. A pity , that.” He reached up, squeezed my breasts
with both hands, and stretched his body with voluptuous
slowness against me, giving me a detailed idea of what I was
missing.
“Ah, we ll,” he said, relaxing reluctantly , but not yet letting
go. “ Foeda est in coitu,  um?”
“It what?”
” ‘Foeda est in coitu et br eois voluptas’ “  he recited
obligingly . ” ‘ Et taedat V eneiis statim peractae . Do ing, a filthy
pleasure is—and short. And done, we straight repent us of the
sport.’ “
I gl anced down at the staine d boards under us. “W ell,
perhaps ‘filthy’ isn’ t altogether the wrong word,” I began, “but
—”
“It’ s not the filthiness that troubles me, Sassenach,” he
interrupted, scow ling at Ian, who was hanging over the side of
the b oat, shouting encourageme nt to Rollo as he swam. “It’ s
the short.”
He g lanced at me, scowl chang ing to a look of approval as
he took in my state of dishevelment. “I mean to take my time
about it, aye?”
This classical start to the day seemed to have had some lasting
influence on Jamie’ s mind. I co uld hear them at it as I sat in
the afternoon sun, thumbing through Daniel Rawlings’ s
casebook—at o nce entertained,  enlightened, and appalled at
the things recorded there.
I co uld hear Jamie’ s voice in the ordered rise and fall of
ancient G reek. I had heard that bit before— a passage from the
Odyssey . He paused, with an expectant rise.
“Ah…” said Ian.
“What comes next, Ian?”
“Er…”“Once more,” said Jamie, with  a slight edge to his voice.
“Pay att ention, man. I’m no talk in’ for the pleasure of hearin’
myself, aye?” He began again, the elegant, formal verse
warming to life as he spoke.
He  mig ht not take pleasure in hearing himself, but I did. I
had no Greek myself, but the rise and fall of syllables in that
soft, dee p voice was as soothing as the lap of water against the
hull.
Reluctantly acc epting his nephew’ s continued presence,
Jamie to ok his guardianship of Ian with due seriousness, and
had been tutoring the lad as we traveled, seizing odd moments
of le isure to teach—or attempt t o teach—the lad the rudiments
of Greek and La tin grammar , and to improve his mathematics
and conversational French.
Fortunately , Ian had the same quick grasp of mathematical
principles as his uncle; the side of the small cabin beside me
was covered with elegant Euclidean proofs, carried out in
burnt stick. When the subject turned to languages, though,
they found less common ground.
Jamie was a natural polygogue; he acquired languages and
dialects with no visible ef fort,  picking up idioms as a dog
picks up  foxtails  in a romp through the fields. In addition, he
had been schooled in the Classics at the Universite  in Paris,
and—while disagreeing now and then with some of the Roman
philosophers—regarded both Homer and V ir gil as personal
friends.
Ian spoke the G aelic and English with which he had been
raised, a nd a sort of low French patois acquired from Fer gus,
and felt this qu ite suf ficient to his needs. T rue, he had an
impressive repertoire of swear  words in six or seven other
languages—acquired from exposure to a number of
disreputable inf luences in the recent past, not least of these
being his uncle—but he had no more than a vague
apprehension of the mysteries of Latin conjugation.
Still less did he  have an appreciation for the necessity of
learning languag es that to him were not only dead, but—heclearly thought —long decayed  beyond any possibility of
usefulness. Homer couldn’ t compete with the excitement of
this new country , adventure reaching out from both shores
with beckoning green hands.
Jamie fi nished his Greek passage, and with a sigh clearly
audible to me w here I sat, dire cted Ian to take out the Latin
book he had bor rowed from Governor T ryon’ s library . W ith no
recitation to distract me, I re turned to my perusal of Dr .
Rawlings’ s casebook.
Like my self, the Doctor had plainly had some Latin, but
preferred Englis h for the bulk of his notes, dropping into Latin
only for an occasional formal entry .
Bled Mr . Beddoes of a pt. Note d istinct lessening of the bilious
humor , his complexion much impr oved of the yellowness and
pustules which have afflicted him . Administer ed black draught
to assist purifying of the blood.
“Ass,” I muttered—not for the first time. “Can’ t you see the
man’ s got liver disease?” Probably a mild cirrhosis; Rawlings
had note d a slight enlar gement and hardening of the liver—
though h e attributed this to excessive production of bile. Most
likely al cohol poisoning; the pustules on face and chest were
characteristic of a nutritional deficiency that I saw commonly
associated with excessive alcohol consumption—and God
knew , that  was epidemic.
Beddoes, if he were still alive—a prospect I considered
doubtful—was likely drinking a nything up to a quart of mixed
spirit daily and h adn’ t so much as smelled a green vegetable in
months. The pustules on whose disappearance Rawlings was
congratulating h imself had likely diminished because he had
used tur nip leav es as a coloring agent in his special receipt for
“black draught.”
Absorbed in my reading, I half heard Ian’ s stumbling
rendition of Plautus’ s V ertue  from the other side of the cabi n,
interrupted in every other line by Jamie’ s deeper voice,
prompting and correcting.” ‘V irtus praemium est optimus…’ “
“Optimum.”
” ‘…est optimum. V irtus omnibus r ebus’  and…ah…and…”
“Anteit.”
“Thank ye, Uncle. ‘V irtus omnibus r ebus anteit…
pr ofectus’ ?”
“Pr ofecto.”
“Oh, aye, pr ofecto . Um… ‘V irtus’? ”
“Libertas. ‘Libertas salus vita r es et par entes, patria et
pr ognati…’  d’ye recall what is meant by ‘vita,’  Ian?”
“Life,” came Ian’ s voice, seizing gratefully on this buoyant
object in a flounderous sea.
“A ye, that’ s good, but it’ s more than life. In Latin, it means
not only  being alive but it’ s also a man’ s substance, what he’ s
made of. See, then it goes on, ‘…libertas salus vita r es et
par entes, patria  et pr ognati tut antur , servantur; virtus omnia
in sese habet, omnia adsunt bona quem penest virtus.’  Now ,
what is he sayin’ there, d’ye think?”
“Ah…virtue is a good thing?” Ian ventured.
There was a momentary silence, during which I could
almost h ear Jam ie’ s blood pressure rising. A hiss of indrawn
breath, then, as he thought bet ter of whatever he had been
about to say , a long-suf fering exhalation.
“Mmphm. Look ye, Ian. ‘T utantur , servantur .’  Wh at do es he
mean by using t hose two together , instead of putting it as…”
My attention faded, drawn back to the book, wherein Dr .
Rawlings now gave account of a duel and its consequences.
May 15. W as called fr om my bed at dawn to attend a
gentleman staying at the Red Dog. Found him in sad case,
with a wound to his hand, occasioned by the misfir e of a pistol,
the thumb and index fingers of the hand being blown off
altogether by the explosion, the middle finger badly mangledand two-thir ds of the hand so lacerated that it was scar ce
r ecognizable as a human appendage.
Determining that only pr ompt amputation would serve, I
sent for the landlor d and r equested a pannikin of brandy , linen
for bandages, and the help of two str ong men. These being
rapidly pr ovided and the patient suitably r estrained, I
pr oceeded to take the hand—it was the right, to the misfortune
of the patient—off just above the wrist. Successfully ligated
two arteries, but the anterior inter osseus escaped me, being
r etracted into the flesh after I sawed thr ough the bones. W as
for ced to loosen the tourniquet in or der to find it, so bleeding
was considerable—a fortunate accident, as the copious
outpouring of blood r ender ed the patient insensible and thus
put an end for the moment to his agony , as well as to his
struggles, which wer e gr eatly hampering my work.
The amputation being successfully concluded, the
gentleman was put to bed, but I stayed near at hand, lest he
r egain consciousness abruptly and in random movement do
hurt to my stitching.
This fascinating  narrative was interrupted by a sudden
outburst from Jamie, who had evidently reached the end of his
patience.
“Ian, your Latin would disgrace a dog! And as for the rest,
ye have na got enough understanding of Greek to tell the
dif ference between water and wine!”
“If they’re drinkin’ it, it’ s not water ,” Ian muttered,
sounding rebellious.
I c losed  the book and got hastily to my feet. It sounded
rather as though the services of a referee might shortly be
called for . Ian w as making small Scottish noises of discontent
as I rounded the cabin.
“A ye, mphm, but I dinna care so much—”
“A ye, ye don’ t care! That’ s the true pity of it—that ye
havena the grace even to feel shame for your ignorance!”There w as a char ged silence af ter this, broken only by the
soft splash of T roklus’ s pole in the bow . I peeked around the
corner , to see Jamie glaring at his nephew , who looked
abashed. Ian glanced at me, coughed and cleared his throat.
“W ell, I’ll tell y e, Uncle Jamie, if I thought shame would
help, I wouldna scruple to blush.”
He looked so apologetically hangdog that I couldn’ t help
laughing. Jamie turned, hearing me, and his scowl faded
slightly .
“Y e’re n ot a bit of help, Sassenach,” he said. “Y ou’ve the
Latin, have ye not? Being a physician, ye must. Perhaps I
should leave his Latin schooling to you, aye?”
I sho ok my head . While it was more or less true that I could
read Latin—badly and laboriously—I didn’ t fancy trying to
cram the ragbag remnants of my education into Ian’ s head.
“All I remember is Arma virumque cano .” I glanced at Ian
and translated, grinning. “My arm got bit of f by a dog.”
Ian burst into giggles, and J amie gave me a look of
profound disillusion.
He sighe d and ran a hand throug h his hair . While Jamie and
Ian didn ’ t resemble each other in any physical respect beyond
height, both had thick hair and  the habit of running a hand
through it when agitated or thou ghtful. It looked to have been
a str essful lesson—both of them  looked as though they’d been
pulled backward through a hedgerow .
Jamie sm iled wryly at me, then turned back to Ian, shaking
his head.
“Ah, well. I’m sorry to bark at ye, Ian, truly . But ye’ve a
fine min d, and I shouldna like to  see ye waste it. God, man, at
your age, I was in Paris, already starting in to study at the
Universite !”
Ian stood looking down into the water that swirled past the
side of the ship in smooth brow n rif fles. His hands rested on
the rail; big hands, broad-backed and browned by the sun.“A ye,” he said. “And at my age, my own father was in
France, too. Fighting.”
I was a bit startled to hear this. I had known that the elder
Ian had soldiered  in France for a time, but not that he had gone
so early for a soldier—nor stayed so long. Y oung Ian was just
fifteen. T he elder Ian had serve d as a foreign mercenary from
that age, then, until the age of twenty-two; when a cannon
blast had left hi m with a leg so badly shattered by grapeshot
that it had been  amputated just below the knee—and he had
come home for good.
Jamie looked at his nephew for a moment, frowning
slightly . Then he came to stand beside Ian, leaning backward,
hands on the rail to balance himself.
“I k en that, aye ?” Jamie said quietly . “For I followed him,
four years later , when I was outlawed.”
Ian looked up at that, startled.
“Y e were together there in France?”
There was a slig ht breeze caused by our movement, but it
was still  a hot da y . Perhaps the t emperature decided him that it
was bet ter to let the subject of higher learning drop for a
moment, for Jamie nodded, lifti ng the thick tail of his hair to
cool his neck.
“In Flan ders. For more than a year , before Ian was wounded
and sent  home. W e fought wi’ a regiment of Scots mercenaries
then—under Fer gus mac Leodhas.”
Ian’ s eyes were alight with interest.
“Is that where Fer gus—our Fer gus—got his name, then?”
His uncle smiled.
“A ye, I named him for mac Leodhas; a bonny man, and a
great soldier , forbye. He thoug ht weel o’ Ian. Did your Da
never speak to you of him?”
Ian shook his head, his brow slightly clouded.“He’ s never said a thing to me. I—I kent he’d lost his leg
fighting in France—Mam told me that, when I asked—but he
wouldna say a word about it, himself.”
W ith Dr . Rawlings’ s description of amputation vivid in my
mind, I thought it likely that th e elder Ian hadn’ t wanted to
recall the occasion.
Jamie shrugged, plucking the sweat-damp shirt away from
his chest.
“A ye, well. I sup pose he meant to put that time behind him,
once he’ d come  home and settle d at Lallybroch. And then…”
He hesitated, but Ian was insistent.
“And then what, Uncle Jamie?”
Jamie glanced at his nephew , and one side of his mouth
curled up.
“W ell, I  think he didna want to  tell too many tales of war
and fighting, lest you lads get th inking on it and set yourselves
to go for soldiers, too. He and your mother will ha’ wanted
better for you, aye?”
I tho ught the eld er Ian had been  wise; it was clear from the
look on his face that the younger Ian couldn’ t think of a much
more exciting prospect than war and fighting.
“That will ha’ been my Mam’ s doing,” Ian said, with an air
of disgu st. “She’d have me wra pped in wool and tied to her
apron strings, did I let her .”
Jamie grinned.
“Oh, let her , is it? And d’ye think she’d wrap ye in wool and
smother ye wi’ kisses if ye were home this minute?”
Ian dropped the pose of disdain.
“W ell, no,” he admitted. “I think she’d skelp me raw .”
Jamie laughed.
“Y e kno w a bit about women, Ian, if not so much as ye
think.”Ian glanced skeptically from his uncle to me, and back.
“And you’ll ken all about them, I suppose, Uncle?”
I rai sed one eye brow , inviting an answer to this, but Jamie
merely laughed.
“It’ s a wise man  who kens the limits of his knowledge, Ian.”
He b ent and kissed my damp forehead, then turned back to his
nephew , adding, “Though I could wish your own limits went a
bit further .”
Ian shrugged, looking bored.
“I di nna mean to  set up for a gen tleman,” he said. “After all,
Y oung J amie and Michael dinna read Greek; they do well
enough!”
Jamie rubbed his nose, considering his nephew thoughtfully .
“Y oung Jamie has Lallybroch. And wee Michael does well
wi’ Jare d in Paris. They’ll be se ttled. W e did as best we might
for t he t wo o’ them, but there w as precious little money to pay
for trave l or schooling when they came to manhood. There
wasna much choice for them, aye?”
He pushed himself of f the rail and stood upright.
“But yo ur parents dinna want that for you, Ian, if better
might be managed. They’d ha ve ye grow to be a man of
learning and influence; duine uasal,  perhaps.” It wa s a Gaelic
expression I had heard before, literally “a man of worth.” It
was the term for  tacksmen and l airds, the men of property and
followers who ranked only below chieftains in the Highland
clans.
Such a man as Jamie himself had been, before the Rising.
But not now .
“Mmphm. And did ye do as your parents wanted for ye,
then, Uncle Jamie?” Ian looked blandly at his uncle, with only
a w ary twitch of the eye to show  he knew he was treading on
shaky ground. Jamie had been meant to be duine uasal,
indeed; Lallybroch had been his by right. It was only in anef fort to  save the property from confiscation by the Crown that
he had made it over legally to Y oung Jamie, instead.
Jamie stared at him for a moment, then rubbed a knuckle
across his upper lip before replying.
“I did say ye’ d a fine mind,  no?” he answered dryly .
“Though since ye ask…I was raised to do two things, Ian. T o
mind my land and people, and to care for my family . I’ve done
those two things, as best I mig ht—and I shall go on doing
them as best I can.”
Y oung Ian had the grace to look abashed at this.
“A ye, w ell, I didna mean…” he mumbled, looking at his
feet.
“Dinna fash, laddie,” Jamie interrupted, clapping him on the
shoulder . He grinned wryly at his nephew . “Y e’ll amount to
something for your mother ’ s sake—if it kills us both. And now
I think it will be my turn at the pole.”
He glanced forward, to where T roklus’ s shoulders gleamed
like oily copper , snake-muscled with long labor . Jamie untied
his breec hes—unlike the other men, he would not take of f his
shirt for poling, but stripped his breeks for coolness and
worked with his shirt knotted  between his thighs, in the
Highland style—and nodded to Ian.
“Y ou thi nk about it, laddie. Y ou ngest son or no, your life’ s
not meant to be wasted.”
He smiled at me then, with a sudden heart-stopping
brilliance, and handed me his sh ed breeks. Then, still holding
my han d in his, he stood upright and, hand over heart,
declaimed,
“Amo, amas, I love a lass,
 As cedar tall and slender;
 Sweet cowslip’ s grace
 Is her nominative case,
 And she’ s o’ the feminine gender .”He nodded graciously to Ian, w ho had dissolved in giggles,
and lifted my hand to his lips, blue eyes aslant with mischief.
“Can I decline a nymph so divine?
 Her voice like a flute is dulcis;
 Her oculus bright, her manus white
 And soft, when I tacto, her pulse is.
 O bow belle, my puella
 I’ll kiss in secula seculorum;
 If I’ve luck, sir , she’ s my uxor ,
 O dies benedictorum.”
He made a cou rtly leg to me, blinked solemnly in his
version of a wink, and strode of f in his shirt.9
T W O - T H I R D S  O F  A  G H O S T
T he s urface of th e river gleamed like oil, the water moving
gently past without a ripple. Th ere was a single lantern hung
from the starboard bow; sitting on a low stool perched on the
forward deck, I could see the light below , not so much
reflected in the water as trapped under it, moving slowly side
by side with the boat.
The moon was a faint sickle, making its feeble sweep
through the treetops. Beyond the thick trees that lined the
river , th e ground fell away in broad sweeps of darkness, over
the rice plantatio ns and tobacco fields. The heat of the day was
sucked down into the earth, glowing with unseen ener gy
beneath the surface of the soil, the rich, fertile flatlands
simmering in black heat behind the screen of pines and
sweetgum trees, working the alchemy of water and trapped
sun.
T o m ove at all was to break a sweat. The air was tangible,
each tiny ripple of warmth a caress against my face and arms.
There was a soft rustle in the dark behind me, and I reached
up a hand, not t urning to look. Jamie’ s big hand closed gently
over mine, squeezed and let go.  Even that brief touch left my
fingers damp with perspiration.
He e ased himself down next to me with a sigh, plucking at
the collar of his shirt.
“I dinna  think I’ve breathed air  since we left Geor gia,” he
said. “Every time I take a breath, I think I’ll maybe drown.”
I laughed, feeling a trickle of sweat snake down between my
breasts.
“It will be coole r in Cross Creek; everyone says so.” I took
a d eep breath m yself, just to prove I could. “Doesn’ t it smell
wonderful, though?” The darkness released all the pungent
green scents of the trees and p lants along the water ’ s edge,mingling with the damp mud of  the riverbank and the scent of
sun-warmed wood from the deck of the boat.
“Y e’d have made a good dog, Sassenach.” He leaned back
against t he wall  of the cabin with a sigh. “It’ s no wonder yon
beast admires ye so.”
The click of toenails on deckboards announced the arrival of
Rollo, who advanced cautiously toward the rail, stopped a
careful foot short of it, and low ered himself gingerly to the
deck. H e laid his nose on his p aws and sighed deeply . Rollo
disapproved almost as strongly of boats as Jamie did.
“Hullo there,” I said. I extended a hand for him to snif f, and
he politely condescended to le t me scratch his ears. “And
where’ s your master , eh?”
“In the cabin, b ein’ taught new ways to cheat at cards,”
Jamie sa id wryly . “God kens best what will happen to the lad;
if he’ s not shot or knocked on the head in some tavern, he’ll
likely come home wi’ an ostrich he’ s won at faro next.”
“Surely they haven’ t either ostriches or faro games up in the
mountains? If there aren’ t any t owns to speak of, surely there
aren’ t many taverns, either .”
“W ell, I shouldna think so,” he  admitted. “But if a man’ s
bound to  go to the devil, he’ll find a way to do it, no matter
where ye set him down.”
“I’m sur e Ian isn’ t going to the devil,” I replied soothingly .
“He’ s a fine boy .”
“He’ s a man,” Ja mie corrected. He cocked an ear toward the
cabin, where I c ould hear muf fled laughter and the occasional
comfortable obscenity . “A damn young one, though, and fat-
heided w ith it.” He looked at m e, a rueful smile visible in the
lantern light.
“If he were a wee lad yet, I could keep some rein on him.
As i t is—” He shrugged. “He’ s  old enough to mind his own
business, and he’ll not thank me for sticking my nose in.”
“He always listens to you,” I protested.“Mmphm. W ait till I tell him something he doesna want to
hear .” He leaned his head agai nst the wall, closing his eyes.
Sweat gleamed across the high c heekbones, and a small trickle
ran down the side of his neck.
I put out a finge r and delicately flicked the tiny drop away ,
before it further dampened his shirt.
“Y ou’ve been telling him for two months that he has to go
home to Scotland; he doesn’ t want to hear that, I don’ t think.”
Jamie opened one eye and surveyed me cynically .
“Is he in Scotland?”
“W ell…”
“Mmphm,” he said, and closed the eye again.
I s at quietly for  a bit, blotting the perspiration of f my face
with a fold of m y skirt. The rive r had narrowed here; the near
bank was no m ore than ten fe et away . I caught a rustle of
movement among the shrubs, and a pair of eyes gleamed
briefly red with reflected light from our lantern.
Rollo lifted his head with a sudden low W oof,  ears pricked
to attent ion. Jamie opened his eyes and glanced at the bank,
then sat up abruptly .
“Christ! That’ s the biggest rat I’ve ever seen!”
I laughed.
“It’ s not a rat; it’ s a possum. See the babies on her back?”
Jamie and Rollo regarded the possum with identical looks of
calculation, asse ssing its plumpness and possible speed. Four
small po ssums s tared solemnly back, pointed noses twitching
over th eir mot her ’ s humped, indif ferent back. Obviously
thinking the boat no threat, the mother possum finished
lapping water , turned, and trundled slowly into the brush, the
tip o f her naked thick pink tail disappearing as the lantern light
faded.
The two hunters let out identical sighs, and relaxed again.“Myers did say as they’re fine eating,” Jamie remarked
wistfully . W ith a small sigh of m y own, I groped in the pocket
of my gown and handed him a cloth bag.
“What’ s this?” He peered interestedly into the bag, then
poured t he small, lumpy brown objects out into the palm of his
hand.
“Roasted peanuts,” I said. “They grow under ground
hereabouts. I found a farmer sell ing them for hogfood, and had
the inn-wife roast some for me. Y ou take of f the shells before
you eat them.” I  grinned at him, enjoying the novel sensation
of for once knowing more about our surroundings than he did.
He gave me a mildly dirty look, and crushed a shell between
thumb and forefinger , yielding three nuts.
“I’m ign orant, S assenach,” he said. “Not a fool. There’ s a
dif ference, aye?” He put a peanut in his mouth and bit down
gingerly . His skeptical look changed to one of pleased
surprise, and he chewed with increasing enthusiasm, tossing
the other nuts into his mouth.
“Like them?” I smiled, enjoying his pleasure. “I’ll make you
peanut butter for your bread, on ce we’re settled and I have my
new mortar unpacked.”
He smiled back and swallowed before cracking another nut.
“I will say that i f it’ s a swampish place, at least it’ s fine soil.
I’ve never seen so many things grow so easily .”
He tossed another nut into his mouth.
“I have been thinking, Sassenach,” he said, looking down
into the palm of his hand. “What would ye think of maybe
settling here?”
The question wasn’ t entirely unexpected. I had seen him
eyeing the black fields and lush crops with a farmer ’ s
glittering eye, and caught his wistful expression when he
admired the Governor ’ s horses.
W e couldn’ t go back to Scotlan d immediately , in any case.
Y oung Ian, yes, but not Jam ie or me, owing to certaincomplications—not the least of these being a complication by
the name of Laoghaire MacKenzie.
“I don’ t  know ,” I said slowly . “Indians and wild animals
quite aside—”
“Och, well,” he interrupted, mildly embarrassed. “Myers
told me they we re no dif ficulty at all, and ye keep clear of the
mountains.”
I forbore from pointing out that the Governor ’ s of fer would
take us into the precincts of precisely those mountains.
“Y es, bu t you do remember w hat I told you, don’ t you?
About the Revolution? This is 1767, and you heard the
conversation at the Governor ’ s table. Nine years, Jamie, and
all hell breaks loose.” W e had both lived through war , and
neither of us took the thought lightly . I laid a hand on his arm,
forcing him to look at me.
“I w as r ight, yo u know—before .” I had known what would
happen at Culloden; had told h im the fate of Charles Stuart
and his men. A nd neither my knowing nor his had been
enough to save u s. T wenty aching years of separation, and the
ghost o f a daughter he woul d never see lay behind that
knowing.
He nodded slowly , and lifted a h and to touch my cheek. The
soft glow  of the small lantern overhead attracted clouds of tiny
gnats; they swirled suddenly , disturbed by his movement.
“A ye, ye were,” he said softly . “But then—we thought we
must cha nge things. Or try , at the least. But here—” He turned,
waving an arm at the vast lan d that lay unseen beyond the
trees. “I shouldna think it my business,” he said simply .
“Either to help or to hinder much.”
I waved the gnats away from my face.
“It might be  our business, if we lived here.”
He r ubbed a fin ger below his lower lip, thinking. His beard
was spro uting, a glimmer of red  stubble sparked with silver in
the l antern light. He was a big man, handsome and strong inthe prime of his life, but no long er a young one, and I realized
that with sudden gratitude.
Highland men were bred to fight; Highland boys became
men when they could lift their swords and go to battle. Jamie
had never been reckless, but h e had been a warrior and a
soldier most of his life. As a young man in his twenties,
nothing could have kept him fr om a fight, whether it was his
own or not. Now , in his forties, sense might temper passion—
or at least I hoped so.
And it was true; beyond this aunt whom he didn’ t know , he
had no family here, no ties that might compel involvement.
Perhaps, knowin g what was com ing, we might contrive to stay
clear of the worst?
“It’ s a verra big  place, Sassenach.” He looked out over the
prow of the boat, into the vast black sweep of invisible land.
“Only si nce we left Geor gia, we  have traveled farther than the
whole length of Scotland and England both.”
“That’ s true,” I admitted. In Scotland, even among the high
crags of  the Highlands, there h ad been no way to escape the
ravages of war . Not so here;  should we seek our place
carefully , we might indeed escape the roving eye of Mars.
He tilted his head to one side, smiling up at me.
“I could  see ye as a planter ’ s lady , Sassenach. If the
Governor will find me a buyer for the other stones, then I shall
have enough, I think, to send  Laoghaire all the money I
promised her , and still have enough over to buy a good place
—one where we might prosper .”
He t ook my righ t hand in his, his thumb gently stroking my
silver wedding ring.
“Perhaps one day I shall deck ye in laces and jewels,” he
said softly . “I havena been able to give ye much, ever , save a
wee silver ring, and my mother ’ s pearls.”
“Y ou’ve given me a lot more th an that,” I said. I wrapped
my fingers around his thumb and squeezed. “Brianna, for
one.”He smiled faintly , looking down at the deck.
“A ye, that’ s true. She’ s maybe the real reason—for staying,
I mean.”
I pulled him toward me, and he  rested his head against my
knee.
“This is her place, no?” he said quietly . He lifted a hand,
gesturing toward the river , the t rees and the sky . “She will be
born here, she’ll live here.”
“That’ s right,” I said softly . I stroked his hair , smoothing the
thick strands that were so much  like Brianna’ s. “This will be
her coun try .” He rs, in a way it could never be mine or his, no
matter how long we might live here.
He nodded, beard rasping gently against my skirt.
“I dinna  wish to fight, or have ye ever in danger , Sassenach,
but if there is a bit I can do…to build, maybe, to make it safe,
and a good lan d for her…” H e shrugged. “It would please
me,” he finished softly .
W e sat silently for a bit, close together , watching the dull
shine of the water and the slow progress of the sunken lantern.
“I le ft th e pearls  for her ,” I said at last. “That seemed right;
they we re an heirloom, after a ll.” I drew my ringed hand,
curved, across his lips. “And the ring is all I need.”
He t ook both m y hands in his, then, and kissed them—the
left, which still bore the gold r ing of my marriage to Frank,
and then the right, with his own silver ring.
“Da mi basia mille,”  he whi spered, smiling. Give me a
thousand kisses.  It was the inscription inside my ring, a brief
quotation from a love song by Catullus. I bent and gave him
one back.
“Dein mille altera,”  I said. Then a thousand more.
It w as n ear mid night when we tied up near a brushy grove to
rest. The  weather had changed; still hot and muggy , now the
air held the hint of thunder , and the under growth stirred withsmall movements—random air currents, or the scurryings of
tiny night things hastening for home before the storm.
W e were  nearly  at the end of t he tidal sur ge; from here it
would b e a matter of sail and pole, and Captain Freeman had
hopes o f catchin g a good breez e on the wings of a storm. It
would pay us to  rest while we could. I curled into our nest on
the stern, but was unable to fall asleep at once, late as it was.
By the Captain’ s  estimation, we might make Cross Creek by
evening tomorrow—certainly by the day after . I was surprised
to realize how eagerly I was looking forward to our arrival;
two months of li ving hand-to-mouth on the road had given me
an ur gent longing for some haven, no matter how temporary .
Familiar as I was with Highland notions of hospitality and
kinship, I had no fears regarding our welcome. Jamie plainly
did not consider  the fact that he hadn’ t met this particular aunt
in fo rty-odd years to be any bar  to our cordial reception, and I
was quit e sure he was right. At the same time, I couldn’ t help
entertaining considerable curiosity about Jocasta Cameron.
There had been five MacKenzie siblings, the children of old
Red Jacob, who had built Castle  Leoch. Jamie’ s mother , Ellen,
had bee n the eldest, Jocasta the youngest. Janet, the other
sister , had died, like Ellen, well before I met Jamie, but I had
known the two brothers, Colum and Dougal, quite well indeed,
and from  that knowledge, could n’ t help speculating as to what
this last MacKenzie of Leoch might be like.
T all, I thought, with a glance at Jamie, curled up peacefully
on the deck besi de me. T all, and  maybe red-haired. They were
all tall—even Colum, victim of a crippling degenerative
disease, had been tall to begin w ith—fair skinned V ikings, the
lot of them, with a ruddy blaze to their coloring that
shimmered from Jamie’ s fiery red through his uncle Dougal’ s
deep russet. Only Colum had been truly dark.
Remembering C olum and Dougal, I felt a sudden stir of
unease. Colum had died before Culloden, killed by his disease.
Dougal had died on the eve of the battle—killed by Jamie. It
had been a matt er of self-defense— my  self, in fact—and onlyone of so many deaths in that bloody April. Still, I did wonder
whether Jamie had given any thought as to what he might say ,
when th e greetings were past at River Run, and the casual
family chat got round to “Oh, and when did you last see So-
and-so?”
Jamie si ghed an d stretched in h is sleep. He could—and did
—sleep well on any surface, accustomed as he had been to
sleeping in conditions that ranged from wet heather to musty
caves to the cold stone floors of prison cells. I supposed the
wooden decking under us must be thoroughly comfortable by
contrast.
I was neither so elastic nor so hardened, myself, but
gradually weariness overwhelmed me, and even the prick of
curiosity about the future was unable to keep me awake.
I wo ke to confu sion. It was still dark, and there was noise
all arou nd, shouting and barking, and the deck beneath me
trembled with the vibration of stamping feet. I jerked upright,
half thin king myself aboard a sailing ship, convinced that we
had been boarded by pirates.
Then my  mind cleared, along w ith my foggy vision, and I
discovered that  we had  bee n boarded by pirates. Strange
voices shouted oaths and orders , and booted feet were heavy
on the deck. Jamie was gone.
I sc rabbled onto my hands an d feet, taking no heed for
clothes or anything else. It was  near dawn; the sky was dark,
but ligh t enough that the cabi n showed as a darker blotch
against it. As I struggled upright , clinging to the cabin roof for
support, I was nearly knocked flat by flying bodies hurling
themselves across it.
There was a confused blur of fur and white faces, a shout
and a shot and a terrible thud, and Ian was crouching ashen on
the deck , over Rollo’ s heaving form. A strange man, hatless
and disheveled, pushed himself to his feet.
“Damn! He nearly got me!” Un hinged by the near miss, the
robber ’ s hand trembled as he fumbled with the spare pistol athis belt. He pointed it at the dog, face drawing down in an ugly
squint.
“T ake that, arse-bite!”
A taller man appeared from nowhere, his hand knocking
down the pistol before the flint could strike.
“Don’ t w aste th e shot, fool.” H e gestured to T roklus and
Captain Freema n—the latter volubly incensed—being herded
toward me. “How d’you mean  to hold them with an empty
gun?”
The shorter man cast an evil look at Rollo, but swung his
pistol to bear on Freeman’ s midrif f instead.
Rollo was making an odd noise,  a low growling mixed with
whimpers of pain, and I could see a wet, dark stain on the
boards under his twitching body . Ian bent low over him, hands
stroking his head helplessly . H e looked up, and tears shone
wet on his cheeks.
“Help me, Auntie,” he said. “Please help!”
I moved impulsively , and the tall man stepped forward,
thrusting out an arm to stop me.
“I want to help the dog,” I said.
“What?”  said the short robber , in tones of outrage.
The tall  man was masked—they all were, I realized, my
eyes adjusting to the growing half-light. How many were
there? It  was impossible to tell under the mask, but I had the
distinct impression that the tall man was smiling. He didn’ t
answer , but gave a short jerk of his pistol, giving me leave.
“Hullo, old boy ,” I said under my breath, dropping to my
knees n ext to the dog. “Don’ t  bite, there’ s a good doggie.
Where is he hurt, Ian, do you know?”
Ian shook his head, snif fing back the tears.
“It’ s under him; I can’ t get him to turn over .”I wasn’ t  about to try to heave t he dog’ s huge carcass over
either . I  felt quickly for a puls e in the neck, but my fingers
sank into Rollo’ s thick ruf f, prodding uselessly . Seized by
inspiration, I instead picked up a front leg and felt up its
length, getting my fingers into the hollow where the leg met
the body .
Sure enough, there it was; a steady pulse, throbbing
reassuringly under my fingers. I began by habit to count, but
quickly abandoned the ef fort, as I had no idea what a dog’ s
normal pulse rate should be.  It was  s teady ,  though ; no
fluttering, no arrhythmia, no weakness. That was a very good
sign.
Another was that Rollo hadn’ t lost consciousness; the great
leg I held tucke d under my elbow had the tension of coiled
spring, n ot the limp dangle of shock. The dog made a long,
high-pitched noi se, halfway between a whine and a howl, and
began to scrabble with his claw s, pulling his leg out of my
grasp in an ef fort to right himself.
“I don’ t think it’ s very bad, Ian,” I said in relief. “Look, he’ s
turning over .”
Rollo stood up, swaying. He shook his head violently ,
shaggy c oat twit ching from head to tail, and a shower of blood
drops flew over the deck with a sound like pattering rain. The
big yello w eyes  fixed on the short man with a look that was
clear to the meanest intelligence.
“Here! Y ou stop  him, or I swear I’ll shoot him dead!” Panic
and sinc erity rang out in the robber ’ s voice, as the muzzle of
the pistol drifted uncertainly between the little group of
prisoners and Rollo’ s lip-curled snarl.
Ian, who  had been frantically undoing his shirt, whipped the
garment of f and over Rollo’ s head, temporarily blinding the
dog, who shook his head madly , making growling noises
inside the restraint. Blood stained the yellow linen—I could
see n ow , though, that it came fro m a shallow gash in the dog’ s
shoulder; evidently , the bullet had only grazed him.Ian hung on gr imly , forcing Rollo back on his haunches,
muttering orders to the dog’ s swaddled head.
“How many aboard?” The taller man’ s sharp eyes flicked
toward Captain Freeman, whose mouth was pressed so tightly
together , it looked no more than a purse seam in the gray fur of
his face, then toward me.
I kn ew him; knew the voice. The knowledge must have
shown in  my face, for he paused  for a moment, then jerked his
head and let the masking kerchief fall from his face.
“How many?” Stephen Bonnet asked again.
“Six,” I said. There was no reaso n not to answer; I could see
Fer gus on the sh ore, hands raised as a third pirate herded him
at gunpo int toward the boat; Jam ie had materialized out of the
darkness beside me, looking grim.
“Mr . Fra ser ,” Bonnet said pleasantly , at sight of him. “A
pleasure to be re newing our acquaintance. But did ye not have
another companion, sir? The one-armed gentleman?”
“Not here,” Jamie replied shortly .
“I’ll have a loo k,” the short robber muttered, turning, but
Bonnet stopped him with a gesture.
“Ah, now , and would ye be  doubting the word of a
gentleman like Mr . Fraser? No, you’ll be after guarding these
fine folk  here, Roberts; I’ll be ha ving the look around.” W ith a
nod to his companion, he vanished.
Looking after Rollo had distracted me momentarily from
the commotion going on elsew here on the boat. Sounds of
breakage came from inside the cabin, and I leapt to my feet,
reminded of my medicine box.
“Here! Where you going? Stop! I’ll shoot!” The robber ’ s
voice he ld a desperate note, but an uncertain one, as well. I
didn’ t st op to look at him, but dived into the cabin, cannoning
into a fourth robber , who was i ndeed rummaging through my
medicine chest.I s taggered back from the colli sion, then clutched his arm,
with a cry of ou trage. He had b een carelessly opening boxes
and bott les, shaking out the con tents, and tossing them on the
floor; a litter of bottles, many of them broken, lay amid the
scattered remnants of Dr . Rawlings’ s selection of medicines.
“Don’ t you dar e  to uch those!” I said, and sna tching the
nearest v ial from  the chest, I popped out the cork and flung the
contents in his face.
Like most of Rawlings’ s mixtures, it contained a high
proportion of alcohol. He gaspe d as the liquid hit, and reeled
backward, eyes streaming.
I pre ssed my ad vantage by seizing a stone ale bottle from
the wreckage and hitting him on  the head with it. It hit with a
satisfying thunk!  b ut I hadn’ t hit him quite hard enough; he
staggered but stayed upright, lurching as he grabbed at me.
I d rew back my  arm for anothe r swing, but my wrist was
seized from behind by a grip like iron.
“Beggin’ your pardon, Mrs. Fraser dear ,” said a polite,
familiar Irish voice. “But I really cannot allow ye to crack his
head. It’ s not very ornamental, sure, but he needs it to hold up
his hat.”
“Frigging bitch ! She hit  m e!” The ma n I had hit was
clutching his head, his features screwed up in pain.
Bonnet hauled me out onto t he deck, my arm twisted
painfully behind  my back. It was nearly light by now; the river
glowed like flat silver . I stared hard at our assailants; I meant
to know them again, if I saw them, masks or no masks.
Unfortunately , the improved ligh t allowed the robbers better
vision as  well. The man I had h it, who seemed to be bearing a
distinct grudge, seized my hand and wrenched at my ring.
“Here, let’ s have that!”
I ya nked my ha nd away and made to slap him, but was
stopped by a me aningful cough from Bonnet, who had steppedclose to Ian and was holding his  pistol an inch from the boy’ s
left ear .
“Best hand them over , Mrs. Fra ser ,” he said politely . “I fear
Mr . Roberts requires some compensation for the damage ye’ve
caused him.”
I t wisted  my gold ring of f, hands trembling both with fear
and rage . The silver one was har der; it stuck on my knuckle as
though r eluctant to part from m e. Both rings were damp and
slippery with sweat, the metal warmer than my suddenly
chilled fingers.
“Give ‘e m up.” The man poked  me roughly in the shoulder ,
then tur ned up a broad, grubby  palm for the rings. I reached
toward him, reluctantly , rings cupped in my hand—and then,
with an impulse I didn’ t stop to  examine, clapped my hand to
my mouth instead.
My head hit the cabin wall with a thud as the man knocked
me backward. His callused fingers jabbed my cheeks and
poked in to my mouth, probing roughly in search of the rings. I
twisted a nd gulped hard, mouth filling with saliva and a silver
taste that might have been either metal or blood.
I b it down and he jerked back  with a cry; one ring must
have flo wn out of my mouth, fo r I heard a faint, metallic ping
somewhere, and then I gagged and choked, the second ring
sliding into my gullet, hard and round.
“Bitch! I’ll slit your friggin’ throat! Y ou’ll go to hell
without your rings, you cheating whore!” I saw the man’ s face,
contorted in rage, and the sud den glitter of a knife blade
drawn. Then something hit me h ard and knocked me over , and
I fou nd myself crushed to the deck, flattened under Jamie’ s
body .
I was too stunne d to move, thou gh I couldn’ t have moved in
any case ; Jamie ’ s chest was pre ssing on the back of my head,
squashing my face into the deck. There was a lot of shouting
and conf usion, muf fled by the f olds of damp linen around my
head. There was a soft thunk!  and I felt Jamie jerk and grunt.Oh, God, they’ve stabbed him!  I th ought, in a n agony of
terror . Another thump  and a louder grunt, though, indicated
only a kick in the ribs. Jamie did n’ t move; just pressed himself
harder against the deck, flattening me like the filling of a
sandwich.
“Leave o f f! Rob erts! I said leav e him!” Bonnet’ s voice rang
out in tones of authority , sh arp enough to penetrate the
muf fling cloth.
“But she—” Roberts began, but his querulous whine was
stopped abruptly with a sharp, meaty smack.
“Raise yourself,  Mr . Fraser . Y our wife is safe—not that she
deserves to be.” Bonnet’ s husky baritone held mingled tones
of amusement and irritation.
Jamie’ s weight lifted slowly of f me, and I sat up, feeling
dizzy an d mildly sick from th e blow on the head. Stephen
Bonnet stood looking down at me, examining me with faint
distaste, as though I were a man gy deerhide he’d been of fered
for sale.  Next to him, Roberts glared malevolently , dabbing at
a smear of blood at his hairline.
Bonnet blinked finally , and switched his gaze to Jamie, who
had regained his feet.
“A fool ish woman,” Bonnet said dispassionately , “but I
suppose you don’ t mind that.” He nodded, a faint smile
showing. “I am obliged for the opportunity to repay my debt to
ye, sir . A life for a life, as the Good Book says.”
“Repay us?” Ian said angrily . “ After what we’ve done for
ye, y e’ll rob and  spoil us, lay violent hands upon my aunt and
my dog, and then ye’ll ha’ the gall to speak of repayment?”
Bonnet’ s pale eyes fixed on Ian ’ s face; they were green, the
color of peeled grapes. He had a  deep dimple in one cheek, as
though God had pressed a thum b there in his making, but the
eyes were cold as river water at dawn.
“Why , were ye never after learning your Scripture, lad?”
Bonnet s hook his head reprovingly , with a click of the tongue.“A virtu ous woman is prized ab ove rubies; her price is greater
than pearls.”
He opened his hand, still smiling, and the lantern light
glittered of f three gems: emerald, sapphire, and the dark fire of
a black diamond.
“I’m sure Mr . F raser would agree, would ye not, sir?” He
slipped the hand into his coat, then brought it out empty .
“And after all,” he said, cold eyes swiveling once more
toward Ian, “there are repayments of dif ferent kinds.” He
smiled, not very pleasantly . “Though I should not suppose you
can be old enou gh to know that yet. Be glad I’ve no mind to
give ye a lesson.”
He turned away , beckoning to his comrades.
“W e have what we came for ,” h e said abruptly . “Come.” He
stepped up onto the rail and jumped, landing with a grunt on
the m uddy riverbank. His henchmen followed, Roberts casting
an evil look a t me before splashing awkwardly into the
shallows and ashore.
The fou r men disappeared at once into the brush, and I
heard the high-pitched greeting whinny of a horse, somewhere
in the darkness. Aboard, all was silence.
The sky  was the color of charcoal, and thunder grumbled
faintly in the distance, sheet ligh tning flickering just above the
far horizon.
“Bastards.”
Captain Freeman spat in valediction over the side, and
turned to his mate.
“Fetch the poles, you, T roklus,” he said, and shambled
toward the tiller , hitching his breeks upward as he went.
Slowly , the others stirred and c ame to life. Fer gus, with a
glance at Jamie, lit the lantern and then disappeared into the
cabin, w here I heard him beginning to set things to rights. Ian
sat huddled on the deck, his dark head bent over Rollo as he
dabbed at the dog’ s neck with his wadded shirt.I didn’ t want to look at Jamie. I rolled onto my hands and
knees and crawled slowly over to Y oung Ian. Rollo watched
me, yellow eyes wary , but made no objection to my presence.
“How is he?” I said, rather hoarsely . I could feel the ring in
my thro at, an uncomfortable obstruction, and swallowed
heavily several times.
Y oung I an looke d up at once; his face was white and set, but
his eyes were alert.
“He’ s al l right, I think,” he said softly . “Auntie—are ye all
right? Y e’re no hurt, are ye?”
“No,” I said, and tried to smile reassuringly . “I’m fine.”
There w as a sore spot on the bac k of my skull and my ears still
rang slightly; the yellow halo  of light around the lantern
seemed to oscillate, to swell a nd shrink in rhythm with the
beating of my heart. One cheek was scraped, I had a bruised
elbow a nd a lar ge splinter in o ne hand, but I seemed to be
fundamentally sound, physically . Otherwise, I had my doubts.
I did n’ t look aro und at Jamie, so me six feet behind me, but I
could fe el his presence, ominous as a thundercloud. Ian, who
plainly could  see  him over my shoulder ,  looked faintly
apprehensive.
There was a slight creaking  of the deck, and Ian’ s
expression eased. I heard Jamie’ s voice inside the cabin,
outwardly casual as he asked Fe r gus a question, then it faded,
lost in the sounds of bumping an d shuf fling as the men righted
furniture and repiled the scatter ed goods. I let my breath out
slowly .
“Dinna fash, Auntie,” Ian said, in an attempt at comfort.
“Uncle Jamie’ s no the sort to lay hands on ye, I dinna think.”
I wasn’ t at all sure of that, given  the vibrations coming from
Jamie’ s direction, but I hoped he was right.
“Is he terribly angry , do you think?” I asked in a low voice.
Ian shrugged uneasily .“W ell, last time I saw him look at me  t hat  way , he took me
back o’ the house and knocked m e flat. He wouldna serve you
that way , though, I’m sure,” he added hastily .
“I d on’ t suppose so,” I said, a little bleakly . I wasn’ t sure I
wouldn’ t prefer it if he did.
“It’ s no verra nice to get the rough side o’ Uncle Jamie’ s
tongue, either ,” Ian said, shaking his head sympathetically .
“I’d rather a thrashing, myself.”
I gave Ian a quelling look and leaned over the dog.
“Suf ficient to the day is the ev il thereof. Has the bleeding
stopped?”
It h ad; disregarding the blood-matted fur , there was
surprisingly little damage; no more than a deep nick in the skin
and mu scle near the shoulder . Rollo flattened his ears and
showed his teeth as I examine d him, but made no audible
protest.
“Good dog,” I murmured. Had I any way to numb the skin, I
would h ave stitched the wound, but we would have to do
without such niceties. “He shou ld have a little ointment there,
to keep the flies out.”
“I’ll get it, Auntie; I ken where your wee box is.” Ian gently
edged R ollo’ s no se of f his knee and got to his feet. “It’ll be the
green stuf f ye put on Fer gus’ s toe?” At my nod, he disappeared
into the cabin, le aving me to deal with my quivering stomach,
sore head, and congested throat. I swallowed several times, but
with no great re sult. I touched my throat gingerly , wondering
which ring I still had.
Eutroclus came round the corn er of the cabin, carrying a
long thick pole of white wood, deeply stained at one end, the
marks te stifying to the frequent necessity of its use. Stabbing
the p ole firmly down of f the side, he leaned his weight against
it, heaving with a long, sustained ef fort.
I jum ped, as Jam ie came out of the shadows, a similar pole
in his hand. I hadn’ t heard h im, above the miscellaneousthumpings and shouts. He didn’ t look at me, but shed his shirt,
and at the deckhand’ s indication, stabbed down his pole.
On the fourth try , I felt the vibration of the hull, a small
judder as something shifted. Encouraged, Jamie and the hand
shoved harder , and all of sudden, the hull slid free, with a
muted bwong!  of reson ant woo d that made Ro llo lift his head
with a startled W uff!
Eutroclus nodded to Jamie, face beaming under a shiny
layer of sweat, and took the p ole from him. Jamie nodded
back, sm iling, and picking up h is shirt from the deck, turned
toward me.
I sti f fened, and Rollo twitched  his ears to full alert, but
Jamie showed no immediate disposition either to berate me or
to toss me overboard. Instead, he leaned down, frowning as he
peered at me in the wavering lantern light.
“How d’ye feel, Sassenach? I canna tell if you’re really
green, or is it only the light.”
“I’m all right. A bit shaky , perhaps.” More than a bit; my
hands were still clammy , and I knew my trembling knees
wouldn’ t hold me if I tried to stand. I swallowed hard,
coughed, and thumped myself on the chest.
“It’ s pro bably my imagination, but it feels like the ring is
caught in my throat.”
He squinted thoughtfully at me,  then turned to Fer gus, who
had appeared from the cabin and was hovering nearby .
“Ask th e captain might I see  his pipe for a moment,
Fer gus.” He turned away , pulling his shirt over his head, and
disappeared aft himself, returning moments later with a cup of
water .
I reached gratefully for it, but he held it out of my reach.
“Not just yet, S assenach,” he said. “Got it? A ye, thanks,
Fer gus. Fetch an empty bucke t, now , will ye?” T aking the
filthy pipe from a puzzled Fer gus, he inserted his thumb intothe stain ed bowl and began to  scrape at the burnt, gummy
residue that lined it.
T urning the pipe upside down, he tapped it over the cup of
water , causing a small showe r of brown crusts and moist
crumbs of half-burnt tobacco, which he stirred into the water
with his blackened thumb. Finished with these preparations, he
looked u p at me over the rim of  the cup in a distinctly sinister
fashion.
“No,” I said. “Oh, no.”
“Oh, yes,” he said. “Come along, Sassenach; it’ll cure what
ails ye.”
“I’ll just…wait, ” I said. I folded my arms across my chest.
“Thanks anyway .”
Fer gus had by this time reappeared with the bucket,
eyebrows raised high. Jamie took it from him and plunked it
on the deck next to me.
“I’ve do ne it that way , Sassenach,” he informed me, “and
it’ s a good deal messier than y e might think. It’ s also not a
pleasant thing to do on a boat, in close company , aye?” He put
a ha nd o n the back of my head and pressed the cup against my
lower lip. “This will be quick. Come on, now; a wee sip is all.”
I pressed my lips tightly together; the smell from the cup
was eno ugh to make my stoma ch turn over , combining as it
did the stale ree k of tobacco, the sight of the noisome brown
surface of the liquid, crusts swi mming below the surface, and
the mem ory of Captain Freeman’ s blobs of brown-tinged
spittle sliding down the deck.
Jamie didn’ t bother with ar gument or persuasion. He simply
let g o of  my head, pinched my nose shut, and when I opened
my mouth to breathe, tipped in  the foul-smelling contents of
the cup.
“Mmmf f f!”
“Swallow ,” he said, clapping a hand tightly across my
mouth and ignoring both my frenzied squirming and themuf fled sounds of protest I was making. He was a lot stronger
than I was, and  he didn’ t mean to let go. It was swallow or
strangle.
I swallowed.
“Good as new .” Jamie finished polishing the silver ring on his
shirttail and held it up, admiring it in the glow of the lantern.
“That is somewhat better than can be said of me,” I replied
coldly . I lay in a crumpled heap on the deck, which in spite of
the placid current, seemed still to be heaving very slightly
under me. “Y ou are a grade-A, double-dyed, sadistic fucking
bastard, Jamie Fraser!”
He bent over me and smoothed the damp hair of f my face.
“I expec t so. If ye feel well enough to call me names,
Sassenach, you’ll do. Rest a bit,  aye?” He kissed me gently on
the forehead and sat back.
Excitement over and order restored to the ravaged decks,
the o ther men ha d gone back to the cabin to restore themselves
with the  aid of a bottle of applejack that Captain Freeman had
contrived to save from the pirates by dropping it into the water
barrel. A  small cup of this beverage rested on the deck near
my head; I was  still too queasy to countenance swallowing
anything, but the warm, fruity smell was mildly comforting.
W e were under sail; everyone was eager to get away , as
though some danger still lingere d over the place of the attack.
W e were moving faster , now; th e usual small cloud of insects
that hov ered near the lanterns had dispersed, reduced to no
more than a few  lacewings resting on the beam above, their
delicate green bodies casting tin y streaks of shadow . Inside the
cabin, th ere was a small burst of laughter , and an answering
growl from Rollo on the side deck—things were returning to
normal.
A sma ll, welcome breeze played across the deck,
evaporating the clammy sweat on my face and lifting the ends
of Jamie’ s hair , drifting them across his face. I could see thesmall vertical line between his brows and the tilt of his head
that indicated deep thought.
Little wonder if he was thinking . In one stroke, we had gone
from riches—p otential riches, at least—to rags, our well-
equipped expedition reduced to  a sack of beans and a used
medicine chest.  So much for his desire not to appear as
beggars at Jocasta Cameron’ s door—we were little more than
that now .
My throat ached for him, pity replacing irritation. Beyond
the ques tion of his immediate pr ide, there was now a terrifying
void in that unknown territory marked “The Future.” The
future had been well open to q uestion before, but the sharp
edges o f all such questions had been buf fered by the
comforting knowledge that we would have money to help
accomplish our aims—whatever those turned out to be.
Even ou r penurious trip north had felt like an adventure,
with the certain knowledge that we possessed a fortune,
whether it was spendable or not.  I had never before considered
myself a person who placed much value on money , but having
the certa inty of  security ripped away in this violent fashion
had given me a sudden and quite unexpected attack of vertigo,
as thoug h I were falling down a  long, dark well, powerless to
stop.
What had it done to Jamie, who felt not only his danger and
mine but the cr ushing responsibility of so many other lives?
Ian, Fer gus, Marsali, Duncan, the inhabitants of Lallybroch—
even that bloody nuisance Laog haire. I wasn’ t sure whether to
laugh or  cry , thinking of the money Jamie had sent her; the
vengeful creatur e was a good deal better of f at present than we
were.
At th e thought of vengeance, I felt a new stab that displaced
all lesser fears. While Jamie was not markedly vengeful—for a
Scot—no Highlander would su f fer a loss such as this with
silent resignation; a loss not only of fortune but of honor . What
might he feel compelled to do about it?Jamie stared fixedly into the dark water , his mouth set; was
he seeing once again the graveyard where, swayed by
Duncan’ s intoxi cated sentimen tality , he had agreed to help
Bonnet escape?
It be latedly occurred to me that  the financial aspects of the
disaster likely had not yet entered Jamie’ s mind—he was
occupied in more bitter reflecti on; it was he who had helped
Bonnet escape the hangman’ s ro pe, and set him free to prey on
the innocent. How many beside s us would suf fer because of
that?
“Y ou’re not to blame,” I said, touching his knee.
“Who el se?” he  said quietly , no t looking at me. “I kent the
man for  what he was. I could have left him to the fate he’d
earned—but I did not. I was a fool.”
“Y ou were kind. It’ s not the same thing.”
“Near enough.”
He b reathed in d eeply; the air was freshening with the scent
of ozon e; the rain was near . He reached for the cup of
applejack and drank, then looked at me for the first time,
holding up the cup inquiringly .
“Y es, thanks.” I struggled to si t up, but Jamie took me by
the shou lders and lifted me to lean against him. He held the
cup for me to dr ink, the blood-warm liquid sliding soft across
my tong ue, then taking fire as it slid down my throat, burning
away the traces of sickness and tobacco, leaving in their place
rum’ s lingering taste of burning sugarcane.
“Better?”
I no dded, and h eld up my right  hand. He slid the ring onto
my finge r , the metal warm from  his hand. Then, folding down
my fingers, he squeezed my fist hard in his own and held it,
tight.
“Had he been following us since Charleston?” I wondered
aloud.Jamie shook his head. His hair w as still loose, heavy waves
falling forward to hide his face.
“I di nna think so . If he’d kent we had the jewels, he would
have set upon u s on the road before we reached W ilmington.
No, I expect he learned it from one of Lillington’ s servants. I
thought we’d be safe enough, for we’d be away to Cross Creek
before anyone heard of the gems. Someone talked, though—a
footman; perhaps the sempstress who sewed your gown.”
His face  was outwardly calm, b ut it always was, when he
was hiding strong emotions. A sudden gust of hot wind shot
sideways across the deck; the rain was getting closer . It
whipped the loose ends of his hair across his cheek, and he
wiped them back, running his fingers through the thick mass.
“I’m sorry for your other ring,” he said, after a moment.
“Oh. It’ s—” I s tarted to say “I t’ s all right,” but the words
stuck in my throat, choked by the sudden realization of loss.
I h ad worn that  gold ring for nearly thirty years; token of
vows taken, forsaken, renewed,  and at last absolved. A token
of marri age, of family; of a lar g e part of my life. And the last
trace of Frank—whom, in spite of everything, I had loved.
Jamie didn’ t say anything, but he took my left hand in his
own and held it, lightly stroking my knuckles with his thumb. I
didn’ t speak either . I sighed dee ply and turned my face toward
the stern ; the trees along the shore were shivering in a rising
wind of anticipation, leaves rustling loudly enough to drown
the sound of the vessel’ s passage.
A sm all drop str uck my cheek, but I didn’ t move. My hand
lay l imp and wh ite in his, looking unaccustomedly frail; it was
something of a shock to see it that way .
I wa s us ed to paying a great de al of attention to my hands,
one way and a nother . They were my tools, my channel of
touch, m ingling the delicacy and strength by which I healed.
They had a certa in beauty , which I admired in a detached sort
of way , but it w as the beauty of  strength and competence, the
assurance of power that made its form admirable.It was the same hand now , p ale and long-fingered, the
knuckles slightly bony—oddly bare without my ring, but
recognizably my hand. Y et it lay in a hand so much lar ger and
rougher that it seemed small, and fragile by comparison.
His other hand squeezed tighte r , pressing the metal of the
silver ring into my flesh, remin ding me of what remained. I
lifted his fist an d pressed it har d against my heart in answer .
The rain began to fall, in lar ge, wet drops, but neither of us
moved.
It ca me in a rush, dropping a veil over boat and shore,
pattering noisily  on leaves an d deck and water , lending a
temporary illusion of concealment. It washed cool and soft
across my skin, momentary bal m on the wounds of fear and
loss.
I felt at once ho rribly vulnerable and yet completely safe.
But then—I had always felt that way with Jamie Fraser .P A R T  F O U R
R i v e r  R u n1 0
J O C A S T A
Cross Creek, North Carolina, June 1767
R iver Run  stood by the edge of the Cape Fear , just above the
confluence that gave Cross Creek its name. Cross Creek itself
was good-sized, with a busy p ublic wharf and several lar ge
warehouses linin g the water ’ s edge. As the Sally Ann  made her
way slowly through the shipping lane, a strong, resinous smell
hung over town and river , trapped by the hot, sticky air .
“Jesus, i t’ s like breathin’ turpentine,” Ian wheezed as a fresh
wave of the stultifying reek washed over us.
“Y ou is  breathin’ turpentine, man.” Eutroclus’ s rare smile
flashed white and disappeared. He nodded toward a bar ge
tethered to a piling by one of the wharfs. It was stacked with
barrels, some of which showed a thick black ooze through split
seams. Other , lar ger barrels bore the brandmarks of their
owners, with a lar ge “T” burned into the pinewood below .
” ‘At’ s right,” C aptain Freeman agreed. He squinted in the
bright sunlight, waving one hand slowly in front of his nose, as
though this might dispel the sti nk. “This time o’ year ’ s when
the pitch-bilers  come down f rom the backcountry . Pitch,
turpentine, tar— bring it all dow n by bar ge t’ W ilmington, then
send it on south to the shipyards at Charleston.”
“I shouldna think it’ s all  turpentine,” Jamie said. He
mopped the back of his neck w ith a handkerchief and nodded
toward t he lar gest of the ware-h ouses, its door flanked by red-
coated soldiers. “Smell it, Sassenach?”
I inhaled, cautiously . There was  something else in the air
here; a hot, familiar scent.
“Rum?” I said.
“And br andywine. And a bit of port, as well.” Jamie’ s long
nose twitched, sensitive as a m ongoose’ s. I looked at him in
amusement.“Y ou haven’ t lost it, have you? ” T wenty years before, he
had man aged his cousin Jared’ s wine business in Paris, and his
nose and palate had been the awe of the winery tasting rooms.
He grinned.
“Oh, I expect I c ould still tell M oselle from horse piss, if ye
held it right und er my nose. But  telling rum from turpentine is
no great feat, is it?”
Ian drew a huge lungful of air and let it out, coughing.
“It all smells the same to me,” he said, shaking his head.
“Good,” said Jamie, “I’ll give ye turpentine next time I
stand ye a drink. It’ll be a good deal cheaper .”
“T urpentine’ s just about what I c ould af ford now ,” he added
under cover of the laughter this remark caused. He
straightened, bru shing down the skirts of his coat. “W e’ll be
there soon. Do I look a terrible beggar , Sassenach?”
Seen with the sun glowing on his neatly ribboned hair , his
darkened profile coin-stamped against the light, I privately
thought he looked dazzling, but I had caught the faint tone of
anxiety in his v oice, and knew well enough what he meant.
Penniless he might be, but he didn’ t mean to look it.
I w as well awar e that the notion of appearing at his aunt’ s
door as a poo r relation come a-begging stung his pride
considerably . The fact that he h ad been forced into precisely
that role didn’ t make it any easier to bear .
I l ooked him ov er carefully . The coat and waistcoat were
not spectacular ,  but quite acc eptable, courtesy of Cousin
Edwin; a quiet gray broadclot h with a good hand and an
excellent fit, buttons not silver , but not of wood or bone either
—a sober pewter , like a prosperous Quaker .
Not that the rest of him bore th e slightest resemblance to a
Quaker , I thought. The linen sh irt was rather grubby , but as
long as he kept his coat on, no one would notice, and the
missing button on the waistcoat was hidden by the gracefulfall of his lace jabot, the sole extravagance he had permitted
himself in the way of wardrobe.
The stoc kings were all right; pal e blue silk, no visible holes.
The white linen breeches were tight, but not—not quite—
indecent, and reasonably clean.
The shoe s were the only real flaw in his ensemble; there had
been no  time to have any mad e. His were sound, and I had
done my best to hide the scuf f-marks with a mixture of soot
and dripping, but they were clea rly a farmer ’ s footwear , not a
gentleman’ s; th ick-soled, made  of rough leather , and with
buckles of lowly horn. Still, I doubted that his aunt Jocasta
would be looking at his feet first thing.
I stood on tiptoe to straighten his jabot, and brushed a
floating down-feather of f his shoulder .
“It will be all right,” I whispered back, smiling up at him.
“Y ou’re beautiful.”
He looked startled; then the expression of grim aloofness
relaxed into a smile.
” Y ou’r e  beautif ul, Sassenach.” He leaned over and kissed
me on the fore head. “Y ou’re flushed as a wee apple; verra
bonny .” He straightened up, glanced at Ian, and sighed.
“As for Ian, perhaps I can pass him of f as a bondsman I’ve
taken on to be swineherd.”
Ian w as one of those people whose clothes, no matter what
their original quality , immediately look as though they had
been salvaged from a rubbish t ip. Half his hair had escaped
from its  green ribbon, and one bony elbow protruded from a
rip in his new sh irt, whose cuf fs were already noticeably gray
round the wrists.
“Captain Freeman says we’ll be there in no time!” he
exclaimed, eyes  shining with excitement as he leaned over the
side, peering upriver in orde r to be first to sight our
destination. “What d’ye think we’ll get for supper?”
Jamie surveyed his nephew with a marked lack of favor .“I expect you’ll get table scraps, wi’ the dogs. Do ye not
own a coat, Ian? Or a comb?”
“Oh, aye,” Ian said, glancing round vaguely , as though
expecting one of these objects to materialize in front of him.
“I’ve a coat here. Somewhere. I think.”
The coat was finally located under one of the benches, and
extracted with some dif ficulty from the possession of Rollo,
who had made a comfortable bed of it. After a quick brush to
remove at least some of the dog hairs from the garment, Ian
was forcibly inserted into it, and sat firmly down to have his
hair combed and plaited whi le Jamie gave him a quick
refresher course in manners, this consisting solely of the
advice to keep his mouth shut as much as possible.
Ian nodded amiably .
“W ill ye tell Great-auntie Jocasta about the pirates yourself,
then?” he inquired.
Jamie glanced briefly at Captain Freeman’ s scrawny back. It
was futi le to expect that such a story would not be told in
every ta vern in Cross Creek, as soon as they had left us. It
would b e a matter of days—hours perhaps—before it spread to
River Run plantation.
“A ye, I’ll tell her ,” he said. “But not just on the instant, Ian.
Let her get accustomed to us, first.”
The mooring for River Run was some distance above Cross
Creek, separate d from the noise and reek of the town by
several miles of tranquil tree-thick river . Having seen Jamie,
Ian, and Fer gus all rendered as handsome as water , comb, and
ribbons could make them, I retired to the cabin, changed out of
my grubby muslin, sponged myself hastily , and slipped into
the cream silk I had worn to dinner with the Governor .
The soft  fabric was light and cool against my skin. Perhaps
a bit more form al than was usual for afternoon, but it was
important to Jamie that we must look decent—especially now ,
after our encounter with the pirates—and my only alternativeswere the  filthy muslin or a clean but threadbare camlet gown
that had traveled with me from Geor gia.
There wasn’ t a g reat deal to be done with my hair; I gave it
a cursory stab with a comb, then tied it back of f my neck,
letting the ends curl up as they would. I needn’ t trouble about
jewelry , I thought ruefully , and rubbed my silver wedding ring
to make  it shine. I still avoide d looking at my left hand, so
nakedly bare; if I didn’ t look, I could still feel the imaginary
weight of the gold upon it.
By the time I em er ged from the cabin, the mooring was in
sight. By contrast to the ricke ty fittings of most plantation
moorings we had passed, River Run boasted a substantial and
well-built wooden dock. A small black boy was sitting on the
end of it, swing ing bare legs in boredom. When he saw the
Sally Ann’ s  approa ch, he leapt to his feet and tore of f,
presumably to announce our arrival.
Our homely craft bumped to a stop against the dock. From
the screen of t rees near the river , a brick walk swept up
through a broad array of formal lawns and gardens, splitting in
two to circle pai red marble statues that stood in their own beds
of flowe rs, then joining again and fanning out in a broad
piazza in front of an imposing two-storied house, colonnaded
and mul tichimneyed. At one side of the flower beds stood a
miniature building, made of white marble—a mausoleum of
some k ind, I thought. I revi sed my opinions as to the
suitability of the cream silk dr ess, and touched nervously at
my hair .
I found her at once, among the  people hurrying out of the
house and down the walk. I would have known her for a
MacKenzie, even if I hadn’ t known who she was. She had the
bold bones, the broad V iking cheekbones and high, smooth
brow of her brothers, Colum and Dougal. And like her
nephew , like her great-niece, she had the extraordinary height
that marked them all as descendants of one blood.
A head higher than the bev y of black servants who
surrounded her ,  she floated do wn the path from the house,hand on the arm of her butler , th ough a woman less in need of
support I had seldom seen.
She was  tall and she was quic k, with a firm step at odds
with the white of her hair . She m ight once have been as red as
Jamie; her hair still held a tinge of ruddiness, having gone that
rich soft white that redheads do , with the buttery patina of an
old gold spoon.
There w as a cry from one of the little boys in the vanguard,
and two  of them broke loose, galloping down the path toward
the mooring, where they circled  us, yapping like puppies. At
first I couldn’ t make out a wor d—it was only as Ian replied
jocularly to them that I realized they were shouting in Gaelic.
I did n’ t know whether Jamie ha d thought what to say or to
do upon this first meeting, but in the event, he simply stepped
forward, went up to Jocasta MacKenzie, and embraced her ,
saying, “Aunt—it’ s Jamie.”
It was only as he released her and stepped back that I saw
his face, with an expression I had never seen before;
something between eagerness, jo y , and awe. It occurred to me,
with a small jol t of shock, that Jocasta MacKenzie must look
very much like her elder sister—Jamie’ s mother .
I though t she might have his deep blue eyes, though I
couldn’ t tell; they were blurred as she laughed through her
tears, ho lding him by the slee ve, reaching up to touch his
cheek, to smooth nonexistent strands of hair from his face.
“Jamie!” she said, over and ov er . “Jamie, wee Jamie! Oh,
I’m glad ye’ve come, lad!” Sh e reached up once more, and
touched his hair , a look of amazement on her face.
“Blessed Bride,  but he’ s a giant! Y ou’ll be as tall as my
brother Dougal was, at least!”
The expression of happiness on his face faded slightly at
that, but he kept his smile, turning her with him so she faced
me.
“Auntie, may I present my wife? This is Claire.”She put out a ha nd at once, bea ming, and I took it between
my own , feeling a small pang of recognition at the long, strong
fingers; though her knuckles were slightly knobbed with age,
her skin was soft and the feel of her grip was unnervingly like
Brianna’ s.
“I am  so glad to meet ye, my dear ,” she said, and drew me
close to kiss my  cheek. The scent of mint and verbena wafted
strongly from her dress, and I felt oddly moved, as though I
had suddenly come under the protection of some beneficent
deity .
“So beautiful!” she said admir ingly , long fingers stroking
the sleeve of my dress.
“Thank you,” I said, but Ian and  Fer gus were coming up to
be i ntroduced in their turn. She greeted them both with
embraces and endearments, laughing as Fer gus kissed her
hand in his best French manner .
“Come,” she said, breaking awa y at last, and wiping at her
wet chee ks with  the back of a h and. “Do come in, my dearies,
and take  a dish of tea, and some food. Y e’ll be famished, no
doubt, a fter such  a journey . Ulys ses!” She turned, seeking, and
her butler stepped forward, bowing low .
“Madame,” he said to me, and “ Sir ,” to Jamie. “Everything
is ready , Miss J o,” he said soft ly to his mistress, and of fered
her his arm.
As they started up the brick wa lk, Fer gus turned to Ian and
bowed, mimicking the butler ’ s courtly manner , then of fered an
arm in mockery . Ian kicked him  neatly in the backside, and
walked up the path, head turning from side to side to take in
everything. His green ribbon had come undone, and was
dangling halfway down his back.
Jamie snorted at the horseplay , but smiled nonetheless.
“Madame?” He put out an arm to me, and I took it,
sweeping rather grandly up the path to the doors of River Run,
flung wide to greet us.The hou se was spacious and airy  inside, with high ceilings and
wide French doors in all the downstairs rooms. I caught a
glimpse of silver and crystal as we passed a lar ge formal
dining room, and thought that on the evidence, Hector
Cameron must have been a very successful planter indeed.
Jocasta l ed us to her private parlor , a smaller , more intimate
room no  less well furnished tha n the lar ger rooms, but which
sported homely touches among the gleam of polished furniture
and the glitter o f ornaments. A lar ge knitting basket full of
yarn bal ls sat on a small table of polished wood, beside a glass
vase spilling summer flowers and a small, ornate silver bell; a
spinning wheel turned slowly by itself in the breeze from the
open French doors.
The but ler escorted us into the room, saw his mistress
seated, then turned to a sideboar d that held a collection of jugs
and bottles.
“Y e’ll have a dram to celebrate your coming, Jamie?”
Jocasta waved a long, slim hand in the direction of the
sideboard. “I shouldna think ye’ll have tasted decent whisky
since ye left Scotland, aye?”
Jamie laughed, sitting down opposite her .
“Indeed not, Aunt. And how d’ye come by it here?”
She shrugged and smiled, looking complacent.
“Y our uncle had the luck to lay down a good stock, some
years ag one. He took half a shipload of wine and liquor in
trade for a warehouse of tobacco, meaning to sell it—but then
the Parliament passed an Act making it illegal for any but the
Crown t o sell any liquor stronger than ale in the Colonies, and
so we ended with two hundred bottles o’ the stuf f in the wine
cellar!”
She stretched out her hand toward the table by her chair , not
bothering to look. She didn’ t need to; the butler set down a
crystal tumbler softly , just whe re her fingers would touch it.
Her hand closed around it, and  she lifted it, passing it under
her nose and snif fing, eyes closed in sensual delight.“There’ s a good bit left of it ye t. A great deal more than I
can guzzle by myself, I’ll tell ye!” She opened her eyes and
smiled, lifting the tumbler toward us. “T o you, nephew , and
your dear wife—may ye find this house home! Slainte! ”
“Slainte mbar!”  Jamie answered, and we all drank.
It was  good whisky; smooth as buttered silk and heartening
as su nshine. I could feel it hit the pit of my stomach, take root,
and spread up my backbone.
It se emed to hav e a similar ef fe ct on Jamie; I could see the
slight frown between his brows ease, as his face relaxed.
“I shall have Ul ysses write this night, to tell your sister that
ye’ve come safe here,” Jocasta was saying. “She’ll have been
sair worrit for h er wee laddie, I’m sure, thinking of all the
misfortunes that might have beset ye along the way .”
Jamie set down his glass and cleared his throat, steeling
himself for the ordeal of confession.
“As to misfortune, Aunt, I am afraid I must tell ye…”
I loo ked away , not wanting to increase his discomfort by
watching as he explained concisely the dismal state of our
fortunes. Jocasta listened with close attention, uttering small
noises o f dismay at his accou nt of our meeting with the
pirates. “W icked, ah, wicked!” she exclaimed. “T o repay your
kindness in such fashion! The man should be hangit!”
“W ell, there’ s none to blame sav e myself, Aunt,” Jamie said
ruefully . “He would have been  han git, if not for me. And since
I did ken the man for a villain to start, I canna be much
surprised to see him commit villainy at the end.”
“Mmphm.” Jocasta drew herself up taller in her seat,
looking a bit over Jamie’ s left shoulder as she spoke.
“Be that as it may , nephew . I s aid ye must consider River
Run as your home; I did mean it. Y ou and yours are welcome
here. An d I am sure we shall contrive a way to mend your
fortunes.”“I th ank ye, Au nt,” Jamie murmured, but he didn’ t want to
meet her eyes, either . He looked down at the floor , and I could
see the hand aro und his whisky glass clenched tight enough to
leave the knuckles white.
The con versation fortunately mo ved on to talk of Jenny and
her family at Lallybroch, and Jamie’ s embarrassment eased a
bit. Din ner had been ordered; I could smell brief tantalizing
whif fs of roasting meat from the cookhouse, borne on the
evening breeze that wafted across the lawns and flower beds.
Fer gus got up and tactfully excused himself, while Ian
wandered around the room, picking things up and putting them
down. Rollo, bored with the indoors, snif fed his way
industriously along the doorsill, watched with open dislike by
the fastidious butler .
The house and all its furnish ings were simple but well
crafted, beautiful, and arranged with something more than just
taste. I realized what lay behind the elegant proportions and
graceful arrangements, when Ian stopped abruptly by a lar ge
painting on the wall.
“Auntie Jocasta!” he exclaimed, turning eagerly to face her .
“Did you paint this? It’ s got your name on it.”
I thought a sudden shadow crossed her face, but then she
smiled again.
“The view o’ th e mountains? A ye, I always loved the sight
of them. I’d g o with Hector , when he went up into the
backcountry to trade for hides. W e’d camp in the mountains,
and set up a gre at blaze of a bonfire, wi’ the servants keeping
it going day and night, as a sign al. And within a few days, the
red savages would come down through the forest, and sit by
the f ire to talk and to drink whi sky and trade—and I, I would
sit b y the hour wi’ my sketchbook and my charcoals, drawing
everything I could see.”
She turned, nodding toward the far end of the room.
“Go and  look at that one in the corner , laddie. See can ye
find the Indian I put in it, hiding in the trees.”Jocasta finished her whisky and set down her glass. The
butler of fered to refill it, but s he waved him away without
looking at him. He set down the decanter and vanished quietly
into the hall.
“A ye, I loved the sight o’ th e mountains,” Jocasta said
again, softly . “They’re none so black and barren as Scotland,
but the sun on the rocks and the mist in the trees did remind
me of Leoch, now and then.”
She shook her head then, and smiled a bit too brightly at
Jamie.
“But this has be en home for a long time now , nephew—and
I hope ye will consider it yours as well.”
W e had little o ther choice, but Jamie bobbed his head,
murmuring som ething dutifully appreciative in reply . He was
interrupted, though, by Rollo, who raised his head with a
startled W uff!
“What is  it, dog?” said Ian, com ing to stand by the big wolf-
dog. “D’ye smell something?” Rollo was whining, staring out
into the shadowy flower border and twitching his thick ruf f
with unease.
Jocasta turned her head toward the open door and snif fed
audibly , fine nostrils flaring.
“It’ s a skunk,” she said.
“A skun k!” Ian whirled to stare at her , appalled. “They
come so close to the house?”
Jamie had got u p in a hurry , and gone to peer out into the
evening.
“I dinna  see it yet,” he said. His  hand groped automatically
at his belt, but of course he wasn’ t wearing a dirk with his
good suit. He tu rned to Jocasta. “Have ye any weapons in the
house, Aunt?”
Jocasta’ s mouth hung open.
“A ye,” she said. “Plenty . But—”“Jamie,” I said. “A skunk isn’ t—”
Before either of us could fi nish, there was a sudden
disturbance amo ng the snapdragons in the herbaceous border ,
the tall stalks w aving back and forth. Rollo snarled, and the
hackles stood up on his neck.
“Rollo!” Ian glanced round for a makeshift weapon, seized
the pok er from the fireplace, and brandishing it above his
head, made for the door .
“W ait, Ian!” Jamie grabbed h is nephew’ s upraised arm.
“Look.” A wide grin spread across his face, and he pointed to
the border . The snapdragons parted, and a fine, fat skunk
strolled into view , handsomely striped in black and white, and
obviously feeling that all was right with his personal world.
” That’ s  a skunk?” Ian asked incredulously . “Why , that’ s no
but a  bittie wee stinkard like a p olecat!” He wrinkled his nose,
with a expression between amusement and disgust. “Phew!
And here I thought it was a dangerous huge beastie!”
The skunk’ s satisfied insouciance was too much for Rollo,
who pou nced forward, uttering a short, sharp bark. He feinted
to and fro on the  terrace, growling and making short lunges at
the skunk, who looked annoyed at the racket.
“Ian,” I said, ta king refuge behind Jamie. “Call of f your
dog. Skunks ar e  dangerous.”
“They are?” Jamie turned a look  of puzzlement on me. “But
what—”
“Polecats only stink,” I explained. “Skunks—Ian, no! Let it
alone, and come inside!” Ian, curious, had reached out and
prodded the skunk with his pok er . The skunk, of fended at this
unwarranted intimacy , stamped its feet and elevated its tail.
I heard the noise of a chair sliding back, and glanced behind
me. Jocasta had stood up and w as looking alarmed, but made
no move to come to the door .
“What is it?” s he said. “What are they doing?” T o my
surprise, she was staring into th e room, turning her head fromone side  to the o ther , as though t rying to locate someone in the
dark.
Suddenly , the truth dawned on m e: her hand on the butler ’ s
arm, her touching Jamie’ s face i n greeting, the glass put ready
for h er g rasp, an d the shadow o n her face when Ian talked of
her painting. Jocasta Cameron was blind.
A strang led cry and a piercing yelp jerked me back to more
pressing issues on the terrace.  A tidal wave of acrid scent
cascaded into the room, hit the f loor , and boiled up around me
like a mushroom cloud.
Choking and gasping, eyes watering from the reek, I groped
blindly for Jamie, who was making breathless remarks in
Gaelic. Above the cacophony of groaning and piteous yowling
outside, I barely heard the small ting!  of Jocasta’ s bell behind
me.
“Ulysses?” she said, sounding  resigned. “Y e’d best tell
Cook the dinner will be late.”
“It was luck that it’ s summer , at least,” Jocasta said at
breakfast next day . “Think if it h ad been winter and we had to
keep the doors closed!” She laughed, showing teeth in
surprisingly good condition for her age.
“Oh, aye,” Ian murmured. “Please, may I have more toast,
ma’am?”
He and Rollo ha d been first sou sed in the river , then rubbed
with tomatoes from the bur geoning vines that over grew the
necessary house out back. The odor -reducing properties of
these fru its work ed as well on skunk oil as on the lesser stinks
of h uman waste, but in neither c ase was the neutralizing ef fect
complete. Ian sat by himself at o ne end of the long table, next
to an open French door , but I saw the maid who brought his
toast to him wrin kle her nose un obtrusively as she set the plate
before him.
Perhaps inspired by Ian’ s proximity and a desire for open
air , Jocasta suggested that we might ride out to the turpentineworks in the forest above River Run.
“It’ s a day’ s jou rney there and back, but I think the weather
will keep fine.” She turned tow ard the open French window ,
where bees hummed over a herbaceous border of goldenrod
and phlox. “Hear them?” she said, turning her slightly of f-
kilter sm ile towa rd Jamie. “The bees do say it will be hot and
fair .”
“Y ou have keen ears, Madame Cameron,” Fer gus said
politely . “If I m ay be permitted to borrow a horse from your
stable, th ough, I  should prefer t o go into the town, myself.” I
knew he was dying to send word to Marsali in Jamaica; I had
helped h im to write a long letter the night before, describing
our adve ntures a nd safe arrival. Rather than wait for a slave to
take it with the w eek’ s mail, he would much rather post it with
his own hands.
“Indeed and ye may , Mr . Fer gus,” Jocasta said graciously .
She smiled round the table generally . “As I said, ye must all
consider River Run as ye would your own home.”
Jocasta plainly meant to accompany us on the ride; she
came down dressed in a habit of dark green muslin, the girl
named Phaedre coming behind, carrying a hat trimmed to
match with velvet ribbon. She paused in the hall, but instead of
putting on the hat at once, she stood while Phaedre tied a strip
of white linen firmly round her head, covering her eyes.
“I ca n see nothi ng but light,” she explained. “I canna make
out objects at all . Still, the light of the sun causes me pain, so I
must shi eld my eyes when ven turing out. Are you ready , my
dears?”
That answered some of my speculations concerning her
blindness, thou gh didn’ t entirely assuage them. Retinitis
pigmentosum? I wondered with interest, as I followed her
down the wide front hall. Or perhaps macular degeneration,
though glaucoma was perhaps the most likely possibility . Not
for t he first time —or the last, I was sure—my fingers curved
around the handle of an invisible ophthalmoscope, itching to
see what could not be seen with eyes alone.T o m y surprise, when we wen t out to the stable block, a
mare wa s stand ing ready saddled for Jocasta, rather than the
carriage I had ex pected. The gift of charming horses ran strong
in the MacKenzie line; the mare lifted her head and whickered
at sight of her mistress, and Jocasta went to the horse at once,
her face alight with pleasure.
“Ciamar a tha t u?”  she said, strokin g the soft Rom an nose.
“This will be m y sweet Corinna. Is she not a dear lassie?”
Reaching in her pocket, she pu lled out a small green apple,
which the horse accepted with delicate pleasure.
“And have they seen to your kn ee, mo chridhe? ” Stooping,
Jocasta ran a hand down the horse’ s shoulder and leg to just
inside th e knee, finding and exploring a healing scar with
expert fingers. “What say ye, ne phew? Is she sound? Can she
stand a day’ s ride?”
Jamie clicked his tongue, and Corinna obligingly took a step
toward him, clearly recognizing someone who spoke her
language. He took a look at he r leg, took her bridle in hand
and with a word or two in soft Gaelic, ur ged her to walk. Then
he pulle d her to a halt, swung into the saddle, and trotted
gently twice round the stabley ard, coming to a stop by the
waiting Jocasta.
“A ye,” he said, stepping down. “She’ s canty enough, Aunt.
What did her the injury?”
“Happen as it was a snake, sir ,” said the groom, a young
black man who had stood back , intently watching Jamie with
the horse.
“Not a snakebite, surely?” I said , surprised. “It looks like a
tear—as though she’d caught her leg on something.”
He looked at me with raised brows, but nodded with
respect.
“A ye, m um, that  it was. ‘T was a month past, I heard the lass
let o ut a rare skelloch, and such a kebbie-lebbie o’ bangin’ and
crashin’, as ye’d think the whole stable was comin’ doon aboot
my h ead. When I rushed to see the trouble, I found the bloodycorpse of a great poison snake lyin’ crushed in the straw
beneath the manger . The manger was dashit all to pieces, and
the wee  lassie quiverin’ in the corner , the blood streamin’
doon her leg from a splinter where she’d caught herself.” He
glanced at the horse with obvio us pride. “Och, such a brave
wee creature as ye are, lass!”
“The ‘gr eat pois on snake’ was p erhaps a foot long,” Jocasta
said to me in  an dry undertone. “And a simple green
gardensnake, forbye. But the foolish thing’ s got a morbid
dread o’ snakes. Let her see one, and she loses her head
entirely .” She cocked her head in the direction of the young
groom and smiled. “W ee Josh is  none so fond o’ them, either ,
is he?”
The groom grinned in answer .
“No, ma’am,” he said. “I cann a thole the creatures, nay
more than my lassie.”
Ian, who  had been listening to t his exchange, couldn’ t hold
back his curiosity any longer .
“Where d’ye come from, man?” he asked the groom,
peering at the young man in fascination.
Josh wrinkled his brow .
“Come from? I dinna come—o h, aye, I tak’ your meaning
now . I was born  upriver , on Mr . Geor ge Burnett’ s place. Miss
Jo bought me twa year past, at Eastertide.”
“And I think we  may assume th at Mr . Burnett himself was
conceived within crow’ s flight of Aberdeen,” Jamie said softly
to me. “A ye?”
River Run took in quite a lar ge territory , including not only
its prim e riverfront acreage but a substantial chunk of the
longleaf pine forest that covered a third of the colony . In
addition, Hector Cameron h ad cannily acquired land
containing a wide creek, one o f many that flowed into Cape
Fear .Thus provided not only with the valuable commodities of
timber , pitch, and turpentine but with a convenient means of
getting them to m arket, it was little wonder that River Run had
prospered, even though it produced only modest quantities of
tobacco and indigo—though the fragrant fields of green
tobacco through  which we rode  looked more than modest to
me.
“There’ s a wee mill,” Jocasta w as explaining, as we rode.
“Just above the joining of the c reek and the river . The sawing
and shap ing are done there, and then the boards and barrels are
sent downriver by bar ge to W ilm ington. It’ s no great distance
from the house to the mill by water , if ye choose to row
upstream, but I thought to show ye a bit of the country
instead.” She breathed the pine-scented air with pleasure. “It’ s
been a time since I was out, myself.”
It was  pl easan t country . Once in the pine forest, it was much
cooler , the sun blocked out by the clustered needles overhead.
Far overhead the trunks of the t rees soared upward for twenty
or thirty feet be fore branching out—no great surprise to hear
that the lar gest part of the mill’ s output was masts and spars,
made for the Royal Navy .
River Run did a great deal of  business with the navy , it
seemed, judging  from Jocasta’ s conversation; masts, spars,
laths, tim bers, p itch, turpentine , and tar . Jamie rode close by
her side, listening intently as she explained everything in
detail, le aving me and Ian to trail behind. Evidently , she had
worked closely with her husba nd in building River Run; I
wondered how she managed the place by herself, now that he
was gone.
“Look!” Ian said, pointing. “What’ s that?”
I pulled up and walked my horse, along with his, to the tree
he had pointed out. A great sla b of bark had been taken of f,
exposing the inner wood for a s tretch of four feet or more on
one side. W ithin this area, the yellow-white wood was
crosshatched in a sort of herring bone pattern, as though it had
been slashed back and forth with a knife.“W e’re near ,” Jocasta said. Jami e had seen us stop, and they
had ridden back to join us. “That will be a turpentine tree
you’re seeing; I smell it.”
W e all could; th e scent of cut wood and pungent resin was
so strong that even I  c ould have found the tree blin dfolded.
Now tha t we had stopped, I cou ld hear noises in the distance;
the rumblings and thumps of men at work, the chunk of an ax
and voic es callin g back and fort h. Breathing in, I also caught a
whif f of something burning.
Jocasta edged Corinna close to the cut tree.
“Here,” she said, touching the bottom of the cut, where a
rough hollow had been chiseled  out of the wood. “W e call it
the b ox; that’ s where the sap and the raw turpentine drip down
and collect. This one is nearly full; there’ll be a slave along
soon to dip it out.”
No soon er had she spoken than a man appeared through the
trees; a slave dr essed in no more than a loincloth, leading a
lar ge white mule with a broad strap slung across its back, a
barrel su spended on either side. The mule stopped dead when
he saw us, flung back his head, and brayed hysterically .
“That will be C larence,” Jocasta said, loudly enough to be
heard ab ove the  noise. “He like s to see folk. And who is that
with him? Is it you, Pompey?”
“Y ah’m. S’me.” The slave gripped the mule by the upper lip
and gave it a vicious twist. “Lea’f, vassar!” As I made the
mental translation of this expression into “Leave of f, you
bastard!” the man turned toward us, and I saw that his slurred
speech w as cau sed by the fact that the lower left half of his
jaw was gone; h is face below the cheekbone simply fell away
into a deep depression filled with white scar tissue.
Jocasta must have heard my ga sp of shock—or only have
expected such a response—for she turned her blindfold toward
me.
“It was a pitch explosion—fortunate he was not killed.
Come, we’re near the works.” W ithout waiting for her groom,she turned her h orse’ s head expertly , and made of f through the
trees, toward the scent of burning.
The con trast of the turpentine w orks with the quiet of the
forest w as amazing; a lar ge cl earing full of people, all in a
hum of activity . Most were slaves, dressed in the minimum of
clothing, limbs and bodies smudged with charcoal.
“Is anyo ne at the sheds?” Jocasta turned her head toward
me.
I ros e in  my stirrups to look; at the far side of the clearing,
near a row of ram shackle sheds,  I caught a flash of color; three
men in the uniform of the British Navy , and another in a
bottle-green coat.
“That w ill be my particular friend,” Jocasta said, smiling in
satisfaction at my description. “Mr . Farquard Campbell. Come,
Nephew; I should like ye to meet him.”
Seen up  close, Campbell proved  to be a man of sixty or so,
no m ore than m iddle height, but with that particular brand of
leathery toughness that some Scotsmen exhibit as they age—
not s o m uch a weathering as a ta nning process that results in a
surface like a l eather tar ge, capable of turning the sharpest
blade.
Campbell greeted Jocasta with pleasure, bowed courteously
to me, acknowledged Ian with the flick of a brow , then turned
the full force of his shrewd gray eyes on Jamie.
“It’ s verra pleased I am that y ou’re here, Mr . Fraser ,” he
said, ext ending his hand. “V erra pleased, indeed. I’ve heard a
deal about ye, ever since your aunt learned of your intentions
to visit River Run.”
He appeared sincerely delight ed to meet Jamie, which
struck me as odd . Not that most  people weren’ t happy to meet
Jamie—he was quite a preposse ssing man, if I did say so—but
there was an a ir almost of r elief in Campbell’ s ef fusive
greeting, which seemed unusua l for someone whose outward
appearance was entirely one of reserve and taciturnity .If Jamie  noticed anything odd, he hid his puzzlement behind
a facade of courtesy .
“I’m flattered that ye should have spared a moment’ s
thought to me, Mr . Campbell.” Jamie smiled pleasantly , and
bowed toward the naval of ficers. “Gentlemen? I am pleased to
make your acquaintance, as well.”
Thus given an opening, a chubby , frowning little person
named Lieutenant W olf f and his two ensigns made their
introductions, and after perfunctory bows, dismissed me and
Jocasta from mind and conversation, turning their attention at
once to a discussion of board feet and gallons.
Jamie lifted one eyebrow at me, with a slight nod toward
Jocasta, suggesting in marital shorthand that I take his aunt
and bugger of f while business was conducted.
Jocasta, however , showed not the slightest inclination to
remove herself.
“Do go on, my dear ,” she ur g ed me. “Josh will show ye
everything. I’ll just wait in the shade whilst the gentlemen
conduct their business; the he at’ s a bit much for me, I’m
afraid.”
The men had sat down to discuss business inside an open-
fronted shed that boasted a crude table with a number of
stools; p resumably this was where the slaves took their meals,
suf fering the blackflies for the sa ke of air . Another shed served
for storage; the third, which was enclosed, I deduced must be
the sleeping quarters.
Beyond the sheds, toward the c enter of the clearing, were
two or three lar g e fires, over which huge kettles steamed in the
sunshine, suspended from tripods.
“They’ll be cookin’ doon the turpentine, a-boilin’ it intae
pitch,” Josh explained, taking m e within eyeshot of one of the
kettles. “Some is put intae the barrels as is”—he nodded
toward t he sheds, where a wago n was parked, piled high with
barrels—”but the rest is made intae pitch. The navalgentlemen will be sayin’ how m uch they’ll be needin’, so as
we’ll know .”
A small  boy of seven or eight was perched on a high,
rickety s tool, stirring the pot with a long stick; a taller youth
stood by with an  enormous ladle, with which he removed the
lighter layer of purified turpen tine at the top of the kettle,
depositing this in a barrel to one side.
As I  wat ched the m, a slave cam e out of the forest, leading a
mule, and headed for the kettle. Another man came to help,
and toge ther the y unloaded the barrels—plainly heavy—from
the m ule, and up ended them into the kettle, one at a time, with
a great whoosh of pungent yellowish pinesap.
“Och, y e’ll want to stand bac k a bit, mum,” Josh said,
taking m y arm to draw me away  from the fire. “The stuf f does
splash a bit, and happen it should take fire, ye wouldna want to
be burnt.”
Having seen the man in the forest, I most certainly didn’ t
want to be burned. I drew away ,  and glanced back at the sheds.
Jamie, Mr . Campbell, and the naval men were sitting on stools
around a table in side one hut, sharing something from a bottle
and poking at a sheaf of papers on the table.
Standing presse d against the shed wall, out of sight of the
men wi thin, was Jocasta Cameron. Having abandoned her
pretense of exhaustion, she was plainly listening for all she
was worth.
Josh caught the expression of  surprise on my face, and
turned to see what I was looking at.
“Miss Jo does hate not to have the char ge o’ things,” he
murmured regretfully . “I havena  haird her myself, but yon lass
Phaedre did say as how Mistr ess takes on when she canna
manage somethi ng—a’rantin’ dr eadful, she says, and stampin’
something fierce.”
“That must be quite a remarkable spectacle,” I murmured.
“What is she not able to manage, though?” From allappearances, Jo casta Cameron  had her house, fields, and
people well in hand, blind or not.
Now it was his turn to look surprised.
“Och, it ’ s the bluidy Navy . Did  she not say why we came
today?”
Before I could go into the fa scinating question of why
Jocasta Cameron should wish to manage the British Navy ,
today or  any other day , we were  interrupted by a cry of alarm
from the far side of the clearing. I turned to look, and was
nearly trampled by several half-naked men running in panic
toward the sheds.
At th e fa r side of the clearing a peculiar sort of mound rose
up o ut o f the ground; I had noticed it earlier but had had no
chance t o ask about it yet. Whil e the floor of the clearing was
mostly dirt, the m ound was covered with grass—but grass of a
peculiar , patchy  sort; part was green, part gone yellow , and
here and  there was an oblong of grass that was stark, dead
brown.
Just as I realiz ed that this ef fect was the result of the
mound’ s being covered in cut tu rves, the whole thing blew up.
There w as no sound of explosion, just a sort of muf fled noise
like a huge sneeze, and a faint wave of concussion in the air
that brushed my cheek.
If it didn’ t soun d like an explos ion, it certainly looked like
one; pieces of turf and bits of burnt wood began to rain down
all over the clearing. There was a lot of shouting, and Jamie
and his companions came rocketing out of the shed like a flock
of startled pheasants.
“Are ye all righ t, Sassenach?” He grasped my arm, looking
anxious.
“Y es, fine,” I s aid, rather confused. “What on earth just
happened?”
“Damned if I ken,” he said briefly , already looking round
the clearing. “Where’ s Ian?”“I d on’ t know . Y ou don’ t think he had anything to do with
this, do you?” I brushed at seve ral floating specks of charcoal
that had landed on my bosom. W ith black streaks ornamenting
my d ecolletage, I followed Jami e into the small knot of slaves,
all b abbling in a  confusing mixture of Gaelic, English, and bits
of various African tongues.
W e found Ian w ith one of the young naval ensigns. They
were peering interestedly into the blackened pit that now
occupied the spot where the mound had stood.
“It h appens often, I understand,” the ensign was saying as
we arrived. “I hadn’ t seen it before, though—amazing
powerful blast, wasn’ t it?”
” What  happens often?” I asked, peering around Ian. The pit
was fille d with a crisscross jum ble of blackened pine logs, all
tossed higgledy-piggledy by the force of the explosion. The
base of the mound was still ther e, rising up around the pit like
the rim of a pie shell.
“A pitch explosion,” the ensign explained, turning to me.
He was small and ruddy-cheeked, about Ian’ s age. “They lay a
charcoal fire, d’ye see, ma’am, below a great pot of pitch, and
cover it all over with earth and cut turves, to keep in the heat,
but allow enough air through  the cracks to keep the fire
burning. The pitch boils down, and flows out through a
hollowed log into the tar barrel—see?” He pointed. A split log
dangled over the remains of a shattered barrel oozing sticky
black. T he reek of burnt wood and thick tar filled the air , and I
tried to breathe only through my mouth.
“The dif ficulty lies in regulating the flow of air ,” the little
ensign w ent on, preening himself a bit on his knowledge. “T oo
little air , and the fire goes out; too much, and it burns with
such ener gy that it cannot be contained, and is like to ignite the
fumes from the pitch and burst its bonds. As you see, ma’am.”
He gestured importantly toward a nearby tree, where one of
the t urves had been thrown wit h such force as to wrap itself
around the trunk like some shaggy yellow fungus.“It i s a matter of the nicest adju stment,” he said, and stood
on t iptoe, looking around with interest. “Where is the slave
whose task it is to manage the fire? I do hope the poor fellow
has not been killed.”
He hadn’ t. I had  been checking carefully through the crowd
as we talked, loo king for any in juries, but everyone seemed to
have escaped intact—this time.
“Aunt!” Jamie exclaimed, suddenly recalling Jocasta. He
whirled toward the sheds, but then stopped, relaxing. She was
there, clearly visible in her green dress, standing rigid by the
shed.
Rigid with fury , as we discove red when we reached her .
For gotten by everyone in the fl urry of the explosion, she had
been una ble to move, sightless as she was, and was thus left to
stand helpless, hearing the turmoil but unable to do anything.
I r ecalle d what Josh had said about Jocasta’ s temper , but she
was too much the lady to stamp and rant in public, however
angry she might be. Josh himself apologized in profuse
Aberdonian for not having been by her side to aid her , but she
dismissed this with kind, if brusque, impatience.
“Clapper your tongue, lad; ye did as I bade ye.” She turned
her head restlessly from side to  side, as though trying to see
through her blindfold.
“Farquard, where are you?”
Mr . Cam pbell moved to her an d put her hand through his
arm, patting it briefly .
“There’ s no great harm done, m y dear ,” he assured her . “No
one hurt, and only the one barrel of tar destroyed.”
“Good,” she said, the tension in her tall figure relaxing
slightly . “But where is Byrnes?” she inquired. “I do not hear
his voice.”
“The overseer?” Lieutenant W olf f mopped several smuts
from his sweating face with a  lar ge linen kerchief. “I hadwondered that myself. W e found no one here to greet us this
morning. Fortunately , Mr . Campbell arrived soon thereafter .”
Farquard Campbell made a small noise in his throat,
deprecating his own involvement.
“Byrnes will be at the mill, I expect,” he said. “One of the
slaves here told me there had be en some trouble wi’ the main
blade of the saw . Doubtless he will be attending to that.”
W olf f looked puf f-faced, as though he considered defective
saw blad es a poor excuse for n ot having been appropriately
received. From the tight line of Jocasta’ s lips, so did she.
Jamie coughed, reached over an d plucked a small clump of
grass out of my hair .
“I d o be lieve th at I saw a basket of luncheon packed, did I
not, Aunt? Perhaps ye might help the Lieutenant to a wee bit
of refreshment, whilst I tidy up matters here?”
It was the right suggestion. Jocasta’ s lips eased a bit, and
W olf f looked distinctly happier at the mention of lunch.
“Indeed, Nephew .” She drew herself upright, her air of
command restored, and nodded in the general direction of
W olf f ’ s voice. “Lieutenant, will ye be so kind as to join me?”
Over lunch, I gathered that the Lieutenant’ s visit to the
turpentine works was a quarterly af fair , during which a
contract was drawn up for the purchase and delivery of
assorted naval stores. It was the Lieutenant’ s business to make
and review similar arrangement s with plantation owners from
Cross C reek to the V ir ginia border , and Lieutenant W olf f made
it plain which end of the colony he preferred.
“If there  is one area of endeavo r at which I will admit the
Scotch excel,” the Lieutenant proclaimed rather pompously ,
taking a  good-si zed swallow of his third cup of whisky , “it is
in the production of drink.”
Farquard Campb ell, who had been taking appreciative sips
from his own pewter cup, gav e a small, dry smile and said
nothing. Jocasta  sat beside him on a rickety bench. Her fingersrested lightly on his arm, sensi tive as a seismograph, feeling
for subterranean clues.
W olf f m ade an unsuccessful attempt to stifle a belch, and
belatedly turned  what he appeared to consider his charm on
me.
“In most other respects,” he w ent on, leaning toward me
confidentially , “they are as a ra ce both lazy and stubborn, a
pair of traits which renders them  unfit for—” At this point, the
youngest ensign, red with embarrassment, knocked over a
bowl of apples, creating enough  of a diversion to prevent the
completion of  the Lieutenant’ s thought—though not,
unfortunately , suf ficient to deflect its train altogether .
The Lieutenant dabbed at the sw eat leaking from under his
wig, and peered at me through bloodshot eyes.
“But I collect th at you are not Scotch, ma’am? Y our voice is
most me lodious and well-bred, and I may say so. Y ou have no
trace of a barbarous accent, in spite of your associations.”
“Ah…thank you,” I murmured, wondering what trick of
administrative incompetence had sent the Lieutenant to
conduct the Navy’ s business in the Cape Fear River V alley ,
possibly the single lar gest colle ction of Scottish Highlanders
to be found in the New W orld. I began to see what Josh had
meant by “Och, the bluidy Navy!”
Jocasta’ s smile might have been stitched on. Mr . Campbell,
beside her , gave me the bares t flick of gray eyebrow , and
looked a ustere. Evidently , stabbing the Lieutenant through the
heart with a fru it knife wasn’ t on—at least not until he had
signed the requisition order—s o I did the next best thing I
could think of; I picked up the whisky bottle and refilled his
cup to the brim.
“It’ s ter ribly good, isn’ t it? W on’ t you have a bit more,
Lieutenant?”
It was  good; smooth and warm. Also very expensive. I
turned to  the young-est ensign, s miled warmly at him, and left
the Lieutenant to find his own way to the bottom of the bottle.Conversation proceeded jerkily but without further incident,
though the two ensigns kept a  wary eye on the Drunkard’ s
Progress going on across the ta ble. No wonder; it would be
their responsibility to get the Lieutenant on a horse and back to
Cross Creek in one piece. I began to see why there were two
of them.
“Mr . Fraser seems to be managing most creditably ,” the
older en sign mu rmured, nodding  outside in a feeble attempt to
restart the stalled conversation. “Do you not think, sir?”
“Oh? Ah. No doubt.” W olf f had lost interest in anything
much beyond the bottom of his  cup, but it was true enough.
While the rest o f us sat over our lunch, Jamie—with Ian’ s aid
—had managed to restore order to the clearing, set the pitch
boilers and sap gatherers back t o work, and collect the debris
of th e explosion. At present he was on the far side of the
clearing, strippe d to shirt and breeches, helping to heave half-
burned logs back into the tar pit. I rather envied him; it looked
to be much mor e pleasant work than lunching with Lieutenant
W olf f.
“A ye, h e’ s done well.” Farquard Campbell’ s quick eyes
flicked over the clearing, the n returned to the table. He
assessed the Lieutenant’ s condition, and gave Jocasta’ s hand a
brief sq ueeze. W ithout turning her head, she spoke to Josh,
who had been lurking quietly in the corner .
“Do ye put that second bottle into the Lieutenant’ s
saddlebag, laddi e,” she said. “I should not want it to be going
to w aste.” She gave the Lieutena nt a charming smile, rendered
the more convincing as he couldn’ t see her eyes.
Mr . Campbell cleared his throat.
“Since ye will s o soon be leavin g us, sir , perhaps we might
settle the matter of your requisitions now?”
W olf f seemed vaguely surprise d to hear that he had been
about to  leave, but his ensig ns sprang to their feet with
alacrity , and began to gather up papers and saddlebags. One
snatched out a traveling inkwell and a sharpened quill and setthem down in front of the Lieutenant; Mr . Campbell whipped
out a folded quire of paper from his coat and laid it down,
ready for signature.
W olf f frowned at the paper , and swayed a little.
“Just there, sir ,” murmured the elder ensign, putting the
quill into his senior ’ s slack hand and pointing at the paper .
W olf f picked up his cup, tilted back his head, and drained
the last drops. Setting the cup down with a bang, he smiled
vacantly around , his eyes unf ocused. The youngest ensign
closed his eyes in resignation.
“Oh, why not?” the Lieutenant said recklessly , and dipped
his quill.
“W ill ye not wi sh to wash and change your clothes at once,
Nephew?” Jocas ta’ s nostrils flared delicately . “Y e stink most
dreadfully of tar and charcoal.”
I thought it just as well she couldn’ t see him. It went a long
way beyond stinking; his hand s were black, his new shirt
reduced to a filth y rag, and his face so begrimed that he looked
as thoug h he had been cleaning chimneys. Such portions of
him as weren’ t black, were red. He had left of f his hat while
working in the m idday sun, and the bridge of his nose was the
color of cooked lobster . I didn’ t think the color was due
entirely to the sun, though.
“My ablutions can wait,” he said. “First, I wish to know the
meaning of yon wee charade.” He fixed Mr . Campbell with a
dark blue look.
“I am lured to  the forest upo n the pretext of smelling
turpentine, and before I ken where I am, I’m sitting wi’ the
British N avy , sa ying aye and na y to matters I ken nothing of,
wi’ yon wee ma nnie kickin’ my shins under the table like a
trained monkey!”
Jocasta smiled at that.
Campbell sighe d. In spite of the exertions of the day , his
neat coa t showed no signs of dust, and his old-fashionedperuke sat squarely on his head.
“Y ou have my apologies, Mr . Fraser , for what must seem a
monstrous imposition upon you r good nature. As it is, your
arrival was fortuitous in the extreme, but did not allow
suf ficient time for communications to be made. I was in
A verasboro unti l last evening, and by the time I received word
of y our arrival, it was much too late for me to ride here to
acquaint you with the circumstances.”
“Indeed? W ell, as I perceive we have a bit of time at
present, I invite ye to do so now ,” Jamie said, with a slight
click as his teeth closed on the “now .”
“W ill ye not sit down first, Nephew?” Jocasta put in, with a
graceful wave of her hand. “It will take a bit of talk to explain,
and ye’ve had a tiring day of it, no?” Ulysses had materialized
out of the ether with a linen sheet over his arm; he spread this
over a chair with a flourish, and gestured to Jamie to sit down.
Jamie ey ed the butler narrowly , but it had  been a tiring day;
I cou ld s ee blist ers amid the soo t on his hands, and sweat had
made clear runnels in the filth  on face and neck. He sank
slowly into the p rof fered chair , and allowed a silver cup to be
put into his hand.
A si milar cup ap peared as if by magic in my own hand, and
I smiled in gratitude at the butler; I hadn’ t been hoiking logs
about, but the long, hot ride had worn me  out. I took a deep,
appreciative sip;  a lovely cool rough cider , that bit the tongue
and slaked the thirst at once.
Jamie took a deep draught, and looked a little calmer .
“W ell, then, Mr . Campbell?”
“It i s a matter of the Navy ,” Campbell began, and Jocasta
snorted.
“A matter of Lieutenant W olf f, ye mean,” she corrected.
“For you r purposes the same, Jo, and well ye know it,” Mr .
Campbell said, a little sharply .  He turned back to Jamie to
explain.The maj ority of  River Run’ s rev enues were, as Jocasta had
told us, derived from the sale  of its timber and turpentine
products, the lar gest and most profitable customer being the
British Navy .
“But the Navy’ s not what it was,” Mr . Campbell said,
shaking his head regretfully . “During the war wi’ the French,
they could scarce keep the fleet supplied, and any man with a
working sawmil l was rich. But for the last ten years, it’ s been
peaceful, and the ships left to r ot—the Admiralty’ s not laid a
new keel in five  years.” He sighed at the unfortunate economic
consequences of peace.
The Na vy did  still require such stores as pitch and
turpentine and spars—with a leaky fleet to keep afloat, tar
would a lways fi nd a market. Ho wever , the market had shrunk
severely , and the Navy now could pick and choose those
landowners with whom they did business.
The Navy requiring dependability above all things, their
covetable contracts were renewed quarterly , upon inspection
and approval by a senior nava l of ficer—in this case, W olf f.
Always dif ficult to deal with, W olf f had nonetheless been
adroitly managed by Hector Cameron, until the latter ’ s death.
“Hector drank with him,” Jocasta put in bluntly . “And when
he left, there’d be a bottle in his saddlebag, and a bit besides.”
The death of Hector Cameron, though, had severely af fected
the business of the estate.
“And not only because there’ s less for bribes,” Campbell
said, with a sidelong glance at Jocasta. He cleared his throat
primly .
Lieutenant W olf f, it seemed, had come to give his
condolences to the widow Cam eron upon the death of her
husband, properly uniformed, attended by his ensigns. He had
come back again the next day , alone—with a proposal of
marriage.
Jamie, caught mid-swallow , choked on his drink.“It wasn a my person the man was interested in,” Jocasta
said, sharply , hearing this. “It was my land.”
Jamie wisely decided not to comment, merely eyeing his
aunt with new interest.
Having heard the background, I thought she was likely right
—W olf f ’ s intere st was in acqu iring a profitable plantation,
which could be rendered still m ore profitable by means of the
naval co ntracts his influence could assure. At the same time,
the person of Jocasta Cameron was no small added
inducement.
Blind or not, she  was a striking woman. Beyond the simple
beauty of flesh a nd bone, though, she exuded a sensual vitality
that caused even such a dry stick as Farquard Campbell to
ignite when she was near .
“I suppo se that explains the Lie utenant’ s of fensive behavior
at lunch ,” I said, interested. “Hell hath no fury like a woman
scorned, but the blokes don’ t like it, either .”
Jocasta turned her head toward me, startled—I think she had
for gotten I was there—but Farquard Campbell laughed.
“Indeed they don’ t, Mrs. Fraser ,” he assured me, eyes
twinkling. “W e’ re fragile things, we poor men; ye trifle with
our af fections at your peril.”
Jocasta gave an unladylike snort at this.
“Af fections, forbye!” she said. “The man has nay af fection
for anything that doesna come in a bottle.”
Jamie was eyeing Mr . Campbell with a certain amount of
interest.
“Since y e raise the matter of af fections, Aunt,” he said, with
a small edge, “might I inquire as to the interests of your
particular friend?”
Mr . Campbell returned the stare.
“I’ve a wife at home, sir ,” he sa id dryly , “and eight weans,
the e ldest of wh om is perhaps a few years older than yourself.But I kent Hecto r Cameron for more than thirty years, and I’ll
do my best by his wife for the sake of his friendship—and
hers.”
Jocasta laid a hand on his arm, and turned her head toward
him. If she could no longer use her eyes for impression, she
still knew the ef fect of downswept lashes.
“Farquard has been a great he lp to me, Jamie,” she said,
with a touch of reproof. “I could na have managed, without his
assistance, after poor Hector died.”
“Oh, ay e,” Jamie said, with no more than a hint of
skepticism. “An d I’m sure I must be as grateful to ye as is my
aunt, sir . But I am still wondering just a bit where I come into
this tale?”
Campbell coughed discreetly and went on with his story .
Jocasta had put of f the Lieutenant, feigning collapse from
the stress of bereavement and had herself carried to her
bedroom, from  which she di d not emer ge until he had
concluded his business in Cross Creek and left for
W ilmington.
“Byrnes managed the contracts that time, and a fine mess he
made of them,” Jocasta put in.
“Ah, Mr . Byrnes, the invisible o verseer . And where was he
this morning?”
A maid had app eared with a bow l of warm perfumed water ,
and a towel. W i thout asking, she knelt by Jamie’ s chair , took
one of his hand s, and began gently to wash the soot away .
Jamie lo oked slightly taken aback by this attention, but was
too occupied by the conversation to send her away .
A slight wry smile crossed Campbell’ s face.
“I’m afraid Mr . Byrnes, though usually a competent
overseer , shares one small weakness wi’ the Lieutenant. I sent
to th e sa wmill fo r him, first thin g, but the slave came back and
told me Byrnes w as insensible in his quarters, reekin’ of drink,
and could not be roused.”Jocasta made another unladylike noise, which caused
Campbell to glance at her with a f fection before turning back to
Jamie.
“Y our au nt is more than capable of managing the business
of th e estate w ith Ulysses to assist her in the documentary
aspects. However , as ye will have seen yourself”—he gestured
delicately at the bowl of water , which now resembled a bowl
of ink—”there are physical concerns to the running of it, as
well.”
“That was the point that Lieutenant W olf f put to me,”
Jocasta said, lips thinning at th e memory . “That I could not
expect to manage my property alone, and me not only a
woman, but sightless as well. I could not, he said, depend upon
Byrnes, unable as I am to go to the forest and the mill to see
what the man is doing. Or not d oing.” Her mouth shut firmly
on the thought.
“Which is true enough,” Camp bell put in ruefully . “It is a
proverb amongs t us—’Happine ss is a son old enough to be
factor .’ For when it’ s a matter of money or slaves, ye cannot
trust anyone save your kin.”
I drew a deep breath and glanced at Jamie, who nodded. At
last we’d got to it.
“And that,” I said, “is where Jamie comes in. Am I right?”
Jocasta had already enlisted Farquard Campbell to deal with
Lieutenant W olf f upon his next visit, intending that Campbell
should keep Byrnes from committing folly with the contracts.
When w e had so opportunely arrived, though, Jocasta had hit
upon a better plan.
“I sent word to Farquard th at he should inform the
Lieutenant that my nephew had come to take up the
management of  River Run. T hat would cause him to go
cautiously ,” she  explained. “For he would not dare to press
me, with a kinsman who had an interest standing by .”
“I see.” Despite himself, Jamie was beginning to look
amused. “So the Lieutenant wou ld think his attempt at a gooddown-setting he re was usurped by my arrival. No wonder the
man seemed to take such a mislike to me. I thought it was
perhaps a general disgust of Sco tsmen that he had, from what
he said.”
“I s hould imagine that he h as—now ,” Campbell said,
dabbing his lips circumspectly with his napkin.
Jocasta reached across the table , groping, and Jamie put out
his hand instinctively to hers.
“Y ou will for give me, Nephew?” she said. W ith his hand to
guide her , she co uld look toward his face; one would not have
known her blind, by the express ion of pleading in her beautiful
blue eyes.
“I kn ew nothing of your charact er , d’ye see, before ye came.
I cou ld n ot risk that you would refuse a part in the deception,
did I tell ye of it first. Do say that ye hold no grudge toward
me, Jamie, if only for sweet Ellen’ s sake.”
Jamie squeezed her hand gently ,  assuring her that he held no
grudge. Indeed, he was pleased to have come in time to help,
and his aunt mig ht count upon his assistance, in any way she
chose to call upon him.
Mr . Campbell beamed and rang the bell; Ulysses brought in
the s pecial whisky , with a tray o f crystal goblets and a plate of
savories, and we drank confusion to the British Navy .
Looking at that fine-boned face, so full of blind eloquence,
though, I couldn’ t help recalling  the brief synopsis Jamie had
once given me of the outstanding characteristics of the
members of his family .
“Frasers are stubborn as rocks,” he’d said. “And
MacKenzies are  charming as l arks in the field—but sly as
foxes, with it.”
“And w here ha ve you  b een?”  Jamie asked, giving Fer gus a
hard up-and-down. “I didna think ye’d money enough for what
it looks as though ye’ve been doing.”Fer gus smoothed his disheve led hair , and sat down,
radiating of fended dignity .
“I met with a pair of French fur -traders in the town. They
speaking little English, and my self being fluent, I could not
but agre e to assist them in their transactions. If they should
then choose to invite me to share a small supper at their inn…”
He lifted  one shoulder in Galli c dismissal of the matter , and
turned to more immediate concerns, reaching inside his shirt
for a letter .
“This ha d arrived in Cross Cree k for you,” he said, handing
it to Jamie. “The postmaster asked me to bring it.”
It w as a thick packet of paper , with a battered seal, and
looked i n little better condition than did Fer gus. Jamie’ s face
lighted when he saw it, thou gh he opened it with some
trepidation. Three letters fell out; one in what I recognized as
his sister ’ s writing, the other two plainly addressed by
someone else.
Jamie picked up the letter from his sister , eyed it as though
it might  contain  something explosive, and set it gently down
by the fruit bowl on the table.
“I’ll start wi’ Ian ,” he said, picki ng up the second letter with
a grin. “I’m not sure I want to be reading Jenny’ s without a
glass of whisky in my hand.”
He prised of f the seal with the tip of the silver fruit knife,
and opened the letter , scanning the first page. “I wonder if
he…” His voice faded of f as he began to read.
Curious, I got up and stood behind his chair , looking over
his s houlder . Ian Murray wrote a clear , lar ge hand, and it was
easy to read, even at a distance.
Dear Br other—
All her e  ar e well, and give thanks to God for the news of your
safe arrival in the Colonies. I  send this missive in car e of
Jocasta Camer o n; should it find you in her company , Jenny
bids you to give her kindest r egar ds to her Aunt.Y ou will  see fr om the enclosed that you ar e r estor ed to my
wife’ s good graces; she has quite ceased to talk of you in the
same br eath with Auld Scratch , and I have hear d no r ecent
r efer ences to Emasculation, which may r elieve your mind.
T o put aside jes ting—her Heart  is much lightened by news of
Y oung Ian’ s safety , as is my own. Y ou will know the depth of
our gratitude at his Deliveranc e, I think; ther efor e I will not
W eary you with Repetitions, thou gh in all truth, I could write a
Novel upon that theme.
W e manage to keep all her e fed, though the barley suffer ed
much fr o m hail, and ther e is a flux abr oad in the village which
has claimed two childr en this m onth, to their par ents’ sorr ow .
It w ill be Annie Fraser and Alasdair Kirby we have lost, may
God have mer cy on their innocence.
On a happier note, we have had  wor d fr om Michael in Paris;
he conti nues to pr osper in the  wine business, and thinks of
marrying soon.
I take joy in acquainting you with news of the birth of my
newest grandson, Anthony Brian Montgomery L yle. I shall
content myself with this ann ouncement, leaving a fuller
description to Jenny; she is besotted of him, as ar e we all, he
is a Dear Lad. His father , Paul—Maggie’ s husband—is a
soldier , so Maggie and wee Anthony bide her e at Lallybr och.
Paul is in France at pr esent; w e pray nightly he may be left
ther e, in r elative peace, and not sent to the dangers of the
Colonies nor the wilds of Canada.
W e have  had visitors this week ; Simon, Lor d Lovat, and his
companions. He  has come a-gathering again, seeking r ecruits
for the Highland r egiment he commands. Y ou will per haps
hear of them in  the Colonies, wher e I understand they have
established some small r eputation. Simon tells gr eat tales of
their bra very ag ainst the Indians and the wicked Fr ench, some
of which ar e doubtless true.
Jamie grinned at this, and turned the page over .He q uite enthralled Henry and M atthew by his stories, and the
girls as well. Josephine (“Kitty’ s eldest,” Jamie observed in an
aside to me) was so inspir ed, indeed, as to engineer a raid
upon the chicken-coop, wher efr om she and her Cousins all
emer ged bedecked with feathers, mud fr om the kail-yar d being
employed in lieu of war -paint.
As all wished to play Savage, Y oung Jamie, Kitty’ s husband
Geor die and myself wer e pr essed into service as the Highland
r egiment, and obliged to suffer attack by T omahawk (kitchen
spoons and ladles) and other fo rms of enthusiastic assault, we
essaying meanw hile a valiant d efense with our br oadswor ds
(pieces of lath and willow twigs).
I put a stop to the Suggestion that the thatch of the dove-cote
be set afir e with flaming arr ows, but was obliged in the end to
submit t o being Scalped. I flatt er myself that I survived this
Operation in better case than did the chickens.
The lett er continued in this vein, giving more news of
family , but dealing more often with the business of the farm,
and reports of events in the district. Emigration, Ian wrote, was
“become epidemic,” with virtually all of the inhabitants of the
village of Shewglie having decided upon this expedient.
Jamie fi nished the letter and pu t it down. He was smiling,
his eyes  faintly dreamy , as though he saw the cool mists and
stones of Lallybroch rather than the humid, vivid jungle that
surrounded us.
The sec ond letter was also addressed in Ian’ s hand, but
marked Private  below the blue wax seal.
“And what will this be, I wonder?” Jamie murmured,
breaking the seal and unfolding it. It began without salutation,
obviously meant as continuation to the lar ger letter .
Now , Br other , I have a matter o f some concern to put to you,
upon which I w rite separately , so that you might shar e my
lar ger letter with Ian, without disclosing this matter .
Y our las t letter spoke of putting Ian aboar d ship in Charleston.
Should this have occurr ed, we will of course welcome hiscoming with joy . However , if by chance he has not yet quitted
your company , it is our wish th at he r emain with you, should
this obligation be not unpleasing to you and to Clair e.
“Not unpleasing to me,” Jamie muttered, nostrils flaring
slightly as he glanced from the  page to the window . Ian and
Rollo were wrestling on the g rass with two young slaves,
rolling o ver and over in a giggling tangle of limbs and cloth
and wa gging tail. “Mmphm.” He turned his back to the
window and resumed reading.
I mentio ned Simon Fraser to you, and the cause of his
pr esence her e. The r egimental levies have been a matter of
concern to us for some time, though the matter has not often
been pr essing, our location being fortunately r emote and
difficult of travel.
Lovat fi nds little tr ouble in ind ucing lads to take the King’ s
shilling; what is ther e for them her e? Poverty and want, with
no hope of bett erment. Why should they r emain her e, wher e
they hav e nothing to inherit, wher e they ar e forbidden the
plaid or  the right to carry a man’ s weapons? Why should they
not seize the ch ance of r eclaiming the notion of manhood—
even should it mean they wear the tartan and carry a swor d in
the service of a German usurper?
I think sometimes this is the worst of it; not only that mur der
and injustice have been loosed unchecked upon us, without
hope of cur e or  r ecourse—but that our young men, our hope
and futur e, should be thus pip ed away , squander ed for the
pr ofit of the conquer or , and paid in the small coin of their
pride.
Jamie looked up at me, one brow raised.
“Y e wou ldna thi nk to look at him that Ian had such poesy in
him, aye?”
There was a brea k in the text here. When it resumed, toward
the bottom of the page, the writing, which had sprawled above
into an angry scrawl with freq uent blots and scratches, was
once more controlled and tidy .I must beg par don for the passion of my wor ds. I had not
meant to  say so much, but the temptation to open my heart to
you as I alway s have is overw helming. These ar e things I
would not say to Jenny , though I imagine she knows them.
T o the point, then; I gr ow garrulous. Y oung Jamie and Michael
ar e well enough for the pr esent—at least we have no fear that
either of them will be tempted by a soldier ’ s life.
The sam e is not true of Ian; you  know the lad, and his spirit of
adventur e, so similar to your o wn. Ther e is no r eal work for
him her e, yet he has not the mi nd of a scholar or a head for
business. How shall he far e, in a world wher e he must choose
between beggar y and the pr ofession of war? For ther e is little
else.
W e woul d have him stay with yo u, if you will have him. It may
be th at t her e is a gr eater opportunity in the New W orld for him
than mig ht be found her e. Even if this should not be so, his
mother will at least be spar ed the sight of her son mar ching
away with his r egiment.
I could ask no better Guar dian or example for him than
Y ourself. I know I ask a gr eat Favour of you in this Matter .
Still, I hope the situation will not be entir ely without benefit to
you, beyond the pr esumed Gr eat Pleasur e of Ian’ s company .
“Not on ly a poet, but an ironist, too,” Jamie observed, with
another glance at the boys on the lawn.
Here the re was another break in  the text, before the writing
resumed, this time with a freshly sharpened quill, the words
written carefully , reflecting the thought behind them.
I ha d left off writing, Br other , wishing my thoughts to be clear
and unmazed by weariness befor e addr essing this concern. I
have in fact taken up my pen and put it down a dozen times,
unsur e whether to speak at all —I fear to offend you, in the
same br eath I ask your favour . And yet I must speak.
I wr ote of Simon Fraser , earlier . He is a man of honour , though
his fathe r ’ s son—but he is a bloody man. I have known him
since all of us wer e lads (sometimes that seems but yester day;and then again, a gulf of years),  and ther e is a har dness in him
now , a glimpse of steel at the b ack of his eyes, that was not
ther e befor e Culloden.
What tr oubles me—and the kn owledge you bear of my love
towar d y ou is all that emboldens me to say this—is that I have
seen that steel in your own eyes, Br other .
I kno w t oo well the sights that f r eeze a man’ s heart, to har den
his eyes in tha t fashion. I trust that you will for give my
frankness, but I have fear ed fo r your soul, many times since
Culloden.
I have not spoke n of the matter to Jenny , but she has seen it,
too. She is a woman, forbye, and will know you in ways I
cannot. It will b e that fear , I think, that caused her to thr ow
Laoghair e at your head. I did think the match ill-made, but
(her e a lar ge, deliberate blotch obscur ed several lines). Y ou
ar e fortunate in Clair e.
“Mmphm,” Jam ie said at this, giving me an eye. I squeezed
his shoulder , and leaned forward to read the rest.
It is late, and I ramble. I spoke of Simon—car e for his men is
now his sole link with humanity . He has neither wife nor child,
he li ves without r oot or hearth,  his patrimony hostage to the
conquer or he serves. Ther e is a burning fir e in such a man, but
no hear t. I hope never to say the same of you—or of Y oung
Ian.
Thus I give you to each other , and may God’ s blessing—and
mine—be with you both.
W rite as soon as  you may . W e hunger for News of you, and for
your accounts of the exotic pr ecincts in which you now Abide.
Y our Most Affectionate Br other ,
 Ian Murray
Jamie carefully folded the letter , and put it into his coat.
“Mmphm,” he said.1 1
T H E  L A W  O F  B L O O D S H E D
July 1767
I  b ecame  gradually accustomed to the rhythm of life at River
Run. The presence of the slaves disturbed me, but there was
little I could do about that, save  to call upon their services as
little as I could , fetching and carrying for myself whenever
possible.
River Run boasted a “simples” room, essentially a small
closet in which dried herbs and  medicines were kept. There
was not much there—no more than a few jars of dandelion
root and willow bark, and a few  patent poultices, dusty from
disuse. Jocasta professed herself delighted that I should want
to use the space —she had herself no talent for medicinals, she
said with a shrug, nor had any of the slaves.
“There i s a new woman who may show some skill in that
direction,” she said, long fingers drawing out the line of wool
from the spindle as the spinning wheel whirred round.
“She is not a house slave, though; she was fresh come from
Africa only a f ew months past, and has neither speech nor
manners. I had thought to train her , perhaps, but since you are
here…ah, now the thread’ s grown too thin, d’ye see?”
While I spent so me time each d ay chatting with Jocasta and
attempting to learn from her th e art of spinning wool, Jamie
spent an hour or two with the butler , Ulysses, who in addition
to servin g as Jocasta’ s eyes and as major domo of the house,
had evidently also been managing the accounts of the
plantation since Hector Cameron’ s death.
“And do ing a fair job of it, too ,” Jamie told me privately ,
after one such session. “If he were a white man, my aunt
would have no dif ficulty in h andling her af fairs. As it is,
though—” He shrugged.“As it is, it’ s luc ky for her that you’re here,” I said, leaning
close to snif f at him. He had spent the day in Cross Creek,
arranging a complicated exchange involving indigo blocks,
lumber , three pairs of mules, five tons of rice, and a warehouse
receipt for a gild ed clock, and as a result, a fascinating variety
of scents clung to his coat and hair .
“It’ s the  least I can do,” he said, his eyes on the boots he
was brushing. His lips tightened  briefly . “Not as though I were
otherwise occupied, is it?”
“A dinn er party ,” Jocasta declared, a few days later . “I must
have a proper fe stival, to introduce the two of ye to the folk of
the county .”
“There’ s no need of it, Aunt,” Jamie said mildly , looking up
from his book. “ I think I shall have met most of the county at
the stock-buyin g last week. Or the masculine part of it, at
least,” he added, smiling at me.  “Come to think on it, though,
perhaps it would suit Claire to b e acquainted wi’ the ladies of
the district.”
“I w ouldn’ t mind knowing a few more people,” I admitted.
“Not that I don’ t find ample occupation here,” I assured
Jocasta, “but—”
“But not  of a sort that interests you,” she answered, though
with eno ugh of a smile to take  the sting out of the remark.
“Y e’ve n o great  fondness for n eedlework, I think.” Her hand
went to the big b asket of colored wools and plucked out a ball
of green, to be attached to the shawl she was knitting.
The ball s of wool were carefully arranged each morning by
one of the maids, in a spiral spectrum, so that by counting,
Jocasta could pick up a ball of the right color .
“A ye, well, not that  sor t of needle work,” Jamie put in,
closing h is book and smiling at me. “It’ s more the stitching of
severed flesh that appeals to Cl aire. I expect she’ll be getting
restless these days, wi’ no more than a cracked head or a case
of piles to be dealing with.”“Ha ha,”  I said t artly , but in fact he was quite right. While I
was plea sed to find that the inh abitants of River Run were on
the whole healthy and well nourished, there was not a great
deal of scope for a physician. W hile I certainly wished no ill to
anyone, there was no denying that I was  getting restless. So
was Jamie, but I thought that was a matter better left
unremarked for the moment.
“I do hope Ma rsali’ s quite well,” I said, changing the
subject. Convinced at last that J amie would not require his aid
for a little wh ile, Fer gus had left the day before, bound
downriver for W ilmington, then ce to take ship for Jamaica. If
all went  well, he would return in the springtime with Marsali
and—God willing—their new child.
“So do I,” said Jamie. “I told Fer gus that—”
Jocasta turned her head sharply toward the door .
“What is it, Ulysses?”
Absorbed by the conversation, I hadn’ t noticed footsteps in
the hall way . Not for the first time, I was struck by the
acuteness of Jocasta’ s hearing.
“Mr . Farquard Campbell,” the butler said quietly , and stood
back against the wall.
It was an indication of Farquard Campbell’ s familiarity with
the h ouse-hold, I thought, that he should not have waited for
Ulysses to return with an invitation for him to enter . He came
into the drawing room on the butler ’ s heels, hat carelessly
thrust beneath one arm.
“Jo, Mrs . Fraser ,” he said with a quick bow to Jocasta and
me, and  “Y our servant, sir ,” to Jamie. Mr . Campbell had been
riding, and riding hard; the skir ts of his coat were thick with
dust, and sweat streamed down his face beneath a wig
crammed on askew .
“What i s it, Farquard? Has som ething happened?” Jocasta
sat forw ard on the edge of her chair , her face reflecting his
obvious anxiety .“Y es,” he said abruptly . “An accident at the sawmill. I’ve
come to ask Mrs. Fraser—”
“Y es, of course. Let me get my box. Ulysses, will you have
someone fetch a horse?” I rose hastily , searching for the
slippers I had kicked of f. I wasn’ t dressed for riding, but from
Campbell’ s look, there wasn’ t time to change. “Is it serious?”
He put out a hand to stop me , as I stooped to pull my
slippers on.
“A ye, ba d enou gh. But you ne edn’ t come, Mrs. Fraser . If
your husband might fetch along  some of your medicines and
such, though—”
“Of course I’ll come,” I said.
“No!” H e spoke  abruptly , and w e all stared at him. His eyes
sought Jamie’ s, and he grimaced, lips tight.
“It’ s not a matter for the ladies,” he said. “But I should be
most grateful for your company , Mr . Fraser .”
Jocasta was on her feet before I could protest, gripping
Campbell’ s arm.
“What is it?” she said sharply . “Is it one of my Negroes?
Has Byrnes done something?”
She was taller than he by an inc h or two; he had to look up
to answer her . I could see the lines of strain in his face, and she
plainly sensed it as well; her fingers tightened on the gray
ser ge of his coat sleeve.
He g lanced at U lysses, then back at Jocasta. As though he
had received a d irect order , the b utler turned and left the room,
soft-footed as ever .
“It is a m atter of  bloodshed, Jo,” he said to her quietly . “I do
not know who, nor how , nor even how bad the injury may be.
MacNeill’ s boy came for me. But for the other—” He
hesitated, then shrugged. “It is the law .”
“And you’re a judge!” she burst out. “For God’ s sake, can
you not do something?” Her h ead moved jerkily , blind eyestrying to fix him, bend him to her will.
“No!” he said sharply , and then, more gently , repeated,
“No.” He lifted her hand from his sleeve and held it tightly .
“Y ou know I cannot,” he said. “If I could…”
“If you could, y ou would not,” she said bitterly . She pulled
her hand out of his grasp and stood back, fists clenched at her
sides. “G o on, then. They’ve called ye to be judge; go and give
them their judgment.” She wh irled on her heel and left the
room, her skirts rustling with angry futility .
He stare d after her , then, as the sound of a slammed door
came from down the passage, blew out his breath with a wry
grimace and turned to Jamie.
“I hesita te to request such a fav or of you, Mr . Fraser , upon
such short acquaintance as we have had. But I would greatly
appreciate your accompanying me upon my errand. Since Mrs.
Cameron hersel f cannot be present, to have you there as her
representative in the matter—”
“What is  this matter , Mr . Campbell?” Jamie interrupted.
Campbell glanced at me, plainly wishing me to leave. Since
I made no mo ve to do so, he shrugged, and pulling a
handkerchief from his pocket, wiped his face.
“It is the law of this colony , sir , that if a Negro shall assault
a white person a nd in so doing, cause blood to be shed, then he
shall die for his crime.” He paused, reluctant. “Such
occurrences are most thankfully rare. But when they occur—”
He stopped, lips pressed together . Then he sighed, and with
a final pat of his flushed cheeks, put the handkerchief away .
“I must go. W ill you come, Mr . Fraser?”
Jamie stood for a moment longer , his eyes searching
Campbell’ s face.
“I w ill,” he sai d abruptly . He went to the sideboard and
pulled open the upper drawer , where the late Hector
Cameron’ s dueling pistols were kept.Seeing this, I turned to Campbell.
“Is there some danger?”
“I cannot say , Mrs. Fraser .” Campbell hunched his
shoulders, “Don ald MacNeill told me only that there had been
an altercation of some kind at the sawmill, and that it was a
matter of the law of bloodshed. He asked me to come at once
to render judgment and oversee the execution, and then left to
summon the other estate owners before I could obtain any
particulars.”
He looked unhappy , but resigned.
“Execution? Do you mean to say you intend to execute a
man without even knowing what he’ s done?” In my agitation, I
had knocked Jocasta’ s basket of yarn over . Little balls of
colored wool ran everywhere, bouncing on the carpet.
“I d o know what he’ s done, Mrs. Fraser!” Campbell lifted
his c hin, his col or high, but with an obvious ef fort, swallowed
his impatience.
“Y our p ardon, m a’am. I know you are newly come here;
you will find some of our ways dif ficult and even barbarous,
but—”
“T oo rig ht I find them barbarous! What kind of law is it that
condemns a man—”
“A slave—”
“A man ! Conde mns him without a trial, without even an
investigation? What sort of law is that?”
“A bad one, ma dame!” he snapped. “But it is still the law ,
and I am char ged with its fulfillment. Mr . Fraser , are you
ready?” He clapped the hat on his head, and turned to Jamie.
“I am.” Jamie finished stowing the pistols and ammunition
in the deep poc kets of his coat, and straightened, smoothing
the skirts down across his thighs. “Sassenach, will ye go and
—”I had crossed to him and grabbed him by the arm before he
could finish.
“Jamie, please! Don’ t go; you can’ t be part of this!”
“Hush.” He laid his hand on m ine and squeezed hard. His
eyes held mine, and kept me from speaking.
“I am already part of it,” he said quietly . “It is my aunt’ s
property , her men involved. Mr . Campbell is right; I am her
kinsman. It will be my duty to go—to see, at least. T o be
there.” He hesitated then, as th ough he might say more, but
instead merely squeezed my hand again and let me go.
“Then I’m going with you.” I s poke quite calmly , with that
eerie sense of detachment that comes with awareness of
impending disaster .
His wide mouth twitched briefly .
“I did expect ye  would, Sassenach. Go and fetch your wee
box, aye? I’ll have the horses brought round.”
I did n’ t wait to hear Mr . Campbell’ s expostulations, but fled
toward the stillroom, my slipper s pattering on the tiles like the
beat of an anxious heart.
W e met Andrew  MacNeill on th e road, resting his horse in the
shade of a chestnut tree. He had been waiting for us; he
stepped out of the shadows at the sound of our hoofbeats. He
nodded to Campbell as we halted by him, but his eyes were on
me, frowning.
“Did yo u not tell him, Campbe ll?” he said, and turned the
frown on Jamie. “It will be no af fair for a woman, Mr . Fraser .”
“Y e called it a matter of bloodshed, did ye no?” Jamie said,
a marke d edge in his voice. “My wife is ban-lighiche ; she has
seen war wi’ me, and more. If ye wish me there, she will go
with me.”
MacNeill’ s lips pressed tight together , but he didn’ t ar gue
further . He turned abruptly and swung into his saddle.“Acquaint us, MacNeill, with the history of this unfortunate
af fair .” Campbell ur ged his mare’ s nose past the withers of
Jamie’ s horse, skillfully edging between MacNeill and Jamie.
“Mr . Fraser is n ewly come, as you know , and your lad said
only to me that it was bloodshed. I have no particulars.”
MacNeill’ s burl y shoulders rose slightly , shrugging toward
the iron-gray pigtail that bisected his collar . His hat was
jammed down on his head, set square with the shoulders, as
though h e had used a carpenter ’ s level to even it. A square,
blunt man, MacNeill, in words as well as appearance.
T old in brief bursts as we trotted , it was a simple story . The
sawmill’ s overse er , Byrnes, had had an altercation with one of
the turpentine slaves. This man, being armed with the lar ge
slash-knife appropriate to his occupation, had attempted to
settle the matter by removing B yrnes’ head. Missing his aim,
he had succeeded only in depriving the overseer of an ear .
“Barked him like a pine tree,” M acNeill said, a certain grim
satisfaction appa rent in his voice. “T ook his lug and a wee bit
o’ the side of his  face, as well. Not that it will ha’ impaired his
beauty ower -much, the ugly wee pusbag.”
I glanced toward Jamie, who lifted one eyebrow in
response. Evidently Byrnes was no favorite with the local
planters.
The ove rseer ha d shrieked for h elp, and with the assistance
of two customer s and several of  their slaves, had succeeded in
subduing his assailant. The wound stanched and the slave
locked in a shed, young Donald  MacNeill—who had come to
have a saw blad e set and found himself unexpectedly in the
midst of drama—had been dispatched at once to spread the
word to the plantation owners nearby .
“Y ou’ll not know ,” Campbell explained, twisting in his
saddle to speak to Jamie. “When  a slave must be executed, the
slaves from those plantations nearby are brought to watch; a
deterrent, aye? against future ill-considered action.”“Indeed,” Jamie said politely . “I believe that was the
Crown’ s notion in executing my grandsire on T ower Hill after
the Rising. V erra ef fective, too ; all my relations have been
quite well behaved since.”
I ha d lived long enough amo ng Scots to appreciate the
ef fects of that li ttle jab. Jamie might have come at Campbell’ s
request, but the grandson of the Old Fox did no man’ s bidding
lightly—nor necessarily held English law in high regard.
MacNeill had got the message, all right; the back of his
neck flushed turkey-red, but Farquard Campbell looked
amused. He uttered a short, dry laugh before turning round.
“Which slave is it, d’ye know?” he asked the older man.
MacNeill shook his head.
“Y oung Donald didna say . But ye ken as well as I do; it’ll be
that bugger Rufus.”
Campbell’ s shoulders slumped in acknowledgment.
“Jo will  be sore pained to hear it,” he murmured, shaking
his head regretfully .
“It’ s her ain fault,” MacNeill said, brutally thwacking a
horsefly that had settled on h is leg above the boot. “Y on
Byrnes i sna fit to mind pigs, let alone run Negroes. I’ve told
her often enough; so’ve you.”
“A ye, bu t Hector hired the man, not Jo,” Campbell protested
mildly . “And she couldna well dismiss him out of hand.
What’ s she to do, then, come and manage the place herself?”
The answer was a grunt as MacNeill shifted his broad
buttocks in the saddle. I glanc ed at Jamie, and found him
poker -faced, eye s hidden in the shadow under the brim of his
hat.
“There’ s little worse than a willful woman,” MacNeill said,
a trifle louder th an strictly necessary . “They’ve none to blame
save themselves if harm comes to them.”
“Whereas,” I chipped in, leaning forward and raising my
own voice enough to be heard over the clop and creak of thehorses, “if harm comes to the m because of some man, the
satisfaction of blaming him will be adequate compensation?”
Jamie snorted briefly with amu sement; Campbell cackled
out loud and poked MacNeill in the ribs with his crop.
“Got ye there, Andrew!” he said.
MacNeill did not reply , but his neck grew even redder . W e
rode in silence after that, MacNeill’ s shoulders hunched just
under his ears.
While mildly satisfying, this exchange did nothing to settle
my nerves; my stomach was kn otted in dread of what might
happen when we reached the mill. Despite their dislike of
Byrnes and the obvious assumption that whatever had
happened had likely been the ov erseer ’ s fault, there wasn’ t the
slightest suggestion that this would alter the slave’ s fate in any
way .
“A bad law ,” Campbell had called it—but the law
nonetheless. Still, it was neither outrage nor horror at the
thought of judicial atrocity that  made my hands tremble and
the leather reins slick with sweat; it was wondering what
Jamie would do.
I could tell noth ing from his fac e. He rode relaxed, left hand
on the reins, th e right curled loosely on his thigh, near the
bulge of the pistol in his coat.
I wa s no t even sure whether I co uld take comfort in the fact
that he had allowed me to come with him. That might mean
that he didn’ t ex pect to commit violence—but in that case, did
it mean he would stand by and let the execution happen?
And if he did… ? My mouth was dry , my nose and throat
choked with the soft brown dust that rose in clouds from the
horses’ hooves.
I a m alr eady pa rt of it . Pa rt of what, though? Of clan and
family , y es—but of this?  Hig hlanders would fight to the death
for a ny cause th at touched their honor or stirred their blood,
but they  were for the most part indif ferent to outside matters.
Centuries of isolation in their mountain fastnesses had leftthem dis inclined to meddle in th e af fairs of others—but woe to
any who meddled in theirs!
Plainly Campbell and MacNeill saw this as Jamie’ s af fair—
but did he? Jamie was not an isolated Highlander , I assured
myself. He was well traveled, well educated, a cultured man.
And he knew damn well what I  thought of present matters. I
had the terrible feeling, though,  that my opinion would count
for very little in the reckoning of this day .
It was a hot and  windless afternoon, with cicadas buzzing
loudly in the we eds along the ro ad, but my fingers were cold,
and stif f on the reins. W e had passed one or two other parties;
small groups of slaves, moving on foot in the direction of the
sawmill. They didn’ t look up a s we passed, but melted aside
into the bushes, making room as we cantered past.
Jamie’ s hat flew of f, knocked by a low branch; he caught it
deftly an d clapp ed it back on his head, but not before I had
caught a glimpse of his face, unguarded for a moment, the
lines of it tense with anxiety . W ith a small shock, it occurred to
me that he  d idn’ t know wh at he was goin g to do either . And
that frightened me more than anything else so far .
W e were suddenly in the pine forest; the yellow-green
flicker o f hickory and alder lea ves gave way abruptly to the
darker light of c ool deep green, like moving from the surface
of the ocean into the calmer depths.
I rea ched back t o touch the wooden case strapped on behind
my saddle, trying to avoid thinking of what might lie ahead, by
making mental preparations for the only role I might
reasonably play in this incipient disaster . I likely could not
prevent damage ; but I could try to repair what had happened
already . Disinfection and cleansing—I had a bottle of distilled
alcohol, and a wash made from pressed garlic juice and mint.
Then dress the wound—yes, I had linen bandages—but surely
it would need stitching first?
In th e midst of wondering what had been done with Byrnes’
detached ear , I stopped. The bu zzing in my own ears was notfrom cicadas. Campbell, in the lead, reined up sharply ,
listening, and the rest of us halted behind him.
V oices in the dis tance, lots of voices, in a deep, angry buzz,
like a hive of bees turned upside down and shaken. Then there
was the  faint sound of shouts and screams, and the sudden
loud report of a shot.
W e galloped down the last slope, dodging trees, and
thundered into the sawmill’ s clearing. The open ground was
filled with people; slaves and bondsmen, women and children,
milling in panic through the stacks of sawn lumber , like
termites exposed by the swing of an ax.
Then I lost all c onsciousness of the crowd. All my attention
was fixed at th e side of the mill, where a crane hoist was
rigged, w ith a huge curved hook for raising logs to the level of
the saw bed.
Impaled on the hook was the body of a black man, twisting
in ho rrid imitation of a worm. The smell of blood struck sweet
and hot through the air; there w as a pool of it on the platform
below the hoist.
My horse stopped, fidgeting, obstructed by the crowd. The
shouts had died away into moans and small, disconnected
screams from women in the crowd. I saw Jamie slide of f in
front of me, an d force his way  through the press of bodies
toward the platform. Campbell and MacNeill were with him,
shoving grimly through the mob. MacNeill’ s hat fell of f,
unregarded, to be trampled underfoot.
I sat frozen in m y saddle, unable to move. There were other
men on the plat form near the hoist; a small man whose head
was wound grotesquely round with bandages, splotched with
blood all down o ne side; several other men, white and mulatto,
armed w ith club s and muskets, making occasional threatening
jabs at the crowd.
Not that there seemed any ur ge  to rush the platform; to the
contrary , there seemed a general ur ge to get away . The faces
around me were stamped with expressions ranging from fearto shock ed dism ay , with only he re and there a flash of anger—
or satisfaction.
Farquard Campbell emer ged fr om the press, boosted onto
the platform by MacNeill’ s sturdy shoulder , and advanced at
once on the me n with clubs, waving his arms and shouting
something I couldn’ t hear , though the screams and moans
around m e were dying away in to the silence of shock. Jamie
seized the edge of the platform and lifted himself up after
Campbell, pausing to give a hand to MacNeill.
Campbell was face-to-face with Byrnes, his lean cheeks
convulsed with fury .
“…unspeakable brutality!” he was shouting. His words
came unevenly , half swallowed in the shuf fle and murmur
around me, but I saw him jab a finger emphatically at the hoist
and its grisly burden. The slav e had stopped struggling; he
hung inert.
The overseer ’ s face was invisible, but his body was stif f
with out rage and defiance. One or two of his friends moved
slowly toward him, plainly meaning to of fer support.
I saw  Jamie stan d for a moment, assessing events. He drew
both pistols from his coat, and  coolly checked the priming.
Then he stepped forward, and clapped one to Byrnes’
bandaged head. The overseer went rigid with surprise.
“Bring h im down,” Jamie said to the nearest thug, loudly
enough to be au dible over the dying grumbles of the crowd.
“Or I blow of f w hat’ s left o’ your friend’ s face. And then—”
He raised the second pistol and aimed it squarely at the man’ s
chest. The expression on Jamie’ s own face made further
threats unnecessary .
The man moved reluctantly , narrowed eyes fixed on the
pistol. He took hold of the brake-handle of the winch that
controlled the hoist, and pulled it back. The hook descended
slowly , its cable taut with the strain of its burden. There was a
massive sigh from the spectators as the limp body touched the
earth.I h ad managed t o ur ge my horse  forward through the crowd,
till I  was within a foot or two of the end of the platform. The
horse sh ied and stamped, tossing his head and snorting at the
strong smell of blood, but was well trained enough not to bolt.
I slid of f, ordering a man nearby to bring my box.
The boards of the platform felt strange underfoot, heaving
like the dry land does when on e steps of f a ship. It was no
more than a few steps to where the slave lay; by the time I
reached him, that cold clarity of mind that is the sur geon’ s
chief res ource h ad come upon m e. I paid no heed to the heated
ar guments behind me, or to the presence of the remaining
spectators.
He w as alive; h is chest moved in small, jerky gasps. The
hook ha d pierce d the stomach, passing through the lower rib
cage, em er ging from the back at about the level of the kidneys.
The man’ s skin was an unearthly shade of dark blue-gray , his
lips blanched to the color of clay .
“Hush,” I said s oftly , though there was no sound from the
slave save the small hiss of his breath. His eyes were pools of
incomprehension, pupils dilated, swamped with darkness.
There was no blood from his mouth; the lungs were not
punctured. The breathing was  shallow , but rhythmic; the
diaphragm had not been pierced. My hands moved gently over
him, my  mind trying to follow the path of the damage. Blood
oozed from both wounds, flow ed in a black slick over the
ridged muscles of back and sto mach, shone red as rubies on
the polished steel. No spurting; they had somehow missed
both abdominal aorta and the renal artery .
Behind m e, a heated ar gument had broken out; some small,
detached portion of my mind noted that Byrnes’ companions
were his  fellow overseers from two neighboring plantations,
presently being rebuked with vigor by Farquard Campbell.
“…blatant disregard of the law! Y ou shall answer for it in
court, gentlemen, be assured that you shall!”“What does it matter?” came a sullen rumble from someone.
“It’ s bloodshed—and mutilation! Byrnes has his rights!”
“Rights no for the likes of you to decide.” MacNeill’ s deep
growl jo ined in.  “Rabble, that’ s what ye are, no better than the
—”
“And where d’you get of f, old man, stickin’ your long
Scotch nose in where it’ s not wanted, eh?”
“What will ye need, Sassenach?”
I h adn’ t  heard him come up beside me, but he was there.
Jamie cr ouched next to me, my box open on the boards beside
him. He  held a loaded pistol still in one hand, his attention
mostly on the group behind me.
“I don’ t know ,” I said. I could hear the ar gument going on in
the back ground, but the words blurred into meaninglessness.
The only reality was under my hands.
It was slowly d awning on me that the man I touched was
possibly not fatally wounded, i n spite of his horrible injury .
From everything I could sense and feel, I thought that the
curve of  the hook had gone upward through the liver . Likely
the right kidney was damaged, and the jejunum or gallbladder
might be nicked—but none of those would kill him
immediately .
It w as sh ock that might do for him, if he was to die quickly .
But I could see a pulse throbbin g in the sweat-slick abdomen,
just abo ve the piercing steel. It was fast, but steady as a
drumbeat; I could feel it echo in the tips of my fingers when I
placed a  hand on it. He had lost blood—the scent of it was
thick, overpowe ring the smell of sweat and fear—but not so
much as to doom him.
An u nsettling thought came to m e—I might be able to keep
this man  alive. Likely not; in th e wake of the thought came a
flood of  all the t hings that could go wrong—hemorrhage when
I r emov ed the hook being only the most immediate. Internal
bleeding, delaye d shock, perforated intestine, peritonitis—and
yet.At Prest onpans, I had seen a man pierced through the body
with a sword, th e location of the wound very much like this.
He had received no treatment beyond a bandage wrapped
around his body—and yet he had recovered.
“Lawlessness!” Campbell was s aying, his voice rising over
the b abble of ar gument. “It cannot be tolerated, no matter the
provocation. I shall have you all taken in char ge, be sure of it!”
No one was pay ing any attention to the true object of the
discussion. Only seconds had passed—but I had only seconds
more to  act. I placed a hand on Jamie’ s arm, pulling his
attention away from the debate.
“If I save him, will they let him live?” I asked him, under
my breath.
His eyes flicked from one to ano ther of the men behind me,
weighing the possibilities.
“No,” he said softly . His ey es met mine, dark with
understanding. H is shoulders straightened slightly , and he laid
the pistol across his thigh. I could not help him make his
choice; he could not help with mine—but he would defend me,
whichever choice I made.
“Give m e the third bottle from th e left, top row ,” I said, with
a nod at the lid of the box, where three rows of clear glass
bottles, firmly corked, held a variety of medicines.
I had two bott les of pure alc ohol, another of brandy . I
poured a good dose of the bro wnish powdered root into the
brandy , and shook it briskly , then crawled to the man’ s head
and pressed it to his lips.
His eyes  were glazed; I tried to look into them, to make him
see me. Why? I  wondered, even as I leaned close and called
his nam e. I couldn’ t ask if this would be his choice—I had
made it for him. And having m ade it, could not ask for either
approval or for giveness.
He swallowed. Once. T wice. The muscles near his blanched
mouth q uivered; drops of brandy ran across his skin. Oncemore a deep convulsive gulp, and then his straining neck
relaxed, his head heavy on my arm.
I sat with my eyes closed, supporting his head, my fingers
on the pulse under his ear . It jumped; skipped a beat and
resumed. A shiver ran over his body , the blotched skin
twitching as though a thousand ants ran over it.
The textbook description ran through my mind:
Numbness. T ingling. A sensation of the skin crawling, as
though a ffected by insects. Nausea, epigastric pain. Labor ed
br eathing, skin cold and clammy , featur es bloodless. Pulse
feeble and irr egular , yet the mind r emains clear .
None of the visible symptoms were discernible from those
he already showed. Epigastric pain, forsooth.
One-fiftieth grain will kill a sparrow in a few seconds. One-
tenth gra in, a rabbit in five minu tes. Aconite was said to be the
poison in the cup Medea prepared for Theseus.
I t ried to hear n othing, feel nothing, know nothing but the
jerky be at benea th my fingers. I tried with all my might to shut
out the voices o verhead, the murmur nearby , the heat and dust
and stink of blo od, to for get w here I was, and what I was
doing.
Y et the mind r emains clear .
Oh, God, I thought. It did.1 2
T H E  R E T U R N  O F  J O H N  Q U I N C Y
M Y E R S
D eeply shaken by the events at the sawmill, Jocasta
nonetheless declared her intention of carrying on with the
party she had planned.
“It will distract our minds fr om the sadness,” she said
firmly . She turned to me, and reaching out, critically fingered
the muslin cloth of my sleeve.
“I’ll call Phaedre to begin a ne w gown for ye,” she said.
“The girl’ s a fine sempstress.”
I rat her thought it would take m ore than a new gown and a
dinner party to distract my  mind, but I caug ht a warning glance
from Jamie and shut my mouth hard to keep the words inside.
In t he event, g iven the shortness of time and a lack of
suitable fabric, Jocasta decided  to have one of her gowns
remade for me.
“How does it look, Phaedre?” Jocasta frowned in my
direction, as though she could summon vision by pure will.
“W ill it do?”
“Do fine,” the m aid answered around a mouthful of pins.
She thrust in three in quick succession, squinted at me,
pinched up a fol d of fabric at the waistline and stabbed in two
more.
“Be just fine,” she elaborated, mouth now clear . “She
shorter t han you , Miss Jo, and a bit thinner in the waist. Some
bigger in the bosom, though,” Phadre added in an undertone,
grinning at me.
“Y es, I know th at.” Jocasta spoke tartly , having caught the
whisper . “Slash the bodice; we  can fill it with V alenciennes
lace over a fiel d of green silk—take a scrap from that old
dressing gown of my husband’ s; it will be the right color tocomplement this.” She touched the sleeve, with its brilliant
green str iping. “Band the slash with the green silk, too; it will
show of f her bosom.” The long  pale fingers indicated the line
of altera tion, drifting across the tops of my breasts almost
absentmindedly . The touch was  cool, impersonal and barely
felt, but I narrowly prevented myself jerking back.
“Y ou ha ve a most remarkable memory for color ,” I said,
surprised and slightly unnerved.
“Oh, I remember this dress very well,” she said. She
touched the full sleeve lightly . “A gentleman once told me I
reminded him of Persephone in it; springtime incarnate, he
said.” A  faint smile of memory lit her face, then was erased as
she lifted her head toward me.
“What color is y our hair , my de ar? I hadna thought to ask.
Y ou sound a bit blond, somehow , but I’ve no notion whether
that may  be actually the case. Pr ay , do not tell me ye’re black-
haired and sallow!” She smiled, but the joke sounded
somehow like a command.
“It’ s more or le ss brown,” I said, touching my hair self-
consciously . “Faded a bit, though; it’ s gone light in streaks.”
She frowned at this, seeming to consider whether brown
was quite suitable. Unable to s ettle the question for herself,
she turned to the maid.
“How does she look, Phaedre?”
The wom an too k a step back and squinted at me. I realized
that she must—as the other ho use servants were—be in the
habit of giving careful descripti ons to her mistress. The dark
eyes passed swiftly over me, p ausing on my face for a long
moment of assessment. She to ok two pins from her mouth
before replying.
“Just fin e, Miss Jo,” Phaedre said. She nodded once, slowly .
“Just fin e,” she said again. “She got white skin, white as skim
milk; looks real fine with that bright green.”
“Mm. B ut the underskirt is ivory; if she is too fair , will she
not look washed out?”I dis liked being discussed as tho ugh I were an objet d’art—
and a possibly defective one, at that—but swallowed my
objections.
Phaedre was shaking her head, definitely .
“Oh, no , ma’am,” she said. “Sh e ain’ t washed out. She got
them bones as m akes shadows. And brown eyes, but don’ t be
thinkin’ they’ s mud-color . Y ou recall that book you got, the
one with the pictures of all them strange animals?”
“If you mean Accounts of an Exploration of  the Indian
Subcontinent, ” Jocasta said, “yes, I recall it. Ulysses read it to
me o nly last mo nth. Y ou mean that Mrs. Fraser reminds you of
one of the illustrations?” She laughed, amused.
“Mm-hm.” Phaedre hadn’ t taken  her eyes of f me. “She look
like that big cat,” she said softly , staring at me. “Like that there
tiger , a-lookin’ out from the leaves.”
An expr ession of startlement showed briefly on Jocasta’ s
face.
“Indeed,” she said, and laughe d. But she didn’ t touch me
again.
I stood in the lower hall, smoothing the green-striped silk over
my bosom. Phaedre’ s reputation as a sempstress was well
founded; the dress fit like a glove, and the bold bands of
emerald satin glowed against the paler shades of ivory and
leaf.
Proud of her own thick hair , Jocasta did not wear wigs, so
there was fortunately no sugges tion that I adopt one. Phaedre
had tried  to powder my hair wit h rice flour instead, an attempt
I had firmly resisted. Inadequately concealing her opinion of
my l ack of fashi onable instinct, she had settled for snaring the
mass of curls in a white silk ribbon and pinning them high to
the back of my head.
I wasn’ t sure quite why I had resisted the array of baubles
with which she had tried to further bedizen me; perhaps it was
mere dislike of fussiness. Or p erhaps it was a more subtleobjection to being made an object, to be adorned and displayed
to Jocas ta’ s purpose. At any rate, I had refused. I wore no
ornament save my wedding ring, a small pair of pearl earbobs,
and a green velvet ribbon round the stalk of my neck.
Ulysses came down the stairs above me, impeccable in his
livery . I moved, and he turned h is head, catching the flicker of
my skirts.
His eyes widened in a look of frank appreciation as he saw
me, and  I looked down, smiling a bit, as one does when being
admired. Then I heard him gasp and jerked my head up to see
his eyes still wide, but now with fear; his hand so tight on the
banister that the knuckles shone.
“Y our pardon, madame,” he sa id, sounding strangled, and
rushed down the stairs and pas t me, head down, leaving the
door to the cookhouse breezeway swinging in his wake.
“What on earth…?” I said alou d, and then I remembered
where—and when—we were.
Alone fo r so long, in a house with a blind mistress and no
master , he had grown careless. He had momentarily for gotten
that most basic and essential protection—the only true
protection a slave had: the bl ank, bland face that hid all
thoughts.
No w onder he h ad been terrorized when he realized what he
had don e. If it h ad been any wo man other than myself to have
intercepted that unguarded look…my hands grew cold and
sweaty , and I swallowed, the remembered scent of blood and
turpentine sharp in my throat.
But it had been me, I reminded myself, and no one else had
seen. Th e butler might be afraid, but he was safe. I would
behave as though nothing had happened—nothing had —and
things would be…well, things w ould be what they were. The
sound of footsteps on the gallery above interrupted my
thoughts. I glanced upward, and gasped, all other thoughts
driven at once from my mind.A Highlander in full regalia is an impressive sight—any
Highlander , no matter how old, ill-favored, or crabbed in
appearance. A tall, straight-bodied, and by no means ill-
favored Highlander in the prime of his life is breathtaking.
He hadn ’ t worn the kilt since Culloden, but his body had not
for gotten the way of it.
“Oh!” I said.
He saw me then, and white teeth flashed as he made me a
leg, silver shoe-buckles gleamin g. He straightened and turned
on his heel to se t his plaid swin ging, then came down slowly ,
eyes fixed on my face.
For a moment, I saw him as he had looked the morning I
married him. The sett of his tarta n was nearly the same now as
then; black check on a crimso n ground, plaid caught at his
shoulder with a silver brooch, dipping to the calf of a neat,
stockinged leg.
His linen  was finer now , as was his coat; the dirk he wore at
his waist had bands of gold across the haft. Duine uasal  was
what he looked, a man of worth.
But the bold face above the lace was the same, older now ,
but wiser with it—yet the tilt of his shining head and the set of
the wide, firm mouth, the slan ted clear cat-eyes that looked
into my  own, were just the sam e. Here was a man who had
always known his worth.
“Y our servant, ma’am,” he said.  And then burst into a face-
splitting smile as he descended the last few stairs.
“Y ou look wonderful,” I said, hardly able to swallow the
lump in my throat.
“It’ s none so bad,” he agreed, with no trace of false
modesty . He arranged a fold ov er his shoulder with care. “Of
course, that’ s the advantage of a plaid—there’ s no trouble
about the fit of it.”
“It’ s Hector Cameron’ s?” I felt ridiculously shy of touching
him, garbed so splendidly . Inst ead, I touched the hilt of thedirk; it was topp ed with a small knurl of gold, roughly shaped
like a bird in flight.
Jamie drew a deep breath.
“It’ s mine, now . Ulysses brought it to me—with my aunt’ s
compliments.” I caught an odd undertone in his voice, and
glanced up at him. Despite his obvious deep pleasure at
wearing the kilt again, somethin g was troubling him. I touched
his hand.
“What’ s wrong?”
He gave  me half a smile, but his brows were drawn together
in concern.
“I wouldna say anything’ s wrong, exactly . It’ s only—”
The sound of feet on the stairs i nterrupted him, and he drew
me to one side, out of the way of a hurrying slave with a pile
of linens. The house was humming with last-minute
preparations; ev en now , I could hear the sound of wheels on
the g ravel at the back of the ho use, and savory smells floated
through the air a s platters were brought in at a gallop from the
kitchen.
“W e canna talk here,” he muttered. “Sassenach, will ye
stand ready at di nner? If I should signal to ye”—and he tugged
at h is earlobe—”will ye make a diversion, right then? It
doesna matter what—spill wine, swoon away , stab your dinner
partner with a fork—” He grinned at me, and I took heart from
that; whatever was worrying him wasn’ t a matter of life and
death, then.
“I can do that,” I assured him. “But what—”
A door opened onto the gallery  above, and Jocasta’ s voice
floated down, giving last-minute orders to Phaedre. Hearing it,
Jamie stooped quickly and kissed me, then whirled away in a
swirl of crimson plaid and silver shoebuckles, disappearing
neatly between two slaves bringing trays of crystal goblets
toward t he drawing room. I stared after him in astonishment,
barely getting out of the way in time to avoid being trampled
by the servants.“Is that you, sw eet Claire?” Jocasta paused on the bottom
step, head turned toward me, eyes trained just over my
shoulder . She was quite uncanny .
“It is,” I said, a nd touched her arm to let her know more
precisely where I was.
“I smelt the camphor from the dress,” she said in answer to
my unsp oken question, tucking  her hand in the crook of my
elbow . “I thought I heard Jamie’ s voice; is he nearby?”
“No,” I said, qu ite truthfully , “I believe he’ s gone out to
greet the guests.”
“Ah.” H er hand tightened on my arm, and she sighed,
somewhere between satisfaction and impatience. “I am not one
to la ment what cannot be mend ed, but I swear I should give
one of my eyes, could the sight of the other be restored long
enough to see the lad in his plaidie this night!”
She shook her head, dismissing it, and the diamonds in her
ears flar ed with  light. She wor e dark blue silk, a foil to her
shining white hair . The cloth was embroidered with
dragonflies that seemed to dart among the folds as she moved
under the lights of the wall sconces and candle-heavy
chandeliers.
“Ah, well. Where is Ulysses?”
“Here, madame. ” He had come back so quietly that I hadn’ t
heard him, appearing on her other side.
“Come then,” she said, and too k his arm. I didn’ t know if
the o rder applied to him or me, but followed obediently in her
shimmering wake, dodging to avoid two kitchen boys bearing
in the centerpiece—a whole roasted boar , tusked head intact
and fierc ely gla ring, succulent backside gleaming fatly , ready
for the knife. It smelled divine.
I smooth ed my hair and prepared to meet Jocasta’ s guests,
feeling rather as though I, too, were being presented on a silver
platter , with an apple in my mouth.The guest list would have read like the Who’ s Who  of Cape
Fear Ri ver gentry , had there been such a thing. Campbell,
Maxwell, Bucha nan, MacNeill, MacEachern…names from the
Highlands, names from the Isles. MacNeill of Barra Meadows,
MacLeod of Islay…many of the plantation names carried the
flavor of their owners’ origins, as did their speech; the high
plastered ceiling echoed with the lilt of spoken Gaelic.
Several of the men came kilted, or with plaids wrapped over
their coats and silk breeches, b ut I saw none as striking as
Jamie—who was conspicuous by his absence. I heard Jocasta
murmur something to Ulysses; he summoned a small serving
girl with  a clap of his hands and  sent her zooming of f into the
lanterned half-dark of the gardens, presumably in search of
him.
Nearly as conspicuous were the few guests who were not
Scots; a broad-shouldered, ge ntly smiling Quaker by the
picturesque nam e of Hermon Husband, a tall, rawboned
gentleman name d Hunter , and—much to my surprise—Phillip
W ylie, immaculately suited, wigged and powdered.
“So we meet again, Mrs. Fraser ,” he remarked, holding on
to my hand much longer than was socially correct. “I confess
that I am ravished with enchantment to behold you again!”
“What are you doing here?” I said, rather rudely .
He grinned impudently .
“I w as brought by mine host, the noble and puissant Mr .
MacNeill of Barra Meadows, from whom I have just
purchased an excellent pair of g rays. Speaking of which, wild
horses would have proved insuf ficient to restrain me from
attendance this evening, upon my hearing that this occasion is
held in your hon or .” His eyes wandered slowly over me, with
the detached air of a connoisseur appreciating some rare work
of art.
“May I observe , ma’am, how most becoming is that shade
of green?”
“I don’ t suppose I can stop you.”“T o say nothing of the ef fect of candlelight upon your skin.
‘Thy neck is as  a tower of ivory ,’ ” he quoted, drawing a
thumb insinuati ngly over my palm, ” ‘thine eyes like the
fishpools in Heshbon.’ “
” ‘Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looketh
toward Damascus,’ ” I said, with a pointed look at his
aristocratically pronounced proboscis.
He b urst out lau ghing, but didn’ t let go. I stole a glance at
Jocasta, who stood only a few feet away; she seemed
engrossed in conversation with a new arrival, but experience
had taught me just how sharp her ears were.
“How old are yo u?” I asked, narrowing my eyes at him and
trying to retrieve my hand without unseemly struggle.
“Five-and-twenty , ma’am,” he answered, rather surprised.
He patted at the star -shaped patc h near his mouth with a finger
of his free hand. “Am I looking indecently haggard?”
“No. I merely wished to be sure  I was telling you the truth
in informing you that I am old enough to be your mother!”
This news appeared not to di stress him in the slightest.
Instead he raised my hand to  his lips and pressed them
fervently upon it.
“I am enchanted,” he breathed. “May I call you Maman ?”
Ulysses stood behind Jocasta, da rk eyes intent on the guests
coming up the lighted walk from  the river—he leaned forward
now and  then to whisper in her  ear . I removed my hand from
W ylie’ s grasp by main force, and used it to tap the butler on
the shoulder .
“Ulysses,” I said, smiling charmingly at W ylie, “would you
be so kind as to ensure that Mr . W ylie is seated near me at
dinner?”
“Indeed, madam e; I will attend to it,” he assured me, and
returned at once to his surveillance.
Mr . W ylie bowed extravaga ntly , professing undying
gratitude, and allowed himself to be propelled into the houseby o ne of the footmen. I waved pleasantly after him, thinking
how mu ch I should enjoy stick ing a fork into him, when the
time came.
I couldn ’ t tell whether it wa s the luck of the draw , or
considerate planning, but I found myself between Mr . W ylie
and the Quaker , Mr . Husband, with Mr . Hunter—the other
non-Gaelic speaker—across the table from me. W e formed a
small island of English in the midst of a sea of swirling Scots.
Jamie had appeared at the last moment, and was now seated
at the head of the table, with Jocasta at his right hand. For the
dozenth time, I wondered what was going on. I kept a sharp
eye on him, a clean fork by my plate, ready for action, but we
had reached the third course with no untoward occurrence.
“I am surprised  to find a gentleman of your persuasion in
attendance at such an occasion,  Mr . Husband. Does not such
frivolity of fend you?” Having failed to divert my attention to
himself during the first two co urses, W ylie now resorted to
leaning across me, the action bringing his thigh casually into
contact with mine.
Hermon Husban d smiled. “Even Quakers must eat, Friend
W ylie. And I h ave had the honor to enjoy Mrs. Cameron’ s
hospitality on many occasions; I should not think to refuse it
now , on ly because she extends it to others.” He switched his
attention back to me, resuming our interrupted conversation.
“Thou asked of the Regulators, Mrs. Fraser?” He nodded
across t he table . “I should reco mmend thy questions to Mr .
Hunter , for if the Regulators might be said to enjoy the
benefits of leadership, it is to this gentleman that they look.”
Mr . Hunter bowed at the compliment. A tall, lantern-jawed
individual, he was more plainly  dressed than most of those in
attendance, though not a Quaker . He and Mr . Husband were
traveling togeth er , both returning from W ilmington to their
homes in the backcountry . W ith Governor T ryon’ s of fer in
mind, I wanted to find out whatever I could about matters in
that area.“W e are but a loose assembly , ” he said modestly , putting
down his wineglass. “In truth, I should be reluctant to claim
any title whatever; it is only that I am fortunate enough to have
a homestead so situated that it is a convenient meeting place.”
“One hears that the Regulators are mere rabble.” W ylie
dabbed at his lips, careful not to dislodge his patch. “Lawless,
and inclined to violence against the duly authorized deputies
of the Crown.”
“Indeed we are not,” Mr . Husband put in, still mildly . I was
surprised to hear him claim association with the Regulators;
perhaps the movement wasn’ t quite so violent and lawless as
W ylie implied. “W e seek only justice, and that is not a quantity
that can be obta ined by means of violence, for where violence
enters in, justice must surely flee.”
W ylie la ughed, a surprisingly deep and masculine sound,
given his foppery .
“Justice apparently should  fle e! That is  certainly the
impression I was given by Mr . Justice Dodgson when I spoke
with him  last week. Or perhaps he was mistaken, sir , in his
identification o f the ruf fians who invaded his chambers,
knocked him down, and dragg ed him by the heels into the
street?” He smiled engagingly at Hunter , who flushed dark red
beneath his weathered tan. His fingers tightened about the
stem of his wine glass. I glanced hopefully at Jamie. No sign of
a signal.
“Mr . Justice Dodgson,” Hunter said precisely , “is a userer , a
thief, a disgrace to the profession of law , and—”
I had for some little time been hearing noises outside, but
had put these down to some crisis in the cookhouse, which
was separated from the main house by a breezeway . The
noises became clearer now , tho ugh, and I caught a familiar
voice that quite distracted me from Mr . Hunter ’ s
denunciations.
“Duncan!” I half rose from m y seat, and heads nearby
turned inquiringly .There w as a sudden confusion of movement out on the
terrace, with shadows jerking past the open French windows,
and voices calling, ar guing and exhorting.
Conversation in the dining room fell silent, and everyone
looked t o see what was happening. I saw Jamie push back his
chair , but before he could rise, an apparition appeared in the
doorway .
It was John Quincy Myers, the mountain man, who filled
the open  double door from top to bottom and side to side,
resplendent in the same costume in which I had first met him.
He leaned heavily upon the doorframe, surveying the
assemblage through bloodshot eyes. His face was flushed, his
breathing stertorous, and in one hand he held a long glass
bottle.
His eyes  lit upon me, and his f ace contorted into a fearful
grimace of gratification.
“THERE ye are,” he said, in tones of the deepest
satisfaction. “S aid sho. Duncan wudd’n havit. Said yesh,
Mishess Claire said gotter be drunk afore she cuts me. Sho I’m
drunk. Drunk— ” He paused, sw aying dangerously , and raised
his bottle high. “As a SKUNK !” he ended triumphantly . He
took a step into the room, fell flat on his face, and didn’ t
move.
Duncan appeare d in the doorw ay , looking a good deal the
worse fo r wear himself. His shirt was ripped, his coat hung of f
his shou lder , an d he had the beginnings of what looked like a
black eye.
He glanced down at the prostrate form at his feet, then
looked apologetically at Jamie.
“I did try to stop him, Mac Dubh .”
I ex tricated myself from my se at, and reached the body at
the s ame time as Jamie, follow ed by a tidal wave of curious
guests. Jamie glanced at me, eyebrows raised.
“W ell, y e did say he must be unc onscious,” he observed. He
bent ov er the mountain man and thumbed back an eyelid,showing a slice of blank white eyeball. “I’d say he’ s made a
good job of it, myself.”
“Y es, but I did n’ t mean dead drunk!” I squatted by the
insensible form, and put a ginger two fingers over the carotid
pulse. Nice and strong. Still…
“Alcohol isn’ t a good anesthetic at all,” I said, shaking my
head. “I t’ s a poison. It depresses the central nervous system.
Put the shock of  operating on top of alcohol intoxication, and
it could kill him, easily .”
“No gre at loss,”  said someone among the guests, but this
caustic opinion was drowned in a flood of reproachful
shushing.
“Shame to waste so much brandy ,” someone else said, to
general laughter . It was Phillip W ylie; I saw his powdered face
loom over Jamie’ s shoulder , smiling wickedly .
“W e’ve heard a great deal of your skill, Mistress Fraser .
Now’ s y our cha nce of proving yourself—before witnesses!”
He waved a graceful hand at the crowd clustered round us.
“Oh, bugger of f,” I said crossly .
“Ooh, hear her!” Someone murmured behind me, not
without admiration. W ylie blinked, taken aback, but then
grinned more broadly than ever .
“Y our wish is my command, ma’am,” he murmured, and
bowed himself back into the crowd.
I stood up, rac ked with doubt. It might work. It was a
technically simple operation, and shouldn’ t take more than a
few minutes—if I encountered no complications. It was a
small incision—but it did involve going into the peritoneum,
with all the attendant risk of infection that  implied.
Still, I was unlikely to encounter better conditions than I had
here—plenty of  alcohol for d isinfection, plenty of willing
assistants. There was no other means of anesthesia available,
and I could und er no circumstances do it with a conscious
patient. Above all, Myers had asked me to do it.I sought Jamie’ s face, wanting advice. He was there,
standing beside me, and saw the question in my eyes. W ell,
he’d wanted a diversion, damn it.
“Best do  it, Sassenach.” Jamie eyed the prostrate form. “He
may ne’ er have either the cour age or the money to get that
drunk again.” I stooped and checked his pulse again—strong
and steady as a carthorse.
Jocasta’ s stately  head appeared among the curious faces
looming over MacNeill’ s shoulder .
“Bring him into the salon,” s he said briefly . Her head
withdrew , and the decision was made for me.
I had operated under odd conditions before, I thought,
rinsing my hands hastily in vine gar brought from the kitchen,
but none odder than this.
Relieved of his nether garb, Myers lay tastefully displayed
on t he mahogany table, boneless as a roasted pheasant, and
nearly as ornamental. In lieu of platter , he lay upon a stable
blanket, a gaudy centerpiece in  his quilled shirt and bear ’ s-
claw necklace, surrounded by a garnish of bottles, rags, and
bandages.
There was no t ime to change my own clothes; a leather
butchering apron was fetched from the smoke shed to cover
my dres s, and Phaedre pinned up my long, frilled sleeves to
leave my forearms bare.
Extra candles had been brought to give me light; candelabra
blazed from sideboard and chandelier in a reckless expenditure
of fr agrant beeswax. Not nearly  as fragrant as Myers, though;
without hesitatio n, I took the decanter from the sideboard, and
sloshed several shillings’ worth of fine brandy over the curly
dark-haired crotch.
“Expensive way to kill lice,” someone remarked critically
behind me, observing the hasty exodus of miscellaneous small
forms of life in the wake of the flood.
“Ah, bu t they’ll die happy ,” sa id a voice I recognized as
Ian’ s. “I  brought your wee box , Auntie.” He set the sur gicalchest by my elbow , and opened it for me.
I snatch ed out my precious blue bottle of distilled alcohol,
and the straight-edged scalpel. Holding the blade over a bowl,
I p oured  alcoho l over it, mean while scanning the crowd for
appropriate assi stants. There wouldn’ t be any shortage of
volunteers; the  spectators were boiling with suppressed
laughter and murmured comment, interrupted dinner for gotten
in a rush of anticipation.
T wo sturdy carriage drivers were summoned from the
kitchen to hold the patient’ s legs, Andrew MacNeill and
Farquard Campbell volunteering to hold the arms, and Y oung
Ian w as set in place by my side,  holding a lar ge candlestick to
cast additional light. Jamie to ok up his position as chief
anesthetist by the patient’ s head, a glass full of whisky poised
near the slack and snoring mouth.
I ch ecked that my supplies and  suture needles were ready ,
took a deep breath, and nodded to my troops.
“Let’ s go.”
Myers’ s penis, embarrassed by  the attention, had already
retreated, peepin g shyly out of the bushes. W ith the patient’ s
long legs raised and spread,  Ulysses himself delicately
cupping the baggy scrotum away , the hernia was clearly
revealed, a smooth swelling the size of a hen’ s egg, its curve a
deep purple where it pressed against the taut inguinal skin.
“Jesus, Lord!” said one of the drivers, eyes bulging at the
sight. “It’ s true—he’ s got three balls!”
A collective gasp and giggle ens ued from the spectators, but
I w as too busy  to correct misapprehensions. I swabbed the
perineum thoroughly with pure alcohol, dipped my scalpel in
the liquid, passed the blade back and forth through the flame
of a candle by way of final sterilization, and made a swift cut.
Not lar ge, not d eep. Just enough to open the skin, and see
the loop of gle aming pinkish- gray intestine bulging down
through the tear in the muscle layer . Blood welled, a thin, dark
line, then dribbled down staining the blanket.I extended the incision, swished my fingers thoroughly in
the disinfecting bowl, then put  two fingers on the loop and
pushed it gently upward. Myers moved in a sudden
convulsion, nearly dislodging me, and just as suddenly
relaxed. He tightened again, buttocks rising, and my assistants
nearly lost their grip on his legs.
“He’ s waking up!” I shouted t o Jamie, above the various
cries of alarm. “ Give him more, quick!” All my doubts about
the use of alcohol as an anesthetic were being borne out, but it
was too late to change my mind now .
Jamie grasped the mountain man’ s jaw , and squeezing open
his mouth, dribbled whisky into it. Myers choked and
spluttered and made noises like a drowning buf falo, but
enough of the al cohol made it down his throat—the huge body
relaxed. The mountain man  subsided into mumbling
immobility and then into long, wet, snuf fling snores.
I h ad managed t o keep my fingers in place; there was more
bleeding than I would have lik ed, but his struggles had not
brought the herniated loop back down. I snatched a clean cloth
soaked i n brandy  and blotted the  site; yes, I could see the edge
of th e muscle layer; scrawny a s Myers was, a thin layer of
yellow fat lay u nder the skin, separating it from the dark red
fibers below .
I could feel the movement of his intestines as he breathed,
the dark  wet warmth of his bo dy surrounding my gloveless
fingers in that strange one-sided intimacy that is the sur geon’ s
realm. I closed my eyes and let all sense of ur gency , all
consciousness of the watching crowd drop away .
I br eathed in slowly , matched my rhythm to the audible
snores. Above the reek of brandy and the faintly nauseating
aromas of food, I could smell the earthy odors of his body;
stale sw eat, grim ed skin, a smal l tang of urine and the copper
scent of blood. T o another , they would have been of fensive,
but not to me, not now .
This body was . No  good, no bad, it simply was. I knew it,
now; it was mine.They were all m ine; the unconscious body in my hands, its
secrets o pen to me; the men wh o held it, their eyes on me. It
didn’ t a lways happen, but when it did, the sensation was
unfor gettable; a synthesis of minds into a single or ganism.
And as I took control of this or g anism, I became part of it, and
lost myself.
T ime sto pped. I was acutely aware of each movement, each
breath, t he tug and pull of the catgut sutures as I tightened the
inguinal ring, but my hands did  not belong to me. My voice
was high and clear , giving directions instantly obeyed, and
somewhere far away , a small wa tcher in my brain observed the
progress of the operation with a remote sense of interest.
Then it was done, and time bega n again. I took a step back,
breaking the link, and feeling slightly dizzy at the
unaccustomed solitude.
“Done,” I said, a nd the hum from the spectators erupted into
loud ap plause. Still feeling intoxicated—had I caught
drunkenness by osmosis from M yers?— I turned on one heel
and sank into a n extravagant low curtsy , facing the dinner
guests.
An hour later , I was drunk on my own merits, the victim of
a do zen toasts in  my honor . I managed to escape briefly , on the
excuse o f checking on my patient, and staggered upstairs to
the guest room where he lay .
I pa used on the  gallery , clinging to the banister while I
steadied myself . There was a loud hum of conversation and
laughter from below; the party was still going strong, but had
dissolved into small groups scattered over the parquet of the
foyer an d salon. From this persp ective, it looked like a honey-
comb, fuzzy wigged heads and gauze-winged dresses bobbing
to a nd fro across the six-side d tiles, buzzing busily over
glasses filled with the nectar of brandywine and porter .
If Ja mie had wanted a divers ion, I thought muzzily , he
couldn’ t have asked for better . Whatever had been going to
happen had been ef fectively forestalled. But what was it—andfor how long cou ld it be prevent ed? I shook my head to clear it
—with indif ferent results—and went in to see my patient.
Myers was still blissfully and deeply asleep, breathing in
long, slow exhalations that made the cotton bed-drapes quiver .
The slave Betty nodded at me, smiling.
“He’ s fine, Mrs. Claire,” she whispered. “Couldn’ t wake
that man with a gun, I don’ t think.”
I didn’ t need to check his heart; his head was turned, and I
could se e the huge vein that ra n down the side of his neck,
throbbing with a pulse slow an d heavy as a hammer blow . I
touched him, feeling his skin cool and damp. No fever , no
signs of  shock. The whole of his enormous person radiated
peace and well-being.
“How is  he?” Had I been less drunk, I would have been
startled. As it was, I merely swayed round on my axis, to find
Jamie standing behind me.
“He’ s fi ne,” I said. “Y ou could n’ t kill him with a cannon.
Like you,” I said, and found myself leaning against him, arms
around his waist, my flushed fa ce buried in the cool folds of
his linen. “Indestructible.”
He kisse d the top of my head, smoothing back a few curls
that had escaped from their dressing during the operation.
“Y e did well, Sassenach,” he whispered. “V erra well, bonnie
lassie.”
He sme lt of wine and candlewax, of herbs and Highland
wool. I slid my hands lower , feeling the curves of his buttocks,
smooth and free under his kilt. He moved slightly , the length
of his thigh pressing briefly against mine.
“Y e need  a bit of air , Sassenach—and we must talk. Can ye
leave him for a time?”
I glanced at the bed and its stertorous occupant.
“Y es. As  long as Betty will keep  sitting with him to be sure
he does n’ t vomit in his sleep and choke?” I glanced at theslave, who looked surprised that I should ask, but nodded
willingly .
“Meet m e by the herb garden— and take care not to fall
down th e stairs and break your neck, aye?” Lifting my chin, he
kissed me quick and deep, and left me dizzy , feeling at once
more sober and more drunk than before.1 3
A N  E X A M I N A T I O N  O F  C O N S C I E N C E
S omething dark landed on the path in front of us with a soft
plop!  and I stopped abruptly , clutching his arm.
“Frog,” Jamie said, unperturbed. “D’ye hear them singing?”
“Singing” wasn’ t the word that would have struck me about
the chorus of c roaks and grunts from the reedbeds near the
river . On the ot her hand, Jamie was tone deaf, and made no
bones about it.
He extended the toe of his shoe and gently prodded the
squat dark shape.
” ‘Brekekekex, ko-ax, ko-ax,’ ” he quoted. ” ‘Brekekekex,
ko-ax!’ ” The s hape hopped away and disappeared into the
moist plants by the path.
“I alway s knew you had a gift for tongues,” I said, amused.
“Didn’ t know you spoke frog, though.”
“W ell, I’ m no ways fluent,” he s aid modestly . “Though I’ve
a fine accent, and I say it myself.”
I lau ghed, and h e squeezed my hand and let it go. The brief
spark of the joke  faded, failing to kindle conversation, and we
walked on, physically together but miles apart in thought.
I should have been exhausted, but adrenaline was still
coursing through my veins. I felt the exultation that comes
with the  completion of a succ essful bit of sur gery , to say
nothing of a littl e standard alcoholic intoxication. The ef fect of
it all was to mak e me slightly wobbly on my pins, but with an
acute and vivid awareness of everything around me.
There was an or namental seat under the trees near the dock,
and it was to this that Jamie led me, into the shadows. He sank
onto the marble bench with a deep sigh, reminding me that I
wasn’ t the only one for whom it had been an eventful evening.I looked around with exaggerated attention, then sat down
beside him.
“W e’re a lone and unobserved,” I said. “Do you want to tell
me what the hell is going on now?”
“Oh, aye.” He straightened, stretching his back. “I should
have said something to ye sooner , only I didna quite expect
she wou ld do such a thing.” He reached out and found my
hand in the dark.
“It’ s not anything wrong, exactl y , as I told ye. It’ s only that
when U lysses brought me the p laid and dirk and the brooch,
he to ld me that Jocasta meant to make an announcement at the
dinner tonight— to tell everyone that she meant to make me
heir to…this.”
His gest ure took in the house and fields behind us—and
everything else: the river mooring, the orchard, the gardens,
the stab les, the endless acres of resinous pines, the sawmill
and the turpentine camp—and the forty slaves who worked
them.
I c ould see the  whole thing u nfolding as Jocasta had no
doubt e nvisioned it; Jamie sitting at the head of the table,
dressed in Hector Cameron’ s tartan, wearing his blade and his
brooch—that b rooch with the Camerons’ unsubtle clan
adjuration “Unite!”—surrounde d by Hector ’ s old colleagues
and comrades, all eager to welcome their friend’ s younger
kinsman into his place.
Let her make such an announc ement, in that company of
loyal Scots, well lubricated with  the late Hector ’ s fine whisky ,
and they would have acclaimed  him on the spot as the master
of River Run, anointed him with boar ’ s fat and crowned him
with beeswax candles.
It had been a thoroughly MacKenzie-like plan, I thought;
audacious, dramatic—and taking no account of the wishes of
the persons involved.
“And if she h ad,” he said, echoing my thoughts with
uncanny precision, “I should have found it verra awkward todecline the honor .”
“Y es, very .”
He sprang suddenly to his feet, too restless to stay still.
W ithout speaking, he held out a hand to me; I rose beside him
and we turned b ack into the orchard path, circling the formal
gardens. The lanterns lit for the party had been removed, their
candles thriftily snuf fed for later use.
“Why did Ulysses tell you?” I wondered aloud.
“Ask yourself, Sassenach,” he said. “Who is master now , at
River Run?”
“Oh?” I said, and then, “Oh!”
“Oh, ind eed,” he said dryly . “My aunt is blind; who has the
keeping of the accounts, the ru nning of the household? She
may dec ide what things should be done—but who is to say
whether they ar e  don e? Who is always at her hand to tell her
aught that happens, whose w ords are in her ear , whose
judgment does she trust above all others?”
“I see.” I stared down at the ground, thinking. “Y ou don’ t
suppose he’ s been fiddling the accounts or anything sordid like
that?” I hoped n ot; I liked Jocas ta’ s butler very much, and had
thought there was both fondnes s and respect between them; I
didn’ t like to think of his cold-bloodedly cheating her .
Jamie shook his head.
“He is not. I’ve  been over the  ledgers and accounts, and
everything is in order—verra good order indeed. I’m sure he is
an honest man and a faithful servant—but he wouldna be
human, to welcome giving up his place to a stranger .”
He snorted briefly .
“My aunt may be blind, but yon black man sees clear
enough. He didna say a word to prevent me, or persuade me of
anything: only told me what my aunt meant to do, and then left
it to me what I  should do. Or not.”“Y ou think he k new that you wouldn’ t—” I stopped there,
because I wasn’ t sure myself that he wouldn’ t. Pride, caution,
or both might have caused him to want to thwart Jocasta’ s
plan, but that didn’ t mean he meant to reject her of fer , either .
He d idn’ t reply , and a small cold chill ran through me. I
shivered, in spite of the warm su mmer air , and took his arm as
we w alked, seeking reassurance  in the solid feel of his flesh
beneath my fingers.
It was late July , and the scent of ripening fruit from the
orchard was sweet, so heavy on the air that I could almost taste
the c lean, crisp tang of new app les. I thought of temptation—
and the worm that lay hidden beneath a shining skin.
T emptation not only for him, but for me. For him, the
chance t o be what he was mad e for by nature, what fate had
denied h im. He was born and br ed to this: the stewardship of a
lar ge estate, the care of the people on it, a place of respect
among men of substance, his peers. More importantly , the
restoration of clan and family . I am  alr eady pa rt of it,  he’d
said.
He cared  nothing for wealth, of  itself; I knew that. Neither
did I think he w anted power; if he did, knowing what I knew
about the future’ s shape, he wou ld have chosen to go north, to
seek a place among the founders of a nation.
But he had been  a laird once. He had told me very little of
his time in prison, but one thing he had said rang in my
memory . Of the men who share d his confinement, he said—
They wer e mine. And the having  of them kept me alive . And I
remembered what Ian had said of Simon Fraser: “Car e for his
men is now his only link with humanity .”
Y es, Jamie needed men. Men to  lead, to care for , to defend
and to fight with. But not to own.
Past the orchard, still in silence, and down the long walk of
herbaceous borders, with the scents of lily and lavender ,
anemone and roses, so pungent and heady that simply to walkthrough the hot, heavy air was like throwing oneself headlong
onto a bed of fragrant petals.
Oh, Riv er Run was a garden of earthly delight, all right…
but I had called a black man friend, and left my daughter in his
care.
Thinking of Joe Abernathy , and Brianna, gave me a strange
sense of dislocated double vision, of existing in two places at
once. I could see their faces in my mind, hear their voices in
my inner ear . A nd yet reality was the man beside me, kilt
swinging with his stride, head bent in anxious thought.
And that was my tempt ation: Jamie. Not the
inconsequentials of soft beds or gracious rooms, silk gowns or
social deference. Jamie.
If he  did not take Jocasta’ s of fer , he must do something else.
And “somethin g else” was m ost likely W illiam T ryon’ s
dangerous lure of land and men. Better than Jocasta’ s generous
of fer , in its way;  what he built would be his own, the legacy he
wanted to leave for Brianna. If he lived to build it.
I w as still living on two planes. In this one, I could hear the
whisper of his k ilt where it bru shed my skirt, feel the humid
warmth of his b ody , warmer even than the heated air . I could
smell th e musky  scent of him that made me want to pull him
from his  thoughts into the border , unbelt him and let the plaid
fall from his sh oulders, pull down my bodice and press my
breasts against him, take him down half-naked and wholly
roused a mong the damp green p lants, and force him from his
thoughts to mine.
But on the plane of memory , I smelled yew trees and the
wind from the s ea, and under my fingers was no warm man,
but the cold, smooth granite of a tombstone with his name.
I didn’ t speak. Neither did he.
W e had made a complete circle  by now , and come back to
the river ’ s edge, where gray stone steps led down and
disappeared und er a lapping sheen of water; even so far
upstream, the faint echoes of the tide could be felt.There w as a boat moored ther e; a small rowboat, fit for
solitary fishing or a leisurely excursion.
“W ill ye come for a row?”
“Y es, why not?” I thought he must feel the same desire I
had—to get away from the hou se and Jocasta, to get enough
distance in which to think clearly , without danger of
interruption.
I ca me down, putting my han d on his arm for balance.
Before I  could step into the boat, though, he turned toward me.
Pulling me to him, he kissed me, gently , once, then held me
against his body , his chin resting on my head.
“I don’ t know ,” he said quietly , in answer to my unspoken
questions. He stepped into the boat and of fered me a hand.
He was silent while we made our way out onto the river . It was
a da rk, moonless night, but the r eflections of starlight from the
surface o f the river gave enough light to see, once my eyes had
adapted to the shifting glimmer of water and tree-shadow .
“Y e dinna mean to say anything?” he asked abruptly , at last.
“It’ s not my cho ice to make,” I said, feeling a tightness in
my chest that had nothing to do with stays.
“No?”
“She’ s your aunt. It’ s your life. It has to be your choice.”
“And you’ll be a spectator , will you?” He grunted as he
spoke, digging with the oars as  he pulled upstream. “Is it not
your  life? Or do ye not mean to stay with me, after all?”
“What do you mean, not stay?” I sat up, startled.
“Perhaps it will be too much for you.” His head was bent
over the oars; I couldn’ t see his face.
“If you mean what happened at the sawmill—”
“No, no t that.” He heaved back on the oars, shoulders
broadening und er his linen, and gave me a crooked smile.
“Death and disaster wouldn a trouble ye ower -much,Sassenach. But the small things , day by day…I see ye flinch,
when the black maid combs your hair , or when the boy takes
your sho es away to clean. And  the slaves who work in the
turpentine camp. That troubles ye, no?”
“Y es. It does. I’m—I can’ t own slaves. I’ve told you—”
“A ye, y e have.” He rested on  the oars for a moment,
brushing a lock of hair out of  his face. His eyes met mine
squarely .
“And if I chose to do this, Sasse nach…could ye stay by me,
and watc h, and do nothing—for there is nothing that could be
done, until my aunt should die. Perhaps not even then.”
“What do you mean?”
“She will not fre e her slaves—how should she? I could not,
while she lived.”
“But once you had inherited the place…” I hesitated.
Beyond the ghoulish aspects o f discussing Jocasta’ s death,
there was the more concrete con sideration that that event was
unlikely to occur for some time ; Jocasta was little more than
sixty , and aside from her blindness, in vigorous health.
I sud denly saw w hat he meant; could I bring myself to live,
day afte r day , month after month, year after year , as an owner
of slaves ? I could not pretend otherwise, could take no refuge
in the notion that I was only a guest, an outsider .
I bit my lip, in order not to cry out instant denial.
“Even then,” he said, answering my partial ar gument. “Did
ye n ot know tha t a slave owner cannot free his slaves without
the written permission of the Assembly?”
“He what?” I stared blankly at him. “Whyever not?”
“The plantation owners go in fe ar of an armed insurrection
of Negroes,” he said. “And d’ye blame them?” he added
sardonically .
“Slaves are forbidden to carry weapons, save tools such as
tree knives, and there are the b loodshed laws to prevent theiruse.” He  shook his head. “Nay , the last thing the Assembly
would a llow is a lar ge group of  free blacks let loose upon the
countryside. Even if a man wishes to manumit one of his
slaves, a nd is given permission to do so, the freed slave is
required to leave the colony with in a short time—or he may be
captured and enslaved by anyone who chooses to take him.”
“Y ou’ve thought about it,” I said slowly .
“Haven’ t you?”
I did n’ t answer . I trailed my han d in the water , a little wave
purling up my wrist. No, I hadn’ t thought about the prospect.
Not consciously , because I hadn’ t wanted to face the choice
that was now being laid before me.
“I su ppose it would be a great chance,” I said, my voice
sounding strain ed and unnatural to my ears. “Y ou’d be in
char ge of everything…”
“My aunt is not a fool,” he interrupted, with a slight edge to
his voice. “She would make me heir , but not owner in her
place. S he would use me to do those things she cannot—but I
would be no mo re than her cat’ s -paw . T rue, she would ask my
opinion, listen to my advice; bu t nothing would be done, and
she didna wish it so.”
He shook his head.
“Her hu sband is  dead. Whether she was fond of him or no,
she is mistress here now , with  none to answer to. And she
enjoys the taste of power too well to spit it out.”
He was plainly correct in this assessment of Jocasta
Cameron’ s character , and therei n lay the key to her plan. She
needed a man; someone to go into those places she could not
go, to deal with the Navy , to handle the chores of a lar ge estate
that she could not manage because of her blindness.
At t he same time, she patently  did not  wa nt a husband;
someone who would usurp her power and dictate to her . Had
he n ot been a slave, Ulysses could have acted for her—but
while he could be her eyes and ears, he could not be her hands.No, Jam ie was the perfect choice; a strong, competent man,
able to command respect among peers, compel obedience in
subordinates. On e knowledgeab le in the management of land
and men. Furthermore, a man bound to her by kinship and
obligation, there  to do her bidding—but essentially powerless.
He w ould be he ld in thrall by dependence upon her bounty ,
and by the rich bribe of River R un itself; a debt that need not
be p aid until the matter was no longer of any earthly concern
to Jocasta Cameron.
There was an increasing lump in my throat as I sought for
words. I couldn’ t, I thought. I couldn’ t manage it. But I
couldn’ t face the alternative, either; I couldn’ t ur ge him to
reject Jo casta’ s of fer , knowing it would send him to Scotland,
to meet an unknown death.
“I ca n’ t say what you should do,” I finally said, my voice
barely audible above the regular lap of the oars.
There w as an eddy pool, where a lar ge tree had fallen into
the water , its br anches forming a trap for all the debris that
drifted downstream. Jamie made for this, backing the rowboat
neatly into quiet water . He let down the oars, and wiped a
sleeve across his forehead, breathing heavily from exertion.
The nig ht was quiet around us , with little sound but the
lapping of water , and the occasi onal scrape of submer ged tree
branches against the hull. At last he reached out and touched
my chin.
“Y our face is my  heart, Sassenach,” he said softly , “and love
of you is my soul. But you’re right; ye canna be my
conscience.”
In spite of every thing, I felt a lightening of spirit, as though
some indefinable burden had dropped away .
“Oh, I’m glad,” I said, adding impulsively , “it would be a
terrible strain.”
“Oh, aye?” He looked mildly s tartled. “Y e think me verra
wicked, then?”“Y ou’re the best man I’ve ever met,” I said. “I only meant…
it’ s such a strain , to try to live f or two people. T o try to make
them fit your ideas of what’ s right…you do it for a child, of
course, you have to, but even then, it’ s dreadfully hard work. I
couldn’ t do it for you—it would be wrong even to try .”
I’d taken him back more than  a little. He sat for some
moments, his face half turned away .
“Do ye really think me a good man?” he said at last. There
was a queer note in his voice, that I couldn’ t quite decipher .
“Y es,” I  said, with no hesitation. Then added, half jokingly ,
“Don’ t you?”
After a long pau se, he said, quit e seriously , “No, I shouldna
think so.”
I looked at him , speechless, no doubt with my mouth
hanging open.
“I am  a violent man, and I ken it well,” he said quietly . He
spread h is hands out on his knees; big hands, which could
wield sword and dagger with e ase, or choke the life from a
man. “So do you—or ye should.”
“Y ou’ve never done anything you weren’ t forced to do!”
“No?”
“I d on’ t think so,” I said, but even as I spoke, a shadow of
doubt c louded my words. Even when done from the most
ur gent necessity , did such things not leave a mark on the soul?
“Y e wouldna hold me in the same estimation as, say , a man
like Stephen Bonnet? He might well say he acted from
necessity .”
“If you think you have the slightest thing in common with
Stephen Bonnet, you’re dead wrong,” I said firmly .
He shrugged, half impatient, and shifted restlessly on the
narrow bench.
“There’ s nay much to choose between Bonnet and me, save
that I have a sen se of honor that he lacks. What else keeps mefrom turning thief?” he demanded. “From plundering those
whom I  might?  It is in me to do it—my one grandsire built
Leoch o n the gold of those he robbed in the Highland passes;
the other built h is fortune on th e bodies of women whom he
forced for their wealth and titles.”
He stretched himself, powerful s houlders rising dark against
the s himmer of the water behin d him. Then he suddenly took
hold of the oar s across his knees and flung them into the
bottom of the boat, with a crash that made me jump.
“I am more than five-and-forty!” he said. “A man should be
settled at that age, no? He should have a house, and some land
to grow his food, and a bit of  money put away to see him
through his auld age, at the least.”
He took  a deep breath; I could see the white bosom of his
shirt rise with his swelling chest.
“W ell, I dinna have a house. Or land. Or money . Not a croft,
not a tattie-plot , not a cow or a sheep or a pig or a goat! I
havena got a rooftree or a bedstead, or a pot to piss in!”
He slammed his fist down on the thwart, making the
wooden seat vibrate under me.
“I dinna own the clothes I stand up in!”
There w as a long silence, brok en only by the thin song of
crickets.
“Y ou have me,” I said, in a small voice. It didn’ t seem a lot.
He made a sma ll sound in his throat that might have been
either a laugh or a sob.
“A ye, I have,” he said. His voice was quivering a bit, though
whether with passion or amusement, I couldn’ t tell. “That’ s the
hell of it, aye?”
“It is?”
He threw up his hand in a gesture of profound impatience.
“If it was only me, what would it matter? I could live like
Myers; go to the woods, hunt and fish for my living, and whenI w as too old, lie down under a  peaceful tree and die, and let
the foxes gnaw my bones. Who would care?”
He shrugged his shoulders with irritable violence, as though
his shirt was too tight.
“But it’ s not  only me,” he said. “It’ s you, and it’ s Ian and it’ s
Duncan and it’ s Fer gus and it’ s Marsali—God help me, there’ s
even Laoghaire to think of!”
“Oh, let’ s don’ t,” I said.
“Do ye not understand?” he sa id, in near desperation. “I
would lay the world at your feet, Claire—and I have nothing
to give ye!”
He honestly thought it mattered.
I sat looking at him, searching for words. He was half
turned away , shoulders slumped in despair .
W ithin a n hour , I had gone from anguish at the thought of
losing him in Scotland, to a strong desire to bed him in the
herbaceous bord ers, and from that to a pronounced ur ge to hit
him on the head with an oar . Now I was back to tenderness.
At last I took o ne big, callused hand and slid forward so I
knelt on  the boards between his knees. I laid my head against
his c hest, and felt his breath stir my hair . I had no words, but I
had made my choice.
” ‘ Whither thou goest,’ ” I said, ” ‘I will go; and where thou
lodgest, I will lo dge: thy people shall be my people, and thy
God my God: W here thou diest, will I die, and there will I be
buried.’ ” Be it Scottish hill or southern forest. “Y ou do what
you have to; I’ll be there.”
The wat er ran fast and shallow near the middle of the creek; I
could se e the boulders black just beneath the glinting surface.
Jamie saw them, too, and pulled strongly for the far side,
bringing us to rest against a shelving gravel bank, in a pool
formed by the roots of a weep ing willow . I leaned out and
caught a  branch of the willow , and wrapped the painter round
it.I h ad thought w e would return to River Run, but evidently
this expedition had some point beyond respite. W e had
continued upriver instead, Jamie pulling strongly against the
slow current.
Left alone with my thoughts, I could only listen to the faint
hiss of his breath, and wonder w hat he would do. If he chose
to stay… well, it might not be  as dif ficult as he thought. I
didn’ t underrate Jocasta Cameron, but neither did I
underestimate Jamie Fraser . Both Colum and Dougal
MacKenzie had tried to bend him to their will—and both had
failed.
I ha d a moment’ s qualm at the memory of my last sight of
Dougal MacKenzie, mouthing s oundless curses as he drowned
in h is own blood, Jamie’ s dirk  socketed at the base of his
throat. I am a violent man,  he’d said, you know it .
But he was still wrong; there w as a dif ference between this
man and  Stephen Bonnet, I tho ught, watching the flex of his
body on  the oars, the grace an d power of the sweep of his
arms. He had several things beyond the honor that he claimed:
kindness, courage…and a conscience.
I r ealize d where we were going, as he backed with one oar ,
steering across the current towa rd the mouth of a wide creek,
overhung with aspens. I had never approached by water
before, but Jocasta had said it was not far .
I should  not have been surprised; if he had come out tonight
to confront his demons, it was a most appropriate place.
A li ttle way abo ve the creek mouth, the mill loomed dark
and silent. There was a dim glo w behind its bulk; light from
the s lave shanties near the wood s. W e were surrounded by the
usual ni ght noises, but the place seemed strangely quiet, in
spite of the racket made by trees and frogs and water . Though
it was night, the huge building seemed to cast a shadow—
though this was plainly no more than my imagination.
“Places that are very busy in the daytime always seem
particularly spooky at night,” I said, in an ef fort to break themill’ s silence.
“Do they?” Jamie sounded abstracted. “I didna much like
that one in the daylight.”
I shuddered at the memory .
“Neither did I. I only meant—”
“Byrnes is dead.” He didn’ t look  at me; his face was turned
toward the mill, half-hidden by the willow’ s shadow .
I dropped the end of the tie rope.
“The overseer? When?” I said, shocked more by the
abruptness than the revelation. “And how?”
“This af ternoon. Campbell’ s youngest lad brought the news
just before sunset.”
“How?” I asked again. I gripped my knees, a double handful
of ivory silk twisted in my fingers.
“It was the lock jaw .” His voice was casual, unemphatic. “A
verra nasty way to die.”
He w as right ab out that. I had never actually seen anyone
die o f tetanus m yself, but I knew the symptoms well enough:
restlessness and  dif ficulty swallowing, developing into a
progressive stif fening as the muscles of arms and legs and
neck began to spasm. The spa sms increased in severity and
duration until the patient’ s body was hard as wood, arched in
an a gony that came on and receded, came on again, went of f,
and at last cam e on in an endless tetany that could not be
relaxed by anything save death.
“He died grinnin’, Ronnie Campbell said. But I shouldna
think it was a h appy death, forbye.” It was a grim joke, but
there was little humor in his voice.
I sat  up quite straight, feeling cold all down my spine in
spite of the warmth of the night.
“It i sn’ t a quick death, either ,” I said. Suspicion spread cold
tentacles through my mind. “It takes days to die of tetanus.”“It t ook Davie B yrnes five days, first to last.” If there had
been any trace o f humor in his voice to start with, it was gone
now .
“Y ou saw  him,”  I said, a small f licker of anger beginning to
thaw the  internal chill. “Y ou s aw him! And you didn’ t tell
me?”
I had dressed Byrnes’ s injur y—hideous, but not life-
threatening—and had been told that he would be kept
somewhere “safe” until the disturbance over the lynching had
died down. Heartsick as I was over the matter , I had made no
ef fort to inquire further after the overseer ’ s whereabouts or
welfare; it was my own guilt at this neglect that made me
angry , and I knew it—but the knowledge didn’ t help.
“Could y e have done anything? I thought ye told me that the
lockjaw was one of the things that couldna be helped, even in
your time.” He wasn’ t looking at me; I could see his profile
turned toward the mill, head sta mped in darker black against
the lighter shadow of pale leaves.
I forced  myself to let go of my skirt. I smoothed the
crumpled patches over my knee, thinking dimly that Phaedre
would have a terrible time ironing it.
“No,” I said, wi th a little ef fort.  “No, I couldn’ t have saved
him. Bu t I should have seen hi m; I might have eased him a
little.”
Now he  did look at me; I saw  his head turn, and felt the
shifting of his weight in the boat.
“Y ou might,” he said evenly .
“And you wouldn’ t let me—” I stopped, remembering his
absences this past week, and h is evasive replies when I had
asked him where he’d been. I could imagine the scene all too
well; the  tiny , stifling attic room in Farquard Campbell’ s house
where I had dre ssed Byrnes’ s injury . The racked figure on the
bed, dyi ng by inches under the cold eyes of those the law had
made his unwilling allies, know ing that he died despised. The
sense of cold came back, raising gooseflesh on my arms.“No, I wouldna let Campbell se nd for you,” he said softly .
“There’ s the law , Sassenach—a nd there is justice. I ken the
dif ference well enough.”
“There’ s such a thing as mercy , too.” And had anyone
asked, I would have called Jam ie Fraser a merciful man. He
had been, once. But the years be tween now and then had been
hard ones—and compassion was a soft emotion, easily eroded
by circumstance . I had thought he still had his kindness,
though; and felt a queer pain at the thought of its loss. I
shouldna think so, no . Had that been no more than honesty?
The boat had drifted halfway r ound, so that the drooping
branch h ung now between us. There was a small snort from
the darkness behind the leaves.
“Blessed are the merciful,” he said, “for they shall find
mercy . Byrnes wasn’ t, and he di dn’ t. And as for me, once God
had made his opinion of the man known, I didna think it right
to interfere.”
“Y ou think God  gave him tetanus?”
“I canna think a nyone else would have the imagination for
it. Besid es,” he went on, logical ly , “where else would ye look
for justice?”
I s earch ed for words, and failed to find any . Giving up, I
returned to the only possible point of ar gument. I felt a little
sick.
“Y ou ou ght to have told me. Eve n if you didn’ t think I could
help, it wasn’ t your business to decide—”
“I didna want ye to go.” His voice was still quiet, but there
was a note of steel in it now .
“I k now you d idn’ t! But it d oesn’ t matter whether you
thought Byrnes deserved to suf fer or—”
“Not for him!” The boat rocked suddenly as he moved, and
I grasped the sides to keep my balance. He spoke violently .
“I d idna care a fig whether Byrnes died easy or hard, but
I’m no a monster of cruelty! I didna keep you from him tomake him suf fer; I kept ye away to protect you.”
I wa s relieved to hear this, bu t increasingly angry as the
truth of what he’d done dawned on me.
“It w asn’ t your business to de cide that. If I’m not your
conscience, it isn’ t up to you to be mine!” I brushed angrily at
the screen of willow fronds between us, trying to see him.
Suddenly a hand shot through the leaves and grabbed my
wrist.
“It’ s up to me to keep ye safe!”
I tried to jerk aw ay , but he had a tight grip on me, and he
wasn’ t letting go.
“I am not a young girl who n eeds protection, nor yet an
idiot! If there’ s some reason for me not to do something, then
tell m e a nd I’ll listen. But you can’ t decide what I’m to do and
where I’ m to go without even consulting me—I won’ t stand
for that, and you bloody well know it!”
The boat lurched, and with a huge rustling of leaves, he
popped his head through the willow , glaring.
“I am not trying to say where ye’ll go!”
“Y ou decided where I mustn’ t  g o, and that’ s just as bad!”
The willow leaves slid back over his shoulders as the boat
moved, jarred by his violence, and we revolved slowly ,
coming out of the tree’ s shadow .
He l oomed in fr ont of me, mass ive as the mill, his head and
shoulders blotting out a good b it of the scenery behind him.
The long, straight nose was an inch from mine, and his eyes
had gon e narrow . They were a dark enough blue to be black in
this ligh t, and looking into th em at close range was most
unnerving.
I blinked. He didn’ t.
He h ad l et go of my wrist when he came through the leaves.
Now he took ho ld of my upper arms. I could feel the heat of
his g rip through the cloth. His hands were very big and veryhard, ma king me suddenly aware of the fragility of my own
bones in contrast. I am a violent man .
He’d shaken me a time or two before, and I hadn’ t liked it.
In c ase he had  something of the sort in mind just now , I
inserted a foot between his leg s, and prepared to give him a
swift knee where it would do most good.
“I was wrong,” he said.
T ensed for violence, I had actu ally started to jerk my foot
up, w hen I heard what he had said. Before I could stop, he had
clamped his legs tight together , trapping my knee between his
thighs.
“I said  I was wrong, S assenach,” he repeated, a touch of
impatience in his voice. “D’ye mind?”
“Ah…no,” I said, feeling a trifle sheepish. I wiggled my
knee tentatively , but he kept his thighs squeezed tight together .
“Y ou wouldn’ t consider letting go of me, would you?” I said
politely . My heart was still pounding.
“No, I wouldn’ t. Are ye going to listen to me now?”
“I su ppose so,” I said, still polite. “It doesn’ t look as though
I’m very busy at the moment.”
I was close enough to see his mouth twitch. His thighs
squeezed tighter for a moment, then relaxed.
“This is a verra  foolish quarrel, and you know that as well
as I do.”
“No, I don’ t.” M y anger had fa ded somewhat, but I wasn’ t
about to  let him dismiss it altogether . “It’ s maybe not
important to you, but it is to me. It isn’ t foolish. And you
know it, or you wouldn’ t be admitting you’re wrong.”
The twit ch was more pronounced this time. He took a deep
breath, and dropped his hands from my shoulders.
“W ell, then. I should maybe have told ye about Byrnes; I
admit it. But if I had, ye would have gone to him, even if I’dsaid it was the lo ckjaw—and I kent it was, I’ve seen it before.
Even if there was nothing ye could do, you’d still go? No?”
“Y es. Even if—yes, I would have gone.”
In fact, there w as nothing I co uld have done for Byrnes.
Myers’ s anesthetic wouldn’ t have helped a case of tetanus.
Nothing short of injectable curare would ease those spasms. I
could have given him nothing more than the comfort of my
presence, and it was doubtful that he would have appreciated
that—or even noticed it. Still, I would have felt bound to of fer
it.
“I would have had to go,” I said, more gently . “I’m a doctor .
Don’ t you see?”
“Of course I do,” he said gruf fly . “D’ye think I dinna ken ye
at all, Sassenach?”
W ithout waiting for an answer , he went on.
“There was talk about what happened at the mill—there
would b e, aye? But with the man  dying under your hands as he
did—well, no one’ s said straigh t out that ye might have killed
him on purpose …but it’ s easy to see folk thinkin’ it. Not
thinkin’ that ye killed him, even —but only that ye might have
thought to let hi m die on purpo se, so as to save him from the
rope.”
I sta red at my hands, spread out on my knees, nearly as pale
as the ivory satin under them.
“I did think of it.”
“I ken that fine, aye?” he said dryly . “I saw your face,
Sassenach.”
I drew a deep breath, if only to assure myself that the air
was no longer thick with the  smell of blood. There was
nothing but the turpentine scen t of the pine forest, clean and
astringent in my nostrils. I had a sudden vivid memory of the
hospital, of the smell of pine-scented disinfectant that hung in
the air , that over laid but could n ot banish the underlying smell
of sickness.I too k another c leansing breath, and raised my head to look
at Jamie.
“And did you  wonder if I’d killed him?”
He looked faintly surprised.
“Y e wou ld have done as ye thought best.” He dismissed the
minor q uestion of whether I’d killed a man, in favor of the
point at issue.
“But it didna seem wise for ye to preside over both deaths,
if ye take my meaning.”
I did, and not for the first time I was aware of the subtle
networks of which he was a pa rt, in a way I could never be.
This place in its  way was as strange to him as it was to me;
and yet he knew not only what people were saying—anyone
could find that out, who cared to haunt tavern and market—but
what they were thinking.
What w as more irritating was that he knew what I  was
thinking.
“So ye see,” he said, watching me. “I kent Byrnes was sure
to die, and ye couldna help. Y et if ye knew his trouble, ye’d
surely g o to him. And then he would die, and folk would
maybe not say how strange it was, that both men had died
under your hand, so to speak—but—”
“But they’d be thinking it,” I finished for him.
The twitch grew into a crooked smile.
“Folk notice you, Sassenach.”
I bit my lip. For good or for ill , they did, and the noticing
had come close to killing me more than once.
He rose , and taking hold of a branch for balance, stepped
out on the gravel and pulled the plaid up over his shoulder .
“I to ld Mrs. Byr nes I would fetch away her husband’ s things
from the mill,” he said. “Y e needna come, if ye dinna wish.”The mill loomed against the star -spattered sky . It couldn’ t
have looked more sinister if it had tried. Whither thou goest, I
will go .
I tho ught I knew  now what he was doing. He had wanted to
see it all, befo re making up his mind; see it with the
knowledge that it might be his. W alking through the gardens
and orchards, rowing past the ac res of thick pines, visiting the
mill—he was surveying the domain he was of fered, weighing
and eva luating, deciding what complications must be dealt
with, and whether he could or would accept the challenge.
After all, I thought sourly , the Devil had insisted on
showing Jesus everything He was passing up, taking Him up
to th e to p of the T emple to gaze  on the cities of the world. The
only dif ficulty was that if Jami e decided to fling himself of f,
there wasn’ t a legion of angels standing by to stop him dashing
his foot —and everything else—against a slab of Scottish
granite.
Only me.
“W ait,” I said, clambering out of the boat. “I’m coming,
too.”
The lumber was still stacked in the millyard; no one had
moved any of it  since the last time I had been here. The dark
took aw ay all sense of perspect ive; the stacks of fresh timber
were pale rectangles that seem ed to float above an invisible
ground, first distant, then suddenly looming close enough to
brush my skirts. The air smelt of pinesap and sawdust.
I c ouldn ’ t see the ground under my own feet, for that matter ,
obscured as it was both by darkness and by my billowing ivory
skirt. Jamie held my arm to keep  me from stumbling. He never
stumbled, of course. Perhaps living all his life without even
the thought of light outside after sunset had given him some
sort of radar , I thought; like a bat.
There was a fire burning, somewhere among the slave huts.
It was very late; most would be sleeping. In the Indies, there
would h ave bee n the nightlong sound of drums and keening;the slave s would have made lamentations for a fellow’ s death,
a festiv al of mourning to last  the week. Here, there was
nothing. No sound save the pine trees’ soughing, no flicker of
movement save the faint light at the forest’ s edge.
“They are afraid,” Jamie said softly , pausing to listen to the
silence, as I did.
“Little wonder ,” I said, half under my breath. “So am I.”
He mad e a small huf fing sound that might have been
amusement.
“So am I,” he muttered, “but not of ghosts.” He took my
arm and pushed open the small man-door at the side of the
mill before I could ask what he was  afraid of.
The silence inside had a body to  it. At first I thought it like
the eerie quiet of dead battlef ields, but then I realized the
dif ference. This  silence was alive. And whatever lived in the
silence h ere, it wasn’ t lying quiet. I thought I could still smell
the blood, thick on the air .
Then I breathed deeply and thought again, cold horror
rippling up my spine. I could  smell blood. Fresh blood.
I gripped Jamie’ s arm, but he had smelled it himself; his
arm had gone hard under m y hand, muscles tensed in
wariness. W ithout a word, he de tached himself from my grip,
and vanished.
For a moment, I  thought he tru ly had  vanished, and nearly
panicked, groping for him, my hand closing on the empty air
where he’d stood. Then I realize d that he had merely flung the
dark plaid over his head, instantly hiding the paleness of face
and line n shirt. I heard his ste p, quick and light on the dirt
floor , and then that was gone too.
The air was ho t and still, and thick with blood. A rank,
sweet smell, with a metal taste on the back of the tongue.
Exactly the same as it had been a week ago, conjuring
hallucination. St ill in the grip of a cold grue, I swung around
and strained my eyes toward the far side of the cavernous
room, ha lf expecting to see the scene engraved on my memorymaterialize again out of darkness. The rope stretched tight
from the lumber crane, the h uge hook swaying with its
groaning burden…
A g roan rent the air , and I nearly bit my lip in two. My
throat swelled with a swallow ed scream; only the fear of
drawing something to me kept me silent.
Where w as Jamie? I longed to call out for him, but didn’ t
dare. M y eyes had grown enou gh accustomed to the dark to
make ou t the shadow of the saw  blade, an amorphous blob ten
feet away , but th e far side of the room was a wall of blackness.
I s trained my ey es to see, reali zing belatedly that in my pale
dress, I was und oubtedly visible to anyone in the room with
me.
The groan came again, and I sta rted convulsively . My palms
were sweating. It’ s not!  I told myself fiercely . It isn’ t, it can’ t
be!
I was paralyzed with fear , and it  took some moments for me
to realize what my ears had told me. The sound hadn’ t come
from the  blackness across the room, where the crane stood
with its hook. It had come from somewhere behind me.
I wh irled. The door we had come through was still open, a
pale rectangle in the pitch-black. Nothing showed, nothing
moved b etween me and the doo r . I took a quick step toward it
and stop ped. Every muscle in my legs strained to run like hell
—but I couldn’ t leave Jamie.
Again the sound, that same sobbing gasp of physical
anguish; pain past the point of crying out. W ith it, a new
thought popped into my mind; w hat if it was Jamie making the
sound?
Shocked out of caution, I tur ned toward the sound and
shouted his name, raising echoes from the roof high above.
“Jamie!” I cried again. “Where ar e  you?”
“Here, Sassena ch.” Jamie’ s muf fled voice came from
somewhere to my left, calm but somehow ur gent. “Come to
me, will ye?”It wasn’ t him. Nearly shaking with relief at the sound of his
voice, I blundered through the dark, not caring now what had
made the sound, as long as it wasn’ t Jamie.
My hand  struck  a wooden wall,  groped blindly , and finally
found a door , s tanding open. He was inside the overseer ’ s
quarters.
I ste pped through the door , and felt the change at once. The
air was even cl oser , and much hotter , than that in the mill
proper . T he floo r here was of wood, but there was no echo to
my step ; the air was dead still, suf focating. And the smell of
blood was even stronger .
“Where are you?” I called again, low-voiced this time.
“Here,” came the reply , startlingly near at hand. “By the
bed. Come and help me; it’ s a lass.”
He was in the tiny bedroom. The small room was
windowless, and  lightless too. I found them by feel, Jamie
kneeling on the wooden floor beside a narrow bed, and in the
bed, a body .
It was a female, as he’d said; touch told me that at once.
T ouch told me a lso that she was exsanguinating. The cheek I
brushed was cool and clammy . Everything else I touched was
warm and wet; her clothing, the bedclothes, the mattress
beneath her . I c ould feel wetness soaking through my skirt
where I knelt on the floor .
I f elt for a pulse in the throat and couldn’ t find it. The chest
moved slightly under my hand, the only sign of life beyond the
faint sigh that went with it.
“It’ s all right now ,” I heard myself saying, and my voice
was soothing, all trace of panic g one, though in truth there was
more reason for it now . “W e’re here, you’re not alone. What’ s
happened to you, can you tell me?”
All the time my  hands were da rting over head and throat
and che st and  stomach, pushing sodden clothes aside,
searching blindly , frantically , for a wound to stanch. Nothing,
no spurt of artery , no raw gash. And all the time, there was afaint but steady pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat,  l ike  the  sound of tiny feet
running.
“T ell…” It was not so much a word as the articulation of a
sigh. Then a catch, a sobbing breath indrawn.
“Who has done this to ye, lass?” Jamie’ s disembodied voice
came low and ur gent. “T ell me, who?”
“T ell…”
I tou ched all th e places where the great vessels lie close
beneath the skin and found th em whole. Seized her by an
unresisting arm and lifted, thrust a hand beneath to feel her
back. All the heat of her body was there; the bodice was damp
with sweat, but not blood-soaked.
“It will be all right,” I said again. “Y ou’re not alone. Jamie,
hold her  hand.” Hopelessness came down on me; I knew what
it must be.
“I alread y have it,” he said to me, and “Dinna trouble, lass,”
to he r . “It will be all right, d’ye hear me?” Pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat .
The tiny feet were slowing.
“T ell…”
I co uld not help , but nonetheless slid my hand beneath her
skirt aga in, this time letting my fingers curve between the limp
splayed thighs. She was still warm here, very warm. Blood
flowed g ently over my hand an d through my fingers, hot and
wet as the air ar ound us, unstoppable as the water that flowed
down the mill’ s sluice.
“I…die…”
“I th ink ye are  murdered, lass,” Jamie said to her , very
gently . “W ill ye not say who has killed you?”
Her breath came louder now , a soft rattle in her throat. Pit.
Pat. Pit. Pat . The feet were tiptoeing softly now .
“Ser…geant. T ell…him…”
I d rew my hand  out from between her thighs and took her
other ha nd in mine, heedless of the blood. It scarcely matterednow , after all.
“… tell …” came with sudden intensity , and then silence. A
long sile nce, and  then, another l ong, sighing breath. A silence,
even longer . And a breath.
“I will,”  said Jamie. His voice w as no more than a whisper
in the dark. “I will do it. I promise ye.”
Pit .
Pat .
They ca lled it the “death drop,” in the Highlands; the sound
of dripping water , heard in a house when one of the inhabitants
was about to di e. Not water d ripping here, but a sure sign,
nonetheless.
There was no m ore sound from the darkness. I couldn’ t see
Jamie, but felt the slight movement of the bed against my
thighs as he leaned forward.
“God will for give ye,” he whisp ered to the silence. “Go in
peace.”
I co uld hear th e buzzing the moment we stepped into the
overseer ’ s quarters the next morning. In the huge, dusty
silence o f the mill, everything h ad been muf fled in space and
sawdust. But in this small, partitioned area the walls caught
every so und and threw it back; our footsteps echoed from
wooden floor to wooden ceiling. I felt like a fly sealed inside a
snare drum, and suf fered a moment’ s claustrophobia, trapped
as I was in the narrow passage between the two men.
There were only two rooms, separated by a short passage
that led from the outdoors into the mill proper . On our right lay
the lar ger room that had served  the Byrneses for living and
cooking, and on the left, the sm aller bedroom, from which the
noise was coming. Jamie took a  deep breath, clasped his plaid
to his face, and pulled open the bedroom door .
It looke d like a blanket cover ing the bed, a blanket of
gunmetal blue sparked with green. Then Jamie took a step intothe room and the flies rose buzzing from their clotted meal in a
swarm of gluttonous protest.
I bit back a cry of abhorrence a nd ducked, flailing at them.
Bloated, slow-moving bodies hit my face and arms and
bounced away , circling lazily through the thick air . Farquard
Campbell made a Scottish noise of overpowering disgust that
sounded like “Heuch!” then lowered his head and pushed past
me, eyes slitted and lips pressed tight together , nostrils
pinched to whiteness.
The tiny  bedroom was hardly b igger than the cof fin it had
become. There were no windows, only cracks between the
boards that let in a dim uncertain light. The atmosphere was
hot a nd humid a s a tropical greenhouse, thick with the rotting-
sweet sm ell of death. I could feel the sweat snaking down my
sides, ticklish as flies’ feet, and tried to breathe only through
my mouth.
She had  not been lar ge; her body made only the slightest
mound beneath the blanket we had laid over her the night
before, for decency’ s sake. Her h ead seemed big by contrast to
the s hrunken body , like a child’ s  stick figure with a round ball
stuck on toothpick limbs.
Brushing away several flies too glutted to move, Jamie
pulled b ack the blanket. The blanket, like everything else, was
blotched and crusted, sodden at the foot. The human body , on
average, contain s eight pints of blood, but it seems a lot more
when you spread it around.
I ha d seen her face briefly the night before, dead features
lent an artificial glow by the li ght of the pine splinter Jamie
held above her . Now she lay pa llid and dank as a mushroom,
blunt fea tures emer ging from a web of fine brown hair . It was
impossible to tell her age, save  that she was not old. Neither
could I tell wh ether she had been attractive; there was no
beauty o f bone, but animation might have flushed the round
cheeks and lent her deepset eyes a sparkle men might have
found pretty . One man had, I thought. Pretty enough, anyway .The men were m urmuring together , bent over the still form.
Mr . Campbell turned now to me, wearing a slight frown
beneath his formal wig.
“Y ou ar e reasonably sure, Mrs. Fraser , of the cause of
death?”
“Y es.” T rying not to breathe the fetid air , I picked up the
edge of the blan ket, and turned it back, exposing the corpse’ s
legs. The feet were faintly blue and beginning to swell.
“I dr ew her skir t down, but I left everything else as it was,”
I explained, pulling it up again.
My stomach muscles tightened automatically as I touched
her . I had seen dead bodies before, and this was far from the
most gruesome, but the hot clim ate and closed atmosphere had
prevented the body from coolin g much; the flesh of her thigh
was as warm as mine, but unpleasantly flaccid.
I had left it where we found it, in the bed between her legs.
A kitchen skewer , more than a foot long. It was covered in
dried blood as well, but clearly visible.
“I…um…found no wound on the body ,” I said, putting it as
delicately as possible.
“A ye, I see.” Mr . Campbell’ s frown seemed to lessen
slightly . “Ah, well, at least ‘tis likely not a case of deliberate
murder , then.”
I opened my mouth to reply , but caught a warning look from
Jamie. Not noticing, Mr . Campbell went on.
“The question remains whether the poor woman will have
done it herself, or met her dea th by the agency of another .
What think ye, Mistress Fraser?”
Jamie narrowed his eyes at me over Campbell’ s shoulder ,
but t he warning was unnecessary; we had discussed the matter
last night, and come to our own conclusions—also to the
conclusion that our opinions need not be shared with the
forces o f law and order in Cross  Creek; not just yet. I pinched
my nos e slightly under pretext of the smell, in order todisguise any telltale alteration of my expression. I was a very
bad liar .
“I’m sure she did it by herself,” I said firmly . “It takes very
little tim e to bleed to death in this manner , and as Jamie told
you, she was still alive when we found her . W e were outside
the mill , talking, for some tim e before we came in; no one
would have been able to leave without our seeing them.”
On the other han d, a person mig ht quite easily have hidden
in th e ot her roo m, and crept ou t quietly in the dark while we
were occupied in comforting the dying woman. If this
possibility did not occur to Mr . Campbell, I saw no reason to
draw it to his attention.
Jamie had rearranged his features into an expression of
gravity suitable to the occasion by the time Mr . Campbell
turned back to him. The older man shook his head in regret.
“Ah, poor unfortunate lass! I suppose we can but be relieved
that no one else has shared her sin.”
“What about the man who fathe red the child she was trying
to get rid of?” I said, with a certain amount of acidity . Mr .
Campbell looke d startled, but pulled himself quickly back
together .
“Um…quite so,”  he said, and coughed. “Though we do not
know whether she were married—”
“So ye do not kn ow the woman yourself, sir?” Jamie butted
in before I could make any further injudicious remarks.
Campbell shook his head.
“She is not the servant of Mr . Buchanan or the MacNeills, I
am sure.  Nor Judge Alderdyce. Those are the only plantations
near enough from which she m ight have walked. Though it
does occ ur to me to wonder why  she should have come to this
particular place to perform such a desperate act…”
It had occurred  to Jamie and  me, too. T o prevent Mr .
Campbell’ s taking the next step in this line of inquiry , Jamie
intervened again.“She sai d verra little, but she did mention a ‘Ser geant.’ ‘T ell
the Ser g eant’ were her words. D o ye perhaps have a thought
whom she might mean by that, sir?”
“I th ink there is  an army ser gea nt in char ge of the guard on
the roya l warehouse. Y es, I a m sure of it.” Mr . Campbell
brightened slightly . “Ah! Nay doubt the woman was attached
in so me way to the military establishment. Depend upon it,
that is the explanation. Though I still wonder why she—”
“Mr . Ca mpbell, do pardon me—I’m afraid I’m feeling a bit
faint,” I interrupted, laying a ha nd on his sleeve. This was no
lie; I  had n’ t slep t or eaten. I felt light-headed from the heat and
the smell, and I knew I must look pale.
“W ill ye see my wife outside, sir?” Jamie said. He gestured
toward the bed a nd its pathetic burden. “I’ll bring the poor lass
along as I may .”
“Pray d o not trouble yourse lf, Mr . Fraser ,” Campbell
protested, alread y turning to usher me out. “My servant can
fetch out the body .”
“It is  my aunt’ s mill, sir , and thus my concern.” Jamie spoke
politely , but firmly . “I shall attend to it.”
Phaedre was waiting outside, by the wagon.
“I to ld you that  place got haints,” she said, surveying me
with an air of grim satisfaction. “Y ou white as ary sheet,
ma’am.” She handed me a flask of spiced wine, wrinkling her
nose delicately in my direction.
“Y ou sm ellin’ worse than what you was last night, and you
look like  you come from a pig-k illin’ then. Sit you down in the
shade here and drink that up; f ix you up peart.” She glanced
over my shoulder . I looked back as well, and saw that
Campbell had reached the shade of the sycamores by the creek
bank, and was deep in conversation with his servant.
“Found her ,” Phaedre said at on ce, dropping her voice. Her
eyes cut sideways, toward the small cluster of slave huts,
barely visible from this side of the mill.“Y ou’re sure? Y ou didn’ t have much time.” I took a
mouthful of wine and held it, glad of the sharp bouquet that
rose up the back of my throat, cleansing my palate of the taste
of death.
Phaedre nodded, her glance moving to the men under the
trees.
“Didn’ t need much. W alked dow n by them houses, saw one
door hangin’ open, little bits of trash scattered round like
somebody done  left in a hurry . I find a picanin’ and ask him
who livi n’ there, he tell me Pollyanne live there, but she gone
now , he  don’ t know where. As k him when she leave, he say
she there for supper last night, this morning she gone, nobody
see her .” Her ey es met mine, dark with questions. “Now you
know , what you mean to do?”
A bl oody good question, and on e for which I had no answer
at all. I swallowed the wine, and along with it, a rising sense of
panic.
“All the slaves h ere must know she’ s gone; how long before
anyone else finds out? Whose b usiness will it be to know such
things, now that Byrnes is dead?”
Phaedre raised one shoulder in a graceful shrug.
“Anybody come askin’ find out right quick. But whose
business it be to  ask—” She nodded toward the mill. W e had
left the small door to the living quarters open; Jamie was
coming out, a blanket-wrapped burden cradled in his arms.
“Reckon it’ s his,” she said.
I am  alr eady p art of it . He  had know n, even before the
interrupted dinn er party . W ith n o formal announcement, with
neither i nvitation nor acceptanc e of the role, he fit the place,
the part, like a piece slipping into a jigsaw puzzle. Already he
was the master of River Run—if he wanted to be.
Campbell’ s serv ant had come to help with the body; Jamie
sank to one knee by the edge of the mill flume, surrendering
his burd en gently to the earth. I gave Phaedre back the flask,
with a nod of thanks.“W ill you fetch the things from the wagon?”
W ithout a word, Phaedre went to get the things I had
brought—a blanket, a bucket, clean rags, and a jar of herbs—
while I went to join Jamie.
He w as kneeling by the creek,  washing his hands, a little
way ups tream fr om where the b ody lay . It was foolish to wash
in pr eparation for what I was abo ut to do, but habit was strong;
I knelt beside him and dipped my hands as well, letting the
cold fresh rush of water carry away the touch of clammy flesh.
“I was right,” I said to him, low-voiced. “It was a woman
called Pollyanne; she’ s run away in the night.”
He grimaced, rubbing his palms briskly together , and
glanced over his shoulder . Campbell was standing over the
corpse now , a slight frown of distaste still on his face.
Jamie scowled in concentration, gaze returning to his hands.
“W ell, t hat’ll put a cocked hat on it, aye?” He bent and
splashed his face, then shook his head violently , flinging drops
like a wet dog. Then he gave m e a nod, and stood up, wiping
his face with the end of his stained plaid.
“See to the lassie, aye, Sassenach?” He stalked purposefully
toward Mr . Campbell, plaid swinging.
There was no use saving any of her clothes; I cut them of f.
Undressed, she looked to be in her twenties. Undernourished;
ribs cou ntable, arms and legs slender and pale as stripped
branches. For all that, she was still surprisingly heavy , and the
remnants of rigor mortis made h er hard to handle. Phaedre and
I were both swe ating heavily before we finished, and strands
of hair were esc aping from the knot at my neck and pasting
themselves to my flushed cheeks.
At least  the heavy labor kept conversation to a minimum,
leaving me in p eace with my thoughts. Not that my thoughts
were particularly peaceful.
A woma n seeking to “slip a bairn,” as Jamie put it, would
do it in her own room, her own bed, if she were doing it alone.The only reason for the strang er to have come to a remote
place su ch as this was to meet the person who would do the
of fice for her—a person who could not come to her .
W e mus t look for a slave in the mill quarters, I had told him,
one maybe with the reputation of a midwife, someone women
would talk about among them selves, would recommend in
whispers.
The fact that I had apparently been proved right gave me no
satisfaction. The abortionist had fled, fearing that the woman
would h ave told  us who had done the deed. If she had stayed
put a nd said not hing, Farquard Campbell might have taken my
word for it tha t the woman must have done it herself—he
could hardly prove otherwise. If anyone else found that the
slave Pollyanne had run, though—and of course they would
find out!—and she were caught and questioned, the whole
matter would no doubt come out at once. And then what?
I shudd ered, despite the heat. Did the law of bloodshed
apply in this case? It certainly ought, I thought, grimly sluicing
yet another bucket of water ov er the splayed white limbs, if
quantity counted for anything.
Damn the woman, I thought, using irritation to cover a
useless p ity . I could do nothing for her now save try to tidy up
the mes s she had left—in ev ery sense of the word. And
perhaps try to save the other player in this tragedy; the hapless
woman who had done murder un meaning, in the guise of help,
and who stood now to pay for that mistake with her own life.
Jamie h ad gotten the wine flask, I saw; he was passing it
back and forth with Farquard Campbell, the two talking
intently , occasio nally turning to gesture at the mill or back
toward the river or the town.
“Y ou got anything I can comb her out with, ma’am?”
Phaedre’ s question pulled my attention back to the job at
hand. She was squatting by the body , fingering the tangled hair
critically .“W ouldn’ t like to put her in th e ground lookin’ like this,
poor child,” she said, shaking her head.
I t hough t Phaedre was likely no t much older than the dead
woman—and in  any case, it scarcely mattered that the corpse
should g o to its grave well-gr oomed. Still, I groped in my
pocket and came up with a sm all ivory comb, with which
Phaedre set to work, humming under her breath.
Mr . Campbell was taking his lea ve. I heard the creak of his
team’ s h arness, and their small stamping of anticipation as the
groom settled himself. Mr . Campbell saw me and bowed
deeply , hat held low . I sketche d him a curtsy in return, and
watched with relief as he drove away .
Phaedre, too, had stopped her w ork and was gazing after the
departing carriage.
She said something under her br eath, and spat in the dust. It
was done without apparent mal ice; a charm against evil that
I’d seen before. She looked up at me.
“Mister Jamie best find that Pol lyanne afore sunset. Be wild
animals in the piney wood, and Mister Ulysses say that woman
worth two hundred pound whe n Miss Jocasta buy her . She
don’ t know the woods, that Pollyanne; she be come straight
from Africa, no more’n a year agone.”
W ithout further comment, she bent her head over her task,
fingers moving dark and quick as a spider among the fine silk
of our corpse’ s hair .
I b ent to my work as well, rea lizing with something of a
shock th at the web of circumstance that enmeshed Jamie had
touched me, too. I did not stand  outside, as I had thought, and
could not if I wanted to.
Phaedre had helped me to find  Pollyanne not because she
trusted or liked me—but because I was the master ’ s wife.
Pollyanne must be found and hidden. And Jamie, she thought,
would of course find Pollyann e and hide her—she was his
property; or Jocasta’ s, which in Phaedre’ s eyes would amount
to the same thing.At last, the stranger lay clean, on the worn linen sheet I had
brought for a shroud. Phaedre had combed her hair and
braided it; I took up the big sto ne jar of herbs. I had brought
them as much from habit as from  reason, but now was glad of
them; not so much for ai d against the progress of
decomposition, but as the sole—and necessary—touch of
ceremony .
It was dif ficult to reconcile th is clumsy , reeking lump of
clay with the sm all, cold hand th at had grasped mine; with the
anguished whi sper that had breathed “T ell…” in the
smothering dark. And yet there was the memory of her , of the
last of her living blood spilling hot in my hand, more vivid in
my m ind than th is sight of her empty flesh, naked in the hands
of strangers.
There was no minister nearer t han Halifax; she would be
buried without rites—and yet, what need had she of rites?
Funeral rituals are for the com fort of the bereaved. It was
unlikely that she had left anyon e behind to grieve, I thought;
for if she had had anyone so clo se to her—family , husband, or
even lover—I thought she would not now be dead.
I had not known  her , would not miss her—but I grieved her;
her and her child. And so for myself, rather than for her , I
knelt by her bo dy and scattered herbs: fragrant and bitter ,
leaves of rue and hyssop flowers, rosemary , thyme and
lavender . A bouquet from the living to the dead—small token
of remembrance.
Phaedre watched in silence, kneeling. Then she reached out
and with gentle fingers, laid the  shroud across the girl’ s dead
face. Jam ie had come to watch . W ithout a word, he stooped
and picked her up, and bore her to the wagon.
He didn’ t speak until I had climbed up and settled myself on
the s eat beside h im. He snapped the reins on the horses’ backs,
and clicked his tongue.
“Let us go and find the Ser geant,” he said.There w ere, of course, a few thi ngs to be attended to first. W e
returned to River Run to leave Phaedre, and Jamie disappeared
to fi nd Duncan and change his stained clothing, while I went
to check  on my patient and to acquaint Jocasta with the
morning’ s events.
I n eedn’ t have troubled on either account; Farquard
Campbell was sitting in the morning room sipping tea with
Jocasta. John Myers, his loins swathed in a Cameron plaid,
was lounging at full length u pon the green velvet chaise,
cheerfully munc hing scones. Judging from the unaccustomed
cleanliness of the bare legs and feet extending from the tartan,
someone had taken advantage of his temporary state of
unconsciousness the night before to administer a bath.
“My dear .” Jocasta’ s head turned at my step, and she smiled,
though I saw th e twin lines of concern etched between her
brows. “ Sit you  down, child, an d take some nourishment; ye
will have had n o rest last night—and a dreadful morning, it
seems.”
I mi ght ordinarily have found it either amusing or insulting
to be called “ch ild;” under the circumstances, it was oddly
comforting. I sank gratefully into an armchair , and let Ulysses
pour me a cup of tea, wondering meanwhile just how much
Farquard had told Jocasta—and how much he knew .
“How a re you this morning?” I asked my patient. He
appeared to be in amazingly good condition, considering his
alcoholic intake of the night before. His color was good, and
so was his appe tite, judging from the quantity of crumbs on
the plate by his side.
He nodded cordially at me, jaws champing, and swallowed
with some ef fort.
“Astounding fin e, ma’am, I tha nk ye kindly . A mite sore
round the privates”—he tenderly patted the area in question
—”but a sweeter job of stitchin’ I’ve not been privileged to
see. Mr . Ulysses was kind enoug h to fetch me a lookin’ glass,”
he e xplained. He shook his head  in some awe. “Never seen myown beh ind before; as much hair as I got back there, ye’d
think my daddy’d been a bear!”
He l aughed heartily at this, and Farquard Campbell buried a
smile in his teacup. Ulysses tur ned away with the tray , but I
saw the corner of his mouth twitch.
Jocasta laughed out loud, blind eyes crinkling in
amusement.
“They d o say it’ s a wise bairn that kens its father , John
Quincy . But I k ent your mother weel, and I’ll say I think it
unlikely .”
Myers shook his head, but his eyes twinkled over the thick
growth of beard.
“W ell, m y mam a did admire a hairy man. Said it was a rare
comfort on a cold winter ’ s nigh t.” He peered down the open
neck of his shirt , viewing the un derbrush on display with some
satisfaction. “M ight be so, at that. The Indian lassies seem to
like it—though it’ s maybe only  the novelty , come to think on
it. Their own men scarcely got fuzz on their balls, let alone
their backsides.”
Mr . Campbell inhaled a fragment of scone, and coughed
heavily into his napkin. I smiled to myself and took a deep
swallow of tea. It was a strong and fragrant Indian blend, and
despite the oppressive heat of the morning, more than
welcome. A light dew of sweat broke out on my face as I
drank, but the warmth settled comfortingly into my uneasy
stomach, the perfume of the te a driving the stench of blood
and excreta from my nose, eve n as the cheerful conversation
banished the morbid scenes of the morning from my mind.
I e yed the hearth rug wistfully . I felt as though I could lie
down there peacefully and slee p for a week. No rest for the
weary , though.
Jamie ca me in, freshly shaved and combed, dressed in sober
coat and  clean linen. He nodded  to Farquard Campbell with no
apparent surpris e; he must have heard his voice from the
hallway .“Auntie.” He bent and kissed Jocasta’ s cheek in greeting,
then smiled at Myers.
“How is it, a charaid ? Or shall I say , how are they?”
“Right as rain,” Myers assured him. He cupped a hand
consideringly between his legs. “Think I might wait a day or
two before I climb back on a horse, though.”
“I would,” Jamie assured him. He turned back to Jocasta.
“Have ye maybe seen Duncan this morning, Auntie?”
“Oh, aye. He’ s gone a small errand for me, he and the
laddie.” She smiled and reache d for him; I saw her fingers
wrap tight around his wrist. “Su ch a dear man, Mr . Innes. So
helpful. And such a quick, cann y man; a real pleasure to talk
to. Do ye not find him so, Nephew?”
Jamie glanced at her curiously , then his gaze flicked to
Farquard Campbell. The older man avoided his eye, sipping at
his tea as he af fected to study the lar ge painting that hung
above the mantel.
“Indeed,” Jamie  said dryly . “A useful man, is Duncan. And
Y oung Ian’ s gone with him?”
“T o fetch a bittie package for me,” his aunt said placidly .
“Did ye need Duncan directly?”
“No,” Jamie said slowly , staring down at her . “It can wait.”
Her fingers slipped free of his sleeve, and she reached for
her teacup. The delicate handle was angled precisely toward
her , ready for her hand.
“That’ s good,” she said. “Y e’l l have a bite of breakfast,
then? And Farquard—another scone?”
“Ah, no, Cha gha bh mi ‘n corr , tapa leib h . I’v e bu siness i n
the t own, and b est I be about it.” Campbell set down his cup
and got to his fe et, bowing to me and to Jocasta in turn. “Y our
servant, ladies. Mr . Fraser ,” he added, with a lift of one brow ,
and bowing, he followed Ulysses out.Jamie sat down, his own brow s raised, and reached for a
piece of toast.
“Y our errand, Aunt—Duncan’ s gone to find the slave
woman?”
“He has.” Jocasta turned her blind eyes toward him,
frowning. “Y ou’ll not mind, Jamie? I ken Duncan’ s your man,
but it seemed a n ur gent matter; and I couldna be sure when
you’d come.”
“What did Campbell tell ye?” I  could tell what Jamie was
thinking; it seemed out of char acter for the upright and rigid
Mr . Cam pbell, justice of the district, who would not stir a hand
to preve nt a gruesome lynching, to conspire for the protection
of a female slave, and an abortionist to boot. And yet—
perhaps he meant it as compensation for what he had not been
able to prevent before.
The handsome shoulders moved in the slightest of shrugs,
and a muscle dipped near the corner of her mouth.
“I’ve kent Farquard Campbell these twenty years, a mhic
mo pheathar . I  hear what he  doesna say be tter than what he
does.”
Myers had been following this exchange with interest.
“Couldn’ t say as my own ears are that good,” he observed
mildly . “All I he ard him say was how some poor woman kilt
herself by accident, up to the mill, tryin’ to rid herself of a
burden. He said he didn’ t kn ow her , himself.” He smiled
blandly at me.
“And th at alone tells me the lass is a stranger ,” Jocasta
observed. “Farq uard knows the folk on the river and in the
town as well as I ken my own folk. She is no one’ s daughter ,
no one’ s servant.”
She set down her cup and lean ed back in her chair with a
sigh.
“It will be all r ight,” she said. “Eat up your food, lad; ye
must be starving.”Jamie stared at h er for a moment, the piece of toast uneaten
in his hand. He leaned forward and dropped it back on the
plate.
“I c anna say I’ ve much appetite just now , Auntie. Dead
lassies curdle my wame a bit.” He stood up, brushing down the
skirts of his coat.
“She’ s maybe no one’ s daughter or servant—but she’ s lyin’
in the yard just now , drawing f lies. I’d have a name for her
before I bury her .” He turned on his heel and stalked out.
I drained the last of my tea and set the cup back with a faint
chime of bone china.
“Sorry ,” I said apologetically . “I don’ t believe I’m hungry ,
either .”
Jocasta n either moved nor changed expression. As I left the
room I saw My ers lean over from his chaise and neatly snag
the last of the scones.
It w as n early no on before we re ached the Crown’ s warehouse
at th e en d of Hay Street. It stood  on the north side of the river ,
with its own pier for loading, a little way above the town itself.
There s eemed little necessity for a guard at the moment;
nothing moved in the vicinity  of the building save a few
sulphur butterflies who, unaf fe cted by the smothering heat,
were diligently laboring among the flowering bushes that grew
thick along the shore.
“What do they keep here?” I asked Jamie, looking curiously
up at the massive structure. The huge double doors were shut
and bolt ed, the single red-coated sentry motionless as a tin
soldier in front of them. A smaller building beside the
warehouse sported an English flag, drooping limply in the
heat; pr esumably this was the lair of the ser geant we were
seeking.
Jamie sh rugged and brushed a questing fly away from his
eyebrow . W e had been attracting more and more of them as theheat of the day increased, despite the movement of the wagon.
I snif fed discreetly , but could smell only a faint hint of thyme.
“Whatever the Crown thinks  valuable. Furs from the
backcountry , naval stores—pitch and turpentine. But the guard
is because of the liquor .”
While every inn brewed its own  beer , and every household
had its receipts for applejack an d cherry-wine, the more potent
spirits were the province of the Crown: brandy , whisky , and
rum were imported to the colo ny in small quantities under
heavy guard, and sold at great cost under the Crown’ s seal.
“I shoul d say they haven’ t got much in stock right now ,” I
said, nodding at the single guard.
“No, the shipments of liquor come upstream from
W ilmington once a month. Campbell says they choose a
dif ferent day each time, so as to run less risk of robbery .”
He spoke abstractedly , a small frown lingering between his
eyebrows.
“Did Campbell believe us, do you think? About her doing it
herself?” W ithout really meanin g to, I cast a half glance into
the wagon behind me.
Jamie made a d erisory Scottish noise in the back of his
throat.
“Of cou rse not, Sassenach; the man’ s no a fool. But he’ s a
good fri end to my aunt; he’ll not make trouble if he doesn’ t
have to. Let’ s h ope the woman had no one who’ll make a
fuss.”
“Rather a cold-blooded hope,” I said quietly . “I thought you
felt dif ferently , in your aunt’ s drawing room. Y ou’re probably
right, though; if she’d had som eone, she wouldn’ t be dead
now .”
He heard the bitterness in my voice, and looked down at me.
“I d inna mean to be callous, S assenach,” he said gently .
“But the poor lassie is  dea d. I canna d o more for her than seeher dece ntly into the ground; it ’ s the living I must take heed
for , aye?”
I he aved a sigh and squeezed his arm briefly . My feelings
were a good deal too complex to try to explain; I had known
the girl no more than minutes before her death, and could in no
way have prevented it—but she had died under my hands, and
I fel t the physician’ s futile rag e in such circumstances; the
feeling that somehow I had failed, had been outwitted by the
Dark Angel. And beyond rage and pity , was an echo of
unspoken guilt; the girl was near Brianna’ s age—Brianna, who
in like circumstances would also have no one.
“I know . It’ s onl y…I suppose I feel responsible for her , in a
way .”
“So do I,” he said. “Never fear , Sassenach; we’ll see she’ s
done rig htly by .”  He reined the horses in under a chestnut tree,
and swung down, of fering me a hand.
There were no barracks; Campbell had told Jamie that the
warehouse guard’ s ten men were quartered in various houses
in the town. Up on inquiry of the clerk laboring in the of fice,
we were  directed across the street to the sign of the Golden
Goose, wherein the Ser geant might presently be found at his
luncheon.
I saw the Ser g eant in question at once as I entered the
tavern; he was sitting at a table by the window , his white
leather stock undone and his tunic unbuttoned, looking
thoroughly relax ed over a mug  of ale and the remains of a
Cornish pasty . Jamie came in behind me, his shadow
momentarily blo cking the light from the open door , and the
Ser geant looked up.
Dim as it was in the taproom, I could see the man’ s face go
blank with shock. Jamie came to  an abrupt halt behind me. He
said something in Gaelic under his breath that I recognized as
a vic ious obscenity , but then he  was moving forward past me,
with no sign of hesitation in his manner .“Ser geant Murchison,” he said, in tones of mild surprise, as
one might greet a casual acquain tance. “I hadna thought to lay
eyes on you again—not in this world, at least.”
The Se r geant’ s expression str ongly suggested that the
feeling h ad been mutual. Also that any meeting this side of
heaven was too soon. Blood flooded his beefy , pockmarked
cheeks with red, and he shoved back his bench with a screech
of wood on the sanded floor .
“Y ou!” he said.
Jamie took of f his hat and inclined his head politely .
“Y our s ervant, sir ,” he said. I could see his face now ,
outwardly pleasant, but with a wariness that creased the
corners of his eyes. He showed it a good deal less, but the
Ser geant wasn’ t the only one to be taken aback.
Murchison was regaining his s elf-possession; the look of
shock was replaced by a faint sneer .
“Fraser . Oh, beg pardon, Mr . Fraser , it will be now , won’ t
it?”
“It w ill.” Jamie kept his voice neutral, despite the insulting
tone of this. Whatever past conflict lay between them, the last
thing he wanted now was trouble. Not with what lay in the
wagon outside. I wiped my sweaty palms surreptitiously on
my skirt.
The Ser geant had begun to do u p his tunic buttons, slowly ,
not taking his eyes of f Jamie.
“I had heard the re was a man called Fraser , come to leech
of f Mistress Cameron at Riv er Run,” he said, with an
unpleasant twist of thick lips. “That’ll be you, will it?”
The war iness in Jamie’ s eyes froze into a blue as cold as
glacier ice, though his lips stayed curved in a pleasant smile.
“Mistress Cameron will be my kinswoman. It is on her
behalf that I have come now .”The Se r geant tilted back his head and scratched
voluptuously at his throat. Ther e was a deep, hard-edged red
crease a cross the expanse of fat pale flesh, as though someone
had tried unsuccessfully to garrote the man.
“Y our kinswoma n. W ell, easy to say so, ain’ t it? The lady’ s
blind as a bat, I hear . No husband, no sons; fair prey for any
sharpster comes  a-calling, claiming family .” The ser geant
lowered his head and smirked at me, his self-possession fully
restored.
“And this’ll be y our doxy , will it?” It was gratuitous malice,
a shot at random; the man had scarcely glanced at me.
“This will be my wife, Mistress Fraser .”
I c ould see the two stif f fingers of Jamie’ s right hand twitch
once aga inst the  skirt of his coat, the only outward sign of his
feelings. He tilted his head back an inch and raised his brows,
considering the Ser geant with an air of dispassionate interest.
“And wh ich one  are you, sir? I b eg pardon for my imperfect
recollection, but I confess that I cannot tell you from your
brother .”
The Ser geant stopped as though  he had been shot, frozen in
the act of fastening his stock.
“Damn you!” he said, choking on the words. His face had
gone an unhealthy shade of plum, and I thought that he ought
really to mind his blood pressure. I didn’ t say so, though.
At this point, the  Ser geant seemed to notice that everyone in
the taproom was staring at him with great interest. He glared
ferociously around him, snatched up his hat, and stamped
toward the door , pushing pas t me as he went, so that I
staggered back a pace.
Jamie gr abbed m y arm to stead y me, then ducked beneath
the lintel himself. I followed, in time to see him call after the
Ser geant.
“Murchison! A word with you!”The soldier whirled on his heel, hands fisted against the
skirts of his scarlet coat. He was a good-sized man, thick
through torso and shoulder , and the uniform became him. His
eyes glittered with menace, but he had gained possession of
himself again.
“A word, is it?” he said. “And what might you have to say
to me, Mister  Fraser?”
“A word in your professional capacity , Ser geant,” Jamie
said coolly . He nodded toward the wagon, which we had left
beneath a nearby tree. “W e’ve brought ye a corpse.”
For the second time, the Ser geant’ s face went blank. He
glanced at the w agon; flies and gnats had begun to gather in
small clouds, circling lazily over the open bed.
“Indeed.” He was  a profe ssional; while the hosti lity of his
manner was undiminished, the hot blood faded from his face,
and the clenched fists relaxed.
“A corpse? Whose?”
“I have no idea, sir . It was my hope that you might be able
to tell us. W ill ye look?” He nodded toward the wagon, and
after a moment’ s hesitation, the Ser geant nodded briefly back,
and strode toward the wagon.
I hu rried after Jamie, and was in time to see the Ser geant’ s
face as he drew  back the corne r of the makeshift shroud. He
had no skill at  all in hiding his feelings—perhaps in his
profession it wasn’ t necessary . Shock flickered over his face
like summer lightning.
Jamie, could see the Ser geant’ s face as well as I.
“Y e’ll know her , then?” he said.
“I—she—that is…yes, I know her .” The Ser geant’ s mouth
snapped shut abruptly , as though he was afraid to let any more
words out. He c ontinued to stare at the girl’ s dead face, his
own tightening, freezing out all feeling.
A fe w men had followed us out of the tavern. While they
stayed at a discreet distance, two or three were craning theirnecks w ith curiosity . It wasn’ t going to be long before the
whole district knew what had h appened at the mill. I hoped
Duncan and Ian were well on their way .
“What has happened to her?” the Ser geant asked, staring
down at the fixed white face. His own was nearly as pale.
Jamie was watching him intently , and making no pretense
otherwise.
“Y ou’ll know her , then?” he said again.
“She is—she was—a laundress.  Lissa—Lissa Garver is her
name.” The Ser geant spoke me chanically , still looking down
into the wagon as though unable to tear his eyes away . His
face was expressionless but his lips were white, and his hands
were clenched into fists at his sides. “What happened?”
“Has she people in the town? A husband, maybe?”
It was a reasonable question, but Murchison’ s head jerked
up as though Jamie had stabbed him with it.
“None of your concern, is it?” he said. He stared at Jamie, a
thin rim  of white visible around the iris of his eye. He bared
his teeth  in what might have been politeness, but wasn’ t. “T ell
me what happened to her .”
Jamie’ s eyes met the Ser geant’ s without blinking.
“She meant to slip a bairn, and it went wrong,” he said
quietly . “If she h as a husband, h e must be told. If not—if she
has no people—I will see her decently buried.”
Murchison turned his head to look down into the wagon
once more.
“She ha s someone,” he said shortly . “Y ou need not trouble
yourself.” He turned away , and rubbed a hand over his face,
scrubbing violen tly as though to wipe away all feeling. “Go to
my of fic e,” he said, voice half  muf fled. “Y ou must make a
statement—see the clerk. Go!”
The of fi ce was empty , the clerk no doubt gone in search of his
own luncheon. I sat down to wai t, but Jamie prowled restlesslyaround the small room, eyes flitting from the regimental
banners on the wall to the drawered cabinet in the corner
behind the desk.
“Damn t he luck, ” he said, half to himself. “It would have to
be Murchison.”
“I take it you know the Ser geant well?”
He glanced at me with a wry quirk of the lips.
“W ell enough. He was in the garrison at Ardsmuir prison.”
“I see.” No love lost between them, then. It was close in the
little of f ice; I blotted a trickle of sweat that ran down between
my breasts. “What do you suppose he’ s doing here?”
“That much I ken; he was sent in char ge of the prisoners
when they were transported to be sold. I imagine the Crown
saw no good rea son to bring him back to England, when there
was need of sol diers here—that would have been during the
war wi’ the French, aye?”
“What was that business about his brother?”
He snorted, a brief, humorless sound.
“There were two o’ them—twins. W ee Billy and W ee
Bobby , we called them. Alike as peas, and not only in looks.”
He paused, marshaling memories. He didn’ t often speak of
his time  in Ardsmuir , and I cou ld see the shadows of it pass
across his face.
“Y e’ll maybe know the sort of man is decent enough on his
own, but get him wi’ others like him, and they might as well
be wolves?”
“Bit hard on the  wolves,” I said, smiling. “Think of Rollo.
But yes, I know what you mean.”
“Pigs, then. But beasts, when they’re together . There’ s no
lack of such men in any army; it’ s why armies work—men
will do terrible things in a mob, that they wouldna dream of on
their own.”“And th e Murc hisons were never on their own?” I asked
slowly .
He gave me a slight nod of acknowledgment.
“A ye, th at’ s it. There were the  two of them, always. And
what on e might scruple at, the o ther would not. And of course,
when it came to  trouble—why , there was no saying which was
to blame, was there?”
He was still p rowling, restles s as a caged panther . He
paused by the window , looking out.
“I—the prisoner s—we might complain of ill-treatment, but
the of fic ers couldna discipline both for the sins of one, and a
man seldom knew which Murch ison it was that had him on the
ground wi’ a bo ot in the ribs, or which it was that hung him
from a hook by  his fetters an d left him so until he’d soil
himself for the amusement of the garrison.”
His eyes were fixed on something outside, his expression
unguarded. He’d spoken of beasts; I could see that the
memories had roused one. His eyes caught the light from the
window , gem-blue and unblinking.
“Are both of them here?” I asked, as much to break that
unnerving stare as because I wanted to know .
It worked; he turned abruptly from the window .
“No,” h e said, shortly . “This is  Billy . W ee Bobby died at
Ardsmuir .” His two stif f fingers  twitched against the fabric of
his kilt.
It had occurred to me briefly to  wonder why he had worn
his kilt this morning, instead of changing to breeks; the
crimson tartan might be quite literally a red flag to a bull,
flaunted thus before an English soldier . Now I knew .
They’d t aken it from him once before, thinking to take with
it pride and manhood. They had failed in that attempt, and he
meant to  unders core that failure, whether it was sense to do so
or not. Sense had little to do with the sort of stubborn pride
that could survive years of such insult—and while he hadmore tha n his share of both, I co uld see that pride was well in
the ascendancy at present.
“From the Ser geant’ s reactions, I suppose we may assume it
wasn’ t natural causes?” I asked.
“No,” he said. He sighed and shrugged his shoulders
slightly , easing them inside the tight coat.
“They marched us out to the stone quarry each morning, and
back aga in at twilight, wi’ two or three guards to each wagon.
One day , W ee Bobby Murchison was the ser geant in char ge.
He c ame out wi’ us in the morn ing—but he didna come back
with us at night.” He glanced once more at the window . “There
was a verra deep pool at the bottom of the quarry .”
His matt er -of-fact tone was nearly as chilling as the content
of this bald acco unt. I felt a small shiver pass up my spine, in
spite of the stifling heat.
“Did yo u—” I began, but he pu t a finger to his lips, jerking
his head toward the door . A moment later , I heard the footsteps
that his keener ears had picked up.
It was the Ser ge ant, not his cle rk. He had been perspiring
heavily; streaks of sweat ran down his face beneath his wig,
and his whole c ountenance was the unhealthy color of fresh
beef liver .
He g lanced at t he vacant desk, and made a small, vicious
noise in his thro at. I felt a qualm on behalf of the absent clerk.
The Ser geant shoved aside the clutter on the desk with a sweep
of his arm that sent paper cascading onto the floor .
He s natched a p ewter inkwell and a sheet of foolscap from
the rubble, and banged them down on the desk.
“W rite i t down, ” he ordered. “W here you found her , what
happened.” He thrust a spattered goose-quill at Jamie. “Sign it,
date it.”
Jamie stared at him, eyes narrowed, but made no move to
take the quill. I felt a sudden sinking in my belly .Jamie was left-handed but had been taught forcibly to write
with his right hand, and then had that right hand crippled.
W riting, for him, was a slow , l aborious business that left the
pages blotted, sweat-stained, a nd crumpled, and the writer
himself in no b etter case. There was no power on earth that
would make him humiliate him self in that fashion before the
Ser geant.
“W rite. It. Down.” The Ser gean t bit of f the words between
his teeth.
Jamie’ s eyes narrowed further , but before he could speak, I
reached out and snatched the pen from the Ser geant’ s grasp.
“I was there; let me do it.”
Jamie’ s hand closed on mine before I could dip the quill in
the i nkwell. He plucked the pen  from my fingers and dropped
it in the center of the desk.
“Y our clerk can wait upon me la ter , at my aunt’ s house,” he
said briefly to Murchison. “Come with me, Claire.”
Not waiting for an answer from the Ser geant, he grasped my
elbow and all b ut pulled me to my feet. W e were outside
before I knew w hat had happened. The wagon still stood under
the tree, but now it was empty .
“W ell, s he’ s safe  for the momen t, Mac Dubh,  but what in hell
shall we  do with the woman?” Duncan scratched at the stubble
on h is chin; he  and Ian had spent three days in the forest,
searching, before finding the slave Pollyanne.
“She’ll no be easy to move,” Ian put in, snaring a piece of
bacon of f the br eakfast table. He broke it in half, and handed
one piec e to Rollo. “The poor lady near died of terror when
Rollo snif fed her out, and we had God’ s own time gettin’ her
on her feet. W e couldna get her on a horse at all; I had to walk
with my arm around her , to keep her from fallin’ down.”
“W e must get her clear away , somehow .” Jocasta frowned,
blank eyes half hooded in thought. “Y on Murchison was at the
mill again yesterday morning, making a nuisance of himself,and last night, F arquard Campbell sent to tell me that the man
has decl ared it was murder , and he’ s called for men to search
the district for the slave who did it. Farquard’ s sae hot under
his collar , I thought his head would burst into flame.”
“Do ye think she could  hav e do ne it?” Chewing, Ian looked
from Jamie to me. “By accident, I mean?”
In sp ite of the hot morning, I shuddered, feeling in memory
the unyielding stif fness of the metal skewer in my hand.
“Y ou have three possibilities: ac cident, murder , or suicide,”
I said. “There are lots  eas ier ways o f committing suicide,
believe me. And no motive for murder , that we know of.”
“Be tha t as it may ,” Jamie said, neatly fielding the
conversation, “if Murchison takes the slave woman, he’ll have
her hanged or flogged to death within a day . He’ s no need of
trial. No, we m ust take her clear out of the district. I’ve
arranged it with our friend Myers.”
“Y ou’ve arranged what  with Myers?” J ocasta asked sharply ,
her voice cutting through the babble of exclamations and
questions that greeted this announcement.
Jamie fi nished buttering the piece of toast that he held, and
handed it to Duncan before speaking.
“W e shall take the woman int o the mountains,” he said.
“Myers says she’ll be welcome among the Indians; he kens a
good pla ce for her , he says. And  she’ll be safe there from W ee
Billy Murchison.”
“W e?”  I asked politely . “And who’ s we ?”
He grinned at me in reply .
“Myers and myself, Sassenach. I need to go to the
backcountry to have a look before the cold weather comes, and
this will  be a g ood chance. Myers is the best guide I could
have.”
He carefully refrained from noting that it might be as well
for him  to be temporarily out of Ser geant Murchison’ s sphere
of influence, but the implication was not lost on me.“Y e’ll take me, will ye not, Uncle?” Ian brushed the matted
hair out  of his face, looking eager . “Y e’ll need help wi’ that
woman, believe me—she’ s the size of a molasses barrel.”
Jamie smiled at his nephew .
“A ye, Ian. I expect we can use another man along.”
“Ahem,” I said, giving him an evil stare.
“T o keep an eye on your auntie, if nothing else,” Jamie
continued, giving the stare back to me. “W e leave in three
days, Sassenach—if Myers can sit a horse by then.”
Three da ys didn’ t allow much t ime, but with the assistance of
Myers and Phaedre, my preparations were completed with
hours to spare. I had a small tr aveling box of medicines and
tools, an d the saddlebags were packed with food, blankets, and
cooking implements. The only small matter remaining was
that of attire.
I rec rossed the ends of the long  silk strip across my chest,
tied the  ends in a jaunty knot between my breasts, and
examined the results in the looking glass.
Not bad.  I extended my arms and jiggled my torso from side
to si de, testing. Y es, that would  do. Though perhaps if I took
one more turn around my chest before crossing the ends…
“What, exactly , are ye doing, S assenach? And what in the
name o f God are ye wearing?” Jamie, arms crossed, was
leaning against the door , watching me with both brows raised.
“I am improvisi ng a brassiere,” I said with dignity . “I don’ t
mean to ride sidesaddle through the mountains wearing a
dress, an d if I’m not wearing sta ys, I don’ t mean my breasts to
be joggling all the way , either . Most uncomfortable, joggling.”
“I dares ay .” He edged into the  room and circled me at a
cautious distance, eyeing my nether limbs with interest. “And
what are those ?”
“Like th em?” I put my hands on my hips, modeling the
drawstring leather trousers that Phaedre had constructed forme—laughing hysterically as she did so—from soft buckskin
provided by one of Myers’ s friends in Cross Creek.
“No,” he  said bluntly . “Y e canna be going about in—in—”
He waved at them, speechless.
“T rousers,” I said. “And of course I can. I wore trousers all
the time, back in Boston. They’re very practical.”
He looked at me in silence for a moment. Then, very slowly ,
he walked around me. At last, his voice came from behind me.
“Y e wor e them outside?” he said, in tones of incredulity .
“Where folk could see ye?”
“I did,”  I said crossly . “So did most other women. Why
not?”
“Why not ?” he said, scand alized. “I can see the whole shape
of your buttocks, for God’ s sake, and the cleft between!”
“I can see yours , too,” I pointed out, turning around to face
him. “I’ve been looking at your  backside in breeks every day
for mon ths, but only occasionally does the sight move me to
make indecent advances on your person.”
His mouth twitched, undecided whether to laugh or not.
T aking advantag e of the indecision, I took a step forward and
put my arms around his waist, firmly cupping his backside.
“Actually , it’ s your kilt that ma kes me want to fling you to
the floor and commit ravishment,” I told him. “But you don’ t
look at all bad in your breeks.”
He did laugh th en, and bending, kissed me thoroughly , his
hands carefully exploring the outlines of my rear , snugly
confined in buckskin. He squeezed gently , making me squirm
against him.
“T ake them of f,” he said, pausing for air .
“But I—”
“T ake th em of f, ” he repeated fi rmly . He stepped back and
tugged l oose the  lacing of his flies. “Y e can put them back onagain af ter , Sass enach, but if th ere’ s flinging and ravishing to
be done, it’ll be me that does it, aye?”P A R T  F I V E
S t r a w b e r r y  F i e l d s  F o r e v e r1 4
F L E E  F R O M  W R A T H  T O  C O M E
August 1767
T hey had hidden the woman in a tobacco shed on the edge of
Farquard Campbell’ s furthest fields. There was little chance of
anyone noticing —other than Campbell’ s slaves, who already
knew—but we took care to arr ive just after dark, when the
lavender sky had faded nearly  to gray , barely outlining the
dark bulk of the drying shed.
The woman slid out like a ghos t, cloaked and hooded, and
was hoisted onto the extra hors e, bundled hastily aboard like
the pack age of contraband she was. She drew up her legs and
clung to  the saddle with both h ands, doubled up in a ball of
panic; evidently she’d never been on a horse before.
Myers tr ied to hand her the reins, but she paid no attention,
only clu ng tight and moaned i n a sort of melodic agony of
terror . The men were becoming restive, glancing over their
shoulders into the empty fields, as though expecting the
imminent arrival of Ser geant Murchison and his minions.
“Let her ride with me,” I suggested. “Maybe she’ll feel safer
that way .”
The woman was detached from her mount with some
dif ficulty and set down on the h orse’ s rump behind my saddle.
She smelt strongly of fresh tobacco leaves, pungently narcotic,
and som ething else, a little mu skier . She at once flung her
arms around my waist, holding on for dear life. I patted one of
the h ands clutched about my mi ddle, and she squeezed tighter ,
but made no other move or sound.
Little wonder if she was terrif ied, I thought, turning my
horse’ s h ead to follow Myers’ s. She might not know about the
hullabaloo Murc hison was raising in the district, but she could
have no illusion s about what mi ght happen if she was caught;she had certainly been among the crowd at the sawmill two
weeks earlier .
As a n alternative to certain deat h, flight into the arms of red
savages might be slightly preferable, but not by much, to judge
from her trembling; the weather was far from cold, but she
shook as though with chill.
She nearly squeezed the stuf fi ngs out of me when Rollo
appeared, stalking out of the bushes like some demon of the
forest. My horse didn’ t like the l ook of him, either , and backed
up, snor ting and stamping, trying to jerk the reins away from
me.
I had to admit that Rollo was reasonably fearsome, even
when h e was in an amiable mood, which he was, at the
moment—Rollo loved expeditions. Still, he undoubtedly
presented a sinister aspect; all h is teeth were showing in a grin
of delight, his s litted eyes half closed as he whif fed the air .
Add to that the w ay the grays and blacks of his coat faded into
the shadows, and one was left with the queer and unsettling
illusion that he had materialized out of the substance of the
night, Appetite incarnate.
He t rotted directly past us, no more than a foot away , and
the woman gasped, her breath hot on my neck. I patted her
hand again, and spoke to her , bu t she made no answer . Duncan
had said she w as Africa-born and spoke little English, but
surely she must understand a few words.
“It will be all right,” I said again. “Don’ t be afraid.”
Occupied with horse and passenger , I hadn’ t noticed Jamie,
until he appeared suddenly by my stirrup, light-footed as
Rollo.
“All rig ht, Sass enach?” he asked softly , putting a hand on
my thigh.
“I th ink so,” I said. I nodded at the death-grip round my
middle. “If I don’ t die of suf focation.”
He looked, and smiled.“W ell, she’ s in no danger of fallin’ of f, at least.”
“I w ish I knew something to say to her; poor thing, she’ s so
afraid. D o you suppose she even knows where we’re taking
her?”
“I sh ouldna think so— I  din na k en wher e we’re going.” He
wore bre eks for riding, but had his plaid belted over them, the
free end  slung across the shoulder of his coat. The dark tartan
blended into the shadows of the forest as well as it had the
shades o f the Scottish heather; all I could see of him was a
white blotch of shirt-front and the pale oval of his face.
“Do you know a ny useful taki-taki  t o say to her?”  I asked.
“Of cou rse, she might not kno w that, either , if she wasn’ t
brought through the Indies.”
He turn ed his head and looked up at my passenger ,
considering.
“Ah,” he  said. “W ell, there’ s the  one thing they’ll all know ,
no matter where they’ve come.” He reached out and squeezed
the woman’ s foot firmly .
“Freedom,” he said, and paused. “ Saorasa . D’yke ken what
I say?”
She didn’ t loosen her grip, but her breath went out in a
shuddering sigh, and I thought I felt her nod.
The hor ses followed each other in single file, Myers in the
lead. Th e rough  track was not even a wagon trail, only a sort
of flatte ning of under -growth, but it did at least provide clear
passage through the trees.
I doubt ed that Ser geant Mur chison’ s vengeance would
pursue us so fa r—if he pursued us at all—but the sense of
escape w as too strong to ignore . W e shared an unspoken but
pervasive sense of ur gency , and with no particular discussion,
agreed to ride on as far as possible.
My pass enger was either losing her fear or simply becoming
too tired to care anymore; after a midnight stop for
refreshment she  allowed Ian and Myers to boost her back onthe horse without protest, and while she never released her
hold on my waist, she did see m to doze now and then, her
forehead pressed against my shoulder .
The fatigue of l ong riding crept over me, too, aided by the
hypnotic soft thudding of the horses’ feet, and the unending
susurrus of the pines overhead.  W e were still in the longleaf
forest, a nd the tall, straight trunk s surrounded us like the masts
of long-sunk ships.
Lines of  an ancient Scottish song drifted through my mind
— “How many strawberries gr ow in the salt sea; how many
ships sail in the for est?” —and I wondered muzzily whether
the composer had walked through a place like this, unearthly
in half-moon and starlight, so dreamlike that the borders
between the elements were lost; we might as well be afloat as
earthbound, the heave and fall b eneath me the rise of planking,
and the sound of the pines the wind in our sails.
W e stopped at dawn, unsaddled the horses, hobbled them,
and left them to feed in the lon g grass of a small meadow . I
found Ja mie, an d curled up at once into a nest of grass beside
him, the horses’ peaceful champing the last thing I heard.
W e slep t heavily through the h eat of the day , and awoke
near sunset, stif f, thirsty , and  covered with ticks. I was
profoundly thankful that the ticks seemed to share the
mosquitoes’ general distaste for my flesh, but I had learned on
our trip north to check Jamie and the others every time we
slept; there were always outriders.
“Ick,” I said, examining a particularly juicy specimen, the
size of a grape , nestling amid the soft cinnamon hair of
Jamie’ s underar m. “Damn, I’m afraid to pull that one; it’ s so
full it’ll likely burst.”
He s hrugged, busy exploring his scalp with the other hand,
in search of further intruders.
“Leave it while ye deal with the rest,” he suggested.
“Perhaps it will fall of its own accord.”“I s uppose I’d better ,” I agreed reluctantly . I hadn’ t any
objection to the tick’ s bursting, but not while its jaws were still
embedded in Jamie’ s flesh. I’d seen infections caused by
forcibly interrupted ticks, and they weren’ t anything I wanted
to de al with in the middle of a forest. I had only a rudimentary
medical kit with me—though th is luckily included a very fine
pair of small tweezer -pointed forceps from Dr . Rawlings’ s
box.
Myers a nd Ian seemed to be managing all right; both
stripped to the w aist, Myers was crouched over the boy like a
huge black baboon, fingers busy in Ian’ s hair .
“Here’ s a wee one,” Jamie said, bending over and pushing
his o wn hair asi de so I could reach the small dark bleb behind
his e ar . I was engaged in gently maneuvering the creature out,
when I became aware of a presence near my elbow .
I ha d been too tired to take much notice of our fugitive
when w e made camp, rightly assuming that she wasn’ t going
to wander of f into the wilderness by herself. She had wandered
as fa r as a nearby stream, though, returning with a bucket of
water .
She set this on the ground, dipped up a handful of water and
funneled it into her mouth. She chewed vigorously for a
moment, cheeks puf fed out. Then she motioned me aside and,
lifting a surprised Jamie’ s arm, spat forcefully and profusely
into his armpit.
She reached into the dripping hollow , and with delicate
fingers appeared to tickle the parasite. She certainly tickled
Jamie, w ho was very sensitive in that particular region. He
turned pink in the face and flinched at her touch, all the
muscles in his torso quivering.
She held tight to  his wrist, though, and within seconds, the
bulging tick dropped of f into the palm of her hand. She flicked
it di sdainfully away , and turne d to me, with a small air of
satisfaction.I h ad thought s he resembled a ball, muf fled in her cloak.
Seen wi thout it, she still did. Sh e was very short, no more than
four feet, and ne arly as wide, with a close-cropped head like a
cannonball, her cheeks so round that her eyes were slanted
above them.
She loo ked like nothing so m uch as one of the carved
African fertility images I had seen in the Indies; massive of
bosom, heavy of haunch, and the rich, burnt-cof fee color of a
Congolese, with  skin so flawless that it looked like polished
stone under its thin layer of sweat. She held out her hand to
me, showing me a few small ob jects in her palm, the general
size and shape of dried lima beans.
“Paw-paw ,” she said, in a voic e so deep that even Myers
turned his head toward her , star tled. It was a huge, rich voice,
reverberant as a drum. Seeing my reaction to it, she smiled a
little shyly , and said something I didn’ t quite understand,
though I knew it was Gaelic.
“She says ye must not swallow the seeds, for they’re
poison,” Jamie translated, eyeing  her rather warily as he wiped
his armpit with the end of his plaid.
“Hau,” Pollyanne agreed, nodding vigorously . “Poi-zin.”
She stoo ped over the bucket for another handful of water ,
washed it round her mouth, and  spat it at a rock with a noise
like a gunshot.
“Y ou co uld be dangerous with that,” I told her . I didn’ t
know whether she understood m e, but she gathered from my
smile that I mea nt to be cordial ; she smiled back, popped two
more of  the paw-paw seeds into  her mouth, and beckoned to
Myers, already chewing, the s eeds making little crunching
pops as she pulverized them between her teeth.
By t he time we  had eaten supper and were ready to leave,
she was nervously willing to tr y riding alone. Jamie coaxed
her to the horse,  and showed her how to let the beast smell her .
She trem bled as the big nose nudged her , but then the horse
snorted; she jumped, giggled in  a voice like honey poured outof a jug,  and allowed Jamie and Ian between them to boost her
aboard.
Pollyanne rema ined shy of the  men, but she soon gained
enough confidence to talk to me, in a polyglot mixture of
Gaelic, English, and her own language. I couldn’ t have
translated it, but both her face and body were so expressive
that I could often gather the sense of what she was saying,
even tho ugh I understood only one word in ten. I could only
regret that I wa s not equally fluent in body language; she
didn’ t understan d most of my questions and remarks, so I had
to w ait u ntil we made camp, when I could prevail on Jamie or
Ian to help me with bits of Gaelic.
Freed—at least temporarily—fr om the constraint of terror ,
and becoming cautiously secure in our company , a naturally
ef fervescent per sonality emer ged , and she talked with abandon
as we rode side by side, rega rdless of my comprehension,
laughing now and then with a  low hooting noise like wind
blowing across the mouth of a cave.
She bec ame sub dued only once: when we passed through a
lar ge clearing where the grass rose in strange undulant
mounds, as though a great serpent lay buried underneath.
Pollyanne went silent when she  saw them, and in an ef fort to
hurry he r horse, instead succeeded only in pulling on the reins
and stopping it dead. I rode back to help her .
“Dr och aite,”  she murmured, glancing out of the corner of
her eye at the silent mounds. A bad place. “Djudju.”  She
scowled, and made a small, quick gesture with her hand, some
sign against evil, I thought.
“Is i t a graveyar d?” I asked Myers, who had circled back to
see w hy we had  stopped. The mounds were not evenly spaced,
but wer e distributed around the edge of the clearing in a
pattern that didn’ t look like any natural formation. The
mounds seemed too lar ge to be graves, though—unless they
were cairns, such as the ancient  Scots built, or mass graves, I
thought, uneasy at the memory of Culloden.“Not to say grav eyard,” he replied, pushing his hat back on
his head . ” ‘T was a village once. T uscarora, I expect. Those
rises there”—he waved a hand—”those are houses, fallen
down. T he big ‘un to the side, that will have been the chief ’ s
longhouse. It be taken no time atall, the grasses come over it.
From th e looks,  though, this ‘un  will have been buried a time
back.”
“What happened to it?” Ian and Jamie had stopped, too, and
come back to look over the small clearing.
Myers scratched thoughtfully at his beard.
“I c ouldn’ t be sayin’, not for certain sure. Might be as
sickness drove ‘em out, might be as they were put to rout by
the Cherokee or the Creek, though we be a mite north of the
Cherokee land. Most likely as  it happened during the war ,
though.” He dug fiercely into h is beard, twisted, and flicked
away the remnants of a lingering tick. “Can’ t say as it’ s a place
I’d tarry by choice.”
Pollyanne being  plainly of the same mind, we rode on. By
evening, we had passed entirely  out of the pines and scrubby
oakland of the foothills. W e were climbing in good earnest
now , and the trees began to change; small groves of chestnut
trees, lar ge patches of oak and hickory , with scattered
dogwood and persimmon, chinkapin and poplar , surrounded us
in waves of feathery green.
The sme ll and feel of the air changed, too, as we rose. The
overwhelming hot resins of the pine trees gave way to lighter ,
more varied scents, tree leaves  mingled with whif fs of the
shrubs a nd flowers that grew fro m every crevice of the craggy
rocks. It  was still damp and hum id, but not so hot; the air no
longer seemed a smothering blanket, but something we might
breathe—and br eathe with pleasure, filled as it was with the
perfumes of leaf mold, sun-warmed leaves, and damp moss.
By sunset of the  sixth day , we were well into the mountains,
and the air was  full of the sound of running water . Streams
crisscrossed the valleys, spilling of f ridges and trickling down
the steep rock faces, trailing m ist and moss like a delicategreen fr inge. When we rounded the side of one steep hill, I
stopped in amazement; from the  side of a distant mountain, a
waterfall leapt into the air , arching a good eighty feet in its fall
to the gor ge far below .
“W ill ye look a t that, now?” I an was openmouthed with
awe.
” ‘T is right pretty ,” Myers allowed, with the smug
complacence of a proprietor . “A in’ t the biggest falls I’ve seen,
but it’ s nice enough.”
Ian turned his head, eyes wide.
“There are bigger ones?”
Myers la ughed, a mountain man’ s quiet laugh, no more than
a breath of sound.
“Boy , you ain’ t seen nothin’ yet.”
W e camped for the night in a  hollow near a good-sized
creek—one big enough for trout. Jamie and Ian waded into
this with enthusiasm, harrying the finny denizens with whippy
rods cut from b lack willow . I hoped they would have some
luck; ou r fresh provisions were running low , though we still
had plenty of cornmeal left.
Pollyanne came scrambling up the bank, bringing a bucket
of w ater with which to make a new batch of corn dodgers.
These were small oblongs of rough cornmeal biscuit made for
traveling; tasty when fresh and h ot, and at least edible the next
day . Th ey became steadily less appetizing with time,
resembling nothing so much as small chunks of cement by the
fourth day . Still, they were por table, and not prone to mold,
and thus were po pular traveling fare, along with dried beef and
salt pork.
Pollyanne’ s natural ebullience seemed a trifle subdued, her
round face shadowed. Her eyeb rows were so sketchy as to be
almost nonexis tent, which had the paradoxical ef fect of
increasing the expressiveness of her face in motion, and
wiping all expression from it in repose. She could be asimpassive as a b all bearing when she wanted to; a useful skill
for a slave.
I supposed that her preoccup ation was at least in part
because this was the last night on which we would all be
together . W e had reached the backcountry , the limits of the
King’ s land; tomorrow , Myers would turn to the north, taking
her across the sp ine of the mou ntains into the Indian lands, to
find what safety and what life she might there.
Her round dark head was be nt over the wooden bowl,
stubby fingers mixing cornmeal with water and lard. I
crouched across from her , feeding small sticks to the infant
fire, the black iron girdle standing ready-greased beside it.
Myers had gone of f to smoke a p ipe; I could hear Jamie call to
Ian somewhere downstream, and a faint answering laugh.
It was deep tw ilight by now; our hollow was ringed by
brooding mountains, and darkness seemed to fill the shallow
bowl, creeping up the trunks of the trees around us. I had no
notion of the pl ace she had come from, whether it might be
forest or jungle, seashore or des ert, but I thought it unlikely to
be much like this.
What co uld she be thinking? She had survived the journey
from Africa, and slavery; I supposed whatever lay ahead
couldn’ t be much worse. It was an unknown future, though—
going into a wil derness so vast and absolute that I felt every
moment as though I might vani sh into it, consumed without a
trace. Our fire se emed the merest spark against the vastness of
the night.
Rollo st rolled into the light of the fire and shook himself,
spraying water in all directions,  making the fire hiss and spit.
He had joined in the fishing, I saw .
“Go away , horrible dog,” I said. He didn’ t, of course; simply
came up  and nosed me rudely , to be sure I was still who he
thought I was, then turned to give Pollyanne the same
treatment.W ith no particular expression, s he turned her head and spat
in his eye. He yelped, backed up, and stood shaking his head,
looking thoroughly surprised. She looked up at me and
grinned, her teeth very white in her face.
I lau ghed, and decided not to worry too much; anyone
capable of spitting in a wolf ’ s eye would likely cope with
Indians, wilderness, and anything else that came along.
The bowl was nearly empty , a neat row of corn dodgers laid
on the girdle. P ollyanne wiped  her fingers on a handful of
grass, watching the yellow corn meal begin to sizzle and turn
brown a s the lard melted. A warm, comforting smell rose from
the fire, mingled with the scent o f burning wood, and my belly
rumbled softly  in anticipation. The fire seemed more
substantial now , the scent of cooking food spreading its
warmth in a wider circle, keeping the night at bay .
Had it been this way where she came from? Had fires and
food held back a jungle darkne ss, kept away leopards instead
of bears? Had light and company given comfort, and the
illusion of safety? For illusion it  had surely been—fire was no
protection against men, or the da rkness that had overtaken her .
I had no words to ask.
“I ha ve never se en such fishing, never ,” Jamie repeated for the
fourth ti me, a look of dreamy bliss on his face as he broke
open a steaming  trout fried in cornmeal. “They were swarming
in the water , were they not, Ian?”
Ian nodd ed, a similar look of reverence on his own homely
features.
“My Da  would give his other l eg to ha’ seen it,” he said.
“They jumped on the hook, Auntie, truly!”
“The Indians don’ t generally bother with hook and line,”
Myers put in, n eatly spearing his own share of fish with his
knife. “T hey bu ild snares and f ish traps, or sometimes they’ll
put s ome sticks and rubbish cros t the creek to prevent the fish,
then sta nd above with a sharp stick, just spearin’ them from
the water .”That wa s enough for Ian; any mention of Indians and their
ways provoked a rash of eager questions. Having exhausted
the methods of fish-catching, he asked again about the
abandoned village we had seen earlier in our journey .
“Y e said it might have happened in the war ,” Ian said, lifting
the bones from a steaming trout, then shaking his fingers to
cool them. He p assed a section of the boneless flesh to Rollo,
who swallowed it in a single gulp, temperature
notwithstanding. “W ill that ha’ been the war wi’ the French,
then? I didna ken there was any fighting so far south.”
Myers shook his head, chewing and swallowing before he
answered.
“Oh, no. It’ll b e the T uscarora W ar I was meanin’; that’ s
how they call it on the white side, at least.”
The T us carora W ar , he explained, had been a short-lived but
brutal conflict some forty yea rs before, brought on by an
attack upon some backcountry settlers. The then governor of
the colony had sent troops into the T uscarora villages in
retaliation, and the upshot was a series of pitched battles that
the colonists, much better armed, had won handily—to the
devastation of the T uscarora nation.
Myers nodded toward the darkness.
“Ain’ t no more than seven vil lages o’ the T uscarora left,
now—and not above fifty or a hundred souls in any but the
biggest one.” So sadly dimin ished, the T uscarora would
quickly have fallen prey to surrounding tribes and disappeared
altogether , had they not been formally adopted by the
Mohawk, and thus become part of the powerful Iroquois
League.
Jamie c ame back to the fire  with a bottle from his
saddlebag. It was Scotch whisky , a parting present from
Jocasta. He poured out a small cupful, then of fered the half-
full bottle to Myers.
“Is t he Mohawk country not a  verra great distance to the
north?” he asked. “How can they of fer protection to theirfellows here, and they with hostile tribes all round?”
Myers took a g ulp of whisky and washed it pleasurably
around his mouth before answering.
“Mmm. That’ s fine stuf f, friend James. Oh, the Mohawk are
a good ways of f, aye. But the Nations of the Iroquois are a
name to reckon with—and of al l the Six Nations, the Mohawk
are the fiercest.  Ain’ t no one— red or  w hite— goin’ t o mess
with the Mohawk ‘thout good cause, nossir .”
I wa s fa scinated by this. I was also pleased to hear that the
Mohawk territory was a good long way away from us.
“Why did the M ohawk want to adopt the T uscarora, then?”
Jamie asked, lifting one brow . “It doesna seem they’d be
needing allies, and they so fierce as ye say .”
Myers’ s hazel eyes had gone to  dreamy half-slits under the
influence of good whisky .
“Oh, they’re fierce, all right—but they’re mortal,” he said,
“Indians are men o’ blood, and  none more than the Mohawk.
They’re men of honor , mind”—he raised a thick finger in
admonition—”but there’ s a sight of things they’ll kill for ,
some reasonable, some not. They raid, d’ye see, amongst
themselves, and they’ll kill for revenge—ain’ t nothin’ will
stop a Mohawk bent on revenge , save you kill him. And even
then, hi s brother or his son or his nephew will come after
you.”
He licke d his lips in slow meditation, savoring the slick of
whisky on his skin.
“Sometimes Indians don’ t kill for any reason a man would
say mattered; specially when liquor ’ s involved.”
“Sounds very much like the Sc ots,” I murmured to Jamie,
who gave me a cold look in return.
Myers picked up the whisky bottle and rolled it slowly
between his palms.
“Any m an migh t take a drop too much and be the worse in
his actio ns for it, but with the Indians, the first drop’ s toomuch. I ’ve heard of more than  one massacre that might not
have been, save for the men bein’ mad with drink.”
He shook his head, recalling himself to his subject.
“Be so as it ma y , it’ s a hard life, and a bloody one. Some
tribes are wiped out altogether ,  and none have men to spare.
So t hey adopt fo lk into the tribe , to replace those as are killed
or die of sickness. They take prisoners, sometimes—take ‘em
into a family , treat ‘em as their own. That’ s what they’ll do
with Mrs. Polly , there.” He n odded at Pollyanne, who sat
quietly by the fire, paying no attention to his speech.
“So happen back fifty years, the Mohawk took and adopted
the who le tribe of the T uscarora. Don’ t many tribes speak
exactly the same language,” Myers explained. “But some are
closer than others. T uscarora’ s more like the Mohawk than ‘tis
like the Creek or the Cherokee.”
“Can ye speak Mohawk yourself, Mr . Myers?” Ian’ s ears
had been flapping all through the explanation. Fascinated by
every ro ck, tree, and bird on our journey , Ian was still more
fascinated by any mention of Indians.
“Oh, a good bit.” Myers shrugged modestly . “Any trader
picks up  a few w ords here and t here. Shoo, dawg.” Rollo, who
had inch ed his nose within snif fing distance of Myers’ s last
trout, twitched his ears at the admonition but didn’ t withdraw
the nose.
“W ill it be the T uscarora ye mean to take Mistress Polly
to?” Jamie asked, crumbling a corn dodger into edible chunks.
Myers nodded, chewing carefully; with as few natural teeth
as he had left, even fresh cor n dodgers were a hazardous
undertaking.
“A ye. Be four , f ive days ride still,” he explained. He turned
to m e an d gave me a reassuring smile. “I’ll see her settled fine,
Mrs. Claire, you’ll not be worried for her .”
“What will the Indians think of her , I wonder?” Ian asked.
He g lanced at Pollyanne, interested. “W ill they have seen a
black woman before?”Myers laughed at that.
“Lad, there’ s a many of the T uscarora ain’ t seen a white
person before. Mrs. Polly won ’ t come as any more a shock
than your auntie might.” Myers  took a vast swig of water and
swished it around his mouth, eyeing Pollyanne thoughtfully .
She felt his eyes on her , and returned his stare, unblinking.
“I shoul d say they’d find her handsome, though; they do
like a woman as  is sweetly plump.” It was moderately obvious
that Myers shared this admiration; his eyes drifted over
Pollyanne with an appreciat ion touched with innocent
lasciviousness.
She saw  it, and an extraordinary  change came over her . She
seemed scarcely to move, and yet all at once, her whole person
was focused on Myers. No wh ite showed around her eyes;
they we re black  and fathomless, shining in the firelight. She
was still  short and heavy , but wi th only the slightest change of
posture, depth of bosom and width of hip were emphasized,
suddenly curved in a promise of lewd abundance.
Myers swallowed, audibly .
I glanc ed away from this little byplay to see Jamie
watching, too, with an expression somewhere between
amusement and concern. I poked him unobtrusively , and
squinted hard, in an expressio n that said as explicitly as I
could manage—”Do something!”
He narrowed one eye.
I wi dened both mine and gave  him a good stare, which
translated to, “I don’ t know , but do something!”
“Mmphm.”
Jamie cl eared his throat, leaned forward, and laid a hand on
Myers’ s arm, jarring the mount ain man out of his momentary
trance.
“I shoul dna like to think the woman will be misused in any
way ,” he said, p olitely , but with an edge of Scottish innuendo
on “misused” that implied the possibility of unlimitedimpropriety . He squeezed a little. “W ill ye undertake to
guarantee her safety , Mr . Myers?”
Myers shot him a look of incomprehension, which slowly
cleared, cognizance coming into the bloodshot hazel eyes. The
mountain man slowly pulled his arm free, then picked up his
cup, gulped the last mouthful o f whisky , coughed and wiped
his m outh. He m ight have been blushing, but it was impossible
to tell behind the beard.
“Oh, ye s. That is, I mean to say , oh, no. No, indeed. The
Mohawk and the T uscarora both, their women choose who
they bed  with, even who they marry . No such thing as rape
among ‘em. Oh, no. No, sir; she won’ t be misused, I can
promise that.”
“W ell, and I’m glad to hear it.” Jamie sat back, at ease, and
gave me an I-trust-you’re-satisf ied glare out of the corner of
his eye. I smiled demurely .
Ian migh t be not quite sixteen, but he was far too observant
to have missed all these exchanges. He coughed, in a
meaningful Scottish manner .
“Uncle, Mr . Myers has been kind enough to invite me to go
with him  and Mrs. Polly , to see  the Indian village. I shall be
sure to see that she finds good treatment there.”
“Y ou—” Jamie started, then broke of f. He gave his nephew
a long, hard lo ok across the fire. I could see the thoughts
racing through his mind.
Ian hadn ’ t asked permission to go; he’d announced he was
going. If Jamie forbade him, he must give grounds—and he
could sc arcely say that it was too dangerous, as this would
mean admitting both that he was willing to send the slave
woman into danger and that h e didn’ t trust Myers and his
relations with the local Indians.  Jamie was trapped, and very
neatly too.
He breathed in strongly through his nose. Ian grinned.
I loo ked back a cross the fire. Pollyanne was still sitting as
she had been, no t moving. Her e yes were still fixed on Myers,but a slight smile curved her lips in invitation. One hand rose
slowly , cupping a massive breast, almost absently .
Myers was staring back, dazed  as a deer with a hunter ’ s
light in its eyes.
And would I do  dif ferently? I thought later , listening to the
discreet rustling noises and small groans from the direction of
Myers’ s blanket s. If I knew that my life depended on a man?
W ould I not do  anything I could to ensure he would protect
me, in the face of unknown danger?
There was a snapping and crackling in the bushes, not far
away . It  was loud, and I stif fen ed. So did Jamie. He slid his
hand ou t from under my shirt , reaching for his dirk, then
relaxing, as the reassuring scent of skunk reached our nostrils.
He put his hand  back under m y shirt, squeezed my breast
and fell back asleep, his breath warm on my neck.
No g reat dif ference at all, perha ps. W as my future any more
certain than hers? And did I not depend for my life upon a man
bound to me—at least in part—by desire of my body?
A fa int wind br eathed through the trees, and I hitched the
blanket higher on my shoulder . The fire had burned to embers,
and so high in t he mountains, it was cool at night. The moon
had set, but it was very clear; the stars blazed close, a net of
light cast over the mountains’ peaks.
No, there were dif ferences. However unknown my future, it
would be shared, and the bond between my man and me went
much deeper than the flesh. Beyond all this was the one great
dif ference, though—I had chosen to be there.1 5
N O B L E  S A V A G E S
W e took our leave  of the others in the morning, Jamie and
Myers ta king pains over the arrangement for a rendezvous in
ten days time. Looking around me at the bewildering
immensity of forest and mountain, I couldn’ t imagine how
anyone c ould be  sure of finding  a specific place again; I could
only trust in Jamie’ s sense of navigation.
They turned to the north, we to the southwest, making our
way along the course of the stream we had camped by . It
seemed very quiet at first, and s trangely lonely , with only the
two of us. W ithin a short time, though, I had grown
accustomed to the solitude and began to relax, taking a keen
interest in our surroundings. This might, after all, be our home.
The thought was a rather daunting one; it was a place of
amazing beauty  and richness, b ut so wild, it hardly seemed
that peo ple could live in it. I didn’ t voice this thought,
however; only followed Jamie’ s horse as he led us deeper and
deeper into the mountains, stopping finally in the late
afternoon to make a small camp and catch fish for dinner .
The light faded slowly , retreating through the trees. The
thick mossy trunks grew dense with shadow , edges still
rimmed with a fugitive light that hid among the leaves, green
shadows shifting with the sunset breeze.
A ti ny g low lit suddenly in the grass a few feet away , cool
and brig ht. I saw another , and an other , and then the edge of the
wood w as full of them, lazily falling, then blinking out, cold
sparks drifting in the growing dark.
“Y ou know , I never saw firefl ies until I came to live in
Boston,” I said, filled with pleasure at sight of them, glowing
emerald and topaz in the grass. “They don’ t have fireflies in
Scotland, do they?”Jamie sh ook his head, reclining lazily on the grass, one arm
hooked behind his head.
“Bonny wee things,” he observed, and sighed with content.
“This is my favorite time of the day , I think. When I lived in
the c ave, after C ulloden, I would come out near evening, and
sit on a stone, waiting for the dark.”
His eyes were half closed, watching the fireflies. The
shadows faded upward as night rose from the earth to the sky .
A m oment before, light through the oak leaves had mottled
him like a fawn ; now the bright ness had faded, so he lay in a
sort of dim gree n glow , the lines of his body at once solid and
insubstantial.
“All the  wee bugs come out just now—the moths and the
midges; all the bittie things that hang about in clouds over the
water . Y e see th e swallows come for them, and then the bats,
swooping down. And the salmon, rising to the evening hatch
and making rings on the water .”
His eyes  were open now , fixed on the waving sea of grass
on the hillside, but I knew he saw instead the surface of the
tiny loch near Lallybroch, alive with fleeting ripples.
“It’ s only a mo ment, but ye feel as though it will last
forever . Strange, is it no?” he said thoughtfully . “Y e can almost
see the light go as ye watch—a nd yet there’ s no time ye can
look an d say ‘Now! Now it’ s night.’ ” He gestured at the
opening between the oak trees, and the valley below , its
hollows filling with dark.
“No.” I lay back  in the grass beside him, feeling the warm
damp of the grass mold the buckskin to my body . The air was
thick and cool under the trees, like the air in a church, dim and
fragrant with remembered incense.
“Do you remember Father Anse lm at the abbey?” I looked
up; the color wa s going from th e oak leaves overhead, leaving
the soft silver u ndersides gray as mouse fur . “He said there
was always an hour in the day when time seems to stop—butthat it was dif ferent for everyone. He thought it might be the
hour when one was born.”
I turned my head to look at him.
“Do you know when you were born?” I asked. “The time of
day , I mean?”
He glanced at me and smiled, rolling over to face me.
“A ye, I do. Perhaps he was rig ht, then, for I was born at
suppertime—just at twilight on the first of May .” He brushed
away a floating firefly and grinned at me.
“Have I  never told ye that story? How my mother had put
on a pot of brose to cook, and then her pains came on so fast
she’d no  time to think of it, and no one else remembered either
until they smelled the burning, a nd it ruined the supper and the
pot as well? There was nothing else in the house to eat save a
great go oseberry pie. So they al l ate that, but there was a new
kitchenmaid and  the gooseberries were green, and all of them
—except my mother and me, of course—spent the night
writhing wi’ the indigestion.”
He shook his head, still smiling. “My father said it was
months before he could look at me without feeling his bowels
cramp.”
I l aughed, and h e reached to pic k a last-year ’ s leaf from my
hair .
“And what hour were you born, Sassenach?”
“I do n’ t know ,” I said, with the usual pang of faint regret for
my vanished family . “It wasn’ t on my birth certificate, and if
Uncle L amb knew , he never to ld me. I know when Brianna
was born, though,” I added, mor e cheerfully . “She was born at
three minutes past three in the  morning. There was a huge
clock on the wall of the delivery room, and I saw it.”
Dim as the light was, I could see his look of surprise clearly .
“Y ou we re awake? I thought ye told me women are drugged
then, so as not to feel the pain.”“They mostly were, then. I wouldn’ t let them give me
anything, though.” I stared upward. The shadows were thick
around u s now , but the sky wa s still clear and light above, a
soft, brilliant blue.
“Why the hell not?” he demanded, incredulous. “I’ve never
seen a woman g ive birth, but I’v e hear d  i t more than on ce, I’ll
tell ye. And damned if I can see why a woman in her right
mind would do it, and there was any choice about it.”
“W ell…” I paused, not wanting to seem melodramatic. It
was the truth, though. “W ell, ” I said, rather defiantly , “I
thought I was going to die, and I didn’ t want to die in my
sleep.”
He wasn’ t shocked. He only ra ised one brow , and snorted
faintly with amusement.
“W ould ye no?”
“No, would you?” I twisted my head to look at him. He
rubbed the bridge of his nose, still amused at the question.
“A ye, well, perhaps. I’ve come close to death by hanging,
and I didna like the waiting a bit. I’ve nearly been killed in
battle a few times; I canna say  I was much concerned about
the dying then, though, bein’ too busy to think of it. And then
I’ve nearly died of wounds and fever , and that was misery
enough that I wa s looking forward verra keenly to being dead.
But on the whole, given my choice about it, I think perhaps I
wouldna mind dying in my sleep, no.”
He lean ed over and kissed me lightly . “Preferably in bed,
next to you. At a verra advance d age, mind.” He touched his
tongue delicatel y to my lips, then rose to his feet, brushing
dried oak leaves from his breeks.
“Best m ake a fire while there ’ s light enough to strike a
flint,” he said. “Y e’ll fetch the wee fish?”
I lef t him  to deal with flints and  kindling while I went down
the little hill to the stream, where we had left the fresh-caught
trout da ngling from stringers in the icy current. As I came
back up the hill it had grown da rk enough that I could see himonly in outline , crouched over a tiny pile of smoldering
kindling. A wisp of smoke rose  up like incense, pale between
his hands.
I s et the gutted fish down in the  long grass and sat back on
my heels beside him, watching as he laid fresh sticks on the
fire, building it patiently , a barricade against the coming night.
“What do you t hink it will be like?” I asked suddenly . “T o
die.”
He s tared into the fire, thinkin g. A burning twig snapped
with hea t, spurting sparks into the air , which drifted down,
blinking out before they touched the ground.
” ‘M an is like the grass that wi thers and is thrown into the
fire; he is like t he sparks that fly upward…and his place will
know him no more,’ ” I quoted softly . “Is there nothing after ,
do you think?”
He shook his head, looking into the fire. I saw his eyes shift
beyond it, to w here the cool bright sparks of the fireflies
blinked in and out among the dark stems.
“I c anna say ,” h e said at last, softly . His shoulder touched
mine and I leaned my head toward him. “There’ s what the
Church says, but—” His eyes w ere still fixed on the fireflies,
winking through the grass stems, their light unquenchable.
“No, I canna say . But I think it will maybe be all right.”
He t ilted his head, pressing his cheek against my hair for a
moment, then stood up, reaching for his dirk.
“The fire’ s well started now .”
The hea vy air of the afternoon h ad lifted with the coming of
twilight, and a soft evening breeze blew the damp tendrils of
hair of f my fa ce. I sat with my face lifted, eyes closed,
enjoying the coolness after the sweaty heat of the day .
I co uld hear Jam ie rustling around the fire, and the quick,
soft whisht  of his knife as  he skinned green oak twigs for
broiling the fish.I t hink it will maybe be all rig ht . I  thought so, t oo. There
was no telling what lay on the o ther side of life, but I had sat
many times through an hour where time stops, empty of
thought, soothed of soul, looking into…what? Into something
that had  neither name nor face, but which seemed good to me,
and full of peace. If death lay there…
Jamie’ s hand touched my shoul der lightly in passing, and I
smiled, not opening my eyes.
“Ouch!” he muttered, on the oth er side of the fire. “Nicked
myself, clumsy clot.”
I opened my eyes. He was a good eight feet away , head bent
as h e sucked a small cut on the knuckle of his thumb. A ripple
of gooseflesh rose straight up my back.
“Jamie,” I said. My voice sounded peculiar , even to me. I
felt a small round cold spot, centered like a tar get on the back
of my neck.
“A ye?”
“Is there—” I swallowed, fee ling the hair rise on my
forearms. “Jamie, is there…someone…behind me?”
His eyes shifted to the shado ws over my shoulder , and
sprang w ide. I didn’ t wait to look round, but flung myself flat
on the ground, an action that likely saved my life.
There was a loud whuff!  and  a sudden strong smell of
ammonia and fish. Something s truck me in the back with an
impact t hat knocked the breath out of me, and then stepped
heavily on my head, driving my face into the ground.
I jer ked up, gasping for breath, shaking leaf mold out of my
eyes. A lar ge black bear , squalling like a cat, was lurching
round the clearing, its feet scattering burning sticks.
For a moment, h alf blinded by dirt, I couldn’ t see Jamie at
all. T hen I spotte d him. He was under the bear , one arm locked
around its neck, his head tucked  into the joint of the shoulder
just under the drooling jaws.One foot shot out from under the bear , kicking frantically ,
stabbing at the ground for tractio n. He had taken his boots and
stockings of f when we made camp; I gasped as one bare foot
slewed through the remnants o f the fire, raising showers of
sparks.
His fore arm was ridged with ef f ort, half buried in thick fur .
His free arm thr ust and jabbed; he had kept hold of his dirk, at
least. At  the same time, he haul ed with all his strength on the
bear ’ s neck, pulling it down.
The bear was lu nging, batting with one paw , trying to shake
of f the clinging weight around its neck. It seemed to lose its
balance, and fell heavily forward, with a loud squall of rage. I
heard a muf fled whoof!  th at didn’ t see m to come fro m the
bear , and looked frantically around for something to use as a
weapon.
The bear struggled back to its feet, shaking itself violently .
I caugh t a brief glimpse of Jamie’ s face, contorted with
ef fort. One bulging eye widened at sight of me, and he shook
his mouth clear of the bristling fur .
“Run!” h e shouted. Then the bear fell on him again, and he
disappeared under three hundred pounds of hair and muscle.
W ith vague thoughts of Mow gli and the Red Flower , I
scrabbled madly  over the damp  earth in the clearing, finding
nothing but small pieces of cha rred stick and glowing embers
that blistered my fingers but were too small to grip.
I had  alw ays tho ught that bears roared when annoyed. This
one was making a lot of noise, but it sounded more like a very
lar ge p ig, with piercing squeals and blatting noises
interspersed with hair -raising growls. Jamie was making a lot
of noise, too, which was reassuring under the circumstances.
My hand fell on something c old and clammy; the fish,
tossed aside at the edge of the fire clearing.
“T o hell  with the Red Flower ,” I muttered. I seized one of
the t rout by the tail, ran forward, and belted the bear across the
nose with it as hard as I could.The bear shut its  mouth and looked surprised. Then its head
slewed t oward me and it lunge d, moving faster than I would
have thought possible. I fell bac kward, landing on my bottom,
and essa yed a final, valiant blow with my fish before the bear
char ged me, Jamie still clinging to its neck like grim death.
It w as like bein g caught in a meat grinder; a brief moment
of total chaos, punctuated by random hard blows to the body
and the sensatio n of being suf fo cated in a lar ge, reeking hairy
blanket. Then it was gone, leaving me lying bruised in the
grass on  my back, smelling stro ngly of bear piss and blinking
up at the evening star , which was shining serenely overhead.
Things w ere a good deal less serene on the ground. I rolled
onto all fours, s houting “Jamie!” at the trees, where a lar ge,
amorphous mas s rolled to and fro, smashing down the oak
saplings and emitting a cacophony of growls and Gaelic
screeches.
It was full dark on the ground by now , but there was enough
light from the sky for me to make things out. The bear had
fallen over again, but instead o f rising and lunging, this time
was roll ing on its back, hind fee t churning in an ef fort to gain
a rip ping purchase. One front p aw landed in a heavy , rending
slap and there was an explosive grunt that didn’ t sound like the
bear ’ s. The smell of blood was heavy on the air .
“Jamie!” I shrieked.
There w as no answer , but the writhing pile rolled and tilted
slowly sideways into the deeper black shadows under the
trees. Th e mingled noises subsided to heavy grunts and gasps,
punctuated by small whimpering moans.
“JAMIE!”
The thrashing and branch-crac king died away into softer
rustlings. Something was movin g under the branches, swaying
heavily from side to side, on all fours.
V ery slowly , breathing in gasps  with a catch and a groan,
Jamie crawled out into the clearing.Disregarding my own bruises, I ran to him, and dropped to
my knees beside him.
“God, Jamie! Are you all right?”
“No,” he said shortly , and collapsed on the ground,
wheezing gently .
His face was no more than a pale blotch in the starlight; the
rest of his body  was so dark as to be nearly invisible. I found
out w hy as I ran my hands swif tly over him. His clothes were
so soake d with blood that they stuck to his body , his hunting
shirt com ing away from his ch est with a nasty little sucking
sound as I pulled at it.
“Y ou smell like a slaughterhouse,” I said, feeling under his
chin for  a pulse. It was fast— no great surprise—but strong,
and a wave of relief washed over me. “Is that your blood, or
the bear ’ s?”
“If it was mine, Sassenach, I’d be dead,” he said testily ,
opening his eyes. “No credit to  you that I’m not, mind.” He
rolled painfully onto his side an d slowly got to his hands and
knees, g roaning. “What possess ed ye, woman, to hit me in the
heid wi’ a fish whilst I was fighting for my life?”
“Hold s till, for heaven’ s sake!”  He couldn’ t be too badly
hurt if he was tr ying to get away . I clutched him by the hips to
stop him, and kneeling behind him, felt my way gingerly up
his sides. “Broken ribs?” I said.
“No. But if ye tickle me, Sassenach, I willna like it a bit,” he
said, gasping between words.
“I won’ t,” I assured him. I ran my hands gently over the
arch of his ribs, pressing lightly . No splintered ends protruding
through the skin, no sinister depressions or soft spots; cracked
maybe, but he was right, not hing broken. He yelped and
twitched under my hand. “Bad spot there?”
“It i s,” he said  between his teeth. He was beginning to
shiver , a nd I hurried to fetch his plaid, which I wrapped about
his shoulders.“I’m fine, Sassenach,” he said, w aving away my attempts to
help him to a seat. “Go see to the horses; they’ll be upset.”
They were. W e had hobbled th e horses a little way from the
clearing; they had made it a good deal farther under the
impetus of terror , judging from the muf fled stamping and
whinnying I could hear in the distance.
There were still small wheezing groans coming from the
deep shadows under the trees; the sound was so human that the
hair prickled on the back of my neck. Carefully skirting the
sounds, I went a nd found the horses, cowering in a birch grove
a few  hundred yards away . They  whickered when they scented
me, delighted to see me, bear piss and all.
By the time I ha d soothed the horses and coaxed them back
in th e direction of the clearing , the pitiful noises from the
shadows had ceased. There was  a small glow in the clearing;
Jamie had managed to get the fire started again.
He w as crouched next to the tiny  blaze, still shivering under
his plaid . I fed in enough stick s to make sure it wouldn’ t go
out, then turned my attention to him once more.
“Y ou’re really not badly damaged?” I asked, still worried.
He gave me a lopsided smile.
“I’ll do. It caught me a good one across the back, but I dinna
think it’ s verra bad. Have a look?” He straightened up,
wincing, and felt his side gingerly as I crossed behind him.
“What made it d o that, I wonder?” he said, twisting his head
toward where the bear ’ s carcass lay . “Myers said the black
bears dinna often attack ye, w ithout ye provoke them some
way .”
“Maybe somebo dy else provoked it,” I suggested. “And
then had the sen se to get out of t he way .” I lifted the plaid, and
whistled under my breath.
The bac k of his shirt hung in shreds, smeared with dirt and
ash, splotched with blood. His b lood this time, not the bear ’ s,
but luckily not much. I gently pulled the tattered pieces of the
shirt apart, exposing the long bo w of his back. Four long claw-marks ran from shoulder blade t o armpit; deep, wicked gouges
that tapered to superficial red welts.
“Ooh!” I said, in sympathy .
“W ell, it’ s no a s though my back was much to look at,
anyway ,” he joked feebly . “R eally , is it bad?” He twisted
around, trying to see, then stopped, grunting as the movement
strained his bruised ribs.
“No. Dirty , though; I’ll need to wash it out.” The blood had
already begun to clot; the woun ds would need to be cleansed
at once. I put the plaid back and  set on a pan of water to boil,
thinking what else I might use.
“I saw some arr owhead plant down near the stream,” I said.
“I think  I can fi nd it again from  memory .” I handed him the
bottle of ale I’d brought from the saddlebags, and took his
dirk.
“W ill yo u be all right?” I paused  and looked at him; he was
very pal e, and still shivering. T he fire glimmered red on his
brows, throwing the lines of his face into strong relief.
“A ye, I will.” He mustered a faint grin. “Dinna worry ,
Sassenach; the thought of dyin’  asleep in my bed seems even
better to me now than it did an hour ago.”
A sickle-moon was rising, bright over the trees, and I had
little trouble finding the place I  remembered. The stream ran
cold and silver in the moonlight , chilling my hands and feet as
I sto od calf-deep in the wate r , groping for tubers of the
arrowhead plant.
Small fr ogs sang all around m e, and the stif f leaves of
cattails rustled softly in the eve ning breeze. It was very , very
peaceful, and all of a sudden I found myself shaking so hard
that I had to sit down on the stream bank.
Anytime. It could happen anytime, and just this fast. I
wasn’ t s ure which seemed most unreal; the bear ’ s attack, or
this, the soft summer night, alive with promise.I re sted my he ad on my knees, letting the sickness, the
residue of shock, drain away . I t didn’ t matter , I told myself.
Not only anytime, but anywhere. Disease, car wreck, random
bullet. There was no true refu ge for anyone, but like most
people, I managed not to think of that most of the time.
I s huddered, thinking of the cl aw marks on Jamie’ s back.
Had he been slo wer to react, not as strong…had the wounds
been slightly deeper…for that matter , infection was still a
major threat. But at least against that danger , I could fight.
The thought brought me back to myself, the squashed leaves
and roots cool and wet in my hand. I splashed cold water over
my face, and st arted up the hill toward the campfire, feeling
somewhat better .
I c ould see Jami e through the th in scrim of saplings, sitting
upright, outlined against the fire. Sitting bolt upright, in a way
that must surely have been painful, considering his wounds.
I stopped, suddenly wary , just as he spoke.
“Claire?” He didn’ t turn around, and his voice was calm. He
didn’ t wait for me to answer , but went on, voice cool and
steady .
“W alk up behind me, Sassenach , and put your knife into my
left hand. Then stay behind me.”
Heart hammering, I took the three steps that brought me
high enough to see over his shoulder . On the far side of the
clearing, just within the light o f the fire, stood three Indians,
heavily armed. Evidently the bear had  been provoked.
The Indi ans looked us over with a lively interest that was more
than returned. There were three of them; an older man, whose
feathered topknot was liberally streaked with gray , and two
younger , perhap s in their twenti es. Father and sons, I thought
—there was a certain similarity among them, more of body
than of face; all three were fairly short, broad-shouldered and
bow-legged, with long, powerful arms.I eyed their weapons covertly . The older man cradled a gun
in the curve of his arm; it was an ancient French wheelock, the
hexagonal barre l rimed with rust. It looked as though it would
explode in his face if he fired it, but I hoped he wouldn’ t try .
One of the younger men carried a bow to hand, arrow
casually nocked . All three had sinister -looking tomahawks and
skinning knives  slung in their belts. Long as it was, Jamie’ s
dirk seemed rather inadequate by comparison.
Evidently coming to the same conclusion, he leaned forward
and placed the d irk carefully on the ground at his feet. Sitting
back, he spread his empty hands and shrugged.
The Ind ians giggled. It was suc h an unwarlike noise that I
found myself half smiling in response, even though my
stomach, less easily disarmed, stayed knotted with tension.
I sa w Jamie’ s shoulders relax  their rigid line, and felt
slightly reassured.
“Bonsoir , messieurs,”  he said. “Parlez-vous francais?”
The Indians giggled again, glanc ing at each other shyly . The
older man took a  tentative step f orward and ducked his head at
us, setting the beads in his hair swinging.
“No…Fransh,” he said.
“English?” I said hopefully . He glanced at me with interest,
but shoo k his head. He said something over one shoulder to
one of his sons, who replied in the same unintelligible tongue.
The older man turned back to Jamie and asked something,
raising his brows in question.
Jamie shook his head in incomprehension, and one of the
young men stepped into the fir elight. Bending his knees and
letting h is shoulders slump, he thrust his head forward and
swayed from side to side, peering nearsightedly in such perfect
imitation of a b ear that Jamie laughed out loud. The other
Indians grinned.
The you ng man straightened up and pointed at the blood-
soaked sleeve of Jamie’ s shirt, with an interrogatory noise.“Oh, aye, it’ s ov er there,” Jamie said, gesturing toward the
darkness under the trees.
W ithout further ado, all three men disappeared into the dark,
from w hich ex cited exclama tions and murmurings soon
emer ged.
“It’ s all right, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “They willna harm
us. T hey’re only hunters.” He closed his eyes briefly , and I
saw the faint sheen of sweat on  his face. “And a good thing,
too, because I think I’m maybe going to swoon.”
“Don’ t even think about it. Don’ t you dar e  faint and leave
me alone with them!” No matter what the savages’ possible
intentions, the thought of facing them alone over Jamie’ s
unconscious body was enough to reknot my intestines with
panic. I put my  hand on the back of his neck and forced his
head down between his knees.
“Breathe,” I said, squeezing cold water from my
handkerchief down the back of his neck. “Y ou can faint later .”
“Can I puke?” he asked, his voice muf fled in his kilt. I
recognized the note of wry jest in it, and let my own breath out
with relief.
“No,” I said. “Sit up; they’re coming back.”
They we re, drag ging the bear ’ s c arcass with them. Jamie sat
up a nd mopped his face with th e wet handkerchief. W arm as
the n ight was, he was shivering slightly from shock, but he sat
steadily enough.
The older man came over to us, and pointed with raised
brows; first to the knife that lay at Jamie’ s feet, then to the
dead bear . Jamie nodded modestly .
“It wasna easy , mind,” he said.
The Indian’ s brows rose higher . Then he ducked his head,
hands spread in a gesture of respect. He beckoned to one of the
younger men, who came over , untying a pouch from his belt.
Shoving me unceremoniously to one side, the younger man
ripped open the throat of Jam ie’ s shirt, pulled it of f hisshoulder , and squinted at the injury . He poured a handful of a
lumpy , half-powdery substance into his hand, spat copiously
into it, stirred it into a foul-smelling paste, and smeared it
liberally over the wounds.
“Now I really am  going to puke,” Jamie murmured, wincing
under the ungentle ministrations. “What is that stuf f?”
“At a guess, it’ s  dried trillium mixed with very rancid bear
grease,” I said, t rying not to inha le the pungent fumes. “I don’ t
suppose it will kill you; at least I hope not.”
“That’ s two of u s, then,” he said  under his breath. “No, I’ll
do now , thank ye kindly .” He waved away further
ministrations, smiling politely at his would-be doctor .
Joking or not, his lips were white, even in the dimness of
the firel ight. I put a hand on his good shoulder , and felt the
muscles clenched tight with strain.
“Get the whisky , Sassenach. I need it badly .”
One of the Indians made a grab at the bottle as I pulled it
from the  bag, but I pushed him rudely away . He grunted with
surprise, but didn’ t follow me. Instead, he picked up the bag
and beg an rooting through it like a hog hunting truf fles. I
didn’ t try to sto p him, but hurried back to Jamie with the
whisky .
He t ook a small  sip, then a lar ger one, shuddered once, and
opened his eyes. He breathed deeply once or twice, drank
again, then wiped his mouth and held out the bottle in
invitation to the older man.
“Do you think that’ s wise?” I muttered, recalling Myers’ s
lurid sto ries abo ut massacres, and the ef fects of firewater on
Indians.
“I can give it to them or let them take it, Sassenach,” he
said, a little testily . “There are three of them, aye?”
The older man passed the mo uth of the bottle under his
nose, no strils flaring as though in appreciation of a rarebouquet. I could smell the liquor from where I stood, and was
surprised that it didn’ t sear the lining of his nose.
A smile  of beatific content spread across the man’ s craggy
face. He said something to his sons that sounded like
“Har oo!”  and  the one who had been rifling our bag came at
once to join his brother , a couple of corn dodgers clutched in
his fist.
The older man stood up with the bottle in his hand, but
instead of drinking, took it ove r to where the bear ’ s carcass
lay , black as an inkblot on the ground. W ith great deliberation,
he p oured a sma ll amount of wh isky into the palm of his hand,
bent, an d dribbled the liquid into the bear ’ s half-open mouth.
Then he turned slowly in a circle, shaking drops of whisky
ceremoniously from his fingers. The drops flew gold and
amber w here they caught the li ght, hitting the fire with tiny ,
sizzling pops.
Jamie sat up straight, dizziness for gotten in his interest.
“W ill ye look at that, now?” he said.
“At what?” I sa id, but he didn’ t answer , absorbed by the
Indians’ behavior .
One of the younger men had taken out a small beaded pouch
that held tobacco. Carefully pac king the bowl of a small stone
pipe, he lit it wit h a dry twig dipped into the flames of our fire,
and drew strongly on the barrel. The tobacco leaf sparked and
fumed, spreading its rich aroma over the clearing.
Jamie w as leaning against me, h is back against my thighs. I
had my hand on  his unwounded shoulder again, and could feel
the shive r in his flesh start to eas e as the warmth of the whisky
began to  spread in his belly . He wasn’ t badly hurt, but the
strain of the fight and the continued ef fort to stay alert were
taking their toll on him.
The older man took the pip e and drew several deep,
leisurely mouthf uls, which he e xhaled with evident pleasure.
Then he  knelt, and taking another deep lungful of smoke,
carefully blew it up the nostrils  of the dead bear . He repeatedthis process several times, muttering something under his
breath as he exhaled.
Then he rose, w ith no sign of stif fness, and extended the
pipe to Jamie.
Jamie smoked as the Indians had done—one or two long,
ceremonious mo uthfuls—and th en lifted the pipe, turning to
hand it to me.
I lifted the pipe  and drew cautiously . Burning smoke filled
my eyes and nose at once, and my throat constricted with an
overwhelming u r ge to cough. I choked it back, and hastily
gave Jamie the pipe, feeling my face turn red as the smoke
curled lazily through my ches t, tickling and burning as it
searched its way through the channels of my lungs.
“Y e dinna br eathe  it, Sass enach,” he murmured. “ Just let it
rise up the back of your nose.”
“Now…you…tell me,” I said, trying not to strangle.
The Indians watched me in round-eyed interest. The older
man put his head on one side, frowning as though trying to
puzzle somethin g out. He popped up onto his feet and came
round th e fire, crouching to peer  curiously at me, close enough
for me to catch the odd, smok y scent of his skin. He wore
nothing but a b reechclout and a sort of short leather apron,
though his chest was covered  by a lar ge, ornate necklace
featuring seashells, stones, and the teeth of some lar ge animal.
W ith no  warning , he suddenly re ached out and squeezed my
breast. There was nothing even faintly lascivious about the
gesture, but I jumped. So did Jamie, hand darting for his knife.
The Indi an sat back calmly on h is heels, waving his hand in
dismissal. He clapped his hand flat on his breast, then made a
cupping motion and pointed at me. He had meant nothing; he
had only wanted to assure him self that I was indeed female.
He pointed from me to Jamie, and raised one brow .
“A ye, sh e’ s min e.” Jamie nodded and lowered his dirk, but
kept a hold on it, frowning at th e Indian. “Mind your manners,
eh?”Uninterested in this byplay , one of the younger Indians said
something, and gestured impatiently at the carcass on the
ground. The older man, who ha d paid no attention to Jamie’ s
annoyance, replied, drawing his skinning knife from his belt as
he turned.
“Here—that’ s mine to do.”
The Indians turned in surprise a s Jamie rose to his feet. He
gestured with his dirk to the bear , and then pointed the tip
firmly at his own chest.
Not waiting for any response, he  knelt on the ground beside
the carcass, crossed himself, and said something in Gaelic,
knife rai sed abo ve the still body . I didn’ t know all the words,
but I had seen hi m do it once before, when he had killed a deer
on the road from Geor gia.
It w as the gralloch prayer he had been taught as a boy ,
learning to hunt in the Highlan ds of Scotland. It was old, he
had told  me; so old that some of the words were no longer in
common use, so it sounded unfamiliar . But it must be said for
any animal slain that was lar ger  than a hare, before the throat
was cut or the bellyskin split.
W ithout hesitatio n, he made a shallow slash across the chest
—no need to ble ed the carcass; t he heart was long since still—
and ripp ed the skin between the legs, so the pale swell of the
intestines bulge d up from th e narrow , black-furred slit,
gleaming in the light.
It took both strength and considerable skill to split and peel
back th e heav y skin without penetrating the mesenteric
membrane that held the visceral sac enclosed. I, who had
opened softer human bodies, re cognized sur gical competence
when I saw it. So did the Indians, who were watching the
proceedings with critical interest.
Jamie’ s skill at skinning wasn’ t what had fixed their
attention, thoug h—that was surely a common enough ability
here. No, it wa s the gralloch prayer—I had seen the older
man’ s eyes widen, and his glan ce at his sons as Jamie kneltover the  carcass. They might n ot know what he was saying,
but it was plain from their expr essions that they knew exactly
what he was doing—and were both surprised, and favorably
impressed.
A small trickle o f sweat ran dow n behind Jamie’ s ear , clear
red in the firelig ht. Skinning a la r ge animal is heavy work, and
small spots of fresh blood wer e showing through the grimy
cloth of his shirt.
Before I  could of fer to take the knife, though, he sat back on
his heel s and of fered the dirk hilt-first to one of the younger
Indians.
“Go ahead,” he said, gesturing at the bear ’ s half-butchered
bulk in invitation. “Y e dinna think I’m going to eat it all
myself, I hope.”
The man took the knife without hesitation, and kneeling,
took ove r the skinning. The two  others glanced at Jamie, and
seeing his nod, joined in the work.
He let me sit him on the log once more and covertly clean
and dres s his shoulder , while he watched the Indians make
quick work of the skinning and butchering.
“What w as it he did with the whisky?” I asked quietly . “Do
you know?”
He n odded, eyes fixed absently  on the bloody work by the
fire.
“It’ s a charm. Y e scatter holy w ater to the four airs of the
earth, to preserve yourself from evil. And I suppose whisky is
a verra reasonable substitute for holy water , in the
circumstances.”
I glanced at the Indians, stained to the elbows with the
bear ’ s blood, talking casually among themselves. One of them
was bui lding a small platform near the fire, a crude layer of
sticks laid across rocks set in a square. Another was cutting
chunks of meat and stringing them on a peeled green stick for
cooking.“From evil? Do you mean they’re afraid of us ?”
He smiled.
“I shouldna think we’re so fearsome, Sassenach; no, from
spirits.”
Frightened as I had been by the Indians’ appearance, it
would never have occurred to m e that they might have been
similarly unnerv ed by ours. But glancing up at Jamie now , I
thought they might pardonab ly have been excused for
nervousness.
Used to him as I was, I was seld om aware anymore of how
he a ppeared to others. But eve n tired and wounded, he was
formidable; straight-backed and wide-shouldered, with slanted
eyes that caught the fire in a glitter as blue as the flame’ s heart.
He sat easily now , relaxed, bi g hands loose between his
thighs. B ut it was the stillness  of a great cat, eyes always
watchful behind the calm. Beyond size and quickness, there
was und eniably an air of savagery about him; he was as much
at home in these woods as the bear had been.
The English had always thought the Scottish Highlanders
barbarians; I had never before considered the possibility that
others might feel likewise. But these men had seen a ferocious
savage, and approached him w ith due caution, arms at the
ready . And Jamie, horrified beforehand at the thought of
savage R ed Indi ans, had seen th eir rituals—so like his own—
and known them at once for fellow hunters; civilized men.
Even now , he was speaking to them quite naturally ,
explaining with broad gestures how the bear had come upon us
and how  he had killed it. They followed him with avid
attention, exclaiming in appreciation in all the right places.
When h e picked up the rema ins of the mangled fish and
demonstrated m y role in the proceedings, they all looked at me
and giggled hilariously .
I glared at all four of them.
“Dinner ,” I said loudly , “is served.”W e shared a me al of half-roasted meat, corn dodgers, and
whisky , watched  throughout by the head of the bear , which
perched ceremon ially on its platform, dead eyes gone dull and
gummy .
Feeling mildly glazed, I leaned against the fallen log,
listening with half an ear to the conversation. Not that I
understood muc h that was actually said. One of the sons, an
accomplished mimic, was giving a spirited rendition of Great
Hunts o f the Past, alternately p laying the parts of hunter and
prey , an d doing it well enough t hat even I had no dif ficulty in
telling a deer from a panther .
W e had got so far in our acquaintance as an exchange of
names. Mine came out in their tongue as “Klah,” which they
seemed to find very funny . “Kl ah,” they said, pointing at me,
“Klah-Klah-Klah-Klah-Klah!” Then they all laughed
uproariously , the ir humor fueled by whisky . I might have been
tempted to reply in kind, save that I wasn’ t sure I could
pronounce “Nacognaweto” once, let alone repeatedly .
They we re—or so Jamie informed me—T uscarora. W ith his
gift of tongues, he was already pointing at objects and
essaying the Indian names for them. No doubt by dawn he
would be exchanging improper stories with them, I thought
blearily; they were already telling him jokes.
“Here,” I said, tugging on the edge of Jamie’ s plaid. “Are
you all right? B ecause I can’ t stay awake to look after you.
Are you going to faint and fall headfirst into the fire?”
Jamie patted me absently on the head.
“I’ll be fine now , Sassenach,” he said. Restored by food and
whisky , he seemed to be suf ferin g no lingering ill ef fects from
his b attle with th e bear . What he ’d feel like in the morning was
another question, I thought.
I wa s be yond w orrying about that, or anything else, though;
my head  was spinning from the ef fects of adrenaline, whisky
and toba cco, and I crawled of f to fetch my blanket. Curled up
by Jamie’ s feet, I drifted drowsily of f to sleep, surrounded bythe sacred fumes of smoke and liquor , and watched by the
dull, sticky eyes of the bear .
“Know just how you feel,” I told it, and then was gone.1 6
T H E  F I R S T  L A W  O F
T H E R M O D Y N A M I C S
I  w as awakened abruptly just after dawn by a tiny stinging
sensation on top of my head. I blinked and put up a hand to
investigate. The movement star tled a lar ge gray jay who had
been pulling hairs out of my head, and he shot up into a nearby
pine tree, screeching hysterically .
“Serve y ou right, mate,” I mutt ered, rubbing the top of my
head, but couldn’ t help smiling.  I had been told often enough
that my hair looked like a bird’ s nest first thing in the morning;
perhaps there was something to it, after all.
The Indians were gone. Luckily , the bear ’ s head had gone
with them. I fel t my own head with ginger fingers, but aside
from the  small sting of the jay’ s depredations, it seemed intact.
Either it  had been remarkably good whisky , or my sense of
intoxication had  been due more to the ef fects of adrenaline and
tobacco than to alcohol.
My comb was in the small de erskin pouch where I kept
personal necessities and those few medicines I thought might
be usefu l on the trail. I sat up  carefully , so as not to wake
Jamie. He lay a short distanc e away on his back, hands
crossed, peaceful as the carved ef figy on a sarcophagus.
A lot more colo rful, though. He lay in the shade, a creeping
patch of sunshine sneaking up  on him, barely touching the
ends of his hair . In the fresh, cool light, he looked like Adam,
newly touched by his Creator ’ s hand.
Rather a battered Adam, though; on closer inspection, this
was a snap taken  well after the Fall. Not the fragile perfection
of a child born o f clay , nor yet the unused beauty of the youth
God loved. No, this one was a man full-formed and powerful;
each line of face  and body marked with strength and struggle,made to take hold of the world he would wake to, and subdue
it.
I mo ved very qu ietly , reaching for my pouch. I didn’ t want
to w ake him; th e opportunity to watch him sleep came rarely .
He slep t like a cat, ready to spring up at any intimation of
threat, a nd he normally rose from his bed at first light, while I
was still floating on the surface of my dreams. Either he had
drunk more than I thought last night, or he was in the deep
sleep of healing, letting his body mend itself as he lay still.
The horn comb slid soothingly t hrough my hair . For once, I
wasn’ t in  a hurry . There was no baby to feed, no child to rouse
and dress for sc hool, no work waiting. No patients to see, no
paperwork to do.
Nothing could be farther from  the sterile confines of a
hospital than this place, I thou ght. Early birds in search of
worms were making a cheerful r acket in the forest, and a cool,
soft breeze blew through the cle aring. I smelt a faint whif f of
dried blood, and the stale ashes from last night’ s fire.
Perhaps it was the scent of blood that had made me
remember the hospital. From th e moment I first walked into
one, I had known it to be my sphere, my natural place. And yet
I w as not out o f place, here in the wild-wood. I thought that
odd.
The ends of my hair brushed my naked shoulder blades with
a p leasa nt, tickling feel, and the air was cool enough that the
small br eeze ma de my skin ripp le with gooseflesh, my nipples
standing up in tiny puckers. So I hadn’ t imagined it, I thought,
with an inward s mile. I certainly hadn’ t taken my own clothes
of f before retiring.
I pushed back the thick linen blanket, and saw the flecks of
dried bl ood, smears on my thig hs and belly . I felt dampness
ooze be tween my legs, and drew a finger between them.
Milky , with a musky scent not my own.
That was enough to bring back the shadow of the dream—
or w hat I had thought must be o ne; the great bulk of the bearlooming over me, darker than th e night and reeking of blood, a
rush of terror th at kept my dream—heavy limbs from moving.
My lying limp, pretending deat h, as he nudged and nuzzled,
breath h ot on my skin, fur soft on my breasts, gentleness
amazing for a beast.
Then that one sharp moment of consciousness; of cold, then
hot, as bare skin, not bearskin, touched my own, and then the
dizzy slide back into drunken dreaming, the slow and forceful
coupling, clima x fading into sleep…with a soft Scottish
growling in my ear .
I l ooked  down and saw the strawberry crescent of a bite
mark on my shoulder .
“No wonder  you’re still asleep,” I said in accusation. The
sun had touched the curve of h is cheek, lighting the eyebrow
on that side like  a match touche d to kindling. He didn’ t open
his eyes, but a slow , sweet smile spread across his face in
answer .
The Indians had left us a portion of the bear meat, tidily
wrapped in oiled skin and hung from the branches of a nearby
tree to discourag e the attentions of skunks and raccoons. After
breakfast and a hasty bath in the creek, Jamie took his bearings
by sun and mountain.
“That way ,” he said, nodding t oward a distant blue peak.
“See wh ere it makes a notch wi ’ the shorter one? On the other
side, it’ s  the Indians’ land; the new T reaty Line follows that
ridge.”
“Someone actually surveyed  through there?” I peered
unbelievingly at the vista of saw-toothed mountain ranges
rising from valleys filled with morning mist. The mountains
rose ahead of us like an endless series of floating mirages,
fading f rom bla ck-green to blue to purple, the farthest peaks
etched black and needle-sharp against a crystal sky .
“Oh, aye.” He s wung up into his saddle, turning his horse’ s
head so the sun fell over his sho ulder . “They had to, to say for
sure whi ch land  could be taken for settling. I made sure of theboundary before we left W ilmington, and Myers said the same
—this si de of the highest ridge. I did think to ask the fellows
who dined with us last night, though, only to be sure they
thought so, too.” He grinned down at me. “Ready , Sassenach?”
“As I’ll  ever be,” I assured him, and turned my horse to
follow .
He had rinsed o ut his shirt—or what was left of it—in the
stream. The stained rag of linen  was spread out to dry behind
his s addle, leaving him half-nak ed in leather riding breeks, his
plaid wrapped carelessly round his waist. The long scratches
left by the bear ’ s attack were black across his fair skin, but
there was no visible inflammation, and from the ease with
which h e moved in the saddle , the wounds seemed not to
trouble him.
Neither did anything else, so far as I could see. The tinge of
wariness he always bore was still with him; it had been part of
him since boyhood—but some w eight had lifted in the night. I
thought perhaps it was our meeting with the three hunters; this
first enc ounter w ith savages had been vastly reassuring to us
both, and seemed substantially to have eased Jamie’ s visions
of tomahawk-wielding cannibals behind every tree.
Or i t might be the trees themselves—or the mountains. His
spirits had grown lighter with every foot upward from the
coastal p lain. I couldn’ t help sharing his apparent joy—but at
the s ame time, fe lt a growing dre ad of what that joy might lead
to.
By midmorning the slopes had g rown too thickly forested to
ride any farther . Looking up a nearly vertical rock face into a
dizzying tangle of dark branche s, sparked with gold and green
and brow n, I was inclined to thi nk the horses were lucky to be
stopping at the bottom. W e hob bled them near a stream, thick
with gra ss along its edge, and plunged in on foot, onward and
upward, ever deeper into the bloody Forest Primeval.
T owering pines and hemlocks, was it? I thought, clambering
over the burled knots of a fallen tree. The monstrous trunksrose so high that  the lowest limbs started twenty feet above my
head. Longfellow had no idea.
The air was dam p, cool but fecu nd, and my moccasins sank
soundlessly into centuries-thick black leaf mold. My own
footprint in the soft mud of a stream bank seemed strange and
sudden as a dinosaur ’ s track.
W e reached the top of a ridge, only to find another before
us, and another beyond. I did not know what we might be
looking for , or how we would know if we found it. Jamie
covered miles with his tireless hill-walker ’ s stride, taking in
everything. I tagged behind, enjoying the scenery , pausing
now and then to  gather some fascinating plant or root, stowing
my treasures in the bag at my belt.
W e mad e our way along the bac k of one ridge, only to find
our way blocked by a great he ath bald: a patch of mountain
laurel that looked from a dist ance like a shiny bare patch
among the dark conifers, but closer to, proved to be an
impenetrable thicket, its springy branches interwoven like a
basket.
W e backtracked, and turned downward, out from under the
huge fragrant firs, across slopes of wild timothy and muhly
grass tha t had gone bright yellow in the sun, and at last back
into the soothing green of oak and hickory , on a wooded bluf f
that overlooked a small and nameless river .
It w as cool under the trees’ sudden shade, and I sighed in
relief, lifting the hair of f my neck to admit a breath of air .
Jamie heard me and turned, sm iling, holding back a limber
branch so that I could follow him.
W e didn’ t talk much; aside from the breath required for
climbing, the mountain itself se emed to inhibit speech; full of
secret green places, it was a v ivid of fspring of the ancient
Scottish mountains, thick with forest, and twice the height of
those ba rren black parental crags. Still, its air held the same
injunction to silence, the same promise of enchantment.The ground here was covered in a foot-deep layer of fallen
leaves, soft and spongy underfoot, and the spaces between the
trees seemed illusionary , as though to pass between those
huge, lichened trunks might transport one suddenly to another
dimension of reality .
Jamie’ s hair sparked in the occ asional shafts of sunlight, a
torch to  follow through the s hadows of the wood. It had
darkened somew hat over the years, to a deep, rich auburn, but
the l ong days of riding and walking in the sun had bleached
his c rown to cop per fire. He had  lost the thong that bound his
hair; he paused, and brushed th e thick damp locks back from
his f ace, so that  I saw the startling streak of white just above
one temple. Normally hidden am ong the darker red, it showed
rarely—a legacy of the bullet wound received in the cave of
Abandawe.
Despite the warmth of the day , I shivered slightly in
recollection. I would greatly have preferred to for get Haiti and
its savag e mysteries altogether , but there was little hope of
that. Sometimes, on the ver ge of sleep, I would hear the voice
of the cave-win d, and the nagg ing echo of the thought that
came in its wake: Wher e else?
W e clim bed a granite ledge, thic k with moss and lichen, wet
with the  omnipresent flow of w ater , then followed the path of
a descen ding freshet, brushing aside long grass that pulled at
our legs, dodging the drooping branches of mountain laurel
and the thick-leaved rhododendrons.
W onders sprang  up by my feet, small orchids and brilliant
fungi, trembling and shiny as jellies, shimmering red and black
on f allen tree tru nks. Dragonflie s hung over the water , jewels
immobile in the air , vanishing in mist.
I felt dazed with abundance, ravished by beauty . Jamie’ s
face bore the dream-stunned look of a man who knows himself
sleeping, but does not wish to w ake. Paradoxically , the better I
felt, the worse I felt, too; desperately happy—and desperately
afraid. This was his place, and surely he felt it as well as I.In early afternoo n we stopped to  rest and drink from a small
spring a t the edge of a natural clearing. The ground beneath
the maple trees was covered with a thick carpet of dark green
leaves, among which I caught a sudden telltale flash of red.
“W ild strawberries!” I said with delight.
The berries were dark red and  tiny , about the size of my
thumb joint. By the standards of modern horticulture, they
would have been too tart, nearly bitter , but eaten with a meal
consisting of half-cooked cold bear meat and rock-hard corn
dodgers, they were delicious—fresh explosions of flavor in my
mouth; pinpricks of sweetness on my tongue.
I g athered handfuls in my cloak,  not caring for stains—what
was a little stra wberry juice among the stains of pine pitch,
soot, lea f smudg es and simple d irt? By the time I had finished,
my fingers were sticky and pungent with juice, my stomach
was comfortably full, and the inside of my mouth felt as
though it had be en sandpapered, from the tartly acid taste of
the berries. Still, I couldn’ t resist reaching for just one more.
Jamie leaned his back against a sycamore, eyelids half
lowered against the dazzle of af ternoon sun. The little clearing
held light like a cup, still and limpid.
“What d’ye think of this place, Sassenach?” he asked.
“I think it’ s beautiful. Don’ t you?”
He n odded, looking down betwe en the trees, where a gentle
slope full of wild hay and timothy fell away and rose again in
a line of willows that fringed the distant river .
“I am thinking,”  Jamie said, a little awkwardly . “There is
the spring here in the wood. That meadow below—” He
waved a hand t oward the scrim of alders that screened the
ridge fro m the grassy slope. “It would do for a few beasts at
first, and  then the land nearer the river might be cleared and
put in crops. The rise of the land here is good for drainage.
And here, see…” Caught by visions, he rose to his feet,
pointing.I l ooked carefully; to me, the p lace seemed little dif ferent
from any of the steep wooded slopes and grassy coves through
which we had wandered for th e last couple of days. But to
Jamie, w ith his farmer ’ s eye, ho uses and stock pens and fields
sprang up like fairy mushrooms in the shadows of the trees.
Happiness was sticking out all over him, like porcupine
quills. My heart felt like lead in my chest.
“Y ou’re thinking we might settle here, then? T ake the
Governor ’ s of fer?”
He looked at me, stopping abruptly in his speculations.
“W e might,” he said. “If—”
He brok e of f and looked sideways at me. Sun-reddened as
he was, I could n’ t tell whether he was flushed with sun or
shyness.
“D’ye believe in signs at all, Sassenach?”
“What sorts of signs?” I asked guardedly .
In answ er , he bent, plucked a sprig from the ground, and
dropped it into my hand—the dark green leaves like small
round C hinese fans, a pure white flower on a slender stem, and
on a nother a half-ripe berry , i ts shoulders pale with shade,
blushing crimson at the tip.
“This. It’ s ours, d’ye see?” he said.
“Ours?”
“The Frasers’, I mean,” he explained. One lar ge, blunt
finger gently prodded the berry . “Strawberries ha’ always been
the emblem of the clan—it’ s w hat the name meant, to start
with, when a Monsieur Freseliere came across from France
wi’ King W illiam that was—a nd took hold of land in the
Scottish mountains for his trouble.”
King W illiam that was. W illiam the Conqueror , that was.
Perhaps not the oldest of the H ighland clans, the Frasers had
still a distinguished heritage.
“W arriors from the start, were you?”“And fa rmers, to o.” The doubt i n his eyes was fading into a
smile.
I d idn’ t say wh at I was thinking, but I knew well enough
that the thought must lie in his mind as well. There was no
more of  clan Fraser save scattered fragments, those who had
survived by flight, by stratagem or luck. The clans had been
smashed at Culloden, their chieftains slaughtered in battle or
murdered by law .
Y et h ere he stoo d, tall and straig ht in his plaid, the dark steel
of a Hig hland di rk by his side. W arrior and farmer both. And if
the soil beneath his feet was not that of Scotland, it was free
air that he breath ed—and a mountain wind that stirred his hair ,
lifting copper strands to the summer sun.
I smiled up at him, fighting back my growing dismay .
“Freseliere, eh? Mr . Strawberry? He grew them, did he, or
was he only fond of eating them?”
“Either or both,” he said dryly , “or it was maybe only that
he was redheided, aye?”
I lau ghed, and he hunkered dow n beside me, unpinning his
plaid.
“It’ s a rare plan t,” he said, touching the sprig in my open
hand. “Flowers, fruit and leaves all together at the one time.
The white flowers are for honor , and red fruit for courage—
and the green leaves are for constancy .”
My throat felt tight as I looked at him.
“They got that one right,” I said.
He caught my hand in his own, squeezing my fingers
around the tiny stem.
“And the fruit is the shape of a heart,” he said softly , and
bent to kiss me.
The tear s were near the surface; at least I had a good excuse
for the one that oozed free. He dabbed it away , then stood up
and pulled his belt loose, letting  the plaid fall in folds aroundhis feet. Then he  stripped of f shirt and breeks and smiled down
at me, naked.
“There’ s no one here,” he said. “No one but us.”
I wo uld have sa id this seemed no reason, but I felt what it
was he meant. W e had been for days surrounded by vastness
and thre at, the wilderness no fa rther away than the pale circle
of ou r fi re. Y et here, we were alo ne together , part and parcel of
the plac e, with no need in broad daylight to hold the
wilderness at bay .
“In the old days, men would do  this, to give fertility to the
fields,” he said, giving me a hand to rise.
“I do n’ t see any  fields.” And wasn’ t sure whether to hope I
never would. Nonetheless, I skimmed of f my buckskin shirt,
and pulled loose the knot of my makeshift brassiere. He eyed
me with appreciation.
“W ell, no doubt I shall have to cut down a few trees first,
but that can wait, aye?”
W e made a bed of plaid and cloaks, and lay down upon it
naked, s kin to skin among the yellow grasses and the scent of
balsam and wild strawberries.
W e touched each other for wh at might have been a very
long time or no time at all, together in the garden of earthly
delight. I forced away the thoug hts that had plagued me up the
mountain, determined only to share his joy for as long as it
lasted. I grasped him tight and h e breathed in deep and pressed
himself hard into my hand.
“And what would Eden be with out a serpent?” I murmured,
fingers stroking.
His eyes  creased  into blue triang les, so close I could see the
black of his pupils.
“And will ye ea t wi’ me, then, mo chridhe ? Of the fruit of
the tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil?”
I put out the tip of my tongue and drew it along his lower lip
in an swer . He s hivered under my fingers, though the air waswarm and sweet.
“Je suis pr est,”  I said. “Monsieur Fr eselier e.”
His head  bent and his mouth fastened on my nipple, swollen
as one of the tiny ripe berries.
“Madame Fr eselier e,”  he whispered back. “Je suis  a votr e
service.”
And then we shared the fruit and flowers, and the green
leaves covering all.
W e lay tangled in drowsiness , stirring only to bat away
inquisitive insects, until the first shadows touched our feet.
Jamie rose quietly , and covered me with a cloak, thinking me
asleep. I  heard the stealthy rus tle as he dressed himself, and
then the soft swish of his passage through the grass.
I rol led over , and saw him a littl e distance away , standing at
the edge of the wood, looking out over the fall of land toward
the river .
He wore nothing but his plaid, crumpled and blood-stained,
belted round his waist. W ith his hair unbound and tangled
round h is shoul ders, he looked the wild Highlander he was.
What I had thou ght a trap for him—his family , his clan—was
his strength. And what I had thought my strength—my
solitude, my lack of ties—was my weakness.
Having known closeness, both its good and its bad, he had
the s trength to le ave it, to step away from all notions of safety
and venture out alone. And I— so proud of self-suf ficiency at
one time—could not bear the thought of loneliness again.
I ha d resolved to say nothing,  to live in the moment, to
accept whatever  came. But the moment was here, and I could
not acce pt it. I saw his head lif t in decision, and at the same
moment, saw his name carved in cold stone. T error and
despair washed over me.
As though he h ad heard the ec ho of my unspoken cry , he
turned his head toward me. Whatever he saw in my face
brought him swiftly to my side.“What is it, Sassenach?”
There was no point in lying; not when he could see me.
“I’m afraid,” I blurted out.
He g lanced quickly round for danger , one hand reaching for
his knife, but I stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“Not that. Jamie—hold me. Please.”
He gathered me close against him, wrapping the cloak
around me. I was shivering, though the air was still warm.
“It’ s all right, a nighean donn, ” he murmured. “I’m here.
What’ s frightened ye, then?”
“Y ou,” I  said, and clung tight. His heart thumped just under
my ear , strong and steady . “Here. It makes me afraid to think
of you here, of us coming here—”
“Afraid?” he asked. “Of wh at, Sassenach?” His arms
tightened aroun d me. “I did say when we were wed that I
would a lways see ye fed, no?”  He pulled me closer , tucking
my head into the curve of his shoulder .
“I gave ye three  things that day ,” he said softly . “My name,
my fami ly , and the protection o f my body . Y ou’ll have those
things a lways, Sassenach— so long as we both shall live. No
matter w here we may be. I willna let ye go hungry or cold; I’ll
let nothing harm ye, ever .”
“I’m not afraid of any of that,” I blurted. “I’m afraid you’ll
die, and I can’ t stand it if you do, Jamie, I really can’ t!”
He jerked back a little, surprised, and looked down into my
face.
“W ell, I’ll do my best to oblige ye, Sassenach,” he said, “but
ye k en I may not have all the say in the matter .” His face was
serious, but one corner of his mouth curled up irrepressibly .
The sight did me in utterly .
“Don’ t you laugh!” I said furiously . “Don’ t you dar e
laugh!”“Oh, I’m not,” he assured me, trying to straighten his face.
“Y ou ar e!” I punched him in  the chest. Now he was
laughing. I punched him again,  harder , and before I knew it,
was hammering him in earnest, my fists making small dull
thumps against his plaid. He grabbed for my hand, but I
ducked my head and bit him on the thumb. He let out a cry and
jerked his hand away .
He examined the toothmarks for a moment, then looked at
me, one eyebrow  raised. The humor lingered in his eyes, but at
least he’d stopped laughing, the bastard.
“Sassenach, ye’ve seen me damn near dead a dozen times,
and not turned a hair . Whyever are ye takin’ on so now , and
me not even ill?”
“Never turned a hair?” I ga wked at him in furious
amazement. “Y ou think I wasn’ t upset ?”
He rubbed a knuckle across his upper lip, eyeing me in
some amusement.
“Oh. W ell, I did think ye cared, of course. But I never
thought of it in just that way , I admit.”
“Of course you didn’ t! And if you had, it wouldn’ t make
any dif ference. Y ou—you—Scot!” It was the worst thing I
could th ink of to call him. Finding no more words, I turned
and stomped away .
Unfortunately , s tomping has relatively little ef fect when
executed in bare feet on a g rassy meadow . I stepped on
something sharp, uttered a small cry , and limped a few more
steps before having to stop.
I had stepped on some sort o f cocklebur; half a dozen
vicious caltrops were stuck in my bare sole, blood drops
welling from the tiny punctures. Precariously balanced on one
foot, I tried to pick them out, cursing under my breath.
I w obble d and nearly fell. A strong hand caught me under
the e lbow and st eadied me. I set my teeth and finished jerking
out the spiny burs. I pulled m y elbow out of his grasp andturning on my heel, walked—with a good deal more care—
back to where I had left my clothing.
Dropping the cloak on the ground, I proceeded to dress,
with what dignity was possible. Jamie stood, arms folded,
watching me without comment.
“When G od threw Adam out of  Paradise, at least Eve went
with him ,” I said, talking to my fingers as I fastened the
drawstring of my trousers.
“A ye, that’ s true,” he agreed, after a cautious pause. He gave
me a sidelong glance, to see w hether I was about to hit him
again.
“Ah—ye havena been eating any o’ the plants ye picked this
morning, have ye, Sassenach? N o, I didna think so,” he added
hastily , seeing my expression. “I only wondered. Myers says
some things here give ye the nightmare something fierce.”
“I am  not havin g nightmares,” I said, with more force than
strictly necessar y had I been telling the truth. I was  having
waking nightmares, though ingestion of hallucinogenic plant
substances had nothing to do with it.
He sighed.
“D’ye mean to tell me straight out what ye’re talkin’ about,
Sassenach, or do ye mean me to suf fer a bit first?”
I gla red at him,  caught as usual between the ur ge to laugh
and the ur ge to hit him with a blunt object. Then a wave of
despair overcam e both laughter and anger . My shoulders
slumped in surrender .
“I’m talking about you,” I said.
“Me? Why?”
“Because you’re a bloody Highlander , and you’re all about
honor and courage and constan cy , and I know you can’ t help
it, and I wouldn’ t want you to, only—only damn it, it’ s going
to take you to Scotland and get you killed, and there’ s nothing
I can do about it!”He gave me a look of incredulity .
“Scotland?” he  said, as though I’d said something
completely mad.
“Scotland! Where your bloody grave is!”
He r ubbed a han d slowly through his hair , looking down the
bridge of his nose at me.
“Oh,” he said at last. “I see, then. Y e think if I go to
Scotland, I must die there, since that’ s where I’ll be buried. Is
that it?”
I nodded, too upset to speak.
“Mmphm. And just why is it ye think I’m going to
Scotland?” he asked carefully .
I g lared at him in exasperation , and waved an arm at the
expanse of wilderness around us.
“Where the hell else are you going to get settlers for this
land? Of course you’re going to Scotland!”
He looked at me, exasperated in turn.
“How in  the name of God d’ye think I should do that,
Sassenach? I might have, when I had the gems, but now? I’ve
maybe ten pound to my name, a nd that’ s borrowed. Shall I fly
to Scotla nd like a bird, then? And lead folk back behind me,
walkin’ on the water?”
“Y ou’ll think of something,” I said miserably . “Y ou always
do.”
He gave me a queer look, then looked away and paused for
several moments before answering.
“I hadna realized ye thought I was God Almighty ,
Sassenach,” he said at last.
“I don’ t,” I said. “Moses, maybe.” The words were
facetious, but neither one of us was joking.
He walked away a bit, hands clasped behind his back.“W atch out for the burs,” I ca lled after him, seeing him
heading for the location of my recent mishap. He altered his
path in response, but said nothin g. He walked to and fro across
the clearing, head bent in thou ght. At last he came back, to
stand in front of me.
“I canna  do it alone,” he said quietly . “Y ou’re right about
that. But I dinna think I need go to Scotland for my settlers.”
“What else?”
“My men—the men who were wi’ me in Ardsmuir ,” he
said. “They’re here already .”
“But you haven’ t any idea wh ere they are,” I protested.
“And besides, they were transported years ago! They’ll be
settled; they won’ t want to pull up stakes and come to the ends
of the bloody earth with you!”
He smiled, a little wryly .
“Y ou did, Sassenach.”
I took a deep breath. The nagg ing weight of fear that had
burdened my heart for the last  weeks had eased. W ith that
concern lifted, though, there was now room in my mind to
contemplate the staggering dif ficulty of the task he was setting
himself. T rack down men sc attered over three colonies,
persuade them to come with him, and simultaneously find
suf ficient capita l to finance the clearing of land and planting of
crops. T o say no thing of the sheer enormity of labor involved
in carving some small foothold out of this vir gin wilderness.
“I’ll think of something,” he s aid, smiling slightly as he
watched doubts and uncertainties flit across my face. “I always
do, aye?”
All of my breath went out in a long sigh.
“Y ou do ,” I said. “Jamie—are you sure? Y our aunt Jocasta
—”
He dismissed that possibility with a flick of his hand.
“No,” he said. “Never .”I still hesitated, feeling guilty .
“Y ou wouldn’ t—it’ s not just because of me? What I said
about keeping slaves?”
“No,” he said. H e paused, and I  saw the two twisted fingers
of h is right hand twitch. He saw it, too, and stopped the
movement abruptly .
“I have lived as  a slave, Claire, ” he said quietly , head bent.
“And I couldna live, knowing there was a man on earth who
felt toward me as I have felt to ward those who thought they
owned me.”
I reached out and covered his crippled hand with my own.
T ears ra n down my cheeks, warm and soothing as summer
rain.
“Y ou won’ t leave me?” I asked at last. “Y ou won’ t die?”
He shook his head, and squeezed my hand tight.
“Y ou ar e my courage, as I am your conscience,” he
whispered. “Y ou are my heart—and I your compassion. W e
are neither of us whole, alone. Do ye not know that,
Sassenach?”
“I do know that,” I said, and my voice shook. “That’ s why
I’m so afraid. I don’ t want to b e half a person again, I can’ t
bear it.”
He t humbed a lo ck of hair of f my wet cheek, and pulled me
into his arms, so  close that I could feel the rise and fall of his
chest as he breathed. He was so solid, so alive, ruddy hair
curling gold against bare skin. And yet I had held him so
before—and lost him.
His hand  touched my cheek, warm despite the dampness of
my skin.
“But do ye not see how verra sm all a thing is the notion of
death, between us two, Claire?” he whispered.
My hands curled into fists aga inst his chest. No, I didn’ t
think it a small thing at all.“All the  time after ye left me, after Culloden—I was dead
then, was I not?”
“I thought you were. That’ s why I—oh.” I took a deep,
tremulous breath, and he nodded.
“T wo hundred years from now , I shall most certainly be
dead, Sassenach,” he said. He smiled crookedly . “Be it
Indians, wild beasts, a plague, th e hangman’ s rope, or only the
blessing of auld age—I will be dead.”
“Y es.”
“And while ye were there—in your own time—I was  dead,
no?”
I nodded, wordless. Even now , I could look back and see the
abyss of despair into which tha t parting had dropped me, and
from which I had climbed, one painful inch at a time.
Now I stood with him again up on the summit of life, and
could not contemplate descent. He reached down and plucked
a sta lk of grass,  spreading the soft green beards between his
fingers.
” ‘Man is like the grass of the field,’ ” he quoted softly ,
brushing the slender stem over my knuckles, where they rested
against his chest. ” ‘T oday it blooms; tomorrow it withers and
is cast into the oven.’ “
He lifted  the silky green tuft to  his lips and kissed it, then
touched it gently to my mouth.
“I was dead, my  Sassenach—an d yet all that time, I loved
you.”
I closed my eyes, feeling the tickle of the grass on my lips,
light as the touch of sun and air .
“I loved you, too,” I whispered. “I always will.”
The gras s fell away . Eyes still c losed, I felt him lean toward
me, and his mouth on mine, warm as sun, light as air .
“So long as my  body lives, and yours—we are one flesh,”
he w hispered. His fingers touch ed me, hair and chin and neckand breast, and I breathed his b reath and felt him solid under
my hand. Then I lay with m y head on his shoulder , the
strength of him supporting me, the words deep and soft in his
chest.
“And when my body shall cease, my soul will still be yours.
Claire—I swear by my hope of heaven, I will not be parted
from you.”
The wind stirred the leaves of the chestnut trees nearby , and
the scen ts of late summer rose  up rich around us; pine and
grass and strawberries, sunwarmed stone and cool water , and
the sharp, musky smell of his body next to mine.
“Nothing is lost, Sassenach; only changed.”
“That’ s the first law of thermodynamics,” I said, wiping my
nose.
“No,” he said. “That’ s faith.”P A R T  S I X
J e  T ’ A i m e1 7
H O M E  F O R  T H E  H O L I D A Y S
Inverness, Scotland, December 23, 1969
H e check ed the train schedule for the dozenth time, then
prowled around the manse’ s living room, too restless to settle.
An hour yet to wait.
The room was half dismantled, with piles of cartons lying
higgledy-piggledy on every surface. He’d promised to have
the plac e cleared out by the New Y ear , except for the pieces
Fiona wanted to keep.
He wandered down the hall and into the kitchen, stood
staring i nto the ancient refrigerator for a moment, decided he
wasn’ t hungry and closed the door .
He wished that Mrs. Graham an d the Reverend could have
met Brianna, and she them. He  smiled at the empty kitchen
table, remembering an adolesce nt conversation with the two
elderly p eople, when he, in the grip of a mad—and unrequited
—lust fo r the tobacconist’ s dau ghter , had asked how to know
if one was truly in love.
“If ye have to as k yourself if you’re in love, laddie—then ye
aren’ t,” Mrs. Graham had assured him, tapping her spoon on
the edge  of her mixing bowl for emphasis. “And keep your
paws of f wee Mavis MacDowell, or her Da will murder ye.”
“When y ou’re in love, Rog, you ’ll know it with no telling,”
the Reverend had chimed in, dipping a finger in the cake
batter . He ducked in mock ala rm as Mrs. Graham raised a
threatening spoon, and laughed. “And do mind yourself with
young Mavis, lad; I’m not old enough to be a grandfather .”
W ell, they’d been right. He knew , with no telling—had
known since he’d met Brianna Randall. What he didn’ t know
for sure was whether Brianna felt the same.
He c ouldn’ t wait any longer . H e slapped his pocket to be
sure of his keys, ran down the stairs and out into the winterrain that  had begun to pelt down just after breakfast. They did
say a cold show er was the thing. Hadn’ t worked with Mavis,
though.
December 24, 1969
“Now , the plum pudding’ s in the warming oven, and the hard
sauce in  the wee pan to the back,” Fiona instructed him,
pulling on her f uzzy woolen hat. It was red, Fiona was short,
and in it she looked like a garden gnome.
“Don’ t t urn up the flame too hi gh, mind. And dinna turn it
out altog ether , e ither , or you’ll n ever get it lit again. And here,
I’ve the directio ns for the birds  for tomorrow all written out,
they’re stuf fed in their pan, a nd I’ve left the veg already
chopped to go along in the big yellow bowl in the fridge,
and…” She fumbled in the pock et of her jeans and withdrew a
handwritten slip of paper , which she thrust into his hand.
He patted her on the head.
“Don’ t worry , Fiona,” he assured her . “W e won’ t burn the
place down. Nor starve, either .”
She frowned dubiously , hesitating at the door . Her fiance,
sitting in his car  outside, revved his engine in an impatient sort
of way .
“A ye, w ell. Y ou ’re sure the two  of ye won’ t come with us?
Ernie’ s Mam wouldna mind it a bit, and I’m sure she’d not
think it right, jus t the two of ye left here by yourselves to keep
Christmas…”
“Don’ t worry , Fiona,” he said, edging her gently backward
out the door . “W e’ll manage fine. Y ou have a nice holiday with
Ernie, and don’ t bother about us.”
She sighed, giving in reluctantly . “A ye, I suppose you’ll
do.” A short, irritable beep!  from behind made her turn and
glare at the car .
“W ell, I’m coming  th en, aren’ t I?” she demanded. T urning
back, she beamed suddenly at Roger , threw her arms about
him, and standing on tiptoe, kissed him firmly on the lips.She drew back and winked conspiratorially , screwing up her
small, round face. “ That’ll  s ort  our  Ernie out,” she whispered.
“Happy Christmas, Rog!” she said loudly , and with a gay
wave, h opped of f the porch and strolled in leisurely fashion
toward the car , hips swinging just a bit.
Its e ngine roaring in protest, the car shot of f with a squeal of
tires bef ore the door had quite shut behind Fiona. Roger stood
on the porch waving, pleased that Ernie wasn’ t an especially
massive bloke.
The doo r opene d behind him a nd Brianna poked her head
out.
“What are you doing out he re with no coat on?” she
inquired. “It’ s freezing!”
He h esitated, tempted to tell he r . After all, it had evidently
worked on Ernie. But it was Christmas Eve, he reminded
himself. In spite of the lowering sky and plummeting
temperature, he felt warm and t ingling all over . He smiled at
her .
“Just seeing Fiona of f,” he said, pulling back the door .
“Shall w e see if we can make lunch without blowing up the
kitchen?”
They ma naged s andwiches without incident, and returned after
lunch to  the study . The room was nearly empty now; only a
few shelves of books remained to be sorted and packed.
On the one hand, Roger felt imm ense relief that the job was
nearly d one. On  the other , it was sad to see the warm, cluttered
study reduced to such a shell of its former self.
The Reverend’ s big desk had be en emptied and removed to
the garage for storage, the floor -to-ceiling shelves denuded of
their hug e burden of books, the  cork-lined wall stripped of its
many layers of fluttering papers. This process reminded Roger
uncomfortably o f chicken-pluc king, the result being a stark
and pathetic bareness that made him want to avert his eyes.There was one square of paper still pinned to the cork. He’d
take that down last.
“What about these?” Brianna waved a feather duster
inquiringly at a small stack of  books that sat on the table
before h er . An array of boxes g aped on the floor at her feet,
half filled with books destined for various fates: libraries,
antiquarian soc ieties, friends of the Reverend’ s, Roger ’ s
personal use.
“They’re autographed, but not inscribed to anybody ,” she
said, handing him the top one. “ Y ou’ve got the set he inscribed
to y our father , but do you w ant these, too? They’re first
editions.”
Roger turned the book over in  his hands. It was one of
Frank Randall’ s, a lovely book, beautifully typeset and bound
to match the elegance of its scholarly content.
“Y ou should have them, shouldn’ t you?” he said. W ithout
waiting for an a nswer , he set th e book gently into a small box
that rested on th e seat of an armchair . “Y our dad’ s work, after
all.”
“I’ve got some,” she protested. “T ons. Boxes and boxes.”
“Not autographed, though?”
“W ell, n o.” She picked up anoth er of the books and flipped
it open to the flyleaf, where T empora mutantur nos et mutamur
in il lis—F . W . R andall  was written in a strong, slanting hand.
She rubbed a fi nger gently over the signature, and her wide
mouth softened.
” The times ar e changing, and we with them . Y ou’re sure you
don’ t want them, Roger?”
“Sure,” he said, and smiled. He waved a wry hand at their
book-strewn surroundings. “Don’ t worry , you won’ t leave me
short.”
She laug hed and put the books  in her own box, then went
back to her wor k, dusting and wiping the stacked and sorted
books before packing them. Mo st hadn’ t been cleaned in fortyyears, an d she was liberally smu dged herself by this time, long
fingers grimy and the cuf fs of he r white shirt nearly black with
filth.
“W on’ t y ou miss this place?” sh e asked. She wiped a strand
of ha ir o ut of her eyes and gestu red at the spacious room. “Y ou
grew up here, didn’ t you?”
“Y es, and yes,” he answered, heaving another full carton
onto the pile to be shipped to the  university library . “Not much
choice, though.”
“I guess you couldn’ t live here,” she agreed regretfully .
“Since you have to be in Oxford  most of the time. But do you
have to sell it?”
“I can’ t  sell  it. It’ s not m ine.” He stooped to get a grip on an
extra-lar ge carton, and rose slowly to his feet, grunting with
ef fort. H e staggered across the room and dropped it onto the
stack, w ith a thud that raised small puf fs of dust from the
boxes beneath it.
“Whew!” He blew out his breath , grinning at her . “God help
the antiquarians when they pick that one up.”
“What do you mean, it’ s not yours?”
“What I said,” he replied matter -of-factly . “It isn’ t mine.
The hou se and land belong to the church; Dad lived here for
near fift y years,  but he didn’ t own it. It belongs to the Parish
Council. The new minister doesn’ t want it—he’ s got money of
his own, and a wife who likes mod cons—so the Council’ s
putting i t to let. Fiona and her Ernie are taking it, heaven help
them.”
“Just the two of them?”
“It’ s che ap. For good reason,” he added wryly . “She wants
lots of kids, though—be room for an army of them here, I can
tell you.” Designed in V ictorian times for ministers with
numerous families, the man se had twelve rooms—not
counting one unmodernized and highly inconvenient bath.“The wedding’ s in February , so that’ s why I’ve got to finish
the clearing up over Christmas, to give time for the cleaners
and pain ters to come in. Sham e to make you work on your
holiday , though. Maybe we’ll drive down to Fort W illiam
Monday?”
Brianna picked up another book , but didn’ t put it in the box
right away .
“So your home’ s gone for good,” she said, slowly . “It
doesn’ t seem right—though I’m glad Fiona will have it.”
Roger shrugged.
“Not as though I meant to settle in Inverness,” he said. “And
it’ s not as thoug h it were an ancestral seat or anything.” He
waved a t the cracked linoleum, the grubby enamel paint, and
the a ncient glass-bowl light fixture overhead. “Can’ t put it on
the N ational T rust and char ge pe ople two quid each to tour the
place.”
She smiled at that, and returned to her sorting. She seemed
pensive, though, a small frown visible between her thick red
brows. F inally s he put the last book in the box, stretched and
sighed.
“The Re verend had nearly as m any books as my parents,”
she said. “Between Mama’ s medical books and Daddy’ s
historical stuf f, they left enough to supply a whole library . It’ll
probably take six months to sort it all out, when I get ho—
when I go back.” She bit her lip lightly , and turned to pick up a
roll of packing tape, picking at it with a fingernail. “I told the
real estate agent she could list the house for sale by summer .”
“That’ s what’ s been bothering you?” he said slowly ,
realization dawning as he watched her face. “Thinking about
taking a part the house you grew up in—having your home
gone for good?”
One sho ulder lifted slightly , her eyes still fixed on the
recalcitrant tape.
“If you can stand it, I guess I c an. Besides,” she went on,
“it’ s not  that bad. Mama took c are of almost everything—shefound a tenant and had the house leased for a year , so I could
have tim e to decide what to do, without worrying about it just
sitting there vacant. But it’ s silly  to keep it; it’ s way too big for
me to live in alone.”
“Y ou might get married.” He blurted it out without thinking.
“Guess I might,” she said. She g lanced at him sidelong, and
the corner of her mouth twitched in what might have been
amusement. “So meday . But what if my husband didn’ t want to
live in Boston?”
It oc curred to hi m quite suddenly that her concern over his
losing the manse might—just possibly—have been that she
envisioned herself living in it.
“D’you want kids?” he asked ab ruptly . He hadn’ t thought to
ask before, but hoped like hell she did.
She looked momentarily startled, but then laughed.
“Only children usually want big families, don’ t they?”
“Couldn’ t say ,” he said. “But I  do.” He leaned across the
boxes and kissed her suddenly .
“Me too,” she sa id. Her eyes went slanted when she smiled.
She didn ’ t look away , but a fai nt blush made her look like a
spring-ripe apricot.
He w anted kids, all right; just at the moment, he wanted to
do what led to kids a lot more.
“But maybe we should finish clearing up, first?”
“What?” The sense of her words penetrated only vaguely .
“Oh. Y eah. Right, guess we should.”
He b ent his head and kissed her again, slowly this time. She
had the most wonderful mouth; wide and full-lipped, almost
too big for her face—but not quite.
He h ad her round the waist, his other hand tangled in silky
hair . Th e nape of her neck was smooth and warm under his
hand; he gripped it and she shive red slightly , mouth opening in
a small sign of submission that made him want to lean herbackward over his arm, carry her down to the hearth rug,
and…
A brisk rapping  made him jerk his head up, startled out of
the embrace.
“Who’ s that ?” Brianna exclaimed, hand to her heart.
The study was lined on one side by floor -to-ceiling
windows—the R everend had been a painter—and a square,
whiskered face was pressed against one of these, nose nearly
flattened with interest.
“That,” said Roger through his teeth, “is the postman,
MacBeth. What the hell is the old bugger doing out there?”
As though hearing this inquiry , M r . MacBeth stepped back a
pace, drew a letter out of his bag and brandished it jovially at
the occupants of the study .
“A letter ,” he mouthed elaborately , looking at Brianna. He
cut h is eyes tow ard Roger and beetled his brows in a knowing
leer .
By the time Rog er reached the f ront door , Mr . MacBeth was
standing on the porch, holding the letter .
“Why d id you not put it in the letter slot, for God’ s sake?”
Roger demanded. “Give it here, then.”
Mr . MacBeth held the letter out of reach and assumed an air
of injure d digni ty , somewhat impaired by his attempts to see
Brianna over Roger ’ s shoulder .
“Thought it might be important , didn’ t I? From the States,
i’nt it? And it’ s for the young lady , not you, lad.” Screwing up
his face into a massive and indelicate wink, he oiled past
Roger , arm extended toward Brianna.
“Ma’am,” he said, simpering th rough his whiskers. “W ith
the compliments of Her Majesty’ s Mail.”
“Thank you.” Brianna was still rosily flushed, but she’d
smoothed her hair , and smiled at MacBeth with every evidence
of s elf-possessio n. She took the letter and glanced at it, butmade no  move to open it. The envelope was handwritten,
Roger saw , with red postal-forwarding marks, but the distance
was too far to make out the return address.
“V isiting, are ye, ma’am?” MacBeth asked heartily . “Just
the two of ye here, all on your ownie-o?” He was giving
Brianna a rolling eye, looking her up and down with frank
interest.
“Oh, no,” Brianna said, straight-faced. She folded the letter
in ha lf a nd stuf f ed it into the back pocket of her jeans. “Uncle
Angus is staying with us; he’ s asleep upstairs.”
Roger bit the ins ide of his cheek . Uncle Angus was a moth-
eaten stuf fed Scottie, a remnant of his own youth, unearthed
during the cleaning of the hous e. Brianna, charmed with him,
had dust ed of f his plaid bonnet a nd placed him on her own bed
in the guest room.
The postman’ s heavy brows rose.
“Oh,” he said, rather blankly .  “A ye, I see. He’ll be an
American, too, then, your uncle Angus?”
“No, he’ s from Aberdeen.” Othe r than a slight pinkening at
the end of her nose, Brianna’ s face showed nothing but the
most open guilelessness.
Mr . MacBeth was enchanted.
“Oh, you’ve a wee bit of Scots in your family , then! W ell,
and I should have known it, now , you wi’ that hair . A bonnie,
bonnie lass, and no mistake.” He  shook his head in admiration,
lechery replaced by a pseudoavuncular air that Roger found
only slightly less objectionable.
“Y es, w ell.” Roger cleared his throat meaningfully . “I’m
sure we don’ t want to keep you from your work, MacBeth.”
“Oh, it’ s  no trouble, no trouble at all,” the postman assured
him, craning to catch a last glimpse of Brianna as he turned to
go. “Nay rest for the weary , is there, my dear?”
“That’ s ‘no rest for the wicked, ‘ ”  Roger said, with some
emphasis, opening the door . “Good day to you, MacBeth.”MacBeth glanced at him, the shadow of a leer back on his
face.
“A good day to you,  Mr .  W a kefield.” He leaned close, dug
Roger in  the ribs with an elbow , and whispered hoarsely , “And
a better night, if her uncle sleeps sound!”
“Here, going to read your letter? ” He plucked it from the table
where she had dropped it, and held it out to her .
She flushed slightly and took it from him.
“It’ s not important. I’ll look at it later .”
“I’ll go to the kitchen, if it’ s private.”
The flush deepened.
“It’ s not. It’ s nothing.”
He rais ed one eyebrow . She shrugged impatiently , and
ripped open the flap, pulling out a single sheet of paper .
“See for yourself, then. I told you, it’ s nothing important.”
Oh, isn’ t it?  he thought, but didn’ t say anything aloud. He
took the prof fered sheet and glanced at it.
It was in fact no thing much; a notification forwarded from
the libra ry at her university , to the ef fect that a specific
reference she had requested wa s unfortunately not obtainable
via inte rlibrary loan, but could be viewed in the private
collection of the Stuart Papers, held in the Royal Annexe of
Edinbur gh University .
She was  watching him when he  looked up, arms folded, her
eyes shiny and lips tight, daring him to say something.
“Y ou should have told me you  were looking for him,” he
said quietly . “I could have helped.”
She shrugged slightly , and he s aw her throat move as she
swallowed.
“I kn ow how to  do historical re search. I used to help my fa
—” She broke of f, lower lip caught between her teeth.“Y eah, I see,” h e said, and did. He took her by the arm and
steered h er down  the hall to the kitchen, where he plunked her
in a chair at the battered old table.
“I’ll put the kettle on.”
“I don’ t like tea,” she protested.
“Y ou need  tea, ” Roger sai d firmly , and lit the gas with a
fiery whoosh . He  turn ed to the cupboard and took down cups
and saucers, and—as an after -thought—the bottle of whisky
from the top shelf.
“And I r eally  don ’ t like whisky ,” Brianna sa id, eyeing it.
She started to push herself away from the table, but Roger
stopped her with a hand on her arm.
“I like whisky ,”  he said. “But I hate to drink alone. Y ou’ll
keep me company , aye?” He smiled at her , willing her to smile
back. At last she did, grudgingly , and relaxed in her seat.
He s at down op posite her , and filled his cup halfway with
the pungent amber liquid. He  breathed in the fumes with
pleasure, and sipped slowly , le tting the fine strong stuf f roll
down his throat.
“Ah,” he breathed. “Glen Morangie. Sure you won’ t join
me? A wee splash in your tea, maybe?”
She shook her head silently , but when the kettle began to
whistle, she got up to take it of f the fire and pour the hot water
into the waiting pot. Roger g ot up and came behind her ,
slipping his arms around her waist.
“It’ s not hing to be ashamed of, ” he said softly . “Y ou’ve a
right to know , if  you can. Jamie Fraser was your father , after
all.”
“But he  wasn’ t— not really .” Her head was bent; he could
see the neat wh orl of a cowlick at her crown, an echo of the
one in the cente r of her forehead, that lifted her hair in a soft
wave of f her face.
“I had  a father ,” she said, sounding a little choked. “Daddy
—Frank Randall—he was  m y father , and I love—loved him. Itdoesn’ t seem right to—to go looking for something else, like
he wasn’ t enough, like—”
“That’ s not it, th en, and you kn ow it.” He turned her round
and lifted her chin with a finger .
“It’ s no thing to do with Frank  Randall or how you feel
about him—aye, he was  your father , and there’ s not a thing
will eve r change  that. But it’ s natural to be curious, to want to
know .”
“Did you  eve r want to know?” Her hand came up and
brushed his away—but she clung to his fingers, holding on.
He took a deep breath, finding comfort in the whisky .
“Y eah. Y es, I did. Y ou need  to, I think.” His fingers
tightened around hers, drawing her toward the table. “Come sit
down; I’ll tell you.”
He knew what missing a fath er felt like, especially an
unknown father . For a time, just after he’d started school, he’d
pored obsessively over his father ’ s medals, carried the little
velvet ca se about in his pocket, boasted to his friends about his
father ’ s heroism.
“T old stories about him, all m ade up,” he said, looking
down in to the aromatic depths o f his teacup. “Got bashed for
being a nuisance , got smacked a t school for lying.” He looked
up at her , and smiled, a little painfully .
“I had to make him real, see?”
She nodded, eyes dark with understanding.
He took  another deep gulp of the whisky , not bothering to
savor it.
“Luckily Dad— the Reverend— he seemed to know the
trouble. He began to tell me stories about my father; the real
ones. Nothing special, nothing heroic—he was a hero, all
right, Jerry MacKenzie, got shot down and all, but the stories
Dad told  were all about what h e was like as a kid—how he
made a martin house, but made the hole too big and a cuckoo
got in; what he liked to eat when he’d come here on holidayand they ’d go into town for a treat; how he filled his pockets
with winkles of f the rocks and for got about them and ruined
his trous ers with the stink—” He broke of f, and smiled at her ,
his throat still tight at the memory .
“He made my father real to me. And I missed him more
than eve r , because then I knew a bit about what I was  missing
—but I had to know .”
“Some p eople would say you ca n’ t miss what you never had
—that it’ s better not to know a t all.” Brianna lifted her cup,
blue eyes steady over the rim.
“Some people are fools. Or cowards.”
He poured another tot of whis ky into his cup, tilted the
bottle toward her with a lifted brow . She held out her cup
without comment, and he splashed whisky into it. She drank
from it, and set it down.
“What about your mother?” she asked.
“I h ad a  few real memories of her; I was nearly five when
she died. And there are the boxes in the garage—” He tilted
his h ead toward the window . “ All her things, her letters. It’ s
like Dad said, ‘Everybody needs a history .’ Mine was out
there; I knew if I ever needed to, I could find out more.”
He studied her for a long moment.
“Y ou miss her a lot?” he said. “Claire?”
She glan ced at him, nodded brie fly , and drank, then held out
her empty cup for more.
“I’m—I was—afraid to look,” she said, eyes fixed on the
stream of whisky .
“It’ s not  just him—it’ s her , too. I mean, I know his stories,
Jamie Fraser ’ s; she told me a lot about him. A lot more than
I’ll ever  find in historical reco rds,” she added with a feeble
attempt at a smile. She took a deep breath.
“But Ma ma—at first I tried to pretend she was only gone,
like on a trip. And then when I couldn’ t do that anymore, Itried to believe she was dead.”  Her nose was running, from
emotion, whisky , or the heat of the tea. Roger reached for the
tea towel hanging by the stove and shoved it across the table to
her .
“She isn’ t,  though.” She picked up the towel and wiped
angrily a t her nose. “That’ s the trouble! I have to miss her all
the time, and know that I’ll never see her again, but she isn’ t
even dead!  How can I mourn for her , when I think—when I
hope—she’ s happy where she is, when I made  her go?”
She gulped the r est of her cup, choked slightly , and got her
breath. She fixed Roger with a dark blue glare, as though he
were to blame for the situation.
“So I want to find out, all right? I want to find her—find
them. Se e if she’ s all right. But I keep thinking maybe I don’ t
want to find out , because what if I find out she’ s not all right,
what if I find ou t something horrible? What if I find out she’ s
dead, or  he is—well, that wouldn’ t matter so much, maybe,
because he already is dead anyw ay , or he was, or—but I have
to, I know I have to!”
She banged her cup down on the table in front of him.
“More.”
He o pened his m outh to say tha t she’d had a good bit more
than she needed already , but a g lance at her face changed his
mind. He shut his mouth and poured.
She didn’ t wait for him to add tea, but raised the cup to her
mouth a nd took  a lar ge swallo w , and another . She coughed,
sputtered, and set the cup down, eyes watering.
“So I’m  looking . Or I was. When I saw Daddy’ s books, and
his handwriting, though…it all seemed wrong, then. Do you
think I’m wrong?” she asked, pe ering woefully at him through
tear -clogged lashes.
“No, hen,” he said gently . “It’ s not wrong. Y ou’re right,
you’ve g ot to know . I’ll help you .” He stood up and, taking her
under th e arms, hoisted her to h er feet. “But right now , I think
you should maybe have a bit of a lie-down, hm?”He g ot her up the stairs and ha lfway down the hall, when
she suddenly broke free and darted into the bathroom. He
leaned against the wall outside, waiting patiently until she
staggered out again, her face the color of the aged plaster
above the wainscoting.
“W aste of Glen Morangie, that, ” he said, taking her by the
shoulders and steering her into the bedroom. “If I’d known I
was dealing with a sot, I’d have given you the cheap stuf f.”
She collapsed on the bed, and allowed him to take of f her
shoes and socks. She rolled onto her stomach, Uncle Angus
cradled in the crook of her arm.
“I told  y ou I d idn’ t like tea,” she mumbled, and was asleep
in seconds.
Roger w orked for an hour or two by himself, sorting books
and tyin g cartons. It was a quiet, dark afternoon, with no
sound bu t a soft patter of rain a nd the occasional whoosh  of a
car ’ s tires on the street outside. When the light began to fail,
he turned on the lamps and went down the hall to the kitchen,
to wash the book grime from his hands.
A hu ge pot of milky cock-a-leekie soup was burbling on the
back of the cooker . What had Fiona said to do about that? T urn
it up ? T urn it of f? Throw things into it? He peered dubiously
into the pot and decided to leave well enough alone.
He t idied up the remains of their impromptu tea—rinsed the
cups and  dried them, hung them  carefully from their hooks in
the cupboard. They were remn ants of the old willow pattern
set the Revere nd had had f or as long as Roger could
remember , the blue-and-white  Chinese trees and pagodas
augmented by odd bits of ill-assorted crockery acquired from
jumble sales.
Fiona w ould have all new , of course. She’d forced them to
look at magazin e pictures of china and crystal and flatware.
Brianna had made suitable admiring noises; Roger ’ s eyes had
gone glassy from boredom. He supposed the old stuf f wouldall end up at the  jumble sale—at least it might still be useful to
someone.
On impulse, he took down th e two cups he’d washed,
wrapped them in a clean tea tow el, and took them to the study ,
where he tucked them into the box he’d set aside for himself.
He felt thoroughly foolish, but  at the same time, somewhat
better .
He looked around the echoing study , quite bare now save
for the single sheet of paper on the cork-lined wall.
So y our home’ s gone for good . W e ll, he’d left  home some
time ago, hadn’ t he?
Y eah, it  bothered him. A lot more than he’d let on to
Brianna, in fact. That was why it had taken so bloody long to
finish clearing out the manse, if he was honest about it. T rue, it
was a monster t ask, true, he had his own job to do at Oxford,
and true , the thousands of books had had to be sorted with care
—but he could have done it faster . If he’d wanted.
W ith the  house standing vacant, he might never have got the
job finis hed. But with the impe tus of Fiona behind, and the
lure of Brianna before…he smil ed at the thought of the two of
them: little dark, curly-heade d wren, and tall fire-haired
V iking. Likely it took women to get men to do anything much.
T ime to finish up, though.
W ith a sense of somber ceremo ny , he unpinned the corners
of th e ye llowed sheet of paper a nd took it down from the cork.
It was his family tree, a genea logical chart made out in the
Reverend’ s neat round hand.
MacKenzies an d more MacKenzies, generations of them.
He’d thought lately of taking ba ck the name permanently , not
just for the singing. After all, wi th Dad gone he didn’ t mean to
come back much more to Inver ness, where folk would know
him as W akefield. That had bee n the point of the genealogy ,
after all; that Roger shouldn’ t for get who he was.
Dad had known a few individual stories, but no more than
the nam es for most of the peop le on the list. And he hadn’ tknown even that, for the most important one—the woman
whose green eyes Roger saw each morning in the mirror . She
was nowhere on this list, for good reason.
Roger ’ s finger stopped near the  top of the chart. There he
was, the  changeling—W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie. Given
to foster  parents to raise, the illegitimate of fspring of the war
chieftain of clan MacKenzie, and of a witch condemned to
burning. Dougal MacKenzie and the witch Geillis Duncan.
Not a witch a t all, of cours e, but something just as
dangerous. He had her eyes— or so Claire said. Had he
inherited someth ing more from her as well? W as the terrifying
ability to travel through the stones passed down unsuspected
through generations of respectable boatwrights and herdsmen?
He t hought of i t each time he saw the chart now—and for
that reason, tried not to look. He appreciated Brianna’ s
ambivalence; he understood all too well the razor ’ s edge
between fear and curiosity , the pull between the need to know
and the fear of finding out.
W ell, he could help Brianna find out. And for himself…
Roger slipped the chart into a folder , and put it in the box.
He close d the top of the carton , and added an “X” of sticky
tape across the flap for good measure.
“That’ s that, then,” he said aloud, and left the empty room.
He stopped at the head of the stairs, taken by surprise.
Brianna had been bathing, braving the ancient geyser with
its crack ed enamel and rumbling flame. Now she stepped into
the hall, wearing nothing but a towel.
She turned down the hall, not se eing him. Roger stood very
still, listening to the thud of his heart, feeling his palm slick on
the polished banister .
She was modestly covered; he had seen more of her in the
halters and shorts she had worn in the summer . It was the
fragility of her covering that roused him; the knowledge thathe could undress her with one quick tug. That, and the
knowledge that they were quite alone in the house.
Dynamite.
He t ook a step after her , and st opped. She had heard him;
she stop ped, too , but it was a lo ng moment before she turned
around. Her feet were bare, high-arched and long-toed; the
slender curves of her wet foot prints were dark on the worn
runner that covered the floor of the hallway .
She didn ’ t say anything. Just looked at him straight-on, her
eyes dar k and slanting. She sto od against the tall window at
the end of the hall, her swaddled figure black against the pale
gray light of the rainy day outside.
If he should tou ch her , he knew how she would feel. Her
skin wo uld be still hot from the  bath, damp in the crevices of
knee and thigh and elbow . He could smell her , the minglings
of sham poo and soap and po wder , the smell of her flesh
masked by the ghosts of flowers.
Her foot prints o n the runner str etched before him, a fragile
chain of footsteps linking them. He kicked of f his sandals and
planted a bare foot on one of the prints she had left; it was cool
on his skin.
There were drops of water on her shoulders, matching the
droplets on the windowpane behind her , as though she had
stepped through it out of the rain. She lifted her head as he
came toward her , and with a shake, let the towel wrapped
round her head fall of f.
The bro nze snakes of her hair fell gleaming, brushed his
cheek with wet. Not a Gor gon’ s beauty , but a water spirit’ s,
changing shape from serpent-maned horse to magic woman.
“Kelpie,” he whispered against the flushed curve of her
cheek. “ Y ou look like you’ve co me straight out of a Highland
burn.” She put her arms around his neck, let go of the towel;
only the pressure of their bodies held it between them.
Her back was bare. Cold air from the window raised the hair
on his forearm, even as her skin warmed his palm. He wantedat on ce to pull the towel about h er , shelter her , cover her from
the c old; at the same time, to st rip both her and himself, take
her heat  to himself and give h er his own, right there in the
damp and drafty hallway .
“Steam,” he whispered. “God, you’re steaming.”
Her mouth curved against his.
“That makes two of us, and you  haven’ t had a bath. Roger
—” Her  hand was on the back of his neck, fingers cool. She
opened her mouth to say somet hing more, but he kissed her ,
feeling hot damp seep through the fabric of his shirt.
Her brea sts rose  against him an d her mouth opened under
his. The  muf fling terry cloth h id the outlines of her breasts
from his  hands but not his imagination; he could see them in
his m ind’ s eye, round and smooth, with that faint, enchanting
wobble of full flesh.
His hand drifted lower , grasping the swell of bare buttock.
She shied, lost her balance, an d the two of them collapsed
awkwardly , gra ppling with each other in an ef fort to stay
upright.
Roger ’ s knees hit the floor , and he dragged her down with
him. She tilted and sprawled, landing laughing on her back.
“Hey!” She grabbed for her tow el, then abandoned it as he
lunged over her , kissing her again.
He’d been right about her breas ts. The one under his hand
was bare  now , full and soft, the nipple hard in the center of his
palm.
Dynamite, and the fuse was lit.
His othe r hand rested at the top of her thigh under the towel,
close enough that he could fe el the damp curls brush his
finger . God, what color was it? Deep auburn, as he’d
imagined? Copper and bronze, like the hair of her head?
Despite himself, his hand slid farther , dying to cup the soft
slippery fullness he could sense, so close. W ith an ef fort that
made him dizzy , he stopped.Her hand was on his arm, pulling him back down.
“Please,” she whispered. “Please, I want you to.”
He f elt hollow as a bell; his he artbeat echoed in head and
chest and painfully hard betwee n his legs. He closed his eyes,
breathing, pressing his hands against the rough fiber of the
rug, trying to e rase the feel of  her skin, lest he grab at her
again.
“No,” he said, a nd his voice sounded queer , hoarse to his
own ear . “No, not here, not like this.”
She was  sitting up, rising out of the dark blue towel that
puddled around her hips, like a mermaid from the waves. She
had cool ed; her flesh was pale a s marble in the gray light, but
goose bu mps stippled the smoothness of arms and breasts and
shoulders.
He touched her , rough skin a nd smooth, and drew his
fingers over her lips, her broad  mouth. The taste of her was
still on his lips,  clean skin and toothpaste—and a sweet, soft
tongue.
“Better ,” he whispered. “I want it to be better…the first
time.”
They kn elt staring at each other , the air between them
crackling with unsaid things. Th e fuse was still burning, but a
slow ma tch now . Roger felt roo ted to the spot; perhaps it was
the Gor gon, after all.
Then the smell o f scorching milk rose up the stair , and both
of them started up at once.
“Something’ s burning!” Brianna said, and made a dart
toward the stair , her towel clumsily back in place.
He c aught her b y the arm as she passed him. She was cold
to the touch, chilled by the drafty hallway .
“I’ll do it,” he said. “Y ou go and get dressed.”
She shot him a quick blue glance and turned, disappearing
into the spare be droom. The door clicked shut behind her andhe dashe d down the hall, clatter ing down the stair toward the
smell of disaster , feeling his pal m burn where he had touched
her .
Downstairs, Roger dealt with the spilled and scalded soup,
berating himself. Where did he get of f, lunging at her like a
crazed s almon e n route to the spawning grounds? Ripping of f
her towel and grappling her to  the floor—Christ, she must
think him next door to a rapist!
At t he same tim e, the hot feeling that suf fused his chest
wasn’ t d ue eithe r to shame or to heat from the cooker . It was
the l atent heat from her skin, still warming him. I wa nt y ou to,
she’d said, and she’d meant it.
He w as familiar enough with t he language of the body to
know desire and surrender whe n he touched them. But what
he’d felt  in that brief moment w hen her body came alive to his
went a great deal farther . The universe had shifted, with a
small, decisive click; he could still hear its echo in his bones.
He w anted her . He wanted all o f her; not just bed, not just
body . Everything, always. Suddenly the biblical injunction,
one flesh,  s eemed something immediate, and very real. They’d
nearly been just that, on the floo r of the hallway , and stopping
as h e had made him feel suddenly and peculiarly vulnerable—
he w asn’ t a w hole person any longer , but only half of
something not yet made.
He d umped the ruined remains o f the soup into the sink. No
matter; they’d have supper at the pub. Best to get out of the
house and away from temptation.
Supper , casual chat, and maybe a walk by the river . She’d
wanted to go to the Christmas Eve services. After that…
After that, he wo uld ask her , ma ke it formal. She would say
yes, he knew . And then…
Why , then, they would come home, to a house dark and
private. W ith themselves alone, on a night of sacrament and
secret, with love newly come int o the world. And he would lifther in his arms and carry he r upstairs, on a night when
vir ginity’ s sacrifice was no loss of purity , but rather the birth
of everlasting joy .
Roger switched out the light a nd left the kitchen. Behind
him, for gotten, the gas flame b urned blue and yellow in the
dark, ardent and steady as the fires of love.1 8
U N S E E M L Y  L U S T
T he Reverend W akefield had been a kindly and ecumenical
man, tolerant of all shades of religious opinion, and willing to
entertain doctrines his flock would have found outrageous, if
not downright blasphemous.
Still, a lifetime  of exposure to  the stern face of Scottish
Presbyterianism and its abid ing suspicion of anything
“Romish” had left Roger with a certain residual uneasiness
upon entering a Catholic church—as though he might be
seized at the door and forcibly baptized by outlandishly
dressed minions of the T rue Cross.
No such  violence of fered as he followed Brianna into the
small stone building. There wa s a boy in a long white robe
visible at the far end of the nave, but he was peaceably
engaged in lighting two pair s of tall white candles that
decorated the altar . A faint, un familiar scent hung in the air .
Roger inhaled, trying to be unobtrusive about it. Incense?
Beside him, Brianna stopped, rummaging in her purse. She
took out a small circle of black lacy stuf f, and bobby-pinned it
to the top of her head.
“What’ s that?” he asked.
“I d on’ t know what you call it,” she said. “It’ s what you
wear in church if you don’ t want to wear a hat or a veil. Y ou
don’ t really have  to do it anymore, but I grew up doing it—it
used to be that women couldn’ t go into a Catholic church with
their heads uncovered, you know .”
“No, I didn’ t,” he said, interested. “Why not?”
“Saint P aul, probably ,” she said, whipping a comb from her
purse to tidy the ends of her hair . “He thought women ought to
keep the ir hair covered all the time, so as not to be objects of
unseemly lust. Cranky old crab, ” she added, stuf fing the comb
back int o the purse. “Mama a lways said he was afraid ofwomen. Though t they were dangerous,” she said, with a wide
grin.
“They are.” Impulsively , he leaned forward and kissed her ,
ignoring the stares of the people nearby .
She look ed surp rised, but then rocked forward on her toes
and kissed him back, soft and quick. Roger heard a faint
“Mmphm” of disapproval somewhere nearby , but paid no
attention.
“In kirk,  and on Christmas Eve, too!” came a hoarse
whisper from behind.
“W ell, it’ s no the kirk exactly , Annie, it’ s only the vestibule,
aye?”
“And him the meenister ’ s lad and all!”
“W ell, ye ken th e saying, Annie, as the cobbler ’ s bairns go
barefoot. I daresay it’ s a’ the sa me wi’ a preacher ’ s lad that’ s
gone to the deil. Come along in, now .”
The voices receded into the c hurch, to the prim tap of
Cuban heels and a man’ s softer shuf fle accompanying. Brianna
pulled back a little and looked up at him, mouth quivering
with laughter .
“Have you gone to the devil?”
He smil ed down at her , and touched her glowing face. She
wore her grandmother ’ s necklace, in honor of Christmas, and
her skin reflected the luster of the freshwater pearls.
“If the devil will have me.”
Before s he could answer , they w ere interrupted by a gust of
foggy air as the church door opened.
“Mr . W akefield, is it yourself?” He turned, to meet two pairs
of bright, inquisitive eyes beami ng up at him. A pair of elderly
women, each about four foot s ix, stood arm in arm in their
winter coats, gray hair puf fed  out under small felt hats,
looking like a matched set of doorstops.“Mrs. McMurdo, Mrs. Hayes! Happy Christmas to you!” He
nodded to them, smiling. Mrs. McMurdo lived two doors
down fr om the manse, and walked to church every Sunday
with her friend Mrs. Hayes. Roger had known them all his life.
“Come over to Rome then, have ye, Mr . W akefield?”
Chrissie McMurdo asked. Jessie Hayes giggled at her friend’ s
wit, the red cherries bouncing on her hat.
“Maybe not just yet awhile,” Roger said, still smiling. “I’m
only see ing a friend to the services, aye? Y ou’ll know Miss
Randall?” He brought Brian na forward and made the
introductions, grinning inwardly as the two little old ladies
looked her over with a frankly avid curiosity .
T o Mrs. McMurdo and Mrs. Ha yes, his presence here was
as overt  a declaration of his int entions as if he’d taken out a
full-page ad in the evening new spaper . T oo bad Brianna was
unaware of it.
Or w as she? Sh e glanced at him with a half-hidden smile,
and he felt the pressure of her fingers on his arm, just for a
moment.
“Och, th ere’ s the wee laddie comin’ wi’ the censer!” cried
Mrs. Hayes, spotting another w hite-robed boy emer ging from
the sanctuary . “Best get in quick, Chrissie, or we’ll never have
a seat!”
“Such a pleasure to meet ye, my  dear ,” Mrs. McMurdo told
Brianna, head tilted back so far that her hat was in danger of
falling of f. “My , such a bonny ta ll lass!” She glanced at Roger ,
twinkling. “Lucky to have found a lad to match ye, eh?”
“Chrissie!”
“Just coming, Jessie, just coming. Dinna fash, there’ s time.”
Straightening her hat, trimmed with a small bunch of grouse’ s
feathers, Mrs. McMurdo turned in leisurely fashion to join her
friend.
The bel l above began to clang again, and Roger took
Brianna’ s arm. Just in front o f them, he saw Jessie Hayesglance b ack, eyes bright with speculation, her smile half sly
with knowing.
Brianna dipped her fingers in a small stone basin set in the
wall by the door , and crossed herself. Roger found the gesture
suddenly and oddly familiar , despite its Romanness.
Y ears ago, hill-walking with the Reverend, they had come
upon a saint’ s pool, hidden in a  grove. There was a flat stone
standing on end beside the tiny spring, the remnants of carving
on it  wo rn nearly  to smoothness, no more than the shadow of a
human figure.
A se nse of myst ery hung about the small, dark pool; he and
the Reverend had stood there for some time, not speaking.
Then the  Reverend had bent, sc ooped up a handful of water ,
and pou red it out at the foot of the stone in silent ceremony ,
scooped up another and splashe d it over his face. Only then
had they knelt by the spring to drink the cold, sweet water .
Above the Reverend’ s bowed back, Roger had seen the
tattered knots of fabric tied to t ree branches above the spring.
Pledges; reminders of prayer , left by whoever still visited the
ancient shrine.
For how many thousands of y ears had men thus blessed
themselves with water before seeking their heart’ s desire?
Roger dabbed his fingers in the water and awkwardly touched
both hea d and heart, with some thing that might have been a
prayer .
They found seats in the east tra nsept, crowded shoulder to
shoulder with a murmuring family , busily engaged in settling
belongings and sleepy children, passing coats and handbags
and bab y bottles to and fro, while a small, wheezy or gan
played “O Little T own of Bethl ehem” somewhere just out of
sight.
Then the  music stopped. There was a silence of expectation,
and then it bur st out once mo re, in a loud rendition of “O
Come, All Y e Faithful.”Roger rose with the congregation as the procession came
down the center aisle. There w ere several of the white-robed
acolytes, one with a swinging ce nser that sent puf fs of fragrant
smoke i nto the crowd. Another bore a book, and a third a tall
crucifix, the gruesome figure o n it blatant, daubed with red
paint whose bloody echoes shimmered in the priest’ s vestment
of gold and crimson.
Despite himself, Roger felt a slight sense of shocked
distaste; the mixture of barbaric pageantry and the undulations
of s ung Latin were quite foreig n to what he subconsciously
felt was proper in church.
Still, as the Ma ss went on, th ings seemed more normal;
there were Bible readings, quite familiar , and then the
accustomed descent into the vaguely pleasant boredom of a
sermon, in which the inevitable Christmas annunciations of
“peace,” “goodwill,” and “love” rose to the surface of his
mind, tranquil as white lilies floating on a pond of words.
By t he time the congregation rose again, Roger had lost all
sense of strangeness. Surrounded by a warm, familiar church
fug composed of floor polish, d amp wool, naphtha fumes, and
a fai nt whif f of the whisky with which some worshipers had
fortified themselves for the long service, he scarcely noticed
the sweet, musky scent of frankincense. Breathing deeply , he
thought he caught the hint of fresh grass from Brianna’ s hair .
It shone in the dim light of the transept, thick and soft
against the dark violet of her ju mper . Its copper sparks muted
by the dimness, it was the deep rufous color of a red deer ’ s
pelt, and it gave him the same sense of helpless yearning he
had felt  when surprised by a deer on a Highland path—the
strong ur ge to touch it, stroke  the wild thing and keep it
somehow with him, coupled with the sure knowledge that a
finger ’ s move would send it flying.
Whatever one thought of Saint  Paul, he thought, the man
had kno wn what he was on about with respect to women’ s
hair . Un seemly lust, was it? He had a sudden memory of the
bare hal lway an d the steam ris ing from Brianna’ s body , thewet snak es of her hair cold on his skin. He looked away , trying
to c oncentrate on the goings-on  at the altar , where the priest
was rais ing a lar ge flat disk of bread, while a small boy madly
shook a chime of bells.
He watc hed her when she went up to take Communion, and
became aware with a slight start that he was praying
wordlessly .
He relax ed just a bit when he realized the content of his
prayer; it wasn’ t the ignoble “Le t me have her” he might have
expected. It was the more humble—and acceptable, he hoped
—”Let m e be worthy of her , le t me love her rightly; let me
take care of her . ” He nodded to ward the altar , then caught the
curious eye of the man next to him, and straightened up,
clearing his throat, embarrassed as though he had been
surprised in private conversation.
She came back, eyes wide-open and fixed on something
deep ins ide, a small dreaming sm ile on her wide sweet mouth.
She knelt, and he beside her .
She had a tender  look at the moment, but it was not a gentle
face. Straight-nosed and sev ere, with thick red brows
redeemed from heaviness only by the grace of their arch. The
cleanness of jaw and cheek mi ght have been cut from white
marble; it was the mouth that could change in a moment, from
soft generosity to the mouth of a medieval abbess, lips sealed
in cool stone celibacy .
The thick Glaswegian voice beside him bawling “W e Three
Kings” brought him to with a start, in time to see the priest
sweep down the aisle, surrounde d by his acolytes, in clouds of
triumphant smoke.
” ‘ W e Three Ki ngs of Orient Are,’ ” Brianna sang quietly as
they ma de their way down Riv er W alk, ‘Going to smoke a
rubber c igar…It was loaded, and explo-oo-ded’—you did  turn
out the gas, didn’ t you?”
“Y es,” h e assured her . “Not to worry; between the cooker
and the  bathroom geyser , if t he manse hasn’ t gone up inflames yet, it must be proof of divine protection.”
She laughed.
“Do Presbyterians believe in guardian angels?”
“Certainly not. Popish superstition, aye?”
“W ell, I hope I haven’ t damned you to perdition by making
you go to Mass with me. Or do Presbyterians believe in hell?”
“Oh, that we do ,” he assured h er . “As much as heaven, if
not more.”
It w as even foggier , here by the river . Roger was glad they
hadn’ t d riven; y ou couldn’ t see m ore than five feet or so in the
thick white murk.
They walked arm in arm beside the River Ness, footsteps
muf fled. Swaddled by the fog, the unseen city around them
might n ot have existed. They had left the other churchgoers
behind; they were alone.
Roger felt strangely exposed, chilled and vulnerable,
stripped of the w armth and assurance he had felt in the church.
Only nerves, he thought, and to ok a firmer grip of Brianna’ s
arm. It was time. He took a deep breath, cool fog filling his
chest.
“Brianna.” He had her by the arm , turned to face him before
she had stopped walking, so her  hair swung heavy through the
dim arc from the streetlamp overhead.
W ater d roplets gleamed in a fin e mist on her skin, glowed
like pearls and d iamonds in her hair , and through the padding
of her jacket, he felt in memory  her bare skin, cool as fog to
his fingers, flesh-hot in his hand.
Her eyes  were wide and dark as a loch, with secrets moving,
half seen, half s ensed, under rippling water . A kelpie for sure.
Each urisge,  a water horse, mane flowing, skin glowing. And
the man who touches such a creature is lost, bound to it
forever , taken down and drowned in the loch that gives it
home.He felt suddenly afraid, not for himself but for her; as
though something might materialize from that water world to
snatch her back, away from him. He grasped her by the hand,
as if to prevent her . Her fingers were cold and damp, a shock
against the warmth of his palm.
“I want you, Bri anna,” he said softly . “I cannot be saying it
plainer than that. I love you. W ill you marry me?”
She didn ’ t say anything, but her face changed, like water
when a stone is  thrown into it. He could see it plainly as his
own reflection in the bleakness of a tarn.
“Y ou didn’ t want me to say that.” The fog had settled in his
chest; he was br eathing ice, crystal needles piercing heart and
lungs. “Y ou didn’ t want to hear it, did you?”
She shook her head, wordless.
“A ye. W ell.” W ith an ef fort, he let go her hand. “That’ s all
right,” he said, surprised at the calmness in his voice. “Y ou’ll
not be worried about it, aye?”
He w as turning to walk on when she stopped him, hand on
his sleeve.
“Roger .”
It w as a great ef fort to turn and face her; he had no wish for
empty comfort, no desire to hea r a feeble of fer to “be friends.”
He didn’ t think he could bear even to look at her , so crushing
was his sense of loss. But he tu rned nonetheless and then she
was aga inst him , her hands cold  on his ears as she gripped his
head and  pushed  her mouth har d onto his, not so much a kiss
as blind frenzy , awkward with desperation.
He gripp ed her hands and pulled them down, pushing her
away .
“What in  God’ s name are you playing at?” Anger was better
than emptiness, and he shouted at her in the empty street.
“I’m not playing! Y ou said you wanted me.” She gulped air .
“I w ant you, too, don’ t you know that? Didn’ t I say so in the
hall this afternoon?”“I th ought you d id.” He stared a t her . “What in hell do you
mean?”
“I mean—I mean I want to go to bed with you,” she blurted.
“But you don’ t want to marry me?”
She sho ok her head, white as a  sheet. Something between
sickness and fury stirred in his gut, and then erupted.
“So you ’ll not marry me, but you’ll fuck me? How can ye
say such a thing?”
“Don’ t use that sort of language to me!”
“Language? Y ou  can suggest such a thing, but I must not
say the word? I have never been so of fended, never!”
She was  trembling, strands of h air sticking to her face with
the damp.
“I didn’ t mean to insult you. I thought you wanted to—to
—”
He grabbed her arms and jerked her toward him.
“If a ll I  wanted was to fuck you, I would have had ye on
your back a dozen times last summer!”
“Like he ll you would!” She wrenched loose one arm and
slapped him hard across the jaw , surprising him.
He grab bed her hand, pulled her  toward him and kissed her ,
a good deal harder and a good  deal longer than he ever had
before. S he was tall and strong and angry—but he was taller ,
stronger , and much angrier . She kicked and struggled, and he
kissed her until he was good and ready to stop.
“The he ll I would,” he said, gas ping for air as he let her go.
He wipe d his mouth and stood back, shaking. There was blood
on his hand; she’d bitten him and he hadn’ t felt a thing.
She was shaking, too. Her face was white, lips pressed so
tight together that nothing show ed in her face but dark eyes,
blazing.“But I didn’ t,” h e said, breathing slower . “That wasn’ t what
I wanted; it’ s not what I want now .” He wiped his bloody hand
against his shirt. “But if you don’ t care enough to marry me,
then I don’ t care enough to have ye in my bed!”
“I do care!”
“Like hell.”
“I care too damn much to marry you, you bastard!”
“Y ou what ?”
“Because when I marry you—w hen I marry anybody—it’ s
going to last, do you hear me? If I make a vow like that, I’ll
keep it, no matter what it costs me!”
T ears were running down her fa ce. He groped in his pocket
for a handkerchief and gave it to her .
“Blow your nose, wipe your fac e, and then tell me what the
bloody hell ye think you’re talking about, aye?”
She did as he said, snif fing and brushing back her damp hair
with one hand. Her foolish little veil had fallen of f; it was
hanging by its bobby pin. He plucked it of f, crumpling it in his
hand.
“Y our S cottish accent comes out when you get upset,” she
said, with a feeble attempt at a smile as she handed back the
wadded hanky .
“I shouldn’ t wonder ,” Roger said in exasperation. “Now tell
me wha t you mean, and do it plainly , before ye drive me all
the way to the Gaelic.”
“Y ou can speak Gaelic?” She was gradually getting
possession of herself.
“I can,”  he said, “and if you don’ t want to learn a good
many coarse expressions right swiftly…talk. What d’ye mean
by m aking me such an of fer— and you a nice Catholic girl,
straight out of Mass! I thought ye were a vir gin.”
“I am! What does that have to do with it?”Before he could answer this piece of outrageousness, she
followed it up with another .
“Don’ t you tell me you haven’ t had girls, I know you have!”
“A ye, I have! I didn’ t want to m arry them, and they didn’ t
want to marry m e. I didn’ t love them, they didn’ t love me. I do
love you, damn it!”
She lean ed against the lamppost, hands behind her , and met
his eyes directly . “I think I love you, too.”
He didn ’ t realize he had been holding his breath until he let
it out.
“Ah. Y ou do.” T he water had condensed in his hair , and icy
trickles were running down his neck. “Mmphm. A ye, and is
the operative word there ‘think,’ then, or is it ‘love’?”
She relaxed, just a little, and swallowed.
“Both.”
She held up a hand as he started to speak.
“I do—I think. But—but I can’ t help thinking what
happened to my mother . I don’ t want that to happen to me.”
“Y our mother?”  Simple astonishment was succeeded by a
fresh burst of outrage. “What? Y ou’re thinking of bloody
Jamie F raser? Y e think ye cann ot be satisfied with a boring
historian—ye must have a—a—great passion, as she did for
him, and you think I’ll maybe not measure up?”
“No! I’m not th inking of Jamie Fraser! I’m thinking of my
father!” She shoved her hands deep in the pockets of her
jacket, and swallowed hard. She’d stopped crying, but there
were tears on her lashes, clotting them in spikes.
“She meant it w hen she married him—I could see it, in
those pi ctures you gave me. Sh e said ‘better or worse, richer ,
poorer ’—and she meant  i t. And then…a nd then she met  Jamie
Fraser , and she didn’ t mean it anymore.”
Her mouth worked silently for a moment, looking for
words.“I—I don’ t blame her , not really , not after I thought about it.
She couldn’ t help it, and I—w hen she talked about him, I
could see how much she lov ed him—but don’ t you see,
Roger? She loved my fathe r , too—but then something
happened. She didn’ t expect it, and it wasn’ t her fault—but it
made her break her word. I won’ t do that, not for anything.”
She wiped a hand under her nose, and he gave her back the
handkerchief, silently . She blinked back the tears and looked at
him, straight.
“It’ s more than a year before w e can be together . Y ou can’ t
leave O xford; I can’ t leave B oston, not till I’ve got my
degree.”
He w anted to sa y that he’d resign, that she should quit her
schooling—but kept quiet. She was right; neither of them
would be happy with such a solution.
“So what if I say yes now , and something happens? What if
—if I met some body else, or y ou did?” T ears welled again,
and one ran do wn her cheek. “I won’ t take the chance of
hurting you. I won’ t.”
“But you love me now?” He touched a finger gently to her
cheek. “Bree, do ye love me?”
She took  a step forward, and w ithout speaking, reached to
undo the fastenings of her coat.
“What the hell are you doing?” Blank astonishment was
added to  the mix of other emotions, succeeded by something
else as her long pale fingers gra sped the zip of his jacket and
pulled it down.
The sudden whif f of cold was o bliterated by the warmth of
her body , pressed against his from throat to knees.
His arm s went around her padd ed back by reflex; she was
holding him tight, arms locked  round him under his jacket.
Her hair  smelled cold and sweet, with the last traces of incense
trapped in the heavy strands, blending with the fragrance of
grass and jasmine flowers. He caught the gleam of a hairpin,
bronze metal in the copper loops of her hair .She didn ’ t say a thing, nor did he. He could feel her body
through the thin layers of cloth  between them, and a jolt of
desire shot up the backs of his legs, as though he were
standing on an electric grid. He tilted up her chin, and set his
mouth on hers.
“…see that Jackie Martin, and her with a new fur collar to
her coat?”
“Och, and where’ s she found t he money for such a thing,
wi’ her husband oot o’ his work this six month past? I tell ye,
Jessie, yon woman…ooh!”
The click of Fre nch-heeled shoes on the pavement halted, to
be s ucceeded by the sound of  a throat being cleared with
suf ficient resonance to wake the dead.
Roger ti ghtened his grip on Brianna, and didn’ t move. She
tightened her arms around him in response, and he felt the
curve of her mouth under his.
“MMPHM!”
“Ah, now , Chrissie,” came a hissed whisper from behind
him. “L et them be, aye? Can  ye not see they’re getting
engaged?”
“Mmphm” came  again, but in a lower tone. “Hmp. They’ll
be g etting something else, and  they go on wi’ that much
longer . S till…” A long sigh, tinged with nostalgia. “Ah, weel,
it’ s nice to be young, isn’ t it?”
The twin  tap of heels came on, much slower , passed them,
and faded inaudibly into the fog.
He stood for a minute, willing himself to let go of her . But
once a man has touched the m ane of a water horse, it’ s no
simple m atter to let go. An old kelpie-rhyme ran through his
head,
And sit weel, Janetie
 And ride weel, Davie.
 And your first stop will be
 The bottom of Loch Cavie.“I’ll wa it,” he said, and let her  go. He held her hands and
looked into her eyes, now soft and clear as rain pools.
“Hear m e, though,” he said soft ly . “I will have you all—or
not at all.”
Let me love her rightly ,  he had said in w ordless prayer . And
hadn’ t he been told often enough by Mrs. Graham—”Be
careful what ye ask for , laddie, for ye just might get it?”
He cupped her breast, soft through her jumper .
“It’ s not  only your body that I w ant—though God knows, I
want it badly . Bu t I’ll have you as my wife…or I will not have
you. Y our choice.”
She reached up and touched hi m, brushed the hair of f his
brow with fingers so cold, they burned like dry ice.
“I understand,” she whispered.
The win d of f the river was cold,  and he reached to do up the
zip of her jacket. In doing so , his hand brushed his own
pocket, and he f elt the small package lying there. He’d meant
to give it to her over supper .
“Here,” he said, handing it to her . “Happy Christmas.”
“I bough t it last summer ,” he said, watching her cold fingers
fumble at the holly-printed paper . “Looks like prescience, now ,
doesn’ t it?”
She held  a silver circle, a bracelet, a flat silver band, with
words et ched ro und it. He took it from her and slipped it over
her hand, onto her wrist. She turned it slowly , reading the
words.
“Je t’a ime…un peu…beaucoup…passionnement…pas du
tout.  I love you…a little…a lot…passionately…not at all.”
He gave the band a quarter turn more, completing the circle.
“Je t’aime,”  he said,  and then with a twist of fingers, sent it
spinning on her wrist. She laid a hand on it, stopping it.“Moi aussi,”  she said softly , looking not at the band but at
him. “Joyeux Noel.”P A R T  S E V E N
O n  t h e  M o u n t a i n1 9
H E A R T H  B L E S S I N G
September 1767
S leeping under the moon and st ars in the arms of a naked
lover , the two of you cradled by furs and soft leaves, lulled by
the gentle murmur of the chestnut trees and the far -of f rumble
of a  waterfall, is terribly roma ntic. Sleeping under a crude
lean-to, squashed into a soggy mass between a lar ge, wet
husband and an equally lar ge, eq ually wet nephew , listening to
rain thrump on the branches ov erhead while fending of f the
advances of a immense and thoroughly saturated dog, is
slightly less so.
“Air ,” I said, struggling feebly  into a sitting position and
brushing Rollo’ s tail out of my face for the hundredth time. “I
can’ t breathe.” The smell of confined male animals was
overpowering; a sort of musky , rancid smell, garnished with
the scent of wet wool and fish.
I r olled onto m y hands and knees and made my way out,
trying n ot to step on anyone.  Jamie grunted in his sleep,
compensating for the loss of my  body heat by curling himself
neatly into a plaid-wrapped ball. Ian and Rollo were
inextricably enta ngled in a mass of fur and cloth, their mingled
exhalations forming a faint fog around them in the predawn
chill.
It was  chilly outside, but the air was fresh; so fresh I nearly
coughed when I took a good lungful of it. The rain had
stopped, but the trees were st ill dripping, and the air was
composed of equal parts water vapor and pure oxygen, spiced
with pungent green scents from every plant on the
mountainside.
I had been sleeping in Jamie’ s spare shirt, my buckskins put
away in a sadd lebag to avoid soaking. I was dappled with
gooseflesh and shivering by the  time I pulled them on, but thestif f leat her warmed enough to shape itself to my body within
a few minutes.
Barefooted and cold-toed, I made my way carefully down to
the strea m to wash, kettle under my arm. It wasn’ t yet dawn,
and the forest was filled wi th mist and gray-blue light;
crepuscle, the mysterious half-light that comes at both ends of
the day , when the small secret things come out to feed.
There was an occasional tentative chirp from the canopy
overhead, but nothing like the usual raucous chorus. The birds
were lat e in starting today because of the rain; the sky was still
lowering, with clouds that range d from black in the west to a
pale slate-blue in the dawning  east. I felt a small rush of
pleasure at the thought that I k new already the normal hour
when the birds should sing, and had noticed the dif ference.
Jamie had been right, I thought,  when he had suggested that
we stay on the m ountain, instea d of returning to Cross Creek.
It was the begin ning of September; by Myers’ s estimation, we
would have two months of good weather—relatively good
weather , I amended, looking up at the clouds—before the cold
made shelter imperative. T ime enough—maybe—to build a
small ca bin, to hunt for meat,  to supply ourselves for the
winter ahead.
“It will be gey h ard work,” Jamie had said. I stood between
his k nees as he sat perched high on a lar ge rock, looking over
the valle y below . “And some d anger to it; we may fail if the
snow is early , or  if I canna hunt meat enough. I willna do it, if
ye say nay , Sassenach. W ould ye be afraid?”
Afraid was putting it mildly . Th e thought made the bottom
of m y stomach drop alarmingly . When I had agreed to settle
on the ridge, I had thought we would return to Cross Creek to
spend the winter .
W e could have gathered both supplies and settlers in a
leisurely manne r , and returned in the spring in caravan, to
clear land and ra ise houses communally . Instead, we would be
completely alone, several days travel from the nearest tinysettlement of Europeans. Alone in a wilderness, alone through
the winter .
W e had virtually nothing with us in the way of tools or
supplies, save a felling ax, a couple of knives, a camp kettle
and gird le, and my smaller medicine box. What if something
happened, if Ian or Jamie fell ill  or was hurt in an accident? If
we starv ed or froze? And while Jamie was sure that our Indian
acquaintances had no objection to our intent, I wasn’ t so
sanguine about any others who might happen along.
Y es, I bloody well would  be afraid. On the other hand, I’d
lived long enough to realize tha t fear wasn’ t usually fatal—at
least not by itself. Add in the od d bear or savage, and I wasn’ t
saying, mind.
For the first tim e, I looked back  with some longing at River
Run, at hot water and warm beds and regular food, at order ,
cleanliness…and safety .
I cou ld see well  enough why Jamie didn’ t want to go back;
living on  Jocasta ’ s bounty for se veral months more would sink
him that  much further in obliga tion, make it that much harder
to reject her blandishments.
He a lso knew—even better than I—that Jocasta Cameron
was bor n a MacKenzie. I had seen enough of her brothers,
Dougal and Colum, to have a de cent wariness of that heritage;
the MacKenzies of Leoch didn’ t give up a purpose lightly , and
were certainly not above plotting and manipulation to achieve
their ends. And a blind spider  might weave her webs that
much more surely , for depending solely on a sense of touch.
There were also really excellent reasons for staying the hell
away from the vicinity of Ser geant Murchison, who seemed
definitely the type to bear a grudge. And then there was
Farquard Campbell and the whole waiting web of planters and
Regulators, slaves and politics…No, I could see quite well
why Jamie mightn’ t want to go back to such entanglement and
complication, to say nothing of t he looming fact of the coming
war . At the same time, I was fairly sure that none of those
reasons accounted for his decision.“It’ s not  just that you don’ t want to go back to River Run, is
it?” I leaned bac k against him, feeling his warmth as a contrast
to th e coolness of the evening breeze. The season had not yet
turned; i t was still late summer , and the air was rich with the
sun-roused scents of leaf and berry , but so high in the
mountains, the nights turned cold.
I f elt the small rumble of a laugh in his chest, and warm
breath brushed my ear .
“Is it so plain, then?”
“Plain enough.”  I turned in his arms, and rested my
forehead against  his, so our eyes were inches apart. His were a
very deep blue, the same color as the evening sky in the notch
of the mountains.
“Owl,” I said.
He l aughed, startled, and blinked as he pulled back, long
auburn lashes sweeping briefly down.
“What?”
“Y ou lose,” I e xplained. “It’ s a game called ‘owl.’ First
person to blink loses.”
“Oh.” H e took hold of my ears  by the lobes and drew me
gently back, forehead to foreh ead. “Owl, then. Y e do have
eyes like an owl, have ye noticed?”
“No,” I said. “Can’ t say I have.”
“All clear and gold—and verra wise.”
I didn’ t blink.
“T ell me then—why we’re staying.”
He didn ’ t blink either , but I felt his chest rise under my
hand, as he took a deep breath.
“How sh all I tell ye what it is, t o feel the need of a place?”
he s aid softly . “The need of s now beneath my shoon. The
breath of the m ountains, breat hing their own breath in my
nostrils as God g ave breath to Adam. The scrape of rock undermy hand , climbi ng, and the sigh t of the lichens on it, enduring
in the sun and the wind.”
His breath was gone and he breathed again, taking mine.
His hand s were linked behind my head, holding me, face-to-
face.
“If I am to live as a man, I mus t have a mountain,” he said
simply . His eyes were open wide, searching mine for
understanding.
“W ill ye trust me, Sassenach?” he said. His nose pressed
against mine, but his eyes didn’ t blink. Neither did mine.
“W ith my life,” I said.
I felt his lips smile, an inch from mine.
“And with your heart?”
“Always,” I whispered, closed my eyes, and kissed him.
And so it was ar ranged. Myers would go back to Cross Creek,
deliver Jamie’ s instructions to Duncan, assure Jocasta of our
welfare, and procure as much in the way of stores as the
remnants of our money would finance. If there was time
before th e first snowfall, he wou ld return with supplies; if not,
in th e spring. I an would stay; his help would be needed to
build the cabin, and to help with the hunting.
Give us this day our daily br ead ,  I thought, pushing through
the wet bushes that edged the creek, and deliver us not into
temptation.
W e were reasonably safe from temptation, though; for good
or ill, we wouldn’ t see River Ru n again for at least a year . As
for the daily bread, that had been coming through as
dependably as manna, so far; at this time of year , there was an
abundance of ripe nuts, fruits an d berries, which I collected as
industriously as any squirrel. In two months, though, when the
trees gre w bare and the streams froze, I hoped God might still
hear us, above the howl of the winter wind.The stre am was  noticeably swelled by the rain, the water
maybe a foot higher than it had been yesterday . I knelt,
groaning slightly as my back unkinked; sleeping on the ground
exaggerated all the normal small morning stif fnesses. I
splashed cold water on my face,  swished it through my mouth,
drank from cupped hands, and splashed again, blood tingling
through my cheeks and fingers.
When I looked up, face dripping, I saw two deer drinking
from a pool on the other side, a little way upstream from me. I
stayed very still, not to disturb them, but they showed no alarm
at m y presence. In the shadow  of the birches, they were the
same so ft blue as the rocks and trees, little more than shadows
themselves, but each line of their bodies etched in perfect
delicacy , like a Japanese painting done in ink.
Then all  of a sud den, they were gone. I blinked, and blinked
again. I hadn’ t seen them turn or run—and in spite of their
ethereal beauty , I was sure I hadn’ t been imagining them; I
could see the dark imprints of their hooves in the mud of the
far bank. But they were gone.
I didn’ t see or hear a thing, but the hair rose suddenly on my
body , instinct rippling up arms a nd neck like electric current. I
froze, nothing moving but my eyes. Where was it, what was
it?
The sun was up; the tops of the t rees were visibly green, and
the rocks began to glow as their colors warmed to life. But the
birds were silent; nothing moved, save the water .
It w as no more  than six feet away from me, half visible
behind a bush. The sound of its lapping was lost in the noise of
the stre am. Then the broad h ead lifted, and a tufted ear
swiveled toward me, though I had made no noise. Could it
hear me breathing?
The sun had reached it, lit it into tawny life, glowed in gold
eyes that stared into mine with a preternatural calm. The
breeze had shifted; I could smell it now; a faint acrid cat-tang,
and the stronger scent of blood . Ignoring me, it lifted a dark-blotched paw and licked fastidiously , eyes slitted in hygienic
preoccupation.
It ru bbed the pa w several times over its ear , then stretched
luxuriously in the patch of new  sun—my God, it must be six
feet long!—and sauntered of f, full belly swaying.
I hadn’ t consciously been afraid; pure instinct had frozen
me in place, and  sheer amazement—at the cat’ s beauty , as well
as it s nearness—had kept me tha t way . W ith its going, though,
my central nervous system thawed out at once, and promptly
went to pieces. I didn’ t gibber , but did shake considerably; it
was several minutes before I ma naged to get of f my knees and
stand up.
My hands shook so that I dropp ed the kettle three times in
filling it. T rust him, he’d said, did I trust him? Y es, I did—and
a fa t lot of good that would d o, unless he happened to be
standing directly in front of me next time.
But for this time—I was alive. I stood still, eyes closed,
breathing in the pure morning air . I could feel every single
atom of my body , blood racing to carry round the sweet fresh
stuf f to every cell and muscle fiber . The sun touched my face,
and warmed the cold skin to a lovely glow .
I op ened my eye s to a dazzle of green and yellow and blue;
day had broken. All the birds were singing now .
I went up the path toward the clearing, resisting the impulse
to look behind me.
Jamie and Ian h ad felled several tall, slender pines the day
before, cut them into twelve-foot lengths, and rolled and
wrestled and tumbled the logs downhill. Now they lay stacked
at the edge of the small clearing, rough bark glistening black
with wet.
Jamie w as pacing out a line, stamping down the wet grass,
when I came back with the kettle filled with water . Ian had a
fire start ed on the top of a lar ge flat stone—he having learnedfrom Ja mie the canny trick o f keeping a handful of dry
kindling always in one’ s sporran, along with flint and steel.
“This will be a wee shed,” Jamie was saying, frowning at
the ground in concentration. “W e’ll build this first, for we can
sleep in it, if it should rain again, but it needna be so well built
as the cabin—it’ll give us something to practice on, eh, Ian?”
“What is it for— beyond practice?” I asked. He looked up
and smiled at me.
“Good morning, Sassenach. Did ye sleep well?”
“Of course not,” I said. “What’ s the shed for?”
“Meat,” he said. “W e’ll dig a shallow pit at the back, and fill
it wi ’ em bers, to  smoke what we  can for keeping. And make a
rack for  drying—Ian’ s seen the Indians do it, to make what
they call jerky . W e must have a safe place where beasts canna
get at our food.”
This see med a sound idea; particularly in view of the sort of
beasts in the area. My only  doubts were regarding the
smoking. I’d seen it done in Scotland, and knew that smoking
meat required a certain amount of attention; someone had to
be at hand to ke ep the fire from  burning too high or going out
altogether , had to turn the meat regularly , and baste it with fat
to avoid scorching and drying.
I had no dif ficul ty in seeing who  was going to be nominated
for this task. The  only trouble was that if I didn’ t manage to do
it right, we’d all die of ptomaine poisoning.
“Right,” I said, without enthusiasm. Jamie caught my tone
and grinned at me.
“That’ s the first shed, Sassenach,” he said. “The second
one’ s yours.”
“Mine?” I perked up a bit at that.
“For you r wee herbs and bits o f plants. They do take up a
bit o f room, as I recall.” He pointed across the clearing, the
light of builder ’ s mania in his eye. “And just there—that’ s
where the cabin will be; where we’ll live through the winter .”Rather to my surprise, they had  the walls of the first shed
erected by the end of the second day , crudely roofed with cut
branches until time should perm it the cutting of shingles for a
proper r oof. The walls were mad e of slender notched logs, still
with the  bark on, and with noticeable chinks and gaps between
them. Still, it was lar ge enough to sleep the three of us and
Rollo comfortab ly , and with a fire burning in a stone-lined pit
at one end, it was quite cozy inside.
Enough branche s had been removed from the roof to leave a
smoke hole; I co uld see the even ing stars, as I cuddled against
Jamie and listened to him criticize his workmanship.
“Look at that,” he said crossly , lifting his chin at the far
corner . “ I’ve go ne and laid in a crooked pole, and it’ s put the
whole of that line of f the straight.”
“I don’ t imagine the deer carcas ses will care,” I murmured.
“Here, let’ s see that hand.”
“And the rooftree’ s a good six inches lower at the one end
than the  other ,” he went on, ign oring me, but letting me have
his left hand. Both hands were smoothly callused, but I could
feel the new ro ughnesses of scrapes and cuts, and so many
small splinters that his palm was prickly to the touch.
“Y ou fee l like a porcupine,” I said, brushing my hand over
his finge rs. “Here, move closer to the fire, so I can see to pull
them out.”
He moved obligingly , crawling around Ian, who—freshly
de-splintered himself—had fallen asleep with his head
pillowed on Rollo’ s furry side. Unfortunately , the change of
position exposed new weaknesses of construction to Jamie’ s
critical eye.
“Y ou’ve never built a shed out of logs before, have you?” I
interrupted his denunciation of the doorway , neatly tweaking a
lar ge splinter out of his thumb with my tweezers.
“Ow! No, but—”
“And you built the bloody thing in two days, with nothing
but a felling ax and a knife, for God’ s sake! There’ s not a nailin it! Why ought you to expec t it to look like Buckingham
Palace?”
“I’ve n ever se en Buckingham Palace,” he said, rather
mildly . He paused. “I do take your point, though, Sassenach.”
“Good.” I bent closely over his palm, squinting to make out
the small dark streaks of splinters, trapped beneath the skin.
“I s uppose it w illna fall down, at least,” he said, after a
longer pause.
“Shouldn’ t think so.” I dabbed a cloth to the neck of the
brandy bottle, swabbed his hand with it, then turned my
attention to his right hand.
He didn’ t speak for a time. The fire crackled softly to itself,
flaring u p now and then as a draft reached in between the logs
to tickle it.
“The house is going to be on the high ridge,” he said
suddenly . “Where the strawberries grow .”
“W ill it?” I mu rmured. “The cabin, you mean? I thought
that was  going to be at the side of the clearing.” I’d taken out
as m any splinters as I could; those that were left were so
deeply embedde d that I would have to wait for them to work
their way nearer the surface.
“No, not the cabin. A fine house,” he said softly . He leaned
back ag ainst the rough logs, looking across the fire, out
through the chinks to the darkn ess beyond. “W i’ a staircase,
and glass windows.”
“That will be gr and.” I laid the tweezers back in their slot,
and closed the box.
“W i’ hig h ceilings, and a doorw ay high enough I shall never
bump my heid going in.”
“That will be lo vely .” I leaned back beside him, and rested
my head on his  shoulder . Somewhere in the far distance, a
wolf how led. R ollo lifted his h ead with a soft wuff!,  listened
for a moment, then lay down again with a sigh.“W ith a stillroom for you, and a study for me, lined with
shelves for my books.”
“Mmmm.” At the moment, he possessed one book— The
Natural History of North Car olina,  p ublish ed 1733 , brought
along as guide and reference.
The fire was bu rning low again, but neither of us moved to
add more wood. The embers would warm us through the night,
to be rekindled with the dawn.
Jamie put an arm around my shoulders, and tilting sideways,
took me  with him to lie curled together on the thick layer of
fallen leaves that was our couch.
“And a bed,” I said. “Y ou could build a bed, I expect?”
“As fine as any in Buckingham Palace,” he said.
Myers, bless his kindly heart and faithful nature, did return
within the month—bringing no t only three pack-mules laden
with tools, small furnishings, an d necessities such as salt, but
also Duncan Innes.
“Here?” Innes looked interestedly over the tiny homestead
that had begun t o take shape on the strawberry-covered ridge.
W e had two stu rdy sheds now , plus a split-railed penfold in
which to keep the horses and  any other stock we might
acquire.
At the moment,  our total stock  consisted of a small white
piglet, which Jamie had obtained from a Moravian settlement
thirty m iles awa y , exchanging for it a bag of sweet yams I had
gathered and a bundle of will ow-twig brooms I had made.
Rather t oo smal l for the penfol d, it had so far been living in
the shed  with us, where it had become fast friends with Rollo.
I wasn’ t quite so fond of it myself.
“A ye. It’ s decent land, with plenty of water; there are
springs in the wood, and the creek all through.”
Jamie g uided Duncan to a spot from which the western
slopes b elow the  ridge were visi ble; there were natural breaks,or “ coves” in th e forest, now over grown with tangles of wild
grass, but ultimately suitable for cultivation.
“D’ye s ee?” He  gestured over the slope, which ran down
gently from the ridge to a s mall bluf f, where a line of
sycamores marked the distant river ’ s edge. “There’ s room
there for  at least thirty homesteads, to start. W e’d need to clear
a de al of forest, but there’ s space enough to begin. Any crofter
worth his salt c ould feed his family from a garden plot, the
soil’ s so rich.”
Duncan had been a fisherman, not a farmer , but he nodded
obediently , eyes  fixed on the vista as Jamie peopled it with
future houses.
“I’ve pa ced it out,” Jamie was saying, “though it will have
to b e surveyed properly as so on as may be. But I’ve the
description of it in my head—d id ye by chance bring ink and
paper?”
“A ye, we did. And a few other things, as well.” Duncan
smiled at me, his long, rather melancholy face transformed by
the expression. “Miss Jo’ s se nt a feather bed, which she
thought might not come amiss.”
“A feath er bed? Really? How wonderful!” I immediately
dismissed any ungenerous thoughts I had ever harbored about
Jocasta Cameron. While Jamie had built us an excellent,
sturdy bedstead  framed in oakwood, with the bottom
ingeniously made of laced rope, I had had nothing to lay on it
save cedar branches, which w ere fragrant but unpleasantly
lumpy .
My thoughts of luxuriant wallowing were interrupted by the
emer gence from the woods of Ian and Myers, the latter with a
brace of squirrels hung from his belt. Ian proudly presented me
with an enormous black object, which on closer inspection
proved to be a turkey , fat from gor ging on the autumn grains.
“Boy’ s g ot a nice eye, Mrs. C laire,” said Myers, nodding
approvingly . “Those be wily birds, turkeys. Even the Indians
don’ t take ‘em easy .”It was early for Thanksgiving, but I was delighted with the
bird, which would be the first su bstantial item in our larder . So
was Jamie, though his pleasure  lay more in the thing’ s tail
feathers, which would provide him with a good supply of
quills.
“I must write to the Governor ,” he explained over dinner ,
“to say that I shall be taking up his of fer , and to give the
particulars of the land.” He picked up a chunk of cake and bit
into it absently .
“Do watch out f or nutshells,” I said, a little nervously . “Y ou
don’ t want to break a tooth.”
Dinner consisted of trout grilled over the fire, yams baked in
it, wild plums, and a very crude cake made of flour from
hickory nuts, ground up in my  mortar . W e had been living
mostly on fish and what edible vegetation I could scrounge,
Ian and Jamie having been too busy with the building to take
time to hunt. I rather hoped that Myers would see fit to stay for
a bit—long enough to bag a deer or some other nice lar ge
source of protein. A winter of dried fish seemed a little
daunting.
“Dinna fash, Sassenach,” Jamie murmured through a
mouthful of cake, and smiled at me. “It’ s good.” He turned his
attention to Duncan.
“When we’ve done with eating, Duncan, you’ll maybe walk
wi’ me to the river , and choose your place?”
Innes’ s face went blank, then flushed with a mixture of
pleasure and dismay .
“My pla ce? Land, ye mean, Mac Dubh? ” Involuntarily , he
hunched the shoulder on the side with the missing arm.
“A ye, la nd.” Jamie speared a hot yam with a sharpened
stick, and began to peel it ca refully with his fingers, not
looking at Innes. “I shall be ne eding you to act as my agent,
Duncan—if ye will. It’ s only r ight ye should be paid. Now ,
what I am thinking—if ye should find it fair , mind—is that I
shall make the claim for a homestead in your name, but as yewillna be here to work it, Ian and I will see to putting a bit of
your land to co rn, and to building a wee croft there. Then
come tim e, you shall have a place to settle, if ye like, and a bit
of corn put by . W ill that suit ye, do ye think?”
Duncan’ s face had been going through an array of emotions
as Jamie spoke, from dismay to amazement to a cautious sort
of excite ment. The last thing tha t would ever have occurred to
him was that he might own land. Penniless, and unable to
work w ith his hands, in Scotla nd he would have lived as a
beggar—if he had lived at all.
“Why—” he began, then stopp ed and swallowed, knobbly
Adam’ s apple bobbing. “A ye, Mac Dubh . That will suit fine.”
A sm all, incredulous smile had  formed on his face as Jamie
spoke, and stayed there, as though Duncan were unaware of it.
“Agent.” He swallowed again, and reached for one of the
bottles o f ale he had brought. “What will ye have me to do for
ye, Mac Dubh ?”
“The tw o things, Duncan, and ye will. First is to find me
settlers.” Jamie waved a hand at the beginnings of our new
cabin, which so far consisted entirely of a fieldstone
foundation, the framing of the floor , and a wide slab of dark
slate selected for the hearthstone, presently leaning against the
foundation.
“I canna  be leaving here just at present, myself. What I want
ye to do is to find as many as ye can of the men who were
transported from Ardsmuir . Th ey’ll have been scattered, but
they came through W ilmington ; a many of them will be in
North o r South Carolina. Find as many as ye can, tell them
what I’m about here—and bring  as many as are willing here in
the spring.”
Duncan was nodding slowly ,  lips pursed beneath his
drooping mustache. Few men wore such facial adornment, but
it suited him, making him look like a thin but benevolent
walrus.
“V erra well,” he said. “And the second?”Jamie glanced at me, then at Duncan.
“My aunt,” he sa id. “W ill ye undertake to help her , Duncan?
She’ s great need of an honest man, who can deal wi’ the naval
bastards and speak for her in business.”
Duncan had showed no hesitation in agreeing to comb
several hundred miles of colony in search of settlers for our
enterprise, but the notion of dealing with naval bastards struck
him with profound uneasiness.
“Business? But I dinna ken aught of—”
“Dinna fash,” Jamie said, smi ling at his friend, and the
adjuration work ed on Duncan a s well as it did on me; I could
see t he mounting uneasiness in D uncan’ s eyes begin to recede.
For roughly the ten-thousandth time, I wondered how he did it.
“It’ll be little trouble to ye,” Jamie said soothingly . “My
aunt ken s well enough what’ s to be done; she can tell ye what
to s ay and wha t to do—it’ s o nly she needs a man for the
saying a nd doin g of it. I shall write a letter to her , for ye to
take back, explaining that ye’ll be pleased to act for her .”
During the latter part of this conversation, Ian had been
digging about in the packs that had been unloaded from the
mules. Now he w ithdrew a flat piece of metal, and squinted at
it curiously .
“What’ s this?” he asked, of no one in particular . He held it
out for us to see; a flat piece of dark metal, pointed at one end
like a knife, with rudimentary crosspieces. It looked like a
small dirk that had been run over by a steamroller .
“Iron for your h earth.” Duncan reached for the piece, and
handed it, handle-first, to Jamie. “It was Miss Jo’ s thought.”
“W as it?  That was kind.” Jamie’ s face was weathered to
deep bronze by long days in the  open, but I saw the faint flush
of pink on the side of his neck. His thumb stroked the smooth
surface of the iron, and then he handed it to me.
“Keep it  safe, Sassenach,” he said. “W e’ll bless our hearth
before Duncan leaves.”I cou ld s ee that he was deeply to uched by the gift, but didn’ t
understand entirely why , until Ian had explained to me that one
buries iron beneath a new hearth, to ensure blessing and
prosperity on the house.
It was Jocasta’ s  blessing on our venture; her acceptance of
Jamie’ s decision—and for giveness for what must have seemed
his aban donment. It was more th an generosity , and I folded the
small pi ece of iron carefully int o my handkerchief, and put it
in my pocket for safekeeping.
W e blessed the hearth two days later , standing in the wall-less
cabin. Myers had removed his hat, from respect, and Ian had
washed his face. Rollo was p resent, too, as was the small
white pig, who was required to attend as the personification of
our “flocks,” despite her object ions; the pig saw no point in
being removed from her meal of acorns to participate in a
ritual so notably lacking in food.
Ignoring piercin g pig-screams of annoyance, Jamie held the
small iron knife upright by its tip, so that it formed a cross, and
said quietly ,
“God, bless the world and all that is ther ein.
 God, bless my spouse and my childr en,
 God, bless the eye that is in my head,
 And bless, God, the handling of my hand,
 What time I rise in the morning early ,
 What time I lie down late in bed,
 Bless my rising in the morning early ,
 And my lying down late in bed.”
He r eached out and touched firs t me, then Ian—and with a
grin, Rollo and the pig—with the iron, before going on:
“God, pr otect the house, and the household,
 God, consecrate the childr en of the mother hood,
 God, encompass the flocks and the young,
 Be Thou after them and tending them,
 What time the flocks ascend hill and wold,
 What time I lie down to sleep.
 What time the flocks ascend hill and wold,
 What time I lie down in peace to sleep.
“Let the fir e of thy blessing burn for ever upon us, O
God.”
He knelt then by the hearth and placed the iron into the
small hole dug for it, covered it over , and tamped the dirt flat.
Then he  and I took the ends of the big hearthstone, and laid it
carefully into place.
I sho uld have fe lt quite ridiculous, standing in a house with
no walls, attended by a wol f and a pig, surrounded by
wilderness and mocked by mockingbirds, engaged in a ritual
more than half pagan. I didn’ t.
Jamie st ood in front of the new hearth, stretched out a hand
to me, and drew  me to stand by the hearthstone beside him.
Looking down at the slate before us, I suddenly thought of the
abandoned homestead we had found on our journey north; the
fallen timbers of the roof, and the cracked hearthstone, from
which a hollybu sh had sprouted. Had the unknown founders of
that place thought to bless their hearth—and failed anyway?
Jamie’ s hand tightened on mine, in unconscious reassurance.
On a flat rock outside the cabin, Duncan kindled a small
fire, My ers hold ing the steel for  him to strike. Once begun, the
fire was coaxed into brightnes s, and a brand taken from it.
Duncan held this in his one han d, and walked sunwise around
the cabin’ s foundation, chan ting in loud Gaelic. Jamie
translated for me as he sang:
“The safeguar d of Fionn mac Cumhall be yours,
 The safeguar d of Cormac the shapely be yours,
 The safeguar d of Conn and Cumhall be yours,
 Fr om wolf and fr om bir d-flock
 Fr om wolf and fr om bir d-flock.”
He paus ed in his chanting as h e came to each point of the
compass, and bowing to the “fo ur airts,” swept his brand in a
blazing arc before him. Rollo, plainly disapproving of thesepyromaniac goings-on, growled deep in his throat, but was
firmly shushed by Ian.
“The shield of the King of Fiann be yours,
 The shield of the king of the sun be yours,
 The shield of the king of the stars be yours,
 In jeopar dy and distr ess
 In jeopar dy and distr ess.”
There w ere a good many verses; Duncan circled the house
three tim es. It was only as he reached the final point, next to
the f reshly laid hearthstone, tha t I realized Jamie had laid out
the c abin so tha t the hearth lay to the north; the morning sun
fell warm on my  left shoulder and threw our mingled shadows
to the west.
“The sheltering of the king of kings be yours,
 The sheltering of Jesus Christ be yours,
 The sheltering of the spirit of Healing be yours,
 Fr om evil deed and quarr el,
 Fr om evil dog and r ed dog.”
W ith a look dow n his nose at Rollo, Duncan stopped by the
hearth, and gave the brand to Jamie, who stooped in turn and
set alight the waiting pile of kindling. Ian gave a Gaelic whoop
as the flame blazed up, and there was general applause.
Later , we saw Duncan and Myers of f. They were bound not for
Cross C reek but, rather , for Mou nt Helicon, where the Scots of
the region held a yearly Gath ering in the autumn, to give
thanks for successful harvests, to exchange news and transact
business, to celebrate marriages and christenings, to keep the
far -flung elements of clan and family in touch.
Jocasta and her household would be there; so would
Farquard Campbell and Andrew MacNeill. It was the best
place for Duncan to begin his ta sk of finding the scattered men
of Ardsm uir; Mount Helicon was the lar gest of the Gatherings;
Scots would come there from a s far away as South Carolina
and V ir ginia.“I shall be here come spring, Mac Dubh, ” Duncan promised
Jamie as  he mounted. “W ith as many men as I can fetch to ye.
And I shall hand on your letters without fail.” He patted the
pouch by  his saddle, and tugged his hat down to shade his eyes
from the rich September sun. “ W ill ye have a word for your
aunt?”
Jamie paused for a moment, thinking. He had written to
Jocasta already; was there anything to add?
“T ell my  aunt I shall not see her at the Gathering this year ,
or perha ps at the next. But the one after that, I shall be there
without fail—and my people with me. Godspeed, Duncan!”
He slapp ed Duncan’ s horse on the rump, and stood by me
waving as the two horses dropped over the edge of the ridge
and out of sigh t. The parting gave me an odd feeling of
desolation; Duncan was our last and only link with
civilization. Now we were truly alone.
W ell, not quite alone, I amen ded. W e had Ian. T o say
nothing of Rollo, the pig, three horses, and two mules that
Duncan had left us, to manage  the spring plowing. Quite a
little establishment, in fact. My spirits rose in contemplation;
within the month, the cabin would be finished, and we would
have a solid roof over our heads. And then—
“Bad news, Auntie,” said Ian’ s voice in my ear . “The pig’ s
eaten the rest of your nutmeal.”2 0
T H E  W H I T E  R A V E N
October 1767
B ody , soul, and m ind,’ ” Jamie sa id, translating as he bent to
seize the end of another trim med log. ” ‘The body for
sensation, the soul for the spr ings of action, the mind for
principles. Y et the capacity for sensation belongs also to the
stalled ox; there is no wild beast or degenerate but obeys the
twitchings of impulse; and even men who deny the gods, or
betray their country , or ’—careful, man!”
Ian, thus warned, stepped neatly backward over the ax
handle, and turned to the left, steering his end of the burden
carefully round the corner of the half-built log wall.
” ‘—or perpetrate all manner of villainy behind locked
doors, have minds to guide them to the clear path of duty ,’ ”
Jamie resumed Marcus Aurelius’ s Meditations . ” ‘Seeing
then’—step up. A ye, good, that’ s got it—’ seeing then that all
else is in common heritage of su ch types, the good man’ s only
singularity lies in his approving welcome to every experience
the looms of fate may weave for him, his refusal to soil the
divinity seated in his breast or perturb it with disorderly
impressions…’ All right now , one, and two, and… er gh !”
His face  went scarlet with ef for t as they reached the proper
position and, in concert, hoisted the squared log to shoulder
height. T oo occupied to go on w ith the meditations of Marcus
Aurelius, Jamie  directed his ne phew’ s movements with jerks
of the head and breathless one-word commands, as they
maneuvered the  unwieldy chunk of wood into the notches of
the cross-pieces below it.
“Och, th e twitchings of impulse, is it?” Ian shouldered a
lock of hair out of his sweating face. “I feel a wee twitch in the
direction of my wame. Is that degenerate, then?”“I believ e that would be an acc eptable bodily sensation at
this time o’ da y ,” Jamie allowed, grunting slightly as they
maneuvered the  log the last inch into place. “A bit to the left,
Ian.”
The log dropped into its notch es, and both men stepped
back with a shared sigh of relieved accomplishment. Ian
grinned at his uncle.
“Meanin’ ye’re hungry yourself, aye?”
Jamie grinned back, but before he could reply , Rollo lifted
his head, ears p erking, and a lo w growl rumbled in his chest.
Seeing t his, Ian turned his head to look, and stopped in the act
of mopping his face with his shirttail.
“Here’ s company , Uncle,” he said, nodding toward the
forest. Jamie stif fened. Before he could turn or reach for a
weapon, though , I had made out what Rollo and Ian had seen
among the shifting leaf-light.
“Not to worry ,” I said, amused. “It’ s your erstwhile drinking
companion—dressed for visiting. A little something the looms
of fate have woven for your approving welcome, I expect.”
Nacognaweto waited politely in the shade of the chestnut
grove until he w as sure we had  seen him. Then he advanced
slowly o ut of the forest, followed this time not by his sons but
by t hree women, two of them c arrying lar ge bundles on their
backs.
One was  a young girl, no more  than thirteen or so, and the
second, in her thirties, plainly  the girl’ s mother . The third
woman who accompanied them was much older—not the
grandmother , I thought, seeing h er bent form and white hair—
perhaps the great-grandmother .
They had indeed come dressed for visiting; Nacognaweto
was bare-legged, with leather buskins on his feet, but he wore
muslin b reeches, loose at the knee, and a shirt of dyed pink
linen over them, belted splendidly with a girdle studded with
porcupine quills and bits of white and lavender shell. Over it
all h e had a leather vest with be aded trim, and a sort of looseturban in  blue calico over his unbound hair , with two crow’ s
feathers dangling down beside one ear . Jewelry of shell and
silver—an earring, several necklaces, a belt buckle and small
ornaments tied to his hair—completed the picture.
The women were somewhat less gor geously arrayed, but
still plai nly in their Sunday be st, in long loose dresses that
reached their knees, soft boots and leather leggings showing
beneath. They were girdled with deer -leather aprons decorated
with painted patterns, and the two younger women wore
ornamental vests as well. They advanced in single file,
halfway across the clearing, then stopped.
“My God,” Jamie murmured, “it’ s an ambassage.” He wiped
a sleeve across his face, and nudged Ian in the ribs. “Make my
curtsies, Ian; I’ll be back.”
Ian, looking a trifle bewildered, advanced to meet the
Indians, waving a lar ge hand in a ceremonial gesture of
welcome. Jamie  grabbed me by the arm and hustled me round
the corner , into the half-built house.
“What—” I began, bewildered.
“Get dre ssed,” he interrupted, shoving the clothes box in my
direction. “Put on your gaudie st things, aye? It wouldna be
respectful, else.”
“Gaudy” was going a bit far in  the description of any item
of m y current w ardrobe, but I did my best, hastily tying a
yellow l inen skirt around my waist and replacing my plain
white kerchief with one Jocasta had sent me, embroidered with
cherries. I thought that would do—after all, it was obviously
the males of the species who were on display here.
Jamie, having flung of f his breeks and belted his crimson
plaid in record time, fastened it with a small bronze brooch,
snatched a bottle out from under the bedframe, and was out
through the open side of the house before I had finished
tidying my hair . Giving up that attempt as a lost cause, I
hurried out after him.The women watched me with th e same fascination I had for
them, but they hung back as Jamie and Nacognaweto
conducted the necessary greetings involving the ceremonial
pouring and sharing of the bran dy , Ian being included in this
ritual. Only then did the seco nd woman come forward at
Nacognaweto’ s gesture, ducking her head in shy
acknowledgment.
“Bonjour , messieurs, madame,”  she said softly , looking
from on e to another of us. Her eyes rested on me with frank
curiosity , taking  in every detail of my appearance, so I felt no
compunction in staring at her , likewise. Mixed blood, I
thought, perhaps French?
“Je suis sa femme,”  she said, with a graceful inclination of
her head toward Nacognaweto, the words verifying my guess
as to her heritage. “Je m’appelle Gabrielle.”
“Um… je m’appelle Clair e, ” I said , with a slightly less
graceful gesture at myself. “ S’il vous plait …” I waved at the
pile of waiting l ogs, inviting them to sit down, while mentally
wondering whether there was enough of the squirrel stew to go
round.
Jamie, m eanwhile, was eyeing Nacognaweto with a mixture
of amusement and irritation.
“Oh, ‘n o Franch,’ is it?” he said. “Not a word, I dinna
suppose!” The Indian gave him a look of profound blandness,
and nodded to his wife to continue with the introductions.
The elder lady was Nayawenne, not Gabrielle’ s
grandmother as I had thought but, rather Nacognaweto’ s. This
lady was light-boned, thin, and bent with rheumatism, but
bright-eyed as the sparrow she so strongly resembled. She
wore a small lea ther bag tied round her neck, ornamented with
a rough  green stone pierced through for stringing, and the
spotted tail feathers of a wood pecker . She had a lar ger bag,
this one of cloth, tied at her wa ist. She saw me looking at the
green stains on the rough cloth, and smiled, showing two
prominent yellow front teeth.The girl was, as I had surmised, Gabrielle’ s daughter—but
not, I thought, Nacognaweto’ s; she had no resemblance to him,
and behaved shyly toward him. Her rather incongruous name
was Berthe, and the ef fects of mixed blood were even more
apparent in her t han in her moth er; her hair was dark and silky ,
but a deep brown rather than ebony , and her round face was
ruddy , w ith the fresh complexion of a European, though her
eyes had the Indian’ s epicanthic fold.
Once the of ficial introductions were over , Nacognaweto
motioned to Berthe, who obediently brought out the lar ge
bundle she had carried, and opened it at my feet, displaying a
lar ge ba sket of orange and green-striped squash, a string of
dried fis h, a smaller basket of y ams, and a huge pile of Indian
corn, shucked and dried on the cob.
“My God,” I murmured. “The return of Squanto!”
Everyone gave me a blank look, and I hastened to smile and
make exclamations—thoroughly heartfelt—of joy and
pleasure over the gifts. It might  not get us through the whole
winter , b ut it was enough to aug ment our diet for a good two
months.
Nacognaweto ex plained throug h Gabrielle that this was a
small and insignificant return for Jamie’ s gift of the bear ,
which had been received with delight by his village, where
Jamie’ s courageous exploit (here the women cut their eyes at
me and tittered, having evidently heard all about the episode of
the fish) had been the subject of great talk and admiration.
Jamie, thoroughly accustomed to this sort of diplomatic
exchange, mode stly disclaimed  any pretention to prowess,
dismissing the encounter as the merest accident.
While Gabrielle was employed in translation, the old lady
ignored the mutual compliments, and sidled crabwise over to
me. W ithout the least sense of of fense, she patted me
familiarly all over , fingering my clothes and lifting the hem of
my dre ss to examine my shoes, keeping up a running
commentary to herself in a soft, hoarse murmur .The mu rmur grew louder and took on a tone of
astonishment when she got to m y hair . I obligingly took out
the pins and shook it down over my shoulders. She pulled out
a cu rl, drew it taut, then let it spring back, and laughed like a
drain.
The men  glanced in our direct ion, but by this time Jamie
had moved on to showing Nacognaweto the construction of
the h ouse. The c himney was complete, built of fieldstone like
the f oundation, and the floor had  been laid, but the walls, built
of solid squared logs each some eight inches in diameter , rose
only shoulder -high. Jamie was ur ging Ian to a demonstration
of the debarking  of logs, in which he chopped his way steadily
backward as he walked along the top of the log, narrowly
missing his toes with each stroke.
This form of male conversation requiring no translation,
Gabrielle was left free to come and chat with me; though her
French was peculiarly accented and full of strange idioms, we
had no trouble understanding each other .
In f airly short order , I discove red that Gabrielle was the
daughter of a French fur trader and a Huron woman, and the
second wife of Nacognaweto, who in turn was her second
husband—the fi rst, Berthe’ s father , had been a Frenchman,
killed in the French and Indian W ar ten years before.
They liv ed in a v illage called Anna Ooka (I bit the inside of
my c heek to keep a straight face; no doubt “New Bern” would
have sounded peculiar to them) , some two days travel to the
northwest—Gabrielle indicated the direction with a graceful
inclination of her head.
While I talked with Gabrielle and Berthe, augmenting the
conversation by means of hand-waving, I slowly became
conscious that another sort of communication was taking
place, with the old lady .
She said nothing to me directly—though she murmured now
and then  to Berthe, plainly demanding to know what I had said
—but h er bright dark eyes sta yed fixed on me, and I was
peculiarly aware of her regard. I had the odd feeling that shewas talking to me—and I to her—without the exchange of a
single spoken word.
I saw Jamie, across the clearing, of fering Nacognaweto the
rest of the bottle of brandy; clearly it was time to of fer gifts in
return. I gave Gabrielle the embroidered kerchief, and Berthe,
a hairpin ornamented with paste brilliants, over which gifts
they exclaimed in pleasure. For Nayawenne, though, I had
something dif ferent.
I h ad been fortu nate enough to f ind four lar ge ginseng roots
the week before. I fetched all four from my medicine chest and
pressed them into her hands, smiling. She looked back at me,
then grin ned, and untying the cloth bag from her belt, thrust it
at me. I didn’ t have to open it; I could feel the four long,
lumpy shapes through the cloth.
I la ughed in re turn; yes, we definitely spoke the same
language!
Moved by curiosity , and by an impulse that I couldn’ t
describe, I asked Gabrielle about the old lady’ s amulet, hoping
that this wasn’ t an insuf ferable breach of good manners.
“Grandmer e est…”  Sh e hesitated, looking for the right
French word, but I already knew .
“Pas docteur ,”  I said, “et pas sor cier e, magicienne. Elle
est…”  I  hesitated too; there really was n’ t a suitable word for it
in French, after all.
“W e say she is a singer ,” Berthe put in shyly , in French.
“W e cal l it shaman;  h er name, it means ‘It may be; it will
happen.’ “
The old lady said something, nodding at me, and the two
younger women  looked startled. Nayawenne bent her head,
slipped t he thon g of f her neck, and placed the little bag in my
hand.
It was so heavy that my wrist s agged, and I nearly dropped
it. Aston ished, I  closed my hand  over it. The worn leather was
warm from her body , the rounded contours fitting smoothlyinto my  palm. For just a moment, I had the remarkable
impression that something in the bag was alive.
My face  must have shown my startlement, for the old lady
doubled up laughing. She held out her hand and I gave her
back the amulet, with a fair amount of haste. Gabrielle
conveyed politely that her husband’ s grandmother would be
pleased to show me the useful  plants that grew nearby , if I
would like to walk with her?
I a ccept ed this invitation with a lacrity , and the old lady set
of f up the path  with a sure-footed spryness that belied her
years. I watched her feet, tiny in soft leather boots, and hoped
that when I was her age, I might be capable of walking for two
days through the woods, and then wanting to go exploring.
W e wandered along the stream for some way , followed at a
respectful distance by Gabrielle and Berthe, who came up
beside us only if summoned to interpret.
“Each of the pl ants holds the cure to a sickness,” the old
lady explained through Gabriel le. She plucked a twig from a
bush by  the path and handed it to me with a wry look. “If we
only knew what they all were!”
For the most p art, we managed fairly well by means of
gesture, but when we reached t he big pool where Jamie and
Ian fished trout, Nayawenne stopped and waved, bringing
Gabrielle to us again. She said something to the woman, who
turned to me, a faint look of surprise on her face.
“My husband’ s grandmother says that she had a dream
about you, on the night of the full moon, two moons ago.”
“About me?”
Gabrielle nodded. Nayawenne put a hand on my arm and
looked u p intent ly into my face,  as though to see the impact of
Gabrielle’ s words.
“She tol d us about the dream; that she had seen a woman
with—” Her lips twitched,  then hastily straightened
themselves, and she delicately touched the ends of her own
long, str aight hair . “Three days later , my husband and his sonsreturned, to tell of meeting yo u and the Bear Killer in the
forest.”
Berthe w as watc hing me with f rank interest, too, twining a
lock of her own  dark-brown hair around the end of an index
finger .
“She wh o heals  said at once that she must see you, and so
when we heard that you were here…”
That gav e me a small start; I had had no sensation of being
watched, and yet plainly someone had taken note of our
presence on the mountain, and conveyed the news to
Nacognaweto.
Impatient with these irrelevancies, Nayawenne poked her
granddaughter -in-law and said s omething, then pointed firmly
at the water by our feet.
“My husband’ s grandmother says that when she dreamed of
you, it was here. ” Gabrielle gestured over the pool, and looked
back at me with great seriousness.
“She met you h ere, at night. The moon was in the water .
Y ou became a white raven; y ou flew over the water and
swallowed the moon.”
“Oh?” I  hoped this wasn’ t a sinister thing for me to have
done.
“The wh ite rave n flew back, an d laid an egg in the palm of
her hand . The egg split open, and there was a shining stone
inside. My husband’ s grandmother knew this was great magic,
that the stone could heal sickness.”
Nayawenne nodded her head several times, and taking the
amulet bag from her neck, reached into it.
“On the day after the dream, my husband’ s grandmother
went to dig kinnea  root, and on the way , she saw something
blue, sticking in the clay of the riverbank.”
Nayawenne drew  out a small, lumpy object, and dropped it
into my  hand. It was a pebble; rough, but undeniably agemstone. Bits of stony matrix clung to it, but the heart of the
rock was a deep, soft blue.
“My goodness—it’ s a sapphire, isn’ t it?”
“Sapphire?” Gabrielle turned the word over in her mouth,
tasting it. “W e c all it…” She hesitated, looking for the proper
French translation. “…pierr e sans peur .”
“Pierr e sans peur?”  A fearless stone?
Nayawenne nodded, talking again. Berthe butted in with the
translation, before her mother could speak.
“My father ’ s grandmother says  a stone like this, it keeps
people from being afraid, and so  it makes their spirit strong, so
they wil l be healed more easily .  Already , this stone has healed
two peo ple of fever , and cured a soreness of the eyes that my
younger brother had.”
“My husband’ s grandmother wishes to thank you for this
gift.” Gabrielle neatly took back the conversation.
“Ah…do tell her she’ s quite welcome.” I nodded cordially
at the old lady , a nd gave her bac k the blue stone. She popped it
into the bag and drew the string  tight about its neck. Then she
peered c losely at me, and reach ing out, drew down a curl of
my hair , talking as she rubbed the lock between her fingers.
“My husband’ s grandmother sa ys that you have medicine
now , but you will have more. When your hair is white like
hers, that is when you will find your full power .”
The old lady dropped the lock of hair , and looked into my
eyes for  a moment. I thought I saw an expression of great
sadness in the fa ded depths, and reached involuntarily to touch
her .
She stepped back and said something else. Gabrielle looked
at me queerly .
“She says you must not be troubled; sickness is sent from
the gods. It won’ t be your fault.”I looked  at Nayawenne, startled, but she had already turned
away .
“What won’ t be my fault?” I asked, but the old lady refused
to say more.2 1
N I G H T  O N  A  S N O W Y  M O U N T A I N
December 1767
T he w inter held o f f for some tim e, but snow began to fall in
the nigh t on November 28, an d we woke to find the world
transformed. Every needle on the great blue spruce behind the
cabin was frosted, and ragged f ringes of ice dripped from the
tangle of wild raspberry canes.
The sno w wasn’ t deep, but its coming changed the shape of
daily life. I no longer foraged during the day , save for short
trips to the stre am for water , and for lingering bits of green
cress salvaged from the icy slush along the banks. Jamie and
Ian ceased their work of log felling and field clearing, and
turned to  roof shingling. The winter drew in on us, and we in
turn withdrew from the cold, turning inward.
W e had no candles; only greas e lamps and rushlights, and
the ligh t of the fire that burned constantly on the hearth,
blackening the roof beams. W e t herefore rose at first light, and
lay dow n after supper , in the sa me rhythm as the creatures of
the forest around us.
W e had no sheep yet, and thus no wool to card or spin, no
cloth to weave or dye. W e had  no beehives yet, and thus no
wax to boil, no candles to dip. There was no stock to care for ,
save the horses and mules an d the piglet, who had grown
considerably in both size and irascibility , and in consequence
been exi led to a private compartment in the corner of the crude
stable Ja mie had built—this itself no more than a lar ge open-
fronted shelter with a branch-covered roof.
Myers had brought a small but useful selection of tools, the
iron parts clanking in a bag, to be supplied with wooden
handles from the forest close at hand: a barking ax and another
felling ax, a plo wshare for the spring planting, augers, planes
and chis els, a small grass scythe , two hammers and a handsaw ,
a pe culiar thing called a “twi bil” that Jamie said was forcutting mortises, a “drawknife”— a curved blade with handles
at either end, used to smooth and taper wood—two small sharp
knives, a hatchet-adze, something that looked like a medieval
torture device but was really a nail-header , and a froe for
splitting shingles.
Between them, Jamie and Ian had succeeded in getting a
roof on the cabin before snow fell, but the sheds were less
important. A block of wood sat constantly by the fire, the froe
stuck th rough it, ready for any one with an idle moment to
strike of f a few m ore shingles. That corner of the hearth was in
fact dev oted to wood carving; Ian had made a rough but
serviceable stool, which sat under one of the windows for
good light, and the shavings co uld all be tossed thriftily into
the fire, which burned day and night.
Myers had brought a few woman’ s tools for me, as well: a
huge sewing basket, well supplied with needles, pins, scissors,
and balls of thr ead, and lengths of linen, muslin, and woven
wool. While sewing was not m y favorite occupation, I was
nonetheless delighted to see these, since owing to Jamie and
Ian’ s constantly lurching through thickets and crawling about
on t he roofs, th e knees, elbows, and shoulders of all their
garments were in constant disrepair .
“Another one!” Jamie sat bolt upright in bed beside me.
“Another what? ” I asked sleepi ly , opening one eye. It was
very dark in the cabin, the fire burnt to coals on the hearth.
“Another bloody leak! It hit m e in the ear , damn it!” He
sprang out of b ed, went to the fire and thrust in a stick of
wood. O nce it was alight, he br ought it back and stood on the
bedstead, thrusting his torch upward as he glowered at the roof
in search of the fiendish leak.
“Urmg?” Ian, who slept on a low trundle bed, rolled over
and groa ned inq uiringly . Rollo, who insisted on sharing it with
him, emitted a brief “uff,”  relapsed into a heap of gray fur , and
resumed his loud snoring.“A leak,” I told Ian, keeping a n arrow eye on Jamie’ s torch.
I wa sn’ t having my precious f eather bed set alight by stray
sparks.
“Oh.” Ia n lay with an arm across his face. “Has it snowed
again?”
“It must  have.” The windows were covered with squares of
oiled de erhide, tacked down, and there was no sound from
outside, but the air had the peculiar muf fled quality that came
with snow .
Snow came silently , and mounded on the roof, then,
beginning to melt from the warm th of the shingles underneath,
would drip down the slope of the roof, to leave a gleaming
portcullis of icicles along the eav es. Now and then, though, the
roaming water found a split in a shingle, or a join where the
overlapping edges had warped, and drips poked their icy
fingers through the roof.
Jamie re garded a ll such intrusions as a personal af front, and
brooked no delay in dealing with them.
“Look!” he exclaimed. “There it is. See it?”
I s hifted my gla ssy gaze from the hairy ankles in front of
my nose, to the  roof overhead. Sure enough, the torchlight
revealed the black line of a split in one shingle, with a
spreading dark patch of damp ness on the underside. As I
watched, a clear drop formed, g listening red in the torchlight,
and fell with a plop onto the pillow beside me.
“W e could shift the bed a bit,” I suggested, though with no
particular hope. I had been through this before. All suggestions
that rep air work could wait till daylight were met with
astonished refusal; no proper man, I was given to understand,
would countenance such a thing.
Jamie stepped down of f the bedstead and prodded Ian in the
ribs with his foot.
“Get up and knock at the spot where the split is, Ian. I’ll
deal with it on the outside.” Seizing a fresh shingle, a hammer ,
a hatchet, and a bag of nails, he headed for the door .“Don’ t you go up on the roof in that!” I exclaimed, sitting
up abruptly . “That’ s your good woolen shirt!”
He halted by th e door , glared b riefly at me, then, with the
rebuking expression of an early Christian martyr , laid down
his tools , stripped of f the shirt, dropped it on the floor , picked
up the tools, and  strode majestically out to deal with the leak,
buttocks clenched with determined zeal.
I rubbed a han d over my sleep-puf fed face and moaned
softly to myself.
“He’ll be all ri ght, Auntie,” Ian assured me. He yawned
widely , not bothering to cover his mouth, and reluctantly
rolled out of his own warm bed.
Thumps on the r oof that were de finitely not the feet of eight
tiny reindeer announced that Jamie was in place. I rolled out of
the way and got up, resigned, as  Ian mounted the bedstead and
jabbed a stick of  firewood upward into the damp patch, jarring
the shingles enough for Jamie to locate the leak on the outside.
A short  period of rending and banging followed, as the
defective shingle was yanked loose and replaced, and the leak
was summarily extinguished, leaving no more evidence of its
existence than the small heap  of snow that had fallen in
through the hole left by the removed shingle.
Back in bed, Ja mie curled his freezing body around me,
clasped me to h is icy bosom, an d fell promptly asleep, full of
the righteous satisfaction of a m an who has defended hearth
and home against all threat.
It was a fragile and tenuous fo othold that we had upon the
mountain—but a foothold, for all that. W e had not much meat
—there had been little time for  hunting, beyond squirrel and
rabbit, and those useful rodents  had gone to their winter rest
by n ow—but a fair amount of d ried vegetables, from yams to
squash t o wild onions and garlic, plus a bushel or two of nuts,
and the small stock of herbs I had managed to gather and dry .
It made for a sparse diet, but with careful management, we
could survive till spring.W ith few  chores  to do outside, there was time to talk, to tell
stories, and to dream. Between the useful objects like spoons
and bowls, Jamie took time to carve the pieces of a wooden
chess se t, and spent a good dea l of his time trying to inveigle
me or Ian into playing with him.
Ian and Rollo, who both suf fer ed badly from cabin fever ,
took to visiting Anna Ooka frequently , sometimes going on
extended hunting trips with young men from the village, who
were pleased to have the benefit of his and Rollo’ s company .
“The lad  speaks the Indian tongue a great deal better than he
does Greek or Latin,” Jamie observed with some dourness,
watching Ian exchanging cordial insults with an Indian
companion as they left on one such excursion.
“W ell, if Marcus Aurelius h ad written about tracking
porcupines, I expect he’d have found a more eager audience,”
I replied soothingly .
Dearly a s I loved Ian, I was myself not displeased by his
frequent absence. There were definitely times when three was
a crowd.
There is nothing more delightful in life than a feather bed
and an open fire —except a feather bed with a warm and tender
lover in  it. When Ian was gone, we would not trouble with
rushlights but would go to bed  with the dark, and lie curled
together in shared warmth, talking late into the night, laughing
and telling stories, sharing our p asts, planning our future, and
somewhere in the midst of the  talking, pausing to enjoy the
wordless pleasures of the present.
“T ell m e about Brianna.” These were Jamie’ s favorite
stories; the tales of Brianna as a child. What she had said and
worn and done; how she had lo oked, all her accomplishments
and her tastes.
“Did I tell you about the time I was invited to her school, to
talk about being a doctor?”
“No.” He shifted to make himself more comfortable, rolling
onto his  side and fitting himse lf to my shape behind. “Whyshould you do that?”
“It was what they called Career Day; the schoolteachers
invited a  lot of people with dif ferent jobs to come and explain
what the y did, so the children w ould have some idea of what a
lawyer does, for instance, or a firefighter—”
“I should think that one would be fairly obvious.”
“Hush. Or a veterinarian—that’ s a doctor who treats animals
—or a dentist, th at’ s a special doctor who deals only with teeth
—”
“W ith teeth ? What can ye do to a tooth, besides pull it?”
“Y ou’d b e surprised.” I brushed the hair out of my face and
up o f f my neck . “Anyway , they’d always ask me to come,
because it wasn’ t at all common for a woman to be a doctor
then.”
“Y e think it’ s common now ?” H e la ughed, a nd I kicked him
lightly in the shin.
“W ell, it  got more common rather soon after that. But at the
time, it wasn’ t. And when I’d got done speaking and asked if
there were any q uestions, an obnoxious little boy piped up and
said that his  mother said women who worked were no better
than pro stitutes, and they ought to be home minding their
families, instead of taking jobs away from men.”
“I shouldna think his mother can have met many
prostitutes.”
“No, I don’ t imagine. Nor all that many women with jobs,
either . B ut when  he said that, Brianna stood up and said in a
very loud voice, ‘W ell, you’d better be glad my mama’ s a
doctor , b ecause you’re going to need  one !’ Then she  hit him
on the head with her arithmetic book, and when he lost his
balance and fell down, she j umped on his stomach and
punched him in the mouth.”
I co uld feel his chest and stomach quivering against my
back.“Oh, braw lassie! Did the schoo lmaster not tawse her for it,
though?”
“They d on’ t beat children in school. She had to write a letter
of apology to the little beast, but then, he had to write one to
mem,  and she thought that was a fair exchange. The more
embarrassing pa rt was that it turned out his father was a doctor
too; one of my colleagues at the hospital.”
“I wouldna suppose you’d taken a job he’d wanted?”
“How did you guess?”
“Mmm.” His breath was warm and ticklish on the back of
my neck. I reached back and stroked the length of a long, hairy
thigh, enjoying the hollow and swell of the muscle.
“Y e said she was at a university , and studying history , like
Frank Randall. Did she never want to be a doctor , like you?” A
lar ge hand cupped my bottom and began to knead it gently .
“Oh, she  did when she was littl e—I used to take her to the
hospital now and then, and sh e was fascinated by all the
equipment; she loved to play with my stethoscope and the
otoscope—a thing you look in ears with—but then she
changed her mind. She changed  it a dozen times, at least; most
children do.”
“They d o?” This was a novel thought to him. Most children
of the time woul d simply adopt the professions of their parents
—or perhaps be apprenticed to learn one chosen for them.
“Oh, yes. Let me see…she wanted to be a ballerina for a
while, li ke most  little girls. That ’ s a dancer who dances on her
toes,” I explained, and he lau ghed in surprise. “Then she
wanted to be a garbageman—that was after our garbageman
gave her  a ride in his truck—an d then a deep-sea diver , and a
mailman, and—”
“What in God’ s name is a deep-sea diver? Let alone a
garbageman?”
By the time I had finished a brief catalog of twentieth-
century occupations, we were facing each other , our legstwined comfortably together , and I was admiring the way his
nipple stif fened to a tiny bump under the ball of my thumb.
“I never  was sure whether she really wanted to read history ,
or w hether she d id it mostly to please Frank. She loved him so
much—and he was so proud of her .” I paused, thinking, as his
hand played down the length of my back.
“She started taking history classes at the university when
she was still in h igh school—I told you how the school system
works? And then when Frank died…I rather think she went
ahead w ith histo ry because she thought he would have wanted
it.”
“That’ s loyal.”
“Y es.” I ran my hand up through his hair , feeling the solid,
rounded bones of his skull, an d his scalp under my fingers.
“Can’ t think where she got that particular trait from.”
He snorted briefly and gathered me closer .
“Can’ t you?” W ithout waiting fo r an answer , he went on, “If
she goes on wi’ the history—d’ye think she’ll find us? W ritten
down somewhere, I mean.”
The thought had honestly not occurred to me, and for a
moment I lay q uite still. Then I stretched a bit, and laid my
head on his shoulder with a  small laugh, not altogether
humorous.
“I sh ouldn’ t think so. Not unles s we were to do something
newsworthy .” I gestured vaguely toward the cabin wall, and
the e ndless wilderness outside. “ Not much chance of that here,
I do n’ t imagine. And she’d have  to be deliberately looking, in
any case.”
“W ould she?”
I was silent for a moment, breathing the musky , deep scent
of him.
“I h ope not,” I said quietly , at last. “She should have her
own life—not spend her time looking back.”He d idn’ t respond directly to t his, but took my hand and
eased it between us, sighing as I took hold of him.
“Y e’re a verra intelligent woman, Sassenach, but
shortsighted, forbye. Though perhaps it’ s only modesty .”
“And what makes you say that?” I asked, mildly piqued.
“The lassie’ s loyal, ye said. She’ll have loved her father
enough to shape her life to do as he would have wanted, even
after he’ s dead. D’ye think she loved you less?”
I tur ned my hea d, and let the piled hair fall down over my
face.
“No,” I said at last, voice muf fled in the pillow .
“W ell, then.” He took me by the hips and turned me, rolling
slowly on top o f me. W e didn’ t speak anymore, then, as the
melting boundaries of our bodies disappeared.
It w as slow , dr eamy and peaceful, his body and mine as
much as mine was his, so that I  curled my foot round his leg
and felt both sm ooth sole and hairy shin, felt callused palm
and tender flesh, was knife and sheath together , the rhythm of
our movement that of one heart beating.
The fire crackled softly to itse lf, casting red and yellow
highlights on the wooden walls of our snug refuge, and we lay
in q uiet peace, not bothering t o sort out whose limbs were
whose. On the v ery ver ge of sle ep, I felt Jamie’ s breath, warm
on my neck.
“She’ll look,” he said, with certainty .
There was a brief thaw two days later , and Jamie—suf fering
slightly from cabin fever himself—decided to take advantage
of it to go hunting. There was s till snow on the ground, but it
was thin and patchy; the going would be easy enough on the
slopes, he thought.
I wa sn’ t so sure as I scooped sno w into a basket for melting,
later in the morning. The snow u nder the bushes still lay thick,
though it had indeed melted on the exposed ground. I hoped hewas righ t, though—our food supplies were low , and we had
had no meat at a ll for more than a week; even the snares Jamie
kept set had been buried under the snow .
I t ook my snow  inside and tipped it into the lar ge cauldron,
feeling, as I always did, rather like a witch.
” ‘Doub le, double, toil and trouble’ ” I muttered, watching
the white clumps hiss and fade into the roiling liquid.
I h ad one lar ge cauldron, filled with water , which bubbled
constantly on the fire. This was  not only the basic supply for
washing but the means of cookin g everything that could not be
grilled, fried, or roasted. Stews  and things to be boiled were
put into hollow gourds or stone ware jars, sealed, and lowered
on strings into the bubbling depths, to be hauled out at
intervals for checking. By this means, I could cook an entire
meal in the one pot, and have hot water for washing afterward.
I d umpe d a second basket of snow into a wooden bowl and
left it to melt more slowly; drinking water for the day . Then,
with not hing of great ur gency to do, I sat down to read Daniel
Rawlings’ s ca sebook and mend stockings, my toes
comfortably toasting by the fire.
At first, I didn’ t worry when Jamie didn’ t come back. That
is, I did worry— I always worried when he was gone for long
—but in  a small and secret way  that I succeeded for the most
part in hiding f rom myself. When the shadows on the snow
turned v iolet wit h the sinking su n, though, I began to listen for
him with an increasing intensity .
I w ent about my  work in consta nt expectation of the crunch
of hi s fo otsteps, listening for a s hout, ready to run out and lend
a h and if he had  brought back a turkey for plucking or some
more or less edible thing in need of cleaning. I fed and watered
the m ules and h orses, looking always up the mountain. As the
afternoon light died around me, though, the expectation faded
into hope.
It w as g rowing chilly in the cab in, and I went out for more
wood. It couldn’ t be much past f our o’clock, I thought, and yetthe shadows under the huckleberry bushes were already cold
and blue . Anoth er hour , and it would be dusk; it would be full
dark in two.
The woo dpile w as dusted with snow , the outer logs damp.
By pulling a chunk of hickory from the side, though, I could
reach inside and extract dry splits—being always mindful of
snakes, skunks, and anything else that might have sought
shelter in the hollow thus provided.
I s nif fed , then bent and peered  cautiously inside, and as a
final precaution poked a long stick inside and stirred it briefly
round. Hearing no scuf fles, slitherings, or other sounds of
alarm, I  reached inside with confidence, and groped until my
fingers encounte red the deep-ridged grain of a chunk of fat
pine. I wanted a hot, quick-burn ing fire tonight; after a full day
spent hunting in snow , Jamie would be chilled through.
Fat pine  for the heart of the fire, then, and three small
chunks of slower -burning hicko ry from the wet outer layer of
the woo dpile. I could stack th ose inside the hearth to dry ,
while I finished the supper maki ng; then when we went to bed,
I’d s moor the fi re with the damp hickory , which would burn
more slowly , smoldering till morning.
The shadows went to indigo an d faded into the gray winter
dusk. The sky w as lavender with thick cloud; snow clouds. I
could b reathe the cold wetness in the air; when the
temperature fell after dark, so would the snow .
“Bloody man,” I said aloud. “W hat have you done, shot a
moose?” My voice sounded small in the muf fled air , but the
thought made me feel better . If he had in fact bagged
something lar ge near the end o f the day , he might well have
chosen t o camp by the carcass; butchering a lar ge animal was
exhausting, lengthy work, and meat was too hard come by to
leave it to the mercies of predators.
My vege table st ew was bubbling, and the cabin was filled
with the savory scent of onions and wild garlic, but I had no
appetite. I pushed the kettle on its hook to the back of the
hearth—easy en ough to heat again when he came. A tiny flashof green caught my eye, and I stooped to look. A tiny
salamander , frightened out of its winter refuge in a crack of the
wood.
It w as g reen and  black, vivid as  a tiny jewel; I scooped him
up b efore he cou ld panic and ru n into the fire, and carried the
damp little thing outside, wriggling madly against my palm. I
put him back in the woodpile, safely near the bottom.
“W atch out,” I s aid to him, “you  might not be so lucky next
time!”
I p aused  before going back inside. It had gone dark now , but
I could still make out the trunks of the trees around the
clearing, chalk and gray against the looming black bulk of the
mountain beyond. Nothing stirred among the trees, but a few
fat wet flakes of snow began t o fall from the soft pink sky ,
melting at once on the bare ground of the dooryard.
I ba rred the door , ate some supper without tasting it,
smoored the fire with damp hickory , and lay down to sleep. He
might h ave met some men from  Anna Ooka and be camped
with them.
The scent of hickory smoke floated in the air , wisps of white
curling up over the hearth. Th e beams above were already
black wi th soot, though fires had burned here for no more than
two months now . Fresh resin still oozed from the timber by my
head, in small gold droplets that glowed like honey and
smelled of turpentine, sharp an d clean. The ax strokes in the
wood sh owed in the firelight, and I had a sudden, vivid
memory of Jamie’ s broad bac k, sheened with sweat as he
swung the ax, o ver and over in strokes like clockwork, the ax
blade co ming do wn in a flash of metal inches from his foot as
he worked his way along the squared rough timber .
It was awfully easy to misjud ge the stroke of an ax or
hatchet. He might have cut wo od for his fire and missed his
stroke, caught an arm or leg. M y imagination, always eager to
help out, promptly supplied a crystal-clear vision of arterial
blood spurting onto white snow in a crimson spray .I flounc ed over onto my sid e. He knew how to live
outdoors. He’d spent seven years in a cave, for heaven’ s sake!
In S cotland, said my imagination, cynically . Where the
biggest carnivore is a wildcat t he size of a house cat. Where
the biggest human threat was English soldiers.
“Fiddlesticks!” I said, and rolled onto my back. “He’ s a
grown m an and he’ s armed to th e teeth and he certainly knows
what to do if it’ s snowing!”
What would  he do?  I wondered. Find or make shelter , I
supposed. I recalled the crude l ean-to he’d built for us when
we f irst camped on the ridge, a nd felt a little reassured. If he
hadn’ t hurt himself, he probably wouldn’ t freeze to death.
If he hadn’ t hurt  himself. If som ething else hadn’ t hurt him.
The bears were presumably fat and fast asleep, but the wolves
still hunted in w inter , and the ca tamounts; I recalled the one I
had met by the stream, and shivered in spite of the feather bed.
I r olled onto my  stomach, the quilts drawn up around my
shoulders. It was warm in the cabin, warmer in the bed, but my
hands an d feet were still icy . I longed for Jamie, in a visceral
way that  had nothing to do with thought or reason. T o be alone
with Jam ie was bliss, adventure, and absorption. T o be alone
without him was…to be alone.
I c ould hear the  whisper of snow against the oiled hide that
covered the window near my h ead. If it kept up, his tracks
would be covered by morning. And if anything had  happened
to him…
I flung back the quilts and got u p. I dressed quickly , without
thinking too much about what I was doing; I’d thought too
much already . I put on my woolen cutty sark for insulation
beneath my buckskins, and two pairs of stockings. I thanked
God tha t my boots were freshl y greased with otter fat; they
smelt very fishy , but would keep the damp out for a good
while.
He h ad taken th e hatchet; I had  to split another piece of fat
pine wit h a mallet and wedge, cu rsing my slowness as I did so.Having now decided on action,  every small delay seemed an
unbearable irrit ation. The long-grained wood split easily ,
though; I had fiv e decent faggots, four of which I bound with a
leather s trap. I thrust the end of  the fifth deep into the smoky
embers of the fire, and waited till the end was well caught.
Then I tied a small medicine bag about my waist, checked
to b e sure I had the pouch of flints and kindling, put on my
cloak, to ok up my bundle and my torch, and set out into the
falling snow .
It was not as cold as I had fear ed; once I began moving, I
was quit e warm inside my wrap pings. It was very quiet; there
was no wind, an d the whisper of the snowfall drowned all the
usual noises of the night.
He h ad meant to  walk his trapli ne, that much I knew . If he
came ac ross pro mising sign en route, though, he would have
followed it. The previous snow lay thin and patchy on the
ground, but the earth was soaked, and Jamie was a big man; I
was fair ly sure I could follow his track, if I came across it.
And if I came ac ross him,  denned up for the night near his kill,
so much the better . T wo slept much better than one in the cold.
Past the bare che stnuts that ringed our clearing to the west, I
turned uphill. I had no great sense of direction, but could
certainly tell up from down. Jamie had also carefully taught
me to navigate using lar ge, immutable landmarks. I glanced
toward t he falls,  their white casc ade no more than a blur in the
distance. I couldn’ t hear them; what wind there was must be
away from me.
“When you’re hunting, ye want the wind toward ye,” Jamie
had explained. “So the stag or the hare wilna scent ye.”
I wonde red uncomfortably what might be out in the dark,
scenting me  on the s nowborne air . I wasn’ t armed, save for my
torch. T he light glittered red on the crust of packed snow , and
shattered from the ice that coated every twig. If I got within a
quarter -mile of him, he’d see me.The first snare was set in a small dell no more than two
hundred yards uphill from the c abin, amid a grove of spruce
and hem lock. I had been with him when he set it, but that had
been in daylight; even with the torch, everything looked
strange and unfamiliar by night.
I cast to and fro, bending close to bring my light near the
ground. It took several journeys back and forth across the little
dell before I fin ally spotted what I was looking for—the dark
indentation of a foot in a patch of snow between two spruce
trees. A little m ore looking and I found the snare, still set.
Either it had caught nothing, or he had removed the catch and
reset it.
The footprints led out of the c learing and upward again,
then disappeare d in a bare patch of matted dead leaves. A
moment’ s panic  as I crisscros sed the patch, looking for a
scuf fled place that might be a footprint. Nothing showed; the
leaves must be a foot thick he re, spongy and resilient. But
there! Y es, there was a log overturned; I could see the dark,
wet furr ow wher e it had lain, and the scuf fed moss on its side.
Ian had told me that squirrels and chipmunks sometimes
hibernated in the cavities under logs.
V ery slowly , constantly losing the trail and having to circle
and backtrack to find it again, I followed him from one snare
to anoth er . The snow was falling thicker and faster , and I felt
some un easiness. If it covered his tracks before I found him,
how would I find my way back to the cabin?
I looked  back, but could see no thing behind me but a long,
treacherous slop e of unbroken snow that fell to the dark line of
an unfam iliar brook below , its r ocks poking up like teeth. No
sign of the cheerful plume of smoke and sparks from our
chimney . I turned slowly round in a circle, but I could no
longer see the falls, either .
“Fine,” I muttered to myself. “ Y ou’re lost. Now  what?” I
sternly q uelled an incipient attack of panic, and stood still to
think. I wasn’ t totally lost. I did n’ t know where I was, but that
wasn’ t quite the same thing. I still had Jamie’ s trail to guideme—or would have, until the snow covered it. And if I could
find him, he presumably could find the cabin.
My torch was burning dangerously low; I could feel the heat
of it, blistering on my hand. I extracted another of the dry
faggots from under my cloak, and lit it from the stub of the
first, dropping the ember just before it burned my fingers.
W as I going fart her from the ca bin, I wondered, or walking
parallel to it? I knew that the tra pline described a rough circle,
but had no idea  precisely how many snares there were. I had
found three so far , all empty and waiting.
The four th one wasn’ t empty . M y torch caught the glitter of
ice crystals, fringing the fur of a lar ge hare, stretched out under
a frozen bush. I touched it, picked it up and disentangled the
noose fr om its neck. It was stif f, whether from cold or rigor
mortis. Been dead a while, the n—and what did that tell me
about Jamie’ s whereabouts?
I tried to think logically , ignoring the increasing cold
seeping through my boots and the growing numbness of face
and fingers. The hare lay in sno w; I could see the indentations
of its pawprints,  and the flurry of its death struggle. I couldn’ t
see any of Jam ie’ s footprints, though. All right; he hadn’ t
visited this snare, then.
I stood still, my  breath forming small white clouds around
my head . I could feel ice forming inside my nostrils; it was
getting c older . S omewhere betw een the last snare and this one,
he had left his path, then. Where? And where had he gone?
Ur gently , I backtracked, looking for the last footprint I was
sure of. It took a long time to find; the snow had nearly
covered all the bare ground wit h a thin dusting of glitter . My
second torch was half burned th rough before I found it again.
There it  was, a featureless blur  in the mud on the edge of a
stream. I had fo und the snare w ith the rabbit only by going in
the direction I thought this footprint pointed—but evidently it
didn’ t. He had stepped out of the mud, and gone…where?“Jamie!” I shouted. I called s everal times, but the snow
seemed to swallow my voice. I listened, but heard nothing
save the gur gle of the ice-rimmed water by my feet.
He wasn’ t behind me, he wasn’ t in front of me. Left, then,
or right?
“Eeny , meeny , miney , mo,” I muttered, and turned downhill
because the walking was easier , shouting now and then.
I stopped to listen. W as there an answering shout? I called
again, but couldn’ t make out a reply . The wind was coming up,
rattling the tree limbs overhead.
I took another step, landed on an icy rock, and my foot slid
out from  under me. I slipped and skidded, floundering down a
short, muddy slope, hit a screen  of dog-hobble, burst through
and clutched a handful of icy twigs, heart pounding.
At m y f eet was the edge of a rocky outcrop, ending in thin
air . Clinging to the bush to ke ep from slipping, I edged my
way closer , and looked over .
It was not a clif f, as I’d thought ; the drop was no more than
five feet. It wa s not this that made my heart leap into my
throat, though, but rather the sight that met my eyes in the
leaf-filled hollow below .
There was a flur ry of tossed and scuf fled leaves, reminding
me u npleasantly of the death ma rks left by the limp rabbit that
hung at my belt.  Something lar ge had struggled on the ground
here—and then been dragged away . A wide furrow plowed
through the leaves, disappearing into the darkness beyond.
Heedless of my footing, I scrab bled my way down the side
of t he outcrop and rushed toward the furrow , following it
under the overhanging low branches of hemlock and balsam.
In the uncertain light of my flickering torch, I followed its path
around a pile of rocks, through a clump of winter green, and…
He was lying n ear the foot of a lar ge split boulder , half
covered in leaves, as though som ething had tried to bury him.
He wasn’ t curled for warmth, but lay flat on his face, anddeathly still. The snow lay thick on the folds of his cloak,
dusted the heels of his muddy boots.
I dro pped my to rch and flung m yself on his body with a cry
of horror .
He let out a blo odcurdling groa n and convulsed under me. I
jerked b ack, tor n between relief and terror . He wasn’ t dead,
but he was  hurt. Where, how badly?
“Where?” I demanded, wrenching at his cloak, which was
tangled round his body . “Wh ere are you hurt? Are you
bleeding, have you broken something?”
I cou ldn’ t see an y lar ge patches of blood, but I had dropped
my torc h, which had promptly extinguished itself in the wet
leaves th at cove red him. The pin k sky and falling snow shed a
luminous glow over everything , but the light was much too
dim to make out details.
He was frighten ingly cold; his flesh felt chilly even to my
snow-numbed h ands, and he sti rred sluggishly , subsiding into
small moans and grunts. I thought I heard him mumble,
“Back,” though, and once I got his cloak out of the way , I tore
at his shirt, yanking it ruthlessly out of his breeks.
This made him groan loudly , and I thrust my hands under
the c loth in a panic, looking for the bullet hole. He must have
been shot in th e back; the entrance wound wouldn’ t bleed
much, but where had it come out? Had the ball gone clean
through? A small piece of my mind found leisure to wonder
who’d shot him, and whether they were still nearby .
Nothing. I found nothing; my groping hands encountered
nothing but bare, clean flesh; cold as a slab of marble and
webbed with old scars, but completely unperforated. I tried
again, fo rcing myself to slow do wn, feeling with mind as well
as fingers, running my palms slowly over his back from nape
to small. Nothing.
Lower? There were dark smudg es on the seat of his breeks;
I’d thou ght them mud. I thrust a hand under him and gropedfor his laces, jerked them loose and yanked down his breeches.
It was  m ud; his buttoc ks glowed before me, white, firm, and
perfect in their roundness, unmarred beneath a silver fuzz. I
clutched a handful of his flesh, unbelieving.
“Is that you, Sassenach?” he asked, rather drowsily .
“Y es, it’ s me! What happened t o you?” I demanded, frenzy
giving w ay to indignation. “Y ou said you’d been shot in the
back!”
“No, I didn’ t. I couldna, for I ha ven’ t been,” he pointed out
logically . He sounded calm and still rather sleepy , his speech
slightly slurred.  “There’ s a verra cold wind whistlin’ up my
backside, Sassenach; d’ye think ye could maybe cover me?”
I jerked up his breeches, making him grunt again.
“What the hell is the matter with you?” I said.
He was waking up a bit; he twisted his head to look round at
me, moving laboriously .
“A ye, well. No real matter . It ’ s only that I canna move
much.”
I stared at him.
“Why not? Have you twisted your foot? Broken your leg?”
“Ah…no.” He sounded a trifle sheepish. “I…ah…I’ve put
my back out of joint.”
“Y ou what ?”
“I’ve do ne it once before,” he assured me. “It doesna last
more than a day or two.”
“I suppose it didn’ t occur to you that you  wouldn’ t last more
than a day or two, lying out here on the ground, covered with
snow?”
“It d id,” he said , still drowsy , “but there didna seem much I
could do about it.”
It was rapidly d awning on me that there might not be that
much I  cou ld do about it, either . He outweighed me by a goodsixty pounds; I couldn’ t carry him. I couldn’ t even drag him
very far over slopes and rocks and gullies. It was too steep for
a ho rse; I might  possibly persuade one of the mules to come
up here—if I could first find my way back to the cabin in the
dark, and then find my way back up the mountain, also in the
dark—and in the middle of w hat looked like becoming a
blizzard. Or perhaps I could bui ld a toboggan of tree branches,
I tho ught wildly , and career dow n the snowy slopes astride his
body .
“Oh, do get a gr ip, Beauchamp,”  I said aloud. I wiped at my
running nose with a fold of cloa k, and tried to think what to do
next.
It w as a sheltere d spot, I realized; looking upward, I could
see the snowfla kes whirling past the top of the big rock at
whose foot we c rouched, but there was no wind where we sat,
and only a few heavy flakes floated down onto my upturned
face.
Jamie’ s hair and shoulders were lightly dusted with snow ,
and flakes were settling on the exposed backs of his legs. I
pulled th e hem of his cloak down, then brushed the snow away
from his face. His cheek was nearly the same color as the big
wet flakes, and his flesh felt stif f when I touched it.
Fresh al arm sur ged through me as I realized that he might
be a lot closer to freezing already than I had thought. His eyes
were half closed, and cold as it was, he didn’ t seem to be
shivering much. That was bloody  dange rous; with no
movement, his muscles were generating no heat, and what
warmth he had was leaching slo wly from his body . His cloak
was already heavy with damp ; if I allowed his clothes to
become soaked through, he might very well die of
hypothermia right in front of me.
“W ake up!” I sa id, shaking him ur gently by the shoulder . He
opened his eyes and smiled drowsily at me.
“Move!” I said. “Jamie, you’ve got to move!”“I can’ t,” he said calmly . “I told ye that.” He shut his eyes
again.
I grabbed him by the ear and dug my fingernails into the
tender lobe. He grunted and jerked his head away .
“W ake up,” I said peremptorily . “Do you hear me? W ake up
this moment! Move, damn you! Give me your hand.”
I did n’ t wait for  him to comply , but dug under the cloak and
seized his hand, which I chafed  madly between my own. He
opened his eyes again and frowned at me.
“I’m all right,” he said. “But I’m gey tired, aye?”
“Move your arms,” I ordered, flinging the hand at him.
“Flap them, up and down. Can you move your legs at all?”
He sigh ed wearily , as though dragging himself out of a
sticky bog, and m uttered something under his breath in Gaelic,
but very slowly he began to m ove his arms back and forth.
W ith more prodding, he succeeded in flexing his ankles—
though any further movement caused instant spasms in his
back—and with great reluctance, began to waggle his feet.
He looked rather like a frog trying to fly , but I wasn’ t in any
mood to  laugh. I didn’ t know  whether he was actually in
danger o f freezing or not, but I wasn’ t taking any chances. By
dint of constant exhortation, aid ed by judicious pokings, I kept
him at this exer cise until I had got him altogether awake and
shivering. In a thoroughly bad temper , too, but I didn’ t mind
that.
“Keep moving,” I advised him. I got up with some
dif ficulty , having grown quite stif f from crouching over him so
long. “Move, I s ay!” I added sharply , as he showed symptoms
of fl agging. “Stop and I’ll step square on your back, I swear I
will!”
I g lance d around, a little blearily . The snow was still falling,
and it was dif ficult to see more than a few feet. W e needed
shelter—more than the rock alone could provide.“Hemlock,” he said between his teeth. I glanced down at
him, and he jerked his head toward a clump of trees nearby .
“T ake the hatchet. Big…branches. Six feet. C-cut four .” He
was breathing heavily , and there was a tinge of color visible in
his face,  despite the dim light. He’d stopped moving in spite of
my threats, but his teeth were  clenched because they were
chattering; a sign I rejoiced to see.
I stooped and groped beneath his cloak again, this time
searching for the hatchet belte d round his waist. I couldn’ t
resist sliding a hand under him,  inside the neck of his fringed
woolen hunting shirt. W arm! Thank God, he was still warm;
his chest felt superficially chilled from its contact with the wet
ground, but it was still warmer than my fingers.
“Right,” I said, taking my hand away and standing up with
the hatchet. “Hemlock. Six-foot branches, do you mean?”
He nodd ed, shivering violently , and I set of f at once for the
trees he indicated.
Inside th e silent  grove, the frag rance of hemlock and cedar
enfolded me at o nce in a mist of resins and turpenes, the odor
cold and sharp, clean and invigorating. Many of the trees were
enormous, with the lower branches well above my head, but
there were smaller ones scattered here and there. I saw at once
the virtues of th is particular tree—no snow fell under them;
the fanlike boughs caught the falling snow like umbrellas.
I ha cked at the lower branches, torn between the need for
haste an d the very real fear of chopping of f a few fingers by
accident; my hands were numb and awkward with the cold.
The wood was green and elastic and it took forever to chop
through the tough, springy fibers. At last, though, I had four
good-sized bran ches, sporting multiple fans of dense needles.
They looked soft and black against the new snow , like big fans
of fe athers; it w as almost a surp rise to touch them and feel the
hard, cold prick of the needles.
I d ragged them back to the rock , and found that Jamie had
managed to scoop more leaves together; he was almostinvisible, subme r ged in a huge drift of black and gray against
the foot of the rock.
Under his terse d irection I leaned the hemlock branches fan-
up a gainst the f ace of the rock, the chopped butt ends stuck
into the earth a t an angle, so as to form a small triangular
refuge underneath. Then I took the hatchet again and chopped
small pine and s pruce branches, pulled up big clumps of dried
grass, an d piled it all against and over the hemlock screen.
Then at last, pa nting with exertion, I crawled into the shelter
beside him.
I n estled down i n the leaves bet ween his body and the rock,
wrapped my cloak around both of us, put my arms around his
body , and held on hard. Then I f ound the leisure to shake a bit.
Not from cold—not yet—but from a mixture of relief and fear .
He felt me shivering, and reac hed awkwardly back to pat
me in reassurance.
“It w ill be all right, Sassenach,” he said. “W ith the two of
us, it will be all right.”
“I k now ,” I said , and put my forehead against his shoulder
blade. It was a long time before I stopped shaking, though.
“How lo ng have you been out here?” I asked finally . “On
the ground, I mean?”
He started to shrug, then stopped abruptly , groaning.
“A good  time. It was just past noon when I jumped of f a
wee cro p of rock. It wasna m ore than a few feet high, but
when I landed on one foot, my  back went click! and next I
knew , I was on my face in the d irt, feelin’ as though someone
had stabbed me in the spine wi’ a dirk.”
It wasn’ t warm in our snug, by any means; the damp from
the l eaves was s eeping in and t he rock at my back seemed to
radiate coldness , like some sort of reverse furnace. Still, it was
noticeably less cold than it was outside. I began shivering
again, for purely physical reasons.
Jamie felt me, and groped at his throat.“Can ye  get my cloak unfastened, Sassenach? Put it over
ye.”
It to ok some m aneuvering, and the cost of a few muf fled
oaths from Jamie as he tried to  shift his weight, but I got it
loose at last, and  spread it over the two of us. I reached down
and laid a cauti ous hand on hi s back, gently rucking up his
shirt to put my hand on cool, bare flesh.
“T ell me  where  it hurts,” I said. I hoped to hell he hadn’ t
slipped a disc; hideous thoughts of his being permanently
crippled raced through my mind, along with pragmatic
considerations o f how I was to g et him of f the mountain, even
if he wasn’ t. W ould I have to leave him here, and fetch food
up to him daily until he recovered?
“Right t here,” he said, with a hiss of indrawn breath. “A ye,
that’ s it. A wic ked stab just t here, and if I move, it runs
straight down the back o’ my leg, like a red-hot wire.”
I fe lt very carefully , with bot h hands now , probing and
pressing, ur ging him to try to lift one leg, right, now the other
knee…no?
“No,” he assured me. “Dinna be worrit, though, Sassenach.
It’ s the same as before. It gets better .”
“Y es, you said it happened before. When was that?”
He stirred briefly and settled, pressing back against my
palms with a small groan.
“Och! Damn, that hurts. At the prison.”
“Pain in the same place?”
“A ye.”
I could feel a hard knot in the muscle on his right side, just
below the kidney , and a bunching in the erector spinae, the
long mu scles near the spine. Fro m his description of the prior
occurrence, I was fairly sure it was only severe muscle spasm.
For which the proper prescription was warmth, rest, and anti-
inflammatory medication.Couldn’ t get much further away from those conditions, I
thought with some grimness.
“I su ppose I cou ld try acupuncture,” I said, thinking aloud.
“I’ve got Mr . W illoughby’ s needles in my pouch, and—”
“Sassenach,” he said, in measured tones. “I can stand fine
bein’ hurt, cold, and hungry . I w ilna put up wi’ being stabbed
in the back by my own wife . Can ye not of fer a bit of
sympathy and comfort instead?”
I la ughed, and slid an arm a round him, pressing close
against h is back . I let my hand slide down and rest in delicate
suggestion, well below his navel.
“Er…what sort of comfort did you have in mind?”
He hastily grasped my hand, to prevent further intrusions.
“Not that,” he said.
“Might take your mind of f the pain.” I wiggled my fingers
invitingly , and he tightened his grip.
“I d aresay ,” he said dryly . “W ell, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach;
once we’ve got home, and I’ve a warm bed to lie in and a hot
supper i n my belly , that notio n might have a good bit of
appeal. A s it is, the thought of—for Christ’ s sake, have ye not
the slightest idea how cold your hands are, woman?”
I l aid my cheek  against his bac k and laughed. I could feel
the quiv er of his own mirth, though he couldn’ t laugh aloud
without hurting his back.
At last we lay silent, listening to the whisper of falling
snow . It was da rk under the hemlock boughs, but my eyes
were ad apted enough to be able to see patches of the oddly
glowing snow-l ight through the screen of needles overhead.
T iny flakes came through the o pen patches; I could see it in
some places, as a thin cloud of white mist, and I could feel the
cold tingle as it struck my face.
Jamie himself was no more tha n a humped dark shape in
front of me, tho ugh as my eyes became accustomed to the
murk, I could see the paler stalk where his neck emer gedbetween his shirt and his queued hair . The queue itself lay cool
and smo oth aga inst my face; by  turning my head only a bit, I
could brush it with my lips.
“What time do you think it is ?” I asked. I had no idea,
myself; I had le ft the house well after dark, and spent what
seemed an eternity looking for him on the mountain.
“Late,” he said. “It will be a l ong time before the dawn,
though,” he added, answering m y real question. “It’ s just past
the solstice, aye? It’ s one of the longest nights of the year .”
“Oh, lovely ,” I said, in disma y . I wasn’ t warm, by any
means—I still couldn’ t feel my toes—but I had stopped
shivering. A dreadful lethar gy was stealing over me, my
muscles yielding to fatigue and cold. I had visions of the two
of u s fre ezing pe acefully togethe r , curled up like hedgehogs in
the leaves. They did say it was  a comfortable death, but that
didn’ t make the prospect any more appealing.
Jamie’ s breathing was getting slower and deeper .
“Don’ t go to sleep!” I said ur gently , poking him in the
armpit.
“Agh!” He pressed his arm tight  to his side, recoiling. “Why
not?”
“W e mustn’ t sleep; we’ll freeze to death.”
“No, we won’ t,” he said crossly . “It’ s snowing outside; we’ll
be covered over soon.”
“I k now that,” I  said, rather cross in my turn. “What’ s that
got to do with it?”
He tried to turn his head to look at me, but couldn’ t, quite.
“Snow’ s cold if ye touch it,” he explained, striving for
patience, “but it keeps the cold out, aye? Like a blanket. It’ s a
great deal warmer in a house that’ s covered wi’ snow than one
that’ s standing clean in the wind. How d’ye think bears
manage? They sleep in the winter , and they dinna freeze.”“They have layers of fat,” I pro tested. “I thought that kept
them warm.”
“Ha ha,” he sa id, and reaching back with some ef fort,
grabbed me firmly by the bottom. “W ell, then, ye needna
worry a bit, eh?”
W ith great deliberation I pulled down his collar , stretched
my head  up, and licked the ba ck of his neck, in a lingering
swipe from nape to hairline.
“Aaah!” He shuddered violently , making a sprinkle of snow
fall from  the branches above us. He let go of my bottom to
scrub at the back of his neck.
“That was a terrible  thing to do!” he said, reproachful. “And
me lyin’ here helpless as a log!”
“Bah, humbug,” I said. I nestled closer , feeling somewhat
reassured. “Y ou ’re sure we are n’ t going to freeze to death,
then?”
“No,” he said. “But I shouldna think it likely .”
“Hm,” I said, feeling somewhat less reassured. “W ell,
perhaps we’d better stay awake for a bit, then, just in case?”
“I w ilna wave my arms about anymore,” he said definitely .
“There’ s no room. And if ye stick your icy wee paws in my
breeks, I swear I’ll throttle ye, bad back or no.”
“All right, all r ight,” I said. “ What if I tell you a story ,
instead?”
Highlanders loved stories, and Jamie was no exception.
“Oh, aye,” he said, sounding m uch happier . “What sort of
story is it?”
“A C hristmas story ,” I said, settling myself along the curve
of his body . “About a miser named Ebenezer Scrooge.”
“An Englishman, I daresay?”
“Y es,” I said. “Be quiet and listen.”I could see my o wn breath as I talked, white in the dim, cold
air . The snow w as falling heavily outside our shelter; when I
paused in the story , I could hear the whisper of flakes against
the hemlock branches, and the far -of f whine of wind in the
trees.
I kne w t he story  very well; it had been part of our Christmas
ritual, Frank’ s and Brianna’ s and mine. From the time Bree
was five  or six, we had read A Christmas Car ol  every year ,
starting a week or two before Christmas, Frank and I taking it
in turns to read to her each night before bed.
“And the specter said, ‘I am the Ghost of Christmas Past…’
“
I might not be freezing to death, but the cold had a strange,
hypnotic ef fect nonetheless. I ha d gone past the phase of acute
discomfort and felt now slightly disembodied. I knew my
hands an d feet were icy , and my  body chilled half through, but
it didn’ t  seem to matter anymore. I floated in a peaceful white
mist, seeing the words swirl rou nd my head like snowflakes as
I spoke them.
“…and there was dear old Fezz iwig, among the lights and
music…”
I cou ldn’ t tell w hether I was gra dually thawing or becoming
colder . I  was conscious of an overall feeling of relaxation, and
an altogether peculiar sense of deja vu, as though I had once
before been entombed, insul ated in snow , snug despite
desolation outside.
As Bob Cratchi t bought his meager bird, I remembered. I
went on  talking  automatically , the flow of the story coming
from somewhere well below the level of consciousness, but
my memory was in the front seat of a stalled 1956 Oldsmobile,
its windscreen caked with snow .
W e had  been on our way to visit an elderly relative of
Frank’ s, somewhere in upstate New Y ork. The snow came on
hard, halfway there, howling down across the icy roads with
gusts of  wind. Before we kn ew where we were, we hadskidded of f the road and halfwa y into a ditch, the windscreen
wipers slashing futilely at the pelting snow .
There w as nothing to be done but wait for morning, and
rescue. W e had had a picnic hamper and some old blankets; we
brought Brianna  up into the front seat between us, and huddled
all together under coats and blankets, sipping lukewarm cocoa
from the thermos and making jokes to keep her from being
frightened.
As it grew late r , and colder , we huddled closer , and to
distract Brianna, Frank began to tell her Dickens’ s story from
memory , countin g on me to supply the missing bits. Neither of
us could  have done it alone, but between us, we managed well.
By the time the sinister Ghost of Christmas Y et to Come had
made his appearance, Brianna was snuggled sound asleep
under the coats, a warm, boneless weight against my side.
There was no need to finish the story , but we did, talking to
each oth er below the words, hands touching below the layers
of blankets. I remembered Frank’ s hands, warm and strong on
mine, thumb stroking my palm, outlining my fingers. Frank
had always loved my hands.
The car had filled with the mist of our breathing, and drops
of water ran down inside the white-choked windows. Frank’ s
head had been a  dark cameo, d im against the white. He had
leaned t oward me at the last, nose and cheeks chilled, lips
warm on mine as he whispered the last words of the story .
” ‘God bless us, every one,’ ” I ended, and lay silent, a small
needle of grief like an ice spli nter through my heart. It was
quiet ins ide the shelter , and seemed darker; snow had covered
over all the openings.
Jamie reached back and touched my leg.
“Put you r hands inside my shirt, Sassenach,” he said softly .
I slid one hand up under his shirt in front, to rest against his
chest, the other up his back. T he faded whip marks felt like
threads under his skin.He laid his hand  against mine, pressing it tight against his
chest. H e was very warm, and his heart beat slow and strong
under my fingers.
“Sleep, a nighean donn, ” he said. “I wilna let ye freeze.”
I woke abruptly from a chilly doze, with Jamie’ s hand
squeezing my thigh.
“Hush,” he said softly . Our tiny shelter was still dim, but the
quality of the light had change d. It was morning; we were
covered over with a thick blan ket of snow that blocked the
daylight, but the faint otherworldly quality of the night’ s
darkness had vanished.
The silence had vanished, too. Sounds from outside were
muf fled, but audible. I heard what Jamie had heard—a faint
echo of voices—and jerked up in excitement.
“Hush!” he said again, in a fierce whisper , and squeezed my
leg harder .
The voices were drawing closer , and it became almost
possible to pick out words. Alm ost. Strain as I might, I could
make no  sense of what was bei ng said. Then I realized that it
was because they were not speaking any language I
recognized.
Indians. It was an Indian tongue. But I thought the language
was not T uscarora, even though I couldn’ t yet make out words;
the rise and fal l was similar , but the rhythm was somehow
dif ferent. I brushed the hair out of my eyes, feeling torn in two
directions.
Here was the he lp we so badly needed—by the sound of it,
there were several men in the party , enough to move Jamie
safely . On the o ther hand, did we really want to attract the
attention of a band of unfamiliar Indians who might be
raiders?
Rather plainly we didn’ t, judging from Jamie’ s attitude. He
had man aged to lift himself on o ne elbow , and he had his knife
drawn, ready in his right hand. He scratched his stubbled chinabsently with the point as he tilted his head to listen more
intently to the approaching voices.
A c lump of sn ow fell from the framework of our cage,
landing on my head with a litt le plop!  and making me start.
The mov ement loosened more snow , which poured inward in a
glittering cascade, dusting Jam ie’ s head and shoulders with
fine white powder .
His fingers were gripping my  leg hard enough to leave
bruises, but I didn’ t move or make a sound. A patch of snow
had fallen from the latticework of hemlock branches, leaving
numerous small spaces through which I could see out between
the needles, peering over Jamie’ s shoulder .
The ground sloped a little away from us, falling a few feet
to the level of t he grove where I had cut branches the night
before. Everything was thick with snow; a good four inches
must ha ve fallen during the night. It was just past dawn, and
the rising sun painted the black trees with coruscations of red
and gold , striking white glare from the icy sweep of snow
below . The wind had come up in the wake of the storm; loose
snow blew of f the branches in drifting clouds, like smoke.
The Indians were on the other side of the grove; I could hear
the voices plainly now; ar guing about something, from the
sound of  it. A sudden thought raised gooseflesh on my arms; if
they came through the grove, they might see the hacked
branches where I had chopped limbs from the hemlocks. I
hadn’ t b een neat; there would be needles and bits of bark
scattered all over the ground. W ould enough snow have
trickled through the branches to cover my awkward spoor?
A fl ash of move ment showed in the trees, then another , and
suddenly they were there, materializing out of the hemlock
grove like dragon’ s teeth sprung from the snow .
They were dressed for winter tra vel, in fur and leather , some
with cloaks or c loth coats atop their leggings and soft boots.
They all carried bundles of blankets and provisions, had
headpieces made of fur , and most had snowshoes slung acrosstheir sho ulders; evidently the snow here was not deep enough
to render them necessary .
They w ere armed; I could see a few muskets, and
tomahawks or war clubs hung at every belt. Six, seven,
eight…I counted silently as they came out of the trees in single
file, each man treading in the prints of the one before him. One
near the  back called out someth ing, half laughing, and a man
near the  front replied over his shoulder , his words lost in the
blowing veil of snow and wind.
I drew a deep breath. I could smell Jamie’ s scent, a sharp
tinge of fresh s weat above his normal musky sleep-smell. I
was swe ating, too, in spite of the cold. Did they have dogs?
Could th ey snif f  us out, hidden as we were beneath the sharp
reek of spruce and hemlock?
Then I realized that the wind m ust be toward us, carrying
the soun d of their voices. No, even dogs wouldn’ t scent us.
But would they see the branches  that framed our den? Even as
I wondered this, a lar ge patch of snow slid of f with a rush,
landing with a soft flump!  outside.
Jamie drew in his breath sharply , and I leaned over his
shoulder , staring . The last man had come out of the gap in the
trees, an arm a cross his face to shield it from the blowing
snow .
He w as a Jesuit . He wore a short cape of bearskin over his
habit, leather leggings and moccasins under it—but he had
black sk irts, kilt ed up for walkin g in the snow , and a wide, flat
black pr iest’ s ha t, held on with one hand against the wind. His
face, when he showed it, was  blond-bearded, and so fair -
skinned that I c ould see the re dness of his cheeks and nose
even at such a distance.
“Call them!” I whispered, leaning close to Jamie’ s ear .
“They’re Christians, they must be, to have a priest with them.
They won’ t hurt us.”
He s hook his he ad slowly , not ta king his eyes of f the file of
men, now vanishing from our view behind a snow-toppedoutcropping.
“No,” he said, half under his breath. “No. Christians they
may be,  but…” He shook his head again, more decidedly .
“No.”
There w as no use ar guing with him. I rolled my eyes in
mingled frustration and resignation.
“How’ s your back?”
He s tretched gingerly , and halted abruptly in mid-motion,
with a strangled cry as though he’d been skewered.
“Not so good, hm?” I said, sympathy well laced with
sarcasm. He gave me a dirty lo ok, eased himself very slowly
back into his bed of crushed leaves, and shut his eyes with a
sigh.
“Y ou ha ve of course thought of some ingenious way of
getting down the mountain, I imagine?” I said politely .
He opened one eye.
“No,” he said, and shut it again. He breathed quietly , his
chest rising and falling gently u nder his fringed hunting shirt,
giving a  brilliant impression of a man with nothing on his
mind but his hair .
It was a cold da y , but a bright one, and the sun was jabbing
brilliant fingers of light into our erstwhile sanctum, making
little blobs of snow drop like falling sugarplums around us. I
scooped up one of these and gen tly decanted it into the neck of
his shirt.
He drew  in his breath through his teeth with a sharp hiss,
opened his eyes, and regarded me coldly .
“I was thinking,” he informed me.
“Oh. Sorry to interrupt, then.” I eased myself down beside
him, pu lling the tangled cloaks up over us. The wind was
beginning to lace through the holes in our shelter , and it
occurred to me that he’d been q uite right about the shelteringef fects of snow . Only there wasn’ t going to be any snow
falling tonight, I didn’ t think.
Then there was the little matte r of food to be considered.
My stom ach had  been making su bdued protests for some time,
and Jamie’ s now voiced its much louder objections. He
squinted censoriously down his long, straight nose at the
of fender .
“Hush,” he said reprovingly in  Gaelic, and cast his eyes
upward. At last he sighed and looked at me.
“W ell, th en,” he  said. “Y e’d bes t wait a bit, to be sure yon
savages are well away . Then ye’ll go down to the cabin—”
“I don’ t know where it is.”
He made a small noise of exasperation.
“How did ye find me?”
“T racked you,” I said, with a certain amount of pride. I
glanced through the needles at the blowing wilderness outside.
“I don’ t suppose I can do it in reverse, though.”
“Oh.” He looked mildly impressed. “W ell, that was verra
resourceful of ye, Sassenach. D inna worry , though; I can tell
ye how to go, to find your way back.”
“Right. And then what?”
He shrugged one shoulder . Th e bit of snow had melted,
running down his chest, dampening his shirt and leaving a tiny
pool of clear water standing in the hollow of his throat.
“Bring m e back a bit of food, an d a blanket. I should be able
to move in a few days.”
“Leave you her e ?” I glared at him, my turn to be
exasperated.
“I’ll be all right,” he said mildly .
“Y ou’ll be eaten by wolves!”
“Oh, I shouldna think so,” he said casually . “They’ll be busy
with the elk, most likely .”“What elk?”
He nodded toward the hemlock grove.
“The one I shot yesterday . I took it in the neck, but the shot
didna qu ite kill it at once. It ran through there. I was following
it, w hen I hurt myself.” He rubbed a hand over the copper and
silver bristles on his chin.
“I canna think it went far . I suppose the snow must have
covered the carcass, else our w ee friends would have seen it,
coming from that direction.”
“So you ’ve shot an elk, which is going to draw wolves like
flies, an d you propose to lie her e in the freezing cold waiting
for them? I suppose you think by the time they get round to the
second course, you’ll be so num b you won’ t notice when they
start gnawing on your feet?”
“Don’ t s hout,” he said. “The s avages might not be so far
away , yet.”
I w as drawing breath for furth er remarks on the subject,
when he stopped me, putting his hand up to caress my cheek.
“Claire,” he said gently . “Y e canna move me. There’ s
nothing else to do.”
“There is,” I said , repressing a quaver in my voice. “I’ll stay
with you. I’ll bring you blankets  and food, but I’m not leaving
you up here alone. I’ll bring wood, and we’ll make a fire.”
“There’ s no need. I can manage,” he insisted.
” I  c an’ t,” I said, between my tee th. I remembered all too
well wh at it had been like in the cabin, during those empty ,
suf focating hour s of waiting. Freezing my arse of f in the snow
for several days wasn’ t at all an  appealing prospect, but it was
better than the alternative.
He saw I meant it, and smiled.
“W ell, then. Y e might bring some whisky , too, if there’ s any
left.”
“There’ s half a bottle,” I said, feeling happier . “I’ll bring it.”He got an arm around me, and pulled me into the curve of
his shou lder . In spite of the howling wind outside, it was
actually reasona bly cozy under the cloaks, snuggled tight
against him. His skin smelled w arm and slightly salty , and I
couldn’ t resist raising my head and putting my lips to the
damp hollow of his throat.
“Aah,” he said, shivering. “Don’ t do  that!”
“Y ou don’ t like it?”
“No, I dinna like it! How could I? It makes my skin crawl!”
“W ell, I  like it,” I protested.
He looked at me in amazement.
“Y ou do?”
“Oh, yes ,” I assured him. “I dea rly love to have you nibble
on my neck.”
He narrowed one eye and squinted dubiously at me. Then he
reached up, took me delicately by the ear , and drew my head
down, turning my face to the side. He flicked his tongue gently
at th e base of my throat, then li fted his head and set his teeth
very softly in the tender flesh at the side of my neck.
“Eeeee,” I said, and shivered uncontrollably .
He let go, looking at me in astonishment.
“I will be damned,” he said. “Y e do  li ke it; ye’ve g one all
gooseflesh and your nipples are  hard as spring cherries.” He
passed a hand l ightly over my breast; I hadn’ t bothered with
my makeshift brassiere when I dressed for my impromptu
expedition.
“T old yo u,” I said, blushing slig htly . “I suppose one of my
ancestresses was bitten by a vampire or something.”
“A what?” He looked quite blank.
There w as time to kill, so I gave him a thumbnail sketch of
the life and times of Count Dracula. He looked bemused and
appalled, but his hand carried on with its machinations, havingnow mo ved under my buckskin shirt and found its way
beneath the cutty sark as well. His fingers were chilly , but I
didn’ t mind.
“Some people find the notion terribly erotic,” I ended.
“That’ s the most disgusting thing I’ve ever heard!”
“I do n’ t care,” I said, stretching out at full length beside him
and putt ing my head back, throat invitingly exposed. “Do it
some more.”
He muttered something under his breath in Gaelic, but
managed to get onto one elbow and roll toward me.
His mou th was warm and soft, and whether he approved of
what he was doing or not, he did it awfully well.
“Ooooh,” I said, and shuddered ecstatically as his teeth sank
delicately into my earlobe.
“Oh, well, if it’ s like that, ” he  said  in resignation, and taking
my hand, pressed it firmly between his thighs.
“Gracious,” I said. “And here I thought the cold…”
“It’ll be warm e nough soon,” he assured me. “Get them of f,
aye?”
It was rather awkward, given the cramped quarters, the
dif ficulty of staying covered in order not to suf fer frostbite in
any expo sed portions, and the fact that Jamie was able to lend
only the most basic assistance, but we managed quite
satisfactorily nonetheless.
What wi th one thing and another , I was rather preoccupied,
though, and it was only during a temporary lull in the activities
that I became a ware of an uneasy sensation, as though I was
being watched. I lifted myself on my hands and glanced out
through the screen of hemlock , but saw nothing beyond the
grove and the snow-covered slope below .
Jamie gave a low groan.
“Don’ t stop,” he murmured, eyes half closed. “What is it?”“I thoug ht I heard something,” I said, lowering myself onto
his chest again.
At t his, I did  h ear something; a laugh, low but distinct,
directly above my head.
I r olled of f in a  tangle of cloak s and discarded buckskins,
while Jamie cursed and snatched for his pistol.
He flun g aside the branches with a swoosh, pointing the
pistol upward.
From th e top of the rock above, several heads peered over ,
all grinning. Ian, and four comp anions from Anna Ooka. The
Indians murmured and snickered among themselves, seeming
to find something immoderately funny .
Jamie laid the pistol down, scowling up at his nephew .
“And what the devil are you doin’ here, Ian?”
“Why , I  was on my way home to keep Christmas with ye,
Uncle,” Ian said, grinning hugely .
Jamie eyed his nephew with marked disfavor .
“Christmas,” he said. “Bah, humbug.”
The elk carcass had frozen in  the night. The sight of ice
crystals frosting its blank eyes made me shudder—not at the
sight of  death; that was quite beautiful, with the great dark
body so still, cru sted with snow—but at the thought that had I
not yielded to m y sense of une asiness and gone out into the
night searching for Jamie, the stark still life before my eyes
might well have been entitled “Dead Scotsman in Snow”
rather than “Frozen Elk with Ar guing Indians.”
The discussion at last concluded to their satisfaction, Ian
informed me that they had decided to return to Anna Ooka, but
would see us safely home, in return for a share of the elk meat.
The carcass had not frozen solidly through; they eviscerated
it, leavin g the cooling entrails in a heap of blue-gray coils,
splotched with black blood. After chopping of f the head to
further lessen the weight, two  of the men slung the bodyupside down from a pole, its l egs tied together . Jamie eyed
them darkly , obviously suspectin g that they meant to give him
the sam e treatment, but Ian assured him that they could
manage a travois ; the men were afoot, but they had brought
one sturdy pack mule to carry any skins they took.
The weather had improved; the snow had melted altogether
from the exposed ground, and while the air was still crisp and
cold, th e sky was a blinding  blue, and the forest coldly
pungent with the scents of spruce and balsam fir .
It w as the sme ll of hemlock, as we passed through one
grove, that reminded me of the  beginning of this hegira, and
the mysterious band of Indians we had seen.
“Ian,” I said, catching up to him. “Just before you and your
friends found us on the moun tainside, we saw a band of
Indians, with a Jesuit priest. Th ey weren’ t from Anna Ooka, I
don’ t th ink—do you have any idea who they might have
been?”
“Oh, aye, Auntie. I ken all about them.” He wiped a
mittened hand under his red-tipped nose. “W e were following
them, when we found you.”
The strange Indians, he said, we re Mohawk, come from far
north. The T uscarora had been a dopted by the Iroquois League
some fifty years before, and there was a close association with
the Mohawk, with frequent exchanges of visits between the
two, both formal and informal.
The present visit held elements of both—it was a party of
young Mohawk men, in search of wives. Their own village
having a shortage of marriageable young women, they had
determined to come south, to see if suitable mates might be
found among the T uscarora.
“See, a  woman must belong to the proper clan,” Ian
explained. “If she is the wrong clan, they canna be marrit.”
“Like MacDonalds and Campbe lls, aye?” Jamie chimed in,
interested.“A ye, a bit,” I an said, grinning. “But that’ s why they
brought the priest wi’ them—if they found women, they could
be m arried at once, and not have to sleep in a cold bed all the
way home.”
“They’re Christians, then?”
Ian shrugged.
“Some of them. The Jesuits have been among them for
some tim e, and a good many of the Huron are converts. Not so
many among the Mohawk, though.”
“So they’d been to Anna Ooka ?” I asked, curious. “Why
were you and your friends following them?”
Ian snorted, and tightened the muf fler of squirrel skins
around his neck.
“They may be allies, Auntie, but it doesna mean
Nacognaweto and his braves trust them. Even the other
Nations of the Iroquois League are afraid of the Mohawk—
Christian or no.”
It w as n ear sunset when we came in sight of the cabin. I was
cold and  tired, but my heart lifted inexpressibly at the sight of
the tiny homestead. One of the mules in the penfold, a light
gray creature named Clare nce, saw us and brayed
enthusiastically in welcome, making the rest of the horses
crowd up next to the rails, eager for food.
“The horses look fine.” Jamie, with a stockman’ s eye,
looked first to the animals’ welfare. I was rather more
concerned with our own; getting inside, getting warm, and
getting fed, as soon as possible.
W e invited Ian’ s friends to stay , but they declined,
unloading Jamie in the dooryard and vanishing quickly to
resume their vigilance over the departing Mohawk.
“They d inna like to stay in a wh ite person’ s house, Auntie,”
Ian explained. “They think we smell bad.”“Oh, rea lly?” I said in pique, thinking of a certain elderly
gentleman I had met in Anna Ooka, who appeared to have
smeared himself with bear grease and then had himself sewn
into his clothes for the winter . T he pot calling the kettle black,
if you asked me.
Much later , Christmas properly kept with a dram—or two—of
whisky all round, we lay at last  in our own bed, watching the
flames of the newly kindled fire, and listening to Ian’ s
peaceful snores.
“It’ s good to be home again,” I said softly .
“It is.” Jamie sighed and pulled me closer , my head tucked
into the curve of his shoulder . “I did have the strangest dreams,
sleeping in the cold.”
“Y ou did ?” I stretched, luxuriating in the soft yielding of the
feather -stuf fed mattress. “What did you dream about?”
“All kinds of things.” He sounded a bit shy . “I dreamt of
Brianna, now and again.”
“Really?” That was a little sta rtling; I too had dreamt of
Brianna in our icy shelter—something I seldom did.
“I di d wonder…” Jamie hesitate d for a moment. “Has she a
birthmark, Sassenach? And if so, did ye tell me of it?”
“She does,” I said slowly , thinking. “I don’ t think  I  ever told
you about it, though; it isn’ t visible most of the time, so it’ s
been years since I noticed it, myself. It’ s a—”
His hand tightening on my shoulder stopped me.
“It’ s a wee brow n mark, shaped like a diamond,” he said.
“Just behind her left ear . Isn’ t it?”
“Y es, it is.” It was warm and cozy in bed, but a small
coolness on the back of my ne ck made me shiver suddenly .
“Did you see that in your dream?”
“I kissed her there,” he said softly .2 2
S P A R K  O F  A N  A N C I E N T  F L A M E
Oxford, September 1970
O h, Jesus.” Roger stared at the page in front of him until the
letters lost their meaning and be came no more than curlicues.
No suc h trick would erase the meaning of the words
themselves; those were already carved into his mind.
“Oh, God, no!” he said out loud. The girl in the next carrel
jerked in  irritation at the noise, scraping the legs of her chair
against the floor .
He leane d over the book, coveri ng it with his forearms, eyes
closed. H e felt sick, and the pal ms of his hands were cold and
sweaty .
He sat that way for several minutes, fighting the truth. It
wasn’ t going to go away , though. Christ, it had already
happened, hadn ’ t it? A long time ago. And you couldn’ t
change the past.
Finally he swallowed the taste of bile in the back of his
throat an d looke d again. It was still there. A small notice from
a ne wspaper , printed on February 13, 1776, in the American
Colony of North Carolina, in the town of W ilmington.
It is with grief that the news is r eceived of the deaths by fir e of
James MacKenzie Fraser and his wife, Clair e Fraser , in a
conflagration that destr oyed their house in the settlement of
Fraser ’ s Ridge, on the night of January 21 last. Mr . Fraser , a
nephew of the l ate Hector Camer on of River Run plantation,
was born at Br o ch T uarach in Scotland. He was widely known
in the colony a nd deeply r espected; he leaves no surviving
childr en.
Except that he did.
Roger g rasped f or a moment at  the dim hope that it wasn’ t
them; there were, after all, any  number of James Frasers, it
was a fairly common name. But not James MacKenzie  Fraser ,not with a wife  named Claire. Not born in Broch T uarach,
Scotland.
No, it was them; the sick certainty filled his chest and
squeezed his throat with grief. His eyes stung and the ornate
eighteenth-century typeface blurred again.
So she had foun d him, Claire. Found her gallant Highlander ,
and enjo yed at least a few years  with him. He hoped they had
been goo d years . He had liked Claire Randall very much—no,
that was to damn her with faint praise. If he were truthful, he
had loved her , and for her own sake as well as her daughter ’ s.
More th an that. He had wanted  badly for her to find her
Jamie Fraser , to live happily  ever after with him. The
knowledge—or more accurately , the hope—that she had done
so had been a s mall talisman to him; a witness that enduring
love was possible, a love strong enough to withstand
separation and hardship, strong enough to outlast time. And
yet all flesh was mortal; no love could outlast that fact.
He g ripped the edge of the table, trying to get himself under
control. Foolish, he told himself. Thoroughly foolish. And yet
he felt as bereft as he had when the Reverend had died; as
though he were himself newly orphaned.
Realization cam e as a fresh blow . He couldn’ t show this to
Bree, he couldn’ t. She’d known the risk, of course, but—no.
She wouldn’ t have imagined anything like this.
It was the purest chance that had led him to find it. He had
been lo oking for the lyrics of old ballads to add to his
repertoire, thumbing through a book of country songs. An
illustration had shown the original newspaper page on which
one ball ad had first been published, and Roger , idly browsing,
had glanced at the archaic n otices posted on the same
newspaper page, his eye caught by the name “Fraser .”
The shock was beginning to we ar of f a little, though grief
had settl ed in the pit of his stom ach, nagging as the pain of an
ulcer . He was a scholar and the son of a scholar; he had grown
up surrounded by books, imbued since childhood with thesanctity of the printed word. H e felt like a murderer as he
groped for his penknife and stealthily opened it, glancing
around to be sure he was unobserved.
It w as instinct more than reaso n; the instinct that leads a
man to want to clear up the rem ains of an accident, to lay a
decent covering over the bodies, to obliterate the visible traces
of disaster , even though the tragedy itself remains.
W ith the folded page lying hidden in his pocket like a
severed thumb, he left the library , to walk the rainy streets of
Oxford.
The walking calmed him, made it possible to think
rationally again,  to force his own feelings back long enough to
plan wh at he must do, how to protect Brianna from a grief that
would be more profound and longer felt than his own.
He had checked the bibliographi c information in the front of
the book; published in 1906 by a small British press. It
wouldn’ t be widely available, then; but still something Brianna
might stumble over in her own researches.
It wasn’ t a logic al place to look  for information of the sort
she was seeking, but the book was titled Songs and Ballads of
the Eighteenth Century . He knew well enough that historian’ s
curiosity that led to impulsive p okings in unlikely places; she
would k now enough to do that too. Still more, he knew the
child’ s h unger for knowledge— any knowledge—that might
lead her to look  at anything dealing with the period, in an
ef fort to imagine her parents’ surroundings, to build a vision of
lives she could neither see nor share.
Long od ds, but not long enough. Someone jostled him in
passing, and he realized that he had been leaning on the bridge
railing for several minutes, watching raindrops patter on the
surface of the river without seeing them. Slowly , he turned
down the street, oblivious of the shops and the mushroom
herds of umbrellas.
There w as no way to ensure that  she would never see a copy
of that book; this might be the only copy , or there might behundreds, lying like time bombs in libraries all over the U.S.
The ache in his guts was getting worse. He was soaked
through by now , and freezing. Inside, he felt a deeper cold
spreading from a new thought: What might Brianna do, if she
found out?
She would be devastated, grief-stricken. But then? He was
himself convinced that the past could not be changed; the
things Claire had told him had made him sure of it. She and
Jamie Fraser had tried to avert the slaughter at Culloden, to no
avail. S he had tried to save her future husband, Frank, by
saving h is ances tor , Jack Randall—and failed, only to find that
Jack had  never been Frank’ s anc estor after all, but had married
his youn ger brother ’ s pregnant lover in order to legitimize the
child when the brother died.
No, the past might twist on itse lf like a writhing snake, but
it could not be changed. He wasn’ t at all sure that Brianna
shared his conviction, though.
How do you mo urn a time-traveler?  s he ’d asked him . If he
showed her the notice, she could mourn truly; she would
know . The knowledge would wound her terribly , but she
would heal, and could put the past behind her . If.
If it wasn’ t for the stones on Craigh na Dun. The stone
circle and its dreadful promise of possibility .
Claire h ad gone through the stones of Craigh na Dun on the
ancient fire feast of Samhain, o n the first day of November ,
nearly two years before.
Roger sh ivered, and not from t he cold. The hairs stood up
on the back of h is neck whenever he thought of it. It had been
a cle ar , m ild fall  morning, that d awn of the Feast of All Saints,
with nothing to disturb the gras sy peace of the hill where the
circle of stones stood sentinel: Nothing until Claire had
touched the great cleft stone, and vanished into the past.
Then the earth h ad seemed to dissolve under his own feet,
and the air had r ipped away with a roar that echoed inside his
head lik e cannon fire. He had gone blind in a blast of light anddark; only his memories of the last time had kept him from
utter panic.
He’d ha d hold of Brianna’ s hand. Reflex closed his grip,
even as all sense s disappeared. It was like being dropped from
a th ousand feet into ice-cold water; terrible vertigo and a
shock so intense, he could fee l no sensation but the shock
itself. B lind and  deaf, bereft of sense and senses, he had been
conscious of two last thoughts, the remnants of his
consciousness flicking out like a candleflame in a hurricane.
I’m dying,  he had thought, with great calmness. And then,
Don’ t let go .
The dawning sun had fallen in  a bright path through the
cleft sto ne; Claire had walked a long it. When Roger stirred at
last and raised h is head, the sun of late afternoon glowed gold
and lave nder behind the great stone, leaving it black against
the sky .
He w as lying on  Brianna, sheltering her with his body . She
was unc onscious but breathing, her face desperately pale
against t he dark red of her hair . W eak as he was, there was no
question of his b eing able to carry her down the steep hillside
to th e car below ; her father ’ s daughter , she was nearly six feet
tall, only a few inches shorter than Roger himself.
He had huddled over her , holding her head in his lap,
stroking her face and shivering , until just before sunset. She
had opened her eyes then, as dark a blue as the fading sky , and
whispered, “She’ s gone?”
“It’ s all  right,” Roger had whispered back. He bent and
kissed her cold forehead. “It’ s all right; I’ll take care of you.”
He’d meant it. But how?
It was getting dark by the time he returned to his rooms. He
could hear a clatter from the dining hall as he passed, and he
smelled boiled ham and baked  beans, but supper was the
farthest thing from his mind.He s quelched up to his rooms and dropped his wet things in
a heap on the f loor . He dried h imself, then sat naked on the
bed, tow el for go tten in his hand , staring at the desk and at the
wooden box that held Brianna’ s letters.
He wou ld do anything to save h er from grief. He would do
much more to save her from the threat of the stones.
Claire had gone back—he hoped—from 1968 to 1766. And
then died in 1776. Now it was 1970. A person going back now
would—might—end in 1768. There would be time. That was
the hell of it; there would be time.
Even if Brianna thought as he d id—or if he could convince
her—that the past could not be changed, could she live
through the next seven years, knowing that the window of
opportunity was  closing, that her only chance ever to know her
father , see her m other again, was disappearing day by day? It
was one thing to let them go, not knowing where they were or
what had  happened to them; it was another to know explicitly ,
and to do nothing.
He h ad known Brianna for mo re than two years, yet been
with her  for only a few month s of that time. And yet, they
knew each other very well in so me respects. How could they
not, hav ing shar ed such an exp erience? Then there had been
the lette rs—dozens, two or three or four each week—and the
rare brief holidays, spent between enchantment and frustration,
that left him aching with need of her .
Y es, he knew her . She was quiet, but possessed of a fierce
determination that he thought would not submit to grief
without a fight. And while she  was cautious, once her mind
was made up, she acted with  hair -raising dispatch. If she
decided to risk the passage, he couldn’ t stop her .
His hands closed tight on the wadded towel, and his
stomach dropped, remembering the chasm of the circle and the
void that had nearly swallowed them. The only thing more
terrifying was the thought of losing Brianna before he had ever
truly had her .He’d ne ver lied to her . But the impact of shock and grief
was slowly receding as the rudiments of a plan formed in his
mind. He stood up and wrapped the towel around his waist.
One lett er wouldn’ t do it. It would have to be slow , a
process of suggestion, of gentle discouragement. He thought it
wouldn’ t be dif ficult; he had fou nd almost nothing in a year of
searching in Scotland, beyond the report of the burning of
Fraser ’ s print shop in Edinbur g h—he shuddered involuntarily
at the thought of flames. Now he knew why , of course; they
must have emigrated soon after , though he had found no trace
of them on the ship’ s rolls he had searched.
T ime to  give up, he would suggest. Let the past rest—and
the d ead bury th e dead. T o keep  on looking, in the face of no
evidence, would border on obsession. He would suggest, very
subtly , t hat it was unhealthy , this looking back—now it was
time to look forw ard, lest she wa ste her life in futile searching.
Neither of her parents would have wanted that.
The room was chilly , but he barely noticed.
I’ll take car e of you,  h e’d said, and meant it. W as
suppressing a dangerous truth the same as lying? W ell, if it
was, then he’d li e. T o give consent to do wrong was a sin, he’d
heard th at from his early days. T hat was all right, he’d risk his
soul for her , and willingly .
He rum maged in the drawer fo r a pen. Then he stopped,
bent, and reached two fingers i nto the pocket of his sopping
jeans. The paper was frayed and soggy , half disintegrating
already . W ith steady fingers, he tore it into tiny pieces,
disregarding the cold sweat that ran in trickles from his face.2 3
T H E  S K U L L  B E N E A T H  T H E  S K I N
I  had  told Jamie that I didn’ t min d being far from civilization;
wherever there were people, there would be work for a healer .
Duncan had been good as his w ord, returning in the spring
of 1768 with eight former Ardsmuir men and their families,
ready to take up homesteading on Fraser ’ s Ridge, as the place
was now known. W ith some thi rty souls to hand, there was an
immediate call on my mildly  rusty services, to stitch up
wounds and treat fevers, to lance abscessed boils and scrape
infected gums. T wo of the wom en were pregnant, and it was
my j oy t o delive r healthy children, a boy and a girl, both born
in early spring.
My fame—if that’ s the word—as a healer soon spread
outside our tiny settlement, and I found myself called farther
and farth er afiel d, to tend the ills of folk on isolated hill farms
scattered over thirty miles of wild mountain terrain. In
addition, I made rare visits w ith Ian to Anna Ooka to see
Nayawenne, returning with baskets and jars of useful herbs.
At first, Jamie had insisted that he or Ian must go with me to
the farther places, but it was soon apparent that neither of them
could be spared; it was time for  the first planting, with ground
to break  and harrow , corn and barley to be planted, to say
nothing of the usual chores re quired to keep a small farm
running. In addition to the horse s and mules, we had acquired
a small flock of chickens, a de praved-looking black boar to
meet the  social needs of the pi g, and—luxury of luxuries—a
milch goat, all of whom required to be fed and watered and
generally kept from killing themselves or being eaten by bears
or panthers.
So more  and more often I went alone when some stranger
appeared suddenly in the dooryard, asking for healer or
midwife. Danie l Rawlings’ s casebook began to acquire new
entries, and the larder was enri ched by the gifts of hams andvenison haunches, bags of grain and bushels of apples, with
which my patients repaid my attentions. I never asked for
payment, but something was always of fered—and poor as we
were, anything at all was welcome.
My backcountry patients came from many places, and many
spoke neither English nor F rench; there were German
Lutherans, Qua kers, Scots and Scotch-Irish, and a lar ge
settlement of Moravian brethren at Salem, who spoke a
peculiar dialect  of what I thought  wa s Czechoslovakian. I
usually managed, though; in most cases, someone could
interpret for me, and at the w orst, I could fall back on the
language of hand and body—”W here does it hurt?” is easy to
understand in any tongue.
August 1768
I wa s ch illed to the bone. Despite my best ef forts to keep the
cloak w rapped tightly round me, the wind ripped it from my
body , an d sent it billowing like sail canvas. It beat round the
head of the boy walking next to me, and jerked me sideways in
my s addle with t he force of the gale. The rain drove in beneath
the flapping folds like frozen  needles, and I was soaked
through gown and petticoats before we reached Mueller ’ s
Creek.
The creek itself was boiling past, uprooted saplings, rocks
and drowned branches bubbling briefly to the surface.
T ommy Mueller peered at the torrent, shoulders hunched
nearly to  the brim of the slouch  hat he wore pulled down over
his ears. I could see doubt etched in every line of his body , and
bent close to shout in his ear .
“Stay here!” I bellowed, pitching my voice below the shriek
of the wind.
He shook his head, mouthing  something at me, but I
couldn’ t hear . I shook my own head vigorously , and pointed up
the bank; the mu ddy soil was cr umbly here; I could see small
chunks of the black dirt melt away even as I watched.“Get back!” I shouted.
He p ointed emphatically himse lf—back in the direction of
the farmhouse—and reached for my reins. Clearly he thought
it was too dangerous; he wanted me to come back to the house,
to wait out the storm.
He definitely had a point. On the other hand, I could see the
stream widening, even as I watc hed, the ravenous water eating
away the soft ba nk in gobbets and chunks. W ait much longer ,
and no one cou ld cross—neither would it be safe for days
after; flo ods like this kept the water high for as long as a week,
as the rains from higher up the mountain trickled down to feed
the torrents.
The thought of b eing cooped up in a four -room house for a
week with all ten Muellers was enough to spur me to
recklessness. Pulling the reins from T ommy’ s grasp, I wheeled
about, t he horse tossing its head against the rain, stepping
carefully on the slick mud.
W e reached the upper slopes of the bank, where a layer of
thick de ad leaves gave better footing. I turned the horse,
motioned T omm y back out of the way , and leaned forward like
a steeple chaser , elbows digging  into the bag of barley bound
over the saddle in front of m e—my payment for services
rendered.
The shift of my weight was enough; the horse was no more
anxious to hang about here than I was. I felt the sudden thrust
as the hindquart ers dropped and bunched, and then we were
flying down the slope like a ru naway toboggan. A jolt and a
moment of giddy freefall, then a resounding splash, and I was
up past my thighs in freezing water .
My hands were so cold, they  might as well have been
welded to the reins, but I had nothing useful to of fer in terms
of guidance. I let my arms go slack, giving the horse his head.
I could feel huge muscles moving rhythmically under my legs
as it swam, and  the even more powerful shove of the water
rushing past us. It dragged at my  skirts, threatening to pull me
of f into the sur ge.Then ca me the jar and scrabble of hooves against the stream
bottom, and we were out, pou ring water like a colander . I
turned in the sad dle, to see T ommy Mueller on the other side,
his jaw hanging  open under hi s hat. I couldn’ t let go of the
reins to wave, but bowed toward him ceremoniously , then
nudged the horse with my heels and turned toward home.
The hoo d of my cloak had fallen  back when we jumped, but
it made  no great dif ference; I  couldn’ t get much wetter . I
knuckled a wet strand of hair o ut of my eyes and turned the
horse’ s head toward the upland  trail, relieved to be headed
home, rain or no.
I had been at the Muellers’ cabin for three days, seeing
eighteen-year -old Petronella through her first labor . It would
be her last, too, according to Petronella. Her seventeen-year -
old husband, peeking tentatively into the room in the middle of
the seco nd day , had received a burst of German invective from
Petronella that sent him stumpin g back to the men’ s refuge in
the barn, ears bright red with mortification.
Still, a few hou rs later , I had seen Freddy—looking much
younger than seventeen—kne el tentatively by his wife’ s
bedside, face whiter than her shift as he reached a hesitant,
scrubbed finger to push aside the blanket covering his
daughter .
He s tared dumbly at the round h ead, furred with soft black,
then looked at his wife, as though in need of prompting.
“Ist sie nicht wunderschon?”  Petronella said softly .
He n odded, slowly , then laid his  head on her lap and began
to cry . The women had all sm iled kindly , and gone back to
fixing dinner .
It had been a good dinner , too; the food was one of the
benefits of house calls to the Mu ellers. Even now , my stomach
was co mfortably distended with dumplings and fried
Blutwurst,  and the lingering taste of bu ttered eggs in my
mouth p rovided some small distraction from the general
discomfort of my present situation.I hoped that Jamie and Ian had managed something
adequate to eat in my absence. This being the end of summer
but n ot yet harve st time, the pantry shelves were nowhere near
the height of wh at I hoped wou ld be their autumn bounty , but
still ther e were cheeses on the shelf, a huge stoneware crock of
salted fish on the floor , and sacks of flour , corn, rice, beans,
barley , and oatmeal.
Jamie could  i n fact cook—a t least so far as dressing game
and roas ting it over a fire—and I had done my best to initiate
Ian into  the mysteries of making oatmeal parritch, but, they
being men, I suspected that they hadn’ t bothered, choosing
instead to survive on raw onions and dried meat.
I couldn’ t tell whether it was simply that after a day spent in
the manly pursuits of chopping down trees, plowing fields, and
carrying deer carcasses over mountains, they honestly were
too exhausted to think of assembling a proper meal, or whether
they did it on purpose, so that I would feel necessary .
The win d had dropped, now that I was in the shelter of the
ridge, but the ra in was still pelti ng down, and the footing was
treacherous, as the mud of the  trail had liquified, leaving a
layer of fallen le aves floating on top, deceptive as quicksand. I
could feel the horse’ s discomfort as its hooves slipped with
each step.
“Good b oy ,” I said soothingly . “Keep it up, that’ s a good
fellow .” The horse’ s ears pricked slightly , but he kept his head
down, stepping carefully .
“Slewfoot?” I said. “How’ s that?”
The horse had no name at the moment—or rather he did, but
I did n’ t know w hat it was. The man from whom Jamie had
bought h im had called him by a German word that Jamie said
was not  at all s uitable for a lad y’ s horse. When I had asked
him to translate the word, he had merely compressed his lips
and look ed Scottish, from which I deduced that it must be
pretty ba d. I had meant to ask old Mrs. Mueller what it meant,
but had for gotten, in the haste of leaving.In an y case, Jam ie’ s theory was that the horse would reveal
his true— or at least speakable—name in the course of time,
and so we were all watching the  animal, in hopes of discerning
its chara cter . On the basis of a trial ride, Ian had suggested
Coney , but Jamie had merely s haken his head and said, no,
that wasn’ t it.
“T winkletoes?” I suggested. “Lightfoot? Damn!”
The hor se had come to a full s top, for obvious reasons. A
small freshet gur gled merrily down the hill, bounding from
rock to rock wi th gay abandon. It was beautiful, the rushing
water c lear as crystal over dark rock and green leaves.
Unfortunately , i t was also bounding over the remains of the
trail, which, unequal to the forc e of events, had slithered of f
the face of the hill into the valley below .
I s at still, drippi ng. There wasn’ t any way around. The hill
rose nearly perpendicularly on my right, shrubs and saplings
poking out of a cracked r ock face, and declined so
precipitously to the left that goin g down would have amounted
to suicide. Swearing under my breath, I backed the nameless
horse and turned around.
If it hadn’ t been for the flooded  creek, I would have gone
back to the Mue llers and let Jam ie and Ian fend for themselves
a bit longer . As  it was, I had no choice; it was find another
way home or stay here and drown.
W earily , we retraced our sloggin g steps. Less than a quarter -
mile from the washout, though, I found a spot where the
hillside fell away into a small saddle, a depression between
two “horns” of granite. Such formations were common; there
was a big one o n a nearby mou ntain, which had gained it the
name of Devil’ s Peak. If I could cross the saddle to the other
side of the hill, and pick my way along it, I would in time
come back to the trail where it crossed the ridge to the south.
From the saddle I had a mom entary clear view of the
foothills, and the blue hollow of the valley beyond. On the
other sid e, though, clouds hid th e tops of the mountains, blackwith rain, suf fused with an occasional flicker of hidden
lightning.
The win d had dropped, now th at the leading edge of the
storm had passed. The rain w as coming down even more
heavily , if such a thing was possible, and I stopped long
enough to pry m y cold fingers of f the reins and put up the
hood of my cloak.
The foo ting on this side of the hill was fair , the ground
being rocky but not too steep. W e picked our way through
small groves of red-berried mountain ash and lar ger stands of
oak. I noted th e location of a huge blackberry bramble for
future re ference, but didn’ t stop. I would be lucky to get home
by dark as it was.
T o distra ct myself from the cold trickles running down my
neck, I began an  mental inventory of the pantry . What could I
make for dinner , once I arrived?
Something quick, I thought, shivering, and something hot.
Stew would take too long; so wo uld soup. If there was squirrel
or rabbit, we m ight have it frie d, rolled in egg and cornmeal
batter . Or if not that, perhaps brose with a little bacon for
flavoring, and a couple of scrambled eggs with green onions.
I ducked, wincing. Despite the hood and the thickness of my
hair , the raindrops were beating on my scalp like hail pellets.
Then I realized that they wer e  hail pellets. T iny white
spheres pinged of f the horse’ s back, and rattled through the
oak leaves. W ithin seconds, the pellets were bigger , the size of
marbles, and the hail had grown  heavy enough that its popping
sounded like machine-gun fire o n the wet mats of leaves in the
clearings.
The horse flung up its head, sha king its mane vigorously in
an e f fort to esca pe the stinging pellets. Hastily , I reined in and
guided it into the semi-shelt er of a huge chestnut tree.
Underneath, it was noisy , but the hail slid of f the thick canopy
of leaves, leaving us protected.“Right,” I said. W ith some dif f iculty , I pried one hand of f
the reins and gave the horse a reassuring pat. “Easy , then.
W e’ll be all right, as long as we don’ t get struck by lightning.”
Evidently this statement had jogged someone’ s memory; a
silent fork of da zzling light split the black sky beyond Roan
Mountain. A few moments late r , the dull rumble of thunder
came booming up the hollow , dr owning out the rasp of hail on
the leaves overhead.
Sheet lig htning shimmered far away , across the mountains.
Then mo re bolts, sizzling across the sky , each succeeded by a
louder roll of thunder . The ha ilstorm passed, and the rain
resumed, peltin g down as har d as ever . The valley below
disappeared in cloud and mist, but the lightning lit the stark
mountain ridges like bones on an X ray .
“One hippopotamus, two hippopotamus, three
hippopotamus, four hippopot—” BWOOOM! The horse
jerked its head and stamped nervously .
“I k now just how you feel,” I told it, peering down the
valley . “Steady , though, steady . ” There it went again, a flash
that lit the dark  ridge and left the silhouette of the horse’ s
pricked ears imprinted on my retinas.
“One hippopotamus, two hippo—” I could have sworn the
ground shook. The horse let out a high-pitched scream and
reared a gainst my pull on the reins, hooves thrashing in the
leaves. The air reeked of ozone.
Flash.
“One,” I said thr ough my teeth. “Damn you, whoa! One hip
—”
Flash.
“One—”
Flash.
“Whoa! WHOA!”I wasn’ t  conscious of the fall at all; nor even the landing.
One mo ment I was sawing at th e reins, a thousand pounds of
panicked horse  going to piec es under me, shying in all
directions. The next, I was lying on my back, blinking up at a
spinning black sky , trying to will my diaphragm to work.
Echoes of the s hock of impact wavered through my flesh,
and I tried frantically to fit mys elf back into my body . Then I
drew breath, a painful gasp, and found myself shaking, the
shock turning to the first intimations of damage.
I lay still, ey es closed, concentrating on breathing,
conducting an inventory . The rain was still pounding down
onto my face, p uddling in my eye sockets and running down
into my ears. My face and hands  were numb. My arms moved.
I could breathe a little easier now .
My legs. The left one hurt, but not in any threatening way;
only a bruised knee. I rolled hea vily onto my side, impeded by
my wet,  bulky garments. Still, it was the heavy clothing that
had saved me from serious damage.
Above me came an uncertain whinny , audible amid the
booming thunde r . I looked up, dizzy , and saw the horse’ s head,
protruding from a thicket of buckbrush some thirty feet
overhead. Below  the thicket, a steep, rocky slope fell away; a
long scrape mark toward the bottom showed where I had
struck and rolled before ending up in my present position.
W e had been standing virtually on the edge of this small
precipice without my seeing it, screened as it was by the heavy
growth o f shrub s. The horse’ s pa nic had sent it to the edge, but
evidently it had sensed the da nger and caught itself before
going over—not before letting me slide of f into space, though.
“Y ou bloody bugger!” I said. And wondered whether the
unknown German name meant something similar . “I could
have broken my neck!” I wiped the mud from my face with a
hand that still shook, and looked about me for a way back up.
There wasn’ t one. Behind me, the rocky clif f face
continued, mer ging into one of t he granite horns. Before me, itended a bruptly , in a plunge straight downward into a small
hollow . The slope I stood on dec lined into this hollow as well,
rolling down through clumps of yellow-wood and sumac to the
banks of a small creek some sixty feet below .
I sto od q uite stil l, trying to think . No one knew where I was.
I  d idn’ t know ex actly where I was, come to that. W orse, no
one would be looking for me for some time. Jamie would
think I was still at Muellers’ because of the rain. The Muellers
would of course have no reason to think I hadn’ t made it
safely ho me; even if they had doubts, they couldn’ t follow me,
because of the flooded creek. A nd by the time anyone found
the washed-out trail, any traces of my passage would long
since have been obliterated by the rain.
I wa s uninjured, that was someth ing. I was also afoot, alone,
without food, moderately lost, and thoroughly wet. About the
only certainty was that I wasn’ t going to die of thirst.
The lightning was still glancin g to and fro like dueling
pitchforks in the sky above, tho ugh the thunder had faded to a
dull rumble in the distance. I had no particular fear of being
struck by lightning now—not with so many better candidates
standing about, in the form of gigantic trees—but finding
shelter seemed a very good idea nonetheless.
It w as st ill rainin g; drops rolled of f the end of my nose with
monotonous regularity . Limping on my bruised knee and
swearing quite a bit, I made my  way down the slippery slope
to the edge of the stream.
This cre ek, too, was swollen by the rain; I could see the tops
of d rowned bushes sticking out of the water , leaves trailing
limply in  the rushing current. There was no bank to speak of; I
fought my way through the gra sping claws of holly and red-
cedar toward the rocky clif f-face to the south; perhaps there
would be a cave or hollow there that would of fer shelter of a
sort.
I f ound nothing but tumbled rocks, black with wet and hard
to navigate. Some distance beyond, though, I saw something
else that of fered a small possibility of shelter .A huge red cedar tree had fallen across the stream, its roots
undermined as the water ate away the soil in which it stood. It
had fallen away from me and struck the clif f, so that the thick
crown sprawled  into the water and over the rocks, the trunk
canted across the stream at a shallow angle; on my side, I
could see the huge mat of its exposed roots, a bulwark of
cracked earth and small bushe s heaved up about them. The
cavity u nder them might not be complete shelter , but it looked
better than standing in the open or crouching in the bushes.
I hadn’ t even paused to think that the shelter might have
attracted bears, catamounts, or other unfriendly fauna.
Fortunately , it hadn’ t.
It was a space about five feet long and five wide, dank,
dark, and clammy . The ceiling was composed of the tree’ s
great gn arled roo ts, packed with sandy earth, like the roof of a
badger ’ s sett. But it was a solid c eiling, for all that; the floor of
churned earth was damp but not muddy , and for the first time
in hours rain was not drumming on my skull.
Exhausted, I crawled into the farthest corner , set my wet
shoes b eside me, and went to  sleep. The cold of my wet
clothes made me dream vividly , in jumbled visions of blood
and chil dbirth, trees and rocks a nd rain, and I woke frequently ,
in that half-conscious way of utter tiredness, falling asleep
again in seconds.
I d reamt that I was giving birth. I felt no pain, but saw the
emer ging head as though I stood between my own thighs,
midwife and mother both together . I took the naked child in
my arms , still smeared with the blood that came from both of
us, and gave her to her father . I  gave her to Frank, but it was
Jamie who took the caul from  her face and said, “She’ s
beautiful.”
Then I woke and  slept, finding m y way among boulders and
waterfalls, ur gently seeking something I had lost. W oke and
slept, pu rsued through woods by something fearsome and
unknown. W oke and slept, a knife in my hand, red with blood
—but whose, I did not know .I w oke all the way to the smell of burning, and sat bolt
upright. The rain had stopped; it was the silence that wakened
me, I thought. The smell of smoke was still strong in my
nostrils, though—it wasn’ t part of the dream.
I poked my head out of my burrow like a snail cautiously
emer ging from its shell. The sk y was a pale purple-gray , shot
with stre aks of orange over the mountains. The woods around
me were still, and dripping. It was nearly sundown, and
darkness was gathering in the hollows.
I cra wled out al l the way , and looked around. The creek at
my back  rushed past in full spate, its gur gling the only sound.
The ground rose in front of me to a small ridge. At the top of
this stood a lar ge balsam poplar tree, the source of the smoke.
The tree  had been struck by ligh tning; half of it still bore green
leaves, the canopy bushy against the pale sky . The other half
was blac kened and charred all down one side of the massive
trunk. W isps of white smoke rose from it like ghosts escaping
an enchanter ’ s bondage, and red lines of fire showed
fleetingly , glowing beneath the blackened shell.
I looked about for my shoes, but couldn’ t find them in the
shadows. Not bothering, I made  my way up the ridge toward
the blas ted tree, panting with ef fort. All my muscles were
stif fened with sleep and cold; I felt like a tree come awkwardly
to life myself, stumping uphill on gnarled and clumsy roots.
It was warm near the tree. Blissfully , wonderfully warm.
The air smelled of ash and burnt soot, but it was warm. I stood
as c lose as I dared, spreading my cloak out wide, and stood
still, steaming.
For some time I didn’ t even try  to think; just stood there,
feeling my chilled flesh thaw an d soften again into something
resembling humanity . But as my blood began to flow again,
my bruises began to ache, and I felt the deeper ache of hunger
as well; it had been a long time since breakfast.
Likely to be a lot longer time till supper , I thought grimly .
The dark  was creeping up from the hollow , and I was still lost.I gla nced across to the opposite ridge; not a sign of the bloody
horse.
“T raitor ,” I muttered. “Probably  gone of f to join a herd of
elk or something.”
I c hafed my han ds together; my clothes were halfway dry ,
but the temperature was dropping; it would be a chilly night.
W ould it  be better to spend the n ight here, in the open, near the
blasted t ree, or ought I to retur n to my burrow while I could
still see to do so?
A snapp ing in the brush behin d me decided me. The tree
had cooled now; though the cha rred wood was still hot to the
touch, t he fire had burned out. It would be no deterrent to
prowling night hunters. Lacking fire or weapons, my only
defense was that of the hunted; lie hidden through the dark
hours, like the m ice and rabbits. W ell, I had to go back to fetch
my shoes anyway .
Reluctantly leaving the last vestiges of warmth, I made my
way bac k down  to the fallen tree. Crawling in, I saw a pale
blur against the darker earth in t he corner . I set my hand on it,
and found not the softness of my buckskin moccasins, but
something hard and smooth.
My insti ncts had grasped the rea lity of the object before my
brain co uld retrieve the word, and I snatched my hand away . I
sat for a moment, my heart pounding. Then curiosity overcame
atavistic fear , and I began to scoop away the sandy loam
around it.
It was indeed a skull, complete with lower jaw , though the
mandible was attached only by the remnants of dried ligament.
A fragment of broken vertebra rattled in the foramen magnum.
” ‘H ow long will a man lie i’  the earth ere he rot?’ ” I
murmured, turni ng the skull over in my hands. The bone was
cold and  damp, slightly roughe ned by exposure to the damp.
The light was to o dim to see details, but I could feel the heavy
ridges o ver the brows, and the slickness of smooth enamel on
the cani nes. Lik ely a man, and  not an old one; most of theteeth we re present, and not und uly worn—at least insofar as I
could tell with a groping thumb.
How long? Eight or nine yea r , the grave-digger said to
Hamlet. I had no notion whether Shakespeare knew anything
about fo rensics, but it seemed a reasonable estimate to me.
Longer than nine years, then.
How had he come here? By violence, my instincts
answered, though my brain was not far behind. An explorer
might die of disease, hunger or exposure—I firmly suppressed
that line of thou ght, trying to ignore my growling stomach and
damp clothes—but he wouldn’ t end up buried under a tree.
The Cherokee and T uscarora buried their dead, all right, but
not like this, alone in a hollow . And not in fragments, either . It
was that  broken  bit of vertebra  that had told me the story at
once; the edges were compressed, the broken face sheared
clean, not shattered.
“Somebody took a real dislike to you, didn’ t they?” I said.
“Didn’ t stop with a scalp; they took your whole head.”
Which made me wonder—was the rest of him here, too? I
rubbed a hand across my face,  thinking, but after all, I had
nothing better to do; I wasn’ t go ing anywhere before daylight,
and the likelihood of sleep had grown remote with the
discovery of my companion. I set the skull carefully to one
side, and began to dig.
It w as fully night by now , but even the darkest of nights
outdoors is seldom completely w ithout light. The sky was still
covered with cloud, which reflected considerable light, even in
my shallow burrow .
The sandy earth was soft, and easy to dig in, but after a few
minutes of scratching, my knuckles and fingertips were rubbed
raw , and  I crawled outside, long enough to find a stick to dig
with. A little more probing yie lded me something hard; not
bone, I thought, and not me tal, either . Stone, I decided,
fingering the dark oval. Just a river stone? I thought not; the
surface was very smooth, but w ith something incised in it; aglyph of some kind, though my touch was not suf ficiently
sensitive to tell me what it was.
More digging yielded nothing. Either the rest of Y orick
wasn’ t h ere, or it was buried so far down that I had no chance
of disco vering it . I put the stone in my pocket, sat back on my
heels, and rubbed my sandy hands on my skirts. At least the
exercise had warmed me again.
I sat down again and picked up the skull, holding it in my
lap. Gruesome as it was, it wa s the semblance of company ,
some di straction from my own plight. And I was quite aware
that all my actions of the last hour or so had been distractions;
designed to fight of f the panic  that I could feel submer ged
below the surface of my mind, waiting to erupt like the sharp
end of a drowned tree branch. It was going to be a long night.
“Right,” I said aloud to the skull. “Read any good books
lately? No, I su ppose you don’ t get round much anymore.
Poetry , m aybe?” I cleared my t hroat and started in on Keats,
warming up with “W ritten in Disgust of V ulgar Superstition”
and going on with “Ode on a Grecian Urn.”
” ‘… For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!’ “  I declaimed.
“There’ s more of that one, but I for get. Not too bad, though,
was it? W ant to try a little Shelley? ‘Ode to the W est W ind’ is
good—you’d like that one, I think.”
It occur red to me to wonder w hy I thought so; I had no
particular reason  to think Y orick was an Indian rather than a
European, but I realized that I di d think so—perhaps it was the
stone I had found with him. Shrugging, I set in again, trusting
that the repellen t ef fect of grea t English poetry would be the
equal of a cam pfire, so far as the bears and panthers were
concerned.
“Make me thy lyr e, even as the for est is:
 What if my leaves ar e falling like its own!
 The tumult of thy mighty harmonies
 W ill take fr om both a deep, autumnal tone,
 Sweet though in sadness. Be thou, Spirit fier ce,
 My spirit! Be thou me, impetuous one!
 “Drive my dead thoughts over the universe
 Like wither ’d leaves to quicken a new birth;
 And, by the incantation of this verse,
“Scatter , as fr om an unextinguish’d hearth
 Ashes and sparks, my wor ds among mankind!
 Be thr ough my lips to unawaken’d earth
“The trumpet of a pr ophecy! O W ind…”
The final stanza faded on my lips. There was a light on the
ridge. A  small spark, growing to a flame. At first I thought it
was the lightning-blasted tree, some smoldering ember come
to li fe—but then it moved. It glided slowly down the hill
toward me, floating just above the bushes.
I spr ang to my feet, realizing only then that I had no shoes
on. Frantically , I groped about the floor , covering the small
space again and again. But it was no use. My shoes were gone.
I seized the skull and stood barefoot, turning to face the
light.
I w atche d the light come nearer , drifting down the hill like a
milkweed puf f. One thought floated in my paralyzed mind—a
random line of Shelley’ s: Fiend, I defy the e! with a calm, fixed
mind . Some where in the dimmer recesses of my
consciousness, something observed that Shelley had had much
better ne rves tha n I. I clutched the skull closer . It wasn’ t much
of a weapon—but somehow I d idn’ t think that whatever was
coming would be deterred by knives or pistols, either .
It wasn’ t only that the wet s urroundings made it seem
grossly improbable that anyone was strolling through the
woods w ith a blazing torch. The light didn’ t burn like a pine
torch or  oil lantern. It didn’ t flicker , but burned with a soft,
steady glow .
It floate d a few feet above the ground, just about where
someone would hold a torch they carried before them. It drewslowly nearer , at the pace of a m an walking. I could see it bob
slightly , moving to the rhythm of a steady stride.
I co wered in my burrow , half hidden by the bank of earth
and severed roots. I was freezing  cold, but sweat ran down my
sides and I could smell the reek of my own fear . My numb toes
curled in the dirt, wanting to run.
I had seen St. Elmo’ s fire before, at sea. Eerie as that was,
its liqui d blue crackle didn’ t r esemble at all the pale light
approaching. Th is had neither s park nor color; only a spectral
glow . M arsh gas, people in Cross Creek said when the
mountain lights were mentioned.
Ha, I said to myself, though soundlessly . Marsh gas my left
foot!
The light moved through a small thicket of alders, and out
into the clearing before me. It wasn’ t marsh gas.
He was tall, and he was naked. Beyond a breechclout, he
wore nothing but paint; long stripes of red down arms and legs
and torso, and h is face was solid  black, from chin to forehead.
His hair was gr eased and dressed in a crest, from which two
turkey feathers stif fly pointed.
I wa s invisible, completely hidden in the darkness of my
refuge, while the torch he he ld washed him in soft light,
gleaming of f his hairless chest and shoulders, shadowing the
orbits of his eyes. But he knew I was there.
I d idn’ t dare to move. My breat h sounded painfully loud in
my ears. He sim ply stood there, perhaps a dozen feet away ,
and look ed straight into the da rk where I was, as though it
were the broadest day . And the l ight of his torch burned steady
and soundless, pallid as a corp se candle, the wood of it not
consumed.
I d on’ t know ho w long I had been standing there before it
occurred to me t hat I was no longer afraid. I was still cold, but
my h eart had slo wed to its norm al pace, and my bare toes had
uncurled.“Whatever do you want?” I said, and only then realized that
we had been in some sort of communication for some time.
Whatever this was, it had no w ords. Nothing coherent passed
between us—but something passed, nonetheless.
The clou ds had lifted, shredding away before a light wind,
and dark  streaks of starlit sky showed through rents in the
racing c irrus. Th e wood was qu iet, but in the usual way of a
drenched night-wood; the creaks and sighs of tall trees
moving, the rustle of shrubs brushed by the wind’ s restless
edge, and in th e background the constant rush of invisible
water , echoing the turbulence of the air above.
I bre athed deeply , feeling sudde nly very much alive. The air
was thick and sweet with the breath of green plants, the tang of
herbs an d musk of dead leaves, overlaid and interlaced with
the scen ts of the storm—wet roc k, damp earth, and rising mist,
and a sharp hint of ozone, sudden as the lightning that had
struck the tree.
Earth an d air , I thought sudden ly , and fire and water too.
And her e I stood with all the elements; in their midst and at
their mercy .
“What d o you want?” I said again, feeling helpless. “I can’ t
do anything for you. I know you’re there; I can see you. But
that’ s all.”
Nothing moved, no words were spoken. But quite clearly
the thou ght form ed in my mind , in a voice that was not my
own.
That’ s enough,  it said.
W ithout haste, he turned and w alked away . By the time he
had gon e two dozen paces, the light of his torch disappeared,
fading into nonexistence like the final glow of twilight into
night.
“Oh,” I said, a little blankly . “Goodness.” My legs were
trembling, and I sat down, the skull—which I had almost
for gotten—cradled in my lap.I sa t there for a long time, watching and listening, but
nothing further happened. The mountains surrounded me, dark
and impenetrable. Perhaps in the morning, I could find my
way back to the trail, but for now , wandering about in darkness
could lead to nothing but disaster .
I was no longe r afraid; my fear had left me during my
encounter with—whatever it was. I was still cold, though, and
very , ve ry hungry . I put down the skull and curled myself up
beside it, pulling my damp clo ak around me. It took a long
time to fall asleep, and I lay in m y chilly burrow watching the
evening stars wheel overhead through rifts in the cloud.
I tried to make sense of the last half hour , but there was
really nothing to make sense of ; nothing, really , had happened.
And yet  it had; he had been there. The sense of him remained
with me, somehow vaguely c omforting, and at last I fell
asleep, cheek pillowed on a clump of dead leaves.
I dreamt  uneasily , because of cold and hunger; a procession
of disjo int im ages. Lightning -blasted trees, blazing like
torches. T rees uprooted from the earth, walking on their roots
with a dreadful lurching gait.
L ying in the rain with my throat cut, warm blood pulsing
down across my chest, a queer  comfort to my chilling flesh.
My fingers numb, unable to move. The rain striking my skin
like hail , each cold drop a hammer blow , and then the rain
itself seemed warm, and soft upon my face. Buried alive, black
soil showering down into open eyes.
I w oke, heart po unding. Lay silent. It was deep night now;
the sky stretched clear and endless overhead, and I lay in a
bowl of darkness. After a time, I slept again, pursued by
dreams.
W olves howling in the distance. Fleeing panicked through a
forest of white aspen that stood in snow , the trees’ red sap
glowing like bloody jewels on white-paper trunks. A man
standing in the bleeding trees with his head plucked bald, save
a standing crest of black, greased hair . He had deep eyes and ashattered smile, and the blood on his breast was brighter than
the tree sap.
W olves, much closer . Howling and barking and the scent of
blood hot in m y own nose, running with the pack, running
from the pack. Running. Harefooted, white-toothed, and the
ghost of blood a taste in my mouth, a tingle in my nose.
Hunger . Chase and catch and kill and blood. Heart hammering,
blood racing, sheer panic of the hunted.
I felt my armbone crack with a noise like a dry branch
snapping, and tasted marrow warm and salty , slippery on my
tongue.
Something brushed my face and I opened my eyes. Great
yellow eyes stared into mine, f rom the dark ruf f of a white-
toothed wolf. I s creamed and struck at it and the beast started
back with a startled “W oof!”
I flound ered to my knees and crouched there, gibbering. It
had just  gone daybreak. The dawning light was new and
tender , a nd showed me plainly the huge black outline of…
Rollo.
“Oh, Jes us God , what the bloo dy hell  are you doing here,
frigging bloody  horrible…filth y beast!” I might eventually
have gotten a grip on myself, but Jamie got one first.
Big hand s pulled  me up and out of my hiding place, held me
tight and patted me anxiously , c hecking for damage. The wool
of his plaid was  soft against my face; it smelt of wet and lye
soap and his own male scent and I breathed it in like oxygen.
“Are ye all rig ht? For God’ s sake, Sassenach, are ye all
right?”
“No,” I said. “Y es,” I said, and started to cry .
It didn’ t  last long; it was no mo re than the shock of relief. I
tried to say as m uch, but Jamie wasn’ t listening. He scooped
me up in his arms, filthy as I was, and began to carry me
toward the small stream.“Hush, then,” he said, squeezing me tightly against him.
“Hush, mo chridhe . It’ s all right now; you’re safe.”
I w as still fuddle d with cold and dreams. Alone so long with
no voice but m y own, his sou nded odd, unreal and hard to
understand. The warm solidness of his grasp was real, though.
“W ait,” I said, t ugging feebly at his shirt. “W ait, I for got. I
have to—”
“Jesus, Uncle Jamie, look at this!”
Jamie turned, holding me. Y ou ng Ian was standing in the
mouth o f my refuge, framed in dangling roots, holding up the
skull.
I felt Jamie’ s muscles tighten as he saw it.
“Holy God, Sassenach, what’ s that?”
“Who, you mean,” I said. “I don ’ t know . Nice chap, though.
Don’ t let Rollo at him; he wouldn’ t like it.” Rollo was snif fing
the skull with intense concentration, wet black nostrils flaring
with interest.
Jamie peered down into my face, frowning slightly .
“Are ye sure you’re quite all right, Sassenach?”
“No,” I said, though in fact my wits were coming back as I
woke up  all the way . “I’m cold and I’m starving. Y ou didn’ t
happen to bring any breakfast, did you?” I asked longingly . “I
could murder a plateful of eggs.”
“No,” he said, setting me dow n while he groped in his
sporran. “I hadna time to trouble for food, but I’ve got some
brandywine. He re, Sassenach; it’ll do you good. And then,” he
added, r aising o ne eyebrow , “you can tell me how the devil ye
came to be out in the middle of nowhere, aye?”
I col lapsed on a  rock and sipped  the brandywine gratefully .
The flas k trembled in my hand s, but the shivering began to
ease as the dark  amber stuf f made its way directly through the
walls of my empty stomach and into my bloodstream.
Jamie stood behind me, his hand on my shoulder .“How lo ng hav e ye been here,  Sassenach?” he asked, his
voice gentle.
“All nig ht,” I said, shivering again. “Since just before noon
yesterday , when the bloody horse—I think his name’ s Judas—
dropped me of f that ledge up there.”
I n odded at the ledge. The middle of nowhere was a good
description of the place, I thought. It could have been any of a
thousand anonymous hollows in these hills. A thought struck
me—one that should have occurred to me long before, had I
not been so chilled and groggy .
“How th e hell did you find me ?” I asked. “Did one of the
Muellers follow me, or—don’ t  tell me the bloody horse led
you to me, like Lassie?”
“It’ s a gelding, A untie,” Ian put in reprovingly . “No a lassie.
But we havena s een your horse at all. No, Rollo led us to ye.”
He beam ed proudly at the dog, who contrived to look blandly
dignified, as though he did this sort of thing all the time.
“But if you hav en’ t seen the horse,” I began, bewildered,
“how did you e ven know I’d left Muellers’? And how could
Rollo—” I broke of f, seeing the two men eyeing each other .
Ian shrugged slightly and nodded, yielding to Jamie. Jamie
hunkered down on the ground b eside me, and lifting the hem
of my dress, took my bare feet into his big, warm hands.
“Y our feet are frozen, Sassenach,” he said quietly . “Where
did ye lose your shoes?”
“Back there,” I said, with a no d toward the uprooted tree.
“They must still be there. I took them of f to cross a stream,
then put them down and couldn’ t find them in the dark.”
“They’re not there, Auntie,” said Ian. He sounded so queer
that I looked up at him in surprise. He was still holding the
skull, turning it gingerly over in his hands.
“No, the y’re not.” Jamie’ s head was bent as he chafed my
feet, and I could see the early light glint copper of f his hair ,which lay tumbled loose over his shoulders, disheveled as
though he had just risen from his bed.
“I was in bed, as leep,” he said, e choing my thought. “When
yon beast suddenly went mad.”  He jerked his chin at Rollo,
without looking up. “Barking and howling and flingin’ his
carcass at the door as though the Devil was outside.”
“I shout ed at him, and tried to  get hold of his scruf f and
shake him quiet,” Ian put in, “but he wouldna stop, no matter
what I did.”
“A ye, he carried on so that the spittle flew from his jaws and
I wa s su re he’d gone truly mad. I thought he’d do us an injury ,
so I bad e Ian unbolt the door an d let him be gone.” Jamie sat
back on his heels and frowned at my foot, then picked a dead
leaf of f my instep.
“W ell, and was  the Devil outside?” I asked flippantly .
Jamie shook his head.
“W e sea rched th e clearing, from the penfold to the spring,
and didn a find a thing—except these.” He reached into his
sporran and drew out my shoes . He looked up into my face,
his own quite expressionless.
“They were sitting on the doorstep, side by side.”
Every h air on my body rose. I lifted the flask and drained
the last of the brandywine.
“Rollo tore of f, bayin’ like a  hound,” Ian said, eagerly
taking u p the story . “But then he came back a moment later ,
and began to snif f at your shoes and whinge and cry .”
“I felt rather lik e doing that myself, aye?” Jamie’ s mouth
lifted slightly at one corner , but I could see the fear still dark in
his eyes.
I swallo wed, bu t my mouth was  too dry to talk, despite the
brandywine.
Jamie sl ipped one shoe onto m y foot, and then the other .
They were damp, but faintly warm from his body .“I di d think ye were maybe dead, Cinderella,” he said softly ,
head bent to hide his face.
Ian didn’ t notice, caught up in the enthusiasm of the story .
“My cle ver wee dog was for dashing of f, the same as when
he’ s smelt a rabbit, so we caught up our plaids and came away
after him, only s topping to snatch a brand from the hearth and
smoor the fire. H e led us a good chase, too, did ye no, laddie?”
He rubbed Rollo’ s ears with af fectionate pride. “And here ye
were!”
The brandywine was buzzing in my ears, swaddling my wits
in a warm, sweet blanket, but I had enough sense left to tell me
that for Rollo to  have followed a trail back to me…someone
had walked all that way in my shoes.
I had recovered some remnants of my voice by this time,
and managed to talk with only a little hoarseness.
“Did you—see anything—along the way?” I asked.
“No, Auntie,” Ian said, suddenly sober . “Did you?”
Jamie li fted his head, and I could see how worry and
exhaustion had  hollowed his face, leaving the broad
cheekbones shar p beneath his skin. I wasn’ t the only one who
had had a long, hard night.
“Y es,” I said, “but I’ll tell you later . Right now , I believe
I’ve turned into a pumpkin. Let’ s go home.”
Jamie h ad brought horses, but there was no way to get them
down in to the hollow; we were forced to make our way down
the banks of the flooded stream, splashing through the
shallows, then to clamber labor iously up a rocky slope to the
ledge above, where the animals were tethered. Rubber -legged
and flim sy after my ordeal, I wasn’ t a great deal of help in this
endeavor , but Jamie and Ian coped matter -of-factly , boosting
me over obstructions and handing me back and forth like a
lar ge, unwieldy package.
“Y ou really aren’ t supposed to give alcohol to people
suf fering from hypothermia,” I  said feebly as Jamie put theflask to my lips again during one pause for rest.
“I d inna care wh at you’re suf fering from, you’ll feel it less
with the drink in your belly ,” he said. It was still chilly from
the rain,  but his face was flushed from the climb. “Besides,”
he added, mopping his brow with a fold of his plaid, “if ye
pass out, you’ll be less trouble to hoik about. Christ, it’ s like
hauling a newborn calf out of a bog.”
“Sorry ,” I said. I  lay flat on the ground and closed my eyes,
hoping I wouldn’ t throw up. The sky was spinning in one
direction, my stomach in the other .
“A way , dog!” Ian said.
I opened one eye to see what was going on, and saw Ian
firmly sh ooing Rollo away from the skull, which I had insisted
he bring with us.
Seen in daylight, it was hardly a prepossessing object.
Stained and discolored by the so il in which it had been buried,
from a distance  it resembled a smooth stone, scooped and
gouged by wind and weather . Several of the teeth had been
chipped or broken, though the skull showed no other damage.
“Just wh at do ye mean to do w i’ Prince Charming there?”
Jamie asked, eyeing my acquisition rather critically . His color
had fade d, and he had got his breath back. He glanced down at
me, rea ched over and smoothed the hair out of my eyes,
smiling.
“All right, Sassenach?”
“Better ,” I assured him, sitting up. The countryside had not
quite stopped moving round me, but the brandy sloshing
through my veins now gave the movement a rather pleasant
quality , like the soothing rush of trees past the window of a
railway carriage.
“I supp ose we ought to take  him home and give him
Christian burial, at least?” Ian eyed the skull dubiously .
“I shoul dn’ t think he’d appreciate it; I don’ t believe he was
a Christian.” I f ought back a v ivid recollection of the man Ihad seen in the hollow . While it was true that some Indians
had been converted by missionaries, this particular naked
gentleman, with his black-painted face and feathered hair , had
given m e the impression that h e was about as pagan as they
come.
I f umbled in the  pocket of my skirt, my fingers numb and
stif f.
“This was buried with him.”
I dre w o ut the flat stone I had unearthed. It was dirty brown
in color , an irregular oval half the size of my palm. It was
flattened on one side, rounded  on the other , and smooth as
though it had come from a streambed. I turned it over on my
palm and gasped.
The flattened face was indeed incised with a carving, as I
had thought. It w as a glyph in the shape of a spiral, coiling in
on itself . But it w asn’ t the carving that brought both Jamie and
Ian to peer into my hand, heads nearly touching.
Where the smooth surface had been chipped away , the rock
within g lowed with a lambent f ire, little flames of green and
orange and red all fighting fiercely for the light.
“My God, what is it?” Ian asked, sounding awed.
“It’ s an opal—and a damned bi g one, at that,” Jamie said.
He p oked the s tone with a lar ge, blunt forefinger , as though
checking to ensure that it was real. It was.
He r ubbed a han d through his hair , thinking, then glanced at
me.
“They d o say that opals are un lucky stones, Sassenach.” I
thought he was joking, but h e looked uneasy . A widely
traveled, well-educated man, still he had been born a
Highlander , and I knew he had  a deeply superstitious streak,
though it didn’ t often show .
Ha, I thought to myself. Y ou’ve  spent the night with a ghost
and you think he’ s  superstitious?“Nonsense,” I said, with rather more conviction than I felt.
“It’ s only a rock.”
“W ell, it’ s no so much they’re unlucky , Uncle Jamie,” Ian
put in. “My Mam has a wee opal ring her mother left her—
though it’ s nothing like this!” Ia n touched the stone reverently .
“She did say as how an opal takes on something of its owner ,
though—so if ye had an opal that belonged to a good person
before ye, then all was well, and you’d have good luck of it.
But if not—” He shrugged.
“A ye, w ell,” Jamie said dryly . H e jerked his head toward the
skull, pointing with his chin. “I f it belonged to this fellow , it
doesna seem as if it was ower -lucky for him.”
“At least we know nobody killed him for it,” I pointed out.
“Perhaps they didna want it because they kent it was bad
luck,” Ia n suggested. He was fr owning at the stone, a worried
line between his eyes. “Maybe we should put it back, Auntie.”
I rubbed my nose and looked at Jamie.
“It’ s probably rather valuable,” I said.
“Ah.” The two of them stood in contemplation for a
moment, torn between superstition and pragmatism.
“A ye well,” Jamie said finally , “I suppose it will do no harm
to keep it for a bit.” One side of his mouth lifted in a smile.
“Let me  carry it, Sassenach; if I’m struck by lightning on the
way home, ye can put it back.”
I got awkwardly  to my feet, holding on to Jamie’ s arm to
keep my  balanc e. I blinked an d swayed, but stayed upright.
Jamie to ok the stone from my ha nd and slipped it back into his
sporran.
“I’ll show it to Nayawenne,” I said. “She might know what
the carving means, at least.”
“A good thought, Sassenach,” Jamie approved. “And if
Prince C harming should be her kinsman, she can have him,
with my blessing.” He nodded t oward a small stand of mapletrees a hundred yards away , their green barely tinged with
yellow .
“The horses are tied just yonder . Can ye walk, Sassenach?”
I looked down at my feet, considering. They seemed a lot
farther away than I was used to.
“I’m not sure,” I said, “I think I’m really rather drunk.”
“Och, no, Auntie,” Ian assured me kindly . “My Da says
you’re never drunk, so long as ye can hold on to the floor .”
Jamie laughed at this, and threw the end of his plaid over his
shoulder .
” My  D a used to say  ye werena drun k, so long as ye could
find your arse with both hands. ” He eyed my backside with a
lifted brow , but wisely though t better of whatever else he
might have been going to say .
Ian choked on a giggle and coughed, recovering himself.
“A ye, w ell. It’ s no much farth er , Auntie. Are ye sure ye
canna walk?”
“W ell, I’m no going to pick her up again, I’ll tell ye,” Jamie
said, not waiting for my answer . “I dinna want to rupture my
back.” He took the skull from I an, holding it between the tips
of h is fingers, and placed it delicately in my lap. “W ait here
wi’ your wee fri end, Sassenach, ” he said. “Ian and I will fetch
the horses.”
By the time we reached Fraser ’ s Ridge, it was early afternoon.
I ha d been cold , wet, and without food for nearly two days,
and was  feeling  distinctly light-headed; a feeling exaggerated
both by more in fusions of brandywine and by my ef forts to
explain the events of the night before to Ian and Jamie.
V iewed in the light of day , the entire night seemed unreal.
But then, almost everything seemed unreal, viewed through
a haze of exhaustion, hung er , and mild drunkenness.
Consequently , w hen we turned into the clearing, I thought atfirst tha t the smoke from the c himney was a hallucination—
until the tang of burning hickory wood struck my nose.
“I th ought you s aid you smoored the fire,” I said to Jamie.
“Lucky you didn’ t burn down the house.” Such accidents were
common; I had heard of more t han one wooden cabin burned
to the ground as the result of a poorly tended hearth.
“I d id smoor it, ” he said briefly , swinging down from the
saddle. “Someone’ s here. D’ye ken the horse, Ian?”
Ian stood in his stirrups to look down into the penfold.
“Why , it ’ s Aunti e’ s wicked beast!” he said in surprise. “And
a big dapple with him!”
Sure enough, the newly named  Judas was standing in the
penfold, unsaddled, companionably switching flies head to tail
with a thick-barreled gray gelding.
“Do you  know who owns him?” I asked. I hadn’ t got down
yet; small waves of dizziness ha d been washing over me every
few minutes, forcing me to cling to the saddle. The ground
under the horse seemed to be heaving gently up and down, like
ocean billows.
“No, bu t it’ s a f riend,” Jamie said. “He’ s fed my beasts for
me, and milked the goat.” He nodded from the horses’ hay-
filled manger to the door , where a pail of milk stood on the
bench, neatly covered with a sq uare of cloth to prevent flies
falling in.
“Come along, Sassenach.” He reached up and took me by
the waist. “W e’ll tuck ye in bed and brew ye a dish of tea.”
Our arrival had been heard; the  door of the cabin opened,
and Duncan Innes looked out.
“Ah, you’re there, Mac Dubh, ” he said. “What’ s amiss,
then? Y our goat was carryin’ on fit to wake the dead, wi’ her
bag like  to burst, when I came up the trail this morning.” Then
he s aw me, an d his long, mournful face went blank with
surprise.“Mrs. Claire!” he said, taking in my mud-stained and
battered appearance. “Y e’ll have had an accident, then? I was a
bit worr it when I found the hors e loose on the mountainside as
I c ame up, and y our wee box on the saddle. I looked about and
called fo r ye, but I couldna find any sign of ye, so I brought
the beast along to the house.”
“Y es, I had an accident,” I said, trying to stand upright by
myself and not succeeding very well. “I’m all right, though.” I
wasn’ t altogethe r sure about that. My head felt three times its
normal size.
“Bed,” Jamie said firmly , grabbing me by the arms before I
could fall over . “Now .”
“Bath,” I said. “First.”
He glanced in the direction of the creek.
“Y ou’ll freeze or drown. Or both. For God’ s sake,
Sassenach, eat and go to bed; ye can wash tomorrow .”
“Now . Hot water . Kettle.” I hadn’ t the ener gy to waste on
prolonged ar gument, but I was determined. I wasn’ t going to
bed dirty , and I wasn’ t going to wash filthy sheets later .
Jamie lo oked at me in exaspera tion, then rolled his eyes in
surrender .
“Hot water , kettle, now , then,”  he said. “Ian, fetch some
wood, a nd then take Duncan and see to the pigs. I’m going to
scrub your auntie.”
“I can scrub myself!”
“The hell ye can.”
He w as right; m y fingers were so stif f, they couldn’ t undo
the h ooks of my  bodice. He und ressed me as though I were a
small child, tossing the ripped skirt and mud-caked petticoats
carelessly into the corner , and stripping of f the chemise and
stays, w orn so long that the cloth folds had made deep red
ridges in my flesh. I groaned with a voluptuous combination of
pain and pleasure, rubbing the  red marks as blood coursed
back through my constricted torso.“Sit,” he said, p ushing a stool under me as I collapsed. He
wrapped a quilt around my sho ulders, put a plate containing
one and a half stale bannocks in front of me, and went to
rootle in the cupboard after soap, washcloth, and linen towels.
“Find the green bottle, please,” I said, nibbling at the dry
oatcake. “I’ll need to wash my hair .”
“Mmphm.” More clinking, and he emer ged at last with his
hands full of things, including a towel and the bottle full of the
shampoo I had made—not wish ing to wash my hair with lye
soap—from soa proot, lupin oil, walnut leaves and calendula
flowers. He set these on the table, along with my lar gest
mixing bowl, and carefully fill ed it with hot water from the
cauldron.
Leaving this to c ool a bit, Jamie  dipped a rag into the water ,
and knelt down to wash my feet.
The feeling of warmth on my sore, half-frozen feet was as
close to ecstasy as I expected to  get this side of heaven. T ired
and half-drunk as I was, I felt as though I were dissolving from
the feet up, as he gently but thoroughly washed me from toe to
head.
“Where did ye get this, Sassena ch?” Recalled from a state
as cl ose to sleep  as to waking, I glanced down muzzily at my
left knee . It was swollen, and th e inner side had gone the deep
purplish-blue of a gentian.
“Oh…that happened when I fell of f the horse.”
“That w as verra careless,” he sa id sharply . “Have I not told
ye time and again to be careful , especially with a new horse?
Y e canna trust them at all until ye’ve known them a good
while. A nd you’re not strong e nough to deal with one that’ s
headstrong or skittish.”
“It wasn ’ t a matter of trusting him,” I said. I rather dimly
admired the broad spread of his bent shoulders, flexing
smoothly under his linen shirt as  he sponged my bruised knee.
“The lightning scared him, and I fell of f a thirty-foot ledge.”
“Y e could have broken your neck!”“Thought I had, for a bit.” I closed my eyes, swaying
slightly .
“Y e should have taken better thought, Sassenach; ye should
never ha ve been  on that side of the ridge to begin with, let
alone—”
“I couldn’ t help it,” I said, opening my eyes. “The trail was
washed out; I had to go around.”
He w as glaring at me, slanted e yes narrowed into dark blue
slits.
“Y e ought not to have left the Muellers’ in the first place,
and it raining like that! Did ye not have sense enough to know
what the ground would be like?”
I straightened up with some ef fort, holding the quilt against
my breasts. It occurred to me, with a faint sense of surprise,
that he was more than slightly annoyed.
“W ell…no,” I said, trying to ma rshal what wits I had. “How
could I know something like that? Besides—”
He interrupted me by slapping the washrag into the bowl,
spattering water all over the table.
“Be quiet!” he said. “I dinna mean to ar gue with you!”
I stared up at him.
“What t he hell do  you mean to do ? And where do you get
of f shouting at me? I haven’ t done anything wrong!”
He inhaled strongly through his nose. Then he stood up,
picked the rag from the bowl, and carefully wrung it out. He
let out his brea th, knelt down in front of me, and deftly
swabbed my face clean.
“No. Y e  haven’ t,” he agreed. O ne corner of his long mouth
quirked wryly . “But ye scairt he ll out of me, Sassenach, and it
makes me want to give ye a terrible scolding, whether ye
deserve it or no.”
“Oh,” I said. I wanted at first to laugh, but felt a stab of
remorse as I saw  how drawn his  face was. His shirt sleeve wasdaubed with mud, and there w ere burrs and foxtails in his
stockings, left from a night of searching for me through the
dark mountains,  not knowing w here I was; if I were alive or
dead. I had  scared hell out of him, whether I meant to or not.
I g roped for so me means of apology , finding my tongue
nearly as thick as my wits. Finally I reached out and picked a
fuzzy yellow catkin from his hair .
“Why don’ t you scold me in Gaelic?” I said. “It will ease
your feelings just as much, and I’ll only understand half of
what you say .”
He mad e a Scottish noise of derision, and shoved my head
into the bowl with a firm hand on my neck. When I
reemer ged, drip ping, though, he dropped a towel on my head
and star ted in, rubbing my hai r with lar ge, firm hands and
speaking in the formally menacing tones of a minister
denouncing sin from the pulpit.
“Silly woman,” he said in Gael ic. “Y ou have not the brain
of a  fly!” I caught the words f or “foolish,” and “clumsy ,” in
the subsequent remarks, but quickly stopped listening. I closed
my eyes and lo st myself instead in the dreamy pleasure of
having my hair rubbed dry and then combed out.
He had a sure and gentle tou ch, probably gained from
handling horses’ tails. I had seen him talk to horses while he
groomed them, much as he was talking to me now , the Gaelic
a soothi ng descant to the whis k of curry comb or brush. I
imagined he was more complimentary to the horses, though.
His hands touched my neck, my  bare back, and shoulders as
he worked; fleeting touches that brought my newly thawed
flesh to life. I sh ivered, but let th e quilt fall to my lap. The fire
was still burning high, flames da ncing on the side of the kettle,
and the room had grown quite warm.
He was now describing, in a pleasantly conversational tone,
various things he would have liked to do to me, beginning
with beating me black and blu e with a stick, and going on
from the re. Gae lic is a rich language, and Jamie was far fromunimaginative in matters of either violence or sex. Whether he
meant it  or not, I thought it wa s probably a good thing that I
didn’ t understand everything he said.
I could feel the heat of the fire on my breasts; Jamie’ s
warmth against my back. The loose fabric of his shirt brushed
my s kin as he leaned across to re ach a bottle on the shelf, and I
shivered again. He noticed this, and interrupted his tirade for a
moment.
“Cold?”
“No.”
“Good.” The sharp smell of ca mphor stung my nose, and
before I  could move, one lar ge hand had seized my shoulder ,
holding me in place, while the other rubbed slippery oil firmly
into my chest.
“Stop! That tickles! Stop, I say!”
He didn’ t stop. I squirmed madly , trying to escape, but he
was a lot bigger than I was.
“Be still,” he said, inexorable fingers rubbing deep between
my tickl ish ribs , under my coll arbone, around and under my
tender breasts, greasing me as thoroughly as a suckling pig
bound for the spit.
“Y ou bastar d !” I said when he let me go, b reathless from
struggling and giggling. I reeked of peppermint and camphor ,
and my skin glowed with heat from chin to belly .
He grinned at me, revenged and thoroughly unrepentant.
“Y ou do it to me  when I’ve got an ague,” he pointed out,
wiping his hands on the towel. “Grease for the gander is
grease for the goose, aye?”
“I have not got an ague! Not even a snif fle!”
“I e xpect ye w ill have, out all night and sleepin’ in wet
clothes.” He clicked his tongue disapprovingly , like a Scottish
housewife.“And yo u’ve never done that, have you? How many times
have you  caught  cold from sleeping rough?” I demanded.
“Good heavens, you lived in a cave  for seven years!”
“And spent three of them sneezing. Besides, I’m a man,” he
added, with total illogic. “Had ye not better put on your night
rail, Sassenach? Y e havena got a stitch on.”
“I noticed. W et clothes and being cold do not cause
sickness,” I informed him, hun ting about under the table for
the fallen quilt.
He raised both eyebrows.
“Oh, they don’ t?”
“No, they don’ t.” I backed out from under the table,
clutching the quilt. “I’ve told yo u before, it’ s germs that cause
sickness. If I ha ven’ t been exposed to any germs, I won’ t get
sick.”
“Ah, gerrrrms,” he said, rolling it like a marble in his
mouth. “God, ye’ve got a fine, fat arse! Why do folk have
more illness in the winter tha n the springtime, then? The
germs breed in the cold, I expect?”
“Not exactly .” Feeling absurdly self-conscious, I spread the
quilt, m eaning to fold it around  my shoulders again. Before I
could wr ap myse lf in it, though,  he had grabbed me by the arm
and pulled me toward him.
“Come here,” he said, unnecessarily . Before I could say
anything, he had smacked my bare backside smartly , turned
me around and kissed me, hard.
He l et g o, and I almost fell dow n. I flung my arms around
him, and he grabbed my waist, steadying me.
“I di nna care wh ether it’ s the ge rms or the night air or Billy-
be-damned,” he said, looking sternly down his nose. “I willna
have ye fallin’ ill, and that’ s al l about it. Now , hop yourself
directly into your gown, and to bed with ye!”
He felt awfully good in my arm s. The smooth linen of his
shirtfront was cool against the  heated glow of my greasedbreasts, and while the wool of  his kilt was much scratchier
against my naked thighs and b elly , the sensation was by no
means unpleasan t. I rubbed myself slowly against him, like a
cat against a post.
“Bed,” he said again, sounding a trifle less stern.
“Mmmm,” I said, making it reasonably obvious that I didn’ t
mean to go there alone.
“No,” he said, squirming slightly . I supposed that he meant
to get away , bu t since I didn’ t let go, the movement merely
exacerbated the situation between us.
“Mm-hmm,” I said, holding on t ight. Intoxicated as I was, it
hadn’ t escaped me that Duncan would undoubtedly be
spending the night on the heart h rug, Ian on the trundle. And
while I was feel ing somewhat uninhibited at the moment, the
feeling didn’ t extend quite that  far .
“My fat her told me never to take advantage of a woman
who wa s the worse for drink ,” he said. He had stopped
squirming, but now started again, slower , as though he
couldn’ t help himself.
“I’m not worse, I’m better ,” I assured him. “Besides—” I
executed a slow , sinuous squirm  of my own. “I thought he said
you we ren’ t drunk if you cou ld find your arse with both
hands.”
He eyed me appraisingly .
“I hate to tell ye, Sassenach, but it’ s not your arse ye’ve got
hold of—it’ s mine.”
“That’ s all right,” I assured him . “W e’re married. Share and
share alike. One flesh; the priest said so.”
“Perhaps it was a mistake to put that grease on ye,” he
muttered, half to himself. “It never does this to me !”
“W ell, you’re a man.”
He had one last gallant try .
“Should ye not eat a bit more, lass? Y ou must be starving.”“Mm-hm,” I said. I buried my face in his shirt and bit him,
lightly . “Ravenous.”
There is  a story told of the Ear l of Montrose—that after one
battle, h e was found lying on th e field, half dead of cold and
starvation, by a young woman. The young woman whipped of f
her shoe, mixed barley with c old water in it, and fed the
resulting mess to the prostrate earl, thus saving his life.
The cup now th rust under my nose appeared to contain a
portion of this same life-giving substance, with the minor
dif ference that mine was warm.
“What is this?” I asked, eyeing the pale grains floating
belly-up on the surface of a wat ery liquid. It looked like a cup
full of drowned maggots.
“Barley crowdie,” Ian said, gazing proudly at the cup as
though it were h is firstborn child. “I made it myself, from the
bag ye brought from Muellers’.”
“Thank you,” I said, and took a  cautious sip. I didn’ t think
he had mixed it in his shoe, despite the musty aroma. “V ery
good,” I said. “How kind of you, Ian.”
He went pink with gratification.
“Och, it was nothing,” he said. “There’ s plenty more,
Auntie. Or shall I fetch ye a bit of cheese? I could cut the
green bits of f for ye.”
“No, no —this w ill be fine,” I said hastily . “Ah…why don’ t
you take your gu n out, Ian, and see if you can bag a squirrel or
a rabbit? I’m sure I’ll be well enough to cook supper .”
He beamed, the smile transforming his long, bony face.
“I’m gla d to hear it, Auntie,” he said. “Y e should see  what
Uncle Jamie and I have been eatin’ while ye’ve been gone!”
He l eft me lying  on my pillows, wondering what to do with
the cup of crow die. I didn’ t wa nt to drink it, but I felt like a
puddle of warm butter—soft an d creamy , nearly liquid—and
the idea of getting up seemed unthinkably ener getic.Jamie, making no further protests, had taken me to bed,
where he had co mpleted the business of thawing me out with
thoroughness and dispatch. I thought it was a good thing he
wasn’ t going hunting with Ian. H e reeked of camphor as much
as I did; the animals would scent him a mile away .
T ucking me tenderly under the quilts, he had left me to
sleep while he w ent to greet Duncan more formally and of fer
him the hospitality of the house.  I could hear the deep murmur
of their voices outside now; they were sitting on the bench
beside the door , enjoying the la st of the afternoon sunshine—
long, pa le beam s slanted through the window , lighting a warm
glow of pewter and wood within.
The sun touched the skull, too . This stood on my writing
table across the room, composi ng a cozily domestic still life
with a clay jug filled with flowers and my casebook.
It was sight of th e casebook that roused me from torpor . The
birth I had atten ded at the Mue llers’ farm now seemed vague
and insu bstantial in my mind; I thought I had better record the
details while I still recalled them at all.
Thus prompted by the stirrings of professional duty , I
stretched, groan ed, and sat up. I still felt mildly dizzy and my
ears ran g from the afteref fects of brandywine. I was also
faintly s ore almost everywhere—more in some spots than
others—but generally speaking, I was in decent working order .
Beginning to be hungry , though.
I d id hope Ian would come ba ck with meat for the pot; I
knew be tter than to gor ge my shriveled stomach on cheese and
salt fish, but a nice, strengthenin g squirrel broth, flavored with
spring onions and dried mushrooms, would be just what the
doctor ordered.
Speaking of broth—I slid reluctantly out of bed and
stumbled across the floor to th e hearth, where I poured the
cold bar ley soup  back into the pot. Ian had made enough for a
regiment—always supposing the regiment to be composed of
Scots. L iving in a country norm ally barren of much that was
edible, they were capable of relishing glutinous masses ofcereal, u ntouched by any redeeming hint of spice or flavor .
From a feebler race myself, I didn’ t feel quite up to it.
The opened bag of barley stood beside the hearth, the burlap
sack stil l visibly  damp. I would have to spread the grain to dry ,
or it would rot. My bruised kne e protesting a bit, I went and
got a lar ge flat tray-basket made  of plaited reeds, and knelt to
spread the damp grain in a thin layer over it.
“W ill he have a soft mouth, then, Duncan?” Jamie’ s voice
came clearly through the window; the hide covering was rolled
up, to let in air ,  and I caught the faint tang of tobacco from
Duncan’ s pipe. “He’ s a big, str ong brute, but he’ s got a kind
eye.”
“Oh, he’ s a bon ny wee fellow ,” Duncan said, the note of
pride in his voice unmistakable. “And a nice soft mouth, aye.
Miss Jo  had her stableman p ick him from the market in
W ilmington; sai d he must find a horse could be managed well
wi’ one hand.”
“Mmphm. A ye, well, he’ s a lovely creature.” The wooden
bench creaked as one of the men shifted his weight. I
understood the equivocation behind Jamie’ s compliment, and
wondered whether Duncan did, as well.
Part of it was si mple condescen sion; Jamie had been raised
on h orseback, and as a born hor seman, would scorn the notion
that han ds were necessary at al l; I had seen him maneuver a
horse by  the shifting pressure of knees and thighs alone, or set
his m ount at a gallop across a crowded field, the reins knotted
on th e horse’ s n eck, to leave Jamie’ s hands free for sword and
pistol.
But Dun can was neither a hors eman nor a soldier; he had
lived as a fisherman near Ard rossan, until the Rising had
plucked him, like so many others, from his nets and his boat,
and sent him to Culloden and disaster .
Jamie wouldn’ t be so untactful as to point up an
inexperience of which Duncan was more than aware already;he would,  though, mean to point up something else. Had
Duncan caught it?
“It’ s you  she means to help, Mac Dubh,  and  well ye ken it,
too.” Duncan’ s tones were very  dry; he’d taken Jamie’ s point,
all right.
“I havena said otherwise, Duncan.” Jamie’ s voice was even.
“Mmphm.”
I sm iled, despite the air of edginess between them. Duncan
was every bit as good as Jamie at the Highland art of
inarticulate eloq uence. This particular noise captured both
mild ins ult at Jamie’ s implication that it was improper for
Duncan to be ac cepting the gift of a horse from Jocasta, and a
willingness to accept the likewise implied apology for the
insult.
“Have ye thought, then?” The bench creaked as Duncan
abruptly changed the subject. “W ill it be Sinclair , or Geordie
Chisholm?”
W ithout giving Jamie time to reply , he went on, but in a way
that made it clear that he had said all this before. I wondered
whether he was trying to convince Jamie, or himself—or only
assist th em both  in coming to a decision by repeating the facts
of the matter .
“It’ s true  Sinclair ’ s a cooper , bu t Geordie’ s a good fellow; a
thrifty worker , and he’ s the tw o wee sons, besides. Sinclair
isna mar rit, so he wouldna need so much in the way of setting
up, but—”
“He’d need lathes and tools, an d iron and seasoned wood,”
Jamie broke in. “He could sleep in his shop, aye, but he’ll need
the s hop to sleep in. And it will cost verra dear , I think, to buy
all that’ s needed for a cooperage. Geordie would need a bit of
food for  his family , but we can provide that from the place
here; be yond tha t, he’ll need no  more to begin than a few wee
tools—he’ll have an ax, aye?”
“A ye, he ’ll have that from his indenture, but it’ s the planting
season now , Mac Dubh . W ith the clearing—”“I ken that weel  enough,” Jamie said, a bit testily . “It’ s me
that put five ac res in corn a month ago. And  cleared them,
first.” While Duncan had been taking his ease at River Run,
chatting in taverns and breaking  in his new horse. I heard it,
and so did Duncan; there was a distinct silence that spoke as
loud as words.
A creak from the bench, and then Duncan spoke again,
mildly .
“Y our auntie Jo’ s sent a wee gift for ye.”
“Oh, has she?” The edge in his voice was even more
perceptible. I hoped Duncan had sense enough to heed it.
“A b ottle of whi sky .” There was a smile in Duncan’ s voice,
answered by a reluctant laugh from Jamie.
“Oh, ha s she?” he said again,  in quite a dif ferent tone.
“That’ s verra kind.”
“She means to be.” There was a substantial creak and
shuf fle as Duncan got to his feet. “Come wi’ me and fetch it,
then, Mac Dubh . A wee drink wouldna do your temper any
harm.”
“No, it wouldn’ t.” Jamie sounded rueful. “I’ve not slept the
night, and I’m cranky as a ru tting boar . Y e’ll for give my
manners, Duncan.”
“Och, d inna spe ak of it.” There  was a soft sound, as of a
hand cla pping a shoulder , and I heard them walk of f across the
yard together . I moved to the  window and watched them,
Jamie’ s hair gleaming dark bronze in the setting sun, as he
tilted his head to  listen to something Duncan was telling him,
the shorter man gesturing in explanation. The movements of
Duncan’ s single  arm threw of f the rhythm of his stride, so he
walked with jerky movements, like a lar ge puppet.
What would have become of him, I wondered, had Jamie
not found him—and found a p lace for him? There was no
place in Scotland for a one-armed fisherman. There would
have been nothing for him but beggary , surely . Starvation,perhaps. Or theft to live, and d eath at the end of a rope, like
Gavin Hayes.
But this  was the New W orld, and if life was chancy here,
well, it meant a chance at life, at least. No wonder that Jamie
should worry over who should have the best chance. Sinclair
the cooper , or Chisholm the farmer?
A coope r would  be valuable to have at hand; it would save
the men  on the ridge the long trip into Cross Creek or
A verasboro to fetch the barrels needed for pitch and
turpentine, for salted meat a nd cider . But it would be
expensive to set up a cooper ’ s shop, even with the bare
rudiments the trade required. And then there was the unknown
Chisholm’ s wife  and small chi ldren to be considered—how
were the y living now , and what might become of them without
help?
Duncan had so far located thirt y of the men of Ardsmuir;
Gavin H ayes w as the first, and  we had done for him all that
could be  done; seen him safe into heaven’ s keeping. T wo more
were known dead, one of fever , one of drowning. Three had
completed their terms of indenture, and—armed only with the
ax and suit of c lothes that were a bondsman’ s final pay—had
managed to find a foothold for themselves, claiming
backcountry land and carving out small homesteads there.
Of the remainde r , we had brought twenty so far to settle on
good land near the river , under Jamie’ s sponsorship. Another
was feeb leminded but worked for one of the others as a hired
man, an d so earned his keep. It had taken all of our resources
to do  it, using a ll our small qua ntity of cash, notes against the
value of as yet nonexistent crops—and one hair -raising trip
into Cross Creek.
Jamie had called upon all his acquaintance there, borrowing
small amounts from each, and had then taken this money to
the r iverside taverns, where in three sleepless nights of play ,
he had managed  to quadruple his stake—narrowly avoiding
being knifed in the process, as I learned much later .I w as speechles s, looking at th e long, jagged rent in the
bosom of his coat.
“What—?” I croaked at last.
He shrugged briefly , looking suddenly very tired.
“It doesna matter ,” he said. “It’ s over .”
He had then sh aved, washed, and gone round to all the
plantation owners again, returning each man’ s money with
thanks and a sm all payment of interest, leaving us with enough
to m anage seed corn for planting , an extra mule for plowing, a
goat and some pigs.
I did n’ t ask him  anything else; only mended the coat, and
saw him  safely into bed when he  came back from repaying the
money l ent. I sat by him for a lo ng time, though, watching the
lines of exhaustion in his face ease a little as he slept.
Only a little. I had lifted his h and, limp and heavy with
sleep, and traced the deep lines  of his smooth, callused palm,
over and  over . The lines of hea d and heart and life ran long
and deep. How many lives lay in those creases now?
My own. His s ettlers. Fer gus and Marsali, who had just
arrived from Jamaica, in the custody of Germaine, a chubby
blond charmer who had his besotted father in the palm of his
fat little hand.
I glanced involuntarily through the window at the thought.
Ian and Jamie had helped to bu ild them a small cabin only a
mile fro m our own, and sometimes Marsali would walk over
in th e evenings to visit, bringi ng the baby . I could do with
seeing him, I thought wistfully . Lonely as I sometimes was for
Bree, little Germaine was a substitute for the grandchild I
would never hold.
I sighed, and shrugged away the thought.
Jamie an d Duncan had come ba ck with the whisky; I could
hear them talking by the padd ock, their voices relaxed, all
tension between them eased—for the moment.I finishe d spreading out a thin layer of the wet barley and
set it in the corn er of the hearth to dry , then went to the writing
table, uncapped the inkwell, and opened my casebook. It
didn’ t take long to record the d etails of the newest Mueller ’ s
arrival i nto the world; it had been a long labor but otherwise
quite normal. The birth itself had presented no complications;
the only unusual feature had been the child’ s caul…
I stoppe d writing and shook my head. Still distracted by
thoughts of Jamie, I had let my attention wander . Petronella’ s
child ha d not been born with a caul. I had a clear memory of
the t op of the skull crowning, the pudendum a shiny red ring
stretched tight around a smal l patch of black hair . I had
touched it, felt the tiny pulse t hrobbing there, just under the
skin. I remembered vividly the sensation of the wet down
against my fingers, like the damp skin of a new-hatched chick.
It w as the dream, I thought. I h ad dreamed in my burrow ,
mingling the events of the two births together—this one, and
Brianna’ s. It was Brianna who had been born with a caul.
A “silly hoo,” the Scots called it; a lucky hood. A fortunate
portent, a caul o f fered—they sa id—protection from drowning
in later life. And  some children born with a caul were blessed
with sec ond sight—though having met one or two of those
who saw with the third eye, I to ok leave to doubt that such a
blessing was unmixed.
Whether lucky or not, Brianna h ad never showed any signs
of that strange Celtic “knowing,” and I thought it just as well. I
knew enough of my own pecul iar form of second sight—the
certain knowledge of things to come—not to wish its
complications on anyone else.
I l ooked  at the page before me. Only half noticing, I had
sketched the rough outline of a  girl’ s head. A curving thick
line of swirling  hair , the bare suggestion of a long, straight
nose. Beyond that, she was faceless.
I was no artis t. I had learne d to make clean clinical
drawings, accur ate pictures of limbs and bodies, but I lacked
Brianna’ s gift of bringing lines to life. The sketch as it stoodwas no more than an aide-memoire; I could look at it and paint
her face in memory . T o try to do more—to conjure flesh out of
the pape r—would be to ruin that, and risk losing the image I
held of her in my heart.
And would I conjure her in the flesh, if I could do it? No.
That I would not; I would a thousand times rather think of her
in th e sa fety and  comfort of her  own time than wish her here
amid the harshness and dangers of this one. But it didn’ t mean
that I didn’ t miss her .
For the first tim e, I felt some small sympathy for Jocasta
Cameron and her desire for an heir; someone to remain
behind, to take h er place; testimony that her life had not been
lived in vain.
T wilight was rising beyond the window , from field and
wood and river . People spoke of night falling, but it didn’ t,
really . Darkness rose, filling first the hollows, then shadowing
the slopes, creeping imperce ptibly up tree trunks and
fenceposts as night swallowed the ground and rose up to join
the greater dark of the star -spread sky above.
I s at staring out  the window , w atching the light change on
the hors es in the paddock; not so much fading as altering, so
that everything—arched necks, round rumps, even single
blades o f grass—stood stark and clean, reality freed for one
brief moment from the day’ s illusions of sun and shadow .
Unseeing, I traced the line of t he drawing with my finger ,
over and  over , as the dark rose up around me and the realities
of my heart stood clear in the dusky light. No, I would not
wish Brianna here. But that didn’ t mean I didn’ t miss her .
I f inished my no tes eventually , and sat quietly for a moment. I
should g o and begin making sup per , I knew , but the weariness
of my ordeal s till dragged at me, making me unwilling to
move. A ll my muscles ached, and the bruise on my knee
throbbed. All I really wanted to do was to crawl back into bed.
Instead, I picked up the skull, which I had set down next to
my casebook on the table. I r an my finger gently over therounded cranium. It was a thoroughly macabre desk ornament,
I w ould admit th at, but I felt rather attached to it, nonetheless.
I had always found bones beautiful, of man or beast; stark and
graceful remnants of life reduced to its foundations.
I tho ught suddenly of something I had not remembered in
many ye ars; a small dark close t of a room in Paris, hidden
behind an apothecary’ s shop. The walls covered with a
honeycomb of shelves, each cell holding a polished skull.
Animals of many kinds, from shrews to wolves, mice to bears.
And wit h my hand on the head of my unknown friend, I
heard M aster Raymond’ s voice, as clear in memory as though
he stood beside me.
“Sympathy?” he  had said as I t ouched the high curve of a
polished elk’ s skull. “It is an u nusual emotion to feel for a
bone, madonna.”
But he had known what I mean t. I knew he did, for when I
asked him why he kept these s kulls, he had smiled and said,
“They are company , of a sort.”
I kn ew what he meant, too; for surely the gentleman whose
skull I kept had been company for me, in a very dark and
lonely p lace. No t for the first time, I wondered whether he had
in fact had anything to do with t he apparition I had seen on the
mountain; the Indian with his face painted black.
The ghost—if that is what he  was—had not smiled or
spoken a loud. I hadn’ t seen his t eeth, which would be my only
point of comparison with the skull I held—for I found that I
was holding it, rubbing a thum b over the jagged edge of a
cracked incisor . I lifted the skull to the light, examining it
closely by the soft sunset light.
The teeth on the  one side had been shattered; cracked and
splintered as though he had been  struck violently in the mouth,
perhaps by a rock or a club—the stock of a gun? On the other
side they  were whole; in very good condition, actually . I was
no e xpert but th ought the skull was that of a mature man; one
in his late thirties or early forti es. A man of that age shouldshow a good bit  of wear to his teeth, given the Indians’ diet of
ground corn, which—owing to the manner of preparation,
pounded between flat stones—contained quite a bit of ground
stone as well.
The inc isors and canine on the good side were scarcely
worn at all, th ough. I turned the skull over , to judge the
abrasion of the molars, and stopped cold.
V ery cold, in sp ite of the fire at my back. As cold as I had
been in the lost , fireless dark, alone on the mountain with a
dead man’ s head. For the late su n now struck sparks from my
hands: from the silver band of my wedding ring—and from the
silver fillings in my late companion’ s mouth.
I sat staring for a moment, then turned the skull over and set
it gently down on the desk, careful as though it were made of
glass.
“My Go d,” I said, all tiredness for gotten. “My God,” I said,
to the empty eyes and the lopsided grin. “Who wer e  you?”
“Who do ye thin k he can have been?” Jamie touched the skull
gingerly . W e had no more than moments; Duncan had gone to
the p rivy , Ian to  feed the pig. I couldn’ t bring myself to wait,
though—I had had to tell someone at once.
“I haven ’ t the faintest idea. Except, of course, that he has to
have bee n some one…like me.” A violent shiver ran over me.
Jamie glanced at me, and frowned.
“Y e havena take a chill, have ye, Sassenach?”
“No.” I smiled weakly up at h im. “Goose walking on my
grave, I expect.”
He p lucked my shawl from the hook by the door and swung
it ar ound me. H is hands stayed on my shoulders, warm and
comforting.
“It m eans the on e thing else, doesn’ t it?” he asked quietly .
“It means there is another…place. Perhaps nearby .”Another stone circle—or something like it. I had thought of
that, too, and th e notion made me shudder once again. Jamie
looked thoughtfully at the skull, then drew the handkerchief
from his sleeve and draped it gently over the empty eyes.
“I’ll bury him after supper ,” he said.
“Oh, supper .” I pushed my hair behind my ear , trying to get
my scatt ered tho ughts to focus on food. “Y es, I’ll see if I can
find some eggs. That will be quick.”
“Dinna trouble yourself, Sassen ach.” Jamie peered into the
pot on the hearth. “W e can eat this.”
This time, the shudder was purely one of fastidiousness.
“Ugh,” I said. Jamie grinned at me.
“Nothing wrong wi’ good barley crowdie, is there?”
“Assuming there is such a thing ,” I replied, looking into the
pot with distaste. “This smells more like distiller ’ s mash.”
Made with wet grain, insuf ficiently cooked and left standing,
the cold , scummy soup was alre ady giving of f a yeasty whif f
of fermentation.
“Speaking of which,” I said, giving the opened sack of
damp ba rley a poke with my to e, “this needs to be spread to
dry , before it starts to mold, if it hasn’ t already .”
Jamie w as starin g at the disgust ing soup, brows furrowed in
thought.
“A ye?” he said absently , then,  coming to consciousness,
“Oh, ay e. I’ll do it.” He twisted shut the top of the bag, and
heaved it onto his shoulder . On the way out the door , he
paused, looking at the shrouded skull.
“Y ou said ye didna think him  Christian,” he said, and
glanced curiously at me. “Why was that, Sassenach?”
I hesitated, but there was no time to tell him about my
dream—if that’ s what it had been. I could hear Duncan and Ian
in conversation, coming toward the house.
“No particular reason,” I said, with a shrug.“A ye, well,” he said. “W e’ll give him the benefit o’ the
doubt.”2 4
L E T T E R - W R I T I N G :  T H E  G R E A T  A R T
O ’  L O V E
Oxford, March 1971
R oger supposed that it must rain  as much in Inverness as it
did i n Oxford, b ut somehow he had never minded the northern
rain. Th e cold Scottish wind sw eeping in of f the Moray Firth
was exhilarating and the drenching rain both stimulation and
refreshment to the spirit.
But that  had been Scotland, when Brianna was with him.
Now she was in America, he in England, and Oxford was cold
and dull , all its streets and buil dings gray as the ash of dead
fires. Ra in pattered on the shou lders of his scholar ’ s gown as
he d ashed across the quad, sh ielding an armload of papers
under the poplin folds. Once in the shelter of the porter ’ s
lodge, he stopped to shake himself, doglike, flinging droplets
over the stone passage.
“Any letters?” he asked.
“Think so, Mr . W akefield. Just a sec.” Martin disappeared
into his inner sa nctum, leaving Roger to read the names of the
College’ s war dead, carved on the stone tablet inside the entry .
Geor ge V anlandingham, Esq. The Honorable Phillip
Menzies. Joseph W illiam Roscoe . Not for the first time, Roger
found himself wondering about those dead heroes and what
they had been like. Since meeting Brianna and her mother ,
he’d found that the past too oft en wore a disturbingly human
face.
“Here y ou are, Mr . W akefield.” Martin leaned beaming
across the counter , holding out  a thin sheaf of letters. “One
from the States today ,” he added, with a broad wink.
Roger felt an an swering grin break out on his face, and a
warm glow spread at once from  his chest through his limbs,
dispelling the chill of the rainy day .“W ill we be s eeing your young woman up soon, Mr .
W akefield?” Martin craned his neck, peering frankly at the
letter with its U .S. stamps. The porter had met Brianna when
she had come do wn with Roger just before Christmas, and had
fallen under her spell.
“I hope so. Perhaps in the summer . Thanks!”
He turned toward his staircase, tucking the letters carefully
into the sleeve o f his gown while  he groped for his key . He felt
a mingl ed sense of elation an d dismay at thought of the
summer . She’d said she’d come in July—but July was still
four mo nths away . In some mo ods, he didn’ t think he’d last
four days.
Roger folded the letter again and tucked it into his inside
pocket, next to his heart. She wrote every few days, from brief
notes to  long screeds, and each of her letters left him with a
small warm glow that lasted usually until the next arrived.
At the same time, her letters were faintly unsatisfactory
these da ys. Still warmly af fectionate, always signed “Love,”
always saying she missed him and wanted him with her . No
longer the sort of thing that burned the page, though.
Perhaps it was n atural; a normal progression as they knew
each other longer; no one could go on writing passionate
missives day after day , not with any honesty .
No doubt it was  only his imagination that Brianna seemed
to hold back a bit in her letters. He could do without the
excesses of one friend’ s girl, who had clipped bits of her pubic
hair and  included them in a letter—though he rather admired
the sentiment behind the gesture.
He t ook a bite of his sandwich a nd chewed absentmindedly ,
thinking of the latest article F iona had showed him. Now
married, Fiona considered herself an expert on matters
matrimonial, and took a sisterly interest in the bumpy course
of Roger ’ s love af fair .She was constantly clipping h elpful tips from women’ s
magazines and mailing them to him. The latest had been a
piece from My W eekly ,  ent itled “How to Intrigue a Man.”
Sauce for the gander ,  Fiona had written pointedly in the
mar gin.
“Share his interests,” one tip advised. “If you think
football’ s a loss, but he’ s dead keen, sit down beside him and
ask about Arsenal’ s chances the week. If football’ s boring, he
isn’ t.”
Roger smiled a little grimly . He’d been sharing Brianna’ s
interests, all right, if tracking her bloody parents through their
hair -raising history counted as a pastime. Damn little of that he
could share with her , though.
“Be coy ,” said another of the magazine’ s tips. “Nothing
piques a  man’ s interest more than an air of reserve. Don’ t let
him get too close, too soon.”
It oc curred to Roger to wonder  whether Brianna had been
reading similar advice in American magazines, but he
dismissed the thought. She w asn’ t above reading fashion
magazines—he had seen her do it on occasion—but Brianna
Randall was as incapable of playing that sort of silly game as
he was himself.
No, she wouldn’ t put him of f just to raise his interest in her;
what wo uld be the point? Surely she knew just how much he
cared about her .
Did she, though? W ith a qualm of uneasiness, Roger
recalled another of My W eekly ‘s tips to the lovelorn.
“Don’ t assume he can read yo ur mind,” the article said.
“Give him a hint of how you feel.”
Roger t ook a random bite of the sandwich and chewed,
oblivious to its contents. W ell, he’d hinted, all right. Come out
and bared his b loody soul. And she’d promptly leapt into a
plane and buggered of f to Boston.
“Don’ t be too aggressive,” he murmured, quoting T ip #14,
and snorted. The woman don next to him edged slightly away .Roger sighed and deposited the bitten sandwich distastefully
on the plastic tray . He picked u p the cup of what the dining
hall was pleased to call cof fee, but didn’ t drink it, merely sat
with it between his hands, absorbing its meager warmth.
The trouble was that while he t hought he had succeeded in
deflecting Brianna’ s attention from the past, he had been
unable t o ignore it himself. Claire and that bloody Highlander
of hers obsessed  him; they mig ht as well have been his own
family , for the fascination they held.
“Always be honest.” T ip #3. If he had been, if he’d helped
her to find out e verything, perh aps the ghost of Jamie Fraser
would be laid now—and so would Roger .
“Oh, bugger!” he muttered to himself.
The wom an next to him crashed her cof fee cup onto her tray
and stood up suddenly .
“Go bugger yourself !” she said crisply , and walked of f.
Roger stared after her for a moment.
“No fear ,” he said. “I think maybe I already have.”2 5
E N T E R  A  S E R P E N T
October 1768
I n p rincip le, I had no objection to snakes. They ate rats, which
was laudable of them, some were ornamental, and most of
them were wise enough to keep out of my way . Live and let
live was my basic attitude.
On the other ha nd, that was th eory . In practice, I had any
number of objections to the hug e snake curled up on the seat
of the privy . Beyond the fact that he was gravely
discommoding me at present, he wasn’ t usefully eating rats
and he wasn’ t aesthetically ple asing, either , being a sort of
drab gray with darker splotches.
My major objection to him, though, was the fact that he was
a rattlesnake. I supposed that in a way it was fortunate that he
was; it was only the heartstoppi ng buzz of his rattles that had
prevented me sitting on him in the dawn’ s early light.
The first sound froze me in place, just inside the tiny privy . I
extended one foot behind me, groping gingerly for the doorsill.
The snake didn’ t like that; I fro ze again as the warning buzz
increased in volume. I could se e the vibrating tip of his tail,
sticking up like a thick yellow finger , rudely pointing from the
heap of coils.
My mouth had gone dry as paper; I bit the inside of my
cheek, trying to summon a little saliva.
How lon g was he? I seemed to r ecall Brianna’ s telling me—
from her  Girl Scout handbook—that rattlesnakes were capable
of striking at a distance up to on e-third their own body length.
No more than two feet sepa rated my nightgown-covered
thighs from the nasty flat head with its lidless eyes.
W as he six fee t long? It was impossible to tell, but the
squirm of coils looked unpleasantly massive, the rounded body
thick with scaled muscle. He was a bloody big snake, and thefear of being ign ominiously bitten in the crotch if I moved was
enough to make me stand still.
I couldn’ t stand still forever , though. Other considerations
aside, the shock of seeing the snake hadn’ t decreased the
ur gency of my bodily functions in the slightest.
I h ad some vag ue notion that s nakes were deaf; perhaps I
could sh out for help. But what i f they weren’ t? There was that
Sherlock Holmes story about the snake who responded to a
whistle. Perhaps the snake would find whistling inof fensive, at
least. Ca utiously , I pursed my lip s and blew . Nothing came out
but a thin stream of air .
“Claire?” said a puzzled voice behind me. “What the hell
are ye doing?”
I j umped  at the sound, and so did the snake—or at least it
moved suddenly , flexing its coils in what appeared to be
imminent attack.
I froze to the doorframe and the snake quit moving, except
for t he c hronic w hirr of its rattle s, like the annoying buzz of an
alarm clock that wouldn’ t shut of f.
“There’ s a fucking snake in her e,” I said through my teeth,
trying not to move even my lips.
“W ell, w hy are ye standing ther e? Move aside and I’ll pitch
it out.” I could hear Jamie’ s footsteps, coming close.
The sna ke hear d him too—obviously it wasn’ t  deaf—and
revved up its rattling.
“Ah,” Jamie said, in a dif feren t tone of voice. I heard a
rustle as he stooped behind me. “Stand still, Sassenach.”
I h adn’ t  time to respond to this piece of gratuitous advice
before a heavy s tone whizzed past my hip and struck the snake
amidships. It sprang into som ething resembling a Gordian
knot, squirmed, writhed—and fell into the privy , where it
landed with a nasty sort of hollow thwuck !
I didn’ t wait to congratulate the victorious warrior , but
instead t urned and ran for the nearest patch of woods, the dew-wet hem of my nightgown slapping round my ankles.
Returning a few minutes later in a more settled frame of
mind, I found J amie and Y oung Ian squeezed into the privy
together—a tight fit, considering their sizes—the latter
squatting on the bench with a pine-knot torch as the former
bent over the hole, peering into the depths beneath.
“Can the y swim?” Ian was askin g, trying to see past Jamie’ s
head without setting his uncle’ s hair on fire.
“I dinna  ken,” Jamie replied dubiously . “I think maybe so.
What I want to know is, can they jump?”
Ian jerked back, then laughed a little nervously , not
altogether sure that Jamie was joking.
“Here, I  canna see a thing; hand me the light.” Jamie
reached up to ta ke the splinter o f pine from Ian, and lowered it
gingerly into the hole.
“If t he stink do esna put the flame out, belike we’ll burn
down th e privy ,”  he muttered, be nding low . “Now , then, where
the devil—”
“There it is! I see it!” Ian cried.
Both he ads jerked, and cracked together with the sound of
splitting melons. Jamie dropped the torch, which fell into the
hole and was promptly extinguished. A thin wisp of smoke
drifted up from the rim of the hole, like incense.
Jamie staggered out of the privy , hands clutching his
forehead, eyes squeezed shut with pain. Y oung Ian leaned
against the inside wall, hands pr essed tightly over the crown of
his head, making abrupt and breathless remarks in Gaelic.
“Is it still alive?” I asked anxiously , peering toward the
privy .
Jamie opened one eye and regar ded me under the clutching
fingers.
“Oh, my head’ s fine, thanks,” he said. “I expect my ears will
ha’ quit ringing by next week, sometime.”“Now , now ,” I said soothingly . “It would take a
sledgehammer to dent your skull. Let me look, though.” I
pushed his fingers aside and p ulled his head down, feeling
gently through the thick hair . T here was a small bruised spot
just above the hairline, but no blood.
I kissed the spot perfunctorily and patted him on the head.
“Y ou won’ t die,” I said. “Not from that, anyway .”
“Oh, good,” he said dryly . “I’d much rather die of snakebite
next time I sit down to my business.”
“It’ s a poisonous serpent, is it?”  Ian asked, letting go of his
head an d coming out of the privy . He inhaled deeply , filling
his thin chest with fresh air .
“V enemous,” Jamie corrected him. “If it bites you and
makes ye sick, it’ s venemous; if you bite it  and it makes ye
sick, it’ s poisonous.”
“Oh, aye ,” Ian said, dismissing this pedantry . “It’ s a wicked
snake, though?”
“V ery wicked,” I said, with a slight shudder . “What are you
going to do about it?” I asked, turning to Jamie.
He raised one eyebrow .
“Me? Why ought I to do anything about it?” he asked.
“Y ou can’ t just let him stay in there!”
“Why not?” he said, raising the other brow .
Ian scratched his head absently , winced as he encountered
the lump left by his collision with Jamie, and stopped.
“W ell, I dinna ken, Uncle Jamie,” he said dubiously . “If ye
want to let your balls hang over a pit wi’ a deadly viper in it,
that’ s your concern, but the noti on makes my flesh creep a bit.
How big’ s the thing?”
“Fair -sized, I’ll admit.” Jamie flexed his wrist, showing his
forearm by way of comparison.
“Eeugh!” said Ian.“Y ou don’ t know  they don’ t jump,” I put in helpfully .
“A ye, I do.” Jam ie eyed me cyn ically . “Still, I grant ye, the
thought’ s enoug h to make one a bit costive. How d’ye mean to
get him out, though?”
“I co uld shoot h im wi’ your pist ol,” Ian of fered, brightening
at the thought of  getting his hand s on Jamie’ s treasured pistols.
“W e needn’ t get him out if we can kill him.”
“Is he…ah…visible?” I put in delicately .
Jamie rubbed his chin dubiously . He hadn’ t shaved yet, and
the dark red bristles rasped under his thumb.
“Not ver y . There ’ s no more than  a few inches o’ filth in the
pit, but I shouldna think ye could see him well enough to aim,
and I hate to waste the shot.”
“W e could invite all of the Han sens for dinner , serve beer ,
and drown him,” I suggested facetiously , naming a nearby—
and very numerous—Quaker family .
Ian erupted in giggles. Jamie gave me an austere sort of
look, and turned toward the woods.
“I’ll think of something,” he said. “After my breakfast.”
Breakfast was luckily no great problem, as the hens had
helpfully provided me with nine eggs and the bread had risen
satisfactorily . The butter was still immured in the back of the
pantry , u nder the  baleful guard o f the newly-farrowed sow , but
Ian had managed to lean in and  snatch a pot of jam from the
shelf as I stood by with the broom, jabbing it into the sow’ s
gnashing jaws as she made little darting char ges at Ian’ s legs.
“I’ll hav e to have a new broom,” I remarked, eyeing the
tattered remains  as I dished up t he eggs. “Perhaps I’ll go up to
the willow grove by the stream this morning.”
“Mmphm.” Jamie reached out a hand and patted absently
around on the table, searching for the bread plate. His attention
was who lly focu sed on the boo k he was reading, Bricknell’ s
Natural History of North Car olina .“Here i t is,” he said. “I knew I’d seen a bit about
rattlesnakes.” Locating the brea d by feel, he took a piece and
used it to scoo p a healthy portion of egg into his mouth.
Having engulfed  this, he read aloud, holding the book in one
hand while groping over the tabletop with the other .
” ‘T he Indians f requently pull out the snakes’ T eeth, so that
they nev er afterwards can do an y Mischief by biting; this may
be easily  done, by tying a bit of  red W ollen Cloth to the upper
end of a long hollow Cane, and so provoking the Rattle-Snake
to b ite, and sud denly pulling it away from him, by which
means the T eeth stick fast in th e Cloath, which are plainly to
be seen by those present.’ “
“Have w e any red cloth, Auntie?” Ian asked, washing down
his own share of the eggs with chicory cof fee.
I sho ok my head , and speared the last of the sausages before
Jamie’ s groping hand reached it.
“Blue, green, yellow , drab, white, and brown. No red.”
“That’ s a fine wee book, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, with
approval. “Does  it say more about the snakes?” He looked
hungrily over the expanse of t able, in search of more food.
W ithout comme nt, I reached into the hutch and brought out a
plate of spoonbread, which I set before him. He sighed happily
and waded in, as Jamie turned the page.
“W ell, here’ s a bit about how the rattlesnakes charm
squirrels and rabbits.” Jam ie touched his plate, but
encountered nothing save bare surface. I pushed the muf fins
toward him.
” ‘It  is surprizin g to observe how these Snakes will allure
and charm Squirrels, Hedge-Conneys, Partridges and many
other small Beasts and Birds to them, which they quickly
devour . The Sympathy is so st rong between these, that you
shall see  the Squirrel or Partri dge (as they have espied this
Snake) l eap or fly from Bough t o Bough, until at last they run
or leap directly i nto its Mouth, n ot having power to avoid theirEnemy , who never stirs out of the Posture or Quoil until he
obtains his Prey .’ “
His hand, blindly groping after sustenance, encountered the
muf fins. He picked one up and glanced up at me. “Damned if
I’ve ever seen that, myself. D’ye think it likely?”
“No,” I said, pus hing the curls back of f my forehead. “Does
that book have any helpful suggestions for dealing with
vicious pigs?”
He waved absently at me with the remnants of his muf fin.
“Dinna fash,” he murmured. “I’ll manage the pig.” He took
his e yes of f the book long enough to glance over the table at
the empty dishes. “Are there no more eggs?”
“There are, but I’m taking the m up to our guest at the
corncrib.” I added two slices of bread to the small basket I was
packing, and took up the bottle of infusion I had left steeping
overnight. The brew of goldenrod, bee-balm, and wild
ber gamot was a blackish green,  and smelled like burnt fields,
but it might help. It couldn’ t hurt. On impulse, I picked up the
tied-feather amulet old Nayawenne had given me; perhaps it
would reassure the sick man. L ike the medicine, it couldn’ t
hurt.
Our impromptu guest was a st ranger; a T uscarora from a
northern village. He had come to the farm several days before,
as part of a hunting party from Anna Ooka, on the trail of bear .
W e h ad of fered food and drink— several of the hunters were
Ian’ s friends—b ut in the course  of the meal I had noticed this
man gazing glassy-eyed into his cup. Close examination had
showed him to be suf fering fro m what I was convinced was
measles, an alarming disease in these days.
He had insisted on leaving with his companions, but two of
them ha d brought him back a few hours later , stumbling and
delirious.
He was plainly— and alarmingl y—contagious. I had made
him a comforta ble bed in the newly built and so-far empty
corncrib, and forced his companions to go and wash in thecreek, a proceeding which they plainly found senseless, but in
which t hey hu mored me before departing, leaving their
comrade in my hands.
The Ind ian was lying on his side, curled under his blanket.
He didn ’ t turn to look at me, though he must have heard my
footsteps on the path. I could h ear him, all right; no need for
my makeshift stethoscope—the rales in his lungs were clearly
audible at six paces.
“Comment ca va?”  I said, kneeling down by him. He didn’ t
answer; it was unnecessary , in a ny case. I didn’ t need anything
beyond the rattling wheeze to diagnose pneumonia, and the
look of him me rely confirmed it—eyes sunken and dull, the
flesh of his fac e fallen away , consumed to the bone by the
fierce blaze of fever .
I tried to persuade him to eat—he desperately needed
nourishment—but he would not even bother to turn away his
face. The water bottle by his s ide was empty; I had brought
more but didn’ t give it to him right away , thinking he might
swallow the infusion from sheer thirst.
He d id take a few mouthfuls, but then stopped swallowing,
merely allowing the greenish-black liquid to run out of the
corners of his m outh. I tried c oaxing in French, but he was
having none of it; he didn’ t even acknowledge my presence,
just stared past my shoulder at the morning sky .
His thin body sagged with despair; plainly he thought
himself abandon ed, left to die in the hands of strangers. I felt a
gnawing anxiety that he might be right—surely he would  die if
he would take nothing.
He would take water , at least. He drank thirstily , draining
the bottle, and I went to the stream to fill it again. When I
came back, I drew the amulet from my basket and held it up in
front of his face. I thought I saw a flicker of surprise behind
the half- closed lids—nothing so strong as to be called hope,
but he did at le ast take conscious notice of me for the first
time.Seized by inspiration, I sank slo wly down onto my knees. I
had no notion at all of the proper ceremony to employ , but I
had been a doct or long enough to know that while the power
of su ggestion was no substitute for antibiotics, it was certainly
better than nothing.
I held up the raven’ s-feather amulet, turned my face
skyward; and solemnly intoned the most sonorous thing I
could remember , which happened to be Dr . Rawlings’ s receipt
for the treatment of syphilis, rendered in Latin.
I poured a small bit of lavender oil into my hand, dipped the
feather in it, and anointed his temples and throat, while singing
“Blow the Man Down,” in a low , sinister voice. It might help
the hea dache. His eyes were following the feather ’ s
movements; I felt rather like a rattlesnake charming away in
its “Quoil,” waiting for a squirrel to run down my throat.
I p icked  up his hand, laid the oi l-drabbled amulet across his
palm, an d close d his fingers ro und it. Then I took the jar of
mentholated bear grease and painted mystic patterns on his
chest, being careful to rub it well in with the balls of my
thumbs. The reek cleared my  sinuses; I could only hope it
would help the patient’ s thick congestion.
I completed my ritual by solemnly blessing the bottle of
infusion with “In nomine Patri, et Filii, et Spiritu Sancti,
Amen.”  and  pre senting it to my patient ’ s lips. Looking mildly
hypnotized, he opened his mouth and obediently drank the
rest.
I drew the blanket up around h is shoulders, put the food I
had brought down beside him , and left him, with mixed
feelings of hope and fraudulence.
I wa lked slowly beside the str eam, eyes alert as always for
anything useful. It was too early in the year for most
medicinals; for medicine, the ol der and tougher the plant, the
better; several seasons of fightin g of f insects ensured a higher
concentration of the active principles in their roots and stems.Also, with many plants, it was t he flower , fruit, or seed that
yielded a useful substance, and while I’d spotted clumps of
turtlehead and lobelia sprouting in the mud along the path,
those had long since gone to seed. I marked the locations
carefully in my mind for fu ture reference, and went on
hunting.
W atercress was abundant; patches of it floated among the
rocks all along the mar gin of the stream, and a huge mat of the
spicy dark green leaves lay temptingly just ahead. A nice patch
of scour ing rush es, too! I had come down barefoot, knowing
I’d b e wading b efore long; I tucked up my skirts and ventured
cautiously out into the stream, c utting knife in hand and basket
over my arm, breath sucked in against the freezing chill.
My feet lost all f eeling within moments—but I didn’ t care. I
quite for got the snake in the pr ivy , the pig in the pantry , and
the Indian in the corncrib, absorbed in the rush of water past
my legs , the wet, cold touch of stems and the breath of
aromatic leaves.
Dragonflies hung in the patches of sunshine on the
shallows, and minnows darted past, snatching gnats too small
for me to see. A kingfisher called in a loud, dry rattle from
somewhere upstream, but he was after lar ger prey . The
minnows scattered at my intrusion but then swarmed back,
gray and silver , green and gold , black marked with white, all
insubstantial as the shadows from last year ’ s leaves, floating
on t he water . Br ownian motion, I thought, seeing puf fs of silt
float up and swirl around my ankles, obscuring the fish.
Everything mov ing, all of the time, down to the smallest
molecule—but in its movement, giving the paradoxical
impression of stillness, small l ocal chaos giving way to the
illusion of a greater order overall.
I moved, too, taking my part in the stream’ s bright dance,
feeling light and shadow change across my shoulders, toes
searching for footholds among the slippery , half-seen rocks.
My hand s and feet were numb f rom the water; I felt as though
I we re half mad e of wood, yet intensely alive, like the silverbirch th at glowed above me, o r the willows that trailed wet
leaves in the pool below .
Perhaps the legends of green men and the myths of
transformed nymphs began this  way , I thought: not with trees
come al ive and walking, nor ye t with women turned to wood
—but with submersion of warm  human flesh into the colder
sensations of the plants, chilled to slow awareness.
I c ould feel my heart beat slowl y , and the half-painful throb
of blood  in my fingers. Sap risi ng. I moved with the rhythms
of water  and of wind, without haste or conscious thought, part
of the slow and perfect order of the universe.
I had for gotten the bit about small local chaos.
Just as I came to  the willows’ b end, there was a loud shriek
from be yond the trees. I’d heard  similar noises from a variety
of animals, from catamounts to hunting eagles, but I knew a
human voice when I heard one.
Blundering out of the stream, I shoved my way through the
tangled branches, and burst through into the clear space
beyond. A boy was dancing on  the bank above me, slapping
madly at his legs and howling as he hopped and fro.
“What—?” I began, and he gl anced up at me, blue eyes
wide with startlement at my sudden appearance.
He wasn ’ t nearly as startled as I was. He was eleven or
twelve; tall and thin as a pine sapling, with a mad tangle of
thick ru sset hair . Slanted blue eyes stared at me from either
side of a knife-bridged nose, familiar to me as the back of my
own hand, though I knew I had never seen this child before.
My heart was somewhere in the vicinity of my tonsils, and
the chill  had shot up from my fe et into the pit of my stomach.
T rained to react in spite of shock, I managed to take in the rest
of his appearance—shirt and breeches of good quality , though
splashed with water , and long pale shins blobbed with black
clots like bits of mud.
“Leeches,” I said, professional  calm descending by habit
over personal tumult. It couldn’ t be,  I  was telling my self, at thesame time that I knew it damn well was . “It’ s only leeches.
They won’ t hurt you.”
“I know what t hey are!” he sa id. “Get them of f me!” He
swatted at his calf, shuddering with dislike. “They’re vile!”
“Oh, not so terribly vile,” I said, beginning to get a grip on
myself. “They have their uses.”
“I don’ t  care what use they are!” he bellowed, stamping in
frustration. “I hate them, get them of f me!”
“W ell, s top whacking at them,” I said sharply . “Sit you
down and I’ll take care of it.”
He hesitated, glaring at me suspiciously , but reluctantly sat
down on  a rock, thrusting his leech-spattered legs out in front
of him.
“Get them of f now !” he demanded.
“In good time,” I said. “Where did you come from?”
He stared blankly at me.
“Y ou do n’ t live near here,” I said, with complete certainty .
“Where did you come from?”
He made an obvious ef fort to collect himself.
“Ah…we slept in a place called Salem, three nights past.
That wa s the last town I saw .” He wiggled his legs hard. “Get
them of f, I say!”
There w ere asso rted methods of getting leeches of f, most of
them somewhat more damaging than the leeches themselves. I
had a look; he’d  picked up four on one leg, three on the other .
One of the fat little beasts was already near bloat, gone plump
and shiny with s tretching. I edged a thumbnail under its head
and it popped of f into my hand , round as a pebble and heavy
with blood.
The boy stared it, pale under his tan, and shuddered.
“Don’ t want to waste it,” I said casually , and went to
retrieve the basket I had drop ped under the branches as Ipushed my way through the trees.
Nearby , I saw h is coat on the ground, discarded shoes and
stockings with it. Simple buckle s on the shoes, but silver , not
pewter . Good broadcloth, not showy but cut with a deal more
style than one saw anywhere north of Charleston. I hadn’ t
really needed confirmation, but there it was.
I sco oped up a handful of mud, pressed the leech gently into
it and wrapped  the gooey bl ob in wet leaves, only then
noticing that my hands were trembling. The idiot! The
deceitful, wicked, conniving…what in hell  had  made him
come here? And God, what would Jamie do?
I came back to the boy , who was bent double, peering at the
remaining leech es with a look of disgusted loathing. One more
was clos e to dropping; as I knelt in front of him, it fell of f,
bouncing slightly on the damp ground.
“Augh!” he said.
“Where’ s your stepfather?” I asked abruptly . Few things
could have taken his attention of f his legs, but that did. His
head jerked up and he stared at me in astonishment.
It was a cool day , but a light dew of sweat shone on his face.
It w as narrower through cheek and temple, I thought, and the
mouth was quite unlike; perhaps the resemblance was not
really so pronounced as I thought.
“How do you know me?” he asked, drawing himself up with
an air of hauteur that would have been extremely funny under
other circumstances.
“All I know abo ut you is that your given name is W illiam.
Am I right?” My hands curled a t my sides, and I hoped I was
wrong. If he was  W illiam, that wasn’ t quite all I knew about
him, but it was plenty to be going on with.
A hot flush rose into his cheeks, and his eyes raked over me,
his attention temporarily distracted from the leeches by being
so fami liarly a ddressed by what—I suddenly realized—
appeared to be a  disheveled beldame with her skirts round her
thighs. E ither he had good manners, or the disparity betweenmy voice and my appearance made him cautious, because he
swallowed the instant retort that came to his lips.
“Y es, it is,” he said shortly , instead. “W illiam, V iscount
Ashness, ninth Earl of Ellesmere.”
“All that?” I said politely . “Gracious.” I took hold of one
leech between thumb and forefinger and pulled gently . The
thing str etched o ut like a thick rubber band, but declined to let
go. T he boy’ s p ale flesh pulled out, too, and he made a small
choking sound.
“Let go!” he said. “It’ll break, you’ll break it!”
“Could d o,” I admitted. I got to my feet and shook down my
skirts, putting myself in better order .
“Come along,” I said, of fering him a hand. “I’ll take you to
the h ouse. If I sprinkle a bit of salt on them, they’ll drop of f at
once.”
He r efused the h and, but got to  his feet, a little shakily . He
glanced around, as though looking for someone.
“Papa,” he explained, seeing my expression. “W e missed
the w ay , and he  told me to wait by the stream while he made
sure of our direc tion. I shouldn’ t like him to take alarm if I am
not here when he returns.”
“I sh ouldn’ t worry ,” I said. “I im agine he’ll have found the
house himself by this time; it is n’ t far .” A fair guess, as it was
the only  house in some distance, and at the end of a well-
marked trail. Lord John had plainly left the boy while he went
ahead, to  find Jamie—and warn  him. V ery thoughtful. My lips
tightened involuntarily .
“W ill that be F rasers’?” the boy asked. He took a ginger
step, spr addling so as not to allow his legs to rub together . “W e
had come to see a James Fraser .”
“I’m Mrs. Fraser ,” I said, a nd smiled at him. Y our
stepmother ,  I might have added—but didn’ t. “Come along.”He f ollowed me through the sc rim of trees toward the house,
almost treading on my heels in his haste. I kept tripping over
tree roots and half-buried stones, not watching where I was
going, fi ghting the overwhelming ur ge to turn around and stare
at him. If W illia m, V iscount Ashness, ninth Earl of Ellesmere,
was not the very  last person I had ever expected to see in the
backwoods of North Carolina, he was certainly next to the last
—King Geor ge  was a trifle less likely to turn up on the
doorstep, I supposed.
What had possessed that…that…I groped about, trying to
choose among several discreditable epithets to apply to Lord
John Gr ey , and gave up the strug gle, in favor of trying to think
what in heaven’ s name to do. I gave that up, too; there wasn’ t
a thing I could  do.
W illiam, V iscount Ashness, ninth Earl of Ellesmere. Or he
thought he was. And just  what do you pr opose to do,  I thought
silently and savagely toward L ord John Grey , when he finds
out that he’ s r e ally the bastar d son of a par doned Scottish
criminal? And mor e important—what’ s the Scottish criminal
going to do? or feel?
I stoppe d, causing the boy to stumble as he tried to avoid
crashing into me.
“Sorry ,” I murmured. “Thought I saw a snake,” and went
on, the thought t hat had stopped me in my tracks still knotting
my midsection like a dose of bitter apples. Could Lord John
have bro ught the boy on purpos e to reveal his parentage? Did
he mean to leave him here, with Jamie—with us?
Alarming as I fo und the notion, I couldn’ t reconcile it with
the m an I had met in Jamaica. I  might have sound reasons for
disliking John Grey—always dif ficult to feel a warm sense of
goodwill toward a man with a professed homosexual passion
for o ne’ s husband, after all—bu t I had to admit that I had seen
no trace  of either recklessness o r cruelty in his character . On
the contrary , he had struck m e as a sensitive, kindly , and
honorable man— or at least he had, before I’d found out about
his predilections toward Jamie.Could something have happened? Some threat to the boy
that made Lord John fear for hi s safety? Surely no one could
have found out the truth about W illiam—no one knew , save
Lord Jo hn and Jamie. And me, of course, I added as an
afterthought. W i thout the evidence of the resemblance—again
I r epress ed the ur ge to turn round and stare at him—there was
no reason for anyone ever to suspect.
But see them side by side, and—well, I shortly would  see
them sid e by side. The thought  gave me a queer hollowness
beneath the breastbone, half fright and half anticipation. W as it
really as strong as I thought, that resemblance?
I took a deliberate quick detour , through a clump of low-
hanging dogwood, making an excuse to turn and wait for him.
He came through after me, duck ing awkwardly to retrieve the
silver -buckled shoe he had dropped.
No, I thought, w atching covertly as he straightened up, face
flushed from bending. It wasn’ t as strong as I’d thought at
first. He had the promise of Jamie’ s bones, but it wasn’ t all
there yet—he had the outlines, but not yet the substance. He
would be very t all—that was obvious—but now he was about
my height, gawky and slender , his limbs very long, and thin
enough to seem almost delicate.
He was much da rker than Jamie, too; while his hair glinted
red in the shafts  of sunlight that came through the branches, it
was a deep ches tnut, nothing like Jamie’ s bright red-gold, and
his skin had turned a soft golden brown in the sun, not at all
like Jamie’ s half-burnt bronze.
He had the Fras ers’ slanted cat-eyes, though, and there was
something abou t the set of his head, the cock of the slender
shoulders, that made me think of—
Bree. It hit me w ith a small shoc k, like a spark of electricity .
He did look qui te a bit like Jamie, but it was my memories of
Brianna that had caused that jolt of instant recognition when I
saw him . Only ten years her jun ior , the childish outlines of his
face were much more similar to hers than to Jamie’ s.He had paused to disentangle a long strand of hair from a
grappling dogw ood branch; now he came up with me, one
brow raised inquiringly .
“Is it far?” he a sked. The color had come back to his face
with the exertion of walking, b ut he still looked a trifle sick,
and kept his eyes averted from his legs.
“No,” I said. I motioned toward the chestnut grove. “Just
there. Look; you can see the smoke from the chimney .”
He didn ’ t wait to be led, but set of f with dogged speed,
anxious to be rid of the leeches.
I fol lowed him quickly , not wan ting him to reach the cabin
ahead of  me. I w as prey to a mixture of the most disquieting
sensations; uppermost was anxiety for Jamie, a little lower ,
anger at John G rey . Below that, an intense curiosity . And at
the bott om, far enough down t hat I could almost pretend it
wasn’ t there, was a pang of sh arp longing for my daughter ,
whose face I had never thought to see again.
Jamie an d Lord John were sitting on the bench by the door;
at th e sound of our steps, Jamie rose and looked toward the
wood. He’d had time to prepare himself; his glance passed
casually over the boy as he turned to me.
“Oh, Cla ire. Y e’ve found the ot her of our visitors, then. I’d
sent Ian down to find ye. Y e’ll recall Lord John, I expect?”
“How could I for get?” I sa id, giving his lordship a
particularly bright smile. His mouth twitched slightly , but he
kept a straight face as he bowed  deeply in my direction. How
did a man stay so impeccably g roomed after several days on
horseback, sleeping in the woods?
“Y our servant, Mrs. Fraser .” He glanced at the boy ,
frowning slightly at his state o f undress. “May I present my
stepson, Lord Ellesmere? And W illiam, as I see you have
made the acquaintance of our g racious hostess, will you also
make your compliments to our host, Captain Fraser?”
The boy was sh ifting from foot to foot, nearly dancing on
his toes. At this  prompting, though, he jerked a quick bow inJamie’ s direction.
“Y our servant, Captain,” he said, then cast an agonized
glance at me, p lainly conscious of nothing but the fact that
more of his blood was being sucked out by the second.
“Y ou’ll excuse us?” I said poli tely , and taking the boy by
the arm, led him  into the cabin and shut the door firmly in the
astonished faces of the men. W illiam sat immediately on the
stool I pointed out, and thrust out his legs, trembling.
“Hurry!” he said. “Oh, please, do hurry!”
There w as no salt ground; I took my digging knife and
chipped a piece from the block with reckless haste, dropped it
into my mortar , and smashed it into granules with a few quick
jabs of the pestle. Crumbling the grains between my fingers, I
scattered the salt thickly on each leech.
“Rather hard on the poor old leeches,” I said, seeing the first
draw itself slowly up into a ball. “Still, it does the trick.” The
leech let go its grip and tumbled of f W illiam’ s leg, followed in
similar fashion by its fellows, who writhed in slow-motion
agony on the floor .
I s cooped up th e tiny bodies an d flung them into the fire,
then knelt in front of him, tactfully keeping my head bent
while he got control of his face.
“Here, let me ta ke care of the bites.” T iny streams of blood
ran dow n his legs; I dabbed them with a clean cloth, then
washed the small wounds with vinegar and St.-John’ s-wort to
stop the bleeding.
He let out a deep and tremulous sigh of relief as I dried his
shins. “I t’ s not that I’m afraid of —of blood,” he said, in a tone
of brava do that made it apparen t that that was precisely what
he was afraid of. “It’ s only they’re such filthy creatures.”
“Nasty little things,” I agreed. I stood up, took a clean cloth,
dipped it in water , and matter -of-factly wiped his smudged
face. Then, without asking, I picked up my hairbrush and
began to comb out the snarls of his hair .He looked utterly startled at thi s familiarity , but beyond an
initial stif fening of his spine, m ade no protest, and as I began
to o rder his hai r , he let out another small sigh, and let his
shoulders slump a little.
His skin  had a pleasant animal  heat, and my fingers, still
chilly fr om the stream, warmed  comfortably as I ordered the
soft stra nds of silky chestnut hair . It was very thick, and
slightly wavy . On the crown o f his head was a cowlick, a
delicate whorl that gave me mil d vertigo to see; Jamie had the
same cowlick, in the same place.
“I’ve lost my ri bbon,” he said, looking vaguely round, as
though one might materialize from bread hutch or inkwell.
“That’ s all right; I’ll lend you one.” I finished plaiting his
hair and tied it with a scrap of yellow ribbon, feeling as I did
so an odd sense of protectiveness.
I had learned of his existence only a few years earlier , and if
I ha d thought of  him in the meantime at all, had felt no more
than a minor sense of curiosity  tinged with resentment. But
now something— be it his resemblance to my own child, his
resemblance to Jamie, or simply  the fact that I had taken care
of him in some small way—had given me a strange feeling of
almost proprietary concern for him.
I c ould hear the  rumble of voices outside; the sound of a
sudden laugh, and my annoyanc e at John Grey came back with
a ru sh. How da re he risk both Jamie and W illiam—and for
what? Why was the bloody man her e,  in a wilderness as
blatantly unsuited to someone of his sort as a—
The door opened, and Jamie poked his head in.
“W ill ye be all right?” he asked. His eyes rested on the boy ,
an e xpression of polite concern on his face, but I saw his hand,
curled tight as it rested on the  door frame, and the line of
tension that ran through leg and  shoulder . He was strung like a
harp; if I had t ouched him, he would have given of f a low
twanging noise.“Quite a ll right,” I said pleasantly . “W ould Lord John care
for some refreshment, do you think?”
I pu t the  kettle on to boil for tea, and—with an inner sigh—
took out the last loaf of bread, which I had meant to use for my
next round of penicillin experiments. Feeling that the
emer gency justi fied it, I brought out the last bottle of brandy
as w ell. Then I put the jampot o n the table, explaining that the
butter was unfortunately in th e custody of the pig at the
moment.
“Pig?” said W illiam, looking confused.
“In the pantry ,” I said, with a nod at the closed door .
“Why do you k eep—” he started, then sat up sharply and
closed his mouth, having obviously been kicked under the
table by his ste pfather , who was smiling pleasantly over his
cup.
“It i s very kind  of you to receive us, Mrs. Fraser ,” Lord
John in terjected, giving his stepson a warning eye. “I do
apologize for our unexpected arrival; I hope we do not
discommode you too greatly .”
“Not at all,” I sa id, wondering just where we were going to
put them to sleep. W illiam could go to the shed with Ian, I
supposed; it was no worse than sleeping rough, as he had been
doing. B ut the thought of sharing a bed with Jamie, with Lord
John on the trundle an arm’ s-length away…
Ian, with his usual instinct for mealtimes, appeared at this
delicate point in the proceedings, and was introduced all
round, with such a confusion of explanations and reciprocal
bowing in cramped quarters that the teapot was knocked over .
Using this minor disaster as a n excuse, I sent Ian of f to
show W illiam the attractions of wood and stream, with a
packet of jam sandwiches an d a bottle of cider to share
between them. Then, free of their inhibiting presences, I filled
the cups with b randy , sat down again, and fixed John Grey
with a narrow eye.
“What are you doing here?” I said, without preamble.He open ed his light blue eyes very wide, then lowered his
very long lashes and batted them deliberately at me.
“I did not com e with the intention of seducing your
husband, I assure you,” he said.
“John!” Jamie’ s fist struck the ta ble with a force that rattled
the t eacups. His cheekbones wer e flushed dark red, and he was
scowling with embarrassed fury .
“Sorry .” Grey , by contrast, had gone white, though he
remained otherwise visibly unru f fled. It occurred to me for the
first tim e that he might possibl y be as unnerved as Jamie by
this meeting.
“My apologies, ma’am,” he sa id, with a curt nod in my
direction. “That was unfor givable. I would point out, however ,
that you have been looking at me since we met as though you
had encountered me lying in the  gutter outside some notorious
mollyhouse.” A light flush burned over his face now , too.
“Sorry ,” I breathed. “Give me a  bit more notice next time,
and I’ll take care to adjust my features.”
He stoo d up suddenly and wen t to the window , where he
stood w ith his back to the room, hands braced on the sill.
There w as an exceedingly awk ward silence. I didn’ t want to
look at Jamie; i nstead I af fected great interest in a bottle of
fennel seeds that stood on the table.
“My wif e has died,” he said abruptly . “On the ship between
England and Jamaica. She was coming to join me there.”
“I am sorry to hear of it,” Jamie said quietly . “The lad will
have been with her?”
“Y es.” L ord Joh n turned back, leaning against the sill, so
that the spring s unlight silhouetted his neat head and gave him
a gleaming halo. “W illie was— very close to Isobel. She was
the only mother he’d known since his birth.”
W illie’ s true mother , Geneva Dunsany , had died in giving
birth to him; his  presumed father , the Earl of Ellesmere, had
died the same day , in an accident. So much, Jamie had alreadytold me.  Likewise, that Geneva’ s sister , Isobel, had taken care
of th e orphaned boy , and that J ohn Grey had married Isobel
when W illie was six or so—at the time Jamie had left the
Dunsanys’ employ .
“I’m ver y sorry ,” I said, sincere ly , and didn’ t mean only the
death of his wife.
Grey gla nced at  me, and gave me the shadow of a nod in
acknowledgment.
“My appointment as governor was nearly at an end; I had
intended perhap s to take up residence on the island, should the
climate suit my family . As it was…” He shrugged.
“W illie was grief-stricken by the loss of his mother; it
seemed advisable to seek to d istract his mind by whatever
means I could. A n opportunity presented itself almost at once;
my wife’ s estate includes a lar g e property in V ir ginia, which
she had  bequeathed to W illiam. Upon her death, I received
inquiries from the factor of the plantation, asking for
instruction.”
He moved away from the window , coming slowly back
toward the table where we sat.
“I could not well decide what to do with the property
without seeing it, and evaluating the conditions that obtain
here. So  I determined that we should sail to Charleston, and
from the re, travel overland to V ir ginia. I trusted to the novelty
of the experience to divert W illiam from his grief—which I am
pleased to observe, it seems to have done. He has been much
more cheerful these past weeks.”
I o pened my mo uth to say that Fraser ’ s Ridge seemed a bit
out of his way , regardless, but then thought better of it.
He a ppeared to g uess what I wa s thinking, for he gave me a
brief wr y smile. I really would h ave to do something about my
face, I thought. H aving Jamie read my thoughts was one thing,
and not at all unpleasant, on the whole. Having total strangers
walk in and out of my mind at will was something else.“Where is the plantation?” Jamie asked, with somewhat
more tact but the same implication.
“The nearest town of any sort i s called L ynchbur g—on the
James River .” Lord John looked  at me, still wry , but apparent
good hu mor res tored. “It is in fact no more than a few days
deviation in our journey to come here, in spite of the
remoteness of your aerie.”
He switched his attention to Jamie, frowning slightly .
“I told W illie that you are an old acquaintance of mine, from
my sol diering days—I trust you do not object to the
deception?”
Jamie shook his head, one side of his mouth turning up a
bit. “Deception, is it? I shouldna think I could well mind what
ye called  me, under the circumstances. And so far as that bit
goes, it’ s true enough.”
“Y ou don’ t think he’ll remember you?” I asked Jamie. He
had been  a groom on W illie’ s home estate; a prisoner of war
following the Jacobite Rising.
He hesitated, but then shook his head.
“I dinna think so. He was barely six when I left Helwater;
that will  be half a lifetime ago,  to a lad—and a world away .
And there’ s no r eason he should think to recall a groom named
MacKenzie, let alone connect the name wi’ me.”
W illie hadn’ t recognized Jamie on sight, certainly , but then
he h ad been to o concerned with the leeches to take much
notice o f anyone. A thought str uck me, and I turned to Lord
John, who was f iddling with a snuf fbox he had taken from his
pocket.
“T ell m e,” I said, moved by a sudden impulse. “I don’ t
mean to distress you—but…do you know how your wife
died?”
“How?” He looked startled at the question, but collected
himself at once. “She died of a bloody flux, so her maid said.”
His mouth twisted slightly . “It was…not a pleasant death, Ibelieve.” Bloody flux, eh? That was the standard description
for anything from amebic dysentery to cholera.
“W as th ere a doctor? Someone on board who took care of
her?”
“There w as,” he said, a little sharply . “What do you imply ,
ma’am?”
“Nothing,” I said. “It’ s only that I wondered whether
perhaps that was where W illie saw leeches used.”
A flicker of understanding crossed his face.
“Oh, I see. I hadn’ t thought—”
At this point, I noticed Ian, who was hovering in the
doorway , obviously reluctant to interrupt but with a marked
look of ur gency on his face.
“Did you want something, Ian?” I asked, interrupting Lord
John.
He shook his head, brown hair flying.
“No, I thank ye , Auntie. It’ s only—” He cast a helpless
glance at Jamie. “W ell, I’m sorry , Uncle, I ken I shouldna ha’
let him do it, but—”
“What?” Alarmed by Ian’ s tone of voice, Jamie was already
on his feet. “What have ye done?”
The lad twisted his big hands together , cracking his
knuckles in embarrassment.
“W ell, y e see, his Lordship asked for the privy , and so I told
him about the snake, and that he’d best go into the wood
instead. So he d id, but then he wanted to see the snake, and…
and…”
“He’ s not bitten?” Jamie asked anxiously . Lord John, who
had obviously been about to as k the same thing, gave him a
glance.
“Oh, no !” Ian looked surprised. “W e couldna see it to start
with, be cause it was too dark below . So we lifted of f thebenchtop to get more light. W e could see the serpent fine, then,
and we poked at  it a bit wi’ a long branch, so it was lashin’ to
and fro like the wee book said,  but it didna seem inclined to
bite itsel f. And—and—” He darted a glance at Lord John, and
swallowed audibly .
“It w as my fault ,” he said, nobly squaring his shoulders, the
better to  accept blame. “I said as how I’d thought to shoot it
earlier , b ut we didna want to waste the powder . And so his
Lordship said as how he would fetch his papa’ s pistol from the
saddlebag and deal with the thing at once. And so—”
“Ian,” said Jamie between his teeth. “Stop blethering this
instant and tell m e straight what ye’ve done wi’ the lad. Y e’ve
not shot him by mistake, I hope?”
Ian looked of fended at this slur upon his marksmanship.
“Of course not!” he said.
Lord John coughed politely , forestalling further
recriminations.
“Perhaps you would be good enough to tell me the
whereabouts of my son at this moment?”
Ian took a deep  breath and visibly commended his soul to
God.
“He’ s in the bottom of the privy ,” he said. “Have ye got a bit
o’ rope, Uncle Jamie?”
W ith an admirable economy of both words and motion,
Jamie re ached th e door in two strides and disappeared, closely
followed by Lord John.
“Is he in there with  th e snake?” I a sked, hastily scrabbling
through the washbasket for something to use as a tourniquet,
just in case.
“Oh, no, Auntie,” Ian assured m e. “Y e dinna think I’d have
left him, and th e serpent was still there? Maybe I’d best go
help,” he added, and disappeared as well.I hurried after him, to find Jamie and Lord John standing
shoulder to shoulder in the doorway of the privy , conversing
with the depths. Standing on tiptoe to peer over Lord John’ s
shoulder , I saw the torn butt end of a long, slender hickory
branch protrudin g a few inches above the edge of the oblong
hole. I held my breath; Lord Ellesmere’ s struggles had stirred
up the contents of the privy , and the reek was enough to sear
the cilia of f my nasal membranes.
“He say s he’ s not hurt,” Jamie assured me, turning away
from th e hole and unlimbering a coil of rope from his
shoulder .
“Good,” I said. “Where’ s the snake, though?” I peeked
nervously into the outhouse, but couldn’ t see anything beyond
the silvery cedar boards and the dark recesses of the pit.
“It went that w ay ,” Ian said, gesturing vaguely down the
path by which I had come. “T he laddie couldna quite get a
clear sho t, so I gave the thing a  wee snoove wi’ the stick, and
damned if the b ugger didna turn and come at me, right up the
branch! It scairt me so I let out a skelloch and let go, and I
bumped the lad, and—well, that ’ s how it happened,” he ended
lamely .
T rying to avoid Jamie’ s eye, he  sidled toward the pit and,
leaning over , yelled awkwardly , “Hey! I’m glad ye didna break
your neck!”
Jamie gave him a look that said rather plainly that if necks
were to be broke n…but forbore further remarks in the interests
of extra cting W illiam promptly from his oubliette. This
procedure was carried out without further incident, and the
would-be marksman was lifted out, clinging to the rope like a
caterpillar on a string.
There had luckily been enough sewage in the bottom of the
pit to break hi s fall. From ap pearances, the ninth Earl of
Ellesmere had landed facedown. Lord John stood for a
moment on the path, wiping h is hands on his breeches and
surveying the encrusted object b efore him. He rubbed the backof a  hand over his mouth, trying either to hide a smile or to
stifle his sense of smell.
Then his shoulders started to shake.
“What news from the Underworld, Persephone?” he said,
unable to keep the quaver of laughter out of his voice.
A pa ir of slante d eyes looked blue murder out of the mask
of fi lth obscuring his Lordship’ s features. It was a thoroughly
Fraser expressio n, and I felt a qualm go through me at the
sight. By my side, Ian gave a su dden start. He glanced quickly
from the  Earl to Jamie and bac k, then he caught my eye and
his own face went perfectly and unnaturally blank.
Jamie was saying something in Greek, to which Lord John
replied in the same language, whereupon both men laughed
like loons. T rying to ignore I an, I bent an eye in Jamie’ s
direction. Shoulders still shaki ng with suppressed mirth, he
saw fit to enlighten me.
“Epicharmus,” he explained. “ At the Oracle of Delphi,
seekers after enlightenment would throw down a dead python
into the pit, and then hang abou t, breathing in the fumes as it
decayed.”
Lord John declaimed, gesturi ng grandly . ” ‘The spirit
toward the heavens, the body to the earth.’ “
W illiam exhaled strongly through his nose, precisely as
Jamie did when tried beyond bearing. Ian twitched beside me.
Good grief, I thought, freshly unnerved. Does the boy have
nothing from his mother?
“And ha ve you attained any spi ritual insights as a result of
your recent m-mystical experience, W illiam?” Lord John
asked, m aking a  poor attempt at self-control. He and Jamie
were both flushed, with a laughter that I thought due as much
to the release of nervous tension as to brandy or hilarity .
His Lordship, glowering, pulled of f his neckcloth and flung
it on the path with a soggy splat. Now Ian was giggling
nervously , too, unable to help h imself. My own belly muscles
were qu ivering under the strain, but I could see that thepatches of exposed flesh above W illiam’ s collar were the color
of the ripe toma toes by the privy . Knowing all too well what
usually happened to a Fraser who reached that particular level
of incandescenc e, I thought the time had come to break up the
party .
“Er -hem,” I said, clearing my throat. “If you will allow me,
gentlemen? Unlearned as I am in Greek philosophy , there is
one small epigram I know by heart.”
I han ded W illiam the jar of lye soap I had brought in lieu of
a tourniquet.
“Pindar ,” I said. ” ‘W ater is best.’ “
A small  flash of what might h ave been gratitude showed
through the muck. His Lordship bowed to me, with utmost
correctness, then turned, gave Ian a fishy stare, and stomped
of f t hrough the g rass toward the creek, dripping. He seemed to
have lost his shoes.
“Puir clarty bugger ,” Ian said, shaking his head mournfully .
“It’ll be days before he gets the stink of f.”
“No dou bt.” Lord John’ s lips were still twitching, but the
ur ge to declaim Greek poetry  seemed to have left him,
replaced by less elevated concerns. “Do you know what has
become of my pistol, by the way? The one W illiam was using
before his unfortunate accident?”
“Oh.” Ian looked uncomfortable. He lifted his chin in the
direction of the privy . “I…ah…well, I’m verra much afraid—”
“I see.” Lord John rubbed his own immaculately barbered
chin.
Jamie fixed Ian with a long stare.
“Ah…” said Ian, backing up a pace or two.
“Get it,” said Jamie, in a tone that brooked no contradiction.
“But—” said Ian.
“Now ,” said his uncle, and dro pped the slimy rope at his
feet.Ian’ s Ad am’ s ap ple bobbed, once. He looked at me, wide-
eyed as a rabbit.
“T ake your clothes of f first,” I  said helpfully . “W e don’ t
want to have to burn them, do we?”2 6
P L A G U E  A N D  P E S T I L E N C E
I  l eft  the  house just before sunset, to check on my patient in
the corncrib. He was no bette r , but neither was he visibly
worse; the same labored breathing and burning fever . This
time, though, the sunken eyes met mine when I entered the
shed, and stayed on my face as I examined him.
He s till h ad the raven’ s-feather a mulet, clutched in his hand.
I touched it and smiled at him, then gave him a drink. He still
would t ake no food but had a little milk, and swallowed
without protest another dose of my febrifuge. He lay
motionless through examination and feeding, but as I was
wringing out a hot cloth to poultice his chest, he suddenly
reached out a hand and grabbed my arm.
He thum ped his chest with his o ther hand, and made an odd
humming noise. This puzzled  me for a moment, until I
realized that he was  humming.
“Really?” I said. I reached for the packet of poulticing herbs
and folded them into the cloth. “W ell, all right then. Let me
think.”
I settled on “ Onward, Chris tian Soldiers,” which he
appeared to like—I was obliged  to sing it through three times
before he seemed satisfied and sank back on his blanket with a
small spate of coughing, wrapped in camphor fumes.
I paused outside the house, cleansing my hands carefully
with the bottle o f alcohol I carried. I was sure I was safe from
contagion—I ha d had measles a s a child—but wanted to take
no chance of infecting anyone else.
“There was talk of an outbreak  of the red measle in Cross
Creek,” Lord John remarked, up on my reporting to Jamie the
condition of our guest. “Is it tru e, Mrs. Fraser , that the savage
is congenitally less able to withstand infection than areEuropeans, while African slaves are yet more hardy than their
masters?”
“Depends on the infection,” I sa id, peering into the cauldron
and giving the stew bottle a cautious poke. “The Indians are a
lot more  resistant to the parasitic diseases—malaria, say—
caused by or ganisms here, and the Africans deal better with
things like dengue fever—which came with them from Africa,
after all. But the  Indians haven’ t much resistance to European
plagues like smallpox and syphilis, no.”
Lord Joh n looked a bit taken aback, which gave me a small
sense of satisfaction; evidently he had only asked out of
courtesy—he hadn’ t actually expected me to know anything.
“How fascinating,” he said,  though, sounding truly
interested. “Y ou  refer to or ganisms? Do you then subscribe to
Mister Evan Hunter ’ s theory of miasmatical creatures?”
Now it was my turn to be taken aback.
“Er…not precisely , no,” I said, and changed the subject.
W e p assed a ple asant enough evening, Jamie and Lord John
exchanging anecdotes of hunting and fishing, with remarks on
the amazing abundance of the countryside, while I darned
stockings.
W illie an d Ian had a game of chess, which the latter won, to
his evid ent satisfaction. His Lordship yawned hugely , then
catching his father ’ s minatory eye, made a belated attempt to
cover h is mouth. He relaxed into a sleepy smile of
contentment, brought on by repletion; he and Ian between
them had demolished an entire currant cake, following their
huge supper .
Jamie saw it, and cocked a brow at Ian, who obligingly rose
and towed his Lordship away to share his pallet in the herb
shed. T w o down , I thought, kee ping my eyes resolutely away
from the bed—and three to go.
In the event, the  delicate problem of bedtime was solved by
my retir ing, cloaked in modesty—or at least in my nightgown—while Jamie and Lord John  took over the chess table,
drinking the last of the brandy by firelight.
Lord John was a much better chess player than I—or so I
deduced from the fact that the game took them a good hour .
Jamie co uld normally beat me in  twenty minutes flat. The play
was mostly silent, though with brief spurts of conversation.
At last Lord Joh n made a move, sat back and stretched, as
though concluding something.
“I co llect you w ill not see much disturbance in the political
way , here in yo ur mountain refuge?” he said casually . He
squinted at the board, considering.
“I do envy you, Jamie, removed from such petty dif ficulties
as af flict  the merchants and gentry of the lowlands. If your life
has its hardships—as cannot help but be the case—you have
the not inconsid erable consolation of knowing your struggles
to be significant and heroic.”
Jamie snorted briefly .
“Oh, aye. V erra heroic, to be sur e. At the moment, my most
heroic struggle is like to be with the pig in my pantry .” He
nodded t oward the board, one eyebrow raised. “Y e really mean
to make that move?”
Grey narrowed his eyes at Jamie, then looked down,
studying the board with pursed lips.
“Y es, I do,” he answered firmly .
“Damn,” said Jamie, and with a grin, reached out and tipped
over his king in resignation.
Grey laughed, and reached for the brandy bottle.
“Damn!” he said in turn, findin g it empty . Jamie laughed,
and rising, went to the cupboard.
“T ry a bit of thi s,” he said, and I heard the musical glug of
liquid into a cup.
Grey lifted the cup to his nose, inhaled and sneezed
explosively , scattering droplets over the table.“It’ s not wine, John,” Jamie observed mildly . “Y e’re meant
to drink it, aye? not savor the bouquet.”
“So I noticed. C hrist, what is it?” Grey snif fed again, more
cautiously , and essayed a trial s ip. He choked, but swallowed
gamely .
“Christ,” he said again. His voi ce was hoarse. He coughed,
cleared h is throa t, and set the cup gingerly on the table, eyeing
it as though it might explode.
“Don’ t tell me,” he said. “Let me guess. It’ s meant to be
Scotch whisky?”
“In t en years or so, it might be,” Jamie answered, pouring a
small cupful for himself. He took a small sip, rolled it around
his m outh and swallowed, shaking his head. “At the moment,
it’ s alcohol, and that’ s as much as I’d say for it.”
“Y es, it’ s that,” Grey agreed, ta king another very small sip.
“Where did you get it?”
“I m ade it,” said  Jamie, with the modest pride of a master
brewer . “I’ve twelve barrels of the stuf f.”
Grey’ s fair brows shot up at that.
“Assuming that you don’ t mean to clean your boots with it,
may I ask what you intend doing with twelve barrels of this ?”
Jamie laughed.
“T rade it,” he said. “Sell it, when I can. Customs tax and a
license to brew s pirits being one of the petty political concerns
wi’ which I am  not af flicted, owing to our remoteness,” he
added ironically .
Lord John grunted, tried another sip, and set the cup down.
“W ell, y ou may  well escape the  Customs, I’ll grant you—
the nearest agent is in Cross Creek. But I cannot say I think it a
safe pra ctice on that account. T o whom, may I ask, are you
selling this remarkable concoction? Not to the savages, I
trust?”
Jamie shrugged.“Only verra small amounts—a flask or two at a time, as a
gift or in trade. Never more than would make one man drunk.”
“V ery wise. Y ou’ll have heard the stories, I expect. I spoke
with o ne man who’d survived the massacre at
Michilimackinac, during the war with the French. That was
caused—in part, at least—by a great quantity of drink falling
into the hands of a lar ge gathering of Indians at the fort.”
“I’ve heard about it, too,” Jamie  assured him dryly . “But we
are o n good term s wi’ the Indians nearby , and there are none
so many of them as all that. And I’m careful, as I say .”
“Mm.” He essayed another sip, and grimaced. “I expect you
risk more by poisoning one of them than by intoxicating a
mob.” He set the glass down and changed the subject.
“I ha ve heard talk in W ilmingto n of an unruly group of men
called Regulators, who terroriz e the backcountry and cause
disruption by means of riot. Have you encountered anything of
such nature here?”
Jamie snorted briefly .
“T errorize what?  Squirrels? There is the backcountry , John,
and then  there is the wilderness.  Surely ye will have remarked
the lack of human habitation on your journey here.”
“I d id notice something of the  kind,” Lord John agreed.
“And yet I had heard certain rumors regarding your presence
here—that it was in part meant  as a quelling influence upon
the growth of lawlessness.”
Jamie laughed.
“I think it will be some time before there is much
lawlessness for me to quell. Tho ugh I did go so far as to knock
down an  old German farmer wh o was abusing a young woman
at the grain mill on the river . He  had it in mind she had given
him short weight—which she had not—and I couldna
convince him otherwise. But that is my only attempt so far at
maintaining public order .”
Grey laughed, and picked up the fallen king.“I am  relieved to hear it. W ill y ou redeem your honor with
another game? I cannot expect the same trick to work twice,
after all.”
I rol led onto my  side, facing the wall, and stared sleeplessly
at the timbers. The firelight glimmered on the wing-shaped
marks of the ax,  running along the length of each log, regular
as sand ripples on a beach.
I t ried to ignore  the conversation going on behind me, to
lose my self instead in the mem ory of Jamie hewing bark and
squaring logs, of sleeping in his arms under the shelter of a
half-built wall, feeling the house rise up around me, enclosing
me in warmth a nd safety , the permanent embodiment of his
embrace. I always felt safe and  soothed by this vision, even
when I was alon e on the moun tain, knowing I was protected
by the house he  had built for me. T onight, though, it wasn’ t
working.
I lay still, wondering exactly what was the matter with me.
Or rathe r , not what, but why . I knew by now what it was, all
right; it was jealousy .
I was indeed je alous; an emotion I hadn’ t felt for some
years, an d was appalled to feel n ow . I rolled onto my back and
closed my eyes, trying to shut out the murmur of conversation.
Lord Joh n had been nothing but  courtesy itself to me. More
than that, he had been intelligent, thoughtful—thoroughly
charming, in fact. And listening to him making intelligent,
thoughtful, char ming conversa tion with Jamie knotted my
insides and made me clench my hands under cover of the quilt.
Y ou ar e an idiot,  I to ld m yself savagely . What is the matter
with you ? I tried to relax, breathing deeply through my nose,
eyes closed.
Part of it was W illie, of course. Jamie was very careful, but
I had seen his  expression when he looked at the boy in
unguarded moments. His whole body was suf fused with shy
joy , pride mingled with dif fidence; and it smote me to the heart
to see it.He would never look at Brianna, his firstborn, that way .
W ould n ever see her at all. That was hardly his fault—and yet
it se emed so u nfair . At the same time, I could scarcely
begrudge him his joy in his son—and didn’ t, I told myself
firmly . T he fact  that it gave me a terrible pang of longing to
look at the boy ,  with that bold, handsome face that mirrored
his siste r ’ s, was simply my problem. Nothing to do with
Jamie, or with W illie. Or with John Grey , who’d brought the
boy here.
What for ? That was what I’d been thinking ever since I had
recovered from the first shock of their appearance, and that
was still what I was thinking. What in hell  was the man up to?
The story about the estate in V ir ginia might be true—or only
an e xcuse. Even if it was true, it was a considerable detour to
come to Fraser ’ s Ridge. Why ha d he taken so much trouble to
bring th e boy here? And so much risk; W illie was clearly
oblivious to the resemblance th at even Ian had noticed, but
what if he hadn’ t been? Had it been so important to Grey , to
restate his claim on Jamie’ s obligation to him?
I rolled onto my other side and cracked an eyelid, watching
them ov er the chessboard, redhe ad and fair head, bent together
in absorption. Grey moved a knight and sat back, rubbing the
back of his neck, smiling to himself at the ef fect of his move.
He was a good-l ooking man; slight and fine-boned, but with a
strong, clear -cut face and a beautiful, sensitive mouth that
many a woman had no doubt envied.
Grey was even b etter at guarding his face than Jamie was; I
hadn’ t yet seen an incriminating  look from him. I’d seen one
once, though, in Jamaica, and w asn’ t in any doubt about the
nature of his feelings for Jamie.
On the other h and, I wasn’ t i n any doubt about Jamie’ s
feelings in that r egard, either . The knot under my heart eased a
bit, and I took a  deeper breath. No matter how late they sat up
over the board, d rinking and talking, it would be my  bed Jamie
came to.I unclenched my fists, and it was then, as I rubbed my palms
covertly against my thighs, that I realized with a shock just
why Lord John af fected me so strongly .
My fingernails had dug small crescents in my palms, a small
line of throbbing half-moons. For years, I had rubbed away
those crescents after every dinner party , every late night when
Frank had “worked at the of fice.” For years, I had lain
intermittently alone in a double bed, wide-awake in the
darkness, nails digging into m y hands, waiting for him to
come back.
And he had. T o his credit, he alw ays did return before dawn.
Sometimes to a back curled against him in cold reproach,
sometimes to the furious challe nge of a body thrust against
him in demand, ur ging him wor dlessly to deny it, to prove his
innocence with his body—trial by combat. More often than
not, he accepted the challenge. But it didn’ t help.
Y et neither of u s spoke of such things in the daylight. I
could not; I had no right. Frank did not; he had revenge.
Sometimes it would be months—even a year or more—
between episodes, and we would live in peace together . But
then it would h appen again; the silent phone calls, the too-
excused absences, the late nights. Never anything so overt as
another woman’ s perfume, or lipstick on his collar—he had
discretion. But I always felt th e ghost of the other woman,
whoever she was; some faceless, indistinguishable She.
I kn ew it didn’ t  matter who it was—there were several of
them. Th e only important thing was that She was not me. And
I wo uld lie awake and clench my fists, the marks of my nails a
small crucifixion.
The murmur of conversation by  the fire had mostly ceased;
the only sound the small click of the chessmen as they moved.
“Do you feel yourself content?” Lord John asked suddenly .
Jamie paused for a moment.
“I have all that man could want,” he said quietly . “A place,
and honorable work. My wife at my side. The knowledge thatmy son is safe a nd well cared for .” He looked up then, at Grey .
“And a good friend.” He reached over , clasped Lord John’ s
hand, and let it go. “I want no more.”
I shut my eyes resolutely , and began to count sheep.
I w as awakened  just before da wn by Ian, crouching by my
bedside.
“Auntie,” he said softly , a hand  on my shoulder . “Best ye
come; the man in the corncrib’ s verra poorly .”
I was on my feet by reflex, wrapped in my cloak and
moving bare-foo ted after Ian before my mind had even begun
to fu nction consciously . Not tha t any great diagnostic skill was
needed; I could hear the deep, rattling respirations from ten
feet away .
The Ear l hovered by the doorw ay , his thin face pale and
scared in the gray light.
“Go awa y ,” I told him sharply .  “Y ou mustn’ t be near him;
nor you , Ian—t he two of you go to the house, fetch me hot
water from the cauldron, my box, and clean rags.”
W illie m oved at once, eager to be away from the frightening
sounds c oming from the shed. Ian lingered, though, his face
troubled.
“I di nna think ye can help him, Auntie,” he said quietly . His
eyes met mine straight on, with an adult depth of
understanding.
“V ery likely not,” I said, answering him in the same terms.
“But I can’ t do nothing.”
He took a deep breath, nodded.
“A ye. B ut I think…” He hes itated, then went on as I
nodded, “I think ye shouldna to rment him wi’ medicine. He’ s
fixed to die, Au ntie; we heard an owl in the night—he will
have heard it, too. It is a sign of death to them.”
I gla nced at the dark oblong of the door , biting my lip. The
breaths were shallow and wheezing, with alarmingly longpauses between them. I looked back at Ian.
“What d o the Indians do, when  someone is dying? Do you
know?”
“Sing,” he said promptly . “The shaman  puts paint upon her
face, and sings the soul away t o safety , so the demons dinna
take it.”
I h esitat ed, my instincts to do something  at war with my
conviction that action would be futile. Had I any right to
deprive this man of peace in his dying? W orse, to alarm him
into fear that his soul would be lost by my interference?
Ian hadn’ t waited for the results of my dithering. He stooped
and scraped up a small clot of e arth, spat in it and stirred it to
mud. W ithout comment, he dipped his forefinger into the
puddle, and drew a line from my forehead down the bridge of
my nose.
“Ian!”
“Shh,” h e murm ured, frowning in concentration. “Like this,
I thi nk.” He ad ded two lines across each cheekbone, and a
rough z igzag down the left sid e of my jawbone. “That’ s as
near as I remem ber the proper w ay of it. I’ve only seen it the
once, and from a distance.”
“Ian, this isn’ t—”
“Shhh,” he said again, laying a hand on my arm to quell
protest. “Go to him, Auntie. Y e willna frighten him; he’ s
accustomed to ye, no?”
I rubbed away a drip from the end of my nose, feeling
thoroughly idiotic. There was no time to ar gue, though. Ian
gave me  a small push, and I tur ned to the door . I stepped into
the darkness of the corncrib, bent and laid a hand on the man.
His skin was hot and dry , his hand limp as worn leather .
“Ian, can you talk to him? Say his name, tell him it’ s all
right?”
“Y e must not say his name, Auntie; it will call demons.”Ian clear ed his throat, and said a few words in soft clicking
gutterals. The hand in mine twitched slightly . My eyes had
adjusted now , I could see the man’ s face, marked with a faint
look of surprise as he saw my mud paint.
“Sing, Auntie,” Ian ur ged, low-voiced. “ T antum er go,
maybe; it sounded a wee bit like that.”
There was nothing else I co uld do, after all. Rather
helplessly , I began.
“T antum er go, sacramentum…”
W ithin a few se conds, my voice steadied, and I sat back on
my bare  heels, singing slowly , holding his hand. The heavy
brows relaxed, and a look of w hat I thought might be calm
came into the sunken eyes.
I ha d been pres ent at a good many deaths, from accident,
warfare, illness, or natural causes, and had seen men meet
death in many ways, from philosophical acceptance to violent
protest. But I had never seen one die quite this way .
He s imply waited, eyes on mine, until I had come to the end
of the song. Then he turned his face toward the door , and as
the rising sun st ruck him, he le ft his body , without the twitch
of a muscle or the drawing of a final breath.
I sat quite still, holding the lim p hand, until it occurred to
me that I was holding my breath, too.
The air around m e seemed queerly still, as though time had
stopped for a moment. But of course it had, I thought, and
forced myself to draw breath. It had stopped for him, forever .
“What are we to do with him?”
There w as nothing further to be done for  our guest; the only
question at the moment was ho w we might best deal with his
mortal remains.
I had had a quiet word with Lord John, and he had taken
W illie to gather late strawberries on the ridge. While the
Indian’ s death had had nothing e ven faintly gruesome about it,I could wish W illie hadn’ t seen it; it wasn’ t a sight for a child
who had seen his mother die no more than a few months
before. Lord John had seemed upset himself—perhaps a little
sunshine and fresh air would help both of them.
Jamie fr owned and rubbed a ha nd over his face. He hadn’ t
shaved yet, and the stubble made a rasping sound.
“W e must give him decent burial, surely?”
“W ell, I don’ t suppose we can leave him lying about in the
corncrib, but would his people mind if we buried him here?
Do you know anything about how they treat their dead, Ian?”
Ian w as still a little pale, but sur prisingly self-possessed. He
shook his head, and took a drink of milk.
“I di nna ken a great deal, Auntie. But I have seen one man
die, as I told ye. They wrapped him in a deerskin and had a
procession round the village, singing, then took the body a
ways in to the wood and put it  up on a platform, above the
ground, and left it there to dry .”
Jamie seemed less than enthrall ed at the prospect of having
mummified bod ies perched in the trees near the farm. “I
should th ink it best maybe to wrap the body decently and carry
it to  the village , then, so his own folk can deal with him
properly .”
“No, yo u can’ t do that.” I slid the pan of newly baked
muf fins out of the Dutch oven, plucked a broomtwig and stuck
it into one plump brown cake. It came out clean, so I set the
pan on the table , then sat down myself. I frowned abstractedly
at the jug of honey , glowing gold in the late morning sun.
“The trouble is that the bod y is almost certainly still
infectious. Y ou didn’ t touch him at all, did you, Ian?” I
glanced at Ian, who shook his head, looking sober .
“No, Au ntie. Not after he fell sick here; before that, I dinna
recall. W e were all together , hunting.”
“And you haven’ t had measles. Drat.” I rubbed a hand
through my hair . “Have you?” I asked Jamie. T o my relief, henodded.
“A ye, w hen I was five or so. And you say a person canna
have the  same sickness twice. So it willna injure me to touch
the body?”
“No, nor me either; I’ve had them too. The thing is, we
can’ t tak e him to the village. I d on’ t know at all how long the
measles virus—that’ s a sort of germ—can live on clothes or in
a body , but how  could we explain to his people that they
mustn’ t touch him or go near h im? And we can’ t risk letting
them be infected.”
“What t roubles me,” Ian put in unexpectedly , “is that he
isna a man from Anna Ooka— he’ s from a village further
north. If  we bury him here in th e usual way , his folk may hear
of it  and  think we had done him to death in some fashion, then
buried him to hide it.”
That wa s a sinister possibility that hadn’ t occurred to me,
and I felt as though a cold hand  had been laid on the back of
my neck.
“Y ou don’ t think they would, surely?”
Ian shrugged, broke open a hot  muf fin, and drizzled honey
over the steaming insides.
“Nacognaweto’ s folk trust us, but Myers did say there were
plenty who would not. They’ve reason to be suspicious, aye?”
Considering that the bulk of the T uscarora had been
exterminated in a vicious war w ith the North Carolina settlers
no m ore than fi fty years before, I rather thought they had a
point. It didn’ t help with the present problem, though.
Jamie sw allowed the last of his  muf fin and sat back with a
sigh.
“W ell, th en. I think best we wra p the poor man in a shroud
of s orts, and put him in the wee cave in the hill above the
house. I’ve set the posts for a stable across the opening
already; those will keep the beasts of f. Then Ian or I should go
to Anna Ooka and explain matters to Nacognaweto. Perhapshe w ill send someone back w ho can look at the body and
assure th e man’ s  people that he  met with no violence from us
—and then we can bury him.”
Before I  could reply to this su ggestion, I heard footsteps,
running across the dooryard. I had left the door ajar , to let in
light and air . As  I turned toward it, W illie’ s face appeared in
the opening, pale and distraught.
“Mrs. Fraser! Please, will you come? Papa’ s ill.”
“Has he  got it from the Indian?” Jamie frowned at Lord John,
whom we had st ripped to his shirt and put to bed. His face was
by turns  flushed and pale—the symptoms I had put down
earlier to emotional distress.
“No, he can’ t h ave. The incubation period is one to two
weeks. Where were you—” I tu rned to W illie, then shrugged,
dismissing the question. They had been traveling; there was no
conceivable way of telling where or when Grey had
encountered the virus. T ravelers normally slept several to a
bed in inns, and  the blankets w ere seldom changed; it would
be e asy to lie down in one and get up in the morning with the
germs of anything from measles to hepatitis.
“Y ou di d say there was an epidemic of measles in Cross
Creek?” I put a hand on Grey’ s forehead. Adept as I was at
reading fevers by touch, I would have put his near a hundred
and three; quite high enough.
“Y es,” he said hoarsely , and coughed. “Have I got the
measles? Y ou must keep W illie away .”
“Ian—take W illie outside, will you, please?” I wrung out a
cloth wetted with elderflower water , and wiped Grey’ s face
and neck . There was no rash yet on his face, but when I made
him open his m outh, the small whitish Koplik’ s spots on the
lining were clear enough.
“Y es, yo u have got the measle s,” I said. “How long have
you been feeling ill?”“I fe lt so mewhat light-headed w hen I retired last night,” he
said, and coughed again. “I woke with a bad headache,
sometime in the night, but I thought it only the result of
Jamie’ s so-called whisky .” He smiled faintly at Jamie. “Then
this morning…”  He sneezed, and I hastily groped for a fresh
handkerchief.
“Y es, qu ite. W el l, try to rest a bi t. I’ve put some willow bark
to st eep; that wi ll help the head ache.” I stood up and raised a
brow at Jamie, who followed me outside.
“W e can’ t let W illie be near him ,” I said, low-voiced so as
not to be overh eard; W illie and Ian were by the penfold,
forking hay into the horses’ manger . “Or Ian. He’ s very
infectious.”
Jamie frowned.
“A ye. What ye said, though, about incubation—”
“Y es. Ia n might have been exposed through the dead man,
W illie might have been expose d to the same source as Lord
John. Ei ther one  of them might have it now , but show no sign
yet.” I turned to look at the two boys, both of them outwardly
as healthy as the horses they were feeding.
“I think, ” I said, hesitating as I formed a vague plan, “that
perhaps you had better camp outside with the boys tonight—
you cou ld sleep in the herb shed , or camp in the grove. W ait a
day or so; if W illie’ s infected— if he got it from the same
source as Lord J ohn—he’ll likely be showing signs by then. If
not, then he’ s likely all right. If he is  all right , then you and he
could go to Anna Ooka to tell Nacognaweto about the dead
man. That would keep W illie safely out of danger .”
“And Ian could stay here to take  care of you?” He frowned,
considering, then nodded. “A ye, I expect that will do.”
He turned to g lance at W illie. Impassive as he could be
when he wanted to, I knew him well enough to detect the
flicker of emotion across his face.
There was worry in the tilt of h is brows—concern for John
Grey , and perhaps for me or  Ian. But beyond that wassomething quite dif ferent—interest tinged with apprehension, I
thought, at the prospect of spending several days alone with
the boy .
“If he hasn’ t noticed it yet, he isn’ t going to,” I said softly ,
putting my hand on his arm.
“No,” he muttered, turning his back on the boy . “I suppose
it’ s safe enough.”
“They do say it ’ s an ill wind that blows nobody good,” I
said. “Y ou’ll be able to talk to him without it seeming odd.” I
paused. “There’ s just the one thing, before you go.”
He put his hand over mine where it lay on his arm, and
smiled down at me.
“A ye, and what’ s that?”
“Do get that pig out of the pantry , please.”2 7
T R O U T  F I S H I N G  I N  A M E R I C A
T he journey began inauspiciously . It was raining, for one
thing. For another , he disliked leaving Claire, especially in
such dif ficult circumstances. Fo r a third, he was badly worried
for J ohn; he hadn’ t liked the look of the man at all when he
took leave of him, barely half conscious and wheezing like a
grampus, his features so blo tched with rash as to be
unrecognizable.
And for a four th, the ninth Earl of Ellesmere had just
punched him in the jaw . He took a firm hold on the
youngster ’ s scruf f and shook him, hard enough to make his
teeth clack painfully together .
“Now , then,” he said, letting go . The boy staggered, and sat
down suddenly as he lost his balance. He glared down at the
lad, sitting in the mud by the penfold. They had been having
this ar gument, on and of f, for the last twenty-four hours, and
he had had enough of it.
“I k en well enough what ye said. But what I  s aid is that
ye’re co ming with me. I’ve tol d ye why , and that’ s all about
it.”
The boy’ s face d rew down in a ferocious scowl. He wasn’ t
easily cowed, but then Jamie supposed that earls weren’ t used
to folk trying, either .
“I am not  leaving!” the boy repeated. “Y ou can’ t make me!”
He g ot to his feet, jaw clenched, and turned back toward the
cabin.
Jamie snaked out an arm, gra bbed the lad’ s collar , and
hauled h im back . Seeing the boy  draw back his foot for a kick,
he c losed his fis t and punched t he boy neatly in the pit of the
stomach. W illiam’ s eyes bulged and he doubled over , holding
his middle.“Don’ t kick,” Jamie said mildly . “It’ s ill-mannered. And as
for makin’ you, of course I can.”
The Earl’ s face was bright red and his mouth was opening
and clos ing like a startled gold fish’ s. His hat had fallen of f,
and the rain was pasting strands of dark hair to his head.
“It’ s verra loyal of ye to want to stay by your stepfather ,”
Jamie went on, wiping the water out of his own face, “but ye
canna help him, and you may d o yourself damage by staying.
So y e’re not.” F rom the corner o f his eye, he caught a glimpse
of move ment as the oiled hide over the cabin’ s window moved
aside, then fell. Claire, no doubt  wondering why they were not
already long gone.
Jamie took the Earl by an unresisting arm, and led him to
one of the saddled horses.
“Up,” he said, and had the sat isfaction of seeing the boy
stick a reluctant foot in the sti rrup and swing aboard. Jamie
tossed th e boy’ s  hat up to him, donned his own, and mounted
himself. As a precaution, though, he kept hold of both sets of
reins as they set of f.
“Y ou, sir ,” said a breathless, enr aged voice behind him, “are
a lout!”
He was torn be tween irritation  and an ur ge to laugh, but
gave wa y to neither . He cast a look back over his shoulder , to
see W illiam also turned, and leaning perilously to the side, half
of f his saddle.
“Don’ t try it,” he advised the  boy , who straightened up
abruptly and glared at him. “I w ouldna like to tie your feet in
your stirrups, but I’ll do it, make no mistake.”
The boy’ s eyes narrowed into b right blue triangles, but he
evidently took Jamie at his word. His jaw stayed clenched, but
his shoulders slumped a little in temporary defeat.
They rode in sil ence for most of the morning, rain drizzling
down their necks and weighting the shoulders of their cloaks.
W illie m ight have accepted defeat, but not graciously . He was
still sull en when  they dismounted to eat, but did at least fetchwater w ithout protest, and pack up the remains of their meal
while Jamie watered the horses.
Jamie eyed him covertly , but there was no sign of measles.
The Earl’ s face was frowning bu t rashless, and while the tip of
his nose was dripping, this appeared to be due solely to the
ef fects of the weather .
“How far is it?” It was midafternoon before W illiam’ s
curiosity overca me his stubbornness. Jamie had long since
relinquished the  boy’ s reins to him—there was no danger of
the lad’ s trying to make his way back alone now .
“T wo days, perhaps.” In such mountainous terrain as lay
between the Ridge and Anna Ooka, they would make little
better speed on horseback than on foot. Having horses, though,
allowed them to bring a few s mall conveniences, such as a
kettle, extra food, and a pair o f carved fishing rods. And a
number of small gifts for the Indians, including a keg of home-
brewed whisky to help cushion the bad news they bore.
There w as no reason to hurry , and some to delay—Claire
had told  him firmly not to brin g W illie back for at least six
days. By then, John would no longer be infectious. He would
be well on the way to recovery—or dead.
Claire h ad been outwardly confident, assuring W illie that
his s tepfather would be quite al l right, but he’d seen the mist
of w orry in her eyes. It gave hi m a feeling of hollowness just
below th e ribs. It was perhaps a s well that he was leaving; he
could be of no  help, and sickness always left him with a
helpless feeling that made him at once afraid and angry .
“These Indians—they ar e  friendly?” He could hear the tone
of doubt in W illie’ s voice.
“Y es.” H e felt W illie waiting for him to add “my lord,” and
took a small, pe rverse satisfacti on in not doing it. He guided
his horse’ s head to the side and  slowed his pace, an invitation
for W illie to ride up next to him. He smiled at the boy as he
did so.“W e hav e know n them more tha n a year , and been guests in
their long-houses—aye, the people of Anna Ooka are more
courteous and hospitable than most folk I’ve met in England.”
“Y ou ha ve lived in England?” T he boy shot him a surprised
look, and he cur sed his carelessness, but luckily the lad was a
great deal more interested in Re d Indians than in the personal
history o f James Fraser , and the  question passed with no more
than a vague reply .
He wa s glad to see the boy abandon his sullen
preoccupation and begin to take some interest in their
surroundings. He did his best to  encourage it, telling stories of
the India ns and pointing out animal sign as they went, and he
was glad  to see the boy thaw into civility , if nothing more, as
they rode.
He welc omed the distraction of conversation himself; his
mind was a good  deal too busy to make silence comfortable. If
the wor st should happen—if John should die—what then
became of W illie? He would do ubtless return to England and
his grandmother—and Jamie would hear no more of him.
John wa s the only other person, besides Claire, who knew
the truth  of W illie’ s paternity without doubt. It was possible
that W il lie’ s grandmother at least suspected the truth, but she
would never , under any circumstances, admit that her
grandson might be the bastard o f a Jacobite traitor rather than
the legitimate issue of the late Earl.
He s aid a small prayer to Saint B ride for the welfare of John
Grey , and tried t o dismiss the na gging worry from his mind. In
spite of his apprehensions, he was beginning to enjoy the trip.
The rain  had lessened to no more than a light spattering, and
the fores t was fragrant with the scents of wet, fresh leaves and
fecund dark leaf mold.
“D’ye see those scratches down  the trunk of that tree?” He
pointed with his chin at a lar ge  hickory whose bark hung in
shreds, showing a number of long, parallel white slashes, some
six feet from the ground.“Y es.” W illie took of f his hat and slapped it against his thigh
to k nock the w ater of f, then leaned forward to look more
closely . “An animal did that?”
“A bear ,” Jamie  said. “Fresh, t oo—see the sap’ s not dried
yet in the cuts.”
“Is it nearby?” W illie glanced around, seeming more
curious than alarmed.
“Not close,” Jamie said, “or th e horses would be carryin’
on. But near enough, aye. Keep an eye out; we’ll likely see its
dung or its prints.”
No, if John died, his tenuous link with W illiam would be
broken. He had long since resi gned himself to the situation,
and accepted the necessity without complaint—but he would
feel bere ft indeed if the measles robbed him not only of his
closest friend but of all connection with his son.
It h ad stopped raining. As the y rounded the flank of a
mountain and came out above a valley , W illie gave a small
exclamation of surprised delig ht, and sat up straight in his
saddle. Against a backdrop of rain-dark clouds, a rainbow
arced from the s lope of a distant mountain, falling in a perfect
shimmer of light to the floor of the valley far below .
“Oh, it’ s glorious!” W illie said.  He turned a wide smile on
Jamie, th eir dif ferences for gotten. “Have you ever seen such a
thing before, sir?”
“Never ,” said Jamie, smiling back. It occurred to him, with
a sm all shock, that these few days in the wilderness might
conceivably be the last he wou ld see or hear of W illiam. He
hoped that he wouldn’ t have to hit the boy again.
He a lways slept lightly in the wood, and the sound woke him
at once. He lay quite still for a moment, unsure what it was.
Then he heard the small, choked noise, and recognized the
sound of stifled weeping.
He chec ked his instant ur ge to turn and lay a hand on the
boy in comfort. The lad was m aking every ef fort not to beheard; h e deserved to keep his pride. He lay still, looking up
into the sweep of the vast night sky above, and listening.
Not frig ht; W illiam had shown no fear of sleeping in dark
woods, and had there been a lar ge animal nearby , the boy
would not be ke eping quiet about it. W as the lad unwell? The
sounds w ere little more than thickened breathing, caught in the
throat—perhaps the boy was in pain and too proud to say . It
was that fear that decided him  to speak; if the measles had
caught t hem up,  there was no time to waste; he must carry the
boy back to Claire at once.
“My lord?” he said softly .
The sob bing cea sed abruptly . He heard the audible sound of
a sw allow and the rasp of cloth on skin as the lad wiped a
sleeve across his face.
“Y es?” t he Earl said, with a creditable attempt at coolness,
marred only by the thickness in his voice.
“Are ye unwell, my lord?” H e could tell already that it
wasn’ t that, but it would do for a pretext. “Have ye maybe
taken a touch of the cramp? Sometimes dried apples take a
man amiss.”
A deep breath came from the far side of the fire, and a
snuf fle as an attempt was ma de to clear a running nose
unobtrusively . T he fire had burn ed down to nothing more than
embers; still, he could see the dark shape that squirmed into a
sitting position, crouched on the far side of the fire.
“I—ah—yes, I think perhaps I have got…something of the
sort.”
Jamie sat up h imself, the plaid falling away from his
shoulders.
“It’ s no great ma tter ,” he said, soothingly . “I’ve a potion that
will cure all manner of ills of th e stomach. Do ye rest easy for
a moment, my lord; I’ll fetch water .”
He got to his feet and went awa y , careful not to look at the
boy . By the time he came back from the stream with the kettlefilled, W illie had got his nose b lown and his face wiped, and
was sitting with his knees drawn up, his head resting on them.
He coul dn’ t kee p himself from touching the boy’ s head as
he passe d. Familiarity be damned. The dark hair was soft to
his touch, warm and slightly damp with sweat.
“A g riping in yo ur guts, is it?” he said pleasantly , kneeling
and putting the kettle to boil.
“Mm-hm.” W illie’ s voice was muf fled in the blanket over
his knees.
“That p asses soon enough,” he said. He reached for his
sporran, and sorted through the proliferation of small items in
it, co ming up ev entually with the small cloth bag that held the
dried mixture of leaves and flow ers Claire had given him. He
didn’ t know how she’d known it would be needed, but he was
long past the point of questioning anything she did in the way
of healing—whether of heart or of body .
He felt a moment’ s passionate gratitude to her . He’d seen
her look at the boy , and knew how she must feel. She’d known
about the lad, o f course, but seeing the flesh-and-blood proof
that her husband had shared another woman’ s bed wasn’ t
something a wife should be asked to put up with. Little
wonder if she was inclined to stick pins in John, him pushing
the lad under her nose as he had.
“It willn a take more than a mom ent to brew up,” he assured
the boy , rubbing  the fragrant mi xture between his hands into a
wooden cup, as he’d seen Claire do.
She’d not reproached him. Not with that  at least, he thought,
suddenly remembering how she’d acted when she’d found out
about La oghaire. She’d gone for him like a fiend, then, and yet
when later she’d learned about  Geneva Dunsany…perhaps it
was only that the boy’ s mother was dead?
The realization went through him like a sword thrust. The
boy’ s m other was dead. Not jus t his real mother , who’d died
the same day he was born—but the woman he’d called mother
all his life since . And now his father—or the man he calledfather , Jamie thought with an unconscious twist of his mouth
—was lying sick of an illness that had killed another man
before the lad’ s eyes no more than days before.
No, it wasn’ t fright that made th e lad greet by himself in the
dark. It was gri ef, and Jamie Fraser , who’d lost a mother in
childhood himself, ought to have known that from the
beginning.
It wasn’ t stubbornness, nor even loyalty , that had made
W illie in sist on staying at the Ri dge. It was love of John Grey ,
and fear  of his loss. And it was  the same love that made the
boy weep in the night, desperate with worry for his father .
An unaccustomed weed of jealousy sprang up in Jamie’ s
heart, stinging like nettles. He stamped firmly on it; he was
fortunate indee d to know that his son enjoyed a loving
relationship with his stepfather . There, that was the weed
stamped out. The stamping, though, seemed to have left a
small br uised spot on his hea rt; he could feel it when he
breathed.
The wat er was beginning to rum ble in the kettle. He poured
it carefu lly over the herb mixtu re, and a sweet fragrance rose
up in the steam.  V alerian, she’d said, and catmint. The root of
a passionflower , soaked in honey and finely ground. And the
sweet, half-musky smell of lavender , coming as an afterscent.
“Don’ t d rink it yourself,” she’d said, casual in giving it to
him. “There’ s lavender in it.”
In fa ct, it didn’ t  trouble him, if he was warned of it. It was
only that now an d then a whif f of lavender took him unawares,
and sent a sudde n sur ge of sickness through his wame. Claire
had seen the ef fects on him once too often to be unwary of it.
“Here.” He leaned forward and handed the cup to the boy ,
wondering whether forever after , the lad too would feel
troubled by the scent of lavender , or if he would find in it a
memory of comfort. That, he supposed, might well depend on
whether John Grey lived or died.The respite had given W illie back his outward composure,
but his face was still marked w ith grief. Jamie smiled at the
boy , hiding his o wn concern. Knowing both John and Claire as
he did, he was less fearful than  the boy—but the dread was
still there, persistent as a thorn in the sole of his foot.
“That will ease ye,” he said, no dding at the cup. “My wife
made it; she’ s a verra fine healer .”
“Is she?” The boy took a deep, trembling breath of the
steam, a nd touched a cautious tongue to the hot liquid. “I saw
her—do things. W ith the Indian who died.” The accusation
there w as clear; she’d done th ings, and the man had died
anyway .
Neither Claire nor Ian had spoken much of that, nor had he
been able to ask her what had ha ppened—she had given him a
lifted br ow and  a brief gold look, to say that he should not
speak of it before W illie, who had come back with her from
the corncrib, white-faced and clammy .
“A ye?” he said curiously . “What sort of—things?”
What the hell had she done? he wondered. Nothing to cause
the man’ s death, surely; he would have seen that in her at
once. Nor did she feel herself at fault, or helpless—he had held
her in his arms more than once, comforting her as she wept for
those she could not save. Th is time she had been quiet,
subdued—as had Ian—but not deeply upset. She had seemed
vaguely puzzled.
“She had mud on her face. And she sang to him. I think she
was singing a Papist song; it was in Latin, and it had
something to do with sacraments.”
“Indeed?” Jamie suppressed his own astonishment at this
description. “A ye, well. Perhap s she meant only to give the
man a bit of co mfort, if she sa w she couldna save him. The
Indians are much more sensible of the ef fects of measles, ye
ken; an infection that will kill one of them wouldna cause a
white m an to blink twice. I’ve h ad the measle myself, as a weelad, and took no harm from it at all.” He smiled and stretched,
demonstrating his evident health.
The tens e lines of the boy’ s face  relaxed a little, and he took
a cautious sip of the hot tea.
“That’ s what Mrs. Fraser said. She said Papa would be all
right. She—she gave me her word upon it.”
“Then ye may depend upon it that he will,” Jamie said
firmly . “Mrs. Fraser is an honorable woman.” He coughed, and
hitched the plaid up around hi s shoulders; it wasn’ t a cold
night, b ut there was a breeze coming down the hill. “Is the
drink helping a bit?”
W illie lo oked blank, then looked down at the cup in his
hand.
“Oh! Y es. Y es, thank you; it’ s v ery good. I feel very much
improved. Perhaps it was not the dried apples, after all.”
“Perhaps not,” Jamie agreed, b ending his head to hide a
smile. “ Still, I think we’ll manage better for our supper
tomorrow; if luck is with us, we’ll have trout.”
This att empt at distraction was successful; W illie’ s head
popped up from his cup, an exp ression of deep interest on his
face.
“T rout? W e can fish?”
“Have ye done much fishing in England? I canna think that
the t rout streams would compar e with these, but I know there
is g ood fishing to be had in t he Lake District—or so your
father tells me.”
He held his brea th. What in Go d’ s name had made him ask
that? He had himself taken a five-year -old W illiam fishing for
char on the lak e near Ellesmere, when he had served his
indenture there. Did he want  the boy to remember?
“Oh…yes. It’ s pleasant on the lakes, surely—but nothing
like this .” W illie waved in the vague d irection of the creek.
The lines in the  boy’ s face had smoothed themselves, and asmall flicker of life had come back into his eyes. “I have never
seen such a place. It’ s not at all like England!”
“That it is not,”  Jamie agreed, amused. “W ill ye not miss
England, though?”
W illie thought about it for a mo ment, as he slurped the rest
of his tea.
“I don’ t think so,” he said, with a decided shake of his head.
“I miss Grandmamma sometimes, and my horses, but nothing
else. It was all tutors and dancing lessons and Latin and Greek
—ugh!” He wrinkled his nose, and Jamie laughed.
“Y e dinna care for the dancing, then?”
“No. Y o u have to do it with girls.” He shot Jamie a look
under his fine, dark brows. “ Do you care for music, Mr .
Fraser?”
“No,” Jamie said, smiling. “I l ike the girls fine, though.”
The girls were going to like this wee laddie just fine, too, he
thought, covertly noting the youngster ’ s breadth of shoulder
and long  shanks , and the long, dark lashes that hid his bonny
blue eyes.
“Y es. W ell, Mrs. Fraser is very pretty ,” the Earl said
politely . His mouth curled sudd enly up on one side. “Though
she did look funny , with the mud on her face.”
“I daresay . W ill ye have another cup, my lord?”
Claire had said t he mixture was for calming; it seemed to be
working. As they talked desultorily of the Indians and their
strange beliefs, W illiam’ s eyelids began to droop, and he
yawned more than once. At last , Jamie reached over and took
the empty cup from his unresisting hand.
“The night is cold, my lord,” he said. “W ill ye choose to lie
next to me, that we may share our coverings?”
The nig ht was chilly , but a long way from cold. He had
guessed right, though; W illie seized the excuse with alacrity .
He c ould not take a lord in his arms to comfort him, nor could
a yo ung earl ad mit to wanting such comfort. T wo men couldlie close  together without shame, though, for the sake of
warmth.
W illie fell asleep at once, nestled close against his side.
Jamie lay awake for a long time, one arm laid lightly across
the sleeping body of his son.
“Now th e wee speckled one. Just on top, and hold it with your
finger , aye?” He wrapped the thread tightly around the tiny
roll of white wo ol, just missing W illie’ s finger but catching the
end of the woodpecker ’ s down feather , so the fluf fy barbs rose
up pertly , quivering in the light air .
“Y ou see? It looks like a wee bug taking flight.”
W illie n odded, intent on the fly . T wo tiny yellow tail
feathers lay smooth under the down feather , simulating the
spread wing casings of a beetle.
“I see. Is it the color that matters, or the shape?”
“Both, b ut more the shape, I think.” Jamie smiled at the boy .
“What matters most is how hungry the fish are. Choose your
time right, and they’ll strike anything—even a bare hook.
Choose it wrong, and ye might a s well be fishing wi’ lint from
your navel. Dinna tell that to a fly fisherman, though; they’ll
be taking all the credit, and none left to the fish.”
W illie didn’ t laugh—the boy d idn’ t laugh much—but he
smiled and took the willow pole with its newly tied fly .
“Is i t the right time, now , do y ou think, Mr . Fraser?” He
shaded h is eyes and looked out over the water . They stood in
the cool  shadow  of a grove of black willow , but the sun was
still abo ve the horizon, and the  water of the stream glittered
like metal.
“A ye, trout feed at sunset. D’ye see the prickles on the
water? This pool’ s waking.”
The surface of the pool was restless; the water itself lay
calm, bu t dozens of tiny ripples spread and overlapped, rings
of light and shadow spreading and breaking in endless
profusion.“The rings? Y es. Is that fish?”
“Not yet. It’ s the hatching; midges and gnats hatch from
their cases and burst through th e surface to the air—the trout
will see them and come to feed.”
W ithout warning, a silver streak shot into the air and fell
back with a splash. W illie gasped.
“That’ s a fish,” Jamie said, unnecessarily . He quickly
threaded his line through the carved guides, tied a fly to his
line, and stepped forward. “W atch now .”
He drew  back his arm and rocked his wrist, back and forth,
feeding more line with each circle of his forearm, until with a
snap of the wrist, he sent the l ine sailing out in a great lazy
loop, the fly flo ating down like a circling gnat. He felt the
boy’ s eyes on him, and was glad the cast had been good.
He let the fly float for a momen t, watching—it was hard to
see, in the sparkling brightness— then began slowly to pull the
line in. Quick as thought, the f ly went under . The ring of its
disappearance h ad not even be gun to spread before he had
jerked the line hard and felt the answering savage tug in reply .
“Y ou’ve got one! Y ou’ve got one!” He could hear W illie,
dancing on the bank behind him with excitement, but had no
attention to spare for anything save the fish.
He had no reel; only the twig that held his spare line. He
pulled the tip of the rod far back, let it fall forward and
gathered in the loose line with  a snatch of the hand. Once
more, line in, and then a desperate rush that took out all the
line gained, and more.
He c ould see no thing amid the flashing sparks of light, but
the tug and pul l through his a rms was as good as sight; a
quiver as live as  the trout itself, as though he held the thing in
his hands, squirming and wriggling, fighting…
Free. Th e line went limp, and he stood for a moment, the
vibrations of struggle dying away along the muscles of his
arms, breathing in the air he had for gotten to take in the heat of
battle.“He got away! Oh, bad luck, si r!” W illie scampered down
the bank, pole in hand, face open in sympathy .
“Good luck for the fish.” Still exhilarated from the fight,
Jamie grinned and wiped a wet  hand over his face. “W ill ye
try , lad?” T oo late, he remembe red that he must call the boy
“lord,” but W illie was too eager to have noticed the omission.
Face fix ed in a scowl of determination, W illie drew back his
arm, squinted at the water , an d snapped his wrist with a
mighty jerk. The rod sailed from his fingers and flew
gracefully into the pond.
The boy gaped after it, then turned an expression of utter
dismay on Jamie, who made no ef fort at all to keep back his
laughter . The young lord looked thoroughly taken aback, and
not very  pleased, but after a moment, one corner of his wide
mouth curved up in wry acknow ledgment. He gestured at the
rod, floating some ten feet from the bank.
“W ill it not frighten all the fish, if I go in after it?”
“It will. T ake mine; I’ll fetch that one back later .”
W illie li cked his lips and set his jaw in concentration, taking
a firm grip on the new rod, testing it with little whips and
jerks. T u rning to the pool, he rocked his arm back and forth,
then snapped his wrist hard. He froze, the tip of the rod
extended in a perfect line with his arm. The loose line wrapped
itself around the rod and draped over W illie’ s head.
“A verra pretty cast, my lord,” Jamie said, rubbing a
knuckle hard over his mouth. “But I think we must put on a
new fly first, aye?”
“Oh.” Slowly , W illie relaxed his rigid posture, and looked
sheepishly at Jamie. “I didn’ t think of that.”
Slightly chasten ed by these misa dventures, the Earl allowed
Jamie to fasten a  fresh fly in place, and then to take him by the
wrist to demonstrate the proper way of casting.
Standing behind the boy , he too k W illie’ s right wrist in his
own, marveling both at the slenderness of the arm and at theknobby wristbones that gave promise of both size and strength
to come . The boy’ s skin was cool with perspiration, and the
feel of his arm m uch like the tin gle of the trout on the line, live
and muscular , vivid to his touch . Then W illie twisted free, and
he felt a momen t’ s confusion, and a peculiar sense of loss at
the breaking of their brief contact.
“That’ s not right,” W illie was s aying, turning to look up at
him. “Y ou cast with the left hand. I saw you.”
“A ye, but I’m cack-handed, my lord. Most men would cast
with the right.”
“Cack-handed?” W illie’ s mouth curved up again.
“I find my left h and more convenient to most purposes than
is the right, my lord.”
“That’ s what I thought it mea nt. I’m the same.” W illie
looked at once rather pleased and mildly shamefaced at this
statement. “My— my mother said it wasn’ t proper , and that I
must lea rn to use the other , as a gentleman ought. But Papa
said no,  and made them let me  write with my left hand. He
said it didn’ t matter so much if I should look awkward with a
quill; when it ca me to fighting with a sword, I should be at an
advantage.”
“Y our father is a wise man.” His heart twisted, with
something betw een jealousy and gratitude—but gratitude was
far the uppermost.
“Papa was a s oldier .” W illie drew himself up a little,
straightening his shoulders with unconscious pride. “He fought
in S cotland, in t he Ris—oh.” He coughed, and his face went a
dull red as he ca ught sight of Ja mie’ s kilt and realized that he
was quite possibly talking to  a defeated warrior of that
particular fight. He fiddled with  the rod, not knowing where to
look.
“A ye, I know . T hat’ s where I met him, first.” Jamie was
careful to keep a ny hint of amus ement from his voice. He was
tempted to tell t he boy the circumstances of that first meeting,but that would b e poor repayment to John for his priceless gift,
these precious few days with his son.
“He was a verra gallant soldier , indeed,” Jamie agreed,
straight-faced. “And right about the hands, as well. Have ye
begun your schooling with the sword, then?”
“Just a little.” W illie was for getting his embarrassment in
enthusiasm for the new topic. “I ’ve had a little whinger since I
was eight, and learnt feint and parry . Papa says I shall have a
proper s word when we reach V ir ginia, now I am tall enough
for the reach of tierce and longe.”
“Ah. W ell, then, if ye’ve been h andling a sword in your left
hand, I think ye’ll have nay great trouble in mastering a rod
that way . Here, let us try again, or we’ll have no supper .”
On the third try , the fly settled sweetly , to float for no more
than a second b efore a small b ut hungry trout roared to the
surface and engulfed it. W illie let out a shriek of excitement,
and yanked the rod so hard that the astounded trout flew
through the air and past his hea d, to land with a splat on the
bank beyond.
“I did it! I did it ! I caught a fish!” W illie waved his rod and
ran a round in little circles whoo ping, for getting the dignity of
both age and title.
“Indeed ye did.” Jamie picked u p the trout, which measured
perhaps six inches from nose to  tail, and clapped the capering
Earl on the back  in congratulations. “W ell done, lad! It looks
as thoug h they’re biting well th e e’en; let’ s have another cast
or two, aye?”
The trou t were indeed biting well. By the time the sun had
sunk below the rim of the dist ant black mountains, and the
silver w ater faded to dull pewte r , they had each a respectable
string of fish. They were also  both wet to the eyebrows,
exhausted, half blind from the glare, and thoroughly happy .
“I have never tasted anything half so delicious,” W illie said
dreamily . “Never .” He was naked, wrapped in a blanket, hisshirt, bre eches a nd stockings draped on a tree limb to dry . He
lay back with a contented sigh, and belched slightly .
Jamie rearrange d his damp plaid on a bush and laid another
chunk of wood on the fire. The weather was fine, God be
thanked, but it w as chilly with the sun down, the night wind
rising, and a wet sark on his ba ck. He stood close to the edge
of the fire and let the heated a ir rise up under his shirt. The
warmth of it ran up his thighs and touched his chest and belly ,
comforting as Claire’ s hands on the chilly flesh between his
legs.
He stood quietly for a time, watching the boy without
seeming to look at him. Putting vanity aside and judging fairly ,
he thoug ht W illiam a handsome child. Thinner than he should
be; ever y rib showed—but wit h a wiry muscularity of limb
and well formed in all his parts.
The boy had turned his head, gazing into the fire, and he
could look more openly . Sap in the pinewood cracked and
popped, flooding W illie’ s face for a moment with golden light.
Jamie stood quite still, feeling his heart beat, watching. It
was one of those strange momen ts that came to him rarely , but
never le ft. A moment that stam ped itself on heart and brain,
instantly recallable in every detail, for all of his life.
There was no telling what made these moments dif ferent
from any other , though he knew  them when they came. He had
seen sights more gruesome an d more beautiful by far , and
been left with no more than a fleeting muddle of their memory .
But these—the still moments, as he called them to himself—
they cam e with no warning, to print a random image of the
most common things inside his brain, indelible. They were like
the photographs that Claire had brought him, save that the
moments carried with them more than vision.
He had one of his father , smeared and muddy , sitting on the
wall of a cow b yre, a cold Scot tish wind lifting his dark hair .
He could call that one up and s mell the dry hay and the scent
of manu re, feel his own fingers  chilled by the wind, and his
heart warmed by the light in his father ’ s eyes.He had such gli mpses of Claire, of his sister , of Ian…small
moments clipped out of time and perfectly preserved by some
odd alchemy of memory , fixed in his mind like an insect in
amber . And now he had another .
For so long as he lived, he could recall this moment. He
could feel the cold wind on his face, and the crackling feel of
the h air on his thighs, half singed by the fire. He could smell
the r ich odor of trout fried in co rnmeal, and feel the tiny prick
of a swallowed bone, hair -thin in his throat.
He c ould hear the dark quiet of the forest behind, and the
soft rush  of the stream nearby . And forever now he would
remember the firelight golden on the sweet bold face of his
son.
“Deo gratias,”  h e murmured, and realized that he had
spoken aloud only when the boy turned toward him, startled.
“What?”
“Nothing.” T o cover the moment, he turned away and took
down h is half-dry plaid from the bush. Even soaking wet,
Highland wool would keep in a man’ s heat, and shelter him
from cold.
“Y e should sleep, my lord,” he said, sitting down and
arranging the damp folds of plaid around himself. “It will be a
long day tomorrow .”
“I’m not sleepy .” As though to  prove it, W illie sat up and
scrubbed his hands vigorously through his hair , making the
thick russet mass stand out like a mane round his head.
Jamie fe lt a stab of alarm; he r ecognized the gesture only
too well as one  of his. In fact, he had been just about to do
precisely the same thing, and it was with an ef fort that he kept
his hands still.
He s wallowed the heart that ha d risen into his throat, and
reached for his sporran. No. Surely the lad would never think
—a boy  of that age paid little heed to anything his elders said
or did, let alone thought to loo k at them closely . Still, it had
been the hell o f a risk for all of them to take; the look onClaire’ s face had been enough to tell him just how striking the
resemblance was.
He t ook a deep breath, and began to take out the small cloth
bundles that contained his fly-tying materials. They had used
all his made flie s, and if he meant to fish for their breakfast, a
few more should be got ready .
“Can I help?” W illie didn’ t wait for permission, but scooted
around the fire, to sit beside him. W ithout comment, he pushed
the s mall wooden box of birds’  feathers toward the boy , and
picked a fishhook from the piece of cork that held them.
They worked in silence for a time, stopping only to admire a
completed Silve r Doctor or Broom-eye, or for Jamie to lend a
word of  advice or help in tying. W illie soon tired of the
exacting work, though, and laid down his half-done Green
Whisker , asking  numerous questions about fishing, hunting,
the forest, the Red Indians they were going to see.
“No,” Ja mie sai d in answer to one such. “I’ve never seen a
scalp in the village. They’re verra kindly folk, for the most
part. Do one some injury , mind, and they’ll not be slow to take
revenge for it.” He smiled wryly . “They do remind me a bit of
Highlanders in that regard.”
“Grandmamma says the Scots  breed I—” The casually
begun st atement choked of f abruptly . Jamie looked up to see
W illie concentrating fiercely on the half-made fly between his
fingers, his face redder than the firelight accounted for .
“Like rabbits?” Jamie let both i rony and smile show in his
voice. W illie flicked a cautious sideways glance in his
direction.
“Scottish familie s are sometimes lar ge, aye.” Jamie plucked
a wren’ s down f eather from the small box and laid it delicately
against the shank of his hook. “W e think children a blessing.”
The bright color was fading from  W illie’ s cheeks. He sat up
a little straighter .
“I see. Have you got a lot of children yourself, Mr . Fraser?”Jamie dropped the down feather .
“No, not a great many ,” he said, eyes fixed on the mottled
leaves.
“I’m sorry—I didn’ t think—that is…” Jamie glanced up to
see W illie gone red again, one hand crushing the half-tied fly .
“Think what?” he said, puzzled.
W illie took a deep breath.
“W ell—the…the…sickness; the  measles. I didn’ t see any
children, but I didn’ t think when I said that…I mean…that
maybe you had some, but they…”
“Och, no.” Jamie smiled at him reassuringly . “My
daughter ’ s grown; she’ll be living far away in Boston this long
while.”
“Oh.” W illie let out his breath, tremendously relieved.
“That’ s all?”
The fallen down-feather moved in a breath of wind,
betraying its presence in the shadows. Jamie pinched it
between thumb and forefinger and lifted it gently from the
ground.
“No, I’v e a son, too,” he said,  eyes on the hook that had
somehow embedded its barb in his thumb. A tiny drop of
blood w elled up  around the shin ing metal. “A bonny lad, and I
love him weel, though he’ s away from home just now .”2 8
H E A T E D  C O N V E R S A T I O N
B y evenin g, Ian was glassy-eyed and hot to the touch. He sat
up on his pallet to greet me, but swayed alarmingly , his eyes
unfocused. I didn’ t have the slightest doubt, but looked in his
mouth for confirmation; sure enough, the small diagnostic
Koplik’ s spots showed white against the dark pink mucous
membrane. Though the skin of his neck was still fair and
childlike under his hair , it showed a harmless-looking stipple
of small pink spots.
“Right,” I said, resigned. “Y ou’ve got it. Y ou’d best come
up to the house so I can take care of you more easily .”
“I’ve got the m easle? Am I goi ng to die, then?” he asked.
He seem ed only  mildly interested, his attention concentrated
on some interior vision.
“No,” I said matter -of-factly , trusting that I was right.
“Feeling pretty bad, though, are you?”
“My head hurts a bit,” he said.  I could see that it did; his
brows were drawn together , and he squinted at even so dim a
light as that provided by my candle.
Still, he could walk, and a good thing, too, I thought as I
watched him make his unsteady  way down the ladder from the
loft. Scrawny and storklike as he looked, he was a good eight
inches taller than I, and outweighed me by at least thirty
pounds.
It w as n o more than twenty yards to the cabin, but Ian was
trembling from exertion by the time I got him inside. Lord
John sat  up as we came in, and made to get out of bed, but I
waved him back.
“Stay th ere,” I said, depositing Ian heavily on a stool. “I can
manage.”
I h ad been sleep ing on the trundle bed; it was already made
up w ith sheets, q uilt, and pillow . I peeled Ian out of his breeksand stoc kings, a nd tucked him u p at once. He was flushed and
clammy-cheeked, and looked m uch sicker than he had done in
the dimness of his loft.
The wil low-bark brew I had left steeping was dark and
aromatic; ready to drink. I pou red it of f carefully into a cup,
glancing as I did so at Lord John.
“I’d meant this for you,” I said. “But if you could stand to
wait…”
“By all means give it to the lad,” he said, with a dismissive
wave. “I can wait easily . Can I not assist you, though?”
I th ought of su ggesting that if he really wanted to be
helpful, he could walk to the pri vy rather than use the chamber
pot—which I would have to em pty—but I could see that he
wasn’ t yet in an y condition to be wandering round outside at
night by himself. I didn’ t wan t to be explaining to young
W illiam that I had allowed his remaining parent—or what he
thought was his remaining pare nt—to be eaten by bears, let
alone take pneumonia.
So I merely shook my head politely , and knelt by the trundle
to admin ister the brew to Ian. He felt well enough to make
faces an d compl ain about the ta ste, which I found reassuring.
Still, the  headac he was obviously very bad; the line between
his brows was f ixed and sharp as though it had been carved
there with a knife.
I s at on the trun dle and took hi s head onto my lap, gently
rubbing his temples. Then I put my thumbs just into the
sockets of his ey es, pressing firmly upward on the ridge of his
brows. He made a low sound of discomfort, but then relaxed,
his head heavy on my thigh.
“Just breathe,” I said. “Don’ t w orry if it’ s a bit tender at
first, it means I’ve got the right spot.”
” ‘S all right,” h e murmured, his words a little slurred. His
hand dri fted up and closed on my wrist, big and very warm.
“That’ s the Chinaman’ s way , no?”“That’ s right. He means Y i T ien Cho—Mr . W illoughby ,” I
explained to Lord John, who was watching the proceedings
with a puzzled frown. “It’ s a wa y of relieving pain by putting
pressure on some points of the  body . This one is good for
headache. The Chinaman taught me to do it.”
I fel t some reluc tance to mention the little Chinese to Lord
John, seeing that the last time we had met, on Jamaica, Lord
John had  had some four hundred soldiers and sailors combing
the island in pursuit of Mr . W illoughby , then suspected of a
particularly atrocious murder .
“He didn’ t do it, you know ,” I felt compelled to add. Lord
John raised one eyebrow at me.
“That’ s as well,” he said dryly , “since we never caught
him.”
“Oh, I’m glad.” I looked down at Ian, and moved my
thumbs a quarter of an inch out ward, pressing again. His face
was still tight w ith pain, but I  thought the whiteness at the
corners of his mouth was lessening a bit.
“I…ah…don’ t suppose you know who did  kill Mrs.
Alcott?” Lord John’ s voice was casual. I glanced up at him,
but his face betrayed nothing beyond simple curiosity and a
lar ge number of spots.
“I do, yes,” I said hesitantly , “but—”
“Y ou do ? A murder? Who was it? What happened, Auntie?
Ooch!” I an’ s eyelids popped open under my fingers, wide with
interest, then snapped shut in a g rimace of pain as the firelight
struck them.
“Y ou be  still,” I said, and dug my thumbs into the muscles
in front of his ears. “Y ou’re ill.”
“Ar gk!” he said, but subsided obediently into limpness, the
corn-shuck mattress rustling loudly under his thin body . “All
right, Auntie, but who? Y e canna be telling wee bits o’ things
like that, and expect me to sleep without knowing the rest of it.
Can she , then?”  He opened one  eye in a slitted appeal toward
Lord John, who smiled in reply .“I bear no furth er responsibility in the matter ,” Lord John
assured me. “However”— he spoke more firmly to Ian—”you
might stop to think that perhaps the story incriminates
someone your aunt prefers to sh ield. It would be discourteous
to insist upon details, in that case.”
“Och, no, it’ s never that,” Ian assured him, eyes tight closed.
“Uncle Jamie wouldna murder anybody , save he had good
reason.”
From the corner of my eye, I saw Lord John jerk, slightly
startled. Plainly ,  it had never occurred to him that it could  have
been Jamie.
“No,” I assured him, seeing the fair brows draw together . “It
wasn’ t.”
“W ell, a nd it wasna me, either ,”  Ian said smugly . “And who
else would Auntie be protecting?”
“Y ou flatter yourself, Ian,” I said dryly . “But since you
insist…”
My hesitancy had in fact been in the interests of protecting
Y oung Ian. No one else could be harmed by the story—the
murderer was dead and, for all  I knew , Mr . W illoughby , too,
perished in the hidden jungles o f the Jamaican hills, though I
sincerely hoped not.
But the story in volved someone  else, as well; the woman I
had first  known as Geillis Dunc an and known later as Geillis
Abernathy , at whose behest Ian had been kidnapped from
Scotland, imprisoned on Jamaica, and had suf fered things that
he had only lately begun to tell us.
Still, there seemed no way out o f it now—Ian was fractious
as a child insis ting on a bedtime story , and Lord John was
sitting up in bed like a chipmunk waiting for nuts, eyes bright
with interest.
And so, with the  macabre ur ge to begin with “Once upon a
time…” I leaned back against the wall, and with Ian’ s head
still in my lap, b egan the story of Rose Hall and its mistress,
the witch Geillis Duncan; of the Reverend ArchibaldCampbell and his strange sister , Mar garet, of the Edinbur gh
Fiend and the Fraser prophecy; and of a night of fire and
crocodile’ s blood, when the slaves of six plantations along the
Y allahs River had risen and slai n their masters, roused by the
houngan  Ishmael.
Of l ater events in the cave of Abandawe on Haiti, I said
nothing. Ian, after all, had been  there. And those happenings
had nothing to do with the murder of Mina Alcott.
“A c rocodile,” Ian murmured. His eyes were closed, and his
face had grown more relaxed under my fingers, despite the
gruesome nature of my story . “Y e really saw it, Auntie?”
“I n ot only saw  it, I stepped on it,” I assured him. “Or
rather , I stepped  on it, and then  I saw it. If I’d seen it first, I’d
have bloody run the other way .”
There was a low laugh from the bed. Lord John scratched at
his arm, smiling.
“Y ou must find life here rather dull, Mrs. Fraser , after your
adventures in the Indies.”
“I could  do with a spot of dullness now and then,” I said,
rather wistfully .
Involuntarily , I glanced at the  bolted door , where I had
propped Ian’ s musket, brought back from the storehouse when
I had  fet ched him . Jamie had tak en his own gun, but his pistols
lay on the sideboard, loaded and primed as he had left them for
me, bullet case and powder horn neatly arranged beside them.
It was cozy in the cabin, with the fire flickering gold and red
on the rough-ba rked walls, and the air filled with the warm,
lingering scents of squirrel stew and pumpkin bread, spiced
with the  bitter tang of willow tea. I brushed my fingers over
Ian’ s jaw . No ra sh yet, but the skin was tight and hot—very
hot still, in spite of the willow bark.
T alking about Jamaica had at le ast distracted me a bit from
my w orry over I an. Headache was not an unusual symptom for
someone with measles; severe and prolonged headache was.Meningitis and encephalitis were dangerous—and all too
possible—complications of the disease.
“How’ s the head?” I asked.
“A b it better ,” h e said. He coughed, eyes squinching shut as
the spasms jarred his head. H e stopped and opened them
slightly , dark slits that glowed with fever . “I’m awfully hot,
Auntie.”
I slid of f the trundle and went to wring out a cloth in cool
water . Ia n stirred slightly as I wiped his face, his eyes closed
once more.
“Mrs. Abernathy gave me amethysts to drink for the
headache,” he murmured drowsily .
“Amethysts?” I  was startled, but kept my voice low and
soothing. “Y ou drank amethysts?”
“Ground up in v inegar ,” he said. “And pearls in sweet wine,
but that was for  the bedding, she said.” His face looked red
and swollen, and he turned his cheek against the cool pillow ,
seeking relief. “She was a gr eat one for the stones, yon
woman. She burned powdered emeralds in the flame of a black
candle, and she rubbed my coc k wi’ a diamond—to keep it
hard, she said.”
There was a faint sound from the bed, and I looked up to see
Lord John, raised up on one elbow , eyes wide.
“And di d the amethysts work? ” I wiped Ian’ s face gently
with the cloth.
“The diamond did.” He made a feeble attempt at an
adolescent’ s bawdy laugh, but it faded into a harsh, rasping
cough.
“No amethysts here, I’m afraid,”  I said. “But there’ s wine, if
you want it.” H e did, and I helped him to drink it—well
diluted with water—then eased him back on the pillow ,
flushed and heavy-eyed.
Lord John had l ain down, too, and lay watching, his thick
blond hair unbound, spread out on the pillow behind him.“That’ s what she wanted wi’ the lads, ye ken,” Ian said. His
eyes were shut t ight against the light, but he could clearly see
something,  i f only in the mists of memory . He licked his lips;
they we re beginning to dry a nd crack, and his nose was
beginning to run.
“She said the s tone grew in a lad’ s innards—the one she
wanted. She said it must be a laddie who’d never gone wi’ a
lass, tho ugh, that was important. If he had, the stone wouldna
be right,  somehow . If he h-huh- had one.” He paused to cough,
and ended breathless, nose dripp ing. I held a handkerchief for
him to blow .
“What did she want the stone for?” Lord John’ s face bore a
look of sympathy—he knew only too well what Ian felt like at
the mom ent—but curiosity compelled the question. I didn’ t
object; I wanted to know too.
Ian started to shake his head, then stopped with a groan.
“Ah! Oh , God, my head will split surely! I dinna ken, man.
She didn a say . Only that it was needful; she must have it to be
s-sure.” He barely got out the la st word before dissolving into
a cough ing attack that was the worst yet; he sounded like a
barking dog.
“Y ou’d better stop talk—” I beg an, but was interrupted by a
soft thump at the door .
Instantly I froze, wet cloth sti ll in my hand. Lord John
leaned swiftly from the bed and  took a pistol from inside one
of his high cavalry boots on th e floor . A finger to his lips to
enjoin silence, he nodded toward Jamie’ s pistols. I moved
silently to the s ideboard and grasped one, reassured by the
smooth, solid heft of it in my hand.
“Who is  there?”  Lord John call ed, in a surprisingly strong
voice.
There was no answer save a sort of scratching, and a faint
whine. I sighed and laid the pistol down, torn between
irritation, relief and amusement.
“It’ s your blasted dog, Ian.”“Are you sure?” Lord John spok e in a low voice, pistol still
aimed unwaveringly at the door . “It might be an Indian trick.”
Ian rolled over with an ef fort, facing the door .
“Rollo!” he shouted, his voice hoarse and cracking.
Hoarse o r not, Rollo knew his master ’ s voice; there was a
deep, jo yful “W ARF!” from outside, succeeding by frantic
scratching, at a height some four feet from the ground.
“Beastly dog,” I said, hurrying t o open the door . “Stop that,
or I’ll make you into a rug, or a coat, or something!”
Giving this threat the attention it deserved, Rollo bounded
past me into th e room. Exuberant with joy , he launched his
hundred and fifty pounds from the middle of the floor and
landed directly on the trundle bed, making it sway
dangerously , joi nts screeching in protest. Ignoring a strangled
cry from the be d’ s occupant, he proceeded to lick Ian madly
about the face and forearms—the latter being flung up as a
wholly inadequate defense to the slobbering onslaught.
“Bad dog,” Ian said, making inef fectual ef forts to push
Rollo of f his chest, giggling  helplessly in spite of his
discomfort. “Bad dog, I say—down, sir!”
“Down, sir!” Lord John echoed sternly . Rollo, interrupted in
his demonstrations of af fection, rounded on Lord John, his
ears laid back. He curled his lip, and gave his lordship a good
look at the cond ition of his back  teeth. Lord John started, and
raised his pistol convulsively .
“Down, a dhiobhuil !” I an said, pr odding Rollo in the
hindquarters. “T ake your hairy arse out o’ my face, ye wicked
beast!”
Rollo instantly dismissed Lord John from consideration, and
padded around on top of the trundle, turning three times and
kneading the bedding with his p aws before collapsing next to
his mast er ’ s body . He licked Ia n’ s ear , and with a deep sigh,
laid his nose between his lar ge muddy paws on the pillow .“W ould you like me to get him  of f, Ian?” I of fered, eyeing
the paws. I wa sn’ t quite sure how I might move a dog of
Rollo’ s size and temperament, bar shooting him with Jamie’ s
pistol an d dragging his carcass of f the bed, so was rather
relieved when Ian shook his head.
“No, let him sta y , Auntie,” he said, croaking slightly . “He’ s
a good fellow . Are ye no, a charaid ?” He laid a han d on the
dog’ s neck, and turned his head so his cheek lay pillowed
against Rollo’ s thick ruf f.
“All righ t, then.” Moving slowly , with a wary glance at the
unblinking yellow eyes, I approached the bed and smoothed
Ian’ s hair . His forehead was sti ll hot, but I thought the fever
was a bit lower . If it broke in the night, as it well might, it was
likely to be succeeded by a fit of violent shivering—when Ian
might well find Rollo’ s warm hairy bulk a comfort.
“Sleep well.”
“Oidhche mhath.”  H e was half asleep already , drifting into
the vivi d dreams of fever , and his “good-night” was barely
more than a murmur .
I moved quietly about the room, tidying away the results of
the day’ s labors; a basket of fresh-gathered peanuts to be
washed, dried and stored; a pa n of dried reeds laid flat and
covered with a layer of bacon grease to make rushlights. A trip
to the pantry , w here I stirred th e beer mash fermenting in its
tub, squeezed out the curds of the soft cheese a-making, and
punched down the slow-rising salt bread, ready to be made
into loav es and baked in the morning, when the small Dutch
oven bu ilt into the side of the hearth would be heated through
by the night’ s low fire.
Ian w as sound a sleep when I came back into the main room;
Rollo’ s eyes were closed as well, though one yellow slit
cracked open at my entrance. I glanced at Lord John; he was
awake, but did not look round.
I s at down on th e settle by the fire, and brought out the big
wool basket with its green and black Indian pattern—Sun-eater , Gabrielle had called the design.
T wo days since Jamie and W illie had left. T wo days to the
T uscarora villag e. T wo days bac k. If nothing happened to stop
them.
“Nonsense,” I muttered, under my breath. Nothing would
stop them. They would be home soon.
The basket was full of dyed skei ns of wool and linen thread.
Some I had been given by Joca sta, some I had spun myself.
The dif ference was obvious, but even the lumpy , awkward-
looking strands I produced could be used for something. Not
stockings or jerseys; perhaps I  could knit a tea cozy—that
seemed suf ficiently shapeless to disguise all my deficiencies.
Jamie had been simultaneously shocked and amused to find
that I didn’ t know how to knit. The question had never arisen
at Lallybroch, where Jenny and the female servants kept
everyone in knitted goods. I had taken on the chores of
stillroom and garden, and never dealt with needlework beyond
the simplest mending.
“Y e can na click it at all?” he said incredulously . “And what
did ye do for your winter stockings in Boston, then?”
“Bought them,” I said.
He had looked elaborately around the clearing where we
had been sitting, admiring the half-finished cabin.
“Since I  dinna see any shops about, I suppose ye’d best
learn, aye?”
“I suppose so.” I dubiously eyed the knitting basket Jocasta
had given me. I t was well equipped, with three long circular
wire needles in dif ferent sizes,  and a sinister -looking set of
four double-ended ivory ones, slender as stilettos, which I
knew w ere used in some myste rious fashion to turn the heels
of stockings.
“I’ll ask  Jocasta  to show me, next time we go down to River
Run. Next year perhaps.”Jamie sn orted briefly and picked up a needle and a ball of
yarn.
“It’ s no verra dif ficult, Sassenach. Look—this is how ye
cast up your row .” Drawing the thread out through his closed
fist, he made a  loop round his thumb, slipped it onto the
needle, and with a quick econo my of motion, cast on a long
row of stitches in a matter of seconds. Then he handed me the
other needle and another ball of yarn. “There—you try .”
I looked at him in complete amazement.
” Y ou  can knit?”
“W ell, of course I can,” he  said, staring at me in
puzzlement. “I’ve known how to clickit wi’ needles since I
was seven years old. Do they no t teach bairns anything  in your
time?”
“W ell,” I said, feeling mildly foolish, “they sometimes teach
little girls to do needlework, but not boys.”
“They didna teach you, did t hey? Besides, it’ s no fine
needlework, Sa ssenach, it’ s only plain knitting. Here, take
your thumb and dip it, so…”
And so he and I an—who, it turned out, could also knit and
was prostrated by mirth at my lack of knowledge—had taught
me the simple basics of knit a nd purl, explaining, between
snorts of derision over my ef fo rts, that in the Highlands all
boys were routinely taught to knit, that being a useful
occupation well  suited to the long idle hours of herding sheep
or cattle on the shielings.
“Once a man’ s grown and has a wife to do for him, and a
lad o f h is own to mind the shee p, he maybe doesna make his
own stockings anymore,” Ian had said, deftly executing the
turn of a heel before handing me back the stocking, “but even
wee laddies ken how , Auntie.”
I c ast an eye at  my current pro ject, some ten inches of a
wooly shawl, which lay in a small crumpled heap at the
bottom o f the basket. I had learned the basics, but knitting for
me was still a p itched battle with knotted thread and slipperyneedles, not the soothing, dreamy exercise that Jamie and Ian
made of it, need les clicketing away in their big hands by the
fire, comforting as the sound of crickets on the hearth.
Not tonight, I thought. I wa sn’ t up to it. Something
mindless, like winding up the balls of yarn. That I could do. I
laid aside a half -finished pair of stockings Jamie was making
for hims elf—striped, the show-of f—and pulled out a heavy
skein of fresh-dyed blue wool, still redolent with the heavy
scents of its dyeing.
Normally I liked the smell of fr esh yarn, with its faint oily
whif f of  sheep, the earthy smell of indigo, and the sharp tang
of the vinegar  used to set the dye. T onight it seemed
smothering, add ed as it was to woodsmoke and candle wax, to
the c lose, acrid smells of male bodies and the reek of illness—
a mi ngled scent of sweaty sheets and used chamber pots—all
trapped together in the room’ s stale air .
I let  the skein lie on my lap, and closed my eyes for a
moment. I wanted nothing so m uch as to undress and sponge
myself with cool water , then slip naked between the clean
linen sheets of my bed and lie still, letting the fresh cool air
blow through the open window across my face while I floated
into oblivion.
But there was a  sweating Englishman in one of my beds,
and a filthy dog in the other , to  say nothing of a teenage boy
who was obviously in for a ha rd night. The sheets had not
been washed in days, and when they were, it would be a
backbreaking bu siness of boiling, lifting and wringing. My
bed for the night —assuming that I got to sleep in it—would be
a pa llet made o f a folded qui lt, with my pillow a sack of
carded wool. I would breathe sheep all night.
Nursing is hard work, and all of  a sudden I was bloody tired
of it . Fo r a moment of intense l onging, I wanted them all just
to g o away . I opened my eyes, looking at Lord John with
resentment. My little burst of self-pity faded, though, as I
looked a t him. He lay on his back, one arm behind his head,
gazing somberly  up at the ceiling. It might have been only atrick of the fire, but his face seemed marked by anxiety and
grief, eyes shadowed with dark loss.
At once  I felt ashamed of my ill temper . Granted, I hadn’ t
wanted him here. I was annoye d at his intrusion into my life
and the burden of obligation his illness had placed upon me.
His very presence made me uneasy—to say nothing of
W illiam’ s. But they would go, soon. Jamie would be home, Ian
would recover ,  and I would have back my peace, my
happiness, and my clean sheets . What had happened to him
was permanent.
John Grey had lost a wife—however he might have
regarded her . It had taken courage of more than one kind to
bring W illiam here, and to sen d him of f with Jamie. And I
didn’ t suppose the bloody man could help having caught the
measles.
I laid the wool aside for the moment and got up to put the
kettle on . A nice cup of tea all round seemed called for . As I
straightened up from the hearth, I saw Lord John turn his head,
my movement drawing his attention from his inward thoughts.
“T ea,” I said, embarrassed to  meet his eyes after my
uncharitable thoughts. I made a small, awkward gesture of
interrogation toward the kettle.
He smiled faintly and nodded.
“I thank you, Mrs. Fraser .”
I took down the tea box from the cupboard, and laid out two
cups and  spoons, adding the sug ar bowl as an afterthought; no
molasses tonight.
When I had got the tea made, I sat down near the bed to
drink it. W e sipp ed in silence for a few moments, an odd air of
shyness hovering between us.
At last, I set down my cup and cleared my throat.
“I’m sorry; I had  meant to of fer  you my condolences on the
loss of your wife,” I said, rather formally .He l ooked surprised for a mom ent, then bowed his head in
acknowledgment, matching my formality .
“It is a c oincidence that you sho uld say so at the moment,”
he said. “I had just been thinking of her .”
Used as I was to having other people take one look at my
face and discern instantly what I was thinking, it was oddly
gratifying to be able to do it to someone else.
“Do you  miss her greatly—your wife?” I felt a bit hesitant
about asking, but he didn’ t seem to find the question intrusive.
I might almost have thought that he had been asking it himself,
for he answered readily , if thoughtfully .
“I don’ t really know ,” he said. He glanced at me, one
eyebrow raised. “Does that sound unfeeling?”
“I c ouldn’ t say ,” I said, a little  tartly . “Surely you’d know
better than I whether you had feelings for her or not.”
“I did, yes.” He let his head fall back on the pillow , his thick
fair hair loose about his shoulders. “Or I do, perhaps. That’ s
why I came, do you see?”
“No, I can’ t say that I do.”
I hea rd I an coug h, and rose to look, but he had only turned
over in his sle ep; he lay on his stomach, one long arm
drooping from the trundle bed. I picked up his hand—it was
still hot,  but not dangerously so—and put it on the pillow near
his face. His hair had fallen in his eyes; I brushed it gently
back.
“Y ou are very g ood with him; have you children of your
own?”
Startled, I looked up to see Lo rd John watching me, chin
propped on his fist.
“I—we—have a daughter ,” I said.
His eyes widened.
“W e?” he said sharply . “The girl is Jamie’ s?”“Don’ t call her ‘the girl,’ ” I s aid, unreasonably irritated.
“Her name is Brianna, and yes, she’ s Jamie’ s.”
“My apologies,” he said, rather stif fly .
“I meant no of fense,” he added a moment later , in a softer
tone. “I was surprised.”
I looked at him directly . I was too tired to be tactful.
“And a bit jealous, perhaps?”
He h ad a diplom at’ s face; almost anything could have been
going on behind that facade of h andsome amiability . I went on
staring a t him, though, and he let the mask drop—a flash of
knowledge lit the light blue eyes, tinged with grudging humor .
“So. One more thing that we  have in common.” I was
startled by his ac uity , though I shouldn’ t have been. It’ s always
discomfiting to find that feelings you thought safely hidden are
in fact sitting out in the open for anyone to look at.
“Don’ t tell me y ou didn’ t think of that when you decided to
come he re.” The  tea was finishe d; I set the cup aside and took
up my skein of wool again.
He studied me for a moment, eyes narrowed.
“I thought of it, yes,” he said finally . He let his head fall
back on the pillow , eyes fixed on the low beamed ceiling.
“Still, if I was human enough—or petty enough—to consider
that I might of fe nd you by bringing W illiam here, I would ask
you to believe that such of fense was not my motive in
coming.”
I l aid the finished ball of yarn  in the basket and took up
another skein, stretching it across the back of a split-willow
chair .
“I believe you,” I said, my eyes fixed on the skein. “If only
because it seems rather a lot o f trouble to go to. What was
your motive, though?”
I sensed the movement as he shrugged, rustling the sheets.
“The obvious—to allow Jamie to see the boy .”“And the other obvious—to allow you to see Jamie.”
There was a marked silence from the bed. I kept my eyes on
the yarn , turning the ball as I wrapped the strand, over and
under , b ack and forth, an intrica te crisscross that would in the
end yield a perfect sphere.
“Y ou are  a rather remarkable woman,” he said at last, in a
level tone.
“Indeed,” I said, not looking up. “In what way?”
He leaned back; I heard the rustle of his bedding.
“Y ou are neither circumspect no r circuitous. In fact, I don’ t
believe I have ever met anyone more devastatingly
straightforward—male or  female.”
“W ell, it’ s not by choice,” I said. I came to the end of the
thread and tucked it neatly into the ball. “I was born that way .”
“So was I,” he said, very softly .
I didn’ t answer; I didn’ t think he had spoken to be heard.
I r ose and wen t to the cupboa rd. I took down three jars:
catmint, valeria n, and wild gin ger . I took down the marble
mortar and tipped the dried leaves and root chunks into it. A
drop of water fell from the kettle, hissing into steam.
“What are you doing?” Lord John asked.
“Making an infusion for Ian,” I said, with a nod toward the
trundle. “The same I gave you four days ago.”
“Ah. W e heard of you as we t raveled from W ilmington,”
Grey said. His voice was casual now , making conversation.
“Y ou ar e well known in the countryside for your skills, it
would appear .”
“Mm.” I  pounded and ground, a nd the deep, musky smell of
wild ginger filled the room.
“They s ay you are a conjure-w oman. What is that, do you
know?”“Anything from a midwife to a physician to a caster of
spells or a fortune-teller ,” I said. “Depending on who’ s
talking.”
He mad e a sound that might have been a laugh, and then
was silent for a bit.
“Y ou thi nk they will be safe.” It  was a statement, but he was
asking.
“Y es. Jamie wouldn’ t have taken the boy if he thought
there’d b e any danger . Surely you know that, if you know him
at all?” I added, glancing at him.
“I know him,” he said.
“Do you indeed,” I said.
He was quiet for a moment, bar the sound of scratching.
“I k now him well enough—or think I do—to risk sending
W illiam away with him, alone. And to be sure he will not tell
W illiam the truth.”
I poured the gree n and yellow po wder into a small square of
cotton gauze and tied it neatly into a tiny bag.
“No, he won’ t, you’re right about that.”
“W ill you?”
I looked up, startled.
“Y ou re ally think I would?” He studied my face carefully
for a moment, then smiled.
“No,” he said quietly . “Thank you.”
I snorte d briefly and dropped the medicine bag into the
teapot. I  put back the jars of herbs, and sat down with my
blasted wool again.
“It was generous of you—to let W illie go with Jamie.
Rather b rave,” I added, somewhat grudgingly . I looked up; he
was staring at th e dark oblong of the hide-covered window , as
though he could look beyond it to see the two figures, side by
side in the forest.“Jamie h as held  my life in his h ands for a good many years
now ,” he answered softly . “I will trust him with W illiam’ s.”
“And what if W illie remembers a groom named MacKenzie
better than you think? Or happens to take a good look at his
own face and Jamie’ s?”
“T welve-year -old boys are not remarkable for their acute
perception,” Grey said dryly . “And I think that if a boy has
lived all his life in the secure be lief that he is the ninth Earl of
Ellesmere, the notion that he might actually be the illegitimate
of fspring of a Scottish groom is not one that would enter his
head—or be long entertained there, if it did.”
I w ound  wool in silence, listening to the crackle of the fire.
Ian w as coughing again, but did n’ t wake. The dog had moved,
and was now curled up by his legs, a dark heap of fur .
I f inishe d the second ball of yarn and began another . One
more, and the infusion would have finished steeping. If Ian
didn’ t need me yet, I would lie down then.
Grey had been s ilent for so lon g that I was surprised when
he starte d to speak again. Whe n I glanced at him, he wasn’ t
looking at me, but was staring upward, seeking visions once
again among the smoke-stained beams.
“I told you I ha d feelings for m y wife,” he said softly . “I
did. Af fection. Familiarity . Loyalty . W e had known each other
all her life; our  fathers had been friends; I had known her
brother . She might well have been my sister .”
“And was she satisfied with that—to be your sister?”
He gave me a glance somewhere between anger and
interest.
“Y ou ca nnot be at all a comfortable woman to live with.”
He shut  his mouth, but couldn ’ t leave it there. He shrugged
impatiently . “Y es, I believe she was satisfied with the life she
led. She never said that she was not.”
I di dn’ t reply to this, though  I exhaled rather strongly
through my nose. He shrugged uncomfortably , and scratchedhis collarbone.
“I was an adequate husband to  her ,” he said defensively .
“That we had no children of our own—that was not my—”
“I really don’ t want to hear about it!”
“Oh, don’ t you?” His voice was still low , not to wake Ian,
but it had lost th e smooth modulations of diplomacy; the anger
was rough in it.
“Y ou as ked me why I came; you questioned my motives;
you accused me of jealousy . Pe rhaps you don’ t  wan t to  know ,
because if you d id, you could n ot keep thinking of me as you
choose to.”
“And ho w the hell do you know  what I choose to think of
you?”
His mou th twisted in an expres sion that might have been a
sneer on a less handsome face.
“Don’ t I?”
I looked him full in the face for a minute, not troubling to
hide anything at all.
“Y ou did mention jealousy ,” he said quietly , after a moment.
“So I did. So did you.”
He turned his head away , but continued after a moment.
“When I heard that Isobel was dead…it meant nothing to
me. W e had live d together for years, though we had not seen
each oth er for nearly two years. W e shared a bed; we shared a
life, I thought. I should have cared. But I didn’ t.”
He t ook a deep breath; I saw the  bedclothes stir as he settled
himself.
“Y ou me ntioned generosity . It wasn’ t that. I came to see…
whether I can still feel,” he said. His head was still turned
away , st aring at the hide-covered window , grown dark with the
night. “Whether  it is my own fe elings that have died, or only
Isobel.”” Only  Isobel?” I echoed.
He lay quite still for a moment, facing away .
“I can still feel shame, at least,” he said, very softly .
I cou ld tell by the feel of the night that it was very late; the
fire had burned low , and the aching of my muscles told me that
it was well past my bedtime.
Ian was  getting  restless; he sti rred in his sleep, moaning,
and Rollo got up and nuzzled him, making small whimpering
noises. I  went to him and wiped his face again, plumped his
pillow and straightened his sheets, making comforting
murmurs. He was no more than half awake; I held his head
and fed him a cup of the warm infusion, sip by sip.
“Y ou’ll feel better in the morning.” There were spots visible
in the open neck of his shirt—only a few as yet—but the fever
was less, and the line between his brows had eased.
I wi ped his fac e once more and eased him back on his
pillow , where he turned a che ek to the cool linen and fell
asleep again at once.
There w as plenty of the infusio n left. I poured another cup
and held  it out to  Lord John. Sur prised, he sat upright and took
it from me.
“And now that you’ve come, a nd seen him—do you still
have feelings?” I said.
He stared at me for a moment, eyes unblinking in the
candlelight.
“I do, yes.” Hand steady as a roc k, he picked up the cup and
drank. “ God help me,” he added, so casual as almost to sound
of fhand.
Ian passed a bad night but dropped of f into a fitful doze near
dawn. I seized t he chance of a little rest myself, and managed
a fe w hours of  delectable sleep on the floor before being
roused by the the loud braying of Clarence the mule.A sociable creature, Clarence was utterly delighted by the
approach of anything he regarded as a friend—this category
embracing virtu ally anything on four legs. He gave tongue to
his joy in a v oice that rang of f the mountainside. Rollo,
af fronted at being thus upstaged in the watchdog department,
leapt of f  Ian’ s bed, soared over me, and out through the open
window , baying like a werewolf.
Thus sta rtled out of slumber , I staggered to my feet. Lord
John, w ho was sitting in his shirt at the table, looked startled
too, tho ugh whether at the ra cket or at my appearance, I
couldn’ t tell. I went outside, running my fingers hastily
through my disheveled locks, heart beating faster in the hope
that it might be Jamie returning.
My hear t fell as I saw that it w asn’ t Jamie and W illie, but
my disappointm ent was quickly replaced by astonishment
when I saw who the visitor wa s—Pastor Gottfried, leader of
the Lutheran church in Salem. I had met the Pastor now and
then, in the hom es of parishioners where I had been paying
medical calls, but I was more than surprised to find him so far
afield.
It w as nearly two days ride from Salem to the Ridge, and
the near est German Lutheran farm was at least fifteen miles
away , ov er rough country . The Pastor was no natural horseman
—I coul d see the mud and dust of repeated falls splashed over
his black  coat— and I thought th at it must be a dire emer gency
indeed that brought him so far up the mountain.
“Down, wicked dog!” I said sharply to Rollo, who was
baring h is teeth and growling at the new arrival, much to the
displeasure of the Pastor ’ s horse. “Be quiet, I say!”
Rollo gave me a yellow-eyed look and subsided with an air
of of fended dignity , as though to suggest that if I wished to
welcome obvious malefactors onto the premises, he  wouldn’ t
answer for the consequences.
The Pastor was a tubby little man with a huge, curly gray
beard that surrounded his face  like a storm cloud, through
which his normally beaming fac e peered like the breaking sun.He wasn’ t beaming this morning, though; his round cheeks
were the color of suet, puf fy lips pale, and his eyes red-
rimmed with fatigue.
“Meine Dame,”  he gree ted me, dof fing his broad-brimmed
hat and bowing deeply from the waist. “Ist Euer Mann hier?”
I spoke no more than a few words of crude German, but
could easily make out that he w as looking for Jamie. I shook
my head, gesturing vaguely toward the woods, to indicate
Jamie’ s absence.
The Pastor looked even more dismayed than before, nearly
wringing his hands in his distress. He said several ur gent
things in German, then seeing that I didn’ t understand him,
repeated himself, speaking slower and louder , his stubby body
straining for expression, trying by sheer force of will to make
me understand.
I wa s still shaki ng my head helplessly when a voice spoke
sharply from behind me.
“W as ist los?”  demanded Lord John, emer ging into the
dooryard. “W as ha bt Ihr gesagt?”  He had put on his breeches,
I w as glad to se e, though he w as still barefoot, with his fair
hair streaming loose on his shoulders.
The Pastor gave me a scandalized look, plainly thinking The
W orst, but this expression was wiped of f his face at once by a
further machine-gun rattle of German from Lord John. The
Pastor bobbed in apology to m e, then turned eagerly to the
Englishman, waving his arms and stammering in his haste to
tell his story .
“What?” I said, having failed to pluck more than a word or
two from the T eutonic flood. “What on earth is he saying?”
Grey turned a grim face toward me.
“Do you know a family named Mueller?”
“Y es,” I said, immediate alarm flaring at the name. “I
delivered a child to Petronella Mueller , three weeks ago.”“Ah.” G rey licked dry lips and  glanced at the ground; he
didn’ t want to tell me. “The—the child is dead, I am afraid. So
is the mother .”
“Oh, no.” I sank  down on the bench by the door , swept by a
feeling of absolute denial. “No. They can’ t be.”
Grey rubbed a hand over his mouth, nodding as the Pastor
went on, waving his small, fat hands in agitation.
“He says it was Masern;  I think that would be what we call
the measle. Flecken, so ahnlich wie diese? ” he demanded of
the Past or , point ing at the remn ants of rash still visible on his
face.
The Pa stor nodded emphatic ally , repeating “Flecken,
Masern, ja!”  and patting his own cheeks.
“But what does he want Jamie for?” I asked, bewilderment
added to distress.
“Apparently he believes Jamie m ight be able to reason with
the man—with Herr Mueller . Are they friends?”
“Not ex actly , no. Jamie hit Gerhard Mueller in the mouth
and knocked him down in front of the mill last spring.”
A muscle twitched in Lord John’ s scabbed cheek.
“I see. I suppos e he’ s using th e term ‘reason with’ rather
loosely , then.”
“Mueller can’ t be reasoned with by any means more
sophisticated tha n an ax handle,” I said. “But what is he being
unreasonable about?”
Grey frowned —he didn’ t recognize my use of
“sophisticated,” I realized, though he understood what I meant.
He h esitated, then turned back t o the small minister and asked
something else, listening intently to the resulting torrent of
Deutsch .
Little by little, with constant interruptions and much
gesticulation, the story emer ged in translation.There w as, as Lord John had told us earlier , an epidemic of
measles in Cross Creek. This had evidently spread into the
backcountry; several households in Salem were af flicted, but
the Muellers, isolated as they w ere, had not suf fered infection
until recently .
However , the day before the fir st sign of measles appeared,
a small band of Indians had stopped at the Mueller farm asking
for food  and drink. Mueller , wit h whose opinions of Indians I
was thoroughly well acquainted, had driven them of f with
considerable ab use. The Indians, of fended, had made—said
Mueller—mysterious signs toward his house as they left.
When m easles broke out among the family the next day ,
Mueller was positive that the disease had been brought upon
them by  means of a hex, placed on his house by the Indians he
had rebuf fed. He had at once painted antihexing symbols upon
his walls, and summoned the Pastor from Salem to perform an
exorcism…”I th ink that is what he said,” Lord John added
doubtfully . “Th ough I am not  sure whether he means by
that…”
“Never mind,” I said impatiently . “Go on!”
None of these precautions availed Mueller , though, and
when Pe tronella and the new baby succumbed to the disease,
the o ld man had  lost what little mind he had. V owing revenge
upon the savages who had bro ught such devastation to his
household, he had forced his sons and sons-in-law to
accompany him, and ridden of f into the woods.
From this expedition they had returned three days ago, the
sons whitefaced  and silent, the  old man burning with cold
satisfaction.
“Ich wa r dort. Ich habe ihn ges chen,”  said Herr Gottfried,
sweat trickling down his chee ks at the recollection. I was
there. I saw .
Summoned by a hysterical message from the women, the
Pastor had ridden into the stable yard, to find two long tails ofdark hair hanging from the ba rn door , stirring gently in the
wind above the crudely painted legend Rache .
“That means ‘revenge,’ ” Lord John translated for me.
“I know ,” I said, my mouth so dry I could barely speak.
“I’ve read Sherlock Holmes. Y ou mean he…”
“Evidently so.”
The Pastor was still speaking; h e seized me by the arm and
shook it, trying to communicate his ur gency . Grey’ s look
sharpened at whatever the minister was saying, and he broke
in with an abrupt question, answered by frenzied noddings.
“He’ s coming here. Mueller .” G rey swung round to me, his
face set in alarm.
T erribly upset by the scalps, the  Pastor had gone in search
of Herr Mueller , only to find th at the patriarch had nailed his
grisly tr ophies to the barn and then left the farm, bound—he
had said—for Fraser ’ s Ridge, to see me.
If I hadn’ t been sitting down alre ady , I might have collapsed
at th is. I could feel the blood draining from my cheeks, and
was sure I looked as pale as Pastor Gottfried.
“Why?” I said. “Is he—he couldn’ t! He couldn’ t think I had
done any thing to Petronella or the baby . Could he?” I turned in
appeal to ward th e Pastor , who p ushed a pudgy , trembling hand
through his gray-streaked hair , d isordering its carefully larded
strands.
“The cle rical ge ntleman doesn’ t know what Mueller thinks,
or what his purpose is in coming here,” said Lord John. He
cast an interested eye over the pastor ’ s unprepossessing form.
“Much to his credit, he set of f alone, hell-for -leather after
Mueller , and found him two hours later—insensible by the
side of the road.”
The huge old farmer had evidently gone for days without
food on his hunt  for revenge. Int emperance was not a common
failing a mong the Lutherans, but under the stimulus of fatigue
and emotion, Mueller had drunk deeply upon his return, andthe enormous draughts of beer he had consumed had been too
much for him. O vercome, he had contrived to hobble his mule,
but then had wrapped himself in his coat and fallen asleep
among the trailing arbutus by the road.
The Pas tor had made no attempt to rouse Mueller , being
well acq uainted with the man’ s temper and feeling it would
not be improved by drink. Inste ad, Gottfried had mounted his
own ho rse and ridden as quic kly as he could, trusting to
Providence to bring him here in time to warn us.
He had had no d oubt that my Mann  would be competent to
deal wit h Mueller , no matter w hat his state or intentions, but
with Jamie gone…
Pastor Gottfried looked helplessly from me to Lord John,
and back again.
“V ielleicht solten Sie gehen?”  he suggested, making his
meaning clear with a jerk of his head toward the paddock.
“I ca n’ t leave,” I  said, and gestured toward the house. “ Mein
—Christ, what’ s nephew?— Mein junger Mann ist nicht gut.”
“Ihr Neffe ist krank”  Lord John corrected briskly . “Haben
Sie jemals Masern gehabt?”
The Pastor shook his head, distress altering to alarm.
“He has n’ t had the measles,” Lo rd John said, turning to me.
“He mus tn’ t stay  here, then, or he will put himself in danger of
contracting the disease, is that so?”
“Y es.” The shock was beginning to recede slightly , and I
was star ting to pull myself tog ether . “Y es, he should go at
once. It’ s safe for him to be ne ar you, you aren’ t contagious
any longer . Ian is, though.” I made a vain attempt at smoothing
my h air , which w as standing on end—little wonder if it was, I
thought. Then I thought of the scalps on Mueller ’ s barn door
and my hair actually did  stand on end, my own scalp rip pling
with horror .
Lord John was speaking authoritatively to the little Pastor ,
ur ging him toward his horse by means of a grip on his sleeve.Gottfried was making protests, but increasingly weak ones. He
glanced back at me, round face full of trouble.
I tried to smil e reassuringly at him, though I felt as
distressed as he did.
“Danke,”  I said. “T ell him it will be all right, will you?” I
said to Lord John. “He won’ t go, otherwise.” He nodded
briefly .
“I have. I told him I am a soldier; that I will not let any
harm come to you.”
The Pas tor stood for a moment,  hand on his horse’ s bridle,
talking earnestly  to Lord John.  Then he dropped the bridle,
turned with decision and crossed the dooryard to me. Reaching
up, he laid a hand gently on my tousled head.
“Seid gesegnet,”  he said. “Benedicite.”
“He said—” began Lord John.
“I understand.”
W e stood silently in the dooryard, watching Gottfried make
his way through the chestnut grove. It seemed incongruously
peaceful out here, with a sof t autumn sun warm on my
shoulders, and birds going about their business overhead. I
heard th e far -of f knocking of a woodpecker , and the liquid
duet of the moc kingbirds that lived in the big blue spruce. No
owls, but naturally there wou ld be no owls now; it was
midmorning.
Who?  I  wondered, as a nother aspect of the tragedy belatedly
occurred to me. Who had been  the tar get of Mueller ’ s blind
revenge? The Mueller farm was several days ride from the
mountain line that separated Indian territory from the
settlements, but he could have reached several T uscarora or
Cherokee villages, depending on his direction.
Had he entered a village? If so, what carnage had he and his
sons left behind? W orse, what carnage might ensue?
I s huddered, cold in spite of th e sun. Mueller was not the
only man who b elieved in revenge. The family , the clan, thevillage of whomever he had murdered—they would seek
vengeance for their slain, as well; and they might not stop with
the Muellers—if they even knew the identity of the killers.
And if they did not, but only knew the murderers to be
white…I shuddered again. I had heard enough massacre
stories to realize that the victim s very seldom did anything to
provoke their fate; they only had the misfortune of being in the
wrong place at the wrong tim e. Fraser ’ s Ridge lay directly
between Mueller ’ s farm and the Indian villages—which at the
moment seemed distinctly the wrong place to be.
“Oh, God, I wis h Jamie were h ere.” I wasn’ t aware that I
had spoken aloud, until Lord John replied.
“So do I,” he said. “Though I begin to think that W illiam
may be far safer with him than the boy might be here—and not
only by reason of the illness.”
I gla nced at him , realizing suddenly how weak he still was;
this was the firs t time he had been out of bed in a week. He
was white-faced  under the remnants of his rash, and he was
gripping the doorjamb for support, to keep from falling down.
“Y ou sh ouldn’ t even be up!” I exclaimed, and grasped him
by the arm. “Go in and lie down at once.”
“I am quite all right,” he said irritably , but he didn’ t jerk
away , or protest when I insisted he get back into bed.
I kn elt to chec k Ian, who was tossing restlessly on the
trundle, blazing with fever . His eyes were shut, his features
swollen and disfigured with the emer gent rash, the glands in
his neck round and hard as eggs.
Rollo poked an inquiring nose u nder my elbow , nudged his
master gently and whined.
“He’ll b e all right,” I said firmly . “Why don’ t you go
outside and keep an eye out for visitors, hm?”
Rollo ignored this advice, though, and instead sat patiently
watching as I wrung out a rag in cool water and bathed Ian. I
nudged him half awake, brushed his hair , gave him thechamber pot, and coaxed bee-balm syrup into him—all the
time listening for the sound of hooves, and Clarence’ s joyful
announcement that company was coming.
It w as a long day . After several hours of starting at every
sound a nd looking over my sh oulder at every step, I finally
settled in to the day’ s work. I nur sed Ian, who was feverish and
miserable, fed the stock, weeded the garden, picked tender
young cucumbers for pickling, and set Lord John, who was
disposed to be helpful, to work shelling beans.
I loo ked into th e woods with longing, on my way from
privy to goat-pen. I would hav e given a lot simply to walk
away into those cool green dep ths. It wouldn’ t have been the
first time I’d ha d such an impulse. But the autumn sun beat
down on the Ridge, and the hours wore on in tranquil peace,
without a sign of Gerhard Mueller .
“T ell me  about this Mueller ,” Lord John said. His appetite
was coming back; he’d finishe d his helping of fried mush,
though he pushed aside the salad of dandelion greens and
pokeweed.
I p lucke d a tender stalk of pokeweed from the bowl and
nibbled it myself, enjoying the sharp taste.
“He’ s th e head of a lar ge family; German Lutherans, as you
no d oubt gathered. They live a bout fifteen miles from here,
down in the river valley .”
“Y es?”
“Gerhard is big, and he’ s stubborn, as you no doubt
gathered. Speak s a few words of English, but not much. He’ s
old, but my God, he’ s strong!” I could still see the old man,
shoulders corde d with stringy muscle, tossing fifty-pound
sacks of flour into his wagon like so many sacks of feathers.
“This fight he had with Jamie—did he appear the sort to
hold a grudge?”
“He’ s ve ry definitely the sort to hold a grudge, but not about
that. It wasn’ t re ally a fight. It—” I shook my head, searchingfor a way to describe it. “Do you know anything about
mules?”
His fair brows lifted and he smiled.
“A bit, yes.”
“W ell, Gerhard Mueller is a m ule. He’ s not really bad-
tempered, and he isn’ t precisely  stupid—but he doesn’ t pay a
great de al of attention to anyth ing other than what’ s in his
head, an d it takes a good deal of force to switch his attention
to anything else.”
I had  no t been present at the alt ercation in the mill, but had
had it described to me by Ian. The old man had got it firmly
stuck into his head that Felic ia W oolam, one of the mill
owner ’ s three daughters, had giv en him short weight and owed
him another sack of flour .
In vain, Felicia protested that he had brought her five bags
of whea t; she had ground them, and filled four bags with the
resulting flour . The dif ference, she insisted, was due to the
chaf f and hulls removed from the grain. Five bags of wheat
equalled four bags of flour .
“Funf!”  Mu eller had s aid, waving his open hand in her
face. “Es gibt funf!”  H e would not be persuaded o therwise,
and bega n to curse volubly in G erman, glowering and backing
the girl into a corner .
Ian, having tried without succe ss to distract the old man’ s
attention, had dashed outside to fetch Jamie from his
conversation with Mr . W oolam. Both men had come hurriedly
inside, but had no more success than Ian in changing Mueller ’ s
conviction that he had been cheated.
Ignoring their exhortations, he had advanced on Felicia,
clearly i ntent on  taking by force  an extra bag of flour from the
stack behind her .
“At that  point, Jamie gave up try ing to reason with him, and
hit him,” I said.He had at first b een reluctant to do so, Mueller being nearly
seventy , but rapidly changed h is mind when his first blow
bounced of f Mueller ’ s jaw as though it had been made of
seasoned oakwood.
The old man h ad turned on him like a cornered boar ,
whereupon Jamie had struck him first in the stomach, and then
in the mouth as hard as possible , knocking Mueller down and
splitting his own knuckles on the old man’ s teeth.
W ith a word to  W oolam—who was a Quaker and thus
opposed to violence—he had then seized Mueller by the legs
and dragged the dazed farme r outside, where one of the
Mueller sons was waiting patien tly in the wagon. Hauling the
old man up by the collar , Jamie had pinned him against the
wagon and held him there, talking pleasantly in German, until
Mr . W oolam—having hastily rebagged the flour—came out
and loaded five  sac ks into the wagon, under the gimlet eye of
the old man.
Mueller had counted them twice, carefully , then turned to
Jamie, a nd said with dignity , “Danke, mein Herr .”  He had
then climbed into the wagon beside his bemused son, and
driven away .
Grey scratched at the remnants of his rash, smiling.
“I see. So he appeared to hold no ill will?”
I shook my head, chewing, then swallowed.
“Not at all. He w as kindness itself to me, when I went to the
farm to help with Petronella’ s baby .” My throat closed
suddenly on the renewed realization that they were gone, and I
choked on the bi tter taste of the dandelion leaves, bile rising in
my throat.
“Here.” Grey pushed the pot of  ale across the table toward
me.
I dra nk deeply , t he cool sourness soothing for a moment the
deeper bitterness of spirit. I set the pot down and sat for a
moment, eyes closed. There was a fresh-smelling breeze from
the wind ow , but the sun was warm on the tabletop under myhands. A ll the tiny joys of physical existence were still mine,
and I was the m ore acutely aware of them, for the knowledge
that they  had been so abruptly t aken from others—from those
who had barely tasted them.
“Thank you,” I said, opening my eyes.
Grey was watching me, with an expression of deep
sympathy .
“Y ou’d think it wouldn’ t be such a shock,” I said, needing
suddenly to try t o explain. “They die here so easily . The young
ones, esp ecially . It isn’ t as though I haven’ t seen it before. And
there’ s so seldom anything I can do.”
I fel t something warm on my c heek, and was surprised to
find it was a tear . He reached into his sleeve, pulled out a
handkerchief an d handed it to me. It wasn’ t especially clean,
but I didn’ t mind.
“I did sometime s wonder what he saw in you,” he said, his
tone deliberately light. “Jamie.”
“Oh, you did? How flattering.” I snif fed, and blew my nose.
“When he began to speak of you, both of us thought you
dead,” he pointed out. “And w hile you are undoubtedly a
handsome woman, it was never of your looks that he spoke.”
T o my surprise, he picked up my hand and held it lightly .
“Y ou have his courage,” he said.
That made me laugh, if only halfheartedly .
“If you only knew ,” I said.
He didn ’ t reply to that, but smiled faintly . His thumb ran
lightly o ver the knuckles of m y hand, his touch light and
warm.
“He doesn’ t hold back for fea r of skinned knuckles,” he
said. “Neither do you, I think.”
“I can’ t.” I took a deep breath and wiped my nose; the tears
had stopped. “I’m a doctor .”“So you  are,” he said quietly , and paused. “I have not
thanked you for my life.”
“It w asn’ t me. T here isn’ t really anything much I can do, for
something like a disease. All I can do is to…be there.”
“A little  more than that,” he said dryly , and released my
hand. “W ill you have more ale?”
I wa s beginning to see quite clearly what Jamie saw in John
Grey .
The afte rnoon passed quietly . Ian tossed and moaned, but by
late afternoon, the rash was fully developed, and his fever
seemed to drop a little. He w ouldn’ t be wanting food, but
perhaps I could induce him to  take a little milk broth. The
thought reminded me that it w as nearly milking time, and I
stood up, with a  murmured word to Lord John, and put aside
my mending.
I o pened the cab in door and step ped out, directly in front of
Gerhard Mueller , who was standing in the dooryard.
Mueller ’ s eyes were a reddish b rown, and seemed always to
be burning with an inner intensity . They burned more brightly
now , for  the bruised frailty of the flesh surrounding them. The
deep-set eyes fixed on me, an d he nodded, once, and then
again.
Mueller had shrunk since I had last seen him. All his flesh
had fallen away; still a huge m an, he was more bone than
muscle now , cadaverous and an cient. His eyes were fixed on
mine, the only spark of life in a face like crumpled paper .
“Herr M ueller ,” I said. My voic e sounded calm to my own
ears; I hoped it sounded the same to him. “W ie geht es Euch?”
The old man sto od swaying in front of me, as though the
evening breeze might knock him down. I didn’ t know if he
had lost  his mount, or left it down below the ridge, but there
was no sign of horse or mule.
He too k a step toward me , and I took one back,
involuntarily .“Frau Klara,” he said, and there was a note of pleading in
his voice.
I s topped, wanting to call out to  Lord John, but hesitant. He
wouldn’ t call me by my first name if he meant to do me harm.
“They a re dead,” he said. “Mein Madchen . Mein Kind.”
T ears w elled su ddenly in the b loodshot eyes, and ran slowly
down th e weather -beaten grooves of his face. The misery in
his eyes was so acute that I reached out and took his huge,
work-scarred old hand in mine.
“I know ,” I said. “I’m sorry .”
He n odded again, his old mout h working. He let me lead
him to the bench by the door , where he sat down quite
suddenly , as though all the strength had gone out of his legs.
The door opened, and John Grey came out. He had his pistol
in h is hand, but when I shook my head at him, he slid it at
once into his shi rt. The old man  had not let go of my hand; he
pulled, forcing me to sit down beside him.
“Gnadige Frau,”  he said, and suddenly turned and
embraced me, hugging me tight against his filthy coat. He
shook w ith soundless crying, and even knowing what he had
done, I put my own arms around him.
He smelled dreadful, sour and reeking with old age and
sorrow , with beer and sweat an d filth, and somewhere under
all t he other odo rs was the fetor of dried blood. I shuddered,
caught i n a web of pity , horror , and revulsion, but could not
pull away .
He let go, final ly , and seemed suddenly to see John Grey ,
who wa s hovering nearby , not sure whether to intervene or
not. The old man started at sight of him.
“Mein Gott!”  he exclaimed, in tones of ho rror . “Er hat
Masern!”  The sun was s inking fast, bathing the dooryard in
bloody l ight. It struck Grey ful l in the face, highlighting the
darkened spots on his face, flushing his skin with red.Mueller turned to me, and frantically seized my face
between his huge, horny paws. His thumbs scraped across my
cheeks, and an e xpression of relief came into his sunken eyes,
as he saw that my skin was still clear .
“Gott sei dank’,”  he said,  and letting go of my face, began
to rumm age in his coat, saying something in German so ur gent
and so mumbled that I could make out no more than the
occasional word.
“He says he was  afraid he would be too late, and is glad that
he w as not,” Gr ey said, seeing my bewilderment. He eyed the
old f armer with suspicious disli ke. “He says he’ s brought you
something—a charm of some kind. It will ward of f the curse,
and keep you safe from the illness.”
The old man wi thdrew an object wrapped in cloth from the
recesses of his coat, and laid it in my lap, still babbling in
German.
“He tha nks you for all your help to his family—he thinks
you are a fine woman, as dear to him as one of his daughters-
in-law—he says that…” Mue ller unfolded the cloth with
shaking hands, and the words died in Grey’ s throat.
I opened  my mouth, but made n o sound. I must have made
some involuntary movement, for the cloth slipped suddenly to
the ground, spilling out the sh eaf of white-streaked hair to
which a  small silver ornament still clung. W ith it was the
leather pouch, the woodpecker ’ s feathers draggled with blood.
Mueller was still speaking, and Grey was trying to, but I
was only  dimly aware of their words. Inside my ears echoed
the word s I had heard a year before, down by the stream, in
Gabrielle’ s soft voice, translating for Nayawenne.
Her name meant. “It may be; i t will happen.” Now it had,
and all that was  left me for consolation was her words: “She
says you must not be troubled; sickness is sent from the gods.
It won’ t be your fault.”2 9
C H A R N E L  H O U S E S
J amie sm elled the smoke long before the village came in
sight. W illie saw him stif fen, a nd tensed in his own saddle,
glancing warily around them.
“What?” the boy whispered. “What is it?”
“I dinna ken.” H e kept his own voice low , though there was
no evide nce that anyone was n ear enough to hear them. He
swung d own from his horse an d handed the reins to W illie,
nodding toward a vine-covered clif f face whose foot was
shrouded in brush.
“T ake th e horses behind the cli f f, lad,” he said. “There’ s a
deer pat h there,  that leads up to a spruce grove. Get well in
among t he trees, and wait ther e for me.” He hesitated, not
wanting to scare the boy , but there was no help for it.
“If I  sho uld not come back by da rk,” he said, “leave at once.
Dinna w ait for the morning; go back to the wee stream we just
crossed, turn to your left, and fo llow it to a place where there’ s
a wa terfall—you ’ll hear it, even in the dark. Behind the falls
there’ s a wee cave; the Indians use it when they’re hunting.”
A small  rim of white showed all the way around the lad’ s
blue irises. Jamie took a firm grip of the boy’ s leg, just above
the knee , to impress the directions upon him, and felt a quiver
run through the long muscle of the thigh.
“Stay th ere till the morning,” he said, “and if I havena
caught ye up by then—go home. Keep the sun on your left in
the morning, on your right afte r noon, and in two days give
your ho rse his head; you’ll be near enough home for him to
find the way , I think.”
He t ook a deep breath, wondering what else to say , but there
was nothing.
“God go  with ye, lad.” He gave W illie as reassuring a smile
as h e co uld mus ter , clapped the horse on the rump to start it,and turned toward the scent of burning.
It w asn’ t the nor mal smell of vi llage fires; not even of the big
ceremonial fires  that Ian had told him of, when they burned
whole trees in t he firepit in th e center of the village. Those
were th e size of Beltane fires , Ian said, and he knew the
crackle and size of such a blaze. This was much bigger .
W ith gre at cauti on he made a wide circle, at last coming to a
small hi ll from which he knew t hat he could gain a view of the
village. As soon as he emer g ed from the forest’ s shelter ,
though, he saw it. Rolling plum es of gray smoke were rising
from the smoldering remnants of every longhouse in the
village.
A th ick brownish pall of smoke  hung over the forest as far
as h e could see. He took a quic k breath, coughed, and hastily
drew a fold of his plaid across his nose and mouth, crossing
himself with his free hand. H e had smelled burning flesh
before, a nd a sudden cold sweat bathed him at the memory of
the funeral pyres of Culloden.
His soul  misgave him at the sight of the desolation below ,
but he searched  carefully , squinting through the eye-stinging
haze for any sign of life among the ruins. Nothing moved save
the wavering smoke, its wraith s gliding silent, wind-driven
through the blackened houses. Had it been the Cherokee or the
Creek, r aiding up from the so uth? Or one of the remnant
Algonkian tribes to the north, the Nanticokes or the T uteloes?
A gu st of wind smote him full in the face with the stink of
charred flesh. He bent and vomited, trying to rid himself of his
bone-deep know ledge of burnt crofts and murdered families.
As he straighte ned up, wiping his mouth on his sleeve, he
heard a dog bark in the distance.
He turne d and went quickly downhill toward the sound, his
heart be ating faster . Raiders would not bring dogs. If there
were survivors of the massacre, the dogs would be with them.
Still, he went as  silently as pos sible, not daring to call out.
That fire  had been burning for less than a day; half the wallswere still standing. Whoever had set it was still nearby ,
without a doubt.
It was a dog that met him; a big yellow mongrel, one that he
recognized as belonging to Ian’ s friend Onakara. Of f its
normal territory , the dog neither barked nor rushed him, but
stood its ground in the shadow of a pine tree, ears laid back
and growling softly . He walked toward it slowly , holding out
his closed fist.
“Balach math,”  he murmured to it. “Hold. Where are your
people, then?”
The dog  extended its muzzle, still growling, and snif fed at
the prof fered hand. Its nostrils twitched, and it relaxed a little,
nosing closer in recognition.
He f elt rather th an saw a human presence, and looked up
into the face of the dog’ s owne r . Onakara’ s face was painted,
with wh ite streaks that ran from  hair to chin, and behind the
pale bars of paint, his eyes were dead.
“What e nemy h as done this?” Jamie asked, in his halting
T uscaroran. “Does your uncle still live?”
Onakara didn’ t answer , but turned and went back into the
forest, followed by his dog. Jam ie came after them, and within
a half-hour ’ s walk emer ged int o a small clearing where the
survivors had made a temporary camp.
As he passed t hrough the camp, he saw faces he knew .
Some of them registered awareness of his presence; others
stared sightlessly into a distance he knew too well—the
infinite prospect of sorrow and despair . All too many were
missing.
He had seen thi s before, and th e ghosts of war and murder
dragged at his f ootsteps as he passed. He had seen a young
woman in the Highlands, sitting on the doorstep of her
smoking house with her husband’ s body at her feet; she had
worn the same stunned look as the young Indian woman by the
sycamore tree.Slowly , though, he became aware that something was
dif ferent here. W igwam shelters dotted the clearing; bundles
lay p iled near th e edges of the clearing, and horses and ponies
were tet hered among the trees. This was no hasty exodus of
people plundered and fleeing for their lives—it was an orderly
retreat, with most of their wor ldly goods neatly packed and
brought along. What in God’ s name had happened in Anna
Ooka this day?
Nacognaweto w as in a wigwam at the far side of the
clearing. Onakara lifted the flap and silently nodded Jamie in.
A sudde n spark leapt in the older man’ s eyes as he entered,
but then died at  once as Nacognaweto saw his face, with the
shadow of reflected grief on it.  The chieftain closed his eyes
for a moment, and reopened them, composed.
“Y ou have not m et with her who  heals, nor with the woman
whose longhouse I dwelt in?”
Used to the In dian notion that it was rude to speak a
person’ s name aloud save for the sake of ceremony , Jamie
knew he must re fer to Gabrielle and old Nayawenne. He shook
his head, knowing that that g esture must destroy the last
flicker of hope the other had held. It was no consolation, but
he took the flask of brandy fro m his belt, and of fered that in
mute apology for his failure to bring good news.
Nacognaweto a ccepted it, and with a tilt of his head,
summoned a woman, who dug about in one of the bundles by
the h ide wall and produced a gourd cup. The Indian poured a
quantity of spirit that would flatten a Scotsman, and drank
deeply before handing the gourd to Jamie.
He t ook a small  sip for the sake of politeness, and handed
back the gourd. It wasn’ t polite to come to the point of a visit
at once, but he had no time for palaver and he could see that
the other had no heart for it.
“What has happened?” he asked bluntly .
“Sickness,” Nac ognaweto answ ered softly . His eyes shone
wetly , watering from the fumes of brandy . “W e are cursed.”Haltingly , the story emer ged, between the swallows of
brandy . Measles had broken out in the village and swept
through it like fire. W ithin the  first week, a quarter of the
people l ay dead ; now , at the end, there were no more than a
quarter left alive.
When the sickness had begun, Nayawenne had sung over
the victims. When more fell sick, she had gone out into the
forest in search of…Jamie’ s grasp of T uscarora was not
suf ficient to interpret the words.  A charm, he thought it was—
some pla nt? Or perhaps she looked for a vision that would tell
them what to do , how to make amends for whatever evil had
brought the sickness on them, or the name of the enemy who
had cur sed them. Gabrielle and Berthe had gone with her ,
because she was old and should not go alone—and none of the
three had come back.
Nacognaweto w as swaying very slightly as he sat, the gourd
cup clasped in his hands. The woman bent over him, trying to
take it away , but he shrugged her aside, and she let him be.
They ha d searched for the wom en, but there was no sign.
Perhaps they had been taken by  raiders, perhaps they too had
fallen ill , and died in the forest. But the village had no shaman
to speak for them, and the gods had not listened.
“W e are cursed.”
Nacognaweto’ s words were slurred, and the cup tilted
dangerously in his hands. The woman knelt behind him and
put her hands on his shoulders, to steady him.
“W e left  the dead in the houses , and set fire to them,” she
said to Jamie. H er eyes were black with sadness, too, but some
life still lurked within them. “Now we will go north, to
Oglanethaka.” Her hands tightened on Nacognaweto’ s
shoulders, and she nodded to Jamie. “Y ou go now .”
He went, the grief of the place clinging to him like the
smoke that permeated clothes and hair . And within his charred
heart as  he left the camp sprang a small green shoot ofselfishness, relief that the grief was—for this time—not his
own. His woman still lived. His children were safe.
He looked up at the sky and saw the dull glow of the sinking
sun reflected in the pall of smoke. He lengthened his stride to a
hill-walker ’ s lope that ate the m iles. There was not much time;
night was coming fast.P A R T  E I G H T
B e a u c o u p3 0
I N T O  T H I N  A I R
Oxford, April 1971
N o,” h e said posi tively . Roger swung round to peer out the
window at the s oggy sky , holding the phone to his ear . “Not a
chance. I’m of f to Scotland next week, I’ve told you.”
“Oh, now , Rog,” coaxed the D ean’ s voice. “It’ s just your
sort of thing. And it wouldn’ t p ut you of f your schedule by a
lot; you could be in the Hieland s a-chasin’ the deer this time a
month—and you told me yourself your girrrl’ s not due till
July .”
Roger g ritted hi s teeth at the Dean’ s put-on Scots accent,
and opened his mouth to say n o again, but wasn’ t quite fast
enough.
“It’ s Americans, too, Rog,” she said. “Y ou’re so good  with
Americans. Speaking of girrls,” she added, with a brief
chortle.
“Now , look, Edwina,” he said, summoning patience, “I’ve
things to do th is holiday . And they don’ t include herding
American tourists round the museums in London.”
“No, no,” she assured him. “W e’ve paid minders to do the
touristy bits; all you’d need to be concerned with is the
conference itself.”
“Y es, but—”
“Money , Rog,” she purred down the phone, pulling out her
secret weapon. “It’ s Americans , I said. Y ou know what that
means.” She paused pregnantly , to allow him to contemplate
the fee for run ning a week-long conference for a gang of
visiting Americ an scholars whose of ficial minder had fallen
ill. By comparison to his normal salary , it was an astronomical
sum.
“Ah…” He could feel himself weakening.“I hear you’re th inking of getting married one of these days,
Rog. Buy an extra haggis for the wedding, wouldn’ t it?”
“Anyone ever tell you how su btle you are, Edwina?” he
demanded.
“Never .” She chortled again briefly , then snapped into
executive mode . “Right, then, s ee you Monday week for the
plans meeting,” and hung up.
He resisted the futile impulse to slam the receiver down, and
dropped it on the hook instead.
Maybe i t wasn’ t  a bad thing after all, he thought bleakly . He
didn’ t care about the money , in all truth, but having a
conference to run might keep h is mind of f things. He picked
up the much cr umpled letter that lay next to the phone, and
smoothed it out, his eye traveling over the paragraphs of
apology without really reading them.
So sorry , she’d said. Special  invitation to engineering
conference in Sri Lanka (Go d, did all Americans go to
conferences in the summer?) valuable contacts, job interviews
( job  inte rviews? Christ, he knew it, she was never coming
back!)—couldn’ t pass it up. Desperately sorry . See you in
September . I’ll write. Love.
“Y eah, right,” he said. “Love.”
He balle d up the sheet again an d threw it at the dresser . It
bounced of f the edge of the silv er picture frame and fell to the
carpet.
“Y ou could have told me straig ht,” he said aloud. “So you
did f ind someone else; you were  right then, weren’ t you? Y ou
were wi se, and me the fool. Bu t could you not be honest, ye
lying wee bitch?”
He w as trying t o work up a good rage; anything to fill the
emptiness in the pit of his stomach. It wasn’ t helping.
He t ook the pict ure in its silver frame, wanting to break it to
bits, wanting to clutch it to his h eart. In the end, he only stoodlooking at it for  a long time, then put it down gently , on its
face.
“So sorry ,” he said. “Y eah, so am I.”
May 1971
The boxes were waiting for him at the porter ’ s lodge when he
returned to college on the last da y of the conference, hot, tired,
and thor oughly fed up with Americans. There were five of
them, lar ge wooden crates plaste red with the bright stickers of
international shipping.
“What’ s this?” Roger juggled the clipboard the deliveryman
handed him, groping in his poc ket with the other hand for a
tip.
“W ell, I dunno, do I?” The man, truculent and sweating
from the trip through the courtyard to the porter ’ s lodge,
dropped the last crate on top of the others with a bang. “All
yours, mate.”
Roger gave the top box an expe rimental shove. If it wasn’ t
books, i t was lead. The push h ad shown him the edge of an
envelope taped securely to the b ox below , though. W ith some
dif ficulty , he pried it loose and ripped it open.
Y ou told me once that your father said that everyone needs a
history ,  th e note inside r ead. This is mine. W i ll you keep it with
yours?  There was neither salutation nor closing; only the
single letter “B,” written in bold angular strokes.
He stare d at it fo r a moment, then folded the note and put it
in his shirt pock et. Squatting carefully , he got hold of the top
crate an d lifted it in his arms. Christ, it must weigh sixty
pounds at least!
Sweating, Roger  dropped the crate on the floor of his sitting
room and went through to the tiny bedroom, where he
scrabbled throug h a drawer . Armed with a screwdriver and a
bottle of beer , h e came back to deal with the box. He tried to
damp down his rising feelings of excitement, but couldn’ t. W illyou keep it with yours?  D id a girl send half her belongings to a
bloke she meant to break of f with?
“History , eh?” he muttered. “Museum quality , by the way
you pac ked it.” The contents had been double-boxed, with a
layer of excelsior between, and  the inner box, once opened,
revealed a mysterious array o f lumpy , newspaper -wrapped
bundles and smaller boxes.
He picked up a sturdy shoe  box and peeked inside.
Photographs; old ones with scalloped edges, and newer ones,
glossy a nd colored. The edge of  a lar ge studio portrait showed,
and he pulled it out.
It w as Claire Randall, much as he had last seen her; amber
eyes wa rm and startling under a  tumble of brown-silk curls, a
slight smile on the lush, delicat e mouth. He shoved it back in
the box, feeling like a murderer .
What emer ged from the layers o f newsprint was a very aptly
named Raggedy  Ann doll, its painted face so faded that only
the shoe-button eyes remained, fixed in a blank and
challenging stare. Its dress was torn but had been carefully
mended, the soft cloth body stained but clean.
The next bundle yielded a tatter ed Mickey Mouse hat, with
a tiny pink foam-rubber bow still fixed between its perky ears.
A ch eap music b ox, that played “Over the Rainbow” when he
opened it. A stuf fed dog, synthe tic fur worn away in patches.
A faded  red sweatshirt, a man’ s size Medium. It might have fit
Brianna, but somehow Roger knew it had been Frank’ s. A
ragged dressing gown in quilted  maroon silk. On an impulse,
he press ed it to his nose. Claire. Her scent brought her vividly
to li fe, a  faint smell of musk and  green things, and he dropped
the garment, shaken.
Under the layer of trivia there was more substantial treasure.
The wei ght of the crate was cau sed mostly by three lar ge flat
chests at the bottom, each cont aining a silver dinner service,
carefully wrapped in gray antitarnishing cloth. Each chest had
a typewritten note tucked inside, giving the provenance and
history of the silver .A Fren ch silver -gilt service,  with rope-knot borders,
maker ’ s mark DG. Acquired by W illiam S. Randall, 1842. A
Geor ge III Old English pattern, acquired 1776 Edward K.
Randall, Esq. Husk Shell pattern, by Charles Boyton, acquired
1903 by Quentin Lambert Beauchamp, given as a wedding
present to Franklin Randall and Claire Beauchamp. The family
silver .
W ith a growing puzzlement, Roger went on, laying each
item carefully on the floor besid e him, the objects of vertu and
objects of use that comprise d Brianna Randall’ s history .
History . Jesus, why had she called it that?
Alarm pricked the puzzlement as another thought occurred
to him, and he grabbed the lid, checking the address label.
Oxford. Y es, she had  sen t them here. Why here, when she’d
known—or thought—that he meant to be in Scotland all
summer? He would have bee n, if not for the last-minute
conference—and he hadn’ t told her about that.
T ucked in the last corner was a jewelry box, a small but
substantial container . Inside wer e several rings, brooches, and
sets of earrings. The cairngorm  brooch he had given her for
her birthday was there. Necklaces and chains. T wo things
weren’ t.
The silver bracelet he had given her—and her
grandmother ’ s pearls.
“Jesus bloody Christ.” He loo ked again, just to be sure,
dumping out the glittering junk and spreading it on his
counterpane. N o pearls. Certainly no string of baroque
Scottish pearls, spaced with antique gold roundels.
She couldn’ t be wearing them, not to an engineering
conference in Sri Lanka. The p earls were an heirloom to her ,
not an ornament. She seldom wore them. They were her link
with—
“Y ou didn’ t,” he said aloud. “God, tell me you didn’ t do it!”
He d ropped the jewel box on th e bed, and thundered down
the stairs to the telephone room.It took forever t o get the intern ational operator on the line,
and a longer t ime yet of vague electronic poppings and
buzzings, before he heard the cl ick of connection, followed by
a fai nt ri nging. O ne ring, two, th en a click, and his heart leapt.
She was home!
“W e’r e sorry ,”  said a woman’ s pleasant, impersonal voice,
“that n umber has been disconnected, or is no longer in
service.”
God, she couldn’ t  have! Could she? Y es, she bloody could, the
reckless wee coof! Where in hell  was she?
He drummed his fingers restlessly against his thigh, fuming,
as the transatlantic phone line clicked and hummed, while
connections were made, while he dealt with the endless delays
and stupidities of hospital switchboards and secretaries. But at
last he heard a familiar voice in his ear , deep and resonant.
“Joseph Abernathy .”
“Dr . Abernathy?  This will be Roger W akefield here. Do you
know where Brianna is?” he demanded without preliminary .
The deep voice rose slightly in surprise.
“W ith you. Isn’ t she?”
A co ld chill was hed over Roger , and he gripped the receiver
harder , a s thoug h he could forc e it to give him the answer he
wanted.
“She is not,” he made himself say , as calmly as he could.
“She me ant to come in the fall,  after she took her degree and
went to some conference.”
“No. No, that’ s not right. She finished her coursework the
end of April—I took her to din ner to celebrate—and she said
she was going straight out to Scotland, without waiting for
commencement. W ait, let me think…yeah, that’ s right; my son
Lenny drove her to the airport …when? Y eah, T uesday…the
27th. Y o u mean to say she didn’ t get there?” Dr . Abernathy’ s
voice rose in agitation.“I don’ t  know whether she got  here or not.” Roger ’ s free
hand was clenched into a fist. “She didn’ t tell me she was
coming.” He forced himself to ta ke a deep breath. “Where was
she flying to—which city , do you know? London?
Edinbur gh?” She might  hav e meant to surprise him with a
sudden, unexpected arrival. He’d been surprised, all right, but
he doubted that was her intention.
V isions of kidnapping, assault, IRA bombings, drifted
through his mind. Almost anything might have happened to a
girl trav eling alo ne in a lar ge city—and almost anything that
could have happened would be preferable to what his gut was
telling him had  happened. Damn  the woman!
“Inverness,” Dr . Abernathy’ s voice was saying in his ear .
“Boston to Edinbur gh, then the train to Inverness.”
“Oh, Jesus.” It w as both a curse  and a prayer . If she had left
Boston on T uesday , she would likely have made Inverness
sometime on the Thursday . And Friday was the thirtieth day of
April—the eve of Beltane, the  ancient fire feast, when the
hilltops of old Scotland had blazed with the flames of
purification and  fertility . When—perhaps—the door to the
fairies’ hill of Craigh na Dun lay widest open.
Abernathy’ s voice quacked in his ear , ur gently demanding.
He forced his attention to focus on it.
“No,” he said, with some dif fi culty . “No, she didn’ t. I’m
still in Oxford. I had no idea.”
The empty air be tween them vibrated, the silence filled with
dread. H e had to ask. He took another breath—he seemed to
be ta king them o ne at a time, each one a conscious ef fort—and
changed his grip on the receiver , wiping his cramped and
sweaty palm on the leg of his trousers.
“Dr . Abernathy ,” he said carefully . “It’ s just possible that
Brianna’ s gone to her mother—to Claire. T ell me—do you
know where she is?”
The silence this time was char ged with wariness.“Ah…no.” Abe rnathy’ s voice came slowly , reluctant with
caution. “No, afraid I don’ t. Not exactly .”
Not exa ctly . Gre at way to put it. Roger rubbed a hand over
his face, feeling the stubble rasp under his palm.
“Let me ask you  this,” Roger said carefully . “Have you ever
heard the name Jamie Fraser?”
The line was utterly silent in his hand. Then there came a
deep sigh in his ear .
“Oh, Jesus Christ on a piece of  toast,” Dr . Abernathy said.
“She did it.”
W ouldn’ t you?
That was what Joe Abernathy had said to him, at the
conclusion of their lengthy conversation, and the question
lingered in his mind as he drove north, barely noticing the road
signs that whizzed past, blurred by the rain.
W ouldn’ t you?
“I would,” Abernathy had said . “If you didn’ t know your
dad, never had  known him—and all of a sudden, you found
out where he w as? W ouldn’ t you want to meet him, find out
what he was really like? I’d be kind of curious, myself.”
“Y ou don’ t understand,” Roger had said, rubbing a hand
across his forehead in frustration. “It’ s not like someone who’ s
adopted, finding  out her real father ’ s name and then just
popping up on his doorstep.”
“Seems to me that’ s just what it’ s like.” The deep voice was
cool. “Bree was  a dopted, right? I think she’d have gone
before, if she hadn’ t felt it was disloyal to Frank.”
Roger shook his head, disregarding the fact that Abernathy
couldn’ t see him.
“It’ s no t that—it’ s the popping-up-on-the-doorstep part.
That—the way through—how she went—look, did Claire tell
you—?”“Y eah, she did,” Abernathy broke in. His tone was
bemused. “Y eah , she did say it wasn’ t quite like walking
through a revolving door .”
“T o put it mildly .” The mere thought of the standing stone
circle on Craigh na Dun gave Roger a cold grue.
“T o put it mildly—you know  what it’ s like?” The far -of f
voice sharpened with interest.
“Y es, da mn it, I do!” He took a long, deep breath. “Sorry .
Look, it’ s not—I can’ t explain it, I don’ t think anyone could.
Those st ones…not everyone hea rs them, obviously . But Claire
did. Bree does, and—and I do. And for us…”
Claire h ad gone through the stones of Craigh na Dun on the
ancient fire feast of Samhain, o n the first day of November ,
two and  a half years before. Roger shivered, and not from
cold. The hairs stood up on the back of his neck whenever he
thought of it.
“So not everybody can go through—but you can.”
Abernathy’ s voice was filled  with curiosity—and what
sounded vaguely like envy .
“I don’ t know .” Roger rubbed a hand through his hair . His
eyes were burning, as though he’d sat up all night. “I might.”
“The th ing is…” He spoke slowly , trying to control his
voice, and with it, his fear . “The thing is—even if she has  gone
through, there’ s no way of telling whether , or where, she came
out again.”
“I se e.” The deep American vo ice had lost its jauntiness.
“And you don’ t know about Cl aire either , then. Whether she
made it?”
He s hook his head, his vision of Joe Abernathy so clear that
he for go t again that the man couldn’ t see him. Dr . Abernathy
was no more than average size, a thickset black man in gold-
rimmed spectac les, but with such an air of authority that his
simple p resence gave one confidence and compelled calm.
Roger w as surpr ised to find that  this presence transferred itself
over the phone lines—but he was more than grateful for it.“No,” he said a loud. Leave it at that, for now . He wasn’ t
about to  go into everything now , on the phone with a near
stranger . “She’ s a woman; there wasn’ t that much public
notice of what individual women were doing, then—not unless
they did something spectacular , like get burned for witchcraft,
or hanged for murder . Or be  murdered.”
“Ha ha,”  said Abernathy , but he wasn’ t laughing. “She did
make it, though, at least once. She went—and she came back.”
“A ye, sh e did.” Roger had bee n trying to take comfort in
that fact  himsel f, but there wer e too many other possibilities
forcing themselves upon his consciousness. “But we don’ t
know th at Brianna went back a s far—or farther . And even if
she did survive the stones and come out in the right time…
have you any idea how dangerous a place the eighteenth
century was? ”
“No,” Abernathy said dryly . “Though I gather you do. But
Claire seemed to manage all right there.”
“She su rvived,” Roger agreed. “Not much of a sell for a
vacation spot, is it, though—’If your luck’ s in, you’ll come
back alive?’ ” Once, at least.
Abernathy did laugh at that, though with a nervous
undertone. He coughed then, and cleared his throat.
“Y eah. W ell. Th e point is—Bree’ s gone someplace . And I
think yo u’re probably right about where. I mean, if it was me,
I’d have gone. W ouldn’ t you?”
W ouldn’ t you?  He pull ed to the left, passed a lorry with its
headlights on, plodding its way through the gathering fog.
I would . Abernathy’ s confident voice rang in his ear .
INVERNESS , 30, read the sign, and he swung the tiny Morris
abruptly to the r ight, skidding on wet pavement. The rain was
drumming down on the tarmac, hard enough to raise a mist
above the grass on the ver ge.
W ouldn’ t you?  He touched the breast pocket of his shirt,
where the squarish shape of Brianna’ s photo lay stif f over hisheart. H is fingers touched the small round hardness of his
mother ’ s locket, snatched at the last moment, brought along
for luck.
“Y eah, maybe I would,” he muttered, squinting through the
rain stre aming o ver the windscreen. “But I would have told
you I was going to do it. In the  name of God, woman—why
did you not tell me? ”3 1
R E T U R N  T O  I N V E R N E S S
T he fumes of furniture polish, floor wax, fresh paint, and air
freshener hung in throat-clutching clouds in the hallway . Not
even these olfactory evidences of Fiona’ s domestic zeal were
able to compete with the delectable aromas floating out of the
kitchen, though.
“Eat your heart out, T om W olfe,” Roger murmured, inhaling
deeply as he set down his bag in the hall. Granted, the old
manse was definitely under new management, but even its
transformation from manse to  bed-and-breakfast had been
unable to alter its basic character .
W elcomed with enthusiasm by Fiona—and somewhat less
by Ernie—he settled into his old room at the top of the stairs,
and embarked at once on his jo b of detection. It wasn’ t that
dif ficult; beyond the normal Highland inquisitiveness about
strangers, a six-feet-tall woman with waist-length red hair
tended to attract notice.
She’d come to Inverness from Edinbur gh. He knew that
much fo r a fact; she’d been seen at the station. Also for a fact
he k new that a tall red-haired woman had hired a car and told
the driver to take her out into the country . The driver had no
real noti on wher e they had gone ; just that all of a sudden, the
woman had said, “Here, this is the place, let me of f here.”
“Said she meant to meet her friends for a walking tour
across the moors,” the driver ha d said, shrugging. “She had a
haversack with her , and she was dressed for walking, sure
enough. A damn wet day for a walk on the moors, but ye know
what loons these American tourists are.”
W ell, he knew what kind of a loon that  one was, at least.
Curse her thick head and fiendis h stubbornness, if she thought
she had to do it, why in hell  hadn’ t she told him? Because she
didn’ t want you to know , spor t, he thought grimly . And he
didn’ t want to think about why not.So f ar he had gotten. And only one way of following her
any farther .
Claire had speculated that the whatever -it-was stood widest
open on  the ancient sun feasts  and fire feasts. It seemed to
work—she had herself gone through the first time on Beltane,
May 1, the seco nd time on Samhain, the first of November .
And now Brianna had evidently followed in her mother ’ s
footsteps, going on Beltane.
W ell, he wasn’ t going to wait till November—God only
knew w hat could happen to he r in five months! Beltane and
Samhain were fire feasts, though; there was a sunfeast
between.
Midsummer ’ s Eve, the summer solstice; that would be next.
June 20, four weeks away . He ground his teeth at the thought
of w aiting—his impulse was to  go now  and damn the danger
—but i t would n’ t help Brianna if his impulse to rush
chivalrously aft er her killed him. He was under no illusions
about th e nature of the stone circle, not after what he’d seen
and heard so far .
V ery quietly , he began to make what preparations he could.
And in the evenings, when the fog rolled in of f the river , he
sought distraction from his thoughts, playing draughts with
Fiona, g oing to the pub with Ernie, and—as a last resort—
having another bash at the doze ns of boxes that still crammed
the old garage.
The gara ge had an air of sinister miracle about it; the boxes
seemed to multiply like the loa ves and fishes—every time he
opened the door , there were more of them. He’d probably
finish the job o f sorting his late father ’ s ef fects just before
being carried out feetfirst himself, he thought. Still, for the
moment, the boring work was  a godsend, dulling his mind
enough to keep him from fret ting himself to pieces in the
waiting. Some nights, he even slept.
“Y ou’ve got a picture on your desk.” Fiona didn’ t look at him,
but kept her attention riveted on the dishes she was clearing.“Lots of them.” Roger took a cautious mouthful of tea; hot
and fresh, but not scalding. How did she do that? “Is there one
you wan t? I know there are a few snaps of your grannie—
you’re more than welcome, though I’d like one to keep.”
She did look up at that, mildly startled.
“Oh. Of  Grannie? A ye, our Da’ll like to see those. But it’ s
the big one I meant.”
“Big one?” Roger tried to thi nk which photo she could
mean; most of them were black-and-white snapshots taken
with the Reverend’ s ancient Bro wnie, but there were a couple
of the lar ger cab inet photos—on e of his parents, another of the
Reverend’ s grandmother , looking like a pterodactyl in black
bombazine, taken on the occasion of that lady’ s hundredth
birthday . Fiona couldn’ t possibly mean those.
“Of her that kilt her husband and went away .” Fiona’ s
mouth compressed.
“Her that—oh.”  Roger took a deep gulp of tea. “Y ou mean
Gillian Edgars.”
“Her ,” Fiona repeated stubbornly . “Why’ve you got a photo
of her?”
Roger se t the cup down and picked up the morning paper ,
af fecting casualness as he wondered what to say .
“Oh—someone gave it to me.”
“Who?”
Fiona was normally persistent, but seldom so direct. What
was troubling her?
“Mrs. Randall—Dr . Randall, I mean. Why?”
Fiona didn’ t reply , but pressed her lips tight shut.
Roger had by now abandoned all interest in the paper . He
laid it down carefully .
“Did you know her?” he said. “Gillian Edgars?”Fiona didn’ t answer directly , but turned aside, fiddling with
the tea cozy .
“Y ou’ve been up to the standin g stones on Craigh na Dun;
Joycie said her Albert saw ye comin’ down when he was
drivin’ to Drumnadrochit Thursday .”
“I have,  yes. No crime in that, i s there?” He tried to make a
joke of it, but Fiona wasn’ t having any .
“Y e know it’ s a queer place, all circles are. And don’ t be
tellin’ me ye went up there to admire the view .”
“I wouldn’ t tell you that.”
He sat back in his chair , looking up at her . Her curly dark
hair was standing on end; she rumpled her hands through it
when she was agitated, and agitated she surely was.
“Y ou do  know her . That’ s right; Claire said you’d met her .”
The small flicker of curiosity he had felt at the mention of
Gillian Edgars was growing into a clear flame of excitement.
“I canna  be knowing her , now ,  can I? She’ s dead.” Fiona
scooped up the empty egg cup , eyes fixed on the discarded
fragments of shell. “Isn’ t she?”
Roger reached out and stopped her with a hand on her arm.
“Is she?”
“It’ s wh at everyone thinks. The police havena found a trace
of her .”  The word came out “polis” in her soft Highland
accent.
“Perhaps they’re not looking in the right place.”
All the blood d rained out of h er flushed, fair face. Roger
tightened his grip, though she w asn’ t trying to pull away . She
knew , dammit, she knew! But what  did she know?
“T ell me, Fiona,” he said. “Please—tell me. What do you
know about Gillian Edgars—and the stones?”
She did  pull away from him then, but didn’ t leave, just
stood th ere, turn ing the egg cup  over and over in her hands, asif it wer e a miniature hour glass.  Roger stood up, and she shied
back, glancing fearfully up at him.
“A bar gain, then,” he said, trying to keep his voice calm, so
as n ot to  frighten  her further . “T ell me what you know , and I’ll
tell you why Dr . Randall gave m e that picture—and why I was
up on Craigh na Dun.”
“I’ve got to thi nk.” Swiftly she bent and snatched up the
tray of dirty crockery . She was  out the door before he could
speak a word to stop her .
Slowly h e sat down again. It had been a good breakfast—all
Fiona’ s meals were delicious—b ut it lay in his stomach like a
bag of marbles, heavy and indigestible.
He shou ldn’ t be so eager , he told himself. It was courting
disappointment. What could Fiona know , after all? Still, any
mention of the woman who had called herself Gillian—and
later Geillis—was enough to rivet his attention.
He picked up his neglected teacup and swallowed, not
tasting it. What if he kept the ba r gain, and told her everything?
Not only  about Claire Randall and Gillian, but about himself
—and Brianna.
The thou ght of Bree was like a rock dropped into the pool
of his heart, sending ripples of fear in all directions. She’ s
dead . Fiona had said of Gillian. Isn’ t she?
Is she?  he had a nswered, the picture of a woman vivid in his
mind, gr een eyes wide and fair hair flying in the hot wind of a
fire, poised to f lee through the doors of time. No, she hadn’ t
died.
Not then, at least, because Claire had met her—would meet
her? Earlier? Later? She hadn’ t  died, but was she dead? She
must be now , mustn’ t she, and yet—damn this twistiness! How
could he even think about it coherently?
T oo unsettled to stay in one pl ace, he got up and walked
down the hall. He paused in the doorway of the kitchen. Fiona
was stan ding at the sink, staring out of the window . She heardhim and  turned around, an unused dishcloth clutched in her
hand.
Her face was red, but determined.
“I’m no t to tell, but I will, I’v e got to.” She took a deep
breath and squared her chin, lo oking like a Pekingese facing
up to a lion.
“Bree’ s Mam— that nice Dr . Ra ndall—she asked me about
my grannie. She kent Grannie’d been a—a—dancer .”
“Dancer? What,  you mean in the stones?” Roger felt faintly
startled. Claire had told him, when he’d first met her , but he
had nev er quite believed it—not that the staid Mrs. Graham
performed arcane ceremonies on green hilltops in the May
dawn.
Fiona let out a long breath.
“So ye do know . I thought so.”
“No, I don’ t know . All I know is what Claire—Dr . Randall
—told me. She and her husband saw women dancing in the
stone ci rcle one Beltane dawn, and your grannie was one of
them.”
Fiona shook her head.
“Not just one o’ them, no. Grannie was the caller .”
Roger m oved in to the kitchen a nd took the dishcloth from
her unresisting hand.
“Come and sit down,” he said , leading her to the table.
“And tell me, what’ s a caller?”
“The one who c alls down the sun.” She sat, unresisting. She
had made up her mind, he saw; she was going to tell him.
“It’ s one  of the auld tongues, the sun-song; some of the
words are a bit like the Gaelic, b ut not all of it. First we dance,
in the circle, then the caller stops and faces the split stone, and
—it’ s no singing, really , but it’ s  no quite talking, either; more
like the  minister at kirk. Y ou’ve to begin at just the rightmoment, when the light first shows over the sea, so just as ye
finish, the sun comes through the stone.”
“Do you remember any of the words?” The scholar in Roger
stirred briefly , curiosity rearing its head through his confusion.
Fiona didn’ t much resemble her grandmother , but she gave
him a look that reminded him s uddenly of Mrs. Graham in its
directness.
“I know them all,” she said. “I’m the caller now .”
He reali zed that his mouth was hanging open, and closed it.
She reached for the biscuit tin and plunked it in front of him.
“That’ s no what ye need to kno w , though,” she said matter -
of-factly , “and so I won’ t tell ye.  Y ou want to know about Mrs.
Edgars.”
Fiona had met Gillian Edgars, all right; Gillian had been one
of th e dancers, though quite a  new one. Gillian had asked
questions of the older women, eager to learn all she could.
She’d wanted to learn the sun-s ong, too, but that was secret;
only the caller and her successor had that. Some of the older
women would know some of it—those who had heard the
chant every year for a long time —but not all of it, and not the
secrets o f when to begin and ho w to time the song to coincide
with the rising of the sun.
Fiona paused, looking down at her folded hands.
“It’ s wo men; only women. The men havena got a part in it,
and we do not tell them. Not ever .”
He laid a hand over hers.
“Y ou’re right to tell me, Fiona, ” he said, very softly . “T ell
me the rest, please. I’ve got to know .”
She drew  a deep, quivering bre ath and pulled her hand out
from under his. She looked direc tly at him. “D’ye know where
she’ s gone? Brianna?”
“I think so. She’ s gone where Gillian went, hasn’ t she?”Fiona d idn’ t re ply , but went on looking at him. The
unreality of the situation swept  over him all of a sudden. He
couldn’ t be sitting here, in the comfortable, shabby kitchen
he’d kno wn since boyhood, sipping tea from a mug with the
Queen’ s face painted on the side , discussing sacred stones and
time-flight with Fiona. Not Fiona,  for God’ s sake, whose
interests were confined to Ernie and the domestic economy of
her kitchen!
Or so he’d thought. He picked up the mug, drained it, and
set it down with a soft thump.
“I have to go after her , Fiona—if I can. Can I?”
She shook her head, clearly afraid.
“I canna say . It’ s  only women I know about; maybe it’ s only
women who can.”
Roger ’ s hand clenched round the saltshaker . That’ s what he
was afraid of—or one of the things he was afraid of.
“Only one way to find out, isn’ t there?” he said, outwardly
casual. In the back of his mind, unbidden, a tall cleft stone rose
up black, stark as a threat against a soft dawn sky .
“I have her wee book,” Fiona blurted.
“What—whose? Gillian’ s? She wrote something?”
“A ye, sh e did. There’ s a place—” She darted a look at him,
and licked her lips. “W e ke ep our things there, ready
beforehand. She’d put the book there, and—and—I took it,
after .” After Gillian’ s husband h ad been found murdered in the
circle, Roger thought she meant.
“I kent the polis  should maybe h ave it,” Fiona went on, “but
it—well, I didna like to give it t o them, and yet I was thinkin’
what if it’ s to do  with the killing? And I couldna keep it back
if it was to be im portant, and yet—” She looked up at Roger in
a plea for unde rstanding. “It was her own book, ye see, her
writing. And if she’d left it in that place…”
“It was secret.” Roger nodded.Fiona nodded, and drew a deep breath.
“So I read it.”
“And th at’ s how  you know wh ere she’ s gone,” Roger said
softly .
Fiona let out a shuddering sigh and gave him a wan smile.
“W ell, the book’ s no going to help the polis, that’ s for sure.”
“Could it help me?”
“I hope so,” she  said simply , an d turning to the sideboard,
pulled open a d rawer and withdrew a small book, bound in
green cloth.3 2
G R I M O I R E
T his i s th e grimoi r e of the witch, Geillis. It is a witch’ s name,
and I take it for my own; what I was born does not matter , only
what I will make of myself, only what I will become.
And what is that? I cannot yet say , for only in the making
will I find what I have made. Mine is the path of power .
Absolute power corrupts absolutely , yes—and how? Why , in
the assumption that power can be absolute, for it never can.
For we ar e mortal, you and I. W atch the flesh shrink and
wither on your bones, feel the lines of your skull, pushing
thr ough the skin, your teeth behind soft lips a grin of grim
acknowledgment.
And yet within the bounds of flesh, many things ar e possible.
Whether such things ar e possible beyond those bounds—that is
the r ealm of others, not mine. And that is the differ ence
between them and me, those others who have gone befor e to
explor e the Black Realm, those who seek power in magic and
the summoning of demons.
I go in the body , not the soul. And by denying my soul, I give
no power to any for ce but those I contr ol. I do not seek favor
fr om devil or god; I deny them. For if ther e is no soul, no
death to contemplate, then neither god nor devil rules—their
battle is of no consequence, to one who lives in the flesh alone.
W e rule for a moment, and yet for all time. A fragile web
woven to snar e both earth and space. Only one life is given to
us—and yet its years may be spent in many times—how many
times?
If you will wield power , you must choose both your time and
your place, for only when the shadow of the stone falls at your
feet is the door of destiny truly open.
“A nutcase for sure,” Roger m urmured. “Horrible prose
style, too.” The kitchen was em pty; he was talking to reassurehimself. It wasn’ t helping.
He turne d the pages carefully , skimming down the lines of
clear , round writing.
After the first bi t, there was a section titled “Sun Feasts and
Fire Feasts,” with a listing after—Imbolc, Alban Eilir , Beltane,
Litha, L ughnassadh, Alban Elfe d, Samhain, Alban Arthuan—
with a paragraph  of notes follow ing each name, and a series of
small crosses inscribed alongside. What the hell was that for?
Samhain  caught his eye, with six crosses by it.
This is the first of the feasts of the dead. Long befor e Christ
and his Resurr ection, on the night of Samhain, the souls of
her oes r ose fr om their graves. They ar e rar e, these her oes.
Who is born when the stars ar e right? Not all who ar e born to
it have the courage to take hold of the power that is their right.
Even in what w as plainly raving madness, she had method
and or ga nization—a queer admixture of cool observation and
poetic fl ight. The center section of the book was labeled “Case
Studies,” and if the first section had raised the hair on Roger ’ s
neck, the second was enough to freeze the blood in his veins.
It w as a careful listing, by date and by place, of bodies
found in the vic inity of stone circles. The appearance of each
was not ed, and below each des cription were a few words of
speculation.
August 14, 1931. Sur -le-Meine, Brittany . Body of a male,
unidentified. Age, mid-40s. Found near north end of standing
stone cir cle. No evident cause of death, but deep burns on
arms and legs. Clothing described only as “rags.” No
photograph.
Possible cause of failur e: (1) male, (2) wr ong date—23 days
fr om near est sun feast.
April 2, 1650. Castlerigg, Scotland. Body of female,
unidentified. Age, about 15. Found outside cir cle. Substantial
mutilation noted, may have been dragged fr om cir cle by
wolves. Clothing not described.Possible cause of failur e: (1) wr ong date—28 days prior to
fir e feast. (2) lack of pr eparation.
February 5, 1953. Callanish, Isle of Lewis. Body of male
identified as John MacLeod, lobsterman, age 26. Cause of
death diagnosed as massive cer ebral hemorr hage, cor oner ’ s
inquest held owing to appearance of body—second-degr ee
burns on skin of face and extr emities, and scor ched look of
clothing. Cor oner ’ s ver dict, death by lightning—possible, but
not likely . Possible cause of failur e: (1) male. (2) very close to
Imbolc, but per haps not close enough? (3) impr oper
pr eparation—N.B. newspaper photograph shows victim, shirt
open; ther e is a burnt spot on the chest which appears to be in
shape of Bridhe’ s Cr oss, but too indistinct to say for sur e.
May 1, 1963. T omnahurich, Scotland. Body of female,
identified as Mary W alker W illis. Cor oner ’ s inquest,
substantial scor ching of body and clothing, death due to heart
failur e—ruptur e of aorta. Inquest notes Miss W alker dr essed in
“odd” clothing, details unspecified.
Failur e—this one knew what she was doing, but didn’ t make
it. Failur e likely due to omission of pr oper sacrifice.
The list went on  chilling Roger more with each name. She
had found twenty-two, altogether , reported over a period from
the mid-1600s to the mid-1900s, from sites scattered over
Scotland, northern England, and Brittany , all sites showing
some evidence of prehistoric building. Some had been obvious
accidents, he thought—people who’d walked into a circle all
unsuspecting and had no notion what had hit them.
A few—only two or three—seemed to have known; they’d
made some preparation of clothing. Perhaps they had passed
through before, and tried again—but this time it hadn’ t
worked. His stomach curled into a small, cold snail. Claire had
been right; it wasn’ t like stepping through a revolving door .
Then there were the disappearances…these were in a separate
section, neatly docketed by dat e, sex, and age, with as much
noted of  the circumstances as was recorded. Ah—that was themeaning of the crosses; how many people had disappeared
near each feast. There were mo re of the disappeared than of
the dead, but t here was of necessity less data. Most bore
question marks—Roger supposed because there was no telling
whether disappearance in the vicinity of a circle was
necessarily connected with it.
He t urned over a page, and stop ped, feeling as though he’d
been punched in the stomach.
May 1, 1945. Craigh na Dun, Inverness-shir e, Scotland.
Clair e Randall, age 27, housewife. Seen last in early morning,
having declar ed intention to visit the cir cle in sear ch of
unusual plant specimens, did not r eturn by dark. Car found
parked at foot of hill. No traces in cir cle, no signs of foul play .
He t urned the pa ge gingerly , as though expecting it to blow
up in his hand . So Claire had inadvertently given Gillian
Edgars part of the evidence that had led to her own
experiment. Had Geilie found the reports of Claire’ s return,
three years later?
No, evidently not, he concluded, after flipping back and
forth through those pages—or if she had, she hadn’ t recorded
it here.
Fiona had brought him more tea  and a plate of fresh ginger
nut biscuits, which had sat un touched since he had begun
reading. A sense of obligation rather than hunger made him
pick up a biscuit  and take a bite, but the sharp-flavored crumbs
caught in his throat and made him cough.
The last section of the book bo re the heading “T echniques
and Preparations.” It began,
Something lies her e, older than man, and the stones keep its
power . The old spells speak of “the lines of the earth,” and the
power that flows thr ough them. The purpose of the stones is to
do with those lines, I am sur e. But do the stones warp the lines
of power , or ar e they only markers?
The bite of bisc uit seemed permanently stuck in his throat,
no matte r how much tea he drank. He found himself readingfaster , sk imming, skipping page s, and finally sat back and shut
the b ook. He w ould read the rest later—and more than once.
But for now , he had to get out, into the fresh air . No wonder
the book had upset Fiona.
He walked fast down the str eet, heading for the river ,
oblivious of the light rain fall ing. It was late; there was a
churchbell ringing for evensong, and the evening foot traf fic to
the p ubs was pic king up across the bridges. But above bell and
voice and footstep, he heard the last words he had read,
chiming in his e ar as though she  had been speaking directly to
him.
Shall I kiss you, child, shall I kiss you, man? Feel the teeth
behind my lips when I do. I could kill you, as easily as I
embrace you. The taste of power is the taste of blood—ir on in
my mouth, ir on in my hand.
Sacrifice is r equir ed.3 3
M I D S U M M E R ’ S  E V E
June 20, 1971
O n Midsu mmer ’ s Eve in Scotland, the sun hangs in the sky
with the moon. Summer solstice, the feast of Litha, Alban
Eilir . Nearly midnight, and the l ight was dim and milky white,
but light nonetheless.
He coul d feel the stones long before he saw them. Claire
and Geillis had both been right,  he thought; the date mattered.
They had been eerie on his ear lier visits, but silent. Now he
could he ar them; not with his ears but with his skin—a low
buzzing hum like the drone of bagpipes.
They ca me over  the crest of the hill and paused, thirty feet
from the circle. Below was dark glen, a mystery under the
rising moon. He heard a small intake of breath at his elbow ,
and it occurred to him that Fiona was seriously afraid.
“Look, you don’ t need to be here,” he told her . “If you’re
afraid, you should go on down; I’ll be all right.”
“It’ s not me I’m scairt for , fool,” she muttered, thrusting her
balled fi sts deep er into her pock ets. She turned away , lowering
her head like a little bull as she  faced up the path. “Come on,
then.”
The alde r bushes rustled near his shoulder and he shivered
suddenly , feeling a cold qualm g o over him, warmly as he was
dressed. His dress seemed su ddenly ridiculous; the long-
skirted coat and the weskit i n thick wool, the matching
breeches and knitted stockings.  A play at the college, he had
told the tailor who made the costume.
“Fool is right,” he muttered to himself.
Fiona went first into the circle; she would not let him come
with her or watc h. Obediently , he turned his back, letting her
do w hatever she intended. She  had a plastic shopping bag,
presumably containing items for her ceremonial. He had askedwhat wa s in it, and she had ters ely told him to mind his own
business. She was nearly as nervous as he was, he thought.
The hum ming noise disturbed him. It wasn’ t in his ears but
in his body—un der his skin, in  his bones. It made the long
bones of his arms and legs thrum like plucked strings, and
itched in his blood, making hi m want constantly to scratch.
Fiona co uldn’ t hear it; he’d asked, to be sure she was safe
before letting her help him.
He h oped to God he was right; that only those who heard
the stones could pass through them. He’d never for give
himself if anything happened to Fiona—though as she’d
pointed out, she’d been in this circle any number of times on
the f ire feasts, w ith no ill ef fec t. He sneaked a look over one
shoulder , saw a tiny flame burning at the base of the big cleft
stone, and jerked his head back around.
She was singing, in a soft, high voice. He couldn’ t make out
the words. All the other travel ers he knew of were women;
would it truly work for him?
It m ight, he thought. If the ability to pass through the stones
was genetic—something like the ability to roll one’ s tongue
into a cylinder or color -blindness—then why not? Claire had
traveled, so had Brianna. Brianna was Claire’ s daughter . And
he w as a descen dant of the only other time-traveler he knew of
—Geillis the witch.
He stamped both feet and shook himself like a horse with
flies, trying to r id himself of th e humming. God, it was like
being ea ten by ants! W as Fiona’ s chanting making it worse, or
was it only his imagination?
He r ubbed violently at his chest,  trying to ease the irritation,
and felt the sma ll round weight of his mother ’ s locket, taken
for luck  and for its garnets. He had his doubts about Geillis’ s
speculations—he wasn’ t about to try blood, though Fiona
seemed to be supplying fire—but after all, the gems could do
no harm , and if they helped…Christ, would Fiona not hurry?
He t wisted and strained inside h is clothes, trying to get out of
not only his clothing but his skin.Seeking distraction, he patted his breast pocket again,
feeling the locket. If it worked… if he could…it was a notion
that had  come to him only lately , as the possibility posed by
the stones had matured into ac tual planning. But if it wer e
possible…he fingered the small, round shape, seeing the face
of Jerry MacKenzie on the dark surface of his mind.
Brianna had gone to find her father . Could he do the same?
Jesus, F iona! Sh e was  making it worse; the roots of his teeth
ached, a nd his skin was burning . He shook his head violently ,
then sto pped, feeling dizzy; the seams of his skull felt as
though they were beginning to separate.
Then sh e was there, a small figure grasping his hand, saying
something anxio us as she led him into the circle. He couldn’ t
hear her—the noise was much worse inside; now it was in his
ears, in his head , blackening his sight, driving wedges of pain
between the joints of his spine.
Gritting his teeth, he blinked back the buzzing darkness,
long enough to fix his eyes on Fiona’ s round and fearful face.
Swiftly he bent and kissed her , full on the mouth.
“Don’ t tell Ernie,” he said. He  turned away from her and
walked through the stone.
A faint scent came to him on the summer wind; the smell of
burning. He turned his head, no strils flared to catch it. There.
A flame  flared and bloomed on a nearby hilltop, a rose of
Midsummer ’ s fire.
There were faint stars overhead,  half shadowed by a drifting
cloud. H e had no ur ge to move,  nor to think. He felt bodiless,
embraced by the sky , his mind  turning free, reflecting starlit
images like the glass bubble of a fisher ’ s float, adrift in the
surf. There was a soft and musi cal hum around him—the far -
of f song of siren stars, and the smell of cof fee.
A v ague feeling of wrongness intruded on his sense of
peace. Sensation prodded at his mind, rousing tiny , painful
sparks o f confusion. He fought back feeling, wanting only tostay aflo at in starlight, but the act of resistance woke him. All
of a sudden, he had a body again, and it hurt.
“ROGER!” The star ’ s voice blared in his ear , and he jerked.
Searing pain shot through his ch est, and he clapped a hand to
the w ound. Something seized hi s wrist and pulled it away , but
not before he ha d felt wetness, and the silky roughness of ash
on his breast. W as he bleeding?
“Oh, ye’re wakin’, thank God! A ye, there, that’ s a good lad.
Easy , ay e?” It was the cloud tal king, not the star . He blinked,
confused, and the cloud resolved  itself into the curly silhouette
of F iona’ s head, dark against th e sky . He jerked upright, more
a convulsion than a conscious movement.
His bod y had come back with a vengeance. He felt
desperately ill, and there was a  horrible smell of cof fee and
burnt fle sh in his nostrils. He rolled onto all fours, retching,
then col lapsed o nto the grass. It  was wet, and the coolness felt
good on his scorched face.
Fiona’ s hands were on him, soothing, wiping his face and
mouth.
“Are ye all right?” she said, for what he knew must be the
hundredth time. This time, he summoned enough strength to
answer .
“A ye,” he whispered. “All right. Why—?”
Her head moved back and fort h, wiping out half a sky of
stars.
“I do n’ t know . Y e went—ye were gone—and then there was
a bu rst o ’ fire, and ye were lyin’ in the circle, wi’ your coat
ablaze. I had to put ye out with the thermos bottle.”
That accounted for the cof fee, then, and the soggy feeling
over his  chest. He lifted a hand,  groping, and this time she let
him. There was a burnt patch on the wet cloth of his coat,
maybe three inches across. The  flesh of his chest was seared;
he could feel the queer cushioned numbness of blisters through
the hole  in the cloth, and the nagging pain of a burn spread
through his breast. His mother ’ s locket was gone entirely .“What happened, Rog?” Fiona was crouching by him, her
face dim  but visible; he could s ee the shiny tracks of tears on
her face . What he had thought a Midsummer ’ s Eve fire was
the f lame of her candle, burned down now to the last half inch.
God, how long had he been out?
“I—” H e had begun to say that he didn’ t know , but broke
of f. “Let me think a bit, aye?” He put his head on his knees,
breathing in the smell of wet grass and scorched cloth.
He c oncentrated  on breathing, let it come back. He had no
real need to thin k—it was all th ere, distinct in his mind. But
how did  one describe such things? There was no sight—and
yet he had the i mage of his father . No sound, no touch—and
yet h e h ad both  heard and felt. The body seemed to make its
own sense of things, translating the numinous phenomena of
time into concretions.
He raised his head from his knees, and breathed deep,
settling himself slowly back in his body .
“I w as thinking of my father ,”  he said. “When I stepped
through the rock, I had just th ought, if it works, could I go
back and find him? And I…did.”
“Y ou did ? Y our dad? W as he a ghost, d’ye mean?” He felt,
more than saw , the flicker of her hand as she made the horns
against evil.
“No. No t exactly . I—I can’ t exp lain, Fiona. But I met him; I
knew hi m.” The  feeling of peace  had not left him altogether; it
hovered there, fluttering gently in the back of his mind. “Then
there wa s—sort of an explosion, is all I can describe it as.
Something hit me, here.” His fingers touched the burnt place
on h is c hest. “T he force of it pushed me…out, and that’ s all I
knew till I woke .” He touched her face gently . “Thanks, Fee;
you saved me burning.”
“Och, get on wi’ ye.” She made an impatient gesture,
dismissing him. She sat back on her heels, rubbing her chin as
she thought.“I’m thi nking, R og—what it said in her book, about there
maybe being some protection, i f ye had a gemstone with ye.
There were the wee jewels in your Mam’ s locket, no?” He
could hear her swallow . “Maybe—if ye hadn’ t had that—ye
might no t have lived. She told a bout the folk who didn’ t. They
were burned—and your burn’ s where the locket was.”
“Y es. It could b e.” Roger was beginning to feel more like
himself. He glanced curiously at Fiona.
“Y ou always say ‘her .’ Why do you never say her name?”
Fiona’ s c urls lift ed in the dawn wind as she turned to look at
him. It was light enough now t o see her face clearly , with its
expression of disconcerting directness.
“Y e dinna call s omething unless ye want it to come,” she
said. “Surely ye know that, and your father a minister?”
The hair s on his forearms prickled, despite the covering of
shirt and coat.
“Now that you mention it,” he said, trying for a joking tone,
and failing utterly . “I wasn’ t qu ite calling my father ’ s name,
but perhaps…Dr . Randall said she thought of her husband,
when she came back.”
Fiona nodded, frowning. He could see her face clearly , and
realized with a start that the li ght was growing. It was near
dawn; the sky to the east was the shimmered color of a
salmon’ s scales.
“Christ, it’ s almost morning! I’ve got to go!”
“Go?” Fiona’ s eyes went round with horror . “Y ou’re no
going to try it again?”
“I am. I’ve got t o.” The lining of his mouth was cotton-dry ,
and he regretted that Fiona had used all the cof fee
extinguishing hi m. He fought down the hollow-bellied feeling
and mad e it to h is feet. His kne es were wobbly , but he could
walk.
“Are you mad, Rog? It’ll kill ye, sure!”He shook his head, eyes fixed on the tall cleft stone.
“No,” he  said, and hoped to hel l he was right. “No, I know
what went wrong. It won’ t happen again.”
“Y ou can’ t know , not for sure!”
“A ye, I do.” He took her hand from his sleeve and held it
between his own; it was small and cold. He smiled at her ,
though h is face felt strangely nu mb. “I hope Ernie’ s not come
home; h e’ll have the police look ing for you. Y ou’d best hurry
back.”
She shrugged, impatient.
“Och, h e’ s at the fishin’ with his cousin Neil; he’ll no be
back till T uesday . What d’ye m ean, it won’ t happen again—
why won’ t it?”
This was  the thing that was hard er to explain than the rest of
it. He owed it to her to try , though.
“When I  said I w as thinking of my father , I was thinking of
him from  what I knew of him—the pictures of him in his
airman’ s kit, or with my mother . The thing is…I was born by
that time. Do you see?” He searched her small, round face, and
saw her blink sl owly , comprehending. Her breath left her in a
small sigh, of fear and wonder mingled.
“Y e did na only meet your Da , then, did ye?” she asked
quietly .
He shook his he ad, wordless. No sight, no sound or smell or
touch. There were no images at all to convey what it had been
like to meet himself.
“I have to go,” he repeated softly . He squeezed her hand.
“Fiona, I cannot say enough to thank you.”
She stared at hi m for a momen t, her soft bottom lip thrust
out, eye s glistening. Then she pulled loose, and twisting of f
her engagement ring, put it into his hand.
“It’ s a wee ston e, but it’ s a real diamond,” she said. “It’ll
maybe help.”“I can’ t take this !” He reached to  give it back, but she took a
step backward, and put her hands behind her back.
“Dinna worry , it’ s insured,” she said. “Ernie’ s a great one
for t he insurance.” She tried to smile at him, though the tears
were running down her face now . “So am I.”
There was nothing more to say . He put the ring in the side
pocket of his c oat, and glanced at the great cleft stone, its
black sides starting to glimmer as bits of mica and threads of
quartz picked up the dawning light. He could hear the hum,
still, though now it felt more like the pulsing of his blood;
something inside him.
No w ords, and n o need. He touched her face once lightly in
farewell, and walked toward the stone, staggering slightly . He
stepped into the cleft.
Fiona he ard nothing, but the still, clear air of Midsummer ’ s
Day shimmered with an echoed name.
She wai ted for a long time, until the sun rested on top of the
stone.
“Slan leat, a charaid choir ,”  s he  said , softly .  “Luck to you,
dear friend.” She went slowly d own the hill, and didn’ t look
back.3 4
L A L L Y B R O C H
Scotland, June 1769
T he so rrel horse’ s name was Brut us, but luckily it didn’ t seem
indicative of character so far . More plodder than plotter , he
was strong and faithful—or if not faithful, at least resigned. He
had carried her through the summer -green glens and rock-lined
gor ges w ithout a slip, taking he r higher and higher along the
good roads made by the Engl ish general W ade fifty years
before, and the bad roads beyond the General’ s reach,
splashing through brushy burns and climbing up to the places
where the roads dwindled away to nothing more than a red
deer ’ s track across the moor .
Brianna let the reins lie on Brutus’ s neck, letting him rest
after the last cl imb, and sat still, surveying the small valley
below . The big white-harled farmhouse sat serenely in the
middle o f pale green fields of oa ts and barley , its windows and
chimneys edged in gray stone, the walled kailyard and the
numerous outbuildings clustering around it like chicks round a
big white hen.
She had  never seen it before, but she was sure. She had
heard her mother ’ s descriptions of Lallybroch often enough.
And bes ides, it was the only substantial house for miles; she
had seen  nothing  else in the last three days but the tiny stone-
walled crofters’  cottages, many deserted and tumbled down,
some no more than fire-black ruins.
Smoke was rising from a chimney below; someone was
home. It was nearly midday; perhaps everyone was inside,
eating dinner .
She swallowed , dry-mouthed with excitement and
apprehension. Who would it be? Whom would she see first?
Ian? Jen ny? And how would the y take her appearance, and her
declaration?She had decided simply to tell the truth, as far as who she
was, and  what she was doing th ere. Her mother had said how
much she looked like her father; she would have to count on
that resemblance to convince them. The Highlanders she had
met so far were wary of her look s and strange speech; perhaps
the Murrays wouldn’ t believe her . Then she remembered and
touched the pocket of her coat; n o, they’d believe her; she had
proof, after all.
A sudden thought hollowed her breastbone. Could they
possibly be here now? Jamie Fraser and her mother? The
thought hadn’ t occurred to h er before. She had been so
convinced that they were in  America—but that wasn’ t
necessarily so. She only knew they would  be in America in
1776; there was no telling where they were right now .
Brutus flung up his head and whinnied loudly . An
answering neigh came from behind them, and Brianna drew up
the rein s as Brutus swung aro und. He lifted his head and
nickered, nostrils flaring with interest as a handsome bay horse
came round the bend of the road, carrying a tall man in brown.
The man pulled up his horse f or a moment when he saw
them, th en twitc hed a heel again st the bay’ s side and came on,
slowly . He was young, she saw ,  and deeply tanned despite his
hat; he must spend a good deal of time outdoors. The skirt of
his c oat was rum pled and his stockings were covered with dust
and foxtails.
He came up to  her warily , nodding as he came within
speaking distanc e. Then she sa w him stif fen in surprise, and
smiled to herself.
He had just noticed that she was a woman. The men’ s
clothes she wore would fool no one up close; “boyish” was the
last word one w ould use to describe her figure. They served
their purpose well enough, thoug h—they were comfortable for
riding a nd, given her height, made her look like a man on
horseback at a distance.
The man swept of f his hat and bowed to her , surprise plain
on his face. H e wasn’ t strictly good-looking, but had apleasant, strong sort of face, with feathery brows—presently
raised high—an d soft brown eyes under a thick cap of curly
hair , black and glossy with good health.
“Madame,” he said. “Might I assist ye?”
She took of f her own hat and smiled at him.
“I hope so,” she said. “Is this place Lallybroch?”
He nodd ed, wariness now added to his surprise as he heard
her odd accent.
“It is, so. W ill ye be having some business here?”
“Y es,” she said firmly . “I will.” She drew herself up straight
in th e saddle and  took a deep breath. “I’m Brianna…Fraser .” It
felt odd to say it aloud; she had never used the name before. It
seemed strangely right, though.
The wariness on his face diminished, but the puzzlement
didn’ t. He nodded cautiously .
“Y our servant, ma’am. Jamie Fraser Murray ,” he added
formally , bowing, “of Broch T uarach.”
“Y oung Jamie!”  she exclaimed, startling him with her
eagerness. “Y ou’re Y oung Jamie!”
“My fam ily calls me so,” he said stif fly , managing to give
her the impression that he obje cted to having the name used
wantonly by strange women in unsuitable clothes.
“Pleased to meet you,” she said, undaunted. She extended a
hand to him, leaning from her saddle. “I’m your cousin.”
The brows, which had come down during the introductions,
popped back up. He looked at her extended hand, then,
incredulously , at her face.
“Jamie Fraser is my father ,” she said.
His jaw dropped, and he sim ply goggled at her for a
moment. He looked her over minutely , head to toe, peered
closely a t her face, and then a wide, slow smile spread across
his own.“Damned if he isn’ t!” he said . He seized her hand and
squeezed it tight enough to grind the bones together . “Christ,
you’ve the look of him!”
He laughed, humor transforming his face.
“Jesus!” he said. “My mother will have kittens!”
The grea t rose brier that overhung the door was newly in leaf,
hundreds of tiny green buds just  forming. Brianna looked up at
it as  she followed Y oung Jamie , and caught sight of the lintel
over the door .
Fraser , 1716  was carved into the weathered wood. She felt a
small th rill at the sight, and stood staring up at the name for a
moment, the sunwarm wood of the jamb solid under her hand.
“All right, Cousin?” Y oung Jam ie had turned to look back at
her inquiringly .
“Fine.” She hurried into the house after him, automatically
ducking her head, though there was no need.
“W e’re mostly tall, save my Mam and wee Kitty ,” Y oung
Jamie said with a smile, seeing her duck. “My grandsire—your
grandsire, too—built this house for his wife, who was a verra
tall wom an herself. It’ s the only  house in the Highlands where
ye c an go throug h a doorway without ducking or bashing your
head, I expect.”
… Y our grandsir e, too . Th e casual w ords made her feel
suddenly warm, in spite of the cool dimness of the entry hall.
Frank Randall had been an onl y child, as had her mother;
such rel atives as she had were  not close—only a couple of
elderly great-au nts in England, and some long-distant second
cousins in Australia. She had se t out thinking only to find her
father; she hadn’ t realized that she might discover a whole new
family in the process.
A lot  of family . As she entered the hallway , with its scarred
paneling, a door opened and four small children ran out,
closely pursued by a tall young woman with brown curly hair .“Ah, run for it, run for it, wee fishies!” she cried, rushing
forward with outstretched hands snapping like pincers. “The
wicked crab will have ye eaten up, snap, snap!”
The children fled down the ha ll in a gale of giggles and
shrieks, looking back over their shoulders in terrified delight.
One of them, a little boy of four  or so, saw Brianna and Y oung
Jamie standing in the entry and instantly reversed his
direction, char ging down the hallway like a runaway
locomotive, shouting, “Daddy , Daddy , Daddy!”
The boy flung himself recklessly at Y oung Jamie’ s midrif f.
The latte r caught him expertly , and hoisted the beaming little
boy in his arms.
“Now , then, wee Matthew ,” he  said sternly . “What sort of
manners is this your auntie Jan et’ s teachin’ you? What will
your new cousin be thinkin’, to see ye dashin’ about wi’ no
more sense than a chicken after corn?”
The little boy giggled louder ,  not at all put of f by the
scolding. He peeked at Brianna, caught her eye, and promptly
buried h is face in his father ’ s shoulder . Slowly he raised his
head and peeked again, blue eyes wide.
“Da!” he said. “Is that a lady?”
“Of course she is, I’ve told ye, she’ s your cousin.”
“But she ’ s got on breeks!” Mat thew stared at her in shock.
“Ladies dinna wear breeks!”
The young woman looked rather as though she subscribed
to this opinion a s well, but she  interrupted firmly , moving to
take the little boy from his father .
“W ell, and I’m sure she’ s a fine reason for it, but it isna
proper to  be makin’ remarks bef ore people’ s faces. Y ou go and
get yourself washed, aye?” She set him down and turned him
toward the door at the end of the hallway , giving him a gentle
push. He didn’ t move, but tu rned back around to stare at
Brianna.
“Where’ s Grannie, Matt?” his father asked.“In the back parlor wi’ Grandda and a lady and a man,”
Matthew replied promptly . “They’ve had two pots of cof fee, a
tray of scones, and a whole D undee cake, but Mama says
they’re h angin’ on in hopes of bein’ fed dinner , too, and good
luck to them because it’ s only b rose and a bit o’ hough today ,
and dam ned—oop!”—he pressed a hand over his mouth,
glancing guiltily at his father—”and drat if she’ll gie them any
of the gooseberry tart, no matter how long they stay .”
Y oung Jamie gave his son a narrow look, then glanced
quizzically at his sister . “A lady and a man?”
Janet made a faint moue of distaste.
“The Grizzler and her brother ,” she said.
Y oung Jamie grunted, with a glance at Brianna.
“I imagine Mam will be pleased for an excuse to get away
from the m, then.” He nodded at  Matthew . “Go and fetch your
Grannie, lad. T ell her I’ve brought a visitor she’ll like to see.
And watch your language, aye?” He turned Matthew toward
the back of the house and slapped him gently on the rump in
dismissal.
The little boy w ent, but slowly , casting glances of intense
fascination over his shoulder at Brianna as he went.
Y oung Jamie turned back to Brianna, smiling.
“That’ll be my eldest,” he said. “And this”—gesturing to the
young woman, “is my sister , Janet Murray . Janet—Mistress
Brianna Fraser .”
Brianna didn’ t know whether to  of fer to shake hands or not,
and instead contented herself w ith a nod and a smile. “I’m
very pleased to meet you,” she said warmly .
Janet’ s eyes sprang wide with amazement, whether at what
Brianna had said or at the acc ent with which she’d spoken,
Brianna couldn’ t tell.
Y oung Jamie grinned at his sister ’ s surprise.“Y ou’ll never guess who she is, Jen,” he said. “Never in a
thousand years!”
Janet lifted one eyebrow , then narrowed her eyes at Brianna.
“Cousin,” she murmured, looking their guest frankly up and
down. “She’ s the look o’ the M acKenzies, surely . But she’ s a
Fraser , ye say…” Her eyes sprang suddenly wide.
“Oh, ye can’ t be ,” she said to Brianna. A wide smile began
to sp read across her face, pointing up the family resemblance
to her brother . “Y ou can’ t  be!”
Her brother ’ s chortle was inte rrupted by the swish of a
swinging door and the sound of light footsteps on the boards
of the hallway .
“A ye, Ja mie? Mattie says we’ve a guest—” The soft, brisk
voice died suddenly , and Brianna looked up, her heart
suddenly in her throat.
Jenny M urray was very small—no more than five feet tall—
and delicately boned as a sp arrow . She stood staring at
Brianna, mouth slightly open. H er eyes were the deep blue of
gentians, made the more strik ing by a face gone white as
paper .
“Oh, my ,” she said softly . “Oh, my .” Brianna smiled
tentatively , nodding to her aunt—her mother ’ s friend, her
father ’ s beloved only sister . Oh, please!  she thought, suddenly
suf fused with a longing as intense as it was unexpected. Please
like me, please be happy I’m her e!
Y oung Jamie bowed elaborately to his mother , beaming.
“Mam, might I have the honor to present to ye—”
“Jamie Fraser! I kent he wa s back—I told ye, Jenny
Murray!”
The voice rang out from the back of the hallway in tones of
highpitched acc usation. Glancin g up in startlement, Brianna
saw a woman emer ging from the shadows, rustling with
indignation.“Amyas Kettrick told  me he’d  seen your brother riding near
Balriggan! But no, ye wouldna  have it, would ye, Jenny—
telling m e I’m a fool, telling me  Amyas is blind, and Jamie in
America! Liars the both of ye, you and Ian, trying to protect
that wicked coward! Hobart!” she shouted, turning toward the
back of the house, “Hobart! Come out here this minute!”
“Be qu iet!” sa id Jenny impatiently . “Y e ar e  a fool,
Laoghaire!” She jerked at the woman’ s sleeve, ur ging her
around. “And as for who’ s blind, look at her! Are ye too far
past it to tell the dif ference between a grown man and a lass in
breeks, for heaven’ s sake?” Her own eyes stayed fixed on
Brianna, bright with speculation.
“A lass? ”
The other woman turned, frowning nearsightedly at
Brianna. Then she blinked once, anger erased as her round
face went slack with surprise. She gasped, crossing herself.
“Mary , M ar garet and Bride! Who in the name of God are
you? ”
Brianna took a d eep breath, looking from one woman to the
other as she answered, trying to keep her voice from shaking.
“My name is Brianna. I’m Jamie Fraser ’ s daughter .”
Both w omen’ s eyes popped wide. The woman called
Laoghaire grew slowly red and seemed to swell, opening and
closing her mouth in a futile search for words.
Jenny st epped fo rward, though, and seized Brianna’ s hands,
looking up into her face. A soft pink bloomed in her cheeks,
making her look suddenly young.
“Jamie’ s? Y ou’ re truly Jamie’ s lassie?” She squeezed
Brianna’ s hands hard between her own.
“My mother says so.”
Brianna felt the answering smil e on her own face. Jenny’ s
hands w ere cool, but Brianna felt a rush of warmth
nonetheless, wh ich spread through her hands and up into her
chest. She caught the faint, spic y scent of baking in the foldsof Jenny’ s gown, and something else, more earthy and
pungent, that she thought must be the smell of sheep’ s wool.
“Does she, so?” Laoghaire had recovered both her voice and
her self-possess ion. She stepped forward, eyes narrowed.
“Jamie Fraser ’ s your father , aye? And just who might your
mother be?”
Brianna stif fened.
“His wife,” she said. “Who else?”
Laoghaire put back her head an d laughed. It wasn’ t a nice
laugh.
“Who else?” she said, mimicking. “Who else indeed, lassie!
And just which wife would that be, now?”
Brianna felt the blood drain fr om her own face, and her
hands grow stif f in Jenny’ s as the flood of realization washed
over her . Y ou idiot, she thoug ht. Y ou stupid idiot. It was
twenty years! Of course he would have married again. Of
course. No matter how much he loved Mama.
On t he heels of this thought was another , more terrible. Did
she find him? O h, God, did she find him with a new wife, and
he sent her away? Oh, God, wher e is she?
She turn ed blindly , wanting to run, not knowing where to
go, what to do, only feeling that she must get out of here at
once, and find her mother .
“Y ou’ll be wanting to sit down, I expect, Cousin. Come into
the parlor , aye?” Y oung Jamie’ s  voice was firm in her ear , and
his arm was around her , turning her , ur ging her down the hall
and through one of the doors that opened of f it.
She sca rcely heard the babble of voices around her , the
confusion of explanations and accusations that popped around
her e ars like stri ngs of firecrackers. She glimpsed a small, neat
man with a face like the White Rabbit, looking vastly
surprised, and another man, much taller , who rose as she came
into the parlor a nd came toward her , his weathered, homely
face creased in concern.It was the tall man who calmed the racket and brought
everyone to order , extracting from the confused muddle of
voices an explanation of her presence.
“Jamie’ s daughter?” He glanced at her with interest, but
looked much less surprised tha n anyone else so far . “What’ s
your name, a leannan ?”
“Brianna.” She was too upset to  smile at him, but he didn’ t
seem to mind.
“Brianna.” He eased himself down on a hassock, motioning
her to a seat opposite, and she saw that he had a wooden leg
that prot ruded st if fly to one side . He took her hand and smiled
at he r , th e warm  light in his soft brown eyes making her feel
momentarily safer .
“I’m your uncle Ian, lass. W elcome to ye.” Her own hand
tightened on his involuntarily , clinging to the refuge he
seemed to of fer . He didn’ t flinch  or draw back, just looked her
over carefully , seeming amused by the way she was dressed.
“Been sleeping in the heather , h ave ye?” he said, seeing the
dirt and plant st ains on her clot hes. “Y ou’ll have come some
way to find us, niece.”
“She says  she ’ s your nie ce,” Laoghaire  said. Recovered
from her shock, she peered over  Ian’ s shoulder , her round face
pinched with dislike. “Belike sh e’ s only come to see what she
can get.”
“I sh ouldna be c allin’ the kettle black, Laoghaire,” Ian said
mildly . H e twist ed round to fac e her . “Or was it not you and
Hobart a  half-ho ur past, tryin’ to  squeeze five hundred pounds
from me?”
Her lips pressed tight together , deepening the lines that
bracketed her mouth.
“That money’ s mine,” she snapped, “and well ye know it! It
was agreed to; you witnessed the paper .”
Ian sighed; evidently this wasn’ t the first he had heard of the
matter today .“I di d,” he said patiently . “And ye’ll have your money—so
soon as Jamie’ s  able to send it. He’ s promised, and he’ s an
honorable man. But—”
“Honorable, is it?” Laoghaire pr oduced an unladylike snort.
“Is i t honorable to commit biga my , then? Desert his wife and
children? Steal away my daughter and ruin her? Honorable!”
She loo ked at Brianna, eyes bright and hard as fresh-rolled
steel.
“I’ll ask again, lass—what’ s your mother ’ s name?”
Brianna simply stared at her , overwhelmed. The stock
around her throat was choking  her , and her hands felt icy ,
despite Ian’ s grasp.
“Y our mother ,” Laoghaire repeated, impatient. “Who was
she?”
“It doesna matter who—” Jenny began, but Laoghaire
rounded on her , face flushed with fury .
“Oh, it matters! If he got her on some army whore, or some
slut of a maidservant when he  was in England—that’ s one
thing. But if she’ s—”
“Laoghaire!”
“Sister!”
“Y e foul-tongued besom!”
Brianna put a stop to the outcry simply by standing up. She
was as tall as a ny of the men, and towered over the women.
Laoghaire took one quick step back. Every face in the room
was turned to her , marked with hostility , sympathy , or merely
curiosity .
W ith a coolness that she didn’ t feel, Brianna reached for the
inner pocket of her coat, the sec ret pocket she had sewed into
the seam only a week before. It seemed like a century .
“My mo ther ’ s n ame is Claire,” she said, and dropped the
necklace on the table.There was utter silence in the ro om, save for the soft hissing
of the peat fire, burning low on the hearth. The pearl necklace
lay g leaming, the spring sun fro m the window picking out the
gold pierced-work roundels like sparks.
It was Jenny w ho spoke first. Moving like a sleepwalker ,
she reached out a slender finger  and touched one of the pearls.
Freshwater pearls, the kind called baroque because of their
singular , irregular , unmistakable shapes.
“Oh, my ,” Jenny said softly . Sh e lifted her head and looked
Brianna in the face, the slanted blue eyes shimmering with
what looked like tears. “I am so very glad to see ye—Niece.”
“Where is my m other? Do you know?” Brianna glanced from
face to face, her heart beating heavily in her ears. Laoghaire
was not  looking at her; her gaze was fastened to the pearls,
face gone cold and frozen.
Jenny and Ian ex changed a quick glance, then Ian stood up,
moving awkwardly to bring his leg under him.
“She’ s with your Da,” he said quietly , touching Brianna’ s
arm. “Dinna fash yourself, lassie; they’re both safe.”
Brianna resisted the impulse to collapse with relief. Instead,
she let out her breath very carefully , feeling the knot of anxiety
loosen slowly in her belly .
“Thank you,” she said. She tried to smile at Ian, but her face
felt slack and rubbery . Safe. And together . Oh, thank yo u!  she
thought, in wordless gratitude.
“Those a re mine, by rights.” Laoghaire nodded at the pearls.
She wasn’ t angry now , but coldly self-possessed. W ithout the
distortions of fury , Brianna could see that she had once been
very pretty , and was still a hand some woman—tall for a Scot,
and graceful in her movements . She had the kind of delicate
fair coloring that fades quickly , and had thickened through the
middle, but her figure was still erect and firm, and her face
still sho wed the pride of a woman who has known herself
beautiful.“That they’re not!” said Jenny , with a quick flash of temper .
“They were my mother ’ s jewels , that my father gave to Jamie
for his wife, and—”
“And his wife I  am,” Laoghaire interrupted. She looked at
Brianna then, a cold, gauging look.
“I am his wife,” she repeated. “I married him in good faith,
and he promised me payment for the wrong he did me.” She
turned h er cold gaze on Jenny . “It’ s been more than a year
since I’ve seen a penny . Am I to sell my shoes to feed my
daughter—the one he’ s left to me?”
She lifted her chin and looked at Brianna.
“If y ou’re his da ughter , then his debts are yours as well. T ell
her , Hobart!”
Hobart looked mildly embarrassed.
“Ah, now , Sister ,” he said, putting a hand on her arm in an
attempt to be soothing. “I dinna think—”
“No, ye don’ t, a nd haven’ t since ye were born!” She shook
him of f in irrit ation, and stretched out a hand toward the
pearls. “They’re mine!”
It w as pure reflex; the pear ls were clutched tight in
Brianna’ s hand before she had made the decision to snatch
them. The gold roundels were cool against her skin, but the
pearls were warm—the sign of a genuine pearl, her mother had
told her .
“Y ou wait just one minute here.” The strength and coldness
of h er own voic e surprised her . “I don’ t know who you are,
and I don’ t know what happened between you and my father ,
but—”
“I am Laoghaire  MacKenzie, and your bastard of a father
married me four years ago—under false pretenses, I might
add.” Laoghaire’ s anger had not disappeared but seemed to
have submer ged ; her face had a tight, stretched look, but she
was not shouting, and the red had faded from her soft, plump
cheeks.Brianna took a deep breath, striving for calmness.
“Y es? But if my mother is with my father now—”
“He left me.”
The wor ds were spoken without heat, but they fell with the
weight o f stones in still water , spreading endless ripples of
pain and  betrayal. Y oung Jamie had been opening his mouth to
speak; he shut it again, watching Laoghaire.
“He said that he  could not bea r it longer—to dwell in the
same house with me, to share m y bed.” She spoke calmly , as
though reciting a piece she had learned by heart, her eyes still
fixed on the empty spot where the pearls had rested.
“So he left. And then he ca me back—with the witch.
Flaunted her in my face; bedded  her under my nose.” Slowly ,
she raised her eyes to Brianna’ s, studying her with quiet
intensity , search ing out the mysteries of her face. Slowly , she
nodded.
“It w as she,” she said, with a ce rtainty that was faintly eerie
in its calmness. “She cast her spells on him from the day she
came to Leoch—and on me. Sh e made me invisible. From the
day she came, he could not see me.”
Brianna felt a small shiver run  up her spine, despite the
hissing peat fire on the hearth.
“And then she was gone. Dea d, they said. Killed in the
Rising. And him come home ag ain from England, free at long
last.” Sh e shook  her head very slightly; her eyes still rested on
Brianna’ s face, but Brianna knew Laoghaire didn’ t see her any
longer .
“But she wasna dead at all,” La oghaire said softly . “And he
was not free. I knew that; I alw ays knew that. Y e canna kill a
witch wi th steel— they must burn.” Laoghaire’ s pale blue eyes
turned to Jenny .
“Y ou saw her—at my wedding. Her fetch standing there,
between me and him. Y e saw her , but ye didna say . I only
heard it later , when ye told Mais ri the seer . Y ou should ha’ toldme, then.” It was a not so much an accusation as a statement of
fact.
Jenny’ s face had gone pale again, the slanted blue eyes dark
with something—perhaps fear . She licked her lips and started
to reply , but Laoghaire’ s attention had shifted to Ian.
“Y e’d best be w ary , Ian Murray ,” she said, her tone now
matter -of-fact. She nodded toward Brianna. “Look at her weel,
man. Is a right w oman made so? T aller than most men, dressed
as a man , wi’ hands as broad as  a dinner plate, fit to choke the
life from one o’ your weans, should she choose.”
Ian didn’ t answer , though his long, homely face looked
troubled. Y oung  Jamie’ s fists clenched, though, and his jaw set
tight. Laoghaire  saw it, and a small smile touched the corners
of her mouth.
“She is a witch’ s child,” she sa id. “And ye know it, all of
you!” She glanced around the room, challenging each
uncomfortable face. “They should have burned her mother in
Cranesmuir , save for the lovespell she’d put on Jamie Fraser .
A ye, I say be wary of what ye’ve brought into your house!”
Brianna brought  the flat of her hand down on the table with
a thump, startling everyone.
“Hogwash,” she said loudly . She could feel the blood
rushing to her face, and didn ’ t care. All the faces were
gawking, mouth s open, but she had no attention to spare for
anyone but Laoghaire MacKenzie.
“Hogwash,” she said again, and pointed a finger at the
woman. “If they ought to be w ary of anybody , it’ s you, you
fucking murderess!”
Laoghaire’ s mouth was open wider than anyone’ s, but no
sound came out.
“Y ou didn’ t tell them all  abo ut Cranesmuir , did you? M y
mother s hould have, but she did n’ t. She thought you were too
young t o know what you were doing. Y ou weren’ t, though,
were you?”“What…?” said Jenny , in a faint voice.
Y oung Jamie looked wildly a t his father , who stood as
though poleaxed, staring at Brianna.
“She trie d to kill my mother .” Brianna was having trouble
controlling her voice; it cracked and trembled, but she got the
words o ut. “Y ou did, didn’ t you ? Y ou told her Geillis Duncan
was ill and call ing for her—you knew she’d go, she always
went to anybod y sick, she’ s a doctor! Y ou knew they were
going to arrest Geilie Duncan for witchcraft, and if my mother
was there, they’d take her , too!  Y ou thought they’d burn her ,
and then you could have him—have Jamie Fraser .”
Laoghaire was white to the lips, her face set like stone. Even
her eyes had no life; they were blank and dull as marbles.
“I could  feel her hand on him,” she whispered. “In our bed.
L ying th ere between us, wi’ he r hand on him, so he would
stif fen a nd cry out to her in h is sleep. She was  a witch . I
always knew .”
The room  was silent, save for th e hissing of the fire, and the
tender s inging of a small bird outside the window . Hobart
MacKenzie stirr ed at last, coming forward to take his sister by
the arm.
“Come away , a leannan, ” he  said quietly . “I’ll see ye s afe
home now .” He nodded to Ian, who returned the nod, with a
small g esture that somehow conveyed both sympathy and
regret.
Laoghaire allowed her brother to lead her away , unresisting,
but at the door she stopped and turned back. Brianna stood
still; she didn’ t think she could move if she tried.
“If you’re Jamie Fraser ’ s daughter ,” Laoghaire said, in a
cold clear voice, “and ye may  be, given your looks—know
this. Y our father is a liar and a whoremaster , a cheat and a
pander . I wish ye well of each other .” She gave in then to
Hobart’ s tugging at her sleeve, and the door swung to behind
her .The rage that had filled her drained suddenly away , and
Brianna leaned forward, resting her weight on the palms of her
hands, th e necklace hard and lu mpy under her hand. Her hair
had come loose, and a thick strand fell over her face.
Her eyes  were closed against the dizziness that threatened to
engulf her; she felt, rather than saw , the hand that touched her
and tenderly smoothed the locks back from her face.
“He went on lov ing her ,” she whispered, as much to herself
as to anyone else. “He didn’ t for get her .”
“Of course he d idna for get her .” She opened her eyes to see
Ian’ s lon g face and kind brown eyes six inches away . A broad
work-worn hand rested on hers, warm and hard, a hand even
lar ger than her own.
“Neither did we,” he said.
“W ill ye no hav e a bit more, Cousin Brianna?” Joan, Y oung
Jamie’ s wife, smiled across the table, serving spoon poised
invitingly above the crumbled remains of a gigantic
gooseberry tart.
“Thank you, no. I couldn’ t eat another bite,” Brianna said,
smiling back. “I’m stuf fed!”
This made Matthew and his little brother Henry giggle
loudly , b ut a gimlet gleam from their grandmother ’ s eye shut
them up sharply . Looking round the table, though, Brianna
could se e suppressed laughter blooming on all the faces; from
grown-ups to toddlers, they all seemed to find her slightest
remark endlessly entertaining.
It wa s ne ither he r unorthodox costume nor the sheer novelty
of seeing a stranger , she thought—even one stranger than
most. There was something else ; some current of joy that ran
among the members of the f amily , unseen but lively as
electricity .
She realized only slowly what it was; a remark from Ian
brought it into focus.“W e didna think that Jamie wou ld ever have a bairn of his
own.” Ian’ s smile across the ta ble was warm enough to melt
ice. “Y ou’ll never have seen him, though?”
She shook her head, swallowing the remains of the last bite,
smiling back in spite of her full mouth. That was it, she
thought; they were delighted with her not so much for her
sake, bu t for Jamie’ s. They lov ed him, and they were happy
not for themselves but for him.
That realization brought tears  to her eyes. Laoghaire’ s
accusations had shaken her , wild as they were, and it was a
great co mfort to realize that to all of these people who knew
him well, Jamie Fraser was neither a liar nor a wicked man; he
was indeed the man her mother thought him.
Mistaking her emotion for choking, Y oung Jamie pounded
her helpfully on the back, making her choke in good earnest.
“W ill ye have written Uncle Jam ie, then, to say as ye were
coming to us?” he asked, ignori ng her coughing and red-faced
spluttering.
“No,” she said hoarsely . “I don’ t know where he is.”
Jenny’ s gull-winged brows went up.
“A ye, ye said that; I’d for gotten.”
“Do you know where he is now? He and my mother?”
Brianna bent forward anxiously , brushing pastry crumbs from
her jabot.
Jenny smiled and rose from the table.
“A ye, I do—mor e or less. If ye’ve eaten your fill, d’ye come
with me, lassie. I’ll fetch his last letter for ye.”
Brianna rose to follow Jenny , bu t stopped abruptly near the
door . She had v aguely noticed some paintings on the walls of
the parlo r earlier , but hadn’ t really looked at them, in the rush
of emotion and event. She looked at this one, though.
T wo littl e boys with red-gold ha ir , stif fly solemn in kilts and
jackets, white shirts with frills showing bright against the darkcoat of a huge dog that sat beside them, tongue lolling in
patient boredom.
The olde r boy was tall and fine-featured; he sat straight and
proud, chin lifted, one hand re sting on the dog’ s head, the
other pr otectively on the shoulder of the small brother who
stood between his knees.
It w as the youn ger boy Brianna stared at, though. His face
was round and snub-nosed, cheeks translucent and ruddy as
apples. W ide blue eyes, slightl y slanted, looked out under a
bell of bright ha ir combed into an unnatural tidiness. The pose
was formal, done in classic eighteenth-century style, but there
was something in the robust, stocky little figure that made her
smile and reach a finger to touch his face.
“Aren’ t you a sweetie,” she said softly .
“Jamie was a sweet laddie, but a stubborn wee fiend,
forbye.” Jenny’ s  voice by her ear startled her . “Beat him or
coax him, it made no dif ference; if he’d made up his mind, it
stayed m ade up. Come wi’ me; there’ s another picture you’ll
like to see, I think.”
The second portrait hung on the landing of the stairs,
looking thoroughly out of place. From below she could see the
ornate gilded frame, its heavy c arving quite at odds with the
solid, battered comfort of the house’ s other furnishings. It
reminded her of pictures in museums; this homely setting
seemed incongruous.
As she followed Jenny onto the landing the glare of light
from the window disappeared, leaving the painting’ s surface
flat and clear before her .
She gasp ed, and  felt the hair rise on her forearms, under the
linen of her shirt.
“It’ s remarkable, aye?” Jenny looked from the painting to
Brianna and back again, her own features marked with
something between pride and awe.
“Remarkable!” Brianna agreed, swallowing.“Y e see why we kent ye at once ,” her aunt went on, laying a
loving hand against the carved frame.
“Y es. Y es, I can see that.”
“It will be my mother , aye? Y our grandmother , Ellen
MacKenzie.”
“Y es,” Brianna said. “I know .”  Dust motes stirred up by
their footsteps whirled lazily through the afternoon light from
the wind ow . Br ianna felt rather as though she was whirling
with them, no longer anchored to reality .
T wo hun dred ye ars from now , she had—I will ? she thought
wildly—stood in front of this portrait in the National Portrait
Gallery , furiously denying the truth that it showed.
Ellen MacKenz ie looked out at her now as she had then;
long-necked and regal, slanted eyes showing a humor that did
not quite  touch the tender mouth. It wasn’ t a mirror image, by
any means; Ellen’ s forehead  was high, narrower than
Brianna’ s, and the chin was roun d, not pointed, her whole face
somewhat softer and less bold in its features.
But the resemblance was there, and pronounced enough to
be s tartling; the wide cheekbon es and lush red hair were the
same. And around her neck w as the string of pearls, gold
roundels bright in the soft spring sun.
“Who painted it?” Brianna said at last, though she didn’ t
need to hear the answer . The  tag by the painting in the
museum had given the artist as “Unknown.” But having seen
the port rait of the two little boys below , Brianna knew , all
right. This picture was less skil led, an earlier ef fort—but the
same hand had painted that hair and skin.
“My mother herself,” Jenny was saying, her voice filled
with a wistful pride. “She’d a great hand for drawing and
painting. I often wished I had the gift.”
Brianna felt her fingers curl unconsciously , the illusion of
the b rush between them momentarily so vivid she could have
sworn she felt smooth wood.That’ s wher e,  she thought, wi th a small shiver , and heard an
almost audible click!  of recognition a s a tiny piece of her past
dropped into place. That’ s wher e I got it .
Frank R andall h ad joked that h e couldn’ t draw a straight
line; Claire that she drew noth ing else. But Brianna had the
gift of line and curve, of light and shadow—and now she had
the source of the gift, as well.
What else?  she thought suddenly . What else did she have
that had  once belonged to the w oman in the picture, to the boy
with the stubborn tilt to his head?
“Ned Gowan brought me this from Leoch,” Jenny said,
touching the frame with a cer tain reverence. “He saved it,
when the English battered dow n the castle, after the Rising.”
She smiled faintly . “He’ s a great one for family , Ned is. He’ s a
Lowlander from  Edinbur gh, wi’ no kin of his own, but he’ s
taken the MacKenzies for his c lan—even now the clan’ s no
more.”
“No more?” Brianna blurted. “They’re all dead?” The
horror in her voice made Jenny glance at her , surprised.
“Och, no. I didn a mean that, lass. But Leoch’ s gone,” she
added, i n a softer tone. “And the last chiefs with it—Colum
and his brother Dougal…they died for the Stuarts.”
She had known that, of course; Claire had told her . What
was surprising was the sudden rush of an unexpected grief;
regret for these strangers of her newfound blood. W ith an
ef fort, she swallowed the thicken ing in her throat and turned to
follow Jenny up the stairs.
“W as Leoch a great castle?” sh e asked. Her aunt paused,
hand on the banister .
“I dinna ken,” she said. Jenn y glanced back at Ellen’ s
picture, something like regret in her eyes.
“I never saw it—and now it’ s gone.”
Entering the bedroom on the sec ond floor was like entering an
undersea cavern. The room was small, as all the rooms were,with low beams smoked black f rom years of peat fires, but the
walls were fresh and white, and the room itself was filled with
a greenish, wavering light that spilled through two lar ge
windows, filtered by the leaves of the swaying rose brier .
Here and there some bright thin g blinked or glowed like a
reef fish in the  soft gloom; a  painted doll that lay on the
hearthrug, aband oned by a grand child, a Chinese basket with a
pierced coin tied to its lid by way of ornament. A brass
candlestick on the table, a sm all painting on the wall, rich
colors deep against the whitewash.
Jenny went at once to the big armoire that stood at the side
of the room, and stood on ti ptoe to bring down a lar ge
morocco-covered box, its corne rs worn with age. As she put
back the lid, Br ianna caught the glint of metal and a small
sharp flash, as of sunlight on jewels.
“Here it is.” Jenny brought out a thick, folded wad of grimy
paper , m uch trav eled and much read by the looks of it, and put
it into Brianna’ s  hand. It had been sealed; a smudge of greasy
wax still clung to the end of one sheet.
“They’re in the Colony of North Carolina, but they dinna
live nea r any town,” Jenny exp lained. “Jamie writes a bit in
the even ings wh en he can, and  keeps the bits all by him, till
either he or Fer g us takes the journey down to Cross Creek, or
a traveler passes by who will carry the letter . That suits him;
he doesna write easy—especiall y since he broke his hand that
time ago.”
Brianna started at the casual reference, but her aunt’ s calm
face showed no special awareness.
“Sit ye down, la ssie.” She waved a hand, giving Brianna the
choice of stool or bed.
“Thank you,” Brianna murmured, taking the stool. So
perhaps Jenny didn’ t know everything about Jamie and Black
Jack Ra ndall? T he notion that she might know things about
this unse en man  that not even his beloved sister knew was in away unsettling. T o dismiss the thought, she hurriedly opened
the letter .
The scra wled words sprang out at her , black and vivid. She
had seen this w riting before— its cramped, dif ficult letters,
with the big, lo oping tails, but that had been on a document
two hundred years old, its ink brown and faded, its writing
constrained by careful thought and formality . Here he had felt
free—the writin g rolled across the page in a bold broken
scrawl, the lines tilting drunkenl y up at the ends. It was untidy ,
but readable for all that.
Fraser ’ s Ridge, Monday 19 September
My dear est Jenny ,
All her e  ar e in Good Health and Spirits, and trust that this
letter will find all in your Household likewise Content.
Y our son  sends his Most Affecti onate Regar ds, and begs to be
Remember ed to his Father , Br others and Sisters. He bids you
tell Matthew and Henry that h e sends them the Encloased
Object, which is the pr eserved Skull of an animal called
Porpentine by Reason of its Pr od igious Spines (though it is not
at all like the small Hedge-cr eepie which you will know by that
name, being much Gr eater in  Size and Dwelling in the
T r eetops, wher e it Feasts upon the tender shoots). T ell
Matthew and Henry that I do not know why the T eeth ar e
orange. No Doubt the animal finds it Decorative.
Also enclosed you will find a s mall Pr esent for yourself; the
Patterning is contrived by use of the Quills of this same
Porpentine, which the Indians dye with the juices of several
Plants, befor e weaving them in the Ingenious Manner you see
befor e you.
Clair e has been r ecently much Inter ested by Conversation—if
the term can be used for a Communication limited mostly to
Gesticulations a nd the Making of Faces (she insists I note her e
that she  does not Make Faces, to which I r eply that I am in
Better C ase to judge of the mat ter , being able to see the Face
in quest ion, wh ich she is not)— in Conversation with an oldwoman of the Indians, much Esteemed in this ar ea as a Healer ,
who has Given her many such  plants. In consequence, her
fingers ar e Purple at pr esent, which I find Most Decorative.
T uesday , 20 Sept.
I have been much Occupied today in r epair and str engthening
of the pen-fold in which we keep our few cows, pigs, etc. at
night, to pr otect them fr om the depr edations of Bears, which
ar e plen tiful. In walking to the privy this morning, I espied a
gr eat Pa wprint in the mud, whic h Measur ed quite the length of
my o wn Foot. The stock appear ed Nervous and disturbed, for
which Condition I can scar ce Blame them.
Do not, I pray you, suffer any Alarm on our account. The
Black Bears of this country ar e wary of Humans, and Loath to
appr oach even a Single Man. Also, our house is str ongly built,
and I have forbidden Ian to go Abr oad after dark, save he is
W ell-armed.
In the matter of Armament, our situation is much Impr oved.
Fer gus has br ought back fr om H igh Point both a fine Rifle of
the new kind, and several excellent Knives.
Also a lar ge boiling kettle, whose Acquisition we have
Celebrated with  a gr eat quantity of tasty Stew , made with
V enison, wild Onions fr om the w ood, dried beans, and likewise
some T o matoe-fruits, dried fr om the Summer . None of us Died
or suffe r ed Ill-effects fr om Eating of this stew , so Clair e is
likely right, T omatoes ar e not Poison.
W ednesday , 21 Sept.
The Bea r has come again. I found lar ge Prints and Scrapings
on the new-turn ed gr ound of Clair e’ s Gar den today . The beast
will be fattening for its W inter sl umbers, and no doubt seeks to
Digg for grubs in the fr esh Earth.
I have Removed the Sow to our Pantry , since she is near
Farr owing. Neit her Clair e nor t he Sow was gr eatly pleased by
this arra ngement, but the Animal is valuable, having cost me
thr ee pound fr om Mr . Quillan.Four Indians came today . They ar e of the kind called
T uscar ora. I have met these m en on several Occasions, and
found them most Amiable.
The Savages having expr essed a determination to hunt our
particular Bear , I made them a  Gift of some tobacco and a
Knife, with which they seemed Pleasd.
They sat under the eaves of the  House most of the morning,
Smoking and talking among themselves, but then near midday
made to  Depart upon their Hun t. I inquir ed whether , the Bear
seeming Fond of our Society , it would not be best for the
Hunters to lie hidden nearby , i n Hopes that the animal will
r eturn her e.
I was Informed—with the Kindest Condescension possible
thr ough wor d and sign—that the appearance of the Animal’ s
dr oppings indica ted beyond any Doubt that it had Quitted the
ar ea, and was Bound upon some errand to the west.
Being of  no Mind to take issue w ith such Expert practitioners,
I wis hed them lu ck and bade them a cor dial Far ewell. I could
not accompany them, having ur gent Labors still to perform
her e, bu t Ian and Rollo have gone with them, as they have
done befor e.
I have loaded m y new Rifle and left it r eady to Hand, lest our
friends’ appr ehension as to the Bear ’ s intent be Mistaken.
Thursday , 22 Sept.
I wa s r oused fr om Sleep last night by a Hideous Noise. This
was a gr eat Scraping, which r everberated thru the wooden
logs of the wall,  accompanied by such Thumps and loud W ails
that I bolted fr om my Bed, convi nced that the house was like to
Fall about our Ears.
The Sow , observ ing the nearness of an Enemy , burst thr ough
the door of the Pantry (which I will say was flimsily made) and
took Ref uge beneath our Bed, sq uealing in a Manner to deafen
us. Per ceiving that the Bear was at Hand, I seiz’d my new
Rifle and ran outside.It w as a moonlit Night, though  hazy , and I could plainly see
my Adve rsary , a  gr eat black sh ape, which str etched upon its
hind fee t appear ed near as T all as Myself, and (to my anxious
eyes) r oughly thr ee times as W ide, being at no Gr eat Distance
fr om me.
I fir ed at it, wher eon it Dr opped to all fours and Ran with
amazing Speed towar d the shelter of the nearby W ood,
disappearing befor e I could make Shift to shoot any mor e.
Come D aylight, I sear ched the gr ound for sign of Blood and
found no ne, so cannot say did m y Shot find its T ar get. The side
of th e House is decorated with several long Scrapes, as might
be m ade with a sharpened Adze  or Chizl, showing white in the
W ood.
W e have since been at some Pains to persuade the Sow (she is
a White Sow , of Pr odigious Size, a most Stubborn T emper , and
not lacking in T eeth) to quit our bed and r epair to her
Sanctuary in the pantry . She wa s Reluctant, but was at length
persuaded by the Combination o f a trail of shatter ed corn laid
befor e her , and myself at her Rear , Armed with a Stout Br oom.
Monday , 26th Sept.
Ian and his Red  Companions have r eturned, their Pr ey having
eluded them in the wood. I shr ewd them the Scratches upon the
Side of the House, wher eon the y became Excited and talked
among t hemselves at such a R ate I could not Follow their
W or ds.
One man then detached a lar ge tooth fr om his necklace of such
items and pr esented it to me wit h gr eat Cer emony , saying that
it would  serve to Identify me to the Bear -spirit, and thus
pr otect me fr om Harm. I acce pted this T oken with all due
Solemnity , and was then oblig’d  to pr esent him with a piece of
Honeycomb in Exchange, thus the pr oprieties wer e observ’d.
Clair e w as called to pr ovide the Honeycomb, and with her
usual ey e for such Matters, per ceived that one of our guests
was Unwell, being heavy-eyed , coughing, and distracted in
Appearance. Clair e says he is also Flushed with fever , thoughthis is not obvio us to look at him. He being too ill to continue
with his Companions, we have laid him on a pallet in the
corncrib.
The sow  has Most Incontinently farr owed in the pantry . Ther e
ar e a dozen piglets, all healthy a nd of a V igor ous Appetite, for
which God be thanked. Our o wn Appetites bid fair to be
impoverished for the pr esent, as the Sow viciously Attacks
anyone who opens the door of the Pantry , r oaring and
gnashing her T eeth in Rage. I w as given one egg to my supper ,
and informed that I shall get no mor e until I have Contriv’d a
solution to this Difficulty .
Satur day , 1 October
A gr eat Surprise today . T wo Guests have come…
“It will be a wild place.”
Brianna looked up, startled. Jenny nodded at the letter , her
eyes fixed on Brianna.
“Savages and bears and porpent ines and such. It’ s no much
more tha n a wee cot, where the y live, Jamie told me. And all
alone, up in the high mountain s. V erra wild, it will be.” She
looked a t Brianna a little anxi ously . “But ye’ll still wish to
go?”
Brianna realized suddenly that Jenny was afraid she would
not; that she would be frighten ed by the thought of the long
journey and the savage place at the end of it. A savage place
rendered suddenly real by the scrawled black words on the
sheet she held—but not nearly  as real as the man who had
written them.
“I’m going,” she assured her aunt. “As soon as I can.”
Jenny’ s face relaxed.
“Oh, good,” she said. She he ld out her hand, showing
Brianna a small leather pouch decorated with a panel made of
porcupine’ s quills, stained in shades of red and black, with
here and there a few quills left in their natural grayish color for
contrast.“This is the present he sent me.”
Brianna took it, admiring the intricacy of the pattern, and
the softness of the pale deer ’ s hide.
“It’ s beautiful.”
“A ye, it is.” Jenny turned away , busying herself with
unnecessary tidy ing of the small ornaments that stood on the
bookshelf. Brian na had just tur ned her attention back to the
letter when Jenny spoke abruptly .
“W ill ye stay a bit?”
Brianna looked up, startled.
“Stay?”
“Only fo r a day or two.” Jenny turned around, the light from
the window halo-bright behind her , shadowing her face.
“I ken ye’ll wish to be gone,” she said. “I should wish so
much to talk wi’ ye for a bit, though.”
Brianna looked at her , puzzled, but could read nothing in the
pale, even features and the slanted eyes so like her own.
“Y es,” she said slowly . “Of course I’ll stay .”
A smile  touched the corner of Jenny’ s mouth. Her hair was
deep black, streaked with white like a magpie.
“That’ s good,” she said softly . The smile spread slowly as
she looked at her niece.
“Dear Lord, you’re like my brother!”
Left alone, Brianna returned to the letter , rereading the
beginning slowly , letting the quiet room around her fade,
disappearing as Jamie Fraser c ame to life in her hands, his
voice so  vivid in her inner ear that he might have stood before
her , the sun from the window glinting on his red hair .
Satur day , 1 October
A gr eat Surprise today . T wo Guests have come fr om Cr oss
Cr eek. Y ou will r ecall, I think, my T elling you of Lor d JohnGr ey , wh om I knew in Ar dsmuir .  I have not said that I had seen
him since, in Jamaica, wher e he was Governor for the Cr own.
He is per haps the last Person one should expect to find in this
Remote Place, so far Removed fr om all T races of Civilization,
let alone  those Luxurious Offices and T rappings of Pomp to
which he is Accustomed. Sur ely we wer e Most Astonish’d by
his appearing at our door , th ough we at once made him
W elcome.
It is a melancholy Event that has led him her e, I am Sorry to
say . His wife, embarked fr om England with her son, contracted
a Fever  on the voyage, and D ied of it while on the Ocean.
Fearing lest the Miasmas of the T r opics pr ove as Fatal to the
Boy as to his Mother , Lor d John determined that the lad must
go to V ir ginia, wher e Lor d John’ s family has Substantial
Pr operty , and Determined to escort him ther e himself, seeing
that the Lad was gr eatly Desolated by loss of his Mother .
I Expr essed Amazement, as well as Gratification, that they
should chuse to make such A lteration in their Journey as
r equir ed to visit this Distant Spot, but his Lor dship dismisses
this, say ing that he would have the Boy see something of the
differ ent Colonies, so as to appr eciate the Richness and
V ariety o f this Land. The lad is most Desir ous of encountering
Red Indi ans—r eminding me in this Respect of Ian, not so long
ago.
He i s a comely l ad, tall and W el l-form’d for his Y ears, which I
believe ar e near T welve. He is somewhat subject still to
Melancholy fr om his Mother ’ s death, but is most Pleasant in
Conversation, a nd Mannerly , for all he is an Earl (Lor d John
is h is stepfather , I believe; his  father having been Earl of
Ellesmer e). His name is W illiam.
Brianna turned the page over , expecting continuation, but
the pass age stopped on that abrupt note. There was a break of
several days before the letter resumed, on the 4th of October .
T uesday , 4 OctoberThe Indi an in the corncrib died early this morning, in spite of
Clair e’ s best efforts to save him. His face, body and limbs wer e
entir ely suffused with a dr eadful Rash, giving him a most
Gr ewsome and Mottled look.
Clair e thinks he suffer ed fr om the Measle, and is much
Concerned, this being a V icious Disease, plaguish and quick
to Spr ea d. She would not suffer  anyone to go near the Body
save only herself—she says she is Safe fr om it, by means of
some ch arm—but we did all Assemble near Midday , wher eat I
r ead some Scriptur e suitable to  the Occasion, and we said a
Prayer for the Repose of his  soul—for I trust that even
unbaptised Savages may find r est in God’ s Mer cy .
W e a r e in some  doubt how this poor soul’ s Earthly Remains
shall be Disposed. I would in  common course send Ian to
summon his Friends, that they might give him such Burial as is
common among the Indians.
Clair e s ays we must not do this, however , for the Corpse itself
may Sp r ead the Disease among the man’ s own People, a
Disaster which he would not Ch use to bring upon his Friends.
She advocates burying or Burning the Corpse ourselves, and
yet I am r elucta nt to undertake such Action, which might be
easily Misunderstood by the man’ s Companions—they thinking
that we Sought by this means t o hide some Complicity in his
Death.
I h ave said noth ing of this Concern to our Guests. If Danger
seems Im minent, I must send them away . Still, I am loathe to
Part wit h their society , so isola ted is our situation. For now ,
we have Laid the Body in a sm all Dry Cave in the hill above
the Hou se, wher ein I had th ought to build a Stable or
Stor ehouse.
I as k your for gi veness for thus Unbur dening my Mind at the
cost of your own Peace. I think all will be W ell in the end, but
for t he Moment, I confess to some W orry . Should Danger—
either fr om Indians or Disease—seem to thr eaten, I will send
this Lett er at once in the car e of our Guests, that it may be
Certain of r eaching you.If all is W ell, I will write quickly to tell you.
Y our Most Loving Br other ,
 Jamie Fraser
Brianna’ s mouth felt dry and she swallowed, forcing saliva.
There were two sheets yet to the letter; they clung together for
a moment, stubbornly resisting her ef forts to separate them,
and then gave way .
Postscriptum, 20 October
W e ar e all Safe, though the Man ner of our Deliverance is most
Melancholy; I will tell you of it later , having no gr eat Heart
for the matter at pr esent.
Ian has been Sick of the Measle, as has Lor d John, but they
ar e both Recover ed, and Clair e bids me say that Ian does
Exceeding well, you shall have no Fear for him. He writes in
his own Hand, that you may know it is the T ruth.
—J.
On t he last sheet was writing in a dif ferent hand, this one
neat and carefully schooled to a n even slant, though here and
there a blot defa ced the page, perhaps the result either of the
writer ’ s illness or a defective pen.
Dear Mam—
I have been Sick , but am all Right agayne. I had a Fever , with
most Peculiar Dr eams, full of o dd things. Ther e was a gr eat
W olf tha t came and spoke to m e in the V oice of a man, but
Auntie Clair e says this must ha ve been Rollo, who Stayed by
me all the time I was Ill, he is a very Good Dog and does not
bite very often.
The Mea sles came out in small  Bumps beneath my Skin, and
itched li ke Fury . I should have thought I had sat down on an
Anthill, or wander ed into a Hornet’ s nest. My head felt twice
its usual Size, and I sneezed quite Fer ocious.
I ha d thr ee Egg s to my Br eakfast today , and porridge, and
have W alked to the privy alone twice, so I am quite W ell,
though I thought at first the Sickness had left me Blind—Icould se e nothing but a gr eat Dazzle of Light when I went
outside, but Auntie said this wo uld soon be r emedied, and it
was.
I will write mor e later—Fer gus is waiting to take the Letter
away .
Y our most Obedient and Devoted Son,
 Ian Murray
P .S. The Porpentine skull is for Henry and Mattie, I hope they
will like it.
Brianna sat on the stool for some time, the whitewashed
wall coo l at her back, smoothing the pages of the letter and
staring absently at the bookcase, with its neat row of cloth and
leather bindings. Robinson Crusoe  pop ped out at her , the title
picked out in gold on the spine.
A savage place, Jenny had said. A dangerous place, too,
where life could shift within a heartbeat from the humorous
dif ficulty of a hog in the pantry to the instant threat of death by
violence.
“And I thought this  was primitive,” she murmured, with a
glance at the peat fire on the hearth.
Not so primitive after all, she  thought as she followed Ian
through the barnyard and out past the outbuildings. Everything
was wel l kept and tidy; the drystone walls and buildings all in
good repair , if a little shabby .  The chickens were carefully
confined to their own yard, a nd a hovering cloud of flies
behind the barn announced the presence of a discreet manure
pit, well away from the house.
The only real dif ference between this farmyard and modern
ones she  had seen was the absence of rusting farm equipment;
there wa s a shovel resting agai nst the barn, and two or three
battered plowshares in a shed that they passed, but no
ramshackle tractor; no tangles of wire and scattered metal
scraps.The animals were healthy , too, if somewhat smaller than
their modern counterparts. A loud “Baaah!” announced the
presence of a s mall herd of fa t sheep in a paddock on the
hillside, who trotted eagerly up to the fence as they passed,
woolly backs wobbling and  yellow eyes agleam in
anticipation.
“Spoilt bastards,” Ian said, but with a smile. “Think
anyone’ s come up here has com e to feed ye, don’ t you? My
wife’ s,” he added, turning to Br ianna. “She gives them all the
cast-of f truck from the kailyard, till ye’d think they’d burst.”
The ram, a majestic creature with great coiled horns,
extended his head over the fence and emitted an imperious
“Beheheh!”  that was immediately echoed by his faithful flock.
“Bugger of f, Hughie,” said Ian, with tolerant scorn. “Y ou’re
no mut ton yet , but the day ’ll come, aye?” He waved
dismissively at the ram and turned up the hill, kilt swinging.
Brianna hung back a step, watching his stride in fascination.
Ian wore his ki lt with an air quite unlike anything she was
used to; not a costume nor a uniform—with a conscious
bearing, but more as though it were part of his body than an
article of clothing.
In spite of that, she knew it wasn’ t usual for him to wear it;
Jenny’ s eyes had opened wide  when he had come down to
breakfast; then she had bent her head, burying a smile in her
cup. Y o ung Jamie had flicked a dark brow at his father , got
back a bland look, and settled to his sausage with a faint shrug,
and one of those small subterranean noises common to
Scottish males.
The plaid cloth w as old—she could see the fading along the
creases and the wornness at th e hem—but carefully kept. It
would have been hidden away after Culloden, along with the
pistols and the s words, with the pipes and their pibrochs—all
the symbols of pride conquered.
No, not quite co nquered, she thought, with a queer small tug
at h er heart. She remembered Roger W akefield, squattingbeside her under a gray sky on the battlefield at Culloden, his
face lean and da rk, eyes shadowed with knowledge of the dead
nearby .
“Scots have long memories,” he’d said, “and they’re not the
most for giving of people. There ’ s a clan stone out there with
the n ame of Ma cKenzie carved on it, and a good many of my
relatives under it.” He had smiled then, but not in jest. “I don’ t
feel quit e so personal about it as some, but I haven’ t for gotten
either .”
No, not conquered. Not through a thousand years of strife
and treachery , and not now . Defeated, scattered, but still
surviving. Like Ian, maimed but upright. Like her father ,
exiled but still a Highlander .
W ith an ef fort s he put Roger fro m her mind, and hurried to
keep up with Ian’ s long, limping stride.
His lean face h ad lighted with pleasure when she had asked
him to show her  Lallybroch. It had been arranged that Y oung
Jamie w ould tak e her to Inverne ss in a week’ s time, to see her
safely aboard a ship to the Colonies, and she meant to use her
time here to good advantage.
They walked—at a good pace, despite Ian’ s leg—over the
fields toward the small foothills that rimmed the valley to the
north, rising toward the pass thr ough the black crags. It was a
beautiful place, she thought. The pale green fields of oats and
barley rippled with shifting li ght, cloud-shadows scudding
through the spring sunshine, dri ven by the breeze that bent the
stems of budding grass.
One field lay in long, dark ridges, the dirt humped and bare.
At the side of the field stood a lar ge heap of rough stones,
neatly stacked.
“Is that a cairn? ” she asked Ian , voice lowered in respect.
Cairns were the memorials of the dead, her mother had told
her—sometimes the very long dead—new rocks added to the
heap by each passing visitor .He g lanced at h er in surprise, caught the direction of her
gaze, and grinned.
“Ah, no, lass. Those are the stones we turned up wi’ the
plow in the spr ing. Every year we take them out, and every
year the re come  new ones. Dam ned if I ken where they come
from,” he added, shaking his head in resignation. “Stone
fairies come and sow them in the night, I expect.”
She didn’ t know whether this w as a joke or not. Uncertain
whether to laugh, she asked a question instead.
“What will you plant here?”
“Oh, it’ s planted already .” Ian shaded his eyes, squinting
across th e long field with pride . “This is the tattie field. The
new vines will be up by the end of the month.”
“T attie—oh, potatoes!” She looked at the field with new
interest. “Mama told me about that.”
“A ye, it was Cla ire’ s notion—and a good one, too. There’ s
more than once the tatties hav e kept us from starving.” He
smiled briefly but said nothing more, and moved of f, heading
for the wild hills beyond the fields.
It was a long w alk. The day was breezy , but warm, and
Brianna was sweating by the tim e they paused at last, halfway
up a rough track  through the hea ther . The narrow path seemed
to p erch precariously between a steep hillside and an even
steeper fall down a sheer rock  face into a small, splashing
burn.
Ian stop ped, wiping his brow with his sleeve, and motioned
her to a seat amid the heaps of granite boulders. From this
vantage point, the valley lay below them, the farmhouse
seeming small and incongruous, its fields a feeble intrusion of
civilization on the surrounding wilderness of crag and heather .
He brou ght out a stone bottle fr om the sack he carried, and
drew the cork with his teeth.
“That’ll be your mother ’ s doing, too,” he said with a grin,
handing her the bottle. “That I’ ve kept my teeth, I mean.” Hepassed the tip of his tongue meditatively over his front teeth,
shaking his head.
“A grea t one for eatin’ weeds,  your mother , but who’ s to
ar gue, eh ? Half the men my age  are eatin’ naught but porridge
now .”
“She was always telling me to eat up my vegetables, when I
was little. And brush after every meal.” Brianna took the bottle
from him  and tilted it into her mouth; the ale was strong and
bitter , but welcomely cool after the long walk.
“When y e were little, eh?” Amused, Ian cast an eye over her
length. “I’ve seldom seen a lass  sae braw . I’d say your mother
kent her business, aye?”
She smiled back and gave him back the bottle.
“She knew enough to marry a tall man, at least,” she said
wryly .
Ian laughed and wiped the ba ck of his hand across his
mouth. He gazed af fectionately at her , brown eyes warm.
“Ah, it’ s  fine to see ye, lassie. Y ou’re verra much like him,
it’ s true. Christ, what I wouldna give to be there when Jamie
sees you!”
She looked down at the ground , biting her lip. The ground
was thic k with bracken, and t heir path up the hill showed
plain, w here the green fronds tha t had over grown the track had
been crushed and knocked aside.
“I d on’ t know whether he kn ows or not,” she blurted.
“About me.” She glanced up at him. “He didn’ t tell you.”
Ian rocked back a little, frowning.
“No, that’ s true,” he said slowly . “But I am thinking he
maybe h adna tim e to say , even if he knew . He’ll not have been
here lon g, that last time he came , with Claire. And then, it was
such a moil, wi’  all that happened—” He stopped, pursing his
lips, and glanced at her .“Y our auntie’ s been troubled about that,” he said. “Thinking
that ye might blame her .”
“Blame her for what?” She stared at him, puzzled.
“For Laoghaire.” The brown eyes held hers, intent.
A faint chill came over Brianna at the memory of those pale
eyes, cold as ma rbles, and the woman’ s hateful words. She had
dismissed them as simple malice, but the echoes of
“whoremaster” and “cheat” lingered unpleasantly in her ear .
“What did Aunt Jenny have to do with Laoghaire?”
Ian sighed, brushing back a thick lock of brown hair that fell
down across his face.
“It was her doing that Jamie married the woman. She meant
it w ell, mind,” he said warning ly . “W e did think Claire was
dead these many years.”
His tone held a question, but Brianna merely nodded,
looking down and smoothing th e fabric across her knee. This
was dangerous ground; better to say nothing, if she could.
After a moment, Ian went on.
“It was after h e’d come home from England—he was a
prisoner there for some years after the Rising—”
“I know .”
Ian’ s bro ws shot up in surprise, but he said nothing; simply
shook his head.
“A ye, well. When he came back, he was—dif ferent. W ell,
he w ould be, ay e?” He smiled briefly , then dropped his eyes,
pleating the fabric of his kilt between his fingers.
“It was like talking to a ghost,”  he said quietly . “He would
look at me, an d smile, and a nswer—but he wasna really
there.” He took a deep breath, and she could see the lines
between his brows, carved deep in concentration.
“Before—after Culloden—it was dif ferent, then. He was
sair wounded—and he’d lost Claire—” He glanced briefly at
her , but she kept still, and he went on.“But it was a desperate time then. A great many folk died;
of the fighting, of sickness or o f starving. There were English
soldiers in the country , burning, killing. When it’ s like that, ye
canna even think of dying, onl y because the struggle to live
and keep your family takes all your time.”
A small  smile touched Ian’ s lip s, the rue of memory oddly
lightened with a private amusement.
“Jamie hid,” he said, with an abrupt gesture toward the
hillside above them. “There. Th ere’ s a wee cave behind that
big gorse bush, halfway up. It ’ s what I brought ye here to
show ye.”
She looked where he pointed, up the tangled slope of rock
and heather , the hillside a riot of tiny flowers. There was no
sign of a cave, but the gorse bush stood out in a blaze of
yellow blossom, brilliant as a torch.
“I ca me up to bring him food on ce, when he was sick of the
ague. I told him he must come d own to the house wi’ me; that
Jenny was scairt he’d die up h ere, all alone. He opened one
eye, all bright with the fever , a nd his voice was sae hoarse I
could scarcely hear him. He said  Jenny needna be worrit; even
though everythi ng in the world seemed set on killin’ him, he
didna mean to make it easy for them. Then he closed his eye
and went to sleep.”
Ian gave  her a wry glance. “I wasna so sure he had that
much to  say about whether he was going to die or no, so I
stayed w ith him  through the nig ht. But he was right, after all;
he’ s ver ra stubb orn, ye ken?” H is tone held a note of a mild
apology .
Brianna nodded , but her thro at felt too tight to speak.
Instead s he stood up abruptly , and headed up the hill. Ian made
no protest, but stayed on his rock, watching her .
It w as a steep climb, and small thorny plants caught at her
stockings. Near the cave, she h ad to scramble upward on all
fours, to keep her balance on the steep granite slope.The cav e mouth  was little more than a crack in the rock, the
opening widenin g into a small triangle at the bottom. She knelt
down and thrust her head and shoulders inside.
The chill was immediate; she could feel dampness condense
on her cheeks. It took a moment for her sight to adapt to the
dark, but enough light trickled into the cave past her shoulders
for her to see.
It w as p erhaps e ight feet long an d six feet wide, a dim, dirt-
floored cavity , with a ceiling so low that one could stand
upright only near the entrance. T o stay inside for any length of
time would be like being entombed.
She pull ed her head out quickly , breathing in deep gulps of
the fresh spring air . Her heart was beating heavily .
Seven years! Seven years to ha ve lived here, in cold grime
and gnawing hunger . I wouldn’ t last seven days,  she thought.
W ouldn’ t you?  said another part of her mind. And then it
came again, that tiny click of recognition that she had felt
when she had l ooked at Ellen’ s portrait, and felt her fingers
close on an invisible brush.
She turned around slowly and sat down, the cave behind
her . It was very quiet here on the mountainside, but quiet in
the way  of hills and forests, a q uiet that was not silent at all,
but composed of constant tiny sounds.
There w ere small buzzings in th e gorse bush nearby , of bees
working the yellow flowers, dusty with pollen. Far below was
the rush ing of the burn, a low  note echoing the rush of the
wind ab ove, stirring leaves and rattling twigs, sighing past the
jutting boulders.
She sat still, and  listened, and thought she knew what Jamie
Fraser had found here.
Not loneliness, but solitude. Not suf fering, but endurance,
the discovery of grim kinship with the rocks and sky . And the
finding here of a harsh peace that would transcend bodily
discomfort, a healing instead of the wounds of the soul.He had perhaps found the cave not a tomb, but a refuge;
drawn s trength from its rocks, like Antaeus thrown to earth.
For this place w as part of him, who had been born here, as it
was part of her , who had never seen it before.
Ian w as still sitting patiently bel ow; hands clasped about his
knees, looking out over the valley . She reached up and
carefully broke of f a bit of the gorse-bush, mindful of its
spines. S he laid it at the entranc e of the cave, weighted with a
small sto ne, then stood and made her way precariously down
the hill.
Ian must have heard her approa ch, but didn’ t turn around.
She sat down beside him.
“It’ s safe for you  to wear that, now?” she said abruptly , with
a nod at his kilt.
“Oh, aye,” he said. He glanced down, his fingers rubbing
the soft , worn wool. “It’ s bee n some years now since the
soldiers last came. After all, wha t’ s left?” He gestured over the
valley below .
“They carried away all they c ould find of value. Ruined
what the y couldna carry . There’ s no much left, save the land,
is there? And I think they hadna much interest in that.” She
could se e he was disturbed in so me way; his wasn’ t a face that
hid its owner ’ s feelings.
She watched him for a momen t, then said quietly , “Y ou’re
still here. Y ou and Jenny .”
His hand stilled, and lay against  the plaid. His eyelids were
closed, his homely , weathered face raised to the sun.
“A ye, that’ s true,” he said at las t. He opened his eyes again,
and turn ed to look at her . “And so are you. W e talked a bit last
night, y our auntie and I. When  ye see Jamie, and all’ s well
between ye—then ask him, if y e will, what would he have us
do.”
“Do? About what?”“About Lallybro ch.” He waved, taking in the valley and the
house below . He turned to her , eyes troubled.
“Y ou’ll maybe know—maybe n ot—that your father made a
deed of sassine before Cullode n, to give over the place to
Y oung Jamie, should it all come to smash and he be killed or
condemned as a traitor . But th at would be before you were
born; before he kent that he’d have a bairn of his own.”
“Y es, I did know that.” She had a sudden awareness of what
he was leading up to, and put her hand on his arm, startling
him with the touch.
“I didn’ t come for that, Uncle,” she said softly . “Lallybroch
isn’ t min e—and I don’ t want it.  All I want is to see my father
—and my mother .”
Ian’ s long face relaxed, and he put his hand over hers where
it lay on his arm. He didn’ t say anything for a moment; then
squeezed her hand gently and let it go.
“A ye, well. Y ou’ll tell him, nonetheless; if he wishes it—”
“He won’ t,” she interrupted firmly .
Ian looked at her , a faint smile at the back of his eyes.
“Y e ken a lot about what he’ll d o, for a lass that’ s never met
him.”
She smiled at him, the spring sun warm on her shoulders.
“Maybe I do.”
The smile broke through to Ian’ s face.
“A ye, your mother will ha’ told  ye, I suppose. And she did
know him, for all she was a S assenach. But then, she was
always…special, your mother .”
“Y es.” S he hesitated for a moment, wanting to hear more
about th e topic of Laoghaire, b ut unsure how to ask. Before
she coul d think of something, he  stood, brushed down his kilt,
and started down the track, forcing her to rise and follow .“What’ s a fetch, Uncle Ian?” she  asked the back of his head.
Preoccupied with the dif ficulties  of descent, he didn’ t turn, but
she saw him lur ch slightly , wooden leg sinking into the loose
earth. At the bottom of the hill he waited for her , leaning on
his stick.
“Y ou’ll be thinking of what Laoghaire said?” he asked.
W ithout waiting  for her nod, he turned and began making his
way along the bottom of the hill, toward the small stream that
flowed down through the rocks.
“A fetch is the sight of a person, when the person himself is
far awa’ ,” he said. “Sometimes it will be a person that’ s died,
far from home. It’ s ill luck to se e one, but worse luck to meet
your own—for if you do, ye die.”
It w as th e absol ute matter -of-fac tness of his tone that made
a shiver run down her spine.
“I hope I don’ t,”  she said. “But she said—Laoghaire—” She
stumbled on the name.
“L ’heery ,” Ian corrected. “A ye, well. It was at her wedding
to Jamie  that Jenny saw your mother ’ s fetch, that’ s true. She
kent then that i t was a bad match, but it was too late to be
undone.”
He knel t awkwardly on his good knee, and splashed water
from the burn o ver his face. Brianna did likewise, and gulped
several handfuls of the cold, peaty-tasting water . Having no
towel, sh e pulled her long shirtt ail from her breeks and wiped
her face. She ca ught Ian’ s scandalized look at the glimpse of
her bare stomach thus af forded, and dropped the shirttail
abruptly , her cheeks flushing.
“Y ou we re going  to tell me why my father married her ,” she
said, to hide her embarrassment.
Ian’ s cheeks had gone a dull red, and he turned hastily away ,
talking to cover his confusion.
“A ye. It was as I told ye—when Jamie came from England,
it w as like the spark had gone out o’ him, and there wasnothing here to kindle it again. I dinna ken what it was that
happened in England, but something did, sure as I’m born.”
He shrugged, the back of his neck fading to its normal
sunburnt brown.
“After Culloden , he was bad hurt, but there was fighting
still to do, of a kind, and that kept him alive. When he came
home from England—there w asna anything here for him,
really .” He spoke quietly , eyes c ast down, watching his footing
on the rocky ground.
“So Jen ny mad e the match for  him, with Laoghaire.” He
glanced at her , eyes bright and shrewd.
“Y ou’ll maybe be old enough to  know , for all you’re unwed
yet. What a woman can do for a man—or he for her , I suppose.
T o h eal him, I  mean. Fill his emptiness.” He touched his
maimed leg absently . “Jamie wed Laoghaire from pity , I think
—and if she ha d truly needed him—aye, well.” He shrugged
again, and smiled at her .
“It’ s no use to sa y what might have been or should be, is it?
But he had left Laoghaire’ s h ouse some time before your
mother came back, you should know that.”
Brianna felt a small sur ge of relief.
“Oh. I’m glad to know that. And my mother—when she
came back—”
“He was verra g lad to see her ,” Ian said simply . This time
the smile lighted his whole face, like sunshine. “So was I.”3 5
B O N  V O Y A G E
I t remind ed her uncomfortably of Boston’ s city dog pound. A
lar ge, halfdark space whose rafters rang with yelping, and an
atmosphere dense with animal smells. The big building on the
market square in Inverness sheltered a great many enterprises
—food vendors, cattle and swine brokers, assurance agents,
ship-chandlers and Royal Navy recruiters, but it was the group
of men, women  and children bu nched in one corner that lent
most force to the illusion.
Here an d there a man or a wom an stood upright amid the
group, c hin out and shoulders set in a show of good health and
spirit, putting themselves forwa rd. But for the most part, the
people who of fered themselves for sale eyed the passersby
warily , in darting glances wh ose expressions were fixed
between hope and fear—much too reminiscent of the dogs in
the anim al shelter where her father had now and then taken her
to adopt a pet.
There were several families, too, with children clinging to
their mo thers, or standing blank-faced beside their parents.
She tried not to look at them; it was always the puppies that
had broken her heart.
Y oung Jamie was sidling slowly  around the group, hat held
against his chest to save it bein g crushed by the crowd, eyes
half closed as he considered the prospects on of fer . Her uncle
Ian had gone to the shipping of fice to arrange her passage to
America, leaving her cousin Jamie to choose a servant to
accompany her on the journey . In vain had she protested that
she didn ’ t need a servant; after  all, she had—so far as they
knew—traveled from France to Scotland by herself, in perfect
safety .
The me n had nodded and smiled and listened with every
evidence of polite attention—and here she was, obediently
following Y oung  Jamie through the crowd like one of her auntJenny’ s sheep. She was beginning to understand exactly what
her moth er had meant by describing the Frasers as “stubborn
as rocks.”
Despite the hubbub around her  and her annoyance at her
male relatives, her heart gave a small, excited bounce at
thought of her mother . It was only now , when she knew for
sure tha t Claire was safe, that s he could admit to herself how
sorely she had missed her . And her father—that unknown
Highlander who had come so su ddenly and vividly to life for
her as she read his letters. The  minor fact of an intervening
ocean seemed no more than a small inconvenience.
Her cousin Jamie interrupted these rosy thoughts by taking
her arm and leaning close to shout in her ear .
“Y on fel low wi’  the cast in one eye,” he said in a subdued
bellow , indicating the gentleman in question by pointing with
his chin. “What d’ye say to him, Brianna?”
“I’d say he looks like the Boston Strangler ,” she muttered,
then louder , shouting into her c ousin’ s ear , “He looks like an
ox! No!”
“He’ s strong, and he looks honest!”
Brianna thought the gentleman in question looked too stupid
to be dis honest, but refrained from sayin g so, merely shaking
her head emphatically .
Y oung Jamie shrugged philosophically and resumed his
scrutiny of the would-be bondsmen, walking around those who
took his  particular interest and peering at them closely , in a
way she might h ave thought exceedingly rude had a number of
other potential employers not been doing likewise.
“Bridies! Hot bridies!” A high-pitched screech cut through
the rumble and racket of the hall, and Brianna turned to see an
old wom an elbowing her way robustly through the crowd, a
steaming tray hung round her n eck and a wooden spatula in
hand.
The heavenly scent of fresh hot dough and spiced meat cut
through the other pungencies in the hall, noticeable as the oldwoman’ s calling . It had been a long time since breakfast, and
Brianna dug in her pocket, feeling saliva fill her mouth.
Ian h ad taken he r purse to pay for her passage, but she had
two or three loose coins; she he ld one up and waved it to and
fro. The  bridie seller spotted th e flash of silver and at once
altered course, tacking through the chattering mob. She hove
to in front of Brianna and reached up to snatch the coin.
“Mary save us, a giantess!” she said, showing strong yellow
teeth in a grin as she tilted her head back to look up at Brianna.
“Y e’d be st take twa, my dearie. One will never do a great lass
like you!”
Heads tu rned, an d faces grinned up at her . She stood half a
head higher than most of the men nearby . Mildly embarrassed
by the attention,  Brianna gave th e nearest of fender a cold look.
This seemed to entertain the young man quite a lot; he
staggered back against his friend, clutching his breast and
pretending to be overcome.
“My God!” he said. “She looked at me! I’m heartstruck!”
“Och, awa’ wi’ ye,” his friend sc of fed, shoving him upright.
” ‘ T was me she was looking at;  who’d look at you  i f they’ d a
choice?”
“Nothing of the sort,” his frien d protested stoutly . “It was
me—wasn’ t it, darlin’?” He languished, making calf ’ s eyes at
Brianna and looking so ridiculou s that she laughed, along with
the crowd around her .
“And what would ye be doing with her , if ye got her , eh?
She’d m ake two of ye. Now , of f wi’ ye, spawn,” the bridie
seller said, casually smacking the young man across the
buttocks with her wooden spatula. “I’ve business, if you
haven’ t. And the young woman  will starve if ye dinna leave
of f playin’ the fool and let her buy her dinner , aye?”
“She loo ks in fine flesh to me, grannie.” Brianna’ s admirer ,
ignoring both assault and admo nition, ogled her shamelessly .
“And as for the rest—fetch me a ladder , Bobby , I’m no afraid
of heights!”Amid gales of l aughter , the young man was dragged away
by h is friends, m aking loud kissing noises over his shoulder as
he m oved reluctantly of f. Brianna took her change in coppers
and retir ed into a corner to eat t wo of the hot beef pasties, her
face still warm with laughter and self-consciousness.
She had n’ t been  so aware of her height since she had been a
gawky seventh -grader , towerin g over all her classmates.
Among her tall cousins, she had felt at home, but it was true;
here she stuck o ut like a sore thumb, despite her having abided
by Jenny ’ s insistence and changed from her men’ s clothes to a
dress of  her cousin Janet’ s, hastily altered and let out in the
seams.
Her sense of sel f-consciousness was not helped by the fact
that no underclothes went with the dress, beyond a shift. No
one seemed to find any lack in t his state of af fairs, but she was
intensely consci ous of the una ccustomed feeling of airiness
about her nether parts, and the o dd feeling of her naked thighs
sliding past each other as sh e walked, her silk stockings
gartered just above the knee.
Both self-consciousness and drafts were for gotten as she bit
into the first hot  pastry . A bridie  was a plump hot pie in a half-
moon shape, filled with minced steak and suet and spiced with
onion. A rush o f hot, rich juice and flaky pastry filled her
mouth, and she closed her eyes in bliss.
“The food was either terribly b ad or terribly good,” Claire
had said, describing her adventures in the past. “That’ s
because there’ s no way of keeping things; anything you eat has
either been salted or preserved in lard, if it isn’ t half rancid—
or else it’ s fresh of f the hoof o r out of the garden, in which
case it can be bloody marvelous.”
The bridie was bloody marvelous, Brianna decided, even if
it did keep drop ping crumbs down the top of her bodice. She
brushed at her bosom, trying  to be unobtrusive, but the
crowd’ s attention had turned—no one was looking at her now .
Or almost no one. A slight, fair man in a shabby coat had
materialized by her elbow , making small nervous movementsas thoug h he wanted to pluck her sleeve but hadn’ t quite got
up t he nerve. Not sure whethe r he was a beggar or another
importunate suitor , she looked suspiciously down her nose at
him.
“Y es?”
“Y ou—you are requiring a servant, ma’am?”
She dropped her aloofness, reali zing that he must be one of
the crowd of indentures.
“Oh. W ell, I wouldn’ t say I require one, exactly , but it looks
as though I’m going to get one anyway .” She glanced at Y oung
Jamie, who was now interrog ating a squat, beetle-browed
individual with shoulders like t he V illage Blacksmith. Y oung
Jamie’ s notion of the ideal ser vant seemed to be limited to
muscle. She looked back at the small man in front of her; he
wasn’ t much by Y oung Jamie’ s standards, but by hers…
“Are you interested?” she asked.
The exp ression of haggard nervousness didn’ t leave his
face, but a fugitive gleam of hope showed in his eyes.
“It—I—that is—not me, no. But will you think—perhaps
consider—will you take my daughter?” he said abruptly .
“Please!”
“Y our daughter?” Brianna looked down at him, startled, her
half-eaten bridie for gotten.
“I beg you, ma ’am!” T o her s urprise, tears stood in the
man’ s eyes. “Y e cannot think how ur gently I pray you, or what
gratitude I must bear ye!”
“But—ah—” Brianna brushed crumbs from the corner of
her mouth, feeling desperately awkward.
“She is a strong  girl in spite of her appearance, and most
willing! She will be content to do any service whatever for ye,
ma’am, and ye’ll buy her contract!”
“But w hy should—look, what’ s the trouble?” she said,
moved past awkwardness by curiosity and pity for his obviousdistress. She took him by the  arm and drew him into the
shelter of a corner , where the racket was slightly diminished.
“Now , why are you so anxiou s that I should hire your
daughter?”
She could see the muscles move in his throat as he
swallowed convulsively .
“There i s a man. He—he desires her . Not as a servant. As a
—as a— concubine.” The words  came out in a hoarse whisper ,
and a flood of ugly crimson stained his face.
“Mmphm,” said Brianna, discovering all at once the utility
of th is ambiguous expression. “ I see. But you needn’ t let your
daughter go to him, surely?”
“I ha ve no choic e.” His agony was patent. “Her contract has
been bought by Mr . Ransom—the broker .” He jerked his head
backward, indic ating a tough-looking gentleman in a tie-wig,
who wa s talking to Y oung Jamie. “He can dispose of it to
whom he will—and he will sell her without a moment’ s
hesitation to this…this…” He choked, overcome by despair .
“Here, take this.” She hastily untucked the wide kerchief
from her bodice, took it of f her neck, and handed it to him. It
left her slightly  less than mod est, but this seemed like an
emer gency .
Clearly it was, to him. He swabbed blindly at his face, then
dropped the cloth and seized her free hand in both of his.
“He is a drover; he has gone to  the cattle market to sell his
beasts. When he has done so, he will return with the money for
her contract, and take her awa y to his house in Aberdeen.
When I heard him say so to Ransom, I was thrown into the
most violent despair . I prayed most ur gently to the Lord for
her deliverance. And then—” He gulped.
“I saw you—so proud and noble and kind-seeming—and it
did come to me  as my prayers were answered. Oh, ma’am, I
pray ye, do not disdain a father ’ s plea. T ake her!”“But I’m going to America! Y ou ’d never—” She bit her lip.
“I mean, you wouldn’ t see her—for a very long time.”
The desp erate father went quite white at this. He closed his
eyes, and seemed to sway slightly , giving at the knees.
“The Colonies?” he whispered. Then he opened his eyes
once more and set his jaw .
“Better she should be gone from  me forever to a wild place,
than to meet dishonor before my eyes.”
Brianna had no idea what to  say to this. She glanced
helplessly over the man’ s head at the sea of bobbing heads.
“Er…your daughter…which one…?”
The flicker of hope in his eyes sprang into sudden flame,
shocking in its intensity .
“Bless ye, lady! I will fetch her to ye directly!”
He pressed her hand fervently ,  then darted away into the
crowd, leaving her staring after him. After a moment, she
shrugged helplessly , and bent to pick up her fallen kerchief.
How had this  happened? And what in the name of goodness
would her uncle and her cousin say , if she—
“This is Elizabeth,” a voice an nounced breathlessly . “Do
your duty to the lady , Lizzie.”
Brianna looked down and found the decision made for her .
“Oh, dear ,” she murmured, seeing the neat white parting
down th e middl e of the small head that bent in a deep curtsy
before her . “A puppy .”
The head bobbed upright, presenting her with a thin,
starved-looking face, in which scared gray eyes occupied most
of the available space.
“Y our se rvant, mum,” said the small, white-lipped mouth.
Or at least that’ s what it looked like it said; the girl spoke so
softly , she couldn’ t be heard above the surrounding racket.“She wi ll serve ye well, ma’am , aye, indeed she will!” The
father ’ s anxious voice was more audible. She glanced at him;
there was a strong resemblance between father and daughter ,
both wit h the same flyaway fai r hair , the same thin, anxious
faces. They were nearly the sam e height, though the girl was
so frail, she seemed like her father ’ s shadow .
“Er…hello.” She smiled at the girl, trying to seem
reassuring. The girl’ s head tilted fearfully back, looking up.
She swallowed visibly , and licked her lips.
“Ah…how old are you, Lizzie? May I call you Lizzie?”
The small head bobbed on a neck that looked like a wild
mushroom’ s sta lk; long, colorless, and infinitely fragile. The
girl whispered something that Brianna didn’ t catch; she looked
at the father , who answered eagerly .
“Fourteen, ma’am. But she’ s a rare hand with cooking and
sewing, clean in her person and  ye’ll never find a soul more
biddable and willing!”
He stood behind his daughter , hands on her shoulders,
gripped tight enough to show hi s knuckles white. His eyes met
Brianna’ s. They were pale blue, pleading. His lips moved—
without sound, but she heard him clearly .
“Please,” he said.
Beyond him, Brianna could see her uncle, who had come
into the hall. He was talking to Y oung Jamie, smooth head and
curly bent together in close co nversation. In a moment they
would be looking for her .
She took a deep breath and drew herself up to her full
height. W ell, and  if you came right down to it, she thought, she
was as much a F raser as her cou sin. Let them find out just how
stubborn a rock could be.
She smiled at the girl and held out a hand, of fering the
second, uneaten bridie.
“It’ s a bar gain, Lizzie. W ill you have a bite to seal it?”“She’ s eaten my food,” Brianna said, with as much assurance
as she could conjure up. “She’ s mine.”
Rather to  her surprise, this statement finally put a stop to the
ar gument. Her cousin looked as though he meant to go on
remonstrating, but her uncle put a hand on Y oung Jamie’ s arm
to si lence him. T he look of sur prise on Ian’ s face turned to a
sort of amused respect.
“Has she, now?” He looked at Lizzie, cowering behind
Brianna, and his lips twitched. “ Mmphm. W ell, then, not much
more to be said, is there?”
Y oung J amie ev idently didn’ t share his father ’ s assessment
of this point; he could think of quite a lot more to be said.
“But a wee lassie like that—s he’ s useless!” He waved a
dismissive hand at Lizzie, frowning. “Why , she isna big
enough even to carry baggage, let alone—”
“I’m big  enoug h to carry my own bags, thanks,” Brianna
put i n. She lowered her brows and gave her cousin back scowl
for scowl, straightening up to emphasize her height.
He lifted an eyebrow in acknowledgment, but didn’ t give
up.
“A woman shouldna be traveling alone—”
“I won’ t be alone, I’ll have Lizzie.”
“—and certainly not to a place like America! Why , it’ s—”
“Y ou’d think it was the ends of  the earth to hear you talk,
and you  haven’ t even seen it!” Brianna said in exasperation. “I
was born  in America, for heaven’ s sake!”
Uncle and cousin gaped at her , identical expressions of
shock on their faces. She seized the opportunity to press her
advantage.
“It’ s my  money , and my servant , and my journey . I’ve given
my word, and I’ll keep it!”
Ian rubbed a kn uckle across his upper lip, suppressing a
grin. He shook his head.“They say it’ s a wise bairn that kens its father , but I dinna
think th ere’ s much doubt who yours is, lass. Y e might have
had the lang ne bbit and red loc ks from anyone, but ye didna
get the stubbornness from any man but Jamie Fraser .”
A self-c onscious flush rose to h er cheeks, but Brianna felt
an odd flutter of something like pleasure.
His feathers ruf fled from the ar gument, Y oung Jamie made
one last attempt.
“It’ s verra unseemly for a woman to be givin’ her opinions
sae free , and her with menfolk to look after her ,” he said
stif fly .
“Y ou don’ t think women ought to have opinions?” Brianna
asked sweetly .
“No, I don’ t!”
Ian gave his son a long look.
“And you’ll have been marrit what, eight years?” He shook
his head. “A ye, well, your Joan ’ s a tactful woman.” Ignoring
Y oung Jamie’ s black look, he turned back to Lizzie.
“V erra well, then. Go and tak e farewell of your father ,
lassie. I’ ll see to the papers.” He watched Lizzie scurry away ,
thin sho ulders hunched against the crowd. He shook his head a
little doubtfully , and turned back to Brianna.
“W ell, she’ll maybe be better company for ye than a
manservant, lass , but your cousi n’ s right about the one thing—
she’ll be no protection. It’ll be you lookin’ out for her , likely .”
Brianna straightened her shoulders and thrust out her chin,
summoning up as much self-co nfidence as she could, in spite
of the sudden hollow feeling that assailed her .
“I can manage,” she said.
She kep t her hand curled tight, holding on to the stone in her
palm. It was som ething to cling to, as the Moray Firth widened
into the sea, an d the cradling s hore of Scotland fell away to
either side.Why ou ght she to feel so strongly for a place she hardly
knew? Lizzie, born and raised  in Scotland, had spared no
glance f or the receding land but had gone below at once, to lay
claim to their sp ace and arrange the few belongings they had
brought aboard.
Brianna had never thought of herself as Scottish—had not
known  she was Scottish until quite recently—yet she had
scarcely felt more bereft by her mother ’ s leaving or her
father ’ s death than by this partin g from people and places she
had known for so short a time.
Perhaps it was only the conta gious emotion of the other
passengers. Man y of them were standing at the rail as she was,
several w eeping openly . Or fear of the long journey ahead. But
she knew quite well it was none of those things.
“That’ s that, I expect.” It was Lizzie, appearing at her elbow
after all, to see the last sight of the land fade away . Her small
pale face was expressionless, but Brianna didn’ t mistake lack
of expression for lack of feeling.
“Y es, we’re on our way .” Mov ed by impulse, Brianna put
out a  ha nd and drew the girl to stand in front of her at the rail,
sheltered alike from fresheni ng wind and from jostling
passengers and seamen. Lizzie was a good foot shorter than
Brianna, and fine-boned as the delicate sooty terns that circled
the masts, squawking overhead.
The sun  did not really set at thi s time of year but hung low
above th e dark hills, and the ai r had grown quite cold in the
Firth. The girl w as thinly dressed; she shivered, and pressed
quite un selfconsciously against Brianna for warmth. Brianna
had a blue woolen arisaid  prov ided by Jen ny; she wrapped her
arms and the sh awl ends around the younger girl, finding as
much comfort in the embrace as she gave.
“It w ill be all right,” she said, to herself as much as to
Lizzie.
The pale blond head bobbed briefly under her chin; she
couldn’ t tell whether it was a nod, or only Lizzie’ s attempt toget t he wind-whipped strands of  hair out of her eyes. Elf-locks
snatched from her own thick p lait fluttered in the stif f salt
breeze, echoing the pull of the huge sails above. Despite her
misgivings, she felt her spirits start to rise with the wind. She
had surv ived a good many part ings so far; she would survive
this. That was what made this leaving hard, she thought. She
had alre ady lost father , mother , lover , home, and friends. She
was alon e by necessity , and als o by choice. But then to find
both home and family again so unexpectedly at Lallybroch had
caught her unaware. She would have given almost anything to
stay—just a little longer .
But there were promises to kee p, losses to be made good.
Then she could come back. T o Scotland. And to Roger .
She shifted her arm, feeling his thin silver band warm on
her wrist under the shawl, the metal heated by her own flesh.
Un peu…beaucoup …Her other hand gripped the cloth
together , exposed to the wind a nd damp with sea spray . If it
hadn’ t b een so cold, she might  not have noticed the sudden
warmth of the drop that fell on the back of her hand.
Lizzie stood stif f as a stick, he r arms hugged tight around
herself. Her ears were lar ge and transparent, her hair fine and
thin, sleek to h er skull. Her ea rs poked out like a mouse’ s,
tender and fragile in the soft deep light of the low night sun.
Brianna reached up and wiped a way the tears by touch. Her
own eyes were dry , and her mouth set firm as she looked out at
the land over L izzie’ s head, but the cold face and quivering
lips against her hand might as well have been her own.
They stood for some time silen tly , until the last of the land
was gone.3 6
Y O U  C A N ’ T  G O  H O M E  A G A I N
Inverness, July 1769
R oger walked slowly through the town, looking around him
with a mixture of fascination and delight. Inverness had
changed a bit in two hundred-od d years, no doubt of it, and yet
it wa s recognizably the same to wn; a good deal smaller , to be
sure, with half it s muddy streets unpaved, and yet he knew  this
street he was w alking down, had walked down it a hundred
times before.
It was Huntly St reet, and while most of the small shops and
buildings were unfamiliar , across the river stood the Old High
Church—not so Old, now—its stubby steeple blunt as ever .
Surely if he wen t inside, Mrs. Dunvegan, the minister ’ s wife,
would be setting out flowers in the chancel, ready for the
Sunday service.  But she woul dn’ t—Mrs. Dunvegan hadn’ t
happened yet, with her thick wo ol sweaters and the terrible pot
pies with which she tormente d the sick of her husband’ s
parish. Y et the s mall stone kirk stood solid and familiar , in the
char ge of a stranger .
His father ’ s own church wasn’ t here; it had been—would
be?—built in 1837. Likewise the manse, which had always
seemed so elderly and decrepit, had not been built until the
early 1900s. He had passed th e site on his way; there was
nothing there now save a tan gle of cinquefoil and sweet
broom, and a single small rowan sapling that sprouted from
the underbrush, leaves fluttering in the light wind.
There was the same damp coolness to the air , tingling with
freshness—but the overlying stink of motor exhaust was gone,
replaced by a distant reek of sewage. The most striking
absence was the churches; where both banks of the river
would one day s port a noble profusion of steeples and spires,
now there was nothing save a scatter of small buildings.There was only the one stone fo otbridge, but the River Ness
itself was naturally much the sa me. The river was low and the
same gulls sat in  the rif fles, squawking companionably to one
another as they picked small fish from among the stones just
under the water ’ s surface.
“Luck to you, m ate,” he said to a fat gull who sat on the
bridge, and crossed the river into the town.
Here and there, a gracious residence sat comfortably
insulated by its wide grounds,  a grand lady spreading her
skirts, ignoring the presence of the hoi polloi nearby . There
was Mountgerald in the distance, the big house looking
precisely as he h ad always known it, save that the great copper
beeches that would in future su rround the house had not yet
been planted; instead, a row of spindly Italian cypresses leaned
dismally against the garden wall, looking homesick for their
sunny birthplace.
For all its elegance, Mountgeral d was reputed to have been
built in the olde st of the old ways—with the foundation laid
over the  body of a human sacrif ice. By report, a workman had
been lur ed into the hole of the cellar , and a great stone dropped
onto him  from the top of the newly built wall, crushing him to
death. H e had— so local history said—been buried there in the
cellar , h is blood a propitiation to the hungry spirits of the
earth, w ho thus satisfied, had allowed the edifice to stand
prosperous and untroubled through the years.
The house could be no more than twenty or thirty years old
now , Roger thought. There migh t easily be people in the town
who had  worked on its building ; who knew exactly what had
happened in that cellar , to whom, and why .
But he had othe r things to do;  Mountgerald and its ghost
would have to k eep their secrets. W ith a mild pang of regret,
he le ft the big house behind, and turned his scholar ’ s nose into
the road that led to the docks downriver .
W ith a feeling of what could only be called deja vu, he
pushed o pen the door of a pub. The half-timbered entry , with
its s tone flags, w as as he had seen it a week before—and twohundred years hence—and the familiar smell of hops and yeast
in th e ai r was a comfort to his spirit. The name had changed,
but not the smell of beer .
Roger took a deep gulp from his wooden cup and nearly
choked. “All right, man?” The barman paused, a bucket of
sand in his hand, to peer at Roger .
“Fine,” Roger said hoarsely . “Just fine.”
The bar man nod ded and went back to scattering sand, but
kept a practiced eye on Roger in case he looked like vomiting
on the freshly swept and sanded floor .
Roger co ughed and cleared his throat, then essayed a further
cautious sip. The flavor was fine; very good, in fact. It was the
alcohol content that was unexpected; this stuf f packed a
wallop far greater than any m odern beer Roger had ever
encountered. Claire had said that alcoholism was endemic to
the t ime, and Ro ger could easily see why . Still, if drunkenness
were the greatest hazard he faced, he could deal with that.
He s at quietly b y the hearth and drank, savoring the dark,
bitter brew as he watched and listened.
It w as a port pub, and a busy one. So near the docks on the
Moray Firth, it hosted sea capta ins and merchants, as well as
sailors from the ships in port a nd longshoremen and laborers
from the nearby warehouses. A  great deal of business of one
kind and another was being transacted over the beer -stained
surfaces of its many small tables.
W ith half an ear  Roger could hear a contract being arranged
for the shipping  of three hundre d bolts of cheap drugget cloth
from Ab erdeen, bound for the Colonies, with an exchange to
be m ade for a car go of rice and  indigo from the Carolinas. A
hundred head of Galloway cattle, six hundred-weight of rolled
copper , casks of sulfur , molasses, and wine. Quantities and
prices, delivery dates and conditions floated through the
babble a nd beer  fumes of the pub like the thick blue clouds of
tobacco smoke that floated near the low ceiling-beams.Not only  goods were being bar g ained for . In one corner sat
a ship’ s captain, marked by the cut of his long, full-skirted coat
and the fine black tricorne that lay on the table by his elbow .
He w as attended by a clerk, a ledger and a money box on the
table before him, interviewing a steady stream of people,
emigrants seeking passage to the Colonies for themselves and
their families.
Roger w atched the proceedings covertly . The ship was
bound f or V ir ginia, and after listening for some time he
deduced that the cost of passage for a male passenger—for a
gentleman, that is—was ten pounds, eight shillings. Those
willing t o travel  in the steerage, packed like casks and cattle in
the lower holds, might ship aboard for four pounds, two
shillings each, bringing their own food for a six-weeks voyage.
Fresh water , he gathered, was provided.
For those desiring passage but lacking funds, there were
other means available.
“Indenturement for yourself, your wife, and your two elder
sons?” The captain tilted his head appraisingly , looking over
the family that stood before h im. A small, wiry man, who
might b e in his early thirties but looked much older , shabby
and bowed with labor . His wife, perhaps a little younger ,
standing behind  her husband, eyes glued to the floor , tightly
grasping the hands of two little girls. One of the girls held on
to her baby broth er , a lad of three or four . The elder boys stood
by their father , t rying to look ma nly . Roger thought they might
be t en and twel ve, allowing for the puny stature caused by
malnutrition.
“Y ourself and the boys, aye, tha t’ll do,” the captain said. He
frowned at the w oman, who didn’ t look up. “No one will buy a
woman with so many young ones—she might keep one,
perhaps. Y ou’ll have to sell the girls, though.”
The man glanced back at his fam ily . His wife kept her head
down, unmovin g, not looking at anything. One of the girls
twitched and jerked, though, complaining in an undertone that
her hand was being crushed. The man turned back.“All right,” he s aid, low-voiced . “Can they—might they—
go together?”
The cap tain rub bed a hand acr oss his mouth, and nodded
indif ferently .
“Likely enough.”
Roger didn’ t wait to witness th e details of the transaction.
He got up abruptly and left the pub; the dark beer had lost its
taste.
He p aused in th e street outside, fingering the coins in his
pocket. It was all he had been able to collect of suitable
money , in the time he’d had. He had thought that it would be
enough, though;  he was good-sized and had a fair amount of
confidence in his own abilities . Still, the little scene he had
witnessed in the pub had shaken him.
He had grown up with the his tory of the Highlands. He
knew well enough the sorts of things that drove families to
such a pitch of desperation that they would accept permanent
separation and semislavery as the price of survival.
He knew all about the sale of lands that forced small
crofters of f the lands their famil ies had tended for hundreds of
years, all about the dreadful conditions of penury and
starvation in the cities, the simp le insupportableness of life in
Scotland in these days. And not all his years of reading and
study ha d prepared him for the look of that woman’ s face, her
eyes fixed on the fresh-sanded floor , her daughters’ hands
clutched hard in her own.
T en pounds, eight shillings. Or four pounds, two. Plus
whatever it might cost for food. He had exactly fourteen
shillings, threep ence in his pock et, together with a handful of
copper doits and a couple of farthings.
He walk ed slowly down the lan e that led along the seaside,
glancing at the collection of ships that lay moored by the
wooden docks. Fishing ketches, for the most part, small
galleys and brigs that plied thei r trade up and down the Firth,
or at most ran across the C hannel, carrying car go andpassengers to France. Only three lar ge ships lay at anchor in
the Firth , those of a size to brave the winds of the Atlantic
crossing.
He coul d cross to France, of course, and take ship from
there. O r travel overland to Edin bur gh, a much lar ger port than
Inverness. But it would be late  in the year then, for sailing.
Brianna was six weeks before h im already; he could waste no
time in finding  her—God knew what could happen to a
woman alone here.
Four pounds, two shillings. W ell, he could work, certainly .
W ith neither children nor wife t o support, he could save most
of his earnings . But given that the average clerk earned
something like twelve pounds per year , and that he was much
more likely to find work shoveling stables than keeping
accounts, the chances of his sav ing up passage money in any
reasonable time were fairly slim.
“First things first,” he muttered.  “Be sure where she’ s gone,
before you trouble about getting there yourself.”
T aking his hand out of his pock et, he turned right between
two war ehouses, and into a narr ow lane. His high spirits of the
morning had lar gely evaporat ed, but they lifted slightly ,
nonetheless, when he saw that h e had been right in his guess;
the harb ormaster ’ s of fice was where he had known it must be
—in the same sq uat stone building where it still would be, two
hundred years hence. Roger smiled with wry humor; Scots
were not inclined to make ch anges purely for the sake of
change.
It was crowded  and busy inside, with four harried clerks
behind a  battered wooden counter , scribbling and stamping,
carrying bundles of paper to and fro, taking money and
conveying it carefully into an inner of fice, from which they
issued moments later , bearing receipts on japanned tin trays.
A cr ush of impatient men press ed against the counter , each
endeavoring to signal by means of voice and posture that his
business was much more ur gent than that of the fellow
standing next him. Once Roger had succeeded in capturing theattention of one of the clerks, th ough, there turned out to be no
great dif ficulty in seeing the r egisters of the ships that had
sailed from Inverness within the last few months.
“Here, wait,” he said to the you ng man who pushed a lar ge,
leather -bound book across the counter to him.
“A ye?” The clerk was flushed w ith hurry , and had a smut of
ink on his nose, but paused politely , arrested in flight.
“How much d’ye get paid for working here?” Roger asked.
The cler k’ s fair eyebrows lifted, but he was in too much
hurry either to ask questions or to take of fense at the inquiry .
“Six shillings the week,” he said briefly , and promptly
disappeared in response to an irritable shout of “Munro!” from
the of fice beyond the counter .
“Mmphm.” Roger pushed back through the crowd and took
the book of registers away to a small table by the window , out
of the main stream of traf fic.
Having seen the conditions under which the clerks worked,
Roger was impressed at the legibility of the handwritten
registers. He was well accustomed to archaic spelling and
eccentric punctuation, though those he was used to seeing
were always yellowed and fragile, on the ver ge of
disintegration. It gave him an odd little historian’ s thrill to see
the page  before him fresh and white, and just beyond, the clerk
who sat  at a hig h table, copying as fast as quill could write,
shoulders hunched against the hubbub in the room.
Y ou’r e shilly-shallying,  said a cold little voice in the middle
of h is br ain. She’ s he r e or she’ s not; being af raid to look won’ t
change it. Get on!
Roger took a de ep breath and flipped open the big ledger
book. T he ships’ names were neatly lettered at the tops of
pages, followed by the names of  their masters and mates, their
main car goes and dates of sailing. Arianna. Polyphemus.
Merry W idow . T ibur on . D espite  his apprehensions, he couldn’ t
help adm iring the names of the  ships as he thumbed through
the pages.Half an hour later , he had ceased  to marvel over both poetry
and pict uresqueness, barely noting each ship’ s name as he ran
his finge r down the pages in increasing desperation. Not here,
she wasn’ t here!
But she had to be, he ar gued with himself. She had  to have
taken a ship to the Colonies, where else could she bloody be?
Unless she hadn’ t found the notice, after all…but the sick
feeling under his ribs assured h im that she had; nothing else
would have made her risk the stones.
He took  a deep breath and closed his eyes, which were
starting to feel the strain of the handwritten pages. Then he
opened his eyes, turned back to  the first relevant register , and
began to read again, doggedly muttering each name beneath
his breath, to be sure of not missing one out.
Mr . Phineas Forbes, gentleman.
 Mrs. W ilhelmina Forbes.
 Master Joshua Forbes.
 Mrs. Josephine Forbes.
 Mrs. Eglantine Forbes.
 Mrs. Charlotte Forbes…
He s miled to him self at the thought of Mr . Phineas Forbes,
surrounded by his womenfolk. Even knowing that “Mrs.” here
was sometimes merely the abbreviated form of “Mistress,” and
thus used for both married and unmarried women—rather than
the “Miss” for little girls—he found himself with an
irresistible ment al picture of Ph ineas marching stoutly aboard
at the head of a  train of four wives, Master Joshua no doubt
bringing up the rear .
Mr . W illiam T albot, mer chant.
 Mr . Peter T albot, mer chant.
 Mr . Jonathan Bicknell, physician.
 Mr . Robert MacLeod, farmer .
 Mr . Gor don MacLeod, farmer .
 Mr . Martin MacLeod…No Randalls this time through, either . Not for the
Persephone,  the Queen’ s Revenge,  o r the Phoebe . He rubbed
his aching eyes, and began o n the register of the Phillip
Alonzo . A  Spanish na me, but it was listed under Scottish
registry . Sailing  from Inverness, under the command of
Captain Patrick O’Brian.
He h adn’ t given up, but had alr eady begun to think what to
do n ext, if she should not be list ed in the registers. Lallybroch,
of cours e. He had been there o nce, in his own time, to the
abandoned rema ins of the estate; could he find it now , without
the guidance of roads and signposts?
His thou ghts stopped with a jol t as his gliding finger came
to a halt, near the bottom of a page. Not Brianna Randall, not
the n ame he’d b een looking for , but a name that rang bells of
recognition in his mind. Fraser ,  re ad the slante d, crisp black
writing. Mr . Brian Fraser . N o, not Brian.  And not Mr ., either .
He bent closer , squinting at the cramped black lettering.
He close d his eyes, feeling his heart thump hard in his chest,
and relief flowed through him, intoxicating as the pub’ s
special d ark bee r . Mrs.,  not  Mr . And what had first s eemed
merely an exuberant tail on th e “n” of Brian was on closer
inspection almost surely instead a careless “a.”
Her , it was her , it had to be! It was an unusual first name—
he h ad seen no  other Briannas or Brianas anywhere in the
massive registe r . And even Fraser made sense, of a sort;
embarked on a quixotic quest to find her father , she had taken
his name, the name she was entitled to by right of birth.
He s lammed the register closed,  as though to keep her from
escaping from the pages, and sa t for a moment, breathing. Got
her! He saw the fairhaired clerk eyeing him curiously from the
counter and, flushing, opened the book again.
The Phillip Alonzo . Sailed from Inverness on the fourth of
July , Anno Domini 1769. For Charleston, South Carolina.
He frowned at the name, s uddenly uncertain. South
Carolina. W as that her real destination, or only as close as shecould ge t? A quick glance at the rest of the registers showed
no ships  in July for North Carolina. Perhaps she had simply
taken the first ship for the so uthern colonies, intending to
journey overland.
Or may be he was wrong. A chill gripped him that had
nothing to do with the river wind seeping through the cracks of
the w indow next to him. He loo ked at the page again, and was
reassured. No, there was no profession given, as there was for
all t he men. It was certainly “Mrs.” and therefore it must be
“Briana” as well. And if “Briana” it was, then Brianna it was,
too, he knew it.
He rose and handed the book ac ross the counter to his fair -
haired acquaintance.
“Thanks, man,” he said, relaxing into his own soft accent.
“Can ye  be tellin’ me, is there  a ship in port bound for the
American Colonies soon, now?”
“Oh, ay e,” the clerk said, deftly stowing the register with
one hand and accepting a bill of lading from a customer with
the other . “Happen it will be Gloriana;  she sails day after
tomorrow for the Carolinas.” He looked Roger up and down.
“Emigrant or seaman?” he asked.
“Seaman,” Roge r said promptly . Ignoring the other ’ s raised
eyebrow , he waved toward the f orest of masts visible through
the paned windows. “Where do I go to sign on?”
Both eye brows high, the clerk n odded in the direction of the
door .
“Her ma ster works from the Fria rs when he’ s in port. Likely
he’ll be there now—Captain Bonnet.” He forbore adding what
was obvious from his skeptical expression; if Roger was a
seaman, he, the clerk, was an African parrot.
“Right, mo ghille . Thanks.” Sketching a salute, Roger
turned away , but turned back at the door to find the clerk still
watching him, ignoring the press of impatient customers.
“W ish me luck!” Roger called, with a grin.The clerk’ s answering grin was tinged with something that
might have been either admiration or wistfulness.
“Luck to  ye, man!” he called, an d waved in farewell. By the
time the door sw ung shut, he was deep in conversation with
the next customer , quill pen poised in readiness.
He foun d Captai n Bonnet in the  pub, as advertised, settled in a
corner under a thick blue haze of smoke, to which the
Captain’ s own cigar was adding.
“Y our name?”
“MacKenzie,” Roger said on sudden impulse. If Brianna
could do it, so could he.
“MacKenzie. Any experience, Mr . MacKenzie?”
A bar of sunlight cut across the Captain’ s face, making him
squint. Bonnet drew back into th e shadow of the settle, and the
lines around his eyes relaxed, le aving Roger exposed to a gaze
of uncomfortable penetration.
“It is myself has fished the he rring now and then, in the
Minch.”
It w as no lie, at that; he’d had several teenage summers as
hand on a herri ng boat captained by an acquaintance of the
Reverend’ s. The experience had left him with a useful layer of
muscle, an ear for the singsong cadence of the Isles, and a
fixed dislike of herring. But he knew the feel of a rope in his
hands, at least.
“Ah, ye’re a good-sized lad. Bu t a fisherman will not be the
same as  a sailor , sure.” The m an’ s soft Irish lilt left it open
whether this was question, statement—or provocation.
“I shouldna have thought it an occupation requiring great
skill.” F or no reason he could name, Captain Bonnet raised the
hairs on the back of his neck.
The green eyes sharpened.
“Perhaps more than ye think—b ut sure it’ s nothing a willing
man can’ t learn. But what wo uld it be, now , that makes afellow of your sort crave the sea of a sudden?”
The eyes flickered in the tavern ’ s shadows, taking him in.
Of your sort . What was it? Roger wondered. Not his speech—
he h ad taken ca re to suppress any hint of the Oxford scholar ,
by t aking on the  “teuchter” cant of the Isles. W as he too well
dressed for a wo uld-be sailor? Or was it the singed collar and
the burn mark on the breast of his coat?
“That w ill be none of your business, I am thinking,” he
answered evenly . W ith a minor ef fort, he kept his hands
relaxed at his sides.
The pa le green eyes studied him dispassionately ,
unblinking. Lik e a leopard wa tching a passing wildebeest,
Roger thought, wondering whether it would be worth the
chase.
The heavy lids dropped; not worth it—for the moment.
“Y ou’ll be aboard by sundo wn,” Bonnet said. “Five
shillings the month, meat three days in the week, plum duf f on
Sundays. Y ou’ll  have a hammo ck, but find your own clothes.
Y ou will be free to leave the ship once the car go is unloaded,
not until that time. W e are agreed, sir?”
“It is agreed,” Roger said, suddenly dry-mouthed. He would
have giv en a lot for a pint, but  not now , not here, under that
pale green gaze.
“Ask for Mr . Dixon when yez come aboard. He’ s
paymaster .” Bon net leaned back, took a small leather -bound
book from his pocket and flipped it open. Audience concluded.
Roger turned smartly and went out, without a backward
glance. There was a small cold spot at the base of his skull. If
he lo oked back, he knew , he wo uld see that lucent green gaze
fixed unwaverin gly over the edge of the unread book, taking
note of every weakness.
The cold spot, he thought, was where the teeth would meet.3 7
G L O R I A N A
B efore shipping with the Gloriana,  Roger had assumed
himself to be in  reasonably good condition. In fact, compared
to most of the obviously malnourished and wizened specimens
of hum anity who constituted the rest of the crew , he
considered hims elf well endowed, indeed. It took precisely
fourteen hours—the length of one day’ s work—to disabuse
him of this notion.
Blisters he had bar gained for , and sore muscles; heaving
crates, lifting spars, and hauling ropes was familiar labor ,
though he hadn’ t done it for some time.
What he had for gotten was the bone-deep fatigue that
sprang as much from the constant chill of damp clothes as
from the  work. He welcomed the heavy labor in the car go
hold, because it warmed him temporarily , even though he
knew the warmth would be succeeded by a fine, constant
shiver as soon as he emer ged on deck, where the wind could
resume its icy probe of his sweat-soaked clothes.
Hands roughened and scraped by wet hemp were painful,
but e xpected; by the end of his first day , his palms were black
with tar , and the skin of his fingers cracked and bled at the
joints, sc raped raw . But the gna wing ache of hunger had been
something of a s urprise. He hadn’ t thought it possible to be as
hungry as he was.
The kno bbled lu mp of humanity working beside him—one
Duf f by name—was similarly damp, but seemed unfazed by
the condition. The long, pointed nose that quested, ferret-like,
from the  upturne d collar of a ragged jacket was blue at the tip
and drip ped regularly as a stal actite, but the pale eyes were
sharp and the mouth beneath grinned wide, displaying teeth
the color of the water in the Firth.
“T ake hairt, man. Grub in tw a bells.” Duf f gave him a
companionable elbow in the ribs and disappeared nimblydown a  hatchway , from whose cavernous recesses echoed
blasphemous shouts and loud bangings.
Roger resumed his unloading of the car go net, heartened
indeed at the prospect of supper .
The after hold h ad already been half filled. The water casks
were loaded; tier upon tier of w ooden hogsheads, squatting in
the shad owy glo om, each hundred-gallon cask weighing more
than sev en hund red pounds. But the forward hold still gaped
empty , and a constant procession of loaders and quaymen
streamed like ants across the dock, piling up such a heap of
boxes and barrels, rolls and bundles, that it seemed
inconceivable that the mass should ever be condensed
suf ficiently to fit within the ship.
It to ok t wo days  to finish the loading: barrels of salt, bolts of
cloth, huge crates of ironmonge ry that had to be lowered with
rope slings because of their we ight. It was here that Roger ’ s
size prov ed of benefit. At the en d of a rope belayed round the
capstan, he leaned back against the weight of a crate
suspended at the other end an d, muscles popping with the
strain, lowered it slowly enough that the two men below could
catch and guide it into place in the increasingly crowded hold.
The passengers came aboard in the late afternoon, a
straggling line of emigrants, b urdened with bags, bundles,
caged chickens,  and children. These were the car go of the
steerage—a space created by erection of a bulk-head across
the forward hold—and as profitable in their way as the harder
goods aft.
“Bondsmen and redemptioners,” Duf f had told him, looking
over the incomers with a pract iced eye. “W orth fifteen pund
each on the hoof  in the plantatio ns, weans three or four . Bairns
at the teat go free wi’ their mithers.”
The seam an coughed, a deep, rattling noise like an ancient
motor s tarting up, and hawked a glob of phlegm, narrowly
missing the side rail as he sp at. He shook his head as he
looked the shuf fling line over .“Happen some can pay their way , but no many in this lot.
They’ll have had a job to come up wi’ twa pund a family for
their feed on the voyage.”
“The Captain doesn’ t feed them, then?”
“Oh, aye.” Duf f rumbled in hi s chest again, coughed and
spat. “Fo r a price.” He grinned a t Roger , wiped his mouth, and
jerked his head toward the gan gplank. “Go and lend a hand,
laddie. W e wouldna want the Captain’ s profit to be fallin’ intae
the water , now , would we?”
Surprised by the padded feel of a little girl as he swung her
aboard, Roger looked closer and saw that the stout build of
many of the women was illusion, occasioned by their wearing
several layers of clothes; all they owned in the world,
apparently , beyond small bundles of personal possessions,
boxes of food put by for th e journey—and the scrawny
children for whose sake they took this desperate step.
Roger sq uatted, smiling at a rel uctant toddler who clung to
his moth er ’ s skirts. He was no more than two, still in smocks,
with a riot of so ft blond curls, h is fat little mouth drawn down
in fearful disapproval of everything around him.
“Come on, man,” Roger said s oftly , putting out a hand in
invitation. It was no longer an e f fort to control his accent; his
usual clipped Oxbridge had elided to the gentler Highland
speech with which he had gro wn up, and he used it now
without conscious thought. “Y our Mam can’ t be pickin’ ye up
now; you come with me.”
Grossly mistrustful, the boy snuf fled and glowered at him,
but suf fe red him to peel the grubby little fingers away from his
mother ’ s skirts. Roger carried the little boy across the deck,
the w oman following him silent ly . She looked up at him as he
handed her down the ladder , her eyes fixed on his; her face
disappeared in the darkness like  a white rock dropped down a
well, an d he turned away with a feeling of unease, as though
he had abandoned someone to drowning.As h e tu rned ba ck to his work, he saw a young woman, just
coming down above the quay . She was the sort of girl called
“bonny”—not b eautiful, but lively and nicely made, with
something about her that took the eye.
Perhaps it was only her postu re; straight as a lily stem
among t he hunched and drooping backs around her . Or her
face, which showed apprehension and uncertainty , but had still
about it the brightness of curiosity . A darer , that one, he
thought, and his heart—oppressed by so many downcast faces
among the emigrants—lightened at the sight of her .
She hesitated at sight of the ship and the crowd around it. A
tall fair -haired young man was with her , a baby in his arms. He
touched her shoulder in reassurance, and she glanced up at
him, an answeri ng smile lighting her face like the striking of a
match. W atching  them, Roger felt a mild pang of something
that might have been envy .
“Y ou, MacKenzie!” The bosun’ s shout pulled him from his
contemplation. The bosun jerked his head aft. “There’ s car go
a-waitin’—it’ s no goin’ to walk aboard by itself!”
Once em barked and under sail, the voyage went smoothly for
some w eeks. The stormy weather that accompanied their
exodus from Scotland quickly diminished into good winds and
rolling seas, and while the im mediate ef fect of this on the
passengers was to make the majority of them seasick, this
ailment also faded in time. T he smell of vomit from the
steerage subsided, becoming only a minor note in the
symphony of stinks aboard the Gloriana .
Roger had been born with an  acute sense of smell, an
attribute he was finding a marked liability in close quarters.
Still, even the keenest nose g rew accustomed in time, and
within a day or so he had ceased to note any but the most
novel stenches.
He was fortunately not subject to seasickness himself,
though his experiences with the herring fishers had been
enough to give him a keen appreciation of the weather , withthe s ailor ’ s unsettling knowledge that his life might depend on
whether the sun was shining that day .
His new shipmates were not fri endly , but neither were they
hostile. Whether it was his “teu chter” accent from the Isles—
for most of the Gloriana ‘s hands were English-speakers from
Dingwall or Peterhead—the occasional odd things that he said,
or simply his size, they regarded him with a certain watchful
distance. No overt antagonism—his size prevented that—but
distance nonetheless.
Roger wasn’ t disturbed by the coolness. He was pleased
enough to be left to his thoughts, his mind ranging free while
his b ody dealt w ith the daily round of shipboard duties. There
was plenty to think about.
He had taken no  heed to the reputation of the Gloriana  or
her captain before signing on ; he would have sailed with
Captain Ahab, provided only that that gentleman was bound
for Nort h Carolina. Still, from the talk he heard among the
crew , he gathered that Stephen Bonnet was known as a good
captain; hard but fair , and a man whose voyages always turned
a profit. T o the s eamen, many of whom sailed on shares rather
than wages, this latter quality plainly more than compensated
for any small defects of character or address.
Not that  Roger had seen open evidence of such defects. But
he did see that Bonnet stood a lways as though an invisible
circle had been drawn around hi m, a circle that few were bold
enough to enter . Only the firs t mate and the bosun spoke
directly to the Captain; the crewmen kept their heads down as
he passed. Roger remembered the cool green leopard-eyes that
had looked him over; little wonder that no one wanted to
attract their notice.
He was more interested in the passengers, though, than in
either cr ew or captain. Little w as seen of them normally , but
they wer e allow ed on deck brief ly twice each day , to take a bit
of air , to empty their slop jars  over the side—for the ship’ s
heads were woefully inadequate for so many—and to carry
down again the small amounts of water carefully rationed toeach family . Roger looked forward to these brief appearances,
and tried to see to it that he was employed as often as possible
near the end o f the deck where they took their fleeting
exercise.
His interest was both professional and personal; his
historian’ s instincts were roused by their presence, and his
loneliness soothed by the homeliness of their talk. Here were
the s eeds of the new country , the legacy of the old. What these
poor emigrants knew and valued, was what would endure to be
passed on.
If one were handpicking the repository of Scottish culture,
he thoug ht, it might not contain such things as the recipe for
warts about which an elderly w oman was berating her long-
suf fering daught er -in-law (“I did tell ye, Katie Mac, and why
ye c hose tae leave my nice dried toadie behind, when ye could
find roo m to bring all yon rubbi sh that we be squattin’ on and
pickin’ o ot from under our hurd ies day and night…”), but that
would last too, right along wi th the folksongs and prayers,
with the woven wool and the Celtic patterns of their art.
He glanced at h is own hand; he vividly remembered Mrs.
Graham rubbing  a lar ge wart on his third finger with what she
said  w as a d ried toad. He grinned, r ubbing a thumb across the
spot. Must have worked; he’d never had another .
“Sir ,” sa id a small voice by his  side. “Sir , may we go and
touch the iron?”
He glan ced down and smiled a t the tiny girl, holding two
tinier brothers by their hands.
“A ye, a leannan, ” he said. “Get on; yourself will be
minding the men, though.”
She nodded and the three of them pattered of f, looking
anxiously up and down to be sure they were not in the way ,
before scramblin g up to touch the horseshoe nailed to the mast
for luck . Iron was protection and healing; the mothers often
sent the little ones who were ailing to touch it.They co uld have  used iron to better ef fect internally , Roger
thought, seeing the rash on the pasty white faces, and hearing
the h igh-pitched complaints of itching boils, of loose teeth and
fever . He resumed his job, measuring out water by the
dipperful into the buckets and d ishes the emigrants held out to
him. They were living on oatme al, the lot of them—that, with
dried peas now a nd then and a bit of hard biscuit, was the sum
total of the “provisions” supplied them for the voyage.
At that, he’d he ard no complaint; the water was clean, the
biscuit w as not moldy , and if the allowance of “corn” was not
generous, neither was it niggardly . The crew was fed better ,
but s till on meat and starch, with only the occasional onion for
relief. He ran h is tongue round his teeth, testing, as he did
every few days. The faint taste of iron was nearly always in his
mouth n ow; his gums were beginning to bleed from the lack of
fresh vegetables.
Still, his teeth were strongly rooted, and he had no sign of
the swollen joints or bruised n ails that several of the other
crewmen showe d. He’d looked it up, during his weeks of
waiting; a normal adult male in good health should be able to
endure from three to six months of prolonged vitamin
deficiency before suf fering any real symptoms. If the good
weather held, they’d be across in only two.
“It will be good weather tomorrow , aye?” His attention
recalled by this apparent reading of his thoughts, he looked
down to find that it was the bonny brown-haired girl he’d
admired on the quay in Inverness. Morag, her friends called
her .
“I am  ho ping it may be,” he sai d, taking her bucket with an
answering smile. “Why do ye say so?”
She nodded, pointing over his s houlder with a small sharp
chin. “T here’ s t he new moon i n the arms o’ the old; if that
means fine weather on the land, I should think it is the same
on the sea, no?”
He glan ced back to see the pale clean curve of a silver
moon, h olding a glowing orb in its cup. It rode high andperfect in an en dless evening sky of pale violet, its reflection
swallowed by the indigo sea.
“Dinna be wasting time chattering, lass—go on and ask
him!” He turned back in time to  hear this hissed over Morag’ s
shoulder by the middle-aged woman behind her . Morag glared
back.
“W ill ye hush?” she hissed back. “I’ll not, I said I won’ t!”
“Y e’re a stubborn lass, Morag,” the older woman declared,
stepping boldly forward, “and  if ye willna be asking for
yourself, I shall do it for ye!”
The goo d-lady laid a broad han d on Roger ’ s arm and gave
him a charming smile.
“And what might your name be, lad?”
“MacKenzie, ma ’am,” Roger said respectfully , holding back
a smile.
“Ah, MacKenzie, is it! W ell, there, ye see, Morag, and
belike he’ll be some kinsman o f your man’ s, and happy to do
ye a  service, at that!” The woman turned triumphantly to the
girl, then swung back to let Roger have the full force of her
personality .
“She’ s s uckling a wean, and dyi n’ o’ thirst in the doin’ of it.
A woma n needs  to drink when she’ s giving suck, or her milk
dries; everyone  kens that weel enough. But the silly lass
cannae bring herself to ask ye f or a bittie more water . There’ s
nane here grudge it to her—is there?” she demanded
rhetorically , turn ing round to glare at the other women in line.
Not surprisingly , all the head s shook back and forth like
clockwork toys.
It was getting da rk, but Morag’ s face was visibly pink. Lips
pressed tight together , she accepted the brimming bucket of
water with a brief bob of her head.
“I thank ye, Mr . MacKenzie,” she murmured. She didn’ t
look up until s he had reached the hatchway—but then she
stopped, and looked back over  her shoulder at him, with asmile of  such gratitude that he felt himself grow warm, in spite
of the sharp ev ening wind that blew through his shirt and
jacket.
He w as sorry to see the water l ine finish and the emigrants
go below , the hatch battened d own over them for the night
watches. He knew they told stories and sang songs to pass the
time, an d would  have given muc h to hear them. Not only from
curiosity , but from longing—what moved him was neither pity
for their  poverty nor thought of  their uncertain future; it was
envy of the sense of connection among them.
But the Captain, the crew , the  passengers, even the all-
important weather , occupied no more than a fragment of
Roger ’ s thoughts. What he thought about, day and night, wet
or dry , hungry or fed, was Brianna.
He went  down to the mess when  the signal came for supper ,
and ate without much noticing the contents of his trencher . His
was the second watch; he went  to his hammock after eating,
choosing solitude and rest  over the possibility of
companionship on the forecastle.
Solitude was an illusion, of course. Swinging gently in his
hammock, he could feel each twitch and turn of the man next
to him, the swea ting heat of slee ping flesh clammy against his
own thr ough th e thick cotton m esh. Each man had eighteen
inches of sleeping space to call his own, and Roger was
uncomfortably aware that whe n he lay upon his back, his
shoulders exceeded that allowance by a good two inches on
either side.
After tw o nights of sleep interrupted by the bumps and
muttered insults  of his shipmate s, he had swapped places and
ended in the space next the bulkhead, where he would have
only one  companion to discommode. He learned to lie on one
side, his face an  inch or two from the wooden partition, back
turned to his companions, and tune his ears to the sounds of
the ship, blocking out the noises of the men around him.
A ve ry m usical thing was a ship —lines and hawsers singing
in the wind, the timber knees cr eaking with each rise and fall,the faint  thumps and murmurs on the far side of the bulkhead,
in th e dark recesses of the passengers’ hold in the steerage. He
stared at the dark wood, lit by the shadows of the swinging
lantern o verhead, and began to re-create her , the lines of face
and hair and body all vivid in the dark. T oo vivid.
He could conjure her face without dif ficulty . What lay
behind it was a good deal harder .
Rest wa s also an illusion. Whe n she had gone through the
stones, she had taken with her all peace of mind. He lived in a
mixture of fear and anger , spic ed with the hurt of betrayal,
rubbed l ike pep per into the wo unds. The same questions ran
round and round inside his m ind without answers, a snake
chasing its tail.
Why had she gone?
What was she doing?
Why didn’ t she tell him?
It was the ef fort to come up wi th an answer to the first of
these that kept him going over and over it, as though the
answer might af ford him the key to the whole mystery of
Brianna.
Y eah, he ’d been lonely . Knew b loody well what it felt like
to have no one in the world wh o belonged to you, or you to
them. But surely that was one reason why they had reached
out to each other—he and Brianna.
Claire knew , too, he thought suddenly . She’d been
orphaned, lost her uncle—of course, she’d been married then.
But she’d been separated from her husband during the war…
yes, she knew a lot about being alone. And that was why she’d
taken care not to leave Bree alone, to assure herself that her
daughter was loved.
W ell, he’d tried to love her pro perly—was still trying, he
thought grimly , twisting uncomfortably in his hammock.
During the day , the demands of  work suppressed the growing
needs of  his body . At night, thou gh…she was a deal too vivid,
the Brianna of his memory .He hadn ’ t hesita ted; he’d known from the first moment of
realization that he must follow her . Sometimes, though, he was
not sure whether he had come to save her or to savage her—
anything, so long as it was settled once and for all between
them. He’d said he’d wait—but he’d waited long enough.
The wor st of it was not the lon eliness, he thought, flinging
restlessly over again, but the do ubt. Doubt of her feelings, and
of his. Panic that he did not truly know her .
For the first tim e since his pas sage through the stones, he
realized what she had meant in  refusing him, and knew her
hesitance for wisdom. But was  it wisdom, and not only fear?
If she had not gone through th e stones—would she have
turned to him at last, wholeheartedly? Or turned away , always
looking for something else?
It was a leap of faith—to throw one’ s heart across a gulf,
and trus t anothe r to catch it. His own was still in flight across
the void, with no certainty of landing. But still in flight.
The sounds on the other side of the bulkhead had faded to
silence, but now they started up again, in a stealthy , rhythmic
fashion with which he was thoro ughly familiar . They were at it
again, whoever they were.
They did it almo st every night, w hen the others had gone to
sleep. At first the sounds had made him feel only his isolation,
alone with the burning ghost of Brianna. There seemed no
possibility of true human warmth, no joining of heart or mind,
no more  than the animal consolation of a body to cling to in
the dark. W as there really any more for a man than this?
But then he began to hear something else in the sounds,
half-caught words of tenderness, small furtive sounds of
af firmation, that  made him in some way not a voyeur , but a
participant in their joining.
He c ouldn’ t tell, of course. It m ight have been any of the
couples, or a ran dom pairing of lust—and yet he put faces to
them, this unknown pair; in his mind, he saw the tall, fair -
haired y oung m an, the brown-haired lass with the open face,saw them look at each other a s they had on the quay , and
would have sold his soul to know such certainty .3 8
F O R  T H O S E  I N  P E R I L  O N  T H E  S E A
A  sudden hard squall kept the passengers belowdecks for
three days, and the sailors at their posts with no more than
scant mi nutes sn atched for rest o r food. At the end of it, when
the Gloriana  rod e high on the dying storm-swell and the dawn
sky was filled with racing mare’ s-tails, Roger staggered down
to his hammock, too exhausted even to shuck his wet clothes.
Crumpled, damp, crusted with salt and feeling fit for
nothing but a ho t bath and another week’ s sleep, he answered
the bosu n’ s whi stle for the afte rnoon watch after four hours
rest, and staggered through his duties.
He w as so tired by sunset that his muscles quivered as he
helped to heave up a fresh water barrel from the hold. He
caved in the top with a hatchet, thinking that he might just
manage the exertion of ladling out water rations without
falling headfirst  into the barrel. Then again, he might not. He
splashed a cool handful of the  fresh water into his face, in
hopes of soothing his burning e yes, and gulped down a whole
dipperful, ignoring for once the strictures imposed by that
constant contradiction of the sea—always both too much
water , and too little.
The folk bringing up their jar s and buckets to be filled
looked as though they felt even worse than he did; green-gilled
as m ushrooms, bruised from be ing pitched to and fro in the
hold like billiard balls, reeking of renewed seasickness and
overflowing chamber pots.
In mark ed contrast to the gener al air of pallid malaise, one
of his old acquaintances was s kipping in rings around him,
singing in a monotonous chant that grated on his ears.
“Seven herrings ar e a salmon’ s fill,
 Seven salmon ar e a seal’ s fill,
 Seven seals ar e a whale’ s fill,
 And seven whales the fill of a Cir ein Cr oin!”
Bubbling with the freedom of release from the hold, the
little girl hopped around like a demented chickadee, making
Roger smile in spite of his tiredness. She hopped to the rail,
then stood on tiptoe, and peeked cautiously over .
“D’ye think ‘twas a Cirein Croin caused the storming, Mr .
MacKenzie? Grandda says it was, like enough. They lash their
great huge tails about, ye ken ,” she informed him. “That’ s
what makes the waves go sae big.”
“I sh ouldna be t hinking such a thing, myself. Where’ s your
brothers, then, a leannan ?”
“Fevered,” the girl answered, indif ferently . It was nothing
out of the way; half the emigrants in line were coughing and
sneezing, three days in darkness and damp clothes having
done nothing for their precarious state of health.
“Have ye seen a  Cirein Croin, then?” she asked, leaning far
over the  rail, a hand shading her eyes. “Are they really big
enough to swallow the boat?”
“Myself has not seen one.” Roger dropped his dipper and
grabbed her by the apron sash, pulling her firmly of f the rail.
“Have a care, aye? It would take no more than a spratling to
swallow you,  lassie!”
“Look!” she shrieked, leaning farther over in spite of his
grasp. “Look, it is, it is !”
Drawn a s much  by the terror in her voice as what she said,
Roger leaned over the rail invol untarily . A dark shape hovered
just belo w the surface, smooth and black, graceful as a bullet
—and half the length of the ship. It kept pace for a few
moments with the racing vessel, then was outdistanced and left
behind.
“Shark,” Roger said, shaken in s pite of himself. He gave the
girl a small shak e, to stop her steam-whistle screeches. “It’ s no
but a shark, hea r? Y e ken what’ s a shark, do ye not? W e ate
one, only last week!”She had  quit shrieking, but was still white-faced and wide-
eyed, tender mouth quivering.
“Y ou’re sure?” she said. “It—it wasna a Cirein Croin?”
“No,” Roger said gently , and gave her a dipper of water to
drink, b y herself. “Only a shar k.” The biggest shark he had
ever seen, with an air of blind ferocity that raised the hair on
his f orearms to see—but only a shark. They hung about the
ship whenever her speed slowed, eager for the garbage and
slops tossed overboard.
“Isobeail!” An indignant cry summoned his erstwhile
companion to come and lend a  hand with the family chores.
W ith dragging step and out-thru st lip, Isobeail slouched of f to
help her mother with the wat er buckets, leaving Roger to
finish his job without further distraction.
No further distraction than his thoughts, at least. For the
most part, he succeeded in for getting that the Gloriana  had
nothing below her save leagues  of empty water; that the ship
was not,  in fact, the small and solid island that it seemed, but
instead n o more  than a fragile shell, at the mercy of forces that
could crush her in moments—and everyone aboard.
Had the Phillip Alonzo  r eac hed port in safety? he wondered.
Ships di d sink, and fairly often;  he’d read enough accounts of
it. Havin g lived through the last three days, he could only be
amazed that more of them didn’ t  sink. W ell, and there was
precisely nothing he could do about that prospect, except pray .
For those in peril on the deep, Lor d, have mer cy .
W ith sudden vividness, he un derstood exactly what the
maker of that line had meant.
Finished, he dropped the dipper  into the barrel and reached
for a board to cover the open top; rats tended to fall in and
drown o therwise. One of the wo men clutched him by the arm
as he turned away . She gestured at the little boy she held,
fussing against his mother ’ s neck.
“Mr . MacKenzie , might the Captain gie us a wee rub wi’ his
ring? Ou r Gibbi e has a touch o’ sore eyes from bein’ in thedark sae long.”
Roger hesitated,  but then ridiculed himself. He, like the rest
of th e cr ew , tend ed to steer clea r of Bonnet, but there was no
reason to refuse the woman’ s re quest; the Captain had obliged
before with a rub of his gold ring, this being a popular remedy
for sore eyes and inflammations.
“Y eah, sure,” he said, for getting himself for a moment.
“Come on.” The woman blinked  in surprise, but followed him
obediently . The Captain was on his quarterdeck, engaged in
close conversation with the mate; Roger motioned to the
woman to wait for a bit, and sh e nodded, shrinking modestly
behind him.
The Captain looked as tired as  any of them, the lines of
dissipation carv ed deeper in his face. Lucifer after a week of
running Hell, and finding it no picnic, Roger thought, sourly
amused.
“…damage to the tea chests?” Bonnet was saying to the
mate.
“Only two, and not soaked through,” Dixon replied. “W e
can salvage a bit; maybe get rid of it upriver in Cross Creek.”
“A ye, they’re more particular in Edenton and New Bern.
W e’ll get the best prices there, though; we’ll get rid of what
we can before we go to W ilmington.”
Bonnet turned slightly and caught sight of Roger . His
expression hardened, but relaxed again when he heard the
request. W ithout comment, he reached down and rubbed the
gold ring he wor e on his little finger gently over little Gilbert’ s
closed eyes. A p lain wide band, Roger saw; it almost looked
like a wedding ring, though smaller—a woman’ s ring, maybe.
The formidable Bonnet with a love token? Could be, Roger
supposed; some women might find the Captain’ s air of
subdued violence attractive.
“The wean’ s ailing,” Dixon remarked. He pointed, there was
a prickl e of red bumps behind the boy’ s ears, and his pale
cheeks bloomed with fever .“No but milk f ever ,” the woman said, pulling her child
defensively against her bosom. “He’ s a new tooth coming,
likely .”
The Captain nodded indif ferently and turned away . Roger
escorted the woman to the galley to beg a bit of hard biscuit
for the child to gnaw on, then  sent her back to the forward
hold with the others.
He had little th ought for Gilbert’ s gums, though; as he
climbed the ladderway to the de ck, his mind was occupied by
the conversation he had overheard.
Stops in New Bern and Edenton, before W ilmington. And
plainly Bonnet was in no rush; h e’d be looking for good prices
for his car go, an d taking the time to broker the indentures of
his passengers—Christ, it could be weeks before they made
W ilmington!
It wouldn’ t do, Roger thought. God knew where Brianna
could g et to—or what sort o f thing happen to her . The
Gloriana  had made swift  passage, in spite of the squall—God
willing, they’d make North Carolina in only eight weeks, if the
winds held. He didn’ t want to sacrifice the valuable time so
gained to lallygagging in the northern Carolina ports,
mooching their way south.
He’d be of f the Gloriana  in  the first port they touched, he
resolved, and make his way south as best he could. T rue, he’d
given his word to stay with the ship until the car go was
disposed of, but then, he wouldn’ t be taking his wages, either ,
so the exchange seemed fair enough.
The fres h cold air above decks did a little bit to rouse him.
His head  still felt stuf fed with damp cotton wool, though, and
the b ack of his throat was raspy with salt. Three hours more to
go o n his watch; he made his w ay forward for another dipper
of water , hoping it would help him stay on his feet.
Dixon had left the Captain, an d was strolling through the
clusters of passengers, nodding  to the men, stopping to say
something to a woman with children. Odd, Roger thought. Themate wa sn’ t a sociable man with the crew , let alone with the
passengers, whom he regarded as nothing more than an
unusually inconvenient form of car go.
Something stirr ed in his mind at the mention of car go,
something uncomfortable, but he couldn’ t bring it to the
forefront of recognition. It hung  in the shadows of exhaustion,
just out of sight, nearly close en ough to smell. Y es, that was it,
it had to do with a smell. But what—
“MacKenzie!” One of the seamen was calling from the
afterdeck, waving for him to come and help with the mending
of sails torn by the storm; huge stacks of folded canvas lay like
dirty sno wdrifts on the boards, their upper layers billowing in
the wind.
Roger groaned, and stretched his aching muscles. No matter
what happened in North Carolina, he would be very glad to get
of f this ship.
T wo nig hts later , Roger was dee p in dreams when the shouting
roused h im. His  feet hit the deck and he was running for the
companionway , heart pumping at full bore, before his mind
had grasped the fact that he was awake. He sprang for the
ladder , only to be knocked sprawling by a blow to his chest.
“Stay w here ye are, fool!” Dixon’ s voice growled from the
rungs above. He could see the mate’ s head, outlined against
the starry square of the hatchway overhead.
“What is it? What’ s happening?” He shook of f the
confusion of his dreams, to f ind no less confusion in the
waking.
There w ere othe rs in the dark near him, he could feel bodies
stumble over him as he struggled to his feet. All the noise was
up a bove, though; a thunder of f eet on the deck and a shouting
and shrieking like nothing he had ever heard.
“Murderers!” A woman’ s voice cut through the racket, shrill
as a fife. “W icked mur —” The  voice cut of f abruptly ,  with a
heavy thump on the deck above.“What i s it?” On his feet again, Roger shoved his way
through the men by the ladder , shouting up to Dixon, “What?
Are we boarded?” His words w ere drowned by the shouting
above; the steam-whistle shrieks of women and children,
cutting through men’ s bellowing and curses.
Red light flickered somewhere above. W as the ship afire?
He s hoved through the press of  men and grabbed the ladder ,
reached up and seized Dixon’ s foot.
“Gerrof!” The foot jerked free, aimed a kick at his head.
“Stay down there! Christ, man, ye want to catch pox?”
“Pox? What the hell  i s going on up there?” Eyes
accustomed to the dark by now , Roger grabbed the stabbing
foot and gave it a vicious twist, jerked downward. Unprepared
for a ssault, Dixon lost his grip on the ladder and fell heavily ,
sliding over Roger ’ s head and into the men below .
Roger ignored the cries of rage and surprise behind him and
clambered out onto the deck. There was a group of men
clustered thick about the forward hatchway . Lanterns hung
above in the rigging, shooting beams of red and white and
yellow light that caught the gleam of blades.
He l ooked quickly for another sh ip, but the ocean was black
and empty on all sides. No boarders, no pirates; all the struggle
was taki ng place near the hatch way , where half the crew was
gathered in a knot, armed with knives and clubs.
Mutiny? he thought, and dismi ssed it, even as he pushed
forward; Bonnet’ s head showed above the crowd, hatless, fair
hair glea ming in the flash of lantern light. Roger shoved his
way into the mob, ruthlessly shouldering smaller seamen
aside.
Shrieks and shouts echoed from the hold, and a flicker of
light sho wed below . A bundle o f rags was handed up, passed
rapidly from hand to hand, disappeared behind the shifting
mass of limbs and clubs. There w as a heavy splash to port, and
then another .“What i s it, what’ s happening?” He bellowed in the ear of
the bosu n, who stood near the hatchway , holding a lantern.
The man jerked round and glared at him.
“Y ou’ve not had pox, have you? Get below!” Hutchinson’ s
attention had already gone back to the open hatchway .
“Y es, I have! What’ s that got to—”
The bosun swung back, surprised.
“Y ou’ve had pox? Y ou’re not marked. Ach, let it go—get
you down, then, we need all hands!”
“For what?” Roger leaned forward, to make himself heard
above the noise from below .
“Smallpox!” the bosun bellowed back. He gestured at the
open hat chway , as one of the seamen appeared at the top of the
ladder , a child under one arm, feebly kicking. Hands clawed
and beat  at the m an’ s hunched back, and a woman’ s voice rose
high above the other noises, shrill with terror .
She got  a grip on the seaman’ s blouse, and as Roger
watched, she began to climb t he man’ s body , dragging him
backward as she struggled to reach the child, screaming as she
clawed the man’ s back, digging handfuls of cloth and flesh.
The man  roared and swatted at  her , trying to dislodge her .
The ladder was fixed, but the seaman, one-handed and pulled
of f balance, swayed wildly , his look of rage turning to alarm as
his feet slipped on the rung.
Reflex alone made Roger lunge forward, grabbing the child
like a rugger ba ll as the seama n threw his arms out in a last
ef fort to  save himself. Entangle d like lovers, man and woman
fell back ward together into the open maw of the hatchway .
There was a cr ash and more screams from below , then the
sudden, momentary silence of shock. Then the outcries began
again, below , and a muttering babble around him.
Roger ri ghted the child, trying to stop its whimpering with
awkward pats. It seemed curiously loose-jointed in his arms,
and it felt hot, even through its l ayers of clothes. Light flashedover Ro ger as the bosun lifted h is lantern high, looking at the
child with distaste.
“Hope you have  had the pox, MacKenzie,” he said.
It was wee Gilb ert, the lad wit h sore eyes—but two days
had mad e such a change that Roger scarcely recognized him.
The boy  was thin as a wraith, th e round face gone so thin that
the skullbones showed. The fair , dirt-smudged skin had gone,
too, submer ged under a mass of  suppurating pustules so thick
that the eyes were mere slits in the lolling head.
He had barely time to regist er the sight before hands
plucked the small, burning bod y from him. Before he could
grasp the sudden emptiness in his arms, there was another
splash to port.
He swung toward the rail in vain reflex, hands curled in fists
of shock , but then turned back as a new roar came from the
hatchway behind.
The passengers had recovered from the surprise of the
attack. A rush of men boiled  up the ladder , armed with
anything they could seize, and f ell upon the seamen at the top,
bearing them down with sheer frenzy .
Someone cannoned into Roger and he fell, rolling to the
side as a stool leg thudded into the deck near his head. He got
to his hands and knees, was kicked in the ribs, shied and was
pushed, heaved back against obstruction, and with a moment’ s
opportunity , threw himself blind ly at a pair of legs, having no
idea wh ether he  fought crew or  passengers, fighting only for
room to stand up and breathe.
The stin k of sickness rolled out of the hold, a sweet, rotting
smell th at overlaid the usual h arsh reek of ripe bodies and
sewage. The lanterns swung with the wind, and light and
shadow cut the scene to pieces, so that here showed a face,
wild-eyed and shouting, there an arm upraised, here a naked
foot, only to vanish in the darkness and be replaced at once by
elbows and knives and thrusting knees, so the deck seemed
awash in dismembered bodies.So strong was the confusion that Roger felt dismembered
himself; he glanced down, feeling numbness in his left arm,
half expecting to find the limb struck of f. It was there, though,
and he raised it  by reflex, fending of f an unseen blow that
jarred through bone.
Someone grasped his hair; he jerked free and swung round,
elbowed someon e hard in the ribs and swung again, hitting air .
He found himself momentarily standing clear of the fight,
gasping for breath. T wo figures crouched before him, in the
shadow of the rail; as he shook his head to clear it, the taller
stood up and launched itself at him.
He reeled backward under the impact, clutching his attacker .
They str uck the  foremast and fell together , then rolled over
and over , hammering each other  in blind earnest. Caught in the
web of noise an d blows, he paid no mind to the disjointed
words that panted in his ear .
Then a boot struck him, and an other , and as he loosed his
hold on his opponent, two crewmen kicked them apart.
Someone seized  the other man and pulled him upright, and
Roger saw the fl ash of the bosun’ s lantern held high, revealing
the f ace of the tall fair -haired passenger—Morag MacKenzie’ s
husband, green eyes dark and wild with fury .
MacKenzie was  the worse for wear—so was Roger , as he
discovered when  he passed a hand across his face and felt his
split lip—but his skin was clear of pustules.
“Good enough,” said Hutchinson briefly , and the man was
thrust unceremoniously toward the hatchway .
His comrades gave Roger a ro ugh hand up, and then left
him swa ying, dazed and ignored, as they finished their work.
The resistance had been short-lived; though armed with the
fury of despair , the passengers were weakened by six weeks
under ha tches, b y sickness and scanty food. The stronger had
been clubbed into submission, the weaker forced back, and
those sick of pox—Roger lo oked ou t at the rail and the path of the moon’ s aisle,
serene o n the water . He grabbed  the rail and vomited, retching
till n o m ore tha n bile came up,  burning the back of nose and
throat. The water below was black, and empty .
Drained and shaking from exerti on, he made his way slowly
across the deck. Those seamen he passed were silent, but from
the b attened forward hatchway , a single thin wail rose up, and
up, an endless keen that drew no breath and knew no respite.
He nearly fell down the companionway into the crew’ s
quarters, went to his hammock, ignoring all questions, and
wrapped his blanket over his hea d, trying to shut out the sound
of the wailing—to shut out everything.
But ther e was no oblivion to be found in the suf focating
woolen folds, and he jerked the blanket of f, heart pounding,
with a sensation of drowning so strong in his chest that he
gulped air , again and again u ntil he felt dizzy , and still
breathed deep, as though he must breathe for those who could
not.
“It’ s for the be st, lad,” Hutchinson had said to him with
gruf f sympathy , passing by as he puked his guts out over the
rail. “Pox spreads like wildfire; none in that hold would live to
make landfall, did we not take out the sick.”
And was this better than the slower death of scabs and
fever? Not for those left behin d; the wail went on and on,
lancing the silence, piercing wood and heart alike.
Maimed pictures flashed in his mind, truncated scenes
caught by the popping of invisible flashbulbs: the sailor ’ s
contorted face as he fell into the hold; the little boy’ s half-open
mouth, the inside scabbed with pustules. Bonnet standing
above the fray , with his face of a fallen angel, watching. And
the dark hungry water , empty under the moon.
Something bumped softly , sliding past the hull, and he
rolled into a shivering ball, oblivious alike to the sweltering
heat in the hold, and the sleepy complaint of the man next tohim. No, not empty . He had heard the seamen say that sharks
never sleep.
“Oh, Go d,” he said aloud. “Oh, God!” He should have been
praying for the dead, but could not.
He rolle d again, squirming, trying to escape, and in the echo
of the futile prayer found memory—the misplaced hearing of
those few frantic words, pan ted in his ear during those
moments of unthinking frenzy .
For the love of G od, man,  t he fair - haired m an had said. For
the love of God, let her go!
He straightened and lay stif f, bathed in cold sweat.
T wo figures in the shadow . And the open hatchway to the
stores hold some twenty feet away .
“Oh, God,” he said again, but this time, it was  a prayer .
It w as the mid dle of the dogwatch next day before Roger
found a n opportunity to go down to the hold. He made no
ef fort to avoid being seen; watc hing his shipmates had taught
him quickly that in close quarters, nothing drew attention
faster than furtiveness.
If an yone asked, he had heard a bumping noise, and thought
perhaps the load had shifted. Close enough to the truth, at that.
He hung from the edge of the hatch by his hands; less
chance o f being followed if he didn’ t put down the ladder . He
dropped into the dark and lan ded hard, jarring his bones.
Anyone down here would have  heard that—and by the same
token, if anyone followed him, he would be warned.
He t ook a mom ent to recover from the shock of landing,
then began to m ove cautiously through the looming dim bulks
of the stacked car go. Everything seemed blurred round the
edges. It wasn’ t only the faint l ight, he thought; everything in
the hold  was vibrating very slightly , thrumming to the shiver
of th e hu ll benea th. He could he ar it, if he listened closely; the
lowest note in the ship’ s song.Through the narrow aisles between the ranks of crates, past
the huge bellies of the serried w ater casks. He breathed in; the
air was full of the smell of wet wood, overlaid by the faint
perfume of tea. There were rust lings and creakings, plenty of
odd nois es—but no sign of any human presence. Still, he was
sure that someone was here.
And why ar e  you her e, mate?  he thou ght. What if one of the
steerage passengers had  taken refuge here? If someone lay
hidden here, chances were good  that they had the pox; Roger
could do nothing for them—why bother to look?
Because he couldn’ t not look, was the answer . He didn’ t
reproach himse lf for failing to save the pox-stricken
passengers; nothing could have helped them in any case, and
perhaps a quick death by dro wning was not in fact more
terrible than the slow agony of the disease. He’d like to
believe that.
But he hadn’ t sl ept; the events of the night filled him with
such a sense of horror and sick  futility that he could find no
rest. Whether he could do anything now , or not, he must do
something . He had to look.
Something small moved in the deep shadows of the hold.
Rat,  he thought, and turned reflexively to stamp on it. The
movement saved him; a heavy object whizzed past his head
and landed with a splash in the bilges below .
He put his head down and lun ged in the direction of the
movement, sho ulders hunched  against an expected blow .
There was nowhere to run, and not much place to hide. He saw
it ag ain, lunged, and grabbed clo th. Jerked hard, and got flesh.
A qu ick scuf fle in the dark, and a cry of alarm, and he found
himself pressing  a body hard against a bulkhead, clutching the
skinny wrist of Morag MacKenzie.
“What the hell? ” She kicked at him, and tried to bite, but he
ignored this. He got a good grip  on the scruf f of her neck and
hauled h er out of the shadows, i nto the dim brown light of the
hold. “What are you doing here?”“Nothing! Let go! Let me go, please! Please, I beg ye, sir
—” Force not availing to free herself—she weighed perhaps
half what he did —she turned to pleading, words pouring out in
a ha lf-whispered stream of desperation. “For the sake of your
own mo ther , sir!  Y e canna do it, please ye cannot let them kill
him please !”
“I’m not going to kill anyone. For God’ s sake, hush
yourself!” he said, and gave her a small shake.
From the blackest shadows behind the anchor chain came
the high, thin wail of a fretful baby .
She gave a small gasp and looked up at him, frantic.
“They’ll hear him! God, man, le t me go to him!” Such was
her desperation that she succeeded in wrenching herself free,
and fled  toward the sound, clambering over the great rusted
links of the anchor chain, heedless of filth.
He followed, more slowly; she couldn’ t get away—there
was nowhere for her to go. He found them in the darkest spot,
crouched against one of the ship’ s knees, the huge angled
timbers that framed the hull. There was barely a foot of
clearance betwe en the rough wood of the hull and the piled
mass of the anchor chain; she w as no more than a darker blot
on the stygian blackness.
“I w ill not hurt you,” he said softly . The shadow seemed to
shrink away from him, but she didn’ t answer .
His eyes were slowly growing a ccustomed to the dark; even
back here, a fain t light seeped through from the distant hatch.
A p atch of whi te—her breast was bared, giving suck to the
child. He could hear the small wet noises as it fed.
“What t he hell are you doing here?” he asked, though he
knew well enough. His stomach clenched tight, and not just
because of the fo ul smell of the bilges. He squatted next to her ,
barely able to fit in the tiny space.
“I’m hiding!” she said fiercely . “Surely to goodness ye see
that?”“Is the child sick?”
“No!” She hunched herself ove r the baby , squirming as far
away from him as she could get.
“Then—”
“It’ s no but a we e rash! All bair ns get them, my mither said
so!” He could hear the fear in her voice, underneath the
furious denial.
“Are you sure?” he said, as gently as he could. He reached a
tentative hand toward the dark blotch she held.
She struck at him, awkwardly one-handed, and he jerked
back with a hiss of pain.
“Jesus! Y e stabbed me!”
“Stay back! I’ve my husband’ s dirk,” she warned. “I won’ t
let ye take him, I’ll kill ye first, I swear I will!”
He b elieved her . Hand to his mo uth, he could taste his own
blood, s weet an d salt on his tongue. It was no more than a
scratch, but he believed her . S he’d kill him—or die herself,
which w as a great deal more li kely if one of the crew found
her .
But no, he thought. She was worth money . Bonnet wouldn’ t
kill her— only have her dragged on deck and forced to watch
as her child was torn out of her  arms and thrown into the sea.
He remembered the dark shadows that dogged the ship, and
shuddered with a cold that had nothing to do with the dank
surroundings.
“I won’ t take him. But if it’ s the pox—”
“It’ s not! I swear to Bride, it’ s not!” A small hand shot out
of the shadows a nd gripped him by the sleeve. “It’ s as I tell ye,
it’ s no but a milk rash, I’ve seen it, man—a hundred times
before! I’m the eldest o’ nine , I ken weel enough when a
bairn’ s sick and when he’ s but teething!”
He h esitated, then made up his  mind abruptly . If she was
wrong, and the child had sma llpox, she was likely alreadyinfected; to return her to the hol d would be only to spread the
disease. And if she was right—he knew as well as she that it
didn’ t matter; any rash would condemn the child on sight.
He could feel her quivering, on the brink of hysteria. He
wanted to touch her in reassur ance, but thought better of it.
She wouldn’ t trust him, and no wonder .
“I won’ t give you away ,” he whispered.
He was met by suspicious silence.
“Y ou ne ed food, don’ t you? And  fresh water . Y ou’ll have no
milk soon, without it, and then what of the bairn?”
He c ould hear her breathing, rag ged and phlegmy . She was
ill, but it needn’ t be pox; all the hold passengers coughed and
wheezed—the damp had got into their lungs early on.
“Show him to me.”
“No!” Her eyes shone in the dark, fearful as a cornered rat’ s,
and the edge of her lip lifted over small white teeth.
“I s wear I will  not take him from you. I need to see,
though.”
“What will ye swear on?”
He grop ed his memory for a suitable Celtic oath, then gave
up and said what was in his mind.
“On my  own woman’ s life,” he said, “and on the heads of
my unborn sons.”
He c ould feel doubt, and then a small easing of the tension
in her; the round knee pressed against his leg moved slightly
as s he relaxed. There was a s tealthy rustling in the chains
nearby . Real rats this time.
“I ca nna leave h im here alone while I steal food.” He saw
the faint  tilt of her head toward the noise. “They’ll eat him
alive; th ey’ve bitten me in my sleep already , the filthy
vermin.”He reached out his hands, con scious all the time of the
sounds from the deck above. It wasn’ t likely that anyone
would come down here, but how long before he was missed
above?
She still hesitated, but at last r eached a finger toward her
breast, a nd freed  the child’ s mo uth with a tiny pop!  I t made  a
small sound of protest, and wriggled slightly as he took it.
He hadn ’ t held babies very often; the feel of the dirty little
bundle was startling—inert but lively , soft yet firm.
“Mind his head!”
“I’ve go t it.” Cradling the warm  round skull in one careful
palm, he  duck-w alked backwar d a step or two, bringing the
child’ s face into dim light.
The che eks were splotched with reddish pustules, topped
with wh ite—they looked for all the world like pox to Roger ,
and he felt a tre mor of revulsion in the palms of his hands.
Immunity or not, it took courage to touch contagion and not
flinch.
He s quinted at t he child, then ca refully undid its wrappings,
ignoring the mother ’ s hissed protest. He slid a hand under its
dress, feeling first the soggy clout that hung between its
chubby legs, and then the sm ooth, silky skin of chest and
stomach.
The child didn’ t really seem so s ick; his eyes were clear , not
gummy . And while the tiny boy  seemed feverish, it wasn’ t the
searing heat he had felt the night before. The baby whined and
squirmed, true, but he kicked wi th a fretful strength in the tiny
limbs, not the weak spasms of a dying child.
The very young go quickly ,  Claire had said. Y ou have no
notion h ow fast disease moves, when ther e’ s nothing to fight it
with . He had some notion, after last night.
“All right,” he whispered at l ast. “I think you’re maybe
right.” He felt, r ather than saw , t he easing of her arm—she had
held her dagger ready .He gingerly handed back the child, with a mingled sense of
relief and reluctance. And the terrifying realization of the
responsibility he had accepted.
Morag w as cooing to the boy , cuddling him against her
breast as she hastily rewrapped him.
“Sweet J emmy , aye, that’ s a good laddie. Hush, bittie, hush
now , it’ll be all right, Mammy’ s here for ye.”
“How long?” Roger whispered,  laying a hand on her arm.
“How long will the rash last, if it’ s milk rash?”
“Maybe four days, maybe five,” she whispered back. “But
it’ s no but maybe twa more, an d the rash will be dif ferent—
less. Anyone can see then that it ’ s not the pox. I can come out,
then.”
T wo day s. If it was pox, the child would be dead in two
days. But if not—he might just manage. And so might she.
“Can you keep awake that long? The rats—”
“A ye, I can,” she said fiercely . “I can do what I must. W ill
ye help me, then?”
He drew a deep breath, ignoring the stench.
“A ye, I will.” He stood up, and  gave her his hand. After a
moment’ s hesitation, she took it, and stood too. She was small,
she barely reached his shoulder , and her hand in his was the
size of a child’ s— in the shadows, she looked like a young girl
cradling her doll.
“How old are you?” he asked suddenly .
He c aught the g leam of her eyes, surprised, and then the
flash of teeth.
“Y esterday I was two-and-twen ty ,” she said dryly . “T oday ,
I’m maybe a hundred.”
The small damp hand pulled f ree of his, and she melted
back into the darkness.3 9
A  G A M B L I N G  M A N
T he fog gathered through the night. By dawn the ship rode in
a cloud so thick  that the sea below could not be seen from the
rail, and only th e susurrus of the hull’ s passage indicated that
the Gloriana  still floated on water , not air .
There was no sun, and little wind; the sails hung limp,
shuddering now and then with a passing air . Oppressed by the
dimness, men walked the decks  like ghosts, appearing out of
the murk with a suddenness that startled one another .
This ob scurity served Roger well; he was able to pass
almost unseen through the ship , and slip unobserved into the
hold, the small store of food he had kept back from his own
meals concealed in his shirt.
The fog had go tten into the hold as well; clammy white
tendrils touched his face, drifting out between the looming
water casks, and hovered near his feet. It was darker than ever
here below , gone from dusty-gold dimness to the black-brown
of cold, wet wood.
The child was asleep; Roger saw no more than the curve of
its c heek, still spattered with re d pustules. They looked angry
and infla med. Morag saw his lo ok of doubt and said nothing,
but took his hand in her own and pressed it to the baby’ s neck.
The tiny pulse went bump-bump-bump under his finger , and
the soft creased skin was warm but damp. Reassured, he
smiled at Morag, and she gave him back a tiny glimmer .
A m onth in steer age had left her  thin and grimy; the last two
days had stamped her face with  permanent lines of fear . Her
hair straggled lank around her  face, caked with grease and
thick with lice. Her eyes were bruised with tiredness, and she
smelled of feces and urine, sour  milk and stale sweat. Her lips
were tight and p ale as the rest of her face. Roger took her very
gently by the shoulders, bent, and kissed her mouth.At t he top of the ladder , he looked back. She was still
standing there looking up at him, the child in her arms.
The deck was q uiet save for the murmur of helmsman and
bosun, invisible at the wheel. Roger eased the hatch cover
back in place, h is heart beginning to slow again, the touch of
her still warmin g his hands. T wo days. Maybe three. Perhaps
they would make it; Roger at least was convinced she was
right, the child did not have pox.
There should be no occasion fo r anyone to go into the hold
soon—a fresh water -cask had b een brought up only the day
before. He could contrive to fee d her—if only she could stay
awake long enough…the sharp ting  o f the s hip’ s bell pierced
the f og, a remin der of time that  no longer seemed to exist, its
passage unmarked by any change of light or dark.
It was as Roger crossed toward the stern that he heard it; a
sudden loud whoosh  in  the m ist of f the rail, very nea r at hand.
The next instant, the ship trembled slightly underfoot, her
boards brushed by something huge.
“Whale!” came a cry from aloft. He could see two men near
the main-mast, dimly outlined in the fog. At the cry , they
froze, and he realized that h e, too, was standing rigid,
listening.
There w as anoth er whoosh  nearby , another farther of f. The
crew of the Gloriana  stood silent, each man chartin g in his
head the great exhalations, marking an invisible map on which
the ship drifted through moving shoals, mountains of silent,
intelligent flesh.
How big were they? Roger wondered. Big enough to
damage the ship? He strained his eyes, vainly trying to see
anything at all through the fog.
It ca me again, a  thump hard eno ugh to jar the rail under his
hands, fo llowed by a long, gratin g rasp that shuddered through
the boards. There were muf fled  cries of fear from below; to
those in the steerage, it would be right next to them, no more
than the planks of the hull between them and rupture—asudden smash and the frightful  inrush of the sea. Three-inch
oak planks seemed no more substantial than tissue paper
against the great beasts that floated nearby , breathing unseen
in the fog.
“Barnacles,” said a soft Irish voice from the mist behind
him. Despite himself, Roger jumped, and a low chuckle
materialized into Bonnet’ s shadowed bulk. The Captain held a
cheroot between his teeth, a spill from the galley fire
illumining the lines and planes of his face, dissolute in red
light. The rasping shudder came again through the boards.
“They scratch themselves to rid their skins of parasites,”
Bonnet said casually . “W e are n o more to them than a floating
stone.” He drew heavily to start the flame, blew fragrant
smoke, and tossed the burning p aper overboard. It vanished in
the mist like a falling star .
Roger l et out a breath only slightly less noisy than the
whales’. How close had Bonne t been? Had the Captain seen
him coming out of the hold?
“They will not damage the ship , then?” he said, matching
the Captain’ s casual tone.
Bonnet smoked for a moment in silence, concentrating on
the draw of his  cigar . W ithout the illumination of the open
flame, h e was once more a shadow , marked only by the
glowing coal of the tip.
“Who knows?” he said at last, small spurts of smoke puf fing
out between his teeth as he sp oke. “Any one of the beasts
might si nk us, should he have a mind in him for mischief. I
saw a ship once—or what was l eft of it—battered to pieces by
an angry whale. Three feet of board, and a bit of spar left
floating—sunk with all hands, two hundred souls.”
“Y ou don’ t seem troubled by the possibility .”
There was a lon g sound of exh alation, a faint echo of the
whales’ sighing, as Bonnet blew smoke between pursed lips.
” ‘T would be a waste of strength to worry myself. A wise
man leaves those things beyond  his power to the gods—andprays that Danu will be with him.” The edge of the Captain’ s
hat turn ed toward him. “Y e’ll know of Danu, will ye,
MacKenzie?”
“Danu?” Roger said stupidly , and then the penny dropped,
an old chant coming back to him  from the mists of childhood
—something Mrs. Graham had taught him to say . “Come to
me, Dan u, change my luck. Mak e me bold. Give me wealth—
and love to hold.”
There was an amused grunt behind the coal.
“Ah, an d you not even an Irishman. But sure I knew you
from the first for a man of learning, MacKenzie.”
“I know Danu the Luck-Giver ,” Roger said, hoping against
hope tha t that particular Celtic g oddess was both a good sailor
and on his side. He took a step backward, meaning to go, but a
hand descended on his wrist, holding tight.
“A man of learn ing,” Bonnet repeated softly , all levity gone
from his  voice, “but no wisdom. And are you a praying man at
all, MacKenzie?”
He tense d, but felt the force of Bonnet’ s grip and did not
pull awa y . Stren gth gathered in his limbs, his body knowing
before he did that the fight had come.
“I said a wise man does not trouble himself with things
beyond his power—but on this ship, MacKenzie, everything is
in m y power .” The grip on  his wrist tightened. “And
everyone.”
Roger je rked his wrist sideways, breaking the grip. He stood
alone, k nowing there was neither help nor escape. There was
no world  beyond the ship, and within it, Bonnet was right—all
were in the Captain’ s power . I f he died, it would not help
Morag—but that choice was made already .
“Why?” said Bonnet, sounding only mildly interested. “The
woman’ s no looker , sure. And a man of such learning, too;
would you risk my ship and my venture, then, only for the
sake of a warm body?”“No risk .” The words came out hoarse, forced through a
tight throat. Come at me,  he thought, and his hands curled at
his sides. Come at me, an d give me a chance to take you with
me . “The child doesn’ t have pox—a harmless rash.”
“Y ou will for give my putting my ignorant opinion above
your own, Mr . M acKenzie, but I am Captain here.” The voice
was still soft, but the venom was clear .
“It is a child, for God’ s sake!”
“It is—and of no value.”
“No value to you, perhaps!”
There was a moment’ s silence, broken only by a distant
whoosh  in the empty white.
“And what value to you?” the voice asked, implacable.
“Why?”
For the sake of a warm body . Y es, for that. For the touch of
humanity , the memory of tenderness, for the feeling of life
stubborn in the face of death.
“For pity ,” he said. “She is poor; there was no one to help
her .”
The rich perfume of tobacco reached him, narcotic,
enchanting. He breathed it in, taking strength from it.
Bonnet moved, and he moved, too, settling himself in
preparation. But there was no blow forthcoming; the shadow
dug in a pocket,  held out a ghostly hand in which he caught a
magpie glitter from the dif fuse lantern light—coins and bits of
rubbish and what might have been a jewel’ s quick gleam. Then
the Cap tain plucked out a silve r shilling, and thrust the rest
back into his pocket.
“Ah, pit y ,” he said. “And did ye z say you were a gambling
man at all, MacKenzie?”
He held out the shilling, dropped  it. Roger caught it, only by
reflex.“For the  suckling’ s life, then,” B onnet said, and the tone of
light amusement was back. “A gentleman’ s wager , shall we
call it? Heads it lives, and tails it dies.”
The coin  was warm and solid in  his palm, an alien thing in
this world of drifting chill. His hands were slick with sweat,
and yet his mind had gone cold and sharp, focused to an ice
pick’ s point.
Heads h e lives, and tails he die s,  he thought quite calmly ,
and did not mean the child below . He marked throat and crotch
on the other man; grip and lung e, a blow and heave—the rail
was no more than a foot away , the empty realm of the whales
beyond.
There was no room beyond his calculations for any sense of
fear . He  saw the coin spin up as though it were thrown by
another hand, then fall to the  deck. His muscles bunched
themselves, slowly .
“It seem s Danu is with ye the night, sir .” Bonnet’ s soft Irish
voice se emed to  come to him from a great way of f, as the
Captain bent and picked up the coin.
Realization was only beginning to bloom in his chest, when
the Captain gripped his shoulder , turning him down the deck.
“Y ou’ll walk with me awhile, MacKenzie.”
Something had happened to his  knees; he felt as though he
would s ink dow n with every s tep, and yet somehow stayed
upright, keeping pace with the shadow . The ship was silent,
the deck  under his feet a mile aw ay; but the sea beyond was a
live thin g, breathing. He felt the breath in his own lungs rise
and fall with th e shifting deck, and felt as though there were
no boundaries to his body . It might have been wood under his
feet, or water , for all he could feel.
It was some time before he made sense of Bonnet’ s words,
and realized, with a vague sense of amazement, that the man
seemed to be rec ounting the story of his life, in a quiet, matter -
of-fact sort of way .Orphaned in Sligo at an early age, he had learned quickly to
fend for himself, he said, working as a cabin boy aboard
trading s hips. But one winter , w ith ships scarce, he had found
work as hore in Inverness, digging the foundation for a grand
house that was building near the town.
“I was just seve nteen,” he said. “The youngest of the crew
of work men. I could not say why it was they hated me.
Mayhap it was my manner , for that was rough enough—or
jealousy for my size and strength; they were an unchancy ,
whey-faced lot. Or maybe that  the lasses smiled on me. Or
maybe ‘twas only that I was a stranger .
“Still, I knew well enough I w as unpopular with them—
little did  I know quite how  unp opular , though, until the day the
cellar was finished and the foundation ready to be laid.”
Bonnet p aused to draw on his cigar , lest it go out. He let out
puf fs of smoke f rom the corners of his mouth, white wisps that
curled past his head into the greater white of the fog.
“The trenches were dug,” he w ent on, the cigar clenched
between his teeth, “and the wall s started; the great block of the
cornerstone stan din’ ready . I had gone to my supper , and was
just walkin’ back to the place  where I slept, when to my
surprise I was caught up by a pair of the lads with whom I
worked.
“They’d a bottle; they sat down on a wall and ur ged me to
drink with them. I should’ve known better , for they were
friendly , which they’d never been before. But I did drink, and
drink ag ain, and in no time at all  I was reelin’ drunk, for I’d no
head for liquor , havin’ never the  money to buy strong drink. I
was wel l fuddled by the time ‘twas full dark, and scarcely
thought to pull away when th ey took me by the arms and
hastened me down the lane. Th en they seized me, tossed me
over a half-built  wall, and to my surprise, I found myself lyin’
in the damp dirt of the cellar I’d helped dig.
“All of them w ere there, the workmen. Another man was
with them, too; one o’ them had  a lantern, and when he held it
up, I could see  the man was Daft Joey . Daft Joey was abeggarman that lived beneath the bridge—he had nay teeth,
and he ate rotten fish and floatin g dung from the river , and he
stank worse than a blackbirder ’ s hold.
“I was so dazed with the whisky  and the fall that I lay where
I w as, only half hearin’ them as they talked—or ar gued, rather ,
for the chief o’ the gang was angry that the two had brought
me. The daftie would do, he said; a mercy to him, at that. But
them tha t brought me said no, better me. Someone might miss
the beggarman, they said. Then someone laughed and said aye,
and they would not have to pay me my last week’ s wages, and
‘twas then I began to know they meant to kill me.
“They’d talked before, while we worked. A sacrifice, they
said, for the fou ndation, lest the earth tremble and the walls
collapse. But I had not listened—and if I had, would not have
guessed that they meant any more than to chop the head of f a
cockerel and bury it, as was usual.”
He h ad not loo ked at Roger through this recital, his eyes
instead fixed on the mist, as though the events he described
were happening  again, somewhere just beyond the white
curtain of fog.
Roger ’ s clothing hung on him, clinging, wringing wet with
mist and  cold sweat. His stomach clenched, and the cesspool
smell of  the steerage might have been the stink of Daft Joey in
the cellar .
“So they palavered for a bit,” Bonnet went on, “and the
beggarman bega n to make noise, for he wanted more drink.
And at last the chief said it wa s not worth so much talk, he
would throw for the choice. Then he took a coin from his
pocket and he said to me, laughin’, ‘W ill ye take heads or tails,
then, man?’
“I w as too sick  to say a word; the sky was black and
whirling round and bits of light kept flickering at the edges of
my eyes, like fallin’ stars. So he said it for me; by Geordie’ s
head should I li ve, and by his arse I should die, and he threw
the shilling up in  the air . It came down in the dirt by my head,
but I had nay strength to turn and look.“He ben t to see and gave a grunt, then he stood up and took
nay more notice of me.”
They had reached the stern in their quiet pacing. Bonnet
stopped there, hands on the ra il, smoking silently . Then he
took the cigar from his mouth.
“They p ulled the daftie to the wall that was built, and made
him sit down on the ground a t its foot. I do remember his
foolish face,” he said softly . “H e took a drink and he laughed
wi’ them, and h is mouth was open—slack and wet as a old
whore’ s cunt. The next momen t, the stone came down from
the top of the wall, and crushed his head.”
Drops o f moistu re had gathered on the spikes of hair at the
back of Roger ’ s  neck; he could  feel them run down, one at a
time, trickling cold down the crease of his back.
“They rolled me on my face and hit me,” Bonnet continued
matter -of-factly . “When I came  to myself again, I was in the
bottom of a fishing boat. The fisherman left me on the shore
near Pet erhead a nd said he woul d advise me to find a new ship
—he could see, he said, I was not meant for the land.”
He held  up the cigar and tappe d it gently with a finger to
loosen the ash.
“At that,” he sa id, “they did give me my wages; when I
came to  look, the shilling was in my pocket. Ah, they were
honest men, sure.”
Roger leaned against the rail, gri pping its wood as the single
solid thing in a world gone soft and nebulous.
“And di d you go back to the land?” he asked, and heard his
own voice, preternaturally calm, as though it belonged to
someone else.
“Did I find them , ye mean.” Bo nnet turned and leaned back
against t he rail, half facing Roger . “Oh, yes. Y ears later . One at
a time. But I fou nd them all.” He  opened the hand that held the
coin, and held it cupped thoughtfully before him, tilting it back
and forth so the silver gleamed in the lantern light.“Heads you live, and tails you d ie. A fair chance, would yez
say , MacKenzie?”
“For them?”
“For you.”
The soft  Irish voice was as unem phatic as it might be were
it making observations of the weather .
As in a dream, Roger felt the weight of the shilling drop
once more into his hands. He heard the suck and hiss of the
water on  the hull, the blowing  of the whales—and the suck
and hiss of Bon net’ s breath as he drew on his cigar . Seven
whales the fill of a Cir ein Cr oin .
“A fair chance,”  Bonnet said. “ Luck was with you before,
MacKenzie. See  will Danu come for you again—or will it be
the Soul-Eater this time?”
The fog had clos ed over the dec k. There was nothing visible
save the glowing coal of Bonne t’ s cigar , a burning cyclops in
the m ist. The m an might be a devil indeed, one eye closed to
human misery , one eye open to the dark. And here Roger stood
quite lite rally between the devil and the deep blue sea, with his
fate shining silver in the palm of his hand.
“It i s my  life; I’ll make the call, ” he said, and was surprised
to h ear his voic e calm and steady . “T ails—tails is mine.” He
threw , and caught, clapped his one hand hard against the back
of the other , trapped the coin and its unknown sentence.
He close d his eyes and though t just once of Brianna. I’m
sorry ,  he said silently to her , and lifted his hand.
A w arm breath passed over his skin, and then he felt a spot
of co olness on the back of his hand as the coin was picked up,
but he didn’ t move, didn’ t open his eyes.
It was some time before he realized that he stood alone.P A R T  N I N E
P a s s i o n n e m e n t4 0
V I R G I N  S A C R I F I C E
W ilmington, the Colony of North Carolina, September 1,
1769
T his w as the third  attack, of wha tever Lizzie’ s sickness was.
She had  seemed  to recover after  the first bad fever , and after a
day spent regaining her strength , had insisted she was able to
travel. T hey had got no more than a day’ s ride north of
Charleston, though, before the fever struck again.
Brianna had hobbled the horses, and made a hasty camp
near a small cre ek, then made trip after trip through the night,
scrabbling up and down a mud dy bank in the dark, carrying
water in a smal l canteen to dribble down Lizzie’ s throat and
over her  steaming body . She w asn’ t afraid of dark woods or
lurking animals, but the thought of Lizzie dying in the
wilderness, mile s from any sort of help, was terrifying enough
to make her wan t to head straig ht back to Charleston as soon
as Lizzie could sit a horse.
By morning, however , the fever had broken, and though
Lizzie w as weak  and pale, she had been able to ride. Brianna
had hesitated, but finally decided to press on toward
W ilmington, rather than turn back. The ur ge that had driven
her all this way  now had a sharper spur; she had  to  find her
mother , for Lizzie’ s sake as well as her own.
Brianna hadn’ t appreciated her size for most of a life spent
looming in the back row of class pictures, but she had begun to
feel the advanta ges of height an d strength as she grew older .
And the longer she spent in th is miserable place, the more
advantageous they seemed.
She braced one arm against the  bed frame as she eased the
chamber pot out from under Liz zie’ s frail white buttocks with
the other  hand. Lizzie was scrawny but surprisingly heavy , and
no more than half conscious; she moaned and twitchedrestlessly , the twitch suddenly s pringing into the full-fledged
convulsion of a chill.
The shivering was beginning t o ease a little now , though
Lizzie’ s teeth were still clenched hard enough to make the
sharp bones of her jaws stand out like struts beneath her skin.
Malaria, Briann a thought, for the dozenth time. It must be,
to keep coming back like this. A number of small pink welts
showed on Lizzie’ s neck, reminders of the mosquitoes that had
plagued them ever since the Phillip Alonzo  drew within sight
of la nd. They h ad made landfall too far south, and wasted
three weeks in meandering through the shallow coastal waters
to Charleston, gnawed incessantly by bloodsucking bugs.
“There now . Feeling a little better?”
Lizzie n odded feebly , and tried to smile, succeeding only in
looking like a white mouse that had taken poisoned bait.
“W ater , honey . T ry a little, just a sip.” Brianna held the cup
to Lizzie ’ s mouth, coaxing. She felt a strange sense of deja vu
and real ized that her voice was the echo of her mother ’ s, both
in word s and tone. The realization was oddly comforting, as
though her mother somehow stood behind her , speaking
through her .
If it were her mother speaking , though, next would have
come the orange-flavored St. Jo seph’ s aspirin, a tiny pill to be
sucked and savored, as much tr eat as medicine, the aches and
fever seeming to subside as quickly as the sweet tart pill
dissolved on her tongue. Brianna cast a bleak glance at her
saddlebags, bulg ing in the corner . No aspirin there; Jenny had
sent a small bu ndle of what s he called “simples,” but the
chamomile and peppermint tea had only made Lizzie vomit.
Quinine was what you gave peo ple for malaria; that’ s what
she needed. But she had no ide a whether it was even called
quinine here, or how it was adm inistered. Malaria was an old
disease, though , and quinine came from plants—surely a
doctor would have some, whatever it was called?Only the hope of finding medical help had kept her going
through Lizzie’ s  second bout. Afraid to stop on the road again,
she h ad taken Li zzie up in front of her , cradling the girl’ s body
against her as they rode, leading Lizzie’ s horse. Lizzie had
alternately blazed with heat and shaken with chill, and both of
them had arrived in W ilmington limp with exhaustion.
But here  they were, in the mids t of W ilmington, and as far
from real help as they had ever been. Bree glanced at the
bedside table, lips tight. A wadded cloth lay there, dabbled
with blood.
The landlady had taken one look at Lizzie and sent for an
apothecary . Despite what her mother had said about the
primitive state of medicine and its practitioners here, Brianna
had felt a sudden instinctive sur ge of relief at sight of the man.
The apo thecary was a decently dressed young man with a
kindly air and reasonably clean hands. No matter what his
state of medical knowledge, he  was likely to know as much
about fevers as s he herself did. More important, she could feel
that she wasn’ t alone in caring for Lizzie.
Modesty prompted her to step outside when the apothecary
drew down the l inen sheet to make his examination, and it was
not until  she heard a small cry of distress that she flung open
the door , to find the young apothecary , fleam in hand, and
Lizzie, h er face white as chalk, r ed blood streaming from a cut
in the crook of her elbow .
“But it is to draw the humors, miss!” the apothecary had
pleaded, trying to shield both himself and the body of his
patient. “Do you not understand ? Y ou must draw the humors!
If it is n ot done,  hot bile will toxify within her or gans and fill
her body entirely , to her certain detriment!”
“It will be to your  certain detriment if you don’ t leave,”
Brianna had informed him, through clenched teeth. “Get out of
here this minute!”
Medical zeal disappearing in favor of self-preservation, the
young man had picked up his c ase and left with what dignityhe c ould, pausing at the foot  of the stairs to shout dire
warnings up at her .
The warnings kept echoing in her ears, between trips
downstairs to fill the basin from  the kitchen copper . Most of
the a pothecary’ s  words were sim ple ignorance—ranting about
humors and bad blood—but the re were some that came back
with uncomfortable force.
“If you will not take heedful advice, miss, you may well
condemn your maid to death!” he had called, indignant face
upturned in the darkness of the  stairwell. “Y ou do not know
how to care for her yourself!”
She didn’ t. She didn’ t even know for sure what Lizzie’ s
sickness was; the apothecary ha d called it an “ague,” and the
landlady had talked of “seasoning.” It was quite common for
new imm igrants to fall ill repea tedly , exposed as they were to
an unfamiliar array of new germs. From the landlady’ s
unguarded rema rks, it seemed a pparent that it was also quite
common for such immigrants not to survive this seasoning
process.
The basin tilted, slopping hot w ater over her wrists. W ater
was the only thin g she had. God knew whether the well behind
the inn was sanitary or not; better to use the boiling water from
the copp er and let it cool, even  if it took longer . There was
cool water in the  pitcher; she dribbled a little between Lizzie’ s
dry , cracked lips, then eased th e girl down on the bed. She
washed Lizzie’ s face and neck, pulled back the quilt and
soaked the linen nightdress agai n, the tiny nipples showing as
dark pink points beneath.
Lizzie managed a small smile, eyelids drooping, then sank
back wit h a tiny sigh and fell asleep, loose joints relaxing like
a rag doll’ s.
Brianna felt as though her own stuf fing had been removed
as well. She dra gged the single stool over to the window and
collapsed on it, leaning on the  sill in a vain ef fort to get a
breath o f fresh air . The atmosp here had lain on them like athick blanket all the way from Charleston—little wonder that
poor Lizzie had crumpled under its weight.
She scra tched u neasily at a bite  on her own thigh; the bugs
were no t nearly as fond of her a s they were of Lizzie, but she
had suf fered a few bites. Malari a wasn’ t a danger; she had had
the s hots for that, as well as for typhoid, cholera, and anything
else she could t hink of. But there was no vaccine for things
like dengue fever , or any of a dozen other diseases that
haunted the thick air like male volent spirits. How many of
those were spread by biting insects?
She closed her e yes and leaned her head against the wooden
frame, blotting trickles of sweat from her breastbone with the
folds of her shir t. She could smell herself; how long had she
been wearing these clothes? It didn’ t matter; she had been
awake fo r most of two days and  two nights, and was too tired
to undress, let alone make the ef fort to wash.
Lizzie’ s fever seemed to have br oken—but for how long? If
it kept coming b ack, it was sure  to kill the little maidservant;
she had  already lost all the weight she had gained on the
voyage, and her fair skin was  beginning to show a yellow
tinge in sunlight.
There was no h elp to be found in W ilmington. Brianna sat
up straight, stretching and feeling the bones of her back pop
into plac e. T ired  or not, there was only one thing to do. She
had to find her mother , and as quickly as possible.
She wou ld sell the horses and find a boat to take them up
the r iver . Even i f the fever cam e back, she could take care of
Lizzie as well on a boat as she could in this hot, smelly little
room—and they would still be traveling toward their goal.
She got up and splashed a little  water on her face, twisting
her sweat-soake d hair up out of the way . She loosened the
crumpled breeches and stepped out of them, making plans in a
dreamy , disconnected sort of way .
A bo at, on the river . Surely it w ould be cooler on the river .
No more  riding;  her thigh muscl es ached from four days in thesaddle. They would sail to Cross Creek, find Jocasta
MacKenzie.
“Aunt,” she murmured, swaying slightly as she reached for
the oil-dip lamp. “Great-aunt Jocasta.” She imagined a kindly
white-haired old lady who would greet her with the same joy
she had found a t Lallybroch. Family . It would be so good to
have family again. Roger drifted into her thoughts, as he did so
often. She resolutely pushed him out again; time enough to
think of him when her mission was accomplished.
A tiny cloud of gnats hovered o ver the flame, and the wall
nearby was spattered with the arrowed shapes of moths and
lacewings, taking respite from their quest. She pinched out the
flame, scarcely hotter than the a ir in the room, and pulled the
shirt of f over her head in darkness.
Jocasta would know exactly where Jamie Fraser and her
mother were—w ould help her get to them. For the first time
since ste pping through the stones, she thought of Jamie Fraser
with nei ther curiosity nor trepidation. Nothing mattered but
finding her mother . Her mother would know what to do for
Lizzie; her mother would know how to take care of
everything.
She spread a folded quilt on the floor and lay down naked
on it. She was a sleep in moments, dreaming of the mountains,
and clean white snow .
By the next evening, things looked better . The fever had
broken, just as before, leaving Lizzie spent and weak, but
clearheaded, and  as cool as the climate allowed. Restored by a
night’ s r est, Brianna had washed her hair and sponge-bathed in
the basin, then had paid the landlady to keep an eye on Lizzie
while s he, dressed in breeches and coat, went about her
business.
It had taken most of the day— and the suf fering of a good
many w idened eyes and gaping mouths as men realized her
sex—to sell the horses at what s he hoped was an honest price.
She had  heard of a man named V iorst, who took passengersbetween W ilmington and Cross Creek in his canoe for a price.
She hadn’ t found V iorst befo re dark, though—and wasn’ t
about to  hang around the doc ks at night, breeches or no
breeches. Morning would be time enough.
Still more heartening, Lizzie had been downstairs when she
returned to the inn toward sunset, being cosseted by the
landlady and fed morsels of corn pudding and chicken
fricassee.
“Y ou’re better!” Brianna ex claimed. Lizzie nodded,
beaming, and gulped her mouthful.
“I a m, so,” she said. “I feel quite myself again, and Mrs.
Smoots has been so kind as to let me wash all of our things.
Oh, it’ s so nice to feel clean again!” she said fervently , laying
a pale hand on her kerchief, which looked freshly ironed.
“Y ou shouldn’ t be washing and ironing,” Brianna scolded,
sliding i nto the bench beside her maid. “Y ou’ll wear yourself
out, and get sick again.”
Lizzie looked down her thin nose, a prim smile perched at
the corners of her mouth.
“W ell, I  didna think ye’d be wanting to meet your Da in
clothes all spotted wi’ filth. Not but what even a clarty gown
would b e better than what ye’ve got on.” The little maid’ s eyes
passed reprovingly over Brianna’ s breeches; she didn’ t
approve at all of her mistress’ s penchant for male costume.
“Meet my Da? What do you—Lizzie, have you heard
something?” A flare of hope shot up inside her , a sudden
bright puf f like the lighting of a gas stove.
Lizzie looked smug.
“I have that. And ‘twas all because of the washin’, too—my
Da did always say as how virtue brings its reward.”
“I’m sure it does,” Brianna said dryly . “What did you find
out, and how?”
“W ell, I  was just after hanging out your petticoat—the nice
one, aye, wi’ the lace about the hem—”Brianna picked up a small jug of milk, and held it
menacingly over her maid’ s head. Lizzie squeaked and ducked
away , giggling.
“All right! I’m telling! I’m telling!”
In the middle o f her washing, one of the tavern’ s patrons
had com e out into the yard to sm oke a pipe, the day being fine.
He had admired Lizzie’ s domestic skills and taken up a
pleasant conversation, in the course of which it was revealed
that this gentleman—one Andrew MacNeill by name— had
not only heard of James Fraser but was well acquainted with
him.
“He is? What did he say? Is this MacNeill still here?”
Lizzie put out a hand and made small quelling motions.
“I’m sayin’ it as  quick as I can. No, he’ s not here; I did try
to m ake him st ay , but he was bound for New Bern by the
packet boat, and couldna bide.” She was nearly as excited as
Brianna; her cheeks were still p ale and sallow , but the tip of
her nose had gone pink.
“Mr . MacNeill knows your Da, and your great-auntie
Cameron as well—she’ s a great lady , he says, verra rich, with
a tremendous great house, and lots of slaves, and—”
“Never mind about that now , what did he say about my
father? Did he mention my mother?”
“Claire,” Lizzie said triumphantly . “Y e did say that was
your Mam’ s name? I asked, and he said yes, Mrs. Fraser ’ s
name was Claire. And he said s he was a most amazing healer
—did ye not say as your mother was a fine physician? He said
as h e ha d seen her do a desperate operation on a man, laid him
smack in  the middle of the dinne r table and cut of f his ballocks
and then stitched them back on, right there on the spot, wi’ all
the dinner party lookin’ on!”
“That’ s my mother , all right.” There were tears of what
might ha ve been  laughter in the corners of her eyes. “Are they
well? Had he seen them lately?”“Och, th at’ s the best of it!” Lizzie leaned forward, eyes big
with the  importance of her news. “He’ s in Cross Creek—your
Da, Mr . Fraser! A man he know s is on trial there for assault,
and you r Da’ s come down to be  witness for him.” She patted
her h andkerchief against her temple, mopping up tiny beads of
sweat.
“Mr . Ma cNeill says the court willna sit again till Monday
week because the judge fell ill , and another is coming from
Edenton, and the trial canna go on until he arrives.”
Brianna brushed back a lock of hair and blew out her breath,
hardly daring to believe their luck.
“A week from Monday…and it’ s Saturday now . God, I
wonder how long it will take to get upriver?”
Lizzie crossed herself hastily in atonement for her mistress’ s
casual blasphemy , but shared in her excitement.
“I di nna ken, bu t Mrs. Smoots d id say as her son’ s made the
trip once before—we could ask him.”
Brianna swung round on her be nch, looking over the room.
Men and boys h ad begun coming in as darkness fell, stopping
for a drink or a supper on their way from work to bed, and
now there were fifteen or twe nty people crammed into the
small space.
“Which one is Junior Smoots?” Brianna asked, craning her
neck to see through the press of bodies.
“Y onder—the laddie wi’ the sweet brown eyes. I’ll fetch
him to ye, shall I?” Emboldened  by excitement, Lizzie slipped
out of her seat and pushed her way into the throng.
Brianna was still holding the jug  of milk, but made no move
to pour it into  her cup. Her throat was too choked with
excitement to swallow . Little more than a week!
W ilmington was a small town, Roger thought. How many
places c ould she  be? If she was here at all. He thought there
was a good chance of it; inquir ies in the dockside taverns in
New Be rn had given him the valuable information that thePhillip Alonzo  h ad reached Charleston safely —and only ten
days before the Gloriana  had docked in Edenton.
It might have taken Brianna anything from two days to two
weeks to make her way from Charleston to W ilmington—
assuming that she was indeed headed there.
“She’ s here,” he muttered. “Damn it, I know  she’ s here!”
Whether this conviction was the result of deduction, intuition,
hope, or  merely stubbornness, he clung to it like a drowning
sailor to a spar .
He had managed the journey from Edenton to W ilmington
with a fair amo unt of ease, hi mself. Put to work unloading
car go fr om the Gloriana ‘s hold, he had carried a chest of tea
into a warehouse, set it down, walked back to the door , and
busied himself in retying the sweat-soaked kerchief round his
head. As  soon as the next man had passed him, he stepped out
onto the dock, t urned right instead of left, and within seconds
was headed up t he narrow cobbled lane that led from docks to
town. B y the next morning he’d found a berth as loader on a
small ca r go boat, transporting naval stores from Edenton to the
main de pot at W ilmington, there to be transferred to a lar ger
ship for transport to England.
He jumped ship again in W ilmington, without a moment’ s
compunction. He hadn’ t time to waste; there was Brianna to be
found.
He kne w she was here. Fraser ’ s Ridge was in the
mountains; she’ d need a guide, and W ilmington was the most
likely port in which to find one. And if she was here, someone
would have noticed her; he’d bet money on that. He could
only hope the wrong sort of person hadn’ t noticed her already .
A quick  reconnoiter of the main  street and the harbor gave
him a count of tw enty-three taverns. Christ, these people drank
like fish! There was the chance she’d taken a room in a private
house, but the taverns were the place to start.
By evening he’d covered ten of the taverns, slowed by the
necessity of avoiding any of his erstwhile shipmates. Being inthe prese nce of so much drink, and he without an extra penny
to spend, had g iven him a ragi ng thirst. He hadn’ t eaten all
day , either , which didn’ t help matters.
At the same time, he scarcely noticed the physical
discomfort. A man in the fifth tavern had seen her , so had a
woman in the seventh. “A tall man  wi’ red hair ,” the man had
said, but “A great huge girl, dressed in men’ s breeches,” the
woman had said, clicking her tongue in shock. “W alkin’ down
the street, plain as you please, with her coat over her arm and
her backside in view of everyone!”
Let Roger get that particular backside in his  view , he
thought with some grimness, and he’d know what to do with
it. He begged a cup of water fro m a kindhearted landlady , and
set of f with renewed determination.
By the time it w as full dark, he had covered another five
taverns. The taprooms were full now , and he discovered that
the tall redheaded girl in men ’ s clothing had been causing
public comment for nearly a we ek. The quality of some of this
comment caused  the blood to throb in his cheeks with outrage,
and only  the fear of being arrested kept him from outright
assault.
As i t was, he left the fifteenth ta vern after an ugly exchange
of words  with two drunkards, bo iling with fury . Christ, had the
woman n o sense  at all? Did she have no notion what men were
capable of?
He stopped in the street and wiped a sleeve across his
sweating face. He breathed heavily , wondering what to do
next. Keep on, he supposed, though if he didn’ t find something
to eat soon, he was going to fall flat on his face in the road.
The Blue Bull, h e decided. He’d glanced into the shed there
as h e pa ssed ear lier , and seen a good pile of clean straw . He’d
spend a penny or two for dinner , and perhaps the owner would
let him sleep in the stable for the sake of Christian kindness.
T urning, his eye caught sight of a sign on the house across
the road.WILMINGT ON GAZETTEER, JNO. GILLETTE. PROP ., it read.
W ilmington’ s newspaper; one of the few in the Colony of
North Carolina. One too many , if you asked Roger . He fought
the ur ge to pick up a rock and hurl it through Jno. Gillette’ s
window . Instead , he yanked the sodden band of f his head and,
making an ef fort to tidy him self into some semblance of
decency , turned toward the river and the Blue Bull.
She was there.
She was sitting by the hearth, he r tailed hair sparking in the
firelight, engaged in conversation with a young man whose
smile Roger wanted to wipe of f  forcibly . Instead, he slammed
the door behind him with a cras h and started toward her . She
turned, startled, and stared blankly at the bearded stranger .
Recognition flas hed in her eyes, then joy , and a huge smile
spread across her face.
“Oh,” she said. “It’ s you.” Then her eyes changed, as
realization flared up like a brushfire. She screamed. It was a
good full-bodied  scream, and every head in the tavern snapped
round at the sound of it.
“Damn you!” He lunged across the table, and got her by the
arm. “What the devil do you think you’re doing?”
Her face  had gone dead white, h er eyes round and dark with
shock. She jerked away , trying to free herself.
“Let go!”
“That I won’ t! Y ou’ll come with me, and ye’ll do it this
moment!”
Sidling r ound th e table, he got hold of her other arm, jerked
her up, whirled her around and pushed her in front of him
toward the door .
“MacKenzie!” D amn, it was one of the seamen from the
car go bo at. Roger glowered at the man, willing him to keep
out of it. Luckily the man was  both smaller and older than
Roger; h e hesita ted, but then to ok courage from the company
and lifted his chin pugnaciously .“What you doing to the lass, MacKenzie? Leave her be!”
There was a sti r among the crowd, men turning from their
drinks, a ttracted by the uproar . H e had to get out of here now ,
or he wouldn’ t get out at all.
“T ell them it’ s all right, tell them you know me!” he
whispered into Brianna’ s ear .
“It’ s all right.” Brianna spoke, voice husky with shock, but
loud enough to be heard over the growing hubbub. “It’ s all
right. I—I know him.” The seam an dropped back a little, still
dubious. A scrawny young girl in the inglenook had gotten to
her f eet; she loo ked frightened to death, but bravely clutched a
stone al e bottle in one fist, evidently intending to hit Roger
with it, if necess ary . Her high-pitched voice rang out above the
suspicious grumble of voices.
“Miss Bree! Y e’ll not go wi’ yon black villain, surely?”
Brianna made a sound that might have been laughter ,
choked by hysteria. Reaching u p, she dug her nails hard into
the b ack of his hand. Startled by the pain, he loosened his grip
and she yanked her arm out of his grasp.
“It’ s all right,” she repeated, m ore firmly to the room at
lar ge. “I know h im.” She made a small shooing gesture at the
girl. “Li zzie, go on up to bed. I’ll—I’ll be back later .” She
whirled on her bootheel and hea ded for the door , walking fast.
Roger gave the taproom a menacing glare, to discourage
anyone who thought of interfering, and followed her .
She was  waiting right outside th e door; her fingers sank into
his a rm with a fierceness that might have been gratifying were
it prompted solely by joy at seeing him. He doubted it.
“What are you doing  here?” she asked.
He detached her fingers and gripped them firmly .
“Not her e,” he snapped. He took her arm and dragged her a
little way down the road, to the shelter of a big horse-chestnut
tree. The sky still glowed with the remnants of twilight, but the
drooping branches reached nea rly to the ground, and it wasdark eno ugh underneath to hide them from any curious souls
who thought of venturing after them.
She whirled on him the instant they reached its shadows.
“What are you doing here, for God’ s sake?”
“Looking for you, ye wee fool! And what in the name of all
holy are you  d oing here? And dressed like that,  God damn
you!” He’d had the briefest loo k at her in her breeches and
shirt, but it was enough.
In he r ow n time,  the clothes wou ld have been so baggy as to
be sexle ss. After months of see ing women in long skirts and
arisaids,  tho ugh, the blatant division o f her legs, the sheer
bloody length of thigh and curve  of calf, seemed so outrageous
that he wanted to wrap a sheet around her .
“Bloody woman ! Y ou might as well walk down the street
naked!”
“Don’ t be an idiot! What are you doing here?”
“I told you—looking for you.”
He took her by the shoulders, then, and kissed her , hard.
Fear , anger , and the sheer relie f of finding her were fused at
once into a solid bolt of desire, and he found he was shaking
with it. So was she. She was clinging to him, shaking in his
arms.
“It’ s all right,” h e whispered to her . He buried his mouth in
her hair . “It’ s all right, I’m here. I’ll take care of you.”
She jerked upright, out of his arms.
“All right? ” sh e cried. “How can you say that? For God’ s
sake, you’re her e !”
There was no m istaking the horror in her voice. He grabbed
her by the arm.
“And where the hell else shoul d I be, with you tearing of f
into fucking nowhere and risking your bloody neck, and—why
the hell did you do it?!”“I’m loo king fo r my parents. W hat else  would I be doing
here?”
“I know that, for God’ s sake! I mean why in hell  did you not
tell me what you meant to do?”
She jerk ed her arm out of his grasp and gave him a healthy
shove in the chest that all but sent him staggering.
“Because you wouldn’ t have le t me go, that’ s why! Y ou’d
have tried to stop me, and—”
“Damn right I w ould! God, I’d have locked you in a room,
or tied you hand and foot! Of all the flea-brained notions—”
She hit him, a fu ll-palmed slap that caught him hard across
the cheekbone.
“Shut up!”
“Bloody woman! D’ye expect me to let you go of f into—
into nothing,  and I s it at home twiddling m y thumbs while
you’re having your womb paraded on a pike in the
marketplace? What sort of man d’ye think I am?”
He felt her mov ement rather than saw it, and grabbed her
wrist before she could slap him again.
“I’m in no mood for that, girl! Hit me once more, and by
Christ, I will do you violence!”
She fold ed her other hand into a  fist and punched him in the
belly , quick as a striking snake.
He wanted to hi t her back. Inste ad, he grabbed her , and with
a ha ndful of her  hair wrapped ro und his fist, kissed her as hard
as he could.
She squirmed and struggled aga inst him, making strangled
noises, but he didn’ t stop. Then she was kissing him back, and
they sank to their knees together . Her arms came round his
neck as he bor e her down beneath him to the leaf-matted
ground beneath  the tree. Then she was crying in his arms,
choking and gasping, tears ru nning down her face as she
clutched him.“Why?” she sobbed. “Why did you have to follow me?
Didn’ t you realize? Now what are we going to do!”
“Do? Do about what?” He cou ldn’ t tell whether she was
crying from anger or fear—both, he thought.
She stared up at him through strands of tangled hair .
“Getting back! Y ou have to h ave somebody to go to—
somebody you care for . Y ou’re the only person I love at that
end—or you were! How am I  going to get back, if you’re
her e ? And how will you get back, if I’m  here?”
He stopped dead, fear and ang er both for gotten, and his
hands c lamped tight on her w rists to stop her hitting him
again.
“That’ s why? That’ s why you wouldn’ t tell me? Because
you love  me? Jesus Christ!”
He let go of her wrists and lay on top of her instead. He
grabbed her face with both hands and tried to kiss her again.
She gav e a sudden snap of he r hips, swung her legs up on
either side, and scissored him neatly across the back, crushing
his ribs.
He rolled, breaking the hold, and brought her with him,
ending on his back, with her on top. He got a hand in her hair
and drew her face down to his panting.
“Stop,” he said. “Christ, what is this, a wrestling match?”
“Let go of my hair .” She shook her head, trying to dislodge
his grip. “I hate  having my hair pulled.”
He let go of her hair , and slid his hand up the length of her
neck, fingers curled round the slender nape, a thumb resting on
the pulse in her throat. It was going like a trip-hammer; so was
his.
“Right, how are ye on being choked?”
“Don’ t like it.”
“Neither do I. Get your arm of f my neck, aye?”V ery slowly , her weight eased back. He still felt short of
breath, b ut not from being choked. He didn’ t want to let go of
her neck . Not from fear of her cutting loose again, but because
he couldn’ t bear to lose the feel of her . It had been too long.
She reached up and took hold of his wrist, but didn’ t pull his
hand away . He felt her swallow .
“Right,” he whispered. “Say it. I want to hear it.”
“I…love…you,” she said, between her teeth. “Got it?”
“A ye, I’ ve got it.” He took her face between his hands, very
gently , and drew her down. She came, arms trembling and
giving way beneath her .
“Y ou’re sure?” he said.
“Y es. What are we going to do ?” she said, and began to cry .
“W e.”  She’d said we . She’d said she was sure.
Roger lay in t he dust of the road, bruised, filthy , and
starving, with a woman trembling and weeping against his
chest, now and then giving him a small thump with her fist. He
had never felt happier in his life.
“Hush,” he whispered, half rock ing her . “It’ s all right; there’ s
another way . W e’ll get back; I  know how . Don’ t worry , I’ll
take care of you.”
Finally , she wore herself out, and lay still in the crook of his
arm, snif fling and hiccuping. There was a lar ge wet spot on the
front of his shirt. The crickets in the tree, startled into silence
by the uproar , cautiously resumed their songs overhead.
She freed herself and sat up, fumbling in the dark.
“I ha ve to blow my dose,” she s aid thickly . “Do you have a
hadky?”
He g ave her the damp rag he used to tie back his hair . She
made whooshing noises, and he smiled in the dark.
“Y ou sound like a can of shaving cream.”“And when was the last time you saw one of those?” She
lay down on him again, head tucked into the curve of his
shoulder , and reached up to tou ch his jaw . He’d shaved two
days ago; there had been neither time nor opportunity since.
Her hair  still smelled faintly of  grass, though no longer of
artificial flowers. It must be her natural scent.
She sighed deeply , tightened her arm around him.
“I’m sorry ,” she said. “I didn’ t want you to come after me.
But…Roger , I’m awfully glad you’re here!”
He k issed her te mple; she was damp and salty with sweat
and tears.
“So am I,” he s aid, and for the  moment all the trials and
dangers of the past two months seemed insignificant. All but
one.
“How long have you been pla nning this?” he asked. He
thought he could have told her , t o the day . Since her letters had
begun to change.
“Oh…about six months,” she said, confirming his guess. “It
was when I went to Jamaica during last Easter vacation.”
“A ye?” T o Jamaica, instead of to  Scotland. She’d asked him
to jo in her , and  he’d refused, foolishly hurt that she hadn’ t
planned to come to him automatically .
She took a deep breath and let it out, blotting the neck of her
shirt against her skin.
“I kept dreaming,” she said. “About my father . Fathers.
Both of them.”
The dreams were little more than fragments; vivid glimpses
of Frank Randall’ s face, longe r stretches now and then, in
which she saw h er mother . And now and then a tall, red-haired
man whom she knew to be the father she had never seen.
“There w as one dream in partic ular…” It had been night in
the dream, somewhere tropical, with fields of tall green plantsthat might have been sugarca ne, and fires burning in the
distance.
“There were drums beating, and I knew something was
hiding, waiting in the canes; something horrible,” she said.
“My mo ther was there, drinking tea with a crocodile.” Roger
grunted, and her voice grew sharper . “It was a dream, all right?
“Then he stepped out of the canes. I couldn’ t see his face
very well, because it was dark, but I could see that he had red
hair; there were copper glints when he turned his head.”
“W as he the dreadful thing in the canes?” Roger asked.
“No.” He could hear the susurrus of her hair as she shook
her head. It had gone quite dark by now , and she was little
more than a comforting weight on his chest, a soft voice
beside him, speaking from the shadows.
“He was  standing between my m other and the awful thing. I
couldn’ t see it, but I knew it was there, waiting.” She gave a
small, involuntary shudder and Roger tightened his hold on
her .
“Then I knew m y mother was going to stand up and walk
right toward it. I  tried to stop her , but I couldn’ t make her hear
me or see me. So I turned to him, and I called to him to go
with her—to save her from whatever it was. And he saw me!”
The han d on his arm squeezed t ight. “He did, he saw me, and
he heard me. And then I woke up.”
“A ye?” Roger said skeptically . “And this made you go to
Jamaica, and—”
“It made  me think,” she said sharply . “Y ou’d looked; you
couldn’ t find them anywhere in Scotland after 1766, and you
couldn’ t find them on any of  the emigration rolls to the
Colonies. That was when you sa id you thought we should give
up; that there wasn’ t any more we could find out.”
Roger w as glad of the darkness that hid his guilt. He kissed
the top of her head, quickly .“But I wondered; the place I saw them in the dream was in
the tropics. What if they were in the Indies?”
“I looke d,” Rog er said. “I che cked the passenger rolls of
every sh ip that left Edinbur gh or London in the late 1760s and
‘70s—headed fo r anyplace. I did tell you,” he added, an edge
in his voice.
“I know that,” she said, with a matching edge. “But what if
they wer en’ t pas sengers? Why did people go  to the Indies then
— now , I mean? ” She caught he rself, voice cracking a little in
realization.
“For trade, mostly .”
“Right. So what if they wen t on a car go ship? They
wouldn’ t show up on the passenger rolls.”
“Okay ,” he said slowly . “Right, they wouldn’ t. But then
how would you look for them?”
“W arehouse re gisters, plantation account books, port
manifests. I spent the whole vacation in libraries and
museums. And—and I found them,” she said, with a small
catch in her voice.
Christ, she’d seen the notice.
“A ye?” he said, striving for calmness.
She laughed, a little tremulously .
“A Captain James Fraser , of a ship named Artemis,  sold five
tons of bat guano to a planter in Montego Bay on April 2,
1767.”
Roger couldn’ t help a grunt of amusement, but at the same
time, couldn’ t help objecting.
“A ye, but a ship ’ s captain? After all your mother said about
the man’ s seasickness? And not to be discouraging, but there
must be  literally hundreds of James Frasers; how could you
possibly know—”
“There m ight; but on April the first, a woman named Claire
Fraser bought a slave from the slave market in Kingston.”“She what ?”
“I don’ t know w hy ,” Brianna said firmly , “but I’m sure she
had a good reason.”
“W ell, sure, but—”
“The papers gave the slave’ s name as ‘T emeraire,’ and
described him as having one arm. Makes him stand out,
doesn’ t it? Anyway , I started looking through collections of
old n ewspapers;  not just from the Indies, from all the southern
colonies, looking for that name—my mother wouldn’ t keep a
slave; if  she bought him, she’d  free him somehow , and the
notices of manumission were sometimes printed in the local
papers. I thought I could may be find where the slave was
freed.”
“And did you?”
“No.” S he was quiet for a minute. “I—I found something
else. A notice of their…deaths. My parents.”
Even knowing that she must have found it, to hear it from
her lips was sti ll a shock. He pulled her tight against him,
wrapping his arms around her .
“Where?” he said softly . “How?”
He shou ld have known better . He wasn’ t listening to her
half-choked explanation; he was too busy cursing himself. He
should h ave known she was too  stubborn to be dissuaded. All
he’d done with h is fatheaded interference was to drive her into
secrecy . And it had been he who’d paid for that—in months of
worry .
“But we’re in tim e,” she said. “It said 1776; we’ve got time
to find them.” S he sighed hugely . “I’m so glad you’re here. I
was so worried you’d find out before I could get back and I
didn’ t know what you’d do.”
“What I did  do….Y ou know ,” he said conversationally , “I
have a friend with a two-year -old child. He says that he’d
never in life condone child abuse—but by God, he understandswhat makes people do it. I feel very much the same about wife
beating just now .”
There was a sma ll quiver of laughter from the heavy weight
on his chest.
“What do you mean by that?”
He s lid a hand down her back and got a firm grip on one
round buttock. She wore no underclothes beneath the loose
breeches.
“I mean that were I a man of this time, instead of my own,
nothing would give me greater pleasure than to lay my belt
across your arse a dozen times or so.”
She didn ’ t seem to consider this a serious threat. In fact, he
thought she was laughing.
“So since you’re not from this t ime, you wouldn’ t do it? Or
you would, but you wouldn’ t enjoy it?”
“Oh, I’d  enjoy it,” he assured her . “There’ s nothing I’d like
better than to take a stick to you.”
She was  laughing.
Suddenly furious, he shoved her of f and sat up.
“What’ s the matter with you?”
“I thought you’d found someon e else! Y our letters, the last
few mon ths…and then that last one. I was sure of it. It’ s that I
want to beat you for—not for ly ing to me or going of f without
telling me—for making me think I’d lost you!”
She was silent for a momen t. Her hand came out of
darkness and touched his face, very softly .
“I’m sor ry ,” she said quietly . “I never meant for you to think
that. I only wanted to keep you  from finding out, until it was
too late. ” Her head turned towar d him, silhouetted by the faint
light from the road outside their refuge. “How did  you find
out?”
“Y our boxes. They came to the college.”“What? But I told them not to send those until the end of
May , when you’d be in Scotland!”
“I would  have been; only for a last-minute conference that
kept me in Oxford. They came the day before I left.”
There w as a sudden spill of lig ht and noise as the door of
the t avern opened, disgor ging a  knot of patrons into the road.
V oices and footsteps passed by their refuge, startlingly close.
Neither of them spoke until the sounds had disappeared. In the
renewed silence, he heard the sound of a conker falling
through the leaves, to bounce on the leaves nearby .
Brianna’ s voice was oddly husky .
“Y ou thought I’d found somebody else…and you still came
after me?”
He sigh ed, anger gone as sud denly as it had come, and
wiped the damp hair of f his face.
“I’d have come if you were m arried to the King of Siam.
Bloody woman.”
She was  no more than a pale blur in the darkness; he saw
the b rief movement as she leane d to pick up the fallen conker ,
and sat toying with it. Finally , she drew a very deep breath and
let it out slowly .
“Y ou said wife  beating.”
He paused. The crickets had stopped again.
“Y ou said you were sure. Did you mean it?”
There was a sil ence, long enough to fill a heartbeat, long
enough to fill forever .
“Y es,” she said softly .
“In Inverness, I said—”
“Y ou sa id you’d  have me all— or not at all. And I said I
understood. I’m sure.”
Her shirt had pulled free of her breeches in their struggle,
and billowed loose around her in the faint hot breeze. Hereached under the floating hem and touched bare skin, which
rippled into gooseflesh at his to uch. He pulled her close, ran
his hand s over bare back and bare shoulders under the cloth,
buried h is face in her hair , her neck, exploring, asking with his
hands—did she mean it?
She grip ped his shoulders and leaned back, ur ging him. Y es,
she did. He answ ered, wordless,  opening the front of her shirt,
spreading it apart. Her breasts were white and soft.
“Please,” she said. Her hand was at the back of his head,
pulling him toward her . “Please!”
“If I take you now , it’ s for always,” he whispered.
She scarcely breathed, but stood stock-still, letting his hands
go where they would.
“Y es,” she said.
The tavern door opened again, startling them apart. He let
her go and stood up, reaching down a hand to help her , then
stood with her hand in his, waiting while the voices receded
into distance.
“Come on,” he said, and ducked under the drooping
branches.
The shed was some distance from the tavern, dark and quiet.
They stopped outside, waiting, but there was no sound from
the back  of the inn; all the windows on the upper floor were
dark.
“I hope Lizzie’ s gone to bed.”
He wondered dimly who Lizzie was, but didn’ t care. At this
distance he could see her face clearly , though the night washed
all colo r from her skin. She looked like a harlequin, he
thought; white cheek planes slashed by leaf shadows, framed
by the dark of her hair , her eyes black triangles set above a
dash of vivid mouth.
He took her hand in his, palm to palm.
“D’ye know what handfasting is?”“Not exactly . Sort of a temporary marriage?”
“A b it. In the Isles and the remoter parts of the Highlands,
where folk were a long way fro m the nearest minister , a man
and a woman now would be handfast; vowed to each other for
a year and a day . At the end of i t, they find a minister and wed
more permanently—or they go their own ways.”
Her hand tightened in his.
“I don’ t want anything temporary .”
“Neither do I. But I don’ t think we’ll find a minister easily .
There are no chu rches here yet; the nearest minister is likely in
New Be rn.” He lifted their linked hands. “I did say I wanted it
all, and if ye did not care enough to wed me…”
Her hand tightened, hard.
“I do.”
“All right.”
He took a deep breath and began.
“I, R oger Jeremiah, do take the e, Brianna Ellen, to be my
lawful wedded wife. W ith my goods I thee endow , with my
body I thee worship…” Her han d twitched in his, and his balls
tightened. Whoever had worded this vow had understood, all
right.
“…in si ckness and in health, in  richness and in poverty , so
long as we both shall live.”
If I make a vow  like that, I’ll keep it—no matter what it
costs me . W as she thinking of that now?
She brought their linked hands down together , and spoke
with great deliberation.
“I, Brianna Ellen, take thee, Roger Jeremiah…” Her voice
was scarcely louder than the be ating of his own heart, but he
heard ev ery word. A breeze cam e through the tree, rattling the
leaves, lifting her hair .
“…as long as we both shall live.”The phrase meant a good bit more to each of them now , he
thought, than it would have ev en a few months before. The
passage through the stones was enough to impress anyone with
the fragility of life.
There w as a moment’ s silence, broken only by the rustle of
leaves overhead and a distant murmur of voices from the
tavern’ s taproom. He raised her hand to his mouth and kissed
it, on the knuck le of her fourth  finger , where one day—God
willing—her ring would be.
It w as m ore of a lar ge shed than  a barn, though some beast—a
horse or mule—stirred in its stall at one end. There was a
strong, clean tang of hops in the  air , enough to overpower the
milder scents of hay and manure; the Blue Bull brewed its own
ale. Roger felt drunk, but not from alcohol.
The shed was very dark, and undressing her was both
frustration and delight.
“And I thought it took blind peo ple years to develop a keen
sense of touch,” he murmured.
The war m breath of her laugh brushed his neck, making the
tiny hairs at his nape stir and prickle.
“Y ou’re sure it’ s not like the poe m about the five blind men
and the elephan t?” she said. He r own hand groped, found the
opening of his shirt, and slid inside.
” ‘No, the beast is like a wall,’ ” she quoted. Her fingers
curved a nd flattened, curiously exploring the sensitive flesh
around his nipple. “A wall with hair . Goodness, a wall with
goose bumps, too.”
She laughed again, and he bent his head, finding her mouth
on the first try , sightless and unerring as a bat snatching a moth
from the air .
“Amphora,” he murmured against the wide, sweet curve of
her l ips. His han ds slid over the  wide, sweet curve of her hips,
cupping smoothness cool and solid, timeless and graceful asthe swell of ancient pottery , promising abundance. “Like a
Grecian vase. God, you’ve got the most beautiful arse!”
“Jug-butt, huh?”
She vibrated against him, the quiver of laughter passing
from her lips to  his and into his bloodstream like infection.
Her hand  slid down his own hip, and up, long fingers fumbling
loose th e flap of his breeches, groping hesitantly and then
more surely , gradually rucking his shirt up to disentangle him
from the layers of fabric.
” ‘No, the beast is like a rope’…oops…”
“Stop laughing, damn you.”
“…like a snake…no…well, maybe a cobra…gosh, what
would you call that ?”
“I had a friend once who called it ‘Mr . Happy ,’ ” Roger
said, feeling light-headed, “but that’ s a bit whimsical for my
tastes.” He grabbed her by the arms and kissed her again, long
enough to put a stop to any further comparisons.
She was  still quivering, but he didn’ t think  i t was laughter .
He slid his arms around her and pulled her closely against him,
amazed as always by the sheer size of her—a good deal more
amazed now that she was naked , those complex planes of bone
and muscle transformed to immediate sensation in his arms.
He paused for breath. He wasn’ t sure whether the sensation
was more akin to drowning or to mountain climbing, but
whatever it was, there wasn’ t much oxygen left between them.
“I’ve never been able to kiss a girl without stooping before,”
he said, making conversation i n hopes of getting his breath
back.
“Oh, good; we wouldn’ t want you to have a stif f neck .” The
quiver w as back in her voice, and it definitely was laughter ,
though h e thought it stemmed as much from nervousness as
humor .
“Ha ha,” he said, and grabbed her again, oxygen be damned.
Her breasts were high and rou nd, pressed against his chestwith that unique mixture of softness and firmness that so
intrigued him whenever he touc hed her . One of her hands slid
hesitantly between them, groping, then withdrew .
He could n’ t bring himself to sto p kissing her long enough to
finish undressin g, but arched his back to let her push the
breeches down over his hips. They were loose enough to fall
in a pud dle arou nd his feet, and  he stepped free of them, still
holding her , only making a small noise in his throat when her
hand came back between them.
She had eaten onions with her dinner . Blindness sharpened
not only  touch, but taste and smell as well. He tasted roast
meat, an d sour ale, and bread. A nd a faint sweet taste that he
couldn’ t identify , that reminded him somehow of green
meadows full of waving grass. D id he taste it, or smell it in her
hair? He couldn’ t tell; he seemed to be losing track of his
senses a s he lost the boundaries between them, breathing her
breath, feeling her heart beat as though it lay in his own chest.
She was  graspin g him a trifle too tightly for comfort, and he
broke the kiss at last, breathing heavily .
“W ould you consider letting go for a moment? I grant you,
it’ s an ef fective handle, but it’ s got better uses.”
Instead of letting go, she dropped to her knees.
Roger made a slight move back, startled.
“Christ, are you sure you want to do that?” He wasn’ t sure
whether he hoped she did or not. Her hair tickled against his
thighs, and his cock was quivering, desperate for engulfment.
At the same time, he didn’ t want to frighten or repulse her .
“Don’ t y ou want me to?” Her hands moved up the backs of
his thigh s, tentative and ticklish. He could feel every hair on
his body  spring erect, from kne es to waist. It made him feel
like a satyr , goat-legged and reeking.
“W ell…yes. Bu t I haven’ t bath ed in days,” he said, rather
awkwardly trying to detach himself.Deliberately , she brushed her nose over his stomach and
down, inhaling deeply . His skin pebbled with gooseflesh, the
shiver having nothing to do with the temperature of the room.
“Y ou smell good,” she whispered. “Like some kind of big
male animal.”
He grasp ed her head hard, finge rs twisted in the thick, silky
hair .
“T oo rig ht about that,” he whisp ered. Her hand rested on his
wrist, light and warm—God, she was warm.
W ithout his actually intending it, his grip loosened; he felt
the f all of her hair brush his thi ghs and then stopped thinking
anything coherent, as all of the  blood left his brain, heading
south at a high rate of speed.
“Mi oing i’ i’?”
“What?” He came out of his daze a few moments later as
she drew back, brushing the hair away from her face.
“I said, am I doing it right?”
“Oh. Ah…I think so.”
“Y ou think  so? Y ou don’ t know for sure?” Brianna seemed
to have been regaining her composure as fast as Roger had
been los ing his; he could hear the suppressed laughter in her
voice.
“W ell…no,” he said. “I mean, I haven’ t…that is, no one’ s…
yeah, I think so.” He had hold of her head again, ur ging her
gently forward.
He thought she was making a low humming noise,
somewhere deep in her throat. It might be his own blood,
though, thrumm ing through distended veins, purling in violent
eddies l ike the trapped water of the ocean, seething through
the rocks. Another minute, an d he was going of f like a
waterspout.
He pulled away and before she could protest, lifted her to
her f eet, then ur g ed her down, o nto the heap of straw where hehad thrown her clothes.
His eyes had adjusted to the dark, but the starlight from the
window was still so faint that he  could see no more of her than
shapes and outlines, white as m arble. Not cold, though; not
cold at all.
He approached his own duty with mingled excitement and
caution; he had tried this exactly once, only to be met with a
faceful of a feminine hygiene product that smelled like the
flowers in his father ’ s church on Sunday—an of f-putting idea
if ever there was one.
Brianna was not hygienic. The scent of her was enough to
make him want to dispense wit h any preliminaries and throw
himself on her in a pure abandonment of lust.
Instead, he breathed deeply , and kissed her just above the
dark smudge of curls.
“Damn,” he said.
“What i s it?” She sounded faintly alarmed. “Do I smell
terrible?”
He closed his e yes and breathed. His head was spinning
slightly , and he felt giddy wit h a combination of lust and
laughter .
“No. It’ s only th at I’ve been wondering for more than a year
what color your hair is here.” H e tugged gently on the curls.
“Now here I am face-to-face with it, and I still can’ t tell.”
She giggled, the vibration making her belly shake gently
under his hand.
“Do you want me to tell you?”
“No, let me be surprised in the morning.” He bent his head
to hi s work, surp rised now by the amazing variety of textures,
all i n such a small space—a smoothness like glass, tickling
roughness, a yielding rubberin ess, and that sudden slippery
slickness, musk and tang and salt together .After a few moments, he felt he r hands come to rest gently
on h is head, as though in benediction. He hoped the stubble of
his b eard wasn’ t hurting her , bu t she didn’ t seem to mind. A
subterranean quiver ran through the warm flesh of her thighs
and she made a  small sound that made a similar quiver dart
through his belly .
“Am I doing it right?” he inqui red half jokingly , lifting his
head.
“Oh, yeah,” she said softly . “ Y ou sure are.” Her hands
tightened in his hair .
He had started to lower his head again, but jerked it up at
this, staring up across the dim  white reaches of her body
toward the pale oval of her face.
“And just how the hell do you know that ?” he asked. His
only answer was a deep, gur gli ng laugh. Then he was beside
her , with no real notion how he’d got there, his mouth on her
mouth, the length of his body p ressed to hers, aware only of
the heat of her , burning like fever .
She tasted of him, and he of her , and God help him, he
wasn’ t going to be able to go slowly .
He d id, though. She was eager ,  but awkward, trying to lift
her hips to him, touching him too quickly , too lightly . He took
her h ands, one a t a time, and placed them flat against his chest.
Her palms were hot, and his nipples tightened.
“Feel my heart,” he said. His voice sounded thick to his own
ears. “T ell me if it stops.”
He hadn’ t actually meant to be funny , and was faintly
surprised when she gave a nervous laugh. The laugh
disappeared as he touched her . Her hands tightened on his
chest; then he felt her relax, opening her legs to him.
“I love you,” he murmured. “Oh, Bree, I do love you.”
She didn ’ t answ er , but a hand floated up from the dark and
lay along his cheek, gentle as a tendril of seaweed. She kept itthere wh ile he took her , laid ope n in trust, while her other hand
held his beating heart.
He felt more drunk than befo re. Not groggy or sleepy ,
though; alive to everything. He could smell his own sweat; he
could smell hers, smell the fain t tang of fear that tinged her
desire.
He close d his eyes and breathed . T ightened his grip on her
shoulders. Press ed slowly . Slid i n. Felt her tear and bit his own
lip, hard enough to draw blood.
Her fingernails dug into his chest.
“Go on!” she whispered.
One sharp hard thrust, and he possessed her .
He s tayed that way , eyes closed , breathing. Balanced on an
edge of pleasure sharp enough to cause him pain. Dimly he
wondered if the pain he felt was hers.
“Roger?”
“Ah?”
“Are you …really big, do you think?” Her voice was slightly
tremulous.
“Ah…” He groped for remnants of coherence. “About the
usual.” A flash of concern penetrated the feelings of
drunkenness. “Am I hurting you a lot?”
“N-no, not exactly . Just…can you not move for a minute?”
“A m inute, an h our . All my life,  if you want.” He thought it
would kill him not to move, and would have died gladly .
Her hands moved slowly down his back, touching his
buttocks. He shivered and ducked his head, eyes closed,
painting her face before his mind’ s eye with a dozen small and
mindless kisses.
“Okay .” She whispered in his ea r , and like an automaton he
began to  move, as slowly as he could, restrained as he went by
the pressure of her hand on his back.She stif fened very slightly and relaxed, stif fened and
relaxed, he knew he was hurting her , did it again, he ought to
stop, she lifted up against him,  taking him, and there was a
deep and  bestial  noise that he must have made, now , it had to
be now , he had to…
Shaking and gasping like a landed fish, he jerked free of her
body and lay on  her , feeling her breasts crushed against him as
he jerked and moaned.
Then he lay sti ll, no longer drunk but wrapped in guilty
peace, and felt her arms around  him and the warm breath of
the whisper in his ear .
“I lo ve you,” sh e said, her voice husky in the hop-scented
air . “Stay with me.”
“All my life,” he said, and wrapped his arms around her .
They lay  peacef ully together , welded with the sweat of their
ef forts, listening  to each other breathe. Roger stirred at last,
lifting his face from her hair , his limbs at once weightless and
heavy as lead.
“All right, love?” he whispered. “Have I hurt you?”
“Y es, but I didn ’ t mind.” Her hand passed lightly down the
length of his bac k, making him s hiver despite the heat. “W as it
all right? Did I do it right?” She sounded faintly anxious.
“Oh, God!” He bent his head  and kissed her , long and
lingering. She tensed a little, but then her mouth relaxed under
his.
“It was all right, then?”
“Oh, Jesus!”
“Y ou certainly swear a lot, for a minister ’ s son,” she said,
with a faint not e of accusation. “Maybe those old ladies in
Inverness were right; you have  gone to the devil.”
“Not bla sphemy ,” he said. He p ut his forehead against her
shoulder , breathing in the deep, ripe scent of her , of them.
“Prayers of thanksgiving.”That made her laugh.
“Oh, it was  all right, then,” she said, with an unmistakable
note of relief.
He lifted his head.
“Christ, yes,” he said, making her laugh again. “How could
you possibly think otherwise?”
“W ell, you didn’ t say anything. Y ou just lay there like
somebody’d hit you over the he ad; I thought maybe you were
disappointed.”
Now it was his turn to laugh, his face half buried in the
smooth damps of her neck.
“No,” h e said finally , coming up for air . “Behaving as
though your spinal column’ s been removed is a fair indication
of male satisfaction. No very gentleman-like, maybe, but
honest.”
“Oh, okay .” She seemed satisfied with that. “The book
didn’ t say anything about that, but then it wouldn’ t; it didn’ t
bother with what happens afterward.”
“What book is this?” He moved cautiously , their skins
separating with a noise like two strips of flypaper being parted.
“Sorry about the mess.” He gro ped for his wadded shirt and
handed it to her .
“The Sensuous Man.”  She took the shirt and dabbed
fastidiously . “Th ere was a lot of stuf f about ice cubes and
whipped cream that I thought w as pretty extreme, but it was
good about how to do things like fellatio, and—”
“Y ou lea rned that from a book ?” Roger felt as scandalized
as one of the ladies of his father ’ s congregation.
“W ell, y ou don’ t think I go around doing that with people I
go out with!” She sounded truly shocked in turn.
“They write books telling you ng women how to—that’ s
terrible!”“What’ s terrible  about it?” she said, rather huf fy . “How else
would I know what to do?”
Roger rubbed a hand over his face, at a loss for words. If
asked an  hour before, he would have stoutly claimed to be in
favor of sexual equality . Under the veneer of modernity ,
though, there was apparently enough of the Presbyterian
minister ’ s son left to feel that  a nice young woman really
ought to be an ignoramus on her wedding night.
Manfully suppre ssing this V ictorian notion, Roger brought a
hand up  over the smooth white  curves of hip and flank, and
cupped a soft full breast.
“Not a thing,” h e said. “Only ,” he said, and dipped his head
to to uch his lips to hers, “there’ s a bit more to it,” and lightly
nipped her lower lip, “than ye read in books, aye?”
She moved suddenly , turning t o bring all that long white
heat against his bare skin, and he shuddered at the shock of it.
“Show me,” she whispered, and bit the lobe of his ear .
A rooster crowed, somewhere nearby . Brianna woke from a
light doze, berating herself for sleeping. She felt disoriented,
tired enough from emotion and exertion to feel light-headed,
as thoug h she were floating a f oot or two of f the ground. At
the same time, she didn’ t want to miss a moment.
Roger st irred by her side, feelin g her move. He groped, put
an arm around h er , and rolled h er over , curving himself to fit
behind her , knees to knees, bell y to buttocks. He brushed the
tangles of her hair away from  his face, making little pfft!
noises that made her want to laugh.
He’d made love to her three tim es. She was very sore, and
very happy . She’d imagined it  a thousand times, and been
wrong every time. There wasn’ t any way to imagine the sheer
terrifying immediacy of being taken like that—stretched
suddenly beyond the limits of flesh, penetrated, rent, enter ed .
Nor was there any way she could have imagined the sense of
power in it.She had expected to be helpless, the object of desire.
Instead, she had held him, felt him quiver with need, all his
strength leashed for fear of hurti ng her—hers to unleash as she
would. Hers, to touch and rouse, to call to her , to command.
Nor had she eve r thought such tenderness existed as when
he c ried out and  shuddered in her arms, pressing his forehead
hard aga inst her own, trusting h er with that moment when his
strength turned so suddenly to helplessness.
“I’m sorry ,” he said softly in her ear .
“For what?” She reached back, stroked his thigh. She could
do that, now . Sh e could touch h im anywhere, delighting in the
textures and tastes of his bod y . She couldn’ t wait for the
daylight, to see him naked.
“For this.” He made a small movement with his hand,
encompassing the dark around them, the hard straw under
them. “I should have waited. I wanted it to be…good for you.”
“It was very go od for me,” she said softly . There was a
shallow groove down the side of his thigh, where the muscle
was indented.
He laughed, a little ruefully .
“I wanted you to have a proper wedding night. Soft bed,
clean sheets…it should have been better , for your first time.”
“I’ve ha d soft beds and clean sheets,” she said. “But not
this.” She turned in his arms, re ached down and cupped him,
that fascinating mass of changeability between his legs. He
stif fened for a second in surp rise, then relaxed, letting her
handle him as s he liked. “It couldn’ t have been better ,” she
said softly , and kissed him.
He k issed her b ack, slow and lazy , exploring all the depths
and holl ows of her mouth, letting her have his. He moaned a
little, far  back in his throat, and reached down to take her hand
away .
“Oh, God, you’re going to kill me, Bree.”“I’m sor ry ,” she said, anxious. “Did I squeeze too hard? I
didn’ t mean to hurt you.”
He laughed at that.
“Not tha t. But give the poor thi ng a wee rest, hm?” W ith a
firm hand, he turned her over again, nuzzling her shoulder .
“Roger?”
“Mm?”
“I don’ t think I’ve ever been so happy .”
“A ye? W ell, that’ s good, then.” He sounded drowsy .
“Even if —if we don’ t get back, as long as we’re together , I
don’ t mind.”
“W e’ll get back.” His hand cupped her breast, gentle as
seaweed coming  to rest round a rock. “I told you, there’ s
another way .”
“There is?”
“I think so.” He told her about the grimoire, the mixture of
careful notes and crazed rambling—and about his own passage
through the stones of Craigh na Dun.
“The second time, I thought o f you,” he said softly , and
traced her features with a finger in the dark. “I lived. And I did
come to the right time. But the diamond Fiona gave me was no
more than a smear of lampblack in my pocket.”
“So it might be possible to—to steer , somehow?” Brianna
couldn’ t keep a hint of hope from her voice.
“There might be.” He hesitated.  “There was a—I suppose it
must have been a poem, or maybe meant to be a spell—in the
book.” His hand fell away as he recited it.
“I raise my athame to the North
 Wher e is the home of my power ,
 T o the W est
 Wher e is the hearth of my soul,
 T o the SouthWher e is the seat of friendship and r efuge,
 T o the East
 Fr om whence rises the Sun.
“Then lay I my blade on the altar I have made.
 I sit down amid thr ee flames.
“Thr ee points define a plane, and I am fixed.
 Four points box the earth and mine is the fullness
ther eof.
 Five is the number of pr otection; let no demon
hinder me.
 My left hand is wr eathed in gold
 And holds the power of the sun.
 My right hand is sheathed in silver
 And the moon r eigns ser ene.
 “I begin.
 Garnets r est in love about my neck.
 I will be faithful.”
Brianna sat up, arms wrapped around her knees. She was
silent for moment.
“That’ s nuts, ” she said, finally .
“Being certifiably insane is unfortunately no guarantee that
someone is likewise wrong,” Roger said dryly . He stretched,
groaning, and sat up crosslegged on the straw .
“Part of it is traditional ritual, I think—given that the
tradition is ancient Celt. The bits about the directions; those
are the ‘four airts,’ which you’ll find running through Celtic
legend f or some  way back. As for the blade, the altar , and the
flames, it’ s straight witchcraft.”
“She stabbed her husband throu gh the heart and set him on
fire.” Sh e still remembered as well as he did the stink of petrol
and burn ing fles h in the circle of Craigh na Dun, and shivered,
though it was warm in the shed.
“I hope we won ’ t be forced to find someone for a human
sacrifice,” Roge r said, trying an d failing to make a joke of it.“The metal, though, and the gems…were you wearing any
jewelry when you came through, Bree?”
She nodded in reply .
“Y our bracelet,” she said softly . “And I had my
grandmother ’ s pearl necklace in my pocket. The pearls
weren’ t hurt, though; they came through fine.”
“Pearls aren’ t gemstones,” he reminded her . “They’re
or ganic—like p eople.” He rubbed a hand across his face; it
had been a long day , and his head was starting to throb. “Silver
and gold, though; you had the silver bracelet, and the necklace
has gold, as we ll as the pearls. Ah—and your mother; she
wore both silver and gold, to o, didn’ t she? Her wedding
rings.”
“Uh-huh. But ‘three points defi ne a plane, Four points box
the eart h, five is the number of protection…’ ” Brianna
murmured unde r her breath. “Could she mean that you need
gemstones to—t o do whatever she was trying to do? Are those
the ‘points’?”
“Could be. She had drawings of triangles and pentagrams,
and lists of dif ferent gemstones, with the supposed ‘magickal’
properties listed alongside. She wasn’ t laying out her theories
in any great detail—didn’ t need to, since she was talking to
herself—but the general notion seemed to be that there are
lines of force— ’ley lines,’ she called them—running through
the earth. Every now and agai n, the lines run close to each
other , an d sort of curl up into knots; and wherever you get
such a knot, you ’ve got a place where time essentially doesn’ t
exist.”
“So if you ste p into one, yo u might step out again…
anytime.”
“Same place, dif ferent time. And if you believe that
gemstones have a force of their own, which might warp the
lines a bit…”
“W ould any gemstone do?”“God kn ows,” Roger said. “But it’ s the best chance we
have, aye?”
“Y es,” Brianna agreed, after a pause. “But where are we
going to  find any?” She waved a n arm toward the town and its
harbor . “I haven’ t seen anything like that anywhere—in
Inverness or here. I think you’d need to go to a lar ge city—
London, or maybe Boston or Philadelphia. And then—how
much m oney do you have, Rog er? I managed to get twenty
pounds, and I st ill have most of  it, but that wouldn’ t be nearly
enough for—”
“That’ s the point,” he interrupt ed. “I was thinking of that,
while you were sleeping. I kno w—I think I know—where I
might lay hands on one stone,  at least. The thing is—” He
hesitated. “I’ll have to go at once, to find it. The man who has
it is in N ew Bern  right now , but he won’ t be there for long. If I
take a bit of your money , I can get a boat in the morning and
be in  Ne w Bern by the next day . I think it’ s best you stay here,
though. Then—”
“I can’ t stay here!”
“Why not?” He reached for her , groping in the dark. “I don’ t
want you with me. Or rather I do,” he corrected himself, “but I
think it’ s a lot safer for you here.”
“I don’ t mean I want to come with you; I mean I can’ t stay
here,” sh e repeated, though she grasped his groping hand. She
had nearly for gotten, but now a ll the excitement of discovery
flooded back again. “Roger , I found him—I found Jamie
Fraser!”
“Fraser? Where ? Here?” He turned toward the door ,
startled.
“No, he’ s in Cr oss Creek, and I know where he’ll be on
Monday . I have to go, Roger . D on’ t you understand? He’ s so
close—and I’ve come so far .” She wanted suddenly and
irrationally to weep, with the thought of seeing her mother
again.“A ye, I see.” Ro ger sounded faintly anxious. “But could you
not w ait a few days? It’ s only a day or so by sea to New Bern,
the sam e back— and I think I can manage what I have to do
within a day or two.”
“No,” she said. “I can’ t. There’ s Lizzie.”
“Who’ s Lizzie?”
“My maid—you  saw her . She was going to hit you with a
bottle.” Brianna grinned at the memory . “Lizzie’ s very brave.”
“A ye, I daresay ,” Roger said dryly . “Be that as it may—”
“But she’ s sick,” Brianna interrupted him. “Didn’ t you see
how pale she is ? I think it’ s malaria; she has horrible fevers
and chil ls that last for a day or  so and then stop—and then a
few day s later , they’re back again. I have to find my mother as
soon as I can. I have  to.”
She could feel him struggling, choking back ar guments. She
reached out in the darkness and stroked his face.
“I have to,” she repeated softly , and felt him surrender .
“All right,” he said. “All right! I’ll come to join you, as soon
as may be. Do me the one favor , though, aye? W ear a bloody
dress!”
“Y ou don’ t like my breeches?” Laughter fizzed up like the
bubbles in carbonated soda—then stopped abruptly , as
something occurred to her .
“Roger ,” she said. “What you’re going to do—are you
going to steal this stone?”
“Y es,” he said simply .
She was  quiet for a minute, her long thumb rubbing slowly
over the palm of his hand.
“Don’ t,” she said at last, very quietly . “Don’ t do it; Roger .”
“Don’ t t rouble y ourself over the man who’ s got it.” Roger
reached for her , trying to reassu re her . “It’ s odds-on he stole it
from someone else.”“It’ s not him I’m worried about—it’ s you!”
“Oh, I’ll be all right,” he assured her , with casual bravado.
“Roger , they hang  people in this time for stealing!”
“I won’ t  be caught.” His hand sought hers in the darkness,
found it, and squeezed. “I’ll be with you before ye know it.”
“But it isn’ t—”
“It will be all rig ht,” he said firm ly . “I said I would take care
of you, aye? I will.”
“But—”
He r ose up on one elbow and silenced her with his mouth.
V ery slowly , he brought her hand toward him, pressed it
between his legs.
She swallowed, the hairs on her arms rising suddenly with
anticipation.
“Mm?” he murmured, against her mouth, and without
waiting for an answer , pulled her down on the straw , and rolled
onto her , nudging her legs apart with his knee.
She gasped and bit his shoulder when he took her , but he
made no sound.
“D’ye know ,” Roger said sleepily , some time later , “I think
I’ve just married my great-aunt  six times removed? I’ve only
just thought.”
“Y ou what ?”
“Don’ t w orry , it’ s nowhere close enough to be incest,” he
assured her .
“Oh, go od,” she said, with a certain amount of sarcasm. “I
was really worried about that. H ow can I be your great-aunt,
for heaven’ s sake?”
“W ell, as I said, I just thought; I hadn’ t realized it before.
But your father ’ s uncle was Dougal MacKenzie—and it washim tha t caused all the trouble  by getting a child on Geilie
Duncan, aye?”
It was the unsatisfactory method of contraception he had
been forced to a dopt that had ca used him to think of it, in fact,
but he thought it  more tactful no t to mention that. Neither shirt
was fit to be worn by now . All things considered, he supposed
it was just as well that Dougal MacKenzie hadn’ t had his sense
of conscientiousness, since that would ef fectively have
prevented Roger ’ s own existence.
“W ell, I don’ t t hink it was all his  fault.” Brianna sounded
pleasantly drowsy as well. It couldn’ t be much of f dawn; birds
were already making noises outside, and the air had changed,
growing fresher as the wind came in of f the harbor .
“So if Dougal is  my great-uncle, and your six-times great-
grandfather…no, you’re wrong. I’m about your sixth or
seventh cousin, not your aunt.”
“No, tha t would  be right if we w ere in the same generation
of d escent, but we’re not; you’re up about five—on your
father ’ s side, at least.”
Brianna was silent, trying to work this out in her head. Then
giving up, she rolled over wit h a faint groan, nestling her
bottom snugly into the hollow of his thighs.
“The he ll with it,” she said. “As  long as you’re sure it’ s not
incest.”
He clas ped her to his bosom,  but his sleepy brain had
grasped the point and wouldn’ t let it go.
“I re ally hadn’ t thought of it,”  he marveled. “Y ou know
what it means, th ough? I’m related to your father , too—in fact,
I suppose he’ s my only  livi ng relation, besides you!” Roger
felt thoroughly nonplussed by  this discovery , and rather
moved. He had long since rec onciled himself to having no
close family at a ll—not that a seven-times great-uncle was all
that close, but—
“No, he isn’ t,” Brianna mumbled.“What?”
“Not the only on e. Jenny , too. And her kids. And grandkids.
My aunt Jenny’ s your—hm, maybe you’re right, after all.
‘Cause if she’ s my aunt, she’ s your umpty-great aunt, so
maybe I’m  your…gahh.” She let her head loll back against
Roger ’ s shoulder , the spill of her hair soft against his chest.
“Who’d you tell them you were?”
“Who?”
“Jenny a nd Ian.” She shifted, stretching. “When you went to
Lallybroch.”
“Never been there.” He shifted, too, fitting his body to hers.
His hand  settled in the dip of he r waist, and he sank back into
drowsiness, gi ving up the abstract complexities of
genealogical calculation for more immediate sensations.
“No? Bu t then…” her voice died away . Fogged with sleep
and the exhausti ons of pleasure, Roger paid no attention, only
snuggling closer with a luxurious moan. A moment later , her
voice sliced through his perso nal fog like a knife through
butter .
“How did you know where I was?” she said.
“Hm?”
She twis ted suddenly , leaving him with empty arms, and a
pair of dark ey es a few inches from his own, slanted with
suspicion.
“How did you know where I was?” she repeated slowly ,
each word a splinter of ice. “How did you know I’d gone to
the Colonies?”
“Ah…I…why…” Much too late, he woke to the realization
of his danger .
“Y ou di dn’ t hav e any way of knowing I’d left Scotland,”
she said, “unless you went to Lallybroch, and they told you
where I was going. But you’ve never been to Lallybroch.”“I…” H e grop ed frantically for an explanation—any
explanation—but there was none, other than the truth. And
from the stif fening of her body , she had deduced that too.
“Y ou knew ,” she said. Her voice wasn’ t much above a
whisper , but the ef fect was as great as if she’d shouted in his
ear . “Y ou knew ,  didn’ t you?”
She was sitting up now , loomin g over him like one of the
Erinyes.
“Y ou saw  th at death notic e! Y ou already knew , you knew all
the time, didn’ t you?”
“No,” he said, t rying to gather his scattered wits. “I mean
yes, but—”
“How long have you known? Why didn’ t you tell  me?” she
cried. She stood up and snatched at the pile of clothes under
them.
“W ait,” he pleaded. “Bree—let me explain—”
“Y eah, explain! I want to hear y ou explain!” Her voice was
ragged with fury , but she did  stop her rummaging for a
moment, waiting to hear .
“Look.” He was up himself b y now . “I did find it. Last
spring. B ut I—”  He took a deep breath, searching desperately
for words that might make her understand.
“I knew  it would hurt you. I di dn’ t want to show it to you
because I knew there was nothin g you could do—there was no
point in you breaking your heart for the sake of—”
“What do you m ean there’ s nothing I could do?” She jerked
a shirt over her head, and glared toward him, fists clenched.
“Y ou can’ t change things, Bree! Don’ t you know that? Y our
parents tried—they knew abo ut Culloden, and they did
everything they possibly could have, to stop Charles Stuart—
but they couldn’ t, could they? They failed! Geillis Duncan
tried to make Stuart a king. Sh e failed! They all failed!” He
risked a hand on her arm; she was stif f as a statue.“Y ou can’ t help them, Bree,” he  said, more quietly . “It’ s part
of history , it’ s pa rt of the past— you’re not from this time; you
can’ t change what’ s going to happen.”
“Y ou don’ t know that.” She was still rigid, but he thought he
heard a hint of doubt in her voice.
“I do!” He wipe d a bead of sweat from his jaw . “Listen—if
I’d thou ght there was the slightest chance—but I didn’ t. I—
God, Bree, I couldn’ t stand the thought of you being hurt!”
She stood still, b reathing heavily through her nose. If she’d
had the choice,  he was sure it would have been fire and
brimstone rather than air .
“It w asn’ t your business to mak e up my mind for me,” she
said, speaking through clenched teeth. “No matter what you
thought. And about something so important—Roger , how
could you do  something like that!?”
The tone of betrayal in her voice was too much.
“Damn it, I was  afraid if I told you, ye’d do just what you
did!” he burst o ut. “Y ou’d leave me! Y ou’d try to go through
the ston es by yourself. And now look what you’ve done—
here’ s the both of us in this godforsaken—”
“Y ou’re trying to blame me  f or you being h ere? When I did
everything I possibly could to keep you from being such an
idiot as to follow me?”
Months of toil and terror , days of worry and fruitless
searching caught up with Roger in a scorching blast.
“An idio t? That ’ s the thanks I get for killing myself to find
you? Fo r risking my fucking life  to  try t o protec t you?” He
rose from the st raw , meaning to get hold of her , not sure if he
meant to shake her or bed her a gain. He had the chance to do
neither; a hard shove caught h im of f balance, square in the
chest, and he went sprawling into the hay .
She was hopping on one foot, cursing incoherently as she
struggled into her breeches.“Y ou—bloody—arrogant—damn you, Roger!— damn  you!”
She jerk ed up the breeches and, leaning down, snatched up her
shoes and stockings.
“Go!” she said. “Damn you, go ! Go and get hanged if you
want to!  I’m going to find my parents! And I’m going to save
them, too!”
She whirled away , reached the door and jerked it open
before he could reach her . She s tood for a moment, silhouetted
in th e paler square of the doorway , dark strands of hair afloat
in the wind, live as the strands of Medusa’ s mane.
“I’m going. Come, or don’ t com e, I don’ t care. Go back to
Scotland—go back through the stones by yourself, for all I
care! But by God, you can’ t stop me!”
And then she was gone.
Lizzie’ s eyes shot wide as the door banged open against the
wall. She hadn’ t been asleep—how could she sleep?—but had
been lying with her eyes closed . She struggled up out of the
bedclothes and fumbled for the tinderbox.
“Are ye all right, Miss Bree?”
It didn’ t sound like it; Brianna was stamping to and fro,
hissing through her teeth like a snake, stopping to kick the
wardrobe with a resounding thud. There were two more thuds
in su ccession; by the wavering  light of the newly lit candle,
Lizzie could see that these wer e caused by Brianna’ s shoes,
which had hit the wall and fallen to the floor .
“Are ye all right?” she repeated, uncertainly .
“Fine!” said Brianna.
From the black air beyond the window a voice roared,
“Brianna! I shall come for you! Do ye hear me! I will come !”
Her mis tress made no answer , but strode to the window ,
seized the shutters and crashed  them shut with a bang that
made th e room echo. Then she turned like a panther striking,and dashed the candlestick to th e floor , plunging the room in
suf focating dark.
Lizzie eased herself back into b ed and lay frozen, afraid to
move or speak. She could hear Brianna tearing of f her clothes
in s ilent frenzy , the hiss of in drawn breath punctuating the
rustle of  cloth and the stamp of bare feet on the wooden floor .
Through the shutter , she heard outside the muf fled sound of
cursing, then nothing.
She had seen Br ianna’ s face for a moment in the light; white
as paper and ha rd as bone, with the eyes black holes. Her
gentle, k indly m istress had vanished like smoke, taken over by
a deamhan,  a she-de vil. Liz zie was a town lass, born long after
Culloden. She had never seen th e wild clansmen of the glens,
or a Hig hlander in the grip of bl ood fury—but she’d heard the
auld stories, and now she kne w them true. A person who
looked like that might do anything at all.
She tried to brea the as though sh e were sleeping, but the air
came through her mouth in strangled gasps. Brianna seemed
not to notice, th ough; she walked about the room in quick,
hard steps, poured water in the  bowl and splashed it on her
face, then slid between the quilts and lay flat, rigid as a board.
Summoning all her courage, she  turned her head toward her
mistress.
“Are ye …all rig ht, a bann-sielbheadair ?” she asked, in a
voice so  low that her mistress could pretend not to have heard
it if she wanted.
For a moment sh e thought that Brianna meant to ignore her .
Then, “ Y es” came the answer , in a voice so flat and
expressionless, it didn’ t sound like Brianna’ s at all. “Go to
sleep.”
She didn’ t, of c ourse. A body didn’ t sleep, lying next to
someone who might turn into a ursiq  next thing. Her eyes had
adjusted to the dark again, but she was afraid to look, in case
the r ed h air lyin g on the pillow next to her should suddenly bea mane, and the delicate straight nose changed to a curved, soft
muzzle, over teeth that would rend and devour .
It was a few moments befor e Lizzie realized that her
mistress was trembling. Not weeping; there was no sound—
but shaking hard enough to make the bedclothes rustle.
Fool,  she scolded herself. It’ s no but your friend and your
lady , with something terrible that’ s happened to her—and you
lyin’ her e sniveling over fancies!
On impulse she rolled toward Brianna, reaching for the
other girl’ s hand.
“Bree,” she said softly . “Can I be helpin’ ye at all, then?”
Brianna’ s hand curled round hers and squeezed, quick and
hard, then let go.
“No,” Brianna said, very softly . “Go to sleep, Lizzie;
everything will be all right.”
Lizzie took leave to doubt that, b ut said no more, lying back
down an d breath ing quietly . It w as a very long time, but at last
Brianna’ s long body shuddered gently and relaxed into sleep.
Lizzie co uldn’ t sleep—with the fever gone again, she was alert
and restless. The single quilt lay  heavy and damp on her , and
with the  shutters closed, the a ir in the tiny room was like
breathing hot molasses.
Finally , unable to stand it any longer , Lizzie slid quietly out
of bed. Keeping  an ear out for any sound from the bed, she
crept to the window and eased open the shutters.
The air was still hot and muggy  outside, but it had begun to
move a little; the dawn breeze was coming, with the turn of the
air from  sea to l and. It was still dark, but the sky had begun to
lighten as well; she could make out the line of the road below ,
blessedly empty .
Not knowing what else to do, s he did what she always did
when tr oubled or confused; set about to make things tidy .
Moving quietly  about the room, she picked up the clothes
Brianna had so violently discarded, and shook them out.They were filthy; covered with streaks of leaf stain and dirt,
riddled with bits of straw; she could see it even in the dim light
from the  window . What had Bri anna been doing, rolling about
on the ground? T he instant the thought came into her head, she
saw it in her mind, so plain t hat the notion froze her with
shock—Brianna pinned to the ground, struggling with the
black devil who had taken her away .
Her mistress was a fine big woman, but yon MacKenzie was
a great tall brute of a man; he co uld have—she stopped herself
abruptly , not wanting to imagine . She couldn’ t help it, though;
her mind had gone too far already .
W ith gre at reluctance, she brought the shirt to her nose and
snif fed. Y es, there it was, the reek of a man, strong and sour as
the smell of a rutting goat. The thought of the wicked creature
with his body pressed to Brianna’ s, rubbing against her ,
leaving his scent on her like a do g who marks his ground—she
shuddered in revulsion.
T rembling, she snatched up the breeches and stockings, and
bore all the clo thes to the basin. She would wash them out,
rinse aw ay the reminder of Ma cKenzie with the dirt and the
grass sta ins. And  if the clothes were too wet for her mistress to
wear in the morning…well, so much the better for that.
She still  had the pot of soft yellow lye soap the landlady had
given her for l aundering; that would take care of it. She
plunged the breeks into the wa ter , added a finger ’ s dollop of
the soap , and began to work it into a scummy lather , pressing
it through and through the fabric.
The window’ s square was lightening. She cast a stealthy
glance o ver her shoulder at her mistress, but Brianna’ s breath
came slow and steady; good, she wouldn’ t wake for a time yet.
She looked back to her work, and froze, feeling a chill
colder than those that came with her fevers. The thin suds that
covered her hands were dark, and small black eddies spread
through the water like the ink stains of a cuttlefish.She didn ’ t want  to look, but it was too late to pretend she
hadn’ t seen. She turned back the  wet fabric carefully , and there
it was; a lar ge, d ark blotch, discoloring the cloth just where the
seams crossed in the crotch of the breeks.
The rising sun oozed a sullen red through the hazy sky ,
turning the water in the basin, the air in the room, the whole
spinning world, the color of fresh blood.4 1
J O U R N E Y ’ S  E N D
B rianna thought she might scream. Instead, she patted
Lizzie’ s back and spoke softly .
“Don’ t worry , it’ll be all right. Mr . V iorst says he’ll wait for
us. As soon as you feel better , we’ll leave. But for now , don’ t
worry about anything, just rest.”
Lizzie nodded, but couldn’ t answer; her teeth were
chattering too hard, in spite of the three blankets over her and
the hot brick at her feet.
“I’ll go and get your drink, honey . Just rest,” Brianna
repeated, and with a final pat, rose and left the room.
It w asn’ t Lizzie’ s fault, of cours e, Brianna thought, but she
could scarcely have picked a w orse moment to have another
attack o f fever . Brianna had sle pt late and restlessly after the
dreadful scene with Roger , wak ing to find her clothes washed
and hung to dry , her shoes polished, her stockings folded, the
room ruthlessly swept and tidied—and Lizzie collapsed in a
shivering heap on the empty hearth.
For the thousandth time, she co unted the days. Eight days
until Monday . If Lizzie’ s attack followed its usual pattern, she
might be able to  travel the day after tomorrow . Six days. And
according to Junior Smoots and Hans V iorst, five to six days
to make the trip upriver at this time of year .
She cou ldn’ t miss Jamie Fraser , she couldn’ t! She had to be
in Cross  Creek by Monday , co me hell or high water . Who
knew how long the trial might ta ke, or whether he would leave
as so on as it was over? She wo uld have given anything to be
able to go at once.
The bu rning ache to move, to go, was so intense it
obliterated all the other aches an d burnings of her body—even
the deep heart-burning of Roger ’ s betrayal—but there wasnothing to be d one. She could go nowhere until Lizzie was
better .
The taproom was full; two new ships had come into the
harbor during the day , and now  at evening the benches were
full of seamen, with a game o f cards loud and lively at the
table in the corner . Brianna edged through the blue clouds of
tobacco smoke,  ignoring the whistles and ribald remarks.
Roger h ad wante d her to wear a dress, had he? Damn him. Her
breeches normally kept men at a safe distance, but Lizzie had
washed them, and they were still too damp to wear .
She gave one m an who reached for her buttocks a glare fit
to sear his eyebr ows. He stopped in mid-grab, startled, and she
slid by him, through the door to the kitchen breezeway .
On the way ba ck, with the ju g of steaming catmint tea
wrapped in a c loth to keep from burning her , she made a
detour around the edge of the room to avoid her would-be
assailant. If he touched her , she would pour boiling water in
his lap. And while that would be no more than he deserved,
and some palliative to her ow n volcanic feelings, it would
waste the tea, which Lizzie badly needed.
She stepped carefully sideways, squeezing between the
raucous cardplayers and the wall. The table was scattered with
coins and other small valuables: silver and gilt and pewter
buttons, a snuf fbox, a silver pen knife, and scribbled scraps of
paper—IOUs, she supposed, or the eighteenth-century
equivalent. Then one of the men moved, and beyond his
shoulder she caught the gleam of gold.
She glanced down, looked away , then looked back, startled.
It w as a ring, a p lain gold band, but wider than most. It wasn’ t
the gold  alone that had caught her eye, though. The ring was
no more than a foot away , and while the light in the taproom
was more than d im, a candlestick sat on the cardplayers’ table,
shedding its light in the inner curve of the golden band.
She couldn’ t quite read the lett ers engraved there, but she
knew th e pattern so well that the legend sprang into her mind,
unbidden.She laid  a hand on the shoulde r of the man who had the
ring, interrupting him in mid-jest. He turned, half frowning,
the frown clearing as he saw who had touched him.
“A ye, sweethear t, and have ye come to change my luck,
then?” H e was a big man, with a  heavy-boned, handsome face,
a broad mouth and a broken n ose, and a pair of light green
eyes that moved over her with quick appraisal.
She forced her lips to smile at him.
“I h ope so,” sh e said. “Shall I give your ring a rub for
luck?” W ithout waiting for permission, she snatched the ring
from the  table and gave it a brisk rub on her sleeve. Then
holding it up to admire the shine, she could see plainly the
words written inside.
Fr om F . to C. with love. Always.
Her hand was trembling as she gave it back.
“It’ s very pretty ,” she said. “Where did you get it?”
He looked startled, then wary , and she hastened to add, “It’ s
too small for yo u—won’ t your wife be angry if you lose her
ring?” How?  she thought wildly . How did he ge t it? And
what’ s happened to my mother?
The full lips curved in a charming smile.
“And if I had a wife, sweetheart, sure I’d leave her for you.”
He look ed her over more closely , long lashes dropping to hide
his gaze. He touched her waist in a casual gesture of invitation.
“I’m busy just now , sweetheart, but later…eh?”
The jug was burning through the cloth, but her fingers felt
cold. Her heart had congealed into a small lump of terror .
“T omorrow ,” she said. “In the daylight.”
He looked at h er , startled, then threw his head back and
laughed.
“W ell, I ’ve heard men say I’m not a one to be met in the
dark, poppet, but the women seem to prefer it.” He ran a thickfinger down her forearm in play; the red-gold hairs rose at his
touch.
“In the daylight, then, if ye like. Come to my ship—
Gloriana,  near the naval yard.”
“Gracious, you vill not how long haf eaten?” Miss V iorst
peered a t Briann a’ s empty bowl with good-willed incredulity .
About the same age as Brianna herself, she was a broad-built,
placid-tempered Dutchwoman whose motherly manner made
her seem a good deal older .
“Day be fore yesterday , I think.” Brianna gratefully accepted
a second helping of dumplings and broth, and yet another thick
slab of salt-rising bread slathe red with curls of fresh white
butter . “Oh, thank you!” The f ood did something to fill the
hollow space that yawned insid e her , a small warm comfort
around which to center herself.
Lizzie’ s fever had come on ag ain, two days upriver . This
time the  attack was longer and more severe, and Brianna had
been seriously afraid that Lizzi e would die, right there in the
middle of the Cape Fear River .
She had  sat in mid-canoe for all of a day and a night, while
V iorst and his partner paddled like maniacs, she alternately
pouring handfuls of water over Lizzie’ s head and wrapping her
in all the coats and blankets available, all the time praying to
see the girl’ s small bosom rise with the next breath.
“If I die, will ye tell my father?” Lizzie had whispered to
her in the rushing dark.
“I w ill, but you won’ t, so dinna fash yourself,” Brianna said
firmly . It was successful; Lizzie’ s frail back quivered with
laughter at Brianna’ s attempted Scots, and a small bony hand
reached up to he rs, holding on u ntil sleep loosened its grip and
the fleshless fingers slipped free.
V iorst, alarmed at Lizzie’ s state, had taken them to the
house he shared with his sister a little way below Cross Creek,
carrying Lizzie’ s blanket-wrapped body up the dusty trail fromthe river  to a small framed cottage. The girl’ s stubborn spirit
had brou ght her through once more, but Brianna thought that
the frag ile flesh might not b e equal to many more such
demands.
She cut a dumpling in half and  ate it slowly , savoring the
rich warm juices of chicken and onion. She was grubby ,
travel-worn, starved, and exhausted, every bone in her body
aching. They had made it, thoug h. They were in Cross Creek,
and tom orrow was Monday . Somewhere nearby was Jamie
Fraser—and God willing, Claire as well.
She touc hed the leg of her breeches, and the secret pocket
sewn int o the seam. It was still there, the small round hardness
of the talisman.  Her mother wa s still alive. That was all that
mattered.
After ea ting, she went once more to check on Lizzie.
Hanneke V iorst was sitting by the bed darning socks. She
nodded to Brianna, smiling.
“She is gut .”
Looking down at the wasted, sleeping face, Brianna
wouldn’ t have said that much. Still, the fever was gone; a hand
on Lizzi e’ s brow came away co ol and damp, and a half-empty
bowl on  the table nearby showed that she had managed a little
nourishment.
“Y ou vill rest, too?” Hanneke half rose, gesturing toward
the trundle bed pulled out in readiness.
Brianna cast a glance of long ing at the clean quilts and
puf fy bolster , but shook her head.
“Not yet, thank you. What I’d really like is to borrow your
mule, if I might.”
There was no telling where Jamie Fraser was now . V iorst
had told her th at River Run was a good distance from the
town; he might be there, or he m ight be staying somewhere in
Cross Creek, for convenience. She couldn’ t leave Lizzie long
enough t o ride all the way to Riv er Run, but she did want to go
into town and f ind the courthouse where the trial would beheld tomorrow . She was taking  no chance of missing him by
not knowing where to go.
The mule was l ar ge and elderly , but not averse to ambling
along the riverbank road. He walked somewhat slower than
she could have d one herself, but that didn’ t matter; she was in
no hurry , now .
Despite her tiredness, she began to feel better as she rode,
her brui sed, stif f body relaxing into the easy rhythm of the
mule’ s s low gai t. It was a hot, humid day , but the sky was
clear an d blue, and great elms and hickory trees overhung the
road, cool leaves filtering the sun.
T orn b etween Lizzie’ s illness and her own painful
memories, she had noticed noth ing of the second half of their
voyage, taken no notice of change in the countryside they
passed. Now it was like being magically transported during
sleep, w aking up in a dif ferent place. She put everything else
aside, de termined to for get the l ast few days and everything in
them. She was going to find Jamie Fraser .
The sandy roads, scrub-pine forests, and marshy swamps of
the coast were gone, replaced by thickets of cool green, by tall,
thick-trunked, canopied trees, and a soft orange dirt that
darkened to black mold where the dead leaves lay matted at
the e dge of the road. The shrieks of gulls and terns were gone,
replaced by the muted chatter of a jay , and the soft liquid song
of a whippoorwill, far back in the forest.
How would it be? she wondered. She had wondered the
same thing a hu ndred times, and a hundred times imagined
dif ferent scenes : what she wou ld say , what he would say—
would he be glad to see her? Sh e hoped so; and yet he would
be a  stranger . Likely he would bear no resemblance at all to
the man of her imagination. W ith some dif ficulty , she fought
back the  memor y of Laoghaire’ s voice: A liar and a cheat …
Her mother hadn’ t thought so.
” ‘Suf ficient unto the day is the evil thereof,’ ” she
murmured to herself. She had come into the town of Cross
Creek it self; the  scattered houses thickened, and the dirt trackwidened into a cobbled street, lined with shops and lar ger
houses. There were people abou t, but it was the hottest part of
the after noon, when the air lay still and heavy on the town.
Those who could be, were inside in the shade.
The road curved out, following the riverbank. A small
sawmill stood by itself on a point of land, and near it, a tavern.
She’d ask there, she decided. Hot as it was, she could use
something to drink.
She patted the pocket of her coat, to be sure she had money .
She felt instead the prickly outline of a horse chestnut’ s hull,
and pulled her hand away as though she’d been burned.
She felt hollow again, in spite o f the food she’d eaten. Lips
pressed tight together , she tethe red the mule and ducked into
the dark refuge of the tavern.
The room was empty save for the landlord, perched in
somnolence on his stool. He ro used himself at her step, and
after the usual g oggle of surprise at her appearance, served her
beer and gave her courteous directions to the courthouse.
“Thank you.” She wiped the swe at from her forehead with a
coat sleeve—even inside, the heat was stifling.
“Y ou’ll have come for the trial, then?” the landlord
ventured, still looking at her curiously .
“Y es—well, not really . Whose trial is it?” she asked,
belatedly realizing that she had no idea.
“Oh, it’ll be Fer gus Fraser ,” the man said, as though
assuming that naturally everyo ne knew who Fer gus Fraser
was. “Assault on an of ficer of t he Crown is the char ge. He’ll
be acquitted, though,” the land lord went on matter -of-factly .
“Jamie Fraser ’ s come down from the mountain for him.”
Brianna choked on her beer .
“Y ou know  J am ie F raser?” she asked breathlessly , swabbing
at the spilled foam on her sleeve.
The landlord’ s brows went up.“W ait but a moment and you’ll know him, too.” He nodded
at a pew ter tanka rd full of beer , sitting on the nearby table. She
hadn’ t n oticed it when she came in. “He went out the back,
just as you came in. He—hey!” He fell back with a cry of
surprise as she d ropped her own tankard on the floor , and shot
out the back door like a bat out of hell.
The light outside was dazzling after the taproom’ s gloom.
Brianna blinked , eyes tearing at the shafts of sun that stabbed
through the shifting greens of a screen of maples. Then a
movement caught her eye, below the flickering leaves.
He stood in the shade of the maples, half turned away from
her , head bent in absorption. A tall man, long-legged, lean and
graceful, with his shoulders broad under a white shirt. He wore
a fad ed kilt in pale greens and browns, casually rucked up in
front as he urinated against a tree.
He finished and, letting the kilt fall, turned toward the post
house. H e saw her then, stand ing there staring at him, and
tensed slightly , hands half curlin g. Then he saw past her men’ s
clothes, and the look of wary suspicion changed at once to
surprise as he realized that she was a woman.
There was no doubt in her mind, from the first glimpse. She
was at once surprised and not su rprised at all; he was not quite
what she  had imagined—he seem ed smaller , only man-sized—
but his face had the lines of her own; the long, straight nose
and stubborn jaw , and the slant ed cat-eyes, set in a frame of
solid bone.
He mov ed toward her out of the maples’ shadow , and the
sun stru ck his hair with a spray of copper sparks. Half
consciously she raised a hand and pushed a strand of hair back
from her face, s eeing from the corner of her eye the matching
gleam of thick red-gold.
“What d’ye want here, lassie? ” he asked. Sharp, but not
unkind. His voice was deeper than she had imagined; the
Highland burr slight but distinct.“Y ou,” she blurted. Her heart se emed to have wedged itself
in her throat; she had trouble forcing any words past it.
He was close en ough that she caught the faint whif f of his
sweat and the fr esh smell of sa wn wood; there was a golden
scatter of sawdust caught in th e rolled sleeves of his linen
shirt. Hi s eyes narrowed with am usement as he looked her up
and dow n, taking in her costume. One reddish eyebrow rose,
and he shook his head.
“Sorry , lass,” he said, with a half-smile. “I’m a marrit man.”
He made  to pass by , and she made a small incoherent sound,
putting out a hand to stop him, but not quite daring to touch
his sleeve. He stopped and looked at her more closely .
“No, I meant it; I’ve a wife at home, and home’ s not far ,” he
said, evidently wishing to be courteous. “But—” He stopped,
close enough now to take in the grubbiness of her clothes, the
hole in the sleeve of her coat and the tattered ends of her stock.
“Och,” he said i n a dif ferent ton e, and reached for the small
leather p urse he wore tied at his waist. “W ill ye be starved,
then, lass? I’ve money , if you must eat.”
She could scarcely breathe. Hi s eyes were dark blue, soft
with kin dness. Her eyes fixed on the open collar of his shirt,
where the curly hairs showed, bleached gold against his
sunburnt skin.
“Are you—you’re Jamie Fraser , aren’ t you?”
He glanced sharply at her face.
“I am,” he said. The wariness had returned to his face; his
eyes narrowed against the sun. He glanced quickly behind
him, toward the tavern, but nothing stirred in the open
doorway . He took a step closer to her .
“Who asks?” he said softly . “H ave you a message for me,
lass?”
She felt an absu rd desire to laugh welling up in her throat.
Did she have a message?“My name is Br ianna,” she said. He frowned, uncertain, and
something flickered in his eyes. He knew it! He’d heard the
name and it meant something to him. She swallowed hard,
feeling her cheeks blaze as tho ugh they’d been seared by a
candle flame.
“I’m you r daugh ter ,” she said, h er voice sounding choked to
her own ears. “Brianna.”
He stood stock-still, not ch anging expression in the
slightest. He had heard her , though; he went pale, and then a
deep, pa inful red washed up his throat and into his face,
sudden as a brushfire, matching her own vivid color .
She felt a deep flash of joy at t he sight, a rush through her
midsection that echoed that blaze of blood, recognition of their
fair -skinned kinship. Did it trouble him to blush so strongly?
she wondered suddenly . Had he schooled his face to
immobility , as she had learned to do, to mask that telltale
sur ge?
Her own face felt stif f, but she gave him a tentative smile.
He blink ed, and his eyes moved at last from her face, slowly
taking in  her appearance, and—with what seemed to her a new
and horrified awareness—her height.
“My God,” he croaked. “Y ou’re huge .”
Her own  blush had subsided, b ut now came back with a
vengeance.
“And whose fault is that,  do you think?” she snapped. S he
drew herself up straight and squ ared her shoulders, glaring. So
close, at her full height, she could look him right in the eye,
and did.
He jerked back, and his fac e did change then, mask
shattering in surprise. W ithout it, he looked younger;
underneath were shock, surprise, and a dawning expression of
half-painful eagerness.
“Och, no, lassie!” he exclaimed. “I didna mean it that way ,
at all! It’ s only— ” He broke of f, staring at her in fascination.His hand lifted, as though desp ite himself, and traced the air ,
outlining her cheek, her jaw and neck and shoulder , afraid to
touch her directly .
“It’ s tru e?” he whispered. “It is you, Brianna?” He spoke
her n ame with a  queer accent— Br ee anah—and she shivered at
the sound.
“It’ s me,” she said, a little h uskily . She made another
attempt at a smile. “Can’ t you tell?”
His mouth was wide and full -lipped, but not like hers;
wider , a bolder shape, that se emed to hide a smile in the
corners of it, even in repose. It was twitching now , not certain
what to do.
“A ye,” he said. “A ye, I can.”
He did touch her then, his fingers drawing lightly down her
face, bru shing back the waves o f ruddy hair from temple and
ear , trac ing the delicate line of  her jaw . She shivered again,
though h is touch was noticeably warm; she could feel the heat
of his palm against her cheek.
“I hadna  though t of you as grown,” he said, letting his hand
fall reluc tantly a way . “I saw the  pictures, but still—I had ye in
my mind somehow as a wee bairn always—as my babe. I
never expected… ” His voice tra iled of f as he stared at her , the
eyes lik e her own, deep blue and thick-lashed, wide in
fascination.
“Pictures,” she said, feeling breathless with happiness.
“Y ou’ve seen pictures of me? Mama found you, didn’ t she?
When you said you had a wife at home—”
“Claire,” he interrupted. The wide mouth had made its
decision; it split into a smile that lit his eyes like the sun in the
dancing tree leaves. He grabb ed her arms, tight enough to
startle her .
“Y ou’ll not have seen her , then? Christ, she’ll be mad wi’
joy!”The thought of her mother was overwhelming. Her face
cracked, and the tears she had  been holding back for days
spilled down her cheeks in a flo od of relief, half choking her
as she laughed and cried together .
“Here, lassie, dinna weep!” he exclaimed in alarm. He let go
of h er a rm and snatched a lar ge, crumpled handkerchief from
his sleeve. He patted tentatively at her cheeks, looking
worried.
“Dinna weep, a leannan,  d inna be troubl ed,” he murmured.
“It’ s all right, m’ annsachd ; it’ s all right.”
“I’m all right; everything’ s all right. I’m just—happy ,” she
said. She took the handkerchief, wiped her eyes and blew her
nose. “What does that mean— a leannan ? And the other thing
you said?”
“Y ou’ll not have the Gaelic, the n?” he asked, and shook his
head. “No, of course she wo uldna have been taught,” he
murmured, as though to himself.
“I’ll learn,” she said firmly , giv ing her nose a last wipe. “A
leannan?”
A slight smile reappeared on his face as he looked at her .
“It mean s ‘darling,’ ” he said softly . “ M’ annsachd —my
blessing.”
The wor ds hung  in the air between them, shimmering like
the leaves. They stood still, both stricken suddenly with
shyness by the endearment, unable to look away from each
other , unable to find more words.
“Fa—” Brianna started to speak, then stopped, suddenly
seized w ith doubt. What should she call him? Not Daddy .
Frank R andall h ad been Daddy to her all her life; it would be a
betrayal to use that name to another man—any other man.
Jamie? No, she couldn’ t possib ly; rattled as he was by her
appearance, he had still a formidable dignity that forbade such
casual use. “Father” seemed remote and stern—and whatever
Jamie Fraser might be, he wasn’ t that; not to her .He saw her hesitate and flush, and recognized her trouble.
“Y ou can…call me Da,” he sai d. His voice was husky; he
stopped and cleared his throat. “If—if ye want to, I mean,” he
added dif fidently .
“Da,” she said, and felt the sm ile bloom easily this time,
unmarred by tears. “Da. Is that Gaelic?”
He smiled back, the corners of his mouth trembling slightly .
“No. It’ s only…simple.”
And sud denly it  was all simple. He held out his arms to her .
She stepped into them and foun d that she had been wrong; he
was  as big as she’d imagined—and his arms were as strong
about her as she had ever dared to hope.
Everything after  that seemed to  happen in a daze. Overcome
by emotion and fatigue, Brianna  was conscious of events more
as a  series of images, sharp as stop-frame photos, than as a
moving flow of life.
Lizzie, gray eyes blinking in the sudden light, tiny and pale
in t he arms of  a sturdy black groom with an improbable
Scottish accent. A wagon piled with glass and fragrant wood.
The polished rumps of horses , and the jolt and creak of
wooden wheels. Her father ’ s voice, deep and warm in her ear ,
describing a house to be built , high on a mountain ridge,
explaining that the windows were a surprise for her mother .
“But no such a s urprise as you, l assie!” And a laugh of deep
joy that seemed to echo in her bones.
A long ride dow n dusty roads, and sleeping with her head
on her father ’ s shoulder , his free arm around her as he drove,
breathing the unfamiliar scent of  his skin, his strange long hair
brushing her face when he turned his head.
Then th e cool luxury of the big, breezy house, filled with
the scent of bee swax and flowers. A tall woman with white
hair and Brianna’ s face, and a  blue-eyed gaze that looked
disconcertingly beyond her . Long cool hands that touched her
face and stroked her hair with abstract curiosity .“Lizzie,” she said, and a pretty woman bent over Lizzie,
murmuring, “Jesuit bark,” her black hands beautiful against
the yellow porcelain of Lizzie’ s face.
Hands—so many hands. Everything was done as if by
magic, with soft murmurs as they passed her from hand to
hand. Sh e was stripped and bathed before she could protest,
scented water poured over her , firm, gentle fingers that
massaged her scalp as lavender s oap was sluiced from her hair .
Linen towels and a small black  girl who dried her feet and
sprinkled them with rice powder .
A fresh cotton gown and floating barefoot over polished
floors, to see her father ’ s eyes  light at sight of her . Food—
cakes and trifles and jellies an d scones—and hot, sweet tea
that seemed to replace the blood in her veins.
A pretty blond girl with a frow n on her face, who seemed
peculiarly fami liar; her father called her Marsali. Lizzie,
washed and wrapped in a blan ket, both frail hands round a
mug of pungent liquid, looking like a steppedon flower newly
watered.
T alk, and people coming, and  more talk, with only the
occasional phrase penetrating through her growing fog.
“…Farquard Campbell has more sense…”
“Fer gus, Da, did ye see him? Is he all right?”
Da?  sh e thought, half puzzled, faintly indignant that
someone else should call him that, because…because…
Her aunt’ s voice, coming from a great distance, saying,
“The po or child is asleep where she sits; I can hear her
snoring. Ulysses, take her up to bed.”
And then strong arms that lifted  her with no sense of strain,
but not the candlewax smell of the black butler; the sawdust
and line n scent of her father . Sh e gave up the struggle and fell
asleep, her head on his chest.
Fer gus F raser m ight sound like a  Scottish clansman; he looked
like a French noble. A Frenc h noble on his way to theguillotine, Brianna silently amended her first impression.
Handsomely dark, slightly built, and not very tall, he
sauntered into the dock, and turned to face the room, long nose
lifted an  inch above the usual. The shabby clothes, the
unshaven jaw , and the lar ge purple bruise over one eye
subtracted nothing from his air of aristocratic disdain. Even
the curved metal hook that h e wore in replacement of a
missing hand only added to his impression of disreputable
glamour .
Marsali gave a s mall sigh at sig ht of him, and her lips grew
tight. She leaned across to Brianna to whisper to Jamie.
“What have they done to him, the bastards?”
“Nothing that matters.” He made a small motion, gesturing
her back, and sh e subsided into her seat, glowering at bailif f
and sherif f in turn.
They ha d been lucky to procur e seats; every space in the
small building was filled, and people were jostling and
muttering at the back of the room, kept in order only by the
presence of the red-coated soldiers who guarded the doors.
T wo more soldiers stood to atte ntion at the front of the room,
beside the Justice’ s bench, an o f ficer of some sort lurking in
the corner behind them.
Brianna saw the of ficer catch Ja mie Fraser ’ s eye, and a look
of malig n satisfaction crept over the man’ s broad features, a
look almost of gloating. It mad e the small hairs rise on the
back of her neck , but her father  met the man’ s gaze squarely ,
then turned away , indif ferent.
The Justice arrived and took his place, and the ceremonies
of justice being duly performed , the trial began. Evidently , it
was not intended  to be a trial by  jury , since no such body was
present; only the Justice and his minions.
Brianna had made out little from the conversation the
evening before, though over breakfast she had managed to
disentangle the  confusion of persons. The young black
woman’ s name was Phaedre, on e of Jocasta’ s slaves, and thetall hom ely boy with the charming smile was Jamie’ s nephew ,
Ian—her cousin , she thought, with the same small thrill of
discovered kinship she had felt at Lallybroch. The lovely
blond M arsali w as Fer gus’ s wife, and Fer gus, of course, was
the French orphan whom Jamie had informally adopted in
Paris, before the Stuart Rising.
Mr . Justice Conant, a tidy gentl eman of middle age, settled
his wig,  arranged his coat, and  called for the char ges to be
read. Th ese were, to wit, that one Fer gus Claudel Fraser ,
resident of Rowan County , had on August 4 of this year of our
Lord 1769, feloniously assaulted the person of one Hugh
Berowne, a deputy sherif f of sai d county , and stolen from him
Crown property , then lawfully in the deputy’ s custody .
The said Hugh, being called to  the stand, proved to be a
gangling fellow of some thirty years and a nervous disposition.
He twitched and stammered th rough his testimony , averring
that he had encountered the de fendant on the Buf falo T rail
Road, while he, Berowne, was in pursuit of his lawful duties.
He had been ro ughly abused by the defendant in the French
tongue, and upon his endeavori ng to leave, had been pursued
by the defendant, who had apprehended him, struck him in the
face, and  taken away the proper ty of the Crown in Berowne’ s
custody , to wit, one horse, with bridle and saddle.
Upon the invitation of the cou rt, the witness here pulled
back the right s ide of his mouth in a grimace, disclosing a
broken tooth, suf fered in the assault.
Mr . Justice Conant peered in terestedly at the shattered
remains of the tooth, and turned to the prisoner .
“Indeed. And now , Mr . Fraser , m ight we hear your account
of this unfortunate event?”
Fer gus l owered his nose half an  inch, awarding the justice
the same regard he might have bestowed on a cockroach.
“This lo athsome wad of dung,” he began in measured tones,
“had—”“The prisoner will refrain from insult,” Justice Conant said
coldly .
“The deputy ,” Fer gus resumed, without turning a hair , “had
come upon my wife as she retu rned from the flour mill, with
my infant son upon her saddle. This—the deputy—hailed her ,
and without ceremony dragged her from the saddle, informed
her that he was taking the horse  and its equipment in payment
of tax, and left her and the chil d on foot, five miles from my
home, in the blazing sun!” He glared ferociously at Berowne,
who narrowed his own gaze in r eply . Next to Brianna, Marsali
exhaled strongly through her nose.
“What tax did the deputy claim was owed?”
A dark flush had mantled Fer gus’ s cheeks.
“I owe nothing! It was his claim that my land is subject to
an annual rent of three shillings, but it is not! My land is
exempt from this tax, by virtue of the terms of a land grant
made to James Fraser by Governor T ryon. I told the stinking
salaud  as much, when he visited my home to try to collect the
money .”
“I h eard nothing of such a gra nt,” Berowne said sulkily .
“These folks will tell you any tale at all, to put of f paying.
Lallygags and cheats, the lot of them.”
“Or eilles en feuille de chou!”
A small  ripple of laughter ran through the room, nearly
drowning out the Justice’ s re buke. Brianna’ s high-school
French was just about adequate to translate this as
“Cauliflower ears!” and she joined in the general smile.
The Justice lifted his head and peered into the courtroom.
“Is James Fraser present?”
Jamie rose and bowed respectfully .
“Here, milord.”
“Swear the witness, Bailif f.”Jamie, having been duly sworn,  attested to the facts that he
was in fact the proprietor of a gr ant of land, that said grant had
been ma de and its terms agree d to by Governor T ryon, that
said term s did include a quitment of land rent to the Crown for
a period  of ten years, such period to expire some nine years
hence, and finally , that Fer gus  Fraser did maintain a house
upon and farm crops within the boundaries of the granted
territory , under license from  himself, James Alexander
Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser .
Brianna’ s attent ion had at first been fixed upon her father;
she could scarcely get enough of looking at him. He was the
tallest m an in the courtroom, and by far the most striking,
attired in snowy linen and a coat of deep blue that set of f his
slanted eyes and fiery hair .
A m ovement in the corner attrac ted her eye, though, and she
looked t o see the of ficer she had noticed before. He was no
longer looking at her father , but had fixed Hugh Berowne with
a p enetra ting stare. Berowne gave the shadow of a nod, and sat
back to await the end of Fraser ’ s testimony .
“It w ould appear that Mr . Fraser ’ s claim of exemption holds
true, Mr . Berow ne,” the Justice said mildly . “I must therefore
hold him acquitted of the char ge of—”
“He cannot prove it!” Berowne blurted out. He glanced at
the of fic er , as though for moral support, and stif fened his long
chin. “There is no documentary proof; only James Fraser ’ s
word.”
Another stir went through the c ourtroom; this one uglier in
tone. Brianna had no trouble h earing the shock and outrage
that her father ’ s  word had been called in question, and felt an
unexpected pride.
Her father showed no anger , t hough; he rose again, and
bowed to the Justice.
“And yo ur Lordship will permit me.” He reached into his
coat and removed a folded sheet of parchment, with a blob of
red sealing wax af fixed.“Y our Lordship will be familiar with the Governor ’ s seal, I
am sure,” he sa id, laying it on the table before Mr . Conant.
The Jus tice raised one eyebrow , but looked carefully at the
seal, then broke it open, exami ned the document within, and
laid it down.
“This is a duly witnessed copy of the original grant of land,”
he announced, “signed by His Excellency , W illiam T ryon.”
“How did you get that?” Berowne blurted. “There wasn’ t
time to get to Ne w Bern and bac k!” Then all the blood drained
from his  face. Brianna looked at the of ficer; his pudgy face
seemed to have acquired all the blood Berowne had lost.
The Justice cast him a sharp glan ce, but merely said, “Given
that documentary proof is  n ow entered in evidence, we find
that the defenda nt is plainly not guilty of the char ge of theft,
since the property in question was his own. On the matter of
assault, howeve r—” At this point he noticed that Jamie had
not sat down, but was still standing in front of the bench.
“Y es, M r . Fraser? Had you some thing else to tell the court?”
Justice C onant d abbed at a trick le of sweat that ran down from
under his wig; with so many bodies packed into the small
room, it was like a sweatbath.
“I beg the court  might gratify my curiosity , your Lordship.
Does Mr . Berowne’ s original char ge describe more fully the
attack upon him?”
The Jus tice raised both eyebrows, but shuf fled quickly
through the papers on the table b efore him, then handed one to
the bailif f, pointing to a spot on the page.
“Complainant stated that one Fer gus Fraser struck him in
the face with his  fist, causing co mplainant to fall stunned upon
the ground, whereat the defendant seized the bridle of the
horse, leapt upon it, and rode away , calling out remarks of an
abusive nature in the French tongue. Complainant—”
A loud cough from the dock pulled all eyes to the
defendant, who  smiled charmingly at Mr . Justice Conant,plucked a handkerchief from his pocket and elaborately wiped
his face—using the hook at the end of his left arm.
“Oh!” said the Justice, and swi veled cold eyes toward the
witness chair , where Berowne squirmed in hot-faced agony .
“And would you care to ex plain, sir , how you have
sustained injury  upon the right side of your face, when struck
by the left fist of a man who does not have one?”
“Y es, cr ottin, ” Fer gus said cheerfully . “Explain that one.”
Perhaps feeling that Berowne’ s a ttempts at explanation were
best conducted in privacy , Justice Conant mopped his neck
and put a summ ary end to the trial, dismissing Fer gus Fraser
with no stain upon his character .
“It was me,” M arsali said proudly , clinging to the arm of her
husband at the celebratory feast that followed the trial.
“Y ou?” Jamie gave her an amus ed glance. “That fisted yon
deputy in the face, ye mean?”
“Not my  fist, my foot,” she corrected. “When the wicked
salaud  t ried to drag me of f the horse, I kicked him in the jaw .
He’d ne ver ha’ got me down,”  she added, glowering at the
memory , “save he snatched Germaine from me, so of course I
had to go and get him.”
She pett ed the sleek blond head of the toddler who clung to
her skirts, a piece of biscuit clutched in one grubby fist.
“I don’ t quite understand,” Brianna said. “Did Mr . Berowne
not want to admit that a woman hit him?”
“Ah, no ,” Jamie said, pouring another cup of ale and
handing it to he r . “It was only Ser geant Murchison making a
nuisance of himself.”
“Ser geant Murchison? That would be the army of ficer who
was at the trial?”  she asked. She  took a small sip of the ale, for
politeness’ sake. “The one who looks like a half-roasted pig?”
Her father grinned at this characterization.“A ye, that’ll be the man. He’ s a mislike of me,” he
explained. “This  wilna be the first time—or the last—that he’ s
tried such a trick to cripple me.”
“He could not hope to succe ed with such a ridiculous
char ge,” Jocasta chimed in, leaning forward and reaching out a
hand. Ulysses, standing by , moved the plate of bannocks the
necessary inch. She took one, unerringly , and turned her
disconcerting blind eyes toward Jamie.
“W as it really necessary for you to subvert Farquard
Campbell?” she asked, disapproving.
“A ye, it was,” Jamie answered. Seeing Brianna’ s confusion,
he explained.
“Farquard Campbell is the usual justice of this district. If he
hadna fallen ill so conveniently”—and here he grinned again,
mischief dancing  in his eyes—”the trial would have been held
last week. That was their plan, aye? Murchison and Berowne.
They m eant to bring the char ge , arrest Fer gus, and force me
down from the mountain in the midst of the harvest—and they
succeeded in that much, damn them,” he added ruefully .
“But the y count ed on my not being able to obtain a copy of
the grant from New Bern before the trial—as indeed I could
not, had it been last week.” He gave Ian a smile, and the boy ,
who ha d ridde n hellbent to New Bern to procure the
document, blushed pink and buried his face in a bowl of
punch.
“Farquard Campbell is a friend, Auntie,” Jamie said to
Jocasta, “but ye ken as well as I that he’ s a man of the law; it
wouldna make a bit of dif ference that he knows the terms of
my grant as well as I do; if I couldna produce the proof in
court, he would feel himself forced to rule against me.
“And if he had,” he went on, returning to Brianna, “I should
have been forced to appeal the  verdict, which would mean
Fer gus being taken to prison i n New Bern, and a new trial
scheduled there. The end of it would have been the same—but
it would  have taken both Fer gu s and myself of f the land formost of the harvest season, and cost me more in fees than the
harvest will bring.”
He looked at B rianna over the rim of his cup, blue eyes
suddenly serious.
“Y ou’ll no be thinking me rich, I hope?” he asked.
“I h adn’ t thought of it at all,” s he replied, startled, and he
smiled.
“That’ s as well,” he said, “for w hile I’ve a good bit of land,
there’ s little of it under cultivation as yet; we’ve enough—
barely—to seed the fields and feed ourselves, wi’ a bit left
over for  the cattle. And capable as your mother is”—the smile
widened—”she canna bring in thirty acres of corn and barley
by herself.” He set down his empty cup and stood up.
“Ian, wi ll ye see to the supplies and drive up the wagon with
Fer gus a nd Mars ali? The lass an d I will go ahead, I think.” He
glanced down at Brianna questioningly .
“Jocasta will care for your wee maid here. Y e dinna mind
going so soon?”
“No,” she said, putting down h er cup and standing up too.
“Can we go today?”
I took down the bottles from the cupboard, one by one,
uncorking one now and then to snif f at the contents. If not
thoroughly dry before storage, fleshy-leaved herbs would rot
in the bottle; seeds would grow exotic molds.
The tho ught of molds made m e think once more of my
penicillin planta tion. Or what I hoped might one day be one,
were I lucky enough, and observant enough to know my luck.
Of the hundred s of molds tha t grew easily on stale, damp
bread, Penicillium  w as only one.  What were the odds of a
stray spo re of that one precious mold taking root on the slices
of bread I laid out weekly? What were the odds of an exposed
slice of bread surviving long enough for any  spores to find it?
And las tly , wha t were the odds  that I would recognize it if I
saw it?I had been trying for more than a year , with no success so
far .
Even with the marigolds and yarrow I scattered for
repellency , it was impossible to keep the vermin away . Mice
and rats, ants a nd cockroaches; one day I had even found a
party of bur glarious squirrels in the pantry , holding riot over
scattered corn and the gnawed ruins of half my seed potatoes.
The only recourse was to lock all edibles in the big hutch
Jamie had built—that, or keep t hem in thick wooden casks or
lidded jars, resistent to the ef fo rts of tooth and claw . But to
seal foo d away from four -footed thieves was also to seal it
away fro m the air—and the air  was the only messenger that
might one day bring me a real weapon against disease.
Each of the plan ts carries an an tidote to some illness—if we
only knew what it was . I felt a renewe d pang of loss when I
thought of Nayawenne; not o nly for herself but for her
knowledge. She had taught me only a fraction of the things she
knew , and I regretted that most bitterly—though not as bitterly
as the loss of my friend.
Still, I knew one  thing she had not—the manifold virtues of
that sma llest of plants, the lowly bread mold. T o find it would
be d if ficult, to recognize it, and to use it, even more so. But I
never doubted it was worth the search.
T o l eave bread e xposed in the house was to draw the mice
and rats inside. I had tried setting it on the sideboard—Ian had
absentmindedly consumed half of my budding antibiotic
incubator , and mice and ants ma de short work of the rest while
I was away from the house.
It was simply impossible, in summer , spring, or autumn,
either to leave b read exposed and unguarded or to stay inside
to look after it. There were too many ur gent chores to be done
outside, too many calls to atten d births or illness, too much
opportunity for foraging.
In th e winter , of course, the vermin went away , to lay their
eggs against the spring, and hib ernate under a blanket of deadleaves, secure from the cold. But the air was cold, too; too cold
to b ring me livi ng spores. The bread I laid out either curled
and dried, or we nt soggy , depending on its distance from the
fire; in either ca se, sporting nothing but the occasional orange
or pi nk c rust: th e molds that live d in the crevices of the human
body .
I wo uld try agai n in the spring, I thought, snif fing at a bottle
of dried marjoram. It was good; musky as incense, smelling of
dreams. The new house on the ridge was already rising,
foundation laid and rooms mark ed out. I could see the skeletal
framework from the cabin door , black against the clear
September sky on the ridge.
By t he spring, i t would be finished. I would have plastered
walls an d laid oak floors, glass windows with stout frames that
kept out  mice and ants—and a  nice snug, sunny sur gery in
which to conduct my medical practice.
My glowing visions were interrupted by a raucous bellow
from the penfold; Clarence announcing an arrival. I could hear
voices in the distance, in between Clarence’ s shrieks of
ecstasy , and I hastily began to tidy away the scatter of corks
and bot tles. It must be Jamie returning with Fer gus and
Marsali—or at least I hoped so.
Jamie had been confident of the trial’ s outcome, but I
worried nonetheless. Raised to believe that British law in the
abstract was one of the great a chievements of civilization, I
had seen a good deal too many of its concrete applications to
have much faith in its avatars. O n the other hand, I had quite a
bit of faith in Jamie.
Clarence’ s vocalizations had dropped to the wheezing
gar gle he used for intimate c onverse, but the voices had
stopped. That was odd. Perhaps things had gone wrong after
all?
I t hrust the last  of the bottles back into the cupboard and
went to the do or . The dooryard was empty . Clarence hee-
hawed enthusia stically at my appearance, but nothing elsemoved. Someo ne had come, though—the chickens had
scattered, fleeing into the bushes.
A brisk chill ran up my spine and I whirled, trying to look in
front of me and  over my shoulder at the same time. Nothing.
The chestnut trees behind the house sighed in the breeze, a
shimmer of sun filtered through their yellowing leaves.
I knew beyond the shadow of a  doubt that I wasn’ t alone.
Damn, and I’d left my knife on the table inside!
“Sassenach.” My heart nearly stopped at the sound of
Jamie’ s voice. I spun toward it,  relief being rapidly overcome
by annoyance. What did he think he—
For a split secon d, I thought I was seeing double. They were
sitting on the bench outside the door , side by side, the
afternoon sun igniting their hair like matchheads.
My eyes focused on Jamie’ s face, alight with joy—then
shifted right.
“Mama.” It was the same expres sion; eagerness and joy and
longing all together . I had no time even to think before she was
in my arms, an d I was in the air , knocked of f my feet both
literally and figuratively .
“Mama!”
I h adn’ t any bre ath; what hadn’ t been taken away by shock
was being squeezed out by a rib-crushing hug.
“Bree!” I managed to gasp, and  she put me down, though
she d idn’ t let go . I looked disbel ievingly up, but she was real. I
looked for Jamie, and found him standing beside her . He said
nothing, but gave me an face-splitting grin, his ears bright pink
with delight.
“I, ah, I wasn’ t expecting—” I said idiotically .
Brianna gave me a grin to match  her father ’ s, eyes bright as
stars and damp with happiness.
“Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!”
“What?” said Jamie blankly .P A R T  T E N
I m p a i r e d  R e l a t i o n s4 2
M O O N L I G H T
September 1769
S he w oke from a dreamless sleep, a hand on her shoulder . She
jerked and started up on one elbow , blinking. Jamie’ s face was
barely d istinguishable above her in the gloom; the fire had
burned down to nothing more t han a glow , and it was nearly
pitch-black in the cabin.
“I sh all be hunting up the mountain, lass; will ye come wi’
me?” he whispered.
She rubbed her eyes, trying to reassemble her sleep-
scattered thoughts, and nodded.
“Good. W ear your breeks.” He rose silently and went out,
letting in a bre ath of piercing-sweet cold air as the door
opened.
By t he time she had pulled on breeks and stockings, he was
back, m oving ju st as silently , de spite the armload of firewood
he c arried. He n odded to her and  knelt to rekindle the fire; she
thrust her arms into her coat and went out herself, in search of
the privy .
The world outside was black and dreamlike; if not for the
chill, sh e might have thought herself still asleep. Stars burned
coldly bright, but seemed to hang low , as though they might
fall from the sky any minute and be extinguished, sizzling, in
the mist-damp trees on the ridges beyond.
What time was it? she wondered, shivering at the touch of
damp wood on her sleep-warmed thighs. Somewhere in the
small hours; surely it was a lon g time until dawn. Everything
was hus hed; no insects hummed yet in her mother ’ s garden,
and ther e were no rustlings, even from the dry corn-stooks
propped in the field.
When she pushed open the doo r of the cabin, the air inside
seemed almost solid; a block of stale smoke, fried food, andthe smell of sleeping bodies. By contrast, the air outside was
sweet but thin—she kept taking lar ge gulps, to get enough.
He was ready; a  leather bag was tied at his belt with ax and
powder horn, a bigger canvas sack slung over his shoulder .
She didn ’ t come in, but stood in the doorway watching as he
bent quickly and kissed her mother in the bed.
He k new she was there, of course—and it was no more than
a light kiss on the forehead—b ut she felt like an intruder , a
voyeur . The more so when Clai re’ s long, pale hand floated up
from the quilts and touched hi s face with a tenderness that
squeezed her heart. Claire murm ured something, but Brianna
didn’ t hear it.
She turn ed away  quickly , face h ot in spite of the chilly air ,
and was standing by the edge of the clearing when he came
out. He shut the  door behind him , waiting for the clunk  within
as it was barred. He had a gun, a long-barreled thing that
seemed nearly as tall as she was.
He didn ’ t speak, but smiled a t her and cocked his head
toward t he wood . She followed, keeping up easily as he took a
faint trail that le d through groves of spruce and chestnut. His
feet knocked the dew from clu mps of grass, and left a dark
trail through tussocks of shimmering silver .
The trail  wound  to and fro, nearly level for a long time, but
then beg an to head uphill. She f elt the shift, rather than saw it.
It wa s st ill very dark, but suddenly the silence was gone. In the
next breath, a bird began to call from the wood nearby .
Then the whole mountainside was alive with birdsong,
screeches and trills and whirrs. Under the calling was a sense
of movement, of fluttering and scratching just below the
threshold of hearing. He stopped, listening.
She stopped, too, looking at him . The light had changed so
slowly t hat she was scarcely aware of it; her eyes adapted to
the dark, she co uld see easily b y the starlight, and knew the
change to daylight only when she glanced from the ground and
saw the vivid color of her father ’ s hair .He had food in his bag; they sat on a log and shared apples
and bread. Then she drank from  a trickle that dropped from a
ledge, filling her hands with co ld crystal. Looking back, she
could no longer see any trace o f the small settlement; houses
and fiel ds were gone, as though the mountain had silently
drawn her forests together , swallowing them up.
She wiped her h ands on the sk irts of her coat, feeling the
prickly shape of the conker in her pocket. No horse chestnuts
on these wooded slopes; that was an English tree, planted by
some expatriate in the hope of creating a memory of home; a
living link to a nother life. She curled her hand around it
briefly , w ondering whether her own links had been severed for
good, then let it go, and turned to follow her father uphill.
At first  her heart had pounded and her thigh muscles
strained at the u naccustomed la bor of climbing, but then her
body had found the rhythm of th e ground. W ith the coming of
light, she no long stumbled. By the time they emer ged at the
top of a steep slope, her feet trod so lightly on the spongy
leaves th at she felt she might flo at of f into the sky that seemed
so near , cut free of the earth.
For a single mo ment, she wished that she could. But the
links sti ll held in the chain that bound her to the earth—her
mother , her father , Lizzie…and Roger . The morning sun was
rising, a  great ball of flame above the mountains. She had to
shut her eyes for a moment, not to be blinded.
Here it was; the place he had me ant to bring her . At the foot of
a tow ering escarpment, part of t he rock had fallen into a loose
tumble, over grown by moss and lichen, small saplings jutting
drunkenly from cracks in the rock. He tilted his head,
gesturing her to follow him. There was a way through the huge
boulders, hard to see, but there . He felt her hesitate behind
him, and looked back.
She smiled and waved a hand at the rock. A huge piece of
limestone had fallen and split in two; he stood between the
pieces.“It’ s all right,” she said softly . “It just reminded me.”
That reminded him,  and raised the hairs on his forearms. He
had to stop and watch as she stepped through, only to be sure.
But it was fine; she stepped thro ugh carefully , and joined him.
He felt the need  to touch her , though, only to be sure; he held
out a hand, and felt reassured by the solid clasp of his fingers
around hers.
He had judged it right; the sun  was just coming over the
farthest ridge as they came out into the open space at the top of
the slop e. Below them spread ridges and valleys, so full of
mist that it looked like smoke boiling through the hollows.
From the mountain opposite, the waterfall arched out and
down in a thin white plume, falling into the mist.
“Here,” he said, stopping at a place where the rocks lay
scattered, surrou nded by thick grass. “Let’ s rest for a bit.”
Chilly as the ea rly mornings were, the climb had heated him;
he sat on a flat rock, legs stre tched out to let the air come
under his kilt, and pushed the plaid of f his shoulders.
“It f eels so dif ferent here,” she said, brushing back a lock of
the s oft red hair whose flames warmed him more than the sun.
She glanced back at him, sm iling. “Do you know what I
mean? I  rode from Inverness to Lallybroch, through the Great
Glen, and that was wild enough”—she shivered slightly at the
recollection—”but it wasn’ t like this at all.”
“No,” he said. He knew exa ctly what she meant; the
wildness of the glens and the m oors was inhabited, in a way
that this place of forests and rushing waters was not.
“I think—” he began, then sto pped. W ould she think him
daft? Bu t she was looking up at him, wanting him to say . “The
spirits th at live there,” he said, a little awkwardly . “They are
auld, and they’ve seen men fo r thousands on thousands of
years; they ken us weel, and they’re none so wary of showing
themselves. Wha t lives here”—he laid a hand on the trunk of a
chestnut tree that rose a hundred  feet above them, whose girth
measured more than thirty feet around—”they havena seen our
like before.”She nodded, seeming not at all taken back.
“They’re curious, though, aren’ t they ,” she said, “some of
them?” and tipped back her he ad to look up into the dizzy
spiral of the branches overhead. “Don’ t you feel them
watching, now and then?”
“Now and then.”
He sat on the rock beside her an d watched the light spread,
spilling over the edge of the mou ntain, lighting the distant falls
the way  kindling  catches from a  spark, filling the mist with a
glow like pearls, then burning it away altogether . T ogether
they saw  the slope of the moun tain come to the light of day ,
and he said a qu iet word to the spirit of this place, in thanks. If
it had no Gaelic, still it might catch his meaning.
She stretched her long legs, br eathing in the scent of the
morning.
“Y ou did n’ t really mind, did yo u?” Her voice was soft, and
she kept her eyes on the valley below , careful not to look at
him. “Living in the cave near Broch Mhorda.”
“No,” h e said. The sun was warm on his breast and face,
and filled him with a sense of peace. “No, I didna mind it.”
“Only hearing about it—I thought it must have been
terrible. Cold and dirty and lon ely , I mean.” She did look at
him then, and the morning sky lived in her eyes.
“It was,” he said, and smiled a little.
“Ian—Uncle Ian—took me there to show me.”
“Did he, then? It’ s none so bleak, in the summertime, when
the yellow’ s on the broom.”
“No. But even when it was—” She hesitated.
“No, I didna mind it.” He clos ed his eyes and let the sun
heat his eyelids.
At f irst he had thought the loneliness would kill him, but
once he had learned it would not , he came to value the solitude
of the mountain side. He could see the sun clear , though hiseyes were closed; a great red ball, flaming round the edges.
W as that how Jocasta saw it behind her blind eyes?
She was silent for a long time, and so was he, content to
listen. T here were wee birds working in the spruce nearby ,
hanging upside down from the branches, hunting the bugs that
they ate and talking to themselves about what they found.
“Roger—” she said suddenly , and his heart was struck by a
dart of jealousy , the more painf ul for being unexpected. W as
he not to have her to himself, even for so short a time? He
opened his eyes and did his best to look interested.
“I tried to tell him, once, about being alone. That I thought it
maybe wasn’ t a bad thing.” S he sighed, the heavy brows
drawn down. “I don’ t think he understood.”
He made a noncommittal sound in his throat.
“I thoug ht—” She hesitated, glanced at him, then away . “I
thought maybe that was why it’ s —why you and Mama…” Her
skin was so clear , he could see the blood bloom under it. She
took a deep breath, hands braced on the rock.
“She’ s like that too. She doesn’ t mind being alone.”
He glan ced at her , wanting bad ly to know what made her
say so. What had Claire’ s life been in their years apart to give
her that knowledge? It was so; Claire knew the flavor of
solitude. It was c old as spring w ater , and not all could drink it;
for s ome it was not refreshment, but mortal chill. But she had
lived daily with a husband; how had she drunk deep enough of
loneliness to know?
Brianna could maybe tell him, b ut he wouldn’ t ask; the last
name he wished to hear spoken in this place was Frank
Randall’ s.
He coughed instead.
“W ell, it’ s maybe true,” he agreed cautiously . “I’ve seen
women—and men too, sometimes—as canna bear the sound of
their ow n thoug hts, and they m aybe dinna make such good
matches with those who can.”“No,” she said, brooding. “Maybe they don’ t.”
The small pang of jealousy ease d. So she had doubts about
this W ak efield, d id she? She’d t old him and Claire everything,
about he r search , the death noti ce, the journey from Scotland,
the v isit to Lallybroch—damn Laoghaire!—and about the man
W akefield, who’d come afte r her . She wasn’ t telling
everything there , he thought, but that was as well; he didn’ t
want to hear it . He was less bothered at the prospect of a
distant d eath by fire than by the more imminent interruption of
his idyll with his long-lost daughter .
He drew up his knees and sat quiet. Much as he wanted to
recapture his sense of tranquility , he could not free his mind
from the thought of Randall.
He had won. Cla ire was his; so was this glorious child—this
young woman, he corrected himself, looking at her . But
Randall had had the keeping of them for twenty years; there
was no doubt he  had set his mark on them. But what mark had
it been?
“Look.” Brianna’ s hand squeezed his arm as she breathed
the word.
He f ollowed her gaze and saw th em; two does, standing just
under the shadow of the trees, n ot twenty feet away . He didn’ t
move, b ut breathed quietly . He could feel Brianna beside him,
enchanted into stillness too.
The deer saw them; delicate heads upraised, dark, moist
nostrils flaring for scent. After  a moment, though, one doe
stepped out, dainty , nervous footsteps leaving streaks in the
dew-wet grass. The other followed, cautious, and they grazed
along the grassy strips between the rocks, turning now and
then to lift their head and cast tranquil eyes on the strange but
harmless creatures on the ledge.
He c ouldn’ t have come within a  mile of a Scottish red deer
that had his scent. The red stags kent weel what a man was.
He watched the deer graze, wi th the innocence of perfect
wildness, and felt the sun’ s bene diction on his head. This wasa new place, and he was conte nt to be alone here with his
daughter .
“What are we hunting, Da?” He was standing still, eyes
squinted as he scanned the hor izon, but she was reasonably
sure he wasn’ t l ooking at an an imal; she could speak without
scaring the game.
They’d seen a g ood many animals in the course of the day;
the t wo deer at dawn, a red fox  that sat watching on a rock,
licking dainty black paws until they came too close, then
vanishing like a blown-out flam e. Squirrels—dozens of them
—chattering through the treetops, playing hide-and-seek past
the tree boles. Even a flock of wild turkey , with two males
strutting, chests puf fed and tail fans spread for the edification
of a gobbling harem.
None of  these were the chosen prey , for which she was glad.
She had  no objection to killing for food, but would have been
sorry to have the beauty of the day soiled by blood.
“Bees,” he said.
” Bees?  How do you hunt bees?”
He p icked up hi s gun and smiled at her , nodding downhill
toward a brilliant patch of yellow .
“Look for flowers.”
There were certainly bees in the flowers; close enough, and
she coul d hear the hum. There were several dif ferent kinds:
huge bla ck bum blebees, a smaller kind, striped with black and
yellow f uzz, an d the smooth le thal shapes of wasps, bellies
pointed as daggers.
“What y e want to do,” her father told her , slowly circling
the patc h, “is to watch and see which direction the honeybees
go. And not get stung.”
A dozen  times, they lost sight of the tiny messengers they
followed, lost in the broken light over a stream, disappearing
into brus h too thick to follow . Ea ch time, Jamie cast to and fro,
finding another patch of flowers.“There’ s some!”  she cried, pointing to a flash of brilliant red
in the distance.
He squinted at them and smiled, shaking his head.
“Nay , not red,” he said. “The wee hummingbirds like the
red ones, but be es like yellow and white—yellow’ s best.” He
plucked a small white daisy fro m the grass near her feet and
handed it to her—the petals were streaked with pollen, fallen
from the delicate stamens in th e round yellow center of the
bloom. Looking  closer , she saw a tiny beetle the size of a
pinhead crawl out of the center , its shiny black armor dusted
with gold.
“The hu mmingbirds drink from  the long-throated flowers,”
he expla ined. “B ut the bees cann a get all the way inside. They
like the broad, flat flowers like this, and the ones that grow in
heavy b unches. They light on them and wallow , till they’re
covered over wi’ the yellow .”
They hunted up and down the mountainside, laughing as
they do dged the bomber assaults of enraged bumblebees,
hunting telltale patches of yellow and white. The bees liked
the mountain laurel, but too many of those patches were too
high to see over , too dense to pass through.
It was late afternoon before t hey found what they were
looking for . A snag, the remnants of a good-sized tree, its
branches reduced to stumps, bark worn away to show
weathered silver  wood beneath—and a wide split in the wood,
through which the bees were crowding, hanging in a veil
around it.
“Oh, good,” Jamie said, with satisfaction at the sight.
“Sometimes they hive in the ro cks, and then there’ s little ye
can do.” He unslung the ax at his belt, and his bags, and
gestured to Brianna to sit down on a nearby rock.
“It’ s best to wai t till dark,” he explained. “For then all the
swarm will be in side the hive. Meanwhile, will ye have a bite
to eat?”They shared the rest of the food, and talked sporadically ,
watching the light fade from the  nearby mountains. He let her
fire the long musket when she asked, showing her how to load
a new round: sw ab the barrel, p atch the ball, ram home ball,
patch, and wadding with a char ge of powder from the
cartridge; pour the rest of the powder into the priming pan of
the flintlock.
“Y ou’re no a bad shot at all, lass,” he said, surprised. He
bent and picked up a small chunk of wood, setting it on top of
a lar ge boulder as a tar get. “T ry again.”
She did,  and again, and again, growing used to the awkward
weight of the weapon, finding the lovely balancing point of its
length a nd its natural seat in the curve of her shoulder . It
kicked less than she’d expected;  black powder hadn’ t the force
of mode rn cartridges. T wice chips flew from the boulder; the
third tim e the chunk of wood  disappeared in a shower of
fragments.
“V erra n ice,” he said, one eyebrow raised. “And where in
God’ s name did ye learn to shoot?”
“My fat her was a tar get shooter .” She lowered the gun,
cheeks flushed with pleasure. “ He taught me to shoot with a
pistol or a rifle.  A shotgun, too .” Then her cheeks flushed a
deeper hue, remembering. “Um. Y ou wouldn’ t have seen a
shotgun.”
“No, I dinna suppose I have,” was all he said, his face a
careful blank.
“How w ill you move the hive?”  she asked, wanting to cover
the awkward moment. He shrugged.
“Oh, once the be es have gone to  their rest, I shall blow a bit
o’ smoke into th e hive, to keep them stunned. Then chop free
the p art of the trunk that’ s got the combs in it, slide a bit of flat
wood be neath it , and wrap it in my plaid. Once at the house,
I’ll nail a bit of wood top and bottom, to make a bee gum.” He
smiled a t her . “Come morning, the bees will come out, look
around, and venture out for the nearest flowers.”“W on’ t they realize they aren’ t in their proper place?”
He shrugged again.
“And what will they do about it, if they do? They’ve no
means to find their way back, and they’ll have no home left
here to come to. Nay , they’ll be  content in the new place.” He
reached for the gun. “Here, let me clean it; the light’ s too bad
for shooting.”
Conversation died, and they sat in silence for half an hour or
so, w atching darkness fill the hollows below , an invisible tide
that crept higher by the minute , engulfing the trunks of the
trees so that the green canopies seemed to float on a lake of
darkness.
At last she clea red her throat, feeling that she must say
something .
“W on’ t Mama be worried about us, coming back so late?”
He shoo k his head, but didn’ t answer; only sat, a grass blade
drooping idle in his hand. The m oon was edging its way above
the trees, big and golden, lopsided as a smudged teardrop.
“Y our m other di d tell me once that men meant to fly to the
moon,” he said abruptly . “They hadna done it yet, that she
knew , but they meant to. W ill ye know about that?”
She nodded, eyes fixed on the rising moon.
“They did. They will, I mean. She smiled faintly . “ Apollo,
they called it—the rocket ship that took them.”
She cou ld see his smile in answer; the moon was high
enough to shed its radiance on the clearing. He tilted his face
up, considering.
“A ye? And what did they say of it, the men who went?”
“They didn’ t need to say anything—they sent back pictures.
I told you about the television?”
He looked a little startled, and she knew that like most
things sh e had told him from he r time, he had no real grasp ofthe r eality of mo ving, talking pictures, let alone the notion that
such things could be sent through thin air .
“A ye?” he said, a little unsurely . “Y ou’ve seen these
pictures, then?”
“Y es.” She rocked back a little, hands clasped around her
knees, lo oking u p at the missha pen globe above them. There
was a faint nimbus of light around it, and farther out in the
starlit sky , a perfect, hazy ring, as though it were a big yellow
stone dropped into a black pon d, frozen in place as the first
ripple formed.
“Fair weather tomorrow ,” he said, looking up at it.
“W ill it be?” She could see everything around them, almost
as c learly as in the daylight, but the color had fled now;
everything was black and gray—like the pictures she
described.
“It t ook hours, w aiting. No one could say exactly how long
it would  take them to land and  get out in their space suits—
you kno w there isn’ t any air on the moon?” She raised a
questioning brow , and he nodded, attentive as a schoolboy .
“Claire told me so,” he murmured.
“The ca mera—the thing that  made the pictures—was
looking out of th e side of the ship, so we could see the foot of
the s hip itself, se ttled in the dust , and the dust rising up over it
like a horse’ s hoof when it puts its foot down.
“It w as flat whe re the ship came down; covered with a soft,
powdery kind of dust, with little rocks scattered on it here and
there. Then the camera moved—or maybe another one started
sending pictures—and you could see that there were rocky
clif fs of f in the distance. It’ s barren—no plants, no water , no
air—but sort of beautiful, in an eerie kind of way .”
“It s ounds like S cotland,” he said. She laughed at the joke,
but thought she heard under the humor his longing for those
barren mountains.W anting to distract him, she waved upward at the stars,
beginning to burn brighter in the velvet sky .
“The sta rs are really suns, like o urs. It’ s only that they’re so
far away from us, they look tiny . They’re so far away that it
may tak e years and years for t heir light to reach us; in fact,
sometimes a star has died and we still see its light.”
“Claire told me that, long ago ,” he said softly . He sat a
moment, then got up with an air of decision.
“Come then,” he said. “Let’ s take the hive, and be of f
home.”
The night was w arm enough that we had left the hide window-
covering unpinn ed and rolled aside. Occasional moths and
June bug s blundered in to drown  themselves in the cauldron or
commit fiery suicide on the hearth, but the cool leaf-scented
air that washed over us was worth it.
On the first ni ght, Ian had gallantly given Brianna the
trundle bed and gone of f to sleep with Rollo on a pallet in the
herb shed, assuring her that he liked the privacy . Leaving, his
quilt over one a rm, he had clap ped Jamie solidly on the back
and squeezed his shoulder in a  surprisingly adult gesture of
congratulation that made me smile.
Jamie had smiled, too; in fac t, he had scarcely stopped
smiling in several days. He wa sn’ t smiling now , though his
face bore a tend er , inward look. There was a half-full moon
riding the sky , and enough light came through the window for
me to see him clearly as he lay on his back beside me.
I w as surprised that he wasn’ t a sleep yet. He had risen well
before d awn and spent the day with Brianna on the mountain,
returning long after dark with a plaid full of smoke-stunned
bees, who were likely to be m ore than irritated when they
woke in the morning and disco vered the trick perpetrated on
them. I made a mental note to k eep away from the end of the
garden where the row of bee gums sat; newly moved bees
were inclined to sting first and ask questions afterward.Jamie gave a ma ssive sigh, and I rolled toward him, curving
myself to fit against him. The night wasn’ t cold, but he wore a
shirt to bed, in deference to Brianna’ s modesty .
“Can’ t sleep?” I asked softly . “Does the moonlight bother
you?”
“No.” He was lo oking out at the  moon, though; it rode high
above th e ridge,  not yet full, but a luminous white that flooded
the sky .
“If it’ s not the m oon, it’ s something.” I rubbed his stomach
lightly , a nd let my fingers curv e around the wide arch of his
ribs.
He sighed again, and squeezed my hand.
“Och, it ’ s no more than a foolish regret, Sassenach.” He
turned h is head toward the trundle bed, where the dark spill of
Brianna’ s hair fell in a moon-po lished mass across the pillow .
“I am only sorry that we must lose her .”
“Mm.” I let my hand rest flat on his chest. I had known it
would come—both the realization and the parting itself—but I
hadn’ t wanted to speak of it, and break the temporary spell that
had bound the three of us so closely .
“Y ou ca n’ t really lose a child ,” I said softly , one finger
tracing the small, smooth hollow in the center of his chest.
“She mu st go back, Sassenach— ye know it as well as I do.”
He stirred impatiently but didn’ t move away . “Look at her .
She’ s like Louis’ s camel, no?”
Despite my own regrets, I smil ed at the thought. Louis of
France kept a fine menagerie at V ersailles, and on good days
the keepers would exercise certain of the animals, leading
them through the spreading gardens, to the edification of
startled passersby .
W e had been wa lking in the gardens one day , and turned a
corner to  find the Bactrian camel advancing toward us down
the path , splendid and stately i n its gold and silver harness,
towering in calm disdain above a crowd of gawking spectators—strikingly exotic, and utterly out of place among the
formalized white statues.
“Y es,” I  said, though with a re luctance that squeezed my
heart. “Y es, of course she’ll have to go back. She belongs
there.”
“I ken that well enough.” He put his own hand over mine,
but k ept his face  turned away , looking at Brianna. “I shouldna
grieve for it—but I do.”
“So do I.” I put my forehead against his shoulder , breathing
in th e clean male scent of him. “ It’ s true, though—what I said.
Y ou can’ t truly lose a child. Do you—do you remember
Faith?”
My voic e tremb led slightly as I asked it; we had not spoken
in years of our first daughter , stillborn in France.
His arm curled around me, pulling me against him.
“Of course I do ,” he said softly . “D’ye think I would ever
for get?”
“No.” T he tears  were flowing d own my face, but I was not
truly we eping; it was no more than the overflow of feeling.
“That’ s what I mean. I never told you—when we were in
Paris, to  see Jared—I went to th e Hopital des Anges; I saw her
grave there. I—I brought her a pink tulip.”
He was quiet for a moment.
“I to ok her viol ets,” he said, so softly I almost didn’ t hear
him.
I was quite still for a moment, tears for gotten.
“Y ou didn’ t tell me.”
“Neither did you.” His fingers traced the bumps of my
spine, brushing softly up and down the line of my back.
“I was afraid you’d feel…” My voice trailed of f. I had been
afraid he would feel guilty , worry that I blamed him—I once
had—for the loss. W e were ne wly reunited, then; I had no
wish to jeopardize the tender link between us.“So was I.”
“I’m sorry that you never saw her ,” I said at last, and felt
him sigh. He tu rned toward me and put his arms around me,
his lips brushing my forehead.
“It doesna matter , does it? A ye, it’ s true, what ye say ,
Sassenach. She was—and we will have her , always. And
Brianna. If—when she goes—she will still be with us.”
“Y es. It doesn’ t matter what happens; no matter where a
child go es—how far or how lo ng. Even if it’ s forever . Y ou
never lose them. Y ou can’ t.”
He didn ’ t answer , but his arms tightened round me, and he
sighed once more. The breeze stirred the air above us with the
sound of angels’ wings, and we  fell slowly asleep together , as
the moonlight bathed us in its ageless peace.4 3
W H I S K Y  I N  T H E  J A R
I  d idn’ t like Ron nie Sinclair . I n ever had  liked him. I didn’ t
like his half-han dsome face, his foxy smile, or the way his
eyes met mine: so direct, so op enly honest, that you knew  he
was hiding something even when he wasn’ t. I particularly
didn’ t like the way he was looking at my daughter .
I c leared  my throat loudly , mak ing him jump. He turned a
sharp-toothed smile on me, idly turning a truss ring in his
hands.
“Jamie says he’ll need a dozen more of the small whisky
casks by  the end of the month, and I’ll need a lar ge barrel of
hickory wood for the smoked  meat, as soon as you can
manage.”
He n odded and m ade a number o f cryptic marks on a slab of
pine tha t hung on the wall. Oddly for a Scot, Sinclair couldn’ t
write bu t had some sort of private shorthand that enabled him
to keep track of orders and accounts.
“Right, Missus Fraser . Anything else?”
I pau sed, trying to reckon up all  the possible necessities for
cooperage that might spring up before snowfall. There would
be fish and meat to salt down, but those did better in stoneware
jars; woo den casks left them tasting of turpentine. I had a good
seasoned barrel for apples and a nother for squash already; the
potatoes would be stored on shelves to keep from rotting.
“No,” I decided. “That will be all.”
“A ye, missus.” He hesitated, twirling the cask band faster .
“W ill Himself be coming down before the casks are ready?”
“No; he has the barley to get in, and the slaughtering to do,
as well as the distilling. Everything’ s late, because of the trial.”
I raised an eyebrow at him. “W hy , though? Do you have a
message for him?”Sited at the foot of the cove n earest the wagon road, the
cooper ’ s shop was the first building most visitors encountered,
and thus a rece ption point for most gossip that came from
outside Fraser ’ s Ridge.
Sinclair tilted his gingerly head, considering.
“Och, likely it’ s nothing. Only that I’ve heard of a stranger
in the district, asking questions about Jamie Fraser .”
From th e corner of my eye, I saw Brianna’ s head snap
round, distracted at once from her inspection of the
spokeshavers, m allets, saws, and axes on the wall. She turned,
skirt rustling in the wood shavings that littered the shop, ankle-
deep.
“Do you know the stranger ’ s name?” she asked anxiously .
“Or what he looks like?”
Sinclair shot her a look of surprise. He was oddly
proportioned, w ith slender shoulders but muscular arms, and
hands so huge that they might have belonged to a man twice
his height. He looked at her , and his broad thumb
unconsciously stroked the metal of the ring, slowly , over and
over again.
“Why , I couldna  speak to his appearance, mistress,” he said,
politely enough,  but with a hungry look in his eyes that made
me wan t to take the truss ring  away from him and wrap it
around his neck. “He gave his name as Hodgepile, though.”
Brianna’ s face lost its look of hope, though the muscle at the
edge of her mouth curved slightly at the name.
“I don’ t suppose that  could be Roger ,” she murmured to me.
“Likely not,” I a greed. “He wouldn’ t have any reason to use
a false name, anyway .” I turned back to Sinclair .
“Y ou won’ t have heard of a man called W akefield, will you?
Roger W akefield?”
Sinclair shook his head decisively .“No, missus. Himself has put w ord about that if such a one
should come, he’ s to be taken to the Ridge at once. If yon
W akefield sets foot within the county , you’ll hear of it as soon
as I do.”
Brianna sighe d, and I h eard her swallow her
disappointment. It was mid-O ctober , and while she said
nothing, she was clearly growi ng more anxious by the day .
She was n’ t the only one, either ; she had told us what Roger
was trying to do, and the thought of the variety of disasters
that might have befallen him i n the attempt was enough to
keep me wakeful at night.
“—about the whisky ,” Sinclair was saying, jerking my
attention back to him.
“The whisky? Hodgepile was asking about Jamie and
whisky?”
Sinclair nodded, and set down the truss ring.
“In Cross Creek. No one wou ld say a word to him, o’
course. But the o ne who told me  did say as the one who spoke
to the man thoug ht him a soldie r .” He grimaced briefly . “Hard
for a lobsterback to wash the flour from his hair .”
“He wasn’ t dressed as a soldier ,  surely?” Foot soldiers wore
their hair in a tight folded queue, wrapped round a core of
lamb’ s wool and powdered with rice flour—which, in this
climate, rapidly turned to paste as the flour mixed with sweat.
Still, I imagined Sinclair meant  the man’ s attitude rather than
his appearance.
“Och, no ; he did claim to be a fu r trader—but he walked wi’
a ram rod up his arse, and ye cou ld hear the leather creak when
he talked. So Geordie McClintock said.”
“Likely one of Murchison’ s men. I’ll tell Jamie—thank
you.”
I lef t the cooper ’ s shop with Brianna, wondering just how
much tr ouble this Hodgepile might prove to be. Likely not
much; the sheer distance from civilization and the
inaccessibility o f the Ridge was protection against mostintrusions; one of Jamie’ s purposes in choosing it. The
multiple inconv eniences of remoteness would be outweighed
by it s be nefits, w hen it came to war . No battle would be fought
on Fraser ’ s Ridge, I was sure of that.
And no matter how virulent Murchison’ s grudge might be,
or how good his spies, I couldn’ t see his superiors allowing
him to mount an armed expedition more than a hundred miles
into the mountains, for the so le purpose of extirpating an
illegal distillery whose total output was less than a hundred
gallons a year .
Lizzie and Ian were waiting for us outside, occupied in
gathering kindli ng from Sinclair ’ s rubbish heap. A cooper ’ s
work generated immense quantities of shavings, splinters, and
discarded chunk s of wood and bark, and it was worth the labor
of picking them up, to save splitting kindling by hand at home.
“Can you and Ia n load the barrels, honey?” I asked Brianna.
“I want a look at Lizzie in the sunlight.”
Brianna nodded, still looking abstracted, and went to help
Ian heav e the half-dozen small kegs outside the shop into the
wagon. They were small, but heavy .
It was the skill that went into these particular barrels that
had earned Ronnie Sinclair his land and shop, in spite of his
less than prepossessing personality; not every cooper knew the
trick of charring the inside of an oak barrel so as to lend a
beautiful amber color and deep smoky flavor to the whisky
aging gently inside.
“Come here, sweetie. Let me see your eyes.” Lizzie
obediently widened her eyes, and let me pull down the lower
lid to see the white sclera of the eyeball.
The girl was stil l shockingly thin, but the nasty yellow tinge
of jaund ice was fading from her skin, and her eyes were nearly
white again. I cupped my fingers gently under her jaw; lymph
glands only slightly swollen—that was better , too.
“Feeling all right?” I asked. She smiled shyly , and nodded.
It was the first time she had been outside the cabin since herarrival with Ian three weeks bef ore; she was still wobbly as a
new calf . Frequent infusions of Jesuit bark had helped, though;
she had had no fresh attacks of  fever in the last week, and I
had hopes of clearing up the liver involvement in short order .
“Mrs. F raser?” she said, and I jumped, startled to hear her
talk. She  was so shy that she could seldom bring herself to say
anything to me or to Jamie directly; she murmured her needs
to Brianna, who conveyed them to me.
“Y es, dear?”
“I—I couldna help hearing wh at yon cooper said—about
how Mr . Fraser ’ s asked word of Miss Brianna’ s man. I did
wonder—” Her words trailed of f in a spasm of shyness, and a
faint rose-pink blush showed in her transparent cheeks.
“Y es?”
“Could h e ask for my father , do  ye think?” The words came
out in a rush, and she blushed still harder .
“Oh, Lizzie! I’m sorry .” Brianna, finished with the barrels,
came and hugged her little ma id. “I hadn’ t for gotten, but I
hadn’ t thought, either . Just a minute, I’ll go and tell Mr .
Sinclair .” W ith a whif f of skirt s, she vanished into the cool
dimness of the cooper ’ s shop.
“Y our father?” I asked. “Have you lost him?”
The girl nodded, pressing her lips together to prevent their
quivering.
“He’ll h a’ gone as a bondsman, but I dinna ken where; only
it would be to the southern colonies.”
W ell, that limited the search to several hundred thousand
square m iles, I thought. Still, it could do no harm to ask
Ronnie Sinclair to put out word.  Newspapers and other printed
matter w ere scar ce in the South;  most real news still passed by
word of mouth, handed on in sh ops and taverns, or carried by
slaves and servants between far -flung plantations.
The tho ught of newspapers gave me a small nasty jolt of
remembrance. S till, seven years seemed comfortingly far away—and B rianna m ust be right; w hether the house was doomed
to burn on Janua ry 21 or not, surely it would be possible for us
not to be in it on that date?
Brianna appeared, rather red in the face, swung aboard the
wagon, and picked up the rein s, waiting impatiently for the
rest of us.
Ian, seeing her flushed face, frowned and glanced toward
the cooper ’ s shop.
“What is it, Coz ? Did yon wee mannie say aught amiss to
ye?” He flexed his hands, nearly as lar ge as Sinclair ’ s.
“No,” she said tersely . “Not a word. Are we ready to go?”
Ian picked Lizzie up and swun g her into the wagon bed,
then put  out a h and and helped me up on the seat by Brianna.
He glanced at th e reins in Brian na’ s hands; he had taught her
to drive the mules, and took professional pride in her skill.
“W atch the bugger on the gee side,” he advised her . “He’ll
no be pullin’ his  share o’ the load, unless ye touch him up now
and again wi’ a slap across the rump.”
He subsided into the wagon bed with Lizzie as we set of f up
the road . I could hear him telling her outlandish stories, and
her faint giggle in reply . The baby of his own family , Ian was
charmed by Lizzie and treated  her like a younger sister , by
turns nuisance and pet.
I gla nced over my shoulder at the receding cooper ’ s shop,
then at Brianna.
“What did he do?” I asked, quietly .
“Nothing. I interrupted him.” The flush across her wide
cheekbones grew deeper .
“What on earth was he doing?”
“Drawing pictur es on a piece of wood,” she said, and bit the
inside of her cheek. “Of naked women.”
I laughed, as much from shock as from amusement.“W ell, h e hasn’ t  got a wife, and not likely to get one soon;
women are very scarce in the colony generally , and even more
so up here. I suppose one can’ t blame him.”
I f elt an unexpe cted pang of sympathy for Ronnie Sinclair .
He’d be en alone  for a very long time, after all. His wife had
died in the terri ble days after Culloden, and he himself had
spent more than ten years in pris on before being transported to
the Colonies. If he had made c onnections here, they had not
endured; he was a solitary man, and suddenly I saw his avid
questing for gossip, his stealthy watching—even his use of
Brianna for artistic inspiration—in a dif ferent light. I knew
what it was like to be lonely .
Brianna’ s embar rassment had faded, and she was whistling
softly under her breath, hunched casually over the reins—a
Beatles’ tune, I t hought, though I never could keep pop groups
straight.
The idle thought floated insidiously through my mind; if
Roger d idn’ t come, she wouldn’ t be left alone for long, either
here or when she returned t o the future. But that was
ridiculous. He would  come. And if not…
A thought I had been trying to keep at bay sneaked past my
defenses and appeared in my mi nd, full-blown. What if he had
chosen not to come?  I knew they had had some sort of
ar gument, though Brianna had been tight-lipped about it. Had
he been so infuriated that he would go back without her?
I rather thought the possibility had occurred to her , too; she
had stop ped speaking much of Roger , but I saw the anxious
light spring up in her eyes whenever Clarence announced a
visitor , a nd saw it die each time the visitor proved to be one of
Jamie’ s tenants, or some of Ian’ s T uscaroran friends.
“Hurry up, you blighter ,” I muttered under my breath.
Brianna caught it, and smartly s napped the reins over the left
mule’ s rump.
“Gee up !” she shouted, and the wagon rattled faster , jolting
over the narrow track toward home.“It’ s a far cry from the still-c ellar at Leoch,” Jamie said,
ruefully poking at the makeshift pot still at the edge of the
small clearing. “It does make whisky , though—of a sort.”
In s pite of his dif fidence, Brianna could see that he was
proud of his infant distillery . It was nearly two miles from the
cabin, located—as he explained—close to Fer gus’ s place, so
that Mar sali cou ld come up seve ral times a day to keep an eye
on the operation. In return for th is service, she and Fer gus had
a slightly lar ger share in the resulting whisky than did the
other farmers on the Ridge, who supplied the raw barley and
helped in the distribution of the liquor .
“No, da rlin’, ye dinna want to  be eating that nasty wee
thing,” M arsali said firmly . She grasped her son’ s wrist and
began pr ying op en his fingers, o ne by one, in an ef fort to free
the lar ge and madly wriggling insect that—in open
contradiction of his mother ’ s adjuration—he very obviously
did  want to be eating.
“Feh!” Marsali dropped the cockroach on the ground and
stamped on it.
Germaine, a stoic, stubby child,  didn’ t cry at the loss of his
treat, but glowered balefully under his blond fringe. The
cockroach, nothing daunted by rough treatment, rose out of the
leaf mold and walked of f, staggering only slightly .
“Oh, I shouldna think it woul d do him harm,” Ian said,
amused. “I’ve eaten them, now a nd again, wi’ the Indians. The
locusts are better , though—especially the smoked ones.”
Marsali and Brianna both made gagging noises, causing Ian
to grin even wi der . He picked up another bag of barley and
poured a thick layer into a flat r ush basket. T wo more roaches,
suddenly exposed to the light of  day , skittered madly over the
side of the ba sket, fell to the ground and dashed away ,
disappearing under the edge of the crudely built malting floor .
“No, I said!” Ma rsali kept a tigh t hold on Germaine’ s collar ,
preventing his determined attempts to follow them. “Stay , ye
wee fien d, d’ye want to be smoked, too?” Small wisps oftransparent smoke rose up through the cracks of the wooden
platform, permeating the small clearing with the breakfast-like
scent of roasting grain. Brianna felt her stomach gur gle; it was
nearly suppertime.
“Maybe you should leave them in,” she suggested, joking.
“Smoked roaches might add a nice flavor to the whisky .”
“I doubt  they’d harm it any ,” her father agreed, coming up
beside h er . He wiped his face with a handkerchief, looked at it,
and mad e a slight face at the sooty smudges on it before
tucking it back up his sleeve. “All right, Ian?”
“A ye, it’ ll do. It’ s only the one bag that’ s spoilt all through,
Uncle Ja mie.” Ian rose with his tray of raw barley , and kicked
negligently at a split bag, where the soft green of mold and
black tin ge of rot showed the ill ef fects of seeping damp. T wo
more opened bags, with the spoiled top layer scooped of f, sat
by the edge of the malting floor .
“Let’ s fi nish, th en,” Jamie said. “I’m starved.” He and Ian
each seized a b urlap bag and scattered the fresh barley in a
thick lay er over the clear space  on the platform, using a flat
wooden spade to flatten and turn the grain.
“How lo ng does it all take?” Brianna poked her nose over
the edge of the mash tub, where Marsali was stirring the
fermenting grain of the last s moking. The mash had only
begun to work; there was no more than a faint whif f of alcohol
in the air .
“Oh, it will dep end on the weather , a bit.” Marsali cast an
experienced eye skyward. It was late afternoon, and the sky
had begu n to darken into a clear  deep blue, with no more than
streaks of white cloud floating o ver the horizon. “Clear as it is,
I should  say—Germaine!” Germaine’ s bottom was the only
part of him visi ble, the top hal f having disappeared under a
log.
“I’ll get him.” Brianna took three quick strides across the
clearing, and scooped him up. G ermaine made a deep sound ofprotest at this unwarranted interference, and began to kick,
hammering his sturdy heels against her legs.
“Ow!” B rianna set him on the ground, rubbing her thigh
with one hand.
Marsali made a sound of exasperation and dropped her
ladle. “ Now  what have ye got, ye wicked thing?” Germaine,
having learned from experience, popped his latest acquisition
into his mouth and swallowed convulsively . He immediately
turned purple and began to choke.
W ith a cry of al arm, Marsali dropped to her knees and tried
to pry his mouth open. Germaine gagged, wheezed, and
staggered backward, shaking his head. His blue eyes bulged,
and a thin line of drool snaked down his chin.
“Here!” Brianna grabbed the little boy by the arm, pulled
his back against her , and wit h both hands fisted into his
stomach, jerked them sharply back.
Germaine made a loud whooping noise, and something
small and round shot out of his mouth. He gur gled, gasped for
air , got a good lungful and started to howl, his face going from
dusky purple to a healthy red within seconds.
“Is he all right?” Jamie peered anxiously at the little boy ,
who was crying in his mother ’ s  arms, then, satisfied, glanced
at Brianna. “That was verra quick, lass. A good job.”
“Thanks. I—thanks. I’m glad it worked.”
Brianna felt a little shaky . Seconds. It hadn’ t taken more
than a few seco nds. Life to death and back again, in nothing
flat. Jamie touched her arm, gi ving her a brief squeeze, and
she felt a little better .
“Best ta ke the laddie down to the house,” he told Marsali.
“Give him his supper and put him to bed. W e’ll finish here.”
Marsali nodded, looking shak en herself. She brushed a
strand o f pale hair out of her eyes, and gave Brianna a poor
attempt at a smile.
“I thank ye, good-sister .”Brianna felt a su rprising small glow of pleasure at the title.
She gave Marsali back the smile.
“I’m glad he’ s all right.”
Marsali picked up her bag from the ground, and with a nod
to Ja mie, turned and made her way carefully down the steep
path, toddler in her arms, Germaine’ s chubby fists twined
tightly in her hair .
“That was pretty work, Coz.” Ian had finished the
spreading, and jumped down from the platform to congratulate
her . “Where did ye learn a thing like that?”
“From my mother .”
Ian nodd ed, loo king impressed. Jamie bent over , searching
the ground nearby .
“What is it the laddie swallowed, I wonder?”
“This.” Brianna spotted the object, half buried under fallen
leaves, a nd plucked it out. “It looks like a button.” The object
was a lopsided circle, crudely carved from wood, but
indisputably a button, with a lo ng shank and holes bored for
thread.
“Let me see.” J amie held out a  hand, and she dropped the
button into it.
“Y ou’ll no be m issing any buttons, will ye, Ian?” he asked,
frowning at the small object in his palm.
Ian peered over Jamie’ s shoulder , and shook his head.
“Maybe Fer gus?” he suggested.
“Maybe, but I dinna think so. Our Fer gus is too much the
dandy to be wearin’ something l ike this. All the buttons on his
coat are made o f polished horn.” He shook his head slowly ,
still frowning, then shrugged. P icking up his sporran, he put
the button into it before fastening it about his waist.
“Ah, we ll. I’ll ask about. W ill ye finish here, Ian? There’ s
no much left to do.” He smiled at Brianna and cocked his headtoward t he path. “Come then, la ss; we’ll ask at Lindseys’, on
our way home.”
In the event, Kenny Lindsey was not at home.
“Duncan Innes came to fetch hi m, not an hour since,” Mrs.
Lindsey said, shading her eyes against the late sun as she stood
in the doorway of her house. “I make nay doubt they’ll be to
your house the noo. W ill ye and your lassie no step in, Mac
Dubh,  and have a taste of something?”
“Ah, no, I thank ye, Mrs. Kenny . My wife will be having the
supper ready for us. But perhaps ye could be tellin’ me
whether this wee bawbee is from Kenny’ s coat?”
Mrs. Lindsey peered at the button in his hand, then shook
her head.
“No, indeed. Have I not just f inished sewing on a whole
fresh set of buttons for him, that’ s he’ s carved from the bone of
a deer? The bon niest things ye ever saw , too,” she declared,
with pride in her  husband’ s craftsmanship. “Each one has got a
wee face on it, grinnin’ like an imp, and each one dif ferent!”
Her eye ran speculatively over Brianna.
“There’ s Kenny ’ s brother , now ,” she said. “W ith a fine wee
place near Cross Creek—twenty  acres in tobacco, and a good
creek th rough it. He’ll be at the Gathering at Mount Helicon;
perhaps you’ll be going, Mac Dubh? ”
Jamie shook his head, smiling a t the bald hint. There were
few available women in the co lony , and even though Jamie
had give n it out that Brianna was promised elsewhere, this had
not by any means put a stop to the matchmaking attempts.
“I fear not this year , Mrs. Kenny . Perhaps the next, but I
canna spare the time just now .”
They too k their leave politely , and turned toward home, the
sinking sun at t heir backs casting long shadows on the path
ahead of them.
“Do you think the button’ s i mportant?” Brianna asked
curiously .Jamie shrugged slightly . A light breeze lifted the hair on the
crown o f his head, and tugged a t the leather thong that held it
back.
“I canna say . It could be nothing—but it could be
something, too. Y our mother told me what Ronnie Sinclair
said, about the man in Cross Creek, asking about the whisky .”
“Hodgepile?” Brianna couldn’ t help smiling at the name.
Jamie returned the smile briefly , then became serious again.
“A ye. If  the button belongs to someone on the Ridge—they
ken well enough where the still is, and they might stop to look
and no harm done. But if it was to be a stranger…” He glanced
at her and shrugged again.
“It’ s non e so easy for a man to pass unnoticed here—unless
he should be hiding a-purpose. A man come for any innocent
reason would stop at a house for a bit of food and drink, and
I’d hear of it the same day . But there’ s been nothing of the
sort. No r would  it be an Indian; they dinna use such things in
their clothing.”
A gu st o f wind whirred across the path in a swirl of brown
and yellow leaves, and they turned uphill, toward the cabin.
They wa lked in near silence, af fected by the growing quiet of
the woo ds; the birds were still singing twilight songs, but the
shadows were lengthening under the trees. The northern slope
of th e mountain across the vall ey had already gone dark and
silent, as the sun edged behind it.
The cabin’ s clearing was still filled with sunlight, though,
filtered t hrough a yellow blaze o f chestnut trees. Claire was in
the palis aded garden, a basin on  one hip, snapping beans from
poled vines. Her slender figure was silhouetted dark against
the sun, her hair a great aureole of curly gold.
“Innisfree,” Bria nna said involuntarily , stopping dead at the
sight.
“Innisfree?” Jamie glanced at her , bewildered.
She hesitated, but there was no way out of explaining.“It’ s a poem, or part of one. Daddy always used to say it,
when he ’d come home and find  Mama puttering in her garden
—he sai d she’d live out there if she could. He used to joke that
she—that she’d leave us somed ay , and go find a place where
she could live by herself, with nothing but her plants.”
“Ah.” Ja mie’ s face was calm, it s broad planes ruddy in the
dying light. “How does the poem go, then?”
She was conscious of a small t ightness round her heart as
she said it.
“I will arise and go now , and go to Innisfr ee,
 And a small cabin build ther e, of clay and wattles
made:
 Nine bean-r ows will I have ther e, a hive for the
honey-bee.
 And live alone in the bee-loud glade.”
The thick red br ows drew together slightly , sparking in the
sun.
“A poem, is it? And where is Innisfree?”
“Ireland, maybe. He was Irish,” Brianna said in explanation.
“The poet.” The row of bee gums stood squat on their stones at
the edge of the wood.
“Oh.”
T iny motes of gold and black  drifted past them through
honeyed air—bees homing from the fields. Her father made no
move to  go forward, but stood s ilent by her side, watching her
mother pick beans, black and gold among the leaves.
Not alone, after all, she thought. But the small tightness
stayed in her chest, not quite an ache.
Kenny L indsey took a sip of whisky , closed his eyes, and
rolled the liquor round his ton gue like a professional wine
taster . He paused, frowning in concentration, then swallowed
with a convulsive gulp.
“Hoo!” He drew breath, shuddering all over .“Christ,” he said hoarsely . “That’ll strip your tripes!”
Jamie grinned at the compliment, and poured another small
measure, shoving it toward Duncan.
“A ye, it’ s better than the last,” he agreed, with a cautious
snif f bef ore essaying his own dr ink. “This one doesna take the
hide of f your tongue—quite.”
Lindsay wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, nodding
in agreement.
“W eel, it’ll find a good home. W oolam wants a cask—that’ll
last him a year , the way yon Quakers dole it out.”
“Y e’ve agreed a price?”
Lindsay nodded, snif fing appr eciatively at the platter of
bannocks and savories that Lizzie set in front of him.
“A hund redweight of barley for the cask; another , if ye’ll go
halves wi’ him in the whisky from it.”
“That’ s f air .” Jamie took a bannock and chewed absently for
a mo ment. Then he raised one b row at Duncan, seated across
the table.
“W ill ye ask MacLeod on Naylor ’ s Creek will he make us
the same bar gain? Y ou’ll pass that way going home, aye?”
Duncan nodded, chewing, and Jamie lifted his cup to me in
a silent toast of celebration—W oolam’ s of fer made a total of
eight hundred pounds of barley , scraped together by barter and
promise. More than the surplus output of every field on the
Ridge; the raw material for next year ’ s whisky .
“A cask each to  the houses on the Ridge, two to Fer gus—”
Jamie pulled absently at his earlobe, calculating. “T wo,
maybe, to Nacognaweto, one kept back to age—aye, we can
spare maybe a dozen casks for the Gathering, Duncan.”
Duncan’ s coming was opportune. While Jamie had managed
to b arter the first year ’ s crop of raw whisky to the Moravians
in Salem  for the tools, cloth, and other things we so ur gentlyneeded, there was no doubt tha t the wealthy Scottish planters
of the Cape Fear would make a better market.
W e couldn’ t possibly spare time away from the homestead
for long  enough to make the week-long journey to Mount
Helicon, but if Duncan could take the whisky down and sell
it…I wa s already making lists in my head. Everyone brought
things to sell, at a Gatherin g. W ool, cloth, tools, food,
animals…I ur gently needed a small copper kettle, and six
lengths of fresh muslin for shifts, and…
“Do you think you should give alcohol to the Indians?”
Brianna’ s question pulled me from my greedy reverie.
“Why not?” Lindsey asked, a little disapproving of her
intrusion. “Afte r all, we’re no going to give  it to them, lass.
They’ve little silver , but they pay in hides—and they pay
well.”
Brianna glanced at me for support, then at Jamie.
“But Indians don’ t—I mean I’ve heard that they can’ t
handle alcohol.”
All three men looked at her uncomprehendingly , and
Duncan looked at his cup, turning it round in his hand.
“Handle it?”
The corner of her mouth quirked inward.
“They get drunk easily , I mean.”
Lindsey peered into his cup, th en looked at her , rubbing a
hand over the balding crown of his head.
“Y e’ve a point, lass?” he said, more or less politely .
Brianna’ s full mouth compressed itself, then relaxed.
“I mean, ” she said, “it se ems wrong to encourage people to
drink, w ho can’ t  stop drinking if  they start.” She looked at me,
a little helplessly . I shook my head.
” ‘Alcoholic’ isn’ t a noun yet,” I said. “It’ s not a disease
now—just weak character .”Jamie glanced up at her quizzically .
“W ell, I’ll tell ye , lass,” he said, “I’ve seen many a drunkard
in m y day , but I’ve yet to see a bottle leap of f a table and pour
itself down anyone’ s throat.”
There were general grunts of agreement with this, and
another small round to accompany the change of subject.
“Hodgepile? No, I’ve not seen t he man, though I do believe
I’ve hea rd the name.” Duncan swilled the rest of his drink and
set d own his cup, wheezing gen tly . “Y ou’ll want me to ask at
the Gathering?”
Jamie no dded, and took another bannock. “A ye, if ye will,
Duncan.”
Lizzie w as bent  over the fire, stirring the stew for supper . I
saw her shoulde rs tighten, but sh e was too shy to speak before
so many men. Brianna suf fered no such inhibitions.
“I h ave someone to ask after , t oo, Mr . Innes.” She leaned
over the table toward him, e yes fixed on him in earnest
entreaty . “W ill you ask for a man named Roger W akefield?
Please?”
“Och, indeed. Indeed I will.” Duncan went pink at the
proximity of Brianna’ s bosom, and in confusion drank down
the rest of Kenny’ s whisky . “Is there aught else I can do?”
“Y es,” I  said, putting down a  fresh cup in front of the
disgruntled Lindsey . “While you’re asking after Hodgepile and
Bree’ s young man, would you also ask for a man named
Joseph W emyss? He’ll be a bondsman.” From the corner of
my eye, I saw Lizzie’ s thin shoulders slump in relief.
Duncan nodded, his compos ure restored as Brianna
disappeared into the pantry to fetch butter . Kenny Lindsey
looked after her , interested.
“Bree? Is that the name ye call your daughter?” he asked.
“Y es,” I said. “Why?”A smile showed briefly on Lindsey’ s face. Then he glanced
at Jamie, coughed, and buried the smile in his cup.
“It’ s a Scots word, Sassenach,” Jamie said, a rather wry
smile appearing on his own face. “A br ee  i s a great
disturbance.”4 4
T H R E E - C O R N E R E D
C O N V E R S A T I O N
October 1769
T he s hock of im pact juddered through his arms. W ith a
rhythm born of long practice, Jamie jerked the axhead free,
swung it back and brought it down in a tchunk!  of splintered
bark and  yellow  wood chips. He  shifted his foot on the log and
struck again, the ax blow judged to a nicety , sharp metal
embedded in the wood a scant two inches from his toes.
He coul d have told Ian of f to do the chopping, and gone
himself to fetch the flour from th e tiny mill at W oolam’ s Point,
but the lad deserved the treat of a visit with the three
unmarried W oolam daughters who worked with their father in
the mill. They w ere Quaker girls, dressed drab as sparrows,
but lively of wit and fair of fac e, and they made a pet of Ian,
vying with each other to of fer him small beer and meat pies
when he came.
A good deal be tter the lad sho uld spend his time flirting
with virtuous Quakers than with the bold-eyed Indian lassies
over the ridge, he thought, wit h a little grimness. He hadn’ t
for gotten what Myers had said about Indian women taking
men to their beds as they liked.
He had sent the wee bondmaid with Ian as well, thinking the
brisk fal l air might bring a bit of color to the lassie’ s face. The
wean w as white-skinned as Claire, but with the sickly blue-
white ca st of skimmed milk, no t Claire’ s pale glow , rich and
grainless as the silk-white heartwood of a poplar tree.
The log was nearly split; one more blow , and a twist of the
ax, and two good chunks lay ready for the hearth, smelling
clean and sharp with resin. He  stacked them neatly on the
growing woodpile next to the p antry , and rolled another half
log into place beneath his foot.The truth of it was that he liked chopping wood. Quite
dif ferent from the damp, backbreaking, foot-freezing job of
cutting peats, but with that same feeling of soul-deep
satisfaction at seeing a good sto ck of fuel laid by , which only
those who have spent winters shivering in thin clothes can
know . T he woodpile reached nearly to the eaves of the house
by n ow , dry split chunks of pine and oak, hickory and maple,
the s ight of them  warming his h eart as much as the wood itself
would warm his flesh.
Speak of warmth; it was a warm day for late October , and
his shirt was clinging to his shoulders already . He wiped a
sleeve across his face and examined the damp patch critically .
If h e got wring ing, Brianna would insist on washing it
again, p rotest as he might that sweat was clean enough.
“Phew ,” she would say , with a disapproving nostril-flare,
wrinkling her long nose up like a possum. He had laughed out
loud wh en he first saw her do  it; as much from surprise as
from amusement.
His mother had died long ago, in his childhood, and while
the odd memory of her came now and then in dreams, he had
mostly replaced her presence with static pictures, frozen
images i n his mind. But she had  said “Phew!” to him when he
came in mucky , and wrinkled up her long nose in just that way
—it had come back with a flash when he saw Brianna do it.
What a mystery blood was—how did a tiny gesture, a tone
of v oice, endure through generations like the harder verities of
flesh? H e had seen it again and again, watching his nieces and
nephews grow , and accepted without thought the echoes of
parent and grandparent that appeared for brief moments, the
shadow of a face looking back through the years—that
vanished again into the face that was now .
Y et now  that he saw it in Brianna…he could watch her for
hours, he thought, and was reminded of his sister , bending
close over each of her newborn  bairns in fascination. Perhaps
that was why parents watched their weans in suchenchantment, he  thought; finding out all the tiny links between
them, that bound the chains of life, one generation to the next.
He s hrugged, and pulled the shi rt of f. It was his own place,
after all; there w as no one to see the marks on his back, and no
one whose business it would be to care if they did. The air was
chill and  sudden on his damp skin, but a few swings of the ax
brought the warm blood pulsing back again.
He loved all Jenny’ s children deeply—especially Ian, the
wee go wk wh ose mixture of foolishness and pigheaded
courage reminded him so much of himself at that age. They
were his blood, after all. But Brianna…
Brianna was his blood, and his flesh as well. An unspoken
promise kept to his own parents; his gift to Claire, and hers to
him.
Not for the first time, he foun d himself wondering about
Frank Randall. And what had Randall thought, holding the
child of another man—and a man he had no cause to love?
Perhaps Randall had been the b etter man, come to that—to
harbor a child for her mother ’ s sake, and not his own; to
search h er face with joy only in  its beauty , and not because he
saw himself reflected there. He felt vaguely ashamed, and
struck down with greater force to exorcise the feeling.
His mind was concerned entirely with its thoughts, and not
at all with his ac tions. While he used it, though, the ax was as
much a part of his body as the arms that swung it. Just as a
twinge in wrist or elbow would  have warned him instantly of
damage, some faint vibration, some subtle shift in weight
arrested him in midswing, so that the loosened axhead flew
harmlessly across the clearing, rather than slamming into his
vulnerable foot.
“Deo gratias,”  he muttered, with rather less thankfulness
than the words indicated. He crossed himself perfunctorily and
went to pick up the slab of metal. Damn the dry weather; it
hadn’ t r ained in nearly a month, and the shrunken haft of hisax was less worrying than the d rooping heads of the plants in
Claire’ s garden near the house.
He cast a glance  at the half-dug well, shrugging in irritation.
Another thing that must be don e, which there wasn’ t time to
do. I t wo uld have to wait a bit; they could haul water from the
creek or melt snow , but without wood to burn they would
starve or freeze, or both.
The door opened and Claire cam e out, cloak on against the
chill of autumn shadows, her basket over her arm. Brianna was
behind her , and at sight of them he for got his annoyance.
“What h ave you done?” Claire s aid at once, seeing him with
the axhead in o ne hand. Her eyes flicked over him quickly ,
looking for blood.
“Nay , I’m whole,” he assured her . “It’ s only I’ve got to
mend th e handle. Y ou’ll be foraging?” He nodded at Claire’ s
basket.
“I thought we’d try up the stream, for wood ears.”
“Ah? Dinna go too far , aye? Th ere are Indians hunting the
far mountain. I smelt them on the ridge this morning.”
“Y ou smelled them?” Brianna asked.
One red  brow went up in inquiry . He saw Claire glance
from Br ianna to  him and smile slightly , to herself; it was one
of his own gestures, then. He lifted one brow , looking at
Claire, and saw her smile grow wider .
“It’ s autumn, and they’re dryin’ venison,” he explained to
Brianna. “Y e can smell the smoking fires a great ways away , if
the wind sets right.”
“W e wo n’ t go far ,” Claire assure d him. “Just above the trout
pool.”
“A ye, well. I daresay it’ s saf e enough.” He felt some
reluctance at letting the women go, but he could scarcely keep
them mewed up in the house only because there were savages
nearby—the Indians were no doubt peacefully employed as he
was himself, in making winter preparations.If he  knew for sure it was Nacognaweto’ s folk, he wouldn’ t
worry , b ut as it was, the hunting parties often roamed far afield
and it could as easily be Cherokee, or the odd small tribe that
called th emselves the Dog People. There was only one village
of them  left, and they were deeply suspicious of white
strangers—not without reason.
Brianna’ s eyes rested on his bar e chest for a moment, at the
tiny knot of puckered scar tissu e, but she showed no sign of
disgust or curiosity—nor did she when she laid her hand
briefly on his shoulder , kissing his cheek in goodbye, though
he knew she must feel the healed welts beneath her fingers.
Claire would have told her , he supposed—all about Jack
Randall, and the days before th e Rising. Or perhaps not quite
all. A small shiv er that had noth ing to do with cold ran up the
crease of his spine, and he stepped back, away from her touch,
though he still smiled at her .
“There’ s bread in the hutch, and a little stew left in the kettle
for you and Ian  and Lizzie.” C laire reached up and flicked a
stray wo od chip from his hair . “Don’ t eat the pudding in the
pantry; that’ s for supper .”
He c aught her fi ngers in his and kissed her knuckles lightly .
She looked surprised, and then a faint warm glow came up
under he r skin. She came up a-tiptoe and kissed his mouth,
then hurried after Brianna, already at the edge of the clearing.
“Be careful!” he called after them. They waved, and
disappeared into  the woods, leaving him with their kisses soft
on his face.
“Deo gratias,”  he murmured again, watching th em, and this
time spoke with heartfelt grati tude. He waited until the last
flicker of Brianna’ s cloak had va nished, before returning to his
work.
He s at on the chopping block, a handful of square-headed nails
on th e ground beside him, carefu lly driving them one at a time
into the  end of the ax handle with a small mallet. The drywood split and spread, but held by the iron enclosure of the
axhead, could not splinter .
He twisted the head, then find ing it firm, stood up and
brought the ax down in a mighty blow on the chopping block,
by way of test. It held.
He was chilled now , from sitting, and pulled his shirt back
on. He was hungry , too, but he would wait a bit for the young
ones. No t but what they had likely stuf fed themselves already ,
he thought cynically . He could  almost smell the meat pies
Sarah W oolam made, the rich scent twining in his memory
through the actual autumn smells of dead leaves and damp
earth.
The thou ght of meat pies lingered in his mind as he went on
with his  work, along with the thought of winter . The Indians
said it would be hard, this winter , not like the last. How would
it be, hunting in deep snow? It snowed in Scotland, of course,
but often enough it lay light on  the ground, and the trodden
paths o f the red deer showe d black on the steep, bare
mountainsides.
Last winter had been like that. But this wilderness was
given to extremes. He had hear d stories of snowfalls that lay
six feet deep, v alleys where a man might sink to his oxters,
and ice that froz e so thick on the creeks that a bear could walk
across. He smiled a little grimly , thinking of bears. W ell, and
that would be eating for the whole winter if he could kill
another , and the skin would not come amiss, either .
His thou ghts drifted slowly into the rhythm of his work, one
part of his mind  dimly occupied with the words to “Daddy’ s
Gone A-Hunting,” while the other was taken up with a
intriguingly vivid picture of Claire’ s white skin, pale and
intoxicant as Rhenish wine ag ainst the glossy black of a
bearskin.
“Daddy’ s gone to fetch a skin / T o wrap his baby bunting
in,” he murmured tunelessly under his breath.He w ondered just how much Claire had  told Brianna. It was
odd, though pleasant, their three-cornered way of talking; he
and the lassie were a bit shy ye t with each other—inclined to
say pers onal things to Claire instead, confident that she would
pass on  their essence; their interpreter in this new and
awkward language of the heart.
Thankful though he was for the miracle of his daughter , he
wanted to make love to his wife in his bed again. It was
getting o verchilly to be having at it in the herb shed or the
forest—though he would admit that floundering naked in the
huge drifts of ye llow chestnut leaves had a certain charm, even
if it lacked dignity .
“A ye, well,” he muttered, smiling slightly to himself. “And
when did a man ever worry for his dignity , doin’ that? ”
He glan ced thoughtfully at the pile of long, straight pine
logs that lay at the side of the clearing, then at the sun. If Ian
was quick enough returning, th ey might shape and notch a
dozen or so before sunset.
Setting down the ax for a moment, he crossed to the house
and began to pace out the dimensions of the new room he
planned, to make do while the big house was a-building. She
was a grown wo man, Brianna—she should have a wee place
of h er own, to be private in, s he and the maid. And if that
restored his own privacy with C laire, well, so much the better ,
aye?
He heard  the small crackling noises among the dried leaves
in th e yard, bu t didn’ t turn round. There was a tiny cough
behind him, like a squirrel sneezing.
“Mrs. Li zzie,” h e said, eyes still  on the ground. “And did ye
enjoy your ride? I trust ye found all the W oolams well.” Where
was Ian and the  wagon? he wo ndered. He hadn’ t heard it on
the road below .
She didn’ t speak, but made an inarticulate noise that made
him swing round in surprise to look at her .She was pale and pinch-faced and looked like a scared
white mouse. This was not unus ual; he knew he frightened her
with his  size and deep voice, a nd so he spoke gently to her ,
slowly , as he would have done to a mistreated dog.
“Have y e had an accident, lass? Has something come amiss
wi’ the wagon or the horses?”
She sho ok her head, still wordless. Her eyes were nearly
round, g ray as the hem of her washed-out gown, and the tip of
her nose had gone bright pink.
“Is I an all right?” He didn’ t want to upset her further , but
she was beginning to alarm him. Something  had happened, that
was sure.
“I’m fine, Uncle. So are the horses.” Quiet as an Indian, Ian
appeared round the corner of th e cabin. He moved to Lizzie’ s
side, of fering her the support of  his presence, and she took his
arm as though by reflex.
He glan ced from one to the other; Ian was outwardly calm,
but his inner agitation was plain to see.
“What’ s happened?” he asked, more sharply than he’d
intended. The lassie flinched.
“Y e’d be tter tell him,” Ian said.  “There might not be much
time.” He touched her shoulder in encouragement, and she
seemed to take s trength from his hand; she stood up straighter
and bobbed her head.
“I—there was—I saw a man. At the mill, sir .”
She tried  to speak further , but he r nerve had dried up; the tip
of h er tongue pr otruded between her teeth with ef fort, but no
words came out.
“She kent him, Uncle,” Ian sai d. He looked disturbed, but
not afraid; excited, rather , in an  unfamiliar way . “She’d seen
him before—with Brianna.”
“A ye?” He tried to speak encou ragingly , but the hair on the
back of his neck was rising with premonition.“At W ilmington,” Lizzie got out. “MacKenzie was his
name; I heard a sailor call him so.”
Jamie glanced quickly at Ian, who shook his head.
“He didna give his place, but I  dinna ken any from Leoch
like him . I saw him and heard him speak; he’ s maybe a
Highlander , but schooled in the south, I’d say—an educated
man.”
“And did this M r . MacKenzie seem to know my daughter?”
he asked. Lizzie nodded, frowning in concentration.
“Oh, aye, sir! A nd she kent him, too—she was afraid of
him.”
“Afraid? Why?” He spoke sharply , and she blanched, but
she was  well started now , and the words came out, tripping
and stumbling, but still coming.
“I dinna  ken, sir . But she turned white when she saw him,
sir , and let out a  wee skelloch. Then she went red and white
and red again—oh, she was fair upset, anyone could see it!”
“What did he do?”
“Why—why—nothing, then. He came close to her , and held
her by the arms, and said to her  that she must come awa’ with
him. Everyone in the taproom was looking. She pulled herself
away , w hite as my shift, but she  said to me as it was all right, I
was to wait, an d she would co me back. And—and then she
went out with him.”
Lizzie d rew in a quick breath an d wiped the end of her nose,
which had begun to drip.
“And ye let her go?”
The little bondmaid shrank back, cowering.
“Ooh, I should have gone after her , I ken weel I should,
sir!” she cried, face twisted with  misery . “But I was afraid, sir ,
and may God for give me!”
W ith an ef fort, J amie smoothed the frown from his face and
spoke as patiently as he might.“A ye, well. And what happened, then?”
“Oh, I went upstairs as she told me, and I lay in the bed, sir ,
prayin’ for all I was worth!”
“W ell, that was verra helpful, I’m sure!”
“Uncle—” Ian’ s voice was soft but not at all tentative, and
his brow n eyes were steady on  Jamie’ s. “She’ s no but a wee
lassie, Uncle; she did her best.”
Jamie rubbed his hand hard over his scalp.
“A ye,” he said. “A ye, I’m sorry , lass; I didna mean to bite
your head of f. But will ye no get on wi’ it?”
A hot pink spo t had begun to burn on each of Lizzie’ s
cheeks.
“She—she didna come back till nearly dawn. And—and—”
Jamie ha d very little patience le ft, and no doubt it showed
on his face.
“I could  smell him on her ,” she whispered, voice dropping
almost to inaudibility . “His…seed.”
The sur ge of rag e took him unaware, like a white-hot bolt of
lightning throug h chest and belly . He felt half choked with it,
but clamped it down tight, hoarding it like coals in a hearth.
“He bedded her , then; you’re sure of that?”
Thoroughly mor tified at this bl untness, the little bondmaid
could do no more than nod.
Lizzie was twisting her hands  in the stuf f of her gown,
leaving her skirt all bunched an d crumpled. Her paleness was
replaced with a hot flush; she  looked like one of Claire’ s
tomatoes. She couldn’ t look at h im, but hung her head, staring
at the ground.
“Oh, sir . She’ s wi’ child, can ye  not see? It must be him—
she was vir gin when he took h er . He’ s come after her—and
she’ s afraid of him.”Quite suddenly , he could  see it, and felt the hairs rise all up
his arms and shoulders. The autumn breeze struck cold
through shirt and skin, and the r age turned to sickness. All the
small things he had half seen a nd half thought, not allowing
them to rise to t he surface of hi s mind, came together at once
in a logical pattern.
The look  of her , and the way she acted; one moment lively
and anot her lost in troubled thought. And the glow in her face
that was not all from the sun. He knew the look of a woman
breeding well enough; if he had  known her before, he would
have seen the change; but as it was…
Claire. Claire knew . The thought came to him, cold in its
certainty . She knew her daughte r , and she was a physician. She
must know—and hadn’ t told him.
“Are ye sure of this?” The coldn ess froze his rage. He could
feel it stuck in  his chest—a d angerous, jagged object that
seemed to point in every direction.
Lizzie nodded, wordless, and blu shed deeper , if such a thing
were possible.
“I am her maid, sir ,” she whispered, eyes on the ground.
“She me ans Brianna hasna had her courses in two months,”
Ian pro vided m atter -of-factly . The youngest of a family
containing several older sisters, he was not constrained by
Lizzie’ s delicacy . “She’ s sure.”
“I—I wouldna have said anything at all, sir ,” the girl went
on wretchedly . “Only , when I saw the man…”
“D’ye th ink he’ s come to claim her , Uncle?” Ian interrupted.
“W e mu st stop him, aye?” The look of angry excitement was
clear now , flushing the lad’ s lean cheeks with feeling.
Jamie to ok a deep breath, only  then realizing that he had
been holding it.
“I dinna ken,” he said, surprised at the calmness of his own
tone. He had ba rely had time to  take in the news, let alone todraw co nclusions, but the lad was right, there was a danger to
be dealt with.
If th is MacKenzie wished it, he  might claim Brianna as his
wife by right o f common law , with the coming bairn as
evidence of his claim. A court of law would not necessarily
force a woman to wed a rapi st, but any magistrate would
uphold the right of a man to his wife and child—regardless of
the wife’ s feelings in the matter .
His own  parents had wed by such device: fleeing and hiding
among the Highland crags until his mother was well with
child, so that her brothers were forced to accept the
unwelcome mar riage. A child was a permanent, undeniable
bond between man and woman, and he had cause to know it.
He glanced toward the path that came up through the lower
wood.
“W ill he  not be here on your heels? The W oolams will have
told him the way .”
“Nooo,” said Ian thoughtfully . “I shouldna think so. W e
took his  horse, aye?” He grinned suddenly at Lizzie, who
giggled faintly in reply .
“A ye? And what’ s to stop him taking the wagon, or one of
the wagon mules?”
The grin widened substantially on Ian’ s face.
“I le ft R ollo in the wagon bed,” he said. “I think he’ll walk
it, Uncle Jamie.”
Jamie was forced to a grudging smile in return.
“That was quick of ye, Ian.”
Ian shrugged modestly .
“W ell, I didna want the bastard to take us unawares. And
though I’ve not heard Cousin Brianna talk about her laddie
lately—yon W a kefield, aye?” He paused delicately . “I didna
think she’d want to see this MacKenzie. Especially if—”“I should say M r . W akefield has left his coming ower -long,”
Jamie said. “Especially if.” It w as no wonder she had stopped
looking forward  to W akefield’ s coming—once she’d realized.
After all, how w ould a woman explain a swelling belly to a
man who’d left her vir gin?
He slow ly and consciously unclenched his fists. There
would be time enough for all that later . For the moment, there
was the one thing to be dealt with.
“Fetch my pistols from the house,” he said, turning to Ian.
“And yo u, lassie —” He gave L izzie something intended for a
smile, a nd reach ed for the coat he’d hung on the edge of the
woodpile.
“Bide ye here, a nd wait for your mistress. T ell my wife—
tell h er I ’ve gon e to give Fer gus  a hand with his chimney . And
dinna sp eak a word about this to my wife or daughter—or I’ll
have you r guts for garters.” This last threat was spoken half in
jest, but the girl went white as though he’d meant it literally .
Lizzie sank down on the chopping block, her knees
wabbling benea th her . She fum bled for the tiny medallion at
her neck, seeking reassurance from the cold metal. She
watched Mr . Fraser stride down  the path, menacing as a great
red wolf . His shadow stretched out black before him, and the
late autumn sun touched him with fire.
The medal in her hand was cold as ice.
“O d ear Mother ,” she murmured, over and over . “O Blessed
Mother , what have I done?”4 5
F I F T Y - F I F T Y
T he oak leaves were dry and crackling underfoot. There was a
constant fall of leaves from the chestnut trees that towered
overhead, a slow yellow rain th at mocked the dryness of the
ground.
“Is it true that In dians can move through the woods without
making a sound, or is that just something they tell you in Girl
Scouts?” Brianna kicked at a sm all drift of oak leaves, sending
them flying. Dressed in wide sk irts and petticoats that caught
at le aves and t wigs, we sounded like a herd of elephants
ourselves.
“W ell, they can’ t do it in dry weather like this, unless they
swing through the trees like chimpanzees. In a wet spring, it’ s
another story—even I  c ould walk through here quietly then;
the ground is like a sponge.”
I dre w in  my skirts to keep them  away from a big elderberry
bush, an d stoope d to look at the fruit. It was dark red, but not
yet showing the blackish tinge of true ripeness.
“T wo more days,” I said. “If we were going to use them for
medicine, we’d pick them now . I want them for wine, though,
and to dry like r aisins—and for that, you want them to have a
lot o f sugar , so  you wait until they’re nearly ready to drop
from their stems.”
“Right. What landmark is it?” Brianna glanced around, and
smiled. “No, don’ t tell me—it’ s that big rock that looks like an
Easter Island head.”
“V ery good,” I said approvingly . “Right, because it won’ t
change with the seasons.”
Reaching the edge of a small stream, we separated, working
our way  slowly down the bank s. I had set Brianna to collect
cress, w hile I poked about the tr ees in search of wood ears and
other edible fungi.I wa tched her c overtly as I hunted, one eye on the ground,
one on her . She  was knee-deep in the stream with her skirts
kilted up , showing an amazing stretch of long, muscular thigh
as she waded slowly , eyes on the rippling water .
There was something wrong; h ad been for days. At first I
had assumed her air of tension was due to the obvious stresses
of th e new situa tion in which she found herself. But over the
past weeks she and Jamie had settled into a relationship that,
while still marked by shyness o n both sides, was increasingly
warm. They delighted each other—and I was delighted to see
them together .
Still, there was something trou bling her . It had been three
years sin ce I had left her—four since she had left me, to live
on h er own, and she had changed; had grown entirely into a
woman now . I c ould no longer read her as easily as I once had.
She had Jamie’ s trick of hiding strong feeling behind a mask
of calmness—I knew it well in both of them.
In part, I had arranged this foraging expedition as an excuse
to talk to her alone; with Jamie, Ian, and Lizzie in the house,
and the constant traf fic of tena nts and visitors come to see
Jamie, private conversation there was impossible. And if what
I su spected was true, this wasn ’ t a conversation I wished to
have where anyone could hear .
By t he time I had my basket half filled with thick, fleshy
orange wood ears, Brianna had emer ged dripping from the
stream, her own basket overflowing with clumps of wet green
cress and bunches of jointed horsetail reeds to make into
tapers.
She wiped her feet on the hem of her petticoat, and came to
join me under one of the huge chestnut trees. I handed her the
canteen of cider , and waited till she had had a drink.
“Is it Roger?” I said then, without preliminary .
She glanced at me, a flash of sta rtlement visible in her eyes,
and then I saw the tense line of her shoulder ease.
“I wondered whether you could still do that,” she said.“Do what?”
“Read my mind. I sort of ho ped you could.” Her wide
mouth quirked awkwardly , trying to smile.
“I expect I’m a bit out of practice,” I said. “But give me a
moment.” I reached up and smo othed the hair of f her face. She
looked a t me, but beyond me, too shy to meet my eyes. A
whippoorwill called in the far green shadows.
“It’ s all right, baby ,” I said quietly . “How far gone are you?”
The brea th left her in a huge sigh. Her face went slack with
relief.
“T wo months.”
Now she met my eyes, and I felt a small shock of dif ference,
the kind I had been getting since her arrival. Once, her relief
would h ave been a child’ s; a fear confided, and half eased
already by the knowledge that I would somehow deal with it.
But now  it was only the relief of sharing an unbearable secret;
she was  not expecting me to remedy things. The knowledge
that I couldn’ t  do anything in any case didn’ t stop my irrational
feeling of loss.
She squeezed my hand, as though reassuring me,  and then
sat down with her back against a tree trunk, stretching out her
legs in front of her , long feet bare.
“Did you know already?”
I sat down next to her , less gracefully .
“I ex pect so; but  I didn’ t know I knew , if that makes sense.”
Looking at her n ow , it was plain to see; the faint pallor of her
skin and tiny a lterations in her color , the fleeting look of
inwardness. I had noticed, but had put the changes down to
unfamiliarity an d strain—to the flurry of emotions over
finding me, meeting Jamie, to worry over Lizzie’ s sickness,
worry over Roger .
That particular worry now took on a sudden new dimension.
“Oh, Jesus. Roger!”She nod ded, pale in the filtered yellow shade of the chestnut
leaves overhead. She looked jaundiced, and no wonder .
“It’ s bee n nearly two months. He should have been here—
unless something happened.”
My mind was busy calculating.
“T wo months, and now it’ s nearly November .” The leaves
under us lay thick and soft, yellow and brown, fresh-fallen
from the hickory and chestnut trees. My heart dropped
suddenly in my chest. “Bree—you’ve got to go back.”
“What?” Her head jerked up. “Go back where?”
“T o the stones.” I waved a hand in agitation. “T o Scotland,
and right away!”
She stared at me, thick brows drawn down.
” Now?  What for?”
I too k a deep breath, feeling a dozen dif ferent emotions
collide. Concern for Bree, fear f or Roger , a terrible sorrow for
Jamie, w ho wou ld have to give her up again, so soon. And for
myself.
“Y ou can go through, pregnant. W e know that much,
because I did it,  with you. But honey—you can’ t take a baby
through that…th at…you can’ t,”  I ended, helpless. “Y ou know
what it’ s like.” It had been three years since I came through the
stones, but I recalled the experience vividly .
Her eyes went b lack as the little  blood remaining in her face
drained away .
“Y ou ca n’ t take a child through ,” I repeated, trying to get
myself under control, think logically . “It would be like
jumping of f Niagara Falls with the baby in your arms. Y ou’ll
have to go back  before it’ s bo rn, or—” I broke of f, making
calculations.
“It’ s almost November . Ships  won’ t make the passage
between late November and M arch. And you can’ t wait till
March—that would mean making a two-month trip across theAtlantic, six or seven months pregnant. If you didn’ t deliver
on the ship—wh ich would likely kill you or the baby or both
—you’d still have to ride thirty  miles to the circle, and then
make the passage, find your way to help on the other side…
Brianna, you can’ t do it! Y ou have to go now , as soon as we
can manage.”
“And if I do go now—how will  I make sure I end up in the
right time?”
She spoke quietly , but her finger s were pleating the fabric of
her skirt.
“Y ou—I think—well, I  did,” I said, my initial panic
beginning to subside into rational thought.
“Y ou ha d Daddy at the other end.” She glanced up at me
sharply . “Whether you wanted to go to him or not, you had
strong f eelings for him—he would have pulled you. Or me.
But he isn’ t there anymore.” Her face tightened, then relaxed.
“Roger knew—knows—how ,” she corrected herself.
“Geillis Duncan ’ s book said you could use gems to travel—for
protection and navigation.”
“But you and R oger are both only guessing!” I ar gued.
“And so was blo ody Geilie Duncan! Y ou might not need either
gemstones or  a strong attachm ent. In the old fairy tales, when
people g o inside a fairy’ s dun and then return, it’ s always two
hundred years. If that’ s the usual pattern, then—”
“W ould you risk finding out it’ s not? And it’ s not—Geilie
Duncan went far -ther  than two hundred years.”
It oc curred to m e, a little belatedly , that she had thought all
this out herself. Nothing I was  saying came as any surprise.
And tha t meant  she had also reached her own conclusion—
which did not involve taking ship back to Scotland.
I rubbed a hand between my brows, making an ef fort to
match h er calmness. The mention of Geillis had called to mind
another memory—though one I had tried to for get.“There’ s another way ,” I said, fighting for calm. “Another
passage, I mean. It’ s on Haiti— they call it Hispaniola now . In
the jungle, there are standing stones on a hill, but the crack, the
passage, is underneath, in a cave.”
The forest air was cool, but it w asn’ t the shadows that made
my skin ripple into gooseflesh. I rubbed my forearms, trying to
erase th e chill. I would willing ly have erased all memory of
the cave of Abandawe as well—I’d tried—but it wasn’ t a place
easily for gotten.
“Y ou’ve been there?” She leaned forward, intent.
“Y es. It’ s a horrible place. But the Indies are a good deal
closer than Scotland is, and ships sail between Charleston and
Jamaica nearly all year .” I took a deep breath, feeling a little
better . “It wouldn’ t be easy to go through the jungle—but it
would give you a little longer—long enough for us to find
Roger .” If he co uld still be foun d, I thought, but didn’ t say so.
That particular fear could be dealt with later .
One of the chestnut leaves spiraled down onto Brianna’ s
lap, vivi d yellow  against the so ft brown homespun, and she
picked it of f, sm oothing the waxy surface absently with her
thumb. She looked at me, blue eyes intent.
“Does this place work like the other one?”
“I don’ t know h ow any of them  work! It sounded dif ferent,
a bell sound instead of a buzzing noise. But it was a passage,
all right.”
“Y ou’ve been there,” she said s lowly , looking at me under
her brows.
“Why? Did you want to go back? After you’d found—
him?” There was still a slight hesitation in her voice; she
couldn’ t quite bring herself to refer to Jamie as “my father .”
“No. It was to do with Geillis Duncan. She found it.”
Brianna’ s eyes sprang wide.
“She’ s her e? ”“No. She’ s dead.”
I too k a deep breath, feeling the remembered shock and
tingle of  an ax b low run up my  arm. Sometimes I thought of
her , of Geillis, when I was alo ne in the forest. Sometimes I
thought I heard her voice be hind me, and turned around
swiftly , but saw no more than the hemlock branches, soughing
in th e w ind. But now and then I  felt her eyes on me, green and
bright as the springtime wood.
“Quite dead,” I said firmly , and  changed the subject. “How
did this happen, anyway?”
There wasn’ t any pretence of not knowing what I was
talking about. She gave me a straight look, one eyebrow
raised.
“Y ou’re the doctor . How many ways ar e  there?”
I gave her back the look, with interest.
“Didn’ t you even think of taking any precautions?”
She glowered, thick brows drawn down.
“I wasn’ t planning  to have sex here!”
I clu tched my h ead, digging my fingers into my scalp in
exasperation.
“Y ou think people plan  it? Good God, how many times did I
come to that school of yours and give talks about—”
“All the time! E very year! My mother the sex encyclopedia!
Do you have any idea how mortifying it is to have your own
mother s tanding up in front of everybody , drawing pictures of
penises? ”
Her face  went the color of the s carlet maples, flushed with
the memory .
“I must not have done it all that well,” I said tartly , “since
you seem not to have recognized one when you saw it.”
Her fac e jerked toward me, b lood in her eye, but then
relaxed when she saw that I was joking—or trying to.“Right,” she said. “W ell, they look dif ferent in 3-D.”
T aken unawares, I laughed. After a moment’ s hesitation, she
joined me, a hesitant giggle.
“Y ou know what I mean. I gave  you that prescription before
I left.”
She looked down her long, straight nose at me.
“Y es, and I was  never so shocked in my life! Y ou thought
I’d run right out and have sex with everybody in sight the
minute you left?”
“Y ou’re implying that it was only my presence stopping
you?” The corner of her wide mouth twitched.
“W ell, not only  t hat,” she conceded. “But you had
something to do with it, you and  Daddy . I mean, I—I wouldn’ t
have wanted to disappoint you .” The twitch had turned to a
quiver in an inst ant, and I hugged her hard, her smooth bright
hair against my cheek.
“Y ou couldn’ t, baby ,” I murm ured, rocking her slightly .
“W e’d never be disappointed in you, never .”
I felt both tension and worry ebb as I held her . Finally , she
took a deep breath and let go of me.
“Maybe not you or Daddy ,” she  said. “But what about—?”
She tilted her head toward the now invisible house.
“He won’ t—” I began, but then  stopped. The truth was that
I didn’ t know what  Jamie would do . On the one hand, he was
strongly inclined  to think that Brianna hung the moon. On the
other hand, he had opinions regarding sexual honor that could
only be described—for obvious reasons—as old-fashioned,
and no inhibitions at all about expressing them.
He was worldly ,  well educated, tolerant, and compassionate.
This did not in any way , shape, o r form mean that he shared or
understood modern sensibilities; I knew quite well he didn’ t.
And I couldn’ t think that his at titude toward Roger would be
tolerant in the slightest.“W ell,” I said d ubiously , “I shouldn’ t wonder if he didn’ t
want to punch Roger in the nose or something. But don’ t
worry ,” I added, seeing her look of alarm. “He loves you,” I
said, and  smoothed the tumbled hair of f her flushed face. “He
won’ t stop.”
I got up, brushing yellow leaves from my skirt.
“W e’ll h ave a bit of time, then, but none to waste. Jamie can
send word downriver , to keep a n eye out for Roger . Speaking
of R oger…” I hesitated, picking a bit of dried fern from my
sleeve. “I don’ t suppose he knows about this, does he?”
Brianna took a deep breath, and  her fist closed tight on the
leaf in her hand, crushing it.
“W ell, see, there’ s a problem about that,” she said. She
looked u p at me, and suddenly s he was my little girl again. “It
isn’ t Roger ’ s.”
“What?” I said stupidly .
“It. Isn’ t. Roger ’ s. Baby ,” she said, between clenched teeth.
I san k down be side her once more. Her worry over Roger
suddenly took on new dimensions.
“Who?” I said. “Here, or there ?” Even as I spoke, I was
calculating—it had to be someone here, in the past. If it had
been a man in h er own time, sh e’d be farther along than two
months. Not only in the past, then, but here, in the Colonies.
I wa sn’ t planning to have sex,  s he ’d sa id. No, of course not.
She hadn’ t told Roger , for fear he would follow her—he was
her anchor , her key to the future. But in that case—
“Here,” she said, confirming my calculations. She dug in
the pocket of h er skirt, and came out with something. She
reached toward me, and I held out my hand automatically .
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” The worn gold wedding band
sparked in the s un, and my hand closed reflexively over it. It
was war m from being carried next to her skin, but I felt a deep
coldness seep into my fingers.“Bonnet?” I said. “Stephen Bonnet? ”
Her thro at moved convulsively , and she swallowed, head
jerking in a brief nod.
“I wasn’ t going to tell you—I co uldn’ t; not after Ian told me
about what happened on the river . At first I didn’ t know what
Da wou ld do; I was afraid he’d  blame me. And then when I
knew him a litt le better—I knew he’d try to find Bonnet—
that’ s what Daddy would have done. I couldn’ t let him do that.
Y ou met that man, you know what he’ s like.” She was sitting
in th e su n, but a shudder passed over her , and she rubbed her
arms as though she was cold.
“I do ,” I  said. My lips were stif f . Her words were ringing in
my ears.
I wa sn’ t planning to have sex. I  couldn’ t tell…I was afraid
he’d blame me .
“What d id he do to you?” I as ked, and was surprised that
my voice sounded calm. “Did he hurt you, baby?”
She grim aced, and pulled her kn ees up to her chest, hugging
them against herself.
“Don’ t call me that, okay? Not right now .”
I rea ched to tou ch her , but she huddled closer into herself,
and I dropped my hand.
“Do you  want to tell me?” I didn’ t want to know; I wanted
to pretend it hadn’ t happened, too.
She looked up at me, lips tightened to a straight white line.
“No,” she said. “No, I don’ t want to. But I think I’d better .”
She had stepped aboard the Gloriana  in bro ad daylight,
cautious, but feeling safe by reason of the number of people
around; loaders , seamen, merchants, servants—the docks
bustled w ith life . She had told a seaman on the deck what she
wanted; he had vanished into t he recesses of the ship, and a
moment later , Stephen Bonnet had appeared.He had on the same clothes a s the night before; in the
daylight, she could see that th ey were of fine quality , but
stained and badly crumpled. Greasy candle wax had dripped
on the silk cuf f of his coat, and his jabot had crumbs in it.
Bonnet himself showed fewer marks of wear than did his
clothes; he was fresh-shaven, and his green eyes were pale and
alert. They passed over her quickly , lighting with interest.
“I did think ye comely last nig ht by candlelight,” he said,
taking her hand and raising it to his lips. “But a-many seem so
when th e drink is flowin’. It’ s a  good deal more rare to find a
woman fairer in the sun than she is by the moon.”
Brianna tried to extract her hand  from his grasp, giving him
a polite smile.
“Thank you. Do you still have the ring?” Her heart beat fast
in h er throat. He could still tell her about the ring—about her
mother—even if  he had lost it gambling. But she wanted very
badly to  have it in her hands. She suppressed the fear that had
haunted her all n ight; that the rin g might be all that was left of
her moth er . It couldn’ t be, not if the newspaper clipping was
right, but—
“Oh, ind eed. The luck of Dan u herself was with me the
night—and still is, by the looks of it.” He gave her a charming
smile, still keeping hold of her hand.
“I—ah, I wondered if you would sell it to me.” She had
brought nearly all the money she had with her , but had no idea
what the cost of a gold ring might be.
“Why?” The blunt question took her unawares, and she
fumbled for an answer .
“It—it looks like one my mother had,” she answered, unable
to invent an ans wer better than the truth. “Where did you get
it?”
Something moved behind his eyes, though he still smiled at
her . He gestured toward the dark companionway , and tucked
her hand  in the crook of his elb ow . He was taller than she, a
big man. She pulled, cautiously , but he held her hand fast.“So ye want the  ring? Come d own to my cabin, my dear ,
and we shall see if an accommodation might be reached.”
Below , he poured her brandy; sh e took the barest sip, but he
drank deeply , draining one glass and pouring another .
“Where?” he said carelessly , in answer to her persistent
questions. “Ah—well, a gentlemen should not be tellin’ tales
of hi s la dies, sho uld he?” He win ked at her . “A love token,” he
whispered.
The smile on her own face felt stif f, and the sip of brandy
she had taken burned in her stomach.
“The lad y who—gave it to you,” she said. “Is she in good
health?”
He gaped at her , lower jaw fallen slightly open.
“Luck,” she said hastily . “It’ s ba d luck to wear jewelry that
belongs to someone who’ s—who’ s dead.”
“Is i t?” The smil e returned. “I cannot say I have noticed that
ef fect m yself.” He set down the glass and gave a slight,
pleasurable belch.
“Still, I can assure ye, the lady from whom I had that ring
was both alive and well when I left her .”
The burning sensation in her stomach eased slightly .
“Oh. I’m glad to hear that. W ill you sell it to me, then?”
He r ocked back in his chair , eye ing her , a small smile on his
lips.
“Sell it. And what will ye of fer me, sweetheart?”
“Fifteen pounds sterling.” Her heart began to beat faster
again, a s he stood up. He was going to agree! Where did he
keep it?
He stood up, took her hand, and pulled her up out of her
chair .
“I’ve en ough money , sweetheart,” he said. “What color ’ s
the hair between your legs?”She jerked her hand out of his grasp, and backed up as
quickly as she could, slamming into the wall of the cabin
within a few steps.
“Y ou’ve mistaken me,” she said. “I didn’ t mean—”
“Maybe not,” he said, and the e dges of his teeth showed in
his s mile. “But I do. And I do think perhaps you’ve mistaken
me,  sweetheart.”
He t ook a step toward her . She snatched the brandy bottle
from the  table, and swung it at his head. He ducked adroitly ,
plucked the bottle from her han d, and slapped her hard across
the face.
She staggered, half blinded by t he sudden pain. He grasped
her by the shoulders, and forced  her to her knees. His fingers
twisted tight in her hair , close to the scalp, and jerked her
head, hard. He held her , head canted at an awkward angle,
while h e fumbled with the ot her hand at the front of his
breeches. He grunted slightly with satisfaction and took a half
step closer , thrusting his hips forward.
“Meet Leroi,” he said.
Leroi wa s both uncircumcised and unwashed, and gave of f a
powerful smell of stale urine. She felt a bolus of vomit rise in
her throat, and tried to turn her head away . The answer to that
was a vicious yank on her hair that brought her back, stifling a
cry of pain.
“Put out that little pink ton gue and give us a kiss,
sweetheart.” Bo nnet sounded cheerful and unconcerned, his
grip on her hair tight as ever . She lifted her hands toward him
in unspo ken protest; he saw it and tightened his grip, making
tears start in her eyes. She put out her tongue.
“Not bad, not b ad,” he said, judiciously . “All right, open
your mo uth.” He  let go of her ha ir quite suddenly and her head
snapped back. Before she could jerk away , he had seized her
by one ear , twisting slightly .
“Bite me, sweetheart, and I’ll m ash your nose flat. Eh?” He
brushed his closed fist lightly under her nose, nudging the tipwith a massive knuckle. Then he took a firm grip on her other
ear , holding her head immobile between his big hands.
She con centrated on the taste of  the blood from her cut lip,
the t aste and the pain of it. W ith her eyes closed, she could see
the taste, salt an d metal, a burnished copper , shining pure in
the dark inside her eyes.
If sh e vomited, she would chok e. She would choke, and he
would not notice. She would str angle and die, and he wouldn’ t
stop. She put her hands on his thighs to brace herself, and dug
her finge rs into the heavy muscle, pushing back as hard as she
could, to resist the battering. H e was humming, deep in his
throat. Fr om Ushant to Scilly is thirty-five leagues . W iry hairs
brushed her lips.
Then Leroi was gone. He let g o of her ears and stepped
back; unbalanced, she fell forward on hands and knees,
gagging and coughing, the stri ngs of saliva from her mouth
tinged pink with blood. She coughed and spat, and spat again,
trying to  clear her mouth of foulness. Her lips were swollen,
and throbbing with her heartbeat.
He l ifted her ef f ortlessly , hands  under her arms, and kissed
her , tongue thrusting, one palm  cupping the back of her head
to keep her from  pulling away . He tasted overpoweringly of
brandy , with a faint nastiness of decaying teeth. The other
hand, at her waist, roamed slowly downward, kneading her
buttocks.
“Mmm,” he said, sighing pleasurably . “Bedtime, eh,
sweetheart?”
She lowered her head and bu tted him in the face. Her
forehead struck hard against bo ne, and he uttered a sharp cry
of su rprise and loosened his gri p. She wrenched free and ran.
Her flyi ng skirt caught on the d oorlatch and tore, disregarded
as she hurled herself out into the dark companionway .
The sail ors were  at supper; twen ty men sat at a long table in
the m ess at the end of the companionway , twenty faces turned
toward her in expressions r anging from startlement tolascivious intere st. It was the cook who tripped her , sticking
out a  foot as she dashed past the  galley . Her knees hit the deck
with numbing force.
“Like ga mes, do  you, sweetheart?” It was Bonnet’ s voice in
her e ar , jovial as ever , as a pair of hands scooped her up with
disconcerting ea se. He whirled her to face him, and smiled.
She had hit him in the nose; a thick trickle of blood flowed
down from one nostril. It ran ov er his upper lip, and followed
the g rooves of his smile, thin lines of red showing between his
teeth, and dark drops dripping slowly from his chin.
His grip on her arms tightened, but the merry glint shone as
ever in his light green eyes.
“That’ s all right, sweetheart,” he said. “Leroi likes games.
Don’ t you, Leroi?” He glanced down, and she followed his
gaze. H e had shed his breeches in the cabin, and stood half
naked, Leroi brushing against her skirts, quivering with
eagerness.
He t ook her by one elbow , and bowing gallantly , gestured
toward the cabin. Numbly , she stepped forward, and he took
his plac e beside  her , arm in arm, nonchalantly exposing the
white cheeks of his buttocks to the stares of his gaping crew .
“After th at…it wasn’ t so bad.” She could hear her own voice,
unnaturally calm , as though it belonged to someone else. “I
didn’ t—didn’ t fight him anymore.”
He hadn’ t bothered to make her  undress, merely untucked her
kerchief. Her dress was made in  the usual fashion, with a low ,
square n eckline, and her breasts were high and round; it took
no m ore than a casual downward yank to bare them, popping
them up over the edge of the bodice like a pair of apples.
He mau led them  idly for a moment, pinching her nipples
between a lar ge thumb and fore finger to make them stand up,
then pushed her toward his tumbled bed.
The sheets were stained with spilled liquor and stank of
perfume and wine, and overwhelmingly of the rank, heavyodor of Bonnet himself. He sho ved up her skirt and arranged
her l egs to suit him, humming all the while beneath his breath.
Far ewell to you all, ye fine Spanish ladies …
In h er mind’ s ey e, she could see herself thrusting him away ,
flinging herself of f the bed and r unning for the door , skimming
light as a gull down the dark companionway and bursting up
through the grated deck to freed om. She could feel the wooden
boards under her bare feet, and  the glare of the hot summer
sun in her dark- blind eyes. Almost. She lay in the dim cabin,
wooden as a figurehead, tasting blood in her mouth.
There was a blind, insistent prodding between her thighs
and she convulse d in panic, scissoring her legs. Still humming,
he thrust a mus cular leg between her own, brutally nudging
her thig hs apart. Naked from the waist downward, he still
wore his  shirt and stock. The long tails drooped around Leroi’ s
pale stalk as he rose up on his knees above her .
He s topped humming long enou gh to spit copiously into his
palm. R ubbing r oughly and thoroughly , he eased the path and
then set to busi ness. W ith one hand clutched firmly on her
breast, he guided himself with the other to an inescapable
berth, making a jovial remark  about the snugness of the
accommodation, and then loosed Leroi on his mindless—and
mercifully brief—gallop to pleasure.
T wo minutes, maybe three. And then it was over , and
Bonnet lay heavily collapsed upon her , sweat crumpling his
linen sto ck, one hand still crus hing her breast. His lank fair
hair fell  soft against her cheek and his exhalations purled hot
and damp on her neck. At least he’d stopped humming.
She lay frozen for endless long minutes, staring up at the
ceiling, where the reflections from the water danced across the
polished beams.  He sighed at last, and rolled slowly of f her
onto his side. H e smiled at her , dreamily scratching one bared
and hairy hip.
“Not bad, sweetheart, though I’ve had livelier rides. Move
your ars e more next time, hm?” He sat up, yawned, and began
to straig hten his attire. She edged toward the side of the bed,then, sure that h e didn’ t mean to restrain her , rolled abruptly
of f and onto her feet. She felt  light-headed and desperately
short of air , as though his bulk still pressed upon her .
Moving in a da ze, she went to the door . It was bolted. As
she strug gled to lift the bolt, her  hands shaking, she heard him
say something behind her , and swung around in amazement.
” What  did you say?”
“I s aid the ring ’ s on the desk,” he said, straightening up
from ret rieving his stockings. He sat down on the bed and
began to pull them on, waving casually at the desk that stood
against the wall. “There’ s money , too. T ake what you want.”
The top of the  desk was a magpie’ s nest, littered with
inkpots, trinkets , bits of jewelry , bills of lading, tattered quills,
silver bu ttons, ra gged bits of pap er and crumpled clothing, and
a scatte r of coins in silver and bronze, copper and gold,
currency of several colonies, several countries.
“Y ou’re of fering me money ?”
He looked up quizzically , fair brows arched.
“I pay for my pleasures,” he said. “Did you think I
wouldn’ t?”
Everything in the cabin seemed unnaturally vivid, detailed
and individual as the objects in  a dream, which would vanish
with waking.
“I didn’ t  think anything,” she said, her voice sounding very
clear , but distant, someone speaking from far away . Her
kerchief lay on the floor where he had thrown it, by the desk.
She walked there, carefully , trying not to think of the warm
slipperiness that streaked down her thighs.
“I’m an honest man—for a pirate,” he said behind her , and
laughed. He stamped once on the deck to settle his foot in its
shoe, the n brush ed past her and  lifted the bolt easily with one
hand.
“Help yourself, sweetheart,” he said, with another casual
wave toward the desk as he went out. “Y ou were worth it.”She heard his footsteps going away down the
companionway , a burst of laughter and a muf fled remark as he
met someone, then a shift of his voice, suddenly clear and
harsh, sh outing orders to someone above, and the tramp and
scurry of feet overhead, rushing to obey . Back to business.
It w as sitting in a bowl made o f cowhorn, jumbled with a
collection of bone buttons, stri ng, and other bits of rubbish.
Like him, she thought, with a cold clarity . Acquisition for its
own sake; a reckless and savage delight in the taking, with no
knowledge at all of the value of what he stole.
Her hand was s haking; she saw it with a vague sense of
surprise. She tried to grasp th e ring, failed, gave up. She
scooped up the bowl and emptie d its contents into her pocket.
She walked down the dark companionway , her fist wrapped
tight around the pocket, holding it like a talisman. There were
seamen all around, too busy about their tasks to spare her more
than a glance of  lewd speculation. Her shoes were perched on
the e nd of the mess table, bows perky in a shaft of light from
the grating overhead.
She put them o n, and with an even tread walked up the
ladder , across the deck and gan gplank, onto the dock. T asting
blood.
“I thoug ht at first I could just p retend it didn’ t happen.” She
took a deep breath, and looked at me. Her hands folded over
her stomach, as though to hid e it. “But I guess that won’ t
work, will it?”
I was silent for  a moment, thinking. It was no time for
delicacy .
“When?” I said. “How long after…um, after Roger?”
“T wo days.”
My eyebrows lifted at that.
“Why are you s o sure it isn’ t Roger ’ s, then? Y ou weren’ t
using pills, obviously , and I’ll bet my life Roger didn’ t use
what passes for condoms in these times.”She half smiled at that, and a small flush rose in her cheeks.
“No. He…um…he…ah…”
“Oh, coitus interruptus?”
She nodded.
I took a deep breath and blew it out through pursed lips.
“There is a wor d,” I said, “for people who depend on that
particular method of birth control.”
“What’ s that?” she asked, looking wary .
“Parents,” I said.4 6
C O M E S  A  S T R A N G E R
R oger bent his hea d and drank from cupped hands. A piece of
luck, tha t flash of green, pointed out by a finger of sunlight
stabbing down through the tree s. W ithout it, he would never
have seen the spring, so far of f the trail as it was.
A cl ear trickle b ubbled through a crack in the rock, cooling
his hands and face. The rock itself was a smooth blackish
green, a nd the ground all round  was boggy , rumpled by tree
roots and furred with a moss tha t grew brilliant as emeralds in
the fleeting patch of sun.
The knowledge that he would see Brianna shortly—perhaps
within the hour—soothed his annoyance as ef fectively as the
cool wa ter eased  his dry throat.  If he’d had to have his horse
stolen, it was so me consolation that he’d been close enough to
reach his destination on foot.
The horse itself had been an ancient nag, barely worth
stealing. At least he’d had the sense to keep his valuables on
his person, not in the saddlebags. He clapped a hand against
the side  seam of his breeches , reassured to feel the small
hardness snuggled against his thigh.
Beyond the horse itself, he had n’ t lost much more than a
pistol—nearly as ancient as the horse and not half so reliable
—a bit of food, and a leather wa ter flask. The loss of the flask
had troubled him for the last few  miles of hot, dusty walking,
but now that minor inconvenience was remedied.
His feet sank into the damp ground as he stood up, leaving
dark stre aks in the emerald mos s. He stepped back and wiped
the mud from his shoe soles on the carpet of dry leaves and
crusted n eedles. Then he dusted down the skirts of his coat as
well as he could, and straightened the grimy stock at his throat.
His knuc kles ras ped the stubble on his jaw; his razor had been
in the saddlebag.He l ooked a rig ht villain, he thought ruefully . No way to
meet your in-laws. In truth, thou gh, he wasn’ t much concerned
with wh at Claire and Jamie Fr aser might think of him. His
thoughts were all on Brianna.
She’d found her parents now; h e could only hope that the
reunion had been so satisfactory that she’d be in a mood to
for give his betrayal. Christ, he’d been stupid!
He m ade his wa y back toward the path, feet sinking in the
soft leaf-layer . Stupid in unde restimating her stubbornness,
stupid not to hav e been honest w ith her , he amended. Stupid to
have bullied her into secrecy . T rying to keep her safely in the
future—no, that  hadn’ t been stupid at all, he thought, with a
grimace at the things he’d seen and heard in the last few
months.
He push ed aside an overhanging limb of loblolly pine, then
ducked w ith an exclamation of alarm, as something black shot
past his head.
A hoarse craawk!  announced that his assailant was a raven.
Similar cries gave notice of the a rrival of reinforcements in the
trees nearby , and within sec onds, another black missile
whizzed past, within inches of his ear .
“Hey , bugger of f!” he exclaimed, ducking away from yet
another croaking buzz bomb. He was plainly near a nest, and
the ravens didn’ t like it.
The first raven sailed back f or another try . This pass
knocked his hat into the dirt. The mobbing was unnerving, the
sense of hostility out of all proportion to the size of his
adversaries. Ano ther came in, z ooming low , and struck him a
glancing blow as its claws ripped at the shoulder of his coat.
Roger snatched up his hat and ran.
A h undred yards up the trail, he slowed to a walk and
looked r ound. The birds were nowhere in sight; he’d passed
their nesting place, then.
“And where’ s Alfred Hitchcock when you need him?” he
muttered to himself, trying to shake of f the sense of danger .His voic e was damped at once  by the thick vegetation; it
was like  talking into a pillow . He was breathing heavily , and
his face felt flushed. All at onc e, it seemed very quiet in the
forest. W ith the ceasing of the  ravens’ racket, all the other
birds seemed to have stopped as well. It was no wonder the old
Scots thought ravens birds of b ad omen; spend much longer
here, an d all the old ways that had been no more than
curiosities would be flourishing away in his mind.
Dangerous, dirt y , and uncomfortable as it was, he had to
admit t he fasc ination of being here—of experiencing at
firsthand things  he’d read about, seeing objects he knew as
museum artifact s being casually used in daily life. If it wasn’ t
for Bria nna, he might not reg ret the adventure, in spite of
Stephen Bonnet and the things he had seen aboard the
Gloriana .
Once m ore his hand went to his  thigh. He had been luckier
than he’d dared hope; Bonnet h ad had not one gemstone, but
two. W ould they really work?  He ducked again, having to
walk half crouched for several steps before the branches
opened up again. Hard to belie ve that people lived up here,
save that someone had cut this trail, and it must lead
somewhere.
“Y ou ca n’ t miss  it,” the girl at th e mill had assured him, and
he could see why . There wasn’ t anyplace else to go.
He shad ed his eyes, looking up  the trail, but the drooping
branches of pine and maple hid  everything, presenting only a
shadowy , mysterious tunnel through the trees. No telling how
far it might be to the top of the ridge.
“Y ou’ll make it by sundown, e asy ,” the girl had told him,
and it was late midafternoon no w . But that had been when he
had a horse. No t wanting to be caught on the mountainside in
the dark, he picked up his pace, straining his eyes for sunlight
ahead that would show him the  openness of the ridge at the
end of the trail.
As he walked, his thoughts ra n inevitably ahead of him,
quick with speculation.And how  had it gone, Brianna’ s reunion with her parents?
What ha d she thought of Jamie Fraser? W as he the man she’d
been im agining for the last yea r , or only a pale reflection of
the image she had built up from her mother ’ s stories?
At l east she had  a father to know , he thought, with a queer
little pang at the memory of Midsummer ’ s Eve, and that burst
of light in the passage through the stones.
There it was! A lightening o f the dense green shadow
ahead; a brightening as tongues of sun struck autumn leaves in
a flare of orange and yellow .
The sun  dazzled  him for a moment as he came out of the
tunnel o f greenery . He blinked o nce, and found himself not on
the r idge, as he had expected, but in a small natural clearing,
edged with scarlet maples and yellow scrub oak. It held the
sunlight like a cup, dark forest spreading beyond on all sides.
As h e turned about, searching for the continuation of the
trail, he heard a  horse’ s whicker and whirled to find his own
elderly m ount, j erking its head a gainst the pull of a rein tied to
a tree at the edge of the clearing.
“W ell, I’ll be buggered!” he e xclaimed in astonishment.
“How the hell did you get up here?”
“The sa me way you did,” a voice answered him. A tall
young m an emer ged from the wood beside the horse, and
stood po inting a  pistol at Roger;  his own, he saw , with a sense
of o utrage as we ll as apprehension. He took a deep breath and
choked down his fear .
“Y ou’ve got my horse and my gun,” Roger said coolly .
“What else d’you want? My hat?” He held out the battered
tricorne in invitation. The robber couldn’ t possibly know what
else he carried; he hadn’ t shown them to anyone.
The young man—couldn’ t be more than in his teens, in spite
of his size, Roger thought—didn’ t smile.
“A bit more th an that, I expect.” For the first time, the
young man took his eyes of f Ro ger , shifting his glance to oneside. Fo llowing the direction of his gaze, Roger felt a jolt like
an electric shock.
He hadn ’ t seen the man at the edge of the clearing, though
he m ust have be en there all the time, standing motionless. He
wore a faded hunting kilt whose browns and greens blended
into the grass and brush, as his flaming hair blended with the
brilliant leaves. He looked as if he’d grown out of the forest.
Beyond the sheer unexpectedness of his appearance, it was
his looks that st unned Roger into speechlessness. It was one
thing to  have been told that Jamie Fraser resembled his
daughter . It was another to see Brianna’ s bold features
transmuted into power by the s tamp of years, and fronting a
personality not only thorough ly masculine, but fierce in
aspect.
It was like lifti ng his hand from the fur of a handsome
ginger cat, only to find himse lf staring into the unblinking
gaze of a tiger . Roger barely kept himself from taking an
involuntary step backward, thinking as he did so that Claire
had not exaggerated a single thing in her descriptions of Jamie
Fraser .
“Y ou’ll be Mr . MacKenzie,” the man said. It wasn’ t a
question. The voice was deep bu t not loud, barely lifted above
the soun d of the rustling leaves , but Roger had no dif ficulty
hearing him.
“I am,” he said, taking a step forward. “And you’ll be…
ah…Jamie Frase r?” He stretched out a hand, but quickly let it
drop. T wo pairs of eyes rested coldly on him.
“I a m,” said the red-haired ma n. “Y ou’ll know me?” The
tone of the question was distinctly unfriendly .
Roger took a dee p breath, cursing his own dishevelment. He
didn’ t k now how Brianna might have described him to her
father , but Fraser had evidently expected something a good
deal more prepossessing.
“W ell, you—look quite a bit like your daughter .”The you ng man gave a loud snort, but Fraser didn’ t look
around.
“And what business have ye wi’ my daughter?” Fraser
moved for the first time, steppin g out from the shadow of the
trees. No, Claire hadn’ t exaggerated. He was  big, even an inch
or two taller than Roger himself.
Roger felt a st ab of alarm, mingled with his confusion.
What the hell ha d Brianna told him? Surely she couldn’ t have
been so angry that—well, he’d sort that out when he saw her .
“I’ve come to claim my wife,” he said boldly .
Something changed in Fraser ’ s eyes. Roger didn’ t know
what it was, bu t it made him drop his hat, and half raise his
hands in reflex.
“Oh, no, ye’re not.” It was the boy who had spoken, in an
odd tone of satisfaction.
Roger g lanced a t him, and was still more alarmed to see the
lad’ s big, bony knuckles white on the pistol’ s grip.
“Here be careful! Y ou don’ t  want that to go of f by
accident,” he said.
The young man’ s lip lifted in a sneer .
“If it goes of f, it’ll be no accident.”
“Ian.” Fraser ’ s voice stayed level, but the pistol lowered,
reluctantly . The big man took a nother step forward. His eyes
were fixed on R oger ’ s, deep blue and slanted; unnervingly like
Brianna’ s.
“I’ll ask  only the once, and I mean to hear the truth,” he
said, quite mildly . “Have ye taken my daughter ’ s
maidenheid?”
Roger felt his face grow hot as a flood of warmth washed up
from ch est to hairline. Christ, what had she told her father?
And for God’ s sake, why ? Th e last thing he had expected to
meet was an inf uriated father , bent on avenging his daughter ’ s
virtue.“It’ s…ah…well, it’ s not what you think,” he blurted. “I
mean, we…that is…we meant to…”
“Did ye or no?” Fraser ’ s face wa s no more than a foot away ,
completely expressionless, save for whatever it was that
burned, far back in his eyes.
“Look—I—damn it, yes! She wanted to—”
Fraser hit him, just under the ribs.
Roger doubled and staggered back, gasping from the blow .
It di dn’ t hurt—yet—but he’d fe lt the force of it all the way to
his s pine. His pr incipal feeling was one of amazement, tinged
with anger .
“Stop,” he said, trying to get enough breath to talk. “Stop!
For God’ s sake, I said I—”
Fraser h it him again, this time on the side of the jaw . That
one hurt, a glancing blow that  scraped the skin and left his
jawbone throbbing. Roger jerked back, fear turning rapidly to
fury . The bloody sod was trying to kill him!
Fraser swung at him again, but missed as Roger ducked and
whirled. W ell, to fuck with good family relations, then!
He t ook a giant step backward, shrugging out of his coat. T o
his surpr ise, Fraser didn’ t come after him, but stood there, fists
at his sides, waiting.
The blood was drumming in R oger ’ s ears, and he had no
eyes for  anyone but Fraser . If it was a fight the bugger wanted,
that’ s what he’d get, then.
Roger c rouched, hands up and ready . He’d been taken by
surprise, but he wouldn’ t be caught that way again. No
brawler , still he’d been in his share of pub fights. They were
well matched for height and reach, and he had more than
fifteen years’ advantage on the man.
He s aw Fraser ’ s right, ducked and countered, felt his fist
brush li nen as it passed Fraser ’ s side and then the left he
hadn’ t seen took him in the eye. Bloody stars and streaks oflight exp loded through the side of his head, and tears ran down
his cheek as he launched himself at Fraser , roaring.
He hit the man; he could feel his fists strike flesh, but it
seemed to make no dif ference. T hrough his one sound eye, he
could see that broad-boned fa ce, set in eerie calm, like a
V iking berserker . He swung, and it disappeared, bobbed up
again; h e swung, grazing an ear . A blow struck him in the
shoulder; he swung half around with it, recovered, and
launched himself headfirst.
“She’ s…mine,” Roger gritted b etween clenched teeth. He
had his arms wrapped around Fraser ’ s body , felt the deep-
sprung r ibs give as he squeezed. He’d crack the bastard like a
nut. “Mine…hear?”
Fraser rabbit-punched him in the back of the neck, a
glancing blow , but hard enoug h to numb his left arm and
shoulder . He let go his grip, hunched and drove his right
shoulder hard into Fraser ’ s ches t, trying to drive the older man
of f his feet.
Fraser took a short step back and hooked him hard, but the
blow str uck his ribs, not the sof t flesh below . Still, it was hard
enough to make him grunt and jerk back, crouching to protect
himself.
Fraser lowered his head and but ted him, straight on; he flew
backward and landed hard. Blood from his nose ran down his
mouth and chin; with a sense of remoteness, he watched the
spatter of dark r ed drops grow a nd run together into a splotch
on his shirt.
He r olled to one  side to avoid the kick he saw coming, but
not far enough. As he rolled frantically the other way , it
occurred to him, in a detached s ort of way , that while he might
be fifteen years younger than his opponent, Jamie Fraser had
likely spent every one of those fifteen years engaged in
physical combat.
He had got mom entarily out of range. Gulping air , he rolled
up o nto his hands and knees. Blood gur gled through smashedcartilage with each breath; he could taste it in the back of his
throat, a taste like sheared metal.
“Nuf f,” he panted. “No. ‘Nuf f!”
A hand grabbed his hair and jerk ed back his head. Blue eyes
glittered six inches away , and h e felt the man’ s breath hot on
his face.
“Not nearly enough,” Fraser s aid, and kneed him in the
mouth. H e fell over and rolled o nce, then struggled to his feet.
The clearing blurred in a throb  of orange and yellow; only
instinct got him up and moving.
He was fighting for his life, and knew it. He hurled himself
blindly at the weaving figure, got a grip of Fraser ’ s shirt and
drove a punch at the man’ s bell y , as hard as he could. Fabric
tore and his fist  struck bone. F raser shifted like a snake and
shot a hand dow n between them. He grabbed Roger ’ s testicles
and squeezed with all his strength.
Roger stood stock-still, then dropped as though his spinal
cord had been s evered. There was a split second, before the
pain hit,  when Roger was consc ious of one last thought, cold
and clear as a shard of ice. My God,  he thou ght, I’m going to
die befor e I’ve been born .4 7
A  F A T H E R ’ S  S O N G
I t wa s well after dark before Jamie came in, and my nerves
were thoroughl y on edge from  the waiting; I could only
imagine Brianna’ s. W e had eaten supper—or I should say ,
supper had been served. None of us had any appetite, either for
food or conversation; even L izzie’ s normal voracity was
noticeably impaired. I hoped the girl wasn’ t ill; pale and silent,
she had pled a headache and gone to bed in the herb shed.
Still, it was fortu nate in the circ umstances; it saved me having
to invent an excuse to get rid of her once Jamie did arrive.
The candles had been lit for over an hour when I finally
heard th e goats bleat in greeting at his step on the path.
Brianna looked up at once at th e sound, her face pale in the
yellow light.
“It’ll be  all right,” I said. She heard the confidence in my
voice an d nodded, slightly reassured. The confidence was
authentic, but not unalloyed. I th ought everything would  be all
right eve ntually—but God knew , it wasn’ t going to be a jolly
family evening. W ell as I knew  Jamie, there were still a good
many circumstances in which I had no idea how he would
react—and hearing that his daughter was pregnant by a rapist
was certainly one of them.
In t he hours s ince Brianna had made my suspicions a
certainty , I had envisioned virtually every possible response he
might  make, several of them involving shouting or the putting
of h is fists thro ugh solid objects, behavior which I always
found upsetting.  So might Bree, and I knew rather better what
she  might do when upset.
She was under a tight control for the moment, but I knew
how precarious  her calm dem eanor was. Let him say a
bruising word to her , and she wo uld flare like a striking match.
Beyond red hair and arresting height, she had from Jamie both
a passionate nature and a perfect readiness to speak her mind.So unfamiliar and so anxious to please each other , they had
both so far stepped delicately—but there seemed no delicate
way of handling this. Unsure whether I should prepare myself
to b e advocate, interpreter , or referee, it was with rather a
hollow feeling that I lifted the latch to let him in.
He had washed at the creek; his hair was damp at the
temples, and he had wiped his face on his shirttail, judging by
the moist patches on it.
“Y ou’re very late; where were you?” I asked, standing on
tiptoe to give him a kiss. “And where’ s Ian?”
“Fer gus came and asked could we give him a hand wi’ his
chimney stones, as he couldna m anage verra well by himself.
Ian’ s sta yed ower , to help fin ish the job.” He dropped an
absent k iss on top of my head, and patted my bottom. He’d
been wo rking hard, I thought; he was warm to my touch and
smelled pungently of sweat, though the skin of his face was
cool and fresh from washing.
“Did Marsali feed you supper ?” I peered at him in the
gloom. Something seemed dif ferent about him, though I
couldn’ t think what.
“No. I dropped a stone and I’v e maybe broken my blasted
finger ag ain; I thought I’d best c ome home and have ye tend to
it.” That  was it, I thought; he’d  patted me with his left hand
instead of his right.
“Come into the light and let me see.” I drew him to the fire,
and mad e him sit down on one of the oak settles. Brianna was
on the other , he r sewing spread around her . She got up and
came to look over my shoulder .
“Y our poor hands, Da!” she said, seeing the swollen
knuckles and scraped skin.
“Och, it’ s no great matter ,” he said, glancing dismissively at
them. “Save for the bloody finger . Ow!”
I fel t my  way gently over the fo urth finger of his right hand,
from base to nail, disregarding his small grunt of pain. It was
reddened and slightly swollen, but not visibly dislocated.It al ways troubled me slightly t o examine this hand. I had
set a number of broken bones in it long ago, before I knew
anything of formal sur gery , and  working under far from ideal
conditions. I had managed; I  had saved the hand from
amputation, and  he had good use of it, but there were small
awkwardnesses; slight twistings and thickenings that I was
aware o f whenever I felt it closely . Still, at the moment, I
blessed the opportunity for delay .
I c losed my eye s, feeling the fire’ s warm flicker on my lids
as I concentrat ed. The fourth finger was always stif f; the
middle joint had been crushed, and healed frozen. I could see
the bone in my mind; not the polished dry surface of a
laboratory specimen, but the faintly luminous matte glow of
living b one, all the tiny osteoblasts busily laying down their
crystal matrix, and the hidden pulse of the blood that fed them.
Once m ore, I drew my own finger down the length of his,
then took it gen tly between my thumb and index finger , just
below th e distal joint. I could feel the crack in my mind, a thin
dark line of pain.
“There?” I asked, opening my eyes.
He nodded, a faint smile on his lips as he looked at me.
“Just there. I like the way y e look when ye do that,
Sassenach.”
“What way is that?” I asked, a bit startled to hear that I
looked any way in particular .
“I canna describe it, exactly ,” he said, head tilted to one side
as he examined me. “It’ s maybe like—”
“Madame Lazonga with her crystal ball,” Brianna said,
sounding amused.
I g lance d up, taken aback to find Brianna gazing down at
me, head  cocked at the same angle, with the same appraising
look. She switched her gaze to Jamie. “A fortune-teller , I
mean. A seer .”
He laughed.“A ye, I think you’re maybe right, a nighean . Though it was
a pr iest I was thinking of; the way they look saying Mass,
when they look past the bread and see the flesh of Christ
instead. Not that I should think  to compare my measly finger
wi’ the Body of Our Lord, mind,” he added, with a modest nod
toward the of fending digit.
Brianna laughed, and a smile cu rved his mouth on one side,
as he looked up at her , his eyes soft despite the lines of
tiredness round them. He’d ha d a long day , I thought. And
likely to  be a lo t longer . I woul d have given anything to hold
that flee ting mo ment of connection between them, but it had
passed already .
” I  t hink you are bo th ridiculous,” I said. I touched his finger
lightly a t the spot I’d held. “The bone is cracked, just there
below th e joint. It’ s not bad, though; no more than a hairline
fracture. I’ll splint it, just in case.”
I got up and went to rummage th rough my medical chest for
a linen bandage and one of the l ong, flat wood chips I used as
tongue depressors. I glanced covertly over the raised lid,
watching him. Something was definitely odd about him this
evening, though I still couldn’ t put my finger on it.
I ha d sensed i t from the first, even through my own
agitation, and sensed it even m ore strongly when I held his
hand to examin e it; a sort of ener gy pulsed through him, as
though h e were excited or upse t, though he gave no outward
sign of it. He was bloody good at hiding things when he
wanted to; what the hell had happened at Fer gus’ s house?
Brianna said something to Jamie, too low for me to catch,
and then  turned away without w aiting for an answer , and came
to join me by the open chest.
“Do you have some ointment, for his hands?” she asked.
Then, le aning close on pretext of looking into the chest, said in
a low voice, “Should I tell him tonight? He’ s tired and he’ s
hurt. Hadn’ t I better let him rest?”I glanced at Jamie. He was leaning back against the settle,
eyes wid e open as he watched th e flames, hands resting flat on
his thighs. He wasn’ t relaxed, though; whatever strange
current was flowing through h im, it had him strung like a
telegraph wire.
“He might rest better not know ing, but you won’ t,” I said,
equally low-voiced. “Go ahead and tell him. Y ou might let him
eat first, though,” I added practically . I was a strong believer in
meeting bad news on a full stomach.
I spl inted Jamie’ s finger while B rianna sat down beside him
and dabbed gentian ointment onto the abraded knuckles of his
other hand. Her face was quite c alm; no one would ever guess
what was going on behind it.
“Y ou’ve torn your shirt,” I said, finishing of f the last
bandage with a small square knot. “Give it to me after supper
and I’ll mend it. How’ s that, then?”
“V erra nice, Madame Lazonga,” he said, gingerly wiggling
his fresh ly splinted finger . “I sh all be getting quite spoilt, wi’
so much attention paid me.”
“When I  start to chew your food  for you, you can worry ,” I
said tartly .
He laug hed, an d gave the s plinted hand to Bree for
anointing.
I w ent to the cupboard to fetch a plate for him. As I turned
back toward the hearth, I saw h im watching her intently . She
kept her head bent, eyes on the lar ge, callused hand she held
between her own. I could imag ine her search for words with
which to begin, and my heart a ched for her . Perhaps I should
have told him pr ivately myself, I thought; not let him near her
until the  first rush of feeling was safely past and he had
himself in hand again.
“Ciamar a tha tu, mo chridhe?”  he said suddenly . It was his
customary greeting to her , the beginning of their evening
Gaelic lesson, but his voice w as dif ferent tonight; soft, andvery gentle. How ar e you, darling?  His hand turned and
covered hers, cradling her long fingers.
“Tha mi gle mhath, athair ,”  she  replied, lo oking a bit
surprised. I am well, Father . Normally he began the lesson
after dinner .
Slowly he reached out with his other hand and rested it
gently on her stomach.
“An e ‘n fhirinn  a th’agad?”  he aske d. Do you tell me true?
I clo sed my eye s and let out a b reath I didn’ t realize I’d been
holding. No need to break all  th e news, after  all. And now I
knew the reason for his taut-str ung strangeness; he knew , and
whatever the knowledge cost h im to hold, hold it he would,
and treat her gently .
She didn’ t know enough Gaelic  yet to tell what he’d asked,
but she knew well enough what he meant. She stared at him
for a  moment, frozen, then lifte d his sound hand to her cheek
and bent her head over it, the loose hair hiding her face.
“Oh, Da,” she said, very quietly . “I’m sorry .”
She sat quite still, holding to his hand as though it were a
lifeline.
“Ah, now , m’ annsachd, ” he said softly , “it will be all
right.”
“No, it won’ t,” she said, her vo ice small but clear . “It can’ t
ever be right. Y ou know that.”
He g lanced at me out of habit, but only briefly . I couldn’ t
tell him what to  do, now . He drew a deep breath, took her by
the shoulder and gave her a gentle shake.
“All I know ,” he said softly , “ is that I’m here by ye, and
your mo ther , too . W e willna see  ye shamed or hurt. Not ever .
D’ye hear me?”
She didn ’ t answ er or look up, but kept her eyes on her lap,
her face hidden by the rich fall of her hair . A maiden’ s hair ,
thick and unbound. His hand traced the shining curve of herhead, th en his fingers trailed along her jaw and lifted her chin
so her eyes looked into his.
“Lizzie’ s right?” he asked gently . “It was rape?”
She pulled her chin away and looked down at her knotted
hands, the gesture as much an admission as her nod.
“I didn’ t think she knew . I didn’ t tell her .”
“She gu essed. But it’ s no your fault, and dinna ever think
so,” he said firmly . “Come here to me, a leannan .” He reached
for her , and gathered her awkwardly onto his knee.
The oakwood creaked alarmingly under their combined
weight, but Jamie had built it af ter his usual sturdy fashion; it
could ha ve held six of him. T all as Brianna was, she looked
almost small cradled in his ar ms, her head tucked into the
curve of his shoulder . He stroked her hair gently , and
murmured small things to her , half in Gaelic.
“I’ll see ye safe marrit, and your bairn wi’ a good father ,” he
murmured to her . “I swear it to ye, a nighean .”
“I can’ t marry anybody ,” she said, sounding choked. “It
wouldn’ t be right. I can’ t take  somebody else when I love
Roger . And Roger won’ t want me now . When he finds out—”
“It’ll make no dif ference to him,” Jamie said, grasping her
harder , a lmost f iercely , as though he could make things right
by pure force of will. “If he’ s a decent man, it’ll make no
dif ference. And if it does—well, then he doesna deserve ye,
and I shall beat him into pulp and stamp on the pieces, and
then go and find ye a better man.”
She gave  a small laugh that turn ed into a sob, and buried her
head in the cloth of his shoulder . He patted her , rocking and
murmuring as though she were a  tiny girl with a skinned knee,
and his eyes met mine over her head.
I h adn’ t wept wh en she had told me; mothers are strong. But
now she  couldn’ t see me, and Jamie had taken the burden of
strength from my shoulders for the moment.She hadn’ t cried when she tol d me, either . But now she
clung to  him and wept, as much  from relief, I thought, as from
grief. H e simply held her and let her cry , stroking her hair
again and again, his eyes on my face.
I blotted my eyes on my sleeve, and he smiled at me, faintly .
Brianna had subsided into long,  sighing breaths, and he patted
her gently on the back.
“I’m hungry , Sassenach,” he said. “And I should imagine a
wee drop wouldna come amiss for any of us, aye?”
“Right,” I said, and cleared m y throat. “I’ll go and fetch
some milk from the shed.”
“That’ s no what I meant by dr ink!” he called after me in
mock outrage.
Ignoring both this and Brianna’ s choked laugh, I pushed
open the door .
The night outside was cold an d bright, the autumn stars
bright sparks overhead. I wasn’ t dressed to be outdoors—my
face and hands were already be ginning to tingle—but I stood
quite sti ll nonet heless, letting the cold wind sweep past me,
taking with it the tension of the last quarter hour .
Everything was quiet; the crickets and cicadas had long
since di ed or gone under ground with the rustling mice, the
skunks and possums who left of f their endless search for food
and went to dre am their winter dreams, the rich fat of their
ef forts wrapped warm about their bones. Only wolves hunted
in the cold, starry nights of late  autumn, and they went silent,
fur -footed on the frozen ground.
“What a re we going to do?” I said softly , addressing the
question to the overwhelming depths of the vast dark sky
overhead.
I h eard no sound but the rush o f wind in the pine trees; no
answer , save the form of my own question—the faint echo of
“we” th at rang in my ears. That much was true at least;
whatever happened, none of us need face things alone. And Isupposed that was after all as m uch answer as I needed, for
now .
They were still on the settle when I came back in, red heads
close together , haloed by the fire. The smell of gentian
ointment mingle d with the pung ent scent of burning pine and
the mouth-watering aroma of the venison stew—quite
suddenly , I was hungry .
I let  the door clo se quietly behind me, and slid to the heavy
bolt. I went to poke the fire and lay a new supper , fetching
down a fresh loaf of bread from the shelf, then went to get
sweet bu tter from the crock in the pantry . I stayed a moment
there, glancing over the loaded shelves.
“Put your trust i n God, and pray  for guidance. And when in
doubt, eat.” A Franciscan mo nk had once given me that
advice, a nd on the whole, I had found it useful. I picked out a
jar of black cur rant jam, a small round goat cheese, and a
bottle of elderflower wine, to go with the meal.
Jamie was talking quietly when  I came back. I finished my
preparations, let ting the deep lilt of his voice soothe me, as
well as Brianna.
“I used to think of you, when ye were small,” Jamie was
saying to Bree, his voice very soft. “When I lived in the cave; I
would im agine t hat I held ye in my arms, a wee babe. I would
hold ye so, against my heart, and  sing to ye there, watching the
stars go by overhead.”
“What would you sing?” Brianna’ s voice was low , too,
barely audible above the crack le of the fire. I could see her
hand, resting on his shoulder . Her index finger touched a long,
bright strand of his hair , tentatively stroking its softness.
“Old songs. Lullabies I could remember , that my mother
sang to me, the same that my sister Jenny would sing to her
bairns.”
She sighed, a long, slow sound.
“Sing to me now , please, Da.”He hesit ated, but then tilted his head toward hers and began
to chant softly , an odd tuneless song in Gaelic. Jamie was
tone-deaf; the song wavered od dly up and down, bearing no
resemblance to music, but the  rhythm of the words was a
comfort to the ear .
I cau ght most of  the words; a fisher ’ s song, naming the fish
of loch and sea, telling the child what he would bring home to
her for food. A hunter ’ s song, naming birds and beasts of prey ,
feathers for beauty and furs f or warmth, meat to last the
winter . It was a father ’ s song—a soft litany of providence and
protection.
I mo ved quietly around the roo m, taking down the pewter
plates and wooden bowls for supper , coming back to cut bread
and spread it with butter .
“Do you know something, Da?” Bree asked softly .
“What’ s that?” he said, momentarily suspending his song.
“Y ou can’ t sing.”
There w as a soft exhalation of  laughter and the rustle of
cloth as he shifted to make them both more comfortable.
“A ye, that’ s true. Shall I stop, then?”
“No.” S he snug gled closer , tucking her head into the curve
of his shoulder .
He resumed his tuneless crooning, only to interrupt himself
a few moments later .
“D’ye ken something yourself, a leannan ?”
Her eye s were closed, her lashes casting deep shadows on
her cheeks, but I saw her lips curve in a smile.
“What’ s that, Da?”
“Y e weigh as much as a full-grown deer .”
“Shall I get of f, then?” she asked, not moving.
“Of course not.”
She reached up and touched his cheek.“Mi gradhaich a thu, athair ,”  s he whispered.  My love to
you, Father .
He gathered her tightly again st him, bent his head and
kissed her forehead. The fire str uck a knot of pitch and blazed
up s uddenly behind the settle, l imning their faces in gold and
black. His features were harsh-cut and bold; hers, a more
delicate echo of his heavy , clean-edged bones. Both stubborn,
both strong. And both, thank God, mine.
Brianna fell asleep after supper , worn out from emotion. I was
feeling r ather lim p, myself, but not yet in any mood to sleep. I
was at once exhausted and jittery , with that horrible battlefield
feeling, of being in the midst o f events beyond my ability to
control, but which must be dealt with anyway .
I d idn’ t want to  deal with anything. What I wanted was to
push aw ay all thought of both present and future, and go back
to the peace of the night before.
I wanted  to crawl into bed with Jamie, and lie warm against
him, the two of  us sealed safe beneath the quilts against the
growing chill of the room. W atch the embers fade as we talked
softly , c olloquy changing from the gossip and small jokes of
the day to the language of the night. Let our talk go from
words to touch, from breath to the small movements of the
body that were in themselves question and answer; the
completion of our conversation  come at last to silence in the
unity of sleep.
But trou ble lay on the house tonight, and there was no peace
between us.
He r oamed the house like a cag ed wolf, picking things up
and putt ing them down. I tidied  away the things from dinner ,
watching him from the corners of my eyes. I wanted nothing
more than to talk to him—and at the same time, dreaded it. I
had prom ised B ree not to tell him about Bonnet. But I was a
bad enough liar at any time—and he knew my face so well.
I fil led a bucket of hot water from the big cauldron, and
took the pewter plates outside to rinse clean.I came back to find Jamie standing by the small shelf where
he kept his inkh orn, quills and p aper . He had not undressed for
bed, but he made no move to take them down and begin the
usual evening’ s work. But of course—he couldn’ t write, with
his damaged hand.
“Do you want me to write something for you?” I asked,
seeing him pick up a quill and put it down again.
He turned away with a restless gesture.
“No. I must write to Jenny , of course—and there are other
things that must be done—but I canna bear to sit down and
think just now .”
“I know how you feel,” I said sympathetically . He looked at
me, a trifle startled.
“I ca nna tell qu ite how I feel myself, Sassenach,” he said,
with a queer laugh. “If ye think ye know , tell me.”
“T ired,” I said, and laid a h and on his arm. “Angry .
W orried.” I glanced at Brianna asleep in the trundle.
“Heartbroken, maybe,” I added softly .
“All of that,” he said. “And a good bit more.” He wore no
stock, bu t plucke d at the collar of his shirt, as though it choked
him.
“I ca nna stay in here,” he said. H e glanced at me; I was still
dressed in my day clothes; ski rt, shift, and bodice. “W ill ye
come out and walk wi’ me a bit?”
I went at once to fetch my cloak. It was dark outside; he
wouldn’ t be able to watch my face.
W e pace d slowl y together , across the dooryard and past the
sheds, down to the penfold and the field beyond. I held his
arm, feeling it tense and stif f under my fingers.
I had  no  notion how to begin, w hat to say . Perhaps I should
simply keep quiet, I thought. Both of us were still upset,
though we had done our best to be calm for Brianna.I co uld feel th e rage boiling just under his skin. V ery
understandable, but anger is as volatile as kerosene—bottled
under pressure, with no tar get  on which to unleash it. An
unwary word of mine might be enough to trigger an explosion.
And if he exploded at me, I m ight either cry or go for his
throat—my own mood was far from certain.
W e walked for quite a long time, through the trees to the
dead cornfield, all round the e dge and back, moving all the
time soft-footed through a minefield of silence.
“Jamie,” I said at last, as we reached the edge of the field,
“what have you been doing with your hands?”
“What?” He swung toward me, startled.
“Y our h ands.” I caught one of  them, held it between my
own. “Y ou didn’ t do that kind of damage stacking chimney
stones.”
“Ah.” He stood still, letting me  touch the swollen knuckles
of his hand.
“Brianna,” he said. “She—she didna tell ye anything about
the man? Did she tell ye his name?”
I hesitated—and was lost. He knew me very well.
“She did tell ye, no?” His voice was thick with danger .
“She ma de me promise not to te ll you,” I blurted. “I told her
you’d know I w as keeping something from you; but Jamie, I
did promise—don’ t make me tell you, please!”
He snorted again, in half-amused disgust.
“A ye, I ken ye well, Sassenach; ye couldna keep a secret
from anyone who knows ye in t he slightest. Even wee Ian can
read ye like a book.”
He flapped a hand in dismissal.
“Dinna trouble your conscience. Let her tell me herself,
when sh e will. I can wait.” His bruised hand curled slowly
against his kilt, and a small shiver ran up my back.“Y our hands,” I said again.
He took  a deep breath and held them out before him, backs
up. He flexed them, slowly .
“D’ye recall, Sassenach, once when we were first acquent?
Dougal deviled me to where I t hought I must pound him, and
yet I couldna do it, then. Y ou told me, ‘Hit something, you’ll
feel better .’ ” H e gave me a wry , lopsided smile. “And I hit a
tree. It hurt, but you were right, no? I did feel better , at least
for a bit.”
“Oh.” I let out my breath, relieved that he didn’ t mean to
press th e matter . Let him wait, then; I doubted that he quite
realized yet that his daughter could be as stubborn as he was
himself.
“Did sh e—did she tell ye what happened?” I couldn’ t see
his face , but the hesitation in his speech was noticeable. “I
mean—” He drew in his breath with a deep hiss. “Did the man
hurt her?”
“No, not physically .”
I hesitated myself, imagining that I could feel the weight of
the ring  in my pocket, though of course I couldn’ t. Brianna
had not asked me to keep an ything to myself, other than
Bonnet’ s name, but I would no t tell Jamie any of the details
she had told me,  unless he asked. And I did not think he would
ask; it was the last thing he would want to know .
He d idn’ t ask; o nly muttered something under his breath in
Gaelic and walked on, head bent.
The sile nce once  broken, I found  that I could not bear it any
longer . Better to explode than s uf focate. I took my hand from
his arm.
“What are you thinking?”
“I am wondering—if it is as terrible to be—to be violated…
if it is—is not …if there is not…damage.” He shifted his
shoulders restlessly , half shrugging as though his coat were too
tight.I kn ew very we ll what was in his mind. W entworth prison,
and the faint sc ars that webbed his back, a net of dreadful
memory .
“Bad en ough, I suppose,” I said. “Though I expect you’re
right, it would be easier to sta nd if there were no physical
reminder of it. B ut then, there is  a physi cal remi nder of it,” I
felt obliged to a dd. “And a bloody noticeable one, come to
that!” His left hand curled at his side, clenching involuntarily .
“A ye, that’ s so,” he muttered. H e glanced uncertainly at me,
the half- moon’ s light gilding the planes of his face. “But still
—he didna hurt her , that’ s something. If he had…killing
would be too good for him,” he finished abruptly .
“There is the very minor detail that you don’ t precisely
‘recover ’ from pregnancy ,” I sa id with a marked edge to my
voice. “If he’d broken her bones  or shed her blood, she’d heal.
As it is—she isn’ t ever going to for get it, you know .”
“I know!”
I flinche d slightl y , and he saw it. He made a sketchy gesture
of apology .
“I didna mean to shout.”
I ga ve him bac k a brief nod of acknowledgment, and we
walked on, side by side, but not touching.
“It—” he began, and then broke of f, glancing at me. He
grimaced, impatient with himself.
“I do know ,” h e said, more quietly . “Y e’ll for give me,
Sassenach, but I ken the hell o f a lot more about the matter
than you do.”
“I w asn’ t ar guing with you. Bu t you haven’ t borne a child;
you can’ t know what that’ s like. It’ s—”
“Y ou ar e  ar guing wi’ me, Sassenach. Don’ t.” He squeezed
my arm,  hard, and let it go. The re was a touch of humor in his
voice, but he was dead serious overall.“I am trying to tell ye what I  know .” He stood still for a
minute, gathering himself.
“I haven a put myself in mind of Jack Randall for some good
time,” h e said at last. “I dinna w ant to do it now . But there it
is.” He shrugged again, and ru bbed a hand hard down one
cheek.
“There is body , and there is soul, Sassenach,” he said,
speaking slowly , ordering his ideas with his words. “Y ou’re a
physician; ye’ll ken the one well. But the other is more
important.”
I o pened my mo uth to say that I knew that as well as he did,
if no t better—but then shut it without saying anything. He
didn’ t no tice; he wasn’ t seeing t he dark cornfield, or the maple
wood with its leaves gone silv er with moonlight. His eyes
were fixed on a small room with thick stone walls, furnished
with a table and stools and a lamp. And a bed.
“Randall,” he said, and his voice  was meditative. “The most
of what he did to me—I could have stood it.” He spread out
the f ingers of his  right hand; the dressing on the cracked finger
shone white.
“I w ould have b een afraid, been hurt; I would have meant to
kill him for doin g it. But I could have lived, after , and not felt
his touch  always  on my skin, felt filthy in myself—were it not
that he wasna s atisfied with my body . He wanted my soul—
and he had it.” The white bandage vanished as his fist folded.
“A ye, well—ye ken all that.” H e turned away abruptly and
began to walk. I had to scurry to catch him up.
“What I  am saying, I suppose, is—was this man a stranger
to her , who only took her for a moment’ s pleasure? If it was
only her body that he wanted…then I think she will heal.”
He t ook a deep breath and let it out again; I saw the faint
white mist surround his head for a moment, the steam of his
anger made visible.
“But if he knew her—was close enough to want her ,  and not
just any woman —then perhaps it might be that he could touchher soul, and do real damage—”
“Y ou don’ t think he did real damage?” My voice rose,
despite myself. “Whether he knew her or not—”
“It is dif ferent, I tell ye!”
“No, it’ s not. I know what you mean—”
“Y ou don’ t!”
“I do! But why—”
“Because it is not your body that matters when I take you,”
he said. “And ye ken that well enough, Sassenach!”
He t urned and kissed me fierce ly , taking me completely by
surprise. He crushed my lips against my teeth, then took my
whole mouth with his, half biting, demanding.
I knew what he wanted of me; the same thing I wanted so
desperately of him—reassurance. But neither of us had it to
give, tonight.
His fing ers dug into my shoulders, slid upward and grasped
my neck. The h airs rose up on my arms as he pressed me to
him—and then he stopped.
“I can’ t, ” he said. He squeezed my neck hard, and then let
go. His breath came raggedly . “I can’ t.”
He stepp ed back and turned aw ay from me, groping for the
fence rail before him as though blind. He grasped the wood
hard with both hands, and stood there, eyes closed.
I was shaking, my legs gone watery . I wrapped my arms
around myself under my cloak and sat down at his feet. And
waited, my heart beating painfu lly loud in my ears. The night
wind moved through the trees on the ridge, murmuring
through the pines. Somewhere,  far away in the dark hills, a
panther screamed, sounding like a woman.
“It’ s not that I dinna want ye,” he said at last, and I caught
the faint rustle of his coat as he turned toward me. He stood
for a moment, head bowed, his bound hair gleaming in the
moonlight, face hidden by the d arkness, with the moon behindhim. At last he leaned down and took my hand in his bruised
one, lifting me to my feet.
“I w ant ye may be more than I ever have,” he said quietly .
“And C hrist! I do need ye, Cla ire. But I canna bear even to
think of  myself  as a man just now . I cannot touch you, and
think of what he—I can’ t.”
I touched his arm.
“I do understand,” I said, and did. I was glad that he hadn’ t
asked for the det ails; I wished I didn’ t know them. How would
it be, to make l ove with him, e nvisioning all the time an act
identical in its motions, but utterly dif ferent in its essence?
“I understand, Jamie,” I said again.
He opened his eyes and looked at me.
“A ye, ye do, do n’ t you? And that’ s what I mean.” He took
my arm and drew me close to him.
“Y ou could tear me limb from limb, Claire, without
touching me,” he whispered, “for ye know me.” His fingers
touched the side of my face. They were cold, and stif f. “And I
could do the same to you.”
“Y ou could,” I said, feeling a little faint. “But I really wish
you wouldn’ t.”
He smil ed a little at that, bent and kissed me, very gently .
W e stood together , barely touching save our lips, breathing
each other ’ s breath.
Y es,  we said silently to each other . Y es, I am still her e . It was
not rescue, but at least a tiny lifeline, stretched across the gulf
that lay between us. I did know what he meant, about the
dif ference between damage to body or soul; what I couldn’ t
explain to him was the link between the two that centered in
the womb. At last I stepped back, looking up at him.
“Bree’ s a very strong person,” I said quietly . “Like you.”
“Like me?” He gave a small snort. “God help her , then.”He sighed, then turned and began to walk slowly along the
line of the fence. I followed, hurrying a little to catch up.
“This m an, this Roger she speaks of. W ill he stand by her?”
he asked abruptly .
I too k a deep br eath and let it out slowly , not knowing how
to answer . I’d k nown Roger only a few months. I liked him;
was very fond of him, in fact. From everything I knew of him,
he was a thoroughly decent, honorable young man—but how
could I even pretend to know what he might think, do, or feel,
upon finding that Brianna had been raped? Even worse, that
she might well carry the rapist’ s child?
The best of me n might not be  able to deal with such a
situation; in my years as a doctor , I had seen even well-
established marriages shatter under the strain of smaller things.
And those that did not shatter , but were crippled by mistrust…
involuntarily , I pressed a hand against my leg, feeling the tiny
hardness of the gold circle in my pocket. Fr om F . to C. with
love. Always .
“W ould you do it?” I said at last. “If it were me?”
He g lanced at m e sharply , and opened his mouth as though
to speak . Then he closed it and looked at me, searching my
face, his brows knotted with troubled thought.
“I mean t to say ‘A ye, of course !’ ” he said slowly , at last.
“But I did promise ye honesty once, did I not?”
“Y ou did ,” I said, and felt my heart sink beneath its guilty
burden. How could I force him  to honesty when I couldn’ t
give it him back? And yet he had asked.
He struck the fencepost a light blow with his fist.
” Ifrinn!  Y es , damn it—I  would. Y ou would be mine, even if
the child  was not. And if you—yes. I would,” he repeated
firmly . “I should take you, and the child with ye, and damn the
whole world!”
“And never think about it afterward?” I asked. “Never let it
come in to your mind when you  came to my bed? Never seethe father when you looked at t he child? Never throw it back
at me or let it make a dif ference between us?”
He ope ned his  mouth to rep ly , but closed it without
speaking. Then I saw a change come over his features, a
sudden shock of sick realization.
“Oh, Christ,” he said. “Frank. Not me. It’ s Frank ye mean.”
I nodded, and he gripped my shoulders.
“What d id he do to ye?” he d emanded. “What? T ell me,
Claire!”
“He stoo d by me,” I said, sound ing choked even to my own
ears. “I tried to make him go, but he wouldn’ t. And when the
baby—when Brianna came—he loved her , Jamie. He wasn’ t
sure, he didn’ t think he could—neither did I—but he truly did.
I’m sorry ,” I added.
He took a deep breath and let go of my shoulders.
“Dinna be sorry for that, Sassenach,” he said gruf fly .
“Never .” He rubbed a hand acr oss his face, and I could hear
the faint rasp of his evening stubble.
“And w hat about you, Sassenach?” he said. “What ye said
—when he came to your bed. Did he think—” He broke of f
abruptly , leaving all the questions hanging in the air between
us, unstated, but asked nonetheless.
“It might have b een me—my fault, I mean,” I said at last,
into the  silence. “I couldn’ t fo r get, you see. If I could…it
might ha ve been dif ferent.” I sh ould have stopped there, but I
couldn’ t; the words that had been dammed up all evening
rushed out in a flood.
“It might have been easier—better—for him if it had  been
rape. That’ s what they told him, you know—the doctors; that I
had been raped and abused, and  was having delusions. That’ s
what eve ryone believed, but I kept saying to him, no it wasn’ t
that way , I insisted on telling him  the truth. And after a time—
he believ ed me, at least halfway . And that was the trouble; not
that I’d had another man’ s child—but that I’d loved you. And Iwouldn’ t stop. I couldn’ t,” I ad ded, in a softer tone. “He was
better th an me, Frank was. He c ould put the past away , at least
for Bree’ s sake. But for me—” T he words caught in my throat
and I stopped.
He turned then, and looked at me for a long time, his face
quite expressionless, eyes hidden by the shadows of his brows.
“And so ye liv ed twenty years with a man who couldna
for give ye for what was never your fault? I did that to ye, no?”
he said. “I am sorry , too, Sassenach.”
A small breath escaped me, not quite a sob.
“Y ou sa id you could tear me limb from limb without
touching me,” I said. “Y ou were right, damn you.”
“I am sorry ,” he whispered again, but this time he reached
for me, and held me tight against him.
“That I loved you? Don’ t be sorry for that,” I said, my voice
half muf fled in his shirt. “Not ever .”
He didn ’ t answer , but bent his head and pressed his cheek
against my hair . It was quiet; I  could hear his heart beating,
over and  under the wind in the  trees. My skin was cold; the
tears on my cheeks chilled instantly .
At l ast I let my arms drop fro m around him and stepped
back.
“W e’d better go back to the house,” I said, trying for a
normal tone. “It’ s getting awfully late.”
“A ye, I suppose  so.” He of fered  me his arm, and I took it.
W e pass ed in an easier silence down the path to the edge of the
gor ge a bove the stream. It w as cold enough that tiny ice
crystals glinted among the rocks where the starlight struck
them, bu t the creek was far from frozen. Its gur gle and rush
filled the air , and kept us from being too quiet.
“A ye, well,” he said, as we tu rned up the path past the
pigsty . “ I hope Roger W akefield is a better man than the two
of us—Frank and I.” He glanced  at me. “Mind ye, if he’ s not, I
shall beat him to a pudding.”Despite myself I laughed.
“That will be a gr eat  help to the situation, I’m sure.”
He s norted briefly and walked o n. At the bottom of the hill,
we t urned without speaking, and  came back in the direction of
the house. Just short of the path that led to the door , I stopped
him.
“Jamie,” I said hesitantly . “Do you believe I love you?”
He turned his head and looke d down at me for a long
moment before replying. The m oon shone on his face, picking
out his features as though they had been chiseled in marble.
“W ell, if ye don ’ t, Sassenach,” he said at last, “ye’ve picked
a verra poor time to tell me so.”
I let out my breath in the ghost of a laugh.
“No, it’ s not that,” I assured him. “But—” My throat
tightened, and I swallowed has tily , needing to get the words
out.
“I—I do n’ t say it often. Perhaps it’ s only that I wasn’ t raised
to say such things; I lived w ith my uncle, and he was
af fectionate, but not—well, I didn’ t know how married people
—”
He put his hand lightly over my mouth, a faint smile
touching his lips. After a moment, he took it away .
I took a deep breath, steadying my voice.
“Look, what I m ean to say is—if I don’ t say it, how do you
know  I love you?”
He stood still, looking at me, then nodded in
acknowledgment.
“I know because ye’re here, Sassenach,” he said quietly .
“And that’ s what ye mean, aye?  That he came after her—this
Roger . And so perhaps he will love her enough?”
“It’ s not a thing you’d do, just for friendship’ s sake.”He nodd ed again, but I hesitated , wanting to tell him more,
to impress him with the significance of it.
“I haven ’ t told you a great deal about it, because—there
aren’ t w ords fo r it. But one thing about it I could tell you.
Jamie—” I shivered involuntarily , and not from the cold. “Not
everyone who goes through the stones comes out again.”
His look sharpened.
“How d’ye ken that, Sassenach?”
“I can—I could—hear them. Screaming.”
I wa s shaking outright by this time, from a mixture of cold
and memory , and he caught my  hands between his own and
drew me close. The autumn wind rattled the branches of the
willows by the stream, a sound like dry , bare bones. He held
me until the shivering stopped, then let me go.
“It’ s cold, Sassenach. Come inside.” He turned toward the
house, but laid my hand on his shoulder to stop him again.
“Jamie?”
“A ye?”
“Should I—would you—do you need me to say it?”
He turne d around and looked d own at me. W ith the light
behind h im, he was haloed in moonlight, but his features were
once more dark.
“I d inna need it , no.” His voice was soft. “But I wouldna
mind if ye wanted to say it. Now and again. Not too often,
mind; I wouldna want to lose the novelty of it.” I could hear
the smil e in his voice, and couldn’ t help smiling in return,
whether he could see it or not.
“Once in a while wouldn’ t hurt, though?”
“No.”
I stepped close to him and put my hands on his shoulders.
“I love you.”
He looked down at me for a long moment.“I’m glad of it,  Claire,” he said quietly , and touched my
face. “V erra glad. Come to bed now; I’ll warm ye.”4 8
A W A Y  I N  A  M A N G E R
T he tiny stable was in a shallow cave under a rocky overhang,
walled in along the front with a stockade of unpeeled cedar
logs, sunk two feet deep in packed earth, stout enough to deter
the most resolute bear . Light spilled out through the open
upper h alf of the stable door , and ruddy , light-filled smoke
shimmered up the face of the clif f above, rippling like bright
water over the stone.
“Why a double door?” she had  asked. It seemed excessive
labor; an unnecessary refinement for such a crude structure.
“Y e mus t give the beasts a place  to look out,” her father had
explained, showing her where to smooth the leather strap
hinges tight around the curve of the wood. He picked up the
hammer to tack down the leath er and smiled at her , kneeling
over the half-made gate. “Keeps them happy , aye?”
She didn ’ t know  if the animals were happy in the stable, but
she  w as; cool and shadowy , smelling pungently of cut straw
and the droppings of grass-fed animals, it was a peaceful
refuge during the day , when its i nhabitants were out grazing in
the m eadow . In bad weather or at night, the little stockade was
a po cket of coz iness; once she had passed near enough after
dark to see the soft, misty exhalations of the animals drifting
through the gap between wood and rock, as though the earth
itself were breathing through pursed lips, warmly asleep in the
autumn cold.
It w as cold tonight, the stars sharp as needle points in the
hard, clear air . It was only five minutes’ walk from the house,
but Brianna was shivering und er her cloak by the time she
reached the stable. The light spilling out came not only from a
hanging lantern, she saw , but also from a small makeshift
brazier in the corner , providing heat and light for the vigil
within.Her fath er lay curled up on a bed of straw , his plaid drawn
over him, within arm’ s reach of the small brindled cow . The
heifer lay on he r chest, feet tucked to the side, grunting now
and then, a look of mild concentration on her broad white face.
His head lifted abruptly at the  sound of her step on the
gravel, and his hand went by reflex to his belt, under his plaid.
“It’ s me ,” she said, and saw him  relax as she came into the
light. He swung his feet to the s ide and sat up, rubbing a hand
over his face as she came in, carefully latching the lower gate
behind her .
“Y our m other ’ s not back yet?” S he was clearly alone, but he
glanced briefly over her shoulder as though hoping to see
Claire materialize out of the darkness.
Brianna shook her head. Claire had gone with Lizzie as
escort to attend a birth at one of  the farms at the far side of the
cove; if the child  hadn’ t arrived before sunset, they would stay
the night at the Lachlans’.
“No. Sh e said if she wasn’ t ba ck, I was to bring you up
some su pper , though.” She knelt and began to unpack the
small basket she had brought, la ying out small loaves of bread
stuf fed with cheese and tomato-pickle, a dried-apple tart, and
two ston e bottles—one of hot vegetable broth, the other of
cider .
“That’ s kind, lassie.” He smiled  at her and picked up one of
the bottles. “W ill ye have eaten yet, yourself?”
“Oh, yes,” she assured him. “P lenty .” She had  eaten, but
couldn’ t resist a quick look of longing at the fresh rolls; the
early faint sense of malaise had left her , replaced by an
appetite mildly alarming in its intensity .
He saw her gla nce, and with a smile, drew his dirk and
sliced one of the rolls in half, handing her the bigger piece.
They munched companionably for a few moments, sitting
side by side on  the straw , the silence broken only by soft
snuf fles and grunts from the sta ble’ s other inhabitants. The far
end of the stab le was fenced of f to provide a pen for thegigantic sow and her new brood  of piglets; Brianna could just
make th em out in the gloom—a  row of plump bodies packed
in the straw , prophetically sausage-shaped.
The rest  of the small space was divided into three rough
stalls. O ne belonged to the red cow , Magdalen, who lay in the
straw pe acefully chewing her cud, her month-old calf curled in
sleep ag ainst he r massive chest. The second stall was empty ,
filled w ith fresh straw , ready f or the brindled cow and her
tardy ca lf. The third stall held  Ian’ s mare, sides glossy and
bulging with the weight of an impending foal.
“It look s like a maternity ward in here,” Brianna said,
nodding toward Magdalen as she brushed crumbs of f her skirt.
Jamie smiled and raised a brow , as he always did when she
said something he didn’ t understand.
“Oh, aye?”
“That’ s a special part of a hospi tal, where they put the new
mothers and their babies,” she explained. “Mama would take
me to work with her sometimes, and let me go look at the
nursery while she did her rounds.”
She had a sudden memory of the smell of the hospital
corridor , faintly  acrid with the scent of disinfectant and floor
polish, the babies lying bundled, plump as piglets in their
bassinets, their blankets coded pink and blue. She always spent
a lon g ti me goin g up and down  the row , trying to pick which
one she would take home with her , if she could keep one.
Pink or blue? Fo r the first time, she wondered what the one
she would  n ow keep migh t wear . The tho ught of “it” as male
or femal e was strangely upsetting, and she pushed the thought
away with words.
“They put the b abies all behind a glass wall, so you could
look at them, but not breathe germs on them,” she said, with a
glance at Magdalen, contentedly oblivious to the strings of
green sa liva tha t dripped from h er placidly moving jaws onto
the head of her calf.“Germs,” he said thoughtfully . “A ye, I’ve heard about the
germs. Dangerous wee beasties, are they not?”
“They can be.” She had a vivid memory of her mother
checking her box of medical supplies for the visit to Lachlans’,
carefully refilling the lar ge glass bottle of distilled alcohol
from the  barrel in the pantry . And a more distant but equally
vivid m emory , of her mother explaining the past to Roger
W akefield.
“Childbirth was the most dangerous thing a woman could
do,” Claire had s aid, frowning in memory of the sights she had
seen. “Infection, ruptured placenta, abnormal presentation,
miscarriage, hemorrhage, puerperal fever—in most places,
surviving birth was roughly a fifty-fifty proposition.”
Brianna’ s finge rs felt cold, in spite of the hissing pine
chunks in the brazier , and her ravenous appetite seemed
suddenly to have deserted her . She set the rest of her roll down
on the straw , swallowing hard, feeling as though a bite of the
thick bread had wedged itself in her throat.
Her father ’ s broad hand touched her knee, warm even
through the wool of her skirt.
“Y our m other willna let ye com e to harm,” he said gruf fly .
“She’ s fought the germs before ; I’ve seen her . She didna let
them ha ve the better of me, and she willna let them trouble
you, either . She’ s a verra stubborn person, aye?”
She laughed, and the choking feeling eased.
“She’d say it takes one to know one.”
“I expec t she’ s right about that.”  He rose and walked around
the brin dled heifer , squatting down and squinting at her tail.
He stood up, shaking his head, and came to sit down again. He
settled c omfortably back and picked up the discarded part of
Brianna’ s roll.
“Is she doing a ll right?” Brianna bent and scooped up a
twist of  straw , holding it invitingly under the heifer ’ s nose.
The cow breathed heavily on her knuckles, but otherwise
ignored the attention, the lon g-lashed brown eyes rollingrestlessly to and fro. Now and then the bulging brindled sides
rippled, the cow’ s thick winter coat rough but shining in the
light of the hanging lantern.
Jamie frowned slightly .
“A ye, I think she’ll maybe do all right. It’ s her first calf,
though, and she’ s small for it. She’ s no much more than a
yearling herself; she shouldna have been bred so early , but…”
He shrugged, and took another bite of roll.
Brianna wiped the sticky moisture from her hand with a fold
of her skirt. Feeling suddenly  restless, she stood up and
walked over to the pigpen.
The vast curve o f the sow’ s bell y rose up out of the hay like
a swolle n balloo n, pink flesh v isible beneath the soft, sparse
white hair . The sow lay in stup orous dignity , breathing slow
and deep, ignoring the squirm s and squeaks of the hungry
brood th at scrab bled at her und erside. One piglet was nudged
too roug hly by a fellow and momentarily lost his hold; there
was a high-pitched shriek of protest, and a jet of milk spurted
from the suddenly released nipple, hissing softly into the hay .
Brianna felt a slight tingle in her own breasts; they seemed
suddenly heavier than usual, resting on her folded forearms as
she leaned on the fence.
It w asn’ t a particularly aesthetic picture of motherhood—
not exactly Madonna and Chi ld—but there was something
vaguely reassuring about the sow’ s nonchalant maternal
torpor , nonetheless—a sort of careless confidence, a blind trust
in natural processes.
Jamie had another look at the brindled cow , and came to
stand beside Brianna by the pigpen.
“That’ s a good wee lass,” he said approvingly , with a nod at
the s ow . As though in reply , the sow released a long, rumbling
fart, and shifted a bit, stretching out in the straw with a
voluptuous sigh.
“W ell, she does look as though she knows what she’ s
doing,” Brianna agreed, biting her lip.“That sh e does. She’ s a wicked  temper , but she’ s an able
mother , for -bye. This will be her fourth litter , and not one lost
or a runt weaned yet.” He nodde d approvingly at the sow , then
glanced at the brindled heifer . “I  could hope that one does half
so well.”
She took a deep breath.
“What if she doesn’ t?”
He d idn’ t answer at once, but stood leaning on the fence,
looking down at the gently squirming litter . Then his shoulders
rose slightly .
“If she canna bring forth the calf alone, and I canna pull it
for h er , then I shall have to slau ghter her ,” he said, matter -of-
factly . “If I ca n save the cal f, I can maybe foster it on
Magdalen.”
Her insi des clenched tight, making lumps and knots of the
food she’d eaten. She’d seen the dirk at his belt, of course, but
it was so much a part of his normal costume, she hadn’ t
thought to question its presenc e in this pastoral setting. The
small round presence in her be lly lay still and heavy , like a
time bomb waiting.
He c rouched beside the brindled  heifer , and ran a light hand
over the bulging flank. Evidentl y satisfied for the moment, he
scratched the cow between the ears, muttering in Gaelic.
How could he murmur endearments to it, she thought,
knowing that within hours he might be slicing into its living
flesh? It seemed cold-blooded; did a butcher whisper “Sweet
lass” to his vic tims? A small icy doubt dropped into her
stomach, to join the other cold  weights that lay there, like a
collection of ball bearings.
He stoo d up and stretched himself, groaning as his spine
crackled. He shifted his shoulders, settled, blinked, and smiled
at her .
“W ill I walk ye to the house, lassie? It will be some time
before aught happens here.”She loo ked up at him, hesitat ing, but then made up her
mind.
“No, I’ll wait with you a little while. If you don’ t mind?”
Now , she decided on impulse. S he would ask now . She had
been waiting for days for the right time, but when could a time
possibly be  r igh t fo r somet hing like this? A t least they would
be alone now , with no chance of disturbance.
“As ye like. I shall be glad of the company .”
Not for long,  she thought, as he turned away to rummage in
the bask et she had brought. She would much have preferred
darkness. It would have been a lot easier to ask what she
needed to know , on the dark trail to the house. But words
wouldn’ t be enough; she had to see his face.
Her mou th was dry; she accepted gratefully when he of fered
her a cup of cider . It was strong and rich, and the slight buzz of
alcohol seemed to lighten the weight in her belly a little.
She gave  him the cup but didn’ t wait for him to drink, afraid
the mom entary heartening ef fect of the cider would desert her
before she could get the words out.
“Da—”
“A ye, lass?” He was pouring more cider , his eyes fixed on
the cloudy golden stream.
“I need to ask you something.”
“Mm?”
She took a deep breath and got it out in a rush.
“Did you kill Jack Randall?”
He f roze for a moment, the jug s till tilted over the cup. Then
he turne d the jug carefully upright, and set it down on the
floor .
“And where will ye have heard  that name?” he asked. He
looked a t her straight on, his vo ice as level as his eyes. “From
your father , maybe? From Frank Randall?”“Mother told me about him.”
A m uscle twitched near the co rner of his mouth, the only
outward indication of shock.
“Did she.”
It wasn’ t a question, but she answered it anyway .
“She told me wh at—what happened. What he d-did to you.
At W entworth.”
Her sma ll spurt of courage was exhausted, but it didn’ t
matter; she was in too deep to go back now . He simply sat and
looked at her , the gourd cup for gotten in his hand. She longed
to take it and drain it herself, but didn’ t dare.
It occur red to her , much too la te, that he might think it a
betrayal that Claire had told any one, let alone her . She rushed
ahead, babbling in her nervousness.
“It wasn’ t now; it was before—I didn’ t know you—she
thought I’d never meet you. I mean—I don’ t think—I know
she didn’ t mean to—” He raised one eyebrow at her .
“Be still, aye?”
She was only too glad to stop t alking. She couldn’ t look at
him, but sat staring down at her lap, her fingers pleating the
russet cloth of h er skirt. The silence lengthened, broken only
by the shiftings  and muf fled s queals of the piglets, and an
occasional digestive rumbling from Magdalen.
Why hadn’ t she found some oth er way? she wondered, in an
agony of embarrassment. Thou sh alt not uncover they fath er ’ s
nakedness . T o invoke Jack  Randall’ s name was to invoke the
images of what he had done—and that was not something she
could bear even to think about. She should have asked her
mother , let Claire ask him…but no. There hadn’ t been any
choice, not really . She had to find out from him…
Her racing thoughts were interrupted by his words, calmly
spoken.
“Why are ye asking, lass?”She jerked her h ead up, to find  him watching her over his
undrunk cider . He didn’ t look  upset, and the jelly in her
backbone stif fened a little. She c lenched her fists on her knees
to steady herself, and met his eyes, straight on.
“I need to know whether it wil l help. I want to kill…him.
The man who—” She made a v ague gesture at her belly , and
swallowed hard. “But if I do, and it doesn’ t help—” She
couldn’ t go on.
He didn’ t seem shocked; abstracted, rather . He raised the
cup to his mouth and took a sip, slowly .
“Mmphm. And will ye have killed a man before?” He
phrased it as a question, but she knew it wasn’ t. The muscle
quivered near his mouth again—with amusement, she thought,
not shock—and she felt a quick spurt of anger .
“Y ou th ink I can’ t, don’ t you? I can. Y ou’d better believe
me, I can!” Her  hands spread out, gripping her knees, broad
and capable. She thought she co uld do it; though her image of
how it might happen wavered. In cold blood, shooting seemed
the best,  perhaps the only certa in way . But trying to imagine
this, she had r ealized vividly the truth of the old saying
“Shooting’ s too good for him.”
It might be too good for Bonnet; it wouldn’ t be nearly good
enough for her . In the night when she flung of f her blankets,
unable to bear even this sligh t weight and its reminder of
restraint, she didn’ t just want him dead—she wanted to kill
him, purely and passionately—kill him with her hands, taking
back by the flesh what had been taken from her by that means.
And yet… what good would it be to murder him, if he would
still hau nt her? There was no way to know—unless her father
could tell her .
“W ill you tell m e?” she blurted. “Did you kill him, finally—
and did it help?”
He s eemed to b e thinking it over , his eyes traveling slowly
over her , narrowed in assessment.“And what would be helped by your doing murder?” he
asked. “It willna take the child from your belly—or give ye
back your maidenheid.”
“I know  that!” She felt her face flush hot, and turned away ,
irritated both with him and her self. They spoke of rape and
murder , and she was embarrassed to have him mention her lost
vir ginity? She forced herself to look back at him.
“Mama said you tried to kill Jac k Randall in Paris, in a duel.
What did you  think you’d get back?”
He rubb ed his chin hard, then dr ew in his breath through his
nose and let it out slowly , eyes f ixed on the stained rock of the
ceiling.
“I mean t to take back my manhood,” he said softly . “My
honor .”
“Y ou think my honor isn’ t worth taking back? Or do you
figure it ’ s the same thing as my maidenheid ?” S he m ocked his
accent nastily .
Sharp blue eyes swung back to hers.
“Is it the same thing to you ?”
“No, it is not,” she said, through clenched teeth.
“Good,” he said, shortly .
“Then a nswer m e, damn it!” Sh e struck a fist on the straw ,
finding no satisfaction in the sou ndless blow . “Did killing him
give you back your honor? Did it help? T ell me the truth!”
She stop ped, breathing heavily . She glared at him, and he
met her eyes with a cold stare. Then he raised the cup abruptly
to hi s m outh, sw allowed the cider in one gulp, and set the cup
down on the hay beside him.
“The tru th? The truth is that I dinna ken whether I killed
him or no.”
Her mouth dropped open in surprise.
“Y ou don’ t know  whether you killed him?”“I said so.” A slight jerk of the shoulders betrayed his
impatience. He stood up abru ptly , as if unable to sit any
longer .
“He died  at Culloden, and I wa s there. I woke on the moor
after the  battle, with Randall’ s corpse on top of me. I ken that
much—and not much more.” He paused as though thinking,
then, mind made up, he thrust o ne knee forward, pulled up his
kilt and nodded downward. “Look.”
It w as an old scar , but no less impressive for its age. It ran
up the inner side of his thigh, ne arly a foot in length, its lower
end starred and knotted like the head of a mace, the rest of it a
cleaner line, though thick and twisted.
“A b ayonet, I ex pect,” he said, l ooking at it dispassionately .
He dropped the kilt, hiding the scar once more.
“I r emember the feel of the b lade strikin’ bone, and no
more. Not what came after—or before.”
He took  a deep, audible breath, and for the first time she
realized that his apparent calmn ess was taking a good deal of
ef fort to maintain.
“I th ought it a blessing—that I couldna remember ,” he said
at last. He wasn’ t looking at her , but into the shadows at the
end of the stable. “There were gallant men who died there;
men I loved well. If I didna know their deaths; if I couldna
recall them or s ee them in my mind—then I didna have to
think of them as dead. Maybe that was cowardice, maybe not.
Perhaps I chose not to remember that day; perhaps I cannot if I
would.” He looked down at her , his eyes gone softer , but then
turned away , plaid swinging, not waiting for an answer .
“Afterward—aye, well. V engeance didna seem important,
then. There were a thousand dead men on that field, and I
thought I should be one of them  in hours. Jack Randall…” He
made an odd, im patient gesture, brushing aside the thought of
Jack Ra ndall as he might a biting deerfly . “He was  one of
them. I thought I could leave him to God. Then.”She took  a deep breath, trying to keep her feelings under
control. Curio sity and sympathy struggled with an
overwhelming feeling of frustration.
“Y ou’re…all right, though. I mean—in spite of what he—
did to you?”
He gave her a look of exasperation, understanding mingled
with half-angry amusement.
“Not many die of it, lass. Not me. And not you.”
“Not yet .” In voluntarily ,  she put a hand over her belly . She
stared up at him. “I guess we’ll see in six months if I die of it.”
That rattled him; she could see  it. He blew out his breath
and scowled at her .
“Y e’ll do fine,” he said curtly . “Y e’re wider through the hip
than yon wee heifer .”
“Like your mother? Everybody says how much I’m like her .
I g uess she was wide through t he hip, too, but it didn’ t save
her ,  did it?”
He flinc hed. Quick and sharp as though she’d slapped him
across the face with a stinging  nettle. Perversely , seeing it
filled her with panic, rather than the satisfaction she’d
expected.
She und erstood then that his pr omise of protection was in
good part illusion. He would kill for her , yes. Or willingly die
himself, she had no doubt. He would—if she let him—avenge
her honor , destroy her enemies. But he could not defend her
from her  own child; he was as powerless to save her from that
threat as if she had never found him.
“I’ll die ,” she said, cold certainty filling her belly like
frozen mercury . “I know I will.”
“Y e won ’ t!” He rounded on he r fiercely , and she felt his
hands bite into her upper arms. “I will not let you!”
She would have given anythin g to believe him. Her lips
were numb and stif f, rage giving way to a cold despair .“Y ou can’ t help,” she said. “Y ou can’ t do anything!”
“Y our mother can,” he said, but sounded only half
convinced. His grip slackened, and she wrenched herself free.
“No, she can’ t—not without a hospital, without drugs and
things. If it—if it goes wrong, all she can do is try to save the
b-baby .” Despite herself, her gaze flickered to his dirk, blade
gleaming cold against the straw where he had left it.
Her knees felt watery , and sh e sat down suddenly . He
snatched up the jug and slopped cider into a cup, pushing it
under her nose.
“Drink it,” he sa id. “Drink up, lass, you’re pale as my sark.”
His hand was on  the back of her head, ur ging her . She took a
sip, but choked and drew back, waving him of f. She drew a
sleeve across her wet chin, wiping of f the spilled cider .
“Y ou kn ow what’ s the worst? Y ou said it wasn’ t my fault,
but it is.”
“It is not!”
She flapped a hand at him, bidding him be quiet.
“Y ou talked about cowardice; you know what it is. W ell, I
was a coward. I should have fought, I shouldn’ t have let him…
but I was scared of him. If I’d been brave enough, this
wouldn’ t have happened, but I w asn’ t, I was scared! And now
I’m even more scared,” she said, voice breaking. She took a
deep breath to steady herself, bracing her hands on the straw .
“Y ou can’ t help, and neither c an Mama, and I can’ t do
anything either . And Roger—” Her voice did crack then, and
she bit her lip hard, forcing back tears.
“Brianna— a leannan …” He made a move to comfort her ,
but she drew back, arms folded tight across her stomach.
“I keep thinking —if I kill him,  that’ s something I can do.
It’ s the only  t hing I can do. If I—if I have to die, at least I’ll
take him  with me, and if I don’ t—then maybe I can for get, if
he’ s dead.”“Y e willna for get.” The words were blunt and
uncompromising as a blow to the stomach. He was still
holding the cup of cider . Now  he tilted back his head and
drank, quite deliberately .
“It d oesna matter , though,” he said, setting down the cup
with an air of businesslike finality . “W e shall find you a
husband, and once the babe’ s bo rn, ye willna have much time
to fret.”
“What?” She gaped at him. “What do you mean, find me a
husband?”
“Y ou’ll need one, aye?” he said , in tones of mild surprise.
“The ba irn mus t have a father .  And if ye willna tell me the
name of the man who’ s given ye a swollen belly , so that I
might make him do his duty by ye—”
“Y ou think I’d marry  the man who did this?” Her voice
cracked again, this time with astonishment.
His voice sharpened slightly .
“W ell, I’m thinkin’—are ye ma ybe playin’ wi’ the truth a
bit, lass? Perhaps it wasna rape at all; perhaps it was that ye
took a mislike to the man, and  ran—and made up the story
later . Y e  were not marked, after all. Hard to think a man could
force a lass of your size, if ye were unwilling altogether .”
“Y ou think I’m lying ?”
He raise d one brow in cynicism . Furious, she swung a hand
at him, but he caught her by the wrist.
“Ah, now ,” he s aid, reprovingly . “Y e’re no the first lass to
make a slip and try to hide it, bu t—” He caught the other wrist
as she struck at him, and pulled them both up sharply .
“Y e dinn a need to make such a fuss,” he said. “Or is it that
ye wanted the man and he threw ye over? Is that it?”
She swiveled in his grip, used her weight to swing aside,
brought her knee up hard. He turned only slightly , and her
knee col lided w ith his thigh, no t the vulnerable flesh between
his legs she had been aiming for .The blow must have bruised him , but didn’ t lessen his grip
on her wrists in  the least. She  twisted, kicking, cursing her
skirts. She hit his shin dead-o n at least twice, but he only
chuckled, as though finding her struggles funny .
“Is that all ye c an do, lassie?” He broke his grip then, but
only to shift both her wrists to one hand. The other prodded
her playfully in the ribs.
“Ther e was a man
 In Muir of Skene,
 He had dirks
 And I had none;
 But I fell on him
 W ith my thumbs,
 And wot you how ,
 I dirkit him,
 Dirkit him,
 Dirkit him?”
W ith each repetition, he dug a thumb hard between her ribs.
“Y ou fucking bastar d !” she screamed. She braced her feet
and yanked down on his arm as hard as she could, bringing it
into bitin g range . She lunged at his wrist, but before she could
sink her  teeth in his flesh, she found herself jerked of f her feet
and whirled through the air .
She ended hard on her knees, on e arm twisted up behind her
back so tightly that her shoulder joint cracked. The strain on
her elbow hurt; she writhed, try ing to turn into the hold, but
couldn’ t budge.  An arm like an iron bar clamped across her
shoulders, forcing her head down. And farther down.
Her chin drove into her chest; she couldn’ t breathe. And still
he force d her head down. Her  knees slid apart, her thighs
forced wide by the downward pressure.
“Stop!” she grunted. It hurt t o force sound through her
constricted windpipe. “Gd’ s sk, stp!”
The rele ntless p ressure paused, but did not ease. She could
feel him there behind her , an inexorable, inexplicable force.She reached back with her free h and, groping for something to
claw , something to hit or bend, but there was nothing.
“I could break your neck,” he said, very quietly . The weight
of his arm left her shoulders, though the twisted arm still held
her bent forward, hair loose and  tumbled, nearly touching the
floor . A  hand settled on her neck. She could feel thumb and
index fingers on either side, pressing lightly on her arteries. He
squeezed, and black spots danced before her eyes.
“I could kill you, so.”
The han d left her neck, and touched her , deliberately , knee
and sho ulder , cheek and chin, emphasizing her helplessness.
She jerked her head away , not letting him touch the wetness,
not wan ting him to feel her tears of rage. Then the hand
pressed sudden and brutal on the small of her back. She made
a sm all, choked sound and arch ed her back to keep her arm
from breaking, thrusting out her  hips backward, legs spread to
keep her balance.
“I c ould use y e as I would,”  he said, and there was a
coldness in his voice. “Could you stop me, Brianna?”
She felt as though she would suf focate with rage and shame.
“Answer me.” The hand took her by the neck again, and
squeezed.
“No!”
She was free. So suddenly released, she pitched forward
onto her face, b arely getting one hand down in time to save
herself.
She lay on the s traw , panting and sobbing. There was a loud
whuf fle near her head—Mag dalen, roused by the noise,
leaning out of h er stall to investigate. Slowly , painfully , she
raised herself to a sitting position.
He was standing over her , arms folded.
“Damn you!” she gasped. She slammed a hand down in the
hay . “God, I want to kill you!”He stood quite still, looking down at her .
“A ye,” he said quietly . “But ye can’ t, can you?”
She stared up at him, not understanding. His eyes were
intent on hers, not angry , not mocking. W aiting.
“Y ou can’ t, ” he repeated, with emphasis.
And then realization came, flooding down her aching arms
to her bruised fists.
“Oh, God,” she said. “No. I ca n’ t. I couldn’ t. Even if I’d
fought him…I couldn’ t .”
Quite suddenly she began to cry , the knots inside her
slipping loose, the weights shift ing, lifting, as a blessed relief
spread t hrough her body . It had n’ t been her fault. If she had
fought with all her strength—as she had fought just now—
“Couldn’ t,” she said, and swallowed hard, gasping for air . “I
couldn’ t have stopped him. I ke pt thinking, if only I’d fought
harder…but it wouldn’ t have  mattered. I couldn’ t have
stopped him.”
A hand touched her face, big and very gentle.
“Y ou’re a fine, braw lassie,” h e whispered. “But a lassie,
nonetheless. W ould ye fret your heart out and think yourself a
coward because ye couldna fight of f a lion wi’ your bare
hands? It’ s the same. Dinna be daft, now .”
She wiped the back of her hand under her nose, and snif fed
deeply .
He put a hand under her elbow and helped her up, his
strength no longer either threat or mockery , but unutterable
comfort. Her knees stung, where she had scraped them on the
ground. Her legs wobbled, bu t she made it to the haypile,
where he let her sit down.
“Y ou could just have told  me, you know ,” she said. “That  it
wasn’ t my fault.”
He smiled faintly .“I d id. Y e could na believe me, though, unless ye knew for
yourself.”
“No. I guess not.” A profound but peaceful weariness had
settled o n her like a blanket. This time she had no ur ge to tear
it of f.
She wat ched, fe eling too limp to  move, as he wetted a cloth
from the  trough  and wiped her face, straightened her twisted
skirts, and poured out a drink for her .
When he  handed her the freshly  filled cup of cider , though,
she laid a hand o n his arm. Bone  and muscle were solid, warm
under her hand.
“Y ou could have fought back. But you didn’ t.”
He laid a big hand over hers, squeezed and let it go.
“No, I didna fight,” he said quietly . “I gave my word—for
your mo ther ’ s life.” His eyes me t hers squarely , neither ice nor
sapphire now , but clear as water . “I dinna regret it.”
He t ook her by the shoulders, and eased her down onto the
piled hay .
“Do ye rest a bit, a leannan .”
She lay down, but reached up t o touch him as he knelt by
her .
“Is it true—that I won’ t for get?”
He paused for a moment, hand on her hair .
“A ye, th at’ s true,” he said softl y . “But it’ s true, too, that it
willna matter after a time.”
“W on’ t it?” She was too tired ev en to wonder what he might
mean by  this. She felt almost w eightless; strangely remote, as
though s he no longer inhabited her troublesome body . “Even if
I’m not strong enough to kill him?”
A cl ear cold dra ft from the open door cut through the warm
fog of smoke, m aking all the a nimals stir . The brindled cow
shifted her weight in sudden irritation and let out a low-throated mwaaah,  not of distress so much as of querulous
complaint.
She felt her fath er glance at the  cow before turning back to
her .
“Y ou’re a verra strong woman, a bheanachd, ” he said at
last, very softly .
“I’m not strong. Y ou just proved I’m not—”
His hand on her shoulder stopped her .
“That’ s not what I mean.” He stopped, thinking, his hand
smoothing her hair , over and over .
“She wa s ten when our mother died, Jenny was,” he said at
last. “It was the day after the funeral when I came into the
kitchen and found her kneeling on a stool, to be tall enough to
stir the bowl on the table.
“She was wearing my mother ’ s apron,” he said softly ,
“folded up under the arms, an d the strings wrapped twice
about her waist. I could see she’d been weepin’, like I had, for
her face was all stained and her eyes red. But she just went on
stirring, staring down into the bowl, and she said to me, ‘Go
and wash, Jamie; I’ll have supper for you and Da directly .’ “
His eyes closed altogether , and h e swallowed once. Then he
opened them, and looked down at her again.
“A ye, I ken fine  how strong women are,” he said quietly .
“And you’re strong enough f or what must be done, m’
annsachd —believe me.”
He s tood up then, and went to the cow . It had risen to its
feet and was mo ving restlessly in a small circle, swaying and
shuf fling on its tether . He caught it by the tether rope, gentled
it w ith hands a nd words, made his way behind the heifer ,
frowning in concentration. She saw him turn his head and
look, to check his dirk, then turn back, murmuring.
Not a loving bu tcher , no. A sur geon in his way , like her
mother . From this odd plateau of remoteness, she could see
how much her parents—so wi ldly dif ferent in temperamentand manner—w ere alike in this one respect; that odd ability to
mingle compassion with sheer ruthlessness.
But they were dif ferent even i n that, she thought; Claire
could hold life and death tog ether in her hands, and yet
preserve herself,  hold aloof; a doctor must go on living, for the
sake of her patients, if not for her own sake. Jamie would be
ruthless toward himself, as much as—or more than—he would
be to anyone else.
He had thrown of f his plaid; now he unfastened his shirt,
with no haste b ut neither with any wasted motion. He pulled
the p ale linen over his head and laid it neatly aside, returning
to his watching post at the heifer ’ s tail, ready to assist.
A lo ng ripple r an down the cow’ s rounded side, and the
torchlight glimm ered white on the tiny knot of a scar over his
heart. Uncover his nakedness? He would strip himself to the
bone, if he thought it necessary . And—a much less comforting
thought—if he thought it neces sary , he would do the same to
her , without a moment’ s hesitation.
He had a hand a t the base of the cow’ s tail, speaking to it in
Gaelic, soothing, encouraging. She felt as though she could
almost grasp the sense of his words—but not quite.
All might be well, or it might not. But whatever happened,
Jamie Fraser would be there, fighting. It was a comfort.
Jamie p aused by the upper fence of the cowpen, on the rise
above th e house . It was late, and he was more than tired, but
his mind kept h im wakeful. The calving completed, he had
carried B rianna down to the cabin—she sleeping sound as a
babe in his arms—and then gone out again, to seek relief in the
solitude of the night.
His shin s ached where she had kicked him, and there were
deep bru ises on his thighs; she was amazingly powerful for a
woman. None of that troubled him in the least; in fact, he felt
an odd and unex pected pride in this evidence of her strength.
She will be all right,  he thought. Surely she will.There was more hope than confidence behind this thought.
Y et it was on his own account th at he was wakeful, and he felt
at on ce troubled and foolish at t he knowledge. He had thought
himself thoroug hly healed, old hurts so far behind him that
they could safely be dismissed f rom mind. He had been wrong
about that, and it unsettled him to find just how close to the
surface the buried memories lay .
If h e were to find rest tonight, they would have to be
exhumed; the ghosts raised in order to lay them. W ell, he had
told the lass it took strength. He stopped, gripping the fence.
The rust le of night sounds faded slowly from his mind as he
waited, listening for the voice. He had not heard it for years,
had thought never to hear it aga in—but he had already heard
its echo once tonight; seen the b laze of anger ’ s phantom in his
daughter ’ s eyes, and felt its flames singe his own heart.
Better to  call it forth and face it boldly than let it lie in
ambush. If he could not face his own demons, he could not
conquer hers. He touched a brui se on his thigh, finding an odd
comfort in the soreness.
No one dies of it,  he’d said. Not you; not me .
The voice did not come at first; for a moment he hoped it
would n ot—perhaps it had  bee n lo ng enou gh…but then it was
there ag ain, whispering in his ear as though it had never left,
its insin uations a caress that bu rned his memory as once they
had burned his skin.
“Gently at first,” it breathed. “Softly . T ender as though you
were my  infant son. Gently , bu t for so long you will for get
there was a time I did not own your body .”
The night stood still around him, paused as time had paused
so long before, poised on the edge of a gulf of dread, waiting.
W aiting for the next words, known beforehand and expected,
but nonetheless…
“And then,” the voice said, lovi ng, “then I’ll hurt you very
badly . And you will thank me, and ask for more.”He stood quite still, face turned upward to the stars. Fought
back the sur ge of fury as it mur mured in his ear , the pulse of
memory in his blood. Then made himself surrender , let it
come. H e trem bled with remembered helplessness, and
clenched his teeth in rage—but stared unblinking at the
brightness of heaven overhead, invoking the names of the stars
as th e words of  a prayer , abandoning himself to the vastness
overhead as he sought to lose himself below .
Betelgeuse. Sirius. Orion. Antar es. The sky is very lar ge,
and you ar e very small . L et the words wash through him, the
voice an d its memories pass ov er him, shivering his skin like
the touch of a ghost, vanishing into darkness.
The Pleiades. Cassiopeia. T aurus. Heaven is wide, and you
ar e very small . Dead, but none the less powerful for being
dead. He spread his hands wide, gripping the fence—those
were po werful, too. Enough to beat a man to death, enough to
choke o ut a life. But even death  was not enough to loose the
bands of rage.
W ith great ef fort, he let go. T urned his hands palm upward,
in gesture of surrender . He reached beyond the stars,
searching. The words formed themselves quietly in his mind,
by habit, so quietly he was not aware of them until he found
them echoed in a whisper on his lips.
” ‘…For give us our tr espasse s as we for give those who
tr espass against us.’ “
He b reathed slowly , deeply . See king, struggling; struggling
to let go. ” ‘Lead  us not into temptation, but deliver us fr om
evil.’ “
W aited, in emptiness, in faith. And then grace came; the
necessary vision; the memory of Jack Randall’ s face in
Edinbur gh, stricken to bare bone by the knowledge of his
brother ’ s death. And he felt once more the gift of pity , calm in
its descent as the landing of a dove.
He c losed his ey es, feeling the wounds bleed clean again as
the succubus drew its claws from his heart.He sighed, and t urned his hands over , the rough wood of the
fence co mforting and solid under his palms. The demon was
gone. He  had been a man, Jack Randall; nothing more. And in
the reco gnition of that common frail humanity , all power of
past fear and pain vanished like smoke.
His shoulders slumped, relieved of their burden.
“Go in peace,” h e whispered, to the dead man and himself.
“Y ou are for given.”
The nigh t sound s had returned; the cry of a hunting cat rose
sharp on  the air , and rotting leaves crunched soft underfoot as
he made  his way back toward the house. The oiled hide that
covered the window glowed golden in the dark, with the flame
of th e ca ndle he  had left burning  in the hope of Claire’ s return.
His sanctuary .
He thought that he should perhaps have told Brianna all this,
too—but no. She couldn’ t understand what he had  t old  her ; he
had had  to show her , instead. H ow to tell her in words, then,
what he had learned himself by  pain and grace? That only by
for giveness could she for get—and that for giveness was not a
single act, but a matter of constant practice.
Perhaps she would find such grace herself; perhaps this
unknown Roger W akefield could be her sanctuary , as Claire
had been his. He found his natural jealousy of the man
dissolved in a passionate wish that W akefield could indeed
give her what he  himself could not. Pray God he would come
soon; pray God he would prove a decent man.
In the meantime , there were oth er matters to be dealt with.
He walked slowly down the hill, oblivious to the wind that
blew the kilt ab out his knees and billowed through his shirt
and plai d. Things must be done  here; winter was coming, and
he could not leave his women here alone with only Ian to hunt
for them and d efend them. He couldn’ t leave to search for
W akefield.
But if W akefield did not come? W ell, there were other ways;
he would see Brianna and the child protected, one way oranother . And at least his daughter was safe from the man who
had harm ed her . Permanently safe. He rubbed a hand across
his face, smelling blood still on his skin from the calving.
For give us our tr espasses as we  for give those who tr espass
against us . Y es, but what  of those who trespass against the
ones we love? He could not for give on another ’ s behalf—and
would n ot, if he could. But if not…how should he expect
for giveness in return?
Educated in the universities of P aris, confidant of kings and
friend to  philosophers, still he w as a Highlander , born to blood
and honor . The body of a warrior and the mind of a gentleman
—and the soul of a barbarian,  he thought wryly , to whom
neither God’ s nor mortal law stood more sacred than the ties of
blood.
Y es, there was f or giveness; she must find a way to for give
the man, for her own sake. But he was a dif ferent matter .
” ‘V engeance is mine, sayeth the Lor d.’ “  He whispered it to
himself. Then he looked up, away from the safe small glow of
hearth and home, to the flaming glory of the stars above.
“The hell it is,”  he said, aloud,  shamed but defiant. It was
ungrateful, he knew . And wrong , forbye. But there it was, and
no use to lie either to God or to himself about it.
“The hell it is,”  he repeated, lo uder . “And if I am damned
for what I’ve done—then let it be! She is my daughter .”
He s tood still for a moment, looking up, but there was no
answer from the stars. He nodde d once, as though in reply , and
went on down the hill, the wind cold behind him.4 9
C H O I C E S
November 1769
I  o pened  Daniel Rawlings’ s box, and stared at the rows of
bottles filled with the soft greens  and browns of powdered root
and leaf, the cl ear gold of distillations. There was nothing
among the bottles to help. V ery  slowly , I lifted the covering
that lay over the top compartment, over the blades.
I lifted out the scalpel with the curved edge, tasting cold
metal in  the back of my throat.  It was a beautiful tool, sharp
and stur dy , well  balanced, part of my hand when I chose it to
be. I balanced it on the end of my finger , letting it tilt gently
back and forth.
I s et it d own, an d picked up the long, thick root that lay on
the table . Part of the stem was still attached, the remnants of
leaves h anging limp and yellow . Only one. I had searched the
woods f or nearly  two weeks, but it was so late in the year that
the leave s of the smaller herbs h ad yellowed and fallen; it was
impossible to recognize plants t hat were no more than brown
sticks. I  had found this one in a sheltered spot, a few of the
distinctive fruits  still clinging to its stalk. Blue cohosh, I was
sure. But only one. It wasn’ t enough.
I had none of the European  herbs, no hellebore, no
wormwood. I could perhaps get wormwood, though with some
dif ficulty; it was used to flavor absinthe.
“And who makes absinthe in the backwoods of North
Carolina?” I said aloud, picking up the scalpel again.
“No one that I know of.”
I jumpe d, and the blade jabbed  deep into the side of my
thumb. Blood spattered across the tabletop, and I snatched the
corner of my ap ron, wadding the cloth hard against the wound
in reflex.“Christ, Sassena ch! Are ye all right? I didna mean to startle
ye.”
It didn’ t hurt a great deal yet, but the shock of sudden injury
made m e bite my lower lip. Looking worried, Jamie took my
wrist and lifted the edge of the wadded cloth. Blood promptly
welled from the cut and ran do wn my hand, and he clamped
the cloth back in place, squeezing tight.
“It’ s all right; just a cut. Where did you come from? I
thought you were up at the still.” I felt surprisingly shaky ,
perhaps from the shock.
“I w as. The mash isna ready  for distilling yet. Y ou’re
bleeding like a p ig, Sassenach. Are ye sure you’re all right?” I
was  bleeding badly; besides the sp lashes of blood across the
table, the corner of my apron was soaked with dark red.
“Y es. I probabl y severed a tin y vein. It’ s not an artery ,
though; it will stop. Hold my hand up, will you?” I fumbled
one-handed with  the strings of my apron, seeking to free it.
Jamie undid it w ith a quick yank, wrapped the apron round my
hand, and held the whole clumsy bundle up over my head.
“What were ye doing with your wee knife?” he asked,
eyeing t he dropp ed scalpel, where it lay alongside the twisted
cohosh root.
“Ah…I was going to slice up  that root,” I said, waving
weakly at it.
He g ave me a sharp look, glanced across to the sideboard,
where m y parin g knife lay in plain sight, then looked back at
me with raised brows.
“A ye? I’ve never seen ye use one of these”—he nodded at
the open array of scalpels and sur gical blades—”save on
people.”
My hand  twitched slightly in hi s, and he tightened his grip
on my thumb, s queezing hard enough to make me catch my
breath in  pain. He loosened his grip, then looked intently into
my face, frowning.“What in heaven’ s name are ye about, Sassenach? Y e look
as though I’d surprised ye about to commit murder .”
My lips felt stif f and bloodless. I  pulled my thumb out of his
grasp and sat d own, holding the wounded digit against my
bosom with my other hand.
“I was…decidin g,” I said, with great reluctance. It was no
good to lie; he would have to know , sooner or later , if Bree—
“Deciding what?”
“About Bree. What was the best way to do it.”
“T o do it?” His  eyebrows shot up. He glanced at the open
medicine case, then at the sc alpel, and a look of sudden
shocked comprehension washed over his face.
“Y ou mean to—”
“If she wants m e to.” I touched the knife, its small blade
stained with my own blood. “T here are herbs—or this. There
are awful risks to using herbs —convulsions, brain damage,
hemorrhage—but it doesn’ t mat ter; I don’ t have enough of the
right kind.”
“Claire—have you done it before?”
I l ooked up, to see him looking down at me with something
I had never see n in his eyes before—horror . I pressed my
hands flat on the table, to stop them trembling. I didn’ t do as
well with my voice.
“W ould it make a dif ference to you if I had?”
He stared at me  for a moment, then eased himself down on
the bench opposite, slowly , as though afraid he might break
something.
“Y e havena done it,” he said softly . “I know it.”
“No,” I said. I stared down at hi s hand, covering mine. “No,
I haven’ t.”
I could feel the tension go out of his hand; it relaxed, curling
over mine, enfolding it. But my own lay limp in his grasp.“I knew ye couldna do murder ,” he said.
“I could. I have .” I didn’ t look up at him, but spoke to the
tabletop. “I killed a man, a patie nt in my care. I told you about
Graham Menzies.”
He was silent for a moment, but held on to my hand,
squeezing slightly .
“I think it isna the same,” he sai d at last. “T o ease a doomed
man to a death he wishes…it se ems to me that that is mercy ,
not murder . And duty , too, perhaps.”
“Duty?” That did make me look at him, startled. The look of
shock had faded from his eyes, though he was still solemn.
“Do ye not recall Falkirk Hill, a nd the night Rupert died in
the chapel there?”
I no dded. It wasn’ t something easily for gotten—the cold
dark of the tiny church, the eerie  sounds of pipes and battle far
outside. Inside the black air thick with the sweat of frightened
men, and Rupert dying slowly o n the floor at my feet, choking
on h is blood. H e had asked Dougal MacKenzie, as his friend
and his chief, to hasten him…and Dougal had.
“It w ill be a doctor ’ s duty , too, I think,” Jamie said gently .
“If you are swor n to heal—but cannot—and to save men pain
—and can?”
“Y es.” I took a deep breath and curled my hand around the
scalpel. “I am  sworn—and by more than a doctor ’ s oath.
Jamie, she’ s my daughter . I would rather do anything in the
world but this—anything.” I lo oked up at him and blinked,
holding back tears.
“Don’ t you think I haven’ t tho ught about it? That I don’ t
know w hat the risks are? Jamie, I could kill her!” I pulled the
cloth of f my wounded thumb; the cut was still oozing.
“Look—it shoul dn’ t bleed like t hat, it’ s a deep cut but not a
bad one. But it does! I hit a vein. I could do the same to Bree
and never know it, until she began to bleed—and if so…Jamie,I couldn’ t stop it! She’d bleed to death under my hand, and
there isn’ t a thing I could do about it, not a thing!”
He looked at me, eyes dark with shock.
“How could ye think of doing s uch a thing, knowing that?”
His voice was soft with disbelief.
I dre w a deep, trembling breath, and felt despair wash over
me. There was no way to make him understand, no way .
“Because I know other things,” I said at last, very softly , not
looking at him. “I know what it is to bear a child. I know what
it is to have yo ur body and yo ur mind and your soul taken
from yo u and changed without your will. I know what it is to
be r ipped out o f the place you thought was yours, to have
choice taken from you. I know what it is,  do you hear me ? and
it isn’ t something anyone shoul d do without being willing.” I
looked up at him , and my fist clenched hard on my wounded
thumb.
“And yo u—for God’ s sake— you  kno w what I don’ t; what
it’ s like to live with the knowledge of violation. Do you mean
to t ell me that  if I could have cut that from you after
W entworth, that  you wouldn’ t have had me do it, no matter
what the risks? Jamie, that may be a rapist’ s child!”
“A ye, I know ,” he began, and had to stop, too choked to
finish. “I know , ” he began again, and his jaw muscles bulged
as he forced the words. “But I know the one thing else—if I
dinna ke n his father , I ken his grandsire well enough. Claire,
that is a child of my blood!”
” Y our  blo od?” I echo ed. I stared at him, the truth dawning
on me. “Y ou wa nt a grandchild badly enough to sacrifice your
daughter?”
“Sacrifice? It isna me that’ s mea ning to commit slaughter in
cold blood!”
“Y ou didn’ t mind the angel-makers at the Hopital des
Anges; you had pity for the women they helped, you said so.”“Those women had nay choice! ” T oo agitated to sit, he got
up a nd paced re stlessly back and forth in front of me. “They
had no one to protect them, no way to feed a child—what else
could they do, poor creatures? But it isna so, for Brianna! I
will nev er let her be hungry or cold, never let aught harm her
or the bairn, never!”
“That isn’ t all there is to it!”
He stared at me, brows drawn down in stubborn
incomprehension.
“If she bears a child here, she won’ t leave,” I said
unsteadily . “She can’ t—not without tearing herself apart.”
“So you  m ean to tear he r apart?” I flinc hed, as though he’d
struck me.
“Y ou w ant her to stay ,” I said, striking back. “Y ou don’ t
care tha t she has a life somewhere else, that she wants  to go
back. If  she’ll stay—and better yet, if she’ll give you a
grandchild—then you bloody do n’ t care what it does to her , do
you?”
It was his turn to flinch, but he turned on me squarely .
“A ye, I care! That doesna mean I think it right for you to
force her into—”
“What do you m ean, force her?” The blood was burning hot
in my cheeks. “For God’ s sake, you think I want to do this?
No! But, by God, she’ll have the choice if she wants it!”
I h ad to press m y hands together to stop them shaking. The
apron ha d fallen to the floor , stained with blood, reminding me
much too vividly of operating theaters and battlefields—and of
the terrible limits of my own skill.
I c ould feel his eyes on me, nar rowed and burning. I knew
that he was as torn in the matte r as I was. He did indeed care
desperately for Bree—but now I  had spoken the truth, we both
recognized it; deprived of his ow n children, living for so long
as an exile, there was nothing he wanted more in life than a
child of his blood.But he couldn’ t stop me, and he knew it. He wasn’ t used to
feeling h elpless, and he didn’ t l ike it. He turned abruptly and
went to the sideboard, where he stood, fists resting on top of it.
I had  never felt so desolate, so i n need of his understanding.
Did he not reali ze how horrible the prospect was for me, as
well as him? W orse, because it was my hand that must do the
damage.
I came up behin d him, and laid a hand on his back. He stood
unmoving, and I stroked him lightly , taking some comfort
from the simple fact of his presence, of the solid strength of
him.
“Jamie.” My thumb left a slight smear of red on the linen of
his shirt. “It will  be all right. I’m sure it will.” I was talking to
convince myself, as much as him. He didn’ t move, and I
ventured to put my arm aroun d his waist, laying my cheek
against t he curve of his back. I w anted him to turn and take me
in his arms, to assure me that it would indeed somehow be all
right—or at the least, that he would not blame me for whatever
happened.
He moved abruptly , dislodging my hand.
“Y e’ve a high opinion of you r power , have ye no?” He
spoke coldly , turning to face me.
“What do you mean by that?”
He gras ped my wrist in one hand, pinning it to the wall
above m y head. I could feel the tickle of blood down my wrist,
flowing from my wounded thumb. His fingers wrapped around
my hand, squeezing tight.
“Y e think it’ s y ours alone to say? That life and death is
yours?” I could feel the sma ll bones of my hand grind
together , and I stif fened, trying to pull free.
“It’ s not  mine to say! But if she  says—then yes, it’ s my
power . And yes, I’ll use it. Ju st like you would—like you
have,  w hen you’ve ha d to.” I shut my eyes, fighting down fear .
He wouldn’ t hurt me…surely? It occurred to me with a small
shock that he could indeed stop me. If he broke my hand…V ery slowly , he bent his head and rested his forehead
against mine.
“Look at me, Claire,” he said, very quietly .
Slowly , I opened my eyes and  looked. His eyes were no
more than an inch away; I could see the tiny gold flecks near
the cente r of his iris, the black ring surrounding it. My fingers
in his were slippery with blood.
He let go of my hand, and touched my breast lightly ,
cupping it for a moment.
“Please,” he whispered, and then was gone.
I sto od quite still against the wall, and then slowly slid to
the f loor in a bloom of skirts, th e cut on my thumb throbbing
with my heartbeat.
I wa s so  shaken by the quarrel w ith Jamie that I couldn’ t settle
to an ything. At last, I put on my cloak and went out, walking
up the ridge. I avoided the pa th that led across the Ridge
toward Fer gus’ s cabin, and down toward the road. I didn’ t
want to risk meeting anyone at all.
It was cold a nd cloudy , with a light rain sputtering
intermittently a mong the leaf-bare branches. The air was
heavy with cold moisture; let the temperature drop a few
degrees more, and it would snow . If not tonight, tomorrow—or
next week. W ithin a month at the most, the Ridge would be cut
of f from the lowlands.
Ought I to tak e Brianna to C ross Creek? Whether she
decided to bear the child or not, might she be safer there?
I sh uf fled through layers of w et, yellow leaves. No. My
impulse was to think that civilization must of fer some
advantage, but not in this case. T here was nothing Cross Creek
could of fer that would truly be of help in case of any
obstetrical emer gency; in fact, she might well be in active
danger from the medical practitioners of the time.
No, wha tever she decided, she w as better of f here, with me.
I w rappe d my arms about myse lf under my cloak, and flexedmy fing ers, trying to work some warmth and suppleness into
them, to feel some sense of surety in touch.
Please,  he’d said. Pleas e what? Please don’ t ask her , please
don’ t do it if she asks? But I had to. I swear by Apollo the
physician…not to cut for the stone, nor to pr ocur e abortion …
W ell, and Hippocrates was neither a sur geon, a woman…nor a
mother . As I’d t old Jamie, I’d s worn by something a lot older
than Apollo the physician—and that oath was in blood.
I never had do ne an abortion though I had had some
experience as a resident, in the post-care of miscarriage. On
the rare occasions a patient had asked it of me, I had referred
them to a colleague. I had no absolute objection; I had seen too
many wo men killed in body or spirit by untimely children. If it
was killing—and it was—then I thought it not murder , but a
justifiable homicide, undertaken in desperate self-defense.
At the same time, I could not bring myself to do it. The
sur geon’ s sense that gave me kn owledge of the flesh under my
hands gave me a lso an acute awareness for the living contents
of the womb. I c ould touch a pre gnant woman’ s belly , and feel
in m y fin gertips the second beating heart; could trace unseeing
the curve of limb and head, and the snakelike curl of the
umbilicus with its rush of blood, all red and blue.
I could not bring myself to destroy it. Not until now; when it
was a matter of killing my own flesh and blood.
How? It would have to be s ur gical. Dr . Rawlings had
evidently not done such procedu res; he had no uterine “spoon”
for s craping the womb, nor any of the slender rods for dilation
of the cervix. I could manage, though. One of the ivory
knitting needles, its point blunted; the scalpel, bent to a
shallow curve, its deadly edge sanded down for the delicate—
but no less deadly—job of scraping.
When? N ow . She was already t hree months gone; if it was
to be  do ne, it must be as soon as possible. Neither could I bear
to be in the same room with Jamie while the matter was
unresolved, feeling his anguish added to my own.Brianna had taken Lizzie to Fe r gus’ s house. Lizzie was to
stay and help Marsali, who had her hands full with the
distillery , little Germaine, and the farm work that Fer gus
couldn’ t manage single-handed. It was a terrible load for an
eighteen-year -old girl to be carrying, but she managed, with
tenacity and style. Lizzie could at least help with the
household chores, and mind the little fiend long enough to let
his mother rest now and then.
Brianna would come back before suppertime. Ian was away ,
hunting with Rollo. Jamie…without being told, I knew that
Jamie would not be back for some time. W e would have a little
while alone.
W ould it be a suitable moment to ask her such a question,
though—fresh fr om seeing Germaine’ s cherubic face? Though
on reflection, exposure to a two- year -old boy was probably the
best possible object lesson in the dangers of motherhood, I
thought wryly .
V aguely lightened by the faint whif f of humor , I turned
back, drawing my cloak around me against the increasing
wind. A s I came down the hill  I saw Brianna’ s horse in the
penfold; she was home. My stomach clenched in dread, I went
to lay the choice before her .
“I thought of it, ” she said, with a deep breath. “As soon as I
realized. I wondered if you could do—something like that,
here.”
“It w ouldn’ t be easy . It would b e dangerous—and it would
hurt. I don’ t even have any laudanum; only whisky . But yes, I
can do it—if y ou want me to. ” I forced myself to sit still,
watching her pace slowly back and forth before the hearth,
hands folded behind her in thought.
“It would have t o be sur gical,” I said, unable to keep quiet.
“I don’ t have the right herbs—and they aren’ t always reliable,
in any case. At least sur gery is…certain.” I laid the scalpel on
the table ; she should not be un der any illusions as to what Iwas sug gesting. She nodded at my words, but didn’ t stop her
pacing. Like Jamie, she always thought better while moving.
A tr ickle of swe at ran down my back, and I shivered. The
fire was  warm enough, but my  fingers were still cold as ice.
Christ, if she wanted it, would  I even be able to do it? My
hands had begun to tremble, with the strain of waiting.
She turned at la st to look at me, eyes clear and appraising
under thick, ruddy brows.
“W ould you have done it? If you could?”
“If I could—?”
“Y ou sai d once that you hated me, when you were pregnant.
If you could have not been—”
“God, no t you!”  I blurted, horro r -stricken. “Not you, ever . It
—” I knotted my hands together , to still their trembling. “No,”
I said, as positively as I could. “Never .”
“Y ou did say so ,” she said, looking at me intently . “When
you told me about Da.”
I rubbed a hand across my face, trying to focus my thoughts.
Y es, I had  told her that. Idiot.
“It was a horrible time. T errible. W e were starving, it was
war—the world was coming apart at the seams.” W asn’ t hers?
“At the time, it seemed as thoug h there was no hope; I had to
leave Ja mie, and the thought drove almost everything else out
of my mind. But there was one other thing,” I said.
“What was that?”
“It w asn’ t rape,” I said softly , meeting her eyes. “I loved
your father .”
She nodded, her face a little pale.
“Y es. But it might  b e Roger ’ s. Y ou did say tha t, didn’ t
you?”
“Y es. It might. Is the possibility enough for you?”She laid a hand over her stomach, long fingers gently
curved.
“Y eah. W ell. It isn’ t an it, to me . I don’ t know who it is, but
—” She stopped suddenly and glanced at me, looking
suddenly shy .
“I don’ t know  if this sounds—well…” She shrugged
abruptly , dismis sing doubt. “I had this sharp pain that woke
me up in the m iddle of the night, a few days…after . Quick,
like somebody had stabbed me with a hatpin, but deep.” Her
fingers curled inward, her fist pressing just above her pubic
bone, on the right side.
“Implantation,” I said softly . “When the zygote takes root in
the wom b.” Wh en that first, et ernal link is formed between
mother and child. When the sm all blind entity , unique in its
union of  egg and sperm, come s to anchor from the perilous
voyage of beginning, home from its brief, free-floating
existence in the body , and settle s to its busy work of division,
drawing sustenance from the flesh in which it embeds itself, in
a co nnection that belongs to n either side, but to both. That
link, which cannot be severed, either by birth or by death.
She nodded. “It was the strang est feeling. I was still half
asleep, but I…well, I just knew all of a sudden that I wasn’ t
alone.” Her lips curved in a fain t smile, reminiscent of wonder .
“And I said to…it…” Her eyes rested on mine, still lit by the
smile, “I said, ‘Oh, it’ s you.’ And then I went back to sleep.”
Her other hand crossed the first, a barricade across her belly .
“I thought it was a dream. That was a long time before I
knew . But I remember . It wasn’ t  a dream. I remember .”
I remembered, too.
I loo ked down a nd saw beneath my hands not the wooden
tabletop nor gleaming blade, but the opal skin and perfect
sleeping face of my first child,  Faith, with slanted eyes that
never opened on the light of earth.
Looked up into the same eyes , open now and filled with
knowledge. I saw that baby , too, my second daughter , filledwith bloody life, pink and crumpled, flushed with fury at the
indignities of birth, so dif ferent from the calm stillness of the
first—and just as magnificent in her perfection.
T wo mi racles I had been given, carried beneath my heart,
born of my body , held in my arms, separated from me and part
of me forever . I knew much to o well that neither death nor
time nor distance ever altered such a bond—because I had
been altered by it, once and forever changed by that
mysterious connection.
“Y es, I understand,” I said. And  then said, “Oh, but Bree!”
as th e knowledge of what her  decision would mean to her
flooded in on me anew .
She was watching me, brows d rawn down, lines of trouble
in he r fa ce, and it occurred to m e belatedly that she might take
my exhortations as the expression of my own regrets.
Appalled at the thought that she might think I had not
wanted her , or had ever wished she had not been, I dropped the
blade and reached out across the table to her .
“Bree,” I said, seized with panic  at the thought. “Brianna. I
love you. Do you believe I love you?”
She nodded without speaking, and stretched out a hand
toward me. I grasped it like a lifeline, like the cord that had
once joined us.
She clos ed her eyes, and for the first time I saw the glitter of
tears that clung to the delicate, thick curve of her lashes.
“I’ve al ways known that, Mama,” she whispered. Her
fingers t ightened around mine; I saw her other hand press flat
against her stomach. “From the beginning.”5 0
I N  W H I C H  A L L  I S  R E V E A L E D
B y late Novembe r , the days as well as the nights were cold,
and the rain clo uds began to hang lower on the slopes above
us. The weather unfortunately had no dampening ef fect on
people’ s temper s; everyone was increasingly edgy , and for
obvious reason: There was still no word of Roger W akefield.
Brianna was still silent about the  cause of their ar gument; in
fact, she almost never referred  to Roger anymore. She had
made her decision; there was nothing to do but to wait, and let
Roger make his—if he hadn’ t already . Still, I could see fear
warring with anger when she left her face unguarded—and
doubt hung over everyone like the clouds over the mountains.
Where was he? And what would happen when—or if—he
finally appeared?
I too k some resp ite from the prevailing mood of edginess by
taking s tock of the pantry . W inter was nearly here; the
foraging was over , the garden harvested, the preserving done.
The pan try shelves bulged with sacks of nuts, heaps of squash,
rows of potatoes , jars of dried tomatoes, peaches, and apricots,
bowls o f dried mushrooms, wh eels of cheese, and baskets of
apples. Braids of onions and g arlic and strings of dried fish
hung from the ceiling; bags of flour and beans, barrels of salt
beef and salt fi sh, and stone ja rs of sauerkraut stood on the
floor .
I cou nted over m y hoard like a squirrel reckoning nuts, and
felt soot hed by our abundance. No matter what else happened,
we would neither starve nor go hungry .
Emer ging from the pantry with  a wedge of cheese in one
hand and  a bowl of dry beans in the other , I heard a tap on the
door . Be fore I could call out, it opened and Ian’ s head poked
in, cautiously surveying the room.“Brianna’ s no here?” he asked. As she clearly wasn’ t, he
didn’ t wait for a n answer but stepped in, trying to smooth back
his hair .
“Have y e a bit o’ looking glass, Auntie?” he asked. “And
maybe a comb?”
“Y es, of course,” I said. I set down the food, got my small
mirror a nd the tortoiseshell comb from the drawer of the
sideboy and handed them to him, peering upward at his
gangling form.
His face seemed abnormally shiny , his lean cheeks blotched
with red, as tho ugh he had not only shaved but had scrubbed
the skin to the point of rawness. His hair , normally a thick,
stubborn sheaf of soft brown, was now slicked straight back on
the side s of his head with some kind of grease. Liberally
pomaded with the same substance, it erupted in an untidy quif f
over his forehead, making him look like a deranged porcupine.
“What h ave you  got on your hair , Ian?” I asked. I snif fed at
him and recoiled slightly at the result.
“Bear fat,” he said. “But it stank a bit, so I mixed in a wee
scoop of incense soap to mak e it smell better .” He peered
critically at himself in the mirr or and made small jabs at his
coif fure with the comb, which seemed pitifully inadequate to
the task.
He was wearing  his good coa t, with a clean shirt and—
unheard of touch for a workday—a clean, starched stock
wrapped about his throat, looking tight enough to strangle him.
“Y ou lo ok very nice, Ian,” I said, biting the inside of my
cheek. “Um…are you going somewhere special?”
“A ye, w ell,” he said awkwardly .  “It’ s just if I’m meant to be
courting, like, I thought I must try to look decent.”
Courting? I wondered at his haste. While he was certainly
interested in girls—and there were a few girls in the district
who made no secret of returnin g his interest—he was barely
seventeen. Men did marry that young, of course, and Ian hadboth his own land and a share in the whisky making, but I
hadn’ t thought his af fections so strongly engaged yet.
“I se e,” I said. “Ah…is the young lady anyone I know?” He
rubbed at his jaw , raising a red flush along the bone.
“A ye, well. It’ s—it’ s Brianna.” He wouldn’ t meet my eyes,
but the flush rose slowly over his face.
“What?” I said incredulously . I s et down the slice of bread I
was holding and stared at him. “Did you say Brianna? ”
His eyes were fixed on the f loor , but his jaw was set
stubbornly .
“Brianna,” he repeated. “I’ve co me to make her a proposal
of marriage.”
“Ian, you can’ t possibly mean that.”
“I d o,” he said, sticking out his long, square chin in a
determined manner . He glanc ed toward the window , and
shuf fled his feet. “W ill she—is she comin’ in soon, d’ye
think?”
The sharp scent of nervous perspiration reached me,
mingled with soap and bear fat, and I saw that his hands were
clenched in fists, tight enough to make the knobby knuckles
stand out white against his tanned skin.
“Ian,” I said, torn between exasperation and tenderness, “are
you doing this because of Brianna’ s baby?”
The whi tes of his eyes flashed a s he glanced at me, startled.
He nodded, shifting his shoulders uncomfortably inside the
stif f coat.
“A ye, of course,” he said, as though surprised that I should
ask.
“Then you’re not in love with he r?” I knew the answer quite
well, but thought we had better have it all out.
“W ell…no,” he said, the painful blush renewing itself. “But
I’m no promised to anyone else,” he hastened to add. “So
that’ s all right.”“It is not all rig ht,” I said firm ly . “Ian, that’ s a very , very
kind notion of yours, but—”
“Oh, it’ s not mine,” he interrupted, looking surprised.
“Uncle Jamie thought of it.”
“He what? ” A loud, incredulous voice spoke behind me,
and I whirled to  find Brianna standing in the doorway , staring
at Ian. She adva nced slowly into the room, hands fisted at her
sides. Just as sl owly , Ian retreated, fetching up with a bump
against the table.
“Cousin,” he said, with a bob o f his head that dislodged a
spike of greased hair . He bru shed at it, but it stuck out,
hanging disreputably over one eye. “I…ah…I…” He saw the
look on Brianna’ s face and promptly shut his eyes.
“I-have-come-to-express-my-desire-to-ask-for -your -hand-
in-the-blessed-sacrament-of-matrimony ,” he said in one
breath. He took in another , with an audible gasp. “I—”
“Shut up!”
Ian, his mouth opened to continue, immediately shut it. He
opened one eye in a cautious slit, like one viewing a bomb
momentarily expected to go of f.
Bree gla red from  Ian to me. Even in the dim room, I could
see the tight look of her mouth  and the crimson rising in her
cheeks. The tip of her nose wa s red, whether from the nippy
air outside or from annoyance, I couldn’ t tell.
“Did you know about this?” she demanded of me.
“Of course not!” I said. “For heaven’ s sake, Bree—” Before
I co uld finish, s he had whirled on her heel and run out of the
door . I could see the quick flash of her rusty skirts as she
hurried up the slope leading to the stable.
I pul led of f my apron and flung it hastily over the chair . “I’d
better go after her .”
“I’ll go, too,” Ian of fered, and I didn’ t stop him.
Reinforcements might be needed.“What do you think she’ll do? ” he asked, panting in my
wake as I hastened up the steep slope.
“God knows,” I said. “But I’m  afraid we’re going to find
out.” I was entirely too familiar with the look of a Fraser
roused to fury . N either Bree nor Jamie lost their temper easily ,
but when they did, they lost it thoroughly .
“I’m glad she didna strike me,” Ian said thankfully . “I
thought for a moment she was going to.” He pulled even with
me, his long leg s outstripping mine, hurrying though I was. I
could hear uplifted voices from the open half-door of the
stable.
“Why o n earth would you put poor little Ian up to such a
thing?” Brianna was saying, her voice high with indignation.
“I’ve never heard of such a high-handed, arrogant—”
“Poor little Ian?” Ian said, vastly af fronted. “What does she
—”
“Oh, high-handed, am I?” Jamie’ s voice interrupted. He
sounded both impatient and irritable, though not yet angry .
Perhaps I was i n time to avert full-scale hostilities. I peeked
through the stable door , to see them face-to-face, glaring at
each other over a lar ge pile of half-dried manure.
“And what better choice could I  make, will ye tell me that?”
he d emanded. “Let me tell y e, lassie, I thought of every
bachelor in fifty miles before I settled on Ian. I wouldna have
ye w ed t o a cruel man or a drunkard, nor yet a poor man—nor
one auld enough to be your grandsire, either .”
He shov ed a hand through his  hair , sure sign of mental
agitation, but made a masterful ef fort to calm himself. He
lowered his voice a bit, trying to be conciliatory .
“Why , I even put aside T ammas McDonald, for while he’ s a
fine stretch of land and a good temper , and he’ s an age for you,
he’ s a bittie wee  fellow forbye, and I thought ye wouldna care
to st and up side  by side with him before a priest. Believe me,
Brianna, I’ve done my best to see ye well wed.”Bree wasn’ t having any; her own hair had come loose
during her dash up the hill, an d was floating round her face
like the flames of a vengeful archangel.
“And w hat makes you think I want to be married to
anybody at all?”
His mouth dropped open.
“W ant?” he said incredulously . “And what has want  to do
with it?”
“Everything!” She stamped her foot.
“Now there you’re wrong, lassie ,” he advised her , turning to
pick up his fork. He eyed her stomach with a nod. “Y ou’ve a
bairn coming, who needs a nam e. Y our time to be choosy is
long since past, aye?”
He d ug his fork into the pile of manure and heaved the load
into the waiting barrow , then dug again, with a smooth
economy of motion born of years of labor .
“Now , Ian’ s a sweet-tempered lad, and a hard worker ,” he
said, eyes on his task. “He’ s got his own land; he’ll have mine,
too, in time, and that will—”
“I am  not going to marry anybody!” Brianna drew herself
up to her full he ight, fists balled at her sides, and spoke in a
voice loud enough to disturb the bats in the corners of the
ceiling. One small dark form detached itself from the shadows
and flit tered out into the gathering dusk, ignored by the
combatants underneath.
“W ell, then, make your own choice,” Jamie said shortly .
“And I wish ye well of it!”
“Y ou…are…not…listening!” Brianna said, grinding each
word between her teeth. “I’ve made my choice. I said I
won’ t…marry… anyone !” She punctuated this with another
stamp of her foot.
Jamie thrust the fork into the pile with a thump. He
straightened up and eyed Brianna, rubbing his fist across his
jaw .“A ye, well. I se em to recall hearin’ a verra similar opinion
expressed by your mother—the night before our wedding. I
havena asked her lately does she  regret bein’ forced to wed me
or n ot, but I flatter myself she’ s maybe not been miserable
altogether . Perhaps ye should go and have a word wi’ her?”
“It’ s not the same thing at all!” Brianna snapped.
“No, it’ s not,” Jamie agreed, keeping a firm grip on his
temper . The sun was low behin d the hills, flooding the stable
with a golden lig ht in which the creeping tide of red in his skin
was nonetheless quite visible. Still, he was making every
attempt to be reasonable.
“Y our m other w ed me to save her life—and mine. It was a
brave th ing she did, and gene rous, too. I’ll grant it’ s no a
matter o f life or death, but—hav e ye no idea what it is to live
branded as a wanton—or as a  fatherless bastard, come to
that?”
Seeing h er expr ession falter slightly at this, he pressed his
advantage, stretching out a hand to her and speaking kindly .
“Come, lassie. Can ye not brin g yourself to do it for the
bairn’ s sake?”
Her face tightened again and she stepped back.
“No,” she said, sounding strangled. “No. I can’ t.”
He dropped his hand. I could see them both, despite the
fading light, and saw the danger signs all too clearly , in the
narrowing of his eyes and the se t of his shoulders, squared for
battle. “Is that h ow Frank Randall raised ye, lass, to have no
regard for what’ s right or wrong?”
Brianna was trembling all over , like a horse that’ s run too
far .
“My father always did what was right for me! And he would
never ha ve tried to pull somethin g like this!” she said. “Never!
He  cared about me!”
At this, Jamie fi nally lost his temper , which went of f with a
bang.“And I don’ t?” he said. “I am  not trying my best to do
what’ s right for ye? In spite of your being—”
“Jamie—” I turned toward him , saw his eyes gone black
with ang er , and turned toward her . “Bree—I know he didn’ t—
you have to understand—”
“Of all the reck less, thoughtless, selfish ways in which to
behave!”
“Y ou self-righteous, insensitive bastard!”
“Bastard! Y e’ll call me  a  bastard, and your belly swe llin’
like a pumpkin with a child that ye mean to doom to finger -
pointing and calumny for all its days, and—”
“Anybody point s a finger at my child, and I’ll break it of f
and stuf f it down their throat!”
“Y e sens eless wee besom! Have ye no the faintest notion o’
how things are? Y e’ll be a scandal and a hissing! Folk will call
ye whore to your face!”
“Let them try it!”
“Oh, let them try it? And ye mea n me to stand by and listen,
I suppose?”
“It’ s not your job to defend me!”
He w as so furiou s that his face went white as fresh-bleached
muslin.
“Not my  job to defend you? For Christ’ s sake, woman, who
else  is meant to do it?”
Ian tugged gently on my arm, drawing me back.
“Y e’ve only the twa choices now , Auntie,” he murmured in
my ear . “Douse  them both wi’ a pan o’ cold water , or come
away with me and leave them to it. I’ve seen Uncle Jamie and
my Mam  go at it before. Belie ve me, ye dinna want to step
between two Frasers wi’ their dander up. My Da said he’ s tried
once or twice, and got the scars to prove it.”I t ook a final g lance at the situ ation and gave up. He was
right; they were nose to nose, re d hair bristling and eyes slitted
like a couple of bobcats, circling, spitting and snarling. I could
have set the hay on fire, and neither one would have spared an
instant’ s notice.
It seemed remarkably quiet and peaceful outside. A
whippoorwill sang in the aspen grove, and the wind was in the
east, car rying the faint sounds of the waterfall to us. By the
time we  reached the dooryard, we couldn’ t hear the shouting
anymore.
“Dinna be worrit, Auntie,” Ian said comfortingly . “They’ll
get hungry , sooner or later .”
In th e event, it  was unnecessary to starve them out; Jamie
stamped down the hill a few minutes later and without a word,
fetched h is horse from the paddock, bridled him, mounted, and
rode bareback at a gallop dow n the track toward Fer gus’ s
cabin. As I watc hed his departing form, Brianna stalked out of
the stable, puf fing like a stea m engine, and made for the
house.
“What does nighean na galladh  mean?” she demanded,
seeing me at the door .
“I don’ t  know ,” I said. I did, but thought it much more
prudent not to say . “I’m sure he didn’ t mean it,” I added.
“Er…whatever it means.”
“Ha,” sh e said, and with an angry snort, stomped into the
house, reappearing moments late r with the egg basket over her
arm. W ithout a w ord, she disappeared into the bushes, making
a rustling noise like a hurricane.
I to ok several deep breaths an d went in to start supper ,
cursing Roger W akefield.
Physical exertio n seemed to hav e dissipated at least some of
the n egative ener gy in the house hold. Brianna spent an hour in
the b ushes, and returned with si xteen eggs and a calmer face.There were leaves and stickers in her hair , and from the look
of her shoes, she had been kicking trees.
I didn’ t know w hat Jamie had be en doing, but he returned at
suppertime, sweaty and windblo wn but outwardly calm. They
pointedly ignored each other , a reasonably dif ficult feat for
two lar ge persons confined in a twenty-foot-square log cabin. I
glanced at Ian, w ho rolled his e yes skyward and came to help
carry the big serving bowl to the table.
Conversation over supper was limited to requests to pass the
salt, and  afterward, Brianna cleared the dishes, then went to sit
at the spinning wheel, working the foot treadle with
unnecessary emphasis.
Jamie ga ve her back a glare, the n jerked his head at me and
went out. He w as waiting on the path to the privy when I
followed him a moment later .
“What am I to do?” he demanded, without preamble.
“Apologize,” I said.
“Apologize?” His hair seemed to be standing on end,
though i t was likely only the ef fe cts of the wind. “But I havena
done anything wrong!”
“W ell, what dif ference does that make?” I said, exasperated.
“Y ou asked me what you should do, and I told you.”
He exhaled strongly through his nose, hesitated a moment,
then turned and stalked back in to the house, shoulders set for
martyrdom or battle.
“I apologize,” he said, looming up in front of her .
Surprised, she nearly dropped the yarn, but caught it
adeptly .
“Oh,” she said, and flushed. She took her foot of f the
treadle, and the great wheel creaked and slowed.
“I w as w rong,” he said, with a quick look at me. I nodded
encouragingly , and he cleared his throat. “I shouldna have—”“It’ s all right.” S he spoke quickly , eager to meet him. “Y ou
didn’ t—I mean, you were only trying to help.” She looked
down at the thre ad, slowing as it ran through her fingers. “I’m
sorry too—I shouldn’ t have been mad at you.”
He c losed his ey es briefly and sighed, then opened them and
lifted one eyebrow at me. I smi led faintly and turned back to
my work, pounding fennel seeds in the mortar .
He pulled up a stool and sat down beside her , and she turned
toward him, putting one hand on the wheel to stop it.
“I kn ow you me ant well,” she said. “Y ou and Ian both. But
don’ t you see, Da? I have to wait for Roger .”
“But if something has happene d to the man—if he’ s met
with an accident of some kind…”
“He isn’ t dead. I know  he isn ’ t.” She  spoke with t he
fervency of someone who mea ns to bend reality to her will.
“He’ll c ome bac k. And how wo uld it be if he did, and found
me married to Ian?”
Ian looked up, hearing his name. He sat on the floor by the
fire, Rollo’ s great head resting on his knee, his yellow wolf-
eyes mere slits of pleasure as Ian methodically combed
through the thick pelt, pulling out ticks and burs as he found
them.
Jamie r an his fingers through his hair in a gesture of
frustration.
“I have had wor d out since ye told me of him, a nighean . I
sent Ian  to Cross Creek to leave  word at River Run, and with
Captain Freeman to pass to the other rivermen. I’ve sent
Duncan wi’ word, all through the Cape Fear valley and as far
north as Edenton and New Bern , and wi’ the packet boats that
run from V ir ginia to Charleston.”
He looked at me, pleading for understanding. “What more
can I do? The m an is nowhere to be found. If I thought there
were the slightest chance—” He stopped, teeth set in his lip.Brianna dropped her gaze to the yarn in her hand, and with a
quick, sharp gesture, snapped it. Leaving the loose end to flap
from the spindle, she got up a nd crossed the room, sitting
down at the table with her back to us.
“I’m sorry , lass,” Jamie said, more quietly . He reached out
and laid a hand on her shoulder , gingerly , as though she might
bite him.
She stif fened slightly , but didn’ t pull away . After a moment,
she reac hed up and took his hand, squeezing it lightly , then
putting it aside.
“I see,” she said . “Thank you, Da.” She sat, eyes fixed on
the flames, her face and figure  utterly still, but managing to
radiate complete desolation. I put my hands on her shoulders,
rubbing gently , but she felt li ke a wax manikin under my
fingers—not resisting but not acknowledging the touch.
Jamie studied her for a momen t, frowning, and glanced at
me. The n, with an air of decisi on, he got up, reached to the
shelf, brought down his inkhorn and quill jar , and set them on
the table with a clank.
“Here’ s a thought,” he said f irmly . “Let us draw up a
broadsheet, here, and I will take it to Gillette in W ilmington.
He c an print it up, and Ian and the Lindsey lads will take the
copies u p and down the coast, from Charleston to Jamestown.
It m ay be that someone’ s not kent W akefield, not hearing his
name, but they’ll maybe know him by his looks.”
He shoo k ink powder made of  iron and oak gall into the
stained half-gou rd he used as a well, and poured a little water
from the pitcher , using the shaf t of a quill to stir the ink. He
smiled at Brianna, and took a sheet of paper from the drawer .
“Now , then, lass, how is this man of yours to look at?”
The sug gestion o f action had bro ught a spark of life back to
Brianna’ s face. She sat up strai ghter , and a current of ener gy
flowed up her spine, into my fingers.
“T all,” s he said. “Nearly as tal l as you, Da. People would
notice; t hey alw ays look at you . He has black hair , and greeneyes—bright green; it’ s one of th e first things you notice about
him, isn’ t it, Mama?”
Ian gave a small start, and looked up from his grooming.
“Y es,” I said, s itting down on the bench next to Brianna.
“But you  can maybe do better than just the written description.
Bree’ s a good h and with a likeness,” I explained to Jamie.
“Can you draw Roger from memory , do you think, Bree?”
“Y es!” S he reach ed for the quill , eager to try . “Y es, I’m sure
I can—I’ve drawn him before.”
Jamie surrendered the quill and paper , the vertical lines
between his brows showing in a slight frown.
“Can the printer work from an ink sketch?” I asked, seeing
it.
“Oh—aye, I expect so. It’ s n o great matter to make a
woodblock, if the lines are clear .” He spoke abstractedly , eyes
fixed on the paper in front of Brianna.
Ian pushed Rollo’ s head of f his knee and came to stand by
the table, looking over Bree’ s shoulder in what seemed a rather
exaggerated curiosity .
Lower lip fixed between her teeth, she drew clean and
swiftly . High forehead, with a th ick lock of black hair that rose
from an  invisible cowlick, then dipped almost to the strongly
marked black brows. She drew h im in profile; a bold nose, not
quite be aky , a clean-lined, sensi tive mouth and a wide, slanted
jaw . Thick-lashed eyes, deepset, with lines of good humor
marking a strong, appealing face. She added a neat, flat ear ,
then turned her attention to th e elegant curve of the skull,
drawing thick, wavy dark hair pulled back in a short tail.
Ian made a small, strangled noise in his throat.
“Are you all right, Ian?” I looked up at him, but he wasn’ t
looking at the d rawing—he wa s looking across the table, at
Jamie. He was wearing a glazed  sort of expression, like a pig
on a spit.I turned , to find precisely the same expression on Jamie’ s
face.
“What on earth is the matter?” I asked.
“Oh…nothing.” The muscles of his throat moved in a
convulsive swallow . The corner of his mouth twitched, and
twitched again, as though he couldn’ t control it.
“Like hell it is!” Alarmed, I leaned across the table, seizing
his wrist and groping for his pulse. “Jamie, what is it? Are you
having chest pains? Do you feel ill?”
” I  do.” Ian was leaning over the table, looking as though he
might b e going to throw up any minute. “Coz—d’ye mean
honestly to tell me that… this “—he gestured feebly at the
sketch—”is Roger W akefield?”
“Y es,” she said, looking up at h im in puzzlement. “Ian, are
you all right? Did you eat something funny?”
He didn’ t answer , but dropped heavily onto the bench
beside her , put his head in his hands, and groaned.
Jamie ge ntly detached his hand from my grip. Even in the
red o f th e firelig ht, I could see that he was white and strained.
The han d on the table curled around the quill jar , as though
seeking support.
“Mr . W akefield,” he said carefully to Brianna. “Has he by
any chance…another name?”
“Y es,” B rianna and I said in unison. I stopped and let her
explain as I rose and went hurriedly to fetch a bottle of brandy
from the  pantry .  I didn’ t know what was going on, but had the
horrible feeling that it was about to be called for .
“—adopted. MacKenzie was his own family name,” she
was saying as I emer ged with the bottle in hand. She glanced
from father to cousin, frowning. “Why? Y ou haven’ t heard of
a Roger MacKenzie, have you?”
Jamie an d Ian exchanged an appalled glance. Ian cleared his
throat. So did Jamie.“What?” Briann a demanded, leaning forward, glancing
anxiously from one to the othe r . “What is it? Have you seen
him? Where?”
I saw Jamie’ s jaw tighten as he summoned up words.
“A ye,” he said carefully . “W e have. On the mountain.”
“What—here? On this  m ounta in?” She stood up, pus hing
back the bench. Alarm and exc itement played over her face
like flames. “Where is he? What happened?”
“W ell,” Ian said defensively , “he did  say as he’d taken your
maidenheid, after all.”
“He WHA T?” Brianna’ s eyes sp rang open so far that a rim
of white showed all around the iris.
“W ell, your Da asked him, just to be sure, and he admitted
that he’d—”
“Y ou what? ” Brianna rounded on Jamie, clenched fists on
the table.
“A ye, well. It—was a mistake,” Jamie said. He looked
utterly wretched.
“Y ou bet it was! What in the name of—what have you
done?” H er own cheeks had blanched, and blue sparks glinted
in her eyes, hot as the heart of a flame.
Jamie took a de ep breath. He looked up, straight into her
face, and set his jaw .
“The wee lassie,” he said. “Lizz ie. She told me that ye were
with child, and that the man who’d got it on ye was a wicked
brute called MacKenzie.”
Brianna’ s mouth  opened and shut, but no words came out.
Jamie looked at her steadily .
“Y e did say to me that ye’d been violated, did ye no?”
She nodded, jerky as a badly sprung puppet.
“So, then. Ian and the lassie  were at the mill, when
MacKenzie cam e askin’ for ye. They rode to fetch me, and Ianand I met him in the clearing just above the green spring.”
Brianna had got her voice working, though only barely .
“What did you do to him?” she asked hoarsely . “What?”
“It was a fair fight,” Ian said, still defensive. “I wanted to
shoot hi m on sight, but Uncle Ja mie said no, he meant to have
his hands on the—the man.”
“Y ou hit  him?”
“A ye, I did!” J amie said, stung at last. “For God’ s sake,
woman, what would ye have me do to the man who’d used ye
that way? It was you wanting to do murder , aye?”
“Besides, he hit Uncle Jamie, to o,” Ian put in helpfully . “It
was a fair fight. I said.”
“Be quiet, Ian, there’ s a good lad,” I said. I poured two
fingers, neat, and pushed the cup in front of Jamie.
“But it was—he  wasn’ t —” Brianna was sputtering, lik e a
firecracker with  a short fuse lit. Then she caught fire, and
slammed one fist on the table, going of f like a rocket.
“WHA T HA VE YOU DONE WITH HIM?” she screamed.
Jamie blinked and Ian flinched. They exchanged haunted
glances.
I p ut a h and on Jamie’ s arm, squ eezing tight. I couldn’ t keep
the quav er out of my own voice as I asked the necessary
question.
“Jamie—did you kill him?”
He glanced at me, and the tension in his face relaxed, if only
mar ginally .
“Ah…no,” he said. “I gave him to the Iroquois.”
“Och, no w , Coz, it could have been worse.” Ian patted Brianna
tentatively on the back. “W e didna kill him, after all.”
Brianna made a small choking sound, and pulled her head
up of f her knees. Her face was w hite and damp as the inside ofan oyster shell, her hair in a tangle round it. She hadn’ t
vomited or fainted, but looked  as though she still might do
either .
“W e did mean to,” Ian went on, looking at her a little
nervously . “I’d my pistol pressed behind his ear , but then I
thought it was really Uncle Jam ie’ s right to blow his brains
out, but then he—”
Brianna choked again, and I hastily placed an ashet on the
table in front of her , just in case.
“Ian, I really think she doesn’ t n eed to hear this just now ,” I
said, narrowing my eyes at him.
“Y es, I do.” Brianna pushed herself upright, hands gripping
the edge  of the table. “I have to hear it all, I have to.” She
turned her head slowly , as thou gh her neck was stif f, toward
Jamie.
“Why?” she said. “WHY?”
He was as white  and ill-looking as she was. He had pushed
away fro m the table and gone to the chimney corner , as though
trying to  get as f ar away as poss ible from the drawing, with its
damning likeness of Roger MacKenzie W akefield.
He looked as though he would have done anything rather
than answer , but answer he did, his eyes steady on hers.
“I m eant to kil l him. I stopped Ian because shooting the
prick seemed too easy a death—too quick for what he’d done.”
He t ook a deep breath, and I co uld see that the hand gripping
his w riting shelf was clenched s o tight that the knuckles stood
out white against his skin.
“I stopp ed to think, how it should be; what I must do. I left
Ian w ith him, an d I walked away .” He swallowed; I could see
the muscles move in his throat, but he didn’ t look away .
“I walked into the forest a wee way , and leaned my back
against a tree to let my heart slo w . It seemed best he should be
awake, t o know—but I didna t hink I could bear to hear himspeak ag ain. He ’d said too muc h already . But then I began to
hear it, over again, what he’d said.”
“What? What did he say?” Even her lips were white.
So were Jamie’ s.
“He said …that ye’d asked him t o your bed. That you—” He
stopped and bit his lip, savagely .
“He said ye wa nted him; that ye’d asked him to take your
maidenheid,” Ian said. He spoke coolly , his eyes on Brianna.
She drew in bre ath with a ragged sound, like paper being
torn.
“I did.”
I g lanced involuntarily at Jamie . His eyes were closed, his
teeth fixed in his lip.
Ian made a shoc ked sound, and Brianna drew back a hand
like lightning and slapped him across the face.
He jerked back, lost his balance, and half fell of f the bench.
He grabbed the edge of the table and staggered to his feet.
“How?” he shouted, his face contorted in sudden anger .
“How co uld ye do such a thing ? I told Uncle Jamie that ye’d
never play the whore, never! But it’ s true, isn’ t it?”
She was on her  feet like a leopard, her cheeks gone from
white to blazing fury in a second.
“W ell, d amn you for a self-righteous prig, Ian! Who gave
you the right to call me a whore?”
“Right?” He sputtered for a moment, at a loss for words. “I
—you—he—”
Before I could i ntervene, she drew back a fist and punched
him har d in the pit of the stomach. W ith a look of intense
surprise, he sat down hard on the floor , mouth open like a
suckling pig.
I mo ved, but Jam ie was faster . I n less than a second he was
beside h er , gripping her arm. Sh e whirled, meaning to hit him,too, I think, but then froze . Her mouth was working
soundlessly , tears of shock and fury running down her cheeks.
“Be still ,” he said, and his voic e was very cold. I saw his
fingers d ig into her flesh, and I made a small sound of protest.
He paid no attention, too intent on Brianna.
“I didna  want to believe it,” he said, in a voice like ice. “I
told myself he w as only saying so to save himself, it wasna
true. But if it was—” He seemed to become aware at last that
he was hurting her . He let go of her arm.
“I couldna take the man’ s life, without being sure,” he said,
and paused, his eyes searching her face. For regret? I
wondered. Or remorse? Whatever he might be looking for , all
he fo und was a smoldering rage . Her face was the echo of his
own, her blue eyes hot as his.
His own face changed, and he looked away .
“I did regret it,”  he said, very quietly . “When I came that
night, and saw y e, I was sorry then that I hadna killed him. I
held ye in my a rms—and I felt my heart go sma’ wi’ shame,
that I should doubt my daughter ’ s virtue.” He looked down,
and I could see the mark where he had bitten his lip.
“Now m y heart is shrunk altoget her . Not only that ye should
be impure but that ye should lie to me.”
“Lie to you?” H er voice was no  more than whisper . “ Lie  to
you?”
“A ye, lie  to me!” W ith sudden violence, he turned back to
her . “Th at ye should bed a man  from lust, and cry rape when
ye fi nd y e’re wit h child! Do ye not realize that it’ s only chance
I have not the sin of murder on my soul, and you the cause of
it?”
She was  too furious to speak; I saw her throat swell with
words, a nd knew I had to do something, at once, before either
of them had the opportunity to say more.
I couldn’ t speak, either . Blindly , I fumbled in the pocket of
my gown, feeling for the ring. I found it, pulled it out, anddropped it on the table. It chimed against the wood; spun, and
rattled to a stop, the gold of the tiny circlet gleaming red in the
firelight.
Fr om F . to C. with love. Always .
Jamie looked at it, his face gone  completely blank. Brianna
drew in her breath with a sob.
“That’ s your ring, Auntie,” Ian s aid. He sounded dazed, and
bent close to lo ok, as though he couldn’ t believe his eyes.
“Y our gold ring. The one that Bonnet took from ye, on the
river .”
“Y es,” I  said. My knees felt we ak. I sat down at the table,
and laid my hand over the telltale ring as though to take it
back, deny its presence.
Jamie took my wrist and lifted it. Like a man handling a
dangerous insect, he picked the ring up gingerly between
thumb and forefinger .
“Where did ye get this?” he asked, his voice almost casual.
He look ed at me, and a bolt of  terror shot through me at the
look in his eyes.
“I brought it to her .” Brianna’ s tears had dried, evaporated
by the heat of her fury . She stood behind me and gripped me
by t he shoulders. “Don’ t you lo ok at her that way , don’ t you
dare!”
He shifted the look to her , but she didn’ t flinch; only held on
to me harder , her fingers digging into my shoulders.
“Where did ye get it?” he asked again, his voice no more
than a whisper . “Where?”
“From him. From Stephen Bonnet.” Her voice was shaking,
but from rage, not fear . “When…he…raped…me.”
Jamie’ s face cracked suddenly , as though some explosion
had bur st him from within. I made an incoherent sound of
distress, and reached out for h im, but he whirled away and
stood rigid, back turned to us, in the middle of the room.I fel t Brianna d raw herself upright, heard Ian say , rather
stupidly , “Bonnet?”  I heard the ticking of the clo ck on the
sideboard, felt the draft from the door . I was dimly aware of all
these things, but had no eyes for anything but Jamie.
I p ushed back th e bench, stumbled to my feet. He stood as
though r ooted in to the floor , fist s clenched into his belly like a
man gut -shot, trying to hold ba ck the inevitable fatal spill of
his insides.
I should be able  to do something , to say something. I should
be able to help them, to take care of them. But I could do
nothing. I could not help one wi thout betraying the other—had
already betrayed them both. I h ad sold Jamie’ s honor to keep
him safe, and the doing of it h ad taken Roger and destroyed
Bree’ s happiness.
I could go to neither of them now . All I could do was to
stand there, feeling my heart crumble into small, jagged
chunks.
Bree left me, and walked quietly around the table, across the
room, around Jamie. She stood i n front of him, looking up into
his face, her own set like marble, cold as a saint’ s.
“Damn you,” she said, scarcely audible. “Damn you very
much, you bastard. I’m sorry I ever saw you.”P A R T  E L E V E N
P a s  d u  T o u t5 1
B E T R A Y A L
October 1769
R oger opened his eyes and thre w up. Or rather , down. It
didn’ t matter; The burning rush of bile through his nose and
the trickle of vomitus that ran into his hair were unimportant
by comparison with the agony in head and groin.
A thumping swerve of movement jarred him, shooting
kaleidoscopic colors from crotc h to brain. A damp smell of
canvas f illed his nose. Then a voice spoke somewhere near ,
and formless panic took sudden, jagged shape among the
colors.
Gloriana!  The y’d got him ! He lurched in reflex, brought up
short by  a searing jolt through his temples—but brought up a
split-second earlier by something round his wrists. T ied, he
was tied up in the hold.
The shape of panic blew up bold and black against his mind.
Bonnet. They’d caught him, tak en back the stones. And now
they’d kill him.
He jerked convulsively , yanking at his wrists, teeth clenched
against t he pain. The deck dropp ed beneath him with a startled
snort, and he slammed down hard.
He v omited again, but his stomach was empty . He retched,
ribs gra ting with each spasm against the canvas-wrapped
bundles he lay across. Not sails; not a hold. Not the Gloriana,
not a ship at all. A horse. He was tied hand and foot, belly
down across a fucking horse!
The horse jolted on a few more steps, then stopped. V oices
muttered, hands fumbled at him, then he was pulled of f
roughly and dropped on his feet. He fell down at once, unable
either to stand or to break his fall.
He lay half doubled on the ground, concentrating on
breathing. W ith out the jouncing, it was easier . Nobodytroubled him, and gradually h e began to be aware of his
surroundings.
A wareness didn’ t help much. There were damp leaves under
his cheek, cool and smelling of sweet rot. He cracked a
cautious eye. Sky above, an impossible deep color , between
blue and purple. The sound of trees, the rush of nearby water .
Everything seemed to be revolving slowly around him,
painfully vivid. He closed his e yes and pressed his hands flat
against the ground.
Jesus, w her e am  I?  The  voi ces wer e talking casually , words
half lost  in the stamping and whickering of nearby horses. He
listened intently but couldn’ t make out the words. He felt a
moment’ s panic at the inability; he couldn’ t even put a name to
the language.
There was a lar ge, tender lump behind one ear , another on
the back of his head, and a pain that made his temples throb;
he’d been hit ha rd—but when? Had the blows ruptured vessels
in hi s brain, deprived him of language? He opened his eyes all
the way , and—with infinite caution—rolled onto his back.
A s quare brown face glanced down at him, with no
particular expres sion of interest, then looked back to the horse
the man was tending.
Indians . The shock was  so great that he for got momentarily
about his pain, and sat up abruptly . He gasped and put his face
on his knees, eyes closed as he  fought to keep from passing
out again, blood pounding through a splitting head.
Wher e was he?  He bit his knee, grinding the cloth savagely
between his teeth, fighting for memory . Fragments of images
came ba ck to him, in mocking bits that stubbornly refused to
fit together into sense.
The creak of bo ards and the smell of bilges. Blinding sun
through panes of glass. Bonnet’ s face, and the breathing of
whales in the mist, and a little boy named…named…
Hands c lasped in  dark and the tang of hops. I the e we d, with
my body I thee worship …Bree. Brianna. Cold sweat rolled down his cheek and his
jaw muscles ached with clenching. The images hopped around
in his mind like fleas. Her face, her face, he must not let it go!
Not gen tle, not a gentle face. A nose dead straight and cold
blue eyes…no, not cold…
A h and on his shoulder yank ed him from the tortured
pursuit of memory into the all too immediate present. It was an
Indian, knife in hand. Numb with confusion, Roger simply
looked at the man.
The Indian, a m iddle-aged man with a bone in his roached
hair , and an air of no-nonsense about him, took Roger by his
own hai r and tilted his head bac k and forth with a critical air .
Confusion evaporated, as it occurred to Roger that he was
about to be scalped as he sat there.
He flun g himself backward and lashed out with his feet,
catching the Indian in the knees. The man went down with a
cry of surprise, and Roger rolled, lurching and stumbling to his
feet, running for his life.
He ran like a drunken spider , spraddle-legged, staggering
toward the trees. Shadows, refuge. There were shouts behind
him, and the s ound of quick feet scattering leaves. Then
something jerked his feet from under him and he fell headlong
with a bone-shaking thud.
They ha d him on his feet before  he had his breath back. No
good to struggle; there were fo ur of them, including the one
Roger had knocked down. That one came toward them,
limping, still holding the knife.
“Not hurt you!” he said crossly . He slapped Roger briskly
across the face, then leaned over and sawed through the leather
thong that bound Roger ’ s wrists. W ith a loud snort, he turned
on his heel and went back to the horses.
The two men h olding Roger promptly let go of him and
walked of f, too, leaving him sw aying like a sapling in a high
wind.Gr eat,  he thought blankly , I’m not dead. What the bloody
hell?
No answ er to this presenting itself, he rubbed a hand
gingerly over his face, discovering several bruises he’d missed
earlier , and looked around.
He s tood in a small clearing, surrounded by huge oaks and
half-shed hickory trees; the ground was thick with brown and
yellow leaves, and the squirrels had left heaps of acorn caps
and nut  hulls scattered over the ground. He stood on a
mountain; the slope of the ground told him that, as the chill air
and jewel-deep sky told him the time was near sunset.
The Ind ians—there were fou r , all men—ignored him
completely , going about the business of camp-building without
a glance in Roger ’ s direction. He licked dry lips and took a
cautious step toward the small stream that burbled over algae-
furred rocks a few yards away .
He d rank his fill , though the cold water made his teeth ache;
nearly all the teeth were loose on one side of his mouth, and
the lining of h is cheek was badly cut. He rinsed his face
gingerly , with a feeling of deja vu. Sometime earlier , he had
washed and drunk like this, cold water running over emerald
rocks…
Fraser ’ s Ridge . He sat back on his heels, memory dropping
back in place, in lar ge, ugly chunks.
Brianna, and Claire…and Jamie Fraser . Suddenly the
confusing image he had sought so desperately came back
unbidden; Brianna’ s face, with its broad, clean bones, blue
eyes set slantwise above a long , straight nose. But Brianna’ s
face gr own ol der , weathered to bronze, rough-cut and
toughened by masculinity and experience, blue eyes gone
black with a murderous rage. Jamie Fraser .
“Y ou bloody sod,” Roger said softly . “Y ou bloody , fucking
sod . Y ou tried to kill me.”
His initial feeling was one of astonishment—but anger
wasn’ t far behind.He remembere d everything now; the meeting in the
clearing, the autumn leaves like fire and honey and the blazing
man among them; the brown-haired youth—and who the hell
was he?  The  fight—he t ouched a sore spot under his ribs with
a gri mace—and the end of it, ly ing flat in the leaves, sure that
he was about to be killed.
W ell, he  hadn’ t been. He had a dim memory of hearing the
man and the boy ar guing somewhere over him—one of them
had been for ki lling him on the  spot, the other said no—but
damned if he kn ew which one. Then one of them had hit him
again, and he remembered nothing more until now .
And now —he g lanced around. The Indians had a fire going,
and a clay pot sitting by it. No ne of them paid him the least
attention, though he was sure they were all aware of him.
Perhaps they had taken him from Fraser and the boy—why ,
though? More likely , Fraser had given him to the Indians. The
man with the knife had said they didn’ t mean to hurt him.
What did  they mean to do with him?
He look ed around. It would be night, soon; already , the
distant shadows under the oaks had thickened.
So w hat, sport? If you slope o ff after dark, wher e’r e you
going to? The only dir ection you know is down . The Indians
were apparently ignoring him because they were confident that
he wasn’ t going anywhere.
Dismissing the uncomfortable t ruth of this observation, he
stood up. First things first. It was the last thing he wanted to do
at the moment, but his bladder w as bursting. His fingers were
slow an d clums y , congested with blood, but he managed to
fumble loose the lacing of his breeches.
His first feeling was one of relie f; it wasn’ t as bad as it felt.
V ery sore, but g inger prodding seemed to indicate that he was
basically intact and unruptured.
It w as only as he turned back toward the fire that simple
relief wa s succe eded by a burst of rage so pure and blinding as
to burn away both pain and fear . On his right wrist was asmudged black oval—a thumbprint, clear and mocking as a
signature.
“Christ,” he said, very softly . F ury burned hot and thick in
the pit of his belly . He could taste it, sour in his mouth. He
looked down the mountain-sid e behind him, not knowing
whether he faced Fraser ’ s Ridge or not.
“W ait fo r me, bugger ,” he said, under his breath. “ Both  of
you—wait for me. I’m coming back.”
Not right away , though. The Ind ians allowed him to share the
food—a sort of stew , which the y scooped up with their hands
in spite of its near -boiling tem perature—but were otherwise
indif ferent to him. He tried them  in English, French—even the
small bits of German that he knew , but got no response.
They did tie him when they lay down to sleep; his ankles
were bou nd and a noose put round his neck, tied to the wrist of
one of his captors. Whether from  indif ference or because there
wasn’ t one, they didn’ t give hi m a blanket, and he spent the
night sh ivering, huddled as close to the dwindling fire as he
could get without choking himself.
He h adn’ t thought he could sle ep, but did, exhausted with
pain. It was a restless sleep,  though, filled with violent,
fragmentary dreams and broken by the constant illusion of
being strangled.
In th e morning, they set of f agai n. No question of riding this
time; he walked, and as fast as he could; the noose was left
around his neck, hanging loose, but a short length of rope
bound h is wrists to the harness leathers of one of the horses.
He stum bled and fell several times, but managed to scramble
to hi s fe et, in spite of bruises an d aching muscles. He had the
distinct impress ion that they w ould allow him to be dragged
without compunction if he didn’ t.
They were heading roughly nor th; he could tell as much by
the sun. Not th at that helped a  lot, since he had no notion
where they had started from. Still, they could be no great
distance from Fraser ’ s Ridg e; he couldn’ t have beenunconscious for more than a few hours. He looked at the
churning hooves  of the horse beside him, trying to estimate its
speed. N o more than two or three miles per hour; he was
managing to keep up without great strain.
Landmarks. The re was no tellin g where they meant to take
him—or why—but if he was ever to get back, he had to
memorize the shape of the terrain through which they passed.
A cl if f, forty fee t high and over grown with shaggy plants, a
twisted persimmon tree protrud ing from a crack in the rock
like a jack-in-the-box popping out, covered in bright orange
bobbles.
They emer ged onto the crest o f a ridge, to a breathtaking
view of distant mountains; three sharp peaks, clustered
together against a blazing sky , the left one higher than the
other two. He could remember that. A stream—a river?—that
fell through a s mall gor ge; they drove the horses through a
shallow ford, soaking Roger to the waist in icy water .
The routine of travel lasted for days, moving ever
northward. His captors did not talk to him, and by the fourth
day he realized that he was be ginning to lose track of time,
falling i nto a dreamlike trance, overcome by fatigue and the
silence of the m ountains. He pulled a long thread from the
hem of his coat  and began to knot it, one knot for each day ,
both as some small hold on reality , and as a crude method of
estimating the distance traveled.
He w as going ba ck. Whatever it took, he was going back to
Fraser ’ s Ridge.
It w as o n the eighth day that he  found his chance. They were
high in the mou ntains by now . They had crossed through one
pass the  day before, and come d own a steep slope, the ponies
grunting, slowing to brace each careful step as the loads on
their saddles creaked and shifted.
Now they were headed up aga in, and the ponies slowed
their pac e still further as the ground sloped sharply upward.
Roger was able to gain a little ground, to pull even with thepony’ s side and cling to the harness leather , letting the tough
little beast pull him along.
The Indians had dismounted, walking and leading the
ponies. He kept a narrow eye on the long black scalp lock
hanging down the back of the brave leading the pony he clung
to. H e h eld on with one hand; th e other was busy under cover
of a han ging flap  of canvas, pick ing at the knot that bound him
to the harness.
Strand b y strand , the hemp cam e free, until no more than a
single th read of rope held him to the pony . He waited, sweat
streaming down  his ribs from fear and the ef fort of the climb,
rejecting one opportunity after another , worrying from
moment to moment that he had left it too late, that they would
stop to make camp, that the brav e who led his pony would turn
and see him, would think to check.
But they  didn’ t stop, and the b rave didn’ t turn. Ther e,  he
thought, and his heart beat fast, seeing the first pony in the
string st ep out along a narrow deer trail cut into the hillside.
The ground fell away sharply be low the trail, then leveled out
about six feet down. Below was a thickly wooded slope, ideal
for concealment.
One pony , then another , negotiated the narrow stretch of
trail, put ting down their feet wi th finicking care. A third, and
then it was Roger ’ s turn. He sq ueezed in close to the pony’ s
side, smelling the sweet, pungen t foam of its sweat. One step,
then another , and they were on the narrow trail.
He j erked the ro pe loose and jum ped. He hit with a jolt and
sank hal fway to his knees, spra ng up and ran downhill. His
shoes ca me of f and he left them  behind. He splashed across a
tiny creek, scrabbled up its ba nk on hands and knees, and
clambered to his feet, running before he’d got upright.
He h eard calls b ehind him, then silence, but knew he was
pursued. He had no breath to waste; neither would they .
The land scape s lid past in a blur of leaves and rocks as he
swung his head from side to side, looking for which way to go,someplace to hide. He chose a grove of birch, burst through
and into  a sloping meadow , careened down across the slippery
grass, ba re feet stubbing on roots and rocks. At the far side, he
took a second to glance back. T wo of them; he saw the round
dark heads among the leaves.
On into another copse, out again, zigzagging madly through
a f ield of broken  rocks, breath c oming hard in his throat. One
thing the bloody past had done for him, he thought grimly;
improved his wind. Then there w as no room for any thought—
nothing but the blind instincts of flight.
And down again, a scrambling drop down the wet, cracked
face of a twenty-foot clif f, grabbing at the plants as he half fell
past them, roots ripping, hands  sinking into pockets of mud,
blunting his fingers on unseen rocks. He landed hard at the
bottom, bent over , gasping.
One of them wa s right behind him, coming backward down
the clif f. He sna tched of f the no ose still around his neck, and
whipped it hard at the Indian’ s h ands. The man’ s hold slipped;
he le t go and slithered down, landing askew . Roger flung the
noose over the man’ s head, gav e it a vicious yank, and fled,
leaving the man on his knees, ch oking and clawing at the rope
round his neck.
T rees. He needed cover . He va ulted a fallen log, stumbled
and roll ed, was up again running. Up, a spruce thicket up a
little way . Heart laboring, he jabbed his feet down hard,
bounding up the slope.
He flung himself into the spruces, fighting through the
pricks o f a million needles, blind , eyes shut against the lashing
twigs. Then the ground gave w ay underneath him and he fell
in a blur of sky and branches.
He hit, half curled, his breath knocked out; had barely sense
to curl up further and keep on rolling, bashing of f rocks and
saplings, setting of f showers of dirt and fallen needles,
bouncing and smashing his way to the bottom.He fetch ed up with a crash amid a tangle of woody stems,
hung a moment, then slid down, to end with a thud. Dazed and
bleeding, he lay still for a mom ent, then rolled painfully onto
his side, wiping dirt and blood from his face.
He look ed up, searching. There they were. The two of them,
at th e top of the slope, coming carefully down beside the ledge
he had fallen from.
On hand s and knees, he dived between the woody stems,
and craw led for his life. T wigs  bent, sharp ends jabbed him,
and cascades of dust, dead leaves and insects fell from the
higher branches above as he hea ved his way forward, forcing a
passage through  the close-grown stems, twisting and turning,
following such openings as he found.
Hell  was  his first coherent thought. Then he realized that it
was as much de scription as curse. He was in a rhododendron
hell. W ith that belated realization, he slowed his flight—if
crawling at roughly ten feet per hour could be called “flight.”
The tunnel-like opening in whic h he found himself was too
narrow to allow him to turn ar ound, but he managed to see
behind h im by thrusting his head to one side and craning his
neck. Th ere wa s nothing there; nothing but damp and musty
darkness, illumined by a faint scatter of light, swirling with
dust motes. Nothing was visib le but the stems and limber
branches of the rhododendron thicket.
His shak ing limbs gave way , and he collapsed. He lay for a
moment, curled up between the stems, breathing the musk of
rotting leaves and damp earth.
“Y ou wanted cover , mate,” he murmured to himself. Things
were beginning to hurt. He was ripped and bleeding in a dozen
places. Even in the dim light, t he ends of his fingers looked
like raw meat.
He t ook a slow  inventory of the damage, listening all the
while for sounds of pursuit. Not  surprisingly , there were none.
He had heard talk about rhododendron hells in the taverns in
Cross Creek; half-boasting stories of hunting dogs who hadchased a  squirrel into one of the huge tangles and become
hopelessly lost, never to be seen again.
Roger hoped there was a fair amount of exaggeration to
these stories, though a good look around wasn’ t reassuring.
What lig ht there was had no direction. Any way he looked,
looked the same. Drooping clusters of cool, leathery leaves,
thick stems and slender branch es laced together in a nearly
impenetrable snarl.
W ith a slight feeling of panic, he realized that he had no
idea from which direction he had come.
He p ut his head  on his knees and breathed deeply , trying to
think. All right, first things firs t. His right foot was bleeding
from a deep gash on the edge of the sole. He took of f his
tattered stocking s and used one to bind his foot. Nothing else
seemed bad enough to need a bandage, save the shallow gouge
in his scalp; that was still seeping blood, wet and sticky to his
touch.
His han ds were shaking; it wa s hard to tie the stocking
round h is head. Still, the small  action made him feel better .
Now , then. He’d climbed countless Munros in Scotland, those
endless craggy peaks, and more  than once had helped to find
day-trippers lost among the rocks and heather .
If yo u were lost in the wilderness, the usual caution was to
stay put;  wait for someone to fin d you. That would seem not to
apply , he  thought, if the only people looking for you were ones
you didn’ t want to be found by .
He looked upward, through the snarl of branches. He could
see small patches of sky , but t he rhododendrons rose nearly
twelve f eet over  his head. Ther e was no way to stand up; he
could barely sit upright under the interlacing branches.
There was no way of telling how big this particular hell
was; on their j ourney through the mountains, he had seen
entire slopes covered with heath  balds, valleys filled with the
deep green of rhododendron, only a few ambitious trees
protruding above the waving sea of leaves. Then again, theyhad detoured round small tangles of the stuf f, no more than a
hundred feet square. He knew he was fairly close to one edge
of the thing, but that knowledge was useless, with no idea in
which direction the edge lay .
He beca me aware that he was  very cold, his hands still
shaking. Shock,  he thou ght dim ly . What did you  do for shock?
Hot liquids, blankets. Brandy . Y eah, right. Elevate the feet.
That much, he could do.
He scooped a shallow , awkward little depression and eased
himself into it, scraping the clammy , half-rotted leaves over
his c hest and sh oulders. He propped his heels in the fork of a
stem and closed his eyes, shivering.
They wouldn’ t come in after hi m. Why should they? A lot
better to wait, if they were in no  hurry . He’d have to come out
eventually—if he still could.
Any movement here below would shake the leaves above,
and pinpoint his movements to the watchers. That was a cold
thought; they undoubtedly knew where he was now , and were
simply waiting for his next mov e. The patches of sky were the
deep blu e of sapphires; it was still afternoon. He would wait
till dark before he moved, then.
Hands clasped together on his chest, he willed himself to
rest, to think of something beyond his present situation.
Brianna. Let him think of her . W ithout the rage or
bewilderment, now; there was no time for that.
Let him  pretend that all was still between them as it had
been on that night, their night. W arm against him in the dark.
Her hands, so frank and curi ous, eager on his body . The
generosity of her nakedness, freely given. And his momentary ,
mistaken convic tion that all wa s forever right with the world.
Gradually , the shivering eased, and he slept.
He woke sometime after moonrise; he could see brightness
suf fusing the sky , though not the moon itself. He was stif f and
cold, an d very sore. Hungry , to o, and with a desperate thirst.
W ell, if he got himself out of this bloody tangle, at least hecould find water; streams were everywhere in these mountains.
Feeling awkward as a turtle on its back, he turned slowly over .
One direction was as good as an other . On hands and knees,
he starte d of f, pushing through crevices, breaking branches,
trying his best to go in a straight line. One fear haunted him
more than thought of the Indian s; he could so easily lose his
bearings, moving blindly throug h this maze. He could end by
going in endless circles, trapped forever . The stories of the
hunting dogs had lost any element of exaggeration.
Some sm all animal ran over his  hand and he jerked, hitting
his head  on the branches overh ead. He gritted his teeth and
kept on,  a few inches at a time. Crickets chirped all around
him, and countless small rustlings let him know that the
inhabitants of this particular hell didn’ t appreciate his
intrusion. He couldn’ t see anyth ing at all; it was almost pitch-
black here below . There was the one good thing, though: The
constant ef fort heated him; sweat stung the gouge in his scalp
and dripped from his chin.
Whenever he had to stop for b reath, he listened for some
clue—to either his location or his pursuers’—but he heard
nothing beyond the occasional night bird’ s call and the rustle
of th e leaves al l around. He wiped his sweating face on his
sleeve and pushed on.
He didn ’ t know how long he had  been going when he found
the rock . Or not so much found it as ran headfirst into it. He
reeled back, clutching his head  and gritting his teeth to keep
from crying out.
Blinking from the pain, he put o ut a hand and found what he
had struc k. Not a boulder; a flat- faced rock. A tall one, too; the
hard surface extended up as high as he could reach.
He g roped to th e side, and made his way around the rock.
There w as a thick stem growing near it; his shoulders stuck in
the narrow space between. He wrenched and heaved,
squirming, and finally shot forward, losing his balance and
landing on his face.Doggedly , he rose up onto his hands again—and realized
that he could see  his hands. He looked up, and around, in
complete amazement.
His head and shoulders protruded into a clear space. Not
merely c lear , bu t empty . Ea gerly , he wr iggled forward,  out of
the claustrophobic grip of the rhododendrons.
He w as standing in an open space, facing a clif f wall that
rose on the far side of a small clearing. It really was a clearing,
too; not hing at all grew in the soft dirt beneath his feet.
Astonished, he turned slowly round, gulping great lungfuls of
cold, sharp air .
“My God in hea ven,” he said softly , aloud. The clearing was
roughly oval in shape, ringed by standing stones, with one end
of the oval clos ed by the clif f face. The stones were evenly
spaced a round the ring, a few of them fallen, a couple more
dislodged from their places by the press of roots and stems
behind them. He could see t he dense black mass of the
rhododendrons, showing between and above the stones—but
not one plant grew within the perimeter of the ring.
Feeling gooseflesh ripple over his body , he walked softly
toward t he cente r of the ring. It couldn’ t be—but it was. And
why not, after al l? If Geillis Duncan had been right…he turned
and saw in the moonlight the scratchings on the clif f face.
He walked closer to look at them. There were several
petroglyphs, some the size of his hand, others nearly as tall as
he was; spiral sh apes, and what might be a bent man, dancing
—or dying. A n early closed circle, that looked like a snake
chasing its tail. W arning signs.
He shuddered again, and his hand went to the seam of his
breeches. They were still there: the two gems he had risked his
life to get, tiny passports to safety—he hoped—for him and for
Brianna.
He could hear nothing; no humming, no buzzing. The
autumn air was cold, a light wind stirring the rhododendron
leaves. D amn, what was the da te? He didn’ t know , had losttrack lon g since. He thought it had been near the beginning of
September , though, when he left Brianna in W ilmington. It had
taken much longer than he’d thought, to track Bonnet and find
an o pportunity to steal the gems. It must be nearly the end of
October now—the feast of Samhain, the Eve of All Hallows,
was nearly come, or only recently past.
W ould this ring follow the same dates, though? He supposed
that it would; if the Earth’ s lines of force shifted with its
revolution aroun d the sun, then all the passages should stand
open or closed with the shift.
He s tepped closer to the clif f and  saw it; an opening near the
base of the clif f,  a split in the ro ck, perhaps a cave. A chill ran
over him  that had nothing to do  with the cold night wind. His
fingers closed tightly over the small round hardness of the
gems. He heard nothing; was it open? If so…
Escape . It wou ld be that. Escape to when, though? And
how? Th e words of Geilie’ s spel l chanted in his mind. Garnets
r est in love about my neck; I will be faithful .
Faithful. T o try that avenue of escape was to abandon
Brianna. And hasn’ t she abandoned you?
“No, I’m  damned if she has!” he whispered to himself.
There was some reason for what she’d done, he knew it.
She’ s found her par ents; she’ll be safe enough . “A nd f or this
reason, a woman shall leave her parents, and cleave to her
husband.” Safety wasn’ t what mattered; love was. If he’d
cared fo r safety ,  he wouldn’ t ha ve crossed that desperate void
to begin with.
His hands were sweating; he could feel the damp grain of
the rough cloth under his fin gers, and his torn fingertips
burned and throbbed. He took o ne more step toward the split
in th e cl if f face,  his eyes fixed on the pitch-black inside. If he
didn’ t step inside…there were o nly two things to do. Go back
to the suf focating grip of the rho dodendrons, or try to scale the
clif f before him.He tilted his head back to gauge its height. A face was
looking down at him, featureless in the dark, silhouetted
against the moon-bright sky . He hadn’ t time to move or think
before the rope noose settled  gently over his head and
tightened, pressing his arms against his body .5 2
D E S E R T I O N
River Run, December 1769
I t had been raining, and soon would be again. Drops of water
hung trembling under the petals of the marble Jacobite roses
on Hecto r Cameron’ s tomb, and the brick walk was dark with
wet.
Semper Fidelis,  it said, beneath his name and dates. Semper
Fi. S he had date d a Marine cad et once; he’d had it carved on
the r ing he had tried to give her .  Always faithful. And who had
Hector Cameron been faithful to? His wife? His prince?
She had n’ t spoken to Jamie Fra ser since that night. Nor he
to her . Not since the final mome nt, when in a fury of fear and
outrage, she had screamed at him, “My father would never
have said such a thing!”
She cou ld still see what his face had looked like when she
spoke her final w ords to him; she wished she could for get. He
had turn ed without a word and left the cabin. Ian had risen,
and quie tly gone after him; neither of them had come back that
night.
Her mother had stayed with her , comforting, petting,
stroking her head and murmurin g small soothing things as she
alternately raged and sobbed. But even as her mother held
Brianna’ s head in her lap and wiped her face with cool cloths,
Bree could feel a part of her yearning toward that man,
wanting to follow him, wantin g to comfort him . And she
blamed him for that as well.
Her head throbbed with the ef fort of staying stone-faced.
She didn’ t dare relax the muscles of eyes and jaw until she
was sure they had left; it would be too easy to break down.
She had n’ t; not since that night. Once she had pulled herself
together , she had assured her m other that she was all right,
insisted that Claire go to bed. She had herself sat up till dawn,eyes burning from rage and wo odsmoke, with the drawing of
Roger on the table before her .
He  had come back at dawn, called  her mother to him, not
looking at Brianna. Murmured a bit in the dooryard, and sent
her mot her back, face hollow-eyed with worry , to pack her
things.
He had brought her here, down the mountain to River Run.
She had wanted to go with them, had wanted to go at once to
find Ro ger , without a moment’ s delay . But he had been
obdurate, and so had her mother .
It was late Dece mber , and the w inter snows lay thick on the
mountainside. She was nearly four months gone; the taut curve
of h er belly wa s tightly rounded now . There was no telling
how long the j ourney might take, and she was reluctantly
compelled to admit that she didn’ t want to give birth on a raw
mountainside. She might hav e overridden her mother ’ s
opinion, but not when it was buttressed by his  stubbornness.
She leaned her forehead against the cool marble of the
mausoleum; it was a cold day , spitting rain, but her face felt
hot and swollen, as though sh e were coming down with a
fever .
She couldn’ t stop hearing him, seeing him. His face,
congested with rage, sharp-edge d as a devil’ s mask. His voice,
rough w ith fury  and contempt, reproaching her—reproaching
her !—for the loss of his bloody honor!
” Y our  h onor?” she h ad said incredulously . “Y our honor?
Y our fucking notion of honor is  what’ s caused all the trouble
in the first place!”
“Y e willna use that sort of language to me! Though if it’ s
fucking we’re speaking of—”
“I’ll fuc king well say anything I want!” she bellowed, and
slammed a fist on the table, rattling the dishes.
She had, too. So had he. Her mother had tried once or twice
to stop them—B rianna flinched at the belated memory of the
distress in Claire’ s deep golden eyes—but neither of them hadpaid a moment’ s notice, too in tent on the savagery of their
mutual betrayal.
Her mother had told her once that she had a Scottish temper
—slow-fused, but long-burning. Now she knew where it came
from, but the knowing didn’ t help.
She put her fold ed arms against the tomb and rested her face
on t hem, breathing in the fain t sheep-smell of the wool. It
reminded her of the hand-knit sweaters her father—her r eal
father , she thought, with a fresh burst of desolation—had liked
to wear .
“Why di d you have to die?” she whispered to the hollow of
damp w ool. “Oh, why?” If Fran k Randall hadn’ t died, none of
this would have happened. He a nd Claire would still be there,
in the house in Boston, her family and her life would be intact.
But her father w as gone, replaced by a violent stranger; a
man who had h er face, but cou ld not understand her heart, a
man who had ta ken both family and home from her , and not
satisfied with that, had taken love and safety , too, leaving her
bereft in this strange, harsh land.
She pulled the shawl closer around her shoulders, shivering
at the wind that cut through the loose weave. She should have
brought a cloak. She had kissed her white-lipped mother
goodbye and then left, running  through the dead garden, not
looking at him. She’d wait here until she was sure they were
gone, no matter if she froze.
She heard a step on the brick p ath above her and stif fened,
though she didn’ t turn around. Perhaps it was a servant, or
Jocasta come to persuade her inside.
But it was a stri de too long and a footfall too strong for any
but one man. She blinked hard, and gritted her teeth. She
wouldn’ t turn around, she wouldn’ t.
“Brianna,” he said quietly behind her . She didn’ t answer ,
didn’ t move.
He made a small snorting noise—anger , impatience?“I have a thing to say to ye.”
“Say it,”  she said, and the word s hurt her throat, as though
she’d swallowed some jagged object.
It w as beginning to rain again; fresh spatters slicked the
marble in front o f her , and she could feel the icy pat ! of drops
that struck through her hair .
“I will bring hi m home to yo u,” Jamie Fraser said, still
quiet, “or I will not come back myself.”
She cou ldn’ t bring herself to tur n around. There was a small
sound, a  click on the pavement behind her , and then the sound
of h is fo otsteps, going away . Before her tear -blurred eyes, the
drops on the marble roses gathered weight and began to fall.
When at last sh e turned around, the brick-lined walk was
empty . At her feet was a folded paper , damp with rain,
weighted with a stone. She picked it up, and held it crumpled
in her hand, afraid to open it.
February 1770
In spite of worry  and anger , she  found herself easily absorbed
into the flow o f daily life at River Run. Her great-aunt,
delighted at her company , encouraged her to find distraction;
finding that she had some skill in drawing, Jocasta had brought
out her own painting equipment, ur ging Brianna to make use
of it.
By comparison with the cabin on the ridge, life at River Run
was so luxurious as to be almost decadent. Still, Brianna woke
at dawn, out of habit. She stretched langourously , wallowing
in th e physical delight of a fe ather bed that embraced and
yielded to her ev ery move—a definite contrast to lumpy quilts
spread over a chilly straw tick.
There was a fire burning on the hearth, and a lar ge copper
can on the wash stand, its burnished sides glowing. Hot water
for washing; she could see the tiny shimmers of heat wavering
over the  metal. There was still a chill in the room, and the light
outside was winter -blue with cold; the servant who had comeand gone in sile nce must have r isen in the black predawn and
broken ice to get the water .
She oug ht to feel guilty at being waited on by slaves, she
thought drowsil y . She must remember to, later . There were a
lot o f things she didn’ t mean to think about until later; one
more wouldn’ t hurt.
For now , she w as warm. Far away , she could hear small
noises in  the house; a comforting scuf fle of domesticity . The
room its elf was wrapped in silence, the occasional pop of
kindling from the fire the only sound.
She rolled onto her back and, mind still half afloat in sleep,
began to reacquaint herself with her body . This was a morning
ritual; so mething she had begun to do half consciously as a
teenager , and found necessary to do on purpose now—to find
and make peace with the small changes of the night, lest she
look suddenly during the day an d find herself a stranger in her
own body .
One stranger in her body was  enough, she thought. She
pushed the bedclothes down, running her hands slowly over
the d ormant swell of her stomac h. A tiny ripple ran across her
flesh as the inh abitant stretche d, turning slowly as she had
turned in the bed a few minutes before, enclosed and
embraced.
“Hi, the re,” she said softly . The bulge flexed briefly against
her han d and then fell still, the occupant returned to its
mysterious dreams.
Slowly , she ruf fled up the nightgown—it was Jocasta’ s,
warm soft flannel—registering the smooth long muscle at the
top of each thigh, the soft hollo w curving in at the top. Then
up and down and over , bare sk in to bare skin, palms to legs
and belly and breasts. Smooth and soft, round and hard;
muscle and bone…but now not all her  muscle and bone.
Her skin  felt dif ferent in the morning, like a snake’ s skin,
newly shed, all tender and light-lucent. Later , when she rose,when the air go t at it, it would be harder , a duller but more
serviceable envelope.
She lay back ag ainst the pillow , watching the light fill the
room. The house was awake be yond her . She could hear the
myriad faint noises of people at work, and felt soothed. When
she was small, she would wake on summer mornings to hear
the chatter of her father ’ s lawnmower underneath her window;
his voic e calling out in greetin g to a neighbor . She had felt
safe, protected, knowing he was there.
More recently , she had waked  at dawn and heard Jamie
Fraser ’ s voice, speaking in soft Gaelic to his horses outside,
and had felt tha t same feeling return with a rush. No more,
though.
It had been true, what her mother said. She was removed,
changed, altered without consen t or knowledge, learning only
after the  fact. She threw aside  the quilts and got up. She
couldn’ t lie in bed mourning what was lost; it was no longer
anyone’ s job to protect her . Th e job of protector was hers,
now .
The baby was a constant presence—and, oddly enough, a
constant reassur ance. For the first time she felt blessing in it,
and an odd reconciliation; her  body had known this long
before her mind. So that was tru e, too—her mother had said it
often—”Listen to your body .”
She leaned against the window  frame, looking out on the
patchy s now that lay on the kitchen garden. A slave, muf fled
in cloak and scarf, was kne eling on the path, digging
overwintered carrots from one of the beds. T all elms bordered
the walled garden; somewhe re beyond those stark bare
branches lay the mountains.
She stay ed still, listening to the  rhythms of her body . The
intruder in her flesh stirred a little, the tides of its movement
mer ging with the pulsing of h er blood—their blood. In the
beating of her h eart, she thought she heard the echo of that
other , sm aller he art, and in the sound found at last the courage
to th ink clearly , with the assura nce that if the worst happened—she pressed hard against the window frame, and felt it creak
under the force of her ur gency —if the worst happened, still
she would not be totally alone.5 3
B L A M E
J amie spoke barely a word to anyone, between our departure
from Fraser ’ s Ridge, and our ar rival at the T uscaroran village
of T enna go. I rode in a state of misery , torn between guilt at
leaving Brianna, fear for Roger , and pain at Jamie’ s silence.
He was short w ith Ian, and had said no more than absolutely
necessary to Jocasta at Cross Creek. T o me, he said nothing.
Plainly , he blamed me for not  telling him at once about
Stephen Bonnet. In retrospect, I blamed myself bitterly , seeing
what had  come of it. He had kep t the gold ring I had thrown at
him; I had no idea what he had done with it.
The weather was intermittently bad, the clouds hanging so
low to the mountains that on the higher ridges, we traveled for
days on end through a thic k, cold fog, water droplets
condensing on the horses’ coats, so that a constant rain dripped
from the ir manes and moisture s hone on their flanks. W e slept
at n ight in whatever shelter we  could find, each rolled in a
damp c ocoon of blankets, lying separately around a
smoldering fire.
Some of  the Indians who had kn own us at Anna Ooka made
us w elcome when we reached T ennago. I saw several men eye
the casks of wh isky as we unloaded our pack mules, but no
one mad e any move to molest them. There were two mule-
loads of  whisky;  a dozen small casks, all of the Fraser share of
the year ’ s distilling—most of our income for the year . A king’ s
ransom, in terms of trade. En ough to ransom one young
Scotsman, I hoped.
It w as the best— and the only—thing we had to trade with,
but it was also a  dangerous one. Jamie presented one cask to
the sachem  of the v illage, and he and Ian d isappeared into one
of the longhous es to confer . Ian  had given Roger to some of
his frien ds among the T uscarora, but did not know where theyhad taken him. I hoped against hope that it was T ennago. If so,
we could be back at River Run within a month.
This was a faint hope, though. In the midst of the bitter
quarrel with Brianna, Jamie had admitted telling Ian to make
sure tha t Roger didn’ t come back again. T ennago was about
ten day s journey from the Ri dge; much too close for the
purposes of an enraged father .
I w anted to as k the women who entertained me about
Roger , b ut no one in the house had any French or English, and
I had only enough words of T uscaroran to allow for basic
politeness. Better to let Ian and Jamie handle the diplomatic
negotiations. Jamie, with his gift for languages, was competent
in T uscaroran; Ian, who spent h alf his time hunting with the
Indians, was thoroughly fluent.
One of the wom en of fered me a platter containing steaming
mounds of grain cooked with fish. I leaned to scoop up a bit
with the flat piece of wood provided for the purpose, and felt
the a mulet swing forward under my shirt, its small weight both
a reminder of grief and a comfort to it.
I had brought both Nayawenne’ s amulet, and the carved
opal I had found under the red  cedar tree. I had brought the
former , i ntending to give it back—to whom, I had no idea. The
latter m ight augment the whisky , if additional bar gaining
power was needed. For the sam e reason, Jamie had brought
every small valuable he possessed—not many—with the
exception of his father ’ s ruby rin g, which Brianna had brought
to him from Scotland.
W e had left the ruby with Brian na, just in case we did not
return—the poss ibility had to b e faced. There was no telling
whether Geillis  Duncan had been right or wrong in her
theories regarding the use of ge mstones, but at least Brianna
would have one.
She had hugged me fiercely and kissed me when we left
River Run. I had n’ t wanted to g o. Nor had I wanted to stay . I
was torn between them once m ore; between the necessity tostay and look aft er Brianna, and the equally ur gent necessity to
go with Jamie.
“Y ou ha ve to go,” Brianna had s aid firmly . “I’ll be fine; you
said yourself I’m healthy as a horse. Y ou’ll be back a long
time before I need you.”
She had  glanced at her fathe r ’ s back; he stood in the
stableyard, supervising the loading of the horses and mules.
She turned back to me, expressionless.
“Y ou ha ve to go, Mama. I trust you to find Roger .” There
was an uncomfortable emphasis on the you,  and I hoped very
much that Jamie couldn’ t hear her .
“Surely you don’ t think Jamie would—”
“I don’ t know ,” she interrupted . “I don’ t know what he’d
do.” Her jaw w as set in a way I recognized all too well.
Ar gument was futile, but I tried anyway .
“W ell, I  know ,” I said firmly . “He’d do anything for you,
Brianna. Anything. And even if it weren’ t you, he’d do
everything he possibly could to get Roger back. His sense of
honor—” Her face shut up like a trap, and I realized my
mistake.
“His ho nor ,” she said flatly . “That’ s what matters. I guess
it’ s all right, though; as long as it makes him get Roger back.”
She turned away , bending her head against the wind.
“Brianna!” I said, but she only hunched her shoulders,
pulling the shawl tight around them.
“Auntie Claire?  W e’re ready now .” Ian had appeared
nearby , glancing from me to Brianna, his face troubled. I
looked f rom him  to Brianna, he sitating, not wanting to leave
her like this.
“Bree?” I said again.
Then she had turned back in a flurry of wool and embraced
me, her cheek cold against mine.“Come back!” she whispered. “Oh, Mama—come back
safe!”
“I can’ t leave you, Bree, I can’ t!” I held her tight, all strong
bone and tender flesh, the child I had left, the child I had
regained—and the woman who now put my arms away from
her and stood straight, alone.
“Y ou have to go ,” she whispered. The mask of indif ference
had fallen and her cheeks were wet. She glanced over my
shoulder at the archway to the  stableyard. “Bring him back.
Y ou’re the only one who can bring him back.”
She kissed me quickly , turned and ran, the sound of her
steps ringing on the brick path.
Jamie came through the stable arch and saw her , flying
through the stormy light like a banshee. He stood still, looking
after her , his face expressionless.
“Y ou can’ t leave her like this,” I said. I wiped my own wet
cheeks with the corner of my  shawl. “Jamie, go after her .
Please, go and say goodbye, at least.”
He s tood still fo r a moment, an d I thought he was going to
pretend he hadn’ t heard me. B ut then he turned and walked
slowly down the path. The first  drops of rain were beginning
to fall, splatting  on the dusty brick, and the wind belled his
cloak as he went.
“Auntie?” Ian’ s  hand was under my arm, gently ur ging. I
went wi th him, and let him giv e me a hand under my foot to
mount. W ithin a few minute s Jamie was back. He had
mounted, not looking at me, and, with a signal to Ian, ridden
out of the stable yard without looking back. I  had looked back,
but there was no sign of Brianna.
Night had long since fallen, and Jamie was still in the
longhouse with Nacognaweto an d the sachem  of the village. I
looked u p whenever anyone came into the house, but it was
never him. At le ngth, though, the hide flap over the doorway
lifted, and Ian came in, a small, round figure behind him.“I’ve a surprise for ye, Aunti e,” he said, beaming, and
stepped aside to show me the smiling round face of the
slavewoman Pollyanne.
Or rathe r , the ex-slave. For her e, of course, she was free.
She sat down beside me, grinn ing like a jack-o’-lantern, and
turned b ack the deerskin mantle  she wore to show me the little
boy in the crook  of her arm, his face as round and beaming as
her own.
W ith Ian  as interpreter , her own  bits of English and Gaelic,
and the odd bit o f female sign la nguage, we were soon deep in
conversation. She had, as Myers surmised, been welcomed by
the T usc arorans and adopted into the tribe, where her skills at
healing w ere valued. She had taken as husband a man who had
been wid owed in the measles epidemic, and had presented him
with this new addition to the family a few months before.
I was delighted  that she had found both freedom and
happiness, and congratulated her warmly . I was reassured, too;
if the T uscarora ns had treated her so kindly , perhaps Roger
had not fared as badly as I feared.
A thought struck me, and I pulled Nayawenne’ s amulet
from the neck of my buckskin shirt.
“Ian—will you ask if she knows who I should give this to?”
He spoke to he r in T uscaroran, and she leaned forward,
fingering the amulet curiously as he spoke. At last she shook
her head and sat back, replying in her curious deep voice.
“She say s they will not want it, Auntie,” Ian translated. “It
is the medicine bundle of a shaman,  and  it is dangerous. It
should have been buried with th e person to whom it belonged;
no o ne here will touch it, for f ear of attracting the shaman ‘s
ghost.”
I hesitated, holding the leathe r pouch in my hand. The
strange sense of holding something alive had not recurred
since Nayawenne’ s death. Surely it was no more than
imagination that seemed to stir against my palm.“Ask her—what if the shaman  was n’ t buried? If the body
couldn’ t be found?”
Pollyanne’ s round face was solemn, listening. She shook her
head when Ian had finished and replied.
“She says that in  that case the ghost walks with you, Auntie.
She says you should not show it to anyone here—they will be
frightened.”
“She isn ’ t fright ened, is she?” P ollyanne caught that on her
own; she shook her head, and touched her massive bosom.
“Indian now ,” she said simply . “ Not always.” She turned to
Ian, and  explained through him that her own people revered
the spirits of the dead; in fact, it was not unusual for a man to
keep by him the head or some other part of his grandfather or
other ancestor , for protection or  advice. No, the thought of a
ghost walking with me did not trouble her .
Nor did the noti on trouble me. In fact, I found the thought
of Nayawenne walking with me to be rather a comfort, under
the circu mstances. I put the amulet back in my shirt. It brushed
soft and warm against my skin, like the touch of a friend.
W e talke d for some time, until long after the others in the
longhouse had gone to their sep arate cubicles, and the sound
of snoring filled the smoky air . W e were surprised, in fact, by
Jamie’ s arrival, which let in a draft of cold air .
It was as Pollya nne made her farewells that she hesitated,
trying to decide whether to tell me something. She glanced at
Jamie, then shrugged her massi ve shoulders and made up her
mind. She leaned close to Ian, murmured something that
sounded like honey trickling over rocks, putting both hands to
her face , finger tips against the skin. She then embraced me
quickly and left.
Ian stared after her in astonishment.
“What did she say , Ian?”
He turne d back to me, his sketchy brows drawn together in
concern.“She says I sh ould tell Uncle Jamie, that the night the
woman died in the sawmill, she saw a man.”
“What man?”
He shook his head, still frowning.
“She did na ken him. Only that he was a white man, heavy
and squa re, not so tall as Uncle or I. She saw him come out of
the mill , and walk fast into the  forest. She was sitting in the
door to her hut, in the dark, so she thinks he didna see her—
but he passed close enough to the fire that she saw his face.
She says he was pockmarked”—here he put his fingertips
against his face, as she had—”with a face like a pig.”
“Murchison?” My heart skipped a beat.
“Did the man wear a uniform?” Jamie asked, frowning.
“No. But she was curious to know what he had been doing
there; he  wasna one of the planta tion owners, nor yet a hand or
an overseer . So she crept to the mill to see, but when she put
her head inside, she knew some thing evil had happened. She
said she smelt blood, and then she heard voices, so she didna
go in.”
So it had been  murder , and Jamie and I had missed
preventing it by a matter of moments. It was warm in the
longhouse, but I felt cold at the memory of the thick, bloody
air i n the  sawmi ll, and the hardn ess of a kitchen skewer in my
hand.
Jamie’ s hand settled on my shoulder . W ithout thinking, I
reached up and t ook it. It felt very good in mine, and I realized
that we had no t purposely touched each other in nearly a
month.
“The dead lass was an army laundress,” he said quietly .
“Murchison has  a wife in England; I suppose he might have
found a pregnant mistress to be an encumbrance.”
“No wo nder he was making s uch a fuss of hunting for
whoever was responsible—and then seizin’ on yon poor
woman who couldna even spea k for herself.” Ian’ s face wasflushed with indignation. “If he could have got her hanged for
it, he’d ha’ thou ght himself safe, I daresay , the wicked wee
scut.”
“Perhaps I will pay a call on the  Ser geant, when we return,”
Jamie said. “Privately .”
The thought made my blood run cold. His voice was soft
and even, and his face calm w hen I turned to look, but I
seemed to see th e surface of a dark Scottish pool reflected in
his eyes , the water ruf fled as though something heavy had just
sunk below .
“Don’ t you think you’ve enough vengeance to keep you
occupied for the moment?”
I s poke more sh arply than I inte nded, and his hand slipped
abruptly out of mine.
“I expe ct so,” he said, both face and voice without
expression. He turned to Ian.
“W akefield—or MacKenzie, or whatever the man’ s name is
—is a good way  to the north. They sold him to the Mohawk; a
small vi llage be low the river . Y our friend Onakara has agreed
to guide us; we’ll leave at first light.”
He r ose and walked away , towa rd the far end of the house.
Everyone else had already retir ed for the night. Five hearths
burned, down the length of th e house, each with its own
smokehole, and the far wall was  divided into cubicles, one for
each cou ple or family , with a low , wide shelf for sleeping and
space beneath for storage.
Jamie st opped at the cubicle as signed for our use, where I
had left our clo aks and bundles. He slipped of f his boots,
unbelted the plaid he wore over breeches and shirt, and
disappeared into  the darkness of the sleeping space without a
backward glance.
I sc rambled to my feet, mean ing to follow him, but Ian
stopped me with a hand on my arm.
“Auntie,” he said hesitantly . “W ill ye not for give him?”“For give him? ” I stared at him. “For what? For Roger?”
He grimaced.
“No. It was a grievous mistake,  but we would do the same
again, thinking matters as we did. No—for Bonnet.”
“For Stephen Bonnet? How can he possibly think I blame
him for that? I’v e never said su ch a thing to him!” And I had
been too busy thinking that he blamed me,  to even consider it.
Ian scratched a hand through his hair .
“W ell…do ye not see, Auntie? H e blames himself for it. He
has, ever since the man robbed us on the river; and now wi’
what he ’ s done to my cousin…” He shrugged, looking mildly
embarrassed. “H e’ s fair eaten up with it, and knowing that
you’re angry wi’ him—”
“But I’m not an gry with him! I thought he was angry with
me, because I didn’ t tell him Bonnet’ s name right away .”
“Och.” Ian looked as though he didn’ t know whether to
laugh or look distressed. “W ell, I daresay it would ha’ saved us
a bit of t rouble i f ye had, but no, I’m sure it’ s not that, Auntie.
After all, by the  time Cousin Brianna told ye, we’d already
met yon MacKenzie on the mountainside and done him a bit of
no good.”
I took in a deep breath and blew it out again.
“But you think he thinks I’m angry at him?”
“Oh, anyone could see ye are, Auntie,” he assured me
earnestly . “Y e dinna look at him or speak to him save for what
ye must—and,” he said, clearing his throat delicately , “I
havena seen ye go to his bed, anytime this month past.”
“W ell, he hasn’ t come to mine, either!” I said hotly , before
reflecting that this was scarcely  a suitable conversation to be
having with a seventeen year -old boy .
Ian hunched his shoulders and gave me an owlish look.
“W ell, he’ s his pride, hasn’ t he?”“God kn ows he has,” I said, rubb ing a hand over my face. “I
—look, Ian, thank you for saying something to me.”
He gave me one of the rare sweet smiles that transformed
his long, homely face.
“W ell, I do hate to see him suf fer . I’m fond of Uncle Jamie,
aye?”
“So am I,” I said, and swallowed the small lump in my
throat. “Good night, Ian.”
I walked  softly down the length of the house, past cubicles in
which whole families slept together , the sound of their
mingled breathing a peaceful descant to the anxious beating of
my heart. It w as raining outside; water dripped from the
smokeholes, sizzling in the embers.
Why had I not seen what Ian had? That was easy to answer;
it wa sn’ t anger , b ut my own sens e of guilt that had blinded me.
I h ad kept back  my knowledge of Bonnet’ s involvement as
much because of the gold wed ding ring as because Brianna
had aske d me to; I could have persuaded her to tell Jamie, had
I tried.
She was right; he would undoubtedly go after Stephen
Bonnet sooner or later . I had somewhat more confidence in
Jamie’ s success than she did, th ough. No, it had been the ring
that had made me keep silence.
And wh y should I feel guilty  over that? There was no
sensible answer; it had been inst inct, not conscious thought, to
hide the ring. I had not wanted to show it to Jamie, to put it
back on  my finger in front of him. And yet I had wanted—
needed—to keep it.
My heart squeezed small, thinki ng of the past few weeks, of
Jamie, going grimly about the necessities of reparation in
loneliness and guilt. That was why I had come with him, after
all—because I was afraid that if he went alone, he might not
come back. Spurred by guilt and courage, he might go to
reckless lengths; with me to c onsider , I knew he would becareful. And all the time he had thought himself not only alone
but bitterly reproached by the one person who could—and
should—have of fered him comfort.
“Eaten up with it” indeed.
I p aused  by the cubicle. The shelf was some eight feet wide,
and he lay well back; I could see little more of him than a
humped shape under a blanket made of rabbit skins. He lay
very still, but I knew he wasn’ t asleep.
I cl imbed onto the platform, and once safe within the
shadows of the c ubicle, slipped out of my clothes. It was fairly
warm in  the longhouse, but m y bare skin prickled and my
nipples tightened. My eyes had grown accustomed to the
dimness; I could see that he lay on his side facing me. I caught
the shine of his eyes in the dark, open and watching me.
I k nelt down an d slid under the blanket, the fur soft against
my skin . W ithou t stopping to th ink too much, I rolled to face
him, pre ssing m y nakedness against him, face buried in his
shoulder .
“Jamie,” I whispered to him. “I’m cold. Come and warm
me. Please?”
He t urned to me , wordless, with a quiet ferocity that I might
have thought the hunger of desi re long stifled—but knew now
for simple desperation. I sought no pleasure for myself; I
wanted only to give him comfort. But opening to him, ur ging
him, some deep wellspring open ed too, and I cleaved to him in
a sudden need as blind and desperate as his own.
W e clung tight together , shuddering, heads buried in each
other ’ s hair , unable to look at each other , unable to let go.
Slowly , as the s pasms died away , I became aware of things
outside our own small mortal coil, and realized that we lay in
the mids t of strangers, naked and helpless, shielded only by
darkness.
And yet we wer e alone, completely . W e had the privacy of
Babel; th ere was  a conversation going on at the far end of thelonghouse, but its words held no meaning. It might as well
have been the hum of bees.
Smoke from the banked fire wavered up outside the
sanctuary of our bed, fragrant and insubstantial as incense. It
was dark as a confessional insi de the cubicle; I could see no
more of Jamie than the faint c urve of light that rimmed his
shoulder , a transient gleam in the locks of his hair .
“Jamie, I’m sorry ,” I said softly . “It wasn’ t your fault.”
“Who else?” he said, with some bleakness.
“Everyone. No one. Stephen Bonnet, himself. But not you.”
“Bonnet?” His voice was blank with surprise. “What has he
to do with it?”
“W ell…everything,” I said, taken aback. “Er…doesn’ t he?”
He rolled halfway of f me, brushing hair out of his face.
“Stephen Bonnet is a wicked creature,” he said precisely ,
“and I shall kill him at the first opportunity I have. But I dinna
see how I can blame him for my own failings as a man.”
“What on earth are you talking about? What failings?”
He d idn’ t answer right away , b ut bent his head, a humped
shadow in the d ark. His legs we re still entangled with mine; I
could feel the tension of his body , knotted in his joints, rigid in
the hollows of his thighs.
“I hadna  though t ever to be so jealous of a dead man,” he
whispered at last. “I shouldna have thought it possible.”
“Of a dead man?” My own  voice rose slightly , with
astonishment, as it finally dawned on me. “Of Frank? ”
He lay still, half on top of me. His hand touched the bones
of my face, hesitant.
“Who el se? I have been worm-eaten wi’ it, all these days of
riding. I see his face in my mind, waking and sleeping. Y e did
say he looked like Jack Randall, no?”I gathere d him tight against myself, pressing his head down
so t hat his ear was near my mouth. Thank God I hadn’ t
mentioned the ring to him—but had my face, my traitorous,
transparent face, somehow given away that I thought of it?
“How?” I whispered to him, squeezing hard. “How could
you think of such a thing?”
He broke loose, rising on one elbow , his hair falling down
over my face i n a mass of flaming shadows, the firelight
sparking gold and crimson through it.
“How could I no t?” he demanded. “Y e heard her , Claire; ye
ken well what she said to me!”
“Brianna?”
“She sai d she would gladly see me in hell, and sell her own
soul to have her father back—her real father .” He swallowed; I
heard the sound of it, above the murmur of distant voices.
“I k eep thinking he would not have made such a mistake.
He w ould have trusted her; he w ould have known that she…I
keep thinking that Frank Randall was a better man than I am.
She thinks so.” H is hand faltered, then settled on my shoulder ,
squeezing tight. “I thought… perhaps ye felt the same,
Sassenach.”
“Fool,” I whispered, and didn’ t  mean him. I ran my hands
down the long slope of his back, digging my fingers into the
firmness of his buttocks. “W ee idiot. Come here.”
He dropped his head, and made a small sound against my
shoulder that might have been a laugh.
“A ye, I am. Y e dinna mind it so much, though?”
“No.” His hair s melt of smoke and pinesap. There were still
bits of needles caught in it; o ne pricked smooth and sharp
against my lips.
“She didn’ t mean it,” I said.
“A ye, she did,” h e said, and I felt him swallow the thickness
in his throat. “I heard her .”“I heard  you both.” I rubbed slowly between his shoulder
blades, feeling the faint traces of the old scars, the thicker ,
more rec ent welts left by the bear ’ s claws. “She’ s just like you;
she’ll say things in a temper s he’d never say in cold blood.
Y ou didn’ t mean all the things you said to her , did you?”
“No.” I could fe el the tightness in him lessening, the joints
of hi s bo dy loos ening, yielding reluctantly to the persuasion of
my fingers. “No, I didna mean it. Not all of it.”
“Neither did she.”
I wa ited a mom ent, stroking him as I had stroked Brianna,
when she was small, and afraid.
“Y ou can believe me,” I whispered. “I love you both.”
He sighed, deeply , and was quiet for a moment.
“If I  can find the man and bring  him back to her . If I do—
d’ye think she’ll for give me one day?”
“Y es,” I said. “I know it.”
On the other sid e of the partitio n, I heard the small sounds
of lo vemaking begin; the shift and sigh, the murmured words
that have no language.
“Y ou ha ve to go.”  Bria nna had sai d to me. “Y ou’r e the only
one who can bring him back.”
It occurred to me for the first time that perhaps she hadn’ t
been speaking of Roger .
It w as a long trek through the m ountains, made longer by the
winter weather . There were days when it was impossible to
travel; when we crouched all da y under rocky overhangs or in
the shelter of a grove of trees, huddled against the wind.
Once we were through the mountains, the traveling was
somewhat easier , though the temperatures grew colder as we
headed north. Some nights we a te cold food, unable to keep a
fire alight in snow and wind. But each night I lay with Jamie,
closely huddled together within  a single cocoon of furs and
blankets, sharing our warmth.I kept close count of the days, marking them by means of a
length o f knotted twine. W e had left River Run in early
January; it was m id-February before Onakara pointed out to us
the smo ke rising in the distance that marked the Mohawk
village where he and his companions had taken Roger
W akefield. “Snake-town,” he said it was called.
Six wee ks, and Brianna would b e nearly six months gone. If
we coul d get Roger back quick ly—and if he was capable of
travel, I  added grimly to myself—we should be back well
before th e child was due. If Roger wasn’ t here, though—if the
Mohawk had sold him elsewhere…or if he was dead—said a
small cold voice inside my he ad, we would return without
delay .
Onakara declined to accompany us into the village, which
did absolutely nothing to increase my confidence in our
prospects. Jamie  thanked him an d saw him of f, with one of the
horses, a  good knife, and a flask  of whisky in payment for his
services.
W e buried the r est of the whisky , hiding it carefully some
distance outside the village.
“W ill they understand what we want?” I asked, as we
remounted. “Is T uscarora close  enough to Mohawk for us to
talk to them?”
“It’ s no quite th e same, Auntie, but close,” Ian said. It was
snowing lightly , and the flakes clung melting to his eyelashes.
“Like the dif ferences between Italian and Spanish, maybe. But
Onakara says that the sachem  and a few others have a bit of
English, though they mostly dinna choose to use it. But the
Mohawk fought  with the English against the French; there will
be some who ken it.”
“W ell, th en.” Jamie smiled at us  and laid his musket across
the saddle in front of him. “Let’ s go and try our luck.”5 4
C A P T I V I T Y  I
February 1770
H e h ad been in th e Mohawk village nearly three months, by
the reck oning of  his knotted str ing. At first he had not known
who they were; only that they were a dif ferent kind of Indian
than his captors—and that his captors were afraid of them.
He had stood numb with exhaustion while the men who had
brought him talked and pointed. The new Indians were
dif ferent; they were dressed for the cold, in fur and leather , and
many of the men’ s faces were tattooed.
One of them pr odded him with the point of a knife, and
made him undress. He was force d to stand naked in the middle
of a long wooden house while several men—and women—
poked an d jeered  at him. His right foot was badly swollen; the
deep cu t had become infected. He could still walk, but each
step sen t jabs of pain throu gh his leg, and he burned
intermittently with fever .
They sh oved him, pushing him to the door of the house.
There was a lot of noise outside. He recognized the gauntlet; a
double row of shouting savages, all armed with sticks and
clubs. Someone  behind poked him in the buttock with the
point of a knife, and he felt a w arm trickle of blood run down
his leg. “Cours!”  they said. Run.
The gro und was trampled, snow packed into grimy ice. It
burned his feet as a shove in his back sent him staggering into
pandemonium.
He staye d upright most of the way , lurching one way , then
another , as the clubs struck him to and fro and sticks lashed at
his legs and back. There was no way to avoid the blows. All he
could do was keep going, as fast as possible.
Close to  the end, a club swung straight and took him hard
across the belly; he doubled o ver and another swatted himbehind the ear . He rolled bonelessly into the snow , barely
feeling the cold on his broken skin.
A switch stung h is legs, then las hed him hard just under the
balls. He jerked his legs up in r eflex, rolled again, and found
himself on hands and knees, still somehow going, the blood
from his nose and mouth mixing with the frozen mud.
He reach ed the end, and with th e last blows still stinging on
his back , grasped the poles of a longhouse and pulled himself
slowly t o his feet. He turned to  face them, holding on to the
poles to  keep from falling. They liked that; they were
laughing, with high-pitched yips that made them sound like a
pack of dogs. He bowed low , and straightened up, head
whirling. They laughed harder . He’d always known how to
please a crowd.
They took him inside then, gav e him water to wash with,
some fo od. They gave him ba ck his ragged shirt and filthy
breeches, but not his coat or shoes. It was warm in the house;
there we re several fires burning at intervals down the length of
the long  structu re, each with its  own open smokehole above.
He crawled into a corner and fell asleep, his hand on the
lumpy seam of his breeches.
After this reception, the Mohawk treated him with general
indif ference but no great cruelty . He was the slave of the
longhouse, at the use of anyone who lived there. If he did not
understand an order , they would show him—once. If he
refused or pretended not to understand, they beat him, and he
refused no more. Still, he shared equally in their food and was
given a decent place to sleep, at the end of the house.
As i t was winter , the main work was in gathering wood and
fetching water , though now and then a hunting party would
take him along to help in butch ering and carrying meat. The
Indians made no great ef fort to communicate with him, but by
careful listening he acquired a little of the language.
He b egan, with g reat caution, to try a few words. He chose a
young girl to begin with, feeling her less dangerous. She stared
at hi m, t hen laug hed, delighted as if she had heard a crow talk.She called a fri end to come and hear , and another , and the
three of them cr ouched in front of him, laughing softly behind
their hands and looking sidewa ys at him from the corners of
their eyes. He said all the words he knew , pointing at the
objects—fire, pot, blanket, corn—then pointed at a string of
dried fish overhead and raised his eyebrows.
“Y ona’kensyonk,”  s aid his new fri end promptly , and giggled
when he repeated it. Over the n ext days and weeks, the girls
taught h im a great deal; it was from them that he finally
learned where he was. Or not where, precisely , but in whose
hands.
They were Kahnyen’kehaka,  the y told him proudly , with
looks of surprise that he did not know that. Mohawk. Keepers
of the Eastern G ate of the Iroq uois League. He, on the other
hand, was Kakonhoaer has . It took a certain amount of
discussion to determine the ex act meaning of this term; he
finally discovere d, when one of the girls dragged in a mongrel
in illustration, that it meant “dogface.”
“Thanks,” he said, fingering the thick growth of his beard.
He bared his teeth at them and growled, and they shrieked
with laughter .
One of the girls ’ mothers became interested; seeing that his
foot was still swollen, she bro ught ointment and bathed it,
bandaging it for him with liche n and corn husks. The women
began to speak to him when he brought them wood or water .
He made no atte mpt at escape; not yet. W inter kept its grip
on the village,  with frequent snows and bitter wind. He
wouldn’ t get far , unarmed, lame, and with no protection from
the wea ther . He bided his time. And he dreamed at night of
lost worlds, waking often in th e dawn to the smell of fresh
grass, with the ache of his need spilled warm on his belly .
The edges of the river were still frozen when the Jesuit came.
Roger had the r un of the village; he was outside when the
dogs began to b ark and yelps from the sentries signaled thearrival o f visitors. People began to gather , and he went with
them, curious.
The new arrivals were a lar ge group of Mohawk, men and
women both, all on foot, burde ned with the usual bundles of
traveling gear . That seemed odd; such visitors as had come to
the villa ge before were small hunting parties. What was odder
was that the visitors had with them a white man—the pale
winter sun gleamed on the man’ s fair hair .
Roger moved closer , eager to s ee, but was shoved back by
some of the vill agers. Not before seeing that the man was a
priest, though; the tattered rem nants of a long black robe
showed beneath a bearskin cape, over leather leggings and
moccasins.
The priest didn’ t act like a priso ner , nor was he bound. And
yet Roger had t he feeling that he traveled under compulsion;
there were lines of strain in an otherwise young face. The
priest and several of his companions disappeared into the
longhouse wher e the sachem  hel d council; R oger had never
been inside, but had heard the women talk.
One of the olde r women from his own longhouse saw him
loitering in the crowd, and ordered him sharply to fetch more
wood. He went, and didn’ t see  the priest again, though the
faces of the ne w arrivals showed in the village, scattered
among the longhouses to share the hospitality of their hearths.
Something was happening in th e village; he could feel the
currents of it eddying around him  but did not understand them.
The men  sat later by the fires in the evenings, talking, and the
women murmured to each other as they worked, but the
discussion was far beyond the grasp of Roger ’ s rudimentary
comprehension. He asked one of the little girls about the new
visitors; she could tell him only  that they came from a village
to the north—w hy they had co me, she did not know , save it
had to do with the Black Robe, the Kahontsi’yatawi .
It was more than a week later that Roger went out with a
hunting party . The weather was cold but clear , and they
traveled far , eventually finding and killing a moose. Roger wasstunned, not only by the size of  the thing but by its stupidity .
He c ould understand the attitude  of the hunters: There was no
honor in killing such a thing; it was only meat.
It wa s a lot  of meat. He was burdened like a pack mule, and
the e xtra weight bore hard on h is lame foot; by the time they
returned to the village, he was limping so badly that he
couldn’ t keep up with the huntin g party , but lagged far behind,
desperately trying to keep them in view lest he be lost in the
forest.
T o his surprise, several men were waiting for him when he
finally limped into view of the v illage palisades. They grabbed
him, reli eved him of the burden of meat, and hustled him into
the village. They didn’ t take him to his own longhouse, but to
a small hut that stood at the far end of the central clearing.
He hadn’ t enough Mohawk to ask questions, and didn’ t
think the y would be answered i n any case. They shoved him
inside the hut, and left him.
There was a small fire burning, but the interior was so dark
after the brightness of the day ou tside that he was momentarily
blinded.
“Who are you?” said a startled voice in French.
Roger blinked several times, and made out a slight figure
rising from its seat beside the fire. The priest.
“Roger MacKenzie,” he said. “Et vous”  H e experienced  a
sudden and unexpected flood of happiness at the simple
speaking of his name. The Indi ans didn’ t care what his name
was; they called him dogface when they wanted him.
“Alexandre.” Th e priest came forward, looking both pleased
and inc redulous. “Pere Alex andre Ferigault. V ous etes
anglais? ”
“Scots,” said Roger , and sat down suddenly , his lame leg
giving way .
“A Scotsman? How do you come here? Y ou are a soldier?”
“A prisoner .”The prie st squat ted by him, look ing him over curiously . He
was  f airly young—i n his late twenties or early thirties, though
his fair skin was chapped and weathered by the cold.
“Y ou will eat wi th me?” He gestured to a small collection of
clay pots and baskets that held food and water .
Speaking in his own language seemed to be as much a relief
for the priest as speaking freely was for Roger . By the time the
meal was concluded, they had gleaned a cautious knowledge
of e ach other ’ s basic past—if n o explanation as yet for their
present situation.
“Why have they put me here  with you?” Roger asked,
wiping grease from his mouth. He didn’ t think it was to
provide the priest with company . Thoughtfulness was not an
outstanding Mohawk characteristic, so far as he’d noticed.
“I ca nnot say . I was in fact asto nished to see another white
man.”
Roger glanced at the door of the hut. It moved slightly;
there was someone outside.
“Are yo u a prisoner?” he asked,  in some surprise. The priest
hesitated, then shrugged, with a small smile.
“I cann ot say that, either . W ith the Mohawk, one is
Kahnyen’kehaka  or one i s—other . And if one is other , the line
between guest and prisoner can alter in a moment. Leave it
that I have lived  among them fo r several years—but I have not
been ad opted into the tribe. I am still ‘other .’ ” He coughed
and changed the subject. “How  did you come to be taken
captive?”
Roger hesitated, not really knowing how to answer .
“I was betrayed,” he said at last. “Sold.”
The priest nodded sympathetically .
“Is there anyone who might ra nsom you? They will take
care to keep you alive if they have some hope of ransom.”
Roger shook his head, feeling hollow as a drum.“There’ s no one.”
Conversation ceased as the light from the smokehole dimmed
into dus k, leaving them in darkn ess below . There was a firepit,
but no wood; the fire died out. The hut seemed to have been
abandoned; there was a bed frame built of poles, but nothing
else in the hut s ave a couple of tattered deerskins and a small
heap of domestic debris in one corner .
“Have you been here—in this hut—long?” Roger asked at
last, breaking the silence. He co uld barely see the other man,
though t he last remnants of twilight were visible through the
smokehole.
“No. Th ey brought me here today—shortly before you
came.” The priest coughed, shifting uneasily on the packed
dirt floor .
That seemed sinister , but Roger thought it more tactful—
and less  frightening—not to mention it. It was no doubt as
obvious to the priest as to himself that the line between
“guest” and “prisoner” had bee n crossed. What had the man
done?
“Y ou are a Christian?” Alexandre broke the silence abruptly .
“Y es. My father was a minister .”
“Ah. May I ask —if they take me away , will you pray for
me?”
Roger fe lt a sudden chill that had nothing to do with the
cheerless surroundings.
“Y es,” he said awkwardly . “Of course. If you like.”
The priest rose and began to  walk restlessly about the
confines of the hut, unable to keep still.
“It may be all right,” he said, bu t it was the voice of a man
trying to convince himself. “They are still deciding.”
“Deciding what?”
He felt rather than saw the priest’ s shrug.“Whether I live.”
There seemed no good response to that, and they fell once
more into silence. Roger sat huddled by the cold firepit,
resting his lame foot, while the priest paced to and fro, finally
settling beside him. W ithout comment, the two moved close
together , pooling their warmth; it was going to be a cold night.
Roger had dozed of f, one of the  deerskins pulled over him,
when the re was a sudden noise a t the door . He sat up, blinking,
to a blaze of fire.
There were four Mohawk warriors in the hut; one dumped a
load of wood into the firepit an d thrust the brand he held into
the pile.  Ignoring Roger , the oth ers pulled Pere Ferigault to his
feet and roughly stripped him of his clothes.
Roger m oved instinctively , half rising, and was knocked
flat. The priest g ave him a quick, open-eyed look that begged
him not to interfere.
One of the wa rriors held his own brand close to Pere
Ferigault’ s face. He said something that sounded like a
question, then, receiving no answer , passed his brand
downward, so close to the prie st’ s body that the white skin
glowed red.
Sweat stood out on Alexandre ’ s face as the fire hovered
near his  genitals, but his face remained carefully blank. The
warrior with the brand poked it suddenly at the priest, who
could no t keep from flinching. T he Indians laughed, and did it
again. This time he was prepare d; Roger smelled singed hair ,
but the priest didn’ t move.
T iring of this sp ort, two of the warriors seized the priest by
the arms, and dragged him out of the hut.
If they take me away—pray for me . Ro ger sat up slowly , the
hairs on his bo dy prickling with dread. He could hear the
voices of the Indians, talking among themselves, receding in
the distance; no sound from the priest.
Alexandre’ s discarded clothes were flung around the hut;
Roger p icked them up, carefully beating the dust from themand folding them. His hands were shaking.
He tried  to pray , but found it hard to focus his mind upon
devotion. Over and around the words of his prayer , he could
hear a small, cold voice, saying, And whe n they come to take
me away—who will pray for me?
They ha d left him a fire; he tried to believe that meant that
they did not mean to kill him right away . The granting of
comforts to a condemned prisoner was not the Mohawk way ,
either . After a time he lay down under the deerskins, curled on
his side,  and watched the flames until he fell asleep, worn out
by terror .
He was roused from uneasy sleep by the shuf fle of feet and
many vo ices. He sprang awake, rolled away from the fire and
crouched, looking frantically for some means of defense.
The door flap li fted, and the na ked body of the priest fell
into the hut. The noises outside moved away .
Alexandre stirred and moaned . Roger came quickly and
knelt by  him. He could smell fresh blood, a hot-copper smell
he recognized from the slaughtering of the moose.
“Are you hurt? What have they done?”
The answ er to that was quick in  coming. He turned the half-
conscious priest  over , to see blood streaming over face and
neck in a shiny red glaze. He snatched the priest’ s discarded
robe to stanch th e wound, pushed back the matted blond hair ,
and found that the priest’ s righ t ear was missing. Something
sharp ha d taken a patch of skin some three inches square from
just behind the jaw , removing both ear and a section of scalp.
Roger clenched his stomach muscles and pressed the cloth
tight against the raw wound. Holding it in place, he dragged
the l imp body to  the fire, and piled the remnants of clothes and
both deerskins on top of Pere Ferigault.
The man  was moaning now . Roger washed his face, made
him drink a little water .“It’ s all right,” he muttered, ov er and over , though he was
uncertain wheth er the other could hear him. “It’ s all right, they
didn’ t ki ll you.” He couldn’ t help wondering whether it might
have been better if they had; did they mean this only as a
warning to the priest, or was it only the preliminary to greater
tortures?
The fire had bur ned itself to co als; in the reddish light, the
seeping blood was black.
Father Alexand re moved constantly in small jerks, the
restlessness of his body at once caused and constrained by the
pain of his wound. He could no t by any means settle to sleep,
and con sequently neither could Roger , nearly as aware as the
priest of each interminably passing minute.
Roger cursed himself for helplessness; he would have given
anything to assuage the other m an’ s pain, even for a moment.
It wasn’ t merely sympathy , and he knew it; Father Alexandre’ s
small, breathless sounds kept the knowledge of the mutilation
fresh in Roger ’ s mind, and ter ror alive in his blood. If the
priest could only sleep, the sounds would stop—and perhaps
in the darkness, the horror would recede a bit.
For the first time, he thought he understood what it was that
made Cl aire Randall tick; made her walk onto battlefields, to
lay her hands o n wounded men. T o ease pain and death in
another was to soothe the fear of it in oneself—and to soothe
his own fear , he would do almost anything.
At l ast, unable to bear the wh ispered prayers and stifled
whimpering any longer , he lay down beside the priest, and
took Alexandre in his arms.
“Hush,” he said, his lips close to  Pere Alexandre’ s head. He
hoped he had th e side with the  ear . “Be still now . Reposez-
vous .”
The priest’ s lean body quivered against his own, the
muscles knotted  with cold and agony . Roger rubbed the man’ s
back briskly , chafed his palms over the chilled limbs, and
pulled both tattered deerskins over them.“Y ou’ll be all ri ght.” Roger spoke in English, aware that it
didn’ t m atter what he said, only  that he said something. “Here
now , it’ s  all right. Y es, go on, then.” He talked as much to
distract himself  as the other man; the feel of Alexandre’ s
naked body was vaguely shocking—as much because it didn’ t
feel unnatural as because it did.
The priest clung to him, head pressed into his shoulder . He
said nothing, but Roger could fe el the wetness of tears against
his s kin. He ma de himself hug the priest tightly , rubbing up
and dow n the spine with its small lumps of knobby bone,
forcing himself to think only of stopping the terrible shaking.
“Y ou could be a dog,” Roger s aid. “A mistreated stray of
some kind. I’d do it if you were a dog, of course I would. No, I
wouldn’ t,” he muttered to hims elf. “Call the ruddy RSPCA, I
expect.”
He patted Alexandre’ s head, careful where his fingers went,
cold with gooseflesh at the thought of touching that raw ,
bloody patch by inadvertence. T he hair at the priest’ s nape was
lank wit h sweat, though the fle sh of his neck and shoulders
was like ice. His lower body was warmer , but not by much.
“Nobody’d treat a dog like this,” he muttered. “Fucking
savages. Set the police onto them. Put their bloody pictures in
the T imes . Complain to my MP .”
A small ripple of something too frightened to be called
laughter went through him. He gripped the priest fiercely , and
rocked him to and fro in darkness.
“Reposez-vous, mon ami. C’est bien, la, c’est bien.”5 5
C A P T I V I T Y  I I
River Run, March 1770
B rianna rolled the wet brush along the edge of the palette,
squeezing out the excess turps to form a good point. She
touched the point briefly to the viridian-cobalt mix and added
a fine line of shadow to the river ’ s edge.
There were footsteps on the pa th behind her , coming from
the house. She recognized the arrythmic double step; it was the
Deadly Duo. She tensed slightly , fighting the ur ge to snatch
the wet canvas and put it out of sight behind Hector Cameron’ s
mausoleum. She  didn’ t mind Jocasta, who often came to sit
with he r while  she painted in the mornings, to discuss
techniques of painting, grinding pigments, and the like. In fact,
she wel comed her great-aunt’ s company and treasured the
older woman’ s stories of her girlhood in Scotland, of Brianna’ s
grandmother , and of the other MacKenzies of Leoch. But
when Jocasta brought her faithful Seeing-eye Dog along, it
was a dif ferent matter .
“Good morning, Niece! Is it not too cold for you the morn?”
Jocasta halted, her own cloak dr awn around her , and smiled
at Brian na. If she hadn’ t known better , she wouldn’ t have
realized her aunt’ s blindness.
“No, it’ s fine here; the…er…tomb blocks the wind. I’m
finished for now , though.” She wasn’ t, but stabbed her brush
into the turpenti ne jar and began  to scrape the palette. Damned
if she’d paint with Ulysses describing her every brushstroke
out loud.
“Ah? W ell, leave your things, t hen; Ulysses will take them
up for you.”
Reluctantly abandoning her ea sel, Brianna picked up her
private sketchbook and tucked it under one arm, giving herother to Jocasta. She wasn’ t leaving that  for  Mr . Sees-all,
T ells-all to flip through.
“W e have company today ,” Jocasta said, turning back
toward the house. “Judge Alderdyce, from Cross Creek, and
his m other . I tho ught perhaps ye’d wish time to change, before
luncheon.” Brianna bit the inside of her cheek, to prevent any
rejoinder to this less than subtle hint. More visitors.
Under the circumstances, she could scarcely refuse to meet
her aunt’ s guests—or even to change clothes for them—but
she could have wished that Jocasta were a good deal less
sociable. There was a constant stream of visitors; for luncheon,
for tea, for supper , overnight,  for breakfast, come to buy
horses, s ell cows, trade lumber , borrow books, bring gifts, play
music. They came from neighboring plantations, from Cross
Creek, and from as far away as Edenton and New Bern.
The arra y of Jocasta’ s acquaintance was staggering. Still,
Brianna had noticed an increa sing tendency of late for the
callers to be men. Single men.
Phaedre verified Brianna’ s susp icions, voiced as the maid
dug in the wardrobe for a fresh morning gown.
“There a in’ t a lot of single women in the colony ,” Phaedre
observed, when  Brianna mentioned the peculiar coincidence
that most of the recent visitors appeared to be bachelors.
Phaedre cast an eye at Brianna’ s midsection, which was
bulging noticeably under the loose muslin shift. ” ‘Specially
not young ones. T o say nothing of women who’ s got River
Run a-coming to them.”
“Who’ s got what? ” Brianna said. She stopped, hair half
pinned, and stared at the maid.
Phaedre laid one graceful hand across her mouth, eyes wide
above it.
“Y our au ntie ain’ t told you yet?  Thought sure you knew , or
I’d not’ve said.”
“W ell, now you’ve said that mu ch, go on saying. What do
you mean?” Phaedre, a born gossip, took little coaxing.“Y our daddy and them hadn’ t be en gone but a week, before
Miss Jo sent fo r Lawyer Forbes and had her will changed.
When M iss Jo dies, they’ s som e little bits of money goes to
your daddy , and some persona l things to Mr . Farquard and
some of her other friends—but everything else, that’ s yours.
The plantation, the timber , the sawmill…”
“But I don’ t want it!”
Phaedre’ s elegantly lifted eyebrow expressed profound
doubt, then dropped, dismissing it.
“W ell, it  ain’ t what you want, I  reckon. Miss Jo is kind of
inclined to get what she  wants.”
Brianna laid the hairbrush down, slowly .
“And ju st what does  s he  wan t?” she asked. “Do you happen
to know that, too?”
“Ain’ t any big secret. She wan ts River Run to last longer
than she  does— and to belong to somebody from her blood.
Seems sense to me; she got no children, no grandchildren.
Who else is there to carry on after her?”
“W ell…there’ s my father .”
Phaedre laid the fresh dress acro ss the bed and frowned at it
appraisingly , glancing back at Brianna’ s middle.
“This one going to last no more  than another couple weeks,
the way that bel ly’ s growing. Oh, yes, there’ s your daddy . She
done tried to m ake him her he ir , but the way I hears it, he
wasn’ t havin’ none of it.” She pursed her lips in amusement.
“Now there’ s a stubborn man  for you. Go of f into the
mountains and live like a red man, just to keep from doing
what Miss Jo w ant him to do. But Mr . Ulysses reckons your
daddy h ad the right of it, at tha t. Be him and Miss Jo buttin’
heads day and night, if he’d a-stayed.”
Brianna slowly twisted up the other side of her hair , but the
hairpin slipped out again, letting it fall.“Here, y ou be lettin’ me do that, Miss Bree.” Phaedre slid
behind h er , pulled out the slipshod pinning, and began deftly
to braid the sides of her hair .
“And all these visitors—these men—”
“Miss Jo out to pick you a good one,” Phaedre assured her .
“Y ou can’ t run the place alone, no more than Miss Jo can. That
Mr . Du ncan, he’ s a godsend; don’ t know what she’d do
without him.”
Sheer astonishment was giving way to outrage.
“She’ s t rying to pick a husband  for me? She’ s showing me
of f like—like some prize heifer?”
“Uh-huh.” Phaedre appeared to see nothing wrong with this.
She frow ned, drawing a straying lock skillfully into the main
braid.
“But she  knows  about Roger—about Mr . W akefield! How
can she be trying to marry me of f to—”
Phaedre sighed, not without sympathy .
“I don’ t reckon s he thinks they’re going to find the man, tell
you true. Miss Jo, she knows a bit about the Indians; we’ve all
heard Mr . Myers tell about the Iroquois.”
It w as chilly in the room, but prickles of sweat broke out
along Brianna’ s hairline and jaw .
“Besides,” Phae dre went on, we aving a blue silk ribbon into
the braid , “Miss Jo don’ t know this W akefield. Might be he’d
not be a good manager . Better—she thinks—to get you
married to a ma n she knows wi ll take good care of her place;
add it to his own, maybe, make a truly grand place for you.”
“I don’ t want  a grand place! I don’ t want  this  place!”
Outrage in turn was giving way to panic.
Phaedre tied the end of the ribbon with a small flourish.
“W ell, like I say —it ain’ t so mu ch what you want. It’ s what
Miss Jo wants. Now , let’ s try this dress.”There was a sou nd in the hallway , and Brianna hastily flipped
the page  of her sketchbook over , to a half-finished charcoal
drawing of the r iver and its trees. The steps went by , though,
and she relaxed, turning back the page.
She wasn’ t working; the drawing was complete. She only
wanted to look at it.
She’d drawn him in three-quarter profile, head turned to
listen as he tuned his guitar strings. It was no more than a
sketch, b ut it caught the line of head and body with a rightness
that memory confirmed. She c ould look at this and conjure
him, bring him close enough almost to touch.
There were others; some botched messes, some that came
close. A  few that were good drawings in themselves, but that
failed to capture the man behind the lines. One or two, like this
one, that she could use to comfort herself in the late gray
afternoons, whe n the light began to fail and the fires burned
low .
The ligh t was fading over the river now , the water dimming
from bright silver to the gentler glow of pewter .
There were others; sketches of J amie Fraser , of her mother ,
of Ian. She had  begun to draw them out of loneliness, and
looked a t them now with fear , hoping against hope that these
fragments of paper were not th e only remnants of the family
she had known so briefly .
T ell you true, I don’ t r eckon Miss Jo thinks they going to
find the man…Miss Jo knows about Indians .
Her hands were damp; the charc oal smeared at the corner of
a page. A soft step sounded jus t outside the parlor door , and
she closed her book at once.
Ulysses came in, a lighted taper in his hand, and began to
light the branches of the great candelabrum.
“Y ou don’ t need to light all those for me.” Brianna spoke as
much from a de sire not to distu rb the quiet melancholy of the
room as from modesty . “I don’ t mind the dark.”The but ler smiled gently and w ent on with his work. He
touched each wick precisely , an d the tiny flames sprang up at
once, jinni called up by a magician’ s wand.
“Miss J o will be down soon,” he said. “She can see the
lights—and the fire—so she knows where she is in the room.”
He finis hed and blew out the taper , then moved about the
room in  his usual soft-footed way , tidying the small disorder
left by the afternoon guests, add ing wood to the fire, puf fing it
into crackling life with the bellows.
She watched him; the small, pre cise movements of the well-
kept hands, his complete absorption in the correct placement
of the whisky d ecanter and its glasses. How many times had
he straig htened this room? Put back each piece of furniture,
each tiny  ornament precisely in its place, so that its mistress’ s
hand would fall upon it without groping?
A whole life devoted to the needs of someone else. Ulysses
could read and write both Fren ch and English; could reckon
numbers, could sing and play the harpsichord. All that skill
and learning—used only for the entertainment of an autocratic
old lady .
T o say to one, “Come,” and he cometh, to say to another
“Go,” and he goeth. Y es, that was Jocasta’ s way .
And if Jocasta had her way…she would own this man.
The thought was unconscionable. W orse, it was ridiculous!
She shif ted imp atiently in her s eat, trying to push it away . He
caught the slight movement, and turned inquiringly , to see if
anything was wanted.
“Ulysses,” she blurted. “Do you want to be free?”
The moment the words were out , she bit her tongue, and felt
her cheeks go red with mortification.
“I’m sorry ,” she said at once, an d looked down at her hands,
twisted in her lap. “That was a terribly rude question. Please
for give me.”The tall butler didn’ t say anything, but regarded her
quizzically for a moment. Then he touched his wig lightly , as
though to settle it in place, and turned back to his work,
picking up the scattered sketches on the table and tapping
them neatly into a stack.
“I was born free,” he said at last, so quietly that she wasn’ t
sure she’d heard him. His head was bent, eyes on the long
black fin gers that plucked the ivory counters from the game
table and placed each one neatly in its box.
“My father had a tiny farm, not too far from here. But he
died of a snake’ s bite, when I was six or so. My mother could
not manage to keep us—she was not strong enough for
farming—and s o she sold hers elf, putting the money with a
carpenter for my apprenticeship  once I should come of age,
that I might learn a useful trade.”
He set the ivory box in its slot in the game table, and wiped
away a crumb of tea cake tha t had fallen on the cribbage
board.
“But the n she died,” he went on matter -of-factly . “And the
carpenter , instea d of taking me as an apprentice, claimed that
as I was  the child of a slave, I was by law a slave myself. And
so he sold me.”
“But that’ s not right!”
He l ooked at her in patient amusement, but didn’ t speak.
And what had right ever had to do with it? his dark eyes said.
“I w as fortunate,” he said. “I w as sold—cheaply , for I was
very small and puny—to a schoolmaster , whom several
plantation owne rs on the Cape Fear had hired to teach their
children. He would ride from on e house to another , staying in
each for a week or a month, and  I would go with him, perched
behind him on the horse’ s rum p, tending the horse when we
stopped, and doing such small services as he required.
“And because the journeys were long and tedious, he would
talk to me as we rode. He sang—he loved to sing, that man,
and he had a m ost delightful voice—” T o Brianna’ s surprise,Ulysses looked faintly nostalgic, but then he shook his head,
recalling himself, and took out a cloth from his pocket, with
which he wiped the sideboard.
“It was the scho olmaster who gave me the name Ulysses,”
he s aid, back turned to her . “He knew some Greek, and some
Latin as well, a nd for his own  amusement, he taught me to
read, on the ni ghts when darkness befell us and we were
forced to encamp on the road.”
The straight, lean shoulders rose in the faintest of shrugs.
“When the schoolmaster died as well, I was a young man of
twenty o r so. Hector Cameron bought me, and discovered my
talents. Not all masters would value such endowments in a
slave, but Mr . Cameron was n ot a common man.” Ulysses
smiled faintly .
“He taught me to play chess, and would wager upon my
success, playing against his friends. He had me taught to sing,
and to play the harpsichord, that I might provide entertainment
for his guests. A nd when Miss J ocasta began to lose her sight,
he gave me to her , to be her eyes.”
“What was your name? Y our real name?”
He paused, thinking, then gave her a smile that did not reach
his eyes.
“I am  not sure that I remember ,” he said politely , and went
out.5 6
C O N F E S S I O N S  O F  T H E  F L E S H
H e woke a little before dawn. It was still black dark, but the
air h ad changed; the embers ha d burned to staleness and the
forest’ s breath moved past his face.
Alexandre was gone. He lay alone under the tattered
deerskin, very cold.
“Alexandre?” he whispered hoarsely . “Pere Ferigault?”
“I am here.” Th e young priest’ s voice was soft, somehow
remote, though he sat no more than a yard away .
Roger rose up on one elbow , squinting. Once the sleep had
left his eyes, he  could see dimly . Alexandre was sitting cross-
legged, his back very straight, his face turned up to the square
of the smokehole overhead.
“Are yo u all right?” One side  of the priest’ s neck was
stained dark with blood, though his face—what Roger could
see of it—seemed serene.
“They will kill me soon. Perhaps today .”
Roger s at up, clutching the dee rskin to his chest. He was
already cold; the calm tone of this froze him.
“No,” he  said, and had to cough  to clear his throat of soot.
“No, they won’ t.”
Alexandre didn’ t bother contradicting him. Didn’ t move. He
sat naked, oblivious of the cold morning air , looking up. At
last he lowered his gaze, and turned his head toward Roger .
“W ill you hear my confession?”
“I’m not a pri est.” Roger scrambled to his knees and
scuf fled across the floor , the skin held awkwardly before him.
“Here, you’ll freeze. Get under this.”
“It does not matter .”Roger wasn’ t sure whether he meant being cold didn’ t
matter , or whether Roger ’ s not b eing a priest didn’ t matter . He
laid a hand on A lexandre’ s bare shoulder . Whether it mattered
or not, the man was cold as ice.
Roger s at down next to Alexa ndre, as close as could be
managed, and spread the skin over them both. Roger could
feel his own ski n ripple into goo seflesh where the other man’ s
icy skin touched him, but it d idn’ t trouble him; he leaned
closer , wanting ur gently to give Alexandre some of his own
warmth.
“Y our father ,” Alexandre said. He had turned his head; his
breath touched Roger ’ s face, and his eyes were dark holes in
his face. “Y ou told me he was a priest.”
“A minister . Y es, but I’m not.”
He sensed, rather than saw , the other ’ s small gesture of
dismissal.
“In time  of need, any man may  do the of fice of a priest,”
Alexandre said. Cold fingers touched Roger ’ s thigh, briefly .
“W ill you hear my confession?”
“If that’ s—yes, if you like.” He felt awkward, but it couldn’ t
hurt, and if it helped the other at all…The hut, and the village
outside, were quiet around them. There was no sound but the
wind in the pine trees.
He c leared his th roat. Did Alexandre mean to begin, or was
he to say something first?
As though the sound had bee n a signal, the Frenchman
turned to face him, bowing his head so the soft light smoothed
the gold hair of his crown.
“Bless m e, brother , for I have sinned,” Alexandre said in a
low voice. And with his head bowed, hands folded in his lap,
he made confession.
Sent ou t from Detroit with an  escort of Hurons, he had
ventured down the river as far as the settlement of Ste. Berthede R onvalle, to relieve the el derly priest in char ge of the
mission, whose health had broken down.
“I was happy there,” Alexandre said, in the half-dreaming
voice that men use for events that have taken place decades
ago. “It was a wild place, but I was very young, and ardent in
my faith. I welcomed hardship.”
Y oung? The priest couldn’ t be much older than himself.
Alexandre shrugged, dismissing the past.
“I spent two ye ars with the Huron, and converted many .
Then I went with a group of them to Ft. Stanwix, where there
was a great gathering of the trib es of the region. There I met
Kennyanisi-t’ago, a war chief of the Mohawk. He heard me
preach, and being moved of th e Holy Spirit, invited me to
return with him to his village.”
The Mohawk were notoriously wary of conversion; it had
seemed a heaven-sent chance. So Pere Ferigault had traveled
down the river by canoe, in company with Kennyanisi-t’ago
and his warriors.
“That w as my first sin,” he said quietly . “Pride.” He lifted
one finger to Roger , as though suggesting that he keep count.
“Still, God was with me.” The Mohawk had sided with the
English during the recent Fren ch and Indian W ar , and were
more than suspicious of the y oung French priest. He had
persevered, lear ning the Mohawk language, that he might
preach to them in their own tongue.
He had succeeded in convertin g a number of the village,
though by no me ans all. However , among his converts was the
war ch ief, so he was protected from interference.
Unfortunately , the sachem  of the village opposed his
influence, and there was co ntinued uneasiness between
Christian and non-Christian in the village.
The prie st licked  dry lips, then picked up the water jar and
drank.
“And then,” he said, taking a deep breath, “then I committed
my second sin.”He had fallen in love with one of his own converts.
“Had you had women, before—?” Roger choked of f the
question, but Alexandre answered quite simply , without
hesitation.
“No, nev er .” There was a breath there, not quite a laugh, of
bitter se lf-mockery . “I had thought I was immune to that
temptation. But man is frail i n the face of Satan’ s fleshly
lures.”
He had lived in the girl’ s longho use for some months. Then,
one mor ning, he had risen early , and going to the stream to
wash, had seen his own reflection in the water .
“There was a sudden disturbance in the water , and the
surface broke. A huge and gaping mouth rose through the
surface, shattering the reflection of my face.”
It had been no  more than a rising trout, leaping for a
dragonfly , but the priest, shaken by the experience, had seen it
as a sign from God that his soul was in danger of being
swallowed by the mouth of Hell. He had gone at once to the
longhouse and removed his things, going to live alone in a
small shelter outside the village. However , he had left his lover
pregnant.
“W as that what caused the trouble that brought you here?”
Roger asked.
“No, not in itself. They do not see matters of marriage and
morality as we do,” Alexandre explained. “W omen take men
as they will, and  marriage is an agreement that endures so long
as the partners are in amity; if they should fall out, then the
woman may expel the man from  her house—or he may leave.
The children, if there are children, stay with the mother .”
“But then—”
“The dif ficulty was that I had al ways, as a priest, refused to
baptize infants unless both par ents were Christian and in a
state of grace. This is necessary ,  you understand, if the child is
to be  raised in faith—for the Indians are inclined otherwise toview the sacrament of baptism as no more than one of their
pagan rituals.”
Alexandre drew a deep breath.
“And of  course I could not baptize this child. This of fended
and horr ified Ke nnyanisi-t’ago, who insisted that I must do so.
Upon m y refusing, he ordered m e to be tortured. My—the girl
—interceded for me, and was abetted in this by her mother and
several other influential persons.”
Consequently the village had been torn by controversy and
schism, and at la st the sachem  had  dec reed tha t they must take
Pere Ale xandre to Onyarekenata, where an impartial council
might judge what must be d one to restore the harmony
amongst them.
Roger scratched at his beard;perhaps the Indian dislike of
hairy Europeans was the association with lice.
“I am afraid I don’ t quite und erstand,” he said carefully .
“Y ou refused to baptize your o wn child because the mother
was not a good Christian?”
Alexandre looked surprised.
“Ah, non ! S he retains he r faith—though  she would have
every ex cuse if she did not,” he added ruefully . He sighed.
“No. I cannot ba ptize the child, not because of its mother—but
because its father is not in a state of grace.”
Roger rubbed his forehead, hoping his face didn’ t betray his
astonishment.
“Ah. Is this wh y you wished t o make confession to me?
That you might be restored to a state of grace, and thus able to
—”
The priest stopped him with a s mall gesture. He sat quietly
for a moment, slender shoulders slumped. He must have
brushed his wound accidentally; the clotted mass had cracked,
and blood was once more seeping slowly down his neck.
“For give me,” Alexandre said. “I should not have asked
you; it was only that I was so grateful to be able to speak inmy own  languag e; I could not resist the temptation to ease my
soul by telling you. But it is  no good; there can be no
absolution for me.”
The man’ s despair was so plain , Roger laid a hand on the
priest’ s forearm, wanting ur gently to assuage it.
“Are you sure? Y ou said that in time of need—”
“It is not that. ” He laid his hand on top of Roger ’ s,
squeezing tight, as though he m ight draw strength from the
other ’ s grip.
Roger said nothing. After a moment, Alexandre’ s head rose
and the priest lo oked him in the face. The light outside had
changed; there was a faint glow , a brightness in the air just
short of light. H is own breath rose white from his mouth, like
smoke rising toward the hole above.
“Even th ough I confess, I will not be for given. There must
be tr ue repentance in order to o btain absolution; I must reject
my sin. And that I cannot do.”
He f ell silent. R oger didn’ t know whether to speak, or what
to say . A priest,  he supposed, w ould have said something like
“Y es, my son?” but he couldn’ t . Instead, he took Alexandre’ s
other hand in his, and held it tightly .
“My sin  was to love her ,” Alexandre said, very softly , “and
that I cannot stop.”5 7
A  S H A T T E R E D  S M I L E
T wo Spe ars is agreeable. The matter must be spoken of
before th e Coun cil, and accepted, but I think it will be done.”
Jamie s louched against a pine tree, slumping a little in
exhaustion. W e had been in the village for a week; he had been
with the sachem  o f the v illage for the greater part of the last
three da ys. I had barely seen him or Ian, but had been
entertained by the women, who  were polite but distant. I kept
my amulet carefully out of sight.
“Then they do have him?” I asked, and felt the knot of
anxiety that had traveled with me for so long begin to loosen.
“Roger ’ s really here?” So far , the Mohawks had been
unwilling to admit either to Ro ger ’ s continued existence—or
the alternative.
“A ye, w ell, as to that, the auld b ugger ’ s no admitting it—for
fear I should try  to steal him away , I suppose—but either he’ s
here or he’ s not far of f. If the Council approves the bar gain,
we’ll exchange the whisky for the man in three days time—
and be of f.” He glanced at the heavy-laden clouds that hid the
distant m ountains. “God, I hope that’ s rain coming, and not
snow .”
“Do you think there’ s any chance the Council won’ t agree?”
He s ighed deeply and ran a ha nd through his hair . It was
unbound and fell rumpled over his shoulders; evidently the
negotiations had been dif ficult.
“A ye, there’ s a chance. They w ant the whisky , but they’re
wary of it. Some of the older men will be against the bar gain,
for f ear of the damage liquor might do to the folk; the younger
men are all for it. Some in the middle say aye, take it; they can
use the liquor in trade if they’re fearful of using it.”
“W akatihsnore told you all that?” I was surprised. The
sachem,  Act s Fast, seem ed much too cool and wily a customerfor such openness.
“Not him : wee Ian.” Jamie smiled briefly . “The lad shows
great promise as a spy , I will say . He’ s eaten at every hearth in
the villa ge, and he’ s found a las sie who’ s taken a great liking
to him. She tells Ian what the Council of Mothers is thinking.”
I hu nched my shoulders and pu lled my cloak tight around
them; ou r perch  on the rocks outside the village made us safe
from interruptio n, but the price of visibility was exposure to
the bitter wind.
“And what does the Council of M others say?” A week spent
in a longhouse had given me some idea of the importance of
the wom en’ s op inions in the s cheme of things; though they
didn’ t make direct decisions about general af fairs, very little
would be done without their approval.
“They could wish I of fered som e ransom other than whisky ,
and they’re none so sure about giving up the man; more than
one lad y has a small fancy for him. They wouldna mind
adopting him into the tribe.” Jamie’ s mouth twisted at that, and
I laughed despite my worry .
“Roger ’ s a nice-looking lad,” I said.
“I’ve see n him,” Jamie said sho rtly . “Most of the men think
he’ s an ugly , ha iry bastard. Of course, they think that of me,
too.” One side o f his mouth lift ed reluctantly , as he brushed a
hand ov er his jaw; knowing the  Indians’ dislike of facial hair ,
he was careful to shave every morning.
“As it is, that may be what makes the dif ference.”
“What, Roger ’ s looks? Or yours?”
“The fact that more than one lady wants the bugger . Ian says
his l assie says he r aunt thinks it will make trouble to keep him;
she’ s thi nking b etter to give him  back to us than to have ill-
feeling amongst the women over him.”
I rubbed  my cold-reddened knuckles over my lips, trying to
keep from laughing.“Has the men’ s Council any idea that some of the women
are interested in Roger?”
“I dinna ken. Why?”
“Because if they knew , they’d give him to you for free.”
Jamie snorted at that, but gave  me a reluctant lift of one
eyebrow .
“A ye, m aybe. I’ll have Ian mention the matter among the
young men. It canna hurt.”
“Y ou said the women wished you would of fer something
instead of whisky . Did you mention the opal to Acts Fast?”
He sat up straight at that, interested.
“A ye, I did. They couldna have been taken more aback had I
pulled a snake from my sporr an. They got verra excited—
angry an d fearful both, and I think they might well have done
me harm, save I’d already mentioned the whisky .”
He r eached into the breast of his  coat and drew out the opal,
dropping it into my hand.
“Best you take it, Sassenach. But I think you’ll maybe not
want to show it to anyone.”
“How odd.” I lo oked down at the stone, its spiral petroglyph
shimmering with color . “So it did mean something to them.”
“Oh, that it did,” he assured me. “I couldna say what, but
whatever it was, they didna like it a bit. The war chief
demanded to know where I’d got it, and I told them ye’d found
it. T hat m ade them back of f a bi t, but they were like a kettle on
the boil over it.”
“Why are you wanting me to take it?” The stone was warm
from his body , and felt smooth  and comfortable in my hand.
Instinctively , my thumb ran round and round the spiraled
carving.
“They were shocked when they  saw it, as I said—and then
angry . O ne or two of them mad e as though to strike me, but
they hel d back. I watched for a bit, wi’ the stone in my hand,and I realized th at they were afraid of it; they wouldna touch
me while I held it.”
He reached out and closed my fist around the stone.
“Keep it by ye. If there should be danger , bring it out.”
“Y ou’re more likely to be in danger than I am,” I protested,
trying to hand it back.
He shook his head, though, the ends of his hair lifting in the
wind.
“No, no t now they ken about the whisky . They’d not harm
me until they’ve heard where it is.”
“But why should I be in any danger?” The thought was
disquieting; the women had been cautious but not hostile, and
the men of the village had lar gely ignored me.
He frowned, and looked down toward the village. From
here, litt le was visible save the  outer palisades, with trails of
smoke drifting above them f rom the unseen longhouses
beyond.
“I canna  say , Sassenach. Only that I have been a hunter—
and I have been hunted. Y e ken how when something strange
is near , the birds stop singing, and there is a stillness in the
wood?”
He nodded toward the village, eyes fixed on the swirl of
smoke as though some shape might emer ge from it.
“There is a stillness there. Som ething is happening that I
canna se e. I dinna think it is to do with us—and yet…I am
uneasy ,” he said abruptly . “A nd I have lived too long to
dismiss such a feeling.”
Ian, who  joined  us shortly at the rendezvous, seconded this
opinion.
“A ye, it ’ s like holding the ed ge of a fishing net that’ s
underwater ,” he said, frowning. “Y e can feel the wriggling
through your hands, and ye ken there’ s fish there—but ye
canna se e where.” The wind ru f fled his thick brown hair; asusual, it was h alf plaited, with strands coming loose. He
thumbed one absently behind an ear .
“There’ s something happening among the people; some
disagreement, I think. And something  happened last night, in
the C ouncil house. Emily willna  answer me when I ask about
it; she only looks away and tell s me it’ s naught to do with us.
But I think it is, somehow .”
“Emily?” Jamie lifted one eyebrow , and Ian grinned.
“It’ s wh at I call her for short,” he said. “Her own name’ s
W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa; it means W orks with Her Hands. She’ s a
rare carv er , is wee Emily . See what she’ s made for me?” He
reached into his pouch and p roudly displayed a tiny otter
carved in white soapstone. The a nimal stood alert, head up and
ready for mischief; just to look at it made me smile.
“V erra nice.” Jamie examined the carving with approval,
stroking the sinuous curve of th e body . “The lassie must like
ye fine, Ian.”
“A ye, w ell, I like her too, Uncl e.” Ian was very casual, but
his l ean cheeks were slightly re dder than the cold wind could
account for . He coughed and changed the subject slightly .
“She said to me that she thinks the Council might be swayed
a bit in our favor , if ye were to give some of them a taste of the
whisky , Uncle Jamie. If it’ s all right wi’ you, I’ll fetch up a
cask and  we’ll have a wee ceilidh  tonight. Emily will manage
it.”
Jamie lifted both eyebrows at that, but nodded after a
moment.
“I’ll trust your judgment, Ian,” he said. “In the Council
House?”
Ian shook his head.
“Nay . Emily says it will be better if it’ s done at the
longhouse of her aunt—auld T ewaktenyonh is the Pretty
W oman.”
“Is what?” I asked, startled.“The Pretty W oman,” he explained, wiping his running nose
on his sleeve. “One woman of influence in the village has it in
her pow er to decide what’ s done wi’ captives; they call her the
Pretty W oman, n o matter what s he looks like. So ye ken, it’ s to
our advantage if T ewaktenyonh can be convinced the bar gain
we of fer is a good one.”
“I suppo se to a captive that’ s been freed, the woman would
seem beautiful, regardless,” Jam ie said wryly . “A ye, I see. Go
ahead then; can ye fetch the whisky by yourself?”
Ian nodded and turned to go.
“W ait a minute, Ian,” I said, and held out the opal as he
turned back to me. “Could y ou ask Emily if she knows
anything about this?”
“A ye, Auntie Claire, I’ll mention it. Rollo!” He whistled
sharply through  his teeth, and Rollo, who had been nosing
suspiciously und er a rock shelf, left of f and bounded after his
master . Jamie watched them go , a slight frown between his
eyebrows.
“D’ye ken where Ian’ s spending his nights, Sassenach?”
“If you mean i n which longhouse, yes. If you mean in
whose bed, no. I could guess, though.”
“Mmphm.” He stretched and shook his hair back. “Come
on, Sassenach, I’ll see ye back to the village.”
Ian’ s ceilidh  got underway soon after dark; the invited guests
included the most prominent members of the Council, who
came one at a time to T ewaktenyonh’ s longhouse, paying their
respects to the sachem,  T wo Spears, who sat at the main hearth
with Jam ie and Ian flanking him . A slight, pretty girl, who I
assumed must be Ian’ s Emily , s at quietly behind him, on the
keg of whisky .
W ith the exception of Emily , w omen were not involved in
the whis ky-tasting. I had come along, though, to watch, and
sat at one of t he smaller hearths, keeping an eye on the
proceedings while helping two of the women to braid onions,exchanging occ asional politene sses in a halting mixture of
T uscarora, English, and French.
The woman at whose hearth I sat of fered me a gourd of
spruce b eer and some kind of cornmeal mush as refreshment. I
did my best to accept with cordiality , but my stomach was
knotted too tightly to make more than a token attempt at
eating.
T oo much depended on this impromptu party . Roger was
here; somewher e in the village, I knew it. He was alive; I
could on ly hope  he was well—w ell enough to travel, at least. I
glanced at the fa r end of the longhouse, at the lar gest hearth. I
could se e no more of T ewaktenyonh than the curve of a white-
streaked head; a queer jolt went through me at the sight, and I
touched the small lump of Naya wenne’ s amulet, where it hung
beneath my shirt.
Once the guests were assembled , a rough circle was formed
around t he hearth, and the open ed keg of whisky brought into
the center of it. T o my surprise, the girl also came into the
circle, and took a place beside the keg, a dipping gourd in her
hand.
After some words from T wo Spears, the festivities
commenced, with the girl measuring out portions of the
whisky . She did this not by pouring the whisky into the cups,
but by taking mouthfuls from the gourd, carefully spitting
three mouthfuls  into each cup before passing it to one of the
men in the circle. I glanced at Jamie, who looked momentarily
taken aback, but who politely  accepted his cup and drank
without hesitation.
I ra ther wondered just how m uch whisky the girl was
absorbing through the lining of h er mouth. Not nearly as much
as t he men, tho ugh I thought it might take quite a bit to
lubricate T wo Spears, who was a taciturn old bastard with a
face like a dys peptic prune. Before the party had got well
underway , thoug h, I was distracted by the arrival of a young
boy , the  of fspring of one of my companions. He came in
silently and sat down by his mother , leaning heavily againsther . She looked sharply at him,  then set down her onions and
rose with an exclamation of concern.
The firelight fell on the boy , and I could see at once the
peculiar hunched way he sat. I rose hastily to my knees,
pushing aside the basket of onions. I knelt forward and took
him by the other arm, turning him toward me. His left shoulder
had been  slightly dislocated; he was sweating, his lips pressed
tightly together in pain.
I g esture d to his mother , who hesitated, frowning at me. The
boy made a sm all, whimperin g noise, and she pulled him
away , holding him tight. W ith sudden inspiration, I pulled
Nayawenne’ s amulet from my shirt; she wouldn’ t know whose
it w as but migh t recognize what  it was. She did; her eyes
widened at the sight of the tiny leather bag.
The boy  made no more noise, b ut I could see the sweat run
down his hairless chest, clear in the firelight. I fumbled at the
thong that held the pouch shut, digging inside for the rough
blue stone. Pierr e sans peur ,  Gabrielle had called it. The
fearless stone. I took the boy’ s good hand and pressed the
stone firmly into his palm, folding his fingers around it.
“Je suis  une sor cier e,”  I said softly . “C’est medecine, la.”
T rust me, I thought. Don’ t be afraid. I smiled at him.
The boy  stared round-eyed at me; the two women at the
hearth e xchanged a look, then as one, looked toward the
distant hearth where the old woman sat.
There was talk f rom the ceilidh;  s om eone was te lling an old
story—I recognized the rise and fall of the formal rhythms. I
had heard Highlanders tell their  stories and legends in Gaelic,
in just that way; it sounded much the same.
The mother nodded; her sister w ent quickly down the length
of the house. I didn’ t turn, but felt the stir of interest behind
me as she passed the other hearths; heads were turning,
looking toward us. I kept my eyes on the boy’ s face, smiling,
holding his hand tightly in my own.The sister ’ s footsteps came softly behind me. The boy’ s
mother reluctan tly released her hold on him, leaving him to
me. Permission had been received.
It was a simple matter to put back the joint; he was a small
boy and  the injury was minor . H is bones were light under my
hand. I smiled at him as I felt  the joint, assessing damage.
Then a quick bending of the arm, rotation of the elbow ,
whipping the arm upward—and it was done.
The boy looked intensely surprised. It was a most
satisfactory ope ration, in that pain was relieved almost
instantly . He felt his shoulder , t hen smiled shyly back at me.
V ery slowly , he opened his hand and held out the stone to me.
The minor sensation created by this occupied my attention
for some  time, with the women crowding close, touching the
boy and peering  at him, summoning their friends to stare at the
murky sapphire.  By the time I had attention to spare for the
whisky party at the far hearth, the festivities were well
advanced. Ian was singing in Gaelic, very of f-key ,
accompanied in a haphazard way by one or two of the other
men, who chimed in with the weird, high-pitched Haihai!  that
I had heard now and then among Nayawenne’ s people.
As though my thought had conjured her , I felt eyes on my
back, and turned, to see T ewaktenyonh watching me steadily
from he r own hearth at the end  of the longhouse. I met her
eyes and nodded to her . She lean ed across to say something to
one of the young women at he r hearth, who rose and came
toward me, stepping carefully around a couple of toddlers
playing under their family bed-cubicle.
“My grandmother asks if you will come to her .” The young
woman squatted  beside me, speaking quietly in English. I was
surprised, though not astonished, to hear it. Onakara had been
right, so me of the Mohawk had some English. They would not
use it, though, except from necessity , preferring their own
language.
I rose and accompanied her to T ewaktenyonh’ s hearth,
wondering what necessity impelled the Pretty W oman. I hadmy own necessities; the thought of Roger , and of Brianna.
The old woman nodded to me, inviting me to sit down, and
spoke to the girl, not taking her eyes of f me.
“My grandmother asks if she may see your medicine.”
“Of course.” I c ould see the old  lady’ s eyes on my amulet,
watching curiously as I took out the sapphire. I had added to
Nayawenne’ s woodpecker feather two of my own; a raven’ s
stif f black wing quills.
“Y ou are the wife of Bear Killer?”
“Y es. Th e T uscarora call me W hite Raven,” I said, and the
girl jer ked, startled. She translated quickly for her
grandmother . The old lady’ s eyes flew wide and she glanced at
me in consternation. Evidently this was not the most
auspicious name she’d ever heard. I smiled at her , keeping my
mouth c losed; th e Indians usually bared their teeth only when
laughing.
The old lady ha nded me back the stone, very gingerly . She
studied me narrowly , then spoke to her granddaughter , not
taking her eyes of f me.
“My gra ndmother has heard that your man bears a bright
stone als o,” the girl said, interpreting. “She would hear more
of this; what it is like, and how you came to have it.”
“She’ s welcome to see it.” T he girl’ s eyes widened in
surprise as I reached into the pouch at my waist and drew out
the stone. I held out the opal to  the old woman; she bent and
peered closely at it, but made no move to take it from me.
T ewaktenyonh’ s arms were bro wn and hairless, wrinkled
and smooth as weathered sati nwood to the eye. But as I
watched I saw the prick of goose-flesh rising, raising vanished
hairs in vain defense. She’ s seen it,  I thought. Or at least she
knows what it is .
I did n’ t need the interpreter ’ s words; her eyes met mine
directly and I heard the question clearly , for all that the words
were strange.“How did this come to you?” she said, and the girl echoed it
faithfully .
I l et my hand li e open; the opal fit snugly in my palm, its
weight belied by its colors, glimmering like a soap bubble in
my hand.
“It came  to me in a dream,” I said at last, not knowing how
else to explain.
The old woman’ s breath went out in a sigh. The fear didn’ t
quite lea ve her eyes, but was overlaid with something else—
curiosity , perhap s? She said som ething, and one of the women
at the hearth rose, digging in a basket under the bed frame at
her b ack. She ca me back and be nt by the old lady , handing her
something.
The old lady be gan to sing, quietly , in a voice cracked with
age, but  still strong. She rubbe d her hands together over the
fire, and  a shower of small brown particles rained down, only
to ri se up again  at once as smoke, thick with the scent of
tobacco.
It w as a quiet night; I could hea r the rise and fall of voices
and loud  laughter from the far  hearth, where the men were
drinking. I could pick out the odd word in Jamie’ s voice—he
was speaking French. W as Roge r perhaps close enough to hear
it too?
I took a deep breath. The smok e rose straight up from the
fire in a thin wh ite pillar , and the  strong sweet scent of tobacco
mingled with the smell of cold air , triggering incongruous
memories of Brianna’ s high school football games; cozy
scents of wool blankets and t hermoses of cocoa, wisps of
cigarette smoke drifting from the crowd. Farther back were
other , harsher memories, of young men in uniform, in the
shattered light of airfields, crush ing out glowing fag ends and
running to their battles, leaving no more of themselves behind
than the smell of smoke on winter air .
T ewaktenyonh spoke, her eyes still on me, and the girl’ s soft
voice chimed in.“T ell me this dream.”
W as it truly a dream I would tell her , or a memory like
these, brought to life on the wings of smoke from a burning
tree? It didn’ t matter; here, all my memories were dreams.
I t old her what I  could. The memory—of the storm and my
refuge a mong the red cedar ’ s ro ots, the skull buried with the
stone—and the dream; the light on the mountain and the man
with his face painted black—making no distinction between
them.
The old lady leaned forward, the astonishment on her
features mirroring that of her granddaughter .
“Y ou have seen the Fire-Carrier?” the girl blurted. “Y ou
have see n his face? ” She shrank away from me, as though I
might be dangerous.
The old lady said something p eremptory; her startlement
had faded into a piercing gaze of interest. She poked the girl,
and repeated her question impatiently .
“My grandmoth er says, can you say what he looked like;
what did he wear?”
“Nothing. A breech-clout, I mean. And he was painted.”
“Painted. How?” the girl asked, in response to her
grandmother ’ s sharp question.
I described the body paint of the man I had seen, as
carefully as I could. This wasn’ t dif ficult; if I closed my eyes, I
could se e him, as clearly as h e had appeared to me on the
mountainside.
“And hi s face was black, from forehead to chin,” I ended,
opening my eyes.
When I described the man, the interpreter became visibly
upset; her lips tr embled, and she glanced fearfully from me to
her grandmother . The old woman listened intently , though, her
eyes searching, straining to discern meaning from my face
before the slower words could reach her ears.When I finished, she sat silent,  dark eyes still fastened on
my own. At last she nodded, reached up a wrinkled hand and
took hol d of the purple wampu m strings that lay across her
shoulder . Myers  had told me enough so that I recognized the
gesture. The wampum was her family record, badge of her
of fice; speech made while holding it was tantamount to
testimony made upon the Bible.
“At the feast of Green Corn, this many years ago”—the
interpreter ’ s fing ers flashed four times—”a man came among
us from  the north. His speech  was strange, but we could
understand him; he spoke like Canienga, or maybe Onondaga,
but he would not tell us his tr ibe or village—only his clan,
which was the T urtle.
“He was  a wild man, but a brave  one. He was a good hunter ,
and a warrior . O h, a fine man; all the women liked to look at
him, but we were afraid to come too close.” T ewaktenyonh
paused a moment, a far -of f look in her eye that made me count
back; sh e would have been a full-grown woman then, but
perhaps young enough still to have been impressed by the
frightening, intriguing stranger .
“The men were not so careful ; men aren’ t.” She gave a
brief, sardonic glance at the ceilidh,  growing louder by the
minute. “So they would sit an d smoke with him, and drink
spruce b eer and listen. He wo uld talk from midday till the
dark, and then again in the night by the fires. His face was
always fierce, because he talked of war .”
She sighed, fingers curling over the purple shell strands.
“Always war . Not against the frog-eaters of the next village,
or t he ones wh o eat moose dung. No, we must lift our
tomahawks agai nst the O’ ser onni . Kill them all, he said, from
the olde st to the youngest, from the T reaty Line to the big
water . Go to the Cayuga, send messengers to the Seneca, let
the Leag ue of the Iroquois go forth as one. Go before it is too
late, he said.”
One frail shoulder lifted, fell.” ‘T oo late for what?’ the men asked. ‘And why shall we
make war for no  cause? W e nee d nothing this season; there is
no w ar treaty’—this was before  the T ime of the French, you
understand.
” ‘ It is o ur last chance,’ he said to them. ‘Already it may be
too late. They seduce us with their metal, bring us close to
them in the hope of knives and  guns, and destroy us for the
sake of cooking pots. T urn back, brothers! Y ou have left the
ways of  years too great to coun t. Go back, I say—or you will
be no more. Y o ur stories will be for gotten. Kill them now or
they will eat you.’
“And my brother—he was sachem  then, and my other
brother war chief—said that this was foolishness. Destroy us
with tools? Eat us? The whites do not consume the hearts of
their enemies, even in battle.
“The young men listened; they listen to anyone with a loud
voice. But the older ones looked at the stranger with a narrow
eye, and said nothing.
“He kne w ,” she said, and the old lady nodded emphatically ,
speaking almost  faster than her granddaughter could translate.
“He knew what would happen—that the British and the French
would f ight with each other , an d would seek our help, each
against the other . He said that that would be the time; when
they fought each other , then we must rise up against them both
and cast them out.
“T awineonawira—Otter -T ooth—that was his name—said to
me, ‘Y ou live in the moment. Y ou know the past, but you don’ t
look to the future. Y our men say , “W e need nothing this
season,” and so they will not move. Y our women think it is
easier to cook in a iron kettle than to make clay pots. Y ou
don’ t see what will happen be cause of your laziness, your
greed.’
” ‘ It’ s not true,’ I said to him. ‘ W e are not lazy . W e scrape
hides, w e dry the meat and the  corn, we press the oil from
sunflowers and put it in jars; we  take heed for the next season—always. If we didn’ t, we would die. And what have pots and
kettles to do with it?’
“He laughed at that, but his eyes were sad. He was not
always fierce with me, you see.”  The young woman’ s eyes slid
toward her grandmother at this, but then she looked away , eyes
once more on her lap.
” ‘A woman’ s heed,’ he said, and shook his head. ‘Y ou
think of things to eat, what to wear . None of this matters. Men
can’ t think of such things.’
” ‘Y ou can be Hodeenosaunee  and  think this ?’ I said.
‘Where do you come from that you don’ t take heed of what the
women think?’
“He shook his head again and  said, ‘Y ou cannot see far
enough.’ I asked him how far then did he  see, but he would not
answer me.”
I kn ew the ans wer to that, and my skin prickled with
gooseflesh, too,  in spite of the fire. I knew too bloody well
how far  he’d seen—and how dangerous the view was from
that particular precipice.
“But no thing I said was any use,” the old lady continued,
“nor what my brothers said. Otter -T ooth grew more angry .
One day he came out and danced the war dance. He was
painted—his arms and legs were striped with red—and he
sang and  shouted through the village. Everyone came out to
watch, t o see who would follow him, and when he drove his
tomahawk into the war tree and shouted that he went to gain
horses a nd plunder from the Sh awnee, a number of the young
men followed him.
“They w ere gone for the rising and setting of a moon, and
came ba ck with horses, and with  scalps. White scalps, and my
brothers were angry . It would br ing soldiers from the fort, they
said—or revenge parties from the T reaty Line settlements,
where they had taken the scalps.
“Otter -T ooth answered boldly that he hoped this was so;
then we  would be forced to figh t. And he said plainly that hewould lead such raids again—ag ain and again, until the whole
land was roused and we saw that it was as he said; that we
must kill the O’ ser onni  or die ourselves.
“No one  could stop him doing what he said, and there were
a fe w of the young men whose blood was hot; they would
follow him, no matter what a nyone said. My brother the
sachem  made his medicine tent, and called the Great T urtle to
counsel with him. He stayed in the tent for a day and a night.
The tent  shook and heaved, and voices came out of it, and the
people were afraid.
“When my brother came out of  the tent, he said that Otter -
T ooth m ust leave the village. He would do what he would do,
but we would not let him bring destruction to us. He caused
disharmony among the people; he must go.
“Otter -T ooth became more angry then than we had ever
seen him. He stood up in the center of the village and he
shouted until the veins stood out in his neck and his eyes were
red w ith rage.” The girl’ s voice dropped. “He shouted terrible
things.
“Then he became very quiet, a nd we were afraid. He said
things th at took the hearts from  our bodies. Even those who
had followed him were afraid of him, then.
“He didn’ t sleep or eat. For all of a day , and all of a night,
and all of the next day , he went on talking, walking round and
round th e village, stopping at the doors of the houses and
talking, until the people in the  house drove him away . And
then he left.
“But he  came back again. And  again. He would go away ,
and hide in the forest, but then h e would be back again, by the
fires at night, th in and hungry , with his eyes glowing like a
fox’ s, al ways talking. His voice filled the village at night, and
no one could sleep.
“W e began to know that he had an evil spirit in him; perhaps
it was Atatarho, from whose head Hiawatha combed the
snakes; p erhaps the snakes had come to this man, looking for ahome. Finally , my brother the war chief said that it must stop;
he must leave or we would kill him.”
T ewaktenyonh p aused. Her fingers, which had stroked the
wampum continuously , as though she drew strength from it for
her story , were now still.
“He was  a stranger ,” she said so ftly . “But he didn’ t know he
was a stranger . I think he never understood.”
At the other en d of the longho use the drinking party was
growing riotous; all the men were laughing, rocking to and fro
with mirth. I could hear the girl Emily’ s voice, higher ,
laughing with them. T ewak tenyonh glanced that way ,
frowning slightly .
Mice w ere creeping briskly up and down my spine. A
stranger . An Indian, by his fac e, by his speech; his slightly
strange speech. An Indian—with silver fillings in his teeth.
No, he hadn’ t understood. He  had thought they were his
people, after all. Knowing what their future held, he had come
to tr y to  save them. How could he believe that they meant to
do him harm?
But they had  meant it. They stripped him, said
T ewaktenyonh, her face remote.  They tied him to a pole in the
center o f the village, and painted his face with an ink made
from soot and oak galls.
“Black is for death; prisoners who are to be killed are
always painted so,” the girl said . One eyebrow lifted slightly .
“Y ou knew this when you met the man on the mountain?”
I s hook my hea d, mute. The op al had grown warm in my
palm, slick with sweat.
They had tortured him for a tim e; prodding his naked body
with sharpened sticks, and th en with hot embers, so that
blisters rose up and burst, and  his skin hung in tatters. He
stood this well, not crying out, and this pleased them. He
seemed still strong, so they left him overnight, still tied to the
pole.“In the morning, he was gone.”  The old woman’ s face was
smooth with secrets. If she had  been pleased, or relieved, or
distressed by the escape, no one would ever have known.
“I sa id that they  should not follow him, but my brother said
it was no good; he would only come back again, if we did not
finish the matter .”
So a  party of warriors left the village, on Otter -T ooth’ s
track. Bloody as he was, it was not dif ficult to follow .
“They chased him to the south. They thought to catch him,
time afte r time, but he was stro ng. He ran on. For four days,
they followed him, and finally t hey caught him, in a grove of
aspens, leafless in the snow and  their branches white as finger
bones.”
She saw the question in my eyes at this, and nodded.
“My brother the war chief was there. He told me, afterward.
“He was alone, and unarmed. H e had no chance, and knew
it. But he faced  them nonetheless—and he talked. Even after
one of the men had struck him in the mouth with a war club,
he ta lked through the blood, spit ting out words with his broken
teeth.
“He was a brave man,” she said, reflectively . “He didn’ t
beg. He told them the same things he had said before, but my
brother said this time it was dif f erent. Before, he had been hot
as fi re; dying, he  was cold as snow—and because they were so
cold, his words terrified the warriors.
“Even w hen the stranger lay d ead in the snow , his words
seemed to go on ringing in the warriors’ ears. They lay down
to sl eep, but his voice talked to them in their dreams, and kept
them from sleeping. Y ou will be for gotten,  he said. The Nations
of th e Ir oquois w ill be no mor e . No one will tell your stories.
Everything you ar e and have been will be lost .
“They turned toward home, but his voice followed them. At
night, th ey coul d not sleep for the evil words in their ears. In
the day , they heard cries and whispers from the trees alongtheir tra il. Some of them said it was only ravens calling, but
others said no, they heard him plainly .
“At last, my b rother said it was clear this man was a
sorcerer .”
The old lady gla nced sharply at me. Je su is u ne sor ci er e,  I’d
said. I swallowed, and my hand went to the amulet at my neck.
“The thi ng to do, my brother sa id, was to cut of f his head,
and then  he would talk no more . So they went back, and they
cut o f f his head , and tied it in the branches of a spruce. But
when they slept that night, they still heard his voice, and they
woke with shriveled hearts. The ravens had picked out his
eyes, but the head still spoke.
“One m an, very brave, said he  would take the head, and
bury it far away .” She smiled br iefly . “This brave man was my
husband. He wrapped the head in a piece of deerskin, and he
ran w ith it, far to the south, and the head still talking under his
arm all the time, so he had to put plugs of beeswax in his ears.
At last he saw a  very big red cedar tree, and he knew this was
the place, because the red cedar has a strong spirit for healing.
“So he buried the head under th e tree’ s roots, and when he
took the  beeswax from his ears, he could hear nothing but the
wind an d water .  So he came home, and no one has spoken the
name of Otter -T ooth in this vil lage, from that day until this
one.”
The girl finished this, eyes on her grandmother . Evidently
this was true; she had never heard this story .
I s wallo wed, and tried to get a clear breath. The smoke had
ceased t o rise as she talked; it had gathered instead in a low
cloud overhead, and the air was thick with narcotic perfume.
The hila rity from  the drinking circle had lessened. One of
the men  got up a nd, stumbling, went outside. T wo more lay on
their sides by the fire, half asleep.
“And this?” I said, holding out the opal. “Y ou’ve seen it? It
was his?”T ewaktenyonh reached out as though to touch the stone, but
then drew back.
“There is a lege nd,” the girl sai d softly , not taking her eyes
from the opal. “ Magic snakes carry stones in their heads. If
you kill such a snake and take the stone, it will give you great
power .” She shifted uneasily , an d I had no trouble imagining
with her  the size of the snake that might have carried a stone
like this.
The old lady spoke suddenly , nodding at the stone. The girl
jumped, but repeated the words obediently .
“It was his,” she said. “He called it his tika-ba .”
I loo ked at the interpreter , but she shook her head. “ T ika-
ba, ” she said, enu nciating clearly . “This is not an English
word?”
I shook my head.
Her story finished, the old wo man sat back in her furs,
watching me with deep speculation. Her eyes rested on the
amulet around my neck.
“Why did he sp eak to you? Why has he given you that?”
She nodded at m y hand, and my  fingers closed over the opal’ s
curve in reflex.
“I don’ t  know ,” I said—but sh e had taken me unaware; I
had had no time to prepare my face.
She fixe d me with a piercing loo k. She knew I was lying, all
right—and yet how could I tell her the truth? T ell her what
Otter -T ooth—whatever his real name—had been? Much less
that his prophecies were true.
“I think perhaps he was a part of my…family ,” I said at last,
thinking of what Pollyanne had  told me about the ghosts of
one’ s ancestors. There was no telling from where—or when—
he had come; he must, I supposed, be an ancestor or a
descendant. If not of me, then of someone like me.
T ewaktenyonh sat up very straight at that, and looked at me
in astonishment. Slowly the look faded, and she nodded.“He has  sent you to me to hear this. He was wrong,” she
declared, with confidence. “My  brother said that we must not
speak of him; w e must let him be for gotten. But a man is not
for gotten, as long as there are two people left under the sky .
One, to tell the story; the other , to hear it. So.”
She reached out and touched m y hand, careful not to touch
the stone. The g litter of moisture in her black eyes might have
been from the tobacco smoke.
“I am one. Y ou are the other . He is not for gotten.”
She motioned to the girl, who r ose silently and brought us
food and drink.
When I rose finally to go back to the longhouse where we
were lod ged, I glanced toward the drinking party . The ground
was littered with snoring bodies , and the keg lay empty on its
side. T w o Spears lay peacefully on his back, a beatific smile
creasing the wrinkles of his face . The girl, Ian, and Jamie were
gone.
Jamie was outside, waiting for me. His breath rose white in
the nigh t air , and the scents of whisky and tobacco wafted
from his plaid.
“Y ou seemed to be having fun,”  I said, taking his arm. “Any
progress, do you think?”
“I think so.” W e walked side by  side across the big central
clearing to the longhouse whe re we were lodged. “It went
well. Ia n was right, bless him ; now they’ve seen this wee
ceilidh  did no harm, I think they’ll maybe be disposed to make
the bar gain.”
I g lance d at the row of longhouses with their floating clouds
of s moke, and the glow of firelight from smokeholes and
doorways. W as Roger in one of them now? I counted
automatically , as I did every day—seven months. The ground
was tha wing; if we traveled partway by river , we could
perhaps make the trip in a month—six weeks at the most. Y es,
if we left soon, we would be in time.“And you, Sassenach? Y e see med to be having a most
earnest discussio n wi’ the auld lady . Did she ken aught of that
stone?”
“Y es. Come inside and I’ll tell you about it.”
He l ifted the ski n over the doorway , and I walked inside, the
opal a solid wei ght in my hand. They hadn’ t known what he
had called it, bu t I did. The man called Otter -T ooth, who had
come to raise a war , to save a nation—with silver fillings in
his teeth. Y es, I knew what it was, the tika-ba .
His unused ticket back. My legacy .5 8
L O R D  J O H N  R E T U R N S
River Run, March 1770
P haedre h ad brou ght a dress, on e of Jocasta’ s, yellow silk,
very full in the skirt.
“W e got better company tonig ht than ol’ Mr . Cooper or
Lawyer Forbes,”  Phaedre said w ith satisfaction. “W e got us a
real live lor d,  how ‘bout that? ”
She let down a h uge armload of fabric on the bed and began
to p ull bits an d pieces from the frothing billows, issuing
instructions like a drill ser geant.
“Here, y ou strip of f and put on these yere stays. Y ou need
somethin’ strong, keep that belly pushed down. Ain’ t nobody
but backcountry trash goes ‘thout stays. Y our auntie wasn’ t
blind as a bat, s he’d ‘a had you  fitted out proper long since—
long  s ince. Then pu t on the stockins and garters—ain’ t those
pretty? I  always  did like that pair with the little bitty leaves on
‘em—then we’ll tie on the petticoats, and then—”
“What lord?” Brianna took the proferred stays and frowned
at them. “My God, what’ s this made of, whalebones?”
“Uh-huh. Ain’ t no cheap tin or i ron for Miss Jo, surely not.”
Phaedre burrowed like a terrier , frowning and muttering to
herself. “Where that garter gone to?”
“I don’ t need these. And what lord is it that’ s coming?”
Phaedre straightened up, staring  at Brianna over the folds of
yellow silk.
“Don’ t need ‘em?” she said cen soriously . “And you with a
six-month belly? What you thinking of, girl, come into dinner
all pooch ed out, and a lordship sittin’ by the soup a-gogglin’ at
you through his eyeglass?”
Brianna couldn’ t help smiling at this description, but replied
with considerable dryness nonetheless.“What dif ference would it make? The whole county knows
by now that I’m having a baby . I wouldn’ t be surprised if that
circuit rider—Mr . Urmstone, is it? didn’ t preach a sermon
about me up on the Buttes.”
Phaedre uttered a short laugh.
“He did, ” she said. “T wo Sundays back. Mickey and Drusus
was there—they thought it was right funny , but your auntie
didn’ t. She set L awyer Forbes on to law him for the slander ,
but ol’ Reveren d Urmstone, he said ‘twasn’ t slander if it was
the truth.”
Brianna stared back at the maid.
“And just what did he say about me?”
Phaedre shook her head and resumed her rummaging.
“Y ou do n’ want  to know ,” she said darkly . “But be that as it
might, w hether the county knows ain’ t the same thing as you
flauntin’ your belly through the dining room and leavin’ his
lordship in no doubt, so you put on them stays.”
Her authoritative tone left no room for ar gument. Brianna
struggled resen tfully into the stif f garment, and suf fered
Phaedre to lace it tight. Her w aist was still slender , and the
remaining bulge  in front would be easily disguised by the full
skirt and petticoats.
She stared at h erself in the mirror , Phaedre’ s dark head
bobbing near her thighs as the maid adjusted the green silk
stockings to her own satisfaction. She couldn’ t breathe, and
being squeezed like that couldn’ t  b e good for th e baby . The
stays lac ed in front; as soon as Phaedre left, she’d undo them.
The hell with his Lordship, whoever he was.
“And who is  this lord we’re having for dinner?” she asked
for the third time, stepping o bediently into the billow of
starched white linen the maid held for her .
“This be Lord John W illiam Grey , of Mount Josiah
plantation in V ir ginia.” Phaedre rolled out the syllables with
great ceremony , though seemin g rather disappointed by theunfortunately brief and simple names of the lord. She would,
Brianna knew , have preferred a Lord FitzGerald
V anlandingham W althamstead if she could have got one.
“He a friend of your daddy’ s, or  so Miss Jo says,” the maid
added, more prosaically . “There, that’ s good. Lucky you got
nice bosoms, this dress is made for ‘em.”
Brianna hoped this didn’ t mean the dress wasn’ t going to
cover he r breasts; the stays ended just beneath, pushing them
up so that they swelled startlingly high, like something
bubbling over the rim of a pot. H er nipples stared at her in the
mirror , gone a rich dark color , like raspberry wine.
It wasn’ t worry  over which bu lges she was exposing that
made he r oblivio us to the rest of Phaedre’ s brisk ministrations,
though; it was the maid’ s casual He a friend of your daddy’ s .
It was not a crow d; Jocasta seldom had crowds. Dependent on
her ears  for the nuances of social byplay , she would not risk
commotion. Stil l, there were mo re people here in the drawing
room than was usual; Lawyer  Forbes, of course, with his
spinster sister; Mr . MacNeill and  his son, Judge Alderdyce and
his mother , a couple of Farquard Campbell’ s unmarried sons.
No one, though, resembling Phaedre’ s lordship.
Brianna smiled sourly to hersel f. “Let ‘em look, then,” she
murmured, straightening her back so that her bulge swelled
proudly before her , glistening u nder the silk. She gave it an
encouraging pat. “Come on, Osbert, let’ s be social.”
Her entrance was greeted by a general outcry of cordiality
that made her m ildly ashamed  of her cynicism. They were
kind men and women, including Jocasta; and the situation,
after all, was none of their  doing.
Still, she did enjoy the expression of mild shock that the
Judge tr ied to hide, and the too-sweet smile on his mother ’ s
face, as her bea dy little parrot eyes registered the blatant fact
of Osbert’ s unbound presence. Jocasta might propose, but the
Judge’ s mother would dispose, no doubt of that. Brianna met
Mrs. Alderdyce’ s eye with a sweet smile of her own.Mr . MacNeill’ s weatherbeaten face twitched slightly with
amusement, but  he bowed gravely and asked after her health
with no sign of  embarrassment. As for Lawyer Forbes, if he
noticed anything  amiss in her appearance, he drew the veil of
his professional discretion ove r it and greeted her with his
customary suavity .
“Ah, Miss Fraser!” he said. “Precisely whom we were
wanting. Mrs. Alderdyce and myself have just been engaged in
amiable dispute concerning a question of aesthetics. Y ou, with
your instinct for loveliness, would have a most valuable
opinion, should you be willing to oblige me by giving it.”
T aking h er arm, he drew her smoothly to his side—away from
MacNeill, who twitched a bus hy brow at her but made no
move to interfere.
He led her to the hearthside, where four small wooden
boxes sa t on the table. Ceremoniously removing the lids of
these, the lawyer displayed in tu rn four jewels, each the size of
a ma rrow-fat pea, each nestled in a pad of dark blue velvet, the
better to set of f its brilliance.
“I think of purchasing one of these stones,” Forbes
explained. “T o have made into a ring. I had them sent from
Boston.” He smirked at Briann a, plainly feeling that he had
stolen a march on the competition—and judging from the faint
glower on MacNeill’ s face, he had.
“T ell me, my de ar—which do you prefer? The sapphire, the
emerald, the topaz or the diamond?” He rocked back on his
heels, waistcoat swelling with his own cleverness.
For the first tim e in her pregnancy , Brianna felt a sudden
qualm of nausea. Her head felt light and giddy , and her
fingertips tingled with numbness.
Sapphire, emerald, topaz, diamond. And her father ’ s ring
held a ruby . Fiv e stones of power , the points of a traveler ’ s
pentagram, the guarantors of safe passage. For how many?
W ithout thinking, she spread a hand protectively over her
belly .She realized the trap Forbes thought he was luring her
toward. Let her make a choice and he would present her with
the unm ounted stone on the spo t, a public proposal that would
—he thought—f orce her either to accept him at once, or cause
an unpleasant scene by rejecting him outright. Gerald Forbes
really knew nothing about women, she thought.
“I—ah—I should not like to venture my own opinion
without first hearing Mrs. Alderdyce’ s choice,” she said,
forcing a cordial smile and a nod toward the Judge’ s mother ,
who looked both surprised and gratified by being so deferred
to.
Brianna’ s stomach clenched, and she surreptitiously wiped
sweaty hands on her skirt. There  they were, all together and in
one place—the four stones she  had thought it would take a
lifetime to find.
Mrs. Alderdyce was jabbing an arthritic finger at the
emerald, explaining the virtues of her choice, but Brianna paid
no atten tion to what the woman  said. She glanced at Lawyer
Forbes, his round face still reflecting smugness. A sudden wild
impulse filled her .
If sh e said yes, now , tonight, while he still had all four
stones…could she bring herself to that? Inveigle him, kiss
him, lull him into complacency—and then steal the stones?
Y es, she  could—and then what? Run of f into the mountains
with them? Leave Jocasta disgraced and the county in an
uproar , run and h ide like a comm on thief? And how would she
get to the Indie s before the ba by came? She counted in her
head, knowing it was insanity , but still—it could be done.
The stones glittered and winked, temptation and salvation.
Everyone had come to look, heads bent over the table,
murmuring their admiration, herself temporarily overlooked.
She could hide, she thought, the steps of the plan unfolding
inevitably befor e her mind’ s eye, quite without her willing it.
Steal a horse, he ad up the Y adkin valley into the backcountry .
Despite the nearness of the fire , she shivered, feeling cold atthe t hought of f light through the winter snows. But her mind
ran on.
She could hide in the mountain s, at her parents’ cabin, and
wait for  them to come back wit h Roger . If they came back. If
Roger w as with them. Y es, and what if the baby came first,
and she was there on the moun tain, all alone with no one at
hand, and nothing to help but a handful of stolen brightness?
Or s hould she ri de at once for W ilmington and find a ship to
the Indies? If Jocasta was right, Roger was never coming back.
W as she  sacrific ing her only cha nce at return to wait for a man
who was dead—or who, if not dead, might reject her and her
child?
“Miss Fraser?”
Lawyer Forbes was waiting, swollen with expectation.
She took a deep breath, feeling sweat trickle down between
her breasts, beneath the loosened stays.
“They’re all very lovely ,” she s aid, surprised at how coolly
she was able to speak. “I could not possibly choose among
them—but then, I have no part icular liking for gems. I have
very simple tastes, I’m afraid.”
She caught the flicker of a smile on Mr . MacNeill’ s face,
and the deep flu sh of Forbes’ s round cheeks, but turned her
back on the stones with a polite word.
“I think we will  not wait dinner ,” Jocasta murmured in her
ear . “If his Lordship should be delayed…”
On cue,  Ulysse s appeared in t he doorway , elegant in full
livery , to  announce dinner . Instead, in a mellifluous voice that
carried easily over the chatter , he said, “Lord John Grey ,
ma’am,” and stepped aside.
Jocasta breathed a sigh of satisfaction, and ur ged Brianna
forward, toward the slight figure that stood in the doorway .
“Good. Y ou shall be his partner at dinner , my dear .”Brianna glanced  back at the table by the hearth, but the
stones were gone.
Lord John Grey was a surprise a surprise. She had heard her
mother speak of John Grey—soldier , diplomat, nobleman—
and exp ected someone tall and imposing. Instead, he was six
inches shorter than she was, fin e-boned and slight, with lar ge,
beautiful eyes, and a fair -skin ned handsomeness that was
saved from girlishness only by the firm set of mouth and jaw .
He had looked startled upon seeing her; many people did,
taken aback by her size—but th en had set himself to exercise
his considerable charm, telling her amusing anecdotes of his
travel, a dmiring the two paintings that Jocasta had hung upon
the wall , and regaling the table at lar ge with news of the
political situation in V ir ginia.
What he  did not mention was her father , and for that she
was grateful.
Brianna listened to Miss Forbes’ s descriptions of her
brother ’ s importance with an absent smile. She felt more and
more as though she were drowning in a sea of kind intentions.
Could th ey not leave her alone?  Could Jocasta not even have
the decency to wait a few months?
“…and t hen there’ s the wee saw mill he’ s just bought, up to
A verasboro. Heavens, how the man manages, I couldna tell
you!”
No, they  couldn’ t, she thought, with a kind of despair . They
couldn’ t leave her alone. They were Scots, kindly but
practical, and with an iron conviction of their own rightness—
the s ame conviction that had go t half of them killed or exiled
after Culloden.
Jocasta was fond of her , but cle arly had made up her mind
that it would be foolish to wait. Why sacrifice the chance of a
good, solid, respectable marriage, to a will-o’-the-wisp hope of
love?The horrible thing was that she  knew herself it was foolish
to wait. Of all th e things she had been trying not to think of for
weeks, this was the worst—and here it was, rising up in her
mind like the shadow of a dead tree, stark against snow .
If. If  the y came back—if, if, IF . If her parents c ame back at
all, Roger would not be with them. She knew it. They
wouldn’ t find the Indians who had taken him—how could
they , in a track less wilderness of snow and mud? Or they
would find the I ndians, only to learn that Roger was dead—of
injuries, disease, torture.
Or h e would be  found, alive, and refuse to come back, not
wanting to see h er ever again. Or he would come back, with
that maddening sense of Scottish honor , determined to take
her , but hating h er for it. Or he w ould come back, see the baby ,
and…
Or none of them  would come back at all. I w ill bring him
home to you—or I will not come home myself . And she would
live here alone f orever , drowned in the waves of her own guilt,
her body bobbing in the swirl of good intentions, anchored by
a ro tting umbilical cord to the child whose dead weight had
pulled her under .
“Miss Fraser! Miss Fraser , are ye quite weel, then?”
“Not very , no,” she said. “I think I’m going to faint.” And
did, sha king the  table with a crash as she fell forward into a
whirling sea of china and white linen.
The tide  had turned again, she th ought. She was buoyed up on
a flood of kindness as people bustled to and fro, fetching warm
drinks and a brick to her feet, seeing her tucked up warmly on
the sofa in the little parlor , with  a pillow to her head and salts
to her nose, a thick shawl round her knees.
At l ast they wer e gone. She could be alone. And now that
the truth  was out in her own mind, she could cry for all her
losses—for father and lover , family and mother , for the loss of
time and place and all that she  should have been and would
never be.Except that she couldn’ t.
She tried. She t ried to summon up the sense of terror she
had felt in the dr awing room, alone among the crowd. But now
that she truly was  alone, paradoxically she wasn’ t afraid
anymore. One of the house slav es popped a head in, but she
waved a hand, sending the girl away again.
W ell, sh e was Scottish, too—”W ell, half,” she muttered,
cupping a hand over her belly—and entitled to her own
stubbornness. They wer e  c oming  back. All of them; mo ther ,
father , Roger . If it felt as though  that conviction were made of
feathers rather than iron…still it was hers. And she was
hanging on to it like a raft, until  they pried her fingers of f and
let her sink.
The door to the  small parlor opened, silhouetting the tall,
spare figure of Jocasta against the lighted hall.
“Brianna?” The pale oval face turned unerringly toward the
sofa; did she only guess where they had put her , or could she
hear Brianna breathing?
“I’m here, Aunt.”
Jocasta came into the room, followed by Lord John, with
Ulysses bringing up the rear with a tea tray .
“How a re you, child? Had I best send for Dr . Fentiman?”
She frowned, laying a long hand across Brianna’ s forehead.
“No!” Brianna had met Dr . Fentiman, a small, damp-handed
golliwog of a m an with a stron g faith in lye and leeches; the
sight of him ma de her shudder . “Er…no. Thank you, but I’m
quite all right; I was just taken queer for a moment.”
“Ah, good.” Jocasta turned blind eyes toward Lord John.
“His Lordship will be going on to W ilmington in the morning;
he wished to pay you his regards, if you are well enough.”
“Y es, of  course. ” She sat up, swinging her feet to the floor .
So the lord w asn’ t going to linger; that would be a
disappointment to Jocasta, if not to her . Still, she could be
polite for a little while.Ulysses set down the tray , and soft-footed out the door
behind her aunt, leaving them alone.
He drew up an  embroidered footstool and sat down, not
waiting for invitation.
“Are yo u truly well, Miss Fraser? I have no desire to see
you prostrate among the teacups .” A smile pulled at the corner
of his mouth, and she flushed.
“I’m fine,” she s aid shortly . “Did you have something to say
to me?”
He wasn’ t taken aback by her abruptness.
“Y es, but I tho ught perhaps you would prefer that I not
mention it in the midst of the c ompany . I understand that you
are interested in the whereabouts of a man named Roger
W akefield?”
She had  been feeling fine; at this, the wave of faintness
threatened to return.
“Y es. How do you—do you know where he is?”
“No.” H e saw her face change, and took her hand between
his. “No , I am so rry . Y our father had written to me, some three
months ago, asking me to assist him in finding this man. It had
occurred to him that if Mr . W akefield was anywhere in the
ports, he might have been taken  up by a press-gang, and thus
be n ow at sea in one of His Majesty’ s ships. He asked if I
would make use of my acquaintance in naval circles to
determine whether such a fate had in fact befallen Mr .
W akefield.”
Another wave of faintness passed over her , this one tinged
with remorse, as she realized th e lengths her father had gone
to, in attempting to find Roger for her .
“He isn’ t on a ship.”
He looked surprised at her tone of certainty .
“I have found n o evidence that he was impressed anywhere
between Jamestown and Charleston. Still, there is thepossibility that he was taken up on the eve of sailing, in which
case his presenc e on the crew would not be registered until the
ship re ached p ort. That is why I travel tomorrow to
W ilmington, to make inquiries—”
“Y ou do n’ t need  to. I know where he is.” In as few words as
possible, she acquainted him with the basic facts.
“Jamie—your father—that is, your parents—have gone to
rescue this man from the Iroquois?” Looking shaken, he
turned a nd poured two cups of  tea, handing her one without
asking if she wanted it.
She held it betw een her hands, finding a small comfort in
the warmth; a gr eater comfort in being able to speak frankly to
Lord John.
“Y es. I wanted to go with them, but—”
“Y es, I see.” He glanced at her bulge and coughed. “I collect
there is some ur gency in finding Mr . W akefield?”
She laughed, unhappily .
“I ca n wait. Can  you tell me something, Lord John? Have
you ever heard of handfasting?”
His fair brows drew together momentarily .
“Y es,” he said slowly . “A Scottish custom of temporary
marriage, is it not?”
“Y es. What I want to know is, is it legal here?”
He r ubbed his ja w , thinking. Either he’d shaved recently or
he had a light beard; late as it was, he showed no sign of
stubble.
“I don’ t know ,” he said finally . “I have never seen the
question addressed in law . Still, any couple who dwells
together as man and wife are considered married, by common
law . I should t hink handfastin g would fall into that class,
would it not?”
“It might, except that we’re rather obviously not dwelling
together ,” Brian na said. She sighed. “ I  t hin k I’ m marri ed—butmy aunt  doesn’ t. She keeps ins isting that Roger won’ t come
back, or that if he does, I’m still not legally bound to him.
Even by the Scots custom, I’m not bound beyond a year and a
day . She wants to pick a husb and for me—and God, she’ s
trying! I thought you were the  newest candidate, when you
showed up.”
Lord John looked amused at the idea.
“Oh. That would explain the oddly assorted company at
dinner . I did notice that the rather florid gentleman—
Alderdyce? A judge?—seemed inclined to pay you attention
beyond the normal limits of gallantry .”
“Much good it w ill do him.” Brianna snorted briefly . “Y ou
should have seen the looks Mrs. Alderdyce kept giving me, all
through dinner . She’ s not going to have her ewe lamb—God,
he m ust be forty , if he’ s a da y—marry the local whore of
Babylon. I’d be surprised if she ever lets him set foot over the
doorstep again.” She patted her small bulge. “I think I’ve seen
to that.”
One brow rose, and Grey smiled wryly at her . He set down
his teacup and reached for the sherry decanter and a glass.
“Ah? W ell, while I admire the  boldness of your strategy ,
Miss Fr aser—may I call you ‘m y dear ’?—I regret to inform
you that your tactics do not suit the terrain upon which you’ve
chosen to employ them.”
“What do you mean by that?”
He l eaned back in his chair , g lass in hand, surveying her
kindly .
“Mrs. Alderdyce. Not being blind—though by no means as
astute as your aunt—I did indeed observe her observing you.
But you  mistake the nature of her observations, I’m afraid.”
He shook his head, looking at her over the rim of his glass as
he sipped.
“Not the  look of outraged respectability , by any means. It’ s
granny lust.”Brianna sat up straight.
“It’ s what ?”
“Granny lust,” he repeated. He sat up himself and topped
his glass, pouring the golden liquid carefully . “Y ou know; an
elderly woman’ s ur gent desire for grandchildren to dandle
upon her knee, spoil with sweetmeats, and generally corrupt.”
He raise d his glass to his nose and reverently breathed in the
vapors. “Oh, ambrosia. I haven’ t had a decent sherry in two
years, at least.”
“What—you me an Mrs. Alderdyce thinks that I—I mean,
because I’ve shown I’m—that I  can have children, then she’ s
sure to get grand children out of me later on? That’ s ridiculous!
The Judge could pick any healthy girl—of good character ,”
she added bitterly , “and be fair ly sure of having children by
her .”
He took  a drink, let it drift across his tongue, and
swallowed, relishing the final ghost of the taste before
answering. “W e ll. No. I rather think that she realizes he could
not. Or would not; it makes no dif ference.” He looked at her
directly , pale blue eyes unblinking.
“Y ou said it yourself—he is forty and unmarried.”
“Y ou mean he—but he’ s a judge!” The moment her
horrified exclamation came out , she realized the idiocy of it,
and clapped a h and over her mouth, blushing furiously . Lord
John laughed, though with a wry edge to it.
“The more certainty therefore,” he said. “Y ou are quite
right; he  could have his choice of any girl in the county . If he
has not so chosen…” He paused delicately , then lifted his glass
to her in ironic toast. “I rather think that Mrs. Alderdyce has
realized that her son’ s marriage  to you is her best—possibly
her only—expectation of having the grandchild she so ardently
desires.”
“Damn!” She couldn’ t make a m ove right, she thought with
despair . “It doesn’ t matter wha t I do. I’m doomed. They’ll
have me married of f to somebody ,  no matter what I do!”“Y ou must give me leave to doubt that,” he said. His smile
quirked sideway s, a little painfully . “From what I have seen of
you, you have your mother ’ s blu ntness and your father ’ s sense
of h onor . Either would be suf fic ient to preserve you from such
entrapment.”
“Don’ t talk to me about my  father ’ s honor ,” she said
sharply . “He’ s who got me into this mess!”
His eyes dropped to her waistline, frankly ironical.
“Y ou shock me,” he said polite ly , seeming not shocked at
all.
She felt the blo od sur ge up in her face once more, hotter
than before.
“Y ou know perfectly well that’ s not what I mean!”
He hid a smile in his sherry cup, eyes crinkling at her .
“My apologies, Miss Fraser . What did you mean, then?”
She took a deep sip of tea to cover her confusion, and felt
the comforting heat run down her throat and into her chest.
“I mean ,” she said through her teeth, “ this  particular mess;
being pu t on show like a piece of bloodstock with doubtful
lines. Be ing held  up by the scruf f of the neck like an orphaned
kitten, in  hopes somebody will take me in! Being—being left
alone he re in the first place,” she ended, her voice trembling
unexpectedly .
“Why are you alone here?” Lord John asked, quite gently . “I
should have thought that your mother might have—”
“She wa nted to. I wouldn’ t let her . Because she had to—that
is, he—oh, it’ s a ll such a fucking  mess !” She dropped her head
into her hands and stared wr etchedly at the tabletop; not
crying, but not far from it, either .
“I can see that .” Lord John l eaned forward and put his
empty g lass bac k on the tray . “It’ s very late, my dear , and if
you will  pardon  my observing i t, you are in need of rest.” He
stood up and la id a hand lightly on her shoulder; oddly , itseemed only friendly , and not condescending, as another
man’ s might.
“As it seems m y journey to W ilmington is unnecessary , I
think I will acce pt your aunt’ s kind invitation to remain here
for a little. W e w ill speak again, and see whether perhaps there
is at least some palliative for your situation.”5 9
B L A C K M A I L
T he commode was magnificent, a beautiful piece of smooth
carved walnut that mingled  appeal with convenience.
Particularly convenient on a rainy , cold night like this. She
fumbled sleepily with the lid in the dark, lit by lightning
flashes f rom the window , then s at down, sighing with relief as
the pressure on her bladder eased.
Evidently pleas ed with the add itional internal space thus
provided, Osbert performed a  series of lazy somersaults,
making her belly undulate in ghostly waves beneath her white
flannel nightgo wn. She stood up slowly—she did almost
everything slowly these days—feeling pleasantly drugged with
sleep.
She paused by the rumpled bed, looking out at the stark
beauty of the hi lls and the rain-lashed trees. The glass of the
window was icy to the touch, and the clouds rolled down from
the mountains, black-bellied a nd growling with thunder . It
wasn’ t snowing, but it was a nasty night and no mistake.
And what was i t like in the high mountains now? Had they
reached a village that would shelter them? Had they found
Roger? She shivered involunta rily , though the embers still
glowed red in the hearth and the room was warm. She felt the
irresistible pull of her bed, promising warmth and, even more,
the lure of dreams in which she  might escape the chronic nag
of fear and guilt.
She turned to the door , though, and pulled her cloak from
the peg behind i t. The ur gency of pregnancy might necessitate
her using the co mmode in her ro om, but she was resolved that
no s lave would ever carry a cha mber pot for her—not as long
as sh e could wa lk. She wrapped the cloak tightly around her ,
took the lidded pewter receptacle from its cabinet, and stepped
quietly into the corridor .It was very late; all the candles  had been put out, and the
stale sm ell of dead fires lay in the stairwell, but she could see
clearly enough by the flicker of the lightning as she made her
way downstairs . The kitchen door was unbolted, a piece of
carelessness for which she bless ed the cook; no need to make
noise struggling one-handed with the heavy bolt.
Freezing rain struck her face an d whooshed up beneath the
hem of her nigh tgown, making her gasp. Once past the first
shock o f cold, though, she enjo yed it; the violence of it was
exhilarating, the wind strong enough to lift her cloak in
billowing sur ges that made her feel light on her feet for the
first time in months.
She swe pt in a f lurry to the nec essary house, rinsed out the
pot in the dren ch of rain that poured from its gutters, then
stood in the paved yard, letting the fresh wind sweep into her
face and  slash her cheeks with ra in. She wasn’ t sure if this was
expiation or exultation—a need to share the discomfort her
parents might be facing, or some more pagan rite—a need to
lose hers elf by joining in the ferocity of the elements. Either or
both, it didn’ t m atter; she stepped deliberately under the spout
of the gutter , letting the water pound against her scalp and
soak her hair and shoulders.
Gasping and shaking water fro m her hair like a dog, she
stepped back—and stopped, her  eye caught by a sudden flash
of light. Not ligh tning; a steady beam that shone for a moment,
then vanished.
A door in the slave quarters o pened for a moment, then
closed. W as someone coming? Someone was; she could hear
footsteps on the gravel, and to ok another step back into the
shadows—the last thing she wanted was to explain what she
was doing out here.
The lightning showed him clear ly as he passed, and she felt
a jar  of recognition. Lord John  Grey , hurrying shirt sleeved
and bareheaded , his fair hair unbound and blowing in the
wind, evidently oblivious to the cold and rain. He passedwithout seeing her , and vanished under the overhang of the
kitchen porch.
Realizing that she was in dang er of being locked out, she
ran after  him, awkward but still fast. He was just closing the
door wh en she hit it with her shoulder . She burst into the
kitchen and stood dripping, L ord John goggling at her in
disbelief.
“Nice ni ght for a walk,” she said, half breathless. “Isn’ t it?”
She wiped back her wet hair , and with a cordial nod slipped
past him , out, and up the stairs, her bare feet leaving wet half-
moon prints on the dark, poli shed wood. She listened, but
heard no steps behind her as she reached her room.
She left  cloak and gown spread  out before the fire to dry ,
and havi ng toweled her hair and  face, climbed naked into bed.
She was  shiverin g, but the feel of the cotton sheets on her bare
skin was wonderful. She stretched, wiggling her toes, then
rolled on her sid e, curling tightly around her center of gravity ,
letting the constant heat from within tendril outward, gradually
reaching her skin, forming a small cocoon of warmth around
her .
She replayed the scene on the footpath once more in
memory , and very gradually , the shadowy thoughts that had
been rattling around in her min d for days fell together into a
rational shape.
Lord John treated her always with attention and respect—
often with amusement or admiration—but there was
something missi ng. She had no t been able to identify it—for
some time had not even been aware of it—but now she knew
what it was, without doubt.
She was accustomed, as are m ost striking women, to the
open admiration of men, and this she had from Lord John as
well. But below such admiration was usually a deeper
awareness, more  subtle than gla nce or gesture, a vibration like
the distant chime of a bell, a  visceral acknowledgment of
herself as female. She had thought she felt it from Lord Johnwhen they met—but it had been  gone on subsequent meetings,
and she had concluded that she had mistaken it at first.
She should have guessed be fore, she thought; she’d
encountered th at inner indif ference once before, in the
roommate of a casual boyfrien d. But then, Lord John hid it
very we ll; she might never have guessed, were it not for that
chance encounte r in the yard. No, he didn’ t chime for her . But
when he came out of the ser vants’ quarters, he had been
ringing like a firebell.
She won dered briefly if her father knew , but dismissed the
possibility . Afte r his experiences in W entworth Prison, he
couldn’ t possibly hold a man with that preference in such
warm regard as she knew he felt for Lord John.
She roll ed onto her back. The polished cotton of the sheet
slid across the b are skin of breasts and thighs, caressing. She
half noticed the feeling, and as her nipple hardened she raised
a ha nd to cup her breast in reflex, felt Roger ’ s lar ge warm
hand in memory , and a sudden sur ge of wanting. Then in
memory she felt the sudden grasp of rougher hands, pinching
and mauling, and wanting chan ged at once to sickened fury .
She flipped onto her stomach, arms crossed beneath her
breasts and face buried in her p illow , legs clenched and teeth
gritted in futile defense.
The baby was a lar ge, uncomfortable lump; impossible to
lie that way now . W ith a small  half-spoken curse, she rolled
over and jerked out of bed, o ut from under the betraying,
seductive sheets.
She walked naked through the half-lit room, and stood again
by t he window , looking out at  the pounding rain. Her hair
hung damp down her back, and  cold was coming through the
glass, pebbling the white flesh of arms and thighs and belly .
She made no mo ve either to cover herself or to go back to bed,
but only  stood there, one hand on the gently squirming bulge,
looking out.
It would be too late soon. She had known when they left
that it was already too late—so had her mother . Neither ofthem had wanted to admit it to the other , though; they had both
pretended that Roger would come back in time, that he and she
would sail to Hi spaniola, and find their way back through the
stones—together .
She laid her other hand against the glass; at once, a mist of
condensation sprang up, outlining her fingers. It was early
March; maybe three months left, maybe less. It would take a
week, maybe two, to travel to the coast. No ship would risk the
treacherous Outer Banks in March, though. Early April, at the
soonest, before a journey could be undertaken. How long to
the W est Indies? T wo weeks, three?
The end  of April, then. And a few days to make their way
inland, find the cave; it would be slow , fighting through the
jungle, more than eight months pregnant. And dangerous,
though that didn’ t matter much, considering.
That would be if Roger were here now . But he wasn’ t. He
might never come, though that was a possibility she fought
hard against envisioning. If she didn’ t think about all the ways
he could die, then he wouldn’ t die; it was one article of her
stubborn faith; the others were that he wasn’ t dead yet, and
that her mother would come back before the child was born.
As t o her father— rage boiled up again, as it did whenever she
thought of him—him or Bonnet—so she tried to think of either
of them as little as possible.
She prayed, of course, as hard as she could, but she wasn’ t
constituted for praying and wai ting; she was made for action.
If only she could have gone with them, to find Roger!
She hadn’ t had a choice abo ut that, though. Her jaw
tightened, and her hand splaye d flat against her belly . She
hadn’ t h ad a choice about a lot  of things. But she had made
one cho ice—to keep her child—and now she’d have to live
with the consequences of it.
She was beginning to shiver . Abruptly she turned away
from the  storm, and went to the  fire. A small tongue of flame
played along the blackened ba ck of a red-crackled log, the
heart of the embers glowing gold and white.She san k down on the hearth rug, closing her eyes as the
heat of the fire sent waves of  comfort over her cold skin,
caressing as the stroke of a h and. This time she kept all
thought of Bonnet at bay , refusing him entrance to her mind,
concentrating fiercely instead on the few precious memories
she had of Roger .
… put y our hand o n my heart. T ell me if it stops …She could
hear him, half breathless, half choked between laughter and
passion.
How the hell do you know that?  T he rough fee l of curly
hairs under her palms, the smooth hard curves of his
shoulders, the throb of the pulse in the side of his throat when
she’d pulled him down to her and put her mouth on him,
wanting in her ur gency to bite him, to taste him, to breathe the
salt and dust of his skin.
The dar k and secret places of him, that she knew only by
feel, recalled as soft weight, r olling and vulnerable in her
palm, a complexity of curve and  depth that yielded reluctantly
to her probing fingertips (Oh, God, don’ t stop, but car eful,
aye? Oh!),  the strange wrinkled silk that grew taut and
smooth, filled her hand rising, si lent and incredible as the stalk
of a night-blooming flower that opens as you watch.
His gent leness a s he touched he r (Christ, I wish I could see
your face, to know how it is for you, am I doing well by ye. Is it
good, just her e? T ell me, Br ee, talk to me…),  as she explored
him, and then the moment when she had pushed him too far ,
her mouth on h is nipple. She felt again the sudden amazing
sur ge of  power in him, as he lost all sense of restraint and
seized h er , lifting her as though she weighed nothing, rolled
her back  against the straw and took her , half hesitating as he
remembered he r freshly riven flesh, then answering the
demand of her n ails in his back to come to her fiercely , forcing
her past the fear of impalement, into acceptance, and welcome,
and fina lly into a frenzy that matched his own, rupturing the
last membrane of reticence between them, joining them
forever in a flood of sweat and musk and blood and semen.She moaned out loud, shudder ed and lay still, too weak
even to move h er hand away . H er heart was thumping, very
slowly . Her belly was tight as a  drum, the last of the spasms
slowly r elaxing its grip on her swollen womb. One half of her
body blazed with heat, the other was cool and dark.
After a moment she rolled onto  her hands and knees, and
crawled away from the fire. Sh e hauled herself onto the bed
like a wounded beast, and lay half stunned, ignoring the
currents of heat and cold that played over her .
At last she stirred, pulled a sin gle quilt over her , and lay
staring a t the wall, hands crossed  in protection above her baby .
Y es, it was too late. Sensation and yearning must be put aside,
along with love and anger . She m ust resist the mindless pull of
both body and emotion. There were decisions to be made.
It took three days to convince herself of the virtue of her plan,
to overcome her own scruples, and, at last, to find a suitable
time and place in which to catch him alone. But she was
thorough and she was patient; she had all the time in the world
—nearly three months of it.
On T uesday , her opportunity came at last. Jocasta was
closeted in her study with Duncan Innes and the account
books, Ulysses—with a brief, inscrutable look at the closed
door of the stud y—had gone to the kitchen to superintend the
preparations for yet another lavish dinner in his Lordship’ s
honor , and she had gotten rid of Phaedre by sending her on
horseback to Barra Meadows to fetch a book Jenny Ban
Campbell had promised her .
W ith a fresh blu e camlet gown t hat matched her eyes, and a
heart beating in her chest like a trip-hammer , she set out to
stalk her victim. She found hi m in the library , reading the
Meditations  of Marcus Aurelius by the French windows, the
morning sun streaming over his shoulder making his smooth
fair hair gleam like buttered tof fee.
He looked up from his boo k when she came in—a
hippopotamus could have made a more graceful entrance, shethought crossly , catching her skirt on the corner of a bric-a-
brac table in her nervousness—then graciously laid it aside,
springing to his feet to bow over her hand.
“No, I don’ t want to sit down, thank you.” She shook her
head at the seat he was of ferin g her . “I wondered—that is, I
thought I’d go for a walk. W ould you like to come with me?”
There was frost on the lower panes of the French door , a
stif f breeze whining past the h ouse, and soft chairs, brandy ,
and blazing fire within. But Lord John was a gentleman.
“There i s nothin g I should like better ,” he gallantly assured
her , and  abandoned Marcus Aurelius without a backward
glance.
It w as a bright day , but very cold. Muf fled in thick cloaks,
they turned into the kitchen gard en, where the high walls gave
them some shelter from the wind. They exchanged small,
breathless comments on the brightness of the day , assured each
other that they were not cold at all, and came through a small
archway into the brick-walled herbary . Brianna glanced
around them; they were quite alone, and she would be able to
see anyone coming along the walk. Best not waste time, then.
“I have a proposal to make to you,” she said.
“I am sure an y notion of yours must necessarily be
delightful, my dear ,” he said, smiling slightly .
“W ell, I don’ t know about that,” she said, and took a deep
breath. “But here goes. I want you to marry me.”
He kept smiling, evidently waiting for the punch line.
“I mean it,” she said.
The sm ile didn’ t altogether go away , but it altered. She
wasn’ t sure whether he was dis mayed at her gaucherie or just
trying not to laugh, but she suspected the latter .
“I don’ t  want any of your money ,” she assured him. “I’ll
sign a paper saying so. And yo u don’ t need to live with me,
either , though it’ s probably a good idea for me to go to
V ir ginia with you, at least for a little while. As for what Icould do  for you…” She hesitat ed, knowing that hers was the
weaker side of t he bar gain. “I’m strong, but that doesn’ t mean
much to you, si nce you have servants. I’m a good manager ,
though—I can keep accounts, and I think I know how to run a
farm. I do  k now how to build things. I could manage your
property in V ir ginia while you were in England. And…you
have a young so n, don’ t you? I’ll look after him; I’d be a good
mother to him.”
Lord John had s topped dead in the path during this speech.
Now he leaned slowly back against the brick wall, casting his
eyes up in a silent prayer for understanding.
“Dear God in h eaven,” he said. “That I should live to hear
an of fer  like that!” Then he low ered his head and gave her a
direct and piercing look.
“Are you out of your mind?”
“No,” she said, with an atte mpt at keeping her own
composure. “It’ s a perfectly reasonable suggestion.”
“I ha ve heard,” he said, rather cautiously , with an eye to her
belly , “that women in an expectant condition are somewhat…
excitable, in consequence of the ir state. I confess, though, that
my experience is distressingly limited with respect to…that is
—perhaps I should send for Dr . Fentiman?”
She drew herself up to her full height, put a hand on the
wall and leaned toward him, deliberately looking down on
him, menacing him with her size.
“No, you should not,” she said,  in measured tones. “Listen
to m e, L ord Joh n. I’m not crazy , I’m not frivolous, and I don’ t
mean it to be an inconvenience to you in any way—but I’m
dead serious.”
The cold  had reddened his fair s kin, and there was a drop of
moisture glistening on the tip of his nose. He wiped it on a
fold of his cloak , eyeing her with something between interest
and horror . At least he’d stopped laughing.
She felt mildly sick, but she’d h ave to do it. She’d hoped it
could be avoided, but there seemed no other way .“If you don’ t a gree to marry me,” she said, “I’ll expose
you.”
“Y ou’ll do what?” His usual mask of urbanity had
disappeared, le aving puzzlem ent and the beginnings of
wariness in its stead.
She was wearing woolen mitten s, but her fingers felt frozen.
So did everything else, except the warm lump of her
slumbering child.
“I know what you were doing—the other night, at the slave
quarters. I’ll tell everyone; my a unt, Mr . Campbell, the sherif f.
I’ll write  letters,” she said, her lips feeling numb even as she
uttered the ridiculous threat. “T o the Governor , and the
Governor of V ir ginia. They put p-pederasts in the pillory here;
Mr . Campbell told me so.”
A frown  drew his brows together; they were so fair that they
scarcely showed against his skin when he stood in strong light.
They reminded her of Lizzie’ s.
“Stop looming over me, if you please.”
He took  hold of her wrist and pulled it down with a force
that surp rised her . He was sma ll but much stronger than she
had supposed, and for the first time, she was slightly afraid of
what she was doing.
He took her fir mly by the elbow and propelled her into
motion, away from the house. The thought struck her that
perhaps he meant to take her d own to the river , out of sight,
and try to drown  her . She thoug ht it unlikely , but still resisted
the direction of his ur ging, and turned back into the square-laid
paths of the kitchen garden instead.
He mad e no demur , but went with her , though it meant
walking head-on  into the wind. He didn’ t speak until they had
turned once more, and reached a  sheltered corner by the onion
bed.
“I am halfway tempted to submit to your outrageous
proposal,” he said at last, the co rner of his mouth twitching—
whether with fury or amusement, she couldn’ t tell.“It w ould certainly please your aunt. It would outrage your
mother . And it would teach you  t o play with fir e, I do assure
you.” Sh e caugh t a gleam in his eye that gave her a sudden
sur ge of  doubt about her conclus ions as to his preferences. She
drew back from him a bit.
“Oh. I hadn’ t thought of that—that you might…men and
women both, I mean.”
“I was  married,” he pointed out, with some sarcasm.
“Y es, but I thoug ht that was probably the same kind of thing
I’m sug gesting now—just a formal arrangement, I mean.
That’ s what made me think of it in the first place, once I
realized that you—” She broke of f with an impatient gesture.
“Are you telling me that you do  lik e to go to bed with
women?”
He raised one eyebrow .
“W ould that make a substantial dif ference to your plans?”
“W ell…” she said uncertainly . “Y es. Y es, it would. If I’d
known that, I wouldn’ t have suggested it.”
” ‘Suggested,’  she says,” he muttered. “Public
denunciation? The pillory? Suggested? ”
The bloo d burned so hotly in her cheeks, she was surprised
not to see the cold air turn to steam around her face.
“I’m sorry ,” she said. “I wouldn’ t have done it. Y ou have to
believe me, I really wouldn’ t ha ve said a word to anybody . It’ s
only when you laughed, I thought—anyway , it doesn’ t matter .
If yo u did want to sleep with me, I couldn’ t marry you—it
wouldn’ t be right.”
He c losed his ey es very tight and held them squinched shut
for a minute. Then he opened one light blue eye and looked at
her .
“Why not?” he asked.
“Because of Roger ,” she said, an d was infuriated to hear her
voice br eak on the name. Still m ore infuriated to feel a hot tearescape to run down her cheek.
“Damn it!” she said. “Damn it to hell! I wasn’ t even going
to think  about him!”
She swiped the tear angrily away , and clenched her teeth.
“Maybe you’re right,” she said. “Maybe it is being
pregnant. I cry all the time, over nothing.”
“I rather doubt it is nothing,” he said dryly .
She took a deep breath, the cold air hollowing her chest.
There was one last card to play , then.
“If you do like w omen…I could n’ t—I mean, I don’ t want to
sleep with you regularly . And I  wouldn’ t mind your sleeping
with anybody else—male or female—”
“Thank you for that,” he mutt ered, but she ignored him,
bent only on the need to get it all out.
“But I can see that you might w ant a child of your own. It
wouldn’ t be right for me to kee p you from having one. I can
give you that, I  think.” She glanced down at herself, arms
clasped across the round of her belly . “Everyone says I’m
made fo r childbearing,” she went on steadily , eyes on her feet.
“I’d—just until I got pregnant again, though. Y ou’d have to
put that in the contract, too—Mr . Campbell could draw it up.”
Lord John massaged his forehe ad, evidently suf fering the
onslaught of a m assive headache. Then he dropped his hand
and took her by the arm.
“Come and sit d own, child,” he said quietly . “Y ou’d best tell
me what the devil you’re up to.”
She took a deep, savage breath to steady her voice.
“I a m not a child,” she said. He glanced up at her and
seemed to change his mind about something.
“No, yo u’re not—God help us both. But before you startle
Farquard Campbell into an apoplexy with your notion of a
suitable marriage contract, I beg you to sit with me for a
moment and share the processes of your most remarkablebrain.” He motioned her through the archway into the
ornamental garden, where they would be invisible from the
house.
The gard en was bleak, but orderly; all the dead stalks of the
year before had been pulled ou t, the dry stems chopped and
scattered as mulch over the beds. Only in the circular bed
around the dry f ountain were there signs of life; green crocus
spikes poked up like tiny battering rams, vivid and
intransigent.
They sa t, but she couldn’ t sit. N ot and face him. He got up
with her , and walked beside her , not touching her but keeping
pace, the wind w hipping strands of blond hair across his face,
not sayi ng a word, but listeni ng, listening as she told him
almost everything.
“So I’ve been thinking, and thinking,” she ended
wretchedly . “And I never get anywhere. Do you see? Mother
and—and Da, they’re out there somewhere—” She waved an
arm toward the distant mountains. “Anything could happen to
them—anything might have hap pened to Roger already . And
here I sit, getting bigger and bigger , and there’ s nothing I can
do !”
She glan ced down at him and drew the back of a mittened
hand under her dripping nose.
“I’m not crying,” she assured him, though she was.
“Of course not,” he said. He took her hand and drew it
through his arm.
“Round and round,” he murmure d, eyes on the path of crazy
paving as they circled the fountain.
“Y es, round and round the mulberry bush,” she agreed.
“And it’ ll be Pop! goes the we asel in three months or so. I
have to do something, ” she ended, miserably .
“Believe it or not, in your case waiting is  doing something,
though I  admit it may not seem so,” he answered dryly . “Why
is it that  you will not wait to see whether your father ’ s quest issuccessful? Is it that your sense of honor will not allow you to
bear a fatherless child? Or—”
“It’ s not  my honor ,” she said. “ It’ s his. Roger ’ s. He’ s—he
followed me. He gave up—everything—and came after me,
when I came here to find my fa ther . I knew he would, and he
did.
“When he finds out about this— ” She grimaced, cupping a
hand to the swe ll of her stomach. “He’ll marry me; he’ll feel
as though he has to. And I can’ t let him do that.”
“Why not?”
“Because I love him. I don’ t w ant him to marry me out of
obligation. And I—” She clamp ed her lips tight on the rest of
it. “I  wo n’ t,” she  ended firmly . “I’ve made up my mind, and I
won’ t.”
Lord John pulled his cloak tigh ter as a fresh blast of wind
came rocketing in of f the rive r . It smelled of ice and dead
leaves, but there was a hint of freshness in it; spring was
coming.
“I see,” he said. “W ell, I quite agree with your aunt that you
require a husband. Why me, though?” He raised one pale
brow . “Is it my title or my wealth?”
“Neither one. It was because I was sure that you didn’ t like
women,” she said, giving him one of those candid blue looks.
“I do like women,” he said, e xasperated. “I admire and
honor them, and for several o f the sex I feel considerable
af fection—your mother among them, though I doubt the
sentiment is reciprocated. I do not, however , seek pleasure in
their beds. Do I speak plainly enough?”
“Y es,” she said, the small lines between her eyes vanishing
like mag ic. “That’ s what I thou ght. See, it wouldn’ t be right
for me to marry  Mr . MacNeill or Barton McLachlan or any of
those me n, because I’d be promising something I couldn’ t give
them. B ut you don’ t want tha t anyway , so there isn’ t any
reason why I can’ t marry you.”He repressed a strong ur ge to bang his head against the wall.
“There most assuredly is.”
“What?”
“T o name only the most obvious, your father would
undoubtedly break my neck!”
“What for?” she demanded, frowning. “He likes you; he
says you’re one of his best friends.”
“I a m honored to be the recipi ent of his esteem,” he said
shortly . “However , that esteem would very shortly cease to
exist, upon Jamie Fraser ’ s discovering that his daughter was
serving as consort and brood mare to a degenerate sodomite.”
“And how would he discover that?” she demanded. “ I
wouldn’ t tell him.” Then she flushed and, meeting his
outraged eye, suddenly dissolved into laughter , in which he
helplessly joined.
“W ell, I’m sorry , but you  said it,” she gasped at last, sitti ng
up and wiping her streaming eyes with the hem of her cloak.
“Oh, Ch rist. Y es, I did.” Distrac ted, he thumbed a strand of
hair out of his mouth, and wiped his running nose on his
sleeve again. “Damn, why have n’ t I a handkerchief? I said it
because it’ s true. As for your father finding out, he’ s well
aware of the fact.”
“He is?”  She seemed disproportionately surprised. “But I
thought he’d never—”
A flash of yello w apron interrupted her; one of the kitchen
maids was in the adjoining garden. W ithout comment, Lord
John stood up and gave her a hand; she got ponderously to her
feet and  they sailed out onto th e dry brown scurf of the dead
lawn, cloaks billowing like sails around them.
The ston e bench under the wil low tree was devoid of its
usual charm at this time of year , but it was at least sheltered
from the icy blasts of f the river . Lord John saw her seated, sat
down himself, and sneezed explosively . She opened her cloak
and dug  in the b osom of her dr ess, finally coming out with acrumpled hand kerchief, which she handed to him with
apologies.
It was warm and smelled of her—a disconcerting odor of
girl-flesh, spiced with cloves and lavender .
“What you said about teaching me to play with fire,” she
said. “Just what did you mean by that?”
“Nothing,” he said, but now it was his turn to flush.
“Nothing, hm?” she said, and gave him the ghost of an
ironic smile. “That was a threat if I ever heard one.”
He sighed, and wiped his f ace once more with her
handkerchief.
“Y ou ha ve been frank with me ,” he said. “T o the point of
embarrassment and well beyond. So yes, I suppose I—no, it
was  a th reat.” He ma de a small gesture of surrender . “Y ou look
like your father , don’ t you see?”
She frowned at him, his words obviously meaning nothing.
Then re alization flickered, sprang to full life. She sat bolt
upright, staring down at him.
“Not you—not Da! He wouldn’ t!”
“No,” Lord John said, very dryly . “He wouldn’ t. Though
your sho ck is scarcely flattering. And for what the statement is
worth, I would under no circum stances take advantage of your
likeness to him—that was as m uch an idle threat as was your
menacing me with exposure.”
“Where did you…meet my father?” she asked carefully , her
own troubles superseded for the moment by curiosity .
“In prison. Y ou knew he was imprisoned, after the Rising?”
She nodded, frowning slightly .
“Y es. W ell. Leave it as said that I harbor feelings of
particular af fection for Jamie Fraser , and have for some years.”
He shook his head, sighing.“And he re you come of fering me your innocent body , with
its e choes of his flesh—and add  to that the promise of giving
me a child who would mingle my blood with his—and all this,
because your honor will not let you wed a man you love, or
love a man you wed.” He brok e of f and sank his head in his
hands.
“Child, you would make an ang el weep, and God knows I
am no angel!”
“My mother thinks you are.”
He glanced up at her , startled.
“She thinks what? ”
“Maybe she wouldn’ t go quite that  far ,” she amended, still
frowning. “She says you’re a g ood man, though. I think she
likes you , but she doesn’ t want t o. Of course, I understand that
now; I suppose she must know—how you…er…feel about…”
She coughed, hiding her blushes in a fold of her cloak.
“Hell,” he muttered. “Oh, hell and thundering damnation. I
ought never to h ave come out with you. Y es, she does. Though
in al l tru th, I am not sure why she regards me with suspicion.
It cannot be jealousy , surely .”
Brianna shook her head, chewing thoughtfully on her lower
lip.
“I th ink it’ s beca use she’ s afraid you’ll hurt him, somehow .
She’ s afraid for him, you know .”
He glanced up at her , startled.
“Hurt him? How? Does she thin k I will overpower him and
commit depraved indignities upon his person?”
He s poke lightly , but a flicker in  her eyes froze the words in
his throa t. He tightened his grip on her arm. She bit her lip,
then gently detached his hand, laying it on his knee.
“Have you ever seen my father with his shirt of f?”
“Do you mean the scars on his back?”She nodded.
He drummed his fingers restlessly on his knees, soundless
on the fine broadcloth.
“Y es, I’ve seen them. I did that.”
Her head jerked back, eyes wid e. The end of her nose was
cherry-red, but the rest of her skin so pale that her hair and
eyebrows seemed to have leached all the life from it.
“Not all of it,”  he said, starin g of f into a bed of dead
hollyhocks. “He ’d been flogged before, which made it all the
worse—that he knew what he was doing, when he did it.”
“Did…what?” she asked. Slowl y , she rearranged herself on
the b ench, not s o much turning toward him as flowing in her
garments, like a cloud changing shape in the wind.
“I w as the comm ander at Ardsmuir prison; did he tell you?
No, I thought n ot.” He made an impatient gesture, brushing
back the strands of fair hair that whipped across his face.
“He was an of ficer , a gentleman. The only of ficer there. He
spoke for the Jacobite prisoners. W e dined together , in my
quarters. W e played chess, we spoke of books. W e had
interests in common. W e…became friends. And then…we
were not.”
He stopped speaking.
She drew away from him a bit, distaste in her eyes.
“Y ou mean—you had him flogged because he wouldn’ t—”
“No, damn it, I did not!” He snatched the handkerchief and
scrubbed angrily at his nose. He flung it down on the seat
between them and glared at her . “How dare you suggest such a
thing!”
“But you said yourself you did it!”
” He  did it.”
“Y ou can’ t flog yourself!”He s tarted to rep ly , then snorted. He raised one brow at her ,
still angry , but with his feelings coming back under control.
“The he ll you can’ t. Y ou’ve been doing it for months,
according to what you’ve told me.”
“W e aren’ t talking about me.”
“Of course we are!”
“No, we’re not!” She leaned toward him, heavy brows
drawn down. “What the hell do you mean, he did it?”
The wind was blowing from b ehind her , into his face. It
made his eyes sting and water , and he looked away .
“What am I doing here?” he muttered to himself. “I must be
mad to be talking with you in this manner!”
“I don’ t care if you’re mad or not,” she said, and gripped
him by the sleeve. “Y ou tell me what happened!”
He p ressed his lips tight togeth er , and for a moment, she
thought he wouldn’ t. But he had already said too much to stop,
and he knew i t. His shoulders rose under his cloak and
dropped, slumping in surrender .
“W e were friends. Then…he discovered my feeling for him.
W e wer e no longer friends, by  his choice. But that was not
enough for him; he wished a final severance. And so he
deliberately brought about an occasion so drastic that it must
alter our relation irrevocably and prevent any chance of
friendship betw een us. So he lied. During a search of the
prisoners’ quarte rs, he claimed a piece of tartan publicly as his
own. Possession was against the law , then—it still is, in
Scotland.”
He drew  a deep breath and let it out. He wouldn’ t look at
her , but kept hi s eyes focused on the ragged fringe of bare
trees across the river , raw against the pale spring sky .
“I was the governor , char ged with execution of the law . I
was obliged to have him flogg ed. As he damn well knew I
would be.”He t ilted his he ad back, resting it against the carved stone
back of the bench. His eyes were closed against the wind.
“I c ould for give his not wantin g me,” he said, with quiet
bitterness. “But I couldn’ t for give him for making me use him
in that fashion. Not forcing me merely to hurt him, but to
degrade him. He could not mer ely refuse to acknowledge my
feeling; he must destroy it. It was too much.”
Bits of debris bo iled past on the flood; storm-cracked twigs
and bran ches, a broken board from the hull of a boat, wrecked
somewhere upst ream. Her hand covered his where it rested on
his knee . It was slightly lar ger than his own, and warm from
sheltering in her cloak.
“There w as a reason. It wasn’ t you. But it’ s for him to tell
you, if he want s to. Y ou did for give him, though,” she said
quietly . “Why?”
He sat up then, and shrugged, but didn’ t put away her hand.
“I h ad to.” He glanced at her , eyes straight and level. “I
hated him for as  long as I could. But then I realized that loving
him…that was part of me, and one of the best parts. It didn’ t
matter th at he couldn’ t love me, that had nothing to do with it.
But if I could no t for give him, then I could not love him, and
that part  of me w as gone. And I found eventually that I wanted
it back.”  He smiled, faintly . “So you see, it was really entirely
selfish.”
He sque ezed he r hand then, stoo d up, and pulled her to her
feet.
“Come, my dear . W e shall both  freeze solid if we sit here
any longer .”
They walked back toward the house, not talking, but
walking close together , arm i n arm. As they came back
through the gardens he spoke abruptly .
“Y ou’re right, I think. T o live with someone you love,
knowing that they tolerate the relation only for the sake of
obligation—no, I wouldn’ t do it, either . W ere it only a matter
of convenience and respect on both sides, then yes; such amarriage is one of honor . As long as both parties are honest—”
His mou th twisted briefly as he glanced in the direction of the
servants’ quarters. “There is no need for shame on either side.”
She look ed down at him, brushing a strand of windblown
copper hair out of her eyes with her free hand.
“Then you’ll accept my proposal?” The hollow feeling in
her chest didn’ t feel like the relief she had expected.
“No,” he said bl untly . “I may have for given Jamie Fraser for
what he  did in the past—but he would never for give me  for
marrying you.” He smiled at he r , and patted the hand he held
tucked in the curve of his arm.
“I can give you  some respite from both your suitors and
your aun t, thoug h.” He glanced at the house, whose curtains
hung unstirring against the glass.
“Do you suppose anyone’ s watching?”
“I’d say you can bet on it,” she said, a little grimly .
“Good.” Pulling of f the sapphire ring he wore, he turned to
face her and took her hand. He pulled of f her mitten and
ceremoniously s lid the ring onto her little finger—the only one
it wo uld fit. The n he rose smoo thly on his toes and kissed her
on the lips. Lea ving her no time to recover from surprise, he
clasped her hand in his, and turned once more toward the
house, his expression bland.
“Come along, my dear ,” he said. “Let us announce our
engagement.”6 0
T R I A L  B Y  F I R E
T hey were left alone all day . The fire was dead, and there was
no fo od left. It didn’ t matter; neither man could eat, and no fire
would have reached Roger ’ s soul-deep chill.
The Indians came back in late afternoon. Several warriors,
escorting an elderly man, dressed in a flowing lace shirt and a
woven mantle, his face painted with red and ocher—the
sachem,  bearing  a small clay pot in his hand, filled with black
liquid.
Alexandre had put on his clothes ; he stood when the sachem
approached him, but neither spoke nor moved. The sachem
began to sing in a cracked old voice, and as he sang, dipped a
rabbit’ s foot into the pot and pai nted the priest’ s face in black,
from forehead to chin.
The Indians left, and the priest sat down on the ground, his
eyes clo sed. Rog er tried to speak  to him, to of fer him water , or
at least the knowledge of company , but Alexandre made no
response, sitting as though he had been carved of stone.
In the last of the twilight, he spoke, finally .
“There i s not much time,” he said softly . “I asked you once
before to pray fo r me. I did not know then what I would have
you pray  for—for the preservation of my life, or my soul. Now
I know that neither is possible.”
Roger moved to speak, but the priest twitched a hand,
stopping him.
“There i s only the only thing I can ask for . Pray for me,
brother—that I might die well. Pray that I may die in silence.”
He l ooked at Roger for the first time, then, his eyes glinting
with moisture. “I would not shame her by crying out.”
It was some time  after dark that the drums began. Roger had
not heard them in his time in the village. Impossible to say
how many there were; the sound seemed to come fromeverywhere. He felt it in the marrow of his bones and the soles
of his feet.
The Moh awks returned. When they came in, the priest stood
up at once. He undressed him self, and walked out, naked,
without a backward glance.
Roger sat staring at the hide-covered doorway , praying—
and listening. He knew what a drum could do; had done it
himself—evoked awe and fury with the beating of a stretched
hide, calling to the deep and h idden instincts of the listener .
Knowing what was happening, t hough, didn’ t make it any less
frightening.
He could not have said how long he sat there listening to the
drums, hearing other sounds—voices, footsteps, the noises of a
lar ge assembly—trying not to listen for Alexandre’ s voice.
Suddenly the drumming stopped. It started again, no more
than a few tenta tive thumps, and then quit altogether . There
were shouts, and then a sudden cacophany of yells. Roger
started up, and hobbled toward the door . The guard was still
there, though; he thrust his head  through the flap and gestured
menacingly , one hand on his war club.
Roger stopped, but couldn’ t ret urn to the fire. He stood in
the half -dark, sweat rolling down his ribs, listening to the
sounds outside.
It so unded like a ll the devils in hell had been let loose. What
in God’ s name was going on out there? A terrific fight,
obviously . But who, and why?
After the first salvo of shrieks, the vocal part of it had
lessened, but there were still individual high-pitched yelps and
ululations from every part of th e central clearing. There were
thuds, too; moans, and other noises indicative of violent
combat. Something struck the wall of the longhouse; the wall
shivered and a bark panel cracked down the middle.
Roger glanced at the door f lap; no, the guard wasn’ t
looking. He dashed across to the panel and tore at it with hisfingers. No good; the wood fibers shredded away beneath his
nails and wouldn’ t give him purchase. In desperation, he
pressed his eye to the hole he had made, trying to see what
was happening outside.
No more than a  narrow slice of the central clearing was
visible. He could see the lon ghouse opposite, a strip of
churned earth between, and over everything, the flickering
light of an eno rmous fire. Red and yellow shadows fought
with black ones, peopling the air with fiery demons.
Some of the dem ons were real; two dark figures reeled past
and out of sight, locked in violent embrace. More figures
streaked across his line of sight, running toward the fire.
Then he stif fened, pressing his face against the wood.
Among the incomprehensible Mohawk yells, he could have
sworn he had heard someone bellowing in Gaelic .
He had.
“Caisteal Dhuni!”  s om ebody shouted nearby , follo wed by a
hair -raising screech. Scots—white men! He had to get to them!
Roger smashed his fists on the shattered wood in a frenzy ,
trying to batter his way through  the panel by main force. The
Gaelic voice broke loose again.
“Caisteal Dhuni!”  N o, wait—God , it was another  voice!
And the  first one, answering. “Do mi!  Do mi!”  T o me! T o me!
And the n a fresh wave of Mohawk shrieks rose up and
drowned the voices—women, it was women screaming now ,
their voices even louder than the men’ s.
Roger fl ung him self at the pane l, shoulder first; it cracked
and splin tered further , but would not give way . He tried again,
and a third time, with no result. There was nothing in the
longhouse that could be used as a weapon, nothing. In
desperation he seized the lashings of one of the bed cubicles
and tore  at it with hands and teeth, ripping until he had
loosened part of the frame.
He g rabbed the wood, heaved; shook it and heaved again,
until with a ren ding crack it ca me free in his hands, leavinghim panting, holding a six-foot pole with a shattered,
sharpened end. He tucked the butt end under his arm and
char ged the doorway , pointed e nd aimed like a spear at the
hide flap.
He shot  out into dark and flame, cold air and smoke, into
noise tha t singed  his blood. He saw a figure ahead of him, and
char ged it. The man danced a side, and raised a war club.
Roger couldn’ t stop, couldn’ t tu rn, but threw himself flat, and
the club smashed down inches from his head.
He r olled to the  side and swung his pole wildly . It crashed
against the Indian’ s head, and the man stumbled and went
down, falling over Roger .
Whisky . The man reeke d of whisky . Not stopping to wonder ,
Roger wriggled out from under the squirming body , staggering
to his feet, pole still in his hand.
A scream came from behind hi m and he whirled, stabbing
with all his stren gth as he pivoted on the ball of his foot. The
shock of  impact shuddered up h is arms and through his chest.
The man  he had struck was cla wing at the pole; it jerked and
quivered, then was wrenched f rom his grasp as the man fell
over .
He staggered, caught himself, then whirled toward the fire.
It was an immense pyre; flames billowing in a wall of pure
and ardent scarlet, vivid against the night. Through the
bobbing heads of the watchers, he saw the black figure in the
heart of the flame, arms spread in a gesture of benediction,
lashed to the pole from which he hung. Long hair fluttered up,
strands catching fire with a burst of flame, surrounding the
head with a ha lo of gold, like Christ in a missal. Then
something crash ed down on Roger ’ s head, and he dropped like
a rock.
He didn’ t quite lose consciousness. He couldn’ t see or
move, but he co uld still hear , dimly . There were voices near
him. Th e yelli ng was still there, but fainter , almost a
background noise, like the roar of the ocean.He felt himself rise in the air , and the crackle of the flames
got louder , it matched the roar in his ears…Christ, they were
going to  throw him into the fire!  His head spun with ef fort and
light blazed behind his shut lids, but his stubborn body
wouldn’ t move.
The roar diminished, but paradoxically he felt warm air
brush his face. H e struck the ground, half bounced, and rolled,
ending u p on his face, his arms flung out. Cool earth was
under his fingers.
He breathed. Mechanically , one breath at a time. V ery
slowly , the spinning sensation began to ebb.
There was noise, a long way away , but he couldn’ t hear
anything near him but his own l oud breathing. V ery slowly , he
opened one eye. Firelight flicker ed on poles and bark panels, a
dim ech o of the brilliance outside. Longhouse. He was inside
again.
His breathing was loud and ragged in his ears. He tried to
hold his breath, but couldn’ t. Then he realized that he was
holding his breath; the gasping noise was coming from
someone else.
It w as behind h im. W ith immense ef fort, he got his hands
under him, and rose onto han ds and knees, swaying, eyes
squinted against the pain in his head.
“Jesus Christ,” he muttered to himself. He rubbed a hand
hard over his face and blinked, but the man was still there, six
feet away .
Jamie Fr aser . He  was lying on his side in a huddle of limbs,
a crimson plaid tangled round his body . Half his face was
obscured with blood, but there wasn’ t any mistaking him.
For a moment, Roger just looked at him blankly . For
months the greater part of his waking moments had been
devoted to imagining a meeting with this man. Now it had
happened, and it seemed simply impossible. There was room
for no feeling beyond a sort of dull amazement.He r ubbed his f ace again, harder , forcing aside the fog of
fear and adrenaline. What… what  was Fraser doing here?
When t hought and feeling connected again, his first
recognizable fee ling was neither fury nor alarm, but an absurd
burst of joyful relief.
“She didn’ t,” he muttered, and th e words sounded queer and
hoarse to his ea rs, after so long without spoken English. “Oh,
God, she didn’ t do it!”
Jamie F raser could be here for only one reason—to rescue
him. An d if that was so, it was because Brianna had made her
father co me. Whether it was mis understanding or malevolence
that had  put him through the hell of the last few months, it had
not been hers.
“Didn’ t,” he said again. “She didn’ t.” He shuddered, both
with nausea from the blow and with relief.
He h ad thought he would be hollow forever , but suddenly
there was something there; something small, but very solid.
Something he could hold in the cup of his heart. Brianna . He
had her back.
There was another set of high-pitched screams from just
outside; ululations that went on and on, sticking into his flesh
like a thousand p ins. He jerked, and shuddered again, all other
feelings subsumed in renewed realization.
Dying with the reassurance that Brianna loved him was
better th an dying without it—but he hadn’ t wanted to die in
the f irst place. H e remembered what he had seen outside, felt
his gor ge rise, and choked it down.
W ith a trembling hand he bega n the unfamiliar sign of the
Cross. “ In the name of the Fathe r ,” he whispered, and then the
words failed him. “Please,” he  whispered instead. “Please,
don’ t let him have been right.”
He crawled shakily to Fraser ’ s body , hoping that the man
was still alive. He was; blood was flowing from a gash on
Fraser ’ s temple , and when he  thrust his fingers under the
man’ s jaw , he could feel the steady bump of a pulse.There was water in one of the p ots under the shattered bed
frame; luckily it hadn’ t spilled. He dipped the end of the plaid
in w ater and use d it to mop Fraser ’ s face. After a few minutes
of this ministration, the man’ s eyelids began to flutter .
Fraser c oughed, gagged heavily ,  turned his head to one side,
and threw up. Then his eyes shot open, and before Roger could
speak or  move, Fraser had rolled up onto one knee, his hand
on the sgian dhu  in his stocking.
Blue eyes glared at him, and Roger raised an arm in
instinctive defense. Then Fraser blinked, shook his head,
groaned, and sat down heavily on the earthen floor .
“Oh, it’ s you,” he said. He closed his eyes and groaned
again. Then his head snapped u p, eyes blue and piercing, but
this time with alarm rather than fury .
“Claire!” he exclaimed. “My wife, where is she?”
Roger felt his jaw drop.
“Claire? Y ou brought her her e?  Y ou  brought a woman into
this? ”
Fraser gave him a glance of ext reme dislike, but wasted no
words. Palming the knife from his stocking, he glanced at the
doorway . The flap was down; n o one was visible. The noise
outside had died down, though the rumble of voices was still
audible. Now and then one sto od out, shouting or raised in
exhortation.
“There’ s a guard,” Roger said.
Fraser g lanced at him and ros e to his feet, smooth as a
panther . Blood was still running  down the side of his face, but
it didn’ t  seem to trouble him. Silently , he flattened himself
along the wall, glided to the edge of the door flap, and eased
the flap aside with the tip of the tiny dagger .
Fraser grimaced at whatever he saw . Letting the flap swing
back in place, he returned and  sat down, putting the knife
away in his stocking.“A good  dozen of them just out side. Is that water?” He put
out a hand, and R oger silently scooped a gourdful of water and
handed it to him . He drank deeply , splashed water in his face,
then poured the rest of it over his head.
Fraser wiped a hand over his battered face, then opened
bloodshot eyes and looked at Roger .
“W akefield, is it?”
“I go by my own name, these days. MacKenzie.”
Fraser gave a brief, humorless snort.
“So I’ve heard.” He had a wide, expressive mouth—like
Bree’ s. His lips compressed briefly , then relaxed.
“I’ve done wrong to ye, MacK enzie, as ye’ll know . I’ve
come to put it right, so far as may be, but it may be as I’ll not
have the  chance.” He gestured briefly toward the door . “For
now , you’ve my apology . For wh at satisfaction ye may want of
me later —I’ll bide your will. Bu t I’d ask ye to let it wait until
we’re safe out of this.”
Roger stared at him for a moment. Satisfaction for the last
months of torment and uncertainty seemed as farfetched a
notion as the thought of safety . He nodded.
“Done,” he said.
They sat  in silence for several moments. The fire in the hut
was bur ning low , but the woo d to feed it was outside; the
guards kept char ge of anythin g that might be used as a
weapon.
“What happened?” Roger asked at last. He nodded toward
the door . “Out there?”
Fraser took a deep breath and let it out in a sigh. For the first
time, Roger noticed that he held the elbow of his right arm
cradled in his left palm, the arm itself held close to the body .
“I will be damned if I know ,” he said.
“They d id burn the priest? He’ s  dead?” There could be no
doubt of  it after what he’d seen, but still Roger felt compelledto ask.
“He was a prie st?” Thick reddish brows rose in surprise,
then fell. “A ye, he’ s dead. And not only him.” An involuntary
shudder went over the Highlander ’ s big frame.
Fraser hadn’ t known what they m eant to do when the drums
began to sound, and everyone w ent out to gather by the great
fire. There was plenty of talk, but his knowledge of the
Mohawk tongue was insuf ficient to make out what was
happening, and his nephew , who spoke the tongue, was
nowhere to be found.
The whites had n ot been invited, but no one made any move
to ke ep them aw ay . And so it was that he and Claire had come
to b e standing o n the edge of the crowd, curious onlookers,
when the sachem  a nd the Counci l came out and the old man
began to speak. Another man had spoken, too, very angrily .
“Then they brought the man out , naked as a tadpole, bound
him to a stake,  and started in upon him.” He paused, eyes
shadowed, and glanced at Roger .
“I’ll tell  ye, man, I’ve seen French executioners keep a man
alive who wished he weren’ t. It wasna worse than that—but no
a g reat deal bett er .” Fraser drank again, thirstily , and lowered
the cup.
“I tr ied to take Claire away— I didna ken but what they
meant to attack us next.” The crowd was pressed so tight
around them, though, that movement was impossible; there
was no choice but to go on watching.
Roger ’ s mouth felt dry , and h e reached for the cup. He
didn’ t w ant to ask, but he felt a perverse need to know—
whether for Alexandre’ s sake or for his own.
“Did he—cry out at all?”
Fraser gave him another glance of surprise, then something
like understanding crossed his face.
“No,” he said sl owly . “He died verra well—by their lights.
Y e will have been knowing the man?”Roger nodded, wordless. It was dif ficult to believe
Alexandre was gone, even hea ring this. And wher e  had he
gone? Surely he could not have been right. I wi ll not be
for given . Surely not. No just God—
Roger shook his head hard, pu shing the thought away . It
was plain that Fraser had no more than half his mind on his
story , ho rrific as it was. He kept glancing at the door , a look of
anxious expectation on his face. W as he expecting rescue?
“How many men did you bring with you?”
The blue eyes flashed, surprised.
“My nephew Ian.”
“That’ s all?” Roger tried to keep  the stunned disbelief out of
his voice, but patently failed.
“Y e we re expecting the 78th Hieland regiment?” Fraser
asked sarcastically . He got to his feet, swaying slightly , arm
pressed to his side. “I brought whisky .”
“Whisky? Did that have anythin g to do with the fighting?”
Remembering th e reek of the man who had fallen over him,
Roger nodded toward the wall of the longhouse.
“It may have.”
Fraser w ent to the wall with the cracked panel, and pressed
an eye against the opening, staring out at the clearing for some
time before returning to the dw indling fire. Things had gone
quiet outside.
The big Highlander was looking more than unwell. His face
was white and s heened with sweat under the streaks of dried
blood. R oger silently poured more water; it was as silently
accepted. He knew well enough what was wrong with Fraser ,
and it wasn’ t the ef fects of injury .
“When you last saw her—”
“When the fighting broke out.” Unable to stay seated, Fraser
set down the cup and got to his feet again, prowling theconfines of the longhouse like a restless bear . He paused,
glancing at Roger .
“W ill ye maybe ken a bit what happened there?”
“I could guess.” He acquainted Fraser with the priest’ s story ,
finding some small respite from worry in the telling.
“They wouldn’ t have harmed her ,” he said, trying to
reassure himself as much as Fraser . “She’d nothing to do with
it.”
Fraser gave a derisory snort.
“A ye, she did.” W ithout warning, he smashed a fist against
the ground, in a muf fled thump of fury . “Damn the woman!”
“She’ll be all right,” Roger repeated stubbornly . He couldn’ t
bear to think otherwise, but he knew what Fraser plainly knew
as well— if Claire Fraser was alive, unhurt, and free, nothing
could have kept her from her husband’ s side. And as for the
unknown nephew…
“I he ard your nephew—in the f ight. I heard him call out to
you. He sounded all right.” Even as he of fered this bit of
information, he knew how feebl e it was as reassurance. Fraser
nodded, though, head bent on his knees.
“He’ s a good lad, Ian,” he murmured. “And he has friends
among the Mohawk. God send they will protect him.”
Roger ’ s curiosity was coming back, as the shock of the
evening began to fade.
“Y our w ife,” he said. “What d id she do? How could she
possibly have been involved in this?”
Fraser sighed. He scrubbed his g ood hand over his face and
through his hair , rubbing until t he loose red locks stood up in
knots and snarls.
“I shouldna have said so,” he said. “It wasna her fault in the
least. It’ s only—she’ll not be  killed, but God, if they’ve
harmed her…”
“They won’ t,” Roger said firmly . “What happened?”Fraser shrugged and closed his eyes. Head tilted back, he
described the scene as though he could still see it, engraved on
the inside of his eyelids. Perhaps he could.
“I didna  take heed of the girl, in such a crowd. I couldna
even say  what she looked like. I t was only at the last that I saw
her .”
Claire h ad been by his side, white-faced and rigid in the
press of shouting, swaying bodies. When the Indians had
nearly finished with the priest, t hey untied him from the stake
and fastened his hands instead to a long pole, held above his
head, from which to suspend him in the flames.
Fraser glanced at him, wiping the back of a hand across his
lips.
“I’ve seen a man’ s heart pulled beating from his chest
before,” he said. “But I hadna seen it eaten before his eyes.”
He spoke almost shyly , as though apologizing for his
squeamishness. Shocked, he had  looked to Claire. It was then
that he had seen the Indian girl s tanding on Claire’ s other side,
with a cradleboard in her arms.
W ith great calmness, the girl had handed the board to
Claire, then turned and slipped through the crowd.
“She did na look to left or right, but walked straight into the
fire.”
“What?” Roger ’ s throat closed w ith shock, the exclamation
emer ging in a strangled croak.
The flames had embraced the gi rl in moments. A head taller
than the folk near him, Jamie had seen everything clearly .
“Her clo thes caught, and then her hair . By the time she
reached him, she was burning l ike a torch.” Still, he had seen
the dark silhouette of her arms, raised to embrace the empty
body of the prie st. W ithin moments, it was no longer possible
to distin guish man or woman; t here was only the one figure,
black amid the towering flames.“It was then everything went mad.” Fraser ’ s wide shoulders
slumped a little, and he touched the gash in his temple. “All I
ken is one woma n set up a howl, and then there was the hell of
a screec h, and of a sudden, everyone was either fleeing or
fighting.”
He had himself  tried to do both, shielding Claire and her
burden while fighting his way out of the thrashing press of
bodies. There were too many of them, though. Unable to
escape, he had pushed Claire against the wall of a longhouse,
seized a stick of  wood with which to defend them, and shouted
for I an, while w ielding his makeshift club on anyone reckless
enough to come near .
“Then a  wee fiend leapt out o’ the smoke, and struck me
with his club.” H e shrugged, one-shouldered. “I turned to fight
him of f,  and then there were thr ee of them on me.” Something
had caug ht him in the temple, a nd he had known no more till
waking in the longhouse with Roger .
“I havena seen Claire since. Nor Ian.”
The fire had burned itself to coals, and it was growing cold in
the longhouse. Jamie unfastened his brooch and pulled the
plaid aro und his  shoulders as w ell as he could, one-handed,
and leaned gingerly back against the wall.
His right arm might be broken; he’d taken a blow from one
of the war clubs just below the shoulder , and the stricken spot
went from numbness to blinding pain with no warning. That
was of no mom ent, though, compared with his worry for
Claire and wee Ian.
It was very late. If Claire hadn ’ t been hurt in the fighting,
she was likely safe enough, he told himself. The old woman
wouldn’ t counte nance harm done to her . As for Ian, though—
he fe lt a  moment’ s pride in the l ad, in spite of his fear . Ian was
a bonny fighter , and a credit to the uncle who’d taught him.
If he should have been overcome, though…there had been
so many of the savages, and with the fighting so hot…He s hifted restlessly , trying not to think of facing his sister
with ill news of her youngest boy . Christ, he’d rather have his
own heart torn from his breast  and eaten before his eyes; it
would feel much the same.
Seeking distrac tion—any distraction—from his fears, he
shifted a gain, taking random stock of the shadowy insides of
the h ouse. Bare as a Skyeman’ s cupboard, for the most part. A
jug of water , a broken bed frame, and one or two tattered skins
for bedding lying crumpled on the earthen floor .
MacKenzie was sitting hunched across the fire, heedless of
the grow ing chill. His arms were wrapped about his knees,
head bent in th ought. He was half turned away , unaware of
Jamie’ s eye on him.
He grud ged to admit it, but the man was decently made.
Long sh anks an d a good breadt h through the shoulders; he’d
have a fair reach with a sword. He was tall as the MacKenzies
of L eoch—and why not? he th ought suddenly . The man was
Dougal’ s get, if a few generations onward.
He found that notion both disturbing and oddly comforting.
He’d kil led men when he must, and mostly their ghosts let him
sleep at night w ith no great rattling of bones. Dougal’ s death,
though, was one that he had live d through more than once, and
woke from sweating, with the sound of those last silent words
of Dougal’ s ringing in his ears; words mouthed in blood.
There’d been not the slightest choice; it was kill or be
killed, and a near thing either way . And yet…Dougal
MacKenzie had been his foster father , and if he was honest, a
part of him had loved the man.
Y es, it was som e comfort to know that a small part of
Dougal was left. The other part of this MacKenzie’ s heritage
was a wee bit m ore troubling. He’d seen the man’ s eyes first
thing when he woke, bright green and intent, and for one
second his wame had shriveled up into a ball, thinking of
Geillis Duncan.Did he much want his daugh ter linked with a witch’ s
spawn? He eyed the man covertly . Perhaps it was as well if
Brianna’ s child was not of this man’ s blood.
“Brianna,” Mac Kenzie said, lifting his head suddenly from
his knees. “Where is she?”
Jamie jerked, and a hot knife-bl ade seared his arm, leaving
him sweating.
“Where?” he said. “At River Run, with her aunt. She’ s
safe.” H is heart was thundering in his ears. Christ, was the
man able to read thoughts? Or had he the Sight?
The green eyes were steady , dark in the dim light.
“Why d id you bring Claire, and  not Brianna? Why did she
not come with you?”
Jamie returned the man’ s cool look. They’d see if it was a
matter o f mind reading or not. If  not, the last thing he meant to
tell Mac Kenzie now was the tru th; time enough for that when
—if—they were safely away .
“I sh ould have l eft Claire as wel l, if I thought I could. She’ s
a stubbo rn wee besom. Short of tying her hand and foot, I
couldna prevent her coming.”
Something dark  flickered in M acKenzie’ s eyes—doubt, or
pain?
“I shoul d not have thought Brianna the kind of lass to mind
her father ’ s word overmuch,” he said. His voice had an edge to
it—yes, pain, and a sort of jealousy .
Jamie relaxed slightly . No mind reading.
“Did ye no? W ell, and perhaps ye dinna ken her so well as
all that,” he said. Pleasantly enough, but with a jeering
undertone that would make one sort of man go for his throat.
MacKenzie was n’ t that sort. He sat up straight, and drew a
deep breath.
“I know her well,” he said levelly . “She is my wife.”Jamie sa t up straight in turn, and  clenched his teeth on a hiss
of pain.
“The hell she is.”
MacKenzie’ s black brows drew down at that.
“W e are handfast, she and I. Did she not tell you that?”
She had n’ t—but he hadn’ t given her much chance to tell
him, eith er . T oo  furious at the thought of her willing to bed a
man, stung at t hinking she’d made a fool of him, proud as
Lucifer and suf fering the Devil’ s pains for it, in wishing her
perfect and finding her only as human as himself.
“When?” Jamie asked.
“Early Septemb er , in W ilmington. When I—just before I
left her .” The admission came unwillingly , and through the
black veil of h is own guilt h e saw a reflection of it on
MacKenzie’ s fa ce. As well deserved as his own, he thought
viciously . If the coward had not left her…
“She didna tell me.”
He s aw the dou bt and the pain in MacKenzie’ s eyes quite
clearly now . The man worried that Brianna did not want him—
for if she did, s he would have come. He knew well enough
that no power on earth or below it would keep Claire from his
side if she thou ght him in danger—and felt a jolt of fear
renewed at that thought; for where was she?
“I suppo se she thought you wouldn’ t see handfasting as a
legal form of marriage,” MacKenzie said quietly .
“Or perh aps she didna see it so herself,” Jamie suggested
cruelly . He could relieve the ma n’ s mind by telling him a part
of the truth—tha t Brianna had n ot come because she was with
child—but he was in no charitable mood.
It was getting quite dark, but even so he could see
MacKenzie’ s fa ce flush at that, and his hands clench on the
ragged deerskin.
“I saw it so,” was all he said.Jamie closed his eyes, and said no more. The last coals in
the fire died slowly , leaving them in darkness.6 1
T H E  O F F I C E  O F  A  P R I E S T
T he s mell of burn t things hung in  the air . W e passed close by
the pit and I couldn’ t help seeing from the corner of my eye
the heap of charred fragments, shattered ends frosted white
with ash. I hoped it was wood. I was afraid to look directly .
I s tumbl ed on the frozen ground , and my escort caught me
by the arm. Pul led me up with out comment and pushed me
toward a  longho use where two men stood on guard, huddled
against a cold wind that filled the air with drifting ashes.
I h ad not slept and had not eate n, though food was of fered.
My feet  and my fingers were co ld. There was keening from a
longhouse at the far end of the village, and over it the louder
formal c hant of a death song. W as it for the girl that they sang,
or someone else? I shivered.
The gua rds glan ced at me and stood aside. I lifted the hide
flap at the door and went in.
It w as d ark; the fire inside as de ad as the one outside. Gray
light from the smokehole gave me enough illumination to see
an u ntidy heap o f skins and clot h on the floor , though. A patch
of red tartan showed amid the jumble, and I felt a sur ge of
relief.
“Jamie!”
The pile heaved and came apart. Jamie’ s rumpled head
popped up, alert but looking a good deal the worse for wear .
Next to him w as a dark, bearded man who seemed oddly
familiar . Then he moved into the light, and I caught the flash
of green eyes above the shrubbery .
“Roger!” I exclaimed.
W ithout a word he rose out of t he blankets and clasped me
in his arms. He held so tight, I could hardly breathe.He was terribly thin; I could feel every one of his ribs. Not
starved, though;  he stank, but with the normal scents of dirt
and stale sweat, not the yeasty ef fluvium of starvation.
“Roger , are you all right?” He let go, and I looked him up
and down, searching for any signs of injury .
“Y es,” he said. His voice was husky , from sleep and
emotion. “Bree? She’ s all right?”
“She’ s fine,” I assured him. “What’ s happened to your
foot?” He wore nothing but a t attered shirt and a stained rag
wrapped around one foot.
“A cut. Nothing. Where is sh e?” He clutched my arm,
anxious.
“At a place called River Run, with her great-aunt. Didn’ t
Jamie tell you? She’ s—”
I was interrupted by Jamie clutching my other arm.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“Y es, of course I—my God, w hat happened to you?” My
attention was momentarily distracted from Roger by the sight
of Jamie. It wasn’ t the nasty contusion on his temple or the
dried blo od on his shirt that stru ck my notice, so much as the
unnatural way he held his right arm.
“My arm ’ s maybe broken,” he said. “Hurts like a bugger .
W ill ye come and tend to it?”
W ithout waiting for an answer h e turned and walked away ,
sitting d own heavily near the br oken bed frame. I gave Roger
a brief pat and w ent after him, w ondering what the hell. Jamie
wouldn’ t admit to being in pain in front of Roger W akefield, if
splintered raw bone were sticking out of his flesh.
“What are you up to?” I mutte red, kneeling beside him. I
felt the arm gingerly throug h his shirt—no compound
fractures. I rolled it carefully up for a better look.
“I havena told him about Bria nna,” he said, very softly .
“And I think it better you do not.”I stared at him.
“W e can’ t do that! He has to know .”
“Keep y our voice down. A ye, he maybe should know about
the bairn—but not the other , not Bonnet.”
I b it my lip, fee ling gingerly down the swell of his biceps.
He had one of  the worst brui ses I had ever seen; a huge
mottled splotch of purple-blue— but I was fairly sure the arm
wasn’ t broken.
I wasn’ t so sure about his suggestion.
He could see th e doubt on my face; he squeezed my hand
hard.
“Not yet; not h ere. Let it wait, at least until we’re safe
away .”
I thought for a moment, as I ripped the sleeve of his shirt
and used  it to m ake a rough sli ng. Learning that Brianna was
pregnant was going to be a shoc k by itself. Perhaps Jamie was
right; there was no telling how Roger would react to the news
of the rape, and we were a long way from being home free yet.
Better he should have his he ad clear . At last I nodded,
reluctantly .
“All rig ht,” I said aloud, gett ing up. “I don’ t think it’ s
broken, but the sling will help.”
I left Jamie sitting on the ground  and went to Roger , feeling
like a Ping-Pong ball.
“How’ s the foot?” I knelt to unwrap the unsanitary-looking
rag around it, but he stopped me with an ur gent hand on my
shoulder .
“Brianna. I know there’ s something wrong. Is she—”
“She’ s pregnant.”
Whatever possib ilities he had been turning over in his mind,
that hadn’ t been among them. It  isn’ t possible to mistake sheer
amazement. He blinked, looking  as though I’d hit him on the
head with an ax.“Are you sure?”
“She’ll be seven months gone by now; it’ s noticeable.”
Jamie had come up so quietly that neither of us had heard him.
He s poke coldly , and looked ev en colder , but Roger was well
beyond noticing subtleties.
Excitement brightened his eyes, and his shocked face came
alive beneath the black whiskers.
“Pregnant. My God, but how?”
Jamie m ade a derisive noise in t he back of his throat. Roger
glanced at him, then quickly away .
“That is, I never thought—”
” How?  A ye, ye didna th ink, and it’ s my  daughter left to pay
the price of your pleasure!”
Roger ’ s head snapped round at that, and he glared at Jamie.
“She is not left, in any way! I told you she is my wife!”
“She is?” I said, startled in the midst of my unwrapping.
“They’re handfast,” Jamie said, very grudgingly . “Why
could the lass not have told us, though?”
I t hough t I could answer that one—in more than one way .
The sec ond answer wasn’ t one I could suggest in front of
Roger , though.
She hadn’ t said, because she wa s with child, and thought it
was Bonnet’ s. Believing that, sh e might have thought it better
not to reveal their handfasting, so as to leave Roger an escape
—if he wanted it.
“Most likely because she thought you wouldn’ t see that as a
true marriage,” I said. “I’d told  her about our wedding; about
the c ontract and how you insist ed on marrying me in church,
with a priest. S he wouldn’ t want to tell you anything she
thought you might not approve  of—she wanted so badly to
please you.”Jamie h ad the grace to look abashed at this, but Roger
ignored the ar gument.
“Is s he well?” he asked, leanin g forward and grasping my
arm.
“Y es, she’ s fine,” I assured him, hoping it was still true.
“She wa nted to come with us, bu t of course we couldn’ t let her
do that.”
“She wa nted to come?” His fac e lighted up, joy and relief
plain to see, even through the hair and filth. “Then she didn’ t
—” He stopped abruptly , and g lanced from me to Jamie and
back. “When I met…Mr . Fraser on the mountainside, he
seemed to think that she—er—had said—”
“A terrible misunderstanding,” I put in hastily . “She hadn’ t
told us about the handfasting, so when she turned up pregnant,
we, er… assumed…” Jamie was brooding, looking at Roger
with no particular favor , but jerked into awareness when I
nudged him sharply .
“Oh, ay e,” he said, a little grudgingly . “A mistake. I’ve
given M r . W akefield my apologies and told him I shall do my
best to see it ri ght. But we’ve other things to think of now .
Have ye seen Ian, Sassenach?”
“No.” I became aware for the first time that Ian was not
with them, and felt a small lu rch of fear in the pit of my
stomach. Jamie looked grim.
“Where have ye been all night, Sassenach?”
“I was with—oh, Jesus!”
I ign ored his question for a moment, caught up in the sight
of R oger ’ s foot. The flesh was s wollen and reddened over half
his f oot, with a  severe ulceration on the outer mar gin of the
sole. I pressed firmly , a little way in, and felt the nasty give of
small pockets of pus under the skin.
“What happened here?”
“I cut it, trying to get away . The y bound it and put things on
it, but it’ s been infected on and of f. It gets better , and then itgets wo rse.” He shrugged; his attention wasn’ t on his foot,
ugly as it was. He looked up at Jamie, evidently having come
to a decision.
“Brianna didn’ t send you to me et me, then? She didn’ t ask
you to—get rid of me?”
“No,” Jamie said, taken by surp rise. He smiled briefly , his
features suf fused with sudden charm. “That was my own
notion.”
Roger drew a deep breath and closed his eyes briefly .
“Thank God,” he said, and open ed them. “I thought perhaps
she’d—we’d had  a terrible ar gument, just before I left her , and
I though t maybe that was why she hadn’ t told you about the
handfasting; tha t she’d decided she didn’ t want to be married
to me.” There was sweat on his forehead, either from the news
or from my handling of his foo t. He smiled, a little painfully .
“Having me beaten to death or sold into slavery seemed a trifle
extreme, though, even for a woman with her temper .”
“Mmphm.” Jamie was slightly  flushed. “I did say I was
sorry for it.”
“I k now .” Roger looked at him for a minute, evidently
making up his mind about some thing. He took a deep breath,
then ben t down and put my hand gently away from his foot.
He straightened up and met Jamie’ s eyes, dead-on.
“I’ve so mething to tell you. Wh at we fought over . Has she
told you what brought her here—to find you?”
“The de ath notice? A ye, she’ s told us. Y e dinna think I’d
allow Claire to come with me otherwise?”
“What?” Puzzled wariness showed in Roger ’ s eyes.
“Y e canna have it both ways. If she and I are to die at
Fraser ’ s Ridge six years from now , we canna very well be
killed by the Iroquois any time before that, now can we?”
I sta red at him; that particular implication had escaped me.
Rather staggerin g; practical immortality—for a time. But that
was assuming—“That’ s assuming that you can’ t change the past—that we
can’ t, I mean. D o you believe t hat?” Roger leaned forward a
little, intent.
“I will be damned if I know . Do you  think so?”
“Y es,” Roger said flatly . “I d o think the past can’ t be
changed. That’ s why I did it.”
“Did what?”
He licked his lips, but went doggedly on.
“I f ound that death notice lo ng before Brianna did. I
thought, though , that it would be useless to try to change
things. S o I—I kept it from her .”  He looked from me to Jamie.
“So now  you know . I didn’ t wan t her to come; I did everything
I could to keep her away from you. I thought it was too
dangerous. And—I was afraid of losing her ,” he ended simply .
T o my surprise,  Jamie was loo king at Roger with sudden
approval.
“Y e tried to keep her safe, then? T o protect her?”
Roger n odded, a certain relief lessening the tension in his
shoulders.
“So you understand?”
“A ye, I do. That’ s the first thing I’ve heard that gives me a
good opinion of ye, sir .”
It wasn’ t an opinion I shared at the moment.
“Y ou found that thing—and didn’ t tell her?” I could feel the
blood climbing into my cheeks.
Roger saw the look on my face, and looked away .
“No. She…um…she saw it your way , I’m afraid. She
thought—well, she said I’d betrayed her , and—”
“And yo u did! Her and us both! Of all the—Roger , how
could you do  such a thing?”
“He did  right,” Jamie said. “A fter all—” I turned on him
fiercely , interrupting.“He did not ! He  deliberately kept it from her , and tried to
keep her from—don’ t you realize, if he’d succeeded, you’d
never have seen her?”
“A ye, I do. And what’ s happened to her would not have
happened.” His eyes were deep blue, steady on mine. “I would
it had been so.”
I sw allowed down my grief a nd anger , until I thought I
could speak again without choking.
“I do n’ t think she  wou ld h ave had  it so,” I said so ftly . “And
it was hers to say .”
Roger jumped in, before Jamie could reply .
“Y ou said what’ s happened to her wouldn’ t have—you
mean, b eing pregnant?” He didn’ t wait for a reply; he had
plainly recovered from the shock of the news suf ficiently to
begin thinking, and was rapidly reaching the same unpleasant
conclusions Brianna had come to, some months earlier . He
swung his head toward me, eyes wide with shock.
“She’ s s even months along, you said. Jesus! She can’ t go
back!”
“Not now , ” I said, with bitter emphasis. “She might have,
when we first found out. I tr ied to make her go back to
Scotland, or at l east to the Indies—there’ s another…opening,
there. But she wouldn’ t do it. She wouldn’ t go without finding
out what happened to you.”
“What h appened to me,” he repeated, and glanced at Jamie.
Jamie’ s shoulders tensed, and he set his jaw .
“A ye,” h e said. “It’ s my fault, and no remedy for it. She’ s
trapped here. And I can do nothing for her—save bring ye
back to her .” And that, I realized, was why he had not wanted
to te ll Roger an ything; for fear that when he realized Brianna
was trap ped in the past, Roger would refuse to come back with
us. Follo wing her into the past  was one thing; staying there
forever w ith her was something else again. Neither was it guilt
over Bo nnet alone that had ea ten Jamie up on our journey
here; the  Spartan  boy with the fox gnawing at his vitals wouldhave recognized  a kindred soul on the spot, I thought, looking
at him with exasperated tenderness.
Roger gazed at him, completely at a loss for words.
Before he could find any , a noise of shuf fling footsteps
approached the door of the hu t. The flap lifted, and a lar ge
number of Mohawks came in, one after the other .
W e looked at the m in astonishment; there were about fifteen
of them , men and women and children, all dressed for
traveling, in leggings and furs. One of the older women held a
cradleboard, and without hesitation she walked up to Roger
and pressed it into his arms, saying something in Mohawk.
He frowned at her , not understanding. Jamie, suddenly alert,
leaned toward her and said a fe w halting words. She repeated
what sh e had said, impatiently , then looked behind her and
motioned to a young man.
“Y ou are…pries t,” he said haltingly to Roger . He pointed at
the cradleboard. “W ater .”
“I’m not  a priest.” Roger tried t o give the board back to the
woman, but she refused to take it.
“Prees,” she said definitely . “Babtize.” She motioned to one
of th e yo unger w omen, who stepped forward, holding a small
bowl made of horn, filled with water .
“Father Alexandre—he say you priest, son of priest,” said
the young man. I saw Roger ’ s face go pale beneath the beard.
Jamie h ad stepp ed aside, murmuring in French patois to a
man he recognized among the c rowd. Now he pushed his way
back to us.
“These a re what  is left of the pr iest’ s flock,” he said softly .
“The council has told them to leave. They mean to travel to the
Huron mission at Ste. Berthe, b ut they would have the child
baptized, lest it die on the journey .” He glanced at Roger .
“They think ye are a priest?”
“Evidently .” Roger looked down at the child in his arms.Jamie hesitated, glancing at the waiting Indians. They stood
patiently , their faces calm. I could only guess what lay behind
them. Fire and d eath, exile—what else? There were marks of
sorrow on the f ace of the old woman who brought the baby;
she would be its grandmother , I thought.
“In case of nee d,” Jamie said quietly to Roger , “any man
may do the of fice of a priest.”
I w ouldn’ t have thought it was p ossible for Roger to go any
whiter , but he did. He swaye d briefly , and the old lady ,
alarmed, reached out a hand to steady the cradleboard.
He caug ht himself, though, and nodded to the young woman
with the water , to come closer .
“Parlez-vous francais?”  he asked, and heads nodded, some
with certainty , some with less.
“C’est bien,”  h e said, and taking a deep breath, lifted the
cradleboard, showing the child to the congregation. The baby ,
a ro und-faced charmer with soft brown curls and a golden
skin, blinked sleepily at the change of perspective.
“Hear the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,” he said clearly in
French. “Obeyin g the word of our Lord Jesus, and sure of his
presence with us, we baptize th ose whom he has called to be
his own.”
Of course, I tho ught, watching  him. He was  the son of a
priest, so to sp eak; he would often enough have seen the
Reverend administer the sacrament of baptism. If he didn’ t
recall th e entire service, he seem ed to know the general form
of it.
He had the baby passed from hand to hand among the
congregation—for so his ag reement had made them—
following and asking questions of each person there, in a low
voice.
“Qui est  votr e Seigneur , votr e S auveur?”  Who is your Lord
and Savior?“V oulez-vous pla cer votr e foi en Lui?”  Do you  have faith in
Him?
“Do you  promise to tell this child the good news of the
gospel, a nd all that Christ commands, and by your fellowship,
to strength his family ties with the household of God?”
Head after head bobbed in reply .
“Oui, certainem ent. Je le pr ome ts. Nous le fer ons.”  Y es, of
course. I promise. W e will.
At last Roger turned and gave the child to Jamie.
“Who is your Lord and Savior?”
“Jesus Christ,” he answered without hesitation, and the baby
was handed on to me.
“Do you trust in him?”
I looked down into the face of innocence, and answered for
it. “I do.”
He took the cradleboard, gave it to the grandmother , then
dipping a sprig of juniper into  the bowl of water , sprinkled
water on the baby’ s head.
“I b aptize you—” he began, and stopped, with a sudden
panicked glance at me.
“It’ s a girl,” I murmured, and he nodded, lifting the sprig of
juniper again.
“I baptiz e you, Alexandra, in the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Spirit, Amen.”
After the small b and of Christians had left, there were no more
visitors. A warrior brought us wood for the fire, and some
food, but he ignored Jamie’ s questions and left, saying
nothing.
“Do you think they’ll kill us?” Roger asked suddenly , after a
period of silence. His mouth tw itched in an attempted smile.
“Kill me , I suppose I mean. Presumably the two of you are
safe.”He d idn’ t sound worried. Looki ng at the deep shadows and
lines in his face, I thought that he was simply too exhausted to
be afraid anymore.
“They won’ t kill us,” I said, and pushed a hand through the
tangle of my hair . I dimly realized that I, too, was exhausted; I
had been without sleep for more than thirty-six hours.
“I started out to tell you . I spent last night in
T ewaktenyonh’ s house. The Council of Mothers met there.”
They ha dn’ t tol d me everything; they never would. But at
the end of the lo ng hours of ceremony and discussion, the girl
who spo ke Engl ish had told me as much as they wanted me to
know , before they sent me back to Jamie.
“Some o f the young men found  the whisky cache,” I said.
“They brought it back to the vi llage yesterday , and started to
drink. T he wo men thought they didn’ t mean anything
dishonest, that they thought the bar gain was already made. But
then som e ar gum ent started among them, just before they lit
the fire to—to e xecute the priest. A fight broke out, and some
of th e men ran into the crowd, a nd—one thing led to another .”
I rub bed a hand hard over my fa ce, trying to keep my thoughts
clear enough to speak.
“A man  was killed in the fighting.” I glanced at Roger .
“They think you killed him; did you?”
He shook his head, shoulders slumping with tiredness.
“I don’ t know . I—probably . What will they do about it?”
“W ell, it  took them a long time to decide, and it isn’ t settled
yet; they ’ve sent word to the main Council, but the sachem
hasn’ t made a decision yet.” I took a deep breath.
“They w on’ t kill you, because the whisky was taken, and
that was of fered as the price o f your life. But since they’ve
decided not to kill us in revenge for their dead, what they
usually do instead is to adopt  an enemy into the tribe, in
replacement of the dead man.”
That shook Roger out of his numbness.“Adopt me? They want to keep me?”
“One of  us. One of you. I don’ t suppose I’d be a suitable
replacement, since I’m not a ma n.” I tried to smile, but failed
completely . All the muscles of my face had gone numb.
“Then it must be me,” Jamie said quietly .
Roger ’ s head jerked up, startled.
“Y ou’ve said yourself; if the p ast canna be changed, then
nothing will happen to me. Leav e me, and as soon as it can be
managed, I will escape and come home.”
He laid a hand on my arm before I could protest.
“Y ou an d Ian will take MacKenzie back to Brianna.” He
looked at Roger , his face insc rutable. “After all,” he said
quietly , “it’ s the two of you she needs.”
Roger started in at once to ar gue, but I butted in.
“May the Lord deliver me from stubborn Scotsmen!” I said.
I glared at the two of them. “They haven’ t decided yet. That’ s
only what the Council of Mothers says. So there’ s no sense in
ar guing about it until we know for sure. And speaking of
knowing things for sure,” I said , in hopes of distracting them,
“where’ s Ian?”
Jamie stared at me.
“I don’ t  know ,”  he said, and I saw his throat ripple as he
swallowed. “But I hope to God he’ s safe in that girl’ s bed.”
No one came. The night passed quietly , though none of us
slept well. I dozed fitfully , through sheer exhaustion, waking
every time there was a sound  outside, my dreams a vivid
crazy-quilt of blood and fire and water .
It w as midday before we he ard the sound of voices
approaching. M y heart leapt as I recognized one of them, and
Jamie was on his feet before the door flap lifted.
“Ian? Is that you?”
“A ye, Uncle. It’ s me.”His voice sounded odd; brea thless and uncertain. He
stepped into the light from the smokehole and I gasped, feeling
as though I had been punched in the stomach.
The hair had been plucked from the sides of his skull; what
was left  stood up in a thick cr est from his scalp, a long tail
hanging down his back. One ea r had been freshly pierced and
sported a silver earring.
His face had be en tattooed. Double crescent lines of small
dark spots, most still scabbed with dried blood, ran across each
cheekbone, to meet at the bridge of his nose.
“I—canna stay long, Uncle,” Ian said. He looked pale,
under th e lines of tattooing, but stood erect. “I said they must
let me come to say goodbye.”
Jamie had gone white to the lips.
“Jesus, Ian,” he whispered.
“The naming ceremony is tonig ht,” Ian said, trying not to
look at us. “They  say that after that I will be Indian, and I must
not spea k any tongue but the Kahnyen’kehaka;  I  canna  speak
again in English, or the Gaelic.” He smiled painfully . “And I
ken ye didna have much Mohawk.”
“Ian, ye canna be doing this!”
“I’ve done it, Un cle Jamie,” Ian said softly . He looked at me
then.
“Auntie. W ill ye say to my mot her that I willna for get her?
My Da will know , I think.”
“Oh, Ian !” I hugged him hard,  and his arms went gently
around me.
“Y e can leave in the morning, ” he said to Jamie. “They
willna prevent ye.”
I let  him  go, and he crossed the  hut to where Roger stood,
looking stunned. Ian of fered him a hand.
“I am sorry for what we did to ye,” he said quietly . “Y e’ll
take good care of my cousin and the bairn?”Roger to ok his hand and shook it. He cleared his throat and
found his voice.
“I will,” he said. “I promise.”
Then Ian turned to Jamie.
“No, Ian,” he said. “God, no, lad. Let it be me!”
Ian smiled, though his eyes we re full of tears. “Y e said to
me once, that my life wasna meant to be wasted,” he said. “It
won’ t be.” He held out his arms. “I willna for get you, either ,
Uncle Jamie.”
They too k Ian to the bank of the river , just before sunset. He
stripped and waded into the freezing water , accompanied by
three women, who ducked and pummeled him, laughing and
scrubbing him with handfuls of sand. Rollo ran up and down
the bank, barking madly , then plunged into the river and joined
in what he plai nly saw as fun and games, coming close to
drowning Ian in the process.
All of the specta tors who lined t he bank found it hilarious—
save the three whites.
Once the white blood had been thus ceremonially scrubbed
from Ian’ s body , more women d ried him, dressed him in fresh
clothing, and took him to the Council longhouse for the
naming ceremony .
Everyone crowded inside; all of the village was there.
Jamie, Roger , and I stood silent ly in a corner , watching as the
sachem  san g and spoke  over him, as the drums beat, as the
pipe wa s lit and passed from ha nd to hand. The girl he called
Emily st ood nea r him, eyes shin ing as she looked at him. I saw
him look back a t her , and the light that sprang up in his own
eyes did a little to ease the soreness of my heart.
They called him W olf ’ s Brother . His brother wolf sat
panting at Jamie’ s feet, viewing the proceedings with interest.
At the end of the ceremony a small hush fell on the crowd,
and at that mom ent Jamie stepped out of the corner . All headsturned a s he crossed to Ian, and  I saw more than one warrior
tense in disapproval.
He u npinned the brooch from hi s plaid, unbelted it, and laid
the length of bloodstained crimson tartan across his nephew’ s
shoulder .
“Cuimhnich,”  he said softly , and stepped back. Remember .
All of us were quiet as we made our way down the narrow trail
that led away fr om the village next morning. Ian had taken a
formal, white-fa ced farewell of us as he stood with his new
family . I hadn’ t been so stalwar t, though, and seeing my tears
made Ia n bite his lip to hold back his own emotion. Jamie had
embraced him, kissed his mouth and left him, without
speaking a word.
Jamie w ent abo ut the business of setting camp that night
with his  usual ef ficiency , but I  could tell that his mind was
somewhere else. And no wonder if it was; my own was
divided in worry between Ian be hind us and Brianna ahead of
us, with very little attention to spare for present circumstances.
Roger dumped an armload of w ood beside the fire and sat
down next to me.
“I’ve been thinking,” he said quietly . “About Brianna.”
“Have y ou? So have I.” I was so tired, I thought I might
tumble headfirst into the flames before I got the water boiling.
“Y ou said there was another circle—opening, whatever it is
—in the Indies?”
“Y es.” I thought briefly of telling him all about Geilie
Duncan and the cave at Abanda we, and dismissed it. I hadn’ t
the ener gy . Another time. Then I jerked out of my mental fog,
catching what he was saying.
“Another one? Here?” I looked wildly around, as though
expecting to see a menhir standing menacingly at my back.
“Not her e, ” he  said . “Somewhere between here and Fraser ’ s
Ridge, though.”“Oh.” I tried to gather my scattered thoughts. “Y es, I know
there is,  but—” Then it penetr ated, and I grabbed his arm.
“Y ou mean you know  where it is?”
“Y ou knew about it?” He stared at me in astonishment.
“Y es, I—here, look…” I scrabbled in my pouch and came
up with the opal. He grabbed it from me before I could
explain.
“Look! It’ s the same; this same  symbol—it’ s carved on the
rock in the circle. Where the hell did you get this?”
“It’ s a long story ,” I said. “I’ll tell you later . But for now—
do you know where this circle is? Y ou’ve actually seen it?”
Jamie, attracted by our excitement, had come to see what
was going on.
“A circle?”
“A time-circle, an opening, a—a—”
“I’ve been there,” Roger said, interrupting my stuttering
explanations. “I found it by ac cident while I was trying to
escape.”
“Could you find it again? How  far is it from River Run?”
My mind was m aking frantic calculations. A little more than
seven months. If it took six weeks to return, Brianna would be
eight and a half months gone. Could we possibly take her into
the mountains in time? And if we could—what would be the
greater r isk, to travel through a  time-passage on the ver ge of
delivery , or to stay in the past permanently?
Roger d ug in the waistband of his ragged breeches and
brought out a strand of thread, grimy and knotted. “Here,” he
said, grasping a double knot. “It was eight days past the day
that they took me. Eight days from Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
“And a week, at least, from River Run to the Ridge.” I let
myself b reathe again, not sure whether I felt disappointment or
relief. “W e’d never make it.”“But the weather is turning,” Ja mie said. He nodded toward
a bi g blue spru ce, its needles wet and dripping. “When we
came, that tree was cased in ice.” He looked at me. “The
traveling may be easier; we may make better time—or not.”
“Or not.” I shook my head reluctantly . “Y ou know as well as
I d o that spring means mud. A nd mud is worse to travel in
than sno w .” I felt my heart begin to slow down, accepting it.
“No, it’ s too late, too risky . She’ll have to stay .”
Jamie was gazing at Roger , over the fire.
“He doesn’ t,” he said.
Roger looked at him, startled.
“I—” he began, then firmed his jaw and started over . “I do.
Y ou don’ t think I’d leave her? And my child?”
I op ened my m outh, and felt Jamie stif fen beside me in
warning.
“No,” I said sha rply . “No. W e have to tell him. Brianna will.
Better h e should know now . If it makes a dif ference to him,
then it’ s better he knows before he sees her .”
Jamie’ s lips pressed tight together , but he nodded.
“A ye,” he said. “T ell him, then.”
“T ell me  what?” Roger ’ s dark hair was loose, rising around
his head  in the evening wind. He looked more alive than he
had sinc e we had found him, ala rmed and excited at once. I bit
the bullet.
“It may not be your child,” I said.
His expression didn’ t change fo r a moment; then the words
fell into place. He grabbed me by the arms, so suddenly that I
yelped with alarm.
“What do you mean? What’ s happened?”
Jamie moved like a striking snak e. He caught Roger a short,
sharp blow under the chin that l oosened his grip and sent him
sprawling backward on the ground.“She means that when ye left my daughter to her own
devices, she was raped,” he sai d roughly . “T wo days past the
time ye lay with  her . So maybe the wean’ s yours, and maybe
it’ s not.”
He glared down at Roger .
“So. D’ye mean to stand by her , or no?”
Roger shook his head, trying to clear it, and got slowly back
to his feet.
“Raped. Who? Where?”
“In W ilmington. A man named Stephen Bonnet. He—”
“Bonnet?”  It was only too clear from Roger ’ s expression
that the name was familiar . He stared wildly from me to Jamie
and back. “Brianna was raped by Stephen Bonnet?”
“So I said.” Sud denly all the ra ge Jamie had been holding
since our exit fr om the village broke loose. He seized Roger
by the throat and slammed him into a tree trunk.
“And w here were you when it was done, ye coward? She
was angry with ye, and so ye ran away and left her! If ye
thought ye must go, why did ye not see her safe into my
keeping first?”
I grabbed Jamie’ s arm and yanked.
“Let go of him!”
He did, and whirled away , breathing hard. Roger , shaken
and almost as furious as Jamie, shook down his ruf fled
clothing.
“I d idn’ t leave because we ar gu ed! I left to find this!” He
snatched a handful of his loos e breeches, and ripped at the
cloth. A spark o f green brightness glowed in the palm of his
hand.
“I ri sked my life to get that, to see her safe back through the
stones! Do you k now where I w ent to get it, who I got it from?
Stephen Bonnet! That’ s why it took me so long to come toFraser ’ s Ridge; he wasn’ t where  I expected him to be; I had to
ride up and down the coast to find him.”
Jamie was frozen, staring at the gemstone. So was I.
“I shipped with Stephen Bonnet, from Scotland.” Roger was
growing a little calmer . “He is a—a—”
“I ken what he is.” Jamie stirre d, breaking his trance. “But
what he also may be, is the father of my daughter ’ s child.” He
gave Roger a lo ng, cold look. “So I’m askin’ ye, MacKenzie;
can ye go back to her , and live with her , knowing that it’ s
likely Bonnet’ s child she bears ? For if ye canna do it—then
say s o n ow , for I swear , if ye come to her and treat her badly…
I will kill ye without a second thought.”
“For God’ s sake!” I burst out. “G ive him a moment to think,
Jamie! C an’ t yo u see that he hasn’ t had a chance even to take
it in, yet?”
Roger ’ s fist closed tight over the  jewel, then opened. I could
hear him breathing, harsh and ragged.
“I don’ t know ,” he said. “I don’ t know!”
Jamie st ooped a nd picked up t he stone, where Roger had
dropped it. He flung it hard between Roger ’ s feet.
“Then g o!” he said. “T ake yon cursed stone and find your
wicked circle. Get ye gone—fo r my daughter doesna need a
coward!”
He had not y et unsaddled the horses; he seized his
saddlebags and heaved them across the horse’ s back. He
untied b oth his horse and min e, and mounted in one fluid
motion.
“Come,” he said to me. I looked helplessly at Roger . He was
staring u p at Jamie, green eyes glinting with firelight, bright as
the emerald in his hand.
“Go,” he  said softly to me, not taking his eyes of f Jamie. “If
I can—then I’ll come.”My hands and feet seemed not to belong to me; they moved
smoothly , witho ut my direction. I walked to my horse, put my
foot in the stirrup, and was up.
When I looked back, even the light of the fire had
disappeared. There was nothing behind us but the dark.6 2
T H R E E - T H I R D S  O F  A  G H O S T
River Run, April 1770
T hey have captured Stephen Bonnet.”
Brianna dropped  the game box on the floor . Ivory counters
exploded in every direction, and  rolled of f under the furniture.
Speechless, she stood staring at Lord John, who set down his
glass of brandy and came hastily to her side.
“Are you all right? Do you require to sit down? I apologize
most profoundly . I should not have—”
“Y es, you should. No, not the sofa, I’ll never get out of it.”
She waved away his of fered ha nd, and made her way slowly
toward a  plain wooden chair near the windows. Once solidly
on it, she gave him a long, level look.
“Where?” she said. “How?”
He didn ’ t trouble asking whether he ought to send for wine
or burnt feathers; she plainly wasn’ t going to swoon.
He drew  up a st ool beside her , but then thought better , and
went to the parlor door . He glanced out into the dark hallway;
sure enough, one of the maids was dozing on a stool in the
curve of the st aircase, availab le in case they should want
anything. The woman’ s head snapped up at his step, eyes
showing white in the dimness.
“Go to bed,” he said. “W e shall not require anything further
this evening.”
The slave nodded and shuf fled o f f, relief in the droop of her
shoulders; she would have been  awake since dawn, and it was
near midnight now . He was desp erately tired himself, after the
long ride  from Edenton, but it w asn’ t news that could wait. He
had arrived in the early evenin g, but this had been his first
opportunity to make an excuse to see Brianna alone.He closed the double doors and placed a footstool in front of
them, to prevent any interruptions.
“He was taken here, in Cros s Creek,” he said without
preamble, sitting  down beside h er . “As to how , I could not say .
The char ge brought was smuggling. Once they discovered his
identity , of course, there were others added.”
“Smuggling what?”
“T ea and brandy . At least this time.” He rubbed the back of
his n eck, trying to relieve the stif fness caused by hours in the
saddle. “I heard of it in Ed enton; evidently the man is
notorious. His reputation ex tends from Charleston to
Jamestown.”
He looked closely at her; she was pale, but not ghastly .
“He is condemned,” he said q uietly . “He will hang next
week, in W ilmington. I thought you would wish to know .”
She too k a deep breath, and let it out slowly , but said
nothing. He stole a closer look a t her , not wanting to stare, but
amazed at the sheer size of her . By God, she was immense! In
the two months since their eng agement, she had doubled in
size, at least.
One side of her enormous abdomen bulged suddenly out,
startling him. He was having second thoughts about the
wisdom of having told her; if the  shock of his news brought on
her conf inement prematurely , he would never for give himself.
Jamie wouldn’ t for give him, either .
She was staring of f into spa ce, her brow wrinkled in
concentration. He’d seen broodmares in foal look that way;
thoroughly abso rbed in inward matters. It had been a mistake
to se nd the slave  away . He got his feet under him, meaning to
go a nd fetch ass istance, but the movement brought her out of
her trance.
“Thank you,” she said. The fro wn was still there, but her
eyes had  lost that distant look; they were fixed on him with a
disconcerting blue directness—the more disconcerting for
being so familiar .“When will they hang him?” S he leaned forward a little,
hand pre ssed against her side. Another swell rippled across her
belly in apparent response to the pressure.
He sat back, eyeing her stomach uneasily .
“Friday week.”
“Is he in W ilmington now?”
Slightly reassured by her calm d emeanor , he reached for his
abandoned glass . He took a sip a nd shook his head, feeling the
comfort of the warm liquor spread through his chest.
“No. He  is still here; there was no need for trial, as he had
been previously convicted.”
“So they’ll move him to W ilmington for the execution?
When?”
“I h ave no idea .” The distant look was back; with deep
misgiving, he recognized it this time—not motherly
abstraction; calculation.
“I want to see him.”
V ery deliberately , he swallowed the rest of the brandy .
“No,” he said definitely , setting down the glass. “Even if
your state allowed of travel to W ilmington—which it
assuredly does not,” he added, glancing sidelong at her
dangerous-looking abdomen—”attendance at an execution
could not but ha ve the worst ef fects upon your child. Now , I
am in complete sympathy with your feelings, my dear , but—”
“No you aren’ t. Y ou don’ t know what my feelings are.” She
spoke without heat, but with com plete conviction. He stared at
her for a moment, then got up and went to fetch the decanter .
She watched the amber liquid  purl up in the glass and
waited for him to pick it up before she went on.
“I don’ t want to watch him die,” she said.
“Thank God for that,” he muttered, and took a mouthful of
brandy .“I want to talk to him.”
The mouthful went down the w rong way and he choked,
spluttering brandy over the frills of his shirt.
“Maybe you should sit down,” she said, squinting at him.
“Y ou don’ t look so good.”
“I can’ t think w hy .” Nonetheless, he sat down, and groped
for a kerchief to wipe his face.
“Now , I  know what you’re goi ng to say ,” she said firmly ,
“so don’ t bother . Can you arran ge for me to see him, before
they tak e him to W ilmington? And before you say no,
certainly not, ask yourself what I’ll do if you do  say that.”
Having opened his mouth to sa y “No, certainly not,” Lord
John shut it and contemplated her in silence for a moment.
“I do n’ t suppose you are intendi ng to threaten me again, are
you?” he asked conversationally . “Because if you are…”
“Of course not.” She had the grace to blush slightly at that.
“W ell, then, I confess I do not see quite what you—”
“I’ll tell  my aunt that Stephen Bonnet fathered my baby .
And I’ll tell Farquard Campbell. And Gerald Forbes. And
Judge Alderdyc e. And then I’ll go down to the garrison
headquarters—that must be where he is—and I’ll tell Ser geant
Murchison. If he won’ t let me in , I’ll go to Mr . Campbell for a
writ to make him admit me. I have a right to see him.”
He looked at her narrowly , but he could see it was no idle
threat. She sat there, solid and immobile as a piece of marble
statuary , and just as susceptible of persuasion.
“Y ou do  not shrink from creating a monstrous scandal?” It
was a rhetorica l question; he s ought only to buy himself a
moment to think.
“No,” she said calmly . “What ha ve I got to lose?” She lifted
one eyebrow in a half-humorous quirk.
“I su ppose you’d have to break  our engagement. But if the
whole county knows who the baby’ s father is, I think thatwould h ave the same ef fect as  the engagement, in terms of
keeping men from wanting to marry me.”
“Y our reputation—” he began, knowing it was hopeless.
“Is not real hot to start with. Though come to that, why
should i t be worse for me to be pregnant because I was raped
by a pirate tha n because I was wanton, as my father so
charmingly put it?” There was a  small note of bitterness in her
voice that stopped him from saying any more.
“Anyway , Aunt Jocasta isn’ t likely to throw me out, just
because I’m scandalous. I won’ t starve; neither will the baby .
And I can’ t say I care whether the Misses MacNeill call on me
or not.”
He t ook up his glass and drank again, carefully this time,
with an eye on her to prevent f urther shocks. He was curious
to kn ow what ha d passed between her and her father—but not
reckless enough  to ask. Instead he put down the glass and
asked, “Why?”
“Why?”
“Why do you fe el you must spe ak with Bonnet? Y ou say I
do not know your feelings, which is undeniably true.” He
allowed a tinge of wryness to creep into his voice. “Whatever
they are, though, they must be exigent, to cause you to
contemplate such drastic expedients.”
A slow smile grew on her lips, spreading into her eyes.
“I really like the way you talk,” she said.
“I am exceeding flattered. However , if you would
contemplate answering my question…”
She sigh ed, deeply enough to m ake the flame of the candle
flicker . S he stood up, moving ponderously , and groped in the
seam of her gow n. She had evidently had a pocket sewn into
it, for she extracted a small pie ce of paper , folded and worn
with much handling.
“Read th at,” she said, handing it to him. She turned away ,
and wen t to the far end of the room, where her paints and easelstood in a corner by the hearth.
The blac k letters struck him wit h a small jolt of familiarity .
He h ad seen Jam ie Fraser ’ s hand only once before, but once
was enough; it was a distinctive scrawl.
Daughter—
I c annot say if I shall see you again. My fervent hope is that it
shall be  so, and that all may be mended between us, but that
event must r est in the Hand of God. I write now in the event
that He may will otherwise.
Y ou aske d me once whether it w as right to kill in r evenge of
the gr eat W r ong done you. I tell you that you must not. For the
sake of your Sou l, for the sake of your own Life, you must find
the grace of for g iveness. Fr eedo m is har dwon, but it is not the
fruit of Mur der .
Do not Fear th at he will esc ape V engeance. Such a man
carries w ith him the seeds of his own Destruction. If he does
not Die at my Hand, it will be by another . But it must not be
your Hand that strikes him down.
Hear me, for the sake of the Love I bear you.
Below the text of the letter , he had written Y our most
affectionate and loving Fathe r , James Fraser . This was
scratched out, and below it was written simply , Da .
“I never said goodbye to him.”
Lord Joh n looked up, startled. H er back was turned to him;
she was staring at the half-finis hed landscape on the easel as
though it were a window .
He cros sed the carpet to stand  beside her . The fire had
burned down in the hearth, an d it was growing cold in the
room. She turned to face him, cl utching her elbows against the
chill.
“I want to be free,” she said quietly . “Whether Roger comes
back or not. Whatever happens.”The ch ild was  restless; he could see it kicking and
squirming below her crossed arms, like a cat in a sack. He
drew a deep breath, feeling chilled and apprehensive.
“Y ou are sure you must see Bonnet?”
She gave him another of those long blue looks.
“I have to find a way to for give him, Da says. I’ve been
trying, ever since they left, but  I can’ t do it. Maybe if I see
him, I can. I have to try .”
“All rig ht.” He let his breath out in a long sigh, shoulders
slumping in capitulation.
A small light—relief?—showed  in her eyes, and he tried to
smile back.
“Y ou’ll do it?”
“Y es. God knows how , but I’ll do it.”
He put out all the candles save one, keeping that to light
their wa y to bed. He gave her  his arm and they walked in
silence through the empty hall, the unpeopled quiet wrapping
them in peace. A t the foot of the stair , he paused, letting her go
ahead of him.
“Brianna.”
She turn ed, questioning, on the stair above him. He stood
hesitant, not knowing how to as k for what he suddenly wanted
so badly . He reached out a hand, lightly poised.
“May I—?”
W ithout speaking, she took his hand and pressed it against
her b elly . It was  warm and very firm. They stood quite still for
a mome nt, her hand locked ov er his. Then it came, a small
hard pu sh against his hand, w hich sent a thrill through his
heart.
“My God,” he said, in soft delight. “He’ s real.”
Her eyes met his in rueful amusement.
“Y es,” she said. “I know .”It w as well past  dark when they drove up beside the garrison
headquarters. It was a small, unprepossessing little building,
dwarfed by the loom of the war ehouse behind it, and Brianna
eyed it askance.
“They have him in there?” Her hands felt cold, in spite of
being muf fled under her cloak.
“No.” Lord John glanced around, as he got down to tie the
horses. A light burned in the window , but the small dirt yard
was emp ty , the narrow street silent and deserted. There were
no houses or shops nearby , and the warehousemen had long
since gone home to their suppers and their beds.
He r eached up b oth hands to help her down; alighting from
a wa gon was ea sier than getting out of a carriage, but still no
small task.
“He’ s in the cel lar below the warehouse,” he told her , his
voice pitched low . “I’ve bribed  the soldier on duty to admit
us.”
“Not us, ” s he said, her v oice pitched as low as his, but no
less firm for that. “Me. I’ll see him alone.”
She saw his lips  compress tightly for a moment, then relax
as he nodded.
“Private Hodgep ile assures me he is in chains, or I would
not coun tenance such a suggestion. As it is…” He shrugged,
half irrit ably , and took her arm  to guide her over the rutted
ground.
“Hodgepile?”
“Private Arvin Hodgepile. Why? Are you acquainted?”
She sho ok her head, holding her skirts out of the way with
her free hand.
“No. I’ve heard the name, but—”
The door of the building opened, spilling light into the yard.“That’ll be you, will it, my lo rd?” A soldier looked out
warily . Hodgepile was slight and narrow-faced, tight-jointed as
a marionette. He jerked, startled, as he saw her .
“Oh! I didn’ t realize—”
“Y ou ne edn’ t.” Lord John’ s voice was cool. “Show us the
way , if you please.”
W ith an apprehensive glance at Brianna’ s looming bulk, the
private b rought out a lantern, an d led them to a small side door
into the warehouse.
Hodgepile was short as well as slight, but held himself more
erect than usual in compensatio n. He w alks with a  ramr od up
his arse . Y es, she thought, watching him with interest as he
marched ahead of them. It had to be the man Ronnie Sinclair
had described to her mother . How many Hodgepiles could
there be, after all? Perhaps she could talk to him when she’d
finished with— her thoughts stopped abruptly as Hodgepile
unlocked the warehouse door .
The Apr il night was cool and fresh, but the air inside was
thick w ith the reek of pitch and turpentine. Brianna felt
suf focated. She could almost feel the tiny molecules of resin
floating in the a ir , sticking to he r skin. The sudden illusion of
being t rapped in a block of  solidifying amber was so
oppressive that she moved sudd enly forward, almost dragging
Lord John with her .
The warehouse was nearly full, its vast space crowded with
bulky sh apes. Kegs of pitch ble d sticky black in the farthest
shadows, while wooden racks n ear the huge double doors at
the f ront held piles of barrels; brandy and rum, ready to roll
down th e ramps and out onto the  dock, to bar ges waiting in the
river below .
Private Hodgepile’ s shadow stretched and shrank by turns
as he passed between the towering ranks of casks and boxes,
his steps muf fled by the thick layer of sawdust on the floor .
“…must be careful of fire…” His high, thin voice floated
back to her , and she saw his puppet shadow wave an etiolatedhand. “Y ou will be careful whe re you set the lantern, won’ t
you? Th ough the re should be no  danger , no danger at all down
below…”
The warehouse was built out over the river , to facilitate
loading, and the front part of the  floor was wood; the back half
of the building was brick-floor ed. Brianna heard the echo of
their footsteps change as they crossed the boundary . Hodgepile
paused by a trapdoor set into the bricks.
“Y ou won’ t be long, my lord?”
“No longer than we can help,” L ord John replied tersely . He
took the lantern and waited in s ilence as Hodgepile heaved up
the door  and propped it. Brianna’ s heart was beating heavily;
she could feel each separate thump, like a blow to the chest.
A flight of redbrick stairs ran down into darkness.
Hodgepile took out his ring of k eys and counted them over in
the p ool of lant ern light, making sure of the right one before
descending. He squinted dubiously at Brianna, then motioned
them to follow him.
“It’ s a good thing they made the  stairs wide enough for rum
casks,” she murmured to Lord J ohn, holding on to his arm as
she edged herself down, one step at a time.
She could see at once why Private Hodgepile wasn’ t
worried about fire down here; the air was so damp, she
wouldn’ t have been surprised to see mushrooms sprouting
from the walls. There was a sound of dripping water
somewhere, and the light of th e lantern shone of f wet brick.
Cockroaches sc attered in panic from the light, and the air
smelled of mold and mildew .
She thought briefly of her mother ’ s penicillin farm, less
briefly of her m other , and her throat closed tight. Then they
were the re, and she could no longer distract herself from the
realization of what she was doing.
Hodgepile struggled with the key , and the panic she had
been suppressing all day swept o ver her . She had no idea what
to say , what to do. What was she doing  here?Lord John squeezed her arm in  encouragement. She took a
deep bre ath of the dank wet air , ducked her head, and stepped
inside.
He s at on a bench at the far side of the cell, eyes fixed on
the door . He’d clearly been ex pecting someone—he’d heard
the footsteps outside—but it wasn’ t her . He jerked in
startlement, and his eyes flashed briefly green as the light
swept over him.
She heard a fai nt metallic clink; of course, they’d said he
was in chains. T he thought gave her a little courage. She took
the lantern from Hodgepile, and shut the door behind her .
She leaned against the wooden door , studying him in
silence. He seemed smaller than she remembered. Perhaps it
was only that she was now so much bigger .
“Do you know who I am?” It w as a tiny cell, low-ceilinged,
with no echo. Her voice sounded small, but clear .
He cock ed his head to one side, considering. His eyes
traveled slowly over her .
“I don’ t think ye were after tellin’ me your name,
sweetheart.”
“Don’ t c all me that!” The spurt of rage took her by surprise,
and she choked it back, clenching her fists behind her . If she
had come here to administer f or giveness, it wasn’ t a good
start.
He shrugged, good-natured but cool.
“As ye will. No, I don’ t know who you are. I’ll know your
face—and a few other things”—his teeth gleamed briefly in
the b lond stubble of his beard— ”but not your name. I suppose
you’ll mean to tell me, though?”
“Y ou do recognize me?”
He drew  in air a nd blew it out through pursed lips, looking
her over carefully . He was a good bit the worse for wear , but it
hadn’ t impaired his assurance.“Oh, indeed I d o.” He seemed amused, and she wanted to
cross th e room and slap him, hard. Instead, she took a deep
breath. That was a mistake—she could smell him.
W ithout warning, her gor ge rose suddenly and violently .
She had n’ t been sick before, but the stench of him brought up
everything in her . She had barel y time to turn away before the
flood of bile and half-digested food came hurtling up,
splattering the damp brick floor .
She leaned her forehead against the wall, waves of hot and
cold running over her . Finally , she wiped her mouth and turned
around.
He w as still sitti ng there, watching her . She’d set the lantern
on the floor . It th rew a yellow fl icker upward, carving his face
from the shadows behind him. H e might have a been a beast,
chained in its d en; only wariness showed in the pale green
eyes.
“My name is Brianna Fraser .”
He nodded, repeating it.
“Brianna Fraser . A lovely name, sure.” He smiled briefly ,
lips together . “And?”
“My par ents are James and Claire Fraser . They saved your
life, and you robbed them.”
“Y es.”
He said it with complete matter -of-factness, and she stared
at him. He stared back.
She felt a wild ur ge to laugh, as unexpected as the sur ge of
nausea had been. What had she expected? Remorse? Excuses?
From a man who took things because he wanted them?
“If ye’ve come in the hopes of getting back the jewels, I’m
afraid y ou’ve left it too late,” he said pleasantly . “I sold the
first to buy a sh ip, and the oth er two were stolen from me.
Perhaps you’ll find that justice; I should think it cold comfort,
myself.”She swallowed, tasting bile.
“Stolen. When?”
Don’ t tr ouble yourself over the man who’ s got it,  Roger had
said. It’ s odds-on he stole it fr om someone else .
Bonnet shifted on the wooden bench and shrugged.
“Some four months gone. Why?”
“No reason.” So Roger had made it; had got them—the
gems that might have been safe  transport for them both. Cold
comfort.
“I recall there was a trinket, too—a ring, was it? But you got
that back.” He smiled, showing his teeth this time.
“I paid for it.” O ne hand went unthinking to her belly , gone
round and tight as a basketball under her cloak.
His gaze stayed on her face, mildly curious.
“Have we business still to do then, darlin’?”
She took a deep breath—through her mouth, this time.
“They told me you’re going to hang.”
“They told me th e same thing.” He shifted again on the hard
wooden bench. He stretched his head to one side, to ease the
muscles of his n eck, and peered up sidelong at her . “Y ou’ll not
have come from pity , though, I shouldn’ t think.”
“No,” she said, watching him thoughtfully . “T o be honest,
I’ll rest a lot easier once you’re dead.”
He s tared at her for a moment, then burst out laughing. He
laughed hard enough that tears  came to his eyes; he wiped
them ca relessly , bending his head to swipe his face against a
shrugged shoulder , then straightened up, the marks of his
laughter still on his face.
“What is it you want from me, then?”
She opened her mouth to reply , and quite suddenly , the link
between them dissolved. She had not moved, but felt as
though s he had taken one step across an impassable abyss. Shestood now safe on the other sid e, alone. Blessedly alone. He
could no longer touch her .
“Nothing,” she said, her voice clear in her own ears. “I don’ t
want anything at all from you. I came to give you something.”
She opened her cloak, and ran her hands over the swell of
her abdomen. The small inhabitant stretched and rolled, its
touch a blind c aress of hand a nd womb, both intimate and
abstract.
“Y ours,” she said.
He looked at the bulge, and then at her .
“I’ve ha d whores try to foist their spawn on me before,” he
said. But he spoke without vicio usness, and she thought there
was a new stillness behind the wary eyes.
“Do you  think I’m a whore?” S he didn’ t care if he did or
not, tho ugh she doubted he d id. “I’ve no reason to lie. I
already told you, I don’ t want anything from you.”
She drew the cloak back together , covering herself. She
drew her self up then, feeling the ache in her back ease with the
movement. It was done. She was ready to go.
“Y ou’re going to die,” she said t o him, and she who had not
come fo r pity’ s sake was surprised to find she had some. “If it
makes the dying easier for you, to know there’ s something of
you left on earth —then you’re welcome to the knowledge. But
I’ve finished with you, now .”
She turned to pi ck up the lanter n, and was surprised to see
the door  half cracked ajar . She had no time to feel anger at
Lord John for eavesdropping, when the door swung fully open.
“W ell, ‘twas a gracious speech, ma’am,” Ser geant
Murchison said judiciously . H e smiled broadly then, and
brought the butt of his musket up even with her belly . “But I
can’ t say I’ve finished, quite, with you.”
She took  a quick step back, and swung the lantern at his
head in a reflex of defense. He  ducked with a yelp of alarm,and a grip of iron seized her wrist before she could dash the
lamp at him again.
“Christ, that was close! Y ou’re fast, girl, if not quite so fast
as the good Ser geant.” Bonnet took the lantern from her and
released her wrist.
“Y ou’re not chained after all,” she said stupidly , staring at
him. Then her wits caught up  with the situation, and she
whirled, plunging for the door . Murchison shoved his musket
in front of her , blocking her way , but not before she had seen
the darkened corridor through the doorway—and the dim form
sprawled facedown on the bricks outside.
“Y ou’ve killed him,” she whispered. Her lips were numb
with shock, and a dread deeper t han nausea sickened her to the
bone. “Oh, God, you’ve killed him.”
“Killed who?” Bonnet held the lantern up, peering at the
spill of butter -yellow hair , blotched with blood. “Who the hell
is that?”
“A busy body ,” Murchison snap ped. “Hurry , man! There’ s
no time to wast e. I’ve taken ca re of Hodgepile and the fuses
are lit.”
“W ait!” Bonnet  glanced from the Ser geant to Brianna,
frowning.
“There’ s no time, I said.” The S er geant brought up his gun
and checked the priming. “Do n’ t worry; no one will find
them.”
Brianna could smell the brimstone scent of the gunpowder
in th e pr iming p an. The Ser geant swung the stock of the gun to
his s houlder , and turned toward  her , but the quarters were too
cramped; with her belly in the w ay , there was no room to raise
the long muzzle.
The Ser geant grunted with irritation, reversed the gun, and
raised it high, to club her with the butt.
Her han d was clenched around the barrel before she knew
she had reached  for it. Everythi ng seemed to be moving veryslowly , Murchison and Bonnet both standing frozen. She
herself felt quite detached, as t hough she stood to one side,
watching.
She pluc ked the musket from Murchison’ s grip as though it
were a broomstraw , swung it hi gh, and smashed it down. The
jolt of it vibrated up her arms, into her body , her whole body
char ged as though someone had thrown a switch and sent a
white-hot current pulsing through her .
She saw so clearly the man’ s face hanging drop-jawed in the
air before her , eyes passing from astonishment through horror
to th e dullness o f unconsciousness, so slowly that she saw the
change. Had time to see the vivid colors in his face. A plum lip
caught o n a yellow tooth, half  lifted in a sneer . Slow tiny
blossoms of brilliant red unfolding in a graceful curve across
his temple, Japanese water flo wers blooming on a field of
fresh-bruised blue.
She was entirely calm, no mo re than a conduit for the
ancient savagery that men call motherhood, who mistake its
tenderness for weakness. She saw her own hands, knuckles
stark and tendons etched, felt th e sur ge of power up her legs
and back, through wrists and arms and shoulders, swung
again, so  slowly , it seemed so slowly , and yet the man was still
falling, had not quite reached the floor when the gun butt
struck again.
A voice was cal ling her name. Dimly , it penetrated through
the crystal hum around her .
“Stop, for God’ s sake! W oman—Brianna—stop!”
There were hands on her shoulders, dragging, shaking. She
pulled free of the grip and turned, the gun still in hand.
“Don’ t touch me,” she said, and  he took a quick step back,
his eyes filled with surprise and wariness—perhaps a touch of
fear . Afr aid of her? Why would anyone be afraid of her? she
thought dimly . He was talking; s he saw his mouth moving, but
she couldn’ t catch the words, it was just noise. The current in
her was dying, making her dizzy .Then time readjusted itself, began to move normally again.
Her muscles quivered, all their fibers turned to jelly . She set
the stained butt of the gun against the floor to balance herself.
“What did you say?”
Impatience flickered across his face.
“I said, it’ s no time we have to be wasting! Did ye not hear
your man sayin’ that the fuses are lit?”
“What f uses? Why?” She saw hi s eyes flick toward the door
behind h er . Before he could mo ve, she stepped back into the
doorway , bringing up the muzzle of the gun. He backed away
from he r instinctively , hitting the bench with the backs of his
legs. He fell bac k, and struck the chains fastened to the wall;
empty manacles chimed against the brick.
Shock w as beginning to steal o ver her , but the memory of
the white-hot current still burned through her spine, keeping
her upright.
“Y ou do not mean to kill me, surely?” He tried to smile, and
failed; couldn’ t keep the panic f rom his eyes. She had  said she
would rest easier with him dead.
Fr eedom is har d-won, but is not the fruit of Mur der . She had
her hard-won freedom now , and would not give it back to him.
“No,” sh e said, and took a firm er hold on the gun, the butt
snugged solid into her shoulder . “But I will by God shoot you
through the knees and leave you here, if you don’ t tell me right
this minute what the hell  is going on!”
He s hifted his w eight, big body hovering, pale eyes on her ,
judging. She blocked the door e ntirely , her bulk filling it from
side to side. She  saw the doubt in his posture, the shift of his
shoulders as he thought to rush her , and cocked the gun with a
single loud click !
He stood six feet from the muzzle’ s end; too far to lunge
and grab  it from her . One move , one pull of her trigger finger .
She couldn’ t miss, and he knew it.
His shoulders slumped.“The warehouse above is laid with gunpowder and fuses,”
he s aid, speaking quick and sh arp, anxious to get it done. “I
can’ t say how long, but it’ s goin’ up with an almighty bang.
For God’ s sake, let me out of here!”
“Why?” Her hands were sweating, but solid on the gun. The
baby stirred, a reminder that sh e had no time to waste, either .
She would risk o ne minute to kn ow , though. She had to know ,
with Joh n Grey’ s body limp on  the floor behind her . “Y ou’ve
killed a good man here, and I want to know why !”
He made a gesture of frustration.
“The smuggling!” he said. “W e were partners, the Ser geant
and I. I’d bring him in cheap contraband, he’d stamp it with
the C rown’ s mark. He’d steal the licensed stuf f, I’d sell it for a
good price and split with him.”
“Keep talking.”
He was nearly dancing with impatience.
“A soldier—Hodgepile—he was on to it, asking questions.
Murchison couldn’ t say if he’d t old anyone, but it wasn’ t wise
to wait and see, not once I was taken. The Ser geant moved the
last of the liquor from the warehouse, substituted barrels of
turpentine, and laid the fuses. It  all goes up, no one can say it
wasn’ t brandy burning—no evidence of theft. That’ s it, that’ s
all. Now let me go!”
“All right.” She lowered the mu sket a few inches, but didn’ t
yet uncock it. “What about h im?” She nodded toward the
fallen Ser geant, who was beginning to snort and mumble.
He stared at her blankly .
“What about him?”
“Aren’ t you going to take him with you?”
“No.” He sidled to one side, looking for a way past her . “For
Christ’ s sweet sake, woman, let me go, and leave yourself!
There’ s twelve hundred-weight of pitch and turpentine
overhead. It’ll go of f like a bomb!”“But he’ s still alive! W e can’ t leave him here!”
Bonnet gave her a look of shee r exasperation, then crossed
the room in two  strides. He ben t, jerked the dagger from the
Ser geant’ s belt, and drew it hard across the fat throat, just
above the leather stock. A t hick spray of blood soaked
Bonnet’ s shirt, and whipped against the wall.
“There,” he said, straightening up. “He’ s not alive. Leave
him.”
He drop ped the  dagger , pushed her aside, and lunged out
into the corridor . She could he ar his footsteps going away ,
quick and ringing on the brick.
T rembling all over with the shock of action and reaction,
she stood still fo r a second, staring down at John Grey’ s body .
Grief rip ped thr ough her , and he r womb clenched hard. There
was no pain, b ut every fiber had contracted; her stomach
bulged as though she’d swallowed a basketball. She felt
breathless, unable to move.
No,  she  thought quite clearly , to the child inside. I am  not in
labor , I absolute ly , positively am not. I won’ t have it. Stay put.
I haven’ t got time right now .
She took two steps down the black corridor , then stopped.
No, she had to c heck, at least, m ake sure. She turned back, and
knelt by John G rey’ s body . He h ad looked dead when she first
saw him lying there, and still did; he hadn’ t moved or even
twitched since she had first seen his body .
She lean ed forward but couldn’ t reach easily over the bulge
of her belly . She grasped his ar m instead, and pulled at him,
trying to  turn him over . A smal l, fine-boned man, he was still
heavy . His body tilted up, rolled boneless toward her , head
lolling, and her heart sank anew , seeing his half-closed eyes
and slack mouth. But she reached beneath the angle of his jaw ,
feeling frantically for a pulse point.
Where the hell was it? She’d  seen her mother do it in
emer gencies; fas ter to find than a wrist pulse, she’d said. Shecouldn’ t find one. How long ha d it been, how long were the
fuses set to burn?
She wiped a fo ld of her cloak across her clammy face,
trying to  think. She looked bac k, judging the distance to the
stairs. Jesus, could she risk it,  even alone? The thought of
popping out into the warehouse above, just as everything went
of f—She cast one look upward , then bent to her work and
tried aga in, pushing his head fa r back. There! She could see
the d amn vein under his skin— that’ s where the pulse should
be, shouldn’ t it?
For a moment, she wasn’ t sure she felt it; it might be only
the ham mering of her own heart , beating in her fingertips. But
no, it was—a di f ferent rhythm, faint and fluttering. He might
be close to dead, but not quite.
“Close,” she muttered, “but no cigar .” She felt too
frightened to be greatly relieve d; now she’d have to get him
out, too. She sc rambled to her feet, and reached down to get
hold of his arms, to drag him. But then she stopped, a memory
of what she had seen a moment before penetrating her panic.
She turned and lumbered hastily back into the cell. A verting
her eyes from th e sodden red mo und on the floor , she snatched
up the lantern and brought it back to the corridor . She held it
high, casting light on the low brick ceiling. Y es, she’d been
right!
The bricks curved up from the floor in groynes, making
arches all along both sides of the corridors. Storage alcoves
and cell s. Above  the groynes, th ough, ran sturdy beams made
of eight-inch pine. Over that, thick planking—and above the
planks, the layer of bricks that formed the floor of the
warehouse.
Going up like a bomb,  Bonnet had said—but was he right?
T urpentine burned, so did pitch; yes, they’d likely explode if
they burned under pressure, bu t not like a bomb, no. Fuses.
Fuses, in  the plural. Long fuses , plainly , and likely running to
small caches of gunpowder; that was the only true explosive
Murchison would have; there were no high explosives now .So the gunpowder would explode in several places, and
ignite th e barrel s nearby . But th e barrels would burn slowly;
she’d seen Sinclair make barrels like those; the staves were
half an inch thi ck, watertight. She remembered the reek as
they walked through the warehouse; yes, Murchison would
likely h ave opened the bungs of a few barrels, let the
turpentine flow out, to help the fire along.
So the barrels w ould burn, but likely they wouldn’ t explode
—or if they did, not all at once. Her breathing eased a little,
making calculations. Not a bomb; a string of firecrackers,
maybe.
So. She took a deep breath—as deep a breath as she could
manage, with Osbert in the way . She put her hands across her
stomach, feeling her racing heart begin to slow .
Even if some of the barrels did explode, the force of the
explosion would  be out, and up, through the thin plank walls
and the roof. V e ry little force would be deflected down. And
what was—she reached up a ha nd and pushed against a beam,
reassuring herself of its strength.
She sat down qu ite suddenly on the floor , skirts puf fed out
around her .
“I think it’ll be all right,” she whispered, not sure if she was
talking to John, to the baby , or to herself.
She sat huddled for a momen t, shaking with relief, then
rolled awkwardly onto her knees again, and began with
fumbling fingers to administer first aid.
She was  still struggling to tear a strip from the hem of her
petticoat when she heard the footsteps. Coming fast, almost
running. She turned sharply toward the stairs, but no—the
footsteps came from the other way , behind her .
She whirled around, to see the form of Stephen Bonnet
looming out of the darkness.
“Run!” he shouted at her . “For Christ’ s sweet sake, why
have ye not gone?”“Because it’ s safe here,” she sa id. She had laid the musket
down on the floo r beside Grey’ s body; she stooped and picked
it up, lifted it to her shoulder . “Go away .”
He stared at her , mouth half open in the gloom.
“Safe? W oman, you’re an eedjit! Did ye not hear—”
“I heard , but you’re wrong. It’ s not going to explode. And if
it did, it would still be safe down here.”
“The hell it is! Sweet bleeding Jesus! Even if the cellar
doesn’ t go, what happens when the fire burns through the
floor?”
“It c an’ t, it’ s bri ck.” She jerked her chin upward, not taking
her eyes of f him.
“Back here it is—up front, by the river , it’ s wood, like the
wharf. It’ll burn through, then collapse. And what happens
back he re then,  eh? Do ye no good for the ceiling to hold,
when the smoke comes rolling back to smother ye!”
She felt a wave of sickness roil up from her depths.
“It’ s open? The cellar isn’ t sea led? The other end of the
corridor ’ s open?” Knowing even  as she spoke that of course it
was—he had run that way , hea ding for the river , not for the
stairs.
“Y es! Now come!” He lunged forward, reaching for her
arm, but she jerk ed away , back against the wall, the muzzle of
the gun trained on him.
“I’m not going without him.” She licked dry lips, nodding at
the floor .
“The man’ s dead!”
“He’ s not! Pick him up!”
An extraordinary mixture of emotions crossed Bonnet’ s
face; fury and astonishment preeminent among them.
“Pick him up!” she repeated fie rcely . He stood still, staring
at her . Then, very slowly , he squatted, and gathering JohnGrey’ s limp form into his arms, got the point of his shoulder
into Grey’ s abdomen and heaved him up.
“Come on, then,” he said, and w ithout another glance at her
started of f into the dark. She hesitated for a second, then
seized the lantern and followed him.
W ithin fifty feet, she smelled smoke. The brick corridor
wasn’ t straight;  it branched a nd turned, encompassing the
many partitions of the cellar . But all the time it slanted down,
heading toward the riverbank. As they descended through the
multiple turning s, the scent of  smoke thickened; a layer of
acrid ha ze swirl ed lazily around them, visible in the lantern
light.
Brianna held her breath, trying not to breathe. Bonnet was
moving fast, despite Grey’ s weight. She could barely keep up,
burdened with gun and lantern, but she didn’ t mean to give up
either one, just yet. Her belly tightened again, another of those
breathless moments.
“Not yet,  I said!” she muttered through gritted teeth.
She had  had to stop for a mome nt; Bonnet had disappeared
into the haze ah ead. Evidently he’d noticed the fading of the
lantern l ight, tho ugh—she heard him bellow , from somewhere
up ahead.
“W oman! Brianna!”
“I’m com ing!” she called, and h urried as fast as she could,
waddling, discarding any pretense of grace. The smoke was
much thicker , and she could hea r a faint crackle, somewhere in
the distance—overhead? Before them?
She was breathing heavily , in sp ite of the smoke. She drew
in a  ragged gul p of air , and smelled water . Damp and mud,
dead lea ves and fresh air , slicing  through the smoky murk like
a knife.
A faint glow sh one through the smoke and grew as they
hurried toward it, dwarfing the  light of her lantern. Then a
dark square loomed ahead. Bon net turned and seized her arm,
dragging her out into the air .They were under the wharf, she realized; dark water lapped
ahead of them, brightness dancing on it. Reflection; the
brightness came from up above, and so did the crackle of
flame. B onnet didn’ t stop or let go of her arm; he pulled her to
one side , into the long, dank grass and mud of the bank. He let
go w ithin a few  steps, but she followed, gasping for breath,
slipping and sliding, tripping on the soggy edges of her skirts.
At la st h e stopp ed, in the shado w of the trees. He bent, and
let Grey ’ s body slide to the ground. He stayed bent for a
moment, chest heaving, trying to get his breath back.
Brianna realized  that she could see both men plainly; could
see e very bud o n the twigs of the tree. She turned and looked
back, to see the warehouse lighted like a jack-o’-lantern,
flames l icking through cracks in the wooden walls. The huge
double doors had been left ajar ; as she watched, the blast of
hot air forced one open, and s mall tongues of fire began to
creep across the dock, deceptively small and playful-looking.
She felt a hand on her shoulder , and whirled, looking up
into Bonnet’ s face.
“I’ve a ship wa iting,” he said. “A little way upriver . W ill
you come with me, then?”
She shook her head. She still held the gun, but didn’ t need it
now . He was no threat to her .
Still he didn’ t g o, but lingered, staring down at her , a small
frown between his brows. His face was gaunt, hollowed and
shadowed by the distant fire. The surface of the river was
aflame now , small tongues of fire flickering from the dark
water as a slick of turpentine spread across it.
“Is i t true?” he asked abruptly . He asked no permission, but
set h is h ands on her belly . It tigh tened at his touch, rounding in
another of those breathless, pai nless squeezes, and a look of
astonishment crossed his face.
She jerk ed away from his touch, pulling her cloak together ,
and nodded, unable to speak.He seize d her chin in his hand and peered into her face—
assessing her truthfulness, perha ps? Then he let go, and stuck
a finger into his mouth, groping in the recesses of his cheek.
He took  her hand, and put something wet and hard in her
palm.
“For his  maintenance, then,” he said, and grinned at her .
“T ake care of him, sweetheart!”
And then he was gone, bounding long-legged up the
riverbank, silhou etted like a dem on in the flickering light. The
turpentine flowing into the water had caught fire, and roiling
billows of scarlet light shot upward, floating pillars of fire that
lit the riverbank bright as day .
She half  raised the musket, finger on the trigger . He was no
more than twenty yards away , a perfect shot. Not by your
hand . She lowered the gun, and let him go.
The warehouse was fully ablaze by now; the heat from it
beat against her cheeks and blew the hair back from her face.
“I have a ship upriver ,” he’d said. She squinted into the
glare. The fire h ad nearly filled the river , a great floating slick
that bloomed from bank to bank  in a fiery garden of unfolding
flames. Nothing could come through that blinding wall of
light.
Her other fist was still closed around the object he had given
her . She  opened her hand and looked down at the wet black
diamond that gleamed in her p alm, the fire glowing red and
bloody in its facets.P A R T  T W E L V E
J e  T ’ A i m e6 3
F O R G I V E N E S S
River Run, May 1770
T hat is the most stubborn woman I have ever met!” Brianna
huf fed into the room like a ship in full sail, and subsided onto
the love seat by the bed, billowing.
Lord John Grey opened one eye , bloodshot under his turban
of bandages.
“Y our aunt?”
“Who else?”
“Y ou have a loo king glass in your room, do you not?” His
mouth curved, and after a reluctant moment, so did hers.
“It’ s her bloody will. I told  her I d on’ t wa nt River Run, I
can’ t ow n slaves—but she won’ t change it! She just smiles as
though I  were a six-year -old having a tantrum and says by the
time it happens,  I’ll be glad of i t. Glad of it!” She snorted and
flounced into a more comfortable position. “What am I going
to do?”
“Nothing.”
“Nothing?” She  turned the force  of her displeasure on him.
“How can I do nothing?”
“T o begin with, I should be extr emely surprised if your aunt
were no t immortal, several of that particular race of Scots
seem to be. However”—he waved a hand in dismissal
—”should this prove untrue, and should she persist in her
delusions that you would prove  a good mistress to River Run
—”
“What makes you think I wouldn’ t?” she said, pride stung.
“Y ou cannot run a plantation of this size without slaves, and
you decl ine to own them for rea sons of conscience, or so I was
given to  understand. Though a l ess likely Quaker I have neverseen.” H e narrowed his open eye, indicating the immense tent
of purple-striped muslin in which she was swathed. “Returning
to t he point at  issue—or one of them—should you find
yourself the unwilling recipient of a number of slaves,
arrangements can undoubtedly be made to free them.”
“Not in North Carolina. The Assembly—”
“No, not in No rth Carolina,” he agreed patiently . “If the
occasion should arise, and you find yourself in possession of
slaves, you will simply sell them to me.”
“But that’ s—”
“And I will take them to V ir ginia, where manumission is
much less stringently controlled . Once they are freed, you will
return my money . At this point , you will be totally destitute
and lacking in p roperty , which appears to be your chief desire,
second only to preventing any possibility of personal
happiness by ensuring that yo u cannot marry the man you
love.”
She pleated a handful of muslin between her fingers,
frowning at the big sapphire that shone on her hand.
“I promised I’d listen to him first.” She cast a narrow eye at
Lord John. “Though I still say it’ s emotional blackmail.”
“So much more ef fective than any other kind,” he agreed.
“Almost worth a cracked pate, to finally hold the whip hand
on a Fraser .”
She ignored this.
“And I only said I’d listen. I still think when he knows
everything, he’ll —he can’ t.” She put a hand on her enormous
belly . “Y ou couldn’ t, could you? Care—really care, I mean—
for a child that wasn’ t yours?”
He moved higher on the pillow , grimacing slightly .
“For the  sake of its parent? I expect I could.” He opened
both eye s and looked at her , smiling. “Indeed, I was under the
impression that I had been doing so for some time.”She look ed mom entarily blank, before a tide of pink flowed
up f rom the sco oped neck of her bodice. She was charming
when she blushed.
“Y ou m ean me? W ell, yes, but—I mean—I’m not a baby ,
and you’re not having to claim  me as your own.” She gave
him a direct blue look, at odds with the lingering pinkness of
her cheeks. “And I did hope it wasn’ t all  for my father ’ s sake.”
He was quiet fo r a moment, the n reached out and squeezed
her hand.
“No, it wasn’ t,” he said gruf fly . He let go, and lay back with
a small groan.
“Are yo u feeling  worse?” she a sked anxiously . “Shall I get
you something? Some tea? A poultice?”
“No, it’ s only t he blasted headache,” he said. “The light
makes it throb.” He shut his eyes again.
“T ell me,” he sa id without opening them, “why is it that you
seem so  convinc ed that a man could not care for a child unless
it we re the fruit of his loins? As  it is, my dear , I did not  mean
to refer to you when I said I had been doing such a thing
myself. My son—my stepson— is in fact the son of my late
wife’ s sister . By tragic accident, both of his parents died within
a day of each other , and my wife Isobel and her parents raised
him from babyhood. I married Isobel when W illie was six or
so. So you see, there is no blood between us at all—and yet
were any  man to impugn my af fection for him, or to say he is
not my son, I would call him out on the instant for it.”
“I se e,” she said , after a moment. “I didn’ t know that.” He
cracked an eyelid; she was still twisting her ring, looking
pensive.
“I think… ” she began, and glanced at him. “I think I’m not
so worried about Roger and the baby . If I’m honest—”
“Heaven forfend you should be otherwise,” he murmured.
“If I ’m honest,” she went on, glowering at him, “I think I’m
worried more about how it would be between us—betweenRoger and me.” She hesitated, then took the plunge.
“I di dn’ t know J amie Fraser was my father ,” she said. “Not
all the time I was growing up. After the Rising, my parents
were separated; they each thoug ht the other was dead. And so
my mother married again. I th ought Frank Randall was my
father . I didn’ t find out otherwise until after he died.”
“Ah.” He viewed her with incre ased interest. “And was this
Randall cruel to you?”
“No! He was…wonderful.” Her voice broke slightly , and
she clea red her throat, embarrassed. “No. He was the best
father I could have had. It’ s just  that I thought my parents had
a good marriag e. They cared for each other , they respected
each other , they—well, I thought everything was fine.”
Lord John scratched at his band ages. The doctor had shaved
his head, a con dition which, in addition to af fronting his
vanity , itched abominably .
“I f ail to see the dif ficulty , as applied to your present
situation.”
She heaved a huge sigh.
“Then my father died, and…we  found out that Jamie Fraser
was still  alive. My mother went to join him, and then I came.
And—it was dif ferent. I saw ho w they looked at each other . I
never saw her look at Frank Randall that way—or him at her .”
“Ah, ye s.” A small gust of ble akness swept through him.
He’d seen that look once or twice; the first time, he had
wanted desperately to put a knife through Claire Randall’ s
heart.
“Do you  know how rare such a  thing is?” he asked quietly .
“That peculiar sort of mutual passion?” The one-sided kind
was common enough.
“Y es.” She had half turned, her  arm along the back of the
love seat, and was looking out through the French doors, over
the bur geoning spread of the spring flower beds below .“The thing is—I think I had it,” she said, even more quietly .
“For a little while. A very little  while.” She turned her head
and looked at him, with eyes that let him see clear through her .
“If I’ve lost it—then I have. I can live with that—or without
it. But I won’ t live with an imitation of it. I couldn’ t stand
that.”
“It l ooks like you may get me by default.” Brianna put the
breakfast tray over his lap and c ollapsed heavily into the love
seat, making the joints groan.
“Don’ t riddle with a sick man,”  he said, picking up a piece
of toast. “What do you mean?”
“Drusus just came racing into th e cookhouse, saying he saw
two riders coming down through  Campbell’ s fields. He said he
was sure one of them was my fa ther—he said it was a big man
with red hair; God knows there aren’ t that many like him.”
“Not ma ny , no.” He smiled briefly , his eyes traveling over
her . “So, two riders?”
“It m ust be Da  and my mother . So they haven’ t found
Roger . Or they did, and he—di dn’ t want to come back.” She
twisted the big sapphire on her  finger . “Good thing I have a
fallback, isn’ t it?”
Lord Joh n blink ed, and made ha ste to swallow his mouthful
of toast.
“If by that extraordinary metaphor , you mean that you
intend to marry me after all, I assure you—”
“No.” She gave him a halfhearted smile. “Just teasing.”
“Oh, goo d.” He took a gulp of tea, closing his eyes to enjoy
the fragrant steam. “T wo riders. Did your cousin not go with
them?”
“Y es, he did,” she said slowly . “God, I hope nothing’ s
happened to Ian.”
“It m ight be that they experien ced any variety of disasters
on the journey , which obliged your cousin and your mother totravel be hind yo ur father and M r . MacKenzie. Or your cousin
and MacKenzie behind your parents.” He waved a hand,
indicating innumerable possibilities.
“I g uess you’re right.” She stil l looked peaked, and Lord
John suspected she had cause. Comforting possibilities were
all very well for the short term, but the colder probabilities
were inclined to triumph over the longer course—and whoever
accompanied Ja mie Fraser , they would be arriving shortly ,
with the answers to all questions.
He pushed back the unfinished breakfast and leaned back
against his pillows.
“T ell me—how far does your remorse extend for having
nearly gotten me killed?”
She colored and looked uncomfortable.
“What do you mean?”
“If I ask you to do something you do not wish to, will your
sense of guilt and obligation compel you to do it nonetheless?”
“Oh, more blackmail. What is it?” she asked warily .
“For give your father . Whatever has happened.”
Pregnancy had made her complexion more delicate; all her
emotions ebbed  and flowed ju st under the surface of that
apricot skin. A touch would bruise her .
He reached out and laid a hand very gently along her cheek.
“For your sake, as well as his,” he said.
“I alread y have.” Her lashes cov ered her eyes as she looked
down; her hands lay still in her lap, the blue fire of his
sapphire glowing on her finger .
The sou nd of hooves came clearly through the open French
doors, rattling on the gravel drive.
“Then I think you had better go down and tell him so, my
dear .”She pursed her l ips, and nodded. W ithout a word, she stood
up and floated o ut the door , di sappearing like a storm cloud
over the horizon.
“When w e heard that there were two riders coming, and one of
them Ja mie, we feared lest something had happened to your
nephew , or MacKenzie. Somehow , it occurred to neither of us
to think that anything had happened to you .”
“I’m immortal,” she murmured,  peering alternately into his
eyes. “Didn’ t you know?” The pressure of her thumbs lifted
from his eyelids and he blinked, still feeling her touch.
“Y ou ha ve a slight enlar gement of one pupil, but very small.
Grip my  fingers  and squeeze as hard as you can.” She held out
her inde x fingers and he obliged , annoyed to feel the weakness
of his grip.
“Did you find M acKenzie?” He was further annoyed not to
be able to control his curiosity .
She gave him a quick, wary glance from those sherry-
colored eyes, and returned her gaze to his hands.
“Y es. He’ll be coming along. A little later .”
“W ill h e?” She caught the tone of his question and
hesitated, then looked at him directly .
“How much do you know?”
“Everything,” he said, and had the momentary satisfaction
of seeing her startled. Then one side of her mouth curved up.
“Everything?”
“Enough,” he amended sardonically . “Enough to ask
whether your statement of Mr . MacKenzie’ s return is
knowledge on your part or wishful thinking.”
“Call it faith.” W ithout so mu ch as a by-your -leave, she
tugged l oose the strings of his nightshirt and spread it open,
exposing his chest. Rolling a sheet of parchment deftly into a
tube, she applied one end of it t o his breast, putting her ear to
the other end.“I beg your pardon, madame!”
“Hush, I can’ t hear ,” she said, making small shushing
motions with one hand. She pr oceeded to move her tube to
dif ferent parts of his chest, pau sing now and then to thump
experimentally or prod him in the liver .
“Have you moved your bowels yet today?” she inquired,
poking him familiarly in the abdomen.
“I decline to s ay ,” he said, pulling his nightshirt back
together with dignity .
She looked more outrageous even than usual. The woman
must be forty at least, yet she showed no more sign of age than
a fine webbing of lines at the corners of her eyes, and
threadings of silver in that ridiculous mass of hair .
She was thinner than he remembered, though it was hard to
judge of her fig ure, dressed as she was in a barbaric leather
shirt and trouserings. She’d p lainly been in the sun and
weather for some time; her face and hands had baked a
delicate soft brown, that made the big golden eyes that much
more sta rtling when they turned full on one—which they now
did.
“Brianna says that Dr . Fentiman trephined your skull.”
He shifted uncomfortably under the sheets.
“I am  told that he did. I am afraid I was not aware of it at
the time.”
Her mouth quirked slightly .
“Just as well. W ould you mind if I look at it? It’ s only
curiosity ,” she went on, with unaccustomed delicacy . “Not
medical necessity . It’ s only that I’ve never seen a trepanation.”
He closed his eyes, giving up.
“Beyond the state of my bowels, I have no secrets from you,
madame.”
He t ilted his head, indicating th e location of the hole in his
head, an d felt her cool fingers slide under the bandage, liftingthe gauze and allowing a breath of air to soothe his hot head.
“Brianna is with her father?” he asked, eyes still closed.
“Y es.” H er voice was softer . “She told me—us—a little of
what you’d done for her . Thank you.”
The fingers left his skin and he opened his eyes.
“It was my plea sure to be of service to her . Perforated skull
and all.”
She smiled faintly .
“Jamie will be up to see you in a bit. He’ s…talking to
Brianna in the garden.”
He felt a small stab of anxiety .
“Are they—in accord?”
“See for yourself.” She put an  arm behind him, and with
amazing strength for a woman with such fine bones, levered
him upright. Just beyond the ba lustrade he could see the two
figures a t the bottom of the garden, heads close together . As he
watched, they embraced, then broke apart, laughing at the
awkwardness caused by Brianna’ s shape.
“I think we got h ere just in time ,” Claire murmured, looking
at her daughter with a practiced eye. “It isn’ t going to be much
longer .”
“I c onfess to some gratitude a t your prompt arrival,” he
said, letting her ease him back o nto the pillows and smooth his
bedding. “I have barely survived the experience of being your
daughter ’ s nursemaid; I fear serving as her midwife would
finish me completely .”
“Oh, I nearly for got.” Claire reached into a nasty-looking
leather pouch around her neck. “ Brianna said to give this back
to you—she won’ t need it anymore.”
He held out his hand, and a tiny spark of brilliant blue fell
into his palm.
“Jilted, by God!” he said, and grinned.6 4
B O T T O M  O F  T H E  N I N T H
I t’ s like baseball, ” I assured her . “Long stretches of boredom,
punctuated by short periods of intense activity .”
She laughed, then stopped abruptly , grimacing.
“Ugh. Intense, yeah. Whew .” She smiled, a little lopsidedly .
“At least at baseball games you get to drink beer and eat hot
dogs in the boring parts.”
Jamie, grasping at the only part of this conversation that
made sense, leaned forward.
“There’ s a crock of small beer , cool in the pantry ,” he said,
peering anxiously at Brianna. “W ill I fetch it in?”
“No,” I said. “Not unless you w ant some; alcohol wouldn’ t
be good for the baby .”
“Ah. What about the hot dog?”  He stood up and flexed his
hands, obviously preparing to dash out and shoot one.
“It’ s a sort of sau sage in a roll,” I said, rubbing my upper lip
in an ef fort not to laugh. I glanced at Brianna. “I don’ t think
she wants one.” Small beads o f sweat had popped out quite
suddenly on her wide brow , and she was looking white around
the eye sockets.
“Oh, barf,” she said faintly .
Correctly interpr eting this remark from the look on her face,
Jamie hastily applied the damp cloth to her face and neck.
“Put your head between your knees, lass.”
She glared at him ferociously .
“I c an’ t get…my head… near  my  knees!” sh e said, teeth
clenched. Then the spasm relaxe d and she took a deep breath,
the color coming back into her face.Jamie gl anced from her to me, frowning worriedly . He took
a hesitant step toward the door .
“I expect I’d best go, then, if you—”
“Don’ t leave me!”
“But it’ s—I mean, you’ve your mother , and—”
“Don’ t leave me!” she repeated. Agitated, she leaned over
and grabbed his arm, shaking it for emphasis. “Y ou can’ t!”
“Y ou sa id I wouldn’ t die.” She was staring intently into his
face. “If  you stay , it will be all right. I won’ t die.” She spoke
with suc h intens ity that I felt a s udden spasm of fear clutch my
own innards, hard as the pain of labor .
She was a big girl, strong and h ealthy . She should have no
great trouble delivering. But I was lar ge enough, healthy as
well—and twent y-five years before, I had lost a stillborn child
at six months, and nearly died  myself. I might be able to
protect her from childbed feve r , but there was no defense
against a sudden hemorrhage; t he best I could do under such
circumstances would be to try to save her child via Caesarian
section. I resolutely kept my ey es of f the chest in which the
sterile blade lay ready , just in case.
“Y ou’re not going to die, Bree,” I said. I spoke as soothingly
as I could, and put a hand on her shoulder , but she must have
felt the fear und er my professional facade. Her face twisted,
and she grabbed  my hand, clingi ng so tightly the bones rubbed
together . She closed her eyes and breathed through her nose,
but didn’ t cry out.
She opened her eyes and looke d straight at me, her pupils
dilated s o that she seemed to be  looking past me, into a future
that only she could see.
“If I  do… ” she said, putting a ha nd to her swollen belly . Her
mouth worked, but whatever she’d been meaning to say
couldn’ t force its way out.
She stru ggled to her feet, then, and leaned heavily on Jamie,
her face muf fled in his shoulde r , repeating, “Da, don’ t leaveme, don’ t.”
“I willna leave ye, a leannan . Din na be afrai d, I’ll stay wi’
ye.” He put an arm around her , looking helplessly over her
head at me.
“W alk her ,” I said to Jamie, seeing her restlessness. “Like a
horse with colic,” I added, as he looked blank.
That made her laugh. W ith the ginger air of a man
approaching an armed bomb, he  put an arm around her waist
and towed her slowly around the room. Given their respective
sizes, it sounded a lot like someone leading a horse, too.
“All right?” I heard him ask anxiously , on one circuit.
“I’ll tell you when I’m not,” she assured him.
It w as warm for  mid-May; I opened the windows wide, and
the scents of phlox and columbine flowed in, mixed with cool,
damp air from the river .
The house was filled with an ai r of expectation: eagerness,
with a hint of fear beneath. Joc asta walked up and down the
terrace below , too nervous to s tay put. Betty put her head in
every few minutes to ask if anything was needed; Phaedre
came up from the pantry with a jug of fresh buttermilk, just in
case. Brianna, her eyes focused inwardly , merely shook her
head at it; I sipped a glass myself, mentally checking of f the
preparations.
The fact was that there wasn’ t a hell of a lot you needed to
do for a normal birth, and not the hell of a lot you could  do if it
wasn’ t. The bed was stripped and old quilts laid to protect the
mattress; there was a stack of c lean cloths to hand, and a can
of hot water , renewed every half hour or so from the kitchen
copper . C ool water for sipping and brow-mopping, a small vial
of o il for rubbing, my suture kit to hand, just in case—and
beyond that, everything was up to Brianna.
After nearly an hour ’ s walking , she stopped dead in the
middle of the floor , gripping Jamie’ s arm and breathing
through her nose like a horse a t the end of a twenty-furlong
race.“I want to lie down,” she said.
Phaedre and I g ot her gown of f,  and got her safely onto the
bed in her shift. I laid my hands on the huge mound of her
belly , marveling at the sheer impossibility of what had
happened already , and what was about to happen next.
The rigidity of the contractio n passed of f, and I could
clearly feel the curves of the child below the thin rubbery
covering of skin and muscle. It was lar ge, I could tell that, but
it seemed to be lying well, head down and fully engaged.
Normally , babies about to be born were fairly quiet,
intimidated by the upheaval of their surroundings. This one
was stirr ing; I felt a small, distin ct sur ge against my hand as an
elbow poked out.
“Daddy!” Brianna reached out blindly , flailing as a
contraction took her unaware . Jamie lunged forward and
caught her hand, squeezing tight.
“I’m here, a bheanachd,  I’m here.”
She breathed heavily , face bright red, then relaxed, and
swallowed.
“How long?” she asked. She wa s facing me but not looking
at me; she wasn’ t looking at anything outside.
“I don’ t know . N ot an awfully lo ng time, I don’ t think.” The
contractions wer e roughly five minutes apart, but I knew they
could continue like that for a lo ng time, or speed up abruptly;
there was simply no telling.
There was a lig ht breeze from the window , but she was
sweating. I wiped her face and  neck again, and rubbed her
shoulders.
“Y ou’re doing fine, lovey ,” I mu rmured to her . “Just fine.” I
glanced up at Jamie, and smiled. “So are you.”
He made  a game try at returning the smile; he was sweating,
too, but his face was white, not red.
“T alk to me, Da,” she said suddenly .“Och?” He looked at me, frantic. “What shall I say?”
“It doesn’ t matter ,” I said. “T ell her stories; anything to take
her mind of f things.”
“Oh. Ah…will ye have heard the one about…Habetrot the
spinstress?”
Brianna grunted in reply . Jamie looked apprehensive, but
started in nonetheless.
“A ye, w ell. It happened that in an old farmhouse that stood
by t he river , there lived a fair m aid called Maisie. She’d red
hair and  blue een, and was the bonniest maid in all the valley .
But she had no husband, because…” He stopped, appalled. I
glared at him.
He c oughed and went on, plainl y not knowing what else to
do. “Ah…because in those days men were sensible, and
instead of looking for lovely l asses to be their brides, they
looked o ut for girls who could cook and spin, who might make
notable housewives. But Maisie…”
Brianna made a deep inhuman noise. Jamie clenched his
teeth for a moment, but went on, holding tight to both her
hands.
“But Ma isie lov ed the light in the fields and the birds of the
glen…”
The ligh t faded gradually from the room, and the smell of
sun-warmed flowers was replaced by the damp green smell of
the willows by the river , and t he faint scent of woodsmoke
from the cookhouse.
Brianna’ s shift was wet through,  and stuck to her skin. I dug
my thumbs into her back, ju st above the hips, and she
squirmed hard against me, tryin g to ease the ache. Jamie sat
with his head down, clinging doggedly to her hands, still
talking soothingly , telling stories of silkies and seal catchers,
of p ipers and el ves, of the great giants of Fingal’ s Cave, and
the Dev il’ s black horse that pas ses through the air faster than
the thought between a man and a maid.The pains were very close toge ther . I motioned to Phaedre,
who ran  away and came back w ith a lighted taper , to light the
candles in the sconces.
It was cool and dim in the room, the walls lit with flickering
shadows. Jamie’ s voice was hoarse; Brianna’ s was nearly
gone.
Suddenly she let go of him and sat up, grabbing at her
knees, face dark red with ef fort, pushing.
“Now , t hen,” I said. I stacked pillows quickly behind her ,
made her lean back against the bedstead, called Phaedre to
hold the candlestick for me.
I oil ed my fingers, reached un der her shift, and touched
flesh I had not t ouched since she was a baby herself. I rubbed
slowly , gently , talking to her , knowing it made no great
dif ference what I said.
I fel t the strain , the sudden change under my fingers. A
relaxation, then once more. There was a sudden gush of
amniotic fluid, that splashed across the bed and dripped on the
floor , filling the room with the scent of fecund rivers. I rubbed
and eased, praying that it would not come too fast, not tear her .
The ring of flesh opened sudde nly , and my fingers touched
something wet and hard. Relaxa tion, and it moved back, away ,
leaving the ends of my fingers  tingling with the knowledge
that I had touche d someone entirely new . Once more the great
pressure, the stretching came, and once more eased slowly
back. I pushed back the edge o f the shift, and with the next
push the ring st retched to impossible size, and a head like a
Chinese gar goyl e popped out, with a flood of amniotic fluid
and blood.
I f ound myself n ose to nose with a waxy-white head with a
face like a fist, that grimaced at me in utter fury .
“What i s it? Is it a boy?” Ja mie’ s hoarse question cut
through my startlement.
“I hope so,” I sa id, hastily thumbing mucus from nose and
mouth. “ It’ s the ugliest thing I’ve ever seen; God help it if it’ sa girl.”
Brianna made a noise that might have started as a laugh, and
turned into an e normous grunt of ef fort. I barely had time to
get my fingers i n and turn the wide shoulders slightly to help.
There was an audible pop,  and a lo ng, we t form slithered out
onto the soggy quilt, wriggling like a landed trout.
I seized a clean linen towel and wrapped him—it was him,
the scrot al sac swelled up round  and purple between fat thighs
—checking quickly for his Apgar signs: breathing, color ,
activity…all good. He was making thin, angry noises, short
explosions of breath, not really crying, and punching the air
with clenched tiny fists.
I lai d hi m on the bed, one hand on the bundle as I checked
Brianna. Her thighs were smea red with blood, but there was
no sign of hemo rrhage. The cord was still pulsing, a thick wet
snake of connection between them.
She was  pantin g, lying back o n the crushed pillows, hair
plastered wetly to her temples, a n enormous smile of relief and
triumph on her face. I laid a hand on her belly , suddenly
flaccid. Deep inside, I felt the placenta give way , as her body
surrendered its last physical link with her son.
“Once more, honey ,” I said  softly to her . The last
contraction shivered over her belly , and the afterbirth slid out.
I tied of f the cord and cut it, and placed the solid little bundle
of her child in her arms.
“He’ s beautiful,” I whispered.
I lef t him to her , and turned my attention to immediate
matters, kneading her belly firmly with my fists, to encourage
the uteru s to contract and stop the bleeding. I could hear the
babble of excitement spreading through the house as Phaedre
rushed d ownstairs to spread the news. I glanced upward once,
to see Brianna glowing, still smiling from ear to ear . Jamie was
behind h er , also smiling, his ch eeks wet with tears. He said
something to her in husky Gael ic, and brushing the hair awayfrom her neck, leaned forward and kissed her gently , just
behind the ear .
“Is he hungry?” Brianna’ s voice was deep and cracked, and
she tried to clear her throat. “Shall I feed him?”
“T ry him and see. Sometimes they’re sleepy right afterward,
but sometimes they want to nurse.”
She fumbled at the neck of her shift and pulled loose the
ribbon, baring one high, full b reast. The bundle made small
gr owf  noises as she turned it awkwardly toward her , and her
eyes sprang open in surprise a s the mouth fastened on her
nipple with sudden ferocity .
“Strong, isn’ t he?” I said, and realized that I was crying only
when I tasted the salt of my tears running into the corners of
my smile.
Sometime later , with mother and child cleaned up and made
comfortable, food and drink brought for Brianna, and a last
check as suring that all was well, I walked out into the deep
shadows of the upper gallery . I  felt pleasantly detached from
reality , as though I were walking a foot or so of f the ground.
Jamie had gone down to tell John; he was waiting for me at
the foot of the stairs. He drew me into his arms without a word
and kissed me; a s he let me go I  saw the deep red crescents of
Brianna’ s nailmarks on his hands, not yet faded.
“Y e did brawly too,” he whispered to me. Then the joy in
his eyes bloomed bright and flo wered in a face-splitting grin.
“Grannie!”
“Is he dark or fair?” Jamie a sked suddenly , rising on one
elbow beside me in bed. “I counted his fingers, and I didna
even think to look.”
“Y ou ca n’ t really tell yet,” I said drowsily . I’d counted his
toes, and I’d th ought of it. “He’ s sort of reddish-purple, and
he’ s still got the  vernix—the white stuf f—all over him. It will
probably be a d ay or two befor e his skin fades into a natural
color . H e’ s got just a bit of dark  hair , but it’ s the sort that rubsof f soon after birth.” I stretched, enjoying the pleasant ache in
legs and back; l abor was hard work, even for the midwife. “It
wouldn’ t prove anything, even if he were fair , since Brianna
is; he could be, either way .”
“A ye…but if he were dark, we’d know for sure.”
“Maybe not. Y our father was dark; so was mine. He could
have recessive genes and come out dark even if—”
“He could have what? ”
I t ried without s uccess to think whether Gregor Mendel had
yet start ed mess ing about with h is pea plants, but gave up the
ef fort, too sleepy to concentrate.  Whether he had or not, Jamie
evidently hadn’ t heard of him.
“He could be an y color , and we  wouldn’ t know for sure,” I
said. I yawned widely . “W e w on’ t know until he gets old
enough to start resembling…so mebody . And even then…” I
trailed of f. Did it matter a great deal who his father had been,
if he wasn’ t going to have one?
Jamie rolled toward me and s cooped me into a spooned
embrace. W e slept naked, and the hair on his body brushed
against m y skin . He kissed me softly on the back of the neck
and sighed, his breath warm and tickling on my ear .
I h overed on the  edge of sleep, too happy to fall completely
over int o dream s. Somewhere nearby , I heard a small stifled
squawk, and the murmur of voices.
“A ye, well,” Jamie’ s voice roused me, some moments later .
He s ounded defiant. “If I dinna k en his father , at least I’m sure
who his grandsire is.”
I reached back and patted his leg.
“So am I—Grandpa. Hush up and go to sleep. ‘Suf ficient
unto the day is the evil thereof.’ “
He snort ed, but his arms relaxed  around me, hand curved on
my breast, and in moments, he was asleep.I lay wide-eyed, watching stars through the open window .
Why had  I said that? It was Frank’ s favorite quotation, one he
always used to soothe Brianna or me when we worried over
things: Sufficient unto the day is the evil ther eof .
The air in the room was live; a light breeze stirred the
curtains, and coolness touched my cheek.
“Do you  know?”  I whispered, so undless. “Do you know she
has a son?”
There w as no answer , but peace  came gradually over me in
the quiet of the night, and I fell at last over the edge of dreams.6 5
R E T U R N  T O  F R A S E R ’ S  R I D G E
J ocasta was loath to part with her newest relative, but the
spring planting was already very late, and the homestead sadly
neglected; we needed to return t o the Ridge without delay , and
Brianna would not hear of stayi ng behind. Which was a good
thing, as it woul d have taken dynamite to separate Jamie from
his grandson.
Lord Joh n was well enough to tr avel; he came with us as far
as the Great Buf falo T rail Road, where he kissed Brianna and
the bab y , embraced Jamie and—to my shock—me, before
turning north toward V ir ginia and W illie.
“I’ll trust you to take care of them,” he said quietly to me,
with a nod toward the wagon, where two bright heads bent
together in mutual absorption over the bundle in Brianna’ s lap.
“Y ou m ay ,” I said, and presse d his hand. “I’ll trust you,
too.” He  lifted my hand to his lips, briefly , smiled at me, and
rode away without looking back.
A week later , we bumped over the grass-choked ruts to the
ridge where the wild strawberries grew , green and white and
red together , constancy and cou rage, sweetness and bitterness
mingled in the shadows of the trees.
The cabin was dirty and uncar ed for , its sheds empty and
full of dead leaves. The garden w as a tangle of old dried stalks
and random shoots, the paddock an empty shell. The
framework of the new house stood black and skeletal,
reproachful on the Ridge. The p lace looked barely habitable, a
ruin.
I had never felt such joy in any homecoming, ever .
Name,  I wrote , and paused. God knew , I thought. His last
name was open to question; his Christian name not yet even
considered.I called him “sw eetie” or “darling,” Lizzie called him “dear
lad,” Jamie addressed him with Gaelic formality either as
“grandson” or “a Ruaidh,”  the Red One—his dark infant fuzz
and dusky skin having given way to a blazing fair ruddiness
that made it cle ar to the most casual observer just who his
grandsire was—whoever his father might have been.
Brianna found no need to call him anything; she kept him
always with her , guarding him with a fierce absorption that
went beyond words. She would  not give him a formal name,
she said. Not yet.
“When?” Lizzie had asked, but Brianna didn’ t answer . I
knew when; when Roger came.
“And if  he doesna come,” said  Jamie privately to me, “I
expect th e poor wee lad will go to his grave wi’ no name at all.
Christ, that lass is stubborn!”
“She trusts Roger ,” I said evenly . “Y ou might try to do the
same.”
He gave me a sharp look.
“There is a dif ference between trust and hope, Sassenach,
and ye ken that as well as I do.”
“W ell, h ave a stab at hope, then, why don’ t you?” I snapped,
and turned my b ack on him, di pping my quill and shaking it
elaborately . Litt le Query Mark had a rash on his bottom, that
had kept him—and everyone else in the house—awake all
night. I was gr ainy—eyed an d cross, and not inclined to
tolerate any show of bad faith.
Jamie walked deliberately around the table and sat down
opposite me, resting his chin on his folded arms, so that I was
forced to look at him.
“I would,” he said, a shadow of humor in his eyes. “If I
could decide whether to hope he comes or hope he does not.”
I s miled , then reached across and ran the feathered tip of my
quill do wn the bridge of his nose in token of for giveness,before returning  to my work. He wrinkled his nose and
sneezed, then sat up straight, peering at the paper .
“What’ s that you’re doing, Sassenach?”
“Making out little Gizmo’ s birth certificate—so far as I
can,” I added.
“Gizmo?” he said doubtfully . “That will be a saint’ s name?”
“I sh ouldn’ t think so, though y ou never know , what with
people named Pantaleon and Onuphrius. Or Ferreolus.”
“Ferreolus? I dinna think I ken  that one.” He leaned back,
hands linked over his knee.
“One of  my favorites,” I told him, carefully filling in the
birthdate and time of birth—ev en that was an estimate, poor
thing. There were precisely two bits of unequivocal
information on this birth certific ate—the date and the name of
the doctor who’d delivered him.
“Ferreolus,” I went on with som e enjoyment, “is the patron
saint of sick p oultry . Christia n martyr . He was a Roman
tribune and a se cret Christian. Having been found out, he was
chained up in the prison cesspoo l to await trial—I suppose the
cells must have been full. Sounds rather a daredevil; he slipped
his c hains and es caped through the sewer . They caught up with
him, though, dragged him back and beheaded him.”
Jamie looked blank.
“What has that got to do wi’ chickens?”
“I haven ’ t the faintest idea. T ake it up with the V atican,” I
advised him.
“Mmphm. A ye, well, I’ve always been fond of Saint
Guignole, myself.” I could see the glint in his eye, but couldn’ t
resist.
“And what’ s he the patron of?”
“He’ s invoked against impotence.” The glint got stronger . “I
saw a statue of him in Brest once; they did say it had beenthere for a thous and years. ‘T was a miraculous statue—it had a
cock like a gun muzzle, and—”
“A what? ”
“W ell, the size wasna the mirac ulous bit,” he said, waving
me to silence. “Or not quite. The townsfolk say that for a
thousand years, folk have whittled away bits of it as holy
relics, a nd yet the cock is still as big as ever .” He grinned at
me. “They do say that a man w i’ a bit of St. Guignole in his
pocket can last a night and a day without tiring.”
“Not with the sa me woman, I don’ t imagine,” I said dryly .
“It does rather make you wo nder what he did to merit
sainthood, though, doesn’ t it?”
He laughed.
“Any man who’ s had his prayer  answered could tell ye that,
Sassenach.” He swiveled on his stool, looking out the open
door . Br ianna and Lizzie sat on the grass, skirts blooming
around them, watching the baby , who lay naked on an old
shawl on his stomach, red-arsed as a baboon.
Brianna Ellen,  I wrote neatly , then paused.
“Brianna Ellen Randall, do you think?” I asked. “Or Fraser?
Or both?”
He didn’ t turn around, but his shoulder moved in the faintest
of shrugs.
“Does it matter?”
“It m ight.” I ble w across the page, watching the shiny black
letters g o dull as the ink dried. “If Roger comes back—
whether he stays or not—if he chooses to acknowledge little
Anonymous, I suppose his name will be MacKenzie. If he
doesn’ t or won’ t, then I imagin e the baby takes his mother ’ s
name.”
He was silent for a moment, watching the two girls. They
had washed their hair in the creek that morning; Lizzie was
combing out Brianna’ s mane, the long strands shimmering like
red silk in the summer sun.“She calls herself Fraser ,” he said softly . “Or she did.”
I p ut down my quill and reach ed across the table to lay a
hand on his arm.
“She’ s for given you,” I said. “Y ou know she has.”
His shoulders moved; not quite a shrug, but the unconscious
attempt to ease some inner tightness.
“For now ,” he said. “But if the man doesna come?”
I hesitated. He was quite right; Brianna had for given him for
his origi nal mistake. Still, if Ro ger did not appear soon, she
would be bound to blame Jamie for it—not without reason, I
was forced to admit.
“Use bo th,” he said abruptly . “Let her choose.” I didn’ t
think he meant last names.
“He’ll come,” I said firmly , “and it will be all right.”
I p icked  up the quill, and added, not quite under my breath.
“I hope.”
He s tooped to dr ink, the water splashing over dark green rock.
It w as a  warm day; spring now , not autumn, but the moss was
still emerald-green underfoot.
The memory of a razor was far behind him; his beard was
thick and his ha ir hung past his shoulders. He’d bathed in a
creek the night before, and don e his best to wash himself and
his clothes, but he had no ill usions about his appearance.
Neither did he care, he told himself. What he looked like
didn’ t matter .
He turned toward the path wh ere he had left his horse,
limping. His foot ached, but that didn’ t matter either .
He rode  slowly through the clea ring where he had first met
Jamie Fraser . The leaves were  new and green, and in the
distance he could hear the raucous calling of the ravens.
Nothing stirred among the trees but the wild grasses. He
breathed deep and felt a stab o f memory , a broken remnant
from a past life, a shard sharp as glass.He turned his ho rse’ s head toward the top of the Ridge and
ur ged it on, kick ing gently with his good foot. Soon now . He
had no idea what his reception might be, but that didn’ t matter .
Nothing mattered now save the fact that he was here.6 6
C H I L D  O F  M Y  B L O O D
S ome enterprising  rabbit had dug its way under the stakes of
my garden again. One voracious rabbit could eat a cabbage
down to the roots, and from the looks of things, he’d brought
friends. I sighed and squatted to repair the damage, packing
rocks and earth back into the hole. The loss of Ian was a
constant ache; at such moments as this, I missed his horrible
dog as well.
I h ad brought a lar ge collection of cuttings and seeds from
River R un, most of which had  survived the journey . It was
mid-June, still time—barely—to  put in a fresh crop of carrots.
The sma ll patch of potato vin es was all right, so were the
peanut bushes; rabbits wouldn’ t touch those, and didn’ t care
for the aromatic herbs either , e xcept the fennel, which they
gobbled like licorice.
I wanted cabbages, though, to preserve as sauerkraut; come
midwinter , we would want food with some taste to it, as well
as some  vitamin  C. I had enough seed left, and could raise a
couple of decent crops before the weather turned cold, if I
could keep the bloody rabbits o f f. I drummed my fingers on
the handle of my basket, thinking. The Indians scattered
clippings of their hair around th e edges of the fields, but that
was more protection against deer than rabbits.
Jamie was the be st repellent, I decided. Nayawenne had told
me that the scen t of carnivore u rine would keep rabbits away
—and a  man who ate meat was  nearly as good as a mountain
lion, to say nothing of being more biddable. Y es, that would
do; he’d shot a deer only two d ays ago; it was still hanging. I
should b rew a fresh bucket of sp ruce beer to go with the roast
venison, though…
As I wandered toward the herb shed to see if I had any
maypop fruits for flavoring, my eye caught a movement at the
far e dge of the clearing. Thinkin g it was Jamie, I turned to goand info rm him of his new duty , only to be stopped dead in my
tracks when I saw who it was.
He l ooked worse than he had the last time I’d seen him,
which w as sayin g quite a bit. He was hatless, hair and beard a
glossy black tangle, and his clothes hung on him in tatters. He
was barefoot, one foot wrapped in a bundle of filthy rags, and
he limped badly .
He saw me at once, and stopped while I came up to him.
“I’m gla d it’ s you,” he said. “I wondered who I’d meet
first.” His voice sounded soft and rusty , and I wondered
whether he had spoken to a living soul since we had left him in
the mountains.
“Y our foot, Roger—”
“It doesn’ t matter .” He gripped my arm. “Are they all right?
The baby? And Brianna?”
“They’re fine. Everybody’ s in the house.” His head turned
toward the cabin, and I added, “Y ou have a son.”
He jerke d sharp ly back toward me, green eyes wide with
startlement.
“He’ s mine? I  have a son?”
“I su ppose you do,” I said. “Y o u’re here, aren’ t you?” The
look of startlement—and hope, I realized—faded slowly . He
looked into my eyes and seemed to see how I felt, for he
smiled—not easily , no more than a painful lifting of the corner
of his mouth—but he smiled.
“I’m here,” he said, and turne d toward the cabin and its
open doorway .
Jamie sat in his rolled-up shirt sleeves at the table, shoulder
to sh oulder with Brianna, frown ing at a set of house drawings
as she pointed with her quill. Both of them were liberally
covered with ink, being inclined to enthusiasm when
discussing architecture. The baby snored peacefully in his
cradle nearby; Brianna was rock ing it absently with one foot.Lizzie was spinning by the wind ow , humming softly under her
breath as the great wheel went round.
“V ery domestic,” Roger said under his breath, stopping in
the door -yard. “Seems a shame to disturb them.”
“Do you have a choice?” I said.
“A ye, I do,” he replied. “But I’ve made it already .” He
walked purposefully up to the open door and stepped inside.
Jamie reacted instantly to this unfamiliar darkening of his
door; he  pushed Brianna of f t he bench and lunged for his
pistols on the wall. He had one l eveled at Roger ’ s chest before
he realized what—or whom—he was looking at, and lowered
it with a small exclamation of disgust.
“Oh, it’ s you,” he said.
The baby , rudely wakened by the crash of the overturned
bench, was shrieking like a fire  engine. Brianna scooped him
out of his cradle and clasped hi m to her breast, looking wild-
eyed at the apparition in the door .
I had  for gotten that she hadn’ t had the benefit of seeing him
even as recently as I had; he m ust be substantially changed
from the young history professo r who’d left her in W ilmington
nearly a year before.
Roger took a ste p toward her; instinctively , she took a step
back. H e stood quite still, looking at the child. She sat down
on the nursing stool, fumbling at her bodice, bending
protectively over the baby . She pulled a shawl across her
shoulder and gave him a breast  in its shelter , and he stopped
squawking at once.
I saw Roger ’ s eyes shift from the baby to Jamie. Jamie
stood beside Brianna with that u tter stillness that so frightened
me—straight and still as a stick  of dynamite, with a lit match
laid a hairsbreadth from the fuse.
The flame of Brianna’ s head moved slightly , looking from
one to the other , and I saw what she saw; the echo of Jamie’ s
dangerous stillness in Roger . It was both unexpected andshocking; I had never seen any  resemblance between them at
all—and yet at the moment th ey might have been day and
dark, images of fire and night, each mirroring the other .
MacKenzie,  I thought suddenly . V iking beasts, bloody-
minded and big. And saw th e third echo of that flaming
heritage blaze up in Brianna’ s e yes, the only thing alive in her
face.
I should  say something, do something, to break the awful
stillness. But my mouth was dry , and there was nothing I could
say in any case.
Roger ’ s reached his hand toward Jamie, palm up, and the
gesture held no hint of supplication.
“I don’ t  imagine  it pleases you any more than it does me,”
he said, in his rusty voice, “but you are my nearest kinsman.
Cut me. I’ve come to swear an oath in our shared blood.”
I c ouldn’ t tell w hether Jamie hesitated or not; time seemed
to h ave stopped, the air in the  room crystallized around us.
Then I watched Jamie’ s dirk cut  the air , honed edge draw swift
across the thin, tanned wrist, and  blood well red and sudden in
its path.
T o my surprise,  Roger didn’ t lo ok at Brianna, or reach for
her hand . Instead, he swiped his thumb across his bleeding
wrist, an d stepped close to her ,  eyes on the baby . She pulled
back instinctively , but Jamie’ s hand came down on her
shoulder .
She still ed at once under its weight, at once a promise of
restraint and protection, but she held the child tight, cradled
against her breast. Roger knelt in front of her , and reaching
out, pushed the shawl aside an d smeared a broad red cross
upon the downy curve of the baby’ s forehead.
“Y ou are  blood of my blood,” he said softly , “and bone of
my bone. I claim thee as my son  before all men, from this day
forever .” He looked up at Jam ie, challenging. After a long
moment, Jamie gave the slightest nod of acknowledgment, and
stepped back, letting his hand fall from Brianna’ s shoulder .Roger ’ s gaze shifted to Brianna.
“What do you call him?”
“Nothing—yet.” Her eyes rested on him, questioning. It was
only too clear that the man who had come back was not the
man who’d left her .
Roger ’ s eyes were fixed on hers as he stood. Blood was still
dripping from his wrist. W ith a small shock, I realized that she
was as changed to him as he to her .
“He’ s my son,” Roger said quietly , nodding at the baby .
“Are you my wife?”
Brianna had gone pale to the lips.
“I don’ t know .”
“This m an says that you are handfast.” Jamie took a step
closer to her , watching Roger . “Is that true?”
“W e—we were.”
“W e still are.” Roger took a d eep breath, and I realized
suddenly that he was about to fall over , whether from hunger ,
exhaustion, or the shock of bei ng cut. I took his arm, made
him sit down, sent Lizzie to the dairy shed for milk, and
fetched down my small medical box to bind his wrist.
This sm all bustle of normality se emed to break the tension a
little. Meaning to help things along in that direction, I broke
out a bottle of brandy from River Run, pouring a cup for
Jamie, a nd putting a good-sized dollop in Roger ’ s milk. Jamie
gave me a wry look, but sat back on the replaced bench and
sipped his drink.
“V erra well, then,” he said, calli ng the meeting to order . “If
you’re h andfast, Brianna, then you’re married and this man is
your husband.”
Brianna’ s flush deepened, but she looked at Roger , not
Jamie.
“Y ou said handfasting was good for a year and a day .”“And you said ye did not want anything temporary .”
She flinched at that, but then set her lips firmly .
“I didn’ t . But I didn’ t know what was going to happen.” She
glanced at me and Jamie, then back at Roger . “They told you
—that the baby isn’ t yours?”
Roger raised his eyebrows.
“Oh, but he is mine. Mm?” He lifted his bandaged wrist in
illustration.
Brianna’ s face had lost its frostbitten look; she was pink
around the edges.
“Y ou know what I mean.”
He met her eyes straight on.
“I know what you mean,” he said softly . “I am sorry for it.”
“It wasn’ t your fault.”
Roger glanced at Jamie.
“A ye, it was,” h e said quietly . “I should have stayed with
you; seen you safe.”
Brianna’ s brows drew together .
“I t old you to  go, and I meant it.” She twitched her
shoulders impatiently . “But it doesn’ t matter now .” She took a
firmer hold on the baby and sat up straight.
“I just want to know one thing,” she said, her voice
trembling only a little. “I want to know why you came back.”
He set his empty cup down deliberately .
“Did ye not want me to come back?”
“Never mind what I wanted. What I want now is to know .
Did you come back because yo u wanted to—or because you
thought you should?”
He looked at her for a long moment, then down at his hands,
still clasped around the cup.“Perhaps both. Perhaps neither . I don’ t know ,” he said very
softly . “That’ s God’ s truth; I don’ t know .”
“Did you go to the stone circle?” she asked. He nodded, not
looking at her . He fumbled in his pocket, and laid the big opal
stone on the table.
“I went there. Th at’ s why I was long in coming; it took me a
long time to find it.”
She was silent for a moment, then nodded.
“Y ou didn’ t go b ack. But you can. Maybe you should.” She
looked at him straight on, her gaze the twin of her father ’ s.
“I d on’ t want to  live with you, if you came back for duty ,”
she said . She looked at me then , her eyes soft with pain. “I’ve
seen a marriage made from obligation—and I’ve seen one
made fo r love. If I hadn’ t—” She stopped and swallowed, then
went on , looking  at Roger . “If I hadn’ t seen both, I could have
lived with obligation. But I have  seen both—and I won’ t.”
I fel t as though someone had struck me in the breastbone.
My  m arriag es, she meant. I looked  for Jamie, and found him
looking at me w ith the same ex pression of shock I knew was
on m y own face . He coughed to break the silence, and cleared
his throat, turning to Roger .
“When were ye handfast?”
“September the second,” Roger answered promptly .
“And no w it is mid-June.” Jam ie glanced from one to the
other , frowning.
“W ell, mo nighean,  if you are handfast with this man, then
you are bound to him; there’ s no question.” He turned and
gave Roger a d ark blue stare. “So you’ll live here, as her
husband. And on September the  third, she will choose whether
she’ll wed ye by  priest and book—or whether ye’ll leave and
trouble her no more. Y e’ve that long to decide why you’re here
—and convince her of it.”
Roger and Brianna both started  to speak, to protest, but he
stopped them, picking up the dirk he had left on the table. Helowered the blade gently , until it touched the cloth over
Roger ’ s chest.
“Y e’ll live here as her husband, I said. But if ye touch her
unwilling, I’ll cut your heart out and feed it to the pig. Y e
understand me?”
Roger stared down at the g leaming blade for a long
moment, no expression visible beneath the thick beard, then
lifted his head to meet Jamie’ s eyes.
“Y ou think I’d trouble a woman who didn’ t want me?”
A rather awkward question, given that Jamie had beaten
him to pulp under precisely that mistaken assumption. Roger
put a hand on Ja mie’ s and shoved the dirk point-first into the
table. He pushed back his stool  abruptly and stood up, turned
on his heel, and left.
Just as quickly , Jamie stood and went after him, sheathing
his dirk as he went.
Brianna looked at me helplessly .
“What do you think he’ll—”
She was  interrupted by a loud  thud and an equally loud
grunt, as a heavy body struck the wall outside.
“T reat her badly and I’ll rip your balls of f and cram them
down your throat,” Jamie’ s voice said softly , in Gaelic.
I glanced at Brianna, and saw that her mastery of Gaelic
was suf f icient to have appreciated the gist of this. Her mouth
opened, but she didn’ t get a word out.
There w as the sound of a quick scuf fle outside, ending in an
even louder thump, as of a head striking logs.
Roger didn’ t have Jamie’ s air of  quiet menace, but his voice
rang with sincerity . “Lay hands on me once more, you fucking
sod, and  I’ll stuf f your head bac k up your arse where it came
from!”
There was a mo ment’ s silence, and then the sound of feet
moving of f. A moment later , Jam ie made a Scottish noise deepin his throat, and moved of f too.
Brianna’ s eyes were round as she looked at me.
“T estosterone poisoning,” I said, with a shrug.
“Can you do an ything about it?” she asked. The corner of
her mouth twitched, though I couldn’ t tell whether with
laughter or incipient hysteria.
I pushed a hand through my hair , considering.
“W ell,” I said finally , “there a re only two things they do
with it, and one of them is try to kill each other .”
Brianna rubbed her nose.
“Uh-huh,” she said. “And the ot her…” Our eyes met with a
perfect understanding.
“I’ll take care o f your father ,” I said. “But Roger ’ s up to
you.”
Life on the mo untain was a trifle tense, with Brianna and
Roger behaving respectively like a trapped hare and a cornered
badger , Jamie fixing Roger with brooding looks of Gaelic
disapproval ove r the supper table, Lizzie falling over her feet
to apolo gize to everyone in sig ht, and the baby deciding that
the time was ripe to have nightly attacks of screaming colic.
It was probably the colic that sp urred Jamie into a frenzy of
activity on the n ew house. Fer gus and some of the tenants had
kindly p ut in a small planting f or us, so that while we would
have no  extra corn this year to  sell, at least we would eat.
Freed of  the need to tend a lar ge acreage, Jamie instead spent
every free moment on the ridge, hammering and sawing.
Roger was doing his best to assist with the other farm
chores, though hampered by his lame foot. He had several
times br ushed o f f my attempts t o treat it, but now I refused to
be put of f any longer . A few days after his arrival, I made my
preparations and informed him firmly that I meant to deal with
it first thing in the morning.The tim e come, I made him lie down, and unwrapped the
layers of rags wound around his foot. The sweet-rotten smell
of d eep infection tickled my no se, but I thanked God to see
neither the red streaks of blood poisoning nor the black tinges
of incipient gangrene. It was bad enough, for all that.
“Y ou’ve got chronic abscesses, deep in the tissue,” I said,
probing firmly with my thum bs. I could feel the squishy
yielding of pockets of pus, and as I squeezed harder , the half-
healed wounds broke open and a nasty yellow-gray slime
oozed from an inflamed crack at the edge of the sole.
Roger went white under his tan , and his hands clenched on
the wooden frame of the bed, but he didn’ t make a sound.
“Y ou’re lucky ,” I said, still work ing his foot back and forth,
flexing the tiny joints of the metacarpals. “Y ou’ve been
breaking open the abscesses and partially draining them by
walking on it. T hey re-form, of course, but the movement’ s
kept the infection from moving much deeper , and it’ s kept
your foot flexible.”
“Oh, good,” he said faintly .
“Bree, I  need you to help,” I sa id, turning casually toward
the far end of th e room, where the two girls sat, taking turns
between baby and spinning wheel.
“I could ; let me do it.” Lizzie sprang up, eager to help.
Remorseful ove r her part in Roger ’ s ordeal, she had been
trying to make amends in any way possible, constantly
bringing him bits of food, of fe ring to mend his clothes, and
driving him mad generally with her expressions of contrition.
I smiled at her .
“Y es, you can help. T ake the baby so Brianna can come
here. Why don’ t you take him outside for a little air?”
W ith a dubious glance, Lizzie d id as I said, scooping little
Gizmo i nto her arms and murmuring endearments to him as
they went out. Brianna came to stand beside me, carefully
keeping her eyes of f Roger ’ s face.“I’m go ing to open this up and drain it the best I can,” I
said, ind icating the long black-crusted slit. “Then we’ll have to
debride the dead tissue, disinfect it, and hope for the best.”
“And what exactly does ‘debride ’ mean?” Roger asked. I let
go of his foot and his body relaxed, very slightly .
“Cleansing of a wound by the sur gical or nonsur gical
removal of dead tissue or bone ,” I said. I touched his foot.
“Luckily , I don’ t think the bone ’ s been af fected, though there
may be  a bit of damage in the cartilage between the
metacarpals. Don’ t worry ,” I said, patting his leg. “The
debridement isn’ t going to hurt.”
“It isn’ t?”
“No. It’ s the d raining and disinfecting that will hurt.” I
glanced up at Bree. “Go take hold of his hands, please.”
She hesitated no more than a second, then moved to the
head of the couch and held ou t her hands to him. He took
them, hi s eyes on her . It was the first time they had touched
each other in nearly a year .
“Hold on tight,” I instructed them. “This is the nasty part.”
I di dn’ t look up, but worked quickly , opening the half-
healed wounds cleanly with a scalpel, pressing out as much
pus and dead m atter as I could. I could feel the tension
quivering in his leg muscles, and the slight arcing of his body
as the pain lifted and bent him, but he didn’ t say a word.
“Do you want something to bite down on, Roger?” I asked,
taking out my bottle of dilute alcohol-water mixture for
irrigating. “It’ s going to sting a bit, now .”
He didn’ t answer; Brianna did.
“He’ s all right,” she said steadily . “Go ahead.”
He made a muf fled noise when I began to wash out the
wounds, and rolled halfway onto  his side, his leg convulsing. I
kept tigh t hold of his foot and finished the job as quickly as
possible. When I let go and rec orked the bottle, I looked up
toward t he head  of the bed. She was sitting on the bed, herarms locked tight around his sho ulders. His face was buried in
her lap, his arms around her waist. Her face was white, but she
gave me a strained smile.
“Is it over?”
“The ba d part is. Just a little mo re to do,” I assured them. I
had made my p reparations two days before; at this time of
year , there was no dif ficulty . I went outside to the smoking
shed. Th e venison carcass hung in the shadows, bathing in
clouds of protectively fragrant hickory smoke. My goal was
less thoroughly preserved meat, though.
Good, it had be en out long eno ugh. I picked up the small
saucer f rom its place near the d oor and carried it back to the
house.
“Phew!” Brianna wrinkled her nose as I came in. “What’ s
that? It smells like rotten meat.”
“That’ s what it is.” The partia l remains of a snare-killed
rabbit, to be exa ct, retrieved from the edge of the garden and
set out to wait for visitors.
She was  still holding his hand s. I smiled to myself and
resumed my place, picking up t he wounded foot and reaching
for my long-nosed forceps.
“Mama! What are you doing? ”
“It won ’ t hurt,” I said. I squeezed the foot slightly ,
spreading one of my sur gical i ncisions. I picked one of the
small white grubs out of the stinking scraps of rabbit meat and
inserted it deftly into the gaping slit.
Roger ’ s eyes had been closed, his forehead sheened with
sweat.
“What?” he said, lifting his h ead and squinting over his
shoulder in an e f fort to see wha t I was doing. “What are you
doing?”
“Putting maggots in the wounds,” I said, intent on my work.
“I learned it from an old Indian lady I used to know .”T win so unds ind icative of shock and nausea came from the
bedhead, but I kept a tight hold on his foot and went on with it.
“It work s,” I said, frowning slightly as I opened another
incision and deposited three of the wriggling white larvae.
“Much b etter than the usual means of debridement; for that,
I’d have to ope n up your foot much more extensively , and
physically scrape out as much dead tissue as I could reach—
which would not only hurt like the dickens, it would likely
cripple y ou permanently . Our little friends here eat dead tissue,
though; they can get into tiny p laces where I couldn’ t reach,
and do a nice, thorough job.”
“Our fr iends t he maggots,” Brianna muttered. “God,
Mama!”
“What, exactly , is going to stop them eating my entire leg?”
Roger asked with a thoroughly spurious attempt at
detachment. “They…um…they spr ead,  don’ t they?”
“Oh, no,” I assured him cheerfully . “Maggots are larval
forms; t hey don ’ t breed. They a lso don’ t eat live tissue—only
the nasty dead stuf f. If there’ s  enough to get them through
their pup al cycle, they’ll develop into tiny flies and fly of f—if
not, when the food’ s exhausted, they’ll simply crawl out,
searching for more.”
Both fac es were a pale green by now . Finished with the
work, I wrappe d the foot loosely in gauze bandages, and
patted Roger ’ s leg.
“There n ow ,” I said. “Don’ t wo rry , I’ve seen it before. One
brave to ld me that they tickle a bit, gnawing, but it doesn’ t
hurt at all.”
I picked up the saucer and took it outside to wash. At the
edge of the door yard I met Jamie, coming down from the new
house, Ruaidh in his arms.
“There’ s Grannie,” he informed the baby , removing his
thumb fr om Ruaidh’ s mouth and wiping saliva from it against
the side of his kilt. “Is she no a bonny woman?”“Gleh,” said Ruaidh, focusing a slightly cross-eyed look on
his gran dfather ’ s shirt button, which he began to mouth in a
meditative fashion.
“Don’ t l et him swallow that,” I said, standing on tiptoe and
kissing first Jamie, then the baby . “Where’ s Lizzie?”
“I found  the lassie sitting on a stump, greetin’,” he said. “So
I took the lad and sent her of f to be by herself for a bit.”
“She was crying? What’ s the matter?”
A small shadow crossed Jamie’ s face.
“She’ll b e grieving for Ian, won ’ t she?” Putting that and his
own grief aside, he took my arm and turned back toward the
trail up the ridge.
“Come up wi’ m e, Sassenach, and see what I’ve done the
day . I’ve  laid the floor for your sur gery; all that’ s needed now
is a bit of a temporary roof, a nd it’ll do for sleeping.” He
glanced back toward the cabin. “I was thinking that
MacKenzie might be put there—for the time being.”
“Good idea.” Even with the ad ditional small room to the
cabin that he had  built for Brianna and Lizzie, conditions were
more than crowded. And if Ro ger was to be bedridden for
several d ays, I would as soon no t have him lying in the middle
of the cabin.
“How are they faring?” he asked, with assumed casualness.
“Who? Brianna and Roger , you mean?”
“Who el se?” he asked, dropping the casualness. “Is it well
between them?”
“Oh, I think so. They’re getting used to each other again.”
“They are?”
“Y es,” I said, with a glance back at the cabin. “He’ s just
thrown up in her lap.”6 7
T H E  T O S S  O F  A  C O I N
R oger rolled onto his side and sat up. There was no glass in
the windows as yet—none nee ded, so long as the summer
weather kept fine—and the sur gery was at the front of the new
house, facing the slope. If he craned his neck to one side, he
could w atch Brianna most of the way down to the cabin,
before the chestnut trees hid her from view .
A last flick of rusty homespun, and she was gone. She’d
come w ithout the baby this evening; he didn’ t know whether
that was  progress or the rever se. They’d been able to talk
without the incessant interruptio ns of wet diapers, squawking,
fussing, feeding, and spitting up; that was a rare luxury .
She hadn’ t stayed as long as usual, though—he could feel
the presence of the child pulling her away , as though she were
tethered to it by a rubber band. He did not resent the little
bugger , he told himself grimly .  It was only that…well, only
that he resented  the little bugge r . Didn’ t mean he didn’ t like
him.
He hadn’ t eaten yet; hadn’ t wanted to waste any of their rare
solitude. He uncovered the basket she’d brought and inhaled
the w arm, rich s cent of squirrel stew and salt-rising bread with
fresh butter . Apple tart, too.
His foot  still throbbed, and it took considerable ef fort not to
think of  the helpful maggots, but in spite of that, his appetite
had returned with a vengeance. He ate slowly , savoring both
the food and the quiet dusk creeping over the mountainside
below .
Fraser had known what he was about when he’d chosen the
site of this ho use. It commanded the entire slope of the
mountain, with a view that ran to the distant river and beyond,
with mist-filled  valleys in the distance and dark peaks that
touched a star -strewn sky . It w as one of the most solitary ,magnificent, heart-wrenchingly romantic spots he had ever
seen.
And Brianna was down below , nursing a small bald parasite,
while he was here—alone with a few dozen of his own.
He put the empty basket on the floor , hopped to the slop jar
in th e co rner , th en back to his lonely bed on the new sur gery
table. W hy in hell had he told her he didn’ t know , when she’d
asked why he’d come back?
W ell, because just then, he hadn’ t  k nown . He’d been
wandering in the bloody wilderness for months, half starved
and of f his head with solitude a nd pain. He hadn’ t seen her in
nearly a  year—a year in which  he’d gone through hell and
back. He’d sat o n the clif f above that bloody stone circle for
three solid days without food or fire, thinking things over ,
trying to  decide. And in the end he’d simply gotten up and
begun walking, knowing that it was the only possible choice.
Obligation? Love? How in hell could you have love without
obligation?
He turned restlessly onto his other side, turning his back on
the glorious night of scent and s un-warmed winds. The trouble
with bei ng restored to health was that some parts of him were
getting a  damn sight too health y for comfort, given that the
chance of their having any proper exercise was something
below nil.
He could n’ t even suggest such a  thing to Brianna. One, she
might think he’d come back solely for that,  and  two, the
bloody Great Scot had not been joking about the pig.
He knew now . He’d come back because he couldn’ t live on
the othe r side. If it were guilt o ver abandoning them—or the
simple knowledge that he would die without her…either or
both, tak e your choice. He knew what he was giving up, and
none of it bloody mattered; he had to be here, that was all.
He flopp ed onto  his back, starin g up at the dim paleness of
the pine boards that roofed his s helter . Thumps and skitteringsannounced the nightly visitation of squirrels from the nearby
hickory tree, who found it a convenient shortcut.
How to tell her that, so she would believe it? Christ, she was
so jumpy that she’d barely let him touch her . A brush of lips, a
touch of  hands, and she was sid ling away . Except for the day
when she’d held him while Claire had tortured his foot. Then,
she’d been truly there for hi m, hanging on with all her
strength. He could still feel h er arms around him, and the
memory gave him a small thump of satisfaction in the pit of
his stomach.
Thinking on that, he wondered a  bit. T rue, the doctoring had
hurt like  buggery , but it was nothing he couldn’ t have stood
with a little tooth-gritting, and Claire, with her battlefield
experience, would certainly have known that.
Done it on purpose, had she? Given Bree a chance to touch
him without feeling pressured or  pursued? Given him a chance
to re member just how strong th e pull between them was? He
rolled again, onto his stomach t his time, and lay with his chin
on his folded arms, looking out into the soft dark outside.
She could have the other foot, if she’d do it again.
Claire lo oked in  on him once or twice each day , but he waited
until the  end of the week, when she came to remove the
bandages, the maggots having presumably done their dirty
work and—he hoped to God—cleared out.
“Oh, lovely ,” she said, poking  his foot with a sur geon’ s
ghoulish delight. “Granulating beautifully; almost no
inflammation left.”
“Great,” he said. “Are they gone?”
“The maggots? Oh, yes,” she assured him. “They pupate
within a  few days. Did a nice  job, didn’ t they?” She ran a
delicate thumbnail along the side of his foot, which tickled.
“I’ll take your w ord for it. I’m clear to walk on it, then?” He
flexed the foot experimentally . It hurt a bit, but nothing
compared to what it had before.“Y es. D on’ t wear shoes for a few more days, though. And
for God’ s sake, don’ t step on anything sharp.”
She beg an to put away her things, humming to herself. She
looked happy but tired; there were shadows under her eyes.
“Kid still howling at night?” he asked.
“Y es, poor thing. Can you hear him up here?”
“No. Y ou just look tired.”
“I’m not surprised. Nobody’ s had a good night’ s sleep all
week, especially  poor Bree, since she’ s the only one who can
feed him.” She yawned briefly and shook her head, blinking.
“Jamie’ s got the back bedroom here nearly floored; he wants
to move up here as soon as it’ s ready—give Bree and the baby
more room, and, not incidentall y , have a little peace and quiet
ourselves.”
“Good idea. Ah—speaking of Bree…”
“Mm?”
No use dragging it out; better say it straight.
“Look—I’m try ing all I can. I l ove her , and I want to show
her that, but—she sheers of f. Sh e comes and we talk, and it’ s
great, but then I  go to put an ar m around her or kiss her , and
suddenly she’ s across the room,  picking leaves of f the floor . Is
there something wrong, something I should do?”
She gave him one of those disconcerting yellow looks of
hers; straightforward and ruthless as a hawk.
“Y ou were her first, weren’ t you? The first man she slept
with, I mean.”
He felt the blood rising his cheeks.
“I—ah—yes.”
“W ell, th en. So far her entire experience of what one might
call the delights  of sex consist s of being deflowered—and I
don’ t care how gentle you were about it, it tends to hurt—
being ra ped two days later , then giving birth. Y ou think this iscalculated to make her fall s wooning into your arms in
anticipation of your reclaiming your marital rights?”
Y ou aske d for it,  he thought, and you got it. Right between
the eyes . His cheeks burned hotter than they ever had with
fever .
“I never thought of that,” he muttered to the wall.
“W ell, naturally not,” she said, sounding torn between
exasperation an d amusement. “Y ou’re a bloody man . That’ s
why I’m telling you.”
He took  a deep breath, and reluctantly turned back to face
her .
“And just what ar e  you telling me?”
“That she’ s afraid,” she said. She cocked her head to one
side, eva luating him. “Though it’ s not you she’ s afraid of, by
the way .”
“It’ s not?”
“No,” she said bluntly . “She may have convinced herself
that she has to k now why you c ame back, but that’ s not it—a
regiment of blind men could see that. It’ s that she’ s afraid she
won’ t be able to—mmphm.” S he raised one brow at him,
encompassing a wealth of indelicate suggestion.
“I se e,” he said, taking a deep br eath. “And just what do you
suggest I do about it?”
She picked up her basket and put it over her arm.
“I don’ t  know ,”  she said, givin g him another yellow look.
“But I think you should be careful.”
He had just about recovered his equanimity after this
unsettling consultation, when another visitor darkened his
door . Jamie Fraser , bearing gifts.
“I’ve br ought ye  a razor ,” Fras er said, looking critically at
him. “And some hot water .”Claire had clipped his beard short with her sur gical scissors
a few days earlier , but he had felt too shaky then to attempt
shaving with what was called a “cutthroat” razor for good
reason.
“Thanks.”
Fraser had brought a small looking glass and a pot of
shaving soap as well. V ery thou ghtful. He could have wished
that Fraser might have left hi m alone, rather than leaning
against the doorframe, lending a critical eye to the
proceedings, but under the circumstances Roger could scarcely
ask him to leave.
Even with the unwelcome spectator , it was a sublime relief
to get rid of the beard. It itched like a fiend, and he hadn’ t seen
his own face in months.
“W ork going well?” He tried for  a bit of polite conversation,
rinsing the blade between stroke s. “I heard you hammering in
the back this morning.”
“Oh, aye.” Fraser ’ s eyes followed his every move with
interest—sizing him up, he thought. “I’ve got the floor laid,
and a bit of roof on. Claire and I will sleep up here tonight, I
think.”
“Ah.” R oger stretched his neck, negotiating the turn of his
jaw . “Claire’ s told me I can wa lk again; let me know which
chores I can take over .”
Jamie nodded, arms crossed.
“Are ye handy wi’ tools?”
“Haven’ t done a lot of building,” Roger admitted. A
birdhouse done in school didn’ t count, he suspected.
“I d inna suppose you’ll be mu ch hand wi’ a plow , or a
farrowing hog?” There was a definite glimmer of amusement
in Fraser ’ s eyes.
Roger lifted his chin, clearing the last of the stubble from
his neck . He’d thought about it, the last few days. Not muchcall for the skills of either a hi storian or a folk singer , on an
eighteenth-century hill farm.
“No,” h e said evenly , putting down the razor . “Nor do I
know ho w to milk a cow , build a chimney , split shingles, drive
horses, shoot bears, gut deer , or spit someone with a sword.”
“No?” Overt amusement.
Roger s plashed water on his fa ce and toweled it dry , then
turned to face Fraser .
“No. What I’ve got is a strong back. That do you?”
“Oh, aye. Couldna ask better , co uld I?” One side of Fraser ’ s
mouth curled up. “Know one end of a shovel from the other ,
do ye?”
“That much I know .”
“Then ye’ll do f ine.” Fraser shoved himself away from the
doorframe. “Claire’ s garden needs spading, there’ s barley to be
turned a t the still, and there’ s an almighty heap of manure
waitin’ in the s table. After that, I’ll show ye how to milk a
cow .”
“Thanks.” He wiped the razor , put it back in the bag, and
handed the lot over .
“Claire and I are going to Fer gus’ s place the eve,” Fraser
said casually , accepting it. “T akin’ the wee maid to help
Marsali for a bit.”
“Ah? W ell…enjoy yourselves.”
“Oh, I expect we will.” Frase r paused in the doorway .
“Brianna though t she’d stay; the bairn’ s settled a bit, and she
doesna want to upset him wi’ the walk.”
Roger st ared hard at the other man. Y ou could read anything
—or nothing—in those slanted blue eyes.
“Oh, aye?” he s aid. “So you’re telling me they’ll be alone?
I’ll keep an eye on them, then.”
One ruddy brow lifted an inch.“I’m sure ye will.” Fraser ’ s hand reached out and opened
over the empty basin. There wa s a small metallic clink and a
red spar k glowed against the p ewter . “Y e’ll mind I told ye,
MacKenzie—my daughter doesna need a coward.”
Before h e could  reply , the brow  dropped, and Fraser gave
him a level blue look.
“Y e’ve cost me a lad I loved, an d I’m no inclined to like ye
for i t.” He glanced down at Roger ’ s foot, then up. “But I’ve
maybe cost ye more than that. I’ll call the score settled—or not
—at your word.”
Astonished, Roger nodded, then found his voice.
“Done.”
Fraser nodded, and disappeared as quickly as he’d come,
leaving Roger staring at the empty doorway .
He l ifted the lat ch and pushed gently on the cabin’ s door . It
was bolt ed. So much for the notion of waking Sleeping Beauty
with a kiss. He  lifted a fist to knock, then stopped. W rong
heroine. Sleepin g Beauty hadn’ t had an irascible dwarf in bed
with her , ready to yell the house down at any disturbance.
He circled the small cabin, checking the windows, names
like Sneezy and Grumpy drifting  through the back of his mind.
What would they call this one? Noisy? Smelly?
The house was snug as a drum,  oiled skins nailed over the
windows. He could punch one loose, but the last thing he
wanted was to scare her by breaking in on her .
Slowly , he circled the house on ce more. The sensible thing
was to go back to the sur gery and wait till morning. He could
talk to her then. Better than waking her out of a sound sleep,
waking the kid.
Y es, that was plainly the thing to do. Claire would take the
little bas—the baby , if he asked  her . They could talk calmly ,
without fear of interruption, walk in the wood, get things
settled between them. Right. That was it, then.T en minutes later he had circled  the house twice more, and
was standing in the grass at the back, looking at the faint glow
of the window .
“What the hell do you think you are?” he muttered to
himself. “A bloody moth?”
The creak of boards prevented his answering himself. He
shot around the end of the ho use in time to see a white-
gowned figure float ghostlike down the path toward the privy .
“Brianna?”
The figure whirled, with a small yelp of fright.
“It’ s me ,” he said, and saw the dark blotch of her hand press
against the white of her nightdress, over her heart.
“What’ s the matter with you, sneaking up on me like that?”
she demanded furiously .
“I want to talk to you.”
She didn ’ t answ er , but whipped round and made of f down
the path.
“I said, I want to talk to you,” he repeated more loudly ,
following.
” I  want to go to the bathroom,” she said. “Go away .” She
shut the door of the privy with a decisive slam.
He retre ated a short distance up the path and waited for her
to emer g e. Her step slowed when she saw him, but there was
no way around him without stepping into the long, wet grass.
“Y ou shouldn’ t be up walking on that foot,” she said.
“The foot’ s fine.”
“I think you should go back to bed.”
“All righ t,” he said, and moved solidly into the center of the
path in front of her . “Where?”
“Where?” She froze, but made no pretense of not
understanding.“Up there?” He jerked a thumb at the ridge. “Or here?”
“I—ah—”
Be car eful,  her mot her said , and my daughter doesna need a
cowar d,  said her father . He could flip a bloody coin, but for
the mom ent he was taking Jamie Fraser ’ s advice, and damn
the torpedoes.
“Y ou sa id you’d seen a marriag e of obligation and one of
love. And do yo u think the one  cuts out the other? Look—I
spent th ree days  in that godfors aken circle, thinking. And by
God, I thought. I thought of sta ying, and I thought of going.
And I stayed.”
“So far .  Y ou don’ t know what you’d be giving up, if you
stay for good.”
“I do! And even  if I did not, I know bloody well what I’d be
giving u p by going.” He grippe d her shoulder , the light gauze
of her shift coarse under his hand. She was very warm.
“I could  not go, and live with myself, thinking I’d left
behind a  child who might be m ine—who is  mine.” His voice
dropped a little. “And I could not go, and live without you.”
She hesitated, drawing back, trying to escape his hand.
“My father—my fathers—”
“Look, I’m neither one of your bloody fathers! Give me
credit for my own sins, at least!”
“Y ou haven’ t committed any sins,” she said, her voice
sounding choked.
“No, and neither have you.”
She look ed up at him, and he caught the gleam of a dark,
slanted eye.
“If I hadn’ t—” she began.
“And if I hadn’ t,” he interrupted roughly . “Drop it, aye? It
doesn’ t matter what you’ve don e—or I. I said I was neither ofyour fat hers, an d I meant it. But there they are, the two of
them, and you know them well—far better than I.
“Did Fra nk Randall not love you as his own? T ake you as
the c hild of his heart, knowing  you  we re the blood of another
man, and one he’d good reason to hate?”
He took her other shoulder and gave her a little shake.
“Did that redheaded bastard not love your mother more than
life? And love y ou enough to sacrifice even that love to save
you?”
She made a sma ll, choked noise, and a pang went through
him at the sound, but he would not release her .
“If you believe it of them,” he  said, his voice little more
than a whisper , “then by God you must believe it of me. For I
am a man like them, and by all I hold holy , I do love you.”
Slowly her head rose, and her breath was warm on his face.
“W e hav e time,” he said softly ,  and knew suddenly why it
had been  so important to talk to her now , here in the dark. He
reached for her hand, clasped it flat against his breast.
“Do you feel it? Do you feel my heart beat?”
“Y es,” she whispered, and slowly brought their linked hands
to her own breast, pressing his palm against the thin white
gauze.
“This is our time,” he said. “Until that shall stop—for one of
us, for both—it  is our time. Now . W ill ye waste it, Brianna,
because you are afraid?”
“No,” she said, and her voice was thick, but clear . “I won’ t.”
There w as a sudden thin wa il from the house, and a
surprising gush of moist heat against his palm.
“I h ave to go,” she said, pulling away . She took two steps,
then turn ed. “Co me in,” she sai d, and ran up the path in front
of him, fleet and white as the ghost of a deer .By the time he reached the door , she had already fetched the
baby fro m his cradle. She had been in bed; the quilt was
thrown back and the hollow of her body was printed on the
feather bed. Looking self-conscious, she sidled past him and
lay down.
“I us ually feed h im in bed at night. He stays asleep longer if
he’ s next to me.”
Roger m ade some murmur of a ssent, and drew up the low
nursing chair before the fire. It was very warm in the room,
and the air was thick with sme lls of cooking, used diapers—
and Bria nna. He r scent was sli ghtly dif ferent these days; the
tang of wild gra ss tempered with a light, sweet smell that he
thought must be milk.
Her head  was bent, loose red hair falling over her shoulders
in a cascade of sparks and shadows. The front of her gown was
open to her wa ist, and the full round curve of one breast
showed plainly , only the nipple  obscured by the roundness of
the baby’ s head. There was a faint sound of sucking.
As though feeling his eyes on her , she raised her head.
“I’m sorry ,” he said softly , not to disturb the baby . “I cannot
pretend not to be looking.”
He c ouldn’ t tell if she flushed; t he fire cast a red glow over
face and breasts alike. She glanced down, though, as if she
was embarrassed.
“Go ahead,” she said. “Nothing much worth looking at.”
W ithout a word, he stood up and began to undress.
“What are you doing?” Her voice was low , but shocked.
“Not fair for me  to sit here gawking at you, is it? It’ s much
less wor th looking at, I expect, but…” He paused, frowning at
a knot in the la cing of his bree ches. “But at least you’ll not
feel you’re on display .”
“Oh.” He didn’ t look up to se e, but he thought that had
made her smile. He’d got his sh irt of f; the fire felt good on hisbare back. Feeling unspeakably  self-conscious, he stood up
and eased his breeches halfway down before stopping.
“Is this a stripte ase?” Brianna’ s mouth quivered as she tried
to keep from laughing out loud, joggling the baby .
“I c ouldn’ t decide whether to turn my back or not.” He
paused. “Have you got a preference?”
“T urn your back,” she said softly . “For now .”
He did, and got the breeches of f without falling into the fire.
“Stay that way for a minute,” she said. “Please. I like to
look at you.”
He s traightened up and stood sti ll, looking into the fire. The
heat played over him, uncomfor tably warm, and he took a step
back, a sudden m emory of Father Alexandre vivid in his mind.
Christ, and why would he think of that now?
“Y ou ha ve mark s on your back , Roger ,” Brianna said, her
voice softer than ever . “Who hurt you?”
“The Indians. It doesn’ t matter . Not now .” He hadn’ t bound
or cut his hair; it fell over his shoulders, tickling the bare skin
of his back. He could imagine the tickle of her eyes, going
lower , over back and arse and thighs and calves.
“I’m going to turn around now . All right?”
“I won’ t be shocked,” she assured him. “I’ve seen pictures.”
She had  her father ’ s trick of hiding her expressions when
she wanted to. He couldn’ t tel l a thing from the soft, wide
mouth or the slanted cat-eyes. W as she shocked, frightened,
amused? Why ought she to be any of those things? She had
touched everyth ing she was now  looking at; had caressed and
handled him with such intimacy that he had lost himself in her
hands, yielded himself to her without reservation—and she to
him.
But that  had been a lifetime ago, in the freedom and frenzy
of h ot darkness. Now he stood  before her for the first time
naked in  the light, and she sat there watching him with a babyin her arms. Which of them had changed more, since their
wedding night?
She look ed at him carefully , hea d on one side, then smiled,
her eyes rising to meet his. She sat up, shifting the child easily
to the other bre ast, leaving her gown open, the one breast
bared.
He could n’ t stand there any long er; the fire was singeing the
hair on his arse. He moved to the side of the hearth and sat
down again, watching her .
“What does that feel like?” he asked, partly from a need to
break the silence before it got too heavy , partly from a deep
curiosity .
“It feels good,” she answered softly , head bent over the
child. “Sort of a pulling. It tin gles. When he starts to feed,
something happens, and ther e’ s a rushing feeling, like
everything in me is sur ging toward him.”
“It’ s not —you don’ t feel drained? I should have thought it
would feel like your substance being taken, somehow .”
“Oh, no , not like that at all. Her e, look.” She put a finger in
the infant’ s mouth and detach ed it with a soft pop!  She
lowered the small body for an  instant, and Roger saw the
nipple d rawn up taut, milk jetting out in a thin stream of
incredible force . Before the child could start to wail, she put
him bac k, but not before Roger had felt the spray of tiny
droplets, warm and then suddenly cool against the skin of his
chest.
“My God,” he said, half shocked . “I didn’ t know it did that!
It’ s like a squirt gun.”
“Neither did I.” She smiled agai n, her hand cupping the tiny
head. Th en the smile faded. “There are lots of things I couldn’ t
have imagined before they happened to me.”
“Bree.” He sat f orward, for gettin g his nakedness in the need
to touch  her . “Bree, I know yo u’re scared. So am I. I don’ t
want you to be afraid of me—but Bree, I do want ye so.”His hand rested on the round of her knee. After a moment,
her free hand came down on his, light as a landing bird.
“I want you, too ,” she whispered. They sat frozen together
for wha t seeme d a long time; he had no notion what to do
next, on ly that he must not go  too fast, not frighten her . Be
car eful .
The tiny sucking sounds had ceased and the bundle had
gone limp and heavy in the curve of her arm.
“He’ s asleep,” she whispered. Moving as cautiously as one
holding a vial of  nitroglycerine, she scooted to the edge of the
bed and stood up.
She mig ht have meant to lay the child in its cradle, but
Roger li fted his hands instinctively . She hesitated for no more
than a second, then bent to la y the child in his arms. Her
breasts h ung ful l and heavy in the shadow of her open gown,
and he smelled the deep musk of her body as she brushed him.
The baby was s urprisingly heavy; dense, for the size of the
bundle. He was amazingly war m, too; warmer even than his
mother ’ s body .
Roger boosted the tiny body cautiously , cuddling it against
him; the  small, curved buttocks  fit in the palm of his hand. It
— he —wasn’ t quite bald, after all. There was a soft red-blond
fuzz all over the  head. T iny ear s. Almost transparent; the one
he could see was red and crumpled from being pressed against
his mother ’ s arm.
“Y ou can’ t tell b y looking.” Brianna’ s voice jerked him out
of h is contemplation. “I’ve tried.” She was standing across the
room, o ne drawer of the sidebo ard open. He thought it might
be regret on her face, but the shadows were too deep to tell.
“That wasn’ t what I was lookin g for .” He lowered the baby
carefully to his l ap. “It’ s only—this is the first time I’ve had a
proper l ook at my son.” The words sounded peculiar , stif f to
his tongue. She relaxed a little, though.
“Oh. W ell, he’ s all there.” There was a small note of pride in
her voice that c aught at his heart, and made him look closer .The little fists w ere curled up t ight as snail shells; he picked
one up and gen tly stroked it with his thumb. Slowly as an
octopus moving, the hand opened, enough for him to insert the
tip of his inde x finger . The fist closed again in reflex,
astonishing in the strength of its grip.
He could hear a rhythmic whish  across the room, and
realized that she was brushing her hair . He would have liked to
watch her , but was too fascinated to look up.
The bod y had feet like a frog’ s;  wide at the toes, narrow at
the h eel. Roger stroked one with  a fingertip, and smiled as the
tiny toes sprang wide apart. Not webbed, at least.
My son,  he thou ght, an d wasn’ t sure what he felt at the
thought. It would take time to get used to.
But he could be,  came the next thought. Not just Brianna’ s
child, to be love d for her sake—but his own flesh and blood.
That thought was even more fo reign. He tried to push it from
his mind, but it kept coming back. That coupling in the dark,
that bittersweet mix of pain and joy—had he started this, in the
midst of that?
He hadn’ t meant to—but he hoped like hell he had.
The child was wearing some long thing made of white
gauzy stuf f; he lifted it, looking  at the sagging diaper and the
perfect o val of the tiny navel jus t above. Moved by a curiosity
he d idn’ t think t o question, he h ooked a finger in the edge of
the clout and pulled it down.
“I told you he was all there.” Brianna was standing at his
elbow .
“W ell, it ’ s there,” Roger said du biously . “But isn’ t it a bit…
small?”
She laughed.
“It’ll grow ,” she assured him. “It’ s not like he needs it for
much yet.”
His own  penis, gone flaccid between his thighs, gave a
small twitch at that reminder .“Shall I take him?” She reached  for the baby , but he shook
his head and picked up the child again.
“Not just yet.” It—he—smelle d of milk and something
sweetly putrid. Something else, his own indefinable smell, like
nothing else Roger had ever encountered.
“Eau de  baby , Mama calls it.” She sat on the bed, a faint
smile on  her face. “She says it’ s a natural protective device;
one of the thing s babies use to keep their parents from killing
them.”
“Killing him? But he’ s a sweet wee lad,” Roger protested.
One eyebrow quirked up in derision.
“Y ou haven’ t been living with the little fiend for the last
month. This is the first night he hasn’ t had colic in three
weeks. I  would have exposed him on a hillside if he wasn’ t
mine.”
If he wasn’ t mine . T hat certainty was a mother ’ s reward, he
supposed. She’d always know—had always known. For a
brief, surprising moment, he envied her .
The baby stirred and made a small, faint yawp!  noise against
his n eck. Before he could move, she was up and had the child
back in her arms, patting the ro unded little back. There was a
soft belch, and he subsided into limpness once more.
Brianna set him on his stomach in the cradle, carefully , as if
he were  wired to a stick of dynamite. He could see the faint
outline of her body through the gauze, highlighted by the fire
behind her . When she turned around, he was ready .
“Y ou could have gone back, on ce you knew . There would
have been time.” He held her eyes, not letting her look away .
“So it’ s my turn  to ask, then, isn’ t it? What made you wait for
me? Love—or obligation?”
“Both,” she said, her eyes nearly black. “Neither . I—just
couldn’ t go without you.”
He b reathed deeply , feeling the last small doubt in the pit of
his stomach melt away .“Then you do know .”
“Y es.” She lifted her shoulders  and let them fall, and the
loose go wn fell too, leaving her as naked as he was. It was  red,
by God.  More than red; she was gold and amber , ivory and
cinnabar , and he wanted her wi th a longing that went beyond
flesh.
“Y ou said that you loved me, by all you hold holy ,” she
whispered. “What is it that’ s holy to you, Roger?”
He stood and reached for her , gently , carefully . Held her
against his heart, and remembered the stinking hold of the
Gloriana  and a thin, ragged woman who smelled of milk and
ordure. Of fire a nd drums and blood, and an orphan baptized
with the name o f the father who  had sacrificed himself for fear
of the power of love.
“Y ou,” he said, against her hair . “Him. Us. There isn’ t
anything else, is there?”6 8
D O M E S T I C  B L I S S
August 1770
I t was a peaceful morning. The baby had slept all night, for
which feat he w as the recipient of general praise. T wo hens
had obligingly laid eggs in the ir coop rather than scattering
them ro und the landscape, so I was not required to crawl
through the blackberry bushes in search of breakfast before
cooking it.
The bread had r isen to a perfec t snowy mound in its bowl,
been mo lded into loaves by Lizzie, and—the new Dutch oven
sharing the general mood of cooperation—had been baked into
a delicate brown fragrance that suf fused the house with
contentment. Spiced ham and turkey hash sizzled pleasantly
on t he griddle, adding their aromas to the softer morning
scents o f damp grass and summer flowers that came through
the open window .
These things all helped, but the general atmosphere of
drowsy well-bei ng owed more to the night before than to the
events of the morning.
It had been a p erfect moon-dre nched night. Jamie had put
out t he c andle a nd gone to bolt the door , but instead he stood,
arms braced on the doorframe, looking down the valley .
“What is it?” I asked.
“Nothing,” he said softly . “Come and see.”
Everything seemed to be floating, deprived of depth by the
eerie lig ht. Far of f, the spurt  of the falls seemed frozen,
suspended in air . The wind was toward us, though, and I could
hear the faint rumble of tons of falling water .
The nig ht air was scented wit h grass and water , and the
breath of pine and spruce blew down cool from the
mountaintops. I shivered in my  shift, and drew closer to him
for warm th. His shirttails were split at the side, open nearly tohis w aist. I slid my hand inside the opening nearest me, and
cupped one round, warm buttock. The muscles tensed under
my grip, then flexed as he turned.
He h adn’ t pulled away; only ste pped back in order to yank
the s hirt of f ove r his head. He stood on the porch naked, and
held out a hand to me.
He was  furred with silver and the moonlight carved his
body from the night. I could see every small detail of him,
long toe s to flowing hair , clear as the clean black canes of the
blackberry bushes at the bottom of the yard. Y et like them he
was dimensionless; he might have been within hand’ s touch or
a mile away .
I s hrugg ed the shift from my shoulders and let it fall from
my bod y , left it puddled by the door and took his hand.
W ithout a word we had floated through the grass, walked wet-
legged and cool-skinned into the forest, turned wordless
toward each other ’ s warmth and stepped together into the
empty air beyond the ridge.
W e had wakened in the dark after moonset, leaf-spattered,
twig-strewn, bug -bitten, and stif f with cold. W e had said not a
word to each other , but laughing and staggering drunkenly ,
stumbling over roots and stones, had helped each other
through the moonless wood and made our way back to bed for
an hour ’ s brief sleep before dawn.
I l eaned  over his shoulder now  and deposited a bowl of
oatmeal in front of him, pausing to pluck an oak leaf from his
hair . I laid it on the table beside his bowl.
He t urned his head, a smile hiding in his eyes, caught my
hand an d kissed it lightly . He let me go, and went back to his
parritch. I touched the back of  his neck, and saw the smile
spread to his mouth.
I looked up, smiling myself, and found Brianna watching.
One cor ner of her mouth turned up, and her eyes were warm
with understand ing. Then I saw her gaze shift to Roger , whowas spoo ning in his parritch in a absentminded sort of way , his
gaze intent on her .
This picture of domestic bliss w as broken by the stentorian
tones of Clarence, announcing  a visitor . I missed Rollo, I
reflected, going to the door to see, but at least Clarence didn’ t
leap on visitors and knock them  flat or chase them round the
dooryard.
The visi tor was  Duncan Innes, who had come bearing an
invitation.
“Y our aunt asks if perhaps y e will be coming to the
Gathering at Mount Helicon this  autumn. She says ye did give
her your word, twa year past.”
Jamie shoved the platter of eggs in front of Duncan.
“I hadna thought of it,” he said, frowning a little. “There’ s
the devi l of a lot to do, and I’m to have a roof on this place
before snowfall.” He gestured upward with his chin, indicating
the slats and bra nches that were temporarily shielding us from
the vagaries of weather .
“There’ s a priest coming, down  from Baltimore,” Duncan
said, car efully a voiding looking  at Roger or Brianna. “Miss Jo
did think as ho w ye might be wishing to have the wean
baptized.”
“Oh.” Jamie sat back, lips purse d in thought. “A ye, that’ s a
thought. Perhaps we will go, then, Duncan.”
“That’ s fine; your auntie wil l be pleased.” Something
appeared to be caught in Dun can’ s throat; he was turning
slowly r ed as I watched. Jamie squinted at him and pushed a
jug of cider in his direction.
“Y e’ve something in your throat, man?”
“Ah…no.” Ever yone had stopped eating by now , viewing
the changes to Duncan’ s complexion in fascination. He had
gone a sort of puce by the time he managed to squeeze out the
next words.“I—errr—wish to ask your consent, an fh earr Mac D ubh,  to
the marriage of Mistress Jocasta Cameron and…and—”
“And who?” Jamie asked, the corner of his mouth twitching.
“The governor of the colony?”
“And myself?” Duncan seized the cup of cider and buried
his f ace in it with the relief of a drowning man seeing a life
raft float past.
Jamie burst out laughing, which seemed to be no great
solace to Duncan’ s embarrassment.
“My consent? D’ye not think m y aunt’ s of an age, Duncan?
Or you, come to that?”
Duncan was breathing a little easier now , though the purple
tinge hadn’ t yet begun to fade from his cheeks.
“I thought it onl y proper ,” he sa id, a little stif fly . “Seeing as
how ye’re her nearest kinsman.” He swallowed, and unbent a
bit. “And…it didna seem enti rely right, Mac Dubh,  that I
should be takin’ what might be yours.”
Jamie smiled and shook his head.
“I’ve no claim on any of my au nt’ s property , Duncan—and
wouldna take it when she of fe red. Y ou’ll be married at the
Gathering? T ell her we’ll come, then, and dance at the
wedding.”6 9
J E R E M I A H
October 1770
R oger rode with Claire and Fer gus, close to the wagon. Jamie,
not trusting Brianna to drive a vehicle containing his grandson,
insisted on driving, with Lizzie and Marsali in the wagon bed
and Brianna on the seat beside him.
From his saddle Roger caught snatches of the discussion
that had been going on ever since his arrival.
“John, f or sure,” Brianna was saying, frowning down at her
son, who  was burrowing ener getically under her shawl. “But I
don’ t know if i t should be his  first name. And if it was—
should i t maybe be Ian? That’ s ‘John’ in Gaelic—and I’d like
to name  him that, but would it be too confusing, with Uncle
Ian and our Ian, too?”
“Since n either o ne of them is here, I think it wouldna be too
troublesome,” Marsali put in. She glanced up at her
stepfather ’ s back. “Did ye not say ye wanted to use one of
Da’ s names, as well?”
“Y es, but which one?” Brianna  twisted around to talk to
Marsali. “Not James, that would  be confusing. And I don’ t
think I like Malcolm much. He’ll already have MacKenzie, of
course, s o maybe—” She caught Roger ’ s eye and smiled up at
him.
“What about Jeremiah?”
“John J eremiah Alexander Fr aser MacKenzie?” Marsali
frowned, saying the names over to taste them.
“I rather like Jeremiah,” Claire chipped in. “V ery Old
T estament. It’ s one of your name s, isn’ t it, Roger?” She smiled
at him and drew closer to the wagon, leaning over to talk to
Brianna.“Besides, if Jeremiah seems to o formal, you can call him
Jemmy ,” she said. “Or is that too much like Jamie?”
Roger felt a small chill prickle down his spine, at the sudden
recollection of another child whose mother had called him
Jemmy—a child whose father was fair -haired, with eyes as
green as Roger ’ s own.
He w aited until Brianna had turn ed to rummage through her
bag for a fresh diaper , handing  the fussing baby to Lizzie to
mind. He kneed his horse, ur ging it up close to Claire’ s mare.
“Do you  recall something?” he a sked in a low voice. “When
you first came to call on me in Inverness, with Brianna—
you’d had my genealogy researched beforehand.”
“Y es?” She quirked a brow at him.
“It’ s bee n some time, and you l ikely wouldn’ t have noticed
in any case…” He hesitated, but  he had to know , if it could be
known. “Y ou pointed out the place on my family tree where
the substitution was made; where Geilie Duncan’ s child by
Dougal was adopted in place of  another child who’d died, and
given his name.”
“W illiam Buccl eigh MacKenzi e,” she said promptly , and
smiled a t his look of surprise. “I went over that genealogy at
some len gth,” she said dryly . “I  could probably tell you every
name on it.”
He took  a deep breath, uneasiness curling at the back of his
neck.
“Can yo u? Wha t I’m wondering—do you know the name of
the c hangeling’ s  wife—my six-times great-grandmother? Her
name wasn’ t listed on my ow n family tree; only W illiam
Buccleigh.”
Soft lashes dropped over the g olden eyes as she thought,
lips pursed.
“Y es,” she said at last, and lo oked at him. “Morag. Her
name was Morag Gunn. Why?”He only  shook his head, too sha ken to reply . He glanced at
Brianna; the baby lay half naked in her lap, the soggy diaper in
a heap on the seat beside her—and remembered the smooth
damp skin and soggy clout of the little boy named Jemmy .
“And th eir son’ s name was Jer emiah,” he said at last, so
softly that Claire had to lean close to hear it.
“Y es.” S he watched him curiously , then turned her head to
look down the twisting road ahead, disappearing between the
dark pines.
“I asked Geilie,” Claire said s uddenly . “I asked her why .
Why we can do it.”
“And did she have an answer?” Roger stared at a deerfly on
his wrist without seeing it.
“She sai d—’T o change things.’ ” Claire smiled at him, her
mouth curled wryly . “I don’ t kno w whether that’ s an answer or
not.”7 0
T H E  G A T H E R I N G
I t had been nearly thirty years since the last Gathering I had
seen; the Gathering at Leoch, and the oath-taking of clan
MacKenzie. Colum MacKenzie was dead now , and his brother
Dougal—and all the clans with them. Leoch lay in ruins, and
there would be no more Gatherings of the clans in Scotland.
Y et here were th e plaids and the pipes, and the remnants of
the Highlanders themselves, undiminished in fierce pride,
among the the new mountains  they claimed for their own.
MacNeills and  Campbells, Buchanans and Lindseys,
MacLeods and MacDonalds; families, slaves and servants,
indentured men and lairds.
I looked  out over the stir and bustle of the dozens of
encampments to see if I could find Jamie, and spotted instead
a familiar tall form, striding loose-jointed through the scattered
throng. I stood up and waved, calling out to him.
“Myers! Mr . Myers!”
John Quincy Myers spotted me and, beaming, made his way
up the slope to our encampment.
“Mrs. C laire!” h e exclaimed, sweeping of f his disreputable
hat a nd bowing over my hand w ith his usual courtliness. “I’m
right uplifted to see ye.”
“The feeling is mutual,” I assu red him, smiling. “I didn’ t
expect to see you here.”
“Oh, I usually reckon to come  to a Gathering,” he said,
straightening up and beaming down at me. “If I’m down from
the mou ntains in time. Fine pla ce to sell my hides; any little
bits of things I have to get rid of. Speakin’ of which…” He
began a slow , methodical rummage through the contents of his
big buckskin pouch.
“W ill you have been far to the north, Mr . Myers?”“Oh, ‘deed I ha ve, ‘deed I have, Mrs. Claire. Halfway up
the Mohawk River , to the place they call the Upper Castle.”
“The Mohawk?” My heart began to beat faster .
“Mm.” He withdrew something from his bag, squinted at it,
put it back, and rummaged further . “Imagine my surprise, Mrs.
Claire, when I stopped at a Mohawk village to the south, to see
a familiar face.”
“Ian! Y o u’ve se en Ian? Is he all right?” I was so excited, I
grasped him by the arm.
“Oh, aye,” he assured me. “Fine-lookin’ boy—though I will
say it did give me a right turn  to see him rigged out like a
brave, a nd his face burnt dark enough that I might ha’ taken
him for one, did he not hail me by name.”
At la st h e found  what he was looking for , and handed me a
small pa ckage w rapped in thin leather and tied with a strip of
buckskin—a woodpecker ’ s feather thrust through the knot.
“He trusted me with that, ma’am, to bring to you and your
goodman.” He smiled kindly . “R eckon as you’ll want to read
that right promptly; I’ll meet up with ye a mite later , Mrs.
Claire.” He bowed with solemn formality , and walked away ,
hailing acquaintances as he passed.
I wo uldn’ t read it without wa iting for Jamie; luckily , he
appeared no more than a few minutes later . The letter was
written o n what seemed to be th e torn-out flyleaf of a book, its
ink the pale brown of oak-galls, but legible enough. Ian salutat
avunculus Jacobus,  the note began, and a grin broke out on
Jamie’ s face.
A ve! That exhausting my Remembrance of the Latin tongue, I
must now lapse into Plain English, of which I recall much
more. I am well, Uncle, and Happy—I ask you to believe it. I
have been married, after the custom of the Mohawk, and live
in the house of my W ife. Y ou will remember Emily , who
carves so cleverly . Rollo has sired a Great many puppies; the
village is littered with small wolfish Replicas. I cannot hope to
claim the same profligacy of Procreation—yet I hope you willwrite to my Mother with the wish that she has not yet so many
Grandchildren that she will overlook the addition of one more.
The birth will be in spring; I will send W ord of its outcome so
soon as I may . In the meantime, you will oblige me by
Remembering me to all at Lallybroch, at River Run, and
Fraser ’ s Ridge. I remember them all most Fondly , and will, so
long as I shall live. My love to Auntie Claire, to Cousin
Brianna, and most of all to yourself. Y our most af fectionate
nephew , Ian Murray . V ale, avunculus.
Jamie blinked once or twice, and folding the torn page
carefully , tucked it in his sporran.
“It’ s avuncule,  ye wee idiot,” he said softly . “A greeting
takes the vocative case.”
Looking over the dotted campfires that evening, I would have
said that every Scottish fami ly between Philadelphia and
Charleston had come—and yet more arrived with the dawn
next day , and kept coming.
It was on the se cond day , while Lizzie, Brianna, and I were
comparing babie s with two of Farquard Campbell’ s daughters,
that Jam ie made his way thro ugh a mass of women and
children, a wide smile on his face.
“Mrs. Lizzie,” he said. “I’ve a wee surprise for ye. Fer gus!”
Fer gus, likewis e beaming, came from behind a wagon,
ushering a slight man with windblown, thin fair hair .
“Da!” Lizzie shrieked, and flung herself into his arms.
Jamie put a finger in his ear and wiggled it, looking amazed.
“I dinna  think I’ve ever heard her make a noise that loud
before,” he said. He grinned at me and handed me two pieces
of paper; originally part of one document, they had been
carefully torn apart so that the notched edge of one fitted the
jagged edge of the other .
“That’ll be Mr . W emyss’ s indenture,” he said. “Put it away
for now , Sassenach; we’ll burn it at the bonfire tonight.”Then he  vanished back into the crowd, summoned by a
wave and a shout of Mac Dubh ! from across the clearing.
By t he t hird day  of the Gatherin g, I had heard so much news,
gossip, a nd gene ral chatter that m y ears rang with the sound of
Gaelic. Those who were not tal king were singing; Roger was
in his element, wandering through the grounds and listening.
He was hoarse f rom singing himself; he had been up most of
the nigh t before, strumming a bo rrowed guitar and singing to a
crowd of enchanted listeners while Brianna sat curled by his
feet, looking smug.
“Is h e any good?” Jamie had murmured to me, squinting
dubiously at his putative son-in-law .
“Better than good,” I assured him.
He l ifted one eyebrow and shru gged, then leaned down to
take the baby from me.
“A ye, w ell, I’ll take your word for it. I think wee Ruaidh
and I will go and find a game of dice.”
“Y ou’re going gambling with a baby?”
“Of cou rse,” he said, and grinn ed at me. “He’ s never too
young to learn an honest trade, in case he canna sing for his
supper like his Da.”
“When you make bashed neeps,” I said, “be sure to boil the
tops along with the turnips. The n save the pot liquor and give
it to the children; you take some too—it’ s good for your milk.”
Maisri Buchanan pressed her smallest child to her breast
and nodded solemnly , committing my advice to memory . I
could not persuade most of the new immigrants either to eat
fresh gre ens or to feed them to their families, but now and then
I found opportunity to introduce a bit of vitamin C
surreptitiously i nto their usual diet—which consisted for the
most part of oatmeal and venison.
I had tried the expedient of making Jamie eat a plate of
sliced tomatoes in public view , in hopes that the sight of himwould e ase some of the new immigrants’ fears. This had not
been su ccessful; most of them regarded him with a half-
superstitious aw e, and I was given to understand that Himself
could naturally survive the eati ng of things that would kill a
normal person dead on the spot.
I dismis sed Maisri, and welcomed the next visitor to my
impromptu clini c, a woman wit h two little girls, covered with
an e czematous rash that I at fi rst thought evidence of more
nutritional deficiency , but which fortunately proved to be only
poison ivy .
I b ecam e aware  of a stir in the  crowd, and paused in my
ministrations, turning to see who had arrived. Sunlight glinted
from metal near the edge of the  clearing, and Jamie’ s was not
the only hand to go to gun or knife hilt.
They ca me into the sun in marchstep, though their drums
were muf fled, with no more than a soft tap-tap!  of stick on rim
to guide them. Muskets pointing skyward, broadswords
waggling like scorpion tails, th ey emer ged from the grove in
small bursts of s carlet, two by two, green kilts aswish around
their knees.
Four , and six, and eight, and ten…I was counting silently ,
with everyone else. Forty men came on, eyes straight ahead
beneath their bearskin caps, look ing neither to left nor to right,
with no sound but the shuf fle of feet and the tap of their drum.
Across the clearing, I saw MacNeill of Barra rise from his
seat and straighten up; there w as a subtle stir around him, a
few step s bringi ng his men to stand near him. I didn’ t need to
look aro und to sense the same thing happening behind me;
felt, rather than saw , the eddies of similar small rallyings
around the mountain’ s foot, eac h group with one eye on the
intruders, one eye on its chief for direction.
I loo ked for Br ianna and was startled, if not surprised, to
find her  just behind me, the baby in her arms, watching
intently over my shoulder .“Who are they?” she asked, lo w-voiced, and I could hear
the echo  of the question running through the Gathering like
ripples in water .
“A Highland regiment,” I said.
“I see that,” she said tartly . “Friend or foe?”
That wa s plainly  the question—were they here as Scots, or
as soldie rs? But  I didn’ t have an answer , nor did anyone else,
judging from the shiftings and mutterings among the crowd.
There were incidents of troops coming to disperse unruly
groups, of course. But surely not a peaceable gathering like
this, which had no political purpose?
At one time, th ough, the mere presence of a number of
Scots in one pl ace was a political declaration, and most of
those present remembered thos e times. The murmuring got
louder , Gaelic spoken with the muf fled sibilance of
vehemence, sighing round the mountain like the wind before a
storm.
There were forty soldiers comin g up the road with guns and
swords. There were two hundred Scotsmen here, most of them
armed, many with slaves and servants. But also with their
wives and children.
I though t of the days after Culloden, and without looking
round, said to Brianna, “If anything happens—anything at all
—take the baby up into the rocks.”
Roger appeared suddenly in front of me, his attention
focused on the soldiers. He did n’ t look at Jamie but moved
silently so they stood, shoulder to shoulder , a bulwark before
us. A ll over the  clearing, the same thing was happening; the
women gave not an inch, but their men stepped out before
them. A nyone coming into the clearing would think that the
women had melted into invisi bility , leaving an implacable
phalanx of Scotsmen staring down the glen.
Then tw o men rode out from the shelter of the trees; an
of ficer on horseback, his aide b y his side, regimental banner
flying. Spurring up, they rode past the column of soldiers intothe edge of the crowd. I saw the aide lean down from his horse
to ask a question, saw the of ficer ’ s head turn toward us in
acknowledgment of the answer .
The of fi cer barked an order an d the soldiers stood to rest,
muskets planted in the dust, th eir checkered legs apart. The
of ficer turned his horse into the crowd, slowly nosing his way
among the throng, who gave way reluctantly before him.
He w as coming toward us; I saw  his eyes fix on Jamie from
a d istance, so co nspicuous by his height and his hair , bright as
scarlet maple leaves.
The man  drew up before us, and took of f his feathered cap.
He slid of f his horse, took two s teps toward Jamie, and bowed,
rigidly c orrect. He was a short  man, but solid, maybe thirty ,
with dark eyes that glittered bri ght as the gor get at his throat.
Closer now , I saw what I had missed before, the smaller bit of
metal pinned to the shoulder of his red coat; a battered brooch
of tarnished gilt.
“Ma name is Airchie Hayes,” he said in broad Scots. His
eyes were fixed on Jamie’ s face , dark with hope. “They say ye
kent my faither .”7 1
C I R C L E ’ S  C L O S E
I  h ave a thing to  say to you,” Roger said. He’d waited for
some tim e to catch Jamie Fras er alone. Fraser was much in
demand; everyo ne wanted his ear for a moment. For this
moment, though, he was by him self, sitting on the fallen log
from wh ich he held court. He  looked up at Roger , brows
raised, but nodded toward a seat on the log.
Roger sat down. He had the b aby with him; Brianna and
Lizzie were making the dinner , and Claire had gone to visit
with the  Camerons of Isle Fleu r , whose fire was nearby . The
night air was th ick with the scent of woodsmoke rather than
peat fires, but in many ways it might be Scotland, he thought.
Jamie’ s eye lighted on the curve of little Jemmy’ s skull,
dusted w ith copp er fuzz that sho ne in the firelight. He held out
his arms, and with only the slightest hesitation, Roger
carefully passed the sleeping baby to him.
“Balach Boidheach,”  Jamie murmure d as the baby stirred
against him. “There now , it’ s fin e.” He looked across at Roger .
“Y ou’ve a thing to say to me, you said.”
Roger nodded.
“I ha ve, though not on my own account. Y ou might say it is
a message to be passed on for someone else.”
Jamie li fted one  quizzical brow , in a gesture so reminiscent
of Brianna that Roger felt a small internal start. T o cover it, he
coughed.
“I—ah—when Brianna went to the stones on Craigh na
Dun, I was forced to wait a few weeks until I could follow
after her .”
“A ye?” Jamie looked wary , as h e always did at any mention
of stone circles.“I w ent to Inverness,” Roger con tinued, keeping his eyes on
his father -in-law . “I stayed at the house that my father had
lived in, and I spent part of the time in sorting through his
papers; he was a great saver of letters and bits of old rubbish.”
Jamie nodded, evidently wondering what Roger was on
about, but too polite to interrupt him.
“I found a letter .” Roger took a deep breath, feeling his heart
thump in his chest. “I committed  it to memory , thinking that if
I fou nd Claire, I would tell her  of it. But then when I found
her”—he shrugg ed—”I was not sure whether I should tell her
or not—or tell Brianna.”
“And yo u are asking me if you should tell them?” Fraser ’ s
brows rose, thick and ruddy , showing his puzzlement.
“Perhaps I am. But thinking on it, it occurred to me that the
letter was perhaps of more conc ern to you than to them.” Now
that the moment was at hand, Roger found himself feeling
some sympathy for Fraser .
“Y ou’ll know my father was a minister? The letter was to
him. I suppose it was written under the seal of confession, in a
way—but I imagine death has dissolved this particular seal.”
Roger took a d eep breath and closed his eyes, seeing the
black letters slanting across the page, in the neat, angular
handwriting. He ’d read it over more than a hundred times; he
was sure of every word.
Dear Reg  (the letter said);
I’ve something the matter with my heart. Besides Clair e, I
mean (says he, with ir ony). The doctor says it might be years
yet, with car e, and I hope it is—but ther e’ s the odd chance. The
nuns at Br ee’ s school used to scar e the kids into fits about the
horrible fate in stor e for sinners who died unconfessed and
unfor given; damned (if you’ll par don the expr ession) if I’m
afraid of whatever comes after—if anything. But again—
ther e’ s the odd chance, isn’ t ther e?
Not a thing I could say to my parish priest, for obvious
r easons. I doubt he’d see the sin in it, even if he didn’ t slip outto telephone discr eetly for psychiatric help!
But you’r e a priest, Reg, if not a Catholic—and mor e
importantly , you’r e my friend. Y ou needn’ t r eply to this; I don’ t
suppose a r eply is possible. But you can listen. One of your
gr eat gifts, listening. Had I told you that befor e?
I’m delaying, though I don’ t know why I should. Best have it
out.
Y ou’ll r ecall the favor I asked you a few years ago—about
the gravestones at St. Kilda’ s? Kind friend that you ar e, you
never asked, but it’ s time I should tell you why .
God knows why old Black Jack Randall should have been
left out ther e on a Scottish hill instead of taken home to Sussex
for burial. Per haps no one car ed enough to bring him home.
Sad to think of; I rather hope it wasn’ t that.
Ther e he is, though. If Br ee’ s ever inter ested in her history—
in my history—she’ll look, and she’ll find him ther e; the
location of his grave is mentioned in the family papers. That’ s
why I asked you to have the other stone put up nearby . It will
stand out—all the other stones in that kirkyar d ar e crumbling
away with age.
Clair e will take her to Scotland one day; I’m sur e of that
much. If she goes to St. Kilda’ s, she’ll see it—no one goes into
an old chur chyar d and doesn’ t have a br owse r ound the stones.
If she wonders, if she car es to look further—if she asks Clair e
—well, that’ s as far as I’m pr epar ed to go. I’ve made the
gestur e; I shall leave it to chance what happens when I’ve
gone.
Y ou know all the rubbish Clair e talked when she came back.
I did all I could to get it out of her head, but she wouldn’ t be
budged; God, she is a stubborn woman!
Y ou’ll not cr edit this, per haps, but when I came last to visit
you, I hir ed a car and went to that damned hill—to Craigh na
Dun. I told you about the witches dancing in the cir cle, just
befor e Clair e disappear ed. W ith that eerie sight in mind,
standing ther e in the early light among those stones—I couldalmost believe her . I touched one. Nothing happened, of
course.
And yet. I looked. Looked for the man—for Fraser . And
per haps I found him. At least I found a man of that name, and
what I could dr edge up of his connections matched what
Clair e told me of him. Whether she was telling the truth, or
whether she had grafted some delusion onto r eal experience…
well, ther e was a man, I’m sur e of that!
Y ou’ll scar cely cr edit this, but I stood ther e with my hand on
that bloody stone, and wanted nothing mor e than that it should
open, and put me face-to-face with James Fraser . Whoever he
was, whenever he was, I wanted nothing mor e in life than to
see him—and to kill him.
I have never seen him—I don’ t know that he existed!—and
yet I hate this man as I have never hated anyone else. If what
Clair e said and what I found was true—then I’ve taken her
fr om him, and kept her by me thr ough these years by a lie.
Maybe only a lie of omission, but nonetheless a lie for that. I
could call that r evenge, I suppose.
Priests and poets call r evenge a two-edged swor d; and the
other edge of it is that I’ll never know—if I gave her the
choice, would she have stayed with me? Or if I told her that
her Jamie survived Culloden, would she have been off to
Scotland like a shot?
I cannot think Clair e would leave her daughter . I hope she’d
not leave me, either…but…if I had any certainty of it, I swear
I’d have told her , but I haven’ t, and that’ s the truth of it.
Fraser—shall I curse him for stealing my wife, or bless him
for giving me my daughter? I think these things, and then I
stop, appalled that I should be giving a moment’ s cr edence to
such a pr eposter ous theory . And yet…I have the oddest sense
of James Fraser , almost a memory , as though I must have seen
him somewher e. Though likely this is just the pr oduct of
jealousy and imagination—I know what the bastar d looks like,
well enough; I see his face on my daughter , day by day!That’ s the queer side of it, though—a sense of obligation.
Not just to Br ee, though I do think she’ s a right to know—later .
I told you I had a sense of the bastar d? Funny thing is, it’ s
stayed with me. I can almost feel him, sometimes, looking over
my shoulder , standing acr oss the r oom.
Hadn’ t thought of this befor e—do you suppose I’ll meet him
in the sweet by-and-by , if ther e is one? Funny to think of it.
Should we meet as friends, I wonder , with the sins of the flesh
behind us? Or end for ever locked in some Celtic hell, with our
hands wrapped r ound each other ’ s thr oat?
I tr eated Clair e badly—or well, depending how one looks at
it. I won’ t go into the sor did details; leave it that I’m sorry .
So ther e it is, Reg. Hate, jealousy , lying, stealing,
unfaithfulness, the lot. Not much to balance it save love. I do
love her—love them. My women. Maybe it’ s not the right kind
of love, or not enough. But it’ s all I’ve got.
Still, I won’ t die unshriven—and I’ll trust you for a
conditional absolution. I raised Br ee as a Catholic; do you
suppose ther e’ s some forlorn hope that she’ll pray for me?
“It was signed, ‘Frank,’ of course,” Roger said.
“Of course,” Jamie echoed softl y . He sat quite still, his face
unreadable.
Roger didn’ t need to read it; he knew well enough the
thoughts that were going throug h the other ’ s mind. The same
thoughts he’d wrestled with, during those weeks between
Beltane and Midsummer ’ s Eve, during the search for Brianna
across th e ocean, during his cap tivity—and at the last, in the
circle in the rh ododendron hell, hearing the song of the
standing stones.
If Frank  Randall had chosen to keep secret what he’d found,
had never placed that stone at S t. Kilda’ s—would Claire have
learned the truth anyway? Perhaps; perhaps not. But it had
been the sight of that spurious grave that had led her to tell her
daughter the story of Jamie Fr aser , and to set Roger on the
path of discovery that had led them all to this place, this time.It had been the stone that had at once sent Claire back to the
arms of her Scottish lover—and possibly to her death in those
arms. T hat had given Frank Randall’ s daughter back to her
other fa ther , and  simultaneousl y condemned her to live in a
time not  her own; that had resul ted in the birth of a red-haired
boy who might otherwise not have been—the continuance of
Jamie Fraser ’ s blood. Interest on the debt owed? Roger
wondered.
And then there were Roger ’ s private thoughts, of another
boy who  might not have been, save for that cryptic stone hint,
left by Frank Randall for the sake of for giveness. Morag and
W illiam MacKenzie were not at the Gathering; Roger was
unsure whether to be disappointed or relieved.
Jamie F raser stirred at last, thou gh his eyes stayed fixed on
the fire.
“Englishman,” he said softly , and it was a conjuration. The
hair rose  very slightly on the back of Roger ’ s neck; he could
believe he saw something move in the flames.
Jamie’ s big hands spread, cradling his grandson. His face
was remote, the flames catching sparks from hair and brows.
“Englishman,” he said, speaking to whatever he saw beyond
the flam es. “I could wish that we shall meet one day . And I
could hope that we shall not.”
Roger waited, hands loose on h is knees. Fraser ’ s eyes were
shadowed, his face masked by the flicker of the dancing fire.
At last, something like a shudder seemed to go over the big
frame; h e shook  his head as though to clear it, and seemed to
realize for the first time that Roger was still there.
“Do I tell her?” Roger said. “Claire?”
The big Highlander ’ s eyes sharpened.
“W ill ye have told Brianna?”
“Not yet; but I will.” He gave back Fraser ’ s stare, eye for
eye. “She is my wife.”
“For now .”“Forever—if she will.”
Fraser looked toward the Cam erons’ fire. Claire’ s lithe
shape was visible, dark against the brightness.
“I d id promise her honesty ,” h e said at last, very quietly .
“A ye, tell her .”
By t he fourth da y , the slopes of the mountain were filled with
new arri vals. Just before dusk, the men began to bring wood,
piling it in the burnt space at the foot of the mountain. Each
family had its campfire, but here was the great fire, around
which everyone  gathered each night to see who had come
during the day .
As the  dark came on, the fires bloomed on the
mountainside, dotted here and there among the shallow ledges
and sandy pockets. For a moment, I had a vision of the
MacKenzie clan badge—a “burning mountain”—and realized
suddenly what it was. Not a vo lcano, as I had thought. No, it
was the image of a Gathering lik e this one, the fires of families
burning in the d ark, a signal to all the clan was present—and
together . And for the first time , I understood the motto that
went with the image: Luceo non ur o; I shine, not burn .
Soon the  mount ainside was alive with fires. Here and there
were sm aller , moving flames, as the head of each family or
plantation thrust a brand into hi s fire and brought it down the
hill, to add to th e blazing pyre at the foot. From our perch high
on th e mountainside, the figures  of the men showed small and
dark in silhouette against the huge fire.
A dozen families had declare d themselves before Jamie
finished his conversation with Gerald Forbes, and rose
himself. He handed me the baby , who was sleeping soundly in
spite of all the racket around h im, and bent to light a brand
from our fire. The shouts cam e from far below , thin but
audible on the clear autumn air .
“The MacNeills of Barra are here!”
“The Lachlans of Glen Linnhe are here!”And after a little, Jamie’ s voice,  loud and strong on the dark
air .
“The Frasers of the Ridge are  here!” There was a brief
spatter of applause from those around me—whoops and yelps
from the  tenants  who had come with us, just as there had been
from the followers of the other heads of families.
I s at quietly , enj oying the feel of the limp, heavy little body
in my arms. He slept with the a bandonment of total trust, tiny
pink mouth half open, his breath  warm and humid on the slope
of my breast.
Jamie came back smelling of woodsmoke and whisky , and
sat d own on the  log behind me.  He took me by the shoulders
and I leaned ba ck against him, enjoying the feeling of him
behind me. Across the fire, Brianna and Roger were talking
earnestly , their heads close toge ther . Their faces shone in the
firelight, each reflecting the other .
“Y e dinna suppose they’re goin g to change his name again,
do you?” Jamie said, frowning slightly at them.
“I don’ t  think so,” I said. “There are other things ministers
do besides christenings, you know .”
“Oh, aye?”
“It’ s we ll past the third of September ,” I said, tilting back
my head to look at him. “Y ou did tell her to choose by then.”
“So I did.” A lopsided moon floated low in the sky ,
shedding a soft light over his face. He leaned forward and
kissed my forehead.
Then he reached down and took my free hand in his own.
“And will ye ch oose, too?” he asked softly . He opened his
hand, and I saw the glint of gold. “Do ye want it back?”
I pa used, looking up into his fa ce, searching it for doubt. I
saw none there, but something e lse; a waiting, a deep curiosity
as to what I might say .
“It was a long time ago,” I said softly .“And a long tim e,” he said. “I am a jealous man, but not a
vengeful one. I w ould take you from him, my Sassenach—but
I wouldna take him from you.”
He paused for a moment, the fire glinting softly from the
ring in his hand. “It was your life, no?”
And he asked again, “Do you want it back?”
I held up my han d in answer and he slid the gold ring on my
finger , the metal warm from his body .
Fr om F . to C. with love. Always .
“What did you s ay?” I asked. He had murmured something
in Gaelic above me, too low for me to catch.
“I sa id, ‘Go in peace,’ ” he an swered. “I wasna talking to
you, though, Sassenach.”
Across the fire, something wink ed red. I glanced across in
time to see Roger lift Brianna’ s hand to his lips; Jamie’ s ruby
shone dark on her finger , catching the light of moon and fire.
“I see she’ s chosen, then,” Jamie said softly .
Brianna smiled, her eyes on Rog er ’ s face, and leaned to kiss
him. Then she stood up, brushing sand from her skirts and bent
to pick up a bra nd from the cam pfire. She turned and held it
out to him, speaking in a voic e loud enough to carry to us
where we sat across the fire.
“Go down,” she said, “and tel l them the MacKenzies are
here.”Books by Diana Gabaldon
OUTLANDER
DRAGONFL Y IN AMBER
VOY AGER
DRUMS OF AUTUMN
THE OUTLANDISH COMP ANION