1
HAPPY THE BRIDE
 THE SUN SHINES ON
Mount Helicon
 The Royal Colony of North Carolina
 Late October , 1770
I  WOKE T O TH E P A TTER OF RAIN on canvas, with the feel
of m y first husb and’ s kiss on my lips. I blinked, disoriented,
and by reflex put my fingers to my mouth. T o keep the feeling,
or to hide it? I wondered, even as I did so.
Jamie st irred and murmured in his sleep next to me, his
movement rous ing a fresh wa ve of scent from the cedar
branches under our bottom quilt. Perhaps the ghost’ s passing
had disturbed him. I frowned at the empty air outside our lean-
to.
Go away , Frank , I thought sternly .
It was still dark  outside, but the mist that rose from the
damp ea rth was a pearly gray; dawn wasn’ t far of f. Nothing
stirred, inside or out, but I had the distinct sense of an ironic
amusement that lay on my skin like the lightest of touches.
Shouldn’ t I come to see her married?
I cou ldn’ t tell w hether the words had formed themselves in
my thoughts, or whether they—and that kiss—were merely the
product of my own subconscious. I had fallen asleep with my
mind sti ll busy with wedding preparations; little wonder that I
should wake from dreams of weddings. And wedding nights.
I sm oothed the r umpled muslin of my shift, uneasily aware
that it was rucked up around m y waist and that my skin was
flushed with more than sleep. I didn’ t remember anything
concrete about the dream tha t had wakened me; only a
confused jumble of image and sensation. I thought perhaps
that was a good thing.I tur ned over o n the rustling branches, nudging close to
Jamie. He was warm and smelled pleasantly of woodsmoke
and whisky , with a faint tang of sleepy maleness under it, like
the deep note o f a lingering chord. I stretched myself, very
slowly , arching my back so that my pelvis nudged his hip. If
he were  sound asleep or disinclined, the gesture was slight
enough to pass unnoticed; if he were not …
He w asn’ t. He smiled faintly , eyes still closed, and a big
hand ran  slowly down my back , settling with a firm grip on
my bottom.
“Mmm?” he said. “Hmmmm.” He sighed, and relaxed back
into sleep, holding on.
I nestled close, reassured. The  immediate physicality of
Jamie w as more than enough to  banish the touch of lingering
dreams. And Frank—if that was  F rank— was right, so far as
that went. I was sure that if such a thing were possible, Bree
would want both her fathers at her wedding.
I wa s wide awak e now , but much too comfortable to move.
It was raining outside; a light r ain, but the air was cold and
damp en ough to make the cozy  nest of quilts more inviting
than the  distant prospect of hot cof fee. Particularly since the
getting of cof fee would involve a trip to the stream for water ,
making up the c ampfire—oh, G od, the wood would be damp,
even if the fire hadn’ t gone completely out—grinding the
cof fee in  a stone quern and brew ing it, while wet leaves blew
round my ankles and drips from overhanging tree branches
slithered down my neck.
Shivering at the thought, I pulled the top quilt up over my
bare shoulder and instead resumed the mental catalogue of
preparations with which I had fallen asleep.
Food, drink … luckily I needn’ t trouble about that. Jamie’ s
aunt Jocasta would deal with the arrangements; or rather , her
black bu tler , Uly sses, would. W edding guests—no dif ficulties
there. W e were in the middle  of the lar gest Gathering of
Scottish Highlan ders in the Colo nies, and food and drink were
being provided. Engraved invitations would not be necessary .Bree wo uld have  a new dress, at least; Jocasta’ s gift as well.
Dark blue wool—silk was both too expensive and too
impractical for life in the backwoods. It was a far cry from the
white satin and orange blossom  I had once envisioned her
wearing to be married in—bu t then, this was scarcely the
marriage anyone might have imagined in the 1960s.
I wondered what Frank might have thought of Brianna’ s
husband. He likely would have approved; Roger was a
historian—or once had been—like Frank himself. He was
intelligent and humorous, a talented musician and a gentle
man, thoroughly devoted to Brianna and little Jemmy .
Which is very admirable indeed,  I thought in the direction of
the mist, under the cir cumstances .
Y ou admit that, do you?  The  words formed in my inner ear
as thoug h he had spoken them, ironic, mocking both himself
and me.
Jamie frowned and tightened his grasp on my buttock,
making small whuf fling noises in his sleep.
Y ou know  I do,  I said silently . I always did, and you know it,
so just bugger off, will you?!
I turned my back firmly on the outer air and laid my head on
Jamie’ s shoulder , seeking refu ge in the feel of the soft,
crumpled linen of his shirt.
I rat her thought Jamie was less inclined than I—or perhaps
Frank—to give Roger credit for  accepting Jemmy as his own.
T o J amie, it wa s a simple matter of obligation; an honorable
man could not do otherwise. And I knew he had his doubts as
to R oger ’ s ability to support and protect a family in the
Carolina wilderness. Roger was tall, well-built, and capable—
but “bo nnet, belt, and swordie” were the stuf f of songs to
Roger; to Jamie, they were the tools of his trade.
The hand on my bottom squeezed suddenly , and I started.
“Sassenach,” Jamie said drowsi ly , “you’re squirming like a
toadling in a we e lad’ s fist. D’y e need to get up and go to the
privy?”“Oh, you’re awake,” I said, feeling mildly foolish.
“I am now ,” he said. The hand fell away , and he stretched,
groaning. His bare feet popped out at the far end of the quilt,
long toes spread wide.
“Sorry . I didn’ t mean to wake you.”
“Och, dinna fash yourself,” he assured me. He cleared his
throat a nd rubbed a hand thro ugh the ruddy waves of his
loosened hair , blinking. “I was d reaming like a fiend; I always
do when  I sleep cold.” He lifted his head and peered down
across the quilt, wiggling his exposed toes with disfavor .
“Why did I not sleep wi’ my stockings on?”
“Really? What were you dreaming about?” I asked, with a
small stab of uneasiness. I r ather hoped he hadn’ t been
dreaming the same sort of thing I had.
“Horses,” he said, to my immediate relief. I laughed.
“What s ort of fiendish dreams could you be having about
horses?”
“Oh, God, it w as terrible.” He rubbed his eyes with both
fists and shook his head, trying  to clear the dream from his
mind. “All to do wi’ the Irish k ings. Y e ken what MacKenzie
was sayin’ about it, at the fire last night?”
“Irish ki—oh!” I remembered, and laughed again at the
recollection. “Y es, I do.”
Roger , flushed with the triumph of his new engagement, had
regaled the company around the  fireside the night before with
songs, poems, and entertaining historical anecdotes—one of
which concerned the rites with which the ancient Irish kings
were sai d to have been crowne d. One of these involved the
successful candidate copulating with a white mare before the
assembled mult itudes, presum ably to prove his virility—
though I thought it would be a better proof of the gentleman’ s
sangfr oid , myself.
“I was in char g e o’ the horse,”  Jamie informed me. “And
everything  w ent wrong. T he man was too short, and I had tofind something for him to stand on. I found a rock, but I
couldna lift it. Then a stool, but the leg came of f in my hand.
Then I tried to pile up bricks to make a platform, but they
crumbled to sand. Finally they said it was all right, they would
just cut the legs  of f the mare, and I was trying to stop them
doing that, and the man who would be king was jerkin’ at his
breeks and complaining that his fly buttons wouldna come
loose, and then someone noticed that it was a black  mare, and
that wouldna do at all.”
I sno rted, muf fling my laughter in a fold of his shirt for fear
of wakening someone camped near us.
“Is that when you woke up?”
“No. Fo r some reason, I was verra much af fronted at that. I
said it would  do, in fa ct the black was a much better horse, for
everyone knows that white horses have weak een, and I said
the of fsp ring wo uld be blind. A nd they said no, no, the black
was ill luck, and I was insisting it was not, and …” He
stopped, clearing his throat.
“And?”
He shrugged and glanced sideways at me, a faint flush
creeping up his neck.
“A ye, w ell. I said it would do fine, I’d show them. And I
had just grasped the mare’ s rum p to stop her moving, and was
getting r eady to  … ah … make myself king of Ireland. That’ s
when I woke.”
I snorted and wheezed, and felt his side vibrate with his own
suppressed laughter .
“Oh, now I’m r eally  sorry to have wakened you!” I wiped
my eyes  on the c orner of the quilt. “I’m sure it was a great loss
to the Irish. Though I do wonder how the queens of Ireland felt
about that particular ceremony ,” I added as an afterthought.
“I c anna think the ladies would suf fer even slightly by
comparison,” Jamie assured me.  “Though I have heard of men
who prefer—”“I wasn’ t thinking of that ,” I said. “It was more the hygie nic
implications, if you see what I mean. Putting the cart before
the h orse is one  thing, but putting the horse before the queen
…”
“The—oh, aye.” He was flushed with amusement, but his
skin darkened further at that. “Say what ye may about the
Irish, Sa ssenach, but I do belie ve they wash now and then.
And under the circumstances, the king might possibly even
have found a bit of soap useful, in … in …”
“ In medias r es ?” I suggested. “Surely not. I mean, after all,
a horse is quite lar ge, relatively speaking …”
“It’ s a matter of readiness, Sassenach, as much as room,” he
said, with a repr essive glance in my direction. “And I can see
that a man mig ht require a bit of encouragement, under the
circumstances. T hough it’ s in medias r es , in any case,” he
added. “Have ye never read Horace? Or Aristotle?”
“No. W e can’ t all be educated.  And I’ve never had much
time for Aristotle, after hearing that he ranked women
somewhere below worms in his classification of the natural
world.”
“The man can’ t have been married.” Jamie’ s hand moved
slowly up my b ack, fingering the knobs of my spine through
my shift. “Surely he would ha’ noticed the bones, else.”
I sm iled and lifte d a hand to his own cheekbone, rising stark
and clean above a tide of auburn stubble.
As I did so, I saw that the sky outside had lightened into
dawn; his head was silhouetted by the pale canvas of our
shelter , but I could see his face clearly . The expression on it
reminded me exactly why he had taken of f his stockings the
night before. Unfortunately , we had both been so tired after the
prolonged festivities that we had fallen asleep in mid-embrace.
I fou nd that bela ted memory rather reassuring, of fering as it
did some explanation both for the state of my shift and for the
dreams f rom wh ich I had awake ned. At the same time, I felt a
chilly draft slide its fingers under the quilt, and shivered.Frank and Jamie were very dif ferent men, and there was no
doubt in  my mind as to who had kissed me, just before
waking.
“Kiss m e,” I said suddenly to Jamie. Neither of us had yet
brushed our teeth, but he obligin gly skimmed my lips with his,
then, when I ca ught the back of his head and pressed him
closer , shifted his weight to one hand, the better to adjust the
tangle of bedclothes round our lower limbs.
“Oh?” he said, when I released  him. He smiled, blue eyes
creasing into dark triangles in t he dimness. “W ell, to be sure,
Sassenach. I must just step outside for a moment first,
though.”
He f lung back t he quilt and rose. From my position on the
ground, I had a rather unortho dox view which provided me
with engaging glimpses under th e hem of his long linen shirt. I
did hope that what I was looking at was not the lingering result
of his nightmare, but thought it better not to ask.
“Y ou’d better hurry ,” I said. “It ’ s getting light; people will
be up and about soon.”
He nodd ed and ducked outside. I lay still, listening. A few
birds cheeped faintly in the distance, but this was autumn; not
even ful l light would provoke the raucous choruses of spring
and summer . The mountain and its many camps still lay
slumbering, but I could feel s mall stirrings all around, just
below the edge of hearing.
I ran  my fingers  through my hair , fluf fing it out round my
shoulders, and rolled over , looking for the water bottle.
Feeling cool air on my back, I glanced over my shoulder , but
dawn had come and the mist had fled; the air outside was gray
but still.
I tou ched the go ld ring on my left hand, restored to me the
night before, and still unfamiliar after its long absence.
Perhaps it was his ring that had summoned Frank to my
dreams. Perhaps tonight at the wedding ceremony , I would
touch it  again, deliberately , and hope that he could see hisdaughter ’ s happiness somehow through my eyes. For now ,
though, he was gone, and I was glad.
A small sound, no louder than the distant birdcalls, drifted
through the air . The brief cry of a baby waking.
I h ad once thought that no mat ter the circumstances, there
ought re ally to be no more than  two people in a marriage bed.
I still thought so. However , a baby was more dif ficult to banish
than the  ghost of a former love; Brianna and Roger ’ s bed must
perforce accommodate three.
The edge of the  canvas lifted, and Jamie’ s face appeared,
looking excited and alarmed.
“Y e’d best get up and dress, Claire,” he said. “The soldiers
are drawn up by the creek. Where are my stockings?”
I sat bolt upright, and far down the mountainside the drums
began to roll.
 
COLD FOG LA Y like smoke in  the hollows all round; a cloud
had settled on M ount Helicon like a broody hen on a single
egg, and  the air was thick with damp. I blinked blearily across
a stretch of rou gh grass, to wh ere a detachment of the 67th
Highland regiment was drawn up in full splendor by the creek,
drums rumbling and the company piper tootling away , grandly
impervious to the rain.
I was very cold, and more than  slightly cross. I’d gone to
bed in the ex pectation of waking to hot cof fee and a
nourishing breakfast, this to be followed by two weddings,
three christenings, two tooth extractions, the removal of an
infected toenail,  and other ente rtaining forms of wholesome
social intercourse requiring whisky .
Instead, I’d been wakened by unsettling dreams, led into
amorous dallian ce, and then dragged out into a cold drizzle in
medias  bloody r es , a pparently to h ear a proclamation of some
sort. No cof fee yet, either .It had taken som e time for the Highlanders in their camps to
rouse themselves and stagger down the hillside, and the piper
had gon e quite purple in the fa ce before he at last blew the
final bla st and left of f with a d iscordant wheeze. The echoes
were still ringing of f the mountainside, as Lieutenant
Archibald Hayes stepped out before his men.
Lieutenant Hayes’ s nasal Fife accent carried well, and the
wind wa s with him. Still, I was  sure the people farther up the
mountain could hear very little. Standing as we did at the foot
of th e slope, though, we were no more than twenty yards from
the Lieu tenant and I could hea r every word, in spite of the
chattering of my teeth.
“By his EXCELLENCY , WILLIAM TR YON, Esquir e, His
Majesty’ s Captain-General, Governor , and Commander -in-
Chief, in  and over the said Pr o vince,”  Hayes read, lifting his
voice in a bellow to carry above the noises of wind and water ,
and the premonitory murmurs of the crowd.
The moisture shrouded trees and rocks with dripping mist,
the clou ds spat intermittent sleet and freezing rain, and erratic
winds had lowered the temperature by some thirty degrees.
My left shin, sensitive to cold, throbbed at the spot where I
had broken the bone two year s before. A person given to
portents and metaphors might have been tempted to draw
comparisons bet ween the nasty weather and the reading of the
Governor ’ s Proclamation, I t hought—the prospects were
similarly chill and foreboding.
“Wher eas,”  Hayes boomed, glowering at the crowd over his
paper , “I have r eceived information that a gr eat Number of
outrageous and disor derly Persons did tumultuously assemble
themselves together in the T own of Hillsbor ough, on the 24th
and 25th of last Month, during the sitting of the Superior
Court of Justice of that District to oppose the Just Measur es of
Government and in open V iolation of the Laws of their
Country , audaciously attacking his Majesty’ s Associate Justice
in the Execution  of his Office, and barbar ously beating and
wounding several Persons in and during the sitting of said
Court, and offering other enormous Indignities and Insults tohis Majesty’ s Government, committing the most violent
Outrages on the Persons and pr operties of the Inhabitants of
the said T own, drinking Damnation to their lawful Sover eign
King Geor ge and Success to the Pr etender—”
Hayes paused, gulping air with which to accomplish the
next cla use. Inflating his chest with an audible whoosh, he
read on:
“T o the End ther efor e, that the  Persons concerned in the
said out rageous Acts may be b r ought to Justice, I do, by the
Advice a nd Consent of his Majesty’ s Council, issue this my
Pr oclamation, her eby r equiring and strictly enjoining all his
Majesty’ s Justices of the Peace in this Government to make
diligent Inquiry into the above r ecited Crimes, and to r eceive
the Deposition of such Person  or Persons as shall appear
befor e them to make Information of and concerning the same;
which Depositio ns ar e to be transmitted to me, in Or der to be
laid befor e the General Assemb ly , at New Bern, on the 30th
day of November next, to which  time it stands Pr or ogued for
the immediate Dispatch of Public Business.”
A fi nal inhalation; Hayes’ s face  was nearly as purple as the
piper ’ s by now .
“Given under my Hand, and the Gr eat Seal of the Pr ovince,
at New Bern, the 18th Day of O ctober , in the 10th Y ear of his
Majesty’ s Reign, Anno Domini 1770.
“Signed, W illiam T ryon,”  H ayes conclud ed, with a fina l
puf f of steamy breath.
“Do you know ,” I remarked to Jamie, “I believe that was all
one single sentence, bar the closing. Amazing, even for a
politician.”
“Hush, Sassenach,” he said, his eyes still fixed on Archie
Hayes. There was a subdued rumble from the crowd behind
me, of interest and consternation—touched with a certain
amount of amusement at the phrases regarding treasonous
toasts.This wa s a Gathering of Highlanders, many of them exiled
to the Colonies in the wake of the Stuart Rising, and had
Archie Hayes chosen to take of ficial notice of what was said
over the cups o f ale and whisky passed round the fires the
night be fore … but then, he had but forty soldiers with him,
and whatever his own opinio ns of King Geor ge and that
monarch’ s possible damnation, he kept them wisely to himself.
Some fo ur hund red Highlander s surrounded Hayes’ s small
beachhead on the creekbank, summoned by the tattoo of
drums. M en and women sheltered among the trees above the
clearing, plaids and arisaids pulled tight against the rising
wind. They too were keeping their own counsel, judging from
the a rray of stony faces visible under the flutter of scarves and
bonnets. Of course, their expressions might derive from cold
as much  as from natural cautio n; my own cheeks were stif f,
the e nd of my nose had gone numb, and I hadn’ t felt my feet
anytime since daybreak.
“Any person wishing to make declaration concerning these
most ser ious ma tters may entrust such statements safely to my
care,” H ayes announced, his round face an of ficial blank. “I
will remain in my tent with my clerk for the rest of the day .
God save the King!”
He hand ed the Proclamation to  his corporal, bowed to the
crowd in dismissal, and turned smartly toward a lar ge canvas
tent that  had been erected near the trees, regimental banners
flapping wildly from a standard next to it.
Shivering, I slid a hand into th e slit of Jamie’ s cloak and
over the  crook of his arm, my cold fingers comforted by the
warmth of his body . Jamie pressed his elbow briefly to his side
in ac knowledgment of my frozen grasp, but didn’ t look down
at me; he was s tudying Archie  Hayes’ s retreating back, eyes
narrowed against the sting of the wind.
A compact and solid man, of inconsequent height but
considerable pr esence, the Lieutenant moved with great
deliberation, as though oblivious of the crowd on the hillsideabove. He vanished into his te nt, leaving the flap invitingly
tied up.
Not for the first time, I reluctantly admired Governor
T ryon’ s political instincts. This Proclamation was clearly
being re ad in towns and villages throughout the colony; he
could have relied on a local magistrate or sherif f to carry his
message of of ficial fury to this Gathering. Instead, he had
taken the trouble to send Hayes.
Archibald Hayes had taken the field at Culloden by his
father ’ s side, at the age of twelve. W ounded in the fight, he
had been captured and sent sou th. Presented with a choice of
transportation or joining the army , he had taken the King’ s
shilling and made the best of it. The fact that he had risen to be
an of ficer in his mid-thirties, in a time when most
commissions were bought rathe r than earned, was suf ficient
testimony to his abilities.
He was as personable as he was professional; invited to
share our food and fire the day before, he had spent half the
night talking with Jamie—and t he other half moving from fire
to fire under the  aegis of Jamie’ s  presence, being introduced to
the heads of all the important families present.
And whose notion had that been ? I wondered, looking up at
Jamie. His long, straight nose w as reddened by the cold, his
eyes hoo ded from the wind, but his face gave no inkling of
what he was thinking. And that, I thought, was a bloody good
indication that he was thinking  something rather dangerous.
Had he known about this Proclamation?
No English of ficer , with an English troop, could have
brought such news into a Gather ing like this, with any hope of
cooperation. But Hayes and his Highlanders, stalwart in their
tartan …  I didn’ t miss the fac t that Hayes had had his tent
erected with its back to a thick grove of pines; anyone who
wished to speak to the Lieutenant in secret could approach
through the woods, unseen.
“Does Hayes expect someone to pop out of the crowd, rush
into his tent, and  surrender on th e spot?” I murmured to Jamie.I personally knew of at least a dozen men among those present
who had taken part in the Hill sborough riots; three of them
were standing within arm’ s length of us.
Jamie sa w the direction of my glance and put his hand over
mine, squeezing it in a silen t adjuration of discretion. I
lowered my brows at him; surely he didn’ t think I would give
anyone away by inadvertence? He gave me a faint smile and
one of those annoying marital looks that said, more plainly
than words, Y ou know how ye ar e, Sassenach. Anyone who
sees your face kens just what ye think.
I sid led in a little closer , and kicked him discreetly in the
ankle. I might have a glass fa ce, but it certainly wouldn’ t
arouse comment  in a crowd like this! He didn’ t wince, but the
smile spread a l ittle wider . He slid one arm inside my cloak,
and drew me closer , his hand on my back.
Hobson, MacLennan, and Fowles stood together just in
front of us, talking quietly amo ng themselves. All three came
from a tiny settlement called Drunkard’ s Creek, some fifteen
miles fr om our own place on Fraser ’ s Ridge. Hugh Fowles
was Joe Hobson’ s son-in-law , and very young, no more than
twenty . He was doing his best t o keep his composure, but his
face had gone white and clammy as the Proclamation was
read.
I d idn’ t know w hat T ryon intended to do to anyone who
could be proved to have had a part in the riot, but I could feel
the currents of unrest created by the Governor ’ s Proclamation
passing through the crowd like the eddies of water rushing
over rocks in the nearby creek.
Several buildings had been destroyed in Hillsborough, and a
number of public of ficials drag ged out and assaulted in the
street. Gossip had it that one ironically titled justice of the
peace h ad lost an eye to a vicious blow aimed with a
horsewhip. No doubt taking this demonstration of civil
disobedience to heart, Chief Justice Henderson had escaped
out o f a window  and fled the town, thus ef fectively preventingthe Cour t from sitting. It was cle ar that the Governor was very
annoyed about what had happened in Hillsborough.
Joe Hobson glanced back at Jamie, then away . Lieutenant
Hayes’ s presence at our fire the previous evening had not gone
unremarked.
If Jamie  saw the glance, he didn’ t return it. He lifted one
shoulder in a shrug, tilting his head down to speak to me.
“I shouldna think Hayes expects anyone to give themselves
up, no. It may be his duty to ask  for information; I thank God
it isn a mine to answer .” He hadn’ t spoken loudly , but loudly
enough to reach the ears of Joe Hobson.
Hobson turned his head and gave Jamie a small nod of wry
acknowledgment. He touched his son-in-law’ s arm, and they
turned away , scrambling up the slope toward the scattered
campsites above, where their womenfolk were tending the
fires and the younger children.
This was the las t day of the Gathering; tonight there would
be m arryings and christenings, t he formal blessing of love and
its riotous fruits, sprung from the loins of the unchurched
multitude during the year before. Then the last songs would be
sung, th e last stories told, and dancing done amid the leaping
flames of many fires—rain or no rain. Come morning, the
Scots an d their households would all disperse back to their
homes, s cattered from the settled banks of the Cape Fear River
to the wild mountains of the west—carrying news of the
Governor ’ s Proclamation and the doings at Hillsborough.
I wi ggled my toes inside my damp shoes and wondered
uneasily who among the crowd might think it their duty to
answer Hayes’ s invitation to co nfession or incrimination. Not
Jamie, no. But others might. T here had been a good deal of
boasting about the riots in Hillsb orough during the week of the
Gathering, but not all the listeners were disposed to view the
rioters as heroes, by any means.
I co uld feel as  well as hear the mutter of conversation
breaking out in the wake of the  Proclamation; heads turning,families drawing close together , men moving from group to
group, as the co ntent of Hayes’ s speech was relayed up the
hill, repeated to those who stood too far away to have heard it.
“Shall we go? There’ s a lot to do yet before the weddings.”
“A ye?” Jamie glanced down at me. “I thought Jocasta’ s
slaves were managing the food and drink. I gave Ulysses the
barrels of whisky—he’ll be soghan. ”
“Ulysses? Did he bring his wig ?” I smiled at the thought.
The soghan  was the man who managed the dispensing of drink
and refreshment at a Highland wedding; the term actually
meant something like “hearty , jovial fellow .” Ulysses was
possibly the most dignified person I had ever seen—even
without his livery and powdered horsehair wig.
“If h e did, it’ s like to be stuck to his head by the evening.”
Jamie glanced up at the lowering sky and shook his head.
“Happy the bride the sun shine s on,” he quoted. “Happy the
corpse the rain falls on.”
“That’ s what I like about S cots,” I said dryly . “An
appropriate proverb for all occasions. Don’ t you dare say that
in front of Bree.”
“What d’ye take me for , Sassen ach?” he demanded, with a
half-smile down at me. “I’m her father , no?”
“Definitely yes.” I suppresse d the sudden thought of
Brianna’ s other father , and glanced over my shoulder , to be
sure she wasn’ t in hearing.
There was no sign of her blazing head among those nearby .
Certainly her father ’ s daughter , she stood six feet tall in her
stocking feet; nearly as easy as Jamie himself to pick out of a
crowd.
“It’ s not  the wedding feast I need to deal with, anyway ,” I
said, tur ning back to Jamie. “I’ve got to manage breakfast,
then do the morning clinic with Murray MacLeod.”
“Oh, aye? I thought ye said wee Murray was a charlatan.”“I s aid he was  ignorant, stubborn, and a menace to the
public health,” I corrected. “That’ s not the same thing—quite.”
“Quite,” said Jamie, grinning. “Y e mean to educate him,
then—or poison him?”
“Whichever seems most ef fective. If nothing else, I might
accidentally step on his fleam an d break it; that’ s probably the
only way I’ll stop him bleeding people. Let’ s go, though, I’m
freezing!”
“A ye, w e’ll away , then,” Jamie agreed, with a glance at the
soldiers, still drawn up along the  creekbank at parade rest. “No
doubt wee Archie means to keep  his lads there ‘til the crowd’ s
gone; they’re going a wee bit blue round the edges.”
Though fully armed and uniformed, the row of Highlanders
was relaxed; imposing, to be su re, but no longer threatening.
Small b oys—and not a few we e girls—scampered to and fro
among them, impudently flicking the hems of the soldiers’
kilts or dashing  in, greatly daring, to touch the gleaming
muskets, dangling canteens, and the hilts of dirks and swords.
“Abel, a charaid !” Jamie had paused to greet the last of the
men from Drunkard’ s Creek. “W ill ye ha’ eaten yet the day?”
MacLennan had  not brought his  wife to the Gathering, and
thus ate where luck took him. The crowd was dispersing
around u s, but he stood stolidly in place, holding the ends of a
red flannel handkerchief pulled over his balding head against
the spatt er of rain. Probably ho ping to cadge an invitation to
breakfast, I thought cynically .
I eyed his stocky form, mentally estimating his possible
consumption of eggs, parritch, and toasted bread against the
dwindling supplies in our hampers. Not that simple shortage of
food would stop any Highland er from of fering hospitality—
certainly not Jamie, who was in viting MacLennan to join us,
even as I men tally divided eighteen eggs by nine people
instead of eight. Not fried, then; made into fritters with grated
potatoes, and I’d best borrow more cof fee from Jocasta’ s
campsite on the way up the mountain.W e turn ed to go, and Jamie’ s hand slid suddenly downward
over my backside. I made an undignified sound, and Abel
MacLennan turn ed round to gawk at me. I smiled brightly at
him, resisting the ur ge to kick Jamie again, less discreetly .
MacLennan turned away , and scrambled up the slope in
front of us with alacrity , coattails bouncing in anticipation over
worn br eeks. Jamie put a hand  under my elbow to help me
over the rocks, bending down as he did so to mutter in my ear .
“Why the devil are ye not wear ing a petticoat, Sassenach?”
he hissed. “Y e’ve nothing at al l on under your skirt—you’ll
catch your death of cold!”
“Y ou’re not wrong there,” I sai d, shivering in spite of my
cloak. I did in fa ct have on a linen shift under my gown, but it
was a thin, ragg ed thing, suitable for rough camping-out in
summertime, but quite insuf ficient to stem the wintry blasts
that blew through my skirt as though it were cheesecloth.
“Y e had a fine woolen petticoat yesterday . What’ s become
of it?”
“Y ou don’ t want to know ,” I assured him.
His eyebrows went up at this , but before he could ask
further questions, a scream rang out behind us.
“Germain!”
I turned to see a small blond head, hair flying as the owner
streaked down the slope bel ow the rocks. T wo-year -old
Germain had taken advantage of his mother ’ s preoccupation
with his newborn sister to escap e custody and make a dash for
the row of soldiers. Eluding capture, he char ged headlong
down the slope, picking up speed like a rolling stone.
“Fer gus!” Marsa li screamed. Germain’ s father , hearing his
name, tu rned round from his co nversation, just in time to see
his s on t rip over  a rock and fly headlong. A born acrobat, the
little boy made no move to save himself, but collapsed
gracefully , rolling into a ball lik e a hedgehog as he struck the
grassy slope on one shoulder .  He rolled like a cannonballthrough the ranks of soldiers, shot of f the edge of a rocky
shelf, and plopped with a splash into the creek.
There w as a general gasp of consternation, and a number of
people r an dow n the hill to help, but one of the soldiers had
already hurried to the bank. Kneeling, he thrust the tip of his
bayonet through the child’ s floating clothes and towed the
soggy bundle to the shore.
Fer gus char ged into the icy sha llows, reaching out to clasp
his waterlogged son.
“Mer ci, mon ami, mille mer ci beaucoup,”  he said to the
young soldier . “Et toi, toto,”  he said, addressing his
spluttering of fspring with a small shake. “Comment ca va, ye
wee chowderheid?”
The soldier looked startled, but I couldn’ t tell whether the
cause was Fer gus’ s unique patoi s, or the sight of the gleaming
hook he wore in place of his missing left hand.
“That’ s all right then, sir ,” he sa id, with a shy smile. “He’ll
no be damaged, I think.”
Brianna appeare d suddenly from behind a chinkapin tree,
six-month-old Jemmy on one shoulder , and scooped baby Joan
neatly out of Marsali’ s arms.
“Here, g ive Joanie to me,” she  said. “Y ou go take care of
Germain.”
Jamie swung the heavy cloak fr om his shoulders and laid it
in Marsali’ s arms in place of the baby .
“A ye, and tell th e soldier laddie who saved him to come and
share ou r fire,” he told her . “W e can feed another , Sassenach?”
“Of co urse,” I said, swiftly readjusting my mental
calculations. Eig hteen eggs, four loaves of stale bread for toast
—no, I should k eep back one for the trip home tomorrow—
three do zen oat cakes if Jamie and Roger hadn’ t eaten them
already , half a jar of honey …
Marsali’ s thin face lighted with a rueful smile, shared
among the three of us, then she was gone, hastening to the aidof her drenched and shivering menfolk.
Jamie lo oked after her with a sigh of resignation, as the
wind caught the full sleeves of  his shirt and belled them out
with a muf fled whoomp . He crossed his arms across his chest,
hunching his shoulders against the wind, and smiled down at
me, sidelong.
“Ah, well. I suppose we shall both freeze together ,
Sassenach. That ’ s all right, tho ugh. I wouldna want to live
without ye, anyway .”
“Ha,” I said amiably . “Y ou could live naked on an ice floe,
Jamie Fraser , and melt it. What have you done with your coat
and plai d?” He wore nothing b esides his kilt and sark save
shoes and stockings, and his high cheekbones were reddened
with cold, like th e tips of his ears. When I slipped a hand back
inside the crook of his arm, though, he was warm as ever .
“Y e dinn a want to know ,” he said, grinning. He covered my
hand wi th one lar ge, callused pa lm. “Let’ s go; I’m starved for
my breakfast.”
“W ait,” I said, detaching myself. Jemmy was indisposed to
share his mother ’ s embrace with the newcomer , and howled
and squi rmed in protest, his sm all round face going red with
annoyance under a blue knitted cap. I reached out and took
him from  Brianna, as he wriggle d and fussed in his wrappings.
“Thanks, Mama .” Brianna smiled briefly , boosting tiny Joan
into a more secu re position against her shoulder . “Are you sure
you want that one, though? This one’ s quieter—and weighs
half as much.”
“No, he’ s all right. Hush, swe etie, come see Grannie.” I
smiled as I said it, with the still-new feeling of mingled
surprise and delight that I could actually be someone’ s
grandmother . Recognizing me, J emmy abandoned his fuss and
went promptly into his muss el-clinging-to-a-rock routine,
chubby fists gripped tight in my hair . Disentangling his
fingers, I peered over his head, b ut things below seemed under
control.Fer gus, breeches and stockings soaking wet, Jamie’ s cloak
draped round his shoulders, was wringing out his shirtfront
one-handed, saying something to the soldier who had rescued
Germain. Marsa li had whipped of f her arisaid and wrapped the
little boy in it, her loosened blond hair flying out from under
her kerch like cobwebs in the wind.
Lieutenant Hayes, attracted by the noise, was peering out
from the flap of his tent like a whelk from its shell. He looked
up, and caught m y eye; I waved  briefly , then turned to follow
my own family back to our campsite.
Jamie was saying something t o Brianna in Gaelic, as he
helped her over a rocky patch in the trail ahead of me.
“Y es, I’m ready ,” she said, replying in English. “Where’ s
your coat, Da?”
“I le nt it  to your husband,” he s aid. “W e dinna want him to
look a beggar at your wedding, aye?”
Bree lau ghed, wiping a flying strand of red hair out of her
mouth with her free hand.
“Better a beggar than an attempted suicide.”
“A what?” I caught up with them as we emer ged from the
shelter o f the rocks. The wind barreled across the open space,
pelting us with sleet and bits o f stinging gravel, and I pulled
the knitted cap further down ov er Jemmy’ s ears, then pulled
the blanket up over his head.
“Whoof!” Brianna hunched over the swaddled baby girl she
carried, sheltering her from the blast. “Roger was shaving
when th e drums  started up; he nearly cut his throat. The front
of h is coat is covered with bloodstains.” She glanced at Jamie,
eyes watering with the wind. “So you’ve seen him this
morning. Where is he now , do you know?”
“The lad ’ s in one piece,” he as sured her . “I told him to go
and talk wi’ F ather Donahue, while Hayes was about his
business.” He gave her a sharp look. “Y e might have told me
the lad was no a Catholic.”“I might,” she said, unperturbed. “But I didn’ t. It’ s no big
deal to me.”
“If ye mean by  that peculiar expression, that it’ s of no
consequence—” Jamie began w ith a distinct edge in his voice,
but was interrupted by the appearance of Roger himself,
resplendent in a kilt of green-and-white MacKenzie tartan,
with the  matchi ng plaid draped over Jamie’ s good coat and
waistcoat. The coat fit decentl y—both men were of a size,
long-limbed and broad-shouldered, though Jamie was an inch
or tw o the taller—and the gray wool was quite as becoming to
Roger ’ s dark hair and olive skin as it was to Jamie’ s burnished
auburn coloring.
“Y ou look very nice, Roger ,” I  said. “Where did you cut
yourself?” His face was pink, w ith the raw look common to
just-shaved skin, but otherwise unmarked.
Roger w as carrying Jamie’ s plaid under his arm, a bundle of
red and black tartan. He handed it over and tilted his head to
one side, showing me the deep gash just under his jawbone.
“Just there. Not so bad, but it bled like the dickens. They
don’ t call them cutthroat razors for nothing, aye?”
The gash had already crusted i nto a neat dark line, a cut
some three inches long, angled  down from the corner of his
jaw acro ss the side of his thro at. I touched the skin near it
briefly . N ot bad ; the blade of the razor had cut straight in, no
flap of skin ne eding suture. No wonder it had bled a lot,
though; it did look as though he had tried to cut his throat.
“A bit nervous t his morning?” I teased. “Not having second
thoughts, are you?”
“A l ittle late for  that,” Brianna said dryly , coming up beside
me. “Got a kid who needs a name, after all.”
“He’ll have more names than he knows what to do with,”
Roger assured her . “So will you—Mrs. MacKenzie.”
A sm all flush lit  Brianna’ s face at the name, and she smiled
at him. He leane d over and kiss ed her on the forehead, taking
the cocooned baby from her as he did so. A look of suddenshock cr ossed his face as he felt the weight of the bundle in his
arms, and he gawked down at it.
“That’ s not ours,” Bree said,  grinning at his look of
consternation. “It’ s Marsali’ s Joan. Mama has Jemmy .”
“Thank God,” he said, holding the bundle with a good deal
more caution. “I thought he’d evaporated or something.” He
lifted the blanket slightly , exposing tiny Joan’ s sleeping face,
and smiled—as people always did—at sight of her comical
quif f of brown hair , which cam e to a point like a Kewpie
doll’ s.
“Not a chance,” I said, grunting as I hoisted a well-
nourished Jemmy , now peacefully comatose in his own
wrappings, into a more comfortable position. “I think he’ s
gained a pound or two on the way uphill.” I was flushed from
exertion, and held the baby a little away from myself, as a
sudden wave of heat flushed my  cheeks and perspiration broke
out under the waves of my disheveled hair .
Jamie took Jemmy from me, an d tucked him expertly under
one arm like a football, one hand cupping the baby’ s head.
“Y e’ve spoken wi’ the priest, th en?” he said, eyeing Roger
skeptically .
“I have,” Roger said dryly , answering the look as much as
the ques tion. “He’ s satisfied I’m no the Anti-Christ. So long as
I’m willing the l ad should be baptized Catholic, there’ s no bar
to the wedding. I’ve said I’m willing.”
Jamie gr unted in reply , and I repressed a smile. While Jamie
had no great religious prejudices—he had dealt with, fought
with, and commanded far too many men, of every possible
background—the revelation that his son-in-law was a
Presbyterian—and had no intention of converting—had
occasioned some small comment.
Bree caught my eye and gave m e a sidelong smile, her own
eyes creasing into blue triangles of catlike amusement.
“V ery wise of you not to mention religion ahead of time,” I
murmured, care ful not to speak loudly enough for Jamie tohear me. Both m en were walking ahead of us, still rather stif f
in their attitudes , though the formality of their demeanor was
rather impaired by the trailing draperies of the babies they
carried.
Jemmy let out a  sudden squawk, but his grandfather swung
him up without breaking stride, and he subsided, round eyes
fixed on us over Jamie’ s shoulde r , sheltered under the hooding
of his blanket. I made a face at him, and he broke into a huge,
gummy smile.
“Roger wanted to say somethi ng, but I told him to keep
quiet.” Bree stuck out her tongue and wiggled it at Jemmy ,
then fixed a w ifely look on Roger ’ s back. “I knew Da
wouldn’ t make a stramash about  it, if we waited ‘til just before
the wedding.”
I n oted both her  astute evaluation of her father ’ s behavior ,
and her easy use of Scots. She resembled Jamie in a good deal
more than the o bvious matter of looks and coloring; she had
his talen t for human judgment and his glibness with language.
Still, the re was something niggl ing at my mind, something to
do with Roger and religion …
W e had come up close enough behind the men to hear their
conversation.
“… about Hillsborough,” Jamie was saying, leaning toward
Roger so as t o be heard over the wind. “Calling for
information about the rioters.”
“Oh, ay e?” Ro ger sounded both interested and wary .
“Duncan Innes will be interested to hear that. He was in
Hillsborough during the troubles, did you know?”
“No.” Jamie sounded more th an interested. “I’ve barely
seen Duncan to speak to this week. I’ll ask him, maybe, after
the wedding—if  he lives through it.” Duncan was to marry
Jamie’ s aunt, Jocasta Cameron, in the evening, and was
nervous to the point of prostration over the prospect.
Roger turned, shielding Joan fro m the wind with his body as
he spoke to Brianna.“Y our au nt’ s tol d Father Donahue he can hold the weddings
in her tent. That’ll be a help.”
“Brrrr!” Bree hunched her sh oulders, shivering. “Thank
goodness. It’ s no day to be  getting married under the
greenwood tree.”
A h uge chestnut overhead sen t down a damp shower of
yellow leaves, as though in agr eement. Roger looked a little
uneasy .
“I don’ t imagine it’ s quite the w edding you maybe thought
of,” he said. “When ye were a wee girl.”
Brianna looked up at Roger and a slow , wide smile spread
across her face. “Neither was t he first one,” she said. “But I
liked it fine.”
Roger ’ s complexion wasn’ t given to blushing, and his ears
were re d with cold in any case. He opened his mouth as
though to reply , caught Jamie’ s gimlet eye, and shut it again,
looking embarrassed but undeniably pleased.
“Mr . Fraser!”
I turned to see o ne of the soldier s making his way up the hill
toward us, his eyes fixed on Jamie.
“Corporal MacN air , your servant, sir ,” he said, breathing
hard as he reached us. He gave a sharp inclination of the head.
“The Lieutenant ’ s compliments, and would ye be so good as to
attend him in his tent?” He caught sight of me, and bowed
again, less abruptly . “Mrs. Fraser . My compliments, ma’am.”
“Y our servant, sir .” Jamie returned the Corporal’ s bow . “My
apologies to the Lieutenant, but I have duties that require my
attendance elsewhere.” He spoke politely , but the Corporal
glanced sharply  up at him. MacNair was young, but not
callow; a quick look of unders tanding crossed his lean, dark
face. Th e last thing any man wo uld want was to be seen going
into Hayes’ s tent by himself, immediately following that
Proclamation.“The Lie utenant bids me request the attendance upon him of
Mr . Farquard Campbell, Mr . A ndrew MacNeill, Mr . Gerald
Forbes, Mr . Duncan Innes, and M r . Randall Lillywhite, as well
as yourself, sir .”
A certain amount of tension left Jamie’ s shoulders.
“Does h e,” he said dryly . So Hayes meant to consult the
powerful men of the area: Farquard Campbell and Andrew
MacNeill were lar ge landowners and local magistrates; Gerald
Forbes a prominent solicitor from Cross Creek, and a justice of
the peace; Lillywhite a magistrate of the circuit court. And
Duncan Innes was about to become the lar gest plantation
owner in the western half of the colony , by virtue of his
impending marriage to Jamie’ s widowed aunt. Jamie himself
was neit her rich nor an of ficial of the Crown—but he was  the
proprietor of a lar ge, if still lar gely vacant, land grant in the
backcountry .
He gave a slight shrug and shifted the baby to his other
shoulder , settling himself.
“A ye. W ell, then. T ell the Lieu tenant I shall attend him as
soon as may be convenient.”
Nothing daunted , MacNair bowed and went of f, presumably
in search of the other gentlemen on his list.
“And what’ s all that about?” I asked Jamie. “Oops.” I
reached up and skimmed a glistening strand of saliva from
Jemmy’ s chin before it could r each Jamie’ s shirt. “Starting a
new tooth, are we?”
“I’ve plenty of teeth,” Jamie assured me, “and so have you,
so f ar as I can see. As to what Hayes may want with me, I
canna sa y for sure. And I dinna mean to find out before I must,
either .” He cocked one ruddy eyebrow at me, and I laughed.
“Oh, a certain flexibility in that word ‘convenient,’ is
there?”
“I didna say it would be convenient for him ,” Jamie pointed
out. “Now , about your petticoat, Sassenach, and why you’re
scampering abou t the forest bare-arsed—Duncan, a charaid !”The wry look on his face melted into genuine pleasure at sight
of Dunc an Innes, making his w ay toward us through a small
growth of bare-limbed dogwood.
Duncan clambered over a fallen log, the process made
rather awkward  by his missing left arm, and arrived on the
path beside us, shaking water d roplets from his hair . He was
already dressed for his wedding, in a clean ruf fled shirt and
starched linen stock above his kilt, and a coat of scarlet
broadcloth trimmed in gold lace, the empty sleeve pinned up
with a brooch. I had never seen Duncan look so elegant, and
said so.
“Och, w ell,” he said dif fidently . “Miss Jo did wish it.” He
shrugged of f the compliment along with the rain, carefully
brushing away dead needles and bits of bark that had adhered
to his coat in the passage through the pines.
“Brrr! A gruesome day , Mac Dubh , and no mistake.” He
looked up at the sky and shook his head. “Happy the bride the
sun shines on; happy the corpse the rain falls on.”
“I do wonder just how delighted you can expect the average
corpse to be,” I said, “whatever the meteorological conditions.
But I’m  sure Jocasta will be quite happy regardless,” I added
hastily , seeing a look of bewilderment spread itself across
Duncan’ s features. “And you too, of course!”
“Oh … aye,” he  said, a little uncertainly . “A ye, of course. I
thank ye, ma’am.”
“When I saw ye coming through the wood, I thought
perhaps Corporal MacNair was nippin’ at your heels,” Jamie
said. “Y ou’re no on your way to see Archie Hayes, are you?”
Duncan looked quite startled.
“Hayes? No, what would the Lieutenant want wi’ me?”
“Y ou w ere in Hillsborough in September , aye? Here,
Sassenach, take this wee squirrel away .” Jamie interrupted
himself to hand me Jemmy , who had decided to take a more
active in terest in the proceedings and was attempting to climb
his gran dfather ’ s torso, digging in his toes and making loudgrunting noises. The sudden activity , however , was not Jamie’ s
chief motive for relieving himself of the burden, as I
discovered when I accepted Jemmy .
“Thanks a lot,” I said, wrinkling  my nose. Jamie grinned at
me, and turned Duncan up the path, resuming their
conversation.
“Hmm,” I said, snif fing cautiously . “Finished, are you? No,
I t hough t not.” Jemmy closed h is eyes, went bright red, and
emitted a popping noise like muf fled machine-gun fire. I undid
his wrappings suf ficiently to peek down his back.
“Whoops,” I said, and hastily unwound the blanket, just in
time. “ What  has your mother been feeding you?”
Thrilled to have escaped his swaddling bands, Jemmy
churned his legs like a windmill, causing a noxious yellowish
substance to ooze from the baggy legs of his diaper .
“Pew ,” I said su ccinctly , and holding him at arm’ s length,
headed of f the path toward o ne of the tiny rivulets that
meandered down the mountainside, thinking that while I could
perhaps do without such amenities as indoor plumbing and
motorcars, there were times when I sincerely missed things
like rubb er pants with elasticated legs. T o say nothing of toilet
rolls.
I fou nd a good spot on the edge of the little stream, with a
thick co ating of  dead leaves. I  knelt, laid out a fold of my
cloak, and parked Jemmy on it o n his hands and knees, pulling
the soggy clout of f without bothering to unpin it.
“W eee!” he said, sounding surprised as the cold air struck
him. He clenched his fat little buttocks and hunched like a
small pink toad.
“Ha,” I told him. “If you think a cold wind up the bum is
bad, just  wait.” I scooped up a h andful of damp yellow-brown
leaves, a nd cleaned him of f br iskly . A fairly stoic child, he
wiggled and squirmed, but didn’ t screech, instead making
high-pitched “Eeeeee” noises as I excavated his crevices.I f lipped him o ver , and with a hand held prophylactically
over the danger zone, administe red a similar treatment to his
private parts, this eliciting a wide, gummy grin.
“Oh, you ar e  a Hieland man, aren’ t you?” I said, smiling
back.
“And just what d’ye mean by that remark, Sassenach?” I
looked u p to find Jamie leaning against a tree on the other side
of the streamlet.  The bold color s of his dress tartan and white
linen sark stood out bright agai nst the faded autumn foliage;
face and hair , though, made him  look like some denizen of the
wood, all bronze and auburn, wi th the wind stirring his hair so
the free ends danced like the scarlet maple leaves above.
“W ell, h e’ s apparently impervious to cold and damp,” I said,
concluding my labors and discarding the final handful of
soiled leaves. “Beyond that … well, I’ve not had much to do
with male infants before, but isn’ t this rather precocious?”
One cor ner of Jamie’ s mouth curled up, as he peered at the
prospect revealed under my hand. The tiny appendage stood
up stif f as my thumb, and roughly the same size.
“Ah, no ,” he said. “I’ve seen a  many wee lads in the raw .
They all do that  now and again.” He shrugged, and the smile
grew wider . “Now , whether it’ s only Scottish  lads, I couldna be
saying …”
“A t alent that improves with ag e, I daresay ,” I said dryly . I
tossed th e dirty clout across the  streamlet, where it landed at
his feet with a splat. “Get the pins and rinse that out, will
you?”
His long, straight nose wrinkled slightly , but he knelt
without demur and picked the filthy thing up gingerly between
two fingers.
“Oh, so that’ s  what ye’ve done wi’ your petticoat,” he said.
I had opened the lar ge pocket I wore slung at my waist and
extracted a clean, folded rectangle of cloth. Not the
unbleached linen of the clout he  held, but a thick, soft, often-washed wool flannel, dyed a pale red with the juice of
currants.
I shrugged, checked Jemmy for the prospect of fresh
explosions, and popped him onto the new diaper .
“W ith three babies all in clouts, and the weather too damp to
dry anything properly , we were rather short of clean bits.” The
bushes a round the clearing where we had made our family
camp were all fe stooned with flapping laundry , most of it still
wet, owing to the inopportune weather .
“Here.” Jamie stretched across the foot-wide span of rock-
strewn water to hand me the pins extracted from the old
diaper . I  took them, careful not t o drop them in the stream. My
fingers w ere stif f and chilly , bu t the pins were valuable; Bree
had made them of heated wir e, and Roger had carved the
capped heads from wood, in accordance with her drawings.
Honest-to-goodness safety pins, if a bit lar ger and cruder than
the mod ern version. The only real defect was the glue used to
hold the wooden heads to the wi re; made from boiled milk and
hoof parings, it was not entirely waterproof, and the heads had
to be reglued periodically .
I fol ded the diap er snugly about Jemmy’ s loins and thrust a
pin throu gh the cloth, smiling at sight of the wooden cap. Bree
had take n one set and carved a s mall, comical frog—each with
a wide, toothless grin—onto each one.
“All right, Froggie, here you go, then.” Diaper securely
fastened, I sat down and booste d him into my lap, smoothing
down his smock and attempting to rewrap his blanket.
“Where did Duncan go?” I asked. “Down to see the
Lieutenant?”
Jamie shook his head, bent over his task.
“I told him not to go yet. He was  in Hillsborough during the
troubles there. Best he should wait a bit; then if Hayes should
ask, he can swe ar honestly there’ s no man here who took part
in the riots.” He  looked up and smiled, without humor . “There
won’ t be, come nightfall.”I w atched his h ands, lar ge and capable, wringing out the
rinsed clout. The scars on his right hand were usually almost
invisible, but they stood out no w , ragged white lines against
his cold-reddened skin. The whole business made me mildly
uneasy , though there seemed no direct connection with us.
For the most pa rt, I could think of Governor T ryon with no
more than a fai nt sense of edg iness; he was, after all, safely
tucked away in his nice new palace in New Bern, separated
from our tiny settlement on Fra ser ’ s Ridge by three hundred
miles of coastal towns, inland plantations, pine forest,
piedmont, trackl ess mountains, and sheer howling wilderness.
W ith all the other things he had to worry about, such as the
self-styled “Regulators” who had terrorized Hillsborough, and
the corru pt sherif fs and judges w ho had provoked the terror , I
hardly th ought h e would have ti me to spare a thought for us. I
hoped not.
The unc omfortable fact remaine d that Jamie held title to a
lar ge gra nt of land in the North Carolina mountains as the gift
of G overnor T ryon—and T ryo n in turn held one small but
important fact tucked away in his vest pocket: Jamie was a
Catholic. And Royal grants of land could be made only to
Protestants, by law .
Given the tiny number of Catholics in the colony , and the
lack of or ganiza tion among them, the question of religion was
rarely an issue. There were no Catholic churches, no resident
Catholic priests ; Father Donahue had made the arduous
journey down from Baltimore,  at Jocasta’ s request. Jamie’ s
aunt Jocasta and her late husban d, Hector Cameron, had been
influential amon g the Scottish community here for so long that
no one would have thought of questioning their religious
background, and I thought it lik ely that few of the Scots with
whom w e had been celebrating all week knew that we were
Papists.
They were, however , likely to notice quite soon. Bree and
Roger , who had been handfasted  for a year , were to be married
by the priest this evening, al ong with two other Catholic
couples from Bremerton—and with Jocasta and Duncan Innes.“Archie Hayes,” I said suddenly . “Is he a Catholic?”
Jamie hung the wet clout from a nearby branch and shook
water from his hands.
“I h avena asked him,” he said , “but I shouldna think so.
That is, his father was not; I should be surprised if he was—
and him an of ficer .”
“T rue.” The disadvantages of Scottish birth, poverty , and
being an ex-Jacobite were suf ficiently staggering; amazing
enough that Hayes had overcom e these to rise to his present
position, without the additional burden of the taint of Papistry .
What was troubling me, thoug h, was not the thought of
Lieutenant Haye s and his men;  it was Jamie. Outwardly , he
was calm and a ssured as ever , with that faint smile always
hiding in the corner of his mouth. But I knew him very well; I
had seen the two  stif f fingers of  his right hand—maimed in an
English prison—twitch against the side of his leg as he traded
jokes an d stories with Hayes t he night before. Even now , I
could see the thin line that formed between his brows when he
was troubled, and it wasn’ t concern over what he was doing.
W as it simply worry over the Proclamation? I couldn’ t see
why that should be, given that none of our folk had been
involved in the Hillsborough riots.
“… a Presbyterian,” he was say ing. He glanced over at me
with a wry smile. “Like wee Roger .”
The memory that had niggled at me earlier dropped
suddenly into place.
“Y ou k new tha t,” I said. “Y ou knew  R oger wasn’ t  a
Catholic. Y ou saw him baptize that child in Snaketown, when
we …  to ok him from the Indians.” T oo late, I saw the shadow
cross his  face, and bit my tongue. When we took Roger—and
left in his place Jamie’ s dearly loved nephew Ian.
A shadow crossed his face momentarily , but he smiled,
pushing away the thought of Ian.
“A ye, I did,” he said.“But Bree—”
“She’d marry the lad if he were a Hottentot,” Jamie
interrupted. “Anyone can see that. And I canna say I’d object
overmuch to wee Roger if he wer e  a Hottentot,” he added,
rather to my surprise.
“Y ou wouldn’ t?”
Jamie sh rugged, and stepped over the tiny creek to my side,
wiping wet hands on the end of his plaid.
“He’ s a braw lad, and he’ s kind. He’ s taken the wean as his
own and said no  word to the lass about it. It’ s no more than a
man should do—but not every man would.”
I gla nced down involuntarily at Jemmy , curled up cozily in
my arms . I tried not to think of  it myself, but could not help
now and  then searching his bluntly amiable features for any
trace that might reveal his true paternity .
Brianna had been handfast wit h Roger , lain with him for
one nigh t—and then been raped two days later , by Stephen
Bonnet. There was no way to te ll for sure who the father had
been, and so fa r Jemmy gave no indication of resembling
either man in t he slightest. He was gnawing his fist at the
moment, with a ferocious scowl of concentration, and with his
soft fuzz  of red-gold plush, he l ooked like no one so much as
Jamie himself.
“Mm. So why al l the insistence on having Roger vetted by a
priest?”
“W ell, th ey’ll be married in any  case,” he said logically . “I
want the wee lad  baptized a Catholic, though.” He laid a lar ge
hand gently on Jemmy’ s head, thumb smoothing the tiny red
brows. “So if I  made a bit of a fuss about MacKenzie, I
thought they’d be pleased to ag ree about an gille ruaidh  here,
aye?”
I l aughe d, and pulled a fold of blanket up around Jemmy’ s
ears.
“And I thought Brianna had you  figured out!”“So doe s she,” he said, with a grin. He bent suddenly and
kissed me.
His mou th was soft and very w arm. He tasted of bread and
butter , and he smelled strongly of fresh leaves and unwashed
male, with just the faintest trace of ef fluvium of diaper .
“Oh, that’ s nice,” I said with approval. “Do it again.”
The woo d aroun d us was still, in the way of woods. No bird,
no b east, just th e sough of leave s above and the rush of water
underfoot. Cons tant movement , constant sound—and at the
center o f it all, a perfect peace. There were a good many
people o n the mountain, and most of them not that far away—
yet just here, just now , we might have been alone on Jupiter .
I o pened  my eyes and sighed, tasting honey . Jamie smiled at
me, and brushed a fallen yellow  leaf from my hair . The baby
lay in my arms, a heavy , warm weight, the center of the
universe.
Neither of us spoke, not wishin g to disturb the stillness. It
was like being at the tip of a spinning top, I thought—a whirl
of event s and people going on all round, and a step in one
direction or another would plunge us back into that spinning
frenzy , but here at the very center—there was peace.
I rea ched up and brushed a scatter of maple seeds from his
shoulder . He seized my hand, an d brought it to his mouth with
a su dden fierceness that startle d me. And yet his lips were
tender , t he tip of his tongue war m on the fleshy mound at the
base of my thumb—the mount of V enus, it’ s called, love’ s
seat.
He r aised his he ad, and I felt the sudden chill on my hand,
where th e ancient scar showed white as bone. A letter “J,” cut
in the skin, his mark on me.
He laid his hand against my face, and I pressed it there with
my own, as thou gh I could feel the faded “C” he bore on his
own palm, against the cold skin of my cheek. Neither of us
spoke, b ut the pledge was made, as we had made it oncebefore, i n a place of sanctuary , our feet on a scrap of bedrock
in the shifting sands of threatened war .
It was not near; not yet. But I h eard it coming, in the sound
of drum s and proclamation, saw it in the glint of steel, knew
the fear of it in heart and bone when I looked in Jamie’ s eyes.
The chill had gone, and hot blood throbbed in my hand as
though t o split the ancient scar and spill my heart’ s blood for
him once again. It would come, and I could not stop it.
But this time, I wouldn’ t leave him.
 
I F OLL OWED JAMIE out of the trees, across a scrabble of
rocks and sand and tufted grass, to the well-trampled trail that
led upward to our campsite. I was counting in my head,
readjusting the breakfast requirements yet again, in light of
Jamie’ s revelation that he had invited two more families to
join us for the meal.
“Robin McGillivray and Geordie Chisholm,” he said,
holding back a branch for me to pass. “I thought we should
make them welcome; they me an to come and settle on the
Ridge.”
“Do they ,” I s aid, ducking as the branch slapped back
behind me. “When? And how many of them are there?”
These were loaded questions. It was close to winter—much
too close to count on building even the crudest cabin for
shelter . Anyone who came to the mountains now would likely
have to live in t he big house wi th us, or crowd into one of the
small settlers’ cabins that dotted the Ridge. Highlanders could,
did, and would live ten to a room when necessary . W ith my
less strongly developed sense of English hospitality , I rather
hoped it wouldn’ t be necessary .
“Six McGillivrays and eight Chisholms,” Jamie said,
smiling. “The McGillivrays will come in the spring, though.
Robin’ s a gunsmith—he’ll have  work in Cross Creek for the
winter—and his family will bide with kin in Salem—his wife’ s
German—until the weather warms.”“Oh, that’ s good.” Fourteen more for breakfast, then, plus
me a nd Jamie, R oger and Bree, Marsali and Fer gus, Lizzie and
her father—Abel MacLennan, mustn’ t for get him—oh, and the
soldier lad who’d rescued Germain, that made twenty-four …
“I’ll go and borrow some cof fee and rice from my aunt,
shall I?”  Jamie had been readin g the growing look of dismay
on my features. He grinned, and held out his arms for the baby .
“Give m e the laddie; we’ll go visiting, and leave your hands
free for the cooking.”
I wa tched them go with a sma ll sense of relief. Alone, if
only for a few moments. I drew a long, deep breath of damp
air , becoming aware of the soft patter of the rain on my hood.
I loved Gatherin gs and social occasions, but was obliged to
admit to myself that the strain o f unrelieved company for days
on end rather got on my nerv es. After a week of visiting,
gossip, daily medical clinics, and the small but constant crises
that atte nd living  rough with a lar ge family group, I was ready
to di g a small hole under a log and climb in, just for the sake
of a quarter hour ’ s solitude.
Just at the moment, though, it l ooked as though I might be
saved the ef fort. There were shouts, calls, and snatches of pipe
music from higher up the mountain; disturbed by the
Governor ’ s Proc lamation, the Gathering was reestablishing its
normal r hythm, and everyone was going back to their family
hearths, to the clearing where t he competitions were held, to
the l ivestock pens beyond the creek, or to the wagons set up to
sell everything from ribbons and churns to powdered mortar
and fresh—well , relatively fresh—lemons. No one needed me
for the moment.
It w as going to be a very busy  day , and this might be my
only chance of solitude for a week or more—the trip back
would ta ke at least that long, moving slowly with a lar ge party ,
including babies and wagons. Most of the new tenants had
neither horses nor mules, and w ould make the journey on foot.
I n eeded  a moment to myself,  to gather my strength and
focus my mind. What focus I had, though, was not on thelogistics of breakfast or weddings, nor even on the impending
sur gery I was contemplating. I was looking farther forward,
past the journey , longing for home.
Fraser ’ s Ridge was high in the western mountains, far
beyond any town—or even any established roads. Remote and
isolated, we had few visitors. Few inhabitants, too, though the
population of the Ridge was growing; more than thirty
families had come to take up h omesteads on Jamie’ s granted
land, under his sponsorship. M ost of these were men he had
known in prison, at Ardsmuir . I thought Chisholm and
McGillivray must be ex-prison ers, too; Jamie had put out a
standing invitation for such men, and would hold to it, no
matter the expense involved in helping them—or whether we
could af ford it.
A ra ven flew silently past, sl ow and heavy , its feathers
burdened by the rain. Ravens were birds of omen; I wondered
whether this one meant us good  or ill. Rare for any bird to fly
in such weather—that must mean it was a special omen.
I kn ocked the heel of my hand against my head, trying to
smack the superstition out of it. Live with Highlanders long
enough, and every damn rock and tree meant something!
Perhaps it did, t hough. There were people all round me on
the mountain—I knew that—and yet I felt quite alone,
shielded by the rain and fog. The weather was still cold, but I
was not. The blo od thrummed near the surface of my skin, and
I fel t heat rise in my palms. I reached a hand out to the pine
that stood by me, drops of water trembling on each needle, its
bark bla ck with wet. I breathe d its scent and let the water
touch m y skin, cool as vapor . The rain fell in shushing stillness
all a round me, dampening my clothes ‘til they clung to me
softly , like clouds upon the mountain.
Jamie had told me once that he must live on a mountain, and
I kn ew n ow why  this was so—t hough I could in no wise have
put the notion into words. All m y scattered thoughts receded,
as I listened for the voice of rocks and trees—and heard thebell of the mountain strike once, somewhere deep beneath my
feet.
I might have s tood thus enchanted for some time, all
thought of breakfast for gotten,  but the voices of rocks and
trees hushed and vanished with the clatter of feet on the nearby
path.
“Mrs. Fraser .”
It was Archie Hayes himself, resplendent in bonnet and
sword despite the wet. If he was surprised to see me standing
by the path alone, he didn’ t sho w it, but inclined his head in
courteous greeting.
“Lieutenant.” I bowed back, feeling my cheeks flush as
though he had caught me in the midst of bathing.
“W ill your husband be about, ma’am?” he asked, voice
casual. Despite my discomfiture, I felt a stab of wariness.
Y oung C orporal MacNair had come to fetch Jamie, and failed.
If th e mountain had come to Mohammed now , the matter
wasn’ t c asual. W as Hayes intending to drag Jamie into some
sort of witch-hunt for Regulators?
“I s uppose so. I don’ t really know wher e  he is,” I said,
consciously not looking up the h ill to the spot where Jocasta’ s
big tent  showed its canvas pea k among a stand of chestnut
trees.
“Ah, I expect he’ll be that busy ,” Hayes said comfortably .
“A great  deal to do for a man lik e himself, and this the last day
of the Gathering.”
“Y es. I expect … er … yes.”
The con versation died, and I wa s left in a state of increasing
discomfort, won dering how on earth I was to escape without
inviting the Lieutenant to breakfast. Even an Englishwoman
couldn’ t get away with the rudeness of not of fering food
without exciting remark.
“Er … Corporal MacNair said you wanted to see Farquard
Campbell as well,” I said, se izing the bull by the horns.“Perhaps Jamie’ s gone to talk with him. Mr . Campbell, I
mean.” I waved helpfully to ward the Campbells’ family
campsite, which lay on the far side of the slope, nearly a
quarter mile from Jocasta’ s.
Hayes blinked, drops running from his lashes down his
cheeks.
“A ye,” he said. “Perhaps that’ s so.” He stood a moment
longer , then tipped his cap to me. “Good day to ye, mum.” He
turned away up the path—toward Jocasta’ s tent. I stood
watching him go, all sense of peace destroyed.
“Damn,” I said under my breath, and set of f to see about
breakfast.2
LOA VES AND FISHES
W E H AD CHOSEN A SITE w ell of f the main path, but
situated in a small, rocky clear ing with a good view of the
wide creekbank below . Glancing downward through a scrim of
holly bu shes, I could see the flash of green-and-black tartans
as the last of the  soldiers dispersed; Archie Hayes encouraged
his m en to mingle with the people at the Gathering, and most
were only too glad to obey .
I w asn’ t  sure whether this policy of Archie’ s was dictated
by guile, penury , or simply humanitarianism. Many of his
soldiers were young, separated from home and family; they
were glad of th e chance to hear Scottish voices again, to be
welcomed at a h omely fireside, of fered brose and parritch, and
to bask in the momentary warmth of familiarity .
As I came out of the trees, I saw that Marsali and Lizzie
were ma king a small fuss of the bashful young soldier who
had fished Germain out of the c reek. Fer gus stood close to the
fire, wisps of steam rising from his wet garments, muttering in
French a s he rubbed Germain’ s h ead briskly with a towel, one-
handed. His hook was braced against the little boy’ s shoulder
to keep him ste ady , and the b lond head wobbled back and
forth, Germain’ s face quite tranquil, in complete disregard of
his father ’ s scolding.
Neither Roger nor Brianna were anywhere in sight, but I
was rather alarmed to see Abel MacLennan sitting on the far
side of the clearing, nibbling a bit of toasted bread on a stick.
Jamie w as already back with the borrowed supplies, which he
was unp acking on the ground next to the fire. He was
frowning to himself, but the frown melted into a smile at sight
of me.
“There ye are, Sassenach!” he said, rising to his feet. “What
kept ye?”“Oh … I met a n acquaintance on the trail,” I said, with a
significant look toward the young soldier . It was evidently not
significant enough, since Jamie knitted his brows in
puzzlement.
“The Lieutenant  is looking for you,” I hissed, leaning close
to him.
“W ell, I  kent that , Sassenach,” he said, in a normal tone of
voice. “He’ll find me soon enough.”
“Y es, but … ahem.” I cleared my throat and raised my
brows, glancing pointedly from Abel MacLennan to the young
soldier . Jamie’ s notions of hospitality wouldn’ t countenance
having his guests dragged away  from under his rooftree, and I
would h ave sup posed that the same principle applied to his
campfire as well. The young so ldier might find it awkward to
arrest MacLenn an, but I was sure the Lieutenant would have
no such hesitation.
Jamie looked rather amused. Raising his own brows, he
took my arm, and led me over to the young man.
“My dea r ,” he said formally , “may I present Private Andrew
Ogilvie, late of the village of K ilburnie? Private Ogilvie, my
wife.”
Private Ogilvie, a ruddy-faced boy with dark curly hair ,
blushed and bowed.
“Y our servant, mum!”
Jamie squeezed my arm lightly .
“Private Ogilvie was just telling me that the regiment is
bound for Portsmouth, in V ir ginia—there to take ship for
Scotland. Y e’ll be glad to see home, I expect, lad?”
“Oh, aye, sir!” the lad said fer vently . “The regiment will
disband in Aberdeen, and then  I’m of f home, so fast as my
legs will carry me!”
“The regiment is disbanding?” Fer gus asked, coming to join
the c onversation, a towel draped round his neck and Germain
in his arms.“A ye, sir . W ith the Frenchies settled—er , beggin’ your
pardon, sir—and the Indians safe, there’ s naught for us to do
here, and the Cr own willna pay us to sit at home,” the lad said
ruefully . “Peace may be a guid thing, all in all, and I’m glad of
it, surely . But there’ s no denying as it’ s hard on a soldier .”
“Almost as hard as war , aye?”  Jamie said dryly . The boy
flushed darkly; young as he wa s, he couldn’ t have seen much
in the way of actual fighting. The Seven Y ears W ar had been
over for nearly ten years—at which time Private Ogilvie
would likely still have been a barefoot lad in Kilburnie.
Ignoring the boy’ s embarrassment, Jamie turned to me.
“The lad tells m e,” he added, “that the Sixty-seventh is the
last regiment left in the Colonies.”
“The last Highland regiment?” I asked.
“No, mum, the l ast of the Crown’ s regular troops. There are
the g arrisons here and there, I s uppose, but all of the standing
regiments have been recalled to England or Scotland. W e’re
the last—and behind our time,  too. W e meant to sail from
Charleston, but things went agl ey there, and so we’re bound
for P ortsmouth now , so fast as w e can make speed. It’ s late in
the year , but the Lieutenant’ s had word of a ship that may risk
passage to take us. If not—” He shrugged, glumly philosophic.
“Then we shall winter in Portsmouth, I suppose, and make
shift as we can.”
“So England means to leave us unprotected?” Marsali
looked rather shocked at the thought.
“Oh, I shouldna think there’ s any great danger , mum,”
Private Ogilvie assured her . “W e ’ve dealt wi’ the Frenchies for
good an d all, and the Indians wi llna be up to much without the
frogs to  stir them up. Everythin g’ s been quite peaceful for a
good time now , and doubtless it’ll stay so.” I made a small
noise in the bac k of my throat, and Jamie squeezed my elbow
lightly .
“Have ye not t hought perhaps to stay , then?” Lizzie had
been pee ling an d grating potatoes while listening to this; sheput dow n the bowl of glistening white shreds by the fire and
began to smear grease on the gr iddle. “Stay in the Colonies, I
mean. There’ s plenty of land still to be had, to the west.”
“Oh.” P rivate Ogilvie glanced down at her , her white kerch
modestly bent over her work, and his color deepened again.
“W ell, I will say I’ve heard worse prospects, miss. But I am
bound to go wi’ my regiment, I’m afraid.”
Lizzie picked up two eggs and cracked them neatly against
the side of the bowl. Her own face, usually pale as whey , bore
a faint pink echo of the Private’ s rich blush.
“Ah. W e ll, it’ s a great pity that ye should go awa so soon,”
she said. Her pale blond lashes swept down against her cheeks.
“Still, we’ll not send ye away on an empty stomach.”
Private Ogilvie went slightly pinker round the ears.
“That’ s … verra kind of ye, miss. V erra kind indeed.”
Lizzie glanced up shyly , and blushed more deeply .
Jamie coughed gently and ex cused himself, leading me
away from the fire.
“Christ,” he said in an undertone, bending down so I could
hear him . “And she’ s been a wo man less than a full day , too!
Have ye been gi vin’ her lessons, Sassenach, or are women just
born wi’ it?”
“Natural talent, I expect,” I said circumspectly .
The unexpected  advent of Lizz ie’ s menarche after supper
last nigh t had in fact been the straw that broke the camel’ s
back, with regard to clean clou ts, and the precipitating event
that had caused me to sacrifice my petticoat. Lizzie naturally
had no menstrua l cloths with her , and I didn’ t want to oblige
her to share the children’ s diapers.
“Mmphm. I suppose I’d best begin looking for a husband
for her , then,” Jamie said in resignation.
“A husband! Why , she’ s scarcely fifteen!”“A ye, so?” He glanced at Marsali, who was rubbing
Fer gus’ s dark hair dry with the towel, and then back at Lizzie
and her soldier , and raised a cynical brow at me.
“A ye, so , yourself,” I said, a little crossly . All right, Marsali
had  b een only fifte en when she married Fer gus. That didn’ t
mean—
“The po int being ,” Jamie went o n, dismissing Lizzie for the
moment, “that the regiment lea ves for Portsmouth tomorrow;
they havena got either time nor disposition to trouble with this
business in Hillsborough—that’ s T ryon’ s concern.”
“But what Hayes said—”
“Oh, if anyone tells him anything, I’m sure he’ll send the
depositions along to New Bern—but as for himself, I imagine
he’d not  much care if the Regul ators set fire to the Governor ’ s
Palace, so long as it doesna delay his sailing.”
I heaved  a deep sigh, reassured. If Jamie was right, the last
thing Hayes would do was take  prisoners, no matter what the
evidence to hand. MacLennan was safe, then.
“But wh at do you suppose Hay es wants with you and the
others, then?” I asked, bending to rummage in one of the
wicker hampers for another loaf of bread. “He is  hunting you
—in person.”
Jamie glanced back over his shoulder , as though expecting
the Lieu tenant to appear at any moment through the holly
bushes. As the screen of prickly green remained intact, he
turned back to me, frowning slightly .
“I dinna ken,” h e said, shaking his head, “but it’ s naught to
do with this business of T ryon’ s. If it was that, he might have
told me last nig ht—for that matter , if he cared himself about
the m atter , he would  have told me last night,” he added. “No,
Sassenach, depe nd upon it, the rioters are no more than a
matter of duty to wee Archie Hayes.
“As for what h e wants wi’ me—” He leaned over my
shoulder to swipe a finger round the top of the honey pot. “I
dinna m ean to trouble about it u ntil I must. I’ve three kegs ofwhisky l eft, and  I mean to turn t hem into a plowshare, a scythe
blade, three ax-heids, ten pound of sugar , a horse, and an
astrolabe before  this evening. Which is a conjuring trick that
might ta ke some attention, aye?” He drew the sticky tip of his
finger ge ntly across my lips, the n turned my head toward him
and bent to kiss me.
“An astrolabe?” I said, tasting honey . I kissed him back.
“Whatever for?”
“And then I wa nt to go home,” he whispered, ignoring the
question. His forehead was pressed against mine, and his eyes
very blue.
“I w ant to take ye to bed— in  my bed. And I mean to spend
the rest of the day thinking what to do to ye once I’ve got ye
there. So wee Archie can just go and play at marbles with his
ballocks, aye?”
“An excellent thought,” I whispered back. “Care to tell him
that yourself?”
My eye had cau ght the flash of a green-and-black tartan on
the othe r side of the clearing, but when Jamie straightened up
and whi rled round, I saw tha t the visitor was in fact not
Lieutenant Hayes but rather John Quincy Myers, who was
sporting a soldier ’ s plaid wrapp ed round his waist, the ends
fluttering gaily in the breeze.
This added a f urther touch of color to Myers’ s already
striking sartorial splendor . Extre mely tall, and decorated from
the top down w ith a slouch h at stuck through with several
needles and a turkey quill, two ragged pheasant feathers
knotted into his long black hair , a vest of dyed porcupine quills
worn over a bea ded shirt, his usual breechclout, and leggings
wrapped with strings of small bells, the mountain man was
hard to miss.
“Friend James!” John Quincy smiled broadly at sight of
Jamie, and hastened forward , hand extended and bells
chiming. “Thought I should find you at your breakfast!”Jamie blinked slightly at this vision, but gamely returned the
mountain man’ s encompassing handshake.
“A ye, John. W ill ye join us?”
“Er … yes,” I chimed in, with a surreptitious look into the
food hamper . “Please do!”
John Quincy bowed ceremoniously to me, sweeping of f his
hat.
“Y our servant, ma’am, and I’m much obliged. Maybe later .
Right now , I co me to fetch away Mr . Fraser , though. He’ s
wanted, ur gent-like.”
“By whom?” Jamie asked warily .
“Robbie McGillivray , he says his name is. Y ou know the
man?”
“A ye, I do.” Whatever Jamie knew about McGillivray , it
was causing him to delve into the small chest where he kept
his pistols. “What’ s the trouble?”
“W ell.” John Quincy scratched  meditatively at his bushy
black beard. “‘T was his wife as  asked me to come find you,
and she don’ t s peak what you’d call right good English, so
may be as I’ve muddled the account of it a bit. But what I
think  she said to me was as how there was a thief-taker who’d
grabbed holt of her son, sayin’ as how the boy was one o’ the
ruf fians who broke up Hillsborough, and meanin’ to take him
to th e ga ol in New Bern. Only R obbie, he says no one’ s takin’
a son of his anywhere, and—well, after that, the poor woman
got r ight flustered and I couldn’ t make out but one word to the
dozen. But I do  believe Robbie would ‘preciate it if you’d
come by and lend a hand with the proceedings.”
Jamie grabbed Roger ’ s bloodsta ined green coat, which was
hung on a bush waiting to be cleaned. Shrugging into it, he
thrust the newly loaded pistol through his belt.
“Where?” he said.
Myers g estured economically with one lar ge thumb, and
pushed of f into the holly bushes, Jamie at his heels.Fer gus, who had been listening to this exchange, Germain in
his arms, set the boy down at Marsali’ s feet.
“I must go help Grand-per e ,” he  told Germ ain. He picked
up a stick of firewood and put it into the little boy’ s hands.
“Y ou stay; protect Maman  and little Joan from bad people.”
“Oui, Papa.”  Germain scowled fiercely under his blond
fringe and took a firm grip on  his stick, settling himself to
defend the camp.
Marsali, MacLe nnan, Lizzie, and Private Ogilvie had been
watching the byplay with rather glazed looks. As Fer gus
picked up another length of firewood and plunged
purposefully into the holly bushes, Private Ogilvie came to
life, stirring uneasily .
“Er …” he said. “Perhaps I … should I go for my ser geant,
do ye think, ma’am? If there’ s like to be any trouble …”
“No, no, ” I said hurriedly . The l ast thing we needed was for
Archie Hayes and his regimen t to show up en masse. This
struck me as the sort of situation which would benefit strongly
from being kept unof ficial.
“I’m sure everything will be qu ite all right. It’ s sure to be
nothing but a misunderstanding. Mr . Fraser will sort it directly ,
never fe ar .” Even as I spoke, I was sidling round the fire
toward the spot where my medic al supplies lay , sheltered from
the drizz le unde r a sheet of canvas. Reaching under the edge, I
grabbed my small emer gency kit.
“Lizzie, why don’ t you give Private Ogilvie some of the
strawberry preserves for his toast? And Mr . MacLennan would
like a bit of honey in his cof f ee, I’m sure. Do excuse me,
won’ t you, Mr . MacLennan, I must just go and … er …”
Smiling inanely , I sidled through the holly leaves. As the
branches swished and crackled behind me, I paused to take my
bearings. A faint chime of bells reached me on the rainy wind;
I turned toward the sound, and broke into a run.
 IT W AS SOME W A Y ; I was out of breath and sweating from
the e xercise by the time I caught them up near the competition
field. Things were just getting under way; I could hear the
buzz of talk from the crowd of men gathering, but no shouts of
encouragement or howls of disappointment as yet. A few
brawny specime ns stamped to and fro, stripped to the waist
and swinging their arms to limbe r up; the local “strongmen” of
various settlements.
The drizzle had started up again; the wetness gleamed on
curving shoulders and plastered  swirls of dark body hair flat
against the pale skins of chests and forearms. I had no time to
appreciate the spectacle, though; John Quincy threaded his
way adroitly through the knots of spectators and competitors,
waving cordially  to this and that acquaintance as we passed.
On the far side of the crowd, a  small man detached himself
from the mass and came hurrying to meet us.
“ Mac Dubh!  Y e’ve come, then—that’ s good.”
“Nay bother , Robbie,” Jamie assured him. “What’ s to do,
then?”
McGillivray , who looked distinctly harried, glanced at the
strongmen and their supporters, then jerked his head toward
the nearby trees. W e followed him, unnoticed by the crowd
gathering round two lar ge stones wrapped with rope, which I
assumed some of the strongmen  present were about to prove
their prowess by lifting.
“It’ s you r son, is it, Rob?” Jamie asked, dodging a water -
filled pine branch.
“A ye,” Robbie answered, “or it was.”
That sounded sinister . I saw Jam ie’ s hand brush the butt of
his pistol; mine went to my medical kit.
“What’ s happened?” I asked. “Is he hurt?”
“Not him,” McGillivray replied cryptically , and ducked
ahead, beneath a drooping chestnut bough hung with scarlet
creeper .Just bey ond was a small open space, not really big enough
to be called a cle aring, tufted with dead grass and studded with
pine saplings. As Fer gus and I d ucked under the creeper after
Jamie, a lar ge woman in homespun whirled toward us,
shoulders hunching as she raised the broken tree limb she
clutched in one hand. She saw McGillivray , though, and
relaxed fractionally .
“W er ist das?”  she  asked sus piciously , eyein g us. Then
John Quincy appeared from under the creeper , and she
lowered the club, her solidly  handsome features relaxing
further .
“Ha, My ers! Y ou  brung me den Jamie, oder ?” She cast me a
curious look, but was too busy  glancing between Fer gus and
Jamie to inspect me closely .
“A ye, love, this is Jamie Roy— Sheumais Mac Dubh .”
McGillivray hastened to take credit for Jamie’ s appearance,
putting a respectful hand on hi s sleeve. “My wife, Ute, Mac
Dubh . And Mac Dubh ‘s son,” he added, waving vaguely at
Fer gus.
Ute McGillivray  looked like a V alkyrie on a starchy diet;
tall, very blond, and broadly powerful.
“Y our servant, ma’am,” Jamie said, bowing.
“Madame,”  Fer gus echoed, making her a courtly leg.
Mrs. Mc Gillivray dropped them  a low curtsy in return, eyes
fixed on the prominent bloodstains streaking the front of
Jamie’ s—or rather , Roger ’ s—coat.
“Mein Herr ,”  s he mur mured, looking impress ed. She turned
and beckoned to a young man of seventeen or eighteen, who
had been lurking in the backgr ound. He bore such a marked
resemblance to his small, wiry , dark-haired father that his
identity could scarcely be in doubt.
“Manfred,” his mother announced proudly . “ Mein  laddie.”
Jamie inclined his head in grave acknowledgment.
“Mr . McGillivray .”“Ah … your s-servant, sir?” The boy sounded rather
dubious about it, but put out his hand to be shaken.
“A pleasure to make your acquaintance, sir ,” Jamie assured
him, shaking it. The courtesies duly observed, he looked
briefly round at the quiet surroundings, raising one eyebrow .
“I had heard that you were suf fering some inconvenience
wi’ rega rd to a thief-taker . Do I take it that the matter has been
resolved?” He glanced in question from McGillivray Junior to
McGillivray Senior .
The thre e McGi llivrays exchang ed assorted glances among
themselves. Robin McGillivray gave an apologetic cough.
“W ell, not to say r esolved , quite, Mac Dubh . That is to say
…” He trailed of f, the harried look returning to his eyes.
Mrs. McGillivray gave him a stern look, then turned to
Jamie.
“ Ist kein  b other , ” she told him. “ Ich haf den  wee ball of
shite saf e put. But only we wa nt to know , how we best den
Korpus  hide?”
“The … body?” I said, rather faintly .
Even Jamie looked a bit disturbed at that.
“Y e’ve killed him, Rob?”
“Me?” McGillivray looked shocked. “Christ’ s sake, Mac
Dubh , what d’ye take me for?”
Jamie raised the eyebrow again; evidently the thought of
McGillivray co mmitting violence was scarcely far -fetched.
McGillivray had the grace to look abashed.
“A ye, w ell. I suppose I might h ave—and I did—well, but,
Mac Dubh ! That business at Ardsmuir w as all long ago and
done wi’, aye?”
“A ye,” Jamie said. “It was. Wha t about this business wi’ the
thief-taker , though? Where is he?”I heard a muf fled giggle behind me, and swung round to see
that the rest of the family McGillivray , silent ‘til now , was
nonetheless pres ent. Three teenaged girls sat in a row on a
dead log  behind  a screen of saplings, all immaculately attired
in cl ean white c aps and aprons, only slightly wilted with the
rain.
“ Meine  lass ies,” Mrs. McGillivray announced, with a wave
in their direction—unnecessarily , since all three of the girls
looked like smaller versions of herself. “Hilda, Inga, und
Senga.”
Fer gus bowed elegantly to the three.
“Enchante, mes demoiselles.”
The girls giggled and bobbed their heads in response, but
without rising, which struck me as odd. Then I noticed some
disturbance taki ng place under the skirt of the oldest girl; a
sort of heaving f lutter , accompanied by a muf fled grunt. Hilda
swung h er heel sharply into w hatever it was, all the time
smiling brightly at me.
There was another grunt—much louder this time—from
under th e skirt, which caused J amie to start and turn in her
direction.
Still smiling brightly , Hilda bent and delicately picked up
the edge  of her skirt, under wh ich I could see a frantic face,
bisected by a dark strip of cloth tied round his mouth.
“That’ s him,” said Robbie, sharing his wife’ s talent for
stating the obvious.
“I see.” Jamie’ s fingers twitched  slightly against the side of
his kilt. “Ah … perhaps we could have him out, then?”
Robbie m otioned to the girls, w ho all stood up together and
stepped aside, revealing a small  man who lay against the base
of the dead log , bound hand and foot with an assortment of
what lo oked l ike women’ s stockings, and gagged with
someone’ s kerchief. He was wet, muddy , and slightly battered
round the edges.Myers b ent and hoisted the man to his feet, holding him by
the collar .
“W ell, h e ain’ t much to look at,” the mountain man said
critically , squinting at the man as though evaluating a
substandard beaver skin. “I guess thief-takin’ don’ t pay so
well as ye might think.”
The man was in  fact skinny and rather ragged, as well as
disheveled, furious—and frightened. Ute snif fed
contemptuously .
“Saukerl!”  she said, and spat neatly on the thief-taker ’ s
boots. Then she turned to Jamie, full of charm.
“So, mein Herr . How we are to kill him best?”
The thief-taker ’ s eyes bulged, and he writhed in Myers’ s
grip. He bucked and twisted, making frantic gar gling noises
behind the gag. Jamie looked him over , rubbing a knuckle
across his mouth, then glanced  at Robbie, who gave a slight
shrug, with an apologetic glance at his wife.
Jamie cleared his throat.
“Mmphm. Y e had something in mind, perhaps, ma’am?”
Ute beamed at this evidence of sympathy with her
intentions, and drew a long dagger from her belt.
“I thought maybe to butcher , wie ein Schwein, ja?  But see
…” She poked the thief-taker gingerly between the ribs; he
yelped behind the gag, and a small spot of blood bloomed on
his ragged shirt.
“T oo much Blut ,” she explain ed, with a m oue of
disappointment. She waved at the screen of trees, behind
which the stone-lifting seemed to be proceeding well. “ Die
Leute  will schmell.”
“Schmell?” I glanced at Jamie, thinking this some
unfamiliar German expression. He coughed, and brushed a
hand un der his nose. “Oh, smell !” I said , enlight ened. “Er , yes,
I think they might.”“I d inna suppose we’d better sh oot him, then,” Jamie said
thoughtfully . “If ye’re wanting to avoid attention, I mean.”
“I say we break his neck,” Robbie McGillivray said,
squinting judiciously at the trussed thief-taker . “That’ s easy
enough.”
“Y ou think?” Fer gus squinted in concentration. “I say a
knife. If you stab in the right spot, the blood is not so much.
The kidney , just beneath the ribs in back … eh?”
The captive appeared to take exception to these suggestions,
judging from the ur gent sounds proceeding from behind the
gag, and Jamie rubbed his chin dubiously .
“W ell, that’ s no verra dif ficult,” he agreed. “Or strangle
him. Bu t he will  lo se his bowels . If it were to be a question of
the smel l, even crushing his skull … but tell me, Robbie, how
does the man come to be here?”
“Eh?” Robbie looked blank.
“Y ou’re no camped nearby?” Ja mie waved a hand briefly at
the tiny clearing, making his meaning clear . There was no
trace of hearthfi re; in fact, no one had camped on this side of
the creek. And yet all the McGillivrays were here.
“Oh, no,” Robbie said, comprehension blossoming on his
spare features. “Nay , we’re camped some distance up. Only ,
we cam e to have a wee keek at the heavies”—he jerked his
head tow ard the  competition field—”and the friggin’ vulture
spied ou r Freddi e and took hold of him, so as to drag him of f.”
He cast an unfriendly look at the thief-taker , and I saw that a
coil of rope dan gled snakelike from the man’ s belt. A pair of
iron manacles lay on the ground  nearby , the dark metal already
laced with orange rust from the damp.
“W e saw  him grab aholt of Brother ,” Hilda put in at this
point. “So we grabbed aholt of him  and pushed him through
here, where nobody could see. When he said he meant to take
Brother away to the sherif f, me  and my sisters knocked him
down and sat on him, and Mama kicked him a few times.”
Ute patted her daughter fondly on one sturdy shoulder .“They are gut , strong Madchen , meine  las ses,” she told
Jamie. “V e komm  see hier die W ettkampfer , maybe choose
husband for Inga or Senga. Hilda hat einen Mann  already
promised,” she added, with an air of satisfaction.
She looked Jamie over frankly , her eye dwelling
approvingly on his height, the breadth of his shoulders, and the
general prosperity of his appearance.
“He is fine, big, your Mann ,” sh e sa id to me. “Y ou haf sons ,
maybe?”
“No, I’m afraid not,” I said apologetically . “Er … Fer gus is
married to my h usband’ s daughter ,” I added, seeing her gaze
shift appraisingly to Fer gus.
The thief-taker appeared to feel that the subject was drifting
somewhat afield, and summon ed attention back to himself
with an indigna nt squeal behind his gag. His face, which had
gone pale at the discussion o f his theoretical demise, had
grown quite red again, and his hair was matted down across
his forehead in spikes.
“Oh, aye ,” Jami e said, noticing. “Perhaps we should let the
gentleman have a word?”
Robbie narrowed his eyes at this, but reluctantly nodded.
The competitions had got well under way by now , and there
was a considerable racket emanating from the field; no one
would notice the odd shout over here.
“Don’ t let ‘em kill me, sir! Y ou know it ain’ t right!” Hoarse
from his  ordeal,  the man fixed his appeal on Jamie as soon as
the gag was removed. “I’m only doin’ as I ought, delivering a
criminal to justice!”
“Ha!” al l the McGillivrays said at once. Unanimous as their
sentiment appeared to be, the expression of it immediately
disintegrated into a confusion of expletives, opinions, and a
random volley of kicks aimed at  the gentleman’ s shins by Inga
and Senga.
“Stop that!” Jamie said, raising h is voice enough to be heard
over the  uproar . As this had no r esult, he grabbed McGillivrayJunior by the scruf f of the neck and roared, “Ruhe!”  at the top
of h is lungs, which startled them  into momentary silence, with
guilty looks over their shoulders in the direction of the
competition field.
“Now , then,” Jamie said firmly . “Myers, bring the
gentleman, if ye will. Rob, Fer g us, come along with ye. Bitte ,
Madame?” He bowed to Mrs. McGillivray , who blinked at
him, but then n odded in slow acquiescence. Jamie rolled an
eye at me, then, still holding Ma nfred by the neck, he marched
the m ale contingent of f toward t he creek, leaving me in char ge
of the ladies.
“Y our Mann —he wi ll save my son?” Ute turned to me, fair
brows knitted in concern.
“He’ll try .” I glanced at the girls, who were huddled
together behind their mother . “Do you know whether your
brother was  at Hillsborough?”
The girls looked at one another , and silently elected Inga to
speak.
“W ell, ja , h e was, then,” she said, a little defiantly . “But he
wasna riotin’, not a bit of it. He ’d only gone for to have a bit
of harness mended, and was caught up in the mob.”
I caught a quick glance exchanged between Hilda and
Senga, and deduced that this wa s perhaps not the entire story .
Still, it wasn’ t my place to judge, thank goodness.
Mrs. McGillivray’ s eyes were fixed on the men, who stood
murmuring together some dista nce away . The thief-taker had
been untied, save for his hand s, which remained bound. He
stood with his b ack against a tree, looking like a cornered rat,
eyeteeth showing in a snarl of defiance. Jamie and Myers were
both looming over him, while Fer gus stood by , frowning
attentively , his chin propped on his hook. Rob McGillivray
had take n out a knife, with which he was contemplatively
flicking small chips of wood from a pine twig, glancing now
and then at the thief-taker with an air of dark intent.“I’m sur e Jamie  will be able to … er … do something,” I
said, privately hoping that the something wouldn’ t involve too
much violence. The unwelcome thought occurred to me that
the d iminutive thief-taker woul d probably fit tidily in one of
the empty food hampers.
“Gut.”  Ute McGillivray nodded slowly , still watching.
“Better that I do not kill him.” Her eyes turned suddenly back
to me, light blue and very bright. “But I vill do it, if I must.”
I believed her .
“I see,” I said carefully . “But—I do beg your pardon—but
even if that man  took your son, could you not go to the sherif f
too, and explain …”
More glances among the girls. This time it was Hilda who
spoke.
“ Nein , ma’am. See, it wouldna have been sae bad, had the
thief-taker come  on us at the camp. But down here—” She
widened her eyes, nodding toward the competition field,
where a muf fled thud and a roar of approval marked some
successful ef fort.
The dif f iculty , apparently , was Hilda’ s fiance, one Davey
Morrison, from Hunter ’ s Point. Mr . Morrison was a farmer of
some substance, and a man of worth, as well as an athlete
skilled in the arcana of stone-throwing and caber -tossing. He
had family , too—parents, uncl es, aunts, cousins—all of the
most up right character and—I  gathered—rather judgmental
attitudes.
Had Manfred been taken by a thief-taker in front of such a
crowd, filled with Davey Morrison’ s relations, word would
have spread at th e speed of light, and the scandal would result
in the prompt rupture of Hilda’ s engagement—a prospect that
clearly perturbed Ute McGillivray much more than the notion
of cutting the thief-taker ’ s throat.
“Bad, too, I kil l him and someone see,” she said frankly ,
waving at the thin scrim of trees shielding us from the
competition field. “ Die  Morrisons would not like.”“I suppose they might not,”  I murmured, wondering
whether Davey Morrison had a ny idea what he was getting
into. “But you—”
“I vi ll ha f meine  la ssies well wed ,” she said firm ly , nodding
several times in reinforcement. “I find gut  men fur  Sie , fine big
men, mit  land, mit  mo ney .” She put an arm round Senga’ s
shoulders and hugged her tight. “Nicht wahr , Liebchen?”
“ Ja , Mama,” Senga murmured, and laid her neat capped
head af fectionately on Mrs. McGillivray’ s broad bosom.
Something was happening on the men’ s side of things; the
thief-taker ’ s hands had been untied, and he stood rubbing his
wrists, no longer scowling, but listening to whatever Jamie
was say ing with an expression of wariness. He glanced at us,
then at Robin M cGillivray , who said something to him and
nodded emphati cally . The thief-taker ’ s jaw worked, as though
he were chewing over an idea.
“So you  all came down to watch the competitions this
morning and look for suitable prospects? Y es, I see.”
Jamie reached into his sporran and drew out something,
which he held under the thief-ta ker ’ s nose, as though inviting
him to smell it. I couldn’ t make out what it was at this
distance, but the thief-taker ’ s face suddenly changed, going
from wariness to alarmed disgust.
“ Ja , only to look.” Mrs. McGillivra y was not watching; she
patted S enga an d let her go. “V e go now to Salem, where ist
meine Familie.  Maybe ve find there a good Mann , too.”
Myers had stepped back from the confrontation now , his
shoulders drooping in relaxation. He inserted a finger under
the edge of his breechclout, scratched his buttocks
comfortably , and glanced ar ound, evidently no longer
interested in the proceedings. Seeing me looking in his
direction, he ambled back through the sapling grove.
“No need to worry more, ma’am,” he assured Mrs.
McGillivray . “I knew Jamie Roy would take care of it, and so
he has. Y our lad’ s safe.”“Ja?”  she said. She looked doubtfully toward the sapling
grove, b ut it was true; the attitu des of all the men had relaxed
now , an d Jamie was handing t he thief-taker back his set of
manacles. I saw the way he handled them, with brusque
distaste. He had worn irons, at Ardsmuir .
“Gott sei dank,”  Mrs. McGillivray said, with an explosive
sigh. Her massive form seemed  suddenly to diminish as the
breath went out of her .
The littl e man was leaving, mak ing his way away from us,
toward the creek. The sound of  the swinging irons at his belt
reached us in a faint chime of m etal, heard between the shouts
of th e crowd behind us. Jamie  and Rob McGillivray stood
close together , talking, while Fer gus watched the thief-taker ’ s
departure, frowning slightly .
“Exactly what did Jamie tell him?” I asked Myers.
“Oh. W ell.” The mountain ma n gave me a broad, gap-
toothed grin. “Jamie Roy told him serious-like that it was
surely luck for t he thief-taker—his name’ s Boble, by the way ,
Harley Boble—that we done come upon y’all when we did. He
give him  to understand that if we hadn’ t, then this lady
here”—he bowe d toward Ute—”would likely have taken him
home in her wagon, and slaughtered him like a hog, safe out of
sight.”
Myers rubbed a knuckle under his red-veined nose and
chortled softly in his beard.
“Boble s aid as how he didn’ t believe it, he thought she was
only a-tryin’ to scare him with that knife. But then Jamie Roy
leaned down close, confidential-like, and said he mighta
thought the same—only that he ’d heard so much about Frau
McGillivray’ s reputation as a famous sausage-maker , and had
had the privilege of bein’ served some of it to his breakfast
this morning. Right about then, Boble started to lose the color
in his face, and when Jamie Roy  pulled out a bit of sausage to
show him—”“Oh, dea r ,” I said, with a vivid memory of exactly what that
sausage smelled  like. I had bought it the day before from a
vendor on the mountain, only to discover that it had been
improperly cured, and once sliced, smelled so strongly of
rotting b lood tha t no one had been able to stomach it at supper .
Jamie had wrapped the of fending remainder in his
handkerchief and put it in his  sporran, intending either to
procure a refund or to shove it down the vendor ’ s throat. “I
see.”
Myers nodded, turning to Ute.
“And y our husband, ma’am —bless his soul, Rob
McGillivray’ s a real born liar—chimes in solemn-like,
agreeing to it al l, shakin’ his he ad and sayin’ as how he’ s got
his work cut out to shoot enough meat for you.”
The girls tittered.
“Da can ’ t kill anything,” Inga s aid softly to me. “He willna
even wring a chicken’ s neck.”
Myers raised his shoulders in a good-humored shrug, as
Jamie and Rob made their wa y toward us through the wet
grass.
“So Jamie promised on his wor d as a gentleman to protect
Boble fr om you,  and Boble promised on his  w ord as a … we ll,
he said as he’d keep clear of young Manfred.”
“Hmp,” said Ute, looking rather disconcerted. She didn’ t
mind at all being considered an  habitual murderess, and was
quite ple ased that Manfred was out of danger—but was rather
put out at having her reputation as a sausage-maker maligned.
“As though I vould ef fer ma ke such shite,” she said,
wrinkling her nose in disdain at the odorous lump of meat
Jamie o f fered f or her inspection. “Pfaugh. Ratzfleisch .” She
waved i t away with a fastidiou s gesture, then turned to her
husband and said something softly in German.
Then she took a deep breath and expanded once more,
gathering all her children like a hen clucking after chicks,ur ging them to thank Jamie properly for his help. He flushed
slightly at the chorus of thanks, bowing to her .
“Gern geschehen,”  he said. “Euer er gebener Diener , Frau
Ute.”
She beamed at h im, composure restored, as he turned to say
something in parting to Rob.
“Such a fine, big Mann ,” she murmure d, shaking her h ead
slightly as she looked him up and down. Then she turned, and
caught my glance from Jamie to  Rob—for while the gunsmith
was a handsome man, with close -clipped, dark curly hair and a
chiseled face, he was also fine- boned as a sparrow , and some
inches shorter than his wife, reaching approximately to the
level of her brawny shoulder . I c ouldn’ t help wondering, given
her apparent admiration for lar ge men …
“Oh, vell,” she said, and shrugged apologetically . “Luf f, you
know .” She sounded as though  love were an unfortunate but
unavoidable condition.
I glanced at Jamie, who was carefully swaddling his sausage
before tucking it back into his s porran. “W ell, yes,” I said. “I
do.”
 
BY THE TIME we returned to our own campsite, the
Chisholms were just departing, having been capably fed by the
girls. Fortunately , Jamie had brought plenty of food from
Jocasta’ s camp, and I sat down at last to a pleasant meal of
potato f ritters, b uttered bannocks, fried ham, and—at last!—
cof fee, wondering just what else  might happen today . There
was plenty of tim e; the sun was barely above the trees, almost
invisible behind the drifting rain clouds.
A li ttle later , pl easantly full of breakfast, and with a third
cup of cof fee t o hand, I went and threw back the canvas
covering what I thought of as m y medical supply dump. It was
time to begin the business of or ganizing for the morning’ s
sur gery; looking  at jars of sutures, restocking the herb jars inmy c hest, refilling the lar ge alco hol bottle, and brewing up the
medicines that must be made fresh.
Somewhat depleted of the commoner herbs I had brought
with me , my stock had been aug mented by the good of fices of
Myers, who had brought me several rare and useful things
from the  Indian villages to the north, and by judicious trading
with Mu rray MacLeod, an ambitious young apothecary who
had made his way inland and set up shop in Cross Creek.
I bit the inside of my cheek, considering young Murray . He
harbored the usual sort of n asty notions that passed for
medical wisdom nowadays—and was not shy about asserting
the superiority of such scientific methods as bleeding and
blistering over the old-fashioned herbcraft that such ignorant
crones as myself were prone to practice!
Still, he was a Scot, and thus possessed of a strong streak of
pragmatism. He had given Jamie’ s powerful frame one look
and hast ily swallowed the more insulting of his opinions. I had
six o unces of wo rmwood and a jar of wild ginger root, and he
wanted them. He was also shrewd enough to have observed
that man y more of the folk on the mountain who ailed with
anything came to me than t o him—and that most who
accepted my cures were improv ed. If I had secrets, he wanted
those, too—and I was more than happy to oblige.
Good, I had plen ty of willow bark still left. I hesitated over
the s mall rank of bottles in the upper right tray of the chest. I
had seve ral very  strong emmenagogues—blue cohosh, er got,
and pennyroyal—but picked instead the gentler tansy and rue,
setting a handful into a bowl and pouring boiling water on
them to steep. Beyond its ef fects in easing menstruation, tansy
had a reputation for calming nerves—and a more naturally
nervous person than Lizzie W emyss it would be dif ficult to
imagine.
I gla nced back at the fire, wher e Lizzie was shoveling the
last of the strawberry preserves into Private Ogilvie, who
appeared to be d ividing his attention among Lizzie, Jamie, and
his slice of toast—the greater proportion going to the toast.Rue was quite a good anthelmintic, to boot. I didn’ t know
that Lizz ie suf fered from worms, but a good many people in
the mountains did, and a dose would certainly do her no harm.
I eyed Abel MacLennan covertly , wondering whether to slip
a quick slug of hellbrew into h is cof fee as well—he had the
pinched, anemic  look of one with intestinal parasites, in spite
of h is stocky bu ild. Perhaps, though, the look of pale disquiet
on his features w as due more to  his knowledge of thief-takers
in the vicinity .
Baby Joan was wailing with hunger again. Marsali sat
down, reached under her arisaid to unfasten her bodice, and set
the baby to her breast, her lip cl enched between her teeth with
trepidation. She  winced, gasped in pain, then relaxed a little,
as the milk began to flow .
Cracked nipples. I frowned and returned to a perusal of the
medicine chest. Had I brought any sheep’ s-wool ointment?
Drat, no. I didn’ t want to use bear grease, with Joan suckling;
perhaps sunflower oil …
“A b it of cof fee , my dear?” Mr . MacLennan, who had been
watching Marsa li with troubled sympathy , extended his fresh
cup tow ard her . “My own wife d id say as hot cof fee eased the
pangs of  nursing  a wean. Whisk y in it’ s better”—his mournful
jowls lifted a bit—”but all the same …”
“T aing.”  Marsali took th e cup with a grateful smile. “I’m
chilled right through this morning.” She sipped the steaming
liquid cautiously , and a small flush crept into her cheeks.
“W ill you be going back to Drunkard’ s Creek tomorrow , Mr .
MacLennan?” she asked politely , handing back the empty cup.
“Or are ye traveling to New Bern wi’ Mr . Hobson?”
Jamie looked up sharply , breaking of f his conversation with
Private Ogilvie.
“Hobson is going to New Bern? How d’ye ken that?”
“Mrs. Fowles says so,” Marsali replied promptly . “She told
me w hen I went  to borrow a dry shirt for Germain—she’ s got
a lad  his size. She’ s worrit for Hugh—that’ s her husband—because her father—that’ s Mr .  Hobson—wishes him to go
along, but he’ s scairt.”
“Why is  Joe Hobson going to New Bern?” I asked, peering
over the top of my medicine chest.
“T o present a petition to the Governor ,” Abel MacLennan
said. “Much good it will do.” He smiled at Marsali, a little
sadly . “N o, lassie. I dinna ken where I’m bound, tell ye the
truth. ‘T won’ t be to New Bern, though.”
“Nor back to your wife at Drunkard’ s Creek?” Marsali
looked at him in concern.
“My wife’ s dead, lass,” MacLennan said softly . He
smoothed the red kerchief across his knee, easing out the
wrinkles. “Dead two months past.”
“Oh, Mr . Abel.” Marsali leaned forward and clasped his
hand, her blue eyes full of pain. “I’m that sorry!”
He patte d her hand, not looki ng up. T iny drops of rain
gleamed in the sparse strands of his hair , and a trickle of
moisture ran down behind one lar ge red ear , but he made no
move to wipe it away .
Jamie ha d stood up while questioning Marsali. Now he sat
down on  the log beside MacLennan, and laid a hand gently on
the smaller man’ s back.
“I hadna heard, a charaid, ” he said quietly .
“No.” M acLennan looked bli ndly into the transparent
flames. “ I—well, the truth of it is, I’d not told anyone. Not ‘til
now .”
Jamie and I exchanged looks across the fire. Drunkard’ s
Creek co uldn’ t p ossibly harbor more than two dozen souls, in
a sc atter of cab ins spread along the banks. Y et neither the
Hobsons nor the Fowleses h ad mentioned Abel’ s loss—
evidently he really hadn’ t told anyone.
“What was it happened, Mr . Ab el?” Marsali still clasped his
hand, though it lay quite limp, palm-down on the red kerchief.MacLennan looked up then, blinking.
“Oh,” he said va guely . “So much happened. And yet … not
really very much, after all. Abby—Abigail, my wife—she died
of a feve r . She got cold, and …  she died.” He sounded faintly
surprised.
Jamie poured a bit of whisky into an empty cup, picked up
one of MacLennan’ s unresisting hands, and folded it around
the cup , holding the fingers i n place with his own, until
MacLennan’ s hand tightened its grasp.
“Drink it, man,” he said.
Everyone was silent, watching as MacLennan obediently
tasted the whisky , sipped, sipped again. Y oung Private Ogilvie
shifted u neasily on his stone, loo king as though he should like
to return to his  regiment, but he too stayed put, as though
fearing an abrupt departure migh t somehow injure MacLennan
further .
MacLennan’ s very stillness drew every eye, froze all talk.
My hand hovered uneasily over  the bottles in my chest, but I
had no remedy for this.
“I had enough,”  he said sudde nly . “I did.” He looked up
from his  cup and glanced round the fire, as though challenging
anyone to dispute him. “For the taxes, aye? It was no so good
a y ear as it migh t have been, but I was careful. I’d ten bushels
of corn put aside, and four good deer hides. It was worth more
than the six shillings of the tax.”
But the taxes must be paid in hard currency; not in corn and
hides and blocks of indigo, as t he farmers did their business.
Barter was the common mean s of trade—I knew that well
enough, I thought, glancing dow n at the bag of odd things folk
had brought me in payment for my herbs and simples. No one
ever paid for anything in money—save the taxes.
“W ell, that’ s only reasonable,” said MacLennan, blinking
earnestly at Private Ogilvie, as though the young man had
protested. “His Majesty canna well be doing wi’ a herd of
pigs, or a brace of turkeys, now , can he? No, I see quite wellwhy it must be h ard money , anyone could. And I had the corn;
it would ha’ brought six shillings, easy .”
The only  dif ficulty , of course, l ay in turning ten bushels of
corn into  six shillings of tax. There were those in Drunkard’ s
Creek who might have bought Abel’ s corn, and were willing—
but no one in Drunkard’ s Creek had money , either . No, the
corn must be ta ken to market in Salem; that was the closest
place where hard coin might be obtained. But Salem lay nearly
forty mi les from Drunkard’ s Creek—a week’ s journey , there
and back.
“I’d five acres in late barley ,” Abel explained. “Ripe and
yellochtie, achin’ for the scythe. I couldna leave it to be spoilt,
and my Abby—she was a wee, slight woman, she couldna be
scything and threshing.”
Unable to spare a week from h is harvest, Abel had instead
sought help from his neighbors.
“They’re guid folk,” he insisted . “One or two could spare
me the odd pen ny—but they’d their ain taxes to pay , hadn’ t
they?” S till hoping somehow to scrape up the necessary coin
without undertaking the arduous trip to Salem, Abel had
delayed—and delayed too long.
“Howard T rav ers is Sherif f,” he said, and wiped
unconsciously at the drop of moisture that formed at the end of
his nose. “He ca me with a paper , and said he mun’ put us oot,
and the taxes not paid.”
Faced with necessity , Abel had left his wife in their cabin,
and gone posthaste to Salem. But by the time he returned, six
shillings in hand, his property had been seized and sold—to
Howard T ravers ’ s father -in-law— and his cabin was inhabited
by strangers, his wife gone.
“I kent she’d no  go far ,” he explained. “She’d not leave the
bairns.”
And tha t in fact was where he found her , wrapped in a
threadbare quilt and shivering under the big spruce tree on the
hill that sheltered the graves of the four MacLennan children,all dead  in their first year of life. In spite of his entreaties,
Abigail would not go down to the cabin that had been theirs,
would seek no a id from those w ho had dispossessed her . If it
was ma dness from the fever that gripped her , or only
stubbornness, he  could not tell; she had clung to the branches
of the tree with d emented strength, crying out the names of her
children—and there had died in the night.
His whis ky cup was empty . He set it carefully on the ground
by his feet, ignoring Jamie’ s gesture toward the bottle.
“They’d given her leave to carry awa what she could. She’d
a bundle  with her , and her gra ve-claes in it. I ken weel her
sitting d own the  day after we were wed, to spin her winding-
sheet. It  had wee flowers all along one edge, that she’d made;
she was a good hand wi’ a needle.”
He had wrapped Abigail in her embroidered shroud, buried
her by the side of their younge st child, and then walked two
miles down the r oad, intending, he thought, to tell the Hobsons
what had happened.
“But I came to the house, and f ound them all abuzzing like
hornets—Hugh Fowles had had a visit from T ravers, come for
the tax, and no money to pay . T ravers grinned like an ape and
said it was all o ne to him—and sure enough, ten days later he
came along wi’ a paper and three men, and put them oot.”
Hobson had scraped up the money to pay his own taxes, and
the Fowleses were crowded in safely enough with the rest of
the fami ly—but Joe Hobson was foaming with wrath over the
treatment of his son-in-law .
“He was a-rantin’, Joe, bleezin’ mad wi’ fury . Janet Hobson
bid m e c ome an d sit, and of fered  me supper , and there was Joe
shoutin’ that he’d take the pric e of the land out of Howard
T ravers’ s hide, and Hugh slump ed down like a trampled dog,
and his wife gr eetin’, and the weans all squealin’ for their
dinners l ike a brood o’ piglets, a nd … well, I thought of telling
them, but then …” He shook his head, as though confused
anew .Sitting h alf-for gotten in the chimney-corner , he had been
overcome by a strange sort of fatigue, one that made him so
tired that his he ad nodded on his neck, lethar gy stealing over
him. It was wa rm, and he was overcome with a sense of
unreality . If the crowded confines of the Hobsons’ one-roomed
cabin were not r eal, neither was the quiet hillside and its fresh
grave beneath the spruce tree.
He s lept under the table, and woke before dawn, to find that
the sen se of unreality persis ted. Everything around him
seemed no more than a waking dream. MacLennan himself
seemed to have ceased to exist;  his body rose, washed itself,
and ate, nodded and spoke wit hout his cognizance. None of
the oute r world existed any lon ger . And so it was that when
Joe Hobson had risen and announced that he and Hugh would
go to Hillsborou gh, there to see k redress from the Court, that
Abel MacLennan had found himself marching down the road
along with them, nodding and s peaking when spoken to, with
no more will than a dead man.
“It did come to me, walkin’ do on the road, as we were all
dead,” he said dreamily . “Me and Joe and Hugh and the rest. I
might sa e well be one place as anither; it was only moving ‘til
the time came to lay my bones beside Abby . I didna mind it.”
When th ey reached Hillsborough, he had paid no great mind
to what Joe intended; only followed, obedient and unthinking.
Followed, and walked the muddy streets sparkling with broken
glass from shattered windows, seen the torchlight and mobs,
heard the shouts and screams—all quite unmoved.
“It was no but d ead men, a-rattling their bones against one
anither ,” he said with a shrug. He was still for a moment, then
turned h is face to Jamie, and loo ked long and earnestly up into
his face.
“Is it so? Are ye dead, too?” One limp, callused hand
floated up from the red kerchief, and rested lightly against the
bone of Jamie’ s cheek.
Jamie didn’ t recoil from the touch, but took MacLennan’ s
hand and brought it down again, held tight between his own.“No, a charaid ,” he said softly . “Not yet.”
MacLennan nodded slowly .
“A ye. Give it ti me,” he said. H e pulled his hands free and
sat for a mom ent, smoothing his kerchief. His head kept
bobbing, noddin g slightly , as though the spring of his neck had
stretched too far .
“Give it time,” h e repeated. “It’ s none sae bad.” He stood up
then, and put the  square of red cloth on his head. He turned to
me and nodded politely , his eyes vague and troubled.
“I thank  ye for the breakfast, ma’am,” he said, and walked
away .3
BILIOUS HUMOURS
A BEL MA CLENNAN’S DEP AR TURE put an abrupt end to
breakfast. Private Ogilvie excus ed himself with thanks, Jamie
and Fer gus went of f in search of scythes and astrolabes, and
Lizzie, wilting in the absence of Private Ogilvie, declared that
she felt unwell and subsided palely into one of the lean-to
shelters, fortified with a lar ge cup of tansy and rue decoction.
Fortunately , Br ianna chose to reappear just then, sans
Jemmy . She and Roger had breakfasted with Jocasta, she
assured me. Jemmy had fallen asleep in Jocasta’ s arms, and
since both parties appeared content with that arrangement, she
had left him th ere, and come back to help me with the
morning’ s clinic.
“Are you sure y ou want to help  me this morning?” I eyed
Bree dubiously .  “It’ s your wedding day , after all. I’m sure
Lizzie or maybe Mrs. Martin could—”
“No, I’ll do it,” she assured me, swiping a cloth across the
seat of the tall stool I used for my morning sur gery . “Lizzie’ s
feeling better , but I don’ t think she’ s up to festering feet and
putrid st omachs.” She gave a small shudder , closing her eyes
at the memory of the elderly gentleman whose ulcerated heel I
had debrided the day before. The pain had caused him to
vomit copiously on his tattered breeches, which in turn had
caused s everal of the people wa iting for my attention to throw
up too, in sympathetic reflex.
I f elt a t rifle queasy at the mem ory myself, but drowned it
with a final gulp of bitter cof fee.
“No, I suppose not,” I agreed reluctantly . “Still, your gown
isn’ t quite finished, is it? Perhaps you should go—”
“It’ s fine,” she assured me. “Phaedre’ s hemming my dress,
and Ulysses is o rdering all the servants around up there like adrill ser geant. I’d just be in the way .”
I ga ve way without further de mur , though I wondered a
little at her alac rity . While Bree wasn’ t squeamish about the
exigencies of normal life, like skinning animals and cleaning
fish, I knew the proximity of people with disfiguring
conditions or obvious illness bo thered her , though she did her
best to disguise it. It wasn’ t di staste, I thought, but rather a
crippling empathy .
I l ifted the kett le and poured freshly boiled water into a
lar ge, half-full jar of distilled alcohol, narrowing my eyes
against hot clouds of alcoholic steam.
It was  dif ficul t to see so many people suf fering from things
that cou ld have been easily tre ated in a time of antiseptics,
antibiotics, and anesthesia—but I had learned detachment in
the field  hospita ls of a time when such medical innovations
were not only new but rare, and I knew both the necessity and
the value of it.
I cou ld n ot help  anyone, if my own feelings got in the way .
And I must help. It was as simple as that. But Brianna had no
such knowledge to use as a shield. Not yet.
She had finished wiping down the stools, boxes, and other
impedimenta for the morning sur gery , and straightened up, a
small frown between her brows.
“Do you remember the woman y ou saw yesterday? The one
with the retarded little boy?”
“Not something you’d for get,” I said, as lightly as possible.
“Why? Here, can you deal with this?” I gestured at the folding
table I used, w hich was stubbornly declining to fold up
properly , its joints having swollen with the damp.
Brianna frowned slightly , studying it, then struck the
of fending joint sharply with the  side of her hand. It gave way
and collapsed obediently at once, recognizing superior force.
“There.” She rubbed the side of her hand absently , still
frowning. “Y ou were making a  big thing of telling her to trynot to have an y more children. The little boy—was it an
inheritable condition, then?”
“Y ou might say that,” I replied dryly . “Congenital syphilis.”
She looked up, blanching.
“Syphilis? Y ou’re sure?”
I no dded, rolling up a length of  boiled linen for bandaging.
It was still very damp, but no help for it.
“The mo ther wasn’ t showing overt signs of the late stages—
yet—but it’ s quite unmistakable in a child.”
The mother had come simply to have a gumboil lanced, the
little boy clinging to her skirts . He’d had the characteristic
“saddle nose,” with its pushed-in bridge, as well as a jaw so
malformed that I wasn’ t surprised at his poor nutrition; he
could ba rely chew . I couldn’ t tell how much of his evident
backwardness was due to brain damage and how much to
deafness; he appeared to have both, but I hadn’ t tested their
extent—there being exactly nothing I could do to remedy
either condition . I had advised the mother to give him pot
liquor , w hich might help with the malnutrition, but there was
little else to be done for him, poor mite.
“I don’ t see it so often here as I did in Paris or Edinbur gh,
where there were a lot of prostitutes,” I told Bree, tossing the
ball of bandages into the canvas bag she held open. “Now and
then, though. Why? Y ou don’ t  think Roger has syphilis, do
you?”
She loo ked at me, openmouthed. Her look of shock was
obliterated by an instant flood of angry red.
“I do not !” she said. “Mother!”
“W ell, I  didn’ t really think so,”  I said mildly . “Happens in
the best of families, though—and you wer e  asking.”
She snorted heavily .
“I was asking  about contraception,” she said, through her
teeth. “O r at least I meant to, before you started in with thePhysician’ s Guide to V ener eal Disease. ”
“Oh, tha t.” I eyed her thoughtfu lly , taking in the dried milk
stains o n her bodice. “W ell, breast-feeding is reasonably
ef fective. Not absolute, by any means, but fairly ef fective.
Less so, after the first six months”—Jemmy was now six
months old—”but still ef fective.”
“Mmphm,” she said, sounding so like Jamie that I had to
bite my lower lip in order not to laugh. “And exactly what else
is ef fective?”
I hadn’ t really discussed contraception—eighteenth-century
style—with her . It hadn’ t seemed necessary when she first
appeared at Fraser ’ s Ridge, and then it r eally  wasn’ t necessary ,
she being already pregnant. So she thought it was now?
I f rowned, slowly putting rolls of bandage and bundles of
herbs into my bag.
“The mo st comm on thing is som e sort of barrier . A piece of
silk or a sponge , soaked with an ything from vinegar to brandy
—though if you have it, tansy oi l or oil of cedar is supposed to
work the best. I have  heard of women in the Indies using half a
lemon, but that’ s obviously not a suitable alternative here.”
She uttered a short laugh.
“No, I wouldn’ t  think so. I don’ t think the tansy oil works
all that well, eit her—that’ s what Marsali was using when she
got pregnant with Joan.”
“Oh, she was  using it? I thought perhaps she’d just not
bothered once—and once is enough.”
I fel t, ra ther tha n saw her stif fe n, and bit my lip again, this
time in chagrin. Once had  bee n enough—we just didn’ t k now
which  once. She hunched her shoulders, though, then let them
fall, deliberately dismissing whatever memories my
thoughtless remark had conjured.
“She said she’d been using it—but she might have
for gotten. It doesn’ t work all the time, though, does it?”I slu ng the bag of sur gical linens and dried herbs over my
shoulder and picked up the med ical chest by the leather strap
Jamie had made for it.
“The on ly thing that always w orks is celibacy ,” I said. “I
suppose that isn’ t a satisfactory option in the present case?”
She shook her h ead, her eyes fixed broodingly on a cluster
of y oung men v isible through the trees below , taking turns at
pitching stones across the creek.
“That’ s what I was afraid of,” she said, and bent to pick up
the folding table and a pair of stools.
I looked round the clearing, considering. Anything else? No
worry a bout leaving the campfire, even if Lizzie fell asleep;
nothing on the mountainside would burn in this weather; even
the kindling and firewood we had stored at the end of our lean-
to the day befor e were damp. Something was missing, though
… what? Oh, yes. I put down the box for a moment and knelt
to crawl  into the lean-to. I dug about in the jumble of quilts,
coming out finally with my tiny leather medicine pouch.
I said a brief prayer to St. Bride and slipped it round my
neck and  down inside the bodice of my dress. I was so much
in the habit of w earing the amulet when I set out to practice
medicine that I had almost ceased to feel ridiculous about this
small rit ual—almost. Bree was watching me, a rather odd look
on her face, but she said nothing.
I didn’ t,  either; merely picked up my things and followed
her across the clearing, stepping carefully round the boggiest
spots. It  wasn’ t raining now , but the clouds sat on the tops of
the trees, promising more at an y moment, and wisps of mist
rose from fallen logs and dripping bushes.
Why was Bree worrying about contraception? I wondered.
Not that I didn’ t think it sensible—but why now? Perhaps it
was to do with the imminence of her wedding to Roger . Even
if they had been living as man  and wife for the last several
months—and th ey had—the formality of vows spoken before
God and man was enough to bring a new sobriety to even thegiddiest of young people. And neither Bree nor Roger was
giddy .
“There is another possibility ,” I said to the back of her neck,
as she led the wa y down the slip pery trail. “I haven’ t tried it on
anyone yet, so I  can’ t say how reliable it may be. Nayawenne
—the ol d T usca roran lady who gave me my medicine bag—
she said there were ‘women’ s herbs.’ Dif ferent mixtures for
dif ferent things—but one plant in particular for that; she said
the s eeds of it would keep a man ’ s spirit from overwhelming a
woman’ s.”
Bree paused, half-turning as I came up beside her .
“Is that how the Indians see pregnancy?” One corner of her
mouth curled wryly . “The man wins?”
I laughed.
“W ell, in a way . If the woman’ s spirit is too strong for the
man’ s, o r won’ t  yield to it, she can’ t conceive. So if a woman
wants a child and can’ t have one, most often the shaman will
treat her husband, or both of them, rather than just her .”
She made a sm all throaty noise, partly amusement—but
only partly .
“What’ s the plant—the women’ s herb?” she asked. “Do you
know it?”
“I’m not positive,” I admitted. “Or not sure of the name, I
should s ay . She did show it to me, both the growing plant and
the d ried seeds, and I’m sure I’d  know it again—but it wasn’ t
a pla nt I knew by an English na me. One of the Umbelliferae,
though,” I added helpfully .
She gave  me an austere look that reminded me once more of
Jamie, then turned to the side to let a small stream of Campbell
women go by , clattering with em pty kettles and pails, each one
bobbing or bowing politely to us as they passed on their way
down to the creek.
“Good day to y e, Mistress Fraser ,” said one, a neat young
woman that I recognized as one of Farquard Campbell’ syounger daughte rs. “Is your ma n about? My faither would be
glad of a word, he says.”
“No, he’ s gone of f, I’m afraid.”  I gestured vaguely; Jamie
could be anywhere. “I’ll tell him if I see him, though.”
She nodded and went on, each  of the women behind her
pausing to wish Brianna happiness on her wedding day , their
woolen skirts and cloaks brushing small showers of rainwater
from the bayberry bushes that lined the path here.
Brianna accepted their good wishes with gracious
politeness, but I saw the small line that formed between her
thick red brows. Something was definitely bothering her .
“What?” I said bluntly , as soon as the Campbells were out
of earshot.
“What’ s what?” she said, startled.
“What’ s troubling you?” I asked. “And don’ t say ‘nothing,’
because I see there is. Is it to do with Roger? Are you having
second thoughts about the wedding?”
“Not ex actly ,” s he replied, looking wary . “I want to marry
Roger , I mean— that’ s  al l right. It’ s jus t … I just … th ought of
something …” She trailed of f, and a slow flush rose in her
cheeks.
“Oh?” I asked, feeling rather alarmed. “What’ s that?”
“V enereal disea se,” she blurted. “What if I have it? Not
Roger , not him, but—from Stephen Bonnet?”
Her face  was flaming so hotly th at I was surprised not to see
the raind rops sizzle into steam w hen they struck her skin. My
own fac e felt cold, my heart tight in my chest. The possibility
had occurred to me—vividly—a t the time, but I hadn’ t wanted
even to suggest such a thing, if she hadn’ t thought of it herself.
I rem embered the weeks of wat ching her covertly for any hint
of malaise—but women often showed no symptoms of early
infection. Jemmy’ s healthy bir th had been a relief in more
ways than one.“Oh,” I said so ftly . I reached out and squeezed her arm.
“Don’ t worry , lovey . Y ou haven’ t.”
She took a deep  breath, and let it out in a pale misty cloud,
some of the tension leaving her shoulders.
“Y ou’re sure?” she said. “Y ou can tell? I feel all right, but I
thought—women don’ t always have symptoms.”
“They don’ t,” I said, “but men  most certainly do. And if
Roger h ad contr acted anything nasty from you , I’d have heard
about it long since.”
Her face  had faded somewhat, but the pinkness came back
at that. She coughed, mist rising from her breath.
“W ell, that’ s a relief. So Jemmy’ s all right? Y ou’re sure?”
“Absolutely ,” I assured her . I ha d put drops of silver nitrate
—procured at considerable cost and dif ficulty—in his eyes at
birth, ju st in case, but I was indeed sure. Aside from the lack
of a ny specific signs of illness , Jemmy had an air of robust
health about him that made th e mere thought of infection
incredible. He radiated well-being like a potful of stew .
“Is that why you asked about contraception?” I asked,
waving a greeting as we passed the MacRaes’ campsite. “Y ou
were worried about having more children, in case …”
“Oh. No. I mean—I hadn’ t even thought about venereal
disease u ntil you mentioned syphilis, and then it just struck me
as a horrible realization—that he might have—” She stopped
and cleared her throat. “Er , no. I just wanted to know .”
A slippe ry patch of trail put paid to the conversation at that
point, but not to my speculations.
It wasn’ t that a young bride’ s mind might not turn lightly to
thoughts of contraception—but  under the circumstances …
what wa s it? I w ondered. Fear for herself, or for a new baby?
Childbirth could be dangerous, of course—and anyone who
had seen the at tendees at my sur gery or heard the women’ s
conversations round the campfires in the evening could be in
no doubt as to the dangers to infants and children; it was therare family that had not lost at least one infant to fever , morbid
sore throat, or “the squitters”— uncontrolled diarrhea. Many
women had lost three, four , o r more babies. I remembered
Abel MacLenna n’ s story , and a small shiver ran down my
spine.
Still, Br ianna was very healthy , and while we did lack
important thing s like antibiotics and sophisticated medical
facilities, I had told her not to  underestimate the power of
simple hygiene and good nutrition.
No, I thought, w atching the strong curve of her back as she
lifted the heavy equipment over an entangling root that
hunched across the trail. It wasn ’ t that. She might have reason
to be concerned, but she wasn’ t basically a fearful person.
Roger? O n the face of it, it woul d seem that the best thing to
do w as to beco me pregnant again quickly , with a child that
was definitely Roger ’ s. That would certainly help to cement
their new marriage. On the oth er hand … what if she did?
Roger would be more than pleased—but what about Jemmy?
Roger h ad sworn a blood oath,  taking Jemmy as his own.
But hum an nature was human nature, and while I was sure that
Roger w ould ne ver abandon or neglect Jemmy , it was quite
possible that he would feel dif ferently—and obviously
dif ferently—for a child he knew was his. W ould Bree risk
that?
On due consideration, I rather thought she was wise to wait
—if she could. Give Roger time to feel a close bond with
Jemmy , before complicating the  family situation with another
child. Y es, very sensible—and B ree was  an emin ently se nsible
person.
It w asn’ t until w e had arrived, finally , at the clearing where
the morning sur geries were held that another possibility
occurred to me.
“Can we be helpin’ ye at all, Missus Fraser?”
T wo of the younger Chisholm boys hurried forward to help,
relieving me and Brianna of our heavy loads, and withoutbeing told, started in at once to unfold tables, fetch clean
water , kindle a fire, and generally make themselves useful.
They were no m ore than eight and ten, and watching them
work, I realized afresh that in this time, a lad of twelve or
fourteen could be essentially a grown man.
Brianna knew that, too. She would never leave Jemmy , I
knew—not whi le he needed her . But … later? What might
happen when he left her ?
I o pened  my chest and began slowly to lay out the necessary
supplies for the morning’ s wo rk: scissors, probe, forceps,
alcohol, scalpel, bandages, tooth pliers, suture needles,
ointments, salves, washes, pur ges …
Brianna was twenty-three. She might be no more than in her
mid-thirties by the time Jem wa s fully independent. And if he
no l onger needed her care—she  and Roger might possibly go
back. Ba ck to her own time, to safety—to the interrupted life
that had been hers by birth.
But only  if she had no further children, whose helplessness
would keep her here.
“Good morn to ye, ma’am.” A short, middle-aged
gentleman stood before me, the morning’ s first patient. He was
bristling with a week’ s worth of whiskers, but noticeably
pallid round the gills, with a cla mmy look and bloodshot eyes
so raw with smoke and whisky that his malady was instantly
discernible. Hangover was endemic at the morning sur gery .
“I’ve a wee grip in’ in my guts, ma’am,” he said, swallowing
unhappily . “W ould ye have anything like to settle ‘em,
maybe?”
“Just the  thing,” I assured him , reaching for a cup. “Raw
egg and a bit of ipecac. Have you a good vomit, and you’ll be
a new man.”
 
THE SU RGER Y was held at the  edge of the big clearing at the
foot of the hill, w here the great fire of the Gathering burned at
night. T he damp  air smelled of soot and the acrid scent of wetashes, but the blackened patch of earth—some ten feet across,
at least—was already disappearing under a crisscross of fresh
branches and kindling. They’d h ave a time starting it tonight, I
thought, if the drizzle kept up.
The gen tleman with the hangover disposed of, there was a
short lull, and I was able to give my attention to Murray
MacLeod, who had set up shop a short distance away .
Murray had gotten an early start, I saw; the ground by his
feet was  dark, the scattered ashes sodden and squishy with
blood. H e had an early patient in hand, too—a stout gentleman
whose red, spongy nose and fla bby jowls gave testimony to a
life of alcoholic  excess. He had  the man stripped to his shirt
despite the rain and cold, sleev e turned up and tourniquet in
place, the bleeding bowl held across the patient’ s knees.
I was a good ten feet from the stool where Murray plied his
trade, bu t could see the man’ s ey es, yellow as mustard even in
the dim morning light.
“Liver disease,” I said to Briann a, taking no particular pains
to lower  my voice. “Y ou can see the jaundice from here, can’ t
you?”
“Bilious humors,” MacLeod sai d loudly , snapping open his
fleam. “ An excess of the humo rs, clear as day .” Small, dark,
and neat  in his dress, Murray w as not personally impressive,
but he was  opinionated.
“Cirrhosis due to drink, I daresay ,” I said, coming closer and
looking the patient over dispassionately .
“An imp action of the bile, ow ing to an imbalance of the
phlegm!” Murray glowered at me, clearly thinking I intended
to steal his thunder , if not his patient.
I ign ored him a nd bent down to examine the patient, who
looked alarmed at my scrutiny .
“Y ou have a hard mass just under the ribs on the right, don’ t
you?” I said, kindly . “Y our piss is dark, and when you shit, it’ s
black and bloody , am I right?”The man nodded, mouth hanging open. W e were beginning
to attract attention.
“Mo-therr .” Brianna was standing behind me. She gave
Murray a nod an d bent to mutter in my ear . “What can you do
for cirrhosis, Mother? Nothing!”
I sto pped, biting my lip. She wa s right. In my ur ge to show
of f b y making the diagnosis—and keep Murray from using his
stained, rusty-looking fleam on the man—I had overlooked the
minor point that I had no alternative treatment to of fer .
The patient was glancing back a nd forth between us, plainly
uneasy . W ith an ef fort, I smiled at him, and nodded to Murray .
“Mr . Ma cLeod has the right of it,” I said, forcing the words
past my  teeth. “Liver disease, surely—caused by an excess of
humors.” I supposed one could consider alcohol a humor , after
all; the folk drin king Jamie’ s whisky last night had evidently
found it hilarious.
Murray’ s face had been tense with suspicion; at my
capitulation, it went quite comically blank with astonishment.
Stepping in front of me, Bria nna seized advantage of the
moment.
“There’ s a charm,” she said, sm iling charmingly at him. “It
… e r …  sharpen s the blade, and  eases the flow of the humors.
Let me show y ou.” Before he could tighten his grip, she
snatched the fleam from his h and and turned to our small
sur gery fire, where a pot of water hung steaming from a tripod.
“In the name o f Michael, wielder of swords, defender of
souls,” she intoned. I trusted that taking the name of St.
Michael in vain was not actual blasphemy—or if it was, that
Michael would not object in a good cause. The men laying the
fire had stopped  to watch, as had a few people coming to the
sur gery .
She raised the fleam and made a lar ge, slow sign of the
cross wi th it, looking from side to side, to be sure she had the
attention of all the onlookers . She did; they were agog.
T owering over most of the gawkers, blue eyes narrowed inconcentration, s he reminded me strongly of Jamie in some of
his more bravura performances. I could only hope she was as
good at it as he was.
“Bless this blade, for the healing of your servant,” she said,
casting her eyes up to heaven, an d holding the fleam above the
fire in the mann er of a priest of fering the Eucharist. Bubbles
were rising through the water , b ut it hadn’ t quite reached the
boil.
“Bless its edge, for the drawing of blood, for the spilling of
blood, for the …  er … the letting of poison from the body of
your most humble petitioner . Bless the blade … bless the blade
… bless the bla de in the hand of your humble servant… .
Thanks be to Go d for the bright ness of the metal.” Thanks be
to God for the r epetitious natur e of Gaelic prayers, I thought
cynically .
Thanks be to G od, the water was boiling. She lowered the
short, c urved blade to the surface of the water , glowered
significantly at the crowd, and declaimed, “Let the cleansing
of the waters from the side of  our Lord Jesus be upon this
blade!”
She plunged the metal into the  water and held it until the
steam rising over the wooden ca sing reddened her fingers. She
lifted the fleam and transferred  it hastily to her other hand,
raising it into the  air as she surreptitiously waggled the scalded
hand behind her .
“May the blessing of Michael, d efender from demons, be on
this blad e and on the hand of it s wielder , to the health of the
body , to the health of the soul. Amen!”
She stepped forward and presen ted the fleam ceremoniously
to Murr ay , handle first. Murray , no fool, gave me a look in
which keen suspicion was mingled with a reluctant
appreciation for my daughter ’ s theatrical abilities.
“Don’ t t ouch th e blade,” I said,  smiling graciously . “It will
break the charm. Oh—and you repeat the charm, each timeyou use  the blade. It has to be done with the water boiling ,
mind.”
“Mmphm,” he said, but took the fleam carefully by the
handle. W ith a short nod to Brianna, he turned away to his
patient, and I to  mine—a young girl with nettle rash. Brianna
followed, wipin g her hands on her skirt and looking pleased
with herself. I he ard the patient’ s soft grunt behind me, and the
ringing patter of blood running into the metal bowl.
I felt rather guilt y about MacLeod’ s patient, but Brianna had
been quite right; there was absolutely nothing I could do for
him under the circumstances. Careful long-term nursing,
coupled with excellent nutrition and a complete abstinence
from alcohol, might prolong hi s life; the chances of the first
two were low , the third, nonexistent.
Brianna had brilliantly saved him from a potentially nasty
blood infection —and seized the opportunity to provide a
similar protectio n for all Mac Leod’ s future patients—but I
couldn’ t help a nagging sense of guilt that I could not do more
myself. Still, the first medical  principle I had learned as a
nurse on the batt lefields of France still held: treat the patient in
front of you.
“Use this ointment,” I said sternly to the girl with nettle
rash, “and don’ t scratch .”4
WEDDING GIFTS
T HE DA Y  HADN’T CLEARED, but the rain had ceased for
the moment. Fires smoked like smudge pots, as people
hastened to take advantage of th e momentary cessation to feed
their carefully hoarded coals, pushing damp wood into the
kindling blazes in a hasty ef fort to dry damp clothes and
blankets. The air was still res tless, though, and clouds of
woodsmoke billowed ghostlike through the trees.
One suc h plume sur ged across the trail before him, and
Roger turned to skirt it, making  his way through tussocks of
wet grass that soaked his stock ings, and hanging boughs of
pine that left dark patches of wetness on the shoulders of his
coat as he passed. He paid the damp no mind, intent on his
mental list of errands for the day .
T o t he tinkers’ w agons first, to buy some small token as a
wedding present for Brianna. What would she like? he
wondered. A bit of jewelry , a ribbon? He had very little
money , but felt the need to ma rk the occasion with a gift of
some sort.
He would have liked to put his own ring on her finger when
they made their vows, but she had insisted that the cabochon
ruby tha t had belonged to her grandfather would do fine; it fit
her h and perfectly , and there wa s no need to spend money on
another ring. She was a pragmatic person, Bree was—
sometimes dismayingly so, in contrast to his own romantic
streak.
Something prac tical but ornamental, then—like a painted
chamber pot? He smiled to him self at the idea, but the notion
of practicality lingered, tinged with doubt.
He h ad a vivid memory of Mrs. Abercrombie, a staid and
practical matron  of Reverend W akefield’ s congregation, who
had arrived at the manse in hysterics one evening in the midstof s upper , saying that she h ad killed her husband, and
whatever should she do? The Reverend had left Mrs.
Abercrombie in the temporary care of his housekeeper , while
he and  Roger , then a teen ager , had hastened to the
Abercrombie residence to see what had happened.
They had found Mr . Abercro mbie on the floor of his
kitchen, fortunately still alive, though groggy and bleeding
profusely from a minor scalp wound occasioned by his having
been struck by the new electr ic steam iron which he had
presented to his wife on the o ccasion of their twenty-third
wedding anniversary .
“But she said t he old one scorched the tea towels!” Mr .
Abercrombie h ad repeated at plaintive intervals, as the
Reverend skillfully taped up his head with Elastoplast, and
Roger mopped up the kitchen.
It w as the vivid memory of the gory splotches on the worn
lino of the Abercrombies’ kitchen that decided him. Pragmatic
Bree might be, b ut this was their wedding. Better , worse, death
do u s part. He’d go for romantic—or as romantic as could be
managed on one shilling, threepence.
There w as a flash of red among the spruce needles nearby ,
like the glimpse of a cardinal. Bigger than the average bird,
though; he stopped, bending to p eer through an opening in the
branches.
“Duncan?” he said. “Is that you?”
Duncan Innes came out of the t rees, nodding shyly . He still
wore the scarlet Cameron tartan , but had left of f his splendid
coat, instead wrapping the end o f his plaid shawllike round his
shoulders in the cozy old style of the Highlands.
“A word, a Smeoraich ?” he said.
“A ye, su re. I’m just of f to the ti nkers’—walk with me.” He
turned b ack to the trail—now clear of smoke—and they made
their way companionably across the mountain, side by side.
Roger s aid nothing, waiting courteously for Duncan to
choose his way into the conversation. Duncan was dif fidentand reti ring by temperament, but observant, perceptive, and
stubborn in a very quiet way . If he had something to say , he’d
say it—given time. At last he drew breath and started in.
“ Mac Dubh  did say to me as how your Da w as a minister—
that’ s true, is it?”
“A ye,” R oger said, rather startled at the subject. “Or at least
—my re al fathe r was killed, an d my mother ’ s uncle adopted
me; it was him was the minister .” Even as he spoke, Roger
wondered why he should feel it necessary to explain. For most
of his life, he had thought and spoken of the Reverend as his
father; and surely it made no dif ference to Duncan.
Duncan nodded, clicking his tongue in sympathy .
“But ye  will have been Presbyterian yourself, then? I did
hear Mac Dubh  speak of it.” Despite Duncan’ s normal good
manners, a brief grin showed b eneath the edge of his ragged
mustache.
“I expect ye did, aye,” Roger replied dryly . He’d be
surprised if the whole Gathering hadn’ t heard Mac Dubh  speak
of it.
“W ell, the thing about it is, so am I,” Duncan said, sounding
rather apologetic.
Roger looked at him in astonishment.
“Y ou? I thought you were Catholic!”
Duncan made a small emba rrassed noise, lifting the
shoulder of his amputated arm in a shrug.
“No. My great-grandda on my mother ’ s side was a
Covenanter—verra fierce in his beliefs, aye?” He smiled, a
little shy ly . “Tha t was watered d own a good bit before it came
to me; my Mam was godly , but  Da wasna much of a one for
the k irk, nor was  I. And when I met up wi’ Mac Dubh  … well,
it wasna as thou gh he’d asked m e to go to Mass with him of a
Sunday , was it?”
Roger nodded, with a brief grunt of comprehension. Duncan
had met with J amie in Ardsmuir Prison, after the Rising.While most of th e Jacobite troops had been Catholic, he knew
there ha d been Protestants of dif ferent stripes among them, too
—and most would likely have kept quiet about it,
outnumbered by the Catholics in close quarters. And it was
true enough that Jamie’ s and Duncan’ s later career in
smuggling would have of fered  few occasions for religious
discourse.
“A ye, so. And your wedding to Mrs. Cameron tonight …”
Duncan nodded , and sucked i n a corner of his mouth,
gnawing contemplatively at the edge of his mustache.
“That’ s it. Am I bound, d’ye think, to say anything?”
“Mrs. Cameron doesn’ t know? Nor Jamie?”
Duncan shook his head silently , eyes on the trampled mud
of the trail.
Roger re alized that it was, of course, Jamie whose opinion
was important here, rather than Jocasta Cameron’ s. The issue
of dif fering religion had evidently not seemed important to
Duncan—and Roger had never heard that Jocasta was in any
way devout—bu t hearing about Jamie’ s response to Roger ’ s
Presbyterianism, Duncan had now taken alarm.
“Y e went to see the priest, Mac Dubh  said.” Duncan glanced
at him sidelong.  “Did he—” He  cleared his throat, flushing. “I
mean, did he oblige ye to be … baptized Romish?”
An atrocious prospect to a devo ut Protestant, and plainly an
uncomfortable one to Duncan. It was, Roger realized, an
uncomfortable thought to him, too. W ould he have done it, if
he had to, to w ed Bree? He su pposed he would have, in the
end, but he admitted to having felt a deep relief that the priest
hadn’ t insisted on any sort of formal conversion.
“Ah … no,” R oger said, and coughed as another fan of
smoke washed suddenly over them. “No,” he repeated, wiping
streaming eyes. “But they don’ t baptize you, ye know , if ye’ve
been christened already . Y ou have been, aye?”“Oh, aye.” Duncan seemed heartened by that. “A ye, when I
—that i s—” A faint shadow crossed his face, but whatever
thought had caused it was dismissed with another shrug.
“Y es.”
“W ell, then. Let me think a bit, aye?”
The tinkers’ wagons were already in sight, huddled like
oxen, their merchandise shrouded in canvas and blankets
against the rain, but Duncan stopped, clearly wanting the
matter settled before going on to anything else.
Roger rubbed a hand over the back of his neck, thinking.
“No,” he  said finally . “No, I think ye needna say anything.
See, it’ll not be a Mass, only the marriage service—and that’ s
just the same. Do ye take this woman, do ye take this man,
richer , poorer , all that.”
Duncan nodded, attentive.
“I can say that, aye,” he said. “ Though it did take a bit of
coming to, the richer , poorer bit. Y e’ll ken that, though,
yourself.”
He spok e quite without any sen se of irony , merely as one
stating an obvious fact, and w as plainly taken aback at his
glimpse of Roger ’ s face in response to the remark.
“I didna mean anything amiss,” Duncan said hastily . “That
is, I only meant—”
Roger waved a hand, trying to brush it of f.
“No har m done, ” he said, his voice as dry as Duncan’ s had
been. “Speak the truth and shame auld Hornie, aye?”
It was  th e truth, too, though he had somehow managed to
overlook it until this moment. In fact, he realized with a
sinking sensation, his situation was a precise parallel with
Duncan’ s: a penniless man without property , marrying a rich—
or potentially rich—woman.
He h ad never th ought of Jamie Fraser as being rich, perhaps
because of the man’ s natural modesty , perhaps simply becausehe wasn’ t—yet. The fact remained that Fraser was the
proprietor of ten thousand acres of land. If a good bit of that
land was  still wilderness, it didn’ t mean it would stay that way .
There were tenants on that property now; there would be more
soon. And when those tenanci es began to pay rents, when
there were sawmills and gristmi lls on the streams, when there
were settlements and stores and taverns, when the handful of
cows an d pigs and horses had  multiplied into fat herds of
thriving stock under Jamie’ s careful stewardship … Jamie
Fraser m ight be a very rich man indeed. And Brianna was
Jamie’ s only natural child.
Then there was Jocasta Cameron, demonstrably already a
very ric h woman, who had stated her intention to make
Brianna her heiress. Bree had exigently refused to countenance
the notion—but Jocasta was as n aturally stubborn as her niece,
and had had m ore practice at it. Besides, no matter what
Brianna said or did, folk would suppose …
And tha t was what was truly sitting in the bottom of his
stomach like a curling stone. N ot just the realization that he
was in fact marrying well abov e his means and position—but
the r ealization that everyone in the entire colony had realized
it long ago, and had probably b een viewing him cynically—
and gossiping about him—as a rare chancer , if not an outright
adventurer .
The smo ke had left a bitter taste  of ashes at the back of his
mouth. He swallowed it down, and gave Duncan a crooked
smile.
“A ye,” he said. “W ell. Better or worse. I suppose they must
see something  in us, eh? The women?”
Duncan smiled, a little ruefully .
“A ye, something . So, ye think it will be all right, then, about
the relig ion? I wouldna have either Miss Jo or Mac Dubh  think
I me ant aught am iss by not spea king. But I didna like to make
a fizz about it, and it’ s no needed.”“No, of course not,” Roger agreed. He took a deep breath
and brus hed dam p hair of f his face. “Nay , I think it’ s all right.
When I spoke to  the—the Father , the only condition he made
was that  I should let any children be baptized as Catholics. But
since that’ s not a consideration  for you and Mrs. Cameron, I
suppose …” He trailed of f delicately , but Duncan seemed
relieved at the thought.
“Och, n o,” he said, and laughe d, a little nervously . “No, I
think I’m no bothered about that.”
“W ell, th en.” Roger forced a smile, and clapped Duncan on
the back. “Here’ s luck to you.”
Duncan brushed a finger beneath his mustache, nodding.
“And you, a Smeoraich .”
He had expected  Duncan to go of f about his business, once
his question was answered, bu t the man instead came with
him, wandering  slowly along the row of wagons in Roger ’ s
wake, peering at the wares on display with a slight frown.
After a week’ s h aggling and bartering, the wagons were as
full as they had been to start with—or more so, heaped with
sacks of  grain and wool, casks of cider , bags of apples, stacks
of hides  and other sundries taken in trade. The stock of fancies
had dwi ndled c onsiderably , but  there were still things to be
bought, as evidenced by the crow d of folk clustering round the
wagons, thick as aphids on a rosebush.
Roger was tall enough to pee r over the heads of most
customers, and made his wa y slowly along the rank of
wagons, squintin g at this or that, trying to envision Brianna’ s
response to it.
She was a beautiful woman, but not inclined to fuss over her
looks. In fact, he  had narrowly s topped her cutting of f most of
her glorious red mane out of im patience at it dangling in the
gravy and Jemmy yanking on it. Maybe a ribbon was  practical.
Or a  decorated comb? More lik ely a pair of handcuf fs for the
wean.He p aused by a vendor of cloth goods, though, and bent to
peer und er the canvas, where caps and bright ribbons hung
safely suspended out of the wet, stirring in the cool dimness
like the tentacles of brilliant jellyfish. Duncan, plaid hitched
up abou t his ears against the gusting breeze, came closer , to
see what he was looking at.
“Looking for something in particular , are ye, sirs?” A
peddler -woman leaned forward over her goods, bosom resting
on h er folded arms, and divided  a professional smile between
them.
“A ye,” Duncan said, unexpectedly . “A yard of velvet.
W ould ye be hav ing such a thing? Good quality , mind, but the
color ’ s not important.”
The woman’ s eyebrows lifted—even in his best clothes,
Duncan would strike no one as a dandy—but she turned
without comment and began to rootle through her diminished
stock.
“D’ye think Mrs. Claire would have some lavender left?”
Duncan asked, turning to Roger .
“A ye, I know sh e has,” Roger replied. His puzzlement must
have shown on his face, for D uncan smiled and ducked his
head dif fidently .
“‘T was a thought I had,” he said . “Miss Jo suf fers from the
megrims, and doesna sleep sae well as she might. I mind, my
mither had a lavender pillow , and said she fell asleep like a
babe the moment she laid her head upon it. So I thought,
perhaps a bit o’ velvet—so as she could feel it against her
cheek, aye?—an d perhaps Mrs. Lizzie would stitch it up for
me… .”
In sickness and in health  …
Roger nodded his approval, feeling touched—and slightly
shamed—by Duncan’ s thoughtfulness. He had had the
impression that the marriage between Duncan and Jocasta
Cameron was principally a matter of convenience and goodbusiness—and perhaps it was. But mad passion wasn’ t a
necessary prerequisite for tenderness or consideration, was it?
Duncan, purchase concluded, took his leave and went of f
with the velvet safely sheltered under his plaid, leaving Roger
to m ake a slow  circuit of the remaining vendors, mentally
selecting, weighing, and discard ing, as he wracked his brain to
think what item of this myriad would best please his bride.
Earrings? No, the kid would pul l them. Same for a necklace—
or  a hair ribbon, now he thought.
Still, his mind d welled on jewelry . Normally , she wore very
little. But she had  worn her father ’ s ruby ring—th e one Jamie
had give n him, the one he had given her when she accepted
him for good—a ll through the G athering. Jem slobbered on it
now and then, but couldn’ t really damage it.
He stopp ed suddenly , letting the crowd flow round him. He
could se e the gold in his mind’ s  eye, and the deep pink-red of
the c abochon ruby , vivid on her  long pale finger . Her father ’ s
ring . Of course; why had he not seen that before?
T rue, Jamie had given him the ring, but that didn’ t make it
his t o give in turn. And he wanted, very suddenly and very
badly , to give Brianna something truly of his own.
He turne d with decision, and made his way back to a wagon
whose m etal wares gleamed and glinted, even in the rain. He
knew fro m expe riment that his l ittle finger was just the size of
her ring finger .
“This one,” he s aid, holding up a ring. It was cheap; made
of braid ed strands of copper and brass, it would undoubtedly
turn her finger green in minutes. So m uch the better , he
thought, handing  over his money . Whether she wore it all the
time or not, she would be marked as his.
For this r eason shall a woman l eave her father ’ s house, and
cleave unto her husband, and the two shall be one flesh.5
RIOT OUS UNREST
B Y THE END OF THE FIRST HOUR, I had a substantial
crowd of patients waiting, despite the intermittent drizzle. It
was the final da y of the Gatheri ng, and people who had stood
the pain of a toothache or the doubt of a rash had suddenly
decided that they must seize the chance of having it seen to.
I dismi ssed a young woman with incipient goiter ,
admonishing he r to procure a quantity of dried fish, as she
lived too far inland to be sure of getting fresh each day , and eat
some daily for its iodine content.
“Next!” I called, brushing damp hair out of my eyes.
The crowd parted like the Re d Sea, revealing a small,
elderly man, so thin he might be a walking skeleton, clad in
rags and carrying a bundle of fur in his arms. As he shambled
toward m e through the ranks of recoiling people, I discovered
the reason for the crowd’ s def erence; he stank like a dead
raccoon.
For a moment, I  thought the pile of grayish fur might be  a
dead rac coon—there was alread y a small pile of furs and hides
near my  feet, though my patients usually went to the trouble of
separating these from their original possessors before
presenting them to me—but then the fur stirred, and a pair of
bright eyes peered out of the tangled mass.
“My dog ’ s hurt, ” the man anno unced brusquely . He set the
dog on my table , shoving the ju mble of instruments aside, and
pointed to a jag ged tear in the animal’ s flank. “Y ou’ll tend
him.”
This wa sn’ t phrased as a request, but it was, after all, the
dog who  was my patient, and he  seemed fairly civil. Medium-
sized an d short-legged, with a bristly , mottled coat and ragged
ears, he sat placidly panting, making no ef fort to get away .“What happened  to him?” I moved the tottering basin out of
danger , and bent to rummage for my jar of sterile sutures. The
dog licked my hand in passing.
“Fightin’ with a she-coon.”
“Hmm,” I said, surveying the animal dubiously . Given its
improbable parentage and evide nt friendliness, I thought any
overtures made to a female racc oon were probably inspired by
lust, rather than ferocity . As though to confirm this impression,
the a nimal extruded a few inch es of moist pink reproductive
equipment in my direction.
“He likes you, Mama,” Bree said, keeping a straight face.
“How flattering,” I muttered, hoping that the dog’ s owner
would n ot be moved to any sim ilar demonstration of regard.
Fortunately , the  old man appeared not to like me in the
slightest; he ignored me completely , sunken eyes fixed
broodingly on the clearing below , where the soldiers were
going through some drill.
“Scissors,” I said, resigned, holding out my palm.
I cli pped away the matted fur  near the wound, and was
pleased to find no great swellin g or other signs of infection.
The gash had c lotted well; evidently it had been some time
since the injury . I wondered whether the dog had met its
nemesis on the mountain. I didn ’ t recognize the old man, nor
did he have the speech of a Scot . Had he been at the Gathering
at all? I wondered.
“Er … would you hold his head, please?” The dog might be
friendly; that didn’ t mean his good nature would remain
unimpaired as I jabbed a needl e through his hide. His owner
stayed s unk in gloom, though, and made no move to oblige. I
glanced around for Bree, looking for help, but she had
suddenly disappeared.
“Here, a bhalaich , here, then,” said a soothing vo ice beside
me, and I tur ned in surprise to find the dog snif fing
interestedly at the prof fered knuckles of Murray MacLeod.
Seeing my look of surprise, he  shrugged, smiled, and leanedover the table, grabbing the astonished dog by scruf f and
muzzle.
“I shoul d advise ye to be quick about it, Mrs. Fraser ,” he
said.
I too k a  firm grip of the leg nearest me and started in. The
dog responded exactly as most humans did in similar
circumstances, wriggling madly and trying to escape, its claws
scrabbling on the rough wood of the table. At one point, it
succeeded in breaking free of M urray , whereupon it leaped of f
the table altogether and made for the wide-open spaces,
sutures trailing. I flung myself bodily upon it, and rolled
through leaves and mud, scattering onlookers in all directions
until one or two  of the bolder souls came to my assistance,
pinning the mangy beast to the ground so that I might finish
the job.
I tie d the last knot, clipped the waxed thread with Murray’ s
fleam—which had in fact been trampled underfoot in the
struggle, though  unfortunately not broken—and took my knee
of f the hound’ s side, panting nearly as heavily as the dog was.
The spectators applauded.
I b owed , a little dazed, and sh oved masses of disheveled
curls ou t of my face with both hands. Murray was in no better
case, his  queue come undone a nd a jagged rent in his coat,
which w as covered with mud. H e bent, seized the dog under
the belly , and swung it of f its f eet, heaving it up on the table
beside its owner .
“Y our dog, sir ,” he said, and stood wheezing gently .
The old  man turned, laid a hand on the dog’ s head, and
frowned, glancing back and forth between me and Murray , as
though unsure what to make of this tag-team approach to
sur gery . He looked back over hi s shoulder toward the soldiers
below , then turned toward me, his sparse brows knotted over a
beak of a nose.
“Who’re they ?” he said, in tones of deep puzzlement. Not
waiting for an a nswer , he shrugged, turned, and walked of f.The dog, tongue lolling, hopped  of f the table and trotted of f at
its owner ’ s side, in search of more adventure.
I too k a deep breath, brushed mud of f my apron, smiled
thanks to Murray , and turned to wash my hands before dealing
with the next patient.
“Ha,” said Brianna, under her breath. “Got him!” She lifted
her c hin slightly , indicating som ething over my shoulder , and I
turned to look.
The next patient was a gentleman. A real gentleman, that is,
judging by his dress and bearing, both of which were a good
deal superior to the general run . I had noticed him hovering
near the edge of the clearing for some time, glancing back and
forth between my center of op erations and that of Murray ,
obviously in doubt as to which medico should have the
privilege of his custom. Evident ly the incident of the trapper ’ s
dog had tipped the balance in my favor .
I g lanced at Mur ray , who was looking distinctly po-faced. A
gentleman would likely pay in cash. I gave Murray a slight
shrug of  apolog y , then put on a pleasant professional smile,
and gestured the new patient onto my stool.
“Do sit down, sir ,” I said, “and tell me where it hurts.”
The gentleman was a Mr . Goodwin of Hillsborough, whose
chief co mplaint, it seemed, was a pain in his arm. This was not
his o nly trouble, I saw; a freshl y healed scar zigzagged down
the side of his face, the livid weal drawing down the corner of
his eye and giving him a most ferocious squint. A faint
discoloration over the cheek showed where some heavy object
had hit him square above the jaw , as well, and his features had
the blunt and sw ollen look of someone who had been badly
beaten in the not-so-distant past.
Gentlemen were  as likely to engage in brawls as anyone,
given suf ficient provocation, but this one seemed of rather
advanced years for such enterta inments, looking to be in his
middle fifties, with a prosperous paunch pressing against the
silver -buttoned waistcoat. Perhaps he had been set uponsomewhere and robbed, I thought. Not on his way to the
Gathering, though; these injuries were weeks old.
I fel t my way carefully over his arm and shoulder , making
him lift and mov e the arm sligh tly , asking brief questions as I
palpated the limb. The trouble was obvious enough; he had
dislocated the elbow , and while the dislocation had fortunately
reduced itself, I thought he had torn a tendon, which was now
caught between the olecranon process and the head of the ulna,
the injury being thus aggravated by movement of the arm.
Not that that wa s all; palpating my way carefully down his
arm, I discovered no fewer than three half-healed simple
fractures to the bones of his for earm. The damage was not all
internal; I could see the fading remnants of two lar ge bruises
on t he forearm above the sites of fracture, each an irregular
blotch of yellow-green with the darker red-black of deep
hemorrhage at the center . Self-d efense injuries, I thought, or I
was a Chinaman.
“Bree, f ind me a decent splint , will you?” I asked. Bree
nodded silently and vanished, leaving me to anoint Mr .
Goodwin’ s lesser contusions with cajeput ointment.
“How did you come by these injuries, Mr . Goodwin?” I
asked ca sually , sorting out a length of linen bandage. “Y ou
look as though you’ve been in q uite a fight. I hope at least the
other fellow looks worse!”
Mr . Goodwin smiled faintly at my attempted witticism.
“‘T was a battle, indeed, Mrs. Fraser ,” he replied, “and yet
no fight of my own. A matter of misfortune, rather—being in
the w rong place at the wrong tim e, as you might say . Still …”
He c losed the sq uinting eye in r eflex as I touched the scar . An
artless job by whoever had stitched it, but cleanly healed.
“Really?” I said. “Whatever happened?”
He grunted, but seemed not displeased at the necessity of
telling me.
“Y ou h eard the  of ficer this morning, surely , ma’am—
reading out the Governor ’ s words regarding the atrociousbehavior of the rioters?”
“I shouldn’ t think the Governo r ’ s words escaped anyone’ s
attention,” I murmured, pulling gently on the skin with my
fingertips. “So you were at Hil lsborough, is that what you’re
telling me?”
“Indeed it is.” H e sighed, but re laxed a little, finding that I
wasn’ t hurting him with my probings. “I live within the town
of H illsborough,  in point of fact. And if I had remained quietly
at h ome—as my good wife be gged me to do”—he gave a
rueful half-smile—”doubtless I should have escaped.”
“They d o say that curiosity kil led the cat.” I had spotted
something when he smiled, and pressed gently with my thumb
over the  discolored area on his cheek. “Someone struck you
across the face here, with som e force. Did they break any
teeth?”
He looked mildly startled.
“A ye, ma’am. But it’ s nothing you can mend.” He pulled up
his u pper lip, re vealing a gap where two teeth were missing.
One pre molar had been knocked out clean, but the other had
broken o f f at the root; I could see a jagged line of yellowed
enamel, gleaming against the dark red of his gum.
Brianna, arriving at this juncture with the splint, made a
slight gagging noise. Mr . G oodwin’ s other teeth, while
essentially whol e, were heavily crusted with yellow calculus,
and quite brown with the stains of tobacco chewing.
“Oh, I think I can help a bit there,” I assured him, ignoring
Bree. “I t’ s painful to bite there, isn’ t it? I can’ t mend it, but I
can draw the remnants of the broken tooth, and treat the gum
to prevent infection. Who hit you, though?”
He shrug ged slig htly , watching with a slightly apprehensive
interest as I laid out the shiny pliers and straight-bladed scalpel
for dentistry .
“T o tell the truth, ma’am, I scarcely know . I had but
ventured into the town to visit the courthouse. I am bringing
suit against a party in Edenton,” he explained, a frown formingon his face at the thought of it, “and I am required to file
documents in support of this act ion. However , I was unable to
transact my business, as I found the street before the
courthouse quite choked with men, many armed with cudgels,
whips, and rough implements of that sort.”
Seeing the mob, he had thought to leave, but just then,
someone threw a rock through  a window of the courthouse.
The crash of glass acted on the m ob like a signal, and they had
sur ged forward, breaking down the doors and shouting threats.
“I becam e conc erned for my fr iend, Mr . Fanning, whom I
knew to be within.”
“Fanning … that would be Edm und Fanning?” I was only
listening with half an ear , as I decided how best to approach
the extraction, but I did recognize that name. Farquard
Campbell had mentioned Fanning, while telling Jamie the gory
details o f the riots following in the wake of the Stamp Act a
few years previous. Fanning h ad been appointed postmaster
for t he colony , a  lucrative position that had likely cost him a
pretty p enny to acquire, and h ad cost him still more dearly
when he  had been obliged to resign it under force. Evidently ,
his unpopularity had escalated in the five years since.
Mr . Goodwin compressed his lips, tightening them to a
seam of disapproval.
“Y es, ma’am, that is the gentleman. And whatever scandal
folk do spread a bout him, he has ever been a friend to me and
mine—so when I heard such grievous sentiments expressed, to
the threat of his life, I determined that I must go to his aid.”
In this gallant endeavor , Mr . G oodwin had been less than
successful.
“I tr ied t o force a path through t he crowd,” he said, his eyes
fixed on my ha nds as I laid his arm along the splint and
arranged the linen bandage beneath it. “I could not make much
way , though, and had barely gai ned the foot of the steps, when
there cam e a great shout from w ithin, and the crowd fell back,
carrying me with it.”Struggling to keep his feet, Mr . Goodwin had been horrified
to see Edmund Fanning dragged bodily through the courthouse
door , kn ocked down, and then p ulled feet first down the steps,
his head striking each one in turn.
“Such a noise as it made,” he said, shuddering. “I could hear
it above  the shouting, thumping like a melon being rolled
downstairs.”
“Dear m e,” I murmured. “But he wasn’ t killed, was he? I
hadn’ t heard of any deaths at Hillsborough. Relax your arm,
please, and take a deep breath.”
Mr . Goo dwin to ok a deep breath , but only in order to utter a
loud sno rt. This was succeeded by a much deeper gasp, as I
turned the arm, freeing the tra pped tendon and bringing the
joint into good alignment. He w ent quite pale, and a sheen of
sweat broke out on his pendulou s cheeks, but he blinked a few
times, and recovered nobly .
“And if he wasn’ t, it was by no mercy of the rioters,” he
said. “‘T was only that they tho ught to have better sport with
the Chie f Justice , and so left Fanning insensible in the dust, as
they rus hed insi de the courthouse. Another friend and I made
shift to raise the poor man, and s ought to make of f with him to
a pla ce of shelte r nearby , when comes the halloo in our rear ,
and we were be set all at once by the mob. That was how I
came by this”—he raised his freshly splinted arm—”and
these.” He touched the weal b y his eye, and the shattered
tooth.
He frowned at me, heavy brows drawn down.
“Believe me, ma’am, I hope so me folk here are moved to
give up the names of the rioters, that they may be justly
punished for such barbarous wo rk—but were I to see here the
fellow w ho struck me, I shouldn ’ t be inclined to surrender him
to the Governor ’ s justice. Indeed I should not!”
His fists  closed slowly , and he  glowered at me as though
suspecting that I had the miscreant in question hidden under
my table. Brianna shifted unea sily behind me. No doubt shewas thinking, as I was, of Hobson and Fowles. Abel
MacLennan I was inclined to consider an innocent bystander ,
no matter what he might have done in Hillsborough.
I murmured something sympathetically noncommittal, and
brought out the bottle of raw w hisky I used for disinfection
and crude anesthesia. The sigh t of it seemed to hearten Mr .
Goodwin considerably .
“Just a bit of this to … er … fortify your spirits,” I
suggested, pouring him out a he althy cupful. And disinfect the
nasty en virons o f his mouth, too . “Hold it in your mouth for a
moment before you swallow—it will help to numb your
tooth.”
I tur ned to Bree , as Mr . Goodwin obediently took a lar ge
gulp of the liqu or and sat with his mouth full, cheeks puf fed
like a frog about to burst into song. She seemed a little pale,
though I  wasn’ t sure whether i t was Mr . Goodwin’ s story or
the view of his teeth that had af fected her .
“I d on’ t think I’ll need you any longer this morning,
darling,” I said, patting her arm  in reassurance. “Why don’ t
you go and see  whether Jocasta is ready for the weddings
tonight?”
“Y ou’re sure, Mama?” Even as she asked, she was untying
her blood-spotted apron and rolling it into a ball. Seeing her
glance toward the trailhead, I looked in that direction and saw
Roger lurking behind a bush, his eyes fixed on her . I saw his
face light when she turned toward him, and felt a small warm
glow at sight of it. Y es, they would be all right.
“Now then, Mr . Goodwin. Just y ou take a drop more of that,
and we’ll finish dealing with this little matter .” I turned back
to my patient, smiling, and picked up the pliers.6
FOR AULD LANG SYNE
R OGER W AITED A T THE EDGE of the clearing, watching
Brianna as she stood by Claire’ s side, pounding herbs,
measuring of f liquids into small bottles, and tearing bandages.
She had rolled up her sleeves, in spite of the chill, and the
ef fort of  ripping the tough linen made the muscles of her bare
arms flex and swell beneath the freckled skin.
Strong in the wrists, he though t, with a faintly disturbing
memory of Estella in Dic kens’ s Gr eat Expectations .
Noticeably strong all over; the wind flattened her skirt against
the solid  slope of hips and a long thigh pressed briefly against
the fabric as she turned, smooth and round as an alder trunk.
He wasn ’ t the only one noticing . Half the people waiting for
the attention of the two physicians were watching Brianna;
some—mostly w omen—with fa int and puzzled frowns, some
—all men—with a covert admiration tinged with earthy
speculation that gave Roger an ur ge to step into the clearing
and assert his rights to her on the spot.
W ell, let  them look , he thought, quelling the ur ge. It only
matters if she’ s looking back, aye?
He moved out of the trees, just a little, and her head turned
at once as she c aught sight of him. The slight frown on her
face melted at once, her face lighting. He smiled back, then
jerked his head in invitation, an d turned away down the path,
not waiting.
W as he suf ficiently petty to w ant to demonstrate to that
gang of gawper s that his woma n would drop everything and
come at his beck ? W ell … yes, he was. Embarrassment at that
realization was tempered by a pleasantly fierce sense of
possession at the sound of her st ep on the path above; yes, she
would  come to him.She had  left her work behind, but carried something in her
hand; a small p acket, wrapped in paper and tied with thread.
He put out a hand and led her  of f the path, down toward a
small copse where a scrim of t attered red and yellow maple
leaves of fered a decent semblance of privacy .
“Sorry to take you from your work,” he said, though he
wasn’ t.
“It’ s okay . I was glad to get awa y . I’m afraid I’m not all that
good at blood and guts.” She  made a rueful face at the
admission.
“That’ s all right,” he assured her . “It’ s not one of the things I
was looking for in a wife.”
“Maybe you should have been ,” she said, shooting him a
brooding sort of glance. “Here in this  place, you might need a
wife who can pull your teeth when they go bad, and sew your
fingers back on when you cut them of f chopping wood.”
The gray ness of the day seemed  to have af fected her spirits
—or per haps it was the job she had been doing. A brief glance
at the run of Claire’ s patients was enough to depress anyone—
anyone but Claire—with their parade of deformities,
mutilations, wounds, and ghastly illnesses.
At least what he meant to tell Brianna might take her mind
of f the more gru esome details of eighteenth-century life for a
bit. He cupped her cheek, and smoothed one thick red brow
with a chilly thumb. Her face  was cold, too, but the flesh
behind h er ear , beneath her hair , was warm—like her other
hidden places.
“I’ve got what I  wanted,” he said firmly . “What about you,
though? Y ou’re  sure ye don’ t want a man who can scalp
Indians and put dinner on the table with his gun? Blood’ s not
my main thing, either , aye?”
A spark of hum or reappeared in her eyes, and her air of
preoccupation lightened.
“No, I don’ t thi nk I want a bloody man,” she said. “That’ s
what Mama calls Da—but only when she’ s mad at him.”He laughed.
“And what will you call me, when you’re mad at me?” he
teased. She looked at him spec ulatively , and the spark grew
brighter .
“Oh, do n’ t worry; Da won’ t te ach me any bad words in
Gaelic, b ut Mar sali taught me a  lot of really evil things to say
in F rench. Do you know what un soular d  is? Un grande
gueule ?”
“ Oui, ma petite chou —not that I’ve ever seen a cabbage
with quite such a red nose.” He flicked a finger at her nose,
and she ducked, laughing.
“Maudit chien!”
“Save something for after the wedding,” he advised. “Y e
might need it.” He took her hand, to draw her toward a
convenient boulder , then noticed again the small package she
held.
“What’ s that?”
“A w edding present,” she said, and held it out to him with
two fingers, distasteful as though it had been a dead mouse.
He t ook it ginge rly , but felt no sinister shapes through the
paper . H e bounced it on his  palm; it was light, almost
weightless.
“Embroidery silk,” she said, in answer to his questioning
look. “From Mrs. Buchanan.” The frown was back between
her brows, and t hat look of … worry? No, something else, but
damned if he could put a name to it.
“What’ s wrong with embroidery silk?”
“Nothing. It’ s what it’ s for .” She took the package from him,
and tucked it into the pocket she wore tied under her petticoat.
She was  looking down, rearranging her skirts, but he could see
the tightness of her lips. “She said it’ s for our winding claes.”
Spoken in Brianna’ s odd version of a Bostonian Scots
accent, it took a moment for Roger to decipher this.“W inding cl—oh, you mean shrouds?”
“Y es. Ev idently , it’ s my wifely d uty to sit down the morning
after the wedding and start spinning cloth for my shroud.” She
bit the words of f through clenched teeth. “That way , I’ll have
it woven and embroidered by the time I die in childbirth. And
if I’m a fast wor ker , I’ll have time to make one for you, too—
otherwise, your next  wife will have to finish it!”
He w ould have laughed, had it not been clear that she was
really upset.
“Mrs. B uchanan is a great fool, ” he said, taking her hands.
“Y ou sh ould not be letting her worry you with her nonsense.”
Brianna glanced at him under lowered brows.
“Mrs. B uchanan,” she said precisely , “is ignorant, stupid,
and tactless. The one thing she isn’ t  is wrong.”
“Of course she is,” he said, with assumed certainty , feeling
nonetheless a stab of apprehension.
“How many wives has Farquard Campbell buried?” she
demanded. “Gideon Oliver? Andrew MacNeill?”
Nine, among the three of them . MacNeill would take a
fourth w ife thi s evening—an  eighteen-year -old girl from
W eaver ’ s Gor ge. The stab came again, deeper , but he ignored
it.
“And Jenny ban Campbell’ s borne eight children and
deviled two husbands into the ground,” he countered firmly .
“For that matter , Mrs. Buchana n herself has five bairns, and
she’ s cer tainly s till kicking. I’ve seen them; turnip-headed to a
man, but all healthy .”
That got him a reluctant twitch of the mouth, and he pressed
on, encouraged.
“Y ou’ve no need to fear , hen.  Y ou had no trouble with
Jemmy , aye?”
“Y eah? W ell, if you think it’ s no trouble, next time you  can
do it!” she snapp ed, but the corner of her mouth curled slightlyup. She tugged at his hand, bu t he held on, and she didn’ t
resist.
“So you’re willing there shoul d be a next time, are you?
Mrs. Bu chanan notwithstanding?” His tone was deliberately
light, but he drew  her close and held her , his face hidden in her
hair , for fear she  should see how  much the question meant to
him.
She wasn’ t fooled. She drew back a little, and her eyes, blue
as water , searched his.
“Y ou’d m arry me, but live celibate?” she asked. “That’ s the
only sure way . The tansy oil d oesn’ t always work—look at
Marsali!” The existence of baby Joan was eloquent testimony
to the inef fective ness of that particular method of birth control.
Still …
“There a re other  ways, I expect ,” he said. “But if you want
celibacy—then yes, you’ll have it.”
She laug hed, because his hand had tightened possessively
on her arse, eve n as his lips renounced it. Then the laughter
faded, and the blue of her eyes grew darker , clouded.
“Y ou mean it, don’ t you?”
“Y es,” h e said, and did, though t he thought of it lay heavy in
his chest, like a swallowed stone.
She sighed, and drew her hand down the side of his face,
tracing the line of his neck, the hollow of his throat. Her
thumb pressed against his hamm ering pulse, so he felt the beat
of it, magnified in his blood.
He meant it, but he bent his head to hers and took her
mouth, so short of breath he must have hers, needing so
ur gently to join with her that he would do it in whatever way
he m ight—hands, breath, mou th, arms; his thigh pressed
between hers, opening her legs. Her hand lay flat against his
chest, as though to push him of f—then tightened convulsively ,
grasping shirt and flesh together . Her fingers dug deep in the
muscle of his breast, and the n they were glued together ,openmouthed and gasping, front teeth scraping painfully in the
flurry of their wanting.
“I don’ t … we’re not …” He broke free for a moment, his
mind grasping dimly for the f ragments of words. Then her
hand fou nd its way under his k ilt, a cold, sure touch on his
heated flesh, and he lost all power of speech.
“Once more before we quit,”  she said, and her breath
wreathed him in heat and mist. “For old times’ sake.” She sank
to he r kn ees in the wet yellow le aves, pulling him down to her .
 
IT HAD ST AR TED raining aga in; her hair lay tumbled round
her , streaked with damp. Her eyes were closed, her face
upturned to the drizzling heavens, and raindrops struck her
face, rolling down like tears. She wasn’ t sure whether to laugh
or cry , in fact.
Roger la y with her , half on her , his weight a warm and solid
comfort, his kilt spread over the ir tangled bare legs, protection
from the rain. Her hand cupped the back of his head and
stroked his hair , wet and sleek as a black seal’ s fur .
He stirre d then, with a groan lik e a wounded bear , and lifted
himself. A draft of cold air struck her newly exposed body ,
damp and heated where they had touched.
“I’m sor ry ,” he muttered. “God,  I’m sorry . I shouldn’ t have
done tha t.” She opened one eye to a slit; he rose to his knees
above her , swaying, and bent to  pull her crumpled skirt down
into decency . He’d lost his stock, and the cut under his jaw had
reopened. She’d torn his shirt, and his waistcoat hung open,
half its buttons g one. He was streaked with mud and blood and
there were dead leaves and acorn fragments in the waves of his
loose black hair .
“It’ s all right,” she said, and sat up. She was in no better
case; he r breasts were heavy w ith milk, and huge wet spots
had soaked through the fabric o f shift and bodice, chilling her
skin. Roger saw , and picked u p her fallen cloak, draping it
gently around her shoulders.“Sorry ,” he said again, and reach ed to brush the tangled hair
from her face; his hand was cold against her cheek.
“It’ s oka y ,” she said, trying to gather all the stray fragments
of herse lf that seemed to be rolli ng round the tiny clearing like
beads of  mercury . “It’ s only six  months, and I’m still nursing
Jemmy . It’ s—I mean, I think it’ s still safe.” But for how much
longer? she wondered. Little jo lts of desire still shot through
her , mingled with spurts of dread.
She had to touch him. She picke d up one corner of her cloak
and pressed it to  the seeping wound beneath his jaw . Celibacy?
When the feel of him, the smell of him, the memory of the last
few minutes, made her want to  knock him flat in the leaves
and do it all aga in? When tenderness for him welled up in her
like the milk that rushed unbidden to her breasts?
Her breasts ached with unsatisfied desire, and she felt
dribbles of milk run tickling do wn her ribs beneath the cloth.
She touc hed one  breast, heavy and swollen, her guarantee of
safety—for a while.
Roger put away her hand, reaching up to touch the cut.
“It’ s all right,” he said. “It’ s stopped bleeding.” He wore the
oddest expressi on—or express ions. Normally his face was
pleasantly reserved, even a little stern. Now his features
seemed unable to settle themselves, shifting from moment to
moment between a look of unde niable satisfaction and one of
just as undeniable dismay .
“What’ s the matter , Roger?”
He s hot her a quick glance, then looked away , a slight flush
rising in his cheeks.
“Oh,” h e said. “W ell. It’ s only that we … er … we aren’ t
actually married at the moment.”
“W ell, of course not. The wedding’ s not ‘til tonight.
Speaking of which …” She loo ked at Roger , and a bubble of
laughter rose from the pit of her  stomach. “Oh, dear ,” she said,
fighting back a fit of giggles. “Y ou look like somebody’ s had
their will of you in the woods, Mr . MacKenzie.”“V ery funny , Mrs. Mac,” he said, eyeing her own
bedraggled state . “Y e’ve been in a rare fight, too, by the looks
of you. But what I meant was that we’ve been handfast for the
last year—and that’ s legally binding, in Scotland at least. But
the year and a day have been up for a bit—and we’re not
formally married ‘til this evening.”
She squinted at him, wiping ra in out of her eyes with the
back of one hand, and once more gave way to the ur ge to
laugh.
“My God, you think it matters ?”
He grinned back, a little reluctantly .
“W ell, n o. It’ s only I’m a preac her ’ s lad; I know it’ s fine—
but somewhere inside is an old Scotch Calvinist, muttering
that it’ s just a wee bit wicked, to be carrying on so with a
woman not really my wife.”
“Ha,” she said, and settled he r arms comfortably on her
drawn-up knees. She leaned to one side and nudged him
gently .
“Old Scotch Calvinist, my ass. What is it, really?”
He wouldn’ t look directly at her , but kept his eyes down,
looking at the ground. Droplets glittered on his strongly
marked dark brows and lash es, gilding the skin of his
cheekbones with silver . He drew a deep breath, and let it out
slowly .
“I can’ t say you’re not right to be afraid,” he said quietly . “I
hadn’ t re alized—not really thou ght about it before today—just
how dan gerous marriage is for a woman.” He looked up and
smiled a t her , though the look of worry stayed in his moss-
green eyes.
“I w ant you, Bre e—more than I can say . It’ s only that I was
thinking of what we just did  and how fine it was—and
realizing that I’ll maybe—no, I will —be risking your life if I
keep on doing it. But damned if I want to stop!”The small strands of dread had coalesced into a cold snake
that ran  down her backbone a nd coiled deep in her belly ,
twisting around her womb. She knew what he wanted, and it
wasn’ t only the thing they’d just shared—powerful as that
was. Kn owing w hat he wanted, though—and why—how could
she hesitate to give it to him?
“Y eah.” She took a breath to ma tch his, and blew it out in a
plume o f white. “W ell, it’ s too late to worry about that, I
think.” She looked at him and touched his arm. “I want you,
Roger .” She pulled down his head and kissed him, taking
comfort from her fears in the strength of his arm around her ,
the warmth of his body beside her .
“Oh, God, Bree,” he murmured into her hair . “I want to tell
you that I’ll k eep you safe, save you and Jemmy from
anything that might threaten you —ever . It’ s a terrible thing, to
think it might be me that would  be the threat, that I could kill
you with my love—but it’ s true.”
His heart was beating under her ear , solid and steady . She
felt the warmth return to her han ds, clasped tight on the bones
of his back, and the thaw reached deeper , uncoiling some of
the frozen strands of fear inside her .
“It’ s all right,” she said at last , wanting to of fer him the
comfort he could not quite give her . “I’m sure it’ll be okay .
I’ve got the hips for it, everybod y says so. Jugbutt, that’ s me.”
She ran a hand r uefully down the lush swell of one hip, and he
smiled, following her hand with his own.
“Y ou kn ow what Ronnie Sinclair said to me last night? He
was wat ching y ou bend down t o pick up a stick of wood for
the fire, and he sighed and said, ‘Y e ken how to pick a good
lass, Ma cKenzie? Start at the bo ttom and work your way up!’
Oof!” He recoiled, laughing, as she slugged him.
Then he bent an d kissed her , ve ry gently . The rain was still
falling, p attering on the layer of  dead leaves. Her fingers were
sticky with the blood from his wound.“Y ou want a baby , don’ t you?” she asked softly . “One you
know is yours?”
He k ept his head  bent for a moment, but at last looked up at
her , letting her see the answer in his face; a great yearning,
mingled with anxious concern.
“I don’ t  mean—” he began, bu t she put a hand across his
mouth to stop him.
“I know ,” she said. “I understand.” She did—almost. She
was an only child, as he was ; she knew the yearning for
connection and closeness—but hers had been gratified. She
had had  not one loving father but two. A mother who had
loved her beyond the bounds of  space and time. The Murrays
of L allybroch, that unexpected g ift of family . And most of all,
her son, her fles h, her blood, a small and trusting weight that
anchored her firmly to the universe.
But Rog er was an orphan, alone in the world for such a long
time. His parents gone before he knew them, his old uncle
dead—he had no one to claim h im, no one to love him for the
sake only of his flesh and bone—no one save her . Little
wonder if he hu ngered for the certainty she held in her arms
when she nursed her child.
He cleared his throat suddenly .
“I—ah—I was going to give ye this tonight. But maybe …
well.” He reached into the inner  pocket of his coat and handed
her a soft bundle, wrapped in cloth.
“Sort of  a wedding present, aye ?” He was smiling, but she
could see the uncertainty in his eyes.
She opened the c loth, and a pair of black button eyes looked
up at her . The doll wore a shapeless smock of green calico,
and red -yarn hair exploded from its head. Her heart beat
heavily in her chest, and her throat tightened.
“I thought the wean might like it—to chew on, perhaps.”
She moved, and the pressure of the sodden fabric on her
breasts made them tingle. She was afraid, all right; but therewere things stronger than fear .
“There’ll be a n ext time,” she s aid, and laid a hand on his
arm. “I can’ t say when—but there will.”
He laid his hand on hers and squeezed it tight, not looking at
her .
“Thanks, Jugbutt,” he said at last, very softly .
 
THE RA IN W AS HEA VIER; it was pissing down now . Roger
thumbed the wet hair out of his  eyes and shook himself like a
dog, sca ttering drops from the tight-woven wool of coat and
plaid. T here wa s a smear of mud down the front of the gray
wool; he brushed at it, to no ef fect.
“Christ, I can’ t be getting marri ed like this,” he said, trying
to lighten the mood between them. “I look like a beggar .”
“It’ s not too late, you know ,” she said. She smiled, teasing a
little tremulously . “Y ou could still back out.”
“It’ s bee n too late for me since the day I saw you,” he said
gruf fly . “Besides,” he added, lifting one brow , “your father
would g ut me like a hog if I sa id I’d had second thoughts on
the matter .”
“Ha,” she said, but the hidden smile popped out, dimpling
one cheek.
“Bloody woman! Y ou like the idea!”
“Y es. No , I mean.” She was laughing again now; that’ s what
he’d wanted. “I don’ t want him to gut you. It’ s just nice to
know he would . A father ought to be protective.”
She smi led at him, touched him lightly . “Like you, Mr .
MacKenzie.”
That gave him a n odd, tight feeling in the chest, as though
his w aistcoat had shrunk. Then a tinge of cold, as he recalled
what he had to tell her . Fathers and their notions of protection
varied, after all, and he wasn’ t sure how she would see this
one.He t ook her arm  and drew her away , out of the rain and into
the shelter of a clump of hemlocks, where the layers of needles
lay dry and fragrant underfoot, protected by the wide-
spreading branches overhead.
“W ell, come and sit with me a moment, Mrs. Mac. It’ s not
important, but there’ s a small thing I wanted to tell you about
before th e wedd ing.” He drew h er down to sit beside him on a
rotting l og, ruste d with lichen. H e cleared his throat, gathering
the thread of his story .
“When I was in Inverness, before I followed you through
the stones, I spent some time trolling through the Reverend’ s
bumf, an d I came across a letter  to him, written by your father .
By F rank Randall, I mean. It’ s no great matter—not now—but
I tho ught … well, I thought perhaps there should be no secrets
between us, before we marry . I told your father about it last
night. So let me tell you now .”
Her hand lay w arm in his, but the fingers tightened as he
talked, and a d eep line grew between her brows as she
listened.
“Again,” she said, when he’d fin ished. “T ell me that again.”
Obligingly , he repeated the letter—as he’d memorized it,
word for word. As he’d told it the night before, to Jamie
Fraser .
“That g ravestone in Scotland with Da’ s name on it is a
fake ?” Her voice r ose slightly with astonishment. “Dad—
Frank—had the Reverend mak e it, and put it there, in the
kirkyard at St. K ilda, but Da isn’ t—won’ t be, I mean—won’ t
be under it?”
“Y es, he did, and  no, he won’ t,” Roger said, keeping careful
track of the “he’ s” involved. “He—Frank Randall, that is—
meant the stone as a sort of ack nowledgment, I think; a debt
owed to your father—your other father , I mean; Jamie.”
Brianna’ s face was blotched with chill, the ends of nose and
ears nipped red as the heat of their lovemaking faded.
“But he couldn’ t know we’d ever find it, Mama and me!”“I don’ t  know that he wanted  you to find it,” Roger said.
“Perhaps he didn’ t know , either . But he felt he had to make the
gesture. Besides,” he added, struck by a memory , “didn’ t
Claire say that he’d meant to bring you to England, just before
he was killed? P erhaps he meant to take you there, make sure
you found it—then leave it to you and Claire what to do.”
She sat still, chewing that one over .
“He knew , then,” she said slowly . “That he—that Jamie
Fraser survived Culloden. He knew  … but he didn’ t say?”
“I d on’ t think y ou can blame him for not saying,” Roger
said gently . “It wasn’ t only selfish, you know .”
“W asn’ t it?” She was still shoc ked, but not yet angry . He
could see her turning it over , trying to see it all before making
up her mind what to think, how to feel.
“No. Th ink of it, hen,” he ur ged . The spruce was cold at his
back, th e bark of the fallen log damp under his hand. “He
loved your mother , aye, and didn’ t want to risk losing her
again. That’ s maybe selfish, but she was his wife first, after
all; no one could blame him for  not wanting to give her up to
another man. But that’ s not all of it.”
“What’ s the rest, then?” Her voice was calm, blue eyes
straight and level.
“W ell—what if he had  told her? There she was, with you, a
young child—and remember , neither of them would have
thought that you might cross through the stones as well.”
The eyes were still straight, but clouded once more with
trouble.
“She would have had to choose ,” she said softly , her gaze
fixed on him. “T o stay with us—or go to him. T o Jamie.”
“T o leav e you behind,” Roger sa id, nodding, “or to stay , and
live her life, knowing her Jamie  was alive, maybe reachable—
but o ut o f reach . Break her vow s—on purpose, this time—and
abandon her child … or live with yearning. I can’ t think that
would have done your family life much good.”“I see.” She sighed, the steam of her exhaled breath
disappearing like a ghost in cold air .
“Perhaps Frank was afraid to give her the choice,” Roger
said, “but he did save her—and you—from the pain of having
to make it. At least then.”
Her lips drew in, pushed out, relaxed.
“I wond er what her choice wou ld have been, if he had  told
her ,” sh e said, a little bleakly . He laid his hand on hers,
squeezed lightly .
“She would have stayed,” he said, with certainty . “She made
the c hoice once, did she not? Ja mie sent her back, to keep you
safe, and she went. She would have known he wanted that, and
she would have stayed—so long as you needed her . She
wouldn’ t have gone back, even  when she did, save that you
insisted. Y e ken that well enough, surely?”
Her face eased a bit, accepting this.
“I gu ess you’re right. But still …  to know he was alive, and
not try to reach him …”
He bit the inside of his cheek, to keep from asking. If it wer e
your choice, Brianna? If it was the bairn or me?  For how
could any man force a choice like that on a woman whom he
loved, e ven hyp othetically? Wh ether for her sake or his own
… he would not ask.
“But he did put that gravestone there. Why did he do that?”
The line  between her brows w as still deep, but no longer
straight; it twisted with a growing perturbation.
He hadn’ t known Frank Randall, but he felt a certain
empathy for the man—and not only a disinterested sympathy ,
either . He hadn’ t fully realized why he’d felt he must tell her
about the letter now , before the wedding, but his own motives
were be coming clearer—and more disturbing to him—by the
moment.
“I think it was obligation, as I said. Not just to Jamie or your
mother—to you.  If it—” he started, then stopped and squeezedher hand , hard. “Look. T ake we e Jemmy . He’ s mine, as much
as y ou a re—he a lways will be.” He took a deep breath. “But if
I were the other man …”
“If y ou were St ephen Bonnet,” she said, and her lips were
tight, gone white with chill.
“If I  were Bonnet,” he agreed, with a qualm of distaste at
the notion, “if I knew the child was mine, and yet he was being
raised by a stran ger—would I not want the child to know the
truth, sometime?”
Her fingers convulsed in his, and her eyes went dark.
“Y ou m ustn’ t te ll him! Roger , f or God’ s sake, promise me
you won’ t tell him, ever!”
He stare d at her in astonishment. Her nails were digging
painfully into his hand, but he made no move to free himself.
“Bonnet? Christ , no! If I ever see the man again, I’ll not
waste time talking!”
“Not Bonnet.” She shuddere d, whether from cold or
emotion, he couldn’ t tell. “God, keep away from that man! No,
it’ s Jemm y I mean.” She swallow ed hard, and gripped both his
hands. “Promise me, Roger . If you love me, promise that
you’ll never tell Jemmy about Bonnet, never . Even if
something happens to me—”
“Nothing will happen to you!”
She looked at h im, and a small, wry smile formed on her
lips.
“Celibacy’ s not my thing, either . It might.” She swallowed.
“And if it does … promise me, Roger .”
“A ye, I promise,” he said, reluctantly . “If you’re sure.”
“I’m sure!”
“W ould you not have wanted ever to know , then—about
Jamie?”She bit her lip at that, her teeth sinking deep enough to leave
a purple mark in the soft pink flesh.
“Jamie Fraser is not Stephen Bonnet!”
“Agreed,” he said dryly . “But I wasna speaking of Jemmy to
start wit h. All I meant was that i f I were Bonnet, I should want
to know , and—”
“He does know .” She pulled h er hand from his, abruptly ,
and stood up, turning away .
“He what ?” H e caught u p with her in two strides, and
grabbed her by the shoulder , tur ning her back to face him. She
flinched slightly , and he loosened his grip. He took a deep
breath, fighting to keep his voic e calm. “Bonnet knows about
Jemmy?”
“W orse than that.” Her lips were trembling; she pressed
them tig htly together to stop it, then opened them just enough
to let the truth escape. “He thinks Jemmy is his.”
She wouldn’ t sit down with him again, but he drew her arm
tightly th rough his and made he r walk with him, walk through
the f alling rain and tumbled sto nes, past the rush of the creek
and the swaying trees, until the movement calmed her enough
to ta lk, to tell him about her days left alone at River Run, a
prisoner of her pregnancy . About Lord John Grey , her father ’ s
friend, a nd hers; how she had confided to Lord John her fears
and struggles.
“I w as afraid yo u were dead. All of you—Mama, Da, you.”
Her hoo d had fallen back and sh e made no ef fort to reclaim it.
Her red hair hu ng in dripping rattails on her shoulders, and
droplets clung to her thick red brows.
“The las t thing Da said to me—he didn’ t say it, even, he
wrote it— he ha d to write it, I w ouldn’ t talk to him… .” She
swallowed and ran a hand ben eath her nose, wiping away a
pendant drop. “He said—I had to find a way to … to for give
him. B-Bonnet.”
“T o do what ?” She pulled her arm away slightly , and he
realized how hard his fingers w ere digging into her flesh. Heloosened his grip, with a small grunt of apology , and she tilted
her head briefly toward him in acknowledgment.
“He knew ,” she said, and stopped. She turned to face him,
her f eelings now in hand. “Y ou know what happened to him—
at W entworth.”
Roger gave a sh ort, awkward nod. In actuality , he had no
clear notion what had been done to Jamie Fraser—and had no
wish to know more than he did . He knew about the scars on
Fraser ’ s back, though, and kne w from the few things Claire
had said that these were but a faint reminder .
“He knew ,” she said steadily . “A nd he knew what had to be
done. He told me—if I wanted to be … whole … again, I had
to find a way to for give Stephen Bonnet. So I did.”
He had Brianna’ s hand in his, held so tight that he felt the
small sh ift of her bones. She had not told him, he had not
asked. The name of Stephen Bonnet had never been mentioned
between them, not until now .
“Y ou did.” He spoke gruf fly , and had to stop to clear his
throat. “Y ou found him, then? Y ou spoke to him?”
She brushed wet hair back from her face, nodding. Grey had
come to her , told  her that Bonnet had been taken, condemned.
A waiting transport to W ilmington and execution, he was being
held in the cellar beneath the  Crown warehouse in Cross
Creek. I t was there that she had gone to him, bearing what she
hoped was absolution—for Bonnet, for herself.
“I w as huge.” Her hand sketc hed the bulge of advanced
pregnancy befor e her . “I told him the baby was his; he was
going to  die, maybe it would be  some comfort to him, to think
that there’d be … something left.”
Roger felt jealousy grip his hear t, so abrupt in its attack that
for a  moment, he thought the pain was physical. Something
left , h e thought. Something of him. And what of me? If I die
tomorr ow—and I might, girl! Life’ s chancy her e for me as well
as you—what will be left of me, tell me that?He ough tn’ t ask, he knew that. He’d vowed never to voice
the thought that Jemmy was not his, ever . If there was a true
marriage between them, then Jem was the child of it, no matter
the c ircumstances of his birth. A nd yet he felt the words spill
out, burning like acid.
“So you were sure the child was his?”
She stopped dead and turned to look at him, eyes wide with
shock.
“No. No , of course not! If I knew that, I would have told
you!”
The burning in his chest eased, just a little.
“Oh. But you told him it was—you didn’ t say to him that
there was doubt about it?”
“He was  going to die! I wanted  to give him some comfort,
not tell him my life story! It wasn’ t any of his goddamn
business to hear about you, or our wedding night, or—damn
you, Roger!” She kicked him in the shin.
He staggered with the force o f it, but grabbed her arm,
preventing her from running of f.
“I’m sorry!” he said, before sh e could kick him again, or
bite him, which she looked prep ared to do. “I’m sorry . Y ou’re
right, it wasn’ t his business—an d it’ s not my business, either ,
to be making you think of it all again.”
She drew in a deep breath through her nose, like a dragon
preparing to sear him into ash. The spark of fury in her eyes
lessened slightly , though her cheeks still blazed with it. She
shook of f his hand, but didn’ t run away .
“Y es, it is,” she said. She gave him a dark, flat look. “Y ou
said there shouldn’ t be secrets b etween us, and you were right.
But whe n you tell a secret, sometimes there’ s another one
behind it, isn’ t there?”
“Y eah. But it’ s not— I don’ t mean—”Before he could say more, the sound of feet and
conversation interrupted him. F our men came out of the mist,
speaking casually in Gaelic. They carried sharpened sticks and
nets, and all we re barefoot, wet to the knees. Strings of fresh-
caught fish gleamed dully in the rain-light.
“A Smeoraich!”  On e man, peering out from under the
sodden b rim of his slouch hat, caught sight of them and broke
into a broad grin, as shrewd eyes passed over their
dishevelment. “It is yourself, Thrush! And the daughter of the
Red One, too? W hat, can you not restrain yourselves until the
darkness?”
“No doubt it is sweeter to taste s tolen fruit than to wait on a
blessing from a shriveled priest.” Another man thrust back his
bonnet on his head, and clasped  himself briefly , making clear
just what he meant by “shriveled.”
“Ah, no ,” said the third, wiping  drops from the end of his
nose as he eyed  Brianna, her cloak pulled tight around her .
“He’ s no  but after singing her a wee wedding song, is he not?”
“I k now the wo rds to that song, too,” said his companion,
his g rin broadening enough to show a missing molar . “But I
sing it still more sweetly!”
Brianna’ s cheek s had begun to blaze again; her Gaelic was
less flue nt than Roger ’ s, but sh e was certainly able to gather
the sens e of crude teasing. Ro ger stepped in front of her ,
shielding her with his body . The  men meant no harm, though;
they winked and grinned appreciatively , but made no further
comment. The first man pulled of f his hat and beat it against
his thigh, shedding water , then set to business.
“It’ s gla d I am to be meeting you thus, a Oranaiche . My
mother did hear your music at t he fire last night, and told it to
my aunt s and my cousins, how  your music was making the
blood da nce in her feet. So now they will hear nothing but that
you mus t come and sing for the  ceilidh at Spring Creek. It is
my y oungest cousin will be wed, and her the only child of my
uncle, who owns the flour mill.”“It w ill be a great af fair , surely!” put in one of the younger
men, the son of  the first speak er , by his resemblance to the
former .
“Oh, it’ s  a wedding?” said Roger , in slow , formal Gaelic.
“W e’ll have an extra herring, then!”
The two older men burst into laughter at the joke, but their
sons merely looked bewildered.
“Ah, the lads would not be knowing a herring, was it
slapped wet against their cheeks,” said the bonneted man,
shaking his head. “Born here, the two of them.”
“And where was your home i n Scotland, sir?” The man
jerked, surprised at the question, put in clear -voiced Gaelic. He
stared at Brianna for a moment , then his face changed as he
answered her .
“Skye,” he said softly . “Skeabost, near the foot of the
Cuillins. I am Angus MacLeod, and Skye is the land of my
sires and my grandsires. But my sons were born here.”
He spok e quietly , but there w as a tone in his voice that
quelled the hilarity in the you nger men as though a damp
blanket had been thrown over th em. The man in the slouch hat
looked at Brianna with interest.
“And were you born in Scotland, a nighean ?”
She shook her h ead mutely , drawing the cloak higher on her
shoulders.
“I was,” said Roger , answering a look of inquiry . “In Kyle
of Lochalsh.”
“Ah,” sa id MacL eod, satisfaction spreading itself across his
weathered featur es. “It is so, then, that you know all the songs
of the Highlands and the Isles?”
“Not all ,” said Roger , smiling. “But many—and I will learn
more.”
“Do that,” said MacLeod, nodding slowly . “Do that, Singer
—and te ach them to your sons. ” His eye lighted on Brianna,and a faint smile curled on his li ps. “Let them sing to my sons,
that they will know the place they came from—though they
will never see it.”
One of the younger men stepped forward, bashfully holding
out a string of fish, which he presented to Brianna.
“For you,” he said. “A gift for your wedding.”
Roger c ould see one corner of her mouth twitch slightly—
with humor or incipient hysteria? he wondered—but she
stretched out a hand and took the dripping string with grave
dignity . She picked up the edge of her cloak with one hand,
and swept them all a deep curtsy .
“Chaneil facal agam dhuibh ach taing,”  she said, in her
slow , str angely a ccented Gaelic.  I have no words to say to you
but thanks.
The you ng men went pink, and the older men looked deeply
pleased.
“It is good, a nighean, ” said MacLeod . “Let your hus band
teach you, then—and teach the  Gaidhlig  to your sons. May
you have many!” He swept of f his bonnet and bowed
extravagantly to her , bare toes s quelching in the mud to keep
his balance.
“Many sons, strong and healthy!” chimed in his companion,
and the two lads smiled and nodded, murmuring shyly . “Many
sons to you, mistress!”
Roger made the arrangements for the ceilidh automatically ,
not d aring to loo k at Brianna. T hey stood in silence, a foot or
two apart, as the  men left, casting curious looks behind them.
Brianna stared down into the mu d and grass where they stood,
arms crossed in front of her . Th e burning feeling was still in
Roger ’ s chest, but now it was dif ferent. He wanted to touch
her , to apologize again, but he thought that would only make
things worse.
In the end, she moved first. Sh e came to him and laid her
head on  his chest, the coolness of her wet hair brushing thewound in his th roat. Her breasts were huge, hard as rocks
against his chest, pushing against him, pushing him away .
“I need Jemmy ,” she said softly . “I need my baby .”
The words jammed in his throat, caught between apology
and anger . He had not realized how much it would hurt to
think of  Jemmy  as belonging t o someone else—not his, but
Bonnet’ s.
“I need him, to o,” he whispered at last, and kissed her
briefly on the forehead before taking her hand to cross the
meadow once again. The mountain above lay shrouded in
mist, invisible, though shouts and murmurs, scraps of speech
and music drifted down, like echoes from Olympus.7
SHRAPNEL
T HE DRIZZLE HAD ST OPPED by mid-morning, and brief
glimpses of pale blue sky show ed through the clouds, giving
me some hope that it might cl ear by evening. Proverbs and
omens quite aside, I didn’ t want the wedding ceremonies
dampened for Brianna’ s sake. It wouldn’ t be St. James’ s with
rice and white satin, but it could at least be dry .
I rubbed my right hand, working out the cramp from the
tooth-pulling pliers; Mr . Goodwin’ s broken tooth had been
more tr oublesome to extract than I expected, but I had
managed to get it out, roots and  all, sending him away with a
small bottle of r aw whisky , and instructions to swish it round
his m outh once an hour to prevent infection. Swallowing was
optional.
I s tretched, feeling the pocket u nder my skirt swing against
my leg with a small but gratifying chink . Mr . Goodwin had
indeed p aid cash; I wondered w hether it was enough for an
astrolabe, and what on earth Jamie wanted with one. My
speculations were disturbed, though, by a small but of ficial-
sounding cough behind me.
I turned around to find Archie Hayes, looking mildly
quizzical.
“Oh!” I said. “Ah—can I help you, Lieutenant?”
“W eel, t hat’ s as may be, Mistress Fraser ,” he said, looking
me over with a  slight smile. “Farquard Campbell said his
slaves ar e convi nced that ye can  raise the dead, so it might be
as a  bit of stray metal would po se no great trial to your skills
as a sur geon?”
Murray MacLeod, overhearing, uttered a loud snort at this,
and turned away to his own waiting patients.“Oh,” I said ag ain, and rubbed a finger under my nose,
embarrassed. O ne of Campbell’ s slaves had suf fered an
epileptic seizure four days before, happening to recover
abruptly from it just as I laid an exploratory hand on his chest.
In va in h ad I tried to explain wh at had happened; my fame had
spread like wildfire over the mountain.
Even now , a small group of slaves squatted near the edge of
the c learing, playing at knucklebones and waiting ‘til the other
patients should be attended to. I gave them a narrow eye, just
in case; if one of them were dying or dangerously ill, I knew
they would make no ef fort to te ll me—both from deference to
my white patients, and from the ir confident conviction that if
anything drastic should happen while they were waiting, I
would simply resurrect the corpse at my own convenience and
deal with the problem then.
All of them see med safely vertical at the moment, though,
and likely to remain so for the im mediate future. I turned back
to Hayes, wiping muddy hands on my apron.
“W ell … let me see the bit of metal, why don’ t you, and I’ll
see what can be done.”
Nothing loath, Hayes stripped of f bonnet, coat, waistcoat,
stock, and shirt, together with t he silver gor get of his of fice.
He h anded his garments to the  aide who accompanied him,
and sat down on my stool, his placid dignity quite unimpaired
by partia l nakedness, by the gooseflesh that stippled his back
and shoulders, or by the murmur  of awed surprise that went up
from the waiting slaves at sight of him.
His torso was n early hairless, with the pale, suety color of
skin that had gone years with no exposure to sunlight, in sharp
contrast to the w eathered brown of his hands, face, and knees.
The contrasts went further than that, though.
Over the milky skin of his left breast was a huge patch of
bluish-black tha t covered him fr om ribs to clavicle. And while
the nipp le on the right was a normal brownish-pink, the one on
the left was a startling white. I blinked at the sight, and heard a
soft “A Dhia!”  behind me.“A Dhia, tha e ‘tionndadh dubh!”  said another voice,
somewhat louder . By God, he is turning black!
Hayes a ppeared not to hear any  of this, but sat back to let
me make my examination. Close inspection revealed that the
dark coloration was not natural pigmentation but a mottling
caused by the presence of innumerable small dark granules
embedded in the skin. The nipple was gone altogether ,
replaced by a p atch of shiny w hite scar tissue the size of a
sixpence.
“Gunpowder ,” I said, running my fingertips lightly over the
darkened area. I’d seen such thin gs before; caused by a misfire
or shot at close range, which dr ove particles of powder—and
often bit s of wadding and cloth— into the deeper layers of the
skin. Sure enough, there were s mall bumps beneath the skin,
evident to my fingertips, dark fragments of whatever garment
he had been wearing when shot.
“Is the ball still in you?” I could see where it had entered; I
touched the white patch, trying to envision the path the bullet
might have taken thereafter .
“Half of it is,” he replied tranquilly . “It shattered. When the
sur geon went to dig it out, he gave me the bits of it. When I
fitted them together after , I couldna make but half a ball, so the
rest of it must have stayed.”
“Shattered? A wonder the pieces didn’ t go through your
heart or your lu ng,” I said, squatting down in order to squint
more closely at the injury .
“Oh, it did,” he  informed me. “At least, I suppose that it
must, for it came in at my breest as ye see—but it’ s keekin’
out from my back just now .”
T o t he a stonishment of the multitudes—as well as my own
—he wa s right. I could not only  feel a small lump, just under
the outer border of his left scapula, I could actually see  it; a
darkish swelling pressing against the soft white skin.
“I will be damned,” I said, and  he gave a small grunt of
amusement, whe ther at my surp rise or my language, I couldn’ ttell.
Odd as it was, the bit of shrapnel presented no sur gical
dif ficulty . I dipped a cloth into my bowl of distilled alcohol,
wiped the area carefully , sterilized a scalpel, and cut quickly
into the skin. Hayes sat quite still as I did it; he was a soldier
and a Scot, and as the markings  on his breast bore witness, he
had endured much worse than this.
I spr ead two fingers and pressed  them on either side of the
incision; the lips of the small slit pouted, then a dark, jagged
bit of metal suddenly protruded like a stuck-out tongue—far
enough for me to grasp it with forceps and pull it free. I
dropped the discolored lump into Hayes’ s hand, with a small
exclamation of triumph, then clapped a pad soaked with
alcohol against his back.
He expelled a long breath between pursed lips, and smiled
over his shoulder at me.
“I th ank ye, Mr s. Fraser . This wee fellow has been wi’ me
for some time now , but I canna say as I’m grieved to part
company with him.” He cupp ed his blood-smeared palm,
peering at the bit of fractured metal in it with great interest.
“How long ago did it happen?”  I asked curiously . I didn’ t
think the bit of shrapnel had actually passed completely
through his body , though it certainly gave the illusion of
having done so. More likely , I thought, it had remained near
the surfa ce of the original wound, and traveled slowly round
the torso, propelled between skin and muscle by Hayes’ s
movements, until reaching its present location.
“Oh, tw enty yea r and more, mi stress,” he said. He touched
the patc h of tough, numbed wh ite that had once been one of
the most sensitive spots on h is body . “That happened at
Culloden.”
He s poke casually , but I felt goo seflesh ripple over my arms
at the name. T w enty years and m ore … twenty-five, more like.
At which point …
“Y ou can’ t have been more than twelve!” I said.“No,” he replied, one eyebrow lifted. “Eleven. My birthday
was the next day , though.”
I ch oked back w hatever I might have said in reply . I had
thought I had los t my capacity to  be shocked by the realities of
the past, but evid ently not. Someone had shot him—an eleven-
year -old boy—at point-blank range. No chance of mistake, no
shot gon e awry in the heat of battle. The man who had shot
him had known it was a child he meant to kill—and had fired,
anyway .
My lips pressed tight as I exam ined my incision. No more
than an inch long, and not deep;  the fractured ball had lain just
below the surface. Good, it wou ldn’ t need stitching. I pressed
a clean pad to the wound and moved in front of him, to fasten
the linen strip that bound it in place.
“A miracle you survived,” I said.
“It was that,” he agreed. “I wa s lyin’ on the ground, and
Murchison’ s face over me, and I—”
“Murchison!” T he exclamation popped out of me, and I saw
a fl icker of sat isfaction cross Hayes’ s face. I had a brief
premonitory qualm, remembering what Jamie had said about
Hayes the night before. He t hinks mor e than he says, does wee
Ar chie—and he talks quite a lot . Be car eful of him, Sassenach.
W ell, a little lat e for caution—but I doubted it could matter;
even if it had  been the same Murchison—
“Y ou’ll ken the name, I see,” Hayes observed pleasantly . “I
had hea rd in England that a Ser geant Murchison of the 26th
was sen t to North Carolina. Bu t the garrison at Cross Creek
was gone when we reached the town—a fire, was it?”
“Er , yes,” I said, rather edgy at this reference. I was glad
that Bree had le ft; only two people knew the whole truth of
what had happened when the Crown’ s warehouse on Cross
Creek burned, and she was one of them. As for the other—
well, St ephen Bonnet was not likely to cross paths with the
Lieutenant anytime soon—if Bonnet himself was still alive.“And the men of the garrison,” Hayes pursued, “Murchison
and the rest—where have they gone, d’ye know?”
“Ser geant Murchison is dead,” said a deep, soft voice
behind me. “Alas.”
Hayes looked beyond me and smiled.
“A Sheumais ruaidh,”  he said. “I did think ye might come
to your wife, sooner or later . I’ve been seekin’ ye the morn.”
I wa s startled a t the name, an d so was Jamie; a look of
surprise flashed across his features, then disappeared, replaced
by w ariness. No one had calle d him “Red Jamie” since the
days of the Rising.
“I h eard,” he said dryly . He sat down on my extra stool,
facing Hayes. “Let’ s have it, then. What is it?”
Hayes p ulled up the sporran that dangled between his knees,
rummaged for a moment, and pulled out a square of folded
paper , secured with a red wax seal, marked with a crest I
recognized. My heart skipped a beat at the sight; I somehow
doubted that Governor T ryon was sending me a belated
birthday wish.
Hayes tu rned it over , checked ca refully to see that the name
inscribed on the front was Jam ie’ s, and handed it across. T o
my surp rise, Jamie didn’ t open it at once, but sat holding it,
eyes fixed on Hayes’ s face.
“What brought ye here?” he asked abruptly .
“Ah, du ty , to be sure,” Hayes answered, thin brows arched
in innoc ent astonishment. “Does a soldier do aught for any
other reason?”
“Duty ,” Jamie repeated. He tapped the missive idly against
his leg. “A ye, w ell. Duty might take ye from Charleston to
V ir ginia, but there are quicker ways to get there.”
Hayes started to shrug, but desisted at once, as the
movement jarred the shoulder I was bandaging.
“I had the Proclamation to bring, from Governor T ryon.”“The Governor ’ s no authority over you or your men.”
“T rue,” Hayes agreed, “but why  should I not do the man a
service, and I could?”
“A ye, an d did he ask ye to do hi m the service, or was it your
own not ion?” Jamie said, a dis tinct tone of cynicism in his
voice.
“Y e’ve grown a bit suspicious in  your auld age, a Sheumais
ruaidh ,” Hayes said, shaking his head reprovingly .
“That’ s how I’ve lived to grow  as auld as I have,” Jamie
replied, smiling slightly . He pau sed, eyeing Hayes. “Y e say it
was a man nam ed Murchison who shot ye on the field at
Drumossie?”
I had finished the bandaging; Hayes moved his shoulder
experimentally , testing for pain.
“Why , ye kent that, surely , a Sheumais ruaidh . D’ye not
recall the day , man?”
Jamie’ s face changed subtly , and I felt a small tremor of
unease. The fact was that Jamie had almost no memory of the
last day of the clans, of the slaughter that had left so many
bleeding in the rain—him among them. I knew that small
scenes f rom tha t day came back  to him now and again in his
sleep, f ragments of nightmare—but whether it was from
trauma, injury , or simple force of will, the Battle of Culloden
was lost to him —or had been, until now . I didn’ t think he
wanted it back.
“A grea t deal happened then,” he said. “I dinna remember
everything, no.”  He bent his head abruptly , and thrust a thumb
beneath the fold of the letter , opening it so roughly that the
wax seal shattered into fragments.
“Y our husband’ s a modest man, Mistress Fraser .” Hayes
nodded to me as he summoned his aide with a flip of the hand.
“Has he never told ye what he did that day?”
“There was a good bit of gallantry on that field,” Jamie
muttered, head bent over the l etter . “And quite a bit of thereverse.” I didn’ t think he was r eading; his eyes were fixed, as
though he were seeing something else, beyond the paper that
he held.
“A ye, th ere was,” Hayes agreed. “But it does seem worth
remark, when a man’ s saved your life, no?”
Jamie’ s head jerked up at that, startled. I moved across to
stand behind him, a hand laid lightly on his shoulder . Hayes
took the  shirt from his aide and put it slowly on, smiling in an
odd, half-watchful way .
“Y e dinna recall how ye struck Murchison across the head,
just as he was s et to bayonet me on the ground? And then ye
picked m e up and carried me f rom the field, awa to a bittie
well nea rby? On e of the chiefs lay on the grass there, and his
men were bathin’ his heid in the  water , but I could see he was
deid, he lay so still. There was someone there to tend me; they
wished ye to sta y , too, for ye were wounded and bleeding, but
ye w ould not. Y e wished me we ll, in the name of St. Michael
—and went back then, to the field.”
Hayes s ettled th e chain of his gor get, adjusting the small
silver cr escent beneath his chin. W ithout his stock, his throat
looked bare, defenseless.
“Y e look ed fair wild, man, for there was blood runnin’ doon
your fac e and your hair was loose on the wind. Y e’d sheathed
your sw ord to carry me, but ye  pulled it again as ye turned
away . I didna think I should see ye again, for if ever I saw a
man set to meet his death …”
He shoo k his head, his eyes half-closed, as though he saw
not the sober , stalwart man before him, not the Fraser of
Fraser ’ s Ridge—but Red Jamie, the young warrior who had
not gone back from gallantry , but because he sought to throw
his life away , feeling it a burden—because he had lost me.
“Did I?” Jamie muttered. “I had  … for gotten.” I could feel
the tension in h im, singing like a stretched wire under my
hand. A pulse b eat quick in the artery beneath his ear . There
were things he had for gotten, but not that. Neither had I.Hayes b ent his head, as his aide fastened the stock around
his neck, then straightened and nodded to me.
“I thank ye, ma’am, ‘twas most gracious of ye.”
“Think nothing of it,” I said, dry-mouthed. “My pleasure.”
It ha d co me on to rain again; th e cold drops struck my hands
and face, and moisture glimmered on the strong bones of
Jamie’ s face, caught trembling in his hair and thick lashes.
Hayes sh rugged himself into his coat, and fastened the loop
of his plaid with  a small gilt brooch—the brooch his father had
given him, before Culloden.
“So Mu rchison is dead,” he sa id, as though to himself. “I
did hear”—his fingers fumbled for a moment with the clasp of
the broo ch—”as how there were two brothers of that name,
alike as peas in the pod.”
“There were,” Jamie said. He  looked up then, and met
Hayes’ s eyes. The Lieutenant’ s face showed no more than
mild interest.
“Ah. And would ye know , then, which it was? …”
“No. But it is no matter; both are dead.”
“Ah,” H ayes said again. He stood a moment, as though
thinking, then bowed to Jamie, formally , bonnet held against
his chest.
“ Buidheachas dhut, a Sheuma is mac Brian . And may
Blessed Michae l defend you.” He lifted the bonnet briefly to
me, clap ped it on his head, and turned to go, his aide following
in silence.
A gust of wind blew through the clearing, with a chilly burst
of rain upon it, so like the freezing April rain of Culloden.
Jamie shivered suddenly beside me, with a deep, convulsive
shudder that crumpled the letter he still held in his hand.
“How much do you remember?” I asked, looking after
Hayes, as he picked his way across the blood-soaked ground.“Almost nothing,” he replied. He stood up and turned to
look down at me, his eyes as dark as the clouded skies above.
“And that is still too much.”
He h anded me t he crumpled letter . The rain had blotted and
smeared the ink here and there, but it was still quite readable.
By c ontrast to the Proclamation, it contained two  sentences—
but the additional period didn’ t dilute its impact.
 
New Bern, 20 October
 
Colonel James Fraser
 
Wher eas the Peace and good Or der of this Government has
been lat ely violated and much I njury done to the Persons and
Pr operties of many Inhabitants of this Pr ovince by a Body of
People who Stile themselves Re gulators, I do by the Advice of
his M ajesty’ s Council Or der and  dir ect you forthwith to call a
General Muster of so many Men as you Judge suitable to serve
in a Regiment of Militia, and make Report to me as soon as
possible of the Number of V olu nteers that ar e willing to turn
out in the Serv ice of their Kin g and Country , when called
upon, an d also what Number of  effective Men belong to your
Regiment who can be or der ed out in case of an Emer gency ,
and in case any further V iolence should be attempted to be
committed by the Insur gents. Y our Diligent and punctual
Obedience to these Or ders will be well r eceived by
 
Y our Obed’ t. Servant,
 W illiam T ryon  
 
I folded the rain-spotted letter neatly up, noticing remotely
that my hands were shaking. Jamie took it from me, and held it
between thumb and forefinger , as though it were some
disagreeable ob ject—as indeed  it was. His mouth quirked
wryly as he met my eyes.“I had hoped for a little more time,” he said.8
THE F ACT OR
A FTER BRIANNA LEFT T O RETRIEVE Jemmy from
Jocasta’ s tent, Roger made his way slowly up the hill toward
their ow n campsite. He exchanged greetings and accepted
congratulations from people he passed, but scarcely heard
what was said to him.
Ther e’ll be a next time,  s he ’d sa id. He held the words c lose,
turning them over in his mind like a handful of coins in his
pocket. S he hadn ’ t been just say ing it. She meant it, and it was
a pro mise that a t the moment me ant even more to him than the
ones she’d made on their first wedding night.
The thought of weddings reminded him, finally , that there
was in fact another coming. He glanced down at himself, and
saw that Bree hadn’ t been exaggerating about his appearance.
Damn, and it was Jamie’ s coat, too.
He bega n to brush of f the pine needles and streaks of mud,
but was  interrupted by a hall oo from the path above. He
looked up, to see Duncan Innes making his way carefully
down the steep slope, body canted to compensate for his
missing arm. Duncan had put on  his splendid coat, scarlet with
blue fac ings and gold buttons, and his hair was plaited tight
under a stylish new black hat. The transformation from
Highland fisherman to prosperous landowner was startling;
even Duncan’ s attitude seemed changed, more confident by
half.
Duncan was accompanied by a tall, thin, elderly gentleman,
very neat but threadbare in appearance, his scanty white locks
tied bac k from a high and balding brow . His mouth had
collapsed from lack of teeth, bu t retained its humorous curve,
and his eyes were blue and bri ght, set in a long face whose
skin was  stretched so tight across the bone as scarce to leave
enough to wrinkle round the eyes, though deep lines carvedthe mouth and brow . W ith a l ong-beaked nose, and clad in
rusty , tattered black, he looked like a genial vulture.
“A Smeoraich,”  Du ncan hailed Roger , lookin g pleased.
“The very man I hoped to find! And I trust you’re weel-fettled
against your marriage?” he added, his eyes falling quizzically
on Roger ’ s stained coat and leaf-strewn hair .
“Oh, aye.” Roger cleared his throat, converting his coat-
brushing to a brief thump of his chest, as though to loosen
phlegm. “Damp weather for a wedding, though, eh?”
“Happy the corpse the rain falls on,” Duncan agreed, and
laughed, a little nervously . “Stil l, we’ll hope not to die o’ the
pleurisy before we’re wed, eh, lad?” He settled the fine
crimson coat more snugly on his shoulders, flicking an
imaginary speck of dust from the cuf f.
“Y ou’re very fine, Duncan,” Roger said, hoping to distract
attention from his own disreputable state with a bit of raillery .
“Quite like a bridegroom!”
Duncan flushed a little behind his drooping mustache, and
his one hand twiddled with the crested buttons on his coat.
“Ah, well,” he said, seeming mildly embarrassed. “Miss Jo
did say as she didna wish to stand up wi’ a scarecrow .” He
coughed, and turned abruptly to  his companion, as though the
word had suddenly reminded him of the man’ s presence.
“Mr . Bug, here’ s Himself ’ s good-son, Roger Mac, him I tellt
ye o f.” He turne d back toward Roger , waving vaguely at his
companion, who stepped forward, extending his hand with a
stif f but cordial bow . “This will be Arch Bug, a Smeoraich .”
“Y our s ervant, Mr . Bug,” Roger said politely , slightly
startled to observe that the lar g e bony hand gripping his was
missing its first two fingers.
“Ump,” Mr . Bug replied, his manner indicating that he
reciprocated the  sentiment sincerely . He might have intended
to expand on th e subject, but w hen he opened his mouth, a
high-pitched feminine voice, a little cracked with age, seemed
to emer ge from it.“It’ s tha t kind, sir , of Mr . Fraser , and I’m sure as he’ll have
nay reason to r egret it, indeed he’ll not, as I said to him
myself. I canna tell ye what a blessing it is, and us not sure
where o ur next bite was comin’ from or how to keep a roof
above ou r heads! I said to Arch, I said, now we must just trust
in Chris t and Our Lady , and if w e mun starve, we shall do it in
a state of grace, and Arch, he says to me …”
A small, round woman, threadbare and elderly as her
husband, but likewise neatly mended, emer ged into view , still
talking. Short as she was, Roger hadn’ t seen her , hidden
behind the voluminous skirts of her husband’ s ancient coat.
“Mistress Bug,” Duncan whispered to him, unnecessarily .
“… and  no but a silver ha’penny to bless ourselves with,
and me a-wondering whatever was to become of us, and then
that Sall y McBride was sayin’ a s how she’d heard that Jamie
Fraser had need of a good—”
Mr . Bug smiled above his wife’ s head. She halted in mid-
sentence, eyes widening in shock at the state of Roger ’ s coat.
“Why , look at th at! Whatever have ye been up to, lad? Have
ye h ad an accid ent? It looks as though someone’ s knocked ye
down and dragged ye by your heels through the dung heap!”
Not wai ting for answers, she whipped a clean kerchief from
the bulging pocket tied at her w aist, spat liberally on it, and
began industrio usly cleaning the muddy smears from the
breast of his coat.
“Oh, yo u needn ’ t … I mean … er … thanks.” Roger felt as
though he’d been caught in s ome kind of machinery . He
glanced at Duncan, hoping for rescue.
“Jamie Roy’ s asked Mr . Bug to  come and be factor at the
Ridge.” Duncan seized the momentary lull af forded by Mrs.
Bug’ s preoccupation to give a word of explanation.
“Factor?” Roger felt a small jolt at the word, as though
someone had punched him just beneath the breastbone.“A ye, fo r times when Himself must be abroad or occupied
with other business. For it’ s true enough—fields and tenants
dinna tend themselves.”
Duncan spoke with a certain note of ruefulness; once a
simple fisherma n from Coigach, he frequently found the
responsibilities of running a lar ge plantation onerous, and he
glanced now at Mr . Bug with a small gleam of covetousness,
as though he thought momentarily of tucking this useful
person i nto his pocket and taking him home to River Run. Of
course, Roger reflected, that would have meant taking Mrs.
Bug, too.
“And just the thing it is, too, such  good fortune, and me
telling Arch just yesterday that the best we might hope for was
to find work in Edenton or Cross Creek, with Arch maybe
takin’ to the boats, but that’ s such a perilous living, is it no?
W et to the skin half the time and deadly agues risin’ up from
the swam ps like ghoulies and the air sae thick wi’ the miasma
as it’ s not fit to b reathe, and me perhaps to be takin’ in laundry
in the toon whilst he was gone abroad on the water , though
I’m sure I should hate that, for we havena been apart one night
since we married, have we, my dearie?”
She cast a glan ce of devotion upward at her tall husband,
who sm iled gently down at he r . Perhaps Mr . Bug was deaf,
Roger thought. Or perhaps they had only been married a
week?
W ithout his needing to inquire, though, he was informed
that the Bugs ha d been husband and wife for more than forty
years. A rch Bug had been a minor tacksman to Malcolm Grant
of Glenmoriston, but the years after the Rising had been hard.
The estate he ha d held for Grant having been confiscated by
the English Crown, Bug had m ade do for some years as a
crofter , but then had been obliged by hardship and starvation
to ta ke his wife  and their little remaining money and seek a
new life in America.
“W e had  though t to try in Edinbur gh—” the old gentleman
said, his  speech slow and courtly , with a soft Highland lilt. Sohe wasn’ t  deaf, Roger thought. Y et.
“—for I  had a cousin there as was to do wi’ one of the
banking houses, and we thought that perhaps it would be that
he could speak a word in someone’ s ear—”
“But I was far too ancient and lacked suf ficient skill—”
“—and lucky they would have been to have him, too! But
nay , suc h fools as they were, th ey wouldna think of it, and so
we had to come awa and try if we might …”
Duncan met Roger ’ s eye and hid a smile beneath his
drooping mustac he as the tale of the Bugs’ adventures poured
out in this syncopated fashion. Roger returned the smile, trying
privately to dismiss a niggling sense of discomfort.
Factor . S omeone to oversee matters on the Ridge, to mind
the planting, tend the harvest, deal with the concerns of tenants
when Jamie Fraser was away o r busy . An obvious necessity ,
with the recent influx of new tenants and the knowledge of
what the next few years would bring.
It w asn’ t until th is moment, though, that Roger realized that
he h ad subconsciously assumed that he  would be Jamie’ s right
hand in such af fairs. Or the left, at least.
Fer gus assisted Jamie to some extent, riding on errands and
fetching back information. Fer gus’ s lack of a hand limited
what he could do physically , though, and he couldn’ t be
dealing with the paperwork or accounts; Jenny Murray had
taught the French orphan her b rother had adopted to read—
after a fashion— but had failed utterly to give him a grasp of
numbers.
Roger stole a g lance at Mr . Bug’ s hand, resting now in
af fection on his wife’ s plump shoulder . It was broad, work-
worn, and strong-looking despite the mutilation, but the
remaining fingers were badly twisted with arthritis, the joints
knobby and painful in appearance.
So Jamie thought that even an elderly , half-crippled man
would b e better equipped than Roger to handle the af fairs of
Fraser ’ s Ridge? That was an unexpectedly bitter thought.He knew  his father -in-law had doubts of his ability , beyond
any father ’ s natural mistrust of the man bedding his daughter .
T otally tone-deaf himself, Jamie would naturally not value
Roger ’ s musical gift. And while Roger was decently sized and
hardworking, it was unfortunately true that he had little
practical knowledge of animal husbandry , hunting, or the use
of deadly weapons. And granted, he had no great experience in
farming or in running a lar ge estate—which Mr . Bug plainly
did. Roger would be the first to admit these things.
But he was Jam ie’ s son-in-law , or about to be. Damn it,
Duncan had just introduced him that way! He might have been
raised in  another time—but he was a Highland Scot, for all
that, and  he was well aware that  blood and kinship counted for
more than anything.
The husband of an only daughter would normally be
considered as the son of the house, coming only second to the
head of the hou sehold in authority and respect. Unless there
was something drastically wrong with him. If he were
commonly known to be a drunkard, for instance—or
criminally disso lute. Or feeble-minded … Christ, was that
what Jamie thought of him? A hopeless numpty?
“Sit ye doon, young man, an d I’ll attend to this  fine
boorachie,” Mrs . Bug interrupted these dark musings. She
pulled o n his sleeve, making clicking noises of disapproval as
she viewed the leaves and twigs in his hair .
“Look at ye, all gluthered and blashed about! Fightin’, was
it? Och, weel, I hope the other fellow looks worse, that’ s all I
can say .”
Before he could protest, she had  him seated on a rock, had
whipped a wooden comb from her pocket and the thong from
his hair , and was dealing with his disordered locks in a brisk
manner that felt calculated to rip several strands from his
scalp.
“Thrush, is it, they call ye?”  Mrs. Bug paused in her
tonsorial activit y , holding up a strand of glossy black and
squinting suspiciously at it, as though in search of vermin.“Oh, aye , but it’ s no for the color of his bonnie black locks,”
Duncan put in, grinning at Roger ’ s obvious discomfiture. “It’ s
for the singin’. H oney-throated as a wee nightingale, is Roger
Mac.”
“Singing?” cried  Mrs. Bug. She dropped the lock of hair ,
enchanted. “W as it you we heard last night, then? Singin’
‘Ceann-rara,’ and ‘Loch Ruadhainn’? And playin’ on the
bodhran with it?”
“W ell, it might have been,” Roger murmured modestly . The
lady’ s unbound ed admiration—expressed at great length—
flattered him, and made him ashamed of his momentary
resentment of her husband. Af ter all, he thought, seeing the
shabbiness of her much-mende d apron, and the lines in her
face, the old people had clearly had a hard time of it. Perhaps
Jamie had hired them as much from charity as from his own
need of help.
That ma de him feel somewhat better , and he thanked Mrs.
Bug very graciously for her assistance.
“W ill ye come along to our fire now?” he asked, with an
inquiring glance  at Mr . Bug. “Y e’ll not have met Mrs. Fraser
yet, I suppose, or—”
He was interrupted by a noise  like a fire engine’ s siren,
distant but obviously coming closer . Quite familiar with this
particular racket , he was not surprised to see his father -in-law
emer ge from one of the trails t hat crisscrossed the mountain,
Jem squirming and squalling like a scalded cat in his arms.
Jamie, looking mildly harried, handed the child across to
Roger . Roger took him and—for lack of any other inspiration
—stuck his thumb in the wide- open mouth. The noise ceased
abruptly , and everyone relaxed.
“What a sweet l addie!” Mrs. Bug stood a-tiptoe to coo over
Jem, wh ile Jamie, looking highly relieved, turned to greet Mr .
Bug and Duncan.
“Sweet” was not the adjective Roger himself would have
chosen. “Berserk” seemed more  like it. The baby was brightred in the face, the tracks of tears staining his cheeks, and he
sucked furiously on the sustaining thumb, eyes squashed shut
in a n ef fort to escape a patently unsatisfactory world. What
hair he had was sticking up in sweaty spikes and whorls, and
he had come ou t of his wrappin gs, which hung in disreputable
folds and draggles. He also smelled like a neglected privy , for
reasons which were all too obvious.
An expe rienced father , Roger at once instituted emer gency
measures.
“Where’ s Bree?”
“God knows, and He’ s no tellin g,” Jamie said briefly . “I’ve
been searchin’ the mountainside  for her since the wean woke
in my arms and decided he wasna satisfied wi’ my company .”
He snif f ed suspiciously at the hand which had been holding
his grandson, then wiped it on the skirts of his coat.
“He’ s not so very pleased with  mine, either , seems like.”
Jem was champing on the thumb, drool running down his chin
and over Roger ’ s wrist, uttering squeals of frustration. “Have
ye se en Marsali, then?” He knew  Brianna didn’ t like anyone to
feed Jem my but herself, but this  was plainly an emer gency . He
cast an eye abou t, hoping to spot a nursing mother somewhere
nearby who might take pity on the child, if not on him.
“Let me  have the poor wee bairnie,” said Mrs. Bug,
reaching for the baby and imme diately altering her status from
chattering busybody to angel of light, so far as Roger was
concerned.
“There, now , a leannan,  there, there.” Recognizing a higher
authority when he saw it, Jemmy promptly shut up, his eyes
rounded with awe as he regarded Mrs. Bug. She sat down with
the little boy on her lap and began to deal with him in the same
firm and  ef ficient manner with which she had just dealt with
his father . Roger thought that perhaps Jamie had hired the
wrong Bug to be factor .
Arch, t hough, was exhibitin g both intelligence and
competence, asking sensible questions of Jamie regardingstock, cr ops, ten ants, and so for th. But I could do that , Roger
thought, following the conversation closely . Some of it , he
amended honestly , as the talk suddenly veered into a
discussion of bag-rot. Perhaps Jamie was right to seek
someone more knowledgeable … but Roger could learn, after
all… .
“And who’ s the bonnie laddie, n oo?” Mrs. Bug had risen to
her feet, cooing over Jemmy , now respectably transformed
into a tightly sw addled cocoon. She traced the line of a round
cheek with one stubby finger , then glanced at Roger . “A ye,
aye, he’ s eyes just like his father , then, hasn’ t he?”
Roger flushed, for getting about bag-rot.
“Oh? I should say he favors his mother , mostly .”
Mrs. Bug pursed her lips, narrow ing her eyes at Roger , then
shook h er head decidedly , and patted Jem on the top of his
head.
“Not th e hair , maybe, but the  shape of him, aye, that’ s
yours, l ad. Those fine broad shoulders!” She gave Roger a
brief no d of approval, and kissed Jem on the brow . “Why , I
shouldna be surprised but what his een will turn green as he
ages, eit her . Mark me, lad, he’ll  be the spit of you by the time
he’ s grown! W on’ t ye, wee mannie?” She nuzzled Jemmy .
“Y e’ll be a big, braw lad like your Da, won’ t ye, then?”
It’ s t he usual thi ng folk say , h e reminded h imself, trying to
quell the absurd rush of pleasur e he felt at her words. The old
wifies, th ey always say how a bairn r esembles this one or that
one . H e discovered suddenly that he was afraid even to admit
the p ossibility that Jemmy could  really be his—he wanted it so
badly . H e told himself firmly th at it didn’ t matter; whether the
boy was  his by blood or not, he would love and care for him as
his son. He wou ld, of course. But it did matter , he found—oh,
it did.
Before h e could say anything further to Mrs. Bug, though,
Mr . Bug turned toward him, to include him courteously in the
men’ s conversation.“MacKenzie, is it?” he asked. “And will ye be one of the
MacKenzies of T orridon, then, or maybe from Kilmarnock?”
Roger had been fielding similar questions all through the
Gathering; expl oring a person’ s antecedents was the normal
beginning of any Scottish conversation—something that
wouldn’ t change a bit in the next two hundred years, he
thought, wariness tempered by the comfortable familiarity of
the process. Before he could answer , though, Jamie’ s hand
squeezed his shoulder .
“Roger Mac’ s kin to me on m y mother ’ s side,” he said
casually . “It will be MacKenzie of Leoch, aye?”
“Oh, aye?” Arch Bug looked impressed. “Y ou’re far afield,
then, lad!”
“Och, no more than yourself, sir , surely—or anyone here,
for that matter .” Roger waved briefly at the mountainside
above, f rom which the sounds o f Gaelic shouts and the music
of bagpipes drifted on the damp air .
“No, no, lad!” Mrs. Bug, Jemmy propped against her
shoulder , rejoined the conversation. “That’ s no what Arch is
meanin’,” she explained. “It’ s that you’re a good long way
from the others.”
“Others?” Rog er exchanged a look with Jamie, who
shrugged, equally puzzled.
“From L eoch,” Arch got in, before his wife seized the
thread of talk between her teeth.
“W e did  hear it on the ship, aye? There were a gaggle of
them, all MacKenzies, all from the lands south of the auld
castle. They’d stayed on after t he laird left, him and the first
lot, but now the y meant to go and join what was left o’ the
clan, and see could they mend their fortunes, because—”
“The laird?” Jamie interrupted her sharply . “That would be
Hamish mac Callum?” Hamish, son of Colum, Roger
translated to himself, and paused. Or rather , Hamish mac
Dougal—but there were only five people in the world who
knew that. Perhaps only four , now .Mrs. Bu g was nodding emphatic ally . “A ye, aye, it is himself
they were calling so. Hamish ma c Callum MacKenzie, laird of
Leoch. The third laird. They said it, just so. And—”
Jamie had evidently caught the knack of dealing with Mrs.
Bug; by dint of ruthless interruption, he succeeded in
extracting the story in less time than Roger would have
thought possible. Castle Leoch had been destroyed by the
English, in the pur ge of the Highlands following Culloden. So
much Ja mie had known, but, imprisoned himself, had had no
word of the fate of those who lived there.
“And no  great heart to ask,” he  added, with a rueful tilt of
the head . The Bugs glanced at each other and sighed in unison,
the same hint of melancholy shadowing their eyes that shaded
Jamie’ s voice. It was a look Rog er was well accustomed to by
now .
“But if Hamish  mac Callum st ill lives …” Jamie had not
taken hi s hand from Roger ’ s sh oulder , and at this it squeezed
tight. “That’ s news to gladden the heart, no?” He smiled at
Roger , w ith suc h obvious joy t hat Roger felt an unexpected
grin break out on his own face in answer .
“A ye,” he said, the weight on h is heart lightening. “A ye, it
is!” The fact th at he would not know Hamish mac Callum
MacKenzie from  a hole in the ground was unimportant; the
man was indeed kin to him—blood kin—and that was  a glad
thought.
“Where have they gone, then?”  Jamie demanded, dropping
his hand. “Hamish and his followers?”
T o Acadia—to Canada, the Bugs agreed. T o Nova Scotia?
T o Maine? No—to an island, th ey decided, after a convoluted
conference. Or was it perhaps—
Jemmy interrup ted the proceedings with a yowl indicating
imminent starvation, and Mrs. Bug started as though poked
with a stick.
“W e mu n be takin’ this puir lad to his Mam,” she said
rebukingly , dividing a glare impartially among the four men,as though accusing them collectively of conspiracy to murder
the child. “Where does your camp lie, Mr . Fraser?”
“I’ll guide ye, ma’am,” Duncan said hastily . “Come wi’
me.”
Roger s tarted after the Bugs, b ut Jamie kept him with a
hand on his arm.
“Nay , le t Duncan take them,” he said, dismissing the Bugs
with a nod. “I’ll speak wi’ Arch later . I’ve a thing I must say to
you, a chliamhuinn .”
Roger fe lt himself tense a bit at the formal term of address.
So, was this where Jamie told him just what defects of
character and background ma de him unsuitable to take
responsibility for things at Fraser ’ s Ridge?
But no, Jamie w as bringing out a crumpled paper from his
sporran. He handed it to Rog er with a slight grimace, as
though t he pape r burned his ha nd. Roger scanned it quickly ,
then glanced up from the Governor ’ s brief message.
“Militia. How soon?”
Jamie lifted one shoulder .
“No one can say , but sooner than any of us should like, I
think.” He gave Roger a faint , unhappy smile. “Y e’ll have
heard the talk round the fires?”
Roger nodded soberly . He had h eard the talk in the intervals
of the singing, around the edges of the stone-throwing
contests, among the men drinking in small groups under the
trees the day before. There had  been a fistfight at the caber -
tossing—quickly stopped, and with no damage done—but
anger hung in the air of the Gathering, like a bad smell.
Jamie rubbed a hand over his fa ce and through his hair , and
shrugged, sighing.
“‘T was luck I should have come across auld Arch Bug and
his wife today . If it comes to the fighting—and it will, I
suppose, later , if not now—then Claire will ride with us. Ishouldna like to leave Brianna to manage on her own, and it
can be helped.”
Roger felt the sm all nagging weight of doubt drop away , as
all became suddenly clear .
“On her own. Y ou mean—ye want me to come? T o help
raise men for the militia?”
Jamie gave him a puzzled look.
“A ye, who else?”
He p ulled the ed ges of his plaid higher about his shoulders,
hunched against the rising wind. “Come along, then, Captain
MacKenzie,” he  said, a wry note in his voice. “W e’ve work to
do before you’re wed.”9
GERM OF DISSENT
I  P EERED UP T HE NOSE of one of Farquard Campbell’ s
slaves, half my m ind on the nasal polyp obstructing the nostril,
the othe r half on Governor T r yon. Of the two, I felt more
charitably toward the polyp, and I intended to cauterize that
out of existence with a hot iron.
It seem ed so bloody unfair , I thought, frowning as I
sterilized my scalpel and set the  smallest cauterizing iron in a
dish of hot coals.
W as this  the beginning? Or one of them? It was the end of
1770; in  five years more, all of the thirteen Colonies would be
at w ar . But each colony wou ld come to that point by a
dif ferent process. Having lived in Boston for so long, I knew
from Bree’ s school lessons what the process had been—or
would be—for Massachusetts. T ax, Boston Massacre, Harbor ,
Hancock, Adams, T ea Party , all that. But North Carolina? How
had it happened—how would  it happen—here?
It could be happening now . Dissension had been simmering
for s everal years between the pl anters of the eastern seaboard
and the hardscrabble homesteaders of the western
backcountry . The Regulators were mostly drawn from the
latter class; the former were wholeheartedly in T ryon’ s camp
—on the side of the Crown, that was to say .
“All right now?” I had given  the slave a good slug of
medicinal whisky , by way of fortification. I smiled
encouragingly , and he nodded, looking uncertain but resigned.
I ha d never he ard of Regulators, but here they were,
nonetheless—and I had seen enough by now to know just how
much th e history books left out . W ere the seeds of revolution
being sown directly under my own nose?Murmuring soothingly , I wrapped a linen napkin round my
left hand , took firm hold of the slave’ s chin with it, poked the
scalpel up his nostril and severed the polyp with a deft flick of
the blade. It bled profusely , of course, the blood gushing
warmly through  the cloth round my hand, but evidently was
not very painful. The slave looked surprised, but not
distressed.
The cau tery iron was shaped like a tiny spade, a bit of
square, flattened metal on the end of a slender rod with a
wooden handle. The flat bit was  smoking in the fire, the edges
glowing red. I pressed the cloth hard against the man’ s nose to
blot the blood, took it away , and  in the split second before the
blood spurted out again, press ed the hot iron up his nose
against the septum, hoping again st hope that I’d got the proper
spot.
The slave made a strangled no ise in his throat, but didn’ t
move, though tears poured down  his cheeks, wet and warm on
my fingers. The smell of searin g blood and flesh was just the
same as the sc ent that rose from the barbecue pits. My
stomach growled loudly; the slave’ s bulging, bloodshot eye
met mine, astonished. My mouth twitched, and he giggled
faintly through the tears and snot.
I t ook the iron a way , cloth poised. No fresh blood flowed. I
tilted th e man’ s head far back , squinting to see, and was
pleased to find t he small, clean m ark, high on the mucosa. The
burn would be a vivid red, I knew , but without the light of a
scope, it  looked  black, a small scab hidden like a tick in the
hairy shadows of the nostril.
The man spoke no English; I sm iled at him, but addressed
his c ompanion, a young woman who had clutched his hand
throughout the ordeal.
“He’ll b e quite all right. T ell hi m, please, not to pick at the
scab. If there sh ould be swelling, pus or fever”—I paused, for
the next line should be—”go to your doctor at once,” and that
was not an option.“Go to your mistress,” I said, instead, reluctantly . “Or find
an herb-woman.” The present Mrs. Campbell was young, and
rather m uddleheaded, from the little I knew of her . Still, any
plantation mis tress should have the knowledge and
wherewithal to treat a fever . A nd if it should go past simple
infection and into septicemia …  well, there was not much
anyone could do, in that case.
I p atted the slav e’ s shoulder and sent him of f, beckoning to
the next in line.
Infection. That was what was brewing. Things seemed quiet
overall—after all, the Crown was withdrawing all its troops!
But dozens, hundreds, thousand s of tiny germs of dissent must
linger , f orming pockets of conflict throughout the Colonies.
The Regulation was only one.
A sm all bucket of distilled alc ohol stood by my feet, for
disinfecting inst ruments. I dipped the cautery iron in this, then
thrust it  back in the fire; the alcohol ignited with a brief,
lightless piff!
I had the unpleasant feeling that the note presently burning a
hole in Jamie’ s s porran was a similar flame, touched to one of
a millio n small fuses. Some might be stamped out, some
would fizzle on their own—but enough would burn, and go on
burning, searing  their destructive way through homes and
families. The end of it would be a clean excision, but a great
deal of blood would flow before the hot iron of guns should
sear the open wound.
W ere we never to have a little peace, Jamie and I?
 
“THERE’S DU NCAN MACLE OD, he’ s got three hundred
acres near the Y adkin River , but no one on it save himself and
his b rother .” Jamie rubbed a sle eve over his face, wiping of f
the shee n of moisture that clun g to his bones. He blinked to
clear his vision, and shook himself like a dog, spattering drops
that had condensed in his hair .“But,” he went on, gesturing t oward the plume of smoke
that marked MacLeod’ s fire, “he’ s kin to auld Rabbie
Cochrane. Rabbie’ s not come to the Gathering—ill wi’ the
dropsy , I hear—but he’ s got eleven grown bairns, scattered
over the  mountains like seed corn. So, take your time wi’
MacLeod, make  sure he’ s pleased to come, then tell him to
send word to Rabbie. W e’ll muster at Fraser ’ s Ridge in a
fortnight, tell him.”
He hesit ated, one hand on Roge r ’ s arm to prevent an abrupt
departure. He squinted into the haze, reckoning up the
possibilities. Th ey’d visited three campsites together , and got
the pled ges of four men. How many more could be found at
the Gathering?
“After Duncan, go across to the  sheep pens. Angus Og will
be there, surely—ye ken Angus Og?”
Roger nodded, hoping he recalled the correct Angus Og.
He’d met at leas t four men of that name in the last week, but
one of them had had a dog at heel, and reeked of raw wool.
“Campbell, aye ? Bent like a fishhook, and a cast in one
eye?”
“A ye, that’ s him.” Jamie gave a nod of approbation, relaxing
his grip. “He’ s too crabbit to fight himself, but he’ll see his
nephews come, and spread the word amongst the settlements
near High Point. So, Duncan, Angus … oh, aye, Joanie
Findlay .”
“Joanie?”
Fraser grinned.
“A ye, au ld Joan,  they call her . Her camp’ s near my aunt, her
and her brother , Iain Mhor .”
Roger nodded, dubious.
“A ye. It’ s her I speak to, though, is it?”
“Y e’ll have to,” Fraser said. “I ain Mhor ’ s got nay speech.
She’ s tw o more brothers who h ave, though, and two sons old
enough to fight. She’ll see they come.”Jamie cast an ey e upward; the day had warmed slightly and
it wasn’ t raining so much as misting—a mizzle, they’d call it
in Scotla nd. The clouds had thi nned enough to show the disk
of th e su n, a pale blurry wafer still high in the sky , but sinking
lower . Another two hours of good light, maybe.
“That’ll do,” he decided, wipi ng his nose on his sleeve.
“Come back to the fire when ye’ve done wi’ auld Joan, and
we’ll have a bit of supper before your wedding, aye?” He gave
Roger an up-cocked brow and a slight smile, then turned away .
Before Roger could move of f, he turned back.
“Say straight of f as you’re Captain MacKenzie,” he advised.
“They’ll mind ye better .” He t urned again and strode of f in
search of the more recalcitrant prospects on his list.
MacLeod’ s fire burned like a sm udge pot in the mist. Roger
turned toward it, repeating the names under his breath like a
mantra. “Dunca n MacLeod, Rabbie Cochrane, Angus Og
Campbell, Joan ie Findlay … Duncan MacLeod, Rabbie
Cochrane …” No bother; three times and he’d have it cold, no
matter w hether it was the word s of a new song to be learned,
facts in a textbo ok, or directions to the psychology of potential
militia recruits.
He cou ld see the sense of finding as many of the
backcountry Scots as possible now , before they scattered away
to their farms a nd cabins. And he was heartened by the fact
that the men Fr aser had approached so far had accepted the
militia summons  with no more than a mild glower and throat-
clearings of resignation.
Captain MacKenzie. He felt a small sense of embarrassed
pride at the title Fraser had casually bestowed on him. “Instant
Soldier ,” he muttered derisively  to himself, straightening the
shoulders of his sodden coat. “Just add water .”
At th e same time, he’d admit to a faint tingle of excitement.
It m ight amount to no more than  playing soldiers, now , indeed
—but the thought of marching with a militia regiment,
muskets shouldered and the smell of gunpowder on their hands
…It was less than four years from now , he thought, and
militiamen would stand on the green at Lexington. Men who
were no more soldiers to start with than these men he spoke to
in the rain—no more than him. A wareness shivered over his
skin, settled in his belly with an odd weight of significance.
It was coming. Christ, it was really coming.
 
MACLEOD W AS NO TROUBLE, but it took longer than
he’d thought to find Angus Og  Campbell, up to his arse in
sheep, a nd irascible at the distraction. “Captain MacKenzie”
had had little e f fect on the old bastard; the invocation of
“Colonel Fraser ”—spoken with a degree of menace—had had
more. Angus Og had chewed his long upper lip with moody
concentration, nodded reluctantly , and gone back to his
bar gaining with a gruf f, “A ye, I’ll send word.”
The miz zle had  stopped and th e clouds were beginning to
break up  by the time he climb ed back up the slope to Joan
Findlay’ s camp.
“Auld Joan,” to his surprise, wa s an attractive woman in her
mid-thirties, with sharp hazel eyes that regarded him with
interest under the folds of her damp arisaid.
“So it’ s come to that, has it?” sh e said, in answer to his brief
explanation of his presence. “I d id wonder , when I heard what
the soldier -laddie had to say this morning.”
She tap ped her lip thoughtfully with the handle of her
wooden pudding-spoon.
“I’ve an  aunt who lives in Hillsborough, ken. She’ s a room
in the King’ s H ouse, straight across the street from Edmund
Fanning’ s house —or where it used to be.” She gave a short
laugh, though it held no real humor .
“She wrote to me. The mob came a-boilin’ down the street,
wavin’ pitchforks like a flock o’ demons, she said. They cut
Fanning’ s house from its sills, and dragged the whole of it
down w i’ ropes, right before her eyes. So now we’re meant tosend our men t o pull Fanning’ s chestnuts from the fire, are
we?”
Roger was cautious; he’d heard  a good deal of talk about
Edmund Fanning, who was less than popular .
“I co uldna say as to that, Mrs. Findlay ,” he said. “But the
Governor—”
Joan Findlay snorted expressively .
“Governor ,” she said, and spat into the fire. “Pah. The
Governor ’ s frie nds, more like. But there—poor men mun
bleed for the rich man’ s gold, and always will, eh?”
She turn ed to two small girls who had materialized behind
her , silent as small shawled ghosts.
“Annie, fetch your brothers. W ee Joanie, you stir the pot.
Mind ye  scrape the bottom wel l so it doesna burn.” Handing
the spoon to th e smallest girl, she turned away , beckoning
Roger to follow .
It w as a poor camp, with no more than a woolen blanket
stretched betwe en two bushes to provide a shelter of sorts.
Joan Findlay squatted down before the cavelike recess so
provided, and Roger followed, bending down to peer over her
shoulder .
“ A bhrathair , here’ s Captain MacKenzie,” she said,
reaching out a hand to the man t hat lay on a pallet of dry grass
under the blanket’ s shelter . Rog er felt a sudden shock at the
man’ s appearance, but suppressed it.
A spasti c, they would have cal led him in the Scotland of
Roger ’ s own time; what did the y call such a condition now?
Perhaps nothing in particular; Fraser had said only , He has nay
speech.
No, nor proper movement, eithe r . His limbs were bony and
wasted, his body twisted into impossible angles. A tattered
quilt had  been laid over him, but his jerking movements had
pulled it awry , so that the cloth was bunched, wrenched hard
between his legs, and his uppe r body was left exposed, theworn shirt also rumpled and pu lled half of f by his struggles.
The pale skin o ver shoulder and ribs gleamed cold and blue-
toned in the shadows.
Joan Fin dlay cupped a hand about the man’ s cheek and
turned his head so that he could look at Roger .
“This will be my brother Iain, Mr . MacKenzie,” she said,
her voice firm, daring him to react.
The face too w as distorted, the mouth pulled askew and
drooling, but a pair of beautiful—and intelligent—hazel eyes
looked b ack at Roger from the ruin. He took firm grip of his
feelings and his own features, and reached out, taking the
man’ s cl awed hand in his own. It felt terrible, the bones sharp
and fragile under skin so cold it might have been a corpse’ s.
“Iain Mh or ,” he said softly . “I have heard your name. Jamie
Fraser sends ye his regards.”
The e yelids lowered in a graceful sweep of
acknowledgment, and came up again, regarding Roger with
calm brightness.
“The Captain’ s come to call for militiamen,” Joan said from
behind Roger ’ s shoulder . “The Governor ’ s sent orders, aye?
Seems h e’ s had enough o’ riot and disorder , so he says; he’ll
put it down by force.” Her voice held a strong tone of irony .
Iain Mhor ’ s eyes shifted to his sister ’ s face. His mouth
moved, struggling for shape, and his narrow chest strained
with ef fort. A few croaking syllables emer ged, thick with
spittle, and he fell back, breathing hard, eyes intent on Roger .
“W ill there be bounty money pa id, he says, Captain?” Joan
translated.
Roger hesitated. Jamie had addressed that question, but
there was no definite answer . He could feel the subdued
eagerness, thoug h, both in the woman behind him and the man
who lay  before him. The Findlays were grinding poor; that
much was plain from the little girls’ ragged frocks and bare
feet, fro m the threadbare clothes and bedding that gave IainMhor sc ant shel ter from the col d. But honesty compelled him
to answer .
“I don’ t  know . There is none advertised as yet—but there
may be.” The payment of bounty money depended on the
response to the Governor ’ s cal l; if a simple order produced
insuf ficient troops, the Governor might see fit to provide
further inducement for militiamen to answer the summons.
An expression of disappointment flickered in Iain Mhor ’ s
eyes, replaced almost at once by resignation. Any income
would have been welcome, but it was not really expected.
“W ell, then.” Joan’ s voice held the same resignation. Roger
felt her draw ba ck and turn aside, but he was still held by the
long-lashed hazel eyes. They met his, unflinching and curious.
Roger hesitated,  unsure whether to simply take his leave. He
wanted to of fer help—but God, what help was there?
He stretched out a hand toward the gaping shirt, the rumpled
quilt. Little enough, but something.
“May I?”
The hazel eyes closed for a moment, opened in
acquiescence, and he set about the chore of putting things
straight. Iain Mhor ’ s body wa s emaciated, but surprisingly
heavy , and awkward to lift from such an angle.
Still, it took no more than a few moments, and the man lay
decently covered, and warmer at least. Roger met the hazel
eyes again, smiled, nodded awkwardly , and backed away from
the grass-lined nest, wordless as Iain Mhor himself.
Joan Findlay’ s two sons had come; they stood by their
mother , sturdy lads of sixteen and seventeen, regarding Roger
with cautious curiosity .
“This w ill be Hugh,” she said, r eaching up to put a hand on
one shoulder , then the other , “and Iain Og.”
Roger inclined his head courteously .
“Y our servant, gentlemen.”The boys exchanged glances with each other , then looked at
their feet, smothering grins.
“So, Captain  MacKenzie.” Joan Findlay’ s voice came down
hard on the wor d. “If I lend ye my sons, will ye promise me,
then, to send them safe home?”
The woman’ s hazel eyes were as bright and intelligent as
her brother ’ s—and as unflinching. He braced himself not to
look away .
“So far as it lies in my power , ma’am—I will see them
safe.”
The edge of her mouth lifted slightly; she knew quite well
what wa s in his power and what  was not. She nodded, though,
and her hands dropped to her sides.
“They’ll come.”
He took  his leave then, and walked away , the weight of her
trust heavy on his shoulders.10
GRANNIE BACON’S GIFTS
T HE LAST OF MY P A TIENTS seen to, I stood on my toes
and stretched luxuriously , fe eling a pleasant glow of
accomplishment. For all the conditions that I couldn’ t really
treat, all the illnesses I couldn’ t cure … still, I had done what I
could, and had done it well.
I closed the lid of my medical chest and picked it up in my
arms; Murray had graciously volunteered to bring back the rest
of my impedimenta—in return for a bag of dried senna leaves
and my spare pill-rolling tile. Murray himself was still
attending his last patient, frowni ng as he prodded the abdomen
of a little old lad y in bonnet and  shawl. I waved in farewell at
him, and he gave me an abstracted nod, turning to pick up his
fleam. At least he did remember to dip it into the boiling
water; I saw his lips move as he spoke Brianna’ s charm under
his breath.
My feet were nu mb from standing on the cold ground, and
my back and shoulders ached, but I wasn’ t really tired. There
were people who would sleep tonight, their pain relieved.
Others who would heal well now , wounds dressed cleanly and
limbs set straight. A few whom  I could truthfully say I had
saved from the possibility of serious infection or even death.
And I had given  yet another version of my own Sermon on
the Mou nt, preaching the gospel of nutrition and hygiene to
the assembled multitudes.
“Blessed are those who eat gree ns, for they shall keep their
teeth,” I  murmu red to a red-ced ar tree. I paused to pull of f a
few of the fragrant berries, and crushed one with my
thumbnail, enjoying the sharp, clean scent.
“Blessed are those who wash th eir hands after wiping their
arses,” I  added, pointing a monitory finger at a blue jay who
had settled on a nearby branch. “For they shall not sicken.”The camp was in sight now , and with it, the delightful
prospect of a cup of hot tea.
“Blessed are those who boil water ,” I said to the jay , seeing
a plume  of steam rising from the small kettle hung over our
fire. “For they shall be called saviors of mankind.”
“Mrs. Fraser , mum?” A small voice piped up beside me,
breaking my reverie, and I looked down to see Eglantine
Bacon, aged seven, and her yo unger sister , Pansy , a pair of
round-faced, tow headed little girls, liberally sprinkled with
freckles.
“Oh, hallo, dear . And how are you?” I asked, smiling down
at th em. Quite w ell, from the lo oks of them; illness in a child
is gener ally visible at a glance , and both the small Bacons
were obviously blooming.
“V ery w ell, mum, thank ye kindly .” Eglantine gave a short
bob, then reached over and pus hed on Pansy’ s head to make
her curtsy , too. The courtesies observed—the Bacons were
townspeople, fro m Edenton, and the girls had been raised to
have nice manners—Eglantine reached into her pocket and
handed me a lar ge wad of fabric.
“Grannie Bacon’ s sent ye a present,” she explained proudly ,
as I unf olded th e material, which proved to be an enormous
mobcap, liberally embellished with lace and trimmed with
lavender ribbons. “She couldna come to the Gathering this
year , but she said as we must b ring ye this, and give ye her
thanks for the medicine ye sent for her … roo-mah-tics.” She
pronounced the word carefully , her face screwed up in
concentration, then relaxed, beaming in pride at having gotten
it out properly .
“Why , thank you. How lovely!” I held the cap up to admire,
privately thinking a few choice things about Grannie Bacon.
I had encountered that redoubtable lady a few months
earlier , at Farquard Campbell’ s plantation, where she was
visiting Farquard’ s aged and obnoxious mother . Mrs. Bacon
was almost as o ld as the ancien t Mrs. Campbell, and quite ascapable of annoying her descendants, but also possessed of a
lively sense of humor .
She had disapproved, audibly , r epeatedly , and eventually to
my face , of my habit of going about with my head uncovered,
it be ing her opin ion that it was unseemly for a woman of my
age not to wear either cap or kerch, reprehensible for the wife
of a man of my husband’ s position—and furthermore, that
only “backcountry sluts and women of low character” wore
their hai r loose upon their shoulders. I had laughed, ignored
her , and given h er a bottle of Jamie’ s second-best whisky , with
instructions to have a wee nip with her breakfast and another
after supper .
A w oman to acknowledge a deb t, she had chosen to repay it
in characteristic fashion.
“W ill ye not pu t it on?” Eglantine and Pansy were looking
trustfully up at m e. “Grannie told us to be sure ye put it on, so
as we could tell her how it suited ye.”
“Did she, indeed.” No help for  it, I supposed. I shook the
object out, twisted up my hair with one hand, and pulled the
mobcap on. It drooped over m y brow , almost reaching the
bridge of my no se, and draped my cheeks in ribboned swathes,
so that I felt like a chipmunk peering out from its burrow .
Eglantine and Patsy clapped their hands in paroxysms of
delight. I thought I heard muf fled sounds of amusement from
somewhere behind me, but didn’ t turn to see.
“Do tell your grannie I said thank you for the lovely present,
won’ t y ou?” I patted the girls gravely on their blond heads,
of fered them each a molasses to f fee from my pocket, and sent
them of f  to their mother . I was just reaching up to pull of f the
excrescence on my head, when I  realized that their mother was
present—had probably been there all along, in fact, lurking
behind a persimmon tree.
“Oh!” I said, co nverting my reach into an adjustment of the
floppy chapeau . I held the overhanging flap up with onefinger , t he better to peer out. “Mrs. Bacon! I didn’ t see you
there.”
“Mrs. Fraser .” Polly Bacon’ s face was flushed a delicate
rose color—no doubt from the chill of the day . She had her
lips pres sed tight together , but h er eyes danced under the ruf fle
of her own very proper cap.
“The girls wanted to give ye t he cap,” she said, tactfully
averting her gaze from it, “but my mother -in-law did send ye
another wee gift. I thought perh aps I’d best bring that myself,
though.”
I wasn’ t sure I wanted anything to do with any more of
Grannie Bacon’ s gifts, but took the prof fered parcel with as
much grace as I could manage. It was a small bag of oiled silk,
plumply stuf fed with something, with a faintly sweet, slightly
oily botanical scent about it. A  crude picture of a plant had
been drawn on the front in brownish ink; something with an
upright stalk and what looked like umbels. It looked faintly
familiar , but I co uld put no nam e to it. I undid the string, and
poured a small quantity of tiny dark-brown seeds out into my
palm.
“What are these?” I asked, looking up at Polly in
puzzlement.
“I d on’ t know what they’re ca lled in English,” she said.
“The Indians call them dauco . Grannie Bacon’ s own grannie
was a Catawba medicine woman, aye? That’ s where she learnt
the use of them.”
“W as sh e really?” I was more than interested now . No
wonder the drawing seemed fa miliar; this must be the plant
that Nayawenne had once shown me—the women’ s plant. T o
be sure of it, though, I asked.
“What is the use of them?”
The col or rose higher in Polly’ s cheeks, and she glanced
round th e clearin g to be sure no one was close enough to hear
before leaning forward to whisper to me.“They stop a w oman from getting wi’ child. Y e take a
teaspoonful each day , in a glass of water . Each day , mind, and
a m an’ s seed ca nna take hold in the womb.” Her eyes met
mine, an d while the light of amusement still lingered at the
backs of them, something more serious was there as well.
“Grannie said ye were a conjure-woman, she could tell. And
that bein’ so, ye’d have cause often to help women. And when
it is a m atter of miscarriage, s tillbirth, or childbed fever , let
alone th e misery  of losing a live babe—she said I must tell ye
that an ounce o’ prevention is worth a pound o’ cure.”
“T ell your mother -in-law thank you,” I said sincerely . The
average woman of Polly’ s age m ight have five or six children;
she had the two girls, and lacked the drained look of a woman
worn with ill-timed bearing. Evidently , the seeds worked.
Polly nodded, the smile breaking out on her face.
“A ye, I’ll tell he r . Oh—she said as how her grannie told her
it was women’ s magic; ye dinna mention it to men.”
I glanced thoughtfully across the clearing, to where Jamie
stood in conversation with Archie Hayes, Jemmy blinking
sleepily in the crook of his ar m. Y es, I could well see that
some men might take exception to old Grannie Bacon’ s
medicine. W as Roger one of them?
Bidding farewel l to Polly Bacon, I took my chest across to
our l ean-to, and tucked the bag o f seeds carefully away in it. A
very useful addition to my pharmacopeia, if Nayawenne and
Mrs. Bacon’ s grannie were cor rect. It was also a singularly
well-timed gift, considering my earlier conversation with Bree.
Even more valuable than the small heap of rabbit skins I had
accumulated, though those were more than welcome. Where
had I put them? I looked round the scattered rubble of the
campsite, half-li stening to the men’ s conversation behind me.
There they were, just under the edge of the canvas. I lifted the
lid o f one of the empty food ham pers to put them away for the
journey home.
“… Stephen Bonnet.”The name stung my ear like a spider ’ s bite, and I dropped
the lid with a bang. I glanced q uickly round the campsite, but
neither Brianna  nor Roger was within hearing distance.
Jamie’ s back was turned to me, but it was he who had spoken.
I pu lled the mo bcap of f my head, hung it carefully from a
dogwood branch, and went purposefully to join him.
 
WHA TEVER THE MEN had been talking about, they stopped
when they saw me. Lieutenant Hayes thanked me gracefully
once more for m y sur gical assistance, and took his leave, his
bland round face revealing nothing.
“What about  Stephen Bonnet?” I said, as soon as the
Lieutenant was out of earshot.
“That’ s what I was inquiring a bout, Sassenach. Is the tea
brewed yet?” Jamie made a move toward the fire, but I
stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“Why?” I demanded. I didn’ t let go my grip, and he
reluctantly turned to face me.
“Because I wish to know where he is,” he said evenly . He
made no pretense of not unders tanding me, and a small, cold
feeling flickered through my chest.
“Did Hayes know where he is? Has he heard anything of
Bonnet?”
He shook his he ad, silent. He w as telling me the truth. My
fingers loosened with relief, and he moved his arm out of my
grasp—not angrily , but with a sense of quiet and definite
detachment.
“It is  my bus iness!” I  said, answering the gesture. I kept my
voice low , glancing round to b e sure that neither Bree nor
Roger was within hearing. I didn’ t see Roger; Bree was
standing by the fire, absorbed in conversation with the Bugs,
the elderly couple Jamie had engaged to help care for the farm.
I turned back to Jamie.
“Why are you looking for that man?”“Is it not sense to know where danger may lie?” He wasn’ t
looking at me b ut over my shoulder , smiling and nodding at
someone. I glanced back to se e Fer gus heading for the fire,
rubbing a cold-reddened hand beneath his arm. He waved
cheerfully with his hook, and J amie lifted a hand halfway in
acknowledgment, but turned away a little, still facing me,
ef fectively preventing Fer gus from coming to join us.
The cold feeling returned, sharp as though someone had
pierced my lung with a sliver of ice.
“Oh, of course,” I said, as coolly as I could. “Y ou want to
know where he is, so that you can take pains not to go there, is
that it?”
Something that might have been a smile flickered across his
face.
“Oh, aye,” he said. “T o be su re.” Given the scarcity of
population in North Carolina in general, and the remoteness of
Fraser ’ s Ridge in particular , the chances of our stumbling over
Stephen Bonne t by accident were roughly equivalent to
walking out of the front door and stepping on a jellyfish—and
Jamie bloody knew it.
I na rrowed my eyes at him. Th e corner of his wide mouth
drew in for a moment, then relaxed, his eyes gone back to
seriousness. There was precisely one good reason for his
wanting to locate Stephen Bonnet—and I  bloody knew that .
“Jamie,” I said, and put a hand on his arm again. “Leave
him alone. Please.”
He put his own hand over min e, squeezing, but I felt no
reassurance from the gesture.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach . I’ve asked throughout the
Gathering, all through the week, inquiring of men from
Halifax to Charleston. There’ s n ay report of the man anywhere
in the colony .”
“Good,” I said. I t was, but the fact did not escape me that he
had been hunting Bonnet with assiduity—and had told menothing of it. No r did it escape me that he had not promised to
stop looking.
“Leave him alone,” I repeated softly , my eyes holding his.
“There’ s enough trouble coming; we don’ t need more.” He had
drawn c lose to me, the better to forestall interruption, and I
could feel the power of him where he touched me, his arm
beneath my hand, his thigh bru shing mine. Strength of bone
and fire of min d, all wrapped round a core of steel-hard
purpose that would make him a  deadly projectile, once set on
any course.
“Y e say it is your business.” His eyes were steady , the blue
of them bleached pale with autumn light. “I know it is mine.
Are ye with me, then?”
The ice  blossomed in my blood, spicules of cold panic.
Damn him! He meant it. There  was one reason to seek out
Stephen Bonnet, and one reason only .
I sw ung round on my heel, pu lling him with me, so we
stood pressed close together , arms linked, looking toward the
fire. Brianna, Marsali, and the Bugs were now listening raptly
to Fer gu s, who was recounting something, his face alight with
cold and  laughter . Jemmy’ s face was turned toward us over his
mother ’ s shoulder , round-eyed and curious.
“ They  are you r busine ss,” I said, my voice pitched low and
trembling with intensity . “And mine. Hasn’ t Stephen Bonnet
done enough damage to them, to us?”
“A ye, more than enough.”
He pulle d me closer to him; I could feel the heat of him
through his clothes, but his voice was cold as the rain. Fer gus’ s
glance flicked toward us; he smiled warmly at me and went on
with his  story . T o him, no doubt we looked like a couple
sharing a brief moment of af fection, heads bent together in
closeness.
“I le t him  go,” Jamie said quietly . “And evil came of it. Can
I let him wander free, knowing what he is, and that I haveloosed him to spread ruin? It is like loosing a rabid dog,
Sassenach—ye wouldna have me do that, surely .”
His hand was hard, his fingers cold on mine.
“Y ou let  him go once; the Crown caught him again—if he’ s
free now , it’ s not your fault!”
“Perhaps not my fault that he is free,” he agreed, “but surely
it is my duty to see he doesna stay so—if I can.”
“Y ou have a duty to your family!”
He took  my chin in his hand and bent his head, his eyes
boring into mine.
“Y e think I would risk them? Ever?”
I held myself stif f, resisting for a long moment, then let my
shoulders slump, my eyelids drop in capitulation. I took a
long, trembling breath. I wasn’ t giving in altogether .
“There’ s risk in hunting, Jamie ,” I said softly . “Y ou know
it.”
His grip  relaxed, but his hand  still cupped my face, his
thumb tracing the outline of my lips.
“I know it,” he whispered. The mist of his breath touched
my chee k. “But  I have been a hunter for a verra long time,
Claire. I willna bring danger to them—I swear it.”
“Only to  yourself? And just wh at do you think will happen
to us, if you—”
I cau ght a glimpse of Brianna from the corner of my eye.
She had half-turned, seeing us, and was now beaming tender
approval on this scene of wha t she supposed to be parental
fondness. Jamie saw her , too; I heard a faint snort of
amusement.
“Nothing will happen to me,” he said definitely , and
gathering me firmly to him, stifled further ar gument with an
encompassing kiss. A faint spatter of applause rose from the
direction of the fire.“Encor e!”  shouted Fer gus.
“No,”  I s aid to him as he released me. I whispered, but
spoke vehemently for all that. “Not encor e . I don’ t want to
hear the name of Stephen Bonnet ever bloody again!”
“It will be all right,” he whispered back, and squeezed my
hand. “T rust me, Sassenach.”1 1
PRIDE
R OGER DIDN’T LOOK BACK, but thoughts of the Findlays
went with him a s he made his way downhill from their camp,
through clumps of brush and trodden grass.
The two boys were sandy-haired and fair , short—though
taller than their mother—but broad-shouldered. The two
younger children were dark, tall, and slender , with their
mother ’ s hazel eyes. Given the g ap of years between the older
boys and their younger siblings, Roger concluded from the
evidence that Mrs. Findlay had likely had two husbands. And
from the look of things now was a widow again.
Perhaps he should mention Joan Findlay to Brianna, he
thought, as further evidence that marriage and childbirth were
not n ecessarily mortal to women . Or perhaps it was better just
to leave that subject lie quiet for a bit.
Beyond thought s of Joan and her children, though, he was
haunted by the soft, bright eyes of Iain Mhor . How old was
he? Roger wondered, grasping t he springy branch of a pine to
keep from sliding down a patch of loose gravel. Impossible to
tell f rom looking; the pale, twis ted face was lined and worn—
but with  pain and struggle, not age. He was no lar ger than a
boy of twelve or so, but Iai n Mhor was older than his
namesake, clearly—and Iain Og was sixteen.
He was likely younger than Joan; but perhaps not. She had
treated h im with deference, bringing Roger to him as a woman
would n aturally bring a visitor to the head of the family . Not
greatly younger , then—say thirty or more?
Christ, h e thoug ht, how did a man like that survive so long
in times like these? But as he had backed awkwardly away
from Iain Mhor , one of the lit tle girls had crawled into the
crude shelter from the back, pushing a bowl of milk pudding
before h er , and had sat down matter -of-factly by her uncle’ shead, sp oon in hand. Iain Mhor  had limbs and fingers enough
—he had a family .
That thought gave Roger a tight feeling in his chest,
somewhere between pain and gladness—and a sinking feeling
lower down, as he recalled Joan Findlay’ s words.
Send the m safe home.  A ye, and if he didn’ t, then Joan was
left with two yo ung girls and a helpless brother . Had she any
property? he wondered.
He h ad h eard a good deal of tal k on the mountain about the
Regulation since  the morning’ s Proclamation. Given that the
matter had plainly not been suf ficiently important to make it
into the history books, he thought this militia business was
unlikely to come to anything. I f it did, though, he vowed to
himself that he would find some way of keeping Iain Og and
Hugh Findlay well away from any danger . And if there was
bounty money , they should have their share.
In the meantime  … he hesitated . He had just passed Jocasta
Cameron’ s camp , bustling like a small village, with its cluster
of te nts, wagons, and lean-tos. In anticipation of her wedding
—now a double wedding—Jocasta had brought almost all of
her house slaves, and not a few of the field hands as well.
Beyond the livestock, tobacco, and goods brought for trade,
there we re trunks of clothes and bedding and dishes, trestles,
tables, hogsheads of ale, and m ountains of food intended for
the celebration afterward. He and Bree had breakfasted with
Mrs. Cameron in her tent this m orning of f china painted with
roses: slices of succulent fried ham, studded with cloves,
oatmeal porridge with cream and sugar , a compote of
preserved fruit,  fresh corn do dgers with honey , Jamaican
cof fee … his s tomach contracted with a pleasant growl of
recollection.
The contrasts between that lavishness and the recent poverty
of th e Findlay e ncampment were too much to be borne with
complacence. He turned upon his heel with sudden decision,
and began the short climb back to Jocasta’ s tent.Jocasta C ameron was at home, so to speak; he saw her mud-
soaked boots outside the tent. Sightless as she was, she still
ventured out to call upon friend s, escorted by Duncan or her
black butler , Ulysses. More often, though, she allowed the
Gathering to come to her , an d her own tent seethed with
company throughout the day , all the Scottish society of the
Cape Fear and the colony coming to enjoy her renowned
hospitality .
For the moment, though, she seemed fortunately alone.
Roger ca ught a glimpse of her through the lifted flap, reclining
in her cane-bottomed chair , feet in slippers, and her head fallen
back in apparen t repose. Her bo dy servant, Phaedre, sat on a
stool ne ar the open tent flap, needle in hand, squinting in the
hazy light over a spill of blue fabric that filled her lap.
Jocasta s ensed him first; she sat up in her armchair , and her
head turned sharply as he to uched the tent flap. Phaedre
glanced up belatedly , reacting to her mistress’ s movement
rather than his presence.
“Mr . Ma cKenzie. It is  th e Thrush, is it no?” Mrs. Cam eron
said, smiling in his direction.
He l aughed, and ducked his hea d to enter the tent, obeying
her gesture.
“It is. And how did ye ken that, Mrs. Cameron? I’ve said
not a word, let alone sung one . Have I a tuneful manner of
breathing?” Bria nna had told him  of her aunt’ s uncanny ability
to compensate for her blindness by means of other senses, but
he was still surprised at her acuity .
“I he ard your st ep, and then I smelt the blood on you,” she
said matter -of-factly . “The wound’ s come open again, has it
not? Come, lad, sit. W ill we fetch ye a dish of tea, or a dram?
Phaedre—a cloth, if ye please.”
His fing ers went involuntarily to the gash in his throat. He’d
for gotten it entirely in the rush o f the day’ s events, but she was
right; it had bled again, leaving a crusty stain down the side of
his neck and over the collar of his shirt.Phaedre was already up, assemb ling a tray from the array of
cakes and biscuits on a small table by Jocasta’ s chair . W ere it
not for the earth and grass underfoot, Roger thought, he would
scarcely know they were not in Mrs. Cameron’ s drawing room
at R iver Run. She was wrapped  in a woolen arisaid, but even
that was fastened by a handsome cairngorm brooch.
“It’ s nothing,” he said, self-conscious, but Jocasta took the
cloth from her maid’ s hand and  insisted on cleaning the cut
herself. Her long fingers were cool on his skin, and
surprisingly deft.
She smelled of woodsmoke, as everybody on the mountain
did, and  the tea she had been drinking, but there was none of
the faintly camphorated musty  odor he normally associated
with elderly ladies.
“T ch, y e’ve got it on your shirt,” she informed him,
fingering the stif f fabric disapprovingly . “W ill we launder it
for y e? T hough I dinna ken d’y e want to wear it sopping; it’ll
never dry by nightfall.”
“Ah, no, ma’am. I thank ye, I’ve  another . For the wedding, I
mean.”
“W ell, then.” Phaedre had produced a small pot of
medicinal grease; he recognized  it as one of Claire’ s, by the
smell of lavender and goldenseal. Jocasta scooped up a
thumbnail of the ointment and spread it carefully over his
wound, her fingers steady on his jawbone.
Her skin was w ell-kept and soft, but it showed the ef fects
not only  of age but weather . Th ere were ruddy patches in her
cheeks, nets of tiny broken veins that from a slight distance
lent her an air of health and vitality . Her hands showed no liver
spots—of course , she was of a wealthy family; she would have
worn gloves out-of-doors all her life—but the joints were
knobbed and the palms slightly callused from the tug of reins.
Not a hothouse flower , this daughter of Leoch, despite her
surroundings.Finished, she passed her hand lightly over his face and head,
picked a  dried leaf from his hai r , then wiped his face with the
damp cl oth, surprising him. She dropped the cloth, then took
his hand, wrapping her own fingers around his.
“There, now . Presentable once more! And now that ye’re fit
for comp any , Mr . MacKenzie— did ye come to speak to me, or
were ye only passing by?”
Phaedre put down a dish of tea and a saucer of cake by his
side, but Jocasta continued to ho ld his left hand. He found that
odd, but the unexpected atmosphere of intimacy made it
slightly easier to begin his request.
He put it simpl y; he had heard the Reverend make such
requests for charity before, and  knew it was best to let the
situation speak for itself, leaving ultimate decision to the
conscience of the hearer .
Jocasta listened carefully , a small furrow between her
brows. He’d expected her to pause for thought when he’d
finished, but instead she replied at once.
“A ye,” she said, “I ken Joanie F indlay , and her brother , too.
Y e’re rig ht, her husband was carried of f by the consumption,
two year gone. Jamie Roy spoke to me of her yesterday .”
“Oh, he did?” Roger felt mildly foolish.
Jocasta n odded. She leaned back a little, pursing her lips in
thought.
“It’ s no  just a matter of of fering help, ye ken,” she
explained. “I’m glad of the chance. But she’ s a proud woman,
Joan Fin dlay—she willna take charity .” Her voice held a slight
note of reproval, as though Roger ought to have realized that.
Perhaps he should, he thought . But he had acted on the
impulse of the moment, moved  by the Findlays’ poverty . It
hadn’ t occurred to him that if she had little else, it would be
that much more important to Jo an Findlay to cling to her one
valuable possession—her pride.“I see,” he said s lowly . “But surely—there must be a way to
help that wouldn’ t of fer of fense?”
Jocasta tilted her head slightly to  one side, then the other , in
a s mall mannerism that he found  peculiarly familiar . Of course
—Bree did that now and then , when she was considering
something.
“There may be,” she said. “The feast tonight—for the
wedding, aye?—the Findlays will be there, of course, and
well-fed. It wouldna be amiss f or Ulysses to make up a wee
parcel of food for them to take for the journey home—’ twould
save it spoiling, after all.” She smiled briefly , then the look of
concentration returned to her features.
“The priest,” she said, with a sudden air of satisfaction.
“Priest? Y e mean Father Donahue?”
One thick, burnished brow lifted at him.
“Y e ken another priest on the mountain? A ye, of course I
do.” She  lifted her free hand, and Phaedre, ever alert, came to
her mistress’ s side.
“Miss Jo?”
“Look o ut some bits from the trunks, lass,” Jocasta said,
touching the maid’ s arm. “Blankets, caps, an apron or two;
breeks and plain shirts—the grooms can spare them.”
“Stockings,” Roger put in quickly , thinking of the little
girls’ dirty bare feet.
“Stockings.” Jocasta nodded. “Plain stuf f, but good wool
and wel l-mended. Ulysses has my purse. T ell him to give ye
ten shillings—st erling—and wrap it in one o’ the aprons. Then
make a bundle of the things and  take them to Father Donahue.
T ell him  they’re for Joan Find lay , but he’ s no to say where
they’ve come from. He’ll know what to say .” She nodded
again, s atisfied, and dropped her hand from the maid’ s arm,
making a little shooing gesture.
“Of f wi’ ye, then—see to it now .”Phaedre murmu red assent and l eft the tent, pausing only to
shake o ut the blue thing she had been sewing and fold it
carefully over her stool. It was a decorated stomacher for
Brianna’ s wedding dress, he saw , done with an elegant lacing
of ribbo ns. He had a sudden vision of Brianna’ s white breasts,
swelling above a low neckline o f dark indigo, and returned to
the conversation at hand with some dif ficulty .
“I beg your pardon, ma’am?”
“I sa id—will that do?” Jocasta was smiling at him, with a
slightly knowing  expression, as though she had been able to
read his thoughts. Her eyes were  blue, like Jamie’ s and Bree’ s,
but n ot s o dark. They were fixed on him—or at least pointed at
him. He  knew she could not see  his face, but she did give the
eerie impression of being able to see thr ough  him.
“Y es, Mrs. Cameron. That’ s—it’ s most kind of ye.” He
brought his feet under him, to stand and take his leave. He
expected her to let go of his hand at once, but instead, she
tightened her grip, restraining him.
“None so fast. I’ve a thing or two to say to ye, young man.”
He settled back on his chair , composing himself.
“Of course, Mrs. Cameron.”
“I wasna sure w hether to speak now or wait until it was
done—but as ye’re here alone now …” She bent toward him,
intent.
“Did my  niece tell ye, lad, that I meant to make her heiress
to my property?”
“A ye, she did.”
He was at once on guard. Brian na had told him, all right—
making it clear in no uncertain terms what she thought of that
particular proposal. He steeled himself to repeat her objections
now , hoping to do it more tactfully than she might have done
herself. He cleared his throat.
“I’m su re my wife is most conscious of the honor , Mrs.
Cameron,” he began cautiously , “but—”“Is s he?” Jocasta asked dryly . “ I shouldna have thought so,
to hear her talk. But doubtless ye ken her mind better than I
do. Be that as it may , though, I mean to tell her that I’ve
changed my own mind.”
“Oh? W ell, I’m sure she’ll—”
“I’ve told Gerald Forbes to be drawing up a will, leaving
River Run and all its contents to Jeremiah.”
“T o—” It took a moment fo r his brain to make the
connection. “What, to wee Jemmy?”
She was still lea ning forward a little, as though peering at
his face.  Now she sat back, nodd ing, still holding firmly to his
hand. It came to him, finally , that, unable to see his face, she
thought to read him by means of this physical connection.
She was welcome to anything h is fingers might tell her , he
thought. He was too stunned at this news to have any notion
how to respond to it. Christ, what would Bree say about it?
“A ye,” s he said, and smiled ple asantly . “It came to me, ye
see, as how a w oman’ s property becomes her husband’ s when
she wed s. Not that there are no  means of settling it upon her ,
but it’ s dif ficult , and I wouldna  involve lawyers more than I
must—I think it always a mista ke to go to the law , do ye not
agree, Mr . MacKenzie?”
W ith a sense of  complete astonishment, he realized that he
was being deliberately insulted. Not only insulted, but warned.
She thought—she did! She thought he was after Brianna’ s
presumed inheri tance, and was warning him not to resort to
any legal contortions to get it. Mingled shock and outrage
sealed his tongue for a moment, but then he found words.
“Why , that is the most—so ye take thought for Joan
Findlay’ s pride, but ye think I h ave none? Mrs. Cameron, how
dare ye suggest that—”
“Y e’re a handsome lad, Thrush ,” she said, holding tight to
his hand. “I’ve felt your face. And you’ve the name of
MacKenzie, wh ich is a good one, to be sure. But there are
MacKenzies aplenty in the Highlands, aren’ t there? Men ofhonor , a nd men without it. Jamie Roy calls ye kinsman—but
perhaps that’ s because ye’re handfast to his daughter . I dinna
think I  ken your family .”
Shock was giving way to a nervous impulse to laugh. Ken
his fami ly? Not likely; and how should he explain that he was
the grandson—s ix times over—of her own brother , Dougal?
That he was, in fact, not only Jamie’ s nephew , but her own as
well, if a bit further down the family tree than one might
expect?
“Nor d oes anyone I’ve spoken to this week at the
Gathering,” she  added, head tilted to one side like a hawk
watching prey .
So t hat was it. She’d been asking about him among her
company—and had failed to turn up anyone who knew
anything of his antecedents, for obvious reasons. A suspicious
circumstance, to be sure.
He wondered whether she supposed he was a confidence
trickster who had taken Jamie i n, or whether perhaps he was
meant to be invo lved in some s cheme with  J am ie? No, har dly
that; Bre e had told him that Jocasta had originally wanted to
leave he r property to Jamie—who had refused, wary of close
involvement with the old leg-trap. His opinion of Jamie’ s
intelligence was reaf firmed.
Before h e could think of some dignified retort, she patted
his hand, still smiling.
“So, I thought to leave it all to the wee lad. That will be a
tidy way  of managing, won’ t it? Brianna will have the use of
the m oney , of co urse, until wee Jeremiah should come of age
—unless anything should happen to the child, that is.”
Her voic e held a definite note of warning, though her mouth
continued to smile, her blank eyes still fixed wide on his face.
“What? What in the name of God d’ye mean by that?” He
pushed h is stool  back, but she held tight to his hand. She was
very strong, despite her age.“Gerald Forbes will be executo r of my will, and there are
three trustees to manage the property ,” she explained. “If
Jeremiah should come to any mischief, though, then
everything will go to my nephew  Hamish.” Her face was quite
serious now . “Y ou’d not see a penny .”
He twisted his fingers in hers and squeezed, hard enough
that he felt her b ony knuckles press together . Let her read what
she liked in that, then! She gasped, but he didn’ t let go.
“Are ye  saying to me that ye think I would harm that
child?” His voice sounded hoarse to his own ears.
She had gone pa le, but kept her dignity , teeth clenched and
chin upraised.
“Have I said so?”
“Y e’ve s aid a great deal—and what ye’ve not said speaks
louder th an what ye have. How dare you imply such things to
me?” He released her hand, all but flinging it back in her lap.
She rubbed her reddened fingers slowly with her other hand,
lips pursed in thought. The canv as sides of the tent breathed in
the wind with a crackling sound.
“W ell, then,” she said at last. “I’ll of fer ye my apology , Mr .
MacKenzie, if I’ve wronged ye in any way . I thought it would
be as well, though, for ye to know what was in my mind.”
“As well? As w ell for whom?” He was on his feet, and
turned toward the flap. W ith gr eat dif ficulty , he kept himself
from seizing the china plates  of cakes and biscuits and
smashing them on the ground as a parting gesture.
“For Jeremiah,” she said levelly , behind him. “And Brianna.
Perhaps, lad, even for you.”
He swung round, staring at her .
“Me? What d’ye mean by that?”
She gave the ghost of a shrug.
“If ye canna love the lad for himself, I thought ye might
treat him well for the sake of his prospects.”He s tared at her , words jammin g in his throat. His face felt
hot, and the blood throbbed dully in his ears.
“Oh, I ken how it is,” she assured him. “It’ s only to be
understood that a man might not feel just so kindly toward a
bairn his wife’ s borne to another . But if—”
He step ped forward then and gripped her hard by the
shoulder , startling her . She jerked, blinking, and the candle
flames flashed from the cairngorm brooch.
“Madam,” he said, speaking very softly into her face. “I do
not wan t your money . My wife does not want it. And my son
will not have it. Cram it up your hole, aye?”
He let her go, turned, and strode out of the tent, brushing
past Ulysses, who looked after him in puzzlement.12
VIR TUE
P EOPLE MOVED  THROUGH the gathering shadows of late
afternoon, visiti ng from one fir eside to another , as they had
each day , but th ere was a dif ferent feeling on the mountain
today .
In part it was th e sweet sadness of leavetaking; the parting
of fr iends, the severing of newfo und loves, the knowledge that
some fac es wou ld be seen tonig ht for the last time on earth. In
part it was antic ipation; the longing for home, the pleasures
and dan gers of the journey to come. In part, sheer weariness;
cranky children, men harried  by responsibility , women
exhausted by the labor of cookin g over open fires, maintaining
a family ’ s clothes and health and appetites from the sustenance
of saddlebags and mule packs.
I could sympathize with all three attitudes myself. Beyond
the s heer excitement of meeting  new people and hearing new
talk, I had had the pleasure—f or pleasure it definitely was,
despite its grimmer aspects—of new patients, seeing novel
ailments and curing what could  be cured, grappling with the
need to find a way to treat what could not.
But the longing  for home was strong: my spacious hearth,
with its huge cauldron and its roasting jack, the light-filled
peace of my sur gery , with the fragrant bunches of nettle and
dried lav ender o verhead, dusty gold in the afternoon sun. My
feather b ed, soft  and clean, line n sheets smelling of rosemary
and yarrow .
I clo sed my eye s for a moment, summoning up a wistful
vision of this haven of delight, then opened them to reality: a
crusted griddle, black with the remnants of scorched oatcake;
soggy shoes and frozen feet; d amp clothes that chafed with
grit and sand; h ampers whose abundance had dwindled to a
single loaf of bread—well-nibbled by mice—ten apples, and aheel of cheese; three screeching babies; one frazzled young
mother with sore breasts and cracked nipples; one expectant
bride wi th a case of incipient ne rves; one white-faced serving-
maid wi th mens trual cramps; four slightly inebriated Scotsmen
—and one Frenchman in similar condition—who wandered in
and out of camp like bears and were not going to be any help
whatever in packing up this eve ning … and a deep, clenching
ache in my lower belly that gave me the unwelcome news that
my own monthly—which had grown thankfully much less
frequent than monthly of late—had decided to keep Lizzie’ s
company .
I gri tted my teet h, plucked a cold , damp clout of f a clump of
brush, a nd made my way duck-footed down the trail toward
the women’ s privy trench, thighs pressed together .
The first  thing to greet me on my return was the hot stink of
scorching metal. I said something very expressive in French—
a us eful bit of phraseology acq uired at L ’Hopital des Anges,
where strong language was often the best medical tool
available.
Marsali’ s mouth fell open. Germain looked at me in
admiration and repeated the expression, correctly and with a
beautiful Parisian accent.
“Sorry ,” I said, looking to Marsali in apology . “Someone’ s
let the teakettle boil dry .”
“Nay m atter , Mo ther Claire,” she said with a sigh, juggling
little Joanie, who’d started to scream again. “It’ s no worse than
the thin gs his father teaches h im a-purpose. Is there a dry
cloth?”
I w as already hu nting ur gently for a dry cloth or a pot-lifter
with which to grasp the wire handle, but nothing came to hand
save soggy diapers and damp stockings. Kettles were hard to
come by , though, and I wasn’ t s acrificing this one. I wrapped
my hand in a fold of my skirt, seized the handle, and jerked the
kettle aw ay from the flames. Th e heat shot through the damp
cloth like a bolt of lightning, and I dropped it.“Mer de!”  said Germain, in happy echo.
“Y es, quite,” I said, sucking a blistered thumb. The kettle
hissed a nd smok ed in the wet leaves, and I kicked at it, rolling
it of f onto a patch of mud.
“Mer de, mer de,  mer de, mer de,”  s an g Germain, with a fair
approximation o f the tune of “Rose, Rose”—a manifestation
of precocious musical feeling that went lamentably
unappreciated in the circumstances.
“Do hush, child,” I said.
He didn ’ t. Jemmy began to screech in unison with Joan,
Lizzie—who had had a relapse owing to the reluctant
departure of Private Ogilvie—began to moan under her bush,
and it started in to hail, small white pellets of ice dancing on
the ground and pinging sharpl y of f my scalp. I pulled the
soggy mobcap of f a branch and clapped it on my head, feeling
like an extremely put-upon toad beneath a particularly homely
mushroom. All it wanted was warts, I thought.
The hail was short-lived. As the rush and clattering
lessened, though , the crunching noise of muddy boots came up
the path . Jamie, with Father Kenneth Donahue in tow , crusted
hail on their hair and shoulders.
“I’ve br ought the good Father for tea,” he said, beaming
round the clearing.
“No, you haven’ t,” I said, rather ominously . And if he
thought I’d for gotten about Stephen Bonnet, he was wrong
about that, too.
T urning at the sound of my voice, he jerked in an
exaggeration of startled shock at sight of me in my mobcap.
“Is that you, Sassenach?” he asked in mock alarm,
pretending to lean forward and p eek under the drooping frill of
my cap. Owing to the presence of the priest, I refrained from
kneeing Jamie in some sensitive spot, and contented myself
instead w ith an attempt to turn h im into stone with my eyes, a
la Medusa.He appeared not to notice, distr acted by Germain, who was
now dancing in little circles while singing theme and
variations on my initial Frenc h expression, to the tune of
“Row , Row , Row Y our Boat.” Father Donahue was going
bright pink with the ef fort o f pretending that he didn’ t
understand any French.
“T ais toi, cr etin,”  Jamie said, reaching into his sporran. He
said it amiably enough, but w ith the tone of one whose
expectation of being obeyed is so absolute as not to admit
question. Germain stopped abru ptly , mouth open, and Jamie
promptly thumbed a sweetie into it. Germain shut his mouth
and began concentrating on the matter at hand, songs
for gotten.
I reached for the kettle, using a handful of my hem again as
pot hold er . Jamie bent, picked up a sturdy twig, and hooked
the handle of the kettle neatly from my hand with it.
“V oila!”  he said, presenting it.
“Mer ci,”  I said, with a distinct lack of gratitude.
Nonetheless, I accepted the stick and set of f toward the nearest
rivulet, smoking kettle borne before me like a lance.
Reaching a rock-studded pool, I dropped the kettle with a
clang, ripped of f the mobcap, f lung it into a clump of sedge,
and stamped on it, leaving a l ar ge, muddy footprint on the
linen.
“I didna  mean to say it wasna fla ttering, Sassenach,” said an
amused voice behind me.
I raised a cold brow in his direction.
“Y ou didn’ t mean to say it was  flattering, did you?”
“No. It makes ye look like a poisonous toadstool. Much
better without,” he assured me.
He pulled me toward him and bent to kiss me.
“It’ s not  that I don’ t appreciate the thought,” I said, and the
tone of my voice stopped him, a fraction of an inch from mymouth. “But one inch farther and I think I might just bite a
small piece out of your lip.”
Moving like a m an who has just realized that the stone he
has cas ually picked up is in actuality a wasp’ s nest, he
straightened up and very , very slowly took his hands of f my
waist.
“Oh,” he  said, and tilted his hea d to one side, lips pursed as
he surveyed me.
“Y e do look a bit frazzled, at that, Sassenach.”
No doubt this was true, but it made me feel like bursting
into tears to he ar it. Evidently the ur ge showed, because he
took me—very gently—by the  hand, and led me to a lar ge
rock.
“Sit,” he said. “Close your eyes, a nighean donn . Rest
yourself a moment.”
I sat, eyes closed and shoulders slumped. Sloshing noises
and a muted cla ng announced that he was cleaning and filling
the kettle.
He set the filled kettle at my feet with a soft clunk, then
eased himself down on the le aves beside it, where he sat
quietly . I could hear the faint  sigh of his breath, and the
occasional snif f and rustle as he wiped a dripping nose on his
sleeve.
“I’m sorry ,” I said at last, opening my eyes.
He turned, half-smiling, to look up at me.
“For what, Sassenach? It’ s not as though ye’ve refused my
bed—or at least I hope it’ s not come to that yet.”
The thought of making love just at the moment was
absolutely at the bottom of my  list, but I returned the half-
smile.
“No,” I said rue fully . “After two weeks of sleeping on the
ground, I wouldn’ t refuse anyone’ s  bed.” His eyebrows went
up at that, and I laughed, taken of f-guard.“No,” I said aga in. “I’m just … frazzled.” Something griped
low in my bell y , and proceeded to twist. I grimaced, and
pressed my hands over the pain.
“Oh!” h e said again, in sudden u nderstanding. “That kind of
frazzled.”
“That kind of fr azzled,” I agreed. I poked at the kettle with
one toe. “I’d bet ter take that bac k; I need to boil water so I can
steep so me willo w bark. It takes  a long time.” It did; it would
take an hour or  more, by which time the cramps would be
considerably worse.
“The hell with willow bark,” he said, producing a silver
flask fro m the recesses of his sh irt. “T ry this. At least ye dinna
need to boil it first.”
I unscrewed the stopper and inhaled. Whisky , and very good
whisky , too.
“I love you,” I said sincerely , and he laughed.
“I love ye too, Sassenach,” he said, and gently touched my
foot.
I t ook a mouthful and let it trickle down the back of my
throat. It seeped pleasantly thro ugh my mucous membranes,
hit bottom, and rose up in a puf f of soothing, amber -colored
smoke t hat filled all my crevice s and began to extend warm,
soothing tendrils round the source of my discomfort.
“Oooooo,” I said, sighing, and taking another sip. I closed
my eye s, the better to apprec iate it. An Irishman of my
acquaintance had once assured me that very good whisky
could raise the dead. I wasn’ t disposed to ar gue the point.
“That’ s wonderf ul,” I said, whe n I opened my eyes again.
“Where did you get it?” This w as twenty-year -old Scotch, if I
knew anything about it—a far cry from the raw spirit that
Jamie had been distilling on the ridge behind the house.
“Jocasta,” he said. “It was mea nt to be a wedding gift for
Brianna and her young man, but I thought ye needed it more.”
“Y ou’re right about that.”W e sat in a companionable silence, and I sipped slowly , the
ur ge to run amok and slaughte r everyone in sight gradually
subsiding, along with the level of whisky in the flask.
The rain  had moved of f again, and the foliage dripped
peacefully around us. There was a stand of fir trees near; I
could smell the cool scent of t heir resin, pungent and clean
above the heavier smell of wet,  dead leaves, smoldering fires,
and soggy fabrics.
“It’ s been three months since the last of your courses,”
Jamie observed casually . “I thought they’d maybe stopped.”
I w as always a trifle taken aback to realize how acutely he
observed such things—but he was a farmer and a husbandman,
after all. He was intimately acquainted with the gynecological
history a nd estrus cycle of eve ry female animal he owned; I
supposed there was no reason to think he’d make an exception
simply because I was not likely either to farrow or come in
heat.
“It’ s not like a tap that just switches of f, you know ,” I said,
rather crossly . “Unfortunately . It just gets rather erratic and
eventually it stops, but you haven’ t any idea when.”
“Ah.”
He leane d forward, arms folded across the tops of his knees,
idly wat ching twigs and bits of leaf bobbing through the rif fles
of the stream.
“I’d think it wou ld maybe be a relief to have done wi’ it all.
Less mess, aye?”
I repressed the ur ge to draw invidious sexual comparisons
regarding bodily fluids.
“Maybe it will,” I said. “I’ll let you know , shall I?”
He s miled faintly , but was wis e enough not to pursue the
matter; he could hear the edge in my voice.
I sipped  a bit m ore whisky . The sharp cry of a woodpecker
—the kind Jamie called a yaf fl e—echoed deep in the woods
and then fell sil ent. Few birds were out in this weather; mostsimply huddled under what she lter they could find, though I
could hear the conversational quacking of a small flock of
migratory ducks somewhere downstream. They  weren’ t
bothered by the rain.
Jamie stretched himself suddenly .
“Ah … Sassenach?” he said.
“What is it?” I asked, surprised.
He ducked his head, uncharacteristically shy .
“I dinna ken whether I’ve done wrong or no, Sassenach, but
if I have, I must ask your for giveness.”
“Of course,” I said, a little uncertainly . What was I for giving
him for? Probably not adulter y , but it could be just about
anything else, up to and including assault, arson, highway
robbery , and blasphemy . God, I hoped it wasn’ t anything to do
with Bonnet.
“What have you done?”
“W ell, as to myself, nothing,” he said, a little sheepishly .
“It’ s only what I’ve said you’d  do.”
“Oh?” I  said, with minor suspicion. “And what’ s that? If
you told Farquard Campbell t hat I’d visit his horrible old
mother again …”
“Oh, no,” he as sured me. “Nothing like that. I promised
Josiah B eardsley that ye’d maybe take out his tonsils today ,
though.”
“That I’d what ?” I goggled at him. I’d met Josiah Beardsley ,
a youth with the worst-looking set of abscessed tonsils I’d ever
seen, the day before. I’d been suf ficiently impressed by the
pustulated state of his adenoids, in fact, to have described
them in detail to  all and sundry over dinner—causing Lizzie to
go green round the gills and give her second potato to Germain
—and h ad mentioned at the tim e that sur gery was really the
only possible ef fective cure. I hadn’ t expected Jamie to go
drumming up business, though.“Why?” I asked.
Jamie rocked back a little, looking up at me.
“I want him, Sassenach.”
“Y ou do? What for?” Josiah was barely fourteen—or at least
he thoug ht he was fourteen; he  wasn’ t really sure when he’d
been bor n and his parents had died too long ago to say . He was
undersized even for fourteen, and badly nourished, with legs
slightly bowed from rickets. He also showed evidence of
assorted parasitic infections, and wheezed with what might be
tuberculosis, or merely a bad case of bronchitis.
“A tenant, of course.”
“Oh? I’d  have thought you had more applicants than you
can handle, as it is.”
I didn’ t just thi nk so; I knew so. W e had absolutely no
money , though the trade Jamie had done at the Gathering had
just about—not quite—cleared our indebtedness to several of
the Cross Creek merchants for ironmongery , rice, tools, salt,
and othe r small items. W e had land in plenty—most of it forest
—but no means to assist people to settle on it or farm it. The
Chisholms and McGillivrays were stretching well past our
limits, in terms of acquiring new tenantry .
Jamie merely nodded, dismissing these complications.
“A ye. Josiah’ s a likely lad, though.”
“Hmm,” I said dubiously . It wa s true that the boy seemed
tough—which was likely what Jamie meant by “likely”;
simply to have survived this long by himself was evidence of
that. “M aybe so. So are lots of others. What’ s he got that
makes you want him specially?”
“He’ s fourteen.”
I l ooked at him,  one brow raised  in question, and his mouth
twisted in a wry smile.
“Any man between sixteen and sixty must serve in the
militia, Sassenach.”I felt a small, unpleasant contraction in the pit of my
stomach. I hadn’ t for gotten the Governor ’ s unwelcome
summons, but what with one th ing and another , I hadn’ t had
the leisure to reflect on exactly what the practical
consequences of it were likely to be.
Jamie sighed and stretched out his arms, flexing his
knuckles until they cracked.
“So you’ll do it?” I asked. “Form a militia company and
go?”
“I must,” he said simply . “T ryon’ s got my ballocks in his
hand, and I’m no inclined to see whether he’ll squeeze, aye?”
“I was afraid of that.”
Jamie’ s picturesque assessment of the situation was
unfortunately accurate. Looking for a loyal and competent
man willing to undertake the se ttlement of a lar ge section of
wild backcountry , Governor T ryon had of fered Jamie a Royal
grant of land just east of the T reaty Line, with no requirement
of quitrent for a period of ten years. A fair of fer , though given
the dif ficulties of settlement in  the mountains, not quite so
generous as it might have looked.
The catch was that holders of such grants were legally
required to be w hite Protestant males of good character , above
the age of thirty . And while Jam ie met the other requirements,
T ryon was well aware of his Catholicism.
Do as the Governor required, and … well, the Governor was
a successful politician; he knew how to keep his mouth shut
about inconvenient matters. Defy him, though, and it would
take no more than a simple lett er from New Bern to deprive
Fraser ’ s Ridge of its resident Frasers.
“Hmm. So you’re thinking tha t if you take the available
men from the Ridge—can’ t you leave out a few?”
“I ha vena got so  many to start with, Sassenach,” he pointed
out. “I can leave  Fer gus, because of his hand, and Mr . W emyss
to lo ok after our  place. He’ s a bond servant, so far as anyone
knows, and only freemen are obliged to join the militia.”“And only able-bodied men. That lets out Joanna Grant’ s
husband; he’ s got a wooden foot.”
He nodded.
“A ye, an d old Arch Bug, who’ s seventy if he’ s a day . That’ s
four men—and maybe eight boys under sixteen—to look after
thirty homesteads and more than a hundred and fifty people.”
“The w omen can probably manage fairly well by
themselves,” I said. “It’ s winte r , after all; no crops to deal
with. And there shouldn’ t be an y dif ficulties with the Indians,
not thes e days.”  My ribbon had  come loose when I pulled of f
the cap. Hair w as escaping from its undone plaits in every
direction, stragg ling down my n eck in damp, curly strands. I
pulled th e ribbo n of f and tried to comb my hair out with my
fingers.
“What’ s so important about Josiah Beardsley , anyway?” I
asked. “Surely one fourteen-year -old boy can’ t make so much
dif ference.”
“Beardsley’ s a hunter ,” Jamie answered, “and a good one.
He brou ght in nearly two hund red weight of wolf, deer , and
beaver s kins to the Gathering— all taken by himself alone, he
said. I couldna do better , myself.”
That was a true  encomium, and I pursed my lips in silent
appreciation. Hides were the main—in fact, the only—winter
crop of any valu e in the mountains. W e had no money now—
not even the paper Proclamation money , worth only a fraction
of sterling—and without hides to sell in the spring, we were
going to have d if ficulty getting the seed corn and wheat we
needed. And if a ll the men were  required to spend a good part
of the winter tramping round the colony subduing Regulators
instead of hunting …
Most wo men on the Ridge cou ld handle a gun, but almost
none could hunt ef fectively , as they were tethered to their
homes by the n eeds of their ch ildren. Even Bree, who was a
very go od hunter , could venture no more than half a day’ stravel aw ay from Jemmy—not nearly far enough for wolf and
beaver .
I rub bed a hand  through my damp locks, fluf fing out the
loosened strands.
“All right, I und erstand that part. Where do the tonsils come
in, though?”
Jamie looked up at me and smiled. W ithout answering at
once, he got to his feet and circled behind me. W ith a firm
hand, he gathered in the fugitiv e strands, captured the flying
bits, and braided it into a tight,  thick plait at the base of my
neck. He bent over my shoulder , plucked the ribbon from my
lap, and tied it neatly in a bow .
“There.” He sat down by my feet again. “Now , as to the
tonsils. Y e told the lad he must have them out, or his throat
would go from bad to worse.”
“It will.”
Josiah Beardsley had believed me. And, having come near
death th e winter before when an abscess in his throat had
nearly suf focate d him before bursting, he was not eager to risk
another such occurrence.
“Y ou’re the only sur geon north of Cross Creek,” Jamie
pointed out. “Who else could do it?”
“W ell, yes,” I said uncertainly . “But—”
“So, I’v e made the lad an of fer ,” Jamie interrupted. “One
section of land—wee Roger and myself will help him to put up
a ca bin on it when the time comes—and he’ll go halves with
me in whatever he takes in the way of skins for the next three
winters. He’ s willing—provided you’ll take out his tonsils as
part o’ the bar gain.”
“But why today? I can’ t take so meone’ s tonsils out here!” I
gestured at the dripping forest.
“Why not?” Jamie raised one eyebrow . “Did ye not say last
night it was a small matter—o nly a few wee cuts wi’ your
smallest knife?”I rubbed a knuckle under my nose, snif fing with
exasperation. “Look, just becaus e it isn’ t a massive bloody job
like amputating  a leg doesn’ t mean it’ s a simple matter!” It
was, in  fact, a relatively simple operation—sur gically
speaking. It was the possibility of infection following the
procedure, and the need for careful nursing—a poor substitute
for antibiotics, but much better than neglect—that raised
complications.
“I can’ t just whack out his ton sils and turn him loose,” I
said. “When we get back to the Ridge, though—”
“He doesna mean to come bac k with us directly ,” Jamie
interrupted.
“Why not?” I demanded.
“He didna say; only that he had a bit of business to do, and
would come to the Ridge by th e first week of December . He
can sleep in the loft above the herb shed,” he added.
“So you—and he—expect me j ust to slash out his tonsils,
put in a few stitches, and see him on his merry way?” I asked
sardonically .
“Y e did nicely wi’ the dog,” he said, grinning.
“Oh, you heard about that.”
“Oh, aye . And the lad who chop ped his foot with an ax, and
the b airns wi’ milk rash, and Mrs. Buchanan’ s toothache, and
your battle wi’ Murray MacLeod over the gentleman’ s bile
ducts …”
“It was  rather a busy morning.” I shuddered briefly in
remembrance, and took another sip of whisky .
“The whole Gathering is talki ng of ye, Sassenach. I did
think of  the Bible, in fact, seeing all the crowd clamoring
round ye this morning.”
“The Bible?” I must have loo ked blank at the reference,
because the grin got wider .“And the whole multitude sought to touch him,” Jamie
quoted. “For there went virtue out of him, and healed them
all.”
I laughed ruefully , interrupting myself with a small hiccup.
“Fresh out of virtue at the moment, I’m afraid.”
“Dinna fash. There’ s plenty in the flask.”
Thus reminded, I of fered him the whisky , but he waved it
away , brows drawn down in tho ught. Melting hail had left wet
streaks in his hair , and it lay l ike ribbons of melted bronze
across his shoulders—like the statue of some military hero,
weathered and glistening in a public park.
“So ye’ll do the lad’ s tonsils, once he comes to the Ridge?”
I thought a moment, then nodded, swallowing. There would
still be dangers in it, and no rmally I wouldn’ t do purely
elective sur gery . But Josiah’ s condition was truly dreadful, and
the cont inued in fections might well kill him eventually , if I
didn’ t take some steps to remedy it.
Jamie nodded, satisfied.
“I’ll see to it, then.”
My feet had th awed, even wet as they were, and I was
beginning to feel warm and p liable. My belly still felt as
though I’d swallowed a lar ge volcanic rock, but I wasn’ t
minding all that much.
“I was wondering something, Sassenach,” he said.
“Y es?”
“Speakin’ of the Bible, ye ken.”
“Got Scripture on the brain today , have you?”
One corner of his mouth curled up as he glanced at me.
“A ye, w ell. It’ s only I was thinking. When the Angel of the
Lord com es alon g to Sarah and tells her she’ll have a bairn the
next yea r , she laughs and says t hat’ s a rare jest, as it’ s ceased
to be wi’ her after the manner of women.”“Most w omen in that situation l ikely wouldn’ t think it at all
a funny idea,” I assured him. “I often think God’ s got a very
peculiar sense of humor , though.”
He l ooked down at the lar ge m aple leaf he was shredding
between thumb and forefinger , but I caught the faint twitch of
his mouth.
“I’ve thought that now and again myself, Sassenach,” he
said, rather dryly . “Be that as it may , she did have the bairn,
aye?”
“The Bible says she did. I’m  not going to ca ll the book of
Genesis a liar .” I debated the wisdom of drinking more, but
decided to save it for a rainy—well, a rainier—day , and put the
stopper back in the flask. I could hear a certain amount of
stirring in the di rection of the c ampsite, and my ears caught a
word of inquiry , borne on the chilly breeze.
“Someone’ s looking for Himself,” I said. “Again.”
Himself glanced over his shoulder and grimaced slightly ,
but made no immediate move to answer the call. He cleared
his throat, and I saw a faint flush  move up the side of his neck.
“W ell, t he point is,” he said, carefully not looking at me,
“that so  far as I  ken, if your name’ s not Mary and the Holy
Ghost is na involved in the matter , there’ s only the one way of
getting wi’ child. Am I right?”
“So far as I know , yes.” I put a h and over my mouth to stifle
a rising hiccup.
“A ye. And if so … well, that must mean that Sarah was still
bedding wi’ Abraham at the time, no?”
He still wasn’ t looking at me, but his ears had gone pink,
and I belatedly r ealized the point of this religious discussion. I
reached out a toe and prodded him gently in the side.
“Y ou were thinking perhaps I wouldn’ t want you anymore?”
“Y e dinna want me now ,” he  po inted ou t logically , eyes on
the crumbled remains of his leaf.“I fe el a s though  my belly is full of broken glass, I’m half-
soaked a nd mud to the knees, and whoever ’ s looking for you
is a bout to bu rst through the shrubbery with a pack of
bloodhounds at any moment,” I  said, with a certain amount of
asperity . “Are you actually inviting me to participate in carnal
revelry with you in that mound  of soggy leaves? Because if
you are—”
“No, no,” he said hastily . “I didna mean now . I only meant
—I was  only wondering if—” The tips of his ears had gone a
dull red. He sto od up abruptly , brushing dead leaves from his
kilt with exaggerated force.
“If,” I said in measured tones, “you were to get me with
child at this poi nt in the proceedings, Jamie Fraser , I would
have yo ur balls  en br ochette .” I rocked back, looking up a t
him. “As for bedding with you, though …”
He stopped what he was doing and looked at me. I smiled at
him, letting what I thought show plainly on my face.
“Once you have a bed again,”  I said, “I promise I won’ t
refuse it.”
“Oh,” he said. He drew a dee p breath, looking suddenly
quite happy . “W ell, that’ s all right, then. It’ s only—I
wondered, ye ken.”
A sudden loud rustling in the shrubbery was followed by the
appearance of Mr . W emyss, whose thin, anxious face poked
out of a nannyberry bush.
“Oh, it’ s yourself, sir ,” he said, in evident relief.
“I suppo se it must be,” Jamie said, in resignation. “Is there a
dif ficulty , Mr . W emyss?”
Mr . W e myss was delayed in answering, having become
inextricably entangled with the nannyberry bush, and I was
obliged to go and help release him. A onetime bookkeeper
who had been ob liged to sell himself as an indentured servant,
Mr . W emyss was highly unsuited to life in the wilderness.“I do apologize for troubling ye, sir ,” he said, rather red in
the f ace. He picked nervously a t a spiny twig that had caught
in his fair , flyaway hair .
“It’ s only—well , she did say as she meant to cleave him
from cro wn to crutch wi’ her ax if he didna leave of f, and he
said no woman would speak to  him in that manner , and she
does have  an ax …”
Accustomed to Mr . W emyss’ s m ethods of communication,
Jamie si ghed, reached out for the whisky flask, uncorked it,
and took a deep, sustaining swig. He lowered the flask and
fixed Mr . W emyss with a gimlet eye.
“Who?” he demanded.
“Oh! Er … did I not say? Rosamund Lindsay and Ronnie
Sinclair .”
“Mmphm.”
Not goo d news; Rosamund Lindsay did  hav e an ax; she was
roasting several  pigs in a pit near the creek, over hickory
embers. She also weighed nearly two hundred pounds and,
while n ormally good-humored, was possessed of a notable
temper w hen rou sed. For his par t, Ronnie Sinclair was entirely
capable of irritating the Angel  Gabriel, let alone a woman
trying to cook in the rain.
Jamie si ghed and handed the fla sk back to me. He squared
his shoulders, shaking droplets from his plaid as he settled it.
“Go and tell them I’m coming, Mr . W emyss,” he said.
Mr . W em yss’ s thin face expressed the liveliest apprehension
at th e thought of coming within  speaking range of Rosamund
Lindsay’ s ax, but his awe of Jamie was even greater . He
bobbed a quick, neat bow , turned, and blundered straight into
the nannyberry bush again.
A w ail like an approaching ambulance betokened the
appearance of Marsali, Joan in her arms. She plucked a
clinging branch from Mr . W emyss’ s coat sleeve, nodding to
him as she stepped carefully round him.“Da,” she said, without preamble. “Y e’ve got to come.
Father Kenneth’ s been arrested.”
Jamie’ s eyebrows shot up.
“Arrested? Just now? By whom?”
“A ye, th is minute! A nasty fat man who said he was sherif f
o’ the county . He came up wi’ two men and they asked who
was the priest, a nd when Father Kenneth said it was him, they
seized h im by the arms and marched him straight of f, with
none so much as a by your leave!”
The blo od was rising in Jami e’ s face, and his two stif f
fingers tapped briefly against his thigh.
“They’ve taken him from my hearth?” he said. “A Dhia!”
This was plainly a rhetorical question, and before Marsali
could an swer it, a crunching of footsteps came from the other
direction, and Brianna popped into sight from behind a pine
tree.
“What?” he barked at her . She blinked, taken aback.
“Ah … Geordie Chisholm says  one of the soldiers stole a
ham from his fi re, and will you go and see Lieutenant Hayes
about it?”
“Y es,” he said p romptly . “Later . Meanwhile, do you go back
wi’ Marsali and find out where they’ve taken Father Kenneth.
And Mr . W emyss—” But Mr . W emyss had at last escaped the
clinging embrace of the nannyberry bush. A distant crashing
signaled his rush to fulfill his orders.
A quick look at Jamie’ s face convinced both girls that a
swift ret reat was  the order of the day , and within seconds, we
were alone again. He took a deep breath, and let it slowly out
through his teeth.
I wa nted to laug h, but didn’ t. Instead I moved closer; cold
and damp as it was, I could feel the heat of his skin through his
plaid.“At least it’ s only the sick ones who want to touch me,” I
said. I held out the flask to him. “What do you  do when all the
virtue’ s gone out of you?”
He glanced down at me, and a slow smile spread across his
face. Ign oring the flask, he sto oped, cupped my face in his
hands, and kissed me, very gently .
“That,” he said.
Then he turned and strode downhill, presumably full of
virtue once more.13
BEANS AND BARBECUE
I  T OOK THE K ETTLE BACK to our camp, only to find the
place momentarily deserted. V oices and laughter in the
distance indicated that Lizzie , Marsali, and Mrs. Bug—
presumably with children in tow—were on their way to the
women’ s privy , a latrine trench dug behind a convenient
screen o f juniper , some way fr om the campsites. I hung the
full kett le over the fire to boil, then stood still for a moment,
wondering in which direction my ef forts might be best
directed.
While Father Kenneth’ s situation might be the most serious
in the long run,  it wasn’ t one where my presence would be
likely to make a dif ference. But I was  a doctor—and
Rosamund Lindsay did  have an ax. I pa tted my damp hair and
garments into some sort of orde r , and started downhill toward
the creek, abandoning the mobcap to its fate.
Jamie had evidently been of the same mind regarding the
relative importance of the emer gencies in progress. When I
fought m y way through the thicket of willow saplings edging
the creek, I fo und him standing by the barbecue pit, in
peaceful conversation with Ronnie Sinclair—meanwhile
leaning casually on the handle of the ax, of which he had
somehow managed to possess himself.
I r elaxed  a bit w hen I saw that, and took my time in joining
the party . Unless Rosamund decided to strangle Ronnie with
her bare  hands or beat him to death with a ham—neither of
these contingen cies being at all unthinkable—my medical
services might not be needed after all.
The pit was a broad one, a natural declivity bored out of the
clay creekbank by some distant flood and then deepened by
judicious spadework in the years succeeding. Judging by the
blackened rocks and drifts of scattered charcoal, it had been inuse for some time. In fact, several dif ferent people were using
it now; the ming led scents of fo wl, pork, mutton, and possum
rose up in a clou d of apple-wood and hickory smoke, a savory
incense that made my mouth water .
The sight of the  pit was somewhat less appetizing. Clouds
of white smoke billowed up from the damp wood, half-
obscuring a number of shapes t hat lay upon their smoldering
pyres—many of these looking faintly and hair -raisingly human
through the haze. It reminded me all too vividly of the charnel
pits on Jamaica, where the bo dies of slaves who had not
survived the rigors of the Midd le Passage were burned, and I
swallowed heavily , trying not to recall the macabre roasting-
meat smell of those funeral fires.
Rosamund was working down i n the pit at the moment, her
skirt kirtled well above plump k nees and sleeves rolled back to
bare her massive arms as she ladled a reddish sauce onto the
exposed ribs of a huge hog’ s carcass. Around her lay five more
gigantic shapes,  shrouded in damp burlap, with the wisps of
fragrant smoke curling up around them, vanishing into the soft
drizzle.
“It’ s poison, is w hat it is!” Ronnie Sinclair was saying hotly ,
as I came up beh ind him. “She’ll ruin it—it’ll no be fit for pigs
when she’ s done!”
“It is  pigs, Ronnie,” Jamie said, with considerable patience.
He r olled an eye  at me, then glanced at the pit, where sizzling
fat dripped onto the biers of hickory coals below . “Myself, I
shouldna think ye could do anything to a pig—in the way of
cooking, that is—that would make it not worth the eating.”
“Quite t rue,” I put in helpfully , s miling at Ronnie. “Smoked
bacon, g rilled chops, roasted loin, baked ham, headcheese,
sausage, sweetb reads, black pudding … somebody once said
you could make use of everything in a pig but the squeal.”
“A ye, well, but this is the barb ecue, isn’ t it?” Ronnie said
stubbornly , ignoring my feeble attempt at humor . “Anyone
kens tha t ye sass a barbecued hog wi’ vinegar—that’ s the
proper way of i t! After all, ye wouldna put gravel into yoursausage meat, would ye? Or b oil your bacon wi’ sweepings
from the henhouse? T cha!” H e jerked his chin toward the
white pottery basin under Rosamund’ s arm, making it clear
that its contents fell into the sam e class of inedible adulterants,
in his opinion.
I c aught  a savory whif f as the  wind changed. So far as I
could tell from smell alone, Rosamund’ s sauce seemed to
include tomatoes, onions, red pepper , and enough sugar to
leave a thick b lackish crust on the meat and a tantalizing
caramel aroma in the air .
“I e xpect the m eat will be very juicy , cooked like that,” I
said, feeling my stomach begin to knot and growl beneath my
laced bodice.
“A ye, a wonderful fat lot of pig s they are, too,” Jamie said
ingratiatingly , as Rosamund glanced up, glowering. She was
black to the knees and her square-jowled face was streaked
with rai n, sweat, and soot. “W ill they have been wild hogs,
ma’am, or gently reared?”
“W ild,” she said, with a certain amount of pride,
straightening up and wiping a s trand of wet, graying hair of f
her b row . “Fattened on chestnut  mast—nothin’ like it to give a
flavor to the meat!”
Ronnie Sinclair made a Scottish noise indicative of derision
and contempt.
“A ye, th e flavor ’ s so good ye must hide it under a larding o’
yon grisly sauce that makes it look as though the meat’ s no
even cooked yet, but bleeding raw!”
Rosamund mad e a rather eart hy comment regarding the
supposed manho od of persons who felt themselves squeamish
at the thought of  blood, which R onnie seemed disposed to take
personally . Jami e skillfully maneuvered himself between the
two, keeping the ax well out of reach.
“Oh, I’m sure it’ s verra well cooked indeed,” he replied
soothingly . “Why , Mistress Lindsay has been hard at work
since dawn, at least.”“Long before that, Mr . Fraser , ” the lady replied, with a
certain grim satisfaction. “Y ou want decent barbecue, you start
at least a day be fore, and tend it all through the night. I been a-
minding of these hogs since yes terday afternoon.” She drew in
a g reat snif f of t he rising smoke, wearing a beatific expression.
“Ah, tha t’ s the stuf f! Not but wh at a savory sass like this ‘un
is wasted on you bastardly Scots,” Rosamund said, replacing
the burla p and patting it tenderly into place. “Y ou’ve pickled
your tongues with that everlastin’ vinegar you slop on your
victuals. It’ s all I can do to stop  Kenny a-puttin’ it on his corn
bread and porridge of a mornin’.”
Jamie raised his voice, drown ing out Ronnie’ s incensed
response to this calumny .
“And w as it Kenny that hunted  the hogs for ye, mistress?
W ild hogs have a chancy na ture; surely it’ s a dangerous
business to be s talking beasts of that size. Like the wild boar
that we hunted in Scotland, aye?”
“Ha.” Rosamund cast a look of good-natured scorn toward
the slope above, where her husband—roughly half her size—
presumably was engaged in less strenuous pursuits. “No,
indeed, Mr . Fraser , I kilt this lot myself. W ith that ax,” she
added pointedly , nodding toward the instrument in question
and narrowing her eyes in a sini ster fashion at Ronnie. “Caved
in their skulls with one blow , I did.”
Ronnie, not the most perceptive of men, declined to take the
hint.
“It’ s the tomato fruits she’ s using, Mac Dubh ,” he hissed,
tugging at Jamie’ s sleeve and po inting at the red-crusted bowl.
“Devil’ s apples! She’ll poison us all!”
“Oh, I shouldna think so, Ronn ie.” Jamie took a firm grip
on Ronnie’ s arm, and smiled engagingly at Rosamund. “Y e
mean to  sell the meat, I suppose, Mrs. Lindsay? It’ s a poor
merchant that would kill her customers, aye?”
“I ain’ t yet los t a one, Mr . Fraser ,” Rosamund agreed,
turning back another sheet of  burlap and leaning over todribble sauce from a wooden l adle over a steaming haunch.
“Ain’ t never had but good words about the taste, neither ,” she
said, “though a-course that would be in Boston, where I come
from.”
Wher e folk have sense,  her tone clearly implied.
“I met a ma n from Boston, last time I went to
Charlottesville,” Ronnie said, his foxy brows drawn down in
disapproval. He tugged, trying to free his arm from Jamie’ s
grip, but to no avail. “He said to me as it was his custom to
have beans at his breakfast, and oysters to his supper , and so
he’d done every day since he was a wean. A wonder he hadna
blown up like a pig’ s bladder , filled wi’ such wretched stuf f as
that!”
“Beans, beans, they’re good for your heart,” I said cheerily ,
seizing the opening. “The more you eat, the more you fart. The
more yo u fart, the better you feel—so let’ s have beans for
every meal!”
Ronnie’ s mouth dropped open, as did Mrs. Lindsay’ s. Jamie
whooped with laughter , and  Mrs. Lindsay’ s look of
astonishment dissolved into a booming laugh. After a moment,
Ronnie rather reluctantly joined in, a small grin twisting up the
corner of his mouth.
“I lived in Boston for a time,” I said mildly , as the hilarity
died down a bit. “Mrs. Lindsay , that smells wonderful!”
Rosamund nodded with dignity , gratified.
“Why , s o it does, ma’am, and I  say so.” She leaned toward
me, lowering her voice—slightly—from its normal stentorian
range. “ It’ s my private receipt what does it,” she said, with a
proprietorial pat of the pottery bowl. “Brings out the flavor ,
see?”
Ronnie’ s mouth opened, but only a small yelp emer ged, the
evident result of Jamie’ s hand tightening about his biceps.
Rosamund ignored this, engaging in an amiable discussion
with Jamie that terminated in he r agreeing to reserve an entire
carcass for use at the wedding feast.I gla nced at Jamie, hearing this . Given that Father Kenneth
was prob ably at present en route either back to Baltimore or to
the gaol in Ed enton, I had my doubts as to whether any
marriages would in fact take place tonight.
On the other ha nd, I had learn ed never to underestimate
Jamie, either . W ith a final w ord of compliment to Mrs.
Lindsay , he dragged Ronnie bodily away from the pit, pausing
just long enough to thrust the ax into my hands.
“See that safe, aye, Sassenach ?” he said, and kissed me
briefly . He grinned down at me. “And where did ye learn so
much about the natural history of beans, tell me?”
“Brianna brought it home from school when she was about
six,” I said, smiling back. “It’ s really a little song.”
“T ell her to sing it to her man ,” Jamie advised. The grin
widened. “He can write it down in his wee book.”
He turned away , putting a companionable arm firmly about
the shoulders of Ronnie Sinclai r , who showed signs of trying
to escape back in the direction of the barbecue pit.
“Come a long w i’ me, Ronnie,” he said. “I must just have a
wee wo rd wi’ the Lieutenant. He wishes to buy a ham of
Mistress Lindsay , I think,” he added, blinking at me in the
owllike fashion that passed with him for winking. He turned
back to Ronnie. “But I ken he’ll  want to hear whatever ye can
tell him, about his Da. Y e were a great friend of Gavin Hayes,
no?”
“Oh,” said Ronnie, his scowl l ightening somewhat. “A ye.
A ye, Ga vin was a proper man. A shame about it.” He shook
his head, obviously referring t o Gavin’ s death a few years
before. He glanced up at Jamie, lips pursed. “Does his lad ken
what happened?”
A tende r question, that. Gavin had in fact been hanged in
Charleston, for theft—a shameful death, by anyone’ s
standards.
“A ye,” Jamie said quietly . “I had to tell him. But it will help,
I t hink, if ye can tell him a bit about his Da earlier—tell himhow it was for us, there in Ardsmuir .” Something—not quite a
smile—touched his face as he lo oked at Ronnie, and I saw an
answering softness on Sinclair ’ s face.
Jamie’ s hand tightened on Ronn ie’ s shoulder , then dropped
away , an d they set of f up the hil l, side by side, the subtleties of
barbecue for gotten.
How it was for us  … I watched them go, linked by the
conjuration of that one simple p hrase. Five words that recalled
the close ness for ged by days an d months and years of shared
hardship; a kinship closed to anyone who had not likewise
lived thr ough it. Jamie seldom spoke of Ardsmuir; neither did
any of the other men who had c ome out of it and lived to see
the New W orld here.
Mist was rising from the hollo ws on the mountain now;
within moments, they had disappeared from view . From the
hazy forest above, the sound of Scottish male voices drifted
down toward the smoking pit, chanting in amiable unison:
“Beans, beans, they’r e good for your heart …”
 
RETURNING T O THE CAMPSITE, I found that Roger had
returned from his errands. He st ood near the fire, talking with
Brianna, a troubled look on his face.
“Don’ t worry ,” I told him, reac hing past his hip to retrieve
the rumb ling teakettle. “I’m sure Jamie will sort it somehow .
He’ s gone to deal with it.”
“He has?” He looked slightly startled. “He knows already?”
“Y es, as  soon as he finds the sherif f, I imagine it will all
come right.” I upended the chipp ed teapot I used in camp with
one han d, shook the old leav es out onto the ground, and
putting i t on the table, tipped a little boiling water in from the
kettle to  warm the pot. It had be en a long day , and likely to be
a lo ng evening as well. I w as looking forward to the
sustenance of a properly brewed cup of tea, accompanied by a
slice of the fruitcake one of my patients had given me during
the morning clinic.“The sherif f?” Roger gave Brianna a baf fled look, faintly
tinged with alarm. “She hasn’ t set a sherif f on me, has she?”
“Set a sherif f on you? Who?” I said, joining in the chorus of
baf flement. I hung the kettle ba ck on its tripod, and reached
for the tin of t ea leaves. “Whatever have you been doing,
Roger?”
A faint flush showed over his high cheekbones, but before
he could answer , Brianna snorted briefly .
“T elling Auntie Jocasta where s he gets of f.” She glanced at
Roger , and her eyes narrowed into triangles of mildly
malicious amusement as she envisioned the scene. “Boy , I
wish I’d been there!”
“Whatever did you say to her , Roger?” I inquired,
interested.
The flush deepened, and he looked away .
“I do n’ t wish to repeat it,” he sa id shortly . “It wasna the sort
of th ing one ought to say to a woman, let alone an elderly one,
and particularly  one about to be related to me by marriage. I
was just asking Bree whether I maybe ought to go and
apologize to Mrs. Cameron before the wedding.”
“No,” Bree said promptly . “The nerve of her! Y ou had every
right to say what you did.”
“W ell, I don’ t regret the substa nce of my remarks,” Roger
said to her , with a wry hint of a smile. “Only the form.
“See,” he said, turning to me , “I’m only thinking that
perhaps I should apologize, to keep it from being awkward
tonight—I don’ t want Bree’ s wedding to be spoiled.”
“Bree’ s weddin g? Y ou think I’m getting married by
myself?” she asked, lowering thick red brows at him.
“Oh, well, no,” he admitted, sm iling a little. He touched her
cheek, gently . “I’ll stand up nex t ye, to be sure. But so long as
we end up married, I’m not so much bothered about the
ceremony . Y e’ll  want it to be nice, though, won’ t ye? Put adamper on the occasion, and y our auntie crowns me with a
stick of firewood before I can say ‘I will.’ ”
I wa s by now consumed by curiosity to know just what he
had  s aid  to Jocasta, but thought I h ad better address the more
immediate issue, which was that at the moment of going to
press, it appeared that there might be no wedding to be
spoiled.
“And so Jamie’ s out looking for Father Kenneth now ,” I
finished. “Marsali didn’ t recognize the sherif f who took him,
though, which makes it dif ficult.”
Roger ’ s dark brows lifted, then drew together in concern.
“I wond er …” he said, and tur ned to me. “Do ye know , I
think perhaps I saw him, just a few moments ago.”
“Father Kennet h?” I asked, knife suspended over the
fruitcake.
“No, the sherif f.”
“What? Where? ” Bree half-turned on one heel, glaring
round. H er hand  curled up into  a fist, and I thought it rather
fortunate that the sherif f wasn’ t in sight. Having Brianna
arrested for assault really would  hav e a dampen ing ef fect on
the wedding.
“He went that way .” Roger gestured downhill, toward the
creek—and Lieutenant Hayes’ s tent. As he did so, we heard
the s ound of foo tsteps squelchin g through mud, and a moment
later , Jamie appeared, looking tired, worried, and highly
annoyed. Obviously , he hadn’ t yet found the priest.
“Da!” Bree greeted him with excitement. “Roger thinks he’ s
seen the sherif f who took Father Kenneth!”
“Oh, aye?” Jamie at once per ked up. “Where?” His left
hand curled up in anticipation,  and I couldn’ t help smiling.
“What’ s funny?” he demanded, seeing it.
“Nothing,” I assured him. “Here, have some fruitcake.” I
handed him a slice, which he  promptly crammed into his
mouth, returning his attention to Roger .“Where?” he demanded, indistinctly .
“I don’ t  know that it was the man you’re looking for ,”
Roger told him. “He was a raggedy wee man. But he had got a
prisoner; he was taking one of  the fellows from Drunkard’ s
Creek of f in handcuf fs. MacLennan, I think.”
Jamie choked and coughed,  spewing small bits of
masticated fruitcake into the fire.
“He arrested Mr . MacLennan? And you let  him?” Bree was
staring at Roger in consternation. Neither she nor Roger had
been present when Abel MacLennan had told his story over
breakfast, but both of them knew him.
“I couldna very well prevent him,” Roger pointed out
mildly . “ I did call out to MacLe nnan to ask if he wanted help
—I thought I’d fetch your Da or Farquard Campbell, if he did.
But he just looked through me, as though I might have been a
ghost, an d then when I called again, he gave me an odd sort of
smile and shook his head. I didn a think I ought to go and beat
up a sherif f, just on general principle. But if you—”
“Not a sherif f,” Jamie said hoarsely . His eyes were
watering, and he paused to cough explosively again.
“A thief-taker ,” I told Roger . “Something like a bounty
hunter , I gather .” The tea wasn’ t nearly brewed yet; I found a
half-full stone bottle of ale and handed that to Jamie.
“Where will he be taking Abel? ” I asked. “Y ou said Hayes
didn’ t want prisoners.”
Jamie shook his head, swallowed, and lowered the bottle,
breathing a little easier .
“He doesna. No, Mr . Boble—it must be him, aye?—will
take Abel to the nearest magistrate. And if wee Roger saw him
just the now … ” He turned, thinking, brows furrowed as he
surveyed the mountainside around us.
“It will be Farquard, most likely ,” he concluded, his
shoulders relaxin g a little. “I ken four justices of the peace andthree magistrate s here at the Gathering, and of the lot,
Campbell’ s the only one camped on this side.”
“Oh, tha t’ s good.” I sighed in relief. Farquard Campbell was
a fair man; a sti ckler for the law , but not without compassion
—and more importantly , perhap s, a very old friend of Jocasta
Cameron.
“A ye, we’ll ask my aunt to have  a word—perhaps we’d best
do it before the weddings.” He turned to Roger . “W ill ye go,
MacKenzie? I must be finding Father Kenneth, if there are to
be  any weddings.”
Roger looked as though he, too, had just choked on a bit of
fruitcake.
“Er … well,” he  said, awkwardly . “Perhaps I’m no the best
man to be saying anything to Mrs. Cameron just now .”
Jamie was staring at him in mingled interest and
exasperation.
“Why not?”
Blushing fiercely , Roger recounted the substance of his
conversation wi th Jocasta—low ering his voice nearly to the
point of inaudibility at the conclusion.
W e heard it clearly enough, nonetheless. Jamie looked at
me. His mouth t witched. Then his shoulders began to shake. I
felt the laughter bubble up under my ribs, but it was nothing to
Jamie’ s hilarity . He laughed almost silently , but so hard that
tears came to his eyes.
“Oh, Christ!” he gasped at last . He clutched his side, still
wheezing faintly . “God, I’ve sprung a rib, I think.” He reached
out and took on e of the half-dr ied clean clouts from a bush,
carelessly wiping his face with it.
“All right,” he said, recovering himself somewhat. “Go and
see Farq uard, then. If Abel’ s there, tell Campbell I’ll stand
surety f or him. Bring him back with ye.” He made a brief
shooing gesture, and Roger—pu ce with mortification but stif f
with dignity—departed at once. Bree followed him, casting aglance of reproof at her father , which merely had the ef fect of
causing him to wheeze some more.
I drown ed my own mirth wit h a gulp of steaming tea,
blissfully fragra nt. I of fered the  cup to Jamie, but he waved it
away , content with the rest of the ale.
“My aunt,” he o bserved, lowering the bottle at last, “kens
verra well indeed what money will buy and what it will not.”
“And she’ s just bought herself—and everyone else in the
county—a good opinion of poor Roger , hasn’ t she?” I replied,
rather dryly .
Jocasta Cameron was a MacKenzie of Leoch; a family
Jamie had once described as “ch arming as the larks in the field
—and sl y as foxes, with it.” Whether Jocasta had truly had any
doubt herself of Roger ’ s motives in marrying Bree, or merely
thought to forestall idle gossi p along the Cape Fear , her
methods had been undeniably successful. She was probably up
in her tent chortling over her cleverness, looking forward to
spreading the story of her of fer and Roger ’ s response to it.
“Poor Roger ,” Jamie agreed, his mouth still twitching.
“Poor but virtuous.” He tipped up the bottle of ale, drained it,
and set it down with a brief sigh of satisfaction. “Though come
to that,”  he added, glancing a t me, “she’ s bought the lad
something of value as well, hasn’ t she?”
“My son,”  I quoted softly , nodding. “Do you think he
realized it himself before he said it? That he really feels
Jemmy is his son?”
Jamie m ade an indeterminate m ovement with his shoulders,
not quite a shrug.
“I canna  say . It’ s as well he should have that fixed in his
mind, though, before the next ba irn comes along—one he kens
for sure is his.”
I thought of my conversation that morning with Brianna, but
decided it was w iser to say noth ing—at least for now . It was,
after all, a matter between Roge r and Bree. I only nodded, and
turned to tidy away the tea things.I felt a s mall glow in the pit of  my stomach that was only
partly th e result  of the tea. Roger had sworn an oath to take
Jemmy as his own, no matte r what the little boy’ s true
paternity might be; he was an honorable man, Roger , and he
meant it . But the speech of the heart is louder than the words
of any oath spoken by lips alone.
When I had gon e back, pregnant, through the stones, Frank
had swo rn to me that he would  keep me as his wife, would
treat the coming child as his own—would love me as he had
before. A ll three  of those vows his lips and mind had done his
best to keep, but his heart, in the end, had sworn only one.
From the moment that he took Brianna in his arms, she was his
daughter .
But what if there had been another child? I wondered
suddenly . It had never been a possibility—but if it had?
Slowly , I wiped the teapot dry  and wrapped it in a towel,
contemplating the vision of that mythical child; the one Frank
and I might have had, but neve r did, and never would. I laid
the wrap ped teapot in the ches t, gently , as though it were a
sleeping baby .
When I turned b ack, Jamie was still standing there, looking
at me with a rather odd expression—tender , yet somehow
rueful.
“Did I ever think  to thank ye, Sassenach?” he said, his voice
a little husky .
“For wh at?” I said, puzzled. He took my hand, and drew me
gently toward him. He smelled of ale and damp wool, and very
faintly of the brandied sweetness of fruitcake.
“For my bairns,” he said softly . “For the children that ye
bore me.”
“Oh,” I said. I leaned slowly forward, and rested my
forehead against the solid warmth of his chest. I cupped my
hands at  the small of his back beneath his coat, and sighed. “It
was … my pleasure.”
 “MR. FR ASER, MR. FRASER !” I lifted my head and turned
to see a small boy churning do wn the steep slope behind us,
arms waving to keep his balance  and face bright red with cold
and exertion.
“Oof!” Jamie got his hands up just in time to catch the boy
as he hurtled down the last few feet, quite out of control. He
boosted the little boy , whom I recognized as Farquard
Campbell’ s youngest, up in his arms and smiled at him. “A ye,
Rabbie, what is it? Does your Da want me to come for Mr .
MacLennan?”
Rabbie s hook hi s head, shaggy h air flying like a sheepdog’ s
coat.
“No, sir ,” he panted, gasping fo r breath. He gulped air and
the smal l throat swelled like a frog’ s with the ef fort to breathe
and speak at once. “No, sir . My Da says he’ s heard where the
priest is and I should show ye the way , sir . W ill ye come?”
Jamie’ s brows flicked up in momentary surprise. He glanced
at m e, then smil ed at Rabbie, and nodded, bending down to set
him on his feet.
“A ye, lad, I will. Lead on, then!”
“Delicate of Farquard,” I said to Jamie under my breath,
with a nod at Rabbie, who scampered ahead, looking back
over his  shoulder now and then, to be sure we were managing
to ke ep up with him. No one wo uld notice a small boy , among
the swar ms of children on the mountain. Everyone would most
assuredly have noticed had Far quard Campbell come himself
or sent one of his adult sons.
Jamie hu f fed a little, the mist o f his breath a wisp of steam
in the gathering chill.
“W ell, i t’ s no Farquard’ s concern, after all, even if he has
got a great regard for my aunt. A nd I expect if he’ s sent the lad
to tell me, it means he kens th e man who’ s responsible, and
doesna mean to choose up sid es wi’ me against him.” He
glanced at the setting sun, and gave me a rueful look.“I did say I should find Father Kenneth by sunset, but still—
I dinna think we shall see a wedding tonight, Sassenach.”
Rabbie led us onward and upward, tracing the maze of
footpaths and trampled dead grass without hesitation. The sun
had finally broken through the c louds; it had sunk deep in the
notch of the mo untains, but was still high enough to wash the
slope with a wa rm, ruddy light that momentarily belied the
chill of the day . People were g athering to their family fires
now , hungry for their suppers, and no one spared a glance for
us among the bustle.
At last, Rabbie came to a stop, at the foot of a well-marked
path that led up and to the right. I had crisscrossed the
mountain’ s face several times during the week of the
Gathering, but had never ventu red up this high. Who was in
custody of Father Kenneth, I wondered—and what did Jamie
propose to do about it?
“Up there,” Rabbie said unnecessarily , pointing to the peak
of a lar ge tent, just visible through a screen of longleaf pine.
Jamie m ade a Scottish noise in t he back of his throat at sight
of the tent.
“Oh,” he said softly , “so that’ s how it is?”
“Is it? Never mind how it i s; whose  is it?” I looked
dubiously at the tent, which was  a lar ge af fair of waxed brown
canvas, pale in the gloaming. It obviously belonged to
someone fairly wealthy , but w asn’ t one I was familiar with
myself.
“Mr . Lillywhite, of Hillsborou gh,” Jamie said, and his
brows drew down in thought. He patted Rabbie Campbell on
the head, and handed him a penny from his sporran. “Thank
ye, l addie. Run away to your M am now; it’ll be time for your
supper .” Rabbie took the coin and vanished without comment,
pleased to be finished with his errand.
“Oh, really .” I cocked a wary eye at the tent. That explained
a few things, I supposed— though not everything. Mr .
Lillywhite was a magistrate from Hillsborough, though I knewnothing else about him, save what he looked like. I had
glimpsed him once or twice during the Gathering, a tall, rather
drooping man, his figure made distinctive by a bottle-green
coat with silver buttons, but had never formally met him.
Magistrates were responsible for appointing sherif fs, which
explained the connection with the “nasty fat man” Marsali had
described, and why Father Ken neth was incarcerated here—
but that left open the question of whether it was the sherif f or
Mr . Lillywhite who had wanted the priest removed from
circulation in the first place.
Jamie put a hand  on my arm, and drew me of f the path, into
the shelter of a small pine tree.
“Y e dinna ken Mr . Lillywhite, do you, Sassenach?”
“Only by sight. What do you want me to do?”
He s miled at me , a hint of mischief in his eyes, despite his
worry for Father Kenneth.
“Game for it, are ye?”
“Unless you’re proposing that I  bat Mr . Lillywhite over the
head and  liberate Father Kenneth by force, I suppose so. That
sort of thing is much more your line of country than mine.”
He l aughed at th at, and gave the  tent what appeared to be a
wistful look.
“I should like nothing better ,” he said, confirming this
impression. “It wouldna be dif f icult in the least,” he went on,
eyeing t he tan canvas sides of  the tent appraisingly as they
flexed in the wind. “Look at the size of it; there canna be more
than two  or three men in there, besides the priest. I could wait
until the full dark, and then take a lad or two and—”
“Y es, but what do you want me to do now?” I interrupted,
thinking I had best put a stop to what sounded a distinctly
criminal train of thought.
“Ah.” H e aband oned his machinations—for the moment—
and squi nted at me, appraising m y appearance. I had taken of f
the bloodstained canvas apron I wore for sur gery , had put upmy hair  neatly with pins, and was reasonably respectable in
appearance, if a trifle mud-draggled round the hems.
“Y e dinna have any of your ph ysician’ s kit about ye?” he
asked, frowning dubiously . “A bottle of swill, a bittie knife?”
“Bottle of swill, indeed. No, I —oh, wait a moment. Y es,
there are these; w ill they do?” Digging about in the pocket tied
at my waist, I ha d come up with the small ivory box in which I
kept my gold-tipped acupuncture needles.
Evidently satisfied, Jamie nodded, and pulled out the silver
whisky flask from his sporran.
“A ye, th ey’ll do,” he said, hand ing me the flask. “T ake this
too, thou gh, for looks. Go up to the tent, Sassenach, and tell
whoever ’ s guarding the priest that he’ s ailing.”
“The guard?”
“The priest,” he said, giving me a look of mild exasperation.
“I da resay everyone will ken ye as a healer by now , and know
ye o n sight. Say that Father Kenneth has an illness that you’ve
been treating, and he must have a dose of his medicine at once,
lest he sicken and die on them. I dinna suppose they want that
—and they’ll not be afraid of you.”
“I s houldn’ t imagine they need be,” I agreed, a trifle
caustically . “Y ou  don’ t mean me to stab the sherif f through the
heart with my needles, then?”
He grinned at the thought, but shook his head.
“Nay , I only want ye to learn why they’ve taken the priest
and wha t they mean to do with him. If I were to go and
demand answers myself, it might put them on guard.”
Meaning that he had not completely abandoned the notion
of a later commando raid on Mr . Lillywhite’ s stronghold,
should the answers prove unsatisfactory . I glanced at the tent
and took a deep breath, settling my shawl about my shoulders.
“All righ t,” I said. “And what ar e you intending to do while
I’m about it?”“I’m go ing to go and fetch the bairns,” he said, and with a
quick squeeze of my hand for luck, he was of f down the trail.
 
I W AS STILL W ONDERING exactly what he meant by that
cryptic s tatement—which “bairns”? Why?—as I came within
sight of the open tent flap, but all speculation was driven from
my mind by the appearance of a gentleman therein who met
Marsali’ s description of “a nasty , fat man” so exactly that I had
no d oubt of his  identity . He was short and toadlike, with a
receding hairline, a belly that strained the buttons of a food-
stained l inen vest, and small, b eady eyes that watched me as
though assessing my immediate prospects as a food item.
“Good day to you, ma’am,” he said. He viewed me without
enthusiasm, no doubt finding me less than toothsome, but
inclined his head with formal respect.
“Good d ay ,” I replied cheerily , dropping him a brief curtsy .
Never h urt to be polite—at least not to start with. “Y ou’ll be
the s herif f, won’ t you? I’m afrai d I haven’ t had the pleasure of
a formal introduction. I’m Mrs. Fraser—Mrs. James Fraser , of
Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
“David Anstruther , Sherif f of Orange County—your
servant, ma’am,” he said, bowing again, though with no real
evidence of delight. He didn’ t show any surprise at hearing
Jamie’ s name, either . Either he simply wasn’ t familiar with it
—rather unlike ly—or he had been expecting such an
ambassage.
That being so, I saw no point in beating round the bush.
“I u nderstand that you’re entertaining Father Donahue,” I
said pleasantly . “I’ve come to see him; I’m his physician.”
Whatever he’d been expecting, it wasn’ t that; his jaw
dropped slightly , exposing a severe case of malocclusion,
well-advanced g ingivitis, and a missing bicuspid. Before he
could close it, a tall gentleman in a bottle-green coat stepped
out of the tent behind him.“Mrs. Fraser?” he said, one eyebrow raised. He bowed
punctiliously . “Y ou say you wish to speak with the clerical
gentleman under arrest?”
“Under arrest?” I af fected great surprise at that. “A priest?
Why , whatever can he have done?”
The Sherif f and the magistrate exchanged glances. Then the
magistrate coughed.
“Perhaps you are unaware, madam, that it is illegal for
anyone other than the cler gy of the established Church—the
Church of England, that is—to undertake his of fice within the
colony of North Carolina?”
I was not unaware of that, though I also knew that the law
was seld om put into ef fect, the re being relatively few of any
kind of cler gy in the colony to start with, and no one bothering
to take any of fic ial notice of the itinerant preachers—many of
them free lances in the most bas ic sense of the word—who did
appear from time to time.
“Gracious!” I said, af fecting sho cked surprise to the best of
my abil ity . “No, I had no idea. Goodness me! How very
strange!” Mr . Lillywhite blinked slightly , which I took as an
indication that that would jus t about do, in terms of my
creating an impression of well-b red shock. I cleared my throat,
and brought out the silver flask and case of needles.
“W ell. I do ho pe any dif ficulties will be soon resolved.
However , I should very much lik e to see Father Donahue for a
moment. As I said, I am his physician. He has an …
indisposition”—I slid back the cover of the case, and
delicately displayed the needles, letting them imagine
something suitably virulent—”that requires regular treatment.
Might I see him for a moment, to administer his medicine? I
… a h … should  not like to see a ny mischief result from a lack
of care on my part, you know .” I smiled, as charmingly as
possible.
The Sherif f pulled his neck dow n into the collar of his coat
and looked malevolently amphibious, but Mr . Lillywhiteseemed better af fected by the smile. He hesitated, looking me
over .
“W ell, I am not sure that …” he began, when the sound of
footsteps came squelching up t he path behind me. I turned,
half-expecting to see Jamie, but instead beheld my recent
patient, Mr . Goodwin, one cheek still puf fed from my
attentions, but sling intact.
He was quite as  surprised to se e me, but greeted me with
great cordiality , and a cloud of a lcoholic fumes. Evidently Mr .
Goodwin had been taking my advice regarding disinfection
very seriously .
“Mrs. F raser! Y ou have not com e to minister to my friend
Lillywhite, I trust? I expect Mr . Anstruther would benefit from
a good pur ge, though—clear the bilious humors, eh, David?
Haha!” He clapped the Sherif f on the back in af fectionate
camaraderie; a gesture Anstruther suf fered with no more than
a small grimace, giving me some idea of Mr . Goodwin’ s
importance in the social scheme of Orange County .
“Geor ge, my dear ,” Mr . Lillywhite greeted him warmly .
“Y ou are acquainted with this charming lady , then?”
“Oh, in deed, indeed I am, sir!” Mr . Goodwin turned a
beaming countenance upon me. “Why , Mrs. Fraser did me
great ser vice thi s morning, great service indeed! See here!” He
brandished his bound and splinted arm, which, I was pleased
to s ee, was evi dently giving him no pain whatever at the
moment, though that probably had more to do with his self-
administered anesthesia than with my workmanship.
“She qu ite cured  my arm, with no more than a touch here, a
touch there—an d drew a broken tooth so clean that I scarce
felt a thing! ‘O ok!” He stuck a finger into the side of his
mouth and pulled back his cheek, exposing a tuft of
bloodstained wadding protruding from the tooth socket and a
neat line of black stitching on the gum.
“Really , I am most impressed, Mrs. Fraser .” Lillywhite
snif fed at the w aft of cloves and whisky from Mr . Goodwin’ smouth, looking interested, and I saw the bulge of his cheek as
his own tongue tenderly probed a back tooth.
“But what brings you up here, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr . Goodwin
turned th e beam  of his joviality  on me. “So late in the day—
perhaps you will do me the hon or of taking a bit of supper at
my fire?”
“Oh, thank you, but I can’ t, really ,” I said, smiling as
charmingly as possible. “I’ve ju st come to see another patient
—that is—”
“She wants to see the priest,” Anstruther interrupted.
Goodwin blinked at that, taken only slightly aback.
“Priest. There is a priest here?”
“A Papist,” Mr . Lillywhite ampl ified, lips curling back a bit
from the unclean word. “It came  to my attention that there was
a Cathol ic priest concealed in the assembly , who proposed to
celebrate a Mass during the fest ivities this evening. I sent Mr .
Anstruther to arrest him, of course.”
“Father Donahu e is a friend of mine,” I put in, as forcefully
as possi ble. “And he was not concealed; he was invited quite
openly , a s the guest of Mrs. Cam eron. He is also a patient, and
requires treatment. I’ve come to see that he gets it.”
“A f riend of yours? Are you Catholic, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr .
Goodwin looked startled; it obviously hadn’ t occurred to him
that he was being treated by a Popish dentist, and his hand
went to his swollen cheek in bemusement.
“I am,” I said, h oping that merely being a Catholic wasn’ t
also against Mr . Lillywhite’ s conception of the law .
Evidently not. Mr . Goodwin gave Mr . Lillywhite a nudge.
“Oh, co me, Randall. Let Mrs. Fraser see the fellow , what
harm can it do? And if he’ s truly Jocasta Cameron’ s guest …”
Mr . Lilly white pursed his lips in  thought for a moment, then
stood aside, holding back the flap of canvas for me.“I s uppose there can be no ha rm in your seeing your …
friend,” he said slowly . “Come in, then, madam.”
Sundown was at hand, and the t ent was dark inside, though
one canvas wall still glowed b rightly with the sinking sun
behind i t. I shut my eyes for a moment, to accustom them to
the change of light, then blinked and looked about to get my
bearings.
The tent seemed cluttered but relatively luxurious, being
equipped with a camp bed and other furniture, the air within
scented not only by damp canvas and wool but with the
perfume of Ceylon tea, expensive wine, and almond biscuits.
Father Donahue was silhouetted in front of the glowing
canvas, sitting on a stool behi nd a small folding table, on
which were arrayed a few sheets of paper , an inkstand, and a
quill. Th ey might as well have been thumbscrews, pincers, and
a red-hot poker , judging from his militantly upright attitude,
evocative of expectant martyrdom.
The clinking of flint and tinder box came from behind me,
and then the faint glow of a light. This swelled, and a black
boy—Mr . Lillyw hite’ s servant, I supposed—came forward and
silently set a small oil lamp on the table.
Now tha t I got a clear look at t he priest, the impression of
martyrdom grew  more pronounced. He looked like Saint
Stephen after the first volley of stones, with a bruise on his
chin and a first- rate black eye, empurpled from browridge to
cheekbone and swollen quite shut.
The non blackened eye widened at sight of me, and he
started up with an exclamation of surprise.
“Father Kenneth.” I gripped him by the hand and squeezed,
smiling broadly for the benefit of whatever audience might be
peeking through the flap. “I’ve brought your medicine. How
are you feeling?” I raised my eyebrows and waggled them,
indicating that he should play along with the deception. He
stared at me in fascination for a moment, but then appeared tocatch on. He co ughed, then, encouraged by my nod, coughed
again, with more enthusiasm.
“It’ s … very kind of ye to … think of me, Mrs. Fraser ,” he
wheezed, between hacks.
I pu lled of f the top of the flask,  and poured out a generous
measure of whisky .
“Are you quite all right, Father ?” I asked, low-voiced, as I
leaned across to hand it to him. “Y our face …”
“Oh, it’ s  nothing, Mrs. Fraser d ear , not at all,” he assured
me, his faint Iri sh accent coming out under the stress of the
occasion. “‘T was only that I made the mistake of resistin’
when th e Sherif f arrested me. N ot but what in the shock of it
all, I didn’ t do a small bit of damage to the poor man’ s
ballocks, and him only doing o f his duty , may God for give
me.” Fa ther Kenneth rolled his undamaged eye upward in a
pious expression—quite spoiled by the unregenerate grin
underneath.
Father Kenneth was no more than middle height, and looked
older than his years by virtue of the hard wear imposed by
long seasons spent in the saddl e. Still, he was no more than
thirty-five, and lean and tough as whipcord under his worn
black coat and fr ayed linen. I began to understand the Sherif f ’ s
belligerence.
“Besides,” he added, touching his black eye gingerly , “Mr .
Lillywhite did tender me a m ost gracious apology for the
hurt.” He nodded toward the ta ble, and I saw that an opened
bottle o f wine and a pewter cup stood among the writing
materials—the c up still full, and  the level of wine in the bottle
not down by much.
The priest picked up the whisky  I had poured and drained it,
closing his eyes in dreamy benediction.
“And a finer m edicine I hope never to benefit from,” he
said, op ening them. “I do thank  ye, Mistress Fraser . I’m that
restored, I might walk on water meself.” He remembered to
cough, this one a delicate hack, fist held over his mouth.“What’ s wrong with the wine ?” I asked, with a glance
toward the door .
“Oh, not a thing ,” he said, taking his hand away . “Only that
I di d not think  it quite right to accept the magistrate’ s
refreshments, under the circums tances. Call it conscience.” He
smiled a t me again, but this time with a note of wryness in the
grin.
“Why h ave they arrested you?” I asked, my voice low . I
looked a gain at the tent’ s door , but it was empty , and I caught
the murmur of v oices outside. Evidently , Jamie had been right;
they weren’ t suspicious of me.
“For sayin’ of the Holy Mass ,” he replied, lowering his
voice to match mine. “Or so they said. It’ s a wicked lie,
though. I’ve not said Mass since last Sunday , and that was in
V ir ginia.” He was looking wistfully at the flask. I picked it up
and poured another generous tot.
I f rowne d a bit, thinking, while he drank it, more slowly this
time. W hatever were Mr . Lillywhite and company up to? They
couldn’ t, surely ,  be meaning to bring the priest to trial on the
char ge of saying Mass. It would be no great matter to find
false wi tnesses to say he had, of course—but what would be
the point of it?
While Catholic ism was certainly not popular in North
Carolina, I could see no great p urpose in the arrest of a priest
who would be leaving in the morning in any case. Father
Kenneth came from Baltimore and meant to return there; he
had come to the Gathering only as a favor to Jocasta Cameron.
“Oh!” I said, an d Father Kenneth looked at me inquiringly
over the rim of his cup.
“Just a thought, ” I said, gesturi ng to him to continue. “Do
you happen to know whether Mr . Lillywhite is personally
acquainted with Mrs. Cameron?” Jocasta Cameron was a
prominent and wealthy woman—and one of strong character ,
therefore not without enemies. I couldn’ t see why Mr .Lillywhite woul d go out of his way to disoblige her in such a
peculiar fashion, even so, but …
“I am acquainted with Mrs. Cameron,” said Mr . Lillywhite,
speaking behind  me. “Though alas, I can claim no intimate
friendship with the lady .” I whi rled to find him standing just
within the tent’ s entrance, followed by Sherif f Anstruther and
Mr . Goodwin, with Jamie bringing up the rear . The latter
flicked an eyebrow at me, but otherwise maintained an
expression of solemn interest.
Mr . Lillywhite bowed to me in acknowledgment.
“I have just been explaining to your husband, madame, that
it is my regard for Mrs. Came ron’ s interests that led me to
attempt to regularize Mr . Donahue’ s position, so as to allow
his continued presence in the colony .” Mr . Lillywhite nodded
coldly at the priest. “However , I am afraid my suggestion was
summarily rejected.”
Father Kenneth put down his c up and straightened up, his
working eye bright in the lamplight.
“They wish me to sign an oath, sir ,” he said to Jamie, with a
gesture a t the paper and quill on  the table before him. “T o the
ef fect that I do not subscribe to a belief in transubstantiation.”
“Do they , indeed.” Jamie’ s voice betrayed no more than
polite interest, but I understood at once what the priest had
meant by his remark regarding conscience.
“W ell, he can’ t do that, can he? ” I said, looking round the
circle of men. “Catholics—I mean— we “—I spo ke with  some
emphasis, looking at Mr . Goodwin—” do  believe in
transubstantiation. Don’ t we?” I asked, turning to the priest,
who smiled slightly in response, and nodded.
Mr . Goodwin looked unhappy , but resigned, his alcoholic
joviality substantially reduced by the social awkwardness.
“I’m so rry , Mrs. Fraser , but that is the law . The only
circumstance under which a cler gyman who does not belong to
the established Church may rem ain in the colony—legally—is
upon the  signing  of such an oath. Many do sign it. Y ou knowthe Reverend Urmstone, the Methodist circuit rider? He has
signed t he oath, as has Mr . Calvert, the New Light minister
who lives near W adesboro.”
The She rif f look ed smug. Repressing an ur ge to stamp on
his foot, I turned to Mr . Lillywhite.
“W ell, but Father Donahue can’ t sign it. So what do you
propose to do w ith him? Throw the poor man in gaol? Y ou
can’ t do that—he’ s ill!” On cue, Father Kenneth coughed
obligingly .
Mr . Lillywhite eyed me dubiously , but chose instead to
address Jamie.
“I co uld by rights imprison the  man, but out of regard for
you, Mr . Fraser , and for your aunt, I shall not do so. He must,
however , leave the colony tomo rrow . I shall have him escorted
into V ir ginia, where he will b e released from custody . Y ou
may rest assured that all care  will be taken to assure his
welfare on the journey .” He tu rned a cold gray eye on the
Sherif f, who straightened up an d tried to look reliable, with
indif ferent results.
“I see.” Jamie spoke lightly , looking from one man to
another , his eyes coming to rest on the Sherif f. “I trust that is
true, sir—for if I should hear of any harm coming to the good
Father , I should be … most distressed.”
The She rif f met his gaze, stone -faced, and held it until Mr .
Lillywhite cleared his throat, frowning at the Sherif f.
“Y ou have my word upon it, Mr . Fraser .”
Jamie turned to him, bowing slightly .
“I co uld ask no more, sir . And y et if I may presume—might
the Fath er not spend tonight in comfort among his friends, that
they might take their leave of him? And that my wife might
attend his injuries? I would stan d surety for his safe delivery
into your hand come morning.”
Mr . Lill ywhite pursed his lips and af fected to consider this
suggestion, but the magistrate was a poor actor . I realized withsome interest that he had foreseen this request, and had his
mind made up already to deny it.
“No, sir ,” he said, trying for a tone of reluctance. “I regret
that I cannot grant your request.  Though if the priest wishes to
write letters to various of his acquaintance”—he gestured at
the shea f of papers—”I will undertake to see them promptly
delivered.”
Jamie cleared his own throat and drew himself up a bit.
“W ell, then,” he said. “I wonder whether I might make so
bold as to ask …” He paused, seeming slightly embarrassed.
“Y es, sir?” Lillywhite looked at him curiously .
“I wonder whether the good Father might be allowed to hear
my confession.” Jamie’ s eyes were fixed on the tent pole,
sedulously avoiding mine.
“Y our confession?”
Lillywhite look ed astonished at this, though the Sherif f
made a noise that might charitably be called a snigger .
“Got something pressing on your conscience?” Anstruther
asked rudely . “Or p’r ’aps you have some premonition of
impending death , eh?” He gave an evil smile at this, and Mr .
Goodwin, looking shocked, rumbled a protest at him. Jamie
ignored both of them, focusing his regard on Mr . Lillywhite.
“Y es, sir . It ha s been some time since I last had the
opportunity of being shriven, ye see, and it may well be some
time bef ore such a chance occ urs again. As it is—” At this
point, he caught my eye, and  made a slight but emphatic
motion w ith his head toward the tent flap. “If ye will excuse us
for a moment, gentlemen?”
Not waiting for a response, he seized me by the elbow and
propelled me swiftly outside.
“Brianna and Marsali are up the path wi’ the weans,” he
hissed in my ear , the moment we were clear of the tent. “Make
sure Lillywhite and yon bastard of a sherif f are well away , then
fetch them in.”Leaving me standing on the path, astonished, he ducked
back into the tent.
“Y our pardon, gentlemen,” I heard him say . “I thought
perhaps … there are some things a man shouldna quite like to
be saying before his wife … you understand?”
There were male murmurs of understanding, and I caught
the word “confession” repeated in dubious tones by Mr .
Lillywhite. Jamie lowered his voice to a confidential rumble in
response, interru pted by a rather loud, “Y ou what ?” from the
Sherif f, and a peremptory shushing by Mr . Goodwin.
There was a bit of confused conversation, then a shuf fle of
movement, and I barely made it of f the path and into the
shelter of the p ines before the tent flap lifted and the three
Protestants eme r ged from the tent. The day had all but faded
now , leaving burning embers of sunlit cloud in the sky , but
close as they we re, there was enough light for me to see the air
of vague embarrassment that beset them.
They mo ved a few steps down the path, stopping no more
than a few feet from my own hiding place. They stood in a
cluster to confer , looking back at the tent, from which I could
now hear Father Kenneth’ s vo ice, raised in a formal Latin
blessing. The lamp in the tent went out, and the forms of Jamie
and the priest, d im shadows on the canvas, disappeared into a
confessional darkness.
Anstruther ’ s bulk sidled closer to Mr . Goodwin.
“What in fuck’ s name is transubstantiation?” he muttered.
I saw Mr . Goodwin’ s shoulders straighten as he drew
himself up, then hunch toward his ears in a shrug.
“In all honesty , sir , I am not positive of the meaning of the
term,” he said, r ather primly , “though I perceive it to be some
form of  pernicious Papist doctrine. Perhaps Mr . Lillywhite
could supply you with a more complete definition—Randall?”
“Indeed,” the magistrate said. “It is the notion that by the
priest’ s speaking particular words in the course of of fering hisMass, br ead and wine are transformed into the very substance
of Our Savior ’ s body and blood.”
“What?” Anstru ther sounded confused. “How can anyone
do that?”
“Change bread and wine into flesh and blood?” Mr .
Goodwin sounded quite taken aback. “But that is witchcraft,
surely!”
“W ell, it would be, if it happened,” Mr . Lillywhite said,
sounding a bit m ore human. “The Church very rightly holds
that it does not.”
“Are we sure of that?” Anstruther sounded suspicious.
“Have you seen them do it?”
“Have I attended a Catholic Mass? Assuredly not!”
Lillywhite’ s tall form drew up, austere in the gathering dusk.
“What do you take me for , sir!”
“Now , R andall, I am sure the Sherif f means no of fense.”
Goodwin put a p lacatory hand on his friend’ s arm. “His of fice
deals with more earthly matters, after all.”
“No, no, no of fense meant, sir , none at all,” Anstruther said
hurriedly . “I was meaning more, like, has anybody  seen this
kind of goings -on, so as to be a decent witness, for the
prosecution of it, I mean.”
Mr . Lillywhite appeared still to be somewhat of fended; his
voice was cold in reply .
“It is scarcely necessary to have witnesses to the heresy ,
Sherif f, as the priests themselves willingly admit to it.”
“No, no. Of cou rse not.” The Sherif f ’ s squat form seemed to
flatten obsequiously . “But if I’m right, sir , Papists do … er …
partake  of this—this transubwhatnot, aye?”
“Y es, so I am told.”
“W ell, then. That’ s frigging cannibalism, isn’ t it?”
Anstruther ’ s bulk popped up again, enthused. “I know that’ s
against t he law!  Why not let this bugger do his bit of hocus-pocus, a nd we’ll arrest the whole boiling lot of ‘em, eh? Get
shut of any number of the bastards at one blow , I daresay .”
Mr . Goodwin emitted a low moan. He appeared to be
massaging his face, no doubt to ease a recurrent ache from his
tooth.
Mr . Lillywhite exhaled strongly through his nose.
“No,” he said evenly . “I am  afraid not, Sherif f. My
instructions are that the priest is  not to be allowed to perform
any cer emonial, and shall be prevented from receiving
visitors.”
“Oh, aye? And what’ s he doing now , then?” Anstruther
demanded, gesturing toward the  darkened tent, where Jamie’ s
voice had begun to speak, h esitant and barely audible. I
thought perhaps he was speaking in Latin.
“That is quite dif ferent,” Lillywhite said testily . “Mr . Fraser
is a gentleman. A nd the prohibition against visitors is to insure
that the priest shall perform n o secret marriages; hardly a
concern at present.”
“Bless m e, Father , for I have sinned.” Jamie’ s voice spoke
in English, suddenly louder , and Mr . Lillywhite started. Father
Kenneth murmured interrogatively .
“I ha ve been gu ilty of the sins of lust and impurity , both in
thought and in my flesh,” Jamie announced—with what I
thought rather more volume than was quite discreet.
“Oh, to be sure, ” said Father Kenneth, suddenly louder too.
He soun ded interested. “Now , these sins of impurity—what
form, precisely , did they take, my son, and upon how many
occasions?”
“A ye, well. I’ve looked upon women with lust, to be starting
with. How many occasions—oh , make it a hundred, at least,
it’ s b een a time since I was last to confession. Did ye need to
know which women, Father , or  only what it was I thought of
doing to them?”
Mr . Lillywhite stif fened markedly .“I think we’ll not have time for the lot, Jamie dear ,” said the
priest. “But if ye were to tell me about one or two of these
occasions, just so as I could be f ormin’ a notion as to the … er
… severity of the of fense … ?”
“Och, ay e. W ell,  the worst was likely the time wi’ the butter
churn.”
“Butter churn? Ah … the sort w ith the handle pokin’ up?”
Father Kenneth’ s tone encompassed a sad compassion for the
lewd possibilities suggested by this.
“Oh, no , Father;  it was a barrel churn. The sort that lies on
its s ide, aye, with a wee handle to turn it? W ell, it’ s only that
she was workin’ the churn with  great vigor , and the laces of
her bodi ce undo ne, so that her breasts wobbled to and fro, and
the c loth clinging to her with th e sweat of her work. Now , the
churn was just the right height—and curved, aye?—so as
make me think of bendin’ her a cross it and lifting her skirts,
and—”
My mouth opened involuntarily in shock. That was my
bodice h e was describing, my br easts, and my butter churn! T o
say nothing of my skirts. I remembered that particular
occasion quite vividly , and if i t had started with an impure
thought, it certainly hadn’ t stopped there.
A ru stling and murmuring drew my attention back to the
men on the path. Mr . Lillywhite had grasped the Sherif f—still
leaning avidly toward the tent, ears flapping—by the arm and
was hissing at him as he forced him hastily down the path. Mr .
Goodwin followed, though with an air of reluctance.
The noise of their departure had unfortunately drowned out
the rest of Jamie’ s description of that particular occasion of
sin, but had luckily also cover ed the leaf-rustling and twig-
snapping behind me that announced the appearance of Brianna
and Ma rsali, Jemmy and Joan swaddled in their arms and
Germain clinging monkeylike to his mother ’ s back.
“I thought they’d never go,” Brianna whispered, peering
over my shoulder toward the spot where Mr . Lillywhite andhis companions had disappeared. “Is the coast clear?”
“Y es, come along.” I reached for Germain, who leaned
willingly into my arms.
“Ou nous allees, Grand-mer e?”  he inquired in a sleepy
voice, blond head nuzzling af fectionately into my neck.
“Shh. T o see Grand-per e  and Father Ken neth,” I whispered
to him. “W e have to be very quiet, though.”
“Oh. Like this?” he hissed, in a  loud whisper , and began to
sing a very vulg ar French song, chanting half under his breath.
“Shh!” I  clapped a hand across his mouth, moist and sticky
with whatever he’d been eating. “Don’ t sing, sweetheart, we
don’ t want to wake the babies.”
I h eard a small, stifled noise fro m Marsali, a strangled snort
from Bree, and realized that Ja mie was still confessing. He
appeared to have hit his stride, and was now inventing freely
—or at least I hoped so. He certainly hadn’ t been doing any of
that with me.
I po ked my head  out, looking u p and down the trail, but no
one was near . I motioned to the girls, and we scuttled across
the path and into the darkened tent.
Jamie stopped abruptly as we fu mbled our way inside. Then
I heard him sa y quickly , “And sins of anger , pride, and
jealousy—oh, and the odd wee bit of lying as well, Father .
Amen.” He dropped to his kn ees, raced through an Act of
Contrition in French, and was o n his feet and taking Germain
from me before Father Kenneth had finished saying the “Ego
te absolvo.”
My eyes were b ecoming adapted to the dark; I could make
out the voluminous shapes of the girls, and Jamie’ s tall outline.
He stood Germain on the table before the priest, saying,
“Quickly , then, Father; we havena much time.”
“W e haven’ t any water , either ,” the priest observed. “Unless
you ladies thought to bring any ?” He had picked up the flint
and tinderbox, and was attempting to relight the lamp.Bree and Marsali exchanged appalled glances, then shook
their heads in unison.
“Dinna fash, Father .” Jamie spoke soothingly , and I saw him
reach out a han d for something on the table. There was the
brief squ eak of a cork being draw n, and the hot, sweet smell of
fine whisky filled the tent, as th e light caught and grew from
the wick, the wavering flame steadying to a small, clear light.
“Under the circumstances …” Jamie said, holding out the
open flask to the priest.
Father Kenneth’ s lips pressed together , though I thought
with suppressed amusement, rather than irritation.
“Under the circumstances, aye,” he repeated. “And what
should be more appropriate tha n the water of life, after all?”
He reach ed up, undid his stock, and pulled up a leather string
fastened round his neck, from w hich dangled a wooden cross
and a small glass bottle, stoppered with a cork.
“The holy chrism,” he explained, undoing the bottle and
setting it on the table. “Thank the V ir gin Mother that I had it
on my person. T he Sherif f took the box with my Mass things.”
He mad e a quick inventory of the objects on the table,
counting them of f on his fingers. “Fire, chrism, water—of a
sort—and a child. V ery well, the n. Y ou and your husband will
stand as godparents to him, I suppose, ma’am?”
This wa s addressed to me, Jamie having gone to take up a
station by the tent flap.
“For all  of them, Father ,” I sai d, and took a firm grip on
Germain, who seemed disposed  to leap of f the table. “Hold
still, darling, just for a moment.”
I heard a small whish  b ehind me; metal drawn from oiled
leather . I glanced back to see  Jamie, dim in the shadows,
standing guard by the door with his dirk in his hand. A qualm
of appre hension curled through my belly , and I heard Bree
draw in her breath beside me.
“Jamie, my son,” said Father K enneth, in a tone of mild
reproval.“Be going on w ith it, if ye please, Father ,” Jamie replied,
very calmly . “I mean to have m y grandchildren baptized this
night, and no one shall prevent it.”
The prie st drew  in his breath with a slight hiss, then shook
his head.
“A ye. And if yo u kill someone, I hope there’ll be time for
me to shrive you  again before they hang us both,” he muttered,
reaching for the oil. “If there’ s a choice about it, try for the
Sherif f, will you, man dear?”
Switching abruptly to Latin, he pushed back Germain’ s
heavy m op of blond hair and his thumb flicked deftly over
forehead, lips, and then—divin g under the boy’ s gown in a
gesture t hat mad e Germain double up in giggles—heart, in the
sign of the Cross.
“On-behalf-of-this-child-do-you-renounce-Satan-and-all-
his-works?” he asked, speaking so fast that I scarcely realized
he was speaking English again, and barely caught up in time to
join with Jamie in the godparents’ response, dutifully reciting,
“I do renounce them.”
I wa s on  edge, keeping an ear o ut for any noises that might
portend the return of Mr . Lillywhite and the Sherif f,
envisioning just what sort of bro uhaha might ensue if they did
come back to d iscover Father Kenneth in the midst of what
would surely be considered an illicit “ceremonial.”
I gla nced back a t Jamie; he was looking at me, and gave me
a fai nt smile tha t I thought was likely meant for reassurance. If
so, it failed utterly; I knew h im too well. He wanted his
grandchildren baptized, and he would see their souls safely
given in to God’ s care, if he died for it—or if we all went to
gaol, Brianna, Marsali, and the children included. Of such
stuf f are  martyrs made, and thei r families are obliged to lump
it.
“Do-you-believe-in-one-God-the-Father -the-Son-and-the-
Holy-Ghost?”“Stubborn man,” I mouthed at Jamie. His smile widened,
and I turned ba ck, hastily chiming in with his firm, “I do
believe.” W as that a footfall on  the path outside, or only the
evening wind, making the tree branches crack as it passed?
The questions and responses finished, and the priest grinned
at m e, looking l ike a gar goyle in the flickering lamplight. His
good eye closed briefly in a wink.
“W e’ll take it that your answe rs will be the same for the
others, shall we, ma’am? And what will be this sweet lad’ s
baptismal name?”
Not breaking his rhythm, the priest took up the whisky
flask, an d dribbled a careful s tream of spirit onto the little
boy’ s head, repeating, “I baptize thee, Germain Alexander
Claudel MacKen zie Fraser , in the Name of the Father , the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, Amen.”
Germain watch ed this operation with profound interest,
round blue eyes crossing as th e amber liquid ran down the
shallow bridge of his nose and d ripped from its stubby tip. He
put out a tongue to catch the d rops, then made a face at the
taste.
“Ick,” he said clearly . “Horse piss.”
Marsali made a brief, shocked “T st!” at him, but the priest
merely chuckled, swung Germain of f the table, and beckoned
to Bree.
She held  Jemmy over the table , cradled in her arms like a
sacrifice. She was intent on the b aby’ s face, but I saw her head
twitch slightly , her attention d rawn by something outside.
There wer e  s ou nds on the path below; I could hear voices. A
group of  men, I thought, talking  together , voices genial but not
drunken.
I tensed, trying not to look at Jamie. If they came in, I
decided, I had better grab Germain, scramble under the far
edge of the tent,  and run for it. I  took a preparatory grip on the
collar of  his gown, just in case.  Then I felt a gentle nudge as
Bree shifted her weight against me.“It’ s all right, Mama,” she whispered. “It’ s Roger and
Fer gus.” She nodded toward the dark, then returned her
attention to Jemmy .
It was, I realized , and the skin of my temples prickled with
relief. Now that I knew , I could make out the imperious,
slightly nasal sound of Fer gus’ s voice, raised in a lengthy
oration o f some kind, and a low  Scottish rumble that I thought
must be  Roger ’ s. A higher -pitched titter that I recognized as
Mr . Goodwin’ s drifted through the night, followed by some
remark in Mr . Lillywhite’ s aristocratic drawl.
I did  glance at Jamie this time. H e still held the dirk, but his
hand had  fallen to his side, and h is shoulders had lost a little of
their tension. He smiled at me a gain, and this time I returned
it.
Jemmy was awake, but drowsy . He made no objection to the
oil, but startled at the cold touch of the whisky on his
forehead, eyes popping open and arms flinging wide. He
uttered a high-pitched “Y eep!” of protest, then, as Bree
gathered him hastily up into his blanket against her shoulder ,
screwed up his face and tried to decide whether he was
suf ficiently disturbed to cry about it.
Bree pa tted his back like a bongo drum and made little
hooting noises in his ear , distracting him. He settled for
plugging his mouth with a thumb and glowering suspiciously
at th e assemblage, but by that time, Father Kenneth was
already pouring  whisky on the  sleeping Joan, held low in
Marsali’ s arms.
“I baptize thee, Joan Laoghaire Claire Fraser ,” he said,
following Marsa li’ s lead, and I glanced at Marsali, startled. I
knew sh e was called Joan for Marsali’ s younger sister , but I
hadn’ t k nown what the baby’ s other names would be. I felt a
small lump in my throat, watching Marsali’ s shawled head
bent ove r the child. Both her sister and her mother , Laoghaire,
were in Scotland; the chances of either ever seeing this tiny
namesake were vanishingly small.Suddenly , Joan’ s slanted eyes popped wide open and so did
her m outh. She let out a piercin g shriek, and everyone started
as though a bomb had exploded in our midst.
“Go in peace, to serve the L ord! And go fast!” Father
Kenneth said, his fingers already nimbly corking up bottle and
flask, frantically whisking away all traces of the ceremony .
Down the path, I could hear voices raised in puzzled question.
Marsali was out the tent flap in  a flash, the squalling Joan
against h er breast, a protesting Germain clutched by the hand.
Bree pa used just long enough to put a hand behind Father
Kenneth’ s head and kiss him on the forehead.
“Thank you, Father ,” she whis pered, and was gone in a
flurry of skirts and petticoats.
Jamie h ad me by the arm and was hustling me out of the
tent as well, but  stopped for a half-second at the door , turning
back.
“Father?” he called in a whisper . “Pax vobiscum!”
Father Kenneth had already seated himself behind the table,
hands fo lded, th e accusing sheets of blank paper spread out
once more before him. He looked up, smiling slightly , and his
face was perfectly at peace in the lamplight, black eye and all.
“ Et c um s piritu tu o , ma n,” he said, and raised three fingers
in parting benediction.
 
“WHA T ON EAR TH did you do that for?” Brianna’ s whisper
floated back to me, loud with  annoyance. She and Marsali
were on ly a few feet in front of us, going slowly because of
the child ren, but close as they  were, the girls’ shawled and
bunchy shapes were scarcely distinguishable from the bushes
over growing the path.
“Do what? Leave that, Germain ; let’ s find Papa, shall we?
No, don’ t put it in your mouth!”
“Y ou pinched Joanie—I saw you ! Y ou could have got us all
caught!”“But I had to!” M arsali sounded  surprised at the accusation.
“And it wouldna have mattered, really—the christening was
done by  then. They couldna mak e Father Kenneth take it back,
now , co uld they?” She giggled slightly at the thought, then
broke of f. “Germain, I said drop it!”
“What do you mean, you had to? Let go, Jem, that’ s my
hair! Ow! Let go, I said!”
Jemmy was evidently now wide awake, interested in the
novel su rroundings, and wanting to explore them, judging
from his repeated exclamations of “Ar gl!” punctuated by the
occasional curious “Gleb?”
“Why , she was a sleep!” Marsali  said, sounding scandalized.
“She didna wake when Father Kenneth poured the water—I
mean the whisky—on her head—Germain, come back here!
Thig air ais a seo! —and ye ken it’ s ill luck for a child not to
make a wee skelloch when it’ s baptized; that’ s how ye ken as
the origi nal sin is leaving it! I c ouldna let the diabhol  stay in
my wee  lassie. Could I, mo mhaorine ?” There were small
kissing n oises, a nd a faint coo from Joanie, promptly drowned
by Germain, who had started to sing again.
Bree gave a small snort of amusement, her irritation fading.
“Oh, I see. W ell, as long as you had a good reason. Though
I’m not so sure i t worked on Jem my and Germain. Look at the
way the y’re acting—I’d swear they were possessed. Ow!
Don’ t bite me, you little fiend, I’ll feed you in a minute!”
“Och, well, they’re boys, after all,” Marsali said tolerantly ,
raising her voice slightly to be heard above the racket.
“Everyone kens that boys are full o’ the devil; I suppose it
would ta ke more than a bit of h oly water to drown it all, even
if it was  nin ety-proof. Germain! Wher e  did  ye hear such a
filthy song, ye wee ratten?”
I s miled , and next to me, Jamie laughed quietly , listening to
the girls’ conversation. W e were far enough from the scene of
the crime by no w not to worry about being heard, among the
snatches of song, fiddle music, and laughter that flickeredthrough the trees with the light o f the campfires, bright against
the growing dark.
The business of the day was l ar gely done, and folk were
settling down to the evening meal, before the calling, the
singing, and the last round of  visits started. The scents of
smoke and supper trailed tantalizing fingers through the cold,
dark air , and my stomach rumb led gently in answer to their
summons. I hoped Lizzie was s uf ficiently restored as to have
begun cooking.
“What’ s mo mhaorine ?” I asked Jamie . “I haven’ t hea rd that
one before.”
“It mean s ‘my wee potato,’ I think,” he said. “It’ s Irish, aye?
She learnt it from the priest.”
He sighed, sounding deeply satisfied with the evening’ s
work so far .
“May Bride bless Father Ken neth for a nimble-fingered
man; for a mom ent, I thought we wouldna manage it. Is that
Roger and wee Fer gus?”
A couple of dark shadows had come out of the wood to join
the girls, and the sound of muf fled laughter and murmured
voices—punctuated by raucous shrieks from both little boys at
sight of their daddies—drifted back to us from the little knot of
young families.
“It i s. And speaking of that, my little sweet potato,” I said,
taking a  firm grip of his arm to slow him, “what do you mean
by t elling Father Kenneth all that about me and the butter
churn?”
“Y e dinna mean to say ye mind ed, Sassenach?” he said, in
tones of surprise.
“Of course I mi nded!” I said. T he blood rose warm in my
cheeks, though I wasn’ t sure whether this was due to the
memory of his confession—or to the memory of the original
occasion. My innards warmed s lightly at that thought as well,
and the last rem nants of cramp began to subside as my womb
clenched and relaxed, eased by  the pleasant inward glow . Itwas scarcely a s uitable time or place, but perhaps later in the
evening, we might manage suf ficient privacy—I pushed the
thought hastily aside.
“Privacy quite aside, it wasn’ t a sin at all,” I said primly .
“W e’re married, for goodness’ sake!”
“W ell, I  did confess to telling lies, Sassenach,” he said. I
couldn’ t see the smile on his face, but I could hear it well
enough in his voice. I supposed he could hear mine, too.
“I had to think of a sin frightful  enough to drive Lillywhite
away—and I couldna confess to theft or buggery; I may have
to do business with the man one day .”
“Oh, so  you think he’d be put of f by sodomy , but he’d
consider your attitude toward w omen in wet chemises just a
minor fl aw of character?” His a rm was warm under the cloth
of his shirt. I  touched the underside of his wrist, that
vulnerable place where the skin lay bare, and stroked the line
of the vein that pulsed there, disappearing under the linen
toward his heart.
“Keep your voice down, Sassenach,” he murmured,
touching my hand. “Y e dinna want the bairns to hear ye.
Besides,” he added, his voice dropping low enough that he
was obli ged to lean down and w hisper in my ear , “it’ s not all
women. Only the ones with lovely round arses.” He let go my
hand and patted my backside fa miliarly , showing remarkable
accuracy in the darkness.
“I wouldna cross the road to se e a scrawny woman, if she
were stark naked and dripping  wet. As for Lillywhite,” he
resumed, in a more normal tone of voice, but without
removing his hand, which was molding the cloth of my skirt
thoughtfully round one buttock, “he may be a Protestant,
Sassenach, but he’ s still a man.”
“I didn’ t realize the two states were incompatible,” Roger ’ s
voice said dryly , coming out of the darkness nearby .
Jamie snatched his hand away as though my bottom were on
fire. It wasn’ t—quite—but there  was no denying that his flinthad struck a spark or two among the kindling, damp as it was.
It was a long time before bedtime, though.
Pausing just long enough to administer a brief, private
squeeze to Jamie’ s anatomy that made him gasp sharply , I
turned to find R oger clasping a lar ge wriggling object in his
arms, its nature obscured by the  dark. Not a piglet, I surmised,
despite the loud grunting noises it was making, but rather
Jemmy , who seemed to be gnawing fiercely on his father ’ s
knuckles. A small pink fist sho t out into a random patch of
light, clenched in concentration, then disappeared, meeting
Roger ’ s ribs with a solid thump.
Jamie gave a small grunt of amusement himself, but wasn’ t
discomposed in the slightest by having his opinion of
Protestants overheard.
“‘All are gude lasses,’ ” he qu oted in broad Scots, “‘but
where do the ill wives come frae?’ ”
“Eh?” Roger said, sounding a bit bewildered.
“Protestants are born  wi’  pricks,” J amie explained, “the
men, at least—b ut some let the m wither from disuse. A man
who spe nds his time pokin’ his … nose into others’ sinfulness
has nay time to tend his own.”
I converted a laugh into a more tactful cough.
“And some just become bigger pricks, what with the
practice,” Roger  said, more dryly still. “A ye, well. I came to
thank you … for managing about the baptism, I mean.”
I noticed  the slight hesitation; he still had not settled on any
comfortable nam e by which to call Jamie to his face. Jamie
addressed him  i mparti ally as “W ee Roger ,” “ Roger Mac,” or
“MacKenzie”—more rarely , by the Gaelic nickname Ronnie
Sinclair had given Roger , a Smeoraich , in hono r of his voice.
Singing Thrush , it meant.
“It’ s me should be thanking you, a charaid . W e shouldna
have ma naged there at the las t, save for you and Fer gus,”
Jamie said, laughter warming his own voice.Roger w as clearly visible in ou tline, tall and lean, with the
glow of someone’ s fire behind him. One shoulder rose as he
shrugged, and he shifted Jemmy to his other arm, wiping
residual drool from his hand against the side of his breeches.
“No trou ble,” he  said, a little gruf fly . “W ill the—the Father
be all right, d’ ye think? Brianna said he’d been roughly
handled. I hope they’ll not mistreat him, once he’ s away .”
Jamie sobered at that. He shrugg ed a little as he straightened
the coat on his shoulders.
“I th ink he’ll be safe enough, aye—I had a word with the
Sherif f.” There was a certain grim emphasis on “word” that
made his meaning clear . A substantial bribe might have been
more ef f ective, but I was well aware that we had exactly two
shillings, threep ence, and nine farthings in cash to our names
at th e m oment. B etter to save th e money and rely on threats, I
thought. Evidently Jamie was of the same mind.
“I shall speak to my aunt,” he said, “and have her send a
note tonight to Mr . Lillywhite,  wi’ her own opinion on the
subject. That will be a better safeguard for Father Kenneth
than anything I can say myself.”
“I don’ t suppose she’ll be at all pleased to hear that her
wedding is postponed,” I observed. She wouldn’ t be. Daughter
of a  Highland la ird and widow of a very rich planter , Jocasta
Cameron was used to having her own way .
“No, she won’ t,” Jamie agreed wryly , “though I suppose
Duncan may be a bit relieved.”
Roger laughed, not without sympathy , and fell in beside us
as w e started do wn the path. He shifted Jemmy , still grunting
ferociously , under his arm like a football.
“A ye, he will. P oor Duncan. So the weddings are definitely
of f, are they?”
I couldn ’ t see Jamie’ s frown, but I felt the movement as he
shook his head doubtfully .“A ye, I’ m afraid so. They wou ldna give the priest to me,
even with my word to hand him over in the morning. W e could
maybe take him by force, but even so—”
“I doubt  that would help,” I interrupted, and told them what
I had overheard while waiting outside the tent.
“So I can’ t see  them standing round and letting Father
Kenneth perform marriages,” I finished. “Even if you got him
away , they’d be combing the m ountain for him, turning out
tents and causing riots.”
Sherif f Anstruther wouldn’ t be without aid; Jamie and his
aunt mi ght be held in good esteem among the Scottish
community , but Catholics in general and priests in particular
weren’ t.
“Instructions?” Jamie repeated, sounding astonished.
“Y ou’re sure of it, Sassenach? It was Lillywhite who said he
had ‘instructions’?”
“It w as,” I said, realizing for the first time how peculiar that
was. The Sherif f was plainly taking instructions from Mr .
Lillywhite, that  being his duty . But who could be giving
instructions to the magistrate?
“There’ s another magistrate here , and a couple of justices of
the peace, but surely …” Roger said slowly , shaking his head
as h e thought. A  loud squawk interrupted his thoughts, and he
glanced down, the light from a nearby fire shining of f the
bridge of his nose, outlining a faint smile as he spoke to his
of fspring. “Wha t? Y ou’re hungry , laddie? Don’ t fret yourself,
Mummy will be back soon.”
“Where is  Mummy?” I said, peering into the shifting mass
of s hadows ahead. A light w ind had risen, and the bare
branches of oak and hickory ratt led like sabers overhead. Still,
Jemmy was more than loud enough for Brianna to hear him. I
caught Marsali’ s voice faintly up ahead, engaged in what
appeared to be amiable conversation with Germain and Fer gus
regarding suppe r , but there was no sound of Bree’ s lower ,
huskier Boston-bred tones.“Why?” Jamie said to Roger , ra ising his voice to be heard
over the wind.
“Why what? Here, Jem, see that? W ant it? A ye, of course ye
do. Y es, good lad, gnaw on that for a bit.” A spark of light
caught something shiny in Roger ’ s free hand; then the object
disappeared, and  Jemmy’ s cries ceased abruptly , succeeded by
loud sucking and slurping noises.
“What is that? It isn’ t small enough for him to swallow , is
it?” I asked anxiously .
“Ah, no. It’ s a watch chain. Not to worry ,” Roger assured
me, “I’ve a good grip on the end of it. If he swallows it, I can
pull it back out.”
“Why w ould so meone not want you to be married?” Jamie
said patiently , ignoring the imminent danger to his grandson’ s
digestive system.
“Me?” R oger so unded surprised. “I shouldn’ t think anyone
cares whether I’m married or not, save myself—and you,
perhaps,” he added, a touch of humor in his voice. “I expect
ye’d like the boy to have a name. Speaking of that”—he
turned to  me, the wind pulling l ong streamers of his hair loose
and turn ing him  into a wild black fiend in silhouette—”what
did  he end up being named? At the christening, I mean.”
“Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser  MacKenzie,” I said, hoping
I recalled it correctly . “Is that what you wanted?”
“Oh, I didn’ t m ind so much what he was called,” Roger
said, edg ing gingerly round a lar ge puddle that spread across
the path. It had  begun to sprinkle again; I could feel small
chilly dr ops on my face, and se e the dimpling of the water in
the puddle where the firelight shone across it.
“I w anted Jeremiah, but I told B ree the other names were up
to her . She coul dn’ t quite decide between John for John Grey ,
and—and Ian, for her cousin, b ut of course they’re the same
name in any case.”
Again I noticed  the faint hesita tion, and I felt Jamie’ s arm
stif fen s lightly under my hand. J amie’ s nephew Ian was a sorepoint—and fresh in everyone’ s  mind, thanks to the note we
had received from him the day before. That must be what had
decided Brianna at last.
“W ell, i f it isna you and my daughter ,” Jamie pursued
doggedly , “then who is it? Jocasta and Duncan? Or the folk
from Bremerton?”
“Y ou think someone’ s out specially to prevent the marriages
tonight?” Roger seized the opportunity to talk about something
other than Ian Murray . “Y ou don’ t think it’ s just general dislike
of Romish practices, then?”
“It might be, bu t it’ s not. If it were, why wait ‘til now to
arrest the priest? W ait a bit, Sassenach, I’ll fetch ye over .”
Jamie le t go of m y hand and ste pped round the puddle, then
reached back, grabbed me by th e waist, and lifted me bodily
across i n a swish of skirts. The wet leaves slipped and
squelched under  my boots as he set me down, but I seized his
arm for balance, righting myself.
“No,” J amie c ontinued the conversation, turning back
toward Roger . “Lillywhite and Anstruther have no great love
of Catho lics, I expect, but why stir up a stramash now , when
the priest would be gone in the morning, anyway? Do they
maybe think he’ll corrupt all the God-fearing folk on the
mountain before dawn if they dinna keep him in ward?”
Roger gave a short laugh at that.
“No, I suppose not. Is there a nything else the priest was
meant to do tonight, beyond performing marriages and
baptisms?”
“Perhaps a few confessions,” I said, pinching Jamie’ s arm.
“Nothing else that I know of.” I squeezed my thighs together ,
feeling an alarming shift in my intimate arrangements. Damn,
one of the pins holding the cloth between my legs had come
loose when Jamie lifted me. Had I lost it?
“I don’ t suppose  they’d be tryin g to keep him from hearing
someone’ s confession? Someone in particular , I mean?” Rogersounded doubtful, but Jamie took the idea and turned it round
in his hands, considering.
“They’d no objection to his hearing mine. And I shouldna
think they’d care if a Catholic w as in mortal sin or not, as by
their lights, we’re all damned  anyway . But if they kent
someone despe rately needed confession, and they thought
there was something to be gained by it …”
“That whoever it was might pay for access to the priest?” I
asked skeptically . “Really , Jamie, these are Scots. I should
imagine that if it  were a question  of paying out hard money for
a priest, your Scottish Catholic murderer or adulterer would
just say an Act of Contrition and hope for the best.”
Jamie snorted slightly , and I saw the white mist of his breath
purl round his head like candle smoke; it was getting colder .
“I d aresay ,” he said dryly . “And if Lillywhite had any
thought of setting up in the confession business, he’ s left it a
bit l ate i n the day to make much  profit. But what if it wasna a
matter of stopping someone’ s confession—but rather only of
making sure that they overheard it?”
Roger uttered a pleased grunt, evidently thinking this a
promising supposition.
“Blackmail? A ye, that’ s a thought,” he said, with approval.
Blood will out, I thought; Oxfo rd-educated or not, there was
little doubt that Roger was a  Scot. There was a violent
upheavel under  his arm, follo wed by a wail from Jemmy .
Roger glanced down.
“Oh, did ye drop  your bawbee? Where’ s it gone, then?” He
hoicked Jemmy up onto his shoulder like a bundle of laundry
and squatted down, poking at the ground in search of the
watch chain, which Jemmy had evidently hurled into the
darkness.
“Blackmail? I think that’ s a trifle far -fetched,” I objected,
rubbing a hand under my nose, which had begun to drip. “Y ou
mean they might suspect that Farquard Campbell, for instance,
had committed some dreadful cr ime, and if they knew about itfor s ure, they c ould hold him up about it? Isn’ t that awfully
devious thinking? If you find a pin down there, Roger , it’ s
mine.”
“W ell, Lillywhite and Anstruthe r are Englishmen, are they
not?” Jamie said, with a delicate sarcasm that made Roger
laugh. “D eviousness and double-dealing come naturally to that
race, no, Sassenach?”
“Oh, rub bish,” I  said tolerantly . “Pot calling the kettle black
isn’ t in it. Besides, they didn’ t try to overhear your
confession.”
“I havena got anything to be blackmailed for ,” Jamie
pointed out, though it was perfe ctly obvious that he was only
ar guing for the fun of it.
“Even so ,” I began, but was interrupted by Jemmy , who was
becoming increasingly restive, flinging himself to and fro with
intermittent steam-whistle shrieks. Roger grunted, pinched
something gingerly between his fingers, and stood up.
“Found your pin,” he said. “No sign of the chain, though.”
“Someone will find it in the m orning,” I said, raising my
voice to be heard over the increasing racket. “Perhaps you’d
better let me take him.” I reached for the baby , and Roger
surrendered his burden with a distinct air of relief—explained
when I got a whif f of Jemmy’ s diaper .
“Not again ?” I said. Apparently taking this as a personal
reproach, he shut his eyes and s tarted to howl like an air -raid
siren.
“Where is  Bree?” I asked, trying simultaneously to cradle
him reassuringl y and to keep  him at a sanitary distance.
“Ouch!” He seemed to have tak en advantage of the darkness
to gr ow a numb er of extra limb s, all of which were flailing or
grabbing.
“Oh, she’ s just g one to run a wee errand,” Roger said, with
an air of vagueness that made Ja mie turn his head sharply . The
light caught him in profile, an d I saw the thick red brows
drawn d own in suspicion. Fire gleamed of f the long, straightbridge of his no se as he lifted it, questioning. Obviously , he
smelled a rat. H e turned toward me, one eyebrow lifted. W as I
in on it?
“I haven ’ t any idea,” I assured him. “Here, I’m going across
to M cAllister ’ s fire to borrow a clean clout. I’ll see you at our
camp in a bit.”
Not wai ting for an answer , I too k a firm grasp on the baby
and shuf fled into the bushes, he ading for the nearest campsite.
Geor giana McA llister had newborn twins—I’d delivered them
four days before—and was hap py to provide me with both a
clean di aper and a private bus h behind which to ef fect my
personal repairs. These accomplished, I chatted with her and
admired the twins, all the whil e wondering about the recent
revelations. Betw een Lieutenan t Hayes and his proclamation,
the machination s of Lillywhite and company , and whatever
Bree and Roger were up to, the mountain seemed a perfect
hotbed of conspiracy tonight.
I wa s pleased that we had managed the christening—in fact,
I wa s su rprised to find just how  gratified I did feel about it—
but I had to admit to a pang of distress over Brianna’ s canceled
wedding. She hadn’ t said much about it, but I knew that both
she and Roger had been looki ng forward very much to the
blessing of their union. The firelight winked briefly ,
accusingly , of f the gold ring on  my left hand, and I mentally
threw up my hands in Frank’ s direction.
And just  what do you expect me to do about it?  I demanded
silently , while externally agreein g with Geor giana’ s opinion on
the treatment of pinworms.
“Ma’am?” One of the older McAllister girls, who had
volunteered to change Jemmy , interrupted the conversation,
dangling a long, slimy object delicately between two fingers.
“I f ound this g aud in the wean’ s cloot; is it maybe your
man’ s?”
“Good grief!” I was shocked by the watch chain’ s
reappearance, but a moment’ s rationality corrected my first
alarmed impression that Jemmy had in fact swallowed thething. It would take several hours for a solid object to make its
way through even the most active infant’ s digestive tract;
evidently he had merely dropped his toy down the front of his
gown and it had come to rest in his diaper .
“Gie it here, lass.” Mr . McAll ister , catching sight of the
watch chain, reached out and to ok it with a slight grimace. He
pulled a lar ge handkerchief from the waist of his breeks and
wiped th e object carefully , bringing to light the gleam of silver
links and a small round fob, bearing some kind of seal.
I n oted the fob  with some gri mness, and made a mental
resolve to give Roger a proper  bollocking about what he let
Jemmy put in his mouth. Thank goodness it hadn’ t come of f.
“Why , that’ s Mr . Caldwell’ s wee gaud, surely!” Geor giana
leaned forward,  peering over the heads of the twins she was
nursing.
“Is i t?” Her hus band squinted at the object, and fumbled in
his shirt for his spectacles.
“A ye, I’ m sure it is! I saw it wh en he preached Sunday . The
first of my pains was just comin’ on,” she explained, turning to
me, “and I had to come away before he’d finished. He saw me
turn to go, and must ha’ thought he’d outstayed his welcome,
for he pulled the watch from his pocket to have a wee keek,
and I saw the glint from that bittie round thing on the chain.”
“That’ s called a seal, a nighean ,” her husband informed her ,
having now settled a pair of half-moon spectacles firmly atop
his nose , and turning the little metal emblem over between his
fingers. “Y ou’re right, though, it’ s Mr . Caldwell’ s, for see?” A
horny finger traced the outline of the figure on the seal: a
mace, an  open book, a bell, and a tree, standing on top of a
fish with a ring in its mouth.
“That’ s from the University of Glasgow , that is. Mr .
Caldwell’ s a scholar ,” he told m e, blue eyes wide with awe.
“Been to learn the preachin’, and a fine job he makes of it.
“Y ou did  miss a fine finish, Geor gie,” he added, turning to
his wife . “He went sae red in the face, talkin’ of theAbomination of Desolation and the wrath at world’ s end, that I
thought surely he’d have an ap oplexy , and then what should
we d o? For he wouldna have Murray MacLeod to him, Murray
bein’ in the way  of a heretic to Mr . Caldwell—he’ s New Light,
Murray”—Mr . M cAllister explained in an aside to me—”and
Mrs. Fra ser here a Papist, as well as bein’ otherwise engaged
wi’ you and the bairns.”
He l eaned over and patted one  of the twins gently on its
bonneted head, but it paid no a ttention, blissfully absorbed in
its suckling.
“Hmp. W ell, Mr . Caldwell could ha’ burst himself, for all I
cared at the tim e,” his wife said frankly . She hitched up her
double armload and settled herself more comfortably . “And for
mysel’, I shouldna much mind i f the midwife was a red Indian
or Engli sh—oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Fraser—so long as
she kent how to catch a babe and stop the bleedin’.”
I mu rmured something modest, brushing away Geor giana’ s
apologies, in favor of finding ou t more about the watch chain’ s
origins.
“Mr . Caldwell. He’ s a preacher , you say?” A certain
suspicion was stirring in the back of my mind.
“Oh, ay e, the best I’ve heard,” Mr . McAllister assured me.
“And I’ve heard ‘em all. Now , M r . Urmstone, he’ s a grand one
for the sins, but he’ s on in years , and gone a bit hoarse now , so
as y e need to be right up front  to hear him—and that’ s a bit
dangerous, ye ken, as it’ s the folk in front whose sins he’ s
likely to start in  upon. The New  Light fella, though, he’ s nay
much; no voice to him.”
He d ismissed the unfortunate preacher with the scorn of a
connoisseur .
“Mr . W oodmason’ s all right; a bit stif f in his manner—an
Englishman, aye?—but verra faithful about turning up for
services, for all he’ s well strick en in years. Now , young Mr .
Campbell from the Barbecue Church—”“This wean’ s fair starved, ma’am,” the girl holding Jemmy
put i n. E vidently so; he was red  in the face and keening. “W ill
I give him a bit o’ parritch, maybe?”
I gave a quick glance at the pot over the fire; it was
bubbling, so likely well-cooked enough to kill most germs. I
pulled o ut the horn spoon I carried in my pocket, which I
could be sure was reasonably clean, and handed it to the girl.
“Thank you so much. Now , this Mr . Caldwell—he wouldn’ t
by chance be a Presbyterian, would he?”
Mr . McAllister  looked surprised, then beamed at my
perceptivity .
“Why , s o he is, indeed! Y e’ll have heard of him, then, Mrs.
Fraser?”
“I th ink perhaps my son-in-law is acquainted with him,” I
said, with a tinge of irony .
Geor giana laughed.
“I shoul d say your grandson ken s him, at least.” She nodded
at the chain, dra ped across her husband’ s broad palm. “Bairns
that size are jus t like magpies; they’ll seize upon any shiny
bawbee they see.”
“So they do,” I  said slowly , sta ring at the silver links and
their dangling fob. That put something of a dif ferent
complexion on the matter . If Jemmy had picked Mr .
Caldwell’ s pocket, it had obviously been done sometime
before Jamie had arranged the impromptu christening.
But Bree and Roger had known about Father Kenneth’ s
arrest and the possible cancelation of their wedding well
before that; there would have b een plenty of time for them to
make o ther plans while Jamie and I were dealing with
Rosamund, Ronnie, and the other assorted crises. Plenty of
time for Roger t o go and talk to Mr . Caldwell, the Presbyterian
minister—with Jemmy along for the ride.
And as soon as R oger had confirmed the unlikelihood of the
priest’ s perform ing any marriages tonight, Brianna haddisappeared on a vague “errand .” W ell, if Father Kenneth had
wanted to interview a Presbyterian groom before marrying
him, I supposed Mr . Caldwell  might be allowed the same
privilege with a prospective Papist bride.
Jemmy was devouring porridge with the single-mindedness
of a starving piranha; we couldn’ t leave quite yet. That was
just as well, I th ought; let Brianna break the news to her father
that she would have her wedding after all—priest or no priest.
I spr ead out my skirt to dry the damp hem, and the firelight
glowed from both my rings. A  strong disposition to laugh
bubbled up inside me, at the tho ught of what Jamie would say
when he  found out, but I suppressed it, not wanting to explain
my amusement to the McAllisters.
“Shall I take that?” I said instead to Mr . McAllister , with a
nod tow ard the watch chain. “I think perhaps I shall be seeing
Mr . Caldwell a little later .”14
HAPPY THE BRIDE
 THE MOON SHINES ON
W E W ERE LUCKY . The rain hel d of f, and shredding clouds
revealed a silver moon, rising lopsided but luminous over the
slope of Black Mountain; suitable illumination for an intimate
family wedding.
I had met David Caldwell, though I hadn’ t recalled it until I
saw him; a small but immensely personable gentleman, very
tidy in his dress, despite camp ing in the open for a week.
Jamie knew him, too, and respec ted him. That didn’ t prevent a
certain tightness of expression as the minister came into the
firelight, his worn prayer book clasped in his hands, but I
nudged Jamie warningly , and he  at once altered his expression
to one of inscrutability .
I saw Roger glance once in our  direction, then turn back to
Bree. There might have been a slight smile at the corner of his
mouth, o r it could have been only the ef fect of the shadows.
Jamie exhaled strongly through  his nose, and I nudged him
again.
“Y ou had your way over the baptism,” I whispered. He
lifted his chin slightly . Brianna glanced in our direction,
looking slightly anxious.
“I havena said a word, have I?”
“It’ s a perfectly respectable Christian marriage.”
“Did I say it was not?”
“Then look happy , damn you!” I hissed. He exha led once
more, and assumed an expression of benevolence one degree
short of outright imbecility .
“Better?” he asked, teeth clenched in a genial smile. I saw
Duncan Innes turn casually tow ard us, start, and turn hastilyaway , murmuring something to Jocasta, who stood near the
fire, whi te hair shining, and a blindfold over her damaged eyes
to sh ield them from the light. Ulysses, standing behind her ,
had in fact put on his wig in honor of the ceremony; it was all I
could see of him in the darkness, hanging apparently
disembodied in the air above h er shoulder . As I watched, it
turned s ideways, toward us, and I caught the faint shine of
eyes beneath it.
“Who that, Grand-mer e ?”
Germain, escaped as usual from parental custody , popped
up near my feet, pointing curiously at the Reverend Caldwell.
“That’ s a minister , darling. Auntie Bree and Uncle Roger
are getting married.”
“ Ou qu’on va  minster?”
I drew a deep breath, but Jamie beat me to it.
“It’ s a sort of priest, but not a proper priest.”
“Bad priest?” Germain viewed the Reverend Caldwell with
substantially more interest.
“No, no,” I said . “He’ s not a bad priest at all. It’ s only that
… w ell, you see, we’re Catholi cs, and Catholics have priests,
but Uncle Roger is a Presbyterian—”
“That’ s a heretic,” Jamie put in helpfully .
“It is not  a heretic, darling, Grand-per e  i s being  funny— or
thinks he is. Presbyterians are …”
Germain was paying no attention to my explanation, but
instead had tilted his head back, viewing Jamie with
fascination.
“Why Grand-per e  is making faces?”
“W e’re v erra happy ,” Jamie explained, expression still fixed
in a rictus of amiability .
“Oh.” Germain at once stretched his own extraordinarily
mobile face into a crude facsim ile of the same expression—ajack-o’-lantern g rin, teeth clenched and eyes popping. “Like
this?”
“Y es, darling,” I said, in a marked tone. “ Just  like that.”
Marsali looked at us, blinked, an d tugged at Fer gus’ s sleeve.
He turned, squinting at us.
“Look happy , Papa!” Germain pointed to his gigantic smile.
“See?”
Fer gus’ s mouth twitched, as he glanced from his of fspring
to J amie. His f ace went blank for a moment, then adjusted
itself in to an enormous smile of white-toothed insincerity .
Marsali kicked him in the ank le. He winced, but the smile
didn’ t waver .
Brianna and Roger were having a last-minute conference
with Reverend Caldwell, on the other side of the fire. Brianna
turned from this, brushing back her loose hair , saw the phalanx
of grinn ing faces, and stared, her mouth slightly open. Her
eyes went to me; I shrugged helplessly .
Her lips pressed tight together , but curved upward
irrepressibly . He r shoulders shook with suppressed laughter . I
felt Jamie quiver next to me.
Reverend Caldw ell stepped forward, a finger in his book at
the proper place, put his specta cles on his nose, and smiled
genially at the assemblage, blinking only slightly when he
encountered the row of leering countenances.
He coughed, and opened his Book of Common W orship.
“Dearly beloved , we are assembled here in the presence of
God …”
I fel t Jamie relax  slightly , as the words went on, evidencing
unfamiliarity , perhaps, but no great peculiarities. I supposed
that he had in fact never taken part in a Protestant ceremony
before—unless one counted the impromptu baptism Roger
himself had conducted among t he Mohawk. I closed my eyes
and sen t a brief prayer upward for Y oung Ian, as I did
whenever I thought of him.“Let us  theref ore reverently remember that God has
established and  sanctified marriage, for the welfare and
happiness of mankind …”
Opening them, I saw that all eyes now were focused on
Roger and Brianna, who stood facing each other , hands
entwined. They were a handsom e pair , nearly of a height, she
bright and he dark, like a photograph and its negative. Their
faces were nothing alike, and yet both had the bold bones and
clean curves that were their joint legacy from the clan
MacKenzie.
I g lance d across  the fire to see the same echo of bone and
flesh in Jocasta, tall and handsome, her blind face turned in
absorption toward the sound of the minister ’ s voice. As I
watched, I saw her hand reach out and rest on Duncan’ s arm,
the long white fingers gently squeeze. The Reverend Caldwell
had kin dly of fered to perform their marriage as well, but
Jocasta had refused, wishing t o wait instead for a Catholic
ceremony .
“W e are in no great hurry , after all, are we, my dear?” she
had asked Duncan, turning toward him with an outward
exhibition of deference that fooled no one. Still, I thought that
Duncan had seemed relieved, rather than disappointed, by the
postponement of his own wedding.
“By His apostles, He has instructed those who enter into this
relation to cherish a mutual esteem and love …”
Duncan had put a hand over Jocasta’ s, with a surprising air
of tenderness. That marriage would not be one of love, I
thought, but mutual esteem—yes, I thought there was that.
“I ch ar ge you both, before the great God, the Searcher of all
hearts, t hat if either of you kno w any reason why ye may not
lawfully be joined together in m arriage, ye do now confess it.
For be ye well assured that if a ny persons are joined together
otherwise than as God’ s W or d allows, their union is not
blessed by Him.”Reverend Caldw ell paused, glancing warningly back and
forth between Roger and Brianna. Roger shook his head
slightly , his eyes fixed on Bree’ s face. She smiled faintly in
response, and the Reverend cleared his throat and continued.
The air of muted  hilarity around the fire had subsided; there
was no sound but the Reverend’ s quiet voice and the crackle of
the flames.
“Roger Jeremiah , wilt thou have this W oman to be thy wife,
and wilt thou pledge thy troth to her , in all love and honor , in
all duty and ser vice, in all faith and tenderness, to live with
her , and  cherish her , according to the ordinance of God, in the
holy bond of marriage?”
“I will,” Roger said, his voice deep and husky .
I heard a deep sigh to my right, and saw Marsali lean her
head on Fer gus’ s shoulder , a dreamy look on her face. He
turned his head and kissed her b row , then leaned his own dark
head against the whiteness of her kerch.
“I will,”  Brianna said clearly , lif ting her chin and looking up
into Roger ’ s face, in response to the minister ’ s question.
Mr . Cald well loo ked benevolently round the circle, firelight
glinting on his spectacles.
“Who giveth this W oman to be married to this Man?”
There w as the briefest of pau ses, and I felt Jamie jerk
slightly , taken by surprise. I squeezed his arm, and saw the
firelight gleam on the gold ring on my hand.
“Oh. I do, to be sure!” he said. Brianna turned her head and
smiled a t him, her eyes dark wi th love. He gave her back the
smile, th en blink ed, clearing his throat, and squeezed my hand
hard.
I fel t a slight tightening of the t hroat myself, as they spoke
their vows, remembering both of my own weddings. And
Jocasta? I wondered. She had b een married three times; what
echoes of the past did she hear in these words?“I, R oger Jeremiah, take thee,  Brianna Ellen, to be my
wedded wife …”
The light of memory shone on most of the faces around the
fire. The  Bugs stood close toget her , looking at each other with
identical gazes of soft devotion. Mr . W emyss, standing by his
daughter , bowe d his head and closed his eyes, a look of
mingled joy and sadness on his face, no doubt thinking of his
own wife, dead these many years.
“In plenty and in want …”
“In joy and in sorrow …”
“In sickness and in health …”
Lizzie’ s face was rapt, eyes wide at the mystery being
carried out before her . How soon might it be her turn, to stand
before witnesses and make such awesome promises?
Jamie re ached across and took my right hand in his, his
fingers l inking with mine, and the silver of my ring shone red
in the glow of th e flames. I looked up into his face and saw the
promise spoken in his eyes, as it was in mine.
“As long as we both shall live.”15
THE FLAMES OF
 DECLARA TION
T HE GREA T FIRE BELOW was blazing, damp wood
snapping with cracks that rang  like pistol shots against the
mountainside—a distant gunfire, though, and little noticed
through the noise of merrymaking.
While she had elected not to be married by the Reverend
Caldwell, Jocas ta had nonetheless generously provided a
lavish w edding f east in honor of  Roger and Brianna’ s nuptials.
W ine, ale, and whisky flowed like water under the aegis of
Ulysses, whose white wig bobb ed through the mob round our
family campfire, ubiquitous as a moth round a candle flame.
Despite the chill damp and the  clouds that had regathered
overhead, at least half the Gath ering was here, dancing to the
music of  fiddle and mouth or gan, descending locustlike on the
groaning tables of delicacies, a nd drinking the health of the
newlyweds—and the eventually-to-be-wed—with so much
enthusiasm that if all such wishes were to take ef fect, Roger ,
Bree, Jo casta, and Duncan would each live to be a thousand, at
least.
I thought I might be good for a hundred years or so, myself.
I w as feeling no  pain; nothing but an encompassing sense of
giddy w ell-being, and a pleasant sense of impending
dissolution.
At o ne side of  the fire, Roger was playing a borrowed
guitar , serenading Bree before a rapt circle of listeners. Closer ,
Jamie sat on a log with Duncan and his aunt, talking with
friends.
“Madam?” Ulysses materialized at my elbow , tray in hand
and resplendent  in livery , behaving as though he were in the
parlor at River Run, rather than on a soggy mountainside.“Thank you.” I accepted a pewter cup full of something, and
discovered it to be brandy . Fair ly good brandy , too. I took a
small si p and let it percolate through my sinuses. Before I
could ab sorb much more of it, though, I became conscious of a
sudden lull in the surrounding gaiety .
Jamie glanced around the circle, gathering eyes, then stood
and held out his  arm to me. I was a little surprised, but hastily
replaced the cup on Ulysses’ s tray , smoothed back my hair ,
tucked in my kerchief, and went to take my place at his side.
“Thig a  seo, a bhean uasa,”  he said, smiling at me. Come,
lady . He  turned and raised his chin, summoning the others.
Roger p ut down  his guitar at once, covering it carefully with a
canvas, then held out a hand to Bree.
“Thig a seo, a bhean,”  h e said, grinni ng. W ith a look  of
surprise, she got to her feet, Jemmy in her arms.
Jamie stood still, waiting, and li ttle by little, the others rose,
brushing away pine needles an d sand from hems and seats,
laughing and murmuring in p uzzlement. The dancers, too,
paused i n their whirling, and came to see what was to do, the
fiddle music dying away in the rustle of curiosity .
Jamie led me down the dark trail toward the leaping flames
of th e great bonf ire below , the others following in a murmur of
speculation. At the end of the main clearing he stopped and
waited. Dark figures flitted through the shadows; a man’ s
shape stood in silhouette before the fire, arm raised.
“The Menzies are here!” the man called, and flung the
branch t hat he carried into the fi re. Faint cheers went up, from
those of his clan and sept within hearing.
Another took his place—MacBean—and another—Ogilvie.
Then it was our turn.
Jamie walked forward alone, into the light of the leaping
flames. The fire was built of oak and pinewood, and it burned
higher than a tall man, tongues of transparent yellow so pure
and ardent as almost to burn white against the blackened sky .
The ligh t of it shone on his upturned face, on his head andshoulders, and threw a long shadow that stretched halfway
across the open ground behind him.
“W e are  gathered here to welco me old friends,” he said in
Gaelic. “And meet new ones—in hopes that they may join us
in for ging a new life in this new country .”
His voi ce was deep and carrying; the last scraps of
conversation ceased as the folk pushing and crowding around
the fire hushed and craned to listen.
“W e hav e all suf fered much har dship on the road here.” He
turned slowly , looking from face to face around the fire. Many
of th e men of Ardsmuir were here: I saw the Lindsay brothers,
homely as a tri o of toads; Ronnie Sinclair ’ s fox-eyed face,
ginger hair slicked up in horns ; the Roman-coin features of
Robin M cGillivray . All looked out from the shadows, ridge of
brow and bridge of nose shining in the glow , each face crossed
by fire.
Under th e influe nce of brandy and emotion, I could easily
see too the ran ks of ghosts who stood behind them; the
families and friends who remained still in Scotland, whether
on the earth … or under it.
Jamie’ s own face was lined with shadow , the firelight
showing the mark of time and struggle on his flesh as wind
and rain mark stone.
“Many of us died in battle,” he said, his voice scarcely
audible above the rustle of the  fire. “Many died of burning.
Many of us starved. Many died at sea, many died of wounds
and illness.” He paused. “Many died of sorrow .”
His eyes  looked beyond the firelit circle for a moment, and I
thought perhaps he was searching for the face of Abel
MacLennan. He  lifted his cup then, and held it high in salute
for a moment.
“Slainte!”  murmured a dozen voices, rising like the wind.
“Slainte!”  h e echoed them —then tipped the cup, so that a
little of the brandy fell into th e flames, where it hissed and
burned blue for an instant’ s time.He l owered the cup, and pause d for a moment, head bent.
He lifted his h ead then, and raised the cup toward Archie
Hayes, who stood across the  fire from him, round face
unreadable, fire sparking from his silver gor get and his father ’ s
brooch.
“While we mourn the loss of th ose who died, we must also
pay tribu te to you who fought and suf fered with equal valor—
and survived.”
“Slainte!”  came the salute, louder this time with the rumble
of male voices.
Jamie closed his eyes for an instant, then opened them,
looking toward Brianna, who stood with Lizzie and Marsali,
Jemmy in her arms. The rawness and strength of his features
stood out by co ntrast with the round-faced innocence of the
children, the gentleness of the young mothers—though even in
their delicacy , I thought, the f irelight showed the seams of
Scottish granite in their bones.
“W e pay tribute to our women,” he said, lifting the cup in
turn to Brianna, to Marsali, and  then, turning, to me. A brief
smile to uched his lips. “For th ey are our strength. And our
revenge upon our enemies will be at the last the revenge of the
cradle. Slainte! ”
Amid th e shouts of the crowd, he drained the wooden cup,
and thre w it into the fire, where it lay dark and round for a
moment, then burst all at once into brilliant flame.
“Thig a seo!”  he calle d, putting out his right hand to me.
“Thig a seo, a S hor cha, nighean Eanruig, neart mo chridhe.”
Come to me , he said . Come to me, Clair e, daughter of Henry ,
str ength of my heart . Scarce ly feeling my feet or those I
stumbled over , I made my way  to him, and clasped his hand,
his grip cold but strong on my fingers.
I saw  hi m turn his head; was he  looking for Bree? But no—
he stretched out his other hand toward Roger .
“Seas ri mo lamh, Roger an t’oranaiche, mac Jer emiah
MacChoinneich!”  Stand by my hand, Roger the singer , son ofJer emiah MacKenzie.  Roger stood stock-still for a moment,
eyes dark on Jamie, then m oved toward him, like one
sleepwalking. The crowd was still excited, but the shouting
had died down, and people craned to hear what was said.
“Stand b y me in battle,” he said  in Gaelic, his eyes fixed on
Roger , left hand extended. He s poke slowly and clearly , to be
sure of understa nding. “Be a s hield for my family—and for
yours, son of my house.”
Roger ’ s expression seemed suddenly to dissolve, like a face
seen in water when a stone is tossed into it. Then it solidified
once more, and he clasped Jamie’ s hand, squeezing hard.
Jamie turned to the crowd then,  and began the calling. This
was something I had seen him do before, many years before,
in Scotland. A formal invitation and identification of tenants
by a laird, it was a small ceremony often done on a quarter -day
or after the h arvest. Faces lighted here and there with
recognition; many of the Highland Scots knew the custom,
though they would not have seen it in this land before tonight.
“Come to me, Geordie Chisholm, son of W alter , son of
Connaught the Red!”
“Stand w ith me , a Choinneich , Evan, Murdo, you sons of
Alexander Lindsay of the Glen!”
“Come to my side, Joseph W emyss, son of Donald, son of
Robert!” I smiled to see Mr . W emyss, flustered but terribly
pleased at this public inclusion, make his way toward us, head
proudly raised, fair hair flying wild in the wind of the great
fire.
“Stand by me, Josiah the hunter!”
W as Josiah Beardsley here? Y es, he was; a slight, dark form
slid out of the s hadows, to take up a shy place in the group
near Jamie. I c aught his eye and smiled at him; he looked
hastily a way , but a small, emba rrassed smile clung to his lips,
as though he had for gotten it was there.
It was an impre ssive group by the time he had finished—
nearly forty men, gathered shoulder -close and flushed as muchwith pride as with whisky . I saw Roger exchange a long look
with Brianna, who was beamin g across the fire at him. She
bent her head to whisper something to Jemmy , who was
submer ged in his blankets, half- asleep in her arms. She picked
up one of his w ee paws and waved it limply toward Roger ,
who laughed.
“… Air mo mhionnan …”  Dis tracted, I ha d missed Jamie’ s
final statement, catching only the last few words. Whatever he
had said  met with approval, though; there was a low rumble of
solemn assent from the men around us, and a moment’ s
silence.
Then he let go my hand, stooped, and picked up a branch
from the ground. Lighting this, he held it aloft, then threw the
blazing brand high into the air . It tumbled end over end as it
fell straight down, into the heart of the fire.
“The Fr asers of the Ridge are here!” he bellowed, and the
clearing erupted in a massive cheer .
As we made our way back u p the slope to resume the
interrupted festivities, I found myself next to Roger , who was
humming something cheerful under his breath. I put a hand on
his sleeve, and he looked down at me, smiling.
“Congratulations,” I said, smiling back. “W elcome to the
family—son of the house.”
He grinned enormously .
“Thanks,” he said. “Mum.”
W e came to a level spot, and walked side by side for a
moment, not speaking. Then he said, in a quite dif ferent tone,
“That was … something quite special, wasn’ t it?”
I didn’ t know whether he meant historically special, or
special in personal terms. In ei ther case, he was right, and I
nodded.
“I didn’ t catch all of the last bit, though,” I said. “And I
don’ t know what earbsachd  means—do you?”“Oh … aye. I know .” It was quite dark here between the
fires; I could see no more of him than a darker smudge against
the black of sh rub and tree. T here was an odd note in his
voice, though. He cleared his throat.
“It’ s an oath—o f a sort. He—Jamie—he swore an oath to
us, to his family  and tenants. Su pport, protection, that kind of
thing.”
“Oh, yes ?” I said, mildly puzzled. “What do you mean, ‘of a
sort’?”
“Ah, well.” He was silent for a moment, evidently
marshaling his words. “It means a word of honor , rather than
just an oath,” he said carefully . “ Earbsachd “—he pronounced
it Y ARB -sochk—”was once said to be the distinguishing
characteristic o f the MacCrimmons of Skye, and meant
basically that their word once g iven must unfailingly be acted
upon at no matt er what cost. If a MacCrimmon said he would
do something”—he paused and drew breath—”he would do it,
though he should burn to death in the doing.”
His hand came up under my elbow , surprisingly firm.
“Here,” he said quietly . “Let me help; it’ s slippery
underfoot.”16
ON THE NIGHT THA T OUR
 WEDDING IS ON US
W ILL YOU SING FOR ME, Roger?” 
 She stood in the  opening of the borrowed tent, facing outward.
From the back, he could see no more than her silhouette
against the gray of the clouded sky , her long hair drifting in the
rainy wi nd. She had worn it unb ound to be married—maiden’ s
hair , though she had a child.
It w as cold tonight, quite dif f erent from that first night
together , that hot, gor geous night that had ended in anger and
betrayal. Months of other nights lay between that one and this
—months of loneliness, months  of joy . And yet his heart beat
as fast now as it had on their first wedding night.
“I al ways sing f or you, hen.” He came behind her , drew her
back aga inst him , so that her head rested on his shoulder , her
hair coo l and live against his face. His arm curled round her
waist, holding her secure. He b ent his head, nuzzling for the
curve of her ear .
“No matter what,” he whispered, “no matter where. No
matter w hether you’re there to hear or not—I’ll always sing
for you.”
She turned into his arms then, with a small hum of content
in h er throat, an d her mouth found his, tasting of barbecued
meat and spiced wine.
The rain  pattere d on the canvas  above, and the cold of late
autumn curled up from the grou nd around their feet. The first
time, th e air had smelled of hops and mudflats; their bower
had had  the earthy tang of hay and donkeys. Now the air was
live with pine and juniper , spiced with the smoke of
smoldering fires—and the faint, sweet note of baby shit.And yet  she was once more dar k and light in his arms, her
face hidden, her body gleaming . Then she had been moist and
molten, humid with the summe r . Now her flesh was cool as
marble, save where he touched it—and yet the summer lived
still in the palm of his hand where he touched her , sweet and
slick, ripe with the secrets of a h ot, dark night. It was right, he
thought, that these vows should  have been spoken as the first
ones had, out of doors, part of wind and earth, fire and water .
“I love you,” s he murmured against his mouth, and he
seized her lip between his teeth,  too moved to speak the words
in reply just yet.
There ha d been words between t hem then, as there had been
words tonight. The words were  the same, and he had meant
them the first time no less th an he did now . Y et it was
dif ferent.
The first time he had spoken them to her alone, and while he
had done so in the sight of G od, God had been discreet,
hovering well in the background , face turned away from their
nakedness.
T onight he said them in the blaze of firelight, before the
face of God and the world, her people and his. His heart had
been hers, and w hatever else he had—but now there was no
question of him and her , his and hers. The vows were given,
his ring put on h er finger , the b ond both made and witnessed.
They were one body .
One hand of the ir joint or ganism crushed a breast a little too
hard, an d one throat made a small sound of discomfort. She
drew ba ck from  him a little, and he felt rather than saw her
grimace. The air came cold between them and his own skin
felt suddenly raw , exposed, as  though he had been severed
from her with a knife.
“I need—”she said, and touched her breast, not finishing.
“Just a minute, okay?”
Claire had fed the child while Brianna went to make her
overtures to Reverend Caldwel l. Bursting with porridge andstewed peaches, Jemmy could scarcely be roused to suckle
briefly before relapsing into somnolence and being taken away
by Lizzi e, his wee round belly tight as a drum. That was as
well for their privacy—drugged into such a gluttonous stupor ,
it w as unlikely the bairn would  wake before dawn. The price
of it, though, was the unused milk.
No one living in  the same house with a nursing mother was
likely to be un aware of her breasts, let alone her husband.
They ha d a life of their own, those breasts. They changed size
from ho ur to hour , for the one thing, swelling from their
normal soft globes into great rou nd hard bubbles that gave him
the eerie feeling that if he touched one it would burst.
Now and then, one did  b urst, or at least gave that
impression. The  ridge of soft flesh would rise like kneaded
bread, slowly but surely pushin g above the edge of Brianna’ s
bodice. Then suddenly there would be a big, wet circle on the
cloth, appearing  magically , as though some invisible person
had thro wn a snowball at her . Or two snowballs—for what one
breast did, its fellow rushed at once to follow suit.
Sometimes the Heavenly T wins were foiled, though; Jemmy
drained one side, but incons iderately fell asleep before
performing the same service for the other . This left his mother
gritting her teeth, gingerly takin g the swollen orb in the palm
of h er h and, pre ssing the edge o f a pewter cup just under the
nipple to  catch the spray and dribble as she eased the aching
fullness, enough to sleep herself.
She was doing i t now; modestly turned away from him, an
arisaid gathered round her shoulders against the chill. He
could hear the hiss of the milk, a tiny chime against the metal.
He w as reluctant to drown the so und, which he found erotic,
but n onetheless picked up the g uitar , and put his thumb to the
strings, his hand on the frets. He  didn’ t strum or strike chords,
but plucked single notes, smal l voices to echo his own, the
thrum of one string ringing through the chanted line.
A love song, to be sure. One of the very old ones, in the
Gaelic. Even if she didn’ t kno w all the words, he thoughtshe’d take the sense of it.
 
“On the night that our wedding is on us,
I will come leaping to thee with gifts,
On the night that our wedding is on us …”
 
He c losed his e yes, seeing in memory what the night now
hid. Her nipples were the color of ripe plums and the size of
ripe che rries, an d Roger had a vivid mental picture of how one
would f eel in his mouth. He had suckled them once, long
before—before the coming of Jemmy—but no more.
 
“Y ou will get a hundr ed silver salmon …
A hundr ed badger skins …”
 
She nev er asked him not to, never turned away—and yet he
could te ll by the faint intake of her breath that, often, she was
bracing herself not to flinch when he touched her breasts.
W as it only tend erness? he wondered. Did she not trust him
to be gentle?
He shie d away from the thoug ht, drowning it in a small
cascade of notes, liquid as a waterfall.
It might not be you , whispered the voice, stubbornly
refusing to be distracted. Per haps it was  him —something that
he did to her .
Fuck. Off , he thought succinctly to the voice, marking each
word with a sharp-plucked string. Stephen Bonnet would have
no place in their wedding bed. None.
He laid a hand on the strings to silence them briefly , and as
she slid the arisaid from her shoulders, began again, this time
in E nglish. A s pecial song, too—one for the two of them
alone. He didn’ t know whether anyone else might hear , but itmade no  dif ference if they did . She stood and slid the shift
from her shoulders as his finger s touched the quiet opening of
the Beatles’ “Y esterday .”
He h eard her lau gh, once, then sigh, and the linen whispered
against her skin as it fell.
She came naked behind him as the soft melancholy yearning
of the song fille d the dark. Her hand stroked his hair , gathered
it tight at the nape of his neck. She swayed, and he felt her
press against his back, her breas ts soft now , yielding and warm
through his shirt, her breath tic kling his ear . Her hand rested
on his shoulder briefly , then slid down inside his shirt, fingers
cool on his chest. He could fee l the warm hard metal of her
ring on his skin, and felt a sur ge of possession that pulsed
through him like a gulp of whisky , a heat suf fusing his flesh.
He ached to turn and take hold of her , but pushed the ur ge
down, h eightening anticipation. He bent his head closer to the
strings, and sang until all thought left him and there was
nothing left but his body and hers. He could not have said
when he r hand closed over his on the frets, and he rose and
turned to her , still filled with the music and his love, soft and
strong and pure in the dark.
 
SHE LA Y QUIET in the dark, f eeling the thunder of her heart
boom slowly in her ears. The th rob of it echoed in the pulse of
her n eck, her wr ists, her breasts, her womb. She had lost track
of h er boundaries; slowly the s ense of limbs and digits, head
and trun k, of space occupied, returned. She moved the single
finger glued between her legs, a nd felt the last of the tingling
shocks run down her thighs as it slid free.
She drew breath slowly , listening.
His breath still came in long, regular exhalations; thank
God, he hadn’ t wakened. She had been careful, moving no
more th an a fingertip, but the final jolt of climax had struck
her so hard that her hips jerk ed as her belly quivered andconvulsed, her heels digging into the pallet with a loud rustling
of straw .
He’d had a very  long day—they all had. Even so, she could
still hear faint sounds of festivit y on the mountainside around
them. Th e chanc e to celebrate l ike this came so rarely that no
one would let s omething so inconsequential as rain, cold, or
tiredness keep them from the revels.
She herself felt like a puddle o f liquid mercury; soft and
heavy , shimmering with each heartbeat. The ef fort of moving
was unthinkable; but her final c onvulsion had pulled the quilt
of f h is s houlders, and the skin of  his back lay smooth and bare,
dark by contrast with the pale cloth. The pocket of warmth
around her was snug and perfe ct, but she couldn’ t luxuriate
while h e lay exposed to the chilly midnight air like that.
T endrils of fog had crept un der the tent flap and hung
ghostlike and clammy all around  them; she could see the faint
gleam of moisture on the high curve of his cheekbone.
She summoned back the notion of bones and muscles, found
a mo tor neuron in working orde r , and sternly ordered it to fire.
Embodied once more, she rolled onto her side, facing him, and
gently pulled the quilt up aro und his ears. He stirred and
murmured something; she stroked his tumbled black hair and
he smiled faintly , eyelids half-opening in the blank stare of one
who sees dreams. They droppe d again and he took a long,
sighing breath and fell back asleep.
“I love you,” she whispered, filled with tenderness.
She stroked his back lightly , loving the feel of his flat
shoulder blades through the quil t, the solid knob of bone at the
nape of his neck , and the long, smooth groove that ran down
the center of his spine to arch in to the swell of his buttocks. A
cold breeze rippled the tiny hairs of her arm, and she pulled it
back under the covers, letting her hand rest lightly on Roger ’ s
bottom.
The feel  of it wa s no novelty , b ut thrilled her just the same,
with its perfect warm roundness , its coarse curly hair . A faint
echo of her solitary joy encouraged her to do it again, and herfree han d crept between her legs, but sheer exhaustion stayed
her , limp fingers cupped on th e swollen flesh, one languid
finger tracing the slickness.
She’d hoped it would be dif feren t tonight. W ithout the ever -
present d anger o f waking Jemmy , free to take as much time as
they wanted, and riding the waves of emotion from their
exchange of vows, she’d thought … but it was the same.
It w asn’ t that she wasn’ t arouse d; quite the contrary . Every
movement, each touch, imprint ed itself in the nerves of her
skin, the  crevices of mouth and memory , drowning her with
scent, branding her with sensation. But no matter how
wonderful the lovemaking, there remained some odd sense of
distance, some barrier that she couldn’ t penetrate.
And so once mo re she found herself lying beside him as he
slept, reliving in memory each m oment of the passion they had
just shared—and able in memory at last to yield to it.
Perhaps it was that she loved h im too much, she thought,
was too  mindful of his plea sure to take her own. The
satisfaction she felt when he lost himself, gasping and
moaning in her arms, was far greater than the simple physical
pleasure of climax. And yet, the re was something darker under
that; a peculiar s ense of triumph, as though she had won some
undeclared and unacknowledged contest between them.
She sigh ed and butted her foreh ead against the curve of his
shoulder , enjoyi ng the reek of  him—a smell of strong and
bitter musk, like pennyroyal.
The thought of herbs reminded  her , and she reached down
again, ca utiously so as not to waken him, and slid one slippery
finger deep inside to check. No, it was all right; the slip of
sponge soaked with tansy oil was still in place, its fragile,
pungent presence safeguarding the entrance to her womb.
She moved closer , and he moved unconsciously , his body
half-turning to accommodate her , his warmth at once
enclosing her , comforting her . His hand groped like a bird
flying blind, skimming her hip, her soft belly , in search of aresting p lace. She seized it in both hands and folded it, secure
beneath her chin. His hand cur led over hers; she kissed one
lar ge, rough knuckle and he sighed deeply , his hand relaxing.
The sounds of revelry on the mountain had faded, as the
dancers tired, and the musicians grew hoarse and weary . The
rain began again, pattering on t he canvas overhead, and gray
mist tou ched her face with coo l damp fingers. The smell of
wet canv as mad e her think of camping trips as a child with her
father , with their mingled sensations of excitement and safety ,
and she nestled deeper into the curve of Roger ’ s body , feeling
a similar sense of comfort and anticipation.
It was early da ys, she thought. They had all their lives
before them. The time of surrender would surely come.17
W A TCHFIRE
F ROM WHERE THEY LA Y , he could see down through a
gap in the rock s, all the way to the watch fire that burned
before Hayes’ s tent. The great fi re of the Gathering had burned
itself to embers, the glow of it faint memory of the towering
flames o f declaration, but the s maller fire burned steady as a
star against the cold night. Now and then a dark, kilted figure
rose to tend it, stood stark for a moment against the brightness,
then faded back again into the night.
He w as faintly c onscious of the racing clouds that dimmed
the moon, the h eavy flutter of the canvas overhead, and the
rock-black shadows of the mountain slope, but he had no eyes
for anyt hing save the fire below , and the white patch of the
tent behind it, shapeless as a ghost.
He had slowed his breath, relaxed the muscles of arms and
chest, ba ck, buttocks, legs. Not in an attempt to sleep; sleep
was far from him, and he had no mind to seek it.
Nor was  it an attempt to fool Claire into thinking he slept.
So close against his body , so close to his mind as she was, she
would k now him  wakeful. No, it was only a signal to her; an
acknowledged pretense that fre ed her from any need to pay
heed to him. She might sleep, knowing him occupied within
the w alnut shell of his mind, ha ving no immediate demand to
make of her .
Few slept on the mountain tonight, he thought. The sound of
the wind masked the murmur of voices, the shuf fle of
movement, but his hunter ’ s senses registered a dozen small
stirrings, identifying things half-heard, putting names to
moving shadow s. A scrape of shoe leather on rock, the flap of
a blanke t shaken out. That would be Hobson and Fowles,
making a quiet departure alone in the dark, fearful of waiting
for the morning, lest they be betrayed in the night.A few notes of music came do wn on a gust of wind from
above; concertina and fiddle. Jocasta’ s slaves, unwilling to
surrender this rare celebration to the needs of sleep or the
imperatives of weather .
An infant’ s thin wail. W ee Jemmy? No, from behind. T iny
Joan, then, and Marsali’ s voic e, low and sweet, singing in
French.
“… Alouette, gentil Alouette …”
There, a  sound he had expected;  footsteps passing on the far
side of the rocks that bordered his family’ s sanctuary . Quick
and light, headed downhill. He w aited, eyes open, and in a few
moments heard the faint hail o f a sentry near the tent. No
figure showed in the firelight below , but the tent flap beyond it
stirred, gaped open, then fell unbroken.
As he had thought, then; sentiment lay strong against the
rioters. It was not held a betrayal of friends, but rather the
necessary giving up of criminals for the protection of those
who cho se to live by law . It mig ht be reluctant—the witnesses
had waited for the dark—but not secretive.
“… j’ante plumerai la tete …”
It occurr ed to him to wonder w hy the songs sung to bairns
were so often g ruesome, and no thought given to the words
they took in wit h their mothers’ milk. The music of the songs
was no more to him than tunele ss chanting—perhaps that was
why he paid more mind than most to the words.
Even Br ianna, who came from what was presumably a more
peaceable time, sang songs of fearsome death and tragic loss
to wee Jem, all with a look on h er face as tender as the V ir gin
nursing the Christ Child. That verse about the miner ’ s
daughter who drowned amidst her ducklings …
It occurr ed to him perversely to wonder what awful things
the B lessed Mother might have counted in her own repertoire
of c radle songs; judging from the Bible, the Holy Land had
been no more peaceful than France or Scotland.He wou ld have crossed himself  in penance for the notion,
but Claire was lying on his right arm.
“W ere they wrong?” Claire’ s  voice came softly from
beneath his chin, startling him.
“Who?” He bent his head to hers, and kissed the thick
softness of her curls. Her hair smelt of woodsmoke and the
sharp, clear tang of juniper berries.
“The men in Hillsborough.”
“A ye, I think so.”
“What would you have done?”
He sighed, moved one shoulder in a shrug.
“Can I say? A ye , if it was me th at was cheated, and no hope
of re dress, I mig ht have laid han ds on the man who’d done it.
But wha t was done there—ye h eard it. Houses torn down and
set a fire, men dr agged out and beaten senseless only for cause
of the of fice they held … no, Sassenach. I canna say what I
might have done—but not that.”
She turn ed her head a little, so h e saw the high curve of her
cheekbone, rimmed in light, and the flexing of the muscle that
ran in front of her ear as she smiled.
“I didn’ t think you would. Can’ t see you as part of a mob.”
He kissed her ear , not to reply directly . He  cou ld se e himse lf
as p art o f a mob, all too easily . That was what frightened him.
He knew much too well the strength of it.
One Highlander was a warrior , but the mightiest man was
only a man. It was the madness that took men together that had
ruled th e glens for a thousand years; that thrill of the blood,
when y ou heard the shrieks of your companions, felt the
strength of the whole bear yo u up like wings, and knew
immortality—for if you should fall of yourself, still you would
be c arried on, your spirit shrieki ng in the mouths of those who
ran beside you. It was only later , when the blood lay cold in
limp veins, and deaf ears heard the women weeping …“And if  it wasn’ t a man who cheated you? If it was the
Crown, or the Court? No o ne person, I mean, but an
institution.”
He knew  where she meant to lead him. He tightened his arm
around her , her breath warm o n the knuckles of his hand,
curled just under her chin.
“It isna that. Not here. Not now . ” The rioters had lashed out
in response to the crimes of men, of individuals; the price of
those cri mes might be paid in blood, but not requited by war—
not yet.
“It isn’ t,” she said quietly . “But it will be.”
“Not now ,” he said again.
The piece of pa per was safely hidden in his saddlebag, its
damnable summons concealed. He must deal with it, and soon,
but for tonight he would prete nd it wasn’ t there. One final
night of peace, with his wife in his arms, his family around
him.
Another shadow  by the fire. Another hail by the sentry , one
more to pass through the traitor ’ s gate.
“And are they  w rong?” A slig ht tilt of her head toward the
tent below . “The ones going to turn in their acquaintances?”
“A ye,” he said, after a moment. “They’re wrong as well.”
A mob might r ule, but it was single men would pay the
price for what was done. Part of the price was the breaking of
trust, th e turnin g of neighbor a gainst neighbor , fear a noose
squeezing tight until there was no longer any breath of mercy
or for giveness.
It had come on to rain; the light spatter of drops on the
canvas o verhead turned to a re gular thrum, and the air grew
live with  the rush of water . It was a winter storm; no lightning
lit the sky , and the looming mountains were invisible.
He h eld Claire close, curving his free hand low over her
belly . She sighed, a small sound of pain in it, and settled
herself, her arse nesting round  as an egg in the cup of histhighs. H e could feel the melting begin as she relaxed, that odd
mer ging of his flesh with hers.
At f irst it had happened only when he took her , and only at
the last. Then so oner and sooner , until her hand upon him was
both inv itation a nd completion, a surrender inevitable, of fered
and acce pted. H e had resisted no w and then, only to be sure he
could, su ddenly fearful of the lo ss of himself. He had thought
it a treac herous passion, like the one that swept a mob of men,
linking them in mindless fury .
Now he  trusted it was right, though. The Bible did say it,
Thou shalt be one flesh , and What God has jo ined together , let
no man put asunder .
He had survived such a sundering once; he could not stand
it tw ice, and live . The sentries ha d put up a canvas lean-to near
their fire to shelt er them from the rain. The flames sputtered as
the rain blew in, though, and li t the pale cloth with a flicker
that puls ed like a heartbeat. He was not afraid to die with her ,
by fire or any other way—only to live without her .
The wind changed, carrying with it the faint sound of
laughter from the tiny tent where the newlyweds slept—or
didn’ t. H e smiled to himself, h earing it. He could only hope
that his daughter would find such joy in her marriage as he had
—but so far , so good. The lad’ s face lit when he looked at her .
“What will you do?” Claire sai d quietly , her words almost
lost in the pattering of the rain.
“What I must.”
It was no answer , but the only one.
There was no world outside t his small confine, he told
himself. Scotland was gone, the Colonies were going—what
lay ahead he c ould only dimly imagine from the things
Brianna told him. The only reality was the woman held fast in
his arms; his children and grandchildren, his tenants and
servants—these were the gifts that God had given to him; his
to harbor , his to protect.The mou ntainside lay dark and q uiet, but he could feel them
there all round him, trusting him to see them safe. If God had
given him this trust, surely He would also grant the strength to
keep it.
He w as becoming aroused by th e habit of close contact, his
rising cock uncomfortably trapped. He wanted her , had been
wanting for days, the ur ge pushed aside in the bustle of the
Gathering. The dull ache in his  balls echoed what he thought
must be the ache in her womb.
He h ad taken he r in the midst of her courses now and then,
when the two of them had wanted too ur gently for waiting. He
had foun d it messy and disturbing, but exciting too, leaving
him with a fa int sense of shame that was not entirely
unpleasant. Now  was not the time or place for it, of course, but
the mem ory of other times and  other places made him shift,
twisting away from her , not to trouble her with the bodily
evidence of his thoughts.
Y et wha t he felt now was not lust—not quite. Nor was it
even the need of her , the wa nting of soul’ s company . He
wished to cover her with his body , possess her—for if he could
do that, he co uld pretend to himself that she was safe.
Covering her so, joined in one body , he might protect her . Or
so he felt, even knowing how senseless the feeling was.
He had stif fened, his body tensing involuntarily with his
thoughts. Claire stirred, and reached back with one hand. She
laid it on his leg, let it lie for a moment, then reached gently
farther up, in drowsy question.
He bent his head, put his lips behind her ear . Said what he
was thinking, without thought.
“Nothing will harm ye while there is breath in my body , a
nighean donn . Nothing.”
“I know ,” she said. Her limb s went slowly slack, her
breathing eased,  and the soft round of her belly swelled under
his p alm as she  melted into sleep. Her hand stayed on him,covering him. He lay stif f and  wide awake, long after the
watch fire had been quenched by the rain.P AR T T WO
The Chieftain’ s Call18
NO PLACE LIKE HOME
G IDEON DAR TE D OUT his head like a snake, aiming for the
leg of the rider just ahead.
“Seas!”  Jamie wrenched the big bay’ s head around before
he could take a bite. “Evil-minded whoreson,” he muttered
under his breath. Geordie Chisholm, unaware of his narrow
escape from Gideon’ s teeth, caught the remark, and looked
back ove r his shoulder , startled. Jamie smiled and touched his
slouch hat apologetically , nudging the horse past Chisholm’ s
long-legged mule.
Jamie ki cked G ideon ungently in the ribs, ur ging him past
the r est of the slow-moving travelers at a speed fast enough to
keep the brute from biting, kick ing, trampling stray bairns, or
otherwise causing trouble. After a week’ s journey , he was all
too well acquainted with the stallion’ s proclivities. He passed
Brianna and Marsali, halfway up  the column, at a slow trot; by
the t ime he pass ed Claire and Ro ger , riding at the head, he was
moving too fast to do more th an flourish his hat at them in
salute.
“A mhic  an dhiobhail,”  he said, clapping the hat back  on
and lean ing low  over the horse’ s  neck. “Y e’re a deal too lively
for y our own go od, let alone mi ne. See how long ye last in the
rough, eh?”
He pulled hard left, of f the trail, and down the slope,
trampling dry grass and brushing leafless dogwood out of the
way wit h a gunshot snapping of twigs. What the seven-sided
son of a bitch needed was fla t country , where Jamie could
gallop t he bejesus out of him and bring him back blowing.
Given that there wasn’ t a flat spot in twenty miles, he’d have
to do the next best thing.
He gath ered up  the reins, click ed his tongue, jabbed both
heels into the h orse’ s ribs, and they char ged up the shrubbyhillside as though they had been fired from a cannon.
Gideon was lar ge-boned, well-nourished, and sound of
wind, which was why Jamie ha d bought him. He was also a
hard-mouthed, bad-tempered reester of a horse, which was
why he hadn’ t cost much. More than Jamie could easily af ford,
even so.
As t hey sailed over a small creek, jumped a fallen log, and
hared up an alm ost vertical hillside littered with scrub oak and
persimmon, Jamie found himsel f wondering whether he’d got
a bar gain or co mmitted suicide. That was the last coherent
thought he had before Gideon veered sideways, crushing
Jamie’ s leg against a tree, then gathered his hindquarters and
char ged down the other side of the hill into a thicket of brush,
sending coveys of quail exploding from under his huge flat
hooves.
Half an hour of dodging low branches, lurching through
streams, and galloping straight up as many hillsides as Jamie
could po int them at, and Gideon  was, if not precisely tractable,
at least exhauste d enough to be manageable. Jamie was soaked
to the thighs, bruised, bleeding  from half a dozen scratches,
and breathing nearly as hard as  the horse. He was, however ,
still in the saddle, and still in char ge.
He turned the horse’ s head toward the sinking sun and
clicked his tongue again.
“Come on, then,” he said. “Let’ s go home.”
They had exerted themselves mightily , but given the rugged
shape of  the land, had not cove red so much ground as to lose
themselves entirely . He turned  Gideon’ s head upward, and
within a quarter hour , had come out onto a small ridge he
recognized.
They picked their way along th e ridge, searching for a safe
way down through the tangles of chinkapin, poplar , and
spruce. T he part y was not far away , he knew , but it could take
some tim e to cross to them, and  he would as soon rejoin them
before th ey reached the Ridge. Not that Claire or MacKenziecould n ot guide them—but he admitted to himself that he
wished very much to return to Fraser ’ s Ridge at the head of
the party , leading his people home.
“Christ, man, ye’d think ye were Moses,” he muttered,
shaking his head in mock dismay at his own pretensions.
The horse was lathered, and whe n the trees opened out for a
space, Jamie halted for a moment’ s rest—relaxing the reins,
but keep ing a suf ficient grip as to discourage any notions the
outheidie creature might still be entertaining. They stood
among a grove of silver birch, at the lip of a small rocky
outcrop above a forty-foot drop; he thought the horse held
much too high an opinion of himself to contemplate self-
destruction, but best to be careful, in case he had any thought
of flinging his rider of f into the laurels below .
The breeze was from the west. Jamie lifted his chin,
enjoying the cold touch of it on  his heated skin. The land fell
away in  undulating waves of brown and green, kindled here
and the re with patches of co lor , lighting the mist in the
hollows like the glow of cam pfire smoke. He felt a peace
come o ver him at the sight, and breathed deep, his body
relaxing.
Gideon relaxed, too, all the feist iness draining slowly out of
him like water from a leaky b ucket. Slowly , Jamie let his
hands d rop lightly on the horse ’ s neck, and the horse stayed
still, ears forward. Ah, he thou ght, and the realization stole
over him that this was a Place.
He t hought of su ch places in a way that had no words, only
recognizing one  when he came to it. He might have called it
holy , save that t he feel of such a place had nothing to do with
church or saint. It was simply a place he belonged to be, and
that was suf ficient, though he p referred to be alone when he
found one. He let the reins go slack across the horse’ s neck.
Not even a thrawn-minded creature like Gideon would give
trouble here, he felt.
Sure enough, the horse stood quiet, massive dark withers
steaming in the chill. They could not tarry long, but he wasdeeply glad of the momentary respite—not from the battle
with Gideon, but from the press of people.
He had learned early on the tri ck of living separately in a
crowd, private in his mind when his body could not be. But he
was bor n a mountain-dweller , a nd had learned early , too, the
enchantment of solitude, and the healing of quiet places.
Quite suddenly , he had a vision of his mother , one of the
small vivid portraits that his mind hoarded, producing them
unexpectedly in response to God knew what—a sound, a
smell, some passing freak of memory .
He had been sn aring for rabbits on a hillside then, hot and
sweaty , his fingers pricked with gorse and his shirt stuck to
him with mud and damp. He had seen a small grove of trees
and gon e to them for shade. His mother was there, sitting in
the greenish shadow , on the ground beside a tiny spring. She
sat quite motionless—which was unlike her—long hands
folded in her lap.
She had not spoken, but smiled at him, and he had gone to
her , not speaking either , but fill ed with a great sense of peace
and contentment, resting his head against her shoulder , feeling
her arm go about him and knowing he stood at the center of
the world. He had been five, maybe, or six.
As sudd enly as it had come, the vision disappeared, like a
bright tr out vanishing into dark water . It left behind it the same
deep sense of peace, though—as though someone had briefly
embraced him, a soft hand touched his hair .
He s wung himself down from th e saddle, needing the feel of
the pine needles under his boots, some physical connection
with this place. Caution made him tie the reins to a stout pine,
though Gideon seemed calm enough; the stallion had dropped
his head  and was nuzzling for tu fts of dried grass. Jamie stood
still for a mome nt, then turned himself carefully to the right,
facing the north.
He n o longer recalled who had taught him this—whether it
was Mo ther , Father , or Auld Jo hn, Ian’ s father . He spoke thewords, though, as he turned himself sunwise, murmuring the
brief prayer to each of the four airts in turn, and ended facing
west, int o the setting sun. He cupped his empty hands and the
light filled them, spilling from his palms.
 
“May God make safe to me each step,
May God make open to me each pass,
May God make clear to me each r oad,
And may He take me in the clasp of His own two hands.”
 
W ith an instinct older than the p rayer , he took the flask from
his belt and poured a few drops on the ground.
Scraps of sound reached him o n the breeze; laughter and
calling, the sound of animals ma king their way through brush.
The caravan was not far away , only across a small hollow ,
coming slowly round the curve of the hillside opposite. He
should go now , to join them on the last push upward to the
Ridge.
Still he hesitated for a moment, loath to break the spell of
the P lace. Some tiny movement  caught the corner of his eye,
and he bent dow n, squinting as he peered into the deepening
shadows beneath a holly bush.
It sat frozen, blending perfectly with its dusky background.
He wou ld never have seen it had his hunter ’ s eye not caught
its movement. A tiny kitten, its gray fur puf fed out like a ripe
milkweed head, enormous eyes wide open and unblinking,
almost colorless in the gloom beneath the bush.
“A Chait,”  he whispered, putting out a slow finger toward
it. “Whatever are ye doing here?”
A feral cat, no doubt; born of a wild mother , fled from some
settlers’ cabin, and long free o f the trap of domesticity . He
brushed the wispy fur of its br east, and it sank its tiny teeth
suddenly into his thumb.“Ow!” H e jerked away , and examined the drop of blood
welling from a s mall puncture wound. He glowered at the cat
for a moment, but it merely stared back at him, and made no
move to run. He paused, then made up his mind. He shook the
blood drop from his finger onto  the leaves, an of fering to join
the d ram he had  spilled, a gift to the spirits of this Place—who
had evidently made up their minds to of fer him a gift,
themselves.
“All rig ht, then,” he said unde r his breath. He knelt, and
stretched out his hand, palm up . V ery slowly , he moved one
finger , then the next, and the next and the next, then again, in
the undulant motion of seaweed in the water . The big pale eyes
fixed on the movement, watching as though hypnotized. He
could see the tip  of the miniatur e tail twitch, very slightly , and
smiled at the sight.
If he could guddle a trout—and he could—why not a cat?
He made a small noise through his teeth, a whistling hiss,
like the distant chittering of birds. The kitten stared,
mesmerized, as the gently swa ying fingers moved invisibly
closer . W hen at last he touched its fur again, it made no move
to escap e. One finger edged ben eath the fur , another slid under
the cold wee pads of one paw , and it let him scoop it gently
into his hand and lift it from the ground.
He held it for a moment against his chest, stroking it with
one finger , tracing the silken j awline, the delicate ears. The
tiny cat closed i ts eyes and bega n to purr in ecstasy , rumbling
in his palm like distant thunder .
“Oh, so ye’ll come away wi’ me, will you?” Receiving no
demur fr om the cat, he opened t he neck of his shirt and tucked
the t iny thing ins ide, where it po ked and prodded at his ribs for
a bit  bef ore curl ing up against h is skin, purr reduced to a silent
but pleasant vibration.
Gideon seemed pleased by the rest; he set of f willingly
enough, and within a quarter hour , they had caught up with the
others. The stallion’ s momentary docility evaporated, though,
under the strain of the final upward climb.Not that the horse could not master the steep trail; what he
couldn’ t abide was following another horse. It didn’ t matter
whether Jamie wished to lead t hem home or not—if Gideon
had anything to do with the matter , they would be not only in
the lead, but several furlongs ahead.
The column of travelers was strung out over half a mile,
each family party traveling at its own speed: Frasers,
MacKenzies, Ch isholms, MacLe ods, and Aberfeldys. At every
space an d wide ning of the trai l, Gideon shouldered his way
rudely ahead, shoving past pack mules, sheep, foot-travelers,
and mares; he even scattered t he three pigs trudging slowly
behind Grannie Chisholm. The pigs bolted into the brush in a
chorus of panicked oinks as Gideon bore down upon them.
Jamie found himself more in sy mpathy with the horse than
not; eager to be home and working hard to get there, irritated
by a nything that threatened to h old him back. At the moment,
the main impediment to progress was Claire, who had—blast
the woman—halted her mare in front of him and slid of f in
order to gather y et another bit of herbage from the trailside. As
though the entire house was not filled from doorstep to
rooftree with plants already , and her saddlebags a-bulge with
more!
Gideon, picking up his rider ’ s mood with alacrity , stretched
out his neck an d nipped the mare’ s rump. The mare bucked,
squealed, and shot of f up the trail, loose reins dangling.
Gideon made a deep rumbling n oise of satisfaction and started
of f after her , only to be jerked unceremoniously to a halt.
Claire had whirled round at the noise, eyes wide. She
looked up at Jamie, up the trail after her vanished horse, then
back at him. She shrugged apologetically , hands full of tattered
leaves and mangy roots.
“Sorry ,” she said, but he saw the corner of her mouth tuck in
and the flush rise in her skin, the smile glimmering in her eyes
like morning light on trout water . Quite against his will, he felt
the tens ion in his shoulders ease. He had had it in mind torebuke h er; in fact, he still did, but the words wouldn’ t quite
come to his tongue.
“Get up, then, w oman,” he said instead, gruf fly , with a nod
behind him. “I want my supper .”
She laug hed at him and scramb led up, kilting her skirts out
of the way . Gideon, irascible at this additional burden,
whipped round to take a nip of a nything he could reach. Jamie
was ready for that; he snapped the end of the rein sharply of f
the stalli on’ s nose, making him j erk back and snort in surprise.
“That’ll teach ye, ye wee basta rd.” He pulled his hat over
his brow and se ttled his errant wife securely , fluttering skirts
tucked i n beneath her thighs, ar ms round his waist. She rode
without shoes or stockings, and her long calves were white and
bare aga inst the dark bay hide.  He gathered up the reins and
kicked the horse, a trifle harder than strictly necessary .
Gideon promptly reared, backed, twisted, and tried to scrape
them both of f under a hanging poplar bough. The kitten,
rudely roused from its nap, sa nk all its claws into Jamie’ s
midsection and yowled in alarm , though its noise was quite
lost in Jamie’ s much louder sc reech. He yanked the horse’ s
head halfway round, swearing, and shoved at the hindquarters
with his left leg.
No easy  conquest, Gideon executed a hop like a corkscrew .
There was a sm all “eek!” and a sudden feeling of emptiness
behind him, as C laire was slung of f into the brush like a bag of
flour . The horse suddenly yielde d to the pull on his mouth, and
shot down the p ath in the wrong direction, hurtling through a
screen of brambles and skidding to a halt that nearly threw him
onto his hindquarters in a shower of mud and dead leaves.
Then he straightened out like a snake, shook his head, and
trotted n onchalantly over to exchange nuzzles with Roger ’ s
horse, which was standing at th e edge of the spring clearing,
watching them with the same bemusement exhibited by its
dismounted rider .
“All right there?” asked Roger , raising one eyebrow .“Certainly ,” Jamie replied, trying to gasp for breath while
keeping his dignity . “And you?”
“Fine.”
“Good.” He was already swinging down from the saddle as
he sp oke. He flu ng the reins toward MacKenzie, not waiting to
see whe ther he caught them, a nd ran back toward the trail,
shouting, “Claire! Where are ye?”
“Just here!” she called cheerfully . She emer ged from the
shadow of the poplars, with leaves in her hair and limping
slightly , but looking otherwise undamaged. “Are you all
right?” she asked, cocking one eyebrow at him.
“A ye, fine. I’m going to shoot that horse.” He gathered her
in briefly , wanting to assure himself that she was in fact whole.
She was breathing heavily , but felt reassuringly solid, and
kissed him on the nose.
“W ell, don’ t shoot him until we get home. I don’ t want to
walk the last mile or so in my bare feet.”
“Hey! Let that alone, ye bugger!”
He l et go of Claire and turned to find Roger snatching a
fistful of ragged-looking plants away from Gideon’ s questing
Roman nose. More plants— what was this mania for
gathering? Claire was still panting from the accident, but
leaned forward to see them, looking interested.
“What’ s that you’ve got, Roger?”
“For Bree,” he said, holding t hem up for her inspection.
“Are they the right kind?” T o Jamie’ s jaundiced eye, they
looked like the yellowed tops o f carrots gone to seed and left
too l ong in the ground, but Claire fingered the mangy foliage,
and nodded approval.
“Oh, yes,” she said. “ V ery  romantic!”
Jamie made a small tactful noise, indicating that they ought
perhaps to be making their wa y , since Bree and the slower -
moving tribe of Chisholms would be catching them up soon.“Y es, all  right,” Claire said, pat ting his shoulder in what he
assumed she meant to be a so othing gesture. “Don’ t snort;
we’re going.”
“Mmphm,” he said, and bent to put a hand under her foot.
T ossing her up i nto the saddle, h e gave Gideon a “Don’ t try it
on, you bastard” look and swung up behind her .
“Y ou’ll wait for the others, t hen, and bring them up?”
W ithout waiting for Roger ’ s nod, Jamie reined around and set
Gideon upon the trail again.
Mollified at being far in the le ad, Gideon settled down to
the job at hand , climbing steadily through the thickets of
hornbeam and poplar , chestnut and spruce. Even so late in the
year , some leaves still clung to the trees, and small bits of
brown and yellow floated down  upon them like a gentle rain,
catching in the horse’ s mane, resting in the loose, thick waves
of Claire ’ s hair . It had come down in her precipitous descent,
and she hadn’ t bothered to put it up again.
Jamie’ s own equanimity returned with the sense of progress,
and was  quite restored by the fortuitous finding of the hat he
had lost, hanging from a white oak by the trail, as though
placed th ere by some kindly han d. Still, he remained uneasy in
his mind , and could not quite grasp tranquillity , though the
mountain lay at peace all round him, the air hazed with blue
and smelling of wood-damp and ever greens.
Then he realized, with a sud den jolt in the pit of his
stomach, that the kitten was gone. There were itching furrows
in th e skin of his chest and abdomen, where it had climbed
him in a frantic ef fort to escape, but it must have popped out
the neck  of his s hirt and been flung of f his shoulder in the mad
career down the slope. He glanc ed from side to side, searching
in the shadows under bushes and trees, but it was a vain hope.
The sha dows were lengthening, and they were on the main
trail now , where he and Gideon had torn through the wood.
“Go with God,” he murmured, and crossed himself briefly .
“What’ s that?” Claire asked, half-turning in the saddle.“Nothing,” he said. After all, i t was a wild cat, though a
small one. Doubtless it would manage.
Gideon worked the bit, pecking and bobbing. Jamie realized
that the tension  in his hands was running through the reins
once more, and consciously slackened his grip. He loosened
his grip on Claire, too, and she took a sudden deep breath.
His heart was beating fast.
It was impossib le for him ev er to come home after an
absence without a certain sense of apprehension. For years
after the  Rising, he had lived in a cave, approaching his own
house only rarely , after dark and with great caution, never
knowing what he might find there. More than one Highland
man had come home to his place to find it burned and black,
his family gone. Or worse, still there.
W ell enough to tell himself n ot to imagine horrors; the
dif ficulty was that he had no need of imagination—memory
suf ficed.
The horse dug w ith his haunches, pushing hard. No use to
tell himself this was a new place; it was, with its own dangers.
If th ere were n o English soldiers in these mountains, there
were stil l marauders. Those too shiftless to take root and fend
for t hemselves, but who wandered the backcountry , robbing
and plu ndering. Raiding Indians. W ild animals. And fire.
Always fire.
He h ad sent the Bugs on ahead, with Fer gus to guide them,
to sa ve Claire dealing with the simultaneous chores of arrival
and hos pitality . The Chisholms, the MacLeods, and Billy
Aberfeldy , with his wife and wee daughter , would all bide with
them at the big h ouse for a time;  he had told Mrs. Bug to begin
cooking at once. Decently mounted and not hindered by
children or livestock, the Bugs should have reached the Ridge
two days before. No one had come back to say aught was
amiss, so perhaps all was well. But still …
He hadn’ t realized that Claire was tensed, too, until she
suddenly relaxed against him, a hand on his leg.“It’ s all right,” she said. “I smell chimney smoke.”
He l ifted his hea d to catch the air . She was right; the tang of
burning hickory  floated on th e breeze. Not the stink of
remembered con flagration, but a homely whif f redolent with
the prom ise of warmth and food. Mrs. Bug had presumably
taken him at his word.
They ro unded th e last turn of the trail and saw it, then, the
high fieldstone chimney rising a bove the trees on the ridge, its
fat plume of smoke curling over the rooftree.
The house stood.
He b reathed deep in relief, notic ing now the other smells of
home; the faint rich scent of ma nure from the stable, of meat
smoked and hanging in the shed, and the breath of the forest
nearby—damp wood and leaf-rot, rock and rushing water , the
touch of it cold and loving on his cheek.
They ca me out of the chestnu t grove and into the lar ge
clearing where the house stood , solid and neat, its windows
glazed gold with the last of the sun.
It was a modest frame house, whitewashed and shingle-
roofed, clean in its lines and sou ndly built, but impressive only
by c omparison with the crude ca bins of most settlers. His own
first cabin still stood, dark and sturdy , a little way down the
hill. Smoke was curling from that chimney , too.
“Someone’ s ma de a fire for Bree and Roger ,” Claire said,
nodding at it.
“That’ s good,” he said. He tig htened his arm about her
waist, and she made a small, contented noise in her throat,
wriggling her bottom into his lap.
Gideon was happy , too; he s tretched out his neck and
whinnied to the two horses in the penfold, who trotted to and
fro in the enclosure, calling greetings. Claire’ s mare was
standing by the fence, reins da ngling; she curled her lip in
what looked like derision, the wee besom. From somewhere
far down the tr ail behind them came a deep, joyous bray;Clarence the mule, hearing th e racket and delighted to be
coming home.
The doo r flew open, and Mrs. Bug popped out, round and
flustered as a tu mble-turd. Jamie smiled at sight of her , and
gave Claire an arm to slide down before dismounting himself.
“All’ s w ell, all’ s well, and how ’ s yourself, sir?” Mrs. Bug
was reassuring him before his b oots struck ground. She had a
pewter c up in one hand, a polishing cloth in the other , and
didn’ t cease her polishing for an  instant, even as she turned up
her face to accept his kiss on her withered round cheek.
She didn’ t wait for an answer , b ut turned at once and stood
a-tiptoe to kiss Claire, beaming.
“Oh, it’ s grand t hat you’re home, ma’am, you and Himself,
and I’ve  the supper all made, so you’ll not be worrit a bit with
it, ma’a m, but come inside, co me inside, and be takin’ of f
those dusty cloots, and I’ll send old Arch along to the mash-
hoose fo r a bit o f the lively , and we’ll …” She had Claire by
one hand, towing her into the h ouse, talking and talking, the
other hand still polishing briskly away , her stubby fingers
dexterously rubbing the cloth inside the cup. Claire gave him a
helpless glance over one shoulde r , and he grinned at her as she
disappeared inside the house.
Gideon shoved an impatient nose under his arm and bumped
his elbow .
“Oh, aye,” he s aid, recalled to his chores. “Come along,
then, ye prickly wee bastard.”
By the time h e had the big horse and Claire’ s mare
unsaddled, wipe d down, and turned out to their feed, Claire
had esca ped from Mrs. Bug; coming back from the paddock,
he s aw t he door  of the house swing open and Claire slip out,
looking guiltily over her shoulder as though fearing pursuit.
Where w as she bound? She did n’ t see him; she turned and
hurried toward the far corner o f the house, disappearing in a
swish of homespun. He followed, curious.Ah. She  had seen to her sur gery ; now she was going to her
garden before it got completely  dark; he caught a glimpse of
her agai nst the sky on the upward path behind the house, the
last of the dayl ight caught like cobwebs in her hair . There
would b e little growing now , only a few sturdy herbs and the
overwintering th ings like carrots and onions and turnips, but it
made no dif ference; she always  went to see how things were,
no matter how short a time she had been gone.
He u nderstood the ur ge; he wo uld not feel entirely home
himself until he had checked al l the stock and buildings, and
made sure of matters up at the still.
The eve ning breeze brought him an acrid hint from the
distant privy , suggesting that matters there were shortly going
to require his attention, speaking of buildings. Then he
bethought him of the new tenants coming, and relaxed;
digging a new p rivy would be just the thing for Chisholm’ s
eldest two boys.
He and Ian had dug this one, when they first came to the
Ridge. God, he missed the lad.
“A Mhicheal bheanaichte,”  he murm ured. Blessed Michael,
pr otect him.  H e liked MacK enzie well enough, but had it been
his choi ce, he would not have exchanged Ian for the man. It
had been  Ian’ s choice, though, not his, and no more to be said
about it.
Pushing away the ache of Ian’ s loss, he stepped behind a
tree, loo sened his breeks, and re lieved himself. If she saw him,
Claire would doubtless make what she considered witty
remarks about dogs and wolves marking their home ground as
they returned to it. Nothing o f the sort, he replied to her
mentally; why walk up the hill, only to make matters worse in
the p rivy? Still, if you came dow n to it, it was  his place, and if
he chose  to piss on it … He ti died his clothes, feeling more
settled.
He raise d his head and saw her coming down the path from
the g arden, her a pron bulging with carrots and turnips. A gustof w ind sent th e last of the leaves from the chestnut grove
swirling round her in a yellow dance, sparked with light.
Moved by sudden impulse, he s tepped deeper into the trees
and began to look about.
Normally , he paid attention only to such vegetation as was
immediately com estible by horse or man, suf ficiently straight-
grained to serve for planks and t imbers, or so obstructive as to
pose dif ficulty in passage. Once  he began looking with an eye
to aesthetics, though, he found h imself surprised at the variety
to hand.
Stalks of half-ripe barley , the seeds laid in rows like a
woman’ s plait. A dry , fragile w eed that looked like the lace
edging o n a fine handkerchief. A branch of spruce, unearthly
green an d cool among the dry b its, leaving its fragrant sap on
his hand  as he to re it from the tree. A twig of glossy dried oak
leaves that reminded him of he r hair , in shades of gold and
brown and gray . And a bit of  scarlet creeper , snatched for
color .
Just in time; she  was coming round the corner of the house.
Lost in thought, she passed within a foot or two of him, not
seeing him.
“Sor cha,”  he called softly , and she turned, eyes narrowed
against the rays of the sinking sun, then wide and gold with
surprise at the sight of him.
“W elcome home ,” he said, and held out the small bouquet
of leaves and twigs.
“Oh,” she said. She looked at the bits of leaf and stick again,
and then  at him, and the corners of her mouth trembled, as
though she might laugh or cry , but wasn’ t sure which. She
reached then, and took the plan ts from him, her fingers small
and cold as they brushed his hand.
“Oh, Jamie—they’re wonderful .” She came up on her toes
and kiss ed him, warm and salty , and he wanted more, but she
was hurrying away into the house, the silly wee things clasped
to her breast as though they were gold.He felt pleasan tly foolish, and foolishly pleased with
himself. The taste of her was still on his mouth.
“Sor cha,”  he whispered, a nd realized that he had called her
so a moment before. Now , that was odd; no wonder she had
been surprised. It was her nam e in the Gaelic, but he never
called her by it. He liked the strangeness of her , the
Englishness. She was his Claire, his Sassenach.
And yet  in the moment when  she passed him, she was
Sor cha . Not only “Claire,” it meant—but light.
He breathed deep, contented.
He was suddenly  ravenous, both for food and for her , but he
made no  move to hasten inside . Some kinds of hunger were
sweet in  themse lves, the anticipation of satisfaction as keen a
pleasure as the slaking.
Hoofsteps and voices; the others were finally here. He had a
sudden ur ge to keep his peaceful solitude a moment longer , but
too late—in seconds, he was surrounded by confusion, the
shrill cries of ex cited children and calls of distracted mothers,
the welcoming of the newcom ers, the bustle and rush of
unloading, turning out the horses and mules, fetching feed and
water … and y et in the midst  of this Babel, he moved as
though h e were still alone, pea ceful and quiet in the setting
sun. He had come home.
 
IT W AS FULL DARK before everything was sorted, the
smallest of the wild Chisholm bairns rounded up and sent
inside fo r his supper , all the stoc k cared for and settled for the
night. H e follow ed Geof f Chisholm toward the house, but then
held back, lingering for a moment in the dark dooryard.
He stood  for a moment, idly chafing his hands against the
chill as he admired the look of the place. Snug barn and sound
sheds, a penfold and paddock i n good repair , a tidy fence of
palisades around Claire’ s scraggly garden, to keep out the deer .
The house loomed white in the early dark, a benevolent spiritguarding the ridge. Light spilled from every door and window ,
and the sound of laughter came from inside.
He sensed a movement in the darkness, and turned to see his
daughter coming  from the spring  house, a pail of fresh milk in
her hand. She stopped by him, looking at the house.
“Nice to be home, isn’ t it?” she said softly .
“A ye,” he said. “It is.” They lo oked at each other , smiling.
Then she leaned forward, peering closely at him. She turned
him, so the light from the win dow fell on him, and a small
frown puckered the skin between her brows.
“What’ s that?” she said, and fl icked at his coat. A glossy
scarlet leaf fell free and floated to the ground. Her brows went
up at sight of it. “Y ou’d better go and wash, Da,” she said.
“Y ou’ve been in the poison ivy .”
 
“YE MIGHT HA VE T OLD ME, Sassenach.” Jamie glowered
at th e table ne ar the bedroom window , where I’d set his
bouquet in a cup of water . The bright, blotchy red of the
poison ivy glowed, even in the dimness of the firelight. “And
ye might get rid of it, too. D’ye mean to mock me?”
“No, I don’ t,” I said, smiling as  I hung my apron from the
peg and reached for the laces of  my gown. “But if I’d told you
when you gave it to me, you’d  have snatched it back. That’ s
the only posy you’ve ever given me, and I don’ t imagine I’ll
get another; I mean to keep it.”
He snor ted, and sat down on the bed to take of f his
stockings. He’d already stripped of f coat, stock, and shirt, and
the fire light gleamed on the slope of his shoulders. He
scratched at the underside of one wrist, though I’d told him it
was psychosomatic; he hadn’ t any signs of rash.
“Y ou’ve never come home with poison ivy rash,” I
remarked. “And you’re bound to have run into it now and
again, so  much time as you spen d in the woods and the fields.
I think you mu st be immune to it. Some people are, you
know .”“Oh, aye ?” He looked interested at that, though he went on
scratching. “Is that like you and Brianna not catching illness?”
“Something like , but for dif fere nt reasons.” I peeled of f the
gown of pale green homespun—more than a little grubby , after
a week’ s travel—and stripped of f my stays with a sigh of
relief.
I got up to check the pan of w ater I had set to heat in the
embers. Some of the newcomers had been sent of f to spend the
night wi th Fer gus and Marsali, or with Roger and Bree, but the
kitchen, the sur gery , and Jamie’ s study below were full of
guests, a ll sleeping on the floor . I wasn’ t going to bed without
washing of f the stains of travel, but I didn’ t care to provide a
public spectacle while doing it, either .
The water shimmered with heat,  tiny bubbles clinging to the
sides of  the pot. I put a finger in, just to check—lovely and
hot. I poured som e into the basin and put the rest back to keep
warm.
“W e aren’ t completely immune, you know ,” I warned him.
“Some t hings—like smallpox—we can’ t ever catch, Roger and
Bree and  I, because we’ve been vaccinated against them, and
it’ s permanent. Other things, like cholera and typhoid, we
aren’ t likely  to catch, but the injections don’ t give permanent
immunity; it wears of f after a time.”
I bent to rummage in the saddlebags he had brought up and
dumped by the door . Someone at the Gathering had given me a
sponge—a real one, imported from the Indies—in payment for
my extr acting an abscessed tooth. Just the thing for a quick
bath.
“Things like malaria—what Lizzie has—”
“I thought ye’d cured her of that,” Jamie interrupted,
frowning.
I shook my head, regretful.
“No, she’ll always have it, poor thing. All I can do is try to
lessen the severity of the attacks , and keep them from coming
too often. It’ s in her blood, you see.”He pulle d of f the thong that bound back his hair , and shook
out t he ruddy locks, leaving them  ruf fled round his head like a
mane.
“That doesna make any sense,” he objected, rising to
unfasten his breeks. “Y e told m e that when a person had the
measles, if he li ved, he’d not ge t it again, because it stayed in
the bloo d. And so I couldna catch pox or measles now ,
because I’d had them both as a child—they’re in my blood.”
“W ell, it’ s not q uite the same thing,” I said, rather lamely .
The thought of trying to explain  the dif ferences among active
immunity , passive immunity , acquired immunity , antibodies,
and parasitic infection was mor e of a challenge than I felt up
to, after a long day’ s ride.
I dipped the sponge into the basin, let it take up water , then
squeezed it out, enjoying the oddly silky , fibrous texture. A
fine mist of sand floated out of the pores and settled to the
bottom of the china basin. The sponge was softening as it took
up water , but I could still feel a hard spot at one edge.
“Speaking of riding—”
Jamie looked mildly startled.
“W ere we speaking of riding?”
“W ell, n o, but I was thinking  of it.” I waved a hand,
dismissing the inconsequent distinction. “In any case, what do
you mean to do about Gideon?”
“Oh.” Ja mie dro pped his breeks in a puddle on the floor and
stretched himself, considering. “W ell, I canna af ford just to
shoot him, I suppose. And he’ s a braw enough fellow . I’ll cut
him, to start. That may settle his mind a bit.”
“Cut him ? Oh, castrate him, yo u mean. Y es, I suppose that
would g et his attention, though it seems a bit drastic.” I
hesitated a moment, reluctant. “Do you want me to do it?”
He stared at me in amazement, then burst out laughing.
“Nay , Sassenac h, I dinna thin k cutting an eighteen-hand
stallion is a job for a woman, sur geon or no. It doesna reallyrequire the delicate touch, aye?”
I was just as pleased to hear this. I had been working at the
sponge with my thumb; it loo sened a bit, and a tiny shell
popped suddenly out of a lar ge pore. It floated down through
the water , a perfect miniature spiral, tinted pink and purple.
“Oh, look,” I said, delighted.
“What a bonnie wee thing.” Jam ie leaned over my shoulder ,
a big  forefinger gently touching the shell at the bottom of the
basin. “How did it get into your sponge, I wonder?”
“I expect the sponge ate it by mistake.”
“Ate it?” One ruddy eyebrow shot up at that.
“Sponges are animals,” I expla ined. “Or to be more exact,
stomachs. They suck in water , and just absorb everything
edible as it passes through.”
“Ah, so that’ s w hy Bree called the bairn a wee sponge. They
do that.” He smiled at the thought of Jemmy .
“Indeed they do.” I sat down and slipped the shift of f my
shoulders, lettin g the garment fall to my waist. The fire had
taken th e chill of f the room, bu t it was still cold enough that
the skin of my breasts and arms bloomed into gooseflesh.
Jamie pi cked up  his belt and carefully removed the assorted
impedimenta it held, laying out pistol, cartridge box, dirk, and
pewter f lask on top of the small bureau. He lifted the flask and
raised an inquiring eyebrow in my direction.
I no dded enthusiastically , and h e turned to find a cup amid
the rubb le of oddments. W ith so many people and their
belongings stuf fed into the house, all of our own saddlebags,
plus the  bundles and bits acquir ed at the Gathering, had been
carried up and d umped in our room; the humped shadows of
the luggage flickering on the wall gave the chamber the odd
look of a grotto, lined with lumpy boulders.
Jamie was as much a sponge as his grandson, I reflected,
watching him rootle about, completely naked and totally
unconcerned about it. He took in everything, and seemed ableto deal with whatever came his w ay , no matter how familiar or
foreign to his ex perience. Mania c stallions, kidnapped priests,
marriageable ma idservants, headstrong daughters, and heathen
sons-in-law … Anything he cou ld not defeat, outwit, or alter ,
he simply accepted—rather like the sponge and its embedded
shell.
Pursuing the analogy further , I supposed I was the shell.
Snatched out of my own small niche by an unexpected strong
current, taken in and surrounded by Jamie and his life. Caught
forever among the strange currents that pulsed through this
outlandish environment.
The thought gave me a sudden queer feeling. The shell lay
still at the bott om of the basin—delicate, beautiful … but
empty . Rather slowly , I raised the sponge to the back of my
neck and squeezed, feeling the t ickle of warm water down my
back.
For the most part, I felt no regre ts. I had chosen to be here; I
wanted  t o be here. And  yet now and then small things like our
conversation about immunity made me realize just how much
had been lost—of what I had had, of what I had been. It was
undeniable that some of my soft  parts had been digested away ,
and the thought did make me fee l a trifle hollow now and then.
Jamie bent to dig in one of the saddlebags, and the sight of
his b are buttocks, turned toward  me in all innocence, did much
to dispel the momentary sense of disquiet. They were
gracefully shaped, rounded w ith muscle—and pleasingly
dusted with a red-gold fuzz that caught the light of fire and
candle. The long, pale colum ns of his thighs framed the
shadow of his scrotum, dark and barely visible between them.
He had found a cup at last, and poured it half full. He turned
and han ded it to me, lifting his  eyes from the surface of the
dark liquid, startled to find me staring at him.
“What is it?” he said. “Is there something the matter ,
Sassenach?”“No,” I said, but I must have sounded rather doubtful, for
his brows drew momentarily together .
“No,” I said, mo re positively . I took the cup from him and
smiled, lifting it slightly in acknowledgment. “Only thinking.”
An answering smile touched his lips.
“A ye? W ell, ye dinna want to do too much of that late at
night, Sassenach. It will give ye the nightmare.”
“Daresay you’re  right about th at.” I sipped from the cup;
rather to my surprise, it was wine—and very good wine.
“Where did you get this?”
“From Father Kenneth. It’ s s acramental wine—but not
consecrated, aye ? He said the Sherif f ’ s men would take it; he
would as soon it went with me.”
A slight shadow crossed his face at mention of the priest.
“Do you think h e’ll be all right?” I asked. The Sherif f ’ s men
had not  struck me as civilized enforcers of an abstruse
regulation, but rather as thugs whose prejudice was
momentarily constrained by fear—of Jamie.
“I ho pe so.” Jam ie turned aside, restless. “I told the Sherif f
that if the Fathe r were misused, he and his men would answer
for it.”
I no dded silently , sipping. If Jamie learned of any harm
done to Father Donahue, he w ould indeed make the Sherif f
answer for it. Th e thought made me a trifle uneasy; this wasn’ t
a good time to  make enemies, and the Sherif f of Orange
County wasn’ t a good enemy to have.
I looked  up to find Jamie’ s eyes still fixed on me, though
now with a look of deep appreciation.
“Y ou’re in good flesh these days, Sassenach,” he observed,
tilting his head to one side.
“Flatterer ,” I said, giving him a cold look as I picked up the
sponge again.“Y e must have g ained a stone, at least, since the spring,” he
said with approval, disregarding the look and circling round
me to inspect. “It’ s been a good fat summer , aye?”
I turned round and flung the wet sponge at his head.
He caught it neatly , grinning.
“I didna  realize how well ye’d filled out, Sassenach, so
bundled as ye’ve been these last weeks. I havena seen ye
naked in a month, at least.” He was still eyeing me with an air
of a ppraisal, as though I were a prime entrant in the Silver
Medalist Round at the Shropshire Fat Pigs Show .
“Enjoy it,” I advised him, my cheeks flushed with
annoyance. “Y o u may not see it again for quite some time!” I
snatched the top of the chem ise up again, covering my—
undeniably rather full—breasts.
His eyebrows rose in surprise at my tone.
“Y ou’re never angry wi’ me, Sassenach?”
“Certainly not,” I said. “Whatever gives you an idea like
that ?”
He smile d, rubbing the sponge a bsently over his chest as his
eyes traveled over me. His nipp les puckered at the chill, dark
and stif f among the ruddy , curling hairs, and the damp
gleamed on his skin.
“I like ye fat, Sassenach,” he said softly . “Fat and juicy as a
plump wee hen. I like it fine.”
I m ight have con sidered this a s imple attempt to remove his
foot from  his mouth, were it no t for the fact that naked men
are conveniently equipped with sexual lie detectors. He did
like it fine.
“Oh,” I said. Rather slowly , I l owered the chemise. “W ell,
then.”
He lifted  his chin, gesturing. I hesitated for a moment, then
stood up and le t the chemise fall on the floor , joining his
breeks. I reached across and took the sponge from his hand.“I’ll … um … j ust finish washing, shall I?” I murmured. I
turned m y back,  put a foot on the stool to wash, and heard an
encouraging rumble of appreciation behind me. I smiled to
myself, and took my time. The room was getting warmer; by
the time I had finished my ablutions, my skin was pink and
smooth, with only a slight chill in fingers and toes.
I tur ned round a t last, to see Jamie still watching me, though
he still rubbed at his wrist, frowning slightly .
“Did you  wash?” I asked. “Even if it doesn’ t trouble you, if
you have oil from the poison ivy on your skin, it can get on
things you touch—and I’m  not immune to the stuf f.”
“I scrubbed my hands with l ye soap,” he assured me,
putting them on my shoulders i n illustration. Sure enough, he
smelled strongly  of the acrid soft soap we made from suet and
wood-ash—it w asn’ t perfumed toilet soap, but it did get things
clean. T hings lik e floorboards and iron pots. No wonder he’d
been scr atching; it wasn’ t easy o n the skin, and his hands were
rough and cracked.
I bent my head and kissed his knuckles, then reached across
to the small box where I kept my personal bits and pieces, and
took out the jar  of skin balm. Made of walnut oil, beeswax,
and purified lanolin from boiled sheep’ s wool, it was
pleasantly soothing, green-scented with the essences of
chamomile, comfrey , yarrow , and elderflowers.
I sc ooped out a bit with my  thumbnail, and rubbed it
between my hands; it was ne arly solid to begin with, but
liquefied nicely when warmed.
“Here,” I said, and took one of his hands between my own,
rubbing the ointment into the creases of his knuckles,
massaging his callused palms. Slowly , he relaxed, letting me
stretch each finger as I worked  my way down the joints and
rubbed more ointment into the  tiny scrapes and cuts. There
were sti ll marks on his hands where he had kept the leather
reins wrapped tightly .“The posy’ s lovely , Jamie,” I said, nodding at the little
bouquet in its cu p. “Whatever made you do it, though?” While
in his own way quite romantic, Jamie was thoroughly practical
as w ell; I didn’ t think he had ever given me a completely
frivolous present, and he was not a man to see value in any
vegetation that could not be eaten, taken medicinally , or
brewed into beer .
He shifted a bit, clearly uncomfortable.
“A ye, well,” he said, looking aw ay . “I just—I mean—well, I
had a wee thing  I meant to give ye, only I lost it, but then you
seemed to think it a sweet thing that wee Roger had plucked a
few gowans for Brianna, and I—” He broke of f, muttering
something that sounded like “Ifrinn!”  under his breath.
I wa nted very much to laugh. Instead, I lifted his hand and
kissed his knuckles, lightly . He looked embarrassed, but
pleased. His thumb traced the e dge of a half-healed blister on
my palm, left by a hot kettle.
“Here, Sassenach, ye need a b it of this, too. Let me,” he
said, and leaned to take a dab of the green ointment. He
engulfed my hand in his, warm and still slippery with the oil
and beeswax mixture.
I r esiste d for a moment, but then let him take my hand,
making deep slow circles on m y palm that made me want to
close my eyes and melt quietly . I gave a small sigh of pleasure,
and must have closed my eyes after all, because I didn’ t see
him move in close to kiss me; j ust felt the brief soft touch of
his mouth.
I raised my other hand, lazily , and he took it, too, his fingers
smoothing mine. I let my fingers twine with his, thumbs
jousting gently , the heels of o ur hands lightly rubbing. He
stood cl ose enough that I felt the warmth of him, and the
delicate brush of the sun-bleached hairs on his arm as he
reached past my hip for more of the ointment.
He p aused, kissing me lightly on ce more in passing. Flames
hissed on the hearth like shifting tides, and the firelightflickered dimly on the whitewashed walls, like light dancing
on t he surface o f water far above. W e might have been alone
together at the bottom of the sea.
“Roger wasn’ t being strictly romantic, you know ,” I said.
“Or maybe he was—depending how one wants to look at it.”
Jamie lo oked quizzical, as he took my hand again. Our
fingers l ocked a nd twined, moving slowly , and I sighed with
pleasure.
“A ye?”
“Bree a sked me about birth co ntrol, and I told her what
methods there are now—which are frankly not all that good,
though b etter than nothing. But old Grannie Bacon gave me
some se eds that she says the Indians use for contraception;
supposed to be very ef fective.”
Jamie’ s face underwent the most comical change, from
drowsy pleasure to wide-eyed astonishment.
“Birth c on—what? She—ye m ean he—those clatty weeds
—”
“W ell, y es. Or at least I think they may help prevent
pregnancy .”
“Mmphm.” The movement of his fingers slowed, and his
brows d rew together—more in concern than disapproval, I
thought. Then he returned to th e job of massaging my hands,
enveloping them  in his much lar ger grasp with a decided
movement that obliged me to yield to him.
He w as quiet for  a few moments, working the ointment into
my fingers more in the busine sslike way of a man rubbing
saddle soap into harness than o ne making tender love to his
wife’ s devoted hands. I shifte d slightly , and he seemed to
realize what he was doing, for he stopped, frowning, then
squeezed my hands lightly and let his face relax. He lifted my
hand to his lips , kissed it, then resumed his massage, much
more slowly .
“Do ye think—” he began, and stopped.“What?”
“Mmphm. It’ s only—does it no t seem a bit strange to ye,
Sassenach? That a young woman newly wed should be
thinking of such a thing?”
“No, it doesn’ t,” I said, rather  sharply . “It seems entirely
sensible to me. And they aren’ t all that newly wed—they’ve
been … I mean, they have  got a child already .”
His nostrils flared in soundless disagreement.
“ She  has  a child,” he said. “That’ s what I mean, Sassenach.
It se ems to me that a young wo man well-suited with her man
wouldna be thinking first thing how not  to  bear his chil d. Are
ye sure all is well between them?”
I paused, frowning as I considered the notion.
“I th ink so,” I said at last, slowly . “Remember , Jamie—Bree
comes fr om a time where women can  decide whether or when
to have babies, with a fair amount of certainty . She’d feel that
such a thing was her right.”
The wide mouth moved, pursed  in thought; I could see him
struggling with the notion—one entirely contrary to his own
experience.
“That’ s the way of it, then?” he asked, finally . “A woman
can say , I will, or I won’ t—and the man has no say in it?” His
voice was filled with astonishment—and disapproval.
I laughed a little.
“W ell, it’ s not exactly  l ike  tha t. Or not all the time. I mean,
there are accidents. And ignorance and foolishness; a lot of
women just let things happen. And most women would
certainly car e  wh at their men  thought about it. But yes … I
suppose if you come right down to it, that’ s right.”
He grunted slightly .
“But MacKenzie’ s from that time, too. So he’ll think
nothing odd of it?”
“He picked the weeds for her ,” I pointed out.“So he did.” The line stayed between his brows, but the
frown eased somewhat.
It was growing  late, and the muf fled rumble of talk and
laughter was dying down in the house below . The growing
quiet of the house was pierced suddenly by a baby’ s wail. Both
of us stood still,  listening—then  relaxed as the murmur of the
mother ’ s voice reached us through the closed door .
“Besides, it’ s not so unusual for  a young woman to think of
such a thing—M arsali came and asked me about it, before she
married Fer gus.”
“Oh, did she?” One eyebrow w ent up. “Did ye not tell her ,
then?”
“Of course I did!”
“Whatever ye told her didna wo rk all that well, did it?” One
corner of his mouth curled up in a cynic smile; Germain had
been born approximately ten months following his parents’
marriage, and Marsali had become pregnant with Joan within
days of weaning him.
I felt a flush rising in my cheeks.
“Nothing works all the time—not even modern methods.
And for that matter—nothing works at all if you don’ t use it.”
In fact, Marsali had wanted contraception not because she
didn’ t w ant a baby—but only because she had feared that
pregnancy wou ld interfere with the intimacy of her
relationship with  Fer gus. When we get to the prick part, I want
to like it  had been her w ords on that memorable occasion, and
my own mouth curled at the memory .
My equally cynical guess was that she had liked it fine, and
had decided that pregnancy was unlikely to diminish her
appreciation of Fer gus’ s finer points. But that rather came back
to Jamie’ s fears about Brianna—for surely her intimacy with
Roger was well established. Still, that was hardly …
One of Jamie’ s hands remained entwined with mine; the
other left my fingers and reached elsewhere—very lightly .“Oh,” I said, beginning to lose my train of thought.
“Pills, y e said.” His face was quite close, eyes hooded in
thought as he worked. “That’ s how it’ s done—then?”
“Um … oh. Y es.”
“Y e didna bring any with you, ” he said. “When ye came
back.”
I breathed deep and let it out, feeling as though I were
beginning to dissolve.
“No,” I said, a little faintly .
He paused a moment, hand cupped lightly .
“Why not?” he asked quietly .
“I …  well, I … I actually—I thought—you have to keep
taking them. I couldn’ t have brought enough. There’ s a
permanent way ,  a small operation. It’ s fairly simple, and it
makes one permanently … barren.” I swallowed. V iewing the
prospect of coming back to th e past, I had in fact thought
seriously about the possibilities of pregnancy—and the risks. I
thought the possibility very low indeed, given both my age and
previous history , but the risk …
Jamie stood stock-still, looking down.
“For Go d’ s sake, Claire,” he said at last, low-voiced. “T ell
me that ye did it.”
I took a deep breath, and squeezed his hand, my fingers
slipping a little.
“Jamie,” I said softly , “if I’d done it, I would have told
you.” I swallowed again. “Y ou … would have wanted me to?”
He was still ho lding my hand. His other hand left me,
touched my back, pressed me—very gently—to him. His skin
was warm on mine.
W e stood close together , touching, not moving, for several
minutes. He sighed then, chest rising under my ear .“I’ve bairns enough,” he said quietly . “I’ve only the one life
—and that’ s you, mo chridhe .”
I reached up and touched his face. It was furrowed with
tiredness, rough with whiskers; he hadn’ t shaved in days.
I had  th ought  about it. And had come very close indeed to
asking a sur geon friend to perform the sterilization for me.
Cold blood and clear head had ar gued for it; no sense in taking
chances. And yet … there wa s no guarantee that I would
survive the journey , would reach the right time or place, would
find him  again. Still less, a chan ce that I might conceive again
at my age.
And yet, gone from him for so long, not knowing if I might
find him—I could not bring my self to destroy any possibility
between us. I di d not want ano ther child. But if I found him,
and he  should want it … then I would risk it for him.
I tou ched him, lightly , and he made a small sound in his
throat an d laid his face against my hair , holding me tight. Our
lovemaking was  always risk an d promise—for if he held my
life in his hands when he lay with me, I held his soul, and
knew it.
“I th ought … I  thought you’d never see Brianna. And I
didn’ t know about W illie. It wa sn’ t right for me to take away
any chance of your having another child—not without telling
you.”
Y ou ar e Blood of my blood , I  had s aid to him, Bone of my
bone . T hat was true, and always wo uld be, whether children
came of it or not.
“I dinna want another child,” he whispered. “I want you.”
His hand rose, as though by itself, touched my breast with a
fingertip, left a s himmer of the s cented ointment on my skin. I
wrapped my hand, slippery and green-scented, round him, and
stepped backward, bringing him  with me toward the bed. I had
just enough presence of mind left to extinguish the candle.
“Don’ t worry for Bree,” I said, reaching up to touch him as
he rose over me, looming black against the firelight. “Rogerpicked the weeds for her . He knows what she wants.”
He gave a deep sigh, the breath of a laugh, that caught in his
throat as he came to me, and ended in a small groan of
pleasure and completion as he  slid between my legs, well-
oiled and ready .
“I ke n w hat I want, too,” he sai d, voice muf fled in my hair .
“I shall pick ye another posy , tomorrow .”
 
DRUGGED WI TH F A TIGUE, languid with love, and lulled
by the comforts of a soft, clean bed, I slept like the dead.
Somewhere toward dawn, I began to dream—pleasant
dreams of touch and color , with out form. Small hands touched
my hair ,  patted my face; I turned on my side, half-conscious,
dreaming of nursing a child in  my sleep. T iny soft fingers
kneaded my breast, and my han d came up to cup the child’ s
head. It bit me.
I sh rieked, shot bolt upright in  bed, and saw a gray form
race across the quilt and disappear over the end of the bed. I
shrieked again, louder .
Jamie sh ot sideways out of be d, rolled on the floor , and
came up standing, shoulders braced and fists half-clenched.
“What?” he demanded, glaring wildly round in search of
marauders. “Who? What?”
“A rat!”  I said, p ointing a trembling finger at the spot where
the g ray shape h ad vanished into the crevice between bed-foot
and wall.
“Oh.” His shoulders relaxed. He scrubbed his hands over his
face and through his hair , blinking. “A rat, aye?”
“A rat in our bed ,” I said, not disposed to view the event
with any degree of calm. “It bit me!” I peered closely at my
injured breast. No blood to speak of; only a couple of tiny
puncture marks that stung slight ly . I thought of rabies, though,
and my blood ran cold.“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I’ll deal with it.” Squaring
his shou lders once more, Jamie picked up the poker from the
hearth and advanced purpose fully on the bed-foot. The
footboard was solid; there was a space of only a few inches
between it and the wall. The rat must be trapped, unless it had
managed to escape in the scant  seconds between my scream
and Jamie’ s eruption from the quilts.
I go t up onto my knees, ready to leap of f the bed if
necessary . Scow ling in concentration, Jamie raised the poker ,
reached out with his free hand, and flipped the hanging
coverlid out of the way .
He w hipped the poker down with great force—and jerked it
aside, smashing into the wall.
“What?” I said.
“What?” he echoed, in a disbelieving tone. He bent closer ,
squinting in the dim light, then  started to laugh. He dropped
the poker , squatted on the floor , and reached slowly into the
space between the bed-foot and wall, making a small chirping
noise through his teeth. It sounded like birds feeding in a
distant bush.
“Are you talking  to the rat?” I began to crawl toward the
foot of the bed, but he motioned me back, shaking his head,
while still making the chirping sound.
I wa ited, with so me impatience. W ithin a minute, he made a
grab, evidently catching whatev er it was, for he gave a small
exclamation of satisfaction. He stood up, smiling, a gray , furry
shape cl utched b y the nape, dan gling like a tiny purse from his
fingers.
“Here’ s your wee ratten, Sassenach,” he said, and gently
deposited a ball of gray fur on  the coverlet. Huge eyes of a
pale celadon green stared up at me, unblinking.
“W ell, g oodness,” I said. “Wherever did you  com e fr om?” I
extended a finger , very slowly . The kitten didn’ t move. I
touched the edge of a tiny gray-silk jaw , and the big green eyesdisappeared, go ing to slits as it rubbed against my finger . A
surprisingly deep purr rumbled through its miniature frame.
“That,”  J amie said, w ith immense satisfaction, “is the
present I meant  to give ye, Sassenach. He’ll keep the vermin
from your sur gery .”
“W ell, p ossibly very small  vermin,” I said, examining my
new present dubiously . “I think a lar ge cockroach could carry
him—is it a him?—of f to its lair , let alone a mouse.”
“He’ll grow ,” Jamie assured me. “Look at his feet.”
He—yes, it was a he—had rol led onto his back and was
doing an imitation of a dead bug, paws in the air . Each paw
was roughly the size of a broad copper penny , small enough by
themselves, but enormous by contrast with the tiny body . I
touched the minuscule pads, an immaculate pink in their
thicket of soft gray fur , and the kitten writhed in ecstasy .
A discreet knock came at the door , and I snatched the sheet
up over my bosom as the door opened and Mr . W emyss’ s head
poked in, his hair sticking up like a pile of wheat straw .
“Er … I hope all is well, sir?” he asked, blinking
shortsightedly . “My lass woke me, sayin’ as she thought there
was a skelloch, like, and then we heard a bit of a bang, like—”
His eye s, hastily averted from me, went to the scar of raw
wood in the whitewashed wall, left by Jamie’ s poker .
“A ye, it ’ s fine, Joseph,” Jamie assured him. “Only a wee
cat.”
“Oh, ay e?” Mr . W emyss squint ed toward the bed, his thin
face bre aking into a smile as he made out the blot of gray fur .
“A c heetie, is it ? W ell, and he’l l be a fine help i’ the kitchen,
I’ve nae doubt.”
“A ye. Sp eakin’ of kitchens, Joseph—d’ye think your lassie
might bring up a dish of cream for the baudrons here?”
Mr . W emyss nodded and disappeared, with a final avuncular
smile at the kitten.Jamie stretched, yawned, an d scrubbed both hands
vigorously through his hair , which was behaving with even
more reckless abandon than usual. I eyed him, with a certain
amount of purely aesthetic appreciation.
“Y ou look like a woolly mammoth,” I said.
“Oh? And what is a mammoth, besides big?”
“A sort of prehistoric elephant—you know , the animals with
the long trunks?”
He squinted down the length of his body , then looked at me
quizzically .
“W ell, I thank ye for the compliment, Sassenach,” he said.
“Mammoth, is it?” He thrust his arms upward and stretched
again, casually arching his back , which—quite inadvertently , I
didn’ t th ink—enhanced any inc idental resemblances that one
might note between the half-engor ged morning anatomy of a
man, and the facial adornments of a pachyderm.
I laughed.
“That’ s not pr ecisely  w hat I meant,” I said. “Stop wa ggling;
Lizzie’ s coming  in any minute. Y ou’d better put your shirt on
or get back in bed.”
The sou nd of footsteps on the landing sent him diving under
the quilt s, and sent the little cat scampering up the sheet in
fright. In the event, it was Mr . W emyss himself who had
brought the dish of cream, sparing his daughter a possible
sight of Himself in the altogether .
The weather being fine, we ha d left the shutters open the
night before. The sky outside w as the color of fresh oysters,
moist and pearly gray . Mr . W emyss glanced at it, blinked and
nodded at Jamie’ s thanks, an d toddled back to his bed,
thankful for a last half hour ’ s sleep before the dawn.
I d isenta ngled the kitten, who h ad taken refuge in my hair ,
and set him down by the bowl of cream. I didn’ t suppose he
could ever have seen a bowl of cream in his life, but the smellwas eno ugh—in moments, he was whisker -deep, lapping for
all he was worth.
“He’ s a fine thru m to him,” Jamie remarked approvingly . “I
can hear him from here.”
“He’ s lovely; wherever did you get him?” I nestled into the
curve of Jamie’ s body , enjoying his warmth; the fire had
burned far down during the night, and the air in the room was
chilly , sour with ash.
“Found him in the wood.” Jamie yawned widely , and
relaxed, proppin g his head on my shoulder to watch the tiny
cat, who  had abandoned himself to an ecstasy of gluttony . “I
thought I’d lost him when Gideon bolted—I suppose he’d
crept int o one of the saddlebags, and came up wi’ the other
things.”
W e lapsed into a peaceful stupor , drowsily cuddled in the
warm nest of our bed, as th e sky lightened, moment by
moment, and the air came aliv e with the voices of waking
birds. The house was waking, t oo—a baby’ s wail came from
below , followed  by the stir and shuf fle of rising, the murmur
of voices. W e should rise, too—there was so much to be done
—and yet neither of us moved, each reluctant to surrender the
sense of quiet sa nctuary . Jamie sighed, his breath warm on my
bare shoulder .
“A week, I think,” he said quietly .
“Before you must go?”
“A ye. I can take that long to settle things here, and speak to
the men from t he Ridge. A week then, to pass through the
country between the T reaty Line and Drunkard’ s Creek and
call a muster—then I’ll bring them here to drill. If T ryon
should call up the militia, then …”
I lay  quiet for a moment, my hand wrapped round Jamie’ s,
his loose fist curled against my breast.
“If he calls, I’ll go with you.”
He kissed the back of my neck.“D’ye wish it?” he said. “I dinn a think there will be need.
Neither you nor Bree know of a ny fighting will be done here
now .”
“That on ly mean s that if anythin g will  hap pen, it won’ t be a
huge battle,” I said. “This—the Colonies—it’ s a big place,
Jamie. And two hundred years of things happening—we
wouldn’ t know about the smaller conflicts, especially ones that
happened in a dif ferent place. Now , in Boston—” I sighed,
squeezing his hand.
I w ouldn ’ t know a great deal about events in Boston myself,
but Bree would; growing up there, she had been exposed in
school t o a good bit of local and  state history . I had heard her
telling Roger things about the  Boston Massacre—a small
confrontation between citizens and British troops that had
taken place the past March.
“A ye, I suppose that’ s true,” he  said. “Still, it doesna seem
as though it wil l come to anyth ing. I think T ryon only means
to frighten the Regulators into good behavior .”
This was in fac t likely . However , I was quite aware of the
old adage—”Man proposes and God disposes”—and whether
it w as God or W illiam T ryon in char ge, heaven only knew
what might happen in the event.
“Do you think so?” I asked. “Or only hope so?”
He sighe d, and stretched his legs, his arm tightening about
my waist.
“Both,” he admitted. “Mostly I hope. And I pray . But I do
think so, too.”
The kitte n had completely emptied the dish of cream. He sat
down with an au dible thump on his tiny backside, rubbed the
last of the delici ous white stuf f from his whiskers, then ambled
slowly toward the bed, sides bulging visibly . He sprang up
onto the coverlet, burrowed cl ose to me, and fell promptly
asleep.
Perhaps not quite asleep; I coul d feel the small vibration of
his purring through the quilt.“What do you think I should call him?” I mused aloud,
touching the tip of the soft, wispy tail. “Spot? Puf f? Cloudy?”
“Foolish names, ” Jamie said, w ith a lazy tolerance. “Is that
what ye  were wont to call your pussie-baudrons in Boston,
then? Or England?”
“No. I’ve never had a cat before,” I admitted. “Frank was
aller gic to them—they made him sneeze. And what’ s a good
Scottish cat name, then—Diarmuid? McGillivray?”
He snorted, then laughed.
“Adso,” he said, positively . “Call him Adso.”
“What s ort of name is that?” I demanded, twisting to look
back at him in amazement. “I’ve heard a good many peculiar
Scottish names, but that’ s a new one.”
He rested his chin comfortably on my shoulder , watching
the kitten sleep.
“My m other h ad a wee cat  named Adso,” he said,
surprisingly . “A gray cheetie, verra much like this one.”
“Did she?” I laid a hand on his  leg. He rarely spoke of his
mother , who had died when he was eight.
“A ye, sh e did. A rare mouser , a nd that fond of my mother;
he didna have much use for us bairns.” He smiled in memory .
“Possibly because Jenny dressed him in baby-gowns and fed
him rusk s, and I dropped him into the millpond, to see could
he swim. He could, by the way ,” he informed me, “but he
didna like to.”
“I c an’ t say I blame him,” I s aid, amused. “Why was he
called Adso, though? Is it a saint’ s name?” I was used to the
peculiar names  of Celtic sain ts, from Aodh—pronounced
OOH—to Dervor gilla, but hadn’ t heard of Saint Adso before.
Probably the patron saint of mice.
“Not a saint,” he  corrected. “A monk. My mother was verra
learned—she was educated at Leoch, ye ken, along with
Colum and Dougal, and could read Greek and Latin, and a bit
of the Hebrew as well as French and German. She didna haveso m uch opportunity for reading at Lallybroch, of course, but
my father would take pains to have books fetched for her , from
Edinbur gh and Paris.”
He r eached across my body to to uch a silky , translucent ear ,
and the kitten t witched its whiskers, screwing up its face as
though about to sneeze, but didn’ t open its eyes. The purr
continued unabated.
“One of the bo oks she liked was written by an Austrian,
from the city of Melk, and so she thought it a verra suitable
name for the kit.”
“Suitable … ?”
“A ye,” h e said, nodding toward the empty dish, without the
slightest twitch of lip or eyelid. “Adso of Milk.”
A slit of green showed as one  eye opened, as though in
response to the name. Then it closed again, and the purring
resumed.
“W ell, if he doesn’ t mind, I suppose I don’ t,” I said,
resigned. “Adso it is.”19
THE DEVIL YE KEN
A  WEEK LA TER, we—that is, the women—were engaged in
the backbreaking business of laundry when Clarence the mule
let out his clarion announcement that company was coming.
Little Mrs. Aberfeldy leaped as though she’d been stung by a
bee, and  droppe d an armload o f wet shirts in the dirt of the
yard. I could se e Mrs. Bug and  Mrs. Chisholm opening their
mouths in reproach, and took the opportunity to wipe my
hands o n my apron and hurry round to the front, to greet
whatever visitor might be approaching.
Sure eno ugh; a bay mule was co ming out of the trees at the
head of the trail, followed by a  fat brown mare on a leading
rein. The mule’ s ears flicked forward and he brayed
enthusiastically in reply to Clarence’ s greeting. I stuck my
fingers in my ears to block the ungodly racket, and squinted
against t he dazzle of the afternoon sun to make out the mule’ s
rider .
“Mr . Hu sband!” Pulling my fingers out of my ears, I hurried
forward to greet him.
“Mrs. Fraser—good day to thee!”
Hermon Husban d pulled of f his black slouch hat and gave
me a brief nod of greeting, then slid of f the mule with a groan
that spoke of a good many hours in the saddle. His lips moved
soundlessly in the framework o f his beard as he straightened
stif fly; he was a  Quaker , and didn’ t use strong language. Not
out loud, at least.
“Is thy husband at home, Mrs. Fraser?”
“I ju st sa w him heading for the s table; I’ll go and find him!”
I shouted, above the continued braying of the mules. I took the
hat from him, and gestured toward the house. “I’ll see to your
animals!”He nodded thanks and limped slowly round the house,
toward the kitchen door . From  the back, I could see how
painfully he moved; he could barely put weight on his left
foot. The hat in my hand was covered with dust and mud
stains, and I ha d smelled the odor of unwashed clothes and
body when he s tood near me. H e’d been a long time riding,
and not  just today—for a we ek or more, I thought, and
sleeping rough for the most of it.
I unsadd led the mule, removing in the process two worn
saddlebags half -filled with printed pamphlets, badly printed
and crudely illustrated. I studied the illustration with some
interest; it was a  woodcut of several indignant and righteous-
looking Regulators defying a group of of ficials, among whom
was a squat fig ure I had no trouble identifying as David
Anstruther; the caption didn’ t mention him by name, but the
artist had captured the Sherif f ’ s resemblance to a poisonous
toad with remarkable facility . Had Husband taken to delivering
the bloody things door -to-door? I wondered.
I t urned  the animals out into the paddock, dumped the hat
and sadd lebags by the porch, then trekked up the hill to the
stable, a shallow cave that Jamie had walled with thick
palisades. Brian na referred to i t as the maternity ward, since
the usual occupants were immi nently expectant mares, cows,
or sows.
I wondered what brought Hermon Husband here—and
whether he was being followed. He owned a farm and a small
mill, bot h at least two days’ ride  from the Ridge; not a journey
he would undertake simply for the pleasure of our company .
Husband was one of the leaders  of the Regulation, and had
been jailed more than once for the rabble-rousing pamphlets
he printed and distributed. The most recent news I had heard
of him was that he had been read out of the local Quaker
meeting, the Friends taking a di m view of his activities, which
they reg arded as incitement to violence. I rather thought they
had a point, judging from the pamphlets I’d read.The doo r of the stable stood op en, allowing the pleasantly
fecund scents of straw , warm animals, and manure to drift out,
along with a stream of simila rly fecund words. Jamie, no
Quaker , did believe in strong lan guage, and was using rather a
lot of it, albeit in  Gaelic, which tends toward the poetic, rather
than the vulgar .
I translated the current ef fusion roughly as, “May your guts
twine upon themselves like serpents and your bowels explode
through the walls of your belly! May the curse of the crows be
upon you, misbegotten spawn of a lineage of dung flies!” Or
words to that ef fect.
“Who are you talking to?” I inquired, putting my head
round the stable door . “And what’ s the curse of the crows?”
I bli nked against the sudden dim ness, seeing him only as a
tall shad ow against the piles of pale hay stacked by the wall.
He turne d, heari ng me, and strod e into the light from the door .
He’d been running his hands th rough his hair; several strands
were pulled from their binding , standing on end, and there
were straws sticking out of it.
“Tha nighean na galladh torrach!”  he said, with a
ferocious scowl and a brief gesture behind him.
“White daughte r of a bi—oh! Y ou mean that blasted sow
has done it again?”
The big white sow , while posse ssed of superior fatness and
amazing reproductive capacity , was also a creature of low
cunning, and impatient of captivity . She had escaped her brood
pen twic e befor e, once by the expedient of char ging Lizzie,
who had—wisely—screamed and dived out of the way as the
pig bar g ed past, and again by assiduously rooting up one side
of th e pe n, lying  in wait until the stable door was opened, and
knocking me flat as she made for the wide-open spaces.
This time, she hadn’ t bothered with strategy , but merely
smashed out a board from her pen, then rooted and dug under
the palisades, making an escape tunnel worthy of British
prisoners-of-war in a Nazi camp.“A ye, she has,” J amie said, reverting to English now that his
initial fu ry had subsided somewhat. “As for the curse o’ the
crows, it depends. It might mean ye want the corbies to come
down on a man’ s fields and eat his corn. In this case, I had in
mind the birds pecking out the evil creature’ s eyes.”
“I s uppose that would make h er easier to catch,” I said,
sighing. “How near is she to farrowing, do you think?”
He shrugged and shoved a hand through his hair .
“A d ay , two day s, three, maybe. Serve the creature right if
she farro ws in the wood and is  eaten by wolves, her and her
piglets together . ” He kicked moodily at the heap of raw earth
left by the sow’ s tunneling, sending a cascade of dirt down
into the hole. “Who’ s come? I heard Clarence yammering.”
“Hermon Husband.”
He turned sharply toward me, instantly for getting the pig.
“Has he, then?” he said softly , a s though to himself. “Why , I
wonder?”
“So did I. He’ s been riding for some time—distributing
pamphlets, evidently .”
I had to scamper after Jamie as I added this; he was already
striding down the hill toward the house, tidying his hair as he
went. I caught up just in time to brush bits of straw from his
shoulders before he reached the yard.
Jamie nodded casually to Mrs. Chisholm and Mrs.
MacLeod, who were hoicking steaming bales of wet clothes
from the big ket tle with paddles and spreading them on bushes
to d ry . I scuttled along with Jamie, ignoring the women’ s
accusing stares and trying to loo k as though I had much more
important concerns to deal with than laundry .
Someone had found Husband refreshment; a plate of
partially eaten bread and but ter and a half-full mug of
buttermilk lay on the table. So did Husband, who had put his
head on his fold ed arms and fallen asleep. Adso crouched on
the table beside him, fascinated  by the bushy gray whiskersthat qui vered like antennae with the Quaker ’ s reverberating
snores. The kitten was just reaching an experimental paw
toward H usband’ s open mouth when Jamie nabbed him by the
scruf f of the neck and dropped him neatly into my hands.
“Mr . Husband?” he said quietly , leaning over the table.
“Y our servant, sir .”
Husband snorte d, blinked, then sat up suddenly , nearly
upsetting the buttermilk. He goggled briefly at me and Adso,
then see med to recollect where he was, for he shook himself,
and half-rose, nodding to Jamie.
“Friend Fraser ,” he said thickly . “I am—I beg pardon—I
have been—”
Jamie brushed away his apologies and sat down opposite
him, casually picking up a slice of bread and butter from the
plate.
“May I be of service to ye, Mr . Husband?”
Husband scrubb ed a hand over his face, which did nothing
to im prove his looks, but did s eem to rouse him more fully .
Seen clearly in the soft aftern oon light of the kitchen, he
looked even worse than he had outside, his eyes pouched and
bloodshot and his grizzled hair and beard tangled in knots. He
was onl y in his mid-fifties, I knew , but looked at least ten
years ol der . He made an attem pt to straighten his coat, and
nodded to me, then Jamie.
“I t hank thee f or the hospitality of thy welcome, Mrs.
Fraser . A nd thee  also, Mr . Frase r . I have come indeed to ask a
service of thee, if I may .”
“Y e may  ask, of course,” Jamie  said courteously . He took a
bite of bread and butter , raising his eyebrows in question.
“W ill thee buy my horse?”
Jamie’ s eyebrows stayed rai sed. He chewed slowly ,
considering, then swallowed.
“Why?”Why , indeed. It would have b een a great deal easier for
Husband to sell a horse in Salem or High Point, if he didn’ t
want to ride as far as Cross Cr eek. No one in his right mind
would v enture to a remote place like the Ridge, simply to sell
a horse.  I set A dso on the floo r and sat down beside Jamie,
waiting for the answer .
Husband gave him a look, clear and direct for all its
bloodshot quality .
“Thee is appointed a colonel of militia, I’m told.”
“For my sins,” Jamie said, bread poised in the air . “Do ye
suppose the Governor has given me money to provide mounts
for my regiment?” He took a bite, half-smiling.
The co rner of Husband’ s mouth lifted briefly in
acknowledgment of the joke. A colonel of militia supplied his
regiment himsel f, counting upon eventual reimbursement from
the Asse mbly; one reason why only men of property were so
appointed—and a major reason why the appointment was not
considered an unalloyed honor .
“If he had, I should be pleased to take some of it.” At
Jamie’ s gesture of invitation,  Husband reached out and
selected another slice of bread and butter , which he munched
gravely , looking  at Jamie under thick salt-and-pepper brows.
Finally , he shook his head.
“Nay , friend James. I must sell my stock to pay the fines
levied u pon me by the Court. If I do not sell what I can, it may
be seize d. And if I will not, then  I have no choice save to quit
the colon y and remove my family elsewhere—and if I remove,
then I must disp ose of what I cannot take—for what price I
may get.”
A small line formed between Jamie’ s brows.
“A ye, I see,” he  said slowly . “I would help ye, Hermon, in
any way I might. Y e ken that, I hope. But I have scarce two
shillings in cash money—not even proclamation money , let
alone ste rling. If  there is anythin g I have that would be of use
to ye, though …”Husband smiled slightly , his harsh features softening.
“A ye, fr iend James. Thy friendship and thy honor are of
great use to me, indeed. For the rest …” He sat back from the
table, g roping in the small sh oulder bag he had set down
beside h im. He came up with a  thin letter , bearing a red wax
seal. I recognized the seal, and my chest tightened.
“I met the messenger at Pumpkin T own,” Husband said,
watching as Jamie took the lett er and put his thumb beneath
the flap. “I of fered to carry the letter to thee, as I was bound
here in any case.”
Jamie’ s brows lifted, but his attention was focused on the
sheet of paper in his hand. I came close, to see over his
shoulder .
 
November 22, 1770
 
Colonel James Fraser
 
Wher eas I am informed that those who stile themselves
Regulators have gather ed to gether in some for ce near
Salisbury , I have sent wor d to  General W addell to pr oceed
thither at once w ith the militia t r oops at his disposal in hopes
of dispersing this unlawful assemblage. Y ou ar e r equested and
commanded to gather such men  as you judge fit to serve in a
Regiment of Militia, and pr ocee d with them to Salisbury with
as much  despatch as may be managed so as to join the
General’ s tr oops on or befor e 15 December , at which point he
will mar ch upon Salisbury . So f ar as possible, bring with you
flour and other pr ovision suffic ient to supply your men for a
space of two weeks.
 
Y our ob’ t. servant,
 W illiam T ryon  
 The roo m was quiet, save for  the soft rumbling of the
cauldron over the coals in the hearth. Outside, I could hear the
women talking in short bursts, interspersed with grunts of
ef fort, a nd the smell of lye soap drifted through the open
window , mingling with the scents of stew and rising bread.
Jamie looked up at Husband.
“Y e ken what this says?”
The Quaker nodded, the lines o f his face sagging in sudden
fatigue.
“The messenger  told me. The Governor has no wish to keep
his intent secret, after all.”
Jamie gave a sm all grunt of agreement, and glanced at me.
No, the Govern or wouldn’ t want to keep it secret. So far as
T ryon was concerned, the more people who knew that W addell
was heading for Salisbury with a  lar ge militia troop, the better .
Hence a lso the setting of a specific date. Any wise soldier
would prefer to intimidate an e nemy rather than fight him—
and give n that T ryon had no of ficial troops, discretion was
certainly the better part of valor .
“What about the Regulators?” I asked Husband. “What are
they planning to do?”
He looked mildly startled.
“Do?”
“If y our people are assembling, it is presumably to some
purpose,” Jamie pointed out, a slightly sardonic tone to his
voice. Husband heard it, but didn’ t take exception.
“Certainly there is purpose,” he said, drawing himself up
with some dignity . “Though the e is mistaken to say these men
are mine, in any way save that o f brethren, as are all men. But
as to purpose, it  is only to protest the abuses of power as are
all too common these days—the imposition of illegal taxes,
the unwarranted seizure of—”
Jamie made an impatient gesture, cutting him of f.“A ye, H ermon, I ’ve heard it. W o rse, I’ve read your writings
about it. And if that is the Regulators’ purpose, what is
yours?”
The Qu aker stared at him, thick brows raised and mouth
half open in question.
“T ryon has no wish to keep his intentions secret,” Jamie
elaborated, “but you might. It doesna serve the Regulators’
interest that those intentions b e carried out, after all.” He
stared at Husband, rubbing a fi nger slowly up and down the
long, straight bridge of his nose.
Husband raised a hand and scratched at his chin.
“Thee mean why did I bring that”—he nodded toward the
letter , w hich lay open on the table—”when I might have
suppressed it?”
Jamie nodded patiently .
“I do.”
Husband heaved a deep sigh, and stretched himself, joints
cracking audibly . Small white puf fs of dust rose from his coat,
dissipating like smoke. He settled back into himself then,
blinking and looking more comfortable.
“Putting aside any consideration of the honesty of such
conduct, friend James … I did say that it was thy friendship
that would be of most use to me.”
“So ye did.” The hint of a smile touched the corner of
Jamie’ s mouth.
“Say for the sak e of ar gument that General W addell does
march upon a gr oup of Regulators,” Husband suggested. “Is it
to th e be nefit of  the Regulators to face men who do not know
them, and are inimical to them—or to face neighbors, who
know them and are perhaps i n some sympathy with their
cause?”
“Better the Devil ye ken than the  Devil ye don’ t, eh?” Jamie
suggested. “And I’m the Devil ye ken. I see.”A slow smile blossomed on Husband’ s face, matching the
one on Jamie’ s.
“One of  them, friend James. I have been a-horse these ten
days past, selling my stock an d visiting in one house and
another , across the western part of the colony . The Regulation
makes n o threat, seeks no destruction of property; we wish
only that our co mplaints be heard, and addressed; it is to draw
attention to the widespread nat ure and the justness of these
complaints that  those most of fended are assembling at
Salisbury . But I cannot well exp ect sympathy from those who
lack information of the of fense, after all.”
The smile faded from Jamie’ s face.
“Y e may  have my sympathy , Hermon, and welcome. But if
it co mes to it … I am Colonel of militia. I will have a duty to
be carried out, whether that duty is to my liking or no.”
Husband flapped a hand, dismissing this.
“I w ould not ask  thee to forsake  duty—if it comes. I pray it
does not.” He leaned forward a little, across the table. “I would
ask som ething of thee, though. My wife, my children … if I
must leave hurriedly …”
“Send them here. They will be safe.”
Husband sat back then, shoulders slumping. He closed his
eyes and breathed once, deeply , then opened them and set his
hands on the table, as though to rise.
“I th ank thee. As to the mare —keep her . If my family
should have need of her , someone will come. If not—I should
greatly prefer that thee have the  use of her , rather than some
corrupt sherif f.”
I felt Jamie move, wanting to protest, and laid a hand on his
leg to stop him. Hermon Husband needed reassurance, much
more than he needed a horse he could not keep.
“W e’ll take good care of her ,” I said, smiling into his eyes.
“And of  your family , if the nee d comes. T ell me, what is her
name?”“The mare?” Hermon rose to h is feet, and a sudden smile
split his  face, lightening it amazingly . “Her name is Jerusha,
but my wife calls her Mistress Piggy; I am afraid she does
possess a great appetite,” he added apologetically to Jamie,
who had stif fened perceptibly at the word “pig.”
“No matter ,” Jamie said, dismissing pigs from his mind with
an obvio us ef fort. He rose, glan cing at the window , where the
rays of the afternoon sun were turning the polished pinewood
of the sills and f loors to molten gold. “It grows late, Hermon.
W ill ye not sup with us, and stop the night?”
Husband shook his head, and stooped to retrieve his
shoulder bag.
“Nay , friend James, I thank thee. I have many places still to
go.”
I ins isted that he  wait, though, while I made up a parcel of
food for  him, and he went with Jamie to saddle his mule while
I d id so. I hear d them talking quietly together as they came
back from the paddock, voices so low-pitched that I couldn’ t
make ou t the words. As I came  out onto the back porch with
the pack age of sandwiches and b eer , though, I heard Jamie say
to h im, with a sort of ur gency , “Are ye sure, Hermon, that
what ye do is wise—or necessary?”
Husband didn’ t answer immediately , but took the parcel
from me with a nod of thanks. Then he turned to Jamie, the
mule’ s bridle in his other hand.
“I am minded,” he said, glancing from Jamie to me, “of
James Nayler . Thee will have heard of him?”
Jamie looked as blank as I did, and Hermon smiled in his
beard.
“He was an earl y member of th e Society of Friends, one of
those who joined Geor ge Fox , who began the Society in
England. James Nayler was a man of forceful conviction,
though h e was … individual in his expression of it. Upon one
famous occasion, he walked naked through the snow , whilstshouting doom to the city of B ristol. Geor ge Fox inquired of
him then, ‘Is thee sur e  the Lord told thee to do this?’ ”
The smile widened, and he put h is hat carefully back on his
head.
“He said  that he was. And so am I, friend James. God keep
thee and thy family .”20
SHOOTING LESSONS
B RIANNA GLA NCED BACK over her shoulder , feeling
guilty . The house below had dis appeared beneath a yellow sea
of chestnut leaves, but the cries of her child still rang in her
ears.
Roger saw her look back down the mountainside, and
frowned a little, though his voice was light when he spoke.
“He’ll be fine, h en. Y ou know your mother and Lizzie will
take good care of him.”
“Lizzie will spoil him rotten,” she agreed, but with a queer
tug at her heart at the admission. She could easily see Lizzie
carrying Jemmy to and fro all day , playing with him, making
faces at him, feeding him rice pudding with molasses …
Jemmy would love the attention , once he got over the distress
of h er leaving. She felt a sudd en sur ge of territorial feeling
regarding Jemmy’ s small pink toes; she hated the very idea of
Lizzie playing T en W ee Piggies with him.
She hate d leaving him, period. His shrieks of panic as she
pried hi s grip from her shirt and handed him over to her
mother echoed in her mind, mag nified by imagination, and his
tearstained look of outraged betrayal lingered in her mind.
At t he same ti me, her need to escape was ur gent. She
couldn’ t wait to peel Jem’ s sticky , clutching hands of f her skin
and spee d away into the morni ng, free as one of the homing
geese that honked their way south through the mountain
passes.
She supposed, reluctantly , that she wouldn’ t feel nearly so
guilty about leaving Jemmy , had  she not secretly been so eager
to do it.
“I’m sure he’ll be fine,” she reassured herself, more than
Roger . “It’ s just … I’ve never really left him for very longbefore.”
“Mmphm.” Roger made a noncommittal noise that might
have been interpreted as sympathy . His expression, however ,
made it clear th at he personally thought it well past time that
she had  left the baby .
A m omentary spurt of anger w armed her face, but she bit
her tongue. He hadn’ t said anything, after all—had clearly
made an  ef fort not to say anythi ng, in fact. She could make an
ef fort, to o—and she supposed that it was perhaps not fair to
quarrel with someone on the ba sis of what you thought they
were thinking.
She cho ked of f the acrimonious  remark she’d had in mind,
and instead smiled at him.
“Nice day , isn’ t it?”
The war y look faded from his f ace, and he smiled, too, his
eyes warming to a green as deep and fresh as the moss that lay
in thick beds at the shaded feet of the trees they passed.
“Great day ,” he said. “Feels go od to be out of the house,
aye?”
She sho t a quick look at him, b ut it seemed to be a simple
statement of fact, with no ulterior motives behind it.
She didn’ t answer , but nodded i n agreement, lifting her face
to th e errant bre eze that wandered through the spruce and fir
around them. A swirl of rusty aspen leaves blew down,
clinging momentarily to the homespun of their breeches and
the light wool of their stockings.
“W ait a minute.”
On i mpulse, she stopped and pulled of f her leather buskins
and stockings, pushing them carelessly into the rucksack on
her shoulder . She stood still, eyes closed in ecstasy , wiggling
long bare toes in a patch of damp moss.
“Oh, Roger , try it! This is wonderful!”He l ifted one eyebrow , but oblig ingly set down the gun—he
had take n it, when they left the  house, and she had let him,
despite a proprietorial ur ge to c arry it herself—undid his own
footgear , and cautiously slid one long-boned foot into the moss
beside hers. His eyes closed involuntarily , and his mouth
rounded into a soundless “ooh.”
Moved by impulse, she leaned over and kissed him. His
eyes flew open in startlement, but he had fast reflexes. He
wrapped a long arm around her waist and kissed her back,
thoroughly . It was an unusually warm day for late autumn, and
he wore  no coat, only a hunting shirt. His chest felt startlingly
immediate through the woolen cloth of his shirt; she could feel
the tiny bump of his nipple rising under the palm of her hand.
God knew what might have ha ppened next, but the wind
changed. A faint cry drifted up from the sea of tossing yellow
below . It might have been a baby’ s cry , or perhaps only a
distant c row , but her head swiv eled toward it, like a compass
needle pointing to true north.
It broke the mood, and he let go, stepping back.
“D’ye want to go back?” he asked, sounding resigned.
She pressed her lips together and shook her head.
“No. Let’ s get a little farther away from the house, though.
W e don’ t want to bother them with the noise. Of—of shooting,
I mean.”
He g rinned, and she felt the blo od rise hot in her face. No,
she coul dn’ t pretend she hadn’ t realized there was more than
one motive for this private expedition.
“No, no t that, either ,” he said. He stooped for his shoes and
stockings. “Come on, then.”
She declined to put on her own footwear , but took the
opportunity to reappropriate the gun. It wasn’ t that she didn’ t
trust him  with it, though he admitted he hadn’ t fired such a
gun before. She just liked the fe el of it, and felt secure with its
weight balanced on her shoulder , even unloaded. A Land
pattern musket, it was more than  five feet long, and weighed agood ten  pounds or so, but the butt of the polished walnut
stock fitted snugly into her han d and the weight of the steel
barrel felt right, laid in the holl ow of her shoulder , muzzle to
the sky .
“Y ou’re going to go barefoot?” Roger cast a quizzical
glance at her fe et, then ahead, up the mountainside, where a
faint path wove through blackberry brambles and fallen
branches.
“Just for a while,” she assured him. “I used to go barefoot
all the time whe n I was little. Daddy—Frank—took us to the
mountains every summer , to the White Mountains or the
Adirondacks. A fter a week, the bottoms of my feet were like
leather; I could have walked on hot coals and not felt a thing.”
“A ye, I did, too ,” he said, smiling, and tucked his shoes
away as well. “Granted,” he sai d, with a nod toward the faint
path that wove its way through  brush and half-buried granite
outcrops, “the walking along th e riverbank of the Ness or the
shingle by the Firth was a bit easier going than this, stones
notwithstanding.”
“That’ s a point,” she said, fro wning slightly at his feet.
“Have y ou had a tetanus shot recently? In case you step on
something sharp and get punctured?”
He was already climbing ahead of her , choosing his footing
cautiously .
“I had injections for everything one could possibly have
injections for , before I came th rough the stones,” he assured
her , over one shoulder . “T yphoid, cholera, dengue fever , the
lot. I’m sure tetanus was in there.”
“Dengue fever? I thought I’d ha d shots for everything, too,
but not that one.” Digging her toes into the cool mats of dead
grass, she took a few long strides to catch him up.
“Shouldn’ t need  it up here.” The path ambled round the
curve of  a steep bank over grown with yellowing pawpaw and
vanished under the overhang of a clump of black-green
hemlock. He held the heavy b ranches back for her and sheducked under them into the pun gent gloom, gun held carefully
crosswise.
“I wasn ’ t sure where I might have to go, see.” His voice
came fr om behind her , casual, damped by the darkened air
under th e trees. “If it was the coastal towns, or the W est Indies
… there were … there ar e ,” he correcte d himself,
automatically , “ any number of entertaining African diseases,
brought in by the slave ships. Thought I’d best be prepared.”
She took advantage of the rough terrain not to answer , but
was dis mayed—and at the same time, rather shamefully
pleased—to discover the lengths to which he’d been prepared
to go in order to follow and find her .
The ground was covered with the mottled brown of shed
needles, but so damp that there was neither crackle nor prick
beneath her feet. It felt spongy , cool, and pleasant under her
bare sol es, with a give to it that made her think the mass of
dead needles must be a foot thick, at least.
“Ow!” R oger , not so lucky in his passage, had set his foot
on a rotten pers immon and slid, barely catching himself by
grabbing hold of a holly bush,  which promptly stabbed him
with its prickly leaves.
“Shit,” he said, sucking the wounded thumb. “Good thing
about the tetanus, aye?”
She laughed in agreement, but found herself worrying as
they clim bed. What about Jemmy , when he began to walk, and
clamber over mountains barefoot? She’d seen enough of the
small MacLeods and Chisholm s—to say nothing of Germain
—to realize that small boys punctured, scraped, lacerated, and
fractured thems elves on a weekly basis, at least. She and
Roger w ere pr otected against things like diphtheria and
typhoid—Jemmy would have no such protection.
She swallowed, remembering the night before. That
murderous horse  of her father ’ s had bitten him in the arm, and
Claire had made Jamie sit down shirtless before the fire while
she cleaned and dressed the bite. Jemmy had poked a curioushead up from h is cradle, and his grandfather , smiling, had
scooped him out and taken him upon his knee.
“Gallopy trot, gallopy trot,” he’d chanted, bouncing a
delighted Jemm y gently up and down. “‘T is a wicked horse
that I have got!/Gallopy trot, gallopy trot/Let’ s send him to
hell and then he’ll be hot!”
It wasn’ t the charming scene of the two redheads giggling at
each other that stuck in her min d, though; it was the firelight
glowing in her son’ s translucent, perfect, untouched skin—and
shining silver on the webbed s cars across her father ’ s back,
black-red on the bloody gash in  his arm. It was a dangerous
time for men.
She cou ldn’ t keep Jem safe from  harm; she knew that. But
the thou ght of him—or Roger—being injured or ill made her
stomach knot and cold sweat come out on the sides of her face.
“Is your thumb all right?” She turned back toward Roger ,
who looked surprised, having for gotten all about his thumb.
“What?” He looked at it, puzzled. “A ye, of course.”
Nonetheless, she took his hand, and kissed the wounded
thumb.
“Y ou be car eful ,” she said fiercely .
He laughed, and looked surprised when she glared at him.
“I w ill,” he said , sobering a littl e. He nodded at the gun she
carried. “Don’ t worry; I may not have fired one, but I know a
wee bit about th em. I won’ t blow my fingers of f. Does this
look all right for a bit of practice?”
They had come out into a heath bald, a high meadow thick
with grass and rhododendron. T here was a stand of aspen at
the far side, their pale branches aflutter with a few late tatters
of g old and crim son leaves, vivid against the deep blue sky . A
stream gur gled downhill, somew here out of sight, and a red-
tailed hawk circled high overhe ad. The sun was well up now ,
warm on  her shoulders, and the re was a pleasant, grassy bank
nearby .“Just right,” she said, and swung the gun down from her
shoulder .
 
IT W AS A bea utiful gun, more than five feet long, but so
perfectly balanced you could rest it across your outstretched
arm without a w obble—which Brianna was doing, by way of
demonstration.
“See?” she said, pulling her arm in and sweeping the stock
up to  her should er in one fluid movement. “That’ s the balance
point; yo u want to put your left hand right there, grab the stock
by t he trigger with your right , and butt it back into your
shoulder . Snug it in, really soli dly . There’ s some kick to it.”
She bumped the burled walnut stock gently into the socket of
her buckskinned shoulder in illustration, then lowered the gun
and han ded it to Roger , with a s omewhat more tender caution
than she  showed when handing him her infant child, he noted
wryly . On the other hand, so far as he could tell, Jemmy was
much more indestructible than the gun.
She sho wed him , hesitant at fir st, reluctant to correct him.
He bit his own  tongue, though, and imitated her carefully ,
following the smooth flow of  the steps from ripping the
cartridge open with his teeth to priming, loading, ramming,
and checking, annoyed at his own novice awkwardness, but
secretly fascinat ed—and more than slightly aroused—by the
casual ferocity of her movements.
Her hands were nearly as lar ge  as his own, though finely
boned; she handled the long g un with the familiarity other
women showed with needle and broom. She wore breeks of
homespun, and the long muscle  of her thigh rose up tight and
round ag ainst th e cloth when s he squatted beside him, head
bent as she groped in her leather bag.
“What, you packed a lunch?” he  joked. “I thought we’d just
shoot something and eat it.”
She igno red him. She pulled ou t a ragged white kerchief to
use as a tar get, and shook it out, frowning critically . Once hehad thought of her scent as jasmine and grass; now she
smelled of gunpowder , leather , and sweat. He breathed it, his
fingers unobtrusively stroking the wood of the gunstock.
“Ready?” she said, glancing at him with a smile.
“Oh, aye,” he said.
“Check your flint and priming,” she said, rising. “I’ll pin up
the tar get.”
Seen fro m the back, her ruddy hair clubbed tightly back,
and clad  in a loose buckskin hunting shirt that covered her
from sh oulder to thigh, her resemblance to her father was
intensified to a s tartling degree. No mistaking the two, though,
he th ought. Breeks or no, Jamie Fraser had never in life had an
arse like that . H e watched he r walk, congratulating himself on
his choice of instructor .
His father -in-law would have given him a lesson, willingly .
Jamie was a fin e shot, and a patient teacher; Roger had seen
him taking the Chisholm boys out after supper , to practice
blasting away at rocks and trees  in the empty cornfield. It was
one thin g for Jamie to know that Roger was inexperienced
with guns; it was another t o suf fer the humiliation of
demonstrating just how  inexperienced, under that
dispassionate blue gaze.
Beyond the matter of pride, though, he had an ulterior
motive i n asking Brianna to com e out shooting with him. Not
that he thought said motive was  in any way hidden; Claire had
glanced from him to her daughter when he had suggested it,
and looked amused in a particularly knowing way that had
made Br ianna frown and say , “Mother!” in an accusatory tone
of voice.
Beyond the all-too-brief hours of their wedding night at the
Gathering, this was the first—and only—time he’d had
Brianna to himself, free from the insatiable demands of her
of fspring.
He caug ht the gleam of sun of f metal as she lowered her
arm. Sh e was wearing his brac elet, he realized with a deepfeeling o f pleasu re. He had give n it to her when he’d asked her
to m arry him—a lifetime ago, in  the freezing mists of a winter
night in Inverne ss. It was a simple circlet of silver , engraved
with a series of phrases in French. Je t’aime , it said: I love you .
Un p eu, beaucoup, passionneme nt, pas du tout: A little, a lot,
passionately — not at all .
“Passionnement,”  h e murmured, envisioning he r wearing
nothing but  his bracelet and her wedding ring.
First things first, though, he told himself, and picked up a
fresh cartridge. After all, they had time.
 
SA TISFIED TH A T HIS loading habits were on the way to
being well established, if not yet rapid, Brianna finally allowed
him to practice sighting, and at last, to shoot.
It took a dozen tries before he could hit the white square of
the kerchief, but the sense of e xultation he felt when a dark
spot appeared suddenly near th e edge of it had him reaching
for a fresh cartridge before the smoke of the shot had
dissipated. The sense of excited accomplishment took him
through another  dozen cartridges, scarcely noticing anything
beyond the jerk and boom of the  gun, the flash of powder , and
the b reathless instant of realization when he saw an occasional
shot go home.
The kerchief hung in tatters by this time, and small clouds
of w hitish smoke floated over the meadow . The hawk had
decamped at the sound of the first shot, along with all the other
birds of  the neighborhood, though the ringing in his ears
sounded like a whole chorus of distant titmice.
He lowered the gun and looked at Brianna, grinning,
whereupon she burst into laughter .
“Y ou lo ok like the end man in a minstrel show ,” she said,
the end of her nose going pink with amusement. “Here, clean
up a little, and we’ll try shooting from farther away .”
She took the gu n and handed him a clean handkerchief in
exchange. He wiped black soot from his face, watching as sheswiftly swabbed  the barrel an d reloaded. She straightened,
then heard something; her head  rose suddenly , eyes fixing on
an oak across the meadow .
Ears stil l ringing from the roar of the gun, Roger had heard
nothing. Swinging round, though, he caught a flicker of
movement; a dark gray squirre l, poised on a pine branch at
least thirty feet above the ground.
W ithout the slightest hesitation, Brianna raised the gun to
her shoulder and seemed to f ire in the same motion. The
branch directly under the squirrel exploded in a shower of
wood ch ips, and  the squirrel, blo wn of f its feet, plunged to the
ground, bouncing of f the springy ever green branches as it
went.
Roger ra n acros s to the foot of the tree, but there was no
need to hurry; the squirrel lay dead, limp as a furry rag.
“Good shot,” he said in congratulation, holding up the
corpse as Brianna came to see. “But there’ s not a mark on him
—you must have scared him to death.”
Brianna gave him a level look from beneath her brows.
“If I ’d m eant to  hit him, Roger ,  I’d have hit him,” she said,
with a slight edge of reproof. “A nd if I had  hit him, you’d be
holding a handful of squirrel m ush. Y ou don’ t aim right at
something that size; you aim to hit just under them and knock
them down. It’ s called barking,” she explained, like a kindly
kinder garten teacher correcting a slow pupil.
“Oh, aye?” He repressed a sma ll sense of irritation. “Y our
father teach you that?”
She gave him a slightly odd look before replying.
“No, Ian did.”
He mad e a noncommittal noise in response to that. Ian was
a po int of awkwardness in the  family . Brianna’ s cousin had
been well-loved, and he knew the whole family missed him.
Still, the y hesita ted to speak of Y oung Ian before Roger , out of
delicacy .It hadn’ t exactly been Roger ’ s fault  that Ian Murray had
remained with the Mohawk—bu t there was no denying that he
had had a part in the matter . If he hadn’ t killed that Indian …
Not for the first time, he pushed aside the confused
memories of that night in Snake town, but felt nonetheless the
physical echoes; the quicksilver rush of terror through his
belly an d the judder of impac t through the muscles of his
forearms, as he drove the broken end of a wooden pole with all
his s trength into a shadow that had sprung up before him out
of the shrieking dark. A very solid shadow .
Brianna had crossed the meadow , and set up another tar get;
three irr egular c hunks of wood set on a stump the size of a
dinner table. W ithout comment, he wiped his sweating hands
on his breeks, a nd concentrated  on the new challenge, but Ian
Murray refused to leave his min d. He’d barely seen the man,
but remembered him clearly; hardly more than a youth, tall
and gangly , with a homely but appealing face.
He coul dn’ t think of Murray’ s face without seeing it as he
last had, scabbed with a line of freshly tattooed dots that
looped across the cheeks and ov er the bridge of his nose. His
face wa s brown from the sun , but the skin of his freshly
plucked scalp had been a fresh and startling pink, naked as a
baby’ s bum and blotched red  from the irritation of the
plucking.
“What’ s the matter?”
Brianna’ s voice startled him, an d the barrel jerked up as he
fired, the shot going wild. Or wilder , rather . He hadn’ t
managed to hit any of the wooden blocks in a dozen shots.
He lowe red the gun and turned  to her . She was frowning,
but didn’ t look angry , only puzzled and concerned.
“What’ s wrong?” she asked again.
He t ook a deep breath and rubbed his sleeve across his face,
careless of the smears of black soot.
“Y our cousin,” he said abruptly . “I’m sorry about him,
Bree.”Her face softened, and the worried frown eased a little.
“Oh,” sh e said. She laid a hand o n his arm and drew near , so
he felt the warm th of her closeness. She sighed deeply and laid
her forehead against his shoulder .
“W ell,” she said at last, “I’m sorry , too—but it isn’ t any
more your fault than mine or Da’ s—or Ian’ s, for that matter .”
She gave a sma ll snort that mi ght have been intended for a
laugh. “If it’ s anyone’ s fault, it’ s Lizzie’ s—and nobody blames
her .”
He smiled at that, a little wryly .
“A ye, I see,” he  answered, and cupped a hand over the cool
smoothness of her plait. “Y ou’re right. And yet—I killed a
man, Bree.”
She didn’ t startle or jerk away , but somehow went
completely still.  So did he; it w as the last thing he’d meant to
say .
“Y ou ne ver told  me that before,”  she said at last, raising her
head to look at him. She sounded tentative, unsure whether to
pursue t he matter . The breeze lifted a strand of hair across her
face, but she didn’ t move to brush it away .
“I—well, to tell ye the truth, I’v e scarcely thought of it.” He
dropped his hand, and the stasis was broken. She shook herself
a little and stood back.
“That sounds terrible, doesn’ t it? But—” He struggled for
words. He’d not meant to say anything, but now he’d started,
it se emed ur gently necessary to  explain, to put it into proper
words.
“It w as at night, during a fight in  the village. I escaped—I’d
a bit of broken pole in my hand, and when someone loomed up
out of the darkness, I …”
His shoulders slumped suddenly , as he realized that there
was no possible way to explain,  not really . He looked down at
the gun he still held.“I didn’ t know I’d killed him,” he said quietly , eyes on the
flint. “I didn’ t even see his face . I still don’ t know who it was
—though it had to be someone I knew; Snaketown was a small
village, I knew all ne r ononkwe .” Why , he wondered suddenly ,
had he never on ce thought of a sking who the dead man was?
Plain en ough; he hadn’ t asked b ecause he didn’ t want to know .
“Ne r ononkwe?”  She repeated the words uncertainly .
“The men … t he warriors … braves. It’ s what they call
themselves, the Kahnyen’kehaka .” The Mohawk words felt
strange o n his tongue; alien and familiar at once. He could see
wariness on her face, and knew his speaking of it had sounded
odd to her; not the way one uses a foreign term, handling it
gingerly , but the way her father sometimes casually mingled
Gaelic and Scots, mind seizing on the most available word in
either language.
He s tared down at the gun in his hand, as though he’d never
seen one before. He wasn’ t looking at her , but felt her draw
near again, still tentative, but not repulsed.
“Are you … sorry about it?”
“No,” he  said at once, and looked up at her . “I mean … aye,
I’m sorry it happened. But sorry I did it—no.” He had spoken
without pausing to weigh his words, and was surprised—and
relieved—to find them true. He felt regret, as he’d told her , but
what gu ilt there was had noth ing to do with the shadow’ s
death, whoever it had been. He had been a slave in Snaketown,
and had no grea t love for any of the Mohawk, though some
were decent enough. He’d not intended killing, but had
defended himself. He’d do it again, in the same circumstance.
Y et there  was a small canker of guilt—the realization of just
how easily he had dismissed that death. The Kahnyen’kehaka
sang an d told stories of their dead, and kept their memory
alive ar ound the fires of the longhouses, naming them for
generations and recounting their deeds. Just as the Highlanders
did. He thought  suddenly of Ja mie Fraser , face ablaze at the
great fir e of the Gathering, calling his people by name and by
lineage. Stand by  my hand, Roger the si nger , son of Jer emiahMacKenzie . Perhaps Ian Murray found the Mohawk not so
strange, after all.
Still, he  felt obscurely as though he had deprived the
unknown dead man of name, a s well as life, seeking to blot
him out  by for getting, to beha ve as though that death had
never ha ppened, only to save himself from the knowledge of
it. And that, he thought, was wrong.
Her face was still, but not frozen; her eyes rested on his with
something like compassion. Stil l, he looked away , back at the
gun who se barrel he gripped. His fingers, soot-stained, had left
greasy black ovals on the meta l; she reached out and took it
from him, rubbing the marks away with the hem of her shirt.
He let her take  it, and watched , rubbing his dirty fingers
against the side of his breeches.
“It’ s just … doe s it not seem that if ye must kill a man, it
should be on purpose? Meaning it?”
She didn’ t answer , but her lips pursed slightly , then relaxed.
“If you shoot someone with this, Roger , it will be on
purpose,” she said quietly . She looked up at him, then, blue
eyes inte nt, and he saw that wha t he had taken for compassion
was in fact a fi erce stillness, like the small blue flames in a
burned-out log.
“And if you have to shoot someone, Roger , I want you to
mean it.”
 
TWO DOZEN ROUNDS later , he could hit the wooden blocks
at least once in six tries. He would have kept it up, doggedly ,
but she could s ee the muscles in his forearms beginning to
tremble as he lif ted the gun, stil led by ef fort of will. He would
begin to  miss more often now , out of fatigue, and that would
do him no good.
Or her . Her breasts were beginning to ache, engor ged with
milk. She’d have to do something about it soon.“Let’ s g o and eat,” she said, smiling as she took the musket
from him after the last shot. “I’m starving.”
The exertion of shooting, reloading, putting up tar gets, had
kept the m both warm, but it was  nearly winter , and the air was
cold; mu ch too cold, she thought regretfully , to lie naked in the
dry ferns. But t he sun was warm, and with forethought, she
had packed two ratty quilts in her rucksack, along with the
lunch.
He was quiet, but it was a comfortable quiet. She watched
him cut slivers from the chunk of hard cheese, dark lashes
lowered, and admired the long-limbed, competent look of him,
fingers neat and quick, gentle m outh compressed slightly as he
concentrated on his work, a dr op of sweat rolling down the
high brown curve of his cheekbone, in front of his ear .
She was n’ t sure what to make o f what he had told her . Still,
she knew enough to realize that it was a good thing that he had
told her , even though she didn’ t like to hear or think of his
time with the M ohawk. It had been a bad time for her—alone,
pregnant, doubting whether he or her parents would ever
return—as well as for him. Sh e reached to accept a bit of
cheese, brushed his fingers with her own, and leaned forward,
to make him kiss her .
He did, then sa t back, his eyes gone soft green and clear ,
free of the shadow that had haunted them.
“Pizza,” he said.
She blinked, then laughed. It was one of their games; taking
turns to think of things they missed from the other time, the
time before—or after , depending how you looked at it.
“Coke,” she said promptly . “I think I could maybe do pizza
—but what good is pizza without Coca-Cola?”
“Pizza w ith beer is perfectly fin e,” he assured her . “And we
can have beer—not that Lizzie’ s homemade hell-brew is quite
on a  par with MacEwan’ s Lager , yet. But you really think you
could make pizza?”“Don’ t s ee why not.” She nibbled at the cheese, frowning.
“This w ouldn’ t do”—she brand ished the yellowish remnant,
then pop ped it in her mouth—”too strong-flavored. But I think
…” She  paused to chew and swallow , then washed it down
with a long drink of rough cider .
“Come t o think of it, this would go pretty well with pizza.”
She lowered the leather bottle a nd licked the last sweet, semi-
alcoholic drops from her lips. “B ut the cheese—I think maybe
sheep’ s cheese would do. Da brought some from Salem last
time he went the re. I’ll ask him to get some more and see how
it melts.”
She squinted against the bright, pale sun, calculating.
“Mama’ s got plenty of dried tomatoes, and tons of garlic. I
know she has basil—don’ t kn ow about the oregano, but I
could do  withou t that. And cru st—” She waved a dismissive
hand. “Flour , water , and lard, nothing to it.”
He laugh ed, handing her a biscu it filled with ham and Mrs.
Bug’ s piccalilli.
“How Pizza Came to the Colonies,” he said, and lifted the
cider bottle in brief salute. “Folk always wonder where
humanity’ s great inventions come from; now we know!”
He spoke lightly , but there was an odd tone in his voice, and
his glance held hers.
“Maybe we do k now ,” she said softly , after a moment. “Y ou
ever think about it—why? Why we’re here?”
“Of cou rse.” Th e green of his eyes was darker now , but still
clear . “So do you, aye?”
She nodded, and took a bite of biscuit and ham, the piccalilli
sweet with onion and pungent in her mouth. Of course they
thought of it. Sh e and Roger an d her mother . For surely it had
meaning, that passage through the stones. It must. And yet …
her parents seldom spoke of war and battle, but from the little
they said—and the much greater quantity she had read—she
knew just how random and how pointless such things couldsometimes be. Sometimes a shadow rises, and death lies
nameless in the dark.
Roger c rumbled the last of his bread between his fingers,
and toss ed the crumbs a few feet away . A chickadee flew
down, pecked once, and was joi ned within seconds by a flock
that swo oped down out of the trees, vacuuming up the crumbs
with chattering ef ficiency . He stretched, sighing, and lay back
on the quilt.
“W ell,” he said, “if you ever fi gure it out, ye’ll be sure to
tell me, won’ t you?”
Her heartbeat was tingling in h er breasts; no longer safely
contained behind the rampart of her breastbone, but set loose
to crackle through her flesh, sm all jolts of electricity tweaking
her n ipples. She didn’ t dare to t hink of Jem; the barest hint of
him and her milk would let down in a gush.
Before she could let herself th ink too much about it, she
pulled the hunting shirt over her head.
Roger ’ s eyes were open, fixed on her , soft and brilliant as
the moss beneath the trees. Sh e undid the knot of the linen
strip, and felt the cool touch of the wind on her bare breasts.
She cupped them in her hand s, feeling the heaviness rise,
begin to tingle and crest.
“Come here,” she said softly , e yes on his. “Hurry . I need
you.”
 
THEY LA Y HALF-CLOTHED and comfortably tangled
beneath the tattered quilt, sleepy and sticky with half-dried
milk, the heat of their joining still warm around them.
The sun through the empty branches overhead made black
ripples behind the lids of her closed eyes, as though she looked
down th rough a dark red sea, wading in the blood-warm water ,
seeing black volcanic sand change and ripple round her feet.
W as he awake? She didn’ t turn h er head or open her eyes to
see, but tried to send a message to him, a slow , lazy pulse of aheartbeat, a question sur ging from blood to blood. Ar e you
ther e?  s he asked sile ntly . She felt the question move up
through her chest and out along her arm; she imagined the pale
underside of her arm and the blue vein along it, as though she
might see some telltale subterranean flash as the impulse
threaded through  her blood and down her forearm, reached her
palm, her finger , and delivered t he faintest throb of its pressure
against his skin.
Nothing happened at once. She could hear his breathing,
slow and regular , a counterpo int to the sough of breeze
through trees and grass, like s urf coming in upon a sandy
shore.
She imagined herself as a jellyfish, he another . She could
see them  clearly; two transparent bodies, lucent as the moon,
veils pu lsing in and out in hypn otic rhythm, borne on the tide
toward one another , tendrils trailing, slowly touching …
His finger crossed her palm, so lightly it might have been
the brush of fin or feather .
I’m her e , it said. And you?
Her hand closed over it, and he rolled toward her .
 
LA TE IN THE YEAR as it was, the light died early . It was still
a m onth  ‘til the winter solstice, but by mid-afternoon, the sun
was alre ady bru shing the slope of Black Mountain, and their
shadows stretched to impossible lengths before them as they
turned eastward, toward home.
She carr ied the gun; instruction was over for the day , and
while th ey weren’ t hunting, if the opportunity of game of fered,
she wou ld take it. The squirre l she had killed earlier was
already cleaned  and tucked in her sack, but that was barely
flavoring for a v egetable stew . A few more would be nice. Or
a possum, she thought dreamily .
She was n’ t sure of the habits of possum, though; perhaps
they hib ernated over winter , and if so, they might already be
gone. The bears were still active ; she’d seen half-dried scat onthe trail , and scratches on the bark of a pine, still oozing
yellow s ap. A bear was good ga me, but she didn’ t mean either
to look for one, or to risk shooting at one unless it attacked
them—and that wasn’ t likely . Leave bears alone, and they’ll
generally leave you alone; both her fathers had told her that,
and she thought it excellent advice.
A c ovey of bo bwhite blasted out of a nearby bush like
exploding shrapnel, and she jerked, heart in her mouth.
“Those are good to eat, aren’ t they?” Roger nodded at the
last of the disappearing gray-white blobs. He had been startled,
too, but less than she had, she noticed with annoyance.
“Y eah,” she said, disgruntled at being taken unawares. “But
you don’ t shoot them with a m usket, unless all you want is
feathers for a pillow . Y ou use a fowling piece, with bird shot.
It’ s like a shotgun.”
“I know ,” he said, shortly .
She felt disinclined to talk, jarred out of their peaceful
mood. Her breasts were beginning to swell again; it was time
to go home, to find Jemmy .
Her step quickened a little at th e thought, even as her mind
reluctantly surrendered the memory of the pungent smell of
crushed dry fern, the glow of su nlight on Roger ’ s bare brown
shoulders above  her , the hiss of her milk, gilding his chest in a
spray of fine d roplets, slick and warm and cool by turns
between their writhing bodies.
She sighed deeply , and heard him laugh, low in his throat.
“Mmm?” She turned her head , and he motioned to the
ground before them. They had b egun to move together as they
walked, neither noticing the unconscious pull of the
gravitational force that bound them. Now their shadows had
mer ged at the top, so an o dd, four -legged beast paced
spiderlike before them, its two heads tilted toward each other .
He put an arm around her waist, and one shadow-head
dipped, joining the other in a single bulbous shape.“It’ s been a good day , aye?” he said softly .
“A ye, it has,” she said, and smiled. She might have spoken
further , but a sound came to her above the rattle of tree
branches, and she pulled suddenly away .
“What—” he began, but she put a finger to her lips to shush
him, beckoning as she crept toward a growth of red oak.
It was a flock of turkeys, scratching companionably in the
earth be neath a lar ge oak tree, turning up winter grubs from
the mat of fallen leaves and ac orns. The late sun shone low ,
lighting the iridescence in their breast feathers, so the birds’
drab black glimmered with tiny rainbows as they moved.
She had the gun  already loaded, but not primed. She groped
for t he powder flask at her belt and filled the pan, scarcely
looking away from the birds. Roger crouched beside her ,
intent as a hound dog on the scent. She nudged him, and held
the g un toward h im in invitation, one eyebrow up. The turkeys
were no  more than twenty yard s away , and even the smaller
ones were the size of footballs.
He hesi tated, bu t she could see  the desire to try it in his
eyes. She thrust the gun firmly into his hands and nodded
toward a gap in the brush.
He shift ed carefully , trying for a clear line of sight. She
hadn’ t taught him to fire from a crouch as yet, and he wisely
didn’ t try , instead standing, though it meant firing downward.
He h esitated, the long barrel w avering as he shifted his aim
from on e bird to another , trying  to choose the best shot. Her
fingers curled and clenched, aching to correct his aim, to pull
the trigger .
She felt him dr aw breath and hold it. Then three things
happened, so quickly as to seem  simultaneous. The gun went
of f with a huge phwoom! , a spray of dried oak leaves
fountained up from the earth und er the tree, and fifteen turkeys
lost their minds, running like a demented football squad
straight at them, gobbling hysterically .The turkeys reached the brush, saw Roger , and took to the
air like flying so ccer balls, wings frantically clapping the air .
Roger ducked to avoid one that soared an inch above his head,
only to be struck in the chest by another . He reeled backward,
and the turkey , clinging to his s hirt, seized the opportunity to
run nimb ly up his shoulder and push of f, raking the side of his
neck with its claws.
The gun  flew through the air . Brianna caught it, flipped a
cartridge from the box on her b elt, and was grimly reloading
and ramming as the last turkey ran toward Roger , zigged away ,
saw her , zagged in the other direction, and finally zoomed
between them, gobbling alarms and imprecations.
She swu ng arou nd, sighted on it  as it left the ground, caught
the b lack blob o utlined for a split second against the brilliant
sky , and blasted it in the tail fea thers. It dropped like a sack of
coal, and hit the  ground forty yards away with an audible thud.
She stoo d still for a moment, then slowly lowered the gun.
Roger w as staring at her , openmouthed, pressing the cloth of
his s hirt against the bloody scra tches on his neck. She smiled
at him, a little w eakly , feeling her hands sweaty on the wooden
stock and her heart pounding with delayed reaction.
“Holy God,” Roger said, deeply impressed. “That wasn’ t
just luck, was it?”
“W ell …  some, ” she said, tryin g for modesty . She failed,
and felt a grin blossom across her face. “Maybe half.”
Roger w ent to retrieve her prize  while she cleaned the gun
again, coming back with a ten-pound bird, limp-necked and
leaking blood like a punctured waterskin.
“What a  thing,”  he said. He held it at arm’ s length to drain,
admiring the vivid reds and blues of the bare, warty head and
dangling wattle. “I don’ t think I’ ve ever seen one, save roasted
on a platter , with chestnut dressing and roast potatoes.”
He looked from the turkey to her with great respect, and
nodded at the gun.
“That’ s great shooting, Bree.”She felt  her cheeks flush with pleasure, and restrained the
ur ge to say , “A w , shucks, it warn’ t nothin’,” settling instead for
a simple, “Thanks.”
They turned again toward home, Roger still carrying the
dripping carcass, held slightly out from his body .
“Y ou ha ven’ t be en shooting all t hat long, either ,” Roger was
saying, still impressed. “What’ s it been, six months?”
She didn ’ t want to lower his estimation of her prowess, but
laughed, shrugged, and told the truth anyway .
“More like six years. Really more like ten.”
“Eh?”
“Daddy—Frank—taught me to shoot when I was eleven or
twelve. He gave me a twenty-two when I was thirteen, and by
the t ime I was fifteen, he was ta king me to shoot clay pigeons
at ranges, or to hunt doves and quail on weekends in the fall.”
Roger glanced at her in interest.
“I thought Jamie’d taught you;  I’d no idea Frank Randall
was such a sportsman.”
“W ell,” she said slowly . “I don’ t know that he was.”
One black brow went up in inquiry .
“Oh, he knew h ow to shoot,” sh e assured him. “He’d been
in the Army during W orld W ar T wo. But he never shot much
himself; he’d just show me, and  then watch. In fact, he never
even owned a gun.”
“That’ s odd.”
“Isn’ t it?” She moved deliberately closer to him, nudging
his s houlder so t hat their shadows mer ged again; now it looked
like a two-headed ogre, carrying a gun over one shoulder , and
a third head held  bloodily in its hand. “I wondered about that,”
she said, with attempted casualness. “After you told me—
about his letter and all that, at the Gathering.”
He shot her a sharp look.“W ondered what?”
She took  a deep breath, feeling the linen strips bite into her
breasts.
“I w ondered why a man who didn’ t ride or shoot should
take such pains to see that his daughter could do both those
things. I  mean, it wasn’ t like it  was common for girls to do
that.” She tried to laugh. “Not in Boston, anyway .”
There was no sound for a moment but the shuf fling of their
feet through dry leaves.
“Christ,” Roger  said softly , at last. “He looked for Jamie
Fraser . He said so, in his letter .”
“And he found a Jamie Fraser .  He said that, too. W e just
don’ t kn ow whe ther it was the right one or not.” She kept her
eyes on her boo ts, wary of snakes. There were copperheads in
the woo d, and timber rattlers; she saw them now and then,
basking on rocks or sunny logs.
Roger took a deep breath, lifting his head.
“A ye. And so you’re wondering now—what else might he
have found?”
She nodded, not looking up.
“Maybe he found me,” she said  softly . Her throat felt tight.
“Maybe he knew I’d go back, th rough the stones. But if he did
—he didn’ t tell me.”
He s topped walking, and put a hand on her arm to turn her
toward him.
“And perhaps he didn’ t know that at all,” he said firmly .
“He may  only have thought ye might  try it, if you ever found
out about Fraser . And if you did find out, and did go … then
he want ed you to be safe. I’d say no matter what he knew ,
that’ s what he wanted; you to be safe.” He smiled, a little
crookedly . “Like you want me to be safe. A ye?”
She heaved a d eep sigh, feeling comfort descend on her
with his words. She’d never do ubted that Frank Randall hadloved her , all the years of her growing up. She didn’ t want to
doubt it now .
“A ye,” she said, and tilted up an inch on her toes to kiss
him.
“Fine, then,” he said, and gentl y touched her breast, where
the buck skin of her shirt showed a small wet patch. “Jem’ll be
hungry . Come on; it’ s time we were home.”
They turned again and went do wn the mountain, into the
golden sea of chestnut leaves, watching their shadows go
before them as they walked, embracing.
“Do you think—” she began, and hesitated. One shadow
head dipped toward the other , listening.
“Do you think Ian’ s happy?”
“I hope so,” he replied, and his arm tightened round her . “If
he has a wife like mine—then I’m sure he is.”21
TWENTY -TWENTY
N OW , HO LD THIS over your le ft eye, and read the smallest
line you can see clearly .” 
 W ith a long-suf fering air , Roger held the wooden spoon over
his right  eye and narrowed his left, concentrating on the sheet
of p aper I had pinned to the kit chen door . He was standing in
the f ront hall, ju st inside the doo r , as the length of the corridor
was the only st retch of floor w ithin the house approaching
twenty feet.
“Et tu Brute?”  he read . He lowered the spoon and looked at
me, one dark ey ebrow raised. “I’ve never seen a literate eye
chart before.”
“W ell, I always did think the ‘f, e, 5, z, t, d’ things on the
regular charts rather boring,” I said, unpinning the paper and
flipping it over . “Other eye, please. What’ s the smallest line
you can read easily?”
He r eversed the spoon, squinte d at the five lines of hand-
printing—done in such even decrements of size as I could
manage—and read the third one, slowly .
“ Eat no onions . What’ s that from?”
“Shakespeare, of course,” I said, making a note. “ Eat no
onions nor garlic, for we ar e to utter sweet br eath . That’ s the
smallest you can read, is it?”
I saw  Jamie’ s expression alter s ubtly . He and Brianna were
standing just behind Roger , out on the porch, watching the
proceedings wit h great interest. Brianna was leaning slightly
toward Roger , a faintly anxiou s expression on her face, as
though willing him to see the letters.
Jamie’ s expression, though, showed slight surprise, faint
pity—and an undeniable glint of satisfaction. He , evidently ,
could re ad the fifth line without trouble. I honor him . Onefrom Julius C aesar: A s he was valian t, I honor him; as he was
ambitious, I slew him.
He felt my gaze  on him, and the expression vanished, his
face ins tantly resuming its usual look of good-humored
inscrutability . I narrowed my eyes at him, with a “Y ou’re not
fooling me ” sort of look, an d he looked aw ay , the corner of his
mouth twitching slightly .
“Y ou ca n’ t make  out any of the next line?” Bree had moved
close to Roger , as though drawn by osmosis. She stared
intently at the paper , then at him, with an encouraging look.
Obviously she could see the last two lines without dif ficulty ,
too.
“No,” Roger said, rather short ly . He’d agreed to let me
check his eyes a t her request, but he obviously wasn’ t happy
about it. He slapped the palm  of his hand lightly with the
spoon, impatient to be done with this. “Anything else?”
“Just a few sm all exercises,”  I said, as soothingly as
possible. “Come  in here, where the light is better .” I put a hand
on his arm and d rew him toward my sur gery , giving Jamie and
Bree a hard look  as I did so. “Brianna, why don’ t you go and
lay the table for supper? W e won’ t be long.”
She hesitated for a moment, but Jamie touched her arm and
said something to her in a low  voice. She nodded, glanced
once mo re at Roger with a small, anxious frown, and went.
Jamie gave me an apologetic shrug, and followed her .
Roger w as standing among the litter in my sur gery , looking
like a bear tha t hears barking hounds in the distance—
simultaneously annoyed and wary .
“There’ s no need for this,” he said, as I closed the door . “I
see fine. I just don’ t shoot very well yet. There’ s nothing the
matter with my eyes.” Still, he made no move to escape, and I
picked up the hint of doubt in his voice.
“Shouldn’ t think  there is,” I said lightly . “Let me have just a
quick look, though … just curiosity on my part, really… .” Igot him  sat down, however re luctantly , and for lack of the
standard small flashlight, lit a candle.
I bro ught it close to check the dilation of his pupils. His
eyes we re the most lovely color , I thought; not hazel at all, but
a v ery clear dar k green. Dark e nough to look almost black in
shadow , but a startling color— almost emerald—when seen
directly in bright light. A disconcerting sight, to one who had
known Geilie Duncan and seen  her mad humor laugh out of
those cl ear green depths. I did hope Roger hadn’ t inherited
anything but  the eyes from her .
He blink ed once , involuntarily , long black lashes sweeping
down over them, and the memory disappeared. These eyes
were bea utiful—but calm, and above all, sane. I smiled at him,
and he smiled back in reflex, not understanding.
I pa ssed the can dle before his face, up, down, right, left,
asking him to keep looking at the flame, watching the changes
as his eyes mov ed to and fro. Since no answers were required
in this exercise , he began to relax a bit, his fists gradually
uncurling on his thighs.
“V ery n ice,” I said, keeping my voice low and soothing.
“Y es, that’ s good … can you look up, please? Y es, now look
down, to ward the corner by the window . Mm-hm, yes … Now ,
look at me agai n. Y ou see my finger? Good, now close your
left eye and tell me if the finger moves. Mm-hmmm …”
Finally , I blew out the candle, and straightened up,
stretching my back with a small groan.
“So,” Roger said lightly , “what’ s the verdict, Doctor? Shall I
go a nd be making myself a white cane?” He waved away the
drifting wisps of smoke from th e blown-out candle, making a
good attempt at casualness—belied only by the slight tension
in his shoulders.
I laughed.
“No, you won’ t need a Seeing Eye dog for some time yet,
nor even spectacles. Though speaking of that—you said you’dnever se en a literate eye chart before. But you have seen eye
charts, I take it. Did you ever wear glasses as a child?”
He frowned, casting his mind back.
“A ye, I did,” h e said slowly . “Or rather”—a faint grin
showed on his face—”I had  a pair of specs. Or two or three.
When I was seven or eight, I think. They were a nuisance, and
gave me  a headache. So I was inclined to leave them on the
public bus, or at  school, or on the rocks by the river … I can’ t
recall actually wearing  t hem fo r more than an hour at a time,
and afte r I’d lost the third pair , my father gave up.” He
shrugged.
“I’ve never felt as though I needed spectacles, to be honest.”
“W ell, you don’ t—now .”
He caug ht the tone of my voice and looked down at me,
puzzled.
“What?”
“Y ou’re a bit sh ortsighted in the left eye, but not by enough
to cause  you any real dif ficulty .” I rubbed the bridge of my
nose, as though feeling the pin ch of spectacles myself. “Let
me guess—you were good at h ockey and football when you
were at school, but not at tennis.”
He laughed at that, eyes crinkling at the corners.
“T ennis? At an Inverness gram mar school? Soft Southron
sport, we’d have called it; game  for poofters. But I take your
point—no, you’re right, I was fine at the football, but not
much at rounders. Why?”
“Y ou do n’ t have  any binocular v ision,” I said. “Chances are
that som eone noticed it when you were a child, and made an
ef fort to  correct it with prismati c lenses—but it’ s likely that it
would have been too late by the time you were seven or eight,”
I a dded hastily , seeing his face  go blank. “If that’ s going to
work, it needs to  be done very young—before the age of five.”
“I don’ t  … binocular vision? But doesn’ t everyone? … I
mean, both my eyes do work, d on’ t they?” He looked mildlybewildered. He looked down int o the palm of his hand, closing
one eye, then the other , as though some answer might be found
among the lines there.
“Y our ey es are fine,” I assured h im. “It’ s just that they don’ t
work together . It’ s really a fairly common condition—and
many pe ople wh o have it don’ t realize it. It’ s just that in some
people, for one reason or anot her , the brain never learns to
mer ge the images coming in from both eyes in order to make a
three-dimensional image.”
“I don’ t  see in three dimension s?” He looked at me, now ,
squinting hard, as though expec ting me suddenly to flatten out
against the wall.
“W ell, I haven’ t  quite got a trained oculist’ s kit”—I waved a
hand at the burned-out candle, the wooden spoon, the drawn
figures, and a co uple of sticks I had been using—”nor yet an
oculist’ s training. But I’m reasonably sure, yes.”
He l istened quietly as I explain ed what I could. His vision
seemed fairly normal, in terms of acuity . But since his brain
was not fusing the information from his eyes, he must be
estimating the distance and relative location of objects simply
by unconscious comparison of their sizes, rather than by
forming a real 3-D image. Which meant …
“Y ou ca n see perfectly well for almost anything you want to
do,” I assured him. “And you ve ry likely can learn to shoot all
right; m ost of the men I see shooting close one eye when they
fire, anyway . But you might have trouble hitting moving
tar gets. Y ou can see what you’re aiming at, all right—but
without binocula r vision, you may not be able to tell pr ecisely
where it is in order to hit it.”
“I se e,” he said. “So, if it come s to a fight, I’d best rely on
straightforward bashing, is that it?”
“In my humble experience of Scottish conflicts,” I said,
“most fi ghts am ount to no mo re than bashing, anyway . Y ou
only use  a gun or arrow if your goal is murder—and in thatcase, a blade is  usually the weapon of preference. So much
surer , Jamie tells me.”
He gave a sma ll grunt of amusement at that, but said
nothing else. He sat quietly , considering what I’d told him,
while I tidied up the disorder le ft by the day’ s sur gery . I could
hear thumping and clanging from  the kitchen, and the pop and
sizzle o f fat that went with the tantalizing aroma of frying
onions and bacon that floated down the corridor .
It w as going to be a hasty meal;  Mrs. Bug had been busy all
day with  the preparations for the militia expedition. Still, even
Mrs. Bug’ s least elaborate spreads were well worth the eating.
Muf fled voices came through the wall—Jemmy’ s sudden
wail, a brief exclamation from Brianna, another from Lizzie,
then Jamie’ s deep voice, evidently comforting the baby while
Bree and Lizzie dealt with dinner .
Roger heard them, too; I saw  his head turn toward the
sound.
“Quite a  woman ,” he said, with  a slow smile. “She can kill
it and  cook it. Which looks like being a good thing, under the
circumstances,” he added ruefully . “Evidently I won’ t be
putting much meat on the table.”
“Pah,” I  said briskly , wishing to  forestall any attempt on his
part to feel sorry for himself. “ I’ve never shot a thing in my
life, and  I put food on this tabl e every day . If you really feel
you must kill th ings, you know , there are plenty of chickens
and gees e and pigs. And if you can catch that damnable white
sow before she undermines the f oundation entirely , you’ll be a
local hero.”
That m ade him smile, though with a wry twist to it
nonetheless.
“I expec t my self-respect will recover , with or without the
pigs,” h e said. “The worst of it will be telling the
sharpshooters”—he jerked his head toward the wall, where
Brianna’ s voice mingled with Ja mie’ s in muf fled conversation—”what the problem is. They’l l be very kind—like one is to
somebody who’ s missing a foot.”
I lau ghed, finished swabbing out my mortar , and reached up
to put it away in the cupboard.
“Bree’ s only worrying about you, because of this Regulation
trouble. But Jamie thinks it w on’ t amount to anything; the
chances of you needing to shoot someone are very small.
Besides, birds of prey haven’ t g ot binocular vision, either ,” I
added, as an afterthought. “Except for owls. Hawks and eagles
can’ t ha ve; their  eyes are on either side of their heads. Just tell
Bree and Jamie I said you have eyes like a hawk.”
He laug hed outright at that, an d stood up, dusting of f the
skirts of his coat.
“Right, I will.” He waited for m e, opening the door to the
hall for me. As I reached it, thou gh, he put a hand on my arm,
stopping me.
“This binocular thing,” he said, gesturing vaguely toward
his eyes. “I was born with it, I suppose?”
I nodded.
“Y es, almost certainly .”
He hesit ated, clearly not knowing quite how to put what he
wanted to say .
“Is i t …  inherite d, then? My fath er was in the RAF; he can’ t
have had  it, surely—but my mother wore spectacles. She kept
them on  a chain round her neck ; I remember playing with it. I
might have gotten the eye thing from her , I mean.”
I p ursed my lips , trying to recall what—if anything—I had
ever read on the  subject of inherited eye disorders, but nothing
concrete came to mind.
“I don’ t know ,” I said at last. “I t might be. But it might not,
too. I really don’ t know . Are you worried about Jemmy?”
“Oh.” A faint look of disappointment crossed his features,
though he blotted it out almo st at once. He gave me anawkward smile, and opened the door , holding it for me to pass
through.
“No, not worried. I was just th inking—if it was inherited,
and if the little fella should have it, too … then I’d know .”
The corr idor was full of the savory scents of squirrel stew
and fres h bread,  and I was starving, but I stood still, staring up
at him.
“I would n’ t wish it on him,” Roger said hastily , seeing my
expression. “Not at all! Just, if it should be that way—” He
broke of f and looked away , swallowing. “Look, don’ t tell Bree
I thought of it, please.”
I touched his arm lightly .
“I think  she’d understand. Y our wanting to know—for
sure.”
He glan ced at the kitchen door , from which Bree’ s voice
rose, singing “Clementine,” to Jemmy’ s raucous pleasure.
“She might understand,” he said. “That doesn’ t mean she
wants to hear it.”22
THE FIER Y CROSS
T HE MEN WERE GONE. Jamie, Roger , Mr . Chisholm and
his sons , the MacLeod brother s … they had all disappeared
before daybreak, leaving no trace behind save the jumbled
remains of a h asty breakfast, and a collection of muddy
bootprints on the doorsill.
Jamie moved so quietly that he  seldom woke me when he
left our bed to d ress in the dark predawn. He did usually bend
to kiss me goodb ye, though, murmuring a quick endearment in
my ear and leaving me to carry the touch and scent of him
back into dreams.
He hadn’ t wakened me this morning.
That job had be en left to the tender of fices of the junior
Chisholms and MacLeods, several of whom had held a pitched
battle directly under my window , just after dawn.
I had sprung into wakefulness, momentarily confused by the
shouts and screams, my hand s reaching automatically for
sponge and oxygen, syringe and alcohol, visions of a hospital
emer gency room vivid around me. Then I drew breath, and
smelled woodsm oke, not ethanol. I shook my head, blinking at
the sight of a rumpled blue and yellow quilt, the peaceful row
of cloth es on their pegs, and the wash of pure, pale light
streaming through half-opened shutters. Home. I was home, on
the Ridge.
A d oor banged open below , an d the racket died abruptly ,
succeeded by a scuf fle of flight, accompanied by muf fled
giggling.
“Mmmphm!” said Mrs. Bug’ s voice, grimly satisfied at
having routed the rioters. The door closed, and the clank of
wood and clang of metal from below announced the
commencement of the day’ s activities.When I went down a few moments later , I found that good
lady eng aged sim ultaneously in toasting bread, boiling cof fee,
making parritch, and complaini ng as she tidied up the men’ s
leavings. Not about the unti diness—what else could be
expected of men?—but rather that Jamie had not waked her to
provide a proper breakfast for them.
“And how’ s Himself to manage, then?” she demanded,
brandishing the toasting-fork at  me in reproach. “A fine, big
man like  that, and him out and doing wi’ no more to line his
wame than a wee sup of milk and a stale bannock?”
Casting a bleary eye over the assorted crumbs and dirty
crockery , it appeared to me that Himself and his companions
had probably accounted for at least two dozen corn muf fins
and an entire loaf of salt-rising bread, accompanied by a pound
or so of fresh butter , a jar of honey , a bowl of raisins, and all of
the first milking.
“I don’ t think he’ll starve,” I murmured, dabbing up a
crumb with a moistened forefinger . “Is the cof fee ready?”
The older Chisholm and MacLeod children had mostly been
sleeping by the kitchen hearth at night, rolled in rags or
blankets. They were up and out now , their coverings heaped
behind the settle. As the smell of food began to permeate the
house, murmurous sounds of rising began to come through the
walls and down the stairs, as the women dressed and tended
the babies and toddlers. Small faces began to reappear from
outside, peeking hungrily round the edge of the door .
“Have ye washed your filthy paws, wee heathens?” Mrs.
Bug demanded, seeing them. She waved a porridge spoon at
the benc hes along the table. “If ye have, come in and set
yourselves doon. Mind ye wipe your muddy feet!”
W ithin moments, the benches and stools were filled, Mrs.
Chisholm, Mrs.  MacLeod, and Mrs. Aberfeldy yawning and
blinking among their of fspring, nodding and murmuring
“Good m orn” to me and each other , straightening a kerchief
here and a shirttail there, using  a thumb wet with spittle toplaster d own the  spiked hair on  a little boy’ s head or wipe a
smudge from a little girl’ s cheek.
Faced w ith a dozen gaping mouths to feed, Mrs. Bug was in
her e lement, hopping back and f orth between hearth and table.
W atching her bustle to and fro, I  thought she must have been a
chickadee in a former life.
“Did yo u see Jamie when he left?” I asked, as she paused
momentarily to refill all the c of fee cups, a lar ge uncooked
sausage in her other hand.
“No, ind eed.” She shook her head, neat white in its kerch. “I
didna ke n a thing about it. I hea rd my auld lad up and stirring
before d awn, but I thought it was only him out to the privy , he
not liking to trouble me with the noise
 o’ the pot. He didna come bac k, though, and by the time I
waked myself, they’d all gone of f. Ah! None of that, now!”
Catching a movement from the c orner of her eye, she dotted
a s ix-year -old MacLeod smartly  on the head with her sausage,
causing him to snatch his fingers back from the jam jar .
“Perhaps they’v e gone hunting,” Mrs. Aberfeldy suggested
timidly , spooning porridge into the little girl she held on her
knee. Barely nineteen, she seldom said much, shy of the older
women.
“Better they be hunting homesteads, and timber for houses,”
Mrs. M acLeod said, hoisting a baby onto her shoulder and
patting its back. She pushed a strand of graying hair out of her
face and gave m e a wry smile. “It’ s nay reflection upon your
hospitality , Mrs.  Fraser , but I’d as soon not spend the winter
under yo ur feet.  Geordie! Leave your sister ’ s plaits alone, or
ye’ll wish ye had!”
Not at my best so early in the d ay , I smiled and murmured
something politely incomprehensible. I would as soon not
have fiv e or ten extra people in my house for the winter , either ,
but I wasn’ t sure it could be avoided.
The Governor ’ s letter had been quite specific; all able-
bodied men in t he backcountry were to be mustered as militiatroops a nd to report to Salisbury by mid-December . That left
very little time for house-build ing. Still, I hoped Jamie had
some plan for relieving the co ngestion; Adso the kitten had
taken up semipermanent residence in a cupboard in my
sur gery , and the scene in the kit chen was quickly assuming its
usual da ily resem blance to one o f the paintings of Hieronymus
Bosch.
At l east the kitchen had lost its early morning chill with so
many bodies crowded into it, and was now comfortably warm
and noisy . What with the mob scene, though, it was several
moments before I noticed that t here were four young mothers
present, rather than three.
“Where did you come from?” I asked, startled at sight of my
daughter , huddled frowsily und er a rug in a corner of the
settle.
Bree blinked sleepily and shifted Jemmy , who was nursing
with single-minded concentration, oblivious of the crowd.
“The Muellers showed up in t he middle of the night and
pounded on our door ,” she sa id, yawning. “Eight of them.
They didn’ t speak much English, but I think  they said Da sent
for them.”
“Really?” I reached for a slice of raisin cake, narrowly
beating a young Chisholm to it. “Are they still there?”
“Uh-huh. Thank s, Mama.” She stretched out a hand for the
bit of cake I of fered her . “Y es. Da came and hauled Roger out
of bed while it was still dark, but he didn’ t seem to think he
needed the Muellers yet. When  Roger left, a big old Mueller
got u p o f f the floor , said, ‘Bitte, Maedle,’  and lay down n ext to
me.” A delicate pink flushed he r cheeks. “So I thought maybe
I’d get up and come up here.”
“Oh,” I said, suppressing a smile. “That would be Gerhard.”
Eminently practical, the old farmer would see no reason why
he shoul d lay his old bones on a  hard plank floor , if there was
bed space available.“I su ppose so,” she said indistin ctly , through a mouthful of
cake. “I guess he’ s harmless, but even so …”
“W ell, h e’d be no danger to you ,” I agreed. Gerhard Mueller
was the patriarch of a lar ge German family who lived between
the Ridge and the Moravian settlement at Salem. He was
somewhere in his late seventies, but by no means harmless.
I chewed slowly , remembering how Jamie had described to
me the scalps nailed to the door of Gerhard’ s barn. W omen’ s
scalps, l ong hair  dark and silken , ends lifting in the wind. Like
live things , he’d said, his face troubled a t the memory , like
bir ds, pinned to the wood . And the white one Gerhard had
brought to me, wrapped in linen and flecked with blood. No,
not harmless. I swallowed, the cake feeling dry in my throat.
“Harmless or not, they’ll be hungry ,” said Mrs. Chisholm
practically . She bent and gathered up a corn-dolly , a soggy
diaper , and a squirming toddler , contriving somehow to leave a
hand fre e for her cof fee. “Best w e clear this lot awa, before the
Germans smell food and come hammering at the door .”
“Is t here anything left to feed th em?” I said, uneasily trying
to re member how many hams  were left in the smokeshed.
After two weeks of hospitality , o ur stores were dwindling at an
alarming rate.
“Of course there is,” Mrs. Bug said briskly , slicing sausage
and flipping the slices onto the  sizzling griddle. “Let me just
ha’ done with this lot, and ye can send them along for their
breakfasts. Y ou, a muirninn —” She tapped a girl of eight or so
on the head with her spatula. “Run ye doon the root cellar and
fetch me up an apronful of potatoes. Germans like potatoes.”
By t he time I had finished my p orridge and begun to collect
up b owls to wa sh, Mrs. Bug, broom in hand, was sweeping
children and debris out of t he back door with ruthless
ef ficiency , while issuing a stream of orders to Lizzie and Mrs.
Aberfeldy—Ruth, that was her name—who seemed to have
been dragooned as assistant cooks.“Shall I help …” I began, rather feebly , but Mrs. Bug shook
her head and made small shooing motions with the broom.
“Dinna think of it, Mrs. Fraser!” she said. “Y ou’ll have
enough to do, I ’m sure, and—here now , ye’ll no be comin’
intae my  nice, clean kitchen wi ’ those mucky boots! Out, out
and wipe them of f before ye think of setting foot in here!”
Gerhard Mueller , followed by his sons and nephews, stood
in the doorway , nonplussed. Mrs. Bug, undeterred either by the
fact that he tow ered over her by more than a foot, or that he
spoke no English, screwed up h er face and poked fiercely at
his boots with her broom.
I waved welcomingly to the Muellers, then seized the
chance of escape, and fled.
 
SEEKING T O A VOID the crow d in the house, I washed at the
well outside, then went to the sheds and occupied myself in
taking in ventory . The situation was not as bad as I’d feared;
we had enough, with careful management, to last out the
winter , though I could see that Mrs. Bug’ s lavish hand might
have to be constrained a bit.
Besides six hams in the smokesh ed, there were four sides of
bacon an d half another , plus a rack of dried venison and half
of a rela tively re cent carcass. Looking up, I could see the low
roof bea ms, black with soot and  thick with clusters of smoked,
dried fish, split and bound stif fly  in bunches, like the petals of
lar ge ug ly flowers. There were ten casks of salt fish, as well,
and four of salt pork. A stone crock of lard, a smaller one of
the fine leaf lard, another of he adcheese … I had my doubts
about that.
I h ad made it according to the instructions of one of the
Mueller women, as translated by Jamie, but I had never seen
headcheese mys elf, and was not quite sure it was meant to
look like that . I lifted  the lid and snif fed c autiously , but it
smelled all right; mildly spiced with garlic and peppercorn,
and no scent at a ll of putrefaction. Perhaps we wouldn’ t die ofptomaine poison ing, though I had it in mind to invite Gerhard
Mueller to try it first.
“How c an ye bide the auld fiend in your house?” Marsali
had demanded, when Gerhard a nd one of his sons had ridden
up to  the  Ridge a few months e arlier . She had heard the story
of the Indian women from Fer gus, and viewed the Germans
with horrified revulsion.
“And what would ye have me do?” Jamie had demanded in
return, s poon lifted halfway from his bowl. “Kill the Muellers
—all of them, for if I did for Gerhard, I’d have to do for the lot
—and n ail their hair to my  b arn?” His mou th quirked slightly .
“I sh ould think i t would put the cow of f her milk. It would put
me of f the milkin’, to be sure.”
Marsali’ s brow puckered, but she wasn’ t one to be joked out
of an ar gument.
“Not that, maybe,” she said. “But ye let them into your
house, a nd treat them as friends !” She glanced from Jamie to
me, frowning. “The women he k illed— they  wer e yo ur frien ds,
no?”
I exc hanged a lo ok with Jamie, and gave a slight shrug. He
paused for a moment, gathering his thoughts, as he slowly
stirred his soup. Then he laid down the spoon and looked at
her .
“It was a fearful thing that Gerhard did,” he said simply .
“But it was a m atter of vengeance to him; thinking as he did,
he c ouldna have done otherwise . W ould it make matters better
for me to take vengeance on him?”
“Non,”  Fer gus said pos itively . He laid a hand on Marsali’ s
arm, putting a s top to whatever she might have said next. He
grinned up at h er . “Of course, Frenchmen do not believe in
vengeance.”
“W ell, perhaps some Frenchmen,” I murmured, thinking of
the Comte St. Germain.
Marsali wasn’ t to be put of f so easily , though.“Hmph,” she said. “What ye mean is, they weren’ t yours ,
isn’ t it?” Seeing Jamie’ s brow  flick up in startlement, she
pressed the point. “The women who were murdered. But if it
were yo ur family? If it had been me and Lizzie and Brianna,
say?”
“That,” said Jamie evenly , “is my point. It was  Gerhard’ s
family .” He pushed back from t he table and stood up, leaving
half his soup unfinished. “Are ye done, Fer gus?”
Fer gus c ocked a  sleek brow at him, picked up his bowl, and
drank it down, Adam’ s apple bobbing in his long brown throat.
“Oui,”  he said , wiping  his mouth on his sleeve. He stood
and patt ed Marsali on the head , then plucked a strand of her
straw-pale hair free of her kerch. “Do not worry yourself,
cheri —even though I do not believe  in vengeance, if anyone
should hunt your hair , I promise  I will make a tobacco pouch
of his scrotum. And your papa will tie up his stockings with
the malefactor ’ s entrails, surely .”
Marsali gave a small pfft!  of irritated amusement and
slapped at his hand, and no m ore was said about Gerhard
Mueller .
I lifted the heavy crock of headcheese and set it down by the
door of the smok eshed, so as no t to for get it when I went back
to th e ho use. I wondered whethe r Gerhard’ s son Frederick had
come w ith him—likely so; the boy was less than twenty , not
an age willing to be left ou t of anything that promised
excitement. It was Frederick’ s young wife Petronella and her
baby who had died—of measles, though Gerhard had thought
the infection a deliberate curs e put on his family by the
T uscarora.
Had Fre derick found a new wife yet? I wondered. V ery
likely . Though if not … there were two teenaged girls among
the new tenants. Perhaps Jamie’ s plans involved finding them
fast husbands? And then there was Lizzie …
The corncrib was more than three-quarters full, though there
were worrying quantities of mouse droppings on the groundoutside. Adso was growing rapidly , but perhaps not fast
enough; he was just about the s ize of an average rat. Flour—
that was  a little low , only eight sacks. There might be more at
the mill, though; I must ask Jamie.
Sacks of rice and dried beans , bushels of hickory nuts,
butternuts, and black walnuts. Heaps of dried squash, burlap
bag of oatmeal a nd cornmeal, and gallon upon gallon of apple
cider an d cider vinegar . A croc k of salted butter , another of
fresh, and a bas ket of spherical goat cheeses, for which I had
traded a  bushel of blackberries  and another of wild currants.
The rest of the berries had been carefully dried, along with the
wild grapes, or made up into  jam or preserve, and were
presently hidden in the pantry , safe—I hoped—from childish
depredations.
The hon ey . I stopped, pursing m y lips. I had nearly twenty
gallons of purified honey , and four lar ge stone jars of
honeycomb, gleaned from my hives and waiting to be
rendered and made into beeswax candles. It was all kept in the
walled cave that served as stab le, in order to keep safe from
bears. It  wasn’ t safe from the children who had been deputed
to fe ed t he cow s and pigs in the stable, though. I hadn’ t seen
any tellt ale stick y fingers or fac es yet, but it might be as well
to take some preventative steps.
Between meat, grain, and the  small dairy , it looked as
though n o one would starve this  winter . My concern now was
the lesser but s till important threat of vitamin deficiency . I
glanced at the chestnut grove, its branches now completely
bare. It would be a good four months before we saw much of
fresh greenery , though I did have plenty of turnips and
cabbage still in the ground.
The roo t cellar was reassuringly well-stocked, heady with
the e arthy smell of potatoes, the  tang of onions and garlic, and
the who lesome, bland scent of turnips. T wo lar ge barrels of
apples s tood at the back—with the prints of several sets of
childish feet leading up to them, I saw .I glanced up. Enormous clusters of wild scuppernong grapes
had been hung from the rafter s, drying slowly into raisins.
They were still there, but the lower , more reachable bunches
had bee n reduced to sprays of bare stems. Perhaps I needn’ t
worry about outbreaks of scurvy , then.
I wande red back toward the house, trying to calculate how
many provisions should be sent with Jamie and his militia,
how much left f or the consumption of the wives and children.
Impossible to say; that would depend in part on how many
men he raised, and on what the y might bring with them. He
was app ointed C olonel, though; the responsibility of feeding
the men  of his regiment would be primarily his, with
reimbursement—if it ever came—to be paid later by
appropriation of the Assembly .
Not for the first time, I wished  heartily that I knew more.
How long might the Assembly be a functional body?
Brianna was out by the well, walking round and round it
with a meditative look furrowing her brows.
“Pipe,” she said, without prelim inaries. “Do people make
metal piping now? The Romans did, but—”
“I’ve seen it in  Paris and Edinbur gh, being used to carry
rain of f roofs,” I of fered. “So it  exists. I’m not sure I’ve seen
any in the Colonies, though. If there is any , it will be terribly
expensive.” Beyond the simplest of things, like horseshoes, all
ironmongery had to be imported from Britain, as did all other
metal goods like copper , brass, and lead.
“Hmm. At least they’ll know w hat it is.” She narrowed her
eyes, calculating the slope of l and between well and house,
then sho ok her head and sighed. “I can make a pump, I think.
Getting water into the house is something else.” She yawned
suddenly , and blinked, eyes watering slightly in the sunlight.
“God, I’ m so tired, I can’ t think. Jemmy squawked all night
and just  when he finally conked  out, the Muellers showed up
—I don’ t think I slept at all.”
“I recall the feeling,” I said, with sympathy—and grinned.“W as I a very cranky baby?” Brianna asked, grinning back.
“V ery ,” I assured her , turning tow ard the house. “And where
is yours?”
“He’ s with—”
Brianna stopped dead, clutching my arm.
“What—” she said. “What in the name of God is that ?”
I turned to look, and felt a spasm  of shock, deep in the pit of
my stomach.
“It’ s qui te evide nt what  it  is,” I said, wa lking slowly toward
it. “The question is—why?”
It was a cross. Rather a big cross, made of dried pine
boughs, stripped  of their twigs and bound together with rope.
It w as p lanted fi rmly at the edg e of the dooryard, near the big
blue spruce that guarded the house.
It stood some se ven feet in heig ht, the branches slender , but
solid. It was not  bulky or obtrus ive—and yet its quiet presence
seemed to dominate the dooryard, much as a tabernacle
dominates a church. At the same time, the ef fect of the thing
seemed neither reverent nor protective. In fact, it was bloody
sinister .
“Are we having a revival m eeting?” Brianna’ s mouth
twitched, trying to make a joke of it. The cross made her as
uneasy as it did me.
“Not tha t I’ve heard of.” I walked slowly round it, looking
up a nd down. Jamie had mad e it—I could tell that by the
quality o f the workmanship. The branches had been chosen for
straightness and symmetry , carefully trimmed, the ends
tapered. The cross piece had been neatly notched to fit the
upright, the rope binding crisscrossed with a sailor ’ s neatness.
“Maybe Da’ s starting his own religion.” Brianna lifted a
brow; she recognized the workmanship, too.
Mrs. Bu g appeared suddenly round the corner of the house,
a bowl of chicken feed in her hands. She stopped dead at sightof us, her mouth opening immediately . I braced myself
instinctively for the onslaught , and heard Brianna snicker
under her breath.
“Och, th ere ye are, ma’am! I was just sayin’ to Lizzie as
how it was a sh ame, a mortal shame it is, that those spawn
should be riotin’ upstairs and doon, and their nasty leavings
scattered all about the hoose, and even in Herself ’ s own
stillroom, and she said to me, did Lizzie, she said—”
“In my sur gery? What? Where? What have they done?”
For getting the cross, I was already hastening toward the house,
Mrs. Bug hard on my heels, still talking.
“I did catch twa  o’ them wee de’ils a-playin’ at bowls in
there with your nice blue bottles and an apple, and be sure I
boxed their ears sae hard for it I’m sure they’re ringin’ still,
the wicked creeturs, and them a-leavin’ bits of good food to
rot and go bad, and—”
“My bread!” I had reached the  front hall, and now flung
open the door o f the sur gery to find everything within spick-
and-span—including the countertop where I had laid out my
most recent penicillin experiments. It now lay completely
bare, its oaken surface scoured to rawness.
“Nasty it was,” Mrs. Bug said fr om the hall behind me. She
pressed her lips together with prim virtue. “Nasty! Covered
wi’ mold, just covered, all blue, and—”
I too k a deep breath, hands clenched at my sides to avoid
throttling her . I shut the sur gery  door , blotting out the sight of
the empty counter , and turned to the tiny Scotswoman.
“Mrs. B ug,” I said, keeping my voice level with great ef fort,
“you kn ow how much I apprecia te your help, but I did  ask you
not to—”
The front door s wung open and crashed into the wall beside
me.
“Y e wretched auld besom! How  dare ye to lay hands on my
weans!”I swung round to find myself nose-to-nose with Mrs.
Chisholm, face flushed with fury and armed with a broom, two
red-faced toddlers clinging to her skirts, their cheeks smeared
with recent tears. She ignored me completely , her attention
focused on Mrs. Bug, who stoo d in the hallway on my other
side, bristling like a diminutive hedgehog.
“Y ou a nd your precious weans!” Mrs. Bug cried
indignantly . “Wh y , if ye cared a stitch for them, ye’d be raisin’
them proper and teachin’ them right from wrong, not leavin’
them to carouse about the hoose like Barbary apes, strewin’
wreck a nd ruin from attic to doorstep, and layin’ their sticky
fingers on anything as isna nailed to the floor!”
“Now , M rs. Bug, really , I’m sure they didn’ t mean—” My
attempt at peacemaking was drowned out by steam-whistle
shrieks from all three Chisholms, Mrs. Chisholm’ s being by
far the loudest.
“Who are you, to be callin ’ my bairns thieves, ye
maundering auld  nettercap!” The aggrieved mother waved the
broom menacingly , moving from side to side as she tried to get
at M rs. Bug. I moved with her , hopping back and forth in an
ef fort to stay between the two combatants.
“Mrs. Chisholm,” I said, raising a placating hand.
“Mar garet. Really , I’m sure that—”
“Who am I?” Mrs. Bug seemed to expand visibly , like rising
dough. “Who am I? Why , I’m a God-fearin’ woman and a
Christian soul! Who are you  to  be speakin’ to your elders an d
betters i n such a way , you and your evil tribe a-traipsin’ the
hills in rags and tatters, wi’out sae much as a pot to piss in?”
“Mrs. Bug!” I exclaimed, whirling round to her . “Y ou
mustn’ t—”
Mrs. Chisholm didn’ t bother tr ying to find a rejoinder to
this, but  instead lunged forward, broom at the ready . I flung
my arms out to  prevent her shoving past me; finding herself
foiled in  her attempt to swat Mrs. Bug, she instead beganpoking a t her over my shoulder , jabbing wildly with the broom
as she tried to skewer the older woman.
Mrs. Bug, obviously feeling  herself safe behind the
barricade of my person, was hop ping up and down like a Ping-
Pong ball, her s mall round face bright red with triumph and
fury .
“Beggars!” she shouted, at the top of her lungs. “T inkers!
Gypsies!”
“Mrs. Chisholm! Mrs. Bug!” I pleaded, but neither paid the
least attention.
“Kittock! Mislearnit pilsh!”  b ellow ed Mr s. Chisholm,
jabbing madly with her broom. The children shrieked and
yowled, and Mrs. Chisholm—who was a rather buxom woman
—trod heavily on my toe.
This cam e under the heading o f more than enough, and I
rounded on Mrs. Chisholm with fire in my eye. She shrank
back, dropping the broom.
“Ha! Y e pert trull! Y ou and—”
Mrs. Bug’ s shrill cries behind me were suddenly silenced,
and I whirled ro und again to see Brianna, who had evidently
run round the ho use and come in through the kitchen, holding
the diminutive Mrs. Bug well of f the floor , one arm round her
middle, the other hand firmly p ressed across her mouth. Mrs.
Bug’ s tiny feet kicked wildly , her eyes bulging above the
muf fling hand. Bree rolled her eyes at me, and retreated
through the kitchen door , carrying her captive.
I tur ned round t o deal with Mrs. Chisholm, only to see the
flick of her homespun gray skirt, disappearing hastily round
the corn er of the doorstep, a child’ s wail receding like a distant
siren. The broom lay at my feet. I picked it up, went into the
sur gery , and shut the door behind me.
I closed my eyes, hands braced on the empty counter . I felt a
sudden, irrational ur ge to hit something—and did. I slammed
my fist on the c ounter , pounded it again and again with themeaty side of my hand, but it was built so solidly that my
blows made scarcely any sound, and I stopped, panting.
What on  earth was the matter with me? Annoying as Mrs.
Bug’ s interferen ce was, it was not critical. Neither was Mrs.
Chisholm’ s maternal pugnacity—she and her little fiends
would b e gone from the house sooner or later . Sooner , I hoped.
My heart had begun to slow a li ttle, but prickles of irritation
still ran over m y skin like nettl e rash. I tried to shake it of f,
opening the big cupboard to assure myself that neither Mrs.
Bug’ s nor the children’ s depredations had harmed anything
truly important.
No, it was all right. Each glass bottle had been polished to a
jewellike gleam—the sunlight caught them in a blaze of blue
and green and c rystal—but each had been put back exactly in
its p lace, each neatly written lab el turned forward. The gauzy
bundles of dried herbs had be en shaken free of dust, but
carefully hung back on their nails.
The sight of the assembled medicines was calming. I
touched a jar of anti-louse ointm ent, feeling a miser ’ s sense of
gratification at the number and variety of bags and jars and
bottles.
Alcohol lamp, alcohol bottle, microscope, lar ge amputation
saw , jar of sutu res, box of pla sters, packet of cobweb—all
were arrayed with military prec ision, drawn up in ranks like
ill-assorted recruits under the eye of a drill ser geant. Mrs. Bug
might have the flaws of her greatness, but I couldn’ t help but
admit her virtue as a housekeeper .
The only thing in the cabinet that plainly hadn’ t been
touched was a ti ny leather bag, the amulet given to me by the
T uscaroran shaman Nayawenne; that lay askew in a corner by
itself. Interesting that Mrs. Bug wouldn’ t touch that, I thought;
I h ad never told her what it was, though it did look Indian,
with th e feathers—from rav en and woodpecker—thrust
through the knot. Less than a year in the Colonies, and less
than a month in the wilderness, Mrs. Bug regarded all things
Indian with acute suspicion.The odor of lye soap hung in the air , reproachful as a
housekeeper ’ s ghost. I supposed I couldn’ t really blame her;
moldy bread, rotted melon, and mushy apple slices might be
research to me; to Mrs. Bug, they could be nothing but a
calculated of fense to the god of cleanliness.
I sig hed and clo sed the cupboard, adding the faint perfume
of d ried lavender and the skun k scent of pennyroyal to the
ghosts of lye and rotted app les. I had lost experimental
preparations ma ny times before, and this one had not been
either complex or in a greatly advanced state. It would take no
more th an half an hour to repla ce it, setting out fresh bits of
bread an d other samples. I woul dn’ t do it, though; there wasn’ t
enough time. Jamie was clearly beginning to gather his
militiamen; it could be no more  than a few days before they
would depart for Salisbury , to report to Governor T ryon.
Before we  w ould depart—for I certainly meant to accompany
them.
It occurred to m e, quite suddenly , that there hadn’ t been
enough time to finish the experiment when I had set it up to
begin w ith. I had known we w ould leave soon; even if I got
immediate good growth, I would not have had time to collect,
dry , purify … I’d known that, consciously—and yet I had done
it anywa y , gone right on with my plans, pursuing my routines,
as though life were still settled and predictable, as though
nothing whatev er might threaten the tenor of my days. As
though acting might make it true.
“Y ou really are a fool, Beaucham p,” I murmured, pushing a
curl of hair tiredly behind one ear . I went out, shutting the door
of the sur gery fi rmly behind me, and went to negotiate peace
between Mrs. Bug and Mrs. Chisholm.
 
SUPERFICIALL Y , peace in the house was restored, but an
atmosphere of uneasiness remained. The women went about
their wo rk tense and tight-lipped; even Lizzie, the soul of
patience, was heard to say “T ch a!” when one of the children
spilled a pan of buttermilk across the steps.Even ou tside, the air seemed to crackle, as though a
lightning storm were near . As I went to and fro from sheds to
house, I kept gla ncing over my shoulder at the sky above Roan
Mountain, half-expecting to see the loom of thunderheads—
and yet the sky was still the pale slate-blue of late autumn,
clouded with nothing more than the wisps of mare’ s tails.
I fo und myself distracted, unable to settle to anything. I
drifted from one task to another , leaving a pile of onions half-
braided in the pantry , a bowl of beans half-shelled on the
stoop, a pair of torn breeks lying on the settle, needle dangling
from its  thread. Again and agai n, I found myself crossing the
yard, coming from nowhere in particular , bound upon no
specific errand.
I gl anced up e ach time I passed the cross, as though
expecting it either to have disappeared since my last trip, or to
have acquired some explanatory notice, neatly pinned to the
wood. If  not Iesus Na zar enus Rex Iudaeorum , then something .
But no. The cro ss remained, two simple sticks of pinewood,
bound together by a rope. Not hing more. Except, of course,
that a cross is always  s om ething more. I just didn’ t know what
it might be, this time.
Everyone else seemed to share my distraction. Mrs. Bug,
disedified by the conflict with Mrs. Chisholm, declined to
make any lunch, and retired to her room, ostensibly suf fering
from headache, though she refu sed to let me treat it. Lizzie,
normally a fine hand with food , burned the stew , and billows
of black smoke stained the oak beams above the hearth.
At l east the Muellers were safel y out of the way . They had
brought a lar ge cask of beer wi th them, and had retired after
breakfast back to Brianna’ s cabin, where they appeared to be
entertaining themselves very nicely .
The bread refused to rise. Jemm y had begun a new tooth, a
hard one, and screamed and screamed and screamed. The
incessant screec hing twisted everyone’ s nerves to the snapping
point, in cluding mine. I should h ave liked to suggest that Bree
take him  away somewhere out of earshot, but I saw the deepsmudges of fatigue under her eyes and the strain on her face,
and hadn’ t the heart. Mrs. Ch isholm, tried by the constant
battles of her own of fspring, had no such compunction.
“For Go d’ s sake , why do ye no tak’ that bairn awa to your
own cabin, lass?” she snapped. “If he mun greet so, there’ s no
need for us all to hear it!”
Bree’ s eyes narrowed dangerously .
“Because,” she hissed, “your tw o oldest sons are sitting in
my cabin, drinking with the Germans. I wouldn’ t want to
disturb them!”
Mrs. Chisholm’ s face went bright red. Before she could
speak, I quickly stepped forward and snatched the baby away
from Bree.
“I’ll take him out for a bit of a walk, shall I?” I said,
hoisting him onto my shoulder . “I could use some fresh air .
Why don’ t you go up and lie down on my bed for a bit,
darling?” I said to Bree. “Y ou look just a little tired.”
“Uh-huh,” she said. One corner of her mouth twitched.
“And the Pope’ s a little bit Catholic, too. Thanks, Mama.” She
kissed Jemmy’ s hot, wet cheek, and vanished toward the
stairwell.
Mrs. Chisholm scowled horridly after her , but caught my
eye, coughed, and called to her t hree-year -old twins, who were
busily demolishing my sewing basket.
The col d air outside was a relief, after the hot, smoky
confines of the k itchen, and Jemmy quieted a little, though he
continued to squirm and whine.  He rubbed his hot, damp face
against m y neck, and gnawed f erociously on the cloth of my
shawl, fussing and drooling.
I p aced slowly t o and fro, pattin g him gently and humming
“Lilibuleero” under my breath. I found the exercise soothing,
in sp ite of Jemm y’ s crankiness. There was only one of him,
after all, and he couldn’ t talk.“Y ou’re a male, too,” I said to h im, pulling his woolen cap
over the soft br ight down that feathered his skull. “As a sex,
you have your d efects, but I will say that catfighting isn’ t one
of them.”
Fond as I was of individual women—Bree, Marsali, Lizzie,
and eve n Mrs. Bug—I had to admit that taken en masse, I
found men much easier to deal with. Whether this was the
fault of my rather unorthodox upbringing—I had been raised
lar gely by my Uncle Lamb and his Persian manservant, Firouz
—my experiences in the W ar , o r simply an aspect of my own
unconventional personality , I f ound men soothingly logical
and—with a few striking exceptions—pleasingly direct.
I tur ned to look at the house. It stood serene amid the spruce
and chestnut trees, elegantly p roportioned, soundly built. A
face showed at one of the win dows. The face stuck out its
tongue and pressed flat against the pane, crossing its eyes
above s quashed nose and cheeks. High-pitched feminine
voices and the sound of banging came to me faintly through
the cold, clean air .
“Hmm,” I said.
Reluctant as I w as to leave hom e again so soon, and little as
I lik ed the idea of Jamie being involved in armed conflicts of
any kind , the thought of going of f to live in the company of
twenty o r thirty unshaven, reeking men for a week or two had
developed a certain undeniable attraction. If it meant sleeping
on the ground …
“Into ea ch life some rain must fall,” I told Jemmy with a
sigh. “But I sup pose you’re just learning that now , aren’ t you,
poor thing?”
“Gnnnh!” he said, and drew himself up into a ball to escape
the p ain of his emer gent teeth, his knees digging painfully into
my side . I settled him more com fortably on my hip, and gave
him an index finger to chew on. His gums were hard and
knobbly; I could feel the tender spot where the new tooth was
coming in, swollen and hot under the skin. A piercing shriekcame fr om the house, followed by the sound of shouts and
running feet.
“Y ou know ,” I said conversationally , “I think a bit of whisky
would b e just the thing for that, don’ t you?” and withdrawing
the f inger , I tuc ked Jemmy up against my shoulder . I ducked
past the cross and into the shelter of the big red spruce—just in
time, as the do or of the house burst open and Mrs. Bug’ s
penetrating voice rose like a trumpet on the chilly air .
 
IT W AS A LONG W A Y to the whisky clearing, but I didn’ t
mind. It was ble ssedly quiet in the forest, and Jemmy , lulled
by th e movement, finally relaxe d into a doze, limp and heavy
as a little sandbag in my arms.
So late in the y ear , all the deciduous trees had lost their
leaves; t he trail was ankle-deep in a crackling carpet of brown
and gold, and m aple seeds whirled past on the wind, brushing
my skirt with a whisper of wings. A raven flew past, high
above. I t gave an ur gent, raucous cry , and the baby jerked in
my arms.
“Hush,” I said, hugging him close. “It’ s nothing, lovey; just
a bird.”
Still, I looked after the raven, and listened for another . They
were birds of portent—or so said Highland superstition. One
raven was an omen of change; two were good fortune; three
were ill.  I tried to dismiss such notions from my mind—but
Nayawenne had  told me the raven was my guide, my spirit
animal—and I never saw the big, black shadows pass
overhead without a certain shiver up the spine.
Jemmy stirred, gave a brief squawk, and fell back into
silence. I patted him and resum ed my climb, wondering as I
made my way slowly up the mountain, what animal might be
his guide?
The animal spirit chose you, Nayawenne told me, not the
other wa y around. Y ou must pay  careful attention to signs and
portents, and wait for your ani mal to manifest itself to you.Ian’ s an imal was the wolf; Jamie’ s the bear—or so the
T uscarora said. I had wondered at the time what one was
supposed to do if chosen by something ignominious like a
shrew or a dung beetle, but was too polite to ask.
Only on e raven . I could still hear it, though it was out of
sight, but no ec hoing cry came from the firs behind me. An
omen of change.
“Y ou could have saved yoursel f the trouble,” I said to it,
under m y breath  so as not to wa ke the baby . “Hardly as though
I needed telling, is it?”
I c limbed slowly , listening to the sigh of the wind and the
deeper sound of my own breath.  At this season, change was in
the air itself, th e scents of ripe ness and death borne on the
breeze, a nd the breath of winter in its chill. Still, the rhythms
of the turning earth brought change that was expected,
ordained; body and mind met it  with knowledge and—on the
whole—with peace. The changes coming were of a dif ferent
order , and one calculated to disturb the soul.
I g lance d back at the house; from this height, I could see
only the corner of the roof, and  the drifting smoke from the
chimney .
“What d o you think?” I said softly , Jemmy’ s head beneath
my chin, round and warm in its knitted cap. “W ill it be yours?
W ill you live here, and your children after you?”
It would be a very dif ferent life, I thought, from the one he
might have led. If Brianna had  risked the stones to take him
back—but she had not, and so  the little boy’ s fate lay here.
Had she thought of that? I wo ndered. That by staying, she
chose no t only for herself, but him? Chose war and ignorance,
disease and danger , but had risked all that, for the sake of his
father—for Rog er . I was not entirely sure it had been the right
choice—but it hadn’ t been my choice to make.
Still, I reflected, there was no w ay of imagining beforehand
what having a child was like—no power of the mind was equalto the knowledg e of just what the birth of a child could do,
wresting lives and wrenching hearts.
“And a good thing, too,” I said to Jemmy . “No one in their
right mind would do it, otherwise.”
My sense of ag itation had faded by now , soothed by the
wind an d the peace of the leafless wood. The whisky clearing,
as we called it, was hidden from the trail. Jamie had spent days
searching the slopes above the Ridge, before finding a spot
that met his requirements.
Or spots, rather . The malting floor was built in a small
clearing at the foot of a hollow; the still was farther up the
mountain in a clearing of its own, near a small spring that
provided fresh, clear water . The malting floor was out of direct
sight of the trail, but not dif ficult to get to.
“No po int in hiding it,” Jamie had said, explaining his
choice to me, “when anyone wi’ a nose could walk to it
blindfolded.”
T rue enough; even now , when there was no grain actively
fermenting in the shed or toa sting on the floor , a faintly
fecund, smoky scent lingered in the air . When grain was
“working,” the musty , pungent scent of fermentation was
perceptible at a distance, but when the sprouting barley was
spread on the floor above a slow fire, a thin haze of smoke
hung ov er the clearing, and the  smell was strong enough to
reach Fer gus’ s cabin, when the wind was right.
No one was at the malting floor now , of course. When a
new batch was working, either  Marsali or Fer gus would be
here to tend it, b ut for the mome nt, the roofed floor lay empty ,
smooth boards darkened to gra y by use and weather . There
was a neat stack of firewood piled nearby , though, ready for
use.
I went close enough to see what sort of wood it was; Fer gus
liked hi ckory , both because it split more easily , and for the
sweet taste it ga ve the malted grain. Jamie, deeply traditional
in h is approach to whisky , w ould use nothing but oak. Itouched a chunk of split wood; wide grain, light wood, thin
bark. I smiled. Jamie had been here recently , then.
Normally , a small keg of whis ky was kept at the malting
floor , both for the sake of hospitality and caution. “If someone
should come upon the lass alone there, best she have
something to give them,” Jamie had said. “It’ s known what we
do t here; best n o one should try to make Marsali tell them
where the brew is.” It wasn’ t the best whisky—generally a
very young, raw spirit—but certainly good enough either for
uninvited visitors or a teething child.
“Y ou haven’ t got any taste buds yet, anyway , so what’ s the
odds?” I murmured to Jemmy , who stirred and smacked his
lips in his sleep, screwing up his tiny face in a scowl.
I hu nted about, but there was no sign of the small whisky
keg eith er in its usual place behi nd the bags of barley or inside
the pile of firew ood. Perhaps taken away for refilling, perhaps
stolen. No great matter , in either case.
I tur ned to the north, past the malting floor , took ten steps
and turned right. The stone of the mountain jutted out here, a
solid block of granite thrusting upward from the growth of
turpelo and buttonbush. Only it wasn’ t solid. T wo slabs of
stone lea ned together , the open crack below them masked by
holly bushes. I p ulled my shawl over Jemmy’ s face to protect
him from the sharp-edged leaves, and squeezed carefully
behind them, ducking down to go through the cleft.
The stone face f ell away in a crumple of huge boulders on
the far side of the cleft, with saplings and under growth
sprouting willy-nilly in the crevices between the rocks. From
below , it looked impassable, bu t from above, a faint trail was
visible, threading down to another small clearing. Hardly a
clearing; no more than a gap in the trees, where a clear spring
bubbled from the rock and disap peared again into the earth. In
summer , it was invisible even from above, shielded by the
leafy growth of the trees around it.
Now , on the ver ge of winter , the white glimmer of the rock
by t he spring w as easily visible through the leafless scrim ofalder and mountain ash. Jamie h ad found a lar ge, pale boulder ,
and rolled it to the head of the spring, where he had scratched
the f orm of a cross upon it, and said a prayer , consecrating the
spring to  our use. I had thought at the time of making a joke
equating whisky  with holy wate r—thinking of Father Kenneth
and the baptisms—but had on second thoughts refrained; I
wasn’ t so sure Jamie would think it a joke.
I ma de my way  cautiously down the slope, the faint trail
leading through the boulders, an d finally round an outcrop of
rock, before debouching into th e spring clearing. I was warm
from the walking, but it was co ld enough to numb my fingers
where I  gripped the edges of  my shawl. And Jamie was
standing at the edge of the spring in nothing but his shirt.
I stopped dead, hidden by a scrubby growth of ever greens.
It w asn’ t his st ate of undress that halted me, but rather
something in the look of him. He looked tired, but that was
only reasonable, since he had been up and gone so early .
The ragged breeks he wore for  riding lay puddled on the
ground nearby , his belt and its impedimenta neatly coiled
beside them. My eye caught a da rk blotch of color , half-hidden
in th e grass bey ond; the blue and brown cloth of his hunting
kilt. As I watc hed, he pulled the shirt over his head and
dropped it, then knelt down nak ed by the spring and splashed
water over his arms and face.
His clothes were mud-streaked from riding, but he wasn’ t
filthy , by any means. A simple hand-and-face wash would
have suf ficed, I thought—and c ould have been accomplished
in much greater comfort by the kitchen hearth.
He s tood up, tho ugh, and taking the small bucket from the
edge of the sp ring, scooped up cold water and poured it
deliberately over himself, closing his eyes and gritting his
teeth as it streamed down his c hest and legs. I could see his
balls draw up tig ht against his body , looking for shelter as the
icy water sluiced through the auburn bush of his pubic hair and
dripped of f his cock.“Y our gr andfather has lost his b loody mind,” I whispered to
Jemmy , who stirred and grimaced in his sleep, but took no
note of ancestral idiosyncrasies.
I k new Jamie w asn’ t totally impervious to cold; I could see
him gasp and shudder from where I stood in the shelter of the
rock, an d I shivered in sympathy . A Highlander born and bred,
he simpl y didn’ t regard cold, hunger , or general discomfort as
anything to take account of. Even so, this seemed to be taking
cleanliness to an extreme.
He took a deep , gasping breath, and poured water over
himself a second time. When h e bent to scoop up the third
bucketful, it began to dawn on me what he was doing.
A sur geon scrubs before operating for the sake of
cleanliness, of course, but that isn’ t all there is to it. The ritual
of s oaping the hands, scrubbing the nails, rinsing the skin,
repeated and repeated to the point of pain, is as much a mental
activity as a phy sical one. The act of washing oneself in this
obsessive way serves to focus the mind and prepare the spirit;
one is washing away external p reoccupation, sloughing petty
distraction, just as surely as one  scrubs away germs and dead
skin.
I h ad done it oft en enough to re cognize this particular ritual
when I saw it . Jamie was not merely washing; he was
cleansing himse lf, using the cold water not only as solvent but
as mortification. He was preparing himself for something, and
the notio n made a small, cold trickle run down my own spine,
chilly as the spring water .
Sure enough, after the third bu cketful, he set it down and
shook himself, droplets flying from the wet ends of his hair
into the dry grass like a spatter of rain. No more than half-dry ,
he pulled the shirt back over his head, and turned to the west,
where th e sun lay low between  the mountains. He stood still
for a moment—very still.
The light streamed through the leafless trees, bright enough
that from where I stood, I could see him now only in
silhouette, light glowing throug h the damp linen of his shirt,the dark ness of his body a shadow within. He stood with his
head lifted, shoulders up, a man listening.
For what? I tried to still my own breathing, and pressed the
baby’ s capped head gently into my shoulder , to keep him from
waking. I listened, too.
I cou ld h ear the  sound of the woods, a constant soft sigh of
needle and branch. There was little wind, and I could hear the
water of  the spring nearby , a mu ted rush past stone and root. I
heard quite clearly the beating o f my own heart, and Jemmy’ s
breath against my neck, and su ddenly I felt afraid, as though
the soun ds were too loud, as though they might draw the
attention of something dangerous to us.
I f roze, not moving at all, tryin g not to breathe, and like a
rabbit u nder a bush, to become  part of the wood around me.
Jemmy’ s pulse beat blue, a tende r vein across his temple, and I
bent my head over him, to hide it.
Jamie said something aloud in  Gaelic. It sounded like a
challenge—or perhaps a greetin g. The words seemed vaguely
familiar—but th ere was no one there; the clearing was empty .
The air felt sudd enly colder , as though the light had dimmed; a
cloud crossing the face of the sun, I thought, and looked up—
but there were no clouds; the sky was clear . Jemmy moved
suddenly in my arms, startled , and I clutched him tighter ,
willing him to make no sound.
Then the air s tirred, the cold faded, and my sense of
apprehension passed. Jamie hadn’ t moved. Now the tension
went out of him , and his shoulders relaxed. He moved just a
little, an d the setting sun lit his shirt in a nimbus of gold, and
caught his hair in a blaze of sudden fire.
He took his dirk from its discarded sheath, and with no
hesitation, drew the edge across the fingers of his right hand. I
could see the thin dark line across his fingertips, and bit my
lips. He waited a moment for the blood to well up, then shook
his h and with a sudden hard flick of the wrist, so that droplets
of blood  flew from his fingers a nd struck the standing stone at
the head of the pool.He l aid the dirk beneath the stone, and crossed himself with
the blood-streaked fingers of his right hand. He knelt then,
very slowly , and bowed his head over folded hands.
I’d s een him pr ay now and then, of course, but always in
public, o r at least with the know ledge that I was there. Now he
plainly thought himself alone, a nd to watch him kneeling so,
stained with blood and his soul given over , made me feel that I
spied on  an act more private th an any intimacy of the body . I
would h ave moved or spoken, and yet to interrupt seemed a
sort of desecrati on. I kept silent , but found I was no longer a
spectator; my own mind had turned to prayer unintended.
Oh, Lor d , the words formed themselv es in my mind,
without conscious thought, I comme nd to you the soul of yo ur
servant James. Help him, please.  And dimly thought, but help
him with what?
Then he  crossed  himself, and r ose, and time started again,
without my having noticed it ha d stopped. I was moving down
the hillside toward him, grass  brushing my skirt, with no
memory of having taken the firs t step. I didn’ t recall his rising,
but Jamie was w alking toward me, not looking surprised, but
his face filled with light at sight of us.
“Mo chridhe,”  he said  softly , smiling, and bent to kiss me.
His bear d stubble was rough a nd his skin still chilled, fresh
with water .
“Y ou’d better put your trousers on,” I said. “Y ou’ll freeze.”
“I’ll do. Ciamar a tha thu, an gille ruaidh? ”
T o my surprise, Jemmy was awake and drooling, eyes wide
blue in a rose-leaf face, all hint of temper gone without a trace.
He leane d, twisting to reach for  Jamie, who lifted him gently
from my  arms and cradled him against a shoulder , pulling the
woolly cap down snugly over his ears.
“W e’re starting a tooth,” I told Jamie. “He wasn’ t very
comfortable, so I thought perhap s a bit of whisky on his gums
… there wasn’ t any in the house.”“Oh, aye . W e can manage that, I think. There’ s a bit in my
flask.” Carrying  the baby to the spot where his clothes lay , he
bent and rummaged one-handed, coming up with the dented
pewter flask he carried on his belt.
He s at on a rock, balancing Jemmy on his knee, and handed
me the flask to open.
“I w ent to the mash house,” I s aid, pulling the cork with a
soft pop , “but the cask was gone.”
“A ye, Fe r gus ha s it. Here, I’ll do it; my hands are clean.” He
held out his left  index finger , an d I dribbled a bit of the spirit
onto it.
“What’ s Fer gus doing with it?” I asked, settling myself on
the rock beside him.
“Keeping it,” he said, uninformatively . He stuck the finger
in Jemmy’ s mouth, gently rubb ing at the swollen gum. “Oh,
there it is. A ye, that hurts a bit, doesn’ t it? Ouch!” He reached
down and gingerly disentangled Jemmy’ s fingers from their
grip on the hairs of his chest.
“Speaking of that …” I said, and reached out to take his
right hand. Shifting his other arm to keep hold of Jemmy , he
let me take the hand and turn his fingers upward.
It was a very s hallow cut, just across the tips of the first
three fingers—the fingers with which he had crossed himself.
The bloo d had already clotted, but I dribbled a bit more of the
whisky over the cuts and cleane d the smears of blood from his
palm with my handkerchief.
He let me tend him in silence , but when I finished and
looked up at him, he met my eyes with a faint smile.
“It’ s all right, Sassenach,” he said.
“Is it?” I said. I searched his face; he looked tired, but
tranquil. The slight frown I had seen between his brows for the
last few days was gone. Whatev er he was about, he had begun
it.
“Y e saw , then?” he asked quietly , reading my own face.“Y es. Is it—it’ s to do with the cross in the dooryard, is it?”
“Oh, in a way , I suppose.”
“What is it for?” I asked bluntly .
He p ursed his li ps, rubbing gently at Jemmy’ s sore gum. At
last he said, “Y e  never saw Do ugal MacKenzie call the clan,
did you?”
I was more than startled at this, but answered cautiously .
“No. I saw Colum do it once—at the oath-taking at Leoch.”
He nodd ed, the memory of that long-ago night of torches
deep in his eyes.
“A ye,” he said softly . “I mind that. Colum was chief, and
the men would come when he summoned them, surely . But it
was Dougal who led them to war .”
He paused a moment, gathering his thoughts.
“There were raids, now and again. That was a dif ferent
thing, and often no more than a fancy that took Dougal or
Rupert, maybe an ur ge born of drink or boredom—a small
band out for the  fun of it, as much as for cattle or grain. But to
gather the clan f or war , all the fighting men—that was a rarer
thing. I only sa w it the once, myself, but it’ s no a sight ye
would for get.”
The cross of pin ewood had been there when he woke one
morning at the castle, surprising him as he crossed the
courtyard. The inhabitants of L eoch were up and about their
business as usual, but no one gla nced at the cross or referred to
it in any way . Even so, there were undercurrents of excitement
running through the castle.
The men stood here and th ere in knots, talking in
undertones, but when he joined a group, the talk shifted at
once to desultory conversation.
“I was Colum’ s nephew , aye, but newly come to the castle,
and they kent my sire and grandsire.” Jamie’ s paternalgrandfather had been Simon, Lord Lovat—chief of the Frasers
of Lovat, and no great friend of the MacKenzies of Leoch.
“I could na tell what was afoot, but something was; the hair
on my arms pri ckled whenever I caught someone’ s eye.” At
last, he had made his way to the stable, and found Old Alec,
Colum’ s Master  of Horse. The old man had been fond of Ellen
MacKenzie, and  was kind to the son for his mother ’ s sake, as
well as his own.
“‘T is th e fiery cross, lad,” he’d  told Jamie, tossing him a
currycomb and jerking his head toward the stalls. “Y e’ll not
ha’ seen it before?”
It was auld, he’d said, one of the ways that had been
followed for hundreds of years, no one quite knowing where it
had started, who had done it first or why .
“When a Hielan’ chief will ca ll his men to war ,” the old
man had said, deftly running his gnarled hand through a
knotted mane, “he has a cross made, and sets it afire. It’ s put
out at once, ken , wi’ blood or wi’ water—but still it’ s called
the fiery cross, and it will be carried through the glens and
corries, a sign t o the men of the clan to fetch their weapons
and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”
“A ye?” Jamie had said, feeling excitement hollow his belly .
“And who do we fight, then? Where do we ride?”
The old man’ s grizzled brow had crinkled in amused
approval at that “we.”
“Y e follow where your chieftain  leads ye, lad. But tonight, it
will be the Grants we go against.”
“It w as, too,” J amie said. “Though not that night. When
darkness came, Dougal lit the cross and called the clan. He
doused the burnin’ wood wi’ sheep’ s blood—and two men
rode out of the courtyard wi’ the fiery cross, to take it through
the m ountains. Four days later , there were three hundred men
in th at courtyard, armed wi’ swo rds, pistols, and dirks—and at
dawn on the fifth day , we rode to make war on the Grants.”His finger was still in the baby’ s mouth, his eyes distant as
he remembered.
“That was the f irst time I used my sword against another
man,” he said. “I mind it well.”
“I expect you d o,” I murmured. Jemmy was beginning to
squirm and fuss again; I reached  across and lifted him into my
own lap to check—sure enough, his clout was wet. Luckily , I
had another , tucked into my belt for convenience. I laid him
out across my knee to change.
“And so this cross in our dooryard …” I said delicately ,
eyes on my work. “T o do with the militia, is it?”
Jamie sighed, and I could see the shadows of memory
moving behind his eyes.
“A ye,” he said. “Once, I could  have called, and the men
would come without question—because they were mine. Men
of my blood, men of my land.”
His eyes were hooded, looking out over the mountainside
that rose up before us. I thought he did not see the wooded
heights of the Carolina wilderness, though; rather , the scoured
mountains and rocky crofts of Lallybroch. I laid my free hand
on his wrist; the skin was cold, but I could feel the heat of him,
just below the surface, like a fever rising.
“They c ame for  you—but you came for them, Jamie. Y ou
came for them at Culloden. Y o u took them there—and you
brought them back.”
Ironic, I thought, that the men who had come then to serve
at his summons  were for the most part still safe at home in
Scotland. No part of the Highlan ds had been untouched by war
—but Lallybroc h and its people were for the most part still
whole—because of Jamie.
“A ye, that’ s so.” He turned to look at me, and a rueful smile
touched his face. His hand tigh tened on mine for a moment,
then rela xed, an d the line deepe ned again between his brows.
He waved a hand toward the mountains around us.“But the se men —there is no d ebt of blood between them
and me.  They are not Frasers; I am not born either laird or
chief to them. I f they come to fight at my call, it will be of
their own will.”
“W ell, that,” I said dryly , “and Governor T ryon’ s.”
He shook his head at that.
“Nay , not that. W ill the Governor ken which men are here,
or whic h ones come to meet his summons?” He grimaced
slightly . “He kens me—and that will do nicely .”
I had to admit the truth of this. T ryon would neither know
nor care  whom Jamie brought— only that he appeared, with a
satisfactory num ber of men b ehind him, ready to do the
Governor ’ s dirty work.
I p ondered that for a moment, p atting Jemmy’ s bottom dry
with the hem of my skirt. All I knew of the American
Revolution were  the things I had heard at second hand from
Brianna’ s schoolbooks—and I, of all people, knew just how
great the gap could be between written history and the reality .
Also, we  had lived in Boston, an d the schoolbooks naturally
reflected local history . The general impression one got from
reading about Lexington and Co ncord and the like was that the
militia involved every able-bodied man in the community , all
of w hom sprang into action at t he first hint of alarm, eager to
perform their civic duty . Perhaps they did, perhaps not—but
the Carolina backcountry wasn’ t Boston, not by a long chalk.
“… r eady to ride and spr ead the alarm,”  I said, half under
my breath, “to every Middlesex village and farm.”
“What?” Jamie’ s brows shot up. “Where’ s Middlesex?”
“W ell, you’d think it was halfway between male and
female,” I said, “but it’ s really  just the area round Boston.
Though of course that’ s named after the one in England.”
“Y es?” he said, looking bewil dered. “A ye, if ye say so,
Sassenach. But—”“Militia.” I lifted Jemmy , who was bucking and squirming
like a landed fis h, making noises of extreme protest at being
forcibly diapered. He kicked me in the stomach. “Oh, give
over , child, do.”
Jamie reached over and took the baby under the arms,
hoisting him from my lap.
“Here, I’ll have him. Does he need more whisky?”
“I d on’ t know , but at least he ca n’ t squawk if your finger ’ s
in his mouth.” I relinquished Jemmy with some relief,
returning to my train of thought.
“Boston’ s been settled for more  than a hundred years, even
now ,” I said. “It has  vill ages and far ms—and the farms aren’ t
all that far from the villages. Pe ople have been living there for
a long time; everyone knows each other .”
Jamie was nodding patiently at each of these startling
revelations, trusting that I would eventually come to some
point. W hich I did, only to disco ver that it was the same point
he’d been making to me.
“So when someone musters militia there,” I said, suddenly
seeing what he’d been telling  me all along, “they come,
because they’re accustomed to fighting together to defend
their towns and because no man would want to be thought a
coward by his neighbors. But here …” I bit my lip,
contemplating the soaring mountains all around us.
“A ye,” he said, nodding, seeing the realization dawn in my
face. “It’ s dif ferent here.”
There was no settlement lar ge enough to be called a town
within a  hundre d miles, save th e German Lutherans at Salem.
Bar that , there was nothing in the backcountry but scattered
homesteads; sometimes a place where a family had settled and
spread, b rothers or cousins building houses within sight of one
another . Small settlements and distant cabins, some hidden in
the mountain hollows, screened by laurels, where the residents
might not see a nother white face for months—or years—at a
time.The sun  had sunk below the angled slope of the mountain,
but t he l ight still  lingered, a brie f wash of color that stained the
trees and rocks gold around us and flushed the distant peaks
with blue and v iolet. There were living creatures in that cold,
brilliant landscape, I knew , habitations nearby and warm
bodies s tirring; b ut so far as the eye could see, nothing moved.
Mountain settlers would go without question to help a
neighbor—because they might as easily require such help
themselves at any moment. The re was, after all, no one else to
turn to.
But they had n ever fought for a common purpose, had
nothing in common to defend. And to abandon their
homesteads and leave their families without defense, in order
to serve  the whim of a distant governor? A vague notion of
duty mig ht comp el a few; a few would go from curiosity , from
restlessness, or in the vague hope of gain. But most would go
only if they were called by a man they respected; a man that
they trusted.
I a m not born either lair d or chief to them , he’d said. Not
born to them, no—but born to it, nonetheless. He could, if he
wished, make himself chief.
“Why?” I asked softly . “Why will you do it?” The shadows
were rising from the rocks, slowly drowning the light.
“Do you not see?” One eyebrow  lifted as he turned his head
to m e. “Y e told  me what would happen at Culloden—and I
believed ye, Sassenach, fearful as it was. The men of
Lallybroch cam e home safe as much because of you as
because of me.”
That wa s not entirely true; any  man who had marched to
Nairn with the Highland army w ould have known that disaster
lay s omewhere ahead. Still … I had  bee n ab le to help in some
small way , to m ake sure that Lallybroch was prepared, not
only for the batt le, but its aftermath. The small weight of guilt
that I always fe lt when I thought of the Rising lifted slightly ,
easing my heart.“W ell, perhaps. But what—”
“Y e’ve told me what will happe n here, Sassenach. Y ou and
Brianna and MacKenzie, all three. Rebellion, and war—and
this time … victory .”
V ictory . I nodded numbly , remembering what I knew of
wars an d the cost of victory . It was, however , better than
defeat.
“W ell, th en.” He stooped to pic k up his dirk, and gestured
with it to the m ountains around  us. “I have sworn an oath to
the Crown; if I break it in time of war , I am a traitor . My land
is forfeit—and my life—and th ose who follow me will share
my fate. T rue?”
“T rue.” I swallowed, hugging my arms tight around me,
wishing I still h eld Jemmy . Jamie turned to face me, his eyes
hard and bright.
“But the Crown willna prevail, this time. Y e’ve told me.
And if the King  is overthrown—what then of my oath? If I
have kept it, then I am traitor to the rebel cause.”
“Oh,” I said, rather faintly .
“Y e see?  At some point, T ryon and the King will lose their
power over me—but I dinna ke n when that may be. At some
point, the rebels will hold power—but I dinna ken when that
may be. And in between …” He tilted the point of his dirk
downward.
“I do see. A very tidy little cleft stick,” I said, feeling
somewhat hollow as I realized just how precarious our
situation was.
T o follo w T ryon’ s orders now was plainly the only choice.
Later , however … for Jamie t o continue as the Governor ’ s
man into the ea rly stages of the Revolution was to declare
himself a Loyalist—which wou ld be fatal, in the long run. In
the short  run, though, to break with T ryon, forswear his oath to
the King, and declare for the rebels … that would cost him his
land, and quite possibly his life.He s hrugged, with a wry twist o f the mouth, and sat back a
little, easing Jemmy on his lap.
“W ell, i t’ s no as though I’ve n ever found myself walking
between two fires before, Sassen ach. I may come out of it a bit
scorched round the edges, but I dinna think I’ll fry .” He gave a
faint snort of what might be amusement. “It’ s in my blood,
no?”
I managed a short laugh.
“If y ou’re thinking of your gran dfather ,” I said, “I admit he
was goo d at it. C aught up with him in the end, though, didn’ t
it?”
He tilted his head from one side to the other , equivocating.
“A ye, m aybe so. But do ye not think things perhaps fell out
as he wished?”
The late Lord L ovat had been notorious for the deviousness
of h is m ind, but  I couldn’ t quite  see the benefit in planning to
have his head chopped of f, and said so.
Jamie smiled, despite the seriousness of the discussion.
“W ell, perhaps beheading wasna quite what he’d planned,
but still—ye saw what he did; h e sent Y oung Simon to battle,
and he stayed home. But which of them was it who paid the
price on T ower Hill?”
I nodded  slowly , beginning to see his point. Y oung Simon,
who was in fac t close to Jamie’ s own age, had not suf fered
physically for his part in the Ris ing, overt though it had been.
He had not be en imprisoned or exiled, like many of the
Jacobites, and while he had lost most of his lands, he had in
fact regained quite a bit of his property since, by means of
repeated and tenacious lawsuits brought against the Crown.
“And O ld Simo n could  have blamed his son, and Y oung
Simon w ould have ended up on the scaf fold—but he didn’ t.
W ell, I suppose even an old vi per like that might hesitate to
put his own son and heir under the ax.”
Jamie nodded.“W ould ye let so meone chop of f your head, Sassenach, if it
was a choice betwixt you and Brianna?”
“Y es,” I said, without hesitation. I was reluctant to admit
that Old  Simon might have pos sessed such a virtue as family
feeling, but I sup posed even vipers had some concern for their
children’ s welfare.
Jemmy had abandoned the prof fered finger in favor of his
grandfather ’ s dir k, and was gnaw ing fiercely on the hilt. Jamie
wrapped his hand around the blade, holding it safely away
from the child, but made no ef fort to take the knife away .
“So would I,” J amie said, smiling slightly . “Though I do
hope it willna come to that.”
“I don’ t think either army was—will be—inclined to behead
people,” I said. That did, of course, leave a number of other
unpleasant optio ns available—b ut Jamie knew that as well as I
did.
I ha d a sudden, passionate wish to ur ge him to throw it all
up, turn  away from it. T ell T r yon to stuf f his land, tell the
tenants they must make their own way—abandon the Ridge
and flee . W ar was coming, but it need not engulf us; not this
time. W e could go south, to Fl orida, or to the Indies. T o the
west, to take r efuge with the Cherokee. Or even back to
Scotland. The Colonies would r ise, but there were places one
could run to.
He was watching my face.
“This,” he said, a gesture dismi ssing T ryon, the militia, the
Regulators, “this is a verra little thing, Sassenach, perhaps
nothing in itself. But it is the beginning, I think.”
The light was be ginning to fail now; the shadow covered his
feet and  legs, but the last of th e sun threw his own face into
strong r elief. There was a smu dge of blood on his forehead,
where he had touched it, crossing himself. I should have wiped
it away , I thought, but made no move to do so.
“If I will save th ese men—if they will walk wi’ me between
the fire s—then they must follow me without question,Sassenach. Best it begins now , while not so much is at stake.”
“I know ,” I said, and shivered.
“Are ye cold, Sa ssenach? Here, take the wean and go home.
I’ll come in a bit, so soon as I’m dressed.”
He handed me Jemmy and the dirk, since the two seemed
momentarily inseparable, and rose. He picked up his kilt and
shook out the tartan folds, but I didn’ t move. The blade of the
knife was warm where I gripped it, warm from his hand.
He looked at me in question, but I shook my head.
“W e’ll wait for you.”
He dressed quickly , but carefully . Despite my
apprehensions, I had to admire the delicacy of his instincts.
Not his dress k ilt, the one in crimson and black, but the
hunting kilt. No ef fort to imp ress the mountain men with
richness; but an oddity of dress, enough to make the point to
the other Highlanders that he was one of them, to draw the eye
and interest of th e Germans. Plaid pinned up with the running-
stag brooch, his belt and scabb ard, clean wool stockings. He
was quiet, absorbed in what he was doing, dressing with a
calm precision that was unnervingly reminiscent of the robing
of a priest.
It would  be tonight, then. Rog er and the rest had clearly
gone to summon the men wh o lived within a day’ s ride;
tonight he would light his cross and call the first of his men—
and seal the bar gain with whisky .
“So Bree was right,” I said, to break the silence in the
clearing. “She said perhaps you were starting your own
religion. When she saw the cross, I mean.”
He g lanced at m e, startled. He looked in the direction where
the house lay , then his mouth curled wryly .
“I suppose I am,” he said. “God help me.”
He t ook the kni fe gently away from Jemmy , wiped it on a
fold of his plaid, and slid it away into its scabbard. He was
finished.I st ood to follow him. The words I couldn’ t speak—
wouldn’ t speak—were a ball of eels in my throat. Afraid one
would slither free and slip out of my mouth, I said instead,
“W as it God you were calling on  to help you? When I saw you
earlier?”
“Och, no ,” he said. He looked a way for a second, then met
my eyes with a  sudden queer glance. “I was calling Dougal
MacKenzie.”
I f elt a d eep and sudden qualm go through me. Dougal was
long dea d; he had died in Jamie ’ s arms on the eve of Culloden
—died with Jamie’ s dirk in his throat. I swallowed, and my
eyes flicked involuntarily to the knife at his belt.
“I made my peace wi’ Dougal long ago,” he said softly ,
seeing the direction of my glance. He touched the hilt of the
knife, with its knurl of gold,  that had once been Hector
Cameron’ s. “He  was a chieftain, Dougal. He will know that I
did t hen as I must—for my men, for you—and that I will do it
now again.”
I realized now what it was he had said, standing tall, facing
the wes t—the direction to which the souls of the dead fly
home. It had been neither prayer  nor plea. I knew the words—
though it was m any years since I had heard them. He had
shouted “T ulach Ar d!” —the war cry of clan MacKenzie.
I swallowed hard.
“And will he … help you, do you think?”
He nodded, serious.
“If he can,” he  said. “W e will  ha’ fought together many
times, Dougal and I; hand to h and—and back to back. And
after all, Sassenach—blood is blood.”
I nodded back, mechanically , and lifted Jemmy up against
my shoulder . The sky had ble ached to a winter white, and
shadow filled the clearing. The stone at the head of the spring
stood out, a pale and ghostly shape above black water .
“Let’ s go,” I said. “It’ s nearly night.”23
THE BARD
I T W AS FULL DARK when Roger finally reached his own
door , but the windows glowed welcomingly , and sparks
showered from the chimney , promising warmth and food. He
was tire d, chilled, and very hungry , and he felt a deep and
thankful appreciation for his home—substantially sharpened
by the knowledge that he would leave it on the morrow .
“Brianna?” He stepped inside, squinting in the dim glow ,
looking for his wife.
“There y ou are! Y ou’re so late! Where have you been?” She
popped out of the small back room, the baby balanced on her
hip a nd a heap of tartan cloth clu tched to her chest. She leaned
over it to kiss him briefly , leaving him with a tantalizing taste
of plum jam.
“I’ve been riding up hill and down dale for the last ten
hours,” he said, taking the cloth  from her and tossing it onto
the bed.  “Looking for a mythical family of Dutchmen. Come
here and kiss me properly , aye?”
She obli gingly wrapped her free arm round his waist and
gave him a ling ering, plum-scented kiss that made him think
that hun gry as he was, dinner co uld perhaps wait for a bit. The
baby , however , had other ideas, and set up a loud wail that
made Brianna hastily detach herself, grimacing at the racket.
“Still teething?” Roger said, observing his of fspring’ s red
and swollen countenance, covered with a shiny coating of
snot, saliva, and tears.
“How d id you guess?” she said caustically . “Here, can you
take him, just for a minute?” She thrust Jemmy , writhing, into
his f ather ’ s arms, and tugged a t her bodice, the green linen
damply creased and stained with pale splotches of spit-up
milk. On e of her breasts bobbed into view , and she reached outfor Jemmy , sitting down with him in the nursing chair by the
fire.
“He’ s been fussing all day ,” sh e said, shaking her head as
the baby squirmed and whined, batting at the prof fered
nourishment with a fretful hand. “He won’ t nurse for more
than a few minu tes, and when h e does, he spits it up again. He
whines w hen yo u pick him up, but he screams if you set him
down.” She shoved a hand tired ly through her hair . “I feel like
I’ve been wrestling alligators all day .”
“Oh, mm. That’ s too bad.” Rog er rubbed his aching lower
back, trying not to be ostentatio us about it. He pointed toward
the bed with his chin. “Ah … what’ s the tartan for?”
“Oh, I for got—that’ s yours .” Attention momentarily
distracted from the struggling c hild, she glanced up at Roger ,
taking in for th e first time his  disheveled appearance. “Da
brought it down for you to wear tonight. Y ou have a big
smudge of mud on your face, by the way—did you fall of f?”
“Several times.” He moved to the washstand, limping only
slightly . One sleeve of his coat  and the knee of his breeches
were pla stered with mud, and he rubbed at his chest, trying to
dislodge bits of dry leaf that h ad got down the neck of his
shirt.
“Oh? That’ s too bad. Shh, shh , shh,” she crooned to the
child, rocking him to and fro. “Did you hurt yourself?”
“Ah, no . It’ s fine.” He shed the coat and turned his back,
pouring water from the pitcher i nto the bowl. He splashed cold
water over his face, listening to Jemmy’ s squeals and privately
calculating the odds of being a ble to make love to Brianna
sometime befor e having to le ave next morning. Between
Jemmy’ s teeth and his grandfather ’ s plans, the chances seemed
slight, but hope sprang eternal.
He b lotted his face with the towel, glancing covertly around
in h opes of foo d. Both table and hearth were empty , though
there was a strong vinegar scent in the air .
“Sauerkraut?” he guessed, snif fing audibly . “The Muellers?”“They b rought two big jars of it,” Brianna said, gesturing
toward t he corner where a ston e crock stood in the shadows.
“That one’ s ours. Did you get anything to eat while you were
out?”
“No.” His belly rumbled loudly , evidently willing to
consider cold sauerkraut, if that was all that was on of fer .
Presumably the re would be food at the big house, though.
Cheered by this thought, he pul led of f his breeches and began
the a wkward business of pleating up the tartan cloth to make a
belted plaid.
Jemmy had quieted a little, now making no more than
intermittent yips of discomfort as his mother rocked him to
and fro.
“What was that about mythical Dutchmen?” Brianna asked,
still rocking, but now with a moment’ s attention to spare.
“Jamie sent me up to the northeast to look for a family of
Dutchmen he’d heard had settled near Boiling Creek—to tell
the men about the militia summons and have them come back
with me , if they would.” He fro wned at the cloth laid out on
the bed. He’d worn a plaid like this only twice before, and
both tim es, had had help to put  the thing on. “Is it important
for me to wear this, do you think?”
Brianna snorted behind him with brief amusement.
“I think you’d b etter wear something . Y o u ca n’ t go up to the
big hou se in nothing but your  shirt. Y ou couldn’ t find the
Dutchmen, then?”
“Not so  much as a wooden shoe.” He had found what he
thought  was  Boiling C reek, and had ridden up the bank for
miles, dodging—or not—overhanging branches, bramble
patches, and thickets of witch hazel, but hadn’ t found a sign of
anything lar ger than a fox that  had slipped across his path,
disappearing into the brush like a flame suddenly
extinguished.
“Maybe they moved on. W ent up to V ir ginia, or
Pennsylvania.” Brianna spoke with sympathy . It had been along, exhausting day , with failure at the end of it. Not a terrible
failure; J amie had said only , “Find them if ye can”—and if he
had  found them, they might not have understood his
rudimentary Dutch, gained on brief holidays to the Amsterdam
of the 1960s. Or might not hav e come, in any case. Still, the
small failure nagged at him, like a stone in his shoe.
He glanced at Brianna, who grinned widely at him in
anticipation.
“All right,” he said with resign ation. “Laugh if ye must.”
Getting into a belted plaid was n’ t the most dignified thing a
man cou ld do, given that the m ost ef ficient method was to lie
down on  the pleated fabric and roll like a sausage on a girdle.
Jamie could do it standing up , but then, the man had had
practice.
His struggles— rather delibe rately exaggerated—were
rewarded by Brianna’ s giggling,  which in turn seemed to have
a cal ming ef fect on the baby . By  the time Roger made the final
adjustments to his pleats and drapes, mother and child were
both flushed, but happy .
Roger made a leg to them, flourishing, and Bree patted her
own leg in one-handed applause.
“T errific,” she said, her eyes traveling appreciatively over
him. “See Daddy? Pretty Daddy!” She turned Jemmy , who
stared openmout hed at the vision of male glory before him and
blossomed into a wide, slow sm ile, a trickle of drool hanging
from the pouting curve of his lip.
Roger w as still hungry , sore, and tired, but it didn’ t seem so
important. He grinned, and held out his arms toward the baby .
“Do you need to change? If he’ s full and dry , I’ll take him
up to the house—give you a bit of time to fix up.”
“Y ou think I need fixing up, do you?” Brianna gave him an
austere l ook down her long, str aight nose. Her hair had come
down in  wisps and straggles, he r dress looked as though she’d
been sle eping in  it for weeks, and there was a dark smear of
jam on the upper curve of one breast.“Y ou look great,” he said, bending and swinging Jemmy
deftly up . “Hush , a bhalaich . Y o u’ve had en ough of Mummy ,
and she’ s definitely had enough  of you for a bit. Come along
with me.”
“Don’ t for get your guitar!” Bree called after him as he
headed for the door . He glanced back at her , surprised.
“What?”
“Da wants you to sing. W ait, he gave me a list.”
“A l ist? Of what ?” T o th e best of Roger ’ s knowledge, Jamie
Fraser paid no a ttention whatever to music. It rankled him a
bit, in fact, though he seldom  admitted it—that his own
greatest skill was one that Fraser didn’ t value.
“Songs, of course.” She furrowed her brow , conjuring up
the memorized list. “He wants you to do ‘Ho Ro!’ and
‘Birniebouzle,’ and ‘The Great Silkie’—you can do other stuf f
in betwe en, he said, but he wants those—and then get into the
warmongering s tuf f. That’ s not what he  called it, but you
know what I mean—’Killiecrankie’ and ‘The Haughs of
Cromdale,’ and ‘The Sherrifsmuir Fight.’ Just the older stuf f,
though; he says don’ t do the songs from the ‘45, except for
‘Johnnie Cope’— he wants that one for sure, but toward the
end. And—”
Roger stared at her , disentangling Jemmy’ s foot from the
folds of his plaid.
“I would n’ t have thought your father so much as knew the
names of songs, let alone had preferences.”
Brianna had stood up and was re aching for the long wooden
pin that held her hair in place.  She pulled it out and let the
thick red shimmer cascade over shoulders and face. She ran
both hands through the ruddy  mass and pushed it back,
shaking her head.
“He doe sn’ t. Have preferences, I mean. Da’ s completely
tone-deaf. Mama says he has a good sense of rhythm, but he
can’ t tell one note from another .”“That’ s what I thought. But why—”
“He may not li sten to music, Roger , but he listens .” She
glanced at him, snigging the co mb through the tangles of her
hair . “And he watches. He kno ws how people act—and how
they feel—when they hear you do those songs.”
“Does he?” Roger murmured. He felt an odd spark of
pleasure at the thought that F raser had indeed noticed the
ef fect of his music, even if he didn’ t appreciate it personally .
“So—he means me to soften them up, is that it? Get them in
the mood before he goes on for his own bit?”
“That’ s it.” She nodded, busy  untying the laces of her
bodice. Escaped from confinement, her breasts bobbed
suddenly free, round and loose under the thin muslin shift.
Roger shifted his weight, easing the fit of his plaid. She
caught the slight movement and looked at him. Slowly , she
drew her hands up, cupping he r breasts and lifting them, her
eyes on his and a slight smile o n her lips. Just for a moment,
he f elt as thoug h he had stopped breathing, though his chest
continued to rise and fall.
She was  the first to break the m oment, dropping her hands
and turning to delve into the chest where she kept her linen.
“Do you  know exactly what h e’ s up to?” she asked, her
voice muf fled in the depths of  the chest. “Did he have that
cross up when you left?”
“A ye, I know about it.” Jemmy  was making small huf fing
noises, like a toy  engine struggling up a hill. Roger tucked him
under one arm, his hand cradl ing the fat little belly . “It’ s a
fiery cross. D’ye ken what that is?”
She emer ged from the chest, a fresh shift in her hands,
looking mildly disturbed.
“A fiery cross? Y ou mean he’ s going to burn  a cross in the
yard?”
“W ell, n ot burn it all the way , no.” T aking down his bodhran
with his  free hand and flicking a finger against the drum headto check the tautness, he explained briefly the tradition of the
fiery cro ss. “It’ s a rare thing,” he concluded, moving the drum
out o f Jemmy’ s grasping reach. “I don’ t think it was ever done
in th e Highlands again, after th e Rising. Y our father told me
he’d seen it once, though—it’ s s omething really special, to see
it done here.”
Flushed with historical enthusiasm, he didn’ t notice at once
that Brianna seemed slightly less eager .
“Maybe so,” she said uneasily . “I don’ t know … it sort of
gives me the creeps.”
“Eh?” Roger glanced at her in surprise. “Why?”
She shrugged, pulling the crumpled shift of f over her head.
“I don’ t know . Maybe it’ s just that I have  seen burning
crosses—on the  evening news o n TV . Y ou know , the KKK—
or do you know? Maybe they  don’ t—didn’ t—report things
like that on television in Britain?”
“The Ku  Klux Klan?” Roger was less interested in fanatical
bigots than in the sight of Brianna’ s bare breasts, but made an
ef fort to  focus on the conversat ion. “Oh, aye, heard of them.
Where d’you think they got the notion?”
“What? Y ou mean—”
“Sure,” he said cheerfully . “The y got it from the Highland
immigrants—from whom they were descended, by the bye.
That’ s why they called it ‘Kla n,’ aye? Come to think,” he
added, interested, “it could be this—tonight—that’ s the link.
The occasion that brings the custom from the Old W orld to the
New , I mean. W ouldn’ t that be something?”
“Something,” Brianna echoed faintly . She’d pulled on a
fresh shift, and now shook out a clean dress of blue linen,
looking uneasy .
“Everything starts somewhere, B ree,” he said, more gently .
“Most often, we don’ t know w here or how; does it matter if
this time we do? And the Ku Kl ux Klan won’ t get started for a
hundred years from now , at leas t.” He hoisted Jemmy slightly ,bouncing him on one hip. “It won’ t be us who sees it, or even
wee Jeremiah here—maybe not even his son.”
“Great,” she said dryly , pulling on her stays and reaching
for the laces. “ So our gr eat -grandson can end up being th e
Grand Dragon.”
Roger laughed.
“A ye, maybe so. But for tonight, it’ s your father .”24
PLA YING WITH FIRE
H E W ASN ’T SURE what he had expected. Something like the
spectacle of the great fire at the Gathering, perhaps. The
preparation was the same, involving lar ge quantities of food
and drin k. A huge keg of beer  and a smaller one of whisky
stood on  planks  at the edge of t he dooryard, and a huge roast
pig on a spit of green hickory turned slowly over a bed of
coals, se nding whif fs of smoke and mouthwatering aromas
through the cold evening air .
He grinn ed at the fire-washed fa ces in front of him, slicked
with grease and flushed with b ooze, and struck his bodhran.
His stomach rumbled loudly , but the noise was drowned
beneath the raucous chorus of “Killiecrankie.”
 
“O, I met the De-ev-il and Dundeeee …
On the brae-aes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”
 
He would have earned his own supper by the time he got it.
He h ad been pla ying and singing for more than an hour , and
the moon was rising over Black Mountain now . He paused
under co ver of the refrain, just l ong enough to grab the cup of
ale set under his stool and wet his throat, then hit the new
verse fresh and solid.
 
“I fought on land, I fought on sea,
At hame I fought my auntie, Oh!
I met the Devil and Dundee …
On the braes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”
 He s miled professionally as he sang, meeting an eye here,
focusing on a face there, and calculated progress in the back of
his mind. He’d got them going now—with a bit of help from
the drink on of f er , admittedly—and well stuck into what Bree
had called “the warmongering stuf f.”
He could feel the cross standing at his back, almost hidden
by th e darkness. Everyone had h ad a chance to see it, though;
he’d heard the murmurs of interest and speculation.
Jamie F raser was away to on e side, out of the ring of
firelight. Roger could just make out his tall form, dark in the
shadow of the big red spruce that stood near the house. Fraser
had been  workin g his way meth odically through the group all
evening, stopping here and there to exchange cordialities, tell a
joke, pause to listen to a problem or a story . Now he stood
alone, waiting. Nearly time, then—for whatever he meant to
do.
Roger gave them a moment for applause and his own
refreshment, the n launched into “Johnnie Cope,” fast, fierce,
and funny .
He’d do ne that one at the Gathering, several times, and
knew pr etty much how they’d take it. A moment’ s pause,
uncertainty , then  the voices beginning to join in—by the end
of the second verse, they’d be whooping and shouting ribald
remarks in the background.
Some of  the men here had fought at Prestonpans; if they’d
been defeated at Culloden, they’d still routed Johnnie Cope’ s
troops first, and loved the chanc e to relive that famous victory .
And those Highlanders who hadn’ t fought had heard about it.
The Muellers, who had likely never heard of Charles Stuart
and probably understood one w ord in a dozen, seemed to be
improvising their own sort of yodeling chorus round the back,
waving their cups in sloshing s alute to each verse. A ye, well,
so long as they were having a good time.
The crowd was half-shouting the final chorus, nearly
drowning him out. 
“Hey , Johnnie Cope, ar e ye walking yet?
And ar e your drums a-beatin’ yet?
If ye wer e walkin’, I wad wait,
T ae gang tae the coals in the mornin’!”
 
He hit a final thu mp, and bowed to huge applause. That was
the warm -up done; time for th e main act to come onstage.
Bowing and smiling, he rose f rom his stool and faded of f,
fetching up in the shadows near the hacked remains of the
huge pork carcass.
Bree was there waiting for him, Jemmy wide-awake and
owl-eyed in her arms. She leaned across and kissed him,
handing him the kid as she did so, and taking his bodhran in
exchange.
“Y ou we re great!” she said. “H old him; I’ll get you some
food and beer .”
Jem usu ally wanted to stay wi th his mother , but was too
stupefied by the noise and the leaping flames to protest the
handover . He snuggled against R oger ’ s chest, gravely sucking
his thumb.
Roger was sweating from the ex ertion, his heart beating fast
from the adrenaline of performance, and the air away from the
fire and  the crowd was cold on his flushed face. The baby’ s
swaddled weight felt good against him, warm and solid in the
crook of  his arm. He’d done w ell, and knew it. Let’ s hope it
was what Fraser wanted.
By the time Bre e reappeared with a drink and a pewter plate
heaped with sliced pork, apple fritters, and roast potatoes,
Jamie had come into the circle of firelight, taking Roger ’ s
place before the standing cross.
He stood tall and broad-shouldered in his best gray
gentleman’ s coat, kilted below in soft blue tartan, his hairloose an d blazing on his shoulde rs, with a small warrior ’ s plait
down one side, adorned with a single feather . Firelight glinted
from the knurled gold hilt of his dirk and the brooch that held
his loop ed plaid . He looked ple asant enough, but his manner
overall was serious, intent. He m ade a good show—and knew
it.
The crowd quieted within seconds, men elbowing their
more garrulous neighbors to silence.
“Y e ken well en ough what we’re about here, aye?” he asked
without preamb le. He raised his hand, in which he held the
Governor ’ s crumpled summons, the red smear of its of ficial
seal visi ble in the leaping fire light. There was a rumble of
agreement; the crowd was still cheerful, blood and whisky
coursing freely through their veins.
“W e are  called in duty , and we come in honor to serve the
cause of law—and the Governor .”
Roger saw old Gerhard Mueller , leaning to one side to hear
the t ranslation that one of his sons-in-law was murmuring in
his ear . He nodded his approval, and shouted, “Ja! Lang lebe
Governor !”  T here was a ripple of laughter , and echoing shouts
in English and Gaelic.
Jamie sm iled, waiting for the noise to die down. As it did,
he turne d slowly , nodding as h e looked from one face to the
next, acknowledging each man. Then he turned to the side and
lifted a hand to the cross that stood stark and black behind
him.
“In the Highlan ds of Scotland, when a chieftain would set
himself for war ,” he said, his to ne casually conversational, but
pitched to be heard throughout the dooryard, “he would burn
the f iery cross, a nd send it for a sign through the lands of his
clan. It was a s ignal to the men of his name, to gather their
weapons and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”
There w as a stir in the midst of the crowd, a brief nudging
and mor e cries of approval, though these were more subdued.
A fe w men had seen this, or at least knew what he was talkingabout. The rest raised their chins and craned their necks,
mouths half-open in interest.
“But this is a new land, and while we are friends”—he
smiled at Gerhard Mueller—” Ja, Fr eunde , neighbors, and
countrymen”—a look at the Lindsay brothers—”and we will
be c ompanions in arms, we ar e not clan. While I am given
command, I am not your chief.”
The hell  you ar en’ t , Ro ger thought. Or w ell on your  way to
it, anyr oad . He  took a last deep swallow o f cold beer and put
down cup and plate. The food could wait a bit longer . Bree had
taken back the baby and had h is bodhran tucked under her
arm; he reached  for it, and she g ave him a glancing smile, but
most of her attention was fixed on her father .
Jamie be nt and pulled a torch fr om the fire, stood with it in
his hand, lighting the broad pl anes and sharp angles of his
face.
“Let God witness here our willingness, and may God
strengthen our arms—” He pau sed, to let the Germans catch
up. “ But let this  fiery cross stan d as testament to our honor , to
invoke God’ s protection for our families—until we come safe
home again.”
He turne d and touched the torch to the upright of the cross,
holding it until the dry bark caught and a small flame grew and
glimmered from the dark wood.
Everyone stood silent, watching. There was no sound but
the s hift and sig h of the crowd, echoing the sough of the wind
in the wilderne ss around them. It was no more than a tiny
tongue of fire, f lickering in the breeze, on the ver ge of going
out alt ogether . No petrol-s oaked roar , no devouring
conflagration. Roger felt Briann a sigh beside him, some of the
tension leaving her .
The flame steadied and caught . The edges of the jigsaw-
pieces of pine b ark glowed crimson, then white, and vanished
into ash  as the f lame began to s pread upward. It was big and
solid, an d would burn slowly , this cross, halfway through thenight, lighting the dooryard as the men gathered beneath it,
talking, eating, drinking, beginning the process of becoming
what Jamie Fraser meant them to be: friends, neighbors,
companions in arms. Under his command.
Fraser s tood for a moment, wat ching, to be sure the flame
had caught. Then he turned back to the crowd of men and
dropped his torch back into the fire.
“W e can not say what may befal l us. God grant us courage,”
he s aid, very sim ply . “God grant us wisdom. If it be His will,
may He grant us peace. W e ride in the morning.”
He t urned then a nd left the fire, glancing to find Roger as he
did so. Roger no dded back, swallowed to clear his throat, and
began to sing so ftly from the darkness, the opening to the song
Jamie had wanted to finish the proceedings—”The Flower of
Scotland.”
 
“Oh, flower of Scotland,
When will we see your like again?
That fought and died for
Y our wee bit hill and glen …”
 
Not one of the songs Bree called the warmongering ones. It
was a solemn song, that one, an d melancholy . But not a song
of grief, for all that; one of remembrance, of pride and
determination. It wasn’ t even a legitimately ancient song—
Roger knew the man who’d written it, in his own time—but
Jamie had heard it, and knowi ng the history of Stirling and
Bannockburn, strongly approved the sentiment.
 
“And stood against him,
Pr oud Edwar d’ s army ,
And sent him homewar dT ae think again.”
 
The Scottish members of the crowd let him sing alone
through the verse, but voices li fted softly , then louder , in the
refrain.
 
“And sent him ho-omewar d …
T ae think again!”
 
He r emembered something Bree  had told him, lying in bed
the nigh t before, during the few  moments when both of them
were sti ll conscious. They had been talking of the people of
the t imes, speculating as to whe ther they might one day meet
people l ike Jef ferson or W ashington face to face; it was an
exciting—and not at all impossible—prospect. She had
mentioned John Adams, quoting something she had read that
he had said—or would say , rather—during the Revolution:
“I am a warrior , that my son may be a mer chant—and his
son may be a
 poet.”
 
“The hills ar e bar e now ,
And autumn leaves lie thick and still,
O’er land that is lost now ,
Which those so dearly held.
 
And stood against him,
Pr oud Edwar d’ s army ,
And sent him homewar d
T ae think again.” 
No long er Edward’ s army , but Geor ge’ s. And yet the same
proud army . He caught a glimp se of Claire, standing with the
other women, apart, at the very edge of the circle of light. Her
face was remote and she stood very still, hair floating loose
around h er face, the gold eyes dark with inner shadow—fixed
on Jamie, who stood quiet by her side.
The same proud army with which she had once fought; the
proud ar my with  which his fath er had died. He felt a catch at
his throat, and forced air from down deep, singing through it
fiercely . I will be a warrior , that my son may be a mer chant—
and his son may be a poet.  Neither Adams nor Jef ferson had
fought; Jef ferson had no son. H e had been the poet, whose
words had echoed through the y ears, raised armies, burned in
the hear ts of those who would die for them, and for the
country founded on them.
Per haps it’ s the hair , Ro ger thought ironically , seei ng the
gleam of ruddy light as Jamie m oved, watching silently over
the t hing he had started. Some V iking tinge in the blood, that
gave those tall fiery men the gift of rousing men to war .
 
“That fought and died for
Y our wee bit hill and glen …”
 
So t hey had; so they would again. For that was what men
always f ought fo r , wasn’ t it? Ho me and family . Another glint
of red hair , loose in firelight, b y the bones of the pig. Bree,
holding Jemmy . And if Roger found himself now bard to a
displaced Highl and chieftain, still he must try also to be a
warrior when the time came, for the sake of his son, and those
who would come after .
 
“And sent him homewar d
T ae think again. 
T ae think … again.”25
THE ANGELING OF MY REST
L A TE AS  IT W AS, we made love by unspoken consent, each
wanting the refuge and reassurance of the other ’ s flesh. Alone
in o ur bedroom, with the shu tters closed tight against the
sounds of the v oices in the do oryard—poor Roger was still
singing, by popular demand—we could shed the ur gencies and
fatigues of the day—at least for a little while.
He h eld me tig htly afterward, his face buried in my hair ,
clinging to me like a talisman.
“It will be all right,” I said softly , and stroked his damp hair ,
dug my fingers deep into the p lace where neck and shoulder
met, the muscle there hard as wood beneath the skin.
“A ye, I know .” He lay still for a moment, letting me work,
and the tension of his neck and  shoulders gradually relaxed,
his b ody growing heavier on m ine. He felt me draw breath
under him, and moved, rolling onto his side.
His stomach rumbled loudly , and we both laughed.
“No time for dinner?” I asked.
“I canna  eat, just before,” he answered. “It gives me cramp.
And the re wasn a time, after . I dinna suppose there’ s anything
edible up here?”
“No,” I said r egretfully . “I had a few apples, but the
Chisholms got them. I’m sorry , I should have thought to bring
something up for you.” I di d know that he seldom ate
“before”—before any fight, confrontation, or other socially
stressful situation, that is—but hadn’ t thought that he might
not have  a chance to eat afterward, what with everyone and his
brother wanting to “have just a wee word, sir .”
“It’ s not as though ye didna have other things to think of,
Sassenach,” he answered dryly . “Dinna fash yourself; I’ll do‘til breakfast.”
“Are yo u sure? ” I put a foot o ut of bed, making to rise.
“There’ s plenty left; or if you don’ t want to go down, I could
go and—”
He s topped me with a hand on  my arm, then dragged me
firmly back under the covers, tucking me spoon-fashion into
the c urve of his  body and wrap ping an arm over me to insure
that I stayed there.
“No,” he said definitely . “This m ay be the last night I spend
in a bed for some time. I mean to stay in it—with you.”
“All right.” I snuggled obediently under his chin, and
relaxed against him, just as pleased to stay . I understood; while
no one would come to fetch  us unless there was some
emer gency , the mere sight of e ither of us downstairs would
cause a n immediate rush of people needing this or that,
wanting to ask a  question, of fer advice, require something …
much better to stay here, snug and peaceful with each other .
I h ad put out th e candle, and the fire was burning low . I
wondered briefl y whether to get up and add more wood, but
decided against it. Let it burn itself to embers if it liked; we
would be gone at daybreak.
Despite my tiredness and the ser ious nature of the journey , I
was look ing for ward to it. Beyo nd the lure of novelty and the
possibility of adventure, there was the delightful prospect of
escape from laundry , cookery , and female warfare. Still, Jamie
was right; tonight was likely the  last we would have of privacy
and comfort for some little time.
I stretched, consciously enjoying the soft embrace of the
feather bed, the smooth, clean s heets with their faint scent of
rosemary and elderflower . Had I packed suf ficient bedding?
Roger ’ s voice reached through the shutters, still strong but
beginning to sound a bit ragged with fatigue.
“The Th rush had best get to his bed,” Jamie said, with mild
disapproval, “if he means to bid his wife a proper farewell.”“Goodness, Bree  and Jemmy went to bed hours ago!” I said.
“The we an, perh aps; the lass is still there. I heard her voice,
a moment ago.”
“Is she?” I strained to listen, but made out no more than a
rumble of muted applause as Roger brought his song to a
close. “I  suppos e she wants to stay with him as long as she
can. Those men are going to be  exhausted in the morning—to
say nothing of hung over .”
“So long as they  can sit a horse, I dinna mind if they slip of f
to h ave a vomit  in the weeds now and again,” Jamie assured
me.
I nestled down, covers drawn up warm around my
shoulders. I could hear the deep rumble of Roger ’ s voice,
laughing, but declining firmly to  sing anymore. Little by little,
the noises in th e dooryard ceased, though I could still hear
bumpings and rattlings as the beer keg was picked up and
shaken empty of the last few drops. Then a hollow thud as
someone dropped it on the ground.
There were noises in the house; the sudden yowl of a
wakening baby , footsteps in the kitchen, the sleepy whine of
toddlers disturbed by the men, a woman’ s voice raised in
remonstrance, then reassurance.
My neck and sh oulders ached, and my feet were sore from
the long walk to the whisky spring, carrying Jemmy . Still, I
found myself annoyingly wakeful, unable to shut out the
noises of the external world a s completely as the shutters
blocked it from view .
“Can you remember everything you did today?” This was a
small game we p layed sometimes at night, each trying to recall
in detail  everything done, seen, heard, or eaten during the day ,
from getting up to going to bed. Like writing in a journal, the
ef fort of recall seemed to pur ge the mind of the day’ s
exertions, and we found great entertainment in each other ’ s
experiences. I loved to hear Jamie’ s daily accounts, whether
pedestrian or exciting, but he wasn’ t in the mood tonight.“I ca nna remember a thing that happened before we closed
the chamber door ,” he said, squeezing my buttock in a
companionable way . “After that, though, I expect I could
recall a detail or two.”
“It’ s rea sonably fresh in my m ind, too,” I assured him. I
curled my toes, caressing the tops of his feet.
W e stop ped speaking, then, and began to shift and settle
toward sleep, as the sounds below ceased, replaced by the
buzz and rasp of miscellaneous snores. Or at least I tried to.
Late as it was, and exhausted a s my body undoubtedly was,
my mind appeared determined to stay up and carouse.
Fragments of the day appeared behind my eyelids the moment
I shu t my eyes—Mrs. Bug and her broom, Gerhard Mueller ’ s
muddy boots, bare-stemmed grape clusters, blanched tangles
of sauerkraut, the round halves of Jemmy’ s miniature pink
bottom, dozens of young Chisholms running amok … I
resolutely strove to discipline my fugitive mind by turning
instead to a mental checklist of my preparations for leaving.
This wa s most unhelpful, as within moments I was wide
awake with suppressed anxiety , imagining the complete
destruction of my sur gery; Brianna, Marsali, or the children
succumbing to some sudden hideous epidemic; and Mrs. Bug
inciting riot and bloodshed from  one end of the Ridge to the
other .
I rol led onto my side, looking at Jamie. He had rolled onto
his back as usual, arms neatly folded across his abdomen like a
tomb figure, profile pure and st ern against the dying glow of
the hearth, tidily composed for  sleep. His eyes were closed,
but there was a slight frown on his face, and his lips twitched
now and then, as though he w ere conducting some kind of
interior ar gument.
“Y ou’re thinking so loudly , I can hear you from over here,”
I said, in conversational tones . “Or are you only counting
sheep?”
His eye s opened at once, and  he turned over to smile
ruefully at me.“I w as counting pigs,” he inform ed me. “And doing nicely ,
too. Only I kept catchin’ sight of that white creature from the
corner of my eye, skippin’ to and fro just out of reach, taunting
me.”
I lau ghed with him, and scoo ted toward him. I laid my
forehead against his shoulder and heaved a deep sigh.
“W e really must sleep, Jamie. I’ m so tired, my bones feel as
though they’re melting, and you ’ve been up even longer than I
have.”
“Mmm.” He put an arm aroun d me, pulling me into the
curve of his shoulder .
“That cr oss—it isn’ t going to catch the house afire, is it?” I
asked after a moment, having thought of something else to
worry about.
“No.” He sounded slightly drowsy . “It’ s burnt out long
since.”
The fire  in the h earth had burned down to a bed of glowing
embers. I rolled over again and  lay watching them for a few
minutes, trying to empty my mind of everything.
“When F rank and I were marri ed,” I said, “we went to be
counseled by a p riest. He advised us to begin our married life
by sayin g the rosary together in bed each night. Frank said he
wasn’ t sure whether this was meant to be devotion, an aid to
sleep, or only a Church-sanctioned method of birth control.”
Jamie’ s chest vibrated with silent laughter behind me.
“W ell, we could try if ye like, S assenach,” he said. “Though
ye’ll hav e to keep count of the Hail Marys; you’re lyin’ on my
left hand and my fingers have gone numb.”
I shifted slightly to allow him to pull his hand out from
under my hip.
“Not that, I don ’ t think,” I said. “But perhaps a prayer . Do
you know any good going-to-bed prayers?”“A ye, lo ts,” he said, holding u p his hand and flexing his
fingers slowly as the blood re turned to them. Dark in the
dimness of the room, the slow movement reminded me of the
way in which he lured trout from under rocks. “Let me think a
bit.”
The house below was silent now , save for the usual creaks
and groans of settling timbers . I thought I heard a voice
outside, raised in distant ar gum ent, but it might have been no
more than the rattle of tree branches in the wind.
“Here’ s one,” Jamie said at last.  “I’d nearly for gotten it. My
father taught it to me, not so lo ng before he died. He said he
thought I might one day find it useful.”
He settled himself comfortably , head bent so his chin rested
on my shoulder ,  and began to speak, low and warm-voiced, in
my ear .
 
“Bless to me, O God, the moon that is above me,
Bless to me, O God, the earth that is beneath me,
Bless to me, O God, my wife and my childr en,
And bless, O God, myself who have car e of them;
Bless to me my wife and my childr en,
And bless, O God, myself who have car e of them.”
 
He h ad begun with a certain self-consciousness, hesitating
now and then t o find a word,  but that had faded with the
speaking. Now he spoke soft a nd sure, and no longer to me,
though his hand lay warm on the curve of my waist.
 
“Bless, O God, the thing on which mine eye doth r est,
Bless, O God, the thing on which my hope doth r est,
Bless, O God, my r eason and my purpose,Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life;
Bless, O God, my r eason and my purpose,
Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life.”
 
His hand smoothed the curve of my hip, lifted to stroke my
hair .
 
“Bless to me the bed companion of my love,
Bless to me the handling of my hands,
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense,
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my r est;
Bless, O bless Thou to me, O God, the fencing of my defense,
And bless, O bless to me the angeling of my r est.”
 
His hand  lay still, curled under m y chin. I wrapped my own
hand round his, and sighed deeply .
“Oh, I like that.  Especially ‘the angeling of my rest.’ When
Bree wa s small, we’d put her to bed with an angel prayer
—’May Michae l be at my right, Gabriel at my left, Uriel
behind me, Rafael before me—and above my head, the
Presence of the Lord.’ ”
He didn’ t answer , but squeeze d my fingers in reply . An
ember in the hearth fell apart with a soft whuff , and sparks
floated for an instant in the dimness of the room.
Sometime later , I returned brief ly to consciousness, feeling
him slide out of bed.
“Wha—?” I said sleepily .
“Nothing,” he whispered. “Just a wee note I’d meant to
write. Sleep, a nighean donn . I’ll wake beside ye.”
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, 1 December , 1770
 James Fraser , Esq., to Lor d John Gr ey ,
 Mount Josiah Plantation
 
My Lor d,
 
I write in hopes that all continues well with your
Establishment and its Inhabita nts; my particular Regar d to
your Son.
All ar e well in my House and— so far as I am awar e—at
River Ru n, as well. The Nuptials  planned for my Daughter and
my Aunt , of which I wr ote you,  wer e unexpectedly interfer ed
with by  Cir cumstance (principally a Cir cumstance by the
name of Mr . Ran dall Lillywhite, whose Name I mention in case
it may one Day pass your Cogn izance), but my Grandchildr en
wer e fortunately christened, and while my Aunt’ s W edding has
been postponed to a later Season, my Daughter ’ s Union with
Mr . MacKenzie was solemnized by the Courtesy of the
Rever end Mr . Caldwell, a worthy Gentleman, though
Pr esbyterian.
Y oung Jer emiah  Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie (the
name “Ian” is of course the Scottish variant of “John”—my
Daughter ’ s Com pliment to a Friend, as well as her Cousin)
survived both the Occasion of his Baptism and the Journey
home in good S pirit. His Mother bids me tell you that your
Namesake now possesses no few er than four T eeth, a fearsome
Accomplishment which r enders him exceeding danger ous to
those unwary Souls charmed by his appar ent Innocence, who
surr ender their Digits all unknowing to his pernicious Grasp.
The Child bites like a Cr ocodile.
Our Population her e exhibits a gratifying Gr owth of late,
with the addition of some twen ty Families since last I wr ote.
God has  pr osper ed our Efforts d uring the Summer , blessing us
with an Abunda nce of Corn and  wild Hay , and an Abundance
of Beast s to consume them. I estimate the Hogs running atlar ge in my W o od to number no fewer than forty at pr esent,
two Cows have borne Calves, an d I have bought a new Horse.
This Animal’ s Character lies i n grave Doubt, but his W ind
does not.
Thus, my good News.
And so to the bad. I am made Colonel of Militia, or der ed to
muster and deliver so many Men  as I can to the Service of the
Governor , by mid-month, this Service to be of Aid in the
Suppr ession of local Hostilities.
Y ou may have he ar d, during your visit to North Car olina, of
a Gr oup of Men who style themselves “Regulators”—or you
may not , as other Matters compelled your Attention on that
Occasion (my W ife is pleased to  hear good Report of your own
Health, and sends with this a Par cel of Medicines, with
Instructions for  their Administration should you still be
plagued with Headache).
These Regulators ar e no mor e than Rabble, less disciplined
in their Actions  even than the Rioters whom we hear have
hanged Gov . Richar dson in Effig y in Boston. I do not say ther e
is no Substance to their Complaint, but the Means of its
Expr ession seem s unlikely to r esult in Redr ess by the Cr own—
rather , t o pr ovoke both Sides to further Excess, which cannot
fail to end in Injury .
Ther e was a serious outbr eak of V iolence in Hillsbor ough
on 24 September , in which much Pr operty was wantonly
destr oyed and V iolence done—some justly , some not—to
officials of the Cr own. One Man, a Justice, was grievously
W ounded; many of the Regulation wer e arr ested. Since then,
we have hear d l ittle mor e than Murmurs; W inter damps down
Discontent, which smolders by the Hearths of Cottages and
Pothouses, but once let out with the Spring Airing, it will flee
abr oad like the foul Odors fr om a sealed House, staining the
Air .
T ryon is an abl e Man, but no t a Farmer . If he wer e, he
would sc ar ce think of seeking to make W ar in W inter . Still, it
may be that he hopes by making Show of For ce now—when heis likely sur e it will not be needed—so to intimidate the
Rapscallions as to obviate its Necessity later . He is a Soldier .
Such r em arks bring me to the true Point of this Missive. I
expect no evil Outcome of the pr esent Enterprise, and yet—you
ar e a  Soldier , too, even as I am. Y ou know the Unpr edictability
of Evil, and what Catastr ophe may spring fr om trivial
Beginnings.
No m an can kno w the Particulars of his own End—save that
he w ill h ave one . Thus, I have made such Pr ovision as I can,
for the W elfar e of my Family .
I en umerate them her e, as yo u will not know them all:
Clair e Fraser , my beloved W ife;  my Daughter Brianna and her
Husband, Roger MacKenzie, and their Child, Jer emiah
MacKenzie. Also my Daughter Marsali and her Husband,
Fer gus Fraser (who is my adop ted Son)—they have now two
young ones, Germain and Joan by Name. W ee Joan is named
for Mar sali’ s sister , known as Joan MacKenzie, pr esently
abiding still in Scotland. I have not the leisur e to acquaint you
with the  History of the Situation, but I am disposed for good
Reason to r egar d this young W oman likewise as a Daughter ,
and I hold myse lf similarly obligated for her W elfar e, and that
of her Mother , one Laoghair e MacKenzie.
I pra y y ou for the Sake of our long Friendship and for the
Sake of  your Regar d for my  W ife and Daughter , that if
Mischance shou ld befall me in this Enterprise, you will do
what you can to see them safe.
I depart upon the Morr ow’ s Dawn, which is now not far off.
 
Y our most humble and obedient Servant,
 James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser  
 Postscriptum: My Thanks for the Intelligence you pr ovide in
answer to my earlier Query r eg ar ding Stephen Bonnet. I note
your acc ompanying Advice with the gr eatest Appr eciation and
Gratitude for its kind Intent—though as you suspect, it will not
sway me. 
Post-Postscriptum: Copies of my W ill and T estament, and of
the P apers pertaining to my Pr o perty and Affairs her e and in
Scotland, will be found with Far quar d Campbell, of
Gr eenoaks, near Cr oss Cr eek.P AR T T HREE
Alarms and
 Excursions26
THE MILITIA RISES
T HE WEA THER F A VORED US, keeping cold but clear . W ith
the Muellers and the men from the nearby homesteads, we set
out f rom Fraser ’ s Ridge with a p arty of nearly forty men—and
me.
Fer gus w ould not serve with the  militia, but had come with
us to  raise men , he being the most familiar with the nearby
settlements and homesteads. A s we approached the T reaty
Line, and the farthest point of our peripatetic muster , we
formed a respectable company in number , if not in expertise.
Some of the m en had been soldiers once, if not trained
infantrymen; either in Scotland, or in the French and Indian
W ars. M any had  not, and each evening saw Jamie conducting
military drills and practice, though of a most unorthodox sort.
“W e havena got time to drill them properly ,” he’d told
Roger o ver the first evening’ s fire. “It takes weeks, ken, to
shape men so they willna run under fire.”
Roger m erely nodded at that, th ough I thought a faint look
of u neasiness flickered across hi s face. I supposed he might be
having doubts regarding his own lack of experience, and
exactly how he himself would respond under fire. I’d known a
lot of young soldiers in my time.
I was kneeling by the fire, cooking corn dodgers on an iron
griddle set in th e ashes. I glan ced up at Jamie, to find him
looking at me, a  slight smile hid den in the corner of his mouth.
He’d not only known young soldiers; he’d been one. He
coughed, and bent forward to  stir the coals with a stick,
looking for more of the quails I’d set to bake, wrapped in clay .
“It’ s the  natural thing, to run fro m danger , aye? The point of
drilling troops is to accustom t hem to an of ficer ’ s voice, so
they’ll hear , even over the roar of guns, and obey without
thinkin’ of the danger .”“A ye, like ye tr ain a horse not to bolt at noises,” Roger
interrupted, sardonically .
“A ye, l ike tha t,” Jamie agreed, quite seriously . “The
dif ference being that ye need to make a horse believe ye ken
better than he do es; an of ficer o nly needs to be louder .” Roger
laughed, and Jamie went on, half-smiling.
“When I  went for a soldier in France, I was marched to and
fro and up and down, and wore a pair of boots clear through
before th ey gav e me powder fo r my gun. I was sae weary at
the end of a day of drilling t hat they could have shot of f
cannon by my pallet and I wouldna have turned a hair .”
He shoo k his head a little, the half-smile fading from his
face. “B ut we havena got the tim e for that. Half our men will
have had  a bit o f soldiering; we must depend on them to stand
if it comes to fighting, and k eep heart in the others.” He
glanced past the fire, and gestu red toward the fading vista of
trees and mountains.
“It’ s no much like a battlefield, is it? I canna say where the
battle m ay be— if there is one— but I think we must plan for a
fight where there’ s cover to be had. W e’ll teach them to fight
as High landers do; to gather or to scatter at my word, and
otherwise, to make shift as they  can. Only half the men were
soldiers, but all of them can  hunt.” He raised his chin,
gesturing toward the recruits, several of whom had bagged
small ga me during the day’ s ride. The Lindsay brothers had
shot the quail we were eating.
Roger nodded, and bent down, s cooping a blackened ball of
clay out of the fi re with his own  stick, keeping his face hidden.
Almost all. He had gone out shooting every day since our
return to  the Ridge, and had stil l to bag even a possum. Jamie,
who had gone with him once, had privately expressed the
opinion to me th at Roger would do better to hit the game on
the head with his musket, rather than shoot at it.
I l owere d my brows at Jamie; he raised his at me, returning
my s tare. Roger ’ s feelings could  take care of themselves, was
the blunt message there. I widened my own eyes, and rose.“But it isn’ t really like hunting, is it?” I sat down beside
Jamie, and handed him one of the hot corn dodgers.
“Especially now .”
“What d ’ye mean by that, Sassenach?” Jamie broke the corn
dodger open, half-closing his eyes in bliss as he inhaled the
hot, fragrant steam.
“For one, you do n’ t know that it  will come to a fight at all,”
I p ointed out. “ For another , if it does, you won’ t be facing
trained t roops—the Regulators aren’ t soldiers, any more than
your men are. For a third, you w on’ t really be trying to kill the
Regulators; only frighten them into retreat or surrender . And
for a fourth”—I smiled at Roger—”the point of hunting is to
kill som ething. The point of going to war is to come back
alive.”
Jamie c hoked on a bite of corn dodger . I thumped him
helpfully on the back, and he rounded on me, glaring. He
coughed crumbs, swallowed, and stood up, plaid swinging.
“Listen to me,” he said, a little hoarsely . “Y e’re right,
Sassenach—and ye’re wrong. It’ s no like hunting, aye.
Because the game isna usually trying to kill you . Mind me—”
He t urned to Roger , his face grim. “She’ s wrong about the rest
of it. W ar is kil ling, and that’ s all. Think of anything less—
think of half-measures, think of frightening—above all, think
of your own sk in—and by God, man, ye will be dead by
nightfall of the first day .”
He f lung the remains of his corn dodger into the fire, and
stalked away .
 
I SA T FROZEN  for a moment, until heat from the fresh corn
dodger I  was holding seeped th rough the cloth round it and
burned m y fing ers. I set it down on the log with a muf fled
“ouch,” and Roger shifted a little on his log.
“All rig ht?” he said, though he  wasn’ t looking at me. His
eyes we re fixed on the direction  in which Jamie had vanished,
toward the horses.“Fine.” I soothed my scorched fingertips against the cold,
damp ba rk of the log. W ith the awkward silence eased by this
little ex change, I found it poss ible to address the matter at
hand.
“Granted,” I said, “that Jamie  has a certain amount of
experience from which to speak … I do think what he said was
rather an overreaction.”
“Do you?” Roger didn’ t seem  upset or taken aback by
Jamie’ s remarks.
“Of course I do.  Whatever happens with the Regulators, we
know pe rfectly w ell that it isn’ t going to be an all-out war . It’ s
likely to be nothing at all!”
“Oh, aye.” Roger was still loo king into the darkness, lips
pursed in thoughtfulness. “Only—I think that’ s not what he
was talking about.”
I lift ed o ne eyeb row at him, an d he shifted his gaze to me,
with a wry half-smile.
“When he went out hunting wi th me, he asked me what I
knew about what was coming. I told him. Bree said he’d asked
her , and she told him, too.”
“What was coming—you mean, the Revolution?”
He nodd ed, eyes on the fragm ent of corn dodger he was
crumbling between long, callused fingers.
“I to ld him wha t I knew . About the battles, the politics. Not
all the detail, o f course, but th e chief battles I remembered;
what a long, dra wn-out, bloody business it will be.” He was
quiet for a moment, then looked up at me, a slight glint of
green in his eye.
“I su ppose ye’d call it fair exchange. It’ s hard to tell with
him, bu t I think  I maybe scared him. He’ s just returned the
favor .”
I g ave a small s nort of amusement, and stood up, brushing
crumbs and ashes of f my skirt.“The day you sc are Jamie Fraser by telling him war stories,
my lad,” I said, “will be the day hell freezes over .”
He laughed, not discomposed in the slightest.
“Maybe I didn’ t scare him, then—though he got very quiet.
But I tell you w hat”—he sobered somewhat, though the glint
stayed in his eye—”he did scare me, just now .”
I gla nced of f in the direction of the horses. The moon hadn’ t
yet risen , and I couldn’ t see anything but a vague jumble of
big, restless shadows, with an oc casional gleam of firelight of f
a rounded rump or the brief shine of an eye. Jamie wasn’ t
visible, but I kn ew he was ther e; there was a subtle shift and
mill of moveme nt among the h orses, with faint whickers or
snorts, that told me someone familiar was among them.
“He was n’ t just a soldier ,” I said at last, speaking quietly ,
though I was fairly sure Jamie was too far away to hear me.
“He was an of ficer .”
I sat  down on the log again, a nd put a hand on the corn
dodger . It was barely warm now . I picked it up, but didn’ t bite
into it.
“I was a combat nurse, you k now . In a field hospital in
France.”
He nodded, dark head cocked in interest. The fire threw
deep shadows on his face, emphasizing the contrast of heavy
brow and strong bones with the gentle curve of his mouth.
“I nurse d soldiers. They were all  scared.” I smiled a little,
sadly . “T he ones who’d been under fire remembered, and the
ones who hadn’ t, imagined. But it was the of ficers who
couldn’ t sleep at night.”
I r an a t humb absently over the  bumpy surface of the corn
dodger . It felt faintly greasy , from the lard.
“I sat with Jamie once, after Preston, while he held one of
his men in his arms as he died. And wept. He remembers that.
He doesn’ t remember Culloden—because he can’ t bear to.” Ilooked d own at the lump of fried  dough in my hand, picking at
the burned bits with my thumbnail.
“Y es, yo u scared him. He doe sn’ t want to weep for you.
Neither do I,” I added softly . “It may not be now , but when the
time does come—take care, will you?”
There w as a long silence. Then, “I will,” he said quietly . He
stood up  and left, his footsteps fading quickly into silence on
the damp earth.
The other campfires burned brightly , as the night deepened.
The men still kept to the company of relative and friend, each
small group around its own fire . As we went on, they would
begin to  join together , I knew . W ithin a few days, there would
be one lar ge fire, everyone gathered together in a single circle
of light.
Jamie w asn’ t scared by what Ro ger had told him, I thought
—but by  what he himself knew . There were two choices for a
good of ficer: let concern for his responsibilities tear him apart
—or let necessity harden him to stone. He knew that.
And as for me … I knew a few things, too. I had been
married to two soldiers—of ficers, both; for Frank had been
one, too . I had been nurse and  healer , on the fields of two
wars.
I kn ew t he nam es and dates of battles; I knew the smell of
blood. A nd of vomit, and voided  bowels. A field hospital sees
the shat tered limbs, the spilled guts, and bone ends … but it
also sees the men who never raised a gun, but died there
anyway , of fever and dirt and sickness and despair .
I kn ew that tho usands died of wounds and killing on the
battlefields of two W orld W ars; I knew that hundreds upon
hundreds of thousands died the re of infection and disease. It
would be no dif ferent now—nor in four years.
And that scared me very much indeed.
 THE NEXT NIGHT , we made camp in the woods on Balsam
Mountain, a mile or so above  the settlement of Lucklow .
Several of the m en wanted to p ush on, to reach the hamlet of
Brownsville. Brownsville was the outer point of our journey ,
before turning back toward Salisbury , and it held the
possibility of a p othouse—or at least a hospitable shed to sleep
in—but Jamie thought better to wait.
“I dinna want to scare the folk there,” he had explained to
Roger , “ riding in with a troop of armed men after dark. Better
to annou nce our  business by day light, then give the men a day
—and a night— to make ready t o leave.” He had stopped then,
and coughed heavily , shoulders racked with the spasm.
I did n’ t like eith er the looks of Jamie or the sound of him.
He had the patchy look of a mildewed quilt, and when he came
to th e fire to fill his dinner bowl , I could hear a faint wheezing
sigh in every breath. Most of the men were in similar
condition; red noses and coughi ng were endemic, and the fire
popped and sizzled every few moments, as someone hawked
and spat into it.
I sho uld have liked to tuck Jamie up in bed with a hot stone
to his feet, a mu stard plaster on his chest, and a hot tisane of
aromatic peppermint and ephedra leaves to drink. Since it
would h ave taken a brace of cannon, leg irons, and several
armed men to g et him there, I contented myself with fishing
up a particularly meaty ladle of stew and plopping it into his
bowl.
“Ewald,” Jamie called hoarsely to one of the Muellers. He
stopped and cleared his throat, with a sound like tearing
flannel. “Ewald—d’ye take Paul and fetch along more wood
for the fire. It’ll be a cold night.”
It already was. Men were standing so close to the fire that
the fring es of their shawls and coats were singed, and the toes
of th eir b oots—those who had boots—stank of hot leather . My
own knees and thighs were c lose to blistering, as I stood
perforce near the blaze in ord er to serve out the stew . My
backside was like ice, though, in spite of the old pair of breeksI w ore under shift and petticoat—both for insulation and for
the avoidance of excessive friction while on horseback. The
Carolina backwoods were no place for a sidesaddle.
The last bowl s erved, I turned round to eat my own stew ,
with the fire a t my back, a grateful bloom of warmth
embracing my frozen bottom.
“All right, is it, ma’am?” Jimmy Robertson, who had made
the stew , peered over my shoulder in search of compliment.
“Lovely ,” I assured him. “Delici ous!” In fact, it was hot and
I w as hungry . That, plus the fact that I hadn’ t had to cook it
myself, lent a suf ficient tone of  sincerity to my words that he
retired, satisfied.
I ate slowly , enjoying the heat of the wooden bowl in my
chilly hands, as well as the so othing warmth of food in my
stomach. The cacophony of sneezing and hacking behind me
did nothing to impair the momentary sense of well-being
engendered by food and the prospect of rest after a long day in
the sadd le. Even the sight of the woods around us, bone-cold
and black under growing starlight, failed to disturb me.
My own  nose had begun to run  rather freely , but I hoped it
was merely the result of ea ting hot food. I swallowed
experimentally , but there was no sign of sore throat, nor
rattling of congestion in my chest. Jamie rattled; he had
finished eating and come to s tand beside me, warming his
backside at the blaze.
“All right, Sassenach?” he asked hoarsely .
“Just vas omotor rhinitis,” I replied, dabbing at my nose with
a handkerchief.
“Where?” He cast a suspicious look at the forest. “Here? I
thought ye said they lived in Africa.”
“What—oh, rhinoceroses. Y es, they do. I just meant my
nose is running, but I haven’ t got la grippe .”
“Oh, aye ? That’ s good. I have,” he added unnecessarily , and
sneezed three times in succession. He handed me his emptiedbowl, in  order to use both hand s to blow his nose, which he
did with a series  of vicious honk s. I winced slightly , seeing the
reddened, raw look of his nostr ils. I had a bit of camphorated
bear gre ase in my saddlebag, but I was sure he wouldn’ t let me
anoint him in public.
“Are you sure we oughtn’ t to push on?” I asked, watching
him. “Geordie says the village is n’ t far , and there is a road—of
sorts.”
I kne w t he answ er to that; he wasn’ t one to alter strategy for
the s ake of perso nal comfort. Besides, camp was already made
and a good fire  going. Still, beyond my own longing for a
warm, clean bed—well, any bed, I wasn’ t fussy—I was
worried for Jamie. Close to, the sigh in his breath had a
deeper , wheezing note to it that troubled me.
He k new what I  meant. He smiled, tucking away the sodden
kerchief in his sleeve.
“I’ll do,  Sassena ch,” he said. “I t’ s no but a wee cold in the
neb. I’ve been a deal worse than this, many times.”
Paul Mueller heaved another lo g onto the fire; a big ember
broke an d roare d up with a flare that made us step away in
order to  avoid the spray of spa rks. W ell baked in the rear by
this time, I turne d to face the fire. Jamie, though, stayed facing
outward, a slight frown on his face as he surveyed the shadows
of the looming wood.
The frown relaxed, and I turne d to see two men emer ging
from the woods, shaking needl es and bits of bark from their
clothes. Jack Parker , and a new  man—I didn’ t yet know his
name, but he was plainly a recent immigrant from somewhere
near Glasgow , judging from his speech.
“All quiet, sir ,” said Parker , tou ching his hat in brief salute.
“Cold as charity , though.”
“A ye, Ah hivny felt ma privates  anytime since dinner ,” the
Glaswegian chimed in, grimacing and rubbing himself as he
headed for the fire. “Might as well be gone aetegither!”“I take your mea ning, man,” Jamie said, grinning. “W ent for
a piss a moment ago, but I couldna find it.” He turned amid the
laughter and went to check the horses, a half-finished second
bowl of stew in one hand.
The other men were already making ready their bedrolls,
debating the wisdom of sleepin g with feet or head near the
fire.
“It’ll scorch the soles o’ your b oots, and ye get too close,”
ar gued Evan Lindsay . “See? Charred the pegs right out, and
now loo k!” He lifted one lar ge foot, exhibiting a battered shoe
with a wrapping of rough tw ine tied round it to hold it
together . The leather soles and heels were sometimes stitched,
but mor e often fastened with t iny whittled pegs of wood or
leather , glued with pine gum or some other adhesive. The pine
gum in particular was flammable; I’d seen occasional sparks
burst fro m the feet of men who  slept with their feet too near
the fire, when a shoe peg suddenly ignited from the heat.
“Better than settin’ your hair on fire,” Ronnie Sinclair
ar gued.
“I dinna think the Lindsays need worry about that
owermuch.” Kenny grinned at his elder brother , and tugged
down the knit cap he wore—l ike his two brothers—over a
balding head.
“A ye, headfirst every time,” Murdo agreed. “Y e dinna want
to chill your sca lp; it’ll go right to your liver , and then you’re a
dead man.” Murdo was tenderly solicitous of his exposed
scalp, being seldom seen without either his knitted nightcap or
a pe culiar hat m ade from the hai ry skin of a possum, lined and
rakishly trimmed with skunk fur . He glanced enviously at
Roger , who was tying back his own thick black hair with a bit
of leather string.
“MacKenzie needna worry; he’ s furred like a bear!”
Roger grinned in response. Like the others, he had stopped
shaving when we left the Ridge ; now , eight days later , a thick
scurf of  dark stubble did give him a fiercely ursine look. Itoccurred to me that beyond convenience, a heavy beard
undoubtedly kep t the face warm on nights like this; I tucked
my own bare a nd vulnerable chin down into the sheltering
folds of my shawl.
Returning from the horses in time to hear this, Jamie
laughed, too, but it ended in a spasm of coughing. Evan waited
‘til it ended.
“How say ye, Mac Dubh ? Heads or tails?”
Jamie w iped his mouth on his sleeve and smiled. Hairy as
the r est, he looked a proper V iking, with the fire glinting red,
gold, and silver from his sprouting beard and loosened hair .
“Nay bother , lads,” he said. “I ’ll sleep warm enough nay
matter how  I’m laid.” He tilted his head in my direction, and
there wa s a general rumble of laughter , with a spattering of
mildly c rude remarks in Scots an d Gaelic from the Ridge men.
One or two of the new recruits eyed me with a brief,
instinctive speculation, quickly abandoned after a glance at
Jamie’ s height, breadth, and air of genial ferocity . I met one
man’ s eyes and smiled; he loo ked startled, but then smiled
back, ducking his head in shyness.
How the hell did Jamie do that? One brief, crude joke, and
he’d laid public claim to me, re moved me from any threat of
unwanted advances, and reasserted his position as leader .
“Just like a bloody baboon tro op,” I muttered under my
breath. “And I’m sleeping with the head baboon!”
“Baboons are the monkeys with no tails?” Fer gus asked,
turning from an exchange with Ewald about the horses.
“Y ou know quite well they are.” I caught Jamie’ s eye, and
his mouth curled up on one side. I knew what he was thinking,
and he knew I did; the smile widened.
Louis of France kept a private z oo at V ersailles, among the
inhabitants of which were a small troop of mandrill baboons.
One of the most popular Court activities on spring afternoons
was to visit the baboon quarters, there to admire both thesexual prowess of the male, and his splendidly multicolored
bottom.
One M. de Ruvel had of fered— in my hearing—to have his
posterior simila rly tattooed, if it would result in such a
favorable recep tion by the ladies of the Court. He had,
however , been firmly informed by Madame de la T ourelle that
his phys ique was in every way inferior to that of the mandrill,
and coloring it was unlikely to improve matters.
The firelight made it dif ficult t o tell, but I was reasonably
sure tha t Jamie’ s own rich colo r owed as much to suppressed
amusement as to heat.
“Speakin’ of tails,” he murmur ed in my ear . “Have ye got
those infernal breeks on?”
“Y es.”
“T ake them of f.”
“What, here?” I gave him a wide-eyed look of mock
innocence. “Y ou want me to freeze my arse of f?”
His eyes narrowed slightly , wi th a blue cat-gleam in the
depths.
“Oh, it wilna freeze,” he said softly . “I’ll warrant ye that.”
He m oved behind me, and the fierce shimmer of the blaze
on m y fl esh was  replaced by the  cool solidness of his body . No
less fierce, though, as I discover ed when he put his arms round
my waist and drew me back against him.
“Oh, you found it,” I said. “How nice.”
“Found what? Had you lost s omething?” Roger paused,
coming from the horses with a  lumpy roll of blankets under
one arm, his bodhran under the other .
“Oh, jus t a pair of auld breeks,” Jamie said blandly . Under
cover of my sha wl, one hand sl id inside the waistband of my
skirt. “D’ye mean to give us a song, then?”
“If anyone likes, sure.” Roger sm iled, the firelight ruddy on
his features. “Actually , I’m meaning to learn one; Evan’ spromised to sing me a silkie-song his grannie knew .”
Jamie laughed.
“Oh, I ken that one, I think.”
One of Roger ’ s eyebrows shot  up, and I twisted slightly
round, to look up at Jamie in surprise.
“W ell, I couldna sing  i t,” he said mildly , seeing our
amazement. “I ken the words, t hough. Evan sang it often and
again, in  the prison at Ardsmuir . It’ s a bit bawdy ,” he added,
with that faintly prim tone that  Highlanders often adopt, just
before telling you something truly shocking.
Roger recognized it, and laughed.
“I’ll may be writ e it down, then,”  he said. “For the benefit of
future generations.”
Jamie’ s fingers had been working skillfully away , and at this
point, the breeks—which were h is, and thus about six sizes too
lar ge for me—came loose and d ropped silently to the ground.
A cold draft who oshed up under my skirt and struck my newly
bared nether portions. I drew in my breath with a faint gasp.
“Cold, is n’ t it?”  Roger hunched his shoulders, smiling as he
shivered exaggeratedly in sympathy .
“Y es, indeed,” I said. “Freeze the balls of f a brass monkey ,
wouldn’ t it?”
Jamie and Roger burst into simultaneous coughing fits.
 
SENTR Y IN PLACE and horse s bedded down, we retired to
our own  resting place, a discre et distance from the circle by
the fire.  I had dug the lar gest r ocks and twigs out of the leaf
mold, cut spruce branches, and spread our blankets over them
by the time Jamie finished his last round of the camp. The
warmth of food and fire had fad ed, but I didn’ t begin to shiver
in earnest until he touched me.
I w ould have m oved at once to get under the blankets, but
Jamie still held me. His original  intent appeared intact—to saythe least—but his attention wa s momentarily distracted. His
arms we re still clasped round m e, but he was standing quite
still, head up as though listening, looking into the murk of the
wood. It  was full dark; no more  showed of the trees than the
glow of  fire reflected from the  few trunks that stood nearest
the camp—the last shadow of twilight had faded, and
everything beyond was a depthless black.
“What is it?” I drew back a little, pressing instinctively
against him, and his arms tightened round me.
“I dinna ken. B ut I do feel something, Sassenach.” He
moved a little, lifting his head in restless query , like a wolf
scenting the wind, but no mess age reached us save a distant
rattling of leafless branches.
“If it’ s no rhinoc eroses, it’ s something,” he said softly , and a
whisper of unease raised the hairs on the back of my neck. “A
moment, lass.”
He l eft me, the wind blowing suddenly cold about me with
the loss of his presence, and went to speak quietly with a
couple of the men.
And wh at migh t he feel, out there in the dark? I had the
greatest respect for Jamie’ s sens e of danger . He had lived too
long as hunter and as hunted, not to sense the edgy awareness
that lay between the two—invisible or not.
He r eturned a m oment later , and squatted beside me as I
burrowed shivering into the blankets.
“It’ s all right,” he said. “I’ve s aid we’ll have two guards
tonight, and each man to keep his piece loaded and to hand.
But I think it’ s a ll right.” He loo ked beyond me, into the wood,
but his face now was merely thoughtful.
“It’ s all right,” he repeated again, more certainly .
“Is it gone?”
He turned his head, his lips c urling slightly . His mouth
looked soft, tender and vulnerab le amid the stif f, ruddy wires
of his starting beard.“I d inna ken if it was ever the re, Sassenach,” he said. “I
thought I felt ey es upon me, bu t it could have been a passing
wolf, an owl—or nay more than a restless spiorad , a-roaming
in the wood. But aye, it’ s gone now .”
He s miled at me ; I saw the flicker of the light that rimmed
his h ead and sh oulders as he turned, silhouetted by the fire.
Beyond, the sound of Roger ’ s voice drifted to me above the
crackle of the fire, as he learned the melody of the silkie-song,
following Evan’ s voice, hoarse but confident. Jamie slid into
the blankets beside me and I  turned to him, cold hands
fumbling to return the favor he had done me earlier .
W e shivered convulsively , ur gent for each other ’ s warmth. I
found him, and he turned me, ruf fling up the layers of fabric
between us, so that he lay behi nd me, his arm secure around
me, the small secret patches of our nakedness joined in
warmth beneath  the blankets. I lay facing the darkness of the
wood, watching  the firelight dance among the trees, as Jamie
moved b ehind m e—behind, bet ween, within—warm and big,
and so slowly a s scarcely to ru stle the branches beneath us.
Roger ’ s voice rose strong and s weet above the murmur of the
men, and the shivering slowly stopped.
 
I WOKE MUCH LA TER beneath a blue-black sky , dry-
mouthed, the rasping sigh of Ja mie’ s breath in my ear . I had
been dreaming; one of those pointless dreams of uneasy
repetition, that fades at once with the waking but leaves a
nasty taste in mouth and mind. Needing both water and relief
of m y bladder , I squirmed care fully out from under Jamie’ s
arm, and slid out from between the blankets. He stirred and
groaned slightly , snuf fling in his sleep, but didn’ t wake.
I p aused  to lay a hand lightly on his forehead. Cool, no
fever . Perhaps he was right, the n—just a bad cold. I stood up,
reluctant to leave the warm sanc tuary of our nest, but knowing
I couldn’ t wait until morning.
The songs were stilled, the f ire smaller now , but still
burning, kept up by the sentry o n duty . It was Murdo Lindsay;I cou ld see the white fur of his possum-skin cap, perched atop
what looked like a huddled pile  of clothing and blankets. The
anonymous Glaswegian crouched on the other side of the
clearing, musket on his knees; he nodded to me, face
shadowed by the brim of his slouch hat. The white cap turned
in m y direction too, at the sou nd of my step. I sketched a
wave, an d Murd o nodded toward me, then turned back toward
the wood.
The men lay in a shrouded circle, buried in their blankets. I
felt a sudden qu alm as I walked between them. W ith the spell
of night and dreams still on me, I shivered at sight of the silent
forms, l ying so still, side by s ide. Just so had they laid the
bodies at Amiens. At Preston. S till and shrouded, side by side,
faces co vered and anonymous. W ar seldom looks on the faces
of its dead.
And wh y should I wake from love’ s embrace, thinking of
war and the sleeping ranks of dead men? I wondered, stepping
lightly p ast the shrouded line of  bodies. W ell, that was simple
enough, given our errand. W e were headed for battle—if not
now , then soon enough.
One blanket-wr apped form grunted, coughed, and turned
over , face invisible, indistingu ishable from the others. The
movement startled me, but then one big foot thrust free of the
blanket, revealing Evan Lindsa y’ s twine-wrapped shoe. I felt
the a nxious burden of imagination ease, with this evidence of
life, of individuality .
It’ s the anonymity of war that makes the killing possible.
When the nameless dead are na med again on tombstone and
on c enotaph, then they regain th e identity they lost as soldiers,
and take their place in grief and memory , the ghosts of sons
and lovers. Perhaps this journ ey would end in peace. The
conflict that was coming, though … the world would hear of
that, and I stepped past the last of the sleeping men, as though
walking through an evil dream not fully waked from.
I p icked  up a canteen from the ground near the saddlebags
and drank deep. The water w as piercingly cold, and mysomber thoughts began to dissipate, washed away by the
sweet, clean taste of it. I pause d, gasping from the coldness,
and wiped my mouth.
Best tak e some back to Jamie; if he wasn’ t wakened by my
absence, he would be by my r eturn, and I knew his mouth
would be dry a s well, since he was completely unable to
breathe through his nose at the moment. I slung the strap of the
canteen over my shoulder and stepped into the shelter of the
wood.
It w as c old unde r the trees, but  the air was still and crystal
clear . Th e shadows that had seemed sinister viewed from the
fireside were oddly reassuring, seen from the shelter of the
wood. T urned away from the fir e’ s glow and crackle, my eyes
and ears began to adapt to the dark. I heard the rustle of
something small in the dried grass nearby , and the unexpected
distant hooting of an owl.
Finished, I stood still for a few minutes, enjoying the
momentary solitude. It was very cold, but very peaceful. Jamie
had been right, I thought; whatever might or might not have
been here earlier , the wood held nothing inimical now .
As t hough my thought of him had summoned him, I heard a
cautious footfall , and the slow , wheezing rasp of his breath. He
coughed, a muf fled, strangled noise that I didn’ t like at all.
“Here I am,” I said softly . “How’ s the chest?”
The cough choked of f in a su dden wheeze of panic, and
there wa s a crunch and flurry am ong the leaves. I saw Murdo
start up by the fire, musket in hand, and then a dark shape
darted past me.
“Hoy!” I said, startled rather than frightened. The shape
stumbled, and by reflex, I swun g the canteen of f my shoulder
and whirled it by the strap. It str uck the figure in the back with
a hollow thunk!  and whoever it was—certainly not Jamie—fell
to his knees, coughing.
There followed a short period of  chaos, with men exploding
out of their blankets like startled  jack-in-the-boxes, incoherentshouting, and general mayhem. The Glaswegian leaped over
several struggling bodies and char ged into the wood, musket
over his head, bellowing. Barreling into the darkness, he
char ged the first shape he saw ,  which happened to be me. I
went flying headlong into the leaves, where I ended
inelegantly spra wled and windless, the Glaswegian kneeling
on my stomach.
I must have given a suf ficiently feminine grunt as I fell, for
he paused, narrowly checking himself as he was about to club
me in the head.
“Eh?” He put down his free hand and felt cautiously .
Feeling what was unmistakably a breast, he jerked back as
though burned, and slowly edged of f me.
“Err … hmm!” he said.
“Whoof,” I replied, as cordially  as possible. The stars were
spinning overh ead, shining brightly through the leafless
branches. The Glaswegian disap peared, with a small Scottish
noise of embarrassment. There  was a lot of shouting and
crashing, of f to my left, but I h adn’ t attention for anything at
the moment bar getting my wind back.
By the time I made it back onto my feet, the intruder had
been captured and dragged into the light of the fire.
Had he not been coughing when I hit him, he likely would
have gotten away . As it was, though, he was hacking and
wheezing so badly that he could barely stand upright, and his
face was dark with the ef fort to snatch a breath in passing. The
veins on  his forehead stood out  like worms, and he made an
eerie whistling noise as he breathed—or tried to.
“What the hell are you  doing here?” Jamie demanded
hoarsely , then paused to cough in sympathy .
This wa s a purely rhetorical question, since the boy plainly
couldn’ t talk. It was Josiah Beardsley , my potential
tonsillectomy patient, and whatever he’d been doing since the
Gathering, it hadn’ t improved his health to any marked extent.I hu rried to the fire, where the c of feepot sat in the embers. I
seized it in a fold of my shawl and shook it. Good, there was
some left, and si nce it had been brewing since supper , it would
be strong as Hades.
“Sit him  down, loosen his cloth es, bring me cold water!” I
shoved my way into the circle of men around the captive,
forcing them aside with the hot cof feepot.
W ithin a  moment or two, I had a mug of strong cof fee at his
lips, black and tarry , diluted with no more than a splash of cold
water to keep it from burning his mouth.
“Breathe out slowly to the cou nt of four , breathe in to the
count of  two, breathe out and ta ke a drink,” I said. The whites
of his eyes show ed all round the iris, and spittle had collected
at th e corners of  his mouth. I put a firm hand on his shoulder
though, ur ging him to breathe, to count, to breathe—and the
desperate straining eased a little.
One sip,  one breath, one sip, one  breath, and by the time the
cof fee was all inside him, his face had faded from its alarming
crimson hue to something more approximating fish belly , with
a couple  of faint reddish marks where the men had hit him.
The air still whistled in his lung s, but he was  breathing, which
was a substantial improvement.
The men stood about murmuring and watching with interest,
but it was cold , it was late, and as the excitement of the
capture faded, they began to droop and yawn. It was, after all,
only a lad, an d a scrawny , ill-favored one at that. They
departed willin gly enough to their blankets when Jamie
dispatched them, leaving Jamie and me to attend to our
unexpected guest.
I had him swaddled in spare blankets, larded with
camphorated bear grease, and provided with another cup of
cof fee in his hands, before I would let Jamie question him. The
boy see med deeply embarrassed at my attentions, shoulders
hunched and eyes on the ground, but I didn’ t know whether he
was simply unused to being fuss ed over , or whether it was thelooming presence of Jamie, arms crossed, that discomfited
him.
He was small for fourteen, and thin to the point of
emaciation; I could have counted his ribs when I opened his
shirt to listen to  his heart. No beauty otherwise; his black hair
had bee n chopped short, and stood on his head in matted
spikes, thick with dirt, grease, and sweat, and his general
aspect was that of a flea-ridden monkey , eyes lar ge and black
in a face pinched with worry and suspicion.
At la st h aving d one all I could, I was satisfied with the look
of him. At my  nod, Jamie lo wered himself to the ground
beside the boy .
“So, Mr . Beardsley ,” he said pleasantly . “Have ye come to
join our troop of militia, then?”
“Ah … no.” Josiah rolled the  wooden cup between his
hands, not looking up. “I … u h … my business chanced to
take me  this way , that’ s all.” He spoke so hoarsely that I
winced in sympathy , imagining the soreness of his inflamed
throat.
“I see.” Jamie’ s voice was low a nd friendly . “So ye saw our
fire by chance, and thought to come and seek shelter and a
meal?”
“I did, aye.” He swallowed, with evident dif ficulty .
“Mmphm. But ye came earlier , no? Y ou were in the wood
just afte r sundown. Why wait ‘til past moonrise to make
yourself known?”
“I didn’ t … I wasn’ t …”
“Oh, ind eed ye were.” Jamie’ s voice was still friendly , but
firm. He put out  a hand and grasped Josiah’ s shirtfront, forcing
the boy to look at him.
“Look ye, man. There’ s a bar gain between us. Y ou’re my
tenant; it’ s agreed. That means you’ve a right to my protection.
It means also that I’ve a right to hear the truth.”Josiah looked back, and while there was fear and wariness
in th e look, the re was also a sense of self-possession that
seemed far older than fourteen. He made no ef fort to look
away , and there was a look of deep calculation in the clever
black eyes.
This child—if one could regard him as a child; plainly
Jamie didn’ t—was used to relying on himself alone.
“I said to you, sir , that I would come to your place by the
New Y ear , and s o I mean to. What I do in the meantime is my
own af fair .”
Jamie’ s brows shot up, but he nodded slowly , and released
his grip.
“T rue enough. Y ou’ll admit, though, that one might be
curious.”
The boy opened his mouth as th ough to speak, but changed
his mind and buried his nose instead in his cup of cof fee.
Jamie tried again.
“May w e of fer you help in your business? W ill ye travel a
ways with us, at least?”
Josiah shook his head.
“No. I am obliged to you, si r , but the business is best
managed by myself alone.”
Roger h ad not gone to sleep, but sat a little behind Jamie,
watching silently . He leaned forward now , green eyes intent on
the boy .
“This business of yours,” he sa id. “It’ s not by any means
connected with that mark on your thumb?”
The cup  hit the ground and cof fee splashed up, spattering
my face and bodice. The boy was out of his blankets and
halfway across the clearing before I could blink my eyes to see
what wa s happening—and by then, Jamie was up and after
him. The boy ha d circled the fire; Jamie leaped over it. Theydisappeared into  the wood like fox and hound, leaving Roger
and myself gaping after them.
For the second time that nigh t, men erupted from their
bedrolls, grabbing for their guns. I began to think the
Governor would be pleased with his militia; they were
certainly ready to spring into action at a moment’ s notice.
“What in hell … ?” I said to Roger , wiping cof fee from my
eyebrows.
“Maybe I shouldn’ t have mentioned it so suddenly ,” he said.
“Wha? Wha? What’ s amiss, then?” bellowed Murdo
Lindsay , glaring  round as he swept his musket barrel past the
shadowed trees.
“Are we attacked? Where’ s the bastards?” Kenny popped up
on h ands and k nees beside me, peering out from under the
band of his knitted cap like a toad beneath a watering pot.
“Nobody . Nothi ng’ s happened. I mean—it’ s really quite all
right!”
My ef forts to calm and explain went lar gely unnoticed in the
racket. Roger , however , being much lar ger and much louder ,
succeeded at last in quelling the disturbance and explaining
matters—so far as they could be explained. What did a lad
more or less matter? W ith considerable grumbling, the men
settled d own once more, leaving Roger and me staring at each
other over the cof feepot.
“What was it, then?” I asked, a little testily .
“The ma rk? I’m pretty sure it was the letter ‘T’—I saw it
when you made him take the cof fee and he wrapped his hand
round the cup.”
My stom ach tightened. I knew what that meant; I’d seen it
before.
“Thief,” Roger said, eyes on my face. “He’ s been branded.”
“Y es,” I said unhappily . “Oh, dear .”“W ould the folk on the Ridge not accept him, if they
knew?” Roger asked.
“I doub t most of them would be much bothered,” I said.
“It’ s not that; it’ s that he ran when you mentioned it. He isn’ t
just a convicted thief—I’m afra id he may be a fugitive. And
Jamie called him, at the Gathering.”
“Ah.” Roger scratched absently at his whiskers.
“ Earbsachd . Ja mie will feel obliged to him in some way ,
then?”
“Something like that.”
Roger w as a Scot, and—technic ally , at least—a Highlander .
But he had been born long aft er the death of the clans, and
neither history nor heritage could ever have taught him the
strength of the ancient bonds between laird and tenant,
between chief and clansman. Most likely , Josiah himself had
no idea of the importance of the earbsachd —of wh at had been
promised and accepted on both sides. Jamie had.
“Do you think Jamie will catch him?” Roger asked.
“I expect he already has. He can’ t be tracking the boy in the
dark, and if he’d lost him, he would have come back already .”
There were other possibilities—that Jamie had fallen over a
precipice in the dark, tripped on a stone and broken his leg, or
met with  a catamount or a bear , for instance—but I preferred
not to dwell on those.
I stood up, stretching my cramped limbs, and looked into
the w oods, where Jamie and his prey had disappeared. Josiah
might be a good  woodsman and hunter; Jamie had been one
much lo nger . Josiah was small, quick, and impelled by fear;
Jamie ha d a considerable advantage in size, strength, and sheer
bloody-mindedness.
Roger stood up beside me. H is lean face was slightly
troubled, as he peered into the encircling trees.
“It’ s taking a lo ng time. If he’ s caught the lad, what’ s he
doing with him?”“Extracting the truth from him, I imagine,” I said. I bit my
lip at the thought. “Jamie doesn’ t like being lied to.”
Roger looked down at me, mildly startled.
“How?”
I shrugged.
“However he can.” I’d seen him  do it by reason, by guile,
with charm, with threats—and o n occasion, by means of brute
force. I hoped he  hadn’ t had to use force—though more for his
sake than Josiah’ s.
“I see,” Roger said quietly . “W ell, then.”
The cof f eepot was empty; I bund led my cloak round me and
went down to th e stream to rin se and fill it, hung it to brew
once more above the fire, and sat down to wait.
“Y ou should go to sleep,” I said to Roger , after a few
minutes. He merely smiled at me, wiped his nose, and hunched
deeper into his cloak.
“So should you,” he said.
There w as no wind, but it was very late, and the cold had
settled well into the hollow , ly ing damp and heavy on the
ground. The men’ s blankets had grown limp with
condensation, an d I could feel the dense chill of the ground
seeping through the folds of my skirt. I thought about
retrieving my breeches, but couldn’ t muster the ener gy to
search for them. The excitement of Josiah’ s appearance and
escape h ad faded, and the leth ar gy of cold and fatigue was
setting in.
Roger p oked up  the fire a bit, an d added a few small chunks
of wood. I tucke d another fold o f skirt beneath my thighs and
pulled cloak and shawl close around me, burying my hands in
the folds of fab ric. The cof feepot hung steaming, the hiss of
occasional droplets falling in to the fire punctuating the
phlegm-filled snores of the sleeping men.
I wasn’ t seeing the blanket-rolled shapes, though, or hearing
the sough of dar k pines. I heard the crackle of dried leaves in aScottish oak wood, in the hills above Carryarrick. W e had
camped there, two days before Prestonpans, with thirty men
from Lallybroch—on our way to join Charles Stuart’ s army .
And a young boy had come sud denly out of the dark; a knife
had glinted in the light of a fire.
A di f ferent place, a dif ferent tim e. I shook myself, trying to
dispel the sudden memories: a th in white face and a boy’ s eyes
huge with shock and pain. The blade of a dirk, darkening and
glowing in the embers of the fire. The smell of gunpowder ,
sweat, and burning flesh.
“I mean to shoot you,”  he had told John Grey . “Head, or
heart?”  By threat, by guile—by brute force.
That wa s then; this was now , I told myself. But Jamie would
do what he thought he must.
Roger sat quietly , watching the dancing flames and the
wood be yond. His eyes were ho oded, and I wondered what he
was thinking.
“D’you worry for him?” he asked softly , not looking at me.
“What, now? Or ever?” I smiled, though without much
humor . “If I did, I’d never rest.”
He t urned his head toward me, and a faint smile touched his
lips.
“Y ou’re resting now , are you?”
I smiled again, a real one in spite of myself.
“I’m not  pacing to and fro,” I a nswered. “Nor yet wringing
my hands.”
One dark eyebrow flicked up.
“Might help keep them warm.”
One of the men stirred, muttering in his wrappings, and we
ceased talking for a moment. The cof feepot was boiling; I
could hear the soft rumble of the liquid inside.Whatever could be keeping him? He couldn’ t be taking all
this time to question Josiah Beardsley—he would either have
gotten w hat answers he required in short order , or he would
have let the boy go. No matter w hat the boy had stolen, it was
no concern of Ja mie’ s—save for the promise of the earbsachd .
The flam es were mildly hypnotic; I could look into the
wavering glow and see in memory the great fire of the
Gathering, the figures dark arou nd it, and the sound of distant
fiddles… .
“Should I go to look for him?” Roger asked suddenly , low-
voiced.
I jerked, startled out of sleepy hypnosis. I rubbed a hand
over my face and shook my head to clear it.
“No. It’ s dangerous to go into strange woods in the dark,
and you couldn’ t find him any way . If he isn’ t back by the
morning—that will be time enough.”
As the moments  wore slowly o n, I began to think that the
dawn might  come before Jamie did. I was w orried for Jamie—
but there was in fact nothing that could be done before the
morning. Disquieting thoughts tried to push their way in; did
Josiah h ave a knife? Surely he did. But even if the boy was
desperate enough to use it, cou ld he possibly take Jamie by
surprise? I pushed aside these anxious speculations, trying to
occupy my mind instead with c ounting the number of coughs
from the men around the fire.
Number eight was Roger; a deep, loose cough that shook his
shoulders. W as he worried for B ree and Jemmy? I wondered.
Or did he wonder whether Bree worried about him ? I could
have told him th at, but it wouldn’ t have helped him to know .
Men fighting—or preparing to fight—needed the idea of home
as a place of utter safety; the conviction that all was well there
kept the m in good heart and on their feet, marching, enduring.
Other things would make them  fight, but fighting is such a
small part of warfare… .A damned important part, Sassenach , said Jamie’ s voice in
the back of my head.
I began at last to nod of f, waking repeatedly as my head
jerked s harply o n my neck. Th e last time, it was the feel of
hands on my s houlders that wakened me, but only briefly .
Roger eased me to the ground, w adding half my shawl beneath
my head for a pillow , tucking the rest of it snug about my
shoulders. I caught a brief glimpse of him in silhouette against
the fire, black and bearlike in his cloak, and then I knew no
more.
 
I DON’T  KNOW  how long I slept; I woke quite suddenly , at
the soun d of an explosive sneez e nearby . Jamie was sitting a
few feet  away , holding Josiah Beardsley’ s wrist in one hand,
his d irk in the other . He paused long enough to sneeze twice
more, wiped his nose impatientl y on his sleeve, then thrust the
dirk into the embers of the fire.
I c aught  the stink of hot metal, and raised myself abruptly
on o ne elbow . B efore I could say or do anything, something
twitched and moved against me. I looked down in
astonishment, then up, then down again, convinced in my
muddled state that I was still dreaming.
A young boy lay under my cloak, curled against my body ,
sound asleep. I saw black hair and a scrawny frame, a pallid
skin smeared with grime and grazed with scratches. Then there
was a sudden loud hiss from the fire and I jerked my gaze back
to se e Jamie pre ss Josiah’ s thumb against the searing metal of
his blackened dirk.
Jamie glimpsed my convulsive movement from the corner
of his eye and scowled in my direction, lips pursed in a silent
adjuration to stillness. Josiah’ s face was contorted, lips drawn
back from his teeth in agony—but he made no noise. On the
far side of the f ire, Kenny Lindsay sat watching, silent as a
rock.Still con vinced that I was dreaming—or hoping that I was—
I p ut a h and on  the boy curled against me. He moved again,
and the  feel of solid flesh under my fingers woke me
completely . My hand closed on his shoulder , and his eyes
sprang open, wide with alarm.
He jerked away , scrambling aw kwardly to get to his feet.
Then he saw his  brother—for plainly Josiah was  his brother—
and stopped abruptly , glancing wildly around the clearing, at
the scattered men, at Jamie, Roger , and myself.
Ignoring what must have been th e frightful pain of a burned
hand, Josiah rose from his seat and stepped quick and soft to
his brother ’ s side, taking him by the arm.
I got to my feet, moving slowly so as not to frighten them.
They watched me, identical lo oks of wariness on the thin,
white faces. Identical. Y es, just the same pinched faces—
though the other boy’ s hair was worn long. He was dressed in
nothing but a ragged shirt, and he was barefoot. I saw Josiah
squeeze his brother ’ s arm in rea ssurance, and began to suspect
just wha t it was he had stolen. I summoned a smile for the two
of them, then stretched out my hand to Josiah.
“Let me see your hand,” I whispered.
He hesitated a moment, then gave me his right hand. It was
a nice, neat job; so neat that it made me slightly faint for a
moment. The ball of the thumb h ad been sliced cleanly of f, the
open wound cauterized with searing metal. A red-black,
crusted oval had replaced the incriminating brand.
There w as a soft movement behind me; Roger had fetched
my medicine box and set it down by my feet.
There w asn’ t a great deal to do  for the injury , save apply a
little gen tian oin tment and bandage the thumb with a clean,
dry cloth. I was conscious of  Jamie as I worked; he had
sheathed his dirk and risen quie tly , to go and rummage among
the packs and saddlebags. By the time I had finished my brief
job, he was back, with a small  bundle of food wrapped in akerchief, and a spare blanket tied in a roll. Over his arm were
my discarded breeches.
He handed these to the new boy , gave the food and blanket
to Josiah, then clapped a hand on the boy’ s shoulder , and
squeezed hard. He touched the other boy gently , turning him
toward t he wood  with a hand on his back. Then he jerked his
head tow ard the trees, and Josiah nodded. He touched his
forehead to me, the bandage gli nting white on his thumb, and
whispered, “Thank’ee, ma’am.”
The two boys di sappeared silently into the forest, the twin’ s
bare feet winking pale below the  flapping hem of the breeks as
he followed his brother .
Jamie nodded to Kenny , then sat down again by the fire,
shoulders slumping in sudden exhaustion. I poured him cof fee
and he took it, his mouth twitching in an attempted smile of
acknowledgment that dissipated in a fit of heavy coughing.
I re ached for t he cup before it could spill, and caught
Roger ’ s eye over Jamie’ s should er . He nodded toward the east,
and laid  a finger across his lips, then shrugged with a grimace
of resignation. He wanted as much as I did to know what had
just hap pened—and why . He was right, though; the night was
fading. Dawn would be here soon, and the men—all
accustomed to wake at first light—would be floating toward
the surface of consciousness.
Jamie had stopped coughing, but was making horrible
gur gling noises in an attempt to clear his throat—he sounded
rather like a pig drowning in mud.
“Here,” I whispered, giving him back the cup. “Drink it, and
lie down. Y ou should sleep a little.”
He shook his head and lifted the cup to his lips. He
swallowed, grimacing at the bitterness.
“Not wo rth it,” he croaked. He nodded toward the east,
where the tufted pines were now  inked black on a graying sky .
“And besides, I’ve got to think what the hell to do now .”27
DEA TH COMES CALLING
I  COULD SCARCEL Y CONT AIN my impatience until the
men had roused and eaten, broken camp—in an irritatingly
leisurely fashio n—and mounte d. At last, though, I found
myself once more on horseback , riding through a morning so
crisp and cold, I thought the air might shatter as I breathed it.
“Right,” I said without preamble, as my mount nosed her
way up next to Jamie’ s. “T alk.”
He glan ced back at me and smiled. His face was creased
with tiredness, but the brisk a ir—and a lot of very strong
cof fee—had revived him. Despite the troubled night, I felt
quick an d lively myself, blood c oursing near the surface of my
skin and blooming in my cheeks.
“Y e dinna mean to wait for wee Roger?”
“I’ll tell him later—or you can.” There was no way of riding
three ab reast; it  was only owin g to a washout that had left a
fan o f gravel down the mountain side that we were able to pick
our way side by side for the moment, out of hearing of the
others. I nudged my mount closer to Jamie’ s, my knees
wreathed in steam from the horse’ s nostrils.
Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, and shook himself, as
though to throw of f fatigue.
“A ye, w ell,” he said. “Y ou’ll have seen they were brothers?”
“I did notice th at, yes. Where the hell did the other one
come from?”
“From t here.” He lifted his chin, pointing toward the west.
Thanks to the w ashout, there was an unimpeded view of a
small co ve in the hollow below—one of those natural breaks
in the wilderness, where the trees gave way to meadow andstream. From the trees at the edge of the cove, a thin plume of
smoke rose upward, pointing like a finger in the still, cold air .
Squinting, I could make out what looked like a small
farmhouse, with a couple of rickety outbuildings. As I
watched, a tiny figure emer ged from the house and headed
toward one of the sheds.
“They’re just about to discover that he’ s gone,” Jamie said,
a tri fle grimly . “ Though with luck, they’ll think he’ s only gone
to the privy , or to milk the goats.”
I didn’ t bother asking how he knew they had goats.
“Is that their home? Josiah and his brother?”
“In a manner of speaking, Sassenach. They were bond
servants.”
“W er e?”  I said skeptically . Somehow I doubted that the
brothers’ terms of indenture had just happened to expire the
night before.
Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and wiped a dripping
nose on his sleeve.
“Unless someone catches them, aye.”
“Y ou caught Josiah,” I pointed out. “What did he tell you?”
“The tru th,” he said, with a sligh t twist of the mouth. “Or at
least I think so.”
He h ad hunted J osiah through the dark, guided by the sound
of the boy’ s fra ntic wheezing, and trapped him at last in a
rocky hollow , seizing him in t he dark. He had wrapped the
freezing boy in his plaid, sat him down, and with judicious
application of patience and firm ness—augmented with sips of
whisky from his flask—had suc ceeded at last in extracting the
story .
“The family were immigrants—father , mother , and six
bairns. Only the twins survived  the passage; the rest perished
of il lness at sea . There were no relatives here—or none that
met the boat, at any rate—and so the ship’ s master sold them.The pric e wouldna cover the co st of the family’ s passage, so
the lads were in dentured for thirty years, their wages to be put
toward the debt.”
His voice in the telling was matter -of-fact; these things
happened. I knew they did, bu t was much less inclined to
accept them without comment.
“Thirty years! Why , that’ s—how old were they at the time?”
“T wo or three,” he said.
I wa s taken aback at that. Overlooking the basic tragedy ,
that was some mitigation, I sup posed; if the boys’ purchaser
had been providing for their welfare as children … but I
remembered Josiah’ s scrawny ri bs, and the bowing of his legs.
They ha dn’ t been all that well provided for . But then, neither
were a good many children who came from loving homes.
“Josiah’ s no idea who his pare nts were, where they came
from, nor what their names were,” Jamie explained. He
coughed briefly , and cleared his throat.
“He kent his o wn name, and that of his brother—the
brother ’ s name is Keziah—but nothing else. Beardsley is the
name o’ the man who took them, but as for the lads, they dinna
ken if they’re Scots, English, Iri sh—with names like that, they
likely aren’ t German or Polish, but even that’ s not
impossible.”
“Hmm.” I puf fed a cloud of thoughtful steam, temporarily
obscuring the farmhouse below . “So Josiah ran away . I
imagine that had something to do with the brand on his
thumb?”
Jamie n odded, eyes on the gro und as his horse picked its
way down the slope. The groun d to either side of the gravel
was soft, and clumps of black dirt showed like creeping fungus
through the scree.
“He stol e a cheese—he was honest enough about that.” His
mouth widened in momentary amusement. “T ook it from a
dairy shed in Br ownsville, but the dairymaid saw him. In fact,the maid said ‘t was the other—the brother—who took it, but
…” Jamie’ s ruddy brows drew together for a moment.
“Perhaps Josiah wasna so honest about it as I thought. At
any rate,  one of the boys took the cheese; Beardsley caught the
two of them with it and summon ed the sherif f, and Josiah took
the blame—and the punishment.”
The bo y had run away from the farm following this
incident, which took place two years before. Josiah had—he
told Jamie—always intended to return and rescue his brother ,
so s oon as he could contrive a place for them to live. Jamie’ s
of fer ha d seemed a godsend to him, and he had left the
Gathering to make his way back on foot.
“Imagine his surprise to find  us perched there on the
hillside,” Jamie  said, and sneez ed. He wiped his nose, eyes
watering slightly . “He was lurking close by , trying to make up
his mind whether to wait until we’d gone, or find out whether
we were  headed for the farm—thinking if so, we might make a
fine distraction for him to slip in and steal away his brother .”
“So you decided to slip in with  him instead, and help with
the stea ling.” My own nose w as dripping from the cold. I
groped for my handkerchief with one hand, trusting to the
horse, Mrs. Piggy , not to catapult us head over heels down the
mountain while I blew my nose . I eyed Jamie over the hanky .
He still had the clammy , red-nos ed look of illness, but his high
cheekbones wer e flushed with the morning sun and he looked
remarkably chee rful for a man who’d been out in a cold wood
all night. “Fun, was it?”
“Oh, aye, it was . I’ve not done anything like that in years.”
Jamie’ s eyes creased into blue  triangles with his grin. “It
reminded me o’ raiding into the Grants’ lands with Dougal and
his men, when I  was a lad. Creepin’ through the dark, stealing
into the barn wi thout a sound—Christ, I had to stop myself in
time before I took the cow . Or I would have, if they’d had
one.”
I snif fed, and laughed indulgently .“Y ou are the most complete bandit, Jamie,” I said.
“Bandit?” he said, mildly af fronted. “I’m a verra honest
man, Sa ssenach. Or at least I am when I can af ford to be,” he
amended, with a quick glance b ehind, to be sure we were not
overheard.
“Oh, you’re entirely honest,” I a ssured him. “T oo honest for
your own good, in fact. Y ou’re just not very law-abiding.”
This observation appeared to disconcert him slightly , for he
frowned and made a gruf f sound in his throat that might have
been eit her a Scottish noise of disagreement or merely an
attempt to dislodge phlegm. He  coughed, then reined in, and
standing up in h is stirrups, waved his hat to Roger , who was
some dis tance up the slope. Rog er waved back, and turned his
horse’ s nose in our direction.
I p ulled my hors e in beside Jam ie, and dropped the reins on
its neck.
“I’ll have wee Roger take the men on to Brownsville,”
Jamie explained, sitting back in his saddle, “while I go and call
upon the  Beardsleys alone. W ill ye come with me, Sassenach,
or go on wi’ Roger?”
“Oh, I’ll  come with you,” I said, without hesitation. “I want
to see what these Beardsleys are like.”
He s miled and b rushed back his hair with one hand before
replacing his hat. He wore his h air loose to cover his neck and
ears against the cold, and it sh one like molten copper in the
morning sun.
“I thoug ht ye might. Mind you r face, though,” he said, in
half-mocking w arning. “Dinna go gape-jawed or gooseberry ,
and they mention their missing servant lad.”
“Mind your own face,” I said, rather crossly . “Gooseberry ,
indeed. Did Josiah say that he  and his brother were badly
treated?” I wondered whether th ere had been more to Josiah’ s
leaving than the cheese incident.
Jamie shook his head.“I didna ask, and he didna say—but ask yourself,
Sassenach: would ye leave a decent home to go and live in the
woods alone, to make your bed  in cold leaves and eat grubs
and crickets ‘til ye learned to hunt meat?”
He nudg ed his horse into motion, and rode up the slope to
meet Roger , leaving me pondering that conjecture. He returned
a few moments  later , and I turned my mount in beside him,
another question in my mind.
“But if things were bad enough here as to force him to leave
—why didn’ t his brother go with him?”
Jamie glanced at me, surprised, but then smiled, a little
grimly .
“Keziah’ s deaf, Sassenach.”
Not born deaf, from what Josiah had told him; his twin had
lost his hearing as the result of an injury , occurring at the age
of fi ve or so. Keziah could therefore speak, but not hear any
but the loudest of noises; and u nable to perceive the sound of
rustling leaves or shuf fling feet, could neither hunt nor avoid
pursuit.
“He says Keziah understands him, and doubtless he does.
When we crept into the barn, I kept watch below while the lad
went up  the ladder to the loft. I didna hear a sound, but within
a mi nute, both la ds were down on the floor beside me, Keziah
rubbing the sleep from his eye s. I hadna realized they were
twins; gave me a turn to see the two of them, so like.”
“I wonder why Keziah didn’ t bring away his breeches,” I
said, touching on one thing that had been puzzling me.
Jamie laughed.
“I a sked. Seems he’d taken the m of f the night before, left
them in the hay , and one o’ the barn cats had kittens on them.
He didna want to disturb her .”
I l aughe d too, though with an uneasy memory of pale bare
feet, blue-tinged skin showing purple in the firelight.
“Kind lad. And his shoes?”“He hadn’ t any .”
By n ow we had reached the bottom of the slope. The horses
milled for a mo ment, turning in a slow gyre round Jamie as
directions were decided, rend ezvous appointed, farewells
taken. Then Roger—with only slight evidence of self-
consciousness—whistled through his teeth and waved his hat
in the air in summons. I watched him ride away , and noticed
him half-turn in the saddle, the n turn back, looking straight
ahead.
“He’ s no sure they’ll really follow him,” Jamie said,
watching. He shook his hea d critically , then shrugged,
dismissing it. “A ye, well. He’ll manage, or not.”
“He’ll manage,” I said, thinking of the night before.
“I’m gl ad ye think so, Sassenach. Come on, then.” He
clicked his tongue and reined his horse’ s head around.
“If y ou’re not su re Roger can manage, why are you sending
him on his own?” I inquired of his back, swaying in the saddle
as we turned into the thin cops e that lay between us and the
now-invisible farm. “Why not keep the men together , and take
them into Brownsville yourself?”
“For one thing, he’ll no learn,  and I dinna give him the
chance. For another …” He pa used, turning to look back at
me. “For another , I didna want the whole boiling coming along
to th e Beardsleys’ and maybe he aring of their missing servant.
The who le camp saw Josiah last night, aye? If you’ve a lad
missing, and hear of a lad popping up and causing a stir in the
forest nearby , conclusions might be drawn, d’ye not think?”
He t urned back, and I followed him through a narrow defile
between the pine trees. Dew gl eamed like diamonds on bark
and nee dle, and small icy drop s fell from the boughs above,
startling my skin where they fell.
“Unless this Beardsley is old or  infirm, though, won’ t he be
joining you?” I objected. “Someone’ s bound to mention Josiah
in his hearing sooner or later .”
He shook his head, not turning round.“And te ll him what, if they do?  They saw the lad when we
dragged him in, and they saw hi m run away again. For all they
ken, he got clear away .”
“Kenny Lindsay saw them both when you brought them
back.”
He shrugged.
“A ye, I had a word wi’ Kenny , while we were saddling the
horses. He’ll say nothing.” He was right, I knew . Kenny was
one of his Ard smuir men; he would follow Jamie’ s orders
without question.
“No,” Jamie went on, skillfully reining round a lar ge
boulder , “Beards ley’ s not infirm; Josiah told me he’ s an Indian
trader—taking goods across the T reaty Line to the Cherokee
villages. What I don’ t know is i f he’ s to home just now . If he
is, th ough—” He drew breath an d paused to cough as the cold
air tickled his lungs.
“That’ s the other reason for sending the men ahead,” he
continued, wheezing slightly . “W e’ll not join them again until
tomorrow , I think. By that time, they’ll have had a night to
drink and be sociable in Brown sville; they’ll scarce recall the
lad, and be the less likely to speak of him in Beardsley’ s
hearing. W ith luck, we’ll be we ll away before anything’ s said
—no chance of Beardsley leaving us to pursue the lad then.”
So he was counting on the Beardsleys being suf ficiently
hospitable as to put us up for the night. A reasonable
expectation, in this neck of the w oods. Listening to him cough
again, I resolved to sit on his ch est this evening, if necessary ,
and oblige him to be well-grea sed with camphor , whether he
liked it or not.
W e eme r ged from the trees, and  I glanced dubiously at the
farmhouse ahead. It was smaller than I had thought, and rather
shabby , with a c racked step, a sa gging porch, and a wide patch
of sh ingles missing from the we athered roof. W ell, I had slept
in worse places, and likely would again.The door to a stunted barn gaped open, but there was no
sign of life. Th e whole place seemed deserted, save for the
plume of smoke from the chimney .
I ha d meant what I said to Ja mie, though I hadn’ t been
entirely accurate. He was  honest, and also law-abiding—
provided that the laws were th ose he chose to respect. The
mere fac t that a law had been e stablished by the Crown was
not, I knew , suf ficient to make it law in his eyes. Other laws,
unwritten, he would likely die for .
Still, while the law of property meant somewhat less to an
erstwhile Highl and raider than it might to others, it hadn’ t
escaped my attention—and therefore certainly hadn’ t escaped
his—that he was about to claim both hospitality and duty from
a man whose property he had just helped to abscond. Jamie
had no deep-se ated objection to indenture as such, I knew;
ordinarily , he would respect such a claim. That he hadn’ t
meant that he perceived some higher law in operation—though
whether that was friendship, pit y , the claim of his earbsachd ,
or something else, I didn’ t know . He had paused, waiting for
me.
“Why di d you decide to help Jos iah?” I asked bluntly , as we
made our way across the ragged cornfield that lay before the
house. Dry stalks snapped ben eath the horses’ feet, and ice
crystals glittered on the litter of dead leaves.
Jamie took of f his hat, and set it on the saddle before him, as
he tied back his hair in preparation for meeting company .
“W ell, I said to him that if he was set on this course, so be it.
But if he chose  to come to the Ridge—alone or with his
brother—then w e must rid him of the mark on his thumb, for it
would c ause talk, and word mig ht get back to yon Beardsley ,
wi’ the devil to pay and a’ that.”
He t ook a deep breath and let it out, the smoke of it wisping
white around his head, then tu rned to look at me, his face
serious.“The lad didna hesitate for a moment, though he’d been
branded; he knew . And I’ll tell  ye, Sassenach—while a man
may do a desperate thing once fr om love or courage … it takes
something more than that, if ye’ve done it once already , and ye
know damn well what it’ s going to feel like to have to do it
again.”
He t urned away without waiting for my response, and rode
into the dooryar d, scattering a f lock of foraging doves. He sat
his hors e uprigh t, his shoulders broad and square. There was
no hint of the d eep-webbed sca rs that lined his back beneath
the homespun cloak, but I knew them well.
So t hat w as it, I thought. As in  wa ter face  answer eth to fa ce,
so the heart of man to man.  And the law of  courage was the
one he had lived by for the longest.
 
SEVERAL CHICKENS HUDDLED on the porch, fluf fed into
balls of yellow-eyed resentment. They muttered balefully
among t hemselves as we dismounted, but were too cold to do
more th an shuf fle away from us, reluctant to abandon their
patch of  sunshine. Several boards of the porch itself were
broken, and the yard nearby wa s littered with scraps of half-
hewn lumber and scattered nails, as though someone had
meant to mend it, but had not ye t found a moment to attend to
the job. The p rocrastination had lasted for some time, I
thought; the nails were rusty , a nd the newly cut boards had
warped and split with damp.
“Ho! The house!” Jamie shouted, stopping in the center of
the dooryard. This was accepted etiquette for approaching a
strange house; while most people in the mountains were
hospitable, there were not a few  who viewed strangers warily
—and were inclined to make introductions at gunpoint, until
the callers’ bona fides should be established.
W ith thi s in mind, I kept a caut ious distance behind Jamie,
but m ade sure I was visible, ostentatiously spreading my skirts
and brushing them down, displaying my gender as evidence of
our peaceable intent.Damn, there was a small hole burnt through the brown
wool, no  doubt from a flying campfire spark. I concealed the
burned s pot in a fold of skirt, thinking how odd it was that
everyone regarded women as inherently harmless. Had I been
so inclined, I co uld easily have bur gled houses and murdered
hapless families from one end of the Ridge to the other .
Fortunately the impulse to do so hadn’ t struck me, though it
had  d awned  on me now and then that the Hippocratic Oath
and its injunctio n to “Do no harm” might not have strictly to
do with medical procedure. I’d had the impulse to dot one of
my more recalcitrant patients o ver the head with a stick of
firewood more than once, but had so far managed to keep the
ur ge in check.
Of c ourse, most people hadn’ t the advantage of a doctor ’ s
jaundiced view of humanity . And it was true that women
didn’ t go in so much for the recreational sorts of mayhem that
men enjoyed—I rarely found women beating each other into
pulp for fun. Give them a good motive, though, and …
Jamie was walking toward the b arn, shouting at intervals, to
no a pparent ef fect. I glanced ro und, but there were no fresh
tracks in the dooryard save our  own. A scatter of dung balls
lay near the half -hewn log, but those had plainly been left days
ago; they were moist with de w , but not fresh—most had
crumbled to powder .
No one had co me, no one had gone, save on foot. The
Beardsleys, whoever and however many of them there were,
were likely still within.
L ying low , though. It was early , but not so early that farm
people w ould not already be a bout their chores; I had seen
someone earlier , after all. I stepped back and shaded my eyes
against t he risin g sun, looking f or any sign of life. I was more
than curious about these Beard sleys—and more than slightly
apprehensive about the prospect s of having one or more male
Beardsleys riding with us, given recent events.
I turned  back to the door , and noticed an odd series of
notches cut into the wood of th e jamb. Each one was small,but ther e were a great many , running the complete length of
one doorpost, and halfway dow n the other . I looked closer;
they we re arranged in groups of seven, a scant width of
unscarred wood between the groups, as a prisoner might count,
keeping track of the weeks.
Jamie emer ged from the barn, f ollowed by a faint bleating.
The goa ts he’d mentioned, of course; I wondered whether it
had been Keziah’ s job to milk  them—if it was, his absence
was going to become rapidly apparent, if it wasn’ t already .
Jamie took a few paces toward the house, cupped his hands
round his mouth, and shouted a gain. No answer . He waited a
few mo ments, then shrugged and strode up onto the porch,
where h e hamm ered on the do or with the hilt of his dirk. It
made enough noise to wake the dead, had there been any in the
vicinity , and sent the chickens squawking away in a feather -
scattering panic , but no one appeared in answer to the
thunderous summons.
Jamie glanced back at me, one eyebrow raised. People
didn’ t n ormally go of f and leav e their farms untended, not if
they had livestock.
“Someone’ s here,” he said, in answer to the unvoiced
thought. “The goats are fresh-m ilked; there are drops still on
their teats.”
“Do you think they could all be out searching for … er …
you know who?” I murmured, moving closer to him.
“Perhaps.” He moved to the s ide, bending to peer into a
window . It had once been glassed, but most of the panes were
cracked or missing, and a sheet of ratty muslin had been
tacked o ver the opening. I saw Jamie frown at it, with the
craftsman’ s disdain for a shoddy repair .
He turned his head suddenly , then looked at me.
“D’ye hear something, Sassenach?”
“Y es. I thought it was the goats, but …”The bleat came again—this time unmistakably from the
house. Jamie set his hand to the door , but it didn’ t budge.
“Bolted,” he said briefly , and moved back to the window ,
where he reached carefully into  the frame and pulled loose a
corner of the muslin cloth.
“Phew ,” I said, wrinkling my no se at the air that wafted out.
I w as used to the odors of a winter -sealed cabin, where the
scents of sweat, dirty clothes, wet feet, greasy hair , and slop
jars min gled wit h baking bread, stewing meat, and the subtler
notes of fungus and mold, but t he aroma within the Beardsley
residence went well beyond the norm.
“Either they’re keeping the pigs in the house,” I said, with a
glance at the barn, “or there are ten people living in there who
haven’ t come out since last spring.”
“It’ s a bit ripe, ” Jamie agreed. He put his face into the
window , grimacing at the stink, and bellowed, “ Thig a mach!
Come out, Beardsley , or I’m comin’ in!”
I peered  over his shoulder , to see whether this invitation
might produce results. The ro om within was lar ge, but so
crowded that scarcely any of the stained wooden floor was
visible through the rubble. Snif fing cautiously , I deduced that
the barrels I saw contained—among other things—salt fish,
tar , apples, beer , and sauerkraut, while bundles of woolen
blankets dyed with cochineal and indigo, kegs of black
powder , and half-tanned hides r eeking of dog turds lent their
own peculiar fragrances to the unique mephitis within.
Beardsley’ s trade goods, I supposed.
The othe r window had been cov ered as well, with a tattered
wolf hide, so th at the interior w as dim and shadowy; with all
the boxes, bundles, barrels, and bits of furniture lying in heaps,
it looked like a poverty-stricken version of Ali Baba’ s cave.
The sound came again from the back of the house,
somewhat loude r; a noise mid way between a squeal and a
growl. I took a  step back, sound and acrid smell together
vividly recalling an image of dark fur and sudden violence.“Bears,” I suggested, half-serio usly . “The people are gone
and there’ s a bear inside.”
“A ye, Goldilock s,” Jamie said, very dryly . “Nay doubt.
Bears or  not, there’ s something  wrong. Fetch the pistols and
cartridge box from my saddlebag.”
I n odded  and turned to go, but  before I could step of f the
porch, a  shuf fling noise came f rom inside, and I turned back
sharply . Jamie had grasped his dirk, but as he saw whatever
was insi de, his hand relaxed o n the hilt. His eyebrows also
rose in surprise, and I leaned over his arm to see.
A woma n peered out from between two hillocks of goods,
looking round suspiciously , like a rat peering out of a garbage
dump. She was not particularly ratlike in appearance, being
wavy-haired and quite stout, but she blinked at us in the
calculating way of vermin, reckoning the threat.
“Go away ,” she said, evidently c oncluding that we were not
the vanguard of an invading army .
“Good m orning to ye, ma’am,” Jamie began, “I am James
Fraser , of—”
“I don’ t care who you are,” she replied. “Go away .”
“Indeed I will n ot,” he said firmly . “I must speak with the
man o’ the house.”
An ext raordinary expression crossed her plump face;
concern, calculation, and what might have been amusement.
“Must you?” she said. She had a slight lisp; it came out as
mutht you?  “And who says that you must?”
Jamie’ s ears were beginning to redden slightly , but he
answered calmly enough.
“The Go vernor , madam. I am Colonel  James Fraser ,” he
said, with emphasis, “char ged with the raising of militia. All
able-bodied me n between the ages of sixteen and sixty are
called to muster . W ill ye fetch Mr . Beardsley , please?”“Mili-ish-ia, is it?” she said, ha ndling the word with care.
“Why , who will you be fighting, then?”
“W ith luck, no one. But the call to muster is sent out; I must
answer , and so must all able-bodied men within the T reaty
Line.” J amie’ s hand tightened on the crosspiece of the inner
frame and rattled it experimenta lly . It was made of flimsy pine
sticks, the wood shrunken and badly weathered; he could
plainly r ip it out of the wall and step through the opening, if he
chose to do so . He met her eyes straight on, and smiled
pleasantly .
She narrowed her eyes and pursed her lips, thinking.
“Able-bodied men,” she said at last. “Hmp. W ell, we’ve
none of those. The bond lad’ s run of f again, but even if he
were here, he’ s not able; deaf a s that doorpotht, and quite as
dumb.” She nodded toward the door in illustration. “If you
care to hunt him down, you’re welcome to keep him, though.”
It didn’ t look a s though there would be any hue and cry
after Keziah, then. I took a deep  breath, in a sigh of relief, but
let it out again, swiftly .
Jamie wasn’ t giving up easily .
“Is Mr . Beardsley in the house?” he asked. “I wish to see
him.” He gave a n experimental  tug on the frame, and the dry
wood cracked with a sound like a pistol shot.
“He’ s th carce fit for company ,” she said, and the odd note
was back in her voice; wary , but at the same time, filled with
something like excitement.
“Is h e ill?” I asked, leaning over Jamie’ s shoulder . “I might
be able to help; I’m a doctor .”
She shu f fled forward a step o r two, and peered at me,
frowning under a heavy mass of wavy brown hair . She was
younger than I’d thought; seen in better light, the heavy face
showed no cobweb of age or slackening of flesh.
“A doctor?”“My wife’ s well-kent as a heale r ,” Jamie said. “The Indian
folk call her White Raven.”
“The co njure woman?” Her eyes flew wide in alarm, and
she took a step back.
Something struc k me odd about  the woman, and looking at
her , I realized what it was. Despite the reek in the house, both
the wom an’ s person and her dress were clean, and her hair was
soft and  fluf fy— not at all the norm at this time of year , when
people g enerally didn’ t bathe for several months in the cold
weather .
“Who ar e you?”  I asked bluntly . “Are you Mrs. Beardsley?
Or perhaps Miss Beardsley?”
No m ore than tw enty-five, I thought, in spite of the bulk of
her swaddled figure. Her shoulders swelled fatly under her
shawl, and the width of her hips brushed the barrels she stood
between. Evidently trade with the Cherokee was suf ficiently
profitable to keep Beardsley’ s family in adequate food, if not
his b ond servants. I eyed her with some dislike, but she met
my gaze coolly enough.
“I am Mrs. Beardthley .”
The alarm had f aded; she pursed her lips, and pushed them
in and out, reg arding me with an air of calculation. Jamie
flexed his arm, and the window frame cracked loudly .
“Come you in, then.”
The odd  tone was still in her voice; half defiance, half
eagerness. Jamie caught it and frowned, but released his grip
on the frame.
She mov ed out from between the boxes and turned toward
the door . I caugh t no more than a glimpse of her in motion, but
that was enough to see that she was lame; one leg dragged, her
shoe scraping on the wooden floor .
There was a bumping and grunting as she fumbled with the
bolt; a grating n oise, and then a thunk  as she dropped it on the
floor . The door was warped, stu ck in its frame; Jamie put hisshoulder to it and it sprang loose and swung in, boards
quivering with the shock. How l ong since it had been opened?
I wondered.
A good long time, evidently . I heard Jamie snort and cough
as he went in, and did my best to breathe through my mouth as
I follow ed. Even so, the smell was enough to knock a ferret
over . Be yond the reek of the goods, there was an outhouse
smell from somewhere; stale u rine and a ripe fecal stench.
Rotting food, too, but something else besides. My nostrils
twitched cautiously as I tried t o inhale no more than a few
molecules of air for analysis.
“How long has Mr . Beardsley been ill?” I asked.
I ha d picked o ut a distinct stench of sickness amid the
general fetor . Not only the ghos t of long-dried vomit, but the
sweet smell of purulent dischar ge and that indefinable musty ,
yeast-rising odo r that seems to be simply the smell of illness
itself.
“Oh … thome time.”
She shut the door behind us, and I felt a sudden sur ge of
claustrophobia. Inside, the air seemed thick, both from the
stench and from the lack of ligh t. I had a great impulse to rip
down th e coverings from both windows and let in a little air ,
and clenched my hands in the fabric of my cloak to keep from
 doing it.
Mrs. Beardsley turned sideways and scuttled crablike
through a narrow passage left between the stacks of goods.
Jamie g lanced at me, made a Scottish noise of disgust in his
throat, and ducked under a ju tting bundle of tent poles to
follow h er . I made my way cautiously after , trying not to
notice t hat my foot fell now and then on objects of an
unpleasant squashiness. Rotten apples? Dead rats? I pinched
my nose and didn’ t look down.
The farmhouse was simple in construction; one big room
across the front, one behind.The rear  room was a striking contrast to the squalid clutter
of the front. Th ere was no orna ment or decoration; the room
was plain and o rderly as a Quaker meeting hall. Everything
was bare and spotless, the wo oden table and stone hearth
scrubbed to rawness, a few pewter utensils gleaming dully on
a shelf. One window here ha d been left uncovered, glass
intact, a nd the morning sun fell across the room in pure white
radiance. The room was quiet a nd the air still, increasing the
odd feel ing that we had entered a sanctuary of some sort from
the chaos of the front room.
The impression of peace was d ispelled at once by a loud
noise fro m above. It was the sound we had heard earlier , but
close at hand, a loud squeal f illed with desperation, like a
tortured hog. Jamie started at t he sound, and turned at once
toward a ladder at the far side of the room, which led upward
to a loft.
“He’ th up there,” Mrs. Beards ley said—unnecessarily , as
Jamie w as already halfway up the ladder . The squealing noise
came again, more ur gently , an d I decided not to fetch my
medicine box before investigating.
Jamie’ s head appeared at the top of the ladder as I grasped
it.
“Bring a light, Sassenach,” he said briefly , and his head
vanished.
Mrs. Beardsley stood motionless, hands buried in her shawl,
making no ef fort to find a light. Her lips were pressed tight
together , her plump cheeks mott led with red. I pushed past her ,
seized a  candles tick from the sh elf, and knelt to light it at the
hearth before hastening upward.
“Jamie?” I poked my head ab ove the edge of the loft,
holding my candle cautiously above my head.
“Here, S assenach.” He was standing at the far end of the
loft, where the s hadows lay thickest. I scrambled over the top
of the ladder and  made my way toward him, stepping gingerly .The sten ch was much stronger here. I caught the gleam of
something in the dark, and brought the candle forward to see.
Jamie drew in his breath, as shocked as I was, but quickly
mastered his emotion.
“Mr . Beardsley , I presume,” he said.
The man  was enormous—or ha d been. The great curve of
his belly  still rose whalelike out of the shadows, and the hand
that lay  slack on the floorboa rds near my foot could have
cupped a  cannonball with ease. But the flesh of the upper arm
hung slack, white and flabby , th e massive chest sunken in the
center . W hat must once have been the neck of a bull had
wasted to stringiness, and a sing le eye gleamed, frantic behind
strands of matted hair .
The eye widened, and he mad e the noise again, his head
straining upward ur gently . I felt a shudder go through Jamie. It
was eno ugh to raise the hair on t he back of my own neck, but I
disregarded it, pushing the candlestick into Jamie’ s hands.
“Hold the light for me.”
I s ank to my knees, too late fee ling the liquid ooze through
the fabric of my skirt. The man lay in his own filth, and had
been lying so f or quite some t ime; the floor was thick with
slime an d wet. He was naked, co vered by no more than a linen
blanket, and as I turned it bac k, I glimpsed ulcerated sores
amid the smears of ordure.
It w as clear eno ugh what ailed Mr . Beardsley; one side of
his face sagged grotesquely , the  eyelid drooping, and both the
arm and the leg on the near side of his body splayed limp and
dead, the joints left knobby and weirdly distorted by the falling
away of the mu scle around them. He snuf fled and bleated,
tongue poking and slobbering from the corner of his mouth in
his vain but ur gent attempts at speech.
“Hush,” I said to him. “Don’ t talk; it’ s all right now .”
I t ook the wrist to check his pu lse; the flesh moved loosely
on the bones o f his arm, with not the slightest twitch of
response to my touch.“A strok e,” I said softly to Jamie. “An apoplexy , you call
it.” I  put  my hand on Beardsley’ s chest, to of fer the comfort of
touch.
“Don’ t worry ,” I said to him. “W e’ve come to help.” I spoke
reassuringly , tho ugh even as I said the words, I wondered what
help was possible. W ell, cleanliness and warmth at least; it was
nearly a s cold in the loft as it was outside, and his chest was
chilly and pebbled with gooseflesh among the bushy hair .
The ladder creaked heavily , and  I turned to see the outline
of Mrs. Beardsley’ s fluf fy head and heavy shoulders,
silhouetted by the light from the kitchen below .
“How long has he been like this?” I asked sharply .
“Perhapth … a month,” she said, after a pause. “I could not
move him,” she said, defensive. “He ith too heavy .”
That was plainly true. However …
“Why is he up here?” Jamie demanded. “If ye didna move
him, how  did he get here?” He turned, shedding the light of
the candle over the loft. There was little here that would draw
a ma n; a n old straw mattress, a few scattered tools, and bits of
household rubbish. The light shone on Mrs. Beardsley’ s face,
turning her pale blue eyes to ice.
“He wath … chathing me,” she said faintly .
“What?” Jamie strode over to th e ladder , and bending down,
seized h er by the arm, helping her—rather against her will, it
seemed—to clamber up the rest of the way into the loft.
“What d’ye mean, chasing you?” he demanded. She
hunched her shoulders, looking round and homely as a cookie
jar in her bundled shawls.
“He thtr uck me, ” she said simp ly . “I came up the ladder to
get a way from h im, but he follo wed. I tried to hide back here
in the thadows, and he came, b ut then … he fell. And … he
could not get up.” She shrugged again.
Jamie held the c andlestick near her face. She gave a small
nervous smile, eyes darting from  me to Jamie, and I saw thatthe l isp w as cau sed by the fact that her front teeth were broken
—snapped of f at an angle, just b eyond the gums. A small scar
ran through her upper lip; another showed white in the hairs of
one eyebrow .
A ho rrible noise came from the man on the floor—a furious
squeal of what sounded like protest—and she flinched, eyes
shut tight in reflexive dread.
“Mmphm,” Jamie said, glancing from her to her husband.
“A ye. W ell. Fetch up some wate r , ma’am, and ye will. Another
candle and some fresh rags a s well,” he called after her
departing back as she hastened  toward the ladder , only too
glad to be given an excuse to leave.
“Jamie—bring back the light, will you?”
He came and sto od beside me, h olding the candle so it shed
its glow on the ruined body . He gave Beardsley a dark look of
mingled pity and dislike, and shook his head slowly .
“God’ s judgment, d’ye think, Sassenach?”
“Not entirely God’ s, I don’ t thin k,” I said, my voice lowered
so a s no t to carry to the kitchen below . I reached up and took
the candlestick from him. “Look.”
A fl ask of water  and a plate of bread, hard and tinged with
blue mo ld, stood in the shadows near Beardsley’ s head; orts
and bits of gluey , half-chewed bread covered the floor nearby .
She had  fed him—enough to k eep him alive. Y et I had seen
great quantities of food in tha t front room as we passed—
hanging hams, barrels of dried fruit and salt fish and
sauerkraut.
There were bundles of furs, jugs of oil, piles of woolen
blankets—and y et the master of those goods lay here in the
dark, starved and shivering beneath a single sheet of linen.
“Why d id she not just let him die, I wonder?” Jamie asked
softly , eyes fixed on the moldy  bread. Beardsley gar gled and
growled at this; his open eye rolled angrily , tears running
down his face an d snot bubbling from his nose. He flailed andgrunted, arching his body in frustration, collapsing with a
meaty thud that shook the boards of the loft.
“He can understand you, I think. Can you?” I addressed this
remark to the sic k man, who go bbled and drooled in a manner
that mad e it clear that he unders tood at least that he was being
spoken to.
“As to why …”
I gestured toward Beardsley’ s legs, moving the candle
slowly above them. Some of the sores were indeed
compression sor es, caused by l ying helpless for a long time.
Others were not. Parallel slashes, clearly made by a knife,
showed black and clotted on on e massive thigh. The shin was
decorated with a regular line of ulcerations, angry red wounds
rimmed with black and oozing. Burns, left to fester .
Jamie ga ve a small grunt at the  sight, and glanced over his
shoulder , toward the ladder . The sound of a door opening came
from bel ow , and  a cold draft blew up into the loft, making the
candle f lame dance wildly . The door shut, and the flame
steadied.
“I c an make sh ift to lower him, I think.” Jamie lifted the
candle, assessing the beams overhead. “A sling, perhaps, with
a rope put over yon beam there. Is it all right to move him?”
“Y es,” I  said, but I wasn’ t paying attention. Bending over
the sick man’ s legs, I had caug ht a whif f of something that I
hadn’ t smelled in a long, long time—a very bad and sinister
stink.
I h adn’ t encountered it often, but even once would have
been eno ugh; the pungent smell of gas gangrene is strikingly
memorable. I didn’ t want to say anything that might alarm
Beardsley—if he was capable of understanding—so instead, I
patted him reassuringly and s tood up to go and fetch the
candle from Jamie for a better look.
He g ave it to me, leaning close to murmur in my ear as he
did so.
“Can ye do aught for him, Sassenach?”“No,” I said, equ ally low-voiced. “Not for the apoplexy , that
is. I can treat the sores and give him herbs against fever—
that’ s all.”
He stood for a moment, looking  at the humped figure in the
shadows, now quiescent. Then he shook his head, crossed
himself, and went quickly down the ladder to hunt a rope.
I we nt s lowly ba ck to the sick man, who greeted me with a
thick “Haughhh ” and a restless thumping of one leg, like a
rabbit’ s warning . I knelt by his feet, talking soothingly of
nothing in particular , while I h eld the light close to examine
them. The toes. All the toes on his dead foot had been burned,
some only blistered, others burn ed nearly to the bone. The first
two toes had go ne quite black, and a greenish tinge spread
over the upper aspect of the foot nearby .
I w as appalled— as much by the  thought of what might have
led to this as by the action itself. The candle wavered; my
hands were shaking, and not only with cold. I was not only
horrified by what had happened here; I was also worried by
the immediate prospects. What on earth were we to do about
these wretched people?
Plainly we couldn’ t take Beardsley with us—just as plainly ,
he could  not be left here, unde r the care of his wife. There
were no  near neighbors to look in, no one else on the farm to
safeguard him. I supposed we might manage to transport him
to B rownsville; there might be a wagon in the barn. But even
if so, what then?
There w as no hospital to care f or him. If one of the homes
in Brow nsville might take him in for the sake of charity …
well and good, but seeing Bea rdsley’ s state after a month, I
thought it unlikely that his condition—in terms either of
paralysis or speech—would imp rove much. Who would keep
him, if it meant caring for him day and night for the rest of his
life?
The rest of hi s life, of course, could be rather short,
depending on my success in dea ling with the gangrene. W orry
retreated as my mind turned to the immediate problem. Iwould have to amputate; it was the only possibility . The toes
were easy—but the toes might not be enough. If I had to take
of f the foot or part of it, we ran a greater risk from shock and
infection.
Could he feel it? Sometimes stroke victims retained feeling
in an af fected limb, but not movement, sometimes movement
without feeling— sometimes nei ther . Cautiously , I touched the
gangrenous toe, eyes on his face.
His wor king eye  was open, focu sed on the beams overhead.
He d idn’ t glance at me or make a noise, which answered that
question. No, he couldn’ t feel the foot. That was a relief, in a
way—at least he wouldn’ t suf fer pain from the amputation.
Nor , it occurred to me, had he felt the damage inflicted on his
limb. Had she been aware of that? Or had she chosen to attack
his dead  side only because he retained some strength on the
other , and might still defend himself?
There w as a soft rustle behind me. Mrs. Beardsley was
back. She set do wn a bucket of  water and a pile of rags, then
stood behind me, watching in silence as I began to sponge
away the filth.
“Can you cure him?” she asked. Her voice was calm,
remote, as though she spoke of a stranger .
The pat ient’ s head lolled suddenly back, so his open eye
fixed on me.
“I think  I can h elp a bit,” I said carefully . I wished Jamie
would return. Aside from need of my medical box, I was
finding the company of the Beardsleys rather unnerving.
The more so when Mr . Beardsley inadvertently released a
small quantity of urine. Mrs. Be ardsley laughed, and he made
a s ound in reply that made the g oose bumps rise on my arms. I
wiped the liquid of f his thigh and went on with my work,
trying to ignore it.
“Have y ou or Mr . Beardsley an y kin nearby?” I asked, as
conversationally as possible. “Someone who might come to
lend you a hand?”“No one ,” she said. “He took me from my father ’ s house in
Maryland. T o thith place.” This place  was spoken as though it
were the  fifth circle of hell; so  far as I could see, there was
certainly some resemblance at the present moment.
The doo r opened below , and a  welcome draft of cold air
announced Jamie’ s return. There was a clunking noise as he
set my box on the table, and I hastily rose, eager to escape
them, if only for a moment.
“There’ s my husband with my m edicines. I’ll just … er …
go and fetch … um …” I edged past Mrs. Beardsley’ s bulk,
and fled  down the ladder , sweating in spite of the chill in the
house.
Jamie stood by the table, frown ing as he turned a length of
rope in his hands. He glanced up as he heard me, and his face
relaxed a little.
“How is it, Sass enach?” he asked, low-voiced, with a jerk of
the chin toward the loft.
“V ery bad,” I wh ispered, coming to stand beside him. “T wo
of h is to es are gangrenous; I’ll have to take them of f. And she
says they’ve no family near to help.”
“Mmphm.” His lips tightened, and he bent his attention to
the sling he was improvising.
I reache d for my medical chest, to check my instruments,
but stopped when I saw Jami e’ s pistols lying on the table
beside it, along with his powder horn and shot case. I touched
his arm and jer ked my head at  them, mouthing, “What?” at
him.
The line  between his brows deepened, but before he could
answer , a dreadful racket came  from the loft above, a great
thrashing and thumping, accompanied by a gar gling noise like
an elephant drowning in a mud bog.
Jamie dropped the rope and shot for the ladder , with me at
his heels. He let out a shout as his head topped the ladder , and
dived forward. As I scrambled into the loft behind him, I saw
him in the shadows, grappling with Mrs. Beardsley .She smashed an elbow at his face, hitting him in the nose.
This removed any inhibitions he might have had about
manhandling a woman, and he jerked her round to face him
and struck her with a short, sharp uppercut to the chin that
clicked her jaws and made her stagger , eyes glazing. I dashed
forward to save the candle, as s he collapsed on her rump in a
pouf of skirts and petticoats.
“God … dab … that … wo mad.” Jamie’ s voice was
muf fled, his sleeve pressed acro ss his face to stanch the flow
of bloo d from his nose, b ut the sincerity in it was
unmistakable.
Mr . Beardsley was flopping like a landed fish, wheezing and
gur gling. I lifted the candle and found him flailing at his neck
with one splayed hand. A linen kerchief had been twisted into
a rop e an d wrap ped round his ne ck, and his face was black, his
one eye popping. I hastily seized the kerchief and undid it, and
his breathing eased with a great whoosh of fetid air .
“If s he’d been faster , she’d hav e had him.” Jamie lowered
his b lood-streaked arm and felt his nose tenderly . “Christ, I
think she broke my dose.”
“Why? Why did you thtop me?” Mrs. Beardsley was still
conscious, though swaying and glassy-eyed. “He thould die, I
want him to die, he mutht die.”
“ A ni ghean na galladh , ye  could ha’ killed him at y our
leisure a ny time this month p ast, if ye wanted him dead,”
Jamie sa id impatiently . “Why in God’ s name wait until ye had
witnesses?”
She looked up at him, eyes suddenly sharp and clear .
“I di d no t want him dead,” she said. “I wanted him to die .”
She smiled, showing the stubs of her broken teeth. “Thlowly .”
“Oh, Christ,” I said, and wiped a hand across my face. It
was only  mid-morning, but I felt as though the day had lasted
several weeks already . “It’ s my  fault. I told her I thought I
could help; she thought I’d save him, maybe cure himaltogether .” The  curse of a reputation for magic healing! I
might have laughed, had I been in the mood for irony .
There w as a sharp, fresh stink in  the air , and Mrs. Beardsley
turned on her husband with a cry of outrage.
“Filthy beast!” She scrambled to her knees, snatched up a
hard roll from th e plate, and thre w it at him. It bounced of f his
head. “Filthy , thtinking, dirty , wicked …” Jamie seized her by
the h air as she hurled herself at the prone body , grabbed her
arm, and jerked her away , sobbing and shrieking abuse.
“Bloody hell,” he said, over the uproar . “Fetch me that rope,
Sassenach, before I kill them both myself.”
The job of getti ng Mr . Beardsley down from the loft was
enough to leave both Jamie and me sweat-soaked and streaked
with filt h, reeking and weak i n the knees with ef fort. Mrs.
Beardsley squatted on a stool in the corner , quiet and
malevolent as a toad, making no ef fort to help.
She gave a gas p of outrage wh en we laid the big, lolling
body on the clean table, but Jamie glared at her , and she sank
back on her stool, mouth clamped to a thin, straight line.
Jamie wiped his bloodstained sleeve across his brow , and
shook his head a s he looked at Beardsley . I didn’ t blame him;
even cleaned up, warmly covered, and with a little warm gruel
spooned into him, the man was in a dreadful state. I examined
him onc e more, carefully , in th e light from the window . No
doubt about the toes; the stink of gangrene was distinct, and
the greenish tinge covered the outer dorsal aspect of the foot.
I’d have  to take more than the t oes—I frowned, feeling my
way carefully around the putrefying area, wondering whether
it was better to try for a partial amputation between the
metacarpals, or simply to take the foot of f at the ankle. The
ankle di ssection would be faster , and while I would normally
try for the more conservative partial amputation, there was
really no  point to it in this case; Beardsley was plainly never
going to walk again.I gn awed my low er lip dubiously . For that matter , the whole
business might be moot; he burn ed with intermittent fever , and
the sore s on legs and buttocks oozed with suppuration. What
were the chances of his recovering from the amputation
without dying of infection?
I ha dn’ t heard M rs. Beardsley come up behind me; for a
heavyset woman, she moved with remarkable silence.
“What do you m ean to do?” she asked, her voice sounding
neutral and remote.
“Y our h usband’ s toes are gangrenous,” I said. No point in
trying not to ala rm Beardsley now . “I’ll have to amputate his
foot.” There was really no choic e, though my heart sank at the
notion of spending the next se veral days—or weeks—here,
nursing Beardsley . I could hardly leave him to the tender care
of his wife!
She circled the t able slowly , coming to a stop near his feet.
Her face  was blank, but a tiny smile appeared at the corners of
her mou th, winking on and of f , as though quite without her
willing i t. She looked at the blackened toes for a long minute,
then shook her head.
“No,” she said softly . “Let him rot.”
The question of Beardsley’ s und erstanding was resolved, at
least; hi s open eye bulged, and he let out a shriek of rage,
thrashing and flailing in an ef fort to get at her , so that he came
perilously near to falling onto th e floor in his struggles. Jamie
seized him, shoving and heaving to keep his ponderous bulk
on the table. A s Beardsley at last subsided, gasping and
making mewlin g noises, Jamie straightened up, gasping
himself, and gave Mrs. Beardsley a look of extreme dislike.
She hunched her shoulders, pulling her shawl tight around
them, but didn’ t retreat or look away . She raised her chin
defiantly .
“I am hith wife, ” she said. “I thall not let you cut him. It ith
a rithk to hith life.”“It’ s certain death if I don’ t,” I  said shortly . “And a nasty
one, too . Y ou—”  I didn’ t get to finish; Jamie put a hand on my
shoulder , squeezing hard.
“T ake her outside, Claire,” he said quietly .
“But—”
“Outside.” His hand tightened on my shoulder , almost
painful in its pressure. “Dinna come back until I call for ye.”
His face  was grim, but there was something in his eyes that
made m e go hollow and wat ery inside. I glanced at the
sideboard, where his pistols lay beside my medicine chest,
then back at his face, appalled.
“Y ou can’ t,” I said.
He looked at Beardsley , his face bleak.
“I would put do wn a dog in such case without a second’ s
thought,” he said softly . “Can I do less for him?”
“He is not a dog!”
“No, he is not.” His hand dropped from my shoulder , and he
circled the table, until he stood by Beardsley’ s side.
“If ye understand me, man—close your eye,” he said
quietly . There was a momen t’ s silence, and Beardsley’ s
bloodshot eye fixed on Jamie’ s face—with undeniable
intelligence. The lid closed slowly , then rose again.
Jamie turned to me.
“Go,” he  said. “Let it be his choice. If—or if not—I will call
for ye.”
My kne es were trembling, and I knotted my hands in the
folds of my skirt.
“No,” I said. I looked at Beardsley , then swallowed hard and
shook m y head. “No,” I said again. “I—if you … you must
have a witness.”
He hesitated a moment, but then nodded.“A ye, you’re right.” He glanced at Mrs. Beardsley . She
stood stock-still, hands knotted under her apron, eyes darting
from me to Jamie to her husband and back. Jamie shook his
head bri efly , then turned back to  the stricken man, squaring his
shoulders.
“Blink once for yes, twice for nay ,” he said. “Y ou
understand?”
The eyelid lowered without hesitation.
“Listen, then.” Jamie drew a deep breath and began to
speak, in a flat, unemotional ton e of voice, his eyes steady on
the ruined face and the fierce gaze of its open eye.
“Y e ken what has happened to you?”
Blink.
“Y e ken that my wife is a physician, a healer?”
The eye rolled in my direction, then back to Jamie. Blink.
“She sa ys that you have suf fered an apoplexy , that the
damage canna be mended. Y ou understand?”
A hu f fing sound came from the  lopsided mouth. This was
not news. Blink.
“Y our foot is putrid. If it is not taken of f, you will rot and
die. Y ou understand?”
No resp onse. Th e nostrils flared suddenly , moist, questing;
then the  air was expelled with a  snort. He had smelled the rot;
had suspected, perhaps, but not known for sure that it came
from his own flesh. Not ‘til now . Slowly , a blink.
The quiet litany went on, statem ents and questions, each a
shovelful of dirt, taken from a deepening grave. Each ending
with the inexorable words, “Y ou understand?”
My hands and feet and face fe lt numb. The odd sense of
sanctuary in the room had altered; it felt like a church, but no
longer a place o f refuge. A place now in which some ritual
took place, leading to a solemn, predestined end.And it was predestined, I understood. Beardsley had made
his choice long since—perhaps even before we arrived. He
had had a mont h in that pur gatory , after all, suspended in the
cold dark between heaven and  earth, in which to think, to
come to grips with his prospects and make his peace with
death.
Did he understand?
Oh, yes, very well.
Jamie bent over the table, one hand on Beardsley’ s arm, a
priest in stained linen, of fering absolution and salvation. Mrs.
Beardsley stood  frozen in the fall of light from the window , a
stolid angel of denunciation.
The statements and the questions came to an end.
“W ill ye have my wife take your foot and tend your
wounds?”
One blink, then two, exaggerated, deliberate.
Jamie’ s breathing was audible, the heaviness in his chest
making a sigh of each word.
“Do ye ask me to take your life?”
Though one half of his face sagged lifeless and the other
was drawn and h aggard, there was enough of Beardsley left to
show expression . The workable corner of the mouth turned up
in a cynical leer . What th er e is left of it , said his silence. The
eyelid fell—and stayed shut.
Jamie c losed hi s own eyes. A small shudder passed over
him. Then he shook himself briefly , like a man shaking of f
cold water , and turned to the sideboard where his pistols lay .
I crossed swiftly to him, laying a hand on his arm. He didn’ t
look at me, but kept his eyes on  the pistol he was priming. His
face was white, but his hands were steady .
“Go,” he said. “T ake her out.”
I looked back at Beardsley , but he was my patient no longer;
his flesh  beyond my healing o r my comfort. I went to thewoman and took her by the arm, turning her toward the door .
She came with me, walking mechanically , and did not turn to
look back.
 
THE O UTDOORS SEEMED UNREAL, the sunlit yard
unconvincingly ordinary . Mrs. Beardsley pulled free of my
grip and headed toward the ba rn, walking fast. She glanced
back over her s houlder at the house, then broke into a heavy
run, disappearin g through the open barn door as though fiends
were after her .
I caught her sense of panic and nearly ran after her . I didn’ t,
though; I stopped at the edge o f the yard and waited. I could
feel my heart b eating, slowly ,  thumping in my ears. That
seemed unreal, too.
The shot came, finally , a small flat sound, inconsequent
amid the  soft bleating of goats f rom the barn and the rustle of
chickens scratching in the dirt nearby . Head, I wondered
suddenly , or heart, and shuddered.
It was long past noon; the cold, still air of the morning had
risen and a chilly breeze moved through the dooryard, stirring
dust and wisps of hay . I stood and waited. He would have
paused, I thought, to say a brief prayer for Beardsley’ s soul. A
moment passed,  two, then the back door opened. Jamie came
out, took a few steps, then stopped, bent over , and vomited.
I started  forward, in case he  needed me, but no. He
straightened and wiped his mouth, then turned and walked
across the yard away from me, heading for the wood.
I felt suddenly s uperfluous, and rather oddly af fronted. I had
been at work no  more than moments before, deeply absorbed
in th e practice o f medicine. Connected to flesh, to mind and
body; attentive to symptoms, aware of pulse and breath, the
vital signs. I hadn’ t liked Beardsley in the least, and yet I had
been tota lly engaged in the struggle to preserve his life, to ease
his suf fering. I could still feel the odd touch of his slack, warm
flesh on my hands.Now my patient was abruptly dead, and I felt as though
some sm all part of my body had been amputated. I thought I
was perhaps a trifle shocked.
I glanced at t he house, my original sense of caution
superseded by distaste—and som ething deeper . The body must
be wash ed, of course, and dece ntly laid out for burial. I had
done such things before—with no great qualms, if without
enthusiasm—and yet I found myself now with a great
reluctance to go back into the place.
I’d seen death by violence—and many much more
distasteful than this was likely t o have been. Death was death.
Whether it came as passage, as  parting, or in some cases, as
dearly desired release … Jamie had freed Beardsley very
suddenly from the prison of his stricken body; did his spirit
perhaps still linger in the hous e, having not yet realized its
freedom?
“Y ou are being superstitious, B eauchamp,” I said severely
to m yself. “Stop it at once.” And yet I didn’ t take a step
toward the house, but hovered in the yard, keyed up like an
indecisive hummingbird.
If B eardsley was beyond my he lp, and Jamie in no need of
it, there was still one who might require it. I turned my back
on the house and went toward the barn.
This was no more than a lar ge open shed with a loft,
fragrantly dark and filled with h ay and moving shapes. I stood
in th e do orway u ntil my eyes ad justed. There was a stall in one
corner , but no h orse. A rickety fence with a milking stanchion
made a goat pen in the other co rner; she was crouched inside
it, on a pile of fresh straw . Ha lf a dozen goats crowded and
bumped around her , jostling and nibbling at the fringes of her
shawl. S he was little more than a hunched shape, but I caught
the brief shine of a wary eye in the shadows.
“Ith it over?” Th e question was asked softly , barely audible
above the quiet grunting and bleating.“Y es.” I hesitated, but she seeme d in no need of my support;
I cou ld s ee bette r now—she had a small kid curled in her lap,
her fingers stroking the small, silky head. “Are you quite all
right, Mrs. Beardsley?”
Silence, then the heavy figure shrugged and settled, some
tension seeming to leave her .
“I th carthely know ,” she said sof tly . I waited, but she neither
moved nor spoke further . The peaceful company of the goats
seemed as likely as mine to be  a comfort to her , so I turned
and left them, rather envying her the warm refuge of the barn
and her cheerful companions.
W e had left the horses in the dooryard, still saddled, tethered
to an alder sap ling. Jamie had loosened their girths and
removed their saddlebags when he went to fetch my medicine
box, but  had not taken the time  to unsaddle them. I did that
now; plainly it would be some time yet before we could leave.
I too k of f the bridles as well, and hobbled them, turning them
loose to graze on  the winter -brown grass that still grew thickly
at the edge of the pines.
There was a hollowed half-log on the western side of the
house, plainly meant to serve as a horse trough, but it was
empty . W elcom ing the chore for the delay it allowed me, I
raised w ater fro m the well and  emptied bucket after bucket
into the trough.
W iping my wet hands on my  skirt, I looked round for
further useful occupation, but there wasn’ t any . No choice,
then. I braced myself, poured more water into the bucket,
dropped in the h ollow drinking gourd that stood on the edge of
the w ell, and carried it back around the house, concentrating
fiercely on not spilling any , in order to avoid thinking about
the prospects within.
When I raised my eyes, I was startled to see that the back
door stood open. I was sure it had been closed before. W as
Jamie inside? Or Mrs. Beardsley?Keeping a wary distance, I craned my neck to peep into the
kitchen, but as I sidled closer , I heard the steady chuff  of a
spade shifting dirt. I went aroun d the far corner to find Jamie
digging near a mountain-ash tree that stood by itself in the
yard, a short distance from the house. He was still in
shirtsleeves, and  the wind blew the stained white linen against
his body , ruf fling the red hair over his face.
He brus hed it back with one w rist, and I saw with a small
sense o f shock that he was crying. He wept silently and
somehow savagely , attacking t he soil as though it were an
enemy . He caught my movement from a corner of his eye, and
stopped, swiping a blood-smeared shirtsleeve quickly across
his face, as though to wipe away sweat from his brow .
He was  breathing hoarsely , loud enough to hear from a
distance. I came silently and of fered him the gourd of water ,
along w ith a clean handkerchief. He didn’ t meet my eyes, but
drank, c oughed, drank again, handed back the gourd, and blew
his nose, gingerly . It was swollen, but no longer bleeding.
“W e won’ t sleep here tonight, will we?” I ventured to ask,
seating myself on the chopping block that stood under the ash
tree.
He shook his head.
“God, n o,” he said hoarsely . Hi s face was blotched and his
eyes blo odshot, but he had firm  hold of himself. “W e’ll see
him dec ently bu ried and go. I dinna mind if we sleep cold in
the wood again—but not here.” I agreed wholeheartedly with
that notion, but there was one thing more to be considered.
“And … her?” I  asked delicately . “Is she in the house? The
back door is open.”
He grunted, and thrust in his shovel.
“No, that was me. I’d for got to leave it open when I came
out before—to let the soul go f ree,” he explained, seeing my
upraised eyebrow .
It w as the complete matter -of-factness with which he
of fered this explanation, rather t han the fact that it echoed myown earlier notion, that made the hairs prickle along my neck.
“I see,” I said, a little faintly .
Jamie dug steadily for a bit, the shovel biting deep into the
dirt. It was loamy soil and leaf mold here; the digging was
easy . At last, wi thout breaking the swing of the blade, he said,
“Brianna told me a story she’d  read once. I dinna recall all
about it, quite, b ut there was a murder done, only the person
killed w as a wicked man, who h ad driven someone to it. And
at the end, when the teller of the tale was asked what should be
done, he said, ‘Let pass the justice of God.’ ”
I nodded . I was in agreement, th ough it seemed a trifle hard
on the person who found himself required to be the instrument
of such justice.
“Do you suppose that’ s what it was, in this case? Justice?”
He shook his head; not in negation, but in puzzlement, and
went on  digging. I watched him for a bit, soothed by his
nearness and by the hypnotic rhythm of his movements. After
a bit, though, I stirred, steeling myself to face the task awaiting
me.
“I suppose I’d best go and lay o ut the body and clear up the
loft,” I said reluctantly , drawing  my feet under me to rise. “W e
can’ t leave that p oor woman alone with such a mess, no matter
what she did.”
“No, wait, Sassenach,” Jamie said, pausing in his digging.
He glanc ed at the house, a little warily . “I’ll go in with ye, in a
bit. For now”—he nodded to ward the edge of the wood
—”d’ye think ye could fetch a few stones for the cairn?”
A cairn? I was more than slightly surprised at this; it seemed
an unnecessary elaboration for the late Mr . Beardsley . Still,
there were undoubtedly wolves in the wood; I’d seen scats on
the trail two days before. It also occurred to me that Jamie
might be contriving an honorable excuse for me to postpone
entering the house again—in  which case, hauling rocks
seemed a thoroughly desirable alternative.Fortunately , there was no shortage of suitable rocks. I
fetched the heavy canvas apron that I wore for sur gery from
my saddlebag, and began to trundle to and fro, an ant
collecting labori ous crumbs. After half an hour or so of this,
the t hought of en tering the house had begun to seem much less
objectionable. Jamie was still hard at it, though, so I kept on.
I stoppe d finally , gasping, and dumped yet another load out
of my apron on to the ground by the deepening grave. The
shadows were falling long across the dooryard, and the air was
cold enough that my fingers had  gone numb—a good thing, in
view of the various scrapes and nicks on them.
“Y ou lo ok a right mess,” I obse rved, shoving a disheveled
mass of hair of f  my own face. “Has Mrs. Beardsley come out
yet?”
He s hook his he ad, but took a moment to get his breath back
before replying.
“No,” h e said, in a voice so h oarse I could scarcely hear
him. “She’ s still wi’ the goats. I daresay it’ s warm in there.”
I ey ed him uneasily . Grave-digging is hard work; his shirt
was clin ging to his body , soa ked through in spite of the
coldness of the day , and his fa ce was flushed—with labor , I
hoped, rather than fever . His fin gers were white and as stif f as
mine, th ough; it took a visible ef fort for him to uncurl them
from the handle of the shovel.
“Surely that’ s deep enough,” I said, surveying his work. I
would myself have settled for the shallowest of gouges in the
soft eart h, but slipshod work wa s never Jamie’ s way . “Do stop,
Jamie, and change your shirt a t once. Y ou’re wringing wet;
you’ll catch a terrible chill.”
He didn’ t bother ar guing, but took up the spade and
carefully neaten ed the corners of the hole, shaping the sides to
keep them from crumbling inward.
The shadows under the pine trees were growing thick, and
the c hickens had all gone to ro ost, feathery blobs perched in
the trees like bunches of brown mistletoe. The forest birds hadfallen si lent, too, and the shadow of the house fell long and
cold across the new grave. I hu gged my elbows, and shivered
at the quiet.
Jamie tossed the shovel onto the ground with a clunk,
startling me. He climbed up out of the hole, and stood still for
a minute, eyes closed, swaying with weariness. Then he
opened his eyes and smiled tiredly at me.
“Let’ s finish, then,” he said.
 
WHETHER TH E OPEN DOOR had indeed allowed the
deceased’ s spirit to flee, or whet her it was only that Jamie was
with me , I felt no hesitation in entering the house now . The
fire had gone out, and the kitche n was cold and dim, yet there
was no sense of anything evil within. It was simply … empty .
Mr . Beardsley’ s mortal remains rested peacefully under one
of his own trade blankets, mute and still. Empty , too.
Mrs. Beardsley had declined to assist with the formalities—
or even to enter the house, so  long as her husband’ s body
remained inside—so I swept the hearth, kindled a new fire,
and coaxed it in to reluctant life, while Jamie took care of the
mess in the loft. By the time he came down again, I had turned
to the main business at hand.
Dead, Beardsley  seemed much less grotesque than he had in
life; the twisted limbs were rela xed, the air of frantic struggle
gone. Jamie had placed a linen  towel over the head, though
when I peeked beneath it, I cou ld see that there was no gory
mess to deal with; Jamie had shot him cleanly through the
blind ey e, and the ball had not burst the skull. The good eye
was clos ed now , the blackened wound left staring. I laid the
towel gently back over the fa ce, its symmetry restored in
death.
Jamie cl imbed d own the ladder , and came quietly to stand
behind me, touching my shoulder briefly .
“Go and  wash,” I said, gesturi ng behind me to the small
kettle of  water I had hung over  the fire to heat. “I’ll managehere.”
He nodded, stripped of f his sodd en, filthy shirt, and dropped
it on  the  hearth. I listened to the  small, homely noises he made
as h e washed. H e coughed now and then, but his breathing
sounded somewhat easier than it had outside in the cold.
“I didna ken it might be that way ,” he said from behind me.
“I thought an apoplexy would kill a man outright.”
“Sometimes that’ s so,” I said, a little absently , frowning as I
concentrated on the job at hand. “Most often that’ s the way of
it, in fact.”
“A ye? I never th ought to ask Dougal, or Rupert. Or Jenny .
Whether my father—” The sentence stopped abruptly , as
though he had swallowed it.
Ah. I felt a sma ll jolt of realiza tion in my solar plexus. So
that was  it. I h adn’ t remember ed, but he had told me of it,
years before, soon after we wer e married. His father had seen
Jamie flogged at Fort W illiam, and under the shock of it, had
suf fered an apoplexy and died.  Jamie, wounded and ill, had
been spi rited aw ay from the Fo rt and gone into exile. He had
not been told of his father ’ s death until weeks later—had no
chance of farewell, had been able neither to bury his father nor
honor his grave.
“Jenny would have known,” I said gently . “She would have
told you, if …” If Brian Fraser had suf fered a death of such
lingering ignom iny as this, dwindled and shrunken, powerless
before the eyes of the family he had striven to protect.
W ould she? If she had nursed her father through
incontinence and helplessness? If she had waited days or
weeks, suddenly bereft of both father and brother , left alone to
stare de ath in the face as it a pproached, moment by slow
moment … and yet Jenny Fraser was a very strong woman,
who had  loved her brother dearly . Perhaps she would have
sought to shield him, both from guilt and from knowledge.
I turned to face him. He was half-naked, but clean now , with
a fre sh shirt from his saddlebag  in his hands. He was lookingat me, but I saw his eyes slip beyond me, to fasten on the
corpse with a troubled fascination.
“She wo uld have told you,” I repeated, striving to infuse my
voice with certainty .
Jamie drew a deep, painful breath.
“Perhaps.”
“She would,” I said more firmly .
He nodd ed, drew another deep breath, and let it out, more
easily . I realized  that the house was not the only thing haunted
by Beard sley’ s death. Jenny held the key of the only door that
could be opened for Jamie, though.
I und erstood now why he had w ept, and had taken such care
with the  digging of the grave. Not from either shock or charity ,
let a lone from r egard for the dead man—but for the sake of
Brian Fraser; the father he had neither buried nor mourned.
I t urned back an d drew the edg es of the blanket up, folded
them snugly over the cleaned a nd decent remains, and tied it
with twine at head and feet,  making a tidy , anonymous
package. Jamie was forty-nine; the same age at which his
father h ad died.  I stole a quick glance at him, as he finished
dressing. If his f ather had been s uch a one as he was … I felt a
sudden p ang of sorrow , for the loss of so much. For strength
cut of f and love snuf fed out, for  the loss of a man I knew had
been great, only from the reflection I saw of him in his son.
Dressed, Jamie circled round the table to help me lift the
body . Instead of putting his hand s under it, though, he reached
across and took my hands in both of his.
“Swear to me, C laire,” he said. His voice was nearly gone
with hoa rseness; I had to lean close to hear it. “If it should one
day fall to my lo t as it did to m y father … then swear ye will
give me the same mercy I gave this wretched bugger here.”
There were fresh blisters on his  palms from the digging; I
felt the strange s oftness of them, fluid-filled and shifting as he
gripped my hands.“I’ll do what mu st be done,” I whispered back, at last. “Just
as yo u d id.” I squeezed his hands and let them go. “Come now
and help me bury him. It’ s over .”28
BROWNSVILLE
I T W AS MID-AFTERNOON b efore Roger , Fer gus, and the
militia r eached Brownsville, having missed their road and
wandered in the hills for several hours before meeting two
Cherokee who pointed the way .
Brownsville was half a dozen ramshackle huts, strewn
among the dying brush of a hil lside like a handful of rubbish
tossed i nto the weeds. Near th e road—if the narrow rut of
churned black mud could be dignified by such a word—two
cabins l eaned tipsily on either side of a slightly lar ger and
more solid-look ing building, like drunkards leaning cozily on
a sober  companion. Rather ironically , this lar ger building
seemed to operate as Brownsville’ s general store and taproom,
judging from the barrels of beer and powder and the stacks of
drenched hides that stood in the muddy yard beside it—though
to ap ply either te rm to it was granting that more dignity than it
deserved, too, Roger thought.
Still, it was plainly the place to start—if only for the sake of
the men with him, who had begun to vibrate like iron filings
near a magnet at sight of the barrels; the yeasty scent of beer
floated out like a welcome. H e wouldn’ t say no to a pint,
either , h e thoug ht, waving a ha nd to signal a halt. It was a
numbingly cold day , and a long time since this morning’ s
breakfast. They weren’ t likely to get anything beyond bread or
stew her e, but as long as it was hot and washed down with
some sort of alcohol, no one would complain.
He slid of f his horse, and had just turned to call to the others
when a hand clutched his arm.
“Attendez.”  Fer gus spoke softly , barely moving his lips. He
was standing beside Roger , looking at something beyond him.
“Do not move.”Roger d idn’ t, nor did any of the men still on their horses.
Whatever Fer gus saw , so did they .
“What is it?” Roger asked, keeping his voice low , too.
“Someone—two someones—a re pointing guns at us,
through the window .”
“Ah.” Roger noted Jamie’ s good sense in not riding into
Brownsville after dark the night before. Evidently , he knew
something about the suspicious nature of remote places.
Moving very slowly , he raised both his hands into the air ,
and jerked his chin at Fer gus, who reluctantly did the same, his
hook gleaming in the afternoon  sun. Still keeping his hands
up, Rog er turned very slowly . Even knowing what to expect,
he felt his stoma ch contract at sight of the two long, gleaming
barrels protruding from behind the oiled deerskin that covered
the window .
“Hallo t he house!” he shouted, with as much authority as
could be managed with his hand s over his head. “I am Captain
Roger MacKenzie, in command of a militia company under
Colonel James Fraser , of Fraser ’ s Ridge!”
The only ef fect of this intellig ence was to cause one gun
barrel to swivel, centering on Roger , so that he could look
straight down the small, dark circle of its muzzle. The
unwelcome prospect did, though, cause him to realize that the
other gu n had not been trained on him to start with. It had
been, and remained, pointing steadily over his right shoulder ,
toward the cluster of men who still sat their horses behind him,
shifting in their saddles and murmuring uneasily .
Great. Now what? The men w ere waiting for him to do
something . Moving slowly , he lowered his hands. He was
drawing breath to shout again, but before he could speak, a
hoarse voice rang out from behind the deerskin.
“I see you, Morton, you bastard!”
This imprecation was accompanied by a significant jerk of
the first gun bar rel, which turned abruptly from Roger to focuson the same tar get as the second—presumably Isaiah Morton,
one of the militiamen from Granite Falls.
There was a scuf fling noise among the mounted men,
startled shouts, and then all hell broke loose as both guns went
of f. Hor ses rear ed and bolted, m en bellowed and swore, and
drifts of acrid white smoke fumed from the window .
Roger h ad thrown himself flat a t the first explosion. As the
echoes died away , though, he  scrambled up as though by
reflex, f lung mud out of his eyes, and char ged the door ,
headfirst. T o his detached surpri se, his mind was working very
clearly . Brianna took twenty seconds to load and prime a gun,
and he doubted that these bu ggers were much faster . He
thought he had just about ten seconds’ grace left, and he meant
to use them.
He hit the doo r with his shoulder , and it flew inward,
smashing against the wall inside and causing Roger to rush
staggering into the room and crash into the wall on the
opposite side. He struck his sho ulder a numbing blow on the
chimney piece, bounced of f, and managed somehow to keep
his feet, stumbling like a drunkard.
Several people in the room had turned to gape at him. His
vision cl eared en ough to see tha t only two of them were in fact
holding guns. He took a deep breath, lunged for the nearest of
these, a scrawny man with a straggling beard, and seized him
by th e s hirtfront, in imitation of a particularly fearsome third-
form master at Roger ’ s grammar school.
“What do you think you are doing, you wee  man , yo u!?” he
roared, jerking the man up onto his toes. Mr . Sanderson would
have been pleased, he supposed, at the thought that his
example had been so memorable. Ef fective, too; while the
scrawny man in Roger ’ s grip did not either wet himself or
snivel, as the first-form students occasionally had under such
treatment, he did make small gobbling sounds, pawing
inef fectually at Roger ’ s hand clutching his shirt.
“Y ou, si r! Leav e hold of my brother!” Roger ’ s victim had
dropped both his gun and powder horn when seized, spillingblack powder all over the fl oor . The other gunman had
succeeded in reloading his weapon, though, and was now
endeavoring to bring it to bear  on Roger . He was somewhat
impeded in this attempt by the three women in the room, two
of whom  were blethering and pulling at his gun, getting in his
way . Th e third had flung her apron over her head and was
uttering loud, rhythmic shrieks of hysteria.
At this point, F er gus strolled into the house, an enormous
horse pistol in h is hand. He poin ted this negligently at the man
with the gun.
“Be so kind as to put that down, if you will,” he said, raising
his voice to be heard above the racket. “And perhaps, madame,
you cou ld pour some water upo n this young woman? Or slap
her briskly?” He gestured toward the screaming woman with
his hook, wincing slightly at the noise.
Moving as though hypnotized, one of the women went
slowly t oward the screeching girl, shook her roughly by the
shoulder , and began to murmur in the girl’ s ear , not taking her
eyes of f Fer gus. The shrieking stopped, replaced by irregular
gulps and sobs.
Roger fe lt an immense relief. Sheer rage, simple panic, and
the a bsolute necessity of doing something  had  got him this far ,
but he would fr eely admit that he had not the slightest idea
what to do next. He took a deep breath, feeling his legs begin
to tremb le, and slowly lowered  his victim, releasing his grip
with an awkward nod. The man took several fast steps
backward, then stood brushing at the creases in his shirt,
narrowed eyes fixed on Roger in resentment.
“And who in blazes are you ?” The second man, who had
indeed put his weapon down, looked at Fer gus in confusion.
The Frenchman  waved his ho ok—which, Roger noticed,
seemed to fascinate the women—in a gesture of dismissal.
“That is of no importance,” he said grandly , lifting his
aristocratically prominent nose another inch. “I require—thatis, we  require”—he amended, with a polite nod toward Roger
—”to know who you  are.”
The inhabitants of the cabin all exchanged confused looks,
as t hough wondering who the y might in fact be. After a
moment’ s hesita tion, though, the lar ger of the two men thrust
out his chin pugnaciously .
“My name is Brown, sir . Richard Brown. This is my
brother , Lionel , my wife, Meg, my brother ’ s daughter ,
Alicia”—that ap peared to be the girl in the apron, who had
now removed the garment from her head and stood tearstained
and gulping—”and my sister , Thomasina.”
“Y our servant, madame, mesdemoiselles.” Fer gus made the
ladies an  extrem ely elegant bow , though taking good care to
keep his pistol aimed at Richard Brown’ s forehead. “My
apologies for the disturbance.”
Mrs. Brown nodded back, looking a little glazed. Miss
Thomasina Brown, a tall, severe-looking person, looked from
Roger to Fer gus and back with the expression of one
comparing a cockroach and a centipede, deciding which to
step on first.
Fer gus, having managed to tran sform the atmosphere from
an armed confrontation to that of a Parisian salon , looked
pleased. He glanced at Roger and inclined his head, clearly
handing management of the situation over to him.
“Right.” Roger was wearing a loose woolen hunting shirt,
but he felt as though it were a  straitjacket. He took another
deep bre ath, tryi ng to force air into his chest. “W ell. As I said,
I am … ah …  Captain MacKenzie. W e are char ged by
Governor T ryon with raising a militia company , and have
come to  notify you of your obligation to provide men and
supplies.”
Richard Brown looked surpr ised at this; his brother
glowered. Befor e they could of fer objections, though, Fer gus
moved closer to Roger , murmuring, “Perhaps we shoulddiscover whethe r they have killed Mr . Morton, mon capitaine ,
before we accept them into our company?”
“Oh, mphm.” Roger fixed the Browns with as stern an
expression as possible. “Mr . Fr aser . W ill you see about Mr .
Morton? I will r emain here.” Keeping the Browns in his gaze,
he held out a hand for Fer gus’ s pistol.
“Oh, yon Morton’ s still canty ,  Captain. He isny wae us,
forbye, ‘ cause h e’ s ta’en to the broosh like a bit’ moggie wae a
scorchit tail, but he wiz movin’ a’ his limbs when I saw um
last.” A nasal Glaswegian voice  spoke from the doorway , and
Roger glanced over to see a cluster of interested heads peering
into the cabin, Henry Gallegher ’ s bristly nob among them. A
number of drawn guns were also in evidence, and Roger ’ s
breath came a little easier .
The Browns had lost interest in  Roger , and were staring at
Gallegher in sheer bewilderment.
“What did he say?” Mrs. Brown  whispered to her sister -in-
law . The older lady shook he r head, lips drawn in like a
pursestring.
“Mr . Morton is alive and well,” Roger translated for them.
He coughed. “Fortunately for  you,” he said to the male
Browns, with as much menace as he could contrive to put into
his voice. He tur ned to Gallegher , who had now come into the
room an d was leaning against the doorjamb, musket in hand
and looking distinctly entertained.
“Is everyone else all right, then, Henry?”
Gallegher shrugged.
“They crap-bags hivny holed anyone, but they gie’d your
saddlebag rare laldy wae a load o’ bird shot. Sir ,” he added as
an afterthought, teeth showing in a brief flash through his
beard.
“The bag with the whisky?” Roger demanded.
“Get awa!” Gallegher bugged his eyes in horror , then
grinned in reassurance. “Nah, t’other .”“Och, well.” Roger waved a hand dismissively . “That’ s only
my spare breeks, isn’ t it?”
This philosophical response drew laughter and hoots of
support from the men crammed in the doorway , which
heartened Roger enough to round on the smaller Brown.
“And what d’ye have against Isaiah Morton?” he demanded.
“He’ s d ishonored my daugh ter ,” Mr . Brown replied
promptly , having recovered his composure. He glared at
Roger , beard twitching with anger . “I told him I’d see him
dead at  her feet, if ever he dared show his wretched
countenance within ten miles of Brownsville—and damn my
eyes if the grass-livered spittle -snake hasn’ t the face to ride
right up to my door!”
Mr . Richard Brown turned to Gallegher .
“Y ou mean to tell me we both missed  the bastard?”
Gallegher shrugged apologetically .
“A ye. Sorry .”
The younger Miss Brown had been following this exchange,
mouth hanging slightly open.
“They missed?” she asked, hope lighting her reddened eyes.
“Isaiah’ s still alive?”
“Not for long,” her uncle assu red her grimly . He reached
down to  pick up his fowling piece, and all the female Browns
burst out in a chorus of renewed screeches, as the guns of the
militia at the door all raised simultaneously , trained on Brown.
He very slowly put the gun back down.
Roger g lanced at Fer gus, who li fted one brow and gave the
slightest of shrugs. Up to him.
The Browns had drawn together , the two brothers glaring at
him, th e women huddled behind them, snif fling and
murmuring. Mil itiamen poked their heads curiously through
the windows, all staring at Roger , waiting for direction.And just what was he to tell them? Morton was a member of
the mil itia, and therefore—h e assumed—entitled to its
protection. Roger couldn’ t ver y well turn him over to the
Browns, no matter what he’d done—always assuming he
could be caught. On the other h and, Roger was char ged with
enlisting the Browns and the r est of the able-bodied men in
Brownsville, and extracting at least a week’ s supplies from
them as  well; they didn’ t look  as though such a suggestion
would be well received at this point.
He had the galling conviction that Jamie Fraser would have
known immediately how best to resolve this diplomatic crisis.
He personally hadn’ t a clue.
He did, at least, have a delaying tactic. Sighing, he lowered
the pistol, and reached for the pouch at his waist.
“Henry , fetch in the saddlebag with the whisky , aye? And
Mr . Brown, perhaps ye will allow me to purchase some food,
and a barrel of your beer , for my men’ s refreshment.”
And with luck, by the time it was all drunk, Jamie Fraser
would be here.29
ONE-THIRD OF A GOA T
I T W ASN’T QUITE OVER, afte r all. It was well past dark by
the time we had finished everything at the Beardsley farm,
tidied up, repacked the bags, and resaddled the horses. I
thought of suggesting that we eat before leaving—we had had
nothing since breakfast—but the atmosphere of the place was
so disturbing that neither Jamie nor I had any appetite.
“W e’ll wait,” he said, heaving the saddlebags over the
mare’ s b ack. He glanced over h is shoulder at the house. “I’m
hollow a s a gourd, but I couldna  stomach a bite within sight o’
this place.”
“I k now what you mean.” I glanced back, too, uneasily ,
though there was nothing to s ee; the house stood still and
empty . “I can’ t wait to get away from here.”
The sun had sun k below the tre es, and a chill blue shadow
spread a cross the hollow where the farmhouse stood. The raw
earth of Beardsley’ s grave showed dark with moisture, a
humped mound beneath the bare branches of the mountain
ash. It was imp ossible to look at it without thinking of the
weight of wet earth and immobility , of corruption and decay .
Y ou will r ot and die , Jamie had said to him. I hoped the
reversal of those two events had been of some benefit to
Beardsley—it ha d not, to me. I hugged my shawl tight around
my shoulders and breathed out hard, then deeply in, hoping the
cold, cle an scent of the pines would eradicate the phantom
reek of dead flesh that seemed to cling to hands and clothes
and nose.
The horses were shifting, stamping, and shaking their
manes, eager to be of f. I didn’ t blame them. Unable to stop
myself, I looked back once more . A more desolate sight would
be h ard to imagine. Even harder  to imagine was the thought of
staying here, alone.Evidently , Mrs.  Beardsley had  imagin ed it, and come to
similar conclusi ons. At this point, she emer ged from the barn,
the k id in her arms, and announced that she was coming with
us. S o, evidently , were the goat s. She handed me the kid, and
disappeared back into the barn.
The kid was heavy and half-asleep, flexible little joints
folded u p into a cozy bundle. It huf fed warm air over my hand,
nibbling gently to see what I was made of, then made a small
“meh” of contentment and re laxed into peaceful inertness
against my ribs. A louder “me h!” and a nudge at my thigh
announced the presence of the kid’ s mother , keeping a
watchful eye on her of fspring.
“W ell, s he can’ t very well leav e them here,” I muttered to
Jamie, w ho was making disgruntled noises in the dusk behind
me. “They have to be milked. Besides, it’ s not a terribly long
way , is it?”
“D’ye ken how fast a goat walks, Sassenach?”
“I’ve ne ver had occasion to tim e one,” I said, rather testily ,
shifting my small hairy burden.  “But I shouldn’ t think they’d
be a lot slower than the horses, in the dark.”
He mad e a guttural Scottish noise at that, rendered more
expressive even than usual by the phlegm in his throat. He
coughed.
“Y ou sound awful,” I said. “When we get where we’re
going, I ’m takin g the mentholated goose grease to you, my
lad.”
He made no objection to this proposal, which rather alarmed
me, as indicating a serious depr ession of his vitality . Before I
could inquire further into his s tate of health, though, I was
interrupted by the emer gence from the barn of Mrs. Beardsley ,
leading six goats, roped together like a gang of jovially
inebriate convicts.
Jamie viewed the procession dubiously , sighed in
resignation, and turned to a consideration of the logistical
problems at hand. There was n o question of mounting Mrs.Beardsley on Gideon the Man-Eater . Jamie glanced from me
to Mrs. Beardsley’ s substantial figure, then at the small form
of my mare, little bigger than a pony , and coughed.
After a bit of contemplation, he had Mrs. Beardsley
mounted on Mrs. Piggy , the sle epy kid balanced before her . I
would ride with him, on Gideon’ s withers, theoretically
preventing any attempt on that a nimal’ s part to fling me of f his
hindquarters into the underbru sh. He tied a rope round the
billy goat’ s neck, and af fixed thi s loosely to the mare’ s saddle,
but left the nannies loose.
“The mother will stay wi’ the ki d, and the others will follow
the billy here,” he told me. “ Goats are sociable creatures;
they’ll no be wa nting to stray awa by themselves. Especially
not at night. Sh oo,” he muttered, pushing an inquisitive nose
out of his face as he squatted to check the saddle girth. “I
suppose pigs would be worse. They will  gang their own way .”
He stood up, absently patting a hairy head.
“If a nything should come amis s, pull it loose at once,” he
told Mrs . Beardsley , showing her the half-bow loop tied to the
saddle n ear her hand. “If the hor se should run away wi’ ye all,
your wee fellow there will be hangit.”
She nod ded, a hunched mound  atop the horse, then lifted
her head and looked toward the house.
“W e should go before moonrithe,” she said softly . “She
cometh out then.”
An icy ripple ran straight up my spine, and Jamie jerked,
head snapping round to look at  the darkened house. The fire
had gone out, and no one had thought to close the open door; it
gaped like an empty eye socket.
“She who ?” Jamie asked, a noticeable edge in his voice.
“Mary Ann,” Mrs. Beardsley answered. “She was the latht
one.” T here was no emphasis whatever in her voice; she
sounded like a sleepwalker .
“The last what ?” I asked.The latht wife,” she replied, an d picked up her reins. “She
thtands under the rowan tree at moonrithe.”
Jamie’ s head turned toward me. It was too dark to see his
expression, but I didn’ t need to. I cleared my throat.
“Ought we … to close the door?” I suggested. Mr .
Beardsley’ s spir it had presumably got the idea by now , and
whether or not Mrs. Beardsley had any interest in the house
and its contents,  it didn’ t seem right to leave it at the mercy of
marauding raccoons and squirrels, to say nothing of anything
lar ger that might be attracted by the scent of Mr . Beardsley’ s
final exit. On the other hand, I really had no desire at all to
approach the empty house.
“Get on the horse, Sassenach.”
Jamie strode across the yard, slammed the door somewhat
harder th an nece ssary , then came back—walking briskly—and
swung into the saddle behind me.
“Hup!” he said sharply , and w e were of f, the glow of a
rising half-moon just visible above the trees.
It was perhaps a quarter mile t o the head of the trail, the
ground rising from the hollow in which the Beardsleys’
farmhouse stood. W e were moving slowly , because of the
goats, and I watched the grass and shrubs as we brushed
through them, wondering whet her they seemed more visible
only because my eyes were ada pting to the dark—or because
the moon had risen.
I f elt quite safe,  with the powerful bulk of the horse under
me, the sociable natter of the goats around us, and Jamie’ s
equally reassuring presence behind me, one arm clasped about
my wais t. I wasn’ t sure that I fel t quite safe enough to turn and
look back again, though. At th e same time, the ur ge to look
was so compelling as almost to counter the sense of dread I
felt about the place. Almost.
“It’ s no really a rowan tree, is it?” Jamie’ s voice came softly
from behind me.“No,” I said, taking heart from the solid arm around me.
“It’ s a mountain ash. V ery like, t hough.” I’d seen mountain ash
many times before; the Highlanders often planted them near
cabins or houses because the c lusters of deep orange berries
and the pinnate leaves did indeed look like the rowan tree of
Scotland—a clo se botanical relative. I gathered that Jamie’ s
comment stemm ed not from ta xonomic hairsplitting, though,
but rathe r from doubt as to whether the ash possessed the same
repellent qualities, in terms of protection from evil and
enchantment. He hadn’ t chosen to bury Beardsley under that
tree from a sense either of aesthetics or convenience.
I sq ueezed his b listered hand, and he kissed me gently on
top of the head.
At the head of the trail, I did glance back, but I could see
nothing but a fa int gleam from the weathered shingles of the
farmhouse. The mountain ash a nd whatever might—or might
not—be under it were hidden in darkness.
Gideon was unusually well-beh aved, having made no more
than a token pro test at being double-mounted. I rather thought
he was happy to leave the farm behind, too. I said as much, but
Jamie sneezed and expressed th e opinion that the wicked sod
was merely biding his time while planning some future
outrage.
The goats seemed inclined to view this nocturnal excursion
as a lark, and  ambled along with the liveliest interest,
snatching mouthfuls of dry grass, bumping into one another
and the horses, a nd generally sounding like a herd of elephants
in the crackling underbrush.
I f elt great relie f at leaving the  Beardsley place at last. As
the pines blotted out the last si ght of the hollow , I resolutely
turned my mind from the distu rbing events of the day , and
began to think what might await us in Brownsville.
“I hope Roger ’ s managed all r ight,” I said, leaning back
against Jamie’ s chest with a small sigh.“Mmphm.” From long expe rience, I diagnosed this
particular catar rhal noise as indicating a polite general
agreement with my sentiment, this overlaying complete
personal indif fer ence to the actu ality . Either he saw no reason
for concern, or he thought Roger could sink or swim.
“I hope he’ s fou nd an inn of sorts,” I of fered, thinking this
prospect might meet with a trifl e more enthusiasm. “Hot food
and a clean bed would be lovely .”
“Mmphm.” Tha t one held a touch of humor , mingled with
an inborn skepticism—fostered by long experience—regarding
the p ossible existence of such ite ms as hot food and clean beds
in the Carolina backcountry .
“The goats seem to be going along very well,” I of fered, and
waited in anticipation.
“Mmphm.” Gru dging agreeme nt, mingled with a deep
suspicion as to t he continuance of good behavior on the part of
the goats.
I was carefully formulating another observation, in hopes of
getting him to d o it again—three times was the record so far—
when Gideon suddenly bore out Jamie’ s original mistrust by
flinging up his head with a loud snort and rearing.
I c rashe d back into Jamie’ s ch est, hitting my head on his
collarbone with  a thump that made me see stars. His arm
crushed the air out of me as he dragged at the reins one-
handed, shouting.
I had no idea what he was saying, or even whether he was
shouting in English or Gaelic. The horse was screaming,
rearing and pawing with his hoo ves, and I was scrabbling for a
grip on anything at all, mane , saddle, reins… . A branch
whipped my face and blinded me. Pandemonium reigned;
there w as screeching and bleating and a noise like tearing
fabric and then something hit me hard and sent me flying into
the darkness.
I w asn’ t  knocked out, but it didn’ t make much dif ference. I
was sprawled in a tangle of brush, struggling for breath,unable t o move, and unable to see anything whatever beyond a
few scattered stars in the sky overhead.
There w as an ungodly racket going on some little distance
away , in which a chorus of pa nicked goats figured lar gely ,
punctuated by what I took to be a woman’ s screams. T wo
women’ s screams.
I sh ook my hea d, confused. Then I flung myself over and
started crawlin g, having belatedly recognized what was
making that noise. I had heard panthers scream often enough
—but al ways safely far in the distance. This one wasn’ t far
away at  all. The tearing-fabric noise I’d heard had been the
cough of a big cat, very close at hand.
I b umpe d into a lar ge fallen log and promptly rolled under
it, wedg ing myself as far into  the small crevice there as
possible. It wasn’ t the best hiding place I’d ever seen, but
might at least prevent anything leaping out of a tree onto me.
I c ould still hea r Jamie shouting, though the tenor of his
remarks had changed to a sort of hoarse fury . The goats had
mostly quit yammering—surely the cat couldn’ t have killed all
of them? I coul dn’ t hear anything of Mrs. Beardsley , either ,
but the horses were making a  dreadful fuss, squealing and
stamping.
My heart was h ammering against the leafy ground, and a
cold sweat tingled along my jaw . There isn’ t much for
invoking raw terror like the prim itive fear of being eaten, and
my sym pathies were entirely with the animals. There was a
crashing in the brush near at hand, and Jamie shouting my
name.
“Here,” I croaked, unwilling to move out of my refuge until
I knew for certai n where the pan ther was—or at least knew for
certain that it wasn’ t anywhere near me. The horses had
stopped squeal ing, though they were still snorting and
stamping, making enough noise to indicate that neither of
them had either fallen prey to our visitor or run away .
“Here!” I called, a little louder .More crashing, close at hand. Jamie stumbled through the
darkness, crouc hed, and felt under the log until his hand
encountered my arm, which he seized.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“I h adn’ t thought to notice, but I think so,” I replied. I slid
cautiously out from under my l og, taking stock. Bruises here
and there, abraded elbows, and a stinging sensation where the
branch had slapped my cheek. Basically all right, then.
“Good. Come quick, he’ s hurt. ” He hauled me to my feet
and star ted prop elling me through the dark with a hand in the
small of my back.
“Who?”
“The goat, of course.”
My eyes  were well-adapted to the dark by now , and I made
out the lar ge shapes of Gideon and the mare, standing under a
leafless poplar , manes and tails swishing with agitation. A
smaller shape that I took to be Mrs. Beardsley was crouched
nearby , over something on the ground.
I could smell blood, and a powerful reek of goat. I squatted
and reached out, touching rough , warm hair . The goat jerked at
my touch, with a loud “MEHeheh!” that reassured me
somewhat. He might be hurt, bu t he wasn’ t dying—at least not
yet; the body u nder my hands was solid and vital, muscles
tense.
“Where’ s the cat?” I asked, locating the ridged hardness of
the horns and feeling my way  hastily backward along the
spine, then down the ribs and flanks. The goat had objections,
and heaved wildly under my hands.
“Gone,” Jamie said. He crouche d down, too, and put a hand
on th e g oat’ s hea d. “There, now , a bhalaich . It’ s all right, then.
Seas, mo charaid .”
I could feel no open wound on the goat’ s body , but I could
certainly smell blood; a hot, metallic scent that disturbed theclean night air of the wood.  The horses did, too; they
whickered and moved uneasily in the dark.
“Are we fairly sur e  it’ s gone?” I asked, trying to ignore the
sensation of eyes fastened on the back of my neck. “I smell
blood.”
“A ye. The cat took one of the nannies,” Jamie informed me.
He knelt next to me, laying a big hand on the goat’ s neck.
“Mrs. B eardsley loosed this brave laddie, and he went for
the cat, bald-heided. I couldn a see it all, but I think the
creature maybe slapped at him; I heard it screech and spit, and
the billy gave a skelloch just then, too. I think his leg is maybe
broken.”
It was. W ith tha t guidance, I found the break easily , low on
the h umerus of the right front leg. The skin wasn’ t broken, but
the bone was cracked through; I could feel the slight
displacement of  the raw ends. The goat heaved and thrust his
horns at my arm when I touched the leg. His eyes were wild
and rolli ng, the odd square pup ils visible but colorless in the
faint moonlight.
“Can ye mend him, Sassenach?” Jamie asked.
“I don’ t know .” The goat was still struggling, but the flurries
of movement were growing perceptibly weaker , as shock set
in. I  bit my lip, g roping for a pu lse in the fold between leg and
body . Th e injury itself was like ly repairable, but shock was a
great danger; I h ad seen plenty of animals—and a few people,
for that matter—die quickly following a traumatic incident, of
injuries that were not fatal in themselves.
“I don’ t  know ,” I said again. M y fingers had found a pulse
at last; it was tr ip-hammer fast, and thready . I was trying to
envision the possibilities for treatment, all of them crude. “He
may we ll die, Jamie, even if I can set the leg. Do you think
perhaps we ought to slaughter him? He’d be a lot easier to
carry , as meat.”
Jamie stroked the goat’ s neck, gently .“It would be a great shame, and him such a gallant
creature.”
Mrs. Beardsley laughed at that, a nervous small giggle, like
a girl’ s, coming out of the dark beyond Jamie’ s bulk.
“Hith name ith Hiram,” she said. “He’ th a good boy .”
“Hiram,” Jamie repeated, still s troking. “W ell, then, Hiram.
Courage, mon brave.  Y ou’ll do. Y ou’ve balls as big as
melons.”
“W ell, persimmons, maybe,” I said, having inadvertently
encountered the testicles in question while making my
examination. “Perfectly respectable, though, I’m sure,” I
added, t aking shallow breaths. Hiram’ s musk glands were
working overtime. Even the harsh iron smell of blood took
second place.
“I was speaking figuratively ,” Jamie informed me, rather
dryly . “What will ye be needing, Sassenach?”
Evidently , the decision had been made; he was already
rising to his feet.
“Right, then,” I said, brushing back my hair with the back of
a wrist. “Find m e a couple of straight branches, about a foot
long, no  twigs, and a bit of rope from the saddlebags. Then
you can  help here,” I added, try ing to achieve a good grip on
my s truggling patient. “Hiram se ems to like you. Recognizes a
kindred spirit, no doubt.”
Jamie la ughed at that, a low , comforting sound at my elbow .
He s tood up wi th a final scratch of Hiram’ s ears, and rustled
of f, coming back within moments with the requested items.
“Right,” I said, loosing one hand from Hiram’ s neck in
order to locate the sticks. “I’m g oing to splint it. W e’ll have to
carry him, but t he splint will k eep the leg from flexing and
doing a ny more damage. Help me get him onto his side.”
Hiram, whether from male pride or goat stubbornness—
always assuming these to be dif ferent things—kept trying to
stand up, broken leg notwithstanding. His head was bobbing
alarmingly , though, as the muscles in his neck weakened, andhis body lurched from side to si de. He scrabbled feebly at the
ground, then stopped, panting heavily .
Mrs. Beardsley hovered over my shoulder , the kid still
clutched in her arms. It gave a  faint bleat, as though it had
awakened sudde nly from a nigh tmare, and Hiram gave a loud,
echoing “Mehh” in reply .
“There’ s a thought,” Jamie murmured. He stood up
suddenly , and took the kid from  Mrs. Beardsley . Then he knelt
down ag ain, pushing the little creature up close to Hiram’ s
side. The goat at once ceased struggling, bending his head
around to snif f at his of fspring. The kid cried, pushing its nose
against the big goat’ s side, and a long, slimy tongue snaked
out, slobbering over my hand as it sought the kid’ s head.
“W ork fast, Sassenach,” Jamie suggested.
I ne eded no pr ompting, and within minutes, had the leg
stabilized, the splinting padded with one of the multiple
shawls Mrs. Beardsley appeared to be wearing. Hiram had
settled, making only occasional  grunts and exclamations, but
the kid was still bleating loudly .
“Where is its mother?” I asked, though I didn’ t need to hear
the answer . I didn’ t know a great deal about goats, but I knew
enough about mothers and babies to realize that nothing but
death w ould keep a mother fro m a child making that sort of
racket. T he othe r goats had co me back, drawn by curiosity ,
fear of the dark, or a simple desire for company , but the
mother didn’ t push forward.
“Poor Beckie,” said Mrs. Beardsley sadly . “Thuch a thweet
goat.”
Dark forms bumped and jostled; there was a whuf f of hot air
in my ear as on e nibbled at my  hair , and another stepped on
my calf,  making  me yelp as the sharp little hooves scraped the
skin. I made no ef fort to shoo them away , though; the presence
of his harem seemed to be doing Hiram the world of good.
I had the leg bones back in place and the splint bandaged
firmly ro und the m. I had found a good pulse point at the baseof his ear , and w as monitoring it, Hiram’ s head resting in my
lap. As the other goats pressed in, nuzzling at him and making
plaintive noises,  he suddenly lifted his head and rolled up onto
his c hest, the bro ken leg awkwardly stuck out before him in its
bindings.
He sway ed to and fro like a d runken man for a moment,
then uttered a lo ud, belligerent “MEEEEEHHH” and lurched
onto three feet. He promptly fe ll down again, but the action
cheered everyone. Even Mrs. Beardsley emitted a faint trill of
pleasure at the sight.
“All right.” Jamie stood up, and ran his fingers through his
hair with a deep sigh. “Now , then.”
“Now , then what ?” I asked.
“Now I shall d ecide what to do,” he said, with a certain
edge to his voice.
“Aren’ t we going on to Brownsville?”
“W e might,” he said. “If Mrs. B eardsley happens to ken the
way well enough to find the trail again by starlight?” He
turned e xpectantly toward her , but I could see the negative
motion of her head, even in the shadows.
It da wned on me that we were, in fact, no longer on the trail
—which was in any case no m ore than a narrow deer track,
winding through the forest.
“W e can’ t be te rribly far of f it, surely?” I looked round,
peering vainly into the dark, as though some lighted sign
might indicate the position of the trail. In fact, I had no idea
even in which direction it might lie.
“No,” Jamie agreed. “And by m yself, I daresay I could pick
it up  sooner or  later . But I dinna mean to go floundering
through the forest in the dark with this lot.” He glanced round,
evidently count ing noses. T wo very skittish horses, two
women—one distinctly odd and possibly homicidal—and six
goats, two of them incapable of walking. I rather saw his
point.He drew his shoulders back, shrugging a little, as though to
ease a tight shirt.
“I’ll go and hav e a keek round. If I find the way at once,
well and good. If I don’ t, we’ll camp for the night,” he said. “It
will be a deal easier to look for the trail by daylight. Be
careful, Sassenach.”
And with a final sneeze, he vanished into the woods,
leaving me in char ge of the camp followers and wounded.
The orphaned goat was becoming louder and more
anguished in its cries; it hurt m y ears, as well as my heart.
Mrs. Beardsley , though, had bec ome somewhat more animated
in J amie’ s absence; I thought she was rather afraid of him.
Now she brought up one of the  other nannies, persuading her
to st and still for the orphan to su ckle. The kid was reluctant for
a m oment, but hunger and the need for warmth and
reassurance were overwhelming, and within a few minutes, it
was feeding busily , its small tai l wagging in a dark flicker of
movement.
I w as happy to see it, but conscious of a small feeling of
envy; I was all a t once aware that I had eaten nothing all day ,
that I was very cold, desperate ly tired, sore in a number of
places—and tha t without the co mplications of Mrs. Beardsley
and her companions, I would l ong since have been safely in
Brownsville, fed, warm, and tucked up by some friendly
fireside. I put a hand on the kid’ s stomach, growing round and
firm with milk, and thought rather wistfully that I should like
someone simply to take care of me . S till, for the m oment, I
seemed to be the Good Shepherd, and no help for it.
“Do you think it might come back?” Mrs. Beardsley
crouched next to me, shawl p ulled tight around her broad
shoulders. She spoke in a low tone, as though afraid someone
might overhear .
“What, the panther? No, I don’ t think so. Why should it?”
Nonetheless, a small shiver ran o ver me, as I thought of Jamie,
alone somewhere in the dark. Hiram, his shoulder firmlyjammed against my thigh, snorted, then laid his head on my
knee with a long sigh.
“Thome folk thay the catth hunt in pairth.”
“Really?” I stifled a yawn—not of boredom, simply fatigue.
I b linked  into the darkness, a chilled lethar gy stealing over me.
“Oh. W ell, I sho uld think a good -sized goat would do for two.
Besides”—I yaw ned again, a jaw-cracking stretch—”besides,
the horses would let us know .”
Gideon and Mrs. Piggy were companionably nose-and-
tailing it under the poplar tre e, showing no signs now of
agitation. This seemed to comfort Mrs. Beardsley , who sat
down on  the ground quite suddenly , her shoulders sagging as
though the air had gone out of her .
“And ho w are you feeling?” I inquired, more from an ur ge
to maintain conversation than from any real desire to know .
“I am glad to be gone from that place,” she said simply .
I definitely shared that sentiment; our present situation was
at least an improvement on the Beardsley homestead, even
with the  odd panther thrown in . Still, that didn’ t mean I was
anxious to spend very long here.
“Do you  know anyone in Brownsville?” I asked. I wasn’ t
sure how lar ge a settlement it was, though from the
conversation of some of the men  we had picked up, it sounded
like a fair -sized village.
“No.” S he was silent for a moment, and I felt rather than
saw her tilt bac k her head, loo king up at the stars and the
peaceful moon.
“I … have never been to Brow nsville,” she added, almost
shyly .
Or anyw here els e, it seemed. S he told the story hesitantly ,
but almost eagerly , with no more than slight prodding on my
part.
Beardsley had—in essence—bought her from her father ,
and brought her , with other goods acquired in Baltimore, downto h is house, where he had essentially kept her prisoner ,
forbidding her to leave the hom estead, or to show herself to
anyone who might come to the house. Left to do the work of
the homestead while Beardsle y traveled into the Cherokee
lands with his trade goods, she had had no society but a bond
lad—who was little company , being deaf and speechless.
“Really ,” I said. In the event s of the day , I had quite
for gotten Josiah  and his twin. I wondered whether she had
known both of them, or only Keziah.
“How long is it since you came to North Carolina?” I asked.
“T wo yearth,” she said softly . “T wo yearth, three month,
and five  dayth.” I remembered t he marks on the doorpost, and
wondered when she had begun to keep count. From the very
beginning? I stretched my b ack, disturbing Hiram, who
grumbled.
“I see. By the w ay , what is you r Christian name?” I asked,
belatedly aware that I had no idea.
“Frantheth,” she said, then tried again, not liking the
mumbled sound of it. “Fran- cess ,” the end of it a hiss through
her broken teeth. She gave a shrug, then, and laughed—a
small, s hy soun d. “Fanny ,” she said. “My mother called me
Fanny .”
“Fanny ,” I said, encouragingly . “That’ s a very nice name.
May I call you so?”
“I …  would be pleathed,” she said. She drew breath again,
but stopped without speaking, evidently too shy to say
whatever she’d had in mind. W ith her husband dead, she
seemed entirely  passive, quite d eprived of the force that had
animated her earlier .
“Oh,” I said, belatedly realizing . “Claire. Do call me Claire,
please.”
“Claire—how pretty .”
“W ell, it  hasn’ t any esses, at leas t,” I said, not thinking. “Oh
—I do beg your pardon!”She made a small pff  sound of dismissal. Encouraged by the
dark, the faint s ense of intimacy engendered by the exchange
of name s—or simply from a ne ed to talk, after so long—she
told me about her mother , who had died when she was twelve,
her father , a cra bber , and her life in Baltimore, wading out
along the shore at low tide to ra ke oysters and gather mussels,
watching the fishing craft and t he warships come in past Fort
Howard to sail up the Patapsco.
“It wath  … peatheful,” she said, rather wistfully . “It wath
tho o pen—nothi ng but the thky and the water .” She tilted back
her head  again, as though yearn ing for the small bit of night
sky visible through the interlacing branches overhead. I
supposed that while the forested mountains of North Carolina
were refuge and embrace to a  Highlander like Jamie, they
might well seem claustrophobic and alien to someone
accustomed to the watery Chesapeake shore.
“W ill you go back there, do you think?” I asked.
“Back?” She sounded slightly startled. “Oh. I … I hadn’ t
thought …”
“No?” I had found a tree trunk to lean against, and stretched
slightly , to ease my back. “Y ou must have seen that your—that
Mr . Beardsley was dying. Didn’ t you have some plan?”
Beyond the fun of torturing him slowly to death, that is. It
occurred to me that I had been getting altogether too
comfortable with  this woman, alone in the dark with the goats.
She might truly have been Beardsley’ s victim—or she might
only be saying so now , to enlist  our aid. It would behoove me
to remember the burned toes on Beardsley’ s foot, and the
appalling state of that loft. I straightened up a little, and felt for
the small knife I carried at my belt—just in case.
“No.” She sounded a little dazed—and no wonder , I
supposed. I felt more than a lit tle dazed myself, simply from
emotion and fatigue. Enough so that I almost missed what she
said next.
“What did you say?”“I thaid … Mary Ann didn’ t te ll me what I wath to do …
after .”
“Mary A nn,” I said cautiously . “Y es, and that would be …
the first Mrs. Beardsley , would it?”
She laughed, and the hair on my neck rippled unpleasantly .
“Oh, no. Mary Ann wath the fourth one.”
“The … fourth one,” I said, a little faintly .
“Thye’ th the only one he buried  under the rowan tree,” she
informed me. “That wath a mi thtake. The otherth are in the
woodth. He got lazy , I think; he did not want to walk tho far .”
“Oh,” I said, for lack of any better response.
“I told you—sshe thtands under the rowan tree at
moonrithe. Whe n I thaw her there at firtht, I thought sshe wath
a living woman. I wath afraid of what he  might do, if he thaw
her there alone—tho I sstole from the houthe to warn her .”
“I se e.” Something in my voice must have sounded less than
credulous, for her head turned  sharply toward me. I took a
firmer grip on the knife.
“Y ou do not believe me?”
“Of course I do!” I assured her , trying to edge Hiram’ s head
of f my lap. My left leg had gone to sleep from the pressure of
his weight, and I had no feeling in my foot.
“I c an thow yo u,” she said, and her voice was calm and
certain. “Mary Ann told me where they were—the otherth—
and I found them. I can thow you their graveth.”
“I’m sure that won’ t be necessary ,” I said, flexing my toes
to re store circulation. If she c ame toward me, I decided, I
would s hove the  goat into her path, roll to the side, and make
of f as fast as po ssible on all fours, shouting for Jamie. And
where in bloody hell was  Jamie, anyway?
“So … um … Fanny . Y ou’re saying that Mr . Beardsley”—it
occurred to me that I didn’ t know his name either , but I
thought I would just as soon  keep my relations with hismemory formal,  under the circu mstances—”that your husband
mur der ed  fou r wives? And no one knew?” Not that anyone
necessarily would  kno w , I  realize d. The Beardsley homestead
was very isolated, and it wasn’ t at all unusual for women to
die—of accident, childbirth, or simple overwork. Someone
might have known that Beardsl ey had lost four wives—but it
was entirely possible that no one cared how .
“Y eth.” She sounded calm, I thought; not incipiently
dangerous, at least. “He would h ave killed me, too—but Mary
Ann thtopped him.”
“How did she do that?”
She drew a dee p breath and sighed, settling herself on the
ground. There was a faint, slee py bleat from her lap, and I
realized that she was holding th e kid again. I relaxed my grip
on the knife; she could hardly attack me with a lapful of goat.
She had, she said, gone out to sp eak to Mary Ann whenever
the moo n was high; the ghostly woman appeared under the
rowan tree only between half-moon wax and half-moon wane
—not in the dark of the moon, or at crescent.
“V ery particular ,” I murmured, but she didn’ t notice, being
too absorbed in the story .
This had gone on for some m onths. Mary Ann had told
Fanny B eardsley who she was, informed her of the fate of her
predecessors, and the manner of her own death.
“He cho ked her ,” Fanny confided. “I could see the markth
of h is ha ndth on  her throat. Ssh e warned me that he would do
the thame to me, one day .”
One night a few weeks later , Fanny was sure that the time
had come.
“He wath far go ne with the rum, you thee,” she explained.
“It wath alwayth worth when he drank, and thith time …”
T rembling with nerves, she had dropped the trencher with
his s upper , splattering food on h im. He had sprung to his feet
with a roar , lunging for her , and she had turned and fled.“He wat h betwe en me and the door ,” she said. “I ran for the
loft. I hoped he would be too drunk to manage the ladder , and
he wath.”
Beardsley had stumbled, lurching, and dragged the ladder
down w ith a crash. As he struggled, mumbling and cursing, to
put it into place again, there came a knock on the door .
Beardsley shout ed to know who it was, but no answer came;
only ano ther kno ck at the door . Fanny had crept to the edge of
the loft, to see  his red face glaring up at her . The knock
sounded for a third time. His tongue was too thick with drink
to speak  coherently; he only growled in his throat and held up
a finger in warning to her , then turned and staggered toward
the door . He wrenched it open, looked out—and screamed.
“I h ave never h eard thuch a thound,” she said, very softly .
“Never .”
Beardsley turned and ran, tripping over a stool and
sprawling full-length, scrabbling to his feet, stumbling to the
foot of the ladd er and scrambling up it, missing rungs and
clawing for purchase, crying out and shouting.
“He kept thouting to me to help him, help him.” Her voice
held an odd not e; perhaps only astonishment that such a man
should have called to her for hel p—but with a disquieting note
that I thought betrayed a dee p and secret pleasure in the
memory .
Beardsley had reached the top of the ladder , but could not
take the final s tep into the loft. Instead, his face had gone
suddenly from red to white, his  eyes rolled back, and then he
fell senseless onto his face on the boards, his legs dangling
absurdly from the edge of the loft.
“I could  not get him down; it wa th all I could do to pull him
up into the loft.” She sighed. “And the retht … you know .”
“Not quite.” Jamie spoke from the dark near my shoulder ,
making me jump. Hiram grunted indignantly , shaken awake.
“How the hell long have you  been there?” I demanded.“Long enough.” He moved to my side and knelt beside me,
a hand on my arm. “And what was it at the door , then?” he
asked M rs. Beardsley . His voice held no more than light
interest, but his hand was tight  on my arm. A slight shudder
went over me. What , indeed.
“Nothing,” she said simply . “There wath no one there at all,
that I could thee. But—you can  thee the rowan tree from that
door , and there wath  a half-moon rithing.”
There was a ma rked period of silence at this. Finally , Jamie
rubbed a hand hard over his face, sighed, and got to his feet.
“A ye. W ell. I’ve found a spot w here we can shelter for the
night. Help me wi’ the goat, Sassenach.”
W e were on hil ly ground, spiked with rocky outcrops and
small tangles of sweet shrub and greenbrier , making the
footing between the trees so uncertain in the dark that I fell
twice, ca tching myself only by luck before breaking my neck.
It w ould have be en dif ficult going in broad daylight; by night,
it was nearly im possible. Fortu nately , it was no more than a
short distance to the spot Jamie had found.
This wa s a sort of shallow gash  in the side of a crumbling
clay bank, overhung with a tattered grapevine and thatched
with matted grasses. At one ti me, there had been a stream
here, and the w ater had carved away a good-sized chunk of
earth from the bank, leaving an overhanging shelf. Something
had dive rted the flow of water some years ago, though, and the
rounded stones of what had been  the streambed were scattered
and half-sunk in mossy soil; one rolled under my foot and I
fell to one knee,  striking it pain fully on another of the beastly
stones.
“All rig ht, Sassenach?” Jamie heard my rude exclamation
and stop ped, turning toward me. He stood on the hillside just
above me, Hiram on his shoulders. From below , silhouetted
against t he sky , he looked grotesque and rather frightening; a
tall, horned figure with hunched and monstrous shoulders.
“Fine,” I said, rather breathless. “Just here, is it?”“A ye. H elp me … will ye?”  He sounded a lot more
breathless than I did. He sank carefully to his knees, and I
hurried to help him lower Hiram to the ground. Jamie stayed
kneeling, one hand on the ground to brace himself.
“I hope it won’ t be too hard to find the trail in the morning,”
I said, watching him anxiously . His head was bent with
exhaustion, air rattling wetly in  his chest with each breath. I
wanted him in a place with fire and food, as fast as possible.
He shook his head, and coughed, clearing his throat.
“I k en where it is,” he said, an d coughed again. “It’ s only
—” The  coughing shook him h ard; I could see his shoulders
braced a gainst it . When he stopp ed, I put a hand gently on his
back, an d could  feel a fine, constant tremor running through
him; not a chill,  just the trembling of muscles forced beyond
the limits of their strength.
“I canna go any further , Claire,” he said softly , as though
ashamed of the admission. “I’m done.”
“Lie down,” I said, just as softly . “I’ll see to things.”
There was a certain amount of bustle and confusion, but
within a  half hour or so, everyon e was more or less settled, the
horses hobbled, and a small fire going.
I knelt to check my chief patie nt, who was sitting on his
chest, sp linted leg stuck out in  front. Hiram, with his ladies
safely gathered behind him in the shelter of the bank, emitted a
belligerent “Meh!” and threatened me with his horns.
“Ungrateful sod,” I said, pulling back.
Jamie laughed, then broke of f to cough, his shoulders
shaking with the spasm. He w as curled at one side of the
depression in the bank, head pillowed on his folded coat.
“And as for you,” I said, eyeing him, “I wasn’ t joking about
that goose grease. Open your c loak, lift your shirt, and do it
now .”
He n arrowed his eyes at me, and  shot a quick glance in Mrs.
Beardsley’ s direction. I hid a s mile at his modesty , but gaveMrs. Beardsley the small kettle  from my saddlebag and sent
her of f to fetch water and more firewood, then dug out the
gourd of mentholated ointment.
Jamie’ s appearance alarmed me slightly , now that I had a
good look at him . He was pale and white-lipped, red-rimmed
round the nostrils, and his eyes were bruised with fatigue. He
looked v ery sick, and sounded worse, the breath wheezing in
his chest with each respiration.
“W ell, I  suppose if Hiram wo uldn’ t die in front of his
nannies, you won’ t die in front o f me, either ,” I said dubiously ,
scooping out a thumbful of the fragrant grease.
“I am not dying  in the least degree,” he said, rather crossly .
“I’m onl y a wee bit tired. I shall  be entirely myself in the morn
—oh, Christ, I hate this!”
His ches t was quite warm, but I thought he wasn’ t fevered;
it was hard to tell, my own fingers being very cold.
He jerke d, made a high-pitched “eee” noise, and tried to
squirm away . I s eized him firmly by the neck, put a knee in his
belly , and proceeded to have m y way with him, all protests
notwithstanding. At length, h e gave up struggling and
submitted, only giggling intermittently , sneezing, and uttering
an o ccasional small yelp when I reached a particularly ticklish
spot. The goats found it all very entertaining.
In a few minutes , I had him well-greased and gasping on the
ground, the skin of his chest an d throat red from rubbing and
shiny with grease, a strong aroma of peppermint and camphor
in the air . I patted a thick flannel into place on his chest, pulled
down his shirt, drew the folds of his cloak around him, and
tucked a blanket up snugly under his chin.
“Now , th en,” I said with satisfac tion, wiping my hands on a
cloth. “As soon as I have hot w ater , we’ll have a nice cup of
horehound tea.”
He opened one eye suspiciously .
“W e will?”“W ell, you will. I’d rather drink hot horse piss, myself.”
“So would I.”
“T oo bad; it hasn’ t any medicinal ef fects that I know of.”
He groaned and shut the eye. He breathed heavily for a
moment, soundi ng like a diseased bellows. Then he raised his
head a few inches, opening his eyes.
“Is yon woman back yet?”
“No, I imagine i t will take her a little time to find the stream
in the dark.” I hesitated. “Did you … hear everything she was
telling me?”
He shook his head.
“Not all—but enough. Mary Ann and that?”
“Y es, that.”
He grunted.
“Did ye believe her , Sassenach?”
I did n’ t reply im mediately , but took my time in cleaning the
goose grease out from under my fingernails.
“I did at the time,” I finally said. “Just now—I’m not sure.”
He grunted again, this time with approval.
“I sh ouldna think she’ s dangerou s,” he said. “But keep your
wee knife about ye, Sassenach— and dinna turn your back on
her . W e’ll take watch and watch about; wake me in an hour .”
He shut his eyes , coughed, and without further ado, fell fast
asleep.
 
CLOUDS WERE BEGINNING to drift across the moon, and
a cold wind stirred the grass on the bank above us.
“W ake h im in an hour ,” I muttered, shifting myself in an
ef fort to achieve some minimal level of comfort on the rocky
ground. “Ha, bloody ha.” I lea ned over and hoisted Jamie’ s
head into my lap. He groaned slightly , but didn’ t twitch.“Snif fles,” I said accusingly to him. “Ha!”
I wriggled my shoulders and leaned back, finding some
support against the sloping wall of our shelter . Despite Jamie’ s
warning, it seemed unnecessary to keep an eye on Mrs.
Beardsley; she had obligingly built up the fire, then curled up
among the goats and—being merely flesh and blood, and
therefore exha usted by the day’ s events—had gone
immediately to sleep. I could hear her on the far side of the
fire, sno ring peacefully among the assorted wheezings and
grunts of her companions.
“And what do y ou think you are, anyway?” I demanded of
the heavy head r esting on my thigh. “V ulcanized rubber?” My
fingers touched his hair , quite w ithout intent, and smoothed it
gently . O ne corn er of his mouth  lifted suddenly , in a smile of
startling sweetness.
It w as g one as quickly as it had come, and I stared at him in
astonishment. No, he was sound asleep; his breath came
hoarse b ut even , and the long parti-colored lashes rested dark
against his cheeks. V ery softly , I stroked his head again.
Sure enough; the smile flickered like the touch of a flame,
and disa ppeared. He sighed, very deeply , bent his neck to
nuzzle closer , then relaxed completely , his body going limp.
“Oh, Christ, Jamie,” I said sof tly , and felt tears sting my
eyes.
It ha d b een year s since I’d seen  him smile in his sleep like
that. No t since the early days  of our marriage, in fact—at
Lallybroch.
He’d alw ays do it as a wee lad , his  sist er Jenny  had told me
then. I think it means he’ s happy .
My fing ers curle d into the soft, thick hair at the nape of his
neck, feeling the solid curve of  his skull, the warm scalp and
the hair -thin line of the ancient scar across it.
“Me, too,” I whispered to him.30
SP A WN OF SA T AN
M RS. MACLEOD and her two children had gone to stay with
Evan Li ndsay’ s wife, and with the leaving of the MacLeod
brothers with the militia, plus Geordie Chisholm and his two
eldest s ons, the congestion in the big house was eased
substantially . Not nearly enough, though, Brianna reflected,
considering that Mrs. Chisholm remained.
The problem was not Mrs. Chi sholm as such; the problem
was Mrs. Chisholm’ s five younger children, all boys, and
referred to collectively—by Mrs. Bug—as “the spawn of
Satan.” Mrs. Chisholm, perhaps understandably , objected to
this terminology . While the other inhabitants of the house were
less fort hright than Mrs. Bug in stating their opinions, there
was a remarkabl e unanimity among them. Three-year -old twin
boys would  hav e that ef fect, Brianna thoug ht, eyeing Jemmy
with some trepidation as she envisioned the future.
He was at the m oment giving no indication of a potential for
future rampage, being half-asle ep on the rag rug of Jamie’ s
study , where Brianna had retired in the faint hope of fifteen
minutes’ semi-solitude in which to write. Residual awe of
Jamie w as suf ficient to keep the little warts out of this room,
for the most part.
Mrs. Bug had informed eight-year -old Thomas, six-year -old
Anthony , and five-year -old T oby Chisholm that Mrs. Fraser
was a notable witch; a White L ady , who would undoubtedly
turn them  into toads on the spot—and no great loss to society ,
she gave them t o understand—should any harm come to the
contents of her sur gery . That di dn’ t keep them out—quite the
opposite; they were fascinated—but it had so far prevented
them breaking much.
Jamie’ s inkstand  stood to hand on the table; a hollow gourd,
neatly corked with a lar ge acorn, with a pottery jar of neatlysharpened turkey quills beside it. Motherhood had taught
Brianna to seize random mome nts; she seized this one, and a
quill, flipping open the cover of  the small journal in which she
kept what she thought of as her private accounts.
 
Last nig ht I dr eamed about making soap. I haven’ t made
soap yet , myself, but I’d been scrubbing the floor yester day ,
and the smell of  the soap was still on my hands when I went to
bed. It’ s a nasty smell, something between acid and ashes, with
a horrib le faint stink fr om the hog fat, like something that’ s
been dead for a long time.
I wa s po uring w ater into a kettl e of wood ash, to make lye,
and it was turning to lye even as I pour ed. Big clouds of
poisonous smoke wer e coming  up fr om the kettle; it was
yellow , the smoke.
Da b r ought me a big bowl of suet, to mix with the lye, and
ther e wer e babies’ fingers in it. I don’ t r emember thinking
ther e was anything strange about this—at the time.
 
Brianna had been trying to ignor e a series of crashing noises
from upstairs, which sounded like several persons jumping up
and down on a bedstead. These ceased abruptly , succeeded by
a pie rcing scream, which in turn  was followed by the sound of
flesh meeting flesh in a loud slap , and several more screams of
assorted pitches.
She flinched and shut her eyes t ight, recoiling as the sounds
of conflict escalated. A moment more, and they were
thundering down the stairs. W ith a glance at Jemmy , who had
been startled awake, but didn’ t seem frightened—my God, he
was getting used to it, she thought—she put down the quill and
stood up, sighing.
Mr . Bug  was there to tend the farm and livestock and repel
physical threats; Mr . W emyss was there to chop firewood, haul
water , an d generally maintain the fabric of the house. But Mr .
Bug was silent, Mr . W emyss t imid; Jamie had left Briannaformally in char ge. She was, the refore, the court of appeal, and
judge in all conflicts. Herself, if you would.
Herself flung open the study do or and glowered at the mob.
Mrs. Bug, red in the face—as usual—and brimming with
accusation. Mrs . Chisholm, ditto, overflowing with maternal
outrage. Little Mrs. Aberfeldy , the color of an eggplant,
clutching her two-year -old daughter , Ruth, protectively to her
bosom. T ony and T oby Chisholm, both in tears and covered
with sno t. T oby  had a red handprint on the side of his face;
little Ruthie’ s wispy hair appear ed to be oddly shorter on one
side than the other . They all began to talk at once.
“… Red savages!”
“… My baby’ s beautiful hair!”
“She started it!”
“… Dare to strike my son!”
“W e was just playin’ at scalpin’, ma’am …”
“… EEEEEEEEEEE!”
“… and torn a  great hole in my feather bed, the wee
spawn!”
“ Look  what she’ s done, the wicked auld besom!”
“ Look  what they’ve done!”
“Look ye, ma’am, it’ s only …”
“AAAAAAAAAAA!”
Brianna stepped  out into the corridor and slammed the door
behind her . It was a solid d oor , and the resultant boom
temporarily halted the outcry . On the other side, Jemmy began
to cry , but she ignored him for the moment.
She drew  a deep breath, prepar ed to wade into the melee,
but then  though t better of it. She couldn’ t face the thought of
the interminable wrangling that would come of dealing with
them as a group. Divide and conquer was the only way .“I am writing ,” she declared instead, and looked narrow-
eyed from face to face. “S omething important.” Mrs.
Aberfeldy looke d impressed; Mrs. Chisholm af fronted; Mrs.
Bug astonished.
She nodded coolly to each one in turn.
“I’ll talk to each of you about it later . A ye?”
She opened the door , stepped in side, and shut it very gently
on t he three pop -eyed faces, then pressed her back against it,
closed her eyes, and let out the breath she had been holding.
There w as silence outside the door , then a distinct “Hmp!”
in Mrs. Chishol m’ s voice, and the noise of footsteps going
away—one set up the stairs, ano ther toward the kitchen, and a
heavier tread into the sur gery ac ross the hall. A rush of small
footsteps out the front door anno unced T ony and T oby making
their escape.
Jemmy c eased wailing when he saw her , and started sucking
his thumb instead.
“I hope Mrs. Chisholm doesn’ t know anything about herbs,”
she told him, whispering. “I’m s ure Grandma keeps poisons in
there.” A  good thing her mother had taken the box of saws and
scalpels with her , at least.
She stood still a  moment, listening. No sounds of breaking
glass. Perhaps Mrs. Chisholm had merely stepped into the
sur gery in order to avoid Mr s. Aberfeldy and Mrs. Bug.
Brianna sank down in the straig ht chair by the small table her
father used as a desk. Or maybe Mrs. Chisholm was lying in
wait, hoping to snare Brianna to  listen to her own grievances,
as soon as the others were safely out of the way .
Jemmy was now lying on his b ack with his feet in the air ,
happily mangling a bit of rusk he had found somewhere. Her
journal had fallen to the floor . Hearing Mrs. Chisholm come
out of the sur gery , she hastily seized the quill, and snatched
one of the ledger books from t he stack on the desk with the
other .The door opened an inch or tw o. There was a moment’ s
silence, during which she bent her head, frowning in
exaggerated concentration at th e page before her , scratching
with an empty quill. The door closed again.
“Bitch,” she said, under her breath. Jemmy made an
interrogative no ise, and she looked down at him. “Y ou didn’ t
hear that, all right?”
Jemmy made an agreeable noise and crammed the soggy
remnant of his toast into his  left nostril. She made an
instinctive movement to take it away from him, then stopped
herself. She wasn’ t in the moo d for any more conflict this
morning. Or this afternoon, either .
She tapped the black quill thou ghtfully on the ledger page.
She’d have to do something, and fast. Mrs. Chisholm might
have found the deadly nightshade—and she knew  Mrs. Bug
had a cleaver .
Mrs. Chisholm had the advantage in weight, height, and
reach, b ut Brianna personally would put her money on Mrs.
Bug, in terms o f guile and treachery . As for poor little Mrs.
Aberfeldy , she’d  be caught in the crossfire, riddled with verbal
bullets. And little Ruthie would likely be bald as an egg before
another week was out.
Her father would have sorted them out in nothing flat by the
joint exe rcise of charm and ma le authority . She gave a small
snort of amusement at the thought. Come, he sayeth to one,
and she curleth up at his feet, pu rring like Adso the cat. Go, he
sayeth to another , and she goeth promptly out into the kitchen
and baketh him a plate of buttered muf fins.
Her mother would have seized t he first excuse to escape the
house—to tend a distant patient or gather medicinal herbs—
and left them to  fight it out among themselves, returning only
when a state of armed neutrali ty had been restored. Brianna
hadn’ t m issed the look of relief on her mother ’ s face as she
swung up into her mare’ s saddle—or the faintly apologetic
glance s he sent her daughter . Still, neither strategy was goingto w ork for her—though the ur g e to seize Jemmy and run for
the hills was pretty strong.
For the hundred th time since th e men had left, she wished
passionately that she could have gone with them. She could
imagine the bulk of a horse mo ving under her , the clean, cold
air i n he r lungs, and Roger riding by her side, the sun glowing
of f his dark hai r , and unseen a dventure to be faced together ,
somewhere ahead.
She missed him with a deep ache, like a bruise to the bone.
How lon g might  he be gone, if it really came to fighting? She
pushed that thought aside, not wanting to look at the thought
that cam e after it; the thought th at if it came to fighting, there
was a possibility—however faint—that he would come back
ill or injured—or wouldn’ t come back at all.
“It’ s not  going to come to that,” she said firmly , aloud.
“They’ll be back in a week or two.”
There was a rattling sound as a blast of icy rain struck the
window . The weather was turni ng cold; it would be snowing
by nightfall. She shivered, drawing the shawl around her
shoulders, and glanced at Jem to see that he was warm enough.
His smock was puddled up around his middle, his diaper was
plainly damp, and one stocking had fallen of f, leaving his
small pink foot bare. He ap peared not to notice, being
absorbed in babbling a song to the bare toes idly flexing
overhead.
She looked dubiously at him, b ut he seemed happy enough
—and the brazier in the corner was  putting out some heat.
“Okay ,” she said, and sighed. She had Jem, and that was
that. That being  th at, the proble m was to find some means of
dealing with the Three Furies b efore they drove her crazy or
assassinated each other with rolling pin or knitting needle.
“Logic,” she said to Jemmy , sit ting up straight in the chair
and poin ting the quill at him. “There must be a logical way .
It’ s like that problem where y ou have to get a cannibal, amissionary , and a goat across a river in a canoe. Let me think
about this.”
Jem began trying to get his foot into his crumb-encrusted
mouth, despite the clear illogic of the procedure.
“Y ou mu st take after Daddy ,” she told him, tolerantly . She
put the quill back in its jar , and s tarted to close the ledger , then
stopped, attracted by the sprawling entries. The sight of
Jamie’ s characteristically messy writing still gave her a faint
thrill, remember ing her first sight of it—on an ancient deed of
sasine, its ink gone pale brown with age.
This ink had been pale brown to start with, but had now
darkened, the iron-gall mixture achieving its typical blue-black
with exposure to air over a day or so.
It was not so much a ledger , she saw , as a logbook,
recording the daily activities of the farm.
 
16 July —Rec’d six weaned piglets of Pastor Gottfried, in
trade for two b ottles muscat wine and a goosewing axhead.
Have put them in the stable ‘til they be gr own enough to
forage conveniently .
17 July —One of the hives commenced to swarm in the
afternoon, and came into the stable. My wife fortunately
r ecaptur ed the swarm, which sh e housed in an empty churn.
She says Ronnie Sinclair must make her a new one.
18 July —Letter fr om my aunt, asking advice r e sawmill on
Grinder ’ s Cr eek . Replied, saying I will ride to inspect the
situation within  the month. Letter sent with R. Sinclair , who
goes to Cr oss Cr eek with a load of 22 barr els, fr om which I am
to r e ceive half h is pr ofit towar d payment of debt on cobbler ’ s
tools. H ave arranged to deduct cost of new churn fr om this
amount.
 
The flow  of entries was soothing , as peaceful as the summer
days they recorded. She felt the knot of tension between hershoulder blades beginning to relax, and her mind began to
loosen and stretch, ready to seek a way out of her dif ficulties.
 
20 July —Barley in the lower field as high as my stocking-
tops. A healthy heifer calf born to r ed cow soon after midnight.
All well. An excellent day .
21 July —Rode to Muellers’. Exchanged one jar honeycomb
for leath er bridle in poor r epai r (but can be mended). Home
well after dark, in consequenc e of seeing a twilight hatch
rising up on the pond near Holl is’ s Gap. Stopped to fish, and
caught a  string of ten fine tr out . Six eaten for supper; the r est
will do for br eakfast.
22 July —My grandson has a rash, though my wife declar es
it of no moment. The white sow  has br oken thr ough her pen
again an d escap ed into the for es t. I am in two minds whether I
shall pursue her or only expr ess  sympathy for the unfortunate
pr edator that first encounters he r . Her temper is similar to that
of my daughter  at the moment , the latter having slept little
these past few nights …
 
Brianna leaned forward, frowning at the page.
 
… in  consequence of the infant’ s scr eaming, which my wife
says is the colic and will pass. I trust she is right. Meanwhile, I
have set tled Brianna and the child in the old cabin, which is
some r el ief to us in the house, if  not to my poor daughter . The
white sow ate four of her last litter befor e I could pr event her .
 
“Why , y ou blood y bastar d !” sh e sa id. She was familiar with
the w hite sow in  question, and not flattered by the comparison.
Jemmy , alarmed by her tone, stopped crooning and dropped
his toast, his mouth beginning to quiver .
“No, no,  it’ s all right, sweetie.” She got up and scooped him
into her arms, swaying gently to soothe him. “Shh, it’ s allright. M ummy is just talking to Grandpa, that’ s all. Y ou didn’ t
hear that word either , okay? Shh, shh.”
Jemmy was reassured, but leaned out from her arms,
reaching after his discarded mea l with small grunts of anxiety .
She stooped and picked it up, eyeing the half-dissolved object
with distaste. The crust was not only stale and wet, but had
acquired a light coating of what seemed to be cat hair .
“Ick. Y ou don’ t really want that, do you?”
Evidently he did, and was persu aded only with dif ficulty to
accept a lar ge ir on bull’ s ring—used for leading male animals
by th e nose, she noted with some irony—from the shelf in lieu
of it. A brief nibble confirmed the desirability of the nose ring,
though, and he settled down in her lap to single-minded
gnawing, allowing her to reread the conclusion of the
of fensive entry .
“Hmm.” She leaned back, shifting Jemmy’ s weight more
comfortably . He could sit up easily now , though it still seemed
incredible that his noodle-neck could support the round dome
of his head. She regarded the ledger broodingly .
“It’ s a thought,”  she said to Jemmy . “If I shift the old bi—I
mean, Mrs. Chisholm—to our cabin, it will get her and her
horrible little monsters out of e veryone’ s hair . Then … hmm.
Mrs. Aberfeldy and Ruthie cou ld go in with Lizzie and her
father , if we mo ve the trundle from Mama and Da’ s room in
there. T he Bugs get their priva cy back, and Mrs. Bug stops
being an  evil-mi nded old … er … anyway , then I suppose you
and I could sleep in Mama and  Da’ s room, at least ‘til they
come back.”
She hated to th ink of moving from the cabin. It was her
home, her private place, her fam ily’ s place. She could go there
and clos e the door , leaving the furor here behind. Her things
were the re; the half-built loom, the pewter plates, the pottery
jug s he h ad pain ted—all the small, homely objects with which
she had made the space her own.Beyond the sense of possession and peace, she had an
uncomfortable sense of some thing like superstition about
leaving it. The c abin was the ho me Roger had shared with her;
to l eave it, however temporarily , seemed somehow an
admission that he might not return to share it again.
She tigh tened her grip on Jemm y , who ignored her in favor
of co ncentration on his toy , his fat little fists shiny with drool
where he grasped the ring.
No, she didn’ t want to give up h er cabin at all. But it was  an
answer , and a logical one. W ou ld Mrs. Chisholm agree? The
cabin w as much more crudely built than the big house, and
lacking its amenities.
Still, she was pretty sure Mrs. Chisholm would accept the
suggestion. If ever she’d seen someone whose motto was,
“Better to reign in hell than ser ve in heaven …” Despite her
trouble, she felt a small bubble  of laughter rise beneath her
stays.
She reached out and flipped the  ledger closed, then tried to
replace i t on the stack from which she’d taken it. One-handed,
though, and encumbered by Jemmy , she couldn’ t quite reach,
and the book slipped of f, falling back onto the table.
“Rats,” she muttered, and scooted forward on her chair ,
reaching to pick it up again. S everal loose sheets had fallen
out, and  she stuf fed these back as tidily as she could with her
free hand.
One, plainly a l etter , had the re mnants of its wax seal still
attached. Her eye caught the i mpression of a smiling half-
moon, a nd she paused. That w as Lord John Grey’ s seal. It
must be the let ter he had sent in September , in which he
described his adventures hunting deer in the Dismal Swamp;
her father had r ead it to the family several times—Lord John
was a humorous correspondent , and the deer hunt had been
beset b y the sort of misfortunes that were no doubt
uncomfortable t o live through, but which made picturesque
recounting afterward.Smiling in memory , she flipped the letter open with her
thumb, looking forward to seein g the story again, only to find
that she was looking at something quite dif ferent.
 
13 October , Anno Domini 1770
 
Mr . James Fraser
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, North Car olina
My dear Jamie,
 
I wo ke th is Morn ing to the sound  of the Rain which has beat
upon us for the l ast W eek, and to  the gentle clucking of several
Chickens, who had come to r oost upon my Bedstead. Rising
under the Star e of numer ous beady Eyes, I went to make
Inquiry as to th is Cir cumstance, and was informed that the
River ha s risen so far under the  Impetus of the r ecent Rain as
to have undermined both the Necessary House and the
Chicken Coop. The contents o f the latter wer e r escued by
W illiam (my Son, whom you will r ecall), and two of the Slaves,
who swept the dispossessed Fowl out of the passing
Floodwaters with Br ooms. I cannot say whose was the Notion
to sequester the hapless feather ed Flood V ictims in my
Sleeping Chamber , but I hold certain Suspicions in this r egar d.
Resorting to use of my Chamber Pot (I could wish that the
Chickens shar ed  this Facility , th ey ar e distr essing incontinent
Fowl), I  dr essed and ventur ed forth to see what might be
salvaged. Some few Boar ds and the shingled Roof of the
Chicken Coop r emain, but my  Privy , alas, has become the
Pr operty of King Neptune—or whatever minor water Deity
pr esides over so modest a T ributary as our River .
I pra y you will suffer no Concern for us, though; the House
is at some dista nce fr om the Ri ver , and safely placed upon a
Rise of Gr ound,  such as to r ender us quite safe fr om even the
most incommodious flooding. (The Necessary had been dug by
the old homest ead, and we h ad not yet attempted a newstructur e mor e convenient; this minor disaster , by affor ding us
the Necessary  opportunity for r ebuilding, thus may pr ove a
blessing in disguise.)
 
Brianna rolled her eyes at the pun, but smiled nonetheless.
Jemmy dropped his ring and began at once to whine for it. She
stooped to pick it up, but stopped halfway down, riveted by the
words at the beginning of the next paragraph.
 
Y our letter mentions Mr . Step hen Bonnet, and inquir es
whether I have news or knowl edge of him. I have met with
him, you will collect, but have unfortunately no Memory
whatever of the Encounter , not even to Recalling of his
Appearance, tho ugh as you kno w , I carry a small Hole in my
Head, as a sin gular Memento  of the occasion. (Y ou may
inform your Lady W ife that I am  healed well, with no further
Symptoms of Discomfort than the occasional Headache.
Beyond this, the Silver Plate with which the Opening is
cover ed is subject to sudden ch ill when the W eather is cold,
which tends to make my left Eye water , and to cause a gr eat
Dischar ge of Snot, but this is of no consequence.)
As I thus shar e your Inter est in Mr . Bonnet and his
Movements, I have long since had Inquiries dispersed among
such Acquaintance as I have near the Coast, since the
Descriptions of his Machinations cause me to believe the man
is most like to be found ther e (this is a comforting Notion,
given th e Gr eat Distance between the Coast and your r emote
Eyrie). T he River being navigable to the Sea, however , I had
some Thought that the River Captains and W ater Scallywags
who now and a gain grace my Dinner T able might at some
Point bear me W or d of the man.
I am  not please d by the Obligation to r eport that Bonnet
still r esi des amo ng the Living, but both Duty and Friendship
compel me to impart such P articulars of him as I have
obtained. These ar e sparse; the W r etch appears sensible of hiscriminal Situati on, so far as to r ender him subtle in his
Movements until now .
 
Jemmy was kicking and squawking. As though in a trance,
she stooped, holding him, and picked up the ring, her eyes still
fixed on the letter .
 
I had hear d littl e of him, save a Report at one Point that he
had r epair ed to France—good News. However , two W eeks past
I had a Guest, one Captain Liston (“Captain” being no mor e
than a title of courtesy; he claims service with the Royal Navy ,
but I will stake a Hogshead of my best T obacco [a sample of
which you will f ind accompanying this Missive—and if you do
not, I would be obliged to hear of it, since I do not altogether
trust the Slave by whom I send it] that he has never so much as
smelled the Ink on a Commiss ion, let alone the Reek of the
Bilges) who gave me a mor e r ecent—and highly disagr eeable
—History of the man Bonnet.
Finding himself at lar ge in the Port of Charleston, Liston
said tha t he fell in with some Companions of low Aspect, who
invited h im to accompany them to a Cockfight, held in the
Innyar d of an Establishment called the Devil’ s Glass. Among
the Rabble ther e was a Man notable for the fineness of his
Dr ess, and the Fr eedom with which he spent his Coin—Liston
hear d this man r eferr ed to as Bonnet, and was told by the
Landlor d that this Bonnet had the name of a Smuggler upon
the Outer Banks, being Popular with the Mer chants of the
coastal T owns in North Car olina, though much less so with the
Authorities, who wer e Helpless to deal with the Man by r eason
of his Busines s and the de pendence of the T owns of
W ilmington, Edenton, and New Bern upon his T rade.
Liston took little further Note o f Bonnet (he said) until an
Alter cation r ose over a W ager upon the Fighting. Hot W or ds
wer e exchanged, and nothing would do save Honor be
satisfied by the drawing of Blood. Nothing loath, the
Spectators at once began to wa ger upon the Outcome of thehuman Contest,  in the same manner as that of the fighting
Fowl.
One combatant was the man B onnet, the other a Captain
Marsden, a half-pay Army Captain known to my Guest as a
good Swor dsman. This Marsden, feeling himself the injur ed
Party , damned Bonnet’ s eyes, and invited the Smuggler to
accommodate him upon the Spot, an Offer at once accepted.
W agers ran heavy upon Marsden, his Reputation being known,
but it was soon clear that he had met his Match and mor e in
Bonnet. W ithin no mor e than a few moments, Bonnet
succeeded in disarming his Opponent, and in W ounding him so
grievously in the Thigh that Marsden sank down upon his
Knees and yielded to his Oppon ent—having no Choice in the
Matter at that Point, to be sur e.
Bonnet d id not accept of this Surr ender , though, but instead
performed an Act of such Cruelty as made the deepest
Impr ession upon all who saw it. Remarking with gr eat
coolness that it was not his own  Eyes that would be damned,
he dr ew the T ip of his W eapon acr oss Marsden’ s Eyes, twisting
it in such Fashion as not only  to blind the Captain, but to
inflict such Mutilation as would make him an Object of the
gr eatest Horr or and Pity to all who might behold him.
Leaving his Foe thus mangled a nd fainting upon the bloody
Sand of the Inn yar d, Bonnet cleansed his Blade by wiping it
upon Marsden’ s  Shirtfr ont, sheathed it, and left—though not
befor e r emovin g Marsden’ s Purse, which he claimed in
payment of his o riginal W ager . None pr esent had any Stomach
to pr event him, having so cogent an Example of his Skill
befor e them.
I r ec ount this History both to acquaint you with Bonnet’ s
last known wher eabouts, and a s warning to his Natur e and
Abilities. I know you ar e alr ea dy well acquainted with the
Former , but I d raw your Attention to the Latter , out of due
Regar d for your W ell-being. Not that I expect a wor d of my
well-meant Advice will find lodging in your Br east, so filled
must it be with animadverse Sentiment towar d the Man, but Iwould beg that y ou take Notice at least of Liston’ s Mention of
Bonnet’ s Connexions.
Upon the occasion of my own M eeting with the man, he was
a Condemned Felon, and I cannot think he has since
performed such Service towar d the Cr own as would gain him
official Par don. If he is content t o flaunt himself thus openly in
Charleston—wher e scant Y ears ago he escaped the Hangman’ s
Noose—it would  seem he is in no gr eat Fears for his Safety—
and this can only mean that he now enjoys the Pr otection and
Patr onage of powerful Friends. Y ou must discover and bewar e
of these, if you seek to destr oy Bonnet.
I wil l continue my Inquiries in this r egar d, and notify you at
once of any further Particulars. In the meantime, keep you
well, and spar e a  thought now and again to your dr enched and
shivering Acqua intance in V ir ginia. I r emain, sir , with all good
W ishes towar d your W ife, Daughter , and Family ,
 
 
Y our ob’ t. servant,
 John W illiam Gr ey , Esq.
 Mount Josiah Plantation
 V ir ginia  
 
Postscriptum: I have been in sear ch of an Astr olabe, per
your Request, but so far have he ar d of nothing that would suit
your Purpose. I am sending to L ondon this month for assorted
Furnishings, though, and will be pleased to or der one fr om
Halliburton’ s in Gr een Str eet, their Instruments ar e of the
highest Quality .
 
V ery slowly , Brianna sat back do wn on the chair . She placed
her h ands gently but firmly over her son’ s ears, and said a very
bad word.31
ORPHAN OF THE ST ORM
I  F ELL ASLEEP , leaning agains t the bank, with Jamie’ s head
on m y lap. I dreamed luridly , as one does when cold and
uncomfortable. I dreamed of  trees; endless, monotonous
forests o f them, with each trun k and leaf and needle etched
like scri mshaw on the inside of  my eyelids, each one crystal-
sharp, all just alike. Y ellow goat-eyes floated in the air
between the tree trunks, and the wood of my mind rang with
the screams of she-panthers and the crying of motherless
children.
I woke suddenly , with the echoes of their cries still ringing
in my ears. I w as lying in a tangle of cloaks and blankets,
Jamie’ s limbs heavily entwined with my own, and a fine, cold
snow was falling through the pines.
Granules of ice crusted my brows and lashes, and my face
was cold and wet with melted snow . Momentarily disoriented,
I r eache d out by reflex to touch Jamie; he stirred and coughed
thickly , his shoulder shaking un der my hand. The sound of it
brought back the events of the  day before—Josiah and his
twin, the  Beards ley farm, Fanny’ s ghosts; the smell of ordure
and gangrene and the cleaner reek of gunpowder and wet
earth. The bleating of goats, still echoing from my dreams.
A thin cry came through the whisper of snow , and I sat up
abruptly , flingin g back the blankets in a spray of icy powder .
Not a goat. Not at all.
Startled awake, Jamie jerked and rolled instinctively away
from the mess o f cloaks and bla nkets, coming up in a crouch,
hair in a wild tangle and eyes darting round in search of threat.
“What?” he whispered hoarsely . He reached for his knife,
lying nearby in its sheath on the  ground, but I lifted a hand to
stop him moving.“I don’ t know . A noise. Listen!”
He lifte d his head, listening, a nd I saw his throat move
painfully as he swallowed. I could hear nothing but the
chisping of the snow , and saw  nothing but dripping pines.
Jamie heard something, though—or saw it; his face changed
suddenly .
“There,” he said softly , nodding  at something behind me. I
scrambled round  on my knees, to see what looked like a small
heap of rags, lying some ten feet away , next to the ashes of the
burned-out fire. The cry came again, unmistakable this time.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” I w as scarcely aware of having
spoken, as I scrambled toward th e bundle. I snatched it up and
began to  root through the laye rs of swaddling cloth. It was
plainly alive—I had heard it cry—and yet it lay inert, almost
weightless in the curve of my arm.
The tiny face and hairless skull were blue-white, the
features closed and sere as the h usk of a winter fruit. I laid my
palm over nose and mouth an d felt a faint, moist warmth
against my skin. Startled by my touch, the mouth opened in a
mewling cry , and the slanted eye s crimped tighter shut, sealing
out the threatening world.
“Holy God.” Jamie crossed himself briefly . His voice was
little more than a phlegmy crackle; he cleared his throat and
tried again, glancing around. “Where’ s the woman?”
Shocked by the child’ s appearance, I had not paused to
consider its origin, nor was there time to do so now . The baby
twitched a little in its wrappings, but the tiny hands were cold
as ice, the skin mottled blue and purple with chill.
“Never m ind he r now—get my shawl, will you, Jamie? The
poor thing’ s nearly frozen.” I fumbled one-handed with the
lacing o f my bodice; it was an old one that opened down the
front, worn for ease of dressing on the trail. I pulled loose my
stays an d the drawstring of my shift and pressed the small icy
creature against my bare breasts, my skin still warm from
sleep. A  blast of wind drove stinging snow across the exposedskin of my neck  and shoulders. I pulled my shift hastily up
over the child an d hunched myself, shivering. Jamie flung the
shawl round my shoulders, the n wrapped his arms round us
both, hu gging fiercely as though to force the heat of his own
body into the child.
The heat of him  was considerable; he was burning with
fever .
“My God, are you all right?” I spared a glance up at him;
white-faced and red-eyed, but steady enough.
“A ye, fine. Where is she?” he asked again, hoarsely . “The
woman.”
Gone, evidently . The goats w ere huddled close together
under the shelter of the bank; I saw Hiram’ s horns bobbing
among the nannies’ brindled b acks. Half a dozen pairs of
yellow e yes watched us with interest, reminding me of my
dreams.
The plac e where  Mrs. Beardsley had lain was empty , with
no more than a patch of flattened grass to testify that she had
ever been there. She must have  gone some distance away in
order to give birth; there was no trace of it near the fire.
“It i s hers?” Jamie asked. I could still hear the congestion in
his voice , but the small wheezing sound in his chest had eased;
that was a relief.
“I suppose it must be. Where else could it have come
from?”
My attention was divided between Jamie and the child—it
had begun to st ir , with little crablike movements against my
belly—but I spared a glance aro und our makeshift camp. The
pines stood black and silent u nder the whispering snow; if
Fanny Beardsley had gone into the forest, no trace remained
on the matted needles to mark her passage. Snow crystals
rimed th e trunks  of the trees, but not enough had fallen to stick
to the ground; no chance of footprints.
“She can’ t have gone far ,” I s aid, craning to peer round
Jamie’ s shoulder . “She hasn’ t taken either of the horses.”Gideon and Mrs. Piggy stood close together under a spruce
tree, ears morosely flattened by the weather , their breath
making clouds of steam around them. Seeing us up and
moving, Gideon  stamped and whinnied, big yellow teeth
showing in an impatient demand for sustenance.
“A ye, ye auld bugger , I’m comin g.” Jamie dropped his arms
and stepped back, wiping his knuckles beneath his nose.
“She co uldna ha ve taken a hors e, if she meant to be secret.
If she had, the other would have made a fuss and roused me.”
He laid a gentle hand on the bulge under my shawl. “I’ll need
to go and feed them. Is he all right, Sassenach?”
“He’ s thawing out,” I assured hi m. “But he—or she, for that
matter—will be hungry , too.” The baby was beginning to
move more, squirming sluggishly , like a chilled worm, its
mouth blindly groping. The feeling was shocking in its
familiarity; my nipple sprang u p by reflex, the flesh of my
breast tingling with electricity as the tiny mouth groped,
rooted, found the nipple, and clamped on.
I ga ve a small  yelp of surprise, and Jamie raised one
eyebrow .
“It … um … is  hungry ,” I said, readjusting my burden.
“I see that, Sassenach,” he said. He glanced at the goats, still
snug in their she ltered spot by the bank, but beginning to shift
and stir with dro wsy grumbles. “He’ s no the only one starving.
A moment, aye?”
W e had brought lar ge forage nets of dry hay from the
Beardsley farm; he opened one of these and scattered feed for
the horses and goats, then ret urned to me. He stooped to
disentangle one of the cloaks from the damp heap of
coverings, and put it round my shoulders, then rootled through
the pac k for a wooden cup, with which he purposefully
approached the grazing goats.
The baby was su ckling strongly , my nipple pulled deep into
its mout h. I found this reassuring so far as the health of the
child was concerned, but the sensation was rather unsettling.“It’ s not that I mind at all, really ,” I said to the child, trying
to distract both of us. “But I’m afraid I’m not  your mother , you
see? Sorry .”
And where in bloody hell was  its mother , anyway? I turned
slowly round in a circle, searching the landscape more
carefully , but still discerned no trace of Fanny Beardsley , let
alone any reason for her disappearance—or her silence.
What on earth could have happened? Mrs. Beardsley could
have—and quite obviously had —hidden an advanced
pregnancy under that mound of fat and wrappings—but why
should she have done so?
“Why n ot tell us? I wonder ,” I murmured to the top of the
baby’ s h ead. It was growing restless, and I rocked from foot to
foot to soothe it. W ell, perhaps she had feared that Jamie
wouldn’ t take her with us, if he knew she was so far gone with
child. I didn’ t b lame her for not wanting to remain in that
farmhouse, whatever the circumstance.
But still, why had she now abandoned the child? Had  she
abandoned it? I considered for a moment the possibility that
someone, or something—my spine prickled momentarily at
the thought of panthers—had come and stolen the woman
from the fireside, but my common sense dismissed the notion.
A cat or bear might conceivably have entered the camp
without waking Jamie or me, ex hausted as we were, but there
wasn’ t a chance that it could ha ve come near without raising
alarms from the goats and ho rses, who had all had quite
enough to do wi th wild beasts b y this time. And a wild animal
looking for prey would clearly prefer a tender tidbit like this
child, to a tough item like Mrs. Beardsley .
But if a human  agency had been responsible for Fanny
Beardsley’ s disappearance—why had they left the child?
Or , perhaps, brought it back?
I sn if fed deeply to clear my n ose, then turned my head,
breathing in and out, testing the air from dif ferent quarters.
Birth is a messy business, and I was thoroughly familiar withthe ripe scents of it. The child in my arms smelled strongly of
such things, but I could detect n o trace at all of blood or birth
waters o n the chilly wind. Goat  dung, horse manure, cut hay ,
the b itter smell of wood ash, and a good whif f of camphorated
goose grease from Jamie’ s clothes—but nothing else.
“Right, then,” I said aloud, gently jiggling my burden, who
was gro wing restless. “She went away from the fire to give
birth. Ei ther she went by herself—or someone made her go.
But if someone took her and saw  that she was about to deliver ,
why would they have bothered bringing you back? Surely
they’d either have kept you, killed you, or simply left you to
die. Oh— sorry . Didn’ t mean to upset you. Shh, darling. Hush,
hush.”
The bab y , beginning to thaw from its stupor , had had time to
consider what else was lacking i n its world. It had relinquished
my breast in fru stration, and was wriggling and wailing with
encouraging strength by the time Jamie returned with a
steaming cup of goat’ s milk and a moderately clean
handkerchief. T wisting this into  a makeshift teat, he dipped it
in the milk and  carefully inserted the dripping cloth into the
open ma w . The mewling ceased at once, and we both sighed
with relief as the noise stopped.
“Ah, that’ s better , is it? Seas, a bhalaich , seas ,” Jamie was
murmuring to the child, dipping more milk. I peered down at
the tiny face, st ill pale and waxy with vernix, but no longer
chalky , as it suckled with deep concentration.
“How could she have left it?”  I wondered aloud. “And
why?”
That was the be st ar gument for kidnapping; what else could
have made a new  mother abandon her child? T o say nothing of
making of f on f oot into a dark ened wood immediately after
giving birth, heavy-footed and sore, her own flesh still torn
and oozi ng … I grimaced at the thought, my womb tightening
in sympathy .
Jamie shook his head, his eyes still intent on his task.“She had some reason, but Christ and the saints only ken
what it is. She d idna hate the c hild, though—she might have
left it in the wood, and us none the wiser .”
That was true; she—or someo ne—had wrapped the baby
carefully , and left it as close to the fire as she could. She
wished it to survive, then—but without her .
“Y ou think she left willingly , then?”
He nodded, glancing at me.
“W e’re no far from the T reaty Line here. It could  be Indians
—but if  it was, if someone took her , why should they not
capture us as well? Or kill us a ll?” he asked logically . “And
Indians would have taken the ho rses. Nay , I think she went on
her o wn. But as to why …” He shook his head, and dipped the
handkerchief again.
The snow was f alling faster now , still a dry , light snow , but
beginning to stick in random pa tches. W e should leave soon, I
thought, before the storm grew worse. It seemed somehow
wrong, t hough, simply to go, wi th no attempt to determine the
fate of Fanny Beardsley .
The whole situation seemed unreal. It was as though the
woman had suddenly vanished through some sorcery , leaving
this sma ll substi tute in exchange. It reminded me bizarrely of
the Scottish tales of changelin gs; fairy of fspring left in the
place of human babies. I cou ldn’ t fathom what the fairies
could possibly want with Fanny Beardsley , though.
I knew it was futile, but turned slowly round once more,
surveying our surroundings. Nothing. The clay bank loomed
over us,  fringed with dry , snow -dusted grass. The trickle of a
tiny stream ran past a little distance away , and the trees rustled
and sigh ed in the wind. There was no mark of hoof or foot on
the laye r of damp, spongy needles, and no hint of any trail.
The woods were not at all silent, what with the wind, but dark
and deep, all right.
“And miles to go before we sleep,” I remarked, turning back
to Jamie with a sigh.“Eh? Ah, no, it’ s no more  than an hour ’ s ride to
Brownsville,” he assured me. “Or maybe two,” he amended,
glancing up at th e white-muslin sky , from which the snow was
falling faster . “I ken where we are, now it’ s light.”
He c oughed again, a sudden sp asm racking his body , then
straightened, and handed me the cup and dummy .
“Here, S assenach. Feed the poor were sgaogan  whi le I tend
the beasts, aye?”
Sgaogan . A changelin g. So the air of supernatural
strangeness abo ut the whole af fair had struck him, too. W ell,
the woman had claimed to see ghosts; perhaps one of them had
come for her? I shivered, and cradled the baby closer .
“Is ther e any settlement near here, besides Brownsville?
Anywhere Mrs. Beardsley might have decided to go?”
Jamie sh ook his head, a line between his brows. The snow
melted where it touched his heat ed skin, and ran down his face
in tiny streams.
“Naught that I ken,” he said. “Is the wean takin’ to the
goat’ s milk?”
“Like a kid,” I assured him,  and laughed. He looked
puzzled, but one side of his mo uth turned up nonetheless—he
wanted humor just now , whether he understood the joke or
not.
“That’ s what the Americans c all—will call—children,” I
told him. “Kids.”
The smile broadened across his face.
“Oh, aye? So th at’ s why Brianna and MacKenzie call wee
Jem so, is it? I thought it was only a bit of private fun between
them.”
He milked the rest of the goa ts quickly while I dribbled
more nourishment into the child, bringing back a brimming
bucket o f warm milk for our own breakfast. I should have
liked a nice hot cup of tea—my fingers were chilled and numb
from dipping the false teat ov er and over—but the creamywhite stuf f was delicious, and a s much comfort to our chilled
and empty stomachs as to the little one’ s.
The child had stopped suckling, and had wet itself
copiously; a good sign of hea lth, by and lar ge, but rather
inconvenient jus t at the moment, as both its swaddling cloth
and the front of my bodice were now soaked.
Jamie rootled hastily through the packs once again, this time
in se arch of diapering and dry clothes. Fortunately , Mrs. Piggy
had been carrying the bag in which I kept lengths of linen and
wads of cotton lint for cleansi ng and bandaging. He took a
handful of these and the child, while I went about the awkward
and draf ty busin ess of changing my shift and bodice without
removing skirt, petticoat, or cloak.
“P-put on your own cloak,” I said, through chattering teeth.
“Y ou’ll die of f-frigging pneumonia.”
He smiled at that, eyes focused on his job, though the tip of
his nose glowed redly in contrast to his pale face.
“I’m fine,” he c roaked, then cleared his throat with a noise
like ripping cloth, impatient. “Fine,” he repeated, more
strongly , then stopped, eyes widening in surprise.
“Oh,” he said, more softly . “Look. It’ s a wee lassie.”
“Is it?” I dropped to my knees beside him to look.
“Rather plain,” he said, critically surveying the little
creature. “A good thing she’ll have a decent dowry .”
“I do n’ t suppose you were any g reat beauty when you were
born, either ,” I said rebukingly . “She hasn’ t even been
properly cleaned, poor thing. What do you mean about her
dowry , though?”
He shru gged, co ntriving to keep the child covered with a
shawl, meanwhile sliding a folded sheet of linen dexterously
beneath her miniature bottom.
“Her father ’ s dead and her moth er ’ s gone. She’ s no brothers
or s isters to sh are, and I didn a find any will in the house
saying that anyone else was to have Beardsley’ s property .There’ s a decent farm left, though, and a good bit in trade
goods there—to  say nothing o f the goats.” He glanced at
Hiram a nd his family , and smi led. “So they’ll all be hers, I
expect.”
“I suppo se so,” I said slowly . “So she’ll be a rather well-to-
do little girl, won’ t she?”
“A ye, an d she’ s just shit hersel f. Could ye not have done
that before I’d put ye on a fresh clout?” he demanded of the
child. U nfazed by the scolding, the little girl blinked sleepily
at him and gave a soft belch.
“Oh, well,” he said, resigned. H e shifted himself to better
shelter her from the wind, lifted the coverings briefly , and
wiped a smear of blackish slime deftly of f the budlike privates.
The child seemed healthy , though rather undersized; she
was no bigger than a lar ge doll, her stomach bulging slightly
with milk. That was the immediate dif ficulty; small as she
was, and  with no body fat for insulation, she would die of
hypothermia within a very short time, unless we could keep
her warm as well as fed.
“Don’ t l et her get chilled.” I put  my hands in my armpits to
warm them, in preparation for picking up the child.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach . I must just wipe her wee
bum and then—” He stopped, frowning.
“What’ s this, Sassenach? Is she damaged, d’ye think?
Perhaps yon silly woman dropped her?”
I l eaned  close to look. He held  the baby’ s feet up in one
hand, a wad of soiled cotton li nt in the other . Just above the
tiny buttocks was a dark bluis h discoloration, rather like a
bruise.
It wasn’ t a bruise. It was, though, an explanation of sorts.
“She isn ’ t hurt,” I assured him, pulling another of Mrs.
Beardsley’ s discarded shawls up to shelter her daughter ’ s bald
head. “It’ s a Mongol spot.”
“A what?”“It mean s the child is black,” I e xplained. “African, I mean,
or p artly so.” Jamie blinked, sta rtled, then bent to peer into the
shawl, frowning.
“No, she isn’ t. She’ s as pale as ye are yourself, Sassenach.”
That wa s quite true; the child was so white as to seem
devoid of blood.
“Black children don’ t usually look black at birth,” I
explained to him. “In fact, they’re often quite pale. The
pigmentation of the skin begins to develop some weeks later .
But they’re often born with this  faint discoloration of the skin
at the base of the spine—it’ s called a Mongol spot.”
He rubb ed a hand over his face, blinking away snowflakes
that tried to settle on his lashes.
“I se e,” he said slowly . “A ye, well, that explains a bit, does
it not?”
It did. The late M r . Beardsley , whatever else he might have
been, had assuredly not been black. The child’ s father had
been. And Fanny Beardsley , k nowing—or fearing—that the
child she  was about to bear would reveal her as an adulteress,
had thou ght it better to abandon the child and flee before the
truth was revealed. I wondered whether the mysterious father
had had  anything to do with  what had happened to Mr .
Beardsley , for that matter .
“Did she know for sure that the father was a Negro, I
wonder?” Jamie touched the small underlip, now showing a
tinge of pink, gently with one fi nger . “Or did she never see the
child at all? For after all, she must have given birth in the dark.
If she had seen it looked white, perhaps she would ha’ chosen
to brazen it out.”
“Perhaps. But she didn’ t. Who  do you suppose the father
can have been?” Isolated as the  Beardsleys’ farm had been, I
couldn’ t imagine Fanny having the opportunity to meet very
many men, other than the Indians who came to trade. Did
Indian babies perhaps have Mongol spots? I wondered.Jamie glanced bleakly around a t the desolate surroundings,
and scooped the child up into his arms.
“I di nna ken, bu t I shouldna thin k he’ll be hard to spot, once
we’ve reached Brownsville. Let’ s go, Sassenach.”
 
JAMIE RELUC T ANTL Y DE CIDED to leave the goats
behind, in the in terest of reaching shelter and sustenance for
the child as quickly as possible.
“They’ll be fine here for a bit,” he said, scattering the rest of
the hay for them. “The nannies wilna leave the auld fellow—
and ye’ re no going anywhere for the present, are ye, a
bhalaich ?” He scratched Hiram between the horns in farewell,
and we left to a chorus of protesting meh s, the goats having
grown used to our company .
The weather was worsening by the moment; as the
temperature rose , the snow changed from dry powder to lar ge,
wet flakes that stuck to everyth ing, dusting ground and trees
with icing sugar , and melting do wn through the horses’ manes.
W ell-muf fled in my thick hooded cloak, with multiple
shawls b eneath and the child snuggled in a makeshift sling
against my stomach, I was quite warm, in spite of the flakes
that brus hed my face and stuck  in my lashes. Jamie coughed
now and  then, but on the whole, looked much healthier than he
had; the  need to take char ge of an emer gency had ener gized
him.
He rode  just behind me, keeping an eye out in case of
marauding panthers or other menaces. I thought myself that
any self-respecting cat—particularly one with a bellyful of
goat—would spe nd a day like this curled up in some cozy den,
not out tramping through the snow . Still, it was very reassuring
to have him the re; I was vulnerable, riding with one hand on
the reins, the oth er wrapped protectively over the bulge under
my cloak.
The chil d was sleeping, I though t, but not quiet; it stretched
and squi rmed with the slow , languid movements of the waterworld, not yet a ccustomed to the freedom of life outside the
womb.
“Y e look as though you’re wi’ child, Sassenach.” I glanced
back ove r my shoulder , to see Jamie looking amused under the
brim of his slou ch hat, though I  thought there was something
else in his expression; perhaps a slight wistfulness.
“Probably beca use I am  wit h child,” I  replied, shifting
slightly in the saddle to accom modate the movements of my
companion. “It’ s just somebody else’ s child I’m with.” The
pressure of small knees and head and elbows shifting against
my bell y were in fact unsettlingly like the sensations of
pregnancy; the fact that they were outside rather than inside
made remarkably little dif ference.
As though drawn to the swell ing under my cloak, Jamie
nudged Gideon up beside me. Th e horse snorted and tossed his
head, wanting to push ahead, bu t Jamie held him back with a
soft “Seas!”  of rebuke, and he subsided, huf fing steam.
“Y e’re troubled for her?” Jamie asked, with a nod toward
the surrounding forest.
No need to ask whom he meant. I nodded, my hand on the
curled tiny backbone, arched still to fit the curve of the
vanished womb. Where was she, Fanny Beardsley , alone in the
wood? C rawled of f to die like a wounded beast—or making,
perhaps, for some imagined haven, floundering blindly
through frozen leaf mold and deepening snow , heading back,
maybe, toward the Chesapeake Bay and some memory of open
sky , of broad waters and happiness?
Jamie leaned over and laid a ha nd on mine where it curled
over the sleeping child; I could feel the chill of his ungloved
fingers through the layer of cloth between us.
“She’ s made her choice, Sassenach,” he said. “And she’ s
trusted us wi’ the bairn. W e’ll see the wee lass safe; that’ s all
we can do for the woman.”
I co uldn’ t turn m y hand to take  his, but nodded. He let my
hand go  with a squeeze and dropped back, and I turned myface tow ard our destination, my lashes wet and spiky as I
blinked away the melting drops.
By the time we came in sight of Brownsville, though, most
of my concern for Fanny Bear dsley had been subsumed by
anxiety for her daughter . The child was awake and bawling,
pummeling my liver with tiny fists in search of food.
I lift ed myself i n the saddle, peering through the curtain of
falling s now . How big a place was Brownsville? I could see no
more than the roofline of a single cabin peeping through the
ever green of pine and laurel. O ne of the men from Granite
Falls had said it was sizable, though—what was “sizable,”
here in the back country? What were the odds that at least one
of the residents of Brownsville might be a woman with a
nursing child?
Jamie ha d emptied out the cant een and filled it with goat’ s
milk, bu t it was better , I thought , to reach shelter before trying
to fe ed t he baby  again. If there was a mother who might of fer
her milk to the child, that would be best—but if not, the goat’ s
milk wo uld nee d to be heated; cold as it was outside, to give
the baby cold milk might lower her body temperature
dangerously .
Mrs. Pig gy snorted out a great gout of steam, and suddenly
picked u p her pace. She knew civilization when she smelled it
—and other horses. She threw  up her head and whinnied
piercingly . Gideon joined her , and when the racket stopped, I
could hear the encouraging replies of a number of horses in the
distance.
“They’re here!”  I exhaled in a steamy burst of relief. “The
militia—they made it!”
“W ell, I should hope so, Sassena ch,” Jamie replied, taking a
firm grip  to prevent Gideon’ s bolting. “If wee Roger couldna
find a village at the end of a str aight trail, I’d have my doubts
of his wits as well as his eyesight.” But he was smiling, too.
As w e came ro und a curve in  the trail, I could see that
Brownsville really was  a vi llage. Chim ney smoke drifted up insoft gray plumes from a dozen cabins, scattered over the
hillside that rose to our right, and a cluster of buildings stood
together by the road, clearly pla ced for custom, judging from
the rubble of dis carded kegs, bottles, and other rubbish strewn
in the dead weeds of the roadside.
Across the road from this pothouse, the men had erected a
crude shelter for the horses, r oofed with pine boughs and
walled o n one side with more br anches to break the wind. The
militiamen’ s hor ses were gathered under this in a cozy knot,
hobbled and snorting, wreathed in clouds of their mingled
breath.
Spotting this refuge, our own ho rses were moving at a good
clip; I had to pull heavily on the reins one-handed in order to
keep Mrs. Piggy from breaking into a trot, which would have
seriously jostled  my passenger . As I hauled her back to a
reluctant walk, a slight figure detached itself from the shelter
of a pine tree and stepped into the road before us, waving.
“Milord,” Fer gus greeted Jamie, as Gideon slewed to a
reluctant halt. He peered up at Jamie from beneath the band of
an indigo-dyed knitted cap, which he wore pulled down over
his brows. It made his head look rather like the top of a
torpedo, dark and dangerous. “Y ou are well? I thought perhaps
you had encountered some dif ficulty .”
“Och.” Jamie waved vaguely at me, indicating the bulge
beneath my cloak. “No really a dif ficulty; it’ s only—”
Fer gus was staring over Gideon’ s shoulder at the bulge with
some bemusement.
“Quelle virilite, monsieur ,”  he said to Jamie, in tones of
deep respect. “My congratulations.”
Jamie g ave him a scathing loo k and a Scottish noise that
sounded like boulders rolling underwater . The baby began to
cry again.
“First things first,” I said. “Are there any women here with
babies? This child needs milk, and she needs it now .”
Fer gus nodded, eyes wide with curiosity .“ Oui , milady . T wo, at least, that I have seen.”
“Good. Lead me to them.”
He nodd ed again, and taking hold of Piggy’ s halter , turned
toward the settlement.
“What’ s amiss, then?” Jamie inquired, and cleared his
throat. I n my anxiety for the baby , I hadn’ t paused to consider
what Fer gus’ s presence meant. Jamie was right, though;
simple concern for our well-being wouldn’ t have brought him
out on the road in this weather .
“Ah. W e appear to have a sm all dif ficulty , milord.” He
described the events of the previous afternoon, concluding
with a Gallic shrug and a huf f of breath. “… and so Monsieur
Morton has taken refuge with the horses”—he nodded ahead,
toward t he makeshift shelter—”while the rest of us enjoy the
hospitalite  of Brownsville.”
Jamie looked a trifle grim a t this; no doubt from a
contemplation of what the hospitalite  for forty-odd men might
cost.
“Mmphm. I take it that the Browns dinna ken Morton is
there?”
Fer gus shook his head.
“Why is  Mo rton there?” I asked, having  temporarily stifled
the baby by pu tting it to my own breast. “I should have
thought he’d be of f away , back t o Granite Falls, and pleased to
be alive.”
“He will not g o, milady . He says he cannot for go the
bounty .” W ord had come just before our departure from the
Ridge; t he Governor was of fering forty shillings per man as an
inducement to serve in the militia; a substantial sum,
particularly to a new homesteader such as Morton, facing a
bleak winter .
Jamie rubbed a hand slowly over his face. This was a
dilemma, all right; the militia company needed the men and
supplies from Brownsville, but Jamie could scarcely conscriptseveral B rowns who would immediately attempt to assassinate
Morton. Nor could he af ford to pay Morton’ s bounty himself.
Jamie lo oked as though he were tempted to assassinate Morton
personally , but I supposed this wasn’ t a reasonable alternative.
“Perhaps Morton could be induced to marry the girl?” I
suggested delicately .
“I thoug ht of that,” Fer gus said. “Regretfully , Monsieur
Morton is already possessed of  a wife in Granite Falls.” He
shook h is head, which was be ginning to look like a small
snowcapped hillock in his cap.
“Why did the Browns not follow yon Morton?” Jamie
asked, apparentl y following his own train of thought. “If an
enemy comes upon your land, a nd you wi’ your kin, ye dinna
just let him flee; ye hunt him down and kill him.”
Fer gus nodded, clearly familiar with this brand of Highland
logic.
“I b elieve that was the inte nt,” he said. “They were
distracted, however , by le petit Roger .”
I could hear a distinct note of amusement in his voice; so
could Jamie.
“What did he do?” he asked warily .
“Sang to them,” Fer gus said, the amusement becoming
more pronounce d. “He has been singing most of the night, and
playing upon his drum. The entire village came to hear—there
are six men of suitable age for the militia, and,” he added
practically , “the two women avec lait , as I said, milady .”
Jamie coughed, wiped a hand under his nose, and nodded to
Fer gus, with a wave at me.
“A ye. W ell, the wee lass must e at, and I canna stay back or
the Browns will tumble to it that Morton’ s here. Go and say to
him that I shall come and speak to him as soon as may be.”
He r eined his ho rse’ s head toward the tavern, and I nudged
Mrs. Piggy to follow .“What are you going to do about the Browns?” I asked.
“Christ,” Jamie said, more to himself than to me. “How in
hell should I know?” And coughed again.32
MISSION ACCOMPLISHED
O UR ARRIV AL with the baby created a suf ficient sensation
to distract everyone in Brownsville from their private
concerns, be these practical or homicidal. A look of intense
relief crossed Roger ’ s face at si ght of Jamie, though this was
instantly suppressed, replaced by a bland attitude of square-
shouldered self-assurance. I ducked my head to hide a smile,
and glan ced at Jamie, wondering if he had noted this rapid
transformation. He sedulously avoided my eye, indicating that
he had.
“Y e’ve d one well,” he said in a casual undertone, clapping
Roger ’ s shoulder in greeting before turning to receive the
salutations of the other men and introductions to our
involuntary hosts.
Roger m erely no dded in an of fh and sort of way , but his face
took on a mute d glow , as thou gh someone had lit a candle
inside him.
Y oung Miss Beardsley caused a great stir; one of the
nursing mothers  was fetched and at once put the screeching
baby to her br east, hastily handing me her own child in
exchange. A three-month-old boy of placid temperament, he
looked u p at me with mild bewilderment, but seemed not to
object to the substitution, merely blowing a few thoughtful spit
bubbles in my direction.
A certain amount of confusion ensued, with everyone
asking questions and of fering speculations at once, but Jamie’ s
story—edited to terseness—of events at the Beardsley farm
put a stop to th e hubbub. Even the red-eyed young woman
whom I recognized from Fer gus’ s story as Isaiah Morton’ s
inamorata for got her grief, listening openmouthed.
“Poor little creature,” she said , peering at the baby as it
suckled fiercely  at her cousin’ s breast. “So you have noparents at all, it  seems.” Miss B rown cast a dark look at her
own fa ther , apparently thin king orphanhood had its
advantages.
“What w ill beco me of her?” M rs. Brown asked, with more
practicality .
“Oh, we’ll see s he’ s taken good care of, my dear . She’ll find
a s ecure place w ith us.” Her hus band put a reassuring hand on
her arm, at the same time exchanging a glance with his
brother . Jamie saw it, too; I saw  his mouth twitch as though he
might say something, but he shrugged slightly and turned
instead to confer with Henry G allegher and Fer gus, his two
stif f fingers tapping gently on his leg.
The elde r Miss Brown leaned toward me, preparing to ask
another question, but was prevented by a sudden blast of arctic
wind tha t blew through the big  room, lifting the loose hides
over the  windows and peppering the room with a spray of
snow lik e frozen bird shot. Mis s Brown gave a small whoop,
abandoned her curiosity , and ran to fasten down the window
coverings; every one else stopped discussing the Beardsleys
and began hastily to batten down hatches.
I c aught a quick  glimpse outside, as Miss Brown struggled
with the unwieldy hides. The s torm had arrived now in good
earnest. Snow was coming dow n thick and fast; the black ruts
of th e road had all but disappeared under a coating of white,
and it was obvio us that Fraser ’ s Company was going nowhere
for the time being. Mr . Richard Brown, looking mildly
disgruntled, nonetheless graciously of fered us a second night’ s
shelter , and the militiamen set tled in for supper among the
houses and barns of the village.
Jamie w ent out to bring in our b edding and provisions from
the horses, and see them fed and sheltered. Presumably he
would also take the opportunity  to speak privately with Isaiah
Morton, if the latter was still lurking out there in the blizzard.
I d id wonder w hat Jamie meant to do with his mountain
Romeo, but I ha dn’ t time for much speculation. It was getting
on n ow for twili ght, and I was sucked into the swirl of activityaround the hearth, as the women rose to the fresh challenge of
providing supper for forty unexpected guests.
Juliet—that is, the younger Miss  Brown—moped sullenly in
the c orner , refusing to help. She  did, though, take over care of
the Bear dsley baby , rocking the little girl and crooning to her
long after it was plain that the child was asleep.
Fer gus a nd Gallegher had been s ent of f to retrieve the goats,
and retu rned with them just before suppertime, wet and muddy
to the knees, the ir beards and ey ebrows frosted with snow . The
nannies were wet and snow-caked, too, their chilled udders red
with cold, milk-swollen and swinging painfully against their
legs. They were enchanted to  be back in the bosom of
civilization, though, and nattered to each other in cheerful
excitement.
Mrs. Brown and her sister -in-la w took the goats of f to the
tiny barn to be milked, leaving me in char ge of the stewpot
and Hiram, who was installed in solitary majesty near the
hearth, contained in a makeshift pen composed of an
overturned table, two stools, and a blanket chest.
The cab in was essentially one lar ge, drafty room, with a
walled l oft above and a small lean-to at the back for storage.
Crowded as it was with tables, benches, stools, kegs of beer ,
bundles of hides, a small handlo om in one corner , a chif fonier
—with a most incongruous chiming clock, adorned with
cupids—in another , a bed against the wall, two settles by the
hearth, a musket and two fowling pieces hung above the
chimney breast, and various apr ons and cloaks on pegs by the
door , the presence of a sick goat was surprisingly
inconsequential.
I had a look at my erstw hile patient, who meh ed
ungratefully at me, long blue tongue protruding in derision.
Snow was melting from the deep spirals of his horns, leaving
them black and shiny , and his coat was soaked into brindled
spikes round his shoulders.
“There’ s gratitude for you,” I said rebukingly . “If it weren’ t
for J amie, you’d be cooking over  t hat  fire , instead  of beside it,and good enough for you, too, you wicked old sod.”
“Meh!”  he said shortly .
Still, he was co ld, tired, and hungry , and his harem wasn’ t
there to be impressed, so he su f fered me to rub his head and
scratch his ears, feed him wisps of hay , and—eventually—to
step into his pen  and run a light hand down his injured leg to
check the splinting. I was more than a little tired and hungry ,
too, having had nothing to ea t since a little goat’ s milk at
dawn. Between  the smell of the simmering stew and the
flickering light and shadows in the room, I felt light-headed,
and very  slightly disembodied, as though I were floating a foot
or two above the floor .
“Y ou’re a nice o ld lad, aren’ t you?” I murmured. After an
afternoon spent  in close contact with babies, all in varying
stages of moistness and shrieking, the company of the irascible
old goat was rather soothing.
“Is he going to die?”
I looked  up in surprise, having quite for gotten the younger
Miss Brown, who had been overlooked in the shadows of the
settle. She was standing by the hearth now , still holding the
Beardsley baby and frowning down at Hiram, who was trying
to nibble the edge of my apron.
“No,” I said, t witching the cloth out of his mouth. “I
shouldn’ t think so.” What was  her name? I groped blearily
through my memory , matching up faces and names from the
earlier flurry of introductions. Alicia, that was it, though I
couldn’ t help still thinking of her as Juliet.
She was n’ t muc h older than Ju liet; barely fifteen, if that.
She was a plain child, though, round-jawed and pasty . Narrow
in the shoulder and broad through the hip; not much of the
jewel in the Ethi op’ s ear about h er . She said nothing more, and
to keep the conversation going,  I nodded at the baby , still in
her arms. “How’ s the little one?”
“All righ t,” she said listlessly . She stood staring at the goat a
moment longer . Then tears suddenly welled in her eyes.“I wish I  was dead,” she said.
“Oh, rea lly?” I said, taken aback. “Er … well …” I rubbed a
hand ov er my face, trying to summon enough presence of
mind to deal with this. Where was the beastly girl’ s mother? I
cast a quick look at the door , but heard no one coming. W e
were momentar ily alone, the women milking or minding
supper , the men all caring for the stock.
I stepped out of Hiram’ s pen and laid a hand on her arm.
“Look,” I said in a low voice. “I saiah Morton’ s not worth it.
He’ s married; did you know that?”
Her eyes went wide, then squinted nearly shut, spurting
sudden tears. No, evidently she hadn’ t known.
T ears w ere pou ring down her c heeks and dripping on the
baby’ s oblivious head. I reached out and took the swaddled
child gently from her , steering her toward the settle with my
free hand.
“H-how did you … ? Wh-who … ?” She was gur gling and
snif fling, trying to ask question s and get control of herself at
the same time. A  man’ s voice shouted something outside, and
she scrubbed frantically at her cheeks with her sleeve.
The gesture reminded me that while the situation seemed
rather melodramatic—not to say slightly comic—in my
currently muzzy  frame of mind, it was a matter of great
seriousness to the principals inv olved in it. After all, her male
relations had  tried to kill Morton, and would certainly try
again, if  they found him. I tensed at the sound of approaching
feet, and  the baby stirred and w hined a little in my arms. But
the footsteps crunched past in the road, and the sound vanished
in the wind.
I sat down beside Alicia Brow n, sighing with the sheer
pleasure of taking weight of f m y feet. Every muscle and joint
in my body ache d from the afteref fects of the previous day and
night, th ough I hadn’ t had time until now to think about it
much. Jamie and I would undoubtedly spend the nightwrapped in blankets on someo ne’ s floor; I eyed the grimy ,
firelit boards with an emotion approaching lust.
It was incongruously peaceful in the lar ge room, with the
snow whispering down outside, and the stewpot burbling away
in th e hearth, fil ling the air with the enticing scents of onion,
venison, and turnips. The baby slept on my breast, emanating
peaceful trust. I would have li ked just to sit and hold her ,
thinking of nothing, but duty called.
“How do I know? Morton told one of my husband’ s men,” I
said. “I don’ t know who his wife is, though; only that she lives
in G ranite Falls.” I patted the ti ny back, and the baby burped
faintly and relaxed again, her breath warm beneath my ear .
The wom en had washed and oil ed her , and she smelled rather
like a fresh pancake. I kept one eye on the door , and the other
warily on Alicia Brown, in case of further hysterics.
She snif fed and sobbed, hiccuped once, and then relapsed
into silence, staring at the floor .
“I wish I was dead ,” sh e whispered again, in tones  of such
fierce despair that I set both eyes on her , startled. She sat
hunched, hair hanging limply be neath her cap, her hands fisted
and crossed protectively over her belly .
“Oh, dear ,” I said. Given her pallor , the circumstances, and
her behavior toward the Beardsley baby , that particular gesture
made it no grea t leap to the obvious conclusion. “Do your
parents know?”
She gav e me a quick look, but didn’ t bother asking how I
knew .
“Mama and Aunt do.”
She was breathing through her mouth, with intermittent wet
snuf fles.
“I th ought—I thought Papa wou ld have to let me wed him,
if—”
I n ever had thought blackmail a very successful basis for
marriage, but this seemed the wrong time to say so.“Mmm,” I said instead. “And does Mr . Morton know about
it?”
She shook her head, disconsolate.
“Does he—does his wife have children, do you know?”
“I’ve no idea.” I turned my h ead, listening. I could hear
men’ s voices in the distance, carried on the wind. So could
she; she gripped my arm with surprising strength, wet brown
eyes spike-lashed and ur gent.
“I h eard Mr . M acKenzie and the men talking last night.
They sa id you were a healer , Mrs. Fraser—one said you were
a conjure woman. About babies. Do you know how—”
“Someone’ s coming.” I pulled away from her , interrupting
before she could finish. “Here, take care of the baby . I need to
—to stir the stew .”
I thr ust the child unceremoniously into her arms and rose.
When the door opened to admit a blast of wind and snow
along w ith a lar ge number of  men, I was standing at the
hearth, spoon in hand, eyes fixed on the pot and my mind
bubbling as vigorously as the stew .
She hadn’ t had time to ask explicitly , but I knew what she’d
been about to say . Conjur e woman,  she’d called me. She
wanted my help to get rid of the  child, almost certainly . How?
I wondered. How could a woman think of such a thing, with a
living child in her arms, less than a day out of the womb?
But she was very  young. V ery young, and suf fering from the
shock of  hearing  that her lover was untrue. Not yet far enough
advanced in pregnancy to show , either; if she hadn’ t yet felt
her own  child move, no doubt it seemed quite unreal to her .
She’d seen it only as a means o f forcing her father ’ s consent;
now it likely seemed a trap that had closed suddenly upon her .
No wonder if she was distraught, looking frantically for
escape. Give her a little time to recover , I thought, glancing at
the settle, where the shadows hid her . I should talk to her
mother , to her aunt… .Jamie appeared  suddenly beside me, rubbing reddened
hands over the f ire, snow melting from the folds of his clothes.
He looked extremely cheerfu l, in spite of his cold, the
complications of Isaiah Morton’ s love life, and the storm
going on outside.
“How is it, Sassenach?” he asked hoarsely , and without
waiting for me to reply , took the spoon from my hand, put one
hard, co ld arm around me, and pulled me of f my feet and up
into a hearty kiss, made the mo re startling by the fact that his
half-sprouted beard was thickly encrusted with snow .
Emer ging slightly dazed from this stimulating embrace, I
realized that the general attitud e of the men in the room was
similarly jolly . Backs were being slapped, boots stamped, and
coats shaken to the accompanim ent of the sort of hoots and
roaring noises men make when feeling particularly exuberant.
“What is it?” I asked, looking round in surprise. T o my
astonishment, Joseph W emyss stood in the center of the
crowd. T he tip of his nose was r ed with cold, and he was being
knocked half of f his feet by men smacking him on the back in
congratulations. “What’ s happened?”
Jamie gave me a  brilliant smile, teeth gleaming in the frozen
wilderness of his face, and thrust a limp crumple of wet paper
into my hand, fragments of red wax still clinging to it.
The ink had ru n with the wet,  but I could make out the
relevant words . Hearing of General W addell’ s intended
approach, the Regulators had decided that discretion was the
better part of va lor . They had dispersed. And as per this order
from Governor T ryon—the militia was stood down.
“Oh, good !” I said. And flinging my arms round Jamie,
kissed him back, snow and ice notwithstanding.
 
THRILLED WITH THE NEWS of the stand-down, the militia
took advantage of the bad weather to celebrate. Equally
thrilled not to be obliged to join the militia, the Browns instead
joined heartily in the celebration, contributing three lar ge kegsof Thomasina Brown’ s best home-brewed beer and six gallons
of hard cider to the cause—at half-cost.
By the time sup per was over , I sat in the corner of a settle
with the Beardsley baby in my arms, half-dissolved with
weariness, and kept vertical only by the fact that there was no
place as yet to lie down. The air shimmered with smoke and
conversation, I had drunk stron g cider with my supper , and
both faces and v oices tended to swim in and out of focus, in a
way that was not at all disagreeable, though mildly
disconcerting.
Alicia B rown had had no further  chance to speak with me—
but I had had no chance to speak with her mother or her aunt.
The girl had t aken up a seat by Hiram’ s pen, and was
methodically feeding the goat crusts of corn bread left from
supper , her face set in lines of sullen misery .
Roger w as singi ng French ballads, by popular request, in a
soft, true voice. A young wom an’ s face floated into view in
front of me, eye brows raised in question. She said something,
lost in the babb le of voices, then reached gently to take the
baby from me.
Of cours e. Jemi ma, that was he r name. The young mother
who had  of fered  to nurse the child. I stood up to give her room
on the settle, and she put the baby at once to her breast.
I leaned against the chimney piece, watching with dim
approval as she cupped the child’ s head, guiding it and
murmuring. She was both tender and businesslike; a good
combination. Her own baby—little Christopher , that was his
name—snored peaceably in his grandmother ’ s arms, as the old
lady bent to light her clay pipe from the fire.
I g lanced back a t Jemima, and h ad the oddest sense of deja
vu. I blinked, try ing to catch the  fleeting vision, and succeeded
in capturing a sense of overwhelming closeness, of warmth
and utte r peace.  For an instant,  I thought it was the sense of
nursing a child, and then, odde r still, realized that it was not
the mother ’ s sense I felt … b ut the child’ s. I had the very
distinct memory—if that’ s what it was—of being held againsta warm body , m indless and replete in the sure conviction of
absolute love.
I closed  my eyes, and took a f irmer grip on the chimney
breast, feeling the room begin a slow and lazy spin about me.
“Beauchamp,” I murmured, “you are quite  drunk.”
If so , I wasn’ t the only one. D elighted at the prospect of
imminent return to their homes, the militiamen had absorbed
most of the drinkables in Brownsville, and were working
assiduously on the remainder . The party was beginning to
break up now , though, with men stumbling of f to cold beds in
barns an d sheds, others thankfully rolling up in blankets by the
fire.
I op ened my ey es to see Jamie throw back his head and
yawn enormously , gape-jawed as a baboon. He blinked and
stood up , shakin g of f the stupor of food and beer , then glanced
toward t he hearth and saw me standing there. He was plainly
as tired as I was, if not quite as giddy , but he had a sense of
deep con tent abo ut him, apparent in the long-limbed ease with
which he stretched and settled himself.
“I’m goi ng to see to the horses,”  he said to me, voice husky
from grippe and much talking. “Fancy a walk in the
moonlight, Sassenach?”
 
THE SNOW HAD ST OPPED, and there was  moonlight,
glowing through a haze of vanis hing cloud. The air was lung-
chillingly cold, still fresh and restless with the ghost of the
passing storm, and did much to clear my spinning head.
I felt a childish delight in being the first to mark the vir gin
snow , and stepped high and carefully , making neat bootprints
and look ing back to admire them . The line of footprints wasn’ t
very straight, but fortunately no one was testing my sobriety .
“Can you recite the alphabet backward?” I asked Jamie,
whose fo otsteps were wavering companionably along with my
own.“I expec t so,” he replied. “Which one? English, Greek, or
Hebrew?”
“Never mind.” I took a firmer grip of his arm. “If you
remember all three forward, yo u’re in better condition than I
am.”
He laughed softly , then coughed.
“Y ou’re never drunk, Sassenach. Not on three cups of
cider .”
“Must be fatigue, then,” I said dreamily . “I feel as though
my head ’ s bobbing about on a string like a balloon. How do
you know how much I drank? Do you notice everything ?”
He laughed again, and folded a hand round mine where it
clutched his arm.
“I like to watch ye, Sassenach. Especially in company .
Y ou’ve the loveliest shine to your teeth when ye laugh.”
“Flatterer ,” I said, feeling nonetheless flattered. Given that I
hadn’ t so much as washed my face in several days, let alone
bathed o r changed my clothes, my teeth were likely the only
things about me that could be  honestly admired. Still, the
knowledge of his attention was singularly warming.
It was a dry sno w , and the whit e crust compressed beneath
our feet with a  low crunching noise. I could hear Jamie’ s
breathing, hoarse and labored still, but the rattle in his chest
had gone, and his skin was cool.
“It w ill b e fair by morning,” he said, looking up at the hazy
moon. “D’ye see the ring?”
It was hard to miss; an immense circle of dif fuse light that
ringed the moon, covering the whole of the eastern sky . Faint
stars were showing through the  haze; it would be bright and
clear within the hour .
“Y es. W e can go home tomorrow , then?”
“A ye. It  will be muddy going, I  expect. Y e can feel the air
changing; it’ s cold enough now , but the snow will melt as soonas the sun’ s full on it.”
Perhaps it would, but it was  cold enough no w . The horses’
brushy shelter had been reinforced with more cut branches of
pine and hemlock, and it looke d like a small, lumpy hillock
rising from the ground, thickly covered over with snow . Dark
patches had melted clear , though, warmed by the horses’
breath, a nd wisps of steam rose from them, scarcely visible.
Everything was quiet, with a palpable sense of drowsy content.
“Morton will be cozy , if he’ s in there,” I observed.
“I sh ouldna think so. I sent Fer g us out to tell him the militia
was disbanded, so soon as W emyss came wi’ the note.”
“Y es, but if I were Isaiah Morton, I don’ t know that I would
have se t straight out on the  road home in a blinding
snowstorm,” I said dubiously .
“Likely ye would, if ye had all the Browns in Brownsville
after ye wi’ guns,” he said. Nonetheless, he paused in his step,
raised his voice a little, and calle d “Isaiah!” in a croaking rasp.
There w as no answer from the m akeshift stable, and taking
my arm again, h e turned back toward the house. The snow was
vir gin no longer , trampled and m uddied by the prints of many
feet, as the mili tia dispersed to their beds. Roger had stopped
singing, but there were still voi ces from inside the house; not
everyone was ready to retire.
Reluctant to go back at once t o the atmosphere of smoke
and noise, we walked by unspoken mutual consent round the
house an d barn, enjoying the si lence of the snowy wood and
the nearness of each other . Coming back, I saw that the door of
the lean-to at the rear of the house stood ajar , creaking in the
wind, and pointed it out to Jamie.
He poke d his head inside, to se e that all was in order , but
then, instead of closing the door , he reached back and took my
arm, pulling me into the lean-to after him.
“I’d a question to ask ye, Sasse nach, before we go in,” he
said. He set the door open, so the moonlight streamed in,shining dimly on the hanging hams, the hogsheads and burlap
bags that inhabited the lean-to with us.
It w as cold insid e, but out of the wind I at once felt warmer ,
and put back the hood of my cloak.
“What is it?” I  said, mildly curious. The fresh air had
cleared my head, at least, and w hile I knew I would be as good
as d ead the instant I lay down, for the moment I had that sense
of p leasant lightness that comes with the feeling of ef fort
completed, honor satisfied. It had been a terrible day and
night, and a long day after , but now it was done, and we were
free.
“Do ye want her , Sassenach?” he asked softly . His face was
a pale oval, blurred by the mist of his breath.
“Who?” I asked, startled. He gave a small grunt of
amusement.
“The child. Who else?”
Who else, indeed.
“Do I want her—to keep h er , you mean?” I asked
cautiously . “Adopt her?” The notion hadn’ t crossed my mind
consciously , but must have been lurking somewhere in my
subconscious, fo r I was not startled at his question, and at the
speaking, the idea sprang into full flower .
My breasts had been tender since the morning, feeling full
and engor ged, and I felt the demanding tug of the little girl’ s
mouth in memory . I could not feed the baby myself—but
Brianna could, or Marsali. Or s he could live on cow’ s milk,
goat’ s milk.
I realized suddenly that I had unconsciously cupped one
breast, and was gently massaging it. I stopped at once, but
Jamie had seen it; he moved closer and put an arm around me.
I leaned my head against him, the rough weave of his hunting
shirt cold against my cheek.
“Do you  want her?” I asked. I wasn’ t sure whether I was
hopeful of his an swer , or fearful of it. The answer was a slightshrug.
“It’ s a big house, Sassenach,” he said. “Big enough.”
“Hmm,” I said. Not a resounding declaration—and yet I
knew it was commitment, no matter how casually expressed.
He h ad a cquired Fer gus in a Par is brothel, on the basis of three
minutes’ acquai ntance, as a hir ed pickpocket. If he took this
child, he would treat her as a daughter . Love her? No one
could guarantee love—not he … and not I.
He had picked up my dubious tone of voice.
“I sa w ye with the wean, Sassenach, riding. Y e’ve a great
tenderness about ye always—b ut when I saw ye so, wi’ the
bairn tu mbling about beneath your cloak, it—I remembered,
how it was, how ye looked, when ye carried Faith.”
I caught my breath. T o hear him speak the name of our first
daughter like that, so matter -of-factly , was startling. W e spoke
of her seldom; her death was so long in the past that
sometimes it seemed unreal, and  yet the wound of her loss had
scarred both of us badly .
Faith herself was not unreal at all, though.
She was  near me, whenever I  touched a baby . And this
child, th is nameless orphan, so small and frail, with skin so
translucent that the blue threads of her veins showed clear
beneath—yes, the echoes of Faith were strong. Still, she
wasn’ t my  child. Though she could be; that was what Jamie
was saying.
W as she perhaps a gift to us? Or at least our responsibility?
“Do you  think we ought to take her?” I asked cautiously . “I
mean—what might happen to her if we don’ t?”
Jamie snorted faintly , dropping his arm, and leaned back
against the wall of the house. He wiped his nose, and tilted his
head tow ard the faint rumble of  voices that came through the
chinked logs.
“She’d be well cared for , Sass enach. She’ s in the way of
being an heiress, ken.”That aspect of the matter hadn’ t occurred to me at all.
“Are you sure?” I said dubious ly . “I mean, the Beardsleys
are both gone, but as she’ s illegitimate—”
He shook his head, interrupting me.
“Nay , she’ s legitimate.”
“But she can’ t be. No one realizes it yet except you and me,
but her father—”
“Her father was Aaron Beard sley , so far as the law is
concerned,” he informed me. “By English law , a child born in
wedlock is the legal child— and  heir—of the husband—even if
it’ s know n for a fact that the mo ther committed adultery . And
yon woman did say that Beardsley married her , no?”
It struck  me that he was remarkably positive about this
particular provis ion of English l aw . It also struck me—in time,
thank God, before I said anything—exactly why  he was
positive.
W illiam. His son, conceived in England, and so far as
anyone in England knew—with the exception of Lord John
Grey—presumably the ninth Earl of Ellesmere. Evidently , he
legally was  t he nint h Earl, according to what Jamie was telling
me, whether the eighth Earl had been his father or not. The
law really was an ass, I thought.
“I se e,” I said slowly . “So little Nameless will inherit all
Beardsley’ s property , even after they discover that he can’ t
have been her father . That’ s … reassuring.”
His eyes met mine for a moment, then dropped.
“A ye,” he said quietly . “Reassuring.” There might have been
a hint of bitterness in his voice , but if there was, it vanished
without trace as he coughed and cleared his throat.
“So ye see,” he went on, matter -of-factly , “she’ s in no
danger of neglect. An Orphan Court would give Beardsley’ s
property—goats and all”—he a dded, with a faint grin—”to
whomever is her guardian, to be used for her welfare.”“And her guardians’,” I said, suddenly recalling the look
Richard Brown had exchanged with his brother , when telling
his wife the child would be “well cared for .” I rubbed my nose,
which had gone numb at the tip.
“So the Browns would take her willingly , then.”
“Oh, aye,” he agreed. “They kent Beardsley; they’ll ken
well enough how valuable she is . It would be a delicate matter
to g et he r away  from them, in fact—but if ye want the child,
Sassenach, then ye’ll have her . I promise ye that.”
The whole discussion was givin g me a very queer feeling.
Something almost like panic, as though I were being pushed
by some  unseen hand toward th e edge of a precipice. Whether
that was  a dangerous clif f or merely a foothold for a lar ger
view remained to be seen.
I saw in memory the gentle cu rve of the baby’ s skull, and
the tissue-paper ears, small and perfect as shells, their soft
pink whorls fading into an otherworldly tinge of blue.
T o g ive myself a little time t o or ganize my thoughts, I
asked, “What did you mean, it would be a delicate matter to
get her away from the Browns? They’ve no claim on her , have
they?”
He shook his head.
“Nay , but none of them shot her father , either .”
“What—oh.” That was a potential trap that I hadn’ t seen;
the possibility that Jamie might be accused of killing
Beardsley in order to get his h ands on the trader ’ s farm and
goods, by then a dopting the orphan. I swallowed, the back of
my throat tasting faintly of bile.
“But no one kno ws how Aaron Beardsley died, except us,” I
pointed out. Jamie had told them only that the trader had had
an a poplexy and died, leaving out his own role as the angel of
deliverance.
“Us and  Mrs. Beardsley ,” he said, a faint tone of irony in his
voice. “And if she should co me back, and accuse me ofmurdering her husband? It would be hard to deny , and I’d
taken the child.”
I forbor e from asking why she  might do such a thing; in
light of what she had already d one, it was clear enough that
Fanny Beardsley might do anything.
“She won’ t come back,” I said. Whatever my own
uncertainties abo ut the rest of it, I was sure that in this respect
at le ast, I spoke the truth. Wherever Fanny Beardsley had gone
—or why—I was sure she had gone for good.
“Even if she di d,” I went on, pushing aside my vision of
snow drifting through an empty  wood, and a wrapped bundle
lying by the bu rned-out fire, “I was there. I could say what
happened.”
“If they’d let ye,” Jamie agreed. “Which they wouldna.
Y ou’re a marrit woman, Sasse nach; ye couldna testify in a
court, even if ye weren’ t my own wife.”
That br ought me up short. Living as we did in the
wilderness, I seldom encounter ed the more outrageous legal
injustices of the times in a pers onal way , but I was aware of
some of them. He was right. In fact, as a married woman, I had
no l egal rights at all. Ironically enough, Fanny Beardsley did ,
being now a widow . She  could testify in a court of law—if she
wished.
“W ell, bloody hell!” I said, with feeling. Jamie laughed,
though quietly , then coughed.
I snorte d, with a satisfactory explosion of white vapor . I
wished moment arily that I was a dragon; it would have been
extremely enjoyable to huf f flame and brimstone on a number
of pe ople, starting with Fanny Beardsley . Instead, I sighed, my
harmless white breath vanishing in the dimness of the lean-to.
“I see what you mean by ‘delicate,’ then,” I said.
“A ye—but not impossible.” He cupped a lar ge, cold hand
along my cheek, turning my face up to his. His eyes searched
my own, dark and intent.“If ye want the  child, Claire, I will take her , and manage
whatever comes.”
If I wanted her . I could feel the soft weight of the child,
sleeping on my breast. I had for gotten the intoxication of
motherhood for years; pushed aside the memory of the
feelings of exaltation, exhaustion, panic, delight. Having
Germain and Jemmy and Joan nearby , though, had reminded
me vividly .
“One last question,” I said. I took his hand and brought it
down, fingers linked with mine. “The baby’ s father wasn’ t
white. What might that mean to her?”
I kn ew what it would have meant in Boston of the 1960s,
but this was a v ery dif ferent place, and while in some ways
society here was more rigid and less of ficially enlightened
than the  time I had come from , in others it was oddly much
more tolerant.
Jamie co nsidered carefully , the stif f fingers of his right hand
tapping out a sil ent rhythm of c ontemplation on the head of a
barrel of salt pork.
“I think it will be all right,” he said at last. “There’ s no
question of her being taken int o slavery . Even if it could be
proved that her father was a slave—and there’ s no proof at all
—a child takes the mother ’ s status. A child born to a free
woman is free; a child born to a slave woman is a slave. And
whatever yon dreadful woman might be, she wasna a slave.”
“Not in name, at least,” I said, thinking of the marks on the
doorpost. “But beyond the question of slavery … ?”
He sighed and straightened.
“I think  not,” he said. “Not here. In Charleston, aye, it
would li kely ma tter; at least if she were in society . But in the
backcountry?”
He shrugged. T rue enough; so  close as we were to the
T reaty Line, there were any number of mixed-breed children.
It w as in  no way unusual for se ttlers to take wives among the
Cherokee. It was a good deal r arer to see children born of ablack and white liaison in the backcountry , but they were
plentiful in the coastal areas. M ost of them slaves—but there,
nonetheless.
And wee Miss Beardsley would not be “in society ,” at least,
not if we left her with the Brow ns. Here, her potential wealth
would matter a great deal more than the color of her skin. W ith
us, it might be d if ferent, for Jamie was—and always would be,
despite his income or lack of it—a gentleman.
“That w asn’ t the  last question, a fter all,” I said. I laid a hand
over his, cold o n my cheek. “The last one is—why are you
suggesting the notion?”
“Ah. W ell, I only thought …”  He dropped his hand, and
looked away . “What ye said w hen we came home from the
Gathering. That ye could have c hosen the safety of barrenness
—but di d not, for my sake. I t hought—” He stopped again,
and rubb ed the knuckle of his free hand hard along the bridge
of his nose. He took a deep breath and tried again.
“For my sake,” he said firmly , addressing the air in front of
him as though it were a tribun al, “I dinna want ye to bear
another child. I wouldna risk your loss, Sassenach,” he said,
his voic e suddenly husky . “Not for a dozen bairns. I’ve
daughters and sons, nieces and nephews, grandchildren—
weans enough.”
He looked at me directly then, and spoke softly .
“But I’ve no life but you, Claire.”
He swallowed audibly , and went on, eyes fixed on mine.
“I d id think, th ough … if ye do want another child …
perhaps I could still give ye one.”
Brief tears blurred my eyes. It w as cold in the lean-to, and
our fingers were stif f. I fumbled  my hand into his, squeezing
tight.
Even a s we had spoken, my mind had been busy ,
envisioning possibilities, dif ficulties, blessings. I did not need
to th ink further , for I knew the decision had made itself. Achild wa s a temptation of the flesh, as well as of the spirit; I
knew the bliss of that unbounded oneness, as I knew the
bittersweet joy of seeing that on eness fade as the child learned
itself and stood alone.
But I had cross ed some subtle line. Whether it was that I
was born myself with some secret quota embodied in my flesh,
or o nly that I  knew my sole allegiance must be given
elsewhere now … I knew . As a mother , I had the lightness
now of ef fort complete, honor satisfied. Mission
accomplished.
I l eaned  my forehead against h is chest and spoke into the
shadowed cloth above his heart.
“No,” I said softly . “But, Jamie … I so love you.”
 
WE ST OOD WRAPPED in e ach other ’ s arms for a time,
hearing the rumble of voices fr om the other side of the wall
that sepa rated the house from the lean-to, but silent ourselves,
and con tent with the peace o f it. W e were at once too
exhausted to make the ef fort to g o in, and reluctant to abandon
the tranquillity of our rude retreat.
“W e’ll h ave to go in soon,” I murmured at last. “If we don’ t,
we’ll fall down right here, and b e found in the morning, along
with the hams.”
A faint wheeze of laughter ran t hrough his chest, but before
he c ould answer , a shadow fell over us. Someone stood in the
open door , blocking the moonlight.
Jamie lifted his head sharply , h ands tight on my shoulders,
but then  he let his breath out, and his grip relaxed, allowing
me to step back and turn round.
“Morton,” Jamie said, in a long-suf fering sort of voice.
“What in Christ’ s name are ye doing here?”
Isaiah M orton didn’ t much look like a rakish seducer , but
then, I supposed tastes must d if fer . He was slightly shorter
than I, but broa d through the shoulder , with a barrel-shapedtorso an d slightly bowed legs. He did have rather pleasant-
looking eyes and a nice mop of wavy hair , though I was
unable to tell the color of either , in the dim light of the lean-to.
I estimated his age at somewhere in the early twenties.
“Colonel, sir ,” he said in a whisp er . “Ma’am.” He gave me a
quick, brief bow . “Didn’ t mean to give you fright, ma’am.
Only I heard the  Colonel’ s voice and thought I best seize the
day , so to speak.”
Jamie regarded Morton narrowly .
“So to speak,” he repeated.
“Y es, sir . I couldn’ t make out how I was to get Ally to come
forth, an d was just a-circling of the house again, when I caught
heed of you and your lady talking.”
He bowed to me again, as though by reflex.
“Morton,” Jamie said, softly , but with a certain amount of
steel in his voice, “why have ye not gone? Did Fer gus not tell
ye that the militia is stood down?”
“Oh, aye, sir , he did, sir .” He bowed to Jamie this time,
looking faintly anxious. “But I couldn’ t go, sir , not without
seeing Ally .”
I cleared my throat and glanced at Jamie, who sighed and
nodded to me.
“Er … I’m afra id that Miss Brown has heard about your
prior entanglement,” I said delicately .
“Eh?” Isaiah looked blank, and Jamie made an irritable
noise.
“She me ans the lass kens ye’v e a wife already ,” he said
brutally , “and if her father doesna shoot ye on sight, she may
stab ye to the he art. And if neith er of them succeeds,” he went
on, drawing himself up to his fully menacing height, “I’m
inclined to do th e job myself, w i’ my bare hands. What sort of
man wo uld slip round a lass an d get her with child, and him
with no right to give it his name?”Isaiah Morton paled noticeably , even in the dim light.
“W ith child?”
“She is,” I said, quite coldly .
“She is,” Jamie repeated, “and now , ye wee bigamist, ye’d
best leave, before—”
He stopped speaking abruptly , as Isaiah’ s hand came out
from und er his cloak, holding a pistol. Close as he was, I could
see that it was both loaded and cocked.
“I’m tha t sorry ,  sir ,” he said apologetically . He licked his
lips, glan cing fro m Jamie to me , and back. “I wouldn’ t do you
harm, si r , nor certain sure your lady . But you see, I just got to
see Ally .” His rather pudgy features firmed a little, though his
lips seemed inclined to tremble . Still, he pointed the pistol at
Jamie with decision.
“Ma’am,” he said to me, “if might be as you’d be so kind,
would y ou go on into the house  and fetch Ally out? W e’ll …
just wait here, the Colonel and me.”
I h adn’ t  had time to feel afraid. I wasn’ t really afraid now ,
though I was speechless with astonishment.
Jamie closed his eyes briefly , as though praying for strength.
Then he opened them and sighed, his breath a white cloud in
the cold air .
“Put it down, id iot,” he said, almost kindly . “Y e ken fine ye
willna shoot me, and so do I.”
Isaiah ti ghtened both his lips a nd his trigger finger , and I
held my breath. Jamie continued to look at him, his gaze a
mixture of censure and pity . At l ast, the finger relaxed, and the
pistol barrel sank, along with Isaiah’ s eyes.
“I just got to see Ally , Colonel ,” he said softly , looking at
the ground.
I d rew a deep br eath, and looked up at Jamie. He hesitated,
then nodded.
“All right, Sassenach. Go canny , aye?”I no dded, and tu rned to slip into the house, hearing Jamie
mutter somethin g under his breath in Gaelic behind me, to the
general ef fect that he must have lost his mind.
I wa sn’ t sure he hadn’ t, though I had also felt the strength of
Morton’ s appeal . If any of the Browns happened to discover
this rendezvous, though, there would be hell to pay—and it
wouldn’ t be only Morton who paid.
The floor inside was littered with sleeping bodies wrapped
in blank ets, though a few men still huddled round the hearth,
gossiping and passing a jug of something spirituous among
themselves. I looked carefully , b ut fortunately Richard Brown
was not among them.
I made my way across the room , carefully stepping through
and ove r the bodies on the floo r , and peered into the bed that
stood ag ainst the  wall as I passed. Richard Brown and his wife
were both curled up in it, sound asleep, nightcaps pulled well
down ov er their  respective ears, though the house was warm
enough, what with all the trapped body heat.
There was only one place that A licia Brown could be, and I
pushed open the door to the lof t stair , as quietly as I could. It
made lit tle dif ference; no one by the fire paid the slightest
attention. One of the men appeared to be trying to get Hiram to
drink from the jug, with some success.
By contr ast to the room below , the loft was quite cold. This
was because the small window was uncovered, and quite a lot
of sn ow had dri fted in, together with a freezing wind. Alicia
Brown was lying in the little snowdrift under the window ,
stark naked.
I wa lked over and stood looking  down at her . She lay stif fly
on h er back, arm s folded over her chest. She was shivering,
and her eyes were squinched shut with ferocious
concentration. O bviously , she hadn’ t heard my footsteps, over
the noises from below .
“What in God’ s name are you doing?” I inquired politely .Her eyes popped open and she  gave a small shriek. Then
she clapped a hand over her mouth and sat up abruptly , staring
at me.
“I’ve heard of a number of  novel ways of inducing
miscarriage,” I told her , picking up a quilt from the cot and
dropping it over her shoulders, “ but freezing to death isn’ t one
of them.”
“If I ’m d-dead, I won’ t need to m-m-miscarry ,” she said,
with a certain am ount of logic. Nonetheless, she drew the quilt
around her , teeth chattering.
“Scarcely the best means of committing suicide, either , I
shouldn’ t think,” I said. “Though I don’ t mean to sound
critical. Still, you can’ t do it n ow; Mr . Morton is out in the
lean-to a nd won’ t go away unti l you come down to speak to
him, so you’d better get up and put something on.”
Her eyes flew wide and she scrambled to her feet, her
muscles so stif f with cold that she stumbled awkwardly and
would h ave fallen, had I not grabbed her arm. She said nothing
more, but dressed as quickly as her chilled fingers would
allow , wrapping a thick cloak around herself.
Bearing in mind Jamie’ s adjuration to “Go canny ,” I sent her
down th e narrow stair alone. Alone, she would be merely
assumed to be g oing to the privy—if anyone even noticed her
departure. Both of us together might cause comment.
Left by myself in the darkened loft, I drew my own cloak
around m e and went to the narro w window to wait for the few
minutes necessary before I could leave, too. I heard the soft
thump of the door closing below , but couldn’ t see Alicia from
this high  angle. Judging from her response to my summons,
she didn’ t intend to stab Isaiah to the heart, but heaven knew
what either of them did  intend.
The clouds were gone now , and the frozen landscape
stretched before me, brilliant and ghostly under a setting
moon. A cross th e road, the hors es’ brushy shelter stood dark,
dappled with clumps of snow . T he air had changed, as Jamiehad said, and wa rmed by the horses’ breath, chunks of melting
snow slid free and plopped to the ground.
In spite of my annoyance with the young lovers, and the
undertones of comic absurdity attending the whole situation, I
couldn’ t help but feel some sym pathy for them. They were so
in earnest, so intent on nothing but each other .
And Isaiah’ s unknown wife?
I hunched my shoulders, shivering slightly inside my cloak.
I sho uld disapprove—I did, in f act—but no one knew the true
nature of a marriage, save those who made it. And I was too
aware of living in a glass house, to think of throwing stones
myself. Almost absently , I stroked the smooth metal of my
gold wedding ring.
Adultery . Fornication. Betrayal. Dishonor . The words
dropped softly in my mind, lik e the clumps of falling snow ,
leaving small dark pits, shadows in moonlight.
Excuses could be made, of course. I had not sought what
had happ ened to me, had fought against it, had had no choice.
Except that, in the end, one always has a choice. I had made
mine, and everything had followed from it.
Bree, Roger , Jemmy . Any chil dren that might be born to
them in the future. All of them were here, in one way or
another , because of what I had chosen to do, that far -of f day on
Craigh na Dun.
Y ou take too mu ch upon yourself . Fra nk h ad said  that to me,
many tim es. Generally in tones of disapproval, meaning that I
did t hings he wo uld have preferred I did not. But now and then
in kindness, meaning to relieve me of some burden.
It was in kindness that the thought came to me now , whether
it was truly spoken, or only called forth from my exhausted
memory for what comfort the words might hold. Everyone
makes c hoices, a nd no one know s what may be the end of any
of th em. If my own was to blam e for many things, it was not
to blame for everything. Nor was harm all that had come of it.‘T il death us do part . Th ere were a great many people who
had spoken those vows, only to abandon or betray them. And
yet it came to me that neither death nor conscious choice
dissolved some bonds. For bette r or for worse, I had loved two
men, and some part of them both would be always with me.
The drea dful thing, I supposed, was that while I had often
felt a deep and searing regret for what I had done, I had never
felt guilt. W ith the choice so fa r behind me, now , perhaps, I
did.
I had  apologized to Frank a thou sand times, and never once
had I asked him  for for giveness. It occurred to me suddenly
that he had given it, nonetheless—to the best of his ability . The
loft was dark, save for faint lines of light that seeped through
the chinks of the floor , but it no longer seemed empty .
I stirred abruptly , pulled from my abstraction by sudden
movement below . Silent as flying reindeer , two dark figures
darted hand-in-hand across the field of snow , cloaks like
clouds a round th em. They hesitated for a moment outside the
horses’ shelter , then disappeared inside.
I l eaned on the sill, heedless of the snow crystals under my
palms. I could hear the noise of the horses rousing; whickers
and stamping came clearly to me across the clear air . The
sounds in the h ouse below had grown fainter; now a clear ,
loud “Meh-eh-eh!”  came up through the floorboards, as Hiram
sensed the horses’ uneasiness.
There w as ren ewed laughter from below , temporarily
drowning the sounds across the road. Where was Jamie? I
leaned out, the w ind billowing the hood of my cloak, brushing
a spray of ice across my cheek.
There he was. A  tall dark figure, walking across the snow
toward t he shelter , but going slowly , kicking up white clouds
of d usty ice. Wh at … but then I realized that he was following
in the lovers’ tracks, stamping and floundering deliberately to
obliterate a trail that must tell its story clearly to any of the
trackers in the house below .A hole appeared  suddenly in the  brushy shelter , as a section
of th e branched wall fell away . Clouds of steam roiled out into
the a ir , and then  a horse emer ged, carrying two riders, and set
of f to the west, ur ged from a walk to a trot and then a canter .
The snow was not deep; no m ore than three or four inches.
The horse’ s hooves left a clear dark trail, leading down the
road.
A piercing whinny rose from the shelter , followed by
another . Sounds of alarm came from below , scuf fling and
thuds as men rolled from their blankets or lunged for their
weapons. Jamie had disappeared.
All at once, hor ses burst from the shelter , knocking down
the wall and trampling the fallen branches. Snorting,
whinnying, kicking, and jostling, they spilled out over the road
in a chaos of flying manes and rolling eyes. The last of them
sprang f rom the  shelter and join ed the runaway , tail whisking
away from the switch that landed on its rump.
Jamie flung away the switch and ducked back into the
shelter , just as the door below flung open, spilling pale gold
light over the scene.
I sei zed the opportunity of the commotion to run downstairs
without being seen. Everyone was outside; even Mrs. Brown
had rushed out, nightcap and all, leaving the quilts pulled half
of f the bed. Hiram, smelling s trongly of beer , swayed and
meh ed t ipsily at m e as I passed, yellow eyes moist and
protuberant with conviviality .
Outside, the roadway was full of half-dressed men, sur ging
to an d fr o and waving their arms in agitation. I caught sight of
Jamie in the midst of the crowd, gesticulating with the best of
them. A mong the excited bits of question and comment, I
heard scraps of speech—”spooked” … “panther?” …
“goddamn!” and the like.
After a bit of m illing around and incoherent ar gument, it
was unanimously decided that the horses would likely come
back by themsel ves. Snow was blowing of f the trees in veils ofwhirling ice; the wind stuck freezing fingers through every
crevice of clothing.
“W ould you  s tay  out  on a ni ght like this?” R oger demanded,
reasonably enough. It being generally decided that no sane
man would—and horses being, if not quite sane, certainly
sensible creatures—the party began to trickle back into the
house, shivering and grumbling as the heat of excitement
began to die down.
Among the last stragglers, Jamie turned toward the house
and saw  me, still standing on the  porch. His hair was loose and
the l ight from the open door lit him like a torch. He caught my
eye, roll ed his own toward heav en, and raised his shoulders in
the faintest of shrugs.
I put cold fingers to my lips and blew him a small frozen
kiss.P AR T F OUR
I Hear No Music
 But the Sound of Drums33
HOME FOR CHRISTMAS
W HA T W OULD YOU HA VE DONE?” Brianna asked. She
turned over , moving carefully in the narrow confines of Mr .
W emyss’ s bed, and parked her chin comfortably in the hollow
of Roger ’ s shoulder .
“What w ould I have done about what?” W arm through for
the first  time in weeks, filled to bursting with one of Mrs.
Bug’ s dinners, and having finally achieved the nirvana of an
hour ’ s privacy with his wife, Ro ger felt pleasantly drowsy and
detached.
“About Isaiah Morton and Alicia Brown.”
Roger gave a jaw-cracking yawn and settled himself deeper ,
the corn-shuck mattress rustling loudly under them. He
supposed the whole house had h eard them at it earlier , and he
didn’ t r eally care. She’d washed her hair in honor of his
homecoming; w aves of it spread over his chest, a silky rich
gleam in the d im glow of the hearth. It was only late
afternoon, but the shutters were closed, giving the pleasant
illusion that they were inside a small private cave.
“I don’ t know . What your Da did, I suppose; what else?
Y our ha ir smells great.” He smoothed a lock of it around his
finger , admiring the shimmer .
“Thanks. I used some of that stu f f Mama makes with walnut
oil and marigol ds. What about Isaiah’ s poor wife in Granite
Falls, though?”
“What about her? Jamie couldn’ t force Morton to go home
to her—assuming that she wants him back,” he added
logically . “And the girl—Alicia—was evidently more than
willing; your father couldn’ t very well have made a kerfuf fle
about Morton leaving with her , unless he wanted the mandead. If the Bro wns had found Morton there, they would have
killed him on the spot and nailed his hide to their barn door .”
He spoke with conviction, rem embering the pointed guns
that had greeted him in Brownsville. He smoothed the hair
behind her ear , and lifted his head far enough to kiss her
between the eyebrows. He’d bee n imagining that for days, that
smooth pale space between the heavy brows. It seemed like a
tiny oasis among the vivid dang er of her features; the flash of
eyes an d blade of nose were more than attractive, to say
nothing of a mobile brow and a wide mouth that spoke its
mind as  much by its shape as by its words—but not peaceful.
After the last three weeks, he was in a mood for peace.
He sank  back on the pillow , tracing the stern arch of one
ruddy brow with a finger .
“I think the best  he could do under the circumstances was to
give the  young lovers a bit of ro om to get safe away ,” he said.
“And th ey did. By the morning,  the snow was already melting
to mud,  and with all the trampling, you couldn’ t have told
whether a regiment of bears had marched through, let alone
which way they were going.”
He s poke with f eeling; the weather had turned suddenly to a
warm thaw , and the militia had returned to their homes in good
spirits, but muddy to the eyebrows.
Brianna sighed, her breath raising a pleasant gooseflesh
across h is chest. She lifted her own head a little, peering in
interest.
“What? Have I got filth stuck to  me still?” He had washed,
but in haste, eager to eat, more eager to get to bed.
“No. I just like it when you get goose bumps. All the hairs
on y our chest st and up, and so do your nipples.” She flicked
one of the objects in question lightly with a fingernail, and a
fresh wave of gooseflesh rac ed across his chest for her
entertainment. H e arched his back a little, then relaxed. No,
he’d have to go  downstairs soon, to deal with the evening
chores; he’d heard Jamie go out already .T ime for a chan ge of subject. He breathed deep, then lifted
his head from the pillow , snif fing with interest at the rich
aroma seeping through the floor from the kitchen below .
“What’ s that cooking?”
“A goose. Or geese—a dozen of them.” He thought he
caught an odd undertone in her voice, a faint tinge of regret.
“W ell, that’ s a treat,” he said, running a lingering hand
down th e length of her back. A pale gold down covered her
back and shoulders, invisible save when there was candlelight
behind her , as th ere was now . “What’ s the occasion? For our
homecoming?”
She lifted her h ead from his chest and gave him what he
privately classified as A Look.
“For Christmas,” she said.
“What?” He groped blankly , trying to count the days, but
the even ts of the last three weeks had completely erased his
mental calendar . “When?”
“T omorrow , idiot,” she said with exaggerated patience. She
leaned over and did something unspeakably erotic to his
nipple, then heaved herself up in a rustle of bedclothes,
leaving him bereft of blissful w armth and exposed to chilly
drafts.
“Didn’ t you see all the greenery  downstairs when you came
in? Lizz ie and I made the little Chisholm monsters go out with
us to  cut ever greens; we’ve been  making wreaths and garlands
for t he last three  days.” The words were somewhat muf fled, as
she w ormed her way into her sh ift, but he thought she sounded
only incredulous, rather than angry . He could hope.
He sat up and swung his feet down, toes curling as they
came in  contact with the cold boards of the floor . His own
cabin ha d a braided rug by the bed—but his cabin was full of
Chisholms at the moment, or so he was informed. He rubbed a
hand through his hair , groping for inspiration, and found it.
“I didn’ t see anything when I came in but you.”That wa s the simple truth, and evidently honesty was the
best policy . Her head popped through the neckhole of her shift
and she gave him a narrow look, which faded into a slow smile
as she saw the evident sincerity stamped on his features.
She came over to the bed and  put her arms around him,
enveloping his head in a smother of marigolds, butter -soft
linen, an d … milk. Oh, aye. Th e kid would be needing to eat
again soon. Resigned, he put his arms round the swell of her
hips and  rested his head betw een her breasts for the few
moments that were his own meager share of that abundance.
“Sorry ,” he said, words muf fled in her warmth. “I’d
for gotten it entirely . I’d have brought you and Jem something,
if I’d thought.”
“Like w hat? A piece of Isaiah M orton’ s hide?” She laughed
and let go, straightening up to smooth her hair . She was
wearing the bracelet he’d given her on an earlier Christmas
Eve; the hearthlight glinted of f the silver as she lifted her arm.
“A ye, ye  could cover a book in it, I suppose. Or make a pair
of wee boots for Jem.” It had be en a long ride, men and horses
pushing past tiredness, eager for home. He felt boneless, and
would h ave asked no better present himself than to go back to
bed with her , pr essed tight together in warmth, to drift toward
the invit ing dep ths of deep blac k sleep and amorous dreams.
Duty called, though; he yawned, blinked, and heaved himself
up.
“Are the geese for our supper tonight, then?” he asked,
squatting to poke through the discarded pile of mud-caked
garments he’d shucked earlier . He might have a clean shirt
somewhere, but with the Chisholms in his cabin, and Bree and
Jem temporarily  lodged here in the W emysses’ room, he had
no i dea where his own thing s were. No sense to put on
something clean  only to go and muck out a byre and feed
horses, anyway . He’d shave and change before supper .
“Uh-huh. Mrs. Bug has half a hog barbecuing in a pit
outside for tomorrow’ s Christmas dinner . I shot the geeseyesterday , though, and she wanted to use them fresh. W e were
hoping you guys would be home in time.”
He glan ced at her , picking up the same undertone in her
voice.
“Y e don’ t care for goose?” he asked. She looked down at
him, with an odd expression.
“I’ve never eaten one,” she answered. “Roger?”
“A ye?”
“I was just wondering. I wanted to ask if you knew …”
“If I know what?”
He was moving slowly , still wrapped in a pleasant fog of
exhaustion and lovemaking. She  had put her gown on, brushed
her hair , and put it up neatly in a thick coil on her neck, all in
the time it had  taken him to disentangle his stockings and
breeches. He shook the breeks absentmindedly , sending a
shower of dried mud fragments pattering over the floor .
“Don’ t do that! What’ s the matt er with you?” Flushed with
sudden annoyance, she snatched the breeks away from him.
She thrust open the shutters and leaned out, flapping the
garment violent ly over the sill. She jerked the shaken breeks
back in and threw them in his general direction; he dived to
catch them.
“Hey . What’ s the matter with you ?”
“Matter? Y ou shower dirt all o ver the floor and you think
there’ s something wrong with me ?”
“Sorry . I didn’ t think—”
She made a noise deep in her throat. It wasn’ t very loud, but
it was threatening. Obeying a deep-seated masculine reflex, he
shoved a leg into his breeches. Whatever might be happening,
he’d rat her meet it with his trousers on. He jerked them up,
talking fast.
“Look, I ’m sorry  I didn’ t think of it being Christmas. It was
—there were important things to deal with; I lost track. I’llmake it up to ye. Perhaps when we go to Cross Creek for your
aunt’ s wedding. I could—”
“The hell with Christmas!”
“What?” He stopped, breeks h alf-buttoned. It was winter
dusk, an d dark in the room, but  even by candlelight, he could
see the color rising in her face.
“The hell with Christmas, the hell with Cross Creek—and
the fucking hell with you, too!” She punctuated this last with a
wooden soap dish from the washstand, which whizzed past his
left ear and smacked into the wall behind him.
“Now just a fucking minute!”
“Don’ t you use language like that to me!”
“But you—”
“Y ou and your ‘important things’!” Her hand tightened on
the big china e wer and he tensed, ready to duck, but she
thought better of it and her hand relaxed.
“I’ve spent the last month  here, up to my eyeballs in laundry
and baby shit and screeching women and horrible children
while you’re out doing ‘important things’ and you come
marching in here covered in mud and tromp all over the clean
floors w ithout even noticing they wer e  cl ean in the firs t place!
Do you have any idea what a pain it is to scrub pine floors on
your han ds and knees? W ith lye  soap!” She waved her hands
at hi m in accusation, but too quickly for him to see whether
they wer e cover ed with gaping s ores, rotted of f at the wrist, or
merely reddened.
“… And  you don’ t even want to look at your son or hear
anything about him—he’ s learned to crawl , and I wanted to
show you, but all you  wan ted was to go to bed, and you didn’ t
even bother to shave first …”
Roger fe lt as though he’d walked into the blades of a lar ge,
rapidly whirling fan. He scratched at his short beard, feeling
guilty .
“I … ah … thought you wanted to—”“I did!” She stam ped her foot, raising a small cloud of dust
from the disintegrated mud. “That hasn’ t got anything to do
with it!”
“All right.” He bent to get his shirt, keeping one eye warily
on her . “So—yo u’re mad because I didn’ t notice you’d washed
the floor , is that it?”
“No!”
“No,” he repeated. He took a d eep breath and tried again.
“So, it is  that I for got it’ s Christmas?”
“No!”
“Y ou’re angry that I wanted t o make love to you, even
though you wanted to do it, too?”
“NO! W ould you just shut up?”
Roger w as strongly tempted to accede to this request, but a
dogged ur ge to get to the bottom of things made him push on.
“But I don’ t understand why—”
“I know you don’ t! That’ s  the problem!”
She spun on her bare heel and stomped over to the chest that
stood by  the window . She flung back the lid with a bang, and
began rummaging, with a series of small snorts and growls.
He opened his mouth, shut it again, and jerked the dirty shirt
on over his head. He felt simultaneously irritated and guilty , a
bad combination. He finished dressing in an atmosphere of
char ged silen ce, considerin g—and rejecting—possible
remarks and questions, all of which seemed likely to inflame
the situation further .
She had found h er stockings, yanked them on, and gartered
them with small savage movem ents, then thrust her feet into a
pair of battered clogs. Now she stood at the open window ,
drawing deep breaths of air a s though she were about to
perform a set of RAF exercises.
His inclination was to escape w hile she wasn’ t looking, but
he couldn’ t bring himself simply to leave, with somethingwrong—whatever in God’ s name it was—between them. He
could still feel the sense of closeness that they had shared, less
than a quarter of  an hour before , and couldn’ t bring himself to
believe that it had simply evaporated into thin air .
He w alked up behind her , slowl y , and put his hands on her
shoulders. She didn’ t whirl round and try either to stamp on
his foot or to k nee him in the stones, so he took the risk of
kissing her lightly on the back of the neck.
“Y ou were going to ask me something about geese.”
She took  a deep breath and let it  out in a sigh, relaxing just a
little ag ainst him. Her anger seemed to have vanished as
quickly as it had appeared, leaving him baf fled but grateful.
He p ut his arms  round her waist, and pulled her back against
him.
“Y esterday ,” she said, “Mrs. Aberfeldy burnt the biscuits for
breakfast.”
“Oh. A ye?”
“Mrs. Bug accused her of being too taken up with her
daughter ’ s hair ribbons to pay at tention to what she was doing.
And what was s he doing—Mrs.  Bug said—putting blueberries
into buttermilk biscuits in the first place?”
“Why shouldn’ t one put blueberries into buttermilk
biscuits?”
“I have no idea. But Mrs. Bug doesn’ t think you should.
And the n Billy MacLeod fell do wn the stairs, and his mother
was now here to be found—she went to the privy and got stuck
—and—”
“She what ?” Mrs. MacLeod was short and rather stout, but
had a well-defined rear aspe ct, with an arse like two
cannonballs in a sack. It was all too easy to envision such an
accident befalling her , and Roger felt laughter gur gle up
through his chest. He tried manf ully to stifle it, but it emer ged
through his nose in a painful snort.“W e shouldn’ t laugh. She had splinters.” Despite this
rebuke, Brianna herself was quivering against him, tremors of
mirth fracturing her voice.
“Christ. What then?”
“W ell, Billy was screaming—he didn’ t break anything, but
he bange d his head pretty hard—and Mrs. Bug shot out of the
kitchen with her broom, hollering because she thought we
were being attacked by Indians, and Mrs. Chisholm went to
find Mrs . MacLeod and started yelling from the privy , and …
well, an yway , th e geese came o ver in the middle of all of it,
and Mrs . Bug looked up at the ceiling with her eyes popping,
then said ‘Geese!’ so loud that everybody stopped yelling, and
she ran into Da’ s study and came back with the fowling piece
and shoved it at me.”
She had  relaxed a little with the telling. She snorted, and
settled back against him.
“I was so mad, I just really wanted  to kill something. And
there were a lot of them—the geese—you could hear them
calling all across the sky .”
He h ad seen the  geese, too. Black V -shapes, flexing in the
winds of the upper air , arrowing their way through the winter
sky . Heard them calling, with a strange feeling of loneliness at
the heart, and wished she were beside him there.
Everyone had rushed out to watch; the wild Chisholm
children and a couple of the h alf-wild Chisholm dogs went
scampering through the trees with whoops and barks of
excitement, to retrieve the fallen birds, while Brianna shot and
reloaded, as quickly as she could.
“One of  the dogs got one, and T oby tried to wrestle it away ,
and the dog bit him, and he wa s running around and around
the y ard screaming that his finge r was bitten of f, and there was
blood all over h im, and nobody could make him stop so we
could see whether it was, and Mama wasn’ t here, and Mrs.
Chisholm was down by the creek with the twins …”She was stif fening again, and he could see the hot blood
rising once more, flushing the back of her neck. He tightened
his hold on her waist.
“W as his finger bitten of f, then?”
She stopped and took a deep b reath, then looked round at
him over her shoulder , the color fading slightly from her face.
“No. The skin wasn’ t even broken; it was goose blood.”
“W ell, so. Y e did well, didn’ t you? The larder full, not a
finger lost—and the house still standing.”
He’d meant it as a joke, and was surprised to feel her heave
a deep sigh, a little of the tension going out of her .
“Y es,” she said, and her voice  held a note of undeniable
satisfaction. “I did. All pres ent and accounted for—and
everybody fed. W ith minimal bloodshed,” she added.
“W ell, it’ s true what they say about omelettes and eggs,
aye?” He laughed and bent to kiss her , then remembered his
beard. “Oh—sorry . I’ll go and shave, shall I?”
“No, do n’ t.” She turned as he released her , and brushed a
fingertip across his jaw . “I sort of like it. Besides, you can do
that later , can’ t you?”
“A ye, I can.” He bent his head and kissed her gently , but
thoroughly . W as  that it, then? She’d only wanted him to say
that she’d done well, left on her own to run the place? He was
thinking she deserved it, if so. He’d known she hadn’ t been
only sitt ing by the hearth singing cradle songs to Jemmy in his
absence—but he hadn’ t envisioned the gory details.
The sme ll of her hair and the musk of her body was all
round h im, but breathing deep to get more of it, he realized
that the room w as fragrant with juniper and balsam, too, and
the m ellow scent of beeswax ca ndles. Not just one; there were
three of  them, set in candlesticks about the room. Normally ,
she wou ld have lit a rush dip, saving the valuable candles, but
the small room glowed now with soft gold light, and he
realized that the bloom of it  had lit them through theirlovemaking, leaving him with memories of russet and ivory
and the gold down that covered her like a lion’ s pelt, the
shadowed crimson and purple of her secret places, the dark of
his s kin on the paleness of hers—memories that glowed vivid
against white sheets in his mind.
The floor was  clean—or had been—its white -pine boards
scrubbed, and the corners strewn with dried rosemary . He
could see the tum bled bed past her ear , and realized that she’d
made it up wit h fresh linen and a new quilt. She’d taken
trouble for his homecoming. And he’d come bar ging in,
brimming with his adventures, expecting praise for the feat of
coming back alive, and seeing none of it—blind to everything
in h is ur gent ne ed to get his hands on her and feel her body
under his.
“Hey ,” h e said softly in her ear . “I may be a fool, but I love
you, aye?”
She sighed deeply , her breasts pushing against his bare
chest, w arm even through the c loth of shift and gown. They
were firm; filling with milk, but not yet hard.
“Y eah, you are,” she said frankl y , “but I love you too. And
I’m glad you’re home.”
He l aughed and let go. There wa s a branch of juniper tacked
above the window , heavy with its clouded blue-green berries.
He reach ed up and broke of f a sprig, kissed it, and tucked it
into the neck of her gown, betw een her breasts, as a token of
truce—and apology .
“Merry Christmas. Now , what was it about the geese?”
She put a hand to the juniper sprig, a half-smile growing,
then fading.
“Oh. W e ll. It’ s not important. It ’ s just …” He followed the
direction of her eyes, turned, and saw the sheet of paper ,
propped up behind the basin on the washstand.
It w as a drawin g, done in charcoal; wild geese against a
stormy sky , striving through th e air above a lash of wind-
tossed trees. It was a wonderf ul drawing, and looking at itgave him the sa me odd feeling at the heart that hearing the
geese themselves had done—half joy , half pain.
“Merry Christm as,” Brianna said softly , behind him. She
came to stand beside him, wrapping a hand around his arm.
“Thanks. It’ s … God, Bree, you ’re good.” She was. He bent
and kissed her , hard, needing t o do something to lessen the
sense of yearning that haunted the paper in his hand.
“Look at the oth er one.” She pulled a little away from him,
still holding his arm, and nodded at the washstand.
He h adn’ t realized there were t wo. The other drawing had
been behind the first.
She was  good. Good enough to chill the blood at his heart.
The sec ond drawing was in charcoal, too, the same stark
blacks and whites and grays. I n the first, she had seen the
wildness of the sky , and put it down: yearning and courage,
ef fort en during i n faith amid the  emptiness of air and storm. In
this, she had seen stillness.
It was a dead go ose, hung by th e feet, its wings half-spread.
Neck lim p and beak half-open, as though even in death it
sought flight and the loud-calling company of its companions.
The lines of it were grace, the details of feather , beak, and
empty ey es exquisite. He had never seen anything so beautiful,
nor so desolate, in his life.
“I drew that last night,” she said quietly . “Everybody was in
bed, but I couldn’ t sleep.”
She had taken a candlestick and prowled the crowded
house, restless, going outside at last in spite of the cold,
seeking solitud e, if not rest, in the chill dark of the
outbuildings. An d in the smokeshed, by the light of the embers
there, had been struck by the beauty of the hanging geese, their
clear plumage black and white against the sooty wall.
“I checked to be sure Jemm y was sound asleep, then
brought my sketch box down an d drew , until my fingers were
too cold  to hold the charcoal any more. That was the best one.”
She nodded at the picture, her eyes remote.For the first time, he saw the blue shadows in her face, and
imagined her by candlelight, u p late at night and all alone,
drawing dead geese. He would have taken her in his arms then,
but she turned a way , going to the window , where the shutters
had begun to bang.
The thaw had faded, to be followed by a freezing wind that
stripped the last sere leaves from the trees and sent acorns and
chestnut hulls sailing through th e air to rattle on the roof like
buckshot. He followed her , reached past her to draw in the
shutters and fasten them against the bitter wind.
“Da told  me stories, while I was—while I was waiting for
Jemmy to be born. I wasn’ t paying close attention”—the
corner of her mouth quirked with wryness—”but a bit here and
there stuck with me.”
She turned around then, and leaned against the shutters,
hands gripping the sill behind her .
“He said  when a hunter kills a greylag goose, he must wait
by th e b ody , bec ause the greylag mate for life, and if you kill
only one, the other will mourn itself to death. So you wait, and
when the mate comes, you kill it, too.”
Her eye s were dark on his, but the candle flames struck
glints of blue in their depths.
“What I wondered is—are all geese like that? Not only
greylags?” She nodded at the pictures.
He touched her , and cleared his throat. He wanted to
comfort her , but not at the price of an easy lie.
“Maybe so. I do n’ t know for su re, though. Y ou’re worried,
then, about the mates of the birds you shot?”
The soft pale lips pressed tight together , then relaxed.
“Not worried. Just … I couldn’ t help thinking about it,
afterward. About them, flying on … alone. Y ou were gone—I
couldn’ t help thinking—I mean,  I knew  you  were all right, this
time, but next time, you might not come—well, never mind.
It’ s just silly . Don’ t worry about it.”She stood up, a nd would have pushed past him into the
room, but he put his arms around her and held her , close so she
couldn’ t see his face.
He knew that she didn’ t absolutely require him—not to
make hay , to plo w , to hunt for her . If needs must, she could do
those thi ngs herself—or find another man. And yet … the wild
geese said she needed him —would mourn  his loss if it ca me.
Perhaps foreve r . In his present vulnerable mood, that
knowledge seemed a great gift.
“Geese,” he said at last, his voi ce half-muf fled in her hair .
“The ne xt-door neighbors kept geese, when I was a wee lad.
Big white buggers. Six of them; they went round in a gang, all
high-nosed and honking. T errorized dogs and children and folk
that passed by on the street.”
“Did they terrorize you?” Her breath tickled warm on his
collarbone.
“Oh, aye . All the time. When we  played in the street, they’d
rush out honking and peck at us and beat us with their wings.
When I wanted to go out into t he back garden to play with a
mate, Mrs. Graham would hav e to come, too, to drive the
bastards of f to their own yard with a broomstick.
“Then the milkman came by on e morning while the geese
were in their front garden. They went for him, and he ran for
his float—and his horse took fright at all the honking and
screeching, and stamped two of the geese flatter than
bannocks. The kids on the street were all thrilled.”
She was laughing against his shoulder , half-shocked but
amused.
“What happened then?”
“Mrs. G raham took them and plucked them, and we had
goose pie for a week,” he said matter -of-factly . He
straightened up and smiled at h er . She was flushed and rosy .
“That’ s what I ken about geese—they’re wicked buggers, but
they taste great.”
He turned and plucked his mud-stained coat from the floor .“So, the n. Let me help your Da  with the chores, and then I
want to see how ye’ve taught my son to crawl.”34
CHARMS
I  T O UCHED A FINGER to the gleaming white surface, then
rubbed my fingers together appraisingly .
“There is absolutely nothing greasier than goose grease,” I
said wit h approv al. I wiped my fingers on my apron and took
up a lar ge spoon.
“Nothing better for a nice pastry crust,” Mrs. Bug agreed.
She stood on he r tiptoes, watching jealously as I divided the
soft whi te fat, ladling it from the kettle into two lar ge stone
crocks; one for the kitchen, one for my sur gery .
“A nice  venison  pie we’ll have  for Hogmanay ,” she said,
eyes narrowing as she envisioned the prospect. “And the
haggis to  follow , wi’ cullen skin k, and a bit o’ corn crowdie …
and a great raisin tart wi’ jam and clotted cream for sweeties!”
“W onderful,” I murmured. My own immediate plans for the
goose grease involved a salve of wild sarsaparilla and
bittersweet for burns and abras ions, a mentholated ointment
for stuf fy noses and chest congestion, and something soothing
and pleasantly scented for dia per rash—perhaps a lavender
infusion, with the juice of crushed jewelweed leaves.
I glanced down in search of Jem my; he had learned to crawl
only a few days before, but was already capable of an
astonishing rate of speed, particularly when no one was
looking. He was sitting peaceably enough in the corner ,
though, gnawing intently at the wooden horse Jamie had
carved for him as a Christmas present.
Catholic as many of them were—and nominally Christian as
they all  were—Highland Scots regarded Christmas primarily
as a relig ious observance, rather than a major festive occasion.
Lacking priest or minister , the day was spent much like a
Sunday , though with a particularly lavish meal to mark theoccasion, and the exchange of s mall gifts. My own gift from
Jamie had been the wooden la dle I was presently using, its
handle carved with the image of a mint leaf; I had given him a
new shir t with a ruf fle at the th roat for ceremonial occasions,
his old one having worn quite away at the seams.
W ith a certain amount of forethought, Mrs. Bug, Brianna,
Marsali, Lizzie,  and I had made up an enormous quantity of
molasses tof fee,  which we had distributed as a Christmas treat
to al l the childre n within earshot. Whatever it might do to their
teeth, it had the  beneficial ef fect of gluing their mouths shut
for long  periods, and in consequ ence, the adults had enjoyed a
peaceful Christmas. Even Germain had been reduced to a sort
of tuneful gar gle.
Hogmanay was a dif ferent kettle of fish, though. God knew
what feverish pagan roots the Scottish New Y ear ’ s celebration
sprang f rom, bu t there was a reason why I wanted to have a
good lot of medicinal preparations made up in advance—the
same reason Jamie was now up at the whisky spring, deciding
which barrels were suf ficiently aged as not to poison anyone.
The goose grease disposed of, t here was a good bit of dark
broth left in th e bottom of the kettle, aswirl with bits of
crackled skin and shreds of meat. I saw Mrs. Bug eyeing it,
visions of gravy dancing in her brain.
“Half,” I said sternly , reaching for a lar ge bottle.
She didn’ t ar gue; merely shrug ged her rounded shoulders
and settled back on her stool in resignation.
“Whatever will ye do with that, though?” she asked
curiously , watch ing as I put a s quare of muslin over the neck
of the bottle, in order to strain the broth. “Grease, aye, it’ s a
wonder for the salves. And bro th’ s good for a body wi’ the
ague or a wabbly wame, to be sure—but it willna keep, ye
know .” One sketchy eyebrow lifted at me in warning, in case I
hadn’ t a ctually known that. “Leave it more than a day or two,
and it’ll be blue with the mold.”“W ell, I do hope so,” I told her , ladling broth into the muslin
square. “I’ve just set out a batch  of bread to mold, and I want
to see if it will grow on the broth, too.”
I could see as sorted question s and responses flickering
through her mind, all based on a growing fear that this mania
of m ine for rotte n food was expanding, and would soon engulf
the entir e output  of the kitchen. Her eyes darted toward the pie
safe, then back at me, dark with suspicion.
I turned my head to hide a smile, and found Adso the kitten
balanced on his hind legs on the  bench, foreclaws anchored in
the t abletop, his big green eyes w atching the movements of the
ladle with fascination.
“Oh, you want some, too?” I reached for a saucer from the
shelf and  filled it with a dark puddle of broth, savory with bits
of goose meat and floating fat globules.
“This is from m y half,” I assured Mrs. Bug, but she shook
her head vigorously .
“Not a bit of it, Mrs. Fraser ,” she said. “The bonnie wee
laddie’ s caught six  m ice in here i n the past two days.” She
beamed fondly at Adso, who had leaped down and was
lapping broth as fast as his tiny pink tongue could move. “Y on
cheetie’ s welcome to anything he likes from my hearth.”
“Oh, has he? Splendid. He can come and have a go at the
ones in my sur gery , then.” W e were presently entertaining a
plague of mice; driven indoors by cold weather , they skittered
along the baseboards like shado ws after nightfall, and even in
broad daylight, shot suddenly across floors and leaped out of
opened cupboards, causing mi nor heart failure and broken
dishes.
“W ell, ye can sc arcely blame the mice,” Mrs. Bug observed,
darting a  quick glance at me. “T hey go where the food is, after
all.”
The poo l of broth had nearly d rained through the muslim,
leaving a thick coating of flots am behind. I scraped this of fand dropped it on Adso’ s saucer , then scooped up a fresh ladle
of broth.
“Y es, th ey do,” I said, evenly . “ And I’m sorry about it, but
the mold is important. It’ s medicine, and I—”
“Oh, aye! Of co urse it is,” she assured me hurriedly . “I ken
that.” There was no tinge of sarc asm in her voice, which rather
surprised me. She hesitated, then reached through the slit in
her skirt, into the capacious pocket that she wore beneath.
“There was a m an, as lived in Auchterlonie—where we had
our hoose, Arch and me, in the village there. He was a carline,
was Joh nnie Howlat, and folk went wary near him—but they
went. Some went by day , for gra ss cures and graiths, and some
went by  night, for to buy charms. Y e’ll ken the sort?” She
darted another glance at me, and I nodded, a little uncertainly .
I kn ew the sort of person she meant; some Highland
charmers dealt not only in remedies—the “graiths” she’d
mentioned—but also in minor magic, selling lovephilters,
fertility potions … ill wishes. S omething cold slid down my
back and vanished, leaving in  its wake a faint feeling of
unease, like the slime trail of a snail.
I sw allowed, seeing in memory the small bunch of thorny
plants, s o carefully bound with red thread and with black.
Placed beneath my pillow by a jealous girl named Laoghaire—
purchased from a witch named  Geillis Duncan. A witch like
me.
W as that  what Mrs. Bug was get ting at? “Carline” was not a
word I was certain of, though I thought it meant “witch,” or
something like it. She was regarding me thoughtfully , her
normal animation quite subdued.
“He was a filthy  wee mannie, Johnnie Howlat was. He’d no
woman to do for him, and his cot smelt of dreadful things. So
did he.” She shivered suddenly , in spite of the fire at her back.
“Y e’d see him, sometimes, in the wood or on the moor ,
pokin’ at the gro und. He’d find creatures that had died, maybe,
and brin g back their skins and th eir feet, bones and teeth for tomake his charms. He wore a wretched auld smock, like a
farmer , a nd sometimes ye’d see him comin’ doon the path wi’
something pooch ed up under his  smock, and stains of blood—
and other things—seepin’ through the cloth.”
“Sounds most unpleasant,” I said , eyes fixed on the bottle as
I s crape d the cloth again and ladled more broth. “But people
went to him anyway?”
“There was no one else,” she said simply , and I looked up.
Her dark eyes fixed unblinkin gly on mine, and her hand
moved slowly , fingering something inside her pocket.
“I didna ken at first,” she said. “ For Johnnie kept mool from
the g raveyard and bone dust and  hen’ s blood and all manner of
such things, but you”—she nodded thoughtfully at me, white
kerch immaculate in the fire-glow—”ye’re a cleanly sort.”
“Thank you,” I said, both amus ed and touched. That was a
high compliment from Mrs. Bug.
“Bar the  moldy bread,” she adde d, the corners of her mouth
primming slightly . “And that heathen wee pooch ye keep in
your cab inet. But it’ s true, no? Y e’re a charmer , like Johnnie
was?”
I hesita ted, not knowing what to say . The memory of
Cranesmuir was  vivid in my mind, as it had not been for many
years. T he last thing I wanted was for Mrs. Bug to be
spreading the rumor that I was a carline—some already called
me a conjure-woman. I was not worried about legal
prosecution as a witch—not h ere, not now . But to have a
reputation for healing was one thing; to have people come to
me for help with the other things that charmers dealt in …
“Not exa ctly ,” I said, guardedly . “It’ s only that I know a bit
about pl ants. And sur gery . But I  really don’ t know anything at
all about charms or … spells.”
She nod ded in satisfaction, as though I had confirmed her
suspicions instead of denying them.
Before I could respond, there w as a sound from the floor
like water hitting a hot pan, followed by a loud screech.Jemmy , tiring of his toy , had cast it aside and crawled over to
investigate Adso’ s saucer . The cat, disinclined to share, had
hissed a t the baby and frightene d him. Jemmy’ s shriek in turn
had frig htened Adso under the settle; only the tip of a small
pink nos e and a flicker of agitated whiskers showed from the
shadows.
I p icked  Jem up and soothed his tears, while Mrs. Bug took
over the broth-straining. She lo oked over the goose debris on
the p latter and p icked out a leg bone, the white cartilage at the
end smooth and gleaming.
“Here, laddie.” She waved it enticingly under Jemmy’ s
nose. He at once stopped crying , grabbed the bone, and put it
in his mouth. M rs. Bug selected a smaller wing bone, with
shreds o f meat still clinging to it, and put that down on the
saucer .
“And th at’ s for you, lad,” she sa id to the darkness under the
settle. “D inna fill your wame too full, though—stay hungry for
the wee moosies, aye?”
She turned back to the table, and began to scoop the bones
into a shallow pan.
“I’ll roast these; they’ll do for s oup,” she said, eyes on her
work. Then without changing to ne or looking up, she said, “I
went to him once, Johnnie Howlat.”
“Did you?” I sat  down, Jemmy o n my knee. “W ere you ill?”
“I wanted a child.”
I h ad no idea what to say; I sat still, listening to the drip of
the broth through the muslin cloth, as she scraped the last bit
of gristl e neatly into the roasting pan, and carried it to the
hearth.
“I’d slip pit four , in the course of a year ,” she said, back
turned to me. “Y e’d not think it , to look at me now , but I was
nay more than skin and bane, the color o’ whey , and my paps
shrunk awa to nothing.”
She settled the pan firmly into the coals and covered it.“So I took what money we had, and I went to Johnnie
Howlat. He took the money , and put water in a pan. He sat me
doon on  the one side of it and h im on the other , and there we
sat for a verra l ong time, him starin’ into the water and me
starin’ at him.
“At last, he shoo k himself a bit and got up, and went awa to
the b ack of his cot. ‘T was dark, and I couldna see what he did,
but he rummaged and poked, and said things beneath his
breath, and finally he came ba ck to me, and handed me a
charm.”
Mrs. Bu g straightened up and turned round. She came close,
and laid her hand on Jemmy’ s silky head, very gently .
“He said  to me, Johnnie did, that here was a charm that
would close up the mouth of my womb, and keep a babe safe
inside, u ntil it should be born. B ut there was a thing he’d seen,
lookin’ i n the water , and he mus t tell me. If I bore a live babe,
then my husband would die, he said. So he would give me the
charm, and the prayer that wen t with it—and then it was my
choice, and who could say fairer than that?”
Her stubby , work-worn finger traced the curve of Jemmy’ s
cheek. Engaged with his new toy , he paid no attention.
“I carried that charm in my pocket for a month—and then I
put it away .”
I rea ched up an d put my hand over hers, squeezing. There
was no sound b ut the baby’ s slobbering and the hiss and pop
of th e b ones in the coals. She s tayed still for a moment, then
drew he r hand away , and put it  back in her pocket. She drew
out a small object, and put it on the table beside me.
“I could na quite bring myself t o throw it away ,” she said,
gazing down at it dispassiona tely . “It cost me three silver
pennies, after all. And it’ s a we e thing; easy enough to carry
along when we left Scotland.”
It wa s a small ch unk of stone, pa le pink in color , and veined
with gray , badly weathered. It had been crudely carved into the
shape of a pregnant woman, littl e more than a huge belly , withswollen breasts and buttocks above a pair of stubby legs that
tapered to nothing. I had seen such figures before—in
museums. Had Johnnie Howlat made it himself? Or perhaps
found it in his pokings through wood and moor , a remnant of
much more ancient times?
I touched it gently , thinking that whatever Johnnie Howlat
might h ave been , or might hav e seen in his pan of water , he
had no doubt been astute en ough to have seen the love
between Arch and Murdina Bu g. W as it easier for a woman,
then, to  forswear the hope of children, thinking it a noble
sacrifice for the sake of a much-loved husband, than to suf fer
bitterness and self-blame for constant failure? Carline he may
have been, Johnnie Howlat—but a charmer , indeed.
“So,” Mrs. Bug said, matter -of-factly , “it may be as ye’ll
find some lass who’ s a use for it. Shame to let it go to waste,
aye?”35
HOGMANA Y
T HE YEAR ENDED clear and cold, with a small, brilliant
moon that rose high in the violet-black vault of the sky , and
flooded the coves and trails of t he mountainside with light. A
good th ing, as people came from all over the Ridge—and
some, even farther—to keep Hogmanay at “the Big House.”
The men had cleared the new barn and raked the floor clean
for the dancing. Jigs and reels and strathspeys—and a number
of other  dances for which I didn’ t know the names, but they
looked like fun—were executed under the light of bear -oil
lanterns, accom panied by the music of Evan Lindsay’ s
scratchy fiddle and the squeal o f his brother Murdo’ s wooden
flute, punctuated by the heartbeat thump of Kenny’ s bodhran.
Thurlo Guthrie’ s ancient father had brought his pipes, too—
a se t of small uilleann pipes that looked nearly as decrepit as
did Mr . Guthrie , but produced a  sweet drone. The melody of
his c hanter sometimes agreed with the Lindsays’ notion of a
particular tune, and sometimes didn’ t, but the overall ef fect
was cheerful, and suf ficient whisky and beer had been taken
by this point in the festivities that no one minded in the least.
After an hour or two of the danc ing, I privately decided that
I understood why the word “reel” had come to indicate
drunkenness; ev en performed without preliminary lubrication,
the dance was enough to make one dizzy . Done under the
influence of whisky , it made al l the blood in my head whirl
round like the w ater in a washi ng machine. I staggered of f at
the end of one such dance, leaned against one of the barn’ s
uprights, and closed one eye, in hopes of stopping the spinning
sensation.
A nudg e on my blind side caused me to open that eye,
revealing Jamie, holding two brimming cups of something.Hot and thirsty as I was, I didn’ t mind what it was, so long as
it was wet. Fortunately it was cider , and I gulped it.
“Drink i t like that, and ye’ll fo under , Sassenach,” he said,
disposing of his own cider in precisely similar fashion. He was
flushed and sweating from the dancing, but his eyes sparkled
as he grinned at me.
“Pif fle,” I said. W ith a bit of cider as ballast, the room had
quit spinning, and I felt cheerf ul, if hot. “How many people
are in here, do you think?”
“Sixty-eight, last time I counted.” He leaned back beside
me, view ing the milling throng with an expression of deep
content. “They come in and ou t, though, so I canna be quite
sure. And I didna count the weans,” he added, moving slightly
to avoid collision as a trio of small boys caromed through the
crowd and shot past us, giggling.
Heaps o f fresh hay were stacked in the shadows at the sides
of th e ba rn; the small bodies of children too wee to stay awake
were dra ped and curled among t hem like so many barn kittens.
The flic ker of lantern light caug ht a gleam of silky red-gold;
Jemmy was sound asleep in his blanket, happily lulled by the
racket. I saw Bree come out of the dancing and lay her hand
briefly o n him to check, then tu rn back. Roger put out a hand
to her , dark and  smiling, and she took it, laughing as they
whirled back into the stamping mass.
People did come in and out—particularly small groups of
young people, and courting couples. It was freezing and frost-
crisp outside, but the cold made cuddling with a warm body
that much more appealing. One of the older MacLeod boys
passed near us, his arm round a much younger girl—one of old
Mr . Gut hrie’ s gr anddaughters, I thought; he had three of them,
all much alike to look at—and Jamie said something genial to
him in Gaelic that made his ear s go red. The girl was already
pink with dancing, but went crimson in the face.
“What did you say to them?”“It doesna bear translation,” he said, putting a hand in the
small of my bac k. He was pulsin g with heat and whisky , alight
with a flame of joy; looking at him was enough to kindle my
own heart. He sa w that, and smiled down at me, the heat of his
hand burning through the cloth of my gown.
“D’ye w ant to go outside for a moment, Sassenach?” he
said, his voice pitched low and rich with suggestion.
“W ell, s ince you  mention it … yes,” I said. “Maybe not just
yet, thou gh.” I nodded past him, and he turned to see a cluster
of e lderly ladies sitting on a  bench against the wall, all
viewing us with the bright-eyed  curiosity of a flock of crows.
Jamie w aved and smiled at the m, making them all burst into
pink-faced giggles, and turned back to me with a sigh.
“A ye, well. In a bit, then—after the first-footing, maybe.”
The late st spate of dancing came to an end, and there was a
general sur ge in the direction of  the tub of cider , presided over
by Mr . W emys s at the far end of the barn. The dancers
clustered round it like a horde o f thirsty wasps, so that all that
was visi ble of Mr . W emyss was the top of his head, fair hair
almost white under the glow of the lanterns.
Seeing i t, I looked round for Lizzie, to see whether she was
enjoying the party . Evidently so; she was holding court on a
hay bale, surrounded by four or five gawky boys, who were all
behaving very much like the dancers round the cider tub.
“Who’ s the big one?” I asked Jamie, calling his attention to
the smal l gathering with a nod of my head. “I don’ t recognize
him.” He glanced over , squinting slightly .
“Oh,” h e said, relaxing, “that will be Jacob Schnell. He’ s
ridden over from Salem with a friend; they came with the
Muellers.”
“Really .” Salem was a good long ride; nearly thirty miles. I
wondered whether the attraction had been the festivities alone.
I l ooked for T o mmy Mueller , whom I had privately marked
out as a possible match for Liz zie, but didn’ t see him in the
crowd.“Do you know anything about this Schnell lad?” I asked,
giving th e boy in question a critical look. He was a year or two
older th an the other boys dancing attendance on Lizzie, and
quite tall. Plain-featured but good-natured-looking, I thought;
heavy-boned, and with a thickness through the middle that
foretold the development of a prosperous paunch in middle
age.
“I dinna  ken the lad himself, b ut I’ve met his uncle. It’ s a
decent family; I think his father ’ s a cobbler .” W e both looked
automatically at the young man’ s shoes; not new , but very
good quality , and with pewter buckles, lar ge and square in the
German fashion.
Y oung Schnell appeared to have gained an advantage; he
was leaning close, saying something to Lizzie, whose eyes
were fix ed on his face, a slight frown of concentration
wrinkling the skin between her f air brows as she tried to make
out w hat he was  saying. Then s he worked it out, and her face
relaxed in laughter .
“I dinna  think so.” Jamie shook his head, a slight frown on
his face as he watched them. “The family’ s Lutheran; they
wouldna let the lad marry a C atholic—and it would break
Joseph’ s heart to send the lass to live so far away .”
Lizzie’ s father was  d eeply attached to her; and ha ving lost
her o nce, he wa s unlikely to giv e her so far away in marriage
as to lose sigh t of her again. Still, I thought that Joseph
W emyss would do almost anything to insure his daughter ’ s
happiness.
“He might go with her , you know .”
Jamie’ s expressi on grew bleak at the thought, but he nodded
in reluctant acknowledgment.
“I suppose so. I should hate to lose him; though I suppose
Arch Bug might—”
Shouts of “Mac Dubh!”  interrupted him.
“Come on, a Sheumais ruaidh , s how him how !” Evan called
from th e far end of the barn, and jerked his bowauthoritatively .
There had been a break in the dancing, to give the musicians
time to breathe and have a drink, and in the interim, some of
the men had been trying their hand at sword dancing, which
could be done w ith only the ac companiment of pipes or to a
single drum.
I ha d been payi ng little attention to this, only hearing the
shouts of encouragement or deri sion from that end of the barn.
Evidently , most  of those present were no great hand at the
sport—the latest gentleman to try it had tripped over one of the
swords and fallen flat; he was being helped to his feet, red-
faced and laughing, returning ge nial insults with his friends as
they beat the hay and dirt from his clothes.
“Mac Dubh, Mac Dubh!”  Ke nny and M urdo shouted in
invitation, beckoning, but Jamie waved them of f, laughing.
“Nay , I havena done that in more time than I—”
“Mac D ubh! Mac Dubh! Mac D ubh!”  Kenny was thumping
his bodh ran, chanting in rhythm, and the group of men around
him were joining in. “Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh!”
Jamie cast me a  brief look of helpless appeal, but Ronnie
Sinclair and Bobby Sutherl and were already heading
purposefully toward us. I stepped away , laughing, and they
seized him each by an arm, smothering his protests with
raucous shouts as they hustled him into the center of the floor .
Applause and shouts of approval broke out as they
deposited him in a clear spac e, where the straw had been
trampled into the damp earth far enough to make a hard-
packed surface. Seeing that he had no choice, Jamie drew
himself up and s traightened his kilt. He caught my eye, rolled
an e ye in mock resignation, an d began to take of f his coat,
waistcoat, and boots, as Ronnie scrambled to lay out the two
crossed broadswords at his feet.
Kenny Lindsay began to tap gently on his bodhran,
hesitating betwe en the beats, a sound of soft suspense. The
crowd murmure d and shifted in anticipation. Clad in shirt, kilt,and stoc kinged feet, Jamie bowed elaborately , turning sunwise
to dip four time s, to each of the “airts” in turn. Then he stood
upright, and moved to take his place, standing just above the
crossed swords. His hands lifted, fingers pointing stif f above
his head.
There was an outburst of cla pping nearby , and I saw
Brianna put two fingers in her m outh and give an earsplitting
whistle of approbation—to the marked shock of the people
standing next to her .
I saw Jamie glance at Bree, with a faint smile, and then his
eyes found mine again. The smile stayed on his lips, but there
was something dif ferent in his expression; something rueful.
The beat of the bodhran began to quicken.
A H ighland sword dance was do ne for one of three reasons.
For exhi bition and entertainment, as he was about to do it now .
For com petition, as it was don e among the young men at a
Gathering. And as it first was done, as an omen. Danced on the
eve of a battle,  the skill of the dancer foretold success or
failure. The young men had danced between crossed swords,
the night before Prestonpans, before Falkirk. But not before
Culloden. There had been no c ampfires the night before that
final fight, no tim e for bards and  battle songs. It didn’ t matter;
no one had needed an omen, then.
Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, bent his head, and the
beat of the drum began to patter , quick and fast.
I k new , because  he had told me, that he had first done the
sword dance in competition, and then—more than once—on
the e ve of battle s, first in the Highlands, then in France. The
old sold iers had asked him to dance, had valued his skill as
reassurance that they would live and triumph. For the Lindsays
to k now his skill, he must also have danced in Ardsmuir . But
that was in the Old W orld, and in his old life.
He knew —and had not needed Roger to tell him—that the
old ways had changed, were changing. This was a new world,
and the sword dance would never again be danced in earnest,seeking omen and favor from the ancient gods of war and
blood.
His eyes opened, and his head sn apped up. The tipper struck
the drum  with a sudden thunk!  and it began with a shout from
the crow d. His feet struck down on the pounded earth, to the
north and the so uth, to the east and the west, flashing swift
between the swords.
His feet struck soundless, sure on the ground, and his
shadow danced on the wall be hind him, looming tall, long
arms upraised. His face was stil l toward me, but he didn’ t see
me any longer , I was sure.
The mu scles of his legs were strong as a leaping stag’ s
beneath the hem of his kilt, and  he danced with all the skill of
the warrior he had been and still was. But I thought he danced
now onl y for the sake of memory , that those watching might
not for get; danced, with the swe at flying from his brow as he
worked, and a look of unutterable distance in his eyes.
 
PEOPLE WERE STILL T ALKING of it when we adjourned
to the house, just before midnight, for stovies, beer , and cider ,
before the first-footing.
Mrs. Bug brought out a basket  of apples, and gathered all
the y oung unmarried girls toget her in a corner of the kitchen,
where—with m uch giggling and glancing over shoulders
toward the young men—each peeled a fruit, keeping the
peeling in one p iece. Each girl tossed her peel behind her , and
the group all whirled round to cluster and exclaim over the
fallen strip and see what was the shape of the letter it made.
Apple peelings being by their nature fairly circular , there
were a good many “C”s, “G”s, and “O”s discovered—good
news for Charley Chisholm, and Y oung Geordie Sutherland—
and much speculation as to whe ther “Angus Og” might be the
meaning of an “ O” or not, for Angus Og MacLeod was a canty
lad, and much l iked, while the only “Owen” was an elderly
widower , about five feet tall, and with a lar ge wen on his face.I ha d taken Je mmy up to put him to bed, and after
depositing him limp and snoring in his cradle, came down in
time to see Lizzie cast her peeling.
“‘C’!” chorused two of the Guthrie girls, almost knocking
heads as they bent to look.
“No, no, it’ s a ‘J’!”
Appealed to as the resident ex pert, Mrs. Bug bent down,
eyeing t he strip of red peel with her head on one side, like a
robin sizing up a likely worm.
“A ‘ J’ it  is, to b e sure,” she rule d, straightening up, and the
group burst out in giggles, tur ning as one to stare at John
Lowry , a  young farmer from W oolam’ s Mill, who peered over
his shoulder at them in total bewilderment.
I caught a flash of red from the corner of my eye, and turned
to se e B rianna i n the doorway t o the hall. She tilted her head,
beckoning me, and I hurried to join her .
“Roger ’ s ready to go out, but w e couldn’ t find the ground
salt; it wasn’ t in the pantry . Do you have it in your sur gery?”
“Oh! Y e s, I have,” I said guiltil y . “I’d been using it to dry
snakeroot, and for got to put it back.”
Guests packed the porches and lined the wide hallway ,
spilling out of the kitchen an d Jamie’ s study , all talking,
drinking, and eating, and I threa ded my way through the crush
after her  toward  my sur gery , exc hanging greetings as I ducked
brandished cups of cider , stovie crumbs crunching under my
feet.
The sur gery itself was nearly empty , though; people tended
to avoid it, through superstition, painful associations, or simple
wariness, and I had not encoura ged them to go in, leaving the
room da rk, with no fire burning . Only one candle was burning
in the room now , and the only person present was Roger , who
was poking among the bits and pieces I’d left on the counter .
He look ed up as we entered, smiling. Still faintly flushed
from the dancing, he had put his coat back on and draped awoolen scarf round his neck; his cloak lay over the stool
beside h im. Custom held that the most fortunate “firstfoot” on
a H ogmanay was a tall and handsome dark-haired man; to
welcome one as the first visit or across the threshold after
midnight brough t good fortune to the house for the coming
year .
Roger being beyond ar gument the tallest—and quite the
best-looking—dark man available, he had been elected to be
firstfoot, not only for the Big H ouse, as folk called it, but for
those ho mes nearby . Fer gus and Marsali and the others who
lived near had already rushed of f to their houses, to be ready to
greet their firstfoot when he should come.
A r ed-haired man, though, w as frightful ill luck as a
firstfoot, and Jamie had been co nsigned to his study , under the
riotous guard of the Lindsay brothers, who were to keep him
safely bottled up ‘til after midnight. There were no clocks
nearer than Cross Creek, but old Mr . Guthrie had a pocket
watch, even older than himself; this instrument would declare
the mys tic moment when one y ear yielded to the next. Given
the w atch’ s propensity for stopp ing, I doubted that this would
be more than a symbolic pronouncement, but that was quite
enough, after all.
“Eleven-fifty ,” B rianna declared , popping into the sur gery
after me , her own cloak over her arm. “I just checked Mr .
Guthrie’ s watch.”
“Plenty of time. Are ye comi ng with me, then?” Roger
grinned at Bree, seeing her cloak.
“Are you kidding? I haven’ t been out after midnight in
years.” She grinned back at him, swirling the cloak around her
shoulders. “Got everything?”
“All but  the salt.” Roger nodded toward a canvas bag on the
counter . A firstfoot was to bring gifts to the house: an egg, a
faggot of wood, a bit of salt —and a bit of whisky , thus
insuring that the household would not lack for necessities
during the coming year .“Right. Where did I—oh, Christ!” Swinging open the
cupboard door to search for the salt, I was confronted by a pair
of glowing eyes, glaring out of the darkness at me.
“Good g rief.” I put a hand over  my chest, to keep my heart
from lea ping out, waving the oth er hand weakly at Roger , who
had sprung up at my cry , ready to defend me. “Not to worry—
it’ s just the cat.”
Adso had taken refuge from th e party , bringing along the
remains of a fre shly killed mouse for company . He growled at
me, evidently thinking I meant to snatch this treat for myself,
but I pushed h im crossly aside, digging the small bag of
ground salt out from behind his furry hindquarters.
I closed the cupboard door , leaving Adso to his feast, and
handed Roger the salt. He took  it, laying down the object he
had had in his hand.
“Where did ye get that wee auld wifie?” he asked, nodding
toward t he object as he put the salt away in his bag. I glanced
at the counter , a nd saw that he had been examining the little
pink stone figure that Mrs. Bug had given me.
“Mrs. Bug,” I replied. “She says it’ s a fertility charm—
which is certainly what it looks like. It is  very old, then?” I’d
thought it must be, and seeing R oger ’ s interest confirmed the
impression.
He nodded, still looking at the thing.
“V ery old. The ones I’ve seen  in museums are dated at
thousands of years.” He traced  the bulbous outlines of the
stone with a reverent forefinger .
Brianna moved closer to see, a nd without thinking, I set a
hand on her arm.
“What?” she said, turning her  head to smile at me. “I
shouldn’ t touch it? Do they work that  well?”
“No, of course not.”
I to ok my hand away , laughin g, but feeling rather self-
conscious. At the same time, I  became aware that I wouldreally ra ther she  didn’ t  tou ch it, and was relieved when she
merely bent down to examine it, leaving it on the counter .
Roger was looking at it, too— or rather , he was looking at
Brianna, his eyes fixed on the back of her head with an odd
intensity . I could almost imagine that he was willing her to
touch the thing, as strongly as I was willing her not to.
Beauchamp , I said silently to myself, you have had much
too much to drink tonight.  A ll the same, I reached out by
impulse and scooped the figure u p, dropping it into my pocket.
“Come o n! W e have to go!” Th e odd mood of the moment
abruptly broken, Brianna straightened up and turned to Roger ,
ur ging him.
“A ye, right. Let’ s go, then.” H e slung the bag over his
shoulder and smiled at me, then took her arm and they
disappeared, letting the sur gery door close behind them.
I put  out the candle, ready to follow them, and then stopped,
suddenly reluctant to go back at once to the chaos of the
celebration.
I could feel the whole house in movement, throbbing around
me, and light fl owed under the door from the hall. Just here,
though, it was quiet. In the silence, I felt the weight of the little
idol in my pocket, and pressed it, hard and lumpy against my
leg.
There is  nothing special about January the first, save the
meaning we give to it. The ancients celebrated a new year at
Imbolc, at the beginning of February , when the winter slackens
and the light be gins to come ba ck—or the date of the spring
equinox, when the world lies in balance between the powers of
dark and  light. And yet I stood  there in the dark, listening to
the soun d of the cat chewing and slobbering in the cupboard,
and felt the power of the earth sh ift and stir beneath my feet as
the y ear—or something—prepared to change. There was noise
and the sense of a crowd nearby , and yet I stood alone, while
the feeling rose through me, hummed in my blood.The odd thing was that it was not strange in the slightest. It
was nothing that came from  outside me, but only the
acknowledgment of something I already possessed, and
recognized, tho ugh I had no notion what to call it. But
midnight was fast approaching. Still wondering, I opened the
door , and stepped into the light and clamor of the hall.
A sh out from a cross the hall betokened the arrival of the
magic h our , as announced by Mr . Guthrie’ s timepiece, and the
men cam e jostli ng out of Jamie ’ s of fice, joking and pushing,
faces turned expectantly toward the door .
Nothing happened. Had Roger decided to go to the back
door , gi ven the crowd in the kitchen? I turned to look down
the hall, but no, the kitchen doorway was crowded with faces,
all looking back at me in expectation.
Still no knock at the door , and there was a small stir of
restiveness in the hallway , and a lull in conversation, one of
those aw kward silences when no one wants to talk for fear of
sudden interruption.
Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the porch, and a
rapid knock, one-two-three. Jamie, as householder , stepped
forward to fling the door open and bid the firstfoot welcome. I
was near enough to see the loo k of astonishment on his face,
and looked quickly to see what had caused it.
Instead of Roger and Brianna, t wo smaller figures stood on
the porch. Skinny and bedraggl ed, but definitely dark-haired,
the two Beardsley twins stepped shyly in together , at Jamie’ s
gesture.
“A happ y New Y ear to you, Mr . Fraser ,” said Josiah, in a
bullfrog croak. He bowed pol itely to me, still holding his
brother by the arm. “W e’ve come.”
 
THE GE NERAL AGREEMENT was that dark-haired twins
were a most fort unate omen, obviously bringing twice the luck
of a single firstfoot. Nonetheless, Roger and Bree—who had
met the twins hesitating in the yard, and sent them up to thedoor—went of f to do their bes t for the other houses on the
Ridge, Bree being severely warn ed not to enter any house until
Roger had crossed the threshold.
Fortunate or not, the appearance of the Beardsleys caused a
good deal of tal k. Everyone had heard of the death of Aaron
Beardsley—the of ficial version, that is, which was that he had
perished of an a poplexy—and th e mysterious disappearance of
his w ife, but the  advent of the twins caused the whole af fair to
be ra ked up and talked over again. No one knew what the boys
had been doing between the militia’ s expedition and New
Y ear ’ s; Josiah said only “wande rin’” in his raspy croak, when
asked—and his brother Keziah said nothing at all, obliging
everyone to talk about the Indian trader and his wife until
exhaustion caused a change of subject.
Mrs. Bu g took the Beardsleys at once under her wing,
taking them of f to the kitchen to  be washed, warmed, and fed.
Half the  partygoers had gone home to be firstfooted; those
who wo uld not leave ‘til morning split into several groups.
The you nger people returned to the barn to dance—or to seek
a bit of privacy  among the hay bales—the older ones sat to
talk of memo ries by the hearth, and those who had
overindulged in dance or whisk y curled up in any convenient
corner—and quite a few inconvenient ones—to sleep.
I fou nd J amie in  his study , leani ng back in his chair with his
eyes closed, a d rawing of some kind on the table before him.
He wasn’ t asleep, and opened his eyes when he heard my step.
“Happy New Y ear ,” I said softly , and bent to kiss him.
“A guid New Y ear to you, a nighean donn .” H e w as warm
and smelled faintly of beer and dried sweat.
“Still w ant to go outside?” I asked, with a glance at the
window . The moon had set lon g since, and the stars burned
faint and cold in the sky . The yard outside was bleak and
black.
“No,” he said fr ankly , rubbing a hand over his face. “I want
to go to bed.” H e yawned and blinked, trying to smooth downthe dishe veled bits of hair stickin g up on the top of his head. “I
want you to come, too, though,” he added, generously .
“I’d like  nothing better ,” I assured him. “What’ s that?” I
circled round behind him, looking over his shoulder at the
drawing, which seemed to be some sort of floor plan, with
mathematical calculations scribbled in the mar gins.
He sat up, looking a trifle more alert.
“Ah. W ell, thi s is wee Rog er ’ s gift to Brianna, for
Hogmanay .”
“He’ s building her a house? But they—”
“Not her .” He grinned up at me,  hands flat on either side of
the drawing. “The Chisholms.”
Roger , w ith a guile that would have become Jamie himself,
had scouted round among the  settlers on the Ridge, and
engineered an agreement between Ronnie Sinclair and Geordie
Chisholm.
Ronnie had a lar ge and comm odious cabin next to his
cooperage. So the agreement was that Ronnie, who was
unmarried, would move into the cooper ’ s shop, where he
could easily sleep. The Chisholms would then move into
Ronnie’ s cabin, to which they would at once—weather
allowing—add t wo rooms, as per the plan on Jamie’ s table. In
return, M rs. Chisholm would undertake to make Ronnie’ s
meals and do his washing. In the spring, when the Chisholms
took po ssession of their own homestead and built a house
there, Ronnie would take back his newly enlar ged cabin—
when the grandness of his imp roved accommodation might
prove suf ficient inducement for some young woman to accept
his proposal of marriage, he hoped.
“And in the meantime, Roger and Bree get back their cabin,
Lizzie and her father stop s leeping in the sur gery , and
everything is beer and skittles!” I squeezed his shoulders,
delighted. “That’ s a wonderful arrangement!”
“What’ s a skittle?” he inquired , frowning back at me in
puzzlement.“One of a set of ninepins,” I sai d. “I believe the expression
is meant  to exemplify a state of general delight with prevailing
conditions. Did you do the plan?”
“A ye. G eordie’ s no carpenter , and I dinna want the place to
fall dow n about his ears.” He squinted at the drawings, then
took a quill from the jar , flipped open the inkwell, and made a
small correction to one of the figures.
“There,” he said, dropping the q uill. “That’ll do. W ee Roger
wants to  show it to Bree when they come back tonight; I said
I’d leave it out for him.”
“She’ll be thrilled.” I leaned against the back of his chair ,
massaging his shoulders with m y hands. He leaned back, the
weight of his head warm against my stomach, and closed his
eyes, sighing in pleasure.
“Headache?” I asked softly , seeing the vertical line between
his eyes.
“A ye, just a bit. Oh, aye, that’ s nice.” I had moved my hands
to his head, gently rubbing his temples.
The hou se had quieted, though I could still hear the rumble
of voice s in the kitchen. Beyond them, the high sweet sound of
Evan’ s fiddle drifted through the cold, still air .
“‘My Brown-Haired Maid,’” I said, sighing reminiscently .
“I d o love that song.” I pulled loose the ribbon binding his
plait, and unbraided the hair , enjoying the soft, warm feel of it
as I spread it with my fingers.
“It’ s rath er odd that you don’ t ha ve an ear for music,” I said,
making small talk to distract him, as I smoothed the ruddy arcs
of hi s br ows, pre ssing just within the edge of the orbit. “I don’ t
know w hy , but an aptitude for mathematics often goes along
with one for music. Bree has both.”
“I used to,” he said absently .
“Used to what?”
“Have both.” He sighed and bent forward to stretch his
neck, his elbows resting on the table. “Oh, Christ. Please. Oh,aye. Ah!”
“Really?” I massaged his neck and shoulders, kneading the
tight muscles hard through the cloth. “Y ou mean you used to
be able to sing ?” It was a fam ily joke; while possessed of a
fine speaking voice, Jamie’ s sen se of pitch was so erratic that
any song  in his voice was a chant so tuneless that babies were
stunned, rather than lulled, to sleep.
“W ell, perhaps not that, so much.” I could hear the smile in
his voice, muf fled by the fall of hair that hid his face. “I could
tell one tune from another , though—or say if a song was sung
badly or well. Now it’ s no b ut noise or screeching.” He
shrugged, dismissing it.
“What happened?” I asked. “And when?”
“Oh, it was before I kent ye, Sa ssenach. In fact, quite soon
before.” He lifted a hand, reaching toward the back of his
head. “D o ye recall, I’d been i n France? It was on my way
back wi’ Dougal MacKenzie and his men, when Murtagh
came across ye, wanderin’ the Highlands in your shift… .”
He spoke lightly , but my fing ers had found the old scar
under hi s hair . It was no more now than a thread, the welted
gash hea led to a hairbreadth lin e. Still, it had been an eight-
inch wound, laid open with an ax. It had nearly killed him at
the time , I knew; he had lain ne ar death in a French abbey for
four months, and suf fered from crippling headaches for years.
“It w as that? Y ou mean that you … couldn’ t hear music
anymore, after you were hurt?”
His shoulders lifted briefly in a shrug.
“I h ear no musi c but the sound of drums,” he said simply .
“I’ve the rhythm of it still, but the tune is gone.”
I s topped, my ha nds on his shou lders, and he turned to look
back at me, smiling, trying to make a joke of it.
“Dinna be troubled for it, Sasse nach; it’ s no great matter . I
didna sing well even when I could  hea r it. And Dougal didna
kill me, after all.”“Dougal? Y ou do think it was Dougal, then?” I was
surprised at the certainty in his  voice. He had thought at the
time that it might perhaps have been his uncle Dougal who had
made the murderous attack upon him—and then, surprised by
his o wn men before being able to finish the job, had pretended
instead to have found him wou nded. But there had been no
evidence to say for sure.
“Oh, aye.” He looked surpris ed, too, but then his face
changed, realizing.
“Oh, aye,” he said again, more slowly . “I hadna thought—
you cou ldna tell what he said,  could you? When he died, I
mean—Dougal.” My hands were still resting on his shoulders,
and I felt an in voluntary shive r run through him. It spread
through my hands and up my arms, raising the hairs all the
way to the back of my neck.
As clearly as tho ugh the scene t ook place before me now , I
could see that attic room in C ulloden House. The bits and
pieces of discarded furniture, things toppled and rolling from
the struggle—and on the floor at my feet, Jamie crouching,
grappling with Dougal’ s body a s it bucked and strained, blood
and air bubbling from the wound where Jamie’ s dirk had
pierced the hollow of his throat. Dougal’ s face, blanched and
mottled as his lifeblood drained away , eyes fierce black and
fixed on Jamie as his mouth m oved in Gaelic silence, saying
… some thing. And Jamie’ s face, as white as Dougal’ s, eyes
locked on the dying man’ s lips, reading that last message.
“What did he sa y?” My hands were tight on his shoulders,
and his face was turned away as  my thumbs rose up under his
hair to seek the ancient scar again.
“Sister ’ s son or no—I would that I had killed you, that day
on th e h ill. For I knew fr om the beginning that it would be you
or me.”  He spoke calm and low-voiced, and the very
emotionlessness of the words made the shudder pass again,
this time from me to him.
It was quiet in the study . The sound of voices in the kitchen
had died to a murmur , as though the ghosts of the pastgathered there to drink and reminisce, laughing softly among
themselves.
“So that  was what you meant,”  I said quietly . “When you
said you’d made your peace with Dougal.”
“A ye.” He leaned back in his chair and reached up, his
hands wrapping  warmly round my wrists. “He was right, ken.
It was  him  or me, and would have bee n, one way or the other .”
I s ighed , and a small burden of guilt dropped away . Jamie
had been fighting to defend me,  when he killed Dougal, and I
had alw ays felt that death to be laid at my door . But he was
right, Dougal; too much lay be tween them, and if that final
conflict had not come then, on the eve of Culloden, it would
have been another time.
Jamie squeezed  my wrists, an d turned in his chair , still
holding my hands.
“Let the dead b ury the dead, Sassenach,” he said softly .
“The pa st is gone—the future i s not come. And we are here
together , you and I.”36
WORLDS UNSEEN
T HE HO USEHOLD W AS QUIET ; it was the perfect
opportunity for my experiments. Mr . Bug had gone to
W oolam’ s Mill, taking the Beardsley twins; Lizzie and Mr .
W emyss had gone to help Mar sali with the new mash; and
Mrs. Bu g, having left a pot of porridge and a platter of toast in
the k itchen, was out, too, combi ng the woods for the half-wild
hens, catching them one by one and dragging them in by the
feet to be insta lled in the handsome new chicken coop her
husband had built. Bree and Ro ger sometimes came up to the
big house for their breakfast, b ut more often chose to eat by
their own hearth, as was the case this morning.
Enjoying the peace of the empty house, I made up a tray
with cup , teapot , cream, and sug ar , and took it with me to my
sur gery , along with my samples . The early morning light was
perfect, pouring through the window in a brilliant bar of gold.
Leaving the tea to steep, I took a couple of small glass bottles
from the cupboard and went outside.
The day was chilly but beautifu l, with a clear pale sky that
promised a little warmth later in the morning. At the moment,
though, it was c old enough that I was glad of my warm shawl,
and the water in  the horses’ trough was frigid, rimmed with
sheets o f fragile ice. Not cold enough to kill the microbes, I
supposed; I could see long strands of algae coating the boards
of the trough, swaying gently as I buckled the thin crust of ice
and dist urbed the water , scraping one of my bottles along the
slimy edge of the trough.
I sco oped up further samples of liquid from the springhouse
and from a pud dle of muddy standing water near the privy ,
then hur ried back to the house  to make my trials while the
light was still good.The microscope stood by the w indow where I had set it up
the day before, all gleaming brass and bright mirrors. A few
seconds’ work to place droplets on the glass slides I’d laid
ready , a nd I bent to peer through the eyepiece with rapt
anticipation.
The ovo id of light bulged, diminished, went out altogether . I
squinted, turning the screw as slowly as I could, and … there it
was. Th e mirror steadied and t he light resolved itself into a
perfect pale circle, window to another world.
I watched, enchanted, as the madly beating cilia of a
paramecium bore it in hot pur suit of invisible prey . Then a
quiet drifting, the field of view itself in constant movement as
the drop of water on my slide shifted in its microscopic tides. I
waited a moment more, in hopes of spotting one of the swift
and eleg ant Euglena, or even a hydra, but no such luck; only
bits of mysterious black-green, daubs of cellular debris and
burst algal cells.
I shifted the sl ide to and fro, but found nothing else of
interest. That was all right; I had plenty of other things to look
at. I rinsed the glass rectangle in a cup of alcohol, let it dry for
a m oment, then dipped a glas s rod into one of the small
beakers I had lin ed up before my microscope, dabbing a drop
of liquid onto the clean slide.
It had taken some experimentation to put the microscope
together properly; it wasn’ t much like a modern version,
particularly whe n reduced to its component parts for storage in
Dr . Rawlings’ s  handsome box. Still, the lenses were
recognizable, an d with that as a starting point, I had managed
to fit the optica l bits into the stand without much trouble.
Obtaining suf ficient light, though, had been more dif ficult, and
I was thrilled finally to have got it working.
“What are ye d oing, Sassenach ?” Jamie, with a piece of
toast in one hand, paused in the doorway .
“Seeing things,” I said, adjusting the focus.“Oh, ay e? What sorts of things ?” He came into the room,
smiling. “Not ghosties, I trust. I will have had enough o’
those.”
“Come look,” I said, stepping back from the microscope.
Mildly puzzled, he bent and peered through the eyepiece,
screwing up his other eye in concentration.
He squinted for a moment, th en gave an exclamation of
pleased surprise.
“I se e them! W e e things with tails, swimming all about!” He
straightened up, smiling at me w ith a look of delight, then bent
at once to look again.
I felt a warm glow of pride in my new toy .
“Isn’ t it marvelous?”
“A ye, marvelous,” he said, absorbed. “Look at them. Such
busy wee strivers as they are, al l pushing and writhing against
one another—and such a mass of them!”
He watc hed for a few moments more, exclaiming under his
breath, then straightened up, shaking his head in amazement.
“I’ve ne ver seen such a thing, Sassenach. Y e’d told me
about th e germs , aye, but I never in life imagined them so! I
thought they might have wee teeth, and they don’ t—but I
never kent they would have suc h handsome, lashing wee tails,
or swim about in such numbers.”
“W ell, some microor ganisms do,” I said, moving to peer
into the eyepiece again myself. “These particular little beasts
aren’ t germs, though—they’re sperms.”
“They’re what?”
He looked quite blank.
“Sperms,” I said patiently . “Male reproductive cells. Y ou
know , what makes babies?”
I t hought he mi ght just possibly choke. His mouth opened,
and a very pretty shade of rose suf fused his countenance.“Y e mean seed?” he croaked. “Spunk?”
“W ell … yes.” W atching him narrowly , I poured steaming
tea into a clean beaker and han ded it to him as a restorative.
He ignored it, though, his eyes fixed on the microscope as
though something might spring out of the eyepiece at any
moment and go writhing across the floor at our feet.
“Sperms,” he muttered to himself. “Sperms.” He shook his
head vigorously , then turned to me, a frightful thought having
just occurred to him.
“Whose are they?” he asked, his tone one of darkest
suspicion.
“Er … well, yo urs, of course.” I cleared my throat, mildly
embarrassed. “Who else’ s would they be?”
His hand darted reflexively between his legs, and he
clutched himself protectively .
“How the hell did ye get them?”
“How d o you think?” I said, rather coldly . “I woke up in
custody of them this morning.”
His hand relaxed, but a deep bl ush of mortification stained
his c heeks dark crimson. He pi cked up the beaker of tea and
drained it at a gulp, temperature notwithstanding.
“I see,” he said, and coughed.
There was a moment of deep silence.
“I … um … didn a ken they could stay alive,” he said at last.
“Errrrm … outside, I mean.”
“W ell, if  you leave them in a spl otch on the sheet to dry out,
they don’ t,” I said, matter -of-factly . “Keep them from drying
out, thou gh”—I gestured at the small, covered beaker , with its
small pu ddle of whitish fluid—”and they’ll do for a few hours.
In th eir proper h abitat, though, they can live for up to a week
after … er … release.”
“Proper habitat,” he repeated, looking pensive. He darted a
quick glance at me. “Y e do mean—”“I do,” I said, with some asperity .
“Mmphm.” At this point, he re called the piece of toast he
still held, and took a bite, chewing meditatively .
“Do folk know about this? Now , I mean?”
“Know what? What sperm look like? Almost certainly .
Microscopes hav e been around for well over a hundred years,
and the first thin g anyone with a working microscope does is
to look at every thing within reach. Given that the inventor of
the micr oscope was a man, I should certainly think that …
Don’ t you?”
He g ave me a look, and took another bite of toast, chewing
in a marked manner .
“I shou ldna quite like to refe r to it as ‘within reach,’
Sassenach,” he said, through a mouthful of crumbs, and
swallowed. “But I do take your meaning.”
As though compelled by some irresistible force, he drifted
toward the microscope, bending to peer into it once more.
“They seem verra fierce,” he ventured, after a few
moments’ inspection.
“W ell, th ey do need to be,” I said, suppressing a smile at his
faintly abashed air of pride in his gametes’ prowess. “It’ s a
long slog, after all, and a terrific fight at the end of it. Only one
gets the honor , you know .”
He l ooked up, b lank-faced. It dawned on me that he didn’ t
know . He’d studied languages, mathematics, and Greek and
Latin ph ilosophy in Paris, not m edicine. And even if natural
scientists of the time were awar e of sperm as separate entities,
rather than a ho mogenous substance, it occurred to me that
they probably didn’ t have any idea what sperm actually did.
“Wherever did you think  bab ies came fr om?” I demanded,
after a certain amount of en lightenment regarding eggs,
sperms, zygotes, and the like, which left Jamie distinctly
squiggle-eyed. He gave me a rather cold look.“And me a farmer all my life? I ken precisely where they
come from,” he informed me. “I just didna ken that … er …
that all of this daf fery was going on. I thought … well, I
thought a man plants his seed into a woman’ s belly , and it …
well … grows.” He waved vaguely in the direction of my
stomach. “Y ou know—like … seed. Neeps, corn, melons, and
the like. I didna ken they swim about like tadpoles.”
“I see.” I rubbed a finger bene ath my nose, trying not to
laugh. “Hence the agricultural designation of women as being
either fertile or barren!”
“Mmphm.” Dismissing this wi th a wave of his hand, he
frowned though tfully at the tee ming slide. “A week, ye said.
So it’ s possible that the wee lad really is  the Thrush’ s get?”
Early in the day  as it was, it took half a second or so for me
to make the leap from theory to practical application.
“Oh—Jemmy , you mean? Y es, it’ s quite possible that he’ s
Roger ’ s child.” Roger and Bonnet had lain with Brianna
within two days of each other . “I told you—and Bree—so.”
He nodded, looking abstracted, then remembered the toast
and push ed the rest of it into his mouth. Chewing, he bent for
another look through the eyepiece.
“Are they dif ferent, then? One man’ s from another , I
mean?”
“Er … not to look at, no.” I picked up my cup of tea and had
a sip, enjoying the delicate flavor . “They ar e  dif ferent, of
course—they carry the characteristics a man passes to his
of fspring… .” That was about as far as I thought it prudent to
go; he was suf ficiently staggered by my description of
fertilization; an explanation of genes and chromosomes might
be r ather excessive at the mom ent. “But you can’ t see the
dif ferences, even with a microscope.”
He grunted at t hat, swallowed the mouthful of toast, and
straightened up.
“Why are ye looking, then?”“Just cu riosity .” I gestured at the collection of bottles and
beakers on the countertop. “I wanted to see how fine the
resolution of the microscope was, what sorts of things I might
be able to see.”
“Oh, aye? And what then? W hat’ s the purpose of it, I
mean?”
“W ell, to  help me diagnose things. If I can take a sample of
a person’ s stool, for instance, and see that he has internal
parasites, then I’d know better what medicine to give him.”
Jamie looked as though he woul d have preferred not to hear
about such things right after bre akfast, but nodded. He drained
his beaker and set it down on the counter .
“A ye, that’ s sensible. I’ll leave ye to get on with it, then.”
He bent and kiss ed me briefly , then headed for the door . Just
short of it, though, he turned back.
“The, um, sperms …” he said, a little awkwardly .
“Y es?”
“Can ye  not take them out and give them decent burial or
something?”
I hid a smile in my teacup.
“I’ll tak e good care of them,”  I promised. “I always do,
don’ t I?”
 
THERE THEY WERE. Dark stalks, topped with clublike
spores, dense against the pale bright ground of the
microscope’ s field of view . Confirmation.
“Got the m.” I straightened up, slowly rubbing the small of
my back as I looked over my preparations.
A se ries of slides lay in a neat  fan beside the microscope,
each bea ring a dark smear in the  middle, a code written on the
end of each sl ide with a bit of wax from a candle stub.
Samples of mold, taken from damp corn bread, from spoiledbiscuit, and a bit of discarded pastry crust from the Hogmanay
venison pie. The crust had yielded the best growth by far; no
doubt it was the goose grease.
Of t he various test substrates I had tried, those were the
three resultant batches of mold that had contained the highest
proportion of Penicillium —or what I could be fairly sure was
Penicillium . There were a dismaying number of molds that
would grow on damp bread, in addition to several dozen
dif ferent strains of Penicillium , b ut the samples I had chosen
contained the best matches for the textbook pictures of
Penicillium  s porophytes that I had committed to memory ,
years ago, in another life.
I cou ld only hope that my memory wasn’ t faulty—and that
the strains of mold I had here were among those species that
produced a lar ge quantity of  penicillin, that I had not
inadvertently in troduced any virulent bacteria into the meat-
broth mixture, and that—well, I  could hope for a lot of things,
but there came a point when one abandoned hope for faith, and
trusted fate for charity .
A line of broth-filled bowls sat at the back of the
countertop, each covered with a square of muslin to prevent
things—insects, airborne particles, and mouse droppings, to
say nothing of m ice—from falling in. I had strained the broth
and boil ed it, then rinsed each bowl with boiling water before
filling it  with the steaming brown liquid. That was as close as I
could come to a sterile medium.
I had then taken scrapings from each of my best mold
samples, and swished the knife blade gently through the
cooled b roth, dissipating the clumps of soft blue as best I
could before covering the bowl with its cloth and leaving it to
incubate for several days.
Some of the cul tures had thrived; others had died. A couple
of bowls showed hairy dark gre en clumps that floated beneath
the surface like submer ged sea beasts, dark and sinister . Some
intruder—mold, bacterium, or perhaps a colonial alga—but
not the precious Penicillium .Some anonymous child had spilled one bowl; Adso had
knocked another onto the floor , maddened by the scent of
goose broth, and had lapped u p the contents, mold and all,
with ev ery evidence of enjoyment. There obviously hadn’ t
been anything toxic in that  one; I glanced down at the little
cat, curl ed up in a pool of sunsh ine on the floor , the picture of
somnolent well-being.
In th ree of the remaining bowls,  though, spongy velvet mats
of mottl ed blue covered the surf ace, and my examination of a
sample t aken from one of them had just confirmed that I did
indeed h ave what I sought. It wasn’ t the mold itself that was
antibiotic—it was a clear substance secreted by  the mold, as a
means of protecting itself from attack by bacteria. That
substance was penicillin, and that was what I wanted.
I had explained as much to Jamie, who sat on a stool
watching me as I poured the broth from each live culture
through another bit of gauze to strain it.
“So wha t ye’ve got there is broth that the mold has pissed
in, is that right?”
“W ell, if you insist on putting it that way , yes.” I gave him
an auste re glance, then took up the strained solution and began
distributing it into several small stoneware jars.
He nodded, pleased to have got it right.
“And the mold piss is what c ures sickness, aye? That’ s
sensible.”
“It is?”
“W ell, ye use other sorts of piss for medicine, so why not
that?”
He l ifted the big black casebook  in illustration. I had left it
open on the counter after re cording the latest batch of
experiments, and he had been amusing himself by reading
some of the e arlier pages, those recorded by the book’ s
previous owner , Dr . Daniel Rawlings.“Possibly Daniel Rawlings did— I  don’ t.” Hands busy , I
lifted m y chin at the entry on the open page. “What was he
using it for?”
“Electuary for the T r eatment o f Scurvy ,”  he read , finger
following the neat small lines of Rawlings’ s script. “T wo
Heads of Garlic, crushed with six Radishes, to which ar e
added Peru Balsam and ten dr ops of Myrr h, this Compound
mixed with the W ater of a Man-child so as to be conveniently
drunk.”
“Bar the last, it  sounds like a rather exotic condiment,” I
said, amused. “What would it go with best, do you think?
Jugged hare? Ragout of veal?”
“Nay , veal’ s too mild-flavored for radish. Hodgepodge of
mutton, maybe,” he replied. “Mutton will stand anything.” His
tongue flicked absentmindedly across his upper lip in
contemplation.
“Why a man-child, d’ye think, Sassenach? I’ve seen the
mention of it in  such receipts before—Aristotle has it so, and
so have some of the other ancient philosophers.”
I gave him a look, as I began tidying up my slides.
“W ell, it’ s certainly easier to col lect urine from a male child
than fro m a little girl; just try it, sometime. Oddly enough,
though, urine from baby boys is  v ery clean, if not entirely
sterile; i t may be that the anci ent philosophers noticed they
had better results with it in th eir formulae, because it was
cleaner t han the usual drinking w ater , if they were getting that
from public aqueducts and wells and the like.”
“Sterile meaning  that it hasna got the germs in it, not that it
doesna breed?” He gave my microscope a rather wary glance.
“Y es. O r rather—it doesn’ t breed germs, because there
aren’ t any there.”
W ith the countertop cleared, save for the microscope and
the jars of penicillin-containing broth—or at least I hoped
that’ s what they were—I began the preparations for sur gery ,taking down my small case of sur gical instruments, and
fetching a lar ge bottle of grain alcohol out of the cupboard.
I handed  this to Jamie, along wi th the small alcohol burner I
had contrived—an empty ink bottle, with a twisted wick of
waxed flax drawn up through a cork stuck into the neck.
“Fill that up for me, will you? Where are the boys?”
“In the kitchen, getting d runk.” He frowned in
concentration, carefully pouring the alcohol. “Is the urine of
wee lassies not clean, then? Or is it only harder to get?”
“No, actually , it isn’ t as clean as that of boys.” I unfolded a
clean clo th on the countertop and laid out two scalpels, a pair
of long- nosed forceps, and a b unch of small cautery irons. I
dug abo ut in the cupboard, unearthing a handful of cotton
pledgets. Cotton cloth was hideously expensive, but I had had
the good  fortune to cajole a sack of raw cotton bolls from
Farquard Campbell’ s wife, in return for a jar of honey .
“The …  um … r oute to the outs ide isn’ t quite so direct, you
might sa y . So the urine tends t o pick up bacteria and bits of
debris from the skin folds.” I lo oked over my shoulder at him
and smiled. “Not that you ought to go feeling superior on that
account.”
“I s houldna dream of it,” he a ssured me. “Are ye ready ,
then, Sassenach?”
“Y es, fetch them in. Oh, and bring the basin!”
He wen t out, and I turned to face the east window . It had
snowed heavily  the day before, but today was a fine, bright
day , clear and cold, with the sun reflecting of f the snow-
covered trees with the light of a million diamonds. I couldn’ t
have asked for better; I should need all the light I could get.
I s et the cautery irons in the small brazier to heat. Then I
fetched my amulet from the cabinet, put it round my neck so it
hung beneath the bodice of my gown, and took down the
heavy canvas apron from its hook behind the door . I put that
on, too, then went to the windo w and looked out at the cold
icing-sugar land scape, emptying  my mind, steadying my spiritfor what  I was a bout to do. It was not a dif ficult operation, and
I had done it ma ny times before. I had not, however , done it on
someone who was sitting upright and conscious, and that
always made a dif ference.
I hadn’ t done it in several years, either , and I closed my eyes
in recollection, visualizing the steps to take, feeling the
muscles of my hand twitch slightly in echo of my thoughts,
anticipating the movements I would make.
“God help me,” I whispered, and crossed myself.
Stumbling footsteps, nervous giggles, and the rumble of
Jamie’ s voice came from the hallway , and I turned round
smiling to greet my patients.
A month  of good food, clean clothes, and warm beds had
improved the Beardsleys immensely , in terms of both health
and appearance. They were both still small, skinny , and
slightly bowlegged, but the hollows of their faces had filled
out a bit, their d ark hair lay so ft against their skulls, and the
look of hunted wariness had faded a little from their eyes.
In fact, both pair s of dark eyes were presently a little glazed,
and Lizzie was obliged to grab Keziah by the arm in order to
prevent his stumbling over a stool. Jamie had Josiah gripped
firmly by the shoulder; he steered the boy over to me, then set
down the pudding basin he carried under his other arm.
“All right, are y ou?” I smiled at Josiah, looking deep into
his eyes, and sq ueezed his arm in reassurance. He swallowed
hard, an d gave me a rather ghastly grin; he wasn’ t drunk
enough not to be scared.
I sat him down, chatting soothingly , wrapped a towel round
his neck, and set the basin on his knees. I hoped he wouldn’ t
drop it; it was ch ina, and the on ly lar ge pudding basin we had.
T o my surprise,  Lizzie came to stand behind him, putting her
small hands on his shoulders.
“Are you sure y ou want to stay , Lizzie?” I asked dubiously .
“W e can manage all right, I think.” Jamie was thoroughly
accustomed to blood and genera l carnage; I didn’ t think Lizziecould ev er have  seen anything beyond the common sorts of
illness and perhaps a childbirth or two.
“Oh, no, ma’am; I’ll stay .” She  swallowed, too, but set her
small jaw bravely . “I promised Jo and Kezzie as I’d stay with
them, all through.”
I gla nced at Jam ie, who lifted o ne shoulder in the hint of a
shrug.
“All right, then.” I took one of the stoneware jars of
penicillin broth, poured it into two cups, and gave one to each
of the twins to drink.
Stomach acid would likely inactivate most of the penicillin,
but it would—I hoped—kill the bacteria in their throats.
Following sur gery , another dose washed over the raw surfaces
might prevent infection.
There w as no way of knowing exactly how much penicillin
there might be in the broth; I m ight be giving them massive
doses—or too little to matter . A t least I was reasonably sure
that wha tever penicillin was in the broth was presently active.
I had no means of stabilizing the antibiotic, and no notion how
long it might be potent—but fresh as it was, the solution was
bound to be me dicinally active, and there was a good chance
that the rest of t he broth would remain usable for at least the
next few days.
I would  make new cultures, a s soon as the sur gery was
complete; with luck, I could dose the twins regularly for three
or four days, and—with gre ater luck—thus prevent any
infections.
“Oh, so ye can drink the stuf f, can ye?” Jamie was eyeing
me cyn ically over Josiah’ s head. I had injected him with
penicillin follow ing a gunshot injury a few years before, and
he obviously now considered that I done so with purely
sadistic intent.
I eyed him back.
“Y ou ca n. Injectable penicillin is much more ef fective,
particularly in the case of an active infection. However , Ihaven’ t any means of injecting  it just at present, and this is
meant to prevent them getting an infection, not to cure one.
Now , if we’re quite  ready …”
I had  thought th at Jamie would restrain the patient, but both
Lizzie a nd Josia h insisted that this was not necessary; Josiah
would sit quite still, no matter what. Lizzie still gripped his
shoulders, her face paler than his, and her small knuckles
sharp and white.
I had examined both boys at len gth the day before, but had
another quick look before starting, using a tongue depressor
made of  a slip of ash wood. I showed Jamie how to use this to
keep the tongue pressed out of my way , then took up forceps
and scalpel and drew a long breath.
I loo ked deep in to Josiah’ s dark eyes, and smiled; I could
see two  tiny reflections of my face there, both looking
pleasantly competent.
“All right, then?” I asked.
He c ouldn’ t speak, with the ton gue depressor in his mouth,
but made a good-natured sort of grunt that I took for assent.
I nee ded to be quick, and I was. The preparations had taken
hours; the operation, no more th an a few seconds. I seized one
spongy red tonsil with the force ps, stretched it toward me, and
made se veral sm all, quick cuts, deftly separating the layers of
tissue. A trickle of blood was running out of the boy’ s mouth
and down his chin, but nothing serious.
I p ulled the gob bet of flesh free, dropped it into the basin,
and shifted my grip to the othe r tonsil, where I repeated the
process, only a trifle more slow ly in consequence of working
backhanded.
The whole thing couldn’ t have taken more than thirty
seconds per side. I drew the instruments out of Josiah’ s mouth,
and he goggled at me, astonish ed. Then he coughed, gagged,
leaned forward, and another small chunk of flesh bounced into
the basin with a small splat , together with a quantity of bright
red blood.I sei zed him by the nose and th rust his head back, stuf fed
pledgets into his mouth to absor b suf ficient blood that I could
see what I was doing, then snatched a small cautery iron and
took car e of the lar gest vessels; the smaller ones could clot and
seal on their own.
His eyes were watering ferociously , and his hands were
clamped in a dea th grip on the basin, but he had neither moved
nor mad e a sound. I hadn’ t expected that he would, after what
I had seen when Jamie removed the brand from his thumb.
Lizzie was still gripping his s houlders, her eyes tight shut.
Jamie re ached up and tapped h er on the elbow , and her eyes
sprang open.
“Here, a muirninn , h e’ s done. T ak e him and put him to his
bed, aye?”
Josiah declined to go, though. Mute as his brother , he shook
his h ead violently , and sat dow n upon a stool, where he sat
swaying and white-faced. He gave his brother a ghastly grin,
his teeth outlined in blood.
Lizzie hovered between the two boys, looking back and
forth between them. Jo caught her eye, and pointed firmly at
Keziah, who had assumed the patient’ s stool with an outward
show of  fortitude, chin upraised. She patted Jo gently on the
head, and went at once to take hold of Keziah’ s shoulders. He
turned his head and gave her a s mile of remarkable sweetness,
then ben t his head and kissed he r hand. Then he turned to me,
shutting his eyes and opening his mouth; he looked just like a
nestling begging for worms.
This ope ration w as somewhat more complicated; his tonsils
and adenoids were terribly enlar ged, and badly scarred from
chronic infection . It was a bloody business; both the towel and
my a pron were h eavily splattered before I had done. I finished
the cautery and looked closely at my patient, who was white as
the snow outside, and completely glassy-eyed.
“Are yo u all right?” I asked. He couldn’ t hear me, but my
concerned expression was clear enough. His mouth twitched in
what I thought was a gallant ef f ort to smile. He began to nod;then his eyes rolled up and he slid of f the stool, ending with a
crash at my feet. Jamie caught the basin, rather neatly .
I thought Lizzie might faint as well; there was blood
everywhere. She did totter a little, but went obediently to sit
down be side Jos iah when I told  her to. Josiah sat looking on,
squeezing Lizzie ’ s hand fiercely while Jamie and I picked up
the pieces.
Jamie ga thered Keziah up in his arms; the boy lay limp and
bloodstained, looking like a murdered child. Josiah rose to his
feet, his eyes resting anxiously on his brother ’ s unconscious
body .
“It w ill b e all right,” Jamie said to him, in tones of complete
confidence. “I told ye, my wif e is a great healer .” They all
turned then, and looked at me , smiling: Jamie, Lizzie, and
Josiah. I felt as though I ought to take a bow , but contented
myself with smiling, too.
“It will be all right,” I said, echoing Jamie. “Go and rest
now .”
The small procession left the ro om, more quietly than they
had come in, leaving me to put away my instruments and tidy
up.
I fel t very happy , glowing with the calm sort of satisfaction
that atte nds succ essful work. I h ad not done this sort of thing
for a long time; the exigen cies and limitations of the
eighteenth centu ry precluded most sur geries save those done
in emer gency . W ithout anesth esia and antibiotic, elective
sur gery was simply too dif ficult and too dangerous.
But now  I had penicillin, at least. And it would  be all right, I
thought, hummi ng to myself as I extinguished the flame of my
alcohol lamp. I had felt it in the ir flesh, touching the boys as I
worked. No germ would threaten them, no infection mar the
cleanliness of my work. There w as always luck in the practice
of medicine—but the odds had shifted today , in my favor .
“All shall be w ell,” I quoted to Adso, who had silently
materialized on the counter , where he was industriouslylicking o ne of the empty bowls, “and all shall be well, and all
manner of thing shall be well.”
The big black casebook lay o pen on the counter where
Jamie had left it. I turned to the back pages, where I had been
recording the progress of my experiments, and took up my
quill. La ter , afte r supper , I woul d write down the details of the
sur gery . For the moment … I p aused, then wrote Eur eka!  at
the bottom of the page.37
MAIL CALL
F ERGUS UNDER T OOK his bimonthly trip to Cross Creek in
mid-February , returning with salt, needles, indigo, a few more
miscellaneous n ecessities, and a bag full of mail. He arrived in
mid-afternoon, s o anxious to get back to Marsali that he stayed
only lon g enough for a quick mug of beer , leaving Brianna and
me to sort through the parcels, gloating over the bounty .
There was a thick stack of newspapers from W ilmington
and New Bern; a few from Phi ladelphia and Boston as well,
sent by friends in the north to Jocasta Cameron, and thence
forwarded on to us. I flipped through these; the most recent
was dated three months prior . N o matter; newspapers were as
good as novels, in a place where reading material was almost
literally scarcer than gold.
Jocasta had also sent two issue s of Brigham’ s Lady’ s Book
for Brianna, this being a periodical featuring drawings of
fashionable Lon don costumes,  and articles of interest to
women of such tastes.
“How to Clean Gold Lace,”  Brianna read, arching one
eyebrow as she opened one of these at random. “That’ s
something everybody ought to know how to do, for sure.”
“Look in the b ack,” I advised her . “That’ s where they
publish the articles about how to  avoid catching gonorrhea and
what to do about your husband’ s piles.”
The other brow went up, makin g her look just like Jamie,
presented with some highly questionable proposition.
“If my husband  gave me gono rrhea, I think he could just
worry about his own piles.” She  turned several pages, and the
eyebrows arched higher . “A Spur to V enus. This being a List of
infallible Remedys for Fatigue of the Male Member .”
I peered over her arm, my own eyebrows rising.“Goodness. A Doze n of Oysters, soaked overnight in a
Mixtur e of W ine and Milk, to be baked in a T art with Crushed
Almonds and Lobstermeat, and served with Spiced Peppers . I
don’ t know what it would do for the male member , but it
would probably give the gentleman attached to it violent
indigestion. Of course, we haven’ t got any oysters here
anyway .”
“No los s,” she assured me, frowning at the page in
concentration. “Oysters remind me of big plugs of snot.”
“That’ s only the raw ones; they’ re more or less edible when
cooked. Speaking of snot, though—where’ s Jemmy?”
“Asleep, or at least I hope so.” She cast a suspicious eye
toward the ceiling, but no untoward noises manifested
themselves, and she returned to the page.
“Here’ s one we could do. The T esticles of a Male Animal —
like you’d get them from a female animal— taken with six
lar ge Mushr ooms and boyled in Sour Ale until tender , then
both T esticles and Mushr ooms to be sliced thin, well-pepper ’d
and seasoned with Salt, then sprinkl’d with V inegar and
br own’d befor e the Fir e until cr usty . Da hasn’ t gotten around
to castrating Gideon yet, has he?”
“No. I’m sure he’d be happy to give you the objects in
question, if you want to try .”
She went very pink in the face, and cleared her throat with a
noise th at reminded me even more of her father . “I—um—
don’ t think we need that just  yet.”
I l aughe d and left her to her fasc inated perusal, turning back
to the mail.
There was a wra pped object addressed to Jamie that I knew
must be  a book, sent from a b ookseller in Philadelphia, but
with Lord John Grey’ s seal af fixed—a daub of blue wax
whimsically marked with a smiling half-moon and a single
star . Hal f our library came from  John Grey , who insisted that
he se nt us books  primarily for his own satisfaction, as he knewno o ne in the Colonies other than Jamie who was capable of
carrying on a decent discussion of literature.
There w ere several letters addressed to Jamie, too; I looked
these over carefully , in hopes of seeing his sister ’ s
characteristic sp iky script, but no such luck. There was a letter
from Ian , who wrote faithfully o nce a month, but nothing from
Jenny; there had been no word from her in the past six months;
not since Jamie had written reluctantly to tell her of the fate of
her youngest son.
I fro wned, setting the letters in a small stack at the edge of
the desk for Ja mie’ s later attention. I could scarcely blame
Jenny , under the circumstances—but I’d been there, after all. It
hadn’ t been Jamie’ s fault, even though he’d accepted the
blame fo r it. Y oung Ian had cho sen to stay with the Mohawk.
He was a man, if a young one , and the decision was his to
make. But then, I reflected, he had been still a lad when he left
his paren ts, and likely still was, so far as Jenny was concerned.
I kn ew that her silence hurt Jamie deeply , though. He
continued to write to her , as he always had, stubbornly putting
down a few paragraphs most evenings, putting by the pages
until som eone s hould be going down from the mountain, to
Cross C reek or W ilmington. He was never obvious about it,
but I saw the way his eyes flicked across each batch of letters,
looking for her writing, and the almost-invisible tightening at
the corner of his mouth when he didn’ t find it.
“Drat you, Jenny Murray ,” I murmured under my breath.
“For give him and have done with it!”
“Hmm?” Brianna had put down the periodical and was
examining a square letter , frowning as she did so.
“Nothing. What ’ s that you have there?” I put down the
letters I had been sorting and came to look.
“It’ s from  Lieutenant Hayes. What do you think he’ s writing
about?”
A tiny spurt of adrenaline tightened my belly . It must also
have shown on my unwary face, for Brianna put down theletter and looked at me, brow furrowed.
“What?” she demanded.
“Nothing,” I said, but it was too late. She stood looking at
me, a fist doubled on her hip, and raised one brow .
“Y ou are the most terrible liar , Mama,” she said tolerantly .
W ithout hesitation, she broke the seal.
“That’ s addressed to your father ,” I said, though my protest
lacked strength.
“Um-hm. So was the other one ,” she said, head bent over
the unfolded sheet of paper .
“What?” But I h ad come to her  side, and was reading over
her arm, even as I spoke.
 
Lieutenant Ar chibald Hayes
 Portsmouth, V ir ginia
 
Mr . James Fraser
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, North Car olina
 
January 18, 1771
 
Sir—
 
I wr ite to inform you that we ar e at pr esent in Portsmouth,
and like  to r emain her e until Spring. If you ar e acquainted
with any Sea C aptains willing to grant Passage to Perth for
forty Men, on p r omise of Recompense fr om the Army once
Port is r eached,  I should be glad to hear of it at your earliest
Convenience.
In th e Meantime, we have put ou r Hands to various Labors,
that we might sustain ourselves thr ough the W inter Months.Several of my Men have obtaine d W ork in the Repair of Boats,
which ar e plentiful her e. I myself am employed as Cook in a
local T a vern, but make shift to visit my Men r egularly in the
assorted Quarters wher e they ar e lodged, to make myself
acquainted with their State.
I called upon one such Lodging two Evenings ago. In course
of C onversation, one of the Me n—a Private Ogilvie, whom I
think you will know—mentioned to me a Conversation which
he had over hea r d in the Shipy ar d. As this pertained to one
Stephen Bonnet, who I r ecollect is of Inter est to you, I pass on
her ewith the Intelligence of the Matter .
Bonnet appears by Report to be a Smuggler , scar ce an
uncommon Occupation in the Ar ea. Howsoever , he seems to
deal in a higher Quality—and Quantity—of Contraband than
is the usual, and in Conse quence, the Natur e of his
Connexions appears also unusu al. Which is to say that certain
W ar ehouses on the Car olina Coast periodically contain Goods
of a Natur e not generally to be  found ther ein, and that such
V isitations coincide with Sightings of Stephen Bonnet in the
T averns and “Holes” nearby .
Private Ogilvie has little Recollection of specific Names
over hear d, as he had no Knowledge that Bonnet was of
Inter est, and mentioned the Ma tter to me only as a curious
Piece of Information. One Name mentioned was “Butler ,” he
says, but he is uncertain wheth er this Name had aught to do
with Bon net. Another name was “Kar en,” but Ogilvie does not
know whether this pertained to a W oman or per haps to a Ship.
A W ar ehouse which he supposed to be a particular Building
indicated in the Conversation—though he fr eely admits that he
is uncertain of this—happened to be at no gr eat Distance fr om
the S hipyar d, and when he told me of his Intelligence, I took it
upon myself to pass by this B uilding and make Enquiries
concerning its Ownership. The Building is owned jointly by
two Partners: one Ronald Priestly and one Phillip W ylie. I
have no Information concerning either Man at Pr esent, but
will continue my Enquiries as my T ime permits.Having learned the Above, I ha ve made an Effort to solicit
Conversation concerning Bonnet in the local T apr ooms, but to
little Eff ect. I should say that the  Name is known, but few wish
to speak of him.
 
 
Y our most obedient servant,
 Ar chibald Hayes, Lieutenant
 67th Highland Regiment  
 All the normal n oises of the house were still around us, but
Bree an d I seemed suddenly to be together in a small, clear
bubble of silence, where time had abruptly stopped.
I fel t reluctant t o put down the letter , for that would mean
that time would go on, and something must at that point be
done. At the sam e time, I wanted not merely to put it down but
to throw it into the fire, and pretend neither of us had seen it.
Then Jemmy began to cry upstairs, Brianna jerked in
response and turned toward th e door , and things began to
move normally again.
I set the letter down in a space by itself, and returned to the
rest of the mail, setting things tidily aside for Jamie’ s later
attention, putting the newspapers and periodicals into a neat
stack, un tying th e string round t he parcel; as I had supposed, it
was a book—T obias Smollett’ s The Exp edition of Humphr ey
Clinker .  I  woun d up the string and tuc ked it into my pocket,
while al l the time a small “Now-what, now-what” beat in the
back of my mind like a metronome.
Brianna came back, carrying Jemmy , who was red and
creased from his nap, and obv iously in that state of mind
where one rouses from sleep to a dazed irritation at the
intrusive demands of consciousness. I sympathized.
She sat down, pulled down the n eck of her shift, and put the
baby to her breast. His cries ceased like magic, and I had a
moment of intense wishfulness that I could do something thatimmediately ef fective for her . As it was, she looked pale, but
composed.
I had to say something.
“I am sorry , swe etheart,” I said. “I tried to stop him—Jamie,
I me an. I know he didn’ t mean you to know about it. T o worry
about it.”
“That’ s okay . I already knew .” R eaching across one-handed,
she slid one of the ledgers out of the stack Jamie kept on his
desk, an d holdin g it by the spine, shook out a folded letter . She
nodded over Jemmy’ s head at it.
“Look at that. I found it while you were gone with the
militia.”
I r ead Lord John ’ s account of th e duel between Bonnet and
Captain Marsde n, feeling a coldness gather beneath my
breastbone. I hadn’ t been un der any illusions regarding
Bonnet’ s charac ter , but I hadn’ t known that he had that much
skill. I  greatly preferred dangerous criminals to be
incompetent.
“I th ought maybe Lord John w as just answering a casual
question for Da—but I guess n ot. What do you think?” Bree
asked. H er tone was cool, almos t detached, as though she were
inquiring my opinion of a hair -ribbon or a shoe-buckle. I
looked up at her sharply .
“What do you  think?” It was Brianna who was important in
this—or that was my  opinion.
“About what?” Her eyes slid away from mine, glancing of f
the lette r , then fastening themselves on the curve of Jemmy’ s
head.
“Oh, the price of tea in China, for starters,” I said, with
some irritation. “Going on prom ptly to the topic of Stephen
Bonnet, if you like.” It felt oddly shocking to say the name out
loud; we had all avoided it for months, by unspoken consent.
Her teeth were fastened in her lower lip. She kept her eyes
fixed on the flo or for a mome nt, then shook her head, veryslightly .
“I don’ t  want to hear about him, or think about him,” she
said, very evenly . “And if I ever  see him again, I might just …
just …” She shu ddered violently , then looked up at me, eyes
fierce and sudden.
“What’ s wr ong  with him?” she cried. “How could he do
this?” H er clenc hed fist struck h er thigh, and Jemmy , startled,
lost his grip and began to wail.
“Y our father , you mean—not Bonnet.”
She nodded, pressing Jemmy back toward her breast, but he
had picked up her agitation, and was squirming and howling. I
reached down and took him, ho isting him to my shoulder and
patting his back in automatic comfort. Bree’ s hands, left
empty , fastened on her knees, crumpled the cloth of her skirt.
“Why co uldn’ t he leave Bonnet alone?” She had to raise her
voice to  be heard above the baby’ s wailing, and the bones of
her face  seemed  to have shifted , so that the skin looked tight-
drawn over them.
“Because he’ s a man—and a bloody Highlander ,” I said.
“‘Live and let live’ is not in their vocabulary .” Milk was
dripping slowly from her nipple onto the fabric of her shift; I
reached out one-handed and twe aked the cloth up to cover her .
She put a hand over her breast  and pressed hard to stop the
milk.
“What does he mean to do, though? If he finds him.”
“ When  he finds him, I’m afraid,” I said reluctantly .
“Because I don’ t believe he’ s g oing to stop looking until he
does. As to wha t he’ll do then … well … then he’ll kill him, I
suppose.” It sounded oddly of fhand, put that way , and yet I
didn’ t see any other way of putting it, really .
“Y ou m ean he’l l try  to kill him.” She glanced at the letter
from Lord John, then away , swallowing. “What if he …”
“Y our father has a great dea l of experience in killing
people,” I said bleakly . “In fa ct, he’ s awfully good at it—though he hasn’ t done it for some time.”
This did n’ t seem to reassure her to any great extent. It
hadn’ t reassured me, either .
“It’ s such a big place,” she murmured, shaking her head.
“America, I mean. Why couldn’ t he just—go away? Far
away?” An excellent question. Jemmy was snorting, rubbing
his face furiously in my shoulder , but no longer screaming.
“I was rather ho ping that Stephen Bonnet would have the
good sense to g o and pursue h is smuggling in China or the
W est Indies, but I suppose he has local connections that he
didn’ t want to abandon.” I shrugged, patting Jemmy .
Brianna let go of her skirt and reached for the baby , who
was still twisting like an eel.
“W ell, he doesn’ t know he has Sherlock Fraser and his
sidekick Lord John W atson on his trail, after all.” It was a
brave try , but h er lip trembled as she said it, and she bit the
lower one again. I hated to cause her more worry , but there
was no point now in avoiding things.
“No, but he very likely will, before too long,” I said
reluctantly . “Lord John is very discreet—Private Ogilvie isn’ t.
If Jamie goes on  asking questions—and he will, I’m afraid—
his interest is going to be rather widely known before long.” I
wasn’ t sure whether Jamie had hoped to discover Bonnet
quickly and take him unawares —or whether his plan was to
smoke B onnet out into the open by means of his inquiries. Or
whether he meant in fact to draw Bonnet’ s attention
deliberately , and  cause him to come to us . Th e las t possib ility
made m e a little weak in the kn ees, and I sat down heavily on
the stool.
Brianna drew a slow , deep breath and let it out through her
nose, settling the baby back at her breast.
“Does Roger know? I mean, is he in on this—this—bloody
vendetta ?”
I shook my head.“I do n’ t think so . I mean, I’m sure not. He would have told
you—wouldn’ t he?”
Her expression eased a little, tho ugh a shadow of doubt still
darkened her eyes.
“I’d hat e to think he’d keep something like that from me.
On the other hand,” she added, voice sharpening a little in
accusation, “ you  did.”
I felt the sting of it, and pressed my lips tight together .
“Y ou said that you didn’ t want to think of Stephen Bonnet,”
I said, looking a way from the tu rbulence of feeling in her face.
“Naturally not. I—we—didn’ t want you to have to.” W ith a
certain feeling of inevitability ,  I realized that I was being
drawn into the vortex of Jamie’ s intentions, through no
consent of my own.
“Now , l ook,” I said briskly , sitting up straight and giving
Brianna a sharp look. “ I  don ’ t th ink it’ s a good idea to look for
Bonnet, and I’ve done all I could to discourage Jamie from
doing it . In fact,” I added ruefully , with a nod toward Lord
John’ s letter , “I thought I had  discouraged him. But apparently
not.”
A look of determination was hardening Brianna’ s mouth,
and she settled herself more solidly in the chair .
“ I’ll  bloody discourage him,” she said.
I gave her a look, considering. If anyone had the necessary
stubbornness an d force of char acter to sway Jamie from his
chosen p ath, it would be his daughter . That was, however , a
very lar ge “if.”
“Y ou can try ,” I said, a little dubiously .
“Don’ t I have the right?” Her initial shock had vanished,
and her features were back und er control, her expression cold
and hard. “Isn’ t it for me to s ay whether I want … what I
want?”
“Y es,” I  agreed,  a twinge of uneasiness rippling down my
back. Fa thers were inclined to think they had rights, too. Sowere husbands. But perhaps that was better left unsaid.
A momentary silence fell between us, broken only by
Jemmy’ s noises , and the calling of crows outside. Almost by
impulse, I asked the question that had risen to the surface of
my mind.
“Brianna. What do you want? Do you want Stephen Bonnet
dead?”
She glanced at me, then away , looking out the window
while she patted Jemmy’ s back.  She didn’ t blink. Finally , her
eyes closed briefly , then opened to meet mine.
“I can’ t,” she sa id, low-voiced. “I’m afraid if I ever let that
thought in my mind … I’d never be able to think about
anything else, I’d want it so much. And I will be damned  if I’ll
let … him … ruin my life that way .”
Jemmy gave a resounding belch, and spit up a little milk.
Bree had an old linen towel across her shoulder , and deftly
wiped h is chin with it. Calmer now , he had lost his look of
vexed incompre hension, and was concentrating intently on
something over his mother ’ s sho ulder . Following the direction
of his clear blue gaze, I saw the shadow of a spiderweb, high
up in the corner of the window . A gust of wind shook the
window frame, and a tiny spot m oved in the center of the web,
very slightly .
“Y eah,” Brianna  said, very softly . “I do want him dead. But
I want Da and Roger alive, more.”38
THE DREAMTIME
R OGER HAD GONE to sing for Joel MacLeod’ s nephew’ s
wedding, as arranged at the Gat hering, and come home with a
new prize, which he was anxious to commit to paper before it
should escape.
He l eft h is mudd y boots in the kitchen, accepted a cup of tea
and a raisin tart from Mrs. Bug, and went directly to the study .
Jamie w as there, writing letters; he glanced up with an absent
murmur of acknowledgment, but then returned to his
composition, a slight frown between his heavy brows as he
formed the letters, hand cramped and awkward on the quill.
There was a small, three-shelf bookcase in Jamie’ s study ,
which held the entire library o f Fraser ’ s Ridge. The serious
works occupied  the top shelf: a volume of Latin poetry ,
Caesar ’ s Commentaries , the Meditations  of Marcus Aurelius, a
few other classic works, Dr . Brickell’ s Natural History of
North Car olina , lent by the Governor and never returned, and
a school book on  mathematics, much abused, with Ian Murray
the Y ounger  written on the flyleaf in a staggering hand.
The middle shelf was given over to more light-minded
reading: a small selection of romances, slightly ragged with
much re ading, fe aturing Robinson Crusoe ; T om Jones , in a set
of seven  small, leather -covered volumes; Roderick Random , in
four volumes; and Sir Henry Richardson’ s monstrous Pamela ,
done in two gigantic octavo bindings—the first of these
decorated with multiple bookm arks, ranging from a ragged
dried maple leaf to a folded penwiper , these indicating the
points which various readers had reached before giving up,
either te mporarily or permanently . A copy of Don Quixote  in
Spanish, ratty , but much less worn, since only Jamie could
read it.The bot tom shelf held a copy of Dr . Sam. Johnson’ s
Dictionary , Jamie’ s ledgers and account books, several of
Brianna’ s sketchbooks, and the slender buckram-bound journal
in which Roger recorded the w ords of unfamiliar songs and
poems acquired at ceilidhs and hearthsides.
He t ook a stool on the other side  of the table Jamie used as a
desk, and cut a new quill for th e job, taking care with it; he
wanted these records to be reada ble. He didn’ t know precisely
what use the c ollection might be put to, but he had been
ingrained with the scholar ’ s instinctive value for the written
word. Perhaps this was only for his own pleasure and use—but
he l iked the fee ling that he might be leaving something to
posterity as well, and took pain s both to write clearly and to
document the circumstances under which he had acquired each
song.
The study was peaceful, with no more than Jamie’ s
occasional sigh as he stopped to rub the kinks from his
cramped hand. After a while, Mr . Bug came to the door , and
after a brief col loquy , Jamie put away his quill and went out
with the factor . Roger nodded vaguely as they bade him
farewell, mind occupied with the ef fort of recall and recording.
When he finished, a quarter of an hour later , his mind was
pleasantly empty , and he sat back, stretching the ache from his
shoulders. He waited a few moments for the ink to be
thoroughly dry before he put  the book away , and while
waiting, went to pull out one of Brianna’ s sketchbooks from
the bottom shelf.
She wouldn’ t mind if he looke d; she had told him he was
welcome to look at them. At the same time, she showed him
only the occasional drawing, those she was pleased with, or
had done especially for him.
He t urned over the pages of the  notebook, feeling the sense
of curiosity and respect that att ends the prying into mystery ,
searching for small glimpses of the workings of her mind.
There were lots of portrait sketches of the baby in this one, a
study in circles.He paus ed at one small sketch, caught by memory . It was a
sketch o f Jemm y sleeping, back turned, his small sturdy body
curled u p in a co mma. Adso the cat was curled up beside him,
in precis ely similar fashion, his chin perched on Jemmy’ s fat
little foot, eyes slits of comato se bliss. He remembered that
one.
She dre w Jemmy often—nearly every day , in fact—but
seldom fullface.
“Babies don’ t really have faces,” she had told him, frowning
critically at her of fspring, who was industriously gnawing on
the leather strap of Jamie’ s powder horn.
“Oh, aye? And what’ s that on t he front of his head, then?”
He had lain flat on the floor with the baby and the cat,
grinning up at her , which made it easier for her to look down
her nose at him.
“I mean, strictly speaking. Naturally they have faces, but
they all look alike.”
“It’ s a wise father that kens his  own child, eh?” he joked,
regretting it instantly , as he saw  the shadow cloud her eyes. It
passed, quick as a summer c loud, but it had been there,
nonetheless.
“W ell, n ot from an artist’ s poi nt of view .” She drew the
blade of  her penknife at an angl e across the tip of the charcoal
stick, sharpening the point. “They don’ t have any bones—that
you can see, I mean. And it’ s th e bones that you use to show
the shape of a face; without bones, there isn’ t much there.”
Bones o r not, she had a remarkable knack for capturing the
nuances of expression. He smile d at one sketch; Jemmy’ s face
wore t he aloof and unmistakable expression of one
concentrating hard on the production of a truly terrible diaper .
Beyond the pictures of Jemmy , there were several pages of
what looked like engineering diagrams. Finding these of no
great interest, he bent and repl aced the book, then drew out
another .He realized at once that it was not a sketchbook. The pages
were dense with Brianna’ s tidy , angular writing. He flipped
curiously through the pages; it wasn’ t really a diary , but
appeared to be a sort of record of her dreams.
Last night I dr eamed that I shaved my legs.  Roger smiled at
the inconsequence, but a vision of Brianna’ s shins, long-boned
and glimmering, kept him reading.
 
I wa s using Dad dy’ s razor and his shaving cr eam, and I was
thinking that he’d complain when he found out, but I wasn’ t
worried. The shaving cr eam c ame in a white can with r ed
letters, and it sa id Old Spice on the label. I don’ t know if ther e
ever was shaving cr eam like that, but that’ s what Daddy
always smelled of, Old Spice aftershave and cigar ette smoke.
He didn ’ t smoke, but the people  he worked with did, and his
jackets a lways smelled like the air in the living r oom after a
party .
 
Roger breathed in, half-conscious of the remembered scents
of f resh baking and tea, furnit ure polish and ammonia. No
cigarettes at the decorous gather ings held in the manse’ s parlor
—and yet his father ’ s jackets too had smelled of smoke.
 
Once G ayle told me that she’d  gone out with Chris and
hadn’ t had time to shave her legs, and she spent the whole
evening trying to keep him fr om putting his hand on her knee,
for fear he’d fe el the stubble. Afterwar d, I never shaved my
legs wit hout thinking of that, a nd I’d run my fingers up my
thigh, to  see whether I could fe el anything ther e, or if it was
okay to stop shaving at my kneecaps.
 
The hair  on Brianna’ s thighs was so fine it could not be felt;
and only  seen when she rose up  naked over him, with the sun
behind her gilding her body , gleaming through that delicate
nimbus of secrecy . The thought  that no one would ever see itbut hims elf gave  him a small glow of satisfaction, like a miser
counting each hair of gold and copper , enjoying his secret
fortune undisturbed by any fear of theft.
He turned the page, feeling unspeakably guilty at this
intrusion, yet drawn irresistibly  by the ur ge to penetrate the
intimacy of her dreams, to kno w the images that filled her
sleeping mind.
The ent ries were undated, but each entry began with the
same words: Last night, I dr eamed.
 
Last nig ht I dr eamed that it was raining. Har dly surprising,
since it was  raining, and has been for two days. When I went
out to the privy this morning, I had to jump over a huge puddle
by th e door , and sank up to the  ankles in the soft spot by the
blackberries.
W e went to bed  last night with  the rain pounding on the
r oof. It was so nice to curl up with Roger and be warm in our
bed, after a wet, chilly day . Raindr ops fell down the chimney
and hiss ed in the fir e. W e told each other stories fr om our
youths—maybe that’ s wher e th e dr eam came fr om, thinking
about the past.
Ther e w asn’ t much to the dr eam, just that I was looking out
a wi ndow in Bo ston, watching the cars go past, thr owing up
big s heets of wa ter fr om their wheels, and hearing the swoosh
and rush of the ir tir es on the  wet str eets. I woke up still
hearing that sound; it was so clear in my mind that I actually
went to the win dow and peeked out, half expecting to see a
busy str eet, full of cars rushin g thr ough the rain. It was a
shock to see sp ruce tr ees and chestnuts and wild grass and
cr eepers, and hear nothing bu t the soft patter of raindr ops
bouncing and tr embling on the bur dock leaves.
Everything was so vivid a gr een, so lush and over gr own,
that it seemed l ike a jungle, or an alien planet—a place I’d
never been, with nothing I r eco gnized, though in fact I see it
every day .All day , I’ve hear d the secr et  rush of tir es in the rain,
somewher e behind me.
 
Feeling guilty , but fascinated, Roger turned the page.
 
Last nig ht I dr eamed of driving my car . It was my own blue
Mustang, and I was driving fast down a winding r oad, thr ough
the mountains— these mountains . I never have driven thr ough
these mountains, though I have been thr ough the mountain
woodlands in upstate New Y ork.  It was definitely her e, though;
I knew it was the Ridge.
It was so r eal. I can still feel my  hair snapping in the wind,
the wheel in m y hands, the vibration of the motor and the
rumble of tir es on the pavement. But that sensation—as well as
the c ar—is impossible. It can’ t happen now , anywher e but in
my head. And yet ther e it is, embedded in the cells of my
memory , as r eal as the privy outside, waiting to be called back
to life at the flick of a synapse.
That’ s another oddness. Nobody knows what a synapse is,
except me and M ama and Roger . What a strange feeling; as
though we thr ee shar e all kinds of secr ets.
Anyway , that particular bit—th e driving—is traceable to a
known memory . But what about the dr eams, equally vivid,
equally r eal, of things I do not know of my waking self. Ar e
some dr eams the memories of things that haven’ t happened
yet?
 
 
Last night I dr eamed that I made love with Roger .
 
He had been about to close the book, feeling a sense of guilt
at his intrusion. The guilt was still there—in spades—but
totally insuf ficie nt to overcome his curiosity . He glanced at thedoor , bu t the house was quiet; women were moving about in
the kitchen, but no one was near the study .
 
Last night I dr eamed that I made love with Roger .
It was gr eat; fo r once I wasn’ t thinking, wasn’ t watching
fr om the outside, like I always do. In fact, I wasn’ t even awar e
of myse lf for a long time. The r e was just this … very wild,
exciting stuff, and I was part of it and Roger was part of it, but
ther e wasn’ t any him or me, just us.
The funny thing is that it was Ro ger , but I didn’ t think of him
like that. Not by his name—not that name. It was like he had
another name, a secr et, r eal one—but I knew what it was.
(I’ve alw ays tho ught everybody  has that kind of name, the
kind that isn’ t a wor d. I know who I am—and whoever it is, her
name isn’ t “Brianna.” It’ s me, th at’ s all. “Me” works fine as a
substitute for what I mean—b ut how do you write down
someone else’ s secr et name?)
I kn ew Roger ’ s r eal name, thou gh, and that seemed to be
why it was working. And it r ea lly was working, too; I didn’ t
think ab out it or worry about it,  and I only thought towar d the
very end, Hey , it’ s happening!
And then  it did happen and eve rything dissolved and shook
and thr obbed—
 
Here she  had blacked out the re st of the line, with a small,
cross note in the mar gin, that said,
 
W ell, none of th e books I’ve ever r ead could describe it,
either!
 
Despite his shocked fascination , Roger laughed aloud, then
choked it of f, glancing round hastily to see that he was still
alone. T here were noises in t he kitchen, but no sound offootsteps in the hall, and his ey es went back to the page like
iron filings drawn to a magnet.
 
I h ad my eyes cl osed—in the dr eam, that is—and I was lying
ther e with little electric shocks s till going off, and I opened my
eyes and it was Stephen Bonnet inside me.
It was such a shock it woke m e up. I felt like I’d been
scr eaming—my thr oat was all raw—but I couldn’ t have been,
because Roger and the baby we r e sound asleep. I was hot all
over , so hot I was sweating, but I was cold, too, and my heart
was pounding. It took a long ti me befor e things settled down
enough for me to go back to sleep; all the bir ds wer e carrying
on.
That’ s what finally let me go back to sleep, in fact—the
bir ds. Da—and Daddy , too, com e to think of it—told me that
the j ays and cr ow s give alarm calls, but songbir ds stop singing
when so meone comes near , so when you’r e in a for est, you
listen for that. W ith so much racket in the tr ees by the house, I
knew it was safe—nobody was ther e.
 
There was a small blank space at the foot of the page. He
turned it, feeling his palms swe at and his heartbeat heavy in
his ears. The wr iting resumed at the top of the page. Before,
the w riting had b een fluid, almost hasty , the letters flattened as
they rac ed across the page. Here , they were formed with more
care, ro unded and upright, as though the first shock of the
experience were  spent, and she had returned, with a stubborn
caution, to think further about it.
 
I tried to for get it, but that didn’ t work. It kept coming back
and com ing bac k into my mind, so I finally went out by myself
to work in the herb shed. Mama keeps Jemmy when I’m ther e
because he gets in things, so I k new I could be alone. So I sat
down in  the middle of all the hanging bunches and closed my
eyes and  tried to r emember ev ery single thing about it, andthink to myself about the diffe r ent parts, “That’ s okay ,” or
“That’ s just a dr eam.” Because Stephen Bonnet scar ed me,
and I felt sick w hen I thought o f the end—but I r eally wanted
to r emem ber how . How it felt, and how I did it, so maybe I can
do it again, with Roger .
But I keep hav ing this feeling that I can’ t, unless I can
r emember Roger ’ s secr et name.
 
There the entry stopped. The dr eams continued on the next
page, bu t Roger didn’ t read fur ther . He closed the book very
carefully and slid it back behind the others on the shelf. He
rose to his feet and stood look ing out the window for some
time, un consciously rubbing his sweating palms over the
seams of his breeches.P AR T F IVE
‘T is Better to Marry Than Burn39
IN CUPID’S GROVE
D O YE THINK they’ll share a bed?”
Jamie d idn’ t raise his voice, b ut he’d made no ef fort to
lower it,  either . Luckily , we were standing at the far end of the
terrace, too far a way for the brid al couple to hear . A number of
heads turned in our direction, though.
Ninian Bell Hamilton was ope nly staring at us. I smiled
brightly and fluttered my closed fan at the elderly Scotsman in
greeting, meanwhile giving Jamie a swift nudge in the ribs.
“A nice, respectable sort of thing for a nephew to be
wondering about his aunt,” I said under my breath.
Jamie shifted out of elbow range and lifted an eyebrow at
me.
“What’ s respectable to do with it? They’ll be married. And
well abo ve the age of consent, b oth o’ them,” he added, with a
grin at Ninian, w ho went bright pink with smothered mirth. I
didn’ t know how old Duncan Innes was, but my best guess put
him in his mid-fifties. Jamie’ s aunt Jocasta had to be at least a
decade older .
I co uld just see  Jocasta over the heads of the intervening
crowd, graciously accepting the greetings of friends and
neighbors at the far end of the terrace. A tall woman gowned
in ru sset wool, she was flanked  by huge stone vases holding
sprays o f dried goldenrod, and her black butler Ulysses stood
at her shoulder ,  dignified in w ig and green livery . W ith an
elegant white lace cap crowning her bold MacKenzie bones,
she was undeniably the queen of River Run Plantation. I stood
on tiptoe, searching for her consort.
Duncan was slightly shorter than  Jocasta, but he should still
have bee n visible. I’d seen him earlier in the morning, dressed
in a n absolute b laze of Highland finery , in which he lookeddashing, if terribly self-conscious. I craned my neck, putting a
hand on Jamie’ s arm to keep my balance. He grabbed my
elbow to steady me.
“What are ye looking for , Sassenach?”
“Duncan. Shouldn’ t he be with your aunt?”
No one could te ll by looking that Jocasta was blind—that
she stoo d between the big vases to keep her bearings, or that
Ulysses was there to whisper in her ear the names of
approaching guests. I saw her le ft hand drift outward from her
side, touch empty air , and drift back. Her face didn’ t change,
though; she smiled and nodded, saying something to Judge
Henderson.
“Run away before the wedding night?” suggested Ninian,
lifting h is chin and both eyebrows in an ef fort to see over the
crowd without standing on his toes. “I’d maybe feel a bit
nervous at the prospect myself. Y our aunt’ s a handsome
woman, Fraser , but she could fr eeze the ballocks of f the King
o’ Japan, and she wanted to.”
Jamie’ s mouth twitched.
“Duncan’ s may be caught short,” he said. “Whatever the
reason. He’ s been to the nec essary house four times this
morning.”
My own  brows went up at this. Duncan suf fered from
chronic constipation; in fact, I had brought a packet of senna
leaves and cof fee-plant roots fo r him, in spite of Jamie’ s rude
remarks about what constituted  a suitable wedding present.
Duncan must be more nervous than I’d thought.
“W ell, it ’ s no going to be any great surprise to my aunt, and
her wi’ three husbands before him,” Jamie said, in reply to a
murmured remark of Hamilton’ s. “It’ll be the first time
Duncan’ s been married, though . That’ s a shock to any man. I
remember my own wedding ni ght, aye?” He grinned at me,
and I felt the heat rise in my cheeks. I remembered it, too—
vividly .“Don’ t you think it’ s rather wa rm out here?” I flicked my
fan into an arc of ivory lace, and fluttered it over my cheeks.
“Really?” he said, still grinning at me. “I hadna taken notice
of it.”
“Duncan has,” Ninian put in. His wrinkled lips pursed
closed, holding in the laughter . “Sweating like a steamed
pudding when I saw him last.”
It was in fact a l ittle chilly out, in spite of the cast-iron tubs
full of hot emb ers that sent th e sweet smell of applewood
smoke wisping up from the corn ers of the stone terrace. Spring
had sprung, and the lawns were  fresh and green, as were the
trees along the river , but the morning air still held a sharp nip
of winter ’ s bite. It was  stil l winter in the mountains, and we
had encountered  snow as far south as Greensboro on our
journey toward River Run, though daf fodils and crocuses
poked bravely through it.
It w as a clear , bright March day now , though, and house,
terrace, lawn, and garden were thronged with wedding guests,
glowing in their finery like an unseasonable flight of
butterflies. Jocasta’ s wedding was clearly going to be the
social e vent of the year , so far as Cape Fear society was
concerned; there must be nearly two hundred people here,
from places as far distant as Halifax and Edenton.
Ninian said something to Jamie in low-voiced Gaelic, with a
sidelong glance at me. Jamie re plied with a remark elegant in
phraseology and  extremely crude in content, blandly meeting
my eye as the older man choked with laughter .
I d id in fact und erstand Gaelic fairly well by now , but there
were moments when discretion was the better part of valor . I
spread m y fan wide, concealing  my expression. T rue, it took
some pr actice to  achieve grace with a fan, but it was a useful
social tool to someone cursed, as I was, with a glass face. Even
fans had their limits, though.
I turned away from the conversation, which gave every
promise of degenerating further , and surveyed the party forsigns of  the absent bridegroom.  Perhaps Duncan was truly ill,
and not with nerves. If so, I should have a look at him.
“Phaedre! Have you seen Mr . Innes this morning?” Jocasta’ s
body servant was flying past, her arms full of tablecloths, but
came abruptly to a halt at my call.
“Ain’ t seen Mister Duncan sin ce breakfast, ma’am,” she
said, with a shake of her neatly capped head.
“How did he see m then? Did he eat well?” Breakfast was an
ongoing af fair of several hours, the resident guests serving
themselves from the sideboard and eating as they chose. It was
more likely nerves than food poisoning that was troubling
Duncan’ s bowels, but some of the sausage I had seen on the
sideboard struck me as highly suspect.
“No, ma’am, nary a bite.” Phaedre’ s smooth brow puckered;
she was fond of Duncan. “Cook tried to tempt him with a nice
coddled egg, but he just shook h is head and looked peaked. He
did take a cup of rum punch, though,” she said, seeming
somewhat cheered at the thought.
“A ye, that’ll settle him,” Ninian remarked, overhearing.
“Dinna trouble yourself, Mrs. Claire; Duncan will be well
enough.”
Phaedre curtsied and made of f toward the tables being set
up under the trees, starched apron flapping in the breeze. The
succulent aroma of barbecuing pork wafted through the chill
spring a ir , and fragrant clouds o f hickory smoke rose from the
fires near the s mithy , where haunches of venison, sides of
mutton, and broiled fowl in the ir dozens turned on spits. My
stomach gur gled loudly in anticipation, despite the tight lacing
of my stays.
Neither Jamie nor Ninian appe ared to notice, but I took a
discreet step away , turning to survey the lawn that stretched
from the  terrace  to the river landing. I wasn’ t so positive of the
virtues of rum, particularly taken on an empty stomach.
Granted, Duncan  wouldn’ t be th e first groom to go to the altar
in an advanced state of intoxication, but still …Brianna, brilliant in blue wool the color of the spring sky ,
was standing near one of the m arble statues that graced the
lawn, Jemmy balanced on her h ip, deep in conversation with
Gerald Forbes, the lawyer . She also had a fan, but at the
moment, it was being put to bett er use than usual—Jemmy had
got h old of it and was munching on the ivory handle, a look of
fierce concentration on his small pink face.
Of cours e, Brianna had less need  of good fan technique than
I did, she having inherited Jamie’ s ability to hide all thoughts
behind a  mask of pleasant bla ndness. She had the mask in
place no w , whic h gave me a good idea of her opinion of Mr .
Forbes. Where was Roger? I w ondered. He’d been with her
earlier .
I turned  to ask Jamie what he thought of this epidemic of
disappearing hu sbands, only to discover that he had joined it.
Ninian Hamilton had turned away to talk to someone else, and
the spac e at my side was now occupied by a pair of slaves,
staggering under the weight of a fresh demijohn of brandywine
as they headed for the refreshment tables. I stepped hastily out
of their way , and turned to look for Jamie.
He had vanished into the crowd like a grouse into heather . I
turned slowly , surveying the terrace and lawns, but there
wasn’ t a  sign of him among the milling crowd. I frowned
against the bright sunlight, shading my eyes with my hand.
It wasn’ t as though he were inconspicuous, after all; a
Highlander with the blood of V iking giants in his veins, he
stood head and shoulders above most men, and his hair caught
the s un like poli shed bronze. T o add icing to the cake, he was
dressed today in his best to celebrate Jocasta’ s wedding—a
belted plaid in crimson and bla ck tartan, with his good gray
coat and  weskit,  and the gaudies t pair of red-and-black Ar gyle
stockings ever to grace a Scotsman’ s shins. He should have
stood out like a splotch of blood on fresh linen.
I didn’ t find him, but did see a familiar face. I stepped of f
the terrace and eeled my way through the knots of partygoers.“Mr . MacLenna n!” He turned toward my call, looking
surprised, but then a cordial s mile spread across his blunt
features.
“Mrs. Fraser!”
“How lovely to see you,” I said,  giving him my hand. “How
are you?” He lo oked much better than when last seen, clean
and dec ent in a dark suit and plain laced hat. There were
hollows in his cheeks, though, and a shadow behind his eyes
that remained even as he smiled at me.
“Oh … I’m well enough, ma’am. Quite well.”
“Are you—where are you living, these days?” That seemed
a more delicate  question than “ Why aren’ t you in jail?” No
fool, he answered both questions.
“Och, well, your husband was sae kind as to write to Mr .
Ninian there”—he nodded across the lawn toward the lean
figure of Ninian Bell Hamilton , who was in the middle of a
heated discussio n of some kin d—”and to tell him of my
trouble. Mr . Ninian’ s a great friend to the Regulation, ken—
and a great friend of Judge Henderson’ s, forbye.” He shook his
head, mouth pursed in puzzlement.
“I c ouldna say quite how it fel l out, but Mr . Ninian came
and fetched me out of the gao l, and took me into his own
household. So I am there, for the present. ‘T was kind—verra
kind.” He spoke with evident si ncerity , and yet with a certain
air of abstractio n. He fell silent  then. He was still looking at
me, but his eyes were blank. I groped for something to say ,
hoping to bring him back to the present, but a shout from
Ninian brought him out of his trance, saving me the trouble.
Abel ex cused hi mself politely to me and went to assist in the
ar gument.
I str olled down the lawn, nodding to acquaintances over my
fan. I was glad t o see Abel again , and know he was physically
well, at least—b ut I couldn’ t de ny that the sight of him cast a
chill over my he art. I had the feeling that in fact, it made littledif ference to Abel MacLennan where his body resided; his
heart still lay in the grave with his wife.
Why ha d Ninian brought him today? I wondered. Surely a
wedding could not but recall  his own marriage to him;
weddings did that to everyone.
The sun  had risen high enough to warm the air , but I
shivered. The sight of MacLennan’ s grief reminded me too
much of  the days after Culloden, when I had gone back to my
own tim e, knowing Jamie dead. I knew too well that deadness
of h eart; the se nse of sleepwalking through days and lying
open-eyed at night, finding no rest, knowing only emptiness
that was not peace.
Jocasta’ s voice floated down from the terrace, calling to
Ulysses. She had lost three hus bands, and now was fixed to
take a fourth. Blind she might be , but there was no deadness in
her eyes . Did that mean she ha d not cared deeply for any of
her husb ands? I wondered. Or only that she was a woman of
great strength, capable of overcoming grief, not once, but over
and again?
I had done it on ce, myself—for Brianna’ s sake. But Jocasta
had no children;  not now , at least. Had she once had them, and
put aside the pain of a sundered heart, to live for a child?
I shook myself, trying to dispel such melancholy thoughts.
It was, after all, a festive occasion, and a day to match. The
dogwoods in the grove were in bloom, and courting bluebirds
and card inals sh ot in and out of the greening trees like bits of
confetti, crazed with lust.
“But of course they have,” a woman was saying, in an
authoritative ton e of voice. “My  God, they’ve shared a house
for months now!”
“A ye, that’ s so,” one of her companions agreed, sounding
doubtful. “But ye wouldna thin k it from the looks of them.
Why , the y scarcely glance at eac h other! Ah … I mean—well,
of cours e, she canna be looking at him, blind as she is, but
ye’d think …”It wasn’ t only the birds, I thought, amused. A certain sense
of rising  sap suf fused the whole  gathering. Glancing up at the
terrace, I could see young women clustered, tittering and
gossiping in small groups like h ens, while the men strode oh-
so-casually up and down in fron t of them, gaudy as peacocks
in th eir party clo thes. I wouldn’ t be surprised if at least a few
engagements re sulted from this celebration—and a few
pregnancies as well. Sex was in the air; I could smell it, under
the heady fragrances of spring flowers and cooking food.
The sen se of melancholy had q uite left me, though I still
had a strong ur ge to find Jamie.
I had gone down  one side of the lawn and up the other , but
saw no sign of him anywhere between the big plantation house
and the dock, where slaves in livery were still greeting
latecomers arriving by water . Among those still expected—
and very  late indeed—was the priest who was to perform the
wedding.
Father LeClerc was a Jesuit, bound from New Orleans to a
mission near Quebec, but seduced from the strict path of duty
by a substantial  donation made by Jocasta to the Society of
Jesus. M oney might not buy happiness, I reflected, but it was a
useful commodity , nonetheless.
I gla nced in the  other direction and stopped dead. At one
side, Ro nnie Campbell caught my eye and bowed; I lifted my
fan in acknowledgment, but was too distracted to speak to
him. I hadn’ t found Jamie, but I had just spotted the likely
reason for his abrupt disappearance. Ronnie’ s father , Farquard
Campbell, was coming up the lawn from the landing,
accompanied by a gentleman in the red and fawn of His
Majesty’ s army , and another i n naval uniform—Lieutenant
W olf f.
The sight gave me an unpleasant shock. Lieutenant W olf f
was not my fav orite person. He wasn’ t all that popular with
anyone else who knew him, either .
I supposed it was reasonable for him to have been invited,
as His Majesty’ s  navy was the principal buyer of River Run’ sproduction of timber , tar , and turpentine, and Lieutenant W olf f
was the navy’ s representative in such matters. And it was
possible that Jocasta had invited him for more personal
reasons as well—the Lieutenant  had at one point asked her to
marry him. Not, as she had dryly noted, from any desire for
her person, but rather to get his hands on River Run.
Y es, I could see her enjoying the  Lieutenant’ s presence here
today . Duncan, less naturally given to ulterior motives and
manipulations, might not.
Farquard Campb ell had spotted me, and was making for me
through the crowd, the armed forces in tow . I got my fan up
and made the necessary facial adjustments for polite
conversation, but—much to my relief—the Lieutenant spotted
a servant carrying a tray of glasses across the terrace and
sheared of f in pursuit, abando ning his escort in favor of
refreshment.
The other military gentleman glanced after him, but
dutifully followed Farquard. I squinted at him, but he was no
one I’d met before, I was sure. Since the removal of the last
Highland regime nt in the autumn, the sight of a red coat was
unusual anywhere in the colony . Who could this be?
My features fixed in what I hoped was a pleasant smile, I
sank into a formal curtsy , sprea ding my embroidered skirts to
best advantage.
“Mr . Campbell.” I glanced covertly behind him, but
Lieutenant W olf f had fortunately vanished in the pursuit of
alcoholic sustenance.
“Mrs. Fraser . Y our servant, ma’am.” Farquard made me a
graceful leg in reply . An elderly , desiccated-looking man, Mr .
Campbell was sedate as usual in black broadcloth, a small
burst of ruf fles at the throat bei ng his only concession to the
festivities.
He looked over my shoulder , frowning slightly in
puzzlement. “I had seen—I thought  I ha d s een your husband
with you?”“Oh. W e ll, I think he’ s … er … gone …” I twiddled my fan
delicately towa rd the trees w here the necessary facilities
lurked, separated from the main house by an aesthetic distance
and a screen of small white pines.
“Ah, I see. Just so.” Campbe ll cleared his throat, and
gestured to the m an who accompanied him. “Mrs. Fraser , may
I present Major Donald MacDonald?”
Major MacDona ld was a rather  hawk-nosed but handsome
gentleman in his late thirties, with the weathered face and erect
bearing of a career soldier , and a pleasant smile belied by a
pair of sharp blue eyes, the same pale, vivid shade as Brianna’ s
dress.
“Y our servant, ma’am.” He bowed, very gracefully . “May I
say , ma’am, how particularly that color becomes you?”
“Y ou may ,” I said, relaxing a little. “Thank you.”
“The Major is but recently arrived in Cross Creek. I assured
him he would find no greater opportunity to pursue
acquaintance with his countrymen and familiarize himself with
his surroundings.” Farquard swept a hand around the terrace,
encompassing th e party—which  did indeed comprise a Who’ s
Who of Scottish society along the Cape Fear .
“Indeed,” the Major said politely . “I have not heard so many
Scottish names since last I was in Edinbur gh. Mr . Campbell
gives me to understand that your husband is the nephew of
Mrs. Cameron—or Mrs. Innes, perhaps I should say?”
“Y es. H ave you met Mrs… . er … Innes yet?” I glanced
toward t he far end of the terrac e. Still no sign of Duncan, let
alone Roger or J amie. Blast it, w here was  everybody? Holding
summit conferences in the necessary house?
“No, but I shall look forward to presenting my compliments.
The late Mr . Cam eron was by way of being an acquaintance of
my father , Robert MacDonald of Stornoway .” He inclined his
wigged head a respectful inch in the direction of the small
white marble building at the sid e of the lawn—the mausoleum
that pre sently sheltered the fleshly remnants of HectorCameron. “Has your husband any connection with the Frasers
of Lovat, by chance?”
W ith an internal groan, I recogn ized a Scottish spiderweb in
the making. The meeting of any two Scots invariably began
with the casting out of skeins o f inquiry until enough strands
of re lation and acquaintanceshi p had stuck to form a useful
network. I tended to become ent angled in the sticky strands of
sept and clan, myself, ending up like a fat, juicy fly ,
thoroughly trapped and at the mercy of my questioner .
Jamie had survived the intrigues of French and Scottish
politics for years by means of such knowledge, though—
skating precariously along the secret strands of such webs,
keeping away from the sticky snares of loyalty and betrayal
that had  doomed so many oth ers. I settled myself to pay
attention, struggling to place this MacDonald among the
thousand others of his ilk.
MacDonald of Keppoch, M acDonald of the Isles,
MacDonald of Clanranald, MacDonald of Sleat. How many
kinds of MacDonald were there, anyway? I wondered, a little
crossly . Surely one or two s hould be suf ficient to most
purposes.
MacDonald of the Isles, evidently; the Major ’ s family
hailed fr om the Isle of Harris. I kept one eye out during the
interrogation, but Jamie had safely gone to earth.
Farquard Campbell—no mean player himself—seemed to
be enjoy ing the verbal game of battledore and shuttlecock, his
dark eye s flicking back and for th between me and the Major
with a look of amusement. The amusement faded into a look
of surpr ise as I finished a rather confused analysis of Jamie’ s
paternal lineage, in response to the Major ’ s expert catechism.
“Y our husband’ s grandfather was Simon, Lord Lovat?”
Campbell said. “The Old Fox?” His voice rose slightly with
incredulity .
“W ell … yes,” I  said, a little uneasily . “I thought you knew
that.”“Indeed,” said Farquard. He looked as though he had
swallowed a brandied plum, noticing too late that the stone
was still in it. He’d known Jamie was a pardoned Jacobite, all
right, but plainly Jocasta hadn’ t mentioned his close
connection with the Old Fox—executed as a traitor for his role
in the Stuart Rising. Most of the Campbells had fought on the
Government side of that particular brouhaha.
“Y es,” M acDonald said, ignorin g Campbell’ s reaction. He
frowned slightly in concentration. “I have the honor to be
slightly acquainted with the present Lord Lovat—the title has
been restored, I collect?”
He went on, turning to Campbell in explanation. “That
would be Y oung Simon, who r aised a regiment to fight the
French in … ‘58? No, ‘57. Y es, ‘57. A gallant soldier ,
excellent fighting man. And he would be your husband’ s …
nephew? No, uncle.”
“Half-uncle,” I clarified. Old Simon had been married three
times, and made no secret of his extramarital by-blows—of
which Jamie’ s father had been one. No need to point that out,
though.
MacDonald nodded, lean face  clearing in satisfaction at
having g ot it all neatly sorted. Farquard’ s face relaxed a little,
hearing that the family reputation had gone so far toward
rehabilitation.
“Papist, of course,” MacDonal d added, “but an excellent
soldier , nonetheless.”
“Speaking of soldiers,” Campbell interrupted, “do you know
…”
I bre athed a sigh of relief that m ade my corset strings creak,
as Mr . Campbel l smoothly led the Major into an analysis of
some pa st military event. The Major , it seemed, was not on
active duty , but like many , presently retired on half-pay .
Unless and until the Crown fo und some further use for his
services, he was thus left to mooch round the Colonies in
search of occupation. Peace was hard on professional soldiers.Just wait , I thought, with a small premonitory shiver . Four
years, or less, and the Major would be busy enough.
I c aught  a flash of tartan from  the corner of my eye and
turned to  look, but it was neithe r Jamie nor Duncan. One less
mystery , though; it was Roger , dark-haired and handsome in
his kilt. His fa ce lit as he spotted Brianna, and his stride
lengthened. She turned her head, as though feeling his
presence, and her own face brightened in answer .
He reached her side, and without the least acknowledgment
of the gentlem an with her , embraced her and kissed her
soundly on the mouth. As they  drew apart, he held out his
arms for Jemmy , and dropped another kiss on the silky red
head.
I returned to the conversation at hand, belatedly realizing
that Farquard Campbell had been talking for some time
without my having any notion what he had said. Seeing my
bemusement, he smiled, a little wryly .
“I must go and p ay my respects elsewhere, Mrs. Fraser ,” he
said. “If  you will pardon me? I shall leave you to the Major ’ s
excellent company .” He touched his hat courteously , and eeled
of f toward the house, perhaps intending to track down
Lieutenant W olf f and stop him pocketing the silver .
Thus marooned with me, the M ajor cast about for suitable
conversation, and fell back upon the most commonly asked
question between new acquaintances.
“Are you and your husband long arrived in the colony ,
ma’am?”
“Not long,” I sa id, rather wary . “Three years or so. W e live
in a sma ll settlem ent in the backcountry—” I waved my closed
fan towa rd the invisible mountains to the west. “A place called
Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
“Ah, yes. I hav e heard of it.” A muscle twitched near the
corner of his mouth, and I wondered uneasily just what he had
heard. Ja mie’ s still was an open  secret in the backcountry , and
among t he Scott ish settlers of th e Cape Fear—in fact, severalkegs of raw whisky from the sti ll were sitting in plain sight by
the s tables, Jamie’ s wedding present to his aunt and Duncan—
but I hoped the secret wasn’ t quite so open that an army of ficer
newly ar rived in the colony wou ld already have heard about it.
“T ell me, Mrs. Fraser …” He hesitated, then plunged ahead.
“Do you  encoun ter a great deal of … factionalism in your area
of the colony?”
“Factionalism? O h, er … no, not a great deal.” I cast a wary
eye toward Hector Cameron’ s mausoleum, where Hermon
Husband’ s dark Quaker gray showed up like a blot against the
pure white marble. Factionalis m was a code word for the
activities of men like Husband and James Hunter—Regulators.
The Governor ’ s militia action in December had quashed the
violent demons trations, but the Regulation was still a
simmering pot under a very tight lid. Husband had been
arrested and imprisoned for a s hort time in February on the
strength of his pamphlets, but the experience had in no way
softened either his disposition or his language. A boilover
could happen at any time.
“I am pleased to hear it, ma’am ,” Major MacDonald said.
“Do you hear much news, remotely situated as you are?”
“Not a great deal. Er … nice day , isn’ t it? W e’ve been so
fortunate in the weather this year . W as it an easy journey from
Charleston? So early in the year—the mud …”
“Indeed, ma’am. W e had some small dif ficulties, but no
more than …”
The Ma jor was assessing me quite openly as he chatted,
taking in the cut and quality of my gown, the pearls at my
throat and ears—borrowed from Jocasta—and the rings on my
fingers. I was fa miliar with such a look; there was no hint of
lechery or flirtation in it. He was simply judging my social
standing and my husband’ s level of prosperity and influence.
I too k n o of fens e. I was busy doing the same thing to him,
after all. W ell-educated and of  good family; that much was
plain from his ra nk alone, though the heavy gold signet on hisright hand clinched the matter . Not personally well-of f,
though; his uniform was worn at the seams, and his boots were
deeply scarred, though well-polished.
A light Scots a ccent with a hint of French gutturality—
experience in Continental camp aigns. And very newly arrived
in the colony , I thought; his face was drawn from recent
illness, and the whites of his eyes bore the slight tinge of
jaundice common to new arrivals, who tended to contract
everything from malaria to dengue fever , when exposed to the
seething germ pools of the coastal towns.
“T ell me, Mrs. Fraser—” the Major began.
“Y ou insult not only me, sir , but every man of honor here
present!”
Ninian Bell Hamilton’ s rather high-pitched voice rang out
through a lull in the general conversation, and heads turned all
over the lawn.
He was face-to-face with Robert Barlow , a man I had been
introduced to earlier in the morn ing. A merchant of some kind,
I vaguely recalled—from Edenton? Or possibly New Bern. A
heavyset man with the look of one unused to contradiction, he
was sneering openly at Hamilton.
“Regulators, you call them? Gaolbirds and rioters! Y ou
suggest that such men possess a sense of honor , do you?”
“I do  not sugges t it—I state it as fact, and will defend it as
such!” The old gentleman drew himself upright, hand groping
for a sword-hilt. Fortunately for the occasion, he wasn’ t
wearing a sword; none of the gentlemen present were, given
the congeniality of the gathering.
Whether this fact af fected Barlow’ s behavior , I couldn’ t
have said, but he laughed contem ptuously , and turned his back
on Hamilton, to walk away . The elderly Scot, inflamed,
promptly kicked Barlow in the buttocks.
T aken u naware and of f balance, Barlow pitched forward,
landing on hands and knees, his coattails ludicrously up over
his ears. Whatever their respective political opinions, all theonlookers burst into laughter . Thus encouraged, Ninian puf fed
up like a bantam  rooster and stru tted round his fallen opponent
to address him from the front.
I could have told him that this was a tactical error , but then,
I ha d the benefi t of seeing Barlow’ s face, which was crimson
with mortified rage. Eyes bulging, he scrambled awkwardly to
his feet and laun ched himself with a roar , knocking the smaller
man flat.
The two of them rolled in the grass, fists and coattails
flying, to whoops of encouragement from the spectators.
W edding guests  came rushing from lawn and terrace to see
what was going on. Abel MacLennan pushed his way through
the mob, obviously intent on o f fering support to his patron.
Richard Caswel l seized his arm to prevent him, and he swung
round, pushing Caswell of f balance.
James Hunter , lean face alight with glee, tripped Caswell,
who sat down hard on the grass , looking surprised. Caswell’ s
son Geor ge let o ut a howl of outrage and punched Hunter in
the kidn ey . Hun ter whirled round and slapped Geor ge on the
nose.
A numb er of ladies were shrieking—not all with shock. One
or tw o appeared to be cheering on Ninian Hamilton, who had
got t emporarily atop his victim’ s  chest and was endeavoring to
throttle him, though with little success, owing to Barlow’ s
thick neck and heavy stock.
I looked frantically round for Jamie—or Roger , or Duncan.
Goddamn it, where were they all?
Geor ge Caswell had fallen back in surprise, hands to his
nose, which was dribbling blood down his shirtfront.
DeW ayne Buch anan, one of Hamilton’ s sons-in-law , was
shoving his way purposefully through the gathering crowd. I
didn’ t know whether he meant to get his father -in-law of f
Barlow , or assist him in his attempt to murder the man.
“Oh, bloody hell,” I muttered to  myself. “Here, hold this.” I
thrust m y fan at Major MacDon ald, and hitched up my skirts,preparing to wade into the mele e, and deciding whom to kick
first—and where—for best ef fect.
“Do you want me to stop it?”
The Major , who had been enjoying the spectacle, looked
disappointed at the thought, but resigned to duty . At my rather
startled nod, he reached for his pistol, pointed it skyward, and
dischar ged it into the air .
The bang was loud enough to temporarily silence everyone.
The combatants froze, and in the momentary lull, Hermon
Husband shoved his way into the scene.
“Friend Ninian,”  he said, nodding cordially round. “Friend
Buchanan. Allow me.” He grabbed the elderly Scot by both
arms and lifted him bodily of f B arlow . He gave James Hunter
a w arning look; Hunter gave an  audible “Humph!” but retired
a few steps.
The younger Mrs. Caswell, a w oman of sense, had got her
husband of f the field of battle  already , and was applying a
handkerchief to  his nose. De W ayne Buchanan and Abel
MacLennan had each got hold of one of Ninian Hamilton’ s
arms, and were m aking a great show of restraining him as they
marched him of f toward the house—though it was reasonably
apparent that either one of them  could simply have picked him
up and carried him.
Richard Caswell had got up by himself, and while looking
rather af fronted,  was evidently not disposed to hit anyone. He
stood brushing dried grass fro m the back of his coat, lips
pressed together in disapproval.
“Y our fa n, Mrs. Fraser?” Jerked from my appraisal of the
conflict, I found Major MacDonald politely of fering me back
my fan. He looked quite pleased with himself.
“Thank you,” I said, taking it and eyeing him with some
respect. “T ell me, Major , do you always go about with a
loaded pistol?”
“An oversight, ma’am,” he replied blandly . “Though
perhaps a fortunate one, aye? I had been in the town of CrossCreek yesterday , and as I was returning alone to Mr . Farquard
Campbell’ s plantation after dark , I thought it would be as well
to go canny on the road.”
He nodded over my shoulder .
“T ell me , Mrs. Fraser , who is th e ill-shaven individual? He
seems a man of guts, despite his lack of address. W ill he take
up the cudgels in his own behalf now , do ye think?”
I swung round, to see Hermon Husband nose-to-nose with
the risen  Barlow , his round blac k hat thrust down on his head
and his beard bristling with pugnacity . Barlow stood his
ground, red-faced and thunder -browed, but had his arms
folded tightly across his chest as he listened to Husband.
“Hermon Husband is a Quaker ,” I said, with a slight tone of
reproof. “No, he won’ t resort to violence. Just words.”
Quite a lot of words. Barlow kept trying to interject his own
opinions, but Husband ignored these, pressing his ar gument
with such enthusiasm that drops of spittle flew from the
corners of his mouth.
“… an heinous miscarriage of justice! Sherif fs, or so they
call them selves, who have not been appointed by any legal
writ, but rather appoint themselves for the purposes of
corruptly enriching themselves and scorn all legitimate …”
Barlow dropped  his arms, and began to edge backward, in
an ef fort to escape the barrage. When Husband paused
momentarily to draw breath, though, Barlow seized the
opportunity to lean forward and jab a threatening finger into
Husband’ s chest.
“Y ou sp eak of justice, sir? What  have riot and destruction to
do with justice?  If you advocate the ruin of property as means
to redress your grievances—”
“I d o not! But  is the poor man to fall a spoil to the
unscrupulous, and his plight pass unregarded? I say to you, sir ,
God wil l unmerc ifully requite those who oppress the poor , and
—”“What a re they ar guing about?”  MacDonald asked, viewing
the exchange with interest. “Religion?”
Seeing Husband involved, and  realizing that no further
punch-ups were  to be expected, most of the crowd had lost
interest, wandering away toward the buf fet tables and the
braziers on the terrace. Hunter and a few other Regulators
hung ab out to give Husband m oral support, but most of the
guests were planters and merchants. While they might side
with Ba rlow in theory , in practice most were disinclined to
waste a rare festive occasion in controversy with Hermon
Husband over the rights of the tax-paying poor .
I w asn’ t all th at eager to examine the rhetoric of the
Regulation in detail, either , bu t did my best to give Major
MacDonald a crude overview of the situation.
“… and  so Governor T ryon felt  obliged to raise the militia
to de al with it, but the Regulators backed down,” I concluded.
“But they haven’ t abandoned their demands, by any means.”
Husband hadn’ t  abandoned his ar gument, either—he never
did—but Barlow had at last succeeded in extricating himself,
and was restoring his tissues at  the refreshment tables under
the elm trees in company with some sympathetic friends, who
all cast periodic glances of disapproval in Husband’ s direction.
“I s ee,” MacDonald said, inter ested. “Farquard Campbell
did tell me something of this disruptive movement. And the
Governor has raised a militia on  occasion to deal with it, you
say , and  may again. Who commands his troops, do you
know?”
“Um …  I believe General W add ell—that’ s Hugh W addell—
has command of several companies. But the Governor himself
was in command of the mai n body; he’ s been a soldier
himself.”
“Has he indeed?” MacDonald seemed to find this very
interesting; he hadn’ t put away his pistol, but was fondling it
in an  absentminded sort of way . “Campbell tells me that your
husband is the holder of a lar ge grant of land in thebackcountry . He is by way of being an intimate of the
Governor?”
“I wouldn’ t put it that strongly ,” I said dryly . “But he does
know  the Governor , yes.”
I f elt a trifle un easy at this line of conversation. It was—
strictly speaking—illegal for Catholics to hold Royal land
grants in the Colonies. I didn’ t know whether Major
MacDonald was  aware of that fact, but he did plainly realize
that Jamie was likely a Catholic, given his family background.
“Do you suppose your husband might be prevailed upon for
an intro duction, dear lady?” The pale blue eyes were bright
with speculation, and I realized suddenly what he was after .
A ca reer soldier with no war w as at a distinct disadvantage
in te rms of occu pation and income. The Regulation might be a
tempest in a tea pot, but on the  other hand, if there was any
prospect of military action … A fter all, T ryon had no regular
troops; h e might well be inclined to welcome—and to pay—an
experienced of ficer , if the militia were called out again.
I c ast a wary ey e toward the lawn. Husband and his friends
had with drawn a bit, and were in close conversation in a little
knot nea r one of Jocasta’ s new statues. If the recent near -brawl
was any indication, the Regulation was still dangerously on
the boil.
“That might be done,” I said ca utiously . I couldn’ t see any
reason why Jamie would object to providing a letter of
introduction to T ryon—and I did owe the Major something,
after all, for hav ing averted a full-scale riot. “Y ou’d have to
ask my husband , of course, but I’d be happy to put in a word
for you.”
“Y ou sh all have  my utmost grat itude, ma’am.” He put away
his pisto l, and bowed low over my hand. Straightening up, he
glanced over my shoulder . “I think I must take my leave now ,
Mrs. Fr aser , b ut I shall hop e to make your husband’ s
acquaintance soon.”The Major marched of f toward the terrace, and I turned, to
see Herm on Hu sband stumping  toward me, Hunter and a few
other men in his wake.
“Mrs. Fraser , I must ask thee to  give my good wishes and
my regrets to Mrs. Innes, if thee will,” he said without
preamble. “I must go.”
“Oh, must you l eave so soon?” I hesitated. On the one hand,
I w anted  to ur ge him to stay; on the other , I could foresee
further trouble if he did. Barlow’ s friends had not taken their
eyes of f him since the near -brawl.
He saw the thou ght cross my fa ce, and nodded soberly . The
flush of debate had faded from his face, leaving it set in grim
lines.
“It w ill be bett er so. Jocasta Cameron has been a good
friend to  me and mine; it would  ill repay her kindness for me
to b ring discord to her weddi ng celebrations. I would not
choose that—and yet, I cannot in conscience remain silent,
hearing such pernicious opinions as I have received here.” He
gave Ba rlow’ s group a look of cold contempt, which was met
in kind.
“Besides,” he added, turning his back on the Barlowites in
dismissal, “we have business  that compels our attention
elsewhere.” He hesitated, clearly wondering whether to tell me
more, but then decided against it. “Thee will tell her?”
“Y es, of course. Mr . Husband—I’m sorry .”
He gave me a faint smile, tinged with melancholy , and
shook hi s head, but said no more . As he left, though, trailed by
his c ompanions, James Hunter paused to speak to me, low-
voiced.
“The Regulators are a-gathering. There’ s a big camp, up
near Sa lisbury ,” he said. “Y ou might see fit to tell your
husband that.”
He nod ded, put his hand to his hat-brim, and without
waiting for acknowledgment,  strode of f, his dark coatdisappearing in the crowd like a  sparrow swallowed by a flock
of peacocks.
 
FROM MY V ANT AGE POINT at the edge of the terrace, I
could see the w hole sweep of the party , which flowed in a
stream o f festivity from house to river , its eddy-pools obvious
to the knowledgeable eye.
Jocasta formed the eye of the lar gest social swirl—but
smaller pools swirled ominously around Ninian Bell Hamilton
and Richard Caswell, and a restless current meandered through
the party , leaving deposits of con versation along its edges, rich
in th e fertile silt  of speculation. From the things I overheard,
the question of our hosts’ putative sex life was the
predominant sub ject of conversation—but politics ran a close
second.
I stil l sa w no sign either of Jam ie or of Duncan. There was
the Major again, though. He stopped, a glass of cider in each
hand; he had caught sight of Brianna. I smiled, watching.
Brianna often stopped men in their tracks, though not
always entirely from admiration. She had inherited a number
of th ings from Jamie; slanted blue eyes and flaming hair , a
long straight nose and a wide, firm mouth; the bold facial
bones th at came from some ancient Norseman. In addition to
these striking attributes, though, she had also inherited his
height. In a tim e when the average woman stood a hair less
than five feet tal l, Brianna reached six. People were inclined to
stare.
Major MacDonald was doing so, cider for gotten in his
hands. Roger noticed; he smiled and nodded, but took that one
step clo ser to Brianna that said unmistakably , She’ s mine,
mate .
W atching the Major in conversation, I noticed how pale and
spindly he looked by comparison with Roger , who stood
nearly as tall as  Jamie. He was broad-shouldered and olive-
skinned, and his hair shone bl ack as a crow’ s wing in thespring sun, perhaps the legacy of some ancient Spanish
invader . I had to admit that there was no noticeable
resemblance between him and little Jem, ruddy as a fresh-
for ged brass candlestick. I cou ld see the flash of white as
Roger smiled; the Major kept his lips pulled down when
smiling, as most people over the age of thirty did, to hide the
gaps and decay that were endem ic. Perhaps it was the stress of
the Major ’ s occupation, I thought; perhaps merely the ef fects
of poor nourishment. Being of good family didn’ t mean a child
in this time ate very well.
I r an my tongue lightly over my  own teeth, testing the biting
edge of  my incisors. Straig ht and sound, and I took
considerable pains to see they w ould stay that way , given the
current state of the art of dentistry .
“Why , M rs. Fraser .” A light voi ce broke in on my thoughts,
and I looked round to find Phillip W ylie at my elbow .
“Whatever can you be thinking, my dear? Y ou look positively
… f eral.” He took my hand and lowered his voice, baring his
own fairly decent teeth in a suggestive smile.
“I am  not your dear ,” I said with some acerbity , jerking my
hand ou t of his. “And as for feral, I’m surprised no one has
bitten you in the backside yet.”
“Oh, I have ho pes,” he assured me, eyes twinkling. He
bowed, m anaging in the process to get hold of my hand again.
“Might I have the honor to claim a dance later , Mrs. Fraser?”
“Indeed you may not,” I said, tugging. “Let go.”
“Y our w ish is my command.” He let go, but not before
planting a light kiss on the back of my hand. I suppressed the
ur ge to wipe the moist spot on my skirt.
“Go away , child,” I said. I flicked my fan at him. “Shoo.”
Phillip W ylie was a dandy . I had met him twice before, and
on both occasions, he had been got up regardless: satin
breeches, silk stockings, and all the trappings that went with
them, including powdered wig, powdered face, and a small
black crescent beauty mark, stuck dashingly beside one eye.Now , however , the rot had spre ad. The powdered wig was
mauve, the satin waistcoat was embroidered with—I blinked.
Y es, with lions and unicorns, done in gold and silver thread.
The satin breeches were fitted t o him like a bifurcated glove,
and the crescen t had given way to a star at the corner of his
mouth. Mr . W ylie had become a macaroni—with cheese.
“Oh, I have no intention of des erting you, Mrs. Fraser ,” he
assured me. “I have been searching everywhere for you.”
“Oh. W ell, you’ve found me,” I said, eyeing his coat, which
was velv et, rose in color , and had six-inch cuf fs of palest pink
silk and  button -covers embro idered with scarlet peonies.
“Though it’ s no wonder you h ad trouble. I expect you were
blinded by the glare from your waistcoat.”
Lloyd S tanhope was with him, as usual, quite as prosperous,
but much more plainly dressed than his friend. Stanhope
guf fawed, but W ylie ignored him, and bowed low , making me
a graceful leg.
“Ah, we ll, Fortuna has smiled u pon me this year . The trade
with Eng land has quite recovered, may the gods be thanked—
and I have had my share of it, and more besides. Y ou must
come with me to see—”
I w as saved at th is point by the sudden appearance of Adlai
Osborn, a well-to-do merchant from somewhere up the coast,
who tapped W ylie on the shoulder . Seizing the opportunity
af forded by the distraction, I pu t up my fan and sidled away
through a gap in the crowd.
Left momenta rily to my own devices, I strolled
nonchalantly of f  the terrace and  down the lawn. I still had an
eye out for Jamie or Duncan, but this was my first opportunity
to e xamine Jocasta’ s latest acquisitions, which were causing
considerable com ment among the wedding guests. These were
two statues, carved from white marble, one standing squarely
in the center of each lawn.
The one closest to me was a life-size replica of a Greek
warrior—Spartan, I assumed, from the fact that the morefrivolous items of attire had been omitted, leaving the
gentleman clad in a sturdy-looking plumed helmet, with a
sword in  one hand. A lar ge shield was planted at his feet,
strategically placed so as to cover the more glaring
deficiencies of his wardrobe.
There w as a matching statue on the right lawn, this one of
Diana the Huntress. While the lady was rather skimpily
draped, and her shapely white marble breasts and buttocks
were attracting a certain amount of sidelong appreciation from
the gentlemen present, she was  no match for her companion,
in te rms of publ ic fascination. I smiled behind my fan, seeing
Mr . and Mrs. Sh erston swan past the statue without so much as
a g lance. After all, their raised noses and bored looks at each
other said, such artworks were commonplace in Europe. Only
rude Colonials, lacking both experience and breeding, would
consider it a spectacle , my dear .
Examining the statue myself, I d iscovered that it was not an
anonymous Greek after all, but rather Perseus. From this new
angle, I could se e that what I had assumed to be a rock resting
beside the shield was in fact th e severed head of a Gor gon,
half its snakes standing on end in shocked dismay .
The evident artistry of these reptiles was af fording an
excuse f or close examination of the statue by a number of
ladies, w ho were  brazening it ou t, pursing their lips knowingly
and making sounds of admiration about the sculptor ’ s
skillfulness in rendering every scale, just so. Every so often
one would allow her eyes to d art upward for a split second,
before jerking her gaze back to the Gor gon, cheeks reddened
—by the  morning air and the mulled wine being served, no
doubt.
My attention was distracted from Perseus by a steaming
mug of this beverage, thrust beneath my nose in invitation.
“Do have some, Mrs. Fraser .” It was Lloyd Stanhope,
roundly amiable. “Y ou wouldn’ t want to take a chill, dear
lady .”There w as no danger of that, given the increasing warmth of
the day , but I acc epted the cup, enjoying the scent of cinnamon
and honey that wafted from it.
I leaned to one  side, looking for Jamie, but he was still
nowhere to be s een. A group of gentlemen ar guing the merits
of V ir ginia tobacco versus indigo as a crop were clustered
round one side of Perseus, while the statue’ s rear aspect now
sheltered three young girls, who were glancing at it from
behind their fans, red-faced and giggling.
“… unique,” Phillip W ylie was saying to someone. The
eddies of conversation had br ought him back to my side.
“Absolutely uni que! Black pearls, they’re called. Never seen
anything like them, I’ll wager .” He glanced round and, seeing
me, reached out to touch my elbow lightly . “I collect you have
spent some time in France, Mrs . Fraser . Have you seen them
there, perhaps?”
“Black pearls?”  I said, scramb ling to catch hold of the
threads of the conversation. “W ell, yes, a few . I recall the
Archbishop of Rouen had a sma ll Moorish page boy who wore
a very lar ge one in his nose.”
Stanhope’ s jaw sagged ludicrou sly . W ylie stared at me for a
split second, then uttered a whoop of laughter so loud that both
the tobacco lobby and the gig gling girls stopped dead and
stared at us.
“Y ou will be the death of me, my dear lady ,” W ylie
wheezed, as Stanhope declined into choked snorts of mirth.
W ylie drew out a lacy kerchief and dabbed delicately at the
corners of his eyes, lest tears of merriment blotch his powder .
“Really , Mrs. Fraser , have you not seen my treasures?” He
grasped my elbow and propelled me out of the crowd with
surprising skill. “Come, let me show you.”
He guided me smoothly through the gathering throng and
past the side of the house, where a flagged path led toward the
stables. Another crowd—mostly men—was clustered roundthe paddock, where Jocasta’ s groom was throwing down hay
for several horses.
There were five of them—two m ares, a couple of two-year -
olds, an d a stallion. All five black as coal, with coats that
gleamed in the pale spring sun, even shaggy as they were with
winter hair . I was no expert in horse conformation, but knew
enough by now to notice the de ep chests, barreled vaults, and
sculpted quarters, which gave them a peculiar but deeply
appealing look of elegant sturdiness. Beyond the beauties of
conformation and coat, though, what was most striking about
these horses was their hair .
These bl ack hor ses had great flo ating masses of silky hair—
almost like women’ s hair—that rose and fluttered with their
movements, mat ching the graceful fall of their long, full tails.
In addition, each horse had delicate black feathers decorating
hoof and  fetlock, that lifted like floating milkweed seed with
each step. By contrast to the usual rawboned riding horses and
rough draft animals used for haulage, these horses seemed
almost magical —and from the awed comment they were
occasioning among the spectators, might as well have come
from Fairyland as from Phillip W ylie’ s plantation in Edenton.
“They’re yours? ” I spoke to W ylie without looking at him,
unwilling to take my eyes away from the enchanting sight.
“Wherever did you get them?”
“Y es,” h e said, his usual af fectations erased by simple pride.
“They are mine. They are Friesians. The oldest breed of warm-
bloods—their lineage can be traced back for centuries.
“As to where I got them”— he leaned over the fence,
extending a hand palm-up and w iggling his fingers toward the
horses in invitation—”I have been breeding them for several
years. I brought  these at Mrs. Cameron’ s invitation; she has it
in mind perhaps  to purchase on e of my mares, and suggested
that one or two of her neighbors might also be interested. As
for Lucas, here, though”—th e stallion had come over ,
recognizing his owner , and was submitting gracefully to
having his forehead rubbed—”he is not for sale.”Both mares were heavily in foal ; Lucas was the sire, and so
had been brought, W ylie said, as proof of the bloodlines. That,
I t hought, privately amused, and  for purposes of showing him
of f. W yl ie’ s “black pearls” were exciting keen interest, and a
number of the horse-breeding gentlemen from the
neighborhood had gone visibly green with envy at sight of
Lucas. Phillip W ylie preened like a cock grouse.
“Oh, there ye are, Sassenach.” Jamie’ s voice came suddenly
in my ear . “I was looking for you.”
“W ere y ou, inde ed?” I said, turn ing away from the paddock.
I fel t a sudden warmth under my breastbone at sight of him
“And where have you  been?”
“Oh, here and th ere,” Jamie said, undisturbed by my tone of
accusation. “A verra fine horse indeed, Mr . W ylie.” A polite
nod, and he had me by the arm and headed back toward the
lawn before W ylie’ s murmured “Y our servant, sir” had been
quite voiced.
“What are ye do ing out here wi’ wee Phillip W ylie?” Jamie
asked, p icking his way through a flock of house slaves, who
streamed past from the cookhouse with platters of food
steaming alluringly under white napkins.
“Looking at his horses,” I sai d, putting a hand over my
stomach in hopes of suppressing the resounding borborygmi
occasioned by the sight of foo d. “And what have you been
doing?”
“Looking for Duncan,” he said, guiding me round a puddle.
“He was na in the necessary , nor yet the smithy , the stables, the
kitchen, the cookhouse. I took  a horse and rode out to the
tobacco-barns, but not a smell of the man.”
“Perhaps Lieutenant W olf f has assassinated him,” I
suggested. “Disappointed rival, and all that.”
“W olf f?” He stopped, frowning at me in consternation. “Is
yon gobshite here?”
“In the flesh,” I  replied, waving my fan toward the lawn.
W olf f had taken up a station next the refreshment tables, hisshort, stout figure unmistakable in its blue and white naval
uniform. “Do you suppose your aunt invited him?”
“A ye, I do,” he said, soundin g grim but resigned. “She
couldna resist rubbing his nose in it, I expect.”
“That’ s what I thought. He’ s onl y been here for half an hour
or so, though—and if he goes o n mopping it up at that rate,” I
added, looking disapprovingly at the bottle clutched in the
Lieutenant’ s han d, “he’ll be out cold before the wedding takes
place.”
Jamie d ismissed the Lieuten ant with a contemptuous
gesture.
“W ell, th en, let him pickle hims elf and welcome, so long as
he only opens his mouth to pour drink in. Where’ s Duncan
hidden himself, though?”
“Perhaps he’ s thrown himself in  the river?” It was meant as
a joke, but I glanced toward the river nonetheless, and saw a
boat headed for the landing, the oarsman standing in the prow
to th row his mo oring rope to a waiting slave. “Look—is that
the priest at last?”
It w as; a short, tubby figure, black soutane hiked up over
hairy knees as he scrambled ignominiously onto the dock, with
the help of a push from the boatmen below . Ulysses was
already hurrying down to the landing, to greet him.
“Good,” Jamie said, in tones of satisfaction. “W e’ve a
priest, th en, and  a bride. T wo of three—that’ s progress. Here,
Sassenach, wait a bit—your hair ’ s coming down.” He traced
the l ine of a fallen curl slowly d own my back, and I obligingly
let the shawl fall back from my shoulders.
Jamie put up the curl again, with a skill born of long
practice, then kissed me gentl y on the nape of the neck,
making me shiver . He wasn’ t im mune to the prevailing airs of
spring, either .
“I suppo se I must go on looking for Duncan,” he said, with
a tin ge of regre t. His fingers lingered on my back, thumb
delicately tracing the groove of my spine. “Once I’ve foundhim, tho ugh … there must be some place here with a bit of
privacy to it.”
The word “privacy” made me l ean back against Jamie, and
glance toward the riverbank, where a clump of weeping
willows sheltered a stone bench—quite a private and romantic
spot, especially at night. The w illows were thick with green,
but I caught a flash of scarlet through the drooping branches.
“Got him !” I exclaimed, straigh tening up so abruptly that I
trod on Jamie’ s toe. “Oh—sorry!”
“Nay ma tter ,” he  assured me. H e had followed the direction
of m y glance, an d now drew himself up purposefully . “I’ll go
and fetc h him out. Do ye go up to the house, Sassenach, and
keep an eye on my aunt and the priest. Dinna let them escape
until this marriage is made.”
 
JAMIE MADE HIS W A Y down the lawn toward the willows,
absently acknowledging the greetings of friends and
acquaintances as he went. In truth, his mind was less on
Duncan’ s approaching nuptials than on thoughts of his own
wife.
He was general ly aware that h e had been blessed in her
beauty; even in her usual home spun, knee-deep in mud from
her gard en, or stained and fierce with the blood of her calling,
the curve of he r bones spoke to his own marrow , and those
whisky e yes could make him dru nk with a glance. Besides, the
mad collieshangie of her hair made him laugh.
Smiling to himself even at the thought, it occurred to him
that he was  slightly drunk. Liquor flowed like water at the
party , and there were already men leaning on old Hector ’ s
mausoleum, glaze-eyed and slac k-jawed; he caught a glimpse
of some one behind the thing, too, having a piss in the
shrubbery . He shook his head. T here’d be a body under every
bush by nightfall.
Christ. O ne tho ught of bodies u nder bushes, and his mind
had presented him with a blindingly indecent vision of Claire,lying sprawled and laughing under one, breasts falling out of
her gown and the dead leaves and dry grass the same colors as
her r umpled skirts and the curly brown hair between her—He
choked the thought of f abruptly , bowing cordially to old Mrs.
Alderdyce, the Judge’ s mother .
“Y our servant, ma’am.”
“Good day to ye, young man , good day .” The old lady
nodded magister ially and passed by , leaning on the arm of her
companion, a long-suf fering young woman who gave Jamie a
faint smile in response to his salute.
“Master Jamie?” One of the maids hovered beside him,
holding out a tr ay of cups. He took one, smiling his thanks,
and drank half its contents in a gulp.
He couldn’ t help it. He had to turn and look after Claire. He
caught n o more  than a glimpse of the top of her head among
the crow d on the terrace—she w ouldn’ t wear a proper cap, of
course, the stubborn wee besom, but had some foolishness
pinned on instead, a scrap of lace caught up with a cluster of
ribbons and rose hips. That made him want to laugh, too, and
he turned back toward the willows, smiling to himself.
It w as s eeing her in the new gown that did it. It had been
months since he’d seen her dres sed like a lady , narrow-waisted
in silk, and her white breasts ro und and sweet as winter pears
in th e low nec k of her gown . It was as though she were
suddenly a dif ferent woman; one intimately familiar and yet
still excitingly strange.
His fingers twitched, remembering that one rebel lock,
spiraling free down her neck, and the feel of her slender nape
—and the feel of her plump w arm arse through her skirts,
pressed against his leg. He had not had her in more than a
week, what with the press of people round them, and was
feeling the lack acutely .
Ever since she had shown him the sperms, he had been
uncomfortably aware of the crowded conditions that must now
and then obtain in his balls, an impression made forciblystronger in situations such as th is. He kent well enough that
there w as no danger of rupture or explosion—and yet he
couldn’ t help but think of all the shoving going on.
Being trapped in a seething mas s of others, with no hope of
escape, was one of his own personal visions of Hell, and he
paused for a moment outside t he screen of willow trees, to
administer a brief squeeze of reassurance, which he hoped
might calm the riot for a bit.
He’d see Duncan safely married, he decided, and then the
man must see t o his own af fai rs. Come nightfall, and if he
could do no bet ter than a bush, then a bush it would have to
be. He pushed a side a swath of willow branches, ducking to go
through.
“Duncan,” he began, and then stopped, the swirl of carnal
thoughts disappearing like water down a sewer . The scarlet
coat bel onged not to Duncan Innes but to a stranger who
turned toward him, with surprise equal to his own. A man in
the uniform of His Majesty’ s army .
 
THE LOOK OF MOMENT AR Y startlement faded from the
man’ s fa ce, almost as quickly as Jamie’ s own surprise. This
must be MacDonald, the half-pay soldier Farquard Campbell
had mentioned to him. Evidently Farquard had described him
to M acDonald, as well; he could see the man had put a name
to him.
MacDonald held  a cup of punch, as well; the slaves had
been busy . He d rained the cup d eliberately , then set it down on
the stone bench, wiping his lips on the back of his hand.
“Colonel Fraser , I presume?”
“Major MacDonald,” he replied, with a nod that mingled
courtesy with wariness. “Y our servant, sir .”
MacDonald bowed, punctilious.
“Colonel. If I might command a  moment of your time?” He
glanced over Jamie’ s shoulder; there were giggles on theriverbank behind  them, and the excited small screams of very
young women pursued by very young men. “In private?”
Jamie noted the usage of his  militia title with a sour
amusement, but nodded briefly , and discarded his own cup,
still half-full, alongside the Major ’ s.
He t ilted his head toward the house in inquiry; MacDonald
nodded and followed him out of  the willows, as loud rustlings
and squealings announced that the bench and its sheltering
trees had now become the province of the younger element.
He wished them good luck with it, privately noting the
location for his own possible use, after dark.
The day  was cold but still and bright, and a number of
guests, mostly men who found the civilized atmosphere within
too su f focating for their tastes, were clustered in
ar gumentative groups in the corners of the terrace, or strolling
round the paths of the newly-sprouting garden, where their
tobacco pipes might fume in peace. Assessing the latter venue
as the best means of avoiding interruption, Jamie led the Major
toward the brick-lined path that curved toward the stables.
“Have you seen W ylie’ s Friesian s?” the Major asked as they
rounded the house, making casual conversation ‘til they should
be safely out of earshot.
“A ye, I have. The stallion’ s a fine animal, is he not?” By
reflex, Jamie’ s eyes turned tow ard the paddock by the barn.
The stallion was browsing, nibbling at the weeds by the
trough, while the two mares head-and-tailed it companionably
near the stable, broad backs shining in the pale sun.
“A ye? W ell, perhaps.” The M ajor squinted toward the
paddock, one eye half-shut in dubious agreement. “Sound
enough, I daresay . Good chest. All that hair , though—wouldn’ t
do i n a cavalry  horse, though I suppose if it were proper
shaved and dressed …”
Jamie suppressed the ur ge to ask whether MacDonald liked
his wom en shaved as well. Th e image of the loosened curl
spiraling down that bare white neck was still in his mind.Perhaps the stables might af ford a better opportunity… . He
pushed that thought aside, for later reference.
“Y ou had some matter with which ye were concerned,
Major?” he asked, more abruptly than he’d meant to.
“Not so much my own concern,” MacDonald replied
equably . “I had been told that you have some interest in the
whereabouts of a gentleman named Stephen Bonnet. Am I
reliably informed, sir?”
He felt the name like a blow to the chest; it took his wind
for a moment. W ithout conscious thought, his left hand curled
over the hilt of his dirk.
“I—yes. Y ou know his whereabouts?”
“Unfortunately , no.” MacDonald’ s brow lifted, seeing his
response. “I ken where he has  bee n, th ough. A  wicked lad, ou r
Stephen, or so I gather?” he inquired, with a hint of jocularity .
“Y e might say so. He has killed men, robbed me—and raped
my daughter ,” Jamie said bluntly .
The Major drew breath, face darkening in sudden
understanding.
“Ah, I see,” he  said softly . He lifted his hand briefly , as
though to touch Jamie’ s arm, but let it fall to his side. He
walked a few steps further , brows puckered in concentration.
“I see,” he said again, all hint of amusement gone from his
voice. “I hadn’ t realized … yes.  I see.” He lapsed into silence
once again, his steps slowing as they neared the paddock.
“I tr ust you do intend to tell me what ye know of the man?”
Jamie said politely . MacDonald glanced up at him, and
appeared to recognize that regardless of his intentions, Jamie’ s
own intent was to gain what knowledge he had, whether by
conversation or more direct methods.
“I have not met the man mysel f,” MacDonald said mildly .
“What I know , I learnt in the course of a social evening in
New Bern last month.”It w as an evening of whist tables hosted by Davis Howell, a
wealthy shipowner and a member of the Governor ’ s Royal
Council. The party , small but select, had begun with an
excellent supper , then moved on to cards and conversation,
well marinated with rum punch and brandy .
As t he hour grew late and the s moke of cigarillos heavy in
the air , the conversation grew unguarded, and there were
jocular references to the recent improvement in one Mr .
Butler ’ s fortunes, with much half-veiled speculation as to the
source of his new riches. One gentleman, expressing envy , was
heard to  say , “If one could but have a Stephen Bonnet in one’ s
pocket …” before being elbow ed into silence by a friend
whose discretion was not quite so much dissolved in rum.
“W as M r . Butler among those present at this soiree?” Jamie
asked sharply . The name was unfamiliar , but if Butler was
known t o members of the Royal Council … well, the circles of
power in  the colony were smal l; someone in them would be
known to his aunt, or to Farquard Campbell.
“No, he wasn’ t.” They had reached the paddock;
MacDonald rested his folded arms atop the rail, eyes fixed on
the stallion. “He resides, I believe, in Edenton.”
As did Phillip W ylie. The stallion—Lucas, that was his
name—sidled t oward them, soft black nostrils flaring in
curiosity . Jamie stretched out his knuckles mechanically and,
the horse proving amiable, rubbed the sleek jawline. Beautiful
as t he Friesian was, he scarcely noticed it, his thoughts
spinning like a whirligig.
Edenton lay on the Albemarle Sound, easily accessible by
boat. Li kely , then, that Bonnet had returned to his sailor ’ s
trade—and with it, piracy and smuggling.
“Y e called Bonnet ‘a wicked lad,’ ” he said, turning to
MacDonald. “Why?”
“Much of a hand at whist, Colonel Fraser?” MacDonald
glanced at him inquiringly . “I recommend it particularly . It
shares so me advantage with chess, in terms of discovering themind of one’ s o pponent, and the greater advantage, in that it
can be played ag ainst a greater number .” The hard-bitten lines
of his face relax ed momentarily  in a faint smile. “And the still
greater advantage that it is po ssible to earn a living by it,
which is seldom the case with chess.”
“I a m familiar with the game,  sir ,” Jamie returned, with
extreme dryness.
MacDonald was a half-pay of ficer , with neither of ficial
duties no r an active regiment. It was by no means unusual for
such men to eke out their meager salary by the acquisition of
small bi ts of intelligence, which might be sold or traded. No
price was being asked—now—but that didn’ t mean that the
debt would not be called in later . Jamie gave a brief nod in
acknowledgment of the situation, and MacDonald nodded in
turn, satisfied. He would say what he wanted, in good time.
“W ell, s ir . I was, as ye might suppose, intrigued to learn
who this  Bonnet might be—and if he were indeed a golden
egg, which goose’ s arse he’d dropped out of.”
MacDonald’ s c ompanions had regained their caution,
though, and he could learn noth ing further of the mysterious
Bonnet—save the ef fect he had on those who had met him.
“Y ou’ll ken that often enough, y e learn as much from what
men don’ t say , as what they do? Or from how  they say it?”
W ithout waiting for Jamie’ s nod, he went on.
“There were eight of us at play . Three were making free
with their speculations, but I co uld see they kent nay more of
Mr . Bonnet than I did myself. T wo more seemed neither to
know n or to care, but the last two—” He shook his head.
“They became very quiet, sir . Li ke those who will not speak of
the devil, for fear of summoning him.”
MacDonald’ s eyes were bright with speculation.
“Y ou are familiar with the fellow Bonnet yourself?”
“I am. The two gentlemen who knew him?”“W alter Priestly  and Hosea W ri ght,” MacDonald responded
promptly . “Both particular friends of the Governor .”
“Merchants?”
“Among other things. Both have warehouses; W right in
Edenton and Plymouth, Priestly in Charleston, Savannah,
W ilmington, an d Edenton. Priestly has business concerns in
Boston, as well,” MacDonald  added as an afterthought.
“Though I know little of their  nature. Oh—and W right’ s a
banker .”
Jamie nodded. His hands were folded together beneath the
tails of his coat as he walked; no  one could see how tightly his
fingers clenched.
“I b elieve I hav e heard of Mr . W right,” he said. “Phillip
W ylie m entioned that a gentleman of that name owns a
plantation near his own.”
MacDonald nod ded in af firmation. The end of his nose had
gone quite red, a nd small broken blood vessels stood out in his
cheeks, mementoes of years spent campaigning.
“A ye, that would be Four Chimneys.” He glanced sidewise
at Jamie, tongue probing a back tooth as he thought.
“Y e mean to kill him, then?”
“Of course not,” Jamie replied  evenly . “A man so well-
connected wi’ those in high places?”
MacDonald look ed at him shar ply , then away with a brief
snort.
“A ye. Just so.”
They paced side by side for several moments without
speech, each occupied with his private calculations—and each
aware of the other ’ s.
The news of Bonnet’ s associations cut both ways; on the
one hand, it would likely make the man easier to find. On the
other , those associations would complicate matters quite a bit,
when it  came to the killing. It wouldn’ t stop Jamie—andMacDonald clearly perceived that—but it was a matter for
thought, to be sure.
MacDonald himself was a considerable complication.
Bonnet’ s business associates would be interested to hear that
someone meant to cut of f their s ource of profit—and would be
more than likely to take action to prevent it. They would also
pay well  for the news that their golden goose was threatened; a
prospect MacDonald would naturally appreciate.
There was no immediate way of corking up MacDonald,
though; Jamie lacked the means for bribery , and that was a
poor rec ourse in  any case, as a m an who could be bought once
was always for sale.
He g lanced at M acDonald, who met his eye, smiled slightly ,
then turned his head away . No, intimidation wouldn’ t serve,
even had he a mind to threaten one who’d done him a service.
What, then? He could scarcely k nock MacDonald on the head,
only to prevent his spilling to W right, Priestly , or Butler .
W ell, an d if it c ould not be brib ery or force, the only thing
left to stop the man’ s mouth was blackmail. Which presented
its own complications, insofar as he knew nothing—for the
moment—to MacDonald’ s discredit. A man who lived as the
Major d id almo st certainly had weak spots, but finding them
… how much time might he have?
That thought triggered another .
“How did ye hear that I sought news of Stephen Bonnet?”
he dem anded abruptly , breaking in on MacDonald’ s own
contemplations.
MacDonald shrugged, and settled his hat and wig more
firmly .
“I he ard it from a half dozen dif ferent sources, sir , in places
from taverns to magistrates’ courts. Y our interest is well
known, I fear . B ut not,” he added delicately , with a sideways
glance, “its reason.”
Jamie gr unted, d eep in his throa t. It seemed he had no knife
with but  a single edge. Casting a  wide net had brought him hisfish—but withou t doubt, it had also caused ripples that might
warn aw ay the whale. If the whole coast knew he sought
Bonnet—then so did Bonnet.
Perhaps this was a bad thing;  or perhaps it was not. If
Brianna were to hear of it—sh e had been outspoken in her
desire t hat he leave Bonnet to his own fate. That was
nonsense, of course, but he h adn’ t ar gued with her; only
listened with every appearance of consideration. She need
know nothing until the man was safely dead, after all. If an
unwary word were to reach her before that, though … He had
only beg un to turn the possibi lities over in his mind when
MacDonald spoke again.
“Y our daughter … that would be Mrs. MacKenzie, would
it?”
“Does it matter?” He spoke coldly , and MacDonald’ s lips
tightened briefly .
“No. T o be sure. ‘T was only— I had some conversation of
Mrs. MacKenzie, and found her most … charming. The
thought of—” He broke of f, c learing his throat. “I have a
daughter , myself,” he said abruptly , stopping and turning to
face Jamie.
“A ye?” Jamie had not heard that MacDonald was married.
Quite possibly he wasn’ t. “That would be in Scotland?”
“In England. Her mother ’ s English.” The chill had painted
streaks of color on the soldier ’ s weathered skin. They
deepened, but MacDonald’ s pale blue eyes stayed steady on
Jamie’ s, the same color as the hazy sky behind him.
Jamie fe lt the tightness down his backbone ease. He lifted
his shou lders in a shrug, and let them fall. MacDonald nodded
infinitesimally . The two men turned, without discussion, and
started back toward the house, c onversing casually of the price
of indigo, the latest news from Massachusetts, and the
surprising clemency of the weather for the season.
“I h ad spoken with your wife, a little earlier ,” MacDonald
remarked. “A charming woman, and most amiable—you are afortunate man, sir .”
“I am inclined t o think so,” Jam ie replied, darting a glance
at MacDonald.
The soldier coughed, delicately .
“Mrs. Fraser was so kind as to suggest that you might
consider provid ing me with a  letter of introduction to his
Excellency , the  Governor . In light of the recent threat of
conflict, she thought that perhaps a man of my experience
might be  able to provide something in the way of … you see?”
Jamie saw fine. And while h e doubted that Claire had
suggested any such thing, he w as relieved to find the price
asked so cheap.
“It s hall be done  at once,” he assured MacDonald. “See me
after the  weddin g this afternoon, and I shall have it in hand for
ye.”
MacDonald inclined his head, looking gratified.
As they reached the path that led to the necessary houses,
MacDonald nodded farewell and took his leave with a raised
hand, passing by Duncan Innes, who was coming from that
direction, looking drawn and haggard as a man will whose
bowels are tied in sheepshank knots.
“Are ye well, Duncan?” Jamie a sked, eyeing his friend with
some concern. Despite the cooln ess of the day , a faint sheen of
sweat shone on Innes’ s brow , and his cheeks were pale. Jamie
hoped that if it were an ague, it wasn’ t catching.
“No,” Innes said, in answer to his question. “No, I am …
Mac Dubh , I must speak to ye.”
“Of course, a charaid .” Alarmed by the man’ s appearance,
he took hold of Duncan’ s arm, to support him. “Shall I fetch
my wife  to ye? D’ye need a wee dram?” From the smell of
him, he’d had se veral already , but nothing out of the ordinary
for a bridegroom . He didn’ t app ear to be the worse for drink,
but was plainly t he worse for so mething. Perhaps a bad mussel
at last night’ s supper… .Innes shook his head. He swallowed, and grimaced, as
though s omething hard was stuck in his throat. He drew air
through his nose then, and set his shoulders, steeling himself
to something.
“No, Mac Dubh , it’ s yourself I am needing. A bit of
counsel, if ye might be so kind …”
“A ye, Duncan, surely .” More curious than alarmed now , he
let go of Duncan’ s arm. “What is it, man?”
“About—about the wedding night,” Duncan blurted. “I—
that is, I have—” He broke of f abruptly , seeing someone
turning into the path before them, heading for the necessary .
“This way .” Jamie turned toward the kitchen gardens, which
were safely enclosed in sheltering brick walls. W edding night?
he thought, both reassured and curious. Duncan had not been
married before, he knew , and when they were in Ardsmuir
together , Dunca n had never spoken of women as some men
did. He had thought it only a modest constraint at the time, but
perhaps … but no, Duncan w as well past fifty; surely the
opportunity had occurred.
That left buggery or the clap, he thought, and he’d swear
Duncan had no taste for boys. A  bit awkward, to be sure, but
he h ad full faith  that Claire cou ld deal with it. He did hope it
was only drip, and not the French disease, though; that was a
cruel plague.
“Here, a charaid ,” he said, drawing Duncan after him into
the shel ter of the onion beds. “W e’ll be quite private here.
Now , then, what’ s your trouble?”40
DUNCAN’S SECRET
F A THER LECLERC SPOKE NO ENGLISH, with the
exception of a jolly “T ally-ho!” which he used alternately as a
greeting, an interjection of amazement, and an exclamation of
approbation. Jocasta was still at her toilette, so I introduced the
priest to  Ulysses, then escorted him to the main parlor , saw
him pro vided with suitable refreshment, and sat him down to
make conversation with the Sherstons, who were Protestant
and rather bug-eyed at meeting a Jesuit, but so eager to show
of f their French that they wer e willing to overlook Father
LeClerc’ s unfortunate profession.
Mentally wiping  my brow afte r this bit of delicate social
rapprochement, I made my excuses and went out to the
terrace, to see whether Jamie had succeeded in retrieving
Duncan. Neither man was in sig ht, but I met Brianna, coming
up from the lawn with Jemmy .
“Hallo, darling, how are you?”  I reached for Jemmy , who
seemed restless, squirming and smacking his lips like someone
sitting down to a six-course m eal after a trek through the
Sahara. “Hungry , are we?”
“Hak!” he said, then feeling this perhaps an insuf ficient
explanation, repeated the syllable several times, with
increasing volume, bouncing up and down by way of
emphasis.
“ He’ s  hungry; I’m  abo ut to  explod e,” Brianna said, lowering
her voice and plucking gingerly at her bosom. “I’m just going
to take him upstairs and feed him. Auntie Jocasta said we
could use her room.”
“Oh? That’ s good. Jocasta’ s jus t gone up herself—to rest a
bit and change, she said. The w edding’ s set for four o’clock,
now the priest i s here.” I had just heard the case clock in the
hall chime noon; I did hope Jamie had got Duncan safely inhand. Pe rhaps he should be shut  up somewhere, to prevent his
wandering away again.
Bree reached to take Jemmy back, sticking a prophylactic
knuckle in his mouth to muf fle his remarks.
“Do you know the Sherstons?” she asked.
“Y es,” I replied warily . “Why , what have they done?”
She raised one eyebrow at me.
“They’ve asked me to paint a portrait of Mrs. Sherston. A
commission, I mean. Evidently Auntie Jocasta sang my praises
to them,  and showed them some of the things I did when I
stayed here last spring, and now they want a picture.”
“Really? Oh, darling, that’ s marvelous!”
“W ell, it will be if they have any money ,” she said
practically . “What do you think?”
It was a good question; fine clothes and appointments didn’ t
always r eflect actual worth, and I didn’ t know much about the
Sherstons’ circu mstances; they were from Hillsborough, not
Cross Creek.
“W ell, they’re rather vulgar ,” I said dubiously , “and dreadful
snobs, but I think he’ s legitimately rich. He owns a brewery , I
think. But ask Jocasta; she’ll know for sure.”
“Rah-tha vul-ga h,” she drawled, mocking my own accent,
and grinned. “Who’ s a snob, then?”
“I am not a snob ,” I said with dignity . “I am a keen observer
of social nuance. Have you s een your father and Duncan
anywhere?”
“Not Duncan, but Da’ s down t here by the trees with Mr .
Campbell.” She pointed helpfully , and I spotted Jamie’ s bright
hair and crimson tartan, a fiery  gleam at the bottom of the
lawn. Not a sign of Duncan’ s scarlet coat, though.
“Damn the man,” I said. “Where has  he got to?”“W ent t o the necessary , and fell in,” Bree suggested. “All
right, hold your horses, we’re going!” Addressing this last to
Jemmy , who was uttering p laintive cries suggestive of
imminent starvation, she disappeared into the house.
I settled my shaw l and strolled d own the lawn to join Jamie.
A picnic lunch was being served to accommodate the guests,
and I snatched a biscuit and a  slice of ham as I passed the
refreshment tables, improvising a hasty snack in order to stave
of f my own hunger pangs.
The air was still cool, but the s un was high and hot on my
shoulders; it was a relief to join the men in the shade of a
small gr ove of oaks that stood near the bottom of the lawn.
They were pin oaks, and had begun to leaf out already , the
unfolding leaves peeping out like a baby’ s fingers. What had
Nayawenne told me about oaks? Oh, yes; one planted corn
when the oak leaves were the size of a squirrel’ s ear .
Judging by that, the slaves cou ld be planting corn in the
River Run kitchen garden any day now . It would be weeks
before the oak leaves were out on the Ridge, though.
Jamie had evidently just said  something humorous, for
Campbell made the low , creaking noise that passed with him
for laughter , nodding to me in greeting.
“I sh all leave ye  to the practice of your own af fairs, then,”
he said to Jamie, recovering hi s composure. “Call upon me,
though, at need.” He shaded hi s eyes, looking up toward the
terrace.
“Ah, the prodigal returns. In shillings, sir , or bottles of
brandy?”
I tur ned to look as well, in time  to see Duncan crossing the
terrace, nodding and smiling shyly to well-wishers as he
passed. I must have looked bewildered, for Mr . Campbell
bowed to me, dry mouth crooked with amusement.
“I’d laid your husband a small wager , ma’am.”
“Five to one on Duncan, the night,” Jamie explained. “That
he and my aunt will share a bed, I mean.”“Goodness,” I said, rather crossly . “Is anyone here talking
of anything else? Minds like sewers, the lot of you.”
Campbell laughed, then turned aside, distracted by the
ur gencies of a small grandson.
“Don’ t tell me ye werena wonde ring the same thing.” Jamie
nudged me gently .
“Indeed I was not,” I said primly . I wasn’ t—but only
because I already knew .
“Oh, indeed,” he said, one corner of his mouth curling up.
“And yo u wi’ lechery as plain on your face as whiskers on a
cat.”
“Whatever do you mean by that ?” I demanded. Just in case
he w as r ight, I flicked the fan op en and covered the lower half
of my face. I peered over its  ivory lacework, batting my
eyelashes in mock innocence.
He made a deris ive Scottish noise in his throat. Then, with a
quick glance round, he bent low and whispered in my ear .
“It means ye lo ok as ye do when ye want me to come to
your bed.” A w arm breath stirred the hair over my ear . “Do
you?”
I smiled brilliantly at Mr . Campbell, who was viewing us
with inte rest over his grandson’ s head, snapped the fan open,
and usin g it as a  shield, stood o n tiptoe to whisper in Jamie’ s
ear . I dropped back on my heels and smiled demurely at him,
fanning away for all I was worth.
Jamie looked mildly shocked, but definitely pleased. He
glanced at Mr . Campbell, who had fortunately turned away ,
drawn into conversation elsewhere. Jamie rubbed his nose and
regarded me with intense speculation, his dark blue gaze
lingering on the scalloped neckline of my new gown. I
fluttered the fan delicately over my decolletage.
“Ah … we could …” His eyes flicked up, assessing our
surroundings fo r possible prospects of seclusion, then down
again, ineluctabl y drawn to the fan as though it were a magnet.“No we couldn’ t,” I informed h im, smiling and bowing to
the elderly Misses MacNeil, who were strolling past behind
him. “Every nook and cranny  in the house is filled with
people. So are t he barns and stables and outbuildings. And if
you had in mind a rendezvous under a bush on the riverbank,
think ag ain. This dress cost a bloody fortune.” A fortune in
illegal whisky , but a fortune nonetheless.
“Oh, I ken that well enough.”
His eyes traveled slowly over m e, from the coils of upswept
hair to the tips of my new calf -leather shoes. The dress was
pale amb er silk, bodice and hem embroidered with silk leaves
in sh ades of brown and gold, and if I did say so myself, it fit
me like a glove.
“W orth it,” he s aid softly , and leaned down to kiss me. A
chilly breeze stirred the oak branches overhead, and I moved
closer to him, seeking his warmth.
What with the long journey from  the Ridge and the crush of
guests caused by the impending celebration, we hadn’ t shared
a bed ourselves in more than a week.
It wasn’ t so much an amorous encounter I wanted—though
I would certainly not say no, if the opportunity of fered. What I
missed w as simply the feel of his body next to mine; being
able to reach ou t a hand in the dark and rest it on the long
swell of  his thigh; to roll towar d him in the morning and cup
his round, neat buttocks in the curve of thigh and belly; to
press my cheek against his back and breathe the scent of his
skin as I slipped into sleep.
“Damn,” I said, resting my fore head briefly in the folds of
his shirt ruf fle, and inhaling the mingled scents of starch and
man with longing. “Y ou know , if your aunt and Duncan don’ t
need the bed, perhaps …”
“Oh, so ye wer e  wondering.”
“No, I wasn’ t,” I said. “Besides, what business is it of
yours?”“Oh, no ne at all,” he said, unperturbed. “Only I’ve been
asked by four m en this morning if I think they will—or have
done already . Which is rather a compliment to my aunt, no?”
It was true; Jocasta MacKenzie must be well into her sixties,
and yet the thought of her sharing a man’ s bed was by no
means unthinkable. I had met any number of women who had
gratefully abandoned all notion of sex, directly the cessation of
childbearing made it possible—but Jocasta wasn’ t one of
them. At the same time—
“They haven’ t,” I said. “Phaedre told me yesterday .”
“I k now . Duncan told me, jus t now .” He was frowning
slightly , but not at me. T oward the terrace, where the bright
splotch of Duncan’ s tartan showed between the huge stone
vases.
“Did he?” I wa s more than a little surprised at that. A
sudden suspicion struck me. “Y ou didn’ t ask  him, did you?”
He gave me a slightly reproachful look.
“I did not,” he said. “What d’ye take me for , Sassenach?”
“A Scot,” I sai d. “Sex fiends, the lot of you. Or so one
would think, listening to all t he talk around here.” I gave
Farquard Campb ell a hard look, but he had turned his back,
engrossed in conversation.
Jamie regarded me thoughtfully , scratching the corner of his
jaw .
“Sex fiends?”
“Y ou know what I mean.”
“Oh, aye, I do. I’m only wondering—is that an insult, would
ye say , or a compliment?”
I op ened my m outh, then paused. I gave him back the
thoughtful look.
“If the shoe fits,” I said, “wear it.”He burs t out laughing, which made a number of those
nearby turn and look at us. T aking my arm, he steered me
across the lawn and into the patchy shade of the elms.
“I did mean to ask ye something, Sassenach,” he said,
checking over his shoulder to be sure we were out of earshot.
“Can ye find occasion to speak wi’ my aunt, alone?”
“In this madhou se?” I glanced t oward the terrace; a swarm
of well-wishers surrounded Duncan like bees round a flower
patch. “ Y es, I suppose I could catch her in her room, before
she comes down for the weddi ng. She’ s gone up to rest.” I
wouldn’ t mind a lie-down, eithe r; my legs ached with hours of
standing, and my shoes were new and slightly too tight.
“That’ll do.” He nodded pleasantly to an approaching
acquaintance, t hen turned his back, shielding us from
interruption.
“All right,” I said. “Why?”
“W ell, it’ s to do wi’ Duncan.” He looked at once amused
and slig htly wor ried. “There’ s a wee dif ficulty , and he canna
bring himself to speak to her about it.”
“Don’ t tell me,” I said. “He was married before, and he
thought his first wife was dead, but he’ s just seen her here,
eating cullen skink.”
“W ell, n o,” he said, smiling. “Not so bad as that. And
perhaps it’ s nay so troublesome as Duncan fears. But he’ s
worrit in his mind about it, and yet he canna bring himself to
speak to my aunt; he’ s a bit shy of her , aye?”
Duncan was a shy and mode st man altogether; an ex-
fisherman presse d into service d uring the Rising, he had been
captured after Culloden, and spent years in prison. He had
been released, rather than transported, only because he had
contracted blood poisoning from a scratch, and had lost one
arm, making him unfit for labor and unsalable as an indenture.
I did n’ t have to  wonder whose idea this marriage had been;
such lof ty aspira tions would never have occurred to Duncan in
a million years.“I can see that. What’ s he worried about, though?”
“W ell,” he said slowly , “it’ s tru e that Duncan hasna been
wed before. Did ye not wonder why?”
“No,” I said. “I ’d just assumed that the Rising had—oh,
dear .” I stopped,  catching a notion of what this might be about.
“It’ s not —goodness. Y ou mean  … he likes men?” My voice
rose involuntarily .
“No!” h e said, scandalized. “Christ, ye dinna think I’d let
him marry my a unt, and him a sodomite? Christ.” He glanced
around, to be sure no one h ad heard this calumny , and
shepherded me into the shelter of the trees, just in case.
“W ell, you wouldn’ t necessarily know , would you?” I asked,
amused.
“I’d know ,” he said grimly . “C ome along.” He lifted an
overhanging bough and ushered  me beneath it, a hand in the
small of  my back. The grove was a lar ge one, and it was easy
enough to get out of sight of the party .
“No,” he said a gain, reaching a small open space well in
among t he trunks. “The filthy m ind of you, Sassenach! No, it’ s
nothing o’ the s ort.” He glanced behind him, but we were a
good distance from the lawn, and reasonably shielded from
view . “It’ s only that he’ s … inca pable.” He lifted one shoulder
slightly , looking profoundly uncomfortable at the thought.
“What—impotent?” I felt my mouth hanging open, and
closed it.
“A ye. H e was betrothed, as a young man, but there was a
dreadful accident; a cart horse k nocked him into the street and
kicked h im in the scrotum.” H e made a slight motion, as
though to touch himself for rea ssurance, but checked it. “He
healed, b ut it—well, he wasna f it for nuptial rites any longer ,
so he released the young woman and she marrit elsewhere.”
“The poor man!” I said, w ith a pang of sympathy .
“Gracious, poor Duncan’ s had nothing but bad luck.”“W ell, he’ s alive,” Jamie observed. “A good many others
aren’ t. Besides”—he gestured over one shoulder , at the spread
of R iver Run be hind him—”I shouldna be inclined to call his
present situation precisely unlucky . Bar the one small
dif ficulty , that is,” he added.
I frowned, running through the medical possibilities. If the
accident had resulted in severe vascular damage, there wasn’ t
much I could do; I was in no way equipped for fine
reconstructive sur gery . If it were only a hemocoel, though,
then perhaps …
“When he was a young man, you said? Hmm. W ell, it’ s not
promising, after so long, but I can certainly have a look and
see whether—”
Jamie stared at me, incredulous.
“A l ook? Sassenach, the man goes puce when ye inquire
after the health of his bowels, and he nearly died o’ shame,
telling me. He’ll have an apo plexy , and ye go pokin’ his
privates.”
A strand of hair had been pulled loose by an oak twig; I
pushed it irritably behind my ear .
“W ell, w hat did you expect me to do, then? I can’ t heal him
with spell-casting!”
“Of cou rse not,” he said, a little impatiently . “I dinna want
ye to do anything to Duncan—only to speak to my aunt.”
“What—you mean she doesn’ t know? But they’ve been
engaged to be m arried for months, and living together for most
of it!”
“A ye, bu t …” Jamie made the odd half-shrugging gesture he
used when feeling embarrassed  or uncomfortable, as though
his shirt were too tight. “D’ye see—when the question of
marriage rose, it never occurred to Duncan that it was a matter
of … mmphm.”
“Mmphm,” I said, raising one e yebrow . “Doesn’ t marriage
usually involve at least the possibility of mmphm?”“W ell, he didna think my aun t was wanting him for his
manly beauty , aye?” Jamie said, raising his own brows back at
me. “It seemed only a matter o f business and convenience—
there are things he could manag e as owner of River Run that
he couldna do as overseer . At that, he wouldna have agreed,
save she persuaded him.”
“And he never thought to mention this … this impediment?”
“Oh, he  though t. But there wa sna any indication that my
aunt reg arded marriage in any but the sense of business. She
didna mention the matter of bed; he was too shy to say . And
the question didna really arise, ken.”
“I ga ther that it now has  aris en? What h appened? Did your
aunt slip  her hand under his kilt this morning and make a
bawdy remark about the wedding night?”
“He didna happen to say ,” he r eplied dryly . “But it wasna
until this  morning, when he began to hear the jests among the
guests, t hat it occurred to Dunc an that perhaps my aunt was
expecting him to … well.”
He lifted one s houlder , and let it fall. “He couldna think
what to do, and was in a panic, listening to everyone.”
“I se e.” I rubbe d a knuckle across my upper lip, thinking.
“Poor Duncan; no wonder he’ s been nervous.”
“A ye.” J amie straightened up, with the air of one having
settled s omething. “So, if ye’ll be so kind as to speak wi’
Jocasta, and see it’ s all straight—”
“Me? Y ou want me  to tell her?”
“W ell, I shouldna think she’ll mind greatly ,” he said,
looking quizzically down at me. “After all, at her age, I
shouldna think—”
I made a rude noise.
“Her age? Y our grandfather Simon was well into his
seventies and still putting it about, when last seen.”“My aunt is a woman,” he said, rather austerely . “If ye
hadna noticed it.”
“And you think that makes a dif ference?”
“Y ou don’ t?”
“Oh, it makes a dif ference, all right,” I said. I leaned back
against a tree, a rms crossed under my bosom, and gave him a
look from under my lashes. “When I am a hundred and one,
and you ’re ninety-six, I’ll invite you to my bed—and we’ll see
which one of us rises to the occasion, hmm?”
He l ooked at me  thoughtfully , a glint in the dark blue of his
eyes.
“I’ve a mind to take ye where ye stand, Sassenach,” he said.
“Payment on account, hmm?”
“I’ve a mind to take you up on  it,” I said. “However …” I
glanced through the screen of branches toward the house,
which was clearly visible. The  trees were beginning to leaf
out, but the tin y sprays of tender green were by no means
suf ficient camouflage. I turned back, just as Jamie’ s hands
descended on the swell of my hips.
Events after that were some what confused, with the
predominant impressions being an ur gent rustling of fabric, the
sharp scent of t rodden onion grass, and the crackling of last
year ’ s oak leaves, dry underfoot.
My eyes popped open a few moments later .
“Don’ t stop!” I said, disbeliev ing. “Not now , for God’ s
sake!”
He g rinned down at me, steppi ng back and letting his kilt
fall into  place. His face was flushed a ruddy bronze with
ef fort, and his chest heaved under his shirt ruf fles.
He grinned maliciously , and wiped a sleeve across his
forehead.
“I’ll gie ye the rest when I’m ninety-six, aye?”
“Y ou won’ t live that long! Come here!”“Oh,” he said. “So ye’ll speak to my aunt.”
“Ef fing blackma iler ,” I panted, fumbling at the folds of his
kilt. “I’ll get you for this, I swear I will.”
“Oh, aye. Y ou will.”
He p ut a n arm round my waist and swung me of f my feet,
turning r ound so that his back was to the house, screening me
with his body . His long fingers deftly ruf fled up the skirt of my
gown, th en the two petticoats beneath, and even more deftly ,
slid between my bare legs.
“Hush,” he murmured in my e ar . “Y e dinna want folk to
hear , do  ye?” He set his teeth gently in the curve of my ear ,
and proceeded about his business in a workmanlike way ,
ignoring my intermittent—and  admittedly rather feeble—
struggles.
I was more than ready and he knew what he was doing. It
didn’ t take long. I dug my finge rs into his arm, hard as an iron
bar across my middle, arched  backward for a moment of
dizzying infinity , and then collapsed against him, twitching
like a worm on the end of a hoo k. He made a deep chuckling
sound, and let go of my ear .
A cold breeze had sprung up, a nd was wafting the folds of
my s kirts about my legs. The sc ent of smoke and food drifted
through the cool spring air , alon g with the rumble of talk and
laughter from the lawn. I could  dimly hear it, under the slow ,
loud thumping of my heart.
“Come to think of it,” Jamie remarked, releasing me,
“Duncan has still got the one go od hand.” He set me gently on
my feet, keeping hold of my el bow , lest my knees give way .
“Y e might mention that to my aunt, if ye think it will help.”41
MUSIC HA TH CHARMS
R OGER M ACKENZIE MADE HIS W A Y through the crowd,
nodding here and there to a f amiliar face, but pushing on
purposefully , preventing any attempt at conversation. He was
not in a talkative mood.
Brianna had gone of f to feed the kid, and while he missed
her , he was just as pleased tha t she was out of sight for the
moment. He didn’ t care at all fo r the sort of looks she’d been
getting. Those directed at her face were admiring, but
respectful enough; he’d caught that wee bastard Forbes staring
at her rear view with an expr ession similar to the one the
gentlemen were  using on the undraped marble goddess on the
lawn, though.
At t he s ame tim e, he was more  than proud of her . She was
gor geous in her new dress, and he felt a pleasant sense of
possession when he looked at her . Still, his pleasure was
slightly spoiled by the uneasy thought that she looked as
though she belonged here, mistress of all this … this …
Y et ano ther slav e trotted past h im, skirts hooped up over
one arm as she  made for the house, a basin of fresh rolls
balanced on her head and anoth er under her arm. How many
slaves did Jocasta Cameron keep? he wondered.
Of course, that alone put the no tion of Brianna’ s inheriting
River Run out o f the question. She wouldn’ t countenance the
notion o f slaves, not ever . Nor would he himself; still, it was
comforting to think that it wasn’ t merely his own pride
keeping Bree from her rightful inheritance.
He c aught the thin wail of a fid dle coming from the house,
and felt his ears prick up at the sound. Of course there would
be music for the party . And with luck, a few new songs that he
didn’ t know .He turne d across the terrace tow ard the house. He hadn’ t a
notebook with him, but doubtless Ulysses could provide him
with something. He bowed to Mrs. Farquard Campbell, who
looked like a particularly horrible but expensive lampshade in
pink silk . He paused to let her precede him into the house,
biting th e inside of his cheek as the four -foot spread of her
skirt stuck momentarily in the three-foot doorway . She
twitched adroitly sideways, though, and sidled crabwise into
the hall, Roger following at a respectful distance.
The fiddle had ceased, but he  could hear the twang and
throb of instruments being handled and tuned nearby . They
were in the big drawing room, whose double doors could be
thrown open to allow dancers to spill out across the foyer ,
when the time c ame. At the moment, there were only a few
guests in the drawing room, engaged in casual conversation.
Roger made his way past Ulyss es, who was standing at the
hearth, i mmaculate in wig and g reen livery , a poker held at the
ready as  he supervised two ma idservants in the making of a
gigantic vat of fresh rum punch. His eyes flicked automatically
to the door , registered Roger ’ s presence and identity , then
returned to his business.
The mu sicians were huddled at the far end of the room,
casting occasional thirsty glances at the hearth as they readied
their instruments.
“What will you be giving us the day?” Roger inquired,
pausing beside the fiddler . He smiled as the man turned round
to him. “‘Ewie wi’ the Crooke d Horn,’ perhaps, or ‘Shawn
Bwee’?”
“Oh, Go d love ye, sir , nothin’ fancy .” The conductor of the
small ensemble, a cricketlike Irishman whose bent back was
belied by the brightness of his eyes, waved a hand in cordial
scorn at his motley crew of musicians.
“They ain’ t up to more than jigs and reels. No more are the
folk as will be dancin’, though,”  he added, practically . “‘T isn’ t
the Assembly Rooms in Dublin, after all, nor even Edenton; a
good fiddler can keep ‘em up to snuf f.”“And that would be you, I expec t?” Roger said with a smile,
nodding at the cracked fiddle ca se the conductor had set on a
whatnot, carefully out of the way of being stepped or sat on.
“That would be me,” the gentle man agreed, with a graceful
bow of acknowledgment. “Seamus Hanlon, sir—your
servant.”
“I am obliged, sir . Roger MacKenzie, of Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
He returned the bow , taking pleasure in the old-fashioned
formality , and clasped Hanlon’ s hand briefly , careful of the
twisted fingers and knobby joints. Hanlon saw his care of the
arthritic hand and gave a brief grimace of deprecation.
“Ah, they’ll be f ine with a drop of lubrication, so they will.”
Hanlon flexed one hand exp erimentally , then flipped the
fingers in dismissal, fixing Roger with a bright glance.
“And yourself, sir; I felt the call uses on your fingertips. Not
a f iddler , perhaps, but would ye  be after playin’ some stringed
instrument?”
“Only to pass the time of an evening; nothing like you
gentlemen.” Roger nodded politely toward the ensemble,
which, now unpacked, boasted a battered cello, two viols, a
trumpet, a flute, and something  which he thought might have
started life as a hunting horn, though it appeared to have been
amended since by the addition of several odd loops of tubing
that stuck out in dif ferent directions.
Hanlon eyed him shrewdly , taking in his breadth of chest.
“And hark at th e voice in him!  Sure, and you’re a singer ,
Mr . MacKenzie?”
Roger ’ s reply was interrupted by a loud thump and a
dolorous twang behind him. He whirled to see the cello player
inflating himself over his instrument in the manner of a hen
with a very lar ge chick, to protect it from further injury by the
gentleman who had evidently kicked it carelessly in passing.
“W atch yourself, then!” the cellist snapped. “Clumsy sot!”“Oh?” The intruder , a stocky man in naval uniform,
glowered menacingly at the cellist. “Y ou dare … dare shpeak
to me …” His face was flush ed an unhealthy red, and he
swayed slightly as he stood; Ro ger could smell the fumes of
alcohol from a distance of six feet.
The of ficer raised a forefinger to the cellist, and appeared to
be on the point of speech. A tongue tip showed pinkly between
his teeth, but no words emer ged. His empurpled jowls
quivered for a m oment, then he abandoned the attempt, turned
on his heel, an d made of f, sw erving narrowly to avoid an
incoming footman with a tray o f drinks, and caroming of f the
doorjamb as he passed into the corridor .
“‘W are, then, Mr . O’Reilly .” Seamus Hanlon spoke dryly to
the c ellist. “W ere we near the se a, I should reckon there’d be a
press-gang waitin’ for ye, the instant ye set foot outside. As it
is, I’ d put no odds on him layin ’ for ye with a marlinspike or
something of the kind.”
O’Reilly spat eloquently on the floor .
“I know him,” he said contemptuously . “W olf f, he’ s called.
Dog, mo re like, and a poor dog at that. He’ s tight as a tick—
he’ll not remember me, an hour hence.”
Hanlon squinted thoughtfully at  the doorway through which
the Lieutenant had vanished.
“W ell, that’ s as may be,” he allowed. “But I know the
gentleman, too, and I do believ e his mind may be somewhat
sharper than his behavior might suggest.” He stood for a
moment, tapping  the bow of his fiddle thoughtfully against the
palm of his hand, then turned his head toward Roger .
“Fraser ’ s Ridge , ye said? W ill ye be a kinsman of Mrs.
Cameron’ s—or Mrs. Innes, I should say?” he corrected
himself.
“I’m married to Jamie Fraser ’ s daughter ,” Roger said
patiently , having discovered that this was the most ef ficient
description, as most of the county appeared to know whoJamie Fraser was, and it prevented further questions regarding
Roger ’ s own family connections.
“Ho-ho,” Seamu s said, looking visibly impressed. “W ell,
then. Hum!”
“What’ s that bladder doing h ere, anyway?” the cellist
demanded, still glaring after the  departed of ficer . He patted his
instrument soothingly . “Everyone knows he meant to wed
Mrs. Ca meron and have River R un for himself. I wonder he’ s
the tripes to show his face today!”
“Perhaps he’ s come to show there are no hard feelings,”
Roger suggested. “A civil gesture—best man won and all that,
aye?”
The mus icians emitted a medley of sniggers and guf faws at
this suggestion.
“Maybe,” said the flutist, shaking his head over his
instrument. “But if you’re any fr iend to Duncan Innes, tell him
to watch his back in the dancin’.”
“A ye, do that,” S eamus Hanlon concurred. “Be of f with ye,
young man, and speak to him—but see ye come back.”
He c rooked a fi nger at the waiting footman, and scooped a
cup nea tly from the prof fered tray . He lifted this in salute,
grinning at Roger over its rim. “It may be you’ll know a tune
or two that’ s new to me.”42
THE DEASIL CHARM
B RIANNA SA T BACK in the leather wing chair before the
hearth, nursing Jemmy as she watched her great-aunt ready
herself for the wedding.
“What you think, then?” Phaedre asked, dipping the silver
comb in to a small pot of pomad e. “Dress it up high, with the
curls ov er the top?” Her voice  was hopeful, but wary . She
disapproved overtly of her mistress’ s refusal to wear a wig,
and would do h er level best to create a similarly fashionable
ef fect with Jocasta’ s own hair , if allowed.
“T osh,” said Jocasta. “This isn’ t Edinbur gh, child, let alone
London.” She leaned back, head lifted and eyes closed,
basking. Bright spring sunshin e poured through the panes,
sparking of f the silver comb, and making dark shadows of the
slave’ s hands against the nimbus of shining white hair .
“Maybe not, but ‘taint the wild Caribee nor the backcountry ,
neither ,” Phaedre countered. “Y ou the mistress here; this your
weddin’. Everybody be lookin’ at you—you wantin’ to shame
me, wea r your hair down your  shoulders like a squaw , and
everybody be thinkin’ I don’ t know my business?”
“Oh, heaven forbid.” Jocasta’ s wide mouth twisted with an
irritable humor . “Dress it simply , if you please, swept back and
put up with com bs. Perhaps my niece will let you show of f
your skill on her locks.”
Phaedre cast a narrow glance ov er her shoulder at Brianna,
who sim ply smiled and shook her head. She’d worn a lace-
edged ca p for the sake of public decency , and wasn’ t disposed
to fuss with he r hair . The sla ve snorted, and resumed her
attempt to cajole Jocasta. Brianna closed her eyes, letting the
amicable bickering recede into the background. W arm sun fell
through the casement over her feet, and the fire purred andcrackled at her b ack, embracing her like the old woolen shawl
she had wrapped about herself and little Jem.
Beyond the voices of Jocasta and Phaedre, she could hear
the thru m of the house below . Every room in the house was
bursting with guests. Some were staying at nearby plantations,
and had ridden in for the festiv ities, but enough were staying
at R iver Run o vernight that all the bedchambers were full,
with guests sleeping five and six to a bed, and more on pallets
in the tents by the river landing.
Brianna eyed the expanse of Jocasta’ s big tester bed
enviously . Between the exigencies of travel, Jemmy , and the
crowded conditions at River Run, she and Roger hadn’ t slept
together in more than a week, and weren’ t likely to, until they
returned to the Ridge.
Not that sleeping together was t he major concern, nice as it
was. Th e tug of the baby’ s mouth on her breast aroused a
number of nonmaternal ur ges e lsewhere, which required both
Roger and a lit tle privacy for satisfaction. They had started
something prom ising the night before, in the pantry , but had
been interrupted by one of the kitchen slaves, coming in to
fetch a cheese. P erhaps the stable? She stretched her legs out,
toes curling, and wondered whether the grooms slept in the
stable or not.
“W ell, I  shall wear the brillian ts, then, but only to please
you, a nighean. ” Jocast a’ s hum orous voice pulled her out of
the a lluring vision of a dark, hay -lined stall, and Roger ’ s body ,
naked limbs half-seen in the gloom.
She glanced up from Jemmy’ s blissful suckling, to where
Jocasta s at upon the window se at, the spring light through the
casement falling across her face. She looked abstracted, Bree
thought, as though she were lis tening to something faint and
far -of f, that only she could h ear . Maybe the hum of the
wedding guests below .
The murmur in the house be low reminded her of her
mother ’ s summe r hives; a thrum  that you could hear if you put
your ear  against  one of the bee gums, a distant sound of busycontent. The product of this particular swarm was talk, rather
than honey , though the intent w as similar—the laying up of
reserves to see them through bleak and nectarless days of
deprivation.
“That will do, that will do.” Jocasta waved Phaedre away ,
getting t o her feet. She shooed t he maid out of the room, then
stood tapping her fingers restlessly on the dressing table,
clearly thinking  of further details that should be attended to.
Jocasta’ s brows drew together , and she pressed two fingers
against the skin above her eyes.
“Have y ou got a headache, Auntie?” Brianna kept her voice
low , so as not to disturb Jem my , who was nearly asleep.
Jocasta dropped  her hand and turned toward her niece with a
small, wry smile.
“Och, it’ s nothing. Whenever the weather turns, my poor
head turns with it!”
In sp ite of the smile, Brianna could see small lines of pain
tugging at the corners of Jocasta’ s eyes.
“Jem’ s n early finished. I’ll go a nd fetch Mama, shall I? She
could make you a tisane.”
Jocasta flapped a hand in dismissal, pushing away the pain
with an obvious ef fort.
“No need, a muirninn . It’ s none so bad as that.” She rubbed
at her temple, c areful of the hairdressing, the gesture belying
her words.
Jemmy’ s mouth  released its hol d with a small, milky pop!
and his head lo lled back. The crook of Brianna’ s elbow was
hot and sweaty ,  where his head had rested; his tiny ear was
crumpled and crimson. She lifted his inert body and sighed
with reli ef as the cool air struck her skin. A soft belch bubbled
out of him with  a dribble of excess milk, and he subsided
against her shoulder like a half-filled water balloon.
“Full, is he?” Jocasta smiled, bli nd eyes turned toward them
at the faint sound.“As a drum,” Brianna assured her . She patted his small
back, to be sure,  but heard no more than the soft sigh of sleep-
filled br eathing. She rose, wiped the milk from his chin, and
laid the baby on  his stomach in his makeshift cradle, a drawer
from Jocasta’ s mahogany chif fonier , laid on the floor and
thickly padded with pillows and quilts.
Brianna hung the shawl over the  back of the chair , shivering
slightly in a dra ft that leaked around the window frame. Not
wanting to risk her new dress b eing stained with spit-up milk,
she’d been nursing Jemmy in sh ift and stockings, and her bare
forearms were pebbled with gooseflesh.
Jocasta t urned her head in answer to the creak of wood and
rustle of  fabric, as Brianna ope ned the big armoire and took
out two linen petticoats and her dress, smoothing the panels of
soft, pale blue w ool with satisfaction. She had woven the cloth
and engineered the design of the gown herself—though Mrs.
Bug had spun the thread, Clair e had dyed it with indigo and
saxifrage, and Marsali had helped with the sewing.
“Shall I call Phaedre back to dress ye, lass?”
“No, that’ s all r ight, I can manage—if you’ll help me with
the l aces?” She didn’ t like to ca ll on the services of the slaves,
any more than could be help ed. The petticoats were no
problem; she simply stepped into them, one at a time, and
fastened the drawstrings round her waist. The stays needed to
be laced up the back, though, and so did the gown itself.
Jocasta’ s brows were still dark, bronze against the pale
apricot h ue of her skin. They ros e a little at the suggestion that
she help  to dress her niece, but she nodded, with no more than
a b rief hesitation . She turned he r blind eyes toward the hearth,
frowning a little.
“I suppo se I can. The laddie’ s not too near the fire, is he?
Sparks can jump, aye?”
Brianna wriggled into the stays, scooping her breasts up into
the scalloped hollows that supported them, then pulled the
gown on over them.“No, he ’ s not too near the fire,” she said patiently . She’d
made th e bodice with light bo ning in the front and sides.
Brianna turned slightly to and fro, admiring the ef fect in
Jocasta’ s lookin g glass. Catching sight in the mirror of her
aunt’ s sl ight frown behind her , she rolled her eyes at herself,
then bent and pulled the drawer a little farther from the hearth,
just in case.
“Thanks to ye f or humoring an auld woman,” Jocasta said
dryly , hearing the scrape of wood.
“Y ou’re welcom e, Aunt,” Brianna replied, letting both
warmth and apology show in her voice. She laid a hand on her
great-aunt’ s shoulder , and Jocasta put her own long hand over
it, squeezing gently .
“It’ s no that I th ink ye’re a negl ectful mother , aye?” Jocasta
said. “But when ye’ve lived so long as I have, ye may be
cautious, too, lass. I have seen dreadful things happen to
bairns, y e ken?”  she said, more softly . “And I should rather be
set afire myself, than see harm come to our bonnie lad.”
She moved behind Brianna and ran her hands lightly down
her niece’ s back, finding the lacings without trouble.
“Y e’ve regained  your figure, I see,” the old woman said
with approval, her hands skimming the sides of Brianna’ s
waist. “What is this—crewelwork? What color is it?”
“Dark in digo blu e. Flowering vines done in heavy cotton, to
contrast with the pale blue woo l.” She took one of Jocasta’ s
hands a nd guided the fingertips lightly over the vines that
covered each bone in the bodice, running from the scalloped
neck to the V of the waist, dropped sharply in front to show
of f the trim figure Jocasta had remarked upon.
Brianna drew in her breath as t he laces tightened, glancing
from he r reflection to her so n’ s small head, round as a
cantaloupe and heartbreakingly perfect. Not for the first time,
she wondered about her great-aunt’ s life. Jocasta had had
children, or at le ast Jamie thought so—but she never spoke ofthem, an d Brianna hesitated to a sk. Perhaps lost in infancy; so
many were. Her chest tightened at the thought.
“Dinna fash yourself,” her aunt said. Jocasta’ s face
readjusted itself into determine d cheerfulness in the mirror .
“Y on la ddie’ s born for great th ings; nay harm will come to
him, I’m sure.”
She turned, the g reen silk of her dressing gown rustling over
her petticoats, leaving Bree fresh ly startled at her aunt’ s ability
to divine people’ s feelings, even without seeing their faces.
“Phaedre!” Joca sta called. “Phaedre! Bring my case—the
black one.”
Phaedre was nearby , as always, and a brief rustling in the
drawers of the armoire produced the black case. Jocasta sat
down with it at her secretary .
The black leather case was ol d and worn, a narrow box
covered in weathered hide, unad orned save for its silver hasp.
Jocasta k ept her best jewels in a much grander case of velvet-
lined cedarwood, Brianna knew . What could be in this one?
She moved to st and beside her aunt as Jocasta put back the
lid. Inside the case was a short length of turned wood, the
thickness of a fi nger , and on it were ranged three rings: a plain
band of gold se t with a beryl, another with a lar ge cabochon
emerald, and the last with three diamonds, surrounded by
smaller stones that caught the light and threw it back in
rainbows that danced across the walls and beams.
“What a lovely ring!” Bree exclaimed involuntarily .
“Oh, the diamond one? W ell, H ector Cameron was aye a
rich man,” said Jocasta, absently touching the biggest ring.
Her long  finger s—unadorned—sorted deftly through a small
heap of trinkets that lay in the box beside the rings, and came
out with something small and dull.
She handed the tiny object to B rianna, who discovered it to
be a small pierc ed-work tin brooch, rather tarnished, made in
the shape of a heart.“That’ s a deasil  charm, a muirninn ,” Jocasta said, with a
satisfied nod. “Put it on the wean’ s skirts, behind.”
“A charm?” Brianna glanced at Jemmy’ s huddled form.
“What kind of charm?”
“Against the fairies,” Jocasta s aid. “Keep it pinned to the
lad’ s smock—always to the back, mind—and naught born of
the Auld Folk will trouble him.”
The hair on Brianna’ s forearms prickled slightly at the
matter -of-factness in the old woman’ s voice.
“Y our mother should ha’ told y e,” Jocasta went on, with a
hint of reproval in her voice. “But I ken as she’ s a Sassenach,
and your father likely wouldna think of it. Men don’ t,” she
added, w ith a hint of bitterness. “It’ s a woman’ s job to see to
the weans, to keep them from harm.”
Jocasta stooped to the kindling basket and groped among
the bits of debris , coming up wit h a long pine twig in her hand,
the bark still on it.
“T ake that,” she commanded, holding it out toward Brianna.
“Light t he end of it from the hearth, and walk ye round the
bairn three times. Sunwise, mind!”
Mystified, Brianna took the stick and thrust it into the fire,
then did as she was bid, holding the flaming twig well away
from both the makeshift crad le and her blue wool skirts.
Jocasta tapped her foot rhythmically on the floor , and chanted,
half under her breath.
She spo ke in Gaelic, but slowly enough that Brianna could
make out most of the words.
 
“W isdom of serpent be thine,
W isdom of raven be thine,
W isdom of valiant eagle.
 V oice of swan be thine,
V oice of honey be thine,
V oice of the Son of the stars.
 
Sain of the fairy-woman be thine,
Sain of the elf-dart be thine,
Sain of the r ed dog be thine.
 
Bounty of sea be thine,
Bounty of land be thine,
Bounty of the Father of Heaven.
 
Be each day glad for thee,
No day ill for thee,
A life joyful, satisfied.”
 
Jocasta p aused for a moment, a slight frown on her face, as
though listening for any backtalk from Fairyland. Evidently
satisfied, she motioned toward the hearth.
“Throw it into the fire. Then the wean will be safe from
burning.”
Brianna obeyed, finding to her fascination that she did not
find any of this even faintly  ridiculous. Odd, but very
satisfying to think that she was protecting Jem from harm—
even harm from fairies, which sh e didn’ t personally believe in.
Or she hadn’ t, before this.
A thread of music drifted up from below; the screek of a
fiddle, a nd the sound of a voice, deep and mellow . She
couldn’ t make out any words, but knew the sound of the song.
Jocasta cocked her head, listening, and smiled.“He’ s a good voice, your young man.”
Brianna listened, too. V ery faintly , she heard the familiar
rise and fall of “My Love Is in America,” somewhere below .
When I sing, it’ s always for yo u . H er breasts w ere soft now ,
drained of milk, but they tingled slightly at the memory .
“Y ou ha ve good  ears, Auntie,” s he said, tucking the thought
away with a smile.
“Are ye pleased in your marriage?” Jocasta asked abruptly .
“D’ye find yourself well-suited wi’ the lad?”
“Y es,” Brianna said, a little startled. “Y es—very much.”
“That’ s good.” Her great-aunt stood still, head tilted to the
side, still listening. “A ye, that’ s good,” she repeated, softly .
Seized by impulse, Brianna laid a hand on the older
woman’ s wrist.
“And you, Auntie?” she asked. “Are you … pleased?”
“Happy” seemed  not quite the word, in view of that row of
rings in the case. “W ell-suited” seemed not quite right, either ,
with her  memory of Duncan, skulking in the corner of the
drawing room the night before, shy and wordless whenever
anyone but Jamie spoke to him, sweating and nervous this
morning.
“Pleased?” Joca sta sounded puzzled. “Oh—to be married,
ye mean!” T o Brianna’ s relief, her aunt laughed, the lines of
her face drawing up in genuine amusement.
“Oh, ay e, surely ,” she said. “Why , it’ s the first time I shall
ha’ changed my name in fifty years!”
W ith a small s nort of amusement, the old lady turned
toward the window and pressed her palm against the glass.
“It’ s a fine day  out, lass,” she said. “Why not take your
cloak and have a bit of air and company?”
She was right; the distant river gleamed silver through a
lacework of green branches, and  the air inside, so cozy a few
moments ago, seemed now suddenly stale and frowsty .“I think I will.” Brianna glanced toward the makeshift
cradle. “Shall I call Phaedre to watch the baby?”
Jocasta waved a hand at her , shooing.
“Och, aw ay wi’ ye. I’ll mind the  bairnie. I dinna mean to go
down yet a while.”
“Thanks, Auntie.” She kissed the old woman’ s cheek, and
turned to  go—th en, with a glanc e at her aunt, took a step back
toward the hearth, and unobtru sively slid the cradle a little
farther from the fire.
 
THE AIR OUTSIDE was fresh,  and smelled of new grass and
barbecue smoke . It made her want to skip down the brick
paths, blood humming in her ve ins. She could hear the strains
of m usic from the house, and the sound of Roger ’ s voice. A
quick tu rn in the fresh air , and then she’d go in; perhaps Roger
would be ready for a break by then, and they could—
“Brianna!” She heard her name, hissed from behind the wall
of the kitchen g arden, and turned, startled, to find her father ’ s
head poking cautiously round th e corner , like a ruddy snail. He
jerked his chin at her and disappeared.
She cast  a quick look over her shoulder to be sure no one
was watching, and hastily whisked round the wall into the
shelter of a spro uting carrot bed, to find her father crouched
over the recumbent body of one  of the black maids, who was
sprawled atop a pile of aging manure with her cap over her
face.
“What o n earth—” Brianna began. Then she caught a whif f
of alcoh ol, pungent among the g arden scents of carrot tops and
sun-ripened manure. “Oh.” She squatted next to her father ,
skirts ballooning over the brick path.
“It was my fault,” he explained. “Or some of it, at least. I
left a cup under the willows, still half-full.” He nodded toward
the brick path, where one of Jo casta’ s punch cups lay on its
side, a sticky drop of liquid still  clinging to its rim. “She must
have found it.”Brianna leaned over and snif fed at the edge of the maid’ s
rumpled cap, now fluttering with heavy snores. Rum punch
was the prevailing odor , but she also detected the richly sour
scent of ale and the smooth tang of brandy . Evidently the slave
had been  thriftily disposing of any dregs left in the cups she
collected for washing.
She lifted the ru f fled edge of the cap with a cautious finger .
It was Betty , on e of the older maids, her face slack-lipped and
drop-jawed in alcoholic stupor .
“A ye, it wasna the first half-c up she’d had,” Jamie said,
seeing her . “She must have been reeling. I canna think how she
walked so far from the house, in such condition.”
Brianna glanced  back, frowning. The brick-walled kitchen
garden was near to the cookhou se, but a good three hundred
yards fr om the main house, and separated from it by a
rhododendron hedge, and several flower beds.
“Not just how ,” Brianna said, and tapped a finger against
her lip in puzzlement. “Why?”
“What?” He had been frowning at the maid, but glanced up
at he r to ne. She rose, and tilted h er head at the snoring woman.
“Why did  she  walk out here? It looks like she’ s been
tippling all day—she can’ t hav e been dashing out here with
every cup; somebody would have noticed. And why bother?
It’ s n ot l ike it would be hard to do without being noticed. If I
were drinking leftovers, I’d jus t stay there under the willows
and gulp it.”
Her father gave her a startled look, replaced at once with
one of wry amusement.
“W ould ye, then? A ye, that’ s a  thought. But perhaps there
was enough in the cup that she thought to enjoy it in peace.”
“Maybe so. But there are surely hiding places nearer the
river than this.” She reached do wn and scooped up the empty
cup. “What was it you were drinking, rum punch?”
“No, brandy .”“Then it  wasn’ t yours that push ed her over the edge.” She
held out  the cup, tilting it so he could see the dark dregs at the
bottom. Jocasta’ s rum punch was made not only with the usual
rum, sug ar , and butter but also with dried currants, the whole
concoction bein g mulled with a hot poker . The result not only
was dark  brown in color but always left a heavy sediment in
the cups , compo sed of tiny grai ns of soot from the poker and
the charred remnants of incinerated currants.
Jamie took the cup from her , frowning. He inserted his nose
into the cup and took a deep snif f, then stuck a finger into the
liquid and put it in his mouth.
“What is it?” she asked, seeing his face change.
“Punch,” he said, but ran the tip of his tongue back and
forth ov er his teeth, as though to  cleanse it. “W ith laudanum, I
think.”
“Laudanum! Are you sure?”
“No,” he said fr ankly . “But there’ s something in it beyond
dried currants, or I’m a Dutchman.” He held the cup out to her ,
and she took it, snif fing furiously . She couldn’ t make out much
beyond but the sweet, burned smell of rum punch. Perhaps
there was a sh arper tang, something oily and aromatic …
perhaps not.
“I’ll tak e your word for it,” she  said, wiping the tip of her
nose on the back of her hand. She glanced at the supine maid.
“Shall I go look for Mama?”
Jamie squatted beside the maid and inspected her carefully .
He l ifted a limp hand and felt it,  listened to her breathing, then
shook his head.
“I canna say wh ether she’ s drugged, or only drunk—but I
dinna think she’ s dying.”
“What shall we do with her? W e can’ t leave her lie.”
He looked down at the slave, frowning.
“No, of course not.” He sto oped and—quite gently—
gathered the woman into his arms. One worn shoe fell of f, andBrianna retrieved it from the brick walk.
“D’ye ken where she sleeps?” Jamie asked, gingerly
negotiating his stertorous burden round the edge of a
cucumber frame.
“She’ s a house slave; she must sleep in the attics.”
He nodd ed, tossing his head to dislodge a strand of red hair
that had blown into his mouth.
“V erra well, then, we’ll go roun d the stables and see can we
get up the back  stair without bein’ seen. Go across, will ye,
lass, and signal me when it’ s clear .”
She tucked shoe and cup under her cloak to hide them, then
ducked quickly out onto the narrow walk that led past the
kitchen garden, branching to c ookhouse and necessary . She
glanced to and fro, feigning casualness. There were a few
people within sight, near the paddock, but that was some
distance away— and all of them had their backs to her ,
engrossed with Mr . W ylie’ s black Dutch horses.
As s he t urned to  signal to her father , she caught sight of Mr .
W ylie himself, escorting a lady into the stable block. A gleam
of gold silk—wa it, it was her mother! Claire’ s pale face turned
momentarily in her direction, but her attention was fixed on
something W ylie was saying, and she didn’ t notice her
daughter on the path.
Bree hesitated, wanting to call to her mother , but couldn’ t
do s o w ithout at tracting unwant ed attention. W ell, at least she
knew where Claire was. She cou ld come and fetch her mother
to help—once they had Betty safely tucked away .
 
WITH A FEW CLOSE alarms and near -misses, they managed
to get Betty up to the long attic room she shared with the other
female house servants. Jamie, panting, dumped her
unceremoniously on one of the narrow beds, then wiped his
sweating brow on his coat slee ve, and, long nose wrinkled,
began fastidiously to dust manure crumbs from the skirts of
his coat.“So, then,” he sa id, a little grumpily . “She’ s safe, aye? If ye
tell one of the o ther slaves she’ s taken ill, I suppose no one
who matters will find out.”
“Thanks, Da.” She leaned close and kissed his cheek.
“Y ou’re a sweet man.”
“Oh, aye,” he sa id, sounding resigned. “My bones are filled
wi’ honey , to be  sure.” Still, he didn’ t look displeased. “Have
ye got that shoe,  still?” He took of f the maid’ s remaining shoe,
and plac ed it neatly beside its fellow beneath the bed, then
drew the coarse woolen blanket gently over the woman’ s feet,
grimy white in their thick stockings.
Brianna checked  the maid’ s co ndition; so far as she could
tell, everything seemed all right ; the woman was still snoring
wetly , but in a reassuringly reg ular manner . As they tiptoed
cautiously back down the rear s tairs, she gave Jamie the silver
cup.
“Here. Did you know this was one of Duncan’ s cups?”
“No.” He arched one brow , frowning. “What d’ye mean,
‘Duncan’ s cups’?”
“Aunt Jocasta had a set of six cups made for Duncan, for a
wedding present. She showed them to me yesterday . See?” She
turned the cup in her hand, to show him the engraved
monogram—”I,” for “Innes,” with a tiny fish, its scales
beautifully detailed, swimming round the letter .
“Does that help?” she asked, seeing his brow crease in
interest.
“It may . ” He pulled out a clean  cambric handkerchief and
wrapped the cup carefully befor e putting it in the pocket of his
coat. “I’ll go a nd find out. Meanwhile, can ye find Roger
Mac?”
“Of course. Why?”
“W ell, it  does occur to me that if yon Betty drank part of a
cup of rum punch and was laid out like a fish on a slab, then I
should like to fin d whoever drank the first part of it, and see ifthey’re in a similar condition.” He raised one brow at her . “If
the p unch was d rugged, then likely it was meant for someone,
aye? I thought p erhaps you and Roger Mac might look round
discreetly for bodies in the shrubbery .”
That aspect of the matter hadn’ t struck her in the rush to get
Betty upstairs.
“All right. I sho uld find Phaedre or Ulysses first, though,
and tell one of them that Betty’ s sick.”
“A ye. If ye spea k with Phaedre, ye might inquire whether
yon Bett y is an opium-eater as w ell as a bibber . Though I will
say I think it unlikely ,” he added dryly .
“So do I,” she s aid, matching his tone. She took his point,
though; perhaps the punch had not been drugged, but Betty
had taken the laudanum herself, on purpose. It was possible;
she knew Jocasta kept some in the stillroom. If she had taken it
herself, though, was it for recre ational use—or had the maid
perhaps intended to commit suicide?
She frow ned at Jamie’ s back, as he paused at the foot of the
stair , listening before stepping onto the landing. It was easy
enough to think that the misery of slavery might dispose one to
suicide. At the same time, honesty compelled her to admit that
Jocasta’ s house servants lived reasonably well; better than any
number of free individuals—black or  w hite— that she ’d seen
in W ilmington and Cross Creek.
The servants’ room was clean, the beds rough but
comfortable. The house servants had decent clothes, even to
shoes and stockings, and more than enough to eat. As for the
sorts of emotional complications that could lead one to
contemplate suicide—well, those weren’ t limited to slaves.
Much more likely that Betty was merely a toper , of the sort
who wo uld drin k anything even vaguely alcoholic—the reek
of her garments certainly suggested as much. But in that case,
why take the risk of stealing laudanum, on a day when the
wedding party insured there wo uld be an abundance of every
kind of drink?She was  reluctantly forced to the same conclusion that she
was sure  her father had already  reached. Betty had taken the
laudanum—if that’ s what it was, she reminded herself—by
accident. And if that was so … whose cup had she drunk
from?
Jamie turned, lips pursed to enjo in silence, and beckoned to
her that the coas t was clear . Sh e followed him quickly across
the land ing and outside, letting out her breath in relief as they
arrived on the path unobserved.
“What were you doing there i n the first place, Da?” she
asked. He looked blank.
“In t he k itchen g arden,” she elaborated. “How did you find
Betty?”
“Oh.” He took h er arm, fetching her away from the house.
They walked casually toward the paddock; innocent guests
bent on viewing  the horses. “I was just havin’ a word wi’ your
mother , over by the grove. I ca me back through the kitchen
garden, and there the woman was, flat on her back on the shit
heap.”
“That’ s a point, isn’ t it?” she asked. “Did she lie down in
the garden on p urpose, or was it only an accident that you
found her there?”
He shook his head.
“I di nna ken,” h e said. “But I mean to speak to Betty , once
she’ s sober . D’ye ken where your mother is now?”
“Y es, she’ s with Phillip W ylie. They were headed for the
stables, I think.” Her father ’ s no strils flared slightly at mention
of W ylie, and she suppressed a smile.
“I’ll fin d her ,” he said. “Mean while, lass, do you go and
speak to Phaedre—and, lass—”
She had  already turned to go;  at this, she looked back,
surprised.
“I think perhaps ye should tell Phaedre to say nothing unless
someone asks her where Betty is, and if they do, to tell you—or me.” He strai ghtened abruptly , clearing his throat. “Go find
your hu sband th en, lass—and, lass? Make sure no one kens
what you’re about, aye?”
He lifted  one brow , and she nodded in reply . He turned on
his h eel then, and strode of f toward the stables, the fingers of
his right hand tapping gently against his coat as though he
were deep in thought.
The chilly wind nipped under her skirts and petticoats,
belling them out and sending a deep shiver through her flesh.
She understood his implication well enough.
If it was neither attempted suicide nor accident—then it
might be intended murder . But of whom?43
FLIR T A TIONS
J AMIE HAD GIVEN ME a lingering kiss for encouragement
after our interlude, and crashed of f through the underbrush,
intending to hunt down Ninian Bell Hamilton and find out just
what the Regulators were up to at the camp Hunter had
mentioned. I followed, after a moment’ s interval for decency ,
but paus ed at the edge of the grove before emer ging back into
public view , to be sure I was seemly .
I had a rather light-headed se nse of well-being, and my
cheeks were very flushed, but I thought that wasn’ t
incriminating in  and of itself. Neither would coming out of the
wood be inculpatory; women and men alike often simply
stepped into the shelter of the trees along the lawn in order to
relieve themselves, rather than making their way to the
overcrowded and smelly necessaries. Coming out of the wood
flushed and breathing heavily , with leaves in my hair and sap
stains on  my skirt, though, wou ld cause a certain amount of
comment behind the fans.
There were a few sandburs and an empty cicada shell
clinging to my skirt, a ghostly excrescence that I picked of f
with a shudder o f distaste. There were dogwood petals on my
shoulder; I brushed them of f an d felt carefully over my hair ,
dislodging a few more that f luttered away like scraps of
fragrant paper .
Just as I stepped out from under  the trees, it occurred to me
to check the bac k of my skirt for stains or bits of bark, and I
was craning my neck to see over my shoulder when I walked
slap into Phillip W ylie.
“Mrs. Fraser!” He caught me b y the shoulders, to prevent
my falling backward. “Are you quite all right, my dear?”
“Y es, certainly .” My cheeks were flaming legitimately at
this point, and I  stepped back, shaking myself back into order .Why did  I keep bumping into Phillip W ylie? W as the little pest
following me? “I do apologize.”
“Nonsense, nonsense,” he said heartily . “It was my fault
entirely . Deuced clumsy of me. May I get you something to
restore your spirits, my dear? A glass of cider? W ine? Rum
punch? A syllabub? Applejack? Or—no, brandy . Y es, allow
me to bring you a bit of brandy to recover from the shock!”
“No, no thing, th ank you!” I co uldn’ t help laughing at his
absurdities, and he grinned back, obviously thinking himself
very witty .
“W ell, if  you are quite recovere d, then, dear lady , you must
come with me. I insist.”
He h ad my hand  tucked into the  crook of his arm, and was
towing me determinedly of f in  the direction of the stable,
despite my protests.
“It will take no  more than a moment,” he assured me. “I
have been looking forward all day to showing you my
surprise. Y ou will be utterly entranced, I give you my word!”
I s ubsided feebly; it seemed less trouble to go and look at
the dam ned horses again than to ar gue with him—and there
was plen ty of time to speak with Jocasta before the wedding,
in any case. This time, though, we skirted the paddock where
Lucas and his companions were submitting tolerantly to
inspection by a couple of bold gentlemen who had climbed the
fence for a closer look.
“That is  an amazingly good-tempered stallion,” I said with
approval, menta lly contrasting Lucas’ s kindly manners with
Gideon’ s rapacious personality . Jamie still had not found time
to castrate the horse, who had consequently bitten almost
everyone, horse and man alike, on the journey to River Run.
“A mark of the breed,” W ylie  replied, pushing open the
door tha t led to t he main stable. “They are the most amiable of
horses, though a gentle disposition does not impair their
intelligence, I do assure you. This way , Mrs. Fraser .”By c ontrast with the brilliant da y outside, it was pitch-dark
in th e st able; so  dark that I stumbled over an uneven brick in
the f loor , and M r . W ylie seized my arm as I lurched forward
with a startled cry .
“Are you all r ight, Mrs. Fraser?” he asked, setting me
upright again.
“Y es,” I  said, a little breathless. In fact I had both stubbed
my toe viciousl y and turned my ankle; my new morocco-
heeled shoes were lovely , but I wasn’ t used to them yet. “Just
let me stand a moment—’ til my eyes adjust.”
He did, but he d idn’ t let go of my arm. Instead, he pulled
my hand  throug h the crook of his elbow and set it solidly , to
give me more support.
“Lean on me,” he said, simply .
I di d, and we stood quietly for a moment, me with my
injured foot drawn up like a he ron’ s, waiting for my toes to
stop thro bbing. For once, Mr . W ylie seemed bereft of quips
and sallies; perhaps because of the peaceful atmosphere.
Stables on the whole ar e  pea ceful, horses and the peop le
who tend them being generally kindly sorts of creatures. This
one, though, had a special air , b oth quiet and vibrant. I could
hear sma ll rustlings and stampings, and the contented noise of
a horse champing hay close at hand.
So close  to Phillip W ylie, I was aware of his perfume, but
even the expensive whif f of musk and ber gamot was overcome
by the stable sm ells. It smelled of fresh straw and grain, of
brick and wood, but there was a faint scent as well of more
elemental things—manure and blood and milk; the basic
elements of motherhood.
“It’ s rather womblike in here, isn’ t it?” I said softly . “So
warm and dark, I mean. I can almost feel the heartbeat.”
W ylie laughed, but quietly .
“That’ s mine,” he said. He tou ched a hand briefly to his
waistcoat, a dark shadow against the pale satin.My eyes adapted quickly to the dark, but even so, the place
was very dim. T he lithe shadow-shape of a stable cat glided
past, ma king me wobble and set down my injured foot. It
wouldn’ t yet bear weight, but I c ould at least put it to the floor .
“Can you stand for a moment alone?” W ylie asked.
W ithout waiting  for my reply , he detached himself and went
to light a lantern that stood on a nearby stool. There were a
few fain t chinks  of flint and steel, then the wick caught and a
soft glob e of yellow light balloo ned around us. T aking my arm
again with his free hand, he led me toward the far end of the
stable.
They w ere in the loose-box at  the end. Phillip raised the
lantern h igh, tur ning to smile at  me as he did so. The lantern
light gleamed on hide that shone and rippled like midnight
water , and glowed in the huge brown eyes of the mare as she
turned toward us.
“Oh,” I said soft ly , “how beautiful,” and then, a little louder ,
“Oh!” The mare had moved a little, and her foal peered out
from beh ind her mother ’ s legs. She was long-legged and knob-
kneed, her tiny r ump and sloping shoulders rounded echoes of
her mother ’ s muscular perfection. She had the same lar ge,
kind eyes, fringed with long, lo ng lashes—but instead of the
sleek hid e of rippling black, she  was a dark reddish-brown and
fuzzy as a rabbit, with an absurd little whisk broom of a tail.
Her dam had the same glorious profusion of flowing mane I
had note d on the Friesians in the paddock; the baby had a
ridiculous crest of stif f hair , a bout an inch long, that stuck
straight up like a toothbrush.
The foa l blinked once, dazzled by the light, then ducked
swiftly behind the shelter of her mother ’ s body . A moment
later , a small nose protruded cautiously into sight, nostrils
twitching. A big eye follow ed, blinked—and the nose
vanished, only to reappear almost instantly , a little further this
time.
“Why , you little flirt!” I said, delighted.W ylie laughed.
“She is indeed,” he said, v oice filled with pride of
ownership. “Are they not magnificent?”
“W ell, y es,” I said, considering . “They are. Still, I’m not
sure that ’ s quite it. ‘Magnificent’ seems more like what you’d
say of a stallion, or a warhorse of some kind. These horses are
… well, they’re sweet !”
W ylie gave a small, amused sort of snort.
“Sweet?” he said. “Sweet?”
“W ell, y ou know ,” I said, laughing. “Charming. Good-
natured. Delightful.”
“All those things,” he said, turning to me. “And beautiful, as
well.” H e wasn’ t looking at the horses, but rather at me, a faint
smile on his face.
“Y es,” I said, f eeling a small, obscure twinge of unease.
“Y es, they are very beautiful.”
He was standing very close; I took a step to the side and
turned away , under the pretext o f looking at the horses again.
The foal was nuzzling at the mare’ s swollen udder , scraggy tail
waggling with enthusiasm.
“What are their names?” I asked.
W ylie m oved to the bar of the loose-box, casually , but in
such a way that his arm brushed my sleeve as he reached
above me to hang the lantern from a hook on the wall.
“The mare’ s name is T essa,” he said. “Y ou saw the sire,
Lucas. A s for the filly …” He reached for my hand, and lifted
it, smiling. “I thought I might name her La Belle Claire.”
I did n’ t move for a second, stunned by sheer disbelief at the
expression that showed quite clearly on Phillip W ylie’ s face.
“What?” I said blankly . Surely  I was wrong, I thought. I
tried to snatch m y hand away , b ut I had hesitated one second
too long , and his fingers tighten ed on mine. Surely he wasn’ t
really meaning to …He was.
“Charming,” he  said softly , a nd moved closer . “Good-
natured. Delightful. And … beautiful.” He kissed me.
I wa s so shocked that I didn’ t move for a moment. His
mouth was soft, the kiss br ief and chaste. That hardly
mattered, though; it was the fact that he had done it.
“Mr . W ylie!” I said. I took a hasty step back, but was
brought up short by the rail.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said softly , and took the same step
forward. “My dear .”
“I am not  you r—” I began, and he kissed me again. W ithout
the least hint o f chasteness. Still shocked, but no longer
stunned, I shoved him, hard. He wobbled, and lost his grip on
my hand , but recovered instantly , seizing me by the arm and
slipping his other hand behind me.
“Flirt,” he whispered, and lowered his face toward mine. I
kicked h im. Unfortunately , I kicked him with my injured foot,
which deprived the blow of much force, and he ignored it.
I began to struggle in good earn est, as the sense of stunned
disbelief faded into the awareness that the young man had one
hand fir mly on my backside. A t the same time, I was aware
that there were a good many people in the vicinity of the
stable; the last thing I wanted was to attract attention.
“Stop that!” I hissed. “Stop it at once!”
“Y ou m adden m e,” he breathed, pressing me to his bosom
and attempting to stick his tongue in my ear .
I certainly thought he was mad, but I declined absolutely to
accept any responsibility for the  condition. I jerked back as far
as I could—not far , with the rail ing at my back—and fought to
get one hand b etween us. Shock quite gone by now , I was
thinking with surprising clarity . I couldn’ t knee him in the
balls; h e had one leg thrust between my own, trapping a
wodge of skirt in my way . If I could get my hand round histhroat and get a sound hold of h is carotids, though, he’d drop
like a rock.
I d id get hold of his throat, but his blasted stock was in the
way; my fingers scrabbled at it, and he jerked to the side,
grabbing at my hand.
“Please,” he said. “I want—”
“I don’ t give a d amn what  you want!” I said. “Let go of me
this instant, you—you—” I groped wildly for some suitable
insult. “Y ou— puppy !”
Rather to my surprise, he stopped. His face couldn’ t go pale,
being already covered in rice flo ur—I could taste it on my lips
—but his mouth was set, and his expression was … rather
wounded.
“Is that really what you think of me?” he asked in a low
voice.
“Y es, it bloody is!” I said. “Wh at else am I to think? Have
you lost your mind, behaving in this—this despicable fashion?
What is the matter with you?”
“Despicable?” He seemed quite taken aback to hear his
advances described in this fashion. “But I—that is, you—I
thought you were … I mean, might be not averse—”
“Y ou can’ t,” I said, positively . “Y ou can’ t possibly have
thought anything of the sort. I’ve never given you the slightest
reason t o think such a thing!” Nor had I—intentionally . The
uneasy thought came to me, though, that perhaps my
perceptions of my own behavio r were not quite the same as
Phillip W ylie’ s.
“Oh, haven’ t you?” His face was changing, clouding with
anger . “I beg to dif fer with you, madam!”
I had told him I was old enough to be his mother; it had
never for a moment occurred to me that he didn’ t believe it.
“Flirt,” he said again, though in  quite a dif ferent tone than
the first time. “N o reason? Y ou have given me every reason,
since the first occasion of our meeting.”“What?” My voice went up a tone, in incredulity . “I’ve
never done anything but engage you in civil conversation. If
that constitutes flirtation in your  book, my lad, then—”
“Don’ t call me that!”
Oh, so he had  noti ced that there was a dif ference of age. He
simply h adn’ t ap preciated the magnitude, I thought. It came to
me, with a certain feeling of apprehension, that at Phillip’ s
level of society , most flirtation was indeed conducted under
the guise of ban ter . What in the name of God had I said to
him?
I had  some dim recollection of having discussed the Stamp
Act with him and his friend Stanhope. Y es, taxes, and, I
thought, horses—but surely that  couldn’ t have been suf ficient
to inflame his misapprehensions?
“Thine eyes ar e like the fishpools in Heshbon,”  he said,
low-voiced and bitter . “Do you not recall the evening when I
said that to yo u? The Song of Solomon is merely ‘civil
conversation’ to you, is it?”
“Good grief.” I was, despite myself, beginning to feel
slightly guilty; we had  had a brief exchange along those lines,
at Jocast a’ s party , two or three years ago. And he remembered
it? The Song of Solomon was reasonably heady stuf f; perhaps
the simp le reference … Then I shook myself mentally , and
drew myself up straight.
“Nonsense,” I declared. “Y ou w ere teasing me, and I simply
answered you in kind. Now , I really must—”
“Y ou came in he re with me today . Alone.” He took another
step toward me, eyes determined. He was talking himself back
into it, the fatheaded popinjay!
“Mr . W y lie,” I said firmly , sliding sideways. “I am terribly
sorry if you have somehow mis understood the situation, but I
am very happily married, and I  have no romantic interest in
you whatsoever . And now , if yo u will excuse me …” I ducked
past him, and hurried out of the stable, as fast as my shoeswould allow . He made no ef for t to follow me, though, and I
reached the outdoors unmolested, my heart beating fast.
There were people near the paddock; I turned in the other
direction, going round the end of the stable block before
anyone should see me. Once out of sight, I made a swift
inventory , checking to be sure that I didn’ t look too
disheveled. I didn’ t know whether anyone had seen me going
into the stable with W ylie; I could only hope no one had seen
my hasty exit.
Only on e lock of hair had come down in the recent
contretemps; I pinned it careful ly back, and dusted a few bits
of straw from my skirts. Fortunately , he hadn’ t torn my
clothes; a retucked kerchief and I was quite decent again.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
I leaped like a  gaf fed salmon, and so did my heart. I
whirled, adrenaline jolting through my chest like an electic
current, to find Jamie standing b eside me, frowning slightly as
he surveyed me.
“What have ye been doing, Sassenach?”
My hea rt was still stuck in my throat, choking me, but I
forced out what I hoped were a few nonchalant words.
“Nothing. I mean, looking at the horses—horse. The mare.
She has a new foal.”
“A ye, I know ,” he said, looking at me oddly .
“Did you find Ninian? What did  he have to say?” I groped
behind my head, tidying my hai r and taking the opportunity to
turn away a little, to avoid his eye.
“He says it’ s true—though I hadna doubted it. There are
more tha n a thousand men, camped near Salisbury . And more
joining them each day , he says. The auld mumper is pleased
about it! ” He frowned, drumming the two stif f fingers of his
right ha nd lightly against his leg, and I realized that he was
rather worried.Not without cause. Putting aside  the threat of conflict itself,
it w as spring. Only the fact that River Run was in the
piedmont had allowed us to come to Jocasta’ s wedding; down
here, the woods were cloudy with blossom and crocuses
popped through the earth like orange and purple dragon’ s-
teeth, but the mountains were still cloaked in snow , the tree
branches sporting swollen bud s. In two weeks or so, those
buds would burst, and it would be time for the spring planting
on Fraser ’ s Ridge.
T rue, Jamie had provided for su ch an emer gency by finding
old Arch Bug, but Arch coul d manage only so much by
himself. And as for the tenants and homesteaders … if the
militia were raised again, the w omen would be left to do the
planting alone.
“The men in this camp—they’re men who’ve left their land,
then?” Salisbury was in the piedmont, as well. It wasn’ t
thinkable for working farmers to abandon their land at this
time of year for the sake of protest against the government, no
matter how annoyed they were.
“Left it, or lost it,” he said briefly . The frown deepened as
he looked at me. “Have ye spoken wi’ my aunt?”
“Ah … no,” I sa id, feeling guilty . “Not yet. I was just going
… oh—you said there was an other problem. What else has
happened?”
He made a sound like a hissing teakettle, which for him
betokened rare impatience.
“Christ, I’d nearly for got her . One of the slave women’ s
been poisoned, I think.”
“What? Who? How?” My hands dropped from my hair as I
stared at him. “Why didn’ t you tell me?”
“I am  t elling ye, am I  not? Dinna fas h yourself, she’ s in no
danger . Only stinking drunk.” He twitched his shoulders
irritably . “The only dif ficulty is that perhaps it wasna her that
was mea nt to be poisoned. I’ve sent Roger Mac and Brianna tolook, and they’ve not come back to say anyone’ s dead, so
maybe not.”
“ Maybe  n ot?” I rubbed  the bridge of my nose, distracted
from the extant worries by this new development. “I grant you,
alcohol is poisonous, not that anyone seems ever to realize it,
but there’ s a dif ference between being drunk and being
deliberately poisoned. What do you mean—”
“Sassenach,” he interrupted.
“What?”
“What i n the name o’ God have ye been doing?” he burst
out.
I stared at him in bewilderment. His face had been growing
redder as we ta lked, though I had supposed it to be only
frustration and worry over Ninian, and the Regulators. It
dawned on me, catching a dange rous blue glint in his eye, that
there wa s something rather more personal about his attitude. I
tilted my head to one side, giving him a wary look.
“What do you mean, what have I been doing?”
His lips pressed tight together , and he didn’ t answer .
Instead, he extended a forefinger and touched it, very
delicately , beside my mouth. He turned his hand over then, and
presented me with a small dark object clinging to the tip of his
finger—Phillip W ylie’ s star -shaped black beauty mark.
“Oh.” I felt a distinct buzzing in my ears. “That. Er …” My
head fel t light, and small spots—all shaped like black stars—
danced before my eyes.
“Y es, that,” he snapped. “Christ, woman! I’m deviled to
death wi’ Duncan’ s havers and Ninian’ s pranks—and why did
ye not tell me he’d been fighting wi’ Barlow?”
“I’d scarcely describe it as a f ight,” I said, struggling to
regain a sense of coolness. “Be sides, Major MacDonald put a
stop to it since you  were nowhere to be found. And if you want
to be told things, the Major wants—”“I ke n what he wants.” He dismissed the Major with a curt
flick of his han d. “A ye, I’m u p to my ears in Majors and
Regulators and drunken maid servants, and you’r e  o ut in the
stable, canoodling wi’ that fop!”
I fel t the blood rising behind my eyes, and curled my fists,
in order to control the impulse to slap him.
“I was not  ‘ca noodling’ in the slightest degree, and you
know it! The beastly little twerp made a pass at me, that’ s all.”
“A pass? Made love to ye, ye mean? A ye, I can see that!”
“He did not!”
“Oh, aye ? Y e asked him to let ye  try his bawbee on for luck,
then?” He waggled the finger w ith the black patch under my
nose, and I slap ped it away , rec alling a moment too late that
“make l ove to” merely meant to engage in amorous flirtation,
rather than fornication.
“I mean ,” I said,  through clenched teeth , “that he kissed me.
Probably for a joke. I’m old enough to be his mother , for
God’ s sake!”
“More like his grandmother ,” Jamie said brutally . “Kissed
ye, forbye—why in hell did ye encourage him, Sassenach?”
My mouth dropped open in outrage—insulted as much at
being called Phillip W ylie’ s grandmother as at the accusation
of having encouraged him.
“Encourage him? Why , you bloody idiot! Y ou know
perfectly well I didn’ t encourage him!”
“Y our own daughter saw ye go in there with him! Have ye
no s hame? W ith all else there is to deal with here, am I to be
forced to call the man out, as well?”
I fel t a slight qu alm at the thou ght of Brianna, and a lar ger
one at the thought of Jamie ch allenging W ylie to a duel. He
wasn’ t w earing his sword, but he’d brought it with him. I
stoutly dismissed both thoughts.“ My  dau ghter is neit her a fool nor an evil-minded gossip,” I
said, with immense dignity . “She wouldn’ t think a thing of my
going to look a t a horse, and why ought she? Why ought
anyone, for that matter?”
He b lew out a long breath through pursed lips, and glared at
me.
“Why , indeed? Perhaps because everyone saw ye flirt with
him on the lawn? Because they saw him follow ye about like a
dog afte r a bitch in heat?” He must have seen my expression
alter dangerously at that, for he coughed briefly and hurried
on.
“More than one person’ s seen f it to mention it to me. D’ye
think I like bein’ made a public laughingstock, Sassenach?”
“Y ou—you—” Fury choked me. I wanted to hit him, but I
could see interested heads turnin g toward us. “‘Bitch in heat’?
How dare you say such a thing to me, you bloody bastard?”
He had the dece ncy to look slig htly abashed at that, though
he was still glowering.
“A ye, well. I shouldna have sai d it quite that way . I didna
mean—but ye did  go of f with him, Sassenach. As though I
hadna enough to contend with,  my own wife … and if ye’d
gone to see my  aunt, as I asked ye, then it wouldna have
happened in the first place. Now see what ye’ve done!”
I h ad changed m y mind about the desirability of a duel. I
wanted Jamie and Phillip W yli e to kill each other , promptly ,
publicly , and with the maximum amount of blood. I also didn’ t
care who was lo oking. I made a very serious ef fort to castrate
him with my ba re hands, and he grabbed my wrists, pulling
them up sharply .
“Christ! Folk are watching, Sassenach!”
“I … don’ t … bloody … care!” I hissed, struggling to get
free. “Let go of  me, and I’ll fucking give them something to
watch!”I didn’ t take my eyes of f his fac e, but I was aware of a good
many other faces turning toward  us in the crowd on the lawn.
So w as he. His brows drew together for a moment, then his
face set in sudden decision.
“All right, then,” he said. “Let them watch.”
He w rapped his arms around m e, pressed me tight against
himself, and kissed me. Unable to get loose, I quit fighting,
and went stif f and furious instea d. In the distance, I could hear
laughter and raucous whoops of encouragement. Ninian
Hamilton shouted something in Gaelic that I was pleased not
to understand.
He final ly moved his lips of f mine, still holding me tightly
against him, and very slowly b ent his head, his cheek lying
cool and firm next to mine. His body was firm, too, and not at
all c ool. The he at of him was leaching through at least six
layers o f cloth to reach my own skin: shirt, waistcoat, coat,
gown, shift, and stays. Whether  it was anger , arousal, or both,
he was fully stoked and blazing like a furnace.
“I’m sor ry ,” he said quietly , hi s breath hot and tickling in
my ear . “I didna  mean to insult ye. T ruly . Shall I kill him, and
then myself?”
I relaxed, very slightly . My hips were pressed solidly
against him, and with only five layers of fabric between us
there, the ef fect was reassuring.
“Perhaps not quite yet,” I said. I felt light-headed from the
rush of adrenali ne, and took a deep breath to steady myself.
Then I drew bac k a little, recoiling from the pungent reek that
wafted o f f his clothes. Had I no t been so upset, I would have
noticed immediately that he was the source of the vile aroma I
had been smelling.
“What on earth have you been doing?” I snif fed at the breast
of his coat, frowning. “Y ou smell terrible! Like—”
“Manure,” he said, sounding resigned. “A ye, I know .” His
arms relaxed.“Y es, manure,” I said, snif fing further . “And rum punch”—
he h adn’ t been drinking rum punch himself, though; I had
tasted nothing but brandy when he kissed me—”and
something awful, like old sweat, and—”
“Boiled turnips,” he said, sounding more resigned. “A ye, the
maid se rvant I was telling ye a bout, Sassenach. Betty , she’ s
called.” He tucked my hand into the crook of his arm, and with
a deep bow of acknowledgment toward the crowd—who all
applauded, damn them—turned to steer me toward the house.
“It would be as well if ye can get anything sensible out of
her ,” he said, w ith a glance to ward the sun, which hung in
mid-sky above the tops of the willows along the river . “But it’ s
growing late; I t hink perhaps ye’d best go up and speak to my
aunt first, if there’ s to be a wedding at four o’clock.”
I too k a deep br eath, trying to s ettle myself. A good deal of
unexpended emotion was still sloshing round inside me, but
there was plainly work to do.
“Right, then,” I said. “I’ll see Jocasta, and then have a look
at Betty . As for Phillip W ylie …”
“As for Phillip W ylie,” he interrupted, “dinna give him
another though t, Sassenach.” A certain look of inward
intentness grew in his eyes. “I’ll take care of him, later .”44
PRIV A TE P AR TS
I  LEFT JAMIE in the parlor , and made my way up the stairs
and along the hall toward Jocasta’ s room, nodding distractedly
to fr iends and ac quaintances enc ountered along the way . I was
disconcerted, an noyed—and a t the same time, reluctantly
amused. I hadn’ t spent so much time in bemused
contemplation o f a penis since I was sixteen or so, and here I
was, preoccupied with three of the things.
Finding myself alone in the hal l, I opened my fan, peering
thoughtfully into the tiny round looking glass that served as a
lake in the pastoral scene painted on it. Meant as an aid to
intrigue rather than grooming, the glass showed me no more
than a few square inches of my  face at once—one eye and its
arched brow regarded me quizzically .
It was quite a pretty eye, I admitted. There were lines
around it, true, but it was nicely shaped, gracefully lidded, and
equipped with long, curving lashes whose dark sable
complemented t he black pupil and contrasted very strikingly
with the gold-flecked amber of the iris.
I m oved the fan a bit, to get a view of my mouth. Full-
lipped, and rather fuller than usu al at present, to say nothing of
a dark, moist p ink. The lips lo oked as though someone had
been kissing them rather roughly . They also looked as though
they’d liked it.
“Hm!” I said, and snapped shut the fan.
W ith my  blood no longer boilin g, I could admit that Jamie
might perhaps be right about Ph illip W ylie’ s intent in making
objectionable advances to me. He might not be, too. But
regardless of the young man’ s underlying motives, I did have
incontrovertible proof that he  had found me physically
appealing, grandmother or not. I rather thought I wouldn’ t
mention that to Jamie, though; Phillip W ylie was a veryannoying young man, but upon cooler reflection, I had decided
that I would prefer not to have h im disemboweled on the front
lawn, after all.
Still, maturity did alter one’ s perspective somewhat. For all
the p ersonal implications of those male members in an excited
state, it was the flaccid one th at most interested me at the
moment. My fingers itched to get hold of Duncan Innes’ s
private parts—figuratively , at least.
There were not so many kinds of trauma, short of outright
castration, that would cause physical impotence. Sur gery
nowadays being the primitive af fair it was, I supposed that it
was possible that whatever doctor had attended the original
injury—if one did—had in fact simply removed both testicles.
If that were the case, though, would Duncan not have said so?
W ell, pe rhaps no t. Duncan was an intensely shy and modest
man, and even a more extroverted personality might hesitate to
confide a misfortune of that exte nt, even to an intimate friend.
Could h e have concealed such a n injury in the close confines
of a prison, though? I drummed my fingers on the inlaid
marquetry of the table outside Jocasta’ s door , considering.
It was certainly possible for men to go for several years
without bathing ; I’d seen a few who obviously had. On the
other hand, the p risoners at Ardsmuir had been forced to work
outdoors, cutting peat and quarrying stone; they would have
had regu lar acc ess to open wa ter , and presumably would at
least hav e washed periodically , if only to keep the itching of
vermin a t bay . I supposed one could wash without necessarily
stripping naked, though.
I suspected that Duncan was still more or less intact. It was
much more likely , I thought, that his impotence was
psychological in origin; having one’ s testes badly bruised or
crushed was bound to give a ma n pause, after all, and an early
experiment might easily have convinced Duncan that all was
up with him—or rather , down.
I paused  before knocking, but not for long. I had had some
experience of giving people bad news, after all, and the onething that experience had taug ht me was that there was no
point in preparation, or worry over what to say . Eloquence
didn’ t help, and bluntness was no bar to sympathy .
I rapped sharply on the door , and entered at Jocasta’ s
invitation.
Father LeClerc was present, seated at a small table in the
corner , dealing in a workmanlike manner with a lar ge
assortment of edibles. T wo bottles of wine—one empty—
stood on the ta ble as well, an d the priest looked up at my
entrance with a greasily beami ng smile that appeared to go
round his face and tie together behind his ears.
“T ally-ho, Madame!” he said cheerfully , and brandished a
turkey leg at me in greeting. “T ally-ho, T ally-ho!”
“Bonjour”  seemed  almost repressive by contrast, so I
contented mysel f with a curtsy and a brief “Cheerio, then!” in
reply .
There was clearly no way of dislodging the priest, and
nowhere else to take Jocasta, a s Phaedre was in the dressing
room, making a great to-do w ith a pair of clothes brushes.
Still, given the limits of Father LeClerc’ s English, I supposed
absolute privacy was not a requirement.
I touched Jocasta’ s elbow , therefore, and murmured
discreetly that perhaps we migh t sit down in the window seat,
as I  had somet hing of importance to discuss with her . She
looked surprised, but nodded,  and with a bow of excuse
toward Father LeClerc—who didn’ t notice, being occupied
with a stubborn bit of gristle—came to sit down beside me.
“A ye, ni ece?” she said, having adjusted her skirts over her
knees. “What is it, then?”
“W ell,” I said, ta king a deep breath, “it’ s to do with Duncan.
Y ou see …”
And she  did. Her face grew quite blank with astonishment
as I began to talk, but I was conscious of a growing sense of
something else in her attitude as she listened—almost …
relief, I thought, surprised.Her lips pursed in absorption, the blind blue eyes fixed in
her usua l unsettling way , a little  over my right shoulder . There
was concern in her manner , but no great distress. Her
expression was altering, in fact, changing from startlement to
the look  of one who suddenl y finds an explanation for a
previously troub ling circumstan ce—and is both relieved and
satisfied to have discovered it.
It occurred to me that she and Duncan had  been living under
the s ame roof fo r more than a year , and had been engaged to
be married for months. Duncan’ s attitude toward her in public
was always respectful—even de ferential—and thoughtful, but
he made no physical gestures of tenderness or possession
toward her . That was not unusu al in the least, for the times;
though some gentlemen were demonstrative toward their
wives, others were not. But p erhaps he hadn’ t made such
gestures in private, either , and she had expected them.
She had been beautiful, was handsome still, and quite
accustomed to the admiration of men; sightless or not, I had
seen her flirt skillfully with Andrew MacNeill, Ninian Bell
Hamilton, Richa rd Caswell—even with Farquard Campbell.
Perhaps she had been surprised, and even mildly discomfited,
to provoke no apparent show of physical interest from
Duncan.
Now she knew why , though, a nd drew in a deep breath,
shaking her head slowly .
“My God, the p oor man,” she said. “T o suf fer such a thing,
and come to terms with it and then, all at once, to have it be
dragged up afresh to worry him . Dear Bride, why cannot the
past leav e us be in what peace  we have made with it?” She
looked down, blinking, and I w as both surprised and touched
to see that her eyes were moist.
A la r ge presence loomed up suddenly beyond her , and I
glanced up to see Father LeC lerc hovering over us, like a
sympathetic thundercloud in his black habit.
“Is ther e trouble?” he said to me, in French. “Monsieur
Duncan, he has suf fered some injury?”Jocasta didn’ t speak more tha n “Comment allez-vous?”
French, but was clearly able t o understand the tone of the
question, as well as to pick out Duncan’ s name.
“Don’ t t ell him,” she said to me, with some ur gency , putting
her hand on my knee.
“No, no,” I assu red her . I look ed up at the priest, flicking
my finge rs in indication that the re was nothing to worry about.
“Non, non , ”  I  said in  turn to him. “C’est rien.”  It’ s nothing.
He frowned at me, uncertain, then glanced at Jocasta.
“A dif fic ulty of the marriage bed, is it?” he asked bluntly , in
French. My face must have be trayed dismay at this, for he
gestured discreetly downward, t oward the front of his habit. “I
heard th e word ‘scrotum,’ Madame, and think you do not
speak of animals.”
I realized—a good bit too late—that while Father LeClerc
spoke no English, he most certainly spoke Latin.
“Mer de,”  I said under my breath, causing Jocasta, who had
glanced up sharply at the word “ scrotum” herself, to turn back
toward m e. I patted her hand reassuringly , trying to make up
my min d what to do. Father LeClerc was regarding us with
curiosity , but also with great kindness in his soft brown eyes.
“I’m afr aid he’ s guessed the gen eral shape of things,” I said
apologetically to Jocasta. “I think perhaps I had better
explain.”
Her upper teeth fastened over her lower lip, but she made no
demur , and I exp lained matters in French, as briefly as I could.
The priest’ s eyebrows rose, and he clutched automatically for
the wooden rosary that hung from his belt.
“Oui, mer de, Madame,”  he said . “Quelle tragedie.”  He
crossed himself briefly with the crucifix, then quite unself-
consciously wip ed the grease from his beard onto his sleeve,
and sat down beside Jocasta.
“Ask her , please, Madame, what is her desire in this matter ,”
he said to me. The tone was polite, but it was an order .“Her desire?”
“ Oui . Does she wish still to be married to Monsieur
Duncan, even knowing this? F or see you, Madame, by the
laws of Holy Mother Church, such an impediment to
consummation is a bar to tru e marriage. I ought not to
administer the sacrament of  matrimony , knowing this.
However—” he  hesitated, pursing his lips in thought as he
glanced at Jocasta. “However , the purpose of such provision is
the intent that m arriage shall be a fruitful union, if God so
wills. In this case, there is no question of God willing such a
thing. S o, you see …” He raised one shoulder in a Gallic
shrug.
I tra nslated this question to Joca sta, who had been squinting
toward the priest, as though she could divine his meaning by
sheer fo rce of will. Enlightened, her face grew blank, and she
sat b ack a little. Her face had as sumed a MacKenzie look; that
characteristic calm, still mask  that meant a great deal of
furious thinking was going on behind it.
I was slightly disturbed, and not only on Duncan’ s behalf. It
hadn’ t occurred to me that this  revelation could prevent the
wedding. Jamie wanted his aunt protected, and Duncan
provided for . The marriage had seemed the perfect answer; he
would b e perturbed if things sh ould come unstuck at this late
date.
After on ly a moment, though, Jocasta stirred, letting out her
breath in a deep sigh.
“W ell, thank Christ I’d the luck to get a Jesuit,” she said
dryly . “O ne of them could ar gue the Pope out of his drawers,
let a lone deal w i’ a small matter of reading the Lord’ s mind.
A ye, tell him I do desire to be married, still.”
I conveyed this to Father LeClerc, who frowned slightly ,
examining Jocasta with great  attention. Unaware of this
scrutiny , she raised one brow , waiting for his reply .
He cleared his throat, and sp oke, his eyes still on her ,
though he was speaking to me.“T ell her this, M adame, if you please. While it is true that
procreation is the basis of this law of the Church, that is not
the o nly matter to consider . For marriage—true marriage of a
man and woman—this … union  of the flesh, it is important of
itself. The language of the rite —the two shall become one
flesh, it says, and there is reason for that. Much happens
between two people who share a bed, and joy in each other .
That is not all a marriage is, but it is something, truly .”
He s poke with great seriousness, and I must have looked
surprised, for he smiled slightly , now looking directly at me.
“I have not alwa ys been a priest, Madame,” he said. “I was
married once. I know what that  is, as I know what it is to put
aside forever that … fleshly …  part of life.” The wooden
beads of his rosary clicked softly together as he shifted.
I no dded, took a  deep breath, and translated this directly as
he h ad said it. Jocasta listened,  but took no time for thought
this time; her mind was made up.
“T ell him  I thank him for his a dvice,” she said, with only
the sligh test edge in her voice. “I too have been married before
—more than once. And with his help, I shall be married once
again. T oday .”
I tra nslated, but he had already taken her meaning from her
upright p osture a nd the tone of her voice. He sat for a moment,
rubbing his beads between his fingers, then nodded.
“Oui, Madame,”  he said. He reached over and squeezed her
hand in gentle encouragement. “T ally-ho, Madame!”45
IF IT QUACKS …
W ELL, THA T W AS ONE DOWN, I thought, mounting the
stairs to the atti c. Next on the agenda of pressing af fairs, the
slave Betty . Had she really bee n drugged? It had been more
than two  hours since Jamie had  discovered her in the kitchen
garden, but I thought I might still be able to discern symptoms,
if she had been as badly af fect ed as he had described her . I
heard th e muf fled chime of the grandfather clock far below .
One, two, three. An hour left before the wedding—though it
could easily be postponed a bit, if Betty required more
attention than I expected.
Given the undesirable position of Catholics in the colony ,
Jocasta would not of fend her guests—mostly Protestants of
one strip e or another—by obliging them to witness the Popish
ceremony itself. The marriage would be performed discreetly ,
in h er boudoir , and then the newlywed couple would descend
the stairs arm-in-arm, to celebrate with their friends, all of
whom c ould the n diplomatically pretend that Father LeClerc
was merely an eccentrically dressed wedding guest.
As I neared the attic, I was surprised to hear a murmur of
voices a bove. T he door to the female slaves’ dormitory stood
ajar; I pushed it open, to discover Ulysses standing at the head
of one narrow bed, arms folded, looking like an avenging
angel c arved in ebony . Obviously , he considered this
unfortunate occ urrence to be a grave dereliction of duty on
Betty’ s p art. A small, dapper man in a frock coat and a lar ge
wig stooped by her side, some small object in his hand.
Before I could speak, he pressed this against the maid’ s limp
arm. There was a small, sharp click!  and he removed the
object, leaving a rectangle of w elling blood, a rich dark red
against the slave’ s brown skin. The drops bloomed, mer ged,and bega n to trickle down her a rm and into a bleeding bowl at
her elbow .
“A scarificator ,” the little man explained to Ulysses, with
some pride, displaying his object. “A great improvement over
such crudities as lancets and fleams. Got it from
Philadelphia!”
The butler bent his head courteo usly , either in acceptance of
the i nvitation to examine the in strument, or acknowledgment
of its distinguished provenance.
“I am sure Mist ress Cameron is most obliged for your kind
condescension, Dr . Fentiman,” he murmured.
Fentiman. So, this was the medical establishment of Cross
Creek. I cleared my throat and Ulysses lifted his head, eyes
alert.
“Mistress Fraser ,” he said, with a small bow . “Dr . Fentiman
has just been—”
“Mistress Fraser ?” Doctor Fentiman had swung round, and
was eyeing me with the same sort of suspicious interest with
which I was vie wing him. Evidently he’d been hearing things,
too. Manners triumphed, though , and he made me a leg, one
hand to the bosom of his satin waistcoat.
“Y our servant, ma’am,” he said, wobbling slightly as he
came up right ag ain. I smelled g in on his breath, and saw it in
the blossoms of burst blood vessels in his nose and cheeks.
“Enchanted, I’m sure,” I said, g iving him my hand to kiss.
He l ooked at fir st surprised, but then bent over it with a deep
flourish. I looked over his powd ered head, trying to make out
as much as I could in the dim light of the attic.
Betty might as well have been dead for a week, judging
from the ashy cast of her skin, but such light as there was in
the attic  came through thick oile d paper nailed across the tiny
gables. Ulysses himself looked gray , like charcoal frosted with
ash.The blood from the slave’ s arm  had already begun to clot;
that was good—though I shuddered to think how many people
Fentiman might have used his n asty little implement on since
acquiring it. His case was open on the floor beside the bed,
and I saw no indication that he thought of cleaning his
instruments between usages.
“Y our kindness does you great credit, Mrs. Fraser ,” the
doctor pronounced, straightening up, but keeping hold of my
hand—to steady  himself, I thought. “There is no need of your
troubling yourself, however . Mrs. Cameron is an old and
valued a cquaintance; I am quite content to attend her slave.”
He smiled benignly , blinking in an attempt to bring me into
focus.
I c ould hear the  maid’ s breathing, deep and stertorous, but
quite regular . I itched to get my hands on her pulse. I inhaled
deeply , as unobtrusively as possible. Above the pungent scent
of D r . Fentiman’ s wig, which h ad evidently been treated with
nettle powder and hyssop agai nst lice, and a strong fog of
ancient sweat and tobacco from the doctor ’ s body , I caught the
sharp copper scent of fresh bloo d, and the older reek of caked,
decayed blood from the inside o f his case. No, Fentiman didn’ t
clean his blades.
Beyond that, I c ould easily smell the alcoholic miasma that
Jamie an d Brianna had described, but I couldn’ t tell how much
of it  came from Betty , and how much from Fentiman. If there
was any  hint of laudanum in t he mix, I would have to get
closer to  detect it, and do it fast, before the volatile aromatic
oils could completely evanesce.
“How exceedingly kind of you, Doctor ,” I said, smiling
insincerely . “I’m sure my husband’ s aunt is most grateful for
your ef forts. But surely a gentlem an such as yourself—I mean,
you must have many more important demands upon your
attention. I’m sure that Ulysse s and myself can see to the
woman’ s nursing; you’ll surely be missed by your
companions.” E specially those eager to win a few pounds of f
you at cards, I thought. They’ll want a chance before you
sober up!Rather to  my surprise, the doctor did not at once succumb to
the flattery of th is speech. Releasing my hand, he smiled at me
with an insincerity equal to my own.
“Oh, no , not at all, my dear . I assure you, no nursing is
required here. It is no mo re than a simple case of
overindulgence, after all. I have administered a strong emetic;
as soon as it shall have its ef fect, the woman may safely be
left. Do return to your pleasures, my dear lady; there is no
need for you to risk soiling such a lovely gown, no need at
all.”
Before I could remonstrate, there came a heavy gagging
noise from the bed, and Doct or Fentiman turned at once,
snatching up the chamber pot from beneath the bed.
In spite of his own impairment, he was commendably
attentive to the patient. I wou ld myself have hesitated to
administer an emetic to a comatose patient, but I had to admit
that it wasn’ t an unreasonabl e thing to do in a case of
suspected poisoning, even if the poison was something as
commonly accepted as alcohol—and if Dr . Fentiman had
perhaps detected the same thing Jamie had …
The slave had ea ten heavily; no surprise, with so much food
available for the festivities. That  in itself might have saved her
life, I thought, slowing the absorption of alcohol—and
anything else—into her bloodstream. The vomitus reeked of
mingled rum and brandy , but I did think I smelled the ghost of
opium as well, faint and sickly sweet, among the other odors.
“What sort of emetic did you use?” I asked, bending over
the woman and thumbing op en one eye. The iris stared
upward, brown and glassy as an agate marble, the pupil shrunk
to a pinpoint. Ha, definitely opium.
“Mrs. Fraser!” Dr . Fentiman gl ared at me in irritation, his
wig fallen half askew over one  ear . “Do you go, please, and
cease interfering ! I am greatly occupied, and have no time to
indulge your fancies. Y ou, sir—remove her!” He waved a
hand at Ulysses  and turned bac k to the bed, shoving his wig
into place as he did so.“Why , y ou little—” I choked of f the intended epithet, seeing
Ulysses take an uncertain step to ward me. He clearly hesitated
to remove me bodily , but it was just as clear that he would
obey the Doctor ’ s orders in preference to mine.
T rembling with fury , I swept around and left the room.
Jamie was waiting for me at the foot of the stair . Seeing my
face as I descen ded, he took my arm at once and led me out
into the yard.
“That—that—” W ords failed me.
“Of ficious worm?” he supplied helpfully . “Unsonsie
shar g?”
“Y es! D id you hear him?! The gall of him, that jumped-up
butcher , that bloody little … squirt! No time to indulge my
fancies! How dare he?”
Jamie made a guttural noise, indicating sympathetic outrage.
“Shall I go up and knivvle him?” he inquired, hand on his
dirk. “I could gu t him for ye—o r just beat his face in, if ye’d
rather .”
Attractive as this prospect sounded, I was forced to decline.
“W ell … no,” I said, bringing my choler under control with
some dif ficulty . “No, I don’ t think you’d better do that.”
The ech o of our similar conversation regarding Phillip
W ylie st ruck me . It struck Jami e, too; I saw one corner of his
long mouth curl with wry humor .
“Damn,” I said ruefully .
“A ye,” he agreed, reluctantly tak ing his hand of f his dirk. “It
doesna look as though I shall be allowed to spill anyone’ s
blood today , does it?”
“Y ou want to, do you?”
“V erra much,” he said, dryly . “S o do you, Sassenach, from
the looks of it.”I c ouldn ’ t ar gue with that; I should have liked nothing better
than to disembowel Dr . Fentiman with a blunt spoon. Instead, I
rubbed a hand o ver my face, and took a deep breath, bringing
my feelings back into some semblance of order .
“Is h e likely to kill the woman?” Jamie asked, jerking his
chin back toward the house.
“Not im mediately .” Bleeding and pur ging were highly
objectionable and possibly dangerous, but not likely to be
instantly fatal. “Oh—you we re probably right about the
laudanum.”
Jamie nodded, pursing his lips thoughtfully .
“W ell, th en. The important thing is to speak wi’ Betty , once
she’ s in a condit ion to make sen se. Y e dinna think Fentiman’ s
the sort to stand watch over a sick slave’ s bed?”
Now it was my turn to think, but finally I shook my head.
“No. He was  doing his best for her ,” I admitted reluctantly .
“But so far as I could tell, she’ s in no great danger . She should
be watc hed, but only in case she should vomit and choke in
her sleep , and I doubt he’d han g about to do that, even if he
thinks of it.”
“W ell, th en.” He stood in thoug ht for a moment, the breeze
lifting s trands of red hair from the crown of his head. “I’ve
sent Brianna and her man to po ke about and see whether any
of the guests is s noring in a corner . I’ll go and do the same for
the slave s. Can ye maybe steal u p to the attic when Fentiman’ s
gone, and talk to Betty as soon as she wakes?”
“I im agine so.” I would have go ne up in any case, if only to
assure m yself of Betty’ s welfare. “Don’ t take too long, though;
they’re almost ready for the wedding.”
W e stood for a moment, looking at each other .
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” he said softly , and tucked
a wi sp o f hair behind my ear . “T he doctor ’ s a wee fool; dinna
mind him.”I tou ched his ar m, thankful for his comfort and wishing to
of fer him the same solace for bruised feelings.
“I am sorry abo ut Phillip W ylie,” I said. I realized at once
that no matter w hat my intentions, the ef fect of this reminder
had not been so othing. The soft curve of his mouth tightened,
and he moved back, his shoulders stif fening.
“Dinna fash yourself about him, either , Sassenach,” he said.
His voic e was still soft, but there was nothing even slightly
reassuring in it. “I shall settle wi’ Mr . W ylie, by and by .”
“But—” I broke of f, helpless. E vidently there was nothing I
could say or do that would make matters right again. If Jamie
felt his honor of fended—and he plainly did, regardless of what
I said—then W ylie would pay for it, and that was all about it.
“Y ou are the most pigheaded man I have ever met,” I said
crossly .
“Thank you,” he said, with a small bow .
“That was not a compliment!”
“A ye, it was.” A nd with another bow , he turned on his heel
and strode of f on his errand.46
QUICKSIL VER
T O JAMIE’S RELIEF , the wedding went of f with no further
dif ficulties. The  ceremony—conducted in French—took place
in Jo casta’ s small sitting room upstairs, attended only by the
bridal pair , the priest, himself and Claire as witnesses, and
Brianna and her young man. Jem my had been present, too, but
scarcely counted, as he had slept through the service.
Duncan had been pale, but composed, and Jamie’ s aunt had
spoken her vows in a firm voice, with no evidence of
hesitation. Brian na, recently wed herself and sentimental in
consequence, had looked o n with misty approbation,
squeezing her lad’ s arm tight, and Roger Mac looking down at
her tender -eyed. Even knowing what he did regarding the
nature of this particular marriage, Jamie had felt moved
himself by the sacrament, and h ad lifted Claire’ s fingers to his
lips, brushing a brief kiss acro ss them as the fat little priest
intoned the blessing.
Then, the formalities concluded and the wedding contracts
signed, they had all come down to join the guests at a lavish
wedding supper , under the light of torches that lined the
terrace, their long flames streaming over tables that groaned
with the abundance of River Run.
He t ook a glass of wine from o ne of the tables, and leaned
back ag ainst the low terrace w all, feeling the tension of the
day drain away down his spine. One down, then.
The maid Betty was still out like a brained ox, but safe
enough for the present. No one else had been found poisoned,
so it was likely she’d taken the stuf f herself. Auld Ninian and
Barlow were both nearly as legless as the maid, and no threat
to each other or anyone else. And whatever Husband and his
Regulators were up to, they we re doing it at a safe distance.Jamie felt pleasantly light, relieved of responsibility , and ready
to turn his mind to recreation.
He raise d his glass in automatic salute to Caswell and
Hunter , who wandered by , heads together in earnest discourse.
He had no wish  for political co nversation, though; he got up
and turned aside, making his wa y through the crowds near the
refreshment tables.
What he  really wanted was his w ife. Early as it was, the sky
was already dark, and a sen se of reckless festivity was
spreading over the house and terrace as the torches flamed
high. Th e air was cold, and with good wine pulsing through
his bloo d, his hands recalled the warm touch of her under her
skirt in the grove, soft and succulent as a split peach in his
palm, sun-ripe and juicy .
He wanted her badly .
There. A t the end of the terrace, torchlight shining on the
waves of her hair , where it swooped up under that ridiculous
bit of lace. His fingers twitched ; once he got her alone, he’d
take out her pins , one by one, and pile up her hair on her head
with his  hands, for the pleasure  of letting it fall again, loose
down her back.
She was laughing at something Lloyd Stanhope had said, a
glass in her hand . Her face was slightly flushed with wine and
the sight of it gave him a pleasurable itch of anticipation.
Bedding her could be anything from tenderness to riot, but
to take her when she was a bit t he worse for drink was always
a particular delight.
Intoxicated, she took less care for him than usual;
abandoned and oblivious to all but her own pleasure, she
would rake him, bite him—and  beg him to serve her so, as
well. He loved t he feeling of pow er in it, the tantalizing choice
between joining her at once in animal lust, or of holding
himself—for a time—in check, so as to drive her at his whim.
He sipped his o wn wine, savoring the rare pleasure of a
decent v intage, and watched her covertly . She was the centerof a small knot  of gentlemen, with whom she seemed to be
enjoying a clash of wits. A glass or two loosened her tongue
and limbered her mind, as it did his. A few glasses more, and
her g low would turn to a molten  heat. It was early yet, and the
real feasting not yet started.
He caug ht her eye briefly on him, and smiled. He held the
goblet b y its bowl and his fingers curved round the smooth
glass as though it were her bre ast. She saw , and understood.
She low ered her lashes in coquetry to him, and turned back to
her conversation, color heightened.
The del ightful paradox of having her in drink was that,
having abandoned consciousness of him as anything save the
agent of  her own sensation, sh e would also cease to guard
herself in any way , and thus lay entirely open to him. He might
tease an d caress, or churn her like butter , leading her through
frenzy to gasping limpness beneath him, lying at his mercy .
She was  using her fan to good ef fect, opening her eyes wide
over the edge of it, in feign ed shock at something that
sodomite Forbes had said. He ran the tip of his tongue
thoughtfully within the tender mar gin of his lower lip, tasting
sweet silver blood in memory . Mercy? No, he would have
none.
That decision made, he was turning his mind to the more
practical problem of finding a spot suf ficiently secluded to
carry out this engaging agenda, but was interrupted by the
advent of Geor ge L yon, looking  sleek and full of himself. He
had been introduced, but knew little of the man.
“Mr . Fraser . A word with you, sir?”
“Y our servant, sir .”
He t urned aside for a moment to  set down his glass, a slight
shift of his weight enough to ef fect discreet adjustment of his
plaid, gl ad that he wasn’ t wear ing tight satin breeks like that
fop, W ylie. Indecent, he thought them, and grossly
uncomfortable, forbye. Why , a man would be risking slow
emasculation in  female company , if he were not a naturaleunuch—and W ylie clearly wasn’ t that, for all his powder and
patches. A belted plaid, though, could hide a multitude of sins
—or at the least, a dirk and pistol—let alone a random
cockstand.
“Shall we walk a bit, Mr . L yon?” he suggested, turning
back. If the ma n had such private business as his manner
implied, they had best not stan d here, where they might be
interrupted at any moment by one of the wedding guests.
They str olled sl owly to the end  of the terrace, exchanging
commonplaces with each other , and pleasantries with
passersby , until  they had gained the freedom of the yard,
where they hesitated for a moment.
“The paddock, perhaps?” Not waiting for L yon’ s nod of
assent, J amie tur ned toward the distant stable yard. He wanted
to see the Friesians again, in any case.
“I have heard much of you, Mr . Fraser ,” L yon began
pleasantly , as they ambled towa rd the tall clock tower of the
stable block.
“Have you, sir? W ell, and I trust  not a great deal of it was to
my discredit, then.” He had heard a bit about L yon; a dealer in
what anyone would buy or sell —and maybe not just that bit
too scrupulous regarding the provenance of his goods. Rumor
had it that he dealt in things less tangible than iron and paper
on occasion, too, but that was only rumor .
L yon laughed, showing teeth that were even enough, but
badly stained with tobacco.
“Indeed not, Mr . Fraser . Bar the slight impediment of your
familial connections—which can scarcely be held to be your
fault, tho ugh fol k will  make assumptions—I have heard none
but the most glo wing encomiums, both of your character and
your accomplishments.”
A Dhia , Jamie thought, blackmail and butter , all in the first
sentence. W as it only that North Carolina was a backwater ,
and not worth the time of a more competent intriguer? Hesmiled politely , with a murmur of modest dismissal, and
waited to see what the blockheid wanted.
Not so much, at least to start. The strength of Fraser ’ s
militia regimen t, and the names of the men. That was
interesting, he thought. L yon was not the Governor ’ s man,
then, or he wou ld have such information to hand. Who was
behind him, if anyone? Not the Regulation surely; the only one
of them  with a spare shilling to his name was Ninian Bell
Hamilton, and if auld Ninian had wanted to know a thing, he
would have come and asked himself. One of the rich planters
from the  coast, then? Most aris tocrats had an interest in the
colony that went no further than their pockets.
Which led to the logical conclusion that whoever L yon’ s
intended market was thought there’d be something either to
gain or to lose f rom the potential disaf fections in the colony .
Who might that be?
“Chisholm, Mc Gillivray , Lind say …” L yon was saying
reflectively . “So the majority of your men are Scottish
Highlanders. The sons of earlier settlers, are they , or perhaps
retired soldiers, like yourself, sir?”
“Oh, I should doubt that a soldier is ever truly retired, sir ,”
Jamie sa id, stooping to let one  of the stable dogs smell his
knuckles. “Once  a man has lived under arms, I suspect he is
marked for life. In fact I hav e heard it remarked that old
soldiers never die; they just fade away .”
L yon laughed immoderately at that, declaring it a fine
epigram, was it his own? W itho ut stopping to hear the answer ,
he went on, clearly paddling into well-charted waters.
“I am pleased to hear such a sentiment expressed, Mr .
Fraser . H is Majesty has always r elied upon the stoutness of the
Highlanders, and their abilities  as fighting men. Did you or
your neighbors perhaps serve with your cousin’ s regiment?
The Seventy-eighth Frasers acquitted themselves with great
distinction during the recent conflict; I daresay the art of
warfare runs in the blood, eh?”That wa s a bald enough swipe. Y oung Simon Fraser was not
in fact his cousi n, but his half-uncle, son of his grandfather . It
was as expiation of the old man’ s treason and in an ef fort to
retrieve the family fortunes and  estates that Y oung Simon had
raised two regiments for the Seven Y ears’ W ar—what Brianna
persisted in calling the French and Indian W ars, as though
Britain had had nothing to do with it.
L yon was asking now whether Jamie had also sought to
establish his credentials as a lo yal soldier of the Crown, by
taking commission with one of the Highland regiments? He
could scarcely believe the flat-footedness of the man.
“Ah, no. I regr et that I was unable to serve in such a
capacity ,” Jami e said. “An i ndisposition from an earlier
campaign, you understand?” The minor indisposition of
having b een a prisoner of the Cr own for several years after the
Rising, though he did not menti on that. If L yon didn’ t know it
already , there was no sense in telling him.
They had reached the paddock by now , and leaned
comfortably upo n the split-rail fence. The horses had not yet
been put away for the night; the big black creatures moved like
shadows, their coats glossy in the torchlight.
“What strange horses, are they not?” He interrupted L yon’ s
disquisition on the evils of factionalism, watching them move
in fascination.
It wasn’ t just the enormously long, silky manes, rippling
like wat er as they tossed their heads, nor yet the coal-black
coats nor the s pringy arch of the neck, thicker and more
muscular than Jocasta’ s thoroughbreds. Their bodies were
thick as well, br oad through chest, withers, and barrel so that
each one seemed almost blocky—and yet they moved as
gracefully as any horse he had  ever seen, adroit and light-
footed, with a sense of playfulness and intelligence.
“Y es, it is a ver y old breed,” L yon said, putting aside his
inquisitiveness f or the moment in order to watch. “I’ve seen
them before—in Holland.”“Holland. Y e will have traveled there a great deal?”
“Not so  much. I was there some years ago, though, and
chanced to meet a kinsman of y ours. A wine merchant named
Jared Fraser?”
Jamie felt a jolt  of surprise, suc ceeded by a warm sense of
pleasure at the mention of his cousin.
“Did ye indeed? A ye, Jared is m y father ’ s cousin. I trust ye
found him well.”
“V ery w ell indeed.” L yon moved fractionally closer , settling
himself on the fence, and Jamie realized that they had now
reached the point of the man’ s business, whatever that might
be. He drained t he rest of the wine in his glass and set it down,
prepared to listen.
“I un derstand that a … talent for  liquor runs in the family as
well, Mr . Fraser .”
He laughed, though he felt no great humor .
“A taste, perhaps, sir . I couldna say , as to talent.”
“Couldn’ t you? Ah, well. I am s ure you are too modest, Mr .
Fraser . The quality of your whisky is well known.”
“Y e flatter me, sir .” He knew w hat was coming now , and
settled h imself to pretend attention. It wouldn’ t be the first
time som eone h ad suggested a partnership; he to provide the
whisky , they to m anage the distribution of it to Cross Creek, to
W ilmington, even as far as Cha rleston. L yon, it seemed, had
grander schemes in mind.
The best  aged stuf f would go by  boat up the coast to Boston
and Philadelphia, he suggested. The raw whisky , though, could
go acro ss the T reaty Line, t here to be delivered to the
Cherokee villag es, in return for hides and furs. He had
partners, who would provide …
Jamie listened in growing disapproval, then cut L yon of f
abruptly .“A ye. I thank ye for your inter est, sir , but I fear I havena
anything like suf ficient product for what ye suggest. I make
whisky only for my family’ s u se, and a few barrels beyond
that, now and then, for local trade. No more.”
L yon grunted amiably .
“I am  su re you could increase your production, Mr . Fraser ,
given your knowledge and skill. If it were to be a matter of the
materials … some arrangement could be made, I am sure … I
can spea k with the gentlemen w ho would be our partners in
the enterprise, and—”
“No, sir . I fear not. If ye will excuse me … ?” He bowed
abruptly , turned on his heel, and headed back toward the
terrace, leaving L yon in the dark.
He must ask Farquard Campbell about L yon. The man
would bear watching. It was n ot that Jamie had any great
objection to smuggling. He did, however , have a great
objection to being caught at it, and could think of few things
more da ngerous than a lar ge-scale operation of the sort L yon
was suggesting, where he himse lf would be involved up to the
neck, bu t have no control over th e more dangerous parts of the
process.
A ye, the  thought of the money  was attractive, but not so
much as to blind him to the risks. If he were to engage in such
a tra de, he woul d do it himself, perhaps with the aid of Fer gus
or Roger Mac—maybe old Arch Bug and Joe W emyss—but
no one else. A great deal safer to keep it small, keep it private
… th ough since L yon had sugge sted the notion, perhaps it was
worth a bit of thought. Fer gus was no farmer , that was sure;
something must be found for h im to do, and the Frenchman
was well acquainted with the risky business, as they called it,
from their time in Edinbur gh… .
He strol led back to the terrace,  pondering, but the sight of
his wife erased all thought of whisky from his mind.
Claire had left S tanhope and his cronies, and stood by the
buf fet table, looking over the de licacies on display with a faintfrown upon her broad clear bro w , as though puzzled by such
surfeit.
He saw Gerald Forbes’ s eyes rest on her , alight with
speculation, and he moved at once by reflex, interposing
himself neatly between his wif e and the lawyer . He felt the
man’ s eyes slap against his back, and smiled grimly to himself.
Mine, corbie , he thought to himself.
“Can ye  not decide where to beg in, Sassenach?” He reached
down and took the empty wineglass from her hand, taking
advantage of the movement to come close against her back,
feeling the warmth of her through his clothes.
She laughed, and swayed back against him, leaning on his
arm. She smelled faintly of rice  powder and warm skin, with
the scent of rose hips in her hair .
“I’m not even terribly hungry . I was just counting the jellies
and pres erves. T here are thirty-seven dif ferent ones—unless
I’ve missed my count.”
He spar ed a glance for the table, which did indeed hold a
bewildering arr ay of silver d ishes, porcelain bowls, and
wooden platters , groaning with more food than would feed a
Highland village for a month. He wasn’ t hungry , either ,
though. At least not for puddings and savories.
“W ell, Ulysses will have seen to that; he wouldna have my
aunt’ s hospitality put to shame.”
“No fea r of that,” she assure d him. “Did you see the
barbecue pit out back? There a re no fewer than three whole
oxen roa sting o n spits out there , and at least a dozen pigs. I
didn’ t ev en try to count the chickens and ducks. Do you think
it’ s just hospitality , or is your aunt meaning to make a show of
what a good job Duncan’ s done—showing of f how profitable
River Run is under his management, I mean?”
“I suppo se she might,” he said, though privately he thought
it unlikely that J ocasta’ s motives were either so thoughtful or
so g enerous in n ature. He considered that the lavishness of the
present celebrati on was much m ore likely owing to her desireto wipe Farquard Campbell’ s eye, overshadowing the fete he
had held  at Green River in December , to celebrate his most
recent marriage.
And speaking of marriage …
“Here, Sassenach.” He deposited her empty glass on a
passing tray borne by a servant, and took a full one in return,
which he set in her hand.
“Oh, I’m  not— ” she began, bu t he forestalled her , taking
another glass from the prof fere d tray and lifting it to her in
salute. Her cheeks flushed deeper , and her eyes glowed amber .
“T o beauty ,” he said softly , smiling.
 
I FEL T PLEASANTL Y liquid inside, as though belly and
limbs w ere fille d with quicksilver . It wasn’ t all to do with the
wine, though that was very goo d. More the release of tension,
after all the worries and conflicts of the day .
It ha d been a quiet, tender wedding, and while the evening’ s
celebration was likely to be nois y in the extreme—I had heard
a n umbe r of the younger men plotting vulgar hilarities for the
later festivities— I needn’ t worry about any of that. My own
intent had been to enjoy the delightful supper that had been
laid on, perhaps  take a glass or t wo more of the excellent wine
… a nd then fin d Jamie and go to investigate the romantic
potential of the stone bench beneath the willows.
Jamie had appeared a trifle prematurely in the program,
insofar a s I had not yet eaten anything, but I had no objection
to rearranging my priorities. There would be plenty of
leftovers, after all.
The torchlight burnished him, making hair and brows and
skin glow like copper . The evening breeze had come up,
flapping tablecloths and pulling the torch flames into fiery
tongues, and it nipped strands of hair from his queue and
lashed them across his face. He raised his glass, smiling at me
across the rim.“T o beauty ,” he said softly , then  drank, not taking his eyes
of f me.
The qui cksilver shifted, quivering through my hips and
down the backs of my legs.
“T o … ah … privacy ,” I replied, with a slight lift of my own
glass. Feeling pleasantly reckless, I reached slowly up, and
deliberately pulled the ornamented lace from my hair . Half-
unpinned, curls fell loose down my back, and I heard someone
draw in his breath in shock behind me.
In front of me, Jamie’ s face went suddenly blank, his eyes
fixed on me lik e a hawk’ s on  a rabbit. I lifted my glass,
holding his eyes with mine, and  drank, swallowing slowly as I
drained it. The scent of black g rapes perfumed the inside of
my head and the heat of the wine warmed my face, my throat,
my brea sts, my skin. Jamie mov ed abruptly to take the empty
glass from my hand, his fingers cold and hard on mine.
And then a voice spoke from the candlelit French doors
behind him.
“Mr . Fraser .”
W e both  started , and the glass fell between us, exploding
into shar ds on the flags of the terrace. Jamie whirled round, his
left hand going b y reflex to the hilt of his dirk. Then it relaxed,
as he saw the silhouetted figure, and he stepped back, mouth
twisting in a wry grimace.
Phillip W ylie stepped out into t he torchlight. His color was
high enough to show through the powder , burning in hectic
spots across his cheekbones.
“My friend Stanhope has propo sed a table or two of whist
this evening,” he said. “W ill you not join us, Mr . Fraser?”
Jamie g ave him a long, cool look, and I saw the damaged
fingers of his ri ght hand twitch, very slightly . The pulse was
throbbing at the side of his neck, but his voice was calm.
“At whist?”“Y es.” W ylie gave a thin smile, sedulously avoiding looking
at me. “I hear you are a good hand at the cards, sir .” He pursed
his lips. “Thoug h of course, we do play for rather high stakes.
Perhaps you do not feel that you—”
“I shall be delig hted,” Jamie said, in a tone of voice that
made it perfectly clear that the  only thing that would truly
have delighted him was the prospect of cramming Phillip
W ylie’ s teeth down his throat.
The teeth in question gleamed briefly .
“Ah. Splendid. I shall … look forward to the occasion.”
“Y our se rvant, sir .” Jamie bowed abruptly , then spun on his
heel, seized my elbow , and marched of f down the terrace, me
decorously in tow .
I ma rched along, keeping step and keeping silence, until we
were safely out of earshot. The quicksilver had shot up out of
my lowe r regions, and was rolli ng nervously up and down my
spine, making me feel dangerously unstable.
“Are yo u quite out of your mind?” I inquired politely .
Receiving nothi ng but a brief snort in reply , I dug in my heels
and pulled on his arm to make him stop.
“That was not a rhetorical question,” I said, rather more
loudly . “High-stakes whist?”
Jamie w as inde ed an excellent card player . He also knew
most of the poss ible ways of cheating at cards. However , whist
was dif f icult if not impossible to cheat at, and Phillip W ylie
also had the reputation of an excellent player—as did
Stanhope. Beyond this, there remained the fact that Jamie
didn’ t happen to possess any  stakes, let alone high ones.
“Y e expect me to allow yon popinjay to trample my honor ,
and then  insult me to my face?”  He swung round to face me,
glaring.
“I’m sur e he didn’ t mean—” I began, but broke of f. It was
quite apparent that if W ylie had not intended outright insult, hehad mea nt it as a  challenge—and  to a Scot, the two were likely
indistinguishable.
“But you don’ t have  to do it!”
I would have had a much great er ef fect had I been ar guing
with the brick wall of the kitchen garden.
“I do,” he said stif fly . “I have my pride.”
I rubbed a hand over my face in exasperation.
“Y es, and Phillip W ylie plainly  knows it! Heard the one
about pride going before a fall, have you?”
“I h avena the slightest intention of falling,” he assured me.
“W ill ye give me your gold ring?”
My mouth fell open in shock.
“W ill I … my r ing?” My fingers went involuntarily to my
left hand, and the smooth gold of Frank’ s wedding band.
He was watching me intently , eyes steady on mine. The
torches a long the terrace had be en lit; the dancing light caught
him from the side, throwing the stubborn set of his bones into
sharp relief, lighting one eye with burning blue.
“I shall need a stake,” he said quietly .
“Bloody hell.” I swung away f rom him, and stood staring
of f t he e dge of the terrace. The torches on the lawn had been
lit, too, and Perseus’ s white marble buttocks glimmered
through the dark.
“I willna  lose it,” Jamie said behind me. His hand rested on
my shoulder , heavy through my shawl. “Or if I do—I shall
redeem it. I know ye … value it.”
I tw itched my sh oulder out from under his hand, and moved
a few steps away . My heart was pounding, and my face felt at
once clammy and hot, as though I were about to faint.
He didn’ t speak, or touch me; only stood there, waiting.
“The gold one,” I said at last, f latly . “Not the silver?” Not
his  ring; not his  mark of ownership.“The gold is w orth more,” he said, and then, after the
briefest hesitation, added, “in terms of money .”
“I know that.” I turned round to face him. The torch flames
fluttered in the wind and cas t a moving light across his
features that made them hard to read.
“I meant—hadn ’ t you better take both of them?” My hands
were cold and slippery with s weat; the gold ring came of f
easily; th e silver  was tighter , but  I twisted it past my knuckle. I
took his hand and dropped the two rings clinking into it.
Then I turned and walked away .47
THE LISTS OF VENUS
R OGER MADE HIS W A Y from the drawing room out onto
the terrace, threading through the gathering crowd that
clustered thick as lice round the supper tables. He was hot and
sweating and the night air struck  coldly refreshing on his face.
He paused in the shadows at the end of the terrace, where he
could unbutton his waistcoat inconspicuously and flap his
shirtfront a bit, letting the cold air inside.
The pine torches that lined the edge of the terrace and the
brick pa ths were  flickering in th e wind, casting wildly shifting
shadows over the mass of celebrants, from which limbs and
faces emer ged and disappeared i n bewildering succession. Fire
gleamed of f silver and crystal, gold lace and shoe-buckles,
earrings and coat buttons. From a distance, it looked as though
the asse mbly were lit by firefli es, winking in and out among
the dark  mass of rustling fabric. Brianna was not wearing
anything reflective, he thought, but she should be easy enough
to spot, nonetheless, on account of her height.
He had caught no more than tantalizing glimpses of her
during the day; she had been da ncing attendance on her aunt,
or caring for Jemmy , or engaged in conversation with the—
apparently—dozens of people she knew from her earlier
sojourn at River Run. He didn’ t  begrudge her the opportunity
in the least; the re was precious little society to be had on
Fraser ’ s Ridge, and he was pleas ed to see her enjoying herself.
He’d been having a great time himself; his throat had an
agreeably raspy feeling now , from the exertion of prolonged
singing, and he had learned th ree new songs from Seamus
Hanlon, safely committed to memory . He’d bowed out at last,
and left the lit tle orchestra playing in the drawing room,
throbbing away in a steamy haze of ef fort, sweat, and alcohol.There sh e was; he caught the g lint of her hair as she came
out of the parlo r doors, turning back to say something to the
woman behind her .
She caug ht sigh t of him as she t urned back, and her face lit
up, touching of f a complementary warm glow beneath his
rebuttoned waistcoat.
“There you are! I’ve barely se en you all day . Heard you
now and then, though,” she adde d, with a nod toward the open
drawing-room doors.
“Oh, aye? Sound all right, did it?” he asked casually ,
shamelessly fish ing for compliments. She grinned and tapped
his ches t with her closed fan, mimicking the gesture of an
accomplished coquette—which she wasn’ t.
“Oh, Mrs. MacKenzie,” she said, pitching her voice high
and thro ugh her nose, “your husband’ s voice is divinity itself!
W ere I so fortunate, I am su re I should spend hours just
drrrinking  in the sound of it!”
He laughed, recognizing Miss Martin, old Miss Bledsoe’ s
young and rather plain compani on, who had hung about wide-
eyed and sighing while he sang ballads in the afternoon.
“Y ou kn ow you’re good,” she said, dropping back into her
own voice. “Y ou don’ t need me to tell you.”
“Maybe not,” he admitted. “Do esn’ t mean I don’ t like to
hear it, though.”
“Really? The adulation of the multitudes isn’ t enough?” She
was laughing at him, eyes gone to triangles of amusement.
He didn’ t know how to answe r that, and laughed instead,
taking her hand.
“D’ye w ant to dance?” He cock ed his head toward the end
of the terrace w here the French doors to the drawing room
stood op en, letting out the cheer ful strains of “Duke of Perth,”
then back toward the tables. “Or to eat?”
“Neither . I want to get away fro m here for a minute; I can
hardly b reathe.” A drop of swe at ran down her neck, glintingred in the torchlight before she swiped it away .
“Great.” He took her hand and  drew it through his arm,
turning toward the herbaceous border that lay beyond the
terrace. “I know just the place.”
“Great. Oh—wait. Maybe I do want something to eat.” She
lifted a hand and stopped a slave  boy , coming up to the terrace
from the  cookhouse with a sma ll covered tray from which an
appetizing steam wafted into the air . “What’ s that, T ommy?
Can I have some?”
“Y ou ha ve all you want, Miss Bree.” He smiled, whipping
the n apkin away to display a sel ection of savories. She inhaled
beatifically .
“I want them a ll,” she said, ta king the tray , to T ommy’ s
amusement. Roger , seizing the  chance, murmured his own
request to the slave, who nodded, disappeared, and returned
within moments  with an open bottle of wine and two goblets.
Roger to ok these, and together they wandered down the path
that led from th e house to the dock, sharing tidbits of news
along with the pigeon pies.
“Did you find any of the guests passed out in the
shrubbery?” she asked, her words muf fled by a mouthful of
mushroom pasty . She swallowed, and became more distinct.
“When Da asked you to go and look this afternoon, I mean.”
He snorted briefly , selecting a dumpling made of sausage
and dried pumpkin.
“Ken the dif ference between a Scottish wedding and a
Scottish funeral, do ye?”
“No, what?”
“The funeral has one less drunk.”
She laughed, scattering crumbs, and took a Scotch egg.
“No,” he said, st eering her skillfully to the right of the dock,
and toward the willows. “Y e’ll see a few feet sticking out of
the bush es now ,  but this afterno on, they hadn’ t had the time to
get rat-legged yet.”“Y ou have such  a way w ith wor ds,” she said appreciatively .
“I went and talk ed to the slaves;  all present and accounted for ,
and mostly sober , too. A couple of the women admitted that
Betty does tipple at parties, though.”
“T o say the least, from what your Da said. Stinking, he
described her as, and I gather he didn’ t mean only drunk.”
Something smal l and dark leaped out of his path. Frog; he
could hear them piping away in the grove.
“Mmm. Mama said she seemed to be okay later on, in spite
of Dr . Fentiman  insisting on bl eeding her .” She gave a small
shudder , drawing her shawl round her shoulders one-handed.
“He gives me the creeps, the Doctor . He looks like a little
goblin o r something, and he’ s g ot the clammiest hands I ever
felt. And he smells terrible, speaking of stinking.”
“I haven’ t had the pleasure yet,” Roger said, amused.
“Come on.” He pushed aside  the hanging veil of willow
branches, alert lest he disturb s ome courting couple that had
beaten them to the stone bench, but all was well. Everyone
was up at the house, dancing, eating, drinking, and planning a
later serenade of the wedding p air . Better Duncan and Jocasta
than us,  he thought, rolling his eyes inwardly at some of the
things he’d heard suggested. Another time, he might have been
interested to see a shivaree, and trace all the roots of it from
French and Highland customs—but not bloody now .
It was suddenly  quiet under the  willows, most of the noise
from the house drowned by t he rushing of water and the
monotonous chirping of frogs. It was also dark as midnight,
and Brianna felt carefully for the bench, in order to set down
her tray .
Roger shut his eyes hard and counted to thirty; when he
opened them, he could at least m ake out her form, silhouetted
against the dim light that filtered through the willows, and the
horizontal line of the bench. He set down the glasses and
poured out the wine, the neck of the bottle chinking faintly
against the goblets as he felt his way .He put out a ha nd and ran it down her arm, locating her
hand in order to put the full gob let safely into it. He raised his
own glass in salute.
“T o beauty ,” he said, letting the smile show in his voice.
“T o priv acy ,” sh e said, returning the toast, and drank. “Oh,
that’ s good,” she said, a moment later , sounding slightly
dreamy . “I haven’ t had wine in … a year? No, nearly two. Not
since before Jemmy was born. I n fact, not since …” Her voice
stopped abruptly , then resumed, more slowly . “Not since our
first  wedding night. In W ilmington, remember .”
“I remem ber .” He reached out a nd cupped a hand round her
cheek, t racing the bones of her face softly with his thumb. It
was no wonder that she thought of that night now . They had
begun it  there, under the droop ing branches of a huge horse-
chestnut tree, that had sheltered  them from the noise and light
of a  nearby tavern. Their pres ent situation was oddly and
movingly reminiscent of that dark and private secrecy , the two
of them amid the smell of le aves and nearby water—the
nearby racket of lust-crazed tree frogs replacing the tavern
noises.
That had been a  hot night, though, thick and humid enough
that flesh melted to flesh. Now  it was cold enough that his
body ye arned for the warmth of hers, and the scent that
enclosed them was the spring  smell of green leaves and
running river , not the musty smell of leaf-litter and mudflats.
“Do you think they’ll sleep together?” Brianna asked. She
sounded slightly breathless; perhaps it was the wine.
“Who? Oh, Jocasta, ye mean, and Duncan? Why not?
They’ll be married.” He drained  his own glass and set it down,
the glass chiming faintly on the stone.
“It was a beautiful wedding, wasn’ t it?” She didn’ t resist as
he took the glas s from her hand  and set it down with his own.
“Quiet, but awfully nice.”
“A ye, very nice.” He kissed he r , softly , and held her close
against him. He could feel th e back lacing of her gown,crisscrossed under the thin knitted shawl.
“Mmm. Y ou taste good.”
“Oh, aye, like s ausages and wine. So do you.” His hand
twitched up the edge of the shawl, getting beneath and
fumbling for the end of the lace, somewhere down near the
small of her back. She pressed against him, making it easier .
“W ill we  still want to make love, do you think, when we’re
as old as they are?” she murmured in his ear .
“I w ill,” he assu red her , getting hold of the small bow that
secured the lace. “I hope you wi ll, too; I shouldna like to have
to do it alone.”
She lau ghed, and took a deep breath, her back swelling
suddenly as the tight lacing cam e loose. There were the stays
underneath, too,  though, damn i t. He used both hands, looking
for the inner lac ings, and she arc hed her back helpfully , which
made he r breasts swell up into sight just below his chin. The
sight ma de him take one hand of f her back, to deal with this
new and delightful development.
“I haven’ t got my … I mean, I didn’ t bring …” She pulled
back a little, sounding dubious.
“Y e’ve t aken th e seeds today , t hough?” A way to hell with
pizza an d loo-paper , he thought; at the moment, he’d trade all
prospects of indoor plumbing for a rubber condom.
“Y es.” She still sounded doubtful, though, and he gritted his
teeth, taking a firmer hold on her , as though she might bolt.
“It’ s all right,” he whispered, nuzzling his way down the
side of her neck toward that heartbreaking slope where the
muscle of her shoulder joined it. She was smooth beneath his
lips, her  skin cool in the air , warm and scented beneath the fall
of her hair . “W e needn’ t … I m ean … I won’ t … just let me
…”
The neckline of her dress was fashionably low with her
kerchief pulled of f, still lower , w ith her gown unlaced, and her
breast w as heav y and soft in his hand. He felt the nipple bigand round as a  ripe cherry against his palm, and bent on
impulse to put his mouth to it.
She stif fened, then relaxed with  an odd little sigh, and he
felt a warm swe et taste on his tongue, then a strange pulsing
and a flooding of the … he s wallowed by reflex, shocked.
Shocked, and terribly aroused. He hadn’ t thought; he hadn’ t
meant … but s he pulled his head hard against her , holding
him.
He went on, emboldened, and pushed her gently backward,
easing h er down  onto the edge of the bench, so that he knelt
before her . A su dden thought had come to him, prompted by
the stinging memory of that entry in her dreambook.
“Don’ t worry ,” he whispered to her . “W e won’ t … risk
anything. Let me do this—just for you.”
She hesi tated, b ut let him run his hands under her skirt, up
the silken curves of stockinged calf and round, bare thigh,
under the flattened curve of her buttocks, cool and bare on the
stone, b eneath the froth of petticoats. One of Seamus’ s songs
had described a gentleman’ s ex ploits “in the lists of V enus.”
The wo rds drifted through his head with the rushing of the
water , and he was determined to acquit himself with honor in
those lists.
Maybe s he couldn’ t describe it, but he meant to make sure
she knew it had  happened. She shivered between his hands,
and he cupped one hand between her thighs.
“Miss Bree?”
Both of them jerked convulsively , Roger snatching his
hands aw ay as though burned. He could feel the thunder of
blood in his ears—and his balls.
“Y es, what is it?  Is that you, Phaedre? What’ s wrong—is it
Jemmy?”
He was sitting back on his heels, trying to breathe, feeling
dizzy . He caught the brief pale gleam of her breasts above him
as s he stood up  and turned toward the voice, tucking herkerchief hastily  back in, pulling the shawl up over her
unfastened gown.
“Y es, ma’am.” Phaedre’ s voice came out from under the
willow nearest the house; nothin g of the slave showed but the
whiteness of her cap, floating dimly in the shadows. “Poor
child, he woke u p hot and fussin’, wouldn’ t take neither mush
nor milk , and then he started in to cough, sounded bad enough,
T eresa s aid we best fetch Dr . Fe ntiman along to him, but I said
…”
“Dr . Fentiman!”
Brianna disappeared with a ferocious rustling of willow
branches, and he heard the hurry ing thump of slippered feet on
earth as she ran toward the house, Phaedre in her wake.
Roger g ot to his feet, and pause d for a moment, hand on his
fly-buttons. The temptation was strong; it wouldn’ t take more
than a minute—less, probably , in his present condition. But no,
Bree mi ght need him to deal with Fentiman. The thought of
the D octor using his gory instr uments on Jemmy’ s soft flesh
was eno ugh to send him crashi ng through the willows in hot
pursuit. The lists of V enus would have to wait.
 
HE FOUND BREE and Jemmy in Jocasta’ s boudoir , the center
of a small knot of women, all of whom looked surprised—
even mi ldly sca ndalized—at his  appearance. Disregarding the
raised ey ebrows and huf fing noises, he for ged his way through
the skirts to Brianna’ s side.
The littl e fella did look bad, and  Roger felt a clutch of fear
in the pit of his stomach. Christ, how could it happen so fast?
He’d seen Jem a t the wedding only a few hours before, curled
up pink  and sweet in his makeshift cradle, and before that,
being hi s usual raucously genia l self at the party . Now he lay
against Brianna’ s shoulder , flush-cheeked and heavy-eyed,
whimpering a little, with a slick of clear mucus dribbling from
his nose.“How is he?” H e reached out and touched a flushed cheek
gently , with the back of his hand. God, he was hot!
“He’ s sick,” Brianna said tersely . As though in
confirmation, Jemmy began to cough, a dreadful noise, loud
but half-choked , like a seal choking on its fish. The blood
sur ged i nto his already flushed face, and his round blue eyes
bulged with the ef fort of drawing breath between the spasms.
“Shit,” Roger muttered. “What do we do?”
“Cold water ,” one of the women standing beside him said,
authoritatively . “Put him altoget her under a bath of cold water ,
then make him drink more of it.”
“No! Heavens, Mary , you’ll kill the child.” Another young
matron reached out to pat Jemmy’ s quivering back. “It’ s the
croup; m y lot have had it now and again. Sliced garlic,
warmed and put to the soles o f his feet,” she told Brianna.
“That works well, sometimes.”
“And if it doesn ’ t?” another woman said, skeptical. The first
woman’ s nostrils pinched, and her friend butted in helpfully .
“Johanna Richards lost two babes to the croup. Gone like
that!” She snapped her fingers, a nd Brianna flinched as though
the sound were one of her own bones cracking.
“Why are we havering so, and a medico to hand? Y ou, girl,
go a nd fetch D r . Fentiman! Did I not say so?” One of the
women clapped her hands sharply at Phaedre, who stood
pressed back against the wall, eyes fixed on Jemmy . Before
she could move to obey , though, Brianna’ s head shot up.
“No! Not him, I won’ t have him.” She glared round at the
women, then shot Roger a look of ur gent entreaty . “Find
Mama for me. Quick!”
He turned and shoved past the women, fear momentarily
assuaged by the ability to do something. Where was Claire
likely to be? Help , he thought, help me  find her , help him be
all right , d irecting the i ncoherent praye r toward anyone who
might b e listening—God, the Reverend, Mrs. Graham, Saint
Bride, Claire herself—he wasn’ t particular .He thundered down the front stair to the foyer , only to meet
Claire h urrying across it toward him. Someone had told her;
she gave  him one quick look, asked, “Jemmy?” with a lift of
her c hin, and at his breathless nod, was up the stairs in a flash,
leaving a foyer full of people gaping after her .
He caug ht her up in the hall abo ve and was in time to open
the door for he r—and to receive an undeserved but much
appreciated look of gratitude from Bree.
He stood back out of the wa y , catching his breath and
marveling. The moment Claire stepped into the room, the
atmosphere of worry and near -panic changed at once. There
was still an air of concern among the women, but they gave
way without hesitation, standing back respectfully and
murmuring to one another as Cl aire headed straight for Jemmy
and Bree, ignoring everything else.
“Hallo, lovey . What is it, then, are we feeling miserable?”
She was  murmuring to Jem, turning his head to one side and
feeling g ently under his flushed chubby jowls and behind his
ears. “Poor thing. It’ s all right, sweetheart, Mummy’ s here,
Grannie’ s here, everything will be just fine… . How long has
he been like this ? Has he had anything to drink? Y es, darling,
that’ s right… . Does it hurt him to swallow?”
She alternated between comforting remarks to the baby and
questions to Brianna and Phaedre, all delivered in the same
tone of calm rea ssurance as her hands touched here and there,
exploring, soothing. Roger felt it working on him, too, and
drew a deep bre ath, feeling the t ightness in his own chest ease
a bit.
Claire took a sheet of Jocasta’ s heavy notepaper from the
secretary , rolled  it into a tube, a nd used it to listen intently to
Jemmy’ s back and chest as he made more of the choking-seal
noises. Roger noticed dimly that her hair had fallen down
somehow; she had to brush it out of the way to listen.
“Y es, of course it’ s croup,” she said absently , in answer to a
half-questioning diagnosis of fered dif fidently by one of the
bystanders. “But that’ s only the cough and the dif ficultbreathing. Y ou can have croup by itself, so to speak, or as an
early symptom of various other things.”
“Such a s?” Bree had a death grip on Jemmy , and her face
was nearly as white as her knuckles.
“Oh… .” Claire seemed to be l istening intently , but not to
Bree. More to whatever was happening inside Jemmy , who
had quit coughing and was lying exhausted against his
mother ’ s should er , breathing thickly in steam-engine gasps.
“Um … coryza—that’ s only a common cold. Influenza.
Asthma. Diphtheria. But it isn’ t that,” she added hurriedly ,
looking up and catching a glimpse of Brianna’ s face.
“Y ou’re sure?”
“Y es,” Claire replied firmly , st raightening up and putting
aside her makeshift stethoscope. “It doesn’ t feel at all like
diphtheria to me. Besides, there isn’ t any of that about, or I’d
have heard. And he’ s still being breast-fed; he’ll have
immunity—” Sh e stopped speaking abruptly , suddenly aware
of the women looking on. She cleared her own throat, bending
down again, as though to enco urage Jemmy by example. He
made a small whimper and coughed again. Roger felt it, like a
rock in his chest.
“It i sn’ t serious,” Claire annou nced firmly , straightening.
“W e must put him in a croup tent, though. Bring him down to
the k itchen. Phaedre, will you f ind me a couple of old quilts,
please?”
She moved toward the door , sho oing the women before her
like a flock of hens.
Obeying an impulse that he did n’ t stop to question, Roger
reached for the baby , and after a instant’ s hesitation, Brianna
let him take him . Jemmy didn’ t fuss, but hung listless and
heavy , the limp slackness a ter rible change from his normal
India-rubber bounce. The baby’ s cheek burned through the
cloth of Roger ’ s shirt as he car ried the little boy downstairs,
Bree at his elbow .The kitchen was in the brick-walled basement of the house,
and Rog er had a brief vision of Orpheus descending into the
underworld, Eurydice close behind him, as they made their
way down the d ark back stair into the shadowy depths of the
kitchen. Instead  of a magic lyre, though, he bore a child who
burned like coal and coughed as though his lungs would burst.
If he didn’ t look back, he thought, the boy would be all right.
“Perhaps a little cold water wouldn’ t come amiss.” Claire
put her hand on Jemmy’ s forehead, judging his temperature.
“Have you got a n ear infection, sweetheart?” She blew gently
into one of the baby’ s ears, then the other; he blinked, coughed
hoarsely , and swiped a chubby h and across his face, but didn’ t
flinch. The slaves were bustli ng round in a corner of the
kitchen, bringing  boiling water , pinning the quilts to a rafter to
make the tent at her direction.
Claire took the b aby out of Rog er ’ s arms to bathe him, and
he stood bereft, wanting ur gently to do something, anything,
until Brianna took his hand and clutched it hard, her nails
digging into his palm.
“He’ll be all rig ht,” she whispered. “He will.” He squeezed
hard back, wordless.
Then the tent was ready , and Brianna ducked under the
hanging quilt, turning to reach back for Jemmy , who was
alternately coughing and crying, having not liked the cold
water at  all. Claire had sent a slave to fetch her medicine box,
and now rummaged through it,  coming up with a vial filled
with a pale yellow oil, and a jar of dirty white crystals.
Before she could do anything with them, though, Joshua,
one of the gro oms, came thumping down the stairs, half-
breathless with his hurry .
“Mrs. Claire, Mrs. Claire!”
Some of the ge ntlemen had been firing of f their pistols in
celebration of the happy event, it seemed, and one of them had
suf fered some kind of mishap, though Josh seemed uncertain
as to exactly what had happened.“He isna bad hurt,” the groo m assured Claire, in the
Aberdonian Scots that came so peculiarly from his black face,
“but he is bleedin’ quite free, and Dr . Fentiman—well, he’ s
maybe n o quite  sae steady as he might be the noo. W ill ye
come, Ma’am?”
“Y es, of  course. ” In the blink of an eye, she had thrust vial
and jar into Roger ’ s hands. “I’ll have to go. Here. Put some in
the hot water; k eep him breathing the steam until he stops
coughing.” Qui ck and neat, she’d closed up her box and
handed it to Jos h to carry , heading for the stair before Roger
could ask her anything. Then she was gone.
W isps of steam were escaping through the opening in the
tent; seeing that, he paused long enough to shed coat and
waistcoat, leaving them in a ca reless heap on the floor as he
bent and ducked into the darkness, vial and jar in hand.
Bree was crouched on a stool, Jemmy on her lap, a big
white pudding-basin full of steaming water at her feet. A
swath of light from the hearth fell momentarily across her
face, and Roger smiled at her , tr ying to look reassuring, before
the quilt dropped back into place.
“Where’ s Mama? Did she leave?”
“A ye, there was some sort of  emer gency . It’ll be fine,
though,” he said firmly . “She gave me the stuf f to put in the
water; s aid just to keep him in the steam until the coughing
stops.”
He sat down on the floor besid e the basin of water . It was
very dim  in the tent, but not totally dark. As his eyes adjusted,
he could  see well enough. Bree  still looked worried, but not
nearly so frightened as she’d be en upstairs. He felt better , too;
at le ast he knew  what to be doing, and Claire hadn’ t seemed
too bothered about leaving h er grandson; obviously she
thought he wasn’ t going to choke on the spot.
The vial contained pine oil, sha rp and reeking of resin. He
wasn’ t sure how much to use, but poured a generous dollop
into the water . Then he pried th e cork out of the jar , and thepungent scent of camphor rose up like a genie from the bottle.
Not really crystals, he saw; lum ps of some sort of dried resin,
grainy a nd slightly sticky . He poured some into the palm of his
hand, then rubbed them hard between his hands before
dropping them into the water , w ondering even as he did so at
the instinctive familiarity of the gesture.
“Oh, that’ s it,” he said, realizing.
“What’ s it?”
“This.” He waved a hand round the snug sanctuary , rapidly
filling w ith pungent steam. “I re member being in my cot, with
a blanket over my head. My mother put this stuf f in hot water
—smelled just like this. That’ s why it seemed familiar .”
“Oh.” The thought seemed to r eassure her . “Did you have
croup when you were little?”
“I suppo se so, though I don’ t remember it. Just the smell.”
Steam had quite filled the li ttle tent by now , moist and
pungent. He drew a deep breath, pulling in a penetrating
lungful, then patted Brianna’ s leg.
“Don’ t worry; this’ll do the trick,” he said.
Jemmy promptly started coughing his guts out with more
seal noises, but they seemed le ss alarming now . Whether it
was the darkness , the smell, or simply the homely racket of the
renewed kitchen noises outside the tent, things seemed calmer .
He heard  Bree take in a deep bre ath, too, and let it out, and felt
rather th an saw the subtle shift of her body as she relaxed a
little, patting Jemmy’ s back.
They sat quietly for a bit, l istening to Jemmy cough,
wheeze, gasp, cough, and finally catch his breath, hiccupping
slightly . He’d stopped whimpering, seeming soothed by the
proximity of his parents.
Roger h ad dropped the cork to  the camphor jar; he patted
round on the floor until he found it, then pushed it firmly back
in.“I w onder what your mother ’ s done with her rings?” he
said, looking for some easy su bject of conversation to break
the steam-filled silence.
“Why should she have done anything with them?” Brianna
brushed back a lock of hair; she’d had it put up for the
evening, but it w as slipping out of its pins, clinging damply to
her face.
“She wa sn’ t wearing them when she gave me the stuf f.” He
nodded a t the camphor jar , set ou t of harm’ s way near the wall.
He had a clear memory of her h ands, the fingers long, white,
and bare; they’d struck him, sin ce he’d never seen her hands
without the gold and silver rings.
“Are yo u sure? She never tak es them of f, except to do
something really  nasty .” She g iggled, a nervous, unexpected
sound. “The last time I remember was when Jem dropped his
bawbee in the chamber pot.”
Roger g ave a brief snort of amusement. A bawbee was any
sort of small obj ect, but that’ s what they’d taken to calling the
iron ring—originally meant for leading cattle by the nose—
that Jem  liked to chew on. It wa s his favorite toy , and he didn’ t
like to go to bed without it.
“Ba-ba?” Jem raised his head, e yes half-closed. He was still
breathing thickly , but beginning to display an interest in
something besides his own discomfort. “Ba-ba!”
“Oops, shouldn’ t have mentioned it.” Bree joggled him
gently o n her knee, and began to sing softly , half under her
breath, to distract him.
“In a can-yon, in a cav-ern, exca-va-ting for a mine …
Dwelt a min-er , forty-nin-er , and his daugh-ter , Clementine …”
The dark  privac y of the tent reminded Roger of something;
he realized that it had something of the same feeling of
peaceful enclosure that the bench beneath the willows had had,
though the tent was a lot hotter . The linen of his shirt was
already limp on his shoulders, and he could feel sweat
trickling down his back from under the hair tied at his neck.“Hey .” He nudged Bree’ s leg. “D’ye maybe want to go up
and take of f your new dress? It’ll be spoilt if ye stay in here for
long.”
“Oh. W ell …” She hesitated, b iting her lip. “No, I’ll stay ,
it’ s okay .”
He got up, stoo ping under the q uilts, and gathered Jem up
of f her lap, hacking and gur gling.
“Go,” he said firmly . “Y ou can fetch his b—his you-know-
what. A nd don’ t worry . Y e ca n tell it’ s helping, the steam.
He’ll be right in no time.”
It took a bit more ar gument, but at last she consented, and
Roger sat down on the vacated  stool, Jemmy cuddled in the
crook of his arm . The pressure of the wooden seat reminded
him of a certain amount of residual congestion from the
encounter under  the willows, and he shifted slightly to ease the
discomfort.
“W ell, i t doesn’ t do ye any lasting harm,” he muttered to
Jemmy . “Ask any girl; they’ll tell ye.”
Jemmy snorted, snuf fled, said something unintelligible
beginning with “Ba—?” and coughed again, but only briefly .
Roger put the b ack of his hand  against the soft round cheek.
He thought  i t was cooler . H ard to tell, warm  as it was in here.
The sweat was r unning freely down his face, and he wiped it
with a sleeve.
“Ba-ba?” asked a froggy little voice against his chest.
“A ye, in a bit. Hush, now .”
“Ba-ba. Ba-ba!”
“Shhhh.”
“Ba—”
“Light s he was, and like a fairy— ”  H e groped for t he words
to the song.
“BA—”“AND HER SHOES WERE NUMBER NINE!”  Roger
abruptly raised the volume, causing startled silence both inside
the t ent and out side, in the kitchen. He cleared his throat and
lowered his voice back to lullaby level.
“ Erm … Herring boxes without topses …  Sandals wer e for
Clementine. Oh, my darling, oh, my darling, oh, my darling
Clementine … Thou art lost, an d gone for -ev-er , oh, my dar -
ling … Clementine.”
The singing seemed to be havin g an ef fect. Jemmy’ s eyelids
had dropped to half-mast. He p ut a thumb in his mouth and
began to suck, but plainly couldn’ t breathe through his
clogged nose. Roger gently pul led the thumb away , and held
the little  fist enclosed in his ow n. It was wet and sticky , and
very small, but felt reassuringly sturdy .
“Fed she duck-lings, by the wa ter , every mor -ning just at
nine … Hit her foot a-gainst a splin-ter , fell into the foaming
brine.”
The eye lids fluttered briefly , then gave up the struggle and
closed. Jemmy sighed and went completely limp, the heat
coming of f his s kin in waves. T iny beads of moisture trembled
on each lash—tears, sweat, steam, or all three.
“Ruby lips a-bove the wa-ter , bl owing bub-bles soft and fine
… Alas for me, I was no swim-mer , so I lost my Clementine.
Oh, my darling, oh, my darling …”
He wiped his fa ce again, bent a nd kissed the soft thatch of
damp, s ilky ha ir . Thank you , he thought with heartfelt
sincerity , addressing everyone from God on down the line.
“… Oh, my darling … Clementine.”48
STRANGERS IN THE NIGHT
I T W AS VER Y LA TE by the time I made my way to bed after
a la st check on  the welfare of all my patients. DeW ayne
Buchanan had suf fered a slight flesh wound in the upper arm
when Ronnie Campbell neglected to raise his pistol high
enough while carousing on the riverbank, but was in good
spirits after having the wound cleaned and dressed. Having
been liberally plied with further spirits by a remorseful
Ronnie, he was quite literally feeling no pain at present.
One of Farquard Campbell’ s slaves, a man named Rastus,
had been  badly burned on the hand when taking grilled fowl
of f a skewer; all I could do there  was to wrap the hand in clean
cloth, set it in a bowl of cold water , and prescribe gin, to be
taken internally . I had also treated several young men who
were considerably the worse for drink, and sporting
miscellaneous contusions, abrasions, and missing teeth as the
result of a disagreement over dice. Six cases of indigestion, all
treated w ith peppermint tea, and reporting improvement. Betty
was in what lo oked like a deep but natural sleep, snoring
loudly in bed. Jemmy was doing likewise, his fever abated.
Most of the loud revelry had died down by now; only the
most die-hard of the card players were still at it, peering red-
eyed at their pas teboards through a cloud of tobacco smoke in
the sma ll drawing room. I gla nced into the other rooms as
well, as I made my way across  the ground floor to the front
stair . A few gentlemen lingered in low-voiced political
conversation at one end of the  dining room, the table long
since cleared and empty brandy glasses for gotten by their
elbows. Jamie wasn’ t one of them.
A heavy -eyed slave in livery bowed as I poked my head in,
murmuring to ask whether I w anted food or drink. I hadn’ teaten anything since supper , but I waved him away , too tired to
think of food.
I pa used at the  first landing and glanced down the hall
toward J ocasta’ s suite of rooms, but all was quiet there, the
charivari and horseplay over . There was a lar ge dent in the
linenfold paneling, where a heavy body had struck, and
glancing up, I c ould see several burned spots in the ceiling,
where shots had been fired into it.
The butler Ulysses sat guard o n a stool by the door , still
dressed in wig and formal live ry , head nodding over folded
arms. A candle guttered and spat in the sconce above him. By
its w avering light, I could see th at his eyes were closed, but he
wore a deep fr own; he hunched in his sleep, and his lips
moved briefly , as though he dreamed of evil things. I thought
to w aken him, but even as I m oved toward him, the dream
passed. He stretched, half-rousing, then fell asleep again, his
face rela xing in to calm. An ins tant later , the candle flickered
out.
I l istene d, but heard no sound in the darkness save Ulysses’ s
heavy breathing. Whether Duncan and Jocasta murmured
understandings t o each other behind the curtains of their bed,
or lay silent, side by side and eternally separate, no one would
ever know . I s ent them a mental wish for happiness, and
dragged myself upward, knees and back aching, wishing for
my own bed—and my own husband’ s understanding.
Through an open casement on the second-floor landing, I
heard distant whoops, laughter , and the occasional crack of
recreational gunfire, borne on the night air . The younger ,
wilder gentlemen—and a few old enough to know better—had
gone do wn to the river landin g in company with a dozen
bottles of whisky and brandy to shoot frogs, or so I was
informed.
The ladi es, though, were all asleep. The second floor was
quiet save for the buzz of muf fled snoring. By contrast to the
chilly corridor outside, the chamber itself was stifling, thoughthe fire had burned down to a crimson coal bed that shed no
more than an eerie red glow across the hearth.
W ith so many g uests in the house, the only people with the
luxury o f a private bedroom were the bridal pair; everyone
else was crammed into the few available rooms, willy-nilly .
T wo lar ge tester beds and a tru ndle occupied the room, with
straw-tick pallets spread over most of the remaining floor
space. Each bed was packed like a sardine tin with shift-clad
women lying side by side acr oss the mattress, radiating as
much moist heat as a greenhouse full of orchids.
I breathed shallowly—the air was filled with a cloying
mixture of stale sweat, barbecue, and fried onions, French
perfume, drink-sodden breath, and the sharp, sweet smell of
vanilla beans—a nd shed my gown and shoes as quickly as I
could, h oping not to break out into a drenching sweat before I
could un dress. I  was still keyed up from the events of the day ,
but e xhaustion was pulling like lead weights at my limbs, and
I wa s glad enou gh to tiptoe through the sprawl of bodies and
creep in to my accustomed space  near the foot of one of the big
beds.
My mind was still buzzing wi th speculations of all sorts,
and in spite of the hypnotic lull of so much slumber all around
me, I lay stif f-limbed and sore, watching the silhouette of my
bare toes against the hearth’ s dying light.
Betty had passed from her stup or into what looked like a
normal deep sleep. When she woke in the morning, we would
find out who had given her the cup, and—perhaps—what was
in it. I ho ped that Jemmy would sleep comfortably as well. But
what was really on my mind, of course, was Jamie.
I ha dn’ t seen hi m among the card players, nor yet among
the men talking low-voiced of taxes and tobacco.
I h adn’ t seen Ph illip W ylie anywhere on the first floor of the
house, either . I could well believ e he was out with the revelers
by t he river lan ding. That was his set and his style, wealthy
young m en who would seek div ersion in drink and carouse inthe dark, careless both of co ld and danger , laughing and
chasing each other by the light of random gunfire.
That was neither Jamie’ s set nor his style, but the thought of
him am ong them was what m ade my feet curl with chill,
despite the heat of the room.
He wouldn’ t do anything stupid , I assured myself, rolling
onto my side, k nees drawn up as much as possible in the
cramped quarter s. He wouldn’ t; but his notion of stupid wasn’ t
always the same as mine, by any means.
Most o f the male guests were bedded down in the
outbuildings, or  in the parlors; as I passed, I had seen
anonymous sleeping figures sprawled on the floor of the front
parlor , snoring loudly , wrapped in their cloaks before the fire. I
had not gone to  poke among th em, but doubtless Jamie was
there—he had had as long a day as I had, after all.
But it was not li ke him to retire  without coming to wish me
good nig ht, no matter what the circumstances. Of course, he
had bee n annoyed with me, an d despite the promise of our
interrupted conversation on the terrace, we had not quite made
up the quarrel. Re-inflamed it, rather , with beastly Phillip
W ylie’ s invitation. My hands curled, thumbs rubbing at the
slight ca lluses that marked the spots where my rings normally
sat. Ef fing Scot!
Next to me J emima Hatfiel d stirred and murmured,
disturbed by my restlessness. I eased myself slowly back onto
my side,  and stared sightlessly a t the oaken footboard in front
of me.
Y es, he was undoubtedly still angry about Phillip W ylie’ s
advances. So was I—or I would be, were I not so tired. How
dare he—I yawned, nearly dislocating my jaw , and decided
that it really was n’ t worth the bo ther of being annoyed, at least
not now .
But it wasn’ t l ike Jamie to avoid me, angry or not. He
wasn’ t the sort of man to sulk or brood. He would seek a
confrontation o r provoke a fight, without a moment’ shesitation; but I didn’ t think he had ever let the sun go down
on anger—at least not with regard to me.
Which left me t o worry about where he was, and what in
bloody h ell he was doing. And the necessity of worrying about
him was making me r eally  ang ry , if only because that was
better than being worried.
But it had  been a v ery long day , and as the  moments passed,
and the faint po ps of gunfire from the river landing gradually
ceased, languor stole over me, blunting my fears and scattering
my thoughts like spilled sand.  The gentle breathing of the
women all around me lulled me like the sound of wind in the
trees, and my grip on reality slackened and at last fell free.
I mi ght have expected dreams o f violence or nightmares of
dread, b ut my subconscious had plainly had enough of that. In
the contrary way of such things, it instead chose to dwell on
another thread of the day’ s even ts. Perhaps it was the warmth
of th e ro om, or simply the closeness of so many bodies, but I
dreamed vividly and erotically , the tides of arousal washing
me n ow and the n near to the shores of wakefulness, then once
more carrying me out into the deeps of unconsciousness.
There were horses in my dreams; glowing black Friesians
with flow ing manes that rippled in the wind as the stallions ran
beside me. I saw my own legs s tretch and leap; I was a white
mare, an d the ground flew past in a blur of green beneath my
hooves, until I stopped and tu rned, waiting for the one, a
broad-chested s tallion who came to me, his breath hot and
moist against my neck, his white teeth closing on my nape …
“I am the King  of Ir eland,”  he said , and I came slowly
awake, t ingling from head to fo ot, to find that someone was
gently stroking the sole of said foot.
Still bem used by  the carnal imag es of my dreams, I was not
alarmed by this, but merely muz zily pleased to discover that I
had feet  after all, and not hoove s. My toes curled and my foot
flexed, reveling in the delicate t ouch of the thumb that traced
its w ay from th e ball of my foot down the high arch and up
into the hollow below my anklebone, managing to stimulate anentire p lexus of sensation. Then I came all the way awake,
with a small jerk.
Whoever it was plainly sensed my return to consciousness,
for the touch lef t my foot momentarily . Then it came back, this
time mo re firmly , a lar ge warm  hand curling quite round my
foot, the thumb executing a fir m but languid massage at the
base of my toes.
By this time, I w as quite awake, and mildly startled, but not
frightened. I wiggled my foot b riefly , as though to throw of f
the hand , but it s queezed my foot lightly in response, and then
its companion gently pinched my great toe.
This little piggy went to market, this little piggy stayed home
… I co uld hear the  rhyme as clearly as though it had been
spoken aloud, as the fingers deftly pinched their way across
my toes, one by one.
And this little piggy went weee-weee-weee, all the way
home!  The touch flicke d tickling down the sole of my foot and
I jerked, an involuntary giggle caught in my throat.
I lifted my head, but the hand seized my foot again and
squeezed in admonition. The fire had gone out altogether and
the room  was black as velvet; even with eyes completely dark-
adapted, I could gain nothing but the sense of a hunched figure
near my  feet, an amorphous blo b that shifted like mercury , its
edges blending with and disappearing into the dark of the air .
The han d slid gently up the calf of my leg. I twitched
violently , and the woman next to me snorted, reared up with a
bleary , “Hnh?” and collapsed again, in a whoosh.
My stomach muscles quivered w ith suppressed laughter . He
must ha ve felt the slight vibration—the fingers left my little
toe with  a gentle squeeze, and s troked the bottom of my foot,
making all my toes curl tight.
The fingers curled into a fist, pressing along the length of
my sole, then su ddenly opened, cupping my heel. His thumb
stroked my ankle, and paused, questioning. I didn’ t move.His fingers were getting warm er; there was only a faint
sensation of cold as they followed the curve of my calf and
sought shelter in the soft place  behind my knee. The fingers
played a quick tattoo on the sensitive skin there, and I twitched
in ag itation. They slowed and s topped, settling surely on the
artery where my pulse beat fast ; I could feel it, blood rushing
past wh ere the skin was so thin the veins would show blue
beneath it.
I he ard a sigh as he shifted his weight; then one hand
cupped the round of my thigh, and slid slowly upward. The
other followed, pressing my legs gently , inexorably apart.
My heart was thumping in m y ears and my breasts felt
swollen, nipples poking hard and round through the thin
muslin of my s hift. I took a deep breath, and smelled rice
powder .
All at once, my heart gave a double-thump and nearly
stopped, as the sudden thought  sprang to life in my mind—
what if it wasn’ t Jamie?
I l ay quite still, trying not to breathe, concentrating on the
hands, which were doing something delicate and quite
unspeakable. Lar ge hands, they wer e  l ar g e hands; I could feel
the knuckles pressing the soft inner flesh of my thigh. But
Phillip W ylie had lar ge hands, too; quite lar ge for his size. I
had seen him scoop up a handful of oats for his stallion, Lucas,
and the horse bury its big black nose in the palm.
Calluses; the roving hands— oh, God!—were smoothly
callused. But so were W ylie’ s ; dandy he might be, but a
horseman; his palms were quite as smooth and hard as Jamie’ s.
It had to be Jamie, I assured myself, lifting my head an inch
or so and peering into the black velvet darkness. T en little pigs
… of course it was Jamie! Then one of the hands did
something quite startling and I gasped out loud and jerked,
limbs twitching. My elbow slammed into the ribs of the
woman next to me, who sn apped upright with a loud
exclamation. The hands retreated abruptly , squeezing my
ankles in a hasty farewell.There was a shuf fling noise as someone crawled hurriedly
across the floor , then a flash of dim light and a breath of cold
air from the corridor as the door opened and shut again
immediately .
“Wha—?” said Jemima next to me, in woozy astonishment.
“Whozat?”
Receiving no answer , she flounced, muttered, and at last lay
down again, to fall promptly fast asleep.
I did not.49
IN VINO VERIT AS
I  LA Y SLEEPLESS for quite a long time, listening to the
peaceful snores  and rustlings of my bedmates, and to the
agitated thump of my own heart. Every nerve in my body felt
as though it were sticking out through my skin, and when
Jemima Hatfield rolled unconsciously into me, I jabbed her
viciously in the ribs with my elbow , so that she uttered a
startled “Whoof?” and sat halfway up, blinking and muttering,
before collapsing slowly back into the communal sea of sleep.
As for me, my s mall bark of consciousness was adrift on the
flood, spinning rudderless, but without the slightest chance of
being pulled under .
I sim ply couldn’ t decide how to feel. On the one hand, I was
aroused—unwillingly , to be sure, but still most definitely
aroused. Whoever my nocturnal visitor had been, he knew his
way around a woman’ s body .
That would ar gue for its being J amie, I thought. Still, I had
no id ea how exp erienced Phillip W ylie might be in the arts of
love—I had spurned his approa ches in the stable so promptly
that he had had no chance of demonstrating any skills he might
possess in that direction.
But my midnight visitor had not  used any caress that I could
positively identi fy as being in Jamie’ s repertoire. Now , if he
had used  his mouth … I shied away from that  l ine  of thought
like a spooked horse, and Jemima gave a muf fled grunt as I
convulsed slightly , my skin rippling in involuntary response to
the images it evoked.
I did n’ t know whether to feel amused or outraged, seduced
or v iolated. I was  extr emely angry; I was sure of that much, at
least, and the surety gave m e some small anchor in the
maelstrom of emotion. Still, I had no idea as to the correct
tar get of  my anger , and with nowhere to aim that particularlydestructive emotion, it was simply crashing round inside me,
knocking things down and leaving dents.
“Oof,” said Jemima, in a point ed—and quite conscious—
tone of voice. Evidently I wasn’ t the only one being dented by
my emotions.
“Mmmm?” I murmured, feigning half-sleep. “Glr gl. Bzg.”
There was a small tinge of guilt in the mix, as well.
If I were sure it had  been Jamie, would I be angry?
The wo rst of it was, I realized, that there was absolutely
nothing I could do to find out who it had been. I could scarcely
ask Jam ie whether he had crept in and fondled me in the
darkness—because if he hadn’ t , his immediate response would
certainly be to assassinate Phillip W ylie bare-handed.
I f elt as though tiny electric eel s were squirming under my
skin. I stretched  as hard as I could, alternately tensed and
relaxed every muscle—and still could find no way to keep
still.
At last, I slid ca utiously of f the bed, and made my way to
the door , with a glance at my erstwhile bedmates, who lay
slumbering peacefully under the quilts like a row of perfumed
sausages. Movin g with great stealth, I eased the door open and
peeked out into the hallway . It  was either very late or very
early; th e tall window at the en d of the corridor had gone to
gray , but the las t of the stars still showed, vanishing pinpoints
on the charcoal satin of the sky .
It w as cold in the hall, away from the contained body heat
of th e women, but I welcomed the chill; the blood was pulsing
just und er my skin, and I bloom ed with heat and agitation. A
nice cooldown was exactly wh at I wanted. I made my way
quietly t o the back stairs, meaning to go down and outside for
a breath of air .
I stopped dead a t the top of the staircase. A man stood at the
foot of the stair , a silhouette tall  and black against the panes of
the doub le French doors. I didn’ t think I had made any sound,but h e tu rned at  once, face lifted  toward me. Even in the poor
light, I knew at once that it was Jamie.
He w as still clad  in the clothes he had worn the night before
—coat and waistcoat, frilled shirt and buckled breeches. The
shirt wa s open at the neck, though, coat and weskit unbuttoned
and aske w . I could see the narro w line of white linen, the flesh
of his throat dark against it. Hi s hair was loose; he had been
running his hands through it.
“Come down,” he said softly .
I hesitated, looking back over my shoulder . A ladylike
medley of snores came from the room I had just left. T wo
slaves were sleeping on the fl oor in the hall, curled under
blankets, but neither moved.
I l ooked  back. He didn’ t speak again, but lifted two fingers,
beckoning. The scent of smoke and whisky filled the stairwell.
The blood was thrumming in my ears—and elsewhere. My
face wa s flushed, my hair damp at the temples and on my
neck; cool air rose up under my shift, touched the patch of
dampness at the base of my spine, the film of slickness where
my thighs brushed together .
I c ame down sl owly , cautiously , trying not to let the stairs
creak under my bare feet. It occurred to me belatedly that this
was ridiculous; the slaves thundered up and down these stairs
hundreds of times a day . Even so, I felt the need for secrecy;
the house was still asleep, and the stairwell was filled with a
gray light that s eemed as fragile as smoked glass. A sudden
sound, a move t oo quick, and something might explode under
my feet, with a flash like a lightbulb popping.
His eyes stayed fixed on me, dark triangles in the paler dark
of his face. He s tared at me with  a fierce intensity , as though to
drag me down the stairs by the force of his gaze alone.
I sto pped, one step from the bottom. There was no blood on
his clothes; thank God for that.
It wasn’ t that I’d never seen Jamie drunk before. No wonder
he hadn ’ t come  up the stairs to me. I thought he was verydrunk now , and yet there was so mething quite dif ferent in this.
He s tood rock-solid, legs set wi de, betrayed only by a certain
deliberation in the way he moved his head to look at me.
“What—” I began, whispering.
“Come here,” he said. His voice was low , rough with
sleeplessness and whisky .
I ha dn’ t time ei ther to reply or to acquiesce; he seized my
arm and  pulled me toward him, then swept me of f the last step,
crushed me to h im, and kissed m e. It was a most disconcerting
kiss—as though his mouth knew mine all too well, and would
compel my pleasure, regardless of my desires.
His hair smelled of a long night’ s smoke—tobacco and
woodsmoke and the smoke of beeswax candles. He tasted so
strongly of whisky that I felt light-headed, as though the
alcohol in his blood were seeping into mine through our skins
where they touched, through the sealed membranes of our
mouths. Someth ing else was seeping into me from him, as
well—a sense of overpowering lust, as blind as it was
dangerous.
I wa nted to remonstrate with him , to push him away . Then I
decided that I di dn’ t, but it wouldn’ t have made any dif ference
if I had. He didn’ t mean to let go.
One big hand was gripping the back of my neck, warm and
hard on my skin, and I thought of a stallion’ s teeth closing on
the neck of the mare he mounts, and shivered from scalp to
sole. His thumb accidentally pressed the great artery under my
jaw; darkness swam behind my eyes and my knees began to
buckle. He felt it and let go, easing me back so that I was
almost lying prone upon the sta irs, his weight half on me and
his hands seeking.
I w as naked un der my shift, an d the thin muslin might as
well not have been there.
The hard edge of a stair pressed into my back, and it
occurred to me, in the dim wa y that things do when you’redrunk, t hat he was just about to take me right there on the
stairs, and devil take anyone who might see.
I got  my  mouth free of his long enough to gasp, “Not here!”
in h is ear . Tha t seemed to bring him momentarily to his
senses; he lifted his head, blin king like one roused from a
nightmare, eyes wide and blind.  Then he nodded once, jerkily ,
and rose, pulling me to my feet with him.
The maids’ cloaks were hanging by the door; he seized one
and wra pped it round me, the n picked me up bodily and
shouldered his way through the door , past a staring housemaid
with a slop jar in her hands.
He set me down  when he reache d the brick path outside; the
bricks were cold under my f eet. Then we were moving
together through  the gray light across a landscape of shadow
and wind, still entangled with each other , stumbling, jostling,
and yet somehow almost flying, clothes fluttering round us
and cold air brushing our skins with the rude touch of spring,
bound for some vaguely sensed and yet inevitable destination.
The stab les. He hit the door and pulled me through with him
into the warm dark, thrust me hard against a wall.
“I must have ye  now , or die,” he said, breathless, and then
his mouth was on mine again , his face cold from the air
outside, and his breath steaming with mine.
Then he drew abruptly away , and I staggered, pressing my
hands against the rough bricks of the wall to keep my balance.
“Hold up your hands,” he said.
“What?” I said stupidly .
“Y our hands. Put them up.”
In co mplete bewilderment, I hel d them up, and felt him take
hold of the left one, fumbling. Pressure and warmth, and the
faint light from the open door sh one on my gold wedding ring.
Then he  seized my right hand, shoved my silver ring onto my
finger , th e metal  warm from the heat of his body . He raised my
hand to his mouth, and bit my knuckles, hard.Then hi s hand was on my breast, cold air brushed my
thighs, a nd I felt the scratch of the bricks on my bare backside.
I ma de a noise, and he clapped a hand over my mouth.
Speared as neatly as a landed trout, I was just as helpless,
pinned flapping against the wall.
He took  his hand away and replaced it with his mouth,
engulfing mine.  I could feel the small ur gent growls he was
making in his th roat, and felt another one, much louder , rising
in mine.
My shift was wadded high around my waist, and my bare
buttocks smacke d rhythmically  against the roughened brick,
but I felt no pain at all. I gripp ed him by the shoulders and
held on.
His hand  skimmed my thigh, p ushing at the drifts of linen
that threatened to come between us. I remembered, vividly ,
those hands in the darkness, and bucked convulsively .
“Look.” His breath came hot in my ear . “Look down. W atch
while I take ye. W atch, damn you!”
His hand pressed my neck, be nding my head forward to
look down in the dimness, past the folds of sheltering fabric to
the naked fact of my possession.
I arc hed my bac k and then collapsed, biting the shoulder of
his coat  to make no noise. His  mouth was on my neck, and
fastened tight as he shuddered against me.
 
WE LA Y T ANGLED together in the straw , watching daylight
creep through the half-open door across the red-brick floor of
the stable. My heart was still thumping in my ears, blood
tingling through skin and temples, thighs and fingers, but I felt
somehow detached from such sensations, as though they were
happening to someone else. I felt unreal—and slightly
shocked.
My cheek lay flat against his chest. Moving my eyes
slightly , I could see the fading re d flush of his skin in the openneck of his shirt, and the coarse  curly hairs, so deep an auburn
that they looked nearly black in the shadowed light.
A pu lse was throbbing in the hollow of his throat, no more
than an inch from my hand. I w anted to lay my fingers on it,
feel his heartbea t echo in my blood. I felt oddly shy , though, as
though such a gesture were too intimate to contemplate.
Which was completely ridiculous, in view of what we had just
done with—and to—each another .
I did  mo ve my index finger , just a bit, so that my fingertip
brushed the tiny three-cornered  scar on his throat; a faded
white knot, pale against his bronzed skin.
There w as a slight catch in the rhythm of his breathing, but
he d idn’ t move. His arm was ro und me, his hand splayed on
the small of my back. T wo breaths, three … and then the faint
pressure of a fingertip against my spine.
W e lay silent, breathing lightly , both concentrated on the
delicate acknow ledgment of our connection, but didn’ t speak
or m ove; slightly embarrassed,  with the return of reason, at
what we had just done.
The sound of voices coming toward the stable galvanized
me into motion, though. I sat up  abruptly , yanked my shift up
over my  shoulders, and began to brush straw from my hair .
Jamie rolled up onto his knees, his back to me, and began
hastily to tuck in his shirttail.
The voices outside stopped abruptly , and we both froze.
There was a brief, char ged silence, and then the sound of
footsteps, delicately retreating. I let out the breath I had been
holding, feeling my racing heart begin to slow . The stable was
filled wi th the rustlings and wh ickers of the horses, who had
heard the voices and footsteps, too. They were getting hungry .
“So you won,” I said to Jamie ’ s back. My voice sounded
strange to me, as though I hadn’ t used it in a long time.
“I prom ised ye I would.” He spoke softly , head bent as he
rearranged the folds of his plaid.I s tood up, feelin g mildly dizzy , and leaned against the wall
to ke ep my bala nce as I brushed  sand and straw from my feet.
The rou gh feel of the bricks beh ind me was a vivid reminder ,
and I spread my hands out against them, bracing myself
against the rush of recalled sensation.
“Are ye all right , Sassenach?” He turned his head sharply to
look up at me, sensing my movement.
“Y es. Y es,” I repeated. “Fine. Just … I’m fine. And you?”
He l ooked pale and scruf fy , hi s face stubbled and hollow
with strain, eyes smudged black from a long and sleepless
night. H e met my eyes for a m oment, then glanced away . A
hint of color showed on his ch eekbones, and he swallowed
audibly .
“I—” he began, then stopped. He got to his feet and stood
before m e. His formal queue had come undone, and the tails of
his h air splayed over his shoulde r , glimmering redly as the bar
of light from the door lit him.
“Y e dinna hate m e?” he asked abruptly . T aken by surprise, I
laughed.
“No,” I said. “Do you think I should?”
His mouth twitched a little, a nd he rubbed his knuckles
across it, scraping on the stubble of his beard.
“W ell, maybe so,” he said, “but I’m glad if ye don’ t.”
He took  my hands gently in his own, his thumb rubbing
lightly across the interlaced p attern of my silver ring. His
hands were cold, chilled by the dawn.
“Whyever do you think I might hate you?” I asked.
“Because of the rings, do you mean?” Granted, I would have
been ups et and furious with him, had he lost either one. Since
he hadn’ t … Of course, he had  caused me to worry all night
about w here he was and what h e was doing, to say nothing of
sneaking into my room and mak ing improper advances to my
feet. Perhaps I ought to be annoyed with him, after all.“W ell, s tarting wi’ that,” he sa id dryly . “I havena let my
pride ge t the better of me in som e time, but I couldna seem to
stop myself, what with wee Phillip W ylie preenin’ about,
smirkin’ at your breasts, and—”
“He was?” I hadn’ t noticed that part.
“He was,” Jamie said, glowering momentarily at the
thought. Then he dismissed Phillip W ylie, returning to the
catalogue of his own sins.
“And then, draggin’ ye out of the house in your shift and
going af ter ye like a ravening beast—” He gently touched my
neck, w here I could still feel the tingling soreness of a bite
mark.
“Oh. W ell, I quite liked that part, actually .”
“Y ou did?” His eyes flicked wide and blue in momentary
startlement.
“Y es. Though I rather think I have bruises on my bottom.”
“Oh.” H e looked down, apparently abashed, though the
corner of his m outh twitched slightly . “I’m sorry for that.
When I’ d finished—at the whist, I mean—I couldna think of
anything but finding ye, Sassen ach. I went up and down that
stair a dozen times, going to your door , and back away again.”
“Oh, yo u did?” I was pleased t o hear this, as it seemed to
increase the odds that he had in fact been my midnight visitor .
He p icked up a hank of my rum pled hair and ran his fingers
gently through it.
“I ke nt I  couldna  sleep, and thou ght, well, I shall go out and
walk in the night for a time, an d I would, but then I should
find my self again outside your room, not knowing how I’d
come there, but only trying to think how I might get to ye—
trying to will ye to come out to me, I suppose.”
W ell, tha t explained my dreams of wild stallions, I thought.
The plac e where he had bitten my neck throbbed slightly . And
where had he brought me? A stable. King of Ireland, forsooth.He squeezed my hands lightly .
“I thoug ht the force of my wanting must wake ye, surely .
And then ye did  come… .” He stopped, looking at me with
eyes gon e soft and dark. “Chris t, Claire, ye were so beautiful,
there on the stair , wi’ your hair down and the shadow of your
body with the light behind ye… .” He shook his head slowly .
“I did think I should die, if I did na have ye,” he said softly .
“Just then.”
I reached up to stroke his face, his beard a soft bristle on my
palm.
“W ouldn’ t want  you to die,” I whispered, tucking back a
lock of hair behind his ear .
W e smiled at ea ch other then, but whatever else we might
have said was interrupted by a loud whinny from one of the
horses, followed by stamping noises. W e were interfering with
their breakfast.
I droppe d my hand and Jamie  bent to pick up his coat,
which la y half-buried in the str aw . He didn’ t lose his balance
as he bent, but I saw him wince  as the blood went suddenly to
his head.
“Did yo u have a terrible lot to drink last night?” I asked,
recognizing the symptoms.
He straightened up with a small grunt of amusement.
“A ye, quarts,” he said, ruefully . “Y e can tell?”
A perso n with much less exper ience than I had could have
told at a distance of roughly half  a mile; putting aside the more
obvious indications of recent intoxication, he smelled like a
distillery .
“It didn’ t impair your card playi ng, evidently ,” I said, being
tactful. “Or was Phillip W ylie similarly af fected?”
He looked surprised, and slightly af fronted.
“Y e dinna think I’d get besotted whilst I was playing, do ye?
And with your r ings at stake? No, that was after—MacDonaldfetched a bottle of champagne  and another of whisky , and
insisted that we must celebrate our winnings in proper style.”
“MacDonald? Donald MacDonald? He was playing with
you?”
“A ye, he and I were partnered against W ylie and Stanhope.”
He s hook the coat, sending bits of straw flying. “I couldna say
what sor t of soldier he was, bu t the man’ s a fine hand at the
whist, to be sure.”
Mention of the w ords “fine hand” reminded me. He’d come
to th e door of my room, he said; he hadn’ t mentioned coming
in. Had he, and been too far go ne between liquor and longing
to re call doing it? Had I, daze d with dreams of equine lust,
imagined the whole thing? Surely not, I thought, but shook of f
the sense of va gue disquiet engendered by the memory , in
favor of another word from his remark.
“Y ou sa id winnings?” In the st ress of the moment, it had
only see med important that he had kept my rings, but it
occurred to me belatedly that tho se were only his stake. “What
did you take o f f Phillip W ylie?” I asked, laughing. “His
embroidered coat buttons? Or his silver shoe buckles?”
His face had an odd expression as he glanced at me.
“W ell, no,” he said. “I took his horse.”
 
HE SW UNG HIS COA T round my shoulders, put an arm
round m y waist,  and led me down the main aisle of the stable
block, past the loose-boxes and stalls.
Joshua had come in quietly , thro ugh the other door , and was
working at the far end of the stable, silhouetted against the
light from the open double-doors as he pitchforked hay into
the e nd stall. As  we reached him , he glanced at us and nodded
in greet ing, his face carefully neutral at the sight of us,
bedraggled, barefoot, and prickled with straw . Even in a
household with a blind mistress, a slave knew what not to see.No business of his, his downcast countenance said clearly .
He looked nearly as tired as I felt, eyes heavy and bloodshot.
“How is he?” Jamie asked, lifting his chin toward the stall.
Josh perked up a bit at the inquiry , putting down his pitchfork.
“Oh, he ’ s bonnie,” he said, wit h an air of satisfaction. “A
bonnie lad, Mr . W ylie’ s Lucas.”
“Indeed he is,” Jamie agreed. “Only he’ s mine now .”
“He’ s what?” Josh goggled at him, openmouthed.
“He’ s m ine.” Jamie went to th e railing and reached out a
hand to scratch the ears of the big stallion, busily engaged in
eating hay from his manger .
“Seas,”  h e murmured to the horse. “Ciamar a tha thu, a
ghille mhoir?”
I fol lowed him, peering over his  arm at the horse, who lifted
his head for a moment, regarded  us with a genial eye, snorted,
tossed h is veil-li ke mane out of his face, and went back to his
breakfast with single-minded intent.
“A lovely creature, is he no?” Jamie was admiring Lucas, a
look of distant speculation in his eyes.
“W ell, yes, he is, but—” My own admiration was
substantially tinged with dism ay . If Jamie had set out to
avenge his own pride at the co st of W ylie’ s, he’d done it in
spades. Despite my irritation with W ylie, I couldn’ t help a
small pang at the thought of how he must be feeling at the loss
of his magnificent Friesian.
“But what, Sassenach?”
“W ell, just—” I fumbled awkwardly for words. I could
scarcely say I felt sorry fo r Phillip W ylie, under the
circumstances. “Just—well, what do you mean to do with
him?”
Even I could see that Lucas was totally unsuited to life on
Fraser ’ s Ridge. The thought of  plowing or hauling with him
seemed sacrilegious, and while I supposed Jamie could  usehim onl y for riding … I frowned dubiously , envisioning the
boggy b ottoms a nd rocky trails t hat would threaten those well-
turned le gs and splinter the glossy hooves; the hanging boughs
and under growth that would tangle in mane and tail. Gideon
the Man-eater was a thousand times better suited to such rough
environs.
“Oh, I dinna m ean to keep him,” Jamie assured me. He
looked at the horse and sighed regretfully . “Though I should
dearly lo ve to. But ye’re right; he wouldna do for the Ridge.
No, I mean to sell him.”
“Oh, go od.” I was relieved to hear this. W ylie would
undoubtedly buy  Lucas back, no matter what the cost. I found
that a comforting thought. An d we could certainly use the
money .
Joshua h ad gone out while we were talking. At this point, he
reappeared in the doorway , a sac k of grain on his shoulder . His
previous sluggish air had disappeared, though; his eyes were
still bloodshot, but he looked alert, and mildly alarmed.
“Mrs. Claire?” he said. “Beggin ’ your pardon, ma’am, but I
met T er esa by the barn just now; she’ s says as how there’ s
summat gone amiss wi’ Betty . I thought ye’d maybe want to
know .”50
BLOOD IN THE A TTIC
T HE A TTIC ROOM looked like the scene of a murder , and a
brutal on e, at that. Betty was str uggling on the floor beside her
overturned bed, knees drawn up and fists doubled into her
abdomen, the muslin of her shift torn and saturated with blood.
Fentiman was on the floor with her , dwarfed by her bulk but
vainly grappling with her spasming body , nearly as smeared
with gore as she was.
The sun was ful ly up now , and pouring in through the tiny
windows in brilliant shafts that spotlighted parts of the chaos,
leaving the rest in shadowed confusion. Cots were pushed
aside an d upset,  bedding tangled in mounds, worn shoes and
bits of clothing scattered like d ebris among the splotches of
fresh blood on the wooden floor .
I hurried  across the attic, but be fore I could reach her , Betty
gave a deep, gur gling cough, and more blood gushed from her
mouth and nose. She curled forward, arched back, doubled
hard again … and went limp.
I fell to my knees beside her , though it was apparent from a
glance that her l imbs had relaxed into that final stillness from
which there could be no hope of revival. I lifted her head and
pressed my fingers under her j aw; her eyes had rolled back,
only the  whites showing. No breath, no sign of a pulse in the
clammy neck.
From th e quantities of blood spread round the room, I
thought there could be very little left in her body . Her lips
were blu e, and her skin had gone the color of ashes. Fentiman
knelt behind her , wigless and white-faced, skinny arms still
locked about her heavy torso, holding her slumped body half
of f the floor .
He was in his nightshirt, I saw , a pair of blue satin breeches
hastily pulled on beneath it. The air reeked of blood, bile, andfeces, and he w as smeared with all those substances. He
looked up at me, though he showed no sign of recognition, his
eyes wide and blank with shock.
“Dr . Fen timan.” I spoke softly; with the noise of struggle
ceased, the attic was stricken with that absolute silence that
often fo llows in  the wake of death, and it seemed sacrilege to
break it.
He blink ed, and  his mouth work ed a little, but he seemed to
have no notion how to reply . He didn’ t move, though the
spreading pool of blood had so aked through the knees of his
breeches. I put a hand on his sh oulder; it was bird-boned, but
rigid with denial. I knew the feeling; to lose a patient you have
fought for is a terrible thing—and yet one all doctors know .
“Y ou ha ve done all you can ,” I said, still softly , and
tightened my grip. “It is not yo ur fault.” What had happened
the day before wasn’ t importan t. He was a colleague, and I
owed him what absolution lay in my power to give.
He licked dry lips, and nodded once, then bent to lay the
body ge ntly down. A shaft of light skimmed the top of his
head, glowing through the scanty bristles of cropped gray hair ,
and mak ing the bones of his skull seem thin and fragile. He
seemed suddenly frail altogethe r , and let me help him to his
feet without protest.
A lo w m oan ma de me turn, still  holding his arm. A knot of
female slaves huddled in the s hadowed corner of the room,
faces sta rk and dark hands fluttering with distress against the
pale muslin of their shifts. There  were male voices on the stair
outside, muted and anxious. I could hear Jamie, low-voiced
and calm, explaining.
“Gussie?” I called toward the w omen in the corner with the
first name that came to mind.
The knot of sl aves clung together for a moment, then
reluctantly unraveled, and Gussie stepped out, a pale brown
moth of a girl from Jamaica, small under a turban of blue
calico.“Madam?” She kept her eyes on mine, steadfastly away
from the still form on the floor .
“I’m taking Doctor Fentiman downstairs. I’ll have some of
the men come to … to take care of Betty . This …” I made a
small ge sture toward the mess on the floor , and she nodded,
still shocked, but obviously relieved to have something to do.
“Y es, Madam. W e do that, quick.” She hesitated, eyes
darting round the room, then looked back at me. “Madam?”
“Y es?”
“Someone must go—tell that girl name Phaedre what’ s gone
with Betty . Y ou tell her , please?”
Startled, I looked, and realized that Phaedre was not among
the slave s in the corner . Of course; as Jocasta’ s body servant,
she would sleep downstairs, near her mistress, even on her
wedding night.
“Y es,” I said, uncertainly . “Of course. But—”
“This Betty that girl’ s mama,” Gussie said, seeing my
incomprehension. She swallowed, tears swimming in her soft
brown eyes. “Somebody—can I go, Madam? Can I go tell
her?”
“Please,” I said, and stepped bac k, motioning her to go. She
tiptoed past the body , then dart ed for the door , callused bare
feet thumping softly on the boards.
Dr . Fentiman had begun to em er ge from his shock. He
pulled a way fro m me and stoo ped toward the floor , making
vague g roping gestures. I saw that his medical kit had been
upset in the struggle; bottles and instruments were strewn
across the floor in a litter of metal and broken glass.
Before h e could retrieve his ki t, though, there was a brief
commotion on the stair , and D uncan came into the room,
Jamie on his he els. I noticed with some interest that Duncan
was still wearing his wedding c lothes, though minus coat and
waistcoat. Had he been to bed at all? I wondered.He nodd ed to me, but his eyes went at once to Betty , now
sprawled on the floor , bloody shift crumpled round her broad,
splayed thighs. One breast spill ed from the torn fabric, heavy
and slack as a half-filled pouch of meal. Duncan blinked
several t imes. Then he wiped the back of his hand across his
mustache, and took a visible br eath. He bent to pluck a quilt
from the carnage and laid it gently over her .
“Help me with her , Mac Dubh ,” he said.
Seeing what he was about, Jam ie knelt and gathered the
dead woman up into his arms. Duncan drew himself upright,
and turned his face toward the women in the corner .
“Dinna fash yourselves,” he sa id quietly . “I shall see her
taken ca re of.” There was an unusual note of authority in his
voice that made me realize that in spite of his natural modesty ,
he had accepted the fact that he was master here.
The men left w ith their burden, and I heard Dr . Fentiman
give a deep sigh. It felt as though the whole attic sighed with
him; the atmosphere was still thick with stench and sorrow , but
the shock of violent death was dissipating.
“Leave it,” I sa id to Fentiman, seeing him move again to
pick up a bottle lying on the floor . “The women will take care
of it.” Not wai ting for ar gument, I took him firmly by the
elbow and marched him out the door and down the stair .
People w ere up; I caught the sounds of rattling dishes from
the dining room, and the faint scent of sausages. I couldn’ t
take him  throug h the public roo ms in his current state, nor up
to th e bedrooms; he was undo ubtedly sharing a room with
several other men, any of whom  might still be abed. For lack
of a better idea, I took him outside, pausing to snatch another
of the maids’ cloaks from the pegs by the door and wrap it
round his shoulders.
So Betty was—or had been—Phaedre’ s mother . I hadn’ t
known Betty well, but I did kn ow Phaedre, and felt grief for
her tigh ten my throat. There was nothing I could do for her
just now , though; but perhaps I could help the doctor .Silent w ith shock, he followed me obediently as I led him
down th e side path by the lawns, shielded from view by
Hector Cameron ’ s white-marble  mausoleum and its growth of
ornamental yew  bushes. There was a stone bench by the river ,
half-hidden under a weeping willow . I doubted anyone would
be patronizing it at this hour of the morning.
No one was, th ough two wine goblets sat on the bench,
stained red with beeswing, abandoned remnants of the night’ s
festivities. I wondered briefly  whether someone had been
having a romantic rendezvous, and was reminded suddenly of
my own midnight tryst. Damn it, I still didn’ t know for sure
who the owner of those hands had been!
Pushing the nagging question away with the wineglasses, I
sat dow n, gesturing to Doctor Fentiman to join me. It was
chilly , but the b ench was in full  sun at this hour , and the heat
was wa rm and comforting on my face. The Doctor was
looking better for the fresh air ; vestiges of color had come
back int o his cheeks, and his nose had resumed its normal
roseate hue.
“Feeling a bit better , are you?”
He nod ded, hunching the cloak around his narrow
shoulders.
“I am, I thank you, Mrs. Fraser .”
“Rather a shock, wasn’ t it?” I asked, employing my most
sympathetic bedside manner .
He closed his eyes, and shook his head briefly .
“Shocked … yes, very shocked,” he muttered. “I would
never have …” He trailed of f,  and I let him sit quiet for a
moment. He would need to talk about it, but best to let him
take it at his own pace.
“It was good of you to come so  quickly ,” I said, after a bit.
“I see they called you from your  bed. Had she grown suddenly
worse, then?”“Y es. I could have sworn she was on the mend last night,
after I bled her .” He rubbed his face with both hands, and
emer ged blinking, eyes very bloodshot. “The butler roused me
just before dawn, and I found h er once again complaining of
griping in the guts. I bled her again, and then administered a
clyster , but to no avail.”
“A clyster?” I murmured. Clysters were enemas; a favorite
remedy of the time. Some were fairly harmless; others were
positively corrosive.
“A tincture of nicotiana,” he explained, “which I find
answers capitally in most cases of dyspepsia.”
I made a noncommittal noise in response. Nicotiana was
tobacco; I supposed a strong solution of that, administered
rectally , would probably dispose promptly of a case of
pinworms, but I didn’ t think it w ould do much for indigestion.
Still, it wouldn’ t make anyone bleed like that, either .
“Extraordinary amount of blee ding,” I said, putting my
elbows on my knees and resting my chin in my hands. “I don’ t
think I’v e ever seen anything like it.” That was true. I was
curious, turning  over various po ssibilities in my mind, but no
diagnosis quite fit.
“No.” Doctor Fentiman’ s sallow cheeks began to show spots
of red. “I—if I had thought …”
I leaned toward him, and laid a consoling hand on his arm.
“I’m sure you did all that anyone could possibly do,” I said.
“She wa sn’ t bleeding at all from the mouth when you saw her
last night, was she?”
He shook his head, hunching deeper into his cloak.
“No. Still, I blame myself, I really do.”
“One does,” I said ruefully . “Th ere’ s always that sense that
one should have been able to do something  more.”
He caug ht the depth of feelin g in my voice and turned
toward me, looking surprised. The tension in him relaxed a
little, and the red color began to fade from his cheeks.“Y ou have … a most remarkably sympathetic
understanding, Mrs. Fraser .”
I smiled  at him, not speaking.  He might be a quack, he
might be ignorant, arrogant, and  int emperate—b ut he had
come at once when called, and h ad fought for his patient to the
best of his ability . That made him  a physician, in my book, and
deserving of sympathy .
After a moment, he put his h and over mine. W e sat in
silence, watchin g the river go by , dark brown and turbid with
silt. The  stone bench was cold  under me, and the morning
breeze kept sticking chilly fing ers under my shift, but I was
too preo ccupied to take much note of such minor discomforts.
I c ould smell th e drying blood on his clothes, and saw again
the scene in the attic. What on earth had the woman died of?
I prodde d him gently , asking tactful questions, extracting
what details he h ad gleaned, but they were not helpful. He was
not a n o bservant man at the best of times, and it had been very
early and the a ttic dark. He grew easier with the talking,
though, gradually pur ging himself of that sense of personal
failure that is the frequent price of a physician’ s caring.
“I hope Mrs. Cameron—Mrs. Innes, I mean—will not feel
that I have betrayed her hospitality ,” he said uneasily .
That see med a rather odd way to put it. On the other hand
… Betty had  been Jocasta’ s property . I supp osed that beyond
any sense of personal failure, Dr . Fentiman was also
contemplating the possibility that Jocasta might blame him for
not preventing Betty’ s death, and try to claim recompense.
“I’m sure she’ll realize that yo u did all you could,” I said
soothingly . “I’ll tell her so, if you like.”
“My dear lady .” Doctor Fentiman squeezed my hand with
gratitude. “Y ou are as kind as you are lovely .”
“Do you think so, Doctor?”
A male  voice spoke coldly behind me, and I jumped,
dropping Dr . Fentiman’ s hand as  though it were a high-voltage
wire. I whirled on the bench t o find Phillip W ylie, leaningagainst the trunk of the willo w tree with a most sardonic
expression on his face.
“‘Kind’ is not the word that springs most immediately to
mind, I must say . ‘Lewd,’ perhaps. ‘W anton,’ most certainly .
But ‘lovely ,’ yes—I’ll give you that.”
His eyes raked me from head to toe with an insolence that I
would have found absolutely reprehensible—had it not
suddenly dawned on me that D r . Fentiman and I had been
sitting hand in hand in wh at could only be called a
compromising state of dishabille, both still in our nightclothes.
I sto od up, draw ing my dressing gown round me with great
dignity . His eyes were fixed on  my breasts—with a knowing
expression? I wondered. I folde d my arms under my breasts,
lifting my bosom defiantly .
“Y ou for get yourself, Mr . W ylie,” I said, as coldly as
possible.
He laughed, but not as though he thought anything were
funny .
“I for get myself? Have you not for gotten something, Mrs.
Fraser? Such as your gown? Do you not find it a trifle cold,
dressed like that? Or do the goo d doctor ’ s embraces warm you
suf ficiently?”
Doctor Fentiman, as shocked as I was by W ylie’ s
appearance, had got to his feet  and now pushed his way in
front of me, his thin cheeks mottled with fury .
“How d are you, sir! How do you have the infernal
presumption to speak to a lady in such fashion? W ere I armed,
sir , I should call you out upon the instant, I swear it!”
W ylie h ad been staring boldly at me. At this, his gaze
shifted t o Fentiman, and he saw the blood staining the doctor ’ s
legs and breeches. His hot-eyed scowl grew less certain.
“I—has something happened, sir?”
“It i s none of your concern, I assure you.” Fentiman bristled
like a banty rooster , drawing himself upright. Rather grandly ,he presented me with his arm.
“Come, Mrs. Fraser . Y ou need not be exposed to the
insulting gibes of this puppy .” He glared at W ylie, red-eyed.
“Allow me to escort you back to your husband.”
W ylie’ s face underwent an instant transformation at the
word “puppy ,” turning a deep, ugly red. So early in the
morning, he was wearing neith er paint nor powder , and the
blotches of fury stood out like a rash on his fair skin. He
seemed to swell noticeably , like an enraged frog.
I had a sudden ur ge to lau gh hysterically , but nobly
suppressed it. Biting my lip in stead, I accepted the doctor ’ s
prof fered arm. He came up roughly to my shoulder , but
pivoted on his bare heel and m arched us away with all the
dignity of a brigadier .
Looking back over my shoulder , I saw W ylie still standing
under the willow tree, staring after us. I lifted my hand and
gave him a small wave of farewell. The light sparked from my
gold ring, and I saw him stif fen further .
“I do hope we’ll  be in time for b reakfast,” Doctor Fentiman
said che erfully . “ I believe I have  quite recovered my appetite.”51
SUSPICION
T HE GUESTS BEGAN T O DEP AR T after breakfast. Jocasta
and Duncan stood together on th e terrace, the very picture of a
happily united couple, bidding everyone farewell, as a line of
carriages and wagons made its slow way down the drive.
Those folk from downriver wa ited on the quay , the women
exchanging last-minute recipes and bits of gossip, while the
gentlemen lit pipes and scratched themselves, relieved of their
uncomfortable c lothes and formal wigs. Their servants, all
looking considerably the worse for wear , sat openmouthed and
red-eyed on bundles of luggage.
“Y ou look tired, Mama.” Bree looked rather tired herself;
she and Roger had both been up ‘til all hours. A faint smell of
camphor wafted from her clothes.
“Can’ t imagine why ,” I replied, stifling a yawn. “How’ s
Jemmy this morning?”
“He’ s got a snif fle,” she said, “but no fever . He ate some
porridge for breakfast, and he’ s—”
I nodded, listened automatically , and went with her to
examine Jemmy , who was cheerfully rambunctious, if runny-
nosed, all in a slight daze of exhaustion. It reminded me of
nothing so much as the sensation I had had now and then when
flying fr om Ame rica to England. Jet lag, they called it; an odd
feeling, of being conscious and lucid, and yet not quite solidly
fixed within one’ s body .
The girl  Gussie was watching J emmy; she was as pale and
bloodshot as everyone else on the premises, but I thought her
air of dull suf fering derived from emotional distress rather
than hangover . All the slaves had been af fected by Betty’ s
death; they went about the ch ores of clearing up after the
wedding festivities in near -silence, their faces shadowed.“Are yo u feeling  all right?” I asked her , when I had finished
looking in Jemmy’ s ears and down his throat.
She looked startled, then confused; I wondered whether
anyone had ever asked her that before.
“Oh. Oh, yes, Madam. Surely .” She smoothed down her
apron with both hands, clearly nervous at my scrutiny .
“All right. I’ll just go and have a look at Phaedre, then.”
I h ad come back  to the house with Dr . Fentiman and turned
him over to Ulysses, to be fed and tidied up. I had then gone
directly to find Phaedre, taking time only to wash and change
my cloth es—not wanting to come to her so visibly smeared
with her mother ’ s blood.
I had found he r in Ulysses’ s pantry , sitting numb and
shocked on the s tool where he s at to polish silver , a lar ge glass
of b randy by h er side, undrunk. One of the other slaves,
T eresa, w as with  her; she breath ed a short sigh of relief at my
appearance and came to greet me.
“She’ s none sae weel,” T eresa m uttered to me, shaking her
head with a wary glance back at her char ge. “She’ s no said a
word, nor wept a drop.”
Phaedre’ s beau tiful face might have been carved of
fruitwood; norm ally a delicate c innamon, her complexion had
faded to a pale,  ligneous brown, and her eyes stared fixedly
through the open door of the pantry at the blank wall beyond.
I put  a hand on her shoulder; it was warm, but so motionless
that she might have been a stone in the sun.
“I am sorry ,” I s aid to her , softly . “V ery sorry . Dr . Fentiman
came to her; he did all that he c ould.” That was true; no point
in giving an opinion of Fentiman’ s skill—it was irrelevant
now , in any case.
No r esponse. She was breathing ; I could see the slight rise
and fall of her bosom, but that was all.
I bit  the  inside of my lower lip,  trying to think of anything
or anyon e that might possibly give her comfort. Jocasta? DidJocasta even know of Betty’ s death yet? Duncan knew , of
course, b ut he might have chosen not to tell her until after the
guests had left.
“The pr iest,” I said, the idea occurring suddenly to me.
“W ould you like Father LeClerc to—to bless your mother ’ s
body?” I thought it rather too late for Last Rites—assuming
that Phaedre knew what those were—but I was sure that the
priest w ould not mind of fering any comfort he could. He had
not left yet; I had seen him in the dining room only a few
moments since, polishing of f a platter of pork-chops garnished
with fried eggs and gravy .
A slight tremor went through the shoulder under my hand.
The still, beautiful face turned toward me, dark eyes opaque.
“What good will that do?” she whispered.
“Ah … well …” Flustered, I gro ped for a reply , but she had
already turned away , staring at a stain in the wood of the table.
What I had done in the end was  to give her a small dose of
laudanum—an irony I resolutely ignored—and tell T eresa to
put her to bed on the cot whe re she normally slept, in the
dressing room of f Jocasta’ s boudoir .
I pushed  open the door of the dressing room now , to see
how she was. The small room was windowless and dark,
smelling of starch and burnt hair  and the faint flower fragrance
of Jocasta’ s toilet water . A huge armoire and its matching
chif fonier stood at one side, a dressing table at the other . A
folding screen marked of f the f ar corner , and behind this was
Phaedre’ s narrow cot.
I c ould hear her breathing, slow and deep, and felt reassured
by that. I moved quietly through the dark room, and pulled
back the  screen a little; she lay on her side, turned away ,
curled into a ball with her knees drawn up.
Bree had come into the dressing room behind me; she
looked o ver my shoulder , her breath warm on my ear . I made a
small gesture indicating that everything was all right, and
pushed the screen back into place.Just inside the door to the bou doir , Brianna paused. She
turned to me suddenly , put her arms about me, and hugged me
fiercely . In the lighted room beyond, Jemmy missed her and
began to shriek.
“Mama! Ma! Ma-MA!”
 
I T HOU GHT I ought to eat something, but with the smell of
the attic and the scent of toilet water still lingering in the back
of m y si nuses, I  had no appetite . A few guests still lingered in
the dinin g room; particular friends of Jocasta’ s, they would be
staying on for a  day or two. I n odded and smiled as I passed,
but ignored the invitations to come and join them, instead
heading for the stairs to the second floor .
The bedroom was empty , the mattresses stripped and the
windows opened to air the room . The hearth had been swept
and the room was cold, but blessedly quiet.
My own  cloak still hung in the wardrobe. I lay down on the
bare ticking, pulled the cloak  over me, and fell instantly
asleep.
 
I WOKE JUST BEFORE sunset, starving, with an oddly
mixed sense of reassurance and unease. The reassurance I
understood at once; the scent of blood and flowers had been
replaced by one of shaving soap  and body-warmed linen, and
the pale gold lig ht streaming through the window shone on the
pillow beside me, where a long red-gold hair glinted in the
hollow left by someone’ s head. Jamie had come and slept
beside me.
As t hough summoned by my thought, the door opened and
he smile d in at me. Shaved, combed, freshly dressed, and
clear -eyed, he seemed to have erased all traces of the night
before—bar the expression on h is face when he looked at me.
Frowsy and ill-kempt as I was by contrast with his own neat
appearance, the look of tenderness in his eyes warmed me, in
spite of the lingering chill in the room.“A wake at last. Did ye sleep well, Sassenach?”
“Like th e dead,” I replied automatically , and felt a small
internal lurch as I said it.
He saw it reflected on my face, and came swiftly to sit down
on the bed beside me.
“What is it? Have ye had an evil dream, Sassenach?”
“Not ex actly ,” I said slowly . In fact, I had no memory of
having dreamed  at all. And yet, my mind appeared to have
been ticking away in the shadows of unconsciousness, making
notes an d drawi ng its deductions. Prompted now by the word
“dead,” it had just presented me with its conclusions, which
accounted for the feeling of unease with which I had awoken.
“That woman Betty . Have they buried her yet?”
“No. Th ey’ve washed the body and put it in a shed, but
Jocasta wished to wait until the morning for the burial, so as
not to trouble her guests. Some are staying on for another
night.” He frowned slightly , watching me. “Why?”
I rub bed a hand  over my face, less to rouse myself than to
collect my words.
“There’ s something wrong. About her death, I mean.”
“W rong … how?” One eyebrow lifted. “It was a fearful way
to die, to be sure, but that’ s not what ye mean, is it?”
“No.” M y hands were cold; I reached automatically for his,
and he took them , engulfing my fingers with warmth. “I mean
—I don’ t believ e it was a natural death. I think someone killed
her .”
Blurted out that way , the words hung cold and stark in the
air between us.
His brows drew together , and he pursed his lips slightly ,
thinking. I noticed, though, that  he did not reject the idea out
of hand, and that strengthened my conviction.
“Who?” he asked at last. “And are ye sure of it, Sassenach?”“I h ave no idea. And I can’ t b e totally sure,” I admitted.
“It’ s onl y—” I hesitated, but h e squeezed one of my hands
lightly in encouragement. I shoo k my head. “I’ve been a nurse,
a doctor , a healer , for a long time, Jamie. I’ve seen a dreadful
number of people die, and from all sorts of things. I can’ t quite
put into words what it is here, b ut now that I’ve slept on it, I
just know—I think—it’ s wrong,” I ended, rather lamely .
The light was fading; shadows were coming down from the
corners of the room, and I sh ivered suddenly , gripping his
hands.
“I see,” he said softly . “But the re’ s no way ye can tell for
sure, is there?”
The window was still half-open; the curtains billowed
suddenly into the room with a gust of wind, and I felt the hairs
rise on my arms with cold.
“There might be,” I said.52
A HARD DA Y’S NIGHT
T HE OUTBUILDING where the y had put the body was well
away from the house—a small toolshed outside the kitchen
garden. The waning moon was  low in the sky , but still shed
light en ough to see the brick path through the garden; the
espaliered fruit trees spread black as spiderwebs against the
walls. So meone had been digging; I could smell the cold damp
of re cently turned earth, and shivered involuntarily at the hint
of worms and mold.
Jamie felt it, and put a light hand on my back.
“All right, Sassenach?” he whispered.
“Y es.” I gripped his free hand for reassurance. They would
hardly be burying Betty in the  kitchen garden; the digging
must be for som ething prosaic, like an onion bed or a trench
for early  peas. The thought was comforting, though my skin
still felt cold and thin, prickling with apprehensions.
Jamie hi mself w as far from eas y , though he was outwardly
composed, as usual. He was no stranger to death, and had no
great fe ar of it. But he was both Catholic and Celt, with a
strong conviction of another , unseen world that lay past the
dissolution of the body . He believed implicitly in tannasgeach
—in spi rits—and had no desire to meet one. Still, if I was
determined, he would brave th e otherworld for my sake; he
squeezed my hand hard, and didn’ t let go.
I squeezed back, deeply grateful for his presence. Beyond
the debatable question of how Betty’ s ghost might feel about
my pro posed plan of action, I knew that the notion of
deliberate mutila tion disturbed him deeply , however much his
own intelligence  might be convinced that a soulless body was
no more than clay .“T o see men hacked to death on a battlefield is one thing,”
he’d sai d earlier in the evening,  still ar guing with me. “That’ s
war , and it’ s hon orable, cruel as it may be. But to take a blade
and carv e up a poor innocent like yon woman in cold blood
…” He looked a t me, eyes dark  with troubled thought. “Y e’re
sure ye must do it, Claire?”
“Y es, I am,” I ha d said, eyes fixe d on the contents of the bag
I wa s assembling. A lar ge roll  of lint wadding, to soak up
fluids, s mall jars for or gan sam ples, my lar gest bone saw , a
couple o f scalpels, a wicked pair of heavy-bladed shears, a
sharp knife borrowed from the  kitchen … it was a sinister -
looking collectio n, to be sure. I wrapped the shears in a towel
to prevent them clanking against the other implements, and put
them in the bag, carefully marshaling my words.
“Look,” I said at last, raising my eyes to meet his. “There’ s
something wrong, I know it. A nd if Betty was killed, then
surely w e owe it to her to find t hat out. If you were murdered,
wouldn’ t you want someone to do whatever they could to
prove it? T o—to avenge you?”
He stood  still for a long moment, eyes narrowed in thought
as he looked down at me. Th en his face relaxed, and he
nodded.
“A ye, I would,” he said quietly . He picked up the bone saw ,
and began wrapping it with cloth.
He hadn’ t protested further . He hadn’ t asked me again
whether I was s ure. He had me rely said firmly that if I was
going to do it, he was coming with me, and that was all about
it.
As for being su re, I wasn’ t. I did have an abiding feeling
that something was very wrong about this death, but I was less
confident in my sense of what it was, with the cold moon
sinking through an empty sky a nd wind brushing my cheeks
with the touch of icy fingers.
Betty might have died only by accident, not malice. I could
be wrong; perhaps it was a  simple hemorrhage of anesophageal ulcer , the bursting of an aneurysm in the throat, or
some other physiological oddity . Unusual, but natural. W as I
doing th is, in fact, only to try to  vindicate my faith in my own
powers of diagnosis?
The win d belled  my cloak and I pulled it tighter around me,
one-handed, stif fening my spine . No. It wasn’ t a natural death,
I knew it. I cou ldn’ t have said how  I knew it, but fortunately
Jamie hadn’ t asked me that.
I had a b rief flas h of memory; J oe Abernathy , a jovial smile
of challenge on his face, reaching into a cardboard box full of
bones, s aying, “ I just want to see can you do it to a dead
person, Lady Jane?”
I co uld; I had. He had handed m e a skull, and the memory
of Geillis Duncan shuddered through me like liquid ice.
“Y e needna do i t, Claire.” Jamie’ s hand tightened on mine.
“I w illna think y e a coward.” His voice was soft and serious,
barely audible above the wind.
“I would,” I sa id, and felt him  nod. That was the matter
settled, then; he let go of my hand and went ahead of me, to
open the gate.
He paused, and my dark-adapted eyes caught the clean
sharp line of his  profile as he turned his head, listening. The
dark-lantern he carried smelled hot and oily , and a faint gleam
escaping from its pierced-work p anel sprinkled the cloth of his
cloak with tiny flecks of dim light.
I g lance d round myself, and loo ked back at the house. Late
as it was, candles still burned in the back parlor , where the
card games lingered on; I caught a faint murmur of voices as
the wind  changed, and a sudden  laugh. The upper floors were
mostly dark—s ave one window which I recognized as
Jocasta’ s.
“Y our au nt’ s awake late,” I whispered to Jamie. He turned
and looked up at the house.
“Nay , it ’ s Duncan,” he said softly . “My aunt doesna need
the light, after all.”“Perhaps he’ s reading to her in bed,” I suggested, trying to
leaven th e solemnity of our erra nd. A small derisive huf f came
from Jam ie, but the oppressive atmosphere did lift just a bit.
He u nlatched the gate and pushe d it open, showing a square of
utter black beyond. I turned my  back on the friendly lights of
the hou se and  stepped through, feeling just a bit like
Persephone entering the Underworld.
Jamie swung the gate to, and handed me the lantern.
“What a re you doing?” I whispe red, hearing the rustle of his
clothing. It was so dark by the gate that I couldn’ t see him as
more tha n a dark blur , but the faint sound that came next told
me what he was doing.
“Pissing on the gateposts,” he whispered back, stepping
back and  rustlin g further as he did up his breeks. “If we must,
then we  will, but I dinna want anything to be following us
back to the house.”
I made my own small huf fing noise at that, but made no
demur when he insisted upon re peating this ritual at the door
to th e shed. Imagination or no t, the night seemed somehow
inhabited, as though invisible  things moved through the
darkness, murmuring under the voice of the wind.
It was almost a relief to go inside, where the air was still,
even though the scents of de ath mingled thickly with the
dankness of rust, rotted straw , and mildewed wood. There was
a faint rasp of metal as the dark-lantern’ s panel slid back, and a
dazzling shaft of light fell over the confines of the shed.
They ha d laid the dead slave on a board across two trestles,
already washed and properly laid out, wrapped in a rough
muslin shroud. Beside her stoo d a small loaf of bread and a
cup of brandy . A  small posy of dried herbs, carefully twisted
into a knot, lay on the shroud, just above the heart. Who had
left thos e? I wondered. One of the other slaves, surely . Jamie
crossed himself at the sight, and looked at me, almost
accusingly .
“It’ s ill luck to touch grave goods.”“I’m sure it’ s only ill luck to take them,” I assured him, low-
voiced, though I crossed myself before taking the objects and
putting them on the ground in a corner of the shed. “I’ll put
them back when I’ve finished.”
“Mmphm. W ait just a moment, Sassenach. Dinna touch her
yet.”
He d ug i n the recesses of his clo ak, and emer ged with a tiny
bottle. H e uncorked this, and putting his fingers to the
opening, poured  out a little liquid, which he flicked over the
corpse, m urmuring a quick Gaelic prayer that I recognized as
an i nvocation to St. Michael to protect us from demons,
ghouls, and things that go bump in the night. V ery useful.
“Is that holy water?” I asked, incredulous.
“A ye, of course. I got it from Father LeClerc.” He made the
sign of the Cross over the body , and laid his hand briefly on
the draped curve of the head, before nodding reluctant
approval for me to proceed.
I e xtracted a sca lpel from my b ag and slit the stitching on
the shroud carefully . I’d broug ht a stout needle and waxed
thread, to sew up the body cavity; with luck, I could also
repair the shroud suf ficiently that no one would realize what
I’d been doing.
Her face was almost unrecognizable, round cheeks gone
slack and sunken, and the soft bloom of her black skin faded to
an ashy  gray , the lips and ears  a livid purple. That made it
easier; i t was clear that this wa s indeed only a shell, and not
the woman I had seen before. That woman, if she was still in
the vicinity , would have no objections, I thought.
Jamie m ade the sign of the Cross again and said something
soft in Gaelic, then stood still, the lantern held high so that I
could w ork by its light. The ligh t threw his shadow on the wall
of the shed, giga ntic and eerie in  the wavering flicker . I looked
away from it, down to my work.
The most formal and sanitary of  modern autopsies is simple
butchery; this was no better—a nd worse only in the lack oflight, water , and specialized tools.
“Y ou ne edn’ t watch, Jamie,” I said, standing back for a
moment to wipe a wrist across my brow . Cold as it was in the
shed, I was sweating from the heavy work of splitting the
breastbone, and  the air was thick with the ripe smells of an
open body . “There’ s a nail on the wall; you could hang up the
lantern, if you want to go out for a bit.”
“I’m all right, Sassenach. What is that?” He leaned forward,
pointing carefully . The look of disquiet on his features had
been replaced by one of interest.
“The trachea and bronchi,” I replied, tracing the graceful
rings of cartilag e, “and a bit of a lung. If you’re all right, then
can I have the light a little closer here, please?”
Lacking spreaders, I couldn’ t wrench the rib cage far
enough apart to expose the com plete lung on either side, but
thought I could see enough to eliminate some possibilities.
The surfaces of both lungs were black and grainy; Betty was in
her forties, and had lived all her life with open wood fires.
“Anything nasty  that you brea the in and don’ t cough up
again—tobacco smoke, soot, smog, what-have-you—gradually
gets shoved out between the l ung tissue and the pleura,” I
explained, lifting a bit of the thin, half-transparent pleural
membrane with the tip of my sc alpel. “But the body can’ t get
rid o f it altogether , so it just stays there. A child’ s lung would
be a nice clean pink.”
“Do min e look like that?” Jamie stifled a small, reflexive
cough. “And what is smog?”
“The ai r in cities like Edinbur gh, where you get smoke
mixing w ith fog  of f the water .”  I spoke abstractedly , grunting
slightly as I pul led the ribs back, peering into the shadowed
cavity . “Y ours likely aren’ t so b ad, since you’ve lived out of
doors or in unheated places so much. Clean lungs are one
compensation to living without fire.”
“That’ s good to know , if ye’ve got no choice about it,” he
said. “G iven the choice, I expe ct most folk would rather bewarm and cough.”
I did n’ t look up , but smiled, slicing through the upper lobe
of the right lung.
“They would, and they do.” No indication of hemorrhage in
either lu ng; no blood in the airway; no evidence of pulmonary
embolism. No pooling of blood in the chest or abdominal
cavity , either , though I was getting some seepage. Blood will
clot soon after death, but then gradually reliquefies.
“Hand me a bit more of the wa dding, will you, please?” A
little spotting of blood on the shroud likely wouldn’ t worry
anyone, given the spectacular n ature of Betty’ s demise, but I
didn’ t want enough to make anyone suf ficiently suspicious to
check inside.
I lea ned across to take the lint f rom his hand, inadvertently
putting a hand on the corpse’ s side. The body emitted a low
groan and Jamie leaped back with a startled exclamation, the
light swinging wildly .
I had jumped, myself, but quickly recovered.
“It’ s all right,” I  said, though my heart was racing and the
sweat on my fac e had gone suddenly cold. “It’ s only trapped
gas. Dead bodies often make odd noises.”
“A ye.” Jamie swallowed and no dded, steadying the lantern.
“A ye, I’ve seen it often. T akes  ye a bit by surprise, though,
doesn’ t it?” He smiled at me, lo psided, though a pale sheen of
sweat gleamed on his forehead.
“It does that.” It  occurred to me  that he had doubtless dealt
with a good m any dead bodies, all unembalmed, and was
likely at  least as familiar with the phenomena of death as I
was. I set a cau tious hand in t he same place, but no further
noises resulted, and I resumed my examination.
Another dif ference between this  impromptu autopsy and the
modern form was the lack of glo ves. My hands were bloody to
the wris t, and the or gans and  membranes had a faint but
unpleasant feel of sliminess; cold though it was in the shed,
the inex orable process of decomposition had started. I got ahand und er the heart and lifted it toward the light, checking for
gross discolorat ions of the surface, or visible ruptures of the
great vessels.
“They m ove, too, now and then, ” Jamie said, after a minute.
There w as an odd tone to his v oice, and I glanced up at him,
surprised. His eyes were fixed on Betty’ s face, but with a
remote look that made it plain he was seeing something else.
“Who moves?”
“Corpses.”
Gooseflesh ripp led up my forea rms. He was right, though I
thought he might have kept that particular observation to
himself for the moment.
“Y es,” I said, a s casually as possible, looking back at my
work. “Commo n postmortem phenomena. Usually just the
movement of gases.”
“I sa w a  dead man sit up once,” he said, his tone as casual
as my own.
“What, at a wake? He wasn’ t really dead?”
“No, in a fire. And he was dead enough.”
I gla nced up sha rply . His voice was flat and matter -of-fact,
but h is face bore  an inward look of deep abstraction; whatever
he’d seen, he was seeing it again.
“After Culloden, the English burned the Highland dead on
the f ield. W e sm elled the fires, b ut I didna see one, save when
they took me out and put me in the wagon, to send me home.”
He h ad lain hid den under a lay er of hay , nose pressed to a
crack in  the boards in order to breathe. The wagon driver had
taken a circuitous route of f the  field, to avoid any questions
from tro ops near the farmhouse, and at one point, had stopped
for a moment to wait for a group of soldiers to move away .
“There w as a fresh pyre burning, perhaps ten yards away;
they’d s et it alight no more tha n a short time before, for the
clothes had only just begun to char . I saw Graham Gillespielyin’ on the heap near me, and he was surely dead, for there
was the mark of a pistol shot on his temple.”
The wagon had waited for what seemed a long time, though
it was hard to tell, through the haze of pain and fever . But as
he watc hed, he had seen Gilles pie suddenly sit up amid the
flames, and turn his head.
“He was  lookin’  straight at me,”  he said. “Had I been in my
right mind, I ex pect I would ha’ let out a rare skelloch. As it
was, it only seemed … friendly of Graham.” There was a hint
of uneasy amusement in his voice. “I thought he was perhaps
tellin’ me it wasna so bad, being dead. That, or welcoming me
to hell, maybe.”
“Postmortem contracture,” I said, absorbed in the
excavation of the digestive system. “Fire makes the muscles
contract, and the limbs often twist into very lifelike positions.
Can you bring the light closer?”
I had  the esopha gus pulled free, and carefully slit the length
of it, turning back the flabby tissue. There was some irritation
toward the lower end, and there was blood in it, but no sign of
rupture or hemorrhage. I bent, squinting up into the pharyngeal
cavity , b ut it was too dark to se e much there. I was in no way
equipped for detailed exploration, so instead returned my
examinations to  the other end, slipping a hand under the
stomach and lifting it up.
I fel t a sharpening of the sense of wrongness that I had had
through this whole af fair . If there was something amiss, this
was the most likely place to fin d evidence of it. Logic as well
as sixth sense said as much.
There w as no food in the stomach; after such vomiting that
was hard ly surpr ising. When I c ut through the heavy muscular
wall, though, the sharp scent of ipecac cut through the reek of
the body .
“What?” Jamie leaned forward a t my exclamation, frowning
at the body .“Ipecac. That quack dosed her with ipecac—and recently!
Can you smell it?”
He grimaced with distaste, but  took a cautious snif f, and
nodded.
“W ould that not be a proper thing to do, when you’ve a
person wi’ a curdled wame? Y e gave wee Beckie MacLeod
ipecacuanha yourself, when she’d drunk your blue stuf f.”
“T rue enough.” Five-year -old Beckie had drunk half a bottle
of the arsenic de coction I made to poison rats, attracted by the
pale blu e color ,  and evidently n ot at all put of f by the taste.
W ell, th e rats liked it, too. “But  I did that right away . There’ s
no poin t in giving it hours afterward, when the poison or
irritant has already passed out of the stomach.”
Given Fentiman ’ s state of m edical knowledge, though,
would he have known that? He might simply have
administered ipecac again because he could think of nothing
else to do. I fr owned, turning back the heavy wall of the
stomach. Y es, this was the sourc e of the hemorrhage; the inner
wall was raw-looking, dark red  as ground meat. There was a
small am ount of liquid in the stomach; clear lymph that had
begun to separate from the clotted blood left in the body .
“So you’re thinking that it was maybe the ipecac that killed
her?”
“I was … but now I’m not so sure,” I murmured, probing
carefully . It had occurred to m e that if Fentiman had given
Betty a heavy dose of ipecac, the violent vomiting provoked
by it might have  caused an internal rupture and hemorrhage—
but I  wa sn’ t find ing any evidence of that. I used the scalpel to
slit the stomach further open, pulling back the edges, and
opening the duodenum.
“Can you hand me one of the small empty jars? And the
wash bottle, please?”
Jamie h ung the lantern on the nail and obligingly knelt to
rummage through the bag, while I rummaged further through
the s tomach. There was some gr anular material forming a palesludge i n the furrows of the rugae. I scraped gingerly at it,
finding that it came free easily , a thick, gritty paste between
my fingertips. I wasn’ t sure what it was, but a suspicion was
growing unpleasantly in the back of my mind. I meant to flush
the stom ach, collect the residue, and take it back to the house,
where I could examine it in a decent light, come morning. If it
was what I thought—
W ithout warning, the door of the shed swung open. A
whoosh of cold air made the  flame of the lantern burn
suddenly high and bright—bright enough to show me Phillip
W ylie’ s face, pale and shocked in the frame of the doorway .
He stared at m e, his mouth hanging slightly open, then
closed it and sw allowed; I heard the sound of it clearly . His
eyes traveled slowly over the sc ene, then returned to my face,
wide pools of horror .
I was shocked, too. My heart h ad leapt into my throat, and
my hands had frozen, but my brain was racing.
What would happen if he caused  an outcry? It would be the
most dreadful scandal, whether  I was able to explain what I
was doing, or not. If not—fear rippled over me in a chilly
wave. I had come close to being burned for witchcraft once
before; and that was one time too often.
I fel t a slight mo vement of the a ir near my feet, and realized
that Jam ie was crouched in the deep shadow below the table.
The ligh t of the lantern was br ight, but limited; I stood in a
pool of darknes s that reached to  my waist. W ylie hadn’ t seen
him. I reached o ut a toe and nudged him, as a signal to stay
put.
I f orced  myself to smile at Phillip W ylie, though my heart
was stuck firmly in my throat, a nd beating wildly . I swallowed
hard and said th e first thing that came into my mind, which
happened to be “Good evening.”
He l icked his lip s. He was wearing neither patch nor powder
at the moment, but was quite as pale as the muslin sheet.“Mrs… . Fraser ,” he said, and swallowed again. “I—er—
what ar e  you doing?”
I sh ould have thought that was reasonably obvious;
presumably his question had to do with the reasons why I was
doing it—and I had no intention of going into those.
“Never you mind that,” I said crisply , recovering a bit of
nerve. “ What ar e you  doi ng, skulking round the plac e at dead
of night?”
Evidently that was a good question; his face shifted at once
from open horror to wariness. H is head twitched, as though to
turn and  look over his shoulder .  He stopped the motion before
it was complete d, but my eyes  followed the direction of it.
There was a ma n standing in th e darkness behind him; a tall
man wh o now stepped forward, his face glimmering pale in
the glo w of the lantern, s ardonic eyes the green of
gooseberries. Stephen Bonnet.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said.
A nu mber of thi ngs happened at that point: Jamie came out
from under the table with a rus h like a striking cobra, Phillip
W ylie le aped back from the do or with a startled cry , and the
lantern c rashed from its nail to  the floor . There was a strong
smell of splattered oil and brandy , a soft whoosh  l ike  a furnace
lighting, and the crumpled shroud was burning at my feet.
Jamie was gone; there were shouts from the darkness
outside, and the sound of running feet on brick. I kicked at the
burning fabric, meaning to stamp it out.
Then I thought better , and inste ad lunged against the table,
knocking it over and dumping it s contents. I seized the blazing
shroud with one hand and dragged it over corpse and upturned
table. Th e floor of the shed was thick with sawdust, already
burning in spots. I kicked the shattered lantern hard, knocking
it into the dry boards of the wall , and spilling out the rest of its
oil, which ignited at once.
There were shouts from the kitchen garden, voices calling in
alarm; I  had to g et out. I seized  my bag and fled, red-handed,into the night, m y fist still clenched tight about the evidence. It
was the one point of certainty in  the prevailing chaos. I had no
notion w hat was  going on, or what might happen next, but at
least I knew for sure that I was right. Betty had indeed been
murdered.
 
THERE WERE A P AIR of agitated servants in the kitchen
garden, apparen tly wakened by the disturbance. They were
casting r ound in a haphazard ma nner , calling out to each other ,
but with  no light but that of the  fading moon, it was an easy
matter to keep to the shadows and slip past them.
No one had come out of the main house yet, but the shouts
and flam es were going to attract attention soon. I crouched
against the wall, in the shadows of a huge raspberry cane, as
the gate flung op en and two mor e slaves came rushing through
from the stable, half-dressed and incoherent, shouting
something about the horses. The smell of burning was strong
in the air; no doubt they thought the stable was on fire, or
about to be.
My heart was p ounding so hard against the inside of my
chest that I could feel it, like a fist. I had an unpleasant vision
of the flaccid heart I had just he ld in my hand, and of what my
own must look like now—a dark red knob of slick muscle,
pulsing and thumping, battering mindlessly away in its neatly
socketed cave between the lungs.
The lung s weren’ t working nearly so well as the heart; my
breath c ame sho rt and hard, in gasps that I tried to stifle for
fear of detection. What if they dragged Betty’ s desecrated
body from the shed? They w ouldn’ t know who had been
responsible for the mutilation, but the discovery would cause
the m ost fearful outcry , with res ultant wild rumors and public
hysteria.
A gl ow was visible now above  the far wall of the kitchen
garden; the roof of the shed wa s beginning to burn, fire-glow
showing in brilliant thin lines as the pine shingles began to
smoke and curl.Sweat w as prickling behind my ears, but my breath came a
little eas ier whe n I saw the slaves standing by the far gate in a
knot, bu nched together in awed silhouette. Of course—they
wouldn’ t try to put it out, well caught as it was. The nearest
water was in the horse troughs; by the time buckets were
fetched, the shed would be well on its way to ashes. There was
nothing near it that would burn. Best to let it go.
Smoke p urled up in quickening billows, high into the air .
Knowing what was in the she d, it was much too easy to
imagine spectral shapes in the transparent undulations. Then
the fire broke th rough the roof, and tongues of flame lit the
smoke from below in an eerie, beautiful glow .
A h igh-pitched wail broke from behind me, and I started
back, banging my elbow against the brick wall. Phaedre had
come through the gate, Gussie and another female slave
behind her . She ran through the garden, screaming “Mama!” as
her white shift caught the light  of the flames that now burst
through holes in the shed’ s roof, showering sparks.
The men by the gate caught her; the women hurried after ,
reaching for her , calling out in agitation. I tasted blood in my
mouth, a nd reali zed that I had bitten my lower lip. I closed my
eyes convulsively , trying not to hear Phaedre’ s frantic cries
and the antiphonal babble of her comforters.
A fr ightful sense of guilt washed  over me. Her voice was so
like Bree’ s, and I could imagin e so clearly what Bree might
feel, we re it my own body , burning in that shed. But there
were worse things Phaedre mig ht feel, had I not let loose the
fire. My hands were shaking from cold and tension, but I
groped for my bag, which I had dropped on the ground at my
feet.
My hand s felt stif f and dreadful, gummy with drying blood
and lymph. I mustn’ t— mustn’ t —be found this way . I fumbled
in the sack with my free hand, finally coming up by feel with a
lidded jar , normally used to keep leeches, and the small wash
bottle of dilute alcohol and water .I couldn ’ t see, but felt blood crack and flake away as I
opened my cramped fingers and gingerly scraped the contents
of my hand into the jar . I couldn’ t grip the cork of the bottle
with my  shaking  fingers; finally I pulled it out with my teeth,
and poured the alcohol over my open palm, washing the rest of
the grainy residue into the jar .
The house had been roused now; I could hear voices coming
from tha t directi on. What was g oing on? Where was Jamie—
and whe re were Bonnet and Phi llip W ylie? Jamie had not been
armed w ith anything save a bottle of holy water; were either of
the othe rs? I had heard no shots, at least—but blades made no
noise.
I rin sed both hands hastily with  the rest of the wash bottle,
and dried them on the dark lining of my cloak, where the
smears wouldn’ t show . People were running back and forth
through the garden, shadows flitting along the walkways like
phantoms, mere feet from my hiding place. Why did they
make no  noise?  W ere they truly  people, or shades, somehow
roused by my sacrilege?
Then one figure shouted; another replied. I realized dimly
that the running  people made n o sound on the bricks because
they wer e barefoot and because my ears were ringing. My face
was tingling with cold sweat, my hands far more numb than
chill would account for .
Y ou idiot, Beauchamp , I thoug ht to myself. Y ou’r e going to
faint. Sit down !
I must have managed to do so, for I came to myself a few
moments later , sprawled in the dirt under the raspberry canes,
half-leaning against the wall. The kitchen garden seemed full
of peopl e by now; jostling pale shapes of guests and servants,
indistinguishable as ghosts in their shifts.
I wa ited for the space of a few breaths, to be sure I was
recovered, then lurched awkwardly to my feet and stepped out
onto the dark path, bag in hand.The first person I saw was Major MacDonald, standing on
the p ath watching the shed burn,  his white wig gleaming in the
light from the f ire. I gripped h im by the arm, startling him
badly .
“What is happening?” I said, not bothering to apologize.
“Where is your husband?” he said in the same moment,
peering round me in search of Jamie.
“I d on’ t know ,” I said, all too truthfully . “I’m looking for
him.”
“Mrs. Fraser! Are you all right, dear lady?” Lloyd Stanhope
popped up by m y elbow , looking like a very animated boiled
egg in his nights hirt, his polled head startlingly round and pale
without his wig.
I assured  him that I was quite all  right, which I was, by now .
It w asn’ t until I saw Stanhope  and noticed that most of the
other gentlemen present were in a similar state of dishabille
that I realized the Major was  fully clothed, from wig to
buckled shoes. My face must have changed as I looked at him,
for I  saw his brows raise and his  gaze run from my bound hair
to m y shod feet, as he quite obv iously noticed the same thing
about me.
“I heard  shouts  of ‘Fire!’ and thought someone might be
hurt,” I said coo lly , lifting the b ag. “I’ve brought my medical
kit. Is everyone all right, do you know?”
“So far as I—” MacDonald began, but then sprang back in
alarm, grasping my arm and dra gging me back, too. The roof
gave way with a deep sighing noise, and sparks plumed high,
showering down among the crowd in the garden.
Everyone gasped and cried out, falling back. Then there
came one of those brief, inexplic able pauses when everyone in
a cr owd falls suddenly silent  at once. The fire was still
burning, with a noise like crumpling paper , but over it I could
hear a distant s houting. It was a woman’ s voice, high and
cracked, but strong for all that, and full of fury .“Mrs. Cameron! ” Stanhope exclaimed, but the Major was
already making for the house at a run.53
THE FRENCHMAN’S GOLD
W E FOUN D JOC AST A CAMERON INNES on the window
seat in her room , clad in her chemise, bound hand and foot
with strips of bed linen, and absolutely scarlet-faced with fury .
I had  no  time to take further not e of her condition, for Duncan
Innes, clad for the night in no thing but his shirt, was lying
sprawled on his face on the floor near the hearth.
I rushed  over and knelt by him at once, searching for a
pulse.
“Is he dead?” The Major peered over my shoulder ,
evidencing more curiosity than sympathy .
“No,” I said br iefly . “Get these people out of here, will
you?” T he chamber was crammed with guests and servants, all
exclaiming over the newly freed Jocasta, expostulating,
speculating, an d generally making bloody nuisances of
themselves. The Major blinked at my peremptory tone, but
retired without demur to deal with the situation.
Duncan was certainly alive, and a cursory examination
showed me no injury beyond a lar ge lump behind one ear;
evidently , he had been clubbed with the heavy silver
candlestick whic h lay beside him  on the floor . He had a nasty
color , but his p ulse was fairly good, and he was breathing
evenly . I thumbed open his eyelids, one at a time, and bent
close to check his pupils. They stared back at me, glazed, but
the same size and not abnormally dilated. So far , so good.
Behind me, the Major was mak ing good use of his military
experience, bark ing orders in a parade-ground voice. Since
most of those p resent were not soldiers, this was having a
limited ef fect.
Jocasta Cameron was having a much greater one. Released
from her bonds, she staggered across the room, leaning heavilyon U lysses’ s arm, parting the cr owd like the waves of the Red
Sea.
“Duncan! Where is my husband?” she demanded, turning
her head  from side to side, blind eyes fierce. People gave way
before her , and she reached my side in seconds.
“Who is there?” Her hand swe pt in a flat arc before her ,
searching for position.
“It’ s me —Claire.” I reached up to touch her hand, guiding
her down beside me. Her ow n fingers were chilled and
trembling, and there were deep red marks on her wrists from
the bonds. “Don’ t worry; I think Duncan will be all right.”
She put out a ha nd, seeking to s ee for herself, and I guided
her fingers to his throat, setting them on the big vein I could
see pulsing at the side of his neck. She uttered a small
exclamation and leaned forward, putting both hands on his
face, tra cing his features with an anxious tenderness that quite
moved m e, so at odds as it w as with her normal autocratic
mien.
“They struck him … is he badly hurt?”
“I think not,” I assured her . “Only a knock on the head.”
“Are you quite s ure?” Her face turned toward me, frowning,
and her sensitive nostrils flared. “I smell blood.”
W ith a small sh ock, I realized that while my hands were
mostly clean, my fingernails were still heavily ringed with
dark blo od from the impromptu autopsy . I repressed the ur ge
to cu rl my hands, instead murm uring discreetly , “That’ s me, I
expect; my courses.” Major  MacDonald was glancing
curiously in our direction; had he heard her?
There w as a stir at the doorway , and I turned. T o my
immense relief, it was Jamie. H e was disheveled, his coat was
torn, and  he sported what looked like the beginnings of a black
eye, but otherwise appeared undamaged.
My relief must have shown on  my face, for his grim look
softened a little, and he nodded as he met my eye. Then ithardened again, as he saw Dun can. He dropped to one knee
beside me.
“He’ s al l right,” I said, before he could ask. “Someone hit
him on the head and tied up your aunt.”
“A ye? Who?” He glanced up at Jocasta, and laid a hand on
Duncan’ s chest, as though to reassure himself that Duncan was
indeed still breathing.
“I haven a the slightest notion,” s he replied crisply . “If I had,
I s hould have se nt men to hunt the ill-deedie shar gs down by
now .” Her lips tightened into a thin line, and the high color
sur ged b ack into her face at thought of the assailants. “Did no
one see the rascals?”
“I think not, Aunt,” Jamie replied calmly . “W ith such a
boiling in the house, no one kens what to look for , aye?”
I r aised one eye brow at him in silent question. What did he
mean by  that? Had Bonnet got away? For surely it must have
been Bonnet who had invaded Jocasta’ s chamber; boiling or
no, t here couldn’ t be multiple v iolent criminals at lar ge on the
same night in a place the size of River Run.
Jamie shook his head briefly . H e glanced at my hands, saw
the blood under my nails, and raised an eyebrow of his own.
Had I discovere d anything? Had there been time for me to be
sure? I nodded, and a slight shudder went over me; yes, I
knew .
Mur der , I mouthed to him.
He sque ezed my arm in quick reassurance, and glanced over
his shou lder; the Major had at last succeeded in pushing most
of the crowd out into the hallway , sending the servants for
restoratives and refreshments, a groom for the Sherif f in Cross
Creek, the men out to search the grounds for possible
miscreants, and  the ladies down to the salon in a flutter of
excited puzzlement. The Major closed the door firmly behind
them, then came briskly over to us.
“Shall we get him onto the bed, then?”Duncan was beginning to stir and groan. He coughed and
gagged a little, but fortunately  didn’ t throw up. Jamie and
Major MacDonald got him up, limp arms about their
shoulders, and conveyed him to the big four -poster , where they
laid him down with complete disregard for the quilted silk
coverlet.
W ith a faint atavistic sense of housewifeliness, I tucked a
soft green velvet pillow under hi s head. It was filled with bran,
but crac kled fain tly under my ha nd and gave of f a strong scent
of la vender . Lavender was good  for headache, all right, but I
wasn’ t sure it was quite up to this.
“Where is Phaedre?”
Ulysses had guided Jocasta to h er chair , and she sank back
in its leather dep ths, looking suddenly exhausted and old. The
color ha d left her face along wi th her rage, and her white hair
was coming down in straggles round her shoulders.
“I sent Phaedre to bed, Aun tie.” Bree had come in,
unnoticed in the scrum, and had resisted removal by the Major .
She bent over Jocasta, touching her hand with solicitude.
“Don’ t worry; I’ll take care of you.”
Jocasta p ut her own hand over Bree’ s in gratitude, but sat up
straighter , looking puzzled.
“Sent her to bed? Why? And what in God’ s name is
burning?” She jerked bolt upright, alarmed. “Are the stables
afire?” T he wind had changed, a nd the night air was streaming
in th rough a bro ken pane above the window seat, heavy with
the scent of smoke and a faint, dreadful smell of burned flesh.
“No, no! The s tables are fine. Phaedre was upset,” Bree
explained, with some delicacy . “The shed by the kitchen
garden seems to have burned down; her mother ’ s body …”
Jocasta’ s face went quite blank for a moment. Then she
drew he rself up, and an extraord inary look came into her face,
something almost like satisfaction, though with a tinge of
puzzlement.Jamie was standing behind me. He evidently saw it, too, for
I heard him give a soft grunt.
“Are ye somewhat recovered, Aunt?” he asked.
She turned her face toward h im, one eyebrow lifted in
sardonic reply .
“I sh all b e the better for a dram, ” she said, accepting the cup
that Ulysses set deftly into her hands. “But aye, nephew , I’m
well enough. Duncan, though?”
I w as sitting by Duncan on the  bed, his wrist in my hand,
and could feel him coming toward the surface of
consciousness, e yelids fluttering  and fingers twitching slightly
against my palm.
“He’ s coming round,” I assured her .
“Give h im brandy , Ulysses,” Jocasta commanded, but I
stopped the butler with a shake of my head.
“Not quite yet. He’ll choke.”
“Do ye feel yourself equal to  telling us what happened,
Aunt?” Jamie asked, with a not iceable edge to his voice. “Or
must we wait for Duncan to come to himself?”
Jocasta sighed, closing her eyes  briefly . She was as good as
all the MacKen zies at hiding what she thought, but in this
case, it was evident at least that she was  thinking, and
furiously , at that. The tip of her tongue flicked out, touching a
raw spo t at the corner of her mouth, and I realized that she
must have been gagged as well as bound.
I c ould feel Jam ie behind me, seething with some strong
feeling. Near as he was, I could hear his stif f fingers
drumming softly  on the bedpost. Much as I wanted to hear
Jocasta’ s story , I wanted even more to be alone with Jamie, to
tell him what I  had discovered, and to find out what had
happened in the darkness of the kitchen garden.
Outside, voices murmured in the hall; not all the guests had
dispersed. I caught muf fled phra ses—”quite burnt up, nothing
left but the bones,” “… stolen? Don’ t know …” “… check thestables,” “Y es, completely burned …” A deep shiver struck
me, and I gripped Duncan’ s han d hard, fighting a panic that I
did not understand. I must have looked odd, for Bree said
softly , “ Mama?” She was looking at me, brow creased with
worry . I tried to smile at her , but my lips felt stif f.
Jamie’ s hands settled on my shoulders, lar ge and warm. I
had been holding my breath wit hout realizing it; at his touch, I
let it out in a small gasp, and breathed again. Major
MacDonald glan ced curiously at me, but his attention was at
once def lected by Jocasta, who o pened her eyes and turned her
face in his direction.
“It is Major MacDonald, is it not?”
“At your service, Mum.” The Major made an automatic
bow , for getting—as folk often did—that she could not see
him.
“I th ank ye for your gallant service, Major . My husband and
I are most indebted to ye.”
The Major made a politely dismissive sound.
“No, no,” she insisted, straightening up and brushing back
her h air with one  hand. “Y e’ve b een put to great trouble on our
account, and we must not imp ose further on your kindness.
Ulysses—take the Major down to the parlor and find him
proper refreshment.”
The butler bowed obsequiously—I noticed for the first time
that he was dre ssed in a nightshirt over unbuckled breeches,
though he had c lapped his wig on his head—and ushered the
Major firmly toward the door . M acDonald looked ludicrously
surprised and not a little disgrun tled at being given the push in
this civilized fashion, he having quite obviously intended to
stay and  hear all the gory details. Still, there was no graceful
way of resisting, and he made the best of it, bowing in a
dignified manner as he took his leave.
The panic had begun to recede, as baf flingly as it had come.
Jamie’ s hands radiated a warmth that seemed to spread
through my body , and my breath  came easily again. I was ableto fo cus my att ention on my patient, who had got his eyes
open, though he seemed to be regretting it.
“Och, mo cheann !” Duncan squinted against the glow of the
lamp, focusing with some dif fic ulty on my face, then rising to
Jamie’ s behind me. “ Mac Dubh —what’ s come amiss?”
One of Jamie’ s h ands left my sh oulder , and reached down to
tighten on Duncan’ s arm.
“Dinna fash yourself, a charaid .” H e gl anced m eaningfully
at Jocas ta. “Y our wife is just about to tell us what has
happened. Are ye not, Aunt?”
There was a slig ht but definite emphasis on the “not,” and
Jocasta, thus put on the spot, pu rsed her lips, but then sighed
and sat straight, plainly resigned to the unpleasant necessity of
confidence.
“There is no one here but family?”
Being assured that there was not, she nodded, and began.
She had sent a way her maid, and been on the point of
retiring, she said, when the doo r from the hall had suddenly
opened to admit what she thought were two men.
“I am  sure there  was more than one—I heard their footsteps,
and brea thing,” she said, frowning in concentration. “There
might  h ave been thre e, but I think not. Only one of them
spoke, t hough. I think the othe r must have been someone I
ken, for he stay ed far away , qu ite at the end of the room, as
though he were afraid I should recognize him by some
means.”
The man who h ad spoken to her was a stranger; she was
positive that she had never heard his voice before.
“He was  an Irishman,” she said, and Jamie’ s hand tightened
abruptly on my shoulder . “W e ll enough spoken, but not a
gentleman, by any means.” Her nostrils flared a little, with
unconscious disdain.
“No, hardly that,” Jamie said, under his breath. Bree had
started slightly at the word “Iri shman,” though her face boreno more than a slight frown of concentration as she listened.
The Irishman had been polite, b ut blunt in his demands; he
wanted the gold.
“Gold?” It was Duncan who s poke, but the question was
plain on  everyone’ s face. “What gold? W e’ve no money in the
house sa ve a few pounds sterling and a bit of the Proclamation
money .”
Jocasta’ s lips pressed tight. There was no help for it, though;
not now . She made a small growling noise in her throat, an
inarticulate protest at being compelled to give up the secret she
had kept for so long.
“The Frenchman’ s gold,” she said, abruptly .
“What?” said Duncan in bew ilderment. He touched the
lump behind his ear , gingerly ,  as though convinced it had
af fected his hearing.
“The French gold,” Jocasta repeated, rather irritably . “That
was sent, just before Culloden.”
“Before—” Bree began, wide-eyed, but Jamie interrupted
her .
“Louis’ s gold,” he said softly . “That’ s what ye mean, Aunt?
The Stuarts’ gold?”
Jocasta uttered a short laugh, quite without humor .
“Once it was.”
She paused, listening. The voices had moved away from the
door , though there were still noi ses in the hallway . She turned
toward Bree, and motioned toward the door .
“Go and see tha t no one’ s got his lug to the keyhole, lass. I
havena held my peace these twenty-five years only to spill it to
the whole county .”
Bree opened the door briefly , peered out, then closed it,
reporting that no one was near .“Good. Come ye here, lass. Sit by me. But no—first, fetch
me the case I showed ye yesterday .”
Looking more than puzzled, Bree vanished into the dressing
room, re turning with a slender c ase of worn black leather . She
laid it in Jocasta’ s lap and settled onto a stool beside her aunt,
giving me a look of faint concern.
I w as feeling qu ite myself again, though a faint echo of that
odd fear still ran g in my bones. I nodded reassuringly to Bree,
though, and bent to give Dunc an a sip of watered brandy . I
knew what it wa s now , that ancient distress. It was that phrase
overheard, the words by chance the same that a small girl had
once heard spoken, whispered in the next room by the
strangers who had come to sa y her mother would not be
coming back, that she had die d. An accident; a crash; fire.
Burnt to bones,  t he  voice had said, filled with the awe of it.
Burnt to bones, and the desolation of a daughter , forever
abandoned. My hand trembled, and the cloudy liquid ran in a
trickle down Duncan’ s chin.
But that  was long ago, and in another country , I thought,
steeling myself against the riptide of memory .
And besides …
Jocasta drained her own cup, set it down with a small
thump, a nd ope ned the case in her lap. A gleam of gold and
diamonds showe d inside, and sh e lifted out a slender wooden
rod that held three rings.
“I had three daughters, once,” she said. “Three girls.
Clementina, Seonag, and Morna.” She touched one of the
rings, a wide band, set with three lar ge diamonds.
“This was for m y girls; Hector gave it to me when Morna
was born. She was his, Morna—you know it means
‘beloved’?” Her  other hand le ft the box and stretched out,
groping. She touched Bree’ s cheek, and Bree took the hand,
cradling it between her own.
“I had one living child of eac h marriage.” Jocasta’ s long
fingers probed delicately , touching each ring in turn.“Clementina belonged to John Cameron; him I wed when I
myself was little more than a child; I bore her at sixteen.
Seonag was the daughter of Black Hugh—she was dark, like
her s ire, but she had my brother Colum’ s eyes.” She turned her
own blind eyes t oward Jamie, briefly , then bent her head back,
touching the ring with three diamonds again.
“And th en Morna, my last child . She was but sixteen when
she died.”
The old woman ’ s face was blea k, but the line of her mouth
softened, speaking the names of her vanished girls.
“I’m sorry , Aunt.” Bree spoke softly . She bent her head to
kiss the knuckles of the hand she cradled, knobbed with age.
Jocasta tightened her hand a little in acknowledgment, but did
not mean to be distracted from her story .
“Hector Cameron gave me this,” Jocasta said, touching the
ring. “And he killed them all. My children, my daughters. He
killed them for the Frenchman’ s gold.”
The shock of it took my breath a nd hollowed my stomach. I
felt Jamie go s till behind me, and saw Duncan’ s bloodshot
eyes go wide. Brianna didn’ t change expression. She closed
her eyes for a moment, but still held on to the long bony hand.
“What happened to them, Aunt?” she said quietly . “T ell
me.”
Jocasta was silent for a few moments. So was the room;
there was no sou nd save the his s of beeswax burning, and the
faint asthmatic wheeze of her breath. T o my surprise, when
she spok e again, it wasn’ t to Brianna. Instead, she lifted her
head and turned again toward Jamie.
“Y ou kn ow abou t the gold, then , a mhic mo pheathar? ” she
said. If he found  this a strange question, he gave no sign of it,
but answered calmly .
“I have heard so mething of it,” he said. He moved, coming
round the bed to sit beside me, closer to his aunt. “It has been
a rumor in the Highlands, ever since Culloden. Louis wouldsend gold, they said, to help his cousin in his holy fight. And
then they said the gold had come, yet no man saw it.”
“I s aw it.” Joc asta’ s wide mouth, so like her nephew’ s,
widened further in a sudden gri mace, then relaxed. “I saw it,”
she repeated.
“Thirty thousand pound, in gold bullion. I was with them
the n ight it came  ashore, rowed in from the French ship. It was
in si x sm all chests, each one so heavy that only two at a time
could be brought, else the boat would sink. Each chest had the
fleur -de-lis carved on the lid, ea ch one bound with iron bands
and a lock, each lock itself seal ed with red wax, and the wax
bore the print of King Louis’ s ring. The fleur -de-lis .”
A si gh r an throu gh us all at the w ords, a collective breath of
awe. Jocasta nodded slowly , blind eyes open to the sights of
that night long past.
“Where was it brought ashore, Aunt?” Jamie asked softly .
She nodded slowly , as though to herself, eyes fixed on the
scene her memory painted.
“On Innismaraich,” she said. “A tiny isle, just of f Coigach.”
I had  be en holdi ng my breath. N ow I let it out, slowly , and
met Jamie’ s eyes. Innismaraich. Island of the Sea-people; the
silkies’ isle, it meant. W e knew that place.
“There were the three men t rusted with it,” she said.
“Hector was one, my brother Dougal was another—the third
man wa s masked; they all were , but of course I kent Hector
and Dou gal. I didna ken the th ird man, nor did any of them
speak his name. I knew his se rvant, though; a man named
Duncan Kerr .”
Jamie ha d stif fened slightly at Dougal’ s name; at the name
of Duncan Kerr he froze.
“There were servants, too?” he asked.
“T wo,” s he said, and a faint, bitter smile twisted her mouth.
“The masked man brought Du ncan Kerr , as I said, and my
brother Dougal had a man with  him from Leoch—I kent hisface, but not hi s name. Hector had me to help him; I was a
braw , strong woman—like you, a leannan , like you,” she said
softly , squeezing Brianna’ s hand. “I was strong, and Hector
trusted me as h e could trust no other . I trusted him, too—
then.”
The noises from outside had died away , but a breeze
through the broken pane stirred the curtains, uneasy as a ghost
that hears its name called from a distance.
“There w ere three boats. The chests were small, but heavy
enough that it took two persons to carry one between them. W e
took two chests into our boat, Hector and I, and we rowed
away , in to the fog. I could hear  the splash of the others’ oars,
growing fainter as they drew away , and then lost in the night.”
“When was this, Aunt?” Jamie a sked, his eyes intent on her .
“When did the gold come from France?”
“T oo late,” she whispered. “Much too late. Damn Louis!”
she exclaimed, with a sudden fierceness that brought her
upright in her seat. “Damn the wicked Frenchman, and may
his e yes rot as mine have! T o th ink what might have been, had
he been true to his blood and his word!”
Jamie’ s eyes met mine, sidelon g. T oo late. Had the gold
come sooner—w hen Charles landed at Glenfinnan, perhaps, or
when he took E dinbur gh, and for a few brief weeks held the
city as a king returned—what then?
The gho st of a smile touched J amie’ s lips with ruefulness,
and he glanced a t Brianna, then back at me, the question asked
and answered in his eyes. What, then?
“It was March,” Jocasta said, recovering from her outburst.
“A freezing night, but clear as ice. I stood upon the clif f and
looked f ar out to sea, and the pa th of the moon lay like gold on
the wate r . The ship came sailing in upon that golden path, like
a king to his co ronation, and I did think it a sign.” Her head
turned toward Jamie, and her mouth twisted abruptly .
“I did think I h eard him laughing, then,” she said. “Black
Brian. H im who took my sister from me. It would have beenlike him. But h e was not ther e; I suppose it was only the
barking of the silkies.”
I w as watching J amie as she spoke. He didn’ t move, but like
magic, t he reddish hairs on his forearm rose, glinting like
wires in the candlelight.
“I di dna ken ye knew my father ,” he said, a faint edge to his
voice. “But let that be for now , Aunt. It was March, ye say?”
She nodded.
“T oo late,” she repeated. “It was meant to have come two
months before, Hector said. There were delays …”
It had  b een too late. I n January , after the victory at Falkirk,
such a show of support from France might have been decisive.
But in March, the Highland Arm y was already moving north,
turned back at D erby from its invasion of England. The last
slim chance of victory had been lost, and Charles Stuart’ s men
were marching then toward destruction at Culloden.
W ith the chests safe ashore, the new guardians of the gold
had conferred over what to do w ith the treasure. The army was
moving, and Stuart with it; Edi nbur gh was once more in the
hands o f the English. There was no safe place to take it, no
trustworthy hands into which it could be delivered.
“They d idna trust O’Sullivan or the others near the Prince,”
Jocasta explained. “Irishmen, Italians … Dougal said he hadna
gone to so much trouble, only t o have the gold squandered or
stolen by foreigners.” She smile d, a little grimly . “He meant he
didna want to chance losing the credit for having got it.”
The thre e keepers had been no  more willing to trust one
another than the Prince’ s advise rs. Most of the night had been
spent in ar gument in the bleak upper room of a desolate tavern,
while Jocasta and the two serva nts slept on the floor , among
the red-s ealed chests. Finally , the gold had been divided; each
man had taken two of the che sts, swearing on his blood to
keep the secret a nd hold the treasure faithfully , in trust for his
rightful monarch, King James.“They made the two servants s wear as well,” Jocasta said.
“They c ut each man, and the drops of blood shone redder in
the candlelight than the wax seals on the chests.”
“Did yo u swear , too?” Brianna spoke quietly , but her eyes
were intent on the white-haired figure in the chair .
“No, I didna swear .” Jocasta’ s lips, still finely shaped,
curved s lightly , as though amused. “I was Hector ’ s wife; his
oath bound me. Then.”
Uneasy in possession of so much wealth, the conspirators
had left the ta vern before dawn, bundling the chests in
blankets and rags to hide them.
“A pair of travelers rode in, as the last of the chests was
brought down. It was their coming that saved the innkeeper ’ s
life, for it was a lonely spot, a nd he the only witness to our
presence there that night. I think  Dougal and Hector would not
have thought to do such a thing —but the third man, he meant
to di spose of the landlord; I saw it in his eyes, in the crouch of
his body  as he w aited near the bottom of the stair , his hand on
his dirk. He saw me watching—he smiled at me, beneath his
mask.”
“And di d he never unmask, this third man?” Jamie asked.
His ruddy brows drew together as though by sheer
concentration h e could recreate the scene she saw in her
mind’ s eye, and identify the stranger .
She shook her head.
“No. I asked my self, now and t hen, when I thought of that
night, would I know the man again, did I see him. I thought I
would; h e was dark, a slender m an, but with a strength in him
like knife steel. Could I see his eyes again, I would be sure of
it. B ut n ow …” She shrugged. “W ould I ken him by his voice
alone? I canna say , so long ago it was.”
“But he wasna by any means an Irishman, this man?”
Duncan was still pale and clammy-looking, but had raised
himself on one elbow , listening with deep absorption.Jocasta started a little, as though she had for gotten his
presence.
“Ah! No, a dhuine . A Sco t by his speech—a Highland
gentleman.”
Duncan and Jamie exchanged glances.
“A MacKenzie or a Cameron?” Duncan asked softly , and
Jamie nodded.
“Or perhaps one of the Grants.”
I u nders tood th eir half-voiced speculations. There were—
had been—a staggeringly complex array of associations and
feuds am ong th e Highland clans, and there were many who
would not—cou ld not—have cooperated in an undertaking of
such importance and secrecy .
Colum MacKenzie had negotiated a close alliance with the
Camerons; in fact, Jocasta he rself had been part of that
alliance, her marriage to a Cameron chief the token of it. If
Dougal MacKenzie was one of the men who had engineered
the recei pt of the French gold, and Hector Cameron another , it
was odds-on that the third man had been someone from one of
those clans, or from another trusted by both. MacKenzie,
Cameron … or Grant. And if Jocasta had not known the man
by s ight, the odds on his being a Grant improved, for she
would have known most high-ranking tacksmen of clans
MacKenzie or Cameron.
But ther e was no time now to consider such things; the story
was not finished.
The conspirators  had separated then, each going by his own
way , eac h with one-third of the  French gold. Jocasta had no
knowledge of what Dougal MacKenzie or the unknown man
had done with t heir chests; Hector Cameron had put the two
chests he brought away into a hole in the floor of his bedroom,
an old hiding place made by his father to conceal valuables.
Hector meant to leave it there u ntil the Prince had reached
some pla ce of safety , where he c ould receive the gold, and use
it for the furth erance of his a ims. But Charles Stuart wasalready in flight, and would not find a place to rest for many
months. Before  he reached his final refuge, disaster
intervened.
“Hector left the gold—and me—at home, and went to join
the Prince and t he army . On the  seventeenth of April, he rode
back int o the dooryard at sunset, his horse lathered to a froth.
He s wung down and left the po or beast to a groom, while he
rushed into the house and bade me pack what valuables I could
—the Cause was lost, he said, and we must flee, or die with
the Stuarts.”
Cameron was wealthy , even then , and canny enough to have
kept his coach and horses, rather than giving them to the Stuart
cause. Canny enough, too, not to carry two chests of French
gold in his flight.
“He took three bars of the gold from one of the chests, and
gave the m to me. I hid them under the seat of the coach; he
and the groom c arried the chests awa to the wood—I didna see
where they buried them.”
It was midday o f April 18, when Hector Cameron boarded
his c oach, with his wife, his gro om, his daughter Morna, and
three bars of French bullion, and headed hell-for -leather south
toward Edinbur gh.
“Seonag was married to the Master of Garth—he declared
early for the Stuarts; he was killed at Culloden, though of
course we didna know it then. Clementina was widowed
already , and living with her sister at Rovo.”
She took a deep breath, shuddering slightly , unwilling to
relive the events she recounted, unable to resist them.
“I begge d Hecto r to go to Rovo. It was only ten miles out of
the way—it would have taken  no but a few hours—but he
wouldna stop. W e could not, he said. T oo big a risk, to take the
time needed to fetch them. Clementina had two children,
Seonag the one. T oo many peo ple for the coach, he said; it
would slow us too much.“Not to bring th em away , then, I said. Only to warn them—
only to see them once more.”
She paused.
“I ke nt where w e were bound—we had talked of it, though I
didna ken he had things in such readiness.”
Hector Cameron had been a Jacobite, but was also a keen
judge of  human af fairs, and no m an to throw his own life after
a l ost cause. See ing how matters were falling out, and fearing
some disaster , he had taken pa ins to engineer an escape. He
had quietly put aside a few bag s of clothing and necessities,
turned w hat he could of his property into money , and secretly
booked three open passages, from Edinbur gh to the Colonies.
“Sometimes, I think I canna blame him,” Jocasta said. She
sat bolt upright , the light of the candles gleaming from her
hair . “He thought Seonag wouldna go without her husband,
and Clem entina wouldna risk her bairns at sea. Perhaps he was
right about that. And perhap s it would have made no
dif ference to warn them. But I knew I shouldna see them
again… .” Her mouth closed, and she swallowed.
In a ny case, Hector had refus ed to stop, fearing pursuit.
Cumberland’ s tr oops had conver ged upon Culloden, but there
were English soldiers on the H ighland roads, and word of
Charles Stuart’ s defeat was spreading like ripples near the
edge of a whirlpool, moving fa ster and faster , in a vortex of
danger .
As it was, the Camerons were discovered, two days later ,
near Ochtertyre.
“A wheel came of f the coach, ” Jocasta said with a sigh.
“Lord, I  can see it now , spinnin g down the road by itself. The
axletree was broke, and we’d no choice but to camp there by
the road, while Hector and the groom made shift to mend it.”
Repairs had taken the best par t of a day , and Hector had
grown more and more edgy as the work went on, his anxiety
infecting the rest of the party .“I didna ken then what he’d seen at Culloden,” Jocasta said.
“He ken t weel enough that if th e English took him, it was all
up w i’ him. If they didna kill h im on the spot, he’d be hangit
as a traitor . He was sweating as he worked, and more wi’ fear
than with the heat of his labor . But even so …” Her lips
pressed tight for a moment, before she went on.
“It was nearly dusk—it was spring, dusk came early—when
they got  the wheel back on the coach, and everyone got back
aboard. The coach had been in a wee hollow when the wheel
flew of f ; the groom ur ged the h orses up a long slope, and just
as we reached the crest of the hill, two men with muskets
stepped out from the shadows into the road ahead.”
It was a company of English soldiers, Cumberland’ s men.
Arriving too late to join in the v ictory at Culloden, they were
inflamed by news of it—but fr ustrated at not sharing in the
battle, and only too ready to wre ak what vengeance they could
on fleeing Highlanders.
Always a quick thinker , Hector had sunk back in the corner
of th e coach at sight of them, hi s head bent and a shawl pulled
over it,  pretending to be an aged crone, sunk in sleep.
Following his hissed instructions, Jocasta had leaned out of the
window , prepared to pose as a respectable lady traveling with
her daughter and mother .
The sold iers had not waited to hear her speech. One yanked
open the door of the coach, a nd dragged her out. Morna,
panicked, had leapt out after h er , trying to pull her mother
away from the s oldier . Another man had grabbed the girl, and
dragged her back, so that he s tood between Jocasta and the
coach.
“Another minute , and they meant to have ‘Grannie’ out on
the grou nd as well—and then they would find the gold, and it
would be all up wi’ all of us.”
A pistol shot startled all of them into momentary
immobility . Leaning from the coach’ s open door , Hector had
fired at the soldier holding Morna—but it was dusk and thelight was poor; perhaps the horses had moved, jostling the
coach. The shot struck Morna in the head.
“I ra n to her ,” Jocasta said. Her voice was hoarse, her throat
gone dry and thick. “I ran to her , but Hector jumped out and
seized me. The soldiers were all standing, staring with the
shock. He dragged me back, into  the coach, and shouted to the
groom to drive, drive on!”
She licked her lips and swallowed, once.
“‘She is  dead,’ he said to me. Over and over , ‘She is dead,
you can not help,’ he said, and  held me tight when I would
have thrown myself from the coach in my despair .”
Slowly she pulled her hand away from Brianna; she had
needed support to begin her stor y , but needed none to finish it.
Her hands folded into fists, pr essed hard against the white
linen of her sh ift, as though to stanch the bleeding of a
desecrated womb.
“It had gone dark by then,” she said, and her voice was
remote, detache d. “I saw the glow of fires against the sky to
the north.”
Cumberland’ s tr oops were spreading outward, burning and
pillaging. They reached Rovo, w here Clementina and Seonag
were with their f amilies, and set the manor house afire. Jocasta
never learned whether they had died in the fire, or later ,
starved and freezing in the cold Highland spring.
“So Hector saved his life—and mine, for what it was worth
then,” she said, still detached. “And of course, he saved the
gold.” H er fingers sought the ri ng again, and turned it slowly
round u pon its rod, so the stones caught the lamplight,
glimmering.
“Indeed,” Jamie murmured. His eyes were fixed on the
blind face, watching her inten tly . It struck me suddenly as
unfair that he sh ould watch her so, almost judging, when she
could not look back, or even know how he looked at her . I
touched him, and he glanced as ide at me, then took my hand,
squeezing it hard.Jocasta put aside the rings and  rose, restless now that the
worst part of t he story was told. She moved toward the
window seat, knelt there, and br ushed back the curtains. It was
hard to believe her blind, seeing her move with such purpose
—and yet this was her room, her place, and every item in it
was scrupulously placed so that she could find her way . She
pressed her hands against the icy glass and the night outside,
and a white fog of condensation flared around her fingers like
cold flames.
“Hector bought this place with the gold we brought,” she
said. “The land, the mill, the s laves. T o do him credit”—her
tone suggested that she was not  inclined to do any such thing
—”the w orth of  it now is due in great part to his own work.
But it was the gold that bought it, to begin with.”
“What of his oath?” Jamie asked softly .
“What o f it?” she said, and uttered a short laugh. “Hector
was a practical man. The Stuarts were finished; what need had
they of gold, in Italy?”
“Practical,” I repeated, surprising myself; I hadn’ t meant to
speak, b ut I thought I had heard  something odd in the way she
spoke the word.
Evidently , I had. She turned around to face us, turning
toward my voice. She was smi ling, but a chill ran down my
backbone at the sight of it.
“A ye, p ractical,” she said, nodding. “My daughters were
dead; he  saw no reason to waste tears upon them. He never
spoke o f them, and would not let me speak, either . He had
been a man of worth once, he would be, again—not so easy
here, had anyone known.” She breathed out, a heavy sound of
stifled anger . “I daresay there a re none in this land who even
ken I was once a mother .”
“Y ou still are,” said Brianna so ftly . “That much I know .”
She glan ced at me, and her blue eyes met mine, dark with
understanding. I  felt the sting of tears behind the smile I gave
her back. Y es, that much she knew , as did I.So d id Jocasta; the lines of her face relaxed for a moment,
fury and remembered despair displaced for a moment by
longing. She walked slowly to w here Brianna sat on her stool,
and laid  her free hand on Bree ’ s head. It rested there for a
moment, then slid down, the long, sensitive fingers probing
Brianna’ s strong cheekbones, her wide lips and long, straight
nose, tracing the small track of the wetness down her cheek.
“A ye, a leannan ,” she said softly . “Y e ken what I mean. And
ye k en n ow , wh y I would leave  this place to you—or to your
blood?”
Jamie coughed, breaking in before Bree could answer .
“A ye,” he said, in a matter -of-fact tone. “So that is what ye
told the Irishman tonight? Not all the story , to be sure—but
that ye have no gold here?”
Jocasta’ s hands dropped from Brianna’ s face and she turned
to face Jamie.
“A ye, I told them. Him. T old him that for all I kent, those
chests were still buried in the wood in Scotland; he was
welcome, I said, to go and dig there, and it suited him.” One
corner of her mouth curled up in a bitter smile.
“He wasna inclined to take your word for it?”
She shook her head, lips pressed together .
“He wasna a gentleman,” she said again. “I canna say how it
might ha ve fallen out—for I sat near the bed, and I keep a wee
knife beneath my pillow; I wou ldna have suf fered him to lay
hands on  me unscathed. Before  I could reach for it, though, I
heard footsteps in the dressing room.”
She wav ed a hand toward the door near the fireplace; her
dressing room lay beyond, joining her bedroom to another—
the room  that had once been Hector Cameron’ s, and was now
presumably Duncan’ s.
The intruders had heard the footsteps, too; the Irishman
hissed somethin g to his friend, then moved away from Jocasta,toward the hearth. The other fellow had come close then, and
seized her from behind, a hand across her mouth.
“All I could tell ye from that wa s that the fellow wore a cap
pulled lo w over his head, and he stank of liquor , as though
he’d pou red it over himself instead of drinking it.” She made a
brief grimace of distaste.
The door had opened, Duncan had come in, and the
Irishman had apparently leapt from behind the open door and
clubbed him over the head.
“I dinna  recall a thing,” Duncan said ruefully . “I came to bid
Miss—that is, my wife—good night. I recall settin’ my hand
upon the knob o f the door , and next thing, I was lyin’ here wi’
my hea d split open.” He touched the lump tenderly , then
looked at Jocasta with an anxious concern.
“Y ou are all righ t, yourself, mo chridhe ? Th e ba stards d idna
of fer ye ill use?” He stretched out a hand to her , then, realizing
that she could n ot see him, tried  to sit up. He collapsed with a
stifled groan, and she stood up at the sound, coming hurriedly
to the bedside.
“Of course I am  all right,” she said, crossly , groping until
she found his ha nd. “Save for the distress of thinking myself
about to  be a wi dow for the fourth time.” She let out a sigh of
exasperation and sat down beside him, smoothing back a
swath of loosened hair from her face.
“I c ouldna tell what had happe ned; I only heard the thud,
and a dreadful groan as ye fell. Then the Irishman came back
toward me, and the creature holding me let go.”
The Irishman had informed he r pleasantly that he did not
believe a word of her claim th at there was no gold at River
Run. He was convinced that the gold was here, and while he
would not dream of of fering  harm to a lady , the same
inhibitions did not obtain with respect to her husband.
“If I didna tell  him where it was, he said, he and his
companion would set in to cut wee bits of f Duncan, beginning
with his toes, a nd advancing to his ballocks,” Jocasta saidbluntly . Duncan hadn’ t much blood in his face to begin with,
but what there was drained away at this. Jamie glanced at
Duncan, then away , clearing his throat.
“Y e were convinced he meant it, I suppose.”
“He’d a  good sharp knife; he ra n it across the palm of my
hand to show me that he was in earnest.” She opened her free
hand; su re enoug h, a hair -thin re d line ran across the heel of it.
She shrugged.
“W ell, I supposed I couldna have that. So I made pretense of
reluctance, until the Irishman went to pick up one of Duncan’ s
feet—then I wept and carried on , in hopes that someone would
hear , bu t the damned servants had gone to bed, and the guests
were too busy drinking my w hisky and fornicating in the
grounds and stables to hear .”
At this last rem ark, Bree’ s face flamed a sudden crimson.
Jamie saw it and coughed, avoiding my eye.
“A ye. So then—”
“So then  I told them at last that the gold was buried under
the f loor of the shed outside the kitchen garden.” The look of
satisfaction returned briefly to her face. “I thought they would
come up on the body and ‘twould put them of f their stride for a
bit. By the time they’d nerved themselves to dig, I hoped I
should have found some way to escape or to give the alarm—
and so I did.”
They had bound and gagged h er hastily and gone to the
shed, threatening to return and resume operations where they
had left of f, should they discove r she had been lying to them.
They ha d made no great job of  the gag, though, and she had
soon succeeded  in tearing it away and kicking out a
windowpane, through which to shout for help.
“So I am thinki ng that when they opened the door to the
shed and  saw the corpse, they must have dropped their lantern
in shock, and so set fire to the place.” She nodded in grim
satisfaction. “A small price. I could but wish I thought they
had gone up with it!”“Y e dinn a suppose they set the fire on purpose?” Duncan
asked. He was looking a little better , though still gray and ill.
“T o cover any marks of digging?”
Jocasta shrugged, dismissing the notion.
“T o what end? There was noth ing to be found there, and
they dug themselves to China.”  She was beginning to relax a
little, a normal color returning to her face, though her broad
shoulders had begun to droop with exhaustion.
Silence fell among us, and I be came aware that there had
been rising noises downstairs for some minutes now; male
voices and footsteps. The various search parties had returned,
but it was appa rent from the tired, disgruntled tones that no
suspects had been apprehended.
The can dle on the table had burned very low by now; the
flame stretched high near my e lbow as the wick reached its
last inch . One of the candles on the mantelpiece guttered and
went ou t in a fragrant wisp of b eeswax smoke. Jamie glanced
automatically at  the window; it was still dark outside, but the
character of the night had changed, as it does soon before
dawn.
The curtains moved silently , a chilly , restless air breathing
through the room. Another candle went out. A second
sleepless night was telling on me; I felt cold all over , numb
and disembodied , and the various horrors I had seen and heard
had begun to fade into unreality in my mind, with nothing save
a lingering strong scent of burning to bear witness to them.
There se emed n o more to say or to do. Ulysses came back,
sliding d iscreetly into the room with a fresh candlestick and a
tray holding a bottle of brandy and several glasses. Major
MacDonald reappeared briefly to report that indeed, they had
found no sign o f the miscreants. I checked both Duncan and
Jocasta briefly , and then left Bree and Ulysses to put them to
bed.
Jamie a nd I made our way downstairs in silence. At the
bottom of the staircase, I turned to him. He was white withfatigue, his features drawn and  set as though he had been
carved of marble, his hair an d beard stubble dark in the
shadowed light.
“They’ll come back, won’ t they?” I said quietly .
He nodd ed, and taking my elbow , led me toward the kitchen
stair .54
TETE-A-TETE, WITH CRUMBCAKE
S O EARL Y IN T HE YEAR, the kitchen in the cellar of the
house was still in use, with the summer cookhouse reserved
for messier or malodorous preparations. Roused by the
commotion, all the slaves were up and working, though a few
looked as though they would c ollapse into the nearest corner
and go back to sleep at the firs t opportunity . The chief cook,
though, was wide-awake, and it was clear that no one was
sleeping on her  watch.
The kitchen was warm and welcoming, the windows still
dark, walls red w ith hearth-glow , and the air suf fused with the
comforting scents of broth, hot bread, and cof fee. I thought
this wou ld be an excellent place to sit down and recuperate for
a bit  before todd ling of f to bed, but evidently Jamie had other
ideas.
He paused in co nversation with the cook, just long enough
for politeness, acquiring in the process not only an entire fresh
crumb cake, dusted with cinnamon and soaked with melted
butter , b ut a lar ge jug of freshly brewed cof fee. Then he made
his farew ells, scooped me up of f the stool onto which I had
thankfully subsided, and we were of f again, into the cool wind
of the dying night.
I had a very odd sense of deja vu as he turned down the
brick path toward the stables. The light was just the same as it
had been twenty-four hours earlier , with the same pinprick
stars jus t fading from the same blue-gray sky . The same faint
breath of spring passed by , and my skin shivered in memory .
But we were wa lking sedately side by side, not flying—and
overlaid on my m emories of the day before were the unsettling
odors of  blood and burning. W ith each step I felt as though I
were abo ut to reach out to push through the swinging doors ofa hospital; that the hum of fluorescent light and the subdued
reek of medicines and floor polish were about to engulf me.
“Lack of sleep,” I murmured to myself.
“T ime enough for sleep later , Sassenach,” Jamie replied. He
shook himself briefly , throwing  of f tiredness as a dog shakes
of f water . “There’ s a thing or two to be done, first.” He shifted
the p aper -wrapped cake, though , and took hold of my elbow
with his  free hand, in case I was  about to fall facefirst into the
cabbage bed from fatigue.
I w asn’ t. I had meant only that it was the lack of sleep that
was giving me t he mildly hallucinatory feeling of being back
in a hospital. Fo r years, as an intern, resident, and mother , I
had worked through long sleepless shifts, learning to function
—and function well—despite complete exhaustion.
It w as th at same  feeling that wa s stealing over me now , as I
passed through simple sleepines s and out again, into a state of
artificially heightened alertness.
I fel t cold and shrunken, as though I inhabited only the
innermost core of my body , insulated from the world around
me b y a thick layer of inert flesh . At the same time, every tiny
detail of my surroundings seemed unnaturally vivid, from the
delicious fragrance of the food Jamie carried and the rustle of
his c oat skirts, to the sound of s omeone singing in the distant
slave quarters and the spikes of sprouting corn in the vegetable
beds beside the path.
The sen se of lucid detachment stayed with me, even as we
followed the turn of the path toward the stables. A thing to be
done, he’d said. I supposed that he did not mean he intended to
repeat yesterday’ s performance. If he proposed a more sedate
form of or gy , though, involving cake and cof fee, it seemed
peculiar to hold it in the stable, rather than the parlor .
The side  door was unbarred; h e pushed it open, and the
warm scents of hay and sleeping animals rushed out.
“Who is it?” said a soft, deep voice from the shadows
inside. R oger . Of course; he ha dn’ t been among the mob inJocasta’ s room.
“Fraser ,” Jamie replied, equally softly , and drew me inside,
closing the door behind us.
Roger st ood silh ouetted against  the dim glow of a lantern,
near the  end of the row of loose-boxes. He was wrapped in a
cloak, and the light shone in a r eddish nimbus round his dark
hair as he turned toward us.
“How is it, a Smeoraich ?” J amie handed him the jug of
cof fee. Roger ’ s cloak fell back as he reached for it, and I saw
him thru st a pistol into the waist  of his breeches with his other
hand. W ithout comment, he pulled the cork and lifted the jug
to his mouth, lowering it sev eral moments later with an
expression of sheer bliss. He sighed, breath steaming.
“Oh, Go d,” he said fervently . “That’ s the best thing I’ve
tasted in months.”
“Not quite.” Sounding faintly amused, Jamie took the jug
back an d handed him the wrap ped crumb cake. “How is he,
then?”
“Noisy a t first, but he’ s been qu iet for a bit. I think he may
be asleep.”
Already tearing  at the butter -soaked wrappings, Roger
nodded toward the loose-box. Jamie took down the lantern
from its hook a nd held it high over the barred gate. Peering
under hi s arm, I could see a huddled shape, half-buried in the
straw at the back of the box.
“Mr . W ylie?” Jamie called, still softly . “Are ye asleep, sir?”
The shape stirred, with a rustling of hay .
“I am  not, sir ,” came the reply , in tones of cold bitterness.
The shape began slowly to unfol d itself, and Phillip W ylie rose
to his feet, shaking straw from his clothes.
I h ad certainly s een him appear to better advantage. Several
buttons were missing from his coat, one shoulder seam was
split, an d both knees of his breeches hung loose, the buckles
burst and  his stockings drooping in unseemly fashion about hisshins. So meone had evidently hit him in the nose; a trickle of
blood ha d dried  on his upper lip, and there was a splotch of
crusty brown on the embroidered silk of his waistcoat.
Despite the deficiencies of his wardrobe, his manner was
unimpaired, being one of icy outrage.
“Y ou will answer for this, Fraser , by God you will!”
“A ye, I will,” Jamie said, unperturbed. “At your pleasure,
sir . But not before I’ve had answers from yourself, Mr . W ylie.”
He unlatched the gate of the loose-box and swung it open.
“Come out.”
W ylie hesitated, unwilling either to remain in the box, or to
come out of it at Jamie’ s command. I saw his nostrils twitch,
though; evidently he had caught scent of the cof fee. That
seemed to decide him, and he c ame out of the box, head held
high. He brushed within a foot of me, but kept his eyes straight
ahead, af fecting not to see me.
Roger had collected two stools  and an upturned bucket. I
took the latter and shoved it modestly into the shadows,
leaving Jamie and W ylie to seat themselves within easy
strangling dista nce of each o ther . Roger himself retired
discreetly into the shadows bes ide me with the crumb cake,
looking interested.
W ylie a ccepted the jug of cof fee stif fly , but a few deep
swallows seemed to restore his composure to a noticeable
degree. H e lowered it at last and breathed audibly , his features
a little more relaxed.
“I thank you, sir .” He handed the jug back to Jamie with a
small bow and s at bolt upright on his stool, tenderly adjusting
his w ig, which had survived the  evening’ s adventures, but was
much the worse for its experiences. “Now , then. May I inquire
the reason for this … this … unspeakable behavior?”
“Y e may , sir ,” Jamie replied, drawing himself up straight in
turn. “I wish to discover the nat ure of your associations with a
certain Stephen Bonnet, and your knowledge of his present
whereabouts.”W ylie’ s face went almost comically blank.
“Who?”
“Stephen Bonnet.”
W ylie began to turn toward me, to ask for clarification, then
recalled that he was not acknowledging my presence. He
glowered at Jamie, dark brows drawn down.
“I have no acqu aintance with any gentleman of that name,
Mr . Fraser , and thus no knowledge of his movements—though
if I did, I great ly doubt that I should feel myself obliged to
inform you of them.”
“No?” Jamie took a thoughtful sip of cof fee, then handed
the jug to me. “What of the obligations of a guest toward his
host, Mr . W ylie?”
The dark brows rose in astonishment.
“What do you mean, sir?”
“I ta ke i t that you are not aware, sir , that Mrs. Innes and her
husband were assaulted last evening, and an attempt at robbery
made upon them?”
W ylie’ s mouth fell open. Either he was a very good actor , or
his surprise was genuine. Given my acquaintance with the
young man to date, I thought he was no kind of actor .
“I was not. Who—” A thought struck him, and
bewilderment vanished in renewed outrage. His eyes bulged
slightly . “Y ou think that I was concerned in this—this—”
“Dastardly enter prise?” Roger suggested. He seemed to be
enjoying himself, relieved of the boredom of guard duty . “A ye,
I exp ect we do. A bit of crumb cake with your cof fee, sir?” He
held out  a chunk of cake; W ylie stared at it for a moment, then
leaped to his feet, striking the cake out of Roger ’ s hand.
“Y ou bl ackguard!” He rounded on Jamie, fists clenched.
“Y ou dare to imply that I am a thief?”
Jamie rocked back a little on his stool, chin lifted.“A ye, I do,” he said coolly . “Y e tried to steal my wife from
under my nose—why should ye scruple at my aunt’ s goods?”
W ylie’ s face flushed a deep an d ugly crimson. Had it not
been a wig, his hair would have stood on end.
“Y ou … absolute … cunt !” he breathed. Then he launched
himself at Jamie. Both of them went over with a crash, in a
flurry of arms and legs.
I l eaped  back, clasping the cof f ee jug to my bosom. Roger
lunged toward the fray , but I snatched at him, catching his
cloak to hold him back.
Jamie had the ad vantage of size and skill, but W ylie was by
no m eans a nov ice in the art of fisticuf fs, and was in addition
propelled by a berserk rage. G iven a few moments more,
Jamie would have him hammer ed into submission, but I was
not inclined to wait.
Monstrously irritated with the pair of them, I stepped
forward and upended the cof fee jug. It wasn’ t boiling, but hot
enough. There were simultaneous yelps of surprise, and the
two men rolled apart, scrambling and shaking themselves. I
thought I heard Roger laugh behind me, but when I whirled on
him, he had assumed a look of straight-faced interest. He
raised his eyebrows at me, and crammed another chunk of
cake into his mouth.
I turned  back to find Jamie already on his feet, and W ylie
rising from his knees, both soaked with cof fee, and both with
expressions imp lying that they intended to resume proceedings
at the point whe re I had interru pted them. I pushed my way
between them and stamped my foot.
“I have bloody well had enough of this!”
“I haven’ t!” W ylie said hotly . “He has impugned my honor ,
and I demand—”
“Oh, to hell wi th your beastly honor—and yours, too!” I
snarled, glaring from him to Jam ie. Jamie, who had evidently
been going to say something eq ually inflammatory , contented
himself instead with a resounding snort.I ki cked one o f the fallen stools, and pointed at it, still
glaring at Jamie.
“Sit!”
Plucking the soaked fabric of hi s shirt away from his chest,
he righted the stool and sat on it, with immense dignity .
W ylie w as less inclined to pay  attention to me, and was
carrying on with further remarks  about his honor . I kicked him
in the shin. This time, I was wearing stout boots. He yelped
and hop ped on one foot, holding  his af fronted leg. The horses,
thoroughly rous ed by the com motion, were stamping and
snorting in their boxes, and the air was full of floating chaf f.
“Y e dinna want to trifle with h er when she’ s in a temper ,”
Jamie told W ylie, with a wary g lance at me. “She’ s dangerous,
aye?”
W ylie g lowered at me, but his  scowl altered to a look of
uncertainty—whether because of the empty cof fee jug, which I
was now  holdin g by the neck like a club, or because of his
memories of the night before, when he had discovered me in
the midst of Betty’ s autopsy . W ith an ef fort, he swallowed
whatever he had been going to say , and sat slowly down upon
the othe r stool. He pulled a kerchief from his stained waistcoat
pocket, and blotted a trickle of blood that was running down
the side of his face from a cut above the brow .
“I w ould like,” he said, with ex quisite politeness, “to know
what is going on here, please.”
He had lost his w ig; it was lying on the floor in a puddle of
cof fee. Jamie bent and picked it up, holding it gingerly , like a
dead animal. He wiped a smear of mud of f the side of his jaw
with his free hand, and held the wig out, dripping, to W ylie.
“W e are in agreement, then, sir .”
W ylie to ok the wig with a stif f n od of acknowledgment and
laid it on his k nee, disregardin g the cof fee soaking into his
breeches. Both men looked at me, with identical expressions
of skep tical impatience. Evidently , I had been appointed
mistress of ceremonies.“Robbery , murder , and heaven knows what else,” I said
firmly . “And we mean to get to the bottom of it.”
“Murder?” Roge r and W ylie sp oke together , both sounding
startled.
“Who has been murdered?” W ylie asked, looking wildly
back and forth between me and Jamie.
“A slave  woman,” Jamie said, w ith a nod toward me. “My
wife suspected ill doing in he r death, and so we meant to
discover the truth of the matter . Thus our presence in the shed
when you came upon us last night.”
“Presence,” W yl ie echoed. His f ace was already pale, but he
looked slightly ill at the recollection of what he had seen me
doing in the shed . “Y es. I … see.” He darted a look at me from
the corner of his eye.
“So she was killed?” Roger came into the circle of lantern
light and set the bucket back in place, sitting down at my feet.
He set the remains of the cake on the floor . “What killed her?”
“Someone fed her ground glass, ” I said. “I found quite a lot
of it still in her stomach.”
I p aid particular  attention to Phillip W ylie as I said this, but
his face bore the  same expression of blank astonishment as did
Jamie’ s and Roger ’ s.
“Glass.” Jamie was the first to  recover . He sat up on his
stool, shoving a disordered hank  of hair behind his ear . “How
long might that take to kill a body , Sassenach?”
I r ubbed  two fingers between my brows; the numbness of
the early  hour was giving way to a throbbing headache, made
worse b y the rich smell of cof fee and the fact that I hadn’ t
gotten to drink any of it.
“I don’ t know ,” I said. “It would  go into the stomach within
minutes, but it might take qui te a long time to do enough
damage to cause major hemorrhage. Most of the damage
would likely be to the small inte stine; the glass particles would
perforate the lining. And if the digestive system weresomewhat impaired—by drink, say—and not moving well,
then it might tak e even longer . Or if she’d taken a lot of food
with it.”
“Is t his the wom an that you and Bree found in the garden?”
Roger turned to Jamie, inquiring.
“A ye.” Jamie nodded, his eyes still fixed on me. “She was
insensible wi’ the drink then. And when ye saw her later ,
Sassenach—were there signs of it, then?”
I shook my head.
“The glass might have been wor king then—but she was out
cold. One thing—Fentiman did say she woke in the middle of
the night, complaining of grip ing in her guts. So she was
certainly af fecte d by that time. But I can’ t say for sure whether
she’d been given the ground gla ss before you and Bree found
her , or whether p erhaps she roused from her stupor in the early
evening, and someone gave it to her then.”
“Griping in the guts,” Roger mu rmured. He shook his head,
mouth grim at the thought. “Christ, what a way to go.”
“A ye, it’ s black wickedness,” Jamie agreed, nodding. “But
why? Who should wish the woman’ s death?”
“A good question,” W ylie said shortly . “However , I can
assure you that it wasn’ t I.”
Jamie gave him a long stare of assessment.
“A ye, m aybe,” he said. “If not, though—how came ye to the
shed last night? What business might ye have there, save
perhaps to look upon the face of your victim?”
“ My  victim!” W ylie jerked bolt upright, stif f with renewed
outrage. “It was not I in that sh ed, red to the elbow with the
woman’ s gore and snatching bits of bone and of fal!” He
snapped his head to the side, glaring up at me.
“My victim, indeed! It is a cap ital crime to defile a body ,
Mrs. Fraser . And I have heard things—oh, yes, I have heard
things about you! I put it to y ou that it is you  w ho did the
woman to death, for the purpose of obtaining—”His words ended in a gur gle, as Jamie’ s hand jerked his
shirtfront tight and twisted it ha rd about his neck. He punched
W ylie in  the stomach, hard, an d the young man doubled up,
coughed, and spewed cof fee, bile, and a few more disagreeable
substances all over the floor , his knees, and Jamie.
I sighed wearily . The briefly warming ef fects of the
discussion had faded, and I was feeling cold and mildly
disoriented again. The stench didn’ t help.
“That’ s not really helpful, you k now ,” I said reprovingly to
Jamie, who had released W ylie and was now hastily removing
his o wn outer g arments. “Not that I don’ t appreciate the vote
of confidence.”
“Oh, aye ,” he said, voice muf fled in the shirt as he pulled it
over his head. He popped out, glaring at me, and dropped the
shirt on the floo r with a splat. “D’ye think I’m going to sit idle
and let this popinjay insult ye?”
“I don’ t suppose  he’ll do it again,” Roger said. He stood and
bent over W ylie, who was still d oubled up on his stool, rather
green in the fac e. Roger glanced back over his shoulder at
Jamie.
“Is he right, th ough? About it being a capital crime to
tamper with a body?”
“I d inna ken,” Jamie said, rather shortly . Stripped to the
waist, st ained w ith blood and vo mit, and with his red hair wild
in the lantern light, he looked a far cry from the polished
gentleman who had gone of f to play whist.
“It scarcely matters,” he added, “as he isna going to tell
anyone about it. Because if he d oes, I shall cut him like a stirk
and feed  both his ballocks and his lying tongue to the pigs.”
He t ouched the hilt of his dirk, a s though assuring himself that
it was handy if wanted.
“But I am sure ye dinna mean to make any such unfounded
accusations reg arding my wife, do ye … sir?” he said to
W ylie, with excessive politeness.I wa s not surpr ised to see Phillip W ylie shake his head,
evidently still incapable of speech. Jamie made a noise of grim
satisfaction and stooped to pick  up the cloak he had dropped
earlier .
Feeling rather weak-kneed after this latest exhibition of the
male sense of honor , I sat down on the bucket.
“All right,” I said, and pushed back a strand of hair . “Fine.
If we’ve got all that settled, then … where were we?”
“Betty’ s murder ,” Roger prompted. “W e don’ t know who,
we don’ t know when, and we don’ t know why—though for the
sake of ar gume nt, might I sug gest we assume that no one
amongst the present company had anything to do with it?”
“V erra well.” Jamie dismissed murder with a brusque
gesture and sat down. “What about Stephen Bonnet?”
Roger ’ s express ion, hitherto one of interest, darkened at
that.
“A ye, what about him? Is he involved in this business?”
“Not in the mur der , perhaps—but my aunt and her husband
were ass aulted i n their chamber last evening by two villains.
One of whom was an Irishman.” Jamie wrapped his cloak
about hi s bare shoulders, bending a sinister glance on Phillip
W ylie, who had recovered suf ficiently to sit up.
“I re peat,” he said coldly , han ds still pressed against his
stomach, “that I have no acquain tance with a gentleman of that
name, whether Irishman or Hottentot.”
“Stephen Bonnet is not a gentleman,” Roger said. The
words were mild enough, but carried an undertone that made
W ylie glance up at him.
“I do not know  the fellow ,” he said firmly . He took a
shallow breath by way of experiment, and finding it bearable,
breathed deeper .  “Why do you suppose that the Irishman who
committed the outrage upon Mr . and Mrs. Innes should be this
Bonnet? Did he leave his card, perchance?”I l aughe d, surprising myself. In spite of everything, I had to
admit to a certa in amount of respect for Phillip W ylie. Held
captive, battered, threatened, do used with cof fee, and deprived
of h is wig, he retained a good deal more dignity than would
most men in his situation.
Jamie glanced at me, then back at W ylie. I thought the
corner of his mouth twitched, but it was impossible to tell in
the dim light.
“No,” he said. “I do  cl aim some acq uaintance with Stephen
Bonnet, who is a felon, a degenerate, and a thief. And I saw
the man with ye, sir , when ye happened upon my wife and
myself at the shed.”
“Y es,” I said. “I  saw him, too—standing right behind you.
And what were you doing th ere, anyway?” I asked, this
question suddenly occurring to me.
W ylie’ s eyes had widened at Jamie’ s accusation. At my
statement, he blinked. He took a nother deep breath and looked
down, ru bbing h is knuckles beneath his nose. Then he looked
up at Jamie, the bluster gone.
“I do not know him,” he said q uietly . “I had some thought
that I was follo wed, but, glancing behind me, I saw no one,
and so paid it n o great mind. When I … saw what lay within
the shed”—his eyes flicked tow ard me, but would not quite
meet my  own—”I was too much shocked to give heed to aught
but what lay before my eyes.”
That, I could believe.
W ylie lifted his shoulders, and let them fall.
“If t his Bonnet w as indeed behind me, then I must take your
word fo r it, sir . And yet I assure  you that he was not there by
my doing, nor with my recognition.”
Jamie an d Roger exchanged glances, but they could hear the
ring of truth in W ylie’ s words, just as I could. There was a
brief sile nce, in which I could hear the horses moving in their
stalls. They were no longer agit ated, but were getting restive,
anticipating food. Dawn light was filtering through the cracksbeneath the eaves, a soft, smok y radiance that leached the air
inside the stable of all color , and  yet revealed the dim outlines
of harness hanging on the wall, pitchforks and shovels
standing in the corner .
“The grooms will be coming so on.” Jamie stirred and drew
breath, drawing up his shoulders in a half-shrug. He glanced
back at W ylie.
“V erra well, sir . I accept your word as a gentleman.”
“Do you? I am flattered.”
“Still,” Jamie went on, pointedly ignoring the sarcasm, “I
should like to know what it was that brought ye to the shed last
night.”
W ylie had half-risen from his seat. At this, he hesitated, then
slowly sat again. He blinked onc e or twice, as though thinking,
then sighed, giving up.
“Lucas,” he said simply . He didn’ t look up, but kept his eyes
fixed on  his hands, hanging lim p between his thighs. “I was
there, th e night he was foaled. I raised him, broke him to the
saddle, trained him.” He swallowed once; I saw the tremor
move beneath the frill at his neck. “I came to the stable to have
a few moments alone with him … to bid him farewell.”
For the first tim e, Jamie’ s face lost the shadow of dislike
that it bore whenever he looked at W ylie. He breathed deep,
and nodded slightly .
“A ye, I see,” he said quietly . “And then?”
W ylie straightened a little.
“When I left th e stable, I thought I heard voices near the
wall of the kitchen garden. An d when I came nearer to see
what might be afoot, I saw light shining through the cracks of
the shed.” He s hrugged. “I opened the door . And you know
better than I what happened then, Mr . Fraser .”
Jamie ru bbed a hand hard over h is face, then shook his head
hard.“A ye,” h e said. “I do. I went fo r Bonnet, and ye got in my
way .”
“Y ou attacked me,” W ylie said c oldly . He hitched the ruined
coat higher up o n his shoulders. “I defended myself, as I had
every right to do . And then you and your son-in-law seized me
between you, frog-marched me in there”—he jerked his chin
at the box stall  behind him—”and held me captive half the
night!”
Roger cleared his throat. So did Jamie, though with more
dour intent.
“A ye, well,” he said. “W e willn a ar gue about it.” He sighed
and stood back, gesturing to W ylie that he might go. “I
suppose ye didna see in which direction Bonnet fled?”
“Oh, ye s. Though I did not know his name, of course. I
expect he is well beyond reach by now ,” W ylie said. There
was an odd no te in his voice ; something like satisfaction.
Jamie turned sharply .
“What d’ye mean?”
“Lucas.” W ylie nodded down the dim aisle of the stable,
toward t he shad ows at the farth er end. “His stall is at the far
end. I know his voice well, the sound of his movement. And I
have no t heard him this mornin g. Bonnet—if that was who it
was—fled toward the stable.”
Before W ylie had finished talking, Jamie had seized the
lantern and was striding down the stable. Horses thrust
inquiring noses over their stall doors as he passed, snorting
and whu f fling in curiosity—but no black nose appeared at the
end of the row , no black mane floated out in joyous greeting.
The rest of us hastened after him, leaning to see past him as he
held the lantern high.
The yellow light shone on empty straw .
W e stoo d silent for a long moment, looking. Then Phillip
W ylie sighed and drew himself up.“If I no longer have him, Mr . Fraser—neither do you.” His
eyes rested on me, then, darkly ironic. “But I wish you joy of
your wife.”
He turned and walked away , stockings sagging, the red
heels of his shoes winking in the growing light.
OUTSIDE, dawn was breaking,  still and lovely . Only the river
seemed to move, the spreadin g light flashing silver on its
current beyond the trees.
Roger had gone of f to the house, yawning, but Jamie and I
lingered by the paddock. People would be stirring within
minutes; there would be more questions, speculations, talk.
Neither one of us wanted any more talk; not now .
At last, Jamie put his arm abou t my shoulders, and with an
air of decision, turned away from the house. I didn’ t know
where he was going, and didn’ t much care, though I did hope I
could lie down when we got there.
W e passed the smithy , where a small, sleepy-looking boy
was blowing up the for ge with a pair of bellows, making red
sparks float and flash like fireflies in the shadows. Past the
outbuildings, aro und a corner , a nd then we were in front of a
nondescript shed with a lar ge double door . Jamie lifted the
latch and swung one door open a bit, beckoning me inside.
“I canna think why I never thought of this place,” he said,
“when I was looking for a spot to be private.”
W e were in the carriage shed. A wagon and a small buggy
stood in the sh adows, as did Jocasta’ s phaeton. An open
carriage like a la r ge sleigh on tw o wheels, it had a bench seat
with blu e velve t squabs, and a  scroll-like singletree like the
prow of a ship. Jamie picked me up by the waist and swung
me in, then clam bered up after me. There was a buf falo robe
lying across the squabs; he pulled this of f and spread it on the
floor of the pha eton. There was just room for two people to
curl up there, if they didn’ t mind lying close together .
“Come on, Sassenach,” he said, sinking to his knees.
“Whatever comes next … it can wait.”I qu ite agreed. Though on the ver ge of unconsciousness, I
couldn’ t help drowsily asking, “ Y our aunt … do you trust her?
What she said, about the gold and all?”
“Oh, aye, of course I do,” he mumbled in my ear . His arm
was hea vy where it lay over my waist. “At least as far as I
could throw her .”55
DEDUCTIONS
A T LAST FORCED FROM OUR REFUGE by thirst and
hunger , we made our way out of  the carriage shed and past the
tactfully averted  eyes of the yard slaves, still busy clearing up
the d ebris from the wedding feast. At the edge of the lawn, I
saw Pha edre, co ming up from the mausoleum with her arms
full of plates and cups that had been left in the shrubbery . Her
face was  swollen and blotched with grief, and her eyes were
red, but she was not crying.
She saw us, and stopped.
“Oh,” she said. “Miss Jo be lookin’ for you, Master Jamie.”
She spoke dully , as though the words had little meaning for
her , and  appeared to find nothing odd in our sudden
appearance or disheveled dress.
“Oh? A ye.” Jamie rubbed a ha nd over his face, nodding.
“A ye, I’ll go up to her .”
She nodded, and was turning to go when Jamie reached out
and touched her shoulder .
“I’m sorry for your trouble, lass,” he said quietly .
Sudden tears welled in her eye s and spilled over , but she
didn’ t sp eak. Sh e dropped a br ief curtsy , turned, and hurried
away , moving so fast that a knife fell from the stack of
crockery , bouncing on the grass behind her .
I sto oped and picked it up, the feel of the knife’ s handle
reminding me suddenly and viv idly of the blade I had used to
open her mother ’ s body . For a disorienting moment, I was no
longer on the la wn before the h ouse, but in the dark confines
of the shed, the scent of death he avy in the air and the proof of
murder gritty in my hand.Then reality readjusted itself, and the green lawn was
covered with flocks of doves and sparrows, foraging
peacefully for crumbs at the fee t of a marble goddess, bright
with sun.
Jamie was saying something.
“… . go and wash and rest a bit, Sassenach?”
“What? Oh … no, I’ll come with you.” I was suddenly
anxious to have this business d one with, and go home. I had
had enough society for the moment.
 
WE FOUND JOCAST A, Dun can, Roger , and Brianna all
together in Jocasta’ s sitting room, digging into what looked
like a substantial, if very late, b reakfast. Brianna cast a sharp
look at Jamie’ s r uined clothes, but said nothing, and went back
to sipping tea, her eyebrows still raised. She and Jocasta both
wore dressing gowns, and while Roger and Duncan were
dressed, they looked pale and s cruf fy after the adventures of
the nigh t. Neither had shaved, an d Duncan sported a lar ge blue
bruise o n the side of his face where he had hit the hearthstone
in falling, but he seemed otherwise all right.
I assume d that Roger had told everyone about our tete-a-tete
with Phillip W ylie, and the disappearance of Lucas. At least no
one asked questions. Duncan sil ently shoved a platter of bacon
in Jamie’ s direction, and there was no sound for a bit save the
musical tinkling of cutlery on plates and the sloshing noises of
tea being drunk.
At l ast, replete and feeling som ewhat restored, we sat back
and beg an hesitantly to discuss the events of the day—and
night—before. So much had happened that I thought perhaps it
might b e best to try to reconstr uct events in a logical sort of
way . I said as much, and while Jamie’ s mouth twitched in an
annoying manner that suggested he found the notion of logic
incompatible with me personally , I ignored this and firmly
called the meeting to order .
“It begins with Betty , don’ t you think?”“Whether it does or not, I suppose that’ s as good a starting
point as any , Sassenach,” Jamie agreed.
Brianna finished buttering a final slice of toast, looking
amused.
“Carry on, Miss Marple,” she s aid, waving it at me before
taking a  bite. Roger made a brief choking noise, but I ignored
that, too, with dignity .
“Fine. N ow , I thought Betty was  likely drugged when I saw
her , but  since Dr . Fentiman stopped me examining her , I
couldn’ t be positive. But we are  reasonably sure that Betty did
drink dr ugged punch, is that rig ht?” I looked round the circle
of faces, and both Bree and Jamie nodded, adopting solemn
expressions.
“A ye, I tasted something  in the cup that wasna liquor ,”
Jamie said.
“And I talked to  the house slav es after I left Da,” Brianna
added, leaning forward. “T wo of the women admitted that
Betty tipples—tippled—from the dregs of drinks at parties, but
both of them insisted she was no more than what they called
‘cheerful’ when  she helped serve rum punch in the drawing
room.”
“And I was in the drawing room then, with Seamus Hanlon
and his musicians,” Roger confi rmed. He glanced at Bree and
squeezed her knee gently . “I saw Ulysses make the punch
himself—that was the first time during the day that you made
it, Ulysses?”
All heads swiveled toward the butler , who stood closed-
faced behind Jocasta’ s chair , his neat wig and pressed livery a
silent reproach to the general air of exhausted dishevelment.
“No, the second,” he said softly . “The first was all drunk at
breakfast.” His eyes were alert, if bloodshot, but the rest of his
face might have been chiseled from gray granite. The
household and its servants wer e his char ge, and it was clear
that he felt recen t events to be a mortifying personal reproach
to his stewardship.“Right.” Roger turned back toward me, rubbing a hand over
his stubbled face. He might h ave snatched a nap since the
confrontation with W ylie in the stable, but he didn’ t look it.
“I didn’ t take any notice of Betty myself, but the point is, I
think I would  surely have noticed, if she were drunk and
reeling a t that point. So would Ulysses, I expect.” He glanced
over his shoulder for confirmation, and the butler nodded,
reluctantly .
“Lieutentant W olf f was  d runk and reel ing,” Roger added.
“Everyone noticed that—they all remarked how early it was
for anyone to be in that condition.”
Jocasta made a rude noise, and Duncan bent his head,
hiding a smile.
“The point being,” Jamie summed up neatly , “that the
second l ot of rum punch was ser ved out just past midday , and I
found th e woma n flat on her back in the dung heap, steamin’
with drin k and a punch cup besi de her , nay more than an hour
later . I’ll  no say it couldna be do ne, but it would be quick work
to get mortal in that span of time, especially if it was all done
wi’ dregs.”
“So we assume that she was in deed drugged,” I said. “The
most likely substance being laudanum. W as there some
available in the stillroom here?”
Jocasta caught the lift of my v oice and knew the question
was add ressed to her; she straig htened up in her chair , tucking
a w isp of white hair back under her ribboned cap. She seemed
to have recovered nicely from the night before.
“Oh, aye. But that’ s naught to go by ,” she objected.
“Anyone might ha’ brought it; it’ s no sae hard to come by , and
ye h ave the pric e. I ken at least two women among the guests
who tak e the stuf f regular . I daresay they’d have brought a bit
with them.”
I would have loved to know which of Jocasta’ s
acquaintances were opium addicts, and how she knew , but
dismissed that point, moving on to the next.“W ell, w herever the laudanum—for the sake of ar gument—
came fro m, it apparently ended up inside Betty .” I turned to
Jamie. “Now , you said that it oc curred to you when you found
her tha t she might have dr unk something—drugged or
poisonous—intended for someone else.”
He nodded, following me closely .
“A ye, for why w ould someone seek to harm or kill a slave?”
“I d on’ t know why , but someone did  kill  her ,” Brianna
interrupted, a definite edge in her voice. “I can’ t see how she
could have eaten ground glass meant for someone else, can
you?”
“Don’ t rush me! I’m trying to  be logical.” I frowned at
Bree, who made a rude noise akin to Jocasta’ s, but not as loud.
“No,” I went o n, “I don’ t think she can have taken the
ground g lass by accident, but I don’ t know when she did  take
it. Almo st certainly , it was some time after you and Jamie took
her up to the attic, though, and after Dr . Fentiman saw her the
first time.”
Fentiman’ s emetics and pur gatives would have caused
extensive bleeding, had Betty already ingested the glass—as
indeed they did, when he re turned to treat her renewed
complaints of internal distress toward dawn.
“I think you’re r ight,” I told Bri anna, “but just to be tidy—
when yo u went to look round, Roger , you didn’ t find any of
the guests who looked as though they might be drugged?”
He shoo k his head, dark brows drawn together , as though
the sunl ight bothered him. I w asn’ t surprised if he had a
headache; the cotton-wool feeling had turned into a throbbing
inside my own skull.
“No,” he said, a nd dug a knuckle hard between his brows.
“There were at least twenty wh o were beginning to stagger a
bit, but they all seemed just legitimately drunk.”
“What about Lieutenant W olf f?” Duncan asked at this point,
to everyone’ s surprise. He blush ed slightly , seeing everyone’ seyes on him, but doggedly pursued his point.
“ A Smeoraich  said the man was drunk and reeling in the
drawing room. Might he have taken the laudanum, or whatever
it was, drunk the half, and given the rest to the slave there?”
“I don’ t know ,” I said dubiously . “If ever I saw anyone who
could have achieved intoxication  within an hour , purely on the
basis of straight alcohol …”
“When I went to check the guests, the Lieutenant was
propped up against the wall of the mausoleum with a bottle in
his fist,” Roger said. “Mostly incoherent, but still conscious.”
“A ye, h e fell down in the shrubbery later ,” Jamie put in,
looking dubious. “I saw him, in  the afternoon. He didna look
like yon slave woman, though, only drunk.”
“The tim ing is about right, though,” I said thoughtfully . “So
it’ s possible, at least. Did anyone see the Lieutenant later in the
day?”
“Y es,” Ulysses said, causing everyone to swivel round to
look at him agai n. “He came into the house during the supper ,
asked me to fin d him a boat at once, and left by water . Still
very drunk,” he added precisely , “but lucid.”
Jocasta made a small puf fing  sound with her lips, and
muttered, “Lucid, forbye,” under her breath. She massaged her
temples with both forefingers; evidently she had a headache,
too.
“I suppo se that puts the Lieutenant out as a suspect? Or is
the fact that he left so suddenly suspicious by itself?” Brianna,
the only  person present who seemed not  to have a headache,
dropped several lumps of sugar into her tea and stirred it
vigorously . Jamie shut his eyes, wincing at the noise.
“Are ye  no overlooking something?” Jocasta had been
following all the ar guments intently , a slight frown of
concentration on her face. Now she leaned forward, stretching
out her hand to ward the low table with its breakfast things.
She tapp ed her fingers lightly here and there to locate what she
wanted, then picked up a small silver cup.“Y e sho wed me the cup from which Betty drank, Nephew ,”
she said to Jami e, holding out th e one in her hand. “It was like
this, aye?”
The cup was sterling silver , and brand-new , the incised
design barely showing. Later , when the metal began to acquire
a patina,  black tarnish would settle into the lines of the etching
and cause it to stand out, but for the moment, the capital letter
“I” a nd the sma ll fish that swam  around it were almost lost in
the gleam of light of f the metal.
“A ye, it was one like that, Aunt,” Jamie replied, touching
the hand that held the cup. “Brianna says it was one of a set?”
“It was.  I gave them to Duncan in the morning of our
wedding day , as a bride-gift.” She set down the cup, but laid
her long fingers across the top of it. “W e drank from two of the
cups, Duncan and I, with our breakfast, but the other four
stayed u p here.” She waved a hand behind her , indicating the
small si deboard against the wall, where the platters of bacon
and fried eggs had been placed. Decorated plates were
propped upright along the back of the sideboard, interspersed
with a set of crystal sherry glasses. I counted; all six of the
silver fish cups were on the tab le now , filled with port, which
Jocasta appeared to like with breakfast. There was no
indication which of them had held the drugged liquor , though.
“Y e didna take any of these cups down to the drawing room
on the wedding day , Ulysses?” she asked.
“No, Madam.” He looked shocked at the thought. “Of
course not.”
She nodded, and turned her bli nd eyes toward Jamie, then
toward me.
“So ye see,” she said simply . “It was Duncan’ s cup.”
Duncan looked startled, then uneasy , as the implications of
what she had said sank in.
“No,” he said, sh aking his head. “Ach, no. Couldna be.” But
tiny dro plets of sweat had begun to form a dew across the
weathered skin of his jaw .“Did an yone of fer ye a drink day before yesterday , a
charaid ?” Jamie asked, leaning forward intently .
Duncan shrugged helplessly .
“A ye, everyone did!”
And of course t hey had. He was, after all, the bridegroom.
He had accepted none of the prof fered refreshment, though,
owing to the dig estive upset occasioned by his nerves. Nor had
he notic ed particularly whether any of the drinks on of fer had
been served in a silver cup.
“I was that distracted, Mac Dubh , I  shouldna hav e noticed if
anyone had been of fering me  a live snake in his hand.”
Ulysses plucked  a linen napkin from the tray and of fered it
unobtrusively . Blindly , Duncan took it and wiped his face.
“So …  you think that someone was trying to harm
Duncan ?” The astonishment in Roger ’ s voice might not have
been strictly flattering, but Du ncan appeared not to take it
amiss.
“But why?” he said, bewildered. “Who could hate me ?”
Jamie ch uckled under his breath, and the tension round the
table relaxed slightly . It was true; while Duncan was
intelligent and competent, he was of so modest a disposition
that it was impossible to conc eive of his having of fended
anyone, let alone driven them into a murderous frenzy .
“W ell, a charaid ,” Jamie said tactfully , “it might not just be
personal, ken?” He caught my eye, and made a wry grimace.
More th an one attempt had be en made on his own life, for
reasons having to do only w ith who he was, rather than
anything he had done. Not that people hadn’ t tried to kill him
occasionally for things he’d done, as well.
Jocasta appeared to have been thinking along the same
lines.
“Indeed,” she said. “I have been  thinking, myself. Do ye not
recall, nephew , what happened at the Gathering?”
Jamie lifted one eyebrow , and picked up a cup of tea.“A good  many things happened there, Aunt,” he said. “But I
take it ye mean what happened with Father Kenneth?”
“I do.” She reac hed up a hand automatically , as Ulysses set
a fre sh cup into it. “Did ye not tell me that yon Lillywhite said
something about the priest being prevented from performing
ceremonials?”
Jamie nodded, closing his eyes b riefly as he took a mouthful
of tea.
“A ye, he  did. So, ye think it was maybe your marriage with
Duncan he meant? That was the ‘ceremonial’ to be
prevented?”
My headache was growing worse. I pressed my fingers
between my brows; they were warm from the teacup, and the
heat felt good on my skin.
“W ait j ust one minute,” I said. “Are you saying that
someone wanted to prevent your aunt’ s marriage to Duncan,
and succeeded in doing so at th e Gathering, but then couldn’ t
think of  any way of preventing it now , and so tried to murder
Duncan, in order to stop it?” My own voice echoed the
astonishment on Duncan’ s features.
“I’m no saying s o, myself,” Jamie said, eyeing Jocasta with
interest, “but I gather that my aunt is suggesting as much.”
“I am,” she said calmly . She drank of f her tea, and set down
the cup with a sigh. “I dinna wish to rate myself too high,
nephew , but the fact is that I hav e been courted by this one and
that one, ever si nce Hector died. River Run is a rich property ,
and I am an auld woman.”
There was a moment’ s silence, as everyone absorbed that.
Duncan’ s face reflected an uneasy horror .
“But—” he said, stuttering sli ghtly , “but—but—if it was
that, Mac Dubh , why wait?”
“W ait?”
“A ye.” He looked around the table, seeking understanding.
“See you, if so meone meant to stop the marriage at theGathering, well  and good. But  it’ s been four months since
then, an d no one’ s lifted a hand against me. I mostly ride
alone; ‘twould have been a simp le matter , surely , to lay for me
on the road as I went about my business, and put a bullet
through my head.” He spoke matter -of-factly , but I saw a small
shiver pass through Jocasta at the notion.
“So why wait until almost the hour of the wedding itself,
and in the presence of hundreds of people? A ye, well, it’ s a
point, Duncan,” Jamie admitted.
Roger had been following all this, elbows propped on his
knees, chin resting in his hands. He straightened up at this.
“One reason I can think of,” he said. “The priest.”
Everyone stared at him, eyebrows raised.
“The pri est was here,” he expla ined. “See, if it’ s River Run
that’ s behind all this, then it isn’ t only a matter of getting
Duncan out of the way . Kill h im, and our murderer is right
back where he started—Jocasta’ s not married to Duncan, but
she isn’ t married to him , either , and no way to force the issue.
“But,” R oger rai sed a finger , “if  the priest is here, and all set
to pe rform a priv ate ceremony … then it’ s simple. Kill Duncan
—in a manner that might suggest suicide or accident—and
then swoop up to Jocasta’ s s uite, and force the priest to
perform the marriage at gunpoint. The servants and guests are
all o ccupied with Duncan, no one to make objections or
interfere. There ’ s the bed to hand—” He nodded at the big
tester , visible through the doorway into the bedroom. “T ake
Jocasta straight there and consummate the marriage by force
… and Bob’ s your uncle.”
At this point, Roger caught sight of Jocasta’ s dropped jaw
and Dun can’ s stunned look, and it occurred to him that this
was not merely an interesting academic proposition. He
blushed crimson, and cleared his throat.
“Ah … I mean … it’ s been done.”
Jamie coughed, and cleared his own throat. It had been
done. H is own bloody-minded grandfather had begun hissocial ri se by forcibly wedding —and promptly bedding—the
elderly and wealthy dowager Lady Lovat.
“What?”  Br ianna swiveled round to stare at Roger ,
obviously appal led. “That’ s the most … but they couldn’ t get
away with something like that!”
“I expect they could, really ,” Roger said, almost
apologetically . “ See, hen, possession is a lot more than nine-
tenths o f the law when it comes to women. Marry a woman
and take her to bed, and she and all her property are yours,
whether she likes it or not. W ithout another male relative to
protest, it’ s not likely a court would do a thing.”
“But she does  have a male relative!” Brianna flipped a hand
toward Jamie— who did have a protest to make, but probably
not along the lines Brianna had expected.
“A ye, well, but. W itnesses,” he objected. “Y e canna do
something like that, without ye have a witness to say it was a
valid marriage.” He cleared his throat again, and Ulysses
reached for the teapot.
Old Simon had had witnesses; two of his friends, plus the
two atte ndants of the dowager . O ne of whom had later become
Jamie’ s grandmother , though I did trust less force had been
involved in that transaction.
“I can’ t see that  that’ s a dif ficul ty ,” I said, brushing crumbs
of f my bosom. “Obviously , this wasn’ t a one-man show .
Whoever the intending bridegroom is—and mind, we don’ t
even know there is one, but for the sake of ar gument—
anyway , whoever he is, if he exists, plainly he has
accomplices. Randall Lillywhite, for one.”
“Who wasna here,” Jamie reminded me.
“Hm. That’ s true,” I admitted. “But still, the principle
holds.”
“Y es,” R oger said stubbornly , “and if he does  exis t, th en the
chief suspect is Lieutenant W olf f, isn’ t he? Everyone knows
he’ s ma de more than one try to marry Jocasta. And he was
here.”“But pie-eyed,” Jamie added, dubiously .
“Or not. As I said, Seamus and his boys were surprised that
anyone could be that drunk so early on, but what if it was a
sham?” Roger glanced round the table, one eyebrow lifted.
“If he were onl y pretending to be reeling drunk, no one
would pay attention to him or treat him later as a suspect, and
yet he could manage to be in position to poison a cup of
punch, g ive it to Betty with ins tructions to give it to Duncan,
then slip away and hang about, ready to nip upstairs the
moment word came that Duncan had collapsed. And if Betty
then of fe red it to Duncan, who refused it—well, there she was,
with a full cup of fresh rum punch in her hand.”
He shrugged.
“Who could blame her for stea ling away into the kitchen
garden to enjoy it?”
Jocasta and Ulysses snorted simultaneously , making it
reasonably clear what they thought of the blameworthiness of
Betty’ s action. Roger coughed and hurried on with his
analysis.
“Right. W ell. But the dose didn’ t kill Betty . Either the
murderer miscalculated or … ” Another bright thought
occurred to Roger . “Perhaps he  didn’ t intend the drug to kill
Duncan. Maybe  he only meant to render him unconscious, and
then tip him qui etly into the river . That would have been even
better . Y e can’ t swim, can you?” he asked, turning to Duncan,
who sho ok his head in a dazed sort of way . His one hand rose,
mechanically massaging the stump of his missing arm.
“A ye. So a nice drowning would have passed for accident,
no worry .” Roger rubbed his hands together , looking pleased.
“But then it al l went wrong, because the maid drank the
drugged punch, not Duncan. And that’ s  why she was killed!”
“Why?” Jocasta was looking quite as dazed as Duncan.
“Because she could identify the man who’d given her the
cup,” Jamie put in. He nodded, lounging thoughtfully back in
his chair . “And she would have, the minute folk started in onher abou t it. A ye, that’ s sense. But of course he couldna make
away with her b y violent means; the risk of being seen coming
or going to the attic was too great.”
Roger nodded approval at this quick appreciation.
“A ye. B ut it would have been no great trick to get your
hands on ground glass—how many goblets and tumblers were
floating through this place during the day? Drop one on the
bricks and grind the shards under your heel, and there ye are.”
Even that might not have been  necessary; there had been
shattered glass all over the paths and the terrace, after the post-
wedding celebrations. I had dropped one glass myself, when
surprised by Phillip W ylie.
I turned to address Ulysses.
“There’ s still the problem of how the ground glass was
administered. D o you know what Betty was given to eat or
drink, Ulysses?”
A fr own rippled over the butler ’ s face, like a stone thrown
into dark water .
“Dr . Fen timan ordered her a syllabub,” he said slowly . “And
a bit  of porridge, if she were awake enough to swallow . I made
up the syllabub myself, and gave  it to Mariah to take up to her .
I ga ve t he order for porridge to the cook, but I do not know
whether Betty ate it, or who might have carried it.”
“Hmm.” Jocasta pursed her lips, frowning. “The cookhouse
would b e madne ss. And with so  many folk about … well, we
can ask Mariah and the others, but I shouldna be surprised if
they dinna recall even carrying the dishes, let alone someone
tampering with them. It would t ake nay more than a moment,
ken; dist ract the  girl, whisk in the glass …” She waved a hand,
indicating the scandalous ease with which murder could be
committed.
“Or som eone could have gone up to the attic under the
pretext of seeing how she was , and given her something to
drink, with the glass in it the n,” I suggested. “A syllabub
would be perfect. People were coming and going, but Bettywas alone up th ere for long stretches, between Dr . Fentiman’ s
visit, an d the time the other sla ves came to bed. It would be
quite possible for someone to go up there unseen.”
“V ery n ice, Inspector Lestrade,” Brianna said to Roger ,
sotto voce . “But there’ s no proof, is there?”
Jocasta and Duncan were sitting  side by side, rigid as a pair
of T oby jugs, ca refully not facing each other . At this, Jocasta
took a deep and audible breath , obviously forcing herself to
relax.
“T rue,” she said. “There’ s not. Y e dinna recall Betty
of fering you a cup of punch, a dhuine ?”
Duncan gnawed fiercely on his moustache for a moment,
concentrating, but then shook his head.
“She might have … a bhean . But she might not, too.”
“W ell, then.”
Everyone fell silent for a moment, during which Ulysses
moved s ilently round the table, clearing things away . At last
Jamie gave a deep sigh and straightened up.
“W ell, so. Then there’ s what h appened last night. W e are
agreed that the I rishman who entered your chamber , Aunt, was
Stephen Bonnet?”
Brianna’ s hand jerked, and the  cup of tea crashed to the
table.
“Who?” she said hoarsely . “Stephen Bonnet—here?”
Jamie glanced at me, frowning.
“I thought ye’d told her , Sassenach.”
“When?” I said, with some irritation. “I thought you’d  told
her ,” I said, turning to Roger , who merely shrugged, stone-
faced. Ulysses had swooped down with a cloth and was
blotting up the tea. Bree was white-faced, but had regained her
self-possession.
“Never mind,” she said. “He was here? Last night?”“A ye, he was,” Jamie said reluctantly . “I saw him.”
“So he was the thief who came after the gold—or one of
them?” Brianna reached for one  of the silver cups of port and
drank it  of f as though it were water . Ulysses blinked, but
hastened to refill the cup from the decanter .
“It wou ld seem so.” Roger reached for a fresh scone,
carefully avoiding Brianna’ s eyes.
“How did he fin d out about the gold, Aunt?” Jamie leaned
back in his chair , eyes half-closed in concentration.
Jocasta gave a s mall snort, and held out her hand. Ulysses,
accustomed to her needs, put a piece of buttered toast into it.
“Hector Cameron told someon e; my brother Dougal told
someone; or the third man told someone. And knowing them
as I did,  I should lay odds it wasna either Hector nor Dougal.”
She shrugged and took a bite of toast.
“But I’ll tell ye one thing,” she added, swallowing. “The
second m an in my room, the on e who reeked of drink. I said
he d idna speak, aye? W ell, tha t’ s plain enough, no? He was
someone I ken, whose voice I should have known, if he
spoke.”
“Lieutenant W olf f?” Roger suggested.
Jamie nodded, a crease forming between his brows.
“Who b etter than the navy , to  find a pirate when one’ s
wanted, aye?”
“ W ould  one want a pirate?” Brianna murmured. The port
had restored her composure, but she was still pale.
“A ye,” J amie said, paying little attention to her . “No small
undertaking, ten  thousand pound in gold. It would take more
than one  man to deal with such a sum—Louis of France and
Charles Stuart kent that much; they sent six to deal with thirty
thousand.” Little wonder , then, if whoever learned of the gold
had enlisted the help of Stephen Bonnet—a well-known
smuggler and pirate, and one with not only the means of
transport but the connections to dispose of the gold.“A boat, ” I said slowly . “The Lieutenant left by boat, during
the s upper . Suppose that he wen t downriver , and met Stephen
Bonnet. They came back together , and waited for the
opportunity to sneak into the ho use and try to terrorize Jocasta
into telling them where the gold was.”
Jamie nodded.
“A ye, that could be. The Lieute nant has had dealings here
for years . Is it possible, Aunt, that he saw something that made
him sus pect ye had the gold here? Y e said Hector had three
bars; is any of it left?”
Jocasta’ s lips pressed tight, but after a moment’ s hesitation,
she gave a grudging nod.
“He would  kee p a lump of it on his desk, to weight his
papers. A ye, W olf f might have seen—but how would he have
kent what it was?”
“Perhaps he didn’ t at the time,” Brianna suggested, “but
then later heard about the Fren ch gold, and put two and two
together .”
There was a nod ding and murmuring at this. As a theory , it
fitted we ll enough. I didn’ t see quite how one would go about
proving it, though, and said so.
Jamie shrugged, and licked a smear of jam of f his knuckle.
“I shouldna think proving what’ s happened is so important,
Sassenach. It’ s maybe what comes next.” He looked at
Duncan, straight on.
“They’ll come back, a charaid ,” h e said quiet ly . “Y e ken
that, aye?”
Duncan nodded. He looked unhappy , but determined.
“A ye, I ken.” He  reached out a hand and took Jocasta’ s—the
first ges ture of the sort I had ever seen him make toward her .
“W e shall be ready , Mac Dubh .”
Jamie nodded, slowly .“I must go, Dun can. The planting willna wait. But I shall
send word to those I ken, to ha ve a watch of some sort kept
upon Lieutenant W olf f.”
Jocasta had sat s ilent, her hand unmoving in Duncan’ s. She
sat up taller in her chair at this.
“And the Irishman?” she said. Her other hand rubbed slowly
across h er knee, pressing lightly with the heel of her hand,
where the knife blade had cut.
Jamie exchanged a glance with Duncan, then with me.
“He’ll come back,” he said, grim certainty in his voice.
I w as looking at Brianna as he said it. Her face was calm,
but I was her mother , and I saw the fear move in her eyes, like
a sn ake through water . Stephen Bonnet, I thought, with a
sinking heart, was already back.
 
WE LEFT NEXT DA Y for the mountains. W e were no more
than fiv e miles on our journey , when I caught the sound of
hoofbeats on the road behind us, and saw a flash of scarlet,
through the spring-green of the chestnut trees.
It was Major M acDonald, and the look of delight upon his
face as he spurred toward us told me all I needed to know .
“Oh, bloody hell !” I said.
The note bore T ryon’ s scarlet se al, bloodred as the Major ’ s
coat.
“It came this morning to Greenoaks,” the Major said,
reining u p to watch as Jamie bro ke the seal. “I of fered to bring
it, as I was bou nd this way , in  any case.” He knew already
what the note c ontained; Farqu ard Campbell would already
have opened his.
I watche d Jamie’ s face as he read. His expression didn’ t
change. He finished reading, and handed me the note.
 19th Mar ch, 1771
 
T o the Commanding Officers of the Militia:
 
Sirs:
 
I Y ester day determined by Consent of His Majesty’ s Council
to mar ch with a Body of For ces taken fr om several Militia
Regiments, into the Settlements of the Insur gents to r educe
them to Obedience, who by their Rebellious Acts and
Declarations h ave set the Government at defiance and
interrupted the Course of Justice by obstructing, overturning
and shu tting up the Courts of Law . That some of your
Regiment ther efo r e may have a Shar e in the Honor of serving
their Country in this important Service, I am to r equir e you to
make a choice of thirty men, w ho shall join the Body of my
For ce in this Endeavor .
It is not intended to move the T r oops befor e the twentieth of
next Mo nth befo r e which time yo u shall be informed of the day
you ar e to assemble your Men, t he time of mar ch and the Road
you ar e to take.
It is  r ecommended as a Christia n Duty incumbent on every
Planter that r emains at Home, to take car e of, and assist to the
utmost of his Ab ilities the Families of those Men who go on
this Service that neither their Families nor plantations may
suffer w hile they ar e employed o n a Service wher e the Inter est
of the whole is concerned.
For the Expenditur es or der ed on this Expedition I shall give
printed W arrants payable to the Bear ers, These W arrants will
become negotiable, until the T r easury can pay them out of the
contingent Fund in case ther e is not a sufficiency of Money in
the T r easury to answer the necessary Services of this
Expedition. 
 
I am &c. &c.,
 W illiam T ryon  
 
Had Hermon Husband and James Hunter known, when they
left Rive r Run? I thought they m ust. And the Major , of course,
was bound for New Bern now , to of fer his services to the
Governor . His boots were filmed with the dust of his ride, but
the hilt of his sword gleamed in the sun.
“Bloody , bloody , fucking hell,” I said softly , again, with
emphasis. Major MacDonald blinked. Jamie glanced at me,
and the corner of his mouth twitched up.
“A ye, well,” he said. “Nearly a  month. Just time to get the
barley in.”P AR T S IX
The W ar of the Regulation56
“… AND FIGHT THEM, SA YING THEY HAD MEN
ENOUGH T O KILL THEM,
 WE CAN KILL THEM”
Deposition of W aightstill A very , W itness
 North Car olina
 Mecklenbur g County
 
W aightstill A ver y T estifieth and saith that on the sixth Day
of M ar ch Instant about nine or T en OClock in the Morning He
this Deponent was at the now d welling house of one Hudgins
who lives at the lower end of the long Island.
And He this De ponent ther e saw Thirty or Forty of those
People who style themselves Regulators, and was then and
ther e arr ested and for ceably d etained a prisoner by one of
them (who said his Name was J ames McQuiston) in the Name
of them  all, and that soon after one James Graham (or
Grimes) spoke to this Deponen t these W or ds “Y ou ar e now a
Prisoner and Y ou must not go any wher e without a Guar d.”
immediately after adding that “Y ou must keep with Y our Guar d
and Y ou shan’ t be hurt.”
This Dep onent was then conducted under Guar d of two Men
to t he r egulating Camp (as th ey termed it) about a Mile
distant, wher e wer e many mor e persons of the same
Denomination a nd others came ther e some Hours after , in the
whole as this Deponent supposes and imagines about two
hundr ed and Thirty .
That fr om themselves He this Deponent learned the Names
of five of their Captains or lea ding Men then pr esent (V iz.,
Thomas Hamilt on and one ot her Hamilton, James Hunter ,
Joshua T eague one Gillespie and the afor esaid James Grimes
(or Gra ham). H e this Deponent hear d many of them whose
Names ar e to Him unknown say appr obrious Things againstthe Gov ernor , th e Judges of th e Superior Court, against the
House of Assembly and other  persons in Office. While a
surr ounding Cr owd wer e uttering Things still mor e
appr obrious the  said Thomas H amilton stood in the Midst and
spoke W or ds of the following T enor and purport (the Cr owd
still assenting to and affirming the T ruth of what was said):
“What B usiness has Maurice Moor e to be judge, He is no
Judge, he was not appointed by the King He nor Henderson
neither , They’ll neither of them h old Court. The Assembly have
gone and made a Riotous Ac t, and the people ar e mor e
inraged than ever , it was the best thing that could be for the
Country for now W e shall be fo r ced to kill all the Clerks and
Lawyers, and W e will kill them and I’ll be damned if they ar e
not put to Death. If they had no t made that Act W e might have
suffer ed some of them to live. A  Riotous Act! ther e never was
any such  Act in the Laws of England or any other Country but
France, they br ought it fr om F rance, and they’ll bring the
Inquisition.”
Many o f them said the Gove rnor was a Friend to the
Lawyers and the Assembly had worsted the Regulators in
making Laws for Fees. They shut Husband up in Gaol that He
might no t see their r oguish pr oceedings and then the Governor
and the Assembly made just such  Laws as the Lawyers wanted.
The Governor is a Friend to th e Lawyers, the Lawyers carry
on e very Thing, they appoint weak ignorant Justices of Peace
for their own purposes.
Ther e should be no Lawyers in  the pr ovince, they damned
themselves if ther e should. Fan ning was outlawed as of the
T wenty-Second of Mar ch and any Regulator that saw Him
after that T ime would kill him a nd some said they would not
wait for that, wi shed they could see him, and swor e they would
kill him befor e th ey r eturned if they could find him at Salisbury
—Some wished they could see Judge Moor e at Salisbury that
they might flog him, others th at they might kill him. One
Robert Thomson said Maurise Moor e was purjur ed and called
him by appr obrious Names as Rascal, Rogue, V illian,
Scoundral, etc. others assented to it.When News was br ought that Captain Rutherfor d at the
head of His Com pany was parading in the Str eets of Salisbury ,
this Deponent hear d Sundry of them ur ge very har d and
str enuously that the whole Body  of the Regulators then pr esent
should Mar ch into Salisbury with their Arms and fight them
saying T hey had Men enough to kill them, W e can kill them
W e’ll teach them to oppose Us.
 
T aken sworn to & Subscribed this eighth 
 Day of Mar ch 1771 befor e Me  
 
(signed) W aightstill A very  
 (witnessed) Wm. Harris, Justice of the Peace  
 
W illiam T ryon to General Thomas Gage
 North Car olina
 New Bern ye 19th Mar ch 1771
 
Sir ,
 
It was Y ester day  determined in His Majestys Council of this
Pr ovince to Raise a Body of For ces fr om the Militia Regiments
and Companies to Mar ch into the Settlements of the
Insur gents, who by their Rebellious Acts and Declarations
have set this Government at defiance.
As w e have few  Military Engines or implements in this
Country , I am to r equest your assistance in pr ocuring me for
this Service the Articles (cannon, shot, colours, drums, etc.)
listed her eby .
I in tend to beg in My Mar ch fr om this T own about the
T wentieth of next Month, and as semble the Militia as I mar ch
thr ough the Counties. My Plan i s to form fifteen Hundr ed Men,
though fr om the Spirit that now appears on the Side of
Government that Number may be considerably incr eased. 
 
I am with much Respect and Esteem
 Sir Y our Most Obedt. Servt.,
 Wm. T ryon57
NOW I LA Y ME DOWN T O SLEEP …
Fraser ’ s Ridge
 15 April, 1771
R OGER LA Y IN BED, listening for the intermittent whine of
an in visible mosquito that had s queezed past the hide covering
the cabin  window . Jem’ s cradle was covered by gauze netting,
but he and Brianna had no suc h shielding. If the damn thing
would just light on him, he’d g et it—but it seemed to circle
tirelessly above their bed, occasionally swooping down to sing
taunting little neeeee  son gs into his ear , before zooming of f
again into the dark.
He s hould have been tired enou gh to fall asleep in the face
of an assault by airborne squad rons of mosquitoes, after the
last few  days of frantic activ ity . T wo days of fast riding
through the mountain coves and ridges, spreading the word to
the nearer settlements, whose inhabitants would in turn alert
those militia members farther away . The spring planting had
been accomplished in record time, all the available men
spending the hours from dawn to dusk in the fields. His system
was still  char ged with adrenaline, and little jolts of it zapped
through mind and muscle, as though he’d been taking cof fee
intravenously .
He’d spe nt all day today helping to ready the farm for their
departure, and fragmented images of the round of chores
scrolled behind his closed lids whenever he shut his eyes.
Fence repair , hay hauling, a hasty excursion to the mill for the
bags of flour needed to feed the regiment on the march. Fixing
a split rim on t he wagon’ s wheel, splicing a broken harness
trace, h elping to catch the w hite sow , who had made an
abortive escape attempt from th e stable, wood-chopping, and
finally , a brisk hour ’ s digging just before supper so Clairecould plant her wee patch of yams and peanuts before they
left.
In spite of the hurry and labor , that dusk-lit digging had
been a welcome respite in the o r ganized frenzy of the day; the
thought of it made him pause  now , reliving it in hopes of
slowing his mind and calming himself enough to sleep.
It w as April, wa rm for the season, and Claire’ s garden was
rampant with growth: green spikes and sprouting leaves and
small brilliant flowers, climbing vines that twisted up the
palisades and opened silent white trumpets slowly above him
as he worked in the gathering twilight.
The sm ells of the plants and the fresh-turned earth rose
round him as the air cooled, strong as incense. The moths
came to the trumpet flowers, soft things drifting out of the
wood in mottled shades of whi te and gray and black. Clouds
of m idges and m osquitoes came too, drawn to his sweat, and
after them, the mosquito-hawks, dark fierce creatures with
narrow wings and furry bodies, who whirred through the
hollyhocks with the aggressive attitude of football hooligans.
He stretched long toes out against the weight of the quilts,
his leg just touching his wife’ s, and felt in memory the chunk
of th e spade, ha rd edge beneath his foot, and the satisfying
feeling of cracking earth and snapping roots as another
spadeful yielded , the black earth moist and veined with the
blind white rhizomes of wild g rass and the fugitive gleam of
earthworms writhing frantically out of sight.
A huge cecropia moth had flown past his head, lured by the
garden scents. Its pale brown wings were the size of his hand,
and marked with staring eye-spots, unearthly in their silent
beauty .
Who makes a gar den works with God.  That had been written
on the edge of the old copper sundial in the garden of the
manse in  Inverness where he had grown up. Ironic, in view of
the fact that the Reverend had neither time nor talent for
gardening, and the place was a  jungle of unmown grass and
ancient rosebushes run wild and leggy with neglect. He smiledat t he thought, and made hi s mental good-night to the
Reverend’ s shade.
Good-night, Dad. God bless you.
It had been a long time since he’d lost the habit of bidding
good-night in this fashion to a b rief list of family and friends;
the hangover of a childhood of nightly prayers that ended with
the usua l list of, “God bless Nana, and Grandpa Guy in
heaven, and my best friend Pete r , and Lillian the dog, and the
grocer ’ s cat …”
He hadn’ t done it in years, but a memory of the peace of
that sma ll ritual made him draw up a new list, now . Better than
counting sheep, he supposed—and he wanted the sense of
peace he remembered, more than he wanted sleep.
Good-night, Mrs. Graham,  h e thought, a nd smiled to
himself, summo ning a brief, vivid image of the Reverend’ s old
housekeeper , di pping her hand in a bowl and flicking water
onto a hot griddle, to see if the drops would dance. God bless.
The Rev erend, M rs. Graham, her granddaughter Fiona and
Fiona’ s husband Ernie … his p arents, though that was a pr o
forma  nod  toward tw o faceless shapes. Claire, up at the big
house, a nd, with a slight hesitati on, Jamie. Then his own small
family . He warmed at the thought of them.
Good ni ght, we e lad , he thought, turning his head in the
direction of the cradle where Jemmy slept. God bless.  And
Brianna.
He turned his h ead the other way , and opened his eyes,
seeing th e dark oval of her sleep ing face turned toward his, no
more than a fo ot away on the pillow . He eased himself as
quietly a s possible onto his sid e, and lay watching her . They
had let the fire g o out, since they would be leaving early in the
morning; it was so dark in the  room he could make out no
more of her features than the faint markings of brows and lips.
Brianna never lay wakeful. She rolled onto her back,
stretched and settled with a sigh of content, took three deep
breaths and was out like a light. Maybe exhaustion, maybe justthe blessings of good health and a clear conscience—but he
sometimes thoug ht it was eagerness to escape into that private
dreamscape of hers, that place where she roamed free at the
wheel of her car , hair snapping in the wind.
What w as she dreaming now? he wondered. He could feel
the faint warmth of her breath on his face.
Last night, I dr eamed I made love with Roger .  The memory
of that particular entry still rankled, hard as he’d tried to
dismiss it. He had been driftin g toward sleep, lulled by his
litany , b ut the memory of her dreambook pulled him back to
wakefulness. She had damn well better not be dreaming such a
thing now! Not after the time he’d just given her .
He c losed his ey es again, concentrating on the regular pulse
of h er breathing. His forehead was mere inches from hers.
Perhaps he could catch the echo of her dream, through the
bones of her skull? What he felt, though, was the echo of her
flesh, and the reverberations of their farewell, with all its
doubts and pleasures.
She and the lad would leave in the morning, too; their things
were pa cked and stood with his  own bundle beside the door .
Mr . W emyss would drive them to Hillsborough, where she
would p resumably be safely— and gainfully—employed in
painting Mrs. Sherston’ s portrait.
“Y ou be  bloody careful,” he’d said to her , for the third time
in a n evening. H illsborough was smack in the center of the
Regulators’ terr itory , and he h ad considerable reservations
about her going at all. She had dismissed his concern, though,
scof fing at the n otion that she o r Jem might be in any danger .
She was likely r ight—and yet he wasn’ t so sure that she would
act dif ferently if there was  d anger . She wa s so excited at the
prospect of her damn commission, he thought, she’d walk
straight through armed mobs to get to Hillsborough.
She was singing softly to herself—”Loch Lomond,” of all
bloody things. “Oh, you’ll take the high road, and I’ll take the
low road, and I’ll be in Scotland aforrrrrrre ye …”“Did ye hear me?” he’d asked, catching hold of her arm as
she folded the last of Jemmy’ s dresses.
“Y es, dear ,” Bree had murm ured, lashes fluttering in
mocking submission. That had irritated him into grabbing her
wrist and pulling her round to face him.
“I mean it,” he said. He stared into her eyes, wide open now ,
but with  a hint of mockery still glinting in dark blue triangles.
He tightened his grip on her w rist; tall and well-built as she
was, her  bones felt delicate, almost frail in his grasp. He had a
sudden vision of the bones beneath Brianna’ s skin—high, wide
cheekbones, domed skull, and long white teeth; all too easy to
imagine those teeth exposed to the root in a permanent rictus
of bone.
He h ad pulled h er to him then with sudden violence, kissed
her h ard enough to feel her teeth  against his own, not caring if
he bruised either of them.
She wore only a shift and he hadn’ t bothered to take it of f,
merely shoving her backward onto the bed and pushing it
above her thighs. She’d lifted her hands toward him, but he
hadn’ t l et her touch him; he’d pinned her arms at first, then
later , borne her into the hollow of the mattress with the weight
of h is body , grinding, grasping, seeking reassurance in the thin
padding of flesh that kept her bones from his.
They had done it in silence, half-aware of the sleeping child
nearby . And yet somewhere in the midst of it, her body had
answered him, in some deep and startling way that went
beyond words.
“I mean it,” he’d repeated, moments later , speaking softly
into the tangle of her hair . He lay on her , enclosing her with
his arms, keeping her from m oving. She twitched, and he
tightened his grasp, holding her still. She sighed, and he felt
her m outh move, her teeth sink gently into the flesh below his
collarbone. She bit him. Not ab ruptly , but in a slow , sucking
bite that made him gasp and lift up to break away .“I k now ,” she s aid, and wriggled her arms free, to come
round his back and hold him close to her damp, warm softness.
“I mean it, too.”
 
“THA T WHA T YOU W ANTED?” He whispered the words
now , but softly , not to awaken her . The warmth of her body
radiated through the bedclothes; she was deep asleep.
If it was what s he’d wanted—w hat, exactly , was it? W as it
the brut al nature  of his lovema king that she’d responded to?
Or had she sensed the strength of what lay behind it, and
acknowledged that—the desperation of his need to keep her
safe?
And if it was the roughness … he swallowed, clenching a
fist agai nst the thought of Stephen Bonnet. She’d never told
him wha t had passed between them, her and Bonnet—and it
was unthinkable that he should ask. More unthinkable that he
should suspect anything in that encounter might have
shamefully stirred her . And yet she did stir visibly on those
rare occ asions w hen something  led him to take her abruptly ,
without his usual gentleness.
He was a long way from praying now .
He felt as he had once before, trapped in a rhododendron
hell, wit h the same maze of damp roots and hanging leaves
always before him, no matter in which direction he turned.
Dim tun nels see med to of fer ho pe of escape, and yet led only
to further tangles.
For me and my true love will never meet again, on the
bonnie banks and braes of Loch Lomond …
He was wound tight again, s kin prickling and his legs
twitching with restlessness. The mosquito whined by and he
slapped at it—too late, of cours e. Unable to keep still, he slid
quietly out of be d, and did a quick series of deep knee-bends
to loosen the cramped muscles.
That brought some relief, and he dropped to the floor to do
push-ups, coun ting silently as he dipped toward thefloorboards. One. T wo. Three. Four . Concentrating only on the
increasing burn in chest and arms and shoulders, the soothing
monotony of the count. T wen ty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-
eight …
At last, muscles  quivering with temporary exhaustion, he
stood up, untacked the hide f rom the window , and stood
naked, letting the damp night air flood in upon him. He might
let in more mosquitoes—but the one might go out, too.
The wood was silvered with m oonlight, and a faint fire-
glow in the darkened heart of it spoke of the militia encamped
there. They had been coming in all day , on mules or ragged
horses, muskets laid across the bundles of their blankets. He
caught t he sound of voices and casual laughter , a fragment
borne on  the breeze. At least he  wasn’ t the only one wakeful;
the notion comforted him.
A br ighter light glowed at the s ide of the big house, at the
farther side of the clearing. A  lantern; two figures walking
close together , one tall, one smaller .
The man said something, an  interrogative rumble; he
recognized Jamie’ s voice, but couldn’ t make out the words.
“No,” Claire’ s voice answered, lighter , clear as they came
closer . He saw her hands flutte r , silhouetted in the lantern’ s
glow . “I’m filthy from the planti ng. I’m going to wash before I
come in. Y ou go up to bed.”
The lar ger figure hesitated, then handed her the lantern.
Roger saw Claire’ s face in th e light for a moment, turned
upward, smiling. Jamie bent and kissed her briefly , then
stepped back.
“Hurry , then,” he said, and Roger could hear the answering
smile in  his voice. “I dinna sleep well without ye beside me,
Sassenach.”
“Y ou’re going to sleep right aw ay , are you?” She paused, a
bantering note in her voice.
“Not right away , no.” Jamie’ s figure had melted into the
darkness, but the breeze was to ward the cabin, and his voicecame ou t of the shadows, part o f the night. “But I canna very
well do the other unless ye’re beside me, either , now can I?”
Claire laughed, though softly .
“Start w ithout me,” she said, turning away toward the well.
“I’ll catch you up.”
Roger waited by the window until he saw her come back,
the lantern swinging with the haste of her step, and go inside.
The bree ze had turned, and he h eard no more of the men in the
wood, though their fire still burned.
“Y ou’re early , mate,” he said, an d eased a finger toward the
firefly , gently nudging. “Think there’ s anyone else out there
yet?” Th e insect  moved a few inches, then stopped, abdomen
stubbornly blinking.
He looked toward the wood,  his skin cool now , and
gooseflesh rose on his chest. He rubbed absently at it, and felt
the tend er spot where she had bitten him. It was dark in the
moonlight, a faint blotch on hi s skin; would it still be there
come morning? he wondered.
Reaching up to pull the hide back into place, he caught the
gleam of moonlight on glass. Brianna’ s small collection of
personal items lay on the shelf by the window: the pair of
tortoiseshell combs Jocasta had given her , her silver bracelet.
The sma ll glass  jar of tansy oil, two or three discreet slips of
sponge b eside it . And the lar ger  gleam of the jarful of Dauco
seeds. She hadn’ t had time for the tansy oil tonight, but he’d
bet his life she’d taken the seeds sometime today .
He tacked down the hide, and made his way back to bed,
pausing by the c radle to put do wn a hand and feel the baby’ s
breath th rough t he mosquito-netting, warm and reassuring on
his skin.
Jem had kicked his covers of f; Roger lifted the netting and
pulled them up by feel, tuckin g them firmly in. There was
something soft … oh, Jemmy’ s rag-doll; the baby was
clutching it to h is chest. Roger stood for a moment, hand onJemmy’ s back, feeling the soothing rise and fall of his
breathing.
“Good-night, laddie,” he whispered at last, and touched the
soft padded round of the little boy’ s bottom. “God bless you
and keep you safe.”58
HAPPY BIR THDA Y T O YOU
May 1, 1771
 May Union Camp
I  WOKE  UP JUST P AST DA WN, roused by an insect of some
sort wal king up my leg. I twitched my foot and whatever it
was scu ttled has tily away into t he grass, evidently alarmed to
discover that I w as alive. I wriggled my toes suspiciously , but
finding n o more intruders in my blanket, drew a deep breath of
sap-filled fresh air and relaxed luxuriously .
I c ould hear fain t stirrings nearby , but it was only the stamp
and blow ing of the of ficers’ hor ses, who woke long before the
men did . The camp itself was still silent—or as silent as a
camp containing  several hundred men was likely to be at any
hour . Th e sheet of canvas overh ead glowed with soft light and
leaf-shadows, but the sun was not yet fully up. I closed my
eyes hal f-way , delighted at the thought that I needn’ t get up for
some time yet—and when I d id, someone else would have
made breakfast.
W e had come in to camp the night before, after a winding
journey down from the mountains and across the piedmont, to
arrive at the place of rendezvous, at Colonel Bryan’ s
plantation. W e were in good tim e; T ryon had not yet arrived
with his  troops from New Be rn, nor had the Craven and
Carteret County  detachments, who were bringing the artillery
field pieces and swivel guns. T ryon’ s troops were expected
sometime today; or so Colonel Bryan had told us over supper
the night before.
A gr asshopper landed on the canvas above with an audible
thump. I eyed it  narrowly , but it  didn’ t seem disposed to come
inside, thank goodness. Perhaps I should have accepted Mrs.
Bryan’ s of fer to find me a bed in the house, along with a few
other of ficers’ wives who had accompanied their husbands.Jamie had insisted upon sleepi ng in the field with his men,
though, and I had gone with him, preferring a bed involving
Jamie and bugs to one with neither .
I glanced sideways, careful not to move in case he was still
asleep. He wasn’ t. He was lyi ng quite still, though, utterly
relaxed, save for his right ha nd. He had this raised, and
appeared to be examining it closely , turning it to and fro and
slowly curling and uncurling his fingers—as well as he could.
The four th finger had a fused joint, and was permanently stif f;
the mid dle finger was slightly twisted, a deep white scar
spiraling round the middle joint.
His han d was callused and batt ered by work, and the tiny
stigma o f a nail-wound still showed, pale-pink, in the middle
of his palm. The skin of his hand was deeply bronzed and
weathered, freck led with sun-blots and scattered with bleached
gold hairs. I thought it remarkably beautiful.
“Happy Birthday ,” I said, softly . “T aking stock?”
He l et th e hand fall on his chest, and turned his head to look
at me, smiling.
“A ye, something of the sort. Though I suppose I’ve a few
hours left. I was born at half-six; I willna have lived a full
half-century until suppertime.”
I lau ghed and ro lled onto my side, kicking the blanket of f.
The air was still delightfully cool, but it wouldn’ t last long.
“Do you expect to disinteg rate much further before
supper?” I asked, teasing.
“Oh, I dinna sup pose anything is likely to fall of f by then,”
he s aid, consideringly . “As to t he workings … aye, well …”
He arche d his back, stretching, and sank back with a gratified
groan as my hand settled on him.
“It a ll seems to be in perfect working order ,” I assured him.
I ga ve a brief, experimental tu g, making him yelp slightly .
“Not loose at all.”“Good,” he said, folding his hand firmly over mine to
prevent further unauthorized experiments. “How did ye ken
what I was doing? T aking stock, as ye say?”
I let him keep ho ld of the hand, but shifted to set my chin in
the center of his chest, where a small depression seemed made
for the purpose.
“I a lways do that, when I have a birthday—though I
generally do it the night before . More looking back, I think,
reflecting a bit on the year tha t’ s just gone. But I do check
things over; I think perhaps everyone does. Just to see if
you’re the same person as the day before.”
“I’m reasonably  certain that I am,” he assured me. “Y e
dinna see any marked changes, do ye?”
I lift ed my chin from its resting place and looked him over
carefully . It was in fact rather ha rd to look at him objectively; I
was bot h so used to his features and so fond of them that I
tended to notice tiny , dear things about him—the freckle on his
earlobe, the lower incisor pu shing eagerly forward, just
slightly out of line with its fe llows—and to respond to the
slightest change of his expression—but not really to look at
him as an integrated whole.
He bore my ex amination tranq uilly , eyelids half-lowered
against the growing light. His hair had come loose while he
slept and feathered over his shoulders, its ruddy waves
framing a face s trongly marked  by both humor and passion—
but which possessed a paradoxical and most remarkable
capacity for stillness.
“No,” I said at last, and set my chin down again with a
contented sigh. “It’ s still you.”
He gave a smal l grunt of amus ement, but lay still. I could
hear one of the cooks stumbling round nearby , cursing as he
tripped over a wagon-tongue. The camp was still in the
process of assembling; a few of the companies—those with a
high proportion of ex-soldiers among their of ficers and men—
were tidy and o r ganized. A good many were not, and tipsytents and strewn equipment spra wled across the meadow in a
quasi-military hodgepodge.
A d rum began to beat, to no apparent ef fect. The army
continued to snooze.
“Do you  think the Governor is going to be able to do
anything with these troops?” I asked dubiously .
The local avatar of the army appeared to have gone back to
sleep as well. A t my question, though, the long auburn lashes
lifted in lazy response.
“Oh, aye. T ryon’ s a soldier . He k ens well enough what to do
—at leas t to start. It’ s no so verra dif ficult to make men march
in colum n and dig latrines, ken. T o make them fight is another
thing.”
“Can he do that?”
The chest under my chin lifted in a deep sigh.
“Maybe so. Maybe no. The question is—will he have to?”
That wa s the question, all right. Rumors had flown round us
like autumn leaves in a gale, all  the way from Fraser ’ s Ridge.
The Reg ulators had ten thousand men, who were marching in
a b ody upon Ne w Bern. General Gage was sailing from New
Y ork wi th a regiment of of ficia l troops to subdue the Colony .
The Ora nge Cou nty militia had rioted and killed their of ficers.
Half the W ake County men had deserted. Hermon Husband
had been arrested and spirited onto a ship, to be taken to
London for trial on char ges of treason. Hillsborough had been
taken by  the Regulators, who w ere preparing to fire the town
and put Edmund Fanning and al l his associates to the sword. I
did hope that one wasn’ t tru e—or if it was, that Hubert
Sherston was not one of Fanning’ s intimates.
Sorting through the mass of hearsay , supposition, and sheer
wild inv ention, the only fact of which we could be sure
appeared to be that Governor T ryon was en route to join the
militia. After which, we would just see, I supposed.Jamie’ s free hand rested on my back, his thumb idly
stroking the edge of my sho ulder blade. W ith his usual
capacity for mental discipline, he appeared to have dismissed
the uncertainty of the military prospects completely from his
mind, and was thinking of something else entirely .
“Do ye ever think—” he began, and then broke of f.
“Think what?” I bent and kissed  his chest, arching my back
to encourage him to rub it, which he did.
“W ell … I’m no  so sure I can explain, but it’ s struck me that
now I have lived longer than my father did—which is not
something I expected to happen,” he added, with faint
wryness. “It’ s only … well, it seems odd, is all. I only
wondered, did ye ever think of that, yourself—having lost
your mother young, I mean?”
“Y es.” My face was buried in hi s chest, my voice muf fled in
the folds of his shirt. “I used t o—when I was younger . Like
going on a journey without a map.”
His hand on my back paused for a moment.
“A ye, that’ s it.” He sounded a l ittle surprised. “I kent more
or less what it would be like to be a man of thirty , or of forty—
but now  what?” His chest mov ed briefly , with a small noise
that might have been a mixture o f amusement and puzzlement.
“Y ou in vent you rself,” I said so ftly , to the shadows inside
the hair that ha d fallen over my face. “Y ou look at other
women—or men ; you try on their lives for size. Y ou take what
you can  use, and you look inside yourself for what you can’ t
find els ewhere. And always … always … you wonder if
you’re doing it right.”
His hand  was warm and heavy o n my back. He felt the tears
that ran unexpectedly from the corners of my eyes to dampen
his shirt , and his other hand ca me up to touch my head and
smooth my hair .
“A ye, that’ s it,” he said again, very softly .The camp was beginning to stir outside, with clangings and
thumps, and the hoarse sound of sleep-rough voices.
Overhead, the grasshopper began to chirp, the sound like
someone scratching a nail on a copper pot.
“This is a morni ng my father ne ver saw ,” Jamie said, still so
softly that I heard it as much thr ough the walls of his chest, as
with my ears. “ The world and each day in it is a gift, mo
chridhe —no matter what tomorrow may be.”
I sighed  deeply and turned m y head, to rest my cheek
against h is chest. He reached ov er gently and wiped my nose
with a fold of his shirt.
“And as for taki ng stock,” he added practically , “I’ve all my
teeth, none of my parts are missing, and my cock still stands
up by itself in the morning. It could be worse.”59
MILIT AR Y ENGINES
Journal of the Expedition against the Insur gents
Kept by W illiam T ryon, Governor
 
Thursday , May 2nd
The Craven and Carter et Detachments mar ched out of New
Bern with the tw o Field Pieces, Six Swivel Guns mounted on
Carriages, Sixt een W aggons, & four Carts, loaded with
Baggage, Ammunition and as much pr ovisions as would
supply th e several Detachments that wer e to join them on their
Route to Col. Bryan’ s, the place of General Rendezvous.
The Governor left New Bern th e 27th of April, and arrived
at C ol. B ryan’ s the 1st of May . T oday the T r oops fr om the two
Districts joined.
 
 
Friday , 3d. of May , Union Camp
The Governor Reviewed at 12 O’Clock the Detachments in
the Meadow at Smiths Ferry on the W est Side of Neuse River .
 
 
Saturday , the 4th of May
The Whole mar ched to Johnston Court House. Nine Miles.
 
 
Sunday , 5th of May
Mar ched to Major Theophilus Hunter ’ s in W ake County .
Thirteen Miles.Monday , 6th of May
The Army halted, and the Governor r eviewed the W ake
Regiment at a Genl. Muster . Mr . Hinton Colonel of the
Regiment acqua inted the Governor that he had got but T wenty
two Men of the  Company he had r eceived Or ders to raise,
owing to a Disaffection among the Inhabitants of the County .
The Governor observing a General Discontent in the W ake
Regiment as he passed along th e Fr ont Rank of the Battalion,
seeing th at not mor e than one M an in five had Arms, & finding
that upo n his calling on them to  turn out as V olunteers in the
Service, they r efused to obey , or der ed the Army to surr ound the
Battalion; which being effected he dir ected thr ee of his
Colonels to draft out Forty of the most Sightly & Most active
Men, which Manouvr e caused no small Panic in the Regiment,
consisting at the T ime of about four Hundr ed Men.
During the drafting  the O fficers of the Army wer e active in
persuading the men to enlist, and in less than two Hours
completed the W ake Company t o Fifty Men. Night coming on
the W ake Regiment was dismissed, much ashamed both of their
Disgrace, & their own Conduct which occasioned it. The Army
r eturned to Camp.
 
 
W ednesday , the 8th of May
Col. Hinton’ s Detachment was left behind, with a V iew to
pr event the disaffected in that  County fr om forming into a
Body , and joining the Regulators in the adjacent Counties.
This Morning a Detachment mar ched to the dwelling House
of T urner T omlinson, a Notorious Regulator , and br ought him
prisoner to Camp, wher e he was closely confined. He
confess’d he was a Regulator , but would make no discoveries.
The Army mar ched, & incamped near Booth’ s, on New
Hope Cr eek.
 
 Friday , the 10th of May
Halted, or der ed  the W aggons to be r efitted, Horses to be
shod, an d every thing put in Rep air . Reviewed in Hillsbor ough
two Companies of the Orange Militia.
The Prisoner T omlinson made his escape this Evening, fr om
the Quarter Guar d. Detachments set after him, but without
Success.
 
 
Sunday , the 12th of May
Mar ched, and for ded Haw River , and encamped on the W est
Side of the Bank s. It was expected the Regulators would have
opposed the passages of the Roy alists over this River , as it was
their Intent, but not suspecting that the Army would move out
of Hillsb or ough till after Monday , they wer e by this Sudden
Movement of the Army defeated in that part of their plan.
Received this Day flying Reports that General W addell was
for ced by the Re gulators, with the T r oops under his Command
to r epass the Y adkin River .
Divine Service, with Sermon, performed by the Revd. Mr .
McCartny . T ext:  “If Y ou have no Swor d Sell your Garment &
Buy One.”
This Day T wenty Gentlemen V olunteers joined the Army ,
chiefly fr om Granville & Bute Counties. They wer e formed
into a T r oop of  Light Horse under the Command of Major
MacDonald. A Regulator taken by the flanking parties laying
in a mbush with his Gun. The Commissary took out of his
House part of a Hogshead of Rum lodged ther e for the Use of
the Regulators. Also some Hogs which wer e to be accounted to
His Family .
 
 
Monday , the 13th of MayMar ched to O’Neal. At 12 O’Clo ck an Expr ess rider arrived
fr om Ge neral W addell, with a V e rbal Message, the Expr ess not
daring to take a  Letter for fear of its being inter cepted. The
Purport of which Message was that on Thursday Evening the
9th Instant the Regulators to t he Number of two Thousand
surr ounded his Camp, and in  the most daring & insolent
Manner r equir e d the General to  r etr eat with the T r oops over
the Y adk in River , of which he was then within two Miles. He
r efused to comply , insisting he had the Governor ’ s Or ders to
pr oceed. This made them mor e insolent, and with many Indian
shouts they endeavour ed to intimidate his Men.
The General finding his Men not exceeding thr ee Hundr ed,
and generally unwilling to engage; and many of his Sentries
going over to the Regulators, was r educed to comply with their
r equisition, & early the next Morning r epassed the Y adkin
River , with his Cannon and Baggage; the Regulators agr eeing
to disperse and r eturn to their several Habitations.
A Co uncil of W a r was held immediately to deliberate on the
Subject of the Intelligence br ought by the Expr ess, composed
of the Honorable John Ruther for d, Lewis DeRosset, Robert
Palmer , & Sam Cornell, of Hi s Majesty’ s Council, and the
Colonels & Field Officers of  the Army , Wher ein it was
r esolved that the Army should c hange their Route, get into the
Road at Captain Holt’ s that leads fr om Hillsbor ough to
Salisbury , pass the little and gr eat Alamance Rivers with all
possible Expedi tion, & mar ch without Loss of T ime to join
General W addell; accor dingly the Army got under Mar ch, and
befor e Night encamped on the W est Side of little Alamance, a
str ong Detachment being sent forwar d to take possession of
the W es t Banks of Gr eat Alamance, to pr event the Enemy’ s
Parties fr om occupying that str ong Post.
This evening r eceived Intelligen ce that the Regulators wer e
sending Scouts thr ough all their Settlements, and assembling
on Sandy Cr eek, near Hunter ’ s.
Mar ched and joined the Detach ment on the W est Banks of
Gr eat Alamance wher e a str ong Camp was chosen. Her e the
Army halted till mor e pr ovisions could be br ought fr omHillsbor ough, f or which purpose several W aggons now
emptied and sent fr om Camp to Hillsbor ough
Intelligence being br ought this Evening into Camp that the
Rebels intended to attack the ca mp in the Night, the Necessary
pr eparations we r e made for an Engagement, and one thir d of
the Army or der ed to r emain u nder Arms all Night, & the
Remainder to lay down near their Arms. No Alarm given.
 
 
T uesday , the 14th of May
Halted, the Men or der ed to keep in Camp.
The Arm y lay on their Arms all Night, as in the pr eceeding.
No alarm.
 
 
W ednesday , the 15th of May
About 6  O’Cloc k in the Evenin g, the Governor r eceived a
Letter fr om the Insur gents which he laid befor e the Council of
W ar , wh er ein it was determined that the Army should mar ch
against the Rebels early the nex t Morning, that the Governor
should send them a Letter offeri ng them T erms, and in Case of
Refusal, should attack them.
The Men  r emained all Night und er Arms. No alarm, tho’ the
Rebels lay within five Miles of the Camp.
 
From the Dreambook:
Hillsborough, May 15
 
“Last night I fell asleep early , and woke up befor e dawn
inside a gray cloud. All day , I’v e felt like I was walking inside
a mist; people talk to me and I d on’ t hear them; I can see their
mouths move, and I nod and smile, and then go away . The airis hot and mug gy and everything smells like hot metal. My
head aches, and the cook is clanging pans.
I’ve trie d all day to r emember what I dr eamed of, and I
can’ t. Th er e’ s on ly gray , and a feeling of fear . I’ve never been
near a battle, but I have the feeling that what I’m dr eaming of
is cannon smoke.”60
COUNCIL OF W AR
J AMIE C AME BACK from the Council of W ar , well after
suppertime, and informed the men briefly of T ryon’ s intent.
The general response was approval, if not outright enthusiasm.
“Ist gut we move now ,” said Ew ald Mueller , stretching out
his long arms and cracking all his knuckles simultaneously .
“Longer we stay , we are growing moss!”
This sentiment was greeted by laughter and nods of
agreement. The mood of the company brightened noticeably at
the p rospect of a ction in the morning; men settled down to talk
around t he fires,  the rays of the s etting sun glinting of f tin cups
and the polished barrels of the muskets laid carefully by their
feet.
Jamie made a quick round of inspection, answering
questions and administering reassurances, then came to join
me at our smaller fire. I looked a t him narrowly; in spite of the
stress of the immediate situation, there was a sense of
suppressed satisfaction about him that at once excited my
suspicions.
“What h ave you done?” I asked , handing him a lar ge chunk
of bread and a bowl of stew .
He didn’ t bother denying that he’d been doing something.
“Got Cornell alone long enough after the Council, to ask
him abo ut Stephen Bonnet.” He ripped of f a chunk of bread
with his teeth an d swallowed it with the minimum of chewing.
“Christ, I’m starved. I’ve not ea ten all day , what wi’ creepin’
through the brambles on my belly like a snake.”
“Surely Samuel Cornell wasn ’ t hanging about in the
brambles.” Cornell was one of the Governor ’ s Royal Council,
a stout and wealthy merchant from Edenton, and grosslyunsuited by position, build, a nd temperament for snaking
through brambles.
“No, that was later .” He swab bed the bread through the
stew , took another enormous bite, then waved a hand,
momentarily spe echless. I handed him a cup of cider , which he
used to wash down the mess.
“W e were searchin’ out the Rebel lines,” he explained, the
obstruction cleared. “They’re no  far of f, ken. Though ‘lines’ is
giving them the benefit of considerable doubt,” he added,
scooping up more stew . “I’ve not seen such a rabble since I
fought in  France , and we took a village where a gang o’ wine-
smugglers were. Half of them w horing and all of them drunk;
we had to pick them up of f the ground to arrest them. This
lot’ s little better , from what I co uld see. Not so many whores,
though,” he added, to be fair , an d shoved the rest of his bread
into his mouth.
At le ast half the  Governor ’ s army was slightly the worse for
drink at the moment, but that w as so usual a condition as not
to c all for com ment. I gave him another piece of bread,
concentrating on the important aspect of the conversation.
“So you’ve found out something about Bonnet, then?”
He nodded, chewed, and gulped.
“Cornell’ s not met him, but he ’ s heard talk. It seems he
works h is way up and down th e Outer Banks for a bit, and
then disappears for three or four months. Then suddenly , one
day he’l l be there again, drinking in the taverns in Edenton or
Roanoke, gold pieces spilling from his pockets.”
“So he’ s bringing in goods from  Europe and selling them.”
Three or four months was the time it would take to sail a ship
to England and back. “Contraband, I suppose?”
Jamie nodded.
“Cornell thinks so. And d’ye ke n where he brings the stuf f
ashore?” He wiped the back of a hand across his mouth,
seeming grimly amused. “W ylie’ s Landing. Or so rumor says.”“What—you don’ t mean Phillip W ylie is in cahoots with
him?” I was shocked—and rather distressed—to hear this, but
Jamie shook his head.
“As to that, I couldna say . But the Landing adjoins Phillip
W ylie’ s plantation, to be sure. And the wee shite was  wi’
Bonnet the night he came to River Run, no matter what he
may have said about it, later ,” he added. He flapped a hand,
dismissing Phillip W ylie for the moment.
“But Cornell says that Bonne t’ s disappeared again; he’ s
been gone, this p ast month. So my aunt and Duncan are likely
safe enough, for the moment. T hat’ s one thing of f my mind—
and a good thing; there’ s enough to worry about without that.”
He spoke without irony , glancing round at the encampment
that spra wled around us. As the light failed, the fires began to
glow thr ough the dimness of twilight, like hundreds of fireflies
along the banks of Great Alamance.
“Hermon Husband is here,” he said.
I looked up from the fresh bowl of stew I was dishing out.
“Did you speak to him?”
He shook his head.
“I could na go near . He’ s with the Regulators, aye? I was on
a wee hill, lookin’ down across the stream, and saw him in the
distance; he was in a great mass  of men, but I couldna mistake
his dress.”
“What will he do?” I handed him the full bowl. “Surely he
won’ t fight—or  allow them to fight.” I was inclined to view
Husband’ s presence as a hopeful sign. Hermon Husband was
the closest thing the Regulato rs had to a real leader; they
would listen to him, I was sure.
Jamie shook his head, looking troubled.
“I dinna  ken, Sassenach. He wil lna take up arms himself, no
—but as  for the rest …” He trailed of f, thinking. Then his face
set in sudden d ecision. He handed me back the bowl, and
turning on his heel, made his way across the camp.I saw  him touch  Roger on the shoulder , and draw him aside
a lit tle. They sp oke together for a few moments, then Jamie
reached into his coat, drew out s omething white, and handed it
to Roger . Roger looked at whatever it was for a moment, then
nodded, and tucked it away in his own coat.
Jamie clapped him on the shoulder , left him, and came back
across th e camp, pausing to laugh and exchange rude remarks
with the Lindsay brothers.
He came  back smiling, and took  the bowl from me, seeming
relieved.
“I’ve told Roger Mac to go fir st thing in the morning, to
find Hu sband,” he said, setting about the stew with renewed
appetite. “If he can, I’ve told h im to bring Husband here—to
speak fa ce to face wi’ T ryon. If he canna convince T ryon—
which h e can’ t—perhaps T ryon will convince Husband that
he’ s in earnest. If Hermon sees that it will mean bloodshed,
then perhaps he will prevail upon his men to stand down.”
“Do you really think so?” It had rained lightly in the
afternoon, and banks of cloud still covered the eastern sky .
The edg es of those clouds glowed faintly red—not from the
slanting rays of sunset, but fro m the fires of the Regulators,
camped invisibly on the opposite bank of the Alamance.
Jamie wiped his bowl and took a last bite of bread, shaking
his head.
“I d inna ken,” h e said simply . “But there’ s nothing else to
try , is there?”
I nodded, and stooped to put more wood on the fire. No one
would sleep early tonight.
The campfires had burned all day , smoking and sputtering
in a  light rain. Now , though, the drizzle had ceased and the
clouds had parted, shredding into long, wispy mare’ s-tails that
glowed like fire across the whole arc of the western sky ,
eclipsing the puny ef forts of the  earthbound flames. Seeing it,
I put a hand on Jamie’ s arm.“Look,” I said. H e turned, wary lest someone had appeared
at his heels with a fresh problem, but his face relaxed as I
gestured upward.
Frank, ur ged to look at some  wonder of nature whilst
preoccupied with a problem, would have paused just long
enough not to s eem discourteous, said, “Oh, yes, lovely , isn’ t
it?” and returned at once to the  maze of his thoughts. Jamie
lifted his face to  the glowing g lory of the heavens and stood
still.
What is the matt er with you?  I th ought to my self. Can’ t you
let Frank Randall r est in peace?
Jamie put an arm about my shoulders, and sighed.
“In Scot land,” h e said, “the sky  would be like lead all day ,
and even  at the t wilight, ye’d see no more than the sun sinking
into the sea like a red-hot cannon ball. Never a sky like this one
is.”
“What m akes you think of Scotland?” I asked, intrigued that
his mind should run as mine did, on things of the past.
“Dawn and twilight, and the season of the year ,” he said,
and his wide mouth curled slightly upward in reminiscence.
“Whenever there  is a change in the air around me, it makes me
think of  what has been, and wh at is now . I dinna always do it
in a house, but when I’m living rough, I’ll often wake
dreaming of folk I once knew , and then sit quiet in the
twilight, thinking of other times and places.” He shrugged a
little. “S o now the sun is going down, and it is Scotland in my
mind.”
“Oh,” I said, comforted at having such an explanation.
“That must be it.”
“Must be what?” The setting s un bathed his face in gold,
softening the lines of strain as he looked down at me.
“I was thinking of other times a nd places, too,” I said, and
leaned my head against his sho ulder . “Just now , though … I
can’ t think of anything but this.”“Oh?” H e hesitated for a moment, but then said, carefully ,
“I di nna much m ention it, Sassenach, for if the answer ’ s ‘yes,’
there’ s nay so much I can do to mend it—but do ye often long
for … the other times?”
I waited for the space of three heartbeats to answer; I heard
them, Ja mie’ s heart beating slow under my ear , and I curled
my left hand clo sed, feeling the smooth metal of the gold ring
on my finger .
“No,” I said, “but I remember them.”61
UL TIMA TUMS
Gr eat Alamance Camp
 May 16th 1771
 
T o the People now Assembled
 in Arms, who Style themselves
 Regulators
 
In Answer to your Petition, I am to acquaint you that I have
ever been attentive to the true Inter est of this Country , and to
that of every In dividual r esiding within it. I lament the fatal
Necessity to which you have now r educed me, by withdrawing
yourselves fr om the Mer cy of the  Cr own, and the Laws of your
Country , to r equir e you ar e assembled as Regulators, to lay
down your Arms, Surr ender up the outlawed Ringleaders, and
Submit y ourselves to the Laws o f your Country , and then r est
on t he lenity and Mer cy of Government. By accepting these
T erms in one Ho ur fr om the deli very of this Dispatch, you will
pr event an effusion of Blood, as  you ar e at this time in a state
of W ar and Reb ellion against your King, your Country , and
your Laws.
 
 
Wm. T ryon
 
JAMIE HAD GONE before I woke; his blanket lay neatly
folded beside me, and Gideon was gone from the pin-oak to
which Jamie had tethered him the night before.
“Colonel’ s gone to meet with the Governor ’ s Council of
W ar ,” Kenny Lindsay told me, yawning widely . He blinked,shaking himself like a wet dog. “T ea, ma’am, or cof fee?”
“T ea, please.” I supposed it was the tenor of current events
that wa s causing me to think of the Boston T ea Party . I
couldn’ t recall for sure when that brouhaha and its subsequent
events were due to occur , but had an obscure feeling that I
ought to seize e very opportunity of drinking tea while it was
still obtainable, in hopes of satu rating my tissues—like a bear
tucking into the grubs and berries in anticipation of winter .
The day had dawned still and clear , and while it was cool
for the moment, there was already a hint of mugginess in the
air f rom the rain  the day before.  I sipped my tea, feeling small
tendrils of hair escape from bondage to curl round my face,
sticking to my cheeks in the steam from my cup.
T issues restored for the moment, I fetched a couple of
buckets and set of f for the stream. I hoped it wouldn’ t be
needed, but it w ould be as wel l to have a quantity of boiled
sterile w ater on hand, just in cas e. And if it wasn’ t needed for
medical purposes, I could rinse my stockings, which were
much in need of attention.
Despite its name the Great Alamance was not a particularly
impressive river , being no more than fifteen or twenty feet
across f or most of its length . It was also shallow , mud-
bottomed, and kinked like a wool-raveling, with multiple
small arms and tributaries that wandered all over the
landscape. I supposed it was a decent military demarcation,
though; while a body of men c ould certainly ford the stream
without much trouble, there wa s no chance of them doing so
by stealth.
Dragonflies darted over the water , and over the heads of a
couple of militia-men, chatti ng companionably as they
relieved themselves into the murky waters of the stream. I
paused tactfully behind a bush u ntil they had left, reflecting as
I ma de my way down the sloping bank with my buckets how
fortunate it was that most of  the troops would consider
drinking  water only if actually dying of dehydration.When I came ba ck into camp, I found it wide awake, every
man alert, if red-eyed. The atmosphere was one of
watchfulness, though, rather tha n immediate battle-readiness,
and there was n o more than a general stir of interest when
Jamie returned, Gideon threading his way past the campfires
with surprising delicacy .
“How is it, Mac Dubh ?” K enny asked, standing to greet him
as Jamie reined up. “Anything ado?”
Jamie shook his head. He wa s dressed with a neatness
approaching severity , hair clubbed back, dirk and pistols fixed
on his belt, sword at his side. A yellow cockade fixed to his
coat wa s the only touch of decoration. Battle-ready , and a
small frisson  crept up my spine at the thought.
“The Governor ’ s sent across his wee letter to the
Regulators. Four sherif fs each took a copy; they’re to read it
out to every group they come across. W e must just wait, and
see what happens.”
I fol lowed his g lance toward the third campfire. Roger had
likely left as soon as it was light, before the camp woke.
I had emptied the buckets into the kettle for boiling. I
picked them up for another trip  to the stream, when Gideon’ s
ears pri cked and he lifted his head suddenly , with a sharp
whicker of greeting. Jamie insta ntly nudged the horse in front
of me, and his  hand dropped to his sword. My view was
blocked by Gideon’ s enormous chest and withers; I couldn’ t
see who was coming, but I did see Jamie’ s hand relax its grip
on the sword-hi lt as whoever it  was came in sight. A friend,
then.
Or i f not precisely a friend, at le ast someone he didn’ t mean
to run through or hack out of the saddle. I heard a familiar
voice, raised in greeting, and pe ered out from under Gideon’ s
chin to see Governor T ryon rid ing across the small meadow ,
accompanied by two aides.
T ryon sat his horse decently , if without great style, and was
dressed as usual for campaigning, in a serviceable blueuniform coat and doeskin breeches, a yellow of ficer ’ s cockade
in hi s ha t, and with one of the cavalry cutlasses called a hanger
at his side—not for show; the hilt showed nicks and the
scabbard was worn.
T ryon pulled up his horse and nodded, touching his hat to
Jamie, who did likewise. Seeing me lurking in Gideon’ s
shadow , the Governor politely removed his cocked hat
altogether , bowing from the saddle.
“Mrs. F raser , your servant.” He glanced at the pails I held,
then turned in his saddle, becko ning to one of the aides. “Mr .
V ickers. Kindly help Mrs. Fraser , if you will.”
I s urrendered the pails gratefu lly to Mr . V ickers, a pink-
cheeked young man of eightee n or so, but instead of going
with him, I simply directed him where to take them. T ryon
raised one eyebrow at me, but  I returned his expression of
mild displeasure with a bland smile, and stood my ground. I
wasn’ t going anywhere.
He w as wise eno ugh to recognize that, and make no issue of
my presence. Dismissing me instead from his cognizance, he
nodded again to Jamie.
“Y our troops are in order , Colonel Fraser?” He glanced
pointedly around. The only troops visible at the moment were
Kenny , who had his nose bu ried in his cup, and Murdo
Lindsay and Geordie Chisholm, who were engaged in a
vicious game of mumblety-peg in the shadows of the copse.
“A ye, sir .”
The Governor raised both brows in patent skepticism.
“Call them, sir . I will inspect their readiness.”
Jamie paused for a moment, gathering up his reins. He
squinted agains t the rising su n, evaluating the Governor ’ s
mount. “A nice gelding ye have there, sir . Is he steady?”
“Of course.” The Governor frowned. “Why?”
Jamie threw back his head and gave a ululating Highland
cry , of the sort meant to be heard over several acres ofmountainside. The Governor ’ s horse jerked at the reins, eyes
rolling back. Militiamen poured out of the thicket, shrieking
like banshees, and a black clou d of crows exploded from the
trees ab ove them like a puf f of cannon smoke, raucous in
flight. The horse reared, decanting T ryon in an undignified
heap on the grass, and bolted for  the trees on the far side of the
meadow .
I took several steps backward, out of the way .
The Governor sat up, purple-faced and gasping for breath,
to find himself i n the center of a ring of grinning militiamen,
all pointing their weapons at him. The Governor glared into
the barre l of the rifle poking in to his face and batted it away
with one hand, making small c hoking noises, like an angry
squirrel. Jamie cleared his throat in a meaningful manner , and
the men faded quietly back into the copse.
I tho ught that on  the whole, it would be a mistake either to
of fer the Governor a hand to arise, or to let him get a look at
my face . I tactfully turned my back and wandered a few steps
away , af fecting to have discovered an absorbing new plant
springing from the ground near my feet.
Mr . V ickers reappeared from the wood, looking startled, a
pail of water in each hand.
“What has happened?” He started toward the Governor , but
I pu t a hand on h is sleeve to det ain him. Best if Mr . T ryon had
a moment to recover both his breath and his dignity .
“Nothing important,” I said, recovering my pails before he
could s pill them. “Er … how many militia troops are
assembled here, do you know?”
“One th ousand and sixty-eight, mum,” he said, looking
thoroughly bewildered. “That is not accounting for General
W addell’ s troops, of course. But what—”
“And you have cannon?”
“Oh, yes, several, mum. W e have two detachments with
artillery . T wo six-pounders, ten swivel-guns, and two eight-pound mortars.”  V ickers stood a little straighter , important
with the thought of so much potential destruction.
“There a re two thousand men across the creek, sir—but the
most of them ba rely armed. Many carry no more than a knife.”
Jamie’ s voice came from be hind me, drawing V ickers’ s
attention away . I turned round, to find that Jamie had
dismounted, and was standing face to face with the Governor ,
holding the latter ’ s hat. He slapp ed it casually against his thigh
and of fered it back to its owner , who accepted it with as much
grace as might be managed under the circumstances.
“I have  been told as much, Mr . Fraser ,” he said dryly ,
“though I am pleased to hear that your intelligence
corroborates my own. Mr . V ickers, will you be so kind as to go
and fetch my ho rse?” The purple hue had faded from T ryon’ s
face, and while his manner stil l held a certain constraint, he
seemed not to b e holding a grud ge. T ryon had both a sense of
fairness, and—m ore importantly  at present—a sense of humor ,
both of which seemed to have survived the recent
demonstration of military readiness.
Jamie nodded.
“I s uppose that your agents h ave also told you that the
Regulators have no leader , as such?”
“On the contrary , Mr . Fraser . I am under the impression that
Hermon Husband is and has be en for some considerable time
one of the chief agitators of this movement. James Hunter , too,
is a  name that  I have often seen appended to letters of
complaint and the endless pet itions that reach me in New
Bern. And there are others—Hamilton, Gillespie …”
Jamie made an impatient gesture, brushing a hovering cloud
of gnats from his face.
“In some circumstances, sir , I s hould be willing to dispute
with ye whether  the pen is mightier than the sword—but not
on the edge of a battlefield, and that is where we stand. A
boldness in writing pamphlets d oes not fit a man to lead troops
—and Husband is a Quaker gentleman.”“I h ave heard as much,” T ryon agreed. He gestured toward
the d istant creek, one brow raise d in challenge. “And yet he is
here.”
“He is here,” Jamie agreed. He paused for a moment,
gauging the governor ’ s mood before proceeding. The
Governor was tightly wound; there was no missing the
tautness in his fi gure, or the brig htness of his eyes. Still, battle
was not  yet imminent and the tension was well-leashed. He
could still listen.
“I h ave fed the man at my ow n hearth, sir ,” Jamie said
carefully . “I have eaten at his. H e makes no secret either of his
views or  his character . If he has  come here today , I am certain
that he has done so in torment of mind.” Jamie drew a deep
breath. He was on dicey ground here.
“I have sent a man across the creek, sir , to find Husband,
and beg him to meet with me. It may be that I can persuade
him to use his considerable in fluence to cause these men—
these citizens”—he gestured briefly toward the creek and the
invisible myrmidons beyond—”to abandon this disastrous
course of action, which cannot  but end in tragedy .” He met
T ryon’ s eyes straight on.
“May I ask you, sir—may I beg of you—if Husband will
come, will you not speak with him yourself?”
T ryon stood silent, oblivious of the dusty tricorne he turned
around and around in his han ds. The echoes of the recent
commotion had faded; a vireo s ang from the branches of the
elm above us.
“They a re citize ns of this colony ,” he said at last, with a nod
in th e direction of the creek. “I should regret that harm should
come to them. T heir grievances are not without merit; I have
acknowledged a s much—publicly!—and taken steps toward
redress.” He glanced toward Jamie, as though to see whether
this statement was accepted. Jamie stood silent, waiting.
T ryon took a deep breath, and slapped the hat against his
leg.“Y et I am Governor of this colony . I cannot see the peace
disturbed, the law flouted, riot a nd bloodshed run rampant and
unpunished!” He glanced bleakly at me. “I will not.”
He turned his attention back to Jamie.
“I th ink he wil l not come, sir . Their course is set”—he
nodded once more toward the trees that edged Alamance
Creek—”and so  is mine. Still …” He hesitated for a moment,
then made up his mind, and shook his head.
“No. If he does  come, then by all means reason with him,
and if he will agree to send his men home peaceably—at that
point, bring him to me and we shall arrange terms. But I
cannot wait upon the possibility .”
Mr . V ickers had retrieved the Governor ’ s mount. The boy
stood a little way apart, holding both horses by their reins, and
I saw him nod slightly at this, as though af firming the
Governor ’ s wor ds. His own hat shaded him from the sun, yet
his f ace was flus hed, and his ey es bright; he was eager for the
fight.
T ryon was not; yet he was ready . Neither was Jamie—but
he w as ready , to o. He held the Governor ’ s gaze for a moment,
and then nodded, accepting inevitability .
“How long?” he asked quietly .
T ryon glanced upward at the sun, which stood a little short
of mid-morning . Roger had been gone for nearly two hours;
how long might it take him t o find Hermon Husband and
return?
“The co mpanies are in battle ord er ,” T ryon said. He glanced
at th e copse, an d the corner of his mouth twitched. Then he
returned a dark gaze to Jamie’ s face. “Not long. Stand ready ,
Mr . Fraser .”
He turned away , and clapping his hat on his head, seized the
reins of his hor se and swung into the saddle. He rode away
without looking back, followed by his aides.
Jamie watched him go, expressionless.I m oved  beside him, touching his hand. I didn’ t need to say
that I hoped Roger would hurry .62
“STRAGLERS AND SUSPECTED PERSONS”
Item #12  - No Officer or Soldier to go beyond the Limits of
the Camp which is within the distance of the Grand Guar d.
 
Item #63  - Commanding Officers of Corps ar e to examine
all Straglers and suspected Persons, and those who cannot
give a good acc ount of themselves to be confined and Report
ther eof made to Head Quarters.
 
“Camp Duties and Regulations”:  Or d ers Given O ut by His
Excellency Gov ernor T ryon to the Pr ovincials of North
Car olina.
 
ROGER T OUCHED THE POCKET of his breeches, where he
had tucked away his pewter militia badge. An inch-and-a-half-
wide bu tton of metal, pierced ro und the edges, stamped with a
crude “F C” for “Fraser ’ s Company” and meant to be sewn
onto coat or hat, such badges—and the cloth cockades—were
the sole items o f uniform for most of the Governor ’ s foot-
troops, and the o nly means of distinguishing a member of the
militia from one of the Regulators.
“And exactly how d’ye know whom to shoot?” he had
inquired ironically , when Jamie had handed him the badge at
supper , two days before. “If yo u get close enough to see the
badge before ye fire, won’ t the other bugger get you first?”
Jamie h ad giv en him a gla nce of equal irony , but
courteously forbore any observations on Roger ’ s
marksmanship and the likelihood—or otherwise—of his doing
any damage with his musket.“I w ouldna wait to see, myself ,” he said. “If anyone runs
toward ye with a gun, fire, and hope for the best.”
A few men seat ed around the fi re nearby sniggered at this,
but Jam ie ignored them. He re ached for a stick and pulled
three roa sting ya ms out of the coals, so they lay side by side,
black an d steaming in the coo l evening air . He kicked one
gently , sending it rolling back into the ashes.
“That’ s us,” he explained. He k icked the next yam. “That’ s
Colonel Leech’ s company , and  that”—he booted the third,
which rolled erratically after its fellows—”is Colonel Ashe’ s.
D’ye see?” He cocked an eyebrow at Roger .
“Each company will go forward in its own path, so ye’re no
likely to  see any other militia, at least to begin with. Anyone
coming toward us is most proba bly the enemy .” Then his long
mouth c urled up  a bit, as he gest ured toward the men all round
them, busy with their suppers.
“Y e ken every m an here well enough? W ell, dinna shoot any
of them, and ye’ll be fine, aye?”
Roger smiled ruefully to himself as he made his way
carefully down a slope covered with tiny yellow-flowered
plants. It was so und advice; he was much less concerned with
the p ossibility of being shot tha n with the fear of accidentally
harming someone himself—including the not-inconsiderable
worry of blowing of f a few of his own fingers.
Privately , he was resolved not to fire at anyone, regardless
either of circumstance or of the possibility of his hitting them.
He’d h eard enough of the Regulators’ stories—Abel
MacLennan, He rmon Husband. Even allowing for the natural
hyperbole of Husband’ s style, his pamphlets burned with a
sense of injustice that was inesc apable. How could Roger look
to k ill a man or maim him, only  for protesting against abuses
and corruption so blatant that  they must of fend any just-
minded person?
A trained historian, he’d seen enough of present
circumstances to understand just how widespread the problemswere, how they’d come abo ut—and he understood well
enough the dif ficulties of corr ecting them. He sympathized
with T ryon’ s position—to a point—but his sympathy stopped a
good wa y short of rendering him a willing soldier in the cause
of upholding the Crown’ s authority—still less, the cause of
preserving W illiam T ryon’ s reputation and personal fortune.
He stopped for a moment, hearing voices, and stepped softly
behind the trunk of a lar ge poplar .
Three men came in sight a moment later , talking casually
amongst themselves. All three had guns and bullet-boxes, but
the i mpression they gave was o f three friends on their way to
hunt rabbits, rather than grim troopers on the eve of battle.
In fact, this appeared to be exactly what they were—
foragers. One had a cluster of furry bodies slung from his belt,
and ano ther carried a muslin bag stained with something that
might h ave been fresh blood. As Roger watched from the
shelter of the po plar , one man s topped, hand out to check his
comrades, who both stif fened like hounds, noses pointing
toward a clump of trees some sixty yards distant.
Even knowing something was there, it took a moment
before Roger spotted the small deer , standing still against a
grove of saplings, a veil of dappled light through the spring
leaves overhead masking it almost perfectly from view .
The first man swung his gun  stealthily down from his
shoulder , reaching for rod and c artridge, but one of the others
stopped him with a hand on his arm.
“Hold there, Abram,” said the second man, speaking softly
but c learly . “Y ou don’ t want to be firing so close to the crick.
Y ou heard what the Colonel said—Regulators are drawn right
up to the bank n ear that point.” He nodded toward the heavy
growth of alder and willow t hat marked the edge of the
invisible creek, no more than a  hundred yards distant. “Y ou
don’ t want to be provokin’ them, not just now .”
Abram nodded reluctantly , and put up his gun again.
“A ye, I suppose. W ill it be today , do you think?”Roger glanced back at the sapling grove, but the deer had
vanished, silent as smoke.
“Can’ t s ee how it won’ t be.” The third man pulled a yellow
kerchief from his sleeve and wi ped his face; the weather was
warm and the air muggy . “T ryon’ s had his guns in place since
dawn; h e’ s not the man to let an ybody get a jump on him. He
might wait for W addell’ s men—but he may think he’ s no need
of them.”
Abram snorted with mild contempt.
“T o crush those rabble? Seen th em, have you? A poorer set
of soldiers you’d not see in a month of Sundays.”
The man with the kerchief smiled cynically .
“W ell, that’ s as may be, Abie. Seen some of the backcountry
militia, have you? Speakin’ of rabble. And speakin’ of the
Regulators, there’ s a lot of ‘em , rabble or not. T wo to one,
Cap’n Neale says.”
Abram grunted, casting a last reluctant glance toward the
wood and the creek beyond.
“Rabble,” he repeated, more confidently , and turned away .
“Come along, then, let’ s have a look upslope.”
The foragers were on the same side as himself; they wore no
cockades, but he saw the mili tia badges on breast and hat,
glinting silver in the morning su n. Still, Roger remained in the
shadows until the men had vanished, talking casually amongst
themselves. He was reasonably  sure that Jamie had sent him
on this mission with no authority beyond his own; best if he
were not asked to explain himself.
The attitude amongst most of the militia toward the
Regulation was at best scornful. At worst—at the upper levels
of command—it was coldly vindictive.
“Crush them once and for all,” Caswell had said, over a cup
of co f fee by the fire the night be fore. A plantation owner from
the eastern part of the colony , Richard Caswell had no
sympathy with the Regulators’ grievances.Roger patted his pocket again, considering. No, best leave
it. H e could pro duce the badge if he were challenged, and he
didn’ t think anyone would shoot him in the back without at
least a shout of  warning. Still, he felt oddly exposed as he
walked t hrough the lush grass of  the river -meadow , and sighed
with involuntary relief, as the languishing branches of the
creek-side willows enfolded him in cool shadow .
He had, with Ja mie’ s approval, left his musket behind, and
come un armed, save for the knif e at his belt that was a normal
accoutrement for any man. His only other item of equipment
was a lar ge white kerchief, presently folded up inside his coat.
“If ye should be threatened—a nywhere—wave it and cry
‘T ruce,’” Jamie had instructed him. “Then tell them to fetch
me, and  dinna say more until I come. If no one prevents you,
bring me Husband under its protection.”
The vision of himself leading Hermon Husband back across
the creek, holding the flapping kerchief on a stick above his
head lik e a guide leading tourist s through an airport, made him
want to hoot with laughter . Jam ie hadn’ t laughed, though, or
even smiled, and so he had accepted the cloth solemnly ,
tucking it away with care. He peered through the screen of
drooping leaves , but the creek ran past sparkling in the new
day’ s sun, silent save for the r ush of water past stones and
clay . No  one was in sight, and the noise of the water drowned
any sound that might have come from beyond the trees on the
other side. While the militia mi ght not shoot him in the back,
he wasn’ t so sanguine about the possibilities of Regulators
shooting him from the front, if t hey saw him crossing from the
Government side.
Still, he couldn’ t skulk in the trees all day . He emer ged onto
the b ank, and m ade his way downstream toward the point the
foragers had indicated, watching the trees carefully for any
signs of life. Th e crossing near the point was better , shallow
water and a rock y bottom. Still, if the Regulators were “drawn
up” anywhere nearby , they were being damned quiet about it.A more peacefu l scene could scarcely be imagined, and yet
his heart was hammering suddenly in his ears. He had again
the odd feeling of someone st anding near him. He glanced
around in all directions, but no thing moved save the rushing
water and the trailing willow fronds.
“That you, Dad?” he said softly , under his breath, and at
once felt foolish. Still, the feeli ng of someone near remained
strong, though benign.
W ith a mental shrug, he bent and took of f his shoes and
stockings. It must be the circumstances, he thought. Not that
one could quite compare wading  a shallow creek in search of a
Quaker rabble-rouser to flying a Spitfire across the night-time
Channel on a b ombing run to Germany . A mission was a
mission, though, he supposed.
He looked round once again, but saw only tadpoles
wriggling in the shallows. W ith a slightly crooked smile, he
stepped into the water , sending the tadpoles into frenzied
flight.
“Over the top, then,” he said to a wood-duck. The bird
ignored him, going on with its foraging among the dark-green
rafts of floating cress.
No c hallenge came from the tre es on either side; no sounds
at all, bar the cheerful racket of nesting birds. It was as he sat
on a sunwarmed  rock, drying hi s feet before putting his shoes
and stockings back on, that he finally heard some indication
that the far side of the creek was populated by humans.
“So what do you want then, sweeting?”
The voice came from the shru bbery behind him, and he
froze, bl ood thundering in his e ars. It was a woman’ s voice.
Before he could move or think to answer , though, he heard a
laugh, d eeper in pitch, and with a particular tone to it that
made him relax.
Instinct informe d him before his  reason did that voices with
that particular intonation were not a threat.
“Dunno, hinney , what will it cost me?”“Ooh, hark at him! Not the time to count your pennies, is
it?”
“Don’ t y ou worry , ladies, we’ll take up a collection amongst
us if we have to.”
“Oh, is that the  way of it? W ell and good, sir , but be you
aware, in this congregation, the collection comes befor e  the
singing!”
Listening to this amiable wrangling, Roger deduced that the
voices in question belonged to t hree men and two women, all
of whom seemed confident that whatever the financial
arrangements, three would go into two quite evenly , with no
awkward remainders.
Picking up his shoes, he stole quietly away , leaving the
unseen sentries —if that’ s what they were—to their sums.
Evidently , the army of the Regulation wasn’ t quite so
or ganized as the government troops.
Less or ganized was putting it mildly , he thought, a little
later . He  had kept to the creek bank for some distance, unsure
where th e main body of the army might be. He had walked
nearly a quarter -mile, with neit her sight nor sound of a soul
other than the two whores and their customers. Feeling
increasingly surreal, he wander ed through small pine groves,
and across the edges of grassy  meadows, with no company
save cou rting bi rds and small go ssamer butterflies in shades of
orange and yellow .
“What the hell sort of way is this to run a war?” he
muttered, shoving his way through a blackberry bramble. It
was like one of those science fiction stories, in which everyone
but t he hero had  suddenly vanished from the face of the earth.
He was beginnin g to be anxiou s; what if he didn’ t manage to
find the bloody Quaker—or even the army—before the
shooting started?
Then he rounded a bend in the  creek, and caught his first
glimpse of the Regulators proper; a group of women, washing
clothes in the rushing waters by a cluster of boulders.He ducked back into the brush before they should see him,
and turn ed away from the creek,  heartened. If the women were
here, the men weren’ t far away .
They weren’ t. W ithin a few mor e yards, he heard the sounds
of ca mp—casual voices, laughte r , the clank of spoons and tea-
kettles a nd the clunk of splittin g wood. Rounding a clump of
hawthorn, he was nearly knock ed over by a gang of young
men who ran past, hooting and yelling, as they chased one of
their nu mber who brandished a fresh-cut racoon’ s tail
overhead, floating in the breeze as he ran.
They ch ar ged p ast Roger without a second glance, and he
went on , a bit le ss warily . He wa sn’ t challenged; there were no
sentries. In fact, a strange face appeared to be neither a novelty
nor a threat. A  few men glanced casually at him, but then
turned b ack to their talk, seeing nothing odd in his appearance.
“I’m loo king for Hermon Husband,” he said bluntly to a
man roa sting a squirrel over the pale flames of a fire. The man
looked blank for a moment.
“The Quaker?” Roger amplified.
“Oh, aye, him,” the man said,  features clearing. “He’ s a
ways beyond—that way , I think.” He gestured helpfully with
his stick , the charred squirrel po inting the way with the stubs
of its blackened forelegs.
“A ways beyond” was some way . Roger passed through
three more scattered camps before reaching what looked to be
the main body of the army—if one could dignify it by such a
term. T rue, there did seem to be an increasing air of
seriousness; the re was less of the carefree frolicking he had
seen near the creek. Still, it wasn’ t Strategic Command
headquarters, by a long shot.
He b egan to fee l mildly hopeful that violence could still be
avoided, even with the armies drawn up face to face and the
gun-crews stand ing by . There had been an air of excited
readiness among  the militia as he passed through their lines,
but no atmosphere of hatred or blood-thirstiness.Here, the situation was far dif ferent than it was among the
orderly militia lines, but even less disposed to immediate
hostilities. As he pressed on fur ther , though, asking his way at
each campfire he passed, he beg an to feel something dif ferent
in the air—a sense of increasing ur gency , almost of
desperation. The  horseplay he’d seen in the outer camps had
vanished; men clustered talking in close groups, their heads
together , or sat by themselves, grimly loading guns and
sharpening knives.
As he got clo ser , the name of Hermon Husband was
recognized by everyone, the  pointing fingers surer of
direction. The name seemed almost a magnet, pulling him
farther and farther into the cente r of a thickening mass of men
and boy s, all excited—all armed. The noise grew greater all
the time, voices beating on his ears like hammers on a for ge.
He f ound Husband at last, stan ding on a rock like a lar ge
gray wo lf at bay , surrounded by a knot of some thirty or forty
men, all clamoring in angry agi tation. Elbows jabbed and feet
trampled, without regard to impact on their fellows. Clearly
they were demanding an answ er , but unable to pause long
enough to hear one were it given.
Husband, stripp ed to his shirtsleeves and red in the face,
was shouting at one or two of those closest to him, but Roger
could he ar nothing of what was  said, above the general hub-
bub. He pushed through the ou ter ring of spectators, but was
stopped nearer the center by the press of men. At least here, he
could pick up a few words.
“W e must! Y ou know it, Hermon, there’ s no choice!”
shouted a lanky man in a battered hat.
“There’ s always  a choice!” Husband bellowed back. “Now
is the time to choose, and God send we do it wisely!”
“A ye, with cannon pointed at us?”
“No, no, forward, we must go forward, or all is lost!”
“Lost? W e have lost everything so far! W e must—”
“The Governor ’ s taken choice from us, we must—”“W e must—”
“W e must—!”
All sing le words were lost in a general roar of anger and
frustration. Seei ng that there was nothing to be gained by
waiting for an audience, Roger shoved his way ruthlessly
between two farmers and seized Husband by the sleeve of his
shirt.
“Mr . Husband—I must speak with you!” he shouted in the
Quaker ’ s ear .
Husband gave him a glazed sort of look, and made to shake
him of f, but then  stopped, blinking as he recognized him. The
square f ace was flushed with color above the sprouting beard,
and Husband’ s coarse gray hair ,  unbound, bristled out from his
head like the quills of a porcupine. He shook his head and shut
his eyes, then op ened them again, staring at Roger like a man
seeking to dispel some impossible vision, and failing.
He grab bed Roger ’ s arm, and with a fierce gesture at the
crowd, leaped down from his rock and made of f toward the
shelter of a ram shackle cabin that leaned drunkenly in the
shade o f a maple grove. Roger followed, glaring round at
those nearest to discourage pursuit.
A few followed, nonetheless, waving arms and
expostulating hotly , but Roger slammed the door in their faces,
and dropped the bolt, placing his back against the door for
good me asure. It was cooler in side, though the air was stale
and smelt of wood-ash and burnt food.
Husband stood panting in the  middle of the floor , then
picked up a dipp er and drank de eply from a bucket that stood
upon the  hearth—the only object left in the cabin, Roger saw .
Husband’ s coat and hat hung neatly on a hook by the door , but
bits of rubbish were scattered across the packed-earth floor .
Whoever owned the cabin had evidently decamped in haste,
carrying their portable belongings.
Calmed by the m oment’ s respite, Husband straightened his
rumpled shirt and made shift to tidy his hair .“What does thee here, friend MacKenzie?” he asked, with
characteristic mi ldness. “Thee does not come to join the cause
of Regulation, surely?”
“Indeed I do not ,” Roger assured him. He cast a wary eye at
the window , lest the crowd try  to gain access that way , but
while the rumble of voices outside continued their ar gument,
there was no im mediate sound of assault upon the building. “I
have come to ask if you will go across the creek with me—
under a flag of truce, your saf ety is assured—to speak with
Jamie Fraser .”
Husband glanced at the window , too.
“I fear the time for speaking has  long passed,” he said, with
a wr y twist of the lips. Roger wa s inclined to think so, too, but
pressed on, determined to fulfill his commission.
“Not so far as th e Governor is c oncerned. He has no wish to
slaughter his own citizenry; if the mob could be convinced to
disperse peaceably—”
“Does it seem to  thee a likely prospect?” Husband waved at
the window , giving him a cynical glance.
“No,” R oger was forced to adm it. “Still, if you would come
—if they could see that there was still some possibility of—”
“If there were possibility of reconciliation and redress, it
should have been of fered long since,” Husband said sharply .
“Is this a token of the Governor ’ s sincerity , to come with
troops and cannon, to send a letter that—”
“Not redress,” Roger said bluntly . “I meant the possibility of
saving all your lives.”
Husband stood quite still. The ruddy color faded from his
cheeks, though he looked still composed.
“Has it come to that?” he asked quietly , his eyes on Roger ’ s
face. Roger took a deep breath and nodded.
“There i s not much time. Mr . Fr aser bid me tell you—if you
could not come to speak with him yourself—there are two
companies of artillery arrayed against you, and eight of militia,all well-armed. All lies in readiness—and the Governor will
not wait past dawn of tomorrow , at the latest.”
He was aware th at it was treason to give such information to
the enemy—but  it was what Jamie Fraser would have said,
could he have come himself.
“There are near two thousand m en of the Regulation here,”
Husband said, as though to himself. “T wo thousand! W ould
thee not  think the sight of it would sway him? That so many
would leave home and hearth and come in protest—”
“It is the Gover nor ’ s opinion that they come in rebellion,
therefore in a state of war ,” Roger interrupted. He glanced at
the window , where the oiled parchment covering hung in
tatters. “ And ha ving seen them, I must say that I think he has
reasonable grounds for that opinion.”
“It is no rebellion,” Husband said stubbornly . He drew
himself up, and pulled a worn  black silk ribbon from his
pocket, with which to tie back  his hair . “But our legitimate
complaints have been ignored, disregarded! W e have no
choice but to co me as a physic al body , to lay our grievances
before M r . T ryon and thus imp ress him with the rightness of
our objection.”
“I thought I heard you speak of choice a few moments
past,” Roger said dryly . “And if now is the time to choose, as
you say ,  it would seem to me that most of the Regulators have
chosen violence —judging from such remarks as I heard on my
way here.”
“Perhaps,” Husb and said reluctantly . “Y et we—they—are
not an avenging  army , not a mob …” And yet his unwilling
glance toward the window suggested his awareness that a mob
was indeed what was forming on the banks of the Alamance.
“Do they have a chosen leader , anyone who can speak
of ficially for them?” Roger interrupted again, impatient to
deliver his message and be go ne. “Y ourself, or perhaps Mr .
Hunter?”Husband paused for a long mom ent, wiping the back of his
hand ac ross his mouth as though to expunge some lingering
rancid taste. He shook his head.
“They h ave no real leader ,” he  said softly . “Jim Hunter is
bold eno ugh, bu t he has no gift of commanding men. I asked
him—he said that each man must act for himself.”
“Y ou have the gift. Y ou can lead them.”
Husband looked  scandalized, as though Roger had accused
him of a talent for card-sharping.
“Not I.”
“Y ou have led them here—”
“They have come  here! I asked none to—”
“Y ou are here. They followed you.”
Husband flinched slightly at this, his lips compressed.
Seeing that his words had some ef fect, Roger pressed his case.
“Y ou spoke for them before, and they listened. They came
with you, after you. They’ll still listen, surely!”
He could hear the noise outsi de the cabin growing; the
crowd was impatient. If it wa sn’ t yet a mob, it was damn
close. And what would they do if they knew who he was, and
what he had come to do? His pa lms were sweating; he pressed
them do wn across the fabric of his coat, feeling the small lump
of hi s m ilitia bad ge in the pocke t, and wished he had paused to
bury it somewhere when he crossed the creek.
Husband looked  at him a moment, then reached out and
seized him by both hands.
“Pray with me, friend,” he said quietly .
“I—”
“Thee need say nothing,” Husband said. “I know thee is
Papist, b ut it is not our way to pray aloud. If thee would but
remain still with me, and ask in your heart that wisdom be
granted—not only to me, but to all here …”Roger bit his tongue to keep from correcting Husband; his
own religious af filiation was  scarcely important at the
moment, though  evidently Husband’ s was. Instead he nodded,
suppressing his  impatience, and squeezed the older man’ s
hands, of fering what support he might.
Husband stood quite still, his h ead slightly lowered. A fist
hammered on the flimsy door of the cabin, voices calling out.
“Hermon! Y ou all right in there?”
“Come on, Hermon! There’ s no time for this! Caldwell’ s
come back from the Governor—”
“An hour , Hermon! He’ s given us an hour , no more!”
A tr ickle of sw eat ran down Roger ’ s back between his
shoulder blades, but he ignored the tickle, unable to reach it.
He glanced from Husband’ s weathered fingers to his face,
and found the ot her man’ s eyes seemingly fixed on his own—
and yet distant,  as though he listened to some far -of f voice,
disregarding the ur gent shouts that came through the walls.
Even Husband’ s  eyes were Qua ker gray , Roger thought—like
pools of rainwater , shivering into stillness after a storm.
Surely t hey would break down the door . But no; the blows
diminished to an impatient knocking, and then to random
thumps. He could feel the beat ing of his own heart, slowing
gradually to a q uiet, even throb in his chest, anxiety fading in
his blood.
He c losed his ow n eyes, trying to fix his thoughts, to do as
Husband asked.  He groped in  his mind for some suitable
prayer , but nothing save confus ed fragments of the Book of
Common W orship came to hand.
Help us, O Lor d …
Hear us …
Help us, O Lor d , his  father ’ s vo ice whispered.  His other
father , the Reverend, speaking somewhere in the back of his
mind. Help us, O Lor d, to r emember how often men do wr ongthr ough want of thought, rather than fr om lack of love; and
how cunning ar e the snar es that trip our feet.
Each wo rd flickered briefly in h is mind like a burning leaf,
rising from a bonfire’ s wind, and then disappeared away into
ash befo re he could grasp it. H e gave it up then and simply
stood, c lasping Husband’ s hands in his own, listening to the
man’ s breathing, a low rasping note.
Please , he thought silently , though with no idea what he was
asking f or . That  word too evap orated, leaving nothing in its
place.
Nothing happened. The voices still called outside, but they
seemed of no more importance now than the calling of birds.
The air in the room was still, b ut cool and lively , as though a
draft played somewhere in the corners, not touching them
where they stood in the center of the floor . Roger felt his own
breath ease, his heart slow its beat still more.
He didn ’ t reme mber opening his eyes, and yet they were
open. Husband’ s  soft gray eyes had flecks of blue in them, and
tiny splinters of black. His lash es were thick, and there was a
small sw elling a t the base of one, a healing sty . The tiny dome
was sm ooth and red, fading fr om a ruby dot at the center
through such successions of crimson, pink, and rose red as
might have graced the dawn sky on the day of Creation.
The face before him was sculpted with lines that drew rough
arcs from  nose to mouth, that curved above the heavy , grizzled
brows whose every hair was lon g and arched with the grace of
a bir d’ s wing. The lips were broad and smooth, a dusky rose;
the whit e edge of a tooth glistened, strangely hard by contrast
with the pliable flesh that sheltered it.
Roger stood without moving, wondering at the beauty of
what he saw . T he notion of Husband as a stocky man of
middle a ge and indeterminate feature had no meaning; what he
saw now  was a heartbreaking singularity , a thing unique and
wonderful; irreplaceable.It struck him tha t this was same  feeling with which he had
studied his infant son, marveling at the perfection of each
small toe, the cu rve of cheek and ear that squeezed his heart,
the r adiance of t he newborn skin that let the innocence within
shine thr ough. And here was the  same creation, no longer new ,
perhaps less innocent, but no less marvelous.
He l ooked down and saw his ow n hands then, still gripping
Husband’ s smaller ones. A sense of awe came on him, with the
realization of the beauty of his o wn fingers, the curving bones
of w rist and knu ckle, the ravishing loveliness of a thin red scar
that ran across the joint of his thumb.
Husband’ s breath left him in a deep sigh, and he pulled his
hands away . Roger felt momentarily bereft, but then felt the
peace o f the room settle upon him once more, the
astonishment of beauty succeeded by a sense of deep calm.
“I thank thee, Friend Roger ,” Husband said softly . “I had not
hoped to receive such grace—but it is welcome.”
Roger nodded, wordless. He watched as Husband took
down his coat and put it on, hi s face settled now in lines of
calm determination. W ithout he sitation, the Quaker lifted the
bolt from the door and pushed it open.
The crowd of m en outside fell back, the surprise on their
faces giving way at once to eagerness and irritation. Husband
ignored the storm of questions and exhortations, and walked
directly to a horse that stood tethered to a sapling behind the
cabin. He untied it and swung up into the saddle, and only then
looked down into the faces of his fellow Regulators.
“Go home!” he said, in a loud voice. “W e must leave this
place; each man must return to his own home!”
This announcement was met with a moment of stunned
silence, and then by cries of puzzlement and outrage.
“What h ome?” called a young man with a scraggly ginger
beard. “Maybe you got a home to go to—I ain’ t!”
Husband sat solid in his saddle, unmoved by the outcry .“Go home!” he shouted again. “I exhort you—nothing but
violence remains to be done here!”
“A ye, and we’ll bloody do it!” bellowed one thickset man,
thrusting his musket overhead, to a ragged chorus of cheers.
Roger had followed Husband, and was lar gely ignored by
the Reg ulators. He stood at a little distance, watching as the
Quaker began slowly to ride away , bending down from his
saddle a s he did so, to shout an d gesture to the men who ran
and shoved beside him. One man grabbed Husband by the
sleeve, a nd the Quaker drew up his rein, leaning down to listen
to what was obviously an impassioned speech.
At t he end of it, though, he straightened up, shaking his
head, and clapped his hat on.
“I ca nnot stay a nd let blood be shed by my staying. If thee
remain h ere, friends, there will be murder done. Leave! Thee
can still go—I pray thee do so!”
He was no long er shouting, but the noise around him had
ceased long enough for his words to carry . He raised a face
creased with worry , and saw Ro ger standing in the shadow of
a do gwood. The stillness of pea ce had left him, but Roger saw
that the look of determination was still there in his eyes.
“I a m going!” he called. “I be g thee all—go home!” He
reined h is horse round with sudd en decision, and kicked it into
a trot. A few men ran after him, but soon stopped. They turned
back, looking puzzled and resentful, muttering in small groups
and shaking their heads in confusion.
The noise was rising again, as everyone talked at once,
ar guing, insistin g, denying. Roger turned away , walking
quietly toward the cover of the maple grove. It seemed wiser
to be gone as soon as possible, now that Husband had
departed.
A hand seized him by the shoulder , and spun him round.
“Who the hell are you? What did you say to Hermon to
make him go?” A grimy fell ow in a ragged leather vestconfronted him, fists clenched. The man looked angry , ready
to take out his frustration on the nearest available object.
“I to ld him that  the Governor doesn’ t want anyone to be
harmed, if it can be avoided,” Roger said, in what he hoped
was a calming tone.
“Do you come from the Governor?” a black-bearded man
asked skeptically , eyeing Roger ’ s grubby homespun. “D’ye
come to of fer dif ferent terms than Caldwell has?”
“No.” R oger had been still unde r the ef fects of the meeting
with Husband, feeling sheltered from the currents of anger and
incipient hysteria that swirled about the cabin, but the peace of
it was fading fast. Others were coming to join his
interrogators, attracted by the sound of confrontation.
“No,” he said again, louder . “I came to warn Husband—to
warn all of you. The Governor wants—”
He was interrupted by a chorus of rude shouts, indicating
that wha t T ryon wanted was a matter of no concern to those
present. He glanced around the  circle of faces, but saw none
that of fered any expression of forbearance, let alone
friendliness. He shrugged then, and stepped back.
“Y ou’ll suit yourselves, then,” h e said, as coolly as possible.
“Mr . Husband gave you his best advice—I second it.” He
turned t o leave, but was gripped by a pair of hands that
descended on his shoulders, pulling him forcibly around to
face the ring of questioners once more.
“Not so fast, ch uck,” said the man in the leather vest. He
was still flushed with angry excitement, but his fists were no
longer clenched. “Y ou’ve spoke with T ryon, have you?”
“No,” Roger admitted. “I was sent—” He hesitated; ought
he to  use  Jamie Fraser ’ s name? No, better not; it was as likely
to ca use trouble as to save it. “I came to ask Hermon Husband
to come across the creek and discover for himself how matters
stand. H e chose instead to accep t my account of the situation.
Y ou saw what his response was.”“So you  say!” A burly man with ginger sidewhiskers raised
his chin pugnaciously . “And why should anyone accept your
account of the situation?” He mimicked Roger ’ s clipped Scots
in a burlesque that brought laughter from his comrades.
The calm he had carried from the cabin had not altogether
left him ; Roger gathered its remnants about him and spoke
quietly .
“I ca nnot compel you to listen, sir . But for those who have
ears—hear this. ” He looked from one face to another , and
reluctantly , one by one, they le ft of f making noise, until he
stood as the center of a ring of unwilling attention.
“The Governor ’ s troops stand ready and well-armed.” His
voice sounded odd to his ow n ears, calm but somehow
muf fled, as though someone else were speaking, some
distance away . “I have not see n the Governor myself, but I
have hea rd his stated purpose: he does not wish to see blood
shed, bu t he is d etermined to take such actions as he perceives
necessary to disperse this assembly . Y et if you will return
peaceably to your homes, he is disposed to leniency .”
A m oment of silence greeted  this, to be broken by a
hawking noise. A glob of mucus , streaked brown with tobacco
juice, landed with a splat in the mud near Roger ’ s boot.
“That,” observed the spitter concisely , “for the Governor ’ s
leniency .”
“And that for y ou, fuckwit!” said one of his companions,
swinging an open palm toward Roger ’ s face.
He ducked the b low , and lowering his shoulder , char ged the
man, who staggered of f-balance and gave way . There were
more beyond him, though; Roger stopped, fists balled, ready
to defend himself if need be.
“Don’ t hurt him, boys,” called the man in the leather vest.
“Not yet, anyways.” He sidled r ound Roger , keeping well out
of range of his fists, and eyed him warily .
“Whether you’ve seen T ryon’ s face or not, reckon you’ve
seen his troops, haven’ t you?”“I have.” Roger ’ s heart was beating fast, and the blood sang
in hi s temples, b ut oddly enough, he wasn’ t afraid. The crowd
was hostile, but not bloodthirsty—not yet.
“So how many men does T ry on have?” The man was
watching him closely , with a gl int in his eye. Best to answer
honestly; the odds were good that the answer was already
known; there was nothing wh atever to hinder men of the
Regulation from crossing the Alamance and assessing the
situation for themselves.
“A f ew more than a thousand, ” Roger said, watching the
man’ s face carefully . No surprise; he had  known. “But they are
trained militia,”  Roger added pointedly , with a glance at a
number of the R egulators, who,  having lost interest in Roger ,
had resumed a wrestling match nearby . “And they have
artillery . I think you have none, sir?”
The man’ s face closed like a fist.
“Think what you like,” he said  shortly . “But you can tell
T ryon that we b oast twice his number . And be we trained  or
not—” h is mou th twisted ironically , “we are all armed, each
man with his m usket.” He tilted back his head, squinting
against the light.
“An hou r , is it?” he asked, more softly . “Sooner than that, I
think.” He lowered his gaze, looking Roger in the eye.
“Go you back across the creek, then, sir . T ell Governor
T ryon that we mean to have our say , and have our way of it. If
he will listen and do as we demand, well and good. If not …”
He t ouched the hilt of the pisto l in his belt, and nodded once,
his face settling into grim lines.
Roger glanced around at the c ircle of silent faces. Some
bore looks of u ncertainty , but  most were sullen or openly
defiant. He turned without a word and walked away , the
Reverend’ s words whispering among the spring leaves as he
passed beneath the trees.
Blessed ar e the peacemakers: f or they shall be called the
childr en of God.He hoped one got credit for trying.63
THE SURGEON’S BOOK I
Item #28 - Th e Sur geons to keep a Book and enter each
Man that comes under his car e, V ixt. the Mans Name, the
Company he belongs to, the Da y he comes under his Hands,
and the day he dischar ges him.
 
— ” Camp Duties and Regulations”
 
I F EL T A cool breeze touch m y cheek, and shivered, though
the d ay w as very  warm. I had the sudden absurd thought that it
was the glancing  touch of a wing-feather , as though the Angel
of Death had silently passed by me, intent on his dark
business.
“Nonsense,” I said aloud. Evan Lindsay heard me; I saw his
head turn momentarily , but then  turn back. Like all the others,
he kept glancing toward the east.
People who don’ t believe in tele pathy have never set foot on
a battlefield, nor served with an army . Something passes
unseen from man to man when an army is about to move; the
air i tself is live  with feeling. Half dread, half eagerness, it
dances over the skin and bores the length of the spine with an
ur gency like sudden lust.
No messenger had come yet, but one would, I knew it.
Something had happened, somewhere.
Everyone stood rooted, waiting. I felt an overwhelming ur ge
to m ove, to bre ak that spell, and turned abruptly , my hands
flexing with the need to stir , to do something. The kettle had
boiled, the water sat ready , cove red with a piece of clean linen.
I h ad set up my medicine chest on a stump; I put back the lid
and began to go mindlessly th rough its contents yet again,
though I knew all was in order .I t ouche d the gleaming bottles one by one, their names a
soothing litany .
Atropine, Bell adonna, Laudanum, Paregoric, Oil of
Lavender , Oil of Juniper , Pennyroyal, Lady’ s-vetch, … and the
squat br own-glass bottle of alcohol. Always alcohol. I had a
keg of it, still on the wagon.
Movement caug ht my eye; it was Jamie, the sun sparking on
his hair through the leaves as he moved quietly under the trees,
bending here to speak a word in  someone’ s ear , touching there
a shoulder , like a magician bringing statues to life.
I sto od still, ha nds twisted in the folds of my apron, not
wanting to distract him, yet wa nting very much to attract his
attention. He moved easily , jokin g, touching casually—and yet
I cou ld s ee the tension in him. When had he last stood with an
army , waiting the order to char ge?
At Culloden, I thought, and the hairs rippled erect on my
forearms, pale in the spring sun.
Hoofsteps sounded nearby , and the crashing sound of horses
moving through  brush. Everyone swung round in expectation,
muskets held loose in their han ds. There was a general gasp
and murmur as the first rider came into view , ducking her
bright red head beneath the maple boughs.
“Holy Christ,” Jamie said, loudly enough to be heard across
the clearing. “What in hell is she  d oing here?” T here was a
ripple of  laughter from the men  who knew her , fracturing the
tension like cracks in ice. Jamie’ s shoulders relaxed, very
slightly , but his face was rather grim as he strode to meet her .
By the time Br ianna had pulled up her horse and swung
down from her saddle next to him, I had reached them, too.
“What—” I began, but Jamie wa s already nose to nose with
his daug hter , his hand on her arm, eyes narrowed and speaking
in a rapid torrent of low-voiced Gaelic.
“I’m tha t sorry , Mum, but she would  come.” A second horse
ambled out of the trees, an apologetic-looking young blackman on top. It was Joshua, Jocasta’ s groom. “I couldna prevent
her , nor could Missus Sherston. W e did try .”
“So I see,” I said.
Brianna’ s color had risen in resp onse to whatever Jamie was
saying t o her , but she showed n o sign of getting back on her
horse and leaving. She said som ething to him, also in Gaelic,
that I didn’ t catch, and he reared back as though stung on the
nose by a wasp.  She nodded sh arply once, as though satisfied
with the impact of her statement , and turned on her heel. Then
she saw me, and a wide smile transformed her face.
“Mama!” She embraced me, her gown smelling faintly of
fresh soap, beeswax, and turpen tine. There was a small streak
of cobalt-blue paint on her jaw .
“Hallo, d arling. Wherever did you come from?” I kissed her
cheek and stood back, cheered by the sight of her , in spite of
everything. She was dressed ve ry plainly , in the rough brown
homespun she wore on the Rid ge, but the clothes were fresh
and clea n. Her long red hair was tied back in a plait, and a
broad straw hat hung from its strings down her back.
“Hillsborough,” she said. “Someone who came to dinner at
the Sher stons’ last night told u s that the militia was camped
here—so I came. I brought som e food”— she waved at the
bulging saddlebags on her horse—”and some herbs from the
Sherstons’ garden I thought you might use.”
“Oh? Oh, yes. Lovely .” I was  uneasily aware of Jamie’ s
glowering presence somewhere behind me, but didn’ t look
around. “Ah … I don’ t mean to sound as though I’m not
pleased to see you, darling, but there is just possibly going to
be a fight here before too long, and … .”
“I know  that.” Her color was still high, and it deepened
somewhat at this. She raised her voice slightly .
“That’ s all right; I didn’ t come to fight. If I had, I would
have worn my breeches.” Sh e darted a glance over my
shoulder , and I h eard a loud snort from that direction, followedby guf fa ws from the Lindsay brothers. She lowered her head
to hide a grin, and I couldn’ t help smiling, too.
“I’ll stay with you,” she said, lowering her voice as well,
and touching my arm. “If there’ s nursing to be done …
afterward—I can help.”
I hes itated, but t here was no question that if things did come
to a figh t, there would be wounded to treat, and an extra pair
of hands  would  be useful. Bria nna wasn’ t skilled at nursing,
but she did understand about germs and antisepsis, knowledge
of much more value in its way than a grasp of anatomy or
physiology .
Bree had straightened. Her glance flickered over the men
who waited in the maples’ shade, searching.
“Where’ s Roger?” she asked, her voice low but level.
“He’ s al l right,” I assured her , hoping it was true. “Jamie
sent him across the creek this morning, with a flag of truce, to
bring back Hermon Husband to talk with the Governor .”
“He’ s over ther e ?” Her voice rose involuntarily , and she
lowered it, self-conscious. “W ith the enemy? If that’ s the right
word for them.”
“He’ll be back.” Jamie stood by my elbow , viewing his
daughter with no great favor , b ut obviously resigned to her
presence. “Dinna fash, lassie. No one will trouble him, under a
flag of truce.”
Bree rai sed her head, looking as far as she could into the
distance toward the creek. Her face had drawn in upon itself, a
pale knot of apprehension.
“W ill a flag of truce help him if he’ s still over there when
the shooting starts?”
The ans wer to  that—which she obviously knew—was
“Probably not.” So did Jamie, w ho didn’ t bother saying it. He
also didn’ t bother saying that perhaps it wouldn’ t come to
shooting; the air was thick wit h anticipation, acrid with the
scent of spilled black powder and nervous sweat.“He’ll be back,” Jamie repeated , though in a gentler tone.
He t ouched her face, smoothing back a random lock of hair . “I
promise, lass. He’ll be all right.”
The look of app rehension faded a bit as she searched his
face. She seemed to find some r eassurance there, for a little of
the tensi on left her , and she nodded, in mute acceptance. Jamie
leaned f orward and kissed her on the forehead, then turned
away to speak to Rob Byrnes.
Bree sto od looking after him fo r a moment, then untied the
strings o f her bonnet and came to sit down beside me on a
rock. Her hands were trembli ng slightly; she took a deep
breath, and clasped her knees to still them.
“Is t here anything I can do to help now?” she asked, with a
nod tow ard my open medicine box. “Do you need me to fetch
anything?”
I shook my head.
“No, I have eve rything I need. There isn’ t anything to do
but wait.” I grimaced slightly . “That’ s the hardest part.”
She made a small sound of reluctant agreement, and
relaxed, with a visible ef fort. She assessed the waiting
equipment, a slight frown between her brows: the fire, the
boiling w ater , th e folding table, the lar ge instrument box, and
the smaller pack that held my emer gency kit.
“What’ s in there?” she asked, p oking a boot-shod toe at the
canvas sack.
“Alcohol and bandages, a scalpel, forceps, amputation saw ,
tourniquets. They’ll bring the wounded here, if they can, or to
one of the other sur geons. But if I have to go to a man
wounded on the field—someone  too bad to walk or be carried
—I can snatch that up and go at once.”
I he ard her sw allow , and when I glanced up at her , the
freckles stood out on the bridge of her nose. She nodded, and
drew a deep b reath to speak. Her face changed suddenly ,
though, switching comically from seriousness to repugnance.She snif fed once, suspiciously , her long nose wrinkling like an
ant-eater ’ s.
I c ould smell it,  too; the stink of fresh feces, coming from
the grove directly behind us.
“That’ s rather common before a battle,” I said, low-voiced,
trying not to lau gh at her expression. “They’re caught short,
poor things.”
She cleared her throat and didn’ t say anything, but I saw her
gaze roam round the clearing, resting now on one man, then
another . I knew what she was thinking. How was it possible?
How co uld one look at such an orderly , compact bundle as a
man, hea d bent to catch a friend ’ s words, arm stretched to take
a canteen, face moving from smile to frown, eyes lighted and
muscles taut—a nd envision rupture, abrasion, fracture … and
death?
It co uldn’ t be do ne. It was an act of the imagination that lay
beyond the capability of one who hadn’ t ever seen that
particular obscene transformation.
It could, however , be remembered. I coughed, and leaned
forward, hoping to distract us both.
“Whatever did you say to your father?” I asked, out of the
side of my mout h. “When you c ame, when you were speaking
Gaelic.”
“Oh, that.” A slight flush of amusement momentarily
relieved her paleness. “He was snarling at me, wanting to
know w hat I thought I was playi ng at—did I mean to leave my
child an orphan, he said, risking  my life along with Roger ’ s?”
She wip ed a strand of red hair away from her mouth, and gave
me a small, edgy smile. “So I said to him, if it was so
dangerous, where did he get of f, risking making me  an orphan
by having you here, hm?”
I laughed, though keeping that, too, under my breath.
“It’ s not dangerous for you, is i t?” she asked, surveying the
militia encampment. “Back here, I mean?”I shook my head.
“No. If the fighting comes anywhere close, we’ll move,
right away . But I don’ t think—”
I was interrupte d by the sound of a horse, coming fast, and
was on my feet, along with the  rest of the camp, by the time
the messenger appeared; one of T ryon’ s baby-faced aides, pale
with bottled-up excitement.
“Stand ready ,” he said, hangin g out of his saddle, half-
breathless.
“And what d’ye think we’ve been doing since dawn?” Jamie
demanded, impatient. “What in God’ s name is happening,
man?”
V ery little, apparently , but that little was important enough.
A minis ter from the Regulators’ side had come to parley with
the Governor .
“A minister?” Jamie interrupted. “A Quaker , do you mean?”
“I d o not know , sir ,” said the aide, annoyed at being
interrupted. “Quakers have no cler gy , anyone knows as much.
No, it was a m inister named Caldwell, the Reverend David
Caldwell.”
Regardless of religious af filiation, T ryon had been unmoved
by the ambassa dor ’ s appeal. He could not, would not, deal
with a mob, and there was an end to it. Let the Regulators
disperse, and he would promise to consider any just
complaints laid before him in a  proper manner . But disperse
they must, within an hour .
“Could you, would you, in a box?” I murmured under my
breath, h alf unh inged by the wa iting. “Could you, would you,
with a fox?” Jamie had taken of f his hat, and the sun shone
bright on his rud dy hair . Bree ga ve a strangled giggle, as much
shock as amusement.
“He could not, would not, with a mob,” she murmured back.
“Could not, would not … do the job?”“He can , though,” I said, sotto voce. “And I’m very much
afraid he will.” F or the hundredth time that morning, I glanced
toward the scrim of willows through which Roger had
disappeared on his errand.
“An hour ,” Jamie repeated, in an swer to the aide’ s message.
He g lanced in th e same direction, toward the creek. “And how
much time is left of that?”
“Perhaps half an hour .” The aide looked suddenly much
younger even than his years. He swallowed, and put on his hat.
“I must go, sir . Listen for the cannon, sir , and luck to you!”
“And with you, sir .” Jamie t ouched the aide’ s arm in
farewell, then slapped the horse’ s rump with his hat, sending it
of f.
As t hough it had  been a signal, the camp sprang into a flurry
of activity , even before the Governor ’ s aide had disappeared
through the trees. W eapons already primed and loaded were
checked and rechecked, buckles unfastened and refastened,
badges polished , hats beaten free of dust and cockades af fixed,
stockings pulled up and tightly gartered, filled canteens shaken
for reassurance that their contents had not evaporated in the
last quarter -hour .
It was catching. I found myself running my fingers over the
rows of glass bottles in the chest yet again, the names
murmuring and  blurring in my mind like the words of
someone telling rosary beads,  sense lost in the fervor of
petition. Rosemary , atr opine, lavender , oil of cloves …
Bree wa s notable for her stillnes s among all this bustle. She
sat on her rock, with no movement save the stir of a random
breeze in her skirts, her eyes fixed on the distant trees. I heard
her say something, under her breath, and turned.
“What did you say?”
“It’ s not  in the b ooks.” She didn’ t take her eyes of f the trees,
and her hands w ere knotted in her lap, squeezing together as
though she could will Roger to  appear through the willows.She lifted her chin, gesturing toward the field, the trees, the
men around us.
“This,” she said. “It’ s not in the  history books. I read about
the B oston Massacre. I saw it ther e , in the history books, and I
saw it her e , in the newspaper . But I never saw this there. I
never re ad a word about Governor T ryon, or North Carolina,
or a place called Alamance. So nothing’ s going to happen.”
She spoke fiercely , willing it. “ If there was a big battle here,
someone would have written something  about it. Nobody did
—so nothing’ s going to happen. Nothing!”
“I ho pe you’re r ight,” I said, and  felt a small warming of the
chill in the sm all of my back. Perhaps she was. Surely it
couldn’ t be a ma jor battle, at lea st. W e were no more than four
years from the outbreak of the Revolution; even the minor
skirmishes preceding that conflict were well-known.
The Boston Massacre had happe ned a little more than a year
before—a street -fight, a clash between a mob and a platoon of
nervous soldiers. Shouted insults, a few stones thrown. An
unauthorized sh ot, a panicked volley , and five men dead. It
had been reported, with a good deal of fierce editorializing, in
one of the Boston newspapers; I had seen it, in Jocasta’ s
parlor; one of her friends had sent her a copy .
And two hundred years later , that brief incident was
immortalized in children’ s textbooks, evidence of the rising
disaf fection of the Colonists. I glanced at the men who stood
around u s, prepa ring to fight. Su rely , if there was to be a major
battle here, a Royal Governor putting down what was
essentially a tax-payer ’ s rebellion, that would have been worth
noting!
Still, tha t was theory . And I was uneasily aware that neither
warfare nor history took much account of what should  happen.
Jamie was standing by Gideon,  whom he had tethered to a
tree. He  would go into battle w ith his men, on foot. He was
taking his pistols from the sadd lebag, putting away the extra
ammunition in the pouch at his belt. His head was bent,
absorbed in the details of what he was doing.I felt a sudden, dreadful ur gency . I must touch him, must say
something. I tried to tell myself  that Bree was right; this was
nothing; likely not even a shot would be fired—and yet there
were th ree thousand armed men here on the banks of the
Alamance, and the knowledge  of bloodshed hummed and
buzzed among them.
I l eft Brianna si tting on her rock , burning eyes fixed on the
wood, and hurried to him.
“Jamie,” I said, and put a hand on his arm.
It was like touching a high-voltage wire; power hummed
inside the insulation of his flesh, ready to erupt in a burst of
crackling light. They say one can’ t let go of such a line; a
victim of electrocution simply f reezes to the wire, helpless to
move or save hi mself, as the current burns through brain and
heart.
He put his hand on mine, looking down.
“A nighean donn,”  he said, and smiled a little. “Have ye
come to wish me luck, then?”
I smiled back as best I could, though the current sizzled
through me, stif fening the muscles of my face as it burned.
“I c ouldn’ t let you go withou t saying … something. I
suppose ‘Good luck’ will do.” I hesitated, words jamming in
my thro at with the sudden ur ge to say much more than there
was time for . In the end, I sa id only the important things.
“Jamie—I love you. Be careful!”
He didn’ t remember Culloden, he said. I wondered suddenly
whether that loss of memory ex tended to the hours just before
the b attle, when he and I had said farewell. Then I looked into
his eyes and knew it did not.
“‘Good luck’ will do,” he said,  and his hand tightened on
mine, likewise frozen to the curr ent that sur ged between us. “‘I
love ye’ does much better .”
He touched my hand, lifted his own and touched my hair ,
my face, looking into my eyes as though to capture my imagein this moment— just in case it  should be his last glimpse of
me.
“There may come a day when you and I shall part again,” he
said soft ly , at last, and his finger s brushed my lips, light as the
touch of a falli ng leaf. He smiled faintly . “But it willna be
today .”
The note s of a bugle came through the trees, far away , but
piercing as a woodpecker ’ s call. I turned, looking. Brianna sat
still as a statue on her rock, looking toward the wood.64
SIGNAL FOR ACTION
Note, when on t he Mar ch the dischar ge of thr ee Pieces of
Cannon will be the signal to form the line of Battle, and five
the signal for Action.
 
—Or der of Battle, Wm. T ryon
 
ROGER W ALKED SLOWL Y away from the Regulators’
camp, willing himself neither to run nor to look back. A few
shouted insults and half-meant threats were hurled in his
direction, but by the time he was well into the trees, the crowd
had lost interest in him, drawn back into its buzzing
controversy . It was past noon, and a hot day for May , but he
found his shirt s weat-soaked and clinging to him in a manner
more befitting July .
He s topped as so on as he was out of sight. He was breathing
fast, and felt d izzy , slightly sick with the afteref fects of
adrenaline. In the center of that ring of hostile faces, he hadn’ t
felt a thing—not a thing. Safely  away , though, the muscles of
his legs were trembling and his fists ached from clenching. He
uncurled them, flexed his stif f fingers, and tried to slow his
breathing.
Maybe a bit mo re like the night-time Channel and the anti-
aircraft guns than he’d thought, after all.
He’d m ade it back, though; w ould be going home to his
wife and son. The thought gave him a queer pang; bone-deep
relief, and an e ven deeper grief, quite unexpected, for his
father , who hadn’ t been so lucky .
A slight  breeze played about him , lifting the damp hairs on
his neck  with a breath of welcome coolness. He’d sweated
through shirt and coat together , and his damp stock feltsuddenly as though it would stra ngle him. He shucked his coat
and pawed at the  neckband, jerking it of f with shaking fingers,
then stoo d with his eyes closed a nd the piece of cloth dangling
from his hand, breathing gre at draughts of air , until the
momentary sense of nausea subsided.
He called to mi nd his last sigh t of Brianna, framed in the
doorway , Jemmy  in her arms. He saw her lashes wet with tears
and the baby’ s round solemn eyes, and felt a deep echo of the
feeling he had ex perienced in the cabin with Husband; a vision
of beaut y , a conviction of joy that soothed his mind and eased
his soul. He would go back to them; that was all that mattered.
After a moment,  he opened his eyes, picked up his coat, and
set o f f, b eginning to feel more s ettled in body , if not in mind,
as he made his way slowly back toward the creek.
He hadn’ t brought back Husband to Jamie, but he had
achieved as much as Jamie hims elf might have. It was possible
that the mob—t hey were no arm y , whatever T ryon thought of
them—would in  fact fall apart, disperse now and go home,
deprived of even the faint semblance of leadership Husband
had provided. He hoped so.
Or t hey might not. Another m an might rise out of that
seething mob, one fit to take command. A thought struck him,
with a phrase recalled from the confusion near the cabin.
“D’ye come to offer differ ent terms than Caldwell has?”
The man with the black beard had asked him that. And earlier ,
dimly he ard thro ugh the pounding at the door of the cabin, as
he s tood in pray er with Husband—” Ther e’ s no time for this!”
someone had shouted. “Cald well’ s come back from the
Governor—” and someone else had added, in tones of
desperation, “An hour , Hermon! He’ s given us an hour , no
mor e!”
“Shit,” he said, aloud. David Caldwell, the Presbyterian
minister who had married him a nd Bree. It must be. Evidently
the man had gone to speak with T ryon on the Regulators’
behalf—and been rebuf fed, with a warning.“An ho ur , no mor e.”  A n hour to disperse, to leave
peaceably? Or an hour to reply to some ultimatum?
He glanced up; the sun stood ov erhead, just a bit past noon.
He pulled on his coat and stuf fed the discarded stock in his
pocket, next to the unused flag of truce. Whatever it meant,
that hour ’ s grace, it was clearly time to be going.
The day  was still bright and hot,  the smell of grass and tree-
leaves p ungent with rising sap. Now , though, his sense of
ur gency and his memory of the Regulators, buzzing like
hornets, deprived him of any appreciation of the beauties of
nature. Even so, some trace of  peace remained deep within
him as he made his way quickly toward the creek; a faint echo
of what he had felt in the cabin.
That odd sense of awe had st ayed with him, hidden but
accessible, like a smooth stone i n his pocket. He turned it over
in his mind as he made his way toward the creek, lar gely
oblivious to clutching brambles and brush in his path.
How peculiar , he thought. Nothing whatever had happened ,
and in fact the entire experience had felt quite ordinary—
nothing otherworldly or supernatural about it. And yet, having
seen by that particular clear ligh t, he could not for get it. Could
he explain it to Brianna? he wondered.
A trailing branch brushed past his face and he reached to
push it aside, feeling even as h e did so a faint surprise at the
cool green gloss of the leaves, t he odd delicacy of their edges,
jagged as knives but paper -light. An echo, faint but
recognizable, of what he had see n before, that piercing beauty .
Did Claire see that? he thoug ht suddenly . Did she see the
touch of beauty in the bodies beneath her hands? W as that
perhaps how—and why—she was a healer?
Husband had seen it, too, h e knew; had shared that
perception. And seeing it, had been confirmed in his Quaker
principles, and had left the field , unable either to do violence
or to countenance it.And wh at of his own principles? He supposed they were
unchanged; if he hadn’ t meant to shoot anyone before, he
could mean it still less, now .
The scents of spring still hung in the air , and a small blue
butterfly floated  past his knee with no apparent sense of care.
It was still a fine spring day , but all illusion of tranquillity had
vanished. The smell of sweat, o f dirt and fear and anger , that
seemed to hang in the air of the encampment, was still in his
nostrils, minglin g with the clean er scents of trillium and water .
What ab out Jamie Fraser ’ s principles? he wondered, turning
past the thicket of willow tha t marked the ford. He often
wondered what made Fraser tick, drawn both by a personal
liking fo r the man, and by his colder historian’ s curiosity .
Roger had made his own decision regarding this conflict—or
had it made for him. He couldn’ t in conscience intend harm to
anyone, though he supposed he  could defend his own life, if
needful. But Jamie?
He was fairly sure that Jamie’ s sympathies, as such, lay with
the R egulators. He thought it lik ely also that his father -in-law
had no sense of personal loyalty to the Crown; oath or no oath,
surely no man could have lived through Culloden and its
aftermath and emer ged with any notion that he owed the King
of England fealty , let alone anyt hing more substantial. No, not
to the Crown, but perhaps to W illiam T ryon?
No loyalty of a personal nature there, either—but there was
definitely an obligation felt. T ryon had summoned Jamie
Fraser , and he had come. Given conditions as they stood, he
had had little choice about that. Having come, though—would
he fight?
How cou ld he not? He must lead his men, and if it came to a
battle—Roger glanced over his shoulder , as though the cloud
of a nger that hu ng over the Regulators’ army might be now
visible, swelling dark above the treetops—yes, he would have
to f ight, no ma tter what his private feelings on the matter
might be.Roger tried to e nvision himself aiming a musket at a man
with whom he had no quarre l and pulling the trigger . Or
worse, r iding down a neighbor , sword in hand. Smashing in
Kenny Lindsay ’ s head, for instance? Imagination failed
completely . No wonder that Jamie had sought to enlist
Husband’ s help in ending the conflict before it began!
Still, Claire had told him once that Jamie had fought in
France as a mercenary , as a young man. He had  presumably
killed men with whom he had no quarrel. How—
He pushed through the willows, and heard their voices
before he saw them. A group of women were working on the
far side of the stream; camp-followers. Some crouched bare-
legged in the shallows, washing, others were carrying wet
laundry up the bank, to be hung from trees and bushes. His eye
passed casually beyond them, th en jerked back, caught by …
what? What was it?
There. H e couldn’ t say why he had spotted her at all—there
was not hing even faintly distinctive about her . And yet she
stood out among the other wo men as though she had been
outlined, drawn  with black ink to stand out against the
backdrop of stream and budding foliage.
“Morag,” he whispered, and h is heart thumped suddenly
with a small shock of joy . She was alive.
He was halfway through the s creen of willows before it
occurred to him to wonder wha t he was doing, let alone why
he was doing it. It was too late b y then, though; he was already
out on the bank, walking openly toward them.
Several of the women glanced at him; a few half-froze,
watchful. But he was only on e man, unarmed. There were
more than twenty women by th e river , their own men nearby .
They watched him, curious, but not alarmed, as he splashed
across the shallow creek.
She stood stock-still, knee-deep in the water , her skirts
kirtled high, and watched him c ome. She knew him, he could
see, but she gave him no sign of acknowledgment.The other women fell back sligh tly , wary of him. She stood
among the darting dragonflies, strands of brown hair poking
out f rom her cap , a wet smock held for gotten in her hands. He
stepped up out of the water and stood before her , wet to the
knees.
“Mrs. MacKenzie,” he said softly . “W ell met.”
A tiny smile to uched the corner of her mouth. Her eyes
were brown; he hadn’ t noticed that before.
“Mr . MacKenzie,” she said, and gave him a small nod. His
mind was working, thinking wha t to do. He must warn her , but
how? Not before all the other women.
He stood  helpless and awkward for a moment, not knowing
what to do, then, inspired, he stooped and seized an armload of
dripping laundry where it swirled in the water near her legs.
He turne d and clambered up the  bank with it, Morag following
in sudden haste.
“What a re ye doing?” she demanded. “Here, come back wi’
my clothes!”
He c arried the w ad of wet clothe s a short way into the trees,
then dro pped them casually into a bush, mindful enough of the
ef fort of  washin g not to let them drag in the dirt. Morag was
right behind him, face flushed with indignation.
“What d’ye think you’re about, ye thievin’ clotheid?” she
demanded heatedly . “Give those back!”
“I’m not stealing them,” Roger assured her . “I only wanted
to talk to you alone for a bit.”
“Oh, aye ?” She gave him a susp icious glance. “What about,
then?”
He smil ed at her; she was still  thin, he saw , but her arms
were brown and her small face a healthy color—she was clean,
and she had lost the pallid, bruised look she had had on board
the Gloriana .
“I wished to ask if you are well,” he said softly . “And your
child—Jemmy?” T o speak the name gave him an odd frisson,and for a split second he saw the image of Brianna in the
doorway , her son in her arms, la id over his memory of Morag,
holding her baby in the dimness of the hold, ready to kill or
die to keep him.
“Oh,” she said, and the suspicio n faded slightly , replaced by
a r elucta nt acknowledgment of his right to ask. “W e’re well …
the both of us. And my husband, too,” she added pointedly .
“I’m pleased to hear it,” he assured her . “V ery pleased.” He
groped for something else to say , feeling awkward. “I—had
thought of you now and then … wondered whether—whether
everything was all right. When I saw you just now … well, I
thought I’d ask, that’ s all.”
“Oh, aye. A ye, I  see. W ell, I do thank ye, Mr . MacKenzie.”
She look ed up and met his eyes directly as she said it, her own
gaze brown and earnest. “I ken what ye did for us. I’ll not
for get; ye’re in my prayers each night.”
“Oh.” Roger felt as though some  soft weight had struck him
in th e breast. “Ahh … thank you.” He had wondered, now and
then, if she ever thought of him. Did she remember the kiss he
had given her , there in the hold, seeking the spark of her
warmth as some shield against the chill of loneliness? He
cleared his throat, flushing at the memory .
“Y ou—live nearby?”
She shook her head, and some thought, some memory ,
tightened her mouth.
“W e did, but now—well, that’ s no matter .” She turned,
suddenly busine ss-like, and began to take her wet clothes from
the b ush, shaking each one before folding it. “I do thank ye for
your concern, Mr . MacKenzie.”
He was clearly dismissed. He wiped his hands down his
breeks a nd shift ed his feet, not wanting to leave. He must tell
her—but having found her again, he was oddly reluctant
simply to warn her and leave; curiosity bubbled in him—
curiosity and a peculiar sense of connection.Perhaps not so peculiar; this small brown woman was his
relative, his own family—the only person of his own blood he
had known since the death of his parents. At the same time, it
was very  peculiar , he realized, even as his hand reached out
and curved around her arm. Sh e was his many-times great-
grandmother , after all.
She stif fened, tried to pull awa y , but he kept hold of her
forearm. Her skin was cold from the water , but he felt her
pulse throb under his fingers.
“W ait,” he said. “Please. Just a  moment. I—I need to tell
you … things.”
“No, ye don’ t. I ’d rather ye didn’ t.” She pulled harder , and
her hand slid through his, pulled free.
“Y our h usband. Where is he?” Belated realizations were
forming in his brain. If she did not live nearby , then she was
what he had firs t thought when he saw the women—a camp-
follower . She was not a whore, h e would stake his life on that;
so she followed her husband, which meant—
“He is very ne arby!” She backed up a step, eyeing the
distance between herself and the remnants of her laundry .
Roger st ood betw een her and the  bush; she would have to pass
near him in order to retrieve her petticoats and stockings.
Realizing sudde nly that she was slightly afraid of him, he
turned hastily , grabbing a handful of things at random.
“I’m sorry . Y our laundry … here.” He thrust them at her ,
and she reached to take them by reflex. Something fell—a
baby’ s gown—and both ducked to reach for it, cracking
foreheads with a solid smack.
“Oh! Oh! Mary and Bride!” Morag clutched her head,
though she still c lasped the wet clothes against her bosom with
one hand.
“Christ, are you all right? Morag—Mrs. MacKenzie—are
you all right? I’m very sorry!”  Roger touched her shoulder ,
squinting at her through eyes  that watered with pain. He
stooped to pick up the tiny gow n that had fallen to the groundbetween them, and made a vain  ef fort to wipe the smears of
mud of f  the wet cloth. She blinked, eyes similarly watering,
and laughed at his expression of dismay .
The collision had somehow b roken the tension between
them; she stepped back, but seemed not to feel threatened now .
“A ye, I’m fine.” She snif fed and wiped her eyes, then
touched the spot on her forehe ad gingerly . “I’ve got a thick
skull, my Mam always said. Are you all right yourself, then?”
“A ye, fine.” Roger touched his own forehead, suddenly and
tinglingly aware that the curve of the browbone under his
fingers was precisely echoed on the face before him. Hers was
smaller , lighter—but just the same.
“I’ve a  thick skull, too.” He grinned at her , feeling
ridiculously happy . “It runs in my family .”
He handed her the mud-stained shirt, carefully .
“I am  sorry ,” he said, apologizing again—and not only for
the ruined laundry . “Y our husband. I asked about him because
—is he one of the Regulators, then?”
She looked at him curiously , one brow lifted.
“Of course. Are ye not with the Regulation yourself?”
Of course. Here on this side of Alamance, what else?
T ryon’ s troops were drawn up in good military order on the
field beyond the creek; over here , the Regulators swarmed like
bees, without leadership or direction, an angry mass buzzing
with random violence.
“No,” he said. “I’ve come wi th the militia.” He waved
toward the distant smudge, where the smoke of T ryon’ s
campfires hung, far beyond the creek. Her eyes grew wary
again, but not frightened; he was only one man.
“That’ s the thing I wanted to t ell you,” he said. “T o warn
you, and  your husband. The Gov ernor is serious this time; he’ s
brought or ganized troops, he’ s brought cannon. Lots of troops,
all a rmed.” He leaned toward h er , holding out the rest of thewet stoc kings. She reached out a hand to take them, but kept
her eyes on his, waiting.
“He means to put down this rebellion, by any means
necessary . He has given orders to kill, if there is resistance. Do
you understand?  Y ou must tell your husband, make him leave
before—before anything happens.”
She pale d, and her hand went reflexively to her belly . The
wet from the clo thes had soaked through her muslin dress, and
he s aw the sma ll swelling that had been hidden there, round
and smooth as a melon under the damp cloth. He felt the jolt
of her fear go through him, as though the wet stockings she
held conducted electricity .
“W e did, but n ot now …”  she had said, when he asked
whether they lived nearby . She might mean only that they had
moved to some new place, but … there were baby’ s things in
her wash; her son was with her here. Her husband was
somewhere in this boiling of men.
A single  man might pick up his  gun and join a mob, for no
reason b eyond drink or boredom; a married man with a child
would not. That spoke of serious disaf fection, consequential
grievance. And to bring both wife and child to war suggested
that he had no safe place to leave them.
Roger thought it likely that Morag and her husband had no
home at  all now , and he understood her fear perfectly . If her
husband should be maimed or killed, how was she to provide
for Jemmy , for t he new baby sw elling under her skirt? She had
no one, no family here to turn to.
Except that she did, though she did not know it. He gripped
her hand hard, pulling her toward him, overcome with the
need somehow to protect her an d her children. He had saved
them once; he could do it again.
“Morag,” he said. “Hear me. If anything should happen—
anything—come to me. If you are in need of anything at all.
I’ll take care of you.”She made no ef fort to pull away , but searched his face, her
eyes bro wn and  serious, a small  frown between those curving
brows. He had an irresistible ur ge to make some physical
connection between them—this time for her sake, as much as
his. He leaned forward and kissed her , very gently .
He o pened his eyes then, and lifted his head, to find himself
looking over her shoulder , into  the disbelieving face of his
many-times great-grandfather .
 
“GET A W A Y FROM MY WIFE.” W illiam Buccleigh
MacKenzie emer ged from the shrubbery with a great rustling
of leaves and a look of sinister intent upon his face. He was a
tall man , close to Roger ’ s own height, and burly through the
shoulders. Further personal d etails seemed inconsequent,
given th at he also had a knife. I t was still sheathed at his belt,
but his hand rested on the hilt in a significant manner .
Roger resisted his original impulse, which had been to say ,
“It’ s not what you think.” It wasn’ t, but there weren’ t any
plausible alternatives to suggest.
“I meant her no disrespect,” he said, instead, straightening
up slow ly . He felt it would be unwise to make any quick
moves. “My apologies.”
“No? And just what the hell  d’ye mean by it, then?”
MacKenzie put a possessive hand on his wife’ s shoulder ,
glowering at Roger . She flinched; her husband’ s fingers were
digging into her flesh. Roger w ould have liked to knock the
hand away , but that was likely to cause more trouble than he
had already .
“I met your wife—and you— ” he added, “on board the
Gloriana , a  year or two ago. When I re cognized her here, I
thought to inquire as to the family’ s welfare. That’ s all.”
“He meant nay harm, W illiam.” Morag touched her
husband’ s hand, and the painful grip lessened. “It’ s right, what
he s ays. Do ye not ken the man?  It was him that found me andJemmy in the hold when we hid there—he brought us food and
water .”
“Y ou as ked me to care for them,” Roger added pointedly .
“During the fight, that night w hen the sailors threw the sick
ones into the sea.”
“Oh, aye?” MacKenzie’ s features relaxed a trifle. “It was
you, was it? I didna see your face, in the dark.”
“I didn’ t  see yours, either .” He c ould see it clearly now , and
despite the awkwardness of the present circumstances,
couldn’ t help studying it with interest.
So this was the son—unacknowledged—of Dougal
MacKenzie, erstwhile war chief of the MacKenzies of Leoch.
He look ed it. His was a rougher , squarer , fairer version of the
family f ace, but looking carefully , Roger could easily spot the
broad cheekbones and high forehead that Jamie Fraser had
inherited from his mother ’ s clan. That and the family height;
MacKenzie stood over six feet tall, nearly eye to eye with
Roger himself.
The man turned slightly at a sound in the brush, and the sun
lit th ose eyes w ith a flash of bright moss-green. Roger had a
sudden ur ge to shut his own e yes, lest MacKenzie feel the
same bolt of recognition.
MacKenzie had other concerns,  though. T wo men emer ged
from the bushes, wary-eyed and grimy with long camping.
One hel d a musket; the other was armed with nothing but a
rough club cut from a fallen limb.
“Who’ s this, then, Buck?” the man with the gun asked,
eyeing Roger with some suspicion.
“That’ s what I mean to be fin ding out.” The momentary
softening had disappeared, leaving MacKenzie’ s face grimly
set. He turned his wife away from him and gave her a small
push. “G o ye back to the women, Morag. I’ll deal with this
fellow .”
“But, W illiam—” Morag glanced from Roger to her
husband, face drawn in distress. “He hasna done anything—”“Oh, ye think it’ s nothing, do you, that a man should cheek
up to ye in public, like a common radge?” W illiam turned a
black look on her , and she blushed suddenly crimson,
evidently recalling the kiss, but stumbled on.
“I—no, I mean—that is—he was kind to us, we shouldna be
—”
“I said go back!”
She opened her mouth as though  to protest, then flinched as
W illiam made a sudden move i n her direction, fist clenched.
W ithout an instant of conscious decision, Roger swung from
the waist, his own fist hitting MacKenzie’ s jaw with a crack
that jarred his arm to the elbow .
Caught of f-balance, W illiam staggered and fell to one knee,
shaking his head like a pole- axed ox. Morag’ s gasp was
drowned by startled exclamations from the other men. Before
he c ould turn to face them, Roger heard a sound behind him—
quiet in itself, b ut loud enough to chill the blood; the small,
cold snick of a hammer drawing back.
There was a brief pst!  of igniting powder , and then a
phfoom!  as the gun wen t of f with a roar and a puf f of black
smoke. Everyone jerked and stumbled with the noise, and
Roger found himself struggling in a confused sort of way with
one of the oth er men, both of them coughing and half-
deafened. As he shoved his ass ailant of f, he caught sight of
Morag, kneeling  in the leaves, dabbing at her husband’ s face
with a bit of wet laundry . W illiam shoved her roughly away ,
scrambled to his feet, and heade d for Roger , his eyes bulging,
face blotched red with fury .
Roger spun on h is heel, slipping in the leaves, and shook of f
the grip of the m an with the gun, making for the shelter of the
bushes. Then he was into the thicket, twigs and small branches
splintering arou nd him, raking face and arms as he thrust his
way through. A heavy crashing  and the huf f of breath came
just behind him, and a hand fa stened on his shoulder with a
grip of iron.He seized the hand and twisted hard, hearing a crack of joint
and bone. The hand’ s owner yelled and jerked back, and Roger
flung himself headlong toward an opening in the scrub.
He hit the groun d on one shoulder , half-curled, rolled, broke
through a small bush, and tobog ganed down a steep clay bank
and into the water , where he landed with a splash.
Scrabbling to find a foothold, he plunged and coughed and
flapped upright,  shaking hair and water from his eyes, only to
see W ill iam MacKenzie poised  at the top of the bank above
him. Seeing his enemy thus at a disadvantage, MacKenzie
launched himself with a whoop.
Something like a cannonball crashed into Roger ’ s chest and
he f ell back int o the water in a mighty splash, hearing the
distant shrieks of women. He couldn’ t breathe and couldn’ t
see, but grapple d with the twist ing mess of clothes and limbs
and roili ng mud, churning the b ottom as he strove vainly for
footing, lungs bursting for air .
His head broke the surface. Hi s mouth opened and closed
like a fish’ s, gulping air , and he heard the wheeze of his
breath, and MacKenzie’ s, too. MacKenzie broke away ,
floundering, and stood upright a few feet away , wheezing like
an engin e as water poured from  his clothes. Roger bent, chest
heaving, hands braced on his t highs and his arms quivering
with ef fort. W ith a final gulp o f air , he straightened, wiping
away the wet hair plastered over his face.
“Look,” he began, panting, “I—”
He got no further , for MacKenzie, still breathing heavily
himself, was advancing on him through the waist-deep water .
The man’ s face had an odd, eager look, and the moss-green
eyes were very bright.
Belatedly , Roger thought of something else. The man was
the son of Dou gal MacKenzie. But the son also of Geillis
Duncan, witch.
Somewhere beyond the willows, there was a deep booming
noise, a nd flocks of startled birds rose screeching from thetrees. The battle had begun.65
ALAMANCE
The Gov ernor th en sent Captain Malcolm, one of his Aides-
de-Camp, and the Sherif of Ora nge, with his Letter , r equiring
the Rebels, to lay down thei r Arms, Surr ender up their
outlawed Ringleaders &c. About half past ten Capt. Malcolm
and the Sherif r eturned with th e Information that the Sherif
had r ead the Letter four several T imes, to differ ent Divisions of
the Revels, who r ejected the T er ms offer ed, with disdain, said
they wanted no time to conside r of them, & with Rebellious
Clamours called out for
 Battle.
 
—”A Jo urnal of the Expedition against the Insur gents,”
Wm. T ryon
 
“YE’LL W A TC H FOR MACKENZIE.” Jamie touched
Geordie Chisho lm’ s shoulder , and Geordie turned his head,
acknowledging the message with a slight nod.
All of them kne w . They were g ood lads, they’d be careful.
They’d find him, surely , coming back toward them.
He told himself so for the dozen th time, but the reassurance
rang as hollow this time as it had before. Christ, what had
happened to the man?
He mov ed up into the lead, shoving aside the brush with as
much violence as though it we re a personal enemy . If they
were watching out, they’d see MacKenzie in time, not shoot
him by mistake.  Or so he told h imself, knowing perfectly well
that in the midst of enemies and the heat of battle, one fired at
whatever moved , and there was seldom time to check the
features of a man who came at you out of the smoke.Not that it wou ld make so much dif ference who did for
MacKenzie, if anyone did. Brianna and Claire would hold him
responsible for the man’ s life, and rightly so.
Then, to his relief, there was no more time to think. They
broke out into open ground and  the men spread out and ran,
bending low , zigzagging throug h the grass in threes and fours
as h e had taugh t them, one seasoned soldier to each group.
Somewhere behind them, the first boom of cannon came like
thunder from a sunny sky .
He spott ed the first of the Regu lators then, a group of men
running, as they were, coming from the right across the open
ground. They hadn’ t seen his men yet.
Before they could, he bellowed “Casteal an DUIN!” and
char ged them, musket raised overhead in signal to the men
behind h im. Roars and shrieks s plit the air , and the Regulators,
startled and taken unawares, stumbled to an untidy halt,
fumbling their weapons and interfering with each other .
“Thugham! Thugham!”  T o me, to me! Close enough, it was
close enough. He dropped to one knee, crouched over the
musket, brought it to bear , and fired just over the heads of the
milling men.
Behind him, he heard the grunt o f his men falling into firing
order , the clink of flint and then the deafening noise of the
volley .
One or two of the Regulators crouched, returning fire. The
rest broke and ran for cover , toward a small rise of grassy
ground.
“ A draigha!  Left! Nach links!  Cu t them of f! ” He heard
himself bellowing, but did it without thought, already running
himself.
The small group of Regulators split, a few making of f
toward t he cree k, the rest bunc hing like sheep, galloping for
the shelter of the rise.
They made it, di sappearing around the curve of the hill, and
Jamie called his troops back, with a piercing whistle thatwould carry over the rising thun der of the guns. He could hear
firing now , a rat tle of muskets, away to their left. He sheared
of f in that direction, trusting that they would follow .
A m istake; the land here was m arshy , full of boggy holes
and clinging mud. He shouted a nd waved again, back toward
the h igher ground. Fall back the re, let the enemy come to them
across the bog, if they would.
The high  ground  was heavy with  brush, but dry , at least. He
spread h is fingers wide and waved, gesturing the men to
spread out, take cover .
The blood was pumping throu gh his veins, and his skin
prickled and tingled with it. A puf f of gray-white smoke
drifted through the nearby trees , acrid with the scent of black
powder . The boom of artillery was regular now , as the gun-
crews fell into t heir rhythm, thumping like a huge, slow heart
in the distance.
He m ade his wa y slowly toward the west, keeping an eye
out. The brush h ere was mostly sumac and redbud, with waist-
high tangles of b ramble and clumps of pine that rose above his
head. V i sibility was poor , but he would hear anyone coming,
long before he saw them—or they saw him.
None of  his own men were in  sight. He took cover in a
stand of dogwood and gave a sharp call, like a bobwhite quail.
Similar calls of “bob-WHITE!” came from behind him, none
in front. Good, they knew roug hly where one another were.
Cautiously , he went forward, pressing through the brush. It
was coo ler here , with the shade  of the trees, but the air was
thick and sweat ran down his neck and back.
He hear d the thump of feet and pressed back into the
branches of a pinetree, letting the dark-needled fans swing
over him , his musket raised to  sight on an opening in the
bushes. Whoever it was was com ing fast. A crack of snapping
twigs un derfoot and the sound o f labored breath, and a young
man sho ved through the shrubbery , panting. He had no gun,
but a skinning-knife glinted in his hand.The lad was fa miliar , the first glance gave him that, and
Jamie’ s memory put a name to the young man’ s face before his
finger had relaxed upon the trigger .
“Hugh!” he called, low-voiced but sharp. “Hugh Fowles!”
The you ng man let out a startled yelp, and swung round
staring. He saw Jamie and hi s gun through the screen of
needles, and froze like a rabbit.
Then a sur ge of panicked determination rose in his face, and
he la unched himself toward Jamie, screaming. Startled, Jamie
barely g ot his musket up in time  to catch the knife-blade on its
barrel. He forced the knife up a nd back; it sheared down the
barrel w ith a screech of metal, glancing of f Jamie’ s knuckles.
Y oung H ugh whipped back his arm for a stab, and he kicked
the boy briskly in the knee, stepping back out of the way as the
lad lost his bala nce and lurched to one side, knife swinging
wildly .
Jamie k icked him again, and he fell down, the knife
embedding itself in the ground.
“W ill ye  stop that?” Jamie said, rather crossly . “For Christ’ s
sake, lad, do ye not know me?”
He could n’ t tell whether Fowles knew him or not—nor even
whether the boy had heard him. Face white and eyes staring,
Fowles w as thrashing in a panic , stumbling and gasping as he
tried to get up, trying at the same time to wrench his knife free.
“W ill yo u—” Ja mie began, and then jerked back as Fowles
abandoned the knife and threw h imself forward with a grunt of
ef fort.
The boy ’ s weight knocked Jamie backward, and hands
scrabbled at him, trying for a grip on his throat. He dropped
the musket, turned a shoulder into Fowles’ s grip, and put a
stop to this non sense with a quick, brutal punch to the lad’ s
midsection.
Hugh Fowles collapsed and la y curled into a ball on the
ground, twitching like a wounded centipede, and making theshocked breathl ess faces of a man whose breakfast has just
been knocked up into his lungs.
Jamie put his ri ght hand to his mouth, sucking blood from
his g razed knuckles. The boy’ s knife had skinned all four , and
the punch hadn’ t helped; they burned like fire, and the blood
had the taste of hot silver in his mouth.
More feet, coming fast. He ha d barely time to seize his
musket before the bushes burst  open once more, this time to
reveal Fowles’ s father -in-law , Joe Hobson, his own musket
held at the ready .
“Stop right there.” Jamie crouched behind his gun, training
the muzzle on Hobson’ s chest . Hobson halted as though a
puppet-master had jerked his strings.
“What have ye done to him?” Hobson’ s eyes flicked from
Jamie to his son-in-law and back.
“Nothing permanent. Put your gun down, aye?”
Hobson didn’ t move. He was grimed with filth and
sprouting a beard, but the eyes were live and watchful in his
face.
“I mean ye nay harm. Set it down!”
“W e’ll n ot be taken,” Hobson sa id. His finger rested on the
trigger of his gun, but there was a dubious note in his voice.
“Y e alre ady are , fool. Dinna fa sh yourself, nay harm will
come to  you or the lad. Y ou’re a deal safer in gaol than out
here, man!”
A whistling crash punctuated h is statement, as something
flew through the trees a few feet overhead, shearing branches
as it went. Chain  shot, Jamie tho ught automatically , even as he
ducked in reflex, bowels clenched.
Hobson jerked in terror , swingi ng the barrel of his musket
toward Jamie. He jerked again, and his eyes went wide with
surprise, as a r ed stain flowered slowly on his breast. He
looked down at it in puzzlement, the muzzle of his gun
drooping like a wilted stem. T hen he dropped the gun, satdown quite suddenly , leaned b ack against a fallen tree, and
died.
Jamie w hirled on his heel, still squatting, and saw Geordie
Chisholm behin d him, face half-black with the smoke of his
shot, looking at Hobson’ s body as though wondering just how
that  had happened.
The boom of artillery came again, and another missile
crashed through  the branches a nd landed nearby with a thud
Jamie felt through the soles of h is boots. He flung himself flat
on his belly and writhed toward Hugh Fowles, who had got
himself up on hands and knees now , retching.
He grabbed Fowles’ s arm, disregarding the pool of vomit,
and jerked, hard.
“Come on!” He scrambled up, s eizing Fowles by waist and
shoulder , and dragged him tow ard the shelter of the copse
behind them. “Geordie! Geordie, help me!”
Chisholm was there. Between them, they got Fowles onto
his feet and half-dragged, half-carried him, running and
stumbling as they went.
The air was fille d with the pungent scent of tree-sap, oozing
from the severed branches, and he thought fleetingly of
Claire’ s garden, turned earth, churned earth beneath his boots,
the fresh-turned earth of furrows and graves, and Hobson
sitting in  the sun by the log, the look of surprise not yet gone
from his eyes.
Fowles stank of vomit and shit. He hoped it was Fowles.
He thought he w ould vomit himself from sheer nerves, but
bit his tongue, t asting blood again, and clenched the muscles
of his belly , willing his wame to go back down.
Someone rose from the shrubb ery to his left. He held the
gun in his left hand, raised it by reflex, fired one-handed. He
stumbled through his own smoke, seeing whoever he had fired
at turn and run, smashing heedless through the trees.Fowles had his feet back under him now , and Jamie let go
his a rm, leaving Geordie to it. H e fell to one knee, groping for
powder and shot, ripped the cart ridge with his teeth and tasted
gunpowder ting ed with blood, poured and rammed home,
filled his priming pan, checked his flint—all the while noticing
with a sense of bemusement that his hands were not shaking in
the least , but went about their business with a deft calm, as
though they knew just what to do.
He r aised the barrel and bared his teeth, only half-conscious
of doing  it. There were men coming, three, and he raised the
gun to bear on th e first. W ith a last shred of conscious thought,
he jerked it higher and fired above their heads, the musket
jolting in his ha nds. They stopped, and he dropped the gun,
ripped the dirk from his belt, and char ged them, screaming.
The words seared his throat, raw from the smoke.
“Run!”
As though from a distance, he watched himself, thinking
that it was just so that Hugh Fowles had done, and he had
thought it foolish then.
“Run!”
The men  scatter ed like fleeing q uail. As a wolf might do, he
turned at once after the slowest, bounding over the broken
ground, a ferocious joy flooding his legs, blooming in his
belly . H e could run forever , the wind cold on his skin and
shrill in his ears, the spring of the earth beneath him lifting his
feet so he flew over grass and rock.
The man he pur sued heard him coming, glanced back over
his shoulder , and with a shriek of terror , ran full-tilt into a tree.
He threw  himself upon his pre y , landing on the man’ s back
and feeling the springy crack of ribs beneath his knee. He
gripped a handful of hair , slick a nd hot with greasy sweat, and
jerked b ack the man’ s head. He barely stopped himself cutting
the naked throat that lay before h im, stretched and defenseless.
He coul d feel the shock of the blade on flesh, the hotness of
the spurting blood, and wanted it.He gulped air , panting.
V ery slowly , he drew the knife a way from the leaping pulse.
The movement left him trembling with need, as though he had
been dra gged from his woman’ s body on the ver ge of spilling
seed.
“Y ou are my prisoner ,” he said.
The man  stared up at him, uncomprehending. The man was
weeping, tears making tracks th rough the dirt on his face, and
trying to  speak, sobbing, but u nable to draw enough air to
make words with his head wrenched back. V aguely , it occurred
to Jami e that he had spoken in Gaelic; the man did not
understand.
Slowly , he loosened his grip, made himself release the
man’ s head. He groped for the English words, buried
somewhere under the bloodlust that pulsed through his brain.
“Y ou are … my  … prisoner ,” he managed at last, panting
for air between words.
“Y es! Y es! Anything, don’ t kill me, please don’ t kill me!”
The ma n huddl ed under him, s obbing, hands clasped to the
back of his nec k and shoulders hunched around his ears, as
though h e feared Jamie would seize his neck in his teeth and
snap his spine.
At t he thought, he felt a dim desire to do so, but the thrum
of his blood was even now dyin g down. He could hear again,
as h is he artbeat faded in his ear s. The wind no longer sang to
him, but  made its own way , heedless and alone, through the
leaves above. There was a popp ing of distant gunshots, but the
boom of the artillery had ceased.
Sweat dripped from chin and eyebrows, and his shirt was
sodden with it, reeking.
He slid slowly o f f his prisoner , and knelt beside the prone
body . Th e muscles of his thighs  trembled and burned from the
ef fort of the cha se. He felt a sudden inexpressible tenderness
for t he man, and reached to touch him, but the feeling was
succeeded by a sense of horror , quite as sudden, and assuddenly gone. He closed his eyes and swallowed, feeling
sick, the place where he had bitten his tongue throbbing.
The ener gy the earth had lent him was draining from his
body no w , flowi ng out of his legs, going back to the earth. He
reached out and patted the prisoner ’ s shoulder , awkwardly ,
then struggled to his feet again st the dead weight of his own
exhaustion.
“Get up,” he said. His hands were shaking; it took three tries
to sheathe his dirk.
“Ciamar a tha t hu, Mac Dubh?”  Ronnie Sinclair was at his
side, ask ing if he was all right. He nodded, and stood back as
Sinclair pulled the man to his fe et and made him turn his coat.
The others were coming, in ones and twos: Geordie, the
Lindsays, Gallegher , catching up and clustering round him like
iron filings drawn to a bit of magnet steel.
The others had bagged prisone rs, too; six in all, looking
sullen, frightened, or simply exhausted, their coats turned
lining-out to show their status. Fowles was among them, white
and wretched.
His mind had cleared now , though his body felt limp and
heavy . Henry Gallegher had a bloody graze across his
forehead; one of the men from Brownsville—Lionel, was it?—
carried o ne arm  at an awkward  angle, obviously broken. Bar
that, no one seemed to be injured; that was good.
“Ask if they h ave seen MacKenzie,” he said to Kenny
Lindsay in Gaelic, with a small gesture toward the prisoners.
The gun shots ha d mostly ceased. There was only a random
firing now , and a flock of doves passed overhead in a racket of
wings, belatedly alarmed.
None had seen Roger MacKenzie, to know him. Jamie
nodded, hearing , and wiped the last of the sweat from his face
with his sleeve.
“Either he has come back s afe, or he has not. But
whatever ’ s done is done now . Y e’ve done brawly , lads—let’ s
go.”66
A NECESSAR Y SACRIFICE
This Evening the Dead wer e interr ed with military Honors;
and thr e e Outlaws taken in the Battle wer e hanged at the Head
of th e A rmy . Thi s gave gr eat Sa tisfaction to the Men & at this
T ime it was a necessary Sacrific e to appease the Murmurings
of the T r oops, who wer e importunate that public Justice should
be immediately executed against some of the Outlaws that
wer e taken in th e Action and in  opposing of whom they had
braved so many Dangers, & su ffer ed such Loss of lives and
Blood.
 
—”A Journal of the Expedition against the Insur gents,”
 Wm. T ryon
 
ROGER JERKE D HARD at the rope round his wrists, but
succeeded only in digging the  rough hemp farther into his
flesh. H e could feel the burn of  abraded skin and a damp feel
that he thought was oozing blood, but his hands had gone so
numb th at he wasn’ t sure. His fi ngers felt the size of sausages,
the skin stretched tight.
He was lying where Buccleigh and his friends had thrown
him, after tying his wrists and ankles, in the shade of a fallen
log. Soaked through from the river , he would have been
shivering with cold, had he not been struggling so desperately
to get loose. Instead, sweat ran down his neck, his cheeks
burned, and he felt as though his head would burst from the
influx of furious blood.
They’d gagged him with the flag of truce, stuf fing the
kerchief so deep into his throat that he was close to choking,
and knotting his own stock rou nd his mouth. Ancestor or no,he w as going to mangle W illia m Buccleigh MacKenzie, if it
was the last thing he ever did.
Shots were still being fired ne arby; not in volleys, but a
ragged popcorn rattle. The air reeked with black powder
smoke, and every so often, something came whistling through
the trees like a jabberwock, with a tremendous ripping and
snapping of branches and leaves. Chain-shot? Cannonballs?
A cann onball had thudded into the riverbank, earlier ,
burying itself in a small explosion of mud and momentarily
interrupting the fight. One of Bu ccleigh’ s friends had uttered a
cry a nd run, spla shing, for the sh elter of the trees, but the other
had stayed, grappling and punching, heedless of the shooting
and yelling, until he and Buc cleigh had managed to press
Roger ’ s head beneath the water and overpower him. He could
still feel the burn of the river -water in his sinuses.
He’d m anaged to get to his knees now , hunched like an
inch-worm, but didn’ t dare to ra ise his head above the log, for
fear of having it  shot of f. Fury was running so strong through
his vein s that he hadn’ t really  been frightened, even at the
realization that the battle was going on round him, but he
hadn’ t lost his mind entirely .
He r ubbed his f ace hard against the crumbling bark of the
log, trying to snag the strip of linen tied round his head. It
worked; the stub of a twig caught, and he jerked his head up,
pulling the stock down below  his chin. Grunting with the
ef fort, he shoved the wadded kerchief out a little way , caught it
on th e sa me twi g, and drew bac k, the soggy rag pulling out of
his throat like a snake-swallower in reverse.
He gagg ed with reaction, feeling  bile rise up the back of his
throat. H e gulped air , greedy for oxygen, and his stomach
settled a bit.
Great, h e could breathe, now what? The firing was still
going on , and he could hear cra shing of f to his left, as several
men plowed through the bushes, heedless of obstruction.Running feet were coming toward him; he ducked behind
the shelt er of the log, just in tim e to avoid being flattened as a
body catapulted over it. His new companion scrambled up
onto han ds and knees, pressing tight against the log, only then
becoming aware of his presence.
“Y ou!” It was Black-beard, from Husband’ s encampment.
He s tared at Rog er , face suf fusing slowly with blood. He could
smell the man, a rank, penetrating reek of fear and anger .
Black-beard grabbed him by the shirt-front, jerking him
close.
“This is your fault! Bastard!”
W ith his hands and feet still tied, he had no means of
fighting back, but jerked back, trying to free himself.
“Let go, fool!”
Only then did the man realize that he was tied, and in his
astonishment, did let go. Of f-balance, Roger fell to the side,
scraping his face painfully on the rough bark of the log. Black-
beard’ s eyes bulged with amazement, then narrowed in glee.
“By Dad , you been captured! I f that ain’ t luck! Who’ s got
you, fool?”
“He’ s mine.” A low Scottish voice behind him announced
the return of W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie. “What d’ye mean
it’ s his fault? What is?”
“This!” Black-beard flung out an arm, indicating the field
around them, and the dying ba ttle. The artillery had ceased,
and the re were no more than scattered rifle-shots in the
distance.
“This damn smooth-talker co me unto the camp this
morning, asking for Hermon Husband, and took him away for
a pr ivate word. I don’ t know what in desolation’ s name he
said, bu t when he finished it, Husband come out, got straight
onto his horse, told us all to go home, and rode of f!”
Black-beard glared at Roger , and drawing back his hand,
slapped him hard across the face. “What did you say to him,arse-bite?”
W ithout waiting  for an answer , he turned back to Buccleigh,
who was glancing back and forth between his captive and his
visitor , a look of deep interest furrowing the thick, fair brows.
“If H ermon had stuck with us,  we might ha’ stood,” Black-
beard raged. “But with him g oin’ of f like that, it cut the
ground r ight from under us—wasn’ t no one knew quite what
to d o, and the next thing you know , here’ s T ryon a-bawling
surrender at us—and a course w e wasn’ t goin’ to do that, but
we wasn ’ t what you’d call pre pared to fight neither …” He
trailed of f at this, catching Roger ’ s eye on him, and
uncomfortably aware that Roger had seen him fleeing in panic.
There w as nothi ng but silence o n the far side of the log; all
firing had stopped. It was daw ning on Roger that the battle
was not only over , but well and truly lost. Which meant in turn
that the militia w ere likely to be swarming over this place in
short order . His eyes were still watering from the slap, but he
blinked them clear , glaring at Black-beard.
“I said to Husba nd what I say to you,” he said, with as much
authority as he could muster , lying trussed on the ground like a
Christmas goose . “The Governor is serious. He means to put
down this rebellion, and by the looks of things, he’ s done just
that. If you have a care for your skin—and I’d say you do—”
W ith an inarticulate growl of  rage, Black-beard seized
Roger b y the shoulders and tried to smash his head into the
log.
Roger twisted like an eel. He reared back, breaking the
man’ s grip, then threw himself  forward, and butted the man
squarely , smashing Black-beard’ s nose with his forehead. He
felt the satisfying crunch of bone and cartilage, and the spurt
of b lood hot and  wet against hi s face, and fell back onto one
elbow , panting.
He’d no t given anyone a Glasgo w kiss before, but it seemed
to co me natural. The jar of it hurt his wrist badly , but he was
beyond caring. Just let Buccleig h come close enough to get the
same, that’ s all he wanted.Buccleigh eyed him with a mixture of amusement and wary
respect.
“Oh, a man of talent, aye? A traitor , a wife-stealer , and  a
bonnie brawler , all in the same wee bundle, is it?”
Black-beard threw up, choking on the blood from his
crushed nose, but Roger paid no attention. His vision clear
now , he kept his eyes square on Buccleigh. He knew which
man of the two was the greater threat.
“A man who’ s s ure of his wife needn’ t worry that someone
else might steal her ,” he said, anger only slightly tempered
with wa riness. “ I’m sure of my own wife, and have no need of
yours, amadain .”
Buccleigh was sunburned and d eeply flushed from fighting,
but at this, a darker red crept into his cheeks. Still, he kept his
composure, smiling lightly .
“Marrit, are ye? Y our wife must  be ill-favored, surely , for ye
to be snif fing after mine. Or is it only that she’ s put ye out of
her bed, because ye couldna serve her decently?”
The rasp of the rope on his wrists reminded Roger that he
was in no position to bandy wor ds. W ith an ef fort, he bit back
the retort that sat at the tip of his tongue, and swallowed it. It
tasted foul, going down.
“Unless ye mean your wife to be a widow , I think it’ s time
ye were going, aye?” he said. H e jerked his head toward the
far side of the log, where the br ief silence had been succeeded
by the distant sound of voices.
“The battle’ s over , your cause i s lost. I don’ t know if they
mean to take prisoners—”
“They’ve taken several.” Buccle igh frowned at him, clearly
undecided. There weren’ t that many options, Roger thought;
Buccleigh must let him go, leav e him tied, or kill him. Either
of the first two  was acceptable. As for the third, surely if
Buccleigh meant to kill him, he’d be already dead.“Y ou’d b est go while ye can,” Roger suggested. “Y our wife
will be worried.”
It was a mistake to have mentioned Morag again.
Buccleigh’ s face grew darker , but before he could say
anything, he was interrupted by  the appearance of the woman
herself, in company with the man who had helped Buccleigh
tie him earlier .
“W ill! O h, W illie! Thank Christ you’re safe! Are ye hurt at
all?” Sh e was pale and anxious, and had a small child in her
arms, clinging monkeylike to her neck. Despite the burden,
she reac hed out a hand to touch her husband, to assure herself
that he was indeed unharmed.
“Dinna fash yourself, Morag,” Buccleigh said gruf fly . “I’ve
taken no harm.” Still, he patted  her hand, and kissed her self-
consciously on the forehead.
Ignoring this tender reunion , Buccleigh’ s companion
prodded Roger interestedly in the side with the toe of his boot.
“What shall we do with this, then, Buck?”
Buccleigh hesita ted, his attention drawn momentarily from
his wife . Morag, spotting Roger on the ground, uttered a
muf fled scream and clapped her hand across her mouth.
“What h ave ye done, W illie?” she cried. “Let him go, for
Bride’ s sake!”
“I shan’ t . He’ s a damned traitor . ” Buccleigh’ s mouth set in a
grim line, obviously displeased  at his wife’ s taking notice of
Roger .
“He’ s not, he c an’ t be!” Clutching her son tightly to her ,
Morag stooped to peer at Roge r , an anxious crease between
her brow s. Seeing the state of his hands, she gasped and turned
indignantly to her husband.
“W ill! How can ye treat this m an so, and after he’ s done
such service to your own wife and bairn!”
For God’ s sake, Morag, back off!  Ro ger thought, seeing
Buccleigh’ s fist clench sudden ly . Buccleigh was plainly ajealous bastard to start with, and being on the losing side of the
battle just past was doing his temper no good at all.
“Bugger of f, Morag,” said B uccleigh, echoing Roger ’ s
sentiment in less-gallant languag e. “This is no place for you or
the bairn; take him and go.”
Black-beard had recovered slightly by this time, and loomed
up alongside Buccleigh. He glared down at Roger , hands
pressed tenderly to his swollen nose.
“Slit his throat, I say , and good riddance.” He emphasized
this opinion with a kick in the ribs that curled Roger up like a
shrimp.
Morag uttered a fierce cry and  kicked Black-beard in the
shin.
“Let him alone!”
Black-beard, taken of f-guard, let out a yelp and hopped
backward. Buccleigh’ s other companion appeared to find this
more tha n funny , but stifled his hilarity when Buccleigh turned
an awful glare on him.
Morag w as on her knees, her small belt-knife in her hand,
trying one-handed to cut the bonds about Roger ’ s wrists.
Much as he appreciated her inte nt, Roger wished she wouldn’ t
try t o he lp him. It was all too apparent that the original green-
eyed m onster had firm possession of the soul of W illiam
Buccleigh MacKenzie, and was glaring out of his eye-sockets
in an emerald fury .
Buccleigh seized  his wife by the arm and jerked her to her
feet. The baby , startled, began to shriek.
“Leave, Morag!” Buccleigh snarled. “Go, and go now!”
“Y es, go!” Black-beard put in, glowering. “W e’ve no need
of your help, you interfering little bizzom!”
“Don’ t you speak to my wife that way!” T urning on his
heel, Buccleigh punched Black -beard swiftly in the stomach.
The man sat do wn hard, his mouth opening and closing in
comical astonishment. Roger could almost feel a certainsympathy for Black-beard, who appeared to be faring no better
between the two MacKenzies than he was himself.
Buccleigh’ s oth er friend, who had been observing the
exchange with the fascination of someone watching a close
tennis match, seized the opportunity to join the conversation,
butting in as Morag tried to soothe her baby’ s crying.
“Whatever ye mean to do, Buck, best we do it and be gone.”
He nodd ed toward the creek, un easy . There were a number of
men coming in their direction,  judging from the rumble of
voices. Not fleeing Regulators; it was a purposeful sound.
Militia, coming in search of prisoners? Roger sincerely hoped
so.
“A ye.” Buccleigh glanced in the direction of the noises, then
turned to his wife. He took her by the shoulders, but gently .
“Go, Morag. I’d have ye safe.”
She heard the n ote of pleading in his voice, and her face
softened. Still, she looked from  her husband to Roger , who
was now  trying mental telepath y , beaming thoughts at her in
increasing desperation.
Leave, for God’ s sake, woman, befor e you get me killed!
Morag turned back to her husband, small jaw set in
determination.
“I’ll go. But yo u swear to me, W illiam Buccleigh, that ye
willna harm one hair of this man’ s head!”
Buccleigh’ s eyes bulged slightly , and his hands curled into
fists, but Morag stood her ground, small and fierce.
“Swear it!” she said. “For by the name of Bride, I’ll not
share the bed of a murderer!”
Clearly torn, Buccleigh glanced from the sullen Black-beard
to h is other friend, who was shuf fling from one foot to the
other like a man in ur gent need of a privy . The party of militia
was getting closer . Then he looked down into his wife’ s face.“All right, Morag,” he said gr uf fly . He gave her a small
push. “Go, now!”
“No.” She reached out and took  her husband’ s hand, pulling
it toward her breast. Little Jemmy had got over his alarm, and
was curled into his mother ’ s shoulder , noisily sucking his
thumb. M orag placed his father ’ s hand on the little boy’ s head.
“Swear on your son’ s head, W ill, that ye’ll not hurt this man
nor see him killed.”
Roger mentally applauded the gesture, but was afraid she’d
gone too far; Buccleigh stif fened for a moment, and the blood
rose in his fac e again. After a tense moment, though, he
nodded, once.
“I swear ,” he said quietly , and let his hand fall. Morag’ s face
eased, and without a word, she turned then and hurried away ,
the baby held close to her bosom.
Roger let out th e breath he’d been holding. God, what a
woman! He hoped passionately that she and her baby would  be
safe—though if her fat-headed husband chose to step in a
gopher hole and break his neck …
W illiam Buccleigh was looking down at him, green eyes
narrowed in contemplation, ignoring the increasing agitation
of his friend.
“Come on, Buck!” The man glanced over his shoulder
toward the creek, where loud  calls to and fro indicated
searchers combing the ground. “There’ s no time to be lost.
They did say T ry on means to hang prisoners, and I’ve no mind
to be one!”
“Does he,” Buccleigh said softly . He held Roger ’ s eyes with
his, and Roger thought for a moment that something familiar
stirred in those depths. A chill of unease ran down his spine.
“He’ s right,” he said to Buccleigh, with a jerk of the head
toward the other man. “Go. I’ll not speak against you—for
your wife’ s sake.”
Buccleigh pursed his lips slightly , thinking.“No,” he said at last, “I dinna think ye will. Speak against
me, that is.” He stooped and picked up the sodden, dirt-
smeared ex-flag of truce from th e ground. “Go along with ye,
Johnny . See to Morag. I’ll meet ye later .”
“But, Buck …”
“Go! I’m safe e nough.” W ith a faint smile, his eyes still on
Roger , B uccleigh put his hand in his pouch and drew out a
small b it of dull silver metal.  W ith a small shock, Roger
recognized his own militia badge, the crudely lettered “FC”
burned black in the pewter disc.
T ossing the badge lightly in his  palm, Buccleigh turned to
Black-beard, who was taking a suddenly renewed interest in
the proceedings.
“I’ve a thought, sir , regarding our mutual friend.” He
nodded toward Roger . “If you’re with me?”
Black-beard looked at Roger , back at MacKenzie, and a
slow smile began to grow benea th his bulbous, reddened nose.
The ripple of unease down Roger ’ s back blossomed suddenly
into a full-blown jolt of fear .
“Help!” he roared. “Help, militia! Help!” He rolled, twisting
to avoid  them, but Black-beard  seized him by the shoulders,
pulling h im back. Calls came f rom beyond the trees, and the
sound of feet, beginning to run.
“No, sir , ” said W illiam Buccleigh, kneeling down in front of
him. He  seized Roger ’ s jaw in a grip of iron, strangling his
yells and  squeez ing his cheeks to force open his mouth. “I do
not think you’ll speak, indeed.” W ith a slight smile, he
rammed the sodden cloth down  Roger ’ s throat again, and tied
the tattered neckcloth fast around it.
He s tood up, the n, the militia badge held tight in his hand.
As the bushes opened, he turned toward them and waved an
arm in hearty greeting.67
AFTERMA TH
It b eing now half past two O’Clock the Enemy entir ely
dispersed, and the Army five Mi les fr om Camp, it was thought
adviseable to lose no T ime, bu t to r eturn immediately to the
Camp at Alamance. Empty W aggons wer e or der ed fr om Camp
which to ok both the killed and wounded of the Loyalists, and
even several of the wounded Rebels, who acknowledged had
they gai ned the day no Quarters would have been given but to
such a s would have turned Regulators, these wer e
nevertheless, taken good Car e of, and had their wounds
dr essed.
 
—”A Journal of the Expedition against the Insur gents,”
 Wm. T ryon
 
A MUSK ET -BALL had shattered David W ingate’ s elbow . Bad
luck; had it struck an inch higher , it would have broken the
bone, but healed cleanly . I’d opened the joint with a
semicircular inc ision across the outer aspect, and dug out both
the f lattened ball and several bo ne chips, but the cartilage was
badly damaged, and the biceps tendon had been sheared
through complet ely; I could see the silvery gleam of one end,
hiding deep in the dark-red meat of the muscle.
I gn awed my low er lip, considering. If I left matters as they
were, th e arm would be perman ently—and badly—crippled. If
I c ould reattach the severed tendon and bring the bone-ends in
the joint  capsule  into good alig nment, he might just possibly
regain some use of it.
I glanced round the campsite, which now resembled an
ambulance depot, littered with bodies, equipment, and blood-
stained bandages. Most of the bodies were moving, thank God,if only to curse or moan. One man had been dead when his
friends brought him in; he lay quiet in the shade of a tree,
wrapped in his blanket.
Most of  the injuries I saw had been slight, though there
were two men s hot through the body; I could do nothing for
them but keep th em warm and h ope for the best. Brianna was
checking them every few minutes for signs of shock and fever ,
in between rounds of administering honeyed water to those
suf fering more superficial wounds. Best she kept busy , I
thought, and she did keep moving, though her face looked like
one of the wild morning glories on the vine that climbed the
bush behind me—white and p uckered, pinched tight closed
against the terrors of the day .
I h ad had to am putate a leg, so on after the battle ended. It
was a man from Mercer ’ s Com pany—camped near to us, and
lacking a sur geon of their own—struck by a rebounding chunk
of a mortar roun d that had torn of f most of his foot and left the
flesh of the low er leg hanging in ribbons from the shattered
bone. I’d thought she would faint when the heavy limb
thumped into the dirt at her feet,  and she’d thought so, too, but
had by some miracle stayed upright, supporting the patient—
who really had  fain ted, thank the Lord for small mercies—
while I cauteriz ed the bleeding vessels and bound the stump
with brutal speed.
Jamie was gone; he had brough t back his men, hugged me
hard and kissed me once, fiercely , then left with the Lindsays
to ta ke the prisoners to the Governor—and inquire along the
way for any news of Roger .
Relief at Jamie’ s return buoyed my heart, but fear for Roger
was a small heavy counterweight below my breastbone. I
could ignore it while I worked, though. No news was good
news for a short time yet, and I welcomed the immediate
realities of triage and treatment as a refuge from imagination.
Nothing else looked exigent. Men were still straggling in,
but B ree looked up at each one, her heart in her eyes. If any of
them needed me, she would ca ll. All right, I decided. Therewas tim e; I’d try it. There was  little to lose, bar a bit more
suf fering for Mr . W ingate, and I would ask if he were willing.
He w as wax-pale and sweating, but still upright. He nodded
his perm ission and I gave him  the whisky bottle again; he
applied it to his mouth with his sound hand as though it
contained the elixir of life. I called one of the other men to
hold his  arm steady while I worked, and swiftly incised the
skin just above the bend of th e elbow in an inverted “T ,”
exposing the lower head of th e biceps and making the site
more accessible . I began to probe with my longest forceps,
teasing out the tough silver s trand of the sheared tendon,
pulling it down as far as I could, until I had a sound spot where
I could pierce it with a suture, and set about the delicate work
of rejoining the severed ends.
I lost touch then with every thing around me, all my
attention focuse d on the probl em before me. I was dimly
conscious of the pit! pit! pit!  o f drops striking the ground a t
my feet, but didn’ t know whet her it was the sweat that ran
down m y arms and face, the patient’ s oozing blood, or both. I
could have used the hands of a trained sur gical nurse to help,
but didn ’ t have them, so made do with my own. I had a fine
sur geon’ s needle, though, and thin boiled-silk sutures; the
stitches showed small and neat, a stark black zigzag that
marked a sturdy hold on the slip pery , gleaming tissue. I would
normally have used the cat-gut sutures for internal work like
this, as those wo uld gradually dissolve and be absorbed by the
body . T endons healed so slowly , though—if at all—that I
couldn’ t risk that. The silk stitches would simply stay
permanently in place, and I prayed would cause no problems
of their own.
Then the hard p art was done, a nd time started again. I was
able to talk soo thingly to David, who had come through it
gallantly; he nodded and made a  feeble attempt to smile when
I tol d hi m it was done, though h is teeth were clenched and his
cheeks wet with tears. He sc reamed when I washed the
wounds with diluted alcohol—they always did; they couldn’ thelp it, poor thin gs—but then sagged back, trembling, while I
stitched the sur gical incisions and bandaged the wounds.
That too k no great skill, thoug h; I had attention to spare
now , and gradually became awa re that some of the men behind
me wer e discu ssing the recent battle, full of praise for
Governor T ryon.
“Did you see it , then?” one was asking eagerly . “Did he
really do as they said?”
“Hope I  may be gutted and fried  for breakfast if it ain’ t so,”
his companion replied sententiously . “Saw him with my own
eyes, did n’ t I? He rode up within  a hundred yards of the swine,
and ordered ‘em face-to-face to surrender . They wasn’ t much
answer for a m inute, only them kind of lookin’ to and fro
amongst themselves to see who might speak, and then
somebody shout s out that no, damn it all, they ain’ t a-going to
surrender nohow . So the Governor , he’ s a-scowlin’ fit to fright
a thu ndercloud, and he rears up  and lifts his sword high, then
brings it down and shouts, ‘Fire on them!’ ”
“And did they do so straight of f?”
“No, we  didn’ t, ” put in another  voice, more educated, and
rather dr y in tone. “Do you blame us? A forty-shilling bounty
for joini ng the militia is one thin g, but to fire in cold blood on
folk you know is something e lse. I looked across and who
should I see on the other side but my wife’ s own cousin,
grinning back at me! Now , I’m n ot saying that the rascal is any
great favorite with me or the family , but how am I to go home
and tell my Sally as I’ve just shot her cousin Millard full of
holes?”
“Better than Cousin Millard doin ’ the same service by you,”
said the first vo ice, with an au dible grin, and the third man
laughed.
“T rue enough,” he said. “But we didn’ t wait to see if it
might come to that. The Governor , he went red as a turkey-
cock when the m en there with him hesitated. He stood up in
his s tirrups with his sword held on high, glared round at us all,and he hollered out, ‘Fire, Godd amn you! Fire on them, or on
me!’ ”
The narrator put a good deal of enthusiasm into this re-
enactment, and there was a mu rmur of admiration from his
hearers.
“Now th ere’ s a soldier for ye!” said one voice, followed by
a general rumble of agreement.
“So we fired,” s aid the narrator , a faint shrug in his voice.
“Didn’ t take so long, once it started. Cousin Millard is right
fast, it seems, once he’ s starte d running. Bastard got clean
away .”
More laughter at this, and I smiled, patting David’ s
shoulder . He was listening, too, the conversation a welcome
distraction.
“No sir ,” another agreed. “I reckon T ryon means to make
sure of his victory this time. Heard he’ s gone to hang the
leaders of the Regulation on the field.”
“He what?” I whirled round at this, bandage still in hand.
The small group of men blinked up at me, surprised.
“Y es, ma’am,” said one man, w ith an awkward tug at the
brim of his hat. “A fellow from Lillington’ s brigade told me
so; he was of f to see the fun.”
“Fun,” muttered another of the men, and crossed himself.
“Shame if he hangs the Quaker ,” another opined, face
shadowed. “Old  Husband’ s a right terror in print, but he ain’ t a
ruf fian. Nor are James Hunter or Ninian Hamilton.”
“Perhaps he’ll hang Cousin M illard,” another suggested,
nudging his neighbor with a grin. “Then you’ll be rid of him
and your wife can blame the Governor!”
There was a chorus of laughter at this, but the tone was
subdued. I turned back to my w ork, concentrating fiercely to
blot out the picture of what was now happening on the field of
war .W ar wa s bad enough, even when it was necessary . Cold-
blooded revenge by the victor was one degree beyond. And yet
from T ryon’ s point of view , tha t might be necessary , too. As
battles went, this one had bee n both quick, and relatively
minor in  terms of casualty . I had  only twenty or so wounded in
my keep ing, and had seen only  one fatality . There would be
more elsewhere, of course, yet from the comments of those
nearby , it had b een a rout, but not a slaughter , the militiamen
being lar gely unenthusiastic about butchering their fellow
citizens, cousins or not.
That me ant that most of the men of the Regulation survived
unharmed. I supposed that the  Governor might feel that a
drastic g esture was required, to seal his victory , intimidate the
survivors, and stamp once and for all on the long-smoldering
wick of that dangerous movement.
There w as a stir , and the sound of a horse’ s hooves. I looked
up—next to me, Bree’ s head jer ked up, her body tense—to see
Jamie returning, riding double with Murdo Lindsay . Both men
slid of f, and he  sent Murdo a way with a word to care for
Gideon, then came at once to me.
I could see from  the anxious look of his face that he had no
word of Roger; he glanced at my face and saw the answer to
his own question there. His shoulders dropped slightly in
discouragement, then straightened, stif fening.
“I w ill g o to search the field,” h e said to me, low-voiced. “I
have sent word already , through the companies. If he is
brought in anywhere, someone will bring us word.”
“I’m going with you.” Brianna  was already taking of f her
grubby apron, wadding it into a ball.
Jamie glanced at her , then nodded.
“A ye, la ss, of course. Just a mo ment, then—I’ll fetch wee
Josh to help your mother .”
“I’ll get—get the horses ready .” Her movements were quick
and jerky , without her usual at hletic grace, and she dropped
the water bottle she was holding, fumbling several timesbefore she succeeded in retrieving it. I took it from her before
she could drop it again, and squeezed her hand, hard.
The cor ner of her mouth trembled as she looked at me; I
thought she meant it for a smile.
“He’ll be all right,” she said. “W e’ll find him.”
“Y es,” I said, and let go her hand. “I know you will.”
I w atched her h urry across the clearing, hands clenched in
her raised skirts, and felt the counterweight of fear come loose,
plunging like a stone into my belly .68
EXECUTION OF ORDERS
R OGER W OKE SLOWL Y , to throbbing pain and a sense of
dreadful ur genc y . He had no idea where he was, or how he
came to be ther e, but there were voices, lots of voices, some
talking just beyond the range of comprehension, some singing
like harpies, in s hrill discord. For a moment, he felt the voices
were ins ide his head. He could  see them, little brown things
with lea ther wings and sharp tee th, banging into each other in
paroxysms of interruption that set of f small bombs of light
behind his eyes.
He c ould feel th e seam along which his head must surely
split und er the pressure, a burning streak across the top of his
skull. H e wante d someone to co me and unzip it, to let out all
the flyin g voice s and their rack et, to leave his skull an empty
bowl of shining bone.
He had no real s ense of opening his eyes, and stared numbly
for some  minutes, thinking that the scene on which he looked
was still  part of the confusion inside his skull. Men swarmed
before h im in a sea of colors, swirling blues and reds and
yellows, mixed with blobs of green and brown.
A d efect in his  vision deprived him of perspective and
caused him to see them in fragments—a distant cluster of
heads floating like a bobble of hairy balloons, a waving arm
that held a crimson banner , seemingly severed from its body .
Several pairs of legs that must b e close by … was he sitting on
the ground? He was. A fly dro ned past his ear and landed,
buzzing, on his upper lip, and he moved by reflex to swat it,
only the n realizing that he was indeed awake—and still bound.
His hands had gone numb beyon d any sense of pain, but the
ache now  throbbed through the straining muscles of his arms
and shoulders. He shook his hea d to clear it, a terrible mistake.Blinding pain shot through his  head, bringing water to his
eyes.
He b linked hard and breathed de ep, willing himself to grasp
some shred of reality , to come to himself. Focus , he thought.
Hold on . T he singing voices had faded away , leaving only a
faint ringing in his ears. The oth ers were still talking, though,
and now he knew  that the sound  was real, he was able to seize
on a word her e and there, and pin it down, flapping, to
examine for meaning.
“Example.”
“Governor .”
“Rope.”
“Piss.”
“Regulators.”
“Stew .”
“Foot.”
“Hang.”
“Hillsborough.”
“W ater .”
“W ater .” That one made sense. He knew water . He wanted
water; w anted it badly . His thro at was dry , his mouth felt as
though it was stuf fed with … it was stuf fed with something; he
gagged as his tongue moved in an unconscious attempt at
swallowing.
“Governor .” Th e repeated word, spoken just above him,
made him look up. He fixed his floating vision on a face.
Lean, dark, frowning with a fierce intent.
“Y ou are sure?” the face said, and he wondered dimly , Sur e
of what?  H e was sure o f nothing, save that he was in a bad
way .
“Y essir ,” said another voice, and he saw another face swim
into view alongside the first. Th is one seemed familiar , fringedwith thick black beard. “I saw him in Hermon Husband’ s
camp, palavering with Husb and. Y ou ask amongst the
prisoners, sir—they’ll say so.”
The first head nodded. It turned to the side, and up,
addressing someone taller . Rog er ’ s eyes drifted up, seeking,
and he jerked u pright with a m uf fled exclamation, as he saw
the green eyes looking down on him, dispassionate.
“He’ s J ames M acQuiston,” s aid the green-eyed man,
nodding confirmation. “From Hudgin’ s Ferry .”
“Y ou saw  him in the battle?” Th e first man was coming into
complete focus, a soldierly-looking fellow in his late thirties,
dressed in uniform. Something else was coming into focus—
James MacQuiston. He’d heard of MacQuiston … what … ?
“He killed a man in my company ,” Green-eyes said, his
voice ro ugh with anger . “Shot him in cold blood as he lay
wounded on the ground.”
The Governor—that was who it must be, Governor …
T ryon! That was the name! Th e Governor was nodding, the
frown etched deep on his face.
“T ake him, too, then,” he said, and turned away . “Three are
enough for now .”
Hands gripped Roger ’ s arms and jerked him upright,
supporting him for a moment,  then pulling him so that he
stumbled, of f-b alance, and found himself half-walking, his
weight supported by two men d ressed in uniform. He pulled
against them, wanting to turn and find Green-eyes—damn,
what was the man’ s name?—but they yanked him round,
compelling him to stumble towa rd a small rise, topped with a
huge white oak.
The rise  was surrounded by a se a of men, but they fell back,
making way for Roger and his escorts. The sense of ur gency
was back, a feeling like ants beneath the surface of his brain.
MacQuiston , he thought, the name suddenly clear in his
memory . James MacQuiston . Ma cQuiston was a minor lead er
of the Regulation, a rabble-rouser from Hudgin’ s Ferry whosefiery speech of threat and denun ciation had been published in
the Gazette ; Roger had seen it.
Why in hell had Green-eyes—B uccleigh! It was Buccleigh.
His sense of relief at remembering the name was succeeded
instantly by shock as he realized  that Buccleigh had told them
he was MacQuiston. Why—
He had not eve n time to form the question when the last
ranks br oke before him, and h e saw the horses beneath the
tree, the looped nooses hanging above the empty saddles from
its branches.
 
THEY HELD THE HORSES by the heads, while the men
were put upon them. Leaves brushed his cheek; twigs caught
in hi s ha ir , and he ducked, turning his head by instinct to save
his eyes being put out.
Some w ay acro ss the clearing, he saw a woman’ s figure,
half-hidden in the crowd; indistinct but with the unmistakable
curve of  a child in her arm, a sm all brown Madonna. The sight
brought him upright with a jol t through chest and belly , the
memory of Bree with Jemmy in  her arms searing through his
mind.
He threw  himself to the side, back arched, felt himself slide
and had  no hands to save himself. Other hands caught him,
pushed him back, one struck h im hard across the face. He
shook h is head, eyes watering, and through the blur of tears
saw the brown Madonna thrust her burden into someone’ s
hands, p ick up her skirts, and run as though the devil chased
her .
Something drop ped upon his breast with the heavy slither of
a s erpen t. Prickly hemp touched his neck, drew tight about his
throat, and he screamed behind the gag.
He struggled without thought for consequence or possibility ,
impelled by the desperation of the instinct to survive. Heedless
of bleeding wrists and wrenching muscle, thighs clenched so
hard about the horse’ s body that  it jerked under him in protest,he s trained at his bonds with a strength beyond what he had
ever imagined he possessed.
Across t he clearing, the child h ad begun to shriek for his
mother . The crowd had fallen s ilent and the baby’ s cries rang
loud. Th e dark soldier sat on his horse, arm lifted, sword
upraised. He seemed to speak, but Roger heard nothing for the
roar of blood in his ears.
The bon es of his hands popped and a line of liquid heat ran
down on e arm as a muscle tor e. The sword fell, a flash of
sunlight from its blade. His buttocks slid back over the horse’ s
rump, legs trailing helpless, an d his weight fell free in an
empty-bellied plunge.
A wrenching jerk …
And he was sp inning, choking , fighting for air , and his
fingers scrabbled, nails tearing at the rope sunk deep in his
flesh. His hands had come loose, but it was too late, he
couldn’ t feel them, couldn’ t manage. His fingers slipped and
slid on the twisted strands, futile, numb, and unresponsive as
wood.
He dangled, kicking, and heard  a far -of f rumble from the
crowd. He kicked and bucked, feet pawing empty air , hands
clawing at his th roat. Chest strained, back arched, and his sight
had gone black, small lightnings flickering in the corners of
his eyes. He reached for God and heard no plea for mercy deep
within himself but only a shri ek of no!  that echoed in his
bones.
And the n the stubborn impulse left him and he felt his body
stretch and loosen, reaching, reaching for the earth. A cool
wind em braced him and he fel t the soothing warmth of his
body’ s voidings. A brilliant light blazed up behind his eyes,
and he heard nothing more but th e bursting of his heart and the
distant cries of an orphaned child.69
HIDEOUS EMERGENCY
J AMIE AND BREE were nearly ready to leave. Smoke-
stained and weary as they wer e, a number of the men had
of fered to join the search-party , an of fer that made Bree bite
her lip and nod thanks. She was grateful for the of fer of help, I
knew—but it takes time to mov e a lar ger group, and I could
see the impatien ce flare up in red blotches under her skin as
weapons were cleaned, canteens refilled, cast-of f shoes
located.
“W ee Josh” had been mildly apprehensive regarding his
new pos ition as sur geon’ s assistant, but he was a groom, after
all, a nd thus acc ustomed to tending the ills of horseflesh. The
only dif ference, as I told him—making him grin—was that
human patients could tell you where it hurt.
I had  paused to wash my hands before stitching a lacerated
scalp, when I be came aware of some disturbance taking place
at th e edge of the meadow behind me. Jamie, hearing it too,
turned his head—and then came swiftly back across the
clearing, eyebrows raised.
“What is it?” I turned to look, and saw a young woman,
evidently in a dreadful state, heading toward us at a lopsided
trot. She was slight of build and limping badly—she had lost a
shoe som ewhere—but still half-running, supported on one side
by Murd o Lindsay , who seemed to be expostulating with her
even as he helped her along.
“Fraser ,” I heard her gasp. “Fr aser!” She let go of Murdo
and push ed her way through the  waiting men, her eyes raking
the f aces as she passed, searching. Her brown hair was tangled
and full of leaves, her face scratched and bloody .
“James … Fraser … I must …  are you … ?” She was
panting for breath, her chest h eaving and her face so red it
looked as though she might have an apoplexy on the spot.Jamie stepped forward and took her by the arm.
“I’m Jamie Fraser , lass,” he said. “Is it me ye want?”
She nod ded, gasping, but had n o breath for words. I hastily
poured a cup of water and of fered it to her , but she shook her
head violently , instead waving her arms in agitation, gesturing
wildly toward the creek.
“Rog … er ,” sh e got out, gulping air like a landed fish.
“Roger . MacKe n … zie.” Befo re the final syllable left her
mouth, Brianna was at the young woman’ s side.
“Where is he? I s he hurt?” She seized the young woman’ s
arm, as much to compel answers as to provide support.
The girl’ s head b obbed up and down, shook back and forth,
and she gasped out, “Hang …  they … they are … hanging
him! Gov—ner!”
Brianna let go of her and ran for the horses. Jamie was
already there, untying reins with the same swift intensity he
had shown when the fighting  began. W ithout a word, he
stooped, hands cupped; Brianna stepped up and swung into the
saddle, kicking the horse into motion before Jamie had
reached his own. Gideon caught the mare up within moments,
though, and both horses disappeared into the willows, as
though swallowed up.
I sai d so mething under my breath, with no consciousness of
whether I’d uttered a curse or a prayer . I thrust needle and
suture into Josh’ s startled hands , caught up the sack with my
emer gency kit, and ran for my o wn horse, leaving the brown-
haired woman collapsed on the grass, vomiting from her
ef fort.
 
I CAUGHT THEM UP within a few moments. W e didn’ t
know precisely where T ryon was holding his drumhead court,
and valuable time was lost as Jamie was compelled to stop,
time and  again, and lean from his horse to ask directions—
these often muddled and contradictory . Bree was gathered intoherself, quivering like a nocked arrow , ready for flight, but
lacking direction.
I t ried to ready myself for anyt hing, including the worst. I
had no idea what preliminaries T ryon might have engaged in,
or how much time might elapse between condemnation and
execution. Not bloody long, I th ought. I’d known T ryon long
enough to see that he acted with thought, but also with
dispatch—and h e would know that if such things were done,
‘twas best they were done quickly .
As to the why of it … imagination failed completely . I could
only hope that t he woman was wrong; that she had mistaken
someone else for Roger . And ye t I didn’ t think so; neither did
Brianna, ur ging her horse through a boggy patch ahead with an
intensity that suggested she wou ld be better pleased to leap of f
the horse and drag it bodily through the mud.
The afternoon was fading, and clouds of small gnats
surrounded us, but Jamie made no move to brush them away .
His shou lders w ere set like ston e, braced to bear the burden of
knowledge. It was that as much as my own fears that told me
Roger was likely dead.
The thou ght beat against me like  a small, sharp hammer , the
sort meant for breaking rocks. So far , I felt only brief,
recurrent shocks of imagined loss, each time I glanced at
Brianna’ s white face, thought of tiny Jemmy orphaned, heard
the e cho of Rog er ’ s soft, deep voice, laughing in the distance,
singing through my heart. I did not try to push the hammering
thoughts aside; it would do no good. And I would not truly
break, I knew , until I saw his body .
Even then, the break would be internal. Brianna would need
me. Jam ie would  stand like a rock for her , would do what must
be done —but he, too, would n eed me, later . No one could
absolve him of t he guilt I knew  he felt, but I could at least be
confessor for him, and his intercessor with Brianna. My own
mourning could wait—a long time, I hoped.
The gro und opened, flattening into the edge of a wide
meadow , and Jamie kicked Gideon into a gallop, the otherhorses streaming after him. Our shadows flew like bats across
the gras s, the sound of our hoo fbeats lost in the sounds of a
crowd of men who filled the field.
On a rise at the  far end of the meadow stood a huge white
oak, its spring leaves bright in the slanting sun. My horse
moved suddenly , dodging past  a group of men, and I saw
them, three stick-figures, dangling broken in the tree’ s deep
shadow . The hammer struck one final blow , and my heart
shattered like ice.
T oo late.
 
IT W AS A BAD HANGING. W ithout benefit of of ficial
troops, T ryon had had no one  to hand with a hangsman’ s
gruesome—and necessary—skills. The three condemned men
had been sat on  horses, the ropes round their necks thrown
over tree branches above, and at the signal, the horses had
been led out from under them, leaving them dangling.
Only on e had been fortunate e nough to die of a snapped
neck. I could see the sharp angl e of his head, the limpness of
his limbs in their bonds. It wasn’ t Roger .
The others had strangled, slowly . The bodies were twisted,
held by their bonds in the final postures of their struggle. One
man—one body —was cut down as I rode up, and carried past
me in the arms of his brother . There was not much to choose
between their faces, each contorted, each darkened in its
separate agony . They had used what rope was to hand; it was
new , unstretched. Roger ’ s toes trailed in the dust; he had been
taller tha n the rest. His hands had come free; he had managed
to h ook the fingers of one hand beneath the rope. The fingers
were nearly black, all circulation  cut of f. I couldn’ t look at his
face at once. I looked at Brianna’ s, instead; white and utterly
still, each bone and tendon set like death.
Jamie’ s face was the same, but where Brianna’ s eyes were
blank with shock, Jamie’ s burned, holes charred black in the
bone of his sku ll. He stood for a moment before Roger , thencrossed himself,  and said someth ing very quietly in Gaelic. He
drew the dirk from his side.
“I’ll hold him. C ut him down, lass.” Jamie handed the knife
to B rianna, not l ooking at her , and stepping forward, took hold
of the body roun d the middle, lifting slightly to take the strain
of f the rope.
Roger moaned. Jamie froze, arms wrapped tight, and his
eyes flicked to me, huge with shock. It was the faintest of
sounds; it was only Jamie’ s resp onse that convinced me I had
indeed heard it—but I had, and  so had Brianna. She leapt at
the rope , and sawed at it in silent frenzy , and I—stunned into
temporary immobility—began to think, as fast as possible.
Maybe not; maybe it was only the sound of the body’ s
residual air escaping with the movement—but it wasn’ t; I
could see Jamie’ s face, holding him, and I knew it wasn’ t.
I darted forward , reaching upward as Roger ’ s body fell, to
catch and cradle the head in my hands, to steady him as Jamie
lowered him to the ground. He was cold, but firm. Of course,
if he were alive,  he must be, but I had prepared myself for the
flaccid-meat touch of dead flesh, and the shock of feeling life
under my hands was considerable.
“A b oard,” I said, breathless a s though someone had just
punched me in the stomach. “A  plank, a door , something to
put him on. W e mustn’ t move his head; his neck may be
broken.”
Jamie s wallowed once, hard, then jerked his head in an
awkward nod, and set of f, walking stif fly at first, then faster
and faster , past the knots of sorrowing kin and eager gawkers,
whose curious gaze was turning now in our direction.
Brianna had the dirk still in her hand. As people began to
come to ward us,  she moved past  me, and I caught a glimpse of
her face . It was still white, still set—but the eyes burned now
with a black light that would s ear any soul so reckless as to
come too near .I had no attention to spare for interference—or anything
else. He  wasn’ t breathing visibly ; no obvious movement of the
chest, no twitch of lips or nostr ils. I felt vainly for a pulse in
his f ree wrist—pointless to poke  at the mass of swollen tissue
in his neck—finally found an abdominal pulse, beating faintly
just below the breastbone.
The noose was s unk deep in his flesh; I groped frantically in
my p ocket for m y penknife. It w as a new rope, raw hemp. The
fibers w ere hairy , stained brown with dried blood. I registered
the fact faintly , i n the remote part of my mind that had time for
such thi ngs while my hands we re busy . New ropes stretch. A
real hangsman has his own rope s, already stretched and oiled,
well-tested for ease of use. The  raw hemp jabbed my fingers,
stabbed painfull y under my nails as I clawed and pried and
ripped at it.
The last  strand popped and I yanked it free, heedless of
laceration—that hardly mattered. I daren’ t risk tilting his head
back; if the cerv ical vertebrae were fractured, I could cripple
or kill him. And  if he couldn’ t breathe, that wouldn’ t matter ,
either .
I g rippe d his jaw , tried to sweep my fingers through his
mouth, to clear mucus and obstructions. No good, his tongue
was swollen, not sticking out, but in the way . Air takes less
room than fingers do, though . I pinched his nose tight,
breathed two or three times, as deeply as I could, then sealed
my mouth on his and blew .
Had I seen his face as he hung, I would have realized at
once tha t he wasn’ t dead; his fea tures had gone slack with loss
of consc iousness and his lips a nd eyelids were blue—but his
face wa sn’ t black with congested blood, and his eyes were
closed, not bulging. He’d lost h is bowels, but his spinal cord
wasn’ t snapped, and he hadn’ t strangled—yet.
He was, however , in the process of doing so before my eyes.
His ches t wasn’ t moving. I took  another breath, and blew , free
hand on his breast. Nothing. Blow . No movement. Blow .
Something. Not enough. Blow . Air leaking all around theedges of my m outh. Blow . Like blowing up a rock, not a
balloon. Blow again.
Confused voices over my head, Brianna shouting, then
Jamie at my elbow .
“Here’ s the board,” he said calmly . “What must we do?”
I gasped for breath, and wiped my mouth.
“T ake his hips, Bree his shoulders. Move when I tell you,
not before.”
W e shifted him quickly , my hands holding his head like the
Holy Gr ail. The re were people a ll around us now , but I had no
time to look or listen; I had eyes only for what must be done.
I r ipped  of f my petticoat, rolled it and used it to brace his
neck; I hadn’ t fe lt any grinding or crackling in the neck when
we lifted  him, but I needed all t he luck I had for other things.
By stubb ornness or sheer miracle, he wasn’ t dead. But he had
hung by the neck for the best pa rt of an hour , and the swelling
of t he tissues in his throat was very shortly going to
accomplish what the rope itself hadn’ t.
I did n’ t know w hether I had a few minutes or an hour , but
the p rocess was inevitable, and there was only one thing to do
about it. No mo re than a few molecules of air were seeping
through that mass of crushed a nd mangled tissue; a bit more
swelling would seal it of f altoge ther . If no air could reach his
lungs by means of nose or mo uth, another channel must be
provided.
I turned  to look for Jamie, but it was Brianna who knelt
beside me. A certain amount of racket in the background
indicated that Jamie was dealing with the spectators.
A cricothrotomy? Fast, and requiring no great skill, but
dif ficult to keep open—and it m ight not be suf ficient to relieve
the obstruction. I had one hand on Roger ’ s sternum, the soft
bump of his hea rt secure under my fingers. Strong enough …
maybe.“Right,” I said to Brianna, hoping I sounded quite calm.
“I’ll need a bit of help.”
“Y es,” she said—and thank God , she  s ou nded calm. “What
shall I do?”
In essence, nothing all that dif ficult; simply hold Roger ’ s
head pulled well back, and keep it steady while I slit his throat.
Of course, hyperextending the neck could easily sever the
spinal cord if there were a fracture, or compress it irreversibly .
But Brianna needn’ t worry about that—or know about it,
either .
She knelt by h is head and d id as I told her , and the
mediastinum of the trachea bulged into view as the skin and
fascia over it tig htened. There it was, neatly lined up—I hoped
—between the great vessels on e ither side. If it wasn’ t, I could
easily lacerate the common carotid or the internal jugular , and
he’d bleed to death right under my hands.
The only virtue to hideous em er gency is that it gives one
license to attempt things that could never be done in cold
blood.
I fumbled for the small bottle of alcohol that I carried in my
pocket. I nearly dropped it, but by the time I had poured the
contents over my fingers and wiped both my scalpel and
Roger ’ s neck, the sur geon’ s trance had come over me, and my
hands were once more steady .
I too k a moment, hands on his n eck, eyes closed, feeling for
the faint throb of the artery , the slightly softer mass of the
thyroid. I pressed upward; yes, it moved. I massaged the
isthmus of the th yroid, pushing it out of the way , hard toward
his head, and with my other hand, pressed the knife blade
down into the fourth tracheal cartilage.
The cartilage here was U-shaped, the esophagus behind it
soft and vulnerable; I must no t stab too deeply . I felt the
fibrous p arting of skin and fasci a, resistance, then the soft pop
as the blade went in. There wa s a sudden loud gur gle, and a
wet kind of wh istling noise; the sound of air being suckedthrough blood. Roger ’ s chest moved. I felt it, and it was only
then that I realized my eyes were still shut.70
ALL IS WELL
T HE BLACKNES S CRADLED HIM, comforting in its warm
completeness. He felt some faint stirring of something outside
it, a painful, in trusive presence, and shrank back into the
shelter of the da rk. It was melting away around him, though,
slowly exposing parts of him to light and harshness.
He opened his eyes. He couldn’ t tell what he was looking at,
and struggled to understand. His head throbbed and so did a
dozen smaller pulses, each one a  brilliant, tender burst of pain.
He felt the poi nts of pain like  pins that nailed him like a
butterfly to a bo ard. If he could but pry them free, he might fly
away …
He closed his eyes again, se eking the comfort of the
darkness. He felt a dim recollection of terrible ef fort, his rib-
muscles tearing with the struggle for air . There was water
somewhere in his memory , filling his nose, wetness ballooning
the h ollows of h is clothes … was he drowning? The idea sent
a fai nt f licker of  alarm through his mind. They said it was an
easy death, drowning, like falling asleep. W as he sinking,
falling into a tre acherous and final ease, even as he sought the
beguiling dark?
He jerke d, flailing with his arm s, trying to turn and reach
the surf ace. Pain burst through his chest and burned in his
throat; h e tried to cough and co uld not, tried to gulp air and
found none, struck something hard—
Something seized him, held him still. A face appeared
above him, a blur of skin, a blaze of reddish hair . Brianna? The
name flo ated int o his mind like a bright balloon. Then his eyes
focused a little, bringing a harsher , fiercer face into view .
Jamie. T he name hung in front  of him, floating, but seeming
somehow reassuring.Pressure, warmt h … a hand was clasping his arm, another
on his shoulder , pressing hard. He blinked, his vision
swimming, grad ually clearing. He felt no air moving in mouth
or nose, his throat was closed and his chest still burned, but he
was  breathing; he fe lt the soreness of the tiny muscles between
his ribs as they moved. He hadn’ t drowned then; it hurt too
much.
“Y ou ar e alive,”  Jamie said. Bl ue eyes stared intently into
his, so close he felt warm breat h on his face. “Y ou are alive.
Y ou are whole. All is well.”
He e xamined the words with a s ense of detachment, turning
them over like a handful of pebbles, feeling the weight of them
in the palm of his mind.
Y ou ar e alive. Y ou ar e whole. All is well.
A va gue feeling of comfort cam e over him. That seemed to
be a ll he needed to know just th en. Anything else could wait.
The waiting black rose up again , with the inviting aspect of a
soft couch, and he sank gratef ully upon it, still hearing the
words like plucked harpstrings.
Y ou ar e alive. Y ou ar e whole. All is well.71
A FEEBLE SP ARK
M RS. CLAIRE?”
It was Robin M cGillivray hovering in the doorway of the
tent, his dark wiry hair standing up on end like a bottle-brush.
He looked like a harried raccoon, the skin round his eyes
wiped free of sweat and soot, the rest still blackened with the
smoke of battle.
At sight of him, Claire rose at once.
“Coming.” She was on her fee t, kit in hand and already
moving toward the door before Brianna could speak.
“Mother!” It was no more than a whisper , but the tone of
panic brought Claire round as though she had stepped on a
turntable. The amber eyes fast ened on Brianna’ s face for a
moment, flicked to Roger , then back to her daughter .
“W atch his breathing,” she said . “Keep the tube clear . Give
him honey-wate r , if he’ s conscious enough to swallow a bit.
And tou ch him. He can’ t turn his head to see you; he needs to
know you’re there.”
“But—” Brianna stopped dead, her mouth too dry to speak.
Don’ t go!  she wanted to cry . Don’ t le ave me alone! I can’ t kee p
him alive, I don’ t know what to do!
“They need me,” Claire said, very gently . She turned, skirts
whispering, to the impatiently waiting Robin, and vanished
into the twilight.
“And I don’ t?” Brianna’ s lips moved, but she didn’ t know
whether she had spoken aloud or not. It didn’ t matter; Claire
was gone, and she was alone.
She felt light-he aded, and realized that she had been holding
her breath. She breathed out, an d in, deeply , slowly . The fear
was a poisonous snake, writhing round her spine, slitheringthrough her mind. Ready to sin k its fangs in her heart. She
took one more b reath through gritted teeth, seized the snake by
the head , mentally stuf fed it wriggling into a basket, and
slammed down the lid. So much for panic, then.
Her mother would not have left , were there any immediate
danger , she told herself firmly , n or if there were anything more
that could be d one medically . So there wasn’ t. W as there
anything she  could do? She b reathed, deep enough to make the
boning of her stays creak.
T ouch him. Speak to him. Let him know you’r e with him.
That was what Claire had said, speaking ur gently but
somehow absentmindedly , during the messy proceedings
following the impromptu tracheotomy .
Brianna turned back to Roger , looking in vain for something
safe to touch. H is hands were swollen like inflated gloves,
stained purple-red with bruisin g, the crushed fingers nearly
black, raw rope-weals sunk so deep in the flesh of his wrists
that she was qu easily sure she could see white bone. They
looked unreal, badly-done makeup for a horror play .
Grotesque as they were, they we re better than his face. That
was bruised and swollen, too, with a ghastly ruf f of leeches
attached beneath his jaw , but it was more subtly deformed, like
some sinister stranger pretending to be Roger .
His hands were lavishly decorated with leeches, too. He
must be wearing  every leech ava ilable, she thought. Claire had
sent Jos h rushing to the other sur geons, to beg their supplies,
and then sent h im and the two Findlay boys splashing down
the creek banks in hasty search of more.
W atch his br eathing.  That, she could do. She sat down,
moving as quietly as she could, from some obscure ur ge not to
wake him . She laid a hand lightl y over his heart, so relieved to
find him  warm to the touch th at she gave a great sigh. He
grimaced slightly at the feel of her breath on his face, tensed,
then relaxed again.His own  breath came so shallo wly that she took her hand
away , feeling that the pressure of her palm on his chest might
be enough to stop its labored rise. He was  breathing, though;
she coul d hear the faint whistle of air through the tube in his
throat. Claire had commandeered Mr . Caswell’ s imported
English pipe, ruthlessly breaking of f the amber stem. Rinsed
hastily with alcohol, it was stil l stained with tobacco tar , but
seemed to be functioning well enough.
T wo fing ers of Roger ’ s right han d were broken, all his nails
clawed bloody , torn, or missing. Her own throat tightened at
this evid ence of just how ferociously he had fought to live. His
state seemed so precarious that she hesitated to touch him, as
though she might startle him over some invisible edge between
death an d life. And yet she cou ld see what her mother meant;
the s ame touch m ight hold him back, keep him from stumbling
over just such an edge, lost in the dark.
She sque ezed his thigh firmly , r eassured by the solid feel of
the long, curving muscle under the blanket that covered his
lower bo dy . He made a small sound, tensed, and relaxed again.
She wondered for a surreal moment whether to cup his
genitals.
“That w ould let him know I’m here, all right,” she
murmured, swallowing a hysterical desire to laugh. His leg
quivered slightly at the sound of her voice.
“Can you hear me?” she asked softly , leaning forward. “I’m
here, Roger . It’ s me—Bree. Don’ t worry , you aren’ t alone.”
Her own voice sounded strange; too loud, stif f and
awkward.
“Bi socair , mo chridhe,”  she said, and relaxed a little. “Bi
samnach, tha mi seo.”
It was easier , somehow , in Gaelic, its formality a thin dam
against the intensity of feelings that might swamp her , were
they eve r set free. Love and fear  and anger , swirled together in
a mix so strong her hand trembled with it.She realized suddenly that her breasts were tur gid, aching
with milk; there had been no time in the last several hours
even to think of it, let alone take the time to relieve the
pressure. Her nipples stung and tingled at the thought, and she
gritted h er teeth against the small gush of milk that leaked into
her bodice, mingling with her sweat. She yearned toward
Roger , wanting suddenly to suck le him, wanting to cradle him
against her breast and let life flow into him from her .
T ouch him.  She  was  for gett ing to touch him . She stroked his
arm, squeezed his forearm gently , hoping to distract herself
from discomfort.
He seem ed to feel her hand on  his arm; one eye opened a
little, an d she thought she saw a consciousness of her flicker in
its depths.
“Y ou lo ok like the male version  of Medusa,” she said, the
first thing that popped into her head. One dark eyebrow
twitched slightly upward.
“The leeches,” she said. She to uched one of those on his
neck, and it contracted sluggishly , already half-full. “A beard
of snake s. Can you feel them? D o they bother you?” she asked
before remembering what her mother had said. His lips
moved, though, forming a soundless “no,” with obvious ef fort.
“Don’ t talk.” She glanced at t he other bed, feeling self-
conscious, but the wounded man in it was quiet, eyes closed.
She turned back, bent, and quickly kissed Roger , the merest
touch of lips. His mouth twitched; she thought he meant to
smile.
She wanted to shout at him. What happened? What in hell
did you DO?  But he couldn’ t answer .
Suddenly , fury overwhelmed h er . Mindful of the people
passing to and fro nearby , she didn’ t shout, but instead leaned
down and gripped his shoulder—that seeming one of the
reasonably und amaged spots— and hissed, “How in God’ s
name did you do  this?” in his ear .His eyes rolled slowly toward her , fixing on her face. He
made a slight gr imace which she couldn’ t interpret at all, and
then the shoulder under her hand began to vibrate. She stared
at h im in comp lete perplexity for a few seconds, before she
realized that he was laughing. Laughing!
The tube in his throat jiggled, and made a soft wheezing
noise, which aggravated her beyond bearing. She stood up,
hands pressed against her aching breasts.
“I’ll be  right back,” she said. “Don’ t you bloody go
anywhere, damn you!”72
TINDER AND CHAR
G ERALD FORB ES W AS A S UCCESSFUL lawyer , and
normally looked the part. Even dressed in his campaigning
gear , and with th e soot of gunpo wder staining his face, he still
had an air of sol id assurance that served him well as a captain
of m ilitia. This air had not quite deserted him, but he seemed
visibly uneasy , curling and uncurling the brim of his hat as he
stood in the doorway of the tent.
At first I assum ed that it was merely the discomfort that
af flicts many people in the presence of illness—or perhaps
awkwardness over the circumstances of Roger ’ s injury . But
evidently it was something else; he barely nodded toward
Brianna, who sat by Roger ’ s bed.
“My sympathies for your misfortune, ma’am,” he said, then
turned at once to  Jamie. “Mr . Fr aser . If I might—a word? And
Mrs. Fraser , too,” he added, with a grave bow in my direction.
I gla nced at Jam ie, and at his nod, got up, reaching by reflex
for my medical kit.
There w as not a great deal I could do; that much was
obvious. Isaiah Morton lay on his side in Forbes’ s tent, his
face dead-white and sheened with sweat. He still breathed, but
slowly , and with a horrible gur gling ef fect that reminded me
unpleasantly of the sound when I had pierced Roger ’ s throat.
He wasn’ t conscious, which was a small mercy . I made a
cursory examination, and sat back on my heels, wiping sweat
from my  face with the hem of my apron; the evening had not
cooled much, and it was close and hot in the tent.
“Shot through the lung,” I said, and both men nodded,
though they both clearly knew as much already .
“Shot in the back,” Jamie said, a grim tone to his voice. He
glanced at Forbes, who nodded, not taking his eyes from thestricken man.
“No,” he said quietly , answering an unspoken question. “He
wasn’ t a coward. And it was  a clean advance—no other
companies in the line behind us.”
“No Re gulators behind you?  No sharpshooters? No
ambush?” Jamie asked, but Forbes was shaking his head
before the questions were finished.
“W e cha sed a few Regulators as far as the creek, but we
stopped there and let them g o.” Forbes still held the hat
between his fingers, and he mechanically rolled and unrolled
the brim, over and over . “I had no stomach for killing.”
Jamie nodded, silent.
I cl eared my throat, and drew  the bloody remnants of
Morton’ s shirt gently over him.
“He was shot twice  in the back,” I said. The second bullet
had only  grazed his upper arm, but I could plainly see the
direction of the furrow it had left.
Jamie closed his eyes briefly , then opened them.
“The Browns,” he said, in grim resignation.
Gerald Forbes glanced at him, surprised.
“Brown? That’ s what he said.”
“He spo ke?” Jamie squatted beside the injured man, a frown
drawing his ruddy brows toget her . He glanced at me, and I
shook m y head mutely . I was h olding Isaiah Morton’ s wrist,
and cou ld feel the flutter and stumble in his pulse. He would
not likely speak again.
“When t hey brought him in.” Forbes squatted by Jamie, at
last setting down the maltreated hat. “He asked for you, Fraser .
And then he sai d, ‘T ell Ally . T ell Ally Brown.’ He said that
several times, before he—” He gestured mutely at Morton,
whose half-closed lids showed slices of white, his eyes rolled
up in agony .Jamie said something obscene, very softly , under his breath
in Gaelic.
“Do you  really think they did this?” I asked, equally softly .
The pulse thumped and shuddered under my thumb,
struggling.
He nodded, looking down at Morton.
“I should na have let them go,” he said, as though to himself.
Morton and Alicia Brown, he meant.
“Y ou couldn’ t have stopped them.” I reached my free hand
toward him, to touch him in reassurance, but couldn’ t quite
reach him, tethered as I was to Morton’ s pulse.
Gerald Forbes was looking at me in puzzlement.
“Mr . Morton … eloped with th e daughter of a man named
Brown,” I explained delicately .  “The Browns weren’ t happy
about it.”
“Oh, I see.” Forbes nodded u nderstandingly . He glanced
down at Morton’ s body and clicked his tongue, a sound
mingling reproo f with sympathy . “The Browns—do you know
which company they belong to, Fraser?”
“Mine,” Jamie said shortly . “O r they did. I havena seen
either of them, since the end of the battle.” He turned to me.
“Is there aught to do for him, Sassenach?”
I shook my head, but didn’ t let go of his wrist. The pulse
hadn’ t improved, but it hadn’ t gotten worse, either .
“No. I thought  he might be gone already , but he isn’ t
sinking yet. The ball must not have struck a major vessel.
Even so …” I shook my head again.
Jamie sighed deeply and nodded.
“A ye. W ill ye stay with him, then, until … ?”
“Y es, of course. W ill you go ba ck to our tent, though, and
make sure everything’ s under control there? If Roger—I mean,
come and fetch me if I’m needed.”He nodd ed once more and left. Gerald Forbes came near ,
and put a tentative hand on Morton’ s shoulder .
“His wife—I shall see that she has help. If he should come
round again, will you tell him that?”
“Y es, of  course,” I said again, but my hesitation made him
look up, brows raised.
“It’ s just that he … um … has two  wives,” I explained. “He
was already married when he eloped with Alicia Brown.
Hence the dif ficulty with her family , you see.”
Forbes’ s face went comically blank.
“I see,”  he said, and blinked. “The … ah … first Mrs.
Morton. Do you know her name?”
“No, I’m afraid I—”
“Jessie.”
The word was b arely more than a whisper , but it might have
been a gunshot, for its ef fect in stopping the conversation.
“What?” My grip on Morton’ s wrist must have tightened,
for he flinched slightly , and I loosened it.
His face  was still dead white , but his eyes were open,
fogged with pain but definitely conscious.
“Jessie …” he whispered again. “Jeze … bel. Jessie
Hatfield. W ater?”
“W at—oh, yes!”  I let go of his wrist and reached at once for
the wate r jug. He would have glugged it, but I let him have
only small sips, for the present.
“Jezebel Hatfield, and Alicia Brown,” Forbes said carefully ,
evidently noting  the names in his neatly-docketed lawyer ’ s
mind. “That is correct? And where do these women live?”
Morton took a breath, coughed, and interrupted the cough
abruptly with a gasp of pain. He struggled for a moment, then
found speech.“Jessie—in Gr anite Falls. Ally’ s—in Greenboro.” He
breathed very shallowly , gasping between words. And yet I
heard no gur gling of blood in hi s throat, saw none oozing from
nose or mouth. I could still hear the sucking sound from the
wound i n his back, and moved  by inspiration, I pulled him
slightly forward and jerked back the pieces of his shirt.
“Mr . Forbes, have you a sheet of paper?”
“Why …  yes. I … that is …” Forbes had thrust his hand
into his coat in automatic response, and come out with a
folded sheet of paper . I snatched this from him, unfolded it,
poured water over it, and plastered it flat against the small hole
beneath Morton’ s shoulder blade. The ink mixed with blood
and ran in littl e dark runnels over the pasty skin, but the
sucking noise abruptly stopped.
Holding the paper in place with  my hand, I could feel the
beating of his he art. It was still faint, but steadier—yes, it was
steadier .
“I’ll be damned ,” I said, leanin g to the side to look at his
face. “Y ou aren’ t going to die, are you?”
Sweat poured from his face, and the rags of his shirt hung
dark and  sodden against his chest, but the edge of his mouth
trembled in an attempt at a smile.
“No, ma’am,” he said. “I ain’ t. ” He was still breathing in
short ga sps, but the breaths were  deeper . “Ally . Baby’ s … next
… month. T old her … I be there.”
I pic ked up the edge of the blan ket with my free hand, and
wiped some of the sweat from his face.
“W e’ll d o our best to see that you are,” I assured him, then
glanced up at the lawyer , who had been watching these
proceedings with his mouth hanging slightly open.
“Mr . Forbes. I th ink perhaps we had better take Mr . Morton
back to my tent. W ill you find a couple of men to carry him?”
He closed his mouth abruptly .“Oh. Y es. Of co urse, Mrs. Fraser . At once.” He didn’ t move
right aw ay , though, and I saw his eyes dart toward the wet
sheet of paper pl astered over Morton’ s back. I glanced down at
it. I could read  only a few indistinct words between my
fingers, but those were enough t o tell me that Jamie’ s casually
insulting references to Forbes as a sodomite were likely
inaccurate. “My darling V alencia,” the letter began. I knew
only one woman named V alen cia in the vicinity of Cross
Creek—in the colony of North Carolina, for that matter .
Farquard Campbell’ s wife.
“I’m terribly sorry about your p aper ,” I said, looking up at
Forbes. Holding  his gaze with my own, I carefully rubbed the
palm of my hand  over the sheet of paper , irrevocably smearing
every w ord on it into a mess of blood and ink. “I’m afraid it’ s
quite ruined.”
He t ook a deep breath, and clapped his hat back on his head.
“That is  quite all right, Mrs. Fraser . Perfectly all right. I’ll—
go and fetch some men.”
 
EVENING BRO UGHT RELIEF from the flies, as well as the
heat. Dr awn by sweat, blood, and manure, they swarmed over
the enca mpment, biting, stinging, crawling, and buzzing in
maddening fashion. Even after they had gone, I kept slapping
absentmindedly at arms and neck, imagining I felt the tickle of
feet.
But the y were gone, at last. I glanced round my small
kingdom, saw that everyone was breathing—if with an
astounding variety of sound ef fects—and ducked out of the
tent for a breath of cool air , myself.
A highly undervalued activity , breathing. I stood for a
moment, eyes closed, appreciati ng the easy rise and fall of my
bosom, the soft inrush, the cle ansing flux. Having spent the
last several hours in keeping air  out of Isaiah Morton’ s chest,
and getting it into Roger ’ s, I was inclined to cherish theprivilege. Neither of them would draw a single breath without
pain for some time—but they wer e  both breathing.
They were my only remaining patients; the other seriously
wounded had all been claimed by the sur geons of their own
companies, or taken to the Governor ’ s tent to be tended by his
personal physician. Those with minor injuries had gone back
to their fellows, to boast of their scars or nurse their pains with
beer .
I h eard a ruf fle  of drums in the distance, and stood still,
listening. A solemn cadence played, and stopped abruptly .
There was a moment’ s silence, in which all motion seemed
suspended, and then the boom of a cannon.
The Lindsay brothers were nearby , sprawled on the ground
by their fire. They too had looked up at the sound of drums.
“What is it?” I called to them. “What’ s happening?”
“They’re bringin’ up the dead, Mrs. Fraser ,” Evan called
back. “Y e’ll no be worrit, aye?”
I waved to them in reassurance, and began to walk toward
the creek. The frogs were singing, a descant to the distant
drums. Full military honors fo r the battle dead. I wondered
whether the two hanged ringle aders would be buried in the
same place, or whether some separate and less honorable
grave would be set aside for them, if their families didn’ t
claim th em. T ryon wasn’ t the sort to leave even an enemy to
the flies.
He wou ld kno w by now , su rely . W ould he come, to
apologize for his mistake? What apology was possible, after
all? It was only by the fluke o f fortune and a new rope that
Roger was alive.
And he might still die.
When I set my hand on Isaiah Morton, I could feel the
burning of the bullet lodged in his lung—but I could feel the
stronger burning of his ferocious will to live in spite of it, too.
When I set my hand on Roger , I felt that same burning … but
it wa s a feeble spark. I listened t o the whistle of his breath andin my mind I saw charred wood, with a tiny patch of white-hot
ember still alight, but trembl ing on the ver ge of abrupt
extinction.
T inder , I thought, absurdly . That’ s what you did with a fire
that threatened to go out. Y ou blew on the spark—but then
there must be char; something for the spark to catch, to feed on
and grow .
A creak ing of wagon wheels m ade me look up from my
contemplation o f a patch of reeds. It was a small wagon, with
a single horse, and a single driver .
“Mrs. Fraser? Is that you?”
It took a moment for me to recognize the voice.
“Mr . MacLennan?” I asked, astonished.
He pulled up alongside me, and touched a hand to his hat.
By starlight, his face was dim and grave in its shadow .
“What are you doing here?” I asked, drawing close and
lowering my voice, though there  was no one anywhere near to
hear me.
“I ca me to find Joe,” he replied, with a slight motion of his
head toward the wagonbed. It should have been no great
shock; I had be en seeing death and destruction all day , and I
was no more than slightly ac quainted with Joe Hobson. I
hadn’ t k nown he was dead, tho ugh, and the hairs rippled on
my forearms.
W ithout speakin g further , I went round to the back of the
wagon. I felt the small jerk and vibration through the wood as
Abel put on the wagon-brake, and got down to join me.
The bod y wasn’ t shrouded, though someone had laid a lar ge
half-clean kerchief over the face. Three huge black flies rested
on i t, still and bloated. It made no dif ference, but I dashed
them aw ay with the back of my hand. They drifted up buzzing,
and settled again, out of my reach.
“W ere you in th e fighting?” I asked, not looking at Abel
MacLennan. He must have been with the Regulators, but therewas no smell of gunpowder on him.
“No,” h e said softly behind my  shoulder . “I’d no wish to
fight. I came wi ’ Joe Hobson, Mr . Hamilton, and the others—
but when it looked as though there would be fighting, I came
awa’. I walked away , as far as th e mill on the other side of the
town. A nd then,  when the sun went down, and no sign of Joe
… I came back,” he finished simply .
“What now?” I asked. W e both spoke softly , as though we
might di sturb the dead man’ s slu mber . “Shall we give you help
to bury him? My husband—”
“Och, no,” he i nterrupted, still softly . “I’ll be takin’ him
home, Mrs. Fraser . Though I thank ye for the kindness. If ye
might spare a bit o’ water , though, or food for the way …”
“Of course. W ait here—I’ll get it.”
I hurried  back toward our tent , thinking as I went of the
distance to Drunkard’ s Spring from Alamance. Four days, five,
six? And  the sun so hot, and the  flies … but I knew the sound
of a Scot who se mind was made up, and went without
ar gument.
I took a moment to check the two men; both breathing.
Noisily , painfully—but breathing. I had replaced the wet paper
on Mort on’ s wound with a bit of oiled linen, stuck down round
the edges with honey , which made an excellent seal. No
leakage; very good.
Brianna still sat by Roger . She had found a wooden comb,
and was  combing out his tumbled hair , gently removing burs
and twigs, working at the tang les, slowly and patiently . She
was singing something under her breath— “Fr er e Jacques.”
The bodice of her dress showed wet circles. She had gone out
once or twice du ring the day to relieve the growing pressure of
milk, bu t obviou sly it was time again. The sight made my own
breasts ache with remembered strain.
She looked up and I caught he r eye. I touched my breast
briefly and nodded toward the tent-flap, eyebrow raised. She
gave me a nod and a tiny smile, meant to be bravelyreassuring, but I could see the bleakness in her eyes. I
supposed it had occurred to her that while Roger might live, he
would likely never sing—or perhaps even talk—again.
I couldn’ t speak past the lump in my own throat; only
nodded to her and hurried out again, the parcel under my arm.
A figure  steppe d out of the darkness in front of me, and I
nearly r an bang into it. I stopped short with an exclamation,
clutching the parcel to my chest.
“My apo logies, Mrs. Fraser . I di d not realize that you didn’ t
see me.”  It was the Governor . He took another step, into the
glow of light from the tent.
He was alone, a nd looked very tired, the flesh of his face
furrowed and loose. He smelt of drink; his Council and the
militia of ficers would have been toasting his victory , I
supposed. His eyes were clear , though, and his step firm.
“Y our son-in-law ,” he said, and glanced toward the tent
behind me. “Is he—”
“He is alive,” said a soft, deep voice behind the Governor .
He w hirled round with a smothered exclamation, and my head
jerked up.
I s aw a shadow  move and take  shape, and Jamie rose up
slowly out of th e night; he had been sitting at the base of a
hickory tree, invisible in the d ark. How long had he been
there? I wondered.
“Mr . Fraser .” The Governor had been startled, but he firmed
his j aw , hands fo lded into fists a t his sides. He was obliged to
tilt h is head back to look up at Jamie, and I could see that he
didn’ t li ke it. Jamie could see it, too, and plainly didn’ t care.
He stood close to T ryon, looming over him, with an expression
on his face that would have rattled most people.
It appeared to rattle T ryon, too, but he lifted his chin,
determined to say whatever he had come to say .
“I have come to make my apologies for the injury done to
your son-in-law ,” he said. “It was a most regrettable error .”“Most regrettable,” Jamie r epeated, with an ironic
intonation. “And  would ye care to say , sir , how this … error …
came ab out?” He took a step forward, and T ryon automatically
took a step back. I could see the heat rise in the Governor ’ s
face, and his jaw clench.
“It w as a mista ke,” he said, through his teeth. “He was
wrongly identified as one of the outlawed ringleaders of the
Regulation.”
“By whom?” Jamie’ s voice was polite.
Small hectic spots burned in the Governor ’ s cheeks.
“I do  no t know . By several people. I had no reason to doubt
the identification.”
“Indeed. And did Roger MacKenzie say nothing in his own
defense? Did he not say who he was?”
T ryon’ s lower teeth fastened bri efly in the flesh of his upper
lip, then let go.
“He … did not.”
“Because he was bloody bound and gagged!” I said. I had
pulled the gag from his mouth myself, when Jamie had cut
him down from the hanging tree. “Y ou didn’ t let  him speak,
did you, you—you—”
The lamplight from the tent- flap gleamed of f T ryon’ s
gor get, a  crescent of silver that hung round his throat. Jamie’ s
hand rose slowly—so slowly that T ryon plainly perceived no
threat—and ver y gently fitted itself around the Governor ’ s
throat, just above the gor get.
“Leave us, Claire,” he said. There was no particular threat in
his voic e; he sounded merely matter -of-fact. A flash of panic
lit T ryon’ s eyes, and he jerked backward, gor get flashing in the
light.
“Y ou da re to lay hands on me, sir!” The panic subsided at
once, replaced by fury .
“Oh, I do, aye. As ye laid hands on my son.”I didn’ t think  J am ie a ctually intended to harm  the Governor .
On the other hand, this was by no means merely an act of
intimidation; I could feel the core of cold rage inside him, and
see it like an ice-burn in his eyes. So could T ryon.
“It was a mistake! And one I ha ve come to rectify , so far as
I m ay!” T ryon w as standing his ground, jaw tight as he glared
upward.
Jamie made a sound of contempt, low in his throat.
“A mist ake. And is the loss of an innocent man’ s life no
more tha n that to ye? Y ou will kill and maim, for the sake of
your glory , and pay no heed to the destruction ye leave—save
only that the re cord of your exploits may be enlar ged. How
will it look in the dispatches ye send to England—sir? That ye
brought cannon to bear on your  own citizens, armed with no
more tha n knive s and clubs? O r will it say that ye put down
rebellion and preserved order? W ill it say that in your haste to
vengeance, ye hanged an innocent man? W ill it say there that
ye mad e ‘a mistake’? Or w ill it say that ye punished
wickedness, and did justice in the King’ s name?”
T ryon’ s jaw muscles bulged, and his limbs trembled, but he
kept his temper in check. He bre athed deeply through his nose,
in and out, before he spoke.
“Mr . Fra ser . I will tell you some thing that is known to a few ,
but is not yet public knowledge.”
Jamie didn’ t reply , but raised o ne brow , glinting red in the
light. His eyes were cold, dark and unblinking.
“I am made Go vernor of the co lony of New Y ork,” T ryon
said. “The letter of appointment arrived more than a month
past. I shall leave by July to take up the new appointment;
Josiah Martin is made Governor here in my room.” He glanced
from Jam ie to me, and back. “S o you see. I had no personal
stake in this; no need to glorify my exploits, as you put it.” His
throat m oved as he swallowed, b ut fear had been replaced now
by a coldness equal to Jamie’ s own.“I have done what I have done as a matter of duty . I would
not leave this colony in a state of disorder and rebellion, for
my successor to deal with—though I might rightfully have
done so.”
He t ook a deep breath, and stepped back, forcing his hands
to relax from the fists into which they had been clenched.
“Y ou have experience of war , M r . Fraser , and of duty . And
if yo u are an honest man, you will know that mistakes are
made—and ma de often—in both realms. It cannot be
otherwise.”
He met Jamie’ s eyes straight on, and they stood in silence,
looking at each other .
My attention was jerked away from this confrontation quite
suddenly , by the distant sound of a baby crying. I turned, head
up, just as Brian na emer ged from the tent-flap behind me, in a
rustle of agitated skirts.
“Jem,” she said. “That’ s Jemmy!”
It was, too. A d isturbance of voices at the far side of the
camp came closer , resolving itself into the round, flounced
shape of Phoebe Sherston, looking frightened but determined,
followed by two slaves: a man carrying two huge baskets, and
a wo man, with a wrapped and squirming bundle in her arms
that was making a terrible racket.
Brianna made for the bundle like a compass needle
swinging north, and the racket c eased as Jemmy emer ged from
his blan kets, hai r sticking up in  red tufts and feet churning in
paroxysms of joyous relief. Mother and child disappeared
promptly into the shadows un der the trees, and a certain
amount of confusion ensued, w ith Mrs. Sherston explaining
disjointedly to a gathering crowd of interested onlookers that
she had just become so  distraught, hearing reports of the
battle, so  terrible, and she feared  … but Mr . Rutherford’ s slave
had com e to say all was well … and she thought perhaps …
and so … and th e child would not  give  ov er shriek ing … so …Jamie and the Governor , shaken out of their nose to nose
confrontation, h ad also retired to the shadows; I could see
them, two stif f shadows, one tall and one shorter , standing
close to gether . The element of danger had gone out of their
tete-a-tete , though; I could see Jamie’ s head bent slightly
toward T ryon’ s shadow , listening.
“… brought food,” Phoebe Sherston was telling me, her
round fa ce pink with excited self-importance. “Fresh bread,
and butter , and some blackberry jam and cold chicken and …”
“Food!” I said, a bruptly reminded of the parcel I held under
my a rm. “Do pa rdon me!” I gav e her a quick, bright smile, and
ducked away , leaving her open-mouthed in front of the tent.
Abel MacLennan was where I had left him, waiting
patiently under the stars. He brushed aside my apologies,
thanking me for the food and jug of beer .
“Is there anything—?” I began, then broke of f. What else
could I possibly do for him?
And yet it seemed there was something.
“Y oung Hugh Fowles,” he said, tidily tucking the parcel
beneath the wagon’ s seat. “The y said he was taken prisoner .
W ould—would your husband maybe speak for him, d’ye
think? As he did for me?”
“I expect he would. I’ll ask him.”
It w as quiet here , far enough from the camp that the sounds
of conversation  didn’ t carry above the song of frogs and
crickets, and the rushing of the creek.
“Mr . MacLennan,” I said, moved by impulse, “where will
you go? After you’ve taken Joe Hobson back, I mean.”
He t ook of f his  hat and scratched his balding head, quite
unself-consciously , though the gesture was not one of
puzzlement, but merely of one preparing to state something
already settled in his mind.
“Och,” he said. “I dinna mean to go anywhere. There are the
women there, aye? And the wea ns. They’ve no man, with Joedead and Hugh prisoner . I shall stay .”
He bowed to me then, and put on his hat. I shook his hand—
surprising him—and then he climbed aboard his wagon and
clicked his tongue to the horse. He lifted his hand to me in
farewell, and I w aved back, realizing the dif ference in him as I
did so.
There was still grief in his voice, and sorrow on his
shoulders; and yet he sat uprig ht on his errand, the starlight
shining on his dusty hat. His v oice was firm, and his hand
likewise. If Joe Hobson had left for the land of the dead, Abel
MacLennan had come back from there.
Things had settled somewhat by the time I came back to the
tent. Th e Governor and Mrs. Sherston were gone, with her
slaves. Isaiah Morton slept, moaning now and then, but
without fever . Roger lay still as a tomb-figure, face and hands
black with bruises, the faint w histle of his breathing tube a
counterpoint to  Brianna’ s murmured song as she rocked
Jemmy .
The littl e boy’ s face was slack , mouth pinkly open in the
utter abandonment of sleep. W ith sudden inspiration, I held
out my arms, and Bree, looking surprised, let me take him.
V ery car efully , I laid the limp,  heavy little body on Roger ’ s
chest. Bree made a small move ment, as though to catch the
baby and stop him sliding of f— but Roger ’ s arm moved up,
stif f and slow , a nd folded across the sleeping child. T inder , I
thought, satisfied.
Jamie was outside the tent, leaning against the hickory tree.
When I had made sure of things inside, I came out to join him
in the shadows. He raised his arms without speaking, and I
came inside them.
W e stoo d together in the shadow s, listening to the crackle of
campfires and the crickets’ songs.
Breathing.
 
 Gr eat Alamance Camp
 Friday 17th May 1771
 Par ole - Granville
 Countersign - Oxfor d
 
The Governor impr essed with the most affectionate sense of
Gratitude gives Thanks to both Officers and Soldiers of the
Army for the V igor ous and Gener ous support they affor ded
Him Y ester day in the Battle ne ar Alamance, it was to their
V alour and steady Conduct that he owed under the Pr ovidence
of Almighty God, the signal V ictory obtained over obstinate
and infatuated Rebels,—His Excellency simpathises with the
Loyalists for the brave Men that fell and suffer ed in the Action,
but whe n he r eflects that the fate of Constitution depended on
the success of t he Day , and th e important Services ther eby
r ender ed to their King and Co untry , He considers this Loss
(though at pr esent the Cause of Affliction to their Relations
and Frie nds) as a Monument o f lasting Glory and Honor to
themselves and Families.
The Dea d to be interr ed at five OClock this Evening in the
Fr ont of  the Park of Artillery , Funeral Service to be performed
with Military Honors to the d eceased—after the Cer emony ,
Prayers and Thanksgiving for the signal V ictory it has pleased
Divine Pr ovidence Y ester day to Grant the Army over the
Insur gents. 
P AR T S EVEN
Alarms of Struggle and Flight73
A WHITER SHADE OF P ALE
M RS. SHE RST ON, with an unexpected generosity , of fered us
her hospitality . I moved to th e Sherstons’ lar ge house in
Hillsborough with Brianna, Je mmy , and my two patients;
Jamie divided his time between Hillsborough and the militia
camp, which remained in place at Alamance Creek while
T ryon satisfied himself that the Regulation had indeed been
decisively crushed.
While I couldn’ t reach the bullet lodged in Morton’ s lung
with my forceps, it didn’ t appear to be troubling him greatly ,
and the wound had begun to  seal itself in a satisfactory
fashion. There was no telling ex actly where the bullet was, but
plainly it hadn’ t pierced any major vessels; as long as it didn’ t
move further , it was quite possib le for him simply to live with
the bullet embedded in his body; I had known a good many
war veterans who had—Archie Hayes among them.
I was not at all sure how stable my small stock of penicillin
might p rove to be, but it seem ed to work; there was a little
redness and seepage at the wou nd site, but no infection, and
very littl e fever . Beyond penicillin, the appearance a few days
after the battle of Alicia Brown, now enormously pregnant,
was the most im portant boost to Morton’ s recovery . W ithin an
hour of her arr ival, he was si tting up in his cot, pale but
jubilant, hair sticking up on end  and his hand lovingly pressed
against the writhing bulges of his unborn child.
Roger was another matter . He was not badly injured, beyond
the crus hing of his throat—though that was bad enough. The
fractures to his f ingers were simple; I had set them with splints
and they  should heal with no trouble. The bruising faded fairly
quickly from livid reds and blu es into a spectacular array of
purple, g reen, and yellow that made him look as though he hadjust bee n exhumed after having been dead for a week or so.
His vital signs were excellent. His vitality was not.
He s lept a grea t deal, which should have been good. His
slumber wasn’ t restful, though; it had about it something
unsettling, as though he sought unconsciousness with a fierce
desire, and once achieved, clung  to it with a stubbornness that
bothered me more than I wanted to admit.
Brianna, who possessed her own brand of stubbornness, had
the j ob of forcin g him back to wakefulness every few hours, to
take some nourishment and ha ve the tube and its incision
cleansed and tended. During these procedures, he would fix
his eyes  on the middle distance , and stare darkly at nothing,
making the barest acknowledgm ent of remarks addressed to
him. Once finished, his eyes wo uld close again, and he would
lie back on his pillow , bandaged hands folded across his chest
like a tomb-fig ure, with no sound save the soft, breathy
whistle from the tube in his neck.
T wo day s after the battle of Alamance, Jamie arrived at the
Sherstons’ house in Hillsborough just before supper , tired
from long riding, and covered with reddish dust.
“I had a wee ta lk wi’ the Governor today ,” he said, taking
the cup of water I had brough t out to him in the yard. He
drained it in a gulp and sighed, wiping sweat from his face
with a coat-sleeve. “He was fashed about wi’ all the to-do, and
of n o mind to think about what happened after the battle—but
I  was of no mind to let it be.”
“I don’ t imagine it was much of a contest,” I murmured,
helping him to peel of f the dusty coat. “W illiam T ryon’ s not
even Scots, let alone a Fraser .”
That got  me a reluctant half-smile. “Stubborn as rocks,” was
the succinct description of the Fraser clan I had been given
years before—and nothing in the intervening time period had
given me cause to think it inaccurate in any way .
“A ye, well.” He shrugged and  stretched luxuriously , his
vertebrae cracking from the long ride. “Oh, Christ. I’mstarved; is there food?” He relaxed and lifted his long nose,
snif fing the air hopefully .
“Baked ham and sweet potato pie,” I told him,
unnecessarily , si nce the honey-soaked fragrances of both were
thick on the hum id air . “So wh at did the Governor say , once
you’d got him properly browbeaten?”
His teeth  showed briefly at that description of his interview
with T ryon, but I gathered from his faint air of satisfaction that
it wasn’ t totally incorrect.
“Oh, a number of things. But to begin with, I insisted he
recall to  me the circumstances when Roger Mac was taken;
who gave him up, and what w as said. I mean to get to the
bottom o f it.” He pulled the thon g from his hair and shook out
the damp locks, dark with sweat.
“Did he remember anything when you pressed him?”
“A ye, a bit more . T ryon says there were three men who had
Roger M ac captive; one of th em had a badge for Fraser ’ s
Company , so of course he thought the man was one of mine.
He says,” he added, with irony .
That would have been a reasonable assumption for the
Governor to make, I thought—but Jamie was plainly in no
mood to be reasonable.
“It must have be en Roger ’ s badge that the man had,” I said.
“The res t of your company came back with you—all except
the Browns, and it wouldn’ t have been them.” The two
Browns had vanished, seizing the opportunity of the confusion
of battle  to take their vengeance on Isaiah Morton and then to
escape before anyone discovered the crime. They wouldn’ t
have hu ng about to frame Roge r , even had they some motive
for doing so.
He nodded, dismissing the conclusion with a brief gesture.
“A ye. But why? He said Roger Mac was bound and gagged
—a dish onorable way to treat a  prisoner of war , as I said to
him.”“And what did h e say to that?” T ryon might be slightly less
stubborn than Jamie; he wasn’ t any more amenable to insult.
“He said it wasn a war; it was treasonable insurrection, and
he w as justified in taking summ ary measures. But to seize and
hang a man, without allowing him to speak a word in his own
behalf—” The color was rising dangerously in his face. “I
swear to  ye, Claire, if Roger Mac had died at the end of yon
rope, I would have snapped T ryon’ s neck and left him for the
crows!”
I hadn’ t the slightest doubt that he meant it; I could still see
his hand, fitting itself so sl owly , so gently , about the
Governor ’ s neck above the silver gor get. I wondered whether
W illiam T ryon had had the slig htest notion of the danger in
which he had stood, that night after the battle.
“He didn’ t die, and he isn’ t going to.” I hoped I was right,
but spoke as firm ly as I could, laying a hand on his arm. The
muscles in his f orearm bulged and shifted with the restrained
desire to  hit someone, but stilled under my touch, as he looked
down at me. He took a deep breath, then another , drummed his
stif f fingers twice against his th igh, then got his anger under
control once more.
“W ell, so. He said the man identified Roger Mac as James
MacQuiston, on e of the ring-lea ders of the Regulation. I have
been asking after MacQuiston,” he added, with another glance
at me. He was growing slightly calmer , talking. “W ould it
surprise ye, Sassenach, to discover that no one kens
MacQuiston, by his face?”
It would , and I said so. He nodded, the high color receding
slightly from his cheeks.
“So it did me. B ut it’ s so; the man’ s words are there in the
papers f or all to see—but no on e has ever seen the man. Not
auld Ninian, not Hermon Husband—no one of the Regulators
that I could find to speak to— though the most of them are
lying low , to be sure,” he added.“I even found the printer who  set one of MacQuiston’ s
speeches in type; he said the script of it was left upon his
doorstep one morning, with a brick of cheese and two
certificates of proclamation money to pay for the printing.”
“W ell, that is  interesting,” I said. I took my hand gingerly
of f his arm, but  he seemed under control now . “So you think
‘James MacQuiston’ is likely an assumed name.”
“V erra likely indeed.”
Pursuing the implications of th at line of thought, I had a
sudden idea.
“Do you think th at perhaps the man who identified Roger to
the Governor as MacQuiston might have been MacQuiston
himself?”
Jamie’ s brows went up, and he nodded slowly .
“And he  sought to shield himself, by having Roger Mac
hanged in his place? Being de ad is an excellent protection
against a rrest. A ye, that’ s a bonn ie idea—if a trifle vicious,” he
added judiciously .
“Oh, just a trifle.”
He seemed less angry with the vicious and fictitious
MacQuiston than with the Governor—but then, there was no
doubt as to what T ryon had done.
W e h ad moved a cross the yard to  the well. There was a half-
filled bucket sitting on the coping, warm and brackish from the
day’ s heat. He rolled up his sl eeves, cupped his hands, and
dashed w ater fro m the bucket u p into his face, then shook his
head vi olently , spattering dr oplets into Mrs. Sherston’ s
hydrangeas.
“Did the  Governor recall what any of these men who had
Roger looked like?” I asked, h anding him a crumpled linen
towel fr om the well-coping. He took it and wiped his face,
shaking his head.
“Only th e one. The one who had  the badge, who did most of
the t alking. He said it was a fa ir -haired fellow , verra tall andwell set up. Green-eyed, he thought. T ryon wasna taking
careful note of his appearance, of course, bein’ exercised in his
mind at the time. But he recalled that much.”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I  said, struck by a thought.
“T all, fair -haired, and green-eye d. Do you think it could have
been Stephen Bonnet?”
His eyes  opened  wide and he stared at me over the towel for
a moment, face blank with astonishment.
“Jesus,” he said, and set the towel down absentmindedly . “I
never thought of such a thing.”
Neither had I. W hat I knew of Bonnet didn’ t seem to fit the
picture of a Reg ulator; most of them were poor and desperate
men, lik e Joe Hobson, Hugh Fowles, and Abel MacLennan. A
few we re outraged idealists, like Husband and Hamilton.
Stephen Bonnet might occasi onally have been poor and
desperate—but I was reasonably sure that the notion of
seeking redress from the government by protest wasn’ t one
that would have occurred to hi m. T ake it by force, certainly .
Kill a judge or sherif f in veng eance for some of fense, quite
possibly . But— no, it was rid iculous. If I was certain of
anything regarding Stephen Bonnet, it was that he didn’ t pay
taxes.
“No.” Jamie shook his head, ha ving evidently come to the
same conclusion s. He wiped a lingering droplet of f the end of
his n ose. “There’ s nay money anywhere in this af fair . Even
T ryon h ad to appeal to the Earl of Hillsborough for funds to
pay his militia. And the Regu lators—” He waved a hand,
dismissing the thought of the Regulators paying anyone for
anything. “I dinna ken everything about Stephen Bonnet, but
from what I’ve seen of the man , I think that only gold or the
promise of it would bring him to a battlefield.”
“T rue.” The clink of china and chime of silver came faintly
through the open window , accompanying the soft voices of
slaves; the table was being set  for dinner . “I don’ t suppose
there’ s any way Bonnet could be James MacQuiston, is
there?”He laughed at that, his face relaxing for the first time.
“No, Sassenach. That I can  b e sure of. St ephen Bonnet
canna read, nor write much more than his name.”
I stared at him.
“How do you know that?”
“Samuel Cornel l told me so. He hasna met Bonnet himself,
but he said that  W alter Priestly came to him once, to borrow
money ur gently . He was surprised, for Priestly’ s a wealthy
man—but Priest ly told him that he had a shipment coming that
must be  paid for in gold—for the man bringing it would not
take wa rehouse receipts, proclamation money , or even bank-
drafts. He didna trust words o n paper that he couldna read
himself, nor would he trust anyone to read them to him. Only
gold would do.”
“Y es, th at does sound like Bonn et.” I had been holding his
coat, folded over one arm. Now I shook it out, and began to
beat the red dust from its skirts, averting my face from the
resultant clouds. “What you said about gold … do you think
Bonnet could have been at Alamance by accident? On his way
to River Run, perhaps?”
He cons idered that one for a moment, but then shook his
head, rolling down the cuf fs of his shirt.
“It wasna a great war , Sassenach—not the sort of thing
where a man mi ght be caught up unawares and carried along.
The armies faced each other fo r more than two days, and the
sentry lines had holes like a fis hing seine; anyone could have
left Alam ance, or ridden round it. And Alamance is nowhere
near Riv er Run. No, whoever it was that tried to kill wee
Roger , it was someone who was there on his own account.”
“So we’re back to the mysterious Mr . MacQuiston—
whoever he might be.”
“Perhaps,” he said dubiously .
“But who else could it be?” I  protested. “Surely no one
among the Regulators could have had anything personalagainst Roger!”
“Y e wouldna think so,” Jamie admitted. “But we’re no
going to know until the lad can tell us, aye?”
 
AFTER SUPPE R—during wh ich there was naturally no
mention of MacQuiston, Stephen Bonnet, or anything else of
an upset ting nature—I went up t o check on Roger . Jamie came
with me, and quietly dismissed the slave woman who sat by
the wind ow , mending. Someone  had to stay with Roger at all
times, to make sure the tube in his throat didn’ t become
clogged or dislodged, as it w as still his only means of
breathing. It would be several days yet before the swelling of
the mangled tissues in his throat subsided enough for me to
risk removing it.
Jamie waited until I had checked Roger ’ s pulse and
breathing, then at my nod, sat down by his bedside.
“Do ye ken the names of the m en who denounced ye?” he
asked w ithout preliminaries. Roger looked up at him,
frowning, dark brows drawn together . Then he nodded slowly ,
and held up one finger .
“One of them. How many were there?”
Three fingers. That agreed with T ryon’ s recollection, then.
“They were Regulators?”
A nod.
Jamie glanced at me, then back at Roger .
“It wasna Stephen Bonnet?”
Roger sat up bolt upright, mouth open. He clutched at the
tube in his throa t, struggling vainly to speak, and shaking his
head violently .
I gra bbed for hi s shoulder , one hand reaching for the tube;
the viole nce of his movement h ad jerked it nearly out of the
incision, and a trickle of blood  ran down his neck where the
wound had reopened. Roger himself seemed oblivious; hiseyes were fixed on Jamie’ s and his mouth was working
ur gently , asking silent questions.
“No, no. If ye didna see him, then he wasna there.” Jamie
took him firmly by the other sho ulder , helping me to ease him
back on the pillow . “It was only that T ryon described the man
who betrayed ye as a tall, fair -haired fellow . Green-eyed,
maybe. W e thought perhaps …”
Roger ’ s face relaxed at that. H e shook his head again and
sank back, mouth twisted a little. Jamie pressed on.
“Y e kent the man, though; ye’d met him before?” Roger
glanced away , nodded, then shrugged. He looked both irritated
and helpless; I could hear his breathing quicken, whistling
through the amber tube. I cleared my throat signficantly ,
frowning at Jamie. Roger was out of immediate danger; that
didn’ t mean he was well, or anywhere near it.
Jamie ignored me. He’d picked up Bree’ s sketching-box on
his way  upstairs ; laying a sheet of paper on it, he put it on
Roger ’ s lap, then extended one of the sticks of hardened
charcoal to him.
“W ill ye try ag ain?” He had been trying to get Roger to
communicate on paper ever since he had regained full
consciousness, but Roger ’ s hands had been too swollen even
to close around a pen. They we re still puf fed and bruised, but
repeated leeching and gentle massage had improved them to
the point that they did at least look  vaguely like hands again.
Roger ’ s lips pressed together m omentarily , but he wrapped
his hand  clumsily around the cha rcoal. The first two fingers on
that hand were broken; the spl ints stuck out in a crude “V”
sign—which I thought rath er appropriate, under the
circumstances.
Roger frowned in concentrati on, and began to scrawl
something slowly . Jamie watched intently , holding the paper
flat with both hands to keep it from sliding.
The stick of charcoal snapped in two, the fragments flying
of f a cross the flo or . I went to pick them up, while Jamie leanedfrowning over the smeared sheet of paper . There was a
sprawling “W” and an “M,” th en a space, and an awkward
“MAC.”
“W illiam?” He looked up at Roger for verification. Sweat
shone on Roger ’ s cheekbones, but he nodded, very briefly .
“W illiam Mac,” I said, peering over Jamie’ s shoulder . “A
Scotsman, then— or a Scottish name, at least?” Not that that
narrowed down the possibilit ies a great deal: MacLeod,
MacPherson, MacDonald, MacDonnel, Mac … Quiston?
Roger raised his hand and thum ped it against his chest. He
thumped it again, and mouthed a word. Recalling television
shows based on charades, I was for once quicker than Jamie.
“MacKenzie?” I asked, and was rewarded with a quick flash
of green eyes, and a nod.
“MacKenzie. W illiam MacKenzie.” Jamie was frowning,
obviously running through his mental roster of names and
faces, but not turning up a match.
I w as watching Roger ’ s face. Still heavily bruised, it too
was beginning to look more normal, despite the livid weal
under hi s jaw , and I thought there was something odd about
his expression.  I could see physical pain in his eyes,
helplessness, and frustration at his immediate inability to tell
Jamie what he wanted to kno w , but I thought there was
something else there, too. Anger , certainly , but something like
baf flement, as well.
“Do you know any W illiam MacKenzies?” I asked Jamie,
who was tapping his fingers lightly on the table as he thought.
“A ye, four or five,” he repli ed, brows still knotted in
concentration. “In Scotland. But none here, and none that—”
Roger ’ s hand lifted abruptly at the word “Scotland,” and
Jamie stopped, fixed on Roger ’ s face like a pointing bird dog.
“Scotland,” he said. “Something about Scotland? The man
is a new immigrant?”Roger s hook his head violently , then stopped abruptly ,
grimacing in pain. He squeezed his eyes shut for a moment,
then opened them, and waved ur gently at the bits of charcoal I
still held in my hand.
It took several tries, and at the end of it Roger lay back
exhausted on the pillow , the nec k of his nightshirt damp with
sweat an d spotte d with blood fro m his throat. The result of his
ef fort w as smeared and straggling, but I could read the word
clearly .
Dougal , it said. Jamie’ s look of interest sharpened into
something like wariness.
“Dougal,” he repeated carefully . He knew several Dougals
as well; a few of them resident in North Carolina. “Dougal
Chisholm? Dougal O’Neill?”
Roger shook his head and the tube in his throat wheezed
with his exhalation. He lifted his hand and pointed
emphatically at Jamie, the splinted fingers jabbing. Getting
only a blank lo ok in response, he fumbled for the bit of
charcoal again, but it rolled of f the sketch-box and shattered
on the floor .
His fingers were smeared with charcoal dust. Grimacing, he
pressed the tip of his ring finger against the page, and by dint
of using  all the fingers in turn, produced a faint and ghostly
scrawl that sent a small electric shock shooting up from the
base of my spine.
Geilie , it said.
Jamie st ared at the name for a moment. Then I saw a small
shiver move over him, and he crossed himself.
“A Dhia,”  he said softly , and looked at me. A wareness
thickened betwe en us; Roger saw it and fell back on his
pillow , exhaling loudly through his breathing-tube.
“Dougal’ s son by Geillis Duncan,” Jamie said, turning to
Roger w ith incredulity writ lar ge on his face. “He was named
W illiam, I think. Y e mean it? Y e’re sure of it?”A brief nod, and Roger ’ s eyes closed. Then they opened
again; o ne splin ted finger rose wavering, and pointed to his
own eye—a deep, clear green, the color of moss. He was white
as the linen he l ay on, and his charcoal-smeared fingers were
trembling. His mouth was twitching; he wanted badly to talk,
to explain—but further explanations were going to have to
wait, for a little while, at least.
His hand dropped, and his eyes closed again.
 
THE REVELA TION of W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie’ s
identity didn’ t alter Jamie’ s ur gent desire to find the man, but
it did change his intention of murdering him immediately ,
once found. On the whole, I was grateful for small favors.
Brianna, summoned from her painting to consult, arrived in
my room in her smock, smelli ng strongly of turpentine and
linseed oil, with a smear of cobalt blue on one earlobe.
“Y es,” she said, bewildered by  Jamie’ s abrupt questions.
“I’ve h eard of  him. W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie. The
changeling.”
“The what?” Jamie’ s brows shot up toward his hairline.
“That’ s what I called him,” I s aid. “When I saw Roger ’ s
family tree, and realized who W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie
must be. Dougal gave the child to W illiam and Sarah
MacKenzie, remember? And they gave him the name of the
child they’d lost two months before.”
“Roger mention ed that he’d seen W illiam MacKenzie and
his w ife, on boa rd the Gloriana , wh en he sailed  from Scotland
to North  Carolina,” Bree put in. “But he said he didn’ t realize
who the  man was until later , an d didn’ t have a chance to talk
to him. So he is here—W illiam, I mean—but why on earth
would he try to kill Roger— and why that way?” She
shuddered brief ly , though the room was very warm. It was
early su mmer , and even with th e windows open, the air was
hot and liquid with humidity .“He’ s th e witch ’ s get,” Jamie said shortly , as though that
was suf ficient answer—as perhaps it was.
“They thought I was a witch, to o,” I reminded him, a little
tartly . That got me a sideways blue glance, and a curve of the
mouth.
“So they did,” he said. He cleared his throat, and wiped a
sleeve across his sweating brow . “A ye, well. I suppose we
must just wait and find out. And having a name helps. I shall
send to Duncan and Farquard; have them put out word.” He
drew a deep breath of exasperation, and blew it out again.
“What a m I to do when I find him, though? W itch-son or
no, he’ s my own blood; I canna kill him. Not after Dougal—”
He caught himself in time, and coughed. “I mean, he’ s
Dougal’ s son. He’ s my own cousin, for God’ s sake.”
I knew what he really meant. Four people knew what had
happened in that attic room at Culloden House, the day before
that distant battle. One of those was dead, the other
disappeared and almost certainly dead too, in the tumult of the
Rising. Only I w as left as the witness to Dougal’ s blood and
the hand  that had spilled it. No matter what crime W illiam
Buccleigh MacKenzie had committed, Jamie would not kill
him, for his father ’ s sake.
“Y ou we re going to kill him? Before you found out who he
was?” B ree didn’ t look shocked at the thought. She had a
stained paint-rag in her hands, and was twisting it slowly .
Jamie turned to look at her .
“Roger Mac is your man, the son of my house,” he said,
very seriously . “Of course I would avenge him.”
Brianna flicked  a glance at me, then looked away . She
looked t houghtful, with a certain intentness that gave me a
slight chill to see.
“Good,” she said, very softly . “When you find W illiam
Buccleigh MacKenzie, I want to know about it.” She folded up
the r ag, thrust it  into the pocket  of her smock, and went back
to her work. 
BRIANNA SCRAPED a tiny blob of viridian onto the edge of
her pale tte, and feathered a touch of it into the big smear of
pale gray she had created. She hesitated a moment, tilting the
palette b ack and forth in the light from the window to judge
the c olor , then a dded the faintest dab of cobalt to the other side
of the smear , pr oducing a range of subtle tones that ran from
blue-gray to green-gray , all so faint as scarcely to be
distinguishable from white by the uneducated eye.
She took one of the short, thick brushes, and worked the
gray ton es along  the curve of the jaw on her canvas with tiny
overlapping strokes. Y es, that was just about right; pale as
fired porcelain, but with a vivid shadow under it—something
both delicate and earthy .
She painted with a deep abs orption that shut out her
surroundings, engrossed in an artist’ s double vision,
comparing the evolving image on the canvas with the one so
immutably etche d in her memory . It wasn’ t that she had never
seen a dead person before. Her father—Frank—had had an
open-casket funeral, and she had been to the obsequies of
older fam ily frie nds in her own time, as well. But the colors of
the embalmer ’ s art were crude, almost coarse by comparison
with those of a fresh corpse. She had been staggered by the
contrast.
It was the blood , she thought, ta king a fine two-haired brush
to add a dot of  pure viridian in the deep curve of the eye
socket. Blood and bone—but death didn’ t alter the curves of
the bones, nor the shadows they cast. Blood, though, colored
those shadows. In life, you got  the blues and reds and pinks
and lave nders of moving blood beneath the skin; in death, the
blood stilled and pooled and darkened … clay-blue, violet,
indigo, purple-brown … and something new: that delicate,
transient green, barely there, that her artist’ s mind classified
with brutal clarity as “early rot.”
Unfamiliar voic es came from the hall, and she looked up,
wary . Phoebe Sherston was fond of bringing in visitors toadmire the painting in progress. Normally , Brianna didn’ t
mind be ing watched, or talking about what she was doing, but
this was a tricky  job, and one with limited time; she couldn’ t
work wi th such subtle colors save for a short period just before
sunset, when the light was clear but dif fuse.
The voic es passed on to the parlor , though, and she relaxed,
taking up the thicker brush again.
She resummone d the vision in her mind; the dead man they
had laid under a  tree at Alamance, near her mother ’ s makeshift
field hospital. She had expected to be shocked by battle-
wounds and death—and was instead shocked by her own
fascination. She had seen terrible things, but it wasn’ t like
attending at her mother ’ s normal sur geries, where there was
time to empath ize with the patients, to take note of all the
small indignities and nastine sses of weak flesh. Things
happened too fast on a battlefie ld; there was too much to be
done for squeamishness to take hold.
And in spite of  the haste and ur gency , each time she had
passed n ear that tree, she had paused for an instant. Bent to
turn back the blanket over the corpse and look at the man’ s
face; appalled at her own fascin ation but making no ef fort to
resist it—committing to memory the amazing, inexorable
change of color and shadow , the stif fening of muscle and
shifting of shape, as skin settled and clung to bone, and the
processes of death and decay be gan to work their awful magic.
She had n’ t thought to ask the dead man’ s name. W as that
unfeeling? she wondered. Probably; the fact was that all her
feelings had been otherwise engaged at the time—and still
were. St ill, she closed her eyes for a moment and said a quick
prayer for the repose of the soul of her unknown sitter .
She opened her eyes to see tha t the light was fading. She
scraped the palette and began to  clean her brushes and hands,
returning slowly  and reluctantly to the world outside her work.
Jem would have been fed his su pper and bathed already , but
he refus ed to go to bed without being nursed and rocked to
sleep. Her breasts tingled sligh tly at the thought; they werepleasantly full, though they s eldom became excruciatingly
engor ged since he had taken t o eating solid food and thus
decreased his voracious demands on her flesh.
She’d n urse Jem and put him down, and then go have her
own belated supper in the kitchen. She had not eaten with the
others, wanting to take advantag e of the evening light, and her
stomach was growling softly , as the lingering smells of food in
the air replaced the astringent scents of turps and linseed oil.
And then … the n she would go upstairs to Roger . Her lips
tightened at the thought; she rea lized it, and forced her mouth
to relax , blowing air out so that her lips vibrated with a
flatulent noise like a motorboat.
At this unfortun ate moment, Phoebe Sherston’ s capped head
popped through the door . She blinked slightly , but had
suf ficiently good manners to pretend that she hadn’ t seen
anything.
“Oh, my dear , there you are! Do come into the parlor for a
moment, won’ t you? Mr . and Mrs. W ilbur are so  eager to
make your acquaintance.”
“Oh—well, yes, of course,” Brianna said, with what
graciousness she could summon. She gestured at her paint-
stained smock. “Let me just go and change—”
Mrs. Sherston waved away the smock, obviously wanting to
show of f her tame artist in costume.
“No, no, don’ t trouble about that. W e are quite simple this
evening. No one will mind.”
Brianna moved reluctantly toward the drawing room.
“All righ t. Only  for a minute, though; I need to put Jem to
bed.”
Mrs. Sherston’ s rosebud mouth primmed slightly at that; she
saw no reason why her slaves could not take care of the child
altogether—but she had heard  Brianna’ s opinions on the
subject before, and was wise enough not to press the issue.Brianna’ s parent s were in the parlor with the W ilburs, who
turned out to b e a nice, elder ly couple—what her mother
would c all a Darby and Joan. They fussed appropriately over
her appearance, insisted poli tely on seeing the portrait,
expressed profound admiration for both subject and painter—
though b linking slightly at the fo rmer—and generally behaved
with such kindness that she felt herself relaxing.
She was  just on the ver ge of making her excuses, when Mr .
W ilbur took advantage of a lull in the conversation to turn to
her , smiling benevolently .
“I understand that congratulations upon your good fortune
are in order , Mrs. MacKenzie.”
“Oh? Ah … thank you,” she said, uncertain what she was
being congratula ted for . She glanced at her mother for some
clue; Claire grimaced slightly , and glanced at Jamie, who
coughed.
“Governor T ryo n has granted y our husband five thousand
acres of land, i n the back-country ,” he said. His voice was
even, almost colorless.
“He has ?” She felt momentarily  bewildered. “What—why?”
There w as a brief stir of embarrassment among the party ,
with sm all throat-clearings and marital glances between the
Sherstons and the W ilburs.
“Compensation,” her mother sa id tersely , darting a marital
glance of her own at Jamie.
Brianna understood then; no one would be so uncouth as to
mention Roger ’ s accidental hanging openly , but it was much
too sen sational a story not to  have made the rounds of
Hillsborough society . She re alized suddenly that Mrs.
Sherston’ s invita tion to her pare nts and Roger had perhaps not
been motivated purely by kindness, either . The notoriety of
having the hanged man as house-guest would focus the
attention of Hillsborough on the  Sherstons in a most gratifying
way—better , even, than having an unconventional portrait
painted.“I do hope that your husband is much improved, my dear?”
Mrs. W ilbur tactfully bridged the conversational gap. “W e
were so sorry to hear of his injury .”
Injury . That was as circumspect a description of the
situation as could well be imagined.
“Y es, he’ s much better , thank you,” she said, smiling as
briefly as politeness allowed before turning back to her father .
“Does Roger know about this? The land grant?”
He glanced at her , then away , clearing his throat.
“No. I thought perhaps ye might wish to tell him of it
yourself.”
Her first response was gratitude; she would have something
to say to Roger . It was an awkward business, talking to
someone who couldn’ t talk back. She stored up conversational
fodder d uring the day; tiny thou ghts or events that she could
turn into  stories , to tell him when she saw him. Her stock of
stories ran out all too soon, though, and left her sitting by his
bed, groping for inanities.
Her second response was a feel ing of annoyance. Why had
her father not told her private ly , rather than exposing her
family’ s business to total strangers? Then she caught the subtle
interplay of glances between her parents, and realized that her
mother h ad just asked him that, silently—and he had replied,
with the  briefest flick of the eyes toward Mr . W ilbur , then
toward Mrs. Sherston, before the long auburn lashes swept
down to hide his gaze.
Better to speak the truth befor e a r eputable witness , his
expression said, than to let gossip spr ead of its own accor d .
She had no great regard for her own reputation
—”notorious” did not begin to encompass it—but she had
grasped enough of the social realities to realize that real
damage could be done to her father by scandal. If a false report
were to get around, for instance , that Roger had really been a
Regulation ring-leader , then Ja mie’ s own loyalties would be
suspect.She had begun to realize, lis tening to the talk in the
Sherstons’ parlor over the last few weeks, that the Colony was
a vast spiderweb. There were innumerable strands of
commerce along  which a few lar ge spiders—and a number of
smaller ones—made their delicate way , always listening for
the f aint hum of  distress made b y a fly that had blundered in,
always testing for a thinning strand, a broken link.
The sma ller entities glided warily along the mar gins of the
web, with an eye out always for the movements of the bigger
ones—for spide rs were cannibals—and so, she thought, were
ambitious men.
Her father ’ s position was prominent—but by no means so
secure as to resist the underm ining ef fects of gossip and
suspicion. She and Roger had ta lked about it before, privately ,
speculating; the fracture-lines were already there, plain enough
to someone who knew what was coming; the strains and
tensions that would deepen into sudden chasm—one deep
enough to sunder the colonies from England.
Let the strain g row too great, too quickly , let the strands
between Fraser ’ s Ridge and the rest of the Colony fray too far
… and they m ight snap, wrapping sticky ends in a thick
cocoon round her family and leaving them suspended by a
thread—alone, and prey to those who would suck their blood.
Y ou  are morbid tonight , sh e thought to herself, sourly
amused at her mind’ s choice o f imagery . She supposed that
painting death would do that.
Neither the W ilburs nor the Sherstons appeared to have
noticed her mood; her mother  had, and gave her a long,
thoughtful look—but said nothing. She exchanged a few more
pleasantries, then excused herself to the company .
Her mood was not lightened by  the discovery that Jemmy
had grown tired of waiting for h er to come, and fallen asleep,
tear -tracks on his cheeks. She k nelt by his crib for a minute,
one hand laid li ghtly on his bac k, hoping that he might sense
her n earness and wake up. His small back rose and fell in thewarm rhythm of utter peace, b ut he didn’ t stir . Perspiration
glimmered wetly in the creases of his neck.
The heat of the day rose upward, and the second floor of the
house w as always stifling by evening. The window , of course,
was firmly closed, lest the dangerous night airs get in and do
the baby harm. Mrs. Sherston had no children of her own, but
she knew what precautions must be taken.
In the mountain s, Brianna would not have hesitated to open
the window . In a heavily-popu lated town like Hillsborough,
full of strangers from the coast , and rife with stagnant horse
troughs and dank wells …
W eighing the relative danger of malaria-bearing mosquitoes
versus that of suf focation, Brianna finally settled for pulling
the ligh t quilt of f her son and gently removing his gown,
leaving him comfortably sprawled on the sheet in nothing but
a clout, his soft skin damp and rosy in the dim light.
Sighing, she put out the candle  and left, leaving the door
ajar so that she c ould hear if he woke. It was nearly dark now;
light welled up through the bannisters from the floor below ,
but the upstairs hall lay in deep shadow . Mrs. Sherston’ s
gilded ta bles and the portraits of Mr . Sherston’ s ancestors were
no more than spectral shapes in the darkness.
There w as a light in Roger ’ s roo m; the door was shut, but a
fan of soft candle-glow spread across the polished boards
beneath it, just c atching the edge of the blue hall-runner . She
moved toward the door , thoughts of food subsumed in a
greater hunger for touch. Her breasts had begun to ache.
A slave was nodding in the corner , hands slack on the
knitting that had fallen to her lap. She jerked, startled, as the
door opened, and blinked guiltily at Brianna.
Bree looked at once toward the bed, but it was all right; she
could he ar the hiss and sigh of his breath. She frowned a little
at th e woman, but made a sm all gesture of dismissal. The
woman clumsily gathered up her half-finished stocking and
blundered out, avoiding Brianna’ s eye.Roger la y on his back, eyes closed, a sheet drawn tidily over
the sharp angles of his body . He’ s so thin , she  tho ught, how did
he g et so thin, so fast ? He could swallow no more than a few
spoonsful of soup and Claire’ s penicillin broth, but surely two
or th ree days was not enough to leave his bones showing so
prominently?
Then she realized that he had likely been thin already , from
the stress of campaigning—both her parents were thinner than
usual. The prominence of his bo nes had been disguised by the
dreadful swelling of his features; now that that had subsided,
his chee kbones were high and g aunt, the hard, graceful line of
his j aw once mo re visible, stark above the white linen of the
bandage wrapped around his lacerated throat.
She realized that she was starin g at his jaw , appraising the
color of  the fading bruises. The yellow-green of a healing
bruise was dif ferent than the del icate gray-green of new death;
just as sickly , b ut withal, a co lor of life. She took a deep
breath, suddenly  aware that th e window in this room was
closed, too, and sweat was trickling down the small of her
back, seeping unpleasantly into the crack of her buttocks.
The sou nd of the sash rising w akened him—he turned his
head on the pillow , and smiled faintly when he saw her .
“How ar e you?”  She spoke in a hushed voice, as though in a
church. Her own voice always seemed too loud, talking to
herself.
He lifted one shoulder in a slight shrug, but mouthed a silent
“Okay .” He looked wilted and damp, the dark hair at his
temples sweat-soaked.
“It’ s awfully hot, isn’ t it?” She w aved at the window , where
warm ai r—but moving air—came in. He nodded, poking at the
collar of his shirt with one bandaged hand. She took the hint
and untied it, spreading the slit open as far as it would go, to
expose his chest to the breeze.
His nipples were small and neat, the aureoles pinkish-brown
under the dark curly hairs. The sight reminded her of her ownmilk-full breasts , and she had a moment’ s insane ur ge to lift
his h ead, pull do wn her shift, an d put his mouth to her breast.
She had an instant’ s vivid recall of the moment when he had
done that, under the willows at  River Run, and a warm rush
spread through her , tingling from breasts to womb. Blood
rising in her cheeks, she turned to look over the nourishment
available on the bedside table.
There was cold meat-broth—spiked with penicillin—in a
covered bowl, and a flask of honey-sweetened tea alongside.
She took up the spoon and raised a brow inquiringly , her hand
hovering over the table.
He grim aced sli ghtly , but nodded at the broth. She picked
up the cup and sat down on the stool beside him.
“Open up the stable-door ,” she said cheerily , circling the
spoon toward his mouth as tho ugh he were Jem. “Heeeeere
comes the horsie!” He rolled his eyes upward in exasperation.
“When I was little,” she said, ignoring his scowl, “my
parents said things like, ‘Here comes the tugboat, open the
drawbridge!’ ‘Open the garage, here comes the car!’—but I
can’ t use those with Jem. Di d your mother do cars and
airplanes?”
His lips twisted, but finally settled on a reluctant smile. He
shook his head and lifted one hand, pointing toward the
ceiling. She turned to see a dark  spot on the plaster—looking
closer , s he could see that it was a vagrant bee, blundered in
from th e garde n during the day , somnolent now in the
shadows.
“Y eah? Okay , here comes the honeybee,” she said, more
softly , slipping the spoon into his mouth. “Bzzz, bzzz, bzzz.”
She couldn’ t keep up the attem pted air of playfulness, but
the atmosphere had relaxed a little. She talked about Jem, who
had a new favorite word—”W agga”—but no one yet had
figured out what he meant by it.
“I thought maybe it meant ‘cat,’ but he calls the cat ‘Mow-
mow .’” She brushed a drop of sweat from her forehead withthe back of her hand, then dipped the spoon again.
“Mrs. Sherston says he should be walking by now ,” she
said, eyes fixed on his mouth. “H er sister ’ s children were both
walking at a year old, naturally ! I asked Mama, though; she
says he’ s fine. She says kids walk when they’re ready , and it
can be any time  between ten months and as much as eighteen,
but fifteen months is about the usual.”
She had  to watch his mouth in order to guide the spoon, but
was aware of his eyes, watching  her . She wanted to look into
them, but was h alfway afraid of what she might see in those
dark green depths; would it be the Roger she knew , or the
silent stranger—the hanged man?
“Oh—I almost for got.” She interrupted herself in the middle
of an account of  the W ilburs. Sh e hadn’ t for gotten, but hadn’ t
wanted to blurt the news out right away . “Da spoke to the
Governor this afternoon. He—the Governor , I mean—is
giving you a land grant. Five thousand acres.” Even as she said
it, s he realized the absurdity o f it. Five thousand acres of
wilderness, in exchange for a life almost destroyed. Cancel the
“almost,”  she thought suddenly , looking at Roger .
He frowned at her in what loo ked like puzzlement, then
shook h is head and lay back on the pillow , eyes closing. He
lifted his hands and let them fall, as though this was simply too
much to be asked to contemplate. Maybe it was.
She stoo d watching him in sile nce, but he didn’ t open his
eyes. There were deep creases where his brows drew together .
Moved by the need to touch him, to bridge the barrier of
silence, she traced the shadow of the bruise that lay over his
cheekbone, her fingers drifting, barely touching his skin.
She cou ld see the oddly blurred  edges of the bruise, could
almost s ee the dark clotted bloo d beneath the skin, where the
capillaries had ruptured. It was beginning to yellow; her
mother had told her that the body’ s leukocytes would come to
the site of an i njury , where they gradually broke down theinjured cells, thriftily recycling the spilled blood; the changing
colors were the result of this cellular housekeeping.
His eyes opened, fixed on her face, his own expression
impassive. She knew she looked worried, and tried to smile.
“Y ou do n’ t look dead,” she said. That broke the impassive
facade; his eyebrows twitched upward, and a faint gleam of
humor came into his eyes.
“Roger—” At a loss for words, she moved impulsively
toward him. He stif fened slightly , hunching instinctively to
protect the fragile tube in his throat, but she put her arms
around his shoulders, careful, but needing desperately to feel
the substance of his flesh.
“I love you,” she whispered, and her hand tightened on the
muscle of his arm, ur ging him to believe it.
She kissed him. His lips were w arm and dry , familiar—and
yet a  feeling of shock ran through her . No air moved against
her chee k, no warm breath to uched her from his nose or
mouth. It was like kissing a mask. Air , damp from the secret
depths of his lungs, hissed cool from the amber tube against
her neck, like the exhalation from a cave. Gooseflesh ran
down her arms and she stepp ed back, hoping that neither
shock nor revulsion showed on her face.
His eyes were closed, squeezed tight shut. The muscle of his
jaw bulged; she saw the shift of the shadow there.
“Y ou … rest,” she managed, her voice shaky . “I’ll—I’ll see
you in the morning.”
She made her way downstairs, barely noticing that the
candlestick in the hall was lit n ow , or that the waiting slave
slid silently from the shadows back into the room.
Her hun ger had come back, but  she didn’ t go downstairs in
search o f food. She had to do something about the unused
milk, first. She t urned toward her parents’ room, feeling a faint
draft move through the stifling s hadows. In spite of the warm,
muggy a ir , her fingers felt cold,  as though turpentine was still
evaporating from her skin. 
Last night I dr ea med about my friend Deborah. She used to
make mo ney doing T ar ot r eadings in the Student Union; she’d
always offer to do one for me, for fr ee, but I wouldn’ t let her .
Sister M arie R omaine told us in the fifth grade that
Catholics ar en’ t allowed to do divination—we wer en’ t to touch
Ouija bo ar ds or T ar ot car ds or crystal balls, because things
like that ar e seductions of the D-E-V -I-L—she always spelled
it out like that, she’d never say the wor d.
I’m not sur e wh er e the Devil came into it, but somehow I
couldn’ t bring myself to let Deb  do r eadings for me. She was,
last night, though, in my dr eam.
I u sed to watch her do it for ot her people; the T ar ot car ds
fascinated me— maybe just because they seemed forbidden.
But the names wer e so cool—the Major Ar cana, the Minor
Ar cana; Knight of Pentacles, Page of Cups, Queen of W ands,
King of Swor ds. The Empr ess, t he Magician. And the Hanged
Man.
W ell, what else would I dr eam about? I mean, this was not a
subtle dr eam, no doubt about it. Ther e it was, right in the
middle o f the spr ead of car ds, an d Deb was telling me about it.
“A man  is suspended by one foot fr om a pole laid acr oss
two tr ees. His arms, folded behind his back, together with his
head, fo rm a triangle with the point downwar d; his legs form a
cr oss. T o an extent, the Hanged  Man is still earthbound, for
his foot is attached to the pole.”
I could see the man on the ca r d, suspended permanently
halfway between heaven and earth. That car d always looked
odd to me—the man didn’ t seem to be at all concerned, in spite
of being upside-down and blind-folded.
Deb kep t scooping up the car ds  and laying them out again,
and that one kept coming up in every spr ead.
“The Hanged Man r epr esents the necessary pr ocess of
surr ender and sacrifice,” she said. “This car d has pr ofound
significance,” she said, and she looked at me and tapped herfinger on it. “Bu t much of it is veiled; you have to figur e out
the meaning for yourself. Self-surr ender leads to
transformation of the personality , but the person has to
accomplish his own r egeneration.”
T ransformation of the personality . That’ s what I’m afraid of,
all right. I liked Roger ’ s personality just fine the way it was!
W ell … rats. I don’ t know how much the D-E-V -I-L has to do
with it, but I am  sur e that trying  to look too far into the futur e
is a mistake. At least right now .74
THE SOUNDS OF SILENCE
I T W AS TEN DA YS before Penelope Sherston’ s portrait was
completed to her satisfaction. By that point, both Isaiah
Morton and Roger had recovered suf ficiently for travel. Given
the imm inence of Morton’ s of fspring and the danger to him in
coming anywhere near either Granite Falls or Brownsville,
Jamie h ad arranged for him a nd Alicia to lodge with the
brewmaster of Mr . Sherston’ s brewery; Isaiah would undertake
employment as a wagoner for  the brewery , as soon as his
strength permitted.
“I ca nna imagine why ,” Jamie h ad said to me privately , “but
I’ve gro wn a bit fond of the immoral wee loon. I shouldna like
to see him murdered in cold blood.”
Isaiah’ s spirits had revived spectacularly upon the arrival of
Alicia, and within a week, he had made his way downstairs, to
sit watching Alicia like a devoted dog as she worked in the
kitchen—and to pause on his way back to bed to of fer
comments on the progress of Mrs. Sherston’ s portrait.
“Don’ t i t look just like her?” he’d said admiringly , standing
in his nightshirt  in the door of the drawing-room where the
sitting was in p rogress. “Why , if you was to see that picture,
you’d know just who it was.”
Given the fact t hat Mrs. Sherston had chosen to be painted
as Salom e, I was not positive th at this would be considered a
compliment, bu t she flushed prettily and thanked him,
evidently recognizing the sincerity in his tone.
Bree had  done a marvelous job, contriving to portray Mrs.
Sherston both realistically and flatteringly , but without overt
irony—dif ficult as that must have been. The only point where
she had given in to temptation was in a minor detail; the
severed head of John the Bapti st bore a striking resemblanceto Governor T ryon’ s saturnine features, but I doubted that
anyone would notice, what with all the blood.
W e were ready to go home, and the house was filled with a
spirit of restless excitement and relief—except for Roger .
Roger was indisputably better , in purely physical terms. His
hands were mobile again, bar the broken fingers, and most of
the b ruising over his face and b ody had faded. Best of all, the
swelling in his t hroat had subsided enough that he could move
air th rough his n ose and mouth a gain. I was able to remove the
tube fro m his throat, and stitch  up the incision—a small but
painful operation that he had b orne with body stif f and eyes
wide open, staring up at the ceiling while I worked.
In m ental terms, I was not so sure of his recovery . After
stitching his throat, I had helpe d him sit up, wiped his face,
and given him a little wate r mixed with brandy as a
restorative. I had watched caref ully as he swallowed, then put
my fingers lightly on his throat , felt carefully , and asked him
to sw allow again. I closed my e yes, feeling the movement of
his laryn x, the rings of his trachea as he swallowed, assessing
as best I could the degree of damage.
At l ast I  opened  my eyes, to find his eyes two inches from
my own  and still wide open, the question in them cold and
stark as glacier ice.
“I don’ t know ,” I said at last, m y own voice no more than a
whisper . My fingers still rested on his throat; I could feel the
thrum of blood through the ca rotid under my palm, his life
flowing just below the skin. Bu t the angular hardness of his
larynx lay still u nder my fingers, queerly misshapen; I felt no
pulsing there, no vibration of air across the vocal cords.
“I don’ t know ,” I said again, and drew my fingers slowly
away . “Do you—want to try now?”
He had shaken his head then, and risen from the bed, going
to the window , facing away from me. His arms were braced
against the frame as he looked  down into the street, and a
faint, uneasy memory stirred in my mind.It had been a mo onlit night, then, not broad day—in Paris. I
had waked from sleep to see Jamie standing naked in the
window frame, the scars on his  back pale silver , arms braced
and body gleaming with cold sweat. Roger was sweating, too,
from the  heat; the linen of his shirt stuck to his body—and the
lines of his body were just the s ame; the look of a man braced
to meet fear; one who chose to face his demons alone.
I cou ld hear voi ces in the street below; Jamie, coming back
from the camp, with Jemmy hel d before him on his saddle. He
had formed the habit of taking  Jem with him on his daily
errands, so that Bree could work without distraction. In
consequence, Je mmy had learned four new words—only two
of them obscene—and Jamie’ s good coat sported jam stains
and smelled like a soiled diaper , but both of them seemed
generally pleased with the arrangement.
Bree’ s v oice floated up from below , laughing as she went
out to retrieve her son. Roger  stood as though he’d been
carved o ut of wood. He couldn’ t call to them, but he might
have knocked on the window frame, or made some other
noise, waved to them. But he didn’ t move.
After a moment , I rose quietly and left the room, feeling a
lump in my throat, hard and unswallowable.
When Bree had carried Jemmy of f for his bath, Jamie told
me that T ryon h ad released most of the men captured during
the battle. “Hugh Fowles among them.” He put aside his coat
and loos ened the collar of his  shirt, raising his face to the
slight breeze from the window . “I spoke for him—and T ryon
listened.”
“As wel l he might,” I said, wit h an edge to my voice. He
glanced at me, and made a noise deep in his throat. It
reminded me of Roger , whose la rynx was no longer capable of
that peculiarly Scottish form of expression.
I m ust have lo oked distressed  at the thought, for Jamie
raised his brows and touched my arm. It was too hot to
embrace, but I pressed my cheek against his shoulder briefly ,taking c omfort from the solidness of his body under the thin,
damp linen.
“I se wed up Rog er ’ s throat,” I said. “He can breathe—but I
don’ t kn ow whether he’ll ever b e able to talk again.” Let alone
sing . The unvoiced thought floated in the muggy air .
Jamie made another noise, this one deep and angry .
“I spoke  to T ryon regarding his  promise to Roger Mac, as
well. He ’ s given me the document of the land grant—five
thousand acres,  adjoining my own. His last of ficial act as
Governor—almost.”
“What do you mean by that?”
“I said he’ s released most of the prisoners?” He moved
away , restless. “All but twelve. He has a dozen men still
gaoled, outlawed ringleaders of the Regulation. Or so he
says.” T he iron y in his voice was as thick as the dusty air .
“He’ll hold them for trial in a month, on char ges of rebellion.”
“And if they’re found guilty—”
“At least they’ll be able to speak before they hang.”
He had stopped in front of the portrait, frowning, though I
wasn’ t sure whether he was actually seeing it or not.
“I w illna stay to see it. I told T ryon that we must go, to tend
our c rops and fa rms. He has released the militia company from
service, on those grounds.”
I f elt a lightening of the weigh t on my heart. It would be
cool in the mountains, the air g reen and fresh. It was a good
place to heal.
“When will we go?”
“T omorrow .” He had  noticed  the portrait; he nodded  at the
gape-jawed head on the platter in grim approval. “There’ s only
the one thing to stay for , and I  think there’ s little point to it,
now .”
“What’ s that?”“Dougal’ s son,” he said, turning away from the portrait. “I
have be en seeking W illiam Buccleigh MacKenzie from one
end of the county to the other for the past ten days. I found
some who kent him, but non e who has seen him since
Alamance. Some said perhaps he had left the Colony
altogether . A good many of the Regulators have fled;
Husband’ s gone—taken his family to Maryland, they say . But
as fo r W illiam M acKenzie, the man’ s disappeared like a snake
down a rat-hole; him, and his family with him.”
 
Last night I dr ea med that we we r e lying under a big r owan
tr ee, Rog er and I. It was a beautiful summer day , and we wer e
having one of those conversations we used to have all the time,
about things we missed. Only the things we wer e talking about
wer e ther e on the grass between us.
I said I’d sell my soul for a Hershey bar with almonds, and
ther e it was. I slipped the outer wrapper off, and I could smell
the chocolate. I unfolded the wh ite paper wrapper inside and
started eating the chocolate, but it was the paper we wer e
talking about, then—the wrapper .
Roger p icked it up and said what he missed most was loo-
paper; t his was too slick to wipe  your arse with. I laughed and
said ther e wasn’ t anything com plicated about toilet paper—
people c ould ma ke it now , if they wanted to. Ther e was a r oll
of toilet paper on the gr ound; I pointed at it, and a big
bumblebee flew down and grab bed the end of it and flew off,
unfurling the toilet paper in i ts wake. It flew in and out,
weaving it thr ough the branches over head.
Then Roger said it was blasph emy to think about wiping
yourself with paper—it is, her e. Mama writes in tiny letters
when sh e does her case-notes, a nd when Da writes to Scotland
he w rites on b oth sides of the  page, and then he turns it
sideways and writes acr oss the lines, so it looks like lattice-
work.
Then I could see Da, sitting on the gr ound, writing a letter
to Aunt Jenny on the toilet paper , and it was getting longer andlonger a nd the bee was carrying it up into the air , flying off
towar d Scotland with it.
I use mor e paper than anyone. Aunt Jocasta gave me some
of he r old sketchbooks to use, and a whole quir e of water color
paper—but I feel guilty when I use them, because I know how
expensive it is. I have to draw , though. A nice thing about
doing this portrait for Mrs. Sherston—since I’m earning
money , I feel like I can use a little paper .
Then the dr eam changed and I was drawing pictur es of
Jemmy , with a #2B yellow penc il. It said “T iconder oga” on it
in black letters, like the ones w e used to use in school. I was
drawing on toilet paper , though, and the pencil kept ripping
thr ough it, and I  was so frustrated that I wadded up a bunch in
my hand.
Then it went into one of those boring, uncomfortable dr eams
wher e you’r e wandering ar ound looking for a place to go to
the bathr oom and can’ t find o ne—and finally you wake up
enough to r ealize that you do have to go to the bathr oom.
I can’ t decide whether I’d rather have the Hershey bar , the
toilet paper , or the pencil. I think the pencil. I could smell the
fr eshly-sharpened wood on the point, and feel it between my
fingers, and my teeth. I used to  chew my pencils, when I was
little. I still r emember what it f elt like to bite down har d and
feel the paint and wood give, ju st a little, and munch my way
up and down the length of the  pencil, until it looked like a
beaver had been gnawing on it.
I was thinking about that, this afternoon. It made me feel
sad that Jem won’ t have a new yellow pencil, or a lunchbox
with Bat man on it, when he goe s to school—if he ever does go
to school.
Roger ’ s hands ar e still too bad to hold a pen.
And now  I know that I don’ t want pencils or chocolate, or
even toilet paper . I want Roger to talk to me again.75
SPEAK MY NAME
O UR JOURNEY BACK T O Fraser ’ s Ridge was much quicker
than the one to Alamance, for all that the return was uphill. It
was late May , an d the cornstalks stood already high and green
in the fields around Hillsborough, shedding golden pollen on
the w ind. The grain would just  be up, in the mountains, and
the newborn stock appearing, calves and foals and lambs
needing protecti on from wolf and fox and bear . The militia
company had disbanded at once upon receiving the Governor ’ s
dismissal, its members scatteri ng in haste to return to their
homesteads and fields.
W e were  in consequence a much smaller party going back;
only two wagons. A few of the men who lived near the Ridge
had chosen to t ravel with us, as had the two Findlay boys,
since we would pass by their mother ’ s homestead on our way .
I c ast a covert glance at the Fin dlays, who were helping to
unload the wagon and set up our nightly camp. Nice boys,
though quiet. They were respectful of—and rather awed by—
Jamie, but had developed a pe culiar sense of allegiance to
Roger o ver the course of the s hort-lived campaign, and this
odd fidelity had continued, even after the militia’ s disbanding.
They h ad come, the two o f them, to see him in
Hillsborough, wriggling their bare toes in embarrassment on
Phoebe Shersto n’ s T urkish carpets. Scarlet-faced and nearly
speechless themselves, they had presented Roger with three
early apples, lopsided green nubbins obviously stolen from
someone’ s orchard on the way .
He h ad smiled broadly at them in thanks, picked up one of
the a pples, and taken a heroic b ite from it before I could stop
him. He  hadn’ t swallowed anything but soup for a week, and
nearly choked to death. Still, h e got it down, strangling andgasping, and all three of th em had sat there grinning
wordlessly at each other , tears standing in their eyes.
The Findlays were usually to be found somewhere near
Roger a s we traveled, always watchful, leaping to help with
anything he couldn’ t quite manage with his injured hands.
Jamie ha d told me about their uncle, Iain Mhor; plainly they
had a good deal of experience in anticipating unspoken needs.
Y oung and strong, Roger had healed quickly , and the
fractures weren’ t bad ones—but two weeks was not a long
time for broken bones to knit. I would have preferred to keep
him bandaged for another week, but he was all too plainly
chafing at the re straint. I had reluctantly taken the splints of f
his fingers the day before, warning him to take things easy .
“Don’ t you dar e ,” I said now , se izing his arm as he reached
into the wagon f or one of the heavy rucksacks of supplies. He
looked d own at me, one eyebrow raised, then shrugged good-
naturedly and stood back, letting Hugh Findlay pull out the
sack and carry it away . Roger pointed at the ring of fire-stones
Iain Findlay was assembling, then at the woods nearby . Could
he gather firewood?
“Certainly not,” I said firmly . He pantomimed drinking, and
raised his brows. Fetch water?
“No,” I said. “All it needs is for a bucket to slip, and …”
I lo oked around, trying to thi nk of something he could
safely do, but all camp-making chores involved rough work.
At the same tim e, I knew how galling he found it to stand by ,
feeling useless. He was bloody  tired of being treated like an
invalid, and I co uld see the glea m of incipient rebellion in his
eye. One  more “no” and he wou ld probably try to pick up the
wagon, just to spite me.
“Can he write, Sassenach?” Jamie had paused by the wagon,
and noticed the impasse in progress.
“W rite? W rite what?” I asked in surprise, but he was already
reaching past me, digging out the battered portable writing-
desk he carried when traveling.“Love letters?” Jamie suggested, grinning down at me. “Or
sonnets, maybe? ” He tossed the lap-desk to Roger , who caught
it neatly in his arms, even as I yelped in protest. “But perhaps
before ye compose an epic in W illiam T ryon’ s honor , Roger
Mac, ye  might oblige me wi’ the tale of how our mutual
kinsman came to try and murder ye, aye?”
Roger stood stock-still for a moment, clutching the desk, but
then gave Jamie a lopsided smile, and nodded slowly .
He had begun while the camp was set up, paused to eat
supper , and then taken up the tas k again. It was tiresome work,
and very slow; t he fractures were mostly healed, but his hands
were very stif f, sore, and awkwa rd. He had dropped the quill a
dozen times. It made my own f inger -joints ache just to watch
him.
“Ow! W ill you stop  that?” I looked up from scouring out a
pan with  a handful of rushes and sand, to find Brianna locked
in morta l combat with her son, who was arched backward like
a bow over her arm, kicking, squirming, and making the sort
of nerv e-wracking fuss that makes even devoted parents
momentarily con template infant icide. I saw Roger ’ s shoulders
draw up toward his ears at the racket, but he went doggedly on
with his writing.
“What is  the matter  with you?” Bree demanded crossly . She
knelt a nd wre stled Jemmy into a semi-sitting position,
evidently trying to make him lie down so she could change his
clout for the night.
The diaper in question was much in need of attention, being
wet, gri my , and  hanging halfway down the little boy’ s legs.
Jem, having slept most of the afternoon in the wagon, had
wakened sun-dazed, cranky , and in no mood to be trifled with,
let alone changed and put to bed.
“Perhaps he isn’ t tired yet,” I suggested. “He’ s eaten,
though, hasn’ t he?” This was a rhetorical question; Jemmy’ s
face was smeared with hasty pu dding, and he had bits of eggy
toast in his hair .“Y es.” Bree ran a hand throug h her own hair , which was
cleaner , but no less disheveled. Jem wasn’ t the only cranky
one in the MacKenzie family . “Maybe he’ s  not tired, but I  am.”
She was ; she had walked beside the wagon most of the day , to
spare the horses on the steepening slopes. So had I.
“Leave him here and go have a wash, why don’ t you?” I
said, no bly suppressing a yawn. I picked up a lar ge wooden
spoon and waggled it alluringly toward Jem, who was
oscillating backward and forward on his hands and knees,
emitting horrible whining noises. Spotting the spoon, he
stopped making the noise, but crouched in place, glaring
suspiciously .
I add ed an empty tin cup to the lure, setting it on the ground
near him . That was enough; he rolled onto his bottom with a
squish, picked up the spoon wit h both hands and began trying
to pound the cup into the dirt with it.
Bree cas t me a look of profound gratitude, scrambled to her
feet, and disappeared into the w oods, heading down the slope
to the small cree k. A quick rinse in cold water , surrounded by
dark forest, wasn’ t quite the sy baritic escape that a fragrant
bubble-bath by candlelight might be—but “escape” was the
important word here. A little solitude worked wonders for a
mother , as I knew from experience. And if cleanliness was not
quite ne xt to godliness, having clean feet, face, and hands
definitely improved one’ s outloo k on the universe, particularly
after a day of sweat, grime, and dirty diapers.
I examin ed my own hands critic ally; between horse-leading,
fire-starting, cooking, and pot-s couring, my own outlook on
the universe could stand a bit of improvement, too.
Still, water was not the only liquid capable of lifting one’ s
spirits. Jamie reached over m y shoulder , put a cup of
something into my hands, and sat down beside me, his own
cup in hand.
“Slainte, mo nighean donn,”  he said softly , smiling at me as
he lifted his cup in salute.“Mmm.” I closed my eyes, inha ling the fragrant fumes. “Is
it proper to say ‘Slainte,’  if  it isn ’ t whisk y you’re drinking?”
The liquid in the cup was wine—and a nice one, too, rough but
with a good round flavor , redolent of sun and grape leaves.
“I canna see why not,” Jamie said logically . “It’ s only to
wish ye good health, after all.”
“T rue, b ut I think ‘Good Healt h’ may be more a practical
wish than a figurative one, at least with some whiskies—that
you hop e the person you’re toasting survives the experience of
drinking it, I mean.”
He laughed, eyes creasing in amusement.
“I havena killed anyone wi’ my distilling yet, Sassenach.”
“I didn’ t mean yours,” I assured him, pausing for another
sip. “Oh, that’ s nice. I was thin king of those three militiamen
from Colonel Ashe’ s regiment.” The three in question had
been found blind-drunk—in one case, literally blind—by a
sentry , a fter having indulged in a bottle of so-called whisky ,
obtained from God knew where.
As A she’ s Company had no sur geon, and we were camped
next to them, I h ad been summoned in the middle of the night
to deal with the matter , as bes t I could. All three men had
survived, but one had lost the sight in one eye and another
plainly had minor brain-damage—though privately , I had my
doubts as to how intelligent he could have been to start with.
Jamie sh rugged. Drunkenness was a simple fact of life, and
bad brewing was another .
“Thig a seo, a chuisle!”  he calle d, seein g Jemmy , who had
lost inte rest in spoon and cup, making of f on hands and knees
toward t he cof feepot, which had been left to keep hot between
the s tones of the fire-ring. Jem my ignored the summons, but
was snatched away from danger  by T om Findlay , who snagged
him nea tly round the waist and delivered him, kicking, to
Jamie.
“Sit,” Ja mie said firmly to him , and without waiting for a
response, parked  the child on the ground and handed him hisball of rags. Jem my clutched this, looking craftily from his
grandfather to the fire.
“Throw that in the fire, a chuisle , a nd I’ll smack your bum,”
Jamie informed him pleasantly .  Jemmy’ s brow contorted and
his lower lip protruded, quivering dramatically . He didn’ t
throw the ball into the fire, though.
“A chuisle?”  I said, trying out the pronunciation. “That’ s a
new one. What’ s it mean?”
“Oh.” Jamie rubbed a finger ac ross the bridge of his nose,
considering. “It means ‘my blood.’”
“I thought that was mo fuil .”
“A ye, it is, but that’ s blood like what comes out when ye
wound yourself. A chuisle  is more like … ‘O, thou in whose
veins runs my very blood.’ Y e only say it to a wee bairn,
mostly—one ye’re related to, of course.”
“That’ s lovely .” I set my empty wine-cup on the ground and
leaned against Jamie’ s shoulder .  I still felt tired, but the magic
of t he wine ha d smoothed the rough edges of exhaustion,
leaving me pleasantly muzzy .
“W ould you call Germain that, do you think, or Joan? Or is
it meant very literally , a chuisle ?”
“I should be more inclined to call Germain un petit
emmer deur ,” he said, with a faint snort o f amusement. “But
Joan—aye, I would call wee Joanie a chuisle . It’ s blood of the
heart, ken, not only the body .”
Jemmy had let his rag-ball fall to the ground and was staring
in o pen-mouthed enchantment at the fireflies, which had
begun to  blink in the grass as darkness fell. W ith our stomachs
full and cool rest at hand, everyone was beginning to feel the
soothing ef fects of the gathering night.
The men were sprawled in the grassy dark under a sycamore
tree, passing the wine bottle from hand to hand and
exchanging talk in the easy , half-connected fashion of men
who know each other well. The Findlay boys were on thewagon-track, that being the only really clear space, throwing
something back and forth, missing half their catches as
darkness fell, and exchanging genial shouted insults.
There was a loud rustling of bushes beyond the fire, and
Brianna emer ged, looking damp, but much more cheerful. She
paused by Roger , a hand light on his back, and looked over his
shoulder at what he was writing. He glanced up at her , then,
with a shrug of resignation, withdrew the finished pages of his
opus and  handed  them to her . She knelt down beside him and
began to read, b rushing back wet strands of hair and frowning
to make out the letters by firelight.
A firefly  landed on Jamie’ s shir t, glowing cool green in the
shadowed folds of cloth. I mo ved a finger toward it, and it
flew away , spiraling above the fire like a runaway spark.
“It w as a good idea, making Roger write,” I said, looking
across the fire w ith approval. “I can’ t wait to find out what
actually happened to him.”
“Nor I,” Jamie agreed. “Thou gh wi’ W illiam Buccleigh
vanished, what’ s happened to Roger Mac is maybe no so
important as what will  happen to him.”
I didn’ t  have to ask what he meant by that. More than
anyone, he knew what it meant, to have a life kicked out from
under one—and what strength was required to rebuild it. I
reached for his right hand, and he let me take it. Under cover
of darkness, I stroked his crippled fingers, tracing the
thickened ridges of the scars.
“So it doesn’ t m atter to you, to find out whether your cousin
is a cold-blooded murderer or not?” I asked lightly , to cover
the more serious conversation going on silently between our
hands.
He made a smal l, gruf f sound th at might have been a laugh.
His fing ers curled over mine, smooth with callus, pressing in
acknowledgment.
“He’ s a MacKenzie, Sassenach. A MacKenzie of Leoch.”“Hm.” The Frasers were stubborn as rocks, I’d been told.
And Jamie himself had described the MacKenzies of Leoch—
charming as larks in the field— and sly as foxes, with it . That
had cert ainly been true of his uncles, Colum and Dougal. I
hadn’ t heard anything to indica te that his mother , Ellen, had
shared that particular family c haracteristic—but then, Jamie
had been only ei ght when she died. His aunt Jocasta? No one’ s
fool, certainly , but with a good deal less scope for plotting and
scheming than her brothers had had, I thought.
“Y ou what ?” B rianna’ s exclamation drew m y attention back
to the other side of the fire. She was looking at Roger , the
pages in her hand, an expressio n of mingled amusement and
dismay o n her face. I couldn’ t s ee Roger ’ s face; he was turned
toward her . One hand rose in a shushing gesture, though, and
he tu rned his head toward the tree where the men sat drinking,
to be sure no one had heard her exclamation.
I caught  a glimpse of firelight shining on the bones of his
face, and then his expression changed in an instant, from
wariness to horror . He lunged to his feet, mouth open.
“ST OKH!” he roared.
It w as a terrible cry , loud and harsh, but with a ghastly
strangled quality to it, like a shout forced out around a fist
shoved down his throat. It froze everyone in earshot—
including Jemmy , who had abandoned the fireflies and
stealthily returned to an investigation of the cof feepot. He
stared up  at his father , his hand six inches from the hot metal.
Then his face crumpled, and he began to wail in fright.
Roger reached across the fire and snatched him up; the little
boy screamed, kicking and squ irming to get away from this
terrifying strang er . Bree hastily took him, clutching him to her
bosom and burying his face in h er shoulder . Her own face had
gone pale with shock.
Roger lo oked shocked, too. He put a hand to his throat,
gingerly , as though unsure he was really touching his own
flesh. The ridge of the rope-scar was still dark under his jaw; Icould se e it, even in the flicker of the firelight, along with the
smaller , neater line of my own incision.
The initial shock of his shout had worn of f, and the men
came sc rambling out from under the tree, the Findlays rushing
in from the ro ad, to gather round Roger , exclaiming in
astonishment and congratulation. Roger nodded, submitting to
having his hand shaken and his back pounded, all the while
looking as though he would strongly prefer to be elsewhere.
“Say somethin’ else,” Hugh Findlay coaxed him.
“Y es, sir , you can do it,” Iain joined in, round face beaming.
“Say … say ‘She sells sea shells, by the sea-shore’!”
This sug gestion was howled down, to be replaced by a rain
of o ther excited proposals. Roger was beginning to look rather
desperate, his jaw set tight. Jam ie and I had got to our feet; I
could feel Jamie setting himself to intervene in some way .
Then Brianna pushed her way through the excited throng,
with Jemmy perched on one hip, regarding the proceedings
with intense distrust. She took Roger ’ s hand with her free one,
and smiled at hi m, the smile tre mbling only a little round the
edges.
“Can you say my name?” she asked.
Roger ’ s smile matched hers. I could hear the air rasp in his
throat as he took a breath.
This time he sp oke softly; very softly , but everyone held
silence, leaning  forward to list en. It was a ragged whisper ,
thick and painful, the first syll able punched hard to force it
through his scarred vocal cords , the last of it barely audible.
But,
“BRREEah … nah,” he said, and she burst into tears.76
BLOOD MONEY
Fraser ’ s Ridge
 June, 1771
I  SA T IN THE VISIT OR’S CHAIR in Jamie’ s study ,
companionably grating bloodroots while he wrestled with the
quarterly accounts. Both were slow and tedious businesses, but
we coul d share the light of a single candle and enjoy each
other ’ s company—and I found enjoyable distraction in
listening to the highly inventive remarks he addressed to the
paper under his quill.
“Egg-sucking son of a porcupine!” he muttered. “Look at
this, Sassenach—the man’ s nay more than a common thief!
T wo shi llings, threepence for two loaves of sugar and a brick
of indigo!”
I clicked my tongue sympathetically , forbearing to note that
two shillings seemed a modest enough price for substances
produced in the W est Indies, transported by ship to Charleston,
and thence carried by wagon, pirogue, horseback, and foot
another several hundred miles overland, to be finally brought
to our door by  an itinerant peddler who did not expect
payment for the three or four m onths until his next visit—and
who wo uld in any case likely n ot get cash, but rather six pots
of gooseberry jam or a haunch of smoked venison.
“Look at that!” Jamie said rhetorically , scratching his way
down a column of figures and arriving with a vicious stab at
the bott om. “A cask of brandywine at twelve shillings, two
bolts of muslin at three and ten each, ironmongery—what in
the nam e of buggery is wee Roger wanting wi’ an ironmonger ,
has he thought of a way to play tunes on a hoe?—
ironmongery , ten and six!”
“I b elieve that was a ploughsha re,” I said pacifically . “It’ s
not ours; Roger brought it for Geordie Chisholm.”Ploughshares were in fact rather expensive. Having to be
imported from England, they were rare amongst colonial small
farmers, many of whom made  do with nothing more than
wooden dibbles  and spades, with an ax and perhaps an iron
hoe for ground-clearing.
Jamie squinted balefully at his figures, rumpling a hand
through his hair .
“A ye,” he said. “Only Geordie hasna got a spare penny to
bless him self with, not until next year ’ s crops are sold. So it’ s
me that’ s paying the ten and  six now , isn’ t it?” W ithout
waiting for an a nswer , he plunged back into his calculations,
muttering “T urd-eating son of a flying tortoise” under his
breath, with no indication whether this applied to Roger ,
Geordie, or the ploughshare.
I fin ished grating a root and dro pped the stub into a jar on
the desk . Bloodroot is aptly named; the scientific name is
Sanguinaria , a nd the juice i s red, acrid, and  sticky . The bowl
in my lap was full of oozy , m oist shavings, and my hands
looked as though I had been disemboweling small animals.
“I have six doze n bottles of che rry cordial made,” I of fered,
picking up another root. As tho ugh he didn’ t know that; the
whole h ouse had smelled like co ugh syrup for a week. “Fer gus
can take those over to Salem and sell them.”
Jamie nodded absently .
“A ye, I’m counting on that t o buy seedcorn. Have we
anything else that can go to Salem? Candles? Honey?”
I gav e him a sharp glance, but encountered only the whorled
cowlicks on top of his head, be nt studiously over his figures.
The candles and honey were a sensitive subject.
“I th ink I can spare ten gallons of honey ,” I said guardedly .
“Perhaps ten—well, all right, twelve dozen candles.”
He scrat ched th e tip of his nose with the end of the quill,
leaving a blot of ink.“I thought ye’d had a good year wi’ the hives,” he said
mildly .
I had ; my origin al single hive had expanded, and I now had
nine bee -gums b ordering my garden. I had taken nearly fifty
gallons of honey from them, an d enough beeswax for a good
thirty do zen can dles. On the oth er hand, I had uses in mind for
those things.
“I need some of the honey for the sur gery ,” I said. “It makes
a good antibacterial dressing over wounds.”
One eyebrow went up, though h e kept his eyes on the hen-
scratches he was making.
“I should think it would draw flies,” he said, “if not bears.”
He flick ed the end of his quill, dismissing the thought. “How
much d’ye need then? I shou ldna think you’ve so many
wounded coming through your sur gery as to require forty
gallons of honey—unless you’re plastering them with it, head
to toe.”
I laughed, despite my wariness.
“No, tw o or three gallons should be enough for dressings—
say five, allowing extra to make up electrolytic fluids.”
He glanced up at me, both brows raised.
“Electric?” He looked at the ca ndle, its flame wavering in
the draft  from the window , then back at me. “Did Brianna not
say that was something to do wi’ lights? Or lightning, at
least?”
“No, electrolyte,” I amplified. “Sugar -water . Y ou know ,
when a person is  feeling shocked, or is too ill to eat, or has the
flux—an electrolytic fluid is one that supports the body by
putting back the essential ions they’ve lost from bleeding or
diarrhea—the bits of salt and sugar and other things—which in
turn dra ws water into the blood and restores blood pressure.
Y ou’ve seen me use it before.”
“Oh, is that how it works?” His face lighted with interest,
and he seemed a bout to ask for an explanation. Then he caughtsight of the stack of receipts an d correspondence still waiting
on his desk, sighed, and picked up his quill again.
“V erra well, then,” he conceded. “Keep the honey . Can I sell
the soap?”
I nodde d, pleased. I had, with  a good deal of cautious
experimentation, succeeded at last in producing a soap that did
not smell like a dead pig soaked in lye, and that did not
remove the upper layer of the ep idermis. It required sunflower
oil or olive oil in lieu of suet, though; both very expensive.
I h ad it in mind  to trade my spare honey to the Cherokee
ladies fo r sunflower oil with w hich to make both more soap
and shampoo. Those, in turn, would fetch excellent prices
almost anywher e—Cross Creek, W ilmington, New Bern—
even Ch arleston, should we ever venture that far . Or so I
thought. I was u nsure whether Jamie would agree to gamble
on that enterpri se, though; it w ould take months to come to
fruition, while he could dispose  of the honey at an immediate
profit. If he saw for sure that the soap would bring much more
than the raw ho ney , though, there would be no dif ficulty in
getting my way .
Before I could expound on the prospects, we heard the
sound of light footsteps in the hall, and a soft rap at the door .
“Come,” Jamie called, pulling himself up straight. Mr .
W emyss poked his head into the room, but hesitated, looking
mildly alarmed at the sight of th e sanguinary splotches on my
hands. J amie beckoned him companionably in with a flick of
his quill.
“A ye, Joseph?”
“If I  mig ht spea k a word in your ear , sir?” Mr . W emyss was
dressed casually , in shirt and breeks, but had slicked down his
fine, pale hair with water , indicating some formality about the
situation.
I p ushed  back my chair , reachin g to gather up my leavings,
but Mr . W emyss stopped me with a brief gesture.“Oh, no , Ma’am. If ye wouldna mind, I should like ye to
stay . It’ s about L izzie, and I should value a woman’ s opinion
on the matter .”
“Of course.” I sat back, brows raised in curiosity .
“Lizzie? Have ye found our wee lass a husband, then,
Joseph?” Jamie dropped his qui ll into the jar on his desk and
sat forward, interested, gesturing toward an empty stool.
Mr . W emyss nodded, the candlelight throwing the bones of
his thin face into  prominence. He took the prof fered seat with
a ce rtain air of dignity , quite at odds with his usual attitude of
mild discombobulation.
“I am  thinking so, Mr . Fraser . Robin McGillivray came to
call upo n me this morning, to speir  for my Elizabe th, to be
pledged to his lad, Manfred.”
My eyebrows went a little h igher . T o the best of my
knowledge, Ma nfred McGillivr ay had seen Lizzie less than
half a dozen tim es, and had not  spoken more than the briefest
of c ourtesies to her . It wasn’ t im possible that he should have
been attracted; Lizzie had grow n into a delicately pretty girl,
and if still very s hy , was possessed of nice manners. It scarcely
seemed the basis for a proposal of marriage, though.
As Mr . W emyss laid out the matter , it became a little clearer .
Jamie had promised Lizzie a do wry , consisting of a section of
prime la nd, and Mr . W emyss, fr eed from his indenture, had a
freeman’ s homestead claim of fifty acres as well—to which
Lizzie was heir . The W emyss land adjoined the McGillivrays’
section, and the two together would make a very respectable
farm. Evidently , with her three girls now married or suitably
engaged, Manfred’ s marriage was the next step in Ute
McGillivray’ s master plan. Reviewing all of the available girls
within a  twenty-mile radius of t he Ridge, she had settled upon
Lizzie a s the best prospect, an d sent Robin round to open
negotiations.
“W ell, the McGillivrays are a decent family ,” Jamie said
judiciously . He dipped a finger into my bowl of bloodrootshavings and dotted it thoughtf ully on his blotter , leaving a
chain of red fin gerprints. “They’ve not much land, but Robin
does well enough for himself, and wee Manfred’ s a hard
worker , from all I hear .” Robin  was a gunsmith, with a small
shop in Cross Creek. Manfred h ad been apprenticed to another
gun-maker in Hillsborough, but was now a journeyman
himself.
“W ould he take her to live in H illsborough?” I asked. That
might weigh heavily with Joseph W emyss. While he would do
anything to insure his daughter ’ s future, he loved Lizzie
dearly , a nd I knew that the loss of her would strike him to the
heart.
He shook his he ad. His hair had  dried, and was beginning to
rise in its usual fair wisps.
“Robin says not. He says the lad plans to ply his trade in
W oolam’ s Cree k—providing h e can manage a wee shop.
They’d live at the farm.” He darted a sideways glance at
Jamie, then looked away , blood rising under his fair skin.
Jamie be nt his head, and I saw the corner of his mouth tuck
in. So this was where he entered the negotiation, then.
W oolam’ s Creek was a small but growing settlement at the
base of Fraser ’ s Ridge. While the W oolams, a local Quaker
family , o wned the mill there, and  the land on the far side of the
creek, Jamie owned all of the land on the Ridge side.
He had so far provided land, tools, and supplies to Ronnie
Sinclair , Theo Frye, and Bob O ’Neill, for the building of a
cooper ’ s shop, a smithy—still under construction—and a
small general store, all on ter ms that provided us with an
eventual share of any profit, but no immediate income.
If J amie and I had plans fo r the future, so did Ute
McGillivray . Sh e knew , of course, that Lizzie and her father
held a place of s pecial esteem with Jamie, and that he would in
all likelihood be moved to do what he could for her . And that
—of course—was what Joseph  W emyss was very delicately
asking now; might Jamie provide premises for Manfred at
W oolam’ s Creek as part of the agreement?Jamie glanced at me out of the c orner of his eye. I lifted one
shoulder in the faintest of shrugs, wondering whether Lizzie’ s
physical delicacy had entered into Ute McGillivray’ s
calculations. There were a good many girls sturdier than
Lizzie, and better prospects for motherhood. Still, if Lizzie
should die in ch ildbirth, then the McGillivrays would be the
richer both for her dower -land, and the W oolam’ s Creek
property—and new wives were not so dif ficult to come by .
“I expect something might be done,” Jamie said cautiously .
I saw his gaze drift to the open ledger , with its depressing
columns of figures, then speculatively to me. Land was not a
problem; with no cash and precious little credit, tools and
materials would be. I firmed my lips and returned his stare; no,
he was not getting his hands on my honey!
He sighed, and sat back, tapping his red-tinged fingers
lightly on the blotter .
“I’ll ma nage,” he said. “What d oes the lass say , then? W ill
she have Manfred?”
Mr . W emyss looked faintly dubious.
“She sa ys she will. He’ s a nice enough lad, though his
mother …  a fine woman,” he added hurriedly , “verra fine. If
just a trifle … er hm. But …” he turned to me, narrow forehead
furrowed. “I am not sure Elizabe th knows her mind, ma’am, to
say truly . She kens ‘twould be a good match, and that it would
keep her  near me …” His expression softened at the thought,
then firmed again. “But I wouldna have her make the match
only because she thinks I favor it.” He glanced shyly at Jamie,
then at me.
“I di d lo ve her mother so,” he sa id, the words coming out in
a rush, as though  confessing some shameful secret. He blushed
bright pink, and looked down at the thin hands he had twisted
together in his lap.
“I see,” I said, ta ctfully averting  my own gaze, and brushing
a few  bi ts of stray bloodroot of f the desk. “W ould you like me
to talk to her?”“Oh, I should be most grateful, Mum!” Lightened by relief,
he nearly sprang to his feet. He wrang Jamie’ s hand fervently ,
bowed repeated ly to me, and at last made his way out, with
much bobbing and murmuring of thanks.
The doo r closed  behind him, an d Jamie sighed, shaking his
head.
“Christ knows it’ s trouble enough to get daughters married
when they do  ken their own minds,” he said darkly , plainly
thinking of Brianna and Marsali. “Maybe it’ s easier if they
don’ t.”
 
THE SINGLE CANDLE was guttering, casting flickering
shadows over the room. I got up  and went to the shelf where a
few fres h ones lay . T o my surpr ise, Jamie got up and came to
join me.  He reached past the as sortment of half-burned tapers
and fresh candles, pulling out t he squat clock-candle that sat
behind them, hidden in the shadows.
He s et it on the desk, and used one of the tapers to light it.
The wic k was already blacken ed; the candle had been used
before, though it wasn’ t burned down very far . He looked at
me, and I went quietly to shut the door .
“Do you think it’ s time?” I as ked softly , moving back to
stand beside him.
He shook his head, but didn’ t answer . He sat back a little in
his chai r , hands folded in his lap, watching the flame of the
clock-candle take hold and swell into a wavering light.
Jamie si ghed and put out a hand to turn his account-book
toward m e. I could see the state of our af fairs laid out there in
black and white—dismal, so far as cash went.
V ery little business in the Colony was done on a cash basis
—virtually no ne, west of Asheville. The mountain
homesteaders all dealt in barter , and so far as that went, we
managed fairly well. W e had mi lk, butter , and cheese to trade;
potatoes and grain, pork and venison, fresh vegetables and
dried fru it, a little wine made from the scuppernong grapes ofthe autumn past. W e had hay and timber—though so did
everyone else— and my honey and beeswax. And above
everything else, we had Jamie’ s whisky .
That was a limit ed resource, though. W e had fifteen acres in
new barley , which—bar hailstones, forest fires, and other Acts
of God— would eventually be made into nearly a hundred kegs
of whisky , which could be sold or traded for quite a lot, even
completely raw and unaged. The barley was still green in the
field, th ough, and the whisky no more than a profitable
phantom.
In th e m eantime, we had used or  sold almost all the spirit on
hand. T rue, there were fourteen small kegs of spirit remaining
—buried in a small cave above the whisky-spring—but that
couldn’ t be used. From each distilling, Jamie put aside two
kegs, to be relig iously kept for aging. The eldest barrel in this
cache w as only two years old; it  would stay there for ten more,
God willing, to emer ge as liquid  gold—and almost as valuable
as the solid kind.
The immediate financial demands were not going to wait
ten y ears, though. Beyond the possibility of a gunsmith’ s shop
for M anfred McGillivray and a modest dowry for Lizzie, there
were the normal expenses of farming, livestock maintenance,
and an ambitious plan to provid e ploughshares to every tenant
—many of whom were still tilling by hand.
And beyond our own expenses, there was one very
burdensome obl igation. Bloody Laoghaire MacKenzie damn-
her -eyes Fraser .
She wasn’ t precisely an ex-wife—but she wasn’ t precisely
not an ex-wife, either . Thinking  me permanently gone, if not
actually dead, Jamie had married her , under the prodding of
his s ister Jenny . The marriage h ad rather quickly proved to be
a mistake, and upon my reappearance, an annulment had been
sought, to the relief—more or less—of all parties.
Generous to a fa ult, though, Jamie had agreed to pay a lar ge
sum to her in an nual maintenanc e, plus a dowry to each of her
daughters. Marsali’ s dowry was being paid gradually , in landand whisky , and there was n o news of Joan’ s impending
marriage. But the money to keep Laoghaire in whatever style
she kept in Scotland was falling due—and we didn’ t have it.
I g lanced at Jam ie, who was brooding, eyes half-closed over
his l ong, straight nose. I didn’ t b other suggesting that we allow
Laoghaire to put in for a gaberlunzie badge and go begging
through the parish. No matter what he thought of the woman
personally , he considered her his responsibility , and that was
that.
I sup posed that p aying the debt in casks of salt fish and lye-
soap was not a  suitable option, either . That left us three
alternatives: W e  could sell the whisky from the cache, though
that wou ld be a great loss in the long term. W e could borrow
money from Jocasta; possible, but highly distasteful. Or we
could sell something else. Several horses, for instance. A lar ge
number of pigs. Or a jewel.
The candle was burning strongly , and the wax around the
wick ha d melted. Looking down into the clear puddle of
molten wax, I could see them: three gemstones, dark against
the p ale gray-gold of the candle , their vivid hues subdued but
still visi ble in the wax. An emerald, a topaz, and a black
diamond.
Jamie d idn’ t touch them, but stared at them, thick ruddy
brows drawn together in concentration.
Selling a gemstone in colonial N orth Carolina would not be
easy; it would li kely require a trip to Charleston or Richmond.
It co uld be done , though, and would result in enough money to
pay Laoghaire her blood-money , as well as to meet the other
mounting expenses. The gemstones had a value, though, that
went beyond money—they were the currency of travel through
the stones; protection for the life of a traveler .
What fe w things  we knew abou t that perilous journey were
based la r gely on the things that Geillis Duncan had written or
had told me; it was her contention that gems gave a traveler
not only protection from the ch aos in that unspeakable spacebetween the layers of time, but some ability to navigate, as it
were—to choose the time in which one might emer ge.
Moved b y impulse, I went back to the shelf, and standing on
tiptoe, groped for the hide-wrapped bundle hidden in the
shadows there. It was heavy in  my hand, and I unwrapped it
carefully , laying the oval stone on the desk beside the candle.
It w as a  lar ge opal, its fiery hea rt revealed within a matrix of
dull stone by th e carving that covered the surface—a spiral; a
primitive drawing of the snake that eats its tail.
The opal was the property of another traveler—the
mysterious India n called Otter -T ooth. An Indian whose skull
showed silver fillings in the te eth; an Indian who seemed at
one time  to have spoken English. He had called this stone his
“ticket back”— so it seemed that Geilie Duncan was not the
only one  who believed that gem stones had some power in that
dreadful place … between.
“Five, the witch said,” Jamie sai d thoughtfully . “She said ye
needed five stones?”
“She tho ught so.” It was a warm evening, but the down
hairs on  my jaw prickled at the thought of Geilie Duncan, of
the stones—and of the Indian I had met on a dark hillside, his
face painted black for death, jus t before I had found the opal,
and the skull buried with it. W as it his skull we had buried,
silver fillings and all?
“W as it needful for the stones to be polished, or cut?”
“I d on’ t know . I  think she said cut ones were better—but I
don’ t kn ow why she thought s o—or if she was right.” That
was always the rub; we knew so little for sure.
He made a little hmf  n oise, and rub bed the bridge of his
nose slowly with one knuckle.
“W ell, we’ve these three, and m y father ’ s ruby . Those are
cut and polished  stones, and th at makes four . Then that wee
bawbee”—he glanced at the opal—”and the stone in your
amulet, which are not.” The po int here being that the cut or
polished stones would fetch a great deal more in cash thanwould th e rough  opal or the raw sapphire in my medicine bag.
And yet—could  we risk losing a stone that might be needed,
that mig ht some day spell the dif ference between life and death
for Bree or Roger?
“It’ s not likely ,” I said, answer ing his thought, rather than
his words. “Bree will stay , certainly until Jemmy’ s grown;
perhaps for good.” After all, ho w could one abandon a child,
the possibility of grandchildren ? And yet, I had done it. I
rubbed a finger absently over the smooth metal of my gold
ring.
“A ye. But the lad?” He looke d up at me, one eyebrow
raised, the candlelight clear in h is eyes, blue as sapphires cut
and polished.
“He wouldn’ t,” I said. “He wouldn’ t leave Bree and
Jemmy .” I spoke stoutly , but there was a thread of doubt in my
heart, and it was reflected in my voice.
“Not yet,” Jamie said quietly .
I took a deep breath, but did not reply . I knew very well
what he meant. W rapped in silence, Roger seemed to
withdraw further day by day .
His fing ers had healed; I had suggested to Brianna that
perhaps he would find solace in  his bodhran. She had nodded,
doubtfully . I didn’ t know whether she had mentioned it to him
or not—but the bodhran hung on the wall of their cabin, silent
as its owner .
He d id still smil e and play with Jemmy , and was unfailingly
attentive to Brianna—but the shadow in his eyes never
lessened, and when he was no t required for some chore, he
would disappea r for hours, sometimes all day , to walk the
mountains, returning after dark , exhausted, dirt-stained—and
silent.
“He hasna slept with her , has he? Since it happened?”
I sighed, brushing a strand of hair of f my forehead.“A few times. I asked. My gu ess would be that it hasn’ t
happened lately , though.”
Bree wa s doing her best to keep  him close, to draw him out
of the depths of  his gathering d epression—but it was clear to
me, as well as to Jamie, that she was losing the battle, and
knew it.  She too was growing silent, and had shadows in her
eyes.
“If he went … back … might there be a cure for his voice?
There in your own time?” Jamie ran a finger over the opal as
he spoke, eyes following the spiral as his finger traced it.
I sighed again, and sat down.
“I don’ t know . There would be help—perhaps sur gery ,
certainly speech therapy . I can’ t say how much  i t woul d help;
no one can. The thing is … he might recover a good deal of his
voice naturally , if he’d only wor k at it. But he isn’ t going to do
that. And of cou rse,” honesty compelled me to add, “he might
not  get it back, no matter how hard he worked.”
Jamie n odded, silent. Regardless of the possibilities of
medical help, the fact was that if the marriage between Roger
and Brianna failed, there was nothing whatever to keep him
here. Whether he would choose to go back then …
Jamie sat up in his chair , and blew the candle out.
“Not yet,” he said in the darkness, his voice firm. “W e’ve a
few weeks yet before I must send money to Scotland; I’ll see
what else we might contrive. For now , we’ll keep the stones.”
 
Last night I dr eamed that I was making br ead. Or at least I
was trying to m ake br ead. I’d be mixing dough and suddenly
r ealize that I didn’ t have any flour . Then I’d put the br ead in
pans and put it in the oven and r ealize that it hadn’ t risen, and
take it back out. I’d knead it and knead it and then I’d be
carrying it ar ound in a bowl und er a cloth, looking for a warm
place to  put it, b ecause you have to keep it warm or the yeast
dies, and I was getting frantic because I couldn’ t find a warm
place; ther e was a cold wind blo wing and the bowl was heavyand slippery and I thought I was going to dr op it; my hands
and feet wer e fr eezing and going numb.
Then I woke up and I r eally was cold. Roger had pulled all
the covers off and r olled himself up in them, and ther e was a
terrible draft blowing in under the door . I nudged him and
yanked on the blankets, but I couldn’ t get them loose and I
didn’ t want to make a lot of noise and wake Jemmy up. Finally ,
I g ot up and got my cloak off the peg and went back to sleep
under that.
Roger g ot up befor e me this mo rning and went out; I don’ t
think he noticed that he’d left me in the cold.77
A P ACKAGE FROM LONDON
T HE P ACKAGE ARRIVED in August, by the good of fices of
Jethro W ainwright, one of the few itinerant peddlers with
suf ficient enterp rise to ascend th e steep and winding paths that
led to the Ridge . Red-faced and wheezing from the climb and
the work of unloading his donkey’ s pack-frame, Mr .
W ainwright handed me the package with a nod, and staggered
gratefully of f toward the kitche n at my invitation, leaving his
donkey to crop grass in the yard.
It w as a small p arcel, a box of some sort, sewn up carefully
in oilskin and tied with twine for good measure. It was heavy .
I sho ok it, but the only sound w as a soft clunking, as though
whatever lay within was padded. The label read simply “T o
Mr . James Fraser , Esq., Fraser ’ s Ridge, the Carolinas.”
“W ell, what do you suppose this is?” I asked the donkey . It
was a rhetorical question, but the donkey , an amiable creature,
looked up from her meal and hee-hawed in reply , stems of
fescue hanging from the corner of her
 mouth.
The sou nd set of f answering cries of curiosity and welcome
from Clarence and the horses, a nd within seconds, Jamie and
Roger a ppeared from the direction of the barn, Brianna came
out of the spring house, and Mr . Bug rose up from behind the
manure pile in his shirtsleeves  like a vulture rising from a
carcass, all drawn by the noise.
“Thanks,” I said to the donkey , who flicked a modest ear at
me and went back to the grass.
“What is it?” Brianna stood on her toes to peer over Jamie’ s
shoulder as he took the packa ge from me. “It’ s not from
Lallybroch, is it?”“No, it’ s neither Ian’ s hand … nor my sister ’ s,” Jamie
replied with no more than a brie f hesitation, though I saw him
glance tw ice to make sure. “It’ s come a good way , though—by
ship?” He held the parcel under my nose inquiringly . I snif fed
and nodded.
“Y es; there’ s a whif f of tar about it. No documents,
though?”
He turned the package over , then shook his head.
“It had a seal, but that’ s gone.” Grayish fragments of wax
clung to  the twine, but the seal that might have provided a clue
to the sender ha d long since suc cumbed to the vicissitudes of
travel and Mr . W ainwright’ s pack.
“Ump.” Mr . Bug shook his head, squinting dubiously at the
package. “Not a mattock.”
“No, it’ s nay a mattock-head,” Jamie agreed, hefting the
little parcel appraisingly . “Nor y et a book, let alone a quire of
paper . I havena ordered anything  else that I can think of. D’ye
think it might be  seeds, Sassenach? Mr . Stanhope did promise
to send ye bits from his friend’ s garden, aye?”
“Oh, it might be!” That was an exciting possibility; Mr .
Stanhope’ s friend Mr . Crossley had an extensive ornamental
garden, with a lar ge number of exotic and imported species,
and Stanhope had of fered to se e whether Crossley might be
amenable to an exchange; seeds and cuttings of some of the
rarer European and Asian herbs from his collection, for bulbs
and seeds from what Stanhope described as my “mountain
fastness.”
Roger and Brianna exchanged a brief look. Seeds were a
good de al less intriguing to the m than either paper or books
would b e. Still, the novelty o f any letter or package was
suf ficient that no one suggested opening it until the full
measure of enjoyment should have been extracted from
speculation about its contents.
In the event, the package was not opened until after supper ,
when everyone had had a chance to weigh the parcel, poke andsnif f at it, and of fer an opinion regarding its contents. Pushing
his empty plate aside, Jamie finally took up the parcel with all
due ceremony , shook it once more, and then handed it to me.
“That knot’ s a job for a sur geon’ s hands, Sassenach,” he
said with a grin. It was; whoever had tied it was no sailor , but
had substituted thoroughness for knowledge. It took me
several minutes of picking, but I got the knot undone at last,
and rolled the twine up tidily for future use.
Jamie th en slit the stitching car efully with the point of his
dirk, and drew out a small  wooden box, to gasps of
astonishment. It  was plain in design, but elegant in execution,
made of  a polished dark wood, equipped with brass hinges and
hasp, and with a matching small brass plate set into the lid.
“From the W orkshop of Messrs. Halliburton and
Halliburton, 14 Portman Square, London.” Brianna read it out,
leaning across the table and cra ning her neck. “Who on earth
are Norman and Greene?”
“I h avena the slightest idea,” J amie replied. He lifted the
hasp wi th one finger , and delic ately put back the lid. Inside
was a small bag of dark red velvet. He pulled this out, opened
its drawstring, and slowly drew out a … thing.
It w as a flat golden disk, about four inches across. Goggling
in a stonishment , I could see that the rim was slightly raised,
like that of a plate, and printed with tiny symbols of some
kind. Se t into the central part of  the disk was an odd pierced-
work arrangement, made of some silvery metal. This consisted
of a small open  dial, rather like a clock-face, but with three
arms connecting its outer rim to the center of the bigger ,
golden disk.
The small silver circle was also adorned with printed
arcana, almost too fine to see,  and attached to a lyre-shape
which it self rest ed in the belly of a long, flat silver eel, whose
back curved snugly round the inner rim of the golden disk.
Surmounting the  whole was a gold bar , tapered at the ends like
a v ery thick com pass needle, and af fixed with a pin that passed
through the center of the disk and allowed the bar to revolve.Engraved in flowing script down the center of the bar was the
name “James Fraser .”
“Why , whatever in the name of Bride will that  be?” Mrs.
Bug, naturally , recovered first from her surprise.
“It’ s a planispheric astrolabe,” Jamie answered, recovered
from his surprise, and sounding now almost matter -of-fact.
“Oh, of course ,” I murmured. “Naturally!”
He t urned the thing over , displ aying a flat surface etched
with several concentric circles, these in turn subdivided by
hundreds of tiny markings and symbols. This side had a
revolving bit like the compass-n eedle thing on the other side,
but rect angular in shape, and with the ends bent upward,
flattened and notched so that the notches formed a pair of
sights.
Bree reached out a finger and touched the gleaming surface
reverently .
“My God,” she said. “Is that really gold ?”
“It is.” Jamie placed the object gingerly into her
outstretched palm. “And what I should like to know is why?”
“Why gold, or why an astrolabe?” I asked.
“Why g old,” he replied, frowning at the thing. “I’d been
wanting such an instrument for  some time, and couldna find
one anywhere between Albany and Charleston. Lord John
Grey ha d promised to have one  sent me from London, and I
suppose this is it. But why in Christ’ s name …”
Everyone’ s attention was still riveted by the astrolabe itself,
but Jamie glanced away , reachi ng instead for the box it had
come in . Sure enough, at the b ottom of the box lay a note,
crisply folded and sealed with b lue wax. The insignia, though,
was not  Lord John’ s customary  smiling half-moon-and-stars,
but an unfamiliar crest, showing a fish with a ring in its mouth.
Jamie glanced at this, frowning, then broke the seal and
opened the note. 
Mr . James Fraser , Esq.
 at Fraser ’ s Ridge
 Royal Colony of North Car olina
 
My dear sir ,
 
I ha ve the honor  to send the enclosed, with the compliments
of my father , Lor d John Gr ey . Upon my departur e for London,
he gave me instructions to obtain the finest instrument
possible, and with knowledge of the high esteem in which he
holds yo ur frien dship, I have ta ken pains to do so. I hope it
will meet with your appr oval.
 
Y our obdt. servant,
 W illiam Ransome, Lor d Ellesmer e,
 Captain, 9th Regiment  
 
“W illiam Ransome?” Brianna had stood up in order to read
over Jam ie’ s shoulder . She glanced at me, frowning. “He says
his father ’ s Lord John—but isn’ t Lord John’ s son still a little
boy?”
“He’ s fifteen.” Jamie’ s voice held an odd note, and I saw
Roger g lance up abruptly from the astrolabe in his hands,
green ey es suddenly intent. His gaze shifted to me, with that
odd look he had  developed of late, of listening to something
no one else could hear . I looked away .
“… not Grey ,” Brianna was saying.
“No.” Jamie was still looking a t the note in his hand, and
sounded a little abstracted. He shook his head briefly , as
though dispellin g some thought, and returned to the matter at
hand.
“No,” he repeated more firmly , laying down the note. “The
lad is John’ s stepson—his father was the Earl of Ellesmere; theboy’ s th e ninth of that title. Ransome is Ellesmere’ s family
name.”
I k ept my eyes fixed sedulously  on the table and the empty
box, afra id to look up for fear that my transparent face might
reveal something—if only the fact that there was something to
be revealed.
W illiam Ransome’ s father had not, in fact, been the eighth
Earl of Ellesmere. His father had been James Fraser , and I
could feel the tension in Jamie’ s leg where it touched mine
beneath the table, though his fa ce now wore an expression of
mild exasperation.
“Evidently the lad’ s been bought a commission,” he said,
folding the letter neatly and tu cking it back in the box. “So
he’ s gon e of f to London, and purchased the thing there at
John’ s instructi on. But I suppose that to a lad of his
background, ‘fine’ must necessarily mean plated wi’ gold!”
He stretc hed out a hand and Mr . W ainwright, who had been
admiring his reflection in th e polished golden surface,
reluctantly surrendered the astrolabe.
Jamie examined  it critically , rotating the inset silver eel with
an index finger .
“A ye, well,” he said, almost rel uctantly . “It is  verr a fi ne, as
to the workmanship of the thing.”
“Pretty .” Mr . Bug nodded his ap proval, reaching for one of
the hot stovies his wife was of fering round. “Survey?”
“A ye, that’ s right.”
“Survey?” Brianna took two of the little potato dumplings
and sat down beside Roger , automatically passing him one.
“It’ s for surveying?”
“Among other things.” Jamie turned the astrolabe over and
gently pushed the flat bar , maki ng the notched sights revolve.
“This bit—it’ s used as a transit. Y e’ll ken what that is?”
Brianna nodded, looking interested.“Sure. I know ho w to do dif ferent sorts of surveying, but we
generally used …”
I saw  Roger grim ace as he swallowed, the roughness of the
stovie ca tching a t his throat. I lifted my hand toward the water
pitcher , but he caught my eye  and shook his head, almost
imperceptibly . He swallowed again, more easily this time, and
coughed.
“I r ecall ye said ye could survey .” Jamie regarded his
daughter with approval. “That’ s why I wanted this”—he hefted
the object in his hand—”though I did have something a wee
bit less gaudy in mind. Pew ter would ha’ been more
serviceable. Still, so long as I havena got to pay for it …”
“Let me  see.” Brianna extended a hand and took the thing,
frowning in absorption as she moved the inner dial.
“Do you know how to use a n astrolabe?” I asked her
dubiously .
“I d o,” Jamie s aid, with a certain degree of smugness. “I
was taught, in France.” He st ood up, and jerked his chin
toward the door .
“Bring it outside, lass. I’ll show ye how to tell the time.”
 
“… A YE, JUST THERE.” Jamie leaned intently over Bree’ s
shoulder , pointin g at a spot on the outer dial. She moved the
inner di al carefully to match, looked up at the sun, and
twitched the pointer a fraction of an inch.
“Five-thirty!” she exclaimed, flushed with delight.
“Five th irty-five,” Jamie correc ted, grinning broadly . “See
there?” He pointed at one of the tiny symbols on the rim,
which at this dis tance, appeared  to be no more than a flyspeck
to me.
“Five th irty-five,” Mrs. Bug said, in tones of awe. “Think of
that, Arch! Why—I havena ke nt the time for sure, since …
since …”“Edinbur gh,” her husband said, nodding.
“A ye, that’ s right! My cousin Jane had a case-clock, a lovely
thing, ‘t would c hime like a chu rch bell, and its face wi’ brass
numbers, and a pair of wee cherubs flying right across, so—”
“This is  the first time I’ve know n what time it was, since I
left the Sherstons’ house.” Bree  was ignoring both Mrs. Bug’ s
raptures and the instrument in  her hands. I saw her meet
Roger ’ s eyes, and smile—and after a moment, his own
lopsided smile in return. How long had it been for him?
Everyone was squinting up at the setting sun, waving clouds
of gnats  from their eyes and discussing when they had last
known the time. How very odd, I thought, with some
amusement. Wh y this preoccupation with measuring time?
And yet I had it, too.
I tried to think when the last time had been for me. At
Jocasta’ s wedding? No—on the field near Alamance Creek,
just before the b attle. Colonel Ashe had had a pocket watch,
and—I stopped,  remembering. No. It was after the battle. And
that was very lik ely the last time Roger had known what time
it was—if he had been suf ficiently conscious to hear one of the
Army su r geons announce that it was then four o’clock—and to
give his  considered opinion that Roger would not live to see
the hour of five.
“What else can you do with it, Da?”
Bree han ded the astrolabe carefully back to Jamie, who took
it and at once b egan polishing away the fingermarks with the
tail of his shirt.
“Oh, a great nu mber of things. Y e can find your position,
whether on land or at sea, tell the time, find a particular star in
the sky …”
“V ery useful,” I observed. “Though perhaps not quite so
convenient as a clock. But I suppose telling time wasn’ t your
chief intent?”
“No.” He shook his head, stowing the astrolabe tenderly
away in its velvet bag. “I must h ave the land of the two grantsproperly surveyed—and soon.”
“Why soon?” Bree had been tur ning to go, but turned back
at this, one brow raised.
“Because time grows short.” Jamie looked up at her , the
pleasure of his acquisition subsiding into seriousness. He
glanced over his shoulder , but there was no one left on the
porch save himself and me, Brianna and Roger .
Mr . W ainwright, uninterested in scientific marvels, had gone
down to  the yard and was lugging his packs into the house,
aided by Mr . Bug, and hinde red by Mrs. Bug’ s running
commentary . Everyone on the Ridge would know he was here
by t omorrow , and would come to the house to buy , sell, and
hear the latest news.
“Y e ken  what’ s coming, the two  of ye.” Jamie glanced from
Bree to Roger . “The King may fall, but the land will stay . And
if we are to hold this land thr ough it all, we must have it
properly surveyed and registered. When there is trouble, when
folk mu st leave their land or maybe have it seized—it’ s the
devil an d all to get back, but it’ s  maybe possible, forbye—and
ye have a proper deed to say what was once yours.”
The sun sparked gold and fire from the curve of his head as
he look ed up. He nodded to ward the dark line of the
mountains, silho uetted by a glorious spray of pink and gold
cloud, but I coul d see from the look of distance in his eyes that
he saw something far beyond.
“Lallybroch—we saved it by means of a deed of sasine.
And Y oung Simon, Lovat’ s son—he fought for his land, after
Culloden, and got most of it bac k at last. But only because he
had the papers to prove what had been his. So.”
He put back the lid of the box he had brought out, and laid
the velvet bag gently in it. “I will have papers. And whether it
is on e G eor ge or  the other who rules in time—this land will be
ours. And yours,” he added softly , raising his eyes to
Brianna’ s. “And your children’ s after you.”I l aid my hand on his, where it  rested on the box. His skin
was war m with work and the heat of the day , and he smelt of
clean sweat. The hairs on his forearm shone red and gold in
the sun, and I understood very well just then, why it is that
men me asure time. They wish to fix a moment, in the vain
hope that so doing will keep it from departing.78
NO SMALL THING
B RIANNA HAD COME UP T O the big house to borrow a
book. Sh e left Jemmy in the kitchen with Mrs. Bug, and went
down th e hall to her father ’ s study . He was gone, the room
empty , though it smelled faintly of him—some indefinable
masculine scent,  composed of le ather , sawdust, sweat, whisky ,
manure—and ink.
She rubbed a fin ger under her nose, nostrils twitching, and
smiled a t the thought. Roger smelled of those things, too—and
yet he had his  own scent, underneath. What was it? she
wondered. His hands used to smell slightly of varnish and
metal, when he owned a guitar . But that was long ago and far
away .
Pushing away the thought, she bent her attention to the
books on the sh elf. Fer gus had brought back three new books
from his  latest trip to W ilmington: a set of essays by Michel de
Montaigne—those were in Fren ch, no good—a tattered copy
of D aniel Defoe’ s Moll Flanders , and a very thin, paper -
covered book by B. Franklin, The Means and Manner of
Obtaining V irtue .
No contest, she thought, plucking out Moll Flanders . The
book had seen h ard use; the spi ne was cracked and the pages
loose. She hoped they were all there; nothing worse than
reaching a good part of the story  and discovering that the next
twenty pages were missing. She flipped carefully through,
checking, but the pages seemed to be complete, if occasionally
crumpled or stained with food. T he book had a rather peculiar
smell, as though it had been dipped in tallow .
A sudde n crash from her mother ’ s sur gery jerked her from
her contemplation of the books. She looked instinctively for
Jem—but of course he wasn’ t there. Shoving the book hastilyback int o place,  she rushed out of the study , only to meet her
mother hurrying down the hall from the kitchen.
She bea t Claire to the door of the sur gery by a scant
moment.
“Jem!”
The doo r of the big standing cupboard stood ajar , and the
smell of honey was strong in the air . A broken stoneware
bottle la y on the floor in a sticky golden puddle, and Jemmy
sat in the mid dle of it, liber ally smeared, his blue eyes
absolutely round, mouth open in guilty shock.
Blood sur ged into her face. Ignoring the stickiness, she
grabbed him by the arm and stood him on his feet.
“Jeremiah Alex ander MacKenz ie,” Brianna said, in awful
tones, “you are a Bad Boy!” She checked him hastily for blood
or in jury , found none, and fetche d him a smack on the bottom,
hard enough to make the palm of her hand sting.
The resu lting screech gave her an instant qualm of guilt.
Then sh e saw the rest of the carnage in the sur gery , and
quelled the impulse to spank him again.
“Jeremiah!”
Bunches of dried rosemary , yarrow , and thyme had been
pulled out of the  drying rack an d shredded. One of the gauze
shelves of the rack itself had been pulled loose, the fabric
ripped a nd hanging. Bottles and jars from the cupboards lay
tipped and rolling; some of the corks had fallen out, spilling
multi-colored powders and liquids. A big linen bag of coarse
ground salt had been rifled, handsful of the crystals tossed
around with abandon.
W orst of all, her mother ’ s amul et lay on the floor , the little
leather pouch torn open, flat and empty . Scattered bits of dried
plants, a few tiny bones, and other debris lay strewn round it.
“Mama, I’m so sorry—he got away . I wasn’ t looking—I
should have kept a better eye o n—” She had nearly to shout
her apologies, to be heard above Jemmy’ s bawling.Claire, flinching slightly at the noise, looked round the
sur gery , taking hasty inventory . Then she stooped and picked
Jemmy up, disregarding the honey .
“Shhhh,” she said, putting a hand lightly over his mouth.
This proving inef fective, she patted the hand over the gaping
orifice, producin g a “wa-wa-wa-wa” sound that made Jemmy
stop bel lowing at once. He s tuck a thumb in his mouth,
snuf fling loudly round it, and pr essed a filthy cheek to Claire’ s
shoulder .
“W ell, t hey do get into things, ” she said to Bree, looking
more am used than upset. “Don’ t worry , darling, it’ s only a bit
of a mes s. He couldn’ t reach the knives, thank goodness, and I
keep the poisons up high, too.”
Brianna felt her heart begin to slow down. Her hand felt hot,
pulsing with blood.
“But your amulet …” She point ed, and saw a shadow cross
her mother ’ s face when she saw the desecration.
“Oh.” C laire too k a deep breath , patted Jemmy’ s back, and
put h im down. H er teeth set in her lower lip, she stooped and
gingerly picked up the limp pouch with its draggled feathers.
“I’m sorry ,” Brianna repeated, helplessly .
She cou ld see the ef fort it cost, but her mother made a small
dismissive gestu re, before crouching to pick up the bits and
pieces from the floor . Her curl y hair was untied, and swung
forward, hiding her face.
“I alway s did wonder what was  in this thing,” Claire said.
She gingerly began to pick up t he tiny bones, collecting them
carefully in the palm of one ha nd. “What do you think these
are from—a shrew?”
“I don’ t know .” Keeping a wary eye on Jemmy , Brianna
squatted and began to pick thin gs up. “I thought maybe they
were from a mouse or a bat.”
Her mother glanced up at her , surprised. “Aren’ t you clever
—look.” She plucked a small, papery brown object from thefloor and held it  out. Bending to look closer , Brianna could see
that the thing that looked like a crumpled dried leaf was in fact
a fragment of a  tiny bat’ s win g, the fragile leather dried to
translucence, a bone slender as a  needle curving through it like
the central rib of a leaf.
“Eye of newt, and toe of frog/ W ool of bat, and tongue of
dog,” Claire quoted. She spilled the handful of bones onto the
counter , looking at them with fascination. “I wonder what she
meant by that?”
“She?”
“Nayawenne—the woman who gave me the pouch.”
Crouching, Claire swept up the crumbled bits of leaf—at least
Brianna hoped they were real leaves—into her hand, and
snif fed them. There were so many odors in the air of the
sur gery that she herself couldn’ t distinguish anything beyond
the ove rwhelming sweetness of honey , but evidently her
mother ’ s sensitive nose had no trouble in making out
individual scents.
“Bayberry , bals am fir , wild gi nger , and Arsesmart,” she
said, snif fing like a truf fle-hound. “Bit of sage, too, I think.”
“Arsesmart? Is that a comment on what she thought of
you?” In spite of her distress, Brianna laughed.
“Ha bloody ha,” he mother rep lied tartly , dusting the little
heap of  dried plant matter on to the table with the bones.
“Otherwise known as water -pepper . It’ s a rather irritating little
thing that grows near brooks—gives you blisters and smarts
the eyes—or other things, I imagine, if you happen to
carelessly sit on it.”
Jemmy , rebukes  for gotten, had got hold of a sur gical clamp
and was  turning it to and fro, evidently trying to decide
whether it was edible. Brianna debated taking it away from
him, but given that her mother always sterilized her metal
implements by boiling, decide d to let him keep it for the
moment, since it had no sharp edges.Leaving him with Claire, she w ent back to the kitchen to
fetch hot water and some cloth s with which to deal with the
honey . M rs. Bug was there but was sound asleep, snoring
gently o n the settle, hands folde d on her rounded stomach, her
kerch comfortably askew over one ear .
T iptoeing back with the bucket of water and a handful of
cloths, s he found most of the debris already swept up, and her
mother crawling round on hands and knees, peering under
things.
“Have you lost s omething?” She glanced at the bottom shelf
of the cupboard , but didn’ t see anything missing, bar the
honey-jar . The other bottles had been neatly stoppered and
replaced, and everything looked much as usual.
“Y es.” Claire crouched lower , frowning as she peered under
the cupb oard itself. “A stone. A bout so big”—she held out a
hand, thumb and index finger circled, describing a sphere
about the diameter of a small coin—”and a sort of grayish-
blue. T ranslucent in spots. It’ s a raw sapphire.”
“W as it in the cupboard? Maybe Mrs. Bug moved it.”
Claire sat back on her heels, shaking her head.
“No, she  doesn’ t touch anything in here. Besides, it wasn’ t
in the cupboard —it was in the re.” She nodded at the table,
where t he amulet’ s empty pouch lay beside the bones and
plant debris.
A quick search—and then a slower one—of the sur gery
revealed no sign of the stone.
“Y ou know ,” Claire said, running a hand through her hair as
she looked thoughtfully at Jemmy , “I hate to suggest this, but
do you think … ?”
“Shi—I mean rats,” Brianna said, concern escalating to mild
alarm. She stooped to look at Je mmy , who loftily ignored her ,
concentrating on the job of inserting the sur gical clamp into
his left nostril. “There wer e  crumbs of dried plant matter stuck
to t he honey a round his mouth, but surely that was just
rosemary or thyme …”Of fended at the close scrutiny , he tried to whack her with
the c lamp, but s he seized his wr ist in a grip of iron, removing
the clamp from his grasp with her other hand.
“Don’ t hit Mummy ,” she said automatically , “it’ s not nice.
Jem—did you swallow Grannie’ s rock?”
“No,” he said, just as automatic ally , grabbing at the clamp.
“Mine!”
She snif fed at his face, causing him to lean back at an
alarming angle, but couldn’ t be sure. She didn’ t think it was
rosemary , though.
“Come smell him,” she said to her mother , standing up. “I
can’ t tell.”
Claire stooped to oblige, and Jemmy shrieked in giggling
alarm, preparing for an enjoyable game of “Eat me up.” He
was disappointe d, though; his grandmother merely inhaled
deeply , said definitely , “wild g inger ,” then leaned in for a
closer look, seizing a damp c loth to rub away the honey
smears, in spite of increasing howls of protest.
“Look.” Claire pointed at the soft skin around his mouth.
Freshly cleansed, Brianna could see them clearly—two or
three tiny blisters, like seed pearls.
“Jeremiah,” she  said sternly , attempting to look him in the
eye. “T ell Mummy . Did you eat Grannie’ s rock?”
Jeremiah avoided her gaze and wriggled away , putting both
hands protectively behind him.
“No hit,” he said. “Nod nice!”
“I’m not  going to spank you,” she assured him, grabbing an
escaping foot. “I just want to k now . Did you swallow a rock
about th is big?” She held up thumb and forefinger . Jemmy
giggled.
“Hot,” he said. That was his n ew favorite word, applied
without distinction to any object he liked.Brianna closed her eyes, sigh ing in exasperation, then
opened them to look at her mother .
“I’m afraid so. W ill it hurt him?”
“Shouldn’ t think so.” Claire  regarded her grandson
thoughtfully , tapping a finger against her lips. Then she
crossed the room, opening on e of the high cupboards and
withdrawing a lar ge brown-glass bottle.
“Castor -bean oil,” she explained, rummaging in a drawer for
a sp oon. “Not quite  as tast y as honey ,” she added, fixing
Jemmy with a gimlet eye, “but very  ef fective.”
 
CAST OR OIL MIGHT BE EFF ECTIVE, but it took a while.
Keeping a close eye on Jemmy , who was set down to play with
his bask et of wooden blocks after being dosed, Brianna and
Claire used the waiting time t o tidy the sur gery , and then
turned to the peaceful, but time-consuming, job of
compounding medicines. It was some time since Claire had
had time to do this, and there was a staggering profusion of
leaves a nd roots and seeds to be shredded, grated, pounded,
boiled in  water , steeped in oil, extracted with alcohol, strained
through gauze, stirred into melted beeswax or bear grease,
mixed w ith ground talc or rol led into pills, then jarred or
bottled or bagged for preservation.
It w as a pleasan tly warm day , and they left the windows
open for the breeze, even though this meant constantly
swatting flies, shooing gnats, and picking the occasional
enthusiastic bumblebee out of some bubbling solution.
“Be careful, sweetie!” Brianna reached hastily to brush
away a honeybee that had light ed on one of Jemmy’ s blocks,
just before Jem could grab it. “Bad bug. Ouchie!”
“They smell their honey ,” Claire said, waving away another .
“I’d better give them some of it back.” She set a bowl of
honey-water on  the windowsill, and within moments, bees
were thick about the rim of it, drinking greedily .“Single-minded, aren’ t they?” B rianna observed, blotting a
trickle of sweat that ran between her breasts.
“W ell, single-mindedness will get you a long way ,” Claire
murmured absently , frowning slightly as she stirred a solution
warming over an alcohol lamp. “Does this look done to you?”
“Y ou kn ow a lot better than I do.” Still, she bent obligingly
and snif fed. “I think so; it smells pretty strong.”
Claire dipped a quick finger into the bowl, then tasted it.
“Mm, yes, I think so.” T aking the bowl of f the flame, she
poured the dark greenish liquid carefully through a gauze
strainer into a bottle. Several other tall glass bottles stood in a
row on the counter , the sunlight glowing through their contents
like red and green and yellow gems.
“Did you always know you w ere meant to be a doctor?”
Brianna asked curiously . Her mother shook her head, skillfully
shredding a handful of dogwood bark with a sharp knife.
“Never thought of it when I was young. Girls mostly didn’ t,
then, of course. Growing up, I a lways assumed that I’d marry ,
have ch ildren, make a home …  does Lizzie look all right to
you? I thought s he was looking a bit yellow round the edges
last night, but it might only have been the candlelight.”
“I th ink she’ s all right. Do you think she’ s really in love
with Manfred?” They had celebrated Lizzie’ s betrothal to
Manfred McGi llivray the night before, with the entire
McGillivray family traveling from their homestead for a lavish
supper . Mrs. Bug, who was fon d of Lizzie, had given of her
best; no wonder she was asleep today .
“No,” C laire said frankly . “But as long as she isn’ t in love
with any one els e, it’ s probably all right. He’ s a good lad, and
quite go od-looking. And Lizzie likes his mother , which is also
a good thing, under the circumstances.” She smiled at the
thought of Ute McGillivray , w ho had taken Lizzie at once
under h er capacious maternal wing, picking out particularly
delicious tidbits and poking them assiduously down Lizzie’ s
gullet, like a robin feeding a puny nestling.“I th ink she may  like Mrs. McGillivray more than she likes
Manfred. She was really young when her own mother died; it’ s
nice for her to s ort of have one again.” Brianna glanced at her
mother from the corner of her ey e. She could remember all too
well the feeling of being moth erless—and the sheer bliss of
being mothered once more. By reflex, she glanced at Jemmy ,
who was holding an animated if mostly unintelligible
conversation with Adso the cat.
Claire n odded, rubbing the shredded bark between her
hands into a small round jar full of alcohol.
“Y es. Still, I think it’ s as well they wait a bit—Lizzie and
Manfred, I mean—and get use d to each other .” It had been
agreed t hat the marriage would take place the next summer ,
after Ma nfred h ad finished setting up his shop in W oolam’ s
Creek. “I hope this will work.”
“What?”
“The dogwood bark.” Claire stoppered the bottle and put it
in th e cupboard. “Dr . Rawlings’  casebook says it can be used
as a sub stitute for cinchona bark —for quinine, you know . And
it’ s certainly easier to get, to say nothing of less expensive.”
“Great—I hope it does work.” Lizzie’ s malaria had stayed
in abeyance for several months—but there was always the
threat o f recur rence, and cinchona bark was  hideously
expensive.
The subject of their earlier conversation lingered in her
mind, and she returned to it, as she took a fresh handful of
sage leaves for her mortar , bruising them carefully before
putting them to steep.
“Y ou did n’ t plan  to be a doctor when you were young, you
said. Bu t you seemed pretty single-minded about it, later on.”
She had scattered, but vivid, memories of Claire’ s medical
training; she could still smell th e hospital smells caught in her
mother ’ s hair and clothing, and feel the soft cool touch of the
green scrubs her mother somet imes wore, coming in to kiss
her goodnight when she came in late from work.Claire didn’ t answer at once, concentrating on the dried corn
silk she was cl eaning, plucking out rotted bits and flicking
them through the open window .
“W ell,” she said at last, not taking her eyes of f her work.
“People—and it’ s not just women, not by any means—people
who kno w who they are, and what they’re meant to be …
they’ll find a way . Y our father—Frank, I mean—” She
scooped up the c leaned silk and transferred it to a small woven
basket, small fragments scattering across the counter as she
did so. “He was a very good historian. He liked the subject,
and he had the gift of discipline and concentration that made
him a success, b ut it wasn’ t rea lly a … a calling  f or him . He
told me himself—he could have  done other things just as well,
and it wouldn’ t have mattered a  great deal. For some people,
one thing does  m atter a great deal, though. And when it does
… w ell, medicine mattered a gr eat deal to me. I didn’ t know ,
early on , but then I realized th at it was simply what I was
meant to  do. And once I knew that …” She shrugged, dusting
her hand s, and covered the basket with a bit of linen, securing
it with twine.
“Y es, but … you  can’ t always d o what you’re meant to, can
you?” she said, thinking of the ragged scar on Roger ’ s throat.
“W ell, life certainly forces some  things on one,” her mother
murmured. She glanced up, meeting Brianna’ s eyes, and her
mouth quirked in a small, wry smile. “And for the common
man—or woman—life as they find it is often the life they lead.
Marsali, for instance. I shouldn ’ t think it’ s ever entered her
mind that she might do other than she does. Her mother kept a
house and raised children; she s ees no reason why she should
do anyth ing else. And yet—” C laire lifted one shoulder in a
shrug, and reached across the ta ble for the other mortar . “She
had one great pa ssion—for Fer g us. And that was enough to jar
her out of the rut her life would have been—”
“And into another just like it?”
Claire bent her head in a half-nod, not looking up.“Just like it—except that she’ s in America, rather than
Scotland. And she’ s got Fer gus.”
“Like yo u have Jamie?” She seldom used his given name,
and Claire glanced up in surprise.
“Y es,” s he said. “Jamie’ s part of me. So are you.” She
touched Bree’ s face, quick and  light, then turned half away ,
reaching to take down a tied b undle of marjoram from the
array of hanging herbs on the beam above the hearth. “But
neither of you is  all of me,” she said softly , back turned. “I am
… w hat I am. Doctor , nurse, healer , witch—whatever folk call
it, th e na me doesn’ t matter . I was born to be that; I will be that
‘til I die. If I should lose you—or Jamie—I wouldn’ t be quite a
whole p erson an y longer , but I would still have that left. For a
little tim e,” she went on, so soft ly that Brianna had to strain to
hear her , “after I  went … back … before you came … that was
all I had. Just the knowing.”
Claire crumbled the dried marjoram into the mortar , and
took up the pes tle to grind it. The sound of clumping boots
came fro m outsi de, and then Ja mie’ s voice, a friendly remark
to a chicken that crossed his path.
And wa s loving  Roger , loving J emmy , not enough for her?
Surely it should be. She had a  dreadful, hollow feeling that
perhaps it was not, and spoke  quickly , before the thought
should find words.
“What about Da?”
“What about him?”
“Does he—is he one who knows what he is, do you think?”
Claire’ s hands stilled, the clanking pestle falling silent.
“Oh, yes,” she said. “He knows.”
“A laird? Is that what you’d call it?”
Her mother hesitated, thinking.
“No,” sh e said at last. She took  up the pestle and began to
grind again. The fragrance of dried marjoram filled the roomlike incense. “He’ s a man,” she s aid, “and that’ s no small thing
to be.”79
LONESOME ME
B RIANNA CLOSED THE BOOK, with a mingled sense of
relief and foreboding. She hadn’ t objected to Jamie’ s notion
that she teach a few of the little girls on the Ridge their ABC’ s.
It filled the cab in with cheerful noise for a couple of hours,
and Jemmy loved the cosseting of a half-dozen miniature
mothers.
Still, she was no t a natural teacher , and always felt relieved
at the end of a lesson. The foreboding came on its heels,
though. Most of the girls came alone, or under the care of an
older sister . Anne and Kate He nderson, who lived two miles
away , were escorted by their older brother , Obadiah.
She was n’ t sure when or how it had started. Perhaps from
the first  day , when he had looked her in the eye, smiling
faintly , and held the glance fo r a moment too long before
patting his sisters’ heads and l eaving them to her care. But
there ha d been nothing she could reasonably object to. Not
then, not in the days since. And yet …
Stated bluntly to herself, Obadiah Henderson gave her the
creeps. H e was a tall lad of twenty or so, heavily muscled and
not bad- looking, brown-haired and blue-eyed. But there was
something about him that was somehow not right; a sense of
something brutal about the mouth, something feral in the
deepset eyes. And something very unsettling in the way he
looked at her .
She hate d going to the door at the end of a lesson. The little
girls would scatter in a flutter of dresses and giggles—and
Obadiah would be waiting, lea ning against a tree, sitting on
the w ell-coping,  once even loun ging on the bench outside her
door .
The constant uncertainty , never knowing where he would be
—but knowing that he was th ere, somewhere, got on hernerves nearly as much as that ha lf-smiling look of his, and the
silent sm irk as he left her , almost winking, as though he knew
some dirty little secret about her , but chose to keep it to
himself—for now .
It oc curred to h er , with a certain sense of irony , that her
discomfort near Obadiah was at least partly because of Roger .
She had grown accustomed to hearing things that weren’ t
spoken aloud.
And Ob adiah di dn’ t speak aloud. He didn’ t say anything to
her , mad e no improper motions toward her . Could she tell him
not to look at her? That was ridiculous. Ridiculous, too, that
something so simple could cause her heart to jump into her
throat when she opened the door , and make sweat prick
beneath her arms when she saw him.
Bracing herself,  she opened the door for the girls and called
goodbye as they scattered, then stood and looked around. He
wasn’ t there. Not by the well, the tree, the bench … nowhere.
Anne and Kate weren’ t looking; they were already halfway
across th e clearing with Janie Ca meron, all three hand in hand.
“Annie!” she called. “Where’ s your brother?”
Annie half-turned, pigtails bouncing.
“He’ s go ne to Salem, Miss,” she called back. “W e’re going
home to sup with Jane today!” Not waiting for
acknowledgment, the girls all skipped away , like a trio of
bouncing balls.
The tens ion melted slowly from her neck and shoulders as
she drew a long, deep breath. She felt blank for a moment, as
though she weren’ t quite sure  what to do. Then she drew
herself u p and brushed down her rumpled apron. Jemmy was
asleep, lulled by the girls’ nasal  singing of the alphabet song.
She cou ld take advantage of his nap to go and fetch some
buttermilk from the springhouse. Roger liked buttermilk
biscuits; she’d make them for supper , with a little ham.
The spr inghouse was cool and dark, and restful with the
sound of water r unning through the stone-lined channel in thefloor . Sh e loved going in there , and waiting for her eyes to
adjust to the dar kness, so she could admire the trailing fronds
of dark- green algae that clung to the stone, drifting in the
current. Jamie had mentioned th at a family of bats had taken
up residence in the springhouse, too—yes, there they were,
four tiny bundles hung up in the darkest corner , each one
barely two inches long, as neat and tidy as a Greek dolmade
wrapped in grape leaves. She sm iled at the thought, though it
was followed by a pang.
She had  eaten dolmades with Ro ger , at a Greek restaurant in
Boston. She didn’ t care all that much for Greek food, but it
would h ave been a memory of their own time to share with
him, when she told him about the bats. If she told him now ,
she thought, he would smile in response—but the smile
wouldn’ t quite reach his eyes, and she would remember alone.
She left the springhouse, walking slowly , the bucket of
buttermilk in one hand balanced by a wedge of cheese in the
other . A cheese omelette would  be good for lunch; quick to
cook, an d Jemm y loved it. He preferred to use his spoon to kill
his p rey , then de vour it messily with both hands, but he would
feed himself, and that was progress.
She was  still smiling when she looked up from the path to
see Obadiah Henderson sitting on her bench.
“What are you d oing here?” Her voice was sharp, but higher
than she’d intended it to be. “The girls said you’d gone to
Salem.”
“So I had.” He rose to his fee t and stepped forward, that
knowing half-smile on his lips. “I came back.”
She suppressed the ur ge to take  a step back. This was her
house; damned if he’d make h er back away from her own
door .
“W ell, th e girls have gone,” she said, as coolly as she could
manage. “They’re at the Camerons’.” Her heart was thumping
heavily , but she moved past hi m, meaning to put the bucket
down on the porch.She ben t, and he put his hand o n the small of her back. She
froze momentarily . He didn’ t move his hand, didn’ t try to
stroke or squeeze—but the weight of it lay on her spine like a
dead sna ke. She  jerked upright and whirled around, taking a
step back, and to hell with not le tting him intimidate her . He’d
already done that.
“I brought ye something,” he said. “From Salem.” The
smile was still on his lips,  but it seemed completely
disconnected from the look in his eyes.
“I d on’ t want it, ” she said. “I mean—thank you. But no. It
isn’ t right for you to—my husband wouldn’ t like it.”
“No nee d for him to know .” He  took a step toward her; she
took one back, and the smile grew wider .
“I he ar your hus band’ s not home much, these days,” he said
softly . “That sounds lonesome.”
He put out a la r ge hand, reaching toward her face. Then
there was an od d, small sound, a sort of meaty tnk! , and his
face went blank, his eyes shocked wide.
She star ed at him for a moment, completely unable to grasp
what ha d happened. Then he tu rned those staring eyes to his
outstretched hand, and she saw the small knife stuck in the
flesh of his forearm, and the gro wing stain of red on the shirt
around it.
“Leave this place.” Jamie’ s voic e was low , but distinct. He
stepped out of the trees, eyes fixed on Henderson in a most
unfriendly manner . He reached them in three strides, put out
his h and, and pulled the knife from Henderson’ s arm. Obadiah
made a small sound, deep in his throat, like a wounded animal
might make, baf fled and pitiable.
“Go,” Jamie said. “Never come here again.”
The blood was flowing down Obadiah’ s arm, dripping from
his fingers. A few drops fell into the buttermilk, floating
crimson on the r ich yellow surface. In a dazed sort of way , she
recognized the horrid beauty of it—like rubies set in gold.Then the  boy was going, free hand clamped to his wounded
arm, shambling, then running for the trail. He disappeared into
the trees, and the dooryard was very still.
“Did yo u have to do that?” was the first thing she managed
to say . She felt stunned, as though she herself had been struck
with something.  The blood drops were beginning to blur , their
edges dissolving into the buttermilk, and she thought she
might throw up.
“Should I have waited?” Her fa ther caught her by the arm,
pulled her down to sit on the porch.
“No. But you—couldn’ t you jus t … have said  something to
him?” Her lips felt numb and there were small flashing lights
in th e periphery of her vision. R emotely , she realized that she
was going to fai nt, and leaned forward, her head between her
knees, face buried in the sanctuary of her apron.
“I did. I told him to go.” The porch creaked as Jamie sat
down beside her .
“Y ou know what I mean.” Her voice sounded odd to her
own ear s, muf fle d in the folds of cloth. She sat up slowly; the
red spru ce by the big house wav ered slightly in her vision, but
then ste adied. “What were you doing ? Sh owing of f? How
could you count on sticking somebody with a knife at that
distance? And what was that, anyway—a pen knife?”
“A ye. It  was all I had in my pocket. And in fact, I didna
mean to  stick him,” Jamie admitted. “I meant to throw into the
wall o’ the cabin, and when he looked to see what made the
noise, hit him from behind. He moved, though.”
She clos ed her eyes and breathed deeply through her nose,
willing her stomach to settle.
“Y e’re all right, a muirninn ?” he asked quietly . He laid a
hand gently on her back—somewhat higher than Obadiah had.
It felt good; lar ge, warm and comforting.
“I’m fin e,” she said, opening her eyes. He looked worried,
and she made an ef fort, smiling at him. “Fine.”He relaxed a b it, then, and his eyes grew less troubled,
though they stayed intent on hers.
“W ell, then,” he said. “It’ s no the first time, aye? How long
has yon gomerel been tryin’ it on wi’ you?”
She took another breath, and fo rced her fists to uncurl. She
wanted t o minimize the situation, moved by a sense of guilt—
for surel y she should have found some way to stop it? Faced
with that steady blue gaze, though, she couldn’ t lie.
“Since the first week,” she said.
His eyes widened.
“So long ? And why did ye not tell your man about it?” he
demanded, incredulous.
She was startled, and fumbled for a reply .
“I—well—I did n’ t think … I mean, it wasn’ t his problem.”
She heard the sudden intake of his breath, no doubt the
precursor to some biting remark about Roger , and hurried to
defend him.
“It—he—he did n’ t actually do  anythin g. Just looks. And …
smiles. How could I tell Roger he was looking  at me? I didn’ t
want to look we ak, or helpless.” Though she had been both,
and kne w it. The knowledge b urned under her skin like ant
bites.
“I didn’ t want to … to have to ask him to defend me.”
He s tared at her , his face blank with incomprehension. He
shook his head slowly , not taking his eyes away from her .
“What in God’ s name d’ye think a man is for ?” he asked at
last. He spoke quietly , but in tones of complete bewilderment.
“Y e want to kee p him as a pet, is it? A lapdog? Or a caged
bird?”
“Y ou don’ t understand!”
“Oh. Do  I not?” He blew out a short breath, in what might
have been a sardonic laugh. “I have been marrit near thirtyyears, an d you less than two. What is it that ye think I dinna
understand, lass?”
“It isn’ t—it isn’ t the same for you and Mama as it is for me
and Roger!” she burst out.
“No, it’ s  not,” he agreed, his voice level. “Y our mother has
regard fo r my pride, and I for he rs. Or do ye maybe think her a
coward, who canna fight her own battles?”
“I …  no .” She swallowed, feeli ng perilously close to tears,
but determined  not to let them escape. “But, Da—it is
dif ferent. W e’re from another place, another time.”
“I ken that fine,” he said, and sh e saw the edge of his mouth
curl up in a wry half-smile. His voice grew more gentle. “But I
canna think that men and women are so dif ferent, then.”
“Maybe not.” She swallowed, forcing her voice to steady .
“But maybe Roger ’ s dif ferent. Since Alamance.”
He d rew breath as though to spe ak, but then let it out again
slowly , saying nothing. He had taken his hand away; she felt
the lack  of it. H e leaned back a little, looking out over the
dooryard, and his fingers tapped lightly on the boards of the
porch between them.
“A ye,” he said at last, quietly . “Maybe so.”
She heard a muf fled thump in the cabin behind them, then
another . Jem was awake, throwing his toys out of his cradle. In
a moment, he w ould start calling for her to come and pick
them up. She stood up suddenly , straightening her dress.
“Jem’ s up; I have to go in.”
Jamie stood up, too, and pickin g up the bucket, flung the
buttermilk in a thick yellow splash across the grass.
“I’ll fetch ye more,” he said, and was gone before she could
tell him not to bother .
Jem wa s standing up, clinging to the side of his cradle,
eager fo r escape, and launched h imself into her arms when she
bent to pick him up. He was g etting heavy , but she clutchedhim tightly to her , pressing her cheek against his head, damp
with sweaty sleep. Her heart was beating heavily , feeling
bruised inside her chest.
“That sounds lonesome,”  Obadiah Henderson had said. H e
was right.80
CREAMED CRUD
J AMIE LEANED BACK from the table, sighing in repletion.
As h e st arted to get up, though, Mrs. Bug popped up from her
place, wagging an admonitory finger at him.
“Now , s ir , now , sir , ye’ll be going nowhere, and me left wi’
gingerbread and fresh crud to go to waste!”
Brianna clapped a hand to her mouth, with the muf fled
noise ch aracteristic of one who has just shot milk up one’ s
nose. Ja mie and Mr . Bug, to whom “crud” was the familiar
Scottish usage for “curds,” both looked at her curiously , but
made no comment.
“W ell, I’ll surely burst, Mrs. B ug, but I expect I’ll die a
happy m an,” Jamie informed her . “Bring it on, then—but I’ve
a wee thing to fetch whilst ye serve it out.” W ith amazing
agility f or a man who had just consumed a pound or two of
spiced sausage with fried apple s and potatoes, he slid out of
his chair and disappeared down the hall toward his study .
I to ok a deep breath, pleased that I had smelled the
gingerbread coo king earlier in the afternoon, and had had the
foresight to remove my stays before sitting down to supper .
“W an’ crud!” Jemmy crowed, picking up infallibly on the
word most calculated to cause maternal consternation. He
pounded his hands on the table  in ecstasy , chanting, “Crud-
crud-crud-crud!” at the top of his lungs.
Roger glanced at Bree with a h alf-smile, and I was pleased
to se e that she caught it, smiling back even as she captured
Jemmy’ s hands and started the job of wiping the remains of
dinner of f his face.
Jamie returned just as the gingerbread and curds—these
being sugared and whipped into creamy blobs—made their
appearance. He reached over Roger ’ s shoulder as he passed,and deposited a cloth-bound le dger on the table in front of
him, topped with the small wooden box containing the
astrolabe.
“The weather ’ s good for another two months, maybe,” he
said casually , sitting down and sticking a finger into the huge
dollop o f cream ed crud on his plate. He stuck the finger in his
mouth, closing his eyes in bliss.
“A ye?” The word came out choked and barely audible, but
enough to make Jemmy quit ba bbling and stare at his father
open-mouthed. I  wondered whether it was the first time Roger
had spoken today .
Jamie had opened his eyes and picked up his spoon, eyeing
his dessert with the determinatio n of a man who means to die
trying.
“A ye, well, Fer gus will be go ing down to the coast just
before snowfall —if he can take the surveying reports to be
filed in New Bern then, that will be good, no?” He dug into the
gingerbread in a businesslike way , not looking up.
There was a silence, filled only with heavy breathing and
the clack  of spoons on wooden  plates. Then Roger , who had
not picked up his spoon, spoke.
“I can … do th at.” It might h ave been no more than the
ef fort it took to force air throug h his scarred throat, but there
was an emphasi s on the last word, that made Brianna wince.
Only sli ghtly , but I saw it—and  so did Roger . He glanced at
her , then looked down at his plate, lashes dark against his
cheek. His jaw tightened, and he picked up his spoon.
“Good, then,” Jamie said, even more casually . “I’ll show ye
how . Y e can go in a week.”
 
Last nig ht I dr eamed that Roger was leaving. I’ve been
dr eaming about his going for a week, ever since Da suggested
it. Sugg ested—ha. Like Moses br ought down the T en
Suggestions fr om Mount Sinai.In th e dr eam, Ro ger was packing things in a big sack, and I
was bus y moppi ng the floor . He  kept getting in my way , and I
kept pus hing the  sack aside to get at another part of the floor .
It w as filthy , w ith all sorts of stains and sticky glop. Ther e
wer e little bones scatter ed ar ou nd, like Adso had eaten some
little animal ther e, and the bone s kept getting caught up in my
mop.
I do n’ t want him  to go, but I do, too. I hear all the things he
isn’ t say ing; they echo in my head. I keep thinking that when
he’ s gone, it will be quiet.
 
SHE P A SSED ABRUPTL Y from  sleep to instant wakefulness.
It was just past  dawn, and she  was alone. There were birds
singing in the w ood. One was ca roling near the cabin, its notes
sharp and musical. W as it a thrush? she wondered.
She knew he was gone, but lifted her head to check. The
rucksack was gone from beside the door , as was the bundle of
food and bottle of cider she ha d prepared for him the night
before. The bodhran still hung in its place on the wall, seeming
to float suspended in the unearthly light.
She had  tried to get him to play again, after the hanging,
feeling that at least he could still have music, if not his voice.
He h ad resisted, though, and fin ally she could see that she was
angering him with her insistenc e, and had stopped. He would
do things his way—or not at all.
She glanced toward the cradle , but all was quiet, Jemmy
still sound asleep. She lay back on her pillow , hands lifting to
her brea sts. She was naked, and  they were smooth, round, and
full as gourds. S he squeezed one nipple gently , and tiny pearls
of milk popped out. One swelle d bigger , overflowed, and ran
in a tiny , tickling droplet down the side of her breast.
They had made love before sleeping, the night before. At
first, she hadn’ t thought he wo uld, but when she came up to
him and put her arms around him, he had clasped her hardagainst himself,  kissed her slowly for a long, long time, and
finally carried her to bed.
She had been so anxious for him, wanting to assure him of
her love with mouth and ha nds and body , to give him
something of herself to take away , that she had for gotten
herself completely , and been surprised when the climax
overtook her . She slid one hand down, between her legs,
remembering the sense of being caught up suddenly by a great
wave, swept helplessly toward shore. She hoped that Roger
had noticed; he hadn’ t said anything, nor opened his eyes.
He had kissed h er goodbye in the dark before dawn, still
silent. O r had he? She put a hand to her mouth, suddenly
unsure, but there was no clue in  the smooth, cool flesh of her
lips.
Had  he kissed her goodbye? Or had she only dreamed it?81
BEAR-KILLER
August, 1771
T HE HORSES NEIGHING from the direction of the paddock
announced company . Curious, I abandoned my latest
experiment and went to peer ou t of the window . Neither horse
nor man was in evidence in the dooryard, but the horses were
still sno rting and carrying on as they did when they saw
someone new . The company must be afoot, then, and have
gone round to the kitchen door—which most people did, this
being mannerly .
This supposition  was almost instantly borne out by a high-
pitched shriek from the back o f the house. I poked my head
out into the hall  just in time to see Mrs. Bug race out of the
kitchen as though dischar ged from a cannon, screaming in
panic.
Not noti cing me, she shot past  and out of the front door ,
which she left hanging open, thu s enabling me to see her cross
the dooryard and vanish into the woods, still in full cry . It
came as something of an anticlimax, when I glanced the other
way and saw a n Indian standing in the kitchen doorway ,
looking surprised.
W e eyed each o ther warily , but as I appeared indisposed to
screaming and running, he relaxed slightly . As he appeared
unarmed and lacking paint or any other evidence of
malevolent intent, I relaxed slightly .
“Osiyo,”  I sa id cautious ly , having observed that he was a
Cherokee, and dressed for visiting. He wore three calico shirts,
one atop the other , homespun b reeches, and the odd drooping
cap, rath er like a half-wound turban, that men favored for
formal occasions, plus long silver earrings and a handsome
brooch in the shape of the rising sun.He smil ed brilliantly in response to my greeting, and said
something I didn’ t understand a t all. I shrugged helplessly , but
smiled in return, and we stood  there nodding at one another
and smi ling back and forth for several moments, until the
gentleman, struc k by inspiration, reached into the neck of his
innermost shirt— a dressy number printed with small yellow
diamonds on a blue background—and withdrew a leather
thong, on which were strung the curved black claws of one or
more bears.
He held  these up, rattled them gently , and raised his
eyebrows, glancing to and fro as though searching for
someone under the table or on the cabinet.
“Oh,” I said, comprehending immediately . “Y ou want my
husband.” I mimed someone aiming a rifle. “The Bear -Killer?”
A fl ash of goo d teeth in a beaming smile rewarded my
intelligence.
“I expect he’ll b e along any min ute,” I said, waving first at
the w indow , indicating the path taken by the exiting Mrs. Bug
—who had undoubtedly gone to inform Himself that there
were red  savages in the house, bent on murder , mayhem, and
the desecration of her clean floor—and then in the direction of
the kitchen. “Come back, won ’ t you, and have a drink of
something?”
He f ollowed me willingly , and we were seated at the table,
companionably sipping tea and exchanging further nods and
smiles, when Jamie came in, accompanied not only by Mrs.
Bug, wh o stuck close to his coattails, casting suspicious looks
at our guest, but by Peter Bewlie.
Our guest was promptly introduced as T satsa’wi, the brother
of Peter ’ s Indian wife. He lived  in a small town some thirty
miles pa st the T reaty Line, but h ad come to visit his sister , and
was staying with the Bewlies for a time.
“W e were havin’ a wee pipe after our supper last night,”
Peter explained,  “and T satsa’wi was a-telling of my wife about
a di f ficulty in th eir village—and she tellin’ it to me, ye see,him havin’ no E nglish and me not speakin’ so verra much of
their tongue, no but the names o f things and the odd politeness
here and  there— but as I say , he was telling of a wicked bear ,
what’ s been a-plaguing of them for months past.”
“I should think T satsa’wi well-equipped to deal wi’ such a
creature, by the looks of it,”  Jamie said, nodding at the
Indian’ s necklace of claws, and touching his own chest in
indication. He smiled at T satsa’wi, who evidently gathered the
meaning of the compliment and smiled broadly back. Both
men bow ed sligh tly to each othe r over the cups of tea, in token
of mutual respect.
“A ye,” Peter agreed, licking droplets of liquid from the
corners of his m outh, and smacking his lips in approval. “He’ s
a bo nnie hunter , is T satsa’wi, an d in the usual course o’ things,
I e xpect  he and his cousins might manage well enough. But it
seems as  how this particular bear is just that wee bit above the
odds. So  I says to him as perhaps we’ll come and tell Mac
Dubh  about it, and maybe as Himself would spare the time to
go and sort the creature for them.”
Peter lifted his chin to his brother -in-law , and nodded
toward Jamie, with a proprietorial air of pride. See , said the
gesture. I told you. He can do it .
I sup pressed a s mile at this. Jamie caught my eye, coughed
modestly and set down his cup.
“A ye, well. I canna come just yet awhile, but perhaps when
the hay is in. D’ye ken what’ s the nature of this problematical
bear , Peter?”
“Oh, aye,” Peter said cheerfully . “It’ s a ghost.”
I c hoked momentarily on my o wn tea. Jamie didn’ t seem
too shocked, but rubbed his chin dubiously .
“Mmphm. W ell, what’ s it done, then?”
The bea r had first made its presence known nearly a year
before, t hough no one had seen it for some time. There had
been the usual incidents of depredation—the carrying away of
racks of drying fish or strings of corn hung outside houses, thestealing of meat from lean-tos—but at first the townspeople
had rega rded this merely as the work of a bear slightly more
clever than the usual—the u sual bear being completely
unconcerned as to whether he was observed in the act.
“It would only come at night , ye see,” Peter explained.
“And it didna m ake a great deal o’ noise. Folk would just
come out in the morning and find their stores broken into, and
not a sound made to rouse them.”
Brianna, who had seen Mrs. Bug’ s unceremonious exit and
come up to investigate the cause , began humming softly under
her breath—a song to which memory promptly supplied the
words, “Oh, he ’ll sleep ‘til noon, but befor e it’ s dark … he’ll
have every picnic basket that’ s in Jellystone Park …”  I pressed
a napkin  to my mouth, ostensibly to blot the remains of the
tea.
“They k ent it was a bear from the first, aye?” Peter
explained. “Footprints.”
T satsa’wi knew that word; he s pread his two hands out on
the table, thumb to thumb, de monstrating the span of the
footprint, then touched the longest of the claws hung round his
neck, nodding significantly .
The townspeop le, thoroughly accustomed to bears, had
taken the usual precautions, moving supplies into more
protected areas, and putting out their dogs in the evening. The
result of this was that a number of dogs had disappeared—
again without sound.
Evidently the dogs had grown warier , or the bear hungrier .
The first victim was a man, killed in the forest. Then, six
months ago, a child had been taken. Brianna stopped humming
abruptly .
The victim was a baby , snatche d cradle-board and all from
the bank of the  river where its mother was washing clothes
toward sunset. There had been n o sound, and no clue left save
a lar ge clawed footprint in the mud.Four mo re of the townspeople h ad been killed in the months
since. T wo child ren, picking wild strawberries by themselves
in la te afternoon. One body had  been found, the neck broken,
but othe rwise untouched. The other had disappeared; marks
showed where it had been drag ged into the woods. A woman
had been  killed in her own cornfield, again toward sunset, and
partially eaten where she fell. T he last victim, a man, had in
fact been hunting the bear .
“They d idna find anything of him , sav e h is bow and a few
bits o’ bloodied clothes,” Peter  said. I heard a small thump
behind me, as Mrs. Bug sat down abruptly on the settle.
“So they  have hunted it themselves?” I asked. “Or tried to, I
should say?”
Peter to ok his eyes of f Jamie and looked at me, nodding
seriously .
“Oh, ay e, Mrs. Claire. That’ s h ow they kent what it was,
finally .”
A small party of hunters had gone out loaded—literally—
for bear , armed with bows, spe ars, and the two muskets the
village b oasted. They had circled the village in a widening
gyre, co nvinced that since the bear ’ s attentions focused on the
town, it  would not wander far away . They had searched for
four day s, now and then finding old spoor , but no trace of the
bear itself.
“T satsa’wi was wi’ them,” Peter  said, lifting a finger toward
his b rother -in-la w . “He and one of his friends were sittin’ up at
night, keepin’ watch whilst the others slept. ‘T was just past
moonrise, he said, when he got up to make water . He turned
back to the fire—just in time to  see his friend bein’ dragged
of f, ston e-dead, wi’ his neck crushed in the jaws of the thing
itself!”
T satsa’wi had been following the tale intently . At this
juncture, he nodded, and made a gesture that appeared to be
the C herokee equivalent of the S ign of the Cross—some quickand form al gesture to repel ev il. He began to talk himself,
then, hands flying as he pantomimed the subsequent events.
He had of course shouted, rousing his remaining comrades,
and had rushed at the bear , hopi ng to frighten it into dropping
his friend—though he could see that the man was already
dead. He tilted his head sharp ly to indicate a broken neck,
letting h is tongue loll in an expression that would have been
quite funny under dif ferent circumstances.
The hunters were accompanied b y two dogs, which had also
flown at the be ar , barking. The bear had in fact dropped its
prey , but instead of fleeing, had char ged toward him. He had
thrown himself to one side, a nd the bear had paused long
enough to swipe one of the dogs of f its feet, and then
disappeared into the darkness of the wood, pursued by the
other dog, a ha il of arrows, and a couple of musket balls—
none of which had touched it.
They ha d chased the bear into the wood with torches, but
been unable to discover it. T he second dog had returned,
looking ashamed of itself—Brianna made a small fizzing noise
at T satsa’wi’ s pantomime of the dog—and the hunters,
thoroughly unne rved, had gone back to their fire, and spent the
rest of the night awake, before returning to their village in the
morning. From whence, T satsa’wi indicated with a graceful
gesture, he had n ow come to sol icit the assistance of the Bear -
Killer .
“But w hy do they think it’ s a ghost?” Brianna leaned
forward, interest displacing her initial horror at the tale.
Peter glanced at her , one eyebrow raised.
“Oh, aye, he didna say—or rather I expect he did, but not so
as y e’d understand it. The thin g was much bigger than the
usual bear , he sa ys—and pure white. He says when it turned to
look at him, the beast’ s eyes glo wed red as flame. They kent at
once it must be a ghost, and so  they werena really surprised
that their arrows didna touch it.”T satsa’wi broke in again, pointing first at Jamie, then
tapping his bear -claw necklace , and then—to my surprise—
pointing at me.
“Me?” I said. “What have I got to do with it?”
The Cherokee heard my tone of surprise, for he leaned
across the table, took my hand i n his own, and stroked it—not
in any af fectiona te manner , but merely as an indication of my
skin. Jamie made a small sound of amusement.
“Y ou’re verra white, Sassenach. Perhaps the bear will think
ye’re a kindred spirit.” He grinned at me, but T satsa’wi
evidently gather ed the sense of  this, for he nodded seriously .
He dropped my hand, and made a brief cawing noise—a
raven’ s call.
“Oh,” I said, di stinctly uneasy . I didn’ t know the words in
Cherokee, but evidently the people of T satsa’wi’ s town had
heard of  White Raven as well as the Bear -Killer . Any white
animal was regarded as being significant—and often sinister . I
didn’ t know whether the impli cation here was that I might
exert some power over the ghos t-bear—or merely serve as bait
—but evidently I was indeed included in the invitation.
And so it was that a week later , the hay safely in and four
sides of venison peacefully hanging in the smokehouse, we set
of f toward the T reaty Line, bent on exorcism.
 
BESIDES JAM IE AND MYSELF , the party consisted of
Brianna and Jemmy , the two Beardsley twins, and Peter
Bewlie, who was to guide us to the village, his wife having
gone ahead with T satsa’wi. Brianna had not wanted to come,
more for fear of taking Jemmy into the wilderness than from
disinclination to  join the hunt, I thought. Jamie had insisted
that she come, though, claiming that her marksmanship would
be inval uable. U nwilling to wean Jemmy yet, she had been
obliged to bring him—though he seemed to be thoroughly
enjoying the trip, hunched brigh t-eyed on the saddle in front ofhis mother , alternately gabbling happily to himself about
everything he saw , or sucking his thumb in dreamy content.
As for the Beardsleys, it was Josiah that Jamie wanted.
“The lad’ s killed two bears, at least,” he told me. “I saw the
skins, at the Gathering. And if his brother likes to come along,
I canna see the harm in it.”
“Neither do I,” I agreed. “But why are you making Bree
come? Can’ t you and Josiah handle the bear between you?”
“Perhaps,” he said, running an oily rag over the barrel of his
gun. “But if two heids are better than one, then a third should
be better still, no? Especially if it shoots like yon lass can.”
“Y es?” I said skeptically . “And what else?”
He glanced up at me and grinned.
“What, ye dinna think I have ulterior motives, do ye,
Sassenach?”
“No, I don’ t think so—I know so.”
He laughed and bent his head over his gun. After a few
moments’ swabbing and cleaning, though, he said, not looking
up, “A y e, well. I thought it no bad idea for the lass to have
friends among the Cherokee. In  case she should need a place
to go, sometime.”
The casual tone of voice didn’ t fool me.
“Sometime. When the Revolution comes, you mean?”
“A ye. O r … when we die. Whenever that might be,” he
added precisely ,  picking the gun up and squinting down the
barrel to check the sight.
It w as bright Indian summer s till, but I felt shards of ice
crackle down my back. Most d ays, I managed to for get that
newspaper clipp ing—the one that reported the death by fire of
one James Fraser and his wife, on Fraser ’ s Ridge. Other days,
I rem embered it, but shoved the  possibility to the back of my
mind, re fusing to  dwell on it. But every now and then, I wouldwake up at night, with bright flames leaping in the corners of
my mind, shivering and terrified.
“The clipping said, ‘no living children,’” I said, determined
to fa ce down th e fear . “Do you suppose that means that Bree
and Roger will have gone … so mewhere … before then?” T o
the Cherokee, perhaps. Or to the stones.
“It migh t.” His face was sober ,  eyes on his work. Neither
one of us was willing to admit the other possibility—no need,
in any case.
Reluctant though she had been to come, Brianna too seemed
to b e enjoying the trip. W itho ut Roger , and relieved of the
chores of cabin housekeeping, she seemed much more relaxed,
laughing and joking with the Beardsley twins, teasing Jamie,
and nurs ing Jemmy by the fire at night, before curling herself
around him and falling peacefully asleep.
The Beardsleys were having a g ood time, too. The removal
of his infected adenoids and to nsils had not cured Keziah’ s
deafness, but had improved it markedly . He could understand
fairly loud speech now , particularly if you faced him and
spoke cl early , though he seemed to make out anything his twin
said wit h ease, no matter how softly voiced. Seeing him look
round wide-eyed as we rode through the thick, insect-buzzing
forest, fording streams and findi ng faint deer paths through the
thickets, I realized that he had n ever been anywhere in his life,
save the area near the Beardsley farm, and Fraser ’ s Ridge.
I w ondered what he would make  of the Cherokee—and they
of h im and his brother . Peter had told Jamie that the Cherokee
regarded twins as particularly blessed and lucky; the news that
the Beardsleys would be joining the hunt had delighted
T satsa’wi.
Josiah seemed to be having fun, too—insofar as I could tell,
he b eing a very contained sort of person. As we drew closer to
the villa ge, though, I thought that he was becoming slightly
nervous.I cou ld s ee that Jamie was a trif le uneasy , too, though in his
case, I suspected  the reason for it. He didn’ t mind at all going
to help with a hunt, and was pleased to have the opportunity to
visit the Cherokee. But I rat her thought that having his
reputation as the Bear -Killer trumpeted before him, so to
speak, was making him uncomfortable.
This supposition was borne out when we camped on the
third nig ht of our journey . W e were no more than ten miles
from the village, and would ea sily make it by mid-day next
day .
I co uld see him making up his mind to something as we
rode, and as we all sat down to  supper round a roaring fire, I
saw him suddenly set his shoul ders and stand up. He walked
up to Peter Bew lie, who sat staring dreamily into the fire, and
faced him with decision.
“There’ s a wee thing I have to be sayin’, Peter . About this
ghost-bear we’re of f to find.”
Peter looked up, startled out of his trance. He smiled,
though, and slid over to make room for Jamie to sit down.
“Oh, aye, Mac Dubh ?”
Jamie did so, and cleared his throat.
“W ell, ye see—the fact is that I dinna actually ken a great
deal about bears, as there have na been any in Scotland for
quite some years now .”
Peter ’ s eyebrows went up.
“But they say ye killed a great bear wi’ naught but a dirk!”
Jamie rubbed his nose with something approaching
annoyance.
“A ye, w ell … so I did, then. But I didna hunt the creature
down. It  came after me, so I had na got a choice about it, after
all. I’m none s o sure that I shall be of any great help in
discovering this ghost-bear . It must be a particularly clever
bear , no? T o have been walking in and out of their village formonths, I mean, and no one with more than a single glimpse of
it?”
“Smarter than the average bear ,” Brianna agreed, her mouth
twitching slightly . Jamie gave her a narrow look, which he
switched to me as I choked on a swallow of beer .
“What?” he demanded testily .
“Nothing,” I gasped. “Nothing at all.”
T urning his back on us in disgust, Jamie suddenly caught
sight of Josiah Beardsley , who, while not guf fawing, was
doing a little mouth-twitching of his own.
“What?” Jamie barked at him. “They’re no but loons”—he
jerked a thumb over his finger at Brianna and me—”but what’ s
to do wi’ you , eh?”
Josiah immediately erased the grin from his face and tried to
look grave, but t he corner of his mouth kept on twitching, and
a hot flush was  rising in his narrow cheeks, visible even by
firelight. Jamie narrowed his eyes and a stifled noise that
might ha ve been a giggle escap ed Josiah. He clapped a hand
across his mouth, staring up at Jamie.
“What, then?” Jamie inquired politely .
Keziah, obviously gathering that something was up,
hunched closer to his twin, squa ring up beside him in support.
Josiah made a brief, unconscious movement toward Kezzie,
but didn’ t look away from Jamie. His face was still red, but he
seemed to have got himself under control.
“W ell, I suppose I best say , sir .”
“I suppose ye had.” Jamie gave him a quizzical look.
Josiah drew a deep breath, resigning himself.
“‘T wasn’ t a bear , always. Sometimes it was me.”
Jamie stared at him for a moment. Then the corners of his
mouth began to twitch.
“Oh, aye?”“Not all the time,” Josiah explained. But when his
wanderings through the wildern ess brought him within reach
of one of the Indian villages—”Only if I was hungry , though,
sir”—he hastened to add—he would lurk cautiously in the
forest nearby , stealing into the p lace after dark and absconding
with any easily-reached edibles . He would remain in the area
for a few days, eating from the village stores until his strength
and his pack were replenish ed, then move on to hunt,
eventually retur ning with his hides to the cave where he had
made a cache.
Kezzie’ s express ion throughout this recital hadn’ t changed;
I wa sn’ t sure h ow much of it  he had heard, but he didn’ t
appear s urprised. His hand rested on his twin’ s arm for a
moment, then slid of f, reaching for a skewer of meat.
Brianna’ s laughter had subsided, and she had been listening
to Josiah’ s confession with a furrowed brow .
“But you  didn’ t—I mean, I’m sur e  you didn’ t take  the baby
in its cradleboa rd. And you did n’ t kill the woman who was
partly eaten … did you?”
Josiah blinked,  though he s eemed more baf fled than
shocked by the question.
“Oh, no. Why’d I do that? Y o u don’ t think I  a te ‘em, do
ye?” He smiled at that, an inco ngruous dimple appearing in
one cheek. “Mind, I been hung ry enough now and then as I
might consider it, if I happened on somebody dead—providin’
it w as fairly recent,” he added  judiciously . “But not hungry
enough as I’d kill someone a-purpose.”
Brianna cleared her throat, with something startlingly like
one of Jamie’ s Scottish noises.
“No, I didn’ t think you ate the m,” she said dryly . “I just
thought that if someone  happened to have killed them—for
some other reason—the bear could have come along and
gnawed on the bodies.”
Peter no dded th oughtfully , seem ing interested but unfazed
by the assorted confessions.“A ye, a bear ’ll d o that,” he said. “They’re no picky eaters,
bears. Carrion is fine by them.”
Jamie nodded in response, but his attention was still fixed
on Josiah.
“A ye, I’ ve heard that, forbye. B ut T satsa’wi said he did see
the bear take his friend—so it does  kill people, no?”
“W ell, it killed that one,” Josiah  agreed. There was an odd
tone to his voi ce, though, and Jamie’ s look sharpened. He
lifted a brow at Josiah, who wor ked his lips slowly in and out,
deciding something. He glanced  at Kezzie, who smiled at him.
Kezzie, I saw , had a dimple in his left cheek, while Josiah’ s
was in the right.
Josiah sighed and turned back to face Jamie.
“I wasn’ t a-goin’ to say about this part,” he said frankly .
“But you been straight with us, sir , and I see it ain’ t right I let
you go after that bear not knowin’ what else might be there.”
I felt the hairs ri se on the back of my neck, and resisted the
sudden impulse  to turn round and look into the shadows
behind me. The ur ge to laugh had left me.
“What e lse?” Ja mie slowly lowered the chunk of bread he
had been  about to bite into. “And just … what else might  be
there, then?”
“W ell, ‘ twas only the once I saw for sure, mind,” Josiah
warned him. “And ‘twas a moo nless night, too. But I’d been
out all the nigh t, and my eyes  was well-accustomed to the
starlight—you’ll know the way of it, sir .”
Jamie nodded, looking bemused.
“A ye, well enough. And ye were where, at the time?”
Near the  village we were headed toward. Josiah had been
there before, and was familiar w ith the layout of the place. A
house at  the end of the village was his goal; there were strings
of co rn h ung to dry beneath the eaves, and he thought he could
get away  with one easily enough , provided he didn’ t rouse the
village dogs.“Rouse one, ye’ve got ‘em all a-yowling on your tail,” he
said, shaking his head. “And it  wasn’ t but a couple of hours
before th e dawn. So I crept along slow-like, looking to see was
one of the rasca ls curled up asleep by the house I had my eye
on.” Lurking in the wood, he ha d seen a figure come out of the
house. A s no dogs took exception to this, it was a reasonable
conclusion that the person belon ged to the house. The man had
paused to make water , and t hen, to Josiah’ s alarm, had
shouldered a bow and quiver , an d marched directly toward the
woods where he lay hidden.
“I didn’ t  think as he could be af ter me, but I went up a tree
quick as  a bob-tail cat, and not makin’ no more noise than one,
neither ,” he said, not bragging.
The man had most likely been a hunter , making an early
start for a distan t stream where raccoon and deer would come
to drink  at dawn. Not seeing an y need of caution so near his
own village, the man had not d isplayed any , walking through
the forest quietly , but with no attempt at concealment.
Josiah had crouched in his tree , no more than a few feet
above the man’ s head, holding his breath. The man had gone
on, disappearing at once into the heavy under growth. Josiah
had bee n just about to descend from his perch when he had
heard a sudden exclamation of surprise, followed by the
sounds of a brief scuf fle that concluded with a sickening
thunk!
“Just lik e a ripe squash when y ou chunk it with a rock to
break it open,” h e assured Jamie. “Made my arse-hole draw up
like a purse-string, hearin’ that noise, there in the dark.”
Alarm was no b ar to curiosity , though, and he had eased
through the wood in the direction of the sound. He could hear
a rustling noise, and as he peered cautiously through a screen
of c edar branches, he made out  a human form stretched upon
the ground, and another bending over it, evidently struggling
to pull some kind of garment of f the prone man’ s body .
“He was dead,” Josiah explaine d, matter -of-factly . “I could
smell the blood, and a shit-sme ll, too. Reckon the little fellacaved in his head with a rock or maybe a club.”
“Little fella?” Peter had been fo llowing the story with close
attention. “How little d’ye mean? Did ye see his face?”
Josiah shook his head.
“No, I saw naught but the shadow of him, movin’ about. It
was full  dark, still; the sky hadn ’ t started to go light yet.” He
squinted, making a mental estimate. “Reckon he’d be shorter
than me ; maybe so high.” He held out a hand in illustration,
measuring a distance some fo ur and a half feet from the
ground.
The murderer had been interrupted in his work of
plundering the body , though. Josiah, intent on watching, had
noticed nothing, until there came a sudden crack from a
breaking stick, and the inquiring whuff  of a questing bear .
“Y ou best believe the little fella run when he heard that,” he
assured Jamie. “He dashed right past, no further from me than
you are now . Th at was when I got the only good look I had at
him.”
“W ell, don’ t keep us in suspense,” I said, as he paused to
take a gulp of his beer . “What did  he look like?”
He wiped a line of foam from the sparse whiskers on his
upper lip, looking thoughtful.
“W ell, ma’am, I was pretty near  sure he was the devil. Only
I did think the  devil would b e bigger ,” he added, taking
another drink.
This statement naturally caused some confusion. Upon
further elucidation, it appeared that Josiah merely meant that
the mysterious “little fella” had been black.
“W asn’ t ‘til I w ent along to that Gathering of yours that it
come to me that some regular folks just ar e  black,” he
explained. “I hadn’ t never seen  anybody who was, nor heard
tell of it, neither .”
Kezzie nodded soberly at this.“Devil in the Book,” he said, in his odd, gruf f voice.
“The Book,” it seemed, was an old Bible that Aaron
Beardsley had taken somewher e in trade and never found a
buyer fo r . Neithe r of the boys had ever been taught to read, but
they were most entertained by t he pictures in the Book, which
included several drawings of the devil, depicted as a crouching
black cr eature, going about his sly business of tempting and
seduction.
“I d idn’ t see no  forked tail,” Josiah said, shaking his head,
“but then, he went by so fast, stood to reason I might have
missed it in the dark and all.”
Not wanting to draw the atte ntion of such a person to
himself, Josiah had stood still, and thus been in a position to
hear the bear giving its attentio n to the unfortunate inhabitant
of the village.
“It’ s like Mr . Pe ter says,” he said, nodding at Peter Bewlie
in acknowledgment. “Bears ain’ t particular . I never did see this
‘un, so I can’ t say was it the white one or no—but it surely did
eat on that Ind ian. I heard it, chawin’ and slobberin’ like
anything.” He seemed untroubled by this recollection, but I
saw Brianna’ s nostrils pinch at the thought.
Jamie exchanged looks with Peter , then glanced back at
Josiah. He rubbed a forefinger slowly down the bridge of his
nose, thinking.
“W ell, then,” he said at last. “It seems that not all the evil
doings in your b rother -in-law’ s village can be laid at the ghost-
bear ’ s door , aye? What wi’ Josia h stealin’ food, and wee black
devils k illing fo lk. What d’ye k en, Peter? Might a bear take a
taste for  human flesh, once he’d had it, and then maybe go to
hunting humans on his own?”
Peter nodded slowly , face creased in concentration.
“That might be, Mac Dubh ,” he allowed. “And if there’ s a
wee bla ck bastard hangin’ about in the wood—who’ s to say
how many the bear ’ s killed, a nd how many the wee black
devil’ s done for , and the bear takin’ the blame?”“But who is  this wee black devil?” Bree asked. The men
looked f rom one to another , a nd shrugged, more or less in
unison.
“It must  be an escaped slave, surely?” I said, lifting my
brows at  Jamie. “I can’ t see why a free black in his right mind
would of f go into the wilderness alone like that.”
“Maybe he isn’ t in his right mind,” Bree suggested. “Slave
or  fr ee. If he’ s going around killing people, I mean.” She cast
an uneasy look at the wood around us, and put a hand on
Jemmy , who was curled in a bla nket on the ground beside her ,
sound asleep.
The men  looked automatically to their weapons, and even I
reached under my apron to touch the knife I wore at my belt
for digging and chopping.
The forest seemed suddenly both sinister and
claustrophobic. It was much too easy to imagine lurking eyes
in th e shadows, ascribe the co nstant soft rustle of leaves to
stealthy footsteps or the brush of passing fur .
Jamie cleared his throat.
“Y our wife’ s not mentioned black devils, I suppose, Peter?”
Bewlie shook his head. The concern with which he had
greeted Josiah’ s  tale was still stamped upon his grizzled face,
but a small touch of amusement gleamed in his eyes.
“No. I can’ t say as she has, Mac Dubh . The only thing I
recall in that regard is the Black Man o’ the W est.”
“And who is that?” Josiah asked, interested.
Peter shrugged and scratched at his beard.
“A ye, w ell, I shouldna say it’ s  anyone, so to speak. Only
that the shaman s say there is a spirit who lives in each o’ the
four directions, and each spirit has a color to him—so when
they go to singin’ their prayers and the like, they’ll maybe call
the R ed Man o’ the East to help  the person they’re singing for ,
because Red is t he color of triumph and success. North, that’ s
blue—the Blue Man, to give th e spirit of the North his rightname—that’ s defeat and trouble. So ye’d call on him  to come
and give  your enemy a bit of grief, aye? T o the South, that’ s
the White Man, and he’ s peace and happiness; they sing to him
for the women with child, and the like.”
Jamie looked both startled and interested to hear this.
“That’ s verra like the four airts, Peter , is it no?”
“W ell, it is, then,” Peter agreed, nodding. “Odd, no? That
the Cherokee should get hold  of the same notions as we
Hielanders have?”
“Oh, not so m uch.” Jamie gestured to the dark wood,
beyond the small circle of our f ire. “They live as we do, aye?
Hunters, and dwellers in the mo untains. Why should they not
see what we have seen?”
Peter nodded slowly , but Josiah was impatient with this
philosophizing.
“W ell, what’ s the Black Man o’ the W est, then?” he
demanded. Both Jamie and Peter turned their heads as one to
look at him. The two men looked nothing alike—Peter was
short, squat, and genially bearded, Jamie tall and elegant, even
in his hunting clothes—and yet there was something identical
in their eyes, that made little m ouse-feet run skittering down
my spine. “What we have seen,” indeed! I thought.
“The W est is the home of the dead,” Jamie said softly , and
Peter nodded, soberly .
“And th e Black Man o’ the W est is death himself,” he
added. “Or so say the Cherokee.”
Josiah w as heard to mutter that he didn’ t think so very much
of that  idea, but Brianna thought even less of it.
“I do not  beli eve that the  spirit of the W est was out in the
woods c onking people on the h ead,” she declared firmly . “It
was a person Josiah saw . And i t was a black person. Er go, it
was either a fre e black or an escaped slave. And given the
odds, I vote for escaped slave.”I w asn’ t sure it was a matter fo r democratic process, but I
was inclined to agree with her .
“Here’ s another thought,” she said, looking round. “What if
it’ s this little bl ack man who’ s responsible for some of the
half-eaten peop le? Aren’ t some of the African slaves
cannibals?”
Peter Be wlie’ s eyes popped at that; so did the Beardsleys’.
Kezzie cast an u neasy look over his shoulder and edged closer
to Josiah.
Jamie appeared amused at this suggestion, though.
“W ell, I  suppose ye might get the odd cannibal here and
there in Africa,” he agreed. “Though I canna say I’ve heard of
one amongst the slaves. I shouldna think they’d be verra
desirable as house-servants, aye ? Y e’d be afraid to turn your
back, for fear of being bitten in the backside.”
This remark made everyone laugh, and relieved the tension
somewhat. People began to stir and make preparations for
going to bed.
W e took especial care in puttin g the food into two of the
saddlebags, which Jamie hung up in a tree, a good distance
from the  camp. Even if the ghos t-bear had been revealed to be
less powerful than previously supposed, there was an
unspoken agreement that there was no sense taking chances.
For the most pa rt, I managed to put aside the knowledge
that we lived in  a wilderness. Now and then some tangible
evidence would shove the fact under my nose: nocturnal visits
by foxes, possums, and raccoons, or the occasional unnerving
screams of panthers, with their uncanny resemblance to the
crying of women or the shrieks of small children. It was quiet
now , wh ere we were. But there was no way of standing in the
center of those mountains at nig ht, submer ged in the absolute
black at their feet, listening to the secret murmurs of the great
trees overhead, and pretending that one was anywhere but in
the grip of the  forest primeval—or of doubting that thewilderness could  swallow us in one gulp, if it cared to, leaving
not a clue behind of our existence.
For all her logic , Brianna was by no means immune to the
whispers of the forest—not wit h a small and tender child to
guard. She didn’ t help with the r eadying of camp for the night,
but instead sat close to Jemmy , loading her rifle.
Jamie, after a quick look at Brianna, announced that he and
she wou ld take the first watch; J osiah and I the next, and Peter
and Kez zie the last watch of the night. Heretofore, we hadn’ t
kept a watch, but no one complained at this suggestion.
A long day in the saddle is one of the best soporifics, and I
lay down beside Jamie with that utter gratitude for being
horizontal that compensates for the hardest of beds. Jamie’ s
hand rested gently on my head; I turned my face and kissed his
palm, feeling safe and protected.
Peter an d the Beardsley twins fell asleep within seconds; I
could hear them snoring on the other side of the fire. I was
nearly asleep myself, lulled by the quiet, half-heard talk
between Jamie and Bree, when I became aware that the tenor
of their conversation had changed.
“Are ye worrit for your man, a nighean ?” he asked softly .
She gave a small, unhappy laugh.
“I’ve been worrit since they ha nged him,” she said. “Now
I’m scared, too—or should that be ‘scairt’?” she asked, trying
to make a joke of it.
Jamie made a low noise in his throat, which I think he
meant to be soothing.
“He’ s in no mor e danger tonight than he was last night, lass
—nor any night since he set out.”
“T rue,” she answered dryly . “Bu t just because I didn’ t know
about ghost-bears and black murderers last week doesn’ t mean
they weren’ t out there.”
“My point precisely ,” he replied. “He’ll be no safer for your
fear , will he?”“No. Y ou think that’ s going to stop me worrying?”
There was a low , rueful chuckle in reply .
“I shouldna think so, no.”
There was a brief silence, before Brianna spoke again.
“I just—keep thinking. What will I do, if something does
happen—if he … doesn’ t come  back? I’m all right during the
day , but at night, I can’ t help thinking …”
“Och, well,” he said softly . I saw  him tilt up his head to the
stars, bla zing ov erhead. “How many nights in twenty years, a
nighean ? Ho w many hou rs? For I spent that long in wondering
whether my wife still lived, an d how she fared. She and my
child.”
His han d ran smoothly over my head, gently stroking my
hair . Brianna said nothing in reply , but made a small,
inarticulate sound in her throat.
“That is what God is for . W orry doesna help—prayer does.
Sometimes,” he added honestly .
“Y es,” she said, sounding uncertain. “But if—”
“And if  she had not come back to me”—he interrupted
firmly—”if you had not come— if I had never known—or if I
had known for sure that both of you were dead …” He turned
his head  to look at her , and I f elt the shift of his body as he
lifted his hand from my hair and reached out his other hand to
touch her . “Then I would still have lived, a nighean , and done
what must be done. So will you.”82
A DARKENING SKY
R OGER P USHED HIS W A Y through a thick growth of sweet
gum and pin oak , sweating. He w as close to water; he couldn’ t
hear it yet, but could smell the sweet, resinous scent of some
plant tha t grew on streambanks. He didn’ t know what it was
called, or even for sure which plant it was, but he recognized
the scent.
The strap of his pack caught on a twig, and he jerked it free,
setting loose a flutter of yellow leaves like a small flight of
butterflies. He would be glad to reach the stream, and not only
for t he sake of water , though he needed that. The nights were
growing cold, but the days w ere still warm, and he had
emptied his canteen before noon.
More ur gently than water , though, he needed open air .
Down h ere in the bottomland, the stands of dogwood and
sweet bay grew so thickly that he could barely see the sky , and
where th e sun poked through, thick grass sprang up knee-high
and the prickly leaves of dahoon caught at him as he passed.
He had brought  Clarence the m ule, as being better suited
than the horses t o the rough going in the wilderness, but some
places were too rough even for  a mule. He had left Clarence
hobbled on the higher ground, with his bedroll and saddlebags,
while he thrashed his way throu gh the brush to reach the next
point for a survey reading.
A wood-duck burst from the  brush at his feet, nearly
stopping his heart with the drum ming of its wings. He stood
still, heart thumping in his ears, and a horde of vivid little
parakeets came chattering through the trees, swooping down to
look at him, friendly and curious. Then something unseen gave
them alarm and they rose up in a bright shriek of flight,
arrowing away through the trees.It was hot; he took of f his coat and tied the sleeves round his
waist, th en wiped his face with  a shirtsleeve and resumed his
shoving, the weight of the astrolabe swinging on a thong round
his n eck. From the top of a mountain, he could look down on
the m isty hollows and wooded r idges, and take a certain awed
pleasure in the thought that he  owned such a place. Down
here, co me to grips with wild vines, burrowing fox-tails, and
thickets of bamboolike cane hig her than his head, the thought
of o wnership was ridiculous—h ow could something like this
—this fucking swamp primeval—possibly be owned ?
Ownership aside , he wanted to finish with this jungle and
get b ack to high er ground. Even dwarfed by the gigantic trees
of the vir gin for est, a man could breathe in the space beneath.
The limbs of the  giant tulip tree s and chestnuts stretched in a
canopy overhead  that shaded the ground beneath, so that only
small things grew beneath—mats of delicate wildflowers,
lady’ s slippers, trilliums—and the trees’ dead leaves rained
down in such p rofusion that one’ s feet sank inches into the
springy mat.
Incomprehensible that such a place should ever alter—and
yet it did, it wo uld. He knew that fine; knew  it—better than
knew it, he’d bloody seen  it! He’d driven a car down a paved
highway , straigh t through the heart of a place once like this.
He k new it could be changed. And yet as he struggled through
the growth of sumac and partridgeberry , he knew even better
that this place could swallow him without a second’ s
hesitation.
Still, there was s omething about the sheer awful scale of the
wilderness that soothed him. Among the gigantic trees and
teeming wildlife, he found some peace; peace from the
dammed-up words inside his head, from the unspoken worry
in Bria nna’ s eyes, the judgment in Jamie’ s—judgment
withheld, but hanging there like  the sword of Damocles. Peace
from the  glances of pity or curiosity , from the constant slow ,
aching ef fort of speech—peace from the memory of singing.
He m issed them all, especially Bree and Jem. He seldom
dreamed with any coherence; not like Bree—what was shewriting now in her book?—but he had wakened this morning
from a vivid impression of Jem, crawling over him as he liked
to do, poking and prodding inquisitively , then softly patting
Roger ’ s face, exploring eyes a nd ears, nose and mouth, as
though searching for the missing words.
He h adn’ t spoken at all for the first few days of surveying,
terribly relieved not to have to. Now he was beginning to talk
again, t hough—disliking the hoarse, mangled sound of the
words, b ut not so bothered, since there was no one else to hear .
He hear d the gur gle then of water over stones, and burst
through a screen of willow sap lings to find the stream at his
feet, sun sparking of f the wa ter . He knelt and drank and
splashed his face, then chose t he spots along the bank from
which to take hi s sightings. He dug the ledger book, ink, and
quill fro m the leather bag over  his shoulder , and fished the
astrolabe out of his shirt.
He h ad a song in his head—again. They sneaked in when he
wasn’ t l ooking, melodies singing in his inner ear like sirens
from the rocks, ready to dash him in pieces.
Not this one, though. He smiled to himself, as he nudged the
bar o f th e astrola be and sighted on a tree on the opposite bank.
It w as a children’ s song, one of the counting songs Bree sang
to Jemm y . One of those terrible songs that got into one’ s head
and wouldn’ t get out again. As he took his sightings and made
the notations in his book, he chanted under his breath, ignoring
the cracked distortion of the sounds.
“The … ants go … mar -shing … one … by one.”
Five thousand acres. What in hell was he to do with it?
What in hell was he to do, period?
“Down … to …  the gr -grround … to ggetout … atha RAIN
… bum, bum, bum …”
 
I DISCOVERED QUICKL Y why my name had appeared to
have sig nificance to T satsa’wi;  the name of the village wasKalanun’yi—Raventown. I didn’ t see any ravens as we rode
in, but did hear one, calling hoarsely from the trees.
The villa ge lay in a charming location; a narrow river valley
at the foot of a smallish mo untain. The town itself was
surrounded by a small spread of fields and orchards. A
middling stream  ran past it, dropping down a small cataract
and flowing of f down the val ley into what looked from a
distance like a h uge thicket of bamboo—a canebrake, it was
called, the leafy giant canes glowing dusty gold in the sun of
early afternoon.
W e were greeted with cordial en thusiasm by the residents of
the t own, lavishly fed and entertained for a day and a night. In
the afternoon of the second da y , we were invited to join in
what I gathered was a petition  to whichever Cherokee deity
was in char ge o f hunting, to in voke favor and protection for
the expe dition a gainst the ghost-bear that was to take place
next day .
It had not occur red to me, prio r to meeting Jackson Jolly ,
that there might be as much variance in talent among Indian
shaman as there was among the Christian cler gy . I had by this
time enc ountered several of both species, but buf fered by the
mysteries of language, had not previously realized that a
calling as shaman did not nece ssarily guarantee a person the
possession of personal magnetism, spiritual power , or a gift for
preaching.
W atching a slow glaze spread across the features of the
people packed into Peter Bewlie’ s wife’ s father ’ s house, I
realized now that whatever his personal charm or connections
with the  spirit world, Jackson J olly was sadly lacking in the
last of these talents.
I had noticed a certain look of resignation on the faces of
some of  the congregation as the  shaman took his place before
the hearth, clad in a shawl-lik e blanket of red flannel, and
wearing a mask carved in the sem blance of a bird’ s face. As he
began to speak, in a loud, droning voice, the woman next tome shifted her w eight heavily from one leg to the other and
sighed.
The sighing was contagious, b ut it wasn’ t as bad as the
yawning. W ithin minutes, half the people around me were
gaping, eyes watering like fountains. My own jaw muscles
ached from being clenched, and I saw Jamie blinking like an
owl.
Jolly was undoubtedly a sincere shaman; he also appeared
to be a b oring o ne. The only pe rson who appeared riveted by
his petitions was Jemmy , who perched in Brianna’ s arms,
mouth hanging open in awe.
The chant for bear -hunting was a fairly monotonous one,
featuring endless repetitions of “He! Hayuya’haniwa,
hayuya’haniwa, hayuya’haniwa …”  Then slight variations on
the them e, each verse ending up with a rousing—and rather
startling— “Y oho!”,  as thou gh we were all about to set sail on
the Spanish main with a bottle of rum.
The congregatio n exhibited more enthusiasm during this
song, th ough, and it finally d awned on me that what was
wrong was probably not with th e shaman himself. The ghost-
bear had been pl aguing the village for months; they must have
gone through this particular ceremony several times, already ,
with no success. No, it wasn’ t that Jackson Jolly was a poor
preacher; only that his congreg ation was suf fering a lack of
faith.
After the conclusion of the son g, Jolly stamped fiercely on
the hearth as pu nctuation to something he was saying, then
took a sage-wand from his pouch, thrust it into the fire, and
began to  march round the room , waving the smoke over the
congregation. The crowd parted politely as he marched up to
Jamie an d circled him and the Beardsley twins several times,
chanting and perfuming them with wafts of fragrant smoke.
Jemmy thought this intensely funny . So did his mother , who
was standing on my other side, vibrating with suppressed
giggling. Jamie  stood tall and  straight, looking extremely
dignified, as Jolly—who was qu ite short—hopped around himlike a toad, liftin g the tail of his coat to perfume his backside. I
didn’ t dare catch Brianna’ s eye.
This phase of the ceremony complete, Jolly regained his
position by the f ire and began t o sing again. The woman next
to me shut her eyes and grimaced slightly .
My back  was beginning to ach e. At long last, the shaman
concluded his proceedings with a shout. He then retired into
the o f fing and to ok of f his mask, wiping the sweat of righteous
labor fro m his brow and looking pleased with himself. The
headman of the village then ste pped up to speak, and people
began to shift and stir .
I stretch ed, as unobtrusively as possible, wondering what
there might be for supper . Di stracted by these musings, I
didn’ t at first notice that the shiftings and stirrings were
becoming more pronounced. Then the woman beside me
straightened up abruptly and said something loud, in a tone of
command. She cocked her head to one side, listening.
The headman stopped talking at once, and all around me
people began to look upward. Bodies grew rigid and eyes grew
wide. I heard it, too, and a sudden shiver raised gooseflesh on
my forearms. The air was filled with a rush of wings.
“What o n earth is that?” Brianna whispered to me, looking
upward like everyone else. “The descent of the Holy Ghost?”
I ha d no idea, but it was getting louder—much louder . The
air w as beginning to vibrate, a nd the noise was like a long,
continuous roll of thunder .
“T siskwa!”  s ho uted a man in the crowd, an d all of a sudden
there was a stampede for the door .
Rushing out of the house, I thought at first that a storm had
come suddenly upon us. The sk y was dark, the air filled with
thunder , and a strange, dim light flickered over everything. But
there wa s no moisture in the air ,  and a peculiar smell filled my
nose—not rain. Definitely not rain.
“Birds, my god, it’ s birds!” I barely heard Brianna behind
me, among the chorus of amazement all around. Everyonestood in the street, looking up. Several children, frightened by
the noise and darkness, started to cry .
It was  unn erving. I had  never seen any thing like it—nor had
most of the Che rokee, judging from their reaction. It felt as
though t he ground was shaking; the air was certainly shaking,
vibrating to the clap of wings like a drum being slapped with
frantic h ands. I could feel the p ulse of it on my skin, and the
cloth of my kerchief tugged, wanting to rise on the wind.
The paralysis of the crowd didn’ t last long. There were
shouts here and there, and all of  a sudden, people were rushing
up and down th e street, char ging into their houses and racing
out a gain, with b ows. W ithin seconds, a perfect hail of arrows
was zipping up into the cloud of birds, and feathered bodies
plopped out of the sky to land in limp, blood-soaked blobs,
pierced with arrows.
Bodies w eren’ t the only thing plopping out of the sky . A
juicy dropping struck my shoulder , and I could see a rain of
falling particles, a noxious precipitation from the thundering
flock overhead, raising tiny puf fs of dust from the street as the
droppings struck. Down feathers shed from the passing birds
floated in the a ir like dandelion seeds, and here and there,
lar ger feathers knocked from tails and wings spiraled down
like miniature lances, bobbing in  the wind. I hastily backed up,
taking s helter under the eaves of a house with Brianna and
Jemmy .
W e watched from our refuge in awe, as the villagers jostled
each other in the street, archers shooting as fast as they could,
one arrow following on the h eels of another . Jamie, Peter
Bewlie, and Josiah had all run f or their guns, and were among
the c rowd, blasting away , not ev en troubling to aim. It wasn’ t
necessary; no one could miss. Children, streaked with bird
droppings, dodged and darted through the crowd, picking up
the fallen birds, piling them in heaps by the doorsteps of the
houses.
It m ust have la sted for nearly half an hour . W e crouched
under the eaves, half-deafened by the noise, hypnotized by theunceasing rush overhead. After the first fright, Jemmy stopped
crying, but huddled close in his mother ’ s arms, head buried
under the drape of her kerchief.
It w as impossible to make o ut individual birds in that
violent c ascade; it was no more than a river of feathers that
filled the  sky from one side to the other . Above the thunder of
the win gs, I could hear the birds calling to each other , a
constant susurrus of sound, like a wind storm rushing through
the forest.
At last—at long last—the great flock passed, stray birds
trailing from the ragged fringe of it as it crossed the mountain
and disappeared.
The village sighed as one. I saw people rubbing at their ears,
trying to  get rid of the clap and echo of the flight. In the midst
of the crowd, Jackson Jolly stood beaming, liberally plastered
with down feathers and bird droppings, eyes glowing. He
spread out his ar ms and said something, and the people nearby
murmured in response.
“W e are  blessed,” T satsa’wi’ s sister translated for me,
looking deeply impressed. She nodded at Jamie and the
Beardsley twins. “The Ancient White has sent us a great sign.
They will find the evil bear , surely .”
I nodded, still feeling slightly stunned. Beside me, Brianna
stooped and picked up a dead bird, holding it by the slender
arrow that pierced it through. It was a plump thing, and very
pretty , with a delicate, smoky -blue head and buf f-colored
breast feathers, the wing plumage a soft reddish-brown. The
head lol led limp , the eyes cove red by fragile, wrinkled gray-
blue lids.
“It is, isn’ t it?” she said, softly .
“I th ink it must be,” I answered, just as softly . Gingerly , I
put out a finger and touched the smooth plumage. As signs and
portents went, I was unsure w hether this one was a good
omen, or not. I had never seen o ne before, but I was quite sure
that the bird I touched was a passenger pigeon. 
THE HUNTERS SET FOR TH before dawn the next day .
Brianna parted reluctantly from Jemmy , but swung up into her
saddle with a lig htness that made me think she wouldn’ t pine
for him while h unting. As for Jemmy himself, he was much
too absorbed in rifling the baskets under the bed platform to
take much notice of his mother ’ s leaving.
The women spent the day in plucking, roasting, smoking,
and preserving the pigeons with wood-ash; the air was filled
with drifting down and the scen t of grilled pigeon livers was
thick in the air , as the whole v illage gor ged on this delicacy .
For my part, I helped with the pigeons, interspersing this work
with entertaining conversation and profitable barter , only
pausing now and then to look toward the mountain where the
hunters had gone, and say a bri ef silent prayer for their well-
being—and Roger ’ s.
I had brought twenty-five gallons of honey with me, as well
as some of the  imported European herbs and seeds from
W ilmington. T rade was brisk,  and by the evening, I had
exchanged my stocks for quantities of wild ginseng, cohosh,
and—a real rarity—a chaga. Th is item, a huge warty fungus
that grows from ancient birch trees, had a reputation—or so I
was told —for th e cure of canc er , tuberculosis, and ulcers. A
useful item for any physician to have on hand, I thought.
As for the hon ey , I had trade d that straight across, for
twenty-five gallons of sunflower oil. This was provided in
bulging skin bags, which were piled up under the eaves of the
house where we were staying, like a small heap of cannon
balls. I paused to look at them  with satisfaction whenever I
went outside, envisioning the soft, fragrant soap to be made
from the oil—no more hands reeking of dead pig fat! And with
luck, I could sel l the bulk of it fo r a high enough price to make
up the next chun k of Laoghaire’ s blood money , damn her eyes.
The next day w as spent in the orchards with my hostess,
another of T satsa’wi’ s sisters, named Sungi. A tall, sweet-
faced w oman of  thirty or so, she had a few words of English,but some of her friends had slightly more—and a good thing,
my own Cherokee being so fa r limited to “Hello,” “Good,”
and “More.”
In spite of the I ndian ladies’ increased fluency , I had some
dif ficulty in making out exa ctly what “Sungi” meant—
depending upon whom I was t alking to, it seemed to mean
either “onion,” “mint,” or—confusingly—”mink.” After a
certain amount of cross talk and sorting out, I got it established
that the word se emed to mean none of these things precisely ,
but rather to indicate a strong scent of some kind.
The apple trees in the orchard were young, still slender , but
bearing decently , providing a small yellowish-green fruit that
wouldn’ t have impressed Luther Burbank, but which did have
a nice crunchy t exture and a tart flavor—an excellent antidote
to the greasy taste of pigeon li vers. It was a dry year , Sungi
said, frowning critically at the trees; not so much fruit as the
year before, and the corn was not so good, either .
Sungi p ut her two young daughters in char ge of Jemmy ,
obviously warning them to be careful, with much pointing
toward the wood.
“Is good the Be ar -Killer come,” she said, turning back to
me, apple basket on her hip. “T his bear not-bear; is not speak
us.”
“Oh, ah,” I sai d, nodding intelligently . One of the other
ladies helpfully amplified this idea, explaining that a
reasonable bea r would pay attention to the shaman’ s
invocation, which called upon the bear -spirit, so that hunters
and bears would meet appropri ately . Given the color of this
bear , as well as  its stubborn and malicious behavior , it was
apparent that it was not a real bear , but rather some malign
spirit that had decided to manifest itself as a bear .
“Ah,” I said, somewhat more intelligently . “Jackson
mentioned ‘the Ancient White’—was it the bear he meant?”
Surely Peter had said that wh ite was one of the favorable
colors, though.Another lady—who had given me her English name of
Anna, rather than try to expla in what her Cherokee name
meant—laughed in shock at that.
“No, no ! Ancient White, he the fire.” Other ladies chipping
in h ere, I fina lly gathered that the fire, while obviously
powerful and to be treated with deep respect, was a beneficial
entity . Thus the atrociousness of the bear ’ s conduct; white
animals normally were accorded respect and considered to be
carriers of messages from the otherworld—here one or two of
the ladies glanced sideways at me—but this bear was not
behaving in any manner they understood.
Knowing what I did about the bear ’ s assistance from Josiah
Beardsley and the “wee black devil,” I could well understand
this. I didn’ t wa nt to implicate Josiah, but I mentioned that I
had heard stories—carefully not saying where I had heard
them—of a black man in the fo rest, who did evil things. Had
they heard of this?
Oh, yes, they a ssured me—but I should not be troubled.
There was a sm all group of the  black men, who lived “over
there”—nodding toward the far side of the village, and the
invisible canebrake and bottomlands beyond the river . It was
possible that these persons were demons, particularly since
they came from the west.
It w as possible that they were  not. Some of the village
hunters had found them, and followed them carefully for
several days, watching to see what they did. The hunters
reported that the black men lived wretchedly , having barely
scraps of clothing and without d ecent houses. This seemed not
how self-respecting demons should live.
However , they were too few and too poor to be worth
raiding—and the hunters said there were only three women,
and those very u gly—and they might be demons, after all. So
the villagers were content to leave them alone for now . The
black men never came near the village, one lady added,
wrinkling her nose; the dogs would smell them. Conversation
lapsed then, as we spread out through the orchard, gatheringripe fruit from the trees, while the younger girls gathered the
windfalls from the ground.
W e went home in mid-afternoon, tired, sunburnt, and
smelling of apples, to find that the hunters had come back.
“Four possums, eighteen rabbits, and nine squirrels,” Jamie
reported, sponging his face and hands with a damp cloth. “W e
found a great many birds, too, but what wi’ the pigeons, we
didna bother , save for a nice haw k that Geor ge Gist wanted for
the feathers.” He was windbl own, the bridge of his nose
burned red, but v ery cheerful. “And Brianna, bless her , killed a
fine elk, just the  other side of the river . A chest shot, but she
brought it down—and cut the throat herself, though that’ s a
dicey thing to do, and the beast’ s still thrashing.”
“Oh, good,” I said, rather faintly , envisioning a flurry of
sharp hooves and lethal antler s in the close vicinity of my
daughter .
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassen ach,” he said, seeing my
expression. “I taught her the proper way of it. She came from
behind.”
“Oh, go od,” I said, a little more tartly . “I imagine the
hunters were impressed?”
“V erra much,” he said cheerfully . “Did ye ken, Sassenach,
that the Cherokee let their wom en make war , as well as hunt?
Not that  they do it so often,” he added, “but now and again,
one will take it into her head, a nd go out as what they call a
W ar W oman. The men will follow her , in fact.”
“V ery interestin g,” I said, trying to ignore the vision this
summoned up, of Brianna being invited to head up a Cherokee
raiding party . “Blood will out, I suppose.”
“What?”
“Never mind. Did you happen to  see any bears, or were you
too busy exchanging interesting tidbits of anthropological
lore?”He n arrowed one eye at me over the towel with which he
was wiping his face, but answered equably enough.
“W e found a de al of bear -sign. Josiah’ s an eye for it. Not
only the droppings; he spotted a scratching-tree—one wi’ bits
of hair caught in the bark. He s ays that a bear has a favorite
tree or two, and will come bac k to the same one again and
again, so  if ye’re set to kill a particular bear , ye could do worse
than camp nearby and wait.”
“I gather that strategy didn’ t answer at present?”
“I daresay it would,” he answered, grinning, “save it was the
wrong bear . The hair on the tree was dark brown, not white.”
The expedition had not, however , been a failure. The
hunters had completed a great semi-circle round the village,
casting far out into the wood, then ranging down as far as the
river . A nd in the soft earth of the bottomland near the
canebrake, they had found footprints.
“Josiah said they were dif ferent than the prints of the bear
whose hair we found—and T satsa’wi thought they were the
same as the pri nts he’d seen when the white bear killed his
friend.”
The logical conclusion, agreed upon by all the bear -experts
present, was that the ghost-bear had in all probability made its
den in the caneb rake. Such places were dense, dark, and cool
in th e heat of summer , and teeming with birds and small game.
Even deer would hide there in hot weather .
“Y ou can’ t get into such a place on horseback, can you?” I
asked. H e shook his head, combing leaves out of his hair with
his fingers.
“No, no r can ye make much headway on foot, either , dense
as it is. But we dinna mean to go in after the bear .”
Instead, the plan was to set fire to the canebrake, driving the
bear—and any other game present—out onto the flat
bottomland on the other side, where it could be easily killed.
Evidently , this was common practice in hunting, particularly in
the fall, when the canebrakes grew dry and flammable.However , the burning would likely drive out a good deal more
game th an only the bear . That b eing so, an invitation had been
sent to another village, some t wenty miles distant, for their
hunters to come and join with those of Ravenstown. W ith luck,
enough game would be taken t o supply both villages for the
winter , and  t he extr a hunter s would insure that the evil ghost-
bear did not escape.
“V ery ef ficient,”  I said, amused. “I hope they don’ t smoke
out the slaves, too.”
“What?” He paused in his tidying.
“Black devils,” I said, “or som ething along those lines.” I
told him  what I had learned about the settlement—if that’ s
what it was—of escaped slaves—if that’ s what they were.
“W ell, I dinna suppose they’re demons,” he said dryly ,
sitting down in front of me so that I could braid his hair up
neatly into a queue. “But I shouldna think they’ll be in danger .
They must live on the far side of the canebrake, on the
opposite bank o’ the river . I’ll ask, though. There’ s time; it will
be three or f our days before the hunters come from
Kanu’gala’yi.”
“Oh, good,” I s aid, tying the th ong neatly in a bow . “That
will give you ju st about time enough to eat all the leftover
pigeon livers.”
 
THE NEXT FEW DA YS passed pleasantly , though with a
sense of  rising anticipation that culminated with the arrival of
the hunters from Kanu’gala’yi— Briertown, or so I was told. I
wondered whether they had been invited because of a
particular expertise in dealing with thorny territory , but forbore
asking. Jamie, with his usual spongelike facility , was picking
up Cher okee words like headlice, but I didn’ t want to tax his
ability with trying to translate puns, just yet.
Jemmy appeared to have inherited his grandfather ’ s touch
with lan guages, and in the week  since our arrival, had roughly
doubled his vocabulary , with half his words being now inEnglish and the other half in Cherokee, which rendered him
unintelligible t o everyone except his mother . My own
vocabulary had expanded by t he addition of the words for
“water ,” “fire,” “food,” and “Help!”—for the rest, I depended
on the kindness of the English-speaking Cherokee.
After the proper ceremonies and a lar ge welcoming feast—
featuring smoked pigeon livers with fried apples—the lar ge
party of hunters set of f at daw n, equipped with pine torches
and firepots, in addition to bow s, muskets, and rifles. Having
seen them of f with a suitabl e breakfast—cornmeal mush
mixed w ith pigeon livers and fr esh apples—those of us not in
the hunt ing party repaired to the houses, to pass the time in
basketry , sewing, and talk.
The day was hot, muggy , and still. Not a breeze stirred in
the fiel ds, where the dry stalks of harvested corn and
sunflowers lay like scattered pick-up sticks. No breath of air
moved the dust in the village street. If one was going to set
something on fire, I thought, it was a good day for the job. For
myself, I was pleased to take refuge in the cool, shadowy
interior of Sungi’ s cabin.
In th e course o f the day’ s conversation, I thought to ask
about the components of the am ulet that Nayawenne had made
for me. Granted, she had been a T uscaroran medicine-woman,
so the underlyin g beliefs might not be the same—but I was
curious about the bat.
“There is a sto ry about bats,” Sungi began, and I hid a
smile. The Cherokee were in fact a great deal like the Scottish
Highlanders, particularly in term s of liking stories. I had heard
several already , in the few days we had spent in the village.
“The animals and the birds dec ided to play a ball game,”
Anna said, translating smoothly  as Sungi talked. “At this time,
bats walked on f our feet, like the other animals. But when they
came to play in the ball game, the other animals said no, they
couldn’ t play; they were too small, and would surely be
crushed. The bats didn’ t like this.” Sungi frowned, with a
grimace indicating a displeased bat.“So the bats went to the birds, and of fered to play on their
side, instead. The birds accepte d this of fer , and so they took
leaves a nd sticks, and they made wings for the bats. The birds
won the  ball game, and the bats liked their wings so much that
—”
Sungi stopped talking abruptly . Her head lifted, and she
snif fed the air . All around us, the women stopped talking.
Sungi ro se swiftly and went to  the door , hand braced on the
doorframe as she looked out.
I co uld smell th e smoke—had been smelling it for the last
hour as it came floating in on the wind—but I realized that the
reek of burning had indeed got ten much stronger now . Sungi
stepped outside ; I got up and followed her with the other
women, small prickles of unease beginning to nip at the backs
of my knees.
The sky was be ginning to darken with rain clouds, but the
cloud of smoke was darker stil l, a roiling black smudge that
rose abo ve the distant trees. A wind had come up, riding on
the edge  of the approaching sto rm, and flurries of dry leaves
rolled past us with a sound like small, skittering feet.
Most languages have a few monosyllables suitable for use
in situat ions of sudden dismay ,  and so does Cherokee. Sungi
said som ething I didn’ t catch, b ut the meaning was clear . One
of the younger women licked a finger and held it up, but the
gesture was unnecessary—I could feel the wind on my face,
strong enough to lift the hair fr om my shoulders, cool on my
neck. It was blowing straight toward the village.
Anna drew a long, deep breath; I could see her inflate
herself, shoulder s squaring to deal with the situation. Then all
at once, the wom en were in mo tion, hurrying down the street
toward t heir houses, calling for children, stopping to sweep the
contents of a rack of drying jerky into a skirt or snatch a string
of onions or squash from the eaves in passing.
I wa sn’ t sure w here Jemmy was; one of the older Indian
girls had  taken him to play with,  but in the flurry , I couldn’ t be
sure which one it was. I picked up my skirts and hurried downthe street, ducking into each house without invitation, looking
for him. There was a strong feeling of ur gency in the air , but
not panic. The sound of the dry leaves seemed constant,
though, a faint rustling that followed at my heels.
I fou nd him in the fifth house, sound asleep with several
other ch ildren of dif ferent ages, all nestled like puppies in the
folds of a buf falo robe. I would  never have spotted him, save
for his bright hair , shining like a beacon in the midst of the soft
darkness. I woke them as gently as possible, and extricated
Jemmy . He came awake at on ce, though, and was looking
round, blinking in confusion.
“Come with Grannie, sweetheart,” I said. “W e’re going to
go now .”
“Go horsie?” he asked, brightening at once.
“An excellent idea,” I replied, hoisting him onto one hip.
“Let’ s go find the horsie, shall we?”
The smell of sm oke was much stronger when we emer ged
into the street. J emmy coughed, and I could taste something
acrid an d bitter at the back of my mouth as I breathed. The
evacuation was in full progress; people—mostly women—
were hurrying in and out of the houses, pushing children
before th em, car rying hastily wrapped bundles of belongings.
Still, there was no sense of panic or alarm in the exodus;
everyone seemed concerned, but fairly matter -of-fact about it
all. It occurred to me that a wooden village located in a deep
forest m ust now  and then be exposed to the risk of fire. No
doubt the inhabitants had faced at least the possibility of a
forest fire before, and were prepared to deal with it.
That realization calmed me a little—though the further
realization that the constant dry- leaf rustling that I was hearing
was in fact the crackle of the approaching fire wasn’ t calming
at all.
Most of the horses had gone with the hunters. When I
reached the brush pen, there we re only three left. One of the
older me n of the village was mounted on one, and had Judasand the other ho rse on tethers, ready to lead away . Judas was
saddled, and wore his saddlebag s, and a rope halter . When the
old man saw m e, he grinned and called something, gesturing
to Judas.
“Thank you!” I called back. The man leaned down and
scooped Jemmy  deftly from my arms, allowing me to mount
Judas and get pr oper hold of the reins before handing Jemmy
carefully back.
The horses were all restless, stamping and shifting. They
knew as well as we did what fire was—and liked it even less. I
took a firm hold on the halter wi th one hand, and a firmer hold
on Jemmy with the other .
“Right, beast,” I said to Judas, with an assumption of
authority . “W e’re going now .”
Judas was all in favor of this su ggestion; he headed for the
open gap  in the brush fence as though it were the finish line of
a race, snagging  my skirts on the thorns of the fence as we
passed. I managed to hold him back a little, long enough for
the old man and his two horse s to emer ge from the brushy
paddock and catch us up.
The man  shoute d something to me, and pointed toward the
mountain, away from the fire. T he wind had picked up; it blew
his long  gray hair across his face, muf fling his words. He
shook it away , but didn’ t bother to repeat himself, instead
merely wheeling his mount in the direction he had pointed.
I kn eed Judas in  the side, turnin g him to follow , but kept a
close rei n, hesit ating. I looked b ack over my shoulder toward
the villa ge, to see small stream s of people trickling out from
between the houses, all heading in the general direction the old
man had  indicated. No one was  running, though they were all
walking with great purpose.
Bree wo uld be coming for Jem my , as soon as she realized
that the village was in danger . I knew she trusted me to see
him safe , but no mother in such circumstances would rest untilreunited with her child. W e we re not in any immediate peril,
so I held back, w aiting, in spite of Judas’ s increasing agitation.
The win d was lashing through the trees now , ripping loose
billows of green and red and ye llow leaves that pelted past us,
plastering my skirt and Judas’ s h ide in autumn patchwork. The
whole sky had gone a violet- black, and I heard the first
grumbles of thunder under the whistle of wind and rustle of
fire. I could smell the tang of coming rain, even through the
smoke, and felt a sudden hope . A good hard drench seemed
just what the situation called for , and the sooner the better .
Jemmy w as wildly excited by the atmospherics, and beat his
fat l ittle hands o n the pommel, shouting a personal war chant
toward the heavens that sounded something like “Oogie-oogie-
oogie!”
Judas didn’ t care for this sort of behavior at all. I was
having a n increasingly hard time keeping him under any sort
of contr ol; he kept jerking at th e halter while executing a sort
of corks crew m aneuver that carried us in erratic circles. The
wrapped rope was cutting hard into my hand, and Jemmy’ s
bare heels were drumming a tattoo against my thighs.
I had just decide d to give up and let the horse have his head,
when he suddenly swung round and flung the head in question
up, neighing loudly toward the village.
Sure enough, there were riders c oming; I saw several horses
coming out of th e forest on the far side of the village at a trot.
Judas, o verjoyed to see other ho rses, was more than willing to
go back into the village, even though it was in the direction of
the fire.
I met Brianna and Jamie in the middle of the village, both
looking anxious ly round as they  rode down the street. Jemmy
shrieked with delight at sight of  his mother , and lunged across
into her arms, narrowly missing being dropped under the
horses’ nervous hooves.
“Did you get the bear?” I called to Jamie.“No!” he shouted back, over th e rising wind. “Come away ,
Sassenach!”
Bree was already of f, heading f or the forest, where the last
of th e villagers were disappearing into the trees. Relieved of
my responsibility for Jemmy , though, I had thought of
something else.
“Just a minute!” I shouted. I pulled up, and slid of f Judas’ s
back, throwing the reins toward Jamie. He leaned out to catch
them, and yelled something after me, but I didn’ t catch it.
W e were  outside Sungi’ s house, and I had caught sight of
the skin s of sunflower oil, pile d under the eaves. I risked a
glance back in the direction of  the canebrake. The fire was
definitely coming closer; there were visible wisps of smoke
swirling past me, and I thought  I c ould see the  glimmer of
distant flame among the lashing  trees. Still, I was fairly sure
that we could o utrun the fire o n horseback—and that was a
year ’ s honey-profit lying about on the ground; I wasn’ t leaving
it for the fire to take.
I dashed into the house, ignoring Jamie’ s infuriated bellows,
and scrabbled madly through the scattered baskets, hoping
against h ope tha t Sungi hadn’ t t aken … she hadn’ t. I seized a
handful of rawhide strips and ran back outside.
Kneeling amid the swirling dust and smoke, I whipped
strips of hide around the necks of two of the skin bags, and
knotted the long ends of the two strips together , pulling the
leather as tight a s I could. Gathe ring the unwieldy pair up into
my arms, I staggered back to the horses.
Jamie, seeing what I was about , gathered both sets of reins
up one-handed, leaned out, and grabbed the makeshift handle
that joined the skins, heaving the contraption over Gideon’ s
withers so that the bags hung on either side.
“Come on!” he shouted.
“One more!” I called back, already running back to the
house. F rom the  corner of my eye, I could see him fighting the
horses, w ho were plunging and snorting, anxious to be away .He was yelling uncomplimentary things about me in Gaelic,
but I sensed a ce rtain resignation  in his tone, and couldn’ t help
smiling to myself, in spite of the anxiety that tightened my
chest and made me fumble with the slippery hide strips.
Judas was snorting and rolling  his eyes, baring his teeth
intermittently with fear , but Jamie pulled him up close,
holding his head tightly while I  managed to fling the second
pair of oil-filled bags across his saddle, and then mount
myself.
The mom ent Jam ie’ s iron grip on his halter relaxed, Judas
was of f. The rope was in my hands, but realizing its
uselessness, I merely clung to the saddle for dear life, the oil
bags bouncing madly against my legs as we hightailed it for
the safety of the rising ground.
The stor m was a lot closer now ; the wind had dropped, but
the thun der sounded in a loud clap overhead, which made
Judas dig in his heels and bound over the open ground like a
jackrabbit. Juda s hated thunder . Remembering what had
happened the last time I’d ri dden him in a rainstorm, I
flattened myself  along his back and clung like a cocklebur ,
grimly determined not to be thr own or scraped of f in his mad
career .
Then we were in to the wood, and leafless branches lashed at
me like whips. I pressed myself lower against the horse’ s neck,
closing my eyes to avoid havi ng one poked out. Judas was
moving more slowly now , by necessity , but was clearly still
panicked; I could feel the churn of his hindquarters, driving us
upward, and hear the breath whistling through his nostrils.
The thunder came again, and he lost his footing on the
slippery leaves, slewing sideways and smashing into a stand of
saplings. The springy wood saved us major damage, though,
and we stumbled and staggered back upright, still moving
upward. Opening one eye cautiously , I could tell that Judas
had somehow found a trail—I could see the faint line of it,
zigging through the dense growth in front of us.Then the  trees closed in again, a nd I could see nothing but a
claustrophobic array of interwoven trunks and branches,
twined with the yellowing remnants of wild honeysuckle and
the flash of sca rlet creepers. The thick growth slowed the
horse still further , and I was at last able to draw a deep breath
and wonder where Jamie was.
The thunder cracked again, and  in its wake, I heard a high-
pitched neigh, not far behind me. Of course—Judas hated
thunder , but Gideon hated to follow another horse. He would
be close behind, pushing to catch up.
A h eavy drop of rain struck me between the shoulder
blades, and I he ard the rustle of the beginning rain, striking
drop by drop by drop on leaves  and wood and ground around
me. The  scent of ozone was sharp in my nostrils, and the
whole w ood seemed to give a green sigh, opening itself to the
rain.
I gave a deep sigh, too, of relief.
Judas to ok a few steps further , a nd lurched to a halt, panting
and blow ing. Not waiting for a nother clap of thunder to set
him of f again, I hastily slid to  the ground, and seizing his
halter -rope, tied  him to a small tree—no easy task, with my
hands stif f and shaking.
Just in time. The thunder crashed again, a clap so loud that I
could feel it on my skin. Judas s creamed and reared, jerking at
his r ope, but I had wrapped it ro und the tree trunk. I stumbled
back to get away from his panic, and Jamie caught me from
behind. He started to say something, but the thunder boomed
again, drowning him out.
I turned and clung to him, shaking with the adrenaline of
delayed shock. The rain began to fall in good earnest now ,
drops co ol on my face. He kisse d my forehead, then let go and
led me under th e overhang of a big hemlock, whose fans of
needles broke the rain, providing a fragrant, almost-dry cave
beneath.As the adrenaline sur ging thro ugh my body began to die
down, I had a moment to look around, and realized that we
were not the first inhabitants of this refuge.
“Look,” I said, pointing into the shadows. The traces were
slight, but obvious; someone ha d eaten here, discarding a tidy
pile of small bo nes. Animals were not so tidy . Animals didn’ t
scrape up dead needles into a comfy pillow , either .
Jamie winced at another bang of thunder , but nodded.
“A ye, it’ s a mankiller ’ s spot, th ough I dinna think it’ s been
used lately .”
“A what ?”
“Mankiller ,” he repeated. The li ghtning flashed behind him,
a vivid sheet th at left his silho uette imprinted on my retina.
“It’ s what they c all the sentries; the warriors who stay outside
the v illage, to ke ep watch and stop anyone coming in unaware.
D’ye see?”
“I can’ t see a th ing, just yet.” I put out a hand, groping, and
touched his coatsleeve, moving blindly into the shelter of his
arm. I closed m y eyes, in hopes of restoring my vision, but
even against my sealed lids, I could see the flash and burst of
lightning.
The thunder seemed to be moving of f a little, or at least
growing less frequent. I blinked, and found that I could see
again. Jamie moved aside, gest uring, and I saw that we were
standing on a sort of ledge, with the face of the mountain
rising st eeply behind us. Screened from view from below by a
row of conifers, there was a narrow clearing—obviously man-
made, a s that was the only sort of clearing that occurred in
these m ountains. Looking out through the conifer branches,
though, I had a breathtaking view over the small valley where
Ravenstown lay .
The rain  had slackened. Looking  out from this high vantage
point, though, I could see that the clouds were not one storm,
but several; patches of dark r ain hung randomly from the
clouds like veils of gray velvet, and silent, jagged forks oflightning lanced suddenly across the black sky above the
distant peaks, thunder grumbling in their wake.
Smoke s till bloomed from the canebrake, a low flat crown
of p ale gray , alm ost white against the darkened sky . Even as
high as we were , the smell of burning stung the nose, mingling
oddly with the scent of rain. Here and there I could see flame-
licks, still burning in the cane, but it was apparent that the fire
was mostly out; the next shower of rain would quench it
entirely . I could see, too, the people returning to the village,
small gr oups making their way from the wood, bundles and
children in tow .
I loo ked for ride rs, but saw none , let alone any with red hair .
Surely Brianna and Jemmy were safe, though? I shivered
suddenly; with the changeableness of mountain weather , the
air h ad gone fro m smothering blanket to chill within less than
an hour .
“All right, Sassenach?” Jamie’ s hand settled warmly on my
neck, fingers rubbing gently a long the tense ridge of my
shoulders. I took a deep breath and let them relax, as much as I
could.
“Y es. D o you think it’ s safe to ride down?” My only
impression of the trail was that i t was both narrow and steep; it
would be muddy now , and slippery with wet, dead leaves.
“No,” he said, “ but I dinna think—” He stopped abruptly ,
frowning in thought as he gauged the sky . He glanced behind
us; I could barely make out the outline of the horses, standing
close to gether under the shelter of the tree where I had tied
Judas.
“I was going to say I didna think it particularly safe to stay
here,” he said at  last. His fingers tapped gently on my shoulder
as he thought, pattering like raindrops.
“But yo n storm is moving fas t; ye can see the lightning
come across the mountain, and the thunder …” W ith
melodramatic timing, a sharp boom of thunder rolled across
the valley . I heard a shrill whinny of protest from one of thehorses, and the rattle of foliag e as he tugged at his halter .
Jamie glanced over his shoulder , expression bleak.
“Y our mount’ s got a strong mislike of thunder , Sassenach.”
“Y es, I noticed that,” I said, h uddling closer to him for
warmth. The wind was picking up again, as the next storm
rolled in.
“A ye, he’ll likely break his neck, and yours, too, if ye’re so
misfortunate as to be on that trai l when it—” Another boom of
thunder drowned his words, but I took his meaning.
“W e’ll wait,” he said, positively .
He pulled me in front of him, and put his arms round me,
sighing as he re sted his chin on the top of my head. W e stood
together in the s helter of the hem lock, waiting for the storm to
come.
Far below , the canebrake seethed and hissed, the smoke of
the burning beginning to rise and fly with the wind. A way
from the village, this time, toward the river . I wondered
suddenly where  Roger was—somewhere under that murky
sky . Had he found safe refuge from the storm?
“I wonder where that bear is, too,” I said, voicing half my
thoughts. Jamie’ s chest moved  in a rueful laugh, but the
thunder drowned his voice.83
WILDFIRE
R OGER HALF-WOKE with the smell of smoke burning in
his t hroat. He coughed and san k back into sleep, fragmented
images of a soo ty hearth and burnt sausages fading into mist.
T ired from a morning of shoving his way through
impenetrable thickets of brush and cane, he had eaten a sparse
lunch an d lain down for an hou r ’ s rest in the shade of a black
willow on the river bank.
Lulled by the ru shing water , he might have sunk back into
solid slumber , but a distant shriek pulled him upright, blinking.
The shriek was repeated, far of f but loud. The mule!
He w as on his feet, stumbling toward the sound, before he
remembered the  leather bag that held his ink and quills, the
half-chain, and the precious surveying records. He lunged
back to snatch it, then splashed across the shallows toward
Clarence’ s hysterical braying, the weight of the astrolabe
swinging on its thong against h is chest. He crammed it inside
his shirt to stop  it catching on branches, looking desperately
for the way by which he had come.
Smoke—he did  smell smoke. He coughed, half choking as
he tried to stifle  it. Coughing hurt his throat, with a searing
pain as the scar tissue inside seemed to tear .
“Coming,” he breathed, in Clare nce’ s direction. It wouldn’ t
have mattered if he could have shouted; even when he’d had a
voice, it hadn’ t t he carrying quality of Clarence’ s. He’d left the
mule hobbled in a grassy patch on the edge of the canebrake,
but he hadn’ t come in very far .
“Again,” he muttered, throwing his weight against a stand
of young cane to force his wa y through. “Y ell … again …
dammit.” The sky was dark. Springing from sleep and
blundering of f as he had, he ha d no sense of where he was,
save for Clarence.Shit, what was happening? The smell of smoke was
noticeably stronger; as his mind cleared from the muddle of
sleep and panic, he realized that something was drastically
wrong. The birds, normally somnolent in mid-day , were
agitated, flutteri ng and calling w ith loud, disjointed screeches
past his head. A ir moved restless through the canes, fluttering
their ragged leaves, and he cau ght a touch of warmth on his
face—not the moist, clinging, all-embracing warmth of the
muggy canebrake, but a dry , hot touch that brushed his cheek
and sent a parad oxical chill right down his back. Holy Christ,
the place was on fire.
He took a deep breath, calming himself deliberately . The
canebrake was alive around him; a hot wind was moving,
rattling dry canes, driving flocks of songbirds and parakeets
before it, flung like handsful of bright confetti through the
leaves. The smoke crept into hi s chest and gripped his lungs,
burning, keeping him from drawing a full breath.
“Clarence,” he rasped, as loudly as he could. No good; he
could sc arcely hear himself above the rising agitation of the
canebrake. He couldn’ t hear th e mule at all. Surely the fat-
headed animal hadn’ t been burned to a crisp already? No,
more likely , he’d broken his ra g hobbles and galloped of f to
safety .
Something brushed his leg and he looked down in time to
see the naked, scaly tail of a possum, scampering into the
brush. That was as good a direction as any , he thought, and
plunged into the growth of buttonbush after it.
There was a gru nting somewhere near; a small pig burst out
of a patc h of yaupon and crossed his path, heading to the left.
Pig, pos sum—was either known to have a good sense of
direction? He hesitated for a moment, then followed the pig; it
was big enough to help break a path.
A p ath there se emed to be; small patches of bare earth
showed here and there, trampled between the tussocks of
grass. W ild orchids winked among them, vivid as small jewels,and he wonder ed at the delicacy of them—how could he
notice such things, at such a time?
The smoke was thicker; he had to stop and cough, bending
nearly d ouble and clutching at his throat, as though he could
keep the tissue intact, keep it from tearing with his hands. Eyes
streaming, he straightened up  to find that the trail had
disappeared. A thrill of panic squeezed his insides as he saw a
wisp of drifting smoke, nosing  its way slowly through the
under growth, delicately questing.
He c lenched his fists hard enoug h to feel the short nails bite
into his palms, using the pain to focus his mind. He turned
slowly round, eyes closed to concentrate, listening, turning his
face from side to  side, searching for a draft of fresh air , a sense
of heat— anything that would tell him which way to go, away
from the fire.
Nothing. Or rather , everything. Smoke was everywhere
now , in thicken ing clouds that crept low across the ground,
rolled black out of thickets, choking. He could hear  the fire
now , a chuckling noise, like som eone laughing, low down in a
scar -choked throat.
W illows. His mind clung to the notion of willows; he could
see a  growth of them in the dis tance, barely visible above the
waving canes. W illows grow n ear water; that was where the
river was.
A small  red and black snake slid across his foot as he
reached the water , but he scarce ly noticed. There was no time
for any fear but the fear of fire. He splashed into the center of
the s tream and d ropped to his kn ees, bending to get his face as
close to the water as he could.
There was moving air , there, c ool from the water , and he
gulped it, deep enough to make him cough again, shaking his
body with a se ries of racking, tearing spasms. Which way ,
which w ay? The stream wound to and fro through acres of
cane and  river thicket. T o follo w it one way would lead him
toward the bottomland—perhap s, out of the fire, or at least to
open country—a  place where he could see again to run. T o gothe other way might take him straight to the heart of the fire.
But ther e was nothing overhead  but cloudy darkness, and no
way of knowing.
He pressed his arms tight against his body , trying to stifle
the cou ghing, and felt the bu lge of his leather bag. The
records. Goddamn it, he could countenance the possibility of
his own death, but not the loss of those records, made over so
many laborious days. Floundering and stumbling, he made his
way to the rive r ’ s edge. He dug frantically with his hands,
scrabbling in the soft mud, ripp ing out handsful of the long,
tough grass, yanking horsetails  up by the roots. They came
apart in his hand s and he flung the segments heedless over his
shoulder , breath sobbing in his chest as he gasped and dug.
The air was hot all round him, searing in his lungs. He
crammed the leather bag into the damp hole he had made,
reached out his a rms and grasped the dirt, pulling it to him, the
mud a comfort on his skin as he scooped it in.
He stopp ed, panting. He should be sweating, but the sweat
dried be fore it reached the surface of his skin. The fire was
close. Rocks, he needed rocks to mark the place—they
wouldn’ t burn. He splashed back into the creek, groped
beneath the surface, oh God it was cold, it was wet, thank
God, grasped a boulder slick w ith green slime and threw it
toward t he bank. Another , a handful of smaller rocks, grasped
in de speration, another big one, a flat one, another—enough, it
would have to be enough, the fire was coming.
He p iled his roc ks into a hasty cairn, and commending his
soul to the mercy of God, plung ed back into the river and fled,
stumbling and choking, rocks rolling and sliding under his
feet, fled for as  long as his trembling legs would carry him,
before the smoke seized him b y the throat, filled head and
nose and  chest, and choked him, the band of scarring a hand
that squeezed out air and life, a nd left only blackness behind
his eyes, lit by the flickering redness of fire.
 HE W AS FIGHTING. Fighting the noose, fighting the bonds
on his wrists, fi ghting most of a ll the black void that crushed
his c hest and sealed his throat,  fighting for one final sip of
precious air . He bucked, straini ng with every ounce of force,
and then was rolling on the ground, arms flying free.
He s truck something with one fl ailing hand. It was soft, and
yelped in surprise.
Then there were hands on his shoulders, his legs, and he
was sitting up, vision fractured and chest heaving in the ef fort
to b reathe. Something struck h im hard in the middle of the
back. He  choked , coughed, gulped enough air to cough down
deep in the cha rred center of himself, and a huge gobbet of
black ph legm ro lled up out of his chest, warm and slimy as a
rotten oyster on his tongue.
He spat  it out, choked and heaved as the bile rose up
burning through  the raw squeez ed channel of his throat. Then
spat again, gulped, and sat up, gasping.
He h ad no attent ion to spare for anything, lost in the miracle
of air and breat h. There were v oices around him, and vague
faces in the dark; everything smelled of burning. Nothing
mattered but the oxygen flooding through his chest, plumping
up his shriveled cells like raisins soaked in water .
W ater touched his mouth, and h e looked up, eyes blinking
and wate ring in the ef fort to see . His eyeballs felt seared; light
and shadow smeared together , a nd he blinked hard, warm tears
a balm to the ra wness of his eye s, cooling his skin as they ran
down his cheeks. Someone hel d a cup to his lips; a woman,
face bla ckened with soot. No, not soot. He blinked, squinted,
blinked. She was black of herself. Slave?
He took a brief  gulp of water , unwilling to interrupt his
breathing even for the pleasure of the coolness on his ravaged
throat. It was good, though—very good. His hands rose and
wrapped around the cup, surprising him. He had expected the
pain of broken fingers, long-numbed flesh … but his hands
were whole and serviceable. He reached automatically for the
hollow of his ne ck, expecting pain and the whistle of amber—and prodded unbelievingly at the solid flesh there. He
breathed, and the air whistled t hrough his nose and down the
back of his throat. The wor ld shifted around him, and
realigned itself.
He w as sitting in a ramshackle hut of some sort. There were
several people in the hut, and more peering in at the door .
Most of  them were black, all w ere in rags, and none of the
faces looked even faintly friendly .
The woman who had given hi m water looked scared. He
tried a smile at her , and coughe d again. She looked up at him
under the ragged cloth tied roun d her brows, and he saw that
the whit es of her eyes were scarlet, the lids red-rimmed and
swollen. His must look the sam e, from the feel of them. The
air was still thic k with smoke, and he could hear the distant
cracks and pops of heat-split c ane, the dying rumble of the
fire. Somewhere nearby , a bird called once in alarm, then fell
abruptly silent.
There w as a conversation going on near the door , conducted
in sibilant whispers. The men who were talking—no, ar guing
—glanced at him now and then, their faces masks of fear and
distrust. It had begun to rain outside; he couldn’ t smell it, but
cool air struck h is face, and he heard the patter of drops on the
roof, on the trees outside.
He drain ed the rest of the water , then of fered the woman
back the cup. She shrank ba ck, as though he might be
contaminated. H e set the cup on the ground, nodding to her ,
and swip ed at his eyes with the  back of his wrist. The hair on
his arm was singed; it crumbled to dust at a touch.
He strain ed to pick out words, but heard nothing but gabble.
The men weren’ t speaking Eng lish, nor yet French or Gaelic.
He had heard some of the fresh blackbirds brought up from
Charleston for sale in the W ilmington market, talking among
themselves in just that sort of husky , secretive murmur . Some
African tongue—or more than one.
His skin was bli stered, hot and painful in several places, and
the air in the hu t was so thickly warm that sweat ran down hisface wit h the water from his eye s, but a chill touched the base
of his spine at the realization. He was not on a plantation—
there were none, so far into the mountains. Such isolated
homesteads as there were up here would be too poor to have
slaves, l et alone such a numb er . Some of the Indians kept
slaves—but not black ones.
Only one answer possible, one confirmed by their behavior .
They we re maro ons, then, his captors—his saviors? Escaped
slaves, living here in secrecy .
Their freedom—and perhaps their lives—depended on that
secrecy . And here he sat, a living  threat to it. His insides gelled
as he realized j ust how tenuous his position was. Had  they
saved hi m from the fire? If so, they must now be regretting it,
judging from the looks of the men by the door .
One of the ar gu ants broke away from the group, came and
squatted down before him, push ing the woman out of the way .
Narrow black eyes darted over him, from face to chest, then
back. “Who you?”
He didn’ t think the pugnacious questioner wanted his name.
Rather , he wanted to know Roger ’ s purpose. Possibilities
flickered throug h Roger ’ s mind—what would be most likely
to keep him alive?
Not “hunter”—if they though t him English and alone,
they’d kill him for sure. Could  he pretend to be French? A
Frenchman wouldn’ t seem so dangerous to them. Perhaps.
He b linked hard to clear his v ision, and was opening his
mouth to say , “Je suis Francais—un voyageur ,”  when he felt a
sharp pa in in the center of his chest that made him suck breath.
The metal of the astrolabe had seared him in the fire, and
quick blisters had risen and burst beneath it, gluing the thing to
him with  their sticky fluid. As h e moved now , the weight of it
had torn free, ripping the ragged shreds of skin away , and
leaving a throbbing raw patch in the center of his chest.
He dipp ed two fingers into t he neck of his shirt, and
carefully pulled up the leather thong.“Sur …  vey … or ,” he croaked, forcing the syllables past
the knot of soot and scar in his throat.
“Hau!”
His questioner stared at the gol den disk, eyes bulging. The
men by the door pushed and shoved each other , trying to get
close enough to see.
One reached out and snatched t he astrolabe, dragging it of f
over his head. He made no attempt to keep it, but sat back,
taking advantage of their preoccupation with the gaudy thing
to gathe r his feet slowly under him. He strained to keep his
eyes open, against the nearly irr esistible ur ge to squeeze them
shut; even the soft daylight from the door was painful.
One of the men glanced at him, and said something sharp.
T wo of them m oved at once between him and the door ,
bloodshot eyes fixed on him lik e basilisks. The man holding
the astro labe ca lled out something, a name, he thought, and
there wa s a movement at the door , someone pushing through
the bodies there.
The woman who came in loo ked much like the others;
dressed in a rag ged shift, damp with rain, with a square of
cloth tied round her head, hiding her hair . One major
dif ference, though; the thin arms and legs protruding from the
shift were the w eathered, freckled brown of a white person.
She stared at Roger , keeping her eyes fixed on him as she
moved into the center of the hut. Only the weight of the
astrolabe in her hand pulled her gaze away from him.
A ta ll, rawboned man with on e eye shoved forward. He
moved close to the woman, poked a finger at the astrolabe, and
said something that sounded like a question. She shook her
head slo wly , tracing the markings round the edge of the disk
with puzzled fascination. Then she turned it over .
Roger sa w her shoulders stif fen when she saw the engraved
letters, a nd a flicker of hope spr ang up in his chest; she knew
it. She recognized the name.He had  been gambling that they might know what a
surveyor was, might realize that the word implied that there
were people awaiting his results—people who would come
looking for him, if he did not return. From their point of view ,
there could be no gain in killing him, if others would come
searching. But if the woman kne w the name “James Fraser” …
The wom an shot Roger a sudde n, hard look, quite at odds
with her earlier hesitation. She approached him, slowly , but
without apparent fear .
“Y ou are not Jameth Frather ,” she said, and he jerked,
startled at the sound of her voice, clear but lisping. He blinked
and squinted, then rose slowly t o his feet, shading his eyes to
see her against the glare of light from the door .
She might have been any age between twenty and sixty ,
though the light brown hair tha t showed at her temples was
unmarked with gray . Her face w as lined, but with struggle and
hunger , he thought, not age. He smiled at her , deliberately , and
her mouth drew back in reflex, a hesitant grimace, but
nonetheless enough for him to catch a glimpse of her front
teeth, broken of f at an angle. Sq uinting, he made out the thin
slash of a scar through one eyebrow . She was much thinner
than Claire’ s description of her , but that was hardly surprising.
“I am not … Jam es Fraser ,” he agreed hoarsely , and had to
stop to cough. H e cleared his throat, hawking up more soot
and slim e. He spat, turning poli tely aside, then turned back to
her . “But you are … Fanny Beardsley … aren’ t you?”
He hadn ’ t been sure, in spite o f the teeth, but the look of
shock t hat crossed her face at his words was solid
confirmation. The men knew that name, too. The one-eyed
man took a quic k step forward and seized the woman by the
shoulder; the others moved menacingly closer .
“James Fraser is … my wife’ s father ,” he said, as quickly as
he c ould, before they could lay h ands on him. “Do you want to
know—about the child?”The look  of suspicion faded from  her face. She didn’ t move,
but a look of su ch hunger rose in her eyes that he had to steel
himself not to step back from it.
“Fahnee?” The tall man still had  a hand on her shoulder . He
drew closer to her , his one ey e flicking back and forth in
suspicion, from the woman to Roger .
She said something, almost under her breath, and put up her
hand, to cover t he man’ s where it rested on her shoulder . His
face wen t suddenly blank, as tho ugh wiped with a slate eraser .
She turn ed to him, looking up into his face, talking in a low
tone, quick and ur gent.
The atmosphere  in the hut had changed. It was still char ged,
but an air of con fusion now mingled with the general mood of
menace. There was thunder overhead, much louder than the
sound of  the rain, but no one too k note of it. The men near the
door lo oked at each other , then, frowning, at the couple
ar guing in whispers. Lightning  flashed, silent, framing the
people in the door with darkness. There were murmuring
voices outside, sounds of pu zzlement. Another boom of
thunder .
Roger stood motionless, gathering his strength. His legs felt
like rub ber , and while breathing was still a joy , each breath
burned a nd tickl ed in his lungs.  He wouldn’ t go fast or far , if
he had to run.
The ar gument stopped abruptly . The tall man turned and
made a sharp ge sture toward the door , saying something that
made th e other men grunt with surprise and disapproval. Still,
they went, slowly , and with much muttered grumbling. One
short fel low with his hair in knots glared back at Roger , bared
his teeth , and drew the edge of a hand across his throat with a
hiss. W i th a small shock, Roger saw that the man’ s teeth were
jagged, filed to points.
The ramshackle door had barely closed behind them when
the woman clutched his sleeve.
“T ell me,” she said.“Not so … fast. ” He coughed again, wiping spittle from his
mouth with the back of his han d. His throat was seared; the
words fe lt like cinders, forced burning from his chest. “Y ou
get … me … out of here. Then … I’ll tell you. All I know .”
“T ell me!”
Her fingers dug hard into his arm. Her eyes were bloodshot
from the smoke, and the brown  irises glowed like coals. He
shook his head, coughing.
The tall man bru shed the woman aside, grabbing Roger by a
handful of shirt. Something gleamed dully , too close to
Roger ’ s eye to see clearly , and amid the stench of burning, he
caught the reek of rotting teeth.
“Y ou tell her , man, or I rip you guts!”
Roger brought a forearm up b etween them, and with an
ef fort, shoved the man back, stumbling.
“No,” he said doggedly . “Y ou get … me out. Then I tell.”
The man  hesitat ed, crouched, the knife blade wavering in a
small arc of uncertainty . His one eye flicked to the woman.
“Y ou sure he know?”
The wom an had not taken her eyes of f Roger ’ s face. She
nodded slowly , not looking away .
“He knows.”
“It was … a girl .” Roger looked at her steadily , fighting the
ur ge to blink. “Y ou’ll know … that much … yourself.”
“Does she live?”
“Get me … out.”
She was not a tall woman, nor a lar ge one, but her ur gency
seemed to fill the hut. She fa irly quivered with it, hands
clenched into fists at her sides. She glared at Roger for a long
minute more, than whirled on her heel, saying something
violent to the man in the odd African tongue.He tried to ar g ue, but it was fruitless; the stream of her
words struck him like water from a fire hose. He flung up his
hands in frustrated surrender , then reached out and snatched
the rag from the woman’ s head. He undid the knots with quick,
long fingers, and whipped it into the shape of a blindfold,
muttering under his breath.
The last thing R oger saw before the man fastened the cloth
round his eyes w as Fanny Beardsley , hair in a number of small
greasy plaits round her shoulders, her eyes still on him,
burning like embers. Her broken teeth were bared, and he
thought she would bite him, if she could.
 
THEY DIDN’T GET OUT without some ar gument; a chorus
of angry voices surrounded the m for some way , and hands
plucked at his clothes and limb s. But the one-eyed man still
had the knife. Roger heard a shout, a scuf fling of feet and
bodies close by , and a sharp cry . The voices dropped, and the
hands no longer snatched at him.
They walked on, his hand on Fanny Beardsley’ s shoulder
for guid ance. He  thought it was  a small settlement; at least, it
took ver y little time before he f elt the trees close around him.
Leaves brushed his face, and the resin smell of sap was
heightened by the hot, smoky air . It was still raining fairly
hard, but the sm ell of smoke was everywhere. The ground was
lumpy , layers of leaf-mold punctuated by upthrusting rocks,
studded with stumps and fallen branches.
The man and woman exchanged occasional remarks, but
soon fel l silent. His clothes grew wet and clung to him, the
seams o f his breeches chafing as  he walked. The blindfold was
too tight to allo w him to see anything, but light leaked under
the edge, and from that, he could judge the changing time of
day . He thought it was just past mid-afternoon when they left
the hut; when th ey stopped at la st, the light had faded almost
completely .
He b linked when the blindfold was taken of f, the sudden
flood of light compensating for its dimness. It was latetwilight. They stood in a hollow , already halfway filled with
darkness. Looki ng up, he saw the sky above the mountains
blazing with orange and crimson, the smoky haze lit up as
though the world itself were still burning. Overhead, the
clouds had broken; a slice of pure blue sky shone through,
soft, and bright with twilight stars.
Fanny B eardsley faced him, looking smaller beneath the
canopy of a tow ering chestnut tree, but every bit as intent as
she had in the hut.
He had had plenty of time to thi nk about it. Ought he to tell
her whe re the child was, or sho uld he claim not to know? If
she knew , would  she make an attempt to reclaim the little girl?
And if so, wh at might be th e fallout—for the child, the
escaped slaves—or even for Jamie and Claire Fraser?
Neither of them had said anythi ng about the events that had
transpired at the Beardsley farmhouse, beyond the simple fact
that Bea rdsley h ad died of an apoplexy . Roger was suf ficiently
familiar with them both, though, to draw silent deductions
from Claire’ s troubled face and Jamie’ s impassive one. He
didn’ t know what had happened, but Fanny Beardsley did—
and it might w ell be something the Frasers would prefer
remain undiscovered. If Mr s. Beardsley reappeared in
Brownsville, see king to reclaim her daughter , questions would
certainly be asked—and perhaps  it was to no one’ s benefit that
they be answered.
The blazing sky washed her face with fire, though, and
faced with the h unger in those burning eyes, he could speak
nothing but the truth.
“Y our daughter … is well,” he b egan firmly , and she made a
small strangled noise, deep in h er throat. By the time he had
finished telling what he knew , th e tears were running down her
face, making tracks in the soot and dust that covered her , but
her eyes stayed wide, fixed on him as though to blink would
be to miss some vital word.
The man hung back a little, wary , keeping watch. His
attention was mostly on the wo man, but he stole occasionalglances at Roger as he spoke, a nd at the end, stood beside the
woman, his one eye bright as hers.
“She have de m oney?” he asked. He had the lilt of the
Indies in  his speech, and a skin like dark honey . He would
have been handsome, save for whatever accident had deprived
him of his eye, leaving a pocket of livid flesh beneath a
twisted, drooping lid.
“Y es, sh e’ s … inherited … all of Aaron … Beardsley’ s
property ,” Roger assured him, breath rasping in his throat from
so much talking. “Mr . Fraser saw … to it.” He and Jamie had
both gone to the  hearing of the  Orphan’ s Court, for Jamie to
bear witness to t he girl’ s identity . Richard Brown and his wife
had been given the guardianship of the child—and her
property . They had named the little girl—from what depths of
sentiment or outrage, he had no idea—”Alicia.”
“No ma tta she black?” He saw  the slave’ s one eye flick
sideways toward Fanny Beard sley , then slide away . Mrs.
Beardsley heard the note of uncertainty in the man’ s voice, and
turned on him like a viper striking.
“She is yourss!” she said. “She could not be histh, could
not!”
“Y ah, you say so,” he replie d, his face cast down in
sullenness. “Dey give money to black girl?”
She stam ped he r foot, noiseless on the ground, and slapped
at hi m. He straightened up and turned his face aside, but made
no other attempt to escape her fury .
“Do you think I would have left her , ever  l eft  her , if she h ad
been white, if she could post hibly have been white?” she
shouted. She punched at him, pummelling his arms and chest
with blows. “It wath your fault I had to leave her , yourss! Y ou
and that damned black hide, God damn you—”
It w as Roger w ho seized her flailing wrists and held them
tight against her straining, letting her shriek herself to
hoarseness before she collapsed at last in tears.The slav e, who had watched all this with an expression
between shame and anger , lifted his hands a little toward her .
It w as the sligh test of movements, but enough; she turned at
once fro m Roger and flung herself into her lover ’ s arms,
sobbing against his chest. He wrapped his arms awkwardly
around her and held her close, rocking back and forth on his
bare heels. He looked sheepish, but no longer angry .
Roger cleared his throat, grimacing at the soreness. The
slave looked up at him, and nodded.
“Y ou go, man,” he said softly .  Then, before Roger could
turn to go, he said, “W ait … true, man, de child fix good?”
Roger nodded, feeling unu tterably tired. Whatever
adrenaline or sense of self-preservation had been keeping him
going w as all used up. The blaz ing sky had gone to ashes, and
everything in the hollow was fading, blurring into dark.
“She’ s all … rig ht. They’ll take … good care of her .” He
groped, wanting  to of fer something else. “She’ s … pretty ,” he
said at last. His voice was n early gone, no more than a
whisper . “A pretty … girl.”
The man’ s face shifted, caugh t between embarrassment,
dismay , and pleasure.
“Oh,” he said. “Dat be from d e mama, sure.” He patted
Fanny Beardsley’ s back, very gently . She had stopped sobbing,
but stood with her face presse d against his chest, still and
silent. It was nearly full dark; in the deep dusk, all color was
leached away; her skin seemed the same color as his.
The man wore n othing but a tattered shirt, wet through, so
that his dark skin showed in pat ches through it. He had a rope
belt, tho ugh, with a rough cloth  bag strung on it. He groped
one-handed in this, and drew out the astrolabe, which he
extended toward Roger .
“Y ou don’ t mean … to keep that?” Roger asked. He felt as
though he was standing inside a cloud; everything was
beginning to feel far away and h azy , and words reached him as
though filtered through cotton wool.The ex-slave shook his head.
“No, ma n, what I do wid dat? Beside,” he added, with a wry
lift of the mouth, “maybe no one come look you, man, but de
masta what own dat ting—he come look, maybe.”
Roger took the h eavy disk, and put the thong over his neck.
It took two tries; his arms felt like lead.
“Nobody … will come looking,” he said. He turned and
walked away , with no idea where he was, or where he might
be going. After a few steps, he turned and looked back, but the
night had already swallowed them.84
BURNT T O BONES
T HE HORSES SETTLED SLIGHTL Y , but were still uneasy ,
pawing, stampin g, and jerking at their tethers, as the thunder
rumbled hollowl y in the distance. Jamie sighed, kissed the top
of my head, and pushed his wa y back through the conifers to
the tiny clearing where they stood.
“W ell, if  ye dinna like it up here ,” I heard him say to them,
“why did ye come?” He spoke tolerantly , though, and I heard
Gideon whinny briefly in pleasure at seeing him. I was turning
to go and hel p with the re assuring, when a flicker of
movement caught my eye below .
I lea ned out to see it, keeping a tight grip on one of the
hemlock’ s branches for safety , but it had moved. A horse, I
thought, but coming from a d if ferent direction than that in
which th e refuge es had come. I wove my way down the line of
conifers, peeking through the branches, and reached a spot
near the  end of the narrow ledg e where I had a clear view of
the river valley below .
Not a horse, quite—it was—
“It’ s Clarence!” I shouted.
“Who?” Jamie’ s voice came back from the far end of the
ledge, half-drowned by the rustle of the branches overhead.
The wind was still rising, damp with returning rain.
“Clarence! Roge r ’ s mule!” Not waiting for a reply , I ducked
beneath an overhanging bra nch and balanced myself
precariously on the lip of the ledge, clinging to a rocky
outcrop that jutted from the clif f where it met the ledge. There
were ser ried ran ks of trees belo w , marching down the slope,
their top s no more than a few inches below the level of my
feet, but I didn’ t want to risk falling down into them.It was  Cla rence, I was  sure of it. I wa s by no means expert
enough to recognize any quadru ped by its distinctive gait, but
Clarence had suf fered some f orm of mange or other skin
disease i n his youth, and the hai r had grown in white over the
healed patches, leaving him peculiarly piebald over the rump.
He was lollopin g over the stubbled corn fields, ears pointed
forward and obviously happy to be rejoining society . He was
also saddled and riderless, and I said a very bad word under
my breath when I saw it.
“He’ s br oken hi s hobbles and r un.” Jamie had appeared at
my shou lder , pe ering down at th e small figure of the mule. He
pointed. “See?” I hadn’ t noticed, in my alarm, but there was a
small ra g of cloth tied round one  of his forelegs, flapping as he
ran.
“I suppo se that’ s better ,” I said. My hands had gone sweaty ,
and I wiped my palms on the elbows of my sleeves, unable to
look away . “I m ean—if he was hobbled, then Roger wasn’ t on
him. Roger wasn’ t thrown, or knocked of f and hurt.”
“Ah, no.” Jamie seemed concerned, but not alarmed. “He’ll
have a long walk back, is all.” Still, I saw his gaze shift out,
over the narrow river valley , now nearly filled with smoke. He
shook his head slightly , and said  something under his breath—
no doubt a cousin to my own bad word.
“I w onder if this  is how the Lord feels,” he said aloud, and
gave me a wry glance. “Able to see what foolishness men are
up to, but canna do a bloody thing about it.”
Before I could answer him, lightning flashed, and the
thunder cracked  on its heels with a clap so loud and sudden
that I jumped, nearly losing my  grip. Jamie seized my arm to
stop me falling, and pulled me back from the edge. The horses
were thr owing f its again, at the  far end of the ledge, and he
turned toward them, but stopped  suddenly , his hand still on my
arm.
“What?” I looked where he wa s looking, and saw nothing
but the wall of the clif f, some ten feet away , festooned withsmall rock plants.
He let go my a rm, and without answering, walked toward
the c lif f. And, I saw , toward an o ld fire-blasted snag that stood
near it. V ery delicately , he reach ed out and tweaked something
from the dead tree’ s bark. I reached his side and peered into
the palm of his  hand, where he cradled several long, coarse
hairs. White hairs.
Rain began to fall again, settling down in a businesslike way
to the job of so aking everything in sight. A piercing pair of
whinnies came from the horses, who didn’ t like being
abandoned one bit.
I looked at the trunk of the tree; there were white hairs all
over it, caught in the cracks of the ragged bark. A bear has
special scratching tr ees , I coul d hear Josiah saying. He’ll
come back to one, again and again . I swallowed, hard.
“Perhaps,” Jamie said very thoughtfully , “it’ s no just the
thunder that troubles the horses.”
Perhaps not, but it wasn’ t helping. Lightning flashed into
the trees  far down the slope and the thunder sounded with it.
Another flash-bang following on its heels, and another , as
though an ack-ack gun were go ing of f beneath our feet. The
horses w ere having hysterics, and I felt rather like joining
them.
I had put on my hooded cloak when I left the village, but
both hood and hair were matted  to my skull, the rain pounding
down on my head like a shower of nails. Jamie’ s hair was
plastered to his head as well, and he grimaced through the rain.
He m ade a “sta y here” gesture, but I shook my head and
followed him. The horses were  in a complete state, saturated
manes dangling over rolling eyes. Judas had succeeded in half-
uprooting the small tree I had tied him to, and Gideon had his
ears laid  flat, flexing his lip repeatedly over his big yellow
teeth, looking for someone or something to bite.
Seeing this, Jamie’ s lips tightened. He glanced back toward
the place where we had found the scratching-tree, invisiblefrom our present position. The lightning flashed, the thunder
shuddered throu gh the rock, and  the horses both screamed and
lunged. Jamie shook his head, making the decision, and
grabbed Judas’ s reins, holding him steady . Evidently we were
getting of f the mountain, slippery trail or not.
I got  into  the saddle in a swash of wet skirts, and took a firm
grip, trying to shout soothing words into Judas’ s ear as he
skittered and danced, eager to b e gone. W e were dangerously
close to the conifers at the edge, and I leaned hard inward,
trying to get him toward the clif f side of the ledge.
An extraordinary prickling sensation ran over my body , as
though I were b eing bitten from head to toe by thousands of
tiny ants . I looked at my hands and saw them glowing, limned
in blue light. Th e hairs on my forearms stood straight out, each
one glow ing blu e. My hood had  fallen back, and I felt the hair
on my head rise  all at once, as though a giant hand had gently
lifted it.
The air smelled  suddenly of brimstone, and I looked about
in a larm. T rees, rocks, the gro und itself was bathed in blue
light. T iny snakes of brilliant white electricity hissed across
the surface of the clif f, a few yards away .
I turned, calling for Jamie, and saw him on Gideon, turning
toward me, his mouth open as he shouted, all words lost in the
reverberation of the air around us.
Gideon’ s mane began to rise, as though by magic. Jamie’ s
hair floated up f rom his shoulders, shot with wires of crackling
blue. Horse and rider glowed w ith hell-light, each muscle of
face and  limb outlined. I felt a rush of air over my skin, and
then Jamie flung himself from h is saddle and into me, hurling
us both into emptiness.
The lightning struck before we hit the ground.
I came to, smelling burned flesh  and the throat-searing sting
of ozone . I felt as though I had  been turned inside out; all of
my or gans seemed to be exposed.It was still raining. I lay still for  a while, letting the rain run
over my  face and soak my hair , while the neurons of my
nervous system slowly began to work again. My finger
twitched, by itself. I tried to do it on purpose, and succeeded. I
flexed m y finger s—not so good. A few more minutes, though,
and enough circuits were working to allow me to sit up.
Jamie w as lying near me, spraw led on his back like a rag
doll amo ng a patch of sumac. I crawled over to him, and found
that his eyes w ere open. He blinked at me, and a muscle
twitched at the side of his mouth in an attempt at a smile.
I couldn’ t see any blood, and while his limbs were thrown
awry , they were all straight. The rain pooled in his eye sockets,
running into his eyes. He blinked violently , then turned his
head to let the water drain of f his face. I put a hand on his
stomach, and felt the big abdom inal pulse beneath my fingers,
very slow , but steady .
I d idn’ t know h ow long we had  been unconscious, but this
storm to o had moved away . Sheet lightning flashed beyond the
distant mountains, throwing the peaks into sharp relief.
“Thunder is good,” I quoted, watching it in a sort of dreamy
stupor , “thunder  is impressive; but it is the lightning that does
the work.”
“It’ s do ne a job of work on me. Are ye all right,
Sassenach?”
“Splendid,” I said, still feeling pleasantly remote. “And
you?”
He glan ced at me curiously , bu t seemed to conclude that it
was all right. H e grasped a sumac bush and dragged himself
laboriously to his feet.
“I canna feel my toes just yet,” he told me, “but the rest is
all right.  The horses, though—” He glanced upward, and I saw
his throat move as he swallowed.
The horses were silent.W e were some t wenty feet below the ledge, among the firs
and bals ams. I could  mo ve, but didn’ t seem able to summon
the will to do s o. I sat still, taking stock, while Jamie shook
himself, then began the climb ba ck up to the mankiller ’ s ledge.
It seemed very quiet; I wondered whether I had been
deafened by the blast. My foot was cold. I looked down and
discovered that my left shoe was gone—whether knocked of f
by t he lightning or lost in the f all, I had no idea, but I didn’ t
see i t anywhere nearby . The stoc king was gone, too; there was
a small dark sta rburst of veins, just below the anklebone—a
legacy of my second pregnancy . I sat staring at it as though it
were the key to the secrets of the universe.
The hor ses must be dead; I knew that. Why weren’ t we? I
breathed in the stink of burning flesh, and a tiny shudder arose,
somewhere deep inside me. W ere we alive now , only because
we w ere doomed to die in four years? When it came our turn,
would we lie in the burnt ruins of our house, shells of charred
and reeking flesh?
Burnt to bones , wh ispered the voice of my memory . T ears
ran dow n my face with the rain , but they were distant tears—
for the horses, for my mother—not for myself. Not yet.
There were blue veins beneath t he surface of my skin, more
prominent than before. On the backs of my hands, they traced
a roadm ap … in the tender flesh  behind my knee, they showed
in webs and tra ceries; along my shin, one lar ge vein swelled
snakelike, distended. I pressed a finger on it; it was soft and
disappeared, but came back the instant I removed the finger .
The inner workings of my body were becoming slowly
more visible, the taut skin thinning, leaving me vulnerable,
with everything outside, exposed to the elements, that once
was safely sheltered in the snug casing of the body . Bone and
blood pu sh throu gh … there was  an oozing graze on the top of
my foot.
Jamie was back, drenched to th e skin and breathless from
the climb. Both his shoes were gone, I saw .“Judas is dead,” he said, sitting  down beside me. He took
my cold hand in his own cold hand and pressed it hard.
“Poor th ing,” I said, and the tears ran faster , warm streams
mingling with cold rain. “He knew , didn’ t he? He always hated
thunder and lightning, always.”
Jamie put an arm  round my shoulders and pressed my head
against his chest, making little soothing noises.
“And Gideon?” I asked at last, r aising my head and making
an ef fort to wipe my nose on a fold of sodden cloak. Jamie
shook his head, with a small, incredulous smile.
“He’ s alive,” he said. “He’ s burn t down the side of his right
shoulder and foreleg and his mane’ s singed of f entirely .” He
picked up a fold  of his own tattered cloak and tried to wipe my
face, wi th no better results than I had had myself. “I expect it
will do wonders  for his temper ,”  he said, trying to make a joke
of it.
“I su ppose so.” I was too worn out and shaken to laugh, but
I managed a small smile, and it felt good. “Can you lead him
down, d o you think? I—I have  some ointment. It’ s good for
burns.”
“A ye, I think so.” He gave me a hand and helped me stand
up. I turned to brush down my crumpled skirts, and as I did so,
caught sight of something.
“Look,” I said, my voice no more than a whisper . “Jamie—
look.”
T en feet  away , up the slope from  us, stood a big balsam fir ,
its t op sheared cleanly away an d half its remaining branches
charred and smoking. W edged between one branch and the
stump o f the trunk was a huge, rounded mass. It was half
black, the tissues turned to carb on—but the hair on the other
half lay in sodden white spik es, the cream-white color of
trilliums.
Jamie stood looking up at the co rpse of the bear , his mouth
half ope n. Slow ly he closed it, and shook his head. He turnedto me, then, and  looked past me , toward the distant mountains,
where the retreating lightning flashed silently .
“They d o say ,” he said softly , “that a great storm portends
the death of a king.”
He touched my face, very gently .
“W ait here, Sassenach, while I  fetch the horse. W e’ll go
home.”85
HEAR THFIRE
Fraser ’ s Ridge
 October , 1771
T HE SEASON CHANGED, from  one hour to the next. She
had gone to sleep in the cool balm of an Indian summer
evening, and wakened in the m iddle of the night to the sharp
bite of autumn, her feet freezin g under the single quilt. Still
drowsy , she couldn’ t fall sleep again, not without more covers.
She dragged slit-eyed out of be d, padded over the icy floor
to check  Jemmy . He was warm enough, sunk deep into his tiny
featherbed, the quilt drawn up a round his small pink ears. She
laid a gentle han d on his back, waiting for the reassurance of
the rise and fall of his breath. Once, twice, once more.
She rummaged for an extra quilt and spread it on the bed,
reached for a cu p of water to ease her dry throat, and realized
with a grunt of annoyance that it was empty . She thought with
longing of crawling back into bed, sinking into deep, warm
slumber—but not dying of thirst.
There w as a bucket of well water by the stoop. Y awning and
grimacing, she slid the bolt from  its brackets and set it gently
down—though Jem slept so soundly at night, there wasn’ t
much danger of waking him.
Still, she opened the door with care and stepped out,
shivering slightly as the cold air twitched the shift about her
legs. Sh e bent and groped in the darkness. No bucket. Where
—
She saw a flicker of movement from the corner of her eye
and wh irled. For an instant, she thought it was Obadiah
Henderson, sittin g on the bench beside her door , and her heart
clenched like a fist as he stood up. Then she realized, and wasin R oger ’ s arms before her mind  could consciously sort out the
details of him.
Pressed against him, speechless, she had time to notice
things: t he arch of his collarbone against her face, the smell of
clothes gone so long worn, so l ong unwashed that they didn’ t
smell ev en of sweat any longer , but of the wood he walked
through and the earth he slept upon, and mostly of the bitter
smoke h e breath ed. The strength of his arm about her and the
rasp of his beard on her skin. The cracked cold leather of his
shoes be neath h er bare toes, and  the shape of the bones of his
feet within them.
“It’ s you,” she said, and was crying. “Y ou’re home!”
“A ye, I’ m home ,” he whispered in her ear . “Y ou’re well?
Jem’ s well?”
She rela xed her  hold on his ribs and he smiled at her , so
strange t o see his smile through a growth of thick black beard,
the curve of his lips familiar in the moonlight.
“W e’re fine. Y ou’re all right?” She snif fed, eyes
overflowing as she looked at h im. “What are you doing out
here, for heaven’ s sake? Why didn’ t you knock?”
“A ye. I’m fine. I didn’ t want to  scare ye. Thought I’d sleep
out here, knock in the morning. Why are ye crying?”
She real ized the n that he wasn’ t  whispering from any desire
to avoid  waking Jem; what voi ce he had was a ragged husk,
warped and breathless. And yet he spoke clearly , the words
unforced, without the painful hesitation he had had.
“Y ou can talk,” she said, wiping hastily at her eyes with the
back of a wris t. “I mean—better .” Once, she would have
hesitated to touch his throat, fea rful of his feelings, but instinct
knew better than to waste the sudden intimacy of shock. The
strain might come again, and they be strangers, but for a
moment, for this  moment in the dark, she could say anything,
do anyth ing, and she put her fingers on the warm ragged scar ,
touched the incision that had saved his life, a clean white line
through the whiskers.“Does it still hurt to talk?”
“It hurts ,” he said, in the faint croaking rasp, and his eyes
met hers , dark and soft in the moonlight. “But I can. I will—
Brianna.”
She stepped back, one hand on his arm, unwilling to let go.
“Come in,” she said. “It’ s cold out here.”
 
I HAD ANY NUMBER of objections to hearthfire, ranging
from spl inters under the fingernails and pitch on the hands to
blisters, burns, and the sheer infuriating contrariness of the
element. I would, however , say two things in its favor: it was
undeniably warm , and it cast the act of love in a light of such
dim beauty that all the hesitations of nakedness could safely be
for gotten.
Our min gled shadows flowed together on the wall, here a
limb, there the curve of back or haunch showed clean, some
part of an undu lating beast. Jamie’ s head rose clear , a great
maned creature looming over me, back arched in his extremity .
I reached up across the stre tch of glowing skin and
trembling muscle, brushed the sparking hairs of arms and
chest, to bury m y hands in the warmth of his hair and pull him
down gasping to the dark hollow of my breasts.
I k ept my eyes half-closed, my legs as well, unwilling to
surrender his body , to give up  the illusion of oneness—if
illusion it was. How many more times might I hold him so,
even in the enchantment of firelight?
I c lung with all my might to him , and to the dying pulse of
my own flesh. But joy grasped  is joy vanished, and within
moments I was n o more than myself. The dark starburst on my
ankle showed clearly , even in firelight.
I s lacken ed my grip on his shoulders and touched the rough
whorls of his hair with tenderness. He turned his head and
kissed my breast, then stirred and sighed and slid sideways.“And th ey say hen’ s teeth are rare,” he said, gingerly
touching a deep bite-mark on one shoulder .
I laughed, in spite of myself.
“As rare as a rooster ’ s cock, I s uppose.” I raised myself on
one elbow and peered toward the hearth.
“What is it, wee hen?”
“Just ma king su re my clothes w on’ t catch fire.” What with
one thing and another , I hadn’ t much noticed where he’d
thrown my garments, but they seemed to be a safe distance
from the  flames; the skirt was in a small heap by the bed, the
bodice a nd shift somehow had e nded up in separate corners of
the room. My brassiere-strip was nowhere to be seen.
Light flickered on the whitewas hed walls, and the bed was
full of shadows.
“Y ou are beautiful,” he whispered to me.
“If you say so.”
“Do ye not believe me? Have I ever lied to you?”
“That’ s not what I mean. I mean—if you say it, then it’ s
true. Y ou make it true.”
He sighed and shifted, easing us into comfort. A log cracked
suddenly in the hearth, sending up a spray of gold sparks, and
subsided, hissing as the heat str uck a hidden seam of damp. I
watched the new wood turn black, then red, blazing into
white-hot light.
“Do ye say it of me, Sassenach?” he asked suddenly . He
sounded shy , and I turned my head to look up at him in
surprise.
“Do I say what? That you’re beautiful?” My mouth curved
involuntarily , and he smiled in return.
“W ell … not that. But that ye can bear my looks, at least.”
I traced the faint white line of the scar across his ribs, left by
a sw ord, long ag o. The longer , thicker scar of the bayonet thathad ripped the length of one thigh. The arm that held me,
browned and roughened, the hairs of it bleached white-gold
with long days of sun and wo rk. Near my hand, his cock
curled b etween his thighs, gone soft and small and tender now ,
in its nest of auburn hair .
“Y ou’re beautifu l to me, Jamie,” I said softly , at last. “So
beautiful, you break my heart.”
His hand traced the knobs of my backbone, one at a time.
“But I am an auld man,” he said, smiling. “Or should be.
I’ve white hairs in my head; my beard’ s gone gray .”
“Silver ,” I said, brushing the so ft stubble on his chin, parti-
colored as a quilt. “In bits.”
“Gray ,” he said firmly . “And scabbit-looking with it. And
yet …” His eyes softened as h e looked at me. “Y et I burn
when I come to  ye, Sassenach—and will, I think, ‘til we two
be burned to ashes.”
“Is that poetry?” I asked cautiously . “Or do you mean it
literally?”
“Oh,” he  said. “No. I hadna meant … no.” He tightened his
arm around me and bent his head to mine.
“I dinna ken about that. If it should be—”
“It won’ t.”
A breath of laughter stirred my hair .
“Y e sound verra sure of it, Sassenach.”
“The future can be changed; I do it all the time.”
“Oh, aye?”
I rolled away a bit, to look at him.
“I d o. Look at Mairi MacNeill. If I hadn’ t been there last
week, sh e would  have died, and  her twins with her . But I was
there, and they didn’ t.”
I put a hand behind my head, watching the reflection of the
flames ripple like water across the ceiling beams.“I do  wo nder—there are lots I c an’ t save, but some I do. If
someone lives because of me, a nd later has children, and they
have ch ildren, a nd so on … well, by the time you reach my
time, say , there are probably thirty or forty people in the world
who wo uldn’ t ot herwise have been there, hm? And they’ve all
been doing things meanwhile, living their lives—don’ t you
think that’ s changing the future? ” For the first time, it occurred
to me to wonder just how much I was single-handedly
contributing to the population  explosion of the twentieth
century .
“A ye,” he said slowly . He pic ked up my free hand and
traced the lines of my palm with one long finger .
“A ye, but it’ s their  future ye change, Sassenach, and perhaps
you’re meant to.” He took my hand in his and pulled gently on
the fingers. One knuckle popped, making a small sound like a
log spitt ing in the hearth. “Physi cians have saved a good many
folk over the years, surely .”
“Of cou rse they do. And not just physicians, either .” I sat
up, impelled by the force of m y ar gument. “But it doesn’ t
matter—don’ t you see? Y ou—” I pointed one finger at him,
“—you’ve saved a life now and then. Fer gus? Ian? And here
they are, both going about the world doing things and
procreating and what-not. Y ou changed the future for them,
didn’ t you?”
“A ye, well … perhaps. I couldna do otherwise, though,
could I?”
That simple statement stopped me, and we lay in silence for
a bit , watching t he flicker of light on the white-plastered wall.
At last he stirred beside me, and spoke again.
“I dinna say it for pity ,” he sai d. “But ye ken … now and
then my  bones ache a bit.” He d idn’ t look at me, but spread his
crippled hand, turning it in the light, so the shadow of the
crooked fingers made a spider on the wall.
Now and then. I  kent, all right. I knew the limits of the body
—and it s miracl es. I’d seen him sit down at the end of a day’ slabor , ex haustion written in every line of his body . Seen him
move sl owly , st ubborn against the protests of flesh and bone
when he rose on cold mornings. I would be willing to bet that
he h ad not liv ed a day since Culloden without pain, the
physical damages of war aggravated by damp and harsh living.
And I would also be willing to bet that he had never
mentioned it to anyone. Until now .
“I k now that,” I said softly , a nd touched the hand. The
twisting scar that runneled his leg. The small depression in the
flesh of his arm, legacy of a bullet.
“But not with yo u,” he said, and  covered my hand where it
lay o n his arm. “D’ye ken that th e only time I am without pain
is in your bed, Sassenach? When I take ye, when I lie in your
arms—my wounds are healed, then, my scars for gotten.”
I sighed and laid my head in the curve of his shoulder . My
thigh pre ssed his , the softness of  my flesh a mold to his harder
form.
“Mine, too.”
He w as silent for a time, stroking my hair with his good
hand. It was wi ld and bushy , fr eed from its moorings by our
earlier s truggles, and he smoothed one curly strand at a time,
combing down each lock between his fingers.
“Y our hair ’ s like a great storm cloud, Sassenach,” he
murmured, sounding half-asleep. “All dark and light together .
No two hairs are the same color .”
He w as right; th e lock between his fingers bore strands of
pure wh ite, of silver and blond, dark streaks, nearly sable, and
several bits still of my young light brown.
His fing ers wen t under the mas s of hair , and I felt his hand
cup the base of my skull, holding my head like a chalice.
“I sa w m y moth er in her cof fin, ” he said at last. His thumb
touched my ear , drew down the curve of helix and lobule, and
I shivered at his touch.“The women had plaited her h air , to be seemly , but my
father wouldna have it. I heard him. He didna shout, though,
he was verra quiet. He would have his last sight of her as she
was to him, he s aid. He was half -crazed wi’ grief, they said, he
should l et well alone, be still. H e didna trouble to say more to
them, bu t went to the cof fin himself. He undid her plaits and
he s pread out he r hair in his two hands across the pillow . They
were afraid to stop him.”
He paused, his thumb stilled.
“I w as there, kee pin’ quiet in the corner . When they all went
out to meet the priest, I crept u p close. I hadna seen a dead
person before.”
I let my fingers curl over the ridge of his forearm, quietly .
My mother had left me one mor ning, kissed my forehead, and
slid in the clip that fell out of my curly hair . I had never seen
her again. Her cof fin had been closed.
“W as it—her?”
“No,” he  said softly . His eyes were half-lidded as he looked
into the fire. “Not quite. The face had the look of her , but no
more. Like as if someone had set out to carve her from birch
wood. But her h air—that was still alive. That was still … her .”
I heard him swallow , and half-clear his throat.
“The hair lay down across her breast, so it covered the child
who lay  with her . I thought per haps he wouldna like it; to be
smothered so. So I lifted up the  locks of red to let him out. I
could se e him— my wee brother , curled up in her arms, wi’ his
head on her breast, all shadowed  and snug under the curtain of
her hair .
“So then I thought no, he’d be h appier if I left him so—so I
smoothed her hair down again, to cover his head.” He drew a
deep br eath, and I felt his chest rise under my cheek. His
fingers ran slowly down through my hair .
“She hadna one white hair , Sassenach. Not one.”Ellen Fraser had died in childbirth, aged thirty-eight. My
own mother had been thirty-two . And I … I had the richness
of all those long years lost to them. And more.
“T o see  the years touch ye gives me joy , Sassenach,” he
whispered, “—for it means that ye live.”
He lifte d his hand and let my hair fall slowly from his
fingers, brushing my face, skimming my lips, floating soft and
heavy on  my neck and shoulders, lying like feathers at the tops
of my breasts.
“Mo nighean donn,”  he whis pered, “ mo chridhe . My brown
lass, my heart.”
“Come to me. Cover me. Shelter me, a bhean , heal me.
Burn with me, as I burn for you.”
I lay on him, covered him, my skin, his bone, and still—
still!—that fierc e bright core of  flesh to join us. I let my hair
fall down around us both, and  in the fire-shot cavern of its
darkness, whispered back.
“Until we two be burned to ashes.”86
THERE’S A HOLE IN THE
 BOTT OM OF THE SEA
Fraser ’ s Ridge
 October , 1771
R OGER W AS INST ANTL Y A W AKE, in that way that
allowed no transition through drowsiness; body inert, but mind
alert, ears tuned to the echo of what had wakened him. He had
no consc ious recollection of Jemmy’ s cry , but it echoed in his
inner ea r , with that combination of hope and resignation that is
the lot of the more-easily wakened parent.
Sleep dr agged at him, pulling h im back under the waves of
slumber like a ten-ton boulder chained to his foot. A tiny
rustling noise kept his head momentarily above the surface.
“Go bac k to sleep,”  h e thought fierc ely , in the dire ction of
the cradle. “Shhhhh. Hush. Quiet. Go … to … sleeeeeep.”  This
telepathic hypnosis seldom worked, but it delayed for a few
precious second s the necessity of moving. And now and then
the miracle happened, and his son actually did  go bac k to
sleep, relaxing into the warm sogginess of wet diaper and
crumb-caked dreams.
Roger held his b reath, clinging to the fading edge of sleep,
hoarding the cherished seconds  of immobility . Then another
small sound came, and he was on his feet at once.
“Bree? Bree, what is it?” The “r” in her name fluttered in
his throat, not quite there, but he didn’ t take the time to be
troubled by it. All his attention was for her .
She was standing by the cradle, a ghostly column in the
dark. H e touched her , took he r by the shoulders. Her arms
were w rapped tight around the little boy , and she was
shuddering with cold and fear .He pulled her close by instinct; her cold infected him at
once. He  felt the chill on his heart and forced himself to hold
tighter , not to look at the empty cradle.
“What is it?” he whispered. “Is it Jemmy? What’ s …
happened?”
A sh iver rose u p the length of  her body , and he felt the
goosebumps rise  under the thin cloth of her shift. Despite the
warmth of the room, he felt the hair on his own arms rising.
“Nothing,” she said. “He’ s all right.” Her voice was thick,
but she was righ t; Jem, waking to find himself uncomfortably
squashed between his parents, let out a sudden yelp of
surprised indign ation, and began to churn his arms and legs
like an eggbeater .
This sturdy battering filled Ro ger with a flood of warm
relief, dr owning the cold imaginings that had seized his mind
at th e sig ht of her . W ith a little dif ficulty , he pried Jemmy from
his mother ’ s arms and hoisted him high against his own
shoulder .
He p atted the solid little back in reassurance—reassurance
of h imself, as much as Jemmy— and made soft hissing noises
through his teeth. Jemmy , finding this accustomed procedure
soothing, yawned widely , relaxed into his normal hamlike
state, an d began to hum drow sily in Roger ’ s ear , with the
rising and falling note of a distant siren.
“DadeeDadeeDadee …”
Brianna was still standing by the cradle, empty arms
wrapped now around herself. R oger reached out with his free
hand and stroked her hair , her hard-boned shoulder , and drew
her close against him.
“Shhh,” he said to them both.  “Shhh, shhh. It’ s all right
now , shhh.”
Her arms went around him, and he could feel the wetness on
her f ace through the linen shirt. His other shoulder was already
damp with Jemmy’ s sleepy , sweaty warmth.“Come t o bed,” he said softly . “Come under the quilt, it’ s …
cold out  here.” It wasn’ t; the ai r in the cabin was warm. She
came, nonetheless.
Brianna reached  for the child, taking him to her breast even
before s he lay down. Never one  to refuse nourishment at any
hour , Je mmy ac cepted the of fer with alacrity , curling up into
an apost rophe of content against his mother ’ s stomach as she
settled on one side.
Roger slid into bed behind h er , and echoed his son’ s
posture, bringing up his knees behind Brianna’ s, curling his
body in a protective comma around her . Thus securely
punctuated, Bri anna began slowly to relax, though Roger
could still feel the tension in her body .
“All righ t now?” he asked softly . Her skin was still clammy
to the touch, but warming.
“Y eah.” She took in a deep breath and let it out in a
shuddering sigh. “Had a bad dream. I’m sorry I woke you.”
“It’ s OK.” He stroked the swel l of her hip, over and over ,
like one gentling a horse. “W ant to tell me?” He hoped she did,
though the sound of Jemmy’ s suckling was rhythmic and
soothing, and he felt sleep stealing over him as the three of
them warmed, melting together like candle wax.
“I was cold,” sh e said softly . “I think the quilt must have
fallen of f. But in the dream, I was cold because the window
was open.”
“Here? One of these windows?” Roger lifted a hand,
indicating the faint oblong of th e window in the far wall. Even
in th e middle of the darkest night, the oiled hide covering the
window was very slightly l ighter than the surrounding
blackness.
“No.” She took a deep breath . “It was in the house in
Boston; where I grew up. I was in bed, but I was cold, and the
cold wo ke me— in the dream. I  got up to see where the draft
was coming from.”There w ere Fren ch windows in her father ’ s study . The cold
wind came from there, bellying the long white curtains into the
room. T he cradl e stood by the antique desk, the end of a thin
white blanket flickering in the draft.
“He wa s gone .” Her voice had steadied, but had a
momentary catc h in it at the memory of terror . “Jemmy was
gone. The cradle was empty , and I knew something came
through the window and took him.”
She pre ssed b ack against him, unconsciously seeking
reassurance. “I was afraid of it—whatever it was—but it didn’ t
matter—I had to find Jemmy .”
One hand was curled up tight under her chin. He folded it in
his, and squeezed lightly , embracing her .
“I threw  open the curtains and ran out, and—and there was
nothing there. Only water .” She was shaking at the memory .
“W ater?” He stroked her clenched fist with a thumb, trying
to calm her .
“Ocean. The sea. Just—water , lapping up against the edge
of the terrace. It was dark, and I knew it went down forever ,
and that  Jemmy was down there, he’d drowned, and I was too
late—” S he chok ed, but got her voice back and went on, more
steadily . “But I dived in anyway , I had to. It was dark, and
there were things in the water w ith me—I couldn’ t see them,
but t hey brushed by me; big things. I kept looking and looking
but I couldn’ t s ee anything, and then the water suddenly got
lighter and I—I saw him.”
“Jemmy?”
“No. Bonnet—Stephen Bonnet.”
Roger f orced himself not to move, not to stif fen. She
dreamed often; he always imagi ned that the dreams she would
not tell him were of Bonnet.
“He was holding Jemmy , and la ughing. I went to take him,
and Bon net held him up away from me. He kept doing that,and I tried to hit  him, and he just caught my hand and laughed.
Then he looked up and his face changed.”
She took  a deep breath, and took hold of Roger ’ s fingers,
holding on for comfort.
“I never saw a look like that, Roger , never . There was
something behind me that he could see, something coming—
and it scared him  more than I’ve ever seen anyone scared. He
was holding me; I couldn’ t turn  around to look, and I couldn’ t
get away—I couldn’ t leave Jemmy . It was coming—and …
then I woke up.”
She gave a small, shaky laugh.
“My friend Gayle’ s grandmother always said that when you
fall of f a clif f i n a dream, if you hit the bottom, you’ll die.
Really die, I mean. Y ou figure the same thing goes for getting
eaten by a sea monster?”
“No. Besides, you always wake up in time from dreams like
that.”
“I have so far .” She sounded a little dubious. Still, dream
told, she was e ased of its ter ror; her body let go its last
resistance and she breathed de ep and easy against him; he
could feel the swell of her rib cage under his arm.
“Y ou always will. Don’ t be troubled now; Jemmy’ s safe.
I’m here ; I’ll keep you both safe .” He put his arm gently round
her , and cupped his hand around Jemmy’ s fat bottom, warm in
its li nen clout. J emmy , all his bodily needs met, had relapsed
into a peaceful torpor , contagious in its abandon. Brianna
sighed and put her hand over Roger ’ s, squeezing lightly .
“There were books on the des k,” she said, beginning to
sound drowsy . “On Dad’ s desk. He’d been working, I could
tell—there were  open books and scattered papers everywhere.
There w as a paper lying in the middle of the desk, with writing
on i t; I wanted t o read it, to see what he’d been doing—but I
couldn’ t stop.”
“Mm-hm.”Brianna shivered slightly , and the movement rustled the
corn shu cks in the mattress, a tiny seismic disturbance of their
small, warm universe. She tensed, fighting sleep, and then
relaxed, as his hand cupped her breast.
Roger lay awake, watching the square of the window grow
slowly lighter , holding his family safe in his arms.
 
IT W AS OVERCAST and morning-cool, but very humid;
Roger could feel the sweat film his body like the skin on
boiled m ilk. It was no more than an hour past dawn, they
weren’ t yet out of sight of the house, and his scalp was
prickling already , slow droplets gathering under the plait at the
base of his skull.
He flexed his shoulders with resignation, and the first trickle
crawled tickling down his backbone. At least sweating helped
to ease the soreness; his arms a nd shoulders had been so stif f
this mor ning that Brianna had h ad to help him dress, pulling
his shirt over his  head and butto ning his flies with deft fingers.
He smiled inwardly , remembering what else those long
fingers had done. It had taken  his mind temporarily of f the
stif fness of his body , and banished the troubling memory of
dreams. He stretched, groaning,  feeling the pull of muscle on
tender jo ints. The clean linen wa s already sticking to chest and
back.
Jamie w as ahead of him on the trail, a damp patch growing
visibly between  his shoulder b lades where the strap of the
canteen crossed his back. Roger noted with some consolation
that his father -in -law was moving with a good bit less than his
usual pantherlik e grace this morning, too. He knew the Great
Scot was only h uman, but it w as reassuring to have that fact
confimed now and then.
“Think the weather will hold?” Roger said it as much for the
sake of speaking as for anything else; Jamie was by no means
garrulous, but he seemed abnormally quiet this morning,
barely speaking beyond a murmured “A ye, morning,” in replyto Roge r ’ s earlier greeting. Perhaps it was the grayness of the
day , with its threat—or promise—of rain.
The sky overhead curved low and dull as the inside of a
pewter b owl. A n afternoon indoors, with rain beating on the
oiled hides of the windows, and wee Jemmy curled up
peaceful as a do rmouse for a n ap, while his mother shed her
shift and  came to bed in the sof t gray light … aye, well, some
ways of breaking a sweat were better than others.
Jamie stopped and glanced up at the lowering sky . He flexed
his r ight hand, closing it to an awkward fist, then opening it
slowly . The stif f fourth finger made delicate chores such as
writing dif ficult, but did provide one dubious benefit in
compensation; t he swollen joints signaled rain as reliably as a
barometer .
Jamie wiggled the fingers experimentally , and gave Roger a
faint smile.
“No but a wee twinge,” he said. “Nay rain before nightfall.”
He stretched, easing his back in anticipation, and sighed.
“Let’ s get to it, aye?”
Roger glanced back; the house and cabin had disappeared.
He frowned at Jamie’ s retreating back, debating. It was nearly
half a mile to the new field; am ple time for conversation. Not
the r ight time, th ough, not yet. I t was a matter to be addressed
face-to-face, and at leisure—later , then, when they paused to
eat.
The woods were hushed, the a ir still and heavy . Even the
birds we re quiet , only the occa sional machine-gun burst of a
woodpecker startling the silence. They threaded their way
through the forest, silent as In dians on the layer of rotted
leaves, and emer ged from the scrub-oak thicket with a
suddenness that sent a flock of c rows shrieking out of the torn
earth of the new -cleared field like demons escaping from the
netherworld.
“Jesus!” Jamie murmured, and crossed himself
involuntarily . Roger ’ s throat closed tight, and his stomachclenched. The crows had been feeding on something lying in
the h ollow left b y an uprooted t ree; all he could see above the
ragged clods of earth was a pale curve that looked unsettlingly
like the round of a naked shoulder .
It was  a  naked should er—of a pig. Jamie squatted by the
boar ’ s carcass, frowning at the  livid weals that marred the
thick, pale skin. He touched the deep gouges on the flank with
distaste; Roger could see the busy movement of flies inside the
black-red cavities.
“Bear?” he asked, squatting bes ide Jamie. His father -in-law
shook his head.
“Cat.” H e brushed aside the stif f , sparse hairs behind the ear
and poin ted to the bluish punctu re wounds in the folded lard.
“Broke t he neck wi’ one bite. And see the claw marks?” Roger
had, but lacked the knowledge to dif ferentiate the marks of a
bear ’ s claws from those of a panther ’ s. He looked closely ,
committing the pattern to memory .
Jamie stood, and wiped a sleeve across his face.
“A b ear would h a’ taken more of the carcass. This is barely
touched. Cats will do that, thou gh—make a kill and leave it,
then come back to nibble at it, day after day .”
Muggy as it was, the hair pricked with chill on Roger ’ s
neck. It  was much too easy to imagine yellow eyes in the
shadow of the th icket behind him, fixed with cool appraisal on
the spot where skull met fragile spine.
“Think it’ s still close by?” He glanced about, trying to seem
casual. T he fore st was just as it had been, but now the silence
seemed unnatural and sinister .
Jamie waved away a couple of questing flies, frowning.
“A ye, maybe. This is a fresh kill; no maggots yet.” He
nodded at the gaping wound in the pig’ s flank, then stooped to
grasp th e stif f trotters. “Come, let’ s hang it. It’ s too much meat
to waste.”They dr agged th e carcass to a tree with a low , sturdy limb.
Jamie reached into his sleeve an d pulled out a grubby kerchief,
to ti e ro und his head to keep th e sweat from burning into his
eyes. Ro ger groped for his own kerchief—carefully washed,
neatly ironed— and did likewise. Mindful of the laundering,
they stripped their clean shirts and hung them over an alder
bush.
There was rope in the field, lef t from the stump-pulling of
earlier days’ work; Jamie whipped a length several times
around t he pig’ s forelimbs, then flung the free end over the
branch above. It was a full-grown sow , some two-
hundredweight of solid flesh. Jamie set his feet and hauled
back on the rope, grunting with the sudden ef fort.
Roger held his b reath as he bent to help hoist the stif fened
corpse, but Jamie had been right; it was fresh. There was the
usual fle shy pig-scent, gone faint with death, and the sharper
tang of blood—nothing worse.
Rough hair scraped the skin of his belly as he wrapped his
arms around the carcass, and he  set his teeth against a grimace
of distaste. There are few things deader than a lar ge, dead pig.
Then a word from Jamie, and t he carcass was secure. He let
go, and the pig swung gently to and fro, a meaty pendulum.
Roger was wringing wet; mor e than the ef fort of lifting
accounted for . There was a big smudge of brownish blood over
his c hest and sto mach. He rubbed the heel of his hand over the
knot in his belly , smearing the blood with sweat. He glanced
casually round once more. Nothing moved among the trees.
“The women will be pleased,” he said.
Jamie laughed, taking the dirk from his belt.
“I shouldna think so. They’ ll be up half the night,
butchering and salting.” He nodded in the direction of Roger ’ s
glance.
“Even if it’ s nea r , it willna trouble us. Cats dinna hunt lar ge
prey unl ess they’re hungry .” He looked wryly at the torn flank
of the dangling  pig. “A half-s tone of prime bacon will ha’satisfied it for the moment, I should think. Though if not—”
He glanced at his long rifle, leaning loaded against the trunk of
a nearby hickory .
He held  the pig while Jamie gutted it, then wrapped the
stinking mass of intestines in th e cloth from their lunch, while
Jamie patiently worked at kind ling a fire of green sticks that
would k eep the flies away from the hanging carcass. Streaked
and reeking with blood, waste, and sweat, Roger walked
across the field to the small stream that ran by the woods.
He knelt and spl ashed, arms and face and torso, trying to rid
himself of the f eeling of being watched. More than once, he
had crossed an empty moor in Scotland, only to have a full-
grown stag erupt from nowhere in front of him, springing by
apparent magic from the heather at his feet. Despite Jamie’ s
words, he was a ll too aware that some piece of quiet landscape
could abruptly detach itself and take life in a thunder of
hooves or a snarl of sudden teeth.
He r insed his mouth, spat, and  drank deep, forcing water
past the lingerin g tightness in hi s throat. He could still feel the
stif f coldness of the pig’ s carc ass, see the caked dirt in the
nostrils, the raw sockets where crows had pecked out the eyes.
Gooseflesh prickled over his shoulders, chilled as much by his
thoughts as by the cold stream-water .
No great dif ference between a pig and a man. Flesh to flesh,
dust to dust. One stroke, that’ s a ll it took. Slowly , he stretched,
savoring the last soreness in his muscles.
There was a raucous croaking from the chestnut overhead.
The crows, black blotches in th e yellow leaves, voicing their
displeasure at the robbery of their feast.
“Whaur … shall we gang a nd … dine the day?”  he
murmured unde r his breath, looking up at them. “Not here …
you bas tards. G et along!” Seized by revulsion, he scooped a
stone from the bank and hurled it into the tree with all his
might. The crows erupted into s hrieking flight, and he turned
back to the field, grimly satisfied.But his belly wa s still knotted, a nd the words of the corbies’
mocking song echoed in his ears: “Y e’ll sit on his white hause-
bane/and I’ll pick oot his bonny blue e’en. W i’ ae lock o’ his
golden hair/we’ll theek oor nest when it gr ows bar e.”
Jamie glanced at his face when he came back, but said
nothing. Beyond the field, the pig’ s carcass hung above the
fire, its outlines hidden in wreaths of smoke.
They had cut the fencerails already , made from pine
saplings they’d uprooted; the rough-barked logs lay ready by
the edge of the forest. The fence would have drystone pillars
to jo in the wooden rails, thoug h; not one of the simple rick-
rack fences meant to keep out deer or mark boundaries, but
one soli d enough to withstand t he jostling of three- and four -
hundred-pound hogs.
W ithin t he mont h, it would be time to drive in the pigs that
had been turned out to live wild in the forest, fattening
themselves on the chestnut mas t that lay thick on the ground.
Some w ould have fallen prey to  wild animals or accident, but
there would likely be fifty or sixty left to slaughter or sell.
They wo rked well together , he and Jamie. Much of a size,
each had an inst inct for the oth er ’ s moves. When a hand was
needed, it was there. No need for it just now , though—this part
of th e job was the worst, for the re was no interest to soften the
tedium, no skill to ease the labor . Only rocks, hundreds of
rocks, to  be hoisted from the loamy soil and carried, dragged,
wrestled to the field, to be piled and fitted into place.
Often they talked as they worked, but not this morning.
Each man worked alone with his  thoughts, tramping to and fro
with the  endless load. The morning passed in silence, broken
only by the far -of f calling of the  disgruntled crows, and by the
thunk and grate of stones, dropped on the growing pile.
It ha d to  be done. There was no choice. He’d known that for
a long time, but now that the dim prospect had hardened into
reality … Roger eyed his father -in-law covertly . W ould Jamie
agree to it, though?From a distance, the scars on h is back were barely visible,
masked by the g leam of sweat. Constant hard work kept a man
trim and taut, and no one seeing Fraser in outline—or close
enough to see th e deep groove of his backbone, the flat belly
and long clean lines of arm and thigh—would have taken him
for a man in middle age.
Jamie ha d showed him the scar s, though, the first day they
went out to wor k together , after he had come back from the
surveying. Standing by the half-built dairy-shed, Jamie had
pulled th e shirt of f and turned his back, saying casually , “Have
a keek, then.”
Up clos e, the scars were old and well-healed, thin white
crescents and lines for the mos t part, with here and there a
silvery net or a shiny lump, where a whipstroke had flayed the
skin in too wide a patch for the  edges of the wound to draw
cleanly together . There was some skin untouched, showing fair
and smooth among the weals—but not much.
And what was he to say? Roger had wondered. I’m sorry for
it? Thanks for the viewing privileges?
In the event, he  had said nothin g. Jamie had merely turned
around, handed Roger an ax wit h complete matter -of-factness,
and the y had begun their work, bare-chested. But he had
noticed that Jamie never stripp ed to work, if the other men
were with them.
All right. Of all men, Jamie would understand the need, the
necessity—the burden of Bria nna’ s dreaming, that lay in
Roger ’ s belly like a stone. Certa inly he would help. But would
he conse nt to allow Roger to finish it alone? Jamie, after all,
had some stake in the matter , too.
The crows were still calling, but farther of f, their cries thin
and desp erate, like those of lost  souls. Perhaps he was foolish
even to think of  acting alone. H e flung an armload of stones
onto the pile; small rocks clacked and rolled away .
“Preacher ’ s lad.” That’ s what the other lads at school had
called him, and that’ s what he w as, with all the ambiguity theterm im plied. The initial ur ge to prove himself manly by
means of force, the later awa reness of the ultimate moral
weakness of violence. But that was in another country—
He chok ed of f the rest of the q uotation, grimly bending to
lever a chunk of rock free of moss and dirt. Orphaned by war ,
raised by a ma n of peace—how was he to set his mind to
murder? He trundled the stone d own toward the field, rolling it
slowly end over end.
“Y ou’ve never killed anything but fish,” he muttered to
himself. “What makes you think …” But he knew all too well
what made him think.
 
BY MID -MORNING, there were enough rocks collected to
begin th e first pillar; with a no d and a murmur , they set to
work, dragging and heaving, stacking and fitting, with now
and then a muf fl ed exclamation at a smashed finger or bruised
toes.
Jamie h eaved a big stone into place, then straightened up,
gasping for breath.
Roger d rew his own deep breath. It might as well be now;
no better opportunity was likely to come.
“I’ve a favor to ask,” he said abruptly .
Jamie g lanced up, breathing heavily , one eyebrow raised.
He nodded, waiting for the request.
“T each me to fight.”
Jamie wiped an arm across his streaming face, and blew out
a deep breath.
“Y e ken  well enough how to fig ht,” he said. One corner of
his mouth quirked up. “D’ye mean will I teach ye to handle a
sword without cutting of f your foot?”
Roger kicked a stone back into the pile.
“That will do, to start.”Jamie s tood for a moment, lo oking him over . It was a
thoroughly dispassionate examination, much as he would have
given a bullock he thought to buy . Roger stood still, feeling the
sweat stream down the groove of his back, and thought that
once mo re, he was being compared—to his disadvantage—
with the absent Ian Murray .
“Y ou’re auld for it, mind,” Jamie said at last. “Most
swordsmen star t when they’re boys.” He paused. “I had my
first sword at five.”
Roger h ad had a train when he was five. W ith a red engine
that tooted its whistle when y ou pulled the cord. He met
Jamie’ s eye, and smiled pleasantly .
“Old for it, maybe,” he said. “But not dead.”
“Y e could be,” Fraser answered. “A little learning is a
dangerous thing —a fool wi’ a blade by his side in a scabbard
is safer than a fool who thinks he kens what to do with it.”
“A little learning is a danger ous thing,”  Roger quoted.
“ Drink de ep, or taste not the Pie rian spring.  Do you think me
a fool?”
Jamie laughed, surprised into amusement.
“Ther e shallow draughts intoxi cate the brain,”  he replied,
finishing the verse. “ And drinking lar gely sobers us again . As
for foolish—ye’ll no just be drunk on the thought of it, I
suppose?”
Roger smiled slightly in reply; he had given up being
surprised by the breadth of Jamie’ s reading.
“I’ll drink deep enough to stay sober ,” he said. “W ill ye
teach me?”
Jamie squinted, then lifted one shoulder slightly . “Y e’ve size
to your credit, a nd a good reac h, forbye.” He looked Roger
head to toe once more and nodded. “A ye, ye’ll maybe do.”
He t urned and w alked away , toward the next heap of stones.
Roger followed, feeling oddly gratified, as though he had
passed some small but important test.The test hadn’ t yet begun, though. It was only partway
through the building of the new pillar that Jamie spoke again.
“Why?” he asked, eyes on the huge stone he was slowly
heaving into place. It was too heavy to lift, the size of a
whisky keg. Knotted clumps of grass roots stuck out from
under it, ripped out of the earth by the stone’ s slow and brutal
passage across the ground.
Roger bent to le nd his own wei ght to the task. The lichens
on the rock’ s su rface were rough under his palms, green and
scabby with age.
“I’ve a family  to protect,” h e said. The rock moved
grudgingly , sliding a few inches across the uneven ground.
Jamie nodded, once, twice; on the silent “three,” they shoved
together , with an echoed grunt  of ef fort. The monster half-
rose, paused, rose altogether and overbalanced, chunking
down into place with a thunk!  that quivered through the
ground at their feet.
“Protect from what?” Jamie sto od and wiped a wrist across
his j aw . He glan ced up and away , gesturing with his chin at the
hanging pig. “I s houldna care to take on a panther wi’ a sword,
myself.”
“Oh, aye?” Roger bent his knees and maneuvered another
lar ge rock into h is arms. “I hear you’ve killed two bears—one
with a dirk.”
“A ye, well,” Jamie said dryly . “ A dirk’ s what I had. As for
the other—if it was a sword, it was Saint Michael’ s, not mine.”
“A ye, an d if ye’d known ahead of time that you might—ugh
—meet it—would you not have armed yourself—better?”
Roger b ent his knees, lowering the stone carefully into place.
He let it drop the last few inches, and wiped stinging hands on
his breeks.
“If I’d known  I should meet a damn bear ,” Jamie said,
grunting as he lifted another stone into place, “I would have
taken another path.”Roger s norted and wiggled the new stone, easing its fit
against the others. There was a s mall gap at one side that left it
loose; Ja mie eye d it, walked to the stone pile, and picked up a
small chunk of granite, tapered at one end. It fit the gap
exactly , and the two men smiled involuntarily at each other .
“D’ye think there’ s another path to take, then?” Roger
asked.
Fraser rubbed a hand across his mouth, considering.
“If i t’ s th e war ye mean—then, aye, I do.” He gave Roger a
stare. “M aybe I’ll find it and maybe I won’ t—but aye, there’ s
another path.”
“Maybe so.” He hadn’ t meant the oncoming war , and he
didn’ t think Jamie had, either .
“As to bears, though …” Jam ie stood still, eyes steady .
“There’ s a deal of dif ference, ye  ken, between meeting a bear
unawares—and hunting one.”
 
THE SUN STILL W ASN’T VISIBLE, but it wasn’ t necessary ,
either . N oon cam e as a rumbling  in the belly , a soreness of the
hands; a sudden awareness of t he weariness of back and legs
as ti mely as the  chiming of a grandfather ’ s clock. The last
lar ge roc k fell into place, and Jamie straightened up, gasping
for breath.
By u nspoken but mutual consent, they sat down with the
packet of food, clean shirts draped across bare shoulders,
against the chill of drying sweat.
Jamie chewed industriously , washing down a lar ge bite with
a gulp of ale. He made an involuntary face, pursed his lips to
spit, then changed his mind and swallowed.
“Ach! Mrs. Lizzie’ s been at the  mash again.” He grimaced
and took a remedial bite of biscuit, to erase the taste.
Roger grinned at his father -in-law’ s face.“What’ s she put in it this time?”  Lizzie had been trying her
hand at flavored ales—with indif ferent success.
Jamie snif fed warily at the mouth of the stone bottle.
“Anise?” he suggested, passing the bottle to Roger .
Roger smelt it, wrinkling up h is nose involuntarily at the
alcoholic whif f.
“Anise and  gin ger ,” he said. Nevertheless, he took a
cautious sip. He made the same face Jamie had, and emptied
the bottle over a compliant blackberry vine.
“W aste not, want not, but …”
“It’ s nay waste to keep from poisoning ourselves.” Jamie
heaved h imself up, took the emp tied bottle, and set of f toward
the small stream on the far side of the field.
He cam e back, sat down, and handed Roger the bottle of
water . “I’ve had word of Stephen Bonnet.”
It was said so  casually that Roger didn’ t register the
meaning of the words at first.
“Have you?” he said at last. Picc alilli relish was oozing over
his h and. Roger wiped the relis h from his wrist with a finger ,
and put it into his mouth, but didn’ t take another bite of
sandwich; his appetite had vanished.
“A ye. I dinna ken where he is now—but I ken where he’ll
be come next A pril—or rather , where I can cause him to be.
Six mon ths, and then we kill him. Do ye think that will give ye
time?”
He w as looking at Roger , calm as though he had suggested
an appointment with a banker , ra ther than an appointment with
death.
Roger could believe in netherw orlds—and demons, too. He
hadn’ t dreamed last night, but th e demon’ s face floated always
at the edge of his mind, just out of sight. T ime to summon him,
perhaps, and bring him into view . Y ou had to call a demon up,
didn’ t you, before you could exorcise him?There were preparations to make, though, before that could
happen. He flexed his shoulders and his arms once more, this
time in anticipation. The soreness had mostly gone.
 
“Ther e’ s mony an ane for him maks mane
but nane shall ken wher e he is gane.
O’er his white banes when they ar e bar e,
The wind shall blaw for ever mair , O—
The wind shall blaw for ever mair .”
 
“A ye,” he said. “That’ll do.”87
EN GARDE
F OR A MOMEN T , he didn’ t thin k he was going to be able to
lift his hand to  the latch-string. Both arms hung as though
weighted with lead, and the small muscles of his forearm
jumped and trembled with exhaustion. It took two tries, and
even the n, he could do no more than catch the string clumsily
between two middle fingers; his thumb wouldn’ t close.
Brianna heard him fumbling; the door opened suddenly and
his h and fell ner veless from the latch. He had no more than a
glimpse of tumbled hair and a beaming face with a smear of
soot down one cheek, and then she had her arms around him,
her mouth on his, and he was home.
“Y ou’re back!” she said, letting go.
“I am .” And glad of it, too. The cabin smelt of hot food and
lye soap , with a clean, faint tang of juniper overlaying the
smoke of reed candles and th e muskier scents of human
occupation. He smiled at her , suddenly a little less tired.
“Dadee, Dadee!” Jemmy was bouncing up and down in
excitement, clinging to a low stool for balance. “Da— deeee !”
“Hallo, hallo,” Roger said, reac hing down to pat the boy’ s
fluf fy he ad. “Who’ s a good lad , then?” He missed his mark
and his hand br ushed a soft che ek instead, but Jemmy didn’ t
care.
“Me! Me!” he shouted, and grinned with a huge expanse of
pink gum, showing of f all his small white teeth. Brianna
echoed the grin, with substanti ally more enamel but no less
delight.
“W e hav e a surprise for you. W atch this!” She went swiftly
toward the table, and sank to one knee, a pace from Jemmy .
She stretched out her arms, he r hands no more than a fewinches from his. “Come to Mama, sweetie. Come here, baby ,
come to Mama.”
Jemmy swayed precariously , loosed one hand, reached for
his mother , then let go and too k one drunken step, then two,
and fell shriekin g into her arms.  She clutched him, giggling in
delight, then turned him toward Roger .
“Go to Daddy ,” Brianna encouraged. “Go on, go to Daddy .”
Jemmy screwed up his face in doubtful concentration,
looking like a first-time parachutist at the open door of a
circling plane. He swayed dangerously to and fro.
Roger squatted, hands held out, tiredness for gotten for the
moment.
“Come on, mate, come on, you can do it!”
Jemmy clung a moment, leaning, leaning, then let go his
mother ’ s hand and staggered d runkenly toward Roger , faster
and faster and faster through three steps, falling headlong into
Roger ’ s saving grasp.
He hugg ed Jemmy tight against him, the little boy wriggling
and crowing in triumph.
“Good lad! Be into everything now , won’ t you?”
“Like he’ s not already!” Brianna said, rolling her eyes in
resignation. As though in illust ration, Jemmy wriggled loose
from Ro ger ’ s grasp, dropped to hands and knees, and crawled
of f at a high rate of speed, heading for his basket of toys.
“And what else have ye been d oing today?” Roger asked,
sitting down at the table.
“What else ?” Her eyes went wide, then narrowed. “Y ou
don’ t think learning to walk is enough for one day?”
“Of course; it’ s wonderful, it’ s marvelous!” he assured her
hastily . “I was only making conversation.”
She relaxed, appeased.“W ell, then. W e scrubbed the floor—not that anybody could
tell the dif ference—” She glanc ed down with some distaste at
the rough, discolored boards underfoot, “—and we made bread
and set it to ris e, only it didn’ t , so that’ s why you’re having
flat-bread with your dinner .”
“Love flat-brea d,” he assured her hastily , catching the
gimlet gleam in her eye.
“Sure you do,” she said, lifting  one thick red brow . “Or at
least you know which side it’ s buttered on.”
He laughed. Here in the warm, the chill was wearing of f,
and his  hands were starting to throb, but he felt good,
nonetheless. T ired enough to fall of f his stool, but good. Good
and hungry . His stomach growled in anticipation.
“Flat-bread and butter is a sta rt,” he said. “What else? I
smell something good.” He looked at the bubbling cauldron
and snif fed hopefully . “Stew?”
“No, laundry .” Bree glowered at the kettle. “The third
bloody b atch tod ay . I can’ t fit much in that dinky thing, but I
couldn’ t take the wash up to the big kettle at the house,
because of washing the floor and  spinning. When you do wash
outside, you have to stay there, to tend the fire and stir it, so
you can’ t do much else at the same time.” Her lips clamped
and thinned. “V ery inef ficient.”
“Shame.” Roger passed lightly over the logistics of laundry ,
in favor of more pressing issues. He lifted his chin toward the
hearth.
“I d o smell meat. Y ou don’ t think a mouse has fallen into
the pot?”
Jemmy , catching this, let go h is hold on a rag-ball and
crawled eagerly toward the fire. “Mouzee? See mouzee?”
Brianna grabbed the collar of Jemmy’ s smock and turned
the glower on Roger .
“Certainly not. No, baby , no mousie. Daddy’ s being silly .
Here, Jemmy , come eat.” Lettin g go the collar , she seized thelittle boy by the waist and lifted him—kicking and struggling
—into h is high chair . “Eat, I said! Y ou stay put.” Jemmy
arched his back, grunting and squealing in protest, then
suddenly relaxed, sliding down out of the chair and
disappearing into the folds of his mother ’ s skirt.
Brianna grappled for him, going red in the face with
laughter and exasperation.
“All right !” she said, hauling him upright. “Don’ t eat, then.
See if I care.” S he reached for the litter of toys, spilled out of
their basket, and plucked a battered corn-husk doll from the
rubble. “Here, see dolly? Nice dolly .”
Jemmy clasped the doll to his b osom, sat down abruptly on
his botto m, and began to addr ess the doll in earnest tones,
shaking it now and then for emphasis.
“Eat!” he said s ternly , poking it in the stomach. He laid the
doll on the floor , picked up the basket, and carefully turned it
over on top of the dolly . “Say put!”
Brianna rubbed a hand down he r face, and sighed. She gave
Roger a glance. “And you want to know what I do all day .”
The glance sharpened, as she t ruly looked at him for the
first time.
“And wh at have  you  bee n do ing, Mr . MacKenzie? Y ou look
like you’ve been in the wars.”  She touched his face gently;
there was a knot forming on his forehead; he could feel the
skin tig htening there, and the tiny stab of pain when she
touched it.
“Something like. Jamie’ s been showing me the rudiments of
swordsmanship.”
Her bro ws we nt up, and he laughed self-consciously ,
keeping his hands in his lap.
“W ooden swords, aye?”
Several wooden swords. They’d broken three so far , though
the mak eshift weapons were stout lengths of wood; not twigs,
by any means.“He stab bed you in the head ?” Brian na’ s voice had a slight
edge, though Roger couldn’ t tell  whether it was meant for him
or for her father .
“Ah … no. Not exactly .”
W ith ha zy mem ories of swashbuckling films and university
fencing matches, he’d been unprepared for the sheer brutal
force in volved i n hand-to-hand combat with swords. Jamie’ s
first blow  had knocked Roger ’ s sword from his hand and sent
it flying; a later one had split the wood and sent a lar ge chunk
of it rocketing past his ear .
“What does ‘not exactly’ mean?”
“W ell, h e was showing me som ething called corps a corps
—which appears  to be French for ‘Get your opponent’ s sword
wrapped round your own, then knee him in the balls and
punch his head while he’ s trying to get loose.’”
Brianna gave a brief, shocked laugh.
“Y ou mean he—”
“No, but it was a near thing,” he said, wincing at the
memory . “I’ve a bruise on my thigh the size of my hand.”
“Are you hurt anywhere else?” Brianna was frowning at
him, worried.
“No.” H e smiled up at her , keeping his hands in his lap.
“T ired. Sore. Starving.”
The frown eased and her smil e flickered back, though a
small line stayed between her brows. She reached for the
wooden platter on the sideboard, turned, and squatted by the
hearth.
“Quail,” she said with satisfaction, raking a number of
blackened bund les out of the ashes with the poker . “Da
brought them this morning. He said not to pluck them; just
wrap the m in mud and bake the m. I hope he knows what he’ s
talking about.” She jerked her head toward the boiling
cauldron. “Jemm y helped me with the mud; that’ s why we had
to do another pot of laundry . Ouch!” She snatched away herhand an d sucked a burned fing er , then picked up the platter
and brought it to the table.
“Let them cool a  little,” she instructed him. “I’ll get some of
those pickles you like.”
The quail looked like nothing so much as charred rocks.
Still, a tantalizing steam drifted  up through cracks in a few of
the black ened lumps. Roger felt like picking one up and eating
it on  the  spot, burned mud and all. Instead, he fumbled at the
cloth-covered plate on the table, discovering the maligned flat-
bread underneath. Stif f-fingered, he managed to tear of f a
good chunk, and stuf fed it silently into his mouth.
Jemmy had abandoned his ball of rags under the bed, and
come to see wha t his father was doing. Pulling himself upright
by the table leg, he spotted the bread and reached up, making
ur gent n oises of demand. Roger carefully tore of f another bit
of bread and ha nded it to his of fspring, nearly dropping it in
the p rocess. His hands were cut  and battered; the knuckles of
his right hand blood-grazed, swollen, and black with fresh
bruising. Half his right thumbna il had been knocked away , and
the bit of raw nail bed showed red and oozing.
“Ow-ee.” Clutching his bread,  Jemmy looked at Roger ’ s
hands, then up at his face. “Daddy owee?”
“Dad’ s all right,” Roger assured him. “Just tired.”
Jemmy stared at the injured thu mb, then slowly raised his
hand to his mou th and inserted h is own thumb, sucking loudly .
It ac tually looked like a good idea. His thumb stung and
ached, w here the nail had gone, and all his fingers were cold
and stif f . W ith a quick glance at Brianna’ s back, he lifted his
hand and stuck his thumb in his mouth.
It felt alien, thick and hard and tasting of silvery blood and
cold grime. Then suddenly it fit, and tongue and palate closed
round the injured digit in a warm and soothing pressure.
Jemmy butted him in the thigh, his usual signal for “up,”
and he grasped the back of the little boy’ s clout with his free
hand, bo osting him up onto his knee. Jemmy made himself athome, rooting and squirming, then relaxed in sudden peace,
bread squashed in one hand, sucking quietly on his thumb.
Roger sl owly relaxed, one elbow propped on the table, the
other ar m round his son. Jemmy’ s heavy warmth and heavy
breathing against his ribs were a soothing accompaniment to
the homely noises Brianna wa s making as she dished the
supper . T o his s urprise, his thumb stopped hurting, but he left
it where it was, too tired to question the odd sense of comfort.
His muscles were gradually relaxing, too, coming of f the
state of tensed readiness in which he’d held them for hours.
His inner ear still rang with brisk instruction. Use your
for earm, man—the wrist, the wrist! Dinna move your hand out
like that , keep it near the body . It’ s a swor d, aye? Not a bloody
club. Use the tip!
He’d thr own Jamie heavily against a tree, at one point. And
Fraser h ad tripped over a rock and gone down once, Roger on
top. As for any a ctual damage inflicted with a sword, he might
as well have been fighting a cloud.
Dirty fighting is the only kind th er e is , Fraser had told him,
panting, as they knelt at the stream and splashed cold water
over sweating faces. Anything else is no but exhibition.
His head  jerked on his neck and he blinked, coming back
abruptly from the grate and crash of wooden swords to the dim
warmth of the cabin. The platter was gone; Brianna was
cursing softly under her breath  at the sideboard, banging the
hilt of his dirk against the blackened lumps of clay-baked quail
to crack them open.
W atch your footing. Back, back—aye, now , come back at
me! No, dinna r each so far … keep your guar d up!
And the  stinging  whap!  of the springy “ blade” across arms
and thig hs and shoulders, the so lid thunk of it driven bruising
home be tween his ribs, sunk de ep and breathless in his belly .
Had it been col d steel, he woul d have been dead in minutes,
cut to bleeding ribbons.Don’ t catch the blade on yours—thr ow it off. Beat, beat it
off! Com e at me, thrust! Keep it close, keep it close … aye,
good … ha!
His elbo w slipped and his hand fell. He jerked upright,
barely k eeping h old of the sleep ing child, and blinked, vision
swimming with firelight.
Brianna started guiltily and shut her notebook. Getting to
her f eet, she thru st it out of sight behind a pewter plate, resting
upright on its edge at the back of the sideboard.
“It’ s rea dy ,” she  said hurriedly . “I just—I’ll get the milk.”
She disappeared into the pantry in a rustle of skirts.
Roger shifted Jemmy , got a grip, and lifted the small, solid
body up to his shoulder , though his arms felt like cooked
noodles. The little boy was sou nd asleep, but kept his thumb
plugged firmly into his mouth.
Roger ’ s own thumb was wet with spittle, and he felt a flush
of emba rrassment. Christ, had she been drawing him that way?
No doubt; she must have caught sight of him sucking his
thumb and thought it “cute”; it w ouldn’ t be the first time she’d
drawn h im in what he considered a compromising position. Or
was she writing dreams again?
He laid Jemmy gently in his c radle, brushed damp bread
crumbs of f the coverlet, and stood rubbing his bruised
knuckles with the fingers of his other hand. Sloshing noises
came from the pantry . Movin g quietly , he stepped to the
sideboard and extracted the book from its hiding place.
Sketches, not dreams.
It w as no more  than a few quick lines, the essence of a
sketch. A man ti red to death, sti ll watchful; head on one hand,
neck bowed with exhaustion—free arm clamped tight around a
treasured, helpless thing.
She’d titled it. En gar de , it said, in her slanted, spiky script.
He c losed the b ook and slid it back behind the plate. She
was standing in the pantry doorway , the milk jug in her hand.“Come and eat,” she said soft ly , eyes on his. “Y ou need
your strength.”88
ROGER BUYS A SWORD
Cross Creek
 November , 1771
H E’D HANDLED  EIGHTEENT H-CENTUR Y broadswords
before; neither the weight nor the length surprised him. The
basket around the hilt was slig htly bent, but not enough to
interfere with fitting his hand in side the grip. He’d done that
before, too. There was a considerable dif ference, though,
beyond reverently placing an antique artifact into a museum
display , and picking up a length  of sharpened metal with the
conscious intent of driving it through a human body .
“It’ s a bit battered,” Fraser had told him, squinting critically
down the length of the sword before handing it to him, “but
the blade’ s well-balanced. T ry the feel of it, to see if it suits.”
Feeling a total f ool, he slipped his hand into the basket and
struck a fencing pose, based on memories of Errol Flynn films.
They w ere standing in the bus y lane outside the smithy in
Cross Creek, and a few passers by paused to watch and of fer
helpful comment.
“What’ s Moore  asking for tha t bit of pot tin?” someone
asked di sparagingly . “Anything more than two shillings, and
it’ s highway robbery .”
“That’ s a fine sword,” said Mo ore, leaning over the half-
door of his for ge and glowering. “I had it from my uncle, who
saw service at Fort Stanwyck. W hy , that blade’ s killed a-many
Frenchmen, and no but the one wee nick to be seen in it.”
“One nic k!” cried the disparager . “Why , the thing’ s bent so,
if you went to stick a man, you’d end up cutting of f his ear!”
There was a lau gh from the gathering crowd that drowned
the smit h’ s response. Roger lowered the point of the sword,
raised it slowly . How the hell  did one road-test a sword?Ought h e to wave it to and fro? Stick something with it? There
was a cart standing a little wa y down the lane, loaded with
burlap bags of something—raw wool, from the smell.
He looked for the proprietor of the bags, but couldn’ t pick
him out from th e growing crowd; the huge draft horse hitched
to the cart was unattended, ea rs twitching sleepily over his
dropped reins.
“Ah, if it’ s a s word the young man’ s wanting, sure and
Malachy McCa be has a better one than that, left from his
service. I think he’d part with  it for nay more than three
shillings.” The cobbler from ac ross the lane pursed his lips,
nodding shrewdly at the sword.
“‘T isn’ t an elegant piece,” one middle-aged ex-soldier
agreed, head tilted on one side. “Serviceable, though, I grant
you that.”
Roger extended  his arm, lunged toward the door of the
smithy , a nd narr owly missed Moore, coming out to defend the
quality o f his wares. The smith leaped aside with a startled cry ,
and the crowd roared.
Roger ’ s apology was interrupted by a loud, nasal voice
behind him.
“Here, sir! Let me of fer a foe more worthy of your steel
than an unarmed smith!”
Whirling round, Roger found himself confronting Dr .
Fentiman, who was pulling a lon g, thin blade from the head of
his ornamental cane. The doctor , who was roughly half
Roger ’ s size, brandished his rapier with a genial ferocity .
Obviously fuele d by a liberal luncheon, the tip of his nose
glowed like a Christmas bulb.
“A t est of skill, sir?” The doctor whipped his sword to and
fro, so the narro w blade sang as  it cut the air . “First to pink his
man, first to draw blood is the victor , what say you?”
“Oh, an  unfair advantage to the doctor! And isn’ t drawing
blood your business, then?”“Ha ha! And if ye run him thro ugh instead of pinking him,
will ye patch the hole for no char ge?” yelled another onlooker .
“Or are ye out to drum up business, leech?”
“W atch yourself, young man! T urn your back on him and
he’ s like to give ye a clyster!”
“Better a clyster than a blade up the arse!”
The doctor ignored these and s imilar vulgar observations,
holding his blade upright in rea diness. Roger shot a glance at
Jamie, who was leaning against the wall, looking amused.
Jamie raised one eyebrow and shrugged slightly .
“T ry the  feel of it,” Jamie’d said. W ell, and he supposed a
duel with a drunken midget was as good a test as any .
Roger raised his blade and fixed  the doctor with a menacing
look.
“En gar de,”  he said, and the knot of onlookers roared
approval.
“Gar dez vous,”  replied the doctor promptly , and lunged.
Roger spun on one heel and the doctor shot past, rapier
pointed like a la nce. Moore the smith leaped aside just in time
to avoid being skewered for the second time, cursing fluently .
“What am I, a friggin’ tar get?” he shouted, shaking a fist.
Disregarding the near miss, the doctor regained his balance
and cha r ged back toward Roger , uttering shrill cries of self-
encouragement.
It w as rather lik e being attacked by a wasp, Roger thought.
If yo u didn’ t pa nic, you found it possible to follow the thing
and bat it away .  Perhaps the do ctor was a decent swordsman
when sober; in his current state, his frenzied thrusts and mad
flurries were easily fended of f—as long as Roger paid
attention.
It occurred to him early on that he could end the contest at
any time , merely  by meeting th e doctor ’ s slender rapier edge-
on w ith his own  much heavier weapon. He was beginning toenjoy himself, though, and was careful to parry with the flat of
the broadsword.
Gradually everything disappeared from Roger ’ s view but
the flash ing poin t of the rapier; the shouts of the crowd faded
to a bee-buzz, t he dirt of the lane and the wall of the smithy
were scarcely visible. He grazed his elbow on the wall, moved
back, moved in a circle to g ain more room, all without
conscious thought.
The rapi er beat on his wider bla de, engaged, and screeched
loose wi th a whinggg!  of metal. Clang and click and the whish
of emp ty air and the ringin g beat that vibrated in his
wristbones with every blow of the doctor ’ s sword.
W atch th e stroke , follow it, bat it away . He had no idea what
he w as d oing, bu t did it anyway . The sweat was running in his
eyes; he shook his head to fling it away , nearly missed a low
lunge toward his thigh, stopped  it close, and flung the rapier
back.
The doctor staggered, thrown of f balance, and feral shouts
of “Now! T ake him! Stick him now !”  ra ng in the dust -filled air .
He saw the expanse of the doctor ’ s embroidered waistcoat,
unguarded, filled with silken butterflies, and choked back the
visceral ur ge to lunge for it.
Shaken by the in tensity of the ur ge, he took a step back. The
doctor , sensing weakness, leapt forward, bellowing, blade
pointed. Roger took a half-step sideways, and the doctor shot
past, grazing the hock of the draft horse in his path.
The horse emitted an outraged scream, and promptly sent
swordsman and sword flying through the air , to crash against
the front of the cobbler ’ s shop. The doctor fell to ground like a
crushed fly , surrounded by lasts and scattered shoes.
Roger stood still, panting. His w hole body was pulsing with
every he artbeat, hot with the fighting. He wanted to go on, he
wanted t o laugh , he wanted to hit something. He wanted to get
Brianna up against the nearest wall, and now .Jamie gently lifted his hand and  pried his fingers from the
hilt of the swor d. He hadn’ t re membered he was holding it.
His arm  felt too light without it, as though it might fly up
toward the sky , all by itself. His fingers were stif f from
gripping so hard, and he flexed t hem automatically , feeling the
tingle as the blood came back.
The blood was tingling everywhere. He hardly heard the
laughter , the of fers of drinks, or felt the blows of
congratulation rained on his back.
“A clyster , a clyster , give him a clyster!” a gang of
apprentices was chanting, following along as the doctor was
borne of f for first-aid in the nearest tavern. The horse’ s owner
was fuss ing sol icitously over the big bay , who looked more
bemused than injured.
“I suppose he’ s won. After all, he drew first blood.”
Roger didn’ t realize that he’d spoken until he heard his own
voice, strangely calm in his ears.
“W ill it do?” Jamie was looking at him in question, the
sword held lightly on the palms of his hands.
Roger nodded. The lane was b right and filled with white
dust; it gritted u nder his eyelids, between his teeth when he
closed his mouth.
“A ye,” he said. “It will do.”
“Good,” said Jamie. “So will you,” he added casually ,
turning away to pay the smith.P AR T E IGHT
A-Hunting W e W ill Go89
THE MOONS OF JUPITER
Late November , 1771
F OR THE FOUR TH TIME in as many minutes, Roger
assured himself  that it was not medically possible to die of
sexual fr ustration. He doubted that it would even cause lasting
damage. On the other hand, it  wasn’ t doing him any great
good, either , in spite of his ef forts to consider it as an exercise
in building character .
He eased himself onto his ba ck, careful of the rustling
mattress, and stared at the ceili ng. No good; from a crack at
the edge  of the oiled hide covering the window , early morning
sun was streaming in across the bed, and from the corner of his
eye, he could still see the pure golden haunches of his wife, lit
as though spotlighted.
She was lying on  her stomach, face buried in the pillow , and
the line n sheet had slipped d own past the swell of her
buttocks, leavin g her bare from  her nape to the crack of her
arse. She lay so close in the narrow bed that his leg touched
hers, and the warmth of her  breathing brushed his bare
shoulder . His mouth was dry .
He c losed his eyes. That didn’ t help; he promptly started
seeing images of the night before: Brianna by the dim light of
a smothered fire, the flames of her hair sparking in the
shadows, light gleaming sudden across the curve of a naked
breast as she slipped the butter -soft linen from her shoulders.
Late as it was, tired as he was, he’d wanted her desperately .
Someone else had wanted her more, though. He cracked an
eyelid a nd raised himself just slightly , enough to see over
Brianna’ s tumbl ed red locks, to where the cradle stood against
the wall, still in shadow . No sign of movement.They had a lon g-standing agre ement. He woke instantly
when disturbed,  she was groggy and maladroit. So when a
siren shriek from the cradle jerked him into heart-pounding
alertness, it was Roger who would rise, pick up the soggy ,
yowling bundle, and deal with the immediate necessities of
hygiene. By the time he brought Jemmy to his mother , bucking
and squirming in the search for sustenance, Brianna would
have roused herself far enough  to wriggle free of her gown,
and wou ld reach up for the child, drawing him down in warm
dark to the murmuring, milky refuge of her body .
Now that Jem w as older , he seld om woke at night, but when
he d id, with be llyache or nightmare, it took a lot longer to
settle hi m back to sleep than it had when he was tiny . Roger
had fall en back to sleep while Bree was still administering
comfort, but woke when she turned in the narrow bed, her
buttocks sliding  past his thigh. The corn shucks under them
crackled loudly with a noise like a thousand distant
firecrackers, all going of f down the length of his spine, waking
him to full awareness of an ur gent, nearly painful arousal.
He’d felt the pre ssure of her arse against him and narrowly
restrained himself from rolling over and assaulting her from
the rear .  Small suckling noises from the other side of her body
stopped him. Jem was still in their bed.
He’d lain still, li stening, praying that she’d stay awake long
enough to return the little bugge r to his cradle; sometimes they
fell asleep together , mother and child, and Roger would wake
in the morning to the confusingly mingled scents of a beddable
woman and baby pee. And then  in the end, he’d fallen asleep
himself, in spite of his discom fort, worn out from a day of
felling logs on the mountainside.
He i nhaled gently . No, she’d pu t him back. No scent in his
bed now  save Brianna’ s, the earthy smell of woman-flesh, a
faint, sweet cloud of sweat and slippery willingness.
She sighed in her sleep , murmured something
incomprehensible, and turned her head on the pillow . There
were blue smudges under her ey es; she’d been up late makingjelly , up  again twice more with  the little bas—with the baby .
How could he wake her , only to gratify his own base ur ges?
How could he not ?
He g ritted his teeth, torn betwe en temptation, compassion,
and the sure con viction that if he yielded to his inclinations, he
would get precisely as far as the  worst possible moment before
an interr uption from the vicinity of the cradle compelled him
to stop.
Experience had been a harsh tea cher , but the ur gings of the
flesh were louder than the vo ice of reason. He put out a
stealthy hand and gently grasped the buttock nearest. It was
cool and smooth and round as a gourd.
She made a small noise deep in her throat and stretched
luxuriously . She arched her back, pushing her backside up in a
way tha t convinced Roger that the course of wisdom was to
fling back the q uilt, roll on top of her , and achieve his goal in
the ten seconds flat it was likely to take.
He got as far a s flinging back the quilt. As he raised his
head fro m the pillow , a round,  pale object rose slowly into
view over the r im of the crad le, like one of the moons of
Jupiter . A pair of blue eyes  regarded him with clinical
dispassion.
“Oh, shit !” he said.
“Oh, chit !” Jemmy said, in happy mimicry . He clambered to
his feet and sto od, bouncing up and down as he gripped the
edge of the crad le he was rapidly outgrowing, chanting “Chit-
chit-chit-chit”  in what he evidently thought was a song.
Brianna jerked into wakefulness, blinking through tangled
locks.
“What? What’ s wrong?”
“Ah … somethi ng stung me.” R oger flipped the edge of the
quilt discreetly back in place. “Must be a wasp in here.”
She stretched on her pillow , groaning and smoothing her
hair out  of her face with one hand, then picked up the cupfrom the table and took a drink; she always woke up thirsty .
Her eyes  traveled over him, and  a slow smile spread across
her wide , soft mouth. “Y eah? N asty sting you got there. W ant
me t o ru b it?” She put down the  cup, rolled gracefully up onto
an elbow , and reached out a hand.
“Y e’re a  sadist,” Roger said, gritting his teeth. “No doubt
about it. Y e must get it from your father .”
She laughed, took her hand of f the quilt, and stood up,
pulling her shift on over her head.
“MAMA! Chit, Mama!” Jemmy informed her , beaming, as
she swung him up out of his cradle with a grunt of ef fort.
“Y ou rat,” she said, af fectionately . “Y ou aren’ t very popular
with Daddy this morning. Y our timing stinks.” She wrinkled
her nose. “And not only your timing.”
“Depends on your perspective, I suppose.” Roger rolled
onto his side, wa tching. “I imagine from his  point of view , the
timing was perfect.”
“Y eah.” Brianna  gave him a raised brow . “Hence the new
word, huh?”
“He’ s he ard it before,” Roger said dryly . “Many times.” He
sat up, swingin g his legs out of bed, and rubbed a hand
through his hair and over his face.
“W ell, all we have to do now is  figure out how to get from
the a bstract to the concrete, huh ?” She put Jemmy on his feet
and kne lt in front of him, kissing him on the nose, then
unpinning his diaper . “Oh, yag . Is eighteen months too soon
for toilet-training, do you think?”
“Are ye asking me, or him?”
“Pew . I don’ t care; whichever one of you has an opinion.”
Jemmy plainly didn’ t; cheerfully stoic, he was ignoring his
mother ’ s determined assault on  his private parts with a cold,
wet cloth, absorbed in a new song of his own composition,which went along the lines of  “Pew , pew , chit, chit, PEW ,
PEW …”
Brianna put a st op to this by swinging him up in her arms
and sitting down with him in the nursing chair by the hearth.
“W ant snackies? ” she said, pulling down the neck of her
shift invitingly .
“God, yes,” Roger said, with feeling. Bree laughed, not
without sympath y , as she settled Jemmy on her lap, where he
settled happily to suckling.
“Y our turn next,” she assured Roger . “Y ou want oatmeal
porridge, or fried mush for breakfast?”
“Anything else on the menu?” Damn, he’d been nearly
ready to stand up. Back to square one.
“Oh, sure. T oast with strawberry jam. Cheese. Eggs, but
you’ll h ave to go get them from  the coop; I don’ t have any in
the pantry .”
Roger found it hard to concentr ate on the discussion, faced
with the sight of Brianna in the dim smoky light of the cabin,
long thighs spread under her sh ift, her heels tucked under the
chair . She seemed to detect h is lack of interest in matters
dietary , for she l ooked up and sm iled at him, her eyes taking in
his own nakedness.
“Y ou look nice, Roger ,” she said softly . Her free hand
drifted down, resting lightly on  the inner curve of one thigh.
The lon g, blun t-nailed fingers made slow circles, barely
moving.
“So do you.” His voice was husky . “Better than nice.”
Her hand rose and patted Jemmy softly on the back.
“W ant to go see Auntie Lizzie after breakfast, sweetie?” she
asked, n ot looking at him. Her  eyes were fixed on Roger ’ s,
and her wide mouth curved in a slow smile.
He didn ’ t think he could wait until after breakfast to touch
her , at least. Her shawl was thrown across the foot of the bed;he grabb ed it and wrapped it r ound his hips for the sake of
decency as he g ot out of bed and crossed to kneel beside her
chair .
Her hair stirred and lifted in a draft from the window , and he
saw the stipple o f gooseflesh break out suddenly on her arms.
He p ut h is arms  around them b oth. The draft was cold on his
bare back, but he didn’ t care.
“I lo ve you,” he whispered in her ear . His hand lay over
hers, resting on her thigh.
She turn ed her head and kissed  him, a glancing contact of
soft lips.
“I love you, too,” she said.
She had rinsed her mouth with water and wine, and tasted of
autumn grapes and cold streams . He was just settling down to
more serious business when a loud hammering shivered the
timbers of the door , accompanied by his father -in-law’ s voice.
“Roger! Are ye in there, man? Up wi’ ye this minute!”
“What does he mean am I in here?” Roger hissed to
Brianna. “Where the hell else would I be?”
“Shh.” She nipped his neck and reluctantly let go, her eyes
traveling over him with deep appreciation.
“He’ s already up, Da!” she called.
“A ye, it ’ s likely to be a permanent condition, too,” Roger
muttered. “Coming!” he bellowed. “Where the hell are my
clothes?”
“Under the bed where you left t hem last night.” Brianna set
down Je mmy , who shrieked ecstatically at the sound of his
grandfather ’ s voice and ran to pound on the bolted door .
Having finally ventured to walk, he had lost no time with the
next sta ge, mov ing on to rapid —and perpetual—locomotion
within a matter of days.
“Hurry!” Sunlig ht flooded into the cabin as the hide over
the window was thrust aside, revealing Jamie Fraser ’ s broad-boned face, flushed with excitement and morning sun. He
lifted an  eyebrow at the view of Roger thus revealed, crouched
on the floor with a shirt clutched protectively to his
midsection.
“Move yourself , man,” he said, mildly . “It’ s no time to be
hangin’ about bare-arsed; MacLeod says there are beasts just
over the  ridge.” He blew a kiss to Jemmy . “A ghille ruaidh, a
charaid! Ciamar a tha thu?”
Roger for got both sex and self-consciousness. He jerked the
shirt over his head and stood up.
“What kind? Deer , elk?”
“I dinna ken, bu t they’re meat!” The hide dropped suddenly ,
leaving the room half in shadow .
The intr usion had let in a blast of cold air , breaking the
warm, smoke-laden atmosphere and bringing with it the breath
of hunti ng weather , of crisp win d and crimson leaves, of mud
and fresh droppings, of wet wool and sleek hide, all spiced
with the imaginary reek of gunpowder .
W ith a final, lon ging look at his wife’ s body , Roger grabbed
his stockings.90
DANGER IN THE GRASS
G RUNTING AND PUFFING, the men pushed into the dark-
green zone of th e conifers by noon. High on the upper ridges,
clusters of balsam fir and hemlock huddled with spruce and
pine, ov er the tumbled rock. Here they stood secure in
seasonal immortality , needles m urmuring lament for the bright
fragility of the fallen leaves below .
Roger sh ivered in the cold shad ow of the conifers, and was
glad of the thick wool hunting shirt he wore over the linen one.
There was no conversation; even when they paused briefly to
draw breath, there was a stillness in the wood here that forbade
unnecessary speech.
The wild erness around them felt calm—and empty . Perhaps
they were too late, and the g ame had moved on; perhaps
MacLeod had been wrong. Roger had not yet mastered the
killing s kills, bu t he had spent a good deal of time alone in sun
and win d and silence; he had ac quired some of the instincts of
a hunter .
The men came out into full sun as they emer ged on the far
side of the ridge. The air was thi n and cold, but Roger felt heat
strike through his chilled body , and closed his eyes in
momentary pleasure. The men paused together in unspoken
appreciation, basking in a sheltered spot, momentarily safe
from the wind.
Jamie stepped to the edge of a rocky shelf, sun glinting of f
his tailed copper hair . He turned to and fro, squinting
downward through the trees. Roger saw his nostrils flare, and
smiled to himself. W ell, then, p erhaps he did smell the game.
He w ouldn’ t be surprised. Roger snif fed experimentally , but
got noth ing but the must of deca ying leaves and a strong whif f
of well-aged perspiration from the body of Kenny Lindsay .Fraser s hook his head, then tu rned to Fer gus, and with a
quiet w ord, climbed over the edge of the shelf and
disappeared.
“W e wa it,” Fer gus said laconically to the others, and sat
down. He produced a pair of carved stone balls from his bag,
and sat rolling them to and fro in his palm, concentrating
intently , rolling a sphere out and  back along the length of each
dexterous finger .
A b rilliant fall sun poked long  fingers through the empty
branches, admin istering the last rites of seasonal consolation,
blessing the dying earth with a final touch of warmth. The men
sat talkin g quiet ly , reeking in th e sun. He hadn’ t noticed in the
colder w ood, bu t here in the sun, the tang of fresh sweat was
apparent, overly ing the deeper layers of grime and body odors.
Roger reflected that perhaps it was not extraordinary
olfactory acuteness on the part of animals, but merely the
extreme smelliness of human beings that made it so dif ficult to
get near game o n foot. He had sometimes seen the Mohawk
rub themselves with herbs, to di sguise their natural odor when
hunting, but even oil of pepper mint wouldn’ t make a dent in
Kenny Lindsay’ s stench.
He didn’ t reek like that himself, did he? Curious, he bent his
head toward the open neck of his shirt and breathed in. He felt
a trickle  of sweat run down th e back of his neck, under his
hair . He blotted it with his colla r and resolved to bathe before
going back to the cabin, no matter if the creek was crusted
with ice.
Showers and deodorants were of more than aesthetic
importance, he reflected. One got used to almost any habitual
stink in short or der , after all. Wh at he’d not realized, secure in
his relatively odorless modern environment, were the more
intimate implications of smell. Sometimes he felt like a bloody
baboon, his most primitive responses unleashed without
warning, by some random assault of odor .
He remembered what had happened just the week before,
and felt a hot blush creep over him at the memory .He had walked i nto the dairy sh ed, looking for Claire. He’d
found her—and Jamie, too. They were both fully clothed,
standing well apart—and the air  was so filled with the musk of
desire and the s harp scent of male completion that Roger had
felt the blood burn in his face, the hair on his body prickling
erect.
His first instinct had been to tu rn and leave, but there was
no excuse for that. He had given his message to Claire,
conscious of Fraser ’ s eyes on him, bland and quizzical.
Conscious, too, of the unspoken communication between the
two of them, an unseen thrum i n the air , as though they were
two beads strung on a wire stretched tight.
Jamie had waited until Roger left, before leaving himself.
From the corner of his eye,  Roger had caught a slight
movement, seen  the light touch of the hand with which he left
her , and  even now , felt a quee r clutch of his insides at the
memory .
He b lew out his breath to ease the tightness in his chest,
then stre tched out in the leaves, letting the sun beat down on
his c losed eyelids. He heard a m uf fled groan from Fer gus, then
the rustle of foo tsteps as the Frenchman made another hasty
withdrawal. Fer gus had eaten half-cured sauerkraut the night
before—a fact made clear to a nyone who sat near him for
long.
His thoughts drifted back to that awkward moment in the
dairy shed.
It was not pruri ence, nor even simple curiosity , and yet he
often found himself watching them. He saw them from the
cabin window , walking together in the evening, Jamie’ s head
bent toward her , hands clasped b ehind his back. Claire’ s hands
moved when she talked, rising  long and white in the air , as
though s he would catch the fut ure between them and give it
shape, w ould hand Jamie her thoughts as she spoke them,
smooth and polished objects, bits of sculptured air .
Once aware of what he was d oing, Roger watched them
purposefully , and brushed aside any feelings of shame at suchintrusion, minor as it was. He had a compelling reason for his
curiosity; there was something he needed to know , badly
enough to excuse any lack of manners.
How was it done, this business of marriage?
He had been brought up in a bachelor ’ s house. Given all he
needed as a boy in terms of af fection by his great-uncle and
the R everend’ s elderly housekee per , he found himself lacking
something as an adult, ignorant of the threads of touch and
word th at bound a married cou ple. Instinct would do, for a
start.
But if love like that could be learned …
A to uch on his  elbow startled him and he jerked round,
flinging out an arm in quick d efense. Jamie ducked neatly ,
eluding the blow , and grinned at him.
Fraser jerked his head toward the edge of the shelf.
“I’ve found them,” he said.
 
JAMIE RAISED A HAND, and Fer gus went at once to his
side. The Frenchman came barely to the big Scot’ s shoulder ,
but didn’ t look ridiculous. He shaded his eyes with his one
hand, peering down where Fraser pointed.
Roger c ame up behind them, looking down the slope. A
flicker shot through a clearing b elow , marked by the swooping
dip and rise of its flight. Its ma te called deep in the wood, a
sound li ke a high-pitched laugh. He could see nothing else
remarkable belo w; it was the same dense tangle of mountain
laurel, hickory , and oak that ex isted on the side of the ridge
from wh ich they had come; far below , a thick line of tall
leafless trees marked the course of a stream.
Fraser sa w him, and gestured do wnward with a twist of the
head, pointing with his chin.
“By the stream; d’ye see?” he said.At first, Roger s aw nothing. The stream itself wasn’ t visible,
but he could chart its course by the growth of bare-limbed
sycamore and willows. Then he  saw it; a bush far down the
slope moved, in a way that wasn’ t like the wind-blown
tossings of the b ranches near it. A sudden jerk that shook the
bush as something pulled at it, feeding.
“Jesus, what’ s that?”
His glimpse of a  sudden dark bu lk had been enough only to
tell him that the thing was big—very big.
“I dinna  ken. Bigger than a dee r . W apiti, maybe.” Fraser ’ s
eyes were intent, narrowed against the wind. He stood easy ,
musket in one hand, but Roger could see his excitement.
“A moose, perhaps?” Fer gus f rowned under his shading
hand. “I have not seen one, but they are very lar ge, no?”
“No.” Roger shook his head. “I mean yes, but that’ s not
what it is. I’ve hunted moose— with the Mohawk. They don’ t
move like that at all.” T oo late, he saw Fraser ’ s mouth tighten
briefly , then relax; by unspoken consent, they avoided mention
of Roger ’ s captivity among the Mohawk. Fraser said nothing,
though, only nodded at the tangle of woodland below .
“A ye, it’ s not de er or moose, either—but there’ s more than
one. D’ye see?”
Roger sq uinted h arder , then saw what Fraser was doing, and
did likewise—swaying from foot to foot, deliberately letting
his eyes drift casually across the landscape.
W ith no  attempt to focus on a single spot in the panorama
below , h e could instead see t he whole slope as a blurred
patchwork of color and motion—like a V an Gogh painting, he
thought, and smiled at the thought. Then he saw what Jamie
had seen, and stif fened, all thought of modern art for gotten.
Here and there among the faded  grays and browns and the
patches of ever green was a disjunction, a knot in the pattern of
nature’ s weft—strange movements, not caused by the rushing
wind. Each beast was invisible itself, but made its presence
known, nonetheless, by the twitchings of the bushes nearby .God, ho w big must they be? There … and there … he let his
eyes dri ft to and fro, and felt a tightening of excitement
through chest and belly . Christ , there were half a dozen, at
least!
“I was right! I w as right, was I no, Mac Dubh ?” MacLeod
exulted. His round face beamed from one to another , flushed
with triumph. “I did say as I’d seen beasts, aye?”
“Jesus, there’ s a whole herd of them,” Evan Lindsay
breathed, echoing his thought. The Highlander ’ s face was
bright, fierce with anticipation. He glanced at Jamie.
“How will it be, Mac Dubh ?”
Jamie lifted one shoulder slightly , still peering into the
valley . “Hard to say; they’re i n the open. W e canna corner
them an ywhere.” He licked a fi nger and held it to the breeze,
then pointed.
“The wind’ s from the west; let us come down the runnel
there to the foot of the slope. T hen wee Roger and I will pass
to the side, near that great outcrop; ye see the one?”
Lindsay nodded slowly , a crooked front tooth worrying the
thin flesh of his lip.
“They’re near the stream. Do you circle about—keep well
clear until ye’re near to the big cedar tree; ye see it? A ye, then
spread y ourselves, two to each b ank of the stream. Evan’ s the
best mar ksman; have him stand ready . Roger Mac and I will
come behind the herd, to drive them toward ye.”
Fer gus nodded, surveying the land below .
“I see. And if they shall see us, they will turn into that small
defile, and so be trapped. V ery good. Allonsy! ”
He g estured imperiously to the others, his hook gleaming in
the s un. Then he  grimaced slightly , hand to his belly , as a long,
rumbling fart despoiled the silence of the wood. Jamie gave
him a thoughtful look.
“Keep downwind, aye?” he said. 
IT W AS IMPOSSIBLE to walk silently through the drifts of
dry leaves, but Roger stepped as lightly as possible. Seeing
Jamie lo ad and prime his own gun, Roger had done likewise,
feeling mingled excitement and misgiving at the acrid scent of
powder . From his impressions of the size of the beasts they
followed, even he might have a chance at hitting one.
Putting aside his doubts, he paused for a moment, turning
his h ead from si de to side to listen. Nothing but the faint rush
of wind  through the bare branches overhead, and the far -of f
murmur of water . A small crack  sounded in the underbrush
ahead, and he c aught a glimpse of red hair . He cupped the
gunstock in his hand, the wood  warm and solid in his palm,
barrel aimed upward over his shoulder , and followed.
Stealing carefully round a sumac bush, Roger felt something
give suddenly under his foot, and jerked back to keep his
balance. He looked at what he’d stepped on, and in spite of his
instant disappointment, felt a strong ur ge to laugh.
“Jamie!” he called, not bothering any longer about stealth or
silence.
Fraser ’ s bright hair appeared through a screen of laurel,
followed by the man himself. H e didn’ t speak, but lifted one
thick brow in inquiry .
“I’m no great tracker ,” Roger said, nodding downward, “but
I’ve stepped in enough of these to know one when I see one.”
He scraped the side of his shoe on a fallen log, and pointed
with his  toe. “What d’ye think we’ve been creeping up on, all
this time?”
Jamie stopped short, squinting , then walked forward and
squatted next to the corrugated brown splotch. He prodded it
with a forefinger , then looked u p at Roger with an expression
of mingled amusement and dismay .
“I w ill be damn ed,” he said. Still squatting, he turned his
head, frowning as he surveyed the wilderness around them.
“But what are they doing here?” he murmured.He stoo d up, shading his eyes  as he looked toward the
creek, where the lowering sun dazzled through the branches.
“It d oesna make a bit of sense,”  he said, squinting into the
shadows. “There are only three kine on the Ridge, and I saw
two of them bei n’ milked this m orning. The third belongs to
Bobby MacLeod, and I should think he’d ken if it was his own
cow he’d seen. Besides …” He turned slowly on his heel,
looking up the steep slope they’d just descended.
He didn ’ t have to speak; no cow not equipped with a
parachute could have come down that way .
“There’ s more than one—a lot more,” Roger said. “Y ou
saw .”
“A ye, there are. But where did  they come from?” Jamie
glanced at him, frowning in puzzlement. “The Indians dinna
keep kine, especially not at this season—they’d slaughter any
beasts they had, and smoke the meat. And there’ s no farm in
thirty miles where they might have come from.”
“Maybe a wild herd?” Roger suggested. “Escaped a long
time ago, and wandering?” Speculation sprang up in Jamie’ s
eyes, echoing the hopeful gur gle of Roger ’ s stomach.
“If so, they’ll be easy hunting,” Jamie said. Skepticism
tempered his voice, even as he smiled. He stooped and broke
of f a  sm all piece  of the cow-pat , crushed it with a thumb, then
tossed it away .
“V erra fresh,” he said. “They’re close; let’ s go.”
W ithin a half-hour ’ s walking, they emer ged onto the bank of
the strea m they had glimpsed from above. It was wide and
shallow here, with willows trailing leafless branches in the
water . N othing moved save a sparkle of sun on the rif fles, but
it was plain that the cows had b een there; the mud of the bank
was cut and churned with drying hoofprints, and in one place,
the dyin g plants  had been pawed  away in a long, messy trough
where something lar ge had wallowed.
“Why did I not think to bring rope?” Jamie muttered,
pushing through the willow saplings on the bank as theyskirted t he wallow . “Meat’ s one thing, but milk and cheese
would b e—” The muttering died away , as he turned from the
stream, following a trail of broken foliage back into the wood.
W ithout speaking, the two men spread out, walking softly .
Roger listened with all his might to the quiet of the forest.
They had to be nearby; even such an inexperienced eye as
Roger ’ s had picked up the freshness of the signs. And yet the
wood w as autum n-still, the silence broken only by a raven,
calling i n the distance. The sun  was hanging low in the sky ,
filling th e air in the wood with  a golden haze. It was getting
noticeably colder; Roger passed through a patch of shadow ,
and shivered, in spite of his coat. They’d have to find the
others and make camp soon; tw ilight was short. A fire would
be good. Better , of course, if there were something to cook
over it.
They were going down, now , into a small hollow where
wisps of  autumn mist rose from  the cooling earth. Jamie was
some di stance ahead, walking with as much purpose as the
broken ground allowed; eviden tly the trail was still plain to
him, in spite of the thick vegetation.
A h erd of cows  couldn’ t just vanish, he thought, even in
mist as heavy as this … not unless they were faery kine. And
that, he wasn’ t quite prepared to believe, in spite of the
unearthly quiet of the woods just here.
“Roger .” Jamie spoke very quietly , but Roger had been
listening so intently that he located his father -in-law at once,
some distance to his right. Jamie jerked his head at something
nearby . “Look.”
He held aside a lar ge, brambly bush, exposing the trunk of a
substantial sycamore tree. Part of the bark had been rubbed
away , leaving an oozing whitish patch on the gray bark.
“Do cows rub themselves like that?” Roger peered
dubiously at the patch, then pi cked out a swatch of woolly
dark hair , snagged by the roughened bark.“A ye, sometimes,” Jamie replied. He leaned close, shaking
his head as he peered at the dark-brown tangle in Roger ’ s
hand. “But damned if I’ve ever seen a cow wi’ a coat like that.
Why ye’d think it was …”
Something moved at Roger ’ s elbow and he turned, to find a
monstrous dark head peering over his shoulder . A tiny , blood-
dark eye met h is own, and h e let out a yell and jerked
backward. There  was a loud bang as his gun went of f, and then
a ru sh and a thud, and he wa s lying wrapped round a tree
trunk, th e breath  knocked out of  him, left with no more than a
fleeting notion of a hairy dark b ulk and a power that had sent
him flying like a leaf.
He s at up, fighting for breath, and found Jamie on his knees
in the leaves, scrabbling frantically for Roger ’ s gun.
“Up!” he said. “Up, wee Roger! My God, it’ s buf falo!”
Then he was up, following Jamie. Still half-winded, but
running, his gun in his hand wi th no clear memory of how it
got there, powder -horn bumping against his hip.
Jamie was bounding like a deer through bushes, bundled
cloak bouncing against his back. The wood wasn’ t silent any
longer; ahead there were crashings and splinterings, and low
snorting bellows.
He caug ht up Jamie on the upwa rd slope; they labored up it,
feet sliding on damp leaves, lu ngs burning from the ef fort,
then top ped a rise and came out  onto a long downward slope,
scattered with spindly pine and hickory saplings.
There th ey were; eight or nine of the huge, shaggy beasts,
clustering togeth er as they thundered down the hill, splitting to
go a round thickets and trees. Jamie dropped to one knee,
sighted, and fired, to no apparent ef fect.
There was no time to stop and reload; they must keep the
herd in sight. A bend of the stre am glinted between the trees,
below an d to the right. Roger ch ar ged down the slope in a rush
of excitement, canteen and bulle t-box flying, heart thunderinglike the hooves of the buf falo  herd. He could hear Jamie
bellowing behind him, shouting Gaelic exhortations.
An e xclamation in a dif ferent tone made Roger glance back.
Jamie had stopped, his face frozen in shock. Before Roger
could ca ll to him, shock shifted to a look of fury . T eeth bared,
he seize d his gun by the barrel, and brought down the stock
with a vicious tchunk!  B arely pausing, he lifted the g un and
clubbed it down again—and again, shoulders rolling with the
ef fort.
Reluctantly abandoning the chase, Roger turned and
bounded up the slope toward him.
“What the hell—?” Then he saw , and felt the hair on his
body rise in a  sur ge of revulsion. Brown coils squirmed
between the tussocks, thick and scaly . One end of the snake
had bee n battered to pulp, and  its blood stained the butt of
Fraser ’ s musket, but the body writhed on, wormlike and
headless.
“Stop! It’ s dead. D’ye hear me? Stop, I say!” He grasped
Fraser ’ s arm, but his father -in-l aw jerked free of his hold and
brought the gun-butt down once  more. Then he did stop, and
stood shuddering violently , half-leaning on his gun.
“Christ! What happened? Did it get you?”
“A ye, in  the leg. I stepped on it.” Jamie’ s face was white to
the lips.  He looked at the still-writhing corpse and a deep
shudder ran through him again.
Roger repressed his own shudder and grabbed Fraser ’ s arm.
“Come away . Sit down, we’ll have a look.”
Jamie came, half-stumbling, and collapsed onto a fallen log.
He f umbled at his stocking top, fingers shaking. Roger pushed
Jamie’ s hand away and stripped buskin and stocking of f the
right foot. The fang marks w ere clear , a double dark-red
puncture in the flesh of Fraser ’ s calf. The flesh around the
small ho les had a bluish tinge,  visible even in the late gold
light.“It’ s poi sonous. I’ve got to cut it.” Roger felt dry-mouthed,
but oddl y calm, with no sense of panic. He pulled the knife
from his belt, thought briefly of sterilization, and dismissed the
notion. I t would  take precious m inutes to light a fire, and there
was no time at all to waste.
“W ait.” Fraser was still white, but had stopped shaking. He
took the  small flask from his be lt and trickled whisky over the
blade, then poured a few drops on his fingers and rubbed the
liquid over the wound. He gave Roger a brief twitch of the
mouth, meant as a smile.
“Claire d oes that, when she sets herself to cut someone.” He
leaned back, hands braced on the mossy trunk, and nodded.
“Go on, then.”
Biting his lip in concentration, Roger pressed the tip of the
knife int o the skin just above o ne of the puncture marks. The
skin was surprisingly tough and  springy; the knife dented it,
but didn ’ t penetrate. Fraser reached down and clasped his hand
around Roger ’ s;  he shoved, with a deep, vicious grunt, and the
knife sank suddenly in, an inc h or more. Blood welled up
around the blade; the gripping hand fell away .
“Again. Hard—and quick, man, for God’ s sake.” Jamie’ s
voice w as steady , but Roger fe lt clear droplets of sweat fall
onto his hand fr om Fraser ’ s face, warm and then cold on his
skin.
He b raced himself to the necess ary force, stabbed hard and
cut q uick—two X marks over t he punctures, just as the first-
aid guid es said. The wounds were bleeding a lot, blood
pouring down in thick streams . That was good, though, he
thought. He had to go deep; deep enough to get beyond the
poison. He dropped the knife and bent, mouth to the wounds.
There was no p anic, but his sense of ur gency was rising.
How fast did venom spread? He had no more than minutes,
maybe less. Roger sucked as har d as he could, blood filling his
mouth w ith the taste of hot meta l. He sucked and spat in quiet
frenzy , blood spattering on the yellow leaves, Fraser ’ s leg
hairs scr atchy a gainst his lips. W ith the peculiar dif fusion ofmind th at attends emer gency , he thought of a dozen fleeting
things a t once, even as he bent his whole concentration to the
task at hand.
W as the bloody snake really dead?
How poisonous was it?
Had the bison got away?
Christ, was he doing this right?
Brianna would kill him if he l et her father die. So would
Claire.
He had the devil of a cramp in his right thigh.
Where in hell w ere the others? Fraser should call for them
—no, he was  calling, was bellowing somewhere outside
Roger ’ s ken. The flesh of the l eg Roger held had gone rock-
hard, muscles rigid under his pressing fingers.
Something gras ped the hair on the back of his head and
twisted, forcing him to stop. He glanced up, breathing hard.
“That’ s enough, aye?” Jamie said mildly . “Y ou’ll drain me
dry .” He  gingerly wiggled his ba red foot, grimacing at his leg.
The slashmarks were vivid, still oozing blood, and the flesh
around them was swollen from the sucking, blotched and
bruised.
Roger sat back on his heels, gulping air .
“I’ve made more—of a mess—than the snake did.”
His mou th filled with saliva; he coughed and spat. Fraser
silently of fered him the whisky flask; he swirled a mouthful
round and spat once more, then drank deep.
“All righ t?” He wiped his chin w ith the back of a hand, still
tasting iron, and nodded at the lacerated leg.
“I’ll do.” Jamie was still pale, b ut one corner of his mouth
turned up. “Go and see are the others in sight.”
They we ren’ t; the view from th e top of the outcrop showed
nothing but a s ea of bare bran ches, tossing to and fro. Thewind had come up. If the biso n still moved along the river ,
there was no trace visible, either of them or of their hunters.
Hoarse f rom hallooing into the wind, Roger made his way
back down the slope. Jamie h ad moved a little, finding a
sheltered spot among rocks at the foot of a big balsam fir . He
was sitt ing, back against a rock and legs outstretched, a
handkerchief bound round his wounded leg.
“No sign of an yone. Can ye walk?” Roger bent over his
father -in-law , and was alarmed to see him flushed and
sweating heavily , despite the gathering chill of the air .
Jamie shook his head and gestured toward his leg.
“I can—but not for long.” The leg was noticeably swollen
near the  bite, and the blue tinge  had spread; it showed like a
faint fresh bruise on either side of the encircling handkerchief.
Roger felt the first stab of uneasiness. He had done
everything he knew to do; first-aid guides always had as the
next step in the treatment of snakebite, “Immobilize limb and
get patient to h ospital as soon as possible.” The cutting and
sucking were meant to pull poison from the wound—but
clearly there was plenty still left, spreading slowly through
Jamie F raser ’ s body . He hadn’ t been in time to get it all—if
he’d got ten any . And the nearest thing to a hospital—Claire
and her herbs—a day’ s walk away .
Roger sank slowly down onto his haunches, wondering
what the  hell to do next. Immobilize the limb—well, that was
ef fectively taken care of, for what good it might do.
“Hurt much?” he asked awkwardly .
“Y es.”
W ith this unhelpful response, Jamie leaned back against the
rock and  closed his eyes. Roge r eased himself down onto a
sheaf of dry needles, trying to think.
It w as getting dark fast; the brief warmth of the day had
faded, and the shadows under th e trees had taken on the deep
blue look of evening, though it couldn’ t be more than four orso. Plainly they weren’ t going anywhere tonight; navigation in
the mountains was nearly impossible in the dark, even if
Fraser c ould wa lk. If the others  were here, they could make a
shift to carry hi m—but would that be any better than leaving
him where he w as? While he ur gently wished Claire were
here, se nse told him there wa s little even she could do—
except, perhaps, comfort Jamie if he were to die …
The tho ught knotted his belly . Shoving it firmly aside, he
reached into his pouch, checki ng supplies. He had a small
quantity of johnny-cake still in  his bag; water was never a
dif ficulty in these mountains—through the sound of the trees,
he c ould hear the gur gle of a str eam somewhere below , not far
of f. He’d better be gathering w ood while it was still light,
though.
“W e’d best make a fire.” Jamie spoke suddenly , startling
Roger with this echo of his thought. Jamie opened his eyes and
looked down at one hand, turni ng it over and back as though
he’d never seen it before.
“I’ve pins and needles in my fingers,” he remarked with
interest. He touched his face w ith one hand. “Here, too. My
lips have gone numb. Is that usual, d’ye ken?”
“I don’ t  know . I suppose it is, if you’ve been drinking the
whisky .” It was a feeble joke, b ut he was relieved to have it
greeted with a faint laugh.
“Nay .” Jamie touched the flask beside him. “I thought I
might need it more, later .”
Roger took a deep breath and stood up.
“Right. Stay there; you shouldn’ t move. I’ll fetch along
some w ood. The others will likely see the light of the fire.”
The other men would be of no particular help, at least not until
morning—but it would be a comfort not to be alone.
“Fetch the snake, too,” Jamie c alled after him. “Fair ’ s fair;
we’ll hae a bite of him  for our supper!”
Grinning in spite of present worry , Roger gave a reassuring
wave and turned down the slope.What were the chances? he aske d himself, stooping to wrest
a thick pine knot from the soft  wood of a rotted log. Fraser
was a big man, and in robust health. Surely he would survive.
Y et folk did die of snakebite, and not infrequently; he’d
heard only last week of a Germ an woman near High Point;
bent to pick up a stick of wood from her woodpile, struck full
in the throat by a snake lying hidden there, dead in minutes.
Reaching under a bush for a dry branch just as this recollection
came to him, he hastily withdr ew his bare hand, gooseflesh
running up his arm. Berating h imself for stupidity , he got a
stick and thoroughly stirred th e drift of dry leaves before
reaching once more cautiously into it.
He coul dn’ t help glancing up the slope every few minutes,
feeling a small s tab of alarm whenever Fraser was out of sight.
What if he should collapse before Roger returned?
Then he relaxed a little as he remembered. No, it was all
right. Jamie wasn’ t going to die  tonight, either of snakebite or
cold. He couldn’ t; he was mean t to die some years hence, by
fire. For once, future doom meant present reassurance. He
took a deep breath and let it out in relief, then steeled himself
to approach the snake.
It was motionless now , quite o bviously dead. Still, it took
some ef fort of will to pick the th ing up. It was as thick around
as h is w rist and  nearly four fee t long. It had begun to stif fen;
in th e end, he was obliged to lay it across the armload of
firewood, like a scaly branch. S eeing it so, he had no trouble
imagining how the snake that h ad bitten the German woman
had escaped notice; the subtle b rowns and grays of its patterns
made it nearly invisible against its background.
Jamie skinned the thing while R oger built the fire. W atching
from the corner of his eye, he c ould see that his father -in-law
was making an u nusually clumsy job of it; the numbness in his
hands m ust be getting worse. Still, he went on doggedly ,
hacking at the corpse, stringing chunks of pale raw flesh onto
a half-peeled twig with trembling fingers.The job complete, Jamie extended the stick toward the
budding fire and nearly dropped  it. Roger grabbed for it, and
felt through the stick the tremor that shook Jamie’ s hand and
arm.
“Y ou all  right?”  he said, and reached automatically to feel
Jamie’ s forehea d. Fraser jerked back, surprised and mildly
af fronted.
“A ye,” he said, b ut then paused. “A ye, well … I do feel a bit
queer ,” he admitted.
It was hard to te ll in the uncert ain light, but Roger thought
he looked a good bit more than queer .
“Lie dow n for a bit, why don’ t you?” he suggested, trying to
sound c asual. “Sleep if ye can;  I’ll wake ye when the food’ s
ready .”
Jamie d idn’ t a r gue, which alarmed Roger more than
anything else so far . He curled himself into a drift of leaves,
moving his wounded leg with a  care that told Roger just how
painful it was.
The snakemeat dripped and sizz led, and in spite of a slight
distaste at the notion of eating snake, Roger felt his stomach
rumble in anticipation; damned if it didn’ t smell like roasting
chicken! Not for the first time, h e reflected on the thin line that
separated appetite from starva tion; give the most finicky
gourmand a day or two without food, and he’d be eating slugs
and lizards without the least hesitation; Roger had, on the
journey back from his surveying trip.
He kept  an eye on Jamie; he didn’ t move, but Roger could
see him  shiver now and then,  in spite of the now-leaping
flames. His eyes were closed. His face looked red, but that
might be only firelight—no telling his real color .
By the time the meat had cooked through, it was full dark.
Roger fetched water , then heape d armloads of dried grass and
wood on the fire , making the flames dance and crackle, higher
than his head; if  the other men were anywhere within a mile,
they should see it.Fraser roused himself with dif fic ulty to eat. It was clear that
he had no appeti te, but he forced himself to chew and swallow ,
each bite a dogged ef fort. Wh at was it? Roger wondered.
Simple stubbornness? A notio n of vengeance against the
snake? Or perhaps some Highland superstition, the idea that
consuming the reptile’ s flesh might be a cure for its bite?
“Did the Indians ken aught to do for snakebite?” Jamie
asked abruptly , lending some credence to the last guess.
“Y es,” Roger answered cautiously . “They had roots and
herbs that they mixed with dun g or hot cornmeal, to make a
poultice.”
“Did it work?” Fraser held a bi t of meat in his hand, wrist
drooping as though too tired to raise it to his mouth.
“I only saw it done twice. Once, it seemed to work perfectly
—no swelling, no pain; the lit tle girl was quite all right by
evening of the same day . The other time—it didn’ t work.” He
had only seen the hide-wrapped body taken from the
longhouse, not witnessed the grisly details of the death.
Evidently he was going to get an other chance to see the ef fects
of snakebite up close, though.
Fraser grunted.
“And what would they do in your time?”
“Give you an injection of something called antivenin.”
“An inje ction, a ye?” Jamie looked unenthusiastic. “Claire
did that to me, once. I didna like it a bit.”
“Did it work?”
Jamie m erely g runted in reply , and tore of f another small
morsel of meat between his teeth.
In spite of his worry , Roger wo lfed his share of the meat,
and the uneaten part of Jamie’ s  meal as well. The sky spread
black and starry overhead, and a cold wind moved through the
trees, chilling hands and face.He b uried the re mnants of the s nake—all they needed now
was for some lar ge carnivore to  show up, drawn by the smell
of blood —and te nded the fire, a ll the time listening for a shout
from the darkness. No sound came but the moaning of wind
and cracking of branches; they were alone.
Fraser h ad pulled of f his hunting shirt in spite of the chill,
and was sitting with his eyes c losed, swaying slightly . Roger
squatted next to him and touche d his arm. Jesus! The man was
blazing hot to the touch.
He o pened his eyes, though, an d smiled faintly . Roger held
up a cup of water; Jamie nodded and took the cup, fumbling.
The leg was gro tesquely swollen below the knee, nearly twice
its norm al size. The skin showed irregular dark red blotches,
as though some succubus had come to place its hungry mouth
upon the flesh, then left unsatisfied.
Roger w ondered uneasily whether he might, perhaps, be
wrong. He’d been convinced that the past couldn’ t be changed;
er go, the time and manner of Fraser ’ s death was set—some
four years in the  future. If it weren’ t for that certainty , though,
he thoug ht, he’d be bloody worried by the look of the man.
Just how certain was  he, after all?
“Y e cou ld be wrong.” Jamie had put down the cup and was
regarding him with a steady blue gaze.
“About what?” he asked, startled to hear his thought spoken
aloud. Had he been muttering to himself, not realizing it?
“About the changing. Y e thought it wasna possible to
change history , ye said. But what if ye’re wrong?”
Roger bent to poke the fire.
“I’m not wrong,” he said firml y , as much to himself as to
Fraser . “Think, man. Y ou and Claire—you tried to stop
Charles Stuart—change what he did—and ye couldn’ t. It can’ t
be done.”
“That’ s no quite right,” Fraser objected. He leaned back,
eyes half-hooded against the fire’ s brightness.“What’ s not right?”
“It’ s true we failed to keep him from the Rising—but that
didna de pend on ly on us and on him; there were a good many
other folk had to do wi’ that. The chiefs who followed him, the
damn Irishmen who flattered him—even Louis; him and his
gold.”
He wave d a hand, dismissing it.  “But that’ s neither here nor
there. Y e said Claire and I couldna stop him—and it’ s true, we
couldna stop the beginning. Bu t we might have stopped the
end.”
“Culloden, you  mean?” Roger stared into the fire,
remembering dimly that long-ago day when Claire had first
told him and Brianna the story of the stones—and Jamie
Fraser . Y es, she had spoken of a last opportunity—the chance
to prevent that final slaughter of the clans …
He glanced up at Fraser .
“By killing Charles Stuart?”
“A ye. If we had  done so—but n either she nor I could bring
ourselves to it.” His eyes were nearly closed, but he turned his
head res tlessly , c learly uncomfortable. “I have wondered many
times since, if that was decency—or cowardice.”
“Or maybe something else,” Roger said abruptly . “Y ou
don’ t kn ow . If Claire had trie d to poison him, I’m betting
something would have happened; the dish would have spilled,
a do g would hav e eaten it, someone else would have died—it
wouldn’ t have made a dif ference!”
Fraser ’ s eyes opened slowly .
“So ye think it’ s all destined, do ye? A man has no free
choice a t all?” He rubbed at hi s mouth with the back of his
hand. “A nd when ye chose to come back, for Brianna, and
then again, for h er and the wean—it wasna your choice at all,
aye? Y e were meant to do it?”
“I—” Roger stopped, hands clenched on his thighs. The
smell of  the Gloriana ‘s bi lges seemed suddenly to rise abovethe s cent of burning wood. The n he relaxed, and gave a short
laugh. “Hell of a time to get philosophical, isn’ t it?”
“A ye, w ell,” Fraser spoke quite mildly . “It’ s only that I may
not have another time.” Before Roger could expostulate, he
went on.  “If there is nay free cho ice … then there is neither sin
nor redemption, aye?”
“Jesus,” Roger muttered, shoving the hair back from his
forehead. “Com e out with Hawkeye and end up under a tree
with bloody Augustine of Hippo!”
Jamie ignored him, intent on his point.
“W e chose—Claire and I. W e wouldna do murder . W e
wouldna shed the blood of one  man; but does the blood of
Culloden then rest on us? W e wouldna commit the sin—but
does the sin find us, still?”
“Of course not.” Roger rose to his feet, restless, and stood
poking the fire. “What happened at Culloden—it wasn’ t your
fault, ho w could  it be? All the men who took part in that—
Murray , Cumbe rland, all the chiefs … it was not any one
man’ s doing!”
“So ye think it is all meant? W e’re doomed or saved from
the m oment of birth, and not a thing can change it? And you a
minister ’ s son!” Fraser gave a dry sort of chuckle.
“Y es,” Roger said, feeling at once awkward and
unaccountably a ngry . “I mean no, I don’ t think that. It’ s only
… well,  if something’ s already happened one way , how can it
happen another way?”
“It’ s only you that thinks it’ s happened,” Fraser pointed out.
“I don’ t think it, I know!”
“Mmphm. A ye, because ye’ve c ome from the other side of
it; it’ s behind you. So perhaps you  cou ldna change something
—but I could, because it’ s still ahead of me?”
Roger rubbed a hand hard over his face.“That m akes—” he began, and then stopped. How could he
say it made no sense? Sometimes he thought nothing in the
world made sense anymore.
“Maybe,” he said wearily . “God knows; I don’ t.”
“A ye. W ell, I suppose we’ll find out soon enough.”
Roger glanced sharply at him, h earing a strange note in his
voice.
“What d’ye mean by that?”
“Y e thin k ye ken that I died three years from now ,” Fraser
said calmly . “If I die tonight, the n you’re wrong, aye? What ye
think happened won’ t have happened—so the past can  be
changed, aye?”
“Y ou’re not going to die!” Roger snapped. He glowered at
Fraser , daring him to contradict.
“I’m pleased to hear it,” Fraser said. “But I think I’ll take a
bit o’ the whisky now . Draw the cork for me, aye? My fingers
willna grasp it.”
Roger ’ s own hands were far from steady . Perhaps it was
only the  heat of Fraser ’ s fever th at made his own skin feel cold
as he held the fl ask for his fathe r -in-law to drink. He doubted
that whisky was recommended for snakebite, but it didn’ t
seem likely to make much dif ference now .
“Lie down,” he said gruf fly , wh en Jamie had finished. “I’ll
fetch a bit more wood.”
He w as unable to keep still; th ere was plenty of wood to
hand, yet still h e prowled the darkness, keeping just within
sight of the blazing fire.
He had had a lot of nights like t his; alone under a sweep of
sky so vast that  it made him dizzy to look up, chilled to the
bone, m oving to keep warm. Th e nights when he had wrestled
with choice, too restless to lie  in a comforting burrow of
leaves, too tormented to sleep.The cho ice had been clear then, but far from easy to make:
Brianna on the o ne hand, and al l that came with her; love and
danger , doubt and fear . And  on the other , surety . The
knowledge of who and what he was—a certainty he had
forsaken, for the sake of the wo man who was his … and the
child who might be.
He had chosen. Dammit, he had  chosen! Nothing had forced
him, he had m ade the choice himself. And if it meant
remaking himself from the ground up, then he’d bloody well
chosen that, too! And he’d ch osen to kiss Morag, too. His
mouth twisted at the thought; he’d had even less notion of the
consequences of that  small act.
Some sm all echo  stirred in his mind, a soft voice far back in
the shadows of his memory .
“… what I was born does not matter , only what I will make
of myself, only what I will become.”
Who’d w ritten t hat? he wondered. Montaigne? Locke? One
of the bloody Enlightenment lads, them and their notions of
destiny and the individual? He’ d like to see what they had to
say about time traveling! Then he remembered where he’d
read it, and the marrow of his spine went cold.
“This is the grimoir e of the witch, Geillis. It is a witch’ s
name, and I take it for my own; what I was born does not
matter , only what I will make  of myself, only what I will
become.”
“Right!” he said aloud, defiant. “Right, and you couldn’ t
change things either , could you, Grandma?”
A sound came f rom the forest b ehind him, and the hair rose
on the back of his neck befor e he recognized it; it wasn’ t
laughter , as he’d thought at first—only a panther ’ s distant cry .
She had, though, he thought suddenly . T rue, she’d not
managed to make a king of Charles Stuart—but she’d done a
good nu mber of other things. And now he came to think on the
matter …  She and Claire had bo th done something guaranteed
to c hange things; they’d borne  children, to men of anothertime. Brianna … W illiam Buccleigh—and when he thought of
the ef fect those two births had had on his own life, let alone
anything else …
That had  t o chan ge thing s, didn’ t it? He sat down slowly on
a fallen log, feeling the bark cold and damp under him. Y es, it
did. T o name on e minor ef fect, his own bloody existence was
the result of Geilie Duncan’ s taking char ge of her destiny . If
Geilie hadn’ t borne a child to Dougal MacKenzie … of course,
she hadn’ t chosen  to do that.
Did intention make any dif ference, though? Or was that
exactly the point he’d been ar guing with Jamie Fraser?
He got up and circled the fire quietly , peering into the
shadows. Fraser was lying down, a humped shape in the
darkness, very still.
He walked lightly , but his fee t crunched on the needles.
Fraser didn’ t twitch. His eyes were closed. The blotchiness
had spre ad to his face. Roger thought his features had a thick,
congested look, lips and eyelids slightly swollen. In the
wavering light, it was impossib le to tell whether he was still
breathing.
Roger knelt and shook him, hard.
“Hey! A re ye still alive?” He’d meant to say it jokingly , but
the fear in his voice was apparent to his own ears.
Fraser didn’ t move. Then one eye cracked open.
“A ye,” he muttered. “But I’m no enjoying it.”
Roger didn’ t leave again. He wi ped Jamie’ s face with a wet
cloth, of fered more whisky—which was refused—then sat
beside the recumbent form, listening for each rasping breath.
Much against his will, he found himself making plans,
proceeding from one unwelcome assumption to the next. What
if th e worst happ ened? Against his will, he thought it possible;
he had seen sev eral people die who didn’ t look nearly as bad
as Fraser did just now .If the worst should  happen, and the others not have
returned, he would have to bury  Jamie. He could neither carry
the bod y nor leave it exposed ; not with panthers or other
animals nearby .
His eye  roamed uneasily over the surroundings. Rocks,
trees, br ush—everything looked alien, the shapes half-masked
by darkness, outlines seeming to waver and change in the
flickering glow , the wind moaning past like a prowling beast.
There, m aybe; the end of a half-fallen tree loomed jagged in
the darkness, leaning at an angle. He could scrape a shallow
trench, p erhaps, then lever the t ree and let it fall to cover the
temporary grave …
He pressed his head hard against his knees.
“No!”  he whispered. “Please, no!”
The thought of telling Bree, te lling Claire, was a physical
pain, sta bbing him in chest and  throat. It wasn’ t only them,
either—what about Jem? What about Fer gus and Marsali,
Lizzie and her father , the Bu gs, the Lindsays, the other
families on the Ridge? They all looked to Fraser for
confidence and direction; what would they do without him?
Fraser shifted, and groaned with the movement. Roger laid a
hand on his shoulder , and he stilled.
Don’ t go,  he thou ght, the unspoken words  balled tight in his
throat. Stay with us. Stay with me.
He s at for a long time, his hand resting on Fraser ’ s shoulder .
He had the abs urd thought that he was somehow holding
Fraser , keeping him anchored to the earth. If he held on ‘til the
sunrise, all would be well; if he lifted his hand, that would be
the end.
The fire  was burning low now , but he put of f from moment
to moment the necessity of tending it, unwilling to let go.
“MacKenzie?” It was no more than a murmur , but he bent at
once.“A ye, I’m here. Y e want water? A drop of whisky?” He was
reaching for the cup even as h e spoke, spilling water in his
anxiety . Fraser took two swallo ws, then waved the cup away
with a twitch of his hand.
“I dinna  ken yet if ye’re right or you’re wrong,” Fraser said.
His voice was soft and hoarse, but distinct. “But if you’re
wrong, wee Roger , and I’m dying, there are things I must say
to ye. I dinna want to leave it too late.”
“I’m here,” Roger repeated, not knowing what else to say .
Fraser closed his eyes, gathering strength, then brought his
hands beneath him and rolled halfway over , ponderous and
clumsy . He grimaced, and took a moment to catch his breath.
“Bonnet. I must tell ye what I’ve put in train.”
“A ye?” For the first time, Roge r felt something other than
simple worry for Fraser ’ s welfare.
“There i s a man named L yon—Duncan Innes will ken best
how to find him. He works on the coast, buying from the
smugglers who run the Outer B anks. He sought me out at the
wedding, to see would I deal with him, over the whisky .”
The plan in outli ne was simple enough; Jamie meant to send
word—by what route, Roger had no notion—to this L yon,
indicating that he was willing to enter into business, provided
that L yon would bring Stephen Bonnet to a meeting, to prove
that he had a man of the nec essary reputation and skill to
manage the transport up and down the coast.
“Necessary reputation,” Roger echoed under his breath.
“A ye, he’ s got that.”
Fraser made a sound that might have been a laugh.
“He’ll not agree that easily—he’ll bar gain and set terms—
but he’ll agree. T ell him ye’ve got enough whisky to make it
worth his while—give him a ba rrel of the two-year -old to try ,
if ye must. When he sees what folk will pay for it, he’ll be
eager e nough. The place—” He stopped, frowning, and
breathed for a moment before going on.“I’d thou ght to make it W ylie’ s Landing—but if it’ s you, ye
should choose a place to your liking. T ake the Lindsays with
ye to guard your back, if they’ll go. If not, find someone else;
dinna go alone. And go ready to kill him at the first shot.”
Roger nodded, swallowing heavily . Jamie’ s eyelids were
swollen, but he looked up unde r them, his eyes glinting sharp
in the firelight.
“Dinna let him get close enough to take ye with a sword,”
he s aid. “Y e’ve done well—but ye’re not good enough to meet
a man like Bonnet.”
“And you are?” Roger couldn’ t stop himself from saying.
He thought Fraser was smiling, but it was dif ficult to tell.
“Oh, aye,” he said softly . “If I l ive.” He coughed then, and
lifted a hand, dismissing Bonnet for the moment.
“For the rest … watch Sinclair .  He’ s a man to be used—he
kens everything  that passes in the district—but no a man to
turn your back on, ever .”
He paused, brow furrowed in thought.
“Y e can trust Duncan Innes and Farquard Campbell,” he
said. “And Fer gus—Fer gus will  help ye, if he can. For the rest
—” He shifted again and winced. “Go wary of Obadiah
Henderson; he’l l try ye. A-many of them will, and ye let them
—but dinna let Henderson. T ake him at the first chance—ye
willna get another .”
Slowly , with frequent pauses to rest, he went down the list
of th e na mes of the men on the Ridge, the inhabitants of Cross
Creek, the prominent men of the  Cape Fear valley . Characters,
leanings, secrets, obligations.
Roger f ought down panic, struggling to listen carefully ,
commit it all to memory , wanting to reassure Fraser , tell him to
stop, to rest, tha t none of this was necessary—at the same time
knowing it was m ore than necessary . There was war coming; it
didn’ t ta ke a time traveler to k now it. If the welfare of the
Ridge—of Brian na and Jemmy , of Claire—were to be left inRoger ’ s inexperienced hands, he must take heed of every scrap
of information that Fraser could give him.
Fraser ’ s voice trailed of f in hoarseness. Had he lost
consciousness? The shoulder u nder Roger ’ s hand was slack,
inert. He sat quietly , not daring to move.
It would n’ t be enough, he thought, and a dull fear settled in
the pit of his stomach, an aching dread that underlay the
sharper pangs of grief. He couldn’ t do it. Christ, he couldn’ t
even shoot a thin g the size of a h ouse! And now he was meant
to st ep into Jam ie Fraser ’ s shoes? Keep order with fists and
brain, feed a fam ily with gun an d knife, tread the tightrope of
politics over a lighted powderkeg, tenants and family all
balanced on his shoulders? Replace the man they called
Himself? Not fucking likely , he thought bleakly .
Fraser ’ s hand twitched suddenly . The fingers were swollen
like sausages, the skin stretched  red and shiny . Roger laid his
free hand over it, and felt the fingers move, trying to curl
around his own.
“T ell Brianna I’m glad of her ,” Fraser whispered. “Give my
sword to the bairn.”
Roger nodded, unable to speak. Then, realizing that Fraser
couldn’ t see him, cleared his throat.
“A ye,” he said g ruf fly . “I’ll tell her .” He waited, but Fraser
said no more. Th e fire had burne d very low , but the hand in his
burned hot as e mbers. A gust of wind knifed past, whipping
strands of his hair against his cheek, sending up a spray of
sudden sparks from the fire.
He waited as lo ng as he thoug ht he dared, the cold night
creeping past in lonely minutes. Then leaned close, so Fraser
could hear him.
“Claire?” he asked quietly . “Is there anything ye’d have me
tell her?”
He t hought he’d waited too long; Fraser lay motionless for
several minutes. Then the big hand stirred, half-closingswollen fingers; the ghost of a motion, grasping after time that
slipped away .
“T ell her … I meant it.”91
DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT
I ‘VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING like that in my entire life.”
I leaned closer , peering. “That is absolutely bizarr e .” 
 “And yo u a healer half your life,” Jamie muttered crossly . “Y e
canna tell me they’ve no got snakes in your time.”
“They haven’ t got many in downtown Boston. Besides, they
wouldn’ t call out a sur geon to deal with a case of snakebite.
Closest I came was when a keeper at the zoo was bitten by a
king cobra—a friend of mine d id the autopsy , and invited me
to come and watch.”
I ref rained from saying that Ja mie looked a lot worse at
present than the subject of the autopsy had.
I set  a hand gin gerly on his ank le. The skin was puf fy , hot
and dry under my hand. It was also red. Bright red. The
brilliant color extended from his  feet up nearly to his rib cage;
he looked as though he’d been dipped in boiling water .
His face, ears, and neck were also flushed the color of a
plum tomato; only the pale skin of his chest had escaped, and
even that was dotted with p inpricks of red. Beyond the
lobsterlike color ation, the skin was peeling from his feet and
hands, hanging in wispy shreds like Spanish moss.
I pee red closely at his hip. Here , I could see that the redness
was caused by a denser version of the rash on his chest; the
stipple of tiny dots showed up clearly on the stretched skin
over the ilial crest.
“Y ou loo k like you’ve been roasted over a slow fire,” I said,
rubbing a finger over the rash in fascination. “I’ve never seen
anything so red in my life.” Not raised; I couldn’ t feel the
individual spots, though I could see them at close range. Not a
rash as such; I thought it must be petechiae, pinpoint
hemorrhages under the skin. But so many of them …“I shouldna say ye’ve much room to criticize, Sassenach,”
he said.  T oo weak to nod, he cut his eyes at my fingers—
stained with huge blotches of yellow and blue.
“Oh, damn !” I leap ed to my feet, threw the quilts hastily on
top of him, an d ran for the door . Distracted by Jamie’ s
dramatic arrival,  I had left a vat full of dyeing to mind itself in
the side yard—a nd the water had been low . Christ, if it boiled
dry and burned the clothes …
The hot reek of urine and indigo hit me in the face as I shot
out t he door . In spite of that, I drew a deep breath of relief, as I
saw Marsali, red in the face with the ef fort of levering a
dripping mass from the pot with  the big wooden clothes-fork. I
went ha stily to help her , snatching the steaming garments one
by one from th e sopping pile and flinging them onto the
blackberry bushes to dry .
“Thank goodnes s,” I said, waving my scalded fingers in the
air to cool them. “I was afraid I’d ruined the lot.”
“W eel, they’ll be a bit dark, ma ybe.” Marsali wiped a hand
across her face, plastering back the fine blond strands that
escaped from her kerch. “If the weather keeps fine, though, ye
can leav e them in the sun to fade. Here, let’ s move the pot
before it scorches!”
Crusts o f indigo  had already sta rted to crackle and blacken
in the bottom of the pot as we ti pped it of f the fire, and clouds
of acrid smoke rose up around us.
“It’ s all right,” Marsali said, coughing and fanning smoke
from her face. “ Leave it, Mother Claire; I’ll fetch up water so
it can soak. Y e’l l need to see to Da, aye? I came down at once
when I heard; is he verra poorly?”
“Oh, thank you, dear .” I was overwhelmed with gratitude;
the last thing I had time to do just now was to haul several
buckets of water from the spring to soak the pot. I blew on my
scalded fingers to cool them; the skin under the splotches of
dye was nearly as red as Jamie’ s.“I th ink he’ll b e all right,” I assured her , suppressing my
own fears. “He feels dreadful, and looks worse—I’ve never
seen anyone look like that in all my born days—but if the
wound d oesn’ t get infected …” I crossed my sore fingers in
superstitious prophylaxis.
“Ah, he’ll do,” Marsali said confidently . “Fer gus said as
they tho ught he was dead whe n they found him and Roger
Mac, but by the time they crossed the second ridge, he was
makin’ terrible jokes about the  snake, so they didna worry
anymore.”
I wa sn’ t quite s o sanguine myself, having seen the state of
his injured leg, but I smiled reassuringly .
“Y es, I think he’ll be fine. I’m just going to make an onion
poultice and clean out the wound a bit. Go and see him, why
don’ t you, while I fetch the onions?”
Luckily there were plenty of on ions; I had pulled them two
weeks before, when the first  frost came, and dozens of
knobbly braided strings hung in the pantry , fragrant and
crackling when I brushed against them. I broke of f six lar ge
onions and brought them into the kitchen to slice. My fingers
were tingling, half-burned and stif f from handling the boiling
clothes, and I w orked slowly , not wanting to slice of f a finger
accidentally .
“Here, I’ll do that, a leannan .” M rs. B ug too k the knife out
of m y ha nd and dealt briskly with the onions. “Is it a poultice?
A ye, that’ll be the thing. A go od onion poultice will mend
anything.” Still, a worried frown  puckered her forehead as she
glanced toward the sur gery .
“Can I help, Mama?” Bree came in from the hallway , also
looking worried. “Da looks awful; is he all right?”
“Ganda full?” Jem popped into the kitchen after his mother ,
less worried about his grandfather than interested in the knife
Mrs. Bu g was using. He dragg ed his little stool toward her ,
face purposeful under his coppery fringe. “Me do!”I b rushed the hair out of my fac e with the back of my hand,
eyes watering fiercely from the onions.
“I think so.” I snif fed and blotted my eyes. “How’ s Roger?”
“Roger ’ s good.” I could hear th e small note of pride in her
voice; Ja mie had  told her Roger  had saved his life. Possibly he
had. I just hoped it stayed  saved.
“He’ s as leep,” s he added. Her m outh curved slightly as she
met my eyes, w ith complete understanding. If a man was in
bed, at least you  knew where he was. And that he was safe, for
the moment.
“Jem! Y ou leave Mrs. Bug alone!” She scooped him of f his
stool and whirled him away from the chopping board, feet
kicking in protest. “Do you need anything, Mama?”
I rubbed a finger between my brows, considering.
“Y es, can you tr y to find me some maggots? I’ll need them
for Jami e’ s leg.” I frowned, gl ancing out the window at the
bright au tumn d ay . “I’m afraid t he frost has killed all the flies;
I h aven’ t seen one in days. T ry the paddock, though; they’ll
lay eggs in the warm dung.”
She ma de a brief face of distaste, but nodded, setting
Jemmy down on the floor .
“Come on, pal, let’ s go find ickies for Grannie.”
“Icky-icky-icky-icky!” Jemmy scampered after her ,
enchanted at the prospect.
I dropp ed the sliced onions i nto a bowl made from a
hollowed gourd and scooped a little of the hot water from the
cauldron into it. Then I left the onions to stew , and went back
to the sur gery . In the center of  the room was a sturdy pine
table, serving as examination  table, dentist’ s chair , drug
preparation surf ace, or auxiliary dining table, depending on
medical exigenc ies and the num ber of dinner guests. At the
moment, it was supporting the supine form of Jamie, scarcely
visible u nder hi s heap of quilt s and blankets. Marsali stoodclose to the tabl e, head bent toward him as she held a cup of
water for him to sip.
“Y ou’re sure you’re all right, Da ?” she said. One hand stole
toward h im, but  she stopped, cle arly afraid to touch him in his
present condition.
“Oh, aye , I’ll do.” I could hear the deep fatigue in his voice,
but a big hand r ose slowly out from under the quilts to touch
her cheek.
“Fer gus did braw work,” he said. “Kept the men together
through the night, found me and Roger Mac in the morning,
brought everyon e home safe across the mountain. He’ s a fine
sense of direction.”
Marsali’ s head was still bent, but I saw her cheek curve in a
smile.
“I did tell him so. He’ll no give over berating himself for
lettin’ th e beasts get away , though. Just one would ha’ fed the
whole Ridge for the winter , he said.”
Jamie gave a small grunt of dismissal.
“Och, we’ll manage.”
It w as plainly an  ef fort for him to speak, but I didn’ t try to
send Ma rsali away . Roger told me Jamie had been vomiting
blood as they brought him back;  I couldn’ t give him brandy or
whisky to ease t he pain, and I hadn’ t any laudanum. Marsali’ s
presence might help to distract him from his wretchedness.
I opened the cupboard quietly and brought out the big
lidded b owl where I kept my leeches. The pottery was cold,
soothing to my scalded hands. I had a dozen or so big ones;
somnolent black blobs, half-floating in their murky brew of
water an d cattail  roots. I scoope d three into a smaller bowl full
of clear water , and set it by the brazier to warm.
“W ake up, lads,” I said. “T ime to earn your keep.”
I l aid out the o ther things I would need, listening to the
murmured conv ersation behind  me—Germain, baby Joan, a
porcupine in the trees near Marsali and Fer gus’ s cabin.Coarse g auze fo r the onion pou ltice, the corked bottle with
its mixture of alcohol and sterile water , the stoneware jars of
dried goldenseal, coneflower , and comfrey . And the bottle of
penicillin broth.  I cursed silentl y , looking at the label on it. It
was nearly a month old; caught up in the bear hunt and the
autumn chores upon our return, I had not made a fresh batch
for weeks.
It would  have to do. Pressing my lips together , I rubbed the
herbs between my hands, into the beechwood brewing cup,
and with no more than a faint sense of self-consciousness,
silently said the blessing of Brid e over it. I’d take all the help I
could get.
“Are the cut pin e-fans ye find on the ground verra fresh?”
Jamie asked, sounding sligh tly more interested in the
porcupine than in Joan’ s new tooth.
“A ye, gr een and fresh. I ken weel enough he’ s up there, the
wicked creature, but it’ s a great huge tree, and I canna spot
him from the gr ound, let alone fire on him.” Marsali was no
more than a mi ddling shot, but since Fer gus couldn’ t fire a
musket at all with his one hand, she did the family’ s hunting.
“Mmphm.” Jamie cleared his throat with an ef fort, and she
hastily gave him more water . “ T ake a bit o’ salted pork rind
from the pantry and rub it ower a stick of wood. Set it on the
ground, not too far from the trunk of the tree, and let Fer gus sit
up to  wa tch. Por cupines are gey fond o’ the salt, and of grease;
they’ll s mell it and venture down after dark. Once it’ s on the
ground, ye needna waste shot; ju st bat it ower the head. Fer gus
can do that fine.”
I op ened the m edical chest and frowned into the tray that
held saw s and scalpels. I took out the small, curve-bladed
scalpel, its handle cool under my fingers. I would have to
debride the wound—clean away  the dead tissue, the shreds of
skin and  bits of leaf and cloth and dirt; the men had plastered
his leg with mu d and wrapped it with a filthy neckerchief.
Then I could sprinkle the penic illin solution over the exposed
surfaces; I hoped that would help.“That w ould be grand,” Marsali  said, a little wistfully . “I’ve
no had such a beast before, but Ian did tell me they were fine;
verra fat, and the quills good for sewing and all manner o’
things.”
I bit  my  lip, looking at the othe r blades. The biggest was a
folding saw , meant for field am putation, with a blade nearly
eight in ches long; I hadn’ t used it since Alamance. The
thought of using it now made co ld sweat spring out under my
arms and inch down my sides—but I’d seen his leg.
“The meat’ s greasy ,” Jamie said, “but that’ s good—” He
stopped abruptly as he shifted his weight, with a muf fled groan
as he moved his leg.
I c ould feel the steps of the process of amputation, echoing
in th e muscles o f my hands and forearms; the tensile severing
of sk in a nd mus cle, the grate of  bone, the snap of tendon, and
the slippery , rubbery , blood-squirting vessels, sliding away
into the severed flesh like … snakes.
I swallowed. No. It wouldn’ t come to that. Surely not.
“Y e need fat meat. Y ou’re verr a thin, a muirninn ,” Jamie
said softly , behind me. “T oo thin, for a woman breeding.”
I tur ned round, swearing silently to myself once more. I’d
thought so, but had hoped I was wrong. Three babies in four
years! And a one-handed husband, who couldn’ t manage the
man’ s w ork of a homestead and wouldn’ t do the “women’ s
work” of baby-minding and mash-brewing that he could
handle.
Marsali made a small sound, half-snort, half-sob.
“How did you know? I havena even told Fer gus yet.”
“Y e should—though he kens it already .”
“He told you?”
“No—but I didna think it only t he indigestion that troubled
him, whilst we were hunting. Now I see ye, I ken what it is
that’ s weighin’ on him.”I wa s biting my  tongue hard enough to taste blood. Did the
tansy oi l and vinegar mixture I’d given her not work? Or the
dauco  s eeds? Or , as I strongly susp ected, had she just not
bothered to use either one regularly? W ell, too late for
questions or reproaches. I caught her eye as she glanced up,
and managed—I hoped—to look encouraging.
“Och,” she said with a feeble smile. “W e’ll manage.”
The leeches were stirring, bo dies stretching slowly like
animated rubber  bands. I turne d back the quilt over Jamie’ s
leg, and  pressed the leeches gen tly onto the swollen flesh near
the wound.
“It l ooks nastier than it is,” I said reassuringly , hearing
Marsali’ s unguarded gasp at the sight. That was true, but the
reality was nasty enough. The slashmarks were crusted black
at the edges, b ut still gaped. Instead of the sealing and
granulation of normal healing, they were beginning to erode,
the expo sed tissues oozing pus. The flesh around the wounds
was hugely swollen, black and mottled with sinister reddish
streaks.
I b it my lip, frowning as I cons idered the situation. I didn’ t
know w hat kind of snake had bitten him—not that it made
much dif ference, with no antivenin for treatment—but it had
plainly had a powerful hemolytic toxin. T iny blood vessels had
ruptured and bled all over his  body—internally , as well as
externally—and lar ger ones, near the site of the wound.
The foot and ankle on the injured side were still warm and
pink—or rather ,  red. That was a good sign, insofar as it meant
the d eeper circulation was intact. The problem was to improve
circulation near the wound, enough to prevent a massive die-
of f a nd sloughing of tissue. The  red streaks bothered me very
much indeed, though; they could  be only part of the
hemorrhagic pro cess, but it was more likely that they were the
early signs of septicemia—blood poisoning.
Roger hadn’ t told me much of t heir night on the mountain,
but he hadn’ t ha d to; I’d seen men before who’d sat through
the d ark with de ath beside them. If Jamie had lived a night anda da y since then, chances were he would go on surviving—if I
could control the infection. But in what condition?
I hadn’ t treated snakebite injuries before, but I’d seen
suf ficient textbo ok illustrations. The poisoned tissue would die
and rot; Jamie could easily lose most of the muscle of his calf,
which would cripple him perma nently—or worse, the wound
could turn gangrenous.
I stole a look at him under my lashes. He was covered with
quilts and so ill he could barely move—and yet the lines of his
body were drawn with grace a nd the promise of strength. I
couldn’ t bear the thought of mu tilating him—and yet I would
do it if I  must. T o cripple Jamie … to leave him halt and half-
limbed … the thought made my stomach clench and sweat
break out on my blue-blotched palms.
W ould he wish that himself?
I reached for the cup of water by Jamie’ s head and drained it
myself. I wouldn’ t ask him. The  choice was his by right—but
he was mine, and I had made my choice. I wouldn’ t give him
up, no matter what I had to do to keep him.
“Y ou’re sure you’re all right, Da?” Marsali had been
watching my face. Her eyes darted from me to Jamie and back,
looking scared. I hastily tried to  rearrange my features into a
look of competent assurance.
Jamie ha d been watching me, to o. One corner of his mouth
turned up.
“A ye, well, I did think so. Now I’m none so sure, though.”
“What’ s the matter? Do you feel worse?” I asked anxiously .
“No, I feel fine ,” he assured me—lying through his teeth.
“It’ s onl y , when I’ve hurt myself, but it’ s all right, ye always
scold like a mag pie—but if I’m desperate bad, ye’re tender as
milk. N ow , ye havena called m e wicked names or uttered a
word of reproach since I came  home, Sassenach. Does that
mean ye think I’m dyin’?”One eye brow ro se in irony , bu t I could see a true hint of
worry i n his eyes. There wer e no vipers in Scotland; he
couldn’ t know what was happening to his leg.
I to ok a deep breath and laid my hands lightly on his
shoulders.
“Bloody man. Stepping on a snake! Couldn’ t you have
looked where you were going?”
“Not whilst chasing a thousand-weight of meat downhill,”
he said, smiling. I felt a tiny relaxation in the muscles under
my h ands, and repressed the ur g e to smile back. I glared down
at him instead.
“Y ou scared bloody hell out of me!” That at least was
sincere.
The eyebrow went up again.
“Maybe ye think I wasna frightened, too?”
“Y ou’re not allowed,” I said firmly . “Only one of us can be
scared at a time, and it’ s my turn.”
That made him laugh, though the laughter was quickly
succeeded by coughing and a shaking chill.
“Fetch me a h ot stone for his feet,” I said to Marsali,
quickly tucking in the quilts aro und him. “And fill the teapot
with boiling water and bring that, too.”
She darted hastily toward the k itchen. I glanced toward the
window , wondering whether Brianna was having any luck in
finding maggots. They had no equal in cleaning pustulant
wounds without damage to the healthy flesh nearby . If I was to
save his leg as well as his life, I needed more help than Saint
Bride’ s.
W ondering vaguely if there were a patron saint of maggots,
I lifted the edge of the quilt and  stole a quick look at my other
invertebrate assistants. Good; I let out a small sigh of relief.
The leeches worked fast; they were already swelling into
plumpness, sucking away the blood that was flooding the
tissues of his leg from ruptured capillaries. W ithout thatpressure, healthy circulation might  be resto red in time to keep
skin and muscle alive.
I co uld see his hand clenched on the edge of the table, and
could fe el the shuddering of his chill through my thighs,
pressed against the wood.
I t ook his head between my hands; the skin of his cheeks
was burning hot.
“Y ou are not  going to die!” I  hissed. “Y ou’re not! I won’ t let
you!”
“People keep sayin’ that to me,” he muttered, eyes closed
and sunken with exhaustion. “ Am I not allowed my own
opinion?”
“No,” I said. “Y ou’re not. Here, drink this.”
I held the cup of penicillin bro th to his lips, steadying it
while he  drank. He made faces,  squinching his eyes shut, but
swallowed it obediently enough.
Marsali had brought the teapot,  brimful of boiling water . I
poured most of it over the waiting herbs, and left them to
steep, w hile I poured him a cu p of cold water to wash away
the taste of the penicillin.
He swallowed the water , eyes still shut, then lay back on the
pillow .
“What is that?” he asked. “It tastes of iron.”
“W ater ,” I replied. “Everything t astes of iron; your gums are
bleeding.” I handed the empty w ater jug to Marsali and asked
her to bring more. “Put honey in it,” I said. “About one part
honey to four parts water .”
“Beef te a is what he needs,” she said, pausing to look at
him, brow furrowed with concern. “That’ s what my Mam did
swear by , and her Mam before her . When a body’ s lost a deal
o’ blood, there’ s naught like beef tea.”
I thought Marsali must be seriously worried; she seldom
mentioned her mother in my hearing, out of a natural sense oftact. For  once, though, bloody Laoghaire was right; beef tea
would b e an excellent thing—if we happened to have any
fresh beef, which we didn’ t.
“Honey water ,” I said briefly , sh ooing her out of the room. I
went to  fetch reinforcements from the leech department,
pausing to check on Brianna’ s progress through the front
window .
She was  out by the paddock, barefoot, skirts kilted up above
the k nee, shaking bits of horse d ung from one foot. No luck so
far , then. She saw me at th e window and waved, then
motioned to the ax that stood n earby , then to the edge of the
wood. I nodded and waved back; a rotted log might be a
possibility .
Jemmy was on the ground nearby , his leading-strings
securely tied to the paddock fence. He certainly didn’ t need
them to  help him stay upright,  but they did keep him from
escaping while his mother was busy . He was industriously
engaged in pulling down the r emains of a dried gourd-vine
that had grown u p over the fence, crowing with delight as bits
of crum bled leaf and the dried remains of frostbitten gourds
showered over his flaming hair . His round face bore a look of
determined intent, as he set about the task of getting a gourd
the size of his head into his mouth.
A movement caught the corner o f my eye; Marsali, bringing
up wate r from the spring, to fill  the crusted cauldron. No, she
wasn’ t s howing at all yet—Jamie was right, she was much too
thin—but now that I knew , I co uld see the pallor in her face,
and the shadows under her eyes.
Damn. Another  glimpse of m ovement; Bree’ s long pale
legs, flashing under her kilted s kirts in the shadow of the big
blue spruce. And was she  u sing the tansy  oil? She was still
nursing Jemmy , but that was no guarantee, not at his age …
I sw ung around at a sound behind me, to find Jamie
climbing slowly back into his nest of quilts, looking like a
great crimson sloth, my amputation saw in one hand.“What the hell are you doing?”
He eased himself down, grimacing, and lay back on the
pillow , breathing in long, deep gasps. The folded saw was
clasped to his chest.
“I repeat,” I said, standing menacingly over him, hands on
my hips, “what the hell …”
He opened his eyes and lifted the saw an inch or so.
“No,” he said positively . “I ken what ye’re thinking,
Sassenach, and I willna have it.”
I took a deep breath, to keep my voice from quivering.
“Y ou know I wouldn’ t, not unless I absolutely had to.”
“No,” h e said again, and gav e me a familiar look of
obstinacy . No surprise at all that he  nev er wondered who
Jemmy looked like, I thought with sour amusement.
“Y ou don’ t know what may happen—”
“I k en what’ s h appening to my leg better than you do,
Sassenach,” he interrupted, then paused to breathe some more.
“I dinna care.”
“Maybe you don’ t, but I  do!”
“I’m no  going to die,” he said firmly , “and I dinna wish to
live with half a leg. I’ve a horror of it.”
“W ell, I ’m not very keen on it myself. But if it’ s a choice
between your leg and your life?”
“It’ s not.”
“It damn well may be!”
“It w on’ t.” Age made not the sli ghtest dif ference, I thought.
T wo yea rs or fifty , a Fraser w as a Fraser , and no rock was
more stubborn. I rubbed a hand through my hair .
“All. Right,” I s aid, between clenched teeth. “Give me the
bloody thing and I’ll put it away .”
“Y our word.”“My what?” I stared at him.
“Y our word,” he repeated, givi ng me back the stare, with
interest. “I may be fevered and lose my wits. I dinna want ye
to take my leg if I’m in no state to stop it.”
“If you’re in that sort of state, I’ll have no choice!”
“Perhaps ye don’ t,” he said eve nly , “but I do. I’ve made it.
Y our word, Sassenach.”
“Y ou bloody , unspeakable, infuriating —”
His smile was startling, a white grin in the ruddy face. “If ye
call me a Scot, Sassenach, then I know  I’m going to live.”
A shriek from outside kept me from answering. I swung
round to the window , in time to see Marsali drop two pails of
water on  the ground. The wate r geysered over her skirt and
shoes, but she paid no attent ion. I glanced hastily in the
direction she was looking, and gasped.
It had walked casually through the paddock fence, snapping
the rails  as though they were matchsticks, and stood now in
the mids t of the pumpkin patch by the house, vines jerking in
its mouth as it chewed. It stood huge and dark and wooly , ten
feet awa y from Jemmy , who stared up at it with round, round
eyes and open mouth, his gourd for gotten in his hands.
Marsali let out another screech, and Jemmy , catching her
terror , b egan to scream for his mother . I turned, and—feeling
as th ough I were  moving in slow motion, though I was surely
not—snatched the saw neatly from Jamie’ s hand, went out the
door , and headed for the yard, thinking as I did so that buf falo
looked so much smaller in zoos.
As I cleared th e stoop—I must have leaped; I had no
memory of the steps—Brianna  came out of the woods. She
was running silently , ax in her hand, and her face was set,
inward and intent. I had no time to call out before she reached
it.
She had  drawn back the ax, still  running, swung it in an arc
as she took the last step, and brought it down with all herstrength, just behind the huge beast’ s ears. A thin spray of
blood flew up and spattered on the pumpkins. It bellowed and
lowered its head, as though to char ge forward.
Bree dodged to one side, dived for Jemmy , was on her
knees, tugging at the strings that bound him to the fence. From
the corner of m y eye, I could see Marsali, yelling Gaelic
prayers and imprecations as she seized a newly dyed petticoat
from the blackberry bushes.
I h ad somehow  unfolded the saw as I ran; I cut Jemmy’ s
strings w ith two swipes, then was on my feet and running back
across th e dooryard. Marsali had thrown the petticoat over the
buf falo’ s head; it stood bewildered, shaking its head and
swaying to and fro, blood show ing black on the yellow-green
of the fresh-dyed indigo.
It stood as tall as I at the shoulder , and it smelt strange;
dusty an d warm, gamey but oddly familiar , with a barn-smell,
like a cow . It took a step, anothe r , and I dug my fingers into its
wool, holding on. I could feel t he tremors running through it;
they shook me like an earthquake.
I h ad never done it, but felt as though I had, a thousand
times. Dreamlik e and sure, I ran a hand under slobbering lips,
felt warm breath blow down my sleeve. The great pulse
throbbed in the a ngle of the jaw; I could see it in my mind, the
big meat y heart and its pumping blood, warm in my hand, cold
against my cheek where it pressed the sodden petticoat.
I dre w t he saw across the throat, cut hard, and felt in hands
and forearms the tensile severing of skin and muscle, the grate
of bone,  the snap of tendon, and the slippery , rubbery , blood-
squirting vessels, sliding away .
The world shook. It shifted and slid, and landed with a thud.
When I came to myself, I was  sitting in the middle of my
dooryard, one hand still twisted  in its hair , one leg gone numb
beneath the weight of the buf falo ’ s head, my skirts plastered to
my thighs, hot and stinking, sodden with its blood.Someone said something and I l ooked up. Jamie was on his
hands and knees on the stoop—mouth open, stark naked.
Marsali sat on the ground, leg s splayed out in front of her ,
soundlessly opening and closing her mouth.
Brianna stood over me, Jemmy held against her shoulder .
T error fo r gotten, he leaned far over , looking down in curiosity
at the buf falo.
“Ooo!” he said.
“Y es,” I said. “V ery well put.”
“Y ou’re all right, Mama?” Bree asked, and I realized she
had ask ed several times before. She put down a hand and
rested it gently on my head.
“I don’ t know ,” I said. “I think so.”
I too k her hand and laboriously worked my leg free, leaning
on h er a s I stood up. The same tremors that had gone through
the buf falo were going through her—and me—but they were
fading. S he took a deep breath,  looking down at the massive
body . L ying on its side, it rose nearly as high as her waist.
Marsali came to stand beside us, shaking her head in awe at its
size.
“Mother of God, how on eart h are we going to butcher
that ?” she said.
“Oh,” I said, and  dragged a trem bling hand through my hair .
“I suppose we’ll manage.”92
I GET BY WITH A LITTLE HELP
 FROM MY FRIENDS
I  LEANED MY FOREHEAD against the cool glass of my
sur gery window , blinking at the scene outside. Exhaustion lent
the scene in the  dooryard an extra tinge of surrealism—not
that it needed much extra.
The sun had all but set, flaming gold in the last ragged
leaves of the ch estnut trees. The spruces stood black against
the dyin g glow , as did the gibbe t in the center of the yard, and
the g risly remains that swung f rom it. A bonfire had been lit
near the blackberry bushes, a nd silhouetted figures darted
everywhere, disappearing in and out of flames and shadow .
Some attacked the hanging carcass, armed with knives and
hatchets; others plodded laden away , carrying slabs of flesh
and buckets of fat. Near the fire, the skirted bell-shapes of
women showed, bending and reaching in silent ballet.
Dark as it was, I  could pick Bria nna’ s tall, pale figure out of
the h orde of dem ons hacking at the buf falo—keeping order , I
thought. Before being forcibly returned to the sur gery , Jamie
had esti mated the buf falo’ s weight at something between
eighteen hundred and two thousand pounds. Brianna had
nodded at this, handed Jemmy to Lizzie, then walked slowly
around the carcass, squinting in deep thought.
“Right,” she’d said, and as soon  as the men began to appear
from their homesteads, half-dressed, unshaven, and wild-eyed
with exc itement, had issued cool directions for the cutting of
logs and the buil ding of a pulley-frame capable of hoisting and
supporting a ton of meat.
The men , disgru ntled at not bein g in on the kill, hadn’ t been
inclined to pay attention to her at first. Brianna, however , was
lar ge, vivid, strongly-spoken—and stubborn.“Whose stroke is that?” she’d demanded, staring down
Geordie Chisholm and his sons as they started toward the
carcass, knives in hand. She po inted at the deep gash across
the neck, then wiped her hand slowly down her sleeve,
drawing attention to the splashed blood there. “Or that?” One
long bare foot pointed delicately at the severed throat, and the
pool of blood th at soaked the d ooryard. My stockings lay at
the edge of the congealing puddle where I had stripped them
of f, limp red rags, but recognizably feminine.
W atching from the window , I h ad seen more than one face
glance toward the house, frowning with the realization that
Brianna was Himself ’ s daughter—a fact the wise kept well in
mind.
It w as R oger wh o had turned the  tide for her , though, with a
cool sta re that brought the Lindsay brothers to heel behind
him, axes in hand.
“It’ s her kill,” he said, in his husking croak. “Do what she
says.” He squared his shoulders and gave the other men a look
that strongly suggested there should be no further controversy .
Seeing this, Fer gus had shrugge d and bent to seize the beast
—one-handed—by its spindly tail.
“Where will you have us put it, madame?” he asked
politely . The men had all laughed, and then with sheepish
glances and shrugs of resignation, reluctantly pitched in as
well, following her directions.
Brianna had given Roger a look  of surprise, then gratitude,
and then—the bit firmly between her teeth—had taken char ge
of the whole ent erprise, with remarkable results. It was barely
nightfall, and the butchery was almost done, the meat
distributed to all the households on the Ridge. She knew
everyone, knew  the number of mouths in each cabin, and
parceled out the meat and swee tbreads as they were cut. Not
even Jam ie could have managed it better , I thought, feeling a
warm swell of pride in her .I g lance d across at the table, where Jamie lay swaddled in
blankets. I had wanted to move him upstairs to his bed, but he
had insisted on staying downstairs, where he could hear—if
not see—what was going on.
“They’re nearly finished with  the butchering,” I said,
coming to lay a  hand on his head. Still flushed and blazing.
“Brianna’ s done a wonderful job of it,” I added, to distract
both of us.
“Has sh e?” His eyes were half -open, but fixed in a fever -
stare; that dream-soaked daze where shadows writhe in the
wavering hot air over a fire. As I spoke, though, he came
slowly b ack from wherever he had been, and his eyes met
mine, heavy-lidded but clear , and he smiled faintly . “That’ s
good.”
The hid e had been pegged out  to dry , the enormous liver
sliced fo r quick searing, intestin es taken to soak for cleaning,
haunches to the shed for smokin g, strips of meat taken of f for
drying into jerky , fat for rende ring into suet and soap. Once
stripped bare, the bones would b e boiled for soup, salvaged for
buttons.
The prized hooves and horns s at bloodily discreet on my
counter , brought in by Murdo Lindsay . T acit trophies, I
supposed; the eighteenth-century equivalent of two ears and a
tail. I had got th e gallbladder , too, though that was simply by
default; no one wanted it, but it was popularly assumed that I
must have some medicinal use f or almost any natural object. A
greenish thing the size of my fist, it sat oozing in a dish,
looking rather sinister next to the set of detached and muddy
hooves.
Everyone on the Ridge had come at the news—even Ronnie
Sinclair , from his cooper ’ s shop  at the foot of the slope—and
little rem ained of the buf falo n ow , save a rack of scavenged
bones. I caught the faint odor of roasting meat, of burning
hickory wood and cof fee, and pushed up the window all the
way to let in the appetizing smells.Laughter and the crackle of fire came in on a gust of cold
wind. It  was warm in the sur ge ry now , and the cold air from
the window felt good against my flushed cheeks.
“Are you hungry , Jamie?” I asked. I was starving myself;
though I  hadn’ t realized it ‘til I smelled food. I closed my eyes
and inhaled, buoyed up by the h earty scent of liver and onions.
“No,” he said, sounding drowsy . “I dinna fancy anything.”
“Y ou sh ould ea t a bit of soup, if you can, before you fall
asleep.” I turned and smoothed the hair of f his face, frowning
a little as I looked at him. The flush had faded a bit, I thought
—hard t o tell for sure in the uncertain light of fire and candle.
W e had got enou gh honey-water and herb tea into him so that
his eyes were no longer sunken with dehydration, but the
bones of  cheek and jaw were still prominent; he hadn’ t eaten
in more than fo rty-eight hours, and the fever was consuming
an immense amount of ener gy , consuming his tissues.
“D’ye need more hot water , ma’ am?” Lizzie appeared in the
doorway , lookin g more disheveled than usual, Jemmy clutched
in h er arms. She  had lost her kerch and her fine, fair hair had
escaped from its bun; Jemmy had a good handful of it in his
chubby fist, and was yanking fretfully at it, making her squint
with each yank.
“Mama-mama-mama,” he said, in an escalating whine that
made it obvious that he’d been saying the same thing for quite
some time. “Mama-mama-MAMA!”
“No, I have enough; thank you, Lizzie. Stop that, young
man,” I said, g etting hold of Jemmy’ s hand and forcibly
unpeeling his fat little fingers. “ W e don’ t pull hair .” There was
a s mall chuckle from the nest o f blankets on the table behind
me.
“Y e’d never ken it to look at ye, Sassenach.”
“Mm?” I turned my head and stared blankly at him for a
moment, then followed the direction of his glance with my
hand. Sure enough, my own cap had somehow disappeared,
and my hair was  standing out lik e a bramblebush. Attracted bythe word “hair ,” Jemmy abandoned Lizzie’ s fine locks, leaned
over , and grabbed a fistful of mine.
“Mama-mama-mama-mama …”
“Foo,” I said, crossly , reaching to disentangle him. “Let go,
you little fiend. And why aren’ t you in bed, anyway?”
“MAMA-MAMA-MAMA …”
“He wants his mother ,” Lizzie explained, rather
redundantly . “I’ve put him in his cot a dozen times, but he’ll
be c limbin’ out again, the instan t my back’ s turned. I couldna
keep him—”
The outer door opened, letting in a strong draft that made
the e mbers in th e brazier glow a nd smoke, and I heard the pad
of bare feet on the oak boards in the hall.
I’d heard the expression, “blood to the eyebrows” before,
but I hadn’ t seen it all that often, at least not outside the
confines of a battlefield. Brianna’ s eyebrows were invisible,
being red enough to have blended into the mask of gore over
her f ace. Jemmy took a good lo ok at her , and turned down his
mouth i n an expression of dou btful distress, just this side of
outright wails.
“It’ s me , baby ,” she reassured him. She reached a hand
toward h im, but stopped short o f touching him. He didn’ t cry ,
but burrowed his face into Lizzie’ s shoulder , rejecting the
notion that this apocalyptic vision had anything at all to do
with the mother he’d been fussing for a few minutes earlier .
Brianna ignored  both her son’ s  rejection and the fact that
she was leaving footprints composed in equal parts of mud and
blood all over the floor .
“Look,” she said, holding out a closed fist to me. Her hands
were caked with dried blood, her fingernails crescents of
black. She reverently uncurled  her fingers to show me her
treasure; a handful of tiny , wriggling white worms that made
my heart give a quick bump of excitement.
“Are they the right kind?” she asked anxiously .“I th ink so; let me check.” I ha stily dumped the wet leaves
from the herb t ea onto a smal l plate, to give the worms a
temporary refug e. Brianna gently deposited them on the
mangled foliage and carried the plate to the counter where my
microscope stoo d, as though t he plate bore specks of gold
dust, rather than maggots.
I pic ked up one of the worms w ith the edge of a fingernail,
and deposited it on a glass slide, where it writhed unhappily in
a futile search for nourishment. I beckoned to Bree to bring me
another candle.
“Nothing but a mouth and a gut,” I muttered, tilting the
mirror to catch t he light. It was much too dim for microscopic
work, but might just be suf ficient for this. “V oracious little
buggers.”
I held my breath, peering through the fragile eyepiece,
straining to see. Ordinary blow-fly and flesh-fly larvae had
one line visible on the body; scr ew-worm larvae had two. The
lines we re faint, invisible to the naked eye, but very important.
Blow-fly maggots ate carrion, and only carrion—dead,
decaying flesh. Screw-worm larvae burrowed into the living
flesh, and consumed the live m uscle and blood of their host.
Nothing I wanted to insert into a fresh wound!
I closed  one eye, to let the other adapt to the moving
shadows in the eyepiece. The dark cylinder of the maggot’ s
body wr ithed, twisting in all dir ections at once. One line was
clearly visible. W as that another? I squinted until my eye
began to  water , but could see n o more. Letting out the breath
I’d been holding, I relaxed.
“Congratulations, Da,” Brianna said, moving to Jamie’ s
side. He opened one eye, which  passed with a marked lack of
enthusiasm dow n Brianna’ s figure. Stripped to a knee-length
shift for butchering, she was sp lotched from head to toe with
gouts of  dark blood, and the mus lin had stuck to her in random
patches.
“Oh, aye?” he said. “For what?”“The ma ggots. Y ou did it,” she  explained. She opened her
other hand, revealing a misshapen blob of metal—a squashed
rifle-ball. “The maggots were in a wound in the hindquarters
—I dug this out of the hole behind them.”
I laughed, as much from relief as from amusement.
“Jamie! Y ou shot it in the arse?”
Jamie’ s mouth twitched a little.
“I di dna think I’d hit it at all,” he said. “I was only trying to
turn the herd tow ard Fer gus.” He reached up a slow hand and
took the ball, rolling it gently between his fingers.
“Maybe you should keep it for  good luck,” Brianna said.
She spoke lightly , but I could  see the furrow between her
invisible brows.  “Or to bite on while Mama’ s working on your
leg.”
“T oo late,” he said, with a very faint smile.
It was then she caught sight of  the small leather strip that
lay on the tab le near his hea d, marked with overlapping
crescents—the deep imprints of Jamie’ s teeth. She glanced at
me, app alled. I lifted one shoul der slightly . I had spent more
than an hour cleaning the wound in his leg, and it hadn’ t been
easy on either of us.
I cle ared my thr oat, and turned back to the maggots. From
the corner of m y eye, I saw Bree lay the back of her hand
gently against Jamie’ s cheek. He turned his head and kissed
her knuckles, blood notwithstanding.
“Dinna fash, lassie,” he said. His voice was faint, but steady .
“I’m fine.”
I o pened  my mouth to say something, but caught sight of
Bree’ s face and bit my tongue  instead. She’d been working
hard, and still had Jemmy and Roger to care for; she needn’ t
worry for Jamie, too—not yet.
I dropped the m aggots into a sm all bowl of sterile water and
swished them rapidly round, then dumped them back on the
bed of wet leaves.“It won’ t hurt,” I said to Jamie, trying to reassure myself as
much as him.
“Oh, aye,” he said, with an unbecoming cynicism. “I’ve
heard that  one before.”
“Actually , she’ s right,” said a so ft, rasping voice behind me.
Roger had already had a quick wash; his dark hair lay damp
against his collar , and his clothes were clean. Jemmy , half
asleep, lay against his father ’ s shoulder , dreamily sucking his
thumb. Roger came over to the table to look down at Jamie.
“How is it, man?” he said quietly .
Jamie moved his head on the pillow , dismissive of
discomfort.
“I’ll do.”
“That’ s good.” T o my surpris e, Roger grasped Jamie’ s
shoulder in a brief gesture of comfort. I’d never seen him do
that before, and once more I wondered just what had passed
between them on the mountain.
“Marsali’ s bringing up some beef tea—or rather , buf falo tea
—for hi m,” Roger said, frowning slightly as he looked at me.
“Maybe you’d best be having some, too.”
“Good i dea,” I said. I closed my eyes briefly and took a
deep breath.
Only wh en I sat down did I rea lize that I had been on my
feet since the ea rly morning. Pain outlined every bone in my
feet and legs, an d I could feel the ache where I had broken my
left tibia, a few years before. Duty called, though.
“W ell, ti me and tide wait for no maggot,” I said, struggling
back to my feet. “Best get on with it.”
Jamie g ave a small snort and stretched, then relaxed, his
long body reluctantly readying itself. He watched with
resignation while I fetched the plate of maggots and my
forceps, then reached for the leather strip by his head.“Y ou’ll not need that,” Roger said. He pulled up another
stool and sat do wn. “It’ s true w hat she said, the wee beasts
don’ t hurt.”
Jamie snorted again, and Roger grinned at him.
“Mind,” he said, “they tickle something fierce. That’ s only
if ye think abou t it, though. If ye can keep all thought of them
out of your mind, why , there’ s nothing to it.”
Jamie eyed him.
“Y e’re a great comfort, MacKenzie,” he said.
“Thanks,” said Roger , with a husk of a laugh. “Here, I
brought ye something.” He leaned forward and deposited a
drowsy Jemmy into Jamie’ s arms. The little boy uttered a
small squawk of surprise, then relaxed as Jamie’ s arms
tightened about him in reflex. O ne chubby hand swung free,
seeking anchorage, then found it.
“Hot,” h e murmured, smiling beatifically . Fist twined in
Jamie’ s ruddy hair , he sighed deeply and went soundly to sleep
on his grandfather ’ s fever -warm chest.
Jamie narrowed  his eyes at me as I picked up the forceps.
Then he gave a  slight shrug, laid his stubbled cheek gently
against Jemmy’ s silk-bright hair , and closed his own eyes,
though t he tenseness in his feat ures was a marked contrast to
the rounded peace of Jemmy’ s.
It couldn ’ t have been easier; I simply lifted away the fresh
onion po ultice, and tucked the maggots one by one into the
ulcerated slashmarks on Jamie’ s calf. Roger circled behind me
to watch.
“It looks almost like a leg again,” he said, sounding
surprised. “I never thought it would.”
I smiled, though I didn’ t look round at him, too intent on my
delicate work. “Leeches are very ef fective,” I said. “Though
your rather crude knifework may have been useful, too—you
left big enough holes that the pu s and fluid were able to drain;
that helped.”It w as true; w hile the limb was still hot and grossly
discolored, the swelling had s ubsided markedly . The long
stretch of shinbone and the de licate arch of foot and ankle
were once more visible. I was  under no illusion about the
dangers still remaining—infection, gangrene, sloughing—but
nonetheless, my heart grew lighter . It was recognizably
Jamie’ s leg.
I pinched another maggot just  behind the head with my
forceps, careful not to crush it. I lifted the edge of the skin
with the slender probe I held in my other hand, and deftly
inserted the tiny , wiggling thin g into the small pocket thus
provided—trying to ignore the nastily spongy feel of the flesh
under my fingers, and my memory of Aaron Beardsley’ s foot.
“Done,” I said, a moment later , and gently replaced the
poultice. Stewed onion and garlic wrapped in muslin and
soaked w ith pen icillin broth would keep the wounds moist and
draining. Renewed every hour or so, I hoped that the warmth
of the poultices would also encourage circulation in the leg.
And the n a dressing of honey , to prevent any further bacterial
invasions.
Concentration a lone had kept my hands steady . Now it was
done, an d there was nothing more to do but wait. The saucer
of wet leaves rattled against the counter as I set it down.
I didn’ t think I had ever been so tired before.93
CHOICES
B ETWEEN THEM, Roger and Mr . Bug got Jamie up to our
bedroom. I hadn’ t wanted to d isturb his leg by moving him
from the sur gery , but he insisted.
“I dinna want ye to be sleeping on the floor down here,
Sassenach,” he said, when I pro tested. He smiled at me. “Y e
should be in yo ur bed—but I ken ye willna leave me alone,
and so that means I must go and be in it, too, aye?”
I would have ar gued further , but in all truth, I was so tired
that I wouldn’ t have complaine d much if he had insisted we
both sleep in the barn.
Once he was settled, though, my doubts returned.
“I’ll jog gle your  leg,” I said, hanging up my gown on one of
the pegs. “I’ll just make up a pallet by the fire here, and—”
“Y ou will not,” he said definite ly . “Y e’ll sleep wi’ me.” He
lay back on the pillows, eyes closed, his hair an auburn tumble
against t he linen . His skin had begun to fade; it wasn’ t quite so
red. It was, however , alarmingly pale where the tiny
hemorrhages didn’ t stain it.
“Y ou wo uld ar g ue on your dea thbed,” I said crossly . “Y ou
don’ t have  to be constantly  in char ge, you know . Y ou could  lie
still and  let other people take ca re of things, for once. What do
you think would happen, if—”
He opened his eyes and gave me a dark blue look.
“Sassenach,” he said softly .
“What?”
“I w ould like y e to touch me … without hurting me. Just
once before I sleep. W ould ye mind much?”I stopped and drew breath, terribly disconcerted at the
realization that he was right. Ca ught up in the emer gency and
worry o f his condition, everything I had done to him during
the day had bee n painful, intrusive, or both. Marsali, Brianna,
Roger , Jemmy—all of them had touched him in gentleness,
of fering sympathy and comfort.
And I—I had been so terrified at the possibility of what
might happen, of what I might b e forced to do, that I had taken
no t ime, allowed no room for gentleness. I looked away for a
moment, blinkin g until the tears retreated. Then I stood and
walked over to the bed, bent, and kissed him, very softly .
I str oked the h air back from h is forehead, smoothed his
brows w ith my thumb. Arch Bug had shaved him; the skin of
his chee k was smooth, hot against the side of my hand. His
bones were hard under his skin,  framing his strength—and yet
he seemed suddenly fragile. I felt fragile, too.
“I want ye to sleep beside me, Sassenach,” he whispered.
“All righ t.” I smiled at him, my  lips trembling only a little.
“Let me brush out my hair .”
I sat  dow n in my shift, shook out my hair , and took up the
brush. He watched me, not spea king, but with a faint smile on
his lips, as I worked. He liked to watch me brush my hair; I
hoped it was as soothing to him as it was to me.
There were noises downstairs, but they were muf fled, safely
distant. The shutters were ajar; firelight flickered against the
glass of the window from the  dying bonfire in the yard. I
glanced at the window , wonde ring if I ought to close the
shutters.
“Leave them, Sassenach,” he murmured from the bed. “I
like to hear the talk.” The sound of voices from outside was
comforting, rising and falling, with small bursts of laughter .
The sound of the brush was soft and regular , like surf on
sand, an d I felt the stress of the day lessen slowly , as though I
could brush all the anxieties a nd dreads out of my hair aseasily as  tangles  and bits of pumpkin vine. When at last I put
down the brush and rose, Jamie’ s eyes were closed.
I knelt to smoor the fire, rose to blow out the candle, and
went at last to bed.
I eas ed myself g ently into the bed beside him, not to jostle.
He lay turned away from me, on his side, and I turned toward
him, echoing the curve of his b ody with my own, careful not
to touch him.
I lay  very quietly , listening. All the house sounds had settled
to th eir night-time rhythm; the h iss of the fire and the rumble
of wind in the flue, the sudden startling crack!  of the stairs, as
though some unwary foot had stepped upon a riser . Mr .
W emyss’ s aden oidal snoring reached me, reduced to a
soothing buzz by the thickness of the intervening doors.
There were still voices outside, muf fled by distance,
disjointed with drink and the la teness of the hour . All jovial,
though; no sound of hostility or incipient violence. I didn’ t
really care, though. The inhabitants of the Ridge could
hammer each other senseless an d dance on the remains, for all
I cared. All my attention was focused on Jamie.
His breathing was shallow but e ven, his shoulders relaxed. I
didn’ t want to d isturb him; he needed rest above all things. At
the same time, I ached to touch him. I wanted to reassure
myself that he was here, alive beside me—but I also needed
badly to know how things went with him.
W as he feverish? Had the incipient infection in his leg
blossomed in spite of the penicillin, spreading poison through
his blood?
I m oved  my head cautiously , bringing my face within an
inch of his shirt- covered back, and breathed in, slow and deep.
I c ould feel the warmth of him  on my face, but couldn’ t tell
through the linen nightshirt just how hot he really was.
He smel t faintly of the woods, more strongly of blood. The
onions in the dressing gave of f a bitter tang; so did his sweat.I inh aled again, testing the air . No scent of pus. T oo early
for the smell o f gangrene, even if the rot was beginning,
invisible under the bandages. I thought there was a strange
scent about his skin, though; something I hadn’ t smelled
before. N ecrosis of the tissue? Some breakdown product of the
snake’ s venom? I blew a short breath through my nose and
took in a fresh one, deeper .
“Do I stink verra badly?” he inquired.
“Uk!” I said, sta rtled into biting my tongue, and he quivered
slightly , in what I took to be suppressed amusement.
“Y e sound like a wee truf fle-pig, Sassenach, snortling away
back there.”
“Oh, ind eed,” I said, a bit crossly . I touched the tender spot
on my tongue. “W ell, at least you’re awake. How do you
feel?”
“Like a pile of moldy tripes.”
“V ery p icturesque,” I said. “Can you be a trifle more
specific?” I put a hand lightly on  his side, and he let his breath
out in a sound like a small moan.
“Like a pile of moldy tripes …” he said, and pausing to
breathe heavily , added, “… .with maggots .”
“Y ou’d joke on your deathbed,  wouldn’ t you?” Even as I
said it, I felt a t remor of unease. He would , and I hoped this
wasn’ t it.
“W ell, I’ll try , S assenach,” he murmured, sounding drowsy .
“But I’m no really at my best under the circumstances.”
“Do you hurt much?”
“No. I’m just … tired.” He sounded as though he were in
fact too exhausted to search f or the proper word, and had
settled for that one by default.
“Little wonder if you are. I’ll go  and sleep somewhere else,
so y ou can rest.”  I made to throw back the covers and rise, but
he stopped me, raising one hand slightly .“No. No , dinna  leave me.” His  shoulder fell back toward
me, and he tried to lift his head from the pillow . I felt still
more un easy wh en I realized tha t he was too weak even to turn
over by himself.
“I won’ t leave you. Maybe I should sleep in the chair ,
though. I don’ t want to—”
“I’m cold,” he said softly . “I’m verra cold.”
I pressed my fingers lightly just under his breastbone,
seeking the big abdominal pulse. His heartbeat was rapid,
shallower than it should have been. He wasn’ t feverish. He
didn’ t just feel cold, he was  cold to the touch, his skin chill ed
and his fingers icy . I found that very alarming.
No longer shy , I cuddled close against him, my breasts
squashing softly against his back, cheek resting on his
shoulder blade. I concentrated a s hard as I could on generating
body heat, trying to radiate war mth through my skin and into
his. So often he had enfolded me in the curve of his body ,
sheltering me, giving me the warmth of his big body . I wished
passionately that I were lar ger , and could do the same for him
now; as it was, I could do no more than cling to him like a
small, fierce mustard plaster , and hope I had the same ef fect.
V ery gently , I found the hem of his shirt and pulled it up,
then cupped my hands to fit the  rounds of his buttocks. They
tightened slightly in surprise, then relaxed.
It occurred to me to wonder just why I felt I must lay hands
on him, but I didn’ t trouble my mind with it; I had had the
feeling many times before, an d had long since given up
worrying that it wasn’ t scientific.
I could feel the faintly pebbled texture of the rash upon his
skin, and the tho ught came unbidden of the lamia. A creature
smooth and cool to the touch, a shape-shifter , passionately
venomous, its nature infectious . A swift bite and the snake’ s
poison spreading, slowing his heart, chilling his warm blood; I
could imagine tiny scales rising under his skin in the dark.I forcibl y repressed the thought, but not the shudder that
went with it.
“Claire,” he said softly . “T ouch me.”
I co uldn’ t hear his heartbeat. I  could hear mine; a thick,
muf fled sound in the ear pressed to the pillow .
I slid my hand over the slope of his belly , and more slowly
down, fi ngers p arting the coarse curly tangle, dipping low to
cup the rounded shapes of him. What heat he had was here.
I stroke d him with a thumb and felt him stir . The breath
went out of him  in a long sigh, and his body seemed to grow
heavier , sinking into the mattress as he relaxed. His flesh was
like candle wax in my hand, smooth and silky as it warmed.
I fel t very odd; no longer frightened, but with all my senses
at o nce preternaturally acute a nd yet … peaceful. I was no
longer conscious of any sounds save Jamie’ s breathing and the
beating of his heart; the darkness was filled with them. I had
no cons cious thought, but seemed to act purely by instinct,
reaching down and under , seeki ng the heart of his heat in the
center of his being.
Then I was moving—or we were moving together . One
hand reached down between u s, up between his legs, my
fingertips on the spot just behin d his testicles. My other hand
reached over , around, moving with the same rhythm that
flexed my thighs and lifted m y hips, thrusting against him
from behind.
I c ould have done it forever , an d felt that perhaps I did. I
had no sense of time passing, on ly of a dreamy peace, and that
slow , steady rhythm as we moved together in the dark.
Somewhere, som etime, I felt a steady pulsing, first in the one
hand, then in both. It melded with the beat of his heart.
He sighed, long and deep, and I felt the air rush from my
own lungs. W e lay silent and passed gently into
unconsciousness, together .
 I WOKE FEELING utterly peaceful. I lay still, without
thought, listening to the thrum of blood through my veins,
watching the drift of sunlit particles in the beam of light that
fell through the half-opened shutters. Then I remembered, and
flung myself over in bed, staring.
His eyes were closed, and his skin was the color of old
ivory . His head was turned sligh tly away from me, so that the
cords of his nec k stood out, but I couldn’ t see any pulse in his
throat. He was still warm, or at least the bedclothes were still
warm. I snif fed the air , ur gently . The room was fetid with the
scent of  onions and honey and  fever -sweat, but no stink of
sudden death.
I c lappe d a hand on the center of his chest, and he jerked,
startled, and opened his eyes.
“Y ou bastar d ,” I said, so relieved to feel the rise of his chest
as he drew breath that my voice trembled. “Y ou tried to die on
me, didn’ t you?”
His ches t rose and fell, rose and fell, under my hand, and
my own  heart jerked and shud dered, as though I had been
pulled back at the last moment from an unexpected precipice.
He blinked at me. His eyes were heavy , still clouded with
fever .
“It didn a take much ef fort, Sassenach,” he said, his voice
soft and husky from sleep. “Not dying was harder .”
He m ade no pre tense of not understanding me. In the light
of day , I saw cl early what exhaustion and the afteref fects of
shock had stopped me seeing the night before. His insistence
on h is o wn bed. The open shutters, so he could hear the voices
of h is family be low , his tenants outside. And me beside him.
He had, very carefully , and without saying a word to me,
decided how and where he wanted to die.
“Y ou th ought you were dying when we brought you up
here, didn’ t you?” I asked. My voice sounded more bewildered
than accusing.It took him a m oment to answer , though he didn’ t look
hesitant. It was more as though he was looking for the proper
words.
“W ell, I didna ken for sure, no,” he said slowly . “Though I
did feel verra ill.” His eyes closed, slowly , as though he were
too tired to ke ep them open. “I still do,” he added, in a
detached sort of voice. “Y e needna worry , though—I’ve made
my choice.”
“What on earth do you mean by that?”
I groped beneath the covers, and found his wrist. He was
warm; hot again, in fact, and wit h a pulse that was too fast, too
shallow . Still, it was so dif ferent from the deathly chill I had
felt in him the night before that my first reaction was relief.
He t ook a couple of deep breaths, then turned his head and
opened his eyes to look at me.
“I mean I could have died last night.”
He c ould, certainly—and yet tha t wasn’ t what he meant. He
made it sound like a conscious—
“What do you mean you’ve made your choice? Y ou’ve
decided not to die, after all?” I tried to speak lightly , but it
wasn’ t w orking very well. I rem embered all too well that odd
sense of timeless stillness that had surrounded us.
“It was verra strange,” he said. “ And yet it wasna strange at
all.” He sounded faintly surprised.
“I th ink,” I said  carefully , keeping a thumb on his pulse,
“you’d better tell me just what happened.”
He a ctually smiled at that, thoug h the smile was more in his
eyes tha n his lips. Those were dry , and painfully cracked in the
corners. I touched his lips with  a finger , wanting to go and
fetch some soothing ointment fo r him, some water , some tea—
but I put aside the impulse, steeling myself to stay and hear .
“I di nna really k now , Sassenach—or rather , I do, but I canna
think qu ite how  to say it.” He still looked tired, but his eyes
stayed o pen. They lingered on my face, a vivid blue in themorning light, with an expression almost of curiosity , as
though he hadn’ t seen me before.
“Y ou are  so beautiful,” he said, softly . “So verra beautiful,
mo chridhe .”
My hands were covered with fading blue blotches and
overlooked sme ars of buf falo blood, I could feel my hair
clinging in unwashed tangles to my neck, and I could smell
everything from the stale-urine odor of dye to the reek of fear -
sweat on  my body . And yet w hatever he saw lit his face as
though h e were looking at the full moon on a summer night,
pure and lovely .
His eyes stayed fixed on my f ace as he talked, absorbed,
moving slightly as they seemed to trace my features.
“I felt verra badly indeed wh en Arch and Roger Mac
brought me up,” he said. “T err ibly sick, and my leg and my
head both throbbing with each h eartbeat, so much that I began
to dr ead the nex t. And so I would listen to the spaces between.
Y e w ouldna think it,” he said, sounded vaguely surprised, “but
there is a great deal of time between the beats of a heart.”
He h ad, he said, begun to hope, in those spaces, that the
next beat would not come. An d slowly , he realized that his
heart was indeed slowing—and that the pain was growing
remote, something separate from himself.
His skin  had grown colder , the fever fading from both body
and mind, leaving the latter oddly clear .
“And th is is where I canna really say , Sassenach.” He pulled
his w rist from m y grip in the intensity of his story , and curled
his fingers over mine. “But I … saw .”
“Saw what?” And yet I already  knew that he couldn’ t tell
me. Lik e any doctor , I had seen sick people make up their
minds to die—and I knew that l ook they sometimes had; eyes
wide-fixed on something  in the distance.
He hesitated, struggling to find words. I thought of
something, and jumped in to try to help.“There was an elderly woman ,” I said. “She died in the
hospital where I was on staf f—a ll her grown children with her ,
it was very peac eful.” I looked down, my own eyes fixed on
his finge rs, still  red and slightl y swollen, interlaced with my
own stained and bloody digits.
“She died—she  was dead , I could see her pulse had
stopped, she wasn’ t breathing. All her children were by her
bedside, weeping. And then, quite suddenly , her eyes opened.
She wasn’ t looking at any o f them, but she was seeing
something . And she said, quite clearly , ‘Oooh!’ Just like that—
thrilled, like a li ttle girl who’ s just seen something wonderful.
And then she c losed her eyes again.” I looked up at him,
blinking back tears. “W as it—like that?”
He nodded, speechless, and his hand tightened on mine.
“Something like,” he said, very softly .
He had felt odd ly suspended, in a place he could by no
means describe, feeling completely at peace—and seeing very
clearly .
“It was as if th ere was a—it w asna a door , exactly , but a
passageway of some kind—before me. And I could go through
it, if I wanted. And I did want to,” he said, giving me a
sideways glance and a shy smile.
He h ad known w hat lay behind him, too, and realized that
for that moment, he could choose. Go forward—or turn back.
“And that’ s when you asked me to touch you?”
“I knew ye were  the only thing  that could bring me back,”
he said simply . “I didna have the strength, myself.”
There w as a huge lump in my throat; I couldn’ t speak, but
squeezed his hand very tight.
“Why?” I asked at last. “Why d id you … choose to stay?”
My throat was s till tight, and m y voice was hoarse. He heard
it, and his hand tightened on m ine; a ghost of his usual firm
grip, and yet with the memory of strength within it.
“Because ye need me,” he said, very softly .“Not because you love me?”
He looked up then, with a shadow of a smile.
“Sassenach … I love ye now , and I will love ye always.
Whether I am dead—or you—whether we are together or
apart. Y ou know it is true,” he  said quietly , and touched my
face. “I know it of you, and ye know it of me as well.”
He bent his head then, the bright hair swinging down across
his cheek.
“I di dna mean o nly you, Sassenach. I have work still to do. I
thought—for a bit—that perhap s it wasna so; that ye all might
manage, with Roger Mac and  auld Arch, Joseph and the
Beardsleys. But there is war co ming, and—for my sins—” he
grimaced slightly , “I am a chief.”
He shook his head slightly , in resignation.
“God ha s made me what I am. He has given me the duty—
and I must do it, whatever the cost.”
“The cost,” I echoed uneasily , hearing something harsher
than resignation  in his voice. He looked at me, then glanced,
almost of f-handed, toward the foot of the bed.
“My leg’ s no much worse,” he said, matter -of-factly , “but
it’ s no better . I think ye’ll have to take it of f.”
 
I S A T IN MY S URGER Y , star ing out the window , trying to
think of another way . There had to be something else I could
do. Had to.
He w as right; th e red streaks were still there. They hadn’ t
advanced any further , but they were still there, ugly and
threatening. The oral and topical penicillin had evidently had
some ef fect on the infection, b ut not enough. The maggots
were dealing nicely with the sm all abscesses, but they couldn’ t
af fect the underlying bacteremia that was poisoning his blood.
I glanced up at the brown glass bottle; only about a third
full. It might help him hold his  ground for a little longer , butthere wasn’ t enough—and it wasn’ t likely to have suf ficient
ef fect, a dministered by mouth— to eradicate whatever deadly
bacterium was multiplying in his blood.
“T en thousand to ten million milligrams,” I murmured to
myself. Recomm ended dosage of penicillin for bacteremia or
sepsis, according to the Mer ck Manual , t he physician’ s  basic
desk reference. I glanced at Daniel Rawlings’ casebook, then
back at the bott le. W ith no way of telling what concentration
of penicillin I had, administration was likely still more
ef ficacious than  the combination of snakeroot and garlic
Rawlings advised—but not enough to matter , I was afraid.
The amputation saw was still lyi ng on the counter , where he
had left it the day before. I’d given him my word—and he’d
given it back.
I clenched my hands, a feeling of unutterable frustration
washing over me, so strongly as almost to overwhelm my
sense of despair . Why , why , why  hadn’ t I started more
penicillin brewing at once? How could I have been so feckless,
so careless—so bloody fucking stupid ?
Why had I not insisted on going to Charleston, or at least
W ilmington, in hopes of finding a glassblower who could
make m e the barrel and plunger for a hypodermic syringe?
Surely I could have improvised  something  for a needle. All
that dif ficulty , all that experimentation, to get the precious
substance in the first place—and now that I desperately needed
it …
A te ntative movement at the ope n door made me turn round,
struggling to get my face under control. I’d have to tell the
household what  was happening, and soon. But it would be
better to choose my time, and tell them all together .
It was one of the Beardsleys. W ith their hair grown out and
neatly trimmed to the same length by Lizzie, it was
increasingly dif ficult to tell them apart—unless one was close
enough to see their thumbs. Onc e they spoke, of course, it was
simple.“Ma’am?” It was Kezzie.
“Y es?” No doubt I sounded short, but it didn’ t matter;
Kezzie couldn’ t distinguish nuances of speech.
He was carrying  a cloth bag. As he came into the room, I
saw the bag twitch and change shape, and a small shudder of
revulsion came over me. He saw that, and smiled a little.
“This fo r Himself,” he said, in his loud, slightly flat voice,
holding up the bag. “Him—old Aaron—said this works good.
A b ig snake bite you, get you a little ‘un, cut his head of f,
drink his blood.” He thrust out the bag, which I very gingerly
accepted, holding it as far away from me as I could. The
contents of the s ack shifted again, making my skin crawl, and
a faint buzzing noise issued through the cloth.
“Thank you,” I said faintly . “I’ll … ah … do something with
it. Thank you.”
Keziah beamed  and bowed his way out, leaving me in
personal custody of a sack containing what appeared to be a
small but highly annoyed rattlesnake. I looked round
frantically for some place to put  it. I didn’ t dare throw it out of
the window; Jemmy often pla yed in the dooryard near the
house.
Finally , I pulled the big clear g lass jar of salt over to the
edge of the counter , and—hold ing the bag at arm’ s length—
used my other hand to dump the salt out on the counter . I
dropped the bag into the jar an d slammed the lid on it, then
rushed t o the other side of the room and collapsed on a stool,
the backs of my knees sweaty with dread.
I didn’ t really mind snakes in theory; in practice, though …
Brianna poked her head through the door .
“Mama? How’ s Da this morning?”
“Not all  that well.” My face evidently told her just how
serious it was, for she came into the room and stood beside
me, frowning.“Really bad?” she asked softly , and I nodded, unable to
speak. She let her breath out in a deep sigh.
“Can I help?”
I let out an ident ical sigh, and m ade a helpless gesture. I had
one vague glimmering of an id ea—or rather , the return of an
idea I’d had in the back of my mind for some time.
“The only thing I can think of doing is to open the leg—cut
down deep through the muscle—and pour what penicillin I
have left directly into the wou nds. It’ s much more ef fective
against bacterial  infections if you can inject it, rather than give
it or ally . Raw pe nicillin like this”—I nodded at the bottle—”is
very uns table in the presence o f acid. It’ s not likely enough
would make it through the stomach to do any good.”
“That’ s more or less what Aun t Jenny did, isn’ t it? That’ s
what made that huge scar on his thigh.”
I no dded, wiping my palms unobtrusively over my knees. I
didn’ t normally suf fer from swe aty hands, but the feel of the
amputation saw was much too clear in my memory .
“I’d have to do two or three deep cuts. It would likely
cripple h im perm anently—but i t might work.” I tried to give
her a  smile. “I don’ t suppose MIT taught you how to engineer
a hypodermic syringe, did they?”
“Why d idn’ t you say so before ?” she said calmly . “I don’ t
know if I can make a syringe, but I’d be really surprised if I
can’ t figure out something that d oes the same thing. How long
have we got?”
I s tared at her , my mouth half op en, then shut it with a snap.
“A few  hours, at least. I thought if we didn’ t get any
improvement with the hot poultices, I’d have to either cut or
amputate by this evening.”
“Amputate!” Al l the blood dra ined out of her face. “Y ou
can’ t do that!”
“I c an—but my God, I don’ t w ant to.” My hands curled
hard, denying their skill.“Let me think, then.” Her face was still pale, but the shock
was pas sing as her mind began to focus. “Oh—where’ s Mrs.
Bug? I was going to leave Jemmy with her , but—”
“She’ s gone? Are you sure she isn’ t just out in the
hencoop?”
“No, I stopped there when I cam e up to the house. I didn’ t
see her anywhere—and the kitchen fire is smoored.”
That was more than odd; Mrs. Bug had come to the house as
usual to make breakfast—what could have induced her to
leave ag ain? I hoped Arch hadn ’ t suddenly been taken ill; that
would just about put the cocked hat on things.
“Where’ s Jemm y , then?” I asked , looking round for him. He
didn’ t n ormally go far away fro m his mother , though he was
beginning to wander a bit, as small boys did.
“Lizzie took him upstairs to see Da. I’ll ask her to look after
him for a while.”
“Fine. Oh!”
My excl amation made her turn back at the door , eyebrows
raised in question.
“Do you think you could take that”—I gestured distastefully
at the big glass jar—”outside, darling? Dispose of it
somewhere?”
“Sure. What is i t?” Curious, she walked over to the jar . The
little rat tlesnake had crawled out of its bag and was coiled up
in a suspicious dark knot; as she extended a hand toward the
jar , it lunged, st riking at the glass, and Brianna jumped back
with a yelp.
“Ifrinn!”  she  said, and I laughed, in spite of the general
stress and worry .
“Where did you get him, and what is he for?” she asked.
Recovering from the initial shock, she leaned forward
cautiously and tapped lightly on the glass. The snake, who
appeared irascible in the extreme, struck the side of the jar
with an audible thump, and she jerked her hand away again.“Kezzie brought him in; Jamie is meant to drink his blood
as a cure,” I explained.
She reached out a cautious foref inger , and traced the path of
a small droplet of yellowish liquid, sliding down the glass.
T wo droplets, in fact.
“Look a t that! He tried to bite me right through the glass!
That’ s a  really mad snake; I guess he doesn’ t think much of
the idea.”
He didn’ t. He—if it was a he—was coiled again, tiny rattles
vibrating in an absolute frenzy of animosity .
“W ell, that’ s all right,” I said, c oming to stand beside her .
“I’m sure Jamie wouldn’ t think  much of the idea, either . He’ s
rather strongly anti-snake at the moment.”
“Mmphm.” She was still staring at the little snake, a slight
frown drawing down her thick red brows. “Did Kezzie say
where he got it?”
“I didn’ t think to ask. Why?”
“It’ s getting cold out—snakes  hibernate, don’ t they? In
dens?”
“W ell, Dr . Brickell says they do,” I replied, rather dubiously .
The goo d docto r ’ s Natural History of North Car olina  made
entertaining rea ding, but I took leave to doubt some of his
observations, p articularly thos e pertaining to snakes and
crocodiles, of whose prowess he appeared to have a rather
exaggerated opinion.
She nodded, not taking her eyes of f the snake.
“See, the thing is,” she said, so unding rather dreamy , “pit-
vipers have beautiful engineering. Their jaws are
disarticulated, so they can swallow prey bigger than they are—
and their fangs f old back against the roof of their mouth when
they aren’ t using them.”
“Y es?” I said, giving her a slightly fishy look, which she
ignored.“The fan gs are hollow ,” she said, and touched a finger to the
glass, m arking the spot where t he venom had soaked into the
linen cloth, leaving a small yellowish stain. “They’re
connected to a v enom sac in the snake’ s cheek, and so when
they bite down, the cheek musc les squeeze venom out of the
sac … and down through the fang into the prey . Just like a—”
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said.
She nodded, finally taking her e yes of f the snake in order to
look at me.
“I was thinking of trying to do something with a sharpened
quill, but this would work lots better—it’ s already designed for
the job.”
“I see,” I said, feeling a small sur ge of hope. “But you’ll
need a reservoir of some kind …”
“First I need a bigger snake,” she said practically , turning
toward the door . “Let me go fin d Jo or Kezzie, and see if that
one did  com e fr om a den—and if so, if there are more of them
there.”
She set of f prom ptly on this mission, taking the glass jar
with her , and leaving me to return to a contemplation of the
antibiotic situation with renewe d hope. If I was going to be
able to inject the solution, it needed to be strained and purified
as much as possible.
I wo uld have lik ed to boil the solution, but didn’ t dare to; I
didn’ t know whether high temperatures would destroy or
inactivate raw penicillin—if, i n fact, there still was  active
penicillin in there. The sur ge of hope I had experienced at
Brianna’ s idea dimmed somewhat. Having a hypodermic
apparatus wouldn’ t help, if I had nothing useful to inject.
Restlessly , I moved around the sur gery , picking things up
and putting them down again.
Steeling myself,  I put my hand o n the saw again, and closed
my eyes, deliberately reliving the movements and sensations,
trying also to recapture the sense of otherworldly detachment
with which I had killed the buf falo.Of course, it was Jamie wh o’d been talking to the
otherworld this time. Nice of you to give him the choice , I
thought sardonically . I see you ar en’ t going to make it easy on
him, though.
But he wouldn’ t have asked f or that. I opened my eyes,
startled. I didn’ t know whether that answer came from my own
subconscious, or  elsewhere—but there it was in my mind, and
I recognized the truth of it.
Jamie was accustomed to make his choice and abide by it,
no matter the cost. He saw that living would likely mean the
loss of his leg and all that that implied—and had accepted that
as the natural price of his decision.
“W ell, I  don’ t bloody accept it!” I said out loud, chin
uplifted toward the window . A cedar waxwing swinging on the
end of a tree limb gave me a sharp look through his black
robber ’ s mask, decided I was mad but harmless, and went
about his business.
I pulled open the cupboard door , threw open the top of my
medicine chest, and fetched a sheet of paper , quill, and ink
from Jamie’ s study .
A jar of dried red winter green berries. Extract of pipsissewa.
Slippery elm bark. W illow bark, cherry bark, fleabane, yarrow .
Penicillin was by far the mos t ef fective of the antibiotics
available, but it wasn’ t the only  one. People had been waging
war on germs fo r thousands of y ears, without any notion what
they were fighting. I knew; that was some slight advantage.
I b egan to make  a list of the her bs I had on hand, and under
each nam e, all the uses that I k new for that herb—whether I
had ever  made such use of it or  not. Any herb used to treat a
septic condition  was a possibility—cleansing lacerations,
treating mouth sores, treatment of diarrhea and dysentery … I
heard fo otsteps in the kitchen, an d called to Mrs. Bug, wanting
her to bring me a kettle of boili ng water , so I could set things
to steeping at once.She appeared in the doorway , h er cheeks bright pink from
the cold  and her hair coming do wn in untidy wisps from under
her kerch, a lar ge basket clutch ed in her arms. Before I could
say anything, she came and plu nked the basket down on the
counter in front of me. Just behi nd her came her husband, with
another basket, and a small op en keg, from which came a
pungent alcoholic scent. The air around them held a faint ripe
smell, like the distant reek of a garbage dump.
“I d id h ear ye say as how ye’d not enough mold on hand,”
she started in, a nxious but bright-eyed, “so I said to Arch, I
said, we  must go round to the houses nearabouts, and see what
we can fetch back wi’ us for Mrs. Fraser , for after all, bread
does go bad so q uick when it’ s damp, and the good Lord kens
that Mrs . Chisho lm is a slattern , for all I’m sure she’ s a good
heart, and what goings-on there may be at her hearth I’m sure I
shouldna like even to think  about, but we—”
I w asn’ t  paying attention, but w as staring at the results of
the Bug s’ morning raid on the  pantries and middens of the
Ridge. Crusts of bread, spoilt biscuit, half-rotted squash, bits
of p ie with the marks of teeth still visible in the pastry … a
hodgepodge of  gluey orts a nd decaying fragments—all
sprouting molds in patches of velvet-blue and lichen-green,
interspersed with  warty blobs of pink and yellow and dustings
of sp lotchy white. The keg was half-filled with decaying corn,
the resul tant murky liquid rimmed with floating islands of blue
mold.
“Evan L indsay’ s pigs,” Mr . Bug explained, in a rare burst of
loquacity . Both Bugs beamed at me, begrimed with their
ef forts.
“Thank you,” I said, feeling choked, and not only from the
smell. I blinked,  eyes watering s lightly from the miasma of the
corn liquor . “Oh, thank you.”
 
IT W AS  JUST AFTER DARK w hen I made my way upstairs,
carrying my tray of potions and  implements, feeling a mixture
of excitement and trepidation.Jamie was propped on his pillows, surrounded by visitors.
People h ad been  coming by the  house all day to see him and
wish him  well; a good many of them had simply stayed, and a
host of anxious faces turned  toward me as I came in,
glimmering in the light of the candles.
He looked very ill, flushed an d drawn, and I wondered
whether I ought to have chased the visitors away . I saw Murdo
Lindsay take his hand, thoug h, and squeeze it tight, and
realized that the distraction and support of his company
through the day was probably m uch more helpful to him than
the rest that he wouldn’ t have taken in any case.
“W ell, then,” Jamie said, with a good assumption of
casualness, “we’re ready , I suppose.” He stretched his legs,
flexing h is toes hard under the blanket. Given the state of his
leg, it must have  hurt dreadfully , but I recognized that he was
taking what he t hought would be the last opportunity to move
the limb, and bit the inside of my lip.
“W ell, we’re ready to have a  go at something,” I said,
smiling at him with an attempt at confident reassurance. “And
anyone who would like to pray about it, please do.”
A ru stle of surp rise replaced the air of dread that had been
sprung up at my appearance, and I saw Marsali, who was
holding a sleeping Joan with o ne hand, grope hastily in her
pocket with the other to pull out her rosary .
There was a rush to clear the bedside table, which was
littered with books, papers, candle-stubs, various treats
brought up to te mpt Jamie’ s appetite—all untouched—and, for
some unfathoma ble reason, the fret-board of a dulcimer and a
half-tanned groundhog hide. I set down the tray , and Brianna,
who had  come up with me, stepped forward, her invention
carefully held in both hands, like an acolyte presenting bread
to a priest.
“What i n the name of Christ is that?” Jamie frowned at the
object, then up at me.
“It’ s sort of a do-it-yourself rattlesnake,” Brianna told him.Everyone murmured with interest, craning their necks to see
—though the interest was diver ted almost at once as I turned
back the  quilt and began to un wrap his leg, to a chorus of
shocked murmurs and sympathetic exclamations at sight of it.
Lizzie and Marsali had been faithfully applying fresh, hot
onion and flaxseed poultices to it all day , and wisps of steam
rose from  the wrappings as I pu t them aside. The flesh of his
leg was bright red to the knee , at least in those parts that
weren’ t black or seeping with  pus. W e had removed the
maggots temporarily , afraid the heat would kill them; they
were presently downstairs on a  plate in my sur gery , happily
occupied with some of the nasti er bits of the Bugs’ gleanings.
If I succeeded in saving the leg, they could help with the
tidying-up, later .
I had carefully  gone through the detritus bit by bit,
examining the blue molds with my microscope, and putting
aside everythin g that could be identified as bearing
Penicillium  i nto a lar ge bowl. Over t his miscellaneous
collection I had poured the ferm ented corn liquor , allowing the
whole to steep during the day—and with luck, to dissolve any
actual raw penicillin from the garbage into the alcoholic
liquid.
Meanwhile, I had made a selec tion of those herbs with a
reputation for the internal treatm ent of suppurative conditions,
and made a stif f decoction of them, steeped in boiling water
for several hours. I poured a cup of this highly aromatic
solution, and handed it to Roger , carefully averting my nose.
“Make h im drink it,” I said. “All of it,” I added pointedly ,
fixing Jamie with a look.
Jamie sn if fed the prof fered cup, and gave me the look back
—but obedientl y sipped, making exaggerated faces for the
entertainment of his company , who giggled appreciatively . The
mood thus lightened, I proceede d to the main event, turning to
take the makeshift hypodermic from Bree.
The Beardsley twins, standing shoulder -to-shoulder in the
corner , p ressed forward to see, swelling with pride. They hadgone out at on ce at Bree’ s request, coming back in mid-
afternoon with a fine rattlesnake, nearly three feet long—and
fortunately dead, having been cut nearly in half with an ax, so
as to preserve the valuable head.
I had dissected  out the poison sacs with great caution,
detaching the fangs, and then had put Mrs. Bug to the task of
rinsing the fangs repeatedly with alcohol, to eradicate any
lingering traces of venom.
Bree had  taken the oiled silk tha t had been used to wrap the
astrolabe, and stitched part of i t into a small tube, gathering
one end of this with a draw-stitch, like a purse-string. She had
cut a thick segm ent from a turkey’ s wing-quill, softened with
hot wate r , and used this to join  the gathered end of the silk
tube to the fang. Melted beeswa x had sealed the joints of tube,
quill, and fang, and been spread  carefully along the line of the
stitching, to prevent leakage. It w as a nice, neat job—but it did
look qui te like a small, fat snake with one enormous curved
fang, and occasioned no little comment from the spectators.
Murdo L indsay was still holding one of Jamie’ s hands. As I
motioned to Fer gus to hold the  candle for me, I saw Jamie
reach out the other toward Roger . Roger looked momentarily
startled, but grabbed the hand and knelt down by the bed,
holding on tight.
I r an my fingers  lightly over the leg, selected a good spot,
clear of major blood vessels, swabbed it with pure alcohol, and
jabbed th e fang in, as deeply as I could. There was a gasp from
the s pectators, and a sharp intak e of breath from Jamie, but he
didn’ t move.
“All right.” I no dded at Brianna, who was standing by with
the b ottle of stra ined corn-alcohol. T eeth sunk in her lower lip,
she poured carefully , filling the  silk tube as I supported it. I
folded the open top tightly over , and with thumb and
forefinger , firmly pressed dow nward, forcing the liquid out
through the fang and into the tissues of the leg.
Jamie m ade a small, breathless noise, and both Murdo and
Roger leaned inward instinctively , their shoulders pressingagainst his, holding on.
I did n’ t dare go  too fast, for fear of cracking the wax seals
by e xerting too much pressur e, though we had a second
syringe, made with the other fang, just in case. I worked my
way up and dow n the leg, with Bree refilling the syringe with
each inj ection, and blood rose glistening from the holes as I
withdrew the fang, rolling in tiny rivulets down the side of his
leg. W ithout being asked, Lizzie  picked up a cloth and blotted
it clean, eyes intent on the job.
The room was s ilent, but I felt everyone’ s breath held as I
chose a new spot, let out in a si gh as the stab was made—and
then the  unconscious leaning toward the bed as I squeezed the
stinging alcohol deep into the infected tissues. The muscles
stood out in kno ts on Jamie’ s forearms, and sweat ran down
his face like rain, but neither he, nor Murdo, nor Roger made a
sound or moved.
From th e corner of my eye, I saw Joseph W emyss stroke
back the  hair from Jamie’ s foreh ead, and wipe away the sweat
from his face and neck with a towel.
“Because ye need me,”  he’d said. And I realized then that it
wasn’ t only me that he’d meant.
It di dn’ t take a long time. When it was done, I spread honey
carefully over all the open wounds, and rubbed oil of
winter green into the skin of foot and calf.
“That’ s a nice job of basting, Sassenach. D’ye reckon it’ s
ready for the oven yet?” Jamie asked, and wiggled his toes,
causing the tension in the room to relax into laughter .
Everyone did leave, then, patting Jamie’ s shoulder or
kissing his cheek in farewell, w ith gruf f wishes of good luck.
He smile d and nodded, lifting his hand in farewell, exchanging
goodbyes, making small jokes.
When the door closed behind th e last of them, he lay back
on th e pillow an d closed his eye s, letting all his breath out in a
long, deep sigh. I set about tidying my tray , setting the syringe
to soak in alcohol, corking bottles, folding bandages. Then Isat dow n beside  him, and he reached out a hand to me, not
opening his eyes.
His skin was warm and dry ,  the hand reddened from
Murdo’ s fierce grip. I traced his knuckles gently with my
thumb, listening  to the rumble and clatter of the house below ,
subdued but lively .
“It will work,” I said softly , after a minute. “I know it will.”
“I know ,” he said. He took a deep breath, and at last, began
to weep.94
NEW BLOOD
R OGER WOKE ABRUPTL Y , out of a black and dreamless
sleep. He felt li ke a landed fish , jerked gasping into an alien
and unimagined  element. He saw but did not grasp his
surroundings; strange light and  flattened surfaces. Then his
mind m ade sense of Brianna’ s touch on his arm, and he was
once more inside his skin, and in a bed.
“Hwh?” He sat up suddenly , making a hoarse noise of
inquiry .
“I’m sorry to w ake you.” Brianna smiled, but a line of
concern drew her brows together as her eyes searched his face.
She smoothed the tangled hair back from his brow , and he
reached for her by reflex, fallin g back against the pillow with
her heavy in his arms.
“Hwm.” Holding her was an anchor to reality—solid flesh
and warm skin, her hair soft as dreams against his face.
“Okay?” she asked softly . Long fingers touched his chest
and his nipple puckered, curly hairs around it rising.
“Okay ,” he said, and sighed deeply . He kissed her forehead
briefly , and relaxed, blinking. H is throat was dry as sand, and
his mouth felt sticky , but he was beginning to think coherently
again. “W hatime ist?” He was i n his own bed, and it was dim
enough in the r oom to be evening, but that was because the
door was closed and the windows covered. Something felt
wrong about the light, the air .
She pushed herself up of f him, s weeping back the fall of red
hair with one hand.
“It’ s a little past  noon. I wouldn’ t have waked you up, but
there’ s a man, and I don’ t know what to do about him.” She
glanced in the direction of the  big house, and lowered her
voice, though surely no one was near enough to hear her .“Da’ s sound asleep, and Mama, too,” she said, confirming
this impression. “I don’ t want to  wake them—even if I could.”
She smiled briefly , one corner of her long mouth curling up
with her father ’ s irony . “It wo uld take gunpowder , I think.
They’re dead to the world.”
She turned away and reached f or the pitcher on the table.
The sound of w ater pouring fell on Roger ’ s ears like rain on
parched land, and he drained the of fered cup in three gulps and
held it out again.
“More. Please. Man?” That was an improvement; he was
making complete words again, and his capacity to think
coherently was coming back.
“He says his name is Thomas Christie. He’ s come to see Da;
he says he was at Ardsmuir .”
“Y eah?” Roger drank the second cup more slowly ,
assembling his thoughts. Then he put down the cup and swung
his legs out of bed, reaching for the discarded shirt that hung
from the peg. “Okay . T ell him I’ll be there in a minute.”
She kissed him briefly and left, pausing long enough to
untack t he hide over the window and let in a brilliant shaft of
light and chilly air .
He dres sed slow ly , his mind st ill pleasantly torpid. As he
bent to dredge h is stockings out from under the bed, though,
something in the tumbled bedclothes caught his eye, just under
the e dge of the pillow . He reached out slowly and picked it up.
The “auld wifie”—the tiny fertility charm, its ancient pink
stone smooth in the sun, surprisingly heavy in his hand.
“I will be damned,” he said, aloud. He stood staring at it for
a m oment, then bent and tuck ed it gently back beneath the
pillow .
 
BRIANNA HAD PUT the visitor in Jamie’ s study—what most
of the tenants still called the speak-a-word room. Roger
stopped for a moment in the corridor , checking to be sure all
his b odily parts were present an d attached. There hadn’ t beentime to shave, but he’d combed his hair; there was a limit to
what this Christie might expect, under the circumstances.
Three faces turned toward the do or as he came in, surprising
him. Bree hadn’ t thought to warn him that Christie had
outriders. Still, the elder man, a square-set gentleman with
trimly cut black hair streaked with gray , was obviously
Thomas Christie; the dark-haired younger man was no more
than twenty , and just as obviously Christie’ s son.
“Mr . Christie?” He of fered the older man his hand. “I’m
Roger MacKenz ie; I’m married to Jamie Fraser ’ s daughter—
you’ve met my wife, I think.”
Christie looked mildly surprised, and looked over Roger ’ s
shoulder , as though expecting Jamie to materialize behind him.
Roger cleared his throat; his voice was still thick from sleep,
and thus even more hoarse than it usually was.
“I’m afr aid my father -in-law is … not available at present.
Could I be of service to you?”
Christie frowne d at him, assessing his potential, then
nodded slowly . He took Roger ’ s  hand, and shook it firmly . T o
his astonishment, Roger felt something both familiar and
grossly unexpected; the distinctive pressure against his
knuckle of a Ma sonic greeting. He had not experienced that in
years, an d it was more reflex than reason that caused him to
respond with what he hoped was the proper countersign.
Evidently it was satisfactory; Christie’ s severe expression
eased slightly , and he let go.
“Perhaps ye may , Mr . MacKenzie, perhaps ye may ,”
Christie said. He fixed a piercing gaze on Roger . “I wish to
find land on wh ich to settle wi th my family—and I was told
that Mr . Fraser might feel himself in a position to put
something suitable in my way .”
“That might be possible,” Rog er replied cautiously . What
the hell?  he thou ght. Had Christie just been trying it on at a
venture, or had he reason to  expect that sign would be
recognized? If he did—that presumably meant that he knewJamie Fraser would recognize it, and thought his son-in-law
might, a s well. Jamie Fraser , a Freemason? The thought had
never so much as crossed Rog er ’ s mind, and Jamie himself
had certainly never spoken of it.
“Please—do sit down,” he said abruptly , motioning to the
visitors. Christie ’ s family—the son and a girl who might be
either Christie’ s  daughter or the son’ s wife—had risen as well
when Roger came in, standing behind the paterfamilias like
attendants behind some visiting potentate.
Feeling more than slightly se lf-conscious, Roger waved
them ba ck to their stools, and sat down himself behind Jamie’ s
desk. He  plucked one of the quills from the blue salt-glazed
jar , hoping this would make him seem more businesslike.
Christ, what questions ought he to ask a potential tenant?
“Now , then, Mr . Christie.” He s miled at them, conscious of
his unshaven jaws. “My wife says that you were acquainted
with my father -in-law , in Scotland?”
“In Ardsmuir prison,” Christie answered, darting Roger a
sharp look, as though daring him to make something of this.
Roger cleared his throat again;  healed as it was, it tended
still to be clog ged and rasping for some time after rising.
Christie appeare d to take it as a n adverse comment, however ,
and bris tled slightly . He had thick brows and prominent eyes
of a light yellowish-brown color , and this, coupled with
feathery , close-clipped dark hai r and the lack of any visible
neck, gave him the aspect of a lar ge, irascible owl.
“Jamie Fraser was a prisoner the re as well,” he said. “Surely
ye knew as much?”
“Why , yes,” Roger said mildly . “I understand that several of
the men  who are settled her e on the Ridge came from
Ardsmuir .”
“Who?” Christie demanded, increasing the owlish
impression.
“Ah … the Lindsays—that’ s K enny , Murdo, and Evan,”
Roger s aid, rubbing a hand ov er his brow to assist thought.“Geordie Chisholm and Robert  MacLeod. I think—yes, I’m
fairly sure Alex MacNeill was from Ardsmuir , too.”
Christie had been following this list with close attention,
like a barn owl keeping track of a rustling in the hay . Now he
relaxed, settling his feathers, as Roger thought.
“I know them,” he said, with an air of satisfaction.
“MacNeill will vouch for my character , if that’ s needful.” His
tone strongly suggested that it shouldn’ t be.
Roger ha d never seen Jamie interview a potential tenant, but
he h ad heard Fraser talk to Claire about the ones he chose.
Accordingly , he  posed a few questions regarding Christie’ s
more recent past, trying to balan ce courtesy with an attitude of
authority , and—he thought—managing it none too badly .
Christie had been transported with the other prisoners, he
said, but  had been fortunate in having his indenture purchased
by a  plantation owner in South  Carolina, who upon finding
that Christie possessed some  learning, had made him
schoolmaster to his own six c hildren, taking fees from the
nearby families for the privilege of sending their children also
to b e tutored by Christie. Once  Christie’ s term of indenture
had expired, he had agreed to remain, working for wages.
“Really?” Roger said, his interest in Christie increasing
markedly . A schoolmaster , eh? I t would please Bree no end, to
be able  to resign her involuntary position as what she
disparagingly termed Bo-Peep. A nd Christie looked more than
capable of dealing with intrans igent scholars. “What brings
you here, then, Mr . Christie? It’ s some way from South
Carolina.”
The man shrugged broad shoulders. He was road-worn and
quite dusty , but his coat was of decent cloth, and he had sound
shoes.
“My wife died,” he said gruf fly . “Of the influenza. So did
Mr . Everett, the owner . His hei r did not require my services,
and I did not wish to remain there without employment.” Heshot Roger a pie rcing look under shaggy brows. “Y ou said Mr .
Fraser is not available. How long will it be until his return?”
“I co uldn’ t say .” Roger tapped the end of the quill against
his t eeth, hesitating. In fact, he  couldn’ t say how long Jamie
might be incapacitated; when seen last night, he’d looked
barely alive. Even if he recovere d uneventfully , he could be ill
for some time. A nd he hated to  send Christie away , or make
him wait; it was  late in the year , and not much time to spare, if
the man and his family were to be settled for the winter .
He glanc ed from Christie to his  son. Both sizable men, and
strong, from the looks of them. Neither had the look of a
drunkard or a lout, and both had the callused palms that
bespoke at least familiarity with manual labor . They had a
woman to look after their domestic requirements. And after
all, M asonic brotherhood quite a side, Christie had been one of
Jamie’ s Ardsmuir men. He knew that Jamie always made a
special ef fort to find such men a place.
Making a decision, Roger pulle d out a clean sheet of paper
and uncapped the inkwell. He cleared his throat once more.
“V ery w ell, Mr . Christie. I thi nk we can reach some …
accommodation.”
T o his pleased s urprise, the study door opened, and Brianna
came in, carrying a tray of bisc uits and beer . She cast down
her eyes modestly as she set it on the desk, but he caught the
flash of amusem ent she sent him  under her lashes. He bent his
head, smiling, and touche d her wrist lightly in
acknowledgment as she set out the mugs in front of him. The
gesture remind ed him of C hristie’ s handshake, and he
wondered whet her Brianna knew anything about Jamie’ s
history in that direction. He rather thought not; surely she
would have mentioned it.
“Brianna, say hello to our new t enants,” he said, with a nod
at the Christies. “Mr . Thomas Christie, and …”
“My son , Allan, ” Christie said, w ith a jerk of the head, “and
my daughter , Malva.”The son had no ne of his father ’ s owlish look, being much
fairer in aspect, with a broad, square, clean-shaven face,
though h e had the same feather y , tufted dark hair . He nodded
in silent acknowledgment of the introduction, eyes fixed on
the refreshment.
The girl—Malv a?—barely loo ked up, her hands folded
modestly in her lap. Roger ha d the vague impression of a
tallish girl, perhaps seventeen or eighteen, neat in a dark blue
dress an d white kerch, with a soft frill of black curls just
visible around the pale oval o f her face. Another point in
Christie’ s favor ,  Roger thought absently; girls of marriageable
age wer e rare, pretty ones still rarer . Malva Christie would
likely have several of fers before the spring planting.
Bree nodded to each of them , looking at the girl with
particular intere st. Then a loud shriek came from the kitchen,
and she fled with a murmured excuse.
“My son,” Roger said, in apolo gy . He lifted a mug of beer ,
of fering it. “W ill you take a bit of refreshment, Mr . Christie?”
The tenant contracts were all kept in the left-hand drawer of
the d esk; he’d se en them, and knew the general outlines. Fifty
acres wo uld be granted outright, more land rented as needed,
with provision for payment m ade according to individual
situations. A little discussion o ver the beer and biscuits, and
they had reached what seemed an adequate agreement.
Completing the contract with a flourish, Roger signed his
own name, as a gent for James Fraser , and pushed the paper
across the desk for Christie to sign. He felt a deep, pleasant
glow of accomp lishment. A sound tenant, and willing to pay
half his quitrent  by serving as schoolmaster for five months of
the year . Jamie himself, Roger thought complacently , would
not have done better .
Then he caught himself. No, Ja mie would have taken one
more step, and seen the Christies of fered not only hospitality
but lodging, a place to stay until they could achieve some
shelter of their o wn. Not here, though; not with Jamie ill andClaire occupied in nursing him. He thought for a moment, then
stepped to the door and called for Lizzie.
“W e’ve a new tenant come, and his family , a muirninn ,” he
said, sm iling at her anxious, willing mouse-face. “This is Mr .
Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter . Can ye ask your
Da will he take  them up to Evan Lindsay’ s cabin? It’ s near
where th ey’ll ha ve their own la nd, and I’m thinking perhaps
Evan an d his wife have room for them to stay for a bit, until
they can get a start on a place of their own.”
“Oh, aye, Mister Roger .” Lizzie bobbed a quick curtsy
toward Christie, who acknowledged her with a small bow .
Then she glanced at Roger , thin brows lifted. “W ill Himself
know about it, then?”
Roger felt a slight flush rise in his cheeks, but gave no sign
of discomposure.
“That’ s all right,” he said. “I’ll  be telling him, so soon as
he’ s feeling better .”
“Mr . Fra ser is ill? I am sorry to hear it.” The unfamiliar soft
voice ca me from behind, startling him, and he turned to find
Malva C hristie looking up at him  in question. He hadn’ t taken
much no tice of her , but was no w struck by the beauty of her
eyes—an odd light gray , almo nd-shaped and luminous, and
thickly fringed with long black l ashes. Perhaps sooner than the
spring planting, he thought, and coughed.
“Bitten by a snake,” he said abruptly . “Not to worry , though;
he’ s mending.”
He thrust out a  hand to Christie, ready this time for the
secret grip.
“W elcome to Fraser ’ s Ridge,” he said. “I hope you and your
family will be happy here.”
 
JAMIE W AS SITTING UP in b ed, attended hand and foot by
devoted women , and looking d esperate in consequence. His
face rela xed a little at sight of  a fellow man, and he wavedaway his handmaidens. Lizzie, Marsali, and Mrs. Bug left
reluctantly , but Claire remained, busy with her bottles and
blades.
Roger moved to sit down on the  bed-foot, only to be shooed
of f by Claire, w ho motioned him firmly to a stool before
lifting the sheet to check matter s beneath and be sure that his
ill-advised gesture had caused no damage.
“All right,” she said at last, poking at the white cheesecloth
dressing with an air of satisfaction. The maggots were back,
evidently earning their keep. She straightened up and nodded
to R oger—like the Grand V izier granting an audience with the
Caliph of Baghdad, Roger thought, amused. He glanced at
Jamie, who rolled his eyes upward, then gave Roger a small,
wry smile of greeting.
“How is it?” both of them said at once. Roger smiled, and
the corner of Jamie’ s mouth turned up. He gave a brief shrug.
“I’m alive,” he said. “Mind, t hat doesna prove ye were
right. Y e’re not.”
“Right about what?” Claire asked, glancing up with
curiosity from the bowl in her hands.
“Oh, a wee poin t of philosophy ,” Jamie told her . “Regarding
choice, and chance.”
She snorted.
“I don’ t want to hear a word about it.”
“Just as well. I ’m no inclined to discuss such matters on
nothing but bread and milk.” Jamie glanced with mild distaste
at a  bowl of that nourishing but squashy substance, sitting
half-finished on  the table at his side. “So, have ye seen to the
ulcer on the mule’ s leg, then, Roger Mac?”
“I did,”  Claire told him. “It’ s healing very well. Roger ’ s
been busy , interviewing new tenants.”
“Oh, aye?” Fraser ’ s brows went up in interest.“A ye, a man named T om Christi e and his family . He said he
was at Ardsmuir with you.”
For a split second, Roger felt as though all the air in the
room had been removed by a vacuum, freezing everything.
Fraser stared at him, expressionless. Then he nodded, his
expression of pleasant interest restored as though by magic,
and normal time resumed.
“A ye, I mind T o m Christie fine. Where has he been in the
last twenty years?”
Roger explaine d both T om Christie’ s account of his
wanderings, and what accommo dations had been reached for
his tenancy .
“That will do verra well,” Jamie said approvingly , hearing
of Christie’ s willingness to be sc hoolmaster . “T ell him he may
use any of the books here—and ask him to make up a list of
others h e might need. I’ll tell F er gus to look about, next time
he’ s in Cross Creek or W ilmington.”
The conversation moved on to more mundane af fairs, and
after a few minutes, Roger got up to take his leave.
Everything seemed perfectly all right, and yet he felt
obscurely uneas y . Surely he h adn’ t imagined that instant?
T urning to close the door behind him, he saw that Jamie had
folded h is hands  neatly on his chest and closed his eyes; if not
yet asleep, ef fectively forbidding conversation. Claire was
looking at her husband, her yellow hawk-eyes narrowed in
speculation. No, she’d seen it, too.
So he hadn’ t ima gined it. What on earth was the matter with
T om Christie?95
THE SUMMER DIM
T HE NEXT DA Y Roger closed the door behind him and stood
on th e p orch for  a moment, brea thing the cold bright air of the
late morning—la te, Christ, it couldn’ t be more than half seven,
but it was a good  deal later than he was accustomed to start the
day . The sun ha d already drifted into the chestnut trees on the
highest ridge, the curve of its fla ming disk visible in silhouette
through the last of the yellow leaves.
The air still held  the tang of blood, but there was no trace of
the buf fa lo left, beyond a dark patch in the flattened pumpkin
vines. He glanced around, takin g stock as he mentally made
his list of chores for the day . Chickens scratched in the fall-
shabby y ard, an d he could hear a small group of hogs rooting
for mast in the chestnut grove.
He h ad the odd feeling that he h ad left his work months, or
even years, before, not days. The feeling of dislocation—so
strong a t first— had left him for  quite a long time, but now it
had come back again, stronger  than before. If he closed his
eyes for  a moment, then opened  them again, surely he would
find himself on the Broad Stree t in Oxford, the smell of auto
exhaust in his nostrils and the prospect of a peaceful morning’ s
work among the dusty books of the Bodleian ahead.
He s macked a h and against one thigh, to dispel the feeling.
Not today . This was the Ridge, not Oxford, and the work
might be peaceful, but it would be done with hands, not head.
There w ere trees  to be girdled and hay to be gathered; not the
field hay , but the  small wild patches scattered through the hills
that would yield an armload here, an armload there—enough
to allow the keeping of an extra cow through the winter .
A hole in the roof of the smoke-shed, made by a falling tree
branch. The roof to be mended a nd re-shingled and the branch
itself to be chopped for wood. A fresh privy-hole to be dug,before th e ground froze or turned to mud. Flax to be chopped.
Fence rails to split. Lizzie’ s spinning wheel to mend …
He felt groggy and stupid, inca pable of simple choice, let
alone complex thought. He h ad slept enough—more than
enough—to be physically recovered from the exhaustion of
the l ast few day s, but Thomas Christie and his family , coming
on the heels of the desperate bu siness of getting Jamie safely
home, had taken all the mental ener gy he had.
He g lanced at the sky; a low sw eep of mare’ s tails, sketched
against the sky . No rain for a  bit, the roof could wait. He
shrugged and scratched his scalp. Hay , then, and tree-girdling.
He s tuf fed a ston e jar of ale and the packet of sandwiches Bree
had made for him into his bag, and went to fetch the hand-
scythe and hatchet.
W alking began to rouse him. I t was cold in the shadows
under the pines, but the sun w as now high enough to make
itself felt whenever he walked t hrough the bright patches. His
muscles warmed and loosened with the exercise, and by the
time he had climbed to the first  of the high meadows, he had
begun to feel himself again, sol idly embedded in the physical
world of  mounta in and forest. T he future had gone back to the
world of dreams and memory , a nd he was once more present
and accounted for .
“Good t hing, to o,” he muttered to himself. “Don’ t want to
be c utting of f yo ur foot.” He dr opped the ax under a tree, and
bent to cut hay .
It wasn ’ t the soothingly mon otonous labor of regular
haying, where the big two-handed scythe laid the dry , rich
grass in pleasing swathes acro ss a field. This was at once
rougher but easier work, that involved grasping a clump of
sprouting muhly  or blue-stem w ith one hand, slicing the stalks
near the root, a nd stuf fing the handful of wild hay into the
burlap sack he had brought.
It to ok no great strength, but required attention, rather than
the mindless muscular ef fort of field-haying. The grass clumps
grew thickly all over this smal l break in the trees, but wereinterspersed wit h outcrops of g ranite, small bushes, decaying
snags, and brambles.
It was soothin g labor , and while it did require some
watchfulness, so on enough his mind began to stray to other
things. The things Jamie had told him, out on the black
mountainside, under the stars.
Some he had k nown; that there was bad feeling between
Alex MacNeill and Nelson McIver , and the cause of it; that
one of Patrick N eary’ s sons was likely a thief, and what should
be done about it. Which land to sell, when, and to whom.
Others, he had had no inkling of. He pressed his lips tight
together , thinking of Stephen Bonnet.
And what should be done about Claire.
“If I  am dead, she must leave,” Jamie had said, rousing
suddenly from a feverish stupor . He had gripped Roger ’ s arm
with surprising strength, his eyes burning dark. “Send her .
Make he r go. Y e should all go,  if the bairn can pass. But she
must go. Make her go to the stones.”
“Why?” Roger had asked quietly . “Why should she go?” It
was pos sible tha t Jamie was de ranged by fever , not thinking
clearly . “It’ s a dangerous thing, to go through the stones.”
“It is dangerous for her here, wi thout me.” Fraser ’ s eyes had
momentarily lost their sharp focus; the lines of his face relaxed
in exhau stion. His eyes half-closed and he sagged back. Then,
suddenly , his eyes opened again.
“She is an Old One,” he said. “They will kill her , if they
know .” Then his eyes had closed  again, and he had not spoken
again until the others had found them at daylight.
V iewed now in the clear light of an autumn morning, safely
removed from the whining win d and dancing flames of that
lost nigh t on the mountain, Roger was reasonably sure that
Fraser had only been wandering in the mists of his fever ,
concern for his wife muddled by phantoms that sprang from
the poison in his blood. Still, Roger couldn’ t help but take
notice.“She is an Old One.”  Fra ser h ad been  speaking in En glish,
which was too bad. Had it bee n Gaelic, his meaning would
have been clearer . Had he said “She is ban-sidhe,”  Roger
would h ave known whether Jamie truly thought his wife was
one of the faery- folk, or only a thoroughly human wisewoman.
Surely h e couldn’ t … but he might. Even in Roger ’ s own
time, the belief in “the others ” ran strongly , if less widely
admitted, in the blood of the Highlands. Now? Fraser believed
quite op enly in ghosts—to say n othing of saints and angels. T o
Roger ’ s cynical Presbyterian mind, there wasn’ t a great deal of
dif ference between lighting candles to St. Genevieve and
putting out a pan of milk for the faeries.
On the other ha nd, he was un easily aware that he would
himself never have disturbed m ilk meant for the Others, nor
touched a charm hung over cow-byre or door lintel—and not
only from respect for the person who had placed it there.
The work had warmed him thoroughly; his shirt was
beginning to stick to his shoulders, and sweat trickled down
his neck . He paused for a moment, to drink from his water
gourd and tie a rag round his brow as a sweatband.
Fraser m ight just have a point, he thought. While the notion
of h imself or Brianna—even of Claire—as being sidheanach
was laug hable o n the face of it … there was more than one
face to it, wasn’ t there? They wer e  dif f erent; not everyone
could travel through the stones, let alone did.
And there were others. Geillis Duncan. The unknown
traveler she had mentioned to Claire. The gentleman whose
severed head Claire had found i n the wilderness, silver fillings
intact. The thought of that one made the hairs prickle on his
forearms, sweat or no.
Jamie had buried the head, wi th due respect and a brief
prayer , on a hill near the house—the first inhabitant of the
small, sun-filled clearing intended as the future cemetery of
Fraser ’ s Ridge. At Claire’ s insistence, he had marked the small
grave with a rou gh chunk of granite, unlabeled—for what was
there to say?—but marbled with veins of green serpentine.W as Fraser right? Y e should all go back, if the bairn can
pass.
And if they didn’ t go back … t hen someday they might all
lie there in the sunny clearing together: himself, Brianna,
Jemmy , each under a chunk of  granite. The only dif ference
was that each would bear a name. What on earth would they
carve for dates? he wondered su ddenly , and wiped sweat from
his jaw .  Jemmy’ s would be no problem, but for the rest of
them …
There was the r ub, of course—or one of them. If the bairn
can pass . I f Claire’ s theo ry was right, a nd the ability to pass
through the stones was a genetic trait, like eye color or blood-
type—then fifty /fifty , if Jemmy were Bonnet’ s child; three
chances out of four , or perhaps certainty , if he were Roger ’ s.
He h acked savagely at a clump  of grass, not bothering to
grasp it, and grain heads fl ew like shrapnel. Then he
remembered the small pink figure underneath his pillow , and
breathed deep. And if it worked, if there were to be another
child, on e that was his for sure , by blood? Odds three out of
four—or perhaps another stone, one day , in the family
graveyard.
The bag was almost full, and there was no more hay worth
the cutti ng here. Fetching the ha tchet, he slung the bag across
his shoulder and made his way downhill, to the edge of the
highest cornfield.
It bo re no more resemblance to the British cornfields he had
been use d to than did the high meadows to a hayfield. Once a
patch of vir gin forest, the tree s still stood, black and dead
against the pale blue sky . They had been girdled and left to
die, the corn planted in the open spaces between them.
It w as the quick est way to clear land suf ficiently for crops.
W ith the  trees dead, enough sunlight came through the leafless
branches for the corn below . O ne or two or three years later ,
the dead  tree roots would have  rotted suf ficiently to make it
possible to push the trunks over , to be gradually cut for woodand hauled away . For now , thou gh, they stood, an eerie band
of black scarecrows, spreading empty arms across the corn.
The corn itself h ad been gathered; flocks of mourning doves
foraged for bugs among the litter of dry stalks, and a covey of
bobwhite took fright at Roger ’ s approach, scattering like a
handful of marbles thrown across the ground. A ladder -backed
woodpecker , sec ure above his head, uttered a brief shriek of
startlement and paused in its hammering to inspect him before
returning to its noisy excavations.
“Y ou should be pleased,” he sa id to the bird, setting down
the bag and unlimbering the hatchet from his belt. “More bugs
for you, aye?” The dead trees were infested by myriad insects;
several woodpe ckers could be found in any field of girdled
trees, heads cocked to hear the subterranean scratchings of
their burrowing prey .
“Sorry ,” he murmured under his breath to the tree he had
selected. It was ridiculous to fee l pity for a tree; the more so in
this sprawling wilderness, where saplings sprang out of the
thawing earth with such spring v igor as to crack solid rock and
the mou ntains were so thickly b lanketed with trees that the air
itself was a smoky blue with their exhalations. For that matter ,
the emo tion wouldn’ t last longer than it took to begin the job;
by the time he reached the thir d tree, he would be sweating
freely and cursing the awkwardness of the work.
Still, he always approached the  job with a faint reluctance,
disliking the manner of it more than the result. Chopping down
a tree for timber was straight-forward; girdling it seemed
somehow mean-spirited, if practical, leaving the tree to die
slowly , u nable t o bring water fr om its roots above the ring of
bare, ex posed wood. It was no t so unpleasant in the fall, at
least, when the trees were dormant and leafless already; it
must be rather like dying in their sleep, he thought. Or hoped.
Chips of aromatic wood flew past his head, as he chopped
his way briskly around the big  trunk, and went on without
pause to the next victim.Needless to say , he took care n ever to let anyone hear him
apologize to a tr ee. Jamie always said a prayer for the animals
he killed, but R oger doubted that he would regard a tree as
anything other than fuel, building material, or sheer bloody
obstruction. The woodpecker s creeched suddenly overhead.
Roger s wung round to see wh at had caused the alarm, but
relaxed at once, seeing the s mall, wiry figure of Kenny
Lindsay approa ching through the trees. It appeared that
Lindsay had come on the same b usiness; he flourished his own
girdling knife in cordial greeting.
“Madain mhath , a Smeoraich!”  he shouted. “And what’ s
this I hear , that we’ve a newcomer?”
No longer even faintly surprised at the speed with which
news pa ssed ov er the mountain, Roger of fered his ale-jug to
Lindsay , and gave him the details of the new family .
“Christie is their name, is it?” Kenny asked.
“Y es. Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter . Y ou’ll
know him—he was at Ardsmuir .”
“A ye? Oh.”
There it was again, that faint tremor of reaction at Christie’ s
name.
“Christie,” Kenny Lindsay repeated. The tip of his tongue
showed briefly , tasting the name. “Mm. A ye, well.”
“What’ s the matter with Christie?” Roger demanded, feeling
more uneasy by the minute.
“Matter?” Kenn y looked startled. “Nothing’ s the matter
with him—is there?”
“No. I mean—y ou seemed a b it taken aback to hear his
name. I wondered whether perh aps he was a known thief, or a
drunkard, or the like.”
Enlightenment spread across Ke nny’ s stubbled face like sun
on a morning meadow .“Oh, aye, I take your meaning now . No, no, Christie’ s a
decent enough sort, so far as I ken the man.”
“So far as ye ken? W ere ye not at Ardsmuir together , then?
He said so.”
“Och, aye, he was there right enough,” Kenny agreed, but
seemed still vaguely hesitant. Additional prodding by Roger
elicited nothing, though, save  a shrug, and after a few
moments, they returned to the cutting, pausing only for the
occasional swig of ale or water . The weather was cool, thank
God, but working like that made the sweat run free, and at the
end of the job, Roger took a last drink, and then poured the
rest of his water over his head, g asping with the welcome chill
on his heated skin.
“Y ou’ll come ben for a bit, a Smeoraich ?” K enny laid d own
his ax and eased his back with a groan. He jerked his head
toward the pines on the far side of the meadow . “My wee
house is  just there. The wife’ s aw a’ to sell her pork, but there’ s
fresh buttermilk in the spring.”
Roger nodded, smiling.
“I will then, Kenny , thanks.”
He wen t with Kenny to tend his beasts; Lindsay had two
milch-goats and a penned sow . Kenny fetched them water
from a small nearby creek, while Roger stacked the hay and
threw a forkful into the goats’ manger .
“Nice pig,” Roger said politely , waiting while Kenny
poured cracked corn into the tro ugh for the sow , a big mottled
creature with one ragged ear and a nasty look in her eye.
“Mean as a viper , and nearly as fast,” Kenny said, giving the
pig a narrow look. “Near as Godalmighty took my hand of f at
the wrist  yesterday . I meant to take her to Mac Dubh’ s boar for
breeding, but she wasna inclined to go.”
“Not much ye can do with a female who’ s not in the mood,”
Roger agreed.Kenny wobbled his head from one side to the other ,
considering.
“Och, w ell, that’ s as may be. There are ways to sweeten
them, aye? That’ s a trick my brother Evan taught me.” He
gave Ro ger a gap-toothed grin, and nodded toward a barrel in
the corner of th e shed, that ga ve of f the sweet pungency of
fermenting corn.
“A ye?” Roger said, laughing. “W ell, I hope it works, then.”
He had an involuntary vision of Kenny and his imposing wife,
Rosamund, in bed together , and wondered in passing whether
alcohol played much part in their unlikely marriage.
“Oh, it’ll work,” Kenny said with confidence. “She’ s a
terror for the sour -mash, is that one. T rouble is, if ye give her
enough to improve her disposition, she canna walk just so
verra well. W e’ll need to bring the boar to her , instead, when
Mac Dubh ‘s on his feet.”
“Is she in season ? I’ll bring the boar tomorrow ,” Roger said,
feeling reckless. Kenny looked startled, but then nodded,
pleased.
“A ye, th at’ s kind , a Smeoraich .” He paused a moment, then
added casually , “I hope Mac Dubh  is  on h is feet soon, then.
W ill he be well enough to have met T om Christie?”
“He hasn’ t met him, no—but I told him.”
“Oh? Oh. W ell, that’ s fine, isn’ t it?”
Roger narrowed his eyes, but Kenny looked away .
His sense of une ase about Christie persisted, and seized by a
sudden impulse, Roger leaned across the hay and grasped
Kenny by the hand, startling th e older man considerably . He
gave the squeeze, the tap on the knuckle, and then let go.
Kenny gawked at him, blinkin g in the beam of sunlight
from the door . F inally , he set down the empty pail, carefully
wiped his hand on his ragged kilt, and of fered it formally to
Roger .When he let go , they were still friendly , but the situation
between them had altered, very subtly .
“Christie, too,” Roger observed, and Kenny nodded.
“Oh, aye. All of us.”
“All of you at Ardsmuir? And—Jamie?” He felt a sense of
astonishment at the thought.
Kenny nodded again, bending to pick up his bucket.
“Oh, aye, it was Mac Dubh  started it. Y e didna ken?”
No poin t in prevarication. He shook his head, dismissing the
matter . H e’d me ntion it to Jamie  when he saw him—assuming
Jamie w as in any shape to be questioned then. He fixed Kenny
with a direct look.
“So, then. About Christie. Is the re anything wrong about the
man?”
Lindsay’ s earlier constraint had disappeared, now that it was
no l onger a ma tter of discussing a Masonic brother with an
outsider . He shook his head.
“Och, no . It’ s only I was a bit su rprised to see him here. He
didna quite get on sae well wi’ Mac Dubh , i s all. If he had
another place to go, I wouldna  have thought he’d seek out
Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
Roger was momentarily surprised by the revelation that
there was someone from Ardsmuir who didn’ t think the sun
shone out of Jamie Fraser ’ s arse, though on consideration,
there wa s no reason why this shouldn’ t be so; God knew the
man was quite as capable of making enemies as friends.
“Why?”
What he was asking was plain . Kenny looked about the
goat-shed, as though seeking escape, but Roger stood between
him and the door .
“No great matter ,” he said, finally , shoulders slumping in
capitulation. “Only Christie’ s a Protestant, see?”“A ye, I see,” Roger said, very dr yly . “But he was put in with
the Jaco bite prisoners. So, was there trouble in Ardsmuir over
it, is that what you’re telling me?”
Likely enough, he reflected. In his own time, there was no
love lost between the Catholics  and the stern Scottish sons of
John Knox and his ilk. Nothing Scots liked better than a wee
spot of religiou s warfare—and  if you got right down to it,
that’ s what the entire Jacobite cause had been.
T ake a few staun ch Calvinists, convinced that if they didn’ t
tuck the ir blankets tight, the Pope would nip down the
chimney and bite their toes, a nd bang them up in a prison
cheek-by-jowl w ith men who p rayed out loud to the V ir gin
Mary … aye, he could see it. F ootball riots would be nothing
to it, numbers being equal.
“How d id he come to be in Ardsmuir , then—Christie, I
mean?”
Kenny looked surprised.
“Och, he was a Jacobite—arrested wi’ the rest after
Culloden, tried and imprisoned.”
“A Protestant Jacobite?” It wasn’ t impossible, or even
farfetched—politics made stranger bedfellows than that, and
always had. It was unusual, though.
Kenny heaved a sigh, glancing toward the horizon, where
the sun was slowly sinking into the pines.
“Come along inside then, MacKenzie. If T om Christie’ s
come to the Ri dge, I suppose it’ s best someone tells ye all
about it. If I hurry myself, ye’ll be in time for your supper .”
Rosamund was not at home, bu t the buttermilk was cool in
the well, as advertised. Stools fetched and the buttermilk
poured, Kenny Lindsay was good as his word, and started in in
businesslike fas hion. Christie was a Lowlander , Kenny said;
MacKenzie would have gathered as much. From Edinbur gh.
At th e ti me of the Rising, Christie had been a merchant in the
city , with a good business, n ewly inherited from a hard-working father . T om Christie w as far from lazy , himself, and
determined to set up for a gentleman.
W ith thi s in mind, and Prince T earlach ‘s army occupying
the c ity , Christie had put on his  best suit of clothes and gone
calling on O’Sullivan, the Irish man who had char ge of the
army commissary . “Naebody kens what passed between them,
other than words—but when Christie came out, he had a
contract to victual the Highland Army , and an invitation to
dance at Holyrood that night.” Kenny took a long drink of
sweet buttermilk and set down the cup, his mustache thickly
coated with white. He nodded wisely at Roger .
“W e hea rd what they were like , those balls at the Palace.
Mac Dubh  to ld us of them , time and again . The Great Gallery ,
wi’ the portraits of all the kings o’ Scotland, and the hearths of
blue Dutch tile, big enough to roast an ox. The Prince, and all
the grea t folk who’d come to see him, dressed in silks and
laces. And the food! Sweet Jesus, such food as he’d tell
about.” Kenny’ s  eyes grew rou nd and dreamy , remembering
descriptions heard on an empty stomach. His tongue came out
and absently licked the buttermilk from his upper lip.
Then he shook himself back to the present.
“W ell, so,” he said, matter -of-factly . “When the Army left
Edinbur gh, Christie cam’ along. Whether it was to mind his
investment, or that he meant to keep himself in the Prince’ s
eye, I canna say .”
Roger noted privately that the notion of Christie having
acted fro m patri otic motives wasn’ t on Kenny Lindsay’ s list of
possibilities. Whether from prudence or ambition, whatever
his reaso ns, Christie had stayed—and stayed too long. He had
left the Army a t Nairn, the day  before Culloden, and started
back toward Edinbur gh, driving one of the commissary
wagons.
“If h e’d left the  wagon and ridden one o’ the horses, he
might ha’ made it,” Kenny sa id cynically . “But no; he ran
smack into a sackful o’ Campbells. Government troops, aye?”Roger nodded.
“I heard  tell as he tried to pass himself of f as a peddler , but
he’d tak en a load of corn from a farmhouse on that road, and
the farmer swore himself purple that Christie’d been in his
yard no more th an three days before, wi’ a white cockade on
his breest. So they took him, and that was that.”
Christie had gone first to Berwick Prison, and then—for
reasons known only to the Crow n—to Ardsmuir , where he had
arrived a year before Jamie Fraser .
“I c ame at the same time.” Kenny peered into his empty
mug, then reached for the pitche r . “It was an old prison—half-
falling d own—but they’d not used it for some years. When the
Crown decided to reopen it, the y brought men from here and
from the re; maybe a hundred a nd fifty men, all told. Mostly
convicted Jacobites—the odd thief, and a murderer or two.”
Kenny grinned suddenly , and Roger couldn’ t help smiling in
response.
Kenny was no great storytelle r , but he spoke with such
simple v ividness that Roger had no trouble seeing the scene he
described: the soot-streaked stones and the ragged men. Men
from all over Scotland, ripped from home, deprived of kin and
companions, thrown like bits of rubbish into a heap of
compost, where filth, starvation, and close quarters generated a
heat of rot that broke down both sensibility and civilness.
Small gr oups ha d formed, for p rotection or for the comfort
of so ciety , and there was consta nt conflict between one group
and ano ther . They banged to and fro like pebbles in the surf,
bruising each other and now an d then crushing some hapless
individual who got in between.
“It’ s food and w armth, aye?” Kenny said dispassionately .
“There’ s naught else to care for , in a place like that.”
Among the groups had been a small obdurate knot of
Calvinists, headed by Thomas Christie. Mindful of their own,
they shared food and blankets, defended each other—andbehaved with a dour self-righteousness that roused the
Catholics to fury .
“If one of us was to catch afire—and now and then,
someone would, bein’ pushed into the hearth whilst sleepin’—
they wouldna piss on him to pu t it out,” Kenny said, shaking
his h ead. “They wouldna be stea ling food, to be sure, but they
would  stand in the corner and pray out loud, rattlin’ on and on
about whore-mongers and usurers and idolaters and the lot—
and makin’ damn sure we kent who was meant by it!”
“And then came Mac Dubh .” T he late aut umn sun was
sinking; Kenny’ s stubbled face was blurred with shadow , but
Roger could see the slight so ftening that came across it,
relaxing the grimness of expression that accompanied
Lindsay’ s reminiscence.
“Something like the Second Coming, was it?” Roger said.
He spoke half under his breath, and was surprised when Kenny
laughed.
“Only if ye mean some of us kent Sheumais ruaidh  already .
No, man, they’d brought him b y boat. Y e’ll ken Jamie Roy
doesna take to boats, aye?”
“I’d heard something of the sort,” Roger answered dryly .
“Whatever ye heard, it’ s tru e,” Kenny assured him,
grinning. “He staggered into the cell green as a lass, vomited
in the corner , then crawled under a bench and stayed there for
the next day or two.”
Upon his emer gence, Fraser had kept quiet for a time,
watching to see who was who and what was what. But he was
a gentle man born, and had been both a laird and a fierce
warrior; a man much respected among the Highlanders. The
men deferred to him naturally , s eeking his opinion, asking his
judgment, and the weaker sheltering in his presence.
“And that griped T om Christie’ s arse like a saddle-gall,”
Kenny said, nodding wisely . “See, he’d got to thinking as how
he was the bigg est frog in the pond, aye?” Kenny ducked hischin and puf fed his throat, popp ing his eyes in illustration, and
Roger burst out laughing.
“A ye, I see. And he didn’ t care for the competition, was that
it?”
Kenny nodded, of f-hand.
“It w ouldna have been so bad, m aybe, save that half his wee
band of salvatio ners started creepin’ of f from their prayers to
hear Mac Dubh tell stories. But the main thing was the new
governor .”
Bogle, the prison’ s original governor , had left, replaced by
Colonel Harry Quarry . Quarry w as a relatively young man, but
an experienced soldier , who had fought at Falkirk and at
Culloden. Unlik e his predecessor , he viewed the prisoners
under his command with a certain respect—and he knew
Jamie Fraser by repute, regard ing him as an honorable, if
defeated, foe.
“Quarry had Mac Dubh  brought up to see him, soon after he
took command at Ardsmuir . I couldna say what happened
between them, but soon it wa s a matter of course; once a
week, th e guards would come an d take Mac Dubh of f to shave
and was h himse lf, and he woul d go take a bit of supper with
Quarry , and speak to him of whatever was needed.”
“And T om Christie didn’ t like that, either ,” Roger guessed.
He was forming a comprehensive picture of Christie;
ambitious, intelligent—and envious. Competent himself, but
lacking Fraser ’ s fortunate birth and skill at warfare—
advantages that a self-made me rchant with social aspirations
might well have resented, even before the catastrophe of
Culloden. Roger felt a certain sneaking sympathy for Christie;
Jamie Fraser was stif f competition for the merely mortal.
Kenny shook his head, and tilte d back to drain his cup. He
set it down with a sigh of repletion, raising his brows with a
gesture toward the jug. Roger waved a hand, dismissing it.
“No, no more, t hanks. But the Freemasons … how did that
happen? Y ou said it was to do with Christie?” The light wasnearly gone. He would have to walk home in the dark—but
that was no matter; his curiosity wouldn’ t let him leave
without learning what had happened.
Kenny grunted , rearranging his kilt over his thighs.
Hospitality was all very well, but he had chores to do as well.
Still, courtesy was courtesy , and he liked the Thrush for
himself, not only that he was Mac Dubh ‘s good son.
“A ye, w ell.” He  shrugged, resigning himself. “No, Christie
didna li ke it a bit, that Mac Dubh  s hould be the great one,
when he felt it his own place by right.” He cast a shrewd
glance at Roger , assessing. “I dinna think he kent what it
might cost to be chief in a place like that—not ‘til later . But
that’ s naught to do with it.” He flapped a hand, waving of f
irrelevancy .
“The thing was, Christie was  a chief himself; only not just
so good  at it as  was Mac Dubh . B ut there wer e those who
listened to him, and not only the God-naggers.”
If Roge r was a trifle take n aback at hearing this
characterization of his co-religionists, he disregarded it in his
eagerness to hear more.
“A ye, so?”
“There was trouble again.” Ken ny shrugged again. “Small
things, aye, but ye could see it happening.”
Shifts an d schisms, the small faults and fractures that result
when two land masses come together , straining and shoving
until either mountains rise betw een them or one is subsumed
by the other , in a breaking of earth and a shattering of stone.
“W e cou ld see Mac Dubh  t hin king,” Kenny said. “But he ’ s
no the man to be telling anyone what’ s in his mind, aye?”
Almost no one , Roger thought suddenly , with t he memory of
Fraser ’ s voice, so low as bar ely to be heard beneath the
whining autumn  wind. He told me . T he thought w as a small
sudden w armth in his chest, bu t he pushed it aside, not to be
distracted.“So one evening Mac Dubh  c ame back to us, quite late,”
Kenny said. “But instead of lyi ng down to his rest, he came
and sum moned us—me and my brothers, Gavin Hayes,
Ronnie Sinclair … and T om Christie.”
Fraser had roused the six men q uietly from their sleep, and
brought them to one of the cell’ s  few windows, where the light
of the night sky might shine upon his face. The men had
gathered round him, heavy-eyed and aching from the day’ s
labors, w ondering what this might mean. Since the last small
clash—a fight between two men over a meaningless insult—
Christie and Fraser had not exc hanged a word, but had kept
each man to himself.
It w as a  soft spring night, the ai r still crisp, but smelling of
fresh gre en things from the spro uting moor and the salt scent
of th e distant sea; a night to make a man yearn to run free
upon the  earth and feel the bloo d humming dark in his veins.
T ired or not, the men roused to it, alive and alert.
Christie was alert; wary-eyed and watchful. Here he was,
called face-to-face with Fraser and five of his closest allies—
what might they intend? T rue, they stood in a cell with fifty
men slee ping round them, and some of those would come to
Christie’ s aid if he called; but a man could be beaten or killed
before anyone knew he was threatened.
Fraser had spoken not a word to start, but smiled and put out
his h and to T om Christie. The other man had hesitated for a
moment, suspicious—but there was no choice, after all.
“Y e would have thought Mac Dubh  h eld a b olt of lightning
in his hand, the  way the shock of it went through Christie.”
Kenny’ s own hand lay open on  the table between them, the
palm hard as horn with calluses. The short, thick fingers curled
slowly closed, and Kenny shook his head, a broad grin
creasing his face.
“I d inna ken ho w it was Mac Dubh  found out that Christie
was a Freemason, but he knew it. Y e should have seen the look
on T om’ s face when he realiz ed that Jamie Roy was one
besides!“It was Quarry d id it,” Kenny explained, seeing the question
still on Roger ’ s face. “He was a Master himself, see.”
A Master Mason, that was, and head of a small military
lodge, composed  of the of ficers of the garrison. One of their
members had died recently , though, leaving them one man
short of the required seven. Quarry had considered the
situation, and after some cautio usly exploratory conversation
on the matter , invited Fraser to join them. A gentleman was a
gentleman, after all, Jacobite or no.
Not precisely an orthodox situation, Roger thought, but this
Quarry sounded  the type to adjust regulations to suit himself.
For that matter , so was Fraser .
“So Qua rry made him, and he moved from Apprentice to
Fellow Craft in a month’ s time, and was a Master himself a
month a fter that —and that was when he chose to tell us of it.
And so we founded a new lodg e that night, the seven of us—
Ardsmuir Lodge Number T wo.”
Roger snorted in wry amusement, seeing it.
“A ye. Y ou six— and Christie.” T om Christie the Protestant.
And Christie, stif f-necked but honorable, sworn to the
Mason’ s oaths, would have had no choice, but been obliged to
accept Fraser and his Catholics as brethren.
“T o star t with. W ithin three months, though, every man in
the cells  was made Apprentice. And there wasna so much
trouble after that.”
There wouldn’ t have been. Freemasons held as basic
principles the notions of equality—gentleman, crofter ,
fisherman, laird; such distinctions were not taken account of in
a lodge—and tolerance. No discussion of politics or religion
among the brothers, that was the rule.
“I can’ t  think it did Jamie any harm to belong to the
of ficers’ lodge, either ,” Roger said.
“Oh,” sa id Ken ny , rather vaguely . “No, I dinna suppose it
did.” He  pushed  back his stool and made to rise; the story was
done; the dark h ad come and it was time to light a candle. Hemade no move toward the clay  candlestick that stood on the
hearth, but Roger glanced towar d the glow of the banked fire,
and not iced for the first time that there was no smell of
cooking food.
“It’ s time I wa s away home for supper ,” he said, rising
himself. “Come with me, aye?”
Kenny brightened noticeably .
“I w ill, then, a Smeoraich , and thanks. Give me a moment
to milk the goats, and I’ll be right along.”
 
WHEN I CAME BACK upstairs next morning after a
delicious breakfast featuring omelettes made with minced
buf falo meat, sweet onions, and mushrooms, I found Jamie
awake, though not noticeably bright-eyed.
“How ar e you this morning?” I asked, setting down the tray
I h ad brought h im and putting a hand on his forehead. Still
warm, but no longer blazing; the fever was nearly gone.
“I wish I were deid, if only so folk would stop asking how
am I ?” h e replie d grumpily . I to ok his mood as an indicator of
returning health, and took my hand away .
“Have you used the chamberpot yet this morning?”
He raised one eyebrow , glowering.
“Have you?”
“Y ou know , you are perfectly impossible when you don’ t
feel well,” I rem arked, rising to peer into the crudely glazed
pot for myself. Nothing.
“Does it not o ccur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it’ s
yourself that’ s impossible when I’m ill? If ye’re not feeding
me some disgusting substance made of ground beetles and
hoof-shavings, you’re pokin’ my belly and making intimate
inquiries into the state of my bowels. Ahh!”
I had in fact pulled down the sheet and prodded him in the
lower abdomen. No distention from a swollen bladder; hisexclamation appeared to be due entirely to ticklishness. I
quickly palpated the liver , but f ound no hardness—that was a
relief.
“Have you a pain in your back?”
“I’ve a marked pain in my backside,” he said, narrowing
one eye at me and folding his arms protectively across his
middle. “And it’ s getting worse by the moment.”
“I a m trying to determine whe ther the snake venom has
af fected your kidneys,” I explained patiently , deciding to
overlook this last remark. “If you can’ t piss—”
“I ca n d o that fine,” he assured me, pulling the sheet up to
his chest, lest I  demand proof. “Now , just leave me to my
breakfast, and I’ll—”
“How do you know? Y ou haven’ t—”
“I ha ve.” Seeing my skeptical glance at the chamberpot, he
glowered under his brows, and muttered something ending in
“… window .” I swung round to the open window , shutters
open and sash raised in spite of the chilly morning air .
“Y ou did what?”
“W ell,” he defended himself, “I was standing up, and I just
thought I would, that’ s all.”
“Why were you standing up?”
“Oh, I thought I would.” He b linked at me, innocent as a
day-old child. I left the question , going on to more important
matters.
“W as there blood in—”
“What have ye brought for my breakfast?” Ignoring my
clinical inquirie s, he rolled to one side, and lifted the napkin
draped over the tray . He looked at the bowl of bread and milk
thus revealed, then turned his h ead, giving me a look of the
most profound betrayal.
Before he could start in on furt her grievances, I forestalled
him by sitting d own on the stool beside him and demandingbluntly , “What’ s wrong with T om Christie?”
He blinked, taken by surprise.
“Is something amiss wi’ the man?”
“I wouldn’ t know; I haven’ t seen him.”
“W ell, I havena seen him in more than twenty years
myself,” he said, picking up the  spoon and prodding the bread
and milk  suspiciously . “If he’ s grown a spare head in that time,
it’ s news to me.”
“Ho,” I said tolerantly . “Y ou may—and I say may —possibly
have fooled Roger , but I know you.”
He looked up at that, and gave me a sidelong smile.
“Oh, aye? D’ye know I dinna care much for bread and
milk?”
My heart fluttered at sight of that smile, but I maintained
my dignity .
“If y ou’re thinking of blackmai ling me into bringing you a
steak, yo u can for get it,” I advised him. “I can wait to find out
about T om Christie, if I have to.” I stood up, shaking out my
skirts as though to leave, and turned toward the door .
“Make it parritch with honey , and I’ll tell ye.”
I turned round to find him grinning at me.
“Done,” I said, and came back to the stool.
He c onsidered for a moment, b ut I could see that he was
only deciding how and where to begin.
“Roger told me about the Masonic lodge at Ardsmuir ,” I
said, to help out. “Last night.”
Jamie shot me a startled look.
“And where did wee Roger Mac find that out? Did Christie
tell him?”
“No, Kenny Lindsay did. But evidently Christie gave Roger
a Maso nic sign of some sort  when he arrived. I thoughtCatholics weren’ t allowed to be Masons, actually .”
He raised one eyebrow .
“A ye, well. The Pope wasna in Ardsmuir prison, and I was.
Though I havena heard that it’ s forbidden, forbye. So wee
Roger ’ s a Freemason, too, is he?”
“Apparently . An d perhaps it isn ’ t forbidden, now . It will be,
later .” I flapped a hand, dismiss ing it. “There’ s something else
about Christie, though, isn’ t there?”
He nodded, and glanced away .
“A ye, there is,” he said quietly . “D’ye recall a Ser geant
Murchison, Sassenach?”
“V ividly .” I had met the Ser geant only once, more than two
years previously , in Cross Creek. The name seemed familiar in
some other , more recent context, though. Then I recalled
where I had heard it.
“Archie Hayes mentioned him—or them. That was it; there
were two of them, twins. One of them was the man who shot
Archie at Culloden, wasn’ t he?”
Jamie no dded. His eyes were h ooded, and I could see that
he was looking back into the time he had spent in Ardsmuir .
“A ye. And to shoot a lad in cold blood was nay more than
one could expect from either o f them. A crueler pair I hope
never to  meet.” The corner of his mouth turned up, but without
humor . “ The only thing I ken to Stephen Bonnet’ s credit is that
he killed one o’ yon lurdans.”
“And the other?” I asked.
“I killed the other .”
The room seemed suddenly very quiet, as though the two of
us w ere far rem oved from Fraser ’ s Ridge, alone together , that
bald statement floating in the air between us. He was looking
straight at me, blue eyes guarded, waiting to see what I would
say . I swallowed.“Why?” I asked, vaguely surprised at the calmness of my
own voice.
He did look away then, shaking his head.
“A hundred reasons,” he said so ftly , “and none.” He rubbed
absently at his wrist, as though feeling the weight of iron
fetters.
“I could tell ye stories of their viciousness, Sassenach, and
they wo uld be true. They preye d upon the weak, robbing and
beating—and they were the sort who took delight in cruelty
for its own sake. There’ s no recourse against such men, not in
a prison. But I dinna say so as an excuse—for there is none.”
The prisoners at Ardsmuir were used for labor , cutting
peats, quarrying and hauling stone. They worked in small
groups, each group guarded by an English soldier , armed with
musket and club. The musket, t o prevent escape—the club, to
enforce orders and ensure submission.
“It was summer . Y e’ll ken the summer in the Highlands,
Sassenach—the summer dim?”
I nodded. The summer dim was the light of the Highland
night, late in sum mer . So far to the north, the sun barely set on
Midsummer ’ s Eve; it would disappear below the horizon, but
even at midnight, the sky was pale and milky white, and the
air was not dark, but seemed filled with unearthly mist.
The pris on gove rnor took advantage of the light, now and
then, to work the prisoners into the late hours of the evening.
“W e did na mind so much,” Jam ie said. His eyes were open,
but fixed on wh atever he was seeing in the summer dim of
memory . “It was better to be outside than in. And yet, by the
evening, we would be so drou kit wi’ fatigue that we could
barely s et one foot before the o ther . It was like walking in a
dream.”
Both gu ards and men were numb with exhaustion, by the
time the work of the day was d one. The groups of prisoners
were collected, formed up into  a column, and marched backtoward the prison, shuf fling across the moorland, stumbling
and nodding, drunk with the need to fall down and sleep.
“W e we re still by the quarry , wh en they set of f; we were to
load the  wagon wi’ the stone-cutting tools and the last of the
blocks, and follow . I remembe r—I heaved a great block up
into the  wagon bed, and stood  back, panting wi’ the ef fort.
There w as a sound behind me, and I turned to see Ser geant
Murchison—Billy , it was, though I didna find that out ‘til
later .”
The Ser geant was no more than a squat black shape in the
dim, face invisible against a sky the color of an oyster ’ s shell.
“I wondered, now and then, if I wouldna have done it, had I
seen his  face.” The fingers of Jamie’ s left hand stroked his
wrist ab sently , a nd I realized tha t he still felt the weight of the
irons he had worn.
The Ser geant had raised his clu b, poked Jamie hard in the
ribs, the n used it to point to a maul left lying on the ground.
Then the Ser geant turned away .
“I didna  think about it for a moment,” Jamie said softly . “I
was on him in two steps, wi’ the chain of my fetters hard
against his throat. He hadna time to make a sound.”
The wagon stood no more than ten feet from the lip of the
quarry pool; there was a drop of forty feet straight down, and
the water below , a hundred fe et deep, black and waveless
under that hollow white sky .
“I tied him to one of the blocks and threw him over , and
then I went back to the wagon.  The two men from my group
were the re, standing like statues in the dim, watching. They
said nothing, nor did I. I stepped up and took the reins, they
got i nto the back  of the wagon, and I drove toward the prison.
W e c aught up to  the column befo re too long, and all went back
together , without a word. No one missed Ser geant Murchison
until the  next evening, for they thought he was down in the
village, of f-duty . I dinna think they ever found him.”He seem ed to notice what he w as doing, then, and took his
hand away from his wrist.
“And the two men?” I asked softly . He nodded.
“T om Christie and Duncan Innes.”
He sighed deeply , and stretched his arms, shifting his
shoulders as though to ease th e fit of his shirt—though he
wore a loose nig htshirt. Then he raised one hand and turned it
to and fro, frowning at his wrist in the light.
“That’ s odd,” he said, sounding faintly surprised.
“What is?”
“The marks—they’re gone.”
“Marks … from the irons?” He nodded, examining both his
wrists in  bemusement. The skin was fair , weathered to a pale
gold, but otherwise unblemished.
“I had them for years—from the chafing, aye? I never
noticed that they’d gone.”
I set  a hand on his wrist, rubbin g my thumb gently over the
pulse where his radial artery crossed the bone.
“Y ou didn’ t have them when I found you in Edinbur gh,
Jamie. They’ve been gone a long time.”
He looked down at his arms, and shook his head, as though
unable to believe it.
“A ye,” he said softly . “W ell, so has T om Christie.”P AR T N INE
A Dangerous Business96
AURUM
I T W AS QUIET IN THE HOUS E; Mr . W emyss had gone to
the grist mill, taking Lizzie and Mrs. Bug with him, and it was
too late in the day for anyone on the Ridge to come visiting—
everyone would  be at their chores, seeing that the beasts were
fed and bedded down, wood and water fetched, the fires built
up for supper .
My own  beast was already fed and bedded; Adso perched in
a somnolent ball in a patch of late sun on the window ledge,
feet tuck ed up and eyes closed in an ecstasy of repletion. My
contribution to the supper—a dish Fer gus referred to elegantly
as lapin aux chanter elles  (known as rabbit stew to the vulgar
among us)—had been burbli ng cheerfully away in the
cauldron since early morning, and needed no attention from
me. As for swee ping the floor , polishing the windows, dusting,
and gen eral drudgery of that so rt … well, if women’ s work
was never done, why trouble about how much of it wasn’ t
being accomplished at any given moment?
I fetched  down ink and pen from  the cupboard, and the big
black clothboun d casebook, then settled myself to share
Adso’ s s un. I wrote up a carefu l description of the growth on
little Geordie Chisholm’ s ear , which would bear watching, and
added t he most recent measurements I had taken of T om
Christie’ s left hand.
Christie did  suf fer from arthritis in both hands, and had a
slight de gree of clawing in the fingers. Having observed him
closely at dinner , though, I wa s nearly sure that what I was
seeing i n the left hand was not arthritis, but Dupuytren’ s
contracture—an odd, hooklike drawing-in of the ring and little
fingers toward the palm of the hand, caused by shortening of
the palmar aponeurosis.Ordinarily , I should have been in no doubt, but Christie’ s
hands were so heavily calluse d from years of labor that I
couldn’ t feel the characteristic nodule at the base of the ring
finger . T he finger had felt wr ong  t o me, though, when I’d first
looked at the hand—in the course of stitching a gash across the
heel of it—and I’d been checki ng it, whenever I caught sight
of T om Christie and could persuade him to let me look at it—
which wasn’ t often.
In spite of Jamie’ s apprehensions, the Christies had been
ideal te nants so far , living quietly and keeping lar gely to
themselves, aside from Thomas Christie’ s schoolmastering, at
which he appeared to be strict but ef fective.
I became aware of a looming presence just behind my head.
The sunbeam had moved, and Adso with it.
“Don’ t even think of it, cat,” I said. A rumbling purr of
anticipation star ted up in the vicinity of my left ear , and a lar ge
paw reached out and delicately patted the top of my head.
“Oh, all right,” I said, resigned. No choice, really , unless I
wanted to get up and go write s omewhere else. “Have it your
way .”
Adso could not resist hair . Anyone’ s hair , whether attached
to a head or not. Fortunately , Major MacDonald had been the
only person reckless enough to sit down within Adso’ s reach
while wearing a wig, and after all, I had  g ot it b ack, though it
meant crawling under the house  where Adso had retired with
his p rey; no one  else dared snat ch it from his jaws. The Major
had been rather austere about th e incident, and while it hadn’ t
stopped him coming round to s ee Jamie now and then, he no
longer removed his hat on such visits, but sat drinking chicory
cof fee at  the kitchen table, his tricorne fixed firmly on his head
and both eyes fixed firmly upo n Adso, monitoring the cat’ s
whereabouts.
I rel axed a bit, not quite purring myself, but feeling quite
mellow . It was rather soothing to  have the cat knead and comb
with his half-sheathed claws, pausing now and then in his
delicate groomin g to rub his face lovingly against my head. Hewas only really dangerous if he ’d been in the catnip, but that
was safely locked up. Eyes half-closed, I contemplated the
minor complication of describing Depuytren’ s contracture
without calling it that, Baron Depuytren not having been born
yet.
W ell, a picture was worth a thou sand words, and I thought I
could produce a competent lin e drawing, at least. I did my
best, meanwhile wondering how I was to induce Thomas
Christie to let me operate on the hand.
It was a fairly quick and simp le procedure, but given the
lack of anesthesia and the fa ct that Christie was a strict
Presbyterian and  a teetotaller … perhaps Jamie could sit on his
chest, Roger on his legs. If Brianna held his wrist tightly …
I ga ve up the problem for the moment, yawning drowsily .
The drowsiness  disappeared abruptly , as a three-inch yellow
dragonfly came whirring in thro ugh the open window with a
noise lik e a small helicopter . Ad so sailed through the air after
it, leavin g my hair in wild disarray and my ribbon—which he
appeared to have been quietly chewing—hanging wet and
mangled behind  my left ear . I removed this object with mild
distaste, laid it o n the sill to dry , and flipped back a few pages,
admiring the neat drawing I ha d done of Jamie’ s snakebite,
and of Brianna’ s rattlesnake hypodermic.
The leg, to my amazement, had healed cleanly and well, and
while th ere had been a good  bit of tissue sloughing, the
maggots had dealt with that so ef fectively that the only
permanent traces were two small depressions in the skin where
the original fang marks had b een, and a thin, straight scar
across th e calf where I had made an incision for debridement
and mag got-placement. Jamie had a slight limp still, but I
thought this would cure itself in time.
Humming in a satisfied sort of way , I flipped back farther ,
idly bro wsing th rough the last f ew pages of Daniel Rawlings’
notes.
 Josephus Howa r d … chief complaint being a fistula of the
r ectum, this of so long a stand ing as to have become badly
abscessed, together with an advanced case of Piles. T r eated
with a decoction of Ale Hoof, mixed with Burnt Alum and
small amount of Honey , this boiled together with juice of
Marigold.
 
A later note on the same page, dated a month later , referred
to th e ef ficacy of this compo und, with illustrations of the
condition of the patient before and after administration. I
raised a brow at the drawings; R awlings was no more an artist
than I was, but had succeeded in capturing, to a remarkable
degree, the intrinsic discomfort of the condition.
I t apped  the quill against my mouth, thinking, then added a
careful note in the mar gin, to the ef fect that a diet rich in
fibrous vegetables should be recommended as an adjunct to
this treatment, useful also in preventing both constipation and
the mor e serious complications thereof—nothing like a little
object lesson!
I wiped the quill, laid it down, and turned the page,
wondering whether Ale Hoof was a plant—and if so, which
one—or a suppurative condition of horses’ feet. I could hear
Jamie rustling about in his study; I’d go ask him in a moment.
I nea rly missed it. It had been jotted on the back of the page
containing the drawing of Mr . Howard’ s fistula, evidently
added as a casual afterthought on the day’ s activities.
 
Have spoke with Mr . Hector C amer on of River Run, who
begs me come e xamine his wife’ s eyes, her sight being sadly
affected. It is a far distance to h is plantation, but he will send
a horse.
 
That bit overcame the soporific atmosphere of the afternoon
at once.  Fascinated, I sat up and turned the page, looking to
see whether the doctor had in f act examined Jocasta. I had—with some dif ficulty—persuaded her to allow me to examine
her e yes once, a nd I was curious as to Rawlings’ conclusions.
W ithout an ophthalmoscope, the re was no way of making sure
of the cause of h er blindness, but I had strong suspicions—and
I co uld at least rule out such things as cataracts and diabetes
with a fair amount of certainty . I wondered whether Rawlings
had seen  anything I had missed , or whether her condition had
changed noticeably since he had seen her .
 
Bled the  smith of a pint, pur ged  his wife with senna oil (10
minims), and administer ed 3 minims of same to the cat
(gratis), I having observed a swarming of worms in the
animal’ s stool.
 
I smiled at that; however crude his methods, Daniel
Rawlings was a good doctor . I wondered once again what had
happened to him, and whether I should ever get the chance to
meet him. I ha d the rather sad  feeling that I should not; I
couldn’ t imagine a doctor not returning somehow to claim
such beautiful instruments as his, if he was in any condition to
do so.
Under the prodding of my curiosity , Jamie had obligingly
made inquiries, but with no res ults. Daniel Rawlings had set
out f or V ir ginia—leaving his box of instruments behind—and
had promptly vanished into thin air .
Another page, another patient; b leeding, pur ging, lancing of
boils, re moval of an infected nail, drawing of an abscessed
tooth, cautery of a persistent sore on a woman’ s leg …
Rawlings had found plenty of bu siness in Cross Creek. Had he
ever made it as far as River Run, though?
Y es, there it was, a week later and several pages on.
 
Reached River Run after a dir e journey , wind and rain fit to
sink a ship, and  the r oad wash ed away entir ely in places, so
was obliged to r ide cr oss-country , lashed by hail, mud to theeyebr ows. Had set out at dawn with Mr . Camer on’ s black
servant, who br ought a horse for me—did not r each sanctuary
‘til w ell past dark, exhausted an d starving. Made welcome by
Mr . Camer on, who gave me brandy .
 
Having gone to the expense of procuring a doctor , Hector
Cameron had evidently decided to make the most of the
opportunity , and had had Rawlings examine all the slaves and
servants, as well as the master of the house himself.
 
Aged Seventy-th r ee, of middling height, br oad-shoulder ed,
but somewhat bowed in Statu r e, Rawlings had written of
Hector ,  with hands so gnarled by r heumatism as to make the
handling of any implement mor e subtle than a spoon
impossible. Otherwise, is well-p r eserved, very V igor ous in his
age. Com plains of rising in the night, painful Micturition. I am
inclined to suspect a prurient D istemper of the Bladder , rather
than Stone or chr onic Disease o f the inwar d male parts, as the
complaint is r ecurr ent, but not of long standing on any
occasion of its evidence—two  weeks being the average
duration of each attack and accompanied by Burning in the
male Or gan. A low fever , tend erness upon palpation of the
lower abdomen and a Black Urine, smelling str ongly , incline
me further to this belief.
The hou sehold b eing possessed of a good quantity of dried
cranberries, have pr escribed a decoction, the inspissated juice
to be drunk thri ce daily , a cupf ul at a time. Also r ecommend
infusion of Cleavers, drunk morning and evening, for its
cooling Effect, and in case of the r e being Gravel pr esent in the
Bladder , which may aggravate this Condition.
 
I found myself nodding approvingly . I didn’ t always agree
with Rawlings, either in terms o f diagnosis or treatment, but I
thought he was likely spot-on on this occasion. What about
Jocasta, though?There she was, on the next page.
 
Jocasta Camer o n, Sixty-four years in age, tri-gravida, well-
nourished and in good Health generally , very youthful in
Aspect.
 
T ri-gravida?  I paused for a moment at that matter -of-fact
remark. So plain, so stark a term , to stand for the bearing—let
alone the loss—of three children . T o have raised three children
past the dangers  of infancy , onl y to lose them all at once, and
in su ch cruel fas hion. The sun w as warm, but I felt a chill on
my heart, thinking of it.
If it was Brianna? Or little Jemmy? How did a woman bear
such loss? I had done it, myself, and still had no idea. It had
been a long time , and yet still, now and then, I would wake in
the n ight, feeling a child’ s warm  weight sleeping on my breast,
her breath warm on my neck. My hand rose and touched my
shoulder , curved as though the child’ s head lay there.
I supposed that it might be easier to have lost a daughter at
birth, without the years of acquaintance that would leave
ragged holes in t he fabric of daily life. And yet I knew Faith to
the last atom of her being; there was a hole in my heart that fit
her shape exactly . Perhaps it wa s that that had been a natural
death, at least; it gave me the fee ling that she was still with me
in some  way , was taken care o f, and not alone. But to have
children slain in blood, butchered in war?
So many things could happen to children in this time. I
returned to my persual of her case history with a troubled
mind.
 
No sign of or ganic Illness, nor external Damage to the Eyes.
The White of the Eye is clear , th e lashes fr ee of any Matter , no
T umor visible. The Pupils r espo nd normally to a Light passed
befor e th em, and  to shading of the Light. A candle held close
to o ne side illu minates the vitr eous Humor of the Eye, butshows n o Defec t ther ein. I note  a slight Clouding, indicating
incipient Catara ct in the lens of the right eye, but this is
insufficient to explain the gradual loss of Sight.
 
“Hum,” I said aloud. Both Rawlings’ observations and his
conclusions matched mine. He briefly noted the length of time
over which sight had failed— roughly two years—and the
process of its failure—nothing abrupt, but a gradual shrinking
of the field of vision.
I tho ught it likel y had taken longer; sometimes the loss was
so g radual that p eople didn’ t notice the tiny decrements at all,
until the sight was seriously threatened.
 
… bits of the vision whittled away like cheese parings. Even
the small r emnant of sight r emaining is of use only in dim
light, as patient exhibits gr eat ir ritation and pain when the eye
is exposed to str ong sunlight.
I ha ve seen this condition twice befor e, always in persons of
some ag e, thoug h not so far advanced. Gave it as my opinion
that sight would soon be completely obliterated, with no
amelioration po ssible. Fortunately , Mr . Camer on has a black
servant capable  of r eading, whom he has given to his wife to
accompany her and warn her o f obstacles, likewise to r ead to
her and apprise her of her surr oundings.
 
It ha d gone further than that now; the light had gone, and
Jocasta was entirely blind. So, a progressive condition—that
didn’ t tell me m uch, most of them were. When had Rawlings
seen her?
It could be any number of conditions—macular
degeneration, tumor of the optic nerve, parasitic damage,
retinitis pigmentosa, temporal arteritis—probably not retinal
detachment, that  would have happened abruptly—but my own
preliminary suspicion was of glaucoma. I remembered
Phaedre, Jocasta’ s body servant, wringing out cloths in coldtea, observing that her mistress was suf fering from headache
“again,”  in  a tone of voi ce that suggested this was a frequent
occurrence—and Duncan asking me to make up a lavender
pillow , to ease his wife’ s “megrims.”
The headaches might have nothing to do with Jocasta’ s
eyesight, though —and I had no t inquired at the time as to the
nature of the headaches; they might be simple tension
headaches or migraines, rather than the pressure-band type that
might—or might not—attend glaucoma. Arteritis would cause
frequent headache, too, after all. The frustrating thing about it
was that glaucoma by itself had absolutely no predictable
symptoms—save eventual blindness. It was caused by a failure
of proper drainage of the fluid inside the eyeball, so that
pressure inside the eye increased to the point of damage, with
no warning at a ll to the patien t or her physician. But other
kinds of blindness were lar gely symptomless as well …
I was still contemplating the possibilities, when I became
aware that Rawlings had contin ued his notes onto the back of
the page—in Latin.
I blinked at that, a little surprised. I could tell that he had
written it as a continuation of the earlier passage; quill-writing
shows a characteristic darkenin g and fading of words, as the
ink is renewed with each dip of the pen, and the shading of
each passage tended to be dif ferent, as dif ferent inks were
used. No , this had been written a t the same time as the passage
on the preceding page.
But why drop suddenly into Latin? Rawlings knew some
Latin, plainly—which ar gued some degree of formal
education, even if not formal medical education—but he didn’ t
normally use it in his clinical notes, beyond the occasional
word or phrase required for th e formal description of some
condition. Here was a page and a half of Latin, though, and
written i n scrupulous letters, smaller than his usual writing, as
though he had thought careful ly about the contents of the
passage—or perhaps as though he felt secretive about it, as the
Latin itself seemed to ar gue.I f lipped back th rough the casebook, checking to verify my
impression. No, he had written in Latin here and there—but
not often, and always as he did here; as the continuation of a
passage begun in English. How odd. I turned back to the
passage concerning River Run and began to try to puzzle it
out.
W ithin a sentence or two, I abandoned the ef fort and went to
find Jamie. He was in his own study , across the hall, writing
letters. Or not.
The inkstand—m ade of a small gourd with a cork to keep
the ink from dr ying—stood at  hand, freshly filled; I could
smell th e woody reek of oak galls brewed with iron filings. A
new turk ey quil l lay on the desk, trimmed to a point of such
sharpness that it looked more suitable for stabbing than
writing, and a f resh sheet of paper lay on the blotter , three
words black and lonely at its head. It took no more than a
glance at his face to know what they said.
My dear Sister .
He looked up at me, smiled wryly , and shrugged.
“What shall I say?”
“I d on’ t know .” At sight of him , I had shut the casebook,
clasping it under one arm. I came in and stood behind him,
laying a hand o n his shoulder . I squeezed gently , and he laid
his own hand over mine for a moment, then reached to pick up
the quill.
“I canna  go on saying that I’m sorry .” He rolled the quill
slowly to and fro between his thumb and middle finger . “I’ve
said it in each letter . If she was disposed to for give me …”
If she was, Jenny would have replied by now to at least one
of the letters that he sent faithfully to Lallybroch each month.
“Ian’ s for given you. And the  children.” Missives from
Jamie’ s brother -in-law arrived sporadically—but they did
come, along with occasional notes from his namesake, Y oung
Jamie, a nd now and then a line from Maggie, Kitty , Michael,or Janet . But the silence from Jenny was so deafening as to
drown out all other communications.
“A ye, it would be worse if …” he trailed of f, staring at the
blank p aper . In fact, nothing could be worse than this
estrangement. Jenny was closer to him, more important to him,
than anyone in the world—with the possible exception of
myself.
I shared  his bed, his life, his l ove, his thoughts. She had
shared h is heart and soul since the day he was born—until the
day whe n he had lost her young est son. Or so she plainly saw
it.
It pained me to see him go on carrying the guilt of Ian’ s
disappearance—and I felt som e small resentment toward
Jenny . I understood the depth of her loss, and sympathized
with her grief, but still, Ian wasn’ t dead—so far as we knew .
She alone could absolve Jamie, and surely she must know it.
I p ulled  up a st ool and sat dow n by him, laying the book
aside. A  small stack of papers la y to one side, covered with his
labored writing. It cost him dearly to write, wrong-handed, and
that hand crippled—and yet he wrote stubbornly , almost every
evening, recording the small events of the day . V isitors to the
Ridge, t he health of the animals, progress in building, new
settlers, news from the Eastern counties … He wrote it down,
one wor d at a t ime, to be sent of f when some visitor arrived
who wo uld take the accumulated pages away , on the first stage
of their precario us journey to Scotland. All the letters might
not a rrive at thei r destination, but some would. Likewise, most
letters from Scotland would reach us, too—if they were sent.
For a time, I had hoped that Jen ny’ s letter had simply been
mis-sent, mispla ced, lost somewhere in transit. But it had been
too long, and I had stopped hoping. Jamie hadn’ t.
“I thought perhaps I should s end her this.” He shuf fled
through the stack of papers a t the side of the desk, and
withdrew a small sheet, stained and grubby , ragged along one
edge where it had been torn from a book.It was a messag e from Ian; the  only concrete evidence we
had that the boy was still alive and well. It had reached us at
the Gathering in November , through the agency of John
Quincy Myers, a mountain man who roamed the wilderness, as
much at home w ith Indian as w ith settler , and more at home
with deer and possum than with anyone who lived in a house.
W ritten in clumsy Latin as a joke, the note assured us that
Ian was well, a nd happy . Married to a girl “in the Mohawk
fashion” (meaning, I thought, that he had decided to share her
house, bed, and hearth, and she had decided to let him), he
expected to become a father him self “in the spring.” And that
was all. Spring had come and g one, with no further word. Ian
wasn’ t d ead, bu t the next thing  to it. The chances of us ever
seeing him again were remo te, and Jamie knew it; the
wilderness had swallowed him.
Jamie touched the ratty paper ge ntly , tracing the round, still-
childish letters. He’d told Jenny what the note said, I knew—
but I  als o knew why he hadn’ t s ent the original before. It was
the o nly physical link with Ian; to give it up was in some final
way to relinquish him to the Mohawk.
“A ve!”  said the note, in Ian’ s half-formed writing. “Ian
salutat avunculus Jacobus.”  Ian salutes his uncle James.
Ian w as more to  Jamie than one of his nephews. Much as he
loved all of Jenny’ s children, Ian was special—a foster -son,
like Fer gus; but unlike Fer gus, a son of Jamie’ s blood,
replacement in a way for the so n he had lost. That son wasn’ t
dead, eit her , but could not ever be claimed. The world seemed
suddenly full of lost children.
“Y es,” I said, my throat tight. “I think you should send it.
Jenny should have it, even if …” I coughed, reminded
suddenly by the note of the case book. I reached for it, hoping
it would distract him.
“Um. Speaking of Latin … there ’ s an odd bit in here. Could
you have a look at it, perhaps?”“A ye, of course.” He set Ian’ s n ote aside and took the book
from me, moving it so the last of the afternoon sun fell across
the page . He frowned slightly , a finger tracing the lines of
writing.
“Christ, the man’ s no more gras p of Latin grammar than ye
have yourself, Sassenach.”
“Oh, thanks. W e can’ t all be scholars now , can we?” I
moved closer , peering over his shoulder as he read. I’d been
right, then; Rawlings didn’ t drop casually into Latin for the
fun of it, or merely to show of f his erudition.
“An odd ity …” Jamie said, translating slowly as his finger
moved a cross the page. “I am awake—no, he means ‘I was
wakened,’ I think—by sounds in the chamber adjoining that
where I lay . I am  thinking—’I thought’—that my patient went
to make  water , and am risen to  follow … Why should he do
that, I wonder?”
“The patient—it’ s Hector Cameron, by the way—had a
problem with his bladder . Rawlings would have wanted to
watch h im urinate, to see wh at sort of dif ficulty he had,
whether he had pain, or blood in the urine, that sort of thing.”
Jamie g ave me a side-long glance, one brow raised, then
shook his head and returned to the casebook, murmuring
something about the peculiar tastes of physicians.
“ Homo pr ocediente  … the man proceeds … Why does he
call him ‘the man,’ rather than his name?”
“He was  writing in Latin to be secret,” I said, impatient to
hear what came next. “If Came ron saw his name in the book,
he’d be curious, I expect. What happened?”
“The man goes out—outdoors, does he mean, or only out of
his c hamber?—o utdoors, it must be … goes out, and I follow .
He walk s steadily , quickly … W hy should he not? Oh, here—I
am puzzled. I give—have given—the man twelve grains of
laudanum …”
“T welve grains ? A re you sure that’ s what he says?” I leaned
over Jam ie’ s arm , peering, but s ure enough—he pointed to theentry , inscribed in clear black a nd white. “But that’ s enough
laudanum to fell a horse!”
“A ye, ‘twelve grains of laudanu m to assist sleep,’ he says.
No wonder the doctor was pu zzled, then, to see Cameron
scampering about the lawn in the middle of the night.”
I nudged him with an elbow .
“Get on!”
“Mmphm. W ell, he says he went to the necessary house—
no doub t thinking to find Camer on—but no one was there, and
there wa sna any  smell of … er … he didna think anyone had
been there recently .”
“Y ou needn’ t be delicate on my account,” I said.
“I know ,” he said, grinning. “But my own sensibilities are
no quite coarsened yet, in spite of my long association with
you, Sas senach. Ow!” He jerked away , rubbing his arm where
I had pinched him. I lowered my brows and gave him a stare,
though inwardly  pleased to have lightened the mood for both
of us.
“Less about your sensibilities, if  you  please,” I said, tapping
my foot. “Besides, you haven’ t  got any in the first place, or
you’d never have married me. Where was Cameron, then?”
He scanned the page, lips silently forming words.
“He doesna ken. He prowled about the place until the butler
popped out of his wee hole, thinking him a marauder of some
sort, and threatened him wi’ a bottle of whisky .”
“A formidable weapon, that,” I observed, smiling at the
thought of a nig htcapped Ulysses, brandishing his implement
of destruction. “How do you say ‘bottle of whisky’ in Latin?”
Jamie gave the page a glance.
“ He  says ‘aqua vitae,’  which is doubtless as close as he
could manage. It must have bee n whisky , though; he says the
butler gave him a dram to cure the shock.”
“So he never found Cameron?”“A ye, he did, a fter he left Ulysses. T ucked up in his wee
white bed, snoring. Next morning, he asked, but Cameron
didna re call getting up in the night.” He flipped the page over
with one finger and glanced at me. “W ould the laudanum keep
him from remembering?”
“It c ould do,” I said, frowning. “Easily . But it’ s simply
incredible that anyone with that  much laudanum in him could
have bee n up marching round in the first place … unless …” I
cocked a brow at him, recalling Jocasta’ s remarks during our
discussion at River Run. “Any chance your Uncle Hector was
an opium-eater or the like? Someone who took a great deal of
laudanum by habit would have a tolerance for it, and might not
be really af fected by Rawlings’ dose.”
Never one to b e shocked by a ny intimation of depravity
among his relatives, Jamie considered the suggestion, but
finally shook his head.
“If so, I’ve heard  naught of it. But then,” he added logically ,
“there’ s no reason anyone would tell me so.”
That was true enough. If Hector Cameron had had the
means to indulge in imported narcotics—and he certainly had,
River Ru n being one of the most prosperous plantations in the
area—then it would have been n o one’ s business save his own.
Still, I did think someone might have mentioned it.
Jamie’ s mind was running on other lines.
“Why w ould a man leave his ho use in dead of night to piss,
Sassenach?” he asked. “I know  Hector Cameron had a
chamber pot; I’ve used it mys elf. It had his name and the
Cameron badge painted on the bottom.”
“Excellent question.” I stared down at the page of cryptic
scratchings. “If Hector Cameron was having great pain or
dif ficulty—passing a kidney sto ne, for example—I suppose he
might have gone out, to avoid waking the house.”
“I ha vena heard my uncle was a n opium-eater , but I havena
heard he was ower -mindful of his wife or servants’convenience, eit her ,” Jamie observed, rather cynically . “From
all accounts, Hector Cameron was a bit of a bastard.”
I laughed.
“No doubt that’ s why your aunt finds Duncan so congenial.”
Adso wandered in, the remains of the dragonfly in his
mouth, and sat down at my feet so I could admire his prize.
“Fine,” I told him, with a cursory pat. “Don’ t spoil your
appetite, though ; there are a lot of cockroaches in the pantry
that I want you to deal with.”
“Ecce homo,”  J amie murmu red thoughtfully , tapping a
finger on the casebook. “A French homo, do you think?”
“A what?” I stared at him.
“Does it not occ ur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it wasna
Cameron that the doctor followed outside?”
“Not ‘til  this minute, no.” I leaned forward and peered at the
page. “Why ought it to be any one else, though, let alone a
Frenchman?”
Jamie pointed to the edge of th e page, where there were a
few small drawings; doodles, I’d thought. The one under his
finger was a fleur -de-lis.
“ Ecce homo ,” he said again, tapping it. “The doctor wasna
easy in his min d about the man he followed—that’ s why he
didna ca ll him by name. If Cam eron were drugged, then it was
someone else who left the house that night—yet he doesna
speak of anyone else who was present.”
“But he might not mention it, unless he’d examined
whoever it was,” I ar gued. “He does put in personal notes, but
most of this is st rictly his case histories; his observations of his
patients and the treatments he was administering. But still …”
I f rowne d at the page. “A fleur -de-lis scribbled in the mar gin
doesn’ t necessarily mean anything at all, let alone that there
was a Frenchman there.” Save Fer gus, Frenchmen were not at
all common in North Carolina. There were some Frenchsettlements south of Savannah, I knew—but that was hundreds
of miles away .
The fleur -de-lis could  be nothing more than a random
doodle—and y et, Rawlings hadn’ t made such scribbles
anywhere else in his book tha t I recalled. When he added
drawings, they were careful and to the point, intended as a
reminder to himself, or as a guide to any physician who should
come after him.
Above the fleur -de-lis was a fig ure that looked rather like a
triangle with a small circle at the apex and a curved base;
below it was a sequence of letters. Au et Aq.
“A … u,” I said slowly , looking at that. “Aurum.”
“Gold?” Jamie glanced up at me, surprised. I nodded.
“It’ s the scientific abbreviation for gold, yes. ‘Aurum et
aqua.’ Gold and water—I suppose he means goldwasser , bits
of gold flake suspended in an aqueous solution. It’ s a remedy
for arthritis—oddly enough, it often works, though no one
knows why .”
“Expensive,” Jamie observed. “Though I suppose Cameron
could af ford it—perhaps he saved an ounce or two of his gold
bars, eh?”
“He did say Cameron suf fered f rom arthritis.” I frowned at
the page and its cryptic mar ginalia. “Maybe he meant to advise
the use of goldwasser  for  the condition. But I don’ t know
about the fleur -de-lis or that other thing—” I pointed at it. “It’ s
not the symbol for any medical treatment I  know of.”
T o my surprise, Jamie laughed.
“I shouldna think so, Sasse nach. It’ s a Freemason’ s
compass.”
“It is?” I blinked  at it, then glanced at Jamie. “W as Cameron
a Mason?”
He shrugged, running a hand th rough his hair . Jamie never
spoke o f his own association with the Freemasons. He had
been “made,” as the saying went, in Ardsmuir , and beyond anysecrecy imposed by membership in the society , he seldom
spoke of  anything that had happened between those dank stone
walls.
“Rawlings must have been one as well,” he said, clearly
reluctant to talk about Freemas onry , but unable to keep from
making logical connections. “Else he’d not have kent what
that is.” One long finger tapped the sign of the compass.
I didn’ t know quite what to say  next, but was saved from
indecision by Adso, who spit out a pair of amber wings, and
sprang u p onto the desk in search of more hors d’oeuvres.
Jamie made a g rab for the inkwell with one hand, and seized
his new quill pro tectively in the other . Deprived of prey , Adso
strolled to the ed ge of the desk and sat on the stack of Jamie’ s
letters, tail waving gently as he pretended to admire the view .
Jamie’ s eyes narrowed at this insolence.
“T ake your furry wee arse of f of my correspondence, beast,”
he s aid, poking at Adso with the  sharp end of his quill. Adso’ s
big g reen eyes w idened as they fixed on the tip of the moving
feather , and his shoulder blades tensed in anticipation. Jamie
twiddled the quill tantalizingly , and Adso made an abortive
swipe at it with one paw .
I seized the cat hastily before mayhem could ensue, lifting
him of f the papers with a surprised and indignant mirp!  of
protest.
“No, that’ s his  toy ,” I said to the cat, and gave Jamie a
reproving look. “Come along now; there are cockroaches to
attend to.”
I r eached for th e casebook with my free hand, but to my
surprise, Jamie stopped me.
“Let me keep it  a bit longer , Sassenach,” he said. “There’ s
something verra  odd about the notion of a French Freemason
wandering Rive r Run by night. I should like to see what else
Dr . Rawlings might have to say when he’ s speaking Latin.”
“All righ t.” I hoisted Adso, who had begun to purr loudly in
anticipation of cockroaches, to my shoulder , and glanced outthe wind ow . The sun had set to a burning glow beyond the
chestnut trees, and I could hear the noise of women and
children in the kitchen; Mrs. Bug was starting to lay the
supper , helped by Brianna and Marsali.
“Dinner soon,” I said, and bent to kiss the top of Jamie’ s
head, w here the last of the light touched his crown with fire.
He smiled and touched his fingers to his lips and then to me,
but h e had alrea dy gone back to a perusal of the close-written
pages by  the time I reached the door . The single sheet with its
three bla ck words lay at the edge of the desk, for gotten—for
the moment.97
CONDITIONS OF THE BLOOD
I  CA UGHT A F LASH OF BROWN outside the door , and
Adso shot of f t he counter as though someone had shouted
“Fish!” The next best thing, ev idently; it was Lizzie, on her
way bac k from the dairy shed, a  bowl of clotted cream in one
hand, a butter di sh in the other , and a lar ge jug of milk pressed
to he r bosom, pr ecariously held in place by her crossed wrists.
Adso w as twining round her ankles like a furry rope, in
obvious hopes of tripping her up and making her drop the
booty .
“Think a gain, cat,” I told him, reaching to rescue the milk
jug.
“Oh, thank ye, ma’am.” Lizzie relaxed, easing her shoulders
with a little sigh . “It’ s only as I didna want to be making two
trips.” She snif fed and tried to wipe her nose with a forearm,
imperiling the butter .
I snatch ed a handkerchief from my pocket and applied it,
repressing the maternal impulse to say , “Now , blow .”
“Thank ye, ma’am,” she repeated, bobbing.
“Are you quite well, Lizzie?” W ithout waiting for an
answer , I took h er by the arm and towed her into my sur gery ,
where the lar ge windows gave me light enough to see by .
“I’m well enough, ma’am. T ruly , I’m fine!” she protested,
clutching the cream and butter to her as though for protection.
She was pale—but Lizzie was always pale, looking as
though she had not a corpuscle  to spare. There was an odd
pallid lo ok to her skin, though, that gave me an uneasy feeling.
It had been nearly a year since her last attack of malarial fever ,
and she did seem generally well, but …“Come here,” I said, drawing her toward a pair of high
stools. “Have a seat, just for a moment.”
Clearly unwilling, but not daring to protest, she sat down,
balancing the dishes on her knee s. I took them from her and—
after a glance at Adso’ s unblinkingly predatory green gaze—
put them in the cupboard for safekeeping.
Pulse normal—normal for Lizzie, that is; she tended always
to be a trifle fast and shallow . Breathing … all right, no catch
or wheezing. The lymph glands  under the jaw were palpable,
but tha t was not unusual; the malaria had left them
permanently enlar ged, like the curve of a quail’ s egg under the
tender sk in. Those in the neck were enlar ged now , too, though
—and those I generally could not  feel.
I thu mbed an ey elid up, peering closely at the pale gray orb
that looked anxiously back. Superficially fine, though slightly
bloodshot. Agai n, though—ther e was something not quite …
right …  about her eyes, though I couldn’ t put my finger on
what tha t something might be. C ould there possibly be a tinge
of yellow to the white? I frowned, turning her head to the side
with a hand under her unresisting chin.
“Hullo, there. Everything all right?” Roger paused in the
doorway , a very lar ge, very dead  bird held nonchalantly in one
hand.
“A turkey!” I exclaimed, summoning a warm note of
admiration. I liked turkeys, all right, but Jamie and Bree had
killed fiv e of the enormous birds the week before, introducing
a certain  note of monotony into dinner of late. Three of the
things w ere hanging in the smo king shed at the moment. On
the o ther hand, w ild turkeys were wily and dif ficult to kill, and
so far as I knew , Roger had never managed to bag one before.
“Did you shoot it yourself?” I asked, coming dutifully to
admire t he thing . He held it by the feet, and the big cupped
wings f lapped halfway open, the breast-feathers catching
sunlight in iridescent patterns of blackish green.“No.” Roger ’ s face was flushed, from sun, excitement or
both, a warm h ue spreading under the tanned skin. “I ran it
down,” he said proudly . “Hit it in the wing with a stone, then
chased it and broke its neck.”
“W onderful,” I said, with somewhat more genuine
enthusiasm. W e wouldn’ t have  to pick buckshot out of the
flesh while cleaning it, or risk breaking a tooth in the eating.
“It’ s a lovely bird, Mr . Mac.” L izzie had slid of f her stool
and come to adm ire it, too. “Such a fat one as it is! W ill I take
it and clean it for ye, then?”
“What? Oh, thanks, Lizzie, no— I’ll, um, take care of it.”
The color rose a little higher under his skin, and I suppressed a
smile. H e meant  he wanted to show of f his catch to Brianna, in
all its glory . He shifted the bird to his left hand, and held out
the right to me, wrapped in a bloodstained cloth.
“I ha d a  bit of a n accident, wrestling the bird. Do you think
perhaps … ?”
I unwra pped the cloth, pursing my lips at what lay
underneath. The turkey , fighting  for its life, had ripped three
jagged gashes across the back o f his hand with its claws. The
blood had mostly clotted, but fresh drops welled up from the
deepest puncture, rolling down his finger to drip on the floor .
“Oh, just a bit,” I said, glancing up at him with eyebrows
raised. “ Y es, I do think perhaps. Come over here and sit down.
I’ll clean it, and—Lizzie! W ait a moment!”
Lizzie, seizing the distraction as an opportunity to escape,
was sidling toward the door . She  stopped as though shot in the
back.
“Really , ma’am, I’m quite all right,” she pleaded.
“Nothing’ s wrong, really there isn’ t.”
In fact, I had stopped her only to remind her to retrieve the
butter a nd cream from the cup board. T oo late for the milk;
Adso stood on his hind legs, head and shoulders stuck
completely into the mouth of th e jug, from which came small
lapping noises. The sound of it echoed the small splat ofRoger ’ s blood dripping on the floor , though, and gave me a
sudden thought.
“I’ve had an idea,” I said. “Sit down again, Lizzie—I want
just a tiny bit of your blood.”
Lizzie lo oked li ke a field mous e that has suddenly looked
up from its crumb to discover itself in the midst of a meeting
of barn owls, but she wasn’ t the sort to defy an order from
anyone. V ery reluctantly , she climbed back onto the stool
beside Roger , who had laid his turkey on the floor beside him.
“Why do you want blood?” he asked, interested. “Y ou can
have all ye wan t of mine, for free.” Grinning, he lifted the
injured hand.
“A generous of fer ,” I said, laying out a linen cloth and a
handful of clean glass rectangles. “But you haven’ t had
malaria, have you?” I plucked Adso out of the milk jug by the
scruf f of the neck and dropped him on the floor , before
reaching into the cupboard above.
“Not so far a s I know .” Roger was watching my
preparations, deeply interested.
Lizzie gave a small, forlorn sound of mirth.
“Y e’d ken it well enough if ye had, sir .”
“I suppose I wou ld.” He gave he r a look of sympathy . “V ery
nasty , from all I hear .”
“It i s that. Y our  bones ache so ye think they’ve all broken
inside ye, and yo ur eyes flame like a demon’ s. Then the sweat
pours of f your skin in rivers, a nd the chills come on, fit to
crack yo ur teeth with the chatterin’ …” She hunched into
herself, shudder ing at the memory . “I did think it was gone,
though,” she said, glancing u neasily at the lancet I was
sterilizing in the flame of my alcohol lamp.
“I hope it is,” I said, frowning at the tiny blade. I picked up
a small cloth an d the blue glas s bottle that held my distilled
alcohol, and thoroughly cleaned  the tip of her middle finger .
“Some p eople never have another attack after the first, and Ido hope  you’re one of them, Lizzie. But for most people, it
does com e back  now and then. I’m trying to find out whether
yours might be coming back. Ready?”
W ithout waiting  for her nod, I jabbed the lancet swiftly
through the skin, then set it down and snatched up a glass
slide. I squeezed the fingertip, dotting generous blood drops on
each of three sl ides, then wrapped the cloth round her finger
and let go.
W orking swiftly , I took up a clean slide and laid it over a
blood-drop, then drew it quickly away , smearing the blood
thinly across the original slide. Again, and a third, and I laid
them down to dry .
“That’ s all, then, Lizzie,” I told her with a smile. “It will
take a bit of preparation before these are ready to look at.
When they are, I’ll call you, shall I?”
“Oh … no, that’ s quite all right, ma’am,” she murmured,
sliding of f the high stool with  a fearful look at the blood-
smeared slides.  “I dinna need to see.” She set down the
discarded cloth, brushed at her apron, and scampered out of
the room—for getting the butter and cream, after all.
“Sorry t o keep you waiting,” I apologized to Roger . “I just
thought …” I re ached into the cupboard, withdrew three small
earthenware pots, and uncorked them.
“Not a problem,” he assured me. He watched with
fascination as I checked each sl ide to be sure the blood-smear
was dry , then slid a bit of glass into each of the pots.
“All righ t, then.” Now I could turn my attention to cleaning
and dre ssing his hand—a straightforward-enough process.
“Not so bad as I thought,” I murmured, wiping caked blood of f
his knuckles. “It bled quite a bit, which is good.”
“A ye, if you say  so.” He didn’ t flinch at all, but carefully
kept his face turned away from what I was doing, his attention
focused out the window .
“W ashes out the wounds,” I  explained, dabbing with
alcohol. “I needn’ t swab so deeply to clean them.”He drew  in his breath with a sharp hiss, then, to distract
himself, nodded at the pots where the slides were soaking.
“Speaking of blood, what are you doing with Mistress
Mousie’ s?”
“T rying something. I don’ t know whether it will work or
not, but I’ve made up some experimental stains, using extracts
from some of th e dyeing-plants.  If any of them work on blood,
I’ll b e able to see the red cells clearly under the microscope—
and what’ s in them.” I spoke with a mixture of hope and
tentative excitement.
T rying t o duplicate cellular stains with the materials I had at
hand wa s a long shot—but no t totally unfeasible. I had the
ordinary solvents—alcohol, water , turpentine and its distillates
—and I had a gr eat range of pla nt pigments to try , from indigo
to rosehips, along with a good working knowledge of their
dyeing properties.
I ha dn’ t any cry stal violet or carbofuchsin, but I had been
able to produce a reddish stain that made epithelial cells highly
visible, if only t emporarily . It remained to be seen whether the
same stain would work on red blood cells and their inclusions,
or whether I should need to try dif ferential staining.
“What is  in them?” Roger turned to look at me, interested.
“Plasmodium vivax,”  I said. “The protozoan that causes
malaria.”
“Y ou can see  i t? I th ought germs were muc h too small to
see, even under a microscope!”
“Y ou’re as bad as Jamie,” I sa id tolerantly . “Though I do
love to hear a Scotsman say ‘gerrrms.’ Such a sinister word,
spoken in a deep voice with that rolling ‘r ,’ you know .”
Roger laughed. The hanging had destroyed much of the
power of his voice, but the lower , harsher registers remained.
“Nearly as good as murrrrderr ,” he said, rumbling like a
cement mixer .“Oh, nothing’ s as good as ‘mur rrderr ’ to a Scot,” I assured
him. “Bloody-minded blokes that you all are.”
“What, all of us?” He grinned, plainly not minding this
gross generalization in the least.
“T o a man,” I assured him. “M ild enough to look at, but
insult a Scot or trouble his fami ly , and it’ s up wi’ the bonnets
of b onnie Dundee. All the blue  bonnets are over the border ,
and next thing you know , it’ s lances and swords all over the
Haughs of Cromdale.”
“Remarkable,” he murmured, ey eing me. “And you’ve been
married to one for …”
“Quite long enough.” I finished my sponging and rinsing
and blot ted the back of his hand, small red patches soaking
into the fresh gauze. “Speaking of bloody men,” I added
casually , “do you happen to know your own blood type?”
One dark brow w ent up at that. W ell, I didn’ t mean to slip it
by him, after all; I’d only wanted a way to broach the question.
“Y es,” he said slowly , “I do. It’ s O-positive.”
The dark green eyes were fi xed on mine, steady with
interest.
“V ery interesting ,” I said. I replaced the gauze square with a
fresh one, and started winding a bandage around it.
“Just how  i nte resting is it? ” he asked. I glanced at him, and
met his eyes.
“Moderately .” I drew out the slides, dripping pink and blue
dyes. On e slide I propped against the milk jug to dry , the other
two I exchanged, putting the pin k slide into the blue stain, and
vice-versa.
“There a re three  main blood gro ups,” I said, blowing gently
on the propped- up slide. “More really , but those three are the
ones everyone knows about. It’ s  called the ABO grouping, and
everyone is said to have type A, type B, or type O blood. The
thing is,  like all your other trai ts, it’ s determined genetically ,
and—human be ings being heterosexual, generally speaking—you have one half your genes for any trait from one parent, the
other half from the other .”
“I dimly recall that bit from school,” Roger said dryly . “All
those bloody charts—excuse me—about hemophilia in the
Royal F amily , an d the like. I assume it has a certain amount of
personal significance now , though?”
“I don’ t  know ,” I said. “It might have.” The pink slide
looked dry; I laid it gently on the stage of the microscope and
bent to adjust the mirror .
“The thi ng is,” I said, squinting  through the eyepiece as I
twiddled the focusing knob, “those blood groups are to do with
antibodies—little odd-shaped things on the surfaces of blood
cells. Th at is, people who are ty pe A have one sort of antibody
on their cells, p eople with type B have a dif ferent sort, and
people with type O don’ t have any at all.”
The red blood cells showed up suddenly , faintly stained, like
round pink ghosts. Here and t here a blotch of darker pink
indicated what might be a bit of  cellular debris, or perhaps one
of the lar ger white blood cells. Not much else, though.
“So,” I went on,  lifting the other two slides from their baths,
“if o ne of his parents gave a ch ild the gene for type O blood,
and the other gave him one for type A, the child’ s blood will
show up  as type A, because it’ s the antibodies that are tested
for . The child does still have  the gene for type O, though.”
I waved one of the slides gently in the air , drying it.
“My blood type is A. Now , I happen to know that my
father ’ s blood was type O. In o rder to show up with type O
blood, that means that both his genes must have been for O. So
whichever of those genes he gave me, it has to have been for
O. The A gene therefore came from my mother .”
Seeing a  familiar glaze come ov er his features, I sighed and
set the slide down. Bree ha d been drawing pictures of
penicillin spores for me, and h ad left her pad and graphite
pencil by the microscope. I took it and flipped to a fresh page.
“Look,” I said, and drew a quick chart. 
 
“Do you see?” I  pointed with th e stick of graphite. “I don’ t
know my mother ’ s type for sure , but it doesn’ t matter; for me
to have type A b lood, she must have given me her gene for it,
because my father hadn’ t one.”
The next slide was nearly dry; I laid down the pencil, put
the slide in place, and bent to look through the eyepiece.
“Can you see blood types—these antibodies—through a
microscope?” Roger was quite close behind me.
“No,” I said, not looking up. “The resolution’ s nowhere near
good en ough. But you can see other things—I hope.” I moved
the knob a fraction of an inch, and the cells sprang into focus. I
let out the breath I had been holding, and a small thrill went
through me. There they were; th e disc-shaped pinkish blobs of
the red blood c ells—and here and there, inside a few of the
cells, a darkish blob, some rounded, some looking like
miniature nine-pins. My heart thumped with excitement, and I
made a small exclamation of delight.
“Come look,” I said, and stood  aside. Roger bent, looking
quizzical.
“What am I looking at?” he asked, squinting.
“Plasmodium vivax,”  I sa id proudly . “Malaria. The small
dark blo bs inside the cells.” The rounded blobs were the
protozoans, the single-celled cre atures transferred to the blood
in a mosquito’ s bite. The few th at looked like bowling pins—
those w ere protozoa in the act  of budding, getting ready to
reproduce themselves.
“When they bud,” I explained, bending for another look
myself, “they multiply until they  burst the blood cell, and then
they move into new blood cells , multiply , and burst those, too—that’ s when the patient suf fe rs a malarial attack, with the
fever and chills. When the Plasmodium  are dormant—not
multiplying—the patient is all right.”
“And what makes them multiply?” Roger was fascinated.
“No one  knows, exactly .” I drew  a deep breath, and corked
up m y b ottles of  stain again. “Bu t you can check, to see what’ s
happening, if they ar e  mu ltiplying. No one can live on
quinine, or even take it for a lo ng period—Jesuit bark is too
expensive, and I don’ t know wh at the long-term ef fects on the
body might be. And you can’ t  touch most protozoans with
penicillin, unfortunately .
“But I’l l check Lizzie’ s blood e very few days; if I see the
Plasmodium  increasing sharply , then I’ll start giving her the
quinine at once. W ith luck, that might prevent an outbreak.
W orth a try , certainly .”
He nodded, looking at the microscope and the pink-and-
blue-splotched slide.
“W ell worth it,” he said quietly .
He w atched me move about, tid ying up the small debris of
my operations. As I bent to retrieve the bloody cloth in which
he’d wrapped his hand, he as ked, “And you know Bree’ s
blood type, of course?”
“T ype B,” I said , eyes on the box of bandages. “Quite rare,
particularly for a white person. Y ou see it mostly in small,
rather isolated populations—some Indian tribes in the
American South west, certain black populations; probably they
came from a specific area of Africa, but of course by the time
blood groups were discovered, that connection had been long
lost.”
“Small, isolated populations. Scottish Highlanders,
perhaps?”
I lifted my eyes.
“Perhaps.”He nodded silently , clearly thinking to himself. Then he
picked u p the pencil, and slowly drew a small chart of his own
on the pad.
 
 
“That’ s right,” I said, nodding as he looked up at me in
question. “Exactly right.”
He gave  me a small, wry smile in response, then dropped
his eyes, studying the charts.
“Can yo u tell, then?” he asked finally , not looking up. “For
sure?”
“No,” I said, an d dropped the c loth into the laundry basket
with a small sig h. “Or rather—I can’ t tell for sure whether
Jemmy is yours. I might  be able to tell for sure if he’ s not.”
The flush had faded from his skin.
“How’ s that?”
“Bree is  type B, but I’m type A. That means she’ll have a
gene for  B and  my gen e for O, either of which she might have
given Jemmy . Y ou could only h ave given him a gene for type
O, because that’ s all you have.”
I no dded at a small rack of tubes near the window , the
serum in them glowing brownish-gold in the late afternoon
sun.
“So. If Bree gave him an O gene, and you—his father—
gave him  an O g ene, he’d show up as type O—his blood won’ t
have any antibodies, and won ’ t react with serum from my
blood or from Jamie’ s or Bree’ s. If Bree gave him her B gene,
and you gave him an O, he’d show up as type B—his blood
would re act with  my serum, but  not Bree’ s. In either case, youmight be the father—but so mig ht anyone with type-O blood.
IF , however—”
I took a deep breath, and picked up the pencil from the spot
where Roger had laid it down. I drew slowly as I talked,
illustrating the possibilities.
 
 
“But” —I tapped the pencil on the paper—”if Jemmy were
to show as type A or type AB—then his father was not
homozygous for  type O—homozygous means both genes are
the same—and you are.” I wrote in the alternatives, to the left
of my previous entry .
 
 
I saw Roger ’ s eyes flick toward that “X,” and wondered
what ha d made me write it tha t way . It wasn’ t as though the
contender for Jemmy’ s paternity could be just anyone, after
all. Still , I could not bring myself to write “Bonnet”—perhaps
it was simple superstition; perhaps just a desire to keep the
thought of the man at a safe distance.
“Bear in mind,” I said, a little ap ologetically , “that type O is
very common, in the population at lar ge.”
Roger g runted, and sat regarding the chart, eyes hooded in
thought.“So,” he said at last. “If he’ s ty pe O or type B, he may be
mine, bu t not for sure. If he’ s typ e A or type AB, he’ s not mine
—for sure.”
One fin ger rubbed slowly back and forth over the fresh
bandage on his hand.
“It’ s a very cru de test,” I said, swallowing. “I can’ t—I
mean, there’ s always the possi bility of a mistake in the test
itself.”
He nodded, not looking up.
“Y ou told Bree this?” he asked softly .
“Of cou rse. She said she doesn’ t want to know—but that if
you did, I was to make the test.”
I saw  him swallo w , once, and his hand lifted momentarily to
the scar across h is throat. His ey es were fixed on the scrubbed
planks of the floor , hardly blinking.
I turned away , to give him a moment’ s privacy , and bent
over the microscope. I would ha ve to make a grid, I thought—
a co unting grid that I could la y across a slide, to help me
estimate the relative density of the Plasmodium -infected cells.
For the moment , though, a crud e eyeball count would have to
do.
It occur red to me that now tha t I had a workable stain, I
ought to test the  blood of others on the Ridge—those in the
household, for starters. Mosquitoes were much rarer in the
mountains than near the coast, but there were still plenty , and
while Lizzie might be well he rself, she was still a sink of
potential infection.
“… four , five, six …” I was counting infected cells under
my brea th, tryin g to ignore both  Roger on his stool behind me,
and the sudden m emory that had popped up, unbidden, when I
told him Brianna’ s blood type.
She had  had her tonsils removed at the age of seven. I still
recalled the sight of the doctor , frowning at the chart he held—
the chart that l isted her blood type, and those of both herparents. Frank had been type A, like me. And two type-A
parents could not, under any cir cumstances, produce a type B
child.
The doctor had looked up, glan cing from me to Frank and
back, his face twisted with embarrassment—and his eyes filled
with a kind of cold speculation as he looked at me. I might as
well have worn a scarlet “A” embroidered on my bosom, I
thought—or in this case, a scarlet “B.”
Frank, bless him, had seen the  look, and said easily , “My
wife was a widow; I adopted Bree as a baby .” The doctor ’ s
face had thawed at once into apologetic reassurance, and
Frank ha d gripped my hand, hard, behind the folds of my skirt.
My ha nd tightened in remembered acknowledgment,
squeezing back —and the slide tilted suddenly , leaving me
staring into blank and blurry glass.
There was a sou nd behind me, as Roger stood up. I turned
round, and he smiled at me, eyes dark and soft as moss.
“The blood doesn’ t matter ,” he said quietly . “He’ s my son.”
“Y es,” I said, and my own throat felt tight. “I know .”
A loud crack broke the mome ntary silence, and I looked
down, startled. A puf f of turkey -feathers drifted past my foot,
and Adso, discovered in the act, rushed out of the sur gery , the
huge fan of a severed wing-joint clutched in his mouth.
“Y ou bloody  cat!” I said.98
CLEVER LAD
A  COLD WIND BLEW from th e east tonight; Roger could
hear the steady w hine of it past the mud-chinked wall near his
head, and the lash and creak of the wind-tossed trees beyond
the h ouse. A sud den gust struck the oiled hide tacked over the
window; it bellied in with a crack!  a nd popped loo se at one
side, the whooshing draft sending papers scudding of f the
table and bending the candle flame sideways at an alarming
angle.
Roger m oved the candle hastily out of harm’ s way , and
pressed the hide flat with the palm of his hand, glancing over
his s houlder to s ee if his wife and son had been awakened by
the n oise. A kit chen-rag stirred on its nail by the hearth, and
the skin of his bodhran thrummed faintly as the draft passed
by . A sudden tongue of fire spra ng up from the banked hearth,
and he saw Brianna stir as the cold air brushed her cheek.
She mer ely snu ggled deeper into the quilts, though, a few
loose re d hairs glimmering as they lifted in the draft. The
trundle where Jemmy now slept  was sheltered by the big bed;
there was no sound from that corner of the room.
Roger let out the breath he had been holding, and rummaged
briefly in the ho rn dish that held bits of useful rubbish, coming
up with a spare tack. He hamm ered it home with the heel of
his h and, muf fling the draft to a  small, cold seep, then bent to
retrieve his fallen papers.
 
“O will ye let T elfer ’ s kye gae back?
Or will ye do aught for r egar d o’ me?”
 He r epeated the words in his mind as he wiped the half-
dried in k from  his quill, he aring the words in Kimmie
Clellan’ s cracked old voice.
It w as a song called “Jamie T elfer of the Fair Dodhead”—
one of the ancie nt reiving ballads that went on for dozens of
verses, and had dozens of region al variations, all involving the
attempts of T elfer , a Borderer , to revenge an attack upon his
home by calling upon the help o f friends and kin. Roger knew
three of the var iations, but Clellan had had another—with a
completely new subplot involving T elfer ’ s cousin W illie.
 
“Or by the faith of my body , quo’ W illie Scott.
I’ se war e my dame’ s calfskin on thee!”
 
Kimmie sang to pass the time o f an evening by himself, he
had told Roger , or to entertain t he hosts whose fire he shared.
He r emembered  all the songs of his Scottish youth, and was
pleased to sing t hem as many ti mes as anyone cared to listen,
so long as his throat was kept wet enough to float a tune.
The rest of the company at the big house had enjoyed two or
three renditions of Clellan’ s repertoire, began to yawn and
blink thr ough the fourth, and finally had mumbled excuses and
staggered glazen-eyed of f to bed— en masse —leaving Roger
to pl y th e old man with more w hisky and ur ge him to another
repetition, until the words were safely committed to memory .
Memory was a chancy thing, though, subject to random
losses and unconscious conjectures that took the place of fact.
Much safer to commit important things to paper .
 
“I winna let the kye gae back,
Neither for thy love, nor yet thy fear …”
 The quill scratched gently , captu ring the words one by one,
pinned like fireflies to the page . It was very late, and Roger ’ s
muscles were cramped with chi ll and long sitting, but he was
determined to get all the new verses down, while they were
fresh in his mind. Clellan might go of f in the morning to be
eaten by a bear or killed by falling rocks, but T elfer ’ s cousin
W illie would live on.
 
“But I will drive Jamie T elfer ’ s kye,
In spite of every Scot that’ s …”
 
The candle made a brief sputteri ng noise as the flame struck
a fault in the wick. The light that fell across the paper shook
and wavered, and the letters fad ed abruptly into shadow as the
candle flame shrank from a finger of light to a glowing blue
dwarf, like the sudden death of a miniature sun.
Roger dropped his quill, and seized the pottery candlestick
with a muf fled curse. He blew on the wick, puf fing gently , in
hopes of reviving the flame.
“But W illie was stricken owr e the head,”  h e murmured to
himself, repeating the words between puf fs, to keep them
fresh.  “ But W illie was  stricken owr e the head/And thr ough the
knapscap the swor d has gane/And Har den grat for very
rage/When W illie on the grund l ay slain … When W illie on the
grund lay slain …”
A ragged corona of orange ro se briefly , feeding on his
breath, but then dwindled stea dily away despite continued
puf fing, winking out into a dot of incandescent red that glowed
mockingly for a second or two before disappearing altogether ,
leaving no more than a wisp of white smoke in the half-dark
room, and the scent of hot beeswax in his nose.
He repeated the curse, somewhat louder . Brianna stirred in
the b ed, and he heard the corn s hucks squeak as she lifted her
head with a noise of groggy inquiry .“It’ s all right,” he said in a hoarse whisper , with an uneasy
glance a t the trundle in the corn er . “The candle’ s gone out. Go
back to sleep.”
But W illie was stricken owr e the head …
“Ngm.” A plop and sigh, as her head struck the goose-down
pillow again.
Like clo ckwork, Jemmy’ s head rose from his own nest of
blankets, his nimbus of fiery fluf f silhouetted against the
hearth’ s dull glow . He made a s ound of confused ur gency , not
quite a cry , and before Roger could stir , Brianna had shot out
of bed like a guided missile, snatching the boy from his quilt
and fumbling one-handed with his clothing.
“Pot!” she snapped at Roger , poking blindly backward with
one bare  foot as she grappled with Jemmy’ s clothes. “Find the
chamber pot! Just a minute, swe etie,” she cooed to Jemmy , in
an abrupt change of tone. “W ait juuuuust a minute, now …”
Impelled to instant obedience by her tone of ur gency , Roger
dropped to his k nees, sweeping an arm in search through the
black hole under the bed.
W illie was stricken owr e the h ead … And thr ough the …
kneecap? nobskull?  Overwhelmed by the situation, some
remote bastion of memory clung stubbornly to the song,
singing in his in ner ear . Only th e melody , though—the words
were fading fast.
“Here!” He found the earthenware pot, accidentally struck
the leg of the be d with it—thank Christ, it didn’ t break!—and
bowled it across the floor to Bree.
She clapped the now-naked Jemmy down onto it with an
exclamation of satisfaction, and Roger was left to grope about
in th e semi-dark for his fallen  candle while she murmured
encouragements.
“OK, sweetie, yes, that’ s right …”
W illie was struck about … no, stricken …He found the candle, luckily uncracked, and sidled carefully
round the drama in progress to  kneel and relight the charred
wick from the embers of the fire. While he was at it, he poked
up the embers and added a f resh stick of wood. The fire
revived, illumin ating Jemmy , who was making what looked
like a very succe ssful ef fort to go back to sleep, in spite of his
position and his mother ’ s ur ging.
“Don’ t y ou need to go potty?” she was saying, shaking his
shoulder gently .
“Go potty?” Roger said, this curious locution pushing the
remnants of the verse from his mind. “What do you mean, go
potty?” It was his personal opinion, based on current
experience as a father , that small children were born  potty , and
improved very slowly thereafter . He said as much, causing
Brianna to give him a remarkably dirty look.
“What?”  s he said, in an  edgy tone. “W hat do you mean,
they’re b orn potty?” She had one hand on Jemmy’ s shoulder ,
balancing him, while the other c upped his round little belly , an
index finger disappearing into th e shadows below to direct his
aim.
“Potty ,” Roger explained, with a brief circular gesture at his
temple in illustration. “Y ou know , barmy . Daft.”
She opened her mouth to say so mething in reply to this, but
Jemmy swayed alarmingly , his head sagging forward.
“No, no!” she s aid, taking a fresh grip. “W ake up, honey!
W ake up and go potty!”
The insidious term had somehow taken up residence in
Roger ’ s mind, and was merrily r eplacing half the fading words
of the verse he had been trying to recapture.
W illie sat upon his pot/The swor d to potty gane …
He s hook his he ad, as though to  dislodge it, but it was too
late—the real words had fled. Resigned, he gave it up as a bad
job and crouched down next to Brianna to help.“W ake up, chum. There’ s wor k to be done.” He drew a
finger gently under Jemmy’ s chin, then blew in his ear ,
ruf fling the silky red tendrils th at clung to the child’ s temple,
still damp with sleep-sweat.
Jemmy’ s eyelids cracked in a slit-eyed glower . He looked
like a small pink  mole, cruelly e xcavated from its cozy burrow
and peering balefully at an inhospitable upper world.
Brianna yawned widely , and shook her head, blinking and
scowling in the candlelight.
“W ell, if you don’ t like ‘go potty ,’ what do you say in
Scotland, then?” she demanded crabbily .
Roger moved the tickling finger to Jem’ s navel.
“Ah … I seem to recall a frien d asking his wee son if he
needed to do a poo,” he of fered. Brianna made a rude noise,
but Jemmy’ s eyelids flickered.
“Poo,” he said dreamily , liking the sound.
“Right, that’ s the idea,” Roger said encouragingly . His
finger twiddled gently in the slight depression, and Jemmy
gave the ghost of a giggle, beginning to wake up.
“Pooooooo,” he said. “Poopoo.”
“Whatever works,” Brianna sai d, still cross, but resigned.
“Go potty , go poo—just get it over with, all right? Mummy
wants to go to sleep.”
“Perhaps you should take yo ur finger of f of his …
mmphm?” Roger nodded tow ard the object in question.
“Y ou’ll give the poor lad a complex or something.”
“Fine.” Bree took her hand a way with alacrity , and the
stubby o bject sp rang back up, p ointing directly at Roger over
the rim of the pot.
“Hey! N ow , just  a min—”he beg an, and got his hand up as a
shield just in time.
“Poo,” Jemmy said, beaming in drowsy pleasure.“Shit!”
“Chit!” Jemmy echoed obligingly .
“W ell, t hat’ s no t quite—would you stop laughing?” Roger
said testily , wiping his hand gingerly on a kitchen rag.
Brianna snorted and gur gled, shaking her head so the
straggling locks of hair that had escaped her plait fell down
around her face.
“ Good  boy , Jemmy!” she managed.
Thus encouraged , Jemmy took on an air of inner absorption,
scrunched his chin down into his chest, and without further
ado, proceeded to Act T wo of the evening’ s drama.
“Clever lad!” Roger said sincerely .
Brianna glanced at him, momentary surprise interrupting
her own applause.
He was surprise d himself. He had spoken by reflex, and
hearing the words, just for a mom ent, his voice hadn’ t sounded
like his own. V ery familiar—b ut not his own. It was like
writing the words of Clellan’ s song, hearing the old man’ s
voice, even as his own lips formed the words.
“A ye, that’ s clever ,” he said, m ore softly , and patted the
little boy gently on his silky head.
He took  the pot outside to empty it while Brianna put
Jemmy back to bed with kisses and murmurs of admiration.
Basic sanitation accomplished, he went to the well to wash his
hands before coming back inside to bed.
“Are yo u throug h working?” Bree asked drowsily , as he slid
into bed beside her . She rolled over and thrust her bottom
unceremoniously into his stomach, which he took as a gesture
of af fect ion, given the fact that  she was about thirty degrees
warmer than he was after the sortie outside.
“A ye, fo r tonigh t.” He put his arms round her and kissed the
back of her ear , the warmth of her body a comfort and delight.
She took his chilly hand in hers without comment, folded it,and tuck ed it snugly beneath her chin, with a small kiss on the
knuckle. He stretched slightly , then relaxed, letting his muscles
go slack and f eeling the tiny movements as their bodies
adjusted, shaping to each other . A faint buzzing snore rose
from th e trund le, where Jemmy slept the sleep of the
righteously dry .
Brianna had freshly smoored the fire; it burned with a low ,
even he at and the sweet scent of hickory , making small
occasional pops as the buried flame reached a pocket of resin
or a spot of damp. W armth crept over him, and sleep tiptoed in
its wake , drawing a blanket of drowsiness up round his ears,
unlocking the tidy cupboards o f his mind, and letting all the
thoughts and impressions of t he day spill out in brightly
colored heaps.
Resisting unconsciousness for a last few moments, he poked
desultorily among the scattered riches thus revealed, in the
faint hope of finding a corner of the T elfer song poking out;
some sc rap of word or music tha t would allow him to seize the
vanished verses  and drag th em back into the light of
consciousness. It wasn’ t the story of the ill-fated W illie that
emer ged from the rubble, though, but rather a voice. Not his
own, and not that of old Kimmie Clellan, either .
Clever lad!  it said, in a clear warm contralto, tinged with
laughter . Roger jerked.
“Whaju say?” Brianna mum bled, disturbed by the
movement.
“Go on— be cle ver ,” he said sl owly , echoing the words as
they formed in his memory . “That’ s what she said.”
“Who?” Brianna turned her head, with a rustle of hair on the
pillow .
“My mother .” He put his free hand round her waist,
resettling them both. “Y ou asked what they said in Scotland.
I’d f or gotten, but that’ s what she used to say to me. ‘Go on—
be clever!’ or ‘Do ye need to be clever?’ ”
Bree gave a small grunt of sleepy amusement.“W ell, it’ s better than poo,” she said.
They lay  quiet for a bit. Then she said, still speaking softly ,
but with all tra ces of sleep go ne from her voice, “Y ou talk
about y our dad now and then—but I’ve never heard you
mention your mother before.”
He gave a one-shouldered shrug, bringing his knees up
against the yielding backs of her thighs.
“I don’ t remember a lot about her .”
“How old were you when she died?” Brianna’ s hand floated
up to rest over his.
“Oh, four , I think, nearly five.”
“Mmm.” She made a small sound of sympathy , and
squeezed his hand. She was q uiet for a moment, alone in
private t hought, but he heard he r swallow audibly , and felt the
slight tension in her shoulders.
“What?”
“Oh … nothing.”
“A ye?” He disengaged his hand, used it to lift the heavy
plait aside, and gently massage d the nape of her neck. She
turned her head away to make it easier , burying her face in the
pillow .
“Just—I was just thinking—if I died now , Jemmy’ s so
young—he wouldn’ t remember me at all,” she whispered,
words half-muf fled.
“Y es, he would.” He spoke in automatic contradiction,
wanting to give her reassurance, even knowing that she was
likely right.
“Y ou do n’ t rem ember , and you were lots older when you
lost your mother .”
“Oh … I do remember her ,” he said slowly , digging the ball
of his thumb into the place where her neck joined her shoulder .
“Only , it’ s just in bits and pieces. Sometimes, when I’m
dreaming, or thinking of something else, I get a quick glimpseof h er , or some echo of her voic e. A few things I recall clearly
—like th e locket she used to wear round her neck, with her
initials on it in wee red stones. Garnets, they were.”
That locket had perhaps saved his life, during his first ill-
fated att empt to  pass through th e stones. He felt the loss of it
now and  then, like a small thorn buried beneath the surface of
the s kin, but pus hed the feeling aside, telling himself that after
all, it was nothing more than a bit of metal.
At the same time, he missed it.
“That’ s a thing , Roger .” Her voice held a hint of sharpness.
“Do you remember her ? I mean—what would Jemmy know
about me—about you, for that m atter—if all he had left of us
was”—she cast about for some suitable object—”was your
bodhran and my pocket knife?”
“He’d k now his dad was musical, and his mum was
bloodthirsty ,” Roger said dryly .  “Ouch!” He recoiled slightly
as h er fist cam e down on his thigh, then set his hands
placatingly on her shoulders. “No, really . He’d know a lot
about us, and not just from the bits and bobs we’d left behind,
though those would help.”
“How?”
“W ell … ” Her shoulders had relaxed again; he could feel
the slender edge of her shoulder blade, hard against the skin—
she was  too thin, he thought. “Y ou studied history for a time,
didn’ t you? Y ou know how mu ch one can tell from homely
objects like dishes and toys.”
“Mmm.” She sounded dubious, but he thought that she
simply wanted to be convinced.
“And Jem would know a lot more than that about you, from
your drawings,” he pointed out. And a hell of a lot mor e than a
son oug ht, if he ever r ead your  dr eam-book,  h e thought. The
sudden impulse to say so, to confess that he himself had read
it, tremb led on his tongue, but he swallowed it. Beyond simple
fear of how she might respond if she discovered his intrusion,was the greater fear that she w ould cease to write in it, and
those small secret glimpses of her mind would be lost to him.
“I guess that’ s tr ue,” she said sl owly . “I wonder if Jem will
draw—or be musical.”
If Stephe n Bonnet plays the flut e,  R oger thought cynically ,
but choked of f that subversive notion, refusing to contemplate
it.
“That’ s how he’ll know the m ost of us,” he said instead,
resuming his gentle kneading. “He’ll look at himself, aye?”
“Mmm?”
“W ell, look at you,” he pointe d out. “Everyone who sees
you says, ‘Y ou m ust be Jamie F raser ’ s lass!’ And the red hair
isn’ t the  only thing—what about the shooting? And the way
you and your mother are about tomatoes …”
She smacked her lips reflexively , and giggled when he
laughed.
“Y eah, all right, I see,” she said . “Mmm. Why did you have
to ment ion tomatoes? I used the last of the dried ones last
week, and it’ll be six months before they’re on again.”
“Sorry ,” he said, and kissed the back of her neck in apology .
“I did wonder ,” he said, a mom ent later . “When you found
out about Jamie—when we began to look for him—you must
have wondered what he was like.” He knew she had; he
certainly had. “When you found him—how did he compare?
W as he at all lik e you thought he’d be, from what you knew
about him already? Or—from what you knew about yourself?”
That made her laugh again, a little wryly .
“I d on’ t know ,” she said. “I didn’ t know then, and I still
don’ t know .”
“What d’ye mean by that?”
“W ell, when you hear things about somebody before you
meet the m, of course the real person isn’ t just like what you
heard, o r what you imagined. B ut you don’ t for get what youimagined, either; that stays in y our mind, and sort of mer ges
with what you fi nd out when you meet them. And then—” She
bent her  head forward, thinking.  “Even if you know somebody
first , and then hear things about them later—that kind of
af fects how you see them, doesn’ t it?”
“A ye? M mm, I suppose so. Do ye mean … your other dad?
Frank?”
“I suppo se I do.” She shifted under his hands, shrugging it
away . She didn’ t want to talk about Frank Randall, not just
now .
“What a bout you r parents, Roger? Do you figure that’ s why
the Reverend saved all their old stuf f in those boxes? So later
you cou ld look through it, learn more about them, and sort of
add that to your real memories of them?”
“I—yes, I suppose so,” he said uncertainly . “Not that I have
any mem ories of my real dad in any case; he only saw me the
once, and I was less than a year old then.”
“But yo u do remember your m other , don’ t you? At least a
little bit?”
She sounded slightly anxious; she wanted him to remember .
He hesit ated, and a thought struck him with a small shock. The
truth of it was, he realized, that  he never consciously tried  to
remember his mother . The reali zation gave him a sudden and
unaccustomed feeling of shame.
“She died in the W ar , didn’ t she?” Bree’ s hand had taken up
his suspended massage, reaching back to gently knead the
tightened muscle of his thigh.
“Y es. She—in the Blitz. A bomb.”
“In Scotland? But I thought—”
“No. In London.”
He d idn’ t want t o speak of it. He never had  spoken of it. On
the rare occasions when mem ory led in that direction, he
veered away . That territory lay  behind a closed door , with a
lar ge “No Entry” sign that he h ad never sought to pass. Andyet tonig ht … he felt the echo of Bree’ s brief anguish at the
thought that her son might not recall her . And he felt the same
echo, like a fain t voice calling, from the woman locked behind
that door in his mind. But was it locked, after all?
W ith a hollow fe eling behind his breastbone that might have
been dread, he reached out and put his hand on the knob of
that closed door . How much did  he recall?
“My Gra n, my mother ’ s mum, was English,” he said slowly .
“A w idow . W e went south to live with her in London, when
my dad was killed.”
He had not thought of Gran, a ny more than his mum, in
years. But with his speaking, he  could smell the rosewater and
glycerine lotion his grandmother had used on her hands, the
faintly musty smell of her ups tairs flat in T ottenham Court
Road, crammed with horsehair furniture too lar ge for it,
remnants of a previous life that had held a house, a husband,
and children.
He took  a deep breath. Bree felt it, and pressed her broad
firm back encouragingly agains t his chest. He kissed the back
of her neck. So the door did  ope n—just a c rack, maybe, but
the light of a wintry London  afternoon shone through it,
lighting up a stack of battered wooden blocks on a threadbare
carpet. A  woman’ s hand was bu ilding a tower with them, the
faint sun scattering rainbows fro m a diamond on her hand. His
own fingers curled in reflex, seeing that slim hand.
“Mum—my mother—she was small, like Gran. That is, they
both seemed big, to me, but I re member … I remember seeing
her stand on her tiptoes to reach things down from the shelf.”
Things. The tea-caddy , with its cut-glass sugar bowl. The
battered kettle, three mismatched mugs. His had had a panda
bear on it. A package of biscuits—bright red, with a picture of
a parrot … My God, he hadn’ t seen those kind ever again—
did they still make them? No, of course not, not now …
He pulled his veering mind firmly back from such
distractions.“I know  what she looked like, but mostly from pictures, not
from my own memories.” And yet he did have  memories, he
realized, with a disturbing sensation in the pit of his stomach.
He thought “Mum,” and sudde nly he didn’ t see the photos
anymore; he saw the chain of her spectacles, a string of tiny
metal beads against the soft curve of a breast, and a pleasant
warm smoothness, smelling of soap against his cheek; the
cotton fabric of a flowered housedress. Blue flowers. Shaped
like trumpets, with curling vines; he could see them clearly .
“What did she look like? Do you look like her at all?”
He shrug ged, and Bree shifted, rolling over to face him, her
head propped upon her outstretched arm. Her eyes shone in the
half-dark, sleepiness overcome by interest.
“A little ,” he said slowly . “Her  hair was dark, like mine.”
Shiny , curly . Lifting in the wind, sprinkled with white grains of
sand. H e’d sprinkled sand on her head, and she brushed it
fr om her hair , laughing. A beach somewher e?
“The Re verend kept some pictures of her , in his study . One
showed her holding me on her lap. I don’ t know what we were
looking at—but both of us look as though we’re trying hard to
keep fro m laughing. W e look a lot alike in that one. I have her
mouth, I think—and … maybe … the shape of her brows.”
For a long time he had felt a tigh tness in his chest whenever
he s aw t he pictu res of his moth er . But then it had passed, the
pictures lost their meaning and became no more than objects
in the casual cl utter of the Re verend’ s house. Now he saw
them clearly once again, and t he tightness in his chest was
back. He cleared his throat hard, hoping to ease it.
“Need w ater?” She made to ris e, reaching for the jug and
cup she kept for  him on the stool by the bed, but he shook his
head, a hand on her shoulder to stop her .
“It’ s all right,” he said, a little g ruf fly , and cleared his throat
again. It  felt as tight and painful as it had in the weeks just past
the hanging, and his hand involuntarily sought the scar ,smoothing the ragged line bene ath his jaw with the tip of a
finger .
“Y ou know ,” he said, seeking at least a momentary
diversion, “you should do a sel f-portrait, next time you go to
see your aunt at River Run.”
“What, me?” She sounded startled, though, he thought—
perhaps a bit pleased at the idea.
“Sure. Y ou could, I know . And then there’d be … well, a
permanent record, I mean.” For Jem  to r emember , in case
anything should happen to you.  The  words float ed above them
in the dark, striking them both momentarily silent. Damn, and
he’d been trying to reassure her .
“I’d like  a portrait of you,” he said softly , and reached out a
finger to  trace the curve of chee k and temple. “So we can look
at it  when we’re  very old, and I can tell ye that you haven’ t
changed a bit.”
She gave a small snort, but turned her head and kissed his
fingers briefly , before rolling onto her back. She stretched,
pointing her toes until her joint s cracked, then relaxed with a
sigh.
“I’ll think about it,” she said.
The room  was quiet, save for th e murmur of the fire and the
gentle c reak of settling timber . The night was cold, but still;
the m orning would be foggy—he had felt the damp gathering
in the ground when he’d gone  outside, breathing from the
trees. But it was  warm and dry within. Brianna sighed again;
he c ould feel he r sinking back toward sleep beside him, could
feel it coming for him, too.
The temptation to give in and let it carry him painlessly
away was great. But while Bria nna’ s fears were eased for the
moment, he still heard that whisper—”He wouldn’ t remember
me a t all.” But it came now from  the other side of the door in
his mind.
Y es, I do, Mum,  he thought, and shoved it open all the way .“I w as w ith her , ” he said softly . He was on his back, staring
up at the pine-b eamed ceiling, the joins of the rafters barely
visible to his dark-adapted eyes.
“What? W ith who?” He could hear the lull of sleep in her
voice, but curiosity roused her briefly .
“W ith my mother . And my grandmother . When … the
bomb.”
He heard her head turn sharpl y toward him, hearing the
strain in his voic e, but he looked  straight upward into the dark
roof-beams, not blinking.
“Do you want to  tell me?” Brianna’ s hand found his, curled
round it , squeez ing. He wasn’ t sure at all that he did, but he
nodded a little, squeezing back.
“A ye. I suppose I must,” he sa id softly . He sighed deeply ,
smelling the lingering scents of fried corn-mush and onions
that hung in the  corners of the cabin. Somewhere in the back
of his nose, the imagined sc ents of hot-air registers and
breakfast porridge, wet woolens, and the petrol fumes of
lorries woke silent guides through the labyrinth of memory .
“It was at night. The air -raid s irens went. I knew what it
was, but  it scared the shit out of me every time. There wasn’ t
time to dress; M um pulled me o ut of bed and put my coat on
over my pajamas, then we rush ed out and down the stairs—
there w ere thirty-six steps, I’d counted them all that day ,
coming home from the shops— and we hurried to the nearest
shelter .”
The nearest shelter for them was  the T ube station across the
street; grubby white tiles and th e flicker of fluorescent lights,
the thrilling rush of air somewhere deep below , like the
breathing of dragons in nearby caves.
“It was exciting. ” He could see the crush of people, hear the
shouting of the wardens over the noise of the crowd.
“Everything was vibrating; the floors, the walls, the air itself.”
Feet thundered on the wooden t reads as streams of refugees
poured into the bowels of the  earth, down one level to aplatform, down another , yet ano ther , burrowing toward safety .
It was panic—but an orderly panic.
“The bombs could go through fifty feet of earth—but the
lower levels were safe.”
They ha d reached the bottom of the first stairway , run
jostling with a mass of others  through a short, white-tiled
tunnel to the head of the next. T here was a wide space at the
head of the stair way , and the crowd pooled in a swirling eddy
into it, swelling with the pressure of refugees pouring from the
tunnel behind, draining only slo wly as a thin stream crowded
onto the stair leading down.
“There w as a wall round the he ad of the stair; I could hear
Gran worrying that I’d be crushed against it—people were
pouring down from the street, pressing from behind.”
He coul d just see over the wall , standing on his toes, chest
pressed against the concrete. Down below , emer gency lights
shone in interrupted streaks along the walls, striping the
milling crowd below . It was la te night; most of the people
were dre ssed in whatever they had been able to seize when the
siren went, and the light glowed on unexpected flashes of bare
flesh and extraordinary garme nts. One woman sported an
extravagant hat, decorated with feathers and fruit, worn atop
an ancient overcoat.
He had been watching the crowd below in fascination,
trying to see if it was really a whole pheasant on the hat. There
was shouting; an air -raid warde n in a white helmet with a big
black “W ,” beckoning madly , trying to hasten the already
rushing crowd toward the far end of the platform, making
room for those coming of f the stair .
“There were children crying, b ut not me. I wasn’ t really
afraid at all.” He hadn’ t been afraid, because Mum was
holding his hand. If she was ther e, nothing bad could happen.
“There was a big  thump nearby . I could see the lights shake.
Then there was a noise like something tearing overhead.
Everyone looked up and began to scream.”The crack through the slant ed ceiling hadn’ t looked
particularly frightening; just a thin black line that zigzagged
back and  forth like a jigsaw snake, following the lines of the
tiles. Bu t then it widened sud denly , a gaping maw like a
dragon’ s mouth, and dirt and tiles began to pour down.
He had long since thawed, and yet every hair on his body
rippled now with gooseflesh. His heart pounded against the
inside of  his chest, and he felt as though the noose had drawn
tight about his neck again.
“She let go,” he said, in a strangled whisper . “She let go my
hand.”
Brianna’ s hand gripped his in both of hers, hard, trying to
save the child he’d been.
“She ha d to,” she said, in an u r gent whisper . “Roger , she
wouldn’ t have let go unless she had to.”
“No.” He shook his head violently . “That’ s not what—I
mean—wait. W ait a minute, OK?”
He blink ed hard , trying to slow  his breathing, fitting back
the s hattered pieces of that nig ht. Confusion, frenzy , pain …
but what had actually happened ? He had kept nothing save an
impression of bedlam. But he had lived through it; he must
know what had happened—if he could bring himself to live
through it again.
Brianna’ s hand clutched his, her fingers still squeezing tight
enough to stop the blood. He patted her hand, gently , and her
grip relaxed a little.
He closed his eyes, and let it happen.
“I didn’ t remember at first,” h e said at last, quietly . “Or
rather , I did—but I remember ed what people told me had
happened.” He had had no memory of being carried
unconscious through the tunnel, and once rescued, he had
spent several weeks being shuttled round Aid shelters and
foster homes with other orphans, mute with terrified
bewilderment.“I knew my nam e, of course, and my address, but that didn’ t
help much under the circumstances. My dad had already gone
down—anyway , by the time the Aid people located Gran’ s
brother—that was the Reverend—and he came to fetch me,
they’d pieced together the story of what happened in the
shelter .
“It w as a mirac le that I hadn’ t been killed with everyone
else on that stair , they told me . They said my mother must
somehow have lost hold of me in the panic—I must have been
separated from her and carried down the stair by the crowd;
that’ s ho w I ended on the lower level, where the roof hadn’ t
given way .”
Brianna’ s hand was still curled over his, protective, but no
longer squeezing.
“But now you remember wh at happened?” she asked
quietly .
“I di d re member her letting go m y hand,” he said. “And so I
thought the rest of it was right, too. But it wasn’ t.
“She let go my hand,” he said. T he words came more easily
now; the tightness in his throat and chest was gone. “She let go
my hand … and  then she picked  me up. That small woman—
she picked me up, and threw me over the wall. Down into the
crowd of people on the platform  below . I was knocked mostly
out by the fall, I think—but I remember the roar as the roof
went. No one on the stair survived.”
She pres sed her face against his chest, and he felt her take a
deep, shuddering  breath. He stroked her hair , and his pounding
heart began to slow at last.
“It’ s all right,” he whispered to  her , though his voice was
thick and cracked, and the f irelight burst in starry blurs
through the moisture in his eye s. “W e won’ t for get. Not Jem,
not me. No matter what. W e won’ t for get.”
He coul d see his mother ’ s face, shining clear among the
stars.
Clever lad,  she said, and smiled.99
BROTHER
T HE SNO W BEG AN T O MEL T . I was torn between pleasure
at the thawing of the world and the throb of spring in the
ground—and dis turbance at the loss of the frozen barrier that
shielded us, however temporarily , from the world outside.
Jamie had not c hanged his mind. He spent an evening in
composing a carefully worded l etter to Milford L yon. He was
now rea dy , he wrote, to contemp late the sale of his goods—for
which, read illegal whisky—as Mr . L yon had suggested, and
was ple ased to say that a substantial quantity was now
available. He was, however , concerned lest his goods suf fer
some misfortun e in delivery—i.e., interception by customs
authorities or pilferage en route —and wished some assurance
that his goods w ould be handled by a gentleman of known
ability in  such matters—in other  words, a smuggler who knew
his way up and down the coast.
He had received assurances from his good friend Mr .
Priestly of Edenton (whom he did not, of course, know from a
hole in the grou nd), he wrote, and from Mr . Samuel Cornell,
with whom he h ad had the hono r to serve upon the Governor ’ s
Council of W ar , that one Stephen Bonnet was by far the most
able in such endeavors, with a reputation for ability
unsurpassed by others. If Mr . L yon would arrange a meeting
with Mr . Bonnet, so that J amie might form his own
impressions and assure himself of the safety of the
arrangement contemplated, why then …
“Do you think he’ll do it?” I asked.
“If h e knows Stephen Bonnet or  can find him, aye, he will.”
Jamie p ressed his father ’ s cabochon ring into the wax seal.
“Priestly and Cornell are names to conjure with, to be sure.”
“And if he does find Bonnet—”“Then I will go  and meet with him.” He cracked the ring
from th e hardened wax, leaving a smooth indentation
surrounded by the tiny strawbe rry leaves of the Fraser crest.
Constancy , they  stood for . In some moods, I was sure this was
merely another word for stubbornness.
The letter to L yo n was dispatched with Fer gus, and I tried to
dismiss it from my mind. It was  still winter; with only a little
luck, Bonnet’ s ship might meet with a storm and sink, saving
us all a good deal of trouble.
Still, the  matter lurked in the recesses of my mind, and
when I returned to the house afte r attending a childbirth to find
a pil e of  letters on the desk in Jamie’ s study , my heart leaped
into my throat.
There was—tha nk God!—no answer among them from
Milford L yon. Even had such an answer come, though, it
would h ave been  promptly eclipsed and for gotten—for among
the shea f of correspondence was a letter bearing Jamie’ s name,
written in his sister ’ s strong black hand.
I cou ld scarcely keep myself fro m tearing it open at once—
and if it were so me searing reproach, sticking it directly into
the fire before Jamie could see  it. Honor prevailed, though,
and I managed to contain myself until Jamie arrived from an
errand to Salem, plastered with mud from the impassable
trails. In formed of the waiting missive, he splashed hands and
face hastily with water , and came to the study , carefully
shutting the door before breaking the seal of the letter .
His face showed nothing, but I saw him take a deep breath
before o pening it, as though br acing for the worst. I moved
quietly round behind him, and put a hand on his shoulder in
encouragement.
Jenny Fraser Murray wrote in a well-schooled hand, the
letters round and graceful, the lines straight and easily
readable on the page.
 
September 16, 1771 
Br other ,
 
W ell. Having taken up my pen and written the single wor d
above, I  have now sat her e sta ring at it ‘til the candle has
burned almost an inch, and me having not one thought what I
shall say . It would be a wicked waste of good beeswax to
continue so, and yet if I wer e to put the candle out and go to
bed, I should have spoilt a shee t of paper to no purpose—so I
see I must go on, in the name of thrift.
I could berate you. That would occupy some space upon the
page, and pr eserve what my hus band is pleased to compliment
as the most foul  and hideous cu rses he has been privileged to
hear in a long l ife. That seems thrifty , as I was at gr eat pains
in th e co mposition of them at th e time, and should not like to
see t he effort wa sted. Still, I thin k I have not so much paper as
would contain them all.
I think also that  per haps, after all, I do not wish to rail or
condemn you, for you might take this as a just punishment, and
so e ase your conscience in per ceived expiation, so that you
leave off your chastising of y ourself. That is too simple a
penance; I would that if you  have wove a hairshirt for
yourself, you wear it still, and may it chafe your soul as the
loss of my son chafes mine.
In sp ite of this, I suppose that I am writing to for give you—I
had some purpose in taking u p my pen, I know , and while
for giveness seem s a doubtful e nterprise to me at pr esent, I
expect the notion will gr ow mor e comfortable with practice.
 
Jamie’ s brows rose nearly to his hairline at this, but he
continued to read aloud with fascination.
 
Y ou will  be curious to know wha t has led me to this action, I
suppose, so I will tell you.I r o de to visit Maggie early Monday last; she has a new
babe, so you ar e once mor e an uncle; a bonnie wee lassie
called Angelica, which is a foolish name, I think, but she is
very fair and born with a strawberry mark on her chest, which
is a charm for good. I left them in the evening, and had made
some way towar ds home when m y mule chanced to step into a
mole’ s hole and fell. Both mule and I r ose up somewhat lamed
fr om thi s accide nt, and it was clear that I could not ride the
cr eatur e nor yet make shift to travel far by foot myself.
I found myself on the r oad Auld earn just over the hill fr om
Balriggan. I should not normall y seek the society of Laoghair e
MacKenzie—for she has r esumed that name, I having made
plain in the dis trict my dislike of her use of “Fraser ,” she
having no pr oper claim to that style—but it was the only place
wher e I might o btain food and shelter , for night was coming
on, with the thr eat of rain.
So I  uns addled the mule and le ft him to find his supper by
the r oad, while I limped off in sear ch of mine.
I came down behind the house, past the kailyar d, and so
came up on the arbor that you b uilt. The vines ar e well gr own
on it now , so I could see nothing, but I could hear that ther e
wer e folk inside, for I hear d voices.
The rain had begun by then. It w as not but a smizzle, yet the
patter on the lea ves must have dr owned my voice, for no one
answer ed when I called. I came closer—cr eeping like a
spavined snail, to be sur e, for I was gr omished fr om the fall
and my right an kle gruppit—an d was just about to call once
mor e, w hen I hear d sounds of a rar e hochmagandy fr om inside
the arbor .
 
“Hochmagandy?” I glanced a t Jamie, brows raised in
question.
“Fornication,” he said tersely .
“Oh,” I said, and moved to loo k over his shoulder at the
letter . 
I stood still, of course, thinking what was best to do. I could
hear that it was Laoghair e shed ding her shanks, but I had no
hint who  her partner might be. My ankle was blown up like a
bladder , so I could not walk much farther , and so I was obliged
to stand about in the wet, listening to all this inhoneste.
I sho uld have kn own, had she b een courted by a man of the
district, and I h ad hear d nothing of her paying heed to any—
though s everal have tried; she has Balriggan, after all, and
lives like a lair d on the money you pay
 her .
I wa s filled with  outrage at the hearing, but somewhat mor e
filled with amazement to discover the cause. That being a
sense of fury on your behalf—irrational as such fury might be,
in the cir cumstances. Still, having discover ed such an emotion
springing full-blown in my br east. I was r eluctantly compelled
to the r ealization that my feelings for you must not in fact have
perished altogether .
 
Here the text bro ke of f, as Jenny had apparently been called
away upon some domestic errand. It resumed, freshly dated,
on the next page.
 
September 18, 1771
I dr eam of young Ian now and then… .
 
“What?” I exclaimed. “T o hell with Y oung Ian—who was
with Laoghaire?”
“I should like t o know that myself,” Jamie muttered. The
tips of his ears were dark with blood, but he didn’ t look up
from the page.
 I d r eam of Ian n ow and then. These dr eams most often take
the shape of daily life, and I see him her e at Lallybr och, but
now and again I dr eam of him in his life among the savages—
if in deed he stil l lives (and I persuade myself that my heart
would by some means know if he did not).
So I see that wh at it comes to in the end is only the same
thing with which I began—that one wor d, “Br other .” Y ou ar e
my br other , as young Ian is my son, the both of you my flesh
and my spirit and always shall be. If the loss of Ian haunts my
dr eams, the loss of you haunts my days, Jamie.
 
He stopped reading for a moment, swallowing, then went
on, his voice steady .
 
I have been writing letters all the morning, debating with
myself whether to finish this one, or to put it into the fir e
instead. But now the accounts  ar e done, I have written to
everyone I can t hink of, and the clouds have gone away , so the
sun shin es thr ough the window by my desk, and the shadows of
Mother ’ s r oses ar e falling over me.
I have thought to myself often and often that I hear d my
mother s peak to  me, thr ough al l these years. I do not need to
hear her now , th ough, to ken we ll enough what she would say .
And so I shall not put this in the fir e.
Y ou r em ember , do you, the da y I br oke the good cr eam-
pitcher , flinging it at your head because you deviled me? I
know yo u r ecall  the occasion, fo r you once spoke to Clair e of
it. I hesi tated to admit the crime, and you took the blame upon
yourself, but Father kent the truth of it, and punished us both.
So n ow I am a grandmother ten times over , with my hair
gone gr e y , and still I feel my cheeks go hot with shame and my
wame sh rink like a fist, thinkin g of Father bidding us kneel
down side by side and bend over the bench to be whipped.
Y ou yelp ed and grunted like a puppy when he tawsed you,
and I could scar ce br eathe and did not dar e to look at you.Then it was my turn, but I was s o wr ought with emotion that I
think I bar ely felt the str okes. No doubt you ar e r eading this
and sayi ng indignantly that it w as only Father was softer with
me b ecause I was a lass. W ell, maybe so, and maybe no; I will
say Ian is gentle with his daughters.
 
Jamie snorted at this.
“A ye, ye’ve got that right,” he m uttered. He rubbed his nose
with one finger and resumed, drumming his fingers on the
desk as he read.
 
But then  Father said you would have another whipping, this
one for lying—f or the truth was the truth, after all. I would
have got up and  fled away then,  but he bade me stay as I was,
and he said to me, quiet, that wh ile you would pay the price of
my cow ar dice, he did not thin k it right for me to escape it
altogether .
Do you know that you did not make a sound, the second
time? I hope yo u did not feel the str okes of the tawse on your
backside, because I felt each one.
I swor e that day that I should not ever be a cowar d again.
And I see that it is cowar dice indeed, that I should go on
blaming you for Y oung Ian. I h ave always kent what it is to
love a man—be he husband or br other , lover or son. A
danger ous business; that’ s what it is.
Men go wher e they will, they do as they must; it is not a
woman’ s part to bid them stay , nor yet to r epr oach them for
being what they ar e—or for not coming back.
I kn ew it when  I sent Ian to France with a cr oss of
bir chwood and a lock of my hair made into a love knot,
praying that he m ight come home to me, body and soul. I knew
it when I gave you a r osary and saw you off to Leoch, hoping
you would not for get Lallybr och or me. I knew it when Y oung
Jamie swam to the seal’ s island , when Michael took ship forParis, a nd I should have know n it, too, when wee Ian went
with you.
But I have been blessed in my  life; my men have always
come back to me. Maimed, per haps; a bit singed r ound the
edges now and then; crippled, crumpled, tatter ed, and torn—
but I have always got them back. I gr ew to expect that as my
right, and I was wr ong to do so.
I h ave seen so many widows since the Rising. I cannot say
why I thought I  should be exempt fr om their suffering, why I
alone should lose none of my men, and only one of my babes,
my w ee girl-child. And since I h ad lost Caitlin, I tr easur ed Ian,
for I knew he was the last babe I should bear .
I tho ught him m y babe still; I should have kent him for the
man he was. A nd that being so, I know well enough that
whether you might have stopped him or no, you would not—
for you ar e one of the damnable cr eatur es, too.
Now I have nearly r eached the e nd of this sheet, and I think
it pr ofligate to begin another .
Mother loved you always, Jamie, and when she kent she was
dying, sh e called  for me, and bade me car e for you. As though
I could ever stop.
 
 
Y our most Affectionate and Loving Sister ,
 Janet Flora Arabella Fraser Murray  
 Jamie held the p aper for a moment, then set it down, very
gently . He sat w ith his head bent, propped on his hand so that I
couldn’ t see his face. His fingers were splayed through his
hair , and  kept moving, massaging his forehead as he slowly
shook h is head, back and forth . I could hear him breathing,
with a slight catch in his breath now and then.
Finally h e dropped his hand and  looked up at me, blinking.
His face  was deeply flushed, there were tears in his eyes, and
he wore the most remarkable expression, in whichbewilderment, fury , and laughter were all mingled, laughter
being only slightly uppermost.
“Oh, God,” he said. He snif fed, and wiped his eyes on the
back of his hand. “Oh, Christ. How in hell  does she do that?”
“Do what?” I p ulled a clean handkerchief from my bodice
and handed it to him.
“Make m e feel as though I am eight years old,” he said
ruefully . “And an idiot, to boot.”
He w iped his nose, then reach ed out a hand to touch the
flattened roses, gently .
 
I W AS THRILL ED with Jenny’ s letter , and knew that Jamie’ s
heart was substantially lightene d by its receipt. At the same
time, I remained  extremely curious about the incident she had
begun to describe—and knew that Jamie was even more
interested, though he carefully refrained from saying so.
A letter arrived a  week or so later , sent by his brother -in-law
Ian, but while th is contained the usual news of Lallybroch and
Broch Mordha, it made no mention whatever of Jenny’ s
adventure near Balriggan, nor her subsequent discovery in the
grape arbor .
“I do n’ t suppose you could ask either of them?” I suggested
delicately , perch ed on the fence as I watched him preparing to
castrate a litter of piglets. “Ian or Jenny?”
“I could not,” Jamie replied firmly . “And after all, it’ s no
my business, is it? If yon woman was ever my wife, she surely
is not now . If she chooses to take a lover , it’ s her own af fair .
Surely .” He stamped on the foot -bellows, fanning up the small
fire in which th e cautery iron was heating, and pulled the
castrating shears from his belt. “Which end of the business
d’ye want, Sassenach?”
It w as a choice between the strong possibility of being
bitten while clipping the teeth  and the certainty of being
shitten while assaulting the other end. The unfortunate truthwas tha t Jamie was far stronge r than I, and while he could
certainly castrate an animal with no dif ficulty at all, I did have
some professional expertise. It was therefore practicality rather
than her oism that dictated my c hoice, and I had prepared for
this activity by donning my heavy canvas apron, wooden
clogs, and a rag ged ex-shirt that had once belonged to Fer gus,
and was bound from the pigpen straight into the fire.
“Y ou hold; I’ll snip.” I slid of f the fence and took the shears.
There ensued a brief but noisy interlude, after which the five
piglets were sent of f to a consolatory meal of kitchen scraps,
their rear aspects heavily daub ed with a tar and turpentine
mixture to prevent infection.
“What d o you think?” I asked, seeing them settle down to
their feeding in an apparent state of content. “If you were a
pig, I mean. W ould you rather root for your food, but keep
your bal ls, or give them up and wallow in luxurious swill?”
These would be kept penned, raised carefully on slops for
tender meat, while most of the pigs were routinely turned out
into the wood to manage for themselves.
Jamie shook his head.
“I suppo se they canna miss what they’ve never had,” he
said. “And they’ve had food, aft er all.” He leaned on the fence
for a few moments, watching the curly tails begin to wag and
twirl with pleasure, the tiny wounds beneath apparently
for gotten.
“Besides,” he added cynically , “ a pair of ballocks may bring
a man more sorrow than joy— though I havena met many
who’d wish them gone, for all that.”
“W ell, priests might find them a  burden, I suppose.” I pulled
the s tained shirt gingerly away from my body before lifting it
over my head. “Phew . Nothing smells worse than pig
excrement—nothing.”
“What—not a blackbirder ’ s hold, or a rotting corpse?” he
asked, laughing. “Festering wounds? A billy goat?”
“Pig shit,” I said firmly . “Hands down.”Jamie took the wadded shirt from me and ripped it into
strips, re serving the cleanest ones for jobs like wiping tools
and wedging cracks. The rest he consigned to the fire, stepping
back as a rando m breeze blew a plume of reeking smoke in
our direction.
“A ye, well, there was Narses. H e was a great general, or so
they say , in spite of being a eunuch.”
“Perhaps a man’ s mind works better without the
distraction,” I suggested, laughing.
He gave no more than a brief sn ort in reply to this, though it
was tinged with amusement. He  shoveled dirt onto the cinders
of the fire, whil e I retrieved my cautery iron and tar -pot, and
we went back to the house, talking of other things.
My min d linger ed on that one remark, though—”a pair of
ballocks may bring a man more sorrow than joy .” Had he been
speaking only generally? I wondered. Or had there been some
personal allusion lurking in it?
In everything he had ever said to me regarding his brief
marriage to Laoghaire MacKenzie—little as that was, by our
common consent—there had been no hint that he had felt
physically drawn to her . He had  wed her from loneliness and a
sense of  duty , wanting some sm all anchor in the emptiness his
life had been after his return from England. Or so he had said.
And I believed what he’d said. He was a man of honor and
duty , an d I knew what his lonel iness had been—for I had had
my o wn. On the  other hand, I knew his body , nearly as well as
my own . If it ha d a great capacity to endure hardship, it had an
equal capacity to experience great joy . Jamie could be ascetic
from necessity—never from natural temperament.
Most of the tim e I succeeded in for getting that he had
shared Laoghai re’ s bed, however briefly and—he said—
unsatisfactorily . I did not for get that she had been, and was
still, quite an attractive woman.
Which left me rather wishing th at Jenny Murray had found
some other inspiration for the conversion of her feelingstoward her brother .
 
JAMIE W AS QUIET and abstracted through the rest of the
day , thou gh he roused himself to  be sociable when Fer gus and
Marsali arrived with their children for a visit after supper . He
taught Germain to play draughts, while Fer gus recalled for
Roger the words of a ballad he had picked up in the alleys of
Paris as a juvenile pickpocket. The women retired to the hearth
to stitch  baby gowns, knit booties, and—in honor of Marsali’ s
advancing pregnancy and Lizzie’ s engagement—entertain
each other with hair -raising anecdotes of labor and birth.
“Laid sideways,  the babe was, and the size of a six-month
shoat …”
“Ha, Germain had a head like  a cannonball, the midwife
said, and he was facing backwar d , the wee rattan—”
“Jemmy had a h uge head, but it  was his shoulders that were
the problem… .”
“… le bourse  … the lady’ s ‘purse,’ of course, is her—”
“Her me ans of making a living, aye, I see. Then the next bit,
where her customer puts his fingers in  her purse—”
“No, ye dinna get to move yet, it’ s still my turn, for I’ve
jumped your man ther e , and so I can go her e —”
“Mer de!”
“Germain!” Marsali bellowed. She glared at her of fspring,
who hunched his shoulders, s cowling at the draughtboard,
lower lip thrust out.
“Dinna fash yourself, man, for see? Now it’ s your turn, ye
can go ther e , and ther e , and ther e —”
“… A vez-vous ete a la selle aujour d’hui?  … and what he is
asking the whore, of course—”
“‘Have you—been in the saddle today?’ Or would it be,
‘Have you had a ride today?’ ”Fer gus laughed, the end of his aristocratic nose pinkening
with amusement.
“W ell, that is one translation, surely .”
Roger lifted a brow at him, half-smiling.
“A ye?”
“That particular expression is also what a French doctor
says,” I put in, seeing his incomprehension. “Colloquially
speaking, it means, ‘Have you had a bowel movement today?’
”
“The la dy in question being perhaps une specialiste ,”
Fer gus explained cheerfully . “I used to know one who—”
“Fer gus!”  Marsali’ s whole face was pink, though she
seemed more amused than outraged.
“I see,” Roger murmured, eyebrows still raised as he
struggled with the nuances of this bit of sophisticated
translation. I did wonder how one would set it to music.
“Comment sont vos selles, grandper e?”  Germain inquired
chummily , evidently familiar with this line of social inquiry .
And how are your stools, grandfather?
“Free and easy ,” his grandfather assured him. “Eat up your
parritch every morning, and ye’ll never have piles.”
“Da!”
“W ell, it’ s true,” Jamie protested.
Brianna was bright red, and emitting small fizzing noises.
Jemmy stirred in her lap.
“ Le petit r ouge  eats parritch,” G ermain observ ed, frowning
narrowly at Jemmy , who was nursing contentedly at his
mother ’ s breast, eyes closed. “He shits stones.”
“Germain!”  all the women shouted in unison.
“W ell, it’ s true,” he said, in perfect imitation of his
grandfather . Looking dignified, he turned his back on the
women and began building towers with the draughts-men.“He doe sna seem to want to give up the teat,” Marsali
observed, nodding at Jemmy . “Neither did Germain, but he’d
no choice—nor did poor wee Joanie.” She glanced ruefully
down at her stomach, which was barely beginning to swell
with Number Three.
I c aught  the barest flicker of a glance between Roger and
Bree, fo llowed by a Mona Lisa  smile on Brianna’ s face. She
settled herself more comfortably , and stroked Jemmy’ s head.
Enjoy it  while you can, sweet heart,  her actions said, more
vividly than words.
I felt my own eyebrows rise, and glanced toward Jamie.
He’d seen that little byplay , too, and gave me the male
equivalent of Brianna’ s smile, before turning back to the
draughtsboard.
“I like parritch,” Lizzie put in shyly , in a minor attempt to
change the subject. “Specially with honey and milk.”
“Ah,” sa id Fer g us, reminded of his original task. He turned
back to Roger , lifting a finger . “Honeypots. The refrain, you
see, where les abeilles  come buzzing—”
“A ye, aye, that’ s so,” Mrs. Bug neatly recaptured the
conversation, when he paused to draw breath, “parritch wi’
honey is the bes t thing for the bowels, though sometimes even
that fail s. Why , I kent a man once, who couldna move his
bowels for more than a month!”
“Indeed. Did he try a pellet of w ax rolled in goose-grease?
Or a tisane of grape leaves?” Fer gus was instantly diverted.
French to the c ore, he was a great connoisseur of pur ges,
laxatives, and suppositories.
“Everything,” M rs. Bug assured him. “Parritch, dried
apples, w ine mix ed wi’ an ox’ s gall, water drunk at the dark o’
the moo n at midnight … nothing at all would shift him. ‘T was
the talk of the village, wi’ folk placing wagers, and the poor
man gone quite gray in the face. Nervous spasms, it was, and
his bowels tied up like garter strings, so that—”
“Did he explode?” Germain asked, interested.Mrs. Bug shook briefly with laughter .
“No, that he didna, laddie. Though I did hear as how it was
a near thing.”
“What was it finally shifted him, then?” Jamie asked.
“She fin ally said she’d marry m e, and not the other fellow .”
Mr . Bug, who had been dozin g in the corner of the settle
through the evening, stood up an d stretched himself, then put a
hand on his wife’ s shoulder , smiling tenderly down at her
upturned face. “‘T was a great relief, to be sure.”
 
IT W AS  LA TE when we went to bed, after a convivial evening
that end ed with Fer gus singing the prostitute’ s ballad in its
lengthy entirety to general applause, Jamie and German
beating time on the table with their hands.
Jamie la y back against the pillow , hands crossed behind his
head, chuckling  to himself now  and then as bits of the song
came ba ck to him. It was cold enough that the windowpanes
were misted with our breath, but he wore no nightshirt, and I
admired the sight of him as I sat brushing my hair .
He had recover ed well from the snakebite, but was still
thinner than usual, so that the graceful arch of his collarbone
was visible, and the long muscle s of his arms roped from bone
to b one, distinct beneath his sk in. The skin of his chest was
bronze where his shirt usually lay open, but the tender skin on
the u nderside of his arms was w hite as milk, a tracery of blue
veins sh owing. T he light shadowed the prominent bones of his
face and glimmered from his ha ir , cinnamon and amber where
it la y across his  shoulders, dark auburn and red-gold where it
dusted his bared body .
“The candlelight becomes ye, Sassenach,” he said, smiling,
and I saw that he was watchin g me, blue eyes the color of
bottomless ocean.
“I was just thin king the same o f you,” I said, standing up
and putt ing asid e my brush. My  hair floated in a cloud round
my s houlders, clean, soft, and shining. It smelled of marigoldsand sunf lowers and so did my skin. Bathing and shampooing
in winte r was a major undertaki ng, but I had been determined
not to go to bed smelling of pig shit.
“Let it burn, then ,” he said, reac hing out to stop me as I bent
to blow the cand le out. His hand curled round my wrist, ur ging
me toward him.
“Come to bed, and let me watch ye. I like the way the light
moves in  your eyes; like whisky , when ye pour it on a haggis,
and then set it on fire.”
“How poetic,” I murmured, but made no demur as he made
room for me, p ulled loose the drawstring of my shift, and
slipped it of f me. The air of the room was cold enough to
make my nipples draw up tight, but the skin of his chest was
delightfully war m on my breasts as he gathered me into him,
sighing with pleasure.
“It’ s Fer gus’ s so ng inspiring me, I expect,” he said, cupping
one of my breasts in his hand and weighing it with a nice
balance between admiration an d appraisal. “God, ye’ve the
loveliest breasts. Y e recall that one verse, where he says the
lady’ s tits were so enormous, s he could wrap them round his
ears? Y o urs aren ’ t so big as that, of course, but d’ye think ye
maybe could wrap them round—”
“I don’ t  think they need to be enormous to do that ,” I
assured him. “Move up. Besides, I don’ t believe it’ s actually
wrapping round, so much as it is squashing together , and
they’re certainly lar ge enough for … see?”
“Oh,” he said, sounding deeply gratified and a little
breathless. “A ye, ye’re right. That’ s … oh, that looks verra
beautiful, Sassenach—at least from here.”
“It look s very interesting from here, too,” I assured him,
trying neither to laugh nor go cross-eyed. “Which one of us
moves, do you think?”
“Me, for now . I’m no chafing ye, Sassenach?” he inquired.
“W ell, just a bi t. W ait, though—” I reached out a hand,
feeling b lindly over the table by the bed. I got hold of the littlepot of creamy almond ointment I used for hand lotion, flicked
the lid of f, and dug a finger into it.
“Y es, that’ s much better ,” I said. “Isn’ t it?”
“Oh. Oh. A ye.”
“And then there’ s that other verse, isn’ t there?” I said
thoughtfully , let ting go for a moment, and drawing a slippery
finger slowly round the curve o f his buttock. “About what the
prostitute did to the choirboy?”
“Oh, Christ!”
“Y es, that’ s what he said. According to the song.”
 
MUCH LA TER, in the dark, I roused from sleep to feel his
hands on me again. Still pleasantly adrift in dreams, I didn’ t
move, but lay inert, letting him do what he would.
My mind was lo osely tethered to reality , and it took some
time for  me to come to the sl ow realization that something
wasn’ t q uite right. It took even longer to focus my mind and
struggle toward the surface of wakefulness, but at last I got my
eyes open, blinking away clouds of sleep.
He was crouched half over me, his face half-lit by the dim
glow from the s moored hearth. His eyes were closed, and he
was frowning a little, his breath coming through half-opened
lips. He moved almost mechanically , and I wondered, muzzily
astonished, whether he could possibly be doing it in his sleep?
A thin film of s weat gleamed on the high cheekbones, the
long stra ight brid ge of his nose, on the slopes and curves of his
naked body .
He was stroking me in an odd, monotonous sort of way , like
a man working at some repetitive task. The touch was more
than intimate, but weirdly impersonal; I might have been
anybody—or anything—I thought.
Then he moved, and eyes still c losed, flipped back the quilt
covering me and moved between my legs, spreading themapart in  a brusque fashion tha t was quite unlike him. His
brows were drawn together , knotted in a frown of
concentration. I moved instinctively to close my legs,
squirming away . His hands clamped down on my shoulders
then, hi s knee thrust my thig hs apart, and he entered me
roughly .
I ma de a high-pi tched sound of startled protest, and his eyes
popped open. He stared at me, his eyes no more than an inch
from mine, unfocused, then sharpening into abrupt awareness.
He froze.
“Who the bloody  h ell do you think I am?” I said, low-
voiced and furious.
He wren ched hi mself away and flung himself of f the bed,
leaving the covers hanging to th e floor in disarray . He seized
his clothes from the peg, reac hed the door in two strides,
opened it, and disappeared, slamming it behind him.
I s at up, feeling  thoroughly rattled. I scrabbled the quilts
back up around myself, feeling dazed, angry—and halfway
disbelieving. I rubbed my hands over my face, trying to wake
up all the way . Surely I  hadn’ t been dreaming?
No. He was. He’d been half-a sleep—or wholly so—and
he’d bloody thought I was bloody Laoghaire! Nothing else
could ac count for the way he had been touching me, with a
sense of painful impatience tinged with anger; he had never
touched me like that in his life.
I l ay back down , but it was patently impossible to go back
to sl eep. I stared  at the shadowy  rafters for a few minutes, then
rose with decision, and got dressed.
The dooryard was bleak and cold under a high, bright moon.
I stepped out, closing the kitchen door softly behind me, and
clutched my cloak round me, li stening. Nothing stirred in the
cold, and the wind was no more than a sigh through the pines.
At some  distance, though, I he ard a faint, regular noise, and
turned toward it, making my way carefully through the dark.
The door of the haybarn was open.I leaned against the doorjamb, and crossed my arms,
watching as he stamped to a nd fro, pitching hay in the
moonlight, working of f his temper . Mine was still pulsing in
my temples, but began to subside as I watched him.
The dif f iculty w as that I did understand, and all too well. I
had not met ma ny of Frank’ s women—he was discreet. But
now and  then, I would catch a glance exchanged at a faculty
party or the local supermarket—and a feeling of black rage
would w ell up in me, only to be followed by baf flement as to
what, precisely , I was to do with it.
Jealousy had nothing to do with logic.
Laoghaire MacKenzie was four thousand miles away; likely
neither o f us would ever see her  again. Frank was even farther
away , and it w as certain neither of us would ever see him
again, this side the grave.
No, jealousy had nothing at all to do with logic.
I b egan to be co ld, but went on  standing there. He knew I
was ther e; I could see it in the  way he kept his head turned
toward his work. He was swea ting, in spite of the cold; the
thin clot h of his shirt stuck to him, making a dark spot on his
back. A t last, he stabbed the pitchfork into the stack, left it,
and sat down on a bench made from half a log. He put his head
in his hands, fingers rubbing violently through his hair .
Finally , he looked up at me, w ith an expression halfway
between dismay and reluctant amusement.
“I dinna understand it.”
“What?” I moved toward him , and sat down near him,
curling m y feet under me. I cou ld smell the sweat on his skin,
along with almond cream and the ghost of his earlier lust.
He gave me a sidelong glance, and answered dryly ,
“Anything, Sassenach.”
“Can’ t be that bad, can it?” I reached tentatively for him,
and ran a hand lightly down the curve of his back.
He heaved a deep sigh, blowing air through pursed lips.“When I was three-and-twenty , I didna understand how it
was that  to look at a woman could turn my bones to water , yet
make me feel I could bend steel in my hands. When I was
five-and-twenty , I didna underst and how I could want both to
cherish a woman and ravish her , all at once.”
“ A  w oman? ” I asked, and got what I wanted—the curl of his
mouth and a glance that went through my heart.
“One woman,” he said. He took the hand I laid on his knee,
and held it tigh tly , as though afraid I might snatch it back.
“Just one,” he repeated, his voice husky .
It was quiet in the barn, but the  boards creaked and settled
in th e co ld. I moved a little on the bench, scooting toward him.
Just a little. Moonlight streamed through the wide-open door ,
glowing dimly of f the piled hay .
“And that,” he s aid, squeezing my fingers tighter , “is what I
dinna ken now . I love you , a nighean donn . I have loved ye
from the moment I saw ye, I will love ye ‘til time itself is
done, an d so long as you are by my side, I am well pleased wi’
the world.”
A flush of warm th went through me, but before I could do
more th an squeeze his hand in reply , he went on, turning to
look at me with an expression of bewilderment so desperate as
to be almost comical.
“And th at bein’ so, Claire—why , in the name of Christ and
all his saints— why  d o I want to ta ke ship to Scotland, hunt
down a man wh ose name and f ace I dinna ken at all, and kill
him, for  swiving  a woman to whom I have nay claim, and who
I c ouldn a stand  to be in the sa me room with for more than
three minutes at the most?”
He brought his free hand down in a fist, striking the log with
a thump that vibrated through the wood under my buttocks.
“I do not  understand!”
I sup pressed the ur ge to say , “A nd you think I  do?” Instead,
I m erely  sat quietly , and after a moment, stroked his knucklesvery lightly with my thumb. It was less a caress than a simple
reassurance, and he took it so.
After a moment, he sighed deeply , squeezed my hand, and
stood up.
“I am a fool,” he said.
I sat  stil l for a m oment, but he seemed to expect some sort
of confirmation, so I nodded obligingly .
“W ell, perhaps,” I said. “But you aren’ t going to Scotland,
are you?”
Instead o f replying, he got to his feet and walked moodily to
and fro, kicking clumps of drie d mud, which burst like small
bombs. Surely he wasn’ t contemplating … he couldn’ t be.
W ith so me dif ficulty , I kept my mouth shut, and waited
patiently , until he came back to stand in front of me.
“All right,” he said, in the tone of one stating a declaration
of p rinciple. “I dinna ken wh y it galls me that Laoghaire
should s eek another man’ s company—no, that’ s no the truth, is
it? I ken well enough. And it isna jealousy . Or … well, it is,
then, but that’ s no the main th ing.” He shot me a look, as
though daring me to contradict  this assertion, but I kept my
mouth s hut. He exhaled strongly through his nose, and took a
deep breath, looking down.
“W ell, t hen. If I’m honest abou t it.” His lips pressed tight
together for a moment. “Why?” he burst out, looking up at me.
“What is it about him?”
“What is what about who? The man she—”
“She ha ted it, the bedding!” he interrupted me, stamping a
clod into powder . “Perhaps I flatter myself, or you flatter me
…” He gave me  a look that wanted to be a glare, but ended in
bewilderment. “Am I … am I … ?”
I w asn’ t  sure whether he wanted me to say , “Y es, you are!”
or “N o, you’re not!” but satisfie d myself with a smile that said
both.“A ye. W ell,” he said reluctantly . “I didna think  it  was me.
And before we were wed, ev en Laoghaire liked me well
enough.” I must have made a small snort at that, for he
glanced at me, but I shook my head, dismissing it.
“I th ought it mu st be a mislike for men in general, or only
for the act. And if it was so … well, it wasna quite so bad, if it
wasna m y fault,  though I did feel somehow I should be able to
mend it… .” He  trailed of f into this thoughts, brow furrowed,
then resumed with a sigh.
“But maybe I was wrong about that. Perhaps it was  me. And
that’ s a thought that sticks in my craw .”
I had no real idea what to say to him, but clearly I had to say
something.
“I th ink it was her ,” I said, firmly . “Not you. Though of
course I may be prejudiced. She did try to kill me, after all.”
“She what?” He swung round, looking blank.
“Y ou did n’ t kno w that? Oh.” I tried to think; had I not told
him? No , I supposed not. What with one thing and another , it
hadn’ t seemed important at the time; I had never expected to
see her again. And later … well, it really wasn’ t  important
then. I explained  briefly about Laoghaire’ s having sent me to
join Gei llie Dun can that day in  Cranesmuir , fully aware that
Geillie w as about to be arrested for witchcraft, and hoping that
I would be taken with her—as indeed I was.
“The wicked wee bitch!” he said, sounding more astonished
than an ything else. “No, I didna ken that at all—Christ,
Sassenach, ye canna think I w ould have marrit the woman,
knowing she’d done such a thing to you!”
“W ell, she was only sixteen at the time,” I said, able under
the circumstances to be tolerantly for giving. “And she might
not have realized that we’d be  tried or that the witch-court
would try to burn us. She might only have meant mischief—
thinking that if I were accused as a witch, it would make you
lose interest in m e.” The revelation of her chicanery seemed atleast to have di stracted Jamie’ s mind, which was all to the
good.
His only  respons e to this was a snort. He paced restlessly to
and fro for a bit, his feet rustling in the spilled straw . He hadn’ t
taken his shoes or stockings, and was barefoot, though the cold
seemed not to trouble him.
At la st he stoppe d, heaved a massive sigh, and bent forward,
resting a hand on the bench, his head on my shoulder .
“I’m sorry ,” he whispered.
I put my arms round his shoulders and pulled him close,
holding him hard until at last he sighed again, and the knotted
strain in  his shoulders relaxed. I let go, and he stood up, giving
me a hand to rise.
W e clos ed the barn door and walked back to the house in
silence, hand in hand.
“Claire,” he said suddenly , sounding a little shy .
“Y es?”
“I dinna  mean to excuse myself—not at all. It’ s only I was
wondering … do ye ever … think of Frank? When we …” He
stopped and cleared his throat. “Does the shadow of the
Englishman perhaps cross my face—now and then?”
And what on earth could I say to that? I couldn’ t lie, surely ,
but how could I say the truth, either , in a way he would
understand, that wouldn’ t hurt him?
I drew a deep breath and let it out, watching the mist of it
purl softly away .
“I don’ t want to make love to a ghost,” I said at last, firmly .
“And I don’ t think you do, either . But I suppose every now
and then a ghost might have other ideas.”
He made a small sound that was mostly a laugh.
“A ye,” he said. “I suppose they might. I wonder if
Laoghaire would like the Englishman’ s bed better than mine?”“Serve h er right if she did,” I said. “But if you like mine, I
suggest you come and get bac k into it. It’ s bloody  cold out
here.”100
DEAD WHALE
B Y LA TE MARCH, the trails down the mountain were
passable. No word had come ye t from Milford L yon, and after
some de bate on the matter , it was decided that Jamie and I,
with Brianna, Roger , and Marsali, would travel to W ilmington,
while Fer gus took the survey  reports to New Bern to be
formally filed and registered.
The girls and I would buy supplies depleted over the winter ,
such as salt, su gar , cof fee, tea, and opium, while Roger and
Jamie would make discreet inqu iries after Milford L yon—and
Stephen Bonnet . Fer gus would come to join us, so soon as the
surveying reports were taken care of, making his own inquiries
along the coast as chance of fered.
After which, presumably , Jamie and Roger , having located
Mr . Bonnet, would drop round  to his place of business and
take turns either shooting him dead or running him through
with a sword, before riding back into the mountains,
congratulating themselves on a job well done. Or so I
understood the plan to be.
“The be st-laid plans of mice a nd men gang aft agley ,” I
quoted t o Jamie , in the midst of one discussion on the matter .
He raised one brow and gave me a look.
“What sorts of plans have mice got?”
“W ell, th ere you have me,” I admitted. “The principle holds,
though; you haven’ t any idea what may happen.”
“That’ s true,” he agreed. “But whatever does  hap pen, I shall
be ready for it.” He patted the di rk that lay on the corner of his
desk, and went back to making lists of farm supplies.
The weather warmed markedly as we descended from the
mountains, and as we drew n earer to the coast, flocks of
seagulls and crows wheeled and swarmed over the fresh-plowed fields, shrieking ecsta tically in the bright spring
sunshine.
The tree s in the mountains were barely beginning to leaf
out, but in W ilmington, flowers  were already glowing in the
gardens, spikes  of yellow c olumbine and blue larkspur
nodding over the tidy fences on Beaufort Street. W e found
lodgings in a sm all, clean inn a little way from the quay . It was
relatively cheap and reasonably comfortable, if a trifle
crowded and dark.
“Why don’ t they have more windows?” Brianna grumbled,
nursing a stubbed toe after stumbling over Germain in the
darkness on the landing. “Somebody’ s going to burn the place
down, lighting candles to see w here they’re going. Glass can’ t
be that  expensive.”
“W indow tax,” Roger informe d her , picking Germain up
and dangling him head-down over the bannister , to Germain’ s
intense delight.
“What? The Crown taxes windows ?”
“It d oes. Y e’d th ink people would care more about that than
stamps or tea, but apparently they’re used to the window tax.”
“No wonder they’re about to have a revolu— Oh, good
morning, Mrs. Burns! The breakfast smells wonderful.”
The girls, the ch ildren, and I spent several days in careful
shopping, whil e Roger and Jamie mixed business with
pleasure in assorted taprooms and taverns. Most of their
errands were completed, and Jamie produced a small but
useful subsidiary income from card-playing and betting on
horses, b ut all he was able to hear of Stephen Bonnet was that
he h ad not been  seen in W ilmington for some months. I was
privately relieved to hear this.
It ra ined later in  the week, hard enough to keep everyone
indoors for two days. More than simple rain; it was a
substantial storm, with winds high enough to bend the
palmetto trees half over and plaster the muddy streets with
torn leaves and fallen branches . Marsali sat up late into thenight, listening to the wind, alternating between saying the
rosary and playing cards with Jamie for distraction.
“Fer gus did say it was a lar ge ship he would be coming on
from New Bern? The Octopus ? That sounds good-sized,
doesn’ t it, Da?”
“Oh, aye. Though I believe the packet boats are verra safe,
too. No, dinna discard that, lass—throw away the trey of
spades instead.”
“How do ye know I have the trey of spades?” she
demanded, frowning suspiciously at him. “And it’ s no true
about the packet boats. Y e ken that as well as I do; we saw the
wreckage of one at the bottom of Elm Street, day before
yesterday .”
“I k now ye’ve got the trey of spades because I haven’ t,”
Jamie to ld her , tucking his han d of cards neatly against his
chest, “a nd all the other spades have already turned up on the
table. Besides, Fer gus might come overland from New Bern;
he may not be on a boat at all.”
A gust of wind struck the house, rattling the shutters.
“Another reason not to have w indows,” Roger observed,
looking over Marsali’ s shoulder  at her hand. “No, he’ s right,
discard the trey of spades.”
“Here, you do it. I’ve got to go and see to Joanie.” She rose
suddenly , and thrusting the cards  into Roger ’ s hand, rustled of f
to th e sm all room  next door that  she shared with her children. I
hadn’ t heard Joanie cry .
There was a lou d thump and scrape overhead, as a detached
tree limb sailed across the roof . Everyone looked up. Below
the high -pitched keen of the wi nd, we could hear the hollow
rumble of the surf, boiling across the submer ged mudflats,
pounding on the shore.
“They that go down to the se a in ships,” Roger quoted
softly , “t hat do business in great waters; these see the works of
the Lord, and h is wonders in the deep. For he commandeth,and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves
thereof.”
“Oh, you ’re a big help,” Brianna said crossly . Already edgy ,
her temper had not been improv ed by the enforced seclusion.
Jemmy , terrified  by all the racket, had been wrapped around
her l ike a poultice for the better part of two days; both of them
were hot, damp, and exceedingly cranky .
Roger appeared not to be put of f by her mood. He smiled,
and bending down, peeled Jemmy away from her , with some
dif ficulty . He put the little boy on the floor , holding him by the
hands.
“They reel to and fro,” he said theatrically , pulling Jem’ s
hands s o that he lurched, of f-balance. “And stagger like a
drunken man, and are at their wit’ s end.”
Jemmy was giggling, and even Brianna was beginning to
smile, reluctantly .
“Then they cry unto the Lord  in their trouble, and he
bringeth  th em out of their distresses— ” On “bringeth,” he
swung J emmy suddenly up in the air , caught him under the
arms and whirled him round, making him shriek in delight.
“He mak eth the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are
still. Then are t hey glad because they be quiet—” He pulled
Jemmy i n close, and kissed him on the head, “—so he bringeth
them unto their desired haven.”
Bree applauded  the performance sarcastically , but smiled
nonetheless. Jamie had retrieved the cards, shuf fling the deck
neatly b ack together . He stopped, looking up. Caught by his
sudden s tillness, I turned my he ad to look at him. He glanced
at me and smiled.
“The wi nd has dropped,” he said. “Hear it? T omorrow , we’ll
go out.”
 
THE WEA THER HAD CLEARED by morning, and a fresh
breeze came in from the sea, bearing with it a tang of theshore, smelling of sea-lavender , pines, and a strong reek of
something marit ime rotting in th e sun. The quay still exhibited
a depressing lack of masts; no lar ge ships lay at anchor , not
even a ketch or packet boat, though the water in W ilmington
harbor swarmed with dinghies, rafts, canoes, and pirettas, the
little four -oared boats that flitted across the water like
dragonflies, droplets sparkling from their flying oars.
One of these spotted our small party standing disconsolately
on the wharf, an d darted toward us, its oarsmen calling out to
know whether we required tran sport? As Roger leaned out to
shout a polite refusal, the breeze of f the harbor whipped away
his hat, which whirled giddily out over the brownish waters
and lighted on the foam, spinning like a leaf.
The craf t sculled  at once toward  the floating hat, and one of
the oarsm en speared it deftly , ra ising it dripping in triumph on
the end of his oar . As the piretta drew up beside the quay ,
though, the boatman’ s look of jubilation changed to one of
astonishment.
“MacKenzie!” he cried. “Bugger me wi’ a silver toothpick
if it isn’ t!”
“Duf f! Duf f, me auld lad!” Rog er leaned down and grabbed
his hat, then rea ched back to giv e his erstwhile acquaintance a
hand up . Duf f, a small, grizzle d Scot with a very long nose,
sparse jowls, and a fine sprout of graying whiskers that made
him loo k as though he’d been thickly dusted in icing sugar ,
leaped nimbly up onto the quay and proceeded to clasp Roger
in a manly embrace, punctuate d by fierce thumpings on the
back and ejaculations of amazement, all heartily returned by
Roger . The rest of us stood politely watching this reunion,
while Marsali prevented Germain from jumping of f the quay
into the water .
“Do you know him?” I asked Brianna, who was dubiously
examining her husband’ s old friend.
“I think  he might have been on a ship with Roger once,” she
replied, renewin g her grip on Jemmy , who was wildly excitedby the sight of s eagulls, finding these much more entertaining
than Mr . Duf f.
“Why , look at him!” Duf f exclaimed, finally standing back
and wip ing a sleeve happily u nder his nose. “A coat like a
lairdie’ s and buttons to match. And the hat! Christ, lad, ye’re
so slick these days as shit wouldna stick to ye, would it?”
Roger laughed, and bent to pick up his soggy hat. He
slapped it against his thigh to dislodge a strand of bladder -
wrack, a nd handed it absently t o Bree, who was still viewing
Mr . Duf f with a rather narrow eye.
“My wif e,” Roger introduced her , and waved a hand at the
rest of us. “And her family . Mr . James Fraser , Mrs. Fraser …
and my wife’ s good-sister , also Mrs. MacKenzie.”
“Y our servant, sir—ladies.” Duf f bowed to Jamie, and put a
finger to the dis reputable object on his head in brief token of
respect. He glanced at Brianna, and a broad grin stretched his
lips.
“Oh, so ye married her . Got her out o’ the breeks, I see.” He
nudged Roger familiarly in the  ribs, lowering his voice to a
hoarse whisper . “Did ye pay her faither for her , or did he pay
you to take her?” He emitted a creaking noise, which I took to
be laughter .
Jamie an d Bree gave Mr . Duf f identical cold looks down the
bridges of their long, straight noses, but before Roger could
reply , the other oarsman shouted something incomprehensible
from the boat below .
“Oh, aye, aye, hold your water , man.” Mr . Duf f waved a
quelling hand at his partner . “ That’ s by way of a jest,” he
explained to me confidentially . “What with us bein’ sailors,
ken. ‘Ho ld your  water ,’ aye? Forbye ye don’ t  hold water , then
ye’ll be at the bottom o’ the ha rbor , aye?” He quivered with
merriment, making the creaking noise again.
“Most amusing,” I assured him. “Did he say something
about a whale?”“Oh, to be sure! W as that not why ye’ve come down to the
shore this morning?”
Everyone looked blank.
“No,” Marsali said, too bent up on her errand to pay much
attention to anything else, inclu ding whales. “Germain, come
back here! No, sir , we’ve come to see if there’ s any word of
the Octopus . Y e’ll not have heard anything, yourself?”
Duf f shook his head.
“No, Mi ssus. But the weather ’ s been that treacherous of f the
Banks fo r a month past …” He saw Marsali’ s face go pale, and
hastened to add, “A good many ships will ha’ sheered of f, see?
Gone to  another  port, maybe, o r lyin’ to just of f the coast, in
hopes of fair skies to make the r un in. Y e recall, MacKenzie—
we did that ourselves, when we came in wi’ the Gloriana .”
“A ye, that’ s true.” Roger nodded, though his eyes grew
wary at mention of the Gloriana . He glanced briefly at
Brianna, then back at Duf f, and lowered his voice slightly .
“Y ou’ve parted company with Captain Bonnet, I see.”
A small jolt shot through the soles of my feet, as though the
dock ha d been electrified. Jamie and Bree both reacted, too,
though i n dif fere nt fashion. He t ook an immediate step toward
Duf f, she took one back.
“Stephen Bonnet?” Jamie said, eyeing Duf f with interest.
“Y e’ll be acquainted with that gentleman, will ye?”
“I have been, sir ,” Duf f said, and crossed himself.
Jamie nodded slowly , seeing this.
“A ye, I see. And  will ye ken somewhat about Mr . Bonnet’ s
present whereabouts, perhaps?”
“Och, well, as to that …”
Duf f looked up at him speculati vely , taking in the details of
his cloth ing and  appearance, and obviously wondering exactly
how much the answer to that question might be worth. Hispartner below was growing increasingly restive, though, and
shouted impatiently .
Marsali was restive, too.
“Where might they go, then? If they’ve gone to another
port? Germain, stop! Y e’ll fall  in, next thing!” She bent to
retrieve her of fspring, who had been hanging over the edge of
the wharf, peacefully exploring its underside, and hoicked him
up onto one hip.
“Bonnet?” Jamie raised his brows, contriving to look
simultaneously encouraging and menacing.
“They gone see da whale o r don’ t they?” yelled the
gentleman in the boat, impatient to be of f on more profitable
ventures.
Duf f seemed somewhat at a loss as to whom to reply to first.
His small eyes blinked, shifting to and fro between Jamie,
Marsali, and his increasingly vociferous partner below . I
stepped in to break the impasse.
“What’ s all this about a whale?”
Compelled to focus on this straightforward question, Duf f
looked relieved.
“Why , the dead whale, Missus. A big ‘un, gone aground on
the Island. I thought sure as ye’d all come down to see.”
I l ooked  out across the water , and for the first time realized
that the boat traf fic was not entirely random. While a few lar ge
canoes and bar ges were headed toward the mouth of Cape
Fear , m ost of the smaller cr aft were plying to and fro,
disappearing int o the distant haze, or returning from it, bearing
small groups of passengers. Linen parasols sprouted like pastel
mushrooms from the boats, and there was a sprinkling of what
were obv iously townspeople on the dock, standing as we were,
looking expectantly across the harbor .
“T wo shillin’ s the boatload,” Duf f suggested ingratiatingly .
“Over and back.”Roger , Brianna, and Marsali looked interested. Jamie looked
uneasy .
“In that ?” he asked, wi th a skeptical glance at the piretta,
bobbing gently below . Duf f ’ s partner—a gentleman of
indeterminate ra ce and language—seemed inclined to take
of fense at this implied criticism  of his craft, but Duf f was
reassuring.
“Oh, it’ s  dead calm today , sir , dead calm. Why , ‘twould be
like sittin’ on a tavern bench. Congenial, aye? V erra suitable to
conversation.” He blinked, innocently af fable.
Jamie dr ew a deep breath in thro ugh his nose, and I saw him
glance o nce more at the pirett a. Jamie hated boats. On the
other hand, he would do far m ore desperate things than get
into a boat in pursuit of Stephen Bonnet. The only question
was whether Mr . Duf f actually h ad information to that end, or
was onl y inveigling passengers. Jamie swallowed hard and
braced his shoulders, steeling himself to it.
Not waiting, Duf f reinforced his position by turning craftily
to Marsali.
“There’ s a lighthouse on the Is land, ma’am. Y e can see a
good wa ys out to sea from the top o’ that. See if any ships
should be lyin’ of f.”
Marsali’ s hand dropped at once  to her pocket, fumbling for
the strings. I observed Germain solicitously poking a dead
mussel over her shoulder toward Jemmy’ s eagerly open
mouth, like a mother bird feeding her of fspring a nice juicy
worm, and tactfully intervened, taking Jemmy into my own
arms.
“No, sweetheart,” I said, dropping the mussel of f the dock.
“Y ou don’ t want that nasty thing. W ouldn’ t you like to go see a
nice dead whale, instead?”
Jamie sighed in resignation, and reached for his sporran.
“Y e’d be st call for another boat, then, so as we’ll not all drown
together .”
 IT W AS LOVEL Y out on the w ater , with the sun covered by a
hazy lay er of cloud, and a cool  breeze that made me take my
hat of f for the pleasure of feeling the wind in my hair . While
not q uite flat ca lm, the rise and fall of the surf was peacefully
lulling—to those of us not af flicted by seasickness.
I glanced at Jamie’ s back, but his head was bent, shoulders
moving in an easy , powerful rhythm as he rowed.
Resigned to the inevitable, he h ad taken brisk char ge of the
situation, summoning a second boat and herding Bree,
Marsali, and the boys into it. Th ereupon Jamie had unfastened
his broo ch and announced that he and Roger would row the
remaining pirett a, in order that Duf f might put himself at ease
and thus improve his chances of recollecting interesting facts
regarding Stephen Bonnet.
“Less chance of me puking if I’ve something to do,” he
muttered to me, stripping of f his coat and plaid.
Roger gave a small snort of amusement, but nodded
agreeably and shed his own coat and shirt. W ith Duf f and
Peter ins talled a t one end of the craft in a state of high hilarity
over the  turnabo ut of being paid  to be rowed in their own boat,
I was told of f to sit in the other end, facing them.
“Just to keep a bit of an eye on  things, Sassenach.” Under
cover of  the wadded clothes, Jamie wrapped my hand around
the stoc k of his pistol, and squeezed gently . He handed me
down into the boat, then climbed down gingerly himself, going
only slightly pale as the craft swayed and shifted under his
weight.
It was  a calm day , fortunately . A faint haze hung over the
water , ob scuring the dim shape o f Smith Island in the distance.
Kittiwakes and terns wheeled in gyres far above, and a heavy-
bodied gull seemed to hang imm obile in the air nearby , riding
the wind as we sculled slowly out into the harbor mouth.
Seated just before me, Roger rowed easily , broad bare
shoulders flexin g rhythmically ,  obviously accustomed to the
exercise. Jamie, on the seat in fr ont of Roger , handled the oarswith a fair amount of grace, but somewhat less assurance. He
was no sailor , a nd never would be. Still, the distraction of
rowing d id seem  to be keeping his mind of f his stomach. For
the moment.
“Oh, I could find myself accustomed to this, what d’ye say ,
Peter?” Duf f lifted a long nose into the breeze, half-closing his
eyes as he savored the novelty of being rowed.
Peter , who appeared to be some  exotic blend of Indian and
African, grunted in reply , but lo unged on the seat beside Duf f,
equally pleased. He wore nothing but a pair of stained
homespun breec hes, tied at the waist with a length of tarred
rope, and was burned so dark by the sun that he might have
been a Negro, sa ve for the spill of long black hair that fell over
one shoulder , decorated with bits of shell and tiny dried
starfish tied into it.
“Stephen Bonn et?” Jamie inquired pleasantly , drawing
strongly on the oars.
“Oh, him .” Duf f  looked as thou gh he would have preferred
to put of f this subject of discussion indefinitely , but a glance at
Jamie’ s face resigned him to the inevitable.
“What d’ye want to know , then?” The little man hunched
his shoulders warily .
“T o begin with, where he is,” Jamie said, grunting slightly
as he hauled on the oars.
“No idea,” Duf f said promptly , looking happier .
“W ell, where did ye last see the bugger?” Jamie asked
patiently .
Duf f and Peter exchanged glances.
“W ell, noo,” Duf f began cautiously , “d’ye mean by ‘see,’
where it was I last clapped een on the captain?”
“What else would he mean, clotheid?” Roger said, grunting
with a backward stroke.Peter nodded thoughtfully , evidently awarding a point to our
side, and elbowed Duf f in the ribs.
“He was in a pot-house on Roanoke, eatin’ fish pie,” Duf f
said, capitulating. “Baked wi’ oysters and breadcrumbs on the
top, and  a pint o f dark ale to wash it down. Molasses pudding,
too.”
“Y e’ve a  keen sense of observation, Mr . Duf f,” Jamie said.
“How’ s your sense of time, then?”
“Eh? Oh, aye, I tak’ your meanin’, man. When was it …
twa month past, aboot.”
“And if ye wer e close enough to see what the man was
eating,” Jamie observed mildly , “then I expect ye were at table
with him, no? What did he speak of?”
Duf f looked mildly embarrassed . He glanced at me, then up
at one of the circling gulls.
“A ye, well. The shape of the arse on the barmaid, mostly .”
“I shouldna think that a topic of conversation to occupy the
course o f a meal, even if the la ssie was particularly shapely ,”
Roger put in.
“Ah, ye’d be su rprised how much there is to say about a
woman’ s bum, lad,” Duf f assured him. “This one was round as
an apple , and heavy as a steamed puddin’. ‘T was cold as
charity i n the place, and the thought of havin’ such a plump,
hot, wee bridie in your hands—meanin’ no of fense to ye,
ma’am, I’m sure,” he added hu rriedly , tipping his hat in my
direction.
“None taken,” I assured him cordially .
“Can yo u swim, Mr . Duf f?” Jam ie asked, his tone still one
of mild curiosity .
“What?” Duf f blinked, taken back. “I … ah … well …”
“No, he can’ t,” Roger said cheerfully . “He told me.”
Duf f gave him a look of outr aged betrayal over Jamie’ s
head.“W ell, there’ s loyalty!” he s aid, scandalized. “A fine
shipmate you  are! Givin’ me away so—ye should be ashamed
of yersel’, so ye should!”
Jamie ra ised his oars, dripping, out of the water , and Roger
followed suit. W e were perhaps a quarter -mile from shore, and
the water beneath our hull was a  deep, soft green, portending a
bottom several fathoms deep. The boat rocked gently , lifting
on the bosom of a long, slow swell.
“Bonnet,” Jamie  said, still polite ly , but with a definite edge.
Peter folded his arms and closed his eyes, making it clear that
the s ubject had nothing to do with him . Duf f sighed and eyed
Jamie narrowly .
“A ye, well. It’ s true, I’ve no notion where the man is. When
I s aw him on R oanoke, he was makin’ arrangements to have
some …  goods … brought in. F or what that might be worth to
ye,” he added, rather ungraciously .
“What goods? Brought in where? And going where?” Jamie
was leaning on his shipped oars, apparently casual. I could see
a certain tension in the line of his body , though, and it
occurred to me that while his attention might be fixed on
Duf f ’ s face, he was of necessi ty also watching the horizon
behind Duf f—which was rising and falling hypnotically as the
swell lifted the piretta and let it drop. Over and over and …
“T ea-chests was  what I took in for him,” Duf f answered
warily . “Couldna say , for the rest.”
“The rest?”
“Christ, man, every boat on this water brings in the odd bit
of jiggery-pokery here and there—surely ye ken that much?”
Peter ’ s eyes had opened to ha lf-slits; I saw them rest on
Jamie’ s face with a certain expression of interest. The wind
had shifted a few points, and the smell of dead whale was
decidedly stronger . Jamie took a slow , deep breath, and let it
out again, rather faster .
“Y e brought in tea, then. Where from? A ship?”“A ye.” Duf f was watching Jamie, too, in growing
fascination. I shifted uneasily o n the narrow seat. I couldn’ t
tell f rom the back of his neck, but I thought it more than likely
that he was beginning to turn green.
“The Sparr ow ,” Duf f went on, eyes fixed on Jamie. “She
anchored of f the Banks, and the boats went out to her . W e
loaded the car go and came in through Joad’ s Inlet. Cam’
ashore at W ylie’ s Landing, and h anded over to a fellow there.”
“What … fellow?” The wind was cool, but I could see
sweat tri ckling down the back of Jamie’ s neck, dampening his
collar and plastering the linen between his shoulders.
Duf f didn’ t answer immediately . A look of speculation
flickered in his small, deep-set eyes.
“Don’ t think about it, Duf f,” Roger said, softly , but with
great assurance. “I can reach ye from here with an oar , ken?”
“A ye?” Duf f glanced thoughtfully from Jamie, to Roger , and
then to me. “A y e, reckon ye might. But allowin’ for the sake
for ar gyment as how you can swim, MacKenzie—and even
that Mr .  Fraser might keep afloa t—I dinna think that’ s true of
the lady , is it? Skirts and petticoats …” He shook his head,
pursing thin lips in speculation as he looked at me. “Go to the
bottom like a stone, she would.”
Peter shifted ever so slightly , bringing his feet under him.
“Claire?” Jamie said. I saw his fingers curl tight round the
oars, an d heard the note of str ain in his voice. I sighed and
drew the pistol out from under the coat across my lap.
“Right,” I said. “Which one shall I shoot?”
Peter ’ s eyes snapped open, wide enough that I saw a rim of
white sh ow all round his black pupils. He looked at the pistol,
then at Duf f, then directly at Jamie.
“Give tea to a man name Butlah,” he said. “W ork for Mist’
L yon.” He pointed at me, the n at Duf f. “Shoot him,” he
suggested.The ice thus br oken, it took very little time for our two
passengers to confide the rest of  what they knew , pausing only
momentarily for Jamie to be sick over the side between
questions.
Smuggling was,  as Duf f had suggested, so common in the
area as to constitute general b usiness practice; most of the
merchants—and all of the small boatmen—in W ilmington
engaged in it, a s did most others on the Carolina coast, in
order to avoid the crippling duties on of ficially imported
goods. S tephen Bonnet, however , was not only one of the
more successful smugglers, but also rather a specialist.
“Brings in goods to order , like,”  Duf f said, twisting his neck
in order to scratch more ef fectively between his shoulder
blades. “And in what ye might call quantity .”
“How much quantity?” Jamie’ s elbows rested on his knees,
his head  sunk onto his hands. It seemed to be helping; his
voice was steady .
Duf f pursed his lips and squinted, calculating.
“There was six of us at the tavern on Roanoke. Six wi’
small boats, I m ean, as could ru n the inlets. If we were each to
be fetch in’ along as much as we could manage … say , fifty
chests of tea all told, then.”
“And h e brings in such a load how often—every two
months?” Roge r had relaxed a little, leaning on his oars. I
hadn’ t, a nd gave  Duf f a hard eye over the pistol to indicate as
much.
“Oh, more often than that,” Duf f answered, eyeing me
warily . “Couldn’ t say exactly , but you hear talk, aye? From
what the  other boats say , I recko n he’ s got a load comin’ every
two weeks in the season, somewhere on the coast betwixt
V ir ginia and Charleston.” Roger gave a brief grunt of surprise
at that, and Jamie looked up briefly from his cupped hands.
“What about the Navy?” he asked. “Who’ s he paying?”
That was a good  question. While small boats might escape the
Navy’ s eye, Bonnet’ s operation evidently involved lar gequantities of contraband, coming  in on lar ge ships. It would be
hard to hide som ething on that scale—and the obvious answer
was that he wasn’ t bothering to hide it.
Duf f shook his head and shrugged.
“Can’ t say , man.”
“But you haven’ t worked for Bonnet since February?” I
asked. “Why not?”
Duf f and Peter exchanged a glance.
“Y ou eat scorpion-fish, you hungry ,” Peter said to me. “Y ou
don’ eat dem, if fen you got sumpin’ bettah.”
“What?”
“The ma n’ s dan gerous, Sassena ch,” Jamie translated dryly .
“They dinna like to deal with him, save for need.”
“W ell, s ee him,  Bonnet,” Duf f said, warming to the topic.
“He’ s no  bad at all to deal with—sae long as your interest runs
wi’ his. Only , if  it might be as a ll of a sudden it doesna  quite
run with his …”
Peter solemnly drew a finger across his stringy neck,
nodding in af firmation.
“And it’ s no as  if there’ s warnin’ about it, either ,” Duf f
added, n odding too. “One minute, it’ s whisky and segars, the
next, ye’re on y our back in the sawdust, breathin’ blood, and
happy still to be breathin’ at that.”
“A temp er , has he?” Jamie drew a hand down over his face,
then wi ped his sweaty palm o n his shirt. The linen clung
damply to his shoulders, but I knew he wouldn’ t take it of f.
Duf f, Peter , and Roger all shook their heads simultaneously
at the question.
“Cold a s ice,” Roger said, and I heard the small note of
strain in his voice.
“Kill ye without the turn of a n arse-hair ,” Duf f assured
Jamie.“Rip yo u like dem whale,” Pe ter put in helpfully , with a
wave toward the island. The cur rent had carried us a good deal
closer to  the land, and I could se e the whale as well as smell it.
Seabirds whirle d and screamed in a great cloud over the
carcass, swoopin g down to tear away gobbets of flesh, and a
small crowd of people clustered nearby , hands to their noses,
clearly clutching handkerchiefs and sachets.
Just the n, the wind changed, and a fetid gust of decay
washed over us like a breaking  wave. I clapped Roger ’ s shirt
to my own face, and even Peter appeared to pale.
“Mother of God, have mercy on  me,” Jamie said, under his
breath. “ I—oh, Christ!” He leaned to the side and threw up,
repeatedly .
I nudged Roger in the buttock with my toe.
“Row ,” I suggested.
Roger obeyed with alacrity , putting his back into it, and
within a few m inutes, the keel of the piretta touched sand.
Duf f and Peter leaped out to run the hull up onto the beach,
then ga llantly assisted me out of the boat, evidently not
holding the pistol against me.
Jamie p aid them, then staggered a short distance up the
beach and sat d own, quite suddenly , in the sand beneath a
loblolly pine. He was roughly  the same shade as the dead
whale, a dirty gray with white blotches.
“W ill we  wait for ye, sir , and row ye back?” Duf f, his purse
now bulging healthily , hovered helpfully over Jamie.
“No,” Jamie said. “T ake them.” He waved feebly at me and
Roger , then closed his eyes an d swallowed heavily . “As for
me, I believe … I shall just … swim back.”101
MONSTERS AND HEROES
T HE LITTLE BOYS WERE mad to see the whale, and tugged
their relu ctant mothers along like kites. I came along, keeping
a somewhat more discreet distance from the towering carcass,
leaving Jamie on the beach to r ecover . Roger took Duf f aside
for a bit of private conversatio n, while Peter subsided into
somnolence in the bottom of the boat.
The carc ass was newly washed up on the beach, though it
must have been dead for some time before its landing; such an
impressive state of decomposition must have taken days to
develop. The stench notwithstanding, a number of the more
intrepid visitors were standing on the carcass, waving cheerily
to their compan ions on the beach below , and a gentleman
armed with a ha tchet was employed in hacking chunks of flesh
from the  side of the animal, dro pping these into a pair of lar ge
buckets. I recognized him as th e proprietor of an ordinary on
Hawthorn Street, and made a mental note to strike that
establishment from our list of potential eating-places.
Numbers of small crustaceans, not nearly so fastidious in
their habits, swarmed merrily over the carcass, and I saw
several people, also armed with buckets, picking the lar ger
crabs and crayfish of f like ripe fruit. T en million sand fleas had
joined the circus, too, and I retreated to a safe distance,
rubbing my ankles.
I g lance d back down the beach,  seeing that Jamie had risen
now an d joined the conversation—Duf f was looking
increasingly rest ive, glancing back and forth from the whale to
his b oat. Clearly , he was anxiou s to return to business, before
the attraction should disappear altogether .
At last he succeeded in escaping, and scampered away
toward his piretta, looking hunted. Jamie and Roger came
toward m e, but the little boys were clearly not ready yet toleave the whale. Brianna nobly volunteered to watch them
both, so  that Marsali could climb the nearby lighthouse tower ,
to see whether there might be any sign of the Octopus.
“What h ave you been saying t o poor Mr . Duf f?” I asked
Jamie. “He looked rather worried.”
“A ye? N o need of worry ,” he said, glancing toward the
water , w here Duf f ’ s piretta was rapidly pulling back to the
quay . “I’ve only put a wee bit of business in his way .”
“He knows where L yon is,” Roger put in. He looked
disturbed, but excited.
“And M r . L yon knows where Bonnet is—or if not where,
precisely , at least how to get word to him. Let us go a bit
higher , aye?” Jamie was still pal e; he gestured toward the stair
of th e to wer wit h his chin, wip ing sweat from the side of his
neck.
The air was  fres her at the top of the tower , but I had little
attention to spare for the view out over the ocean.
“And so … ?” I said, not sure I wanted to hear the answer .
“So I have commissioned Duf f to carry a message to Mr .
L yon. A ll being agreeable, we will meet with Mr . Bonnet at
W ylie’ s Landing, in a week’ s time.”
I swallowed, feeling a wave of dizziness that had nothing to
do w ith the heig ht. I closed my eyes, clutching the wooden rail
that surrounded the tiny platform  we stood on. The wind was
blowing hard, and the boards  of the tower creaked and
groaned, feeling frighteningly insubstantial.
I heard Jamie shift his weight, moving toward Roger .
“He is a man, ken?” he said quietly . “Not a monster .”
W as he?  It was a monster , I tho ught, who haunted Brianna
—and p erhaps h er father . W ould killing him reduce him, make
him no more than a man again?
“I know .” Roger ’ s voice was steady , but lacked conviction.I op ened my eyes, to see the oc ean falling away before me
into a bank of floating mist. It  was vast and beautiful—and
empty . One might well fall of f the end of the world, I thought.
 
“YE SAILED WI’ our Stephen, aye? For what, two months,
three?”
“Near on three,” Roger answered.
Our Stephen , wa s it? And what did Jamie mean by that
homely usage, then?
Jamie nodded, not turning his h ead. He looked out over the
rolling w ash of the sea, the breeze whipping strands of hair
loose from their binding to dance like flames, pale in daylight.
“Y e’ll have kent the man well enough, then.”
Roger leaned his weight against the rail. It was solid, but
wet and  sticky with half-dried spray , where spume from the
rocks below had reached it.
“W ell enough,” he echoed. “A ye. W ell enough for what?”
Jamie turned then, to look him in the face. His eyes were
narrowed against the wind, but straight and bright as razors.
“W ell enough to ken he is  a man—and no more.”
“What else would he be?” Roger felt the edge in his own
voice.
Jamie turned back toward the se a, shading his eyes with his
hand as he looked toward the sinking sun.
“A m onster ,” he said softly . “Something less than a man—
or more.”
Roger o pened his mouth to rep ly , but found he could not.
For it was a monster that shadowed his own heart with fear .
“How did the s ailors see him?” Claire’ s voice came from
Jamie’ s other side; she leaned ov er the rail to look around him,
and the wind sei zed her hair and shook it out in a flying cloud,
stormy as the distant sky .“On the Gloriana ?” Roger took a deep breath, a whif f of
dead whale mingling with the f ecund scent of the salt marsh
behind. “They … respected him . Some of them were afraid of
him.” Like me . “He had the reputation of a hard captain, but a
good one. Competent. Men were willing to ship with him,
because he always came safe into port, his voyages were
always profitable.”
“W as he  cruel?”  Claire asked. A  faint line showed between
her brows.
“All cap tains ar e cruel sometimes, Sassenach,” Jamie said,
with a slight tinge of impatience. “They need to be.”
She glanced up at him, and Roger saw her expression
change, memory softening her eyes, a wry thought tightening
the corner of her mouth. She laid a hand on Jamie’ s arm, and
he saw her knuckles whiten as she squeezed.
“Y ou’ve never done other than  you had to,” she said, so
quietly that Roger could scarcely hear her . No matter; the
words were plainly not meant for him. She raised her voice
then, sl ightly . “There’ s a dif ference between cruelty and
necessity .”
“A ye,” J amie said, half under h is breath. “And a thin line,
maybe, between a monster and a hero.”102
THE BA TTLE OF WYLIE’S LANDING
T HE S OUND W AS CALM and flat, the surface barely ruf fled
by t iny wind-driven waves. And a bloody good thing, too,
Roger thought, looking at his fa ther -in-law . Jamie had his eyes
open, at  least, fixed on the shore with a sort of desperate
intensity , as though the sight of solid land, however
unreachable, might yet impart some comfort. Droplets of
sweat gleamed on his upper lip , and his face was the same
nacreous color as the dawn sky , but he hadn’ t vomited yet.
Roger w asn’ t seasick, but he felt nearly as ill as Jamie
looked. Neither of them had eaten any breakfast, but he felt as
though he’d swallowed a lar ge mass of parritch, liberally
garnished with carpet-tacks.
“That’ s it.” Duf f sat back on h is oars, nodding toward the
wharf ahead. It was cool on th e water—almost cold at this
hour—but the air was thick with  moisture, and sweat ran down
his f ace from hi s ef forts. Peter s at silent on his own oars, dark
face set in an expression indicating that he wanted nothing to
do w ith this ente rprise, and the sooner their unwelcome car go
disembarked, the better .
W ylie’ s Landing  seemed like a mirage, floating in a layer of
mist above the water amid a th ick growth of needlerush and
cord grass. Marshland, clumps of stunted coastal forest, and
broad stretches of open water surrounded it, under an
overwhelming arch of pale gray sky . By comparison to the
green en closures of the mountains, it seemed uncomfortably
exposed. At the same time, it was completely isolated,
evidently miles from any other sign of human habitation.
That wa s in part illusion; Roger knew that the plantation
house w as no more than a mile  from the landing, but it was
hidden by a dense growth of scraggy-looking forest thatsprang from the marshy ground like some misshapen, dwarfish
Sherwood, thick with vines and brush.
The lan ding itself consisted of a short wooden dock on
pilings, and a collection of ramshackle sheds adjoining it,
weathered to a silver -gray that seemed about to disappear into
the lowering sky . A small ope n boat was drawn up on the
shore, hull upturned. A zigzag s plit-rail fence enclosed a small
pen beyond the s heds; W ylie must ship livestock by water now
and then.
Jamie touched the cartridge box  that hung at his belt, either
for r eassurance, or perhaps only to insure that it was still dry .
His eyes went to the sky , assessing, and Roger realized with a
sudden qualm that if it rain ed, the guns might not be
dependable. Black powder clum ped in the damp; more than a
trace of moisture and it wouldn’ t fire at all. And the last thing
he want ed was to find himself facing Stephen Bonnet with a
useless gun.
He is a man, no  mor e,  h e repeated silently to himself. Let
Bonnet swell to supernatural pr oportions in his mind, and he
was doomed. He groped for some reassuring image, and
fastened on a m emory of Stephen Bonnet, seated in the head
of the Gloriana , bre eches puddled round his ba re feet, blond-
stubbled jaw slack in the mornin g light, his eyes half-closed in
the pleasure of taking a peaceful crap.
Shit,  h e thought. T hink of Bonnet as a monster , and it
became impossi ble; think of him  as a man, and it was worse.
And yet, it had to be done.
His palm s were sweating; he rub bed them on his breeks, not
even bothering to try to hide it.  There was a dirk on his belt,
along w ith the pair of pistols; t he sword lay in the bottom of
the boat, solid in its scabbard . He thought of John Grey’ s
letter , and Captain Marsden’ s eyes, and tasted something bitter
and metallic at the back of his throat.
At Jamie’ s direction, the piretta drew slowly nearer the
landing, everyone on board alert for any sign of life.“No one lives here?” Jamie asked, low-voiced, leaning over
Duf f ’ s shoulder to scan the buildings. “No slaves?”
“No,” D uf f said , grunting as he  pulled. “W ylie doesna use
the l anding sae o ften these days, for he’ s built a new road from
his hous e—goes inland and joins wi’ the main road toward
Edenton.”
Jamie gave Duf f a cynical glance.
“And if W ylie doesna use it, there are others who do, aye?”
Roger could see that the landing was well situated for casual
smuggling; out of sight from the landward side, but easily
accessible from the Sound. What he had at first taken for an
island to  their right was in fact a maze of sandbars, separating
the c hannel that led to W ylie’ s Landing from the main sound.
He c ould see at  least four smaller channels leading into the
sandbanks, two of them wide en ough to accommodate a good-
sized ketch.
Duf f chuckled under his breath.
“There’ s a wee shell-road as le ads to the house, man,” he
said. “If anyone should come that way , ye’ll have fair
warnin’.”
Peter stirred restively , jerking his head toward the sandbars.
“T ide,” he muttered.
“Oh, aye. Y e’ll no have lo ng to wait—or ye will,
depending.” Duf f grinned, evidently thinking this funny .
“Why?” Jamie said gruf fly , not sharing the amusement. He
was looking somewhat better , n ow that escape was at hand,
but was obviously in no mood yet for jocularity .
“The tide’ s comin’ in.” Duf f sto pped rowing and leaned on
his o ars long en ough to remove his disreputable cap and wipe
his balding brow . He waved the cap at the sandbars, where a
crowd of small shorebirds we re running up and down in
evident dementia.“When the tide’ s out, the chan nel’ s too shallow to float a
ketch. In  two hours”—he squint ed at the glow in the east that
marked the sun’ s rising, and nodded to himself—”or a bit
more, th ey can come in. If they’re waitin’ out there now ,
they’ll c ome in at once, so as to finish the job and get of f again
before t he tide turns. But if they’ve not come yet, they’ll
maybe n eed to wait for the even ing sur ge. It’ s a chancy job, to
risk the channel s by night—but Bonnet’ s no the lad to be put
of f by a bit o’ da rkness. Still, if he’ s in nay rush, he might well
delay ‘til next morning. A ye, ye might have a bit of a wait.”
Roger re alized he had been holding his breath. He let it out
and drew a deep, slow breath, smelling of salt and pines, with
a faint stink of dead shellfish. So it would be soon—or perhaps
not unti l after nightfall, or not until the next day’ s dawn. He
hoped it would be soon—and h oped at the same time that it
wouldn’ t.
The piretta slid in close to the wharf, and Duf f thrust out an
oar against one of the barnacle-crusted pilings, swinging the
tiny boa t deftly alongside. Jami e hoisted himself up onto the
dock wi th alacrity , eager to rea ch dry land. Roger handed up
the s words and the small bundl e that contained their canteens
and spare powder , then followed . He knelt on the dock, all his
senses alert for the slightest so und of human movement, but
heard nothing but the liquid singing of blackbirds in the marsh
and the cry of gulls on the Sound.
Jamie rummaged in his pouch and pulled out a small purse,
which h e tossed  down to Duf f, with a nod. No more need be
said; thi s was a token payment. The rest would be paid when
Duf f returned for them, in two days.
Jamie had waited to the last po ssible moment to make the
arrangements, ensuring that Bonnet at least would be
unreachable unt il after the mee ting—the ambush—had taken
place. If  it was successful, Jam ie would pay the rest of the
money agreed; if it was not—Claire would pay .
He had a vision of Claire’ s face,  pale and drawn, nodding in
stif f-lipped agre ement as Jamie explained the arrangements toDuf f. Her eyes had flicked to Duf f, then, with the fierce yellow
ruthlessness of a hawk about to eviscerate a rat, and he had
seen Duf f flinch at the implicit threat. He hid a smile at the
memory . If friendship and money were insuf ficient to keep
Duf f ’ s m outh shut, perhaps fear of the White Lady would
suf fice.
They stood silently together on the dock, watching the
piretta pull slowly away . The knot in Roger ’ s stomach
tightened. He would have prayed, but could not. He couldn’ t
ask help  for such a thing as he meant now to do—not from
God or Michael the archangel; not from the Reverend or his
parents. Only from Jamie Fraser .
He wondered now and then h ow many men Fraser had
killed—if he counted. If he knew . It was a dif ferent thing, of
course, to kill a man in battle o r in self-defense, than to lie in
ambush for him, planning murd er in cold blood. Still, surely it
would be easier for Fraser , what they meant to do.
He g lanced at F raser , and saw him watching the boat pull
away . H e stood still as stone, and  Roger saw that his eyes were
fixed somewher e far beyond t he boat, beyond the sky and
water—looking on some evil thing, not blinking. Fraser took a
deep breath and swallowed hard . No, it wouldn’ t be easier for
him.
Somehow , that seemed a comfort.
 
THEY EXPLORED ALL the sheds briefly , finding nothing
but scattered rubbish: broken packing crates, heaps of moldy
straw , a few gnawed bones left by dogs or slaves. One or two
of th e sheds had  evidently once been used as living quarters,
but not recently . Some animal had built a lar ge, untidy nest
against the wall of one shed; w hen Jamie prodded it with a
stick, a plump gray rodent-like thing shot out, ran between
Roger ’ s feet, and sailed of f the  dock into the water with an
unnerving splash.They too k up quarters in the lar gest shed, which was built
on the wharf itself, and settled down to wait. More or less.
The plan was si mplicity itself; shoot Bonnet the instant he
appeared. Unless it rained, in which case it would be necessary
to employ swords or knives. S tated like that, the procedure
sounded altogether straightforward. Roger ’ s imagination,
though, was unable to leave it at that.
“W alk about if y e like,” Jamie said, after a quarter -hour of
watching Roger fidget. “W e’ll hear him come.” He himself sat
tranquil as a frog on a lily pa d, methodically checking the
assortment of weapons laid out before him.
“Mmphm. What if he doesna come alone?”
Jamie sh rugged, eyes fixed on the flint of the pistol in his
hand. He  wiggled it to be sure it  was firmly seated, then set the
gun down.
“Then he does not. If there are men with him, we must
separate him from them. I shall take him into one of the small
sheds, on pretext of private conversation, and dispatch him
there. Y o u keep anyone from following; I shallna require more
than a minute.”
“Oh, aye? And then ye come strolling out and inform his
men ye’ve just d one for their captain, and then what?” Roger
demanded.
Jamie rubbed a hand down th e bridge of his nose, and
shrugged again.
“He’ll be dead. D’ye think he ’ s the man to inspire such
loyalty as would make his men seek vengeance for him?”
“W ell …  no,” Roger said slowly . “Perhaps not.” Bonnet was
the type  to inspire hard work f rom his men, but it was labor
based on fear and the hope of profit, not love.
“I have discovered a good deal regarding Mr . Bonnet,”
Jamie observed, laying down the pistol. “He has regular
associates, aye, but he doesna have particular friends. He
doesna sail always with the sam e mate, the same crew—whichsea captains often do when they find a few men who suit them
well. Bonnet picks his crews as chance provides, and he
chooses them for strength or sk ill—not for liking. That being
so, I  wouldna expect to find any great liking for him among
them.”
Roger n odded, a cknowledging the truth of this observation.
Bonnet had run a tight ship on the Gloriana , b ut there had
been no  sense of camaraderie, e ven with his mate and bosun.
And it was true,  what Jamie said; everything they had learned
suggested that Bonnet picked up assistants as he required
them; if he brought men with him to this rendezvous, they
were unlikely to be a devoted lieutenant and crew—more
likely sailors picked at random of f the docks.
“All right. But if—when—we kill him, any men with him
—”
“W ill be in need of new employment,” Jamie interrupted.
“Nay , so  long as we take care not to fire upon them, or give
them reason to think we threat en them, I dinna think they’ll
trouble owermuch about Bonnet’ s fate. Still—” He picked up
his sword, frowning slightly , and slid it in and out of the
scabbard, to be sure it moved easily .
“I think if that should be the situation, then I will take
Bonnet aside, as I said. Give m e a minute to deal with him,
then make some excuse and c ome as though to fetch me.
Dinna stop, though; go straight through the sheds, and head for
the trees. I’ll come and meet ye there.”
Roger ey ed Jamie skeptically . Christ, the man made it sound
like a Sunday outing—a turn b y the river , and we’ll meet in
the park, I’ll bring ham sandwiches and you fetch the tea.
He c leared his th roat, cleared it again, and picked up one of
his o wn pistols. The feel of it w as cool and solid in his hand, a
reassuring weight.
“A ye, then. Just the one thing. I’ll take Bonnet.”
Fraser g lanced sharply at him. H e kept his own eyes steady ,
listening to the p ulse that had be gun to hammer hard inside hisears.
He saw Fraser start to speak, then stop. The man stared
thoughtfully at him, and he could hear the ar guments,
hammering on his inner ear w ith his pulse, as plainly as if
they’d been spoken aloud.
Y ou have never killed a man, no r even fought in battle. Y ou
ar e no marksma n, and only half-decent with a swor d. W orse,
you ar e afraid of the man. And if you try and fail …
“I k now ,” he sa id aloud, to Fraser ’ s deep blue stare. “He’ s
mine. I’ll take him. Brianna’ s your daughter , aye—but she’ s
my wife.”
Fraser b linked and looked away . He drummed his fingers on
his k nee for a moment, then stopped, drawing breath in a deep
sigh. He drew hi mself slowly upright and turned toward Roger
once again, eyes straight.
“It is your rig ht,” he said, formally . “So, then. Dinna
hesitate; dinna challenge him. Kill him the instant ye have the
chance.” He paused for a moment, then spoke again, eyes
steady o n Roge r ’ s. “If ye fall, though—know I will avenge
you.”
The nail-studded mass in his b elly seemed to have moved
upward, sticking in his throat. He coughed to shift it, and
swallowed.
“Great,” he said. “And if yo u fall, I’ll avenge you . A
bar gain, is it?”
Fraser didn’ t laugh, and in that moment, Roger understood
why men would follow him anywhere, to do anything. He only
looked at Roger for a long moment, and then nodded.
“A rare bar gain ,” he said softly . “Thank you.” T aking the
dirk from his belt, he began to polish it.
 
THEY HAD NO timepiece, but they didn’ t need one. Even
with the sky shrouded in low-lying clouds and the sun
invisible, it was possible to feel the creep of minutes, thegradual shift of the earth as the  rhythms of the day changed.
Birds th at had sung at dawn ceased singing, and the ones who
hunted i n morni ng began. The s ound of water lapping against
the pilings changed in tone, as the rising tide echoed in the
space beneath the wharf.
The time of high  tide came and passed; the echo beneath the
wharf be gan to grow hollow , as the water started to drop. The
pulse in Roger ’ s ears began to slacken, along with the knots in
his gut.
Then something struck the dock, and the vibration juddered
through the floor of the shed.
Jamie was up i n an instant, two pistols through his belt,
another in his hand. He cock ed his head at Roger , then
disappeared through the door .
Roger ja mmed h is own pistols s ecurely in his belt, touched
the hilt of his dirk for reassurance, and followed. He caught a
quick glimpse of the boat, the dark wood of its rail just
showing above the edge of the wharf, and then was inside the
smaller shed to t he right. Jamie was nowhere in sight; he’d got
to his own post, then, to the left.
He p ressed himself against the w all, peering out through the
slit af forded between hinge and door . The boat was drifting
slowly a long the edge of the dock, not yet secured. He could
see j ust a bit of the stern; the rest was out of sight. No matter;
he couldn’ t fire until Bonnet appeared on the wharf.
He wiped his palm on his breeks and drew the better of his
two pistols, checking for the tho usandth time that priming and
flint were in or der . The metal of the gun smelled sharp and
oily , in his hand.
The air was damp; his clothes stuck to him. W ould the
powder fire? He touched the dir k, for the ten-thousandth time,
running through Fraser ’ s instructions on killing with a knife.
Hand o n his shoulder , drive it up beneath the br eastbone,
har d. Fr om behind, the kidney , up fr om under . Go d, c ould hedo it face to fac e? Y es. He hoped it would be face to face. He
wanted to see—
A co il o f rope hit the dock; he heard the heavy thump, and
then the scramble and thud of so meone springing over the rail
to tie up. A rustle and a grunt of ef fort, a pause … He closed
his eyes , trying to hear through the thunder of his heart. Steps.
Slow , but not furtive. Coming toward him.
The door stood half-ajar . He ste pped silently to the edge of
it, li stening. W aiting. A shadow , dim in the cloudy light, fell
through the door . The man stepped in.
He lunged out from behind the door and flung himself
bodily at the m an, knocking him back into the wall with a
hollow thud. The man whooped  in surprise at the impact, and
the soun d of the cry stopped him just as he got his hands round
a distinctly unmasculine throat.
“Shit!” he said. “I mean, I—I—I beg your pardon, ma’am.”
She was  pressed against the wall, all his weight on her , and
he w as well aw are that the rest of her was unmasculine, too.
Blood, hot in h is cheeks, he released her and stepped back,
breathing heavily .
She shook herself like a dog, straightening her garments,
and tenderly touching the back o f her head where it had struck
the wall.
“I’m sor ry ,” he said, feeling both shocked and a complete
prat. “I didn’ t mean— Are you hurt?”
The girl was as tall as Brianna, but more solidly built, with
dark bro wn hair and a handsome face, broad-boned and deep-
eyed. She grinned at Ro ger and said something
incomprehensible, strongly scented with onions. She looked
him up and do wn in a bold sort of way , then, evidently
approving, put her hands under her breasts in a gesture of
unmistakable invitation, jerking her head toward a corner of
the s hed, where mounds of damp  straw gave of f a fecund scent
of not-unpleasant decay .“Ahhh …” Roger said. “No. I’m afraid you’re mistaken—
no, don’ t touch that. No. Non! Nein!”  He fumbled with her
hands, which seemed determine d to unfasten his belt. She said
something else in the unfamiliar tongue. He didn’ t understand
a word, but he got the sense of it well enough.
“No, I’m a married man. W ould ye stop!”
She laughed, gave him a flashing glance from under long
black lashes, and renewed her assault on his person.
He would have been convinced he was hallucinating, were
it not for the sm ell. Engaged at close quarters, he realized that
onions were the least of it. She w asn’ t filthy to look at, but had
the d eep-seated reek of someone just of f a long sea voyage; he
recognized that smell at once. Beyond that, though, the
unmistakable scent of pigs wafted from her skirts.
“Excusez-moi, mademoiselle.”  Jamie’ s voice came from
somewhere behind him, sounding rather startled. The girl was
startled, too, though not frighte ned. She let go of his balls,
though, allowing him to step back.
Jamie ha d a pistol drawn, though he held it by his side. He
raised one eyebrow at Roger .
“Who’ s this, then?”
“How in hell should I know?” Struggling for composure,
Roger sh ook himself back into some kind of order . “I thought
she was Bonnet or one of his men, but evidently not.”
“Evidently .” Fr aser seemed disposed to find something
humorous in the situation; a muscle near his mouth was
twitching fiercely . “Qui etes-vous, mademoiselle?”  he asked
the girl.
She frowned at him, clearly not understanding, and said
something in the odd language a gain. Both Jamie’ s brows rose
at that.
“What’ s she speaking?” Roger asked.
“I’ve no idea.” His look of amusement tinged with wariness,
Jamie turned toward the door , raising his pistol. “W atch her ,aye? She’ll no be alone.”
This was clear; there were voices on the wharf. A man’ s
voice, and another woman. Roger exchanged baf fled glances
with Jamie. No, the voice was neither Bonnet’ s nor L yon’ s—
and what in God’ s name were all these women doing here?
The voices were coming closer , though, and the girl
suddenly called out something in her own language. It didn’ t
sound like a warning, but Jamie quickly flattened himself
beside th e door ,  pistol at the ready and his other hand on his
dirk.
The narrow door darkened almost completely , and a dark,
shaggy head thrust into the she d. Jamie stepped forward and
shoved his pistol up under th e chin of a very lar ge, very
surprised-looking man. Seizing the man by the collar , Jamie
stepped backward, drawing him into the shed.
The man  was followed almost at once by a woman whose
tall, solid build and handsome face identified her at once as the
girl’ s mother . The woman was b lond, though, while the man—
the girl ’ s fathe r?—was as dark as the bear he strongly
resembled. He was nearly as tal l as Jamie, but almost twice as
broad, massive through the chest and shoulders, and heavily
bearded.
None of them appeared to be  at all alarmed. The man
looked surprised, the woman af fronted. The girl laughed
heartily , pointing at Jamie, then at Roger .
“I begin  to feel rather foolish,” Jamie said to Roger .
Removing the pistol, he stepped back warily . “W er seid Ihr?”
he said.
“I don’ t  think they’re German,” Roger said. “She”—he
jerked a  thumb at the girl, who  was now eyeing Jamie in an
appraising sort of way , as thou gh sizing up his potential for
sport in the straw —”didna seem to understand either French or
German, though perhaps she was pretending.”
The man  had been frowning, glancing from Jamie to Roger
in an  att empt to make out what they were saying. At the word“French,” though, he seemed to brighten.
“Comment ca va?”  he said , in the most execrable accent
Roger had ever heard.
“Parlez-vous Francais?”  J amie said, still eyeing the m an
cautiously .
The gian t smiled and put a callused thumb and forefinger an
inch apart.
“Un peu.”
A very little peu , as they shortly discovered. Th e man had
roughly a dozen words of F rench, just about enough to
introduce himself as one Mikhail Chemodurow , his wife Iva,
and his daughter , Karina.
“Rooshki,” Chemodurow said, slapping a hand across his
beefy chest.
“Russians?” Roger stared at them, flabber gasted, though
Jamie seemed fascinated.
“I’ve never met a Russian before,” he said. “What in
Christ’ s name are they doing here, though?”
W ith some dif ficulty , this question was conveyed to Mr .
Chemodurow , who beamed and flung a massive arm out,
pointing toward the wharf.
“Les cochons,”  he said . “Pour le Monsieur W ylie.”  He
looked expectantly at Jamie. “Monsieur W ylie?”
Given the eye-watering aroma rising of f all three of the
Russians, the mention of pigs came as no great surprise. The
connection betw een Russian swineherds and Phillip W ylie was
somewhat less obvious. Before the question could be gone
into, tho ugh, there was a loud thump outside, and a grinding
noise, a s though some lar ge wooden object had struck the
dock. This was s ucceeded immediately by a piercing chorus of
bellows and squeals—mostly porcine, but some of them
human—and female.Chemodurow moved with amazing speed for his size,
though J amie an d Roger were o n his heels as he shot through
the door of the shed.
Roger h ad barely time to see that there were two boats now
tied up at the wharf; the Russian’ s small bark, and a smaller
open boat. Several men, bristling  with knives and pistols, were
swarming out of the smaller boat onto the dock.
Seeing this, Jamie dived to on e side, disappearing out of
sight round the edge of a sma ller shed. Roger grabbed his
pistol, b ut hesitated, not sure wh ether to fire or run. Hesitated
a mome nt too long. A muske t jammed up under his ribs,
knocking out his breath, and han ds snatched at his belt, taking
pistols and dirk.
“Don’ t move, mate,” the man holding the musket said.
“T witch, and I’ll blow your liver out through your backbone.”
He spoke with no particular animus, but suf ficient sincerity
that Roger wasn’ t inclined to test it. He stood still, hands half-
raised, watching.
Chemodurow had waded in to the invaders without
hesitation, layin g about him wi th hands like hams. One man
was in the water , evidently having been knocked of f the wharf,
and the Russian  had another in  his grip, throttling him with
brutal ef ficiency . He ignored all shouts, threats, and blows, his
concentration fixed on the man he was killing.
Screams rent the air; Iva and Ka rina had rushed toward their
boat, wh ere two of the invader s had appeared on deck, each
clutching a slightly smaller vers ion of Karina. One of the men
pointed a pistol at the Russian w omen. He appeared to pull the
trigger; Roger saw a spark, and a small puf f of smoke, but the
gun faile d to fire. The women didn’ t hesitate, but char ged him,
shrieking. Panicking, he dropped the gun and the girl he was
holding, and jumped into the water .
A sickening thud wrenched R oger ’ s attention from this
byplay . One of the men, a sho rt, squat figure, had clubbed
Chemodurow over the head with the butt of a gun. TheRussian blinked, nodded, and his grip on his victim loosened
slightly . His assailant grimaced, took a tighter hold on the gun,
and sma shed him again. The Ru ssian’ s eyes rolled up into his
head and  he dropped to the doc k, shaking the boards with the
impact.
Roger had been looking from man to man, searching
ur gently amid the melee for Stephen Bonnet. Look as he
might, though, there was no trace of the Gloriana ‘s erstwhile
captain.
What was wrong? Bonnet was no coward, and he was a
natural f ighter . It wasn’ t thinkable that he would send men in,
and hang back himself. Roger looked again, counting heads,
trying to keep track of men,  but the conclusion became
stronger , as the chaos quickly died down. Stephen Bonnet
wasn’ t there.
Roger h adn’ t tim e to decide whe ther he was disappointed or
relieved by this discovery . The man who had clubbed
Chemodurow turned toward him at this point, and he
recognized David Anstruther , the sherif f of Orange County .
Anstruther reco gnized him, too—he saw the man’ s eyes
narrow—but didn’ t seem surprised to see him.
The fight—such as it was—was wrapping up quickly . The
four Russian women had all been rounded up and pushed into
the l ar gest shed, amid much scre aming and shouting of curses,
and the fallen C hemodurow was  dragged in as well, leaving a
disquieting smear of blood along the boards in his wake.
At this point, a p air of well-kept hands appeared on the edge
of the dock, and  a tall, elegantl y lean man pulled himself up
from the boat. Roger had no dif ficulty in recognizing Mr .
Lillywhite, one of the Orange County magistrates, even
without his wig and bottle-green coat.
Lillywhite had dressed for the occasion in plain black
broadcloth, thou gh his linen wa s as fine as ever and he had a
gentleman’ s swo rd at his side. He made his way across the
dock, in no great hurry , observing the disposition of matters ashe went . Roger saw his mouth tighten fastidiously at sight of
the trail of blood.
Lillywhite gestu red to the man  holding Roger , and at last,
the bruis ing pressure of the gun-muzzle eased, allowing him to
draw a deep breath.
“Mr . M acKenzie, is it not?” Lillywhite asked pleasantly .
“And where is Mr . Fraser?”
He’d be en expecting that question, and had had time to
contemplate the answer .
“In W ilmington,” he said, matching Lillywhite’ s pleasant
tone. “Y ou’re rather far afield yourself, are ye not, sir?”
Lillywhite’ s no strils pinched momentarily , as though
smelling somet hing bad—whic h he certainly was, though
Roger doubted the reek of pigs was causing his disedification.
“Do not trifle with me, sir ,” the magistrate said curtly .
“W ouldn’ t dream of it,” Roger assured him, keeping an eye
on the fellow with the musk et, who seemed disposed to
resume jabbing.  “Though if we’re asking that sort of question
—where’ s Stephen Bonnet?”
Lillywhite gave  a brief laugh, a sort of wintry amusement
coming into his pale gray eyes.
“In W ilmington.”
Anstruther appe ared at the ma gistrate’ s elbow , squat and
sweaty . He gave Roger a nod and an ugly grin.
“MacKenzie. Nice to see you again. Where’ s your father -in-
law , and more important—where’ s the whisky?”
Lillywhite frowned at the sherif f.
“Y ou haven’ t found it? Have you searched the sheds?”
“A ye, we looked. Nothing ther e but bits of rubbish.” He
rocked up onto his toes, menacing. “So, MacKenzie, where’d
you hide it?”“I haven’ t hidden anything,” Ro ger replied equably . “There
isn’ t any whisky .” He was begin ning to relax a little. Wherever
Stephen Bonnet was, he wasn’ t here. He didn’ t expect them to
be pleased at discovering that the whisky was a ruse, but—
The She rif f hit him in the pit o f the stomach. He doubled
up, his vision w ent dark, and he struggled vainly to breathe,
fighting a flash of panic as he relived his hanging, the black,
the lack of air …
Bright floating spots appeared at  the edges of his vision, and
he d rew breath, gasping. He w as sitting on the dock, legs
splayed out before him, the She rif f clutching a handful of his
hair .
“T ry again,” Anstruther advised  him, shaking him roughly
by the hair . The pain was irrita ting, rather than discomfiting,
and he swiped a fist at the Sherif f, catching him a solid blow
on the thigh. The man yelped and let go, hopping backward.
“Did you look on the other boat?” Lillywhite demanded,
ignoring the Sherif f ’ s discomfort. Anstruther glowered at
Roger , rubbing his thigh, but shook his head in answer .
“Nothing there but pigs and girls . And where in fuck’ s name
did they  come from?” he demanded.
“Russia.” Roge r coughed, clenched his teeth against the
resulting burst of pain, and got slowly to his feet, holding an
arm across his m iddle to keep h is guts from spilling out. The
Sherif f doubled a fist in anticip ation, but Lillywhite made a
quelling gesture  toward him. He looked incredulously at
Roger .
“Russia? What have they to do with this business?”
“Nothing, so far as I know . They arrived soon after I did.”
The mag istrate g runted, looking displeased. He frowned for
a moment, thinking, then decided to try another tack.
“Fraser had an arrangement with Milford L yon. I have now
assumed Mr . L yon’ s part of the agreement. It is altogether
proper for you to deliver th e whisky to me,” he said,attempting to infuse a note of businesslike politeness into his
voice.
“Mr . Fraser has made other arrangements,” Roger said, with
equal politeness. “He sent me to say as much to Mr . L yon.”
That seemed to take Lillywhite  aback. He pursed his lips,
and worked them in and out, staring hard at Roger , as though
to estimate his truthfulness. Roger stared blandly back, hoping
that Jamie wouldn’ t reappear ino pportunely and put paid to his
story .
“How did you get here?” Lillywhite demanded abruptly . “If
you did not travel on that boat?”
“I came overland from Edenton.” Blessing Duf f for the
information, he waved casually over his shoulder . “There’ s a
shell road back there.”
The two of th em stared at him, but he stared back,
undaunted.
“Something smells fishy , and it isn’ t the marsh.” Anstruther
snif fed loudly in illustration, then coughed and snorted.
“Phew! What a stink.”
Lillywhite disregarded this, but went on looking at Roger
with a narrowed eye.
“I think perhaps I must inconvenience you for a little longer ,
Mr . Mac Kenzie,” he said, and t urned to the Sherif f. “Put him
in with the Russians—if that’ s what they are.”
Anstruther accep ted this commission with alacrity , prodding
Roger in the bu ttocks with the muzzle of his musket as he
forced him toward the shed where the Russians were
imprisoned. Roger gritted his teeth and ignored it, wondering
how high the Sh erif f might bounce, if picked up and slammed
down on the boards of the dock.
The Rus sians were all clustered in the corner of the shed,
the women tending solicitously to their wounded husband and
father , but they all looked up at Roger ’ s entrance, with a
babble of incomprehensible greetings and questions. He gavethem as much of a smile as he could manage, and waved them
back, pressing his ear to the wall of the shed in order to hear
what Lillywhite and company were up to now .
He h ad hoped th ey would simply accept his story and depart
—and th ey might still do that, once they satisfied themselves
that the re really was no whisky hidden anywhere near the
landing. Another possibility had occurred to him, though; one
that was making him increasingly uneasy .
It was clear enough from the be havior of the men that they
had intended to take the whisk y by force—if there had been
any . And the way Lillywhite had held back, concealing
himself … it wouldn’ t do, obviously , for a county magistrate
to be revealed as having connections with smugglers and
pirates.
As i t was, since there was no wh isky , Roger could report no
actual wrong-doing on Lillywhite’ s part—it was illegal to deal
in contraband, of course, but such arrangements were so
common on the coast that the m ere rumor of it wasn’ t likely to
damage Lillywhite’ s reputation in his own inland county . On
the other hand, Roger was alone—or Lillywhite thought he
was.
There was clearly some connec tion between Lillywhite and
Stephen Bonnet —and if Roger and Jamie Fraser began to ask
questions, chanc es were good that it would come to light. W as
whatever Lillyw hite was engaged in suf ficiently dangerous
that he might think it worth killing Roger to prevent his
talking? He had the uneasy feeling that Lillywhite and
Anstruther might well come to that conclusion.
They could simply take him in to the marsh, kill him and
sink his body , then return to their companions, announcing that
he h ad gone back to Edenton.  Even if someone eventually
traced the members of Lillywhite’ s gang, and  if they could be
persuaded to talk—both matters of low probability—nothing
could be proved.
There was a lot of thumping and banging outside, gradually
succeeded by more distant ca lling, as the sheds were re-searched, and the search then spread to the nearby marsh.
It occurred to Roger that Lillywhite and Anstruther might
well have intended to kill him  and Jamie after taking the
whisky . In which case, there w as still less to prevent them
doing it now; they would be already prepared for it. As for the
Russians—would they harm them? He hoped not, but there
was no telling.
A light pattering rang on the tin roof of the shed; it was
beginning to rain. Fine, if their powder got wet, they wouldn’ t
shoot him; they’d have to cut hi s throat. He went from hoping
that Jam ie wouldn’ t show up too  soon, to hoping fervently that
he wouldn’ t show up too late. A s to what he might do if and
when he did  show up …
The swords. W ere the swords still where they had left them,
in the corner of the shed? The ra in had grown too loud for him
to hear anything outside, anyway; he abandoned his listening
post and went to look.
The Rus sians all  looked up at him with mingled expressions
of warin ess and concern. He smiled and nodded, making little
shooing gestures to get them out of the way . Y es, the swords
were stil l there—that was something, and he felt a small sur ge
of hope.
Chemodurow was conscious; he said something in a slurred
voice, an d Karin a got up at once and came to stand by Roger .
She patt ed him gently on the arm , then took one of the swords
from him. She drew it from its scabbard with a ringing whoosh
that made them all jump, then laugh nervously . She wrapped
her hands round the hilt and held it over her shoulder , like a
baseball bat. She marched over to the door and took up her
station beside it, scowling fiercely .
“Great,” Roger said, and gave her a broad smile of approval.
“Anyone pokes his head in, take it of f, aye?” He mimed a
chopping motion with the side of his hand, and the Russians
all made loud gr owling sounds of enthusiastic support. One of
the younger girls reached for th e other sword, but he smiled
and indicated that he would keep it, thanks anyway .T o his surprise,  she shook her head, saying something in
Russian. He raised his eyebrows and shook his head
helplessly . She tugged on his arm, and made him come with
her , back toward the corner .
They h ad been  busy during the brief period of their
captivity . They had moved aside the rubbish, made a
comfortable pal let for the inju red man—and uncovered the
lar ge trapdoor installed in the fl oor , meant to be used by boats
coming under the wharf at low  tide, so that car go could be
handed directly up into the shed , rather than unloaded onto the
dock.
The tide was going out now; it was a drop of more than six
feet to the water ’ s dark surface. He stripped to his breeks and
hung by his ha nds from the edge of the trapdoor before
dropping in feetfirst, not want ing to risk a dive into what
might be dangerous shallows.
The water was higher than his head, though; he sank in a
shower of silver bubbles, then  his feet touched the sandy
bottom and he launched himself upward, breaking the surface
with a whoosh of air . He waved reassuringly at the circle of
Russian faces peering down at him through the trapdoor , then
struck out for the far end of the wharf.
 
FROM H IS PERCH ON the ro of of the shed, Jamie assessed
the m agistrate’ s  way of moving, and the manner in which he
fondled the weapon. Lillywh ite turned away , his hand
nervously caress ing the hilt of his sword. A long reach, and a
good bearing; quick, too, if a little jerky . T o wear a sword
under these circumstances suggested both a habit of familiarity
with the weapon and a fondness for it.
He couldn’ t see Anstruther , who had pressed himself back
against the wall of the shed, under the overhang of the roof,
but he was less  concerned with the Sherif f. A brawler , that
one, and short in the arm.
“I say we kill them all. Only way to be safe.”There was a grunt of dubious assent from Lillywhite.
“That m ay be— but the men? W e do not wish to put our fate
in the hands of witnesses who m ay talk. W e could have dealt
with Fraser and MacKenzie saf ely out of sight—but so many
… perhaps we m ay leave these Russians; they are foreigners
and seem not to speak any English… .”
“A ye, and how did they come here, I’d like to know? I’ll
warrant they wasn’ t caught up in a waterspout and set down
here by accident. Someone knows about ‘em, someone will
come lo oking fo r ‘em—and whoever that someone is, he’ s got
some means to talk to ‘em, I’ll be bound. They’ve seen too
much already—and if you mean to go on using this place …”
The rain was still light, but coming down steadily . Jamie
turned h is head to wipe the mois ture out of his eyes against his
shoulder . He was lying flat, ar ms and legs outspread like a
frog’ s to keep from sliding down the pitch of the tin roof. He
didn’ t dare to move, just yet. The rain was whispering out on
the Sound, though, puckering the water like drawn silk, and
making a faint ringing noise on  the metal around him. Let it
rain just  that wee bit harder , an d it would cover any noise he
made.
He s hifted his w eight a little, feeling the press of the dirk,
hard under his h ipbone. The pistols lay beside him on the roof,
likely useless in the rain. The dirk was his only real weapon at
the mom ent, and one much better suited to surprise than to a
frontal attack.
“… send the men back with the boat. W e can go by the
road, after …”
They were still talking, low-voiced, but he could tell that the
decision had been made; Lillywhite only needed to convince
himself that it was a matter of necessity , and that wouldn’ t take
long. Th ey’d send the men away first, though; the magistrate
was right to be afraid of witnesses.
He blinked water out of his eyes and glanced toward the
lar ger shed, where Roger Mac  and the Russians were. Thesheds were close together; the g aps between the staggered tin
roofs no  more than three or four feet. There was one shed
between him and the lar ger one. W ell, then.
He woul d take advantage of the men leaving to move across
the roofs, and trust to luck and the rain to prevent Lillywhite or
Anstruther from looking up. Crouch above the door to the
shed, and when they came to do the deed, wait just until they’d
got t he door open, then drop on the magistrate from above and
hope to break his neck or at least disable him at once. Roger
Mac cou ld be depended on to r ush out and help deal with the
Sherif f, then.
It was the b est plan he could contrive under the
circumstances, and not a bad one, he thought. If he didn’ t slip
and break his own neck, of course. Or a leg. He flexed his left
leg, feel ing the slight stif fness of the muscles in his calf. It was
healed, but there was no denying the slight weakness
remaining. He could manage  well enough, walking, but
jumping across rooftops …
“A ye, well, needs must when the Devil drives,” he muttered.
If it came to sm ash and he rui ned the leg again, he’d better
hope the Sherif f killed him, because Claire surely would.
The tho ught made him smile, but he couldn’ t think about
her now . Later , when it was fi nished. His shirt was soaked
through, stuck to his shoulders,  and the rain was chiming of f
the tin roofs like  a chorus of fairy-bells. Squirming cautiously
backward, he got his knees und er him and rose to a crouch,
ready to drop flat again if anyone was looking up.
No one was on the dock. There were four men besides
Lillywhite and the Sherif f; all of them were out in the soft
ground t o the south of the landing, poking through the waist-
high gra ss in a desultory fashio n. He took a deep breath and
got his feet slow ly under him. As he swiveled round, though,
he c aught a flicker of moveme nt from the corner of his eye,
and froze.
Holy Christ, there were men coming out of the wood. For an
instant, he thought it was more o f Lillywhite’ s doing, and thenhe realized that the men were black. All but one.
Les Cochons,  t he Rus sian had  said. Pour le Monsieu r W ylie.
And here was Monsieur W yli e, coming with his slaves to
collect his pigs!
He lay down on  his belly again  and squirmed over the wet
metal, eeling toward the back of the shed roof. It was open to
question, he thought, whether W ylie would be better disposed
to he lp him or to run him through himself—but he did suppose
the man had some stake in preserving his Russians.
 
THE W A TER W AS COLD, but  not numbing, and the pull of
the tidal current wasn’ t great yet. Still, the injury to his throat
and the searing o f the canebrake fire had left him much shorter
of b reath than h e used to be, and Roger found himself obliged
to bob to the su rface and gasp for air with every three or four
strokes.
Ruby lips, above the water ,  he sang  ironica lly to himself,
blowing bubb-le s soft and fine … He d rew in a gulp of air , and
trod water , listening. He had he aded toward the south side of
the l anding first, but had heard voices above, and so reversed
direction. He was just under the north edge of the wharf now ,
hidden in the deep shadow by the Russians’ boat.
The sme ll of pigs was overwhelming, and he could hear
muf fled thumps and grunts from the hold, coming through the
wood be side him. Christ, had they sailed that tiny craft all the
way from Russia? It looked it ; the wood was battered and
dented.
No soun d of voices nearby . It was raining hard, shushing
into the Sound; that would hel p cover any racket he made.
Ready , s teady , go, then. He took a great lungful of air and
launched himself into the rainy light beyond the landing.
He swam desperately , trying not to splash, expecting a
musket ball between the shoulder blades every moment. He
blundered into the weeds, felt th e grasp and slash of sawgrass
on a rm and leg,  rolled half-over , gasping, salt burning in thecuts, and then w as on his hands and knees, crawling through
the growth of marsh plants, black needlerushes waving over
his head , rain pounding on his  back, the water lapping just
below his chin.
He s topped at last, chest heavin g with the need for air , and
wondered what in hell to do nex t. It was good to be out of the
shed, bu t he hadn’ t a plan for what happened now . Find Jamie,
he supposed—if he could, without being caught again.
As thoug h the thought had draw n attention to him, he heard
the slosh and swish of someone walking slowly through the
marsh nearby . Searching. He froze, hoping the rain would
cover the sound of his breath, loud and rasping in his ears.
Closer . D amn, they were coming closer . He fumbled at his
belt, but he had lost the dirk, so mewhere in his swimming. He
got one knee up  under his chin, braced himself to spring and
run.
The gras s above him swept sudd enly away , and he leaped to
his feet,  just in time to avoid the spear that sliced into the
water where he’d lain.
The spea r quive red in front of him, six inches from his face.
On the other side of it, a black man gaped at him, eyes
saucered in amazement. The Negro closed his mouth, blinked
at him, and spoke in tones of deepest accusation.
“Y ou ain’ t no possum!”
“No,” sa id Roger , mildly . “I’m not.” He brushed a trembling
hand down his c hest, assuring himself that his heart was still
inside it. “Sorry .”
 
PHILLIP WYLIE LOOKED a great deal dif ferent at home,
Roger th ought, than he did in society . Attired for pig-catching
in loose  breeks and a farmer ’ s  smock, damp with rain, and
minus an y trace of wig, paint, powder , or patches, he was still
elegantly slende r , but looked quite normal, and reasonably
competent. He also looked somewhat more intelligent, though
his m outh did te nd to keep drop ping open, and he did insist onbreaking into Jamie’ s account with questions and
expostulations.
“Lillywhite? Randall Lillywhite? But what can he—”
“Concentrate, m an,” Jamie said impatiently . “I’m telling ye
now , and I’ll tell ye more later , but he and yon sherif f are like
to be carving up  your Russians like a set of Christmas hams,
and we dinna go and tend to the matter this minute.”
W ylie glared at Jamie, then looked suspiciously at Roger ,
who wa s standi ng under the co ver of the forest, half-naked,
soaking wet, and covered with blood-streaked mud.
“He’ s right,” Roger croaked, then coughed, cleared his
throat, a nd repe ated it, more fi rmly . “He’ s right; there’ s not
much time.”
W ylie’ s lips compressed into a  thin line, and he exhaled
strongly through  his nose. He looked round at his slaves, as
though counting them; a half-dozen men, all carrying stout
sticks. One or two had cane-knives at their belts. W ylie
nodded, making up his mind.
“Come on, then.”
A voiding the telltale crunching of the shell-road, they made
slow but steady progress through the marsh.
“Why pigs?” He heard Jamie as k curiously , as he and W ylie
for ged ahead of the group.
“Not pigs,” W ylie replied. “Russian boars. For sport.” He
spoke rather proudly , swishing h is own stick through the thick
grass. “E veryone says that of all  game, the Russian boar is the
fiercest and most wily opponen t. I propose to release them in
the woods on my property and allow them to breed.”
“Y e mean to hunt them?” Jamie sounded mildly
incredulous. “Have ye ever hunted a boar?”
Roger saw W ylie’ s shoulders stif fen under his damp smock
at th e question. The rain had sl ackened, but was still coming
down.“No,” he said. “Not yet. Have you?”
“Y es,” Jamie said, but wisely didn’ t amplify the answer .
As they drew n ear the landing, Roger caught a glimpse of
movement beyond. The smaller boat was pulling away .
“They’ve given up looking for me or the whisky , and sent
their men away .” Jamie wiped a  hand down his face, slicking
the r ain of f. “Wh at say ye, W yli e? There’ s no time to lose. The
Russians are in the main shed, on the wharf.”
Once decided, W ylie was no ditherer .
“Storm the place,” he said shortly .
He wav ed a hand, beckoning his slaves to follow , and
headed for the landing at a trot. The whole party swerved onto
the shell-road, thundering towa rd the wharf with a noise like
an avalanche. That ought to give Lillywhite and Anstruther
pause in their m urdering, Roger thought. They sounded like an
approaching army .
Barefoot, Roger kept to the marshy ground, and was in
consequence slo wer than the rest. He saw a startled face peer
out between the sheds, and quickly withdraw .
Jamie saw it too, and gave one of his wild Highland cries.
W ylie je rked, startled, but then joined in, bellowing “Get out
of it, you bastar ds!” Thus encouraged, the Negroes all began
shouting and bellowing, waving  their sticks with enthusiasm
as they char ged the landing.
It was something  of an anticlimax to arrive on the wharf and
find no one the re save the captive Russians, who narrowly
missed beheading Phillip W ylie when he imprudently shoved
open the door to their prison without announcing himself.
A brief search of the Russian  boat and the surrounding
marsh turned up no trace of Lillywhite and Anstruther .
“Most like they swim for it,” one of the Negroes said,
returning from the search. He nodded across the channel,
toward the tangle of the sandbars, and fingered his spear . “W ego h unt them?” It was the ma n who had discovered Roger ,
evidently still eager to try his luck.
“They didn’ t swim,” W ylie said  shortly . He gestured at the
tiny beach near the landing, an empty stretch of oyster shells.
“They’ve taken my boat, blast them.”
He turned away , disgusted, an d began to give orders for
unloading and penning the Russian boars. Chemodurow and
his f amily had a lready been taken of f to the plantation house,
with the girls alternating between amazement at the black
slaves an d coy looks at Roger , who had retrieved his shirt and
shoes, but whose breeches were still plastered to his body .
One of the slave s appeared from the shed with an armful of
discarded weapo nry , recalling W ylie temporarily to the duties
of a host.
“I a m obliged to you for yo ur help in preserving my
property , sir ,” he said to Jamie. He bowed, rather stif fly . “W ill
you not allow me to of fer y ou and Mr . MacKenzie my
hospitality?” He didn’ t sound thrilled about it, Roger noted,
but still, he’d of fered.
“I am obliged t o you, sir , for your help in preserving our
lives,” Jamie said with equal stif fness, returning the bow . “And
I thank ye, but—”
“W e’d b e deligh ted,” Roger interrupted. “Thanks.” He gave
W ylie a firm handshake, surprising him very much, and
grabbed Jamie by the arm, steer ing him toward the shell-road
before he could protest. There were times and places to be on
your high horse, he supposed, but this wasn’ t one of them.
“Look, ye havena got to kiss the man’ s bum,” he said, in
response to Jamie’ s mutterings, as they slogged toward the
forest. “Let his butler give us a dry towel and a bit of lunch,
and we’ ll be of f while he’ s still  busy with his boars. I’ve had
no breakfast, and neither have you. And if we’ve got to walk
to Edenton, I’m no doing it on an empty belly .”
The mention of food seemed to go some way toward
restoring Jamie’ s equanimity , and as they reached the semi-shelter o f the wood, a mood of almost giddy cheerfulness had
sprung up between them. Roger  wondered if this was the sort
of w ay you fel t after a battle; the sheer relief of finding
yourself alive and unwounded made you want to laugh and
arse about, just to prove you still could.
By unspoken consent, they left discussion of recent events
—and speculation as to the present whereabouts of Stephen
Bonnet—for later .
“Russian boars, for Christ’ s sake,” Jamie said, shaking
himself like a dog as they paused under the shelter of the
wood. “ And I doubt the man’ s ever seen a boar in his life!
Y e’d think he could manage to kill himself without going to
such expense about it.”
“A ye, w hat d’ye think it must have cost? More money than
we’ll see  in ten years, likely , jus t to haul a lot of pigs … what,
six thousand miles?” He shook his head, staggered at the
thought.
“W ell, to be fa ir about it, they’re more than only pigs,”
Jamie said tolerantly . “Did ye not see them?”
Roger ha d, though only briefly . The slaves had been herding
one of the anim als across the dock as he’d emer ged from the
shed with his cl othes. It was tall and hairy , with long yellow
tushes that looked nasty enough.
It w as e maciated from the long sea-voyage, though, its ribs
showing and half its bristly pelt  rubbed bald. It had obviously
not got its landle gs yet, staggering and careening drunkenly on
its ridiculous small hooves, eyes rolling, grunting in panic as
the slaves shouted and poked at it with their poles. Roger had
felt quite sorry for it.
“Oh, they’re big enough, aye,” he said. “And I suppose once
they’re filled out a bit, they’d b e something to see. I wonder
how the y’ll like this, though, af ter Russia?” He waved a hand
at the damp, scrubby wood around them. The air was moist
with rain , but the trees blocked most of the downfall, leaving it
dark and resin-smelling under the low canopy of scrub oak andscraggy pines. T wigs and acorn caps crunched pleasantly
under their boots on the sandy earth.
“W ell, there are acorns and roots aplenty ,” Jamie observed,
“and the  odd Negro now and th en, for a treat. I expect they’ll
do well enough.”
Roger laughed, and Jamie grunted in amusement.
“Y e think I’m jesting, aye? Y e’ll not have hunted boar ,
either , I suppose.”
“Mmphm. W ell, perhaps Mr . W ylie will invite us to come
and—”
The back of his head exploded, and everything disappeared.
 
A T SOM E POINT he became a ware again. A ware mostly of a
pain so  great that unconsciousness seemed immensely
preferable. But aware too of pebbles and leaves pressing into
his f ace, and of noises nearby . The clash and thud and grunt of
men fighting in earnest.
He forc ed himself toward consciousness, and raised his
head, though the ef fort made c olored fireworks go of f inside
his eyes and made him want very badly to throw up. He braced
himself on his folded arms, teeth gritted, and after a moment,
his vision cleared, though things were still blurred.
It took a moment to make out what was happening; they
were ten  feet or so beyond the spot where he lay , with bits of
tree and  brush obscuring the fi ght. He caught a muttered “ A
Dhia! ” th ough, among the panting and grunting, and felt a
sharp pang of relief. Jamie was alive, then.
He got to his knees, swaying, and stayed there for a
moment, his vision winking in and out of blackness. When it
steadied, his head had fallen forward and he was staring at the
ground. His sword lay a few feet away , half-covered with
scuf fed sand and leaves. One of his pistols was with it, but he
didn’ t bother with that; he couldn’ t hold it steady , even if the
powder were still dry enough to fire.He scrabbled and fumbled, bu t once he’d got his hand
wedged into the basket of the sword’ s hilt, he felt a little
better; he wouldn’ t drop it, now . Something wet was running
down his neck—blood, rain? It didn’ t matter . He staggered,
clutched a tree with his free hand, blinked away the blackness,
took another step.
He felt like the boar , unfamiliar ground shifting and
treacherous under his feet. He trod on something that rolled
and gave way , and he fell, landing hard on one elbow .
He turned awkwardly over , hampered by the sword, and
found th at he had stepped on Anstruther ’ s leg. The Sherif f was
lying on his bac k, mouth open, looking surprised. There was a
lar ge rip in his neck, and a lot  of blood had soaked into the
sand around him, rusty and stinking.
He recoiled, and the shock of it got him on his feet, with no
memory of having stood up. Lil lywhite’ s back was to him, the
linen of his shi rt wet and sticking to his flesh. He lunged,
grunting, then flung back, beat, riposted …
Roger shook his head, trying to  clear it of the idiotic terms
of s wordsmanship, then stoppe d, gasping with pain. Jamie’ s
face was  set in a  maniac half-grin, teeth bared with ef fort as he
followed his opponent’ s weapon. He’d seen Roger , though.
“Roger!” he shouted, breathless with the fight. “Roger , a
charaid! ”
Lillywhite didn’ t turn, but flung himself forward, feinting,
beating away , lunging back in tierce.
“Not … stupid …” he gasped.
Roger realized dimly that Lillywhite thought Jamie was
bluf fing, trying to make him turn around. His vision was
flickering round the edges again, and he grabbed for a tree,
gripping hard to stay upright. T he foliage was wet; his grip
was slipping.
“Hey …” he cal led hoarsely , unable to think of any words.
He raised his sword, the tip trembling. “Hey!”Lillywhite stepped back and whirled around, eyes wide with
shock. R oger lunged blindly , with no aim, but with all the
power left in his body behind it.
The sword went into Lillywhite’ s eye, and a slithering
crunch r an up Roger ’ s arm, as metal scraped bone and went
through to something softer , where it stuck. He tried to let go,
but his hand wa s trapped in the basket-hilt. Lillywhite went
stif f, and Roger could feel the man’ s life run straight down the
sword, through his hand, and up his arm, swift and shocking as
an electric current.
Panicked, he jerked and twisted, trying to get the sword
free. Lillywhite spasmed, went limp, and fell toward him,
flopping like a h uge dead fish as Roger wrenched and yanked,
vainly trying to free himself from the sword.
Then Ja mie seiz ed him by the wrist and got him loose, got
an arm around him, and led hi m away , stumbling and blind
with pa nic and pain. Held his  head and rubbed his back,
murmuring nonsense in Gaelic while he puked and heaved.
W iped his face and neck with handsful of wet leaves, wiped
the snot from his nose with the wet sleeve of his shirt.
“Y ou okay?” Roger mumbled, somewhere in the midst of
this.
“A ye, fine,” Jamie said, and patted him again. “Y ou’re fine,
too, all right?”
At le ngth he wa s on his feet again. His head had gone past
the poin t of pain; it still hurt, but the pain seemed a separate
thing from himself, hovering somewhere nearby , but not
actually touching him.
Lillywhite lay face-up in the leaves. Roger closed his eyes
and swallowed. He heard Jamie mutter something under his
breath, a nd then  a grunt, a rustling of leaves, and a small thud.
When Roger opened his eyes, Lillywhite was lying face-down,
the back of his shirt smeared with sand and acorn hulls.
“Come on.” Jamie got him und er the arm, pulled the arm
over his  shoulder . Roger lifted h is free hand, waved it vaguelytoward the bodies.
“Them. What should we do with … them?”
“Leave them for the pigs.”
Roger could walk by himself by  the time they left the wood,
though he had a tendency to d rift to one side or the other ,
unable to steer q uite straight as yet. W ylie’ s house lay before
them, a handsome construction in red brick. They picked their
way acr oss the lawn, ignoring the stares of several house-
servants, who clustered at the  upstairs windows, pointing
down at them and murmuring to one another .
“Why?” Roger asked, stopping for a moment to shake some
of the leaves from his shirt. “Did they say?”
“No.” Jamie pulled a soggy wad  of cloth that had once been
a handkerchief from his sleeve and swished it in the
ornamental fou ntain. He used it to mop his face, looked
critically at the resultant streaks of filth, and soused it in the
fountain again.
“The first I knew was the thud when Anstruther clubbed ye
—here, your head’ s still bleedin’. I turned round to see ye lyin’
on th e ground, a nd the next insta nt, a sword came at me out o’
nowhere, right across my ribs. Look at that, will ye?” He
poked his fingers through a lar ge rent in his shirt, wiggling
them. “I ducked behind a tree, and barely got my own blade
out in time. But neither of them said a word at all.”
Roger pressed the prof fered handkerchief gingerly to the
back of his head . He sucked air through his teeth with a hiss as
the cold water touched the wound.
“Shit. Is it only that my head’ s cracked, or does that make
no sense? Why in Christ’ s name try so hard to kill us?”
“Because they wanted us dead,” Jamie said logically ,
turning up his sleeves to wash his hands in the fountain. “Or
someone else does.”
The pain  had decided to take up residence in Roger ’ s head
again. He was feeling sick again.“Stephen Bonnet?”
“If I were a gambling man, I’d put good odds on it.”
Roger closed one eye in order to correct a tendency for there
to be two of Jamie.
“Y ou ar e  a gambling man. I’ve seen ye do it.”
“W ell, there ye are, then.”
Jamie ran a hand absently thr ough his matted hair , and
turned to ward the house. Karina and her sisters had appeared
at the window , and were waving ecstatically .
“What I want v erra much to know just now is, where is
Stephen Bonnet?”
“W ilmington.”
Jamie swung round, frowning at him.
“What?”
“W ilmington,” Roger repeated. He cautiously opened the
other ey e, but it seemed all right. Only one Jamie. “That’ s
what Lillywhite said—but I thought he was joking.”
Jamie stared at him for a moment.
“I hope to Christ he was,” he said.103
AMONG THE MYR TLES
W ilmington
B Y C ONTRAST WITH FRASER’S RIDGE, W ilmington was
a giddy metropolis, and under normal circumstances, the girls
and I should hav e fully enjoyed its delights. Given the absence
of R oger and Ja mie, and the nature of the errand they were
bound upon, though, we were able to find little distraction.
Not that we d idn’ t try . W e lived through the creeping
minutes of nights broken by crying children and haunted by
imaginations worse than nightm are might be. I was sorry that
Brianna had seen as much as  she had, after the battle at
Alamance; vague imaginings based on fear were bad enough;
those based on close acquainta nce with the look of ruined
flesh, of smashed bone and st aring eyes, were a good deal
worse.
Rising heavy-eyed amid a crumple of discarded clothes and
stale linen, we fed and dressed  the children and went out to
seek wh at mental respite might be found during the day in the
distractions of horse-racing, shopping, or the competing
musicales hoste d once a week— on successive evenings—by
Mrs. Crawford and Mrs. Dunning, the two most prominent
hostesses in town.
Mrs. Dunning’ s evening had tak en place the day after Roger
and Jamie left. Performances upon the harp, violin,
harpsichord, and flute were interspersed with recitations of
poetry—at least it was referred to as poetry—and “Songs, both
Comick and T ragick,” sung by Mr . Angus McCaskill, the
popular and courteous proprietor of the lar gest ordinary in
W ilmington.
The T ragick songs were actually much funnier than the
Comick ones, owing to Mr . M cCaskill’ s habit of rolling his
eyes up into his  head during the  more lugubrious passages, asthough he had the lyrics written on the inside of his skull. I
adopted a suitably solemn expression of appreciation, though,
biting the inside of my cheek throughout.
Brianna required no such aid to courtesy . She sat staring at
all the performances with a countenance of such brooding
intensity that it seemed to disco ncert a few of the musicians,
who eye d her nervously , and e dged toward the other side of
the room, getting the harpsichord safely between her and them.
Her attitude had nothing to do with the performance, I knew ,
but rather with a reliving of the  ar guments that had preceded
the men’ s departure.
These had been prolonged, vigorous, and conducted in low
voices, as the four of us walked up and down the quay at
sunset. Brianna had been impassioned, eloquent, and
ferocious. Jamie had been patient, cool, and immovable. I had
kept my mouth shut, for once more stubborn than either of
them. I could no t in conscience side with Bree; I knew what
Stephen Bonnet was. I would not side with Jamie; I knew what
Stephen Bonnet was.
I kn ew what Jamie was, too, and while the thought of his
going to deal w ith Stephen Bonnet was enough to make me
feel as though I were hanging from a fraying rope over a
bottomless pit, I did know tha t there were few men better
equipped for such a task. For b eyond the question of deadly
skill, which he certainly had , there was the question of
conscience.
Jamie w as a Highlander . While the Lord might insist that
vengeance was His, no male Highlander of my acquaintance
had ever  though t it right that the Lord should be left to handle
such thi ngs without assistance. God had made man for a
reason, a nd high  on the list of th ose reasons was the protection
of a family and the defense of its honor—whatever the cost.
What Bonnet had done to Bri anna was not a crime that
Jamie would ever for give, let alo ne for get. And beyond simple
vengeance, and the continuing threat that Bonnet might pose
to Bree or Jemmy , there was th e fact that Jamie felt himselfresponsible, at least in part, for such harm as Bonnet might do
in the world— to our family , or to others. He had helped
Bonnet to escape the gallows o nce; he would not be at peace
until he had amended that mistake—and said so.
“Fine!” Brianna  had hissed at him, fists clenched at her
sides. “So you’ll be at peace. Just fine! And how peaceful do
you think Mama and I will be, if you or Roger is dead?”
“Y e’d prefer me to be a coward? Or your husband?”
“Y es!”
“No, ye wouldn ’ t,” he said with  certainty . “Y e only think so
now , because ye’re afraid.”
“Of course I’m afraid! So is Mama, only she won’ t say so,
because she thinks you’ll go anyway!”
“If s he does thin k so, she’ s right,” Jamie said, giving me a
sidelong look, with a hint of a smile. “She’ s known me a long
time, aye?”
I glance d at him, but shook my head and turned away ,
sealing my lips and staring out at the masts of the ships
anchored in the harbor while the ar gument raged on.
Roger had finally put a stop to it.
“Brianna,” he said softly , when she paused for breath. She
turned toward him, face anguished, and he touched her
shoulder . “I willna have this m an in the same world as my
children,” he said, still softly , “or my wife. Do we go then with
your blessing—or without it?”
She had  sucked in her breath,  bitten her lip, and turned
away . I saw the tears brimming i n her eyes, and the working of
her throat as she swallowed them. She said no more.
Whatever word of blessing she had given him had been
spoken i n the night, in the quiet of their bed. I had given Jamie
blessing and farewell in that same darkness—still without
speaking a word. I couldn’ t. He would  go, no matter what I
said.Neither of us slept that night; we lay in each other ’ s arms,
silently aware of each breath and shift of body , and when the
shutters began to show cracks of gray light, we rose—he to
make his preparations, I because I could not lie still and watch
him go.
As he left, I stood on tiptoe to kiss him, and whispered the
only important thing.
“Come back,” I’d said. He’d sm iled at me, smoothing a curl
behind my ear .
“Y e ken  what I s aid at Alamance? W ell, it’ s no today , either ,
Sassenach. W e’ll both be back.”
 
MRS. CRA WFO RD’S ASSEM BL Y , held the next evening,
boasted the same performers, for the most part, as had Mrs.
Dunning’ s, but had one novelt y; it was there that I smelled
myrtle candles for the first time.
“What i s that lovely scent?” I asked Mrs. Crawford during
the interval, snif fing at the candelabra that decorated her
harpsichord. The candles were beeswax, but the scent was
something both delicate and sp icy—rather like bayberry , but
lighter .
“W ax-myrtle,” she replied, gratified. “I don’ t use them for
the c andles themselves, though o ne can —but it does take such
a tremen dous quantity of the be rries, near eight pound to get
only a pound o f the wax, imag ine! It took my bond-maid a
week of  picking, and she broug ht me barely enough as would
make a dozen candles. So I rend ered the wax, but then I mixed
it in with the regular beeswax when I dipped the candles, and I
will say I am ple ased. It does gi ve such a pleasant aroma, does
it not?”
She leaned closer to me, lowering her voice to a confidential
whisper .
“ Someone  said to me that Mrs. Dunning’ s home smelt last
night as though the cook had sco rched the potatoes at supper!”And so, on the third day , faced with the alternatives of a day
spent co oped up with three small children in our cramped
lodgings, or a repeat visit to the much-diminished remains of
the d ead whale, I borrowed seve ral buckets from our landlady ,
Mrs. Burns, commissioned a picnic basket, and marshalled my
troops for a foraging expedition.
Brianna and Marsali consented to the notion with alacrity , if
not enthusiasm.
“Anything is better than sitting  around worrying,” Brianna
said. “Anything!”
“A ye, and anything is better th an the stink of filthy clouts
and sour  milk, too,” Marsali add ed. She fanned herself with a
book, looking pale. “I could do wi’ a bit of air .”
I wo rried a little  about Marsali’ s ability to walk so far , given
her expanding girth—she was in her seventh month—but she
insisted that the exercise would benefit her , and Brianna and I
could help to carry Joanie.
As is usual in cases of travel with small children, our
departure was somewhat prolonged. Joanie spit up mashed
sweet po tato down the front of her gown, Jemmy committed a
sanitary indiscretion of major proportions, and Germain
disappeared during the conf usion occasioned by these
mishaps. He was discovered, at the conclusion of a half-hour
search involving everyone in the street, behind the public
livery stable, happily engaged in throwing horse dung at
passing carriages and wagons.
Everyone forcibly cleaned, redressed, and—in Germain’ s
case—threatened with death and dismemberment, we
descended the stairs again, to fin d that the landlord, Mr . Burns,
had help fully dug out an old goat-cart, with which he kindly
presented us. The goat, however , was employed in eating
nettles in the next-door garden, and declined to be caught.
After a quarter of an hour ’ s heated pursuit, Brianna declared
that she would prefer to pull the  cart herself, rather than spend
any longer playing ring-around-the-rosy with a goat.“Mrs. Fraser , Mrs. Fraser!” W e were halfway down the
street, the children, buckets, and picnic basket in the goat-cart,
when M rs. Burn s came hurrying out of the inn after us, a jug
of sm all beer in one hand, and a n ancient flintlock pistol in the
other .
“Snakes,” she explained, handing me the latter . “My Annie
says she  saw at least a dozen adders, last time she walked that
way .”
“Snakes,” I said, accepting the object and its attendant
paraphernalia with reluctance. “Quite.”
Given that “adder” could mean anything from a water
moccasin to the most harmless g rass snake, and also given that
Annie Burns had a marked tal ent for melodrama, I was not
unduly concerned. I thought of dropping the gun into the
picnic b asket, but a glance at Germain and Jemmy , pictures of
cherubic innocence, decided me of the unwisdom of leaving
even an unloade d firearm anywhere near them. I dropped the
pistol into my berry-bucket, instead, and put it over my arm.
The day  was overcast and cool, with a light breeze of f the
ocean. The air was damp, and  I thought there was a good
chance of rain before long, but for the moment, it was very
pleasant out, with the sandy earth packed down suf ficiently
from earlier rains to make the walking easy .
Following Mrs. Crawford’ s directions, we made our way a
mile or so down the beach, and found ourselves at the edge of
a thick growth of coastal forest, where scanty-needled pines
mingled with mangroves and palmetto in a dense, sun-
splintered tangl e, twined with vines. I closed my eyes and
breathed in, nostrils flaring at the intoxicating mixture of
scents: mudflats  and wet sand, pine resins and sea air , the last
faint whif fs of d ead whale, and what I had been looking for—
the fresh, tangy scent of wax-myrtles.
“That w ay ,” I said, pointing into the tangle of vegetation.
The going was too heavy for the cart now , so we left it,
allowing the little boys to run wild, chasing tiny crabs and
bright birds, as we made our way slowly into the scrubbyforest. M arsali carried Joan, who curled up like a dormouse in
her mother ’ s arms and went to  sleep, lulled by the sound of
ocean and wind.
In spite of the he avy growth, the walking was more pleasant
here than on the  open beach; the wind-stunted trees were tall
enough to give a  pleasing sense of secrecy and refuge, and the
footing was better , with a thin layer of decaying leaves and
needles underfoot.
Jemmy grew tired of walking, and tugged on my skirt,
raising both arms to be picked up.
“All right.” I hung a berry-bucket from one wrist, and
swung h im up, with a crackle a nd pop of vertebrae; he was a
very solid little boy . He twined his sandy feet comfortably
round m y waist and rested his fa ce on my shoulder with a sigh
of relief.
“All ver y well for you,” I said, gently patting his back.
“Who’ s going to give Grannie a ride, hey?”
“Grand-da,” he said, and giggled. He lifted his head,
looking round. “W’ere Grand-da?”
“Grand-da’ s busy ,” I told him, t aking care to keep my voice
light and cheerful. “W e’ll see Grand-da and Daddy soon.”
“W ant Daddy!”
“Y es, so does Mummy ,” I murmured. “Here, sweetie. See
that? See the little berries? W e’re going to pick some, won’ t
that be fun? No,  don’ t eat them ! Jemmy , I said no , do not  put
them in your mouth, they’ll make you sick!”
W e had found a  luxuriant patch of wax-myrtles, and soon
spread o ut, losing sight of each  other amid the bushes as we
picked, but calling out every few minutes, in order not to lose
each other entirely .
I ha d put Jemmy down again, and was idly contemplating
whether there might be any use for the berry-pulp, once the
myrtle berries were boiled to ren der the wax, when I heard thesoft crun ch of footsteps on the other side of the bush I was
picking from.
“Is that you, darling?” I called , thinking it was Brianna.
“Perhaps we ought to have our lunch soon; I think it’ s maybe
coming on to rain.”
“W ell, i t’ s a kind invitation, sure,” said a male voice,
sounding amuse d. “I thank ye, ma’am, but I’ve made a decent
breakfast not long since.”
He stepp ed out from behind the bush, and I stood paralyzed,
completely unab le to speak. My mind, oddly enough, was not
paralyzed in the slightest; my thoughts were running at the
speed of light.
If Stephe n Bonn et’ s her e, Jamie and Roger ar e safe, thank
God.
Wher e ar e the childr en?
Wher e is Br ee?
Wher e’ s that gun, goddamnit?
“Who’ s that, Grandmer e ?” Germain, appearing from behind
a bu sh w ith wha t appeared to be  a dead rat dangling from one
hand, approached me warily , blue eyes narrowed at the
intruder .
“Germain,” I said in a croak, no t taking my eyes of f Bonnet.
“Go find your mother , and stay with her .”
“ Grandmer e , is it? And who will his mother be, then?”
Bonnet glanced from me to Ger main and back, interested. He
tilted back the hat he wore, and scratched at the side of his jaw .
“Never mind that,” I said, as firmly as I could. “Germain,
go!” I stole a lo ok downward, but the pistol was not in my
bucket. There were six buckets , and we had left three on the
goat-cart; undoubtedly the gun  was in one of those, worse
luck.
“Oh, do n’ t be goin’ just yet, young sir .” Bonnet made a
move to ward Germain, but the little boy took alarm at thegesture and skittered back, throwing the rat at Bonnet. It hit
him in the knee, surprising him and making him hesitate for
the split second necessary for  Germain to vanish into the
myrtles. I could hear his feet ch uf fing the sand as he ran, and
hoped h e knew where Marsali w as. The last thing we needed
was for him to lose himself.
W ell, possibly not the very last thing, I amended. The very
last thin g we needed was for Stephen Bonnet to lay eyes on
Jemmy , which he promptly did, when the latter wandered out
of the bushes a n instant later , his short gown smeared with
mud, m ore mud oozing through the fingers of his clenched
fists.
There w as no sun, but Jemmy’ s hair seemed to blaze with
the brilliance of a striking matc h. Paralysis disappearing in a
heartbeat, I grabbed him up, an d backed away several steps,
knocking over the half-filled bucket of myrtle berries.
Bonnet’ s eyes were the pale green of a cat’ s, and they
brightened now  with the intentness of a cat that spots a
creeping mouse.
“And who will this sweet mann een be?” he asked, taking a
step toward me.
“My son,” I said instantly , and pulled Jem tight against my
shoulder , ignoring his struggles. W ith the natural perversity of
small ch ildren, he seemed to b e fascinated by Bonnet’ s Irish
lilt, and kept turning his head to stare at the stranger .
“Favors his father , I see.” Drop s of sweat glistened in the
heavy blond brows. He smoothed first one, then the other , with
the t ip o f his finger , so the sweat ran in trickles down the sides
of his face, but the pale green eyes never wavered in their
regard. “As does his … sister .  And is your lovely daughter
anyplace nearby , dear one? I should enjoy to renew our
acquaintaince—such a charmin’ girl, Brianna.” He smiled.
“No dou bt you would,” I said, making no particular ef fort to
disguise the edge in my voice. “No, she isn’ t. She’ s at home—
with her husband.” I leaned heavily on the word husband ,hoping that Brianna was near enough to hear me and take
warning, but he paid it no mind.
“At hom e, now . And where do ye call home then, Mum?”
He took of f the hat and wiped his face with his sleeve.
“Oh … in the ba ckcountry . A homestead.” I waved vaguely
in the direction I thought roughl y west. What was this—social
conversation? And yet the choices seemed distinctly limited. I
could tu rn and flee—at which point he would catch me
handily , burdened as I was with Jemmy . Or I could stand here
until he revealed  what he wante d. I didn’ t think he was out for
a picnic among the myrtles.
“A homestead,” he repeated, a muscle twitching in his
cheek. “What business brings ye so far from home, and I
might ask?”
“Y ou might not,” I said. “Or rather—you might ask my
husband. He’ll be along shortly .”
I t ook another step backward as I said this, and he took a
step toward me at the same time. A flicker of panic must have
crossed my face, for he looked amused, and took another step.
“Oh, I doubt tha t, Mrs. Fraser dear . For see, the man’ s dead
by now .”
I squeez ed Jemmy so hard th at he let out a strangled
squawk.
“What d o you mean?” I demanded hoarsely . The blood was
draining from my head, coagul ating in an icy ball round my
heart.
“W ell, d’ye see, it was a bar gain,” he said, the look of
amusement grow ing. “A division of duties, ye might say . My
friend L illywhite and the good Sherif f were to attend to Mr .
Fraser and Mr . MacKenzie, and Lieutenant W olf f was to
manage Mrs. Cameron’ s end of the business. That left me with
the plea sant task of makin’ myself reacquainted with my son
and his mother .” His eyes sharpened, focusing on Jemmy .“I d on’ t know w hat you are talking about,” I said, through
stif f lips , taking a better grip on Jemmy , who was watching
Bonnet, owl-eyed.
He gave a short laugh at that.
“Sure, a nd ye’re no hand at lyin’, ma’am; you’ll for give the
observation. Y e ’d never make a card player . Y e know well
enough what I mean—ye saw m e there, at River Run. Though
I con fess as how  I should be obliged to hear exactly what you
and Mr . Fraser was engaged in, a-butchering that Negro
woman that W olf f killed. I did hear as how the picture of a
murderer shows  in the victim’ s eyes—but ye didn’ t seem to be
looking at her e yes, from what I could see. W as it magic of a
sort ye were after doing?”
“W olf f—it was  him, then?” Just at the moment, I didn’ t
really care whether Lieutenant W olf f had murdered scores of
women, but I was willing to engage in any line of conversation
that of fered the possibility of distracting him.
“A ye. He’ s a bungler , W olf f,” he said, dispassionately . “But
‘twas hi m that found out about the gold to begin with, so he
claimed a part in the doings.”
How far away were Marsali and Brianna? Had Germain
found th em? I could hear noth ing over the whine of insects
and the distant wash of surf. Surely they must hear us talking,
though.
“Gold,” I said, raising my voice  a little. “Whatever do you
mean, gold? There isn’ t any gold at River Run; Jocasta
Cameron told you as much.”
He puf fed air through his lips in genial disbelief.
“I will say as Mrs. Cameron is a better liar than yourself,
dear one, but su re, I didn’ t believe her , either . The doctor saw
the gold, see.”
“What d octor?” A baby’ s high-pitched cry came faintly
through the bushes—Joan. I coughed, hoping to drown it out,
and repeated, more loudly , “What doctor do you mean?”“Rawls, I think was his name, or Rawlings.” Bonnet was
frowning slightly , head turned toward the sound. “I’d not the
pleasure of his acquaintance, though; I might be mistaken.”
“I’m sor ry—I still have no idea what you’re talking about.”
I wa s trying simultaneously to hold his gaze and to scan the
ground nearby for anything that might be used as a weapon.
Bonnet had a p istol in his belt , and a knife, but showed no
disposition to draw either one. W hy should he? A woman with
an armload of two-year -old was not any sort of threat.
One thick blond brow flicked up , but he seemed in no great
hurry , whatever he was about.
“No? W ell, ‘twas W olf f, as I was sayin’. It was a tooth to be
drawn or somesuch; he met with this sawbones in Cross
Creek. Bought the fellow a drink in reward, and spent the
evening inside a wine-skin with him, in the end. Y e’ll know
the Lieutenant’ s weakness for  the drink—the doctor was
another sot, I he ar , and the two of them thick as thieves before
the d awn. Rawlings let out that  he’d seen a great quantity of
gold at River Run, for he’d just come from there, see?”
Rawlings had either passed out or sobered up enough to say
no m ore, but th e revelation had been enough to renew the
Lieutenant’ s determination to gain the hand—and property—
of Jocasta Cameron.
“The lady would be havin’ none of him, though, and then
she ups and dec lares as she’ll be takin’ the one-armed fella
instead. ‘T was a cruel blow to the Lieutenant’ s pride, alas.” He
grinned at that, showing a missing molar on one side.
Lieutenant W olf f, furious and baf fled, appealed to his
particular friend, Randall Lillywhite, for advice.
“Why , t hat—so that’ s why he arrested the priest at the
Gathering? T o prevent him marrying Mrs. Cameron to Duncan
Innes?”
Bonnet nodded.
“That w ould be  the way of it. A  matter of delay , ye might
say , so as to be havin’ the oppo rtunity of lookin’ further intothe matter .”
Said opportunity  had occurred at the wedding. As we had
theorized, someone—Lieutenan t W olf f—had in fact attempted
to drug Duncan Innes with a cup of punch spiked with
laudanum. The plan had been to render him insensible and
pitch him into the river . Duri ng the uproar occasioned by
Duncan’ s disappearance and presumedly accidental death,
W olf f would have the chance to search the premises
thoroughly for the gold—and eventually , to renew his
addresses to Jocasta.
“But the black bitch drank t he stuf f herself,” he said
dispassionately . “Didn’ t die of it, worse luck—but she could
have sai d who gave the cup to  her , of course, and so W olf f
slipped round and mixed ground glass into the gruel they were
after feedin’ her .”
“What I want to know ,” I said, “is just how you  got involved
in this. Why were you there at River Run?”
“And isn’ t the Lieutenant the friend of my bosom these
many years past, dear one? H e came to me for help in
disposing of the one-armed lad,  so as he could take care to be
seen in the midst of the party , enjoyin’ himself in all innocence
whilst accident was befallin’ his rival.” He frowned slightly ,
tapping a finger on the hilt of his pistol.
“I w ould have done better to bash the Innes fella on the
head an d toss him in, once I saw the laudanum had gone
astray . Couldn’ t  get at him, though—he spent half the day in
the jakes, and so meone always in there with him, bad cess to
them.”
There was nothing on the ground near me that could
possibly be used as a weapon. T wigs, leaves, scattered
fragments of shell, a dead rat—well, that had worked for
Germain, but I d idn’ t think Bonnet could be surprised twice in
that fash ion. Jem my was losing his fear of the stranger as we
talked, and was beginning to squirm to get down.I ed ged backward a little; Bon net saw it, and smiled. He
wasn’ t b othered. Obviously he didn’ t think I could escape, and
just as obviously , he was waitin g for something. Of course—
he had told me, himself. He was waiting for Brianna. I realized
belatedly that he had clearly fol lowed us out here from town;
he knew that Marsali and Brianna were somewhere nearby—
much easier simply to wait until they revealed themselves.
My best hope w as that someone else would happen along;
the w eather was muggy and dam p, but not raining yet, and this
was a well-known spot for picnicking, according to Mrs.
Burns. If someone did come along, how could I take
advantage of it? I knew that Bonnet would not have the
slightest compunction in simply shooting anyone who got in
his w ay—he was boasting about the rest of his bloodthirsty
plans.
“Mrs. Cameron —Mrs. Innes, she’ll be now—seemed
willin’ e nough to talk, when I suggested that her husband
might soon be lackin’ a few of his treasured parts, though as it
happens, she was lyin’, then, too, deceitful old trout. But it
came to me, ponderin’ the matter afterward, that she might be
more obligin’, were it a matter of her heir .” He nodded toward
Jemmy , and clicked his tongue at the boy . “So, lad, will we be
goin’ to see your great-auntie, then?”
Jemmy looked suspiciously at Bonnet, cuddling back
against me.
“Whozat?” he asked.
“Oh, it’ s  a wise child that knows  its father , isn’ t it? I’m your
Da, lad—was your mother not after telling you so?”
“Daddy?” Jemm y looked at Bo nnet, then at me. “At’ s not
Daddy!”
“No, he isn’ t y our daddy ,” I assured Jemmy , shifting my
hold. My arms were beginning to ache under the strain of
holding him. “He’ s a bad man; we don’ t like him.”
Bonnet laughed.“Is t here no sham e with you at all, dear one? Of course he’ s
mine—it’ s your daughter has said so, to my face.”
“Nonsense,” I said. I had maneu vered my way into a narrow
gap betw een two of the ever green wax-myrtle bushes. I’d try
to di stract him b ack into conversation, then seize a moment to
whirl round, set Jemmy down, a nd ur ge him to run. W ith luck,
I c ould block th e gap long enou gh to prevent Bonnet grabbing
him before he could get away—if he would  run.
“Lillywhite,” I said, taking hold of the conversation. “What
did you mean, Lillywhite and the Sherif f were going to—to
attend to my husband and Mr . MacKenzie?” Merely
mentioning the possibility made me feel sick; sweat was
running down my sides, but my face felt cold and clammy .
“Oh, tha t? What I said, Mrs. Fraser . Y our husband is dead.”
He had started looking past m e, pale green eyes flicking
through the shrubbery . He was clearly expecting Brianna to
show up at any moment.
“What happened at the wedding showed us clear enough
that it wouldn’ t do, to leave Mrs. Cameron with so much
protection. No, if we meant to tr y again, the thing to do was to
see that  she’ s no manfolks to call upon, either for help, or
vengeance. So when your husband suggested to Mr . L yon that
he fe tch me alon g to a private meeting, I thought that might be
a s uitable opportunity to dispose  of him and Mr . MacKenzie—
two bird s with one whisky keg , as ye might be sayin’—but
then I thought best if Lillywhite were the lad to handle that
end of things, him and his tame sherif f.” He smiled. “I thought
best I come to be fetchin’ my son and his mother along, so as
not to risk anything goin’ amiss, ye see. W e’ll—”
I shi fted weight, spun on my h eel, and plunked Jemmy on
the ground on the far side of the bushes.
“Run!” I said ur gently to him. “Run, Jem! Go!” There was a
flash of red as he scampered away , whimpering with fear , and
then Bonnet crashed into me.He tried  to shove me aside, bu t I was ready for that, and
grabbed for the pistol at his belt. He felt me snatch, and jerked
back, but I had my fingers on th e butt. I got it free and flung it
behind me, as I fell to the ground with him on top of me.
He rolled of f me and up on to his knees, where he froze.
“Stay there, or by the Holy V ir gin, I’ll blow your head of f!”
Gasping from the fall, I sat up slowly , to see Marsali, pale as
a sheet, aiming the ancient flintlock at him over the swell of
her belly .
“Shoot him, Maman !” G ermain was behind her , small face
alight with eagerness. “Shoot him like a porcupine!”
Joan was somewhere back in th e bushes; she began to wail
at th e sound of her mother ’ s voice, but Marsali didn’ t take her
eyes of f  Bonnet. Christ, had she loaded and primed the gun? I
thought she must have; I could smell a whif f of black powder .
“W ell, now ,” Bonnet said slowly . I could see his eyes trace
the distance between him and Marsali—fifteen feet or more,
too much to reach her with a dive. He put one foot on the
ground, beginning to rise. He could reach her in three strides.
“Don’ t l et him stand up!” I scrabbled up onto my own feet,
shoving at his shoulder . He fell to the side, catching himself on
one hand, then h eaved back, faster than I could have imagined,
seizing me round the waist and  pulling me back down, this
time on top of him.
There were screams from behin d me, but I had no attention
to sp are. I stabbed my fingers at his eye, narrowly missing as
he jerke d me sideways; my nails  slid of f his cheekbone, raking
furrows in his skin. W e rolled in a flurry of petticoats and Irish
oaths, me grabbing for his privates, him trying at once to
throttle me and protect himself.
Then he squirmed and flipped over like a fish, and we ended
with his  arm locked tight around  my neck, holding me against
his ches t. There was a whisp er of metal on leather , and
something cold against my neck. I stopped struggling, and
took a deep breath.Marsali’ s eyes were the size of saucers, her mouth clamped
tight. He r gaze, thank heaven, w as still trained on Bonnet, and
so was the gun.
“Marsali,” I said, very calmly , “shoot him. Right now .”
“Be putting the g un down, colleen,” Bonnet said, with equal
calmness, “or I’ll cut her throat on the count of three. One—”
“Shoot him!” I said, with all my force, and took my last
deep gulp of air .
“T wo.”
“W ait!”
The pres sure of the blade acros s my throat lessened, and I
felt the sting of blood as I took a breath I had not expected to
be given. I hadn’ t time to enjoy the sensation, though; Brianna
stood amid the myrtles, Jemmy clinging to her skirts.
“Let her go,” she said.
Marsali had been holding her breath; she let it out with a
gasp and sucked air deep.
“He isn’ t about to let me go, and it doesn’ t matter ,” I said
fiercely to them both. “Marsali, shoot him. Now! ”
Her han d tightened on the gun, but she couldn’ t quite do it.
She glanced at Brianna, white-faced, then back, her hand
trembling.
“Shoot him, Maman ,” Germain whispered, but the
eagerness had gone from his face. He was pale, too, and stood
close to his mother .
“Y ou’ll come along with me, d arlin’, you and the lad.” I
could feel the vibration through Bonnet’ s chest as he spoke,
and sens ed the half-smile on his face, though I couldn’ t see it.
“The others can go.”
“Don’ t,” I said, trying to make Bree look at me. “He won’ t
let us go, you know he won’ t. He’ll kill me and Marsali, no
matter w hat he says. The only thing to do is shoot him. If
Marsali can’ t do it, Bree, you’ll have to.”That got  her attention. Her eyes  jerked to me, shocked, and
Bonnet grunted, half in annoyance, half in amusement.
“Condemn her mother? She’ s not the girl to be doing such a
thing, Mrs. Fraser .”
“Marsali—he’ll kill you, and the babe with you,” I said,
straining every muscle to make her understand, to force her to
fire. “Germain and Joan will die out here, alone. What happens
to me doesn’ t matter , believe me—for God’ s sake, shoot him
now! ”
She fired.
There w as a spark and puf f of white smoke, and Bonnet
jerked. Then her hand sagged,  the muzzle of the gun tilted
down—and the wad and ball fell out on the sand with a tiny
plop. Misfire.
Marsali moane d in horror , and Brianna moved like
lightning, seizing the fallen bucket and hurling it at Bonnet’ s
head. He yelped and threw himself aside, letting go his grip on
me. The  bucket struck me in the  chest and I caught it, stupidly
staring down into it. It was dam p inside, with a scattering of
the blue-white waxy berries stuck to the wood.
Then Germain and Jemmy were both crying, Joan was
shrieking her head of f in the wood, and I dropped the bucket
and crawled madly for shelter behind a yaupon bush.
Bonnet was back on his feet, face flushed, the knife in his
hand. He was c learly furious, but made an ef fort to smile at
Brianna.
“Ah, no w , darlin’,” he said, having to raise his voice to be
heard ab ove the racket. “It’ s o nly yourself and my son I’m
wanting. I’ll not be harming either of you.”
“He’ s not your son,” Brianna said, low-voiced and vicious.
“He’ll never be yours.”
He grunted contemptuously .
“Oh, aye? That’ s not how I heard it, in that dungeon in
Cross C reek, sw eetheart. And now I see him …” He looked atJemmy again, nodding slowly . “He’ s mine, darlin’ girl. He’ s
the look of me—haven’ t ye, boyo?”
Jemmy buried his face in Brianna’ s skirts, howling.
Bonnet sighed, shrugged, and gave up any pretense of
cajolement.
“Come on, then,” he said, and started forward, obviously
intending to scoop Jemmy up.
Brianna’ s hand rose out of her skirts, and aimed the pistol I
had yanked out of his belt back at the place it had come from.
Bonnet stopped in mid-step, mouth open.
“What about it?” she whispered , and her eyes were fixed,
unblinking. “Do you keep your powder dry , Stephen?”
She bra ced the pistol with bo th hands, drew aim at his
crotch, and fired.
He was fast, I’d give him that. He hadn’ t time to turn and
run, but  was reaching to cover his threatened balls with both
hands, even as she pulled the trigger . Blood exploded in a
thick spray through his fingers,  but I couldn’ t tell what she’d
hit.
He staggered back, clutching himself. He stared wildly
round, a s though  unable to belie ve it, then sank to one knee. I
could hear him breathing, hard and fast.
W e all stood par alyzed, watching. One hand scrabbled at the
sand, leaving bloody furrows. Then he rose, slowly , doubled
over , the other hand pressed into his middle. His face was dead
white, green eyes like dull water .
He stum bled round, gasping, and made of f like a bug that’ s
been stepped on, leaking and h itching. There was a crashing
noise as  he blundered through the bushes, and then he was
gone. B eyond a palmetto tree, I could see a line of pelicans
flying, ungainly  and impossibly graceful against the lowering
sky .
I was still crouched on the groun d, chilled with shock. I felt
something warm slide down my cheek, and realized it was araindrop.
“Is he right?” Br ianna was crouching beside me, helping me
sit up. “Do you  think he’ s righ t? Are they dead?” She was
white to the lip s, but not hyste rical. She had Jemmy in the
crook of her arm, clinging to her neck.
“No,” I said. Ev erything seemed remote, as though it were
happening in slow motion. I stood up slowly , balancing
precariously , as though not sure quite how to do it.
“No,” I said again, and felt no fear , no panic at the memory
of w hat Bonnet had said; nothin g but a certainty in my chest,
like a small, comforting weight. “No, they’re not.” Jamie had
told me; this was not the day when he and I would part.
Marsali had vanished into the wood to retrieve Joanie.
Germain was bent over the sp lotches of blood on the sand,
studying them with fascination . It occurred to me dimly to
wonder what type they were, bu t then I dismissed the thought
from my mind.
“He’ll never be yours,”  she had said.
“Let’ s go,” I said, patting Jemmy gently . “I think we’ll make
do with unscented candles, for now .”
 
ROGER AND JAMIE appeared at dawn two days later ,
rousing everyone in the inn b y pounding at the door , and
causing people in the neighbori ng houses to throw open their
shutters and put their nightcappe d heads out in alarm, owing to
the resultant whooping and yelling. I was reasonably sure that
Roger had a minor concussion, but he refused to be put to bed
—though he did allow Bree to hold his head in her lap and
make noises of shocked sympathy about the impressive lump
on it, while Jamie gave us a terse account of the battle of
W ylie’ s Landing, and we gave a somewhat confused
explanation of our adventures in the myrtle groves.
“So Bonnet’ s not dead?” Roger asked, opening one eye.“W ell, we don’ t know ,” I expl ained. “He got away , but I
don’ t kn ow how badly he was hurt. There wasn’ t a dreadful lot
of blood , but if he was hit in the lower abdomen, that would be
a terrible wound, and almost certainly fatal. Peritonitis is a
very slow and nasty way to die.”
“Good,” Marsali said, vindictively .
“Good!” Germ ain echoed, looking proudly up at her .
“ Maman  shot the bad man, Grandper e ,” he told Jamie. “So did
Auntie. He was full  of holes—there was blood everywhere!”
“Holes,” Jemmy said happily . “Holes, holes, lotsa holes!”
“W ell, maybe one hole,” Brianna murmured. She didn’ t
look up from t he damp cloth with which she was gently
sponging dried blood from Roger ’ s scalp and hair .
“Oh, aye? W ell, if ye only took of f a finger or one of his
balls, las s, he might survive,” Jamie observed, grinning at her .
“W ouldna improve his temper , though, I dinna suppose.”
Fer gus arrived on the noon packet boat, triumphantly
bearing the registered, stamped, and of ficially sealed deeds for
the two land gra nts, thus putting the cocked hat on the day’ s
rejoicing. The celebrations were limited, though, owing to the
sobering knowledge that one rather major loose end remained.
After a vigorous discussion, it was decided—meaning that
Jamie made up his mind and pigheadedly refused to entertain
dissenting views—that he and I would ride west at once to
River Run. The young families would remain in W ilmington
for a few days, to complete business, and to keep an ear out for
any rep ort of a wounded or dying man. They would then
proceed back to Fraser ’ s Ridge,  keeping strictly clear of Cross
Creek and River Run.
“Lieutenant W olf f canna be using threats to you or the lad to
influence my aunt, if ye’re nowhere near him,” Jamie pointed
out to Brianna.
“And as for you, mo charadean ,” he said to Roger and
Fer gus, “ye canna be leaving the women and weans to look
out for themselves—God kens who they might shoot next!”It was only as h e closed the door on the resulting laughter
that he turned to me, ran a fingertip over the scratch on my
throat, and then pulled me so  hard against himself that I
thought my ribs would break. I clung tight to him on the
landing, not caring that I couldn’ t breathe, nor whether anyone
might se e; happy only to be touching him—and to have him
there to touch.
“Y e did right, Cl aire,” he muttered at last, mouth against my
hair . “But for God’ s sake, never do it again!”
So it was that he and I left at dawn next day , alone.104
SL Y AS FOXES
W E ARRIVED A T RIVER RUN near sundown three days
later , horses lathered and filth y , and ourselves in no better
case. Th e place seemed peaceful enough, the last of the spring
light glowing on green lawns and spotlighting the white
marble s tatues a nd the stone of Hector ’ s mausoleum among its
dark yews.
“What do you t hink?” I asked Jamie. W e had reined up at
the foot  of the lawn, looking the situation over cautiously
before approaching the house.
“W ell, no one’ s burned the place down,” he replied,
standing in his stirrups to surve y the prospect. “And I dinna
see r ivers of blood cascading do wn the front stair . Still …” He
sat dow n, reach ed into his sadd lebag, and withdrew a pistol,
which h e loaded and primed as a precaution. W ith this tucked
into the waistban d of his breeks  and concealed by the skirts of
his coat, we rode slowly up the drive to the front door .
By the time w e had reached it, I knew something was
wrong. There was a sinister air of stillness about the house; no
sound o f scurrying servants, no music from the parlor , no
scents of supper being fetched in from the cookhouse. Most
peculiar of all, Ulysses was not there to greet us; our knocking
went un answered for several minutes, and when the door was
at last opened, it was Phaedre, Jocasta’ s body-servant, who
appeared.
She had looked dreadful when I had last seen her , nearly a
year bef ore, aft er her mother ’ s death. She didn’ t look much
better now; there were circles under her eyes, and her skin
looked bruised and drawn, like a fruit beginning to go bad.
When she saw u s, though, her eyes lighted and her mouth
relaxed in visible relief.“Oh, Mr . Jamie!” she cried. “I been prayin’ for somebody to
come help, ever since yesterday , but I thought for sure it would
be Mr . Farquard, and then we maybe be in worse trouble, he
such a man for the law and al l, even if he is your auntie’ s
friend.”
Jamie raised an eyebrow at this rather confused declaration,
but nodded reassuringly and squeezed her hand.
“A ye, la ss. I dinna believe I’ve  been an answer to prayer
before, but I’ve no objection. Is my aunt … well?”
“Oh, yes, sir— she’ s  well enough.”
W ithdrawing before we could ask further questions, she
beckoned us toward the stair .
Jocasta was in her boudoir , knitting. She raised her head at
the s ound of fee t, alert, and before anyone could say anything,
asked “Jamie?” in a quavering v oice, and stood up. Even at a
distance, I could see that there were mistakes in the knitting,
missed stitches and open runs; m ost unlike her usual fastidious
needlework.
“A ye, it’ s me, Aunt. And Claire. What’ s amiss, then?”
Crossing the room in two strides , he reached her side and took
her arm, patting her hand in reassurance.
Her face underwent the same transformation of relief that
we h ad seen in Phaedre, and I t hought she might give way at
the knees. She s tif fened her spine, though, and turned toward
me.
“Claire? Thank Blessed Bride ye’ve come, though how—
well, never mind it for now . W ill ye come? Duncan’ s hurt.”
Duncan lay in b ed in the next room, inert under a stack of
comforters. At first, I was afraid he might be dead, but he
stirred at once at the sound of Jocasta’ s voice.
“Mac Dubh?”  he said, puzzled . He poked his head up from
the mound of covers, squinting to see in the dimness of the
room. “What in God’ s name brings you here?”“Lieutenant W olf f,” Jamie said, a little caustically . “Is the
name perhaps familiar to ye?”
“A ye, ye  might say so.” There was a slightly odd tone to
Duncan’ s voice, but I paid it no mind, engaged in lighting
candles and in excavating him suf ficiently from the bedclothes
to find out what the matter was.
I w as expecting to find a knife  or gunshot wound. At first
examination, there was nothing whatever of the sort visible,
and it took a few moments’ mental regrouping to discover that
what he was suf fering from was a broken leg. It was a simple
fracture of the lower tibia, fortunately , and while undoubtedly
painful, it seemed to be no great threat to his health.
I s ent Phaedre to  find some splinting materials, while Jamie,
informed that Duncan stood in no great danger , sat down to get
to the bottom of things.
“He has been here? Lieutenant W olf f?” he asked.
“A ye, he has.” Again the slight hesitation.
“Has he gone, then?”
“Oh, aye.” Duncan shuddered a little, involuntarily .
“Am I hurting you?” I asked.
“Oh, no, Mrs. Claire,” he assu red me. “I was only—well
…”
“Y e may  as well tell me straight out, Duncan,” Jamie said,
in a tone of mil d exasperation. “I think it’ll no be a tale that
improves wi’ keeping, aye? And if it’ s the sort of tale I think,
then I have a bittie story to tell to you, as well.”
Duncan eyed him narrowly , bu t then sighed, capitulating,
and lay back on the pillow .
The Lieutenant had arrived at R iver Run two days before,
but u nlike his us ual habit, had n ot come to the front door to be
announced. Inst ead, he had left his horse hobbled in a field a
mile from the house, and approached stealthily on foot.“W e only realized as much, be cause of finding the horse
later , ye  see,” Duncan explained  to me, as I bound his leg. “I
didna ken he was here at all, un til I went out to the necessary
after supper , and he leaped at m e, out o’ the dark. I near died
o’ fr ight, and then I near died of  being shot, for he fired at me,
and if I had had an arm on that side, I daresay he would have
struck it. Only I hadna got one, so he didn’ t.”
In spite of his disability , Duncan had fought back
ferociously , butting the Lieutenant in the face, char ging him,
and knocking him backward.
“He staggered and tripped himself on the brick walk, and
fell backward so as he hit his head a dreadful smackit.” He
shuddered again  at memory of the sound. “Like a melon hit
wi’ an ax, it was.”
“Och, aye. So, was he killed a t once, then?” Jamie asked,
interested.
“W ell, n o.” Dun can had grown easier in his manner , telling
the tale, but now began to look uneasy again. “Now , see, Mac
Dubh , her e’ s the pinc h of the matter . For I’d gone staggering,
too, whe n I knocked him ower , and I stepped into the stone
channel from the necessary and  snapped my leg, and there I
lay , groa ning by  the walk. Ulyss es heard me callin’ at last, and
came down, and Jo after him.”
Duncan had told Jocasta what ha d happened, as Ulysses had
gone to fetch a c ouple of grooms to help carry Duncan into the
house. A nd then, between the p ain of his broken leg and his
habit of leaving dif ficulties to the butler to be resolved, had
likewise left the Lieutenant.
“It was my fault, Mac Dubh , and I ken it well,” he said, his
face drawn and pale. “I ought to have given orders of some
kind; th ough in fact I canna thi nk even now what I ought to
have said, and I’ve had time and plenty enough to think.”
The rest of the story , pried out o f him with some reluctance,
was that Jocasta and Ulysses h ad evidently conferred on the
matter , and concluded that the Lieutenant had gone beyondbeing a nuisance, and become  an outright threat. And that
being so …
“Ulysses killed him,” Duncan said baldly , then stopped, as
though appalled afresh. He swallowed, looking deeply
unhappy . “Jo says as how she ordered him to do it—and Christ
knows, Mac Dubh , she might have done so. She’ s no the
woman to be t rifled with, let alone to have her servants
murdered, herself threatened, and her husband set upon.”
I gathere d from his hesitance, though, that some small doubt
about Jocasta’ s part in this still lingered in his mind.
Jamie had grasped the main point troubling him, though.
“Christ,” he said. “The man Ul ysses will be hangit on the
spot, or worse, if anyone hears o f it. Whether my aunt ordered
it, or no.”
Duncan looked a little calmer , now that the truth was out.
He nodded.
“A ye, th at’ s it,” he agreed. “I canna let him go to the
gallows—but what am I to do about the Lieutenant? There’ s
the Nav y to be considered, to  say nothing of sherif fs and
magistrates.” That was a definite point. A good deal of the
prosperity of River Run depended upon its naval contracts for
timber and tar; Lieutenant W ol f f had in fact been the naval
liaison r esponsible for such contracts. I could see that His
Majesty’ s Navy might just possibly be inclined to look
squiggle-eyed a t a proprietor w ho had killed his local naval
representative, no matter what the excuse. I imagined that the
law , in the pers on of Sherif f a nd magistrates, might take a
more len ient view of the situatio n—save for the person of the
perpetrator .
A slave  who shed the blood  of a white person was
automatically co ndemned, regar dless of provocation. It would
make no dif ference what had happened—even with a dozen
witnesses to testify to W olf f ’ s attack on Duncan, Ulysses
would b e doomed. If anyone f ound out about it. I began tounderstand the air of desperatio n that hung over River Run;
the other slaves were well aware of what might happen.
Jamie rubbed a knuckle over his chin.
“Ah … just how did … I mean,  would it not be possible to
say that ye’d done it yourself, Duncan? It was self-defense,
after all— and I’ve evidence that the man did come in order to
murder ye, wi’ t he notion of ma rrying my aunt then by force,
or a t least holdi ng her hostage so as she might be threatened
into telling about the gold.”
“Gold?” Duncan looked blank. “But there isna any gold
here. I thought we’d got that straight last year .”
“The Lieutenant and his associates thought there was,” I
told him. “But J amie can tell you all about that, in a bit. What
did  happen to the Lieutenant, exactly?”
“Ulysses cut his throat,” Dun can said, and swallowed,
Adam’ s apple bobbing in his ow n throat. “I should be pleased
enough to say I’d done it, aye, only …”
Beyond the simple dif ficulty of cutting someone’ s throat
with only one h and, it was evidently all too apparent that the
Lieutenant’ s throat had been cut by a left-handed person—and
Duncan, of course, lacked a left hand altogether .
I happened to know that Jocasta Cameron—like her nephew
—was le ft-handed, but it seemed more tactful not to mention
that at the mome nt. I glanced at Jamie, who raised both brows
at me.
W ould she?  I asked silently .
A MacKenzie of Leoch?  his cynical look said back.
“Where is  Ulysses?” I asked.
“In the stable, m ost like, if he hasna already headed west.”
Knowing that if anyone learned  the truth of the Lieutenant’ s
death, U lysses w ould be condemned at once, Jocasta had sent
her butler to sad dle a horse, with instructions to flee into the
mountains, should anyone come.Jamie dr ew a deep breath and rubbed a hand over his head,
thinking.
“W ell, th en. I should say the best thing, perhaps, is for the
Lieutenant to disappear . Where have ye put him for the
moment, Duncan?”
A muscle near Duncan’ s mouth twitched, in an uneasy
attempt at a smile.
“I believe he’ s in  the barbecue p it, Mac Dubh . Covered over
wi’ burlap, and piled with hick ory wood, disguised as a pork
carcass.”
Jamie’ s brows went up again, but he merely nodded.
“A ye, then. Leave it to me, Duncan.”
I l eft instruction s for Duncan to be given honeyed water and
tea brew ed with boneset and cherry bark, and went outside
with Jamie to contemplate methods of disappearance.
“The sim plest thing would be ju st to bury him somewhere, I
suppose,” I said.
“Mmphm,” Jamie said. He lifted the pine torch he was
carrying, frowning thoughtfully at the humped mound of
burlap in  the pit. I hadn’ t liked the Lieutenant in the least, but
it looked rather pitiful.
“Maybe. I’m thinkin’, though—the slaves all ken what’ s
happened. If we bury him on th e place, they’ll ken that, too.
They wouldna tell anyone, of course—but he’ll haunt the
place, aye?”
A shiver ran up my spine, engendered as much by the
matter -of-factness of his tone as by his words, and I pulled my
shawl closer round me.
“Haunt the place?”
“A ye, of course. A murder vict im, done to death here, and
hidden, unavenged?”
“Y ou mean … really haunt the  place?” I asked, carefully ,
“or do you only mean the slaves would think so?”He shrugged, twitching his shoulders uneasily .
“I dinna  think it matters so muc h, does it? They’ll avoid the
spot where he’ s buried, one of the women will see the ghost at
night, rumors will get round, as they do—and next thing, a
slave at Greenoaks will say something, someone in Farquard’ s
family w ill hear  of it, and before ye know it, someone will be
over here, asking questions. Given that the Navy is like to be
looking for the Lieutenant before too long anyway … what
d’ye say to weighting the body and putting it in the river?
That’ s what he had in mind for Duncan, after all.”
“Not a bad noti on,” I said, considering it. “But he meant
Duncan to be fo und. There’ s a lot of boat traf fic on the river ,
and it isn’ t very deep up this far . Even if we weighted the body
well, it’ s  possibl e it would rise, or someone snag it with a pole.
W ould i t matter if someone fo und it, though, do you think?
The body wouldn’ t be connected with River Run.”
He nod ded slowly , moving the torch aside to keep the
sparks from showering over his sleeve. There was a light
wind, an d the elms near the bar becue pit whispered restlessly
overhead.
“A ye, that’ s so. Only , if someon e does find him, there’ll be
an inquiry . The Navy will send someone to try to find out the
truth of the matter—and they’ll come here, asking questions.
What d’ye think will happen, if they were to badger the slaves,
askin’ had they seen the Lieutenant, and so on?”
“Mm, yes.” Given the slaves’ pr esent acute state of nerves, I
imagined that any inquiry wou ld send one or more of them
into a state of panic, in which anything might be blurted out.
Jamie was standing quite still, staring at the burlap-draped
shape with an e xpression of deep abstraction. I drew a deep
breath, caught a faint scent of decaying blood, and let it out
again, quick.
“I su ppose … w e could burn him,” I said, and swallowed a
sudden taste of bile. “He is  already in the pit, after all.”“It’ s a thought,”  Jamie said, an d one corner of his mouth
quirked in a faint smile. “Bu t I think I’ve a better one,
Sassenach.” He  turned to look thoughtfully at the house. A
few windows were dimly alight, but everyone was inside,
cowering.
“Come on, then,” he said, with sudden decision. “There’ll
be a sledgehammer in the stable, I expect.”
 
THE FRONT OF THE MAUSOLEUM was covered by an
ornamental grille of black wrought iron, with an enormous
lock, its metal decorated by sixteen-petalled Jacobite roses. I
had always considered this to  be merely one of Jocasta
Cameron’ s af fe ctations, since I doubted that grave-robbers
were a great thre at in such a rural setting. The hinges scarcely
creaked when Jamie unlocked the grille and swung it open;
like everything  else at River  Run, it was maintained in
impeccable condition.
“Y ou really think this is better than burying or burning
him?” I asked. T here was no one nearby , but I spoke in a near
whisper .
“Oh, aye. Auld Hector will take care of him, and prevent
him doi n’ harm,” Jamie replied matter -of-factly . “And it’ s
blessed ground,  in a manner of speaking. No a matter of
leaving his soul to wander about, makin’ trouble, aye?”
I nodded, a little uncertainly . He was probably right; in
terms of  belief, Jamie understood the slaves much better than I
did. For  that matter , I wasn’ t sure whether he was speaking
only of what th e psychological ef fect on them might be—or
whether he was himself convinced that Hector Cameron ought
to be capable o f dealing with t his ex post facto  threat to his
wife and plantation.
I lift ed t he torch  so Jamie could  see what he was doing, and
set my teeth in my lower lip.
He had wrapped  the sledgehammer in rags, so as not to chip
the m arble blocks. The small b locks of the front wall, insidethe grille, had b een expertly cut to fit and lightly mortared in
place. T he first blow knocked two of the blocks a few inches
out of place. A few more blows, and a dark space showed,
where the blocks had given way  enough to show the blackness
inside the mausoleum.
Jamie stopped to wipe sweat from his forehead, and
muttered something under his breath.
“What did you say?”
“I said, it stinks,” he replied, sounding puzzled.
“This is surprising, is it?” I asked, a little testily . “How long
has Hector Cameron been dead, four years?”
“W ell, aye, but it’ s no—”
“What a r e you doing?”  J oc asta Cameron’ s voice rang out
behind me, sharp with agitation , and I jumped, dropping the
torch.
It flickered, but didn’ t go out, and I snatched it up again,
waving it to encourage the flame . The flame rose and steadied,
shedding a ruddy glow on Joc asta, who stood on the path
behind us, ghostly in her white nightgown. Phaedre huddled
behind h er mistress, no more of her face visible than the brief
shine of eyes in the darkness. The eyes looked scared, flicking
from Jamie and me to the da rk hole in the facade of the
mausoleum.
“What am I doing? Disposing of Lieutenant W olf f, what
else?” Jamie, who had been as startled as I had by his aunt’ s
sudden appearance, sounded a little cross. “Leave it to me,
Aunt. Y e needna concern yourself.”
“Y ou are not—no, ye mustn’ t open Hector ’ s tomb!”
Jocasta’ s long nose twitched, obviously picking up the scent of
decay—which was faint, but distinct.
“Dinna fash yourself, Aunt,” J amie said. “Go back to the
house. I’ll manage. It will all be well.”
She ignored his soothing words, advancing blindly over the
walk, hands groping in the empty air .“No, Jamie! Y e mustn’ t. Close  it up again. Close it, for
God’ s sake!”
The panic in her voice was unmistakable, and I saw Jamie
frown in  confusion. He looked u ncertainly from his aunt to the
hole in the mau soleum. The wind had dropped, but now rose
in a small gust, wafting a much stronger scent of death around
us. Jamie’ s face changed, and ignoring his aunt’ s cries of
protest, he knocked loose more blocks with several quick
blows of the padded hammer .
“Bring the torch, Sassenach,” he said, setting down the
hammer , and with a sense of creeping horror , I did so.
W e stood shoulder to shoulder , peering through the narrow
gap in the block s. T wo cof fins o f polished wood stood inside,
each on a pedestal of marble. And on the floor between them
…
“Who is  he, Aunt?” Jamie’ s voice was quiet as he turned to
speak to her .
She stoo d as if paralyzed, the muslin of her gown flapping
round her legs in the wind, pulling strands of white hair from
beneath her cap. Her face was fr ozen, but the blind eyes darted
to and fro, seeking an impossible escape.
Jamie st epped forward and grabbed her fiercely by the arm,
making her start from her frozen trance.
“Co a th’ann?”  he growled. “Who is he? Who?”
Her mouth worked, trying to form words. She stopped,
swallowed, tried  again, eyes still flickering to and fro over his
shoulder , lookin g at God knew what. Had she still been able to
see when they put him in there? I wondered. Did she see it
now , in memory?
“His name—his name was Rawlings,” she said faintly , and
something inside my chest fell like an iron weight.
I m ust have mo ved or made so me sound, for Jamie’ s eyes
went to me. He  reached out a  hand for mine, and held on
tightly , though his eyes went back to Jocasta.“How?” he asked, calmly , but w ith a tone that warned that
he would brook no evasion.
She closed her eyes then, and sighed, broad shoulders
slumping suddenly .
“Hector killed him,” she said.
“Oh, aye ?” Jamie cast a cynical  glance at the cof fins inside
the mau soleum, and the huddled mass that lay on the floor
between them. “A good trick, th at. I hadna realized my uncle
was so capable.”
“Before.” Her eyes opened aga in, but she spoke dully , as
though nothing mattered any longer . “He was a doctor ,
Rawlings. He’d come to look a t my eyes, once before. When
Hector took ill, he called the man back. I canna say quite what
happened, but Hector caught him nosing round where he
should not, and smashed his he ad in. He was a hot-tempered
man, Hector .”
“I shoul d say so,” Jamie said, with another glance at the
body of Dr . Rawlings. “How did he get in here?”
“W e—he—hid the corpse, meaning to carry it of f and leave
it in the wood. But then … H ector got worse, and couldna
leave his  bed. W ithin a day , he w as dead, too. And so …” She
lifted a long wh ite hand, gesturing toward the draft of dank
chill that floated from the open tomb.
“Great minds think alike,” I mu rmured, and Jamie gave me
a dir ty look, let ting go my hand. He stood contemplating the
stillness inside the violated mausoleum, thick brows drawn
down in a frown of concentration.
“Oh, aye?” he said again. “Whose is the second cof fin?”
“Mine.” Jocasta was recoverin g her nerve; her shoulders
straightened and her chin lifted.
Jamie m ade a small puf fing noise and glanced at me. I could
believe that Jocasta would callously leave a dead man to lie
exposed, rather than put him in her own pristine cof fin … andyet. T o do so dr astically increas ed the odds of discovery , slim
as those might be.
No one would h ave opened Jocasta’ s cof fin until it was time
to re ceive her ow n body; Dr . Rawlings’ corpse could have lain
there in complete safety , even  were the mausoleum to be
opened for some reason. Jocasta Cameron was selfish—but by
no means stupid.
“Put W olf f in, then, if you must,” she said. “He can lie on
the floor with the other one.”
“Why no t put him in your cof fin , Aunt?” Jamie asked, and I
saw that he was looking at her intently .
“No!” She had begun to turn away , but at this whipped
back, he r blind face fierce in the torchlight. “He is dung. Let
him lie and rot in the open!”
Jamie n arrowed his eyes at her response, but didn’ t reply .
Instead, he turned to the tomb and began to shift the loosened
blocks.
“What a re you doing?” Jocasta could hear the grating noise
of the shifting m arble, and became agitated anew . She turned
round on the wa lk, but became disoriented, staring of f toward
the river . I realized that she must now be completely blind,
unable even to see the light from the torch.
I had no atten tion to pay he r just then, though. Jamie
wedged himself through the gap in the blocks, and stepped
inside.
“Light me, Sassenach,” he said softly , and his voice echoed
slightly in the small stone chamber .
Breathing very shallowly , I followed him. Phaedre had
begun to moan in the darkness outside; she sounded like the
ban-sidhe  th at howls for  approaching death—but this death
had come long since.
The cof fins were equipped with brass plates, gone slightly
green with damp, but still easily readable. “Hector Alexander
Robert Cameron ,” read one, and  “Jocasta Isobeail MacKenzieCameron,” the other . W ithout hesitation, Jamie seized the
edges of the lid of Jocasta’ s cof fin and pulled up.
It wasn’ t nailed; the lid was heavy , but shifted at once.
“Oh,” Jamie said softly , looking down.
Gold will never tarnish, no matter how damp or dank its
surroundings. It will lie at the b ottom of the sea for centuries,
to emer g e one day in some random fisherman’ s net, bright as
the day it was smelted. It glim mers from a rocky matrix, a
siren’ s song that has called to men for thousands of years.
The ingots lay in a shallow la yer over the bottom of the
cof fin. E nough to fill two small chests, each chest heavy
enough to require two men—or a man and a strong woman—
to carry it. Each  ingot stamped w ith a fleur -de-lis. One third of
the Frenchman’ s gold.
I blinked at the shimmer , and looked aside, my eyes blurring
with fra ctured li ght. It was dark  on the floor , but I could still
make ou t the huddled form against the pale marble. “Nosing
where h e shou ld not.” And what had he seen, Daniel
Rawlings, that had made him draw the fleur -de-lis in the
mar gin of his casebook, with that discreet notation, “Aurum”?
Hector Cameron was still alive, then. The mausoleum had
not y et been sea led. Perhaps when Dr . Rawlings rose to follow
his wandering patient, Hector had led him here unwitting,
going do wn in the night to view his hoard? Perhaps. Neither
Hector Cameron nor Daniel Rawlings could say , now , how it
had been, or what had happened.
I fel t a thickening in my throat, for the man whose bones lay
now at my feet,  the friend and colleague whose instruments I
had inherited, whose shade had stood at my elbow , lending me
both cou rage and comfort, when I laid hands on the sick and
sought to heal them.
“Such a waste,” I said softly , looking down.
Jamie lo wered the cof fin lid, g ently , as though the cof fin
held an occupant whose rest had been disturbed.Outside, Jocasta stood still on the path. She had an arm
round Phaedre, who had stopped whimpering, but it was not
clear which of them was supp orting the other . Jocasta must
know no w from the noise wher e we were, but she faced the
river still, eyes fixed, unblinking in the torchlight.
I c leared  my throat, hugging the  shawl tighter with my free
hand.
“What shall we do, then?” I asked Jamie.
He turned and looked back into the tomb for a moment, then
shrugged a little.
“W e’ll le ave the Lieutenant to H ector , as we planned. As for
the doctor …” He drew breath slowly , troubled gaze fixed on
the slender bones that lay in a gr aceful fan, pale and still in the
light. A sur geon’ s hand—once.
“I th ink,” he said, “we will take him home with us—to the
Ridge. Let him lie among friends.”
He brus hed pas t the two women without acknowledgment
or pardon, and went to fetch Lieutenant W olf f.105
A THRUSH’S DREAM
Fraser ’ s Ridge
 May , 1772
T HE N IGHT AIR W AS COOL an d fresh. So early in the year ,
the bloodthirsty flies and mosquitoes hadn’ t started yet; only
random moths came in throug h the open window now and
then, to flutter r ound the smoored hearth like bits of burning
paper , brushing past their outflung limbs in brief caress.
She lay as she h ad fallen, half on  top of him, heart thumping
loud and slow in her ears. F rom here, she could see out
through the window; the jagged black line of trees on the far
side of the dooryard, and beyond them a section of sky , lit with
stars, so  near and bright that it should be possible to step out
among them and walk from one to another , higher and higher ,
to the hook of the crescent moon.
“Y ou’re not mad at me?” he whispered. He spoke more
easily no w , but lying with her e ar on his chest, she could hear
the f aint catch in  his voice, the point where he forced air hard
through his scarred throat to form the words.
“No.” H is hand was on her hair , stroking. “I didn’ t ever tell
you not to read it.”
His fingers touched her shoulder , lightly , and her toes curled
with ple asure at the feeling. Did  she mind? No. She supposed
she oug ht to feel exposed in some way , the privacy of her
thoughts and dreams laid bare to him—but she trusted him
with them. He would never use those things against her .
Besides, once set down on pa per , the dreams became a
separate thing from her , herself . Much like the drawings that
she m ade; a refle ction of one fac et of her mind, a brief glimpse
of some thing once seen, once thought, once felt—but not the
same thing as the mind or heart that made them. Not quite.“Fair ’ s fair , though.” Her chin rested in the hollow of his
shoulder . He smelled good, bitte r and musky with the scent of
satisfied desire. “T ell me one of your dreams, then.”
A laugh vibrated through his chest, nearly soundless, but
she felt it.
“Only one?”
“Y es, but it has to be an important one. Not the flying ones,
or the ones where you’re being chased by a monster , or the
ones wh ere you go to school without your clothes on. Not the
ones that everybody has—one that only you  have.”
One of her han ds was on his chest, scratching gently to
make the dark curly hairs twitch  and rise. The other was under
the p illow; if she moved her fingers slightly , she could feel the
smooth little shape of the ancient wifie, as he called it. She
could imagine her own womb swelling, round and hard. She
could feel the clutch and sof t spasm in her lower belly;
aftershocks of their lovemaking. W ould it be this time?
He turne d his head on the pillow , thinking. Long lashes lay
against his cheek, black as the lines of the trees outside. He
turned back then, lifting them, and his eyes were the color of
moss, soft and vivid in the shadowed light.
“I could be romantic,” he whispered, and his fingers drifted
down he r back, so that she felt gooseflesh rise in their wake. “I
could say this is my dream—you and me, here alone … us and
our children.” He turned his hea d a little, checking the trundle
in the corner , but Jemmy was sound asleep, invisible.
“Y ou could,” she echoed, and ducked her head so her
forehead pressed against his shoulder . “But that’ s a waking
dream—not a real dream. Y ou know what I mean.”
“A ye, I do.”
He was quiet fo r a minute, his  hand lying still, broad and
warm across the base of her spine.
“Sometimes,” he whispered at last, “sometimes, I dream I
am singing, and I wake from it with my throat aching.”He coul dn’ t see her face, or the tears that prickled at the
corners of her eyes.
“What do you sing?” she whispered back. She heard the
shush  of the linen pillow as he shook his head.
“No song I’ve e ver heard, or know ,” he said softly . “But I
know I’m singing it for you.”106
THE SURGEON’S BOOK II
July 27, 1772
 
“W as called fr om churning to attend Rosamund Lindsay ,
who arr ived in late afternoon w ith a sever e laceration to the
left hand , sustained with an axe while gir dling tr ees. W ound
was extensive, having nearly sever ed the left thumb; laceration
extended fr om base of index finger to two inches above the
styloid pr ocess of the radius, which was superficially
damaged. Injury had been sustained appr oximately thr ee days
prior , tr eated with r ough binding and bacon gr ease. Extensive
sepsis appar ent, with suppuration, gr oss swelling of hand and
for earm. Thumb blackened; gan gr ene appar ent; characteristic
pungent odor . Subcutaneous r ed str eaks, indicative of blood
poisoning, extended fr om site of injury nearly to antecubital
 fossa.
Patient pr esented with high fever (est. 104 degr ees F ., by
hand), symptoms of dehyd ration, mild disorientation.
T achycar dia evident.
In view of t he seriousness of patient’ s condition,
r ecommended im mediate amputation of limb at elbow . Patient
r efused to consider this, insisting instead upon application of
pigeon poultice,  consisting of the split body of a fr eshly-killed
pigeon, applied  to wound (pa tient’ s husband had br ought
pigeon, neck fr eshly wrung). Removed thumb at base of
metacarpal, ligated r emains of radial artery (crushed in
original injury) and superficiali s volae. Debrided and drained
wound, applied appr oximately 1/2 oz. crude penicillin powder
(sour ce: r otted casaba rind, batch #23, pr ep. 15/4/72)
topically , followed by application of mashed raw garlic (thr ee
cloves), barberry salve—and pigeon poultice, at insistence of
husband applied  over dr essing. Administer ed fluids by mouth;febrifuge mixtur e of r ed centaury , bloodr oot, and hops; water
ad lib . Injected liquid penicillin mixtur e (batch # 23), IV ,
dosage 1/4 oz in suspension in sterile water .
Patient’ s condition deteriorated rapidly , with incr easing
symptoms of disorientation and delirium, high fever . Extensive
urticaria appear ed on arm and upper torso. Attempted to
r elieve fever by r epeated applications of cold water , to no
avail. Patient being incoher ent, r equested permission to
amputate fr om husband; permission denied on gr ounds that
death appear ed imminent, and p atient “would not want to be
buried in pieces.”
Repeated peni cillin injection. Patient lapsed into
unconsciousness shortly ther eafter , and expir ed just befor e
dawn.
 
I DI PPED MY QUILL again, but then hesitated, letting the
drops of ink sli de of f the sharpened point. How much more
should I say?
The deeply-ingr ained disposition for scientific thoroughness
warred with caution. It was im portant to describe what had
happened, as fully as possible. At the same time, I hesitated to
put dow n in writing what migh t amount to an admission of
manslaughter—it wasn’ t murder , I assured myself, though my
guilty feelings made no such distinctions.
“Feelings aren’ t truth,” I murmured. Across the room,
Brianna looked up from the bread she was slicing, but I bent
my head  over the page, and she returned to her whispered
conversation with Marsali by the fire. It was no more than
mid-afternoon, b ut dark and rain y outside. I had lit a candle by
which to  write, but the girls’ hands flickered over the dim
table lik e moths, lighting here a nd there among the plates and
platters.
The truth was that I didn’ t think Rosamund Lindsay had
died of septicemia. I was fairly sure that she had died of an
acute reaction to an unpurified penicillin mixture—of themedicine I gave her , in short. Of course, the truth also was that
the blood poisoning would certainly have killed her , left
untreated.
The trut h also was that I had had no way of knowing what
the e f fects of th e penicillin would be—but that was rather the
point, wasn’ t it? T o make sure someone else might  know?
I t widdled the qu ill, rolling it between thumb and forefinger .
I had  kept a faithful account of my experiments with penicillin
—the growing of cultures on media ranging from bread to
chewed pawpaw and rotted  melon rind, painstaking
descriptions of the microscopic and gross identification of the
Penicillium  m olds, the ef fe cts of—to this p oint—very limited
applications.
Y es, certainly I must include a  description of the ef fects.
The real question, though, was— for whom was I keeping this
careful record?
I b it my lip, thinking. If it was only for my own reference, it
would be a simple matter; I could simply record the
symptoms, timi ng, and ef fects, without explicitly noting the
cause of death; I was unlikely  to for get the circumstances,
after all.  But if this record were  ever to be useful to someone
else … someone who had no notion of the benefits and
dangers of an antibiotic …
The ink was drying on the quil l. I lowered the point to the
page.
Age—44 , I wrote  slowly . In this day , cas ebook accounts like
this often ended with a pious de scription of the deceased’ s last
moments, marked—presumably—by Christian resignation on
the part of the h oly , repentance by the sinful. Neither attitude
had marked the passage of Rosamund Lindsay .
I gla nced at the cof fin, sitting on its trestles under the rain-
smeared window . The Lindsays’ cabin was very small, not
suited for a funeral in the pouring rain, where a lar ge number
of m ourners were expected. The  cof fin was open, awaiting theevening wake, but the muslin sh roud had been drawn up over
her face.
Rosamund had been a whore in  Boston; growing too stout
and too old to p ly her trade wit h much profit, she had drifted
south, lo oking for a husband. “I  couldn’ t bide another of them
winters,” she had confided to me, soon after her arrival on the
Ridge. “Nor yet another of them stinkin’ fishermen.”
She had found the necessary refuge in Kenneth Lindsay ,
who was looking for a wife to share the work of
homesteading. N ot a match bo rn of physical attraction—the
Lindsays had had perhaps six sound teeth between them—or
emotional comp atibility , still it had seemed an amicable
relationship.
Shocked rather than grief-strick en, Kenny had been taken
of f by Jamie for medication with whisky—a somewhat more
ef fective treatment than my own. At least I didn’ t think it
would be lethal.
Immediate cause of death— I wrote, and paused again. I
doubted that Rosamund’ s response to approaching death
would have found outlet in eithe r prayer or philosophy , but she
had had opportunity for neither . She had died blue-faced,
congested, and bulging-eyed, unable to force word or breath
past the swollen tissues of her throat.
My own throat felt tight at the  memory , as though I were
being choked. I picked up the c ooling cup of catmint tea and
took a sip, feelin g the pungent l iquid slide soothingly down. It
was littl e comfo rt that the sept icemia would have killed her
more lingeringly . Suf focation was quicker , but not much more
pleasant.
I t apped  the quill point on the bl otter , leaving inky pinpoints
that spread through the rough fibers of the paper , forming a
galaxy of tiny st ars. As to that—there was another possibility .
Death might conceivably have been due to a pulmonary
embolism—a clot in the lung. That would be a not-impossible
complication of the septicemia, and could have accounted for
the symptoms.It was a hopef ul thought, but not one I placed much
credence in. It was the voice o f experience, as much as the
voice of  conscie nce, that bade m e dip the quill and write down
“anaphylaxis,” before I could think again.
W as anaphylaxis  a known medical term yet? I hadn’ t seen it
in any of Rawli ngs’ notes—bu t then, I hadn’ t read them all.
Still, while death from the shoc k of aller gic reaction was not
unknown in any time, it wasn’ t common, and might not be
known by name. Better describe  it in detail, for whoever might
read this.
And that was the rub, of course. Who would  read it? I
thought it unlikely , but what if a  stranger should read this and
take my account for a confess ion of murder? That was far -
fetched—but it could happen. I  had come perilously close to
being ex ecuted as a witch, in  part because of my healing
activities. Once almost burned, twice shy , I thought wryly .
Extensive swelling in affected limb , I  wrote, and li fted the
quill, the  last word fading as the pen ran dry . I dipped it again
and scratched doggedly on. Swelling extended to upper torso,
face, and neck. Skin pale, marked with r eddish blotches.
Respiration incr easingly rapid and shallow , heartbeat very
fast and light, tending to inaudibility . Palpitations evident.
Lips and ears cyanotic. Pr onounced exophthalmia.
I swallowed again, at the thought of Rosamund’ s eyes,
bulging under the lids, rolling t o and fro in uncomprehending
terror . W e had tried to shut them, when we cleansed the body
and laid  it out for burial. It w as customary to uncover the
corpse’ s face for the wake; I thought it unwise in this case.
I didn’ t want to look at the cof fin again, but did, with a
small nod of acknowledgment and apology . Brianna’ s head
turned t oward me, then sharply away . The smell of the food
laid out for the wake was filling the room, mingling with the
scents of oak-wood fire and oak-gall ink—and the fresh-
planed oak of the cof fin’ s boards. I took another hasty gulp of
tea, to stop my gor ge rising.I knew damn well why the first line of Hippocrates’ oath
was, “First, do no harm.” It was too bloody easy to do harm.
What hu bris it took to lay hands  on a person, to interfere. How
delicate and complex were bodies, how crude a physician’ s
intrusions.
I c ould have so ught seclusion in sur gery or study , to write
these no tes. I knew why I hadn’ t. The coarse muslin shroud
glowed soft white in the rainy light from the window . I
pinched the quill hard between t humb and forefinger , trying to
for get the pop  o f the cricoid cartilage, when I had jabbed a
penknife into Rosamund’ s throa t in a final, futile attempt to let
air into her straining lungs.
And yet … there was not one practicing physician, I
thought, who had never faced this. I had had it happen a few
times before—even in a modern hospital, equipped with every
life-saving device known to man—then.
Some future physician here would face the same dilemma;
to u ndertake a possibly dangerous treatment, or to allow a
patient to die who might  hav e been saved. And that was my
own di lemma—to balance the unlikely possibility of
prosecution for manslaughter against the unknown value of
my records to someone who might seek knowledge in them.
Who might that be? I wiped the pen, thinking. There were
as yet few medi cal schools, and those few , mostly in Europe.
Most ph ysicians gained their knowledge from apprenticeship
and experience. I slipped a finger into the casebook, feeling
blind between the early pages , kept by the book’ s original
owner .
Rawlings had not gone to a medical school. Though if he
had, man y of his techniques wou ld still have been shocking by
my stand ards. M y mouth twisted at the thought of some of the
treatments I had seen described  in those closely written pages
—infusions of liquid mercury to cure syphilis, cupping and
blistering for epileptic fits, lancing and bleeding for every
disorder from indigestion to impotence.And stil l, Danie l Rawlings had been a doctor . Reading his
case not es, I could feel his care for his patients, his curiosity
regarding the mysteries of the body .
Moved by impulse, I turned ba ck to the pages containing
Rawlings’ notes. Perhaps I was only delaying to let my
subconscious reach a decision— or perhaps I felt the need of
communication, no matter how remote, with another
physician, someone like me.
Someone like me. I stared at th e page, with its neat, small
writing, its careful illustration, seeing none of the details. Who
was there, like me?
No one. I had thought of it before, but only vaguely , in the
way of a probl em acknowledged, but so distant as not to
require a ny ur ge ncy . In the colo ny of North Carolina, so far as
I knew , there was only one formally designated “doctor”—
Fentiman. I snorted, and took an other sip of tea. Better Murray
MacLeod and his nostrums—most of those were harmless, at
least.
I sip ped my tea,  regarding Rosamund. The simple truth was
that I wouldn’ t l ast forever , either . W ith luck, a good long time
yet—but still, not forever . I needed to find someone to whom I
could pass on at least the rudiments of what I knew .
A st ifled giggle from the table, t he girls whispering over the
pots of head-cheese, the bowls of sauerkraut and boiled
potatoes. No, I thought, with some regret. Not Brianna.
She would be t he logical choice; she knew what modern
medicine was, at least. There would be no overcoming of
ignorance and superstition, no n eed to convince of the virtues
of a sepsis, the dangers of ger ms. But she had no natural
inclination, no instinct for heali ng. She was not squeamish or
afraid o f blood—she had helped me with any number of
childbirths and minor sur gical procedures—and yet she lacked
that peculiar mixture of empathy and ruthlessness a doctor
needs.She was perhaps Jamie’ s child more than mine, I reflected,
watching the firelight ripple in the falls of her hair as she
moved. She had his courage, hi s great tenderness—but it was
the courage of a warrior , the tenderness of a strength that could
crush if it chose. I had not man aged to give her my gift; the
knowledge of blood and bone, th e secret ways of the chambers
of the heart.
Brianna’ s head lifted sharply ,  turning toward the door .
Marsali, slower , turned too, listening.
It w as barely au dible through the thrumming of the rain, but
knowing it was there, I could pick it out—a male voice, raised
high, chanting. A pause, and t hen a faint answering rumble
that might have been distant t hunder , but wasn’ t. The men
were coming down from the shelter on the mountain.
Kenny Lindsay had asked Roger to chant the caithris  for
Rosamund; the formal Gaelic lament for the dead. “She wasna
Scots,” Kenny had said, wiping  eyes bleared from tears and a
long night’ s watching. “Nor even God-fearin’. But she was
that fon d o’ singin’, and she fair admired your way o’ it,
MacKenzie.”
Roger had never done a caithris  before; I knew he had never
heard on e. “Dinna fash,” Jamie h ad murmured to him, hand on
his arm, “all ye need to be is loud.” Roger had bent his head
gravely in acquiescence, and we nt with Jamie and Kenneth, to
drink whisky by the malting flo or and learn what he could of
Rosamund’ s life, the better to lament her passing.
The hoarse chant vanished; the  wind had shifted. It was a
freak of the storm that we had heard them so soon—they
would b e headed down the Ridge now , to collect mourners
from the outlying cabins, an d then to lead them all in
procession back  up to the house, for the feasting and singing
and storytelling that would go on all night.
I y awne d involuntarily , my jaw cracking at the thought of it.
I’d never last, I thought in dismay . I had had a few hours’
sleep in the mor ning, but not en ough to sustain me through a
full-blown Gaelic wake and funeral. The floors would be thickwith bodies by dawn, all of them smelling of whisky and wet
clothes.
I yawned again, then blinked, m y eyes swimming as I shook
my head to clear it. Every bone in my body ached with fatigue,
and I wanted nothing more than to go to bed for several days.
Deep in thought, I hadn’ t noticed Brianna coming to stand
behind me. Her hands came down on my shoulders, and she
moved c loser , so  I felt the warmth of her touching me. Marsali
had gon e; we were alone. She began to massage my shoulders,
long thumbs moving slowly up the cords of my neck.
“T ired?” she asked.
“Mm. I’ ll do,” I said. I closed the book, and leaned back,
relaxing momentarily in the sheer relief of her touch. I hadn’ t
realized I was strung so tightly .
 
THE BIG ROOM was quiet and orderly , ready for the wake.
Mrs. Bug was tending the barbecue. The girls had lit a pair of
candles, one at each end of the laden table, and shadows
flickered over the whitewashed walls, the quiet cof fin, as the
candle flames bent in a sudden draft.
“I th ink I killed her ,” I said sud denly , not meaning to say it
at all. “It was the penicillin that killed her .”
The long fingers didn’ t stop their soothing movement.
“W as it?” she murmured. “Y ou couldn’ t have done any
dif ferently , though, could you?”
“No.”
A small  shudder of relief went over me, as much from the
bald con fession as from the gradual release of the painful
tightness in my neck and shoulders.
“It’ s okay ,” she said softly , rubbing, stroking. “She would
have died anyway , wouldn’ t sh e? It’ s sad, but you didn’ t do
wrong. Y ou know that.”“I know that.” T o my surprise, a single tear slid down my
cheek an d dropped on the page,  puckering the paper . I blinked
hard, struggling for control. I didn’ t want to distress Brianna.
She wasn’ t distressed. Her hands left my shoulders, and I
heard th e scraping of stool legs . Then her arms came around
me, and I let her draw me back, my head resting just under her
chin. She simply held me, let ting the rise and fall of her
breathing calm me.
“I went to dinner with Uncle Joe once, just after he’d lost a
patient,” she said finally . “He told me about it.”
“Did he?” I was  a little surprised; I wouldn’ t have thought
Joe would talk about such things with her .
“He did n’ t mean to. I could see something was bothering
him, though, so I asked. And— he needed to talk, and I was
there. Afterward, he said it was almost like having you there. I
didn’ t know he called you Lady Jane.”
“Y es,” I  said. “Because of the way I talk, he said.” I felt a
breath of laughter against my ear , and smiled slightly in
response. I closed my eyes, and could see my friend, gesturing
in passionate conversation, face alight with the desire to tease.
“He said—that when something like that happened,
sometimes there  would be a sort of formal inquiry , at the
hospital. Not like a trial, not tha t—but a gathering of the other
doctors, to hear exactly what happened, what went wrong. He
said it was sort of like confession, to tell it to other doctors,
who could understand—and it helped.”
“Mm-hm.” She was swaying slightly , rocking me as she
moved, as she rocked Jemmy , soothing.
“Is that what’ s b othering you?” she asked quietly . “Not just
Rosamund—but that you’re alo ne? Y ou don’ t have anybody
who can really understand?”
Her arms wrapped around my shoulders, her hands crossed,
resting lightly on my chest. Y ou ng, broad, capable hands, the
skin fresh and fair , smelling of fresh-baked bread andstrawberry jam.  I lifted one, and laid the warm palm against
my cheek.
“Apparently I do,” I said.
The han d curved , stroked my ch eek, and dropped away . The
big young hand moved slowly , smoothing the hair behind my
ear with soft af fection.
“It will be all rig ht,” she said. “E verything will be all right.”
“Y es,” I said, an d smiled, despite the tears blurring my eyes.
I couldn’ t teach her to be a doctor . But evidently I had,
without meaning to, somehow taught her to be a mother .
“Y ou sh ould go lie down,” she said, taking her hands away
reluctantly . “It will be an hour at least, before they get here.”
I l et my breath go out in a sig h, feeling the peace of the
house around me. If Fraser ’ s Ridge had been a short-lived
haven fo r Rosamund Lindsay , still it had been a true home. W e
would see her safe, and honored in death.
“In a minute,” I said, wiping my nose. “I need to finish
something, first.”
I sat up straight and opened my book. I dipped my pen, and
began to  write the lines that mu st be there, for the sake of the
unknown physician who would follow me.107
ZUGUNRUHE
September , 1772
I  WOKE  DRENCHED in sweat. The thin chemise in which I
slept clu ng to me, transparent with wet; the darkness of my
flesh showed in patches throug h the cloth, even in the dim
light fro m the unshuttered window . I had kicked away sheet
and quil t in my disordered slee p, and lay sprawled with the
linen sh ift rucked up above my thighs—but still my skin
pulsed with heat, waves of smothering warmth that flowed
over me like melted candle wax.
I s wung  my legs over the side  of the bed, and stood up,
feeling dizzy and disembodied.  My hair was soaked and my
neck was slick w ith perspiration; a trickle of sweat ran down
between my breasts and disappeared.
Jamie was still asleep; I could see the humped mound of his
upturned shoulder , and the spill of his hair , dark across the
pillow . He shifted slightly and mumbled something, but then
lapsed into the r egular deep breaths of sleep. I needed air , but
didn’ t w ant to wake him. I pushed away the gauze netting,
stepped softly across to the door , and into the small box-room
across the hall.
It w as a  small room, but it had a lar ge window , in order to
balance the one in our bedroom. This one had no glass as yet;
it wa s covered o nly by wooden shutters, and I could feel drafts
of night air drifting through the slats, swirling across the floor ,
caressing my bare legs. Ur gent f or the coolness of it, I stripped
of f my wet shi ft and sighed in relief as the draft skimmed
upward over hips and breasts and arms.
The hea t was still there, though,  hot waves pulsing over my
skin wit h each heartbeat. Fumb ling in the dark, I unfastened
the shutters and pushed them open, gasping for the great
draughts of cool night that flooded in upon me.From here, I co uld see above the trees that screened the
house, d own the slope of the ridge, almost to the faint black
line of the rive r far away . The wind stirred in the treetops,
murmuring, and wafted over me with blessed coolness and the
pungent green smell of leaves and summer sap. I closed my
eyes and  stood still; within a min ute or two, the heat was gone,
vanished like a quenched coal, leaving me damp but peaceful.
I didn’ t want to go back to bed yet; my hair was damp, and
the sheets where I had lain wo uld still be clammy . I leaned
naked on the sill, the down-hairs of my body prickling
pleasantly as my skin cooled. The peaceful whooshing of the
trees wa s interru pted by the thin  sound of a child’ s wail, and I
glanced toward the cabin.
It w as a hundre d yards from the house; the wind must be
toward me, to h ave carried the sound. Sure enough, the wind
changed as I leaned out of the window , and the crying was lost
in th e flutter of  leaves. The breeze passed on, though, and I
could hear the screeching, louder now , in the silence.
It w as louder b ecause it was getting closer . There was a
creak an d the groan of wood as the cabin door opened, and
someone steppe d out. There was no lamp or candle lit in the
cabin, and the quick glimpse I had of the emer ging figure
showed me nothing but a tall fo rm silhouetted against the dim
glow of the banked hearth insid e. It seemed to have long hair
—but bo th Roger and Brianna s lept with their hair untied and
capless. It was pleasant to imagine Roger ’ s glossy black locks
mingling with the fire of Brian na’ s on the pillow—did they
share a pillow? I wondered suddenly .
The screeching hadn’ t abated. Fretful and cranky , but not
agonized. Not belly-ache. A bad dream? I waited a moment,
watching, to see whether whoever it was would bring the child
to the house, in search of me , and put out a hand to my
crumpled shift, just in case. No—the tall figure had vanished
into the spruce grove; I could hear the receding wails. Not
fever , then.I r ealized that m y breasts had b egun to tingle and stif fen in
response to the crying, and smiled, a little ruefully . Strange,
that inst inct went so deep and lasted so long—would I come
one day to a poi nt when nothing in me stirred to the sound of a
crying baby , to t he scent of a man aroused, to the brush of my
own long hair against the skin of my naked back? And if I did
come to  such a p oint—would I mourn the loss, I wondered, or
find myself peaceful, left to contemplate existence without the
intrusion of such animal sensations?
It w asn’ t only th e glories of the  flesh that were the gifts of
the worl d, after all; a doctor see s the plentiful miseries flesh is
heir to, as well—and yet … sta nding cool in the flood of late
summer ’ s air from the window , the boards smooth under my
bare fee t and the touch of wind  on bare skin … I could not
wish to be a pure spirit—not yet.
The cryi ng grew  louder , and I heard the low murmur of an
adult’ s voice below it, trying unsuccessfully to soothe it.
Roger , then.
I cupped my breasts gently , liking the soft, full weight of
them. I remembered what they ’d been like when I was very
young; s mall hard swellings, so sensitive that the touch of a
boy’ s ha nd mad e me weak in the knees. The touch of my own
hand, come to that. They were dif ferent now—and yet
peculiarly the same.
This wa s not the discovery of a new and unimagined thing,
but rather only a new awareness, the acknowledgment of
something that had risen while my back was turned, like a
shadow cast upon the wall, its presence unsuspected, seen only
when I turned to look at it—but there all the time.
Oh, I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
And what can be the use of him, is mor e than I can see.
And if I turned my back again, the shadow would not leave
me. It was irre vocably attache d to me, whether I chose to
notice it or not, crouched always insubstantial, intangible but
pr esent , s mall to vanis hing under my feet when the light ofother preoccupations shone upon me, blown up to gigantic
proportions in the glare of some sudden ur ge.
Resident demon , or guardian an gel? Or only the shadow of
the beas t, constant reminder of the inescapability of the body
and its hungers?
Another noise mingled with the whinging below; coughing,
I t hought, but it  didn’ t stop, and  the rhythm sounded wrong. I
put my head out , cautious as a snail after a thunderstorm, and
made out a few words in the rasping gur gle.
“… excavating for a mine … forty-niner … da-aughter ,
Clementine.”
Roger was singing.
I fel t the  tears sting my eyes, an d drew my head in hastily ,
lest I be seen. T here was no tu ne to it—the pitch varied no
more tha n the hooting of wind across the mouth of an empty
bottle—and yet  it was music. A dogged, ragged gasp of a
song, an d yet Jemmy’ s wailing  quieted to snif fling sobs, as
though he was trying to make  out the words, so painfully
forced through his father ’ s scarred throat.
“Fed she duck-lings … by the wa-ter …” He was having to
gasp for  breath after each whis pered phrase, the sound of it
like tearing linen. I curled my f ingers into fists, as though by
sheer force of will I could help him get the words out.
“Herring box-es … without top-ses … san-dals were for …
Clementine.” The breeze was rising again, stirring in the tops
of th e trees. The  next line was lost in their rustle, and I heard
no more for a minute or two, strain my ears as I would.
Then I saw Jamie, standing still.
He made no no ise, but I felt him at once; a warmth, a
thickening, in the cool air of the room.
“Are ye well, Sassenach?” he asked softly from the
doorway .
“Y es, fin e.” I spoke in a whisper , not to wake Lizzie and her
father , who slept in the back bedroom. “Just needed a breath ofair; I didn’ t mean to wake you.”
He came closer , a tall naked ghost, smelling of sleep.
“I always wake when you do, Sassenach; I sleep ill without
ye by my side.” He touched my forehead briefly . “I thought ye
were maybe fevered; the bed was damp where ye’d lain.
Y ou’re sure you’re all right?”
“I w as hot; I couldn’ t sleep. But yes, I’m all right. And
you?” I touched his face; his skin was warm with sleep.
He c ame to stand beside me at t he window , looking out into
the l ate summer night. The moo n was full, and the birds were
restless; from near at hand, I h eard the faint chirp of a late-
nesting warbler , and farther of f, the squeak of a hunting saw-
whet owl.
“Y ou recall Laurence Sterne?” Jamie asked, evidently
reminded of the naturalist by the sounds.
“I d oubt anyone who’ s met him  would for get him,” I said
dryly . “T he bag  of dried spider s makes rather an impression.
T o say nothing of the smell.” Sterne carried with him a
distinctive aroma, composed in equal parts of natural body
odor , an  expen sive cologne that he favored—which was
suf ficiently stron g to compete w ith—though not to conquer—
the pungencies of various preservatives such as camphor and
alcohol—and a faint reek of d ecay from the specimens he
collected.
He chuckled softly .
“That’ s true. He stinks worse than you do.”
“I do not stink!” I said indignantly .
“Mmphm.” He took my hand and lifted it to his nose,
snif fing delicate ly . “Onions,” he said, “and garlic. Something
hot … peppercorns. A ye, and clove. Squirrel-blood and meat-
juice.” His tongue flicked out like a snake’ s, touching my
knuckles. “St arch—potatoes—and something woody .
T oadstools.”“Not fai r at all,” I said, trying to get my hand back. “Y ou
know perfectly well what we ha d for dinner . And they weren’ t
toadstools, they were woodears.”
“Mm?” He turned my hand ov er and snif fed at my palm,
then my wrist a nd up my forearm. “V inegar and dill; ye’ve
been making cucumber pickles,  aye? Good, I like those. Mm,
oh, and soured milk here in the  fine hairs on your arm—were
ye splashed churning butter , or skimming cream?”
“Y ou guess, since you’re so good at it.”
“Butter .”
“Damn.” I was still trying to pull away , but only because the
stubble on his fa ce tickled the sensitive skin of my upper arm.
He smelled his way up my arm into the hollow of my
shoulder , makin g me squeak as the strands of his hair drifted
across my skin.
He lifted my ar m a bit, touched  the damp silky hair there,
and ran  his fingers under his nose. “Eau de femme,”  he
murmured, and I heard the laughter in his voice. “Ma petite
fleur .”
“And I bathed , too,” I said ruefully .
“A ye, w ith the sunflower soap,” he said, a slight tone of
surprise in his voice as he snif fed at the hollow of my
collarbone. I gave a small, high-pitched yelp, and he reached
up t o lay a lar ge, warm hand across my mouth. He  smelt of
gunpowder , hay , and manure, but I couldn’ t say so, what with
him muf fling me.
He strai ghtened a little, and leaned close, so the roughness
of his whiskers brushed my che ek. His hand fell away , and I
felt the softness of his lips against my temple, the butterfly
touch of his tongue on my skin.
“And sa lt,” he said, very softly , his breath warm on my face.
“There is salt on your face, and your lashes are wet. D’ye
weep, Sassenach?”“No,” I said, though I had a sudden, irrational ur ge to do
just that. “No, I sweat. I was … hot.”
I wasn’ t any longer; my skin was cool; cold where the
night-draft from the window chilled my backside.
“Ah, bu t here … mm.” He was  on his knees now , one arm
about my waist to hold me still, his nose buried in the hollow
between my breasts. “Oh,” he sa id, and his voice had changed
again.
I did n’ t normally wear perfume,  but I had a special oil, sent
from the Indies, made with orange flowers, jasmine, vanilla
beans, a nd cinna mon. I had only  a tiny vial, and wore a small
dab infr equently—for occasions that I thought might perhaps
be special.
“Y e wan ted me,” he said ruefull y . “And I fell asleep without
even touching you. I’m sorry , Sassenach. Y e should have
said.”
“Y ou were tired.” His hand had left my mouth; I stroked his
hair , smoothing the long dark strands behind his ear . He
laughed, and I felt the warmt h of his breath on my bare
stomach.
“Y e could raise me from the dead for that, Sassenach, and I
wouldna mind it.”
He stoo d up then, facing me, a nd even in the dim light I
could see that n o such desperate measures on my part would
be required.
“It’ s hot,” I said. “I’m sweating.”
“Y e think I’m not?”
His hands closed on my waist and he lifted me suddenly ,
setting me down on the broad w indowsill. I gasped at contact
with the cool wood, reflexively grasping the window frame on
either side.
“What on earth are you doing?”He didn’ t bother answering; it was an entirely rhetorical
question, in any case.
“Eau de femme,”  he murmured, his soft hair brushing
across m y thigh s as he knelt. The floorboards creaked under
his weight. “ Parfum d’amor , mm?”
The cool breeze lifted my hair ,  drew it tickling across my
back like the lig htest of lover ’ s touches. Jamie’ s hands were
firm on the curve of my hips; I was in no danger of falling, and
yet I  felt  the dizzy drop behind m e, the clear and endless night,
with its star -strewn empty sky i nto which I might fall and go
on f alling, a tin y speck, blazing hotter and hotter with the
friction of my passage, bursting finally into the incandescence
of a shooting … star .
“Ssh,” J amie murmured, far of f. He was standing now , his
hands o n my waist, and the moaning noise might have been
the w ind, or me.  His fingers brushed my lips. They might have
been matches, striking flames against my skin. Heat danced
over me, belly a nd breast, neck and face, burning in front, cool
behind, like St. Lawrence on his gridiron.
I wrappe d my legs around him, one heel settled in the cleft
of his buttocks, the solid strength of his hips between my legs
my only anchor .
“Let go, ” he said in my ear . “I’ll  hold you.” I did let go, and
leaned back on the air , safe in his hands.
 
“YOU DID ST AR T OUT to tell  me something about Laurence
Sterne,” I murmured drowsily , much later .
“So I did.” Jam ie stretched and settled himself, a hand
curved proprietorially over my buttock. My knuckles brushed
the hairs on his thigh. It was too hot to lie pressed together , but
we didn’ t want to separate entirely .
“W e were talking of birds; he bein’ uncommon fond of
them. I asked him why it was th at in the late summer , the birds
sing at night—t he nights are s horter then, ye’d think they’d
want the ir rest, but no. There’ s rustling and twittering and allmanner o’ carryings-on, all the  night long in the hedges and
the trees.”
“Are there? I hadn’ t noticed.”
“Y e’re n o in the habit of sleeping in the forest, Sassenach,”
he said tolerantly . “I have been, and so had Sterne. He’d
noticed the same thing, he said, and wondered why .”
“And did he have an answer?”
“Not an answer—but a theory , at least.”
“Oh, even better ,” I said, in sleepy amusement.
He gave  a soft g runt of agreement and rolled slightly to one
side, adm itting a little welcome air between our salty skins. I
could se e the gleam of moisture over the slope of his shoulder ,
and the prickle of sweat among the dark curly hairs of his
chest. He scratched gently at it, with a softly agreeable rasping
sound.
“What h e did was to capture a number of the birds, and shut
them up in cages lined with blotting paper .”
“What?” That waked me up  a bit, if only to laugh.
“Whatever for?”
“W ell, n ot lined  entirely , only o n the floor ,” he explained.
“He put out a wee plate on the floor filled with ink and a cup
of seed in the middle, so that they couldna feed without getting
the ink on their feet. Then as they hopped to and fro, their
footprints would show on the blotting paper .”
“Umm. And what, precisely , did that show—other than
black footprints?”
The insects were beginning to find us, drawn by the musk of
our heated flesh. A tiny zeeeeee  b y my ear pro mpted me to
slap at the invisible mosquito, then reach for the gauze-cloth
that Jam ie had pushed back when he rose to find me. This was
fastened to an i ngenious mechanism—Brianna’ s invention—
fixed to  the beam above the bed, so that when unrolled, the
cloth fel l down on all sides, shielding us from the bloodthirsty
hordes of the summer nights.I p ulled it into place with some regret, for while it excluded
mosquitoes, gna ts, and the unn ervingly lar ge mosquito-hawk
moths, it also u navoidably shu t out some of the air and all
sight of the lum inous night sky beyond the window . I lay
down a gain at a little distanc e on the bed; while Jamie’ s
natural furnace was a great boon on winter nights, it had its
drawbacks in the summer . I did n’ t mind melting in an inferno
of b lazing desire, if it came to that, but I had no more clean
shifts.
“There were a g reat many footprints, Sassenach—but most
of them were on one side of the cage. In all the cages.”
“Oh, really? And what did Sterne think that signified?”
“W ell, h e had the bright thought  of putting down a compass
by the cages. And it seems that all the night through, the birds
were hopping and striving toward the southeast—which is the
direction in which they migrate, come the fall.”
“That’ s very interesting.” I pulled my hair back into a tail,
lifting it  of f my neck for coolne ss. “But it’ s not quite the time
to m igrate, is it,  in late summer ? And they don’ t fly at night,
do they , even when they migrate?”
“No. It was as th ough they felt t he imminence of flight, and
the pull of it—and that disturbed their rest. The stranger it was,
because most of the birds that he had were young ones, who
had nev er yet made the journe y; they hadna seen the place
where th ey were bound, and ye t they felt it there—calling to
them, perhaps, rousing them from sleep.”
I moved slightly , and Jamie lifted his hand from my leg.
“Zugunruhe,” he said softly , tracing with a fingertip the
damp mark he had left on my skin.
“What’ s that?”
“It’ s what Sterne called it—the wakefulness of the wee
birds, getting ready to leave on their long flight.”
“Does it mean something in particular?”“A ye. ‘Ruhe’ is stillness, rest. And ‘zug’ is a journey of
some sort. So ‘zugunruhe’ is a restlessness—the uneasiness
before a long journey .”
I rolled  toward him, butting my forehead af fectionately
against h is shoulder . I inhaled, in the style of one savoring the
delicate aroma of a fine cigar .
“Eau de homme?”
He raised his he ad and snif fed dubiously , wrinkling up his
nose.
“ Eau de chevr e,  I think,” he said. “Though it might be
something worse. Is there a French word for skunk, I
wonder?”
“Le Pew .”  I suggested, giggling.
The birds sang all night.108
TULACH ARD
October , 1772
J AMIE NODDED at something behind him, smiling. 
 “I see we’ve help today .” 
 Roger lo oked back to see Jemmy stumping along behind them,
his sma ll fair brow furrowed in fierce concentration, a fist-
sized rock clutched to his chest w ith both hands. Roger wanted
to laugh  at the sight, but instead turned and squatted down,
waiting for the boy to catch them up.
“Is that for the new hogpen, a ghille ruaidh?” he said.
Jemmy nodded solemnly . The morning was still cool, but
the little boy’ s cheeks glowed with ef fort.
“Thank you,” Roger said gravely . He held out his hand.
“Shall I take it, then?”
Jemmy shook his head violently , heavy fringe flying.
“Me do!”
“It’ s a long wal k, a ghille ruaidh,” Jamie said. “And your
mother will miss ye, no?”
“No!”
“Grand-da’ s right, a bhalaich , Mummy needs you,” Roger
said, reaching for the rock. “Here, let me take …”
“No!” Jemmy clutched the ro ck protectively against his
smock, mouth set in a stubborn line.
“But ye can’ t …” Jamie began.
“Come!”
“No, I said ye must …” Roger began.
“COME!”“Now , look, lad—” both men began together , then stopped,
looked at each other , and laughed.
“Where’ s Mummy , then?” Roge r said, trying another tack.
“Mummy will be worried about you, aye?”
The small red head shook in vehement negation.
“Claire said the women meant to be quilting today ,” Jamie
said to Roger . “Marsali’ s brought a pattern; they’ll maybe have
started the stitching of it.” He squatted down beside Roger , eye
to eye with his grandson.
“Have ye got away from your mother , then?”
The soft pink mouth, hitherto  clamped tight, twitched,
allowing a small giggle to escape.
“Thought so,” Roger said in resignation. “Come on, then.
Back to the house.” He stood up and swung the little boy up
into his arms, rock and all.
“No, no! NO!” Jemmy stif fened in resistance, his feet
digging painfully into Roger ’ s belly as his body arched
backward like a bow . “Me help! Me HELP!”
T rying to make his own ar guments heard through Jemmy’ s
roars wi thout shouting, while at the same time keeping the boy
from fal ling backward onto his head, Roger didn’ t at first hear
the cries from the direction of  the house. When he finally
resorted to clapping a hand over his of fspring’ s wide-open
mouth, though, feminine calls of “Jeeeeemmmeeeeeeee!” were
clearly audible through the trees.
“See, Mrs. Lizzie’ s looking f or ye,” Jamie said to his
grandson, jerking a thumb toward the sound.
“Not only Lizzie,” Roger said. More women’ s voices were
echoing the chorus, with increasing notes of annoyance.
“Mum and Grannie Claire, and Grannie Bug and Auntie
Marsali, too, from the sounds of it. They don’ t sound very
pleased with you, lad.”
“W e’d best take him, back, then ,” Jamie said. He looked at
his gran dson, not without sympathy . “Mind, you’re like to getyour bum  smacked, laddie. W omen dinna like it when ye run
of f on them.”
This threatening prospect caused Jemmy to drop his rock
and wrap his arms and legs tightly round Roger .
“Go with YOU, Daddy ,” he said coaxingly .
“But Mummy—”
“NO MUMMY! W ant Daddy!”
Roger patted Jemmy’ s back, small but solid under his
grubby s mock. H e was torn; this  was the first time Jem had so
definitely wanted him  in preference to Bree, and he had to
admit to  a sneaking feeling o f flattery . Even if his son’ s
present partiality sprang as much from an ur ge to avoid
punishment as from a desire for  his company , Jem had  wanted
to come with him.
“I suppo se we could take him,” he said to Jamie, over Jem’ s
head, now nestled trustingly against his collarbone. “Just for
the morning; I could fetch him back at noon.”
“Oh, aye,” Jamie said. He smiled at his grandson, picked up
the fallen stone, and handed it back to him. “Building hogpens
is proper man’ s work, aye? None of this prinking and yaf fling
the ladies are so fond of.”
“Speaking of yaf fling …” Roger lifted his chin in the
direction of the house, where the cries of “JEEMEEEEE!”
were now taking on a distinctly irritated tone, tinged with
panic. “W e’d best tell them we have him.”
“I’ll go.” Jamie dropped the rucksack of f his shoulder with a
sigh, and raised one eyebrow at his grandson. “Mind, lad, ye
owe me. When women are in a fret, they’ll take it out on the
first man they se e, whether he’ s to blame or not. Like enough
I’ll get my  bum smacked.”  He rolled his eyes, but grinned at
Jemmy , then turned and set of f for the house at a trot.
Jemmy giggled.
“Smack, Grand-da!” he called.“Hush, wee rascal.” Roger gave him a soft slap on the
bottom, and realized that Jem was wearing short breeks under
his smoc k, but no clout under t hem. He swung the boy down
onto his feet.
“D’ye need to go potty?” he asked automatically , falling
into Brianna’ s peculiar idiom.
“No,” Je m said,  just as automa tically , but with a reflexive
kneading of his crotch that made his father take him by the
arm, firm ly steering him of f the  path and behind a convenient
bush.
“Come on. Let’ s have a try , while we wait for Grand-da.”
 
IT SEEMED RA THER a long time before Jamie reappeared,
though t he indig nant cries of th e searchers had been quickly
stilled. If Jamie had got his b um smacked, Roger thought
cynically , he appeared to hav e enjoyed it. A slight flush
showed on the high cheekbon es, and he wore a faint but
definite air of satisfaction.
This was explained at once, thou gh, when Jamie produced a
small bundle from inside his shirt and unwrapped a linen
towel, revealing half a dozen f resh biscuits, still warm, and
dripping with melted butter and honey .
“I th ink perhaps Mrs. Bug meant them for the quilting
circle,” he said, distributing the  booty . “But there was plenty
of batter left in the bowl; I doubt they’ll be missed.”
“If they are, I’ll blame it on you,” Roger assured him,
catching a dribble of warm honey that ran down his wrist. He
wiped it of f and sucked his finger , eyes closing momentarily in
ecstasy .
“What n ow , ye’ d give me up to the Inquisition?” Jamie’ s
eyes cre ased into blue triangles of amusement as he wiped
crumbs from his mouth. “And a fter I shared my plunder with
ye, too—there’ s gratitude!”“Y our reputation  will stand it,” Roger said wryly . “Jem and
I are persona non grata  after what happened to her spice cake
last wee k, but Himself can do no  wrong, as far as Grannie Bug
is co ncerned. She wouldn’ t min d if you ate the entire contents
of the pantry single-handed.”
Jamie lic ked a smear of honey from the corner of his mouth,
with the smug complacency of  a man permanently in Mrs.
Bug’ s good books.
“W ell, that’ s as may be,” he admitted. “Still, if ye expect to
blame it  on me, we’d best wipe  a bit of the evidence of f the
laddie before we go home.”
Jemmy had been addressing himself to his treat with single-
minded concentration, with the result that his entire face
gleamed with butter , daubs of h oney ran in amber trails down
his smock, and what appeared to be several small globs of
half-chewed biscuit were stuck in his hair .
“How in hell di d you do that so fast?” Roger demanded in
amazement. “Look what ye’ve done to your shirt! Y our mother
will kill  us both.” He took the towel and made an abortive
attempt to wipe some of the m ess of f, but succeeded only in
spreading it farther .
“Dinna fash,” Jamie said tolerantly . “He’ll be so covered
wi’ filth by the end of the day , his mother will never notice a
few crum bs extr a. W atch out, la d!” A quick grab saved half a
biscuit t hat had broken of f as the  boy made an attempt to cram
the last pastry into his mouth in a single gulp.
“Still,” Jamie said, biting tho ughtfully into the rescued
biscuit-half as he looked at his g randson, “perhaps we’ll souse
him in the creek a bit. W e dinna want the pigs to smell the
honey on him.”
A faint qualm of  unease went over Roger , as he realized that
Jamie w as in fact not joking abo ut the pigs. It was common to
see o r hear pigs in the wood ne arby , rooting through the leaf-
mold under oaks and poplars, or grunting blissfully over a
trove of  chestnut mast. Food w as plentiful at this season, andthe pigs  were no threat to grown men. A small boy , though,
smelling of sweetness … you t hought of pigs as only eating
roots and nuts, but Roger had a vivid memory of the big white
sow , seen a few  days before, with the naked, blood-smeared
tail of a possum  dangling from her maw as she champed
placidly away .
A c hunk of bis cuit seemed to be stuck in his throat. He
picked Jemmy up, despite the stickiness, and tucked him
giggling under one arm, so the little boy’ s arms and legs
dangled in the air .
“Come on, then,” Roger said, resigned. “Mummy won’ t like
it a bit, if you get eaten by a pig.”
 
FENCE POLES  LA Y piled nea r the stone pillar . Roger dug
about until he found a splint ered piece short enough for
convenience, an d used it to lever a big chunk of granite up far
enough to get both hands under it. Squatting, he got it onto his
thighs, and very slowly stood u p, his back straightening one
vertebra at a time, fingers digging into the lichen-splotched
surface with the ef fort of lifting. The rag tied round his head
was dren ched, a nd perspiration was running down his face. He
shook his head to flick the stinging sweat out of his eyes.
“Daddy , Daddy!”
Roger felt a sudd en tug at his breeches, blinked sweat out of
his eye,  and planted his feet well apart to keep his balance
without dropping the heavy rock. He tightened his grip and
glanced down, annoyed.
“What, lad?”
Jemmy h ad tight hold of the cloth with both hands. He was
looking toward the wood.
“Pig, Daddy ,” he whispered. “ Big  pig.”
Roger glanced in the direction of the little boy’ s gaze and
froze.It w as a huge black boar , perhaps eight feet away . The thing
stood more than three feet at the  shoulder , and must weigh two
hundred pounds or more, with curving yellow tushes the
length of Jemmy’ s forearm. It stood with lifted head, piggy
snout moistly working as it snuf fed the air for food or threat.
“Shit,” Roger said involuntarily .
Jemmy , who would normally have seized on any inadvertent
vulgarity and trumpeted it gleefully , now merely clung tighter
to his father ’ s leg.
Thoughts raced through Roger ’ s mind like colliding freight
cars. W ould it attack if he m oved? He had to move; the
muscles of his arms were trem bling under the strain. He’d
splashed Jem with water; did the boy still smell—or look—
like something on the pig’ s menu?
He picked one coherent thought out of the wreckage.
“Jem,” he said, his voice very c lam, “get behind me. Do it
now ,” he added with  emphasis, as the boar turned its head in
their direction.
It saw them; he could see the sm all dark eyes change focus.
It took a few s teps forward, its hooves absurdly small and
dainty under its menacing bulk.
“Do you  see Grand-da, Jem?” he asked, keeping his voice
calm. Streaks of fire were burning through his arms, and his
elbows felt as though they’d been crushed in a vise.
“No,” Jemmy whispered. Roger could feel the little boy
crowding close behind him, pressed against his legs.
“W ell, look round. He went to the stream; he’ll be coming
back from that direction. T urn round and look.”
The boar was ca utious, but not afraid. That was what came
of not hunting t he things suf ficiently , he thought. They ought
to b e gutting a few in the wood once a week, as an object
lesson to the rest.
“Grand-da!” Jemmy’ s voice ra ng out from behind him,
shrill with fear .At the sound, the pig’ s hackles sprang suddenly erect in a
ridge of coarse hair down its spine and it lowered its head,
muscles bunching.
“Run, Je m!” Roger cried. “Run to Grand-da!” A sur ge of
adrenaline shot through him and suddenly the rock weighed
nothing. He flung it at the char ging pig, catching it on the
shoulder . It gave a whuff!  of surprise, faltered, then opened its
mouth with a roar and came at him, tushes slashing as it swung
its head.
He couldn’ t duck aside and let it go past; Jem was still close
behind him. He kicked it in the jaw with all his strength, then
flung himself on it, grasping for a hold round its neck.
His fing ers slipp ed and slid, una ble to get a firm grip on the
wiry ha ir , stubbing and sliding of f the hard rolls of tight-
packed flesh. Christ, it was like  wrestling an animated sack of
concrete! He felt something warm and wet on his hand and
jerked it  back; had it slashed him ? He felt no pain. Maybe only
saliva fr om the gnashing jaws— maybe blood from a gash too
deep to feel. No time to look. He thrust the hand back down,
flailing blindly , got his fingers round a hairy leg, and pulled
hard.
The pig  fell sideways with a s queal of surprise, throwing
him of f its back.  He hit the ground on hands and one knee, and
his knee struck stone. A bolt of pain shot from ankle to groin,
and he curled u p involuntarily ,  momentarily paralyzed from
the shock.
The boa r was up, shaking itself with a grunt and a rattle of
bristles, but facing away from him. Dust rose from its coat and
he could  see the corkscrew ta il, coiled up tight against its
rump. A second more, and the pig would turn, rip him from
gut t o gu llet, an d stamp on the pieces. He grabbed for a rock,
but it burst in his hand, nothing but a clod of dirt.
The gasp  and thud of a running man came from his left, and
he heard a breathless shout.
“T ulach Ar d! T ulach Ar d!”The boar heard Jamie’ s cry an d swung snorting round to
meet this new e nemy , mouth agape and eyes gone red with
rage.
Jamie h ad his dirk in his hand; Roger saw the gleam of
metal as Jamie dropped low and  swung it wide, slashing at the
boar , then danced aside as it cha r ged. A knife. Fight that thing
with a knife ?
Y ou ar e out of  your fucking mind , Roger thought quite
clearly .
“No, I’m not,” Jamie said, pant ing, and Roger realized that
he must  have spoken aloud. Jamie crouched, balanced on the
balls of his feet , and reached his free hand toward Roger , his
eyes still fastened on the pig, w hich had paused, kneading the
ground with its hooves and cl ashing its teeth, swinging its
head back and forth between the two men, estimating its
chances.
“Bioran!”  Jamie said, beckoning ur gently . “Stick, spear—
gie it to me!”
Spear … the splintered fence-pole. His numbed leg still
wouldn’ t work, but he could m ove. He threw himself to the
side, grabbed the ragged shaft of wood, and fell back on his
haunches, bracing it before him like a boar -spear , sharp end
pointed toward the foe.
“T ulach Ar d!”  he bellowed. “Come here, you fat fucker!”
Distracted for an instant, the boar swung toward him. Jamie
lunged at it, stabbing down, aiming between the shoulder
blades. There was a piercing s queal and the boar wheeled,
blood flying from a deep gash in its shoulder . Jamie threw
himself sideways, tripped on something, fell, and skidded hard
across the mud and grass, the knife spinning from his outflung
hand.
Lunging forward, Roger jabbed his makeshift spear as hard
as he could just below the boa r ’ s tail. The animal uttered a
piercing squeal and appeared to  rise straight into the air . The
spear jerked through his hands, rough bark ripping skin of f hispalms. H e grabb ed it hard and managed to keep hold of it as
the boar crashed onto its side  in a blur of writhing fury ,
gnashing, roarin g, and spraying blood and black mud in all
directions.
Jamie was up, mud-streaked and bellowing. He’d got hold
of anoth er fence-pole, with which he took a mighty swing at
the rising pig, the wood meeting its head with a crack like a
well-hit baseball just as the anim al achieved its feet. The boar ,
mildly stunned, gave a grunt and sat down.
A shrill cry from  behind made R oger whirl on his haunches.
Jemmy , his grandfather ’ s dirk held over his head with both
hands and wobbling precariously , was staggering toward the
boar , his face beet-red with ferocious intent.
“Jem!” he shouted. “Get back!”
The boar grunted loudly behind him, and Jamie shouted
something. Roge r had no attention to spare; he lunged toward
his son, but caught a flicker of movement from the wood
beyond Jemmy that made him glance up. A streak of gray , low
to the ground and moving so fa st that he had no more than an
impression of its nature.
That was enough.
“W olves!” he shouted to Jami e, and with a feeling that
wolves on top of pigs was patently unfair , reached Jemmy ,
grabbed the knife, and threw himself on top of the boy .
He pressed himself to the ground, feeling Jemmy squirm
frantically under him, and waited, feeling strangely calm.
W ould it be tusk or tooth? he wondered.
“It’ s all right, Je m. Be still. It’ s all right, Daddy’ s got you.”
His fore head was pressed against the earth, Jem’ s head tucked
in the hollow of his shoulder . H e had one arm sheltering the
little boy , the kn ife gripped in h is other hand. He hunched his
shoulders, feelin g the back of his neck bare and vulnerable,
but couldn’ t move to protect it.
He coul d hear the wolf now , howling and yipping to its
companions. The boar was making an ungodly noise, a sort oflong, continuous  scream, and Jamie, too short of breath to go
on shout ing, seemed to be callin g it names in brief, incoherent
bursts of Gaelic.
There w as an odd whirr overhead and a peculiar , hollow-
sounding thump! , succeeded by sudden and utter silence.
Startled, Roger raised his head a few inches, and saw the pig
standing a few f eet before him, its jaw hanging open in what
looked like sheer astonishment. Jamie was standing behind it,
smeared from forehead to knee with blood-streaked mud, and
wearing an identical expression.
Then the  boar ’ s front legs gave way and it fell to its knees.
It wobbled, eyes glazing, and collapsed onto its side, the shaft
of an arrow poking up, looking  frail and inconsequential by
comparison to the animal’ s bulk.
Jemmy was squirming and crying underneath him. He sat
up s lowly , and gathered the lit tle boy up into his arms. He
noticed, remotely , that his hands were shaking, but he felt
curiously blank. The torn skin on his palms stung, and his knee
was throbbing. Patting Jemmy’ s back in automatic comfort, he
turned his head toward the wood and saw the Indian standing
at the edge of the trees, bow in hand.
It occurred to him, dimly , to look for the wolf. It was nosing
at the pig’ s carcass, no more than a few feet from Jamie, but
his fathe r -in-law was paying it no mind at all. He too was
staring at the Indian.
“Ian,” h e said softly , and a look of incredulous joy
blossomed slowly through the smears of mud, grass, and
blood. “Oh, Christ. It’ s Ian.”109
THE V OICE OF TIME
A S LI ZZIE HAD NO MOTHER  to see to her proper “fitting
out” for marriage, the women  on the Ridge had grouped
together to provide things like  petticoats, nightgowns, and
knitted stocking s, with a few of the more talented ladies
piecing quilt blocks. When a quilt-top was completed,
everyone would come up to the “Big House” to see to the
actual quilting— the laborious stitching together of quilt-top
and backing, with whatever mig ht be available in the way of
batting—worn-out blankets, stitched-together rags, or wool-
combings—laid in between quilt-top and backing for warmth.
I ha d neither g reat talent nor great patience for sewing
generally , but I did have the m anual dexterity for small, fine
stitches. More importantly , I had a lar ge kitchen with good
light and enough room for a quilting-frame, plus the services
of M rs. Bug, who kept the quilters well supplied with mugs of
tea and endless plates of apple scones.
W e were in the midst of quilting a block pattern Mrs. Evan
Lindsay had pieced out in cre ams and blues, when Jamie
appeared sudden ly in the door to the hallway . Caught up in an
absorbing conversation about the snoring of husbands in
general and theirs in particular , most of the women didn’ t
notice him, but I was facing the door . He seemed not to want
to interrupt, or t o attract attention, for he didn’ t come into the
room—but once  he’d caught my eye, he jerked his head
ur gently , and disappeared toward his study .
I glance d at Bree, who was sitting next to me. She’d seen
him; she  raised an eyebrow and shrugged. I popped the knot—
jerking t he knotted end of my thread up between the layers of
fabric, so it wouldn’ t show—stabbed my needle through the
quilt-top, and got up, murmuring an excuse.“Give him beer to his supper ,” M rs. Chisholm was advising
Mrs. Ab erfeldy . “A great deal of it, and well-watered. That
way , he’ ll have to wake to piss every half-hour , and can’ t get
started wi’ the so rt of rumption that shakes the shingles loose.”
“Oh, aye,” Mrs. Aberfeldy objected. “I tried that. But then
when he  comes back to bed, he’ s wantin’ to … mmphm.” She
flushed red as the ladies all cackled. “I get less sleep than I do
with the snorin’!”
Jamie w as waiting in the hall. The moment I appeared, he
grabbed me by the arm and hustled me out of the front door .
“What—” I began, bewildered.  Then I saw the tall Indian
sitting on the edge of the stoop.
“What—” I said again, and the n he stood up, turned, and
smiled at me.
“Ian!” I shrieked, and flung myself into his arms.
He was thin and  hard as a piece of sun-dried rawhide, and
his cloth es smelled of wood-damp and earth, with a faint echo
of the smoke an d body-smells of a long-house. I stood back,
wiping m y eyes , to look at him, and a cold nose nudged my
hand, making me utter another small shriek.
“Y ou!” I  said to Rollo. “I thought I’d never see you again!”
Overcome with emotion, I rubbe d his ears madly . He uttered a
short bark and dropped to his forepaws, wagging equally
madly .
“Dog! D og-dog! Here, dog!” Jemmy burst from the door of
his own  cabin, running as fast as his short legs would carry
him, we t hair standing on end and face beaming. Rollo shot
toward h im, hitting him amidships and bowling him over in a
flurry of squeals.
I had  at first feared that Rollo—who was, after all, half-wolf
—saw J emmy as prey , but it was immediately apparent that
the two were merely engaged in mutually ecstatic play .
Brianna’ s maternal sonar had picked up the squealing, though,
and she came rushing to the door .“What—” she began, eyes going to the melee taking place
on the grass. Th en Ian stepped forward, took her in his arms,
and kissed her . Her shriek in tu rn brought the quilting circle
boiling out onto the porch, i n an eruption of questions,
exclamations, an d small subsidiary shrieks in acknowledgment
of the general excitement.
In the midst of the resulting pandemonium, I suddenly
noticed that Roger , who had appeared from somewhere, was
sporting a fresh raw graze across his forehead, a black eye, and
a cle an s hirt. I glanced at Jamie, who was standing next to me
watching the goings-on, his face wreathed in a permanent grin.
His shirt , by contrast, was not only filthy but ripped down the
front, an d with an enormous re nt in one sleeve. There were
huge smears of mud and dried blood on the linen, too, though I
didn’ t se e any fresh blood showing. Given Jemmy’ s wet hair
and clean shirt—not that it was, anymore—this was all highly
suspicious.
“What on earth have you lot been doing?” I demanded.
He shook his head, still grinning.
“It doesna signify , Sassenach. Though I have got a fresh hog
for ye to butcher—when ye’ve the time.”
I pushed back a lock of hair in exasperation.
“Is this the local equivalent of killing the fatted calf in honor
of the prodigal’ s  return?” I asked, nodding at Ian, who was by
now com pletely submer ged in a tide of women. Lizzie, I saw ,
was clinging to one of his arms, her pale face absolutely
ablaze with excitement. I felt a slight qualm, seeing it, but
pushed it away for the moment.
“Has Ian brought friends? Or—his family , perhaps?” He had
said his  wife was expecting, a nd that was nearly two years
back. The child—if all had go ne well—must be nearly old
enough to walk.
Jamie’ s smile dimmed a little at that.
“No,” he said. “ He’ s alone. Save for the dog, of course,” he
added, w ith a nod at Rollo, who  was lying on his back, pawsin the air , squirming happily under Jemmy’ s onslaught.
“Oh. W ell.” I smoothed down my hair and re-tied the
ribbon, b eginning to think what ought to be done regarding the
quilters, the fresh hog, and som e sort of celebratory supper—
though I supposed Mrs. Bug would deal with that.
“How long is he staying, did he say?”
Jamie took a deep breath, putting a hand on my back.
“For good,” he said, and his voice was full of joy—but with
an odd tinge of sadness that made me look up at him in
puzzlement. “He’ s come home.”
 
IT W AS VER Y LA TE indeed before the butchering, the
quilting, and the supper were all finished, and the visitors
finally left, char ged with gossip . Though not so much gossip
as all that; Ian had been frien dly to everyone, but reticent,
saying very little about his journey from the north—and
nothing at all about the reasons behind it.
“Did Ian tell yo u anything?” I asked Jamie, finding him
temporarily alone in his study before dinner . He shook his
head.
“V erra little. Only that he had come back to stay .”
“Do you suppose something dreadful happened to his wife?
And the  baby?” I felt a deep pang of distress, both for Ian, and
for the slight, pr etty Mohawk girl called W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa
—W orks W ith Her Hands. Ian h ad called her Emily . Death in
childbirth was not uncommon, even among the Indians.
Jamie shook his head again, looking sober .
“I d inna ken, bu t I think it must be something of the kind.
He h asna spoken of them at all— and the lad’ s eyes are a great
deal older than he is.”
Lizzie had appeared at the d oor then, with an ur gent
message from Mrs. Bug regarding dispositions for supper , and
I had to go. Following Lizzie toward the kitchen, though, Icouldn’ t help wondering just what Ian’ s return might mean to
her—particularly if we were right in our suppositions about
Ian’ s Mohawk wife.
Lizzie h ad been half in love with  Ian, before he had left, and
had pine d for months following his decision to stay with the
Kahnyen’kehaka. But that was more than two years ago, and
two yea rs can be a very long time, especially in a young
person’ s life.
I kn ew what Ja mie meant about Ian’ s eyes, and knew for
certain t hat he wasn’ t the same impulsive, cheerful lad we had
left with the Mo hawk. Lizzie wasn’ t quite the timidly adoring
girl-mouse she had been, either .
What she was , though, was Manfred McGillivray’ s
betrothed. I could only be thankful that neither Ute
McGillivray nor any of her dau ghters had been present at this
afternoon’ s quilting circle. W ith luck, the glamor of Ian’ s
return would be short-lived.
“W ill you be all right down here?” I asked Ian, dubiously . I
had put several quilts and a goo se-down pillow on the sur gery
table for him, h e having politely rejected Mr . W emyss’ s of fer
of his own be d and Mrs. Bug’ s desire to make him a
comfortable pallet before the kitchen hearth.
“Oh, aye, Auntie,” he said, and grinned at me. “Y e wouldna
credit t he places Rollo and I have been sleeping.” He
stretched, yawning and blinking. “Christ—I’ve no been up
past sunset anytime this month or more.”
“And up at dawn, too, I expect. That’ s why I thought you
might be better in here; no one will disturb you, if you’d like
to sleep late in the morning.”
He laughed at that.
“Only if I leave the window open, so Rollo can come and go
as he likes. Though he seems to think the huntin’ might be
good enough inside.”
Rollo was seated in the middle o f the floor , muzzle lifted in
anticipation, his yellow wolf-ey es fixed unwaveringly on theupper cupboard door . A low rumbling noise, like water
bumping in a kettle, issued from behind the door .
“I’ll gie ye odd s on the cat, Ian,” Jamie observed, coming
into the sur gery . “He’ s a verra high opinion of himself, has
wee Adso. I saw him chase a fox, last week.”
“The fact that you were behind him with a gun had nothing
to do with the fox’ s running away , of course,” I said.
“W ell, not so far as yon cheetie’ s concerned,” Jamie agreed,
grinning.
“Cheetie,” Ian repeated softly . “It feels … verra good to
speak Scots again, Uncle Jamie.”
Jamie’ s hand brushed Ian’ s arm lightly .
“I suppose it does, a m hic a pheathar ,” he said, just as
softly . “W ill ye have for got all your Gaelic, then?”
“‘S beag  ‘tha fhios aig fear a bhaile mar ‘tha fear na mara
beo,”  Ian replied, without hesitation. It was a well-known
saying: “Little does the landsman know how the seaman
lives.”
Jamie laughed in gratified surprise, and Ian grinned broadly
back. His face was weathered to a deep brown, and the dotted
lines of his Moh awk tattoos ran in fierce crescents from nose
to cheek bones—but for a moment, I saw his hazel eyes dance
with mischief, and saw again the lad we had known.
“I used to say t hings over in m y mind,” he said, the grin
fading a  little. “I’d look at thin gs, and say the words in my
mind— ‘A vbhar ,’ ‘Coir e,’  ‘Skirlie’ —so as not to for get.” He
glanced shyly at Jamie. “Y e did tell me to remember , Uncle.”
Jamie blinked, and cleared his throat.
“So I did, Ian,” he murmured. “I’m glad of it.” He squeezed
Ian’ s sh oulder h ard—and then they were embracing fiercely ,
thumping each other ’ s backs with wordless emotion.
By the time I had wiped my own eyes and blown my nose,
they had separated and resumed an air of elaborate casualness,af fecting to ignore my descent into female sentiment.
“I kept hold of the Scots and th e Gaelic, Uncle,” Ian said,
clearing his own throat. “The Latin was a bit beyond me,
though.”
“I canna  think ye’d have much occasion to practice your
Latin,” Jamie said. He wiped his shirtsleeve under his nose,
smiling. “Unless a wandering Jesuit happened by .”
Ian looked a litt le queer at that. He glanced from Jamie to
me, then  at the door to the su r gery , to be sure no one was
coming.
“W ell, it wasna exactly that, Uncle,” he said.
He walk ed quietly to the door , peeked out into the hallway ,
then clo sed the door softly , and came back to the table. He had
worn a small lea ther bag tied at his waist, which—aside from
knife, bo w , and quiver—appeared to contain the whole of his
worldly possessions. He had put this aside earlier , but now
picked i t up and rummaged brie fly in it, withdrawing a small
book, bound in black leather . H e handed this to Jamie, who
took it, looking puzzled.
“When I—that is, just before I left Snaketown—the old
lady , T ewakteny onh, gave me that wee book. I’d seen it
before; Emily”— he stopped, clearing his throat hard, then
went on steadily—”Emily begged a page of it for me, to send
ye a note to say all was well. Did ye get that?”
“Y es, we did,” I  assured him. “Jamie sent it to your mother ,
later .”
“Oh, aye?” Ian’ s expression lightened at thought of his
mother . “That’ s  good. She’ll be pleased to hear I’ve come
back, I hope.”
“I’ll lay ye any odds ye like o n that one,” Jamie assured
him. “But what’ s this?” He lifted the book, raising a brow in
question. “It looks like a priest’ s breviary .”
“So it does.” Ia n nodded, scratching at a mosquito bite on
his neck. “That’ s not what it is, though. Look at it, aye?”I m oved close to Jamie, look ing over his elbow as he
opened the book. There was a ragged edge of paper , where the
flyleaf had been torn out. There  was no title page, though, nor
printing. The book appeared to be a journal of some sort; the
pages were filled with writing in black ink.
T wo wo rds stoo d alone at the top of the first page, scrawled
in lar ge, shaky letters.
Ego sum , they said. I am.
“Are you, then?” said Jamie, h alf under his breath. “A ye,
and who will ye be?” Half down the page, the writing
continued. Here the writing was smaller , more controlled,
though something seemed odd-looking about it.
“ Prima cogitatio est … ”
“This is the first thing that come s into my head,” Jamie read
softly , translating aloud.
 
“I am; I still e xist. Did I, in that place between? I must
have, fo r I r emember it. I will try later to describe it. Now I
have no wor ds. I feel very ill.”
 
The lette rs were small and rounded, each printed singly . The
work o f a neat and careful writer , but they staggered
drunkenly , words slanting up the page. He did feel ill, if the
writing were any indication.
When the tidy printing resume d on the next page, it had
steadied, along with the writer ’ s nerve.
 
“Ibi denum locus …
It is  the  place. Of course it would be. But it is the pr oper
time as well, I know it. The tr ees, the bushes ar e differ ent.
Ther e was a clearing to the west and now it is completely filled
with laur els. I was looking at a big magnolia tr ee when I
stepped into the cir cle, and now it is gone; ther e is an oaksapling ther e. The sound is differ ent. Ther e is no noise of
highway and vehicles in the distance. Only bir ds, singing very
loudly . W ind.
I a m still dizzy . My legs ar e wea k. I cannot stand yet. I woke
under th e wall wher e the snake eats its tail, but some distance
fr om the cavity w her e we laid the cir cle. I must have crawled,
ther e ar e  dirt and scratches on m y hands and clothes. I lay for
some tim e after  waking, too ill to rise. I am better now . Still
weak an d sick, but I am exultant nonetheless. It worked. W e
have succeeded.”
 
“W e?”  I  said, looking at Jamie with b oth eyebrows raised.
He shrugged and turned the page.
 
“The stone is g one. Only a smear of soot in my pocket.
Raymond was right, then. It wa s a small unpolished sapphir e.
I mu st r emember to put down ev erything, for the sake of others
who may come after me.”
 
A small , cold shudder of premonition flowed up my back
and ove r me, making my scalp tingle as the hair on my head
began to stand. Others who may  come after me. Not meaning
to, I  reached out  and touched the book; an irresistible impulse.
I ne eded to touc h him somehow , make some contact with the
vanished writer of these words.
Jamie glanced curiously at me. W ith some ef fort, I took my
hand away , curling my fingers into a fist. He hesitated for a
moment, but then looked back a t the book, as though the neat
black writing compelled his gaze as it did my own.
I knew now what had struck m e about that writing. It had
not been  written with a quill. Quill-writing, even the best, was
uneven in color , dark where t he quill was freshly dipped,
fading slowly through a line of writing. Every word of this
was the same—written in a thi n, hard line of black ink that
slightly dented the fibers of the page. Quills never did that.“Ball point,” I said. “He wrote it with a ball-point pen. My
God.”
Jamie gl anced back at me. I must have looked pale, for he
moved a s though to close the book, but I shook my head,
motioning to him to go on reading. He frowned dubiously , but
with one eye s till on me, looked back. Then his attention
shifted w holly to  the book, and his brows rose as he looked at
the writing on the next page.
“Look,” he said softly , turning  the book toward me and
pointing to one line. W ritten in Latin like the others, but there
were unfamiliar words mixed into the text—long, strange-
looking words.
“Mohawk?” Jamie said. He looked up, into Ian’ s face. “That
is a wor d in an Indian tongue, surely . One of the Algonquian
tongues, no?”
“Rains Hard,” said Ian, quietly . “It is the Kahnyen’kehaka—
the Mohawk tongue, Uncle. Rains Hard is someone’ s name.
And the others written there, too—Strong W alker , Six T urtles,
and T alks W ith Spirits.”
“I thought the Mohawk have no written language,” Jamie
said, one ruddy eyebrow lifted. Ian shook his head.
“Nor they do, Uncle Jamie. But someone wrote that”—he
nodded at the page,—”and if y e work out the sound of the
words …” He s hrugged. “They are Mohawk names. I’m sure
of it.”
Jamie looked at him for a long moment, then without
comment bent his head and resumed his translation.
 
“I had one of t he sapphir es, Rains Har d the other . T alks
W ith Spi rits had a ruby , Str ong W alker took the diamond, and
Six T urtles had the emerald. W e  wer e not sur e of the diagram
—whether it should be four points, for the dir ections of the
compass, or five, in a pentacle. But ther e wer e the five of us,
sworn b y blood  to this deed, so we laid the cir cle with five
points.” 
There was a sm all gap between this sentence and the next,
and the writing changed, becoming now firm and even, as
though t he write r had paused, th en taken up his story at a later
point.
 
“I h ave gone ba ck to look. The r e is no sign of the cir cle—
but I see no r eason why ther e should be, after all. I think I
must have been unconscious for  some time; we laid the cir cle
just inside the mouth of the cr evice, but ther e ar e no marks in
the eart h ther e to show how I crawled or r olled to the spot
wher e I woke, and yet ther e ar e marks in the dust, made by
rain. My  clothes  ar e damp, but I cannot tell if this is fr om rain,
fr om mo rning de w , or sweat fr om  lying in the sun; it was near
midday when I w oke, for the sun  was over head, and it was hot.
I am thirsty . Did I crawl awa y fr om the cr evice, and then
collapse? Or was I thr own som e distance by the for ce of the
transition?”
 
I ha d the most curious sense, hearing this, that the words
were echoing, somewhere inside  my head. It wasn’ t that I had
heard it before, and yet the wor ds had a dreadful familiarity . I
shook my head, to clear it, and looked up to find Ian’ s eyes on
me, soft brown and full of speculation.
“Y es,” I said ba ldly , in answer to his look. “I am. Brianna
and Roger , too.” Jamie, who had paused to disentangle a
phrase, l ooked up. He saw Ian’ s face, and mine, and reached to
put his hand on mine.
“How much could ye read, lad?” he asked quietly .
“Quite a lot, Un cle,” Ian answered, but his eyes didn’ t leave
my face. “Not everything”—a brief smile touched his lips
—”and I’m sure I havena got the grammar right—but I think I
understand it. Do you?”
It w asn’ t clear w hether he addressed the question to me or
Jamie; both of u s hesitated, exchanged a glance—then I turnedback to Ian and nodded, and so did Jamie. Jamie’ s hand
tightened on mine.
“Mmphm,” Ian said, and his fac e lighted with an expression
of profound satisfaction. “I knew  ye wer en’ t a fairy , Auntie
Claire!”
 
UNABLE T O ST A Y A W AKE much longer , Ian had finally
retired, yawning, though pausing in his flight toward bed to
seize Rollo by the scruf f of the neck and immobilize him while
I removed Adso from the cupboard, fluf fed to twice his normal
size and  hissing like a snake. Ho lding the cat by his own scruf f
to av oid being d isemboweled, I had carried him out of harm’ s
way , up to our bedroom, where I dumped him
unceremoniously on the bed, turning at once to Jamie.
“What happened next?” I demanded.
He was already lighting a fresh c andle. Unfastening his shirt
with one hand a nd thumbing the book open with the other , he
sank down onto the bed, still absorbed in the reading.
“He couldna find any of his  friends. He searched the
countryside nearby for two days, calling, but there was no
trace. He was ve rra much distraught, but at last he thought he
must go  on; he was in need of  food, and had nothing but a
knife and a bit of salt with him. He must hunt, or find people.”
Ian said that T ewaktenyonh had given him the book,
enjoining him to bring it to me. It had belonged to a man
named Otter -T ooth, she said—a member of my family .
An icy finger h ad touched my spine at that—and hadn’ t
gone away . Little ripples of une ase kept tickling over my skin
like the touch of ghostly fingers. My family , indeed.
I had  told  her that Otter -T ooth was  perhaps one of “my
family ,” unable to describe the peculiar kinship of time-
travelers in any other way . I h ad never met Otter -T ooth—at
least not in the flesh—but if he was the man I thought he was,
then his  was the head buried in our small burying-ground—
complete with silver fillings.Perhaps I was at last going to learn who he had really been
—and how on earth he had come to meet such a startling end.
“He wasna much of a hunter ,” Jamie said critically ,
frowning at the page. “Couldna catch so much as a ground-
squirrel with a snare, and in the middle of summer , forbye!”
Fortunately for Otter -T ooth—if  it was indeed he—he had
been fam iliar with a number of edible plants, and seemed
extremely pleased with himself for recognizing pawpaw and
persimmon.
“Recognizing a persimmon is no  great feat, for God’ s sake,”
I said. “They look like orange baseballs!”
“And they taste like the bottom  of a chamber pot,” Jamie
added, he not caring at all for persimmons. “Still, he was
hungry b y that time, and if ye’re hungry enough …” He trailed
of f, lips moving silently as he continued his translation.
The man had wandered through the wilderness for some
time—though “ wandering” see med not quite right; he had
chosen a  specific direction, guided by the sun and stars. That
seemed odd—what had he been looking for?
Whatever it was, he had eventually found a village. He
didn’ t speak the language of the inhabitants—”Why ought he
to think he should?” Jamie wondered aloud—but had become
extraordinarily distraught, according to his writing, at the
discovery that the women were u sing iron kettles to cook with.
“T ewaktenyonh said that!” I interrupted. “When she was
telling me about him—if it’ s t he same man,” I added, pr o
forma , “ she said he c arried on all the time about the cooking
pots, and the kn ives and guns. He said the Indians were …
How did  she put it?—they needed to ‘return to the ways of
their ancestors,’ or the white man would eat them alive.”
“A verra excitable fellow ,” Jamie muttered, still riveted to
the book. “And with a taste for rhetoric, too.”
W ithin a  page or two, though, the source of Otter -T ooth’ s
strange preoccu pation with cooking pots became somewhat
clearer .“I ha ve failed,” Jamie read. “I a m too late.” He straightened
his back, and glanced at me, then went on.
 
“I d o no t know exactly when I a m, nor can I find out—these
people will not r eckon years by any scale I know , even had I
enough of their tongue to ask. But I know I am too late.
Had I arrived w hen I meant to, befor e 1650, ther e would be
no ir on in a village so far inland . T o find it her e in such casual
use means that I am at least fifty years too late—per haps
mor e!”
 
Otter -T ooth was  cast into great gloom by this discovery , and
spent several days in utmost despair . But then he pulled
himself together , determining that there was nothing to be
done but to go on. And so he had set out alone, though, with
the gift of some food from the villagers—heading north.
“I’ve no idea what the man thought he was doing,” Jamie
observed. “But I will say he shows courage. His friends are
dead or gone, and he’ s nothing with him, no notion where he is
—and yet he goes on.”
“Y es—though in  all honesty , I don’ t suppose he could think
of anyth ing else to do,” I said. I touched the book again,
gently , r emembering the first few days after my own passage
through the stones.
The dif ference, of course, was that this man had chosen to
come th rough the stones on purp ose. Exactly why  he had done
it—and how—was not revealed just yet.
T raveling alone  through the w ilderness, with nothing but
this sma ll book for company , Otter -T ooth had—he said—
decided that he would occupy h is mind with setting down an
account of his journey , with its motives and intents.
 
“Per haps I will not succeed in my attempt—our attempt. In
fact, it seems likely at the moment that I will simply perishher e in the wilderness. But if th at is so, then the thought that
some r ecor d of our noble endeavor r emains will be some
consolation—and it is all the memorial I can pr ovide for those
who wer e my br others; my companions in this adventur e.”
 
Jamie st opped a nd rubbed his e yes. The candle had burned
far down ; my own eyes were watering so much from yawning
that I could scarcely see the page in the flickering light, and I
felt light-headed from fatigue.
“Let’ s stop,” I s aid, and laid my head on Jamie’ s shoulder ,
taking c omfort from its warm solidness. “I can’ t stay awake
any longer , I re ally can’ t—and it doesn’ t seem right to rush
through his story . Besides”—I stopped, interrupted by a jaw-
cracking yawn that left me swaying and blinking—”perhaps
Bree and Roger should hear this, too.”
Jamie ca ught m y yawn and ga ped hugely , then shook his
head violently , blinking like a la r ge red owl shaken rudely out
of its tree.
“A ye, ye ’re righ t, Sassenach.” He closed the book, and laid
it gently on the table by the bed.
I didn’ t bother with any sort of bedtime toilette, merely
removing my outer clothes, brushing my teeth, and crawling
into bed  in my s hift. Adso, who had been snoozing happily on
the pillo w , was disgruntled at our appropriation of his space,
but grumpily moved at Jamie’ s insistence, making his way to
the f oot of the bed, where he co llapsed on my feet like a lar ge,
furry rug.
After a few moments, though, he abandoned his pique,
kneaded the bedclothes—and my feet—gently with his claws,
and began to purr in a somnolent fashion.
I fo und his pre sence almost as soothing as Jamie’ s soft,
regular s noring. For the most pa rt, I felt at home, secure in the
place I had made for myself in  this world, happy to be with
Jamie, whatever the circumstan ces. But now and then, I saw
suddenly and clearly the magnitu de of the gulf I had crossed—the dizzying loss of the world I had been born to—and felt
very much alone. And afraid.
Hearing this man’ s words, his panic and desperation, had
brought back to me the memory of all the terror and doubts of
my journeys through the stones.
I cuddled close to my sleeping husband, warmed and
anchored, and heard Otter -T ooth’ s words, as though they were
spoken in my inner ear—a c ry of desolation that echoed
through the barriers of time and language.
T oward the foot of that one pag e, the tiny Latin writing had
grown i ncreasingly hasty , some of the letters no more than
dots of ink, the endings of words swallowed in a frantic
spider ’ s dance. And then the la st lines, done in English, the
writer ’ s Latin dissolved in desperation.
 
Oh God, oh God… .
Wher e ar e they?
 
IT W AS AFTERNOON of the n ext day before we managed to
collect Brianna, Roger , and Ian and retire privately to Jamie’ s
study without attracting unwanted attention. The night before,
the haze of fati gue, following on the heels of Ian’ s sudden
appearance, had  combined to make almost anything seem
reasonable. But going about my  chores in the bright light of
morning, I found it increasingl y dif ficult to believe that the
journal really existed, and was not merely something I had
dreamed.
There it was, though, small, but black and solid on Jamie’ s
desk-table. He and Ian had spent the morning in his study ,
immersed in translation; when I  joined him, I could tell by the
way Jam ie’ s hair was sticking up that he had found the
journal’ s accoun t either deeply a bsorbing, terribly upsetting—
or possibly both.“I’ve told them what it is,” he said without preamble,
nodding toward Roger and Bree. The two of them sat close
together on stools, looking solemn. Jemmy , having refused to
be parted from h is mother , was under the table, playing with a
string of carved wooden beads.
“Have you read through the whole thing?” I asked,
subsiding into the extra chair .
Jamie nodded, with a glance at Y oung Ian, who stood by the
window , too restless to sit. Hi s hair was cropped short, but
nearly as disordered as Jamie’ s.
“A ye, w e have. I’m no going to read the whole thing aloud,
but I thought I’d best start wi’ t he bit where he’ s made up his
mind to put it all down from the beginning.”
He had marked the spot with th e scrap of tanned leather he
customarily used as a bookmark. Opening the journal, he
found his spot and began to read.
 
“The na me I was given at birth  is Robert Springer . I r eject
this name, and a ll that goes with it, because it is the bitter fruit
of centuries of mur der and injustice, a symbol of theft, slavery ,
and oppr ession—”
 
Jamie lo oked up over the edge of the book, remarking, “Y e
see why I dinn a want to read every word; the man’ s gey
tedious about it.” Running a finger across the page, he
resumed:
“In the year of Our Lord—their lord, that Christ in whose
name th ey rape and pillage and —well, more of the same, but
when he gets do wn to it, it was the year nineteen-hundred-and-
sixty-eight. So I suppose ye’ll be familiar wi’ all this murder
and pillage he’ s talking about?” He raised his eyebrows at
Bree and Roger .
Bree sat up abruptly , clutching Roger ’ s arm.“I know that name,” she said, sounding breathless. “Robert
Springer . I know it!”
“Y ou knew him ?” I asked, feeling a thrill of something—
excitement, dread, or simple curiosity—run through me.
She shook her head.
“No, I didn’ t know him , but I know the name—I saw it in
the n ewspapers. Did you—?” She turned toward Roger , but he
shook his head, frowning.
“W ell, m aybe yo u wouldn’ t, in t he UK, but it was a big deal
in Bosto n. I think  Robert Springer was one of the Montauk
Five.”
Jamie pinched the bridge of his nose.
“The five what?”
“It was just a— a thing people did to call attention to
themselves.” Brianna flapped a hand in dismissal. “It’ s not
important. They  were AIM activists, or at least they started out
that way , only they were even too nuts for AIM, and so—”
“Nuts? W’ere nuts?” Jemmy , picking the only word of
personal interest out of this account, emer ged from under the
table.
“Not tha t kind of nuts, baby , sorry .” Looking around for
some ob ject of interest to distr act him, Bree slipped of f her
silver bracelet and gave it to him . Seeing the puzzled looks on
the faces of fat her and cousin, she took a deep breath and
started o ver , tryi ng—with occas ional clarifications from Roger
and me—to define things, an d give a short, if confused,
account of the sad state of the American Indian in the
twentieth century .
“So this  Robert Springer is—or was—an Indian, of sorts, in
your own time?” Jamie tapped his fingers in a brief tattoo on
the table, frowning in concentration. “W ell, that corresponds
wi’ his own acc ount; he and his friends apparently took no
little exception to the behavior of what they called ‘whites.’ Iwould suppose those to be Englishmen? Or Europeans, at
least?”
“W ell, y es—except that by nineteen sixty-eight, of course
they we ren’ t Eu ropeans anymore, they were Americans, only
the Indians were Americans first—and so that’ s when they
started calling themselves native  Americans, and—”
Roger patted her knee, stopping her in mid-flow .
“Perhaps we can do the history a bit later ,” he suggested.
“What was it ye read about Robert Springer in the papers?”
“Oh.” T aken aback, she furrowed her brow in concentration.
“He disappeare d. They disappeared—the Montauk Five, I
mean. They were all wanted by  the government, for blowing
things u p or threatening to or something, I for get—and they
were arr ested, b ut then they got out on bail, and the next thing
you know , they’d all disappeared.”
“Evidently so,” Y oung Ian mur mured, glancing toward the
journal.
“It w as a big deal in the papers for a week or so,” Brianna
went on. “The other activist types were all accusing the
government of having done aw ay with them, so that stuf f
coming out of the trial wouldn’ t embarrass the government,
and of course th e government was denying it. So there was a
big searc h on, and I think I remember reading that they found
the body of on e of the missing men—out in the woods
somewhere in New Hampshire o r V ermont or someplace—but
they cou ldn’ t tell how he died—and nobody turned up any
trace of the others.”
“Wher e ar e they?”  I quoted softly , the hair rippling on the
back of my neck. “My God, wher e ar e they?”
Jamie nodded soberly .
“A ye, then; I thi nk this Springer may well be your man.” He
touched the page before him, with something like respect.
“He and his four companions all renounced any association
with the  white world, taking new names from their realheritage—or so he says.”
“That w ould be the proper thing to do,” Ian said softly . He
had a new , str ange stillness to him, and I was forcibly
reminded that he had been a Mohawk for the last two years—
washed free of his white blood, renamed W olf ’ s Brother—one
of the Kahnyen’kehaka, the Guardians of the W estern Gate.
I t hough t Jamie was aware of this stillness, too, but he kept
his eyes on t he journal, flipping pages slowly as he
summarized their content.
Robert Springer—or T a’wineonawira—”Otter -T ooth,” as he
chose henceforth to call himself had numerous associations in
the shadow world of extremist p olitics and the deeper shadows
of what he called Native American shamanism—I had no
notion h ow muc h resemblance there was between what he was
doing, a nd the original beliefs of the Iroquois, but Otter -T ooth
believed that he was descended from the Mohawk, and
embraced such remnants of tradition as he could find—or
invent.
It wa s at a naming cer emony that I first met Raymond . I sat
up abruptly , hearing that. He ha d mentioned Raymond in the
beginning, but I had taken no particular note of the name, then.
“Does he describe this Raymond?” I asked ur gently .
Jamie shook his head.
“Not in terms of appearance, no. He says only that
Raymond was a great shaman, who could transform himself
into bird s or animals—and who  could walk through time,” he
added delicately . He glanced at me, one eyebrow raised.
“I d on’ t know ,” I said. “I thou ght so, once—but, now , I
don’ t know .”
“What?” Brianna was looking back and forth between us,
puzzled. I shook my head, smoothing back my hair .
“Never mind. Someone I knew in Paris was named
Raymond, and I thought—but what in the name of anythingwould he be doi ng in America in nineteen sixty-eight?” I burst
out.
“W ell, you were there, aye?” Jamie pointed out. “But
putting that aside for the moment—” He returned to the text,
laying it all out in the oddly sti lted English of the translation:
Intrigued by Raymond, Otter -T ooth had met with the man
repeatedly , and brought several of his closest friends to him as
well. G radually , the scheme— a gr eat , audacious plan,
stunning in conception —”Modest, isn’ t he?” Roger muttered
— had been conceived.
 
“Ther e was a te st. Many failed, but I did not. Ther e wer e
five of us who pa ssed the test, who hear d the voice of time, five
of us who swor e  in our blood and by our blood that we would
undertake this gr eat ventur e, to r escue our people fr om
catastr ophe. T o r ewrite their history and r edr ess their wr ongs,
to—”
 
Roger gave a faint groan.
“Oh, God,” he said. “What did they mean to do—
assassinate Christopher Columbus?”
“Not quite,” I said. “He meant to arrive before 1600, he
said. What happened then, do you know?”
“I di nna ken wh at happened then,” Jamie told me, rubbing a
hand through his hair , “but I ken  well enough what he thought
he w as d oing. H is plan was to go to the Iroquois League, and
rouse th em against the white settlers. He thought that there
were few enough settlers then, that the Indians could easily
wipe them out, if the Iroquois led the way .”
“Perhaps he was right,” Ian said  softly . “I’ve heard the old
people t ell the stories. When th e first of the O’ seronni came,
how the y were welcomed, how they brought trade goods. A
hundred years ago, the O’ seronni were few—and the
Kahnyen’kehaka were masters, leaders of the Nations. A ye,
they could have done it—had they wished to.”“W ell, but he couldn’ t possibly have stopped the
Europeans,” Brianna objected. “There were just way too many .
He didn’ t mean to get the Mohawk to invade Europe, did he?”
A broad grin crossed Jamie’ s face at the thought.
“I sh ould have liked to see tha t,” he said. “The Mohawk
would have given the Sassenachs something to think about.
But no, alas”—he gave me a sardonic look—”our friend
Robert Springer wasna quite  so ambitious.”
What Ot ter -T ooth and his companions had had in mind was
suf ficiently amb itious, though— and perhaps … just perhaps
… possible. Their intention was not to prevent white
settlement altogether—they were, just barely , sane enough to
realize t he impossibility of that. What they intended was to put
the Indians on their guard against the whites, to establish trade
on their  terms, to deal from a position of power .
“Instead of allowing them to se ttle in great numbers, they
might k eep the whites bottled up in small towns. Instead of
allowing them to build fortifications, demand weapons from
the start. Establish trade on their own terms. Keep them
outnumbered, and outgunned—and force the Europeans to
teach them the ways of metal.
“Prometheus redux,” I said, and Jaime snorted.
Roger shook his head, half-admiringly .
“It’ s a crack-brained scheme,” he said, “but ye do have to
admire their League nerve. It m ight just possibly have worked
— if  he could convince the Iroquoi s, and if  they acted at the
right tim e, bef ore the balance of power shifted to the
Europeans. It all went wrong, th ough, didn’ t it? First he comes
to th e w rong tim e—much too late—and then he realizes none
of his friends have made it with him.”
I saw goosebumps rise suddenly on Brianna’ s arms, and
caught the look she sent me—one of sudden understanding.
She had  abruptly imagined just how it might be, to arrive
suddenly out of one’ s own time … alone.I ga ve h er a small smile, and pu t my hand on Jamie’ s arm.
Absentmindedly , he put his own hand over mine, and squeezed
it gently .
“A ye. He nearly despaired, as he  says, when he realized that
it had all gone w rong. He thought of going back—but he didna
have a gemstone  anymore, and t his Raymond had said ye must
have one, for protection.”
“He did find on e eventually , though,” I said. Getting up, I
reached to the to p shelf and brou ght down the big raw opal, its
inner fire flickering through the carved spiral on its surface.
“That is—I’m assuming there can’ t have been multiple
Indians named Otter -T ooth, a ssociated with Snaketown.”
T ewaktenyonh, an elderly Mohawk woman, and leader of the
Council of Mothers, had given me the stone when we went to
the villa ge of Snaketown to rescue Roger from captivity . She
had also  told me the story of Otter -T ooth, and how he met his
death—and I shivered, though it was warm in the room.
The big smooth stone felt warm in my hand, too; I rubbed a
thumb g ingerly over the spiral. The sna ke that eats its tail,
he’d said.
“A ye. He doesna mention that, though.” Jamie sat back,
running both hands through his loosened hair , then rubbing a
hand over his f ace. “The story ends with him deciding that
there’ s n o help for it; whatever y ear it may be—and he had no
notion—and wh ether he was alone or not, he would carry out
his plan.”
Everyone was silent for a moment, regarding the enormity
—and the futility—of such a plan.
“He can’ t have thought it would work,” Roger said, the
rasping husk of his voice giving the words a sense of finality .
Jamie shook his head, looking d own at the book, though his
eyes were clearly looking through it, dark blue and remote.
“Nor he did,” he said softly . “What he said, here at the
last”—his fingers touched the page, very gently—”was that
thousands of his people had die d for their freedom, thousandsmore wo uld die in years to come . He would walk the path they
walked, for the honor of his blo od, and to die fighting was no
more than a warrior of the Mohawk should ask.”
I heard Ian draw breath behind me in a sigh, and Brianna
bent her  head, so the bright hair hid her face. Roger ’ s own face
was turned toward her , grave in profile—but it was none of
them I saw . I saw a man with his face painted black for death,
walking through  a dripping forest at night, holding a torch that
burned with cold fire.
A ya nk on my skirt pulled me a way from this vision, and I
glanced down to find Jemmy s tanding beside me, pulling on
my hand.
“W atsat?”
“What—oh! It’ s  a rock, sweetheart; a pretty rock, see?” I
held out the opal, and he seized it with both hands, plumping
down on his bottom to look at it.
Brianna wiped a hand underneath her nose, and Roger
cleared his throat with a noise like ripping cloth.
“What I want to know ,” he said gruf fly , gesturing toward the
journal, “is why in hell did he write that in Latin?”
“Oh. He  says that. He’d learnt Latin in school—perhaps that
was what turned him against E uropeans”—Jamie grinned at
Y oung Ian, who grimaced—”a nd he thought if he wrote in
Latin, anyone who happened to  see it would think it only a
priest’ s book of prayers, and pay it no heed.”
“They did think that—the Kah nyen’kehaka,” Ian put in.
“Old T ewaktenyonh kept the book, though. And when I—left,
she gave me the  wee book, and said as I must bring it back wi’
me, and give it to you, Auntie Claire.”
“T o me?” I felt a sense of hesitation at touching the book,
but nonetheless reached out a hand and touched the open
pages. The ink, I saw , had begun to run dry toward the end—
the letters skipped and stuttere d, and some words were no
more than indentations on the paper . Had he thrown the emptypen away , I wondered, or kept  it, a useless reminder of his
vanished future?
“Do you think s he knew what was in the book?” I asked.
Ian’ s face was impassive, but his soft hazel eyes held a hint of
trouble. When he had been a Sc ot, he hadn’ t been one to hide
his feelings.
“I dinna ken,” he said. “She kent something , but I couldna
say what. She didna tell me— only that I must bring ye the
book.” He hesitated, glancing from me to Brianna and Roger ,
then back. “Is it true?” he asked. “What ye said, cousin—about
what will happen to the Indians?”
She looked up, meeting his eyes squarely , and nodded.
“I’m afraid so,” she said softly . “I’m sorry , Ian.”
He only  nodded, rubbing a knu ckle down the bridge of his
nose, but I wondered.
He hadn’ t forsaken his own people, I knew , but the
Kahnyen’kehaka were his as well. No matter what had
happened to cause him to leave.
I wa s op ening m y mouth to ask  Ian about his wife, when I
heard Jemmy . He had retired b ack under the table with his
prize, and had b een talking to it in a genially conversational—
if uninte lligible—manner for several minutes. His voice had
suddenly changed, though, to a tone of alarm.
“Hot,” he said, “Mummy , HOT!”
Brianna was already rising from her stool, a look of concern
on h er face, wh en I heard the noise. It was a high-pitched
ringing sound, like the weird sin ging of a crystal goblet when
you run  a wet f inger round and round the rim. Roger sat up
straight, looking startled.
Brianna bent and snatched Jemm y out from under the table,
and as she straig htened with him, there was a sudden pow!  like
a gunshot, and the ringing noise abruptly stopped.
“Holy God,” said Jamie, rather mildly under the
circumstances.Splinters of glimmering fire pro truded from the bookshelf,
the books, the w alls, and the thick folds of Brianna’ s skirts.
One had whizzed past Roger ’ s head, barely nicking his ear; a
thin tric kle of blood was runni ng down his neck, though he
didn’ t seem to have noticed yet.
A stipple of brilliant pinpoints glinted on the table—a
shower of the sharp needles ha d been thrust upward through
the i nch-thick wood. I heard Ian  exclaim sharply , and bend to
pull a tiny shaft from the flesh of his calf. Jemmy began to cry .
Outside, Rollo the dog was barking furiously .
The opal had exploded.
 
IT W AS STILL broad daylight; the candleflame was nearly
invisible, no more than a wave r of heat in the late afternoon
light fro m the window . Jamie blew out the taper he had used to
light it, and sat down behind his desk.
“Y e didna sense anything odd about yon stone when ye gave
it to the lad, Sassenach?”
“No.” I still felt shaken by the explosion, the echoes of that
eerie noise still chiming in my  inner ear . “It felt warm—but
everything in the room is wa rm. And it certainly wasn’ t
making that noise.”
“Noise?” He looked at me queerly . “When it went bang,
d’ye mean?”
Now it was my turn to look askance.
“No—before tha t. Didn’ t you hear it?” He shook his head, a
small frown between his brow s, and I glanced round at the
others. Bree and Roger nodded— both of them looked pale and
ill—but Ian shook his head, looking interested, but puzzled.
“I didna hear a thing,” he said. “What did it sound like?”
Brianna opened her mouth to answer , but Jamie raised a
hand to stop her .“A moment, a nighean . Jem, a ruradh —did ye hear a noise
before the bang?”
Jemmy had settled down from his fright, but was still
crouching in his mother ’ s lap, th umb in his mouth. He looked
at hi s grandfather out of wide bl ue eyes that had already begun
to sh ow a defini te slant, and slowly nodded, not removing the
thumb.
“And the stone Grannie gave ye—it was hot?”
Jemmy cast a glare of intense accusation in my direction
and nod ded again. I felt a small sur ge of guilt—followed by a
much l ar ger o ne, when I th ought of what might have
happened, had Bree not snatched him up at once.
W e had picked most of the spli nters out of the woodwork;
they lay on the desk in a smal l heap of brittle fire. One had
sliced a tiny fla p of skin from my knuckle; I put it in my
mouth, tasting silver blood.
“My God, those things are sharp as broken glass.”
“They ar e  b roken glass.” Brianna clutc hed Jem a little
closer .
“Glass? Y ou mean it wasn’ t a r eal opal?” Roger raised his
brows, leaning forward to pick up one of the needlelike shards.
“Sure it is—but  opals are glass.  Really hard volcanic glass.
Gemstones are gemstones because they have a crystalline
structure that makes them pretty; opals just have a really brittle
structure, compared to most.” The color was beginning to
come back into Brianna’ s face , though she kept her arms
wrapped tightly round her son.
“I knew  you could break one i f you hit with a hammer or
something, but I never heard of one doing that .” Sh e n odded at
the pile of glimmering fragments.
Jamie p icked a lar ge shard out of the pile with finger and
thumb and held it out to me.
“Put it in your hand, Sassenach. Does it feel warm to you?”I ac cepted the j agged piece of stone gingerly . It was thin,
nearly w eightless, and translucent, sparkling with vivid blues
and oranges.
“Y es,” I  said, tilting my palm cautiously to and fro. “Not
remarkably hot—just about skin temperature.”
“It felt cool to me,” Jamie said. “Give it to Ian.”
I t ransferred the bit of opal to Ian, who put it in the palm of
his h and and stroked it cautiousl y with a fingertip, as though it
were some small animal that might bite him if annoyed.
“It feels cool,” h e reported. “Like a bit of glass, like Cousin
Brianna says.”
A bit more experimentation established that the stone felt
warm—though not strikingly so —to Brianna, Roger , and me
—but no t to Jamie or Ian. By th is time, the wax had melted in
the top of the b ig clock candle, allowing Jamie to extract the
gemstones hidde n there. He fished them out, rubbed the last of
the hot wax of f o n his handkerchief, and laid them out in a row
along the edge of the desk to cool.
Jemmy watched  this with grea t interest, his misadventure
apparently for gotten.
“D’ye li ke these , a ghille ruaidh ?” Jamie  asked him, and he
nodded eagerly , leaning out of his mother ’ s lap, reaching
toward the stones.
“Hot,” he said, then, remember ing, shrank back a little, a
look of doubt crossing his small, blunt features. “Hot?”
“W ell, I  do hope not,” his grand father said. He took a deep
breath and picked up the emerald, a crudely faceted stone the
size of his thumbnail. “Put out your hand, a bhalaich .”
Brianna looked as though she w anted to protest, but bit her
lower lip, and encouraged Jemmy to do as his grandfather
asked. He took the stone, still looking suspicious, but then the
look of wariness faded into a smile as he looked down at the
stone.
“Pretty rock!”“Is it hot?” Bri anna asked, poised to snatch it out of his
hand.
“Y es, ho t,” he said, with satisfaction, holding it against his
stomach.
“Let Mama see.” W ith a little dif ficulty , Brianna succeeded
in g etting her fingers onto the rock, though Jemmy wouldn’ t
surrender it. “It’ s warm,” she sa id, looking up. “Like the piece
of o pal—but not way hot. If it gets way hot, you drop it fast ,
OK?” she said to Jemmy .
Roger had been watching this with fascination.
“He’ s go t it, hasn’ t he?” he said softly . “Fifty/fifty , you said,
or three chances in four , depen ding—but he’ s got it, doesn’ t
he?”
“What?” Jamie glanced at Rog er , then me, one red brow
raised in question.
“I th ink he can … travel,” I said , feeling a tightening of my
chest at the thought. “Y ou know what Otter -T ooth said—” I
nodded at the journal, which la y discarded on the desk. “He
said the y had to take a test—t o see if they could hear ‘the
voice of time.’ W e know that not everyone can … do this.” I
felt unac countably shy , talking of it before Ian. “But some can.
From w hat Otter -T ooth said, there was a way of finding out
who could and couldn’ t, ahead of time, without having
actually to try .”
Jemmy was paying no attention to the grown-up
conversation, instead rocking back and forth, humming to the
stone clutched in his pudgy hand.
“Do you suppose the ‘voice of t ime’ is—Jem, can you hear
the rock ?” Roger leaned forward, taking hold of Jemmy’ s arm
to comp el his attention away fr om the emerald. “Jem, is the
rock singing to you?”
Jemmy looked up, surprised.
“No,” he  said uncertainly . Then, “Y es.” He held the rock up
to h is ear , frow ning, then thrust it at Roger . “Y ou sing,Daddy!”
Roger accepted the emerald gingerly , smiling at Jemmy .
“I don’ t know any rock songs,” he said, in his husky rasp of
a vo ice. “Unless ye count the Beatles.” He lifted the rock to
his own ear , looking self-conscious. He listened intently ,
frowning, then lowered his hand, shaking his head.
“It’ s not—I can’ t—I couldna r eally say I hear  anything.
And yet—here, you try .” He passed the stone to Brianna, and
she in turn to me. Neither of u s heard anything in particular ,
and yet I thought I could perceive something, if I listened very
hard. Not exactly a sound, mo re a sense of very , very faint
vibration.
“What is it?” Ian asked. He  had been following the
proceedings with rapt interest. “Y e’re no sidheanach , the three
of ye—b ut why  is it you can do … what ye do, and Uncle
Jamie an d I canna? Y e can’ t, ca n ye, Uncle Jamie?” he asked
dubiously .
“No, thank God,” his uncle replied.
“It’ s genetic, isn’ t it?” Brianna asked, looking up. “It has to
be.”
Jamie and Ian looked wary at the unfamiliar term.
“Genetic?” Ian asked. His feathery brows drew together in
puzzlement.
“Why shouldn’ t it be?” I said. “Everything else is—blood
type, eye color .”
“But everyone has eyes and blood, Sassenach,” Jamie
objected. “Whatever color his eyes may be, everyone can see.
This—” He waved at the small collection of stones.
I sighed with impatience.
“Y es, but there are other things that are genetic—
everything, if you come right down to it! Look—” I turned to
him and stuck out my tongue . Jamie blinked, and Brianna
giggled at his expression.Disregarding this, I pulled in my tongue and put it out again,
this time with the edges rolled up into a cylinder .
“What about that?” I asked, pop ping it back in. “Can you do
that?”
Jamie looked amused.
“Of course I can.” He stuck out a rolled tongue and wiggled
it, demo nstrating, then pulled it back. “Everyone can do that,
surely? Ian?”
“Oh, aye , of course.” Ian obligin gly demonstrated. “Anyone
can.”
“I can’ t,” said Brianna. Jamie stared at her , taken aback.
“What d’ye mean ye can’ t?”
“Bleah.” She stuck out a flat t ongue and waggled it from
side to side. “I can’ t.”
“Of course ye can.” Jamie frow ned. “Here, it’ s simple, lass
—anyone can do it!” He stuc k out his own tongue again,
rolling and unrolling it like a paternal anteater , anxiously
encouraging its of fspring toward an appetizing mass of insects.
He glanced at Roger , brows lifted.
“Y ou’d think so, wouldn’ t you?” Roger said ruefully . He
stuck out his own tongue, flat. “Bleah.”
“See?” I said triumphantly . “Some people can roll their
tongues, and some simply can’ t. It can’ t be learned. Y ou’re
born with it, or you’re not.”
Jamie looked from Bree to Rog er and back, frowning, then
turned to me.
“Allowing for the moment that  ye may be right—why can
the l ass not do it, if you and I both can? Y e did assure me she’ s
my daughter , aye?”
“She is most as suredly your daughter ,” I said. “As anyone
with eyes in their head could tell you.” He glanced at Brianna,
taking in  her lean height and ma ss of ruddy hair . She smiled athim, blue eyes creasing into triangles. He smiled back and
turned to me, shrugging in good-natured capitulation.
“W ell, I shall take your word  for it, Sassenach, as an
honorable woman. But the tongue, then?” He rolled his own
again, in  doubtfu l fashion, still n ot quite believing that anyone
couldn’ t do it if they put their mind to it.
“W ell, you do know where ba bies come from,” I began.
“The egg and the …”
“I do ,” h e said, with a noticeable edge to his voice. The tips
of his ears turned slightly pink.
“I mean , it takes something from the mother and something
from the  father .” I could feel my own cheeks pinken slightly ,
but carried on gamely . “Sometimes the father ’ s influence is
more visible than the mother ’ s; sometimes the other way
round—but both … er … influences are still there. W e call
them ge nes—the things babies get from their two parents that
af fect the child’ s appearance and abilities.”
Jamie glanced at Jemmy , who was humming again, engaged
in tryin g to balance one gem stone on top of another , the
sunlight glinting of f his coppery hair . Looking back, he caught
Roger ’ s eye, and quickly turned his attention to me.
“A ye, so?”
“W ell, genes af fect more than simply hair or eye-color .
Now ,” I warmed to my lecture, “ each person has two genes for
every tr ait—one from the father , one from the mother . And
when th e . . er . . gametes are formed in the ovaries and testes
—”
“Perhaps ye should tell me all  about it later , Sassenach,”
Jamie interrupted, with a sidelong glance at Brianna. Evidently
he d idn’ t think the word “teste s” suitable for his daughter ’ s
ears; his own were blazing.
“It’ s all right, D a. I know where babies come from,” Bree
assured him, grinning.“W ell, then,” I said, taking back command of the
conversation. “Y ou have a pair of genes for each trait, one
gene fro m your mother and one gene from your father—but
when the time c omes to pass th ese on to your own of fspring,
you can only pass one  of the pair . Because the child will get
another gene from his other p arent, you see?” I raised an
eyebrow at Jamie and Roger , wh o nodded in unison, as though
hypnotized.
“Right. W ell, then. Some genes are said to be dominant, and
others recessive. If a person has a dominant gene, then that’ s
the o ne that will  be expressed—will be visible. They may have
another gene that’ s recessive and so you don’ t see it—but it
can still be passed to the of fspring.”
My collective audience looked wary .
“Surely you learned this in school, Roger?” Bree asked,
amused.
“W ell, I did,” h e muttered, “but I think perhaps I wasna
paying proper attention at the time. After all, I wasn’ t
expecting it actually to matter .”
“Right,” I said dryly . “W ell, then. Y ou and I, Jamie,
evidently each have one of the dominant genes that allows us
to roll our tongues. But —” I continued , raising a finge r , “we
must also each have a recessive gene, that doesn’ t  allow
tongue-rolling. And evidently , each of us gave the recessive
gene to Bree. Therefore, she ca n’ t roll her tongue. Likewise,
Roger m ust have  two copies of the non-rolling recessive gene,
since if he had e ven one of the dominant genes, he could do it
—and he can’ t. Q.E.D.” I bowed.
“W at’ s tes-tees ?” inquired a small voice. Jemmy had
abandoned his rocks and was l ooking up at me in profound
interest.
“Er …” I said. I glanced round the room in search of aid.
“That’ s Latin for your balls, lad,” Roger said gravely ,
suppressing a grin.
Jemmy looked quite interested at that.“I gots balls? W’ere I gots balls?”
“Er …” said Roger , and glanced at Jamie.
“Mmphm,” said Jamie, and looked at the ceiling.
“W ell, ye do have a kilt on, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said,
grinning. Jamie gave his nephew  a look of gross betrayal, but
before he could move, Roger h ad leaned forward and cupped
Jemmy gently between the legs.
“Just there, a bhalaich ,” he said.
Jemmy kneaded his crotch briefly , then looked at Roger ,
small strawberry brows knitted into a puzzled frown.
“Nots a ball. ‘Sa willy!”
Jamie sighed deeply and got up. He jerked his head at
Roger , then reached down and took Jemmy’ s hand.
“A ye, all right. Come outside w ith me and your Da, we’ll
show ye.”
Bree’ s face was the exact shade of her hair , and her
shoulders shook briefly . Roger ,  also suspiciously pink about
the c heeks, had opened the door  and stood aside for Jamie and
Jem to go through.
I di dn’ t think J amie paused to think about it; seized by
impulse, he turned to Jemmy , rolling up his tongue into a
cylinder and sticking it out.
“Can you do that, a ruaidh ?” he asked, pulling it back in
again.
Brianna drew in her breath with a sound like a startled duck,
and froze. Roger froze, too, h is eyes resting on Jemmy as
though the little boy were an e xplosive device, primed to go
of f like the opal.
A second too late, Jamie realized, and his cheeks went pale.
“Damn,” he said, very quietly under his breath.
Jemmy’ s eyes grew round with reproach.
“Bad, Granda! At’ sa bad word. Mama?”“Y es,” Brianna said, narrowed eyes on Jamie. “W e’ll have
to wash Grand-da’ s mouth out with soap, won’ t we?”
He l ooked very much as though  he had already swallowed a
good mouthful of soap, and lye-soap, at that.
“A ye,” h e said, and cleared his throat. The flush had faded
entirely from his face. “A ye, t hat was verra wicked of me,
Jeremiah. I must beg pardon o ’ the ladies.” He bowed, very
formally , to me and Brianna. “Je suis navr e, Madames. Et
Monsieur ,”  he added softly to Roger . Roger nodded very
slightly . His eyes were still on Jemmy , but his lids were
lowered and his face carefully blank.
Jemmy’ s own round face assumed the expression of beatific
delight t hat he wore whenever French was spoken near him,
and—as Jamie had clearly inten ded—broke immediately into
his own pet contribution to that language of art and chivalry .
“ Fr er e Jacques, Fr er e Jacques.  …”
Roger lo oked up at Bree, and something seemed to pass
through the air between them. He reached down and took hold
of Jem’ s other hand, momentarily interrupting his song.
“So, a bhalaich , can ye do it, then?”
“ FRERE  … do whats?”
“Look at Grand-da.” Roger nodded at Jamie, who took a
deep br eath and quickly put o ut his tongue, rolled into a
cylinder .
“Can ye do that?” Roger asked.
“Chure.” Jemmy beamed and put out his tongue. Flat.
“Bleah!”
A colle ctive s igh gusted through the room. Jemmy ,
oblivious, swu ng his legs up, his weight suspended
momentarily fro m Roger ’ s and Jamie’ s hands, then stomped
his feet  down on the floor again, recalling his original
question.“Grand-da gots balls?” he asked, pulling on the men’ s hands
and tilting his head far back to look up at Jamie.
“A ye, lad, I hav e,” Jamie said dryly . “But your Da’ s are
bigger . Come on, then.”
And to the sound of Jemmy’ s tuneless chanting, the men
trundled him outside, hanging like a gibbon between them, his
knees drawn up to his chin.1 10
MAN OF BLOOD
I  CR UMBLED DR Y SAGE LEA VES in my hands, letting the
gray-green flake s fall into the burning coals. The sun hung low
in the sky abov e the chestnut trees, but the small burying-
ground lay already in shadow , and the fire was bright.
The five of us stood in a circle around the chunk of granite
with which Jamie had marked the stranger ’ s grave. Ther e wer e
five of us, and so we laid th e cir cle with five points.  By
common consent, this was not o nly for the man with the silver
fillings, but for his four unknown companions—and for Daniel
Rawlings, whose fresh and final grave lay under a mountain-
ash, nearby .
The smo ke rose up from the small iron fire-pot, pale and
fragrant. I had brought other herbs as well, but I knew that for
the T usc arora, f or the Cherokee, and for the Mohawk, sage
was holy , the smoke of it cleansing.
I rubbed juniper needles between my hands into the fire, and
followed them with rue, called herb-of-grace, and rosemary—
that’ s for remembrance, after all.
The leav es of the trees nearby rustled gently in the evening
breeze, and the twilight lit the d rifting smoke, turning it from
gray to gold as it rose up and up into heaven’ s vault, where the
faint stars waited.
Jamie lifted his head, touched with fire as bright as the blaze
by his feet, and looked toward the west, where the souls of the
dead fly  away . He spoke softly , in Gaelic, but all of us knew
enough by now to follow .
 
“Thou goest home this night to thy home of winter ,
T o thy home of autumn, of spring, and of summer;Thou goest home this night to thy perpetual home,
T o thine eternal bed, to thine eternal slumber .
 
The sleep of the seven lights be thine, O br other ,
The sleep of the seven joys be thine, O br other ,
The sleep of the seven slumbers be thine, O br other ,
On the arm of the Jesus of blessings, the Christ of grace.
 
The shade of death lies upon thy face, beloved,
But the Jesus of Grace has His hand r ound about thee;
In nearness to the T rinity far ewell to thy pains,
Christ stands befor e thee and peace is in His mind.”
 
Ian stoo d by him, close, but not touching. The fading light
touched his face, fierce upon his scars. He said it first in the
Mohawk tongue, but then in English, for the rest of us.
 
“Be the hunt successful,
Be your enemies destr oyed befor e your eyes,
Be your heart ever joyful in the lodge of your br others.”
 
“Y e’re meant to say it over and over again, a good many
times,” he added, ducking his head apologetically . “W i’ the
drums, aye? But I thought once would do, for now .”
“That w ill do fine, Ian,” Jamie assured him, and looked then
toward Roger .
Roger coughed and cleared his throat, then spoke, the husk
of his voice as transparent and as penetrating as the smoke.
 “Lor d, make me to know mine end,
And the measur e of my days, what it is;
That I may know how frail I am.
Behold, Thou has made my days as an hand-br eadth;
And mine age is as nothing befor e Thee.
Hear my prayer , O Lor d, and give ear unto my cry;
Hold not Thy peace at my tears:
For I am a stranger with Thee,
And a sojourner , as all my fathers wer e.”
 
W e stood in si lence then, as the darkness came quietly
around us. As the last of the light faded and the leaves
overhead lost their brilliance, Br ianna picked up the pitcher of
water , a nd poured it over the pot of coals. Smoke and steam
rose up in a ghostly cloud, and the scent of remembrance
drifted through the trees.
 
IT W AS  NEARL Y DARK as w e came down the narrow trail
back to the house. I could see Brianna in front of me, though,
leading the way; the men were a little behind us. The fireflies
were out in great profusion, d rifting through the trees, and
lighting the grass near my feet. One of the little bugs lighted
briefly in Brianna’ s hair and clung there for a moment,
blinking.
A w ood at twilig ht holds a deep  hush, that bids the heart be
still, the foot step lightly on the earth.
“Have y e thought, then, a cliamhuinn ?” J amie said, b ehind
me. His voice was low , the tone of it friendly enough—but the
formal address made it clear that the question was seriously
meant.
“Of what?” Roger ’ s voice was calm, hushed from the
service, the rasp of it barely audible.“Of what ye shall do—you and your family . Now that ye
ken both  that the wee lad can travel—and what it might mean,
if ye stay .”
What it might mean to them all.  I drew breath, uneasy . W ar .
Battle. Uncertainty , save for the certainty of danger . The
danger of illness or accident, for  Brianna and Jem. The danger
of d eath in the toils of childbirth, if she was again with child.
And for Roger—danger both of body and soul. His head had
healed, but I saw  the stillness at the back of his eyes, when he
thought of Randall Lillywhite.
“Oh, aye,” Roger said, softly , invisible behind me. “I have
thought—and am still thinking … m’ athair -ceile .”
I sm iled a little,  to hear him call Jamie “father -in-law ,” but
the tone of his voice was altogether serious.
“Shall I tell ye what I think? And you will tell me?”
“A ye, do that. There is time still, for thinking.”
“I have been thinking, lately , of Hermon Husband.”
“The Qu aker?” Jamie sounded surprised. Husband had left
the colony with his family , af ter the battle of Alamance. I
thought I heard that they had gone to Maryland.
“A ye, hi m. Wha t d’ye think mi ght have happened, had he
not b een a Quak er? Had he gone ahead, and led the Regulators
to their war?”
Jamie grunted slightly , thinking.
“I dinna ken,” he said, though he sounded interested. “Y e
mean they might have succeeded, with a proper leader?”
“A ye. O r maybe not—they’d no weapons, after all—but
they would have done better than they did. And if so—”
W e had come w ithin sight of the house, now . Light was
glowing in the back windows as the hearth-fire was stoked up
for the evening, the candles lit for supper .
“What’ s going to happen here—I am thinking, had the
Regulation been properly led, perhaps it would have startedhere and then; not three years from now , in Massachusetts.”
“A ye? And if so, what then?”
Roger gave a brief snort, the verbal equivalent of a shrug.
“Who knows? I know what’ s g oing on in England now—
they are  not ready , they’ve no notion of what they’re risking
here. If war wer e to break out suddenly , with little warning—if
it had  broken out, at Alamance—it might spread quickly . It
might be over before the En glish had a clue what was
happening. It might have saved years of warfare, thousands of
lives.”
“Or not,” Jamie said dryly , and Roger laughed.
“Or not,” he agreed. “But the point there is this; I think
there ar e times for men of peace—and a time for men of
blood, as well.”
Brianna had reached the house, but turned and waited for
the rest of us. She had been listening to the conversation, too.
Roger stopped beside her , looking up. Bright sparks flew
from the  chimney in a firework  shower , lighting his face by
their glow .
“Y e call ed me,” he said at last, still looking up into the
blazing dark. “At the Gathering, at the fire.”
“Seas vi mo lamh, Roger an t’oranaiche, mac Jer emiah mac
Choinneich,”  Jamie said qui etly . “A ye, I d id. Stand by my
side, Roger the singer , son of Jeremiah.”
“Seas vi mo lam h, a mhic mo thaighe,”  Rog er s aid. “St and
by my side—son of my house. Did ye mean that?”
“Y e know that I did.”
“Then I mean it , too.” He reached out and rested his hand
on J amie’ s shoulder , and I saw  the knuckles whiten as he
squeezed.
“I will stand by you. W e will stay .”Beside m e, Brianna let out the breath she had been holding,
in a sigh like the twilight wind.1 1 1
AND YET GO OUT
 T O MEET IT
T HE BIG CLOCK CANDLE had burned down a little, but
there we re still a good many of the black rings that marked the
hours. Jamie dropped the stones  back into the pool of melted
wax around the flame: one, two , three—and blew it out. The
fourth stone, the big topaz, was ensconced in a small wooden
box, wh ich I had sewn up in oiled cloth. It was bound for
Edinbur gh, cons igned to Mrs. Bug’ s cousin’ s husband, who,
with his banking connections, would manage the sale of the
stone, and—with the deduction of a suitable commission for
his help—would see the funds transmitted to Ned Gowan.
The accompany ing letter , lying sealed in the box with the
stone, char ged Ned to determine whether one Laoghaire
MacKenzie was  living with a man in a state tantamount to
marriage—and if so, further char ged him to declare the
contract betwee n one Laoghaire MacKenzie and one James
Fraser to be fulf illed, whereupon the funds from the sale of the
stone we re to be placed on depo sit in a bank, to be used for the
dowry of one Joan MacKenzie Fraser , daughter of the
aforesaid Laoghaire, when she should marry .
“Y ou’re sure you don’ t want to  ask Ned particularly to tell
you who the man is?” I asked.
He shook his head firmly .
“If h e ch ooses to  tell me, that’ s fine. And if he doesna, that’ s
fine, as well.” He looked up a t me with a faint, wry look.
Unsatisfied curiosity was to be his penance, evidently .
Down the hall, I could hear Brianna simultaneously talking
to Mrs. Bug and admonishing Jemmy , then Roger ’ s voice,
interrupting, and Jemmy’ s excited squeal as Roger swept him
up into the air .“Do you think Roger chose we ll?” I asked quietly . I was
very glad of Roger ’ s decision—and knew that Jamie was, as
well. But in sp ite of the peculiar perspective that Brianna,
Roger , a nd I had on coming eve nts, I knew that Jamie had far
better an idea of what was truly coming. And if the stone
passage had its dangers, so did war .
He paus ed, thinking, then leaned past me, reaching for a
small volume at the end of the b ookcase. It was bound cheaply
in c loth, and m uch used; an edition of Thucydides he had
acquired in the wildly optimistic hope that Germain and
Jemmy might eventually learn suf ficient Greek to read it.
He o pened the b ook gently , to keep the pages from falling
out. Greek lettering looked to me like the conniptions of an
ink-soaked worm , but he found the bit he was looking for with
no dif ficulty .
 
“The br avest ar e sur ely those w ho have the clear est vision of
what is
befor e them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding
go out
to meet it.”
 
The words were before him, an d yet I thought he was not
reading them from the paper , but from the pages of his
memory , from the open book of his heart.
The doo r slammed, and I heard Roger shouting outside now ,
cracked voice raised in warnin g, calling out to Jemmy , and
then his  laugh, deep and half-choked, as Bree said something
to him, a lighter sound too far away to hear in words.
Then they moved away , and there was silence, save for the
sough of the wind in the trees.
“The bra vest are  those who hav e the clearest vision. W ell,
you’d k now about that, wouldn’ t you?” I said softly . I laid a
hand on  his shoulder , just where it joined his neck. I traced thepowerful cords of his neck wi th my thumb, looking at the
worm-writhings on the page. He would, and so would I; for
the vision he had was the one I had shown him.
He kept hold of the book, but tilted his head to one side, so
that his cheek brushed my hand, and the thickness of his hair
touched my wrist, soft and warm.
“Ah, no,” he s aid. “Not me. It’ s only brave if there’ s a
choice about it, aye?”
I laughed, snif fed, and wiped the wrist of my free hand
across my eyes.
“And you think you haven’ t a choice?”
He paused for a moment, then  shut the book, though he
continued to hold it in his hands.
“No,” he said at last, with a queer tone in his voice. “Not
now .”
He turne d in his chair , looking through the window . Nothing
was visi ble but the big red spru ce at the side of the clearing,
and the deep shade of the oak grove behind it, tangled with the
brambles of wild blackberry , escaped from the yard. The
blackened spot where the fiery cross had stood was over grown
now , covered with thick wild barley .
The air moved and I realized th at it was not silent, after all.
The sounds of the mountain were all around us, birds calling,
water rushing in the distance—and there were voices, too,
speaking in the murmured traf f ic of daily rounds, a word by
the pigpen, a call from the privy . And under and over
everything, the sound of children, faint shrieks and giggles
borne on the restless air .
“I su ppose you’re right,” I said , after a moment. He was;
there was  no choi ce abou t it now , and the knowledge gave me
a sort of peace. What was coming, would come. W e would
meet it as best we might, and h ope to survive; that was all. If
we d idn’ t—perh aps they would. I gathered the tail of his hair
in m y hand and  twined my fingers through it, holding tight,
like an anchor ’ s rope.“What about the other choices, though?” I asked him,
looking out with him over the empty dooryard, and into the
shades o f the forest beyond. “ All the ones you made that
brought you here? Those were real—and bloody well brave, if
you ask me.”
Beneath the tip of my index finger , I could feel the hair -thin
line of his ancie nt scar , buried d eep beneath the ruddy waves.
He lean ed back against the pu ll of my hand, and swiveled
round to  look up at me, so my hand now cupped the bone of
his jaw .
“Oh. W ell,” he said, smiling slightly . His hand touched
mine, and drew my fingers into  his. “Y e’d know about that,
now , wouldn’ t ye, Sassenach?”
I s at down beside him, close, m y hand on his leg, and his
hand on  mine. W e sat thus for a bit, side by side, watching the
rain clou ds roll in over the rive r , like a threat of distant war .
And I thought that whether it wa s choice or no choice, it might
be that it came to the same thing in the end.
Jamie’ s hand still lay on mine.  It tightened a little, and I
glanced at him, but his eyes w ere still fixed somewhere past
the door yard; pa st the mountains, and the distant clouds. His
grip tightened further , and I felt the edges of my ring press into
my flesh.
“When t he day shall come, that we do part,” he said softly ,
and turned to look at me, “if my last words are not ‘I love
you’—ye’ll ken it was because I didna have time.”Also by Diana Gabaldon
OUTLANDER
DRAGONFL Y IN AMBER
VOY AGER
DRUMS OF AUTUMN
 
 
THE OUTLANDISH COMP ANION