P A R T  O N E
R u m o r s  o f  W a r1
AN INTERRUPTED
 CONVERSA TION
T HE DOG SENSED THEM F IRST . Dark as it was, Ian
Murray felt rather than saw Rol lo’ s head lift suddenly near his
thigh, ears pricking. He put a hand on the dog’ s neck, and felt
the hair there ridged with warning.
So a ttuned as th ey were to each  other , he did not even think
consciously , “M en,” but put his other hand to his knife and lay
still, breathing. Listening.
The forest was quiet. It was hours ‘til dawn and the air was
still as that in a church, with a mist like incense rising slowly
up from the ground. He had lain down to rest on the fallen
trunk of a giant tulip tree, preferring the tickle of wood-lice to
seeping damp. He kept his hand on the dog, waiting.
Rollo w as grow ling, a low , con stant rumble that Ian could
barely hear but felt easily , the v ibration of it traveling up his
arm, arousing all the nerves of h is body . He hadn’ t been asleep
—he rarely slept at night anymore—but had been quiet,
looking up into the vault of the sky , engrossed in his usual
ar gument with God. Quietness had vanished with Rollo’ s
movement. He sat up slowly , swinging his legs over the side of
the half-rotted log, heart beating fast now .
Rollo’ s warnin g hadn’ t changed, but the great head
swiveled, follow ing something  unseen. It was a moonless
night; I an could see the faint  silhouettes of trees and the
moving shadows of the night, but nothing more.
Then he heard them. Sounds of passage. A good distance
away , bu t coming nearer by the moment. He stood and stepped
softly into the p ool of black under a balsam fir . A click of the
tongue, and Rollo left of f his growling and followed, silent as
the wolf who had been his father .Ian’ s resting-place overlooked a game trail. The men who
followed it were not hunting.
White men . N ow that was  odd, and more than odd. He
couldn’ t see them, but didn’ t nee d to; the noise they made was
unmistakable. Indians traveling were not silent, and many of
the H ighlanders  he lived among could move like ghosts in the
wood—but he had no doubt wh atever . Metal, that was it. He
was hea ring the jingle of harn ess, the clink of buttons and
buckles—and gun barrels.
A lo t of them.  So clos e, he began to smell the m. He leaned
forward a little, eyes closed, the better to snuf f up what clue he
could.
They carried pelts; now he pick ed up the dried-blood cold-
fur smell that had probably waked Rollo—but not trappers,
surely; too many . T rappers moved in ones and twos.
Poor me n, and dirty . Not trappers, and not hunters. Game
was easy to co me by at this season, but they smelled of
hunger . And the sweat of bad drink.
Close by now , perhaps ten fee t from the place where he
stood. Rollo made a tiny snort ing sound, and Ian closed his
hand on ce more  on the dog’ s ruf f, but the men made too much
noise to hear it. He counted the passing footsteps, the bumping
of c anteens and bullet boxes, foot-sore grunts and sighs of
weariness.
T wenty-three men, he made it, and there was a mule—no,
two mules with them; he could hear the creak of laden
panniers and that querulous heav y breathing, the way a loaded
mule did, always on the ver ge of complaint.
The men would never have detected them, but some freak of
the air bore Ro llo’ s scent to the mules. A deafening bray
shattered the dark, and the forest erupted in front of him with a
clishmaclaver of crashing and startled shouts. Ian was already
running when pistol shots crashed behind him.
“A Dhia!”  Something struck him in the head and he fell
headlong. W as he killed?No. Rollo was p ushing a worried wet nose into his ear . His
head buzzed like a hive and h e saw bright flashes of light
before his eyes.
“Run! Ruith!”  he gasped, pushing at the dog. “Run out!
Go!” The dog hesitated, whi ning deep in his throat. He
couldn’ t see, but felt the big bo dy lunge and turn, turn back,
undecided.
“Ruith!”  H e got himself  up onto hands and knees, ur ging,
and the dog at last obeyed, running as he had been trained.
There was no time to run himself, even could he have
gained his feet. He fell facedow n, thrust hands and feet deep
into the leaf mold, and wriggled madly , burrowing in.
A foot struck be tween his shoulder blades, but the breath it
drove out of him was muf fled in wet leaves. It didn’ t matter ,
they were making so much no ise. Whoever had stepped on
him didn’ t notice; it was a glancing blow as the man ran over
him in panic, doubtless thinking him a rotted log.
The sho oting ce ased. The shouting didn’ t, but he made no
sense of it. He knew he was lyi ng flat on his face, cold damp
on h is ch eeks an d the tang of dead leaves in his nose—but felt
as though very drunk, the world  revolving slowly round him.
His head didn’ t hurt much, past the first burst of pain, but he
didn’ t seem able to lift it.
He h ad the dim  thought that if he died here, no one would
know . His mother would mind, he thought, not knowing what
had become of him.
The noises grew fainter , more orderly . Someone was still
bellowing, but it had the sou nd of command. They were
leaving. It occurred to him dimly that he might call out. If they
knew he was white, they might help him. And they might not.
He k ept quiet. E ither he was dy ing or he wasn’ t. If he was,
no help was possible. If he wasn’ t, none was needed.
W ell, I asked then, didn’ t I?  he thought, resuming his
conversation with God, calm as though he lay still on the trunk
of th e tu lip tree,  looking up into  the depths of heaven above. Asign, I said. I didna quite expect Y e to be so pr ompt about it,
though.2
DUTCH CABIN
March 1773
N O ONE HAD KNOWN the cabin was there, until Kenny
Lindsay had seen the flames, on his way up the creek.
“I w ouldna ha’ seen at all,” he  said, for perhaps the sixth
time. “Save for the dark comin’  on. Had it been daylight, I’d
never ha ’ kent it, never .” He wi ped a trembling hand over his
face, un able to take his eyes of f the line of bodies that lay at
the edge of the forest. “W as it savages, Mac Dubh ? They’re no
scalped, but maybe—”
“No.” Jamie laid the soot-smear ed handkerchief gently back
over the staring blue face of a small girl. “None of them is
wounded. Surely ye saw as much when ye brought them out?”
Lindsay shook his head, eyes closed, and shivered
convulsively . It was late afternoon, and a chilly spring day , but
the men were all sweating.
“I didna look,” he said simply .
My own  hands were like ice; as  numb and unfeeling as the
rubbery flesh of the dead woma n I was examining. They had
been dead for more than a day; the rigor of death had passed
of f, leaving them limp and chill ed, but the cold weather of the
mountain spring had preserved them so far from the grosser
indignities of putrefaction.
Still, I breathed shallowly; the air was bitter with the scent
of b urning. W isps of steam r ose now and then from the
charred ruin of the tiny cabin. From the corner of my eye, I
saw Ro ger kick at a nearby log, then bend and pick up
something from the ground beneath.
Kenny had pounded on our door long before daylight,
summoning us from warm beds. W e had come in haste, evenknowing that we were far too late to of fer aid. Some of the
tenants f rom the  homesteads on Fraser ’ s Ridge had come, too;
Kenny’ s brother Evan stood with Fer gus and Ronnie Sinclair
in a small knot under the trees, talking together in low-voiced
Gaelic.
“D’ye ken what did for them, Sassenach?” Jamie squatted
beside m e, face troubled. “The ones under the trees, that is.”
He n odded at the corpse in front of me. “I ken what killed this
puir woman.”
The wom an’ s long skirt stirred in the wind, lifting to show
long, sle nder fee t shod in leather  clogs. A pair of long hands to
match lay still a t her sides. She had been tall—though not so
tall as Brianna,  I thought, and looked automatically for my
daughter ’ s bright hair , bobbing among the branches on the far
side of the clearing.
I had turned the woman’ s apron up to cover her head and
upper body . Her hands were red, rough-knuckled with work,
and with  callused palms, but fr om the firmness of her thighs
and the slenderness of her bod y , I thought she was no more
than thirty—likely much younger . No one could say whether
she had been pretty .
I shook my head at his remark.
“I don’ t think she died of the burning,” I said. “See, her legs
and feet  aren’ t touched. She mu st have fallen into the hearth.
Her hai r caught fire, and it spread to the shoulders of her
gown. She must have lain near enough to the wall or the
chimney hood for the flames to  touch; that caught, and then
the whole bloody place went up.”
Jamie nodded slowly , eyes on the dead woman.
“A ye, th at makes sense. But what was it killed them,
Sassenach? The others are singed a bit, though none are
burned like this. But they mus t have been dead before the
cabin caught alight, for none o’ them ran out. W as it a deadly
illness, perhaps?”
“I don’ t think so. Let me look at the others again.”I wa lked slowly down the row  of still bodies with their
cloth-covered faces, stooping over each one to peer again
beneath the makeshift shrouds. There were any number of
illnesses that could be quickly  fatal in these days—with no
antibiotics to hand, and no way of administering fluids save by
mouth or rectum, a simple case of diarrhea could kill within
twenty-four hours.
I saw  such things often enough  to recognize them easily;
any doct or does,  and I had been a doctor for more than twenty
years. I saw things now and th en in this century that I had
never encountered in my own—particularly horrible
parasitical diseases, brought with the slave trade from the
tropics—but it was no parasite  that had done for these poor
souls, an d no illness that I kne w , to leave such traces on its
victims.
All the bodies—the burned woman, a much older woman,
and three children—had been found inside the walls of the
flaming house. Kenny had pulled them out, just before the roof
fell i n, th en ridd en for help. All dead before the fire started; all
dead virtually at the same time , then, for surely the fire had
begun t o smolder soon after the woman fell dead on her
hearth?
The victims had been laid out ne atly under the branches of a
giant red  spruce, while the men began to dig a grave nearby .
Brianna stood by the smallest girl, her head bent. I came to
kneel by the little body , and she knelt down across from me.
“What was it?” she asked quietly . “Poison?”
I glanced up at her in surprise.
“I think so. What gave you that idea?”
She nodded at the blue-tinged face below us. She had tried
to cl ose the eyes, but they bulged beneath the lids, giving the
little gir l a look of startled horror . The small, blunt features
were twisted in a rictus of agony , and there were traces of
vomit in the corners of the mouth.“Girl Scout handbook,” Brianna said. She glanced at the
men, but no one  was near enough to hear . Her mouth twitched,
and she looked away from the  body , holding out her open
hand. “Never eat any strange mushr oom,”  s he  quo ted. “Ther e
ar e man y poisonous varieties, and distinguishing one fr om
another is a job for an expert.  Rog er f ound the se, growing in a
ring by that log over there.”
Moist, fleshy caps, a pale brown  with white warty spots, the
open gi lls and slender stems so pale as to look almost
phosphorescent in the spruce shadows. They had a pleasant,
earthy look to them that belied their deadliness.
“Panther toadstools,” I said, half to myself, and picked one
gingerly from her palm. “ Agaricus pantherinus —or that’ s
what they will  be called, once somebody gets round to naming
them properly . Pantherinus,  b ecause  they kill so swiftly—li ke
a striking cat.”
I could see the gooseflesh ripple on Brianna’ s forearm,
raising the soft, red-gold hairs. S he tilted her hand and spilled
the rest of the deadly fungus on the ground.
“Who in their ri ght mind would eat toadstools?” she asked,
wiping her hand on her skirt with a slight shudder .
“People who didn’ t know better . People who were hungry ,
perhaps,” I answered softly . I p icked up the little girl’ s hand,
and traced the delicate bones of the forearm. The small belly
showed signs of bloat, whether from malnutrition or
postmortem changes I couldn’ t tell—but the collarbones were
sharp as  scythe blades. All of th e bodies were thin, though not
to the point of emaciation.
I l ooked  up, into the deep blue s hadows of the mountainside
above th e cabin.  It was early in the year for foraging, but there
was food in abundance in the  forest—for those who could
recognize it.
Jamie ca me and knelt down beside me, a big hand lightly on
my back . Cold as it was, a trickle of sweat streaked his neck,
and his thick auburn hair was dark at the temples.“The gr ave is ready ,” he said, speaking low , as though he
might alarm the child. “Is that what’ s killed the bairn?” He
nodded at the scattered fungi.
“I th ink so—and the rest of them , too. Have you had a look
around? Does anyone know who they were?”
He shook his head.
“Not English; the clothes are wrong. Germans would have
gone to Salem, surely; they’re c lannish souls, and no inclined
to settle on their own. These were maybe Dutchmen.” He
nodded toward the carved wood en clogs on the old woman’ s
feet, cracked and stained with lo ng use. “No books nor writing
left, if there was any to begin with. Nothing that might tell
their name. But—”
“They hadn’ t been here long.” A low , cracked voice made
me look up. Ro ger had come; he squatted next to Brianna,
nodding toward the smoldering remains of the cabin. A small
garden p lot had been scratched into the earth nearby , but the
few plants showing were no more than sprouts, the tender
leaves limp and blackened wi th late frost. There were no
sheds, no sign of livestock, no mule or pig.
“New emigrants ,” Roger said softly . “Not bond servants;
this was  a family . They weren’ t  used to outdoor labor , either;
the women’ s hands have blisters and fresh scars.” His own
broad hand rubbed unconsciously over a homespun knee; his
palms w ere as smoothly callused as Jamie’ s now , but he had
once been a tender -skinned scholar; he remembered the pain
of his seasoning.
“I wonder if they left people behind—in Europe,” Brianna
murmured. She smoothed blond hair of f the little girl’ s
forehead, and laid the kerchief back over her face. I saw her
throat move as she swallowed. “They’ll never know what
happened to them.”
“No.” Ja mie stood abruptly . “They do say that God protects
fools—but I think even the Alm ighty will lose patience now
and then.” He turned away , motioning to Lindsay and Sinclair .“Look f or the man,” he said to Lindsay . Every head jerked
up to look at him.
“Man?” Roger said, and then gl anced sharply at the burned
remnants of the cabin, realization dawning. “A ye—who built
the cabin for them?”
“The women could have done it ,” Bree said, lifting her chin.
“ Y ou  cou ld, aye,” he said, mouth twitching slightly as he
cast a sidelong look at his wife. Brianna resembled Jamie in
more tha n colori ng; she stood si x feet in her stockings and had
her father ’ s clean-limbed strength.
“Perhaps they could, but they didn’ t,” Jamie said shortly . He
nodded toward the shell of th e cabin, where a few bits of
furniture still held their fragile shapes. As I watched, the
evening wind came down, scou ring the ruin, and the shadow
of a stool collap sed noiselessly  into ash, flurries of soot and
char moving ghostlike over the ground.
“What do you mean?” I stoo d and moved beside him,
looking into the house. There w as virtually nothing left inside,
though the chimney stack still stood, and jagged bits of the
walls remained, their logs fallen like jackstraws.
“There’ s no metal,” he said, nodding at the blackened
hearth, w here the remnants of a  cauldron lay , cracked in two
from the heat, it s contents vaporized. “No pots, save that—and
that’ s to o heavy  to carry away . Nay tools. Not a knife, not an
ax—and ye see whoever built it had that.”
I did ; the logs were unpeeled, but the notches and ends bore
the clear marks of an ax.
Frowning, Roge r picked up a long pine branch and began to
poke through the piles of ash a nd rubble, looking to be sure.
Kenny Lindsay and Sinclair didn’ t bother; Jamie had told them
to look for a man, and they promptly went to do so,
disappearing into the forest. Fer gus went with them; Evan
Lindsay , his brother Murdo, and the McGillivrays began the
chore of collecting stones for a cairn.“If there was  a man—did he leave them?” Brianna
murmured to me, glancing fro m her father to the row of
bodies. “Did this woman maybe think they wouldn’ t survive
on their own?”
And thu s take her own life, and those of her children, to
avoid a long-drawn-out death from cold and starvation?
“Leave them and take all their tools? God, I hope not.” I
crossed myself at the thought, though even as I did so, I
doubted it. “W ouldn’ t they have  walked out, looking for help?
Even w ith children … the snow’ s mostly gone.” Only the
highest mountain passes were still packed with snow , and
while the trails and slopes were  wet and muddy with runof f,
they’d been passable for a month, at least.
“I’ve found the man,” Roger said, interrupting my thoughts.
He spoke very calmly , but paused to clear his throat. “Just—
just here.”
The daylight was beginning to f ade, but I could see that he
had gone pale. N o wonder; the curled form he had unearthed
beneath the charred timbers of a fallen wall was suf ficiently
gruesome as to give anyone pause. Charred to blackness,
hands upraised in the boxer ’ s p ose so common to those dead
by fire, it was dif ficult even to be sure that it was  a man—
though I thought it was, from what I could see.
Speculation abo ut this new body was interrupted by a shout
from the forest’ s edge.
“W e’ve found them, milord!”
Everyone looked up from contemplation of this new corpse,
to see Fer gus waving from the edge of the wood.
“Them,” indeed. T wo men, this time. Sprawled on the
ground within the shadow of the trees, found not together , but
not far apart, only a short distance from the house. And both,
so far as I could tell, probably dead of mushroom poisoning.
“ That’ s  no Dutchman,” Sinclair said, for probably the fourth
time, shaking his head over one body .“He might be,” said Fer gus dubiously . He scratched his nose
with the  tip of the hook he wore in replacement of his left
hand. “From the Indies, non ?”
One of the unknown bodies was in fact that of a black man.
The other was white, and both wore nondescript clothes of
worn homespun—shirts and bre eches; no jackets, despite the
cold weather . And both were barefoot.
“No.” Jamie shook his head, rubbing one hand
unconsciously o n his own breeches, as though to rid himself of
the touch  of the dead. “The Dutch keep slaves on Barbuda, aye
—but th ese are better fed than the folk from the cabin.” He
lifted his chin toward the silent row of women and children.
“They d idna liv e here. Besides …” I saw his eyes fix on the
dead men’ s feet.
The feet were grubby about the ankles and heavily callused,
but basically clean. The soles o f the black man’ s feet showed
yellowish pink, with no smears o f mud or random leaves stuck
between the toes. These men hadn’ t been walking through the
muddy forest barefoot, that much was sure.
“So ther e were perhaps more men? And when these died,
their companions took their shoes—and anything else of
value”—Fer gus added practically , gesturing from the burned
cabin to the stripped bodies—”and fled.”
“A ye, maybe.” Jamie pursed his lips, his gaze traveling
slowly o ver the earth of the yard—but the ground was churned
with foo tsteps, clumps of grass uprooted and the whole of the
yard dus ted with ash and bits of charred wood. It looked as
though the place had been ravaged by rampaging hippopotami.
“I co uld wish th at Y oung Ian w as here. He’ s the best of the
trackers; he could maybe tell w hat happened there, at least.”
He nodded into the wood, wh ere the men had been found.
“How m any there were, maybe, and which way they’ve gone.”
Jamie hi mself was no mean trac ker . But the light was going
fast now ; even in the clearing where the burned cabin stood,the d ark was ris ing, pooling under the trees, creeping like oil
across the shattered earth.
His eyes went to  the horizon, where streamers of cloud were
beginning to blaze with gold a nd pink as the sun set behind
them, and he shook his head.
“Bury them. Then we’ll go.”
One more grim discovery remained. Alone among the dead,
the burn ed man had not died of fire or poison. When they
lifted the charred corpse from the ashes to bear him to his
grave, somethin g fell free of the body , landing with a small,
heavy th unk on the ground. Bri anna picked it up, and rubbed
at it with the corner of her apron.
“I guess they overlooked this,” she said a little bleakly ,
holding it out. It was a knife, or  the blade of one. The wooden
hilt had burned entirely away , and the blade itself was warped
with heat.
Steeling myself against the thick, acrid stench of burned fat
and fles h, I bent over the corpse, poking gingerly at the
midsection. Fire destroys a great deal, but preserves the
strangest things. The triangular wound was quite clear , seared
in the hollow beneath his ribs.
“They s tabbed him,” I said, and wiped my sweating hands
on my own apron.
“They killed him,” Bree said, watching my face. “And then
his w ife—” She glanced at the young woman on the ground,
the conc ealing apron over her head. “She made a stew with the
mushrooms, and they all ate it. The children, too.”
The clearing was silent, save for  the distant calls of birds on
the mou ntain. I could hear my own heart, beating painfully in
my chest. V engeance? Or simple despair?
“A ye, maybe,” Jamie said quietl y . He stooped to pick up an
end of the sheet of canvas they  had placed the dead man on.
“W e’ll call it accident.”The Dutchman and his family were laid in one grave, the
two strangers in another .
A co ld w ind had  sprung up as the sun went down; the apron
fluttered away from the woman’ s face as they lifted her .
Sinclair gave a strangled cry of shock, and nearly dropped her .
She had neither face nor hair anymore; the slender waist
narrowed abruptly into charred ruin. The flesh of her head had
burned away completely , leaving an oddly tiny , blackened
skull, from which her teeth grinned in disconcerting levity .
They lowered her hastily into the shallow grave, her
children and mother beside her , and left Brianna and me to
build a small ca irn over them, in the ancient Scottish way , to
mark the  place and provide protection from wild beasts, while
a more rudimentary resting place was dug for the two barefoot
men.
The work finally done, everyone gathered, white-faced and
silent, ar ound the new-made mounds. I saw Roger stand close
beside B rianna, his arm protectively about her waist. A small
shudder went through her , which I thought had nothing to do
with the  cold. Their child, Jem my , was a year or so younger
than the smallest girl.
“W ill y e speak a word, Mac Dubh ?” Kenny Lindsay
glanced inquiringly at Jamie, pulling his knitted bonnet down
over his ears against the growing chill.
It w as nearly n ightfall, and no one wanted to linger . W e
would have to make camp, so mewhere well away from the
stink of burning, and that would be hard enough, in the dark.
But Ken ny was right; we couldn ’ t leave without at least some
token of ceremony , some farewell for the strangers.
Jamie shook his head.
“Nay , le t Roger Mac speak. If these were Dutchmen, belike
they were Protestant.”
Dim as the light was, I saw the sharp glance Brianna shot at
her fathe r . It was true that Roger was a Presbyterian; so was
T om Ch ristie, a much older man  whose dour face reflected hisopinion of the proceedings. The question of religion was no
more tha n a pretext, though, and everyone knew it, including
Roger .
Roger cleared his throat with a  noise like tearing calico. It
was always a painful sound; there was anger in it now as well.
He d idn’ t protest, though, and h e met Jamie’ s eyes straight on,
as he took his place at the head of the grave.
I h ad thought h e would simply say the Lord’ s Prayer , or
perhaps one of the gentler psalm s. Other words came to him,
though.
“Behold, I cry out of wr ong, but I am not hear d: I cry aloud,
but ther e is no judgment. He h ath fenced up my way that I
cannot pass, and He hath set darkness in my paths.”
His voice had o nce been powerful, and beautiful. It was
choked now , no more than a rasping shadow of its former
beauty—but there was suf ficient power in the passion with
which he spoke to make all those who heard him bow their
heads, faces lost in shadow .
“He hath stripped me of my glor y , and taken the cr own fr om
my h ead. He ha th destr oyed me on every side, and I am gone:
and my hope hath He r emoved like a tr ee.”  His face was set,
but his eyes res ted for a bleak moment on the charred stump
that had served the Dutch family for a chopping block.
“He ha th put my br ethr en far fr om me, and mine
acquaintance ar e verily estranged fr om me. My kinsfolk have
failed, a nd my familiar friends have for gotten me.”  I saw the
three Lindsay brothers exchange glances, and everyone drew a
little closer together , against the rising wind.
“Have p ity upon  me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends,”
he s aid, and his voice softened,  so that it was dif ficult to hear
him, abo ve the sighing of the tre es. “For the  hand of God has
touched me.”
Brianna made a slight movemen t beside him, and he cleared
his throat once more, explosively , stretching his neck so that I
caught a glimpse of the rope scar that marred it.“Oh, that my wor ds wer e now written! Oh, that they wer e
printed in a book! That they wer e graven with an ir on pen and
lead in the r ock for ever!”
He look ed slo wly round from face to face, his own
expressionless, then took a deep breath to continue, voice
cracking on the words.
“For I know th at my r edeemer liveth, and that He shall
stand at  the latter day upon the earth: And though after my
skin worms destr oy this body” —Brianna shuddered
convulsively , and looked away from the raw mound of dirt
— “yet in my flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for
myself, and mine eyes shall behold.”
He stopped, and there was a  brief collective sigh, as
everyone let out the breath they  had been holding. He wasn’ t
quite finished,  though. He had reached out, half-
unconsciously , for Bree’ s hand,  and held it tightly . He spoke
the last words a lmost to himself, I thought, with little thought
for his listeners.
“Be ye  afraid of the swor d: for wrath bringeth the
punishments of the swor d, that ye may know ther e is a
judgment.”
I shi vered, and J amie’ s hand curled round my own, cold but
strong. He looked down at me, and I met his eyes. I knew what
he was thinking.
He w as thinking, as I was, not of the present, but the future.
Of a small item  that would appear three years hence, in the
pages of the W ilmington Gazette,  dated February 13, 1776.
It is with grief that the news is r eceived of the deaths by
fir e of James MacKenzie Fraser and his wife, Clair e
Fraser , in a conflagration that destr oyed their house in
the s ettlement of Fraser ’ s Ridge, on the night of January
21 la st. Mr . Fras er , a nephew of the late Hector Camer on
of River  Run Plantation, was born at Br och T uarach in
Scotland. He was widely known  in the Colony and deeply
r espected; he leaves no surviving childr en.It had been easy , so far , not to th ink too much of it. So far in
the future, and surely not an unchangeable future—after all,
forewarned was forearmed … wasn’ t it?
I glanced at the shallow cairn, and a deeper chill passed
through me. I st epped closer to Jamie, and put my other hand
on h is arm. He covered my hand with his, and squeezed tight
in re assurance. No, he said to m e silently . No, I will not let it
happen.
As we left the d esolate clearing,  though, I could not free my
mind of one vi vid image. Not the burned cabin, the pitiful
bodies, the pathetic dead garde n. The image that haunted me
was one  I had seen some years before—a gravestone in the
ruins of Beauly Priory , high in the Scottish Highlands.
It was the tomb of a noble lady , her name surmounted by the
carving of a gr inning skull—v ery like the one beneath the
Dutchwoman’ s apron. Beneath the skull was her motto:
Hodie mihi cras tibi—sic transit gloria mundi.
My turn today—yours tomorr ow . Thus passes the glory
of the world.3
KEEP YOUR FRIENDS CLOSE
W E RETURNED T O FRASER’S RIDGE just before sunset
the next day , t o discover a visitor waiting. Major Donald
MacDonald, late  of His Majesty ’ s army , and even more lately
of Governor T ryon’ s personal light-horse guard, was sitting on
the front stoop, my cat in his lap and a jug of beer beside him.
“Mrs. F raser! Y our servant, mum,” he called genially ,
seeing m e appro ach. He tried t o stand up, but then let out a
gasp as Adso, objecting to the loss of his cozy nest, dug his
claws into the Major ’ s thighs.
“Do sit, Major ,” I said, wav ing him hastily back. He
subsided with a grimace, but nobly refrained from flinging
Adso int o the bushes. I came up  onto the stoop beside him and
sat down, sighing with relief.
“My husband is just seeing to  the horses; he’ll be down
directly . I see that someone’ s made you welcome?” I nodded at
the beer , which he promptly o f fered to me with a courtly
gesture, wiping the neck of the jug on his sleeve.
“Oh, yes , mum,” he assured me . “Mrs. Bug has been most
assiduous of my welfare.”
Not to seem uncordial, I accepted the beer , which in all truth
went do wn very  well. Jamie had  been anxious to get back, and
we’d bee n in the saddle since da wn, with only a brief break for
refreshment at midday .
“It is a most excellent brew ,” t he Major said, smiling as I
exhaled after swallowing, my eyes half-closing. “Y our own
making, perhaps?”
I s hook my head  and took another swallow , before handing
the jug back to him. “No, it’ s Lizzie’ s. Lizzie W emyss.”“Oh, yo ur bondmaid; yes, of co urse. W ill you give her my
compliments?”
“Isn’ t sh e here?” I glanced toward the open door behind
him, rather surprised. At this time of day , I would have
expected Lizzie to be in the kitchen, making supper , but she
would surely have heard our arr ival and come out. There was
no s mell of coo king, now that I noticed. She wouldn’ t have
known when to expect us, of course, but …
“Mm, n o. She is …” The Major knitted his brows in the
ef fort of recall, and I wondere d how full the jug had been
before he got at it; there were no  more than a couple of inches
left now . “Ah, yes. She went t o the McGillivrays’ with her
father , Mrs. Bug said. T o visit her af fianced, I believe?”
“Y es, she’ s engaged to Manfred McGillivray . But Mrs. Bug
—”
“—is in the spr inghoose,” he said, with a nod up the hill
toward t he smal l shed. “A matte r of cheese, I believe she said.
An omelette was most graciously proposed for my supper .”
“Ah …”  I relaxed a bit more, the dust of the ride settling
with the beer . I t was wonderful to come home, though my
sense of  peace was uneasy , ta inted by the memory of the
burned cabin.
I supposed that Mrs. Bug would have told him our errand,
but he made no  reference to it—nor to whatever had brought
him up to the R idge. Naturally  not; all business would wait
appropriately for Jamie. Being female, I would get impeccable
courtesy and small bits of social gossip in the meantime.
I cou ld d o socia l gossip, but ne eded to be prepared for it; I
hadn’ t a natural knack.
“Ah … Y our relations with my cat seem somewhat
improved,” I hazarded. I glance d involuntarily at his head, but
his wig had been expertly mended.
“It is an accepted principle of politics, I believe,” he said,
ruf fling his fingers through the t hick silver fur on Adso’ s belly .
“Keep your friends close—but your enemies closer .”“V ery sound,” I said, smiling. “Er … I hope you haven’ t
been waiting long?”
He shrugged, intimating that any wait was irrelevant—
which it generally was. The mountains had their own time, and
a wise man did  not try to hurry them. MacDonald was a
seasoned soldier , and well-traveled—but he had been born in
Pitlochry , close enough to the Highland peaks to know their
ways.
“I came this morning,” he said. “From New Bern.”
Small warning bells went of f i n the back of my mind. It
would h ave taken him a good ten days to travel from New
Bern, if he had come directly—and the state of his creased and
mud-stained uniform suggested that he had.
New Be rn was where the new royal governor of the colony ,
Josiah Martin, had taken up his residence. And for MacDonald
to ha ve said, “F rom New Bern,” rather than mentioning some
later sto p on his journey , made it reasonably plain to me that
whatever busine ss had impelled this visit, it had originated in
New Bern. I was wary of governors.
I glance d toward  the path that led to the paddock, but Jamie
wasn’ t visible yet. Mrs. Bug was, emer ging from the
springhouse; I waved to her and she gestured enthusiastically
in w elcome, though hampered b y a pail of milk in one hand, a
bucket o f eggs in the other , a crock of butter under one arm,
and a lar ge chun k of cheese tuck ed neatly underneath her chin.
She negotiated the steep descent with success, and disappeared
round the back of the house, toward the kitchen.
“Omelettes all round, it looks like,” I remarked, turning
back to the Ma jor . “Did you happen to come through Cross
Creek, by chance?”
“I did indeed, mum. Y our husband’ s aunt sends you her kind
regards—and a quantity of books and newspapers, which I
have brought with me.”
I was wary of newspapers these days, too—though such
events as they reported had undoubtedly taken place severalweeks—or mon ths—previously . I made appreciative noises,
though, wishing  Jamie would hurry up, so I could excuse
myself. My hair smelled of burning and my hands still
remembered the touch of cold flesh; I wanted a wash, badly .
“I beg your pardon?” I had missed something MacDonald
was saying. He bent politely closer to repeat it, then jerked
suddenly , eyes bulging.
“Frigging cat!”
Adso, who had been doing a splendid imitation of a limp
dishcloth, had sprung bolt upright in the Major ’ s lap, eyes
glowing and tail like a bottlebr ush, hissing like a teakettle as
he fl exed his cla ws hard into the  Major ’ s legs. I hadn’ t time to
react before he had leapt over MacDonald’ s shoulder and
swarmed throug h the open sur gery window behind him,
ripping the Major ’ s ruf fle and k nocking his wig askew in the
process.
MacDonald was cursing freely , but I hadn’ t attention to
spare for him. R ollo was coming up the path toward the house,
wolflike and sinister in the gloaming, but acting so oddly that I
was stan ding before conscious thought could bring me to my
feet.
The dog  would run a few steps toward the house, circle
once or twice as though unable t o decide what to do next, then
run back  into the wood, turn, and run again toward the house,
all the while whining with agitation, tail low and wavering.
“Jesus H . Roose velt Christ,” I sa id. “Bloody T immy’ s in the
well!” I flew d own the steps and ran for the path, barely
registering the Major ’ s startled oath behind me.
I fou nd Ian a few hundred yards down the path, conscious,
but g roggy . He w as sitting on the ground, eyes closed and both
hands holding his head, as tho ugh to keep the bones of his
skull from coming apart. He opened his eyes as I dropped to
my knees beside him, and gave me an unfocused smile.
“Auntie,” he said hoarsely . H e seemed to want to say
something else, but couldn’ t quite decide what; his mouthopened, but then simply hung that way , tongue moving
thoughtfully to and fro.
“Look at me, Ia n,” I said, as calmly as possible. He did—
that was  good. It was too dark to see whether his pupils were
unnaturally dilated, but even in the evening shadow of the
pines tha t edged  the trail, I could see the pallor of his face, and
the dark trail of bloodstains down his shirt.
Hurried steps were coming after me down the trail; Jamie,
followed closely by MacDonald.
“How is it, lad?”
Jamie gripped him by one arm, and Ian swayed very gently
toward him, then dropped his hands, closed his eyes, and
relaxed into Jamie’ s arms with a sigh.
“Is he bad?” Jamie spoke anxiously over Ian’ s shoulder ,
holding him up as I frisked him  for damage. The back of his
shirt was saturated with dried blood—but it was  drie d. T he tail
of his hair was stif f with it, too, and I found the head wound
quickly .
“I do n’ t think so . Something’ s hit him hard on the head and
taken out a chunk of his scalp, but—”
“A tomahawk, do you think?”
MacDonald leaned over us, intent.
“No,” said Ian drowsily , his fa ce muf fled in Jamie’ s shirt.
“A ball.”
“Go away , dog,” Jamie said brie fly to Rollo, who had stuck
his nose in Ian’ s  ear , eliciting a stifled squawk from the patient
and an involuntary lifting of his shoulders.
“I’ll have a look in the light, bu t it may not be too bad,” I
said, observing this. “He walked  some way , after all. Let’ s get
him up to the house.”
The men  made shift to get him up the trail, Ian’ s arms over
their shoulders, and within minutes, had him laid facedown on
the table in my  sur gery . Here, he told us the story of hisadventures, in a disjoint fashion punctuated by small yelps as I
cleaned the injury , clipped bits of clotted hair away , and put
five or six stitches into his scalp.
“I thoug ht I was dead,” Ian said, and sucked air through his
teeth as I drew the coarse thread through the edges of the
ragged w ound. “Christ, Auntie Claire! I woke in the morning,
though, and I wasna dead after all—though I thought my head
was split open, and my brains spilling down my neck.”
“V ery nearly was,” I murmured, concentrating on my work.
“I don’ t think it was a bullet, though.”
That got everyone’ s attention.
“I’m not shot?” Ian sounded mil dly indignant. One big hand
lifted, straying toward the back  of his head, and I slapped it
lightly away .
“Keep still. No, you aren’ t shot,  no credit to you. There was
a deal of dirt in the wound, and shreds of wood and tree bark.
If I had to guess, one of the shots knocked a dead branch loose
from a tree, and it hit you in the head when it fell.”
“Y ou’re quite sure as it wasn’ t  a tomahawk, are ye?” The
Major seemed disappointed, too.
I tie d the final knot and clipped the thread, shaking my
head.
“I don’ t  believe I’ve ever seen  a tomahawk wound, but I
don’ t think so. See how jagged the edges are? And the scalp’ s
torn badly , but I don’ t believe the bone is fractured.”
“It was pitch-dark, the lad said,” Jamie put in logically . “No
sensible person would fling a to mahawk into a dark wood at
something he couldna see.” He was holding the spirit lamp for
me to work by; he moved it closer , so we could see not only
the r agged line of stitches, but t he spreading bruise around it,
revealed by the hair I had clipped of f.
“A ye, see?” Jamie’ s finger spread the remaining bristles
gently apart, tracing several deep scratches that scored thebruised area. “Y our auntie’ s right, Ian; ye’ve been attacked by
a tree.”
Ian opened one eye a slit.
“Has an yone ever told ye wha t a comical fellow ye are,
Uncle Jamie?”
“No.”
Ian closed the eye.
“That’ s as well, because ye’re not.”
Jamie smiled, and squeezed Ian’ s shoulder .
“Feeling a bit better then, are ye?”
“No.”
“A ye, w ell, the thing is,” Major MacDonald interrupted,
“that the lad did meet with some sort of banditti, no? Had ye
reason to think they might be Indians?”
“No,” sa id Ian again, but this tim e he opened the eye all the
way . It was bloodshot. “They weren’ t.”
MacDonald didn’ t appear pleased with this answer .
“How co uld ye be sure, lad?” he  asked, rather sharply . “If it
was dark, as ye say .”
I saw  Jamie gla nce quizzically at the Major , but he didn’ t
interrupt. Ian moaned a littl e, then heaved a sigh and
answered.
“I sm elt them,” he said, adding a lmost immediately , “I think
I’m going to puke.”
He raised himself on one elbow and promptly did so. This
ef fectively put an end to any fur ther questions, and Jamie took
Major M acDonald of f to the kit chen, leaving me to clean Ian
up and settle him as comfortably as I could.
“Can yo u open both eyes?” I asked, having got him tidied
and resting on his side, with a pillow under his head.He d id, blinking a little at the light. The small blue flame of
the spirit lamp w as reflected twice over in the darkness of his
eyes, but the pupils shrank at once—and together .
“That’ s good,” I said, and put down the lamp on the table.
“Leave i t, dog,”  I said to Rollo, who was nosing at the strange
smell of  the lamp—it was burni ng a mix of low-grade brandy
and turpentine. “T ake hold of my fingers, Ian.”
I h eld out my index fingers and he slowly wrapped a lar ge,
bony ha nd round  each of them. I put him through the drill for
neurological damage, having him squeeze, pull, push, and then
concluded by listening to his heart, which was thumping along
reassuringly .
“Slight concuss ion,” I announced, straightening up and
smiling at him.
“Oh, aye?” he asked, squinting up at me.
“It mean s your head aches and  you feel sick. Y ou’ll feel
better in a few days.”
“I could ha’ told ye that,” he muttered, settling back.
“So you could,” I agreed. “But ‘concussion’ sounds so
much more important than ‘cracked heid,’ doesn’ t it?”
He didn ’ t laugh, but smiled faintly in response. “W ill ye
feed Rollo, Auntie? He wouldna leave me on the way; he’ll be
hungry .”
Rollo pricked his ears at the sou nd of his name, and shoved
his muzzle into Ian’ s groping hand, whining softly .
“He’ s fi ne,” I said to the dog. “Don’ t worry . And yes,” I
added to  Ian, “I’ll bring someth ing. Do you think you could
manage a bit of bread and milk, yourself?”
“No,” he said definitely . “A dram o’ whisky , maybe?”
“No,” I said, just as definitely , and blew out the spirit lamp.
“Auntie,” he said, as I turned to the door .“Y es?” I’d left a single candle stick to light him, and he
looked very young and pale in the wavering yellow glow .
“Why d’ye suppose Major MacDonald wants it to be
Indians I met in the wood?”
“I don’ t know . But I imagine Jamie does. Or will, by now .”4
SERPENT IN EDEN
B RIANNA PUSHED OPEN the door to her cabin, listening
warily for the scamper of rode nt feet or the dry whisper of
scales across the floor . She’d once walked in in the dark and
stepped within inches of a small rattlesnake; while the snake
had been nearly as startled as she was, and slithered madly
away between the hearthstones, she’d learned her lesson.
There w as no scuttle of fleeing mice or voles this time, but
something lar ger had been and gone, pushing its way through
the oile d skin tacked over the  window . The sun was just
setting, and there was enough daylight left to show her the
woven-grass ba sket in which she kept roasted peanuts,
knocked from its shelf onto the floor and the contents cracked
and eaten, a litter of shells scattered over the floor .
A loud rustling noise froze her momentarily , listening. It
came again, followed by a loud clang as something fell to the
ground, on the other side of the back wall.
“Y ou little bastar d !” she said. “Y ou’re in my pantry!”
Fired with righteous indignation, she seized the broom and
char ged into the lean-to with a  banshee yell. An enormous
raccoon, tranquilly munching a smoked trout, dropped its prey
at sight of her , dashed between her legs, and made of f like a fat
banker in flight from creditors, making loud birring  noises of
alarm.
Nerves p ulsing with adrenaline, she put aside the broom and
bent to salvage what she could of the mess, cursing under her
breath. Raccoon s were less de structive than squirrels, who
would chew and shred with hapless abandon—but they had
bigger appetites.
God kne w how long he’d been  in here, she thought. Long
enough to lick all the butter out of its mold, pull down acluster of smoked fish from the rafters—and how something
so f at had managed the acrob atic feat required for that  …
Luckily , the honeycomb had been stored in three separate jars,
and only one ha d been despoiled. But the root vegetables had
been dumped on the floor , a fresh cheese mostly devoured, and
the precious jug of maple syrup  had been overturned, draining
into a sticky puddle in the dirt. The sight of this loss enraged
her a fresh, and s he squeezed the potato she had just picked up
so hard that her nails sank through its skin.
“Bloody , bloody , beastly , horrible, bloody beast !”
“Who?” said a voice behind he r . Startled, she whirled and
fired the potato at the intruder , who proved to be Roger . It
struck him squarely in the forehead and he staggered,
clutching the door frame.
“Ow! Christ! Ow! What the hell’ s going on in here?”
“Raccoon,” she said shortly , and stepped back, letting the
waning light from the door illuminate the damage.
“He got the maple syrup? Bugger! Did you get the bastard?”
Hand pr essed to his forehead, Roger ducked inside the lean-to
pantry , glancing about for furry bodies.
Seeing that her husband shared both her priorities and her
sense of outrage soothed her somewhat.
“No,” she said. “He ran. Are you bleeding? And where’ s
Jem?”
“I don’ t think so ,” he said, taking the hand gingerly from his
forehead and glancing at it. “O w . Y ou’ve a wicked arm, girl.
Jem’ s at the Mc Gillivrays’. Lizzie and Mr . W emyss took him
along to celebrate Senga’ s engagement.”
“Really? Who did she pick?” Both outrage and remorse
were im mediately subsumed in interest. Ute McGillivray , with
German thoroug hness, had carefully selected partners for her
son and three daughters according to her own criteria—land,
money , and respectability ranki ng highest, with age, personal
appearance, and charm coming well down the list. Not
surprisingly , her children had other ideas—though such wasthe forc e of Frau  U te’ s personality that both Inga and Hilda
had married men that she approved of.
Senga, though, was her mother ’ s daughter—meaning that
she poss essed si milarly strong opinions and a similar lack of
inhibition in expressing them. For months, she had been
hovering between two suitors: Heinrich Strasse, a dashing but
poor yo ung m an—and a Lutheran!—from Bethania, and
Ronnie Sinclair ,  the cooper . A well-of f man, by the standards
of th e R idge, an d to Ute, the fact that Ronnie was thirty years
Senga’ s senior was no bar .
The business of Senga McGillivray’ s marriage had been a
topic of intense speculation on the Ridge for the last several
months, and Brianna was aware of several substantial wagers
riding on the outcome.
“So who’ s the lucky man?” she repeated.
“Mrs. Bug doesn’ t know , and i t’ s driving her mad,” Roger
replied, breaking into a grin. “Manfred McGillivray came to
fetch them yesterday morning, but Mrs. Bug hadn’ t come
down to  the Big House yet, so L izzie left a note pinned to the
back do or to say where they’d gone—but she didn’ t think to
say who the fortunate bridegroom is.”
Brianna glanced  at the setting sun; the orb itself had sunk
out of sight, thou gh the blazing light through the chestnut trees
still lit the door yard, making the spring grass look deep and
soft as emerald velvet.
“I su ppose we’ll have to wait ‘til tomorrow to find out,” she
said, wi th some regret. The McGillivrays’ place was a good
five miles; it would be full dark long before they reached it,
and even past t he thaw , one didn’ t wander the mountains at
night wi thout a good reason—or at least a better reason than
mere curiosity .
“A ye. D’ye want to go up to the Big House for supper?
Major MacDonald’ s come.”
“Oh, him.” She considered for a  moment. She would like to
hear any news the Major had brought—and there wassomething to be said for having Mrs. Bug make supper . On the
other ha nd, she was really in n o mood to be sociable, after a
grim three days, a long ride, and the desecration of her pantry .
She became aware that Roger was carefully not contributing
an o pinion. One arm leaning on  the shelf where the dwindling
stock of  winter apples was spread, he idly caressed one of the
fruits, a forefinger slowly strok ing the round yellow cheek of
it. Faint, familiar vibrations were coming of f him, suggesting
silently that there might be advantages to an evening at home,
sans parents, acquaintances—or baby .
She smiled at Roger .
“How’ s your poor head?”
He g lanced at her briefly , the waning rays of the sun gilding
the bridg e of his nose and strik ing a flash of green from one
eye. He cleared his throat.
“I su ppose ye m ight kiss it,” he suggested dif fidently . “If ye
liked.”
She obl igingly rose on her tiptoes and did so, gently ,
brushing back the thick black ha ir from his brow . There was a
noticeable lump, though it hadn’ t begun to bruise yet.
“Is that better?”
“Not yet. Better try again. Maybe a bit lower?”
His hands settled on the swell of her hips, drawing her in.
She was  nearly as tall as he was; she’d noticed before what an
advantage of fit this was, bu t the impression struck her
forcibly anew . She wriggled slightly , enjoying it, and Roger
drew a deep, rasping breath.
“Not quite that low ,” he said. “Not yet, anyway .”
“Picky , picky ,” she said tolerantly , and kissed him on the
mouth. His lips were warm, b ut the scent of bitter ash and
damp ea rth clun g to him—as it did to her—and she shivered a
little, drawing back.He kept a hand lightly on her back, but leaned past her ,
running a finger along the edge of the shelf where the jug of
maple s yrup had been overturned. He ran the finger lightly
along he r lower  lip, then his own, and bent again to kiss her ,
sweetness rising up between them.
“I C AN’T REMEMBER how lo ng it’ s been since I’ve seen ye
naked.”
She closed one eye and looked at him skeptically .
“About three days. I guess it wasn’ t all that memorable.” It
had been a grea t relief to shed the clothes she’d been wearing
for the last thre e days and nights. Even naked and hastily
washed, though,  she still smelled dust in her hair and felt the
grime of the journey between her toes.
“Oh, well, aye. That’ s not what I mean, though—I mean, it’ s
been a long whi le since we’ve made love in the daylight.” He
lay on his side, facing her , and  smiled as he passed a light
hand ov er the deep curve of her waist and the swell of buttock.
“Y e’ve n o idea how lovely ye look, stark naked, wi’ the sun
behind you. All gold, like ye were dipped in it.”
He c losed one eye, as though the sight dazzled him. She
moved, and the sun shone in his face, making the open eye
glow like an emerald in the split second before he blinked.
“Mmm.” She put out a lazy hand  and drew his head in close
to kiss him.
She did know what he meant. It felt strange—almost
wicked, in a ple asant sort of wa y . Most often, they made love
at night,  after Jem was asleep, whispering to each other in the
hearth-lit shadows, finding each other among the rustling,
secret layers of quilts and nightclothes. And while Jem
normally slept as though he’d been poleaxed, they were
always half-conscious of the small, heavy-breathing mound
beneath the quilt of his trundle bed nearby .
She was  oddly just as conscious of Jem now , in his absence.
It fe lt strange to  be apart from him; not constantly aware ofwhere he was, not feeling his body as a small, very mobile
extension of her own. The free dom was exhilarating, but left
her feeling uneasy , as though she had misplaced something
valuable.
They’d left the door open, the better to enjoy the flood of
light and air on their skins. The sun was nearly down now ,
though, and while the air still g lowed like honey , there was a
shadow of chill in it.
A s udden gust of wind rattled  the hide tacked over the
window and blew across the room, slamming the door and
leaving them abruptly in the dark.
Brianna gasped. Roger grunted in surprise and swung of f
the bed, going to open the door . He flung it wide, and she
gulped in the freshet of air and sunshine, only then aware that
she had  held her breath when the door closed, feeling
momentarily entombed.
Roger seemed to feel the same . He stood in the doorway ,
bracing himself against the frame, letting the wind stir the
dark, curling hairs of his body . His hair was still bound in a
tail; he hadn’ t bothered undoi ng it, and she had a sudden
desire to  come behind him, untie the leather thong and run her
fingers t hrough the soft, glossy black of it, the legacy of some
ancient Spaniard, shipwrecked among the Celts.
She was up and doing it before she had consciously decided
to, combing tiny yellow catkins and twigs from his locks with
her fing ers. He shivered, from her touch or that of the wind,
but his body was warm.
“Y ou ha ve a farmer ’ s tan,” she said, lifting the hair of f his
neck and kissing him on the bone at the base of his nape.
“W ell, so. Am I not a farmer , then?” His skin twitched
under he r lips, like a horse’ s hide. His face, neck, and forearms
had paled over t he winter , but w ere still darker than the flesh
of back and shoulders—and a faint line still lingered round his
waist, demarcating the soft buckskin color of his torso from
the startling paleness of his backside.She cupped his buttocks, enjoying the high, round solidity
of them,  and he breathed deepl y , leaning back a little toward
her , so her breasts pressed against his back and her chin rested
on his shoulder , looking out.
It w as still dayl ight, but barely . The last long shafts of the
sinking sun burst through the chestnut trees, so the tender
spring green of their leaves bu rned with cool fire, brilliant
above the lengthening shadows. It was near evening, but it was
spring; the birds were still at it, chattering and courting. A
mockingbird sang from the forest nearby , in a medley of trills,
liquid ru ns, and odd yowls, wh ich she thought it must have
learned from her mother ’ s cat.
The air was growing nippy , and gooseflesh stippled her
arms and thighs—but Roger ’ s b ody against her own was very
warm. S he wrapped her arms a round his waist, the fingers of
one hand playing idly with the thicket of his short and curlies.
“What are you looking at?” sh e asked softly , for his eyes
were fixed on t he far side of the dooryard, where the trail
emer ged from the forest. The trailhead was dim, shadowed by
a growth of dark pines—but empty .
“I’m watching out for a snake bearing apples,” he said, and
laughed, then cleared his throa t. “Are ye hungry , Eve?” His
hand came down to twine with hers.
“Getting there. Are you?” He must be starving; they had had
only a hasty snack at midday .
“A ye, I am, but— ” He broke of f, hesitating, and his fingers
tightened in hers. “Y e’ll think I’ m mad, but—would ye mind if
I w ent to fetch wee Jem tonight, instead of waiting for the
morning? It’ s only , I’d feel a bit better to have him back.”
She squeezed his hand in return, her heart lifting.
“W e’ll both go. It’ s a great idea.”
“Maybe so, but it’ s five miles to McGillivrays’, too. It’ll be
long dark before we’re there.” H e was smiling, though, and his
body brushed against her breasts as he turned to face her .Something moved by her face, and she drew back sharply .
A ti ny caterpillar , green as the  leaves on which it fed and
vibrant against Roger ’ s dark hair , reared itself into an S-shape,
looking vainly for sanctuary .
“What?” Roger slid his eyes sideways, trying to see what
she was looking at.
“Found your snake. I expect he’ s looking for an apple, too.”
She coaxed the tiny worm onto her finger , stepped outside, and
squatted to let it crawl onto a grass blade that matched its vivid
green. B ut the grass was in shad ow . In only an instant, the sun
had gone down, the forest no longer the color of life.
A thread of smo ke reached her nose; chimney smoke from
the Big House, but her throat c losed at the smell of burning.
Suddenly her uneasiness was stronger . The light was fading,
night co ming on . The mockingbird had fallen silent, and the
forest seemed full of mystery and threat.
She rose to her feet, shoving a hand through her hair .
“Let’ s go, then.”
“Do ye not wan t supper , first?” Roger looked quizzically at
her , breeches in hand.
She shook her head, chill beginning to creep up her legs.
“No. Le t’ s just go.” Nothing se emed to matter , save to get
Jem, and be together again, a family .
“All right,” Roger said mildly , eyeing her . “I do think ye’d
best put on your fig leaf first, though. Just in case we meet an
angel with a flaming sword.”5
THE SHADOWS WHICH
 FIRE THROWS
I  ABANDONED IAN AND ROLLO to the juggernaut of
Mrs. Bug’ s benevolence—let Ian try telling her  he didn ’ t want
bread an d milk—and sat down to my own belated supper: a
hot, fresh omelette, featuring not only cheese, but bits of salty
bacon, asparagu s, and wild mu shroom, flavored with spring
onions.
Jamie an d the Major had finished their own meals already ,
and sat by the fire beneath a companionable fug of tobacco
smoke from the Major ’ s clay p ipe. Evidently , Jamie had just
finished telling Major MacDonald about the gruesome tragedy ,
for MacDonald was frowning and shaking his head in
sympathy .
“Puir go merels!” he said. “Y e’ll be thinking that it was the
same banditti, perhaps, who set upon your nephew?”
“I am,” Jamie replied. “I shouldna like to think there were
two such bands prowling the mountains.” He glanced toward
the window , cozily shuttered for the night, and I noticed
suddenly that he had taken down his fowling piece from over
the h earth and w as absently wiping the spotless barrel with an
oily rag. “Do I gather , a charaid,  that ye’ve heard some report
of similar doings?”
“Three o thers. A t least.” The M ajor ’ s pipe threatened to go
out, and he dre w on it mightily , making the tobacco in the
bowl glow and crackle sudden red.
A small qualm m ade me pause, a bite of mushroom warm in
my mouth. The possibility that a mysterious gang of armed
men might be roaming at lar ge, attacking homesteads at
random, had not occurred to me ‘til this moment.Obviously , it had occurred to Jamie; he rose, put the fowling
piece back on its hooks, touched the rifle that hung above it for
reassurance, then went to the sideboard, where his dags and
the case with its elegant pair of dueling pistols were kept.
MacDonald watched with approval, puf fing clouds of soft
blue smoke, as Jamie methodically laid out guns, shot
pouches, bullet molds, patches, rods, and all the other
impedimenta of his personal armory .
“Mmphm,” MacDonald said. “A verra nice piece, that,
Colonel.” He nodded at one of the dags, a long-barreled,
elegant thing with a scroll butt and silver -gilt fittings.
Jamie g ave M acDonald a narrow glance, hearing the
“Colonel,” but answered calmly enough.
“A ye, it’ s a bonny thing. It doesna aim true at anything over
two pac es, thou gh. W on it in a horse race,” he added, with a
small apologetic  gesture at the gun, lest MacDonald think him
fool enough to have paid good money for it.
He checked the flint nonetheless, replaced it, and set the gun
aside.
“Where?” Jamie said casually , reaching for the bullet mold.
I h ad resumed c hewing, but looked inquiringly at the Major
myself.
“Mind, it’ s only what I’ve he ard,” MacDonald warned,
taking t he pipe from his mout h for a moment, then hastily
putting it back f or another puf f. “A homestead some distance
from Salem, burned to the ground. Folk called Zinzer—
Germans.” He sucked hard, cheeks hollowing.
“That was in February , late in the month. Then three weeks
later , a ferry , on  the Y adkin north of W oram’ s Landing—the
house robbed, and the ferryman  killed. The third—” Here he
broke of f, puf fing furiously , and  cut his eyes at me, then back
at Jamie.
“Speak, o, friend,” Jamie said in Gaelic, looking resigned.
“She will have been seeing more dreadful things than youhave, by far .”
I n odde d at this, forking up another bite of egg, and the
Major coughed.
“A ye. W ell, saving your presence, mum—I happened to find
myself in a, er , establishment in Edenton… .”
“A brothel?” I put in. “Y es, quite. Do go on, Major .”
He did, rather h urriedly , his face flushing dark beneath his
wig.
“Ah … to be sure. W ell, d’ye see, ‘twas one of the, er , lasses
in the place, told me as she’d been stolen from her home by
outlaws who set upon the place one day without warning.
She’d no but an  auld grannie s he lived with, and said they’d
kilt the auld woman, and burned the house above her head.”
“And w ho did she say had done it?” Jamie had turned his
stool to face the hearth, and wa s melting lead scrap in a ladle
for the bullet mold.
“Ah, mmphm.” MacDonald’ s flush deepened, and the
smoke fumed from his pipe w ith such ferocity that I could
barely make out his features through the curling wreaths.
It transp ired, wi th much coughing and circumlocution, that
the M ajor had not really believe d the girl at the time—or had
been too interested in availing himself of her charms to pay
much at tention. Putting the story down simply as one of the
tales whores often told to elici t sympathy and the odd extra
glass of geneva, he had not bothered to ask for further detail.
“But when I hea rd by chance la ter of the other burnings …
well, d’y e see, I’ve had the luck to be char ged by the Governor
with keeping an ear to the ground, as it were, in the
backcountry , for  signs of unrest.  And I began to think that this
particular instan ce of unrest was  maybe not just sae much of a
coincidence as might at first appear .”
Jamie an d I exchanged glances at that, Jamie’ s tinged with
amusement, mine with resignation. He’d bet me that
MacDonald—a half-pay cavalry of ficer who survived byfreelancing—would not only survive Governor T ryon’ s
resignation, but would succeed in worming his way promptly
into some position with the new  regime, now that T ryon had
left to take up a superior position as governor of New Y ork.
“He’ s a gentleman o’ fortune, our Donald,”  he’d said.
The militant smell of hot lead b egan to permeate the room,
competing with the Major ’ s pipe smoke, and quite
overpowering th e pleasantly domestic atmosphere of rising
bread, co oking, dried herbs, scouring rushes, and lye soap that
normally filled the kitchen.
Lead m elts suddenly; one instant, a deformed bullet or a
bent but ton sits in the ladle, whole and distinct; the next, it’ s
gone, a tiny pu ddle of metal s himmering dully in its place.
Jamie po ured th e molten lead ca refully into the mold, averting
his face from the fumes.
“Why Indians?”
“Ah. W ell, ‘twas what the whor e in Edenton said. She said
some of those w ho burned her house and stole her away were
Indians. But as I say , at the time I paid her story little mind.”
Jamie made a Scottish noise indicating that he took the
point, but with skepticism.
“And when did ye meet this la ssie, Donald, and hear her
story?”
“Near Christmas.” The Major poked at the bowl of his pipe
with a stained forefinger , not looking up. “Y e mean when was
her h ouse attacked? She didna s ay , but I think … perhaps not
too l ong before. She was still … fairly , er , fresh.” He coughed,
caught my eye, caught his bre ath, and coughed again, hard,
going red in the face.
Jamie’ s mouth pressed tight, and he looked down, flipping
open the mold to drop a new-made ball onto the hearth.
I put down my fork, the remnants of appetite vanished.
“How?” I demanded. “How did this young woman come to
be in the brothel?”“Why , they sold her , mum.” The flush still stained
MacDonald’ s cheeks, but he had recovered his countenance
enough to look at me. “The brigands. They sold her to a river
trader , she said, a few days after they’d stolen her . He kept her
for a bit, on his boat, but then a man came one night to do
business, took a fancy to her , an d bought her . He brought her
as far as the coa st, but I suppose he’d tired of her by then… .”
His words trailed of f, and he stuck the pipe back into his
mouth, drawing hard.
“I see.” I did, and the half of the omelette I’d eaten lay in a
small hard ball in the bottom of my stomach.
“Still fairly fr esh.”  How long did it take, I wondered? How
long wo uld a woman last, pass ed from hand to casual hand,
from the splintered planks of a riverboat’ s deck to the tattered
mattress of a hired room, give n only what would keep her
alive? It was m ore than possible that the brothel in Edenton
had seem ed a haven of sorts by  the time she reached it. The
thought didn’ t make me feel any more kindly toward
MacDonald, though.
“Do you remember her name at least, Major?” I asked, with
icy courtesy .
I tho ught I saw the edge of Jam ie’ s mouth twitch, from the
corner of my eye, but kept my stare focused on MacDonald.
He t ook the pipe from his mouth, exhaled a long stream of
smoke, then looked up into my face, his eyes pale blue and
very direct.
“In truth, mum,” he said, “I jus t call them all Polly . Saves
trouble, ken?”
I was saved from reply—or from something worse—by the
return of Mrs. Bug, bearing an empty bowl.
“The laddie’ s eaten, and now he’ll sleep,” she announced.
Her sharp eyes flicked from my face to my half-empty plate.
She ope ned her  mouth, frowning, but then glanced at Jamie,
and seem ing to pick up some u nspoken command from him,shut her mouth again, and picked up the plate with a brief
“hmp!”
“Mrs. Bug,” said Jamie quietly . “W ill ye awa’ just now , and
ask Arch to com e down to me? And, if it’ s no troubling ye too
much, the same word to Roger Mac?”
Her sma ll black eyes went round, then narrowed as she
glanced at MacDonald, obviously suspecting that if there were
mischief afoot, he was behind it.
“I will,” she said , and shaking her head with admonishment
at me for my lack of appetite, she put down the dishes and
went out, leaving the door on the latch.
“W oram’ s Land ing,” Jamie said to MacDonald, resuming
their conversation as though it had not been interrupted. “And
Salem. A nd if it is the same men, Y oung Ian met them in the
forest, a day’ s travel west of here. Near enough.”
“Near enough to be the same? A ye, it is.”
“It’ s ear ly in the spring.” Jamie glanced at the window as he
spoke; it was d ark now , and th e shutters closed, but a cool
breeze crept through and stirred the threads where I had strung
mushrooms to dry , dark wizened shapes that swayed like tiny
dancers, frozen against the pale wood.
I knew what he meant by that. The ground in the mountains
was impassable during the winter; the high passes still held
snow , a nd the lower slopes h ad only begun to green and
blossom in the l ast few weeks. If there was an or ganized gang
of m arauders, they might only now be moving into the
backcountry , after a winter spent lying low in the piedmont.
“It is,” MacDonald agreed. “Early enough, perhaps, to have
folk on their gu ard. But before your men come, sir—perhaps
we should speak of what brought me?”
“A ye?” Jamie said, squinting carefully as he poured a
glittering stream  of lead. “Of course, Donald. I should have
kent no small matter would bring ye so far . What is it?”
MacDonald smiled like a shark; now we’d come to it.“Y e’ve done well wi’ your plac e here, Colonel. How many
families it is ye have on your land the noo?”
“Thirty-four ,” Jamie said. He didn’ t look up, but turned out
another bullet into the ashes.
“Room for a few more, perhaps?” MacDonald was still
smiling. W e were surrounded by thousands of miles of
wilderness; the handful of homesteads on Fraser ’ s Ridge made
scarcely a dent in it—and could  vanish like smoke. I thought
momentarily of the Dutch cabin, and shivered, despite the fire.
I cou ld still taste  the bitter , cloying smell of burned flesh, thick
in th e back of my throat, lurking beneath the lighter flavors of
the omelette.
“Perhaps,” Jam ie replied equably . “The new Scottish
emigrants, is it? From up past Thurso?”
Major MacDonald and I both stared at him.
“How the devil d’ye ken that?” MacDonald demanded. “I
heard it myself only ten days since!”
“Met a man at th e mill yesterday ,” Jamie replied, picking up
the ladle again. “A gentleman from Philadelphia, come into
the mountains to collect plants . He’d come up from Cross
Creek and seen them.” A mus cle near his mouth twitched.
“Apparently , the y made a bit of a stir at Brunswick, and didna
feel them selves quite welcome,  so they came up the river on
flatboats.”
“A bit of a stir? What did they do?” I asked.
“W ell, d’ye see, mum,” the Ma jor explained, “there are a
great many folk come flooding  of f ships these days, straight
from the  Highla nds. Whole villages, packed into the bowels of
a ship—and looking as though they’ve been shat out when
they disembark, too. There’ s nothing for them on the coast,
though, and the townsfolk are inclined to point and snigger ,
seein’ them in t heir outlandish rig—so for the most part, they
get straight onto a bar ge or a flatboat and head up the Cape
Fear . Ca mpbelton and Cross Creek at least have folk who can
talk to them.”He g rinned at m e, brushing a smudge of dirt from the skirts
of his uniform coat.
“The fol k in Brunswick willna be quite accustomed to such
rawboned Highlanders, they having seen only such civilized
Scotch persons as your husband and his aunt.”
He n odded toward Jamie, who g ave him a small, ironic bow
in return.
“W ell, r elatively civilized,” I murmured. I was not ready to
for give MacDonald for the whore in Edenton. “But—”
“They’ve barely a word of English among them, from what
I hear ,” MacDonald hurried o n. “Farquard Campbell came
down t o speak  wi’ them, a nd brought them north to
Campbelton, or  I doubt not but they’d be milling about
onshore yet, wi’ no notion at all where to go or what to do
next.”
“What’ s Campbell done wi’ them?” Jamie inquired.
“Ah, th ey’re parceled out amongst his acquaintance in
Campbelton, bu t ‘twon’ t suit in  the long run, ye can see that,
of course.” MacDonald shrugged. Campbelton was a small
settlement near  Cross Creek, centered around Farquard
Campbell’ s successful trading store, and the land around it was
entirely settled— mostly by Campbells. Farquard had eight
children, many of whom were also married—and as fertile as
their father .
“Of course,” Jamie said, looking wary . “But they’re from
the northern coast. They’ll be fishermen, Donald, not
crofters.”
“A ye, but they’re willing to make a change, no?”
MacDonald gestured toward the door , and the forest beyond.
“There’ s nothing for them left in Scotland. They’ve come here,
and now  they must make the best of it. A man can learn to
farm, surely?”
Jamie looked rather dubious, but MacDonald was in the full
flush of his enthusiasm.“I’ve seen many a fisher -lad and  plowboy become a soldier ,
man, an d so have you, I’ll wager . Farming’ s no more dif ficult
than soldiering, surely?”
Jamie smiled a l ittle at that; he had left farming at nineteen
and fought as a mercenary in France for several years before
returning to Scotland.
“A ye, w ell, that’ s maybe true, Donald. But the thing about
being a soldier is that someone’ s tellin’ ye what to do, from the
moment ye rise until ye fall dow n at night. Who’ s to tell these
poor wee gomerels which end o’ the cow to milk?”
“That would be you, I expect,”  I said to him. I stretched
myself, easing my back, stif f fr om riding, and glanced across
at M acDonald. “Or at least I  suppose that’ s what you’re
getting at, Major?”
“Y our charm is exceeded only by your quickness of wit,
mum,” said MacDonald, bowin g gracefully in my direction.
“A ye, that’ s the meat of it. All your folk are Highlanders, sir ,
and crof ters; they can speak to these newcomers in their own
tongue, show them what they’ll need to know—help them to
make their way .”
“There are a good many other folk in the colony who have
the Gaidhlig, ” Jamie objected. “And most of them a great deal
more convenient to Campbelton.”
“A ye, but you’ve vacant land that needs clearing, and they
haven’ t.” Obviously feeling that he had won the ar gument,
MacDonald sat back and took up his neglected mug of beer .
Jamie lo oked at  me, one eyebr ow raised. It was perfectly
true that we had  vacant land: ten thousand acres, but barely
twenty of them under cultivation. It was also true that lack of
labor was acute in the entire colony , but even more so in the
mountains, where the land didn’ t lend itself to tobacco or rice
—the sorts of crops suited to slave labor .
At the same time, though—
“The dif ficulty is, Donald, how  to settle them.” Jamie bent
to turn out an other ball on the hearth, and straightened,brushing back a loose strand o f auburn hair behind his ear .
“I’ve land, aye, but little else. Y e canna be loosing folk straight
from Scotland into the wilderne ss, and expect them to claw a
living out of it. I couldna even g ive them the shoon and suit of
clothes a  bondsman would have, let alone tools. And to feed
them and all th eir wives and weans through the winter? T o
of fer them protection?” He lifted his ladle in illustration, then
shook his head and dropped in another lump of lead.
“Ah, protection. W ell, since ye’ve mentioned that, let me
proceed to another wee matter of interest.” MacDonald leaned
forward, lowering his voice confidentially , though there was
no one to hear .
“I’ve sai d I’m the Governor ’ s m an, aye? He’ s char ged me to
travel about, over the western p art of the colony , and keep an
ear to the ground. There are Regulators still unpardoned,
and”—he glanced warily to and fro, as though expecting one
of these  persons to bound out of the fireplace—”ye’ll have
heard of the Committees of Safety?”
“A bit.”
“Y e’ll not have one established yet, here in the
backcountry?”
“Not that I’ve heard of, no.” Jamie had run out of lead to
melt, an d now stooped to scoop  the new-made balls from the
ashes at his feet , the warm light  of the fire glowing red on the
crown o f his head. I sat down beside him on the settle, picking
up the shot pouch from the table and holding it open for him.
“Ah,” said MacDonald, looking pleased. “I see I’ve come in
good time, then.”
In th e wake of the civil unrest that surrounded the W ar of
the Regulation a year before,  a number of such informal
citizens’ groups had sprung up, inspired by similar groups in
the other colonies. If the Crown was no longer able to assure
the safet y of the colonists, they ar gued, then they must take the
matter into their own hands.The sherif fs could no longer be  trusted to keep order; the
scandals that had inspired th e Regulator movement had
assured that. The dif ficulty , of course, was that since the
committees were self-appointed, there was no more reason to
trust them than the sherif fs.
There were other committees, too. The Committees of
Correspondence, loose associations of men who wrote letters
to and fro, spreading news and rumor between the colonies.
And it was out of these various committees that the seeds of
rebellion woul d spring—were germinating even now ,
somewhere out in the cold spring night.
As I did now and then—and much more often, now—I
reckoned up the time remaining. It was nearly April of 1773
And on the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five … as
Longfellow so quaintly put it …
T wo years. But war has a long fuse, and a slow match. This
one had been lit at Alamance, and the bright, hot lines of the
creeping fire in North Carolina were already visible—for those
who knew to look.
The lead balls i n the shot pouch I held rolled and clicked
together; my fingers had tightened on the leather . Jamie saw it
and touched my knee, quick and light, in reassurance, then
took the pouch and rolled it up , tucking it into the cartridge
box.
“Good time,” he repeated, looking at MacDonald. “What
d’ye mean by that, Donald?”
“Why , who should lead such a committee other than
yourself, Colone l? I had sugges ted as much to the Governor .”
MacDonald tried to look modest, and failed.
“V erra obliging of ye, Major ,” Jamie said dryly . He raised
an eyebr ow at me. The state of the colony’ s government must
be w orse even t han he had supposed, for Governor Martin to
be not only tolerating the existence of the committees—but
clandestinely sanctioning them.The long-drawn  whine of a dog’ s yawn reached me faintly
from the hall, and I excused myself, to go and check on Ian.
I wondered whether Governor Martin had the slightest idea
what he was loo sing. I rather thought he did, and was making
the best of a bad job, by trying to ensure that some, at least, of
the Committees  of Safety were run by men who had backed
the Crown during the W ar o f the Regulation. The fact
remained that he could not control—or even know about—
many such committees. But the colony was beginning to
seethe an d bump  like a teakettle  on the boil, and Martin had no
of ficial troops at his command, only such irregulars as
MacDonald—and the militia.
Which was why MacDonald was calling Jamie “Colonel,”
of course. The previous governor , W illiam T ryon, had
appointed Jamie —quite against his will—colonel of militia for
the backcountry above the Y adkin.
“Hmph,” I said to myself. Neither MacDonald nor Martin
was a fool. Inviting Jamie to set up a Committee of Safety
meant that he w ould call upon those men who had served
under him in the militia—but would commit the government
to nothi ng, in terms of paying or equipping them—and the
Governor would be clear of any responsibility for their
actions, since a Committee of Safety was not an of ficial body .
The danger to Jamie—and all of us—in accepting such a
proposal, though—that was considerable.
It was dark in the hall, with no light but the spill from the
kitchen behind me, and the fain t glow of the single candle in
the sur gery . Ian was asleep, b ut restless, a faint frown of
discomfort wrinkling the soft skin between his brows. Rollo
raised h is head, thick tail swishing to and fro across the floor
in greeting.
Ian didn ’ t respo nd when I spok e his name, or when I set a
hand on  his shoulder . I shook h im gently , then harder . I could
see him struggling, somew here under the layers of
unconsciousness, like a man drifting in the underwatercurrents, yielding to the beckoning depths, then snagged by an
unexpected fishhook, a stab of pain in cold-numbed flesh.
His eyes opened suddenly , dark and lost, and he stared at me
in incomprehension.
“Hallo there,” I said softly , relieved to see him wake.
“What’ s your name?”
I could see that the question made no sense to him at once,
and repeated it, patiently . A wareness stirred somewhere in the
depths of his dilated pupils.
“Who am I?” h e said in Gaelic. He said something else,
slurred, in Mohawk, and his eyelids fluttered, closing.
“W ake up, Ian,” I said firmly , resuming the shaking. “T ell
me who you are.”
His eyes opened again, and he squinted at me in confusion.
“T ry something easier ,” I suggested, holding up two fingers.
“How many fingers do you see?”
A flicker of awareness sprang up in his eyes.
“Dinna let Arch Bug see ye do that, Auntie,” he said
drowsily , the hint of a smile touching his face. “That’ s verra
rude, ken.”
W ell, at least he had recognized me, as well as the “V” sign;
that was  someth ing. And he mu st know who he was, if he was
calling me Auntie.
“What’ s your full name?” I asked again.
“Ian James FitzGibbons Fraser Murray ,” he said, rather
crossly . “Why d’ye keep asking me my name?”
“FitzGibbons?” I said. “Where on earth did you get that
one?”
He g roaned and put two fingers against his eyelids, wincing
as he pressed gently .
“Uncle J amie gave it me—blame him,” he said. “It’ s for his
auld godfather , he said. Murtagh FitzGibbons Fraser , he wascalled, but my m other didna want me named Murtagh. I think
I’m going to puke again,” he added, taking his hand away .
In the event, he heaved and retched a bit over the basin, but
didn’ t actually vomit, which was a good sign. I eased him back
onto his  side, white and clamm y with sweat, and Rollo stood
on his hind legs, front paws br aced on the table, to lick his
face, which made him giggle be tween groans and try feebly to
push the dog away .
“Theirig dhachaigh, Okwaho,”  h e said. “Theirig
dhachaigh” meant “go home,” in Gaelic, and Okwaho was
evidently Rollo’ s Mohawk name. Ian seemed to be having
some dif ficulty choosing among the three languages in which
he w as f luent, b ut was obviously lucid, in spite of that. After I
had made him answer a few more annoyingly pointless
questions, I wiped his face with a damp cloth, let him rinse his
mouth with well-watered wine, and tucked him in again.
“Auntie?” he said drowsily , as I was turning for the door .
“D’ye think I’ll ever see my Mam again?”
I stoppe d, havin g no idea how to answer that. In fact, there
was no need; he had dropped back into sleep with the
suddenness that  concussion patients often showed, and was
breathing deeply before I could find any words.6
AMBUSH
I AN WOKE ABRUPTL Y , hand closing round his tomahawk.
Or what  should have been his tomahawk, but was instead a
handful of breeches. For an in stant, he had no notion at all
where h e was, and sat up straigh t, trying to make out shapes in
the dark.
Pain shot through his head like  heat lightning, making him
gasp sou ndlessly and clutch it. Somewhere in the dark below
him, Rollo gave a small, startled wuff ?
Christ. The piercing smells of h is aunt’ s sur gery stabbed the
back of his nose, alcohol and burned wick and dried medicine
leaves and the foul brews she called penny-syllin. He closed
his e yes, put his  forehead on his drawn-up knees, and breathed
slowly through his mouth.
What had he been dreaming? Some dream of danger ,
something violent—but no clea r image came to him, only the
feel of being stalked, something following him through the
wood.
He h ad t o piss, badly . Fumbling  for the edge of the table he
lay o n, h e eased  himself slowly upright, squinting against the
flashes of pain in his head.
Mrs. Bug had le ft him a pot, he remembered her saying so,
but t he c andle h ad gone out and  he’d no mind to crawl round
the f loor looking for it. Faint light showed him where the door
was; she  had left it ajar , and a glow spread down the hall from
the kitch en hearth. W ith that as  bearing, he made his way to
the window , got it open, fumb led free the shutter fastening,
and stoo d in the flood of air from the cool spring night, eyes
closed in relief as his bladder eased.
That was better , though with the  relief came new awareness
of the queasiness of his stomach and the throbbing in his head.He sat down, putting his arms on  his knees and his head on his
arms, waiting for everything to ease.
There were voices in the kit chen; he could hear them
clearly , now that he paid attention.
It w as Uncle Jam ie and yon MacDonald, and old Arch Bug,
as well, with Au ntie Claire now and again putting in a word,
her English voice sharp by con trast with the gruf f mutter of
Scots and Gaelic.
“W ould ye care, perhaps, to be an Indian agent?”
MacDonald was saying.
What was that? he wondered—t hen it came to him. A ye, of
course; the Crown employed men to go out to the tribes, of fer
them gif ts, tobacco, and knives a nd the like. T ell them silliness
about German Geordie, as though the King was like to come
and sit down by the council fire s at the next Rabbit Moon and
speak like a man.
He smil ed grimly to think of  it. The notion was plain
enough; cozen the Indians to fight for the English, when
fighting was needed. But why  should they think it needed
now? The French had yielded, retreated to their northern
foothold in Canada.
Oh. He remembered belatedly what Brianna had told him
about the new fighting to come. He’d not known whether to
believe her—perhaps she was right, though, in which case …
he didn’ t want to think about it. Or about anything.
Rollo padded over to him, sat and leaned heavily against
him. He leaned back, resting his head in the thick fur .
An Ind ian age nt had come once, while he lived in
Snaketown. A fat wee fellow , shifty-eyed and with a tremble
in his voice. He thought the man—Christ, what was his name?
The Mo hawk had called him Bad Sweat, and that fit; he stank
as th ough with a mortal illness— he thought the man was not
accustomed to the Kahnyen’kehaka; he’d not much of their
speech, and plainly expected them to take his scalp at any
moment, something they had thought hilarious—and one ortwo would likely have tried  it, for a joke, save that
T ewaktenyonh s aid to treat him with respect. Ian had been
pressed to interpret for him, a j ob he’d done, though without
much pleasure in it. He would much sooner think himself
Mohawk than acknowledge any kinship with Bad Sweat.
Uncle Jamie, though … he’d make a better job of it, by far .
W ould he do it? Ian listened to the voices with a vague sense
of interest, but it was clear that Uncle Jamie would not be
pressed for a decision. MacDonald might as soon get a grip on
a frog in a sp ring, he thought, hearing his uncle elude
commitment.
He sighe d, put his arm around Rollo, and eased more of his
weight onto the dog. He felt aw ful. He would have supposed
he was dying, sa ve that Auntie Claire had said he’d feel poorly
for several days. He was sure she would have stayed if he were
dying, not gone and left him with only Rollo for company .
The shu tters were still open, an d cold air poured over him,
chilly an d soft at once, the way spring nights were. He felt
Rollo raise his nose, snif fing, and utter a low , eager whine.
Possum, maybe, or a raccoon.
“Go on,  then,” he said, straighte ning up and giving the dog
a small push. “I’m fine.”
The dog snif fed him suspiciousl y , and tried to lick the back
of h is head, wh ere the stitches were, but left of f when Ian
yelped and covered them with his hands.
“Go, I said!” H e cuf fed the dog  gently , and Rollo snorted,
circled once, then sailed over his head and out through the
window , hitting the ground outside with a solid thump. A
frightful screech rent the air and there was the sound of
scrabbling feet and heavy bodies tearing through shrubbery .
Startled voices came from the d irection of the kitchen, and
he h eard Uncle Jamie’ s step in the hall, an instant before the
sur gery door pushed in.
“Ian?” called his uncle softly . “ Where are ye, lad? What’ s
amiss?”He stood up, but a sheet of blinding white came down inside
his e yes and he staggered. Uncle Jamie caught him by the arm,
and set him down on a stool.
“What is  it, lad?” His vision cle aring, he could see his uncle
in the light from the door , rifle in one hand, his face looking
concerned but humorous as he glanced toward the open
window . He snif fed deeply . “Not a skunk, I suppose.”
“A ye, w ell, I suppose it’ s one thing or the other ,” Ian said,
touching his head gingerly . “Either Rollo’ s gone after a
painter , or he’ s treed Auntie’ s cat.”
“Oh, aye. He’d fare better wi’ the painter .” His uncle set the
rifle dow n and went to the wind ow . “Shall I close the shutter ,
or d’ye need the air , lad? Y ou’re that bit peaked.”
“I feel peaked,”  Ian admitted. “A ye, leave it, if ye will,
Uncle.”
“Shall ye rest, Ian?”
He h esitated. His stomach still lurched uneasily and he felt
very mu ch that he would like  to lie down again—but the
sur gery made him uneasy , with its strong smells and the glints
here and there o f tiny blades and other mysterious and painful
things. Uncle Jamie seemed to guess the trouble, for he bent
and got a hand under Ian’ s elbow .
“Come along, lad. Y e can sleep upstairs in a proper bed, if
ye dinna mind Major MacDonald in the other .”
“I dinna  mind,” he said, “but I’ll stay here, I think.” He
gestured toward the window , not wanting to nod and bother his
head again. “Rollo will likely be back soon.”
Uncle Jamie didn’ t ar gue with him, something he was
grateful for . W omen fussed. Men just got on with it.
His uncle boosted him unceremoniously back into his bed,
covered him up, then began r ootling about in the dark, in
search o f the rifle he had put down. Ian began to feel that
perhaps he could do with just a wee bit of fuss, after all.
“Could ye get me a cup o’ water , Uncle Jamie?”“Eh? Oh, aye.”
Auntie Claire had left a jug of water close to hand. There
was the comfortable sound of glugging liquid, and then the rim
of a pott ery cup held to his mouth, his uncle’ s hand at his back
to keep him upright. He didn’ t need it, but didn’ t object; the
touch was warm and comforting. He hadn’ t realized how
chilled he was from the night air , and shivered briefly .
“All right, laddie?” Uncle Ja mie murmured, his hand
tightening on Ian’ s shoulder .
“A ye, fine. Uncle Jamie?”
“Mphm?”
“Did Auntie Claire tell ye about—about a war? One
coming, I mean. W ith England.”
There w as a moment’ s silence,  his uncle’ s big form gone
still against the light from the door .
“She ha s,” he said, and took away his hand. “Did she tell
you?”
“No, Cousin Brianna did.” He l ay down on his side, careful
of his tender head. “D’ye believe them?”
There was no hesitation this time.
“A ye, I do.” It was said with his  uncle’ s usual dry matter -of-
factness, but something in it pri ckled the hairs on the back of
Ian’ s neck.
“Oh. W ell, then.”
The goose-down pillow was soft under his cheek, and
smelled of lavender . His uncle’ s hand touched his head,
smoothed the ruf fled hair back from his face.
“Dinna fash yourself about it, I an,” he said softly . “There’ s
time, yet.”
He p icked up th e gun and left. From where he lay , Ian could
see across the dooryard and above the trees where theydropped from the edge of the Ridge, past the slope of Black
Mountain, and on into the black sky beyond, thick with stars.
He hear d the back door open, and Mrs. Bug’ s voice, rising
high above the others.
“They’re no to h ame, sir ,” she was saying, breathless. “And
the hoose is dark, no fire in the hearth. Wherever might they
go, this time o’ night?”
He w ondered dimly who was gone, but it didn’ t seem to
matter much. If it was trouble, U ncle Jamie would deal with it.
The thou ght was comforting; he felt like a small boy , safe in
bed, hearing his father ’ s voice outside, talking to a tenant in
the cold dark of a Highland dawn.
W armth spread slowly over him beneath the quilt, and he
slept.
THE MO ON W AS beginning to rise when they set out, and a
good thing, too, Brianna thought. Even with the big, lopsided
gold orb sailing up out of a cradle of stars and shedding its
borrowed radiance over the sky , the trail beneath their feet was
invisible. So were their feet, dro wned in the absolute black of
the forest at night.
Black, but not q uiet. The giant trees rustled overhead, small
things squealed and snuf fled in t he dark, and now and then the
silent fl utter of a bat passed close enough to startle her , as
though p art of the night had suddenly come loose and taken
wing under her nose.
“The Minister ’ s Cat is an apprehensive cat?” Roger
suggested, as she gasped and c lutched at him in the wake of
one such leather -winged visitation.
“The Minister ’ s  Cat is an … appreciative cat,” she replied,
squeezing his hand. “Thank you.” They’d likely end up
sleeping on their cloaks in front of the McGillivrays’ fire,
instead of cozily tucked up in  their own bed—but at least
they’d have Jemmy .He squeezed back, his hand big ger and stronger than hers,
very reassuring in the dark.
“It’ s all right,” h e said. “I want him, too. It’ s a night to have
your family all together , safe in one place.”
She mad e a small sound in her throat, acknowledgment and
appreciation, bu t wanted to keep  up the conversation, as much
to k eep the sense of connection  with him as because it would
keep the dark at bay .
“The Minister ’ s Cat was a ve ry eloquent cat,” she said
delicately . “At the—the funeral, I mean. For those poor
people.”
Roger snorted; she saw the brief  curl of his breath, white on
the air .
“The Mi nister ’ s Cat was a highl y embarrassed cat,” he said.
“Y our father!”
She smiled, since he couldn’ t see her .
“Y ou did really well,” she said mildly .
“Mmphm,” he said, with another brief snort. “As for
eloquence … if there was any , it was none of mine. All I did
was quote bits of some psalm— I couldna even tell ye which it
was.”
“It didn’ t matter . Why did you pick—what you said,
though?” she asked, curious. “I  sort of thought you’d say the
Lord’ s P rayer , o r maybe the T w enty-Third Psalm—everybody
knows that one.”
“I thoug ht I would, too,” he admitted. “I meant to. But when
I came to it …” He hesitated, and she saw in memory those
raw , cold mounds, and shivered, smelling soot. He tightened
his g rasp on her  hand, and drew her closer , tucking the hand
into the crook of his elbow .
“I don’ t know ,” he said gruf fly . “It just seemed—more
suitable, somehow .”“It was,” she s aid quietly , but didn’ t pursue the subject,
choosing instead  to steer the conversation into a discussion of
her lates t engineering project, a hand pump to raise water from
the well.
“If I had something to use for pipe, I could get water into
the hous e, easy as anything! I’ve already got most of the wood
I need for a nice  cistern, if I can get Ronnie to cooper it for me
—so we can sho wer with rainwater , at least. But hollowing out
tree limbs”—the method employed for the small amount of
piping used for the pump—”i t would take me months to
manage enough just to get from the well to the house, let alone
the stream. And there’ s not a chance of getting any rolled
copper . Even if we could af ford  any , which we can’ t, bringing
it up from W ilmington would be—” She threw her free hand
up in frustration at the monumental nature of the undertaking.
He considered that for a bit, the chuf f of their shoes on the
rocky trail a comforting rhythm.
“W ell, the ancient Romans did it with concrete; the recipe’ s
in Pliny .”
“I know . But it takes a particular kind of sand, which we
don’ t happen to have. Likewise, quicklime, which we likewise
don’ t have. And—”
“A ye, but what a bout clay?” he interrupted. “Did ye see that
plate at Hilda’ s wedding? The b ig brown and red one, with the
beautiful patterns?”
“Y es,” she said. “Why?”
“Ute McGillivray said someone from Salem brought it. I
dinna re call the name, but she s aid he was quite the big noise
in potting—or whatever ye call making dishes.”
“I’ll bet you any amount of money she didn’ t say that!”
“W ell, w ords to that ef fect.” He went on, undeterred. “The
point being that he made it her e;  it wasn’ t something he’d
brought from Germany . So there’ s clay about that’ s suitable
for firing, eh?”“Oh, I see.  Hmm. W ell, now , that’ s an idea, isn’ t it?”
It was, and an attractive one whose discussion occupied
them for most of the rest of the journey .
They had come down of f the  Ridge and were within a
quarter -mile of the McGillivrays’ place when she began to
have an uneasy feeling down th e back of her neck. It could  be
only im agination; after the sights they had seen in that
deserted hollow , the dark air of  the wood seemed thick with
threat, a nd she had been imagining ambush at every blind
bend, tensing with the anticipation of attack.
Then she heard something crack in the trees to her right—a
small dry branch breaking, in a way that neither wind nor
animal w ould break it. Real danger had its own taste, vivid as
lemon juice, by contrast with the weak lemonade of
imagination.
Her hand tightened on Roger ’ s arm in warning, and he
stopped at once.
“What?” he whispered, hand on his knife. “Where?” He
hadn’ t heard it.
Damn, why hadn’ t she brought her gun, or at least her own
dirk? All she had was her Swiss Army knife, carried always in
her pocket—and what weapons the landscape of fered.
She lean ed into Roger , pointing, her hand close to his body
to b e sure he followed the direction of her gesture. Then she
stooped, feeling  about in the darkness for a rock, or a stick to
use as a club.
“Keep talking,” she whispered.
“The Mi nister ’ s Cat is a fraidy cat, is she?” he said, his tone
one of fairly convincing teasing.
“The Minister ’ s Cat is a fer ocious  cat,” she replied , trying to
match his bantering tone, mean while fumbling one-handed in
her p ocket. Her other hand closed on a stone, and she pulled it
free of the clinging dirt, cold and heavy in her palm. She rose,all her senses focused on the darkness to their right. “She’ll
freaking disembowel anything that—”
“Oh, it’ s you,” said a voice in the woods behind her .
She shrieked, and Roger jerked in reflex, spun on his heel to
face the threat, grabbed her and thrust her behind him, all in
the same motion.
The push sent he r staggering backward. She caught a heel in
a hi dden root in the dark, and fell, landing hard on her
backside, from which position she had an excellent view of
Roger in the moonlight, knife in hand, char ging into the trees
with an incoherent roar .
Belatedly , she registered what the voice had said, as well as
the unm istakable tone of disappointment in it. A very similar
voice, loud with alarm, spoke from the wood on the right.
“Jo?” it said. “What? Jo, what?”
There was a lo t of thrashing a nd yelling going on in the
woods to the left. Roger ’d got his hands on someone.
“Roger!” she shouted. “Roger , stop! It’ s the Beardsleys!”
She’d d ropped the rock when s he fell, and now got to her
feet, rub bing th e dirt from her hand on the side of her skirt.
Her hear t was still pounding, he r left buttock was bruised, and
her ur ge to laugh was tinged with a strong desire to strangle
one or both of the Beardsley twins.
“Kezzie Beardsley , come out of there!” she bellowed, then
repeated it, even louder . Kezzie’ s hearing had improved after
her mother had removed his chronically infected tonsils and
adenoids, but he was still rather deaf.
A lo ud rustling in the brush yielded the slight form of
Keziah Beardsle y , dark-haired, white-faced, and armed with a
lar ge cl ub, which he swung of f his shoulder and tried
abashedly to hide behind him when he saw her .
Meanwhile, much louder rustling and a certain amount of
cursing behind her portended the emer gence of Roger ,
gripping the scrawny neck of Josiah Beardsley , Kezzie’ s twin.“What in  the name of God d’ye wee bastards think ye’re up
to?” Rog er said,  shoving Jo acro ss to stand by his brother in a
patch of moonlight. “D’ye realize I nearly killed you?”
There w as just enough light fo r Brianna to make out the
rather cynical expression that crossed Jo’ s face at this, before it
was erased and replaced with one of earnest apology .
“W e’re t hat sorr y , Mr . Mac. W e heard someone coming, and
thought it might be brigands.”
“Brigands,” Brianna repeated, feeling the ur ge to laugh
rising, b ut keepi ng it firmly in check. “Where on earth did you
get that word?”
“Oh.” Jo looked at his feet, hands clasped behind his back.
“Miss Lizzie was a-readin’ to us, from that book what Mr .
Jamie brought. ‘T was in there. About brigands.”
“I s ee.” She g lanced at Roger , who met her eye, his
annoyance obviously waning into amusement, as well. “The
Pirate Gow ,”  she explained. “Defoe.”
“Oh, aye .” Roge r sheathed his d irk. “And why , exactly , did
ye think there might be brigands coming?”
Kezzie, with the quirks of his erratic hearing, picked that up
and answered, as earnestly as his  brother , though his voice was
louder and slightly flat, the result of his early deafness.
“W e com e acros s Mr . Lindsay , s ir , on his way home, and he
did tell us what passed, up by D utchman’ s Creek. It’ s true, so,
what he said? They was all burned to cinders?”
“They were all dead.” Roger ’ s voice had lost any tinge of
amusement. “What’ s that to do with you lot lurking in the
woods with clubs?”
“W ell, you see, sir , McGillivrays’ is a fine, big place, what
with the  cooper ’ s shop and the new house and all, and being
on a road, like—well, if I  was a b rigand, sir , ‘tis just the s ort of
place I might choose,” replied Jo.
“And Miss Lizzie’ s there, with her Pap. And your son, Mr .
Mac,” Kezzie added pointedly . “Shouldn’ t want no harm tocome to ‘em.”
“I see.” Roger smiled a little crookedly . “W ell, thanks to ye,
then, for the kind thought. I doubt the brigands will be
anywhere near , though; Dutchman’ s Creek is a long way
away .”
“A ye, sir ,” Jo agreed. “But brigands might be anywhere,
mightn’ t they?”
This was undeniable, and suf ficiently true as to give
Brianna a renewed feeling of chill in the pit of the stomach.
“They might be, but they aren’ t,” Roger assured them.
“Come along to the house with  us, aye? W e’re just going to
collect wee Jem. I’m sure Frau  Ute would give ye a bed by the
fire.”
The Beardsleys  exchanged inscrutable looks. They were
nearly identica l—small and lithe, with thick dark hair ,
distinguished on ly by Kezzie’ s deafness and the round scar on
Jo’ s thumb—and to see the two fine-boned faces wearing
precisely the same expression was a little unnerving.
Whatever information had been exchanged by that look, it
had evidently included as much consultation as was required,
for Kezzie nodded slightly , deferring to his brother .
“Ah, no,  sir ,” Josiah said politel y . “W e’ll bide, I think.” And
with no further talk, the two of them turned and crunched of f
into the dark, scuf fling leaves and rocks as they went.
“Jo! W ait!” Brianna called after them, her hand having
found something else in the bottom of her pocket.
“A ye, ma’am?” Josiah was back, appearing by her elbow
with unsettling abruptness. His twin was no stalker , but Jo
was.
“Oh! I mean, oh, there you are. ” She took a deep breath to
slow her heart, a nd handed him the carved whistle she’d made
for G ermain. “Here. If you’re g oing to stand guard, this might
be helpful. T o call for help, if someone should  come.”Jo Beardsley had plainly never  seen a whistle before, but
didn’ t ca re to admit it. He turn ed the little object over in his
hand, trying not to stare at it.
Roger reached out, took it from  him, and blew a healthy
blast tha t shattered the night. Several birds, startled from their
rest, sho t out of the nearby tree s, shrieking, followed closely
by Kezzie Beardsley , eyes huge with amazement.
“Blow in that end,” Roger said, tapping the appropriate end
of th e whistle b efore handing it back. “Squeeze your lips a
bit.”
“Much obliged, sir ,” Jo murmured. His normal stoic facade
had shattered with the silence, a nd he took the whistle with the
wide-eyed look  of a boy on C hristmas morning, turning at
once to show the prize to his twin. It struck her quite suddenly
that neit her boy likely ever had  had a Christmas morning—or
any other sort of gift.
“I’ll make another one for you,”  she told Kezzie. “Then the
two of you can s ignal back and f orth. If you see any brigands,”
she added, smiling.
“Oh, yes , ma’am. W e’ll do that,  we surely will!” he assured
her , scarcely glancing at her in  his eagerness to examine the
whistle his brother had put in his hands.
“Blow it three t imes, if ye want help,” Roger called after
them, taking her arm.
“A ye, sir!” came back from th e darkness, followed by a
belated faint “Thank you, ma’am!”—this in turn followed at
once by a fusillade of puf fs, gasps, and breathless rattles,
punctuated by briefly successful shrill toots.
“Lizzie’ s been teaching them manners, I see,” Roger said.
“As we ll as their letters. D’y e think they’ll ever be truly
civilized, though?”
“No,” she said, with a trace of regret.
“Really?” She couldn’ t see his face in the dark, but heard
the s urprise in his voice. “I was only joking. Y e really thinknot?”
“I do—a nd no wonder , after the way they grew up. Did you
see the way they were with that  whistle? No one’ s ever given
them a present, or a toy .”
“I suppose not. D’ye think that’ s what makes boys
civilized? If so, I imagine wee Jem will be a philosopher or an
artist or something. Mrs. Bug spoils him rotten.”
“Oh, as  if you don’ t,” she said tolerantly . “And Da, and
Lizzie, and Mama, and everyone else in sight.”
“Oh, we ll,” Roger said, unembarrassed at the accusation.
“W ait ‘til he has  a bit of competition. Germain’ s in no danger
of sp oiling, is h e?” Germain, Fer gus and Marsali’ s eldest son,
was harr ied by two small sisters, known to one and all as the
hell-kittens, who followed their brother constantly , teasing and
pestering.
She laughed, but felt a slight sense of uneasiness. The
thought of another baby always made her feel as though she
were per ched at  the top of a rol ler coaster , short of breath and
stomach clenche d, poised somewhere between excitement and
terror . Particularly now , with the memory of their lovemaking
still softly heavy , shifting like mercury in her belly .
Roger seemed to sense her ambivalence, for he didn’ t
pursue t he subject, but reached for her hand and held it, his
own lar g e and warm. The air w as cold, the last vestiges of a
winter chill lingering in the hollows.
“What about Fer gus, then?” he asked, taking up an earlier
thread of the con versation. “From what I hear , he hadn’ t much
of a childhood, either , but he seems fairly civilized.”
“My aun t Jenny  had the raising of him from the time he was
ten,” sh e objected. “Y ou haven’ t met my aunt Jenny , but
believe me, she could have civ ilized Adolf Hitler , if she put
her min d to it. Besides, Fer gu s grew up in Paris, not the
backwoods—even if it was  in a brothel. And it sounds like it
was a pretty high-class brothel, too, from what Marsali tells
me.”“Oh, aye? What does she tell you?”
“Oh, jus t stories that he’ s told her , now and then. About the
clients, and the wh—the girls.”
“Can ye not say ‘whore,’ then?” he asked, amused. She felt
the blood rise in her cheeks, and was pleased that it was dark;
he teased her more when she blushed.
“I can’ t help it that I went to a  Catholic school,” she said,
defensive. “Early conditioning.” It was true; she couldn’ t say
certain w ords, save when in the grip of fury or when mentally
prepared. “Why  can you, though ? Y ou’d think a preacher ’ s lad
would have the same problem.”
He laughed, a little wryly .
“Not precisely the same problem. It was more a matter of
feeling obliged to curse and carry on in front of my friends, to
prove I could.”
“What kind of c arrying on?” she asked, scenting a story . He
didn’ t often talk about his early  life in Inverness, adopted by
his great-uncle, a Presbyterian minister , but she loved hearing
the small tidbits he sometimes let fall.
“Och. Smoking, drinking beer , and writing filthy words on
the w alls in the boys’ toilet,” he said, the smile evident in his
voice. “T ipping over dustbins. Letting air out of automobile
tires. Stealing sweeties from the Post Of fice. Quite the wee
criminal I was, for a time.”
“The ter ror of Inverness, huh? Did you have a gang?” she
teased.
“I did,” he said, and laughed. “Gerry MacMillan, Bobby
Cawdor , and Dougie Buchanan. I was odd man out, not only
for being the preacher ’ s lad, but for having an English father
and an English n ame. So I was always out to show them I was
a hard man. Meaning I was usually the one in most trouble.”
“I had no idea you were a juvenile delinquent,” she said,
charmed at the thought.“W ell, not for long,” he assured her wryly . “Come the
summer I was fi fteen, the Reverend signed me up on a fishing
boat, an d sent me to sea with t he herring fleet. Couldna just
say whe ther he did it to improve  my character , keep me out of
jail, or only because he couldn’ t  stand me round the house any
longer , but it did  work. Y e wan t to meet hard men sometime,
go to sea with a bunch of Gaelic fishermen.”
“I’ll remember that,” she said, trying not to giggle and
producing a series of small, wet snorts instead. “Did your
friends e nd up in jail, then, or did they go straight, without you
to mislead them?”
“Dougie joined the army ,” he sa id, a tinge of wistfulness in
his voice. “Gerry took over hi s dad’ s shop—his dad was a
tobacconist. Bobby … aye, well, Bobby’ s dead. Drowned, that
same summer , out lobstering with his cousin of f Oban.”
She leaned closer to him an d squeezed his hand, her
shoulder brushing his in sympathy .
“I’m sorry ,” she said, then paused. “Only … he isn’ t dead, is
he? Not yet. Not now .”
Roger sh ook his head, and mad e a small sound of mingled
humor and dismay .
“Is t hat a comfo rt?” she asked. “Or is it horrible to think
about?”
She wanted to keep him talking; he hadn’ t talked so much in
one go since th e hanging that had taken his singing voice.
Being forced to speak in public  made him self-conscious, and
his throa t tightened. His voice w as still rasping, but relaxed as
he was now , he wasn’ t choking or coughing.
“Both,” he said, and made the sound again. “I’ll never see
him again, either way .” He shrugged slightly , pushing the
thought away . “D’ye think of your old friends much?”
“No, not much,” she said softl y . The trail narrowed here,
and she linked her arm in his, drawing close as they
approached the last turn, which  would bring them in sight ofthe McGillivrays’. “There’ s too much here.” But she didn’ t
want to talk about what wasn’ t  here.
“Do you think Jo and Kezzie are just playing?” she asked.
“Or are they up to something?”
“What should they be up to? ” he asked, accepting her
change of subject without comment. “I canna think they’re
lying in wait to commit highway robbery—not at this time of
night.”
“Oh, I believe them about standing guard,” she said.
“They’d do anything to protect Lizzie. Only—” She paused.
They had come out of the forest onto the wagon road; the far
ver ge fell away in a steep bank, looking at night like a
bottomless pool  of black velvet—by daylight, it would be a
tangled mass of fallen snags, clumps of rhododendron, redbud,
and dogwood, over grown with the snarls of ancient grapevines
and creepers. The road made a switchback further on and
curved back on itself, arriving gently at the McGillivrays’
place, a hundred feet below .
“The lights are still on,” she sa id with some surprise. The
small group of buildings—the Old Place, the New Place,
Ronnie Sinclair ’ s cooper ’ s shop, Dai Jones’ s blacksmith’ s
for ge and cabin—were mostly d ark, but the lower windows of
the McGillivrays’ New Place were striped with light, leaking
through the cracks of the shutters, and a bonfire in front of the
house made a brilliant blot of light against the dark.
“Kenny Lindsay ,” Roger sa id matter -of-factly . “The
Beardsleys said they’d met him . He’ll have stopped to share
the news.”
“Mm. W e’d better be careful, the n; if they’re looking out for
brigands, too, they might shoot at anything that moves.”
“Not ton ight; it’ s a party , remem ber? What were ye saying,
though, about the Beardsley boys protecting Lizzie?”
“Oh.” Her toe stubbed against some hidden obstacle, and
she clutched his arm to keep from falling. “Oof! Only that I
wasn’ t sure who they thought they were protecting her from.”Roger tightened his grip on her arm in reflex.
“Whatever d’ye mean by that?”
“Just that if I were Manfred McGillivray , I’d take good care
to b e nice to Lizzie. Mama says the Beardsleys follow her
around l ike dogs, but they don ’ t. They follow her like tame
wolves.”
“I thought Ian said it wasn’ t possible to tame wolves.”
“It is n’ t,” she sa id tersely . “Come on, let’ s hurry , before they
smoor the fire.”
THE B IG LOG  HOUSE was literally overflowing with
people. Light spilled from the open door and glowed in the
row of tiny arro w-slit windows that marched across the front
of the house, and dark forms wove in and out of the bonfire’ s
light. The sounds of a fiddle c ame to them, thin and sweet
through the dark, borne on the wind with the scent of roasting
meat.
“I suppose Senga’ s truly made her choice, then,” Roger
said, taking her arm for the final steep descent to the
crossroad. “Who  d’ye bet it is? Ronnie Sinclair or the German
lad?”
“Oh, a bet? What are the stake s? W oops!” She stumbled,
tripping on a half-buried rock in the path, but Roger tightened
his grip, keeping her upright.
“Loser sets the pantry to rights,” he suggested.
“Deal,” she said promptly . “I think she chose Heinrich.”
“A ye? W ell, ye may be right,”  he said, sounding amused.
“But I have to tell you, it was five to three in favor of Ronnie,
last I heard. Frau  Ute’ s a force to be reckoned with.”
“She is,” Brianna admitted. “An d if it was Hilda or Inga, I’d
say it was no contest. But Senga’ s got her mother ’ s
personality; nob ody’ s telling her  wh at to do—no t even Frau
Ute.“Where did they get ‘Senga,’ anyway?” she added. “There
are lots of Ingas and Hildas ove r toward Salem, but I’ve never
heard of another Senga.”
“Ah, well, ye wouldn’ t—not in Salem. It’ s not a German
name, ken—it’ s Scots.”
“Scots?”  she said in astonishment.
“Oh, aye,” he said, the grin evident in his voice. “It’ s Agnes,
spelt backward. A girl named that is bound to be contrary ,
don’ t ye think?”
“Y ou’re kidding! Agnes, spelled backward?”
“I would na say it’ s common, exactly , but I’ve certainly met
one or two Sengas in Scotland.”
She laughed.
“Do the Scots do that with any other names?”
“Back-spelling?” He considered. “W ell, I did go to school
with a lass named Adnil, and th ere was a grocer ’ s lad who got
in the messages for old ladies in the neighborhood—his
name’ s pronounced ‘Kirry ,’ but it’ s spelt ‘C-i-r -e.’”
She looked sharply at him, in c ase he was teasing, but he
wasn’ t. She shook her head.
“I think Mama’ s right about Scots. So yours spelled
backward would be—”
“Regor ,” he confirmed. “Sounds like something from a
Godzilla film, doesn’ t it? A giant eel, maybe, or a beetle with
death-ray eyes.” He sounded pleased at the notion.
“Y ou thought about it, didn’ t you?” she said, laughing.
“Which would you rather be?”
“W ell, when I was a kid, I thought the beetle with the death-
ray eyes would be best,” he admitted. “Then I went to sea and
started hauling up the occasiona l Moray eel in my net. Those
are not the kind of thing ye’d want to meet in a dark alley ,
believe me.”“More agile than Godzilla, at least,” she said, shuddering
slightly at the r ecollection of the one Moray eel she’d met
personally . A four -foot length of spring steel and rubber , fast
as lightning and equipped with a mouthful of razors, it had
come up from the hold of a fish ing boat she’d watched being
unloaded in a little port town called MacDuf f.
She and Roger had been leanin g on a low rock wall, idly
watching the gulls hover in the wind, when a shout of alarm
from the fishing boat just below had made them look down in
time to see fishermen scrambling back from something on
deck.
A dark sine wave had flashed through the silver wash of fish
on deck , shot under the rail, an d landed on the wet stones of
the quay , where it had caused similar panic among the
fishermen hosing down their gear , writhing and lashing about
like a crazed high-tension cable until one rubber -booted man,
gathering his self-possession, had rushed up and kicked it back
into the water .
“W ell, they’re no really bad sorts, eels,” Roger said
judiciously , evid ently recalling the same memory . “Y e canna
blame th em, afte r all; being drag ged up from the bottom of the
sea without warning—anyone would thrash about a bit.”
“So they would,” she said, think ing of themselves. She took
his hand, threading her fingers  between his, and found his
firm, cold grip a comfort.
They we re close enough now to catch snatches of laughter
and talk, billowing up into the cold night with the smoke of the
fire. The re were children running loose; she saw two small
forms dart through the legs of the crowd around the fire, black
and thin-limbed as Halloween goblins.
That wa sn’ t Jem, surely? No, he was smaller , and surely
Lizzie wouldn’ t—
“Mej,” Roger said.
“What?”“Jem, backward,” he explained. “I was just thinking it
would be a lot of fun to see Godzilla films with him. Maybe
he’d like to be the beetle with death-ray eyes. Be fun, aye?”
He sounded so wistful that a lump came to her throat, and
she squeezed his hand hard, then swallowed.
“T ell him Godzilla stories,” she said firmly . “It’ s make-
believe anyway . I’ll draw him pictures.”
He laughed at that.
“Christ, you do, and they’ll be stoning ye for traf ficking
with the  devil, Bree. Godzilla looks like something straight out
of the Book of Revelation—or so I was told.”
“Who told you that?”
“Eigger .”
“Who …  oh,” she said, going in to mental reverse. “Reggie?
Who’ s Reggie?”
“The Reverend.” His great-uncle, his adoptive father . There
was still  a smile in his voice, but one tinged with nostalgia.
“When we went to the monster  films together of a Saturday .
Eigger a nd Regor—and ye should have seen the looks on the
faces of the Ladies’ Altar and T ea Society , when Mrs. Graham
let t hem in with out announcing them, and they came into the
Reverend’ s study to find us stamping round and roaring,
kicking hell out of a T okyo built of blocks and soup tins.”
She laughed, but felt tears prick at the backs of her eyes.
“I wish I’d kno wn the Reverend,” she said, squeezing his
hand.
“I wish ye had, too,” he said softly . “He would have liked ye
so much, Bree.”
For the space of a few moments, while he talked, the dark
forest and the fla ming fire below had faded away; they were in
Inverness, cozy  in the Reverend’ s study , with rain on the
windows and the sound of traf fic going by in the street. It
happened so often when they talked like this, betweenthemselves. Then some small thing would fracture the moment
—now , it was a shout from the fire as people began to clap and
sing—and the world of their own time vanished in an instant.
What if he were gone, she thought suddenly . Could I bring it
back, all by myself?
A spasm of elemental panic gripped her , just for a moment,
at the thought. W ithout Roger as her touchstone, with nothing
but her own me mories to serve as anchor to the future, that
time would be lost. W ould fade into hazy dreams, and be lost,
leaving her no firm ground of reality to stand upon.
She too k a deep breath of the cold night air , crisp with
woodsmoke, and  dug the balls of her feet hard into the ground
as they walked, trying to feel solid.
“MamaMamaMAMA!” A small blob detached itself from
the confusion round the fire and  rocketed toward her , crashing
into her  knees with enough fo rce to make her grab hold of
Roger ’ s arm.
“Jem! T here you are!” She scoo ped him up and buried her
face in his hair , which smelled pleasantly of goats, hay , and
spicy sausage. He was heavy , and more than solid.
Then Ut e McGil livray turned and saw them. Her broad face
was crea sed in a frown, but br oke into a beam of delight at
seeing them. People turned at her call of greeting, and they
were engulfed at once by the crowd, everyone asking
questions, expressing gratified surprise at their coming.
A few questions were asked about the Dutch family , but
Kenny Lindsay had brought the  news of the burning earlier;
Brianna was glad of that. Peo ple clucked and shook their
heads, but by no w they had exhausted most of their horrified
speculations, and were turning to other matters. The cold of
the g raves beneath the fir trees s till lingered as a faint chill on
her heart; she had no wish to make that  exp erience real again
by talking about it.
The newly engaged couple were  seated together on a pair of
upturned buckets, holding hand s, faces blissful in the glow ofthe bonfire.
“I win,” Brianna said, smiling at sight of them. “Don’ t they
look happy?”
“They do,” Roger agreed. “I do ubt Ronnie Sinclair is. Is he
here?” H e glanced round, and so did she, but the cooper was
nowhere in sight.
“W ait—he’ s in his shop,” she said, putting a hand on
Roger ’ s wrist and nodding toward the small building on the
opposite side of the road. There  were no windows on this side
of th e cooper ’ s shop, but a faint glow showed round the edge
of the closed door .
Roger glanced from the darkened shop to the convivial
crowd round the fire; a good many of Ute’ s relations had
ridden over with the lucky brid egroom and his friends from
Salem, bringing  with them an immense barrel of black beer ,
which w as adding to the festiv ities. The air was yeasty with
the tang of hops.
By contrast, the cooper ’ s shop had a desolate, glowering
sort of air about it. She wondered whether anyone around the
fire had yet missed Ronnie Sinclair .
“I’ll go and have a bit of a blether with him, aye?” Roger
touched her back in brief af fec tion. “He could maybe use a
sympathetic ear .”
“That a nd a stif f drink?” She nodded toward the house,
where Robin McGillivray was visible through the open door ,
pouring what she assumed to be whisky for a select circle of
friends.
“I imagi ne he will have managed that for himself,” Roger
replied d ryly . He left her , makin g his way around the convivial
group by  the fire. He disappeared in the dark, but then she saw
the door of the  cooper ’ s shop open, and Roger silhouetted
briefly a gainst the glow from wi thin, his tall form blocking the
light before vanishing inside.
“W anna drink, Mama!” Jemm y was wriggling like a
tadpole, trying to get down. She set him on the ground, and hewas of f like a shot, nearly upsetting a stout lady with a platter
of corn fritters.
The aroma of t he steaming fritters reminded her that she
hadn’ t had any supper , and she made her way after Jemmy to
the t able of food , where Lizzie, in her role as almost-daughter -
of-the-house, he lped her importantly to sauerkraut, sausages,
smoked eggs, and something involving corn and squash.
“Where’ s your  sw eetheart, Lizzie?” she ask ed, teasing.
“Shouldn’ t you be spooning with him?”
“Oh, him ?” Lizzie looked like someone recalling a thing of
vague general interest, but no immediate importance.
“Manfred, ye mean? He’ s … ower there.” She squinted against
the glow of the  fire, then pointed with her serving spoon.
Manfred McGillivray , her own betrothed, was with three or
four other young men, all with a rms linked, swaying to and fro
as they sang something in Ger man. They appeared to have
trouble remembering the words, as each verse dissolved into
giggles and shoving accusations.
“Here, Schatzchen —that’ s ‘sweetheart,’ ken, in German,”
Lizzie explaine d, leaning down to give Jemmy a bite of
sausage. He snapped the tidbi t up like a starving seal and
chewed industriously , then mumbled, “W agga gink,” and
wandered of f into the night.
“Jem!” B rianna made to go afte r him, but was hampered by
an oncoming crowd headed for the table.
“Ah, dinna fash yourself about him,” Lizzie assured her .
“Everyone kens who he is; he’ll come to nay harm.”
She might still have gone after him, save that she saw a
small blond head pop up beside  Jem’ s. Germain, Jem’ s bosom
friend. G ermain was two years older , and had a great deal
more w orldly knowledge tha n the average five-year -old,
thanks i n great part to his father ’ s tutelage. She did hope he
wasn’ t picking pockets in the cr owd, and made a mental note
to frisk him for contraband, later .Germain had Jem firmly by the hand, so she allowed herself
to be persuaded  to sit down with Lizzie, Inga, and Hilda, on
the bale s of straw that had bee n placed a little way from the
fire.
“Und where’ s your  swe etheart, then?” teased Hild a. “Y on
big bonny black devil?”
“Oh, him?” Brianna said, mimicking Lizzie, and they all
broke into rather unladylike roars of laughter; evidently the
beer had been making the rounds for some time.
“He’ s co mforting Ronnie,” she said, with a nod toward the
darkened cooper ’ s shop. “Is your mother upset about Senga’ s
choice?”
“Och, aye,” said Inga, rolling her eyes with great
expressiveness. “Should ha’ hea rd them at it, her and Senga.
Hammer and tongs, hammer and tongs. Da went out to the
fishing, and stayed awa’ three days.”
Brianna ducked her head to hid e a grin. Robin McGillivray
liked a peaceful life, something he was never likely to enjoy in
the company of his wife and daughters.
“Ah, well,” Hilda said philosophically , leaning back a little
to ease the strain of her first pregnancy , which was well
advanced. “She  couldna really say so much, meine Mutter .
Heinrich’ s her own cousin’ s son, after all. Even if he is  poor .”
“But young,” Inga added practically . “Da says Heinrich will
have time to get rich.” Ronnie Sinclair wasn’ t precisely rich—
and he was  thirty years older than Senga. On the other hand,
he did own both his cooper ’ s s hop and half of the house in
which he and the McGillivrays lived. And Ute, having
shepherded both her elder daughters to solid marriages with
men of property , had obviously s een the advantages of a match
between Senga and Ronnie.
“I can see that it might be a lit tle awkward,” Brianna said
tactfully . “Ronnie going on living with your family , after—”
She nod ded at the betrothed couple, who were feeding each
other bits of cake.“Hoo!” Hilda exclaimed, rolling  her eyes. “I’m that glad not
to be living here!”
Inga nodded vigorous agreement, but added, “W ell, but
Mutti  i sna  the  one to be greetin’ ove r spilt milk. She’ s got an
eye out for a wife for Ronnie. Just watch her .” She nodded
toward the food table, where Ute was chatting and smiling
with a group of German women.
“Who d’ye think it is she has p icked out?” Inga asked her
sister , ey es narrowed as she watched her mother operate. “That
wee Gretchen? Or your Archie’ s cousin, maybe? The walleyed
one—Seona?”
Hilda, married to a Scot from Su rry County , shook her head
at this.
“She’ll want a German girl,” she objected. “For she’ll be
thinkin’ of what will happen if Ronnie dies, and the wife
marries again. If it’ s a German  girl, chances are Mama can
bully he r into a new marriage with one of her nephews or
cousins—keep the property in the family , aye?”
Brianna listened with fascination as the girls discussed the
situation, with perfect matter -of-factness—and wondered
whether Ronnie Sinclair had the slightest idea that his fate was
being decided in this pragmatic  fashion. But he’d been living
with the McGillivrays for more  than a year , she reasoned; he
must have some idea of Ute’ s methods.
Thanking God silently that she was not herself compelled to
live in the same house with the redoubtable Frau  McGillivray ,
she look ed round for Lizzie, fe eling a pang of sympathy for
her erstwhile bondmaid. Lizzie would  be livin g with Ute, once
her marriage to Manfred took place next year .
Hearing the name “W emyss ,” she returned to the
conversation at hand, only to d iscover that the girls were not
discussing Lizzie, but rather her father .
“Auntie Gertrud,” declared Hilda, and belched softly , fist to
her mouth. “She’ s a widow-woman herself; she’d be the best
for him.”“Auntie Gertrud would have poor wee Mr . W emyss dead in
a year ,” Inga objected, laughing. “She’ s twice his size. If she
didna ki ll him from exhaustion, she’d roll over in her sleep
and squash him flat.”
Hilda clapped both hands to he r mouth, but less in shock
than to stifle her  giggles. Brianna thought she’d had her share
of beer , too; h er cap was awry and her pale face looked
flushed, even by firelight.
“A ye, w eel, I think he’ s no much bothered at the thought.
See him?” Hilda nodded past the beer -drinkers, and Brianna
had no trouble p icking out Mr . W emyss’ s head, his hair pale
and flyaway as his daughter ’ s. He was in animated
conversation with a stout woman in apron and cap, who
nudged him intimately in the ribs, laughing.
As she watched, though, Ute McGillivray made her way
toward them, followed by a tall blond woman, who hesitated a
little, hands folded under her apron.
“Oh, who’ s that?” Inga craned her neck like a goose, and
her sister elbowed her , scandalized.
“Lass das, du alte Ziege!  Mutti’ s looking this way!”
Lizzie had half-risen to her knees, peering.
“Who—?” she said, sounding lik e an owl. Her attention was
momentarily dis tracted by Manfred, who dropped beside her
in the straw , grinning amiably .
“How is it, then, Herzchen ?” he said, putting an arm round
her waist and trying to kiss her .
“Who’ s that, Freddie?” she said, adroitly eluding his
embrace and pointing discreetly toward the blond woman, who
was smiling shyly as Frau  Ute introduced her to Mr . W emyss.
Manfred blinked, swaying a little on his knees, but
answered readily enough.
“Oh. That’ s Fraulein  Berrisch. Pastor Berrisch’ s sister .”Inga and  Hilda made little cooing sounds of interest; Lizzie
frowned a little, but then relaxed , seeing her father tilt back his
head to address the newcomer;  Fraulein  B errisc h was nearly
as tall as Brianna herself.
W ell, that explains why she’ s  still a Fraulein,  Brianna
thought with sympathy . The woman’ s hair was streaked with
gray , wh ere it showed beneath her cap, and she had a rather
plain face, though her eyes held a calm sweetness.
“Oh, a Protestant, then,” Lizzie  said, in a dismissive tone
that made it clear that the Fraulein  could hardly be considered
as a potential mate for her father .
“A ye, bu t she’ s a nice woman, for a’ that. Come and dance,
Elizabeth.” Manfred had clearly lost any interest in Mr .
W emyss and the Fraulein;  he pulle d Lizzi e, protesting, to her
feet, and propelled her toward t he circle of dancers. She went
reluctantly , but Brianna saw that by the time they had reached
the dance, Lizzie was laughing at something Manfred had said,
and he was smi ling down at her , the firelight glowing on the
handsome planes of his face. They were a nice-looking couple,
she thought, better -matched in appearance than Senga and her
Heinrich—who was tall, but spindly and rather hatchet-faced.
Inga and Hilda had begun ar guing with each other in
German, allowing Brianna to devote herself to the
wholehearted consumption of th e excellent supper . Hungry as
she was, she wo uld have enjoyed almost anything, but the tart,
crisp sauerkraut and the sausages, bursting with juice and
spices, were a rare treat.
It was only as she wiped the last of the juice and grease
from her wooden plate with a chunk of corn bread that she cast
a g lance  at the cooper ’ s shop, thinking guiltily that she ought
perhaps to have saved some for Roger . He was so kind, taking
thought for poor Ronnie’ s feelin gs. She felt a rush of pride and
af fection for him. Maybe she sh ould go over there and rescue
him.
She had  put down her plate and was sorting out her skirts
and petticoats, in preparation for putting this plan into action,when sh e was forestalled by a pair of small figures who came
weaving out of the darkness.
“Jem?” she said, startled. “What’ s the matter?”
The flames gleamed on Jemmy’ s hair like freshly minted
copper , b ut the face under it was  white, and his eyes enormous
dark pools, fixed and staring.
“Jemmy!”
He turned a bla nk face to her ,  said “Mama?” in a small,
uncertain voice, then sat down suddenly , his legs collapsing
under him like rubber bands.
She was dimly a ware of Germain, swaying like a sapling in
a hig h b reeze, bu t had no attenti on to spare for him. She seized
Jemmy , lifting his head and shaking him a little.
“Jemmy! W ake up! What’ s wrong?”
“The w ee laddie’ s dead drunk, a nighean, ” said a voice
above her , sounding amused. “Whatever have ye been givin’
him?” Robin McGillivray , rather obviously a little the worse
for wear himself, leaned over and prodded Jemmy gently ,
eliciting nothing more than a soft gur gle. He picked up one of
Jemmy’ s arms, then let it go; it fell, boneless as a strand of
boiled spaghetti.
“ I  didn ’ t g ive him  anything,” she replied, panic giving way
to a  rising annoyance, as she saw that Jemmy was in fact
merely asleep, his small che st rising and falling with a
reassuring rhythm. “Germain!”
Germain had subsided into a small heap, and was singing
“Alouette” to himself in a drea my sort of way . Brianna had
taught it to him; it was his favorite song.
“Germain! What did you give Jemmy to drink?”
“… j’ te plumerai la tete…”
“Germain!”  She  grabbed him by the arm, and he ceased
singing, looking surprised to see her .
“What did you give Jemmy , Germain?”“He was  thirsty , m’dame,” Germain said, with a smile of
surpassing sweetness. “He wanted a drink.” Then his eyes
rolled ba ck in his head, and he keeled over backward, limp as
a dead fish.
“Oh, Jesus Christ on a piece of toast !”
Inga and Hilda looked shocked, but she was in no mood to
worry about their sensibilities.
“Where the bloody hell is Marsali?”
“She’ s no here,” Inga said, bending forward to inspect
Germain. “She stopped at hame wi’ the wee maedchen.  Fer gus
is … ” She straightened up, loo king vaguely round. “W ell, I
saw him a while ago.”
“What’ s the trouble?” The hoarse voice at her shoulder
surprised her , and she turned to find Roger looking quizzical,
his face relaxed from its usual sternness.
“Y our son is a  drunkard,” she informed him. Then she
caught a whif f of Roger ’ s brea th. “Following in his father ’ s
footsteps, I see,” she added coldly .
Disregarding this, Roger sat down beside her and gathered
Jemmy up into his lap. Holding  the little boy propped against
his knees, he patted Jemmy’ s cheek, gently but insistently .
“Hallo there, Mej,” he said so ftly . “Hallo, then. Y e’re all
right, are ye?”
Like magic, Jemmy’ s eyelid s floated up. He smiled
dreamily at Roger .
“Hallo, Daddy .” Still smiling beatifically , his eyes closed
and he relaxed into utter limpness, cheek flattened against his
father ’ s knee.
“He’ s all right,” Roger told her .
“W ell, good,” she said, not particularly mollified. “What do
you think they’ve been drinking? Beer?”
Roger leaned forward and snif fed at his of fspring’ s red-
stained lips.“Cherry Bounce , at a guess. There’ s a vat of it, round by the
barn.”
“Holy God!” She’d never drunk Cherry Bounce, but Mrs.
Bug had told her how to make it: “T ak’ th e juice of a bushel o’
cherries, dissolv e twenty-four pound o’ sugar ower it, then ye
put it into a forty-gallon cask and fill it up wi’ whisky .”
“He’ s all right.” Roger patted her arm. “Is that Germain
over there?”
“It is.” She leaned over to check, but Germain was
peacefully asleep, also smiling. “That Cherry Bounce must be
good stuf f.”
Roger laughed.
“It’ s terrible. Like industrial-strength cough syrup. I will say
it makes ye very cheerful, though.”
“Have y ou been  drinking it?” S he eyed him narrowly , but
his lips appeared to be their usual color .
“Of course not.” He leaned over and kissed her , to prove it.
“Surely ye dinna think a Scotsman like Ronnie would deal wi’
disappointment by drinking C herry Bounce? When there’ s
decent whisky to hand?”
“T rue,” she said. She glanced at the cooperage. The faint
glow fro m the hearth fire had fa ded and the outline of the door
had disappeared , leaving the b uilding no more than a faint
rectangle of black against the darker mass of the forest
beyond. “How is  Ronnie dealing  with it?” She glanced round,
but I nga and Hil da had taken themselves of f to help Frau  Ute;
all of them were  clustered round the food table, clearing things
away .
“Oh, he’ s all right, Ronnie.” Roger moved Jemmy of f his
lap, plac ing him gently on his side in the straw near Germain.
“He wasna in lo ve with Senga, after all. He’ s suf fering from
sexual frustration, not a broken heart.”
“Oh, we ll, if that’ s all,” she said dryly . “He won’ t have to
suf fer m uch long er; I’m informed that Frau  Ute has the matterwell in hand.”
“A ye, she’ s told him she’ll find him a wife. He’ s what ye
might call philosophical about the matter . Though still reeking
wi’ lust,” he added, wrinkling his nose.
“Ew . Do you wa nt anything to e at?” She glanced at the little
boys, getting her feet under her . “I’d better get you something
before Ute and the girls clear it all away .”
Roger yawned, suddenly and immensely .
“No, I’m  all right.” He blinked,  smiling sleepily at her . “I’ll
go tell Fer gus w here Germain is, maybe snatch a bite on the
way .” He patted her shoulder , t hen stood up, swaying only a
little, and moved of f toward the fire.
She chec ked the boys again; both were breathing deeply and
regularly , dead to the world. W ith a sigh, she bundled them
close together , piling up the str aw around them, and covered
them with her cloak. It was growing colder , but winter had
gone; there was no feel of frost in the air .
The par ty was still going on, b ut it had shifted to a lower
gear . The dancing had stopped and the crowd broken up into
smaller groups, men gathered in a circle near the fire, lighting
their pipes, the younger men disappeared somewhere. All
around her , families were settl ing in for the night, making
nests for themselves in the hay . Some were in the house, more
in the barn; sh e could hear the sound of a guitar from
somewhere behind the house, and a single voice, singing
something slow and wistful. It made her yearn suddenly for
the sound of Roger ’ s voice as it had been, rich and tender .
Thinking of that, though, she realized something; his voice
had bee n much better when he came back from consoling
Ronnie. Still husky and with only a shadow of its former
resonance—but it had come easily , without that choked note in
it. Perhaps alcohol relaxed the vocal cords?
More likely , she thought, it simply relaxed Roger; removed
some of his inh ibitions about the way he sounded. That was
worth kn owing. Her mother had opined that his voice wouldimprove, if he would stretch it, work with it, but he was shy of
using it, wary of pain—whether from the actual sensation of
speaking, or from the contrast with the way he had sounded
before.
“So maybe I’ll make a little Cherry Bounce,” she said
aloud. T hen she looked at the two small forms slumbering in
the hay , and con templated the prospect of waking up alongside
three hangovers, come morning. “W ell, maybe not.”
She bun ched up enough hay for  a pillow , spread her folded
kerchief over it—they’d be pic king hay out of their clothes
most of tomorrow—and lay down, curling her body round
Jem’ s. If  either boy stirred or vo mited in his sleep, she’d feel it
and rouse.
The bon fire had burned down; only a ragged fringe of
flames now flickered over the b ed of glowing embers, and the
lanterns set around the yard had  all gone out or been thriftily
extinguished. Guitar and singer had ceased. W ithout light and
noise to  keep it at bay , the night came in, spreading wings of
cold silence over the mountain. The stars burned bright above,
but they were pinpricks, millennia away . She closed her eyes
against the immensity of the n ight, bowing to put her lips
against Jem’ s head, cradling his warmth.
She tried to com pose her mind for sleep, but without the
distractions of company , and with the scent of burning timber
strong in the air , memory stole back, and her normal prayers of
blessing became pleas for mercy and protection.
“He ha th put my br ethr en far fr om me, and mine
acquaintance ar e verily estranged fr om me. My kinsfolk have
failed, and my familiar friends have for gotten me.”
I won’ t for get you,  s he said  silently  to the dead. It s eemed so
pitiful a  thing to say—so small and futile. And yet the only
thing in her power .
She shivered briefly , tightening her grip on Jemmy .
A sudden rustle of the hay , and Roger slid in behind her . He
fumbled a bit, spreading his ow n cloak over her , then sighedwith reli ef, his body relaxing h eavily against hers as his arm
came round her waist.
“Been a bloody long day , hasn’ t it?”
She groaned faintly in agreement. Now that everything was
quiet, with no m ore need to talk, watch, pay attention, every
fiber of her mu scles seemed about to dissolve with fatigue.
There w as no more than a thin layer of hay between her and
cold, hard ground, but she felt  sleep lapping at her like the
waves o f the tide creeping up  a sandy shore, soothing and
inexorable.
“‘Did you get something to eat?” She put a hand on his leg,
and his arm tightened in reflex, holding her close.
“A ye, if ye think  beer ’ s food. Many folk do.” He laughed, a
warm fo g of hops on his breath.  “I’m fine.” The warmth of his
body was beginning to seep through the layers of cloth
between them, dispelling the night’ s chill.
Jem always gave of f heat when he slept; it was like holding
a clay firepot, with him curled against her . Roger was putting
out even  more heat, though. W ell, her mother did say that an
alcohol lamp burned hotter than oil.
She sighed and snuggled back against him, feeling warm,
protected. The cold immensity of the night had lifted, now that
she had her family close, together again, and safe.
Roger was humming. She realized it quite suddenly . There
was no tune to it, but she felt the vibration of his chest against
her b ack. She di dn’ t want to chance stopping him; surely that
was good for his vocal cords. He stopped on his own, though,
after a moment. Hoping to start him again, she reached back to
stroke his leg, essaying a small questioning hum of her own.
“Hmmm-mmmm?”
His hands cupped her buttocks and fastened tight.
“Mmm-hmmm,” he said, in what sounded like a
combination of invitation and satisfaction.She didn ’ t reply , but made a slight dissentient motion of the
behind. Under normal conditions, this would have caused him
to let go. He did  le t go, but only  with one hand , and this in
order to slide it down her leg, evidently meaning to get hold of
her skirt and ruckle it up.
She reached back hastily and grabbed the roving hand,
bringing it round and placing it on her breast, as an indication
that while she appreciated the notion and under other
circumstances would be thrilled to oblige, just this moment
she thought—
Roger was usually very good at reading her body language,
but e vidently this skill had dissolved in whisky . That, or—the
thought came suddenly to her—he simply didn’ t car e  whether
she wanted—
“Roger!” she hissed.
He had  st arted humming again, the sound now interspersed
with the  low , bumping noises a teakettle makes, just before the
boil. He ’d got his hand down her leg and up her skirt, hot on
the flesh of her thigh, groping swiftly upward—and inward.
Jemmy coughed, jerking in her arms, and she made an attempt
to kick Roger in the shin, as a signal of discouragement.
“God, y ou’re beautiful,” he murmured into the curve of her
neck. “Oh, God, so beautiful. So beautiful … so … hmmm …”
The next words were a mumb le against her skin, but she
thought  he’d said “slippery .” His fingers had reached their
goal, and she arched her back, trying to squirm away .
“Roger ,” she said, keeping her v oice low . “Roger , there are
people  around!” And a snoring toddler  wedged like a doorstop
in front of her .
He mumbled something in which the words “dark” and
“nobody’ll see” were distinguishable, and then the groping
hand retreated—only to grab a handful of her skirts and start
shoving them out of the way .
He had resume d the humming, pausing momentarily to
murmur , “Love you, love you so much… .”“I love you, too,” she said, reaching back and trying to catch
his hand. “Roger , stop that !”
He did, but immediately reached around her , and grasped
her by the shoulder . A quick heave, and she was lying on her
back staring up at the distant sta rs, which were at once blotted
out by Roger ’ s h ead and shoulders as he rolled on top of her in
a tremendous rustling of hay and loosened clothing.
“Jem—” She flung out a hand toward Jemmy , who appeared
not t o have been  disturbed by the sudden disappearance of his
backstop, but was still curled up in the hay like a hibernating
hedgehog.
Roger w as, of all things, singing  n ow , if one co uld call it
that. Or chanting , at least, the words to a very bawdy Scottish
song, ab out a miller who is pestered by a young woman
wanting him to grind her corn. Whereupon he does.
“He flun g her down upon the sacks, and there she got her
corn ground, her corn ground… .” Roger was chanting hotly in
her ear , his full weight pinning her to the ground and the stars
spinning madly far above.
She’d thought his description of Ronnie as “reeking wi’
lust” merely a f igure of speech, but evidently not. Bare flesh
met bare flesh, and then some. She gasped. So did Roger .
“Oh, God,” he said. He paused, frozen for an instant against
the sky above her , then sighed in an ecstasy of whisky fumes
and began to move with her , humming. It was  dark, thank
God, though not nearly dark eno ugh. The remnants of the fire
cast an eerie glow over his face, and he looked for an instant
the bonny big, black devil Inga had called him.
Lie back and enjoy it,  she  thought. The hay made a
tremendous rust ling—but there  were other rustlings nearby ,
and the sound o f the wind sou ghing through the trees in the
cove was nearly enough to drown them all in sibilance.
She had managed to suppress her embarrassment and was
indeed b eginning to enjoy it, wh en Roger got his hands under
her , lifting.“W rap your legs round me,” he whispered, and nipped her
earlobe with his teeth. “W rap them round my back and
hammer my arse wi’ your heels.”
Moved p artly by  an answering wantonness, and partly by a
desire to squeeze the breath out  of him like an accordion, she
flung her legs a part and swung them high, scissoring them
tight across his heaving back. H e gave an ecstatic groan and
redoubled his ef forts. W antonness was winning; she had nearly
for gotten where they were.
Hanging on for dear life and thr illed by the ride, she arched
her back  and jerked, shuddering against the heat of him, the
night wi nd’ s touch cool and electric on thighs and buttocks,
bared to  the dark. T rembling and moaning, she melted back
against the hay , her legs still locked around his hips. Boneless
and nerv eless, she let her head  roll to the side, and slowly ,
languidly , opened her eyes.
Someone was there; she saw movement in the dark, and
froze. It was F er gus, come to fetch his son. She heard the
murmur of his voice, speaking French to Germain, and the
quiet rustle of his footsteps in the hay , moving of f.
She lay still, h eart pounding, legs still locked in place.
Roger , meanwhile, had reached his own quietus. Head hanging
so th at h is long hair brushed her face like cobwebs in the dark,
he murmured, “Love you … God, I love you,” and lowered
himself, slowly and gently . Wh ereupon he breathed, “Thank
you,” in her ear and lapsed into warm half-consciousness on
top of her , breathing heavily .
“Oh,” she said, looking up to  the peaceful stars. “Don’ t
mention it.” She unlocked her stif f legs, and with some
dif ficulty , got herself and Roger disentangled, more or less
covered, and restored to blessed anonymity in their hay-lined
nest, Jemmy safely stowed between them.
“Hey ,” she said suddenly , and Roger stirred.
“Mm?”
“What sort of monster was Eigger?”He laughed, and the sound was low and clear .
“Oh, Eigger was a giant sponge cake. W ith chocolate icing.
He’d fall on t he other monsters, and smother them wi’
sweetness.” He laughed again, hiccuped, and subsided in the
hay .
“Roger?” she said softly , a moment later . There was no
answer , and she stretched a hand across the slumbering body
of her son, to rest light on Roger ’ s arm.
“Sing to me,” she whispered,  though she knew that he
already was asleep.7
JAMES FRASER, INDIAN AGENT
J AMES FRASER , Indian Agent,” I said, closing one eye as
though reading it of f a screen. “It sounds like a W ild W est
television show .”
Jamie paused in the act of pulling of f his stockings, and
eyed me warily .
“It does? Is that good?”
“Insofar as the hero of a television show never dies, yes.”
“In that case, I’ m in favor of it,” he said, examining the
stocking he’d just pulled of f. He  snif fed it suspiciously , rubbed
a thumb  over a thin patch on the heel, shook his head, and
tossed it into the laundry basket. “Must I sing?”
“Si—oh,” I said, recollecting that the last time I had tried to
explain television to him, my descriptions had focused lar gely
on The Ed Sullivan  Show .  “No, I don’ t think so. Nor yet swing
from a trapeze.”
“W ell, th at’ s a comfort. I’m none sae young as I was, ken.”
He stoo d up and stretched himself, groaning. The house had
been built with eight-foot ceilings, to accommodate him, but
his fists brushed the pine beams, even so. “Christ, but it’ s been
a long day!”
“W ell, it ’ s nearly over ,” I said, snif fing in turn at the bodice
of the gown I’d just shed. It smelled strongly , though not
disagreeably , of horse and woodsmoke. Air it a bit, I decided,
and see whether it could go another little while without
washing. “I couldn’ t have swung on a trapeze even when I was
young.”
“I’d pay money to see ye try ,” he said, grinning.“What is  an Indian agent?” I inquired. “M acDonald seemed
to th ink he was doing you a sign al favor by suggesting you for
the job.”
He shrugged, unbuckling his kilt.
“Nay doubt he thinks he is. ” He shook the garment
experimentally , and a fine sifting of dust and horsehair
bloomed on the floor beneath it. He went to the window ,
opened the shutters, and, thrusting the kilt outside, shook it
harder .
“He would be”—his voice came faintly from the night
outside, then more strongly , as he turned round again—”were
it not for this war of yours.”
“Of mine ?” I said, indignant. “Y ou sound as though you
think I’m proposing to start it, single-handed.”
He made a small gesture of dismissal.
“Y e ken what I mean. An Indian agent, Sassenach, is what it
sounds like—a fellow who goes  out and parleys wi’ the local
Indians, giving them gifts and talking them round, in hopes
that they’ll be inclined to ally themselves with the Crown’ s
interests, whatever those might happen to be.”
“Oh? An d what’ s this Southern Department that MacDonald
mentioned?” I glanced involuntarily toward the closed door of
our room , but muf fled snoring from across the hall indicated
that our guest had already collapsed into the arms of
Morpheus.
“Mmphm. There’ s a Southern Department and a Northern
Department that deal wi’ Indian af fairs in the colonies. The
Southern Department is under John Stuart, who’ s an Inverness
man. T urn round, I’ll do it.”
I tur ned my bac k gratefully to him. W ith expertise born of
long experience, he had the lacing of my stays undone in
seconds. I sighed deeply as they loosened and fell. He plucked
the shift away f rom my body , massaging my ribs where the
boning had pressed the damp fabric into my skin.“Thank you.” I sighed in bliss and leaned back against him.
“And being an Inverness man, MacDonald thinks this Stuart
will ha ve a natural predisposition to employ other
Highlanders?”
“That might depend upon whether Stuart’ s ever met any of
my kin,”  Jamie said dryly . “But MacDonald thinks so, aye.”
He kissed the top of my he ad in absent af fection, then
withdrew his hands and began u ntying the lace that bound his
hair .
“Sit,” I said, stepping out of my fallen stays. “I’ll do it.”
He sat on the  stool in his shirt, closing his eyes in
momentary relaxation as I unbraided his hair . He’d worn it
clubbed in a tigh t queue for ridi ng, bound up for the last three
days; I ran my  hands up into  the warm fiery mass as it
unraveled from its plait, and th e loosened waves of it spilled
cinnamon and gold and silver in the firelight as I rubbed the
pads of my fingers gently into his scalp.
“Gifts, you said. Does the Crow n supply these gifts?” The
Crown, I had noticed, had a bad habit of “honoring” men of
substance with of fices that required them to come up with
lar ge amounts of their own money .
“Theoretically .” He yawned hugely , broad shoulders
slumping comfo rtably as I took up my hair brush and set about
tidying h im. “Oh, that’ s nice. That’ s why MacDonald thinks it
a favor; there’ s the possibility of doing well in trade.”
“Besides generally excellent opportunities for corruption.
Y es, I see.” I worked for a few  minutes before asking, “W ill
you do it?”
“I d inna ken. I must think a bit. Y e were mentioning W ild
W est—Brianna’ s said such a thing, telling me about cowherds
—”
“Cowboys.”
He w aved of f the correction. “A nd the Indians. That’ s true,
is it—what she says about the Indians?”“If what  she says is that they’ll b e lar gely exterminated over
the next century or so—yes, she’ s right.” I smoothed his hair ,
then sat down on the bed facing him and set about brushing
my own. “Does that trouble you?”
His brows drew together a little  as he considered it, and he
scratched absent ly at his chest, where the curly red-gold hairs
showed at the open neck of his shirt.
“No,” he said s lowly . “Not precisely . It’ s not as though I
should be doing them to death  wi’ my own hands. But …
we’re coming to it, are we not? The time when I must tread
wi’ some care, if I’m to walk betwixt the fires.”
“I’m afr aid we are,” I said, an  uneasy tightness hovering
between my shoulder blades. I saw what he meant, all too
clearly . The battle lines were not clear yet—but they were
being drawn. T o become an Indi an agent for the Crown was to
appear to be a Loyalist—all very well for the moment, when
the R ebel movement was no m ore than a radical fringe, with
pockets of disaf fection. But ver y , very dangerous, as we grew
closer to  the point where the disaf fected seized power , and
independence was declared.
Knowing the eventual outcome, Jamie dare not wait too
long to ally himself to the Rebe l side—but to do so too early
was to risk arrest for treason. Not a good prospect for a man
who was already a pardoned traitor .
“Of cou rse,” I said dif fidently , “ if you wer e  to be an Indian
agent I suppose you might actually persuade some of the
Indian t ribes into supporting the American side—or staying
neutral, at least.”
“I might ,” he agreed, with a certain note of bleakness in his
voice. “B ut putting aside any question as to the honor of such
a course—that would help condemn them, no? W ould the
same th ing happen to them in  the end, d’ye think, if the
English were to win?”
“They won’ t,” I said, with a slight edge.
He glanced sharply at me.“I do believe ye,” he said, with a similar edge. “I’ve reason
to, aye?”
I n odde d, my lips pressed tog ether . I didn’ t want to talk
about the earlier Rising. I didn’ t want to talk about the
oncoming Revolution, either , but there was little choice about
that.
“I do n’ t know ,” I said, and took  a deep breath. “No one can
say—since it didn’ t happen—but if I were to guess  … then I
think the Indians might quite po ssibly do better under British
rule.” I smiled at him, a little ruefully .
“Believe it or not, the British Empire did—or will, I should
say—generally manage to run  its colonies without entir ely
exterminating the native people in them.”
“Bar the  Hieland folk,” he said , very dryly . “A ye, I’ll take
your word for it, Sassenach.”
He stoo d up, running a hand back through his hair , and I
caught a  glimpse  of the tiny streak of white that ran through it,
legacy of a bullet wound.
“Y ou sh ould talk to Roger about it,” I said. “He knows a
great deal more than I do.”
He nodded, but didn’ t reply , beyond a faint grimace.
“Where do you suppose Roger and Bree went, speaking of
Roger?”
“T o the MacGillivrays’, I suppose,” he replied, surprised.
“T o fetch wee Jem.”
“How do you know that?” I asked, equally surprised.
“When there’ s mischief abroad, a man wants his family safe
under his eye, k en?” He raised one brow at me, and reaching
to the top of the  wardrobe, took down his sword. He drew it
halfway from its scabbard, then put it back and set the
scabbard gently back in place, the sword loosened, hilt ready
to hand.He’d br ought a loaded pistol upstairs with him; that was
placed on the wa shstand by the window . The rifle and fowling
piece too had been left loaded and primed, hanging from their
hooks a bove the  hearth downstairs. And, with a small ironic
flourish, he drew the dirk from i ts belt sheath and slid it neatly
under our pillow .
“Sometimes I for get,” I said a li ttle wistfully , watching this.
There had been a dirk under the  pillow of our wedding couch
—and under many a one since then.
“Do ye?” He s miled at that; a little lopsidedly , but he
smiled.
“Don’ t you? Ever?”
He shook his head, still smiling, though it had a rueful tinge.
“Sometimes I wish I did.”
This colloquy was interrupted by a spluttering snort across
the h all, followed at once by a t hrashing of bedclothes, violent
oaths, and a sharp thump!  as something—likely a shoe—struck
the wall.
“Fucking cat!” bellowed Major MacDonald. I sat, hand
pressed across my mouth, as th e stomp of bare feet vibrated
through the floorboards, succeeded briefly by the crash of the
Major ’ s door , which flung open, then shut with a bang.
Jamie too had s tood frozen for an instant. Now he moved,
very delicately , and soundlessly eased our own door open.
Adso, tail arrogantly S-shaped, strolled in. Magnificently
ignoring us, he crossed the room, leapt lightly onto the
washstand, and sat in the basin, where he stuck a back leg into
the air and began calmly licking his testicles.
“I s aw a man once in Paris who could do that,” Jamie
remarked, observing this performance with interest.
“Are the re people willing to pa y to watch such things?” I
assumed that no one was li kely to engage in a public
exhibition of that sort merely for the fun of it. Not in Paris,
anyway .“W ell, it wasna the man, so much. More his female
companion, who  was likewise flexible.” He grinned at me, his
eyes glinting blue in the candlelight. “Like watching worms
mate, aye?”
“How fascinating,” I murmured. I glanced at the washstand,
where Adso was now doing something even more indelicate.
“Y ou’re lucky the Major doesn ’ t sleep armed, cat. He might
have potted you like a jugged hare.”
“Oh, I doubt tha t. Our Donald l ikely sleeps with a blade—
but he kens well enough which s ide of his bread’ s buttered. Y e
wouldna be likely to give him breakfast, and he’d skewered
your cat.”
I glanc ed towa rd the door . The mattress-heaving and
muttered curses across the hall h ad died down; the Major , with
the prac ticed ea se of a professi onal soldier , was already well
on his way back to dreamland.
“I suppo se not. Y ou were right about his worming his way
into a position w ith the new governor . Which is the real reason
for his desire for your political advancement, I imagine?”
Jamie nodded, but had plainly lost interest in discussing
MacDonald’ s machinations.
“I was  right, no? That means ye owe me a forfeit,
Sassenach.”
He e yed me wi th an air of dawning speculation, which I
hoped had not been too much inspired by his memories of the
wormlike Parisians.
“Oh?” I regarded him warily . “And, um, what  precisely …
?”
“W ell, I havena quite worked out all the details as yet, but I
think ye should maybe lie on the bed, to begin with.”
That sounded like a reasonable s tart to the matter . I piled up
the p illows at the head of the be d—pausing to remove the dirk
—then began to climb onto it. I paused again, though, and
instead bent to wind the bedkey , tightening the ropes thatsupported the mattress until the bedstead groaned and the
ropes gave a creaking twang.
“V erra canny , Sassenach,” Jamie said behind me, sounding
amused.
“Experience,” I informed him, clambering over the newly
tautened bed on hands and knees. “I’ve waked up often
enough after a night with you , with the mattress folded up
round my ears and my arse no more than an inch of f the
ground.”
“Oh, I expect y our arse will en d up somewhat higher than
that,” he assured me.
“Oh, you’re going to let me be on top?” I had mixed
feelings about that. I was desperately tired, and while I
enjoyed riding Jamie, all right, I ’d been riding a beastly horse
for more  than ten hours, and the thigh muscles required for
both activities were trembling spasmodically .
“Perhaps later ,” he said, eyes narrowed in thought. “Lie
back, Sassenach, and ruckle up your shift. Then open your legs
for me, there’ s a good lass no, a bit wider , aye?” He began—
with deliberate slowness—to remove his shirt.
I sighed and shifted my buttocks a little, looking for a
position that wouldn’ t give me cramp if I had to hold it for
long.
“If y ou have in mind what I thi nk you have in mind, you’ll
regret it. I haven’ t even bathed properly ,” I said reproachfully .
“I’m desperately filthy and I smell like a horse.”
Naked, he raised one arm and snif fed appraisingly .
“Oh? W ell, so do I. That’ s no matter; I’m fond of horses.”
He’d ab andoned any pretense of delay , but paused to survey
his arrangements, looking me over with approval.
“A ye, v erra good. Now then, i f ye’ll just put your hands
above your head and seize the bedstead—”
“Y ou wouldn’ t!”  I said, and then lowered my voice, with an
involuntary glance toward the door . “Not with MacDonald justacross the hall!”
“Oh, I would,” he assured me, “and the devil wi’
MacDonald and a dozen more like him.” He paused, though,
studying me thoughtfully , and after a moment, sighed and
shook his head.
“No,” he said q uietly . “Not tonight. Y e’re still thinking of
that poor Dutch bastard and his family , no?”
“Y es. Aren’ t you?”
He sat down beside me on the bed with a sigh.
“I’ve been trying verra hard no t to,” he said frankly . “But
the new dead dinna lie easy in their graves, do they?”
I laid a h and on his arm, relieved that he felt the same. The
night air seemed restless with the passage of spirits, and I had
felt the dragging melancholy of  that desolate garden, that row
of graves, all through the events and alarums of the evening.
It was  a night to be securely locked inside, with a good fire
on the hearth, and people nearby . The house stirred, shutters
creaking in the wind.
“I do want ye, Claire,” Jamie s aid softly . “I need … if ye
will?”
And had  they spent the night be fore their deaths like this, I
wondered? Peaceful and snug betwixt their walls, husband and
wife whispering together , lying  close in their bed, having no
notion what the future held. I saw in memory her long white
thighs a s the wind blew over h er , and the glimpse I’d had of
the small curly mat between them, the pudenda beneath its
nimbus of brown hair pale as carved marble, the seam of it
sealed like a vir gin’ s statue.
“I need, too,” I said, just as softly . “Come here.”
He leane d close, and pulled the drawstring neatly from the
neck of my shift, so the worn linen wilted of f my shoulders. I
made a grab for  the fabric, but he caught my hand, and held it
down by my si de. One-fingered, he brushed the shift lower ,
then put  out the candle, and in a  dark that smelled of wax andhoney and the s weat of horses, kissed my forehead, eyes, the
corners of my cheeks, my lips  and chin, and so continued,
slow and soft-lipped, to the arches of my feet.
He raised himself then, and suckled my breasts for a long
time, and I ran my hand up his back and cupped his buttocks,
naked and vulnerable in the dark.
Afterward, we lay in a pleasantly vermiform tangle, the only
light in the room a faint glow fro m the banked hearth. I was so
tired tha t I could feel my body sinking into the mattress, and
desired n othing more than to ke ep going down, down, into the
welcoming dark of oblivion.
“Sassenach?”
“Um?”
A moment’ s hesitation, then his hand found mine, curling
round it.
“Y e wouldna do what she did, would ye?”
“Who?”
“Her . The Dutchwoman.”
Snatched back from the edge of sleep, I was muzzy and
confused, suf ficiently so that even the image of the dead
woman, shrouded in her apron, seemed unreal, no more
disturbing than the random fragments of reality my brain
tossed o verboard in a vain ef for t to keep afloat as I sank down
into the depths of sleep.
“What? Fall into the fire? I’l l try not,” I assured him,
yawning. “Good night.”
“No. W ake up.” He shook my  arm gently . “T alk to me,
Sassenach.”
“Ng.” It was a considerable ef fort, but I pushed away the
enticing arms of Morpheus, and  flounced over onto my side,
facing him. “Mm. T alk to you. About … ?”
“The Du tchwoman,” he repeate d patiently . “If I were to be
killed, ye wouldna go and kill your whole family , would ye?”“What?” I rubbed my free han d over my face, trying to
make so me sense of this, amid  the drifting shreds of sleep.
“Whose whole—oh. Y ou think she did it on purpose?
Poisoned them?”
“I think maybe so.”
His words were no more than a whisper , but they brought
me back to full consciousness. I  lay silent for a moment, then
reached out, wanting to be sure he was really there.
He was; a lar ge , solid object, t he smooth bone of his hip
warm and live under my hand.
“It m ight as w ell have been an accident,” I said, voice
pitched low . “Y ou can’ t know for sure.”
“No,” he admitted. “But I cann a keep from seeing it.” He
turned restlessly onto his back.
“The me n came,” he said softly ,  to the beams overhead. “He
fought them, and they killed him there, on his own threshold.
And wh en she saw her man was  gone I think she told the men
she mus t feed the weans first,  before … and then she put
toadstools into the stew , and fed it to the bairns and her
mother . She took the two men with them, but I think it was
that  that  was the accident. She only meant to follow him. She
wouldna leave him there, alone.”
I wante d to tell him that this was a rather dramatic
interpretation of what we had s een. But I couldn’ t very well
tell him he was wrong. Hearing him describe what he saw in
thought, I saw it, too, all too clearly .
“Y ou don’ t know ,” I said at las t, softly . “Y ou can’ t know .”
Unless you find the other men ,  I thought suddenly , and ask
them.  I didn’ t say that, though.
Neither of us spoke for a bit. I could tell that he was still
thinking, but the quicksand of sl eep was once more pulling me
down, clinging and seductive.
“What i f I canna keep ye safe?” he whispered at last. His
head mo ved sud denly on the pi llow , turning toward me. “Y ouand the rest of th em? I shall try wi’ all my strength, Sassenach,
and I dinna mind if I die doing it, but what if I should die too
soon—and fail?”
And what answer was there to that?
“Y ou won’ t,” I whispered back . He sighed, and bent his
head, so his forehead rested against mine. I could smell eggs
and whisky , warm on his breath.
“I’ll try not,” he said, and I put my mouth on his, soft
against mine, acknowledgment and comfort in the dark.
I lai d my head against the curve of his shoulder , wrapped a
hand ro und his arm, and breathed in the smell of his skin,
smoke and salt, as though he had been cured in the fire.
“Y ou sm ell like a smoked ham,” I murmured, and he made a
low sou nd of amusement and wedged his hand into its
accustomed spot, clasped between my thighs.
I let go then, at last, and let the heavy sands of sleep engulf
me. Perhaps he s aid it, as I fell into darkness, or perhaps I only
dreamed it.
“If I die,” he wh ispered in the d ark, “dinna follow me. The
bairns will need ye. Stay for them. I can wait.”P A R T  T W O
A  G a t h e r i n g  o f  S h a d o w s8
VICTIM OF A MASSACRE
Fr om Lor d John Gr ey
T o Mr . James Fraser , Esq.
April 14, 1773
My dear friend—
I write you in good Health, and trust that I find you
and yours in similar condition.
My Son has r eturned to England, ther e to complete his
Education. He writes with Delight of his Experiences (I
inclose a Copy of his most r ecent Letter), and assur es me
of his W ell-being. Mor e importantly , my Mother also
writes to assur e me that he flourishes, though I believe—
mor e fr om what she does not say than fr om what she does
—that he intr oduces an unaccustomed Element of
Confusion and Upheaval in her Household.
I confess to feeling the Lack of this Element in my own
Household. So or derly and well-r egulated a Life as mine
is these Days, you would be astonished. Still, the Quiet
seems oppr essive to me, and while I am in Health in
terms of Body , I find my Spirit somewhat flagging. I miss
W illiam sadly , I fear .
For Distraction fr om my solitary State, I have of late
undertaken a new Employment, that of making W ine.
While I admit the Pr oduct lacks the Power of your own
Distillations, I flatter myself that it is not undrinkable,
and if allowed to stand for a Y ear or two, mighteventually be palatable. I shall send you a dozen Bottles
later in the Month, by the Hand of my new Servant, Mr .
Higgins, whose History you may find inter esting.
Y ou will per haps have hear d something of a
disr eputable Brawl occurring in Boston in Mar ch of thr ee
Y ears past, which I have often seen in Newspaper and
Br oadside called a “Massacr e,” most irr esponsibly—and
most inaccurately , to one who has been privy to the
actual Occurr ence.
I was not pr esent myself, but have spoken to numer ous
of the Officers and Soldiers who wer e. If they speak truly ,
and I believe they do, such a V iew as is given by the
Boston Pr ess of the Matter has been monstr ous.
Boston is by all Accounts a perfect Hellhole of
r epublican Sentiment, with so-called “Mar ching
Societies” at lar ge in the Str eets in every W eather , these
being no mor e than an Excuse for the Assembly of Mobs,
whose chief Sport is the tormenting of the T r oops
quarter ed ther e.
Higgins tells me that no Man would dar e go out alone
in Uniform, for fear of these Mobs, and that even when in
gr eater Numbers, harassment fr om the public soon dr ove
them back to their Quarters, save when compelled by
Duty to persist.
A Patr ol of five Soldiers was so beset one Evening,
pursued not only by insults of the gr ossest Natur e, but by
hurled Stones, Clods of Earth and Dung, and other such
Rubbish. Such was the Pr ess of the Mob ar ound them that
the Men fear ed for their Safety , and thus pr esented their
W eapons, in hopes of discouraging the raucous Attentions
rained upon them. So far fr om accomplishing this Aim,
the Action pr ovoked still gr eater Outrages fr om the
Cr owd, and at some Point, a Gun was fir ed. No one can
say for sur e whether the Shot was dischar ged fr om theCr owd, or fr om one of the Soldier ’ s W eapons, let alone
whether it wer e by Accident or in Deliberation, but the
Effect of it … well, you will have sufficient Knowledge of
such Matters to imagine the Confusion of subsequent
Events.
In the End, five of the Mob wer e killed, and while the
Soldiers wer e buffeted and badly handled, they escaped
alive, only to be made Scapegoats by the malicious
Rantings of the mob’ s Leaders in the Pr ess, these so
styled as to make it seem a wanton and unpr ovoked
Slaughter of Innocents, rather than a Matter of Self-
defense against a Mob inflamed by Drink and
Sloganeering.
I confess that my Sympathies must lie altogether with
the Soldiers; I am sur e so much is obvious to you. They
wer e br ought to T rial, wher e the Judge discover ed Thr ee
to be Innocent, but no Doubt felt it would be Danger ous
to his own Situation to fr ee them all.
Higgins, with one other , was convicted of
Manslaughter , but pled Cler gy and was r eleased after his
Branding. The Army of course dischar ged him, and
without means of making a Living and subject to the
Oppr obrium of the Populace, he found himself in sad
Case. He tells me that he was beaten in a T avern soon
after his Release, injuries inflicted ther ein depriving him
of the Sight in one Eye, and in fact, his very Life was
thr eatened on mor e than one Occasion. So seeking Safety ,
he took Passage on a Sloop captained by my Friend,
Captain Gill, working as a Sailor , though I have seen him
sail and I assur e you he is not one.
This state of Affairs became soon evident to Captain
Gill, who terminated his Employment upon arrival at
their first Port. I was in the T own on Business, and
encounter ed Captain Gill, who told me of Higgins’ s
desperate Situation.I contrived to find the Man, feeling some Pity for a
Soldier who appear ed to me to have performed his Duty
honorably , and thinking it har d that he should suffer by it.
Discovering him to be intelligent and of a generally
agr eeable Character , I engaged him in Service, wher ein
he has pr oved most faithful.
I send him with the W ine, in Hopes that your W ife
might be so kind as to examine him. The local Physician,
one Dr . Potts, has seen him, and declar es the Injury to his
Eye irr etrievable, as indeed it may be. Having some
personal Experience of your W ife’ s skill, however , I
wonder whether she might suggest T r eatment for his
other Ills; Dr . Potts was unable to be of much Help. T ell
her , please, that I am her humble Servant, and r emain in
perpetual Gratitude for her Kindness and Ability .
My warmest Regar ds to your Daughter , for whom I
have sent a small Pr esent, to arrive with the W ine. I trust
her Husband will not take Offense at my Familiarity , by
Consideration of my long Acquaintance with your
Family , and will allow her to accept it.
As always, I r emain your Ob’ t. Servant,
John Gr ey9
THE THRESHOLD OF W AR
April 1773
R OBER T HIGGI NS W AS a slight young man, so thin as to
seem that his bones were barely held together by his clothes,
and so pale that it was easy to imagine you could in fact see
through him. He was, however , graced with lar ge, candid blue
eyes, a mass of wavy , light-brown hair , and a shy manner that
caused Mrs. Bug to take him at once under her wing and
declare a firm intent to “feed him up,” before he should depart
back to V ir ginia.
I q uite liked Mr . Higgins myself; he was a sweet-natured
boy , with the soft accent of his native Dorset. I did rather
wonder , though,  whether Lord J ohn Grey’ s generosity toward
him was as unselfish as it seemed.
I ha d come rel uctantly to like John Grey , too, after our
shared e xperience of the measles a few years earlier , and his
friendship to Brianna while Ro ger was held captive by the
Iroquois. Still, I remained acutely aware of the fact that Lord
John did like men—specificall y , Jamie, but certainly other
men, as well.
“Beauchamp,” I said to myself, laying out trillium roots to
dry , “you have a very suspicious mind.”
“A ye, ye have,” said a voice be hind me, sounding amused.
“Whom do ye suspect of doing what?”
I je rked in sta rtlement and sent trilliums flying in all
directions.
“Oh, it’ s  you,” I said crossly . “Why must you sneak up on
me like that?”
“Practice,” Jamie said, kissing me on the forehead. “I
shouldna like to lose my touch  at stalking game. Why d’yetalk to yourself?”
“It assu res me of a good listener ,” I said tartly , and he
laughed, bending to help me pick up the roots from the floor .
“Who are ye suspecting, Sassenach?”
I hes itated, but w as unable to come up with anything but the
truth.
“I was wondering whether John Grey’ s buggering our Mr .
Higgins,” I said baldly . “Or intends to.”
He blinked slightly , but didn’ t look shocked—which in
itself suggested to me that he’d considered the same
possibility .
“What makes ye think so?”
“He’ s a very pretty young man , for the one thing,” I said,
taking a handful of the roots from  him and beginning to spread
them out on a sheet of gauze. “And he’ s got the worst case of
piles I’ve ever seen in a man of his age, for another .”
“He let ye look  at them?” Jamie had flushed up himself at
the m ention of buggery; he dis liked me being indelicate, but
he’d asked, after all.
“W ell, it took no little persuasion,” I said. “He told me about
them readily enough, but he wa sn’ t keen to have me examine
them.”
“I would na care for that prospect, either ,” Jamie assured me,
“and I’m wed to  ye. Why on earth would ye want to look at
such a thing, bey ond morbid curiosity?” He cast a wary glance
at my big blac k casebook, open on the table. “Y e’re no
drawing pictures of poor Bobby Higgins’ s backside in there,
are ye?”
“No nee d. I can’ t imagine a physician in any time who
doesn’ t know what piles look like. The ancient Israelites and
Egyptians had them, after all.”
“They did?”
“It’ s in the Bible. Ask Mr . Christie,” I advised.He gave me a sidelong look.
“Y e’ve been discussing the Bibl e wi’ T om Christie? Y e’re a
braver man than I am, Sassenac h.” Christie was a most devout
Presbyterian, an d never happier than when hitting someone
over the head with a fistful of Sacred Scripture.
“Not me . Germa in asked me las t week what ‘emerods’ are.”
“What are they?”
“Piles. Then said they , What shall be the tr espass offering
which we shall r eturn to him? They answer ed, Five golden
emer ods, and five golden mice, accor ding to the number of the
lor ds of the Philistines, ” I quot ed, “or something of the sort.
That’ s as close a s I can come from memory . Mr . Christie made
Germain write out a verse from  the Bible as punishment, and
having a n inqui ring sort of min d, Germain wondered what it
was he was writing.”
“And he wouldna ask Mr . Christie, of course.” Jamie
frowned, rubbing a finger down the bridge of his nose. “Do I
want to know what it was Germain did?”
“Almost certainly not.” T om Christie earned the quitrent on
his land  by serving as the local schoolmaster , and seemed
capable of keeping discipline o n his own terms. My opinion
was that having Germain Fraser  as a pupil was probably worth
the entire amount, in terms of labor .
“Gold emerods,” Jamie mur mured. “W ell, there’ s a
thought.” He had assumed the f aintly dreamy air he often had
just before coming up with some hair -raising notion involving
the possibility of maiming, death, or life imprisonment. I
found this expression mildly alarming, but whatever the train
of thought triggered by golden hemorrhoids, he abandoned it
for the moment, shaking his head.
“W ell, so. W e were speaking of Bobby’ s backside?”
“Oh, ye s. As for why I wanted to look at Mr . Higgins’ s
emerods,” I said, returning to the previous point of
conversation, “I wanted to see whether the best treatment was
amelioration, or removal.”Jamie’ s eyebrows went up at that.
“Remove them? How? W i’ your wee knife?” He glanced at
the case  where I kept my sur gical tools, and hunched his
shoulders in aversion.
“I could , yes, though I imagine  it would be rather painful
without anesthesia. There was a much simpler method just
coming into widespread use, though, when I … left.” Just for a
moment, I felt a deep twinge of longing for my hospital. I
could all but s mell the disinfectant, hear the murmur and
bustle o f nurses and orderlies, t ouch the glossy covers of the
research journals bulging with ideas and information.
Then it was gon e, and I was estimating the desirability of
leeches versus string, with reference to Mr . Higgins’ s
achieving ideal anal health.
“Dr . Rawlings advises the use of leeches,” I explained.
“T wenty or thirty , he says, for a serious case.”
Jamie nodded, showing no particular revulsion at the idea.
Of c ourse, he’d been leeched a f ew times himself, and assured
me that it didn’ t hurt.
“A ye. Y e havena got that many on hand, do ye? Shall I
collect the wee lads and set them to gathering?”
Jemmy and Germain would like nothing better than an
excuse to go bogging through the creeks with their
grandfather , coming back festooned with leeches and mud to
the eyebrows, but I shook my head.
“No. Or I mean, yes,” I corrected. “At your convenience—
but I don’ t need them immediately . Using leeches would
relieve the situation temporarily , but Bobby’ s hemorrhoids are
badly thrombosed—have clots of dried blood in them—” I
emended, “and I think he really would be better of f if I remove
them en tirely . I believe I can ligate them—tie a thread very
tightly round the base of each hemorrhoid, I mean. That
starves them of blood, and even tually , they just dry up and fall
of f. V ery neat.”“V erra neat,” Jamie murmured, in echo. He looked mildly
apprehensive. “Have ye done it before?”
“Y es, once or twice.”
“Ah.” He pursed his lips, a pparently envisioning the
process. “How … er , I mean … can he shit, d’ye think, while
this is going on? It must take a bit of time, surely .”
I frowned, tapping a finger on the countertop.
“His ch ief dif fi culty is that he  doesn’ t  shit,” I said. “Not
often enough, I mean, and not with the proper consistency .
Horrible diet,” I said, pointing an accusatory finger at him.
“He told me. Bread, meat, and ale. No vegetables, no fruit.
Constipation is absolutely rife  in the British army , I don’ t
doubt. I shouldn’ t be surprised if every man jack of them has
piles hanging out of his arse like grape clusters!”
Jamie nodded, one eyebrow raised.
“There are a great many things I admire about ye, Sassenach
—especially the  delicate manner of your conversation.” He
coughed, glancing downward. “But if ye say it’ s costiveness
that causes piles—”
“It is.”
“A ye, well. It’ s only—what ye were saying about John
Grey . I mean, ye don’ t think the state of Bobby’ s arse is to do
with … mmphm.”
“Oh. W ell, no, not directly .” I paused. “It was more that
Lord Joh n said in his letter that he wanted me to—how did he
put it?— I m ight suggest tr eatment for his other ills.  I  mean,  he
might possibly know about Bobby’ s dif ficulty , without … er
… personal inspection, shall we say? But as I  say , piles are so
commonplace an  af fliction, why ought he be concerned to the
point of  asking me to do some thing about them—unless he
thought that they might hampe r his own eventual … er …
progress?”
Jamie’ s face had resumed its normal hue during the
discussion of leeches and const ipation, but at this point, wentred again.
“His—”
“I mean ,” I said, folding my arms beneath my bosom, “I’m
just a trifle put of f … by the notion that he’ s sent Mr . Higgins
down for repair , you might say .” I had been suf fering from a
niggling feeling of unease regarding the matter of Bobby
Higgins’ s backside, but hadn’ t put this notion into words
before. Now that I had, I realized precisely what was bothering
me.
“The thought that I’m meant to be fixing up poor little
Bobby , a nd then  sending him ho me to be—” I pressed my lips
tight together , and turned abruptly back to my roots,
needlessly turning them.
“I don’ t like the thought,” I said, to the cupboard door . “I’ll
do what I can for Mr . Higgins, mind. Bobby Higgins hasn’ t
many pr ospects; no doubt he’d do … whatever his Lordship
required. But perhaps I’m wronging him. Lord John, I mean.”
“Perhaps ye are.”
I t urned  round, to find Jamie sitting on my stool, fiddling
with a jar of goose grease that seemed to have his full
attention.
“W ell,” I said uncertainly . “Y ou know him better than I do.
If you think he isn’ t …” My w ords trailed of f. Outside, there
was a sudden so ft thump as a falling spruce cone struck the
wooden stoop.
“I ke n m ore abo ut John Grey th an I wish I did,” Jamie said
finally , a nd glan ced at me, a rueful smile in the corner of his
mouth. “And he kens a great dea l more about me than I like to
think on. But”—he leaned forward, setting down the jar , then
put his hands on his knees and looked at me—”I ken the one
thing beyond doubt. He’ s an honorable man. He wouldna take
advantage of Higgins, nor any other man under his
protection.”
He soun ded very  definite about it, and I felt reassured. I did
like John Grey . And still … the appearance of his letters,regular as clockwork, always ga ve me a faint sense of unease,
like the hearing of distant thunder . There was nothing about
the letters themselves to evoke such a response; they were like
the man himself—erudite, humorous, and sincere. And he had
reason to write, of course. More than one.
“He does still love you, you know ,” I said quietly .
He nodded, but didn’ t look a t me, his gaze still fixed
somewhere beyond the trees that edged the dooryard.
“W ould you rather he didn’ t?”
He paus ed, then  nodded again. This time, though, he did
turn to look at me.
“I w ould, aye. For myself. F or him, certainly . But for
W illiam?” He shook his head, uncertain.
“Oh, he may ha ve taken W illiam on for your sake,” I said,
leaning back against the count er . “But I’ve seen the two of
them, remember . I’ve no doubt he loves W illie for his own
sake now .”
“No, I dinna dou bt that, either .” He got up, restless, and beat
imaginary dust from the pleats o f his kilt. His face was closed,
looking inward at something he didn’ t wish to share with me.
“Do you—” I be gan, but stopped when he glanced up at me.
“No. It doesn’ t matter .”
“What?” He tilted his head to one side, eyes narrowing.
“Nothing.”
He didn’ t move, merely intensified the stare.
“I can see from your face that it’ s not, Sassenach. What?”
I b reathed deeply through my nose, fists wrapped in my
apron.
“It’ s onl y—and I’m sure it isn ’ t true, it’ s only a passing
thought—”
He m ade a low  Scottish noise, indicating that I had better
stop blethering and cough it up.  Having enough experience torealize that he wouldn’ t leave the matter ‘til I did, I coughed.
“Did you ever w onder whether Lord John might have taken
him because … well, W illiam d oes look terribly like you, and
evidently did from an early ag e. Since Lord John finds you
physically … attractive …” The words died, and I could have
cut my throat for speaking them, seeing the look on his face.
He closed his eyes for a moment, to stop me looking in. His
fists were curled up so tightly that the veins stood out from
knuckle to forearm. V ery slow ly , he relaxed his hands. He
opened his eyes.
“No,” he said, co mplete conviction in his voice. He gave me
a str aight, hard l ook. “And it’ s n o that I canna bear the thought
of it, either . I know .”
“Of course,” I said hastily , eager to leave the subject.
“I k now ,” he repeated more sh arply . His two stif f fingers
tapped, once, against his leg, and then stilled. “I thought of it,
too. When he first told me he meant to wed Isobel Dunsany .”
He turned away , staring out thro ugh the window . Adso was
in the dooryard, stalking something in the grass.
“I of fere d him my body ,” Jamie said abruptly , not looking
round. T he words were steady enough, but I could see from
the knotted shoulders how much  it cost him to speak them. “In
thanks, I said. But it was—” He made an odd convulsive
movement, as though trying to free himself from some
constraint. “I meant to see, ken, what sort of man he might be,
for sure. This man who would take my son for his own.”
His voic e shook, very slightly , w hen he said, “take my son,”
and I moved to him by instinct, wanting somehow to patch the
open wound beneath those words.
He was stif f w hen I touched him, not wanting to be
embraced—but he took my hand and squeezed it.
“Could you … r eally tell, do you think?” I was not shocked;
John Grey had told me of that of fer , years before, in Jamaica. I
didn’ t think he had realized the true nature of it, though.Jamie’ s hand tightened on mine , and his thumb traced the
outline of mine, rubbing lightly over the nail. He looked down
at m e, a nd I felt his eyes search  my face—not in question, but
in the way one  does when see ing anew some object grown
familiar—seeing with the eyes what has been seen for a long
time only with the heart.
His free  hand rose and traced the line of my brows, two
fingers r esting for an instant on the bone of my cheek, then
moved up, back, cool in the warmth of my hair .
“Y e canna be so  close to another ,” he said finally . “T o be
within each other , to smell the ir sweat, and rub the hairs of
your bod y with theirs and see n othing of their soul. Or if ye
can  do that …” He hesitated, and I wondered whether he
thought of Black Jack Randall, o r of Laoghaire, the woman he
had married, thinking me dead. “W ell … that is a dreadful
thing in itself,” he finished softly , and his hand dropped away .
There was silence between us. A sudden rustle came from
the grass outside as Adso lun ged and disappeared, and a
mockingbird beg an to shriek alarm from the big red spruce. In
the k itchen, something was drop ped with a clang, and then the
rhythmic shoosh  of sweeping began. All the homely sounds of
this life we had made.
Had I ever done that? Lain with  a man, and seen nothing of
his soul? Indeed I had, and he was right. A breath of coldness
touched me, and the hairs rose, silent on my skin.
He heav ed a sigh that seemed to come from his feet, and
rubbed a hand over his bound hair .
“But he wouldn a do it. John.” He looked up then, and gave
me a  cro oked sm ile. “He loved me, he said. And if I couldna
give him that in return—and he kent I couldn’ t—then he’d not
take counterfeit for true coin.”
He shook himself, hard, like a dog coming out of the water .
“No. A man who would say such a thing is not one who’d
bugger a  child for the sake of his father ’ s bonny blue eyes, I’ll
tell ye that for certain, Sassenach.”“No,” I said. “T ell me …” I hesitated, and he looked at me,
one eyebrow up. “If—if he had  … er … taken you up on that
of fer—and you’d found him …” I fumbled for some
reasonable wording. “Less, um, decent than you might hope
—”
“I should have b roken his neck there by the lake,” he said.
“It w ouldna have mattered if th ey’d hanged me; I’d not have
let him have the boy .
“But he didn’ t, and I did,” he added with a half-shrug. “And
if w ee B obby goes to his Lordship’ s bed, I think it will be of
his own free will.”
NO MA N IS really at his best with someone else’ s hand up his
arse. I had noticed this before, and Robert Higgins was no
exception to the general rule.
“Now , th is won’ t hurt much at all,” I said as soothingly as
possible. “All you need to do is to keep quite still.”
“Oh, I s’all do that, mum, indeed I will,” he assured me
fervently .
I had him on the sur gery table, wearing only his shirt, and
situated foursquare on hands and knees, which brought the
area of operation conveniently to eye level. The forceps and
ligatures I should need were pl aced on the small table to my
right, with a bowl of fresh leeches alongside, in case of need.
He emitted a sm all shriek when I applied a wet cloth soaked
in turpentine to the area, in orde r to cleanse it thoroughly , but
was as good as his word and didn’ t move.
“Now , we are g oing to obtain a very good ef fect here,” I
assured him, taking up a pair of long-nosed forceps. “But if the
relief is to be permanent, there will have to be a drastic change
in your diet. Do you understand me?”
He gasp ed deeply , as I grasped one of the hemorrhoids and
pulled it toward me. There were three, a classic presentation,
at n ine, two, and five o’clock . Bulbous as raspberries, and
quite the same color .“Oh! Y -yes, mum.”
“Oatmeal,” I said firmly , transferring the forceps to my
other ha nd without lessening the grip, and taking up a needle
threaded with silk thread in my right. “Porridge every
morning, without fail. Have you noticed a change for the
better in your b owel habits, since Mrs. Bug has been feeding
you parritch for breakfast?”
I passe d the thread loosely round the base of the
hemorrhoid, then delicately pushed the needle up beneath the
loop, making a small noose of it, and pulled tight.
“Ahhh … oh! Erm … tell ‘ee truth, mum, it’ s like shitting
house bricks covered with hedgehog skin, makes no matter
what I eat.”
“W ell, i t will,” I assured him, securing the ligature with a
knot. I released the hemorrhoid, and he breathed deeply .
“Now , grapes. Y ou like grapes, don’ t you?”
“No’m. Sets me teeth on edge to bite ‘em.”
“Really?” His teeth didn’ t look badly decayed; I should
have a closer lo ok at his mouth ; he might be suf fering from
mar ginal scurvy . “W ell, we’ll have Mrs. Bug make a nice
raisin pie for yo u; you can eat  that with no dif ficulty . Does
Lord John have a capable cook? ” I took aim with my forceps
and got  hold of the next one. Now accustomed to the
sensation, he only grunted a bit.
“Y essum. Be an Indian, he is, named Manoke.”
“Hmm.” Round,  up, tighten, tie of f. “I’ll write out a receipt
for t he raisin pie , for you to carry back to him. Does he cook
yams, or beans? Beans are quite good for the purpose.”
“I b’lieve he does, mum, but his Lordship—”
I had the windows open for ventilation—Bobby was no
filthier than the average, but he was certainly no cleaner—and
at th is point, I heard sounds from the trailhead; voices, and the
jingle of harness.Bobby h eard them, too, and glanced wildly at the window ,
hindquarters ten sing as though to spring of f the table like a
grasshopper . I grasped him by o ne leg, but then thought better
of it. There was  no way of covering the window , bar closing
the shutters, and I needed the light.
“Go ahead and s tand up,” I told him, letting go and reaching
for a towel. “I’ ll go and see who it is.” He followed this
direction with alacrity , scrambli ng down and reaching hastily
for his breeches.
I s teppe d out onto the porch, in  time to greet the two men
who led  their mules up over the last arduous slope and into the
yard. Richard Brown, and his brother Lionel, from the
eponymously named Brownsville.
I wa s su rprised to see them; it was a good three-day ride to
Brownsville from the Ridge, and there was little commerce
between the two settlements. It was at least that far to Salem,
in the opposite direction, but the inhabitants of the Ridge went
there much more frequently; the Moravians were both
industrious and great traders, taking honey , oil, salt fish, and
hides in trade for cheese, potte ry , chickens, and other small
livestock. So far as I knew , the denizens of Brownsville dealt
only in cheap trade goods fo r the Cherokee, and in the
production of a very inferior type of beer , not worth the ride.
“Good day , mistress.” Richard, the smaller and elder of the
brothers, touche d the brim of his hat, but didn’ t take it of f. “Is
your husband to home?”
“He’ s out by the hay barn, scraping hides.” I wiped my
hands carefully on the towel I was carrying. “Do come round
to the kitchen; I’ll bring up some cider .”
“Don’ t t rouble.” W ithout further ado, he turned and set of f
purposefully round the house. Lionel Brown, a bit taller than
his b rother , though with the sam e spare, almost gangly build
and the same tob acco-colored h air , nodded briefly to me as he
followed.They ha d left their mules, reins hanging, evidently for me to
tend. The animals were beginni ng to amble slowly across the
yard, pausing to crop the long grass that edged the path.
“Hmpf!” I said, glaring after the brothers Brown.
“Who a re they?” said a low voice behind me. Bobby
Higgins had come out and was  peering of f the corner of the
porch with his g ood eye. Bobby tended to be wary of strangers
—and no wonder , given his experiences in Boston.
“Neighbors, such as they are.” I lunged of f the porch and
caught o ne of the mules by the  bridle as he reached for the
peach sapling I had planted near the porch. Disliking this
interference in his af fairs, he bra yed ear -splittingly in my face,
and attempted to bite me.
“Here, mum, let me.” Bobby , already holding the other
mule’ s reins, leaned past to take  the halter from me. “Hark at
‘ee!” he said to the obstreperous mule. “Hush tha noise, else I
take a stick to ‘ee, then!”
Bobby h ad been a foot soldier  rather than cavalry , it was
clear to see. The words were bold enough, but ill-matched
with his tentative manner . He g ave a perfunctory yank on the
mule’ s reins. The mule promptly  laid back its ears and bit him
in the arm.
He screamed and let go both sets of reins. Clarence, my own
mule, he aring the racket, set up a loud bray of greeting from
his p en, and the two strange mules promptly trotted of f in that
direction, stirrup leathers bouncing.
Bobby wasn’ t badly hurt, though the mule’ s teeth had
broken the skin; spots of blood seeped through the sleeve of
his shirt . As I was turning back the cloth to have a look at it, I
heard footsteps on the porch, and looked up to see Lizzie, a
lar ge wooden spoon in hand, looking alarmed.
“Bobby! What’ s happened?”
He s traightened at once, seeing her , assuming nonchalance,
and brushed a lock of curly brown hair of f his brow .“Ah, oh! Naught, miss. Bit o ’ trouble with tha sons o’
Belial, like. No fear , it’ s fine.”
Whereupon his eyes rolled up in his head and he fell over in
a dead faint.
“Oh!” Lizzie flew down the s teps and knelt beside him,
ur gently patting his cheek. “Is he all right, Mrs. Fraser?”
“God kn ows,” I said frankly . “I think so, though.” Bobby
appeared to be breathing norma lly , and I found a reasonable
pulse in his wrist.
“Shall we carry him inside? Or should I fetch a burnt
feather , do you think? Or the spirits of ammonia from the
sur gery? Or some brandy?” Lizzie hovered like an anxious
bumblebee, rea dy to fly of f in any of several dif ferent
directions.
“No, I think he’ s  coming round.” Most faints last only a few
seconds, and I could see his  chest lift as his breathing
deepened.
“Bit o’ brandy wouldn’ t come amiss,” he murmured, eyelids
beginning to flutter .
I nodde d to Lizzie, who vanished back into the house,
leaving her spoon behind on the grass.
“Feeling a bit peaky , are you?” I inquired sympathetically .
The injury to his arm was no more than a scratch, and I
certainly hadn’ t done anything of a shocking nature to him—
well, not physically shocking. What was the trouble here?
“I du nno, mum.” He was trying to sit up, and while he was
white as  a sheet, seemed otherwise all right, so I let him. “It’ s
only , every now and again, I g ets these spots, like, whirring
round me head like a swarm o’ bees, and then it all goes
black.”
“Now and again? It’ s happened before?” I asked sharply .
“Y essum.” His head wobbled like a sunflower in the breeze,
and I put a hand under his armpit, lest he fall over again. “HisLordship was in hopes you might know summat would stop
it.”
“His Lord—oh, he knew about the fainting?” W ell, of
course h e would , if Bobby were  in the habit of falling over in
front of him.
He nodded, and took a deep, gasping breath.
“Doctor Potts bled me regular , twice a week, but it didn’ t
seem to help.”
“I dares ay not. I hope he was of somewhat more help with
your piles,” I remarked dryly .
A faint tinge o f pink—he had scarcely enough blood to
provide a decent blush, poor bo y—rose in his cheeks, and he
glanced away , fixing his gaze on the spoon.
“Erm … I, um, didn’ t mention that  to anybody .”
“Y ou didn’ t?” I was surprised at that. “But—”
“See, ‘tw as only  the riding. Fro m V ir ginia.” The pink tinge
grew . “I’d not have let on, save I was in such agony after a
week on yon bloody horse—saving your presence, mum—I’d
no chance of hiding it.”
“So Lord John didn’ t know about that, either?”
He shook his head vigorously , making the disheveled brown
curls flop back over his forehea d. I felt rather annoyed—with
myself f or havin g evidently misjudged John Grey’ s motives,
and with John Grey , for making me feel a fool.
“W ell …  are you feeling a bit better , now?” Lizzie was not
appearing with the brandy , and I wondered momentarily where
she was . Bobby was still very pale, but nodded gamely , and
struggled to his feet, where he stood swaying and blinking,
trying to  keep his balance. Th e “M” branded on his cheek
stood out, an angry red against the pallid skin.
Distracted by Bobby’ s faint, I had ignored the sounds
coming from the other side of the house. Now , though, I
became aware of voices, and approaching footsteps.Jamie an d the two Browns came  into sight round the corner
of the house, then stopped, seeing us. Jamie had been frowning
slightly; the frown grew deeper . The Browns, by contrast,
seemed oddly elated, though in a grim sort of way .
“So it’ s true, then.” Richard B rown stared hard at Bobby
Higgins, then turned to Jamie. “Y ou’ve a murderer on your
premises!”
“Have I?” Jamie was coldly polite. “I’d no idea.” He bowed
to Bobby Higgins with his best French-court manner , then
straightened, gesturing to the Browns. “Mr . Higgins, may I
present Mr . Richard Brown and Mr . Lionel Brown.
Gentlemen, my guest, Mr . Higgins.” The words “my guest”
were spoken with a particular emphasis that made Richard
Brown’ s thin mouth compress to near invisibility .
“Have a care, F raser ,” he said, staring hard at Bobby , as
though daring him to evaporate. “Keeping the wrong company
can be dangerous, these days.”
“I choose my company as I will, sir .” Jamie spoke softly ,
biting of f each word between h is teeth. “And I do not choose
yours. Joseph!”
Lizzie’ s father , Joseph W emyss,  appeared round the corner ,
leading the two renegade mules, who now seemed docile as
kittens, though either of them dwarfed Mr . W emyss.
Bobby Higgins,  flabber gasted by the proceedings, looked
wildly at me for explanation. I shrugged slightly , and kept
silence as the two Browns mounted and rode out of the
clearing, backs stif f with anger .
Jamie waited ‘til they’d disappeared from view , then blew
out his breath, r ubbing a hand viciously through his hair and
muttering somet hing in Gaelic. I  didn’ t follow the finer points,
but I gathered that he was co mparing the character of our
recent v isitors to that of Mr . Higgins’ s piles—to the detriment
of the former .
“Beg pardon, sir?” Higgins looked bewildered, but anxious
to please.Jamie glanced at him.
“Let the m awa’ and bile their heids,” he said, dismissing the
Browns with a flip of the hand. He caught my eye and turned
toward the house. “Come ben, Bobby; I’ve a thing or two to
say to ye.”
I FO LLOWED them in, both f rom curiosity and in case Mr .
Higgins should feel faint again; he seemed steady enough, but
still very pale. B y contrast with Bobby Higgins, Mr . W emyss
—fair -haired and slight as his daughter—looked the picture of
ruddy health. Whatever was the matter with Bobby? I
wondered. I stole a discreet look  at the seat of his breeches as I
followed him, but that was all right; no bleeding.
Jamie led the way into his study , gesturing at the motley
collection of stools and boxes he used for visitors, but both
Bobby and Mr . W emyss chose to stand—Bobby for obvious
reasons, Mr . W emyss from respect; he was never comfortable
sitting in Jamie’ s presence, save at meals.
Unhampered by either bodily or social reservations, I settled
myself on the best stool and raised one eyebrow at Jamie, who
had sat down himself at the table he used as a desk.
“This is  the way of it,” he said  without preamble. “Brown
and his brother have declared themselves head of a Committee
of S afety , and ca me to enlist me  and my tenants as members of
it.” H e g lanced at me, the corne r of his mouth curling a little.
“I declined, as ye doubtless noticed.”
My stomach contracted slightly , thinking of what Major
MacDonald had said—and of what I knew . It was beginning,
then.
“Committee of Safety?” Mr . W emyss looked bewildered,
and glanced at Bobby Higgins—who was beginning to look
substantially less so.
“Have they , so?” Bobby said so ftly . Strands of curly brown
hair had escaped from their binding; he fingered one back
behind his ear .“Y e’ve heard of such committees before, Mr . Higgins?”
Jamie inquired, raising one brow .
“Met one, zur . Close-like.” Bobby touched a finger briefly
below his blind eye. He was still pale, but beginning to recover
his self-possession. “Mobs they be, zur . Like they mules, but
more of them— and more wicious.” He gave a lopsided smile,
smoothing the shirt-sleeve over the bite on his arm.
The mention of mules reminde d me abruptly , and I stood
up, putting a sudden stop to the conversation.
“Lizzie! Where’ s Lizzie?”
Not waiting for an answer to thi s rhetorical question, I went
to the study doo r and shouted her name—only to be met by
silence. She’d gone in for brandy; there was plenty , in a jug in
the k itchen, and she knew that— I’d seen her reach it down for
Mrs. Bug only the night befor e. She must be in the house.
Surely she wouldn’ t have gone—
“Elizabeth? Elizabeth, where are you?” Mr . W emyss was
right behind me, calling, as I strode down the hall to the
kitchen.
Lizzie w as lying  in a dead faint on the hearth, a limp bundle
of cl othes, one f rail hand flung out as though she had tried to
save herself as she fell.
“Miss W emyss! ” Bobby Higgins shouldered his way past
me, looking frantic, and scooped her up into his arms.
“Elizabeth!” Mr . W emyss elbowed his way past me as well,
his face nearly as white as his daughter ’ s.
“Do let me look  at her , will you?” I said, elbowing firmly
back. “Put her down on the settle, Bobby , do.”
He r ose carefully with her in his  arms, then sat down on the
settle, still holding her , wincing  slightly as he did so. W ell, if
he wanted to be a hero, I hadn’ t time to ar gue with him. I knelt
and seized her w rist in search of a pulse, smoothing the pale
hair of f her face with my other hand.One look had b een enough to tell me what was likely the
matter . S he was clammy to the  touch, and the pallor of her
face was tinged with gray . I could feel the tremor of oncoming
chills that ran through her flesh, unconscious as she was.
“The ague’ s back, is it?” Jamie a sked. He’d appeared by my
side, and was g ripping Mr . W emyss by the shoulder , at once
comforting and restraining.
“Y es,” I said br iefly . Lizzie had malaria, contracted on the
coast a few ye ars before, and was subject to occasional
relapses—though she hadn’ t had one in more than a year .
Mr . W emyss took a deep, au dible breath, a little color
coming back to his face. He was familiar with malaria, and
had con fidence that I could dea l with it. I had, several times
before.
I hoped that I could this time. Lizzie’ s pulse was fast and
light und er my fingers, but regu lar , and she was beginning to
stir . Still, the sp eed and suddenness with which the attack had
come on was fr ightening. Had she had any warning? I hoped
the concern I felt didn’ t show on my face.
“T ake h er up to her bed, cover her , get a hot stone for her
feet,” I said, ris ing and addressing Bobby and Mr . W emyss
briskly in turn. “I’ll start some medicine brewing.”
Jamie followed me down to the sur gery , glancing back over
his shoulder to be sure that the others were out of earshot
before speaking.
“I th ought ye w ere out of the Jesuit bark?” he asked, low-
voiced.
“I am. Damn it. ” Malaria was a chronic disease, but for the
most part, I had been able to keep it under control with small,
regular doses of cinchona bark. But I had run out of cinchona
during th e winte r , and no one had yet been able to travel down
to the coast for more.
“So, then?”
“I’m thinking.”I pulled open the door of the cupboard, and gazed at the neat
ranks of  glass bottles therein— many of them empty , or with
no more  than a few scattered crumbs of leaf or root inside.
Everything was  depleted, after a cold, wet winter of grippe,
influenza, chilblains, and hunting accidents.
Febrifuges. I had a number of things that would help a
normal f ever; malaria was something else. There was plenty of
dogwood root and bark, at le ast; I had collected immense
quantities durin g the fall, fore seeing the need. I took that
down, and after a moment’ s tho ught, added the jar containing
a sort of gentian known locally as “agueweed.”
“Put on the ket tle, will you?” I asked Jamie, frowning to
myself as I crumbled roots, bark, and weed into my mortar . All
I c ould do was to treat the supe rficial symptoms of fever and
chill. And shock, I thought, better treat for that, too.
“And bring me a little honey , too, please!” I called after
him, as he had already reached the door . He nodded and went
hurriedly toward  the kitchen, hi s footsteps quick and solid on
the oak floorboards.
I b egan to poun d the mixture, still turning over additional
possibilities. Som e small part of my mind was half-glad of the
emer gency; I could put of f for a little while the necessity of
hearing about the Browns and their beastly committee.
I h ad a m ost uneasy feeling. Wh atever they wanted, it didn’ t
portend anything good, I was sure; they certainly hadn’ t left on
friendly terms. As for what Jamie might feel obliged to do in
response to them—
Horse chestnut. That was sometimes used for the tertian
ague, as Dr . Raw lings called it. Did I have any left? Glancing
quickly over the jars and bot tles in the medicine chest, I
stopped, seeing one with an inch or so of dried black globules
left at the bottom. Gallberries,  t he labe l read. Not mine; it was
one of Rawlings’ s jars. I’d never used them for anything. But
something niggled at my memory . I’d heard or read something
about gallberries; what was it?Half-unconsciously , I picked up the jar and opened it,
snif fing. A sharp, astringent smell rose from the berries,
slightly bitter . And slightly familiar .
Still hol ding the  jar , I went to th e table where my big black
casebook lay , and flipped hastily to the early pages, those
notes le ft by the man who had first owned both book and
medicine chest, Daniel Rawlings. Where had it been?
I wa s still flippi ng pages, scanning for the shape of a half-
remembered not e, when Jamie came back, a jug of hot water
and a dish of honey in hand—and the Beardsley twins dogging
his steps.
I g lance d at them, but said nothing; they tended to pop up
unexpectedly , like a pair of jack-in-the boxes.
“Is Miss Lizzie fearfully sick?” Jo asked anxiously , peering
around Jamie to see what I was doing.
“Y es,” I said briefly , only hal f paying attention to him.
“Don’ t worry , though; I’m fixing her some medicine.”
There it was. A brief notati on, added as an obvious
afterthought to the account of treatment of a patient whose
symptoms seemed clearly mala rial—and who had, I noticed
with an unpleasant twinge, died.
I a m told by the  T rader fr om whom I pr ocur ed Jesuit Bark
that the Indians use a Plant called Gallberry , which rivals the
Bark of Cinchon a for bitterness and is thought capital for Use
in t ertian and quartan Fevers . I have collected some for
Experiment and pr opose to try an Infusion so soon as the
Opportunity pr esents itself.
I picked out one of the dried berries and bit into it. The
pungent taste of quinine at once flooded my mouth—
accompanied by a copious flood of saliva, as my mouth
puckered at the eye-watering bitterness. Gallberry , indeed!
I div ed for the open window , spat into the herb bed beneath
and wen t on spitting, to the accompaniment of giggles and
snorts from the Beardsleys, wh o were most diverted at the
unexpected entertainment.“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Amusement was fighting
with wo rry for dominance of Jamie’ s face. He poured a bit of
water fro m the jug into a clay beaker , added a dollop of honey
as an afterthought, and handed it to me.
“Fine,” I croaked. “Don’ t drop that!” Kezzie Beardsley had
picked up the ja r of gallberries and was snif fing cautiously at
it. He nodded at my admonition, but didn’ t put the jar down,
instead handing it of f to his brother .
I took a good  mouthful of hot, honeyed water , and
swallowed. “Those—they have something like quinine in
them.”
Jamie’ s face changed at once, the worry lessening.
“So they’ll help the lass?”
“I hope so. There aren’ t many , though.”
“D’ye mean you need more o’ these things for Miss Lizzie,
Mrs. Fra ser?” Jo glanced up at  me, dark eyes sharp over the
little jar .
“Y es,” I said, su rprised. “Y ou don’ t mean you know where
to get any , surely?”
“A ye, ma’am,” Kezzie said, his voice a little loud, as usual.
“Indians got ‘em.”
“Which Indians?” Jamie asked, his gaze sharpening.
“Them Cherok ee,” Jo said, waving vaguely over one
shoulder . “By the mountain.”
This description  might have suited half a dozen villages, but
evidently it was a specific village that they had in mind, for the
two of them turned as one, obviously intending to go directly
and fetch back gallberries.
“W ait a bit, lads ,” Jamie said, sn agging Kezzie by the collar .
“I’ll go along w ith ye. Y e’ll be  needing something to trade,
after all.”
“Oh, we  got hides a-plenty , sir , ” Jo assured him. “‘T was a
good season.”Jo w as an exp ert hunter , and while Kezzie still hadn’ t
suf ficiently keen  hearing to hun t well, his brother had taught
him to run trap lines. Ian had told me that the Beardsleys’
shack was stacked nearly to th e rooftree with the hides of
beaver , marten, deer , and ermine . The smell of it always clung
to them, a faint miasma of dried blood, musk, and cold hair .
“A ye? W ell, that’ s generous of ye, Jo, to be sure. But I’ll
come, n onetheless.” Jamie glanced at me, acknowledging the
fact that he had made his decision—but asking for my
approval, nonetheless. I swallowed, tasting bitterness.
“Y es,” I said, and cleared my throat. “If—if you’re going,
let me send some things, and tell you what to ask for in trade.
Y ou won’ t leave until morning, surely?”
The Beardsleys were vibrating with impatience to be gone,
but Jam ie stood  still, looking at  me, and I felt him touch me,
without words or movement.
“No,” he said softly , “we’ll bide for the night.” He turned
then to the Beardsleys. “Go up, will ye, Jo, and ask Bobby
Higgins to come down. I’ll need to speak with him.”
“He’ s up with Miss Lizzie?” Jo Beardsley looked displeased
at th is, and his brother ’ s face echoed his expression of slit-
eyed suspicion.
“What’ s he a-doin’ in her room,  then? Don’ t he know she’ s
betrothed?” Kezzie asked, righteously .
“Her father ’ s with her , too,” Jamie assured them. “Her
reputation’ s safe, aye?”
Jo snorted briefly , but the brothers exchanged glances, then
left together , slender shoulders s et in determination to oust this
threat to Lizzie’ s virtue.
“So you’ll do i t?” I set down the pestle. “Be an Indian
agent?”
“I th ink I must. If I do not—R ichard Brown surely will. I
think I canna r isk that.” He h esitated, then drew close and
touched me lightly , fingers on my elbow . “I’ll send the ladsback at once wit h the berries ye  need. I may need to stay for a
day , ma ybe two. For the talkin g, aye?” T o tell the Cherokee
that he was now  an agent for the British Crown, he meant—
and to make ar rangements for word to be spread that the
headmen of the mountain villages should come down later to a
council for parley and gifts.
I no dded, feeling a small bubb le of fear swell under my
breastbone. It was starting. No matter how much one knows
that something dreadful is goin g to happen in the future, one
somehow never thinks it will be today .
“Not—don’ t stay away too long, will you?” I blurted, not
wanting to burden him with my fears, but unable to keep quiet.
“No,” he said softly , and his hand rested for an instant in the
small of my back. “Dinna fash yourself; I’ll not tarry .”
The sound of fe et descending the stairs echoed in the hall. I
supposed Mr . W emyss had shooed the Beardsleys out, along
with Bo bby . Th ey didn’ t stop, b ut went of f without speaking,
casting looks of veiled dislike at Bobby , who seemed quite
oblivious to them.
“Y on lad said you wanted to speak to me, zur?” He’d
regained some color , I was glad to see, and seemed steady
enough on his feet. He glance d uneasily at the table, still
spread w ith the  sheet I’d put him on, and then at me, but I
merely shook my head. I’d finish dealing with his piles later .
“A ye, Bobby .” Jamie made a bri ef gesture toward a stool, as
though to invite Bobby to sit, but I cleared my throat in a
meaningful manner , and he stopped, then leaned against the
table, rather than sitting down himself.
“Those two who came—Brown, they’re called. They’ve a
settlement some way away . Y e said ye’ve heard of the
Committees of Safety , aye? So ye’ll have some notion what
they’re about.”
“A ye, zu r . Tha Browns, zur—did they want me?” He spoke
calmly enough, but I saw him swallow briefly , Adam’ s apple
bobbing in his slender throat.Jamie sighed, and ran a hand th rough his hair . The sun was
slanting through the window now , and struck him directly ,
making his red hair glow with flame—and picking out here
and there a flic ker of the silver that was beginning to show
among the ruddy strands.
“They did. They kent ye were here; heard of ye, doubtless
from someone ye met along the way . Y e’ll have told folk
where ye were headed, I suppose?”
Bobby nodded, wordless.
“What did they want with him?”  I asked, tipping the ground
root bark and berries into a bowl and pouring hot water over
them to steep.
“They d idna make that quite clear ,” Jamie said dryly . “But
then, I didna gi ve them the chance. I only told them they’d
take a guest from my hearth over my dead body—and theirs.”
“I thanks ‘ee for that, zur .” Bobby took a deep breath. “They
—knew , I reckon? About Bost on? I’d not told anyone that,
surely .”
Jamie’ s frown deepened slightly .
“A ye, th ey did. They pretended to think I didna ken; told me
I w as harboring  a murderer unb eknownst, and a threat to the
public welfare.”
“W ell, the first is true enough, ” Bobby said, touching his
brand gingerly , as though it still  burned him. He of fered a wan
smile. “But I dunno as I s’ould be a threat to anyone, these
days.”
Jamie dismissed that.
“The point is, Bobby , that they do ken ye’re here. They’ll
not come and dr ag ye away , I think. But I’d ask ye to go canny
about th e place. I’ll make prov ision to see ye safely back to
Lord Joh n, when  the time comes , with an escort. I gather ye’re
no quite finished with him?” he asked, turning to me.
“Not quite,” I replied equably . Bobby looked apprehensive.“W ell, th en.” Jamie reached into the waist of his breeches,
and drew out a pistol, which had been hidden by the folds of
his shirt. It was, I saw , the fancy gilt-edged one.
“Keep it by ye,”  Jamie said, handing it to Bobby . “There’ s
powder and shot in the sideboard. W ill ye look out for my wife
and family , then, whilst I’m gone?”
“Oh!” Bobby looked startled, but then nodded, tucking the
pistol away in h is own breeches. “I will so, zur . Depend upon
it!”
Jamie smiled at him, his eyes warming.
“That’ s a comfort to me, Bobby . W ill ye maybe go and find
my son-in-law? I’ll need a word with him before I go.”
“A ye, zu r . Right away!” He squared his shoulders and set
of f, an expression of determination on his poet’ s face.
“What do you think they wou ld have done with him?” I
asked s oftly , as the outer door closed behind him. “The
Browns.”
Jamie shook his head.
“God knows. Hanged him at a crossroad, maybe—or maybe
only bea ten him and driven him  out of the mountains. They
want to make a show of being able to protect the folk, aye?
From da ngerous criminals and the like,” he added, with a twist
of the mouth.
“A government derives its pow ers fr om the just consent of
the governed,”  I quoted, nodding. “For a Committee of Safety
to h ave any legitimacy , there ne eds to be an obvious threat to
the publ ic safety . Clever of the Browns to have reasoned that
out.”
He gave me a look, one auburn brow raised.
“Who said that? The consent of the governed. ”
“Thomas Jef ferson,” I replied, feeling smug. “Or rather , he
will say it in another two years.”“He’ll steal it from a gentlema n named Locke in another
two years,” he corrected. “I sup pose Richard Brown must ha’
been decently educated.”
“Unlike me, you mean?” I said, unruf fled. “If you expect
trouble from the Browns, though, should you have given
Bobby that  particular pistol?”
He shrugged.
“I’ll need the go od ones. And I doubt verra much that he’ll
fire that one.”
“Counting on its deterrent ef fec t?” I was skeptical, but he
was likely right.
“A ye, that. But more on Bobby .”
“How so?”
“I doubt he’d fire a gun again to save his own life—but he
would, m aybe, to save yours. And should it come to such a
pass, the y’ll be too close to miss.” He spoke with dispassion,
but I felt the hairs prickle down my nape.
“W ell, th at’ s a comfort,” I said. “And just how do you know
what he’d do?”
“T alked to him,” he said brie fly . “The man he shot in
Boston was the first he’d ever killed. He doesna want to do it
again.” He straightened, and moved restlessly toward the
counter , where he busied himself in straightening a scatter of
small instruments I had laid out for cleaning.
I m oved  to stand beside him, watching. There was a handful
of small  cautery irons and sca lpels, soaking in a beaker of
turpentine. He took them out, one by one, wiped them dry and
laid them  back in their box, neatly , side by side. The spade-
shaped metal ends of the irons were blackened by use; the
scalpel blades were weathered to a soft glow , but the sharp
edges gleamed, a hairbreadth of bright silver .
“W e’ll be all r ight,” I said q uietly . I meant it to be a
reassuring statement, but it came out with a tinge of question.“A ye, I know ,” he said. He put the last iron in its box, but
didn’ t re place the lid. Instead, h e stood, hands spread flat on
the counter , looking straight ahead.
“I dinna  want to go,” he said softly . “I dinna want to do
this.”
I w asn’ t sure wh ether he was sp eaking to me, or to himself
—but I thought he wasn’ t referring only to his journey to the
Cherokee village.
“Neither do I,” I whispered, and moved a little closer , so I
felt his breathing. He lifted his hands then and turned toward
me, taki ng me into his arms, and we stood wrapped close,
listening to each other ’ s breat hing, the bitter smell of the
brewing tea seeping through the homely scents of linen, dust,
and sun-warmed flesh.
There were still choices to be  made, decisions to reach,
actions to take. Many of them. But in one day , one hour , one
single declaration of intent, we had stepped across the
threshold of war .1 0
DUTY CALLS
J AMIE HAD SENT BOBBY after Roger Mac, but found
himself too restless to wait, and  set of f himself, leaving Claire
to her brewing.
Everything seem ed peaceful and beautiful outside. A brown
sheep with a pair of lambs stood indolently in her pen, jaws
moving in a slow stupor of satisfaction, the lambs hopping
awkwardly to and fro like fuzzy grasshoppers behind her .
Claire’ s herb bed was full of leafing greens and sprouting
flowers.
The well lid w as ajar; he bent  to draw it into place and
found the boards had warped.  He added fixing that to the
constant list of chores and repa irs that he carried in his head,
wishing fervent ly that he could devote the next few days to
digging, hauling manure, shingling, and the like, instead of
what he was about to do.
He’d rather bury the old privy pit or castrate pigs than go
and ask Roger Mac what he kent about Indians and
revolutions. He found it mildly gruesome to discuss the future
with his son-in-law , and tried never to do it.
The things Claire told him of her own time seemed often
fantastic, with the enjoyable half-real sense of faery tales, and
sometimes macabre, but alwa ys interesting, for what he
learned of his w ife from the telling. Brianna tended to share
with him small, homely details of machinery , which were
interesting, or wild stories of me n walking on the moon, which
were immensely entertaining, b ut no threat to his peace of
mind.
Roger Mac, though, had a cold- blooded way of talking that
reminded him to an uncomfortable degree of the works of the
historians he’d read, and had therefore a sense of concretedoom about it. T alking to Rog er Mac made it seem all too
likely that this, that, or the other frightful happenstance was
not o nly indeed going  to happen—but would most likely have
direct and personal consequences.
It was like talking to a particularly evil-minded fortune-
teller , he thought, one you hadn’ t paid enough to hear
something pleasant. The thought made a sudden memory pop
up on the surface of his mind, bobbing like a fishing cork.
In Paris. He’d been with friends, other students, drinking in
the p iss-smelling  taverns near the universite.  He’ d be en fairl y
drunk himself when someone took a fancy to have his palms
read, an d he had pushed with the others into the corner where
the old woman who did it alway s sat, scarcely visible amid the
gloom and clouds of pipe smoke.
He hadn’ t intended to do it himself; he had only a few
pennies in his pocket, and did n’ t mean to waste them on
unholy nonsense. He’d said so, loudly .
Whereupon a scraggy claw had shot out of the darkness and
seized h is hand, sinking long, f ilthy nails into his flesh. He’d
yelped in surprise, and his frien ds all laughed. They laughed
harder when she spat in his palm.
She rubbed the spittle into his skin in a businesslike way ,
bent close enough that he could  smell the ancient sweat of her
and see the lice crawling in the grizzled hair that keeked from
the edge  of her rusty-black sha wl. She peered into his hand
and a dirty nail traced the lines of it, tickling. He tried to pull
his h and away , b ut she tightened her grip on his wrist, and he
found to his surprise that he could not break it.
“T’es un  chat, toi,”  the old woman  had remarked, in tones
of malicious interest. “Y ou’re a cat, you. A little red cat.”
Dubois—that was his name, Dubois—had at once begun to
miaou and yowl, to the amusem ent of the others. He himself
refused to rise to the bait, and saying only , “Mer ci, madame,”
tried again to pull away .“Neuf,”  s he said, tappin g rapid random places on his palm,
then seizing a finger and wiggling it by way of emphasis. “Y ou
have a nine in your hand.  And death,” she’d added
of fhandedly . “Y ou’ll die nine times before you rest in your
grave.”
She’d le t go then, amidst a chorus of sarcastic “aou-la-las!”
from the French students, and laughter from the rest.
He s norted, sending the memor y back where it came from,
and good riddance to it. The old woman refused to go so
easily , though, and called to hi m through the years, as she’d
called through the raucous, beer -filled air of the tavern.
“Sometimes dying doesn’ t hurt, mon p’ tit chat, ” she’d called
after him, mocking. “But more often it does.”
“No it doesn’ t,” he muttered, and stopped, appalled, hearing
himself. Christ.  It wasn’ t himself he was hearing, but his
godfather .
“Don’ t be afraid, laddie. It doe sna hurt a bit, to die.”  He
missed his footing and staggered, caught himself and stood
still, a taste of metal on the back of his tongue.
His hear t was thumping, suddenly , for no reason, as though
he h ad run miles. He saw the c abin, certainly , and heard the
calling of jays in the half-leafe d chestnut trees. But he saw
even mo re clearly Murtagh’ s face, the grim lines of it relaxing
into peace and t he deep-set black eyes fixed on his, shifting in
and out of focus, as though his godfather looked at once at him
and at something far beyond him. He felt the weight of
Murtagh’ s body in his arms, g rowing suddenly heavy as he
died.
The visi on vanished, as abruptly as it had come, and he
found h imself standing next to a rain puddle, staring at a
wooden duck half-mired in the mud.
He crossed himself, with a quick word for the repose of
Murtagh’ s soul, then bent and r etrieved the duck, washing the
mud away in th e puddle. His hands were trembling, and littlewonder . His memories of Culloden were few and fragmentary
—but they were beginning to come back.
So f ar , s uch thin gs had come to  him only in glimpses at the
edge of sleep. He’d seen Murtagh there before, and in the
dreams that followed.
He hadn’ t told Claire about them. Not yet.
He pushed open the door of the cabin, but it was empty , the
hearth smoored, spinning wheel and loom standing idle.
Brianna was likely at Fer gus’ s place, visiting Marsali. Where
would Roger Mac be now? He s tepped back outside and stood
listening.
The thump of a n ax came faintly from somewhere in the
forest beyond the cabin. It stop ped, then, and he heard men’ s
voices, raised in greeting. He turned and headed for the trail
that led upslope, half grown over with spring grass, but
showing the black smudges of fresh footmarks.
What might the old woman have told him if he’d paid her?
he w ondered. Had she lied to sp ite him for his miserliness—or
told him the truth, for the same reason?
One of the more  disagreeable things about talking to Roger
Mac was that Jamie was sure he always told the truth.
He’d for gotten t o leave the duc k at the cabin. W iping it on
his breeches, he pushed grimly through the sprouting weeds, to
hear what fate awaited him.1 1
BLOODWORK
I  P USHED THE MICROSCOPE toward Bobby Higgins, who
had returned from his errand, hi s own discomforts for gotten in
worry for Lizzie.
“See the round pinkish things?”  I said. “Those are Lizzie’ s
blood cells. Everyone has blood  cells,” I added. “They’re what
make your blood red.”
“‘Strewth,” he muttered, amazed. “I never knew!”
“W ell, n ow you  do,” I said. “Do you see that some of the
blood cells are broken? And t hat some have little spots in
them?”
“I do, mum,” he said, screwing up his face and peering
intently . “What are ‘ey , then?”
“Parasites. Little  beasts that get into your blood if a certain
kind of mosquito bites you,” I explained. “They’re called
Plasmodium.  O nce you’ve go t them, they go  on living in your
blood—but ever y so often, they begin to … er … breed. When
there are  too many of them, the y burst out of the blood cells,
and that’ s what causes a malaria l attack—the ague. The sludge
of t he broken b lood cells sort of silts up, you see, in the
or gans, and makes you feel terribly sick.”
“Oh.” H e straightened up, making a face of deep aversion at
the microscope. “That’ s … that’ s pure gashly , that is!”
“Y es, it is,” I said, succeeding in keeping a straight face.
“But quinine—Jesuit bark, you know?—will help stop it.”
“Oh, that’ s good, mum, very  good,” he said, his face
lightening. “How ever you do come to know such things,” he
said, shaking his head. “‘T is a wonder!”“Oh, I know quite a lot of things about parasites,” I said
casually , taking the saucer of f the bowl in which I had been
brewing the mix of dogwood b ark and gallberries. The liquid
was a rich purplish black, and  looked slightly viscous, now
that it had cooled. It also smelle d lethal, from which I deduced
that it was about ready .
“T ell me, Bobby—have you ever heard of hookworms?”
He looked at me blankly .
“No, mum.”
“Mm. W ould you hold this for me, please?” I put a folded
square o f gauze  over the neck of a flask and handed him the
bottle to hold while I poured the purple mixture into it.
“These fainting fits of yours,” I said, eyes on the stream.
“How long have you had them?”
“Oh … six months, mebbe.”
“I s ee. Did you  by chance notice any sort of irritation—
itching, say? Or a rash? Happening maybe seven months ago?
Most likely on your feet.”
He s tared at me , soft blue eyes thunderstruck as though I
had performed some feat of mind reading.
“Why , so I did have, mum. Last autumn, ‘twas.”
“Ah,” I said. “W ell, then. I thin k, Bobby , that you may just
possibly have a case of hookworms.”
He looked down at himself in horror .
“Where?”
“Inside.” I took the bottle from him and corked it.
“Hookworms ar e parasites that burrow through the skin—most
often through the soles of the feet—and then migrate through
the body until they reach your intestines—your , um, innards,”
I amended, seeing incomprehension cross his face. “The adult
worms h ave nas ty little hooked bills, like this”—I crooked my
index fi nger in illustration—”and they pierce the intestinallining and proceed to suck your blood. That’ s why , if you have
them, you feel very weak, and faint frequently .”
From th e suddenly clammy look of him, I rather thought he
was about to faint now ,  and  guided him hastily to a stool,
pushing his head down between his knees.
“I don’ t know f or sure that that ’ s the problem,” I told him,
bending down to address him. “I was just looking at the slides
of Lizzie’ s blood, though, and thinking of parasites, and—
well, it came to  me suddenly that a diagnosis of hookworms
would fit your symptoms rather well.”
“Oh?” he said fa intly . The thick tail of wavy hair had fallen
forward, leaving the back of his neck exposed, fair -skinned
and childlike.
“How ol d are you, Bobby?” I as ked, suddenly realizing that
I had no idea.
“T wenty-three, mum,” he said. “Mum? I think I s’all have to
puke.”
I s natche d a bucket from the cor ner and got it to him just in
time.
“Have I got rid of them?” he a sked weakly , sitting up and
wiping his mouth on his sleeve as he peered into the bucket. “I
could do it more.”
“I’m afraid not,” I said sympathetically . “Assuming that you
have got  hookworms, they’re attached very firmly , and too far
down for vomiting to dislodge t hem. The only way to be sure
about it, though, is to look for the eggs they shed.”
Bobby eyed me apprehensively .
“It’ s not exactly as I’m horrible shy , mum,” he said, shifting
gingerly . “Y ou know that. But Dr . Potts did give me great huge
clysters of mustard water . Surely that would ha’ burnt they
worms r ight out ? If I was a worm, I s’ould let go and give up
the ghost at once, did anyone souse me with mustard water .”
“W ell, you would think so, wouldn’ t you?” I said.
“Unfortunately not. But I won’ t give you an enema,” I assuredhim. “W e need to see whether y ou truly do have the worms, to
begin w ith, and if so, there’ s a m edicine I can mix up for you
that will poison them directly .”
“Oh.” H e looked  a little happier  at that. “How d’ye mean to
see, then , mum? ” He glanced n arrowly at the counter , where
the assortment of clamps and suture jars were still laid out.
“Couldn’ t be simpler ,” I assured him. “I do a process called
fecal sed imentation to concentra te the stool, then look for the
eggs under the microscope.”
He nodded, plainly not following. I smiled kindly at him.
“All you have to do, Bobby , is shit.”
His face was a study in doubt and apprehension.
“If i t’ s all the same to you, mum ,” he said, “I think I’ll keep
the worms.”1 2
FUR THER MYSTERIES
 OF SCIENCE
L A TE IN THE AFTERNOON, Roger MacKenzie came back
from the cooper ’ s shop to discover his wife deep in
contemplation of an object sitting on his dinner table.
“What is  tha t? Some type of prehistoric  Christmas tinned
goods?” Roger extended a ginger forefinger toward a squat jar
made o f greenish glass and s ealed with a cork, the latter
covered with a s tout layer of red  wax. An amorphous chunk of
something was visible inside, evidently submer ged in liquid.
“Ho ho,” said h is wife tolerantly , moving the jar out of his
reach. “Y ou think  you ’re b eing fu nny . It’ s white p hosphorus—
a present from Lord John.”
He g lanced at he r; she was exci ted, the tip of her nose gone
pink and bits of red hair pulled loose and waving in the breeze;
like her father , s he was inclined to run her hands through her
hair when thinking.
“And yo u intend  to do … what  with  it? ” he asked, trying to
keep an y note of foreboding from his voice. He had the
vaguest memories of hearin g about the properties of
phosphorus in his distant school days; he thought either it
made yo u glow in the dark or it blew up. Neither prospect was
reassuring.
“W ellll … make matches. Maybe.” Her upper teeth fastened
momentarily in the flesh of her lower lip as she considered the
jar . “I know how—in theory . But it might be a little tricky in
practice.”
“Why is that?” he asked warily .
“W ell, it bursts into flame if you expose it to air ,” she
explained. “That’ s why it’ s packed in water . Don’ t touch, Jem!It’ s poisonous.” Grabbing Jemmy round the middle, she pulled
him dow n from the table, where he had been eyeing the jar
with greedy curiosity .
“Oh, we ll, why worry about that? It will explode in his face
before h e has a chance to get it in his mouth.” Roger picked up
the j ar f or safek eeping, holding it as though it might go of f in
his hands. He wanted to ask whether she were insane, but had
been ma rried long enough to know the price of injudicious
rhetorical questions.
“Where d’ye mean to keep it?”  He cast an eloquent glance
round th e confines of the cabi n, which in terms of storage
boasted a blanket chest, a sma ll shelf for books and papers,
another for comb, toothbrushes, and Brianna’ s small cache of
personal belong ings, and a pie hutch. Jemmy had been able to
open the pie hutch since the age of seven months or so.
“I’m thinking I’d better put it in Mama’ s sur gery ,” she
replied, keeping an absentminded grip on Jem, who was
struggling with single-minded ener gy to get at the pretty thing.
“Nobody touches anything in there.”
That was true e nough; the people who were not afraid of
Claire F raser personally were generally terrified of the
contents of her sur gery , these featuring fearsomely painful-
looking implements, mysterious murky brews, and vile-
smelling medicines. In addition, the sur gery had cupboards too
high for even a determined climber like Jem to reach.
“Good i dea,” Ro ger said, anxious to get the jar out of Jem’ s
vicinity . “I’ll take it up now , shall I?”
Before B rianna could answer , a knock came at the door ,
followed immediately by Jamie  Fraser . Jem instantly ceased
trying to get at the jar and instead flung himself on his
grandfather with shrieks of joy .
“How is it, then, a bhailach ?” J amie inquired amiably ,
neatly turning Jem upside down and holding him by the
ankles. “A word, Roger Mac?”“Sure. Y e’ll sit, maybe?” He’d told Jamie earlier what he
knew—lamentably little—regar ding the role of the Cherokee
in th e up coming Revolution. Ha d he come to inquire further?
Reluctantly setti ng down the jar , Roger pulled out a stool and
pushed it in his father -in-law’ s direction. Jamie accepted it
with a nod, dext erously transferring Jemmy to a position over
one shoulder and sitting down.
Jemmy giggled  madly , squirming until his grandfather
slapped him lightly on the seat of his breeches, whereupon he
subsided, hanging contentedly upside-down like a sloth, his
bright hair spilling down the back of Jamie’ s shirt.
“It’ s this way , a charaid, ” Ja mie said. “I must be going in
the morn ing to the Cherokee villages, and there is a thing I’d
ask ye to do in my place.”
“Oh, aye. D’ye want me to see to the barley harvest, then?”
The earl y grain  was still ripen ing. Everyone had his fingers
crossed that the weather would keep fair for another few
weeks, but the prospects were good.
“No, Bri anna can do that—if ye will, lass?” He smiled at his
daughter , who raised thick ruddy eyebrows, the twins of his.
“I ca n,” she agre ed. “What are you planning to do with Ian,
Roger , and Arch Bug, though?”  Arch Bug was Jamie’ s factor ,
and the logical person to be overseeing the harvest in Jamie’ s
absence.
“W ell, I shall ta ke Y oung Ian with me. The Cherokee ken
him well, and h e’ s comfortable wi’ their speech. I’ll take the
Beardsley lads, too, so they can fetch back the berries and bits
o’ things your mother wants for Lizzie, straightaway .”
“I go, too?” Jemmy inquired hopefully .
“Not this time, a bhailach.  I n the autumn , maybe.” He
patted J emmy on the bottom, then returned his attention to
Roger .
“That be ing so,” he said, “I need ye to go to Cross Creek, if
ye w ill, and coll ect the new tenants.” Roger felt a small sur geof excitement—and alarm—at the prospect, but merely cleared
his throat and nodded.
“A ye. Of course. W ill they—”
“Y e’ll take Arch Bug along, and T om Christie.”
A moment of incredulous silence greeted this statement.
“T om Christie ?” Bree said, exchanging a glance of
baf flement with Roger . “What on earth for?” The schoolmaster
was a notably dour sort, and no one’ s idea of a congenial
traveling companion.
Her father ’ s mouth twisted wryly .
“A ye, well. There’ s the one small thing MacDonald
neglected to tell me, when he asked if I’d take them. They’re
Protestants, the lot.”
“Ah,” sa id Roger . “I see.” Jam ie met his eye and nodded,
relieved to be so immediately understood.
“ I  don’ t see.” Bria nna patted her hair , frowning, then pulled
of f the ribbon an d began to comb her fingers slowly through it,
undoing the tangles as a preli minary to brushing it. “What
dif ference does it make?”
Roger and Jamie exchanged a brief but eloquent glance.
Jamie shrugged, and pulled Jem down into his lap.
“W ell.” Roger rubbed his chin, trying to think how to
explain two centuries of Scottish religious intolerance in any
way that would make sense to an American of the twentieth
century . “Ahh … ye recall the civil-rights thing in the States,
integration in the South, all that?”
“Of course I do. ” She narrowed her eyes at him. “Okay . So,
which side are the Negroes?”
“The what?” Jamie looked en tirely baf fled. “Where do
Negroes come into the matter?”
“Not quite that simple,” Roger assured her . “Just an
indication of the depth of feeling involved. Let us say that the
notion of having a Catholic land lord is likely to cause our newtenants severe qualms—and vice versa?” he asked, glancing at
Jamie.
“What’ s Negroes?” Jemmy asked with interest.
“Er … .dark-s kinned people,”  Roger replied, suddenly
aware of the pot ential quagmire opened up by this question. It
was true that th e term “Negro” didn’ t invariably mean also
“slave”—but near enough that there was little dif ference.
“D’ye n ot remember them, from your great-auntie Jocasta’ s
place?”
Jemmy frowned , adopting for an unsettling instant the
precise expression his grandfather was wearing.
“No.”
“W ell, anyway ,”  Bree said, calling the meeting to order with
a s harp rap of he r hairbrush on the table, “the point is that Mr .
Christie is enough of a Protestan t to make the new people feel
comfortable?”
“Something of the sort,” her fa ther agreed, one side of his
mouth curling up. “Between your man here and T om Christie,
at le ast they’ll not think they’ re entering the Devil’ s realm
entirely .”
“I see,” Roger s aid again, in a slightly dif ferent tone. So it
wasn’ t only his position as son o f the house and general right-
hand ma n, was it—but the fact that he was a Presbyterian, at
least in name. He raised a brow at Jamie, who shrugged in
acknowledgment.
“Mmphm,” Roger said, resigned.
“Mmphm,” said Jamie, satisfied.
“Stop doing  that,” Brianna said crossly . “Fine. So you and
T om Christie are going to Cross Creek. Why is Arch Bug
going?”
Roger became aware, in a sublim inally marital way , that his
wife was disgruntled at the thought of being left behind to
or ganize the harvest—a filthy , exhausting job at the best of
times—whilst he frolicked with a squad of his co-religionistsin the romantically exciting metropolis of Cross Creek,
population two hundred.
“It will be Arch , mostly , helping them to settle and build
themselves shelter before the cold,” Jamie said logically . “Y e
dinna m ean to suggest, I hope, that I send him alone to talk to
them?”
Brianna smiled involuntarily at that; Arch Bug, married for
decades to the v oluble Mrs. Bug, was famous for his lack of
speech. He could  t alk, but seldom did so, li miting his
conversational contributions to the occasional genial “Mmp.”
“W ell, they’ll likely never realize that Arch is Catholic,”
Roger said, rubbing his upper li p with a forefinger . “Or is he,
come to that? I’ve never asked him.”
“He is,” Jamie said, very dryly . “But he’ s lived long enough
to ken when to be silent.”
“W ell, I can se e this is going to be a jolly expedition,”
Brianna said, raising one brow . “When do you think you’ll be
back?”
“Christ, I don’ t know ,” Roger said, feeling a stab of guilt at
the casual blasphemy . He’d have to revise his habits, and
quickly . “A month? Six weeks?”
“At least,” his father -in-law said cheerfully . “They’ll be on
foot, mind.”
Roger to ok a deep breath, contemplating a slow march, en
masse,  f rom Cross Cre ek to the mountains, with Arch Bug on
one side of him and T om Christie on the other , twin pillars of
taciturnity . His eyes lingered wistfully on his wife, envisioning
six weeks of sleeping by the roadside, alone.
“Y eah, fine,” he said. “I’ll … um … go speak to T om and
Arch tonight, then.”
“Daddy go?” Catching the gist of the conversation, Jem
scrambled of f his grandfather ’ s knee and scampered over to
Roger , grabbing him round the leg. “Go with you,  Daddy!”“Oh. W ell, I don ’ t think—” He caught sight of Bree’ s face,
resigned, and then the green an d red jar on the table behind
her . “Wh y not?” he said sudden ly , and smiled at Jem. “Great-
Auntie Jocasta would love to se e you. And Mummy can blow
things u p to her heart’ s content without worrying where you
are, aye?”
“She can do what?” Jamie looked startled.
“It doesn’ t explode, ” Br ianna said, picking up the  jar of
phosphorus and cradling it possessively . “It just burns. Are
you sure?” This last was address ed to Roger , and accompanied
by a searching look.
“Y eah, sure,” he said, af fecting confidence. He glanced at
Jemmy , who was chanting “Go! Go! Go!”, meanwhile
hopping up and down like a demented popcorn kernel. “At
least I’ll have someone to talk to on the way .”1 3
SAFE HANDS
I T W AS NEARL Y DARK when Jamie came in to find me
sitting at the kitchen table, head  on my arms. I jerked upright
at the sound of his footstep, blinking.
“Are ye all righ t, Sassenach?” He sat down on the opposite
bench, eyeing me. “Y e look as though ye’ve been dragged
through a hedge backward.”
“Oh.” I patted vaguely at my hair , which did seem to be
sticking out a bit. “Um. Fine. Are you hungry?”
“Of course I am. Have ye eaten, yourself?”
I squinted and rubbed my face, trying to think.
“No,” I decided at last. “I was w aiting for you, but I seem to
have fallen asleep. There’ s stew . Mrs. Bug left it.”
He g ot up and peered into the small cauldron, then pushed
the swinging hook back to bring it over the fire to warm.
“What have ye been doing, Sassenach?” he asked, coming
back. “And how’ s the wee lass?”
“The we e lass is what I’ve been doing,” I said, suppressing
a y awn. “Mostly .” I rose, slowly , feeling my joints protest, and
staggered over to the sideboard to cut some bread.
“She couldn’ t keep it down,” I said. “The gallberry
medicine. Not that I blame her ,” I added, cautiously licking
my l ower lip. A fter she’d thrown it up the first time, I’d tasted
it m yself. My ta stebuds were still in a state of revolt; I’d never
met a more aptly named plant, a nd being boiled into syrup had
merely concentrated the flavor .
Jamie snif fed deeply as I turned.
“Did she vomit on ye?”“No, that was Bobby Higgins,” I said. “He’ s got
hookworms.”
He raised his brows.
“Do I want to hear about them whilst I’m eating?”
“Definitely not,”  I said, sitting down with the loaf, a knife,
and a crock of soft butter . I tore of f a piece, buttered it thickly ,
and gave it to him, then took one for myself. My tastebuds
hesitated, but wavered on the edge of for giving me for the
gallberry syrup.
“What have you  been doing?” I asked, beginning to wake up
enough to take n otice. He seemed tired, but more cheerful than
he had been when he’d left the house.
“T alking to Roger Mac about Indians and Protestants.” He
frowned at the h alf-eaten chunk  of bread in his hand. “Is there
something amiss wi’ the bread, Sassenach? It tastes odd.”
I waved a hand apologetically .
“Sorry , that’ s me. I washed several times, but I couldn’ t get
it of f completely . Perhaps you’d better do the buttering.” I
pushed the loaf toward him wi th my elbow , gesturing at the
crock.
“Couldna get what  of f?”
“W ell, we tried a nd tried with the syrup, but no good; Lizzie
simply c ouldn’ t hold it down, p oor thing. But I remembered
that quinine can be absorbed through the skin. So I mixed the
syrup into some goose grease, and rubbed it all over her . Oh,
yes, than ks.” I leaned forward and took a delicate bite of the
buttered bit of b read he held ou t for me. My tastebuds gave in
gracefully , and I realized that I hadn’ t eaten all day .
“And it worked? ” He glanced up  at the ceiling. Mr . W emyss
and Lizzie shared the smaller ro om upstairs, but all was quiet
above.
“I think so,” I sa id, swallowing.  “The fever finally broke, at
least, and she’ s asleep. W e’ll ke ep using it; if the fever doesn’ t
come back in two days, we’ll know it works.”“That’ s good, then.”
“W ell, and then there was Bobby and his hookworms.
Fortunately , I have some ipecacuanha and turpentine.”
“Fortunately for the worms, or for Bobby?”
“W ell, neither , really ,” I said, an d yawned. “It will probably
work, though.”
He smil ed faintly , and uncorked a bottle of beer , passing it
automatically un der his nose. F inding it all right, he poured
some for me.
“A ye, well, it’ s a comfort to k now I’m leaving things in
your ca pable h ands, Sassena ch. Ill-smelling,” he added,
wrinkling his long nose in my direction, “but capable.”
“Thanks so much.” The beer wa s better than good; must be
one of Mrs. Bug’ s batches. W e sipped companionably for a bit,
both too  tired to get up and serve the stew . I watched him
beneath my lashes; I always did, when he was about to leave
on a journey , storing up small memories of him against his
return.
He l ooked tired, and there were small twin lines between his
heavy br ows, betokening slight worry . The candlelight glowed
on the broad bo nes of his face , though, and cast his shadow
clear on  the plastered wall be hind him, strong and bold. I
watched the shadow raise its spectral beer glass, the light
making an amber glow in the shadow glass.
“Sassenach,” he  said suddenly , putting down the glass,
“how many times, would ye say , have I come close to dying?”
I sta red at him for a moment, b ut then shrugged and began
to reckon, mustering my synapses into reluctant activity .
“W ell …  I don’ t know what horrible things happened to you
before I met you, but after … well, you were dreadfully ill at
the a bbey .” I gla nced covertly at him, but he seemed not to be
bothered at the thought of W entworth prison, and what had
been do ne to him there that had caused the illness. “Hmm.
And after Culloden—you said you had a terrible fever then,from your wounds, and though t you might die, only Jenny
forced you—I mean, nursed you through it.”
“And th en Laoghaire shot me,” he said wryly . “And you
forced me through it. Likewise , when the snake bit me.” He
considered for a moment.
“I had the smallpox when I was  a wean, but I think I wasna
in danger of dying then; they said it was a light case. So only
four times, then.”
“What a bout the day I first met you?” I objected. “Y ou
nearly bled to death.”
“Oh, I did not,” he protested. “That was no but a wee
scratch.”
I lif ted one bro w at him, and leaning over to the hearth,
scooped a ladle of aromatic stew into a bowl. It was rich with
the juices of rabbit and venison, swimming in a thick gravy
spiced with rosemary , garlic, and onion. So far as my tastebuds
were concerned, all was for given.
“Have it your w ay ,” I said. “B ut wait—what about your
head? When Dougal tried to kill you with an ax. Surely that’ s
five?”
He frowned, accepting the bowl.
“A ye, I suppose you’re right,” he said, seeming displeased.
“Five, then.”
I r egarded him gently over my own bowl of stew . He was
very lar g e, solid, and beautifully formed. And if he was a bit
battered by circumstance, that merely added to his charm.
“Y ou’re a very h ard person to ki ll, I think,” I said. “That’ s a
great comfort to me.”
He smiled, reluctant, but then reached out and lifted his
glass in salute, touching it first to his own lips, then to mine.
“W e’ll drink to that, Sassenach, shall we?”1 4
PEOPLE OF THE
 SNOWBIRD
G UNS,” Bird-who-sings-in-the-morning said. “T ell your
King we want guns.”
Jamie suppresse d the ur ge to reply , “Who doesn’ t?” for a
moment, but then gave in to it, surprising the war chief into a
blink of startlement, followed by a grin.
“Who, indeed?” Bird was a short man, shaped like a barrel,
and young for his of fice—but shrewd, his af fability no
disguise to his intelligence. “They all tell you this, all the
village war chiefs, eh? Of course they do. What do you tell
them?”
“What I can.” J amie lifted one shoulder , let it fall. “T rade
goods ar e certai n, knives are li kely—guns are possible, but I
cannot yet promise them.”
They w ere sp eaking a slightly unfamiliar dialect of
Cherokee, and he hoped he h ad got right the manner of
indicating probability . He did well enough with the usual
tongue in casual matters of trade and hunting, but the matters
he d ealt in here would not be ca sual. He glanced briefly at Ian,
who was  listening closely , but ev idently what he’d said was all
right. Ia n visite d the villages n ear the Ridge frequently , and
hunted w ith the young men; he shifted into the tongue of the
T salagi as easily as he did into his native Gaelic.
“So, well enough.” Bird settled himself more comfortably .
The pewter badge Jamie had giv en him as a present glinted on
his breast, firelight flickering over the broadly amiable planes
of his face. “T el l your King abo ut the guns—and tell him why
we need them, eh?”“Y ou wish me to tell him that, d o you? Do you think he will
be willi ng to send you guns with which to kill his own
people?” Jamie asked dryly . The incursion of white settlers
across the T reaty Line into th e Cherokee lands was a sore
point, and he risked something by alluding to it directly , rather
than add ressing Bird’ s other needs for guns: to defend his
village from raiders—or to go raiding himself.
Bird shrugged in reply .
“W e can kill t hem without guns, if we want to.” One
eyebrow lifted a little, and Bird ’ s lips pursed, waiting to see
what Jamie made of this statement.
He supposed Bird meant to shock him. He merely nodded.
“Of course you can. Y ou are wise enough not to.”
“Not ye t.” Bird’ s lips relaxed i nto a charming smile. “Y ou
tell the King—not yet.”
“His M ajesty will be pleased to hear that you value his
friendship so much.”
Bird bur st into laughter at that, rocking back and forth, and
his brother Still W ater , who sat beside him, grinned broadly .
“I like you, Bear -Killer ,” he said, recovering. “Y ou’re a
funny man.”
“I may be,” Jamie said in English, smiling. “Give it time.”
Ian g ave a small snort of amusement at that, causing Bird to
look sharply at him, then away , clearing his throat. Jamie
raised on e brow at his nephew , who replied with a bland smile.
Still W ater was watching Ian narrowly . The Cherokee
welcomed them  both with resp ect, but Jamie had noticed at
once a particular edge in their re sponse to Ian. They perceived
Ian t o be Mohaw k—and he made them wary . In all honesty , he
himself sometimes thought there  was some part of Ian that had
not come back from Snaketown, and perhaps never would.
Bird had  given him an avenue to inquire about something,
though.“Y ou have been much troubled by persons who come into
your lands to settle,” he said, nodding sympathetically . “Y ou
of c ourse do n ot kill these persons, being wise. But not
everyone is wise, are they?”
Bird’ s eyes narrowed briefly .
“What do you mean, Bear -Killer?”
“I h ear of burni ng, T sisqua.” He held the other man’ s eyes
with his own, ca reful to give no hint of accusation. “The King
hears of houses burning, men killed and women taken. This
does not please him.”
“Hmp,” Bird said, and pressed h is lips together . He did not,
however , say he had not heard of such things himself, which
was interesting.
“Enough of such stories, and th e King may send soldiers to
protect his people. If he should do that, he will hardly wish to
have them face guns that he himself has given,” Jamie pointed
out logically .
“And wh at should we do, then? ” Still W ater broke in hotly .
“They come across the T reaty Line, build houses, plant fields,
and take the gam e. If your King  cannot keep his people where
they belong, how can he protest if we defend our lands?”
Bird made a small flattening g esture with one hand, not
looking at his brother , and Still  W ater subsided, though with
bad grace.
“So, Be ar -Killer . Y ou will tell the King these things, will
you?”
Jamie inclined his head gravely .
“That is my of f ice. I speak of the King to you, and I will
take your words to the King.”
Bird nod ded thoughtfully , then waved a hand for food and
beer , and the talk changed firmly to neutral matters. No more
business would be done tonight.
IT W AS  LA TE when they left T sisqua’ s house for the small
guesthouse. He thought it was well past moonrise, but there
was no moon to be seen; the sky glowed thick with cloud, and
the scent of rain was live on the wind.
“Oh, God,” Ian said, yawning and stumbling. “My bum’ s
gone asleep.”
Jamie yawned, too, finding it contagious, but then blinked
and laughed. “A ye, well. Dinna bother waking it up; the rest of
ye can join it.”
Ian made a derisive noise with his lips.
“Just because Bird says ye’re a  funny man, Uncle Jamie, I
wouldna go believing it. He’ s only being polite, ken?”
Jamie ignored this, murmuring thanks in T salagi to the
young woman who had shown t hem the way to their quarters.
She handed him a small baske t—filled with corn bread and
dried ap ples, fro m the smell—then wished them a soft “Good
night, sleep well,” before vanishing into the damp, restless
night.
The sma ll hut seemed stuf fy aft er the cool freshness of the
air , and he stood in the doorwa y for a moment, enjoying the
movement of the wind through the trees, watching it snake
through the pine boughs like a huge, invisible serpent. A
spatter o f moist ure bloomed on his face, and he experienced
the d eep pleasure of a man who  realizes that it’ s going to rain
and he isn’ t going to have to spend the night out in it.
“Ask about, Ian, when ye’re gossiping tomorrow ,” he said,
ducking inside. “Let it be kno wn—tactfully—that the King
would be pleased to know exactly who in hell’ s been burning
cabins—and mig ht be pleased enough to cough up a few guns
in re ward. They’ll not tell ye if it’ s them that’ s been doing it—
but if it’ s another band, they might.”
Ian nodded, yawning again. A small fire burned in a stone
ring, the  smoke  of it wisping up toward a smoke hole in the
roof ove rhead, a nd by its light,  a fur -piled sleeping platformwas visi ble across one side of the hut, with another stack of
furs and blankets on the floor .
“T oss ye  for the bed, Uncle Jam ie,” he said, digging in the
pouch a t his waist and coming  out with a battered shilling.
“Call it.”
“T ails,” Jamie said, setting down the basket and unbelting
his plaid . It fell in a warm pudd le of fabric round his legs and
he shook out his shirt. The linen was creased and grimy
against his skin, and he could smell himself; thank God this
was the last of the villages. On e more night, perhaps, two at
the most, and they could go home.
Ian swore, picking up the coin.
“How d’ ye do that? Every night  ye’ve said ‘tails,’ and every
night, tails it is!”
“W ell, it’ s your s hilling, Ian. Dinna blame me.” He sat down
on the bed platform and stretched himself pleasurably , then
relented. “Look at Geordie’ s nose.”
Ian f lipped the s hilling over in h is fingers and held it to the
light of the fire, squinting, then swore again. A tiny splotch of
beeswax, so thin as to be invisible unless you were looking,
ornamented the aristocratically prominent nose of Geor ge III,
Rex Britannia.
“How did that get there?” Ian narrowed his eyes
suspiciously at his uncle, but Jamie merely laughed and lay
down.
“When ye were showing wee  Jem how to spin a coin.
Remember , he knocked the candlestick over; hot wax went
everywhere.”
“Oh.” Ian sat looking at the coin in his hand for a moment,
then shook his head, scraped the wax away with a thumbnail,
and put the shilling away .
“Good night, Uncle Jamie,” he said, sliding into the furs on
the ground with a sigh.
“Good night, Ian.”He’d be en ignoring his tiredness, holding it like Gideon, on
a short rein. Now he dropped the reins and gave it leave to
carry him of f, his body relaxing into the comfort of the bed.
MacDonald, he  reflected cynically , would be delighted.
Jamie had planned on visits onl y to the two Cherokee villages
closest to the T r eaty Line, there to announce his new position,
distribute modest gifts of whisky and tobacco—this last hastily
borrowed from T om Christie, who had fortunately purchased a
hogshead of the weed on a seed-buying trip to Cross Creek—
and inform the Cherokee that further lar gesse might be
expected when he undertook ambassage to the more distant
villages in the autumn.
He had been most cordially received in both villages—but
in the second, Pigtown, several strangers had been visiting;
young m en in search of wives . They were from a separate
band of Cherokee, called the Snowbird band, whose lar ge
village lay higher in the mountains.
One of the youn g men had bee n the nephew of Bird-who-
sings-in-the-morning, headman of the Snowbird band, and had
been ex igent in pressing Jamie to return with him and his
companions to their home village. T aking a hasty private
inventory of his remaining whisky and tobacco, Jamie had
agreed, and he a nd Ian had been most royally received there,
as ag ents of His Majesty . The Snowbird had never been visited
by an Indian agent before, and appeared most sensible of the
honor—and prompt about seeing what advantages might
accrue to themselves in consequence.
He t hought Bird was the sort o f man with whom he could
do business, though—on various fronts.
That tho ught led him to belated recollection of Roger Mac
and the new tenants. He’d had n o time over the last few days
to s pare much worry there—but he doubted there was any
cause for concern. Roger Mac w as capable enough, though his
shattered voice made him less certain than he should be. W ith
Christie and Arch Bug, though…He closed his e yes, the bliss o f absolute fatigue stealing
over him as his thoughts grew more disjointed.
A day more, m aybe, then home in time to make the hay .
Another maltin g, two maybe, before the cold weather .
Slaughtering … could it be time at last to kill the damned
white sow? No … the vicious creature was unbelievably
fecund. What kind of boar had the balls to mate with her? he
wondered dimly , and did she eat him, after? W ild boar …
smoked hams, blood pudding …
He was just drif ting down through the first layers of sleep
when he  felt a h and on his priv ates. Jerked out of drowsiness
like a salmon o ut of a sea-loc h, he clapped a hand to the
intruder ’ s, gripping tight. And elicited a faint giggle from his
visitor .
Feminine fingers wiggled gently in his grasp, and the hand’ s
fellow promptly  took up operations in its stead. His first
coherent thought was that the lassie would be an excellent
baker , so good as she was at kneading.
Other thoughts followed rapidly on the heels of this
absurdity , and he tried to grab the second hand. It playfully
eluded him in the dark, poking and tweaking.
He groped for a polite protest in Cherokee, but came up
with nothing but a handful of r andom phrases in English and
Gaelic, none of them faintly suitable to the occasion.
The first hand was purposefully wriggling out of his grasp,
eel-like. Relucta nt to crush her fingers, he let go for an instant,
and made a successful grab for her wrist.
“Ian!” he hissed, in desperatio n. “Ian, are ye there?” He
couldn’ t see his nephew in the p ool of darkness that filled the
cabin, nor tell if he slept. There were no windows, and only
the faintest light came from the dying coals.
“Ian!”
There w as a stirring on the floor , bodies shifting, and he
heard Rollo sneeze.“What is it, U ncle?” He’d spoken in Gaelic, and Ian
answered in the same language. The lad sounded calm, and not
as though he’d just come awake.
“Ian, there is a woman in my bed,” he said in Gaelic, trying
to match his nephew’ s calm tone.
“There a re two of them, Uncle Jamie.” Ian sounded amused,
damn hi m! “The other will be down by your feet. W aiting her
turn.”
That unnerved him, and he n early lost his grip on the
captive hand.
“T wo of them! What do they think I am?”
The girl  giggled again, leaned o ver , and bit him lightly on
the chest.
“Christ!”
“W ell, no, Uncle, they don’ t th ink you’re Him,” Ian said,
obviously suppressing his own mirth. “They think you’re the
King. So to spea k. Y ou’re his agent, so they’re doing honor to
His Majesty by sending you his women, aye?”
The seco nd wom an had uncovered his feet and was slowly
stroking his soles with one fing er . He was ticklish and would
have found this bothersome, were he not so distracted by the
first woman, with whom he wa s being compelled into a most
undignified game of hide-the-sausage.
“T alk to them, Ian,” he said between clenched teeth,
fumbling madly with his free hand, meanwhile forcing back
the que sting f ingers of the captive hand—which were
languidly stroki ng his ear—and wiggling his feet in a frantic
ef fort to discourage the second lady’ s attentions, which were
growing bolder .
“Erm … what d’ye want me to say?” Ian inquired,
switching back to English. His voice quivered slightly .
“T ell them I’m deeply sensible of the honor , but—gk!”
Further diplomatic evasions were cut of f by the suddenintrusion of someone’ s tongue into his mouth, tasting strongly
of onions and beer .
In t he midst of  his subsequent struggles, he was dimly
aware that Ian had lost any sense of self-control and was lying
on the floor gig gling helplessly . It was filicide if you killed a
son, he thought grimly; what wa s the word for assassinating a
nephew?
“Madam!” he said, disengaging his mouth with dif ficulty .
He s eized the la dy by the should ers and rolled her of f his body
with eno ugh for ce that she who oped with surprise, bare legs
flying—Jesus, was she naked?
She was . Both of them were; his eyes adapted to the faint
glow of  the embers, he caugh t the shimmer of light from
shoulders, breasts, and rounded thighs.
He sat up, gathering furs and blankets round him in a sort of
hasty redoubt.
“Cease, the two of you!” he said severely in Cherokee. “Y ou
are beautiful, but I cannot lie with you.”
“No?” said one, sounding puzzled.
“Why not?” said the other .
“Ah …  because there is an oath upon me,” he said,
necessity producing inspiration. “I have sworn … sworn …”
He grop ed for the proper word, but didn’ t find it. Luckily , Ian
leaped in at this point, with a stream of fluent T salagi, too fast
to follow .
“Ooo,” breathed one girl, impressed. Jamie felt a distinct
qualm.
“What in God’ s name did ye tell them, Ian?”
“I to ld t hem the  Great Spirit cam e to ye in a dream, Uncle,
and told ye that ye mustn’ t go with a woman until ye’d
brought guns to all the T salagi.”
“Until I what ?!”“W ell, it was the  best I could think of in a hurry , Uncle,” Ian
said defensively .
Hair -raising as the notion was , he had to admit it was
ef fective; the two women were  huddled together , whispering
in awed tones, and had quite left of f pestering him.
“A ye, well,” he said grudgingly . “I suppose it could be
worse.” After all, even if the Crown were persuaded to provide
guns, there were a damn lot of T salagi.
“Y e’re welcome, Uncle Jamie.”  The laughter was gur gling
just belo w the surface of his nep hew’ s voice, and emer ged in a
stifled snort.
“What?” he said testily .
“The one lady is  saying it’ s a disappointment to her , Uncle,
because you’re verra nicely equipped. The other is more
philosophical ab out it, though. She says they might have borne
ye c hildren, and the bairns migh t have red hair .” His nephew’ s
voice quivered.
“What’ s wrong wi’ red hair , for God’ s sake?”
“I d inna ken, quite, but I gather it’ s not something ye want
your bairn to be marked with, and ye can help it.”
“W ell, fine,” he snapped. “No danger of it, is there? Can
they not go home now?”
“It’ s raining, Uncle Jamie,” Ian pointed out logically . It was;
the win d had brought a patter  of rain, and now the main
shower arrived, beating on the r oof with a steady thrum, drops
hissing into the hot embers through the smoke hole. “Y e
wouldna send them out in the wet, would ye? Besides, ye just
said ye couldna lie wi’ them, not that ye meant them to go.”
He brok e of f to say something interrogative to the ladies,
who replied with eager confidence. Jamie thought they’d said
—they h ad. Rising with the grace of young cranes, the two of
them cla mbered naked as jaybirds back into his bed, patting
and str oking h im with murmurs of admiration—though
sedulously avoiding his private parts—pressed him down intothe f urs, and snu ggled down on either side of him, warm bare
flesh pressed cozily against him.
He o pened his m outh, then shut it again, finding absolutely
nothing to say in any of the languages he knew .
He l ay on his back, rigid and breathing shallowly . His cock
throbbed indignantly , clearly meaning to stay up and torment
him all night in  revenge for its  abuse. Small chortling noises
came fro m the pile of furs on the ground, interspersed with
hiccuping snorts. He thought it was maybe the first time he’d
heard Ian truly laugh since his return.
Praying for fortitude, he drew a long, slow breath, and
closed his eyes, hands folded f irmly across his ribs, elbows
pressed to his sides.1 5
ST AKIT T O DROON
R OGER W ALKED OUT ONT O the terrace at River Run,
feeling p leasantly exhausted. After three weeks of strenuous
work, he ’d gathered the new tenants from the highways and
byways of Cross Creek and Ca mpbelton, become acquainted
with all the hea ds of households, managed to equip them at
least minimally for the journey , in terms of food, blankets, and
shoes—and got them all collected in one place, firmly
overcoming their tendency to panic and stray . They’d start in
the morning for Fraser ’ s Ridge, and not a moment too soon.
He look ed out over the terrace in satisfaction, toward the
meadow that lay beyond Jocasta Cameron Innes’ s stables.
They w ere all bedded down in a temporary camp there:
twenty-two families, with seventy-six individual souls, four
mules, t wo pon ies, fourteen dogs, three pigs, and God only
knew ho w many chickens, kittens, and pet birds, bundled into
wicker cages for carrying. He had all the names on a list—
animals excluded—dog-eared and crumpled in his pocket. He
had several other lists there, as well, scribbled over , crossed
out, and amended to the point of illegibility . He felt like a
walking Book of Deuteronomy . He also felt like a very lar ge
drink.
This was luckily forthcoming; Duncan Innes, Jocasta’ s
husband, had returned from h is own day’ s labor and was
sitting on the te rrace, in company with a cut-glass decanter ,
from which the rays of the sinki ng sun struck a mellow amber
glow .
“How is it, then, a charaid ?” Duncan greeted him genially ,
gesturing toward  one of the basketwork chairs. “Y e’ll take a
dram, perhaps?”
“I will, and thanks.”He sank gratefully into the chair , which creaked amiably
beneath his weight. He accepted the glass Duncan handed him,
and tossed it back with a brief “Slainte.”
The whisky burned through the strictures that bound his
throat, making him cough, but seeming suddenly to open
things, s o that the constant fai nt sense of choking began to
leave him. He sipped, grateful.
“Ready to go, are they?” Duncan nodded toward the
meadow , where the smoke of ca mpfires hung in a low golden
haze.
“Ready as they’ll ever be. Poor  things,” Roger added with
some sympathy .
Duncan raised one shaggy brow .
“Fish out of wa ter ,” Roger amplified, holding out his glass
to ac cept the pro f fered refill. “The women are terrified, and so
are the men, but they hide it better . Y e’d think I was taking
them all to be slaves on a sugar plantation.”
Duncan nodded. “Or sell them t o Rome to clean the Pope’ s
shoon,” he said wryly . “I misd oubt most of them had ever
smelt a Catholic before embarking. And from the wrinkled
noses, th ey dinn a care so much for the scent now , I think. Do
they so much as tak’ a dram now and then, d’ye ken?”
“Only m edicinally , and only if in actual danger of death, I
think.” R oger to ok a slow , amb rosial swallow and closed his
eyes, feeling the whisky warm his throat and curl in his chest
like a purring ca t. “Meet Hiram yet, did you? Hiram Crombie,
the head man of this lot.”
“The wee sour -drap wi’ the sti ck up his arse? A ye, I met
him.” Duncan grinned, his drooping mustache lifting at the
end. “He’ll be at supper with us. Best have another .”
“I will, thanks,” said Roger , extending his glass. “Though
they’re n one of them much for hedonistic pleasure, so far as I
can tell. Y e’d think they were all still Covenanters to the bone.
The Frozen Chosen, aye?”Duncan laughed immoderately at that.
“W ell, it’ s no li ke it was in my grandsire’ s day ,” he said,
recovering and reaching across for the decanter . “And thank
the Lord for that.” He rolled his eyes, grimacing.
“Y our grandsire was a Covenanter , then?”
“God, yes.” Shaking his head, Duncan poured a goodly
measure, first for Roger , then h imself. “A fierce auld bastard,
he was. Not that he’d no cause, mind. His sister was stakit to
droon, ken?”
“W as—Christ.” He bit his tongue in penance, but was too
interested to pay it much mind. “Y e mean—executed by
drowning?”
Duncan nodded, eyes on his glass, then took a good gulp
and held it for a moment in his mouth before swallowing.
“Mar garet,” he said. “Her name was Mar garet. Eighteen she
was, at the time. Her father and her brother—my grandfather ,
aye?—they’d fled, after the battle at Dunbar; hid in the hills.
The troops came a-hunting them, but she wouldna say where
they’d gone—and she had a Bib le by her . They tried to make
her reca nt then,  but she wouldn a do that, either—the women
on that side o’ th e family , ye might as well talk to a stone,” he
said, shaking his head. “There’ s no moving them. But they
dragged her doon to the shore , her and an auld Covenanter
woman from the village, strippe d them, and tied them both to
stakes at  the tide line. W aited th ere, the crowd o’ them, for the
water to come in.”
He took another swallow , not waiting for the taste of it.
“The auld woman went under fi rst; they’d tied her closer to
the water—I suppose thinking M ar garet would give in, if she
saw the auld wo man die.” He g runted, shaking his head. “But
nay , not a bit of it. The tide rose, and the waves came up ower
her . She  choked, and she coughe d, and her hair loose, hanging
over her  face, plastered doon li ke kelp, when the water went
out.“My mither saw it,” he explaine d, lifting his glass. “She was
but seven at the time, but she never for got. After the first
wave, sh e said, there was the space of three breaths, and the
wave came ower Mar garet ag ain. And then out … three
breaths … and in again once  more. And ye couldna see
anything then but the swirl of her hair , floating on the tide.”
He r aised his gla ss an inch higher , and Roger lifted his own
in in voluntary toast. “Jesus,” he said, and it was no blasphemy .
The whisky burned his throat  as it went down and he
breathed deep, giving thanks to God for the gift of air . Three
breaths. It was the single malt of Islay , and the iodine taste of
sea and kelp was strong and smoky in his lungs.
“May God give her peace,” he said, his voice rasping.
Duncan nodded, and reached again for the decanter .
“I w ould suppose she earned it, ” he said. “Though they”—
he pointed with his chin toward the meadow—”they’d say
‘twas no ne of her doing at all; God chose her for salvation and
chose th e Engli sh to be damned ; nay more to be said on the
matter .”
The ligh t was fading and the cam pfires began to glow in the
dimness of the meadow beyon d the stables. The smoke of
them rea ched Roger ’ s nose, the scent warm and homelike, but
nonetheless adding to the burn in his throat.
“I’ve no  found sae much worth dyin’ for , myself,” Duncan
said refl ectively , then gave one of his quick, rare smiles. “But
my gran dsire, he’d say it only  meant I was chosen to be
damned. ‘By the decr ee of God, for His everlasting glory ,
some men and angels ar e pr edestined unto everlasting life,
and others for e-or dained to eve rlasting death.’  He’ d sa y that,
whenever anyone spoke of Mar garet.”
Roger nodded, recognizing the statement from the
W estminster Confession. When was that—1646? 1647? A
generation—or two—before Duncan’ s grandfather .
“I expect it was easier for him to think her death was God’ s
will, and nothing to do with him,” Roger said, not withoutsympathy . “Y e’ll not believe it yourself, then? Predestination, I
mean.”
He aske d with true curiosity . The Presbyterians of his own
time did still es pouse predestination as a doctrine—but, a bit
more flexible in attitude, tended to soft-pedal the notion of
predestined dam nation, and not to think too much on the idea
that eve ry detail of life was so predestined. Himself? God
knew .
Duncan lifted his shoulders, the right rising higher and
making him seem momentarily twisted. “God knows,” he said,
and laughed. He shook his head, and drained his glass again.
“Nay , I think I don’ t. But I w ouldna say as much before
Hiram Crombie—nor yet yon Christie.” Duncan lifted his chin
toward the meadow , where he could see two dark figures,
walking side by side toward the house. Arch Bug’ s tall,
stooped frame was easy to reco gnize, as was T om Christie’ s
shorter , blocky build. He looked pugnacious even in
silhouette, Roger thought, making short, sharp gestures as he
walked, clearly ar guing something with Arch.
“There’d be wicked fights ower it sometimes, in Ardsmuir ,”
Duncan said, watching the progress of the two figures. “The
Catholics took it amiss, to be told they were damned. And
Christie and his wee band took the greatest pleasure in telling
them so .” His shoulders shook a little in suppressed laughter ,
and Rog er wondered just how much whisky Duncan had had
before he came out to the terrace. He’d never seen the older
man so jovial.
“ Mac Dubh  put a stop to it, finally , when he made us all be
Freemasons,” he added, leaning forward to pour a fresh glass.
“But a few men  were nearly kil led, before that.” He lifted the
decanter inquiringly in Roger ’ s direction.
Looking forward to a supper including both T om Christie
and Hiram Crombie, Roger accepted.
As Dunc an leaned toward him t o pour , still smiling, the last
of th e sun shon e across his weathered face. Roger caught aglimpse of a faint white line through Duncan’ s upper lip, half-
visible beneath the hair , and realized quite suddenly why
Duncan wore a long mustache—an unusual adornment, in a
time when most men were clean-shaven.
He wou ld not have spoken, like ly , save for the whisky and
the mood of strange alliance between them—two Protestants,
amazingly bound to Catholics and bemused at the strange tides
of fa te th at had washed over them; two men left quite alone by
the misf ortunes of life, and now surprised to find themselves
the head s of households, holding the lives of strangers in their
hands.
“Y our lip, Duncan.” He touched his own mouth briefly .
“What did that?”
“Och, that?” Duncan touched his own lip, surprised. “Nay , I
was born wi’ a harelip, or so they said. I dinna recall it,
myself; it was mended when I was nay more than a week old.”
It was Roger ’ s turn to be surprised.
“Who mended it?”
Duncan shrugged, one-shouldered this time.
“A traveling healer , my mither said. She’d quite resigned
herself to losin’ me, she said,  because I couldna suck, of
course. S he and my aunties all took it in turn to drap milk into
my mouth from a rag, but she s aid I’d wasted nearly to a wee
skeleton, when this charmer came by the village.”
He rubbed a knuckle self-consciously over his lip,
smoothing the thick, grizzled hairs of his mustache.
“My faither gave him six herrin gs and a mull o’ snuf f, and
he stitched it up,  and gave my mither a bit o’ some ointment to
put o n th e woun d. W ell, and so …” He shrugged again, with a
lopsided smile.
“Perhaps I was destined to live,  after all. My grandsire said
the Lord had chosen me—though God only kens what for .”
Roger w as conscious of a faint ripple of unease, dulled
though it was by whisky .A Highland charmer who could repair a harelip? He took
another drink, trying not to stare, but covertly examining
Duncan’ s face. He supposed it w as possible; the scar was just
barely visible—if you knew  to look—under Duncan’ s
mustache, but didn’ t extend up into the nostril. It must have
been a fairly simple harelip, then , not one of the hideous cases
like that one he ’d read about—unable to look away from the
page for horror—in Claire’ s big black doctor ’ s book, where
Dr . Raw lings ha d described a c hild born not only with a split
lip, but missing the roof of its m outh, and most of the center of
its face, as well.
There had been no drawing, thank God, but the visual
picture conjured up by Rawlings’ s spare description had been
bad enough. He closed his eyes and breathed deep, inhaling
the whisky’ s perfume through his pores.
W as it possible? Perhaps. Pe ople did do  sur gery now ,
bloodstained, crude, and agonizing as it was. He’d seen
Murray MacLeo d, the apothecary from Campbelton, expertly
stitch up a man’ s cheek, laid open when the man was trampled
by a sheep. W ould it be any more dif ficult to stitch a child’ s
mouth?
He thought of Jemmy’ s lip, tender as a blossom, pierced by
needle and black thread, and shuddered.
“Are ye cold, then, a charaid ? Sh all w e go in?” Duncan got
his feet under h im, as though to rise, but Roger waved the
older man back.
“Ah, no . Goose walking on my grave.” He smiled, and
accepted another drop to keep the nonexistent evening chill
away . And yet he felt the hairs on his arms rise, just a little.
Could ther e be another one—mor e—like us?
There had been, he knew . His own multiple-times great-
grandmother , Geillis, for one. The man whose skull Claire had
found, complete with silver fillings in its teeth, for another .
But had Duncan  met another , in  some remote Highland village
half a century before?Christ,  he tho ught, fr eshly unnerved. How often does it
happen? And what happens to them?
Before t hey had quite reached th e bottom of the decanter , he
heard footsteps behind him, and the rustle of silk.
“Mrs. Cameron. ” He rose at once, the world tilting just a
little, and took his hostess’ s hand, bowing over it.
Her long hand touched his fa ce, as was her habit, her
sensitive fingertips confirming his identity .
“Och, th ere ye are, Jo. Had a good journey wi’ the wee lad,
did y e?” Duncan struggled to ris e, handicapped by whisky and
his single arm, but Ulysses, Jocasta’ s butler , had materialized
silently out of th e twilight behind his mistress in time to move
her wicker chair into place. She sank into it without so much
as puttin g a hand out to see that it was there, Roger noticed;
she simply knew it would be.
Roger viewed the butler with interest, wondering who
Jocasta had bribed to get him back. Accused—and very likely
guilty of—the death of a Briti sh naval of ficer on Jocasta’ s
property , Ulysse s had been fo rced to flee the colony . But
Lieutenant W olf f had not been considered a great loss to the
navy—and Ulys ses was indispensable to Jocasta Cameron. All
things might not be possible with gold—but he was willing to
bet that Jocasta  Cameron hadn’ t yet met a circumstance she
couldn’ t mend with money , political connections, or guile.
“Oh, ay e,” she replied to her husband, smiling and putting
out a hand to him. “‘T was such fun to show him of f, husband!
W e’d a wonderful luncheon with old Mrs. Forbes and her
daughter , and the wee bairn sang a song and charmed them all.
Mrs. Forbes had the Montgome ry lasses in, as well, and Miss
Ogilvie, and we had wee lamb c utlets wi’ raspberry sauce and
fried apples and—oh, is that yo u, Mr . Christie? Do come and
join us!” She raised her voice a little, and her face, appearing
to look expectantly into the gloom over Roger ’ s shoulder .
“Mrs. C ameron. Y our servant, madam.” Christie stepped up
onto the terrace, making a co urtly bow that was no lesspunctilious for the fact that its recipient was blind. Arch Bug
followed him, bowing in turn ov er Jocasta’ s hand, and making
a genial noise in his throat by way of greeting.
Chairs were brought out, more whisky , a plate of savories
appeared as by m agic, candles were lit—and suddenly it was a
party , echoing on a higher plane the sense of slightly nervous
festivity taking place in the me adow below . There was music
in the distance; the sound of a tin whistle, playing a jig.
Roger let it all wash over him, enjoying the brief sense of
relaxation and irresponsibility . Just for tonight, there was no
need to worry; e veryone was gathered, safe, fed, and prepared
for the morrow’ s journey .
He needn’ t even trouble to keep up his end of the
conversation; T o m Christie and Jocasta were enthusiastically
discussing the literary scene in Edinbur gh and a book he’d
never he ard of, with Duncan, lo oking so mellow that he might
slide out of his  chair any minute, putting in the occasional
remark, and old Arch—where w as Arch? Oh, there; gone back
toward the meadow , having doubtless thought of some last
minute thing he must tell someone.
He b lessed Jamie Fraser for his forethought in sending Arch
and T om with him. Between the two of them, they’d saved
him from any n umber of blunders, managed the ten thousand
necessary detail s, and eased t he fears of the new tenants
regarding this latest leap into the unknown.
He took a deep , contented breath of air scented with the
homely smells of campfires in the distance and roasting dinner
near at hand—and belatedly recalled the one small detail
whose welfare was still his exclusive concern.
Excusing himself, he made his way into the house, and
discovered Jem down below in the main kitchen, cozily
ensconced in the corner of a settle, eating bread pudding with
melted butter and maple syrup on it.
“That’ s never your dinner , is i t?” he asked, sitting down
beside his son.“Uh-huh. W ant some, Daddy?” Jem extended a dripping
spoon upward toward him, an d he bent hastily to take the
of fered mouthful before it fell of f. It was delicious, bursting-
sweet and creamy on the tongue.
“Mmm,” he said, swallowing. “W ell, let’ s not tell Mummy
or Grannie, shall we? They’ve this odd prejudice toward meat
and vegetables.”
Jem nodded, agreeable, and of f ered him another spoonful.
They consumed the bowl together in a companionable silence,
after wh ich Jem  crawled into his  lap, and leaning a sticky face
against his chest, fell sound asleep.
Servants bustled to and fro around them, smiling kindly
now and  then. He should, he thought vaguely , get up. Dinner
would be being served in a mo ment—he saw the platters of
roasted duck and mutton being skillfully laid out, bowls
mounded with heaps of fluf fy , steaming rice soaked with
gravy , and a huge sallet of greens being tossed with vinegar .
Filled with whisky , bread pudding, and contentment,
though, he lingered, putting of f  from moment to moment the
necessity of parting from Jem a nd ending the sweet peace of
holding his sleeping son.
“Mister Roger? I take him, shall I?” said a soft voice. He
looked up from an examination  of Jem’ s hair , which had bits
of bread  pudding stuck in it, to see Phaedre, Jocasta’ s body
servant, stooping before him, hands held out to receive the
boy .
“I w ash him, pu t him to his bed, sir ,” she said, her oval face
as soft as her voice as she looked at Jem.
“Oh. Y es, sure. Thanks.” Roger sat up, Jem in his arms, and
rose care fully , h olding Jem’ s considerable weight. “Here—I’ll
carry him up for you.”
He f ollowed the slave up the nar row stairs from the kitchen,
admiring—in a purely abstract and aesthetic sort of way—the
grace of  her carriage. How old was she? he wondered. T wenty ,
twenty-two? W ould Jocasta allow her to marry? She must haveadmirers, surely . But he knew how valuable she was to
Jocasta, too—seldom out of her mistress’ s presence. Not easy
to reconcile that with a home and family of her own.
At the top of th e stair , she stop ped and turned to take Jem
from him; he su rrendered his limp burden with reluctance, but
also with some relief. It was sti fling-hot down below , and his
shirt was damp with sweat where Jem had pressed against him.
“Mister Roger?” Phaedre’ s voice stopped him, as he was
about to  take his leave. She was looking at him over Jem’ s
shoulder , eyes hesitant beneath the white curve of her head
scarf.
“A ye?”
The thump of feet coming up the stairs made him move,
narrowly avoidi ng Oscar , char ging upstairs with an empty
platter u nder his  arm, evidently bound for the summer kitchen,
where the fish w ere being fried. Oscar grinned at Roger as he
passed, and blew a kiss toward Phaedre, whose lips tightened
at the gesture.
She ma de a slight motion with her head, and Roger
followed her down the hall, away from the bustle of the
kitchen. She stopped near the door that led out to the stables,
glancing round to be sure they were not overheard.
“I m aybe shouldn’ t say nothin’, sir—may be as it is  nothin’.
But I’m thinkin’ I should tell you, anyway .”
He nodd ed, shoving back the d amp hair at his temple. The
door stood open, and there was a little breeze here, thank God.
“W e was in the  town, sir , this morning, at Mr . Benjamin’ s
warehouse, you know the one? Down by the river .”
He nodded again, and she licked her lips.
“Master Jem, he got restless and went to pokin’ round,
whilst the mistress talked with M r . Benjamin. I followed him,
seein’ as he falls into no trouble, and so I was right there when
the man come in.”
“A ye? Which man was this?”She shook her head, dark eyes serious.
“I dunno , sir . W as a big man, t all as you. Light-haired; he
wasn’ t wearin’ no wig. W as a gentleman, though.” By which,
he assumed, she meant the man was well-dressed.
“And?”
“He look s round, sees Mr . Benjamin a-talkin’ with Miss Jo,
and he takes a step to the side,  like as he don’ t want no one
takin’ no tice he there. But then he sees Mr . Jem, and he get a
sharp kind of look on his face.”
She pulled Jem a little closer , recalling.
“I ain’ t likin’ that look, sir , tel l you truly . I see him start
toward J emmy and I go quick and pick the lad up, same as I
got him now . T he man look surprised, then like he think
something’ s funny; he smile at J em and ax him who his daddy
be?”
She gave a quick smile, patting Jem’ s back.
“Folk ax  him that all the time, sir , downtown, and he speak
right up, say his daddy Roger MacKenzie, same as he always
do. This  man, he laugh and ruf fl e Jem’ s hair—they all do that,
sir , he gots such  pretty hair . The n he say , ‘Is he, then, my wee
maneen, is he indeed?’”
Phaedre was a n atural mimic. She caught the Irish lilt of it
perfectly , and the sweat turned cold on Roger ’ s skin.
“And then what happened?” he demanded. “What did he
do?” Unconsciously , he glanced over her shoulder through the
open door , searching the night outside for danger .
Phaedre hunched her shoulders, shivering slightly .
“He ain’ t do  n othin’,  sir . But he look at Jem  real close, and
then at me, and he smile, right in my eyes. I ain’ t likin’ that
smile, si r , not one bit.” She sho ok her head. “But then I hear
Mr . Benjamin lift his voice behind me, callin’ out to say does
the gent leman want him? And t he man turn quick-like on his
heel, an d be gone out the door , just like that. ” She clutchedJem with one a rm, and snapped the fingers of her free hand
briefly .
“I se e.” The bread pudding had formed a solid mass that lay
like iron in his  stomach. “Did you say anything to your
mistress about this man?”
She shook her head, solemn.
“No, sir . He ain ’ t really done nothin’, like I say . But he
trouble m e, sir , and so I study on it, comin’ home, and think
finally , well, I best tell you, sir , and I gets the chance.”
“Y e did right,” he said. “Thank you, Phaedre.” He fought
the ur ge to take  Jem from her , hold him tight. “W ould ye—
when ye’ve got him to bed, will ye stay with him? Just until I
come up. I’ll tell your mistress I asked you to.”
Her dark eyes m et his with perfect understanding, and she
nodded.
“A ye, sir . I keep him safe.” She bobbed the shadow of a
curtsy , and went up the stairs to ward the room he shared with
Jem, humming something soft and rhythmic to the boy .
He breathed slowly , trying to master the overwhelming ur ge
to seize  a horse from the stables, ride to Cross Creek, and
search th e place, going from house to house in the dark until
he found Stephen Bonnet.
“Right,” he said aloud. “And the n what?” His fists curled up
involuntarily , knowing quite well what to do, even as his mind
acknowledged the futility of such a course.
He fought down rage and he lplessness, the last of the
whisky lighting his blood, throbbing in his temples. He
stepped abruptly through the open door into the night, for it
was full dark now . From this side of the house, the meadow
was invi sible, but he could still smell the smoke of their fires,
and catch the faint trill of music on the air .
He’d known Bonnet would come again, one day . Down
beside the lawn, the white bulk of Hector Cameron’ s
mausoleum was  a pale smear on the night. And safe inside it,hidden in the cof fin that waited for Hector ’ s wife, Jocasta, lay
a fortune in Jacobite gold, the long-held secret of River Run.
Bonnet knew the gold existed , suspected it was on the
plantation. He had tried for it on ce before, and failed. He was
not a careful man, Bonnet—but he was  persistent.
Roger fe lt his bones strain in his  flesh, ur gent with desire to
hunt and  kill the man who had raped his wife, threatened his
family . But there were seventy-six people depending on him—
no, seventy-seven. V engeance warred with responsibility—
and, most reluctantly , gave way .
He breat hed slow  and deep, feel ing the knot of the rope scar
tighten in his throat. No. He had to go, see the new tenants
safe. The thought of sending th em with Arch and T om, while
he remained behind to search for Bonnet, was tempting—but
the job was his; he couldn’ t aba ndon it for the sake of a time-
consuming—and likely futile—personal quest.
Nor could he leave Jem unprotected.
He mus t tell Duncan, though; Duncan could be trusted to
take step s for the protection of R iver Run, to send word to the
authorities in Cross Creek, to make inquiries.
And Ro ger would make sure th at Jem was safe away , too,
come morning, held before him on his saddle, kept in his sight
every inch of the way to the sanctuary of the mountains.
“Who’ s your daddy?” he muttered, and a fresh sur ge of rage
pulsed through his veins. “God damn it, I  am, you bastard!”P A R T  T H R E E
T o  E v e r y  T h i n g
 T h e r e  I s  a  S e a s o n1 6
LE MOT JUSTE
August 1773
Y E’RE SM ILING T O yourself,” Jamie said in my ear . “Nice,
was it?”
I turned  my head and opened my eyes, finding them on a
level with his mouth—which was smiling, too.
“Nice,” I said thoughtfully , tracing the line of his wide
lower lip with the tip of o ne finger . “Are you being
deliberately mo dest, or are y ou hoping to inspire me to
raptures of praise by means of classic understatement?”
The mou th widened further , and his teeth closed gently on
my questing finger for a moment before releasing it.
“Oh, modesty , to be sure,” he sa id. “If I’d hopes of inspiring
ye to raptures, it wouldna be with my words, now , would it?”
One hand ran lightly down my back in illustration.
“W ell, the words help, ” I said.
“They do?”
“Y es. Ju st now , I was actually t rying to rank ‘I love you, I
like you, I worsh ip you, I have to have my cock inside you,’ in
terms of their relative sincerity .”
“Did I say that?” he said, sounding slightly startled.
“Y es. W eren’ t you listening?”
“No,” he admitted. “I meant ev ery word of it, though.” His
hand cupped one buttock, weighing it appreciatively . “Still do,
come to that.”
“What, even the last one?” I laughed and rubbed my
forehead gently against his che st, feeling his jaw rest snugly
on top of my head.“Oh, aye,” he sa id, gathering me firmly against him with a
sigh. “I will say the flesh requires a bit of supper and a wee
rest before I think of doin’ it again, but the spirit is always
willing. God, ye have the sweetest fat wee bum. Only seeing it
makes me want to give it ye again directly . It’ s lucky ye’re
wed to a decrepit auld man, Sassenach, or ye’d be on your
knees with your arse in the air this minute.”
He smel led delectably of road d ust and dried sweat and the
deep musk of a man who has just enjoyed himself thoroughly .
“Nice to be miss ed,” I said contentedly into the small space
beneath his arm. “I missed you, too.”
My brea th tickled him and his skin shivered suddenly , like a
horse sh edding flies. He shifted a bit, turning me so that my
head fit  into the hollow of his shoulder , and sighed in
matching content.
“W ell, so. I see the place is still standing.”
It w as. It was late afternoon, the windows open, and the sun
came low through the trees to make shifting patterns on the
walls an d linen sheets, so that we floated in a bower of
murmuring shadow leaves.
“The ho use is standing, the barley is mostly in, and
nothing’ s died,” I said, settling myself comfortably to report.
Now that we’d taken care of the most important thing, he’d
want to know how the Ridge had fared in his absence.
“Mostly?” he said, neatly catching the dicey bit. “What
happened? It rained, aye, but the barley should all have been in
a week before.”
“Not rain. Grasshoppers.” I shuddered in memory . A cloud
of the nasty goggle-eyed things had come whirring through,
just at the end of the barley harvest. I’d gone up to my garden
to pick greens, only to discov er said greens seething with
wedge-shaped b odies and shuf fling, clawed feet, my lettuces
and cabbages gnawed to ragged nubbins and the morning-
glory vine on the palisade hanging in shreds.“I ra n an d got Mrs. Bug and Liz zie, and we drove them of f
with bro oms—but then they all rose up in a big cloud and
headed up through the wood t o the field beyond the Green
Spring. They settled in the barle y; you could hear the chewing
for miles. It sounded like giants walking through rice.”
Goosebumps of revulsion rose on my shoulders, and Jamie
rubbed my skin absently , his hand lar ge and warm.
“Mmphm. W as it only the one field they got, then?”
“Oh, yes.” I too k a deep breath, still smelling the smoke.
“W e torched the field, and burnt them alive.”
His body jerked in surprise, and he looked down at me.
“What? Who thought of that?”
“I did,” I said, not without pride. In cold-blooded retrospect,
it wa s a sensible thing to have done; there were other fields at
risk, not only of  barley , but of ripening corn, wheat, potatoes,
and hay—to say nothing of the  garden patches most families
depended on.
In actua l fact, it had been a decision made in boiling rage—
sheer , bloody-minded revenge for the destruction of my
garden. I would happily have ri pped the wings of f each insect
and stam ped on the remains—burning them had been nearly as
good, though.
It was Murdo L indsay’ s field; slow in both thought and
action, Murdo hadn’ t had time to react properly to my
announcement t hat I meant to fire the barley , and was still
standing on the stoop of his cabin, mouth hanging open, as
Brianna, Lizzie,  Marsali, Mrs. Bug, and I ran round the field
with armsful of faggots, lighting them from torches and
hurling the blazing sticks as far as we could out into the sea of
ripe, dry grain.
The dry grass w ent up with a crackle, and then a roar , as the
fire took  hold. Confused by th e heat and smoke of a dozen
fires, th e grassh oppers flew up like sparks, igniting as their
wings c aught fire and vanishing into the rising column of
smoke and whirling ash.“Of course, it would  be just then that Roger chose to arrive
with the new t enants,” I said, repressing an ur ge to laugh
inappropriately at the memory . “Poor things. It was getting
dark, an d here they all were, sta nding in the woods with their
bundles and children, watching this—this bally conflagration
going on, and al l of us dancing round barefoot with our shifts
kirtled up, hooting like gibbons and covered with soot.”
Jamie covered his eyes with one hand, plainly visualizing
the scene. His chest shook bri efly , and a wide grin spread
beneath the hand.
“Oh, God. They must ha’ thoug ht Roger Mac had brought
them to hell. Or to a coven meeting, at least.”
A bu bble of guil ty laughter was forcing itself up from under
my ribs.
“They did. Oh, Jamie—the look s on their faces!” I lost my
grip and buried my own face in  his chest. W e shook together
for a moment, laughing almost soundlessly .
“I did  try to make them welcome,” I said, snorting a little.
“W e gave them supper , and found them all places to sleep—as
many as we could fit in the h ouse, the rest spread between
Brianna’ s cabin,  the stable, and the barn. I came down quite
late at night, though—I couldn’ t sleep, for all the excitement—
and found a dozen of them praying in the kitchen.”
They had been standing in a circle near the hearth, hands
linked and heads bowed reveren tly . All the heads had snapped
up a t my appearance, eyes sh owing white in thin, haggard
faces. They’d stared at me in total silence, and one of the
women had let go the hand of the man beside her to hide her
own hand under her apron. In another time and place, I should
have thought she was reaching for some weapon—and perhaps
she was, at that;  I was fairly sure she was making the sign of
the horns beneath the shelter of the ragged cloth.
I’d already discovered that only a few of them spoke
English. I asked in my halting Gaelic whether they needed
anything? They stared at me as  though I had two heads, thenafter a moment, one of the men,  a wizened creature with a thin
mouth, had shaken his head the barest inch.
“Then they went right back to t heir praying, leaving me to
skulk of f back to bed.”
“Y e went down in your shift?”
“W ell … yes. I didn’ t expect anyone to be awake at that
hour .”
“Mmphm.” His knuckles grazed my breast, and I could tell
exactly what he was thinking. M y summer night rail was thin,
worn linen, and yes, all right, dammit, I supposed one could
see through it a  bit in the light, but the kitchen had been lit
only by the ruddy glow of a smoored hearth.
“I dinna  suppose ye went down in a proper nightcap,
Sassenach?” Jamie asked, runn ing a thoughtful hand through
my hair . I’d loosened it to go to bed with him, and it was
writhing of f merrily in all directions, a la Medusa.
“Of cou rse not. I had it plaited, though,” I protested. “Quite
respectable!”
“Oh, qui te,” he agreed, grinning , and pushing his fingers up
into the wild mass of my hair , cradled my head in his hands
and kissed me. H is lips were chapped from wind and sun, but
agreeably soft. He hadn’ t shave d since his departure and his
beard was short and curly , springy to the touch.
“W ell, so. They’re sorted now , I expect? The tenants?” His
lips brus hed my  cheek, and nibb led gently at my ear . I inhaled
deeply .
“Ah. Oh . Y es. Arch Bug took them of f in the morning; he’ s
got them parceled out with fam ilies all over the Ridge, and
already working on …” My train of thought temporarily
derailed, and I c losed my fingers by reflex in the muscle of his
chest.
“And ye  told Murdo I’d make it right with him, of course.
About the barley?”“Y es, of course.” My dr ifting attention snagged
momentarily and I laughed. “He just stared at me, and then
nodded in a dazed sort of way , and said, oh, just as Himself
liked, to be sure. I don’ t know if  he realized even then why I’d
burnt hi s field; perhaps he jus t thought I’d taken a sudden
fancy to set fire to his barley .”
Jamie laughed, too—a most unsettling sensation, as he had
his teeth fixed in my earlobe.
“Um,” I said fa intly , feeling the tickle of red beard on my
neck and the ve ry warm, firm flesh beneath my palm. “The
Indians. How did you manage with the Cherokee?”
“Fine.”
He m oved suddenly , rolling over on top of me. He was very
big, and very  warm, and he smelled of desire, strong and
sharp. The leafy shadows moved across his face and shoulders,
dappled the bed and the white sk in of my thighs, opened wide.
“I like ye fine, S assenach,” he murmured in my ear . “I can
see ye there, h alf-naked in your shift and your hair down,
curling over your breest… . I love you. I wor—”
“What was that about a rest and supper?”
His hands were worming themselves under me, cupping my
buttocks, squeezing, his breath soft and hot on my neck.
“I have  to have my—”
“But—”
“Now , S assenach.” He rose up a bruptly , kneeling on the bed
before m e. Ther e was a faint smile on his face, but his eyes
were dark blue and intent. He cupped his heavy balls in one
hand, the thumb moving up and down his exigent member in a
slow and thoughtful manner .
“On your knees, a nighean, ” he said softly . “Now .”1 7
THE LIMITS OF POWER
Fr om James Fraser , Esq., Fraser ’ s Ridge
to Lor d John Gr ey of Mount Josiah Plantation
August 14, 1773
My lor d—
I write to inform you of my new Office, viz,  that of
Indian Agent to the Cr own, by Appointment to the
Southern Department under John Stuart.
I was originally of two Minds r egar ding Acceptance of
this Appointment, but found my V iews made mor e
singular by Reason of a V isit by Mr . Richar d Br own, a
distant Neighbor , and his Br other . I expect that Mr .
Higgins will alr eady have given you an Account of their
so-called Committee of Safety , and its immediate Object
of arr esting him.
Have you encounter ed such ad hoc  Bodies in V ir ginia?
I think per haps your Situation is not so unsettled as is our
own, or that in Boston, wher e Mr . Higgins also r eports
their Pr esence. I hope it is not.
I think a Person of Sense must deplor e these
committees in Principle. Their stated Purpose is to
pr ovide Pr otection fr om V agabonds and Banditti, and to
arr est Criminals in those Ar eas wher e no Sheriff or
Constable is available. W ith no Law to r egulate their
Behavior save Self-inter est, though, plainly ther e is
Nothing to pr event an irr egular Militia fr om becomingmor e of a Thr eat to the Citizenry than the Dangers fr om
which it offers to pr eserve them.
The Appeal is plain, though, particularly in such Case
as we find ourselves her e, so r emotely situated. The
near est Courthouse is—or was—thr ee days’ Ride, and in
the constant Unr est that has followed the Regulation,
Matters have decayed even fr om this unsatisfactory State.
The Governor and his Council ar e in constant Conflict
with the Assembly , the Cir cuit Court has effectually
ceased to exist, Judges ar e no longer appointed, and
ther e is no Sheriff of Surry County at pr esent, the latest
Holder of that Office having r esigned under Thr eat of
having his House fir ed.
The Sheriffs of Orange and Rowan Counties still boast
Office—but their Corruption is so well known that no one
may depend upon them, save those whose Inter est is
invested in them.
W e hear fr equent r eports these Days of House-
burnings, Assaults, and similar Alarums in the W ake of
the r ecent W ar of Regulation. Governor T ryon officially
par doned some of those involved in the Conflict, but did
nothing to pr event local Retribution against them; his
Successor is still less able to deal with such Events—
which ar e in any Case occurring in the Backcountry , far
fr om his Palace in New Bern and thus the mor e easily
ignor ed. (In all Justice, the Man doubtless has T r oubles
near er at Hand to deal with.)
Still, while Settlers her e ar e accustomed to defend
themselves fr om the normal Thr eats of the W ilderness, the
Occurr ence of such random Attacks as these—and the
Possibility of Irruption of the Indians, so close to the
T r eaty Line—is sufficient to unnerve them, and cause
them to gr eet with Relief the Appearance of any Body
willing to undertake the Role of public Pr otection. Hencethe V igilantes of the Committees ar e welcomed—at least
to begin with.
I give you so much Detail by way of explaining my
Thoughts r egar ding the Appointment. My friend Major
MacDonald (late of the 32nd Cavalry) had told me that
should I ultimately decline to become an Indian Agent, he
would appr oach Mr . Richar d Br own, Br own being in the
way of doing substantial T rade with the Cher okee, and
thus in a position of Acquaintance and pr esumed T rust
that would pr edispose his Acceptance by the Indians.
My Acquaintance with Mr . Br own and his Br other
inclines me to r egar d this Pr ospect with Alarm. W ith such
Rise in Influence as such an Appointment would bring,
Br own’ s Statur e in this unsettled Region might shortly
become so gr eat that no man could easily oppose him in
any V entur e—and that, I think, is danger ous.
My Son-in-law astutely observes that a Man’ s sense of
Morality tends to decr ease as his Power incr eases, and I
suspect that the Br others Br own possess r elatively little of
the Former to begin with. It may be mer e Hubris on my
part, to assume that I have mor e. I have seen the
corr osive Effects of Power upon a Man’ s Soul—and I
have felt its Bur den, as you will understand, having borne
it so often yourself. Still, if it is a choice between myself
and Richar d Br own, I suppose I must r esort to the old
Scottish Adage that the Devil you ken is better than the
Devil you don’ t.
I am likewise made uneasy at the Thought of the long
Absences fr om Home which my new Duties must r equir e.
And yet I cannot in Conscience allow the People under
my Dominion to be subject to the V agaries and possible
Injuries of Br own’ s Committee.
I could of course convene my own such Committee—I
think you would ur ge such a Course—but will not.Beyond the Inconvenience and Expense of such a Move, it
would be T antamount to declaring open W ar with the
Br owns, and I think that not prudent, not if I must be
fr equently away fr om home, leaving my Family
unpr otected. This new Appointment, though, will extend
my own Influence, and—I trust—put some Limit to the
Br owns’ Ambitions.
So having r eached this Decision, I sent W or d at once to
accept the Appointment, and essayed my first V isit to the
Cher okee in the Office of Indian Agent during the last
Month. My initial Reception was most Cor dial, and I
hope my Relations with the V illages will r emain so.
I shall visit the Cher okee again in the Autumn. If you
should have any Matters of Business that my new Office
might assist, send to me r egar ding them, and r est assur ed
that I shall make every Effort on your Behalf.
T o mor e domestic Matters. Our small Population has
nearly doubled, as the Result of an Influx of Settlers
newly arrived fr om Scotland. While most desirable, this
Incursion has caused no little T urmoil, the Newcomers
being Fisher -folk fr om the Coast. T o these, the Mountain
W ilderness is full of Thr eat and Mystery , such Thr eats
and Mysteries being personified by Pigs and Plowshar es.
(W ith r egar d to Pigs, I am not sur e but that I shar e
their V iews. The white Sow has lately taken up Residence
beneath the Foundation of my House and ther e engages
in such debauches that our Dinner is disturbed daily by
hellish Noises r esembling the Sounds of Souls in T orment.
These Souls appar ently being torn Limb fr om Limb and
devour ed by Demons beneath our Feet.)
Since I speak of Matters hellish, I must observe that
our Newcomers ar e also, alas, stern Sons of the
Covenant, to whom a Papist such as myself pr esents
himself as one fully furnished with Horns and T ail. Y ouwill r ecall one Thomas Christie, I think, fr om Ar dsmuir?
By comparison of these stiff-necked Gentlemen, Mr .
Christie appears the Soul of compassionate Gener osity .
I had not thought to thank Pr ovidence for the Fact that
my Son-in-law is Pr esbyterian by inclination, but I see
now how true it is that the Almighty does indeed have
Designs beyond the Ken of us poor mortals. While even
Roger MacKenzie is a sadly depraved Libertine by their
Lights, the new T enants ar e at least able to speak to him
without the Necessity of small Gestur es and Signs
intended to r epel Evil, which ar e the constant
Accompaniment to their Conversations with myself.
As for their Behavior with Respect to my W ife, you
would think her the W itch of Endor , if not the Gr eat
Whor e of Babylon. This, because they consider the
Furnishments of her Sur gery to be “Enchantments,” and
wer e appalled at witnessing the Entrance ther ein of a
Number of Cher okee, gaily festooned for visiting, who
had come to T rade in such Ar cana as Snakes’ Fangs and
the Gallbladders of Bears.
My wife begs me expr ess her Pleasur e at your kind
Compliments r egar ding Mr . Higgins’ s impr oved Health—
and still mor e, at your Offer to pr ocur e medicinal
Substances for her fr om your Friend in Philadelphia. She
bids me send you the enclosed List. As I cast an Eye upon
this, I suspect that your supplying of her Desir es will do
nothing to allay the Suspicions of the Fisher -folk, but
pray do not desist on that Account, as I think nothing
save T ime and Custom will decr ease their Fears of her .
My Daughter likewise bids me expr ess her Gratitude
for your Pr esent of the Phosphorus. I am not certain that
I shar e this Sentiment, given that her Experiments with
the Substance pr ove frighteningly incendiary to date.
Fortunately , none of the Newcomers observed theseExperiments, or they would be in no Doubt that Satan is
indeed a particular Friend to me and mine.
In happier V ein, I congratulate you upon your latest
V intage, which is indeed drinkable. I send in r eturn a Jug
of Mrs. Bug’ s best Cider , and a Bottle of the barr el-aged
Thr ee-year -old, which I flatter myself you will find less
corr osive to the Gullet than the last Batch.
Y our ob’ t. servant,
J. Fraser
Postscriptum: I have had Report of a Gentleman who by
Description r esembles one Stephen Bonnet, this Man
appearing briefly in Cr oss Cr eek last Month. If it was
indeed the Gentleman, his Business is unknown, and he
seems to have vanished without T race; my Uncle-in-law ,
Duncan Innes, has made Inquiries in the Ar ea, but writes
to tell me that these have pr oved fruitless. Should you
hear of anything in this Regar d, I pray you will advise me
at once.1 8
VROOM!
From the Dreambook
Last night I dr eamed of running water . Generally , this
means I drank too much befor e I went to bed, but this was
differ ent. The water was coming fr om the faucet in the
sink at home. I was helping Mama do the dishes; she was
running hot water fr om the hose-sprayer over the plates,
then handing them to me to dry; I could feel the hot china
thr ough the dish towel, and feel the mist of water on my
face.
Mama’ s hair was curling up like mad because of the
humidity , and the pattern on the plates was the lumpy
pink r oses of the good wedding china. Mama didn’ t let me
wash that until I was ten or so, for fear I’d dr op it, and
when I got to wash it at last, I was so pr oud!
I can still see every last thing in the china cabinet in
the living r oom: Mama’ s gr eat-grandfather ’ s hand-
painted cake stand (he was an artist, she said, and won a
competition with that cake stand, a hundr ed years ago),
the dozen crystal goblets that Daddy’ s mother left him,
along with the cut-glass olive dish and the cup and
saucer hand-painted with violets and gilt rims.
I was standing in fr ont of it, putting away the china—
but we didn’ t keep the china in that cabinet; we kept it in
the shelf over the oven—and the water was overflowing
fr om the sink in the kitchen, and running out acr oss the
floor , puddling r ound my feet. Then it started to rise, and
I was sloshing back and forth to the kitchen, kicking upthe water so it sparkled like the cut-glass olive dish. The
water got deeper and deeper , but nobody seemed to be
worried; I wasn’ t.
The water was warm, hot, in fact, I could see steam
rising off it.
That’ s all ther e was to the dr eam—but when I got up
this morning, the water in the basin was so cold I had to
warm water in a pan on the fir e befor e I washed Jemmy .
All the time I was checking the water on the fir e, I kept
r emembering my dr eam, and all those gallons and
gallons of hot, running water .
What I wonder is, these dr eams I have about then —
they seem so vivid and detailed; mor e than the dr eams I
have about now .  Why do I see things that don’ t exist
anywher e except inside my brain?
What I wonder about the dr eams is—all the new
inventions people think up—how many of those things ar e
made by people like me—like us? How many
“inventions” ar e r eally memories, of the things we once
knew? And—how many of us ar e ther e?
“IT ISN ’T REALL Y that hard to have hot, running water . In
theory .”
“No? I suppose not.” Roger only half-heard, concentrated as
he was on the object taking shape beneath his knife.
“I mean, it would be a big, horrible job to do.  But it’ s simple
in co ncept. Dig ditches or build  sluices—and around here, it
would probably be sluices… .”
“It wou ld?” Here was the trick y bit. He held his breath,
chiseling delicate, tiny slivers of wood away , one shaving at a
time.
“No me tal,” Bree said patiently . “If you had metal, you
could make surface pipes. But I bet there isn’ t enough metal inthe w hole colony of North Caro lina to make the piping you’d
need to bring water from the creek to the Big House. Let alone
a boiler! And if there was, it would cost a fortune.”
“Mmm.” Feeling that this was perhaps not an adequate
response, Roger added hastily , “But there’ s some metal
available. Jamie’ s still, for instance.”
His wife snorted.
“Y eah. I  asked him where he got it—he said he won it in a
high-stakes gam e of loo against a ship’ s captain in Charleston.
Think I  could travel four hun dred miles to bet my silver
bracelet against a few hundred feet of rolled copper?”
One more sliver … two … the smallest scrape with the tip
of the knife … ah. The tiny cir cle came free of the matrix. It
turned!
“Er … sure,” h e said, belatedly realizing that she’d asked
him a question. “Why not?”
She burst out laughing.
“Y ou haven’ t heard one single word I’ve said, have you?”
“Oh, sure I have,” he protest ed. “‘Ditch,’ ye said. And
‘water .’ I’m sure I remember that one.”
She snorted again, though mildly .
“W ell, you’d have to do it, anyway .”
“Do what?” His thumb sought  the little wheel, and set it
spinning.
“Gamble. No one’ s going to let me  into a high-stakes card
game.”
“Thank God,” he said, in reflex.
“Bless your little Presbyterian heart,” she said tolerantly ,
shaking her head. “Y ou’re not a ny kind of a gambler , Roger ,
are you?”
“Oh, and you are, I suppose.” He said it jokingly , wondering
even as he did so why he should feel vaguely reproached byher remark.
She merely smiled at that, wide mouth curving in a way that
suggested untold volumes of wicked enterprise. He felt a slight
sense of unease at that. She was  a  gambler , though so far …
He glanced involuntarily at the lar ge, charred spot in the
middle of the table.
“That was an accident,” she said defensively .
“Oh, aye. At least your eyebrows have grown back.”
“Hmpf. I’m nearly there. One more batch—”
“That’ s what ye said last time.” He was aware that he was
treading on dangerous ground, but seemed unable to stop.
She took a slow , deep breath, gazing at him through slightly
narrowed eyes, like one taking the range before firing of f some
major piece of artillery . Then she seemed to think better of
whatever she had been going to  say; her features relaxed and
she stretched out her hand toward the object he was holding.
“What’ s that you’ve been making?”
“Just a wee bawbee for Jem.” He let her take it, feeling the
warmth of modest pride. “The wheels all turn.”
“Mine, Daddy?” Jemmy had been wallowing on the floor
with Ad so the cat, who was tolerant of small children. Hearing
his name, though, he abandoned the cat, who promptly
escaped through the window , and popped up to see the new
toy .
“Oh, look!” Brianna ran the litt le car over the palm of her
hand and lifted it, letting all fo ur tiny wheels spin free. Jem
grabbed eagerly for it, pulling at the wheels.
“Careful, careful! Y ou’ll pull them of f! Here, let me show
you.” C rouching, Roger took the car and rolled it along the
hearthstones. “See? V room. V room-vroom!”
“Broom!” Jemmy echoed. “Lemme do it, Daddy , let me!”
Roger surrendered the toy to Jemmy , smiling.“Broom! Broom-broom!” The little boy shoved the car
enthusiastically , then, losing his grip on it, watched open-
mouthed as it zoomed to the end of the hearthstone by itself,
hit t he edge, a nd flipped over . Squealing with delight, he
scampered after the new toy .
Still smi ling, Ro ger glanced up, to see Brianna looking after
Jem, a rather odd expression on her face. She felt his eyes on
her , and looked down at him.
“V room?” she said quietly , and he felt a small internal jolt,
like a punch in the stomach.
“Whatsit, Daddy , what’ s it?” Jemmy had recaptured the toy
and ran up to him, clutching it to his chest.
“It’ s a … a …” he began, help less. It was in fact a crude
replica of a Morris Minor , but even the word “car ,” let alone
“automobile,” had no meani ng here. And the internal
combustion engine, with its pleasantly evocative noises, was at
least a century away .
“I g uess it’ s a vroom, honey ,” said Bree, a distinct tone of
sympathy in her voice. He felt the gentle weight of her hand,
resting on his head.
“Er … yeah, tha t’ s right,” he sa id, and cleared a thickening
in his throat. “It’ s a vroom.”
“Broom,” said Jemmy happily , and knelt to roll it down the
hearth again. “Broom-broom!”
STEAM. It would have to be steam- or wind-power ed; a
windmill would work, maybe, to pump water into the system,
but i f I want hot water , ther e would be steam anyway—why not
use it?
Containment is the pr oblem; wood burns and leaks, clay
won’ t ho ld against pr essur e. I need metal, that’ s all ther e is to
it. What  would Mrs. Bug do, I wonder , if I took the laundry
cauldr on? W ell, I know what sh e’d do, and a steam explosion
is no comparison; besides, we do need to do  the laundry . I’ll
have to dr eam up something else.1 9
MAKING HA Y
M AJOR MACDONALD returned on the final day of
haymaking. I was just maneuvering my way along the side of
the house with an immense basket of bread, when I saw him
near the  trailhead, tying up his horse to a tree. He lifted his hat
to me and bow ed, then came across the dooryard, looking
curiously round at the preparations taking place.
W e had set up tr estles under the chestnut trees, with boards
laid across them for tables, and  a constant stream of women
scurried to and fro like ants between the house and yard,
fetching food. The sun was setting, and the men would be in
soon for a celebratory feast; filthy , exhausted, starving—and
exhilarated by the end of their labors.
I greeted the Major with a nod, and accepted with relief his
of fer to carry the bread to the tables for me.
“Haying, is it?” he said, in answer to my explanation. A
nostalgic smile spread across his weathered face. “I remember
the hay making, from when I was a lad. But that was in
Scotland, aye? W e’d seldom such glorious weather as this for
it.” He looked up into the bl azing deep blue bowl of the
August sky above. It really wa s perfect haying weather , hot
and dry .
“It’ s wonderful,” I said, snif fing appreciatively . The scent of
fresh hay was everywhere—an d so was the hay; there were
shimmering mounds of it in eve ry shed, everyone carried bits
of it on their clothes, and small trails of scattered straw lay
everywhere. No w the smell of cut, dry hay was mingled with
the delectable scent of the barbecue that had been simmering
under ground overnight, the fresh bread, and the heady tang of
Mrs. Bug’ s cider . Marsali and B ree were bringing down jugsof it  from the springhouse, where it had been cooling, along
with buttermilk and beer .
“I see I’ve cho sen my time well,” the Major remarked,
viewing all this ef fort with approval.
“If y ou came to  eat, yes,” I said, rather amused. “If you
came to  talk to Jamie, I rather think you’ll have to wait until
tomorrow .”
He l ooked at me , puzzled, but had no opportunity to inquire
further; I had c aught another glimpse of movement at the
trailhead. The Major turned, see ing the direction of my glance,
and frowned slightly .
“Why , it’ s that f ellow with the brand on his face,” he said,
wary d isapproval in his voice. “I saw him down at
Coopersville, but he saw me fir st, and steered well clear . W ill
ye h ave me driv e him of f, mum ?” He set down the bread and
was already settling his sword b elt on his hip, when I gripped
his forearm.
“Y ou’ll do no such thing, Major ,” I said sharply . “Mr .
Higgins is a friend.”
He gave me a flat look, then dropped his arm.
“As ye like, M rs. Fraser , of c ourse,” he said coolly , and
picking up the bread again, went of f toward the tables.
Rolling my eyes in exasperation, I went to greet the
newcomer . Plainly Bobby Hig gins could have joined the
Major on the path to the Ridge; just as plainly , he had chosen
not t o. H e had become a little m ore familiar with mules, I saw;
he was riding on e and leading a nother , laden with a promising
array of panniers and boxes.
“His Lo rdship’ s compliments, mum,” he said, saluting me
smartly as he s lid of f. From the corner of my eye, I saw
MacDonald watching—and his small start of recognition at the
military gesture. So, now he k new Bobby for a soldier , and
doubtless would  ferret out his background in short order . I
repressed a sigh; I couldn’ t men d matters; they’d have to settle
it between themselves—if there was anything to settle.“Y ou’re looking well, Bobby ,” I said, smiling as I pushed
aside my disquiet. “No dif ficulties with the riding, I hope?”
“Oh, no, mum!” He beamed. “ And I’ s not fallen out once
since I left you  last!” “Fallen out” meant “fainted,” and I
congratulated him on the state o f his health, looking him over
as he unloaded the pack mule with deft ef ficiency . He did
seem much better; pink and fre sh-skinned as a child, bar the
ugly brand on his cheek.
“Y onder lobster back,” he said, af fecting insouciance as he
set down a box. “He’ s known to ye, is he, mum?”
“That’ s Major MacDonald,” I said, carefully not looking in
the Major ’ s direction; I could feel his stare boring into my
back. “Y es. He … does things fo r the Governor , I believe. Not
regular army , I mean; he’ s a half-pay of ficer .”
That bit  of information seemed to ease Bobby’ s mind a bit.
He took a breath , as though to say something, but then thought
better of it. Inst ead, he reached into his shirt and withdrew a
sealed letter , which he handed over .
“That’ s for you,” he explained. “From his Lordship. Is Miss
Lizzie by any chance about?” H is eyes were already searching
the flock of girls and women readying the tables.
“Y es, she was in the kitchen last I saw ,” I replied, a small
uneasy feeling skittering down my backbone. “She’ll be out in
a m inute. But …  you do know she’ s betrothed, don’ t you,
Bobby? Her fiance will be coming with the other men for
supper .”
He met my eyes and smiled with singular sweetness.
“Oh, aye , mum,  I know that well enough. On’y thought as I
s’ould thank her for her kindness when I last was here.”
“Oh,” I said, no t trusting that s mile in the slightest. Bobby
was a very handsome lad, blind eye or not—and he had been a
soldier . “W ell … good.”
Before I  could say more, I caug ht the sound of male voices,
coming through the trees. It was n’ t precisely singing; sort of arhythmic chant. I wasn’ t sure w hat it was—there was a lot of
Gaelic “Ho-ro!” and the like—but all of them seemed to be
bellowing along in a cordial fashion.
Haymaking was  a novel conce pt to the new tenants, who
were much more accustomed to  rake kelp than scythe grass.
Jamie, Arch, and Roger had shepherded them through the
process, though,  and I had been asked to stitch no more than a
handful of minor wounds, so I assumed it had been a success
—no ha nds or feet lopped of f, a few shouting matches, but no
fistfights, and no more than the usual amount of hay trampled
or ruined.
All of them see med in good spirits as they poured into the
dooryard, bedra ggled, sweat-so aked, and thirsty as sponges.
Jamie was in th e thick of them, laughing and staggering as
someone pushed  him. He caugh t sight of me, and a huge grin
split his sun-browned face. In a stride, he had reached me and
swept me into a n exuberant embrace, redolent of hay , horses,
and sweat.
“Done, by God!” he said, and k issed me soundly . “Christ, I
need a drink. A nd nay , that’ s n o blasphemy , wee Roger ,” he
added, w ith a glance behind him. “It’ s heartfelt gratitude and
desperate need, aye?”
“A ye. First things first, though, hm?” Roger had appeared
behind J amie, his voice so hoarse that it was barely audible in
the general uproar . He swallowed, grimacing.
“Oh, aye.” Jamie shot a quick lo ok at Roger , assessing, then
shrugged and strode out into the center of the yard.
“Eisd ri s! Eisd ris!”  b ellowe d Kenny Lindsay , seeing him.
Evan and Murdo joined him, clapping their hands and
shouting “Hear him!” loudly enough that the crowd began to
subside and pay attention.
“I say the prayer fr om my mouth,
I say the prayer fr om my heart,I say the prayer to Thee Thyself,
O, Healing Hand, O Son of the God of salvation.”
He didn ’ t raise his voice much above its normal speaking
level, but everyone quieted at once, so the words rang clear .
“Thou Lor d God of the angels,
Spr ead over me Thy linen r obe;
Shield me fr om every famine,
Fr ee me fr om every spectral shape.
Str engthen me in every good,
Encompass me in every strait,
Safeguar d me in every ill,
And fr om every enmity r estrain me.”
There was a stirring of faint approval in the crowd; I saw a
few of the fisher -folk bow th eir heads, though their eyes
stayed fixed on him.
“Be Thou between me and all things grisly ,
Be Thou between me and all things mean,
Be Thou between me and all things gruesome
Coming darkly towar d me.
“O God of the weak,
O God of the lowly ,
O God of the righteous,
O shield of homesteads:“Thou art calling upon us
In the voice of glory ,
W ith the mouth of mer cy
Of Thy beloved Son.”
I g lanced at Rog er , who was nodding slightly with approval,
as well.  Eviden tly , they’d agreed on it together . Sensible; it
would be a prayer familiar in form to the fisher -folk, and
nothing specifically Catholic about it.
Jamie spread his arms, quite unconsciously , and the breeze
caught t he worn  damp linen of  his shirt as he tilted back his
head and raised his face to the sky , open with joy .
“O may I find r est everlasting
In the home of Thy T rinity ,
In the Paradise of the godly ,
In the Sun-gar den of Thy love!”
“Amen!” said Roger , as loudly as he could, and there were
gratified murmurs of “amen” round the yard. Then Major
MacDonald rais ed the tankard o f cider he was holding, called
“Slainte!”  and drained it.
Festivity became general after that. I found myself sitting on
a cask, Jamie on the grass at my feet, with a platter of food and
a constantly refilled mug of cider .
“Bobby Higgins is here,” I told him, catching sight of
Bobby in the midst of a small gr oup of admiring young ladies.
“Do you see Lizzie anywhere?”
“No,” he said, stifling a yawn. “Why?”
“He asked for her particularly .”
“Then I ’m sure he’ll find her . W ill ye have a bit o’ meat,
Sassenach?” He  held up a lar ge rib bone, brow cockedinquiringly .
“I’ve ha d some, ” I assured him,  and he at once tore into it,
addressing himself to the vinegar -spiced barbecue as though
he hadn’ t eaten for a week.
“Has Major MacDonald spoken to you?”
“No,” he said, mouth full, and swallowed. “He’ll keep.
There’ s Lizzie—wi’ the McGillivrays.”
I fe lt reassured by that. The McGillivrays—particularly
Frau  U te—w ould certainly discou rage any inappropriate
attentions to their new intended daughter -in-law . Lizzie was
chatting and laughing with R obin McGillivray , who was
smiling at her in fatherly fashion, while his son Manfred ate
and dran k with single-minded appetite. Frau  Ute, I saw , was
keeping a sharp and interested eye on Lizzie’ s father , who was
sitting o n the porch nearby , cozily side by side with a tall,
rather plain-faced German lady .
“Who’ s that with Joseph W emyss?” I asked, nudging Jamie
with my knee to direct his attention.
He n arrowed his eyes against th e sun’ s glare, looking, then
shrugged.
“I d inna ken. S he’ s German; she must ha’ come with Ute
McGillivray . Matchmaking, aye?” He tilted up his mug and
drank, sighing with bliss.
“Do you  think so?” I looked at the strange woman with
interest. She certainly seemed  to be getting on well with
Joseph—and he with her . His thin face was alight as he
gestured, explaining something to her , and her neatly capped
head was bent toward him, a smile on her lips.
I di dn’ t always approve of U te McGillivray’ s methods,
which tended toward the juggernaut, but I had to admire the
painstaking intricacy of her plans. Lizzie and Manfred would
marry next spring, and I had wo ndered how Joseph would fare
then; Lizzie was his whole life.He migh t, of course, go with her  when she married. She and
Manfred would simply live in the McGillivrays’ lar ge house,
and I imagined  that they woul d find room for Joseph, too.
Still, he  would be torn, not wanting to leave us—and while
any able-bodied man could always be of use on a homestead,
he was by no means a natural farmer , let alone a gunsmith, like
Manfred and his father . If he himself were to wed, though …
I gav e Ute McG illivray a glance, and saw her watching Mr .
W emyss and his inamorata with  the contented expression of a
puppet master whose puppets are dancing precisely to her
tune.
Someone had left a pitcher of cider beside us. I refilled
Jamie’ s mug, then my own. It was wonderful, a dark, cloudy
amber , sweet and pungent and with the bite of a particularly
subtle se rpent to  it. I let the coo l liquid trickle down my throat
and bloom inside my head like a silent flower .
There was much talk and laughter , and I noticed that while
the new tenants still kept to their  own family groups, there was
now a little mor e blending, as the men who had been working
side-by-side for the last two weeks maintained their cordial
relations, these social courtesies fueled by cider . The new
tenants mostly regarded wine as a mocker , strong drink—
whisky , rum, or brandy—as raging, but everyone drank beer
and cider . Cider was wholesom e, one of the women had told
me, han ding a mug to her smal l son. I gave it half an hour , I
thought, sipping slowly , before they started dropping like flies.
Jamie made a small amused sound, and I looked down at
him. He nodded at the far side o f the dooryard, and I looked to
see that Bobby Higgins had disentangled himself from his
admirers, and by some alchemical legerdemain had managed
to abstra ct Lizz ie from the mid st of the McGillivrays. They
were standing in the shadow of the chestnut trees, talking.
I looked back at the McGillivrays. Manfred was leaning
against the foundation of the house, head nodding over his
plate. His father had curled up beside him on the ground and
was snoring peacefully . The girls chatted around them, passingfood to and fro over the droopin g heads of their husbands, all
in va rious stages of impending somnolence. Ute had moved to
the porch, and was talking to Joseph and his companion.
I gla nced back. Lizzie and Bo bby were only talking, and
there wa s a respectful distance between them. But there was
something about the way he bent toward her , and the way she
half-turned away from him, then back, swinging a fold of her
skirt one-handed …
“Oh, de ar ,” I said. I shifted a little, getting my feet under
me, but unsure w hether I ought really to go and interrupt them.
After all, they were in plain sight, and—
“Three things astonish me, nay four , sayeth the prophet.”
Jamie’ s hand squeezed my thigh, and I looked down to see that
he w as also wat ching the couple under the chestnut trees, his
eyes half-closed . “The way of an eagle in the air , the way of a
serpent on the ro ck, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea—
and the way of a man with a maid.”
“Oh, so I’m not  imagining it,” I said dryly . “Do you think
I’d best do something?”
“Mmphm.” He took a deep breath and straightened up,
shaking his head vigorously to wake himself. “Ah. No,
Sassenach. If wee Manfred willn a take the trouble to guard his
woman, it’ s no your place to do it for him.”
“Y es, I quite ag ree. I’m only thinking, if Ute should see
them …  or Joseph?” I wasn’ t sure what Mr . W emyss would
do; I thought Ute would probably make a major scene.
“Oh.” He blinked, swaying a l ittle. “A ye, I suppose ye’re
right.” He turned his head, sear ching, then spotting Ian, lifted
his chin in summons.
Ian had been sprawled dreamily on the grass a few feet
away , ne xt to a pile of greasy rib bones, but now rolled over
and crawled obligingly to us.
“Mm?” he said. His thick brow n hair had fallen half out of
its b inding, and several cowlick s were sticking straight up, the
rest fallen disreputably over one eye.Jamie nodded in the direction of the chestnut trees.
“Go and ask wee Lizzie to mend your hand, Ian.”
Ian glanced blearily down at h is hand; there was a fresh
scratch across the back of it, tho ugh it was long since clotted.
Then he looked in the direction Jamie indicated.
“Oh,” he said. He remained on hands and knees, eyes
narrowed thoughtfully , then slowly rose to his feet, and pulled
the binding of f his hair . Casua lly shoving it back with one
hand, he strolled in the direction of the chestnut trees.
They were much too far away  to hear anything, but we
could se e. Bobb y and Lizzie pa rted like the waves of the Red
Sea as Ian’ s tall, gangly form stepped purposefully between
them. T he three seemed to cha t amiably for a moment, then
Lizzie and Ian d eparted for the house, Lizzie giving Bobby a
casual wave of the hand—and a brief, backward glance.
Bobby stood for a moment looking after her , rocking
thoughtfully on his heels, then shook his head and made for
the cider .
The cider was ta king its toll. I’d  expected every man in the
place to be laid  out cold by nightfall; during haying, men
commonly fell asleep in their pl ates from sheer exhaustion. As
it was, there was still plenty of talk and laughter , but the soft
twilight glow beginning to suf fuse the dooryard showed an
increasing number of bodies strewn in the grass.
Rollo was gnawing contentedly  on Ian’ s discarded bones.
Brianna sat a little way away; Roger lay with his head in her
lap, sound asleep. The collar of his shirt was open, the ragged
rope sca r still vivid across his neck. Bree smiled at me, her
hand ge ntly stroking his glossy black hair , picking bits of hay
out of it. Jemmy was nowhe re to be seen—neither was
Germain, as I a scertained with a quick look around. Luckily
the phosphorus was under loc k and key , in the top of my
highest cupboard.
Jamie la id his own head against  my thigh, warm and heavy ,
and I put my ha nd on his hair , smiling back at Bree. I heardhim snort faintly , and looked in the direction of his gaze.
“For such a wee small lass, yon Lizzie does cause a good
deal of trouble,” he said.
Bobby Higgins was standing beside one of the tables,
drinking cider , and quite eviden tly unaware that he was being
stalked by the B eardsley twins. The two of them were slinking
like foxes through the wood, no t quite out of sight, conver ging
on him from opposite directions.
One—Jo, probably—stepped out suddenly beside Bobby ,
startling him into spilling his dr ink. He frowned, wiping at the
wet splotch on his shirt, whil e Jo leaned close, obviously
muttering menaces and warnings. Looking of fended, Bobby
turned away from him, only to be confronted by Kezzie on the
other side.
“I’m not sure it ’ s Lizzie who’ s causing the trouble,” I said
defensively . “She only talked to him, after all.” Bobby’ s face
was growing noticeably flushed . He set down the mug he’d
been dri nking from and drew himself up a little, one hand
folding into a fist.
The Bea rdsleys crowded closer , with the evident intention
of fo rcing him i nto the wood. Glancing warily from one twin
to the other , he took a step back, putting a solid tree trunk at
his back.
I glance d down; Jamie was watching through half-closed
lids, with an expression of dreamy detachment. He sighed
deeply , his eyes closed altogeth er , and he went suddenly and
completely limp, the weight of him heavy against me.
The reason for this sudden absquatulation loomed up a
second later: MacDonald, ruddy  with food and cider , his red
coat glowing like a cinder in the  sunset light. He looked down
at Jamie, peacefully slumbering against my leg, and shook his
head. He turned slowly round, surveying the scene.
“‘Strewth,” he said mildly . “I’ll tell ye, mum, I’ve seen
battlefields with much less carnage.”“Oh, have you?” His appearance had distracted me, but at
the mention of “carnage,” I g lanced back. Bobby and the
Beardsley twins had disappeared, vanished like wisps of mist
in th e gloaming. W ell, if they w ere beating each other to pulp
in the wood, I was sure I’d hear about it before too long.
W ith a small sh rug, MacDonald bent, took Jamie by the
shoulders, and eased him of f me, laying him down in the grass
with surprising gentleness.
“May I?” he ask ed politely , and upon my nod of assent, sat
down beside me on the other side, arms companionably
hooked round his knees.
He w as neatly dressed, as alway s, wig and all, but the collar
of his shirt was grimy and the skirts of his coat frayed at the
hem and spattered with mud.
“A g reat deal of  travel these days, Major?” I asked, making
conversation. “Y ou look rather tired, if you’ll pardon my
mentioning it.”
I had surprised him in the midd le of a yawn; he swallowed
it, blinking, then laughed.
“A ye, mum. I’ve been in the saddle for the last month, and
seen a bed perhaps one night in three.”
He d id l ook tire d, even in the soft sunset light; the lines of
his face were cut deep with fatigue, the flesh beneath his eyes
sagging and smudged. He wa s not a handsome man, but
normally had a brash self-assurance that lent him an attractive
air . Now he looked what he was: a half-pay soldier pushing
fifty , lac king a regiment or regular duty , struggling for any
small connections that might hold some hope of advancement.
I wo uldn’ t normally have spoke n to him of his business, but
sympathy moved me to ask, “Are you working a lot on behalf
of Governor Martin these days?”
He n odded, and took another gulp of cider , breathing deeply
after it.“A ye, mum. The Governor has been kind enough to char ge
me with  bringing him news of conditions in the backcountry—
and has done me the signal favor of accepting my advice, now
and then .” He glanced at Jamie , who had curled himself up
like a hedgehog and commenced to snore, and smiled.
“W ith regard to my husband’ s appointment as Indian Agent,
you mean? W e do thank you, Major .”
He waved a casual hand in dismissal of my thanks.
“Ah, no , mum; that had nothin g to do wi’ the Governor ,
save indirectly . Such appointments are the province of the
Superintendent of the Southern Department. Though it is of
course a matter of interest to th e Governor ,” he added, taking
another sip, “to hear news of the Indians.”
“I’m su re he’ll tell you all about it in the morning,” I
assured him, with a nod at Jamie.
“Indeed, mum.” He hesitated for a moment. “W ould ye ken
… d id Mr . Frase r perhaps mention, in his conversations in the
villages—was there any mention of … burnings?”
I sat up straight, the cider buzz disappearing from my head.
“What’ s happened? Have there been more?”
He nod ded, and rubbed a hand tiredly down his face,
scrubbing at the sprout of whiskers.
“A ye, two—but the one was a barn-burning, down below
Salem. One o’ the Moravian brethren’ s. And from all I can
learn of  the matter , ‘twas likely some of the Scotch-Irish
Presbyterians who’ve settled in Surry County . There’ s a wee
arsebite of a preacher who’ s  got them riled about the
Moravians—Godless heathen that they are—” He grinned
suddenly at that, but then sobered again.
“There’ s been trouble brewing in Surry County for months.
T o the point t hat the brethren have been petitioning the
Governor to redraw the boundary lines, so as to put them all in
Rowan C ounty . The line between Surry and Rowan goes rightthrough their land, ken? And t he sherif f in Surry is …” He
twiddled a hand.
“Perhaps not so keen in the per formance of his duty as he
might b e?” I suggested. “At least where the Moravians are
concerned?”
“He’ s the arsebite’ s cousin,” MacDonald said, and drained
his c up. “Y e’ve had no trouble  wi’ your new tenants, by the
way?” he added, lowering it. He smiled crookedly , looking
round th e dooryard at the small groups of women, chattering
contentedly as their men slept by their feet. “It would appear
ye’ve made them welcome.”
“W ell, they are Presbyterians, and fairly vehement about it
—but they haven’ t tried to burn the house down yet, at least.”
I t ook a quick glance at the por ch, where Mr . W emyss and
his c ompanion still sat, heads c lose in conversation. I thought
Mr . W em yss was probably the only man still conscious, bar
the Majo r himse lf. The lady wa s plainly a German, but not, I
thought, a Moravian; they very seldom married outside their
community , nor did the women often travel far .
“Unless you think the Presbyter ians have formed a gang for
the purpose of pur ging the countryside of Papists and
Lutherans—and you don’ t  think that, do you?”
He smiled briefly at that, though without much humor .
“No. But then, I was raised Presbyterian myself, mum.”
“Oh,” I said. “Er … a drop more cider , Major?”
He held out his cup without demur .
“The other burning—that seems much like the others,” he
said, graciously choosing to overlook my remark. “An isolated
homestead. A man living alone.  But this one was just over the
T reaty Line.”
This las t was said with a significant glance, and I looked
involuntarily at Jamie. He’d to ld me that the Cherokee were
upset about settlers intruding into their territory .“I shall ask your husband in the morning, of course, mum,”
MacDonald sai d, correctly interpreting my glance. “But
perhaps ye’d ken whether he’ s heard any references … ?”
“V eiled threats from a Snowbird chief,” I confessed. “He
wrote to John Stuart about them. But nothing specific. When
did this latest burning happen?”
He shrugged.
“No tell ing. I heard of it three weeks ago, but the man who
told me had heard of it a month before that—and he’d not seen
it, only heard from someone else.”
He scratched thoughtfully at his jaw .
“Someone should go and inspect the place, perhaps.”
“Mm,” I said, n ot bothering to hide the skepticism in my
voice. “And you think it’ s Jamie’ s job, do you?”
“I shoul dna be so presumptuous as to instruct Mr . Fraser in
his dutie s, mum,” he said, with the hint of a smile. “But I will
suggest to him that the situation may be of interest, aye?”
“Y es, yo u do that,” I muttered. Jamie had planned another
quick trip to the Snowbird villages, squeezed in between
harvesting and the onset of the  cold weather . The notion of
marching into the village and quizzing Bird-who-sings-in-the-
morning about a burned homestead seemed more than slightly
risky , viewed from my perspective.
A slight chill made me shiver , and I gulped the rest of my
own cider , wishing suddenly that it was hot. The sun was fully
set now , and the air had grown cool, but that wasn’ t what was
cooling my blood.
What if MacDonald’ s suspic ions were right? If the
Cherokee had been burning homesteads? And if Jamie were to
show up, asking inconvenient questions … .
I looked at the house, standing solid and serene, its windows
glowing with candlelight, a pale bulwark against the darkening
woods beyond.It is with  grief that the news is r eceived of the deaths by fir e
of James MacKenzie Fraser and his wife, Clair e Fraser , in a
conflagration that destr oyed their house… .
The fireflies were coming out, drifting like cool green
sparks in the shadows, and I looked upward involuntarily , to
see a spray of  red and yellow ones from the chimney .
Whenever I thought of that grue some clipping—and I tried not
to, n or to  count the days between now and January 21 of 1776
—I had thought of the fire as  occurring by accident. Such
accidents were more than common, ranging from hearth fires
run amo k and candlesticks tipped over , to blazes caused by the
summer lightning storms. It hadn’ t consciously occurred to me
before that it might be a deliberate act—an act of murder .
I moved my foot enough to nudge Jamie. He stirred in his
sleep, reached out one hand, and clasped it warmly round my
ankle, then subsided with a contented groan.
“Stand between me and all thin gs grisly ,” I said, half-under
my breath.
“Slainte,”  said the Major , and drained his cup again.2 0
DANGEROUS GIFTS
P ROPELLED BY MAJOR M AC DONALD’S news, Jamie
and Ian departed two days later for a quick visit to Bird-who-
sings-in-the-morning, and the Major went of f on his further
mysterious errands, leaving m e with Bobby Higgins for
assistance.
I wa s dying to dig into the cra tes Bobby had brought, but
what with one thing and another—the white pig’ s demented
attempt to eat A dso, a goat with  infected teats, a strange green
mold that had go t into the last batch of cheese, the completion
of a much-needed summer kitchen, and a stern conversation
with the Beardsleys regarding the treatment of guests, among
other thi ngs—it was more than a week before I found leisure
to unpack Lord John’ s present and read his letter .
September 4, 1773
Fr om Lor d John Gr ey , Mount Josiah Plantation
T o Mrs. James Fraser
My dear Madam—
I trust that the Articles you r equested will have arrived
intact. Mr . Higgins is somewhat nervous of carrying the
Oil of V itriol, as I understand he has had some evil
Experience connected with it, but we have packed the
Bottle with some Car e, leaving it sealed as it came fr om
England.
After examining the exquisite Drawings you sent—do I
detect your daughter ’ s elegant Hand in them?—I r ode to
W illiamsbur g, in or der to consult with a famous
Glassmaker who abides ther e under the nomen (doubtlessfabulous) of Blogweather . Mr . Blogweather allowed that
the Pelican Retort would be simplicity itself, scar cely a
fair T est of his Skill, but was enchanted by the
Requir ements of the distilling Apparatus, particularly the
detachable Coil. He appr ehended immediately the
Desirability of such a Device in case of Br eakage, and
has made thr ee of them.
Pray consider these my Gift—a most insignificant
Demonstration of my abiding Gratitude for your many
Kindnesses, both towar d myself and Mr . Higgins.
Y our most humble and obedient servant,
John Gr ey
Postscriptum: I have thus far r estrained my sense of
vulgar Curiosity , but I do ventur e to hope that on some
futur e Occasion, you may possibly gratify me by
explaining the Purpose to which you intend these Articles
be put.
THEY HAD P ACKED WITH some care. Pried open, the
crates proved to be filled with an immense quantity of straw ,
the bits of glassware and sealed bottles gleaming within,
cradled like roc’ s eggs.
“Y ou will  be careful with that, won’ t ‘ee, mum?” Bobby
inquired anxious ly , as I lifted out a squat, heavy , brown-glass
bottle, the cork heavily sealed  with red wax. “It’ s turrible
noxious, that stuf f.”
“Y es, I know .” Standing on tiptoe, I boosted the bottle up
onto a high shelf, safe from marauding children or cats. “Have
you seen it used, then, Bobby?”
His lips drew in tight, and he shook his head.
“Not to say used, mum. But I’ve seen what it does.  W as a …
a lass, in London, what I come t o know a bit, whilst we was a-
waitin’ the ship to carry us to America. Half her face prettyand smooth as a  buttercup but t’other side was so scarred you
could scarce look at it. Like as it was melted in a fire, but she
said ‘tw as vitriol.” He glanced u p at the bottle, and swallowed
visibly . “Anothe r whore’d thrown it on her , she said, ‘cause of
jealousy .”
He shook his head again, sig hing, and reached for the
broom to sweep up the scattered straw .
“W ell, y ou need n’ t worry ,” I as sured him. “I don’ t propose
to throw it at anyone.”
“Oh, no, mum!” He was quite shocked. “I s’ould never
think that!”
I disregarded this reassurance, involved in delving for more
treasure.
“Oh, look, ” I said, enchanted. I held in my hands the fruit of
Mr . Blogweather ’ s artistry: a globe of glass, the size of my
head, bl own to perfect symmetry and lacking even the hint of
a b ubble. There was a faint blue tinge to the glass, and I could
see my own distorted reflection, wide-nosed and bug-eyed,
like a mermaid peering out.
“A ye, mum,” said Bobby , dutifully peering at the retort.
“It’ s, er … big, in’ t it?”
“It’ s perfect. Just perfect!” Rather than being cut of f cleanly
from the blower ’ s pipe, the neck  of the globe had been drawn
out i nto a thick-walled tube abo ut two inches long and an inch
in di ameter . The edges and inter ior surface of this had been …
sanded? Ground ? I’d no idea what Mr . Blogweather had done,
but the result was a silky , opaq ue surface that would form a
lovely se al when a similarly fini shed piece was inserted into it.
My hands were damp with excitement and nervousness, lest
I dro p th e precio us thing. I clutc hed a fold of my apron round
it, an d turned to  and fro, debatin g where best to put it. I hadn’ t
expected one so lar ge; I should need Bree or one of the men to
make me a suitable support.
“It h as t o go over a small fire,” I explained, frowning at the
little brazier I used for brew ing. “But the temperature isimportant; a charcoal bed may be too hard to keep at a steady
heat.” I placed the big ball in my cupboard, safely behind a
row of bottles. “I think it will have to be an alcohol lamp—but
it’ s b igger than I  thought, I’ll ha ve to have a good-size lamp to
heat it… .”
I became aware that Bobby was not listening to my
babbling, his attention having been distracted by something
outside. He was frowning at som ething, and I came up behind
him, peering through the open window to see what it was.
I s hould  have guessed; Lizzie W emyss was out on the grass,
churning butter  under the c hestnut trees, and Manfred
McGillivray was with her .
I g lanced at the pair , engaged in cheerful conversation, then
at Bobby’ s somber countenance. I cleared my throat.
“Perhaps you’d open the other crate for me, Bobby?”
“Eh?” His attention was still fixed on the pair outside.
“Crate,” I repeated patiently . “T hat one.” I nudged it with
my toe.
“Crate …  oh! Oh, aye, mum, to be sure.” Pulling his gaze
from the window , he set about the task, looking glum.
I too k the rest of the glassware f rom the open crate, shaking
of f the straw a nd putting globes, retorts, flasks, and coils
carefully into a high cupboard—but I kept an eye on Bobby as
I did so, ponde ring this newly revealed situation. I hadn’ t
thought his feelings for Lizzie were more than a passing
attraction.
And perhaps it was no more th an that, I reminded myself.
But if it was … Despite myself, I glanced through the window ,
only to discover that the pair had become a trio.
“Ian!” I  exclaimed. Bobby glanced up, startled, but I was
already heading for the door , hastily brushing straw from my
clothes.
If Ian was back, Jamie was—He cam e through the front doo r just as I barreled into the
hallway , and grabbed me round the waist, kissing me with sun-
dusty enthusiasm and sandpaper whiskers.
“Y ou’re back,” I said, rather inanely .
“I am, and there are Indians just behind me,” he said,
clutching my bottom with both hands and rasping his whiskers
fervently against my cheek. “God, what I’d give for a quarter
of a n hour alon e wi’ ye, Sassenach! My balls are burst—ah.
Mr . Higgins. I, um, didna see ye there.”
He let go and s traightened abr uptly , sweeping of f his hat
and sma cking it against his thigh in an exaggerated pantomime
of casualness.
“No, zur ,” Bobby said morosely . “Mr . Ian’ s back, as well, is
he?” He didn’ t sound as thoug h this was particularly good
news; if Ian’ s arrival had distracted Lizzie from Manfred—and
it had—it did nothing to redirect her attention to Bobby .
Lizzie had abandoned her churn  to poor Manfred, who was
turning the crank with an air o f obvious resentment, as she
went la ughing of f in the dire ction of the stable with Ian,
presumably to show him the ne w calf that had arrived during
his absence.
“Indians,” I said, belatedly catching what Jamie had said.
“What Indians?”
“A half-dozen of the Cherokee,” he replied. “What’ s this?”
He nod ded at the trail of loose straw leading out of my
sur gery .
“Oh, that. That,” I said happily , “is ether . Or going to be.
W e’re feeding the Indians, I suppose?”
“A ye. I’ ll tell Mrs. Bug. But there’ s a young woman with
them that they’ve fetched along for ye to tend.”
“Oh?” H e was already striding down the hall toward the
kitchen, and I hurried to keep  up. “What’ s the matter with
her?”“T oothache,” he said briefly , and pushed open the kitchen
door . “M rs. Bug ! Ca bhfuil tu?  Ether , Sassenach? Y e dinna
mean phlogiston, do you?”
“I don’ t think  th at I do ,” I said, trying to recal l what on earth
phlogiston was. “I’ve told you about anesthesia, though, I
know—that’ s wh at ether is, a sort of anesthetic; puts people to
sleep so you can do sur gery without hurting them.”
“V erra useful in case of the toothache,” Jamie observed.
“Where’ s the woman gone to? Mrs. Bug!”
“So it would be, but it will take some time to make. W e’ll
have to make do with whisky fo r the moment. Mrs. Bug is in
the s ummer kitchen, I expect; it ’ s bread day . And speaking of
alcohol—” He was already out t he back door , and I scampered
across th e stoop  after him. “I’ll need quite a bit of high-quality
alcohol, for the ether . Can you bring me a barrel of the new
stuf f tomorrow?”
“A barrel? Christ, Sassenach, what d’ye mean to do, bathe
in it?”
“W ell, a s a matter of fact, yes. Or rather not me—the oil of
vitriol. Y ou pour it gently into a bath of hot alcohol, and it—”
“Oh, Mr . Fraser! I did think as how I heard someone a-
callin’.” Mrs. Bug appeared suddenly with a basket of eggs
over on e arm, beaming. “It’ s pleased I am to see ye home
again safe!”
“And gl ad to be so, Mrs. Bug,”  he assured her . “Can we be
feeding a half-dozen guests for supper?”
Her eyes went wide for a moment, then narrowed in
calculation.
“Sausage,” she declared. “And neeps. Here, wee Bobby ,
come an d make  yourself useful.” Handing me the eggs, she
seized B obby , w ho had come ou t of the house after us, by the
sleeve and towed him of f toward the turnip patch.
I h ad the feelin g of having be en caught in some rapidly
revolving apparatus like a merry-go-round, and took hold ofJamie’ s arm in order to steady myself.
“Did yo u know that Bobby Higg ins is in love with Lizzie?”
I asked.
“No, bu t it’ll do him little good if he is,” Jamie replied
callously . T aking  my hand on his arm as invitation, he took the
eggs fro m me and set them on the ground, then pulled me in
and kissed me again, more slowly , but no less thoroughly .
He let go with a deep sigh of content, and glanced at the
new sum mer kitchen we had e rected in his absence: a small
framed structure  consisting of c oarse-woven canvas walls and
a pin e-branch roof, erected round a stone hearth and chimney
—but with a lar ge table insid e. Enticing scents of rising
dough, fresh-ba ked bread, oatcakes, and cinnamon rolls
wafted through the air from it.
“Now , about that quarter of an h our , Sassenach … I believe
I could manage wi’ a bit less, if necessary… .”
“W ell, I  couldn’ t,” I said firmly , though I did allow my hand
to fondl e him for a thoughtful instant. My face was burning
from contact with his whiskers. “And when we do have time,
you can tell me what  on earth you’ve been doing to bring this
on.”
“Dreaming,” he said.
“What?”
“I kept havin’ terrible lewd dreams about ye, all the night
long,” he explained, twitching his breeks into better
adjustment. “Every time I rolled over , I’d lie on my cock and
wake up. It was awful.”
I b urst out laugh ing, and he af fe cted to look injured, though
I could see reluctant amusement behind it.
“W ell, you  can laugh, Sassenach,” he said. “Y e havena got
one to trouble ye.”
“Y es, and a great relief it is, too,” I assured him. “Er …
what sort of lewd dreams?”I cou ld s ee a deep blue gleam o f speculation at the back of
his e yes as he looked at me. He  extended one finger , and very
delicately ran it down the side of my neck, the slope of my
breast where it d isappeared into my bodice, and over the thin
cloth covering my nipple—which promptly popped up like a
puf fball mushroom in response to this attention.
“The so rt that make me want to take ye straight into the
forest, far enough that no one will hear when I lay ye on the
ground, lift your skirts, and split ye like a ripe peach,” he said
softly . “A ye?”
I swallowed, audibly .
At this delicate moment, whoop s of greeting came from the
trailhead on the other side of the house.
“Duty calls,” I said, a trifle breathless.
Jamie drew a deep breath of his own, squared his shoulders,
and nodded.
“W ell, I  havena died of unreq uited lust yet; I suppose I
shallna do it now .”
“Don’ t suppose you will,” I sai d. “Besides, didn’ t you tell
me once that a bstinence makes … er … things … grow
firmer?”
He gave me a bleak look.
“If it gets any firmer , I’ll faint from a lack of blood to the
heid. Dinna for get the eggs, Sassenach.”
It w as late afte rnoon, but plenty of light left for the job,
thank goodness. My sur gery was positioned to take advantage
of morning light for operations, though, and was dim in the
afternoons, so I set up an impr omptu theater of operation in
the dooryard.
This was an advantage, insofar as everyone wished to
watch; Indians always regar ded medical treatment—and
almost anything else—as a community af fair . They were
particularly enthusiastic about operations, as these held a highdegree of entertainment value. Everyone crowded eagerly
around, commenting on my preparations, ar guing with each
other an d talking to the patie nt, whom I had the greatest
dif ficulty in discouraging from talking back.
Her name was Mouse, and I could only assume that she had
been given it for some metaph ysical reason, as it certainly
wasn’ t suited either to appearance or personality . She was
round-faced, unusually snub-nosed for a Cherokee, and if she
wasn’ t precisely pretty , she had a force of character that is
often more attractive than simple beauty .
It was certainly working on the males present; she was the
only wo man in the Indian party , the others consisting of her
brother , Red Clay W ilson, and four friends who had come
along, either to keep the W ilson s company , of fer protection on
the journey—or to vie for Miss Mousie’ s attention, which
seemed to me the most likely explanation of their presence.
Despite the W ilsons’ Scottish name, none of the Cherokee
spoke any English beyond a few basic words—these including
“no,” “yes,” “good,” “bad,” and “whisky!” Since the Cherokee
equivalent of these terms w as the extent of my own
vocabulary , I was taking little part in the conversation.
W e were at the moment waiting  for whisky , in fact, as well
as translators. A settler named  W olverhampton, from some
nameless hollow to the east, had inadvertently amputated one
and a half toes a week before, while splitting logs. Finding this
state of things in convenient, he had proceeded to try to remove
the remaining half-digit himself with a froe.
Say what you will regarding general utility; a froe is not a
precision instrument. It is, however , sharp.
Mr . W olverhampton, a burly sort with an irascible temper ,
lived on  his own, some seven miles from his nearest neighbor .
By t he time he had reached this neighbor—on foot, or what
remained of it—and the neighbor had bundled him onto a
mule for transport to Fraser ’ s Ridge, nearly twenty-four hours
had passed, and the partial foot  had assumed the dimensions
and appearance of a mangled raccoon.The requirements of the cleanup sur gery , the multiple
subsequent debridements to control the infection, and the fact
that Mr . W olverhampton refused to surrender the bottle, had
quite exhausted my usual sur gic al supply . As I needed a keg of
the raw spirit fo r my ether -making in any case, Jamie and Ian
had gone to fetc h more from the whisky spring, which was a
good mi le from the house. I hoped they would return while
there was still enough light to see what I was doing.
I interrupted Miss Mousie’ s loud remonstrance with one of
the gentlemen, who was evidently teasing her , and indicated
by mean s of sign language that she should open her mouth for
me. She  did, but went on expostulating by means of rather
explicit hand signals, which seemed to be indicating various
acts she expected the gentleman  in question to perform upon
himself, judging from his flushed countenance, and the way
his companions were falling about with hilarity .
The side of her face was puf fed and obviously tender . She
didn’ t wince or shy away , thoug h, even when I turned her face
farther toward the light for a better view .
“T oothache, forsooth!” I said, involuntarily .
“Ooth?” Miss Mouse said, cocking an eyebrow at me.
“Bad,” I explained, pointing at her cheek. “Uyoi.”
“Bad,” s he agre ed. There followed a voluble exposition—
interrupted only by my inserting my fingers into her mouth
periodically—which I took to be an explanation of what had
happened to her .
Blunt tra uma, by the look of it. One tooth, a lower canine,
had been knocked completel y out, and the neighboring
bicuspid was so badly broken I would have to extract it. The
next to that could be saved, I thought. The inside of her mouth
was bad ly lacerated by the sharp edges, but the gum was not
infected. That was heartening.
Bobby Higgins came down from the stable, drawn by the
chatter , and was promptly sent back to bring me a file. MissMousie grinned lopsidedly at hi m when he brought it, and he
bowed extravagantly to her , making all of them laugh.
“These folk are Cherokee, are they , mum?” He smiled at
Red Cla y , and made a hand sig n, which seemed to amuse the
Indians, though they returned it . “I’ve not met any Cherokee
before. It’ s mostly other tribes near his Lordship’ s place in
V ir ginia.”
I w as pleased to  see that he was familiar with Indians, and
easy in his manner toward them. Hiram Crombie, who
appeared at this point, was not.
He stopped dead at the edge of the clearing, seeing the
assemblage. I waved cheerily at him, and—with evident
reluctance—he advanced.
Roger h ad told me Duncan’ s description of Hiram as “that
wee sour -drap.” It was apt. He w as small and stringy , with thin
grizzled hair that he wore straine d back in a plait so tight that I
thought he must find it dif ficult to blink. His face deeply lined
by the rigors of a fisherman’ s life, he looked about sixty , but
was lik ely much younger—and his mouth was habitually
downturned, in the expression of one who has sucked not
merely a lemon, but a rotten lemon.
“I w as l ooking f or Mr . Fraser ,” he said, with a wary eye on
the India ns. “I had heard he was  back.” He had a hatchet in his
belt, and kept a tight grip on it with one hand.
“He’ll be back directly . Y ou’ve met Mr . Higgins, haven’ t
you?” Evidently he had, and had been unfavorably impressed
by the experience. His eyes fixed on Bobby’ s brand, he made
the sma llest p ossible nod of acknowledgment. Nothing
daunted, I waved a hand round at the Indians, who were all
examining Hiram with much more interest than he showed in
them. “M ay I introduce Miss W ilson, her brother Mr . W ilson,
and … er … their friends?”
Hiram stif fened further , if such a thing was possible.
“W ilson?” he said, in an unfriendly voice.
“W ilson,” agreed Miss Mouse cheerily .“That is my wi fe’ s family name,” he said, in a tone that
made it clear he considered the use of it by Indians to be
grossly outrageous.
“Oh,” I said. “H ow nice. Do you think they might be your
wife’ s relatives, perhaps?”
His eyes bulged slightly at that, and I heard a strangled
gur gle from Bobby .
“W ell, they plainly got the name from a Scottish father or
grandfather ,” I pointed out. “Perhaps …”
Hiram’ s face was working like a nutcracker , emotions from
fury to dismay passing in swift succession over it. His right
hand cu rled up, forefinger and little finger protruding in the
horns, the sign against evil.
“Great-Uncle Ephraim,” he whispered. “Jesus save us.” And
without further word, he turned on his heel and tottered of f.
“Goodbye!” called Miss Mousie in English, waving. He cast
a single,  haunte d glance over hi s shoulder at her , then fled as
though pursued by demons.
THE W HISKY FINALL Y arrived, and, a fair amount of it
passed out to pa tient and spectators alike, the operation at last
commenced.
The file was nor mally used on horses’ teeth, and thus a little
lar ger th an I would have liked, but worked reasonably well.
Miss Mouse was inclined to be loud about the discomfort
involved, but her complaints grew less with her increasing
intake of whisky . By the time I h ad to draw her broken tooth, I
thought, she wouldn’ t feel a thing.
Bobby , meanwhile, was entertaining Jamie and Ian with
imitations of Hiram Crombie’ s response to the discovery that
he might possibly share some family connection with the
W ilsons. Ian, between bursts of laughter , translated the matter
for the Indians, who all rolled on the grass in paroxysms of
mirth.“ Do  they have an Ephraim W ilson in their family tree?” I
asked, taking a firm grip of Miss Mousie’ s chin.
“W ell, th ey’re not sure of the ‘Ephraim,’ but aye, they do.”
Jamie grinned broadly . “Thei r grandsire was a Scottish
wanderer . Stayed long enough to get their grandmother wi’
child, th en fell of f a clif f and was buried by a rockslide. She
marrit again, of course, but liked the name.”
“I wonder what it was made Great-Uncle Ephraim leave
Scotland?” Ian sat up, wiping tears of laughter from his eyes.
“The proximity  of people like  Hiram, I expect,” I said,
squinting to see what I was doin g. “Do you think—” I realized
suddenly that everyone had quit talking and laughing, their
attention focused on something across the clearing.
This something was the arrival of another Indian, carrying
something in a bundle over his shoulder .
THE IN DIAN W AS A gentleman named Sequoyah, somewhat
older th an the young W ilsons and their friends. He nodded
soberly to Jamie, and swinging  the bundle of f his shoulder ,
laid it on the g round at Jamie’ s feet, saying something in
Cherokee.
Jamie’ s face changed, the lingering traces of amusement
vanishing, repla ced by interest—and wariness. He knelt, and
carefully turning  back the ragge d canvas, revealed a jumble of
weathered bones, a hollow-eyed skull staring up from the
midst of them.
“Who in  bloody hell is that ?” I had stopped work, and with
everyone else, including Miss Mouse, stood staring down at
this latest arrival.
“He says it’ s t he auld man w ho owned the homestead
MacDonald told of—the one that burned inside the T reaty
Line.” Jamie reached down and  picked up the skull, turning it
gently in his hands.
He h eard my sm all intake of breath, for he glanced at me,
then turn ed the skull over , holdin g it for me to see. Most of theteeth we re missing, and had bee n missing long enough that the
jawbone had closed over the empty sockets. But the two
molars remaining showed nothing but cracks and stains—no
gleam of silver filling, no empty space where such fillings
might have been.
I let my breath o ut slowly , not su re whether to be relieved or
disappointed.
“What happened to him? And why is he her e ?”
Jamie knelt and laid the skull gently back in the canvas,
then turned some of the bone s over , examining them. He
looked up, and with a small motion of the head, invited me to
join him.
The bones showed no sign o f having been burned, but
several of them did  show signs of having been g nawed by
animals. One or two of the long bones had been cracked and
split, no doubt to get at the marrow , and many of the smaller
bones of hands and feet were missing. All of them had the
gray , fragile look of bones that had lain outside for some time.
Ian had relayed my question to Sequoyah, who squatted
down ne xt to Jamie, explaining as he jabbed a finger here and
there amongst the bones.
“He say s,” Ian translated, frown ing, “that he knew the man
a l ong time. The y werena friends, exactly , but now and again,
when he  was near the man’ s cab in, he would stop, and the man
would share his food. So he wo uld bring things, too, when he
came—a hare for the pot, a bit o’ salt.”
One day , a few  months back, he had found the old man’ s
body in the woo d, lying under a tree, some distance from his
house.
“No on e kilt him, he says,” Ian said, frowning in
concentration at  the rapid stream of words. “He just … died.
He think s the man was hunting—he had a knife on him, and
his gun beside h im—when the spirit left him, and he just fell
down.” He echoed Sequoyah’ s shrug.Seeing no reason to do anythin g with the body , Sequoyah
had left it there, and left the knife with it, in case the spirit
should r equire it, wherever it had gone; he did not know where
the spiri ts of white men went, or whether they hunted there.
He pointed—the re was an old knife, the blade almost rusted
away , under the bones.
He h ad taken th e gun, which seemed too good to leave, and
as it  wa s on his way , had stopped at the cabin. The old man
had own ed very little, and what  he had was mostly worthless.
Sequoyah had taken an iron pot, a kettle, and a jar of
cornmeal, which he had carried back to his village.
“He’ s no  from Anidonau Nuya, is he?” Jamie asked, then
repeated the question in Cherokee. Sequoyah shook his head,
the small ornaments braided into his hair making a tiny
chiming sound.
He was from a village some mi les west of Anidonau Nuya
—Standing Stone. Bird-who-sings had sent word to the nearby
towns, in the wake of Jamie’ s visit, asking if there was anyone
who kne w of the old man and his fate. Hearing Sequoyah’ s
account, Bird had sent him to c ollect what was left of the old
man, an d to bring the remains to Jamie, in proof that no one
had killed him.
Ian asked a question, in which I caught the Cherokee word
for “ fire.” Sequoyah shook his head again, and replied with a
stream of words.
He had not bur ned the cabin—why should he do such a
thing? He thought no one had done so. After collecting the old
man’ s bones—his face showed his distaste for the procedure—
he h ad g one to look at the cabin  again. T rue, it was burned—
but it was clear to him that a tr ee nearby had been struck by
lightning, and had set fire to a good bit of the forest near it.
The cabin was only half-burned.
He rose to his feet with an air of finality .
“W ill he  stay for supper?” I asked, seeing that he seemed
about to depart.Jamie conveyed the invitation , but Sequoyah shook his
head. He had done what was required of him; now he had
other bu siness. He nodded to th e other Indians, then turned to
go.
Something struck him, though , and he stopped, turning
back.
“T sisqua says,” he said, in the c areful way of one who has
memorized a speech in an unfamiliar tongue, “you re-mem-ber
de guns.” He nodded then decisively , and went.
THE GRA VE W AS MARKED  with a small cairn of stones
and a small wo oden cross made of pine twigs. Sequoyah
hadn’ t known his acquaintance’ s name, and we had no idea of
his age, nor yet the dates of birth and death. W e hadn’ t known
if he was Christian, either , but the cross seemed a good idea.
It was a very small burial service, consisting of myself,
Jamie, I an, Bree and Roger , Li zzie and her father , the Bugs,
and Bobby Higgins—who I was fairly sure was in attendance
only bec ause Lizzie was. Her f ather seemed to think so, too,
judging from the occasional suspicious glances he cast at
Bobby .
Roger read a br ief psalm over the grave, then paused. He
cleared his throat and said simply , “Lord, we commend to Thy
care the soul of this our brother …”
“Ephraim,” murmured Brianna, eyes cast modestly down.
A subterranean sense of laughter moved through the crowd,
though n o one actually laughed. Roger gave Bree a dirty look,
but I saw the corner of his mouth twitching, as well.
“… of our brother , whose name Thou knowest,” Roger
concluded with dignity , and closed the Book of Psalms he had
borrowed from Hiram Crom bie—who had declined an
invitation to attend the funeral.
The ligh t had gone by the time Sequoyah had finished his
revelations the night before, and I was obliged to put of f Miss
Mouse’ s dental work to the mo rning. Stewed to the gills, shemade no objection, and was he lpfully supported of f to a bed
on the kitchen f loor by Bobby Higgins—who might or might
not be in love w ith Lizzie, but who seemed nonetheless most
appreciative of Miss Mouse’ s charms.
Once finished with the tooth-drawing, I had suggested that
she and her friends stay for a bit, but they , like Sequoyah, had
business elsewhere, and with many thanks and small gifts, had
departed by mid-afternoon, sme lling strongly of whisky , and
leaving us to dispose of the  mortal remains of the late
Ephraim.
Everyone went back down the  hill after the service, but
Jamie and I loite red behind, seeking an opportunity to be alone
for a  few  minute s. The house ha d been full of Indians the night
before, with much talk and story telling by the fire, and by the
time we had finally gone to bed, we had simply curled up in
each other ’ s arms and fallen asleep, barely exchanging the
brief civility of a “good night.”
The grav eyard was sited on a small rise, some distance from
the house, and was a pretty , peaceful place. Surrounded by
pines whose golden needles blanketed the earth, and whose
murmuring branches provided a constant soft susurrus, it
seemed a comforting spot.
“Poor old creature,” I said, putting a final pebble on
Ephraim’ s cairn. “How do you suppose he ended up in such a
place?”
“God knows.” Jamie shook his head. “There are always
hermits, men who mislike the so ciety of their fellows. Perhaps
he was one o’ t hose. Or perhaps some misfortune drove him
into the wilderness, and he … stayed.” He shrugged a little,
and gave me a half-smile.
“I sometimes wonder how any of us came to be where we
are, Sassenach. Don’ t you?”
“I us ed to,” I said. “But after a time, there didn’ t seem to be
any possibility of an answer , so I stopped.”
He looked down at me, diverted.“Have ye, then?” He put out a hand and tucked back a lock
of w indblown hair . “Perhaps I s houldna ask it, then, but I will.
Do y e m ind, Sas senach? That ye ar e  here , I mean. D o ye ever
wish ye were—back?”
I shook my head.
“No, not ever .”
And that was true. But I woke sometimes in the dead of
night, thinking, Is no w t he dr eam ?  W o uld I wake again to the
thick warm smell of central he ating and Frank’ s Old Spice?
And when I fell asleep again to the scent of woodsmoke and
the musk of Jamie’ s skin, would feel a faint, surprised regret.
If he saw the thought on my face, he gave no sign of it, but
bent and kissed me gently on the forehead. He took my arm,
and we walked a little way into the wood, away from the
house and its clearing below .
“Sometimes I smell the pines,” he said, taking a deep, slow
breath of the pungent air . “And I think for an instant I am in
Scotland. But then I come to my self and see; there is no kindly
bracken here, nor great barren mountains—not the wildness
that I kent, but only wilderness that I do not.”
I t hough t I heard nostalgia in his voice, but not sorrow . He’d
asked, though; so would I.
“And do you ever wish to be … back?”
“Oh, aye,” he said, surprising m e—and then laughed at the
look on my face. “But not enough not to wish more to be here,
Sassenach.”
He glanc ed over his shoulder at  the tiny graveyard, with its
small collection  of cairns and crosses, with here and there a
lar ger boulder marking a particular grave.
“Did ye  ken, Sassenach, that some folk believe the last
person to lie in  a graveyard becomes its guardian? He must
stand on  guard until the next per son dies and comes to take his
place—only then can he rest.”“I s uppose our mysterious Ephraim might be rather
surprised to find himself in such a position, when here he’d
lain dow n under a tree all alone,” I said, smiling a little. “But I
do wonder: what is the guardian  of a graveyard guarding—and
from whom?”
He laughed at that.
“Oh … vandals, maybe; desecraters. Or charmers.”
“Charmers?” I was surprised at  that; I’d thought the word
“charmer” synonymous with “healer .”
“There are charms that call for bones, Sassenach,” he said.
“Or the ashes of a burnt body . O r soil from a grave.” He spoke
lightly enough, but with no sen se of jesting. “A ye, even the
dead may need defending.”
“And w ho better to do it than a resident ghost?” I said.
“Quite.”
W e clim bed up through a stand of quivering aspen, whose
light dappled us with green and silver , and I paused to scrape a
blob of the crimson sap from a paper -white trunk. How odd, I
thought, wondering why the sight of it gave me pause—and
then remembere d, and turned sharply to look again at the
graveyard.
Not a memory , but a dream—or a vision. A man, battered
and brok en, risin g to his feet amid a stand of aspen, rising for
what he knew was the last time,  his last fight, baring shattered
teeth stained with blood that was the color of the aspens’ sap.
His face was painted black for death—and I knew that there
were silver fillings in his teeth.
But the granite b oulder stood silent and peaceful, drifted all
about with yellow pine needles, marking the rest of the man
who had once called himself Otter -T ooth.
The moment passed, and vanis hed. W e walked out of the
aspens, and into another clearing, this one higher than the rise
the graveyard stood on.I w as surprised to see that some one had been cutting timber
here, and clearing the ground. A sizable stack of felled logs lay
to one side, an d nearby lay a  tangle of uprooted stumps,
though several more, still rooted  in the ground, poked through
the heavy growth of wood sorrel and bluet.
“Look, Sassenach.” Jamie turned me with a hand on my
elbow .
“Oh. Oh, my .”
The ground rose high enough h ere that we could look out
over a stunning  vista. The trees fell away below us, and we
could see beyond our mountain , and beyond the next, and the
next, in to a blue distance, ha zed with the breath of the
mountains, clouds rising from their hollows.
“D’ye like it?” The note of pro prietorial pride in his voice
was palpable.
“Of cou rse I like it. What—?”  I turned, gesturing at the
logs, the stumps.
“The next house will stand here, Sassenach,” he said simply .
“The next  house? What, are we building another?”
“W ell, I dinna ken will it be us,  or maybe our children—or
grandchildren,” he added, mouth curling a little. “But I
thought, should anything happe n—and I dinna think anything
will,  mind, but if it should—well, I should be happier to have
made a start. Just in case.”
I stared at him for a moment, trying to make sense of this.
“Should anything happen,” I said slowly , and turned to look to
the east,  where the shape of our house was just visible among
the trees, its chimney smoke a white plume among the soft
green of  the chestnuts and firs. “Should it really … burn down,
you mean.” Just putting the idea  into words made my stomach
curl up into a ball.
Then I looked at him again, and saw that the notion scared
him, too. But Ja mie-like, he had simply set about to take what
action he could, against the day of disaster .“D’ye like it?” he repeated, blue eyes intent. “The site, I
mean. If not, I can choose another .”
“It’ s beautiful,” I said, feeling t ears prickle at the backs of
my eyes. “Just beautiful, Jamie.”
HOT AF TER THE CLIMB, we sat down in the shade of a
giant hemlock, to admire our future view . And, with the
silence broken concerning the dire possibility of the future,
found we could discuss it.
“It’ s not so much the idea of us dying,” I said. “Or not
entirely . It’ s that ‘no surviving children’ that gives me the
whim-whams.”
“W ell, I take your point, Sassenach. Though I’m no in favor
of us dying, either , and I mean  to see we don’ t,” he assured
me. “Think, though. It might not mean they’re dead. They
might only … go.”
I to ok a deep breath, trying to accept that supposition
without panic.
“Go. Go back, you mean. Roge r and Bree—and Jemmy , I
suppose. W e’re assuming he can—can travel through the
stones.”
He nodded soberly , arms clasped about his knees.
“After what he did to that opal? A ye, I think we must
assume he can.” I nodded, rec alling what he’d done to the
opal: held it, complaining of it growing hot in his hand—until
it expl oded, shattering into hundreds of needle-sharp
fragments. Y es, I thought we must assume he could time-
travel, to o. But what if Brianna had another child? It was plain
to me that she and Roger wanted another—or at least that
Roger did, and she was willing.
The thought of losing them w as acutely painful, but I
supposed the possibility had to be faced.
“Which leaves a choice, I suppose,” I said, trying to be
brave and objective. “If we’re dead, they’d go, becausewithout us, they’ve no real reason to be here. But if we’re not
dead—will they  go anyway? W ill we send them away , I mean?
Because of the war . It won’ t be safe.”
“No,” he  said softly . His head was bent, stray auburn hairs
lifting from his crown, from th e cowlicks he had bequeathed
both to Bree and to Jemmy .
“I dinna ken,” he said at last, and lifted his head, looking out
into the distance of land and sky . “No one does, Sassenach. W e
must just meet what comes as we can.”
He t urned and la id his hand over  mine, with a smile that had
as much of pain in it as joy .
“W e’ve ghosts enough between us, Sassenach. If the evils of
the past canna h inder us—neither then shall any fears of the
future. W e must just put things behind us and get on. A ye?”
I laid a light hand on his chest, not in invitation, but only
because I wanted the feel of him. His skin was cool from
sweating, but he had helped dig the grave; the heat of his labor
glowed in the muscle beneath.
“Y ou we re one of my ghosts,” I  said. “For a long time. And
for a long time, I tried to put you  behind me.”
“Did ye , then?” His own hand came to rest lightly on my
back, moving unconsciously . I knew that touch—the need of
touching only to reassure onese lf that the other was actually
there, present in flesh.
“I thought I couldn’ t live, looking back—couldn’ t bear it.”
My throat was thick with the memory of it.
“I k now ,” he said softly , his hand rising to touch my hair .
“But ye had the  bairn—ye had a husband. It wasna right to
turn your back on them.”
“It wasn’ t right to turn my back on you. ” I blinked, but tears
were leaking from the corners o f my eyes. He drew my head
close, put out hi s tongue, and delicately licked my face, which
surprised me so much that I laughed in the midst of a sob, and
nearly choked.“I do  love thee, as meat loves sa lt,” he quoted, and laughed,
too, very softly . “Dinna weep, Sassenach. Y e’re here; so am I.
There’ s naught that matters, aside from that.”
I leaned my forehead against his cheek, and put my arms
around him. My hands rested f lat on the planes of his back,
and I stroked h im from the blade of his shoulder to the
tapering small of his back, lightly , always lightly , tracing the
whole of him, the shape of him, and not the scars that reamed
his skin.
He held me close, and sighed deeply .
“D’ye ken we’ve been wed this time nearly twice as long as
the last?”
I d rew back and  frowned dubiously at him, accepting the
distraction.
“W ere we not married in between?”
That took him by surprise; he frowned, too, and ran a finger
slowly down the sunburnt bridge of his nose in thought.
“W ell, there’ s a question for a priest, to be sure,” he said. “I
should think we were—but if so, are we not both bigamists?”
“W ere, not are,” I corrected, feeling slightly uneasy . “But
we weren’ t, really . Father Anselme said so.”
“Anselme?”
“Father Anselme—a Franciscan priest at the Abbey of St.
Anne. But perhaps you wouldn’ t recall him; you were very ill
at the time.”
“Oh, I recall him,” he said. “He  would come and sit wi’ me
at night, when I couldna sleep.” He smiled, a little lopsided;
that time wasn’ t something he wished to remember . “He liked
ye a great deal, Sassenach.”
“Oh? And what about you?” I asked, wanting to distract him
from the memory of St. Anne. “Didn’ t you like me?”
“Oh, I liked ye fine then,” he assured me. “I maybe like ye
even more now , though.”“Oh, do you, indeed.” I sat up a little straighter , preening.
“What’ s dif ferent?”
He tilte d his head to one side, eyes narrowing a bit in
appraisal.
“W ell, ye fart le ss in your sleep,” he began judiciously , then
ducked, laughing, as a pinecone whizzed past his left ear . I
seized a chunk of wood, but before I could bat him over the
head wit h it, he lunged and caug ht me by the arms. He shoved
me flat in the g rass and collapsed on top of me, pinning me
ef fortlessly .
“Get of f, you oaf! I do not  fart in my sleep!”
“Now , how would ye ken tha t, Sassenach? Y e sleep so
sound, y e wouldna wake, even to the sound of your own
snoring.”
“Oh, you want to talk about snoring, do you? Y ou—”
“Y e’re p roud as  Lucifer ,” he sai d, interrupting. He was still
smiling, but the words were mo re serious. “And ye’re brave.
Y e were always bolder than was safe; now ye’re fierce as a
wee badger .”
“So I’m  arrogan t and ferocious. This does not sound like
much of  a catalog of womanly v irtues,” I said, puf fing a bit as
I strained to wriggle out from under him.
“W ell, ye’re kind, too,” he said, considering. “V erra kind.
Though ye are inclined to do it on your own terms. Not that
that’ s bad, mind,” he added, neatly recapturing the arm I had
extricated. He pinned my wrist over my head.
“W omanly ,” he murmured, brows knotted in concentration.
“W omanly virtu es …” His fre e hand crept between us and
fastened on my breast.
“Besides that!”
“Y ou’re verra clean,” he said approvingly . He let go my
wrist an d ruf fled a hand through my hair—which was indeed
clean, smelling of sunflower and marigolds.“I’ve never seen any woman wa sh herself sae much as you
do—save Brianna, perhaps.
“Y e’re no much of a cook,” he went on, squinting
thoughtfully . “T hough ye’ve never poisoned anyone, save on
purpose. And I will say ye sew a neat seam—though ye like it
much better if it’ s through someone’ s flesh.”
“Thanks so much!”
“T ell me some more virtues,” he suggested. “Perhaps I’ve
missed one.”
“Hmph! Gentleness, patience …” I floundered.
“Gentle? Christ.” He shook his head. “Y e’re the most
ruthless, bloodthirsty—”
I da rted my head upward, and  nearly succeeded in biting
him in the throat. He jerked back, laughing.
“No, ye’re no verra patient, either .”
I gave up struggling for the moment and collapsed flat on
my back, tousled hair spread out on the grass.
“So what is  my most endearing trait?” I demanded.
“Y e think I’m funny ,” he said, grinning.
“I …  do … not …” I grunted, struggling madly . He merely
lay on top of m e, tranquilly oblivious to my pokings and
thumpings, until I exhausted  myself and lay gasping
underneath him.
“And,” he said thoughtfully , “y e like it verra much when I
take ye to bed. No?”
“Er …”  I wanted to contradict him, but honesty forbade.
Besides, he bloody well knew I did.
“Y ou are squashing me,” I said  with dignity . “Kindly get
of f.”
“No?” he repeated, not moving.
“Y es! All right! Y es! W ill you bloody get off ?!”He didn ’ t get of f, but bent his head and kissed me. I was
close-lipped, determined not to give in, but he was determined,
too, and if one came right down to it … the skin of his face
was war m, the plush of his beard stubble softly scratchy , and
his wide  sweet mouth … My legs were open in abandon and
he w as solid be tween them, bare chest smelling of musk and
sweat and sawdust caught in th e wiry auburn hair… . I was
still hot  with struggling, but t he grass was damp and cool
around us… . W ell, all right; another minute, and he could
have me right there, if he cared to.
He felt me yield, and sighed, letting his own body slacken;
he no longer held me prisoner , but simply held me. He lifted
his head then, and cupped my face with one hand.
“D’ye w ant to know what it is, really?” he asked, and I
could se e from the dark blue of his eyes that he meant it. I
nodded, mute.
“Above all creatures on this ear th,” he whispered, “you are
faithful.”
I t hough t of saying something about St. Bernard dogs, but
there was such tenderness in his face that I said nothing,
instead merely staring up at him, blinking against the green
light that filtered through the needles overhead.
“W ell,” I said at last, with a de ep sigh of my own, “so are
you. Quite a good thing, really . Isn’ t it?”2 1
WE HA VE IGNITION
M RS. BUG HAD MADE chicken fricassee for supper , but
that wasn’ t suf ficient to account for the air of suppressed
excitement that Bree and Roger  brought with them when they
came in. They were both smiling, her cheeks were flushed, and
his eyes as bright as hers.
So when  Roger announced that they had great news, it was
perhaps only reasonable that M rs. Bug should leap directly to
the obvious conclusion.
“Y ou’re wi’ child again!” she cr ied, dropping a spoon in her
excitement. She clapped her hands together , inflating like a
birthday balloon. “Oh, the joy of it! And about time, too,” she
added, l etting go her hands to wag a finger at Roger . “And
here was me th inkin’ as I sho uld add a bit o’ ginger and
brimstone to your parritch, young man, so as to bring ye up to
scratch! But ye kent your business weel enough in the end, I
see. And you, a bhailach,  what d’ye think? A bonny wee
brother for ye!”
Jemmy , thus addressed, stared up at her , mouth open.
“Er …” said Roger , flushing up.
“Or , of course, it might be a w ee sister , I suppose,” Mrs.
Bug admitted. “But good news, good news, either way . Here, a
luaidh,  hav e a sweetie on the strength of it, and the rest of us
will drink to it!”
Obviously bewildered, but strongly in favor of sweeties,
Jem took  the prof fered molasses drop and stuck it promptly in
his mouth.
“But he isn’ t—” Bree began.
“Nank you, Missus Bug,” Jem said hastily , putting a hand
over his mouth lest his mother try to repossess this distinctlyforbidden predinner treat on grounds of impoliteness.
“Oh, a wee sw eetie will do him nay harm,” Mrs. Bug
assured her , picking up the fallen spoon and wiping it on her
apron. “Call Arch in, a muirninn,  and we’ll tell him your
news. Blessed Bride save ye, lass, I thought ye’d never get
round to  it! Here was all the ladies saying’ as they didna ken
whether ye’d turned cold to your husband, or was it him
maybe, lackin’ the vital spark, but as it is—”
“W ell, as  i t is,” s aid Rog er , raising his v oice in order to be
heard.
“I’m not pr egnant !” said Bree, very loudly .
The succeeding silence echoed like a thunderclap.
“Oh,” sa id Jamie mildly . He pi cked up a serviette and sat
down, tu cking it into the neck of his shirt. “W ell, then. Shall
we eat?” He held out a hand to Jem, who scrambled up onto
the bench beside him, still suc king fiercely on his molasses
drop.
Mrs. Bug, momentarily turned to stone, revived with a
marked “Hmpf !” Massively af fronted, she turned to the
sideboard and slapped down a stack of pewter plates with a
clatter .
Roger , still rather flushed, appeared to find the situation
funny , ju dging from the twitching of his mouth. Brianna was
incandescent, and breathing like a grampus.
“Sit down, darling,” I said, in the tentative manner of one
addressing a lar ge explosive dev ice. “Y ou … um … had some
news, you said?”
“Never mind!” She stood still, glaring. “Nobody cares, since
I’m not pregnan t. After all, wha t else  cou ld I possibly  do that
anybody would think was worthwhile?” She shoved a violent
hand thr ough her hair , and encountering the ribbon tying it
back, yanked this loose and flung it on the ground.
“Now , s weetheart …” Roger began. I could have told him
this was  a mistake; Frasers in a fury tended to pay no attentionto honeyed words, being instead inclined to go for the throat of
the nearest party unwary enough to speak to them.
“Don’ t you ‘sweetheart’ me!” she snapped, turning on him.
“Y ou th ink so, too! Y ou think everything I do is a waste of
time if it isn’ t w ashing clothes or cooking dinner or mending
your ef fi ng socks! And you blam e me for not getting pregnant,
too, you think it’ s my fault! W ell, it’ s NOT , and you know it!”
“No! I don’ t thi nk that, I don’ t  at all. Brianna, please… .”
He stretched out a hand to he r , then thought better of the
gesture and withdrew it, clearly feeling that she might take his
hand of f at the wrist.
“Less EA T , Mummy!” Jemmy piped up helpfully . A long
string of  molass es-tinged saliva  flowed from the corner of his
mouth and dripped down the front of his shirt. Seeing this, his
mother turned on Mrs. Bug like a tiger .
“Now see what you’ve done, you interfering old busybody!
That wa s his last clean shirt! An d how dare you talk about our
private lives with everybody in sight, what possible earthly
business of yours is it, you beastly old gossiping—”
Seeing the futility of protest, Ro ger put his arms round her
from beh ind, picked her up bodily of f the floor , and carried her
out the back door , this departure accented by incoherent
protests from Bree and grunts of pain from Roger , as she
kicked him repeatedly in the shins, with considerable force
and accuracy .
I w ent to the do or and closed it delicately , shutting of f the
sounds of further altercation in the yard.
“She gets that from you,  y ou know ,” I s aid reproachful ly ,
sitting down opposite Jamie. “Mrs. Bug, that smells
wonderful. Do  let’ s eat!”
Mrs. Bu g dished the fricassee in huf fy silence, but declined
to join us at table, instead putting on her cloak and stamping
out the front doo r , leaving us to  deal with the clearing-up. An
excellent bar gain, if you asked me.W e ate in blissful peace, the qu iet broken only by the clink
of spoons on pe wter and the occasional question from Jemmy
as to why molas ses was sticky , how did milk get into  the cow ,
and when would he get his little brother?
“ What  am I going to s ay to Mrs. Bug?” I asked, in the brief
hiatus between queries.
“Why ought ye to say anything, Sassenach? It wasna you
calling her names.”
“W ell, n o. But I’d be willing to bet that Brianna isn’ t going
to apologize—”
“Why should she?” He shrugged. “She was provoked, after
all. And I cann a think Mrs. Bu g has lived sae long without
being called a gossiping busybody before. She’ll wear herself
out, telling Arch all about it, and tomorrow it will be fine
again.”
“W ell,” I said uncertainly . “Perhaps so. But Bree and Roger
—”
He smiled at me, dark blue eyes crinkling into triangles.
“Dinna feel as though every disaster is yours to fash
yourself about, mo chridhe, ” he said. He reached across and
patted my hand. “Roger Mac a nd the lass must work it out
between them—and the lad did appear to have a decent grip on
the situation.”
He laughed, and I joined him, reluctantly .
“W ell, it  will be mine to fash about, if she’ s broken his leg,”
I rem arked, getting up to fetch cream for the cof fee. “Likely
he’ll come crawling back to have it mended.”
At this apropos moment, a knock sounded on the back door .
W ondering why  Roger would knock, I opened it, and stared in
astonishment at the pale face of Thomas Christie.
HE W A S NOT  ONL Y P ALE, but sweating, and had a
bloodstained cloth wrapped round one hand.“I wouldna discommode ye, mistress,” he said, holding
himself stif fly . “I’ll just … wait upon your convenience.”
“Nonsense,” I said, rather shortly . “Come into the sur gery
while there’ s still some light.”
I too k ca re not to catch Jamie’ s eye directly , but I glanced at
him as I bent to  push in the bench. He was leaning forward to
put a  sau cer ove r my cof fee, his  eyes on T om Christie with an
air o f thoughtful speculation th at I had last seen in a bobcat
watching a flight of ducks overh ead. Not ur gent, but definitely
taking notice.
Christie was taking no notice of anything beyond his injured
hand, r easonably enough. M y sur gery’ s windows were
oriented to east and south, to ta ke best advantage of morning
light, bu t even near sunset, the room held a soft radiance—the
setting sun’ s reflection from the shimmering leaves of the
chestnut grove. Everything in the room was suf fused with
golden light, save T om Christie’ s face, which was noticeably
green.
“Sit dow n,” I said, shoving a stool hastily behind him. His
knees buckled as he lowered him self; he landed harder than he
had inte nded, jarring his hand, a nd let out a small exclamation
of pain.
I pu t a thumb on the big vein at the wrist, to help slow the
bleeding, and unwound the cl oth. Given his aspect, I was
expecting a severed finger or two, and was surprised to find a
simple gash in the meat at the base of the thumb, angled down
and runn ing onto the wrist. It was deep enough to gape, and
still bleeding freely , but no major vessels had been cut, and he
had by great go od fortune only nicked the thumb tendon; I
could mend that with a stitch or two.
I l ooked up to tell him this, only  to see his eyes roll back in
his head.
“Help!” I shouted, dropping the  hand and grabbing for his
shoulders as he toppled backward.A cr ash of over turned bench and the thump of running feet
answered my call, and Jamie burst into the room in a
heartbeat. Seein g me dragged of f my feet by Christie’ s weight,
he seize d the man by the scruf f of the neck and shoved him
forward like a ra g doll, pushing Christie’ s head down between
his legs.
“Is he desperate bad?” Jamie asked, squinting at Christie’ s
injured hand, which was resting on the floor , oozing blood.
“Shall I lay him on the table?”
“I do n’ t think so.” I had a hand under Christie’ s jaw , feeling
for h is pulse. “H e’ s not hurt badly; he’ s only fainted. Y es, see,
he’ s coming round. Keep your head down for a bit, now , you’ll
be q uite all right in a moment.” I addressed this latter remark
to C hristie, who was breathing  like a steam engine, but had
steadied a little.
Jamie removed his hand from C hristie’ s neck, and wiped it
on h is kilt with  an expression of mild distaste. Christie had
broken o ut in a profuse cold sw eat; I could feel my own hand
slimy with it, b ut picked up th e fallen cloth and wiped my
hand more tactfully with that.
“W ould you like to lie down?” I asked, bending to look at
Christie’ s face. He was still a  ghastly color , but shook his
head.
“No, mistress. I’m quite all rig ht. Only taken queer for a
moment.” He spoke hoarsely , but firmly enough, so I
contented myself with pressing the cloth hard against the
wound to stanch the dripping blood.
Jemmy was loitering in the doorway , wide-eyed, but
showing no particular alarm; blood was nothing new to him.
“Shall I  fetch ye a dram, T om?” Jamie said, eyeing the
patient warily . “I ken ye dinn a hold wi’ strong drink, but
there’ s a time for it, surely?”
Christie’ s mouth worked a little, but he shook his head.
“I … no. Perhaps … a little wine?”“ T ake a little wi ne for thy stom ach’ s sake,  e h? A ye, fine.
T ake heart, man, I’ll fetch it.” Jamie clapped him
encouragingly on the shoulder , and went briskly of f, taking
Jemmy by the hand as he went out.
Christie’ s mouth tightened in a grimace. I had noticed
before that like some Protestants, T om Christie regarded the
Bible as being a document addressed specifically to himself
and confided to his personal ca re for prudent distribution to
the masses. Thus, he quite dis liked hearing Catholics—i.e.,
Jamie—quoting casually from it. I had also noticed that Jamie
was awa re of this, and took every opportunity to make such
quotes.
“What happened ?” I asked, as much to distract Christie as
because I wished to know .
Christie broke of f his glower at the empty doorway and
glanced at his left hand—then hastily away , going pale again.
“An accident,” he said gruf fly . “I was cutting rushes; the
knife slipped.” His right hand f lexed slightly as he said this,
and I glanced at it.
“No blo ody won der!” I said. “H ere, keep that up in the air .”
I lift ed the injur ed left hand, tightly wrapped, above his head,
let go of it, and reached for the other .
He had been su f fering from a condition in the right hand
called D upuytren’ s contracture—or at least it would  be called
that, on ce Baron Dupuytren got round to describing it in
another sixty or seventy years. Caused by a thickening and
shortening of the fibrous sheet t hat kept the hand’ s tendons in
place wh en the fingers flexed, the result of it was to draw the
ring fing er in toward the palm of the hand. In advanced cases,
the l ittle finger and sometimes t he middle finger as well were
involved. T om Christie’ s case had advanced quite a bit since I
had last had the chance of a good look at his hand.
“Did I tell you?” I demanded rhetorically , pulling gently on
the claw ed fingers. The middle finger could still be halfway
unfolded; the ring and little fing ers could barely be lifted awayfrom the palm. “I said it would get worse. No wonder the knife
slipped—I’m surprised you could even hold it.”
A sl ight flush appeared under the clipped salt-and-pepper
beard, and he glanced away .
“I c ould have ta ken care of it easily months ago,” I said,
turning the hand to look critical ly at the angle of contracture.
“It w ould have been a very simple matter . Now it will be
rather more complicated—but I can still correct it, I think.”
Had he been a less stolid man, I should have described him
as wriggling with embarrassment. As it was, he merely
twitched slightly , the flush deepening over his face.
“I—I do not desire—”
“I don’ t  bloody care what you desire,” I told him, putting
the claw ed hand  back in his lap. “If you don’ t allow me to
operate on that hand, it will be all but useless inside six
months. Y ou can barely write with it now , am I right?”
His eyes met mine, deep gray and startled.
“I can write,” he said, but I could tell that the belligerence in
his v oice hid a deep uneasiness. T om Christie was an educated
man, a scholar , and the Ridge’ s  schoolteacher . It was to him
that many of the Ridge pe ople went for help in the
composition of letters or legal documents. He took great pride
in this; I knew the threat of loss of this ability was the best
lever I had—and it was no idle threat.
“Not for  long,” I said, and wide ned my eyes at him to make
my m eaning clear . He swallowe d uneasily , but before he could
reply , Jamie reappeared, holding a jug of wine.
“Best listen to her ,” he advised Christie, setting it on the
counter . “I ken what it’ s like to  try to write wi’ a stif f finger ,
aye?” He held up his own righ t hand and flexed it, looking
rueful. “If she c ould mend that  wi’  her wee knife, I’d lay my
hand on the block this instant.”
Jamie’ s problem  was almost the reverse of Christie’ s,
though the ef fect was quite sim ilar . The ring finger had beensmashed so badly that the joints had frozen; it could not be
bent. Consequently , the two fingers on either side had limited
motion, as well, though the joint capsules were intact.
“The dif ference being that your hand isn’ t getting any
worse,” I told Jamie. “His is.”
Christie made a small movement, pushing his right hand
down between his thighs, as though to hide it.
“A ye, well,” he said uncomfortably . “It can bide awhile,
surely .”
“At least long en ough to let my wife mend the other ,” Jamie
observed, pouring out a cup of wine. “Here—can ye hold it,
T om, or shall I—?” He made a questioning gesture, holding
the c up as thoug h to feed it to C hristie, who snatched his right
hand out of the sheltering folds of his clothes.
“I’ll manage,” he snapped, and took the wine—holding the
cup between thumb and forefinger with an awkwardness that
made him flush even more deep ly . His left hand still hung in
the air above his shoulder . He looked foolish, and obviously
felt it.
Jamie poured another cup and  handed it to me, ignoring
Christie. I would have thought it natural tact on his part, were I
not aware of the complicated h istory between the two men.
There w as always a small barbed edge in any dealings
between Jamie and T om Christie, though they managed to
keep an outwardly cordial face on things.
W ith any other man, Jamie’ s display of his own injured
hand would have been just what it seemed—reassurance, and
the of fering of fellowship in in firmity . W ith T om Christie, it
might have been consciously meant  as reassurance, but there
was a threat implied, as well, t hough perhaps Jamie couldn’ t
help that.
The simple fact was that peop le came to Jamie for help
more often than they did to Christie. Jamie had widespread
respect and admiration, despite his crippled hand. Christie was
not a personally  popular man; h e might well lose what socialposition he had, if he lost his ability to write. And—as I had
bluntly noted—Jamie’ s hand would not get worse.
Christie’ s eyes had narrowed a l ittle over his cup. He hadn’ t
missed the threat, whether inten ded or not. He wouldn’ t; T om
Christie was a s uspicious man by nature, and inclined to see
threat where it wasn’ t  intended.
“I th ink that’ s settled a bit by no w; let me take care of it.” I
took hold of h is left hand, gently , and unwrapped it. The
bleeding had stopped. I set the hand to soak in a bowl of water
boiled w ith garlic, added a fe w drops of pure ethanol for
additional disinfection, and set about gathering my kit.
It was beginnin g to grow dark, and I lit the alcohol lamp
Brianna had made for me. By it s bright, steady flame, I could
see that Christie’ s face had lost  its momentary flush of anger .
He wasn’ t as pa le as he had been, but looked uneasy as a vole
at a convention of badgers, his eyes following my hands as I
laid out my su tures, needles, and scissors, all clean and
gleaming-sharp in the light.
Jamie didn’ t leave, but stayed leaning against the counter ,
sipping his own cup of wine—presumably , in case Christie
passed out again.
A fine trembling ran through Christie’ s hand and arm,
braced a s they were on the table. He was sweating again; I
could smell it, acrid and bitter . It was the scent of that, half-
for gotten, but immediately familiar , that finally made me
realize t he dif ficulty: it was f ear . He was afraid of blood,
perhaps; afraid of pain, certainly .
I kep t m y eyes fixed on my work , bending my head lower to
keep him from s eeing anything in my face. I should have seen
it sooner ; I would have, I thoug ht, had he not been a man. His
paleness, the fainting … not due to loss of blood, but to shock
at seeing blood lost.
I s titched up me n and boys routinely; mountain farming was
rough work, and it was a rare w eek when I wasn’ t presented
with ax wounds, hoe gouges, spud slashes, hog bites, scalplacerations sustained while falling over something, or some
other mi nor cala mity requiring stitches. By and lar ge, all my
patients behaved with complete matter -of-factness, accepting
my ministrations stoically , and going right back to work. But
nearly all of the  men were Highlanders, I realized, and many
not only Highlanders but erstwhile soldiers.
T om Christie was a townsman, from Edinbur gh—he had
been imprisoned in Ardsmuir as a Jacobite supporter , but had
never be en a fighting man. He had been a commissary of ficer .
In fa ct, I realize d with surprise, he had likely never even seen
a re al military b attle, let alone engaged in the daily physical
conflict with nature that Highland farming entailed.
I becam e aware of Jamie, still standing in the shadows,
sipping wine and watching with  a faintly ironic dispassion. I
glanced up quickly at him; his expression didn’ t alter , though
he met my eyes and nodded, very slightly .
T om Ch ristie’ s lip was fixed bet ween his teeth; I could hear
the faint whistle of his breath. He couldn’ t see Jamie, but knew
he was there; the stif fness of his back said as much. He might
be afraid, T om Christie, but he had some courage to him.
It would  have hurt him less, could he have relaxed the
clenched muscles of arm and hand. Under the circumstances,
though, I could hardly suggest a s much. I could have insisted
that Jam ie leave, but I was nearly finished. W ith a sigh of
mingled exasperation and puzzlement, I clipped the final knot
and laid down the scissors.
“All right, then,” I said, swipin g the last of the coneflower
ointment across  the wound and reaching for a clean linen
bandage. “Keep  it clean. I’ll make up some fresh ointment for
you; sen d Malva for it. Then come back in a week and I’ll take
the stitc hes out.” I hesitated, g lancing at Jamie. I felt some
reluctance to use his presence as blackmail, but it was for
Christie’ s own good.
“I’ll tak e care of your right han d, then, too, shall I?” I said
firmly .He was  still sweating, though the color in his face had
begun to come back. He glanced at me, and then,
involuntarily , at Jamie.
Jamie smiled faintly .
“Go on, then, T om,” he said. “It’ s naught to trouble ye. No
but a wee nick. I’ve had worse.”
The wo rds were spoken casually , but they might as well
have been written in flaming letters a foot high. I’ve had
worse.
Jamie’ s face was still in shadow , but his eyes were clearly
visible, slanted with his smile.
T om Ch ristie had not relaxed his rigid posture. He matched
Jamie’ s stare, closing his gnarled  right hand over the bandaged
left.
“A ye,” he said. “W ell.” He wa s breathing deeply . “I will,
then.” H e rose abruptly , knocki ng the stool aside, and headed
for the door , a little of f-balance, like a man the worse for
strong drink.
At the door , he p aused, fumbling for the knob. Finding it, he
drew himself up and turned back, looking for Jamie.
“At leas t,” he said, breathing so  hard that he stumbled over
the words, “at least it will be an honorable scar . W on’ t it, Mac
Dubh ?”
Jamie straightened up abruptly , but Christie was already out,
stamping down the corridor with a step heavy enough to rattle
the pewter plates on the kitchen shelf.
“Why , ye wee pissant!” he said, in a tone somewhere
between anger and astonishment. His left hand clenched
involuntarily into a fist, and I  thought it a good thing that
Christie had made such a rapid exit.
I wa s rather unsure as to exactly what  had happened—or
been happening—but relieved that Christie was gone. I’d felt
like a handful of  grain, trapped between two grindstones, bothof them trying to grind each other ’ s faces, with no heed for the
hapless corn in between.
“I’ve never heard T om Christie call you Mac Dubh, ” I
observed cautiously , turning to tidy away my sur gical leavings.
Christie was not, of course, a Gaelic-speaker , but I had never
heard him use even the Gae lic nickname that the other
Ardsmuir men still called Jamie by . Christie always called
Jamie “Mr . Fraser ,” or simply “Fraser ,” in moments of what
passed for cordiality .
Jamie made a derisive Scottish noise, then picked up
Christie’ s half-full cup and thriftily drained it.
“No, he wouldna—frigging Sassenach.” Then he caught a
glimpse of my face, and gave me a lopsided smile. “I didna
mean you, Sassenach.”
I kn ew he didn ’ t mean me; the word was spoken with a
completely dif ferent—and quite shocking—intonation; a
bitterness that reminded me that “Sassenach” was by no means
a friendly term in normal usage.
“Why do you c all him that?” I asked curiously . “And just
what did he mean by that ‘honorable scar ’ crack?”
He look ed down , and didn’ t an swer for a moment, though
the stif fened fingers of his right hand drummed soundlessly
against his thigh.
“T om Christie’ s a solid man,” h e said at last. “But by God,
he is a stif f-necked wee son of a bitch!” He looked up then,
and smiled at me, a little ruefully .
“Eight years he lived in a cell wi’ forty men who had the
Gaelic—and he wouldna lower himself to let a word of such a
barbarous tongue pass his lips! Christ, no. He’d speak in
English, no matter who it was he spoke to, and if it was a man
who had no Eng lish, why , then, he’d just stand there, dumb as
a stone, ‘til someone came along to interpret for him.”
“Someone like you?”“Now and then.” He glanced toward the window , as though
to ca tch a glimpse of Christie, but the night had come down
altogether , and the panes gave back only a dim reflection of
the sur gery , our own forms ghostlike in the glass.
“Roger did say that Kenny Lin dsay mentioned something
about Mr . Christie’ s … pretensions,” I said delicately .
Jamie shot me a sharp glance at that.
“Oh, he did, did he? So, Roger Mac had second thoughts
about his wisdom in taking on C hristie as a tenant, I suppose.
Kenny wouldna have said, unless he was asked.”
I had more or less got used to the speed of his deductions
and the accuracy of his insights, and didn’ t question this one.
“Y ou ne ver told me about that,” I said, coming to stand in
front of him. I p ut my hands on his chest, looking up into his
face.
He put his own hands over min e, and sighed, deep enough
for m e to  feel the movement of his chest. Then he wrapped his
arms around me, and drew me close, so my face rested against
the warm fabric of his shirt.
“A ye, well. It wasna really important, ken.”
“And you didn’ t want to think about Ardsmuir , perhaps?”
“No,” he said softly . “I have had enough of the past.”
My hands were on his back no w , and I realized suddenly
what Christie had likely meant . I could feel the lines of the
scars through the linen, clear to my fingertips as the lines of a
fishnet, laid across his skin.
“Honorable scar s!” I said, liftin g my head. “Why , that little
bastar d ! Is that what he meant?”
Jamie smiled a little at my indignation.
“A ye, he did,” h e said dryly . “That’ s why he called me Mac
Dubh —to rem ind me of Ardsmuir , so I’d ken for sure what he
meant by it. He saw me flogged there.”“That—that—” I was so angry , I could barely speak. “I wish
I’d stitched his fucking hand to his balls!”
“And yo u a physician, sworn to do nay harm? I’m verra
much shocked, Sassenach.”
He was laughing now , but I wasn’ t amused at all.
“Beastly little coward! He’ s afraid of blood, did you know
that?”
“W ell, a ye, I did. Y e canna live  in a man’ s oxter for three
years without learning a great m any things ye dinna want to
know about him, let alone something like that.” He sobered a
bit, though a hint of wryness still lurked at the corner of his
mouth. “ When t hey brought me back from being whipped, he
went white as s uet, went and puked in the corner , then lay
down with his face to the wall. I wasna really taking notice,
but I remember thinking that wa s a bit raw; I was the one was
a bl oody mess, why was he t akin’ on like a lass wi’ the
vapors?”
I sno rted. “Don’ t you go makin g jokes about it! How dare
he? And  what does he mean, an yway—I know what happened
at A rdsmuir , and those bloody w ell … I mean, those certainly
ar e  honorable scars, and everyone there knew it!”
“A ye, maybe,” he said, all hint of laughter disappearing.
“That time. But everyone could  see when they stood me up
that I’d been flogged before, aye? And no man there has ever
said a word to me about those scars. Not ‘til now .”
That brought me up short.
Flogging wasn’ t merely brutal; it was shameful—meant to
permanently disfigure, as well as to hurt, advertising a
criminal’ s past as clearly as a branded cheek or cropped ear .
And Jamie would, of course, prefer to have his tongue torn out
by the roots, soo ner than reveal to anyone the reasons for his
scars, even if tha t meant leaving everyone with the assumption
that he had been flogged for some disgraceful act.
I was so used to Jamie’ s alwa ys keeping his shirt on in
anyone else’ s presence that it ha d never occurred to me that ofcourse the Ardsmuir men would know about the scars on his
back. A nd yet he hid them, and everyone pretended they did
not exist—save T om Christie.
“Hmph,” I said. “W ell … God d amn the man, anyway . Why
would he say such a thing?”
Jamie uttered a short laugh.
“Because he didna like me watching him sweat. He wanted
a bit of his own back, I expect.”
“Hmph,” I said again, and fo lded my arms beneath my
bosom. “Since you mention it— why did  you  do that? If you
knew he  couldn’ t stand blood and the like, I mean, why stay
and watch him like that?”
“Because I kent he wouldna wh imper or faint if I did,” he
replied. “He’d let ye thrust red-hot needles through his
eyeballs before he’d squeal in front of me.”
“Oh, so you noticed that?”
“W ell, o f course I did, Sassena ch. What d’ye think I was
there for? Not th at I dinna appreciate your skill, but watching
ye s titch up wo unds isna really good for the digestion.” He
cast a brief glanc e at the discarded cloth, splotched with blood,
and grimaced. “D’ye think the cof fee’ s gone cold by now?”
“I’ll hea t it up.” I slid the cle an scissors back into their
sheath, then sterilized the need le I’d used, ran a fresh silk
suture th rough it, and coiled it up in its jar of alcohol—still
trying to make sense of things.
I pu t everything back into the cupboard, then turned to
Jamie.
“Y ou aren’ t afraid of T om Christie, are you?” I demanded.
He blinked, astonished, then laughed.
“Christ, no. What makes ye think that, Sassenach?”
“W ell … the w ay the two of you act sometimes. It’ s like
wild sheep, butting heads to see who’ s stronger .”“Oh, that.” He waved a hand, dismissive. “I’ve a harder
head by far than T om, and he ke ns it well enough. But he’ s no
going to  give in and follow me round like a yearling lamb,
either .”
“Oh? But what do you think you’re doing, then? Y ou
weren’ t just torturing him to prove you could, were you?”
“No,” he said, and smiled faintly at me. “A man stubborn
enough to speak English to Hi eland men in prison for eight
years is a man stubborn enough to fight beside me for the next
eight ye ars; that ’ s what I think.  It would be good if he were
sure of it, himself, though.”
I drew a deep breath and sighed, shaking my head.
“I do not  understand men.”
That made him chuckle, deep in his chest.
“Y es, ye do, Sassenach. Y e only wish ye didn’ t.”
The sur gery lay neat again, ready for whatever emer gencies
the morr ow mig ht bring. Jamie r eached for the lamp, but I laid
a hand on his arm, stopping him.
“Y ou promised me  honesty ,” I said. “But are you quite sure
you’re being honest with yourself? Y ou weren’ t baiting T om
Christie just because he challenges you?”
He stopped, his eyes clear an d unguarded, a few inches
from mine. He lifted a hand and cupped the side of my face,
his palm warm on my skin.
“There are only two people in this world to whom I would
never lie, Sassenach,” he said so ftly . “Y e’re one of them. And
I’m the other .”
He k issed me g ently on the forehead, then leaned past me
and blew out the lamp.
“Mind,” his voice came from the darkness, and I saw his tall
form silhouetted  against the faint oblong of light from the
doorway as he straightened up, “I can be fooled. But I
wouldna be doing it on purpose.”ROGER MOVED a little, and groaned.
“I think ye broke my leg.”
“Did not,” said his wife, calme r now , but still disposed to
ar gument. “But I’ll kiss it for you, if you want.”
“That’d be nice.”
T remendous rus tlings of the corn-shuck mattress ensued as
she clambered into position to execute this treatment, ending
with a naked Brianna straddling his chest, and leaving him
with a view that caused him to wish they’d taken time to light
the candle.
She was in fact kissing his shins, which tickled. Given the
circumstances, though, he was inclined to put up with it. He
reached up with both hands. Lacking light, Braille would do.
“When I  was fourteen or so,” h e said dreamily , “one of the
shops in Inverness had a most daring window display—daring
for the times, th at is—a lady mannequin wearing nothing but
underwear .”
“Mm?”
“A ye, a full-length pink girdle, garters, the lot—with
matching brassie re. Everyone was shocked. Committees were
got up to protest, and calls were made to all the ministers in
town. Next day , they took it do wn, but meanwhile, the entire
male population of Inverness had been past that window ,
taking pains to look casual a bout it. ‘T il this minute, I’d
always thought that was the most erotic thing I’d ever seen.”
She susp ended h er operations for a moment, and he thought
from the sense of movement that she was looking back over
her shoulder at him.
“Roger ,” she said thoughtfully . “I do believe you’re a
pervert.”
“Y es, but one with really good night vision.”That made her laugh—the thing he’d been striving for since
he’d finally got her to stop frothing at the mouth—and he
raised hi mself b riefly , planting a light kiss on either side of the
looming object of his af fections before sinking contentedly
back onto the pillow .
She kiss ed his knee, then put her head down, cheek against
his thigh, so the mass of her hair spilled over his legs, cool and
soft as a cloud of silk threads.
“I’m sorry ,” she said softly , after a moment.
He m ade a dism issive noise, and ran a soothing hand over
the round of her hip.
“Och, it ’ s no matter . T oo bad, th ough; I wanted to see their
faces when they saw what ye’d done.”
She snorted briefly , and his leg  twitched at the warmth of
her breath.
“Their faces were something to see, anyway .” She sounded
a little bleak. “And it would have been a real anticlimax, after
that. ”
“W ell, you’re right about that,” he admitted. “But ye’ll show
them tomorrow , when they’re in a frame of mind to appreciate
it properly .”
She sighed, and kissed his knee again.
“I didn’ t mean it,” she said, after a moment. “Implying it
was your fault.”
“A ye, ye did,” h e said softly , still caressing. “It’ s all right.
Y e’re probably right.” Likely she was. He wasn’ t going to
pretend it hadn’ t hurt to hear it, but he wouldn’ t let himself be
angry; that would help neither of them.
“Y ou don’ t know that.” She raised up suddenly , looming
like an obelisk in silhouette ag ainst the pale rectangle of the
window . Swinging one leg neatly over his supine body , she
slithered down beside him. “It could be me. Or neither of us.
Maybe it just isn’ t the right time, yet.”He put an arm around her and hugged her close in answer .
“Whatever the cause, we’ll not blame each other , aye?” She
made a small so und of assent an d nestled closer . W ell enough;
there was no way to keep from blaming himself, though.
The facts were clear enough; she’d got pregnant with
Jemmy after one night—wheth er with himself, or Stephen
Bonnet, no one k new , but once w as all it took. Whereas they’d
been trying for the last several months, and Jem was looking
more an d more like being an only child. Possibly he did  lack
the vital spark, as Mrs. Bug and her chums speculated.
Who’ s your Daddy?  ech oed mockingly in the back  of his
mind—in an Irish accent.
He coughed explosively , and settled back, determined not to
dwell on that  little matter .
“W ell, I’m sorry , too,” he said, c hanging the subject. “Y e’re
maybe r ight about me acting like I’d rather ye cook and clean
than mess about with your wee chemistry set.”
“Only because you would, ” she said without rancor .
“It’ s not  so much the not cooki ng as it is the setting things
on fire I mind.”
“W ell, y ou’ll lov e the next proje ct, then,” she said, nuzzling
his shoulder . “It’ s mostly water .”
“Oh … good,” he said, thoug h even he could hear the
dubious note in his voice. “Mostly?”
“There’ s some dirt involved, too.”
“Nothing that burns?”
“Just wood. A little. Nothing special.”
She was running her fingers slowly down his chest. He
caught her hand and kissed her fingertips; they were smooth,
but hard , callused from the con stant spinning she did to help
keep them clothed.“Who c an find a virtuous wom an?”  he quo ted, “for her
price is  far above rubies. She  seeketh wool and flax and
worketh willingly with her hands. She maketh herself
coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple.”
“I would love  to find  some dye plant that gives a true
purple,” she said wistfully . “I miss the bright colors.
Remember the dress I wore to the man-on-the-moon party?
The bla ck one, with the band s of Day-Glo pink and lime
green?”
“That was pretty memorable, aye.” Privately , he thought the
muted c olors of homespun suited her much better; in skirts of
rust and  brown, jackets of gra y and green, she looked like
some exotic, lovely lichen.
Seized by the sudden desire to see her , he reached out,
fumbling on the table by the bed. The little box was where
she’d th rown it when they came back. She’d designed it to be
used in the dark,  after all; a turn of the lid dispensed one of the
small, w axy sticks, and the tiny strip of roughened metal glued
to the side was cool to his hand.
A skritch!  that made his heart leap with its simple
familiarity , and the tiny flame a ppeared with a whif f of sulfur
—magic.
“Don’ t waste them,” she said, but smiled in spite of the
protest, delighted at the sight as she’d been when she first
showed him what she’d done.
Her hair was loose and clean, just washed; shimmering over
the pale round of her shoulder , clouds of it lying soft over his
chest, cinnamon and amber and roan and gold, sparked by the
flame.
“She do es not fear the snow for her household, for all her
household ar e clothed in scarlet,”  he said softly , h is free hand
round h er , twining a lock nea r her face round his finger ,
twisting the tiny strand as he’d seen her spin yarn.
The long lids o f her eyes closed halfway , like a basking
cat’ s, but the smile remained on  that wide, soft mouth—thoselips that hurt, then healed. Th e light glowed in her skin,
bronzed the tiny brown mole b eneath her right ear . He could
have watched her forever , but th e match was burning low . Just
before the flame touched his fi ngers, she leaned forward and
blew it out.
And in the smo ke-wisped dark, whispered in his ear , “ The
heart of  her husband doth safely trust in her . She will do him
good and not evil all the days of her life.  So there.”2 2
ENSORCELLMENT
T OM CH RISTIE didn’ t come back to the sur gery , but he did
send his daughter , Malva, to g et the ointment. The girl was
dark-haired, slender , and quiet, but seemed intelligent. She
paid close attention as I quizzed her on the look of the wound
—so far , so go od, a bit of redness, but no suppuration, no
reddish streaks up the arm—and gave her instructions on how
to apply the ointment and change the dressing.
“Good, then,” I said, giving her the jar . “If he should begin a
fever , co me and fetch me. Oth erwise, make him come in a
week, to have the stitches taken out.”
“Y es, ma’am, I’ll do that.” She  didn’ t turn and go, though,
but lingered, her gaze flickering over the mounds of drying
herbs on the gauze racks and the implements of my sur gery .
“Do you  need something else, dear? Or did you have a
question?” She’d seemed to understand my instructions
perfectly well—but perhaps she wanted to ask something more
personal. After all, she had no mother . .
“W ell, aye,” she said, and no dded at the table. “I only
wondered—what is it that ye write in yon black book,
ma’am?”
“This? Oh. It’ s my sur gical n otes, and recipes … er …
receipts, I mean, for medicines. See?” I turned the book round
and open ed it so that she could s ee the page where I had drawn
a sketch of the damage to Miss Mouse’ s teeth.
Malva’ s gray eyes were bright with curiosity , and she leaned
forward to read, hands careful ly folded behind her back as
though afraid she might touch the book by accident.
“It’ s all right,” I said, a little amused by her caution. “Y ou
can look  throug h it, if you like.” I pushed it toward her , andshe stepped back, startled. She glanced up at me, a look of
doubt w rinkling her brow , but w hen I smiled at her , she took a
tiny , excited breath, and reached out to turn a page.
“Oh, loo k!” The page she’d tur ned to wasn’ t one of mine,
but one of Dan iel Rawlings’ s—it showed the removal of a
dead child from the uterus, via the use of assorted tools of
dilatation and curettage. I glanced at the page, and hastily
away . R awlings hadn’ t been an artist, but he had had a brutal
knack for rendering the reality of a situation.
Malva d idn’ t see m to be distress ed by the drawings, though;
she was bug-eyed with interest.
I began  to be interested, too, watching covertly as she
turned pages at random. She na turally paid most attention to
the drawings—but she paused to read the descriptions and
recipes, as well.
“Why d’ye write things down t hat ye’ve done?” she asked,
glancing up with raised eyebrows. “The receipts, aye, I see ye
might for get things—but why d’ye draw these pictures and
write down the bits about how ye took of f a toe wi’ the frost-
rot? W ould ye do it dif ferently , another time?”
“W ell, s ometimes you might,” I said, laying aside the stalk
of d ried rosemary I’d been stri pping of its needles. “Sur gery
isn’ t the  same each time. All bodies are a bit dif ferent, and
even though you may do the s ame basic procedure a dozen
times, th ere wil l be a dozen things that happen dif ferently—
sometimes only tiny things, sometimes big ones.
“But I keep a re cord of what I’v e done for several reasons,”
I a dded,  pushing back my stool and coming round the table to
stand beside her . I turned anoth er few pages, stopping at the
record I  kept of old Grannie M acBeth’ s complaints—a list so
extensive that I had alphabetized it for my own convenience,
beginning with Arthritis—all joints,  running through
Dyspepsia, Earache,  and Fainting,  and then onward for most
of two pages, terminating with W omb, pr olapsed.“Partly , it’ s so that I’ll know  what’ s been done for a
particular person, and what happened—so that if they need
treatment later ,  I can look back and have an accurate
description of their earlier state. T o compare, you see?”
She nodded eagerly .
“A ye, I see. So ye’d know were they getting better or worse.
What else, then?”
“W ell, the most important reason,” I said slowly , seeking the
right words, “is so that another doctor—someone who might
come later—so that person coul d read the record, and see how
I’d done this o r that. It mig ht show them a way to do
something they hadn’ t done themselves—or a better way .”
Her mouth pursed up in interest.
“Ooh! Y e mean someone mi ght learn from this”—she
touched a finger to the page, del icately—”how to do what it is
ye do? W ithout ‘prenticing himself to a doctor?”
“W ell, it’ s best if you have som eone to teach you,” I said,
amused at her eagerness. “And there are things you can’ t
really learn from a book. But if there’ s no one to learn from—”
I gla nced out t he window , at the vista of green wilderness
swarming over the mountains. “It’ s better than nothing,” I
concluded.
“Where did you learn?” she asked, curious. “From this
book? I see the re’ s another hand, besides yours. Whose was
it?”
I ought  to have seen that one coming. I hadn’ t quite
bar gained on Malva Christie’ s quickness, though.
“Ah … I learned from a lot  o f books,” I sa id. “And from
other doctors.”
“Other doctors,” she echoed, looking at me in fascination.
“D’ye call yourself a doctor , th en? I didna ken women ever
could be.”
For the rather good reason that no women did  call
themselves phys icians or sur geons now—nor were accepted assuch.
I coughed.
“W ell …  it’ s a n ame, that’ s all. A  good many people just say
wisewoman, or conjure woman. Or ban-lichtne, ” I added. “But
it’ s all the sam e, really . It o nly matters whether I know
something that might help them.”
“Ban—”  She mouthed the unfamiliar word. “I haven’ t
heard that before.”
“It’ s the  Gaelic.  The Highland t ongue, you know? It means
‘female healer ’ or something like.”
“Oh, the Gaelic.” An expression of mild derision crossed
her face; I exp ected she had absorbed her father ’ s attitude
toward t he High landers’ ancient language. She evidently saw
something in my  face, though, for she instantly erased the
disdain from her own features and bent over the book again.
“Who was it wrote these other bits, then?”
“A man named Daniel Rawlings.” I smoothed a creased
page, with the usual sense of af fection for my predecessor . “He
was a doctor from V ir ginia.”
“Him?” She looked up, surprised. “The same who’ s buried
in the boneyard up the mountain?”
“Ah … yes, that ’ s him.” And the  story of how he came to be
there wa s not something to be  shared with Miss Christie. I
glanced out of the window , estimating the light. “W ill your
father be wanting his dinner?”
“Oh!” She stood up straight at that, glancing out the
window , too, with a faint look of alarm. “A ye, he will.” She
cast a last look of longing toward the book, but then brushed
down he r skirt and set her cap straight, ready to go. “I thank
ye, Mrs. Fraser , for showing me your wee book.”
“Happy to,” I assured her sincerely . “Y ou’re welcome to
come ag ain and look at it. In fact … would you—” I hesitated,
but plunged on, encouraged by her look of bright interest. “I’m
going to  take a g rowth from Grannie Macbeth’ s ear tomorrow .W ould y ou like to come along w ith me, to see how? It would
be a help to me, to have another pair of hands,” I added, seeing
sudden doubt war with the interest in her eyes.
“Oh, ay e, Mrs. Fraser—I’d dea rly like it!” she said. “It’ s
only my  father—” She looked uneasy as she said it, but then
seemed to make up her mind. “ W ell … I’ll come. I’m sure I
can talk him round.”
“W ould it help i f I were to send a note? Or come and speak
with him?” I was suddenly quite desirous that she should come
with me.
She gave a small shake of the head.
“Nay , ma’am, it’ll be all right, I’ m sure.” She dimpled at me
suddenly , gray eyes sparkling. “I’ll tell him I’ve had a keek at
your bla ck book , and it’ s no by way of being spells in it, at all,
but only receipts for teas and pur ges. I’ll maybe not say about
the drawings, though,” she added.
“Spells?” I asked incredulously . “Is that what he thought?”
“Oh, aye,” she assured me. “He  warned me not to touch it,
for fear of ensorcellment.”
“Ensorcellment,” I murmured, bemused. W ell, Thomas
Christie was  a schoo lmaster , after all. In fact, he might have
been right, I th ought; Malva glanced back at the book as I
went with her to the door , obvious fascination on her face.2 3
ANESTHESIA
I  CLOSED MY EYES AND, holding my hand a foot or so in
front of my face, wafted it gentl y toward my nose, like one of
the parfumeurs  I’d seen in Paris, testing a fragrance.
The smell hit me in the face like an ocean wave, and with
approximately the same ef fect. My knees buckled, black lines
writhed through my vision, and I ceased to make any
distinction between up and down.
In what seemed an instant later , I came to, lying on the floor
of the sur gery with Mrs. Bug staring down at me in horror .
“Mrs. Claire! Are ye all right, mo gaolach ? I saw ye fall—”
“Y es,” I croaked, shaking my head gingerly as I got up on
one elbow . “Put—put the cork in.” I gestured clumsily at the
lar ge open flask on the table, it s cork lying alongside. “Don’ t
get your face near it!”
Face averted and screwed into a  grimace of caution, she got
the cork and inserted it, at arm’ s length.
“Phew , what is  yon  stuf f?” she said, steppin g back and
making faces. She sneezed explosively into her apron. “I’ve
never smelt anything like that—and Bride kens I’ve smelt a
good many nasty things in this room!”
“That, my dear Mrs. Bug, is ether .” The swimming
sensation in my head had almost disappeared, replaced by
euphoria.
“Ether?” She looked at the distilling apparatus on my
counter in fascination, the alcohol bath bubbling gently away
in its great glass  bubble over a low flame and the oil of vitriol
—later to be known as sulfuric  acid—slicking its slow way
down the slanted tubing, its mal ign hot scent lurking below theusual sur gery smells of roots an d herbs. “Fancy! And what’ s
ether , then?”
“It p uts people asleep, so they won’ t feel pain when you cut
them,” I explained, thrilled by my success. “And I know
exactly who I’m going to use it on first!”
“T OM CHRISTIE?” Jamie repeated. “Have ye told him?”
“I to ld M alva. S he’ s going to w ork on him; soften him up a
bit.”
Jamie snorted briefly at the thought.
“Y e could boil T om Christie in milk for a fortnight, and he’d
still be hard as a grindstone. And if ye think he’ll listen to his
wee lass  prattle about a magic li quid that will put him to sleep
—”
“No, sh e isn’ t to tell him abou t the ether . I’ll do that,” I
assured him. “She’ s just going to pester him about his hand;
convince him he needs it mended.”
“Mm.” Jamie still appeared dubious, though not, it seemed,
entirely on Thomas Christie’ s account.
“This et her ye’v e made, Sassenach. Might ye not kill him
with it?”
I had, in fact, worried considerably about that very
possibility . I’d done operations frequently where ether was
used, an d it was on the whole a fairly safe anesthetic. But
homemade ether , administered by hand … and people did  die
of anesth etic accidents, even in the most careful settings, with
trained anesthetists and all sorts of resuscitating equipment to
hand. A nd I remembered Rosamund Lindsay , whose
accidental death still haunted my dreams now and then. But
the poss ibility of having a reliab le anesthetic, of being able to
do sur gery without pain—
“I m ight,” I adm itted. “I don’ t think so, but there’ s always
some risk. W orth it, though.”
Jamie gave me a slightly jaundiced look.“Oh, aye? Does T om think so?”
“W ell, we’ll find out. I’ll explain it all carefully to him, and
if he won’ t—well, he won’ t. But I do hope he does!”
The edge of Jamie’ s mouth curle d up and he shook his head
tolerantly .
“Y e’re li ke wee Jem wi’ a new toy , Sassenach. T ake care the
wheels dinna come of f.”
I mi ght have ma de some indignant reply to this, but we had
come in sight of the Bugs’ cabin, and Arch Bug was sitting on
his stoop , peacefully smoking a clay pipe. He took this from
his mou th and made to stand u p when he saw us, but Jamie
motioned him back.
“Ciamar a tha thu, a charaid?”
Arch replied with his customary “Mmp,” infused with a
tone of cordiali ty and welcome. A raised white brow in my
direction, and a twiddle of the pipe stem toward the trail
indicated that his wife was at o ur house, if that’ s who I was
looking for .
“No, I’m just going into the woods to forage a bit,” I said,
lifting my empty basket by way of evidence. “Mrs. Bug for got
her needlework, though—may I fetch it for her?”
He n odded, eyes creasing as he  smiled round his pipe. He
shifted his lean buttocks courteously to allow me to go past
him into the c abin. Behind me, I heard a “Mmp?” of
invitation, and felt the boards o f the stoop shift as Jamie sat
down beside Mr . Bug.
There were no w indows, and I was obliged to stand still for
a moment to let  my eyes adjust to the dimness. It was a small
cabin, th ough, a nd it took no more than half a minute before I
could make out the contents: little more than the bed frame, a
blanket chest, and a table with two stools. Mrs. Bug’ s workbag
hung from a hook on the far wall, and I crossed to get it.
On the porch b ehind me, I heard the murmur of male
conversation, featuring the quite unusual sound of Mr . Bug’ svoice. H e could and did talk, of course, but Mrs. Bug talked so
volubly that when she was present, her spouse’ s contribution
was generally not much more t han a smile and an occasional
“mmp” of accord or disagreement.
“Y on Christie,” Mr . Bug was s aying now , in a meditative
tone of voice. “D’ye find him strange, a Sheaumais ?”
“A ye, w ell, he’ s a Lowlander ,” Jamie said, with an audible
shrug.
A humo rous “mmp” from Mr . B ug indicated that this was a
perfectly suf ficient explanation, and was succeeded by the
sucking noises of a pipe being encouraged to draw .
I op ened the bag , to be sure that the knitting was inside; in
fact, it was not, and I was obliged to poke round the cabin,
squinting in the dimness. Oh—there it was; a dark puddle of
something soft in the corner , fall en from the table and knocked
aside by someone’ s foot.
“Is he stranger than he might be, Christie?” I heard Jamie
ask, his own tone casual.
I gla nced through the door in time to see Arch Bug nod
toward Jamie, though he didn’ t speak, being engaged in a
fierce ba ttle with his pipe. How ever , he raised his right hand
and waggled it, displaying the stumps of his two missing
fingers.
“A ye,” h e said finally , releasing  a triumphant puf f of white
smoke w ith the word. “He wished to ask me whether it hurt a
good deal, when this was done.”
His face  wrinkled up like a paper bag, and he wheezed a
little—high hilarity for Arch Bug.
“Oh, aye? And what did ye te ll him, then, Arch?” Jamie
asked, smiling a little.
Arch s ucked meditatively on his pipe, now fully
cooperative, the n pursed his lips and blew a small, perfect ring
of smoke.“W eeel, I said it didna hurt a bi t—at the time.” He paused,
blue eyes twinkling. “Of course , that may have been because I
was laid out cold as a mackerel from the shock of it. When I
came ro und, it stung a bit.” He lifted the hand, looking it over
dispassionately , then glanced through the door at me. “Y e
didna mean to u se an ax on poor old T om, did ye, ma’am? He
says ye’re set to mend his hand next week.”
“Probably not. May I see?” I stepped out on the porch,
bending to him, and he let me take the hand, obligingly
switching his pipe to the left.
The index and middle finger had  been severed cleanly , right
at the knuckle. I t was a very old injury; so old that it had lost
that shocking look common to recent mutilations, where the
mind still sees what should  be there, and tries vainly for an
instant to reconcile reality with expectation. The human body
is amazingly plastic, though, and will compensate for missing
bits as well as it can; in the case of a maimed hand, the
remnant often under goes a subtle sort of useful deformation, to
maximize what function remains.
I felt along the hand carefully , fascinated. The metacarpals
of the severed d igits were intact, but the surrounding tissues
had shrunk and twisted, withd rawing that part of the hand
slightly , so that the remaining tw o fingers and the thumb could
make a better opposition; I’d see n old Arch use that hand with
perfect grace, holding a cup to d rink, or wielding the handle of
a spade.
The sca rs over the finger stumps had flattened and paled,
forming a smooth, calloused surface. The remaining finger
joints w ere knobbed with arthritis, and the hand as a whole
was so twisted t hat it really didn’ t resemble a hand anymore—
and yet it was not at all repulsive. It felt strong and warm in
mine, an d in fact, was oddly att ractive, in the same way that a
piece of weathered driftwood is.
“It was done w ith an ax, you said?” I asked, wondering
exactly how he had managed to inflict such an injury on
himself, given that he was right-handed. A slippage mighthave gas hed an arm or leg, but to take two fingers of the same
hand right of f li ke that … Realization dawned and my grasp
tightened involuntarily . Oh, no.
“Oh, aye,” he sa id, and exhaled a plume of smoke. I looked
up, straight into his bright blue eyes.
“Who did it?” I asked.
“The Frasers,” he said. He squ eezed my hand gently , then
withdrew his own and turned it to and fro. He glanced at
Jamie.
“Not the Frasers of Lovat,” he assured him. “Bobby Fraser
of Glenhelm, and his nephew . Leslie, his name was.”
“Oh? W ell, that’ s good,” Jamie replied, one eyebrow lifted.
“I shouldna like to hear it was close kin of mine.”
Arch chuckled, almost soundlessly . His eyes still gleamed
bright in  their webs of wrinkled  skin, but there was something
in that laugh that made me want suddenly to step back a little.
“No, ye wouldna,” he agreed. “N or me. But this was maybe
the year  ye would have been born, a Sheaumais,  or a bit
before. And there are no Frasers at Glenhelm now .”
The han d itself had not troubled me at all, but the imagined
vision of how it had got that wa y was making me a trifle faint.
I sat down beside Jamie, not waiting for invitation.
“Why?” I said bluntly . “How?”
He drew on his pipe, and blew another ring. It struck the
remnants of the first and bot h disintegrated in a haze of
fragrant smoke. He frowned a l ittle, and glanced down at the
hand, now resting on his knee.
“Ah, well. It w as my choice. W e were bowmen, see,” he
explained to me. “All the men o f my sept, we were brought up
to it, early . I’d my first bow at three, and could strike a grouse
through the heart at forty feet by the time I was six.”
He s poke with a n air of simple pride, squinting a little at a
small flock of do ves that were foraging under the trees nearby ,as though estimating how easily he could have bagged one.
“I d id hear my father tell of the archers,” Jamie said. “At
Glenshiels. Ma ny of them Grants, he said—and some
Campbells.” H e leaned forward, elbows on his knees,
interested in the story , but wary .
“A ye, that was us.” Arch pu f fed industriously , smoke
wreathing up round his head. “W e’d crept down through the
bracken in the n ight,” he explained to me, “and hid among the
rocks above the river at Glenshi els, under the bracken and the
rowans. Y e could have stood a foot away and not seen one of
us, so thick as it was.
“A bit cramped,” he added confidentially to Jamie. “Y e
couldna stand up to take a piss , and we’d had our suppers—
with a bit o’ be er—before we came up the other side o’ the
mountain. All squatting like wo men, we were. T rying like the
devil to keep our bowstrings dr y in our shirts, too, what wi’
the rain coming  down and drip ping down our necks through
the fern.
“But come the dawn,” he went on cheerfully , “and we stood
on the signal and let fly . I will  say ‘twas a bonny sight, our
arrows h ailing down from the h ills on the poor sods camped
there by the river . A ye, your faither fought there, too, a
Sheaumais, ” h e added, poin ting the stem o f his pipe at Jamie.
“He was one o’ those by the river .” A spasm of silent laughter
shook him.
“No love lost, then,” Jamie replied, very dryly . “Between
you and the Frasers.”
Old Arch shook his head, not at all discomposed.
“None,” he said. He turned hi s attention back to me, his
manner sobering a little.
“So when the F rasers would capture a Grant alone on their
land, it was thei r habit to give him a choice. He could lose his
right eye , or the twa fingers of his right hand. Either way , he
wouldna draw a bow again against them.”He rubb ed the maimed hand sl owly to and fro against his
thigh, st retching it out, as though his phantom fingers reached
and yearned for the touch of sin ging sinew . Then he shook his
head, as  though dismissing the v ision, and curled his hand into
a fist. He turned to me.
“Y e werena intending to take Christie’ s fingers straight of f,
were ye, Mrs. Fraser?”
“No,” I said, sta rtled. “Of course not. He doesn’ t think … ?”
Arch shrugged, bushy white brows raised toward his
receding hairline.
“I could na say for sure, but he s eemed verra much disturbed
at the thought of being cut.”
“Hmm,” I said. I’d have to speak to T om Christie.
Jamie had stood up to take his  leave, and I followed suit
automatically , shaking out my skirts and trying to shake out of
my head  the mental image of a young man’ s hand, pinned to
the ground, and an ax chunking down.
“No Fr asers at Glenhelm, ye said?” Jamie asked
thoughtfully , looking down at Mr . Bug. “Leslie, the nephew—
he would have been Bobby Fraser ’ s heir , would he?”
“A ye, he would.” Mr . Bug’ s pipe had gone out. He turned it
over and knocked the dottle nea tly out against the edge of the
porch.
“Both ki lled together , were they? I mind my father telling of
it, once. Found in a stream, their heads caved in, he said.”
Arch Bug blinked up at him, eyelids lowered, lizardlike,
against the sun’ s glare.
“W eel, y e see, a Sheaumais, ” he said, “a bow ’ s like a good-
wife, ay e? Knows her master , a nd answers his touch. An ax,
though—” He shook his head. “An ax is a whore. Any man
can use one—and it works as well in either hand.”
He blew through the stem of the pipe to clear it of ash,
wiped the bowl with his handke rchief, and tucked it carefullyaway—left-handed. He grinned at us, the remnants of his teeth
sharp-edged and yellowed with tobacco.
“Go with God, Seaumais mac Brian. ”
LA TER IN THE WEEK, I went to the Christies’ cabin, to take
the stitc hes out of T om’ s left hand and explain to him about
the ether . His son, Allan, was in the yard, sharpening a knife
on a foot-treadled grindstone. H e smiled and nodded to me,
but didn’ t speak, unable to be h eard above the rasping whine
of the grindstone.
Perhaps it was that sound, I th ought, a moment later , that
had aroused T om Christie’ s apprehensions.
“I ha ve decided that I shall leave my other hand as it is,” he
said stif fly , as I clipped the last stitch and pulled it free.
I set down my tweezers and stared at him.
“Why?”
A dull red rose in his cheeks, and he stood up, lifting his
chin and looking over my shoulder , so as not to meet my eye.
“I have prayed about it, and I have come to the conclusion
that if this infirmity be God’ s will, then it would be wrong to
seek to change it.”
I sup pressed the strong ur ge to  say “Stuf f and nonsense!”,
but with great dif ficulty .
“Sit dow n,” I said, taking a deep breath. “And tell me, if
you would, just why you think  God wants you to go about
with a twisted hand?”
He did glance at me then, surprised and flustered.
“Why … it is not my place to question the Lord’ s ways!”
“Oh, isn ’ t it?” I said mildly . “I rather thought that’ s what
you we re doing last Sunday . Or wasn’ t it you I heard,
inquiring as to what the Lord thought He was about, letting all
these Catholics flourish like the green bay tree?”
The dull red color darkened substantially .“I am sure you have misunderstood me, Mistress Fraser .”
He straightened  himself still f urther , so that he was nearly
leaning over backward. “The fact remains that I shall not
require your assistance.”
“Is it because I’ m a Catholic?” I asked, settling back on the
stool and folding my hands on my knee. “Y ou think perhaps
I’ll t ake advantage of you, and baptize you into the church of
Rome when you’re of f your guard?”
“I have been su itably christened!” he snapped. “And I will
thank you to keep your Popish notions to yourself.”
“I have an arran gement with the Pope,” I said, giving him
stare for  stare. “I issue no bulls  on points of doctrine, and he
doesn’ t do sur gery . Now , about your hand—”
“The Lord’ s will—” he began stubbornly .
“W as it the Lor d’ s will that your cow should fall into the
gor ge a nd break her leg last month?” I interrupted him.
“Because if it was, then you presumably ought to have left her
there to die, rath er than fetching my husband to help pull her
out, and then allowing me to set her leg. How is she, by the
way?”
I co uld see the cow in question through the window ,
peacefully grazing at the edge of the yard, and evidently
untroubled eithe r by her nursing  calf, or by the binding I had
applied to support her cracked cannon bone.
“She is well, I thank you.” He was beginning to sound a
little strangled, though his shirt was loose at the collar . “That is
—”
“W ell, then,” I s aid. “Do you think the Lord regards you as
less deserving of medical help than your cow? It seems
unlikely to me, what with Him  regarding sparrows and all
that.”
He’d gone a sort of dusky purple round the jowls by this
point, an d clutched the defective hand with the sound one, as
though to keep it safe from me.“I s ee that you  have heard something of the Bible,” he
began, very pompous.
“Actually , I’ve read it for mysel f,” I said. “I read quite well,
you know .”
He brushed this remark aside , a dim light of triumph
gleaming in his eye.
“Indeed. Then I am sure you wi ll have read the Letter of St.
Paul to T imothy , in which he says, Let a woman be silent —”
I had , in fact, encountered St. Paul and his opinions before,
and had a few of my own.
“I expec t St. Paul ran into a w oman who could outar gue
him, too ,” I said, not without sy mpathy . “Easier to try to put a
stopper on the entire sex than to win his point fairly . I should
have expected better of you,  though, Mr . Christie.”
“But that’ s blasphemy!” he gasped, clearly shocked.
“It is not,” I cou ntered, “unless you’re saying that St. Paul is
actually God— and if you are , then I rather think that’ s
blasphemy . But let’ s not quibble ,” I said, seeing his eyes begin
to bulge. “Let m e …” I rose from my stool and took a step
forward, bringing me within touching distance of him. He
backed up so hastily that he bumped into the table and
knocked it askew , sending Malva’ s workbasket, a pottery jug
of milk, and a pewter plate cascading to the floor with a crash.
I bent swiftly and grabbed th e workbasket, in time to
prevent it being soaked by the f lood of milk. Mr . Christie had
as sw iftly seized a rag from the hearth, and bent to mop up the
milk. W e narrow ly missed bumping heads, but did collide, and
I los t my balanc e, falling heavily against him. He caught hold
of m y ar ms by reflex, dropping the rag, then hastily let go and
recoiled, leaving me swaying on my knees.
He was on his k nees, as well, b reathing heavily , but now a
safe distance away .
“The truth of it is,” I said severely , pointing a finger at him,
“you’re afraid.”“I am not!”
“Y es, you are.” I got to my feet,  replaced the workbasket on
the table, and shoved the rag delicately over the puddle of milk
with my foot. “Y ou’re afraid tha t I’ll hurt you—but I won’ t,” I
assured him. “I have a medicine  called ether; it will make you
go to sleep, and you won’ t feel anything.”
He blinked at that.
“And perhaps you’re afraid that you’ll lose a few fingers, or
what use of your hand you have.”
He was still kneeling on the hearth, staring up at me.
“I can’ t absolutely guarantee that you won’ t,” I said. “I
don’ t think  tha t will happen—but man p roposes, and God
disposes, doesn’ t He?”
He n odded, very slowly , but di dn’ t say anything. I took a
deep breath, for the moment out of ar gument.
“I think  I ca n mend your hand,” I said. “I can’ t guarantee it.
Sometimes things happen. Infections, accidents—something
unexpected. But …”
I r eache d out a hand to him, mo tioning toward the crippled
member . Movin g like a hypnotized bird trapped in a serpent’ s
gaze, he extended his arm and let me take it. I grasped his
wrist an d pulled him to his feet; he rose easily and stood
before me, letting me hold his hand.
I took it in both of mine and pressed the gnarled fingers
back, rubbing my thumb gently over the thickened palmar
aponeurosis tha t was trapping the tendons. I could feel it
clearly , could see in my mind exactly how to approach the
problem, where to press with the scalpel, how the calloused
skin wou ld part. The length and depth of the Z-shaped incision
that would free his hand and make it useful once more.
“I’ve done it b efore,” I said softly , pressing to feel the
submer ged bones. “I can do it again, God willing. If you’ll let
me?”He w as only a couple of inches taller than I; I held his eyes,
as w ell as his hand. They were a clear , sharp gray , and
searched my face with something between fear and suspicion
—but with something else at the back of them. I became quite
suddenly aware of his breathing, slow and steady , and felt the
warmth of his breath on my cheek.
“All rig ht,” he said at last, hoarsely . He pulled his hand
away from mine, not abruptly , b ut almost with reluctance, and
stood cradling it in his sound one. “When?”
“T omorrow ,” I said, “if the wea ther is good. I’ll need good
light,” I explained, seeing the st artled look in his eyes. “Come
in the morning, but don’ t eat breakfast.”
I pic ked up my kit, bobbed an a wkward curtsy to him, and
left, feeling rather queer .
Allan Christie waved cheerfully  to me as I left, and went on
with his grinding.
“DO YOU THINK he’ll come?” Breakfast had been eaten,
and no sign yet of Thomas Ch ristie. After a night of broken
sleep, in  which I dreamed repeatedly of ether masks and
sur gical disaster s, I wasn’ t sure whether I wanted him to come
or not.
“A ye, he ’ll come.” Jamie was reading the North Car olina
Gazette,  four months ou t of date, while  munching the last of
Mrs. Bug’ s cinnamon toast. “Look, they’ve printed a letter
from the Governor to Lord Dart mouth, saying what an unruly
lot of seditious,  conniving, thieving bastards we all are, and
asking General Gage to send him cannon to threaten us back
into good behavior . I wonder if MacDonald knows that’ s
public knowledge?”
“Did the y really?” I said absently . I rose, and picked up the
ether ma sk I had been staring at all through breakfast. “W ell, if
he does come, I suppose I’d best be ready .”
I had the ethe r mask Bree had made for me and the
dropping bottle laid out ready in my sur gery , next to the arrayof instru ments I would need fo r the sur gery itself. Unsure, I
picked u p the bottle, uncorked it, and waved a hand across the
neck, wafting fumes toward my nose. The result was a
reassuring wave  of dizziness that blurred my vision for a
moment. When  it cleared, I recorked the bottle and set it
down, feeling somewhat more confident.
Just in time. I h eard voices at the back of the house, and
footsteps in the hall.
I t urned  expecta ntly , to see Mr . Christie glowering at me
from the doorway , his hand curled protectively into his chest.
“I have changed my mind.” Christie lowered his brows still
further , to emphasize his position. “I have considered the
matter , and prayed upon it, and I shall not allow ye to employ
your foul potions upon me.”
“Y ou stu pid man ,” I said, thorou ghly put out. I stood up and
glowered back. “What is  the matter with you?”
He looked taken aback, as though a snake in the grass at his
feet had dared to address him.
“There is nothing whatever the matter with me,” he said,
quite gruf f. He lifted his chin aggressively , bristling his short
beard at me. “What is the matter with you,  madam?”
“And I thought it was only High landers who were stubborn
as rocks!”
He look ed quite  insulted at this  comparison, but before he
could take further issue with me, Jamie poked his head into the
sur gery , drawn by the sounds of altercation.
“Is there some dif ficulty?” he inquired politely .
“Y es! He refuses—”
“There is. She insists—”
The words collided, and we bot h broke of f, glaring at each
other . Ja mie glanced from me to Mr . Christie, then at the
apparatus on the table. He ca st his eyes up to heaven, asthough implorin g guidance, then rubbed a finger thoughtfully
beneath his nose.
“A ye,” h e said. “W ell. D’ye want your hand mended, T om?”
Christie went on looking mulish, cradling the crippled hand
protectively against his chest. After a moment, though, he
nodded slowly .
“A ye,” he said. H e gave me a deeply suspicious look. “But I
shall not be having any of this Popish nonsense about it!”
“Popish?” Jamie and I spoke at the same time, Jamie
sounding merely puzzled, myself deeply exasperated.
“A ye, an d ye need not be think ing ye can cod me into it,
either , Fraser!”
Jamie shot me an “I told ye so, Sassenach” sort of look, but
squared himself to give it a try .
“W ell, ye always were an awkw ard wee bugger , T om,” he
said mil dly . “Y e must please yo urself about it, to be sure—but
I can tell ye from experience that it does hurt a great deal.”
I thought Christie paled a little.
“T om. L ook.” Ja mie nodded at the tray of instruments: two
scalpels, a probe, scissors, forceps, and two suture needles,
already threaded  with gut and floating in a jar of alcohol. They
gleamed dully in the sunlight. “She means to cut into your
hand, aye?”
“I know that,” C hristie snapped, though his eyes slid away
from the sinister assemblage of sharp edges.
“A ye, ye  do. But ye’ve not the slightest notion what it’ s like.
I h ave. See here?” He held up his right hand, the back of it
toward Christie , and waggled it. In that position, with the
morning sun full on it, the thin white scars that laced his
fingers were stark against the deep bronze skin.
“That bloody hurt, ” h e assured Ch ristie. “Y e dinna want to
do some thing li ke that, and the re’ s a choice about it—which
there is.”Christie barely glanced at the ha nd. Of course, I thought, he
would b e familia r with the look of it; he’d lived with Jamie for
three years.
“I ha ve made m y choice,” Christie said with dignity . He sat
down in the chair and laid his hand palm-up on the napkin. All
the colo r had leached out of hi s face, and his free hand was
clenched so hard that it trembled.
Jamie looked at him under heav y brows for a moment, then
sighed.
“A ye. W ait a moment, then.”
Obviously , there was no further point in ar gument, and I
didn’ t bother trying. I took d own the bottle of medicinal
whisky I kept on the shelf and poured a healthy tot into a cup.
“T ake a  little wine for thy stoma ch’ s sake,”  I said, thrusting
it firmly into his  upturned hand. “Our mutual acquaintance, St.
Paul. If it’ s all r ight to drink for the sake of a stomach, surely
to goodness you can take a drop for the sake of a hand.”
His mouth, grimly compressed in anticipation, opened in
surprise. He glanced from the cup to me, then back. He
swallowed, nodded, and raised the cup to his lips.
Before h e had finished, though, Jamie came back, holding a
small, battered green book, whi ch he thrust unceremoniously
into Christie’ s hand.
Christie looked surprised, but held the book out, squinting
to se e what it was. HOL Y BIBLE  was  printed on  the warped
cover , King James V ersion.
“Y e’ll take help where ye can, I suppose?” Jamie said a little
gruf fly .
Christie looked at him sharply , then nodded, a very faint
smile passing through his beard like a shadow .
“I thank you, sir ,” he said. He took his spectacles out of his
coat and put them on, then opened the little book with great
care and  began to thumb throu gh it, evidently looking for a
suitable inspiration for under going sur gery without anesthetic.I ga ve Jamie a long look, to w hich he responded with the
faintest of shrugs. It wasn’ t me rely a Bible. It was the Bible
that had once belonged to Alexander MacGregor .
Jamie h ad come  by it as a very  young man, when he was
imprisoned in Fort W illiam by Captain Jonathan Randall.
Flogged once, and awaiting another , frightened and in pain, he
had bee n left in solitary confinement with no company save
his thoughts—and this Bible, given to him by the garrison’ s
sur geon for what comfort it might of fer .
Alex MacGrego r had been anot her young Scottish prisoner
—one w ho had died by his own hand, rather than suf fer the
further attentions of Captain Randall. His name was written
inside the book, in a tidy , rath er sprawling hand. The little
Bible was no stranger to fear and suf fering, and if it wasn’ t
ether , I hoped it might still possess its own power of anodyne.
Christie had found something that suited him. He cleared
his throa t, straightened himself in the chair , and laid his hand
on the towel, p alm up, in such a forthright manner that I
wondered wheth er he had settled on the passage in which the
Maccabees willingly present their hands and tongues for
amputation at the hands of the heathen king.
A pe ek over his  shoulder indicated that he was somewhere
in the Psalms, though.
“At you r conven ience, then, Mistress Fraser ,” Christie said
politely .
If he wasn’ t to  be unconscious, I needed a bit of extra
preparation. Ma nly fortitude was all very well, and so was
Biblical inspiration—but there are relatively few people
capable of sitting motionless while having their hand sliced
into, and I didn’ t think Thomas Christie was one of them.
I ha d a plentifu l supply of linen strips for bandaging. I
rolled ba ck his sleeve, then used a few of the strips to bind his
forearm tightly to the little ta ble, with an additional band
holding back the clawed fingers from the site of operation.Though Christie seemed rather shocked at the notion of
drinking liquor while reading the Bible, Jamie—and, just
possibly , the sight of the waiting scalpels—had convinced him
that circumstances justified it. He had consumed a couple of
ounces b y the time I had him p roperly secured and his palm
thoroughly swa bbed with raw alcohol, and was looking
significantly more relaxed than he had upon entering the room.
This sense of relaxation disappeared abruptly when I made
the first incision.
His breath rushed out in a high-pitched gasp and he arched
upward out of the chair , jerking the table across the floor with
a scr eech. I grab bed his wrist in time to prevent his ripping the
bandages away , and Jamie seized him by both shoulders,
pressing him back into the chair .
“Now t hen, no w then,” Jamie said, squeezing firmly .
“Y ou’ll do, T om. A ye, you’ll do.”
Sweat had popped out all over Christie’ s face, and his eyes
were huge behind the lenses of his spectacles. He gulped,
swallowed, took a quick look a t his hand, which was welling
blood, then looked away fast, white as a sheet.
“If you’ re going to vomit, Mr . Christie, do it there, will
you?” I said, sh oving an empty bucket toward him with one
foot. I still had one hand on his wrist, the other pressing a wad
of sterilized lint hard onto the incision.
Jamie was still talking to him l ike one settling a panicked
horse. C hristie was rigid, but breathing hard, and trembling in
every limb, including the one I meant to be working on.
“Shall I stop?” I asked Jamie, giving Christie a quick
appraisal. I could feel his pul se hammering in the wrist I
grasped. He wasn’ t in shock —quite—but plainly wasn’ t
feeling at all well.
Jamie shook his head, eyes on Christie’ s face.
“No. Shame to w aste that much whisky , aye? And he’ll not
want to go throu gh the waiting a gain. Here, T om, have anotherdram; it will do ye good.” He pressed the cup to Christie’ s lips,
and Christie gulped it without hesitation.
Jamie had let go  of Christie’ s shoulders as he settled; now
he took hold of Christie’ s fore arm with one hand, gripping
firmly . W ith the other , he pick ed up the Bible, which had
fallen to the floor , and thumbed it open.
“The right hand of the Lor d is exalted,”  he read , squinti ng
over Ch ristie’ s shoulder at the book. “ The right hand of the
Lor d doeth valiantly .  W ell, that’ s appropriate, no?” He glanced
down at Christie, who had subsi ded, his free hand clenched in
a fist against his belly .
“Go on,” Christie said, voice hoarse.
“I s hall not di e, but live, and declar e the works of the
Lor d,”  Jamie went on, his voice low but firm. “The Lor d hath
chastened me sor e, but he hath not given me over unto death.”
Christie seemed  to find this heartening; his breathing
slowed a little.
I couldn ’ t spare time to look at him, and his arm under
Jamie’ s grasp was hard as wood. Still, he was beginning to
murmur along with Jamie, catching every few words.
“Open to me the  gates of righteousness… I will praise thee,
for thou hast hear d me… .”
I h ad the apone urosis laid bare, and could clearly see the
thickening. A flick of the scalpel freed the edge of it; then a
ruthless slice, cutting hard dow n through the fibrous band of
tissue … the scalpel struck bone, and Christie gasped.
“God is the Lo r d which has showed us light; bind the
sacrifice with cor ds, even unto  the horns of the altar… .” I
could hear a tin ge of amusement in Jamie’ s voice as he read
that bit, and felt the shift of his body as he glanced toward me.
It did look rather as though I had been sacrificing
something; hands don’ t bleed as profusely as head wounds,
but there are plenty of small vessels in the palm, and I was
hastily blotting away the blood with one hand as I worked withthe o ther; discarded wads of blo odstained lint littered the table
and the floor around me.
Jamie w as flipping to and fro, picking out random bits of
Scripture, but Christie was with  him now , speaking the words
along w ith him.  I stole a hasty glance at him; his color was
still bad , and his pulse thundering, but the breathing was
better . He was c learly speaking from memory; the lenses of his
spectacles were fogged.
I had the hind ering tissue fully exposed now , and was
trimming away the tiny fibers from the surface of the tendon.
The clawed fingers twitched, and the exposed tendons moved
suddenly , silver as darting fish. I grabbed the feebly wiggling
fingers and squeezed them fiercely .
“Y ou mustn’ t move,” I said. “I n eed both hands; I can’ t hold
yours.”
I couldn’ t look up, but felt him nod, and released his
fingers. W ith the tendons gleaming softly in their beds, I
removed the last bits of the aponeurosis, sprayed the wound
with a mixture o f alcohol and distilled water for disinfection,
and set about closing the incisions.
The men’ s voices were no more than whispers, a low
susurrus to which I had paid no  attention, engrossed as I was.
As I  relaxed m y attention and began to suture the wound,
though, I became aware of them again.
“The Lor d is my shepher d, I shall not want… .”
I l ooked up, wip ing perspiration from my forehead with my
sleeve, and saw that Thomas Christie now held the small
Bible, closed and pressed against his body with his free arm.
His chin jammed hard into his chest, his eyes tight closed and
face contorted with pain.
Jamie still held the bound arm t ight, but had his other hand
on Christie’ s shoulder , his own  head bent near Christie’ s; his
eyes, too, were closed, as he whispered the words.
“Y ea, though I walk thr ough t he valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil… .”I kn otted the las t suture, clipped the thread, and in the same
movement, cut through the linen bindings with my scissors,
and let go the breath I’d been holding. The men’ s voices
stopped abruptly .
I lift ed the hand , wrapped a fresh dressing tightly around it,
and pressed the clawed finge rs gently back, straightening
them.
Christie’ s eyes opened, slowly . His pupils were huge and
dark beh ind his lenses, as he bl inked at his hand. I smiled at
him, and patted it.
“Sur ely goodness and mer cy shall follow me all the days of
my life,”  I said softly . “And I shall dwell in the house of the
Lor d for ever .”2 4
T OUCH ME NOT
C HRISTIE’S PULSE W AS a little rapid, but strong. I set
down th e wrist I had been hol ding, and put the back of my
hand against his forehead.
“Y ou’re a bit feverish,” I said. “Here, swallow this.” I put a
hand beh ind his back to help him  sit up in bed, which alarmed
him. He  sat up i n a flurry of bedclothes, drawing in his breath
sharply as he jostled the injured hand.
I tactful ly af fected not to notice his discomposure, which I
put dow n to the fact that he was clad in his shirt and I in my
nightclothes. These were mode st enough, to be sure, with a
light sha wl covering my linen n ight rail, but I was reasonably
sure that he hadn’ t been anywhere near a woman in dishabille
since his wife died—if then.
I murm ured something meaningless, holding the cup of
comfrey tea for him as he drank,  and then settled his pillows in
comfortable but impersonal fashion.
Rather t han send  him back to his own cabin, I had insisted
that he stay the night, so I could  keep an eye on him in case of
postoperative infection. Intransigent as he was by nature, I
didn’ t by  any means trust him to  follow instructions and not to
be s lopping hogs, cutting wood, or wiping his backside with
the w ounded hand. I wasn’ t let ting him out of sight until the
incision had begun to granulate—which it should do by the
next day , if all went well.
Still sha ky from the shock of  sur gery , he had made no
demur , and Mrs. Bug and I had put him to bed in the
W emysses’ room, Mr . W emyss and Lizzie having gone to the
McGillivrays’.
I ha d no lauda num, but had slipped Christie a strong
infusion of valerian and St. John ’ s wort, and he had slept mostof th e afternoon. He had declin ed any supper , but Mrs. Bug,
who app roved of Mr . Christie, had been plying him through
the evening with toddies, syl labubs, and other nourishing
elixirs—all containing a hi gh percentage of alcohol.
Consequently , he seemed rather dazed, as well as flushed, and
made no  protest  as I picked up t he bandaged hand and brought
the candle close to examine it.
The hand was swollen, which was to be expected, but not
excessively so. Still, the bandage was tight, and cutting
uncomfortably i nto the flesh. I snipped it, and holding the
honeyed dressing that covered the wound carefully in place,
lifted the hand and snif fed at it.
I c ould smell honey , blood, herbs, and the faintly metallic
scent of fresh-severed flesh—bu t no sweet whif f of pus. Good.
I presse d carefully near the dressing, watching for signs of
sharp pain or s treaks of vivid red in the skin, but bar a
reasonable tenderness, I saw only a small degree of
inflammation.
Still, he was  feverish; it would bear watchin g. I took a fresh
length of bandage and wound it carefully over the dressing,
finishing with a neat bow at the back of the hand.
“Why do you never wear a proper kerch or cap?” he blurted.
“What?” I looked up in su rprise, having temporarily
for gotten the man attached to the hand. I put my free hand to
my head. “Why should I?”
I s ometi mes plaited my hair befo re bed, but hadn’ t tonight. I
had brushed it, though, and it floated loose around my
shoulders, smell ing pleasantly of the hyssop and nettle-flower
infusion I combed through it to keep lice at bay .
“Why?” His voice rose a little. “Every woman that prayeth
or pr ophesieth with her head  uncover ed dishonour eth her
head: for that is even all one as if she wer e shaven.”
“Oh, are we back to Paul again?” I murmured, returning my
attention to his hand. “Does it not occur to you that that man
had rather a be e in his bonnet when it came to women?Besides, I’m not praying at the m oment, and I want to see how
this does overnight, before I risk any prophesying about it. So
far , though, it seems—”
“Y our hair .” I l ooked up to see him staring at me, mouth
curved downwa rd in disapproval. “It’ s …” He made a vague
movement round his own clipped poll. “It’ s …”
I raised my brows at him.
“There’ s a great deal of it,” he ended, rather feebly .
I eyed him for  a moment, then put down his hand and
reached for the little green Bib le, which was sitting on the
table.
“Corinthians, was it? Hmm, oh, yes, here we are.” I
straightened my back and read the verse: “Doth not even
natur e i tself tea ch you, that, if a man have long hair , it is a
shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair , it is a glory to
her: for her hair is given her for a covering.”  I c losed the
book with a snap and set it down.
“W ould you care to step across  the landing and explain to
my husband how shameful his  hair is?” I asked politely . Jamie
had gone to bed; a faint, rhythmic snoring was audible from
our room. “Or do you expect he knows that already?”
Christie was already flushed from drink and fever; at this,
an u gly dark red  washed him from chest to hairline. His mouth
moved, opening and closing soundlessly . I didn’ t wait for him
to decide on something to say , but merely turned my attention
back to his hand.
“Now ,” I said firmly , “you mu st do exercise regularly , to
make su re that the muscles don’ t contract as they heal. It will
be painful at first, but you must do it. Let me show you.”
I took hold of his ring finger , just below the first joint, and
keeping the finger itself straight, bent the top joint a little
inward.
“Do you  see? Here, you do it. T ake hold with your other
hand, an d then try to bend just that one joint. Y es, that’ s it. Doyou feel  the pull, down through the palm of your hand? That’ s
just what’ s wanted. Now , do it with the little finger … yes.
Y es, that’ s very good!”
I loo ked up and  smiled at him. The flush had faded a little,
but he still looked thoroughly nonplussed. He didn’ t smile
back at me, but glanced hastily away , down at his hand.
“Right. N ow , put your hand flat on the table—yes, that’ s the
way—and try to raise your fourth finger and little finger by
themselves. Y es , I know it isn’ t easy . Keep trying, though. Are
you hungry , Mr . Christie?”
His stom ach had given a loud growl, startling him as much
as me.
“I suppose I might eat,” he mumbled ungraciously , scowling
at his uncooperative hand.
“I’ll fetc h you something. Keep trying those exercises for a
bit, why don’ t you?”
The house was quiet, settled for  the night. W arm as it was,
the shutters had been left open, and enough moonlight
streamed throug h the windows that I didn’ t need to light a
candle. A shadow detached itself from the darkness in my
sur gery , and followed me down  the hallway to the kitchen—
Adso, leaving of f his nocturnal hunt for mice, in hopes of
easier prey .
“Hallo, cat,” I said, as he slithered past my ankles into the
pantry . “If you think you’re h aving any of the ham, think
again. I might g o as far as a sau cer of milk, though.” The milk
jug was white e arthenware with  a blue band round it, a squat,
pale shape floating in the darkn ess. I poured out a saucer and
put i t do wn on the floor for Ads o, then set about assembling a
light supper—aware that Scottish expectations of a light meal
involved suf ficient food to founder a horse.
“Ham, cold fried potatoes, cold fried mush, bread and
butter ,” I chanted under my brea th, shoveling it all onto a lar ge
wooden tray . “Rabbit dumpling, tomato pickle, a bit of raisin
pie f or pudding … what else?” I glanced down toward the softlapping noises coming from the  shadows at my feet. “I’d give
him milk, too, but he wouldn’ t drink it. W ell, we might as well
keep on as we’ve started, I supp ose; it will help him to sleep.”
I rea ched for th e whisky decanter and put that on the tray , as
well.
A fa int scent of  ether floated in  the dark air of the hallway
as I made my  way back t oward the stairs. I snif fed
suspiciously—had Adso tipped over the bottle? No, it wasn’ t
strong enough for that, I de cided, just a few wayward
molecules seeping around the cork.
I was simultaneously relieved and regretful that Mr . Christie
had refu sed to let me use the ether . Relieved, because there
was no telling h ow it might have worked—or not. Regretful,
because I would have liked v ery much to add the gift of
unconsciousness to my arsenal of skills—a precious gift to
bestow on future patients, and one I should very much have
liked to give Mr . Christie.
Beyond the fact that the sur gery  had hurt him badly , it was
very much more dif ficult to op erate on a conscious person.
The muscles were tensed, adrenaline was flooding through the
system, heart rate was vastly speeded up, causing blood to
spurt rather than flow… . For the dozenth time since the
morning, I envisioned exactly w hat I had done, asking myself
whether I might have done better .
T o my surprise,  Christie was still doing the exercises; his
face was sheened with sweat an d his mouth set grimly , but he
was still doggedly bending the joints.
“That’ s very good,” I said. “Do  stop now , though. I don’ t
want you to st art bleeding again.” I picked up the napkin
automatically and blotted the sweat from his temples.
“Is there someone else in the house?” he asked, irritably
jerking his head away from my ministrations. “I heard you
speaking to someone downstairs.”
“Oh,” I said, rather embarrassed. “No, just the cat.”
Prompted by this introduction, Adso, who had followed meupstairs, leapt onto the bed and stood kneading the covers with
his paws, big green eyes fixed on the plate of ham.
Christie turned a gaze of deep suspicion from the cat to me.
“No, he is not m y familiar ,” I said tartly , scooping up Adso
and dum ping hi m unceremonio usly on the floor . “He’ s a cat.
T alking to him is slightly less ridiculous than talking to
myself, that’ s all.”
An expression of surprise flitted across Christie’ s face—
perhaps surprise  that I had read his mind, or simple surprise at
my idiocy—but the creases of suspicion round his eyes
relaxed.
I c ut up his food with brisk ef fi ciency , but he insisted upon
feeding himself. He ate clumsily with his left hand, eyes on his
plate and brows knotted in concentration.
When h e had finished, he dra nk of f a cup of whisky as
though i t were water , set down the empty cup, and looked at
me.
“Mistress Fraser ,” he said, speaking very precisely , “I am an
educated man. I do not think ye are a witch.”
“Oh, yo u don’ t?” I said, rather amused. “So you don’ t
believe in witches? But there are witches mentioned in the
Bible, you know .”
He stifled a belch with his fist and regarded me fishily .
“I did not say I  do not believe in witches. I do. I said ye
aren’ t one. A ye?”
“I’m very much obliged to hear it,” I said, trying not to
smile. He was q uite drunk; though his speech was even more
precise than usual, his accent had begun to slip. Normally , he
suppressed the inflections of his  native Edinbur gh as much as
possible, but it was growing broader by the moment.
“A b it m ore?” I didn’ t wait for a n answer , but poured a solid
tot o f whisky into his empty cup. The shutters were open and
the r oom was co ol, but sweat sti ll gleamed in the creases of hisneck. He was clearly in pain, and wasn’ t likely to sleep again
without help.
He s ipped it this  time, watching me over the rim of the cup
as I tidie d up the supper leavings. In spite of whisky and a full
stomach, he was increasingly restive, shifting his legs beneath
the q uilt and tw itching his shoulders. I thought he needed the
chamber pot, and was debating whether I ought to of fer to help
him with it, or simply leave promptly so he could manage by
himself. The latter , I thought.
I was mistaken,  though. Before I could excuse myself, he
set down his cup on the table and sat up straight in bed.
“Mistress Fraser ,” he said, fixing me with a beady eye. “I
wish to apologize to ye.”
“What for?” I said, startled.
His lips pressed tight.
“For … my behavior this morning.”
“Oh. W ell … that’ s quite all right. I can see how the idea of
being put to sleep must seem … quite peculiar to you.”
“I dinna mean that.” He glanced up sharply , then down
again. “I meant … that I … could not keep myself still.”
I s aw the deepen ing flush rise up his cheeks again, and had
a sudden pang of surprised sympathy . He was truly
embarrassed.
I set down the tray and sat down slowly on the stool beside
him, wondering what I could say that might assuage his
feelings—and not make matters worse.
“But, Mr . Christie,” I said. “I wouldn’ t expect anyone  to
hold still while h aving their hand taken apart. It’ s—it’ s simply
not human nature!”
He shot me a quick, fierce glance.
“Not even your husband?”I blinked, taken aback. Not so much by the words, as by the
tone of bitterne ss. Roger had told me a bit of what Kenny
Lindsay had said about Ardsm uir . It had been no secret that
Christie had been envious of Jamie’ s leadership then—but
what had that to do with this?
“What makes you say that?” I asked quietly . I took his
injured hand, ostensibly to check the bindings—in fact, merely
to give me somewhere to look other than into his eyes.
“It’ s true, aye? Y our husband’ s hand.” His beard jutted
pugnaciously at me. “He said ye’d mended it for him. He
didna wriggle and squirm when ye did it, now , did he?”
W ell, no, he hadn’ t. Jamie had prayed, cursed, sweated,
cried—and screamed, once or twice. But he hadn’ t moved.
Jamie’ s hand wasn’ t a matter I wanted to discuss with
Thomas Christie, though.
“Everyone’ s dif f erent,” I said, giving him as straight a look
as I could. “I wouldn’ t expect—”
“Y e wouldna expect any man to do as well as him. A ye, I
ken that.” The d ull red color was burning in his cheeks again,
and he looked down at his band aged hand. The fingers of his
good hand were clenched in a fist.
“That’ s not what I meant,” I protested. “Not at all! I’ve
stitched wounds and set bones f or a good many men—almost
all th e Highlanders were terribly brave about—” It occurred to
me, that fraction of a second too late, that Christie was not  a
Highlander .
He made a deep growling noise in his throat.
“Highlanders,” h e said, “hmp!” in a tone that made it clear
he woul d have liked to spit on th e floor , had he not been in the
presence of a lady .
“Barbarians?” I said, responding  to the tone. He glanced at
me, and  I saw his mouth twist, as he had his own moment of
belated r ealization. He looked away , and took a deep breath—I
smelled the gust of whisky as he let it out.“Y our hu sband … is … certainl y a gentleman. He comes of
a noble  family , if one tainte d by treason.” The “r”s of
“treason” rolled like thunder—he really was quite drunk. “But
he is also … also …” He frowned, groping for a better word,
then gave it up. “One of them. Surely ye ken that, and you an
Englishwoman?”
“One of them,” I repeated, mildly amused. “Y ou mean a
Highlander , or a barbarian?”
He gave me a look somewhere between triumph and
puzzlement.
“The same thing, is it not?”
I rather thought he had a point. While I had met Highlanders
of wealth and education, like Colum and Dougal MacKenzie
—to say nothing of Jamie’ s grandfather , the treasonous Lord
Lovat to  whom Christie was referring—the fact was that every
single one of them had the instincts of a V iking freebooter .
And to be perfectly honest, so did Jamie.
“Ah … well, they , um, do ten d to be rather …” I began
feebly . I  rubbed a finger under m y nose. “W ell, they are raised
to be fighting men, I suppose. Or is that what you mean?”
He sighed deeply , and shook his head a little, though I
thought it was not in disagreement, but simply in dismay at the
contemplation of Highland customs and manners.
Mr . Chr istie was himself well-educated, the son of a self-
made Edinbur g h merchant. As such, he had pretensions—
painful ones—t o being a gent leman—but would obviously
never m ake a proper barbarian.  I could see why Highlanders
both puzzled and annoyed him. What must it have been like, I
wondered, for him to find himself imprisoned alongside a
horde of uncouth—by his sta ndards—violent, flamboyant,
Catholic barbarians, treated—or mistreated—as one of them?
He h ad leaned back a little on his pillow , eyes closed and
mouth compres sed. W ithout opening his eyes, he asked
suddenly , “D’ye ken that your husband bears the stripes of
flogging?”I o pened my mo uth to reply tartly that I had  been married to
Jamie for nearly thirty years—when I realized that the
question implied something about the nature of Mr . Christie’ s
own con cept of marriage that I didn’ t want to consider too
closely .
“I know ,” I said instead, briefly ,  with a quick glance toward
the open door . “Why?”
Christie opened his eyes, which were a little unfocused.
W ith some ef fort, he brought his gaze to bear on me.
“Y e know why?” he asked, slurring a little. “Wha’ he did?”
I felt heat rise in my cheeks, on Jamie’ s behalf.
“At Ardsmuir ,” Christie said before I could answer , leveling
a finger at me. H e poked it at the air , almost in accusation. “He
claimed a bit of tartan, aye? Forbidden.”
“A ye?” I said, in baf fled reflex. “I mean—did he?”
Christie shook his head slowly back and forth, looking like
a lar ge, intoxicated owl, eyes fixed now and glaring.
“Not his,” he said. “A young lad’ s.”
He opened his mouth to speak further , but only a soft belch
emer ged from it, surprising hi m. He closed his mouth and
blinked, then tried again.
“It was an act of extra … extraordinary … nobility and—
and courage.” He looked at me, and shook his head slightly .
“Im—incompre … hensible.”
“Incomprehensible? How he did it, you mean?” I knew how ,
all right; Jamie was so bloody-mindedly stubborn that he
would s ee out any action he intended, no matter whether hell
itself barred the way or what happened to him in the process.
But surely Christie knew that  about him.
“Not how .” Christie’ s head loll ed a little, and he pulled it
upright with an ef fort. “Why?”
“Why?” I wanted to say , Because he’ s an effing her o, tha t’ s
why; he can’ t help it —but th at would n’ t really have been right.Besides, I didn’ t know why Jamie had done it; he hadn’ t told
me, and I did wonder why not.
“He’d do anything to protect one  of his men,” I said instead.
Christie’ s gaze was rather glassy , but still intelligent; he
looked a t me for a long moment , unspeaking, thoughts passing
slowly behind his eyes. A floorb oard in the hall creaked, and I
strained my ears for Jamie’ s b reathing. Y es, I could hear it,
soft and regular; he was still asleep.
“Does h e think that I am one of ‘his men’?” Christie asked
at last. His voic e was low , but full of both incredulity and
outrage. “Because I am not, I ass—ashure you!”
I began to think that last glass of whisky had been a grave
mistake.
“No,” I said with a sigh, repre ssing the ur ge to close my
eyes and  rub my forehead. “I’m sure he doesn’ t. If you mean
that”—I nodded  at the little Bible—”I’m sure it was simple
kindness. He’d do as much for any stranger—you would
yourself, wouldn’ t you?”
He breat hed heavily for a bit, glaring, but then nodded once
and lay back, as though exhausted—as well he might be. All
the b elligerence had gone out of him as suddenly as air from a
balloon, and he looked somehow smaller , and rather forlorn.
“I am sorry ,” he said softly . He lifted his bandaged hand a
little, and let it fall.
I wasn’ t sure whether he was apologizing for his remarks
about Jamie, or for what he saw  as his lack of bravery in the
morning. I thought it wiser not  to inquire, though, and stood
up, smoothing down the linen night rail over my thighs.
I pulled the quilt up a bit and tugged it straight, then blew
out t he c andle. H e was no more  than a dark shape against the
pillows, his breathing slow and hoarse.
“Y ou di d very well,” I whispered, and patted his shoulder .
“Good night, Mr . Christie.”
MY PE RSONAL BARBARIAN was asleep, but woke,
catlike, when I c rawled into bed. He stretched out an arm and
gathered me into himself w ith a sleepily interrogative
“mmmm?”
I nestled against him, tight muscles beginning to relax
automatically into his warmth.
“Mmmm.”
“Ah. And how’ s our wee T om , then?” He leaned back a
little and his big  hands came down on my trapezius, kneading
the knots from my neck and shoulders.
“Oh. Oh . Obnoxious, prickly , censorious, and very drunk.
Otherwise, fine. Oh, yes. More, please—up a bit, oh, yes.
Oooh.”
“A ye, well, that sounds like T om at his best—bar the
drunkenness. If ye groan like that, Sassenach, he’ll think I’m
rubbing something other than your neck.”
“I do not  care ,” I  said, eyes closed, the b etter to appreciate
the exquisite sensations vibratin g through my spinal column.
“I’ve had quite enough of T o m Christie for the moment.
Besides, he’ s likely passed out by now , with as much as he’ s
had to drink.”
Still, I tempered  my vocal resp onse, in the interests of my
patient’ s rest.
“Where did that Bible come f rom?” I asked, though the
answer was obvious. Jenny must have sent it from Lallybroch;
her last parcel had arrived a f ew days before, while I was
visiting Salem.
Jamie an swered the question I’d really asked, sighing so his
breath stirred my hair .
“It g ave me a queer turn to see it, when I came to it among
the books my s ister sent. I cou ldna quite decide what to do
with it, aye?”
Little wonder if it had given him a turn.“Why d id she send it, did she say?” My shoulders were
beginning to relax, the ache between them dulling. I felt him
shrug behind me.
“She sent it with  some other books; said she was turning out
the attic and found a box of the m, so decided to send them to
me. But she did  mention hearing that the village of Kildennie
had decided to emigrate to North Carolina; they’re all
MacGregors up near there, ken?”
“Oh, I see.” Jam ie had once told me that his intention was
one day to find the mother of Alex MacGregor , and give her
his Bible , with the information t hat her son had been avenged.
He had made inq uiries after Culloden, but discovered that both
of the MacGreg or parents were dead. Only a sister remained
alive, and she h ad married and left her home; no one knew
quite wh ere she was, or even whether she was still in Scotland.
“Do you think Jenny—or Ian, rather—found the sister at
last? And she lived in that village?”
He shrugged again, and with  a final squeeze of my
shoulders, left of f.
“It may be. Y e ken Jenny; she’ d leave it to me whether to
search for the woman.”
“And wi ll you?” I rolled over to face him. Alex MacGregor
had han ged himself, rather than live as prey to Black Jack
Randall. Jack Randall was dead, had died at Culloden. But
Jamie’ s memories of Culloden were no more than fragments,
driven f rom him  by the trauma  of the battle and the fever he
had suf fered afterward. He had waked, wounded, with Jack
Randall’ s body lying on top of him—but had no recollection
of what had happened.
And yet , I supposed, Alex MacGregor had  been avenged—
whether or not by Jamie’ s hand.
He t hought about that for a moment, and I felt the small
stirring as he tapped the two stif f fingers of his right hand
against his thigh.
“I’ll ask,” he said finally . “Her name was Mairi.”“I se e,” I said. “W ell, there can’ t be more than, oh … three
or four hundred women named Mairi in North Carolina.”
That made him laugh, and we drifted of f to sleep, to the
accompaniment of T om Christie ’ s stertorous snores across the
hall.
IT MIGHT HA VE BEEN minutes or hours later that I woke
suddenly , listeni ng. The room was dark, the fire cold on the
hearth, and the s hutters rattling faintly . I tensed a little, trying
to w ake enough to rise and go to my patient—but then heard
him, a long wheezing inspiration, followed by a rumbling
snore.
It wasn’ t that that had wakened me, I realized. It was the
sudden silence beside me. Jamie was lying stif f beside me,
scarcely breathing.
I pu t ou t a hand slowly , so he would not be shocked at the
touch, and rested it on his leg. He hadn’ t had nightmares for
some months, but I recognized the signs.
“What is it?” I whispered.
He drew breath a little deeper  than usual, and his body
seemed momentarily to draw in upon itself. I didn’ t move, but
left my hand on his leg, feeling the muscle flex
microscopically beneath my fingers, a tiny intimation of flight.
He didn ’ t flee, though. He mov ed his shoulders in a brief,
violent twitch, then let out hi s breath and settled into the
mattress. He didn’ t speak for a bit, but his weight drew me
closer , l ike a moon pulled near to its planet. I lay quiet, my
hand on him, my hip against his—flesh of his flesh.
He stared upward, into the sha dows between the beams. I
could se e the line of his profile, and the shine of his eyes as he
blinked now and then.
“In the dark … ” he whispered at last, “there at Ardsmuir ,
we lay in the da rk. Sometimes there was a moon, or starlight,
but even then, y e couldna see a nything on the floor where we
lay . It was naught but black—but ye could hear .”Hear the breathing of the fort y men in the cell, and the
shuf fles and shifts of their movement. Snores, coughing, the
sounds of restless sleep—and the small furtive sounds from
those who lay awake.
“It woul d be weeks, and we wouldna think of it.” His voice
was com ing easier now . “W e were always starved, cold. W orn
to the bone. Y e d inna think much, then; only of how to put one
foot in front of another , lift another stone… . Y e dinna really
want  to think, ken? And it’ s easy enough not to. For a time.”
But every now a nd then, something would change. The fog
of exhaustion would lift, suddenly , without warning.
“Sometimes ye kent what it was—a story someone told,
maybe, or a let ter that came from someone’ s wife or sister .
Sometimes it came out of now here; no one said a thing, but
ye’d wa ke to it, in the night, like the smell of a woman lying
next to ye.”
Memory , longing … need. They became men touched by
fire—roused from dull accept ance by the sudden searing
recollection of loss.
“Everyone would go a bit mad,  for a time. There would be
fights, all the time. And at night, in the dark …”
At n ight, you w ould hear the so unds of desperation, stifled
sobs or stealthy rustlings. Some  men would, in the end, reach
out to another—sometimes to be rebuf fed with shouts and
blows. Sometimes not.
I wasn’ t  sure what he was trying to tell me, nor what it had
to do with Thomas Christie. Or , perhaps, Lord John Grey .
“Did any of them ever … touch you?” I asked tentatively .
“No. None of them would ever think to touch me,” he said
very softly . “I was their chief. They loved me—but they
wouldna think, ever , to touch me.”
He took a deep, ragged breath.
“And di d you want them to?” I  whispered. I could feel my
own pulse begin to throb in my fingertips, against his skin.“I hungered for it,” he said so softly I could barely hear him,
close as I was. “More than food. More than sleep—though I
wished m ost des perately for sleep, and not only for the sake of
tiredness. For when I slept, sometimes I saw ye.
“But it wasna the longing for a woman—though Christ
knows, that was bad enough. It was only—I wanted the touch
of a hand. Only that.”
His skin had ached with need, ‘til he felt it must grow
transparent, and  the raw soreness of his heart be seen in his
chest.
He made a small rueful sound, not quite a laugh.
“Y e ken those pi ctures of the Sacred Heart—the same as we
saw in Paris?”
I kn ew them—Renaissance pain tings, and the vividness of
stained g lass glo wing in the aisl es of Notre Dame. The Man of
Sorrows, his heart exposed and pierced, radiant with love.
“I remembered that. And I thought to myself that whoever
saw that vision of Our Lord w as likely a verra lonely man
himself, to have understood so well.”
I l ifted my hand and laid it on the small hollow in the center
of h is chest, very lightly . The sheet was thrown back, and his
skin was cool.
He closed his eyes, sighing, and clasped my hand, hard.
“The tho ught of that would com e to me sometimes, and I
would think I kent what Jes us must feel like there—so
wanting, and no one to touch Him.”2 5
ASHES T O ASHES
J AMIE C HECKED HIS SADDL EBAGS once more, though
he had done it so often of late that the exercise was little more
than custom. Each time he ope ned the left-hand one, he still
smiled, though. Brianna had remade it for him, stitching in
loops of leather that presented h is pistols, hilt up, ready to be
seized in an emer gency , and a clever arrangement of
compartments th at held handy h is shot pouch, powder horn, a
spare knife, a coil of fishing line, a roll of twine for a snare, a
hussif with pins, needles, and th read, a packet of food, a bottle
of beer , and a neatly rolled clean shirt.
On the outside of the bag was a small pouch that held what
Bree wa s pleased to call a “first-aid kit,” though he was unsure
what it was meant to be in aid of. It contained several gauze
packets of a bitter -smelling tea, a tin of salve, and several
strips of her adh esive plaster , none of which seemed likely to
be of use in any imaginable misadventure, but did no harm.
He r emoved a ca ke of soap she had added, along with a few
more unnecessary fripperies, and carefully hid them under a
bucket, lest she be of fended.
Just in time, too ; he heard her voice, exhorting wee Roger
about the inclusion of suf ficient clean stockings in his bags.
By the time they came round the corner of the hay barn, he
had everything securely buckled up.
“Ready , then, a charaid ?”
“Oh, aye .” Roge r nodded, and s lung the saddlebags he was
carrying on his shoulder of f o nto the ground. He turned to
Bree, who was carrying Jemmy , and kissed her briefly .
“I go with you,  Daddy!” Jem exclaimed hopefully .
“Not this time, sport.”“W anna see Indians!”
“Later , perhaps, when ye’re bigger .”
“I can talk Indian! Uncle Ian tellt me! W anna go!”
“Not thi s time,” Bree told him firmly , but he wasn’ t inclined
to listen, and began struggling to get down. Jamie made a
small rumble in his throat, and fixed him with a quelling eye.
“Y e’ve heard your parents,” he said. Jem glowered, and
stuck out his lower lip like a shelf, but ceased his fuss.
“Someday ye must tell me how ye do that,” Roger said,
eyeing his of fspring.
Jamie laughed, and leaned down to Jemmy . “Kiss Grandda
goodbye, eh?”
Disappointment generously abandoned, Jemmy reached up
and seiz ed him round the neck. He picked the little boy up out
of Brianna’ s arms, hugged him, and kissed him. Jem smelled
of pa rritch, toast, and honey , a h omely warm and heavy weight
in his arms.
“Be goo d and mind your moth er , aye? And when ye’re a
wee bit bigger , ye’ll come, to o. Come and say farewell to
Clarence; ye can tell him the words Uncle Ian taught ye.” And
God willing, they’d be words suitable for a three-year -old
child. Ian had a most irresponsible sense of humor .
Or per haps,  he tho ught, g rinning to himself, I’m only
r ecalling some o’ the things I taught Jenny’ s bairns—including
Ian—to say in Fr ench.
He’d al ready s addled and bridled Roger ’ s horse, and
Clarence the pack mule was fully loaded. Brianna was
checking the girth and stirrup l eathers while Roger slung his
saddlebags—more to keep herself busy than because of any
need. Her lower lip was caugh t in her teeth; she was being
careful not to seem worried, but was fooling no one.
Jamie to ok Jem  up to pat the m ule’ s nose, in order to give
the lass and her man a moment’ s  privacy . Clarence was a good
sort, and suf fered Jem’ s enthusiastic patting andmispronounced Cherokee phrases with long-suf fering
tolerance, but when Jem turned in his arms toward Gideon,
Jamie leaned back sharply .
“Nay , lad, ye din na want to touch yon wicked bugger . He’ll
take your hand right of f.”
Gideon twitched his ears and stamped once, impatient. The
big stall ion was dying to get under way and have another
chance at killing him.
“Why do you keep that vicious thing?” Brianna asked,
seeing Gideon’ s  long lip wrinkle back to show his yellow teeth
in anticipation. She took Jemmy  from him, stepping well away
from Gideon.
“What, wee Gideon? Oh, we ge t on. Besides, he’ s half my
trade goods, lass.”
“Really?” She gave the big chestnut a suspicious glance.
“Are you sure you won’ t sta rt a war , giving the Indians
something like him?”
“Oh, I dinna mean to give him to them,” he assured her .
“Not directly , at least.”
Gideon was a bad-tempered, thrawn-headed reester of a
horse, with a mouth like iron and a will to match. However ,
these unsociable qualities see med most appealing to the
Indians, as did the stallion’ s massive chest, long wind, and
stoutly m uscled frame. When Quiet Air , the sachem in one of
the v illages, had of fered him thr ee deerskins for the chance to
breed his spotted mare to Gideo n, Jamie had realized suddenly
that he had something here.
“‘T was the greatest good fortune that I never found the time
to c astrate him,” he said, slapp ing Gideon familiarly on the
withers and dodging by reflex as the stallion whipped his head
round to  snap. “He earns his ke ep, and more, standing at stud
to th e In dian po nies. It’ s the onl y thing I’ve ever asked him to
do that he’ s not balked at.”
The lass was pi nk as a Christmas rose from the morning
cold; she laughed at that, though, going an even deeper color .“What’ s castrate?” Jemmy inquired.
“Y our mother will tell ye.” He grinned at her , ruf fled
Jemmy’ s hair , and turned to Roger . “Ready , lad?”
Roger M ac nodded and stepped up into his stirrup, swinging
aboard. He had a steady old bay gelding named Agrippa, who
tended to grunt a nd wheeze, but was sound enough for all that,
and good for a rider like Roger—competent enough, but with
an abiding sense of inner reservation about horses.
Roger leaned down from the saddle for a last kiss from
Brianna, and they were under way . Jamie’d taken a private—
and thorough—leave of Claire earlier .
She was in the window of their bedroom, watching out to
wave to them as they rode past, her hairbrush in her hand. Her
hair was standing out in a grea t curly swash round her head,
and the early-morning sun ca ught in it like flames in a
thornbush. It gave him a sudden queer feeling to see her thus
so disord ered, half-naked in her shift. A sense of strong desire,
despite what he’d done to her no t an hour past. And something
almost fear , as though he might never see her again.
Quite without thought, he glanc ed at his left hand, and saw
the ghos t of the scar at the base of his thumb, the “C” so faded
that it was scarcely visible. He had not noticed it or thought of
it in years, and  felt suddenly as though there was not air
enough to breathe.
He waved, though, and she threw him a mocking kiss,
laughing. Christ, he’d marked her;  he could see the dark patch
of the love bite he’d left on her neck, and a hot flush of
embarrassment rose in his face. He dug his heels into Gideon’ s
side, cau sing the stallion to giv e a squeal of displeasure and
turn round to try to bite him in the leg.
W ith thi s distrac tion, they were safe away . He looked back
only once, at the trailhead, to see her still there, framed by
light. Sh e lifted one hand, as though in benediction, and then
the trees hid her from sight.
THE WEA THER  W AS F AIR, though cold for as early in the
autumn as it was; the horses’ breath steamed as they made
their way down from the Ridg e through the tiny settlement
folk now called Cooperville, and along the Great Buf falo T rail
to th e no rth. He kept an eye on the sky; it was much too early
for s now , but heavy rains were  not uncommon. What clouds
there were were mare’ s tails, though; no cause for worry .
They didn’ t speak much, each man alone with his thoughts.
Roger Mac was easy company , for the most part. Jamie did
miss Ian, though; he would have liked to talk over the situation
as it stood now  with T sisqua. Ian understood the minds of
Indians better than most white men, and while Jamie
understood Bird’ s gesture of sending the hermit’ s bones well
enough—it was  meant as a proof of his continuing goodwill
toward settlers, if the King should send them guns—he would
have valued Ian’ s opinion.
And while it wa s necessary that he introduce Roger Mac in
the villages, for the sake of future relations … W ell, he
blushed at the thought of having to explain to the man about
…
Damn Ian. The lad had simply gone in the night, a few days
past, him and his dog. He’d  done it before, and would
doubtless be back as suddenly as he’d gone. Whatever
darkness he’d brought back from the north would now and
then bec ome too  much for him,  and he would vanish into the
wood, coming back silent and withdrawn, but somewhat more
at peace with himself.
Jamie understood it well enough; solitude was in its own
way a balm for loneliness. And whatever memory the lad was
fleeing—or seeking—in the wood …
“Has he  ever spoken to you abo ut them?”  Claire had asked
him, troubled. “His wife? His child?”
He h ad not. Ian  did not speak of anything about his time
among the Mohawk, and the on ly token he had brought back
from the north was an armlet, made of blue-and-whitewampum shells . Jamie had caught a glimpse of it in Ian’ s
sporran once, but not enough to tell the pattern of it.
Blessed Michael defend you, lad,  he thought silently toward
Ian. And may the angels mend you.
W ith on e thing and another , he had no real conversation
with Roger Mac until they’d stopped for their noon meal. They
ate the fresh stuf f the women ha d sent, enjoying it. Enough for
supper left; next day , it would be corn dodgers and anything
that came across their path tha t could be easily caught and
cooked. And one day more, and the Snowbird women would
have them royally fed, as representatives of the King of
England.
“Last time, it w as ducks, stuf fed wi’ yams and corn,” he
told Roger . “It’ s manners to eat as much as ye can, mind, no
matter what’ s served, and ye’re the guest.”
“Got it.”  Roger smiled faintly , th en looked down at the half-
eaten sausage roll in his hand. “About that. Guests, I mean.
There’ s a wee problem, I think—with Hiram Crombie.”
“Hiram?” Jamie was surprised. “What’ s to do wi’ Hiram?”
Roger ’ s mouth twitched, unsure whether to laugh or not.
“W ell, it’ s only—ye ken everybody’ s calling the bones we
buried Ephraim, aye? It’ s all Bree’ s fault, but there it is.”
Jamie nodded, curious.
“W ell, s o. Y esterday Hiram came along to me, and said he’d
been studying upon the matter—praying and the like—and had
come to  the conclusion that if it were true that some of the
Indians were his wife’ s kin, the n it stood to reason that some
of them must be saved, as well.”
“Oh, aye?” Amusement began to kindle in his own breast.
“Y es. And so, he says, he feels called upon to bring these
hapless savages  the word of Christ. For how else are they to
hear it?”Jamie rubbed a knuckle over his upper lip, torn now
between amusement and dismay at the thought of Hiram
Crombie invading the Cherokee villages, psalmbook in hand.
“Mmphm. W ell, but … do ye not believe—Presbyterians, I
mean—that it’ s all predestined? That some are saved, I mean,
and som e damne d, and not a thing to be done about it? Which
is why the Papists are all bound for hell in a handbasket?”
“Ah … well …”  Roger hesitated, clearly not quite willing to
put the matter so baldly hims elf. “Mmphm. There may be
some dif ference  of opinion am ong Presbyterians, I imagine.
But yes, that’ s m ore or less what Hiram and his cohorts think.”
“A ye. W ell, then, if he thinks some o’ the Indians must be
saved already , why must they be preached to?”
Roger rubbed a finger between his brows.
“W ell, d ’ye see, it’ s the same reason Presbyterians pray and
go to kirk and all. Even if they’r e saved, they feel they want to
praise G od for it, and—and learn to do better , so as to live as
God wishes them to. In gratitude for their salvation, see?”
“I ra ther think H iram Crombie’ s God might take a dim view
of the Indian wa y of living,” Ja mie said, with vivid memories
of n aked bodies in the dimness  of ember glow , and the smell
of furs.
“Quite,” Roger said, catching Claire’ s dry tone so exactly
that Jamie laughed.
“A ye, I see the dif ficulty ,” he s aid, and he did, though he
still found it funny . “So Hiram  means to go to the Cherokee
villages and preach? Is that it?”
Roger nodded, swallowing a bit of sausage.
“T o be more exact, he wants you to take him there. And
make in troduction for him. He w ouldna expect ye to interpret
the preaching, he says.”
“Holy God.” He took a moment to contemplate this
prospect, then shook his head decidedly . “No.”“Of course not.” Roger pulled the cork from a bottle of beer ,
and of fe red it to him. “I just tho ught I should tell ye, so ye can
decide best what to say to him when he asks.”
“V erra t houghtful of ye,” Jamie said, and taking the bottle,
drank deeply .
He l owered it, to ok breath—and  froze. He saw Roger Mac’ s
head turn sharply and knew he had caught it, too, borne on the
chilly breeze.
Roger Mac turned back to him, black brows furrowed.
“Do ye smell something burning?” he said.
ROGER HEAR D THEM first: a raucous caucus of cries and
cackles, shrill as witches. Then a clappering of wings as they
came in sight, and the birds flew up, mostly crows, but here
and there a huge black raven.
“Oh, God,” he said softly .
T wo bod ies hung from a tree beside the house. What was
left of them. He  could tell that it was a man and a woman, but
only by their clothes. A piece of paper was pinned to the man’ s
leg, so crumpled and stained that he saw it only because one
edge lifted in the breeze.
Jamie ripped it of f, unfolded it enough to read, and threw it
on th e g round. Death to Regulators,  it read; he saw the scrawl
for an instant, before the wind blew it away .
“Where are the bairns?” Jamie asked, turning sharply to
him. “These folk have children. Where are they?”
The ashes were cold, already scattering in the wind, but the
smell of  burning filled him, clogged his breathing, seared his
throat so that w ords rasped like gravel, meaningless as the
scrape o f pebble s underfoot. Roger tried to speak, cleared his
throat, and spat.
“Hiding, maybe ,” he rasped, and flung out an arm toward
the wood.“A ye, maybe.” Jamie stood abruptly , called into the wood,
and, not  waiting for an answer , set of f into the trees, calling
again.
Roger followed, sheering of f as they reached the forest’ s
edge, go ing upslope behind the house, both of them shouting
words of reassurance that were swallowed up at once by the
forest’ s silence.
Roger stumbled  through the trees, sweating, panting,
heedless of the pain in his throat as he shouted, barely
stopping long enough to hear if anyone answered. Several
times he saw mo vement from the corner of his eye and swung
toward i t, only to see nothing bu t the ripple of wind through a
patch of drying sedges, or a dangling creeper , swaying as
though someone had passed that way .
He half-imagined he was seeing Jem, playing at hide-and-
seek, an d the vision of a darting  foot, sun gleaming of f a small
head, lent him s trength to shout again, and yet again. At last,
though, he was forced to admit  that children would not have
run so far , and he circled back toward the cabin, still calling
intermittently , in hoarse, strangled croaks.
He came back in to the dooryard to find Jamie stooping for a
rock, which he threw with great force at a pair of ravens that
had settled in the hanging tree, edging bright-eyed back
toward its burden. The ravens squawked and flapped away—
but only so far as the next tree, where they sat watching.
The day  was cold, but both of them were soaked with sweat,
hair straggling wet on their necks. Jamie wiped his face with
his sleeve, still breathing hard.
“H-how many … children?” Roger ’ s own breath was short,
his throat so raw that the words were barely a whisper .
“Three, at least.” Jamie coughed, hawked, and spat. “The
eldest is twelve, maybe.” He st ood for a moment, looking at
the b odies. Then he crossed him self and drew his dirk to cut
them down.They had nothing to dig wit h; the best that could be
managed was a wide scrape in t he leaf mold of the forest, and
a thin cairn of rocks, as much to spite the ravens as for the
sake of decency .
“W ere they Regulators?” Roger asked, pausing in the midst
of it to wipe his face on his sleeve.
“A ye, but …” Jamie’ s voice trailed away . “It’ s naught to do
wi’ that business.” He shook his head and turned away to
gather more rocks.
Roger thought it was  a rock  at first, half-hidden in the
leaves that had drifted against  the scorched cabin wall. He
touched it, and it moved, bringing him to his feet with a cry
that would have done credit to any of the corbies.
Jamie re ached h im in seconds, in time to help dig the little
girl out of the leaves and cinders.
“Hush, a muirninn,  h ush,” Jamie said ur gently , though in
fact the child wa s not crying. She was maybe eight, her clothes
and hair burned away and her s kin so blackened and cracked
that she  might have been made  of stone indeed, save for her
eyes.
“Oh, Go d, oh, God.” Roger kep t saying it, under his breath,
long after it became clear that if it was a prayer , it was long
past answering.
He was cradling her against his chest, and her eyes opened
halfway , regarding him with nothing like relief or curiosity—
only a calm fatality .
Jamie had poured water from his canteen onto a
handkerchief; he fed the tip of it between her lips to wet them,
and Roger saw her throat move in reflex as she sucked.
“Y e’ll be all righ t,” Roger whispered to her . “It’ s all right, a
leannan. ”
“Who has done this, a nighean ?” Jamie asked, just as
gently . Roger saw that she unde rstood; the question stirred the
surface of her ey es like wind on a pond—but then passed over ,leaving them calm again. She d id not speak, no matter what
questions they asked, only looked at them with incurious eyes,
and went on sucking dreamily at the wet cloth.
“Are ye  baptize d, a leannan ?” Jamie asked her at last, and
Roger fe lt a deep jolt at the question. In the shock of finding
her , he had not truly taken in her condition.
“Elle ne peut pas vivr e,”  J am ie s aid softl y , his eyes meet ing
Roger ’ s. She cannot live.
His first instinct was a visceral denial. Of course she could
live, she  must. But huge patches of her skin were gone, the
raw flesh crusted but still oozing. He could see the white edge
of a  knee bone,  and literally see her heart beating, a reddish,
translucent bulge that pulsed at the notch of her rib cage. She
was light as a corn-dolly , and he became painfully aware that
she seemed to float in his arms, like a slick of oil on water .
“Does it hurt, sweetheart?” he asked her .
“Mama?” she whispered. Then she closed her eyes and
would say no more, only muttering “Mama?” now and then.
He had thought at first they would take her back to the
Ridge, to Claire. But it was more than a day’ s ride; she
wouldn’ t make it. Not possibly .
He s wallowed, realization closing on his throat like a noose.
He l ooked at Ja mie, seeing the same sick acknowledgment in
his eyes. Jamie swallowed, too.
“Do ye … know her name?” Roger could scarcely breathe,
and forc ed the words. Jamie shook his head, then gathered
himself, hunching his shoulders.
She had stopped sucking, but still murmured “Mama?” now
and then. Jamie took the han dkerchief from her lips and
squeezed a few drops from it onto her blackened forehead,
whispering the words of baptism.
Then they looked at each othe r , acknowledging necessity .
Jamie was pale, sweat beading  on his upper lip among thebristles of red beard. He took a deep breath, steeling himself,
and lifted his hands, of fering.
“No,” Roger said softly . “I’ll do  it.” She was his; he could
no more  surrender her to another than he could have torn of f
an a rm. He reac hed for the handkerchief, and Jamie put it into
his hand, soot-stained, still damp.
He’d never thought of such a th ing, and couldn’ t think now .
He didn ’ t need to; without hesit ation, he cradled her close and
put the handkerchief over her n ose and mouth, then clamped
his h and tight o ver the cloth, feeling the small bump of her
nose caught snug between his thumb and index finger .
W ind sti rred in the leaves above, and a rain of gold fell on
them, whisperin g on his skin, brushing cool past his face. She
would b e cold, he thought, and w ished to cover her , but had no
hand to spare.
His othe r arm was round her , h and resting on her chest; he
could fe el the tiny heart beneat h his fingers. It jumped, beat
rapidly , skipped , beat twice more … and stopped. It quivered
for a  mo ment; h e could feel it trying to find enough strength to
beat one  last time, and suf fered  the momentary illusion that it
would n ot only do so, but would force its way through the
fragile wall of her chest and into his hand in its ur ge to live.
But the momen t passed, as di d the illusion, and a great
stillness came. Near at hand, a raven called.
THEY HAD ALMOST finished the burying, when the sound
of hooves and jingling harness announced visitors—a lot of
visitors.
Roger , ready to decamp into the woods, glanced at his
father -in-law , but Jamie shook his head, answering his unasked
question.
“Nay , they’d no come back. Wh at for?” His bleak gaze took
in th e smoking ruin of the homestead, the trampled dooryard,
and the low mounds of the graves. The little girl still lay
nearby , covered with Roger ’ s cloak. He hadn’ t been able tobear put ting her into the ground just yet; the knowledge of her
alive was still too recent.
Jamie straighten ed, stretching his back. Roger saw him
glance t o see that his rifle was to hand, leaning against a tree
trunk. T hen he settled himself, leaning on the scorched board
he had been using as a shovel, waiting.
The first of the  riders came out of the woods, his horse
snorting and tossing its head at the smell of burning. The rider
pulled it skillfully round and ur ged it closer , leaning forward to
see who they were.
“So it’ s you, is  it, Fraser?” R ichard Brown’ s lined face
looked grimly jovial. He glance d at the charred and steaming
timbers, then round at his comrades. “Didn’ t think you made
your money just by selling whisky .”
The men—Roger counted six of them—shifted in their
saddles, snorting with amusement.
“Have a bit o’ respect for the dead, Brown.” Jamie nodded
at the graves, an d Brown’ s face hardened. He glanced sharply
at Jamie, then at Roger .
“Just the two of you, is it? What are you doing here?”
“Digging graves,” Roger said. His palms were blistered; he
rubbed a hand s lowly on the si de of his breeches. “What are
you  doing here?”
Brown s traightened abruptly in his saddle, but it was his
brother Lionel who answered.
“Coming down from Owenaw isgu,” he said, jerking his
head at the hors es. Looking, Roger saw that there were four
packhorses, lad en with skins, and that several of the other
horses carried bulging saddlebags. “Smelled the fire and come
to see.” He glan ced down at th e graves. “T ige O’Brian, was
it?”
Jamie nodded.
“Y e kent them?”Richard Brown shrugged.
“A ye. It’ s on the way to Owenawisgu. I’ve stopped a time or
two; taken supper with them.” B elatedly , he removed his hat,
plastering down  wisps of hair over his balding crown with the
flat of his hand. “God rest ‘em.”
“Who’ s burnt ‘em out, if it wasn’ t you?” one of the younger
men in the part y called. The man, a Brown by his narrow
shoulders and lantern jaw , grin ned inappropriately , evidently
thinking this a jest.
The sing ed bit of paper had flow n with the wind; it fluttered
against a  rock near Roger ’ s foot. He picked it up and with a
step forward, slapped it against Lionel Brown’ s saddle.
“Know anything  about that, do you?” he asked. “It was
pinned to O’Brian’ s body .” He sounded angry , knew it, and
didn’ t c are. His throat ached and his voice came out as a
strangled rasp.
Lionel Brown glanced at the paper , brows raised, then
handed it to his brother .
“No. W rite it yourself, did you?”
“What?” He stared up at the man, blinking against the wind.
“Indians,” Lion el Brown said, nodding at the house.
“Indians done this.”
“Oh, aye?” Roger could hear the undercurrents in Jamie’ s
voice—skepticism, wariness, and anger . “Which Indians? The
ones from whom ye bought the hides? T old ye about it, did
they?”
“Don’ t be a fool, Nelly .” Richard Brown kept his voice
pitched low , but his brother flin ched a little, hearing it. Brown
edged h is horse nearer . Jamie stood his ground, though Roger
saw his hands tighten on the board.
“Got the  whole family , did they ?” he asked, glancing at the
small body under its cloak.“No,” Jamie said. “W e’ve not fo und the two elder children.
Only the wee lassie.”
“Indians,” Lione l Brown repeated stubbornly , from behind
his brother . “They took ‘em.”
Jamie took a deep breath, and coughed from the smoke.
“A ye,” he said. “I’ll ask in the villages, then.”
“W on’ t find ‘em,” Richard Brown said. He crumpled the
note, tightening his fist suddenly . “If Indians took them, they
won’ t keep them near . They’ll sell them on, into Kentucky .”
There w as a general mutter of agreement among the men,
and Roger felt the ember that had simmered in his chest all
afternoon burst into fire.
“Indians didn’ t write that,” he snapped, jerking a thumb at
the note in Bro wn’ s hand. “And if it was revenge against
O’Brian for being a Regulator , they wouldn’ t have taken the
children.”
Brown gave him a long look, eyes narrowed. Roger felt
Jamie shift his weight slightly , preparing.
“No,” said Brown softly . “They wouldn’ t. That’ s why Nelly
figured you wrote it yourself. S ay the Indians came and stole
the little  ‘uns, but then you  c ome along and decide to tak e
what’ s left. So you fired the cabin, hung O’Brian and his wife,
pinned t hat note, and here you are. How say you to that bit of
reasoning, Mr . MacKenzie?”
“I’d ask how ye kent they were hanged, Mr . Brown.”
Brown’ s face tightened, and Ro ger felt Jamie’ s hand on his
arm in warning, realizing only then that his fists were
clenched.
“The ropes, a charaid, ” Jamie said, his voice very calm.
The words penetrated dimly , an d he looked. T rue, the ropes
they had cut from the bodies lay by the tree where they had
fallen. Jamie was still talking, h is voice still calm, but Roger
couldn’ t hear the words. The wind deafened him, and justbelow th e whine  of it he heard t he intermittent soft thump of a
beating heart. It might have been his own—or hers.
“Get of f that ho rse,” he said, or thought he had. The wind
swept into his face, heavy with soot, and the words caught in
his t hroat. The taste of ash was thick and sour in his mouth; he
coughed and spat, eyes watering.
V aguely , he became aware of a pain in his arm, and the
world swam back into view . Th e younger men were staring at
him, with expressions ranging from smirks to wariness.
Richard Brown and his brother were both sedulously avoiding
looking at him, focused instead on Jamie—who was still
gripping his arm.
W ith an ef fort, h e shook of f Jam ie’ s hand, giving his father -
in-law th e slightest nod by way  of reassurance that he wasn’ t
about to go ber serk—though his heart still pounded, and the
feel of the noose was so tight about his throat that he couldn’ t
have spoken, even had he been able to form words.
“W e’ll help.” Brown nodded at the little body on the
ground, and began to swing one leg over his saddle, but Jamie
stopped him with a small gesture.
“Nay , we’ll manage.”
Brown stopped , awkwardly half-on, half-of f. His lips
thinned and he p ulled himself back on, reined around and rode
of f with no word of farewell. The others followed, looking
curiously back as they went.
“It wasna them.” Jamie had taken up his rifle and held it,
gazing a t the wood where the la st of the men had disappeared.
“They ken something more about it than they’ll say , though.”
Roger nodded, wordless. He walked deliberately to the
hanging tree, kicked aside the ropes, and drove his fist into the
trunk, twice, three times. Stood panting, his forehead pressed
against the rough bark. The pain of raw knuckles helped, a bit.
A tr ail of tiny ants was scurrying upward between the plates
of bark, bound on some momentous business, all-absorbing.
He w atched them for a little, u ntil he could swallow again.Then straightened up and went to bury her , rubbing at the
bone-deep bruise on his arm.P A R T  F O U R
A b d u c t i o n2 6
AN EYE T O THE FUTURE
October 9, 1773
R OGER DROPPED HIS saddlebags on the ground beside the
pit and peered in.
“Where’ s Jem?” he said.
His mud -smeared wife looked up at him and brushed a
sweat-matted lock of hair out of her face.
“Hello to you, too,” she said. “Have a good trip?”
“No,” he said. “Where’ s Jem?”
Her brow s rose at that, and she  stabbed her shovel into the
bottom of the pit, extending a hand for him to help her
scramble out.
“He’ s at  Marsali ’ s. He and Germ ain are playing V room with
the little cars yo u made them—or they were when I left him
there.”
The kno t of anxiety he had carri ed under his ribs for the last
two weeks began slowly to relax. He nodded, a sudden spasm
of the throat preventing him from speaking, then reached out
and pull ed her to him, crushing her against him in spite of her
startled yelp and mud-stained clothes.
He h eld her hard, his own heart hammering loud in his ears,
and wouldn’ t—couldn’ t—let go, until she wriggled out of his
embrace. She kept her hands on  his shoulders, but cocked her
head to one side, one brow raised.
“Y eah, I missed you, too,” she said. “What’ s wrong? What
happened?”
“T errible things.” The burning, the little girl’ s death—these
had become dreamlike during their travel, their horror muted
to the surreal by  the monotonous labor of riding, walking, theconstant whine of wind and cru nch of boots on gravel, sand,
pine needles, mud, the engulfing  blur of greens and yellows in
which they lost themselves beneath an endless sky .
But now  he was home, no longer adrift in the wilderness.
And the  memory of the girl who had left her heart in his hand
was suddenly as real as she had been in the moment she died.
“Y ou come inside.” Brianna was peering closely at him,
concerned. “Y ou need something hot, Roger .”
“I’m all right,” he said, but followed her without protest.
He sat at the table while she pu t the kettle on for tea, and
told her everything that had h appened, head in his hands,
staring down at the battered ta bletop, with its homely spills
and burn scars.
“I ke pt thinking there must be s omething … some way . But
there wa sn’ t. Even while I—I p ut my hand over her face—I
was sure  it wasna really happen ing. But at the same time—”
He sat up, then, looking into th e palms of his hands. At the
same time, it had been the most vivid experience of his life.
He could  not bear to think of it,  save in the most fleeting way ,
but k new he could never for get the slightest thing about it. His
throat closed suddenly again.
Brianna looked searchingly into his face, saw his hand
touch the ragged rope scar on his throat.
“Can you breathe?” she said an xiously . He shook his head,
but it wasn’ t true , he was  brea thing, somehow , though it felt as
though his throat had been crush ed in some huge hand, larynx
and windpipe mangled into a bloody mass.
He f lapped a hand to indicate that he would be all right,
much as he doubted it himself. She came round behind him,
pulled his hand from his thro at, and laid her own fingers
lightly over the scar .
“It’ll be all rig ht,” she said q uietly . “Just breathe. Don’ t
think. Just breathe.”Her fingers were cold and her h ands smelled of dirt. There
was water in his eyes. He blinked, wanting to see the room, the
hearth and candle and dishes and loom, to convince himself of
where h e was. A drop of warm moisture rolled down his
cheek.
He tried to tell her that it was all right, he wasn’ t crying, but
she merely pressed closer , holding him across the chest with
one arm, the other hand still cool on the painful lump in his
throat. Her breasts were soft a gainst his back, and he could
feel, rather than hear , her humm ing, the small tuneless noise
she made when she was anxious, or concentrating very hard.
Finally , the spasm began to ease, and the feel of choking left
him. His  chest swelled with the  unbelievable relief of a free
breath, and she let go.
“What … is it … that ye’re digging?” he asked, with only a
little ef fort. He looked round at her and smiled, with a lot
more. “A bar … becue pit for … a hippopot … amus?”
The gho st of a s mile touched her face, though her eyes were
still dark with concern.
“No,” she said. “It’ s a groundhog kiln.”
He t ried for a moment to compose some witty remark about
it be ing a really  lar ge hole for killing something as small as a
groundhog, but he wasn’ t up to it.
“Oh,” he said instead.
He took the hot mug of catnip tea she placed in his hand and
held it near his face, letting the fragrant steam warm his nose
and mist on the cold skin of his cheeks.
Brianna poured out a mug for herself, as well, and sat down
across from him.
“I’m glad you’re home,” she said softly .
“Y eah. Me, too.” He essayed a sip; it was still scalding. “A
kiln?” He’d told her about the O’Brians; he had to, but he
didn’ t w ant to talk about it. Not now . She seemed to sense this,
and didn’ t press him.“Uh-huh. For the water .” He must have looked confused, for
her smile grew more genuine . “I told you there was dirt
involved, didn’ t I? Besides, it was your idea.”
“It was?” At thi s point, almost nothing would surprise him,
but he had no memory of having bright ideas about water .
The pro blem of bringing water to the houses was one of
transport. God knew there was plenty of water; it ran in creeks,
fell in waterfalls, dripped from ledges, sprang from springs,
seeped in boggy patches under the clif fs … but making it go
where you wanted required some method of containment.
“Mr . W emyss told Fraulein  B errisc h—that’ s his girlfriend;
Frau  Ute fixed them up—what I wa s doing, and she told him
that the men’ s choir over in Salem was working on the same
problem, so—”
“The ch oir?” He tried another cautious sip and found it
drinkable. “Why would the choir—”
“That’ s just what they call them . There’ s the single men’ s
choir , the single women’ s cho ir , the married choir … they
don’ t ju st sing together , though, it’ s more like a social group,
and each choir h as particular jobs they do for the community .
But anyway”—she flapped a hand—”they’re trying to bring
water in to the town, and having the same problem—no metal
for pipes.
“Y ou remember , though—you reminded me about the
pottery t hey do in Salem. W ell, they tried making water pipes
out of logs, but that’ s really hard and time-consuming, because
you have to bor e the middle of the log out with an augur , and
you still  need metal collars to bi nd the logs together . And they
rot, after a while. But then they had the same idea you had—
why not make pipes out of fired clay?”
She was becoming animated, tal king about it. Her nose was
no longe r red from cold, but her  cheeks were flushed pink and
her eyes  bright with interest. Sh e waved her hands when she
talked—she got that from her m other , he thought to himself,
amused.“… so we parked the kids with Mama and Mrs. Bug, and
Marsali and I went to Salem—”
“Marsali? But she couldn’ t be riding, surely?” Marsali was
enormously pregnant, to the point that merely being around
her mad e him slightly nervous, for fear she might go into labor
at any moment.
“She isn’ t due for a month. Besides, we didn’ t ride; we took
the wago n, and traded honey an d cider and venison for cheese
and quilts and—see my new tea pot?” Proud, she waved at the
pot, a homely sq uat thing with a red-brown glaze and yellow
squiggly shapes painted round the middle. It was one of the
uglier objects he’d ever seen, a nd the sight of it made tears
come to his eyes from the sheer joy of being home.
“Y ou don’ t like it?” she said, a small frown forming
between her brows.
“No, it’ s great ,” he said ho arsely . He fumbled for a
handkerchief and blew his nose to hide his emotion. “Love it.
Y ou were saying … Marsali?”
“I was saying about the water pipes. But—there’ s something
about Marsali, too.” The frown deepened. “I’m afraid Fer gus
isn’ t behaving very well.”
“No? What’ s he doing? Having a mad af fair with Mrs.
Crombie?”
This sug gestion was greeted with a withering look, but it
didn’ t last.
“He’ s gone a lot, for one thing, leaving poor Marsali to
mind the children and  do all the work.”
“T otally normal , for the time,” he observed. “Most men do
that. Y our father does that. I  do that; had ye not noticed?”
“I n oticed,” she said, giving hi m a faintly evil look. “But
what I mean is, m ost men do the  heavy work, like plowing and
planting, and let their wives manage the inside stuf f, the
cooking and the spinning and the weaving, and  the laundry ,
and  the  preserving, and —well, anyway , all that stuf f. ButMarsali’ s doing it all, plus the kids and the outdoor work, and
working at the malting floor . And when Fer gus is  home, he’ s
grumpy and he drinks too much.”
This als o sounded like normal behavior for the father of
three small, wild children and th e husband of a very pregnant
wife, Roger thought, but didn’ t say so.
“I’d not have thought Fer gus a layabout,” he observed
mildly . Bree shook her head, st ill frowning, and poured more
tea into his mug.
“No, he’ s not lazy , really . It’ s hard for him, with only one
hand; he really can’ t handle some of the heavy chores—but he
won’ t help with the kids, or cook  and clean while Marsali does
them. D a and Ian help with the plowing, but … And he leaves
for days  on end—sometimes he’ s picking up little jobs here
and there, translating for a traveler—but mostly , he’ s just
gone. And …” She hesitated, d arting a look at him as though
wondering whether to go on.
“And?” he said obligingly . The tea was working; the pain in
his throat was almost gone.
She look ed down at the table, drawing invisible patterns on
the oak with a forefinger .
“She didn’ t say so … but I think he hits her .”
Roger felt a sud den weight on his heart. His first reaction
was to dismiss the notion out o f hand—but he had seen too
much, living with the Reverend. T oo many families, outwardly
content and respectable, where the wives poked fun at their
own “clumsines s,” brushing away concern at black eyes,
broken noses, dislocated wrists. T oo many men who dealt with
the pressures of providing for a family by resorting to the
bottle.
“Damn,” he said, feeling suddenly exhausted. He rubbed at
his forehead, where a headache was starting.
“Why d o you think so?” he asked bluntly . “Has she got
marks?”Bree nodded unhappily , still not looking up, though her
finger had stilled.
“On her arm.” S he wrapped a hand around her forearm, in
illustration. “Little round bruises, like fingermarks. I saw when
she reac hed up to get a bucket of honeycomb from the wagon
and her sleeve fell back.”
He nodded, wishing there was something stronger than tea
in his mug.
“Shall I talk to him, then, d’ye think?”
She did look up  at him then, her eyes softening, though the
look of worry remained.
“Y ou know , most men wouldn’ t of fer to do that.”
“W ell, it ’ s no my idea of fun,” he admitted. “But ye canna
let th at s ort of thing go on, hopi ng it will cure itself. Someone
has to say something. ”
God knew what, though—or how . He was already regretting
the of fer , trying to think what the hell he could  say . “So,
Fer gus, old man. Hear you’r e beating your wife. Be a good
fellow and stop that, okay?”
He drain ed the rest of his mug,  and got up to look for the
whisky .
“W e’re out,” Brianna said, seeing his intent. “Mr . W emyss
had a cold.”
He p ut down the empty bottle with a sigh. She touched his
arm delicately .
“W e’re invited up to the Big House for supper . W e could go
early .” That was a cheering sugg estion. Jamie invariably had a
bottle of excellent single-malt , secreted somewhere on the
premises.
“A ye, all right.” He took her cloak from the peg and swung
it round  her shoulders. “Hey . D ’ye think I should mention the
business about Fer gus to your D a? Or best handle it myself?”He h ad a sudden , unworthy hope that Jamie would consider it
his business and take care of the matter .
That seemed to be what Brian na was afraid of; she was
shaking her head, simultaneously fluf fing out her half-dried
hair .
“No! I think Da would break his  neck. And Fer gus won’ t be
any good to Marsali if he’ s dead.”
“Mmphm.” He accepted the inevitable, and opened the door
for her . The big white house gl owed on the hill above them,
tranquil in the afternoon light, the big red spruce behind it a
looming but benign presence; not for the first time, he felt that
the tree was som ehow guarding the house—and in his present
fragile mental state, found that notion a comfort.
They ma de a short detour , so that he could properly admire
the new  pit and be told all about the internal workings of a
groundhog kiln. He failed to follow these in any detail, only
grasping the notion that the point was to make the inside very
hot, but he found the flow of Brianna’ s explanation soothing.
“… bric ks for the chimney ,” she  was saying, pointing at the
far end of the eight-foot pit, which at present resembled
nothing so much as the resting  place for an extremely lar ge
cof fin. She’d made a nice, neat job of it so far , though; the
corners were squared as thoug h done with a instrument of
some so rt, and the walls painstakingly smoothed. He said as
much, and she beamed at him,  thumbing a lock of red hair
behind her ear .
“It n eeds to be a lot deeper ,” she  said, “maybe another three
feet. But the dirt here is really g ood for digging; it’ s soft, but it
doesn’ t crumble  too much. I hope I can finish the hole before
it st arts to snow , but I don’ t know .” She rubbed a knuckle
under her nose, squinting dubio usly at the hole. “I really need
to card and spin  enough more wool to weave the fabric for
winter shirts for you and Jem, but I’ll have to pick and
preserve for the next week or so, and—”
“I’ll dig it for you.”She stood on tip toe and kissed him, just under the ear , and
he laughed, suddenly feeling better .
“Not for  this winter ,” she said, taking him contentedly by
the arm,  “but eventually—I’m wondering if I can vent some of
the heat from the kiln, and run it under the floor of the cabin.
Y ou know what a Roman hypocaust is?”
“I d o.” He turned to eye the fo undation of his domicile, a
simple hollow base of fieldstone on which the log walls were
built. Th e notion of central heat ing in a crude mountain cabin
made h im wan t to laugh, b ut there was really nothing
impossible abou t it, he supposed. “Y ou’d what? Run pipes of
warm air through the foundation stones?”
“Y es. Always assuming I can actually make good pipes,
which remains to be seen. What do you think?”
He glanc ed from the proposed project up the hill to the Big
House. Even at this distance, a mound of dirt by the
foundation was visible, evidence of the white sow’ s burrowing
capabilities.
“I th ink ye run  a great danger of having that big white
buggeress transfer her af fections to us, if ye make a cozy warm
den under our house.”
“Buggeress?” she said, diverted. “Is that physically
possible?”
“It’ s a metaphysical description,” he informed her . “And ye
saw what she tried to do to Major MacDonald.”
“That pig really doesn’ t like Major MacDonald,” Bree said
reflectively . “I wonder why not?”
“Ask your mother; she’ s none so fond of him, either .”
“Oh, well, that—” She stopped suddenly , lips pursed, and
looked thoughtf ully at the Big House. A shadow passed the
window of the sur gery , someone moving inside. “T ell you
what. Y ou find Da and have a drink with him, and while
you’re doing that, I’ll tell Mam a about Marsali and Fer gus.
She might have a good idea.”“I don’ t know th at it’ s a medica l problem, exactly ,” he said.
“But anesthetizing Germain would certainly be a start.”2 7
THE MAL TING-FLOOR
I  CO ULD SMELL THE SWEET , musty scent of damp grain
on the wind as I  made my way up the trail. It was nothing like
the head y punge ncy of the barm  mash, the faintly cof feelike
toasted smell of malting, nor yet the reek of distilling—but
still spoke as strongly of wh isky . It was a very fragrant
business, making uisgebaugh,  and the reason why the whisky
clearing was located nearly a m ile from the Big House. As it
was, I often caught a wild faint scent of spirit through my open
sur gery window s when the wind was right and the mash was
making.
The whisky-making had its own cycle, and one that
everyone on the Ridge was subconsciously attuned to, whether
directly involved  in it or not. W hich was how I knew without
asking that the barley in the m alting shed had just begun its
germination, and therefore, Marsali would be there, turning
and spreading the grain evenly before the malting fire was lit.
The gra in must be allowed to germinate, to assure a
maximal sweetness—but must not sprout, or the mash would
have a bitter tas te and be ruined. No more than twenty-four
hours must pass after germination began, and I had smelled the
fecund damp scent of the grain begin to rise as I foraged in the
woods the afternoon before. The time was here.
It was by far the best place to have a private conversation
with Marsali; the whisky clearing was the only place she was
ever without a cacophonous assortment of children. I often
thought that she valued the sol itude of the work much more
than the share o f whisky Jamie gave her for minding the grain
—valuable though that  was.
Brianna told me that Roger had  gallantly of fered to have a
word with Fer gus, but I though t that I should talk to Marsalifirst, just to find out what was really going on.
What ought I t o say? I wonde red. A straightforward “Is
Fer gus beating you?”  I couldn’ t quite believe that, despite—or
perhaps because of—an intimate knowledge of emer gency
rooms filled with the debris of domestic disputes.
It wasn’ t that I thought Fer gus incapable of violence; he’d
seen—and experienced—any amount of it from an early age,
and gro wing up among Highlanders in the middle of the
Rising a nd its aftermath probab ly did not inculcate a young
man with any deep regard for the virtues of peace. On the
other hand, Jenny Murray had had a hand in his upbringing.
I t ried and faile d to imagine an y man who had lived with
Jamie’ s sister for more than a w eek ever  li fting his hand  to a
woman. Besides, I knew by my  own observations that Fer gus
was a very gen tle father , and there was usually an easiness
between him and Marsali that seemed—
There was a sudden commotion overhead. Before I could so
much as glance up, something h uge crashed down through the
branches in a sh ower of dust and dead pine needles. I leapt
backward and swung my basket up in instinctive defense—but
even as I did so, I realized that I was not in fact being attacked.
Germain lay flat on the path in front of me, eyes bulging as he
struggled for the breath that had been knocked out of him.
“What on earth —?” I began, rather crossly . Then I saw that
he was clutching  something to h is chest; a late nest, filled with
a cl utch of four greenish eggs , which he had miraculously
contrived not to break in his fall.
“For … Maman, ” he gasped, grinning up at me.
“ V ery  nic e,” I said. I had had enou gh to do with young
males—well, any age, really; they all did it—to realize the
complete futility of reproach in such situations, and since he
had brok en neith er the eggs nor his legs, I merely took the nest
and held  it while he gulped for air and my heart resumed
beating at its normal speed.Recovered, he scrambled to his feet, disregarding the dirt,
pitch, and broken pine needles t hat covered him from head to
toe.
“ Maman ‘s in the shed,”  he said, reaching for his treasure.
“Y ou come too, Grandmer e ?”
“Y es. Where are your sisters?” I asked suspiciously . “Are
you meant to be watching them?”
“Non,”  he said  airily .  “They are at home; that’ s where
women belong.”
“Oh, really? And who told you that?”
“I for get.” Thoroughly recovered, he hopped ahead of me,
singing a song, the refrain of which seemed to be “Na tuit, na
tuit, na tuit, Germain!”
Marsali was indeed at the whisky clearing; her cap, cloak,
and gown hung from a branch of the yellow-leaved
persimmon, and a clay firepot full of coals sat nearby , smoking
in readiness.
The malting floor had been enclosed now by proper walls,
making a shed in which the damp grain could be heaped, first
to germ inate and then to be gently toasted by a low-burning
fire unde r the floor . The ash and charcoal had been scraped out
and oak wood for a new fire laid in the space beneath the
stilted floor , but it wasn’ t yet lit. Even without a fire, the shed
was warm; I fe lt it from several feet away . As the grain
germinated, it gave of f such he at that the shed fairly glowed
with it.
A rhythmic shush and scrape came from within; Marsali
was turning the grain with a w ooden shovel, making sure it
was eve nly spread before lighting the malting fire. The door of
the shed  was open, but there we re of course no windows; from
a distance, I could see only a dim shadow moving within.
The shushing of the grain had masked our footsteps; Marsali
looked up, startled, when my body blocked the light from the
doorway .“Mother Claire!”
“Hallo,” I said cheerfully . “Germain said you were here. I
thought I’d just—”
“ Maman!  Look, look, see what I have!” Germain pushed
past me with single-minded eagerness, thrusting out his prize.
Marsali smiled at him, and pushed a damp strand of fair hair
back behind her ear .
“Oh, ay e? W ell, that’ s grand, n o? Let’ s take it out to the
light, shall we, so I can have a proper look.”
She stepped out of the shed, sighing in pleasure at the touch
of th e cool air . She was stripped to her shift, the muslin so wet
with sweat that I could see not only the dark rounds of her
areolae, but even the tiny bul ge of her popped-out navel,
where the cloth clung to the massive curves of her belly .
Marsali sat down with another huge sigh of relief, stretching
her legs out, b are toes pointed. Her feet were somewhat
swollen, and blue veins show ed, distended, beneath the
transparent skin of her legs.
“Ah, it’ s good to sit! So then,  a chuisle,  sho w me what
ye’ve got.”
I took the opportunity to circle round behind her , as
Germain display ed his prize, and covertly check for bruises or
other sinister signs.
She was  thin—but Marsali simply was  t hin , bar the bulge of
her preg nancy , a nd always had been. Her arms were slender ,
but hard  with muscle, as were her legs. There were smudges of
tiredness beneath her eyes—but she had three small children,
after all, besides the discomforts of pregnancy to keep her
awake. Her face was rosy and damp, thoroughly healthy-
looking.
There were a couple of small bruises on her lower legs, but I
dismissed those; pregnant women did bruise easily , and with
all the obstruct ions presented by living in a log cabin and
traversing wild mountains, there were few people on the Ridge
—male or  female—not sporting the odd contusion.Or w as I only seeking excuses, not wanting to admit the
possibility of what Brianna had suggested?
“One for me,” Germain was explaining, touching the eggs,
“and one for Joa n, and one for Felicite, and one for Monsieur
L ’Oeuf. ” He pointed at the melonlike swell of her stomach.
“Ah, now , what a sweet lad,” Marsali said, pulling him
close and kissing his smudged forehead. “Y e’re my wee
nestling, to be sure.”
Germain’ s beam  of pleasure faded into a look of speculation
as he came in c ontact with his mother ’ s protruding belly . He
patted it cautiously .
“When the egg hatches inside, what do you do with the
shell?” he inquired. “Can I have it?”
Marsali went pink with suppressed laughter .
“People dinna come in shells,” she said. “Thank God.”
“Y ou are  sure, Maman ?” He eyed her belly dubiously , then
poked it gently . “It feels  like an egg.”
“W ell, s o it does, but it’ s not. That’ s only what Papa and I
call a wee one before it’ s born. Y ou  were ‘Monsieur L ’Oeuf ’
once, aye?”
“I was?” Germain looked thunderstruck at this revelation.
“Y e were. So were your sisters.”
Germain frowned, shaggy blond  fringe almost touching his
nose.
“No, they weren’ t. They are Mademoiselles L ’Oeufs. ”
“Oui, certainement,”  Marsali said, laughing at him. “And
perhaps this one is, too—but Monsieur  is easier to say . Here,
look.” She leaned back a little a nd pushed a hand firmly into
the side of her mound. Then she seized Germain’ s hand and
put it on the spot. Even from w here I stood, I could see the
sur ge of flesh a s the baby kicked vigorously in response to
being poked.Germain jerked  his hand away , startled, then put it back,
looking fascinated, and pushed.
“Hello!” he said loudly , putting his face close to his
mother ’ s belly . “ Comment ca va  in there, Monsieur L ’Oeuf ?”
“He’ s fine,” his mother assured him. “Or she. But babies
dinna talk right at first. Y e ken that much. Felicite doesna say
anything but ‘Mama’ yet.”
“Oh, aye.” Losing interest in his impending sibling, he
stooped to pick up an interesting-looking stone.
Marsali lifted her head, squinting at the sun.
“Y e should go home, Germain. Mirabel will be wanting
milked, and I’ve a bit to do here  yet. Go and help Papa, aye?”
Mirabel was a goat, and a suf ficiently new addition to the
household as still to be interesti ng, for Germain brightened at
the suggestion.
“Oui, Maman. Au’voir , Grandmer e!”  He took aim and
flipped his rock at the shed, missing it, then turned and
scampered toward the path.
“Germain!” Marsali called after him. “Na tuit!”
“What d oes that mean?” I asked  curiously . “It’ s Gaelic, is it
—or French?”
“It’ s the  Gaelic, ” she said, smili ng. “It means ‘Don’ t fall!’”
She shook her h ead in mock dismay . “That laddie canna stay
out o f tr ees to save his life.” Germain had left the nest with its
eggs; she set it gently on the gr ound, and I saw then the faint
yellowed ovals on the underside of her forearm—faded, but
just as Brianna had described them.
“And how is  Fer gus? ” I asked, as though it had anything to
do with the conversation.
“He’ s well enough,” she replied , a look of wariness closing
over her features.
“Really?” I glanced deliberately at her arm, then into her
eyes. She flushed, and turned her arm quickly , hiding themarks.
“A ye, he’ s fine!” she said. “H e’ s no verra good at the
milking just yet, but he’ll have the way of it soon enough. It’ s
awkward wi’ the one hand, to be sure, but he’ s—”
I sat  dow n on the log beside her , and took hold of her wrist,
turning it over .
“Brianna told me,” I said. “Did Fer gus do this?”
“Oh.” She seemed embarrassed, and pulled her wrist away ,
pressing the forearm against her belly to hide the marks.
“W ell, aye. A ye, he did.”
“Do you want me to speak to Jamie about it?”
A rich tide of color sur ged into  her face, and she sat up in
alarm.
“Christ, no! Da would break F er gus’ s neck! And it wasna
his fault, really .”
“Certainly it was his fault,” I sa id firmly . I had seen all too
many be aten wo men in Boston e mer gency rooms, all of whom
claimed that it wasn’ t really their husband’ s or boyfriend’ s
fault. Granted, the women often did  have something  to do with
it, but still—
“But it wasn’ t!” Marsali insiste d. The color had not gone
from her face; i f anything, it intensified. “I—he—I mean, he
grabbed my arm, aye, but ‘twas only because I … er … well, I
was tryin’ to br ain him wi’ a stick of wood at the time.” She
glanced away , blushing fiercely .
“Oh.” I rubbed my nose, a littl e taken aback. “I see. And
why were you trying to do that? W as he … attacking you?”
She sighed, shoulders slumping a little.
“Oh. No. W eel, it was because Joanie spilled the milk, and
he s houted at he r , and she cried,  and …” She shrugged a little,
looking uncomf ortable. “I just had a wee de’il sittin’ on my
shoulder , I suppose.”
“It’ s not like Fer gus to shout at the children, is it?”“Oh, no,  it’ s not!” she said quickly . “He hardly ever … well,
he d idna used to , but with so many … well, I couldna blame
him, this  time. It took him a terrible time to milk the goat, and
then to have it all spilt and wasted—I would ha’ shouted, too, I
expect.”
Her eyes  were fixed on the ground, avoiding mine, and she
was fing ering the seam of her shift, running a thumb over and
over the stitching.
“Small children can certainly be trying,” I agreed, with
vivid memories  of an incide nt involving a two-year -old
Brianna, a phone call that had distracted me, a lar ge bowl of
spaghetti with meatballs, and Frank’ s open briefcase. Frank
normally exhibited a saintly degree of patience with Bree—if
somewhat less with me—but on that particular occasion his
bellows of outrage had rattled the windows.
And now that I recalled the occasion, I actually had  thrown
a me atball at hi m in a fury ver ging on hysteria. So had Bree,
though s he had done it out of g lee, rather than vindictiveness.
Had I been standing by the sto ve at the time, it might easily
have bee n the pot I threw . I rubb ed a finger under my nose, not
sure whe ther to regret the memory or to laugh at it. I never did
get the stains out of the rug.
It w as a shame  that I couldn’ t share the memory with
Marsali, as she was in ignoran ce not only of spaghetti and
briefcases, but also of Frank. She was still looking down,
scuf fing at the dead oak leaves with a pointed toe.
“‘T was all my fault, really ,” she said, and bit her lip.
“No, it wasn’ t.”  I squeezed her arm in reassurance. “Things
like that are no one’ s fault; accidents happen, people get upset
… but it all comes right in the end.” So it did, I thought—
though often not in any expected way .
She nod ded, but  the shadow stil l lay on her face, her lower
lip tucked in.
“A ye, it’ s only …” she began, then trailed of f.I sat patiently , careful not to push her . She wanted—needed
—to talk . And I needed to hear it, before deciding what—or if
—to tell  Jamie. There was something going on between her
and Fer gus, that was sure.
“I …  wa s just thinking of it no w , whilst I was shoveling. I
wouldna have done it, I don’ t think, only it minded me so
much …  it was o nly I felt as though it was the same again… .”
“The sam e as what?” I asked, w hen it became clear that she
had trailed of f.
“I sp ilt the milk,” she said, all in a rush. “When I was a
wean. I was hungry , and I reached to pull the jug, and it
spilled.”
“Oh?”
“A ye. And he shouted.” Her sh oulders hunched a little, as
though in memory of a blow .
“Who shouted?”
“I dinna ken, for sure. It might ha’ been my father , Hugh—
but it might have been Simon—Mam’ s second husband. I
dinna re ally rem ember—only be in’ so scairt that I wet myself,
and that  made him angrier .” Color flamed in her face, and her
toes curled with shame.
“My mo ther cried, for it was all the food there was, a bit o’
bread an d milk, and now the milk was gone—but he  shouted
that he couldna bear the nois e, for Joan and I were both
howling, too … and then he slapped my face, and Mam went
for him bald-heided, and he pushed her so she fell against the
hearth a nd smacked her face on  the chimney—I could see the
blood running from her nose.”
She snif fed and brushed a knu ckle under her own nose,
blinking, her eyes still fixed on the leaves.
“He stamped out, then, slammin ’ the door , and Joanie and I
rushed up to Ma m, both shriekin’ our heids of f, for we thought
she was  deid … but she got up onto her hands and knees and
told us it was all right, it would be all right—and her swayin’to and fro, with her cap fallen of f and strings of bloody snot
dripping from her face onto the  floor … I’d for got that. But
when Fe r gus started shouting at poor wee Joanie … ‘twas like
he was Simon. Or maybe Hugh. Him,  whoever he was.” She
closed h er eyes and heaved a deep sigh, leaning forward so her
arms cradled the burden of her pregnancy .
I rea ched out and smoothed the  damp strings of hair out of
her face, brushing them back from her rounded brow .
“Y ou miss your mother , don’ t you?” I said softly . For the
first time, I felt some sympathy for her mother , Laoghaire, as
well as for Marsali.
“Oh, aye,” Marsali said simply . “Something terrible.” She
sighed again, closing her eyes a s she leaned her cheek against
my h and. I drew her head against me, holding her , and stroked
her hair in silence.
It was late aftern oon, and the sh adows lay long, cold in the
oak wood. The heat had left her now , and she shivered briefly
in the cooling a ir , a stipple of gooseflesh coming up on her
fine-boned arms.
“Here,” I said, standing up and  swinging the cloak of f my
shoulders. “Put this on. Y ou don’ t want to take a chill.”
“Ah, no, it’ s all right.” She straightened up, shaking back
her h air , and wip ed her face wit h the back of a hand. “There’ s
no but a bit more to do here, and then I’ve got to be going
home and making up the supper—”
“I’ll do it,” I said firmly , and t ucked the cloak around her
shoulders. “Y ou rest a bit.”
The air inside the tiny shed wa s ripe enough to make one
light-headed, all by itself, thick with the fecund musk of
sprouting grain and the fine sharp dust of barley hulls. The
warmth was welcoming after th e chill of the air outside, but
within moments, my skin was damp beneath dress and shift,
and I pulled the gown of f over my head and hung it on a nail
by the door .No matt er; she was right, there wasn’ t much to be done. The
work wo uld kee p me warm, and  then I would walk home with
Marsali straightaway . I would make supper for the family ,
letting her rest—and while I wa s about it, I’d perhaps have a
word with Fer gus and discover m ore about what was going on.
Fer gus could have been making the supper , I thought,
frowning as I dug into the dim heaps of sticky grain. Not that
he w ould think of such a thin g, the little French layabout.
Milking the goat was as far a s he was likely to go in the
direction of “women’ s work.”
Then I thought o f Joan and Felic ite, and felt more charitable
toward F er gus. Joan was three, Felicite one and a half—and
anyone alone in a house with  those two had my complete
sympathy , no matter what  kind of work they were doing.
Joan was outwardly a sweet bro wn wren of a child, and by
herself was even-tempered and biddable—to a point. Felicite
was the spitting image of her father , dark, fine-boned, and
given to alternate bouts of languishing charm and intemperate
passion. T ogether … Jamie referred to them casually as the
hell-kits, and if they were at home, it was no wonder that
Germain was out wandering in the woods—nor that Marsali
found it a relief to be out here by herself, doing heavy labor .
“Heavy” was the operative term, I thought, thrusting the
shovel in  again and heaving. Sprouting grain was damp grain,
and each shovelful weighed pounds. The turned grain was
patchy , splotched dark with moisture from the underlying
layers. The unturned grain wa s paler in color , even in the
failing light. Only a few mounds of pale grain remained, in the
far corner .
I att acked them with a will, realizing as I did so that I was
trying very hard not to think of the story Marsali had told me. I
didn’ t w ant to like Laoghaire—and I didn’ t. But I didn’ t want
to fe el sympathy for her , either , and that was proving harder to
avoid.
It ha dn’ t been an  easy life for her , apparently . W ell, nor had
it been for anyone else living in  the Highlands then, I thought,grunting as I flung a shovelful of grain to the side. Being a
mother was not that easy anyw here—but it seemed she had
made a good job of it.
I s neezed from the grain dust, paused to wipe my nose on
my sleeve, then went back to shoveling.
It wasn’ t as though she had tried to steal Jamie from me,
after all, I told  myself, striving for compassion and high-
minded objectivity . Rather the reverse, in fact—or at least she
might well see it that way .
The edge of the  shovel gritted hard against the floor as I
scraped up the last of the grain. I sent the grain flying to the
side, the n used the flat of the bl ade to shove some of the new-
turned grain into the empty corner and smooth down the
highest hillocks.
I knew all the reasons why he said he’d married her—and I
believed him. However , the fact remained that the mention of
her name conjured up assorted  visions—starting with Jamie
kissing h er ardently in an alcov e at Castle Leoch, and ending
with him fumbling up her nightgown in the darkness of their
marriage bed, hands warm and e ager on her thighs—that made
me s nort like a grampus and feel the blood throb hotly in my
temples.
Perhaps, I reflected, I was not  really a very high-minded
sort of person. Occasionally quite low-minded and grudge-
bearing, in fact.
This bo ut of self-criticism was cut short by the sound of
voices a nd movement outside. I stepped to the door of the
shed, squinting against the dazzle of the late afternoon sun.
I c ouldn ’ t see their faces, nor even tell for sure how many
there might be. Some were on h orseback, some on foot, black
silhouettes with the sinking sun behind them. I caught a
movement in the corner of my eye; Marsali was on her feet,
backing toward the shed.
“Who are ye, sirs?” she said, chin high.“Thirsty travelers, mistress,” said one of the black forms,
edging h is horse ahead of the others. “In search of hospitality .”
The words were courteous enough; the voice wasn’ t. I
stepped out of the shed, still gripping the shovel.
“W elcome,” I said, making no ef fort to sound welcoming.
“Stay where you are, gentlemen; we’ll be pleased to bring you
a drink. Marsali, will you fetch the keg?”
There was a sm all keg of raw whisky kept nearby for just
such occasions. My heartbeat was loud in my ears, and I was
clutching the wooden handle o f the shovel so tightly that I
could feel the grain of the wood.
It was more than unusual to see so many strangers in the
mountains at one time. Now and  then, we would see a hunting
party of Cherokee—but these men were not Indians.
“No bother , mistress,” said another of the men, swinging
down of f his horse. “I’ll help her fetch it. I do think we shall
be needing more than one keg, though.”
The voice was English, and oddly familiar . Not a cultivated
accent, but with a careful diction.
“W e have only one keg read y ,” I said, slowly moving
sideways and keeping my eyes  on the man who had spoken.
He was short an d very slender , and moved with a stif f, jerky
gait, like a marionette.
He w as moving toward me; so w ere the others. Marsali had
reached the woodpile, and was fumbling behind the chunks of
oak and hickory . I could hear h er breath, harsh in her throat.
The keg was hidden in the woodpile. There was an ax lying
next to the wood, too, I knew .
“Marsali,” I said. “Stay there. I’ll come and help you.”
An a x was a better weapon than a shovel—but two women
against … how many men? T en … a dozen … more? I
blinked, eyes watering against the sun, and saw several more
walk ou t of the w ood. I could se e these clearly; one grinned atme and I had to steel myself not to look away . His grin
broadened.
The short man w as coming closer , too. I glanced at him, and
a bri ef i tch of recognition tickle d me. Who the hell was he? I
knew hi m; I’d seen him before—and yet I hadn’ t any name to
attach to the lantern jaws and narrow brow .
He s tank of long -dried sweat, dirt ground into the skin, and
the tang of dribbled urine; they all did, and the odor of them
floated on the wind, feral as the stink of weasels.
He saw me reco gnize him; thin lips pulled in for a moment,
then relaxed.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said, and the feeling of apprehension
deepened sharply as I saw the look in his small, clever eyes.
“I th ink you hav e the advantage of me, sir ,” I said, putting
as bold a face on it as I might. “Have we met?”
He d idn’ t answer that. One sid e of his mouth turned up a
little, but his atte ntion was distracted by the two men who had
lunged f orward to take the keg  as Marsali rolled it out of its
hiding place. One had already seized the ax I had my eye on,
and was about t o stave in the top of the cask, when the thin
man shouted at him.
“Leave it!”
The ma n look ed up at him , mouth open in heavy
incomprehension.
“I said leave it!”  the thin man snapped, as the other glanced
from the cask to the ax and back in confusion. “W e’ll take it
with us; I’ll not have you all befuddled with drink now!”
T urning to me, as though continuing a conversation, he said,
“Where’ s the rest of it?”
“That’ s all there is,” Marsali s aid, before I could answer .
She was frowning at him, wary  of him, but also angry . “T ake
it, then, and ye must.”The thin man’ s a ttention shifted  to her for the first time, but
he gave her no more than a cas ual glance before turning back
to me.
“Don’ t trouble lying to me, Mrs.  Fraser . I know well enough
there’ s more, and I’ll have it.”
“There is not. G ive me that, ye great oaf!” Marsali snatched
the a x n eatly fro m the man hold ing it, and scowled at the thin
man. “T his is how ye repay proper welcome, is it—by
thieving? W ell, take what ye came for and leave, then!”
I had no choice but to follow her lead, though alarm bells
were ringing in my brain every time I looked at the thin little
man.
“She’ s right,” I said. “See for y ourselves.” I pointed at the
shed, th e mash tubs and the  pot still that stood nearby ,
unsealed and patently empty . “W e’re only beginning the
malting. It will be weeks yet before there’ s a new batch of
whisky .”
W ithout the slightest change of expression, he took a quick
step forward and slapped me hard across the face.
The blow wasn’ t hard enough to knock me down, but it
snapped my head back and left my eyes watering. I was more
shocked than hurt, though there  was a sharp taste of blood in
my mouth, and I could already feel my lip beginning to puf f.
Marsali uttered a sharp cry of  shock and outrage, and I
heard so me of the men murmur in interested surprise. They
had drawn in, surrounding us.
I put  the  back of my hand to my bleeding mouth, noticing in
a detached sort of way that it was trembling. My brain, though,
had withdrawn to a safe dis tance and was making and
discarding suppositions so quickly that they fluttered past, fast
as shuf fling cards.
Who were these men? How dangerous were they? What
were they prepared to do? The sun was setting—how long
before Marsali or I was missed a nd someone came looking forus? W ou ld it be Fer gus, or Jamie? Even Jamie, if he came
alone …
I had no doubt that these men were the same who had
burned T ige O’Brian’ s house, and were likely responsible for
the a ttacks inside the T reaty Line, as well. V icious, then—but
with theft as their major purpose.
There w as a copper taste in my mouth; the metal tang of
blood an d fear . No more than a second had passed in these
calculations, but  as I lowered my hand, I had concluded that it
would be best t o give them wh at they wanted, and hope that
they left with the whisky at once.
I had  no  chance  to say so, though. The thin man seized my
wrist and twisted viciously . I f elt the bones shift and crack
with a tearing pain, and sank to my knees in the leaves, unable
to make more than a small, breathless sound.
Marsali made a louder sound and moved like a striking
snake. She swung the ax from the shoulder with all the power
of h er b ulk behi nd it, and the blade sank deep in the shoulder
of the man beside her . She wren ched it free and blood sprayed
warm across my face, pattering like rain upon the leaves.
She scre amed, h igh and thin, a nd the man screamed, too,
and then the w hole clearing was in motion, men sur ging
inward with a ro ar like collapsing surf. I lunged forward and
seized the thin m an’ s knees, butted my head hard upward into
his c rotch. He m ade a choking wheeze and fell on top of me,
flattening me to the ground.
I s quirmed out f rom under his knotted body , knowing only
that I had to get to Marsali, get between her and the men—but
they wer e upon her . A scream cut in half by the sound of fists
on f lesh, and a dull boom as bo dies fell hard against the wall
of the malting shed.
The clay firepot was in reach. I seized it, heedless of its
searing heat, and flung it straight into the group of men. It
struck o ne hard in the back and shattered, hot coals spraying.
Men yelled and jumped back,  and I saw Marsali slumpedagainst the shed, neck canted o ver on one shoulder and her
eyes rolled back white in her head, legs splayed wide and the
shift tor n down from her neck, leaving her heavy breasts bare
on the bulge of her belly .
Then so meone s truck me in the  side of the head and I flew
sideways, skidding through the leaves and ending boneless,
flat on the ground, unable to rise or move or think or speak.
A great calm c ame over me and my vision narrowed—it
seemed very slowly—the closing of some great iris, spiraling
shut. Before me, I saw the nest on the ground, inches from my
nose, its interwoven sticks slender , clever , the four greenish
eggs rou nd and fragile, perfect in its cup. Then a heel smashed
down on the eggs and the iris closed.
THE SMELL OF BURNING r oused me. I could have been
unconscious for no more than moments; the clump of dry
grass near my fa ce was barely b eginning to smoke. A hot coal
glowed in a nest of char , shot with sparks. Threads of
incandescence shot up the withered grass blades and the clump
burst into flame, just as hands s eized me by arm and shoulder ,
dragging me up.
Still daz ed, I flailed at my capt or as he lifted me, but was
hustled uncerem oniously to one of the horses, heaved up, and
flung across the saddle with a fo rce that knocked the wind out
of me. I had barely the presence  of mind to grab at the stirrup
leather , as someone smacked the horse’ s rump and we set of f
at a bruising trot.
Between dizzin ess and jostling, everything I saw was
fractured, crazed like broken glass—but I caught one last
glimpse of Marsali, now lying  limp as a rag doll among a
dozen tin y fires, as the scattered coals began to catch and burn.
I ma de s ome str angled noise, trying to call to her , but it was
lost in the clat ter of harness and men’ s voices, speaking
ur gently , near at hand.“Y ou crazed, Hodge? Y ou don’ t want that woman. Put her
back!”
“I shan’ t.” The small man’ s voice sounded cross, but
controlled, som ewhere near at hand. “She’ll show us to the
whisky .”
“Whisky’ll do us no good if we’re dead, Hodge! That’ s
Jamie Fraser ’ s wife,  for Christ’ s sake!”
“I know who she is. Get on with you!”
“But he—you don’ t know the m an, Hodge! I see him one
time—”
“Spare me your memories. Get on,  I said!”
This last was punctuated by a sudden vicious thunk,  and a
startled sound of pain. A pistol butt, I thought. Square across
the face, I added mentally , swallowing as I heard the wet,
wheezing gasps of a man with a broken nose.
A hand seized me by the hair and jerked my head round
painfully . The thin man’ s fac e stared down at me, eyes
narrowed in calculation. He seemed only to want to assure
himself that I was indeed alive, for he said nothing, and
dropped my head again, indif ferent as though it were a
pinecone he had picked up along the way .
Someone was leading the horse I was on; there were several
men on foot, as well. I heard them, calling to one another , half-
running to keep up as the hors es lurched up a rise, crashing
and grunting like pigs through the under growth.
I couldn’ t breathe, save in shallow gasps, and was being
jolted unmercifu lly with each step—but I had no attention to
spare for physical discomfort. W as Marsali dead? She had
looked i t, surely , but I’d seen no blood, and I clung to that
small fact for the slim—and temporary—comfort that it was.
Even if she was n’ t dead yet, she soon might be. Whether
from injury , shock, a sudden miscarriage—oh, God, oh, God,
poor little Monsieur L ’Oeuf —My han ds cle nched helpless on the stirrup leathers,
desperate. Who might find her—and when?
It had lacked lit tle more than an  hour to suppertime when I
had arriv ed at the malting shed. How late was it now? I caught
glimpses of the ground juddering past below , but my hair had
come lo ose and streamed across my face whenever I tried to
raise my  head. There was a growing chill to the air , though,
and a still look to the light that  told me the sun was near the
horizon. W ithin a few minutes, the light would start to fade.
And then what? How long before a search began? Fer gus
would notice Marsali’ s absence when she didn’ t appear to
cook supper—but would he go to look for her , with the little
girls in his care? No, he’d send Germain. That caused my heart
to lurch and catch in my throat. For a five-year -old boy to find
his mother …
I co uld still sm ell burning. I snif fed, once, twice, again,
hoping that I wa s imagining it. But above the dust and sweat
of horse , the tang of stirrup leather , and the whif f of crushed
plants, I could distinctly smell the reek of smoke. The clearing,
the shed—or both—were well and truly alight now . Someone
would see the smoke, and come. But in time?
I s hut my eyes tight, trying to stop thinking, seeking any
distraction to keep from seeing in my mind’ s eye the scene that
must be taking place behind me.
There were still voices near . T he man they called Hodge
again. It  must be his horse I rode; he was walking near its
head, on the f ar side of the animal. Someone else was
expostulating with him, but to no more ef fect than the first
man.
“Spread them out,” he was sayi ng tersely . “Divide the men
in two groups— you’ll ‘ave one, the rest go with me. Join
again in three days’ time at Brownsville.”
Bloody hell. He expected pursu it, and meant to frustrate it
by splitting his group and con fusing the trail. Frantically , Itried to think of something to drop; surely I had something  to
leave as a means of telling Jamie which way I had been taken.
But I wore nothing save shift, stays, and stockings—my
shoes had been lost when they dragged me to the horse. The
stockings seemed the only possibility; though the garters, with
extreme perversity , were for once snugly tied, and quite out of
my reach at the moment.
All around me I could hear th e noise of men and horses
moving, calling  and shoving a s the main body split. Hodge
chirruped to the horse, and we began to move faster .
My floa ting hair snagged on a twig as we brushed past a
bush, held for a second, then broke free with a painful ping!  as
the twig snapped, ricocheting of f my cheekbone and narrowly
missing my eye. I said something very rude, and someone—
Hodge, for a gu ess—dealt me a censorious smack across the
bottom.
I s aid somethin g much, much ruder , but under my breath
and through clenched teeth. My sole comfort was the thought
that it would be no great trick to follow a band such as this,
leaving as they were a wide trail of broken branches,
hoofprints, and overturned stones.
I’d seen  Jamie track things sma ll and sly , as well as lar ge
and lumbering— and had seen him check the bark of trees and
the twig s of bushes as he went, for scratched bark and
betraying tufts of … hair .
No o ne w as wal king on the side  of the horse where my head
hung do wn. Hastily , I began t o pluck hairs from my head.
Three, four , five—was that enough? I stretched out my hand
and drag ged it through a yaupo n bush; the long, curly hairs
drifted o n the breeze of the horse’ s passing, but stayed safely
tangled in the jagged foliage.
I did  the  same thing four times m ore. Surely he would see at
least one of the signs, and would know which trail to follow—
if he didn’ t was te time following the other first. There was
nothing I could d o about that save pray—and I set in to do thatin g ood earnest, beginning firs t with a plea for Marsali and
Monsieur le Oeuf,  w hose need wa s plainly much greater than
mine.
W e cont inued upward for quite some time; it was full dark
before we reached what seemed  to be the summit of a ridge,
and I was nearly  unconscious, my head throbbing with blood
and my stays pushed so hard int o my body that I felt each strip
of whalebone like a brand against my skin.
I h ad just enoug h ener gy left to push myself backward when
the h orse stopped. I hit the groun d and crumpled at once into a
heap, where I sat light-headed a nd gasping, rubbing my hands,
which had swollen from hanging down for so long.
The men were gathered in a sm all knot, occupied in low-
voiced conversa tion, but too ne ar for me to think of trying to
creep away into the shrubbery . O ne man stood only a few feet
away , keeping a steady eye on me.
I looked back the way we had come, half-fearing, half-
hoping to see the glow of fire far below . The fire would have
drawn attention from someone—someone would know by now
what had happened, be even now spreading the alarm,
or ganizing pursuit. And yet … Marsali.
W as she already dead, and the baby with her?
I s wallo wed hard, straining my eyes at the dark, as much to
prevent tears as in hopes of seeing anything. As it was, though,
the trees grew thick around us, and I could see nothing at all,
save variations on inky blackness.
There w as no light; the moon ha d not yet risen, and the stars
were still faint—but my eyes had had more than enough time
to adapt , and while I was no cat to see in the dark, I could
distinguish enou gh to make a rough count. They were ar guing,
glancing at me now and then. Perhaps a dozen men … How
many had there been, originally? T wenty? Thirty?
I f lexed my fing ers, trembling. My wrist was badly bruised,
but that wasn’ t what was troubling me at present.It was clear to me—and theref ore presumably to them, as
well—that they couldn’ t head directly for the whisky cache,
even we re I able to find it at ni ght. Whether Marsali survived
to ta lk or not— I felt my throat close at the thought—Jamie
would li kely realize that the whisky was the intruders’ goal,
and have it guarded.
Had things not fallen out as they did, the men would ideally
have forced me to lead them to the cache, taken the whisky ,
and fled , hoping to escape before the theft was discovered.
Leaving me and Marsali alive t o raise the alarm and describe
them? I wondered. Perhaps; perhaps not.
In the panic following Marsali’ s attack, though, the original
plan had fallen apart. Now what?
The knot of men was breakin g up, though the ar gument
continued. Footsteps approached.
“I tell you, it wo n’ t do,” one man was saying heatedly . From
the t hickened voice, I assumed it was the gentleman with the
broken nose, undeterred by his  injury . “Kill her now . Leave
her here ; no one’ll find her before the beasts have scattered her
bones.”
“A ye? And if no one finds her , they’ll think she’ s still with
us, won’ t they?”
“But if Fraser catches up to us, and she’ s not, who shall he
blame …”
They stopped, four or five o f them surrounding me. I
scrambled to my feet, my hand  closing by reflex around the
nearest thing approaching a we apon—an unfortunately small
rock.
“How fa r are we from the whisky?” Hodge demanded. He
had taken of f his hat, and his eyes gleamed, ratlike in the
shadow .
“I don’ t know ,” I said, keeping a firm grip on my nerves—
and the rock. My lip was still tender , puf fed from the blow he
had deal t me, and I had to form the words carefully . “I don’ t
know where we ar e. ”This was true, though I could have made a reasonable guess.
W e had traveled for a few hours , mostly upward, and the trees
nearby w ere fir and balsam; I could smell their resin, sharp
and clean. W e w ere on the upper slopes, and probably near a
small pass that crossed the shoulder of the mountain.
“Kill her ,” ur ged one of the ot hers. “She’ s no good to us,
and if Fraser finds her with us—”
“Shut yo ur face !” Hodge rounded on the speaker with such
violence that the man, much lar ger , stepped back involuntarily .
That thr eat disposed of, Hodge ignored him and seized me by
the arm.
“Don’ t play coy with me, wom an. Y ou’ll tell me what I
want to know .” He didn’ t bother with the “or else”—
something cold passed across the top of my breast, and the hot
sting of the cut followed a second later , as blood began to
bloom from it.
“Jesus H . Roose velt Christ!” I s aid, more from surprise than
pain. I jerked my arm out of his grasp. “I told you, I don’ t even
know w here we  ar e,  you  idiot! How do you expect me to tell
you where anything else is?”
He blinked, startled, and broug ht the knife up by reflex,
wary , as though he thought I mig ht attack him. Realizing that I
wasn’ t about to, he scowled at me.
“I’ll tell you what I do  kno w ,” I said,  and was distan tly
pleased to hear that my voice  was sharp and steady . “The
whisky cache is about half a mile from the malting shed,
roughly northwest. It’ s in a cave , well-hidden. I could take you
there—if we began from the spring where you took me—but
that’ s all I can tell you in the way of direction.”
This was  true, too. I could find it easily enough—but to give
directions? “Go thr ough a gap in the brush a little way , until
you see the clus ter of oak wher e Brianna shot a possum, bear
left to a squarish r ock with a bunch of adder ’ s-tongue gr owing
over it… .”  T he fact that the need for my services as a guidewas probably all that kept them from killing me on the spot
was, of course, a secondary consideration.
It wa s a very sha llow cut; I wasn ’ t bleeding badly at all. My
face and  hands were ice-cold, though, and small flashing lights
came an d went at the edges of my vision. Nothing was
keeping me upright save a vagu e conviction that if it came to
that, I preferred to die on my feet.
“I tell you, Hodge, you don’ t want nothing to do with that
one—nothing.” A lar ger man had joined the small group round
me. He leaned over Hodge’ s shoulder , looking at me, and
nodded. They were all black in the shadow , but this man had a
voice tin ged with the lilt of Africa—an ex-slave, or perhaps a
slave-trader . “That woman—I hear about her . She is a conjure
woman. I know them. They are  like serpents, conjure wives.
Y ou don’ t touch that one, hear me? She will curse you!”
I m anaged to gi ve a rather nasty-sounding laugh in answer
to this, and the man closest to me took a half-step back. I was
vaguely surprised; where had that  come from?
But I was breath ing better now , and the flashing lights were
gone.
The tall  man stretched his nec k, seeing the dark line of
blood on my shift.
“Y ou draw her b lood? Damn you, Hodge, you done it now .”
There was a distinct note of alarm in his voice, and he drew
back a little, m aking some sort of sign toward me with one
hand.
W ithout the slightest notion as to what moved me to do it, I
dropped the rock, ran the finger s of my right hand across the
cut, and in one s wift motion, reached out and drew them down
the thin man’ s cheek. I repeated the nasty laugh.
“Curse, is it?” I said. “How’ s this? T ouch me again, and
you’ll die within twenty-four hours.”
The streaks of blood showed da rk on the white of his face.
He was close enough that I co uld smell the sourness of his
breath, and see the fury gather on his face.What on earth do you think you ar e doing, Beauchamp?  I
thought, utterly surprised at myself. Hodge drew back his fist
to strike me, but the lar ge man caught him by the wrist with a
cry of fear .
“Don’ t you do that! Y ou will kill us all!”
“I’ll friggin’ kill you  right now , arsebite!”
Hodge was still holding the knife in his other hand; he
stabbed awkwar dly at the lar ger man, grunting with rage. The
big man  gasped  at the impact, but wasn’ t badly stricken—he
wrenched at the wrist he held and Hodge gave a high,
squealing cry , like a rabbit seized by a fox.
Then the others were all in it, pushing and shouting,
grappling for weapons. I turned and ran, but got no more than
a few steps before one of them grabbed me, flinging his arms
round me and jerking me hard against himself.
“Y ou’re not going anywhere, lady ,” he said, panting in my
ear .
I w asn’ t. He was no taller than I , but a good deal stronger . I
lunged against his grip, but he had both arms wrapped tight
around me, and squeezed tighter . I stood stif f then, heart
pounding with anger and fear , not wanting to give him an
excuse t o maul me. He was excited; I could feel his heart
pounding, too, and smell the reek of fresh sweat over the fetor
of stale clothes and body .
I co uldn’ t see w hat was going on, but I didn’ t think they
were fighting so much as merel y shouting at each other now .
My captor shifted his weight and cleared his throat.
“Ahh …  where do you come from, ma’am?” he asked, quite
politely .
“What?” I said, no end startled. “Come from? Er … ah …
England. Oxfordshire, originally . Then Boston.”
“Oh? I’m from the north myself.”
I r epressed the automatic ur ge to reply , “Pleased to meet
you,” since I wasn’ t, and the conversation languished.The fight had st opped, abruptly  as it had started. W ith a lot
of token  snarling and growling, the rest of them backed down
in the face of Hodge’ s bellowed assertions that he was in
command here, and they’d blee din’ well do as he said or take
the consequences.
“He means it, t oo,” muttered my captor , still pressing me
firmly to his filthy bosom. “Y ou  don’ t want to cross him, lady ,
believe me.”
“Hmph,” I said, though I assu med the advice was well-
meant. I had been hoping the conflict would be noisy and
prolonged, thus increasing the chances of Jamie catching up to
us.
“And where is this Hodge fro m, speaking of origins?” I
asked. He still s eemed remarkab ly familiar to me; I was sure I
had seen him somewher e —but where?
“Hodgepile? Ahhh … England, I reckon,” said the young
man grip ping me. He sounded surprised. “Don’ t he sound like
it?”
Hodge? Hodgepile? That rang a bell, certainly , but …
There was a goo d deal of muttering and milling round, but
in much too little time, we were of f again. This time, thank
God, I was allowed to ride astrid e, though my hands were tied
and bound to the saddle.
W e moved very slowly; there w as a trail of sorts, but even
with the faint l ight shed by a rising moon, the going was
dif ficult. Hodgepile no longer led the horse I rode; the young
man who had recaptured me held the bridle, tugging and
coaxing the increasingly reluctant horse through the thickets of
brush. I could g limpse him now and then, slender , with thick,
wild hai r that hung past his shoulders and rendered him lion-
maned in silhouette.
The threat of im mediate death had receded a little, but my
stomach was still knotted and the muscles of my back stif f
with apprehension. Hodgepile had his way for the moment, but
there had been n o real agreement among the men; one of thosein favor of killi ng me and leav ing my corpse for the skunks
and weasels might easily decide to put a quick end to the
controversy with a lunge out of the dark.
I co uld hear Hodgepile’ s voice, sharp and hectoring,
somewhere up ahead. He seeme d to be passing up and down
the column, bullying, nagging, nipping like a sheepdog, trying
to keep his flock on the move.
They wer e  moving, though it was clear ev en to me that the
horses were tired. The one I ro de was shambling, jerking her
head with irritation. God knew w here the marauders had come
from, or how long they had traveled before reaching the
whisky c learing. The men were slowing, too, a gradual fog of
fatigue settling on them as the a drenaline of flight and conflict
receded. I could feel lassitude stealing upon me, too, and
fought against it, struggling to stay alert.
It w as still early autumn, but I was wearing only my shift
and stay s, and we were high eno ugh that the air chilled rapidly
after da rk. I shivered constantly , and the cut on my chest
burned as the tin y muscles flexed beneath the skin. It wasn’ t at
all s erious, but w hat if it became infected? I could only hope
that I would live long enough for that to be a problem.
Hard as I tried, I could not  keep from thinking of Marsali,
nor keep my mind from making medical speculations,
envisioning everything from concussion with intracranial
swelling to burns with smoke in halation. I could do something
—perhaps even an emer gency C-section—if I were there. No
one else could.
I clenched my hands hard on the edge of the saddle,
straining against the rope that bound them. I needed to be
there!
But I was not, and might never be.
The quarreling and muttering had all but ceased as the
darkness of the forest closed in upon us, but a lingering sense
of unease lay heavy on the group. In part, I thought it was
apprehension and fear of pursuit, but in much greater part, asense of internal discord. The  fight had not been settled,
merely postponed to a more convenient season. A sense of
simmering conflict was sharp in the air .
A co nflict focused squarely on  me.  Unable to see clearly
during the ar gument, I couldn’ t be sure which men held which
opinions, but the division was clear: one party , headed by
Hodgepile, was in favor of ke eping me alive, at least long
enough to lead them to the whisky . A second group was for
cutting t heir los ses, and my th roat. And a minority opinion,
voiced b y the gentleman with the African speech, was for
turning me loose, the sooner the better .
Obviously , it would behoove me to cultivate this gentleman,
and try to turn h is beliefs to my  advantage. How? I’d made a
start by cursing Hodgepile—an d I was still quite startled that
I’d done that. I  didn’ t think it would be advisable to start
cursing them wholesale, though—ruin the ef fect.
I sh ifted in the saddle, which was beginning to chafe me
badly . T his wasn ’ t the first time I’d had men recoil from me in
fear of what they thought I was.  Superstitious fear could be an
ef fective weapon —but it was a very dangerous one to use. If I
truly frightened them, they’d kill me without a moment’ s
hesitation.
W e had crossed  into the pass. There were few trees among
the b oulders here, and as we em er ged onto the far side of the
mountain, the sky opened out before me, vast and glowing,
fiery with a multitude of stars.
I m ust have let out a gasp at the sight, for the young man
leading my horse paused, lifting his own head skyward.
“Oh,” h e said softly . He stare d for a moment, then was
pulled back to earth by the passage of another horse that
brushed past us, its rider turning to peer closely at me as it did
so.
“Did you have stars like this—w here you came from?” my
escort asked.“No,” I said, s till slightly under the spell of the silent
grandeur overhead. “Not so bright.”
“No, they weren’ t,” he said, sha king his head, and pulled at
the rein.  That seemed an odd remark, but I could make nothing
of it. I might have engaged him in further conversation—God
knew I needed all the allies I could get—but there was a shout
from up ahead; evidently , we were making camp.
I wa s untied and  pulled of f the horse. Hodgepile pushed his
way through the scrum and grasped me by the shoulder .
“Y ou try to run , woman, and you’ll wish you ‘adn’ t.” He
squeezed viciously , fingers digging into my flesh. “I need you
alive—I don’ t need you ‘ole.”
Still gripping my shoulder , he lifted his knife and pressed
the flat of the blade against my lips, jammed the tip of it up my
nose, then leaned close enough that I felt the moist warmth of
his very repugnant breath on my face.
“The one thing I won’ t  cut of f is your tongue,” he
whispered. The knife blade drew slowly out of my nose, down
my chin, along the line of my  neck, and circled round the
curve of my breast. “Y ou take my meaning, do you?”
He waited until I managed a nod, then released me and
disappeared into the darkness.
If h e meant to unnerve me, he’d managed nicely . I was
sweating despite the chill, and st ill shaking when a tall shadow
loomed up beside me, took on e of my hands, and pressed
something into it.
“My name is T ebbe,” he murmured. “Y ou remember that—
T ebbe. Rememb er I was good to you. T ell your spirits they
don’ t hurt T ebbe, he was good to you.”
I nodde d once more, astonished, and was left again, this
time with a lu mp of bread i n my hand. I ate it hastily ,
observing that while very stale , it had originally been good
dark rye bread, of the sort the G erman women of Salem made.
Had the men attacked some house near there, or merely bought
the bread?A ho rse’ s saddle had been flun g down on the ground near
me; a canteen hung from the pommel, and I sank down on my
knees to  drink from it. The bread and the water—tasting of
canvas and wood—tasted bette r than anything I’d eaten in a
long wh ile. I’d noticed before th at standing very close to death
improves the appetite remarkably . Still, I did hope for
something more elaborate as a last meal.
Hodgepile returned a few minutes later , with rope. He didn’ t
bother with further threats, evidently feeling that he’d made
his poin t. He merely tied me hand and foot, and pushed me
down on the ground. No one spoke to me, but someone, with a
kindly impulse, threw a blanket over me.
The camp settled quickly . No fire was lit, and so no supper
was cooked; the men presumably refreshed themselves in the
same makeshift way I had, then scattered into the wood to
seek their rest, leaving the horses tethered a little way of f.
I waited until the comings and goings died down, then took
the blanket in my teeth and wriggled carefully away from the
spot where I h ad been placed, making my way inchworm
fashion to another tree, a dozen yards away .
I h ad no thought of escape in d oing this; but if one of the
bandits in favor of disposing of me should think to take
advantage of the darkness in o rder to achieve their aims, I
didn’ t mean to be lying there like a staked goat. W ith luck, if
anyone came skulking round the spot where I’d been, I would
have enough warning to scream for help.
I k new beyond the shadow of a doubt that Jamie would
come. My job was to survive until he did.
Panting, sweatin g, covered with crumbled leaves and with
my stockings in rags, I curled u p under a big hornbeam, and
burrowed back under the blanket. Thus concealed, I had a try
at undoing the knots in the rop e around my wrists with my
teeth. H odgepile had tied them, though, and had done so with
military thoroug hness. Short of gnawing gopherlike through
the ropes themselves, I was going nowhere.Military . It was that thought that recalled suddenly to me
who he  was, and where I had seen him before. Arvin
Hodgepile! He had been the cler k at the Crown’ s warehouse in
Cross Creek. I h ad met him briefly , three years before, when
Jamie and I brought the bod y of a murdered girl to the
ser geant of the garrison there.
Ser geant Murch ison was dead—and I’d thought Hodgepile
was, as well, kil led in the conflagration that had destroyed the
warehouse and its contents. So, a deserter , then. Either he had
had time to escape the warehouse before it went up in flames,
or had simply not been there at  the time. In either case, he’d
been clever enough to realize that he could take this
opportunity to disappear from His Majesty’ s army , leaving his
death to be assumed.
What he had been doing si nce then was clear , too.
W andering the countryside, stealing, robbing, and killing—and
collecting a number of like-minded companions along the way .
Not that they a ppeared to be o f one mind just at present.
While Hodgepile might be the self-proclaimed leader of this
gang at the moment, it was plain to see that he hadn’ t held the
position for long. He wasn’ t accustomed to command, didn’ t
know how to m anage men, save by threat. I’d seen many
military commanders in my time, good and bad, and
recognized the dif ference.
I could hear Hodgepile even n ow , voice raised in distant
ar gument with someone. I’d see n his sort before, vicious men
who could temporarily cow those near them by outbursts of
unpredictable v iolence. They seldom lasted long—and I
doubted that Hodgepile was going to last much longer .
He w asn’ t going to last any lon ger than it took for Jamie to
find us. That th ought calmed me like a slug of good whisky .
Jamie would surely be looking for me by now .
I c urled  tighter under my blanket, shivering a little. Jamie
would need light to track at nig ht—torches. That would make
him and  his party visible—and vulnerable—if they came
within sight of t he camp. The camp itself wouldn’ t be visible;there was no fir e lit, and the horses and men were scattered
through the wood. I knew sent ries had been posted; I could
hear them moving in the wood now and then, talking low-
voiced.
But Jamie was no fool, I told myself, trying to drive away
visions of ambush and massacre. He would know , from the
freshness of the horses’ dung, if he were drawing close, and
certainly wouldn’ t be marching right up to the camp, torches
blazing. If he had tracked the party this far , he would—
The sou nd of quiet footsteps froze me. They were coming
from the direction of my origina l resting place, and I cowered
under my blanket like a field mouse with a weasel in sight.
The steps shuf fled slowly to a nd fro, as though someone
was poking his way through the dried leaves and pine needles,
looking for me. I held my breath, though surely no one could
hear that, with the night wind sighing through the branches
overhead.
I str ained my e yes at the darkness, but could make out
nothing more than a faint blur moving among the tree trunks, a
dozen yards away . A sudden th ought struck me—could it be
Jamie? If he ha d come close enough to locate the camp, he
would very likely steal in on foot, looking for me.
I dre w breath at  the thought, straining against my bonds. I
wanted ur gently to call out, bu t didn’ t dare. If it should  be
Jamie, calling to him would expose his presence to the bandits.
If I could hear the sentries, they could certainly hear me.
But if it were not  Jamie, but one of the bandits, seeking to
kill me quietly …
I let  my breath out very slowly , every muscle in my body
clenched and trembling. It was cool enough, but I was bathed
in sw eat; I could  smell my own body , the reek of fear mingling
with the colder smells of earth and vegetation.
The blur had vanished, the footsteps gone, and my heart was
pounding like a kettledrum. T he tears I had held back for
hours seeped out, hot on my face, and I wept, shaking silently .The night was im mense around me, the darkness filled with
threat. O verhead, the stars hung bright and watchful in the sky ,
and at some point, I slept.2 8
CURSES
I  WOKE JUST B EFORE DA WN , in a muck sweat and with a
throbbing headache. The men were already moving, grumbling
about the lack of cof fee or breakfast.
Hodgepile stopped beside me, looking down with narrowed
eyes. He  glanced  toward the tree  beneath which he had left me
the night before and the deep fu rrow of disturbed leaf mold I
had created in worm-crawling toward my present spot. He had
very little in the way of lips, but his lower jaw compressed in
displeasure.
He pulled the knife from his belt, and I felt the blood drain
from my  face. However , he me rely knelt and cut my bonds,
rather th an slicing of f a finge r by way of expressing his
emotions.
“W e lea ve in five minutes,” he said, and stalked of f. I was
quivering and faintly nauseated  with fear , and so stif f that I
could barely stand. I managed to get to my feet, though, and
staggered the short distance to a small stream.
The air was damp and I was now  chilly in my sweat-soaked
shift, but cold water splashed on  my hands and face seemed to
help a little, soothing the throb behind my right eye. I had just
time to make a hasty toilet, removing the rags of my stockings
and running wet fingers through my hair , before Hodgepile
reappeared to march me of f again.
This time, I was put on a horse, but not tied, thank God. I
wasn’ t allowed to hold the reins , though; my mount was on a
leading rein, held by one of the bandits.
It w as my first chance to get a good look at my captors, as
they cam e out of the wood and shook themselves into rough
order , coughing, spitting, and  urinating on trees withoutreference to my presence. Beyond Hodgepile, I counted twelve
more men—a baker ’ s dozen of villains.
It was easy to pick out the ma n called T ebbe; his height
aside, he was a mulatto. There was another man of mixed
blood—black and Indian, I thought—but he was short and
squat. T ebbe didn’ t glance in my direction, but went about his
business with head lowered, scowling.
That was a disappointment; I di dn’ t know what had passed
among the men during the night, but evidently T ebbe’ s
insistence that I be released was no longer so insistent. A rust-
spotted kerchief bound his wrist; that might have something to
do with it.
The young man who had guide d my horse the night before
was also  easy to pick out, by way of his long, bushy hair , but
he d idn’ t come near , and avoide d looking at me, too. Rather to
my surprise, he was an Indian—not Cherokee; perhaps a
T uscarora? I hadn’ t expected that from his speech, nor his
curly hair . Clearly he was mixed-blood, too.
The rest  of the g ang were more or less white, but a motley
crew , nonethele ss. Three of them were no more than half-
bearded boys in their mid-teens, scruf fy and gangling. They
did  look at me, goggling drop-jawed, and nudging one another .
I s tared at one of them until he  met my eye; he went bright
scarlet beneath his sparse whiskers, and looked away .
Fortunately , the shift I was wea ring was one with sleeves;
the thing covered me decently e nough from drawstring neck to
the hem  at mid-calf, but there  was no denying that I felt
uncomfortably exposed. The shift was damp and clung limply
to the curve of my breasts—a s ensation I was uncomfortably
aware of. I wished I had kept hold of the blanket.
The men swirled slowly round me, loading the horses, and I
had the distinct and unpleasant sense of being the center of the
mass—in much the same way a bull’ s-eye lies at the center of
a tar get. I could only hope that I looked aged and cronelike
enough for my state of untidine ss to be repellent, rather than
interesting; my hair was loose, wild, and tangled as witch’ smoss aro und my shoulders, and I certainly felt  as though I had
been crumpled up like an old paper bag.
I hel d myself bo lt upright in the saddle, giving an unfriendly
glare to anyone who so much as  glanced in my direction. One
man bli nked blearily at my b are leg with a faint look of
speculation—only to recoil noticeably when he met my eye.
That gave me a momentary feeling of grim satisfaction—
superseded almost immediately by shock. The horses had
begun to move, and as mine obediently followed the man in
front of me, two  more men came into view , standing under a
big oak. I knew them both.
Harley Boble was tying the strings on a packsaddle,
scowling as he said something to another , lar ger man. Harley
Boble was an erstwhile thieftaker , now evidently turned thief.
A thoro ughly nasty little man, he was unlikely to be well-
disposed toward  me, owing to an occurrence at a Gathering
some time before.
I wa sn’ t at all pleased to see him here, though I was by no
means s urprised to find him in such company . But it was the
sight of his companion that c aused my empty stomach to
contract, and my skin to twitch like a horse with flies.
Mr . Lionel Brown, of Brownsville.
He look ed up, caught sight of me, and turned hastily away
again, sh oulders hunching. He must have realized that I had
seen him, though, for he turned back to face me, thin features
set in a sort of weary defianc e. His nose was swollen and
discolored, a dark red bulb visible even in the grayish light. He
stared at me for a moment, then nodded as though making
some reluctant acknowledgment, and turned away again.
I risked a glance back over my shoulder as we entered the
trees, but couldn’ t see him anymore. What was he  doing here?
I ha dn’ t recognized his voice a t the time, but clearly it had
been he who ha d ar gued with H odgepile about the wisdom of
taking me. Little wonder! He wa sn’ t the only one disturbed by
our mutual recognition.Lionel Brown and his brother , Richard, were traders; the
founders and patriarchs of Brownsville, a tiny settlement in the
hills some forty miles from the  Ridge. It was one thing for
freebooters like Boble or Hodgepile to roam the countryside,
robbing and burning; quite another for the Browns of
Brownsville to be providing a b ase for their depredations. The
very last thing in the world M r . Lionel Brown could wish
would be for me to reach Jamie with word of what he had been
up to.
And I rather th ought he would take steps to prevent me
doing so . The sun was coming up, beginning to warm the air ,
but I felt suddenly cold, as though I had been dropped in a
well.
Rays of light shone through the branches, gilding the
remnants of the night mist that veiled the trees and silvering
the dripping edges of their leav es. The trees were alive with
birdsong, and a towhee hopped  and scratched in a patch of
sun, oblivious of the passing me n and horses. It was too early
yet for flies and mosquitoes, and the soft morning breeze
caressed my face. Definitely one of those prospects where
only man was vile.
The morning passed quietly eno ugh, but I was aware of the
constant state of tension among the men—though no more
tense than I was.
Jamie Fraser , wher e are  you?  I thou ght, concentrating
fiercely on the forest around us.  Every distant rustle or snap of
twig m ight presage rescue, and my nerves began to be
distinctly frayed in anticipation.
Where? When? How? I had neither reins nor weapons; if—
when—an attack was made on the group, my best—well, the
only pos sible—strategy was to fling myself of f the horse and
run. As we rode  I constantly evaluated each patch of witch-
hazel and stand of spruce, spotti ng footholds, plotting a zigzag
path through saplings and boulders.
It wasn’ t only an attack by Jamie and his men that I was
preparing for; I couldn’ t see Lionel Brown, but I knew he wassomewhere nearby . A spot between my shoulder blades
clenched in a knot, anticipating a knife.
I k ept an eye out for potential weapons: rocks of a useful
size, branches that might be seized from the ground. If and
when I ran, I meant to let no one stop me. But we pushed on,
moving as quickly as the horses’ footing allowed, men
glancing back constantly over their shoulders, hands on their
guns. A s for me, I was obliged to relinquish my imaginary
grasp on each possible weapon in turn as it slid past, out of
sight.
T o my intense disappointment, we reached the gor ge near
midday , without incident.
I ha d visited th e gor ge once with Jamie. The cataract fell
sixty feet down a granite clif f face, sparkling with rainbows
and roaring with a voice like the archangel Michael. Fronds of
red chok eberry and wild indigo fringed the falls, and yellow
poplars overhun g the river below the cataract’ s pool, so thick
that no more than a fugitive gleam from the water ’ s surface
showed between the banks of lush vegetation. Hodgepile, of
course, had not been drawn by the scenic beauty of the spot.
“Get of f.” A gru f f voice spoke n ear my elbow , and I looked
down to  see T ebbe. “W e will swim the horses across. Y ou
come with me.”
“I’ll take her .” My heart sprang up into my throat at the
sound o f a thickly nasal voice. It was Lionel Brown, pushing
his way past an overhanging rope of creeper , dark eyes intent
on me.
“Not you.” T ebbe rounded on Brown, fist closed.
“Not you,” I rep eated firmly . “I’m going with him.” I slid
of f the horse and promptly took shelter behind the big
mulatto’ s menacing frame, peering out at Brown from beneath
the bigger man’ s arm.
I wasn’ t under the slightest illusion about Brown’ s intent.
He wouldn’ t risk assassinating me under Hodgepile’ s eye, but
he could —and would—drown me easily , and claim it was anaccident. The river was shallow here, but still fast; I could hear
it whooshing past the rocks near shore.
Brown’ s eyes darted right, then left, thinking whether to try
it on—but T ebbe hunched his massive shoulders, and Brown
gave it up as a bad job. He snorted, spat to one side, and
stamped away , snapping branches.
I mi ght never h ave a better chance. Not waiting for the
sounds of Brown’ s huf fy exit to subside, I slipped a hand over
the big man’ s elbow and squeezed his arm.
“Thank you,” I said, low-voice d. “For what you did last
night. Are you badly hurt?”
He glanced down at me, apprehension clear in his face. My
touching him plainly disconcerte d him; I could feel the tension
in his arm as he tried to decide whether to pull away from me
or not.
“No,” he said at last. “I am all right.” He hesitated a
moment, but then smiled uncertainly .
It was obvious what Hodgepile intended; the horses were
being led, one at a time, down a narrow deer trail that edged
the e scarpment. W e were more than a mile from the cataract,
but the air was still loud with its noise. The sides of the gor ge
plunged steeply down to the wa ter , more than fifty feet below ,
and the opposite bank was equally steep and over grown.
A thick fringe of bushes hid t he edge of the bank, but I
could se e that the river spread out here, becoming slower as it
shallowed. W ith no dangerous currents, the horses could be
taken downstrea m, to come out at some random point on the
opposite shore. Anyone who ha d succeeded in tracking us to
the gor g e would  lose the trail here, and have no little dif ficulty
in picking it up on the opposite side.
W ith an ef fort, I stopped mys elf looking back over my
shoulder for signs of imminent pursuit. My heart was beating
fast. If Jamie was nearby , he wo uld wait and attack the group
when they entered the water , wh en they were most vulnerable.
Even if he were not yet near , it w ould be a confusing business,crossing the river . If there we re ever a time to attempt an
escape …
“Y ou shouldn’ t go with them,” I said conversationally to
T ebbe. “Y ou’ll die, too.”
The arm under my hand jerked convulsively . He glanced
down at me, wi de-eyed. The sclera of his eyes were yellow
with jaundice, and the irises broken, giving him an odd,
smudgy stare.
“I told him the truth, you know .” I lifted my chin toward
Hodgepile, visib le in the distance. “He’ll die. So will all those
with him. There’ s no need for you to die, though.”
He m uttered something under h is breath, and pressed a fist
against his chest. He had someth ing on a string there, hanging
beneath his shirt. I didn’ t know whether it might be a cross or
some mo re pagan amulet, but he  seemed to be responding well
to suggestion so far .
So c lose to the river , the air w as thick with moisture, live
with the smell of green things and water .
“The wa ter is my friend,” I said,  trying for an air of mystery
suitable to a con jure woman. I was not a good liar , but I was
lying for  my life. “When we go into the river , let go your hold.
A water horse will rise up to carry me away .”
His eyes couldn’ t get any wide r . Evidently , he’d heard of
kelpies, or something like them. Even this far from the
cataract, the roar of the water had voices in it—if one chose to
listen.
“I am not going away with a water horse,” he said with
conviction. “I know about them . They take you down, drown
you, and eat you.”
“It won’ t eat me,” I assured him. “Y ou needn’ t go near it.
Just stand clear , once we’re in the water . Keep well away .”
And if he did, I’ d be under the water and swimming for my
life before he could say Jack Robinson. I would be willing to
bet that most of Hodgepile’ s bandits couldn’ t swim; fewpeople in the m ountains coul d. I flexed my leg muscles,
readying myself, aches and stif fness dissolved in a flood of
adrenaline.
Half the  men were over the edge with the horses already—I
could delay T ebbe, I thought, until the rest were safely in the
water . Even if h e wouldn’ t deliberately connive at my escape,
if I slipped his grasp, I thought he wouldn’ t try to catch me.
He pulled halfheartedly at my arm, and I stopped abruptly .
“Ouch! W ait, I’ve stepped on a bur .”
I lift ed o ne foot,  peering at the sole. Given the dirt and resin
stains adhering to it, no one cou ld possibly have told whether I
had picked up co ckleburs, bramble thorns, or even a horseshoe
nail.
“W e need to go,  woman.” I didn’ t know whether it was my
proximity , the roar of the water ,  or the thought of water horses
that was  disturb ing T ebbe, but he was sweating with nerves;
his odor  had changed from simple musk to something sharp
and pungent.
“Just a moment,” I said, pretending to pick at my foot.
“Nearly got it.”
“Leave it. I will carry you.”
T ebbe was breathing heavily , looking back and forth from
me to the edge of the gor ge, w here the deer trail disappeared
into the growth, as though fearing the reappearance of
Hodgepile.
It wasn’ t Hodgepile who poppe d out of the bushes, though.
It w as Lionel B rown, his face set with purpose, two younger
men behind him, looking equally determined.
“I’ll take her ,” he said without preamble, grabbing my arm.
“No!” By reflex, T ebbe clutched my other arm and pulled.
An undignified tug-of-war ens ued, with T ebbe and Mr .
Brown each jerking one of my  arms. Before I could be split
like a wishbone, T ebbe fortunately changed tactics. Releasingmy arm, he seiz ed me instead ab out the body and clutched me
to himself, kicking out with one foot at Mr . Brown.
The resu lt of this maneuver was  to cause T ebbe and myself
to fall backward  into an untidy pile of arms and legs, while
Brown also lost his balance, tho ugh I didn’ t realize at first that
he h ad. All I was aware of w as a loud yell and stumbling
noises, followed  by a crash and the rattle of dislodged stones
bounding down a rocky slope.
Disengaging myself from T ebbe, I crawled out, to discover
the rest of the m en grouped round an ominously flattened spot
in th e bushes fr inging the gor ge. One or two were hurriedly
fetching ropes and yelling contradictory orders, from which I
deduced that Mr . Brown had in deed fallen into the gor ge, but
was not yet certifiably dead.
I rapidly reversed directions, meaning to dive headfirst into
the vege tation, but came up ins tead against a pair of cracked
boots, belonging to Hodgepile. He seized me by the hair and
yanked, causing  me to shriek and lash out at him in reflex. I
caught h im across the midrif f. He oomphed and went open-
mouthed, gasping for air , but didn’ t let go his iron grip on my
hair .
Making furious faces in my direction, he let go then, and
boosted me toward the edge of the gor ge with a knee. One of
the youn ger men was clinging to the bushes, feeling gingerly
for f ootholds on the slope below , one rope tied round his waist
and another slung in a coil over his shoulder .
“Frigging mort!” Hodgepile yel led, digging his fingers into
my arm as he leaned through the broken bushes. “What d’ye
mean by this, you bitch?”
He cape red on the edge of the gor ge like Rumpelstiltskin,
shaking his fist and hurling abuse impartially at his damaged
business partner and at me, while the rescue operations
commenced. T ebbe had withdrawn to a safe distance, where he
stood looking of fended.At length, Brown was hauled u p, groaning loudly , and laid
out on the grass . Those men no t already in the river gathered
round, looking hot and flustered.
“Y ou mean to mend him, conjure woman?” T ebbe asked,
glancing skeptic ally at me. I didn’ t know whether he meant to
cast dou bt upon my abilities, o r only on the wisdom of my
helping Brown,  but I nodded, a little uncertainly , and came
forward.
“I s uppose so.” An oath was  an oath, though I rather
wondered if Hippocrates ever ran into this sort of situation
himself. Possibl y he did; the ancient Greeks were a violent lot,
too.
The men gave w ay to me easily enough; once having got
Brown out of the gor ge, it was obvious that they had no notion
what to do about him.
I did a hasty tri age. Aside from multiple cuts, contusions,
and a thick coa ting of dust and  mud, Mr . Lionel Brown had
fractured his left leg in at leas t two places, broken his left
wrist, and probably crushed a couple of ribs. Only one of the
leg f ractures was compound, bu t it was nasty , the jagged end
of the broken thighbone poking through skin and breeches,
surrounded by a steadily widening patch of red.
He h ad unfortunately not severed his femoral artery , since if
he h ad, he would  have been dead already . Still, Mr . Brown had
probably ceased to be a personal threat to me for the moment,
which was all to the good.
Lacking any equipment or medication, bar several filthy
neckcloths, a pine branch, and some whisky from a canteen,
my ministrations were necessarily limited. I managed—with
no li ttle dif ficulty and quite a lo t of whisky—to get the femur
roughly straightened and splinted without having Brown die of
shock, which I thought no small accomplishment under the
circumstances.
It was a dif ficult  job, though, an d I was muttering to myself
under my breath—something I hadn’ t realized I was doing,until I glanced up to find T ebbe  crouched on his heels on the
other side of Brown’ s body , regarding me with interest.
“Oh, yo u curse him,” he said approvingly . “Y es, that is a
good idea.”
Mr . Bro wn’ s eyes sprang open a nd bugged out. He was half
of f his head with pain, and thor oughly drunk by now , but not
quite so drunk as to overlook this.
“Make her stop,” he said hoarsely . “Here, Hodgepile—make
her stop! Make her take it back!”
“‘Ere, what’ s this? What did you say , woman?” Hodgepile
had simmered down a bit, but his animus was instantly
rekindled by this. He reached do wn and grabbed my wrist just
as I was feeling my way over Brown’ s injured torso. It was the
wrist he had twisted so viciously the day before, and a stab of
pain shot up my forearm.
“If you must k now , I expect I said ‘Jesus H. Roosevelt
Christ’!” I snapped. “Let go of me!”
“That’ s what she said when she  cursed you! Get her away
from me ! Don’ t let her touch me!” Panicked, Brown made to
squirm a way fro m me, a very bad idea for a man with freshly
broken b ones. He went dead-white under the smears of mud,
and his eyes rolled back in his head.
“Look at that! H e’ s dead!” one of the onlookers exclaimed.
“She’ s done it! She witched him!”
This caused no little uproar , between the vocal approbation
of T ebbe  and his supporters, my  own protests, and outcries of
concern from Mr . Brown’ s frien ds and relations, one of whom
squatted down by the body , putting an ear to the chest.
“He’ s alive!” this man exclaimed. “Uncle Lionel! Y ou all
right?”
Lionel Brown groaned loudly and opened his eyes, causing
further commotion. The young man who had called him Uncle
drew a lar ge kni fe from his belt and pointed it at me. His eyes
were open so wide that the whites showed all around.“Y ou get back!” he said. “Don’ t you touch him!”
I raised my hands, palms out, in gesture of abnegation.
“Fine!” I snapped. “I won’ t!” T here was, in fact, little more
I cou ld d o for Brown. He should be kept warm, dry , and well-
hydrated, but something told me  that Hodgepile would not be
open to any such suggestions.
He wasn ’ t. By means of furious and repeated bellows, he
quelled the incipient riot, then declared that we were crossing
the gor ge, and right quickly , too.
“Put ‘im  on a stretcher , then,” he said impatiently , in reply
to prote sts from Brown’ s nephew . “And as for you—” He
rounded on me, glaring. “Did I tell you? No tricks, I said!”
“Kill her ,” Brown said hoarsely  from the ground. “Kill her
now .”
“Kill her? Not bloody likely , oul’ son.” Hodgepile’ s eyes
gleamed with malice. “She’ s no more risk to me  alive than
dead—and a good bit more pro fit alive. But I’ll keep her in
line.”
The knif e was never far from h is grasp. He had it out in an
instant, and had seized my hand. Before I could so much as
draw bre ath, I felt the blade press down, cutting partway into
the base of my forefinger .
“Remember what I told you, d o you?” He breathed it, his
face was soft with anticipation. “I don’ t need you whole.”
I did  remember , and my belly h ollowed, my throat dried to
silence. My skin burned where  he cut, and pain spread in a
flash thr ough my  nerves; the nee d to jerk away from the blade
was so strong that the muscles of my arm cramped with it.
I could imagine vividly the spurting stump, the shock of
broken bone, ripped flesh, the horror of irrevocable loss.
But behind Hodgepile, T ebbe had risen to his feet. His odd,
smudgy stare was fixed on me, with an expression of
fascinated dread . I saw his hand close in a fist, his throat moveas h e swallowed, and felt the sal iva return to my own. If I was
to keep his protection, I must keep his belief.
I fix ed my eyes on Hodgepile ’ s, and made myself lean
toward him. My skin quivered and jumped, and the blood
roared louder in my ears than the voice of the cataract—but I
opened my eyes wide. A witch’ s eyes—or so some said.
V ery , ve ry slowly , I lifted my  free hand, still wet with
Brown’ s blood. I reached the bloody fingers toward
Hodgepile’ s face.
“I remember ,” I said, my voice a hoarse whisper . “Do you
remember what I  said?”
He w ould have done it. I saw the decision flash in his eyes,
but before he c ould press the knife blade down, the bushy-
haired y oung In dian leaped forward, grabbing at his arm with
a cr y of horror . Distracted, Ho dgepile let go his grip, and I
pulled free.
In a n instant, T ebbe and two more men sur ged forward,
hands on knives and pistol grips.
Hodgepile’ s thin face was pinched with fury , but the
moment of incipient violence ha d passed. He lowered his own
knife, the menace receding.
I opened my mouth to say something that might help defuse
the situation further , but was f orestalled by a panicked cry
from Brown’ s nephew .
“Don’ t let her talk! She’ll curse us all!”
“Oh, bleedin’ ‘ell,” said Hodgepile, fury transmuted to mere
crossness.
I had used several neckcloths to bind Brown’ s splint.
Hodgepile stooped and snatched one from the ground, wadded
it into a ball, and stepped forward.
“Open your mouth,” he said t ersely , and seizing my jaw
with one  hand, he forced open  my mouth and crammed the
wadded fabric into it. He glare d at T ebbe, who had made a
jerky move forward.“I shan’ t kill her . But she says  not a word more. Not to
‘im”—he nodded at Brown, then T ebbe—”not to you. Nor
me.” He glanced back at me, and to my surprise, I saw a
lurking uneasiness in his eyes. “Not to anyone.”
T ebbe lo oked uncertain, but Hodgepile was already tying
his own neckcloth round my head, ef fectively gagging me.
“Not a word,” Hodgepile repeated, glaring round at the
company . “Now , let’ s go!”
WE CROSSED THE river . T o my surprise, Lionel Brown
survived, but it was a lengthy b usiness, and the sun was low
by the time we made camp, two miles past the gor ge on the
farther side.
Everyone was wet, and a fire was kindled without
discussion. The currents of dissension and distrust were still
there, but had been damped by the river and exhaustion.
Everyone was simply too tired for further strife.
They had tied my hands loosely , but left my feet unbound; I
made my way to a fallen log near the fire and sank down,
utterly drained. I was damp and chilled, my muscles trembling
with exh austion—I had been forced to walk from the river—
and for the first time, I began to wonder whether Jamie would
in fact find me. Ever .
Perhaps he had followed the wrong group of bandits.
Perhaps he had found and attacked them—and been wounded
or killed in the fight. I had closed my eyes, but opened them
again, seeking to avoid the visi ons this thought had conjured
up. I still worri ed about Marsali—but either they had found
her in time or they hadn’ t; either way , her fate had been
decided.
The fire  was burning well, at least; cold, wet, and eager for
hot food, the m en had brought an immense pile of wood. A
short, silent black man was stok ing the fire, while a couple of
the teenagers rifled the packs for food. A pot of water was seton th e fi re with a chunk of salt beef, and the lion-haired young
Indian poured cornmeal into a bowl with a lump of lard.
Another bit of lard sizzled on an iron girdle, melting into
grease. It smelled wonderful.
Saliva fl ooded my mouth, absorbed at once into the wad of
fabric, and despite discomfort, t he smell of food bolstered my
spirits a little. M y stays, loosened by the travel of the last
twenty-four hours, had tightened again as the wet laces dried
and shrank. My skin itched beneath the fabric, but the thin ribs
of the boning did give me a sense of support, more than
welcome at the moment.
Mr . Bro wn’ s t wo nephews—Aaron and Moses, I had
learned—limped slowly into camp, a makeshift stretcher
sagging between them. They set it gratefully down beside the
fire, evoking a loud yell from the contents.
Mr . Brown had survived the r iver crossing, but it hadn’ t
done him  any good. Of course,  I had  told them he should be
kept well-hydrated. The thought undid me, tired as I was, and I
made a muf fled snorting sound behind my gag.
One of the young lads nearb y heard me, and reached
tentatively for the knot of my gag, but dropped his hand at
once when Hodgepile barked at him.
“Leave her!”
“But—don’ t she need to eat, Hodge?” The boy glanced
uneasily at me.
“Not just yet she doesn’ t.” Hodgepile squatted down in
front of me, looking me over . “Learned your lesson yet, ‘ave
you?”
I didn’ t move. Just sat and looked at him, infusing my gaze
with as much sc orn as possible. The cut on my finger burned;
my palms had b egun to sweat—but I stared. He tried to stare
back, but couldn’ t do it—his eyes kept slipping away .
That made him even angrier; a flush burned high on his
bony cheeks.“Stop looking at me!”
I bli nked slowly , once, and kept  looking, with what I hoped
appeared to be interested dispassion. He was looking rather
strained, our Mr . Hodgepile was. Dark circles under the eyes,
muscle f ibers br acketing his mouth like lines carved in wood.
Sweat stains wet and hot beneath the armpits. Constant
browbeating must take it out of one.
All at once, he stood up, grabbed me by the arm, and
yanked me to my feet.
“I’ll put  you where you can’ t stare, bitch,” he muttered, and
marched me past the fire, shov ing me ahead of him. A little
way outside the camp, he found a tree to his liking. He untied
my h ands and re bound my wrists, with a loop of line wrapped
round my waist and my hands f astened to it. Then he pushed
me dow n into a seated position,  fashioned a crude noose with
a slipknot, and p ut it round my neck, tying the free end to the
tree.
“So as you won ’ t wander away ,” he said, pulling the rough
hemp sn ug around my neck. “S houldn’ t want you to get lost.
Might b e eaten by a bear , and then what, eh?” This had quite
restored his humor; he laughed immoderately , and was still
chuckling when he left. He turn ed, though, to glance back at
me. I sat upright , staring, and the humor abruptly left his face.
He turned and strode of f, shoulders stif f as wood.
In sp ite of hunger , thirst, and general discomfort, I actually
felt a sense of profound, if m omentary , relief. If I was not
strictly speaking alone, I was a t least unobserved, and even
this modicum of privacy was balm.
I w as a good twenty yards from the fire ring, out of sight of
all th e m en. I sagged against the tree trunk, the muscles of face
and body giving way all at o nce, and a shiver seized me,
though it wasn’ t cold.
Soon. Surely Jamie would find me soon. Unless—I pushed
the dubious thought aside as though it were a venomous
scorpion. Likewise any thought of what had happened toMarsali, or might happen if and when—no, when —he did find
us. I  didn’ t know how he’d manage, but he would. He just
would.
The sun was nea rly down; shadows were pooling under the
trees an d the light faded slowl y from the air , making colors
fugitive and solid objects lose their depth. There was rushing
water somewhere nearby , and the calling of the occasional bird
in th e distant trees. These bega n to fall silent as the evening
cooled, replaced  by the rising chirp of crickets near at hand.
My eye caught the flicker of m ovement, and I saw a rabbit,
gray as the dusk, sitting up on its hind legs under a bush a few
feet distant, nose twitching.
The she er norm alcy of it all made my eyes sting. I blinked
away the tears, and the rabbit was gone.
The sight of it had restored my nerve a little; I essayed a few
experiments, to see the limits of  my present bondage. My legs
were fre e—that was good. I could rise up into a sort of
ungainly squat, and duck-waddl e round the tree. Even better; I
would be able to relieve myself in privacy on the far side.
I co uld not, how ever , rise entirely to my feet, nor could I
reach the knot of the line that circled the tree trunk; the rope
either sl id or caught on the bar k, but in either case, the knot
remained frustratingly on the opposite side of the trunk—
which had to measure nearly three feet in diameter .
I had  ab out two feet of line betw een the trunk and the noose
about m y neck;  enough to allo w me to lie down, or to turn
from side to side. Hodgepile was rather obviously well-
acquainted with  convenient methods of restraining captives; I
thought of the O ’Brians’ homes tead, and the two bodies there.
The two elder c hildren missing. A small shudder passed over
me again.
Where were they? Sold to one o f the Indian tribes as slaves?
T aken to  a sailors’ brothel in one  of the coastal towns? Or onto
a ship, to be pre ssed into use o n the sugar plantations of the
Indies?I was under no illusions that any of these picturesquely
unpleasant fates  lay in store for me. I was much too old, much
too obstreperous—and much too notorious. No, the only value
I h eld for Hodge pile was my kn owledge of the whisky cache.
Once he had got within snif fing distance of that, he would slit
my throat without a moment’ s compunction.
The sme ll of roasting meat floated through the air , flooding
my mou th with fresh saliva—a welcome relief, in spite of the
growling of my stomach, sin ce the gag dried my mouth
unpleasantly .
A tiny jolt of p anic tensed my muscles. I didn’ t want to
think about the gag. Or the ropes around my wrists and neck.
It w ould be too easy to succumb to the panic of confinement,
and exhaust myself in futile st ruggle. I had to preserve my
strength; I didn’ t know when or how I would need it, but need
it I surely would. Soon,  I prayed. Let it be soon.
The men had settled to their supper , the contentions of the
day sunk in ap petite. They were far enough away that I
couldn’ t hear the particulars of t heir conversation, but only the
stray wo rd or phrase borne on th e evening breeze. I turned my
head to let the b reeze smooth the hair from my face, and found
that I could see a long, narrow swath of sky above the distant
gor ge, gone a deep, unearthly blue, as though the fragile layer
of atmos phere that covered the e arth grew thinner still, and the
darkness of space beyond shone through.
The star s began  to prick out, one by one, and I managed to
lose my self in watching, countin g them as they appeared, one
by o ne by one … touching them as I might the beads of a
rosary , and saying to myself s uch astronomical names as I
knew , comfortin g in their sound, even though I had no idea
whether such names bore any re lation to the celestial bodies I
saw . Alpha Centauri, Deneb, Sirius, Betelgeuse, the Pleiades,
Orion …
I s uccee ded in soothing myself to the extent that I dozed of f,
only to rouse som e time later to find it now full dark. The light
of t he fire sent a flickering glow through the underbrush,painting my feet, which lay in an open spot, with rosy
shadows. I stirred and stretche d myself as well as I could,
trying to relieve the stif fness in my back, and wondered
whether Hodgepile thought himself safe now , to be allowing
such a lar ge fire?
A lo ud groan c ame to me on the wind—Lionel Brown. I
grimaced, but there was nothin g I could do for him in my
present condition.
I he ard shuf fling and a murmur of voices; someone was
attending to him.
“… hot as a pistol …” one voice  said, sounding only mildly
concerned.
“… fetch the woman? …”
“No,” said a definite voice. Hodgepile. I sighed.
“… water . No help for that  …”
I wa s listening so intently , in hopes of hearing what was
happening by the fire, that it w as some time before I became
aware o f noises in the brush nearby . Not animals; only bears
would make that much noise, and bears didn’ t giggle. The
giggling was subdued, not only muf fled but repeatedly
interrupted.
There w as whispering, too, though I couldn’ t make out most
of the words. T he overall atmosphere was so much one of
excited juvenile  conspiracy , though, that I knew it must be
some of the younger members of the gang.
“… go on,  t hen !” I  caught , spoken in a vehement tone, and
accompanied by a crashing noise, indicating that someone had
been pushed into a tree. Another crash, indicating retaliation.
More rustling. Whisper , whisper , snigger , snort. I sat up
straight, wondering what in God’ s name they were up to.
Then I heard, “Her legs aren’ t ti ed …” and my heart gave a
small jump.
“But what if she …” mumble, mumble.“W on’ t matter . She can’ t scream.”
That  came through very clearly , and I jerked my feet back to
scramble up—only to be brought up short by the noose around
my neck. It felt like an iron bar across my windpipe, and I fell
back, seeing blood-red blotches at the corners of my eyes.
I shook my hea d and gulped air , trying to shake of f the
dizziness, adren aline racing through my blood. I felt a hand on
my ankle, and kicked out sharply .
“Hey!” he said out loud, sound ing surprised. He took his
hand of f my ankle and sat back a little. My vision was
clearing; I could see him now ,  but the firelight was behind
him; it was one of the young lad s, but no more than a faceless,
hunched silhouette in front of me.
“Shh,” he said, and giggled ner vously , reaching out a hand
toward me. I made a deep growling noise behind my gag, and
he stopp ed, frozen in mid-reach. There was a rustling in the
brush behind him.
This seemed to remind him that his friend—or friends—
were watching, and he reached out with renewed resolution,
patting me on the thigh.
“Don’ t you worry , ma’am,” h e whispered, duck-walking
closer on his heels, “I don’ t mean you no harm.”
I snorted, and he hesitated again—but then another rustle
from the bush se emed to stif fen his resolve, and he grasped me
by the shoulders , trying to make me lie down. I struggled hard,
kicking and kneeing at him, a nd he lost his grip, lost his
balance, and fell on his backside.
A muf fled explosion of sniggering from the bush brought
him up on his f eet like a jack- in-the-box. He reached down
with decision, seized my ankles , and yanked, jerking me flat.
Then he  flung himself on top of me, pinning me with his
weight.
“Hush!” he said ur gently into  my ear . His hands were
grappling for my throat, and I squirmed and thrashed under his
weight, trying to buck him of f. His hands closed tight on myneck, though, and I stopped, my  vision going black and bloody
once again.
“Hush, now ,” he said more quie tly . “Y ou just hush, ma’am,
all right? ” I was making small choking noises, which he must
have taken for assent, for his grip slackened.
“I ain’ t gonna hurt you, ma’am, I really ain’ t,” he
whispered, tryin g to hold me down with one hand while
fumbling about between us with the other . “W ould you just be
still,  please?”
I wo uldn’ t, and he finally put a forearm across my throat
and lean ed on it. Not hard enoug h to make me black out again,
but hard enough to take some o f the fight out of me. He was
thin and  wiry , but very stro ng, and by dint of simple
determination, succeeded in pushing up my shift and wedging
his knee between my thighs.
He w as breathing nearly as hard as I was, and I could smell
the g oaty reek of his excitement . His hands had left my throat,
and wer e feverishly grasping at my breasts, in a manner that
made it reasonably clear that th e only other breast he’d ever
touched was likely his mother ’ s.
“Hush, now , don’ t you be scar ed, ma’am, it’ s all right, I
ain’ t … oh. Oh , my . I … uh …  oh.” His hand was poking
about between my thighs, then  left of f momentarily as he
raised himself briefly and wriggled down his breeches.
He c ollapsed heavily on top of me, hips pumping frantically
as he thrust madly away—ma king no contact save that of
friction, as he ve ry obviously had no idea of the way in which
female anatomy was constructed. I lay still, astonished into
immobility , then  felt a warm pulse of liquid under my thighs
as he lost himself in panting ecstasy .
All the wiry te nsion went out of him in a rush, and he
subsided on my chest like a limp balloon. I could feel his
young heart pounding like a st eam hammer , and his temple
was pressed against my cheek, damp with sweat.I f ound the intim acy of this cont act quite as objectionable as
the softening presence wedged between my thighs, and rolled
abruptly to the side, dumping him of f. He came to life
suddenly , and scrambled to his knees, yanking at his drooping
breeches.
He sway ed to and fro for a m oment, then dropped to his
hands and knees and crawled up close beside me.
“I’m really sorry , ma’am,” he whispered.
I ma de no move, and after a moment, he reached out a
tentative hand and patted me gently on the shoulder .
“I’m rea l sorry ,” he repeated, still whispering, and then was
gone, leaving me lying on my back in a puddle, wondering
whether such an incompetent assault could legitimately be
termed rape.
Distant rustling in the bushes, accompanied by muf fled
whoops of young male delight, decided me firmly that it
could. Christ, the rest of the obnoxious little beasts would be at
me in no time. Panicked, I sat up, mindful of the noose.
The glow from the fire was irre gular and flickering, barely
enough to make out the trunks of trees and the pale layer of
needles and leaf mold on the  ground. Enough to see the
protrusions of granite boulders through the leaf layer , and the
occasional hump  of a fallen twig. Not that the lack of potential
weapons mattered, given that my hands were still firmly tied.
The weight of t he young assailant had made things worse;
the knots had pulled tighter during my struggles, and my hands
throbbed with lack of circulation. My fingers were beginning
to go numb at the tips. Bloody hell. W as I about to lose several
fingers to gangrene, as a result of this absurdity?
For an instant, I contemplated the wisdom of behaving
compliantly with the next horrible little boy , in hopes that he
would remove the gag. If he wo uld, I could at least beg him to
loosen the ropes—and then scream for help, in hopes that
T ebbe would come and stop fur ther assault, out of fear of my
eventual supernatural revenge.Here he came, a  stealthy rustling in the bushes. I gritted my
teeth on  the gag and looked up, but the shadowy form in front
of me wasn’ t one of the young boys.
The only  thought that came to mind when I realized who the
new visitor was was, Jamie Fraser , you bastar d, wher e  are
you?
I f roze, as thou gh not moving might somehow render me
invisible. The man moved in front of me, squatting down so as
to look into my face.
“Not laughin’ so much now , are you?” he said
conversationally . It was Boble, the erstwhile thieftaker . “Y ou
and you r husband thought it was  damn funny , didn’ t you, what
them Ge rman women did to me ? And then Mr . Fraser tellin’
me a s th ey meant to make sausage meat of me, and him with a
face like a Christian readin’ the Bible. Thought that was funny ,
too, didn’ t you?”
T o b e perfectly honest, it had been funny . He was quite
correct, though; I wasn’ t laughing now . He drew back his arm
and slapped me.
The blow made my eyes water , but the fire lit him from the
side; I could st ill see the smil e on his pudgy face. A cold
qualm ra n through me, making me shudder . He saw that, and
the smil e broadened. His canine teeth were short and blunt, so
the incisors stood out by contrast, long and yellowed,
rodentlike.
“Reckon you’ll think this is eve n funnier ,” he said, rising to
his feet and reac hing for his flie s. “Hope Hodge don’ t kill you
right aw ay , so you get to tell your husband about it. Bet you
he’ll enjoy the joke, man with a sense of humor like he’ s got.”
The boy’ s semen was still damp  and sticky on my thighs. I
jerked back by reflex, trying to scramble to my feet, but was
brought up short by the noose round my neck. My vision went
dark for an insta nt as the rope tightened on my carotids, then
cleared, and I found Boble’ s fac e inches from mine, his breath
hot on my skin.He seized my c hin in his hand and rubbed his face over
mine, biting at my lips and ras ping the stubble of his beard
hard across my cheeks. Then h e drew back, leaving my face
wet with his saliva, pushed me flat, and climbed on top of me.
I co uld feel the  violence in him, pulsing like an exposed
heart, th in-walled and ready to b urst. I knew I couldn’ t escape
or p revent him—knew he would hurt me, given the slightest
excuse. The only thing to do was be still and endure him.
I co uldn’ t. I h eaved under him and rolled to the side,
bringing up my knee as he push ed my shift aside. It hit him a
glancing blow in the thigh, and he drew back his fist by reflex
and punched me in the face, sharp and quick.
Red-black pain bloomed sudden  from the center of my face,
filled my head, and I went blind, shocked into momentary
immobility . Y ou utter fool,  I th ought, with total clarity . Now
he’ll kill you.  The second blow struck my cheek and snapped
my head  to the side. Perhaps I moved again in blind resistance,
perhaps I didn’ t.
Suddenly he was kneeling a stride me, punching and
slapping, blows dull and heavy  as the thump of ocean waves
on sand,  too remote as yet for pain. I twisted, curling, bringing
up my shoulder and trying to shield my face against the
ground, and then his weight was gone.
He was standing . He was kicki ng me and cursing, panting
and half -sobbing as his boot thu dded into sides and back and
thighs an d buttocks. I panted in  short gasps, trying to breathe.
My body jerked and quivered w ith each blow , skidding on the
leaf-strewn ground, and I clung to the sense of the ground
below m e, trying so hard to sink down, be swallowed by the
earth.
Then it stopped. I could hear him panting, trying to speak.
“Goddamn … goddamn … oh, g oddamn … frig … friggin’ …
bitch…”
I lay inert, trying to disappe ar into the darkness that
enveloped me, knowing that he was going to kick me in thehead. I could feel my teeth shatter , the fragile bones of my
skull spl inter an d collapse into the wet soft pulp of my brain,
and I trembled, clenching my teeth in futile resistance against
the impa ct. It would sound like  a melon being smashed, dull,
sticky-hollow . W ould I hear it?
It didn’ t come. There was another sound, a fast, hard
rustling that made no sense. A faintly meaty sound, flesh on
flesh in a soft smacking rhythm, and then he gave a groan and
warm gouts of fluid fell wet  on my face and shoulders,
splattering on bare skin where the cloth of my shift had torn
away .
I wa s frozen. S omewhere in the back of my mind, the
detached observ er wondered aloud whether this was in fact the
single m ost disgusting thing I had ever encountered. W ell, no,
it wasn’ t. Some of the things I had seen at L ’Hopital des
Anges, to say nothing of Father Alexandre’ s death, or the
Beardsleys’ attic  … the field hospital at Amiens … heavens,
no, this wasn’ t even close.
I lay rigid, eyes shut, recalling v arious nasty experiences of
my past and wishing I were in fact in attendance at one of
those events, instead of here.
He leane d over , seized my hair , and banged my head several
times against the tree, wheezing as he did so.
“Show you …” he muttered, th en dropped his hand and I
heard shuf fling noises as he staggered away .
When I finally opened my eyes again, I was alone.
I REMAINED ALONE, a small mercy . Boble’ s violent attack
seemed to have frightened away the boys.
I r olled onto m y side and lay still, breathing. I felt very
tired, and utterly forlorn.
Jamie,  I thought, wher e ar e you?
I wasn’ t afraid of what might happen next; I couldn’ t see
any furth er than  the moment I was in, a single breath, a singleheartbeat. I didn’ t think, and wo uldn’ t feel. Not yet. I just lay
still, and breathed.
V ery slowly I b egan to notice small things. A fragment of
bark caught in my hair , scratchy on my cheek. The give of the
thick dead leaves beneath me, c radling my body . The sense of
ef fort as my chest lifted. Increasing ef fort.
A tiny nerve began to twitch near one eye.
I realize d quite suddenly that with the gag in my mouth and
my nasal tissues being rapidly congested by blood and
swelling, I was in some actual danger of suf focation. I twisted
as f ar onto my side as I coul d get without strangling, and
rubbed my face first against the ground, then—with increasing
desperation—dug my heels into the ground and wriggled
upward, scraping my face hard against the bark of the tree,
trying without success to loosen or dislodge the gag.
The bark  rasped lip and cheek,  but the kerchief tied round
my head was so  tight that it cut hard into the corners of my
mouth, forcing it open so that sa liva leaked constantly into the
wad of fabric in my mouth. I gagged at the tickle of sodden
cloth in my throat, and felt vomit burn the back of my nose.
Y ou ar en ’ t, you ar en’ t, you ar en ’ tyouar en’ tyou  aren’ t going
to vomit!  I dragged air bubbling through my bloody nose,
tasted thick copper as it slim ed down my throat, gagged
harder , d oubled up—and saw white light at the edge of vision,
as the noose went tight around my throat.
I fell back, my head hitting ha rd against the tree. I hardly
noticed; the noose loosened again, thank God, and I managed
one, two, three precious breaths of blood-clogged air .
My nose was puf fed from cheekbone to cheekbone, and
swelling fast. I clenched my teeth on the gag and blew
outward through my nose, trying to clear it, if only for a
moment. Blood tinged with bile  sprayed warm across my chin
and splattered on my chest—and I sucked air fast, getting a bit.
Blow , in hale. Bl ow , inhale. Blow … but my nasal passages
were almost swollen shut by now , and I nearly sobbed in panicand frustration, as no air came.
Christ, don’ t cry! Y ou’r e dead if you cry , for God’ s  sake
don’ t cry!
Blow …  blow … I snorted with  the last reserve of stale air
in my lungs, and got a hair of clearance, enough to fill them
once more.
I h eld my breat h, trying to stay  conscious long enough to
discover a way to breathe—there had  to be a way to breathe.
I would not  le t a wr etch like Harley Boble kill me by simple
inadvertence. That wasn’ t right; it couldn’ t be.
I pressed myself, half-sitting, up against the tree to ease the
strain on  the noose around my neck as much as possible, and
let m y h ead fall  forward, so tha t the blood from my nose ran
down, dripping. That helped, a little. Not for long, though.
My eyelids began to feel tigh t; my nose was definitely
broken, and the flesh all round the upper part of my face was
puf fing now , swelling with the blood and lymph of capillary
trauma, squeezing my eyes shut, further constricting my thread
of air .
I bit the gag in an agony of frustration, then, seized by
desperation, beg an to chew at it, grinding the fabric between
my teet h, trying to smash it down, compress it, shift it
somehow inside  my mouth… . I bit the inside of my cheek and
felt the pain bu t didn’ t mind, it wasn’ t important, nothing
mattered but breath, oh, God, I  couldn’ t br eathe,  please help
me breathe, please… .
I bit  my tongue , gasped in pain—and realized that I had
succeeded in thrusting my tongu e past the gag, reaching the tip
of it to the corner of my mouth . By poking as hard as I could
with my  tongue tip, I had made a tiny channel of air . No more
than a wisp of oxygen could ooze through it—but it was air ,
and that was all that mattered.
I had my head canted painfully to one side, forehead pressed
against t he tree, but was afraid to move at all, for fear of losing
my s lender lifeline of air , if the gag should shift when I movedmy head . I sat still, hands clenched, drawing long, gur gling,
horribly shallow  breaths, and wondering how long I could stay
this way; the muscles of my neck were already quivering from
strain.
My hand s were throbbing again —they hadn’ t ever stopped,
I sup posed, but I  hadn’ t had atte ntion to spare for them. Now I
did, and momentarily welcom ed the shooting pains that
outlined each nail with liquid fire, for distraction from the
deadly stif fness spreading down my neck and through my
shoulder .
The muscles of my neck jumped and spasmed; I gasped, lost
my air , and arched my body bowlike, fingers dug into the
binding ropes as I fought to get it back.
A hand came down on my arm. I hadn’ t heard him
approach. I turned blindly , butting at him with my head. I
didn’ t ca re who he was or what he wanted, provided he would
remove the gag. Rape seemed a perfectly reasonable exchange
for survival, at least at the moment.
I made desperate  noises, whimpering, snorting, and spewing
gouts of  blood and snot as I shook my head violently , trying to
indicate that I was choking—given the level of sexual
incompetence so far demonstrated, he might not even realize
that I couldn’ t breathe, and simply proceed about his business,
unaware that simple rape was becoming necrophilia.
He w as fumbling round my hea d. Thank God, thank God! I
held myself still with superhuman ef fort, head swimming as
little bursts of fi re went of f insi de my eyeballs. Then the strip
of fabric  came away and I thru st the wad of cloth out of my
mouth by reflex, instantly gagged, and threw up, whooping air
and retching simultaneously .
I hadn’ t eaten; no more than a thread of bile seared my
throat and ran d own my chin. I choked and swallowed and
br eathed,  sucking air in huge, greedy , lung-bursting gulps.
He was saying something, whispering ur gently . I didn’ t
care, couldn’ t listen. All I heard was the grateful wheeze of myown bre athing, and the thump of my heart. Finally slowing
from its frantic r ace to keep oxy gen moving round my starved
tissues, it pounded hard enough to shake my body .
Then a word or two got through  to me, and I lifted my head,
staring at him.
“Whad?” I said thickly . I cough ed, shaking my head to try
to clear it. It hurt very much. “ What  did you say?”
He was visible only as a ragged, lion-haired silhouette,
bony-shouldered in the faint glow from the fire.
“I said,” he whispered, leaning close, “does the name
‘Ringo Starr ’ mean anything to you?”
I W AS BY THI S TIME well b eyond shock. I merely wiped
my split  lip gingerly on my shoulder , and said, very calmly ,
“Y es.”
He had been holding his breath; I realized it only when I
heard the sigh as he released it, and saw his shoulders slump.
“Oh, God,” he said, half under his breath. “Oh, God.”
He lung ed forward suddenly and caught me against him in a
hard em brace. I recoiled, choking as the noose round my neck
tightened once again, but he did n’ t notice, absorbed in his own
emotion.
“Oh, God,” he said, and burie d his face in my shoulder ,
nearly sobbing. “Oh, God. I knew , I knew you hadda be, I
knew it, but I couldn’ t believe it, oh, God, oh, God, oh, God! I
didn’ t think I’d ever find another one, not ever—”
“Kk,” I said. I arched my back, ur gently .
“Wha—oh, shit!” He let go and grabbed for the rope around
my neck. He sc rabbled hold of it and yanked the noose over
my h ead, nearly tearing my ear of f in the process, but I didn’ t
mind. “Shit, you okay?”
“Y es,” I croaked. “Un … tie me.”He snif f ed, wiping his nose on his sleeve, and glanced back
over his shoulder .
“I ca n’ t,” he wh ispered. “The next guy who comes along’ll
see.”
“The next  guy?” I screamed, as well as I could scream in a
strangled whisper . “What do you mean, the next—”
“W ell, you know… .” It seeme d suddenly to dawn on him
that I might hav e objections to waiting tamely like a trussed
turkey for the n ext would-be rapist in the lineup. “Er … I
mean … well, never mind. Who are you?”
“Y ou know damn well who I  am,” I croaked furiously ,
shoving him with my bound han ds. “I’m Claire Fraser . Who in
bloody  hell are you, what are you doing here, and if you want
one more word out of me, you ’ll bloody well untie me this
minute!”
He turned again to glance apprehensively over his shoulder ,
and it occurred to me vaguely that he was afraid of his so-
called co mrades. So was I. I could see his profile in silhouette;
it was indeed the bushy-haired young Indian, the one I had
thought might be a T uscaroran. Indian … some connection
clicked into place, deep in the tangled synapses.
“Bloody hell,” I said, and dabbed at a trickle of blood that
ran from the raw corner of my mouth. “Otter -T oof. T ooth.
Y ou’re one of his.”
“What?!” His head swung back to face me, eyes so wide the
whites showed briefly . “Who?”
“Oh, what in he ll was his real name? Robert … Robert th-
something …” I was trembling  with fury , terror , shock, and
exhaustion, grop ing through the muddled remnants of what
used to be my m ind. W reck though I might be, I remembered
Otter -T ooth, all right. I had a sudden vivid memory of being
alone in the dar k, on a night like this, wet with rain and all
alone, a long-buried skull cupped in my hands.
“Springer ,” he said, and gripped my arm eagerly . “Springer
—was that it? Robert Springer?”I h ad just enoug h presence of mind to clamp my jaw , thrust
out m y c hin, and hold up my bound hands in front of him. Not
another word until he cut me loose.
“Shit,” he muttered again, and with another hasty glance
behind him, fumbled for his knif e. He wasn’ t skillful with it. If
I ha d ne eded an y evidence that he wasn’ t a real Indian of the
time … but he got my hands free without cutting me, and I
doubled up with a groan, hand s tucked under my armpits as
the b lood sur ged into them. The y felt like balloons filled and
stretched to the point of bursting.
“When?” he demanded, paying no attention to my distress.
“When did you come? Where did you find Bob? Where is
he?”
“1946,” I said, squeezing my arms down tight on my
throbbing hands. “The first time. 1968, the second. As for Mr .
Springer—”
“The second—d id you say the second  time?” His voice rose
in aston ishment. He choked it of f, looking guiltily back, but
the s ounds of the men dicing and ar guing round the fire were
more than loud enough to drown out a simple exclamation.
“Second time,” he repeated more softly . “So you did it? Y ou
went back?”
I nodded , pressing my lips together and rocking back and
forth a little. I thought my fingernails would pop of f with each
heartbeat.
“What a bout you?” I asked, though I was fairly sure that I
already knew .
“1968,” he said, confirming it.
“What year did you turn up in ?” I asked. “I mean—how
long have you been here? Er … now , I mean.”
“Oh, God.” He sat back on his heels, running a hand back
through his long, tangled hair . “ I been here six years, as near
as I can tell. But you said—second time. If you made it home,
why in hell’d you come back ? Oh—wait. Y ou didn’ t make ithome, you went to another tim e, but not the one you came
from? Where’d you start from?”
“Scotland, 1946. And no, I m ade it home,” I said, not
wanting to go into details. “My husband was here, though. I
came back on p urpose, to be with him.” A decision whose
wisdom seemed presently in severe doubt.
“And sp eaking of my husband,” I added, beginning to feel
as though I might possess a few shreds of sanity after all, “I
was not  jo king. He’ s co ming. Y ou don’ t want him to find you
keeping me captive, I assure you. But if you—”
He disregarded this, leaning eagerly toward me.
“But that means you know how it works! Y ou can steer!”
“Something like  that,” I said, impatient. “I take it that you
and you r compa nions didn’ t  know how to steer , as you put it?”
I m assag ed one hand with the other , gritting my teeth against
the t hrob of bloo d. I could feel the furrows the rope had left in
my flesh.
“W e thought we did.” Bitterness tinged his voice. “Singing
stones. G emstones. That’ s what  we used. Raymond said … It
didn’ t w ork, though. Or maybe … maybe it did.” He was
making deductions; I could hear the excitement rising again in
his tone.
“Y ou met Bob Springer—Otter -T ooth, I mean. So he did
make it!  And if he made it, ma ybe the others did, too. See, I
thought they were all dead. I thought—thought I was alone.”
There w as a catch in his voice, and despite the ur gency of the
situation and my annoyance at him, I felt a pang of sympathy .
I knew very well what it felt like to be alone in that way ,
marooned in time.
In a  way , I hated to disillusion him, but there was no point
in keeping the truth from him.
“Otter -T ooth is dead, I’m afraid.”
He s uddenly stopped moving and sat very still. The faint
glow of firelight through the tree s outlined him; I could see hisface. A few long hairs lifted in the breeze. They were the only
thing that moved.
“How?” he said at last, in a small, choked voice.
“Killed by the Iroquois,” I said. “The Mohawk.” My mind
was beginning, very slowly , to w ork again. Six years ago, this
man—whoever he was—had come. 1767, that would be. And
yet Otter -T ooth,  the man who had once been Robert Springer ,
had died more than a generation earlier . They’d started out
together , but ended in dif ferent times.
“Shit,” h e said, though the obvio us distress in his voice was
mingled with something like awe. “That would have been a
real bummer , especially for Bob. He, like, idolized those
guys.”
“Y es, I expect he was most p ut out about it,” I replied,
rather dryly . My eyelids felt thick and heavy . It was an ef fort
to force them open, but I could still see. I glanced at the fire
glow , but couldn’ t see anything beyond the faint movement of
shadows in the distance. If there actually was a lineup of men
waiting for my services, at least they were tactfully keeping
out of sight. I d oubted it, and g ave silent thanks that I wasn’ t
twenty years younger—there might have been.
“I met some Iroquois—Christ, I went looking  for ‘em, if
you can believe that! That was t he whole point, see, to find the
Iroquois tribes and get them to—”
“Y es, I know w hat you had in mind,” I interrupted. “Look,
this is not really the time or plac e for a long discussion. I think
that—”
“Those Iroquois are some nasty tumblers, I tell you,  man,”
he said, jabbing me in the chest with a finger for emphasis.
“Y ou wouldn’ t believe  what they do to—”
“I k now . So is my husband.” I gave him a glare, which—
judging from the way he flinched—was probably rendered
highly ef fective by the state of my face. I hoped so; it hurt a lot
to do it.“Now , what you  want to do,” I said, mustering as much
authority into my voice as I could, “is to go back to the fire,
wait for a bit, then leave casually , sneak round, and get two
horses. I hear a stream down there—” I waved briefly to the
right. “I ’ll meet you there. Onc e we’re safely away , I’ll tell
you everything I know .”
In fact, I probab ly couldn’ t tell him anything very helpful,
but he didn’ t know that. I heard him swallow .
“I don’ t know …” he said uncertainly , glancing round again.
“Hodge, he’ s kind of gnarly . He shot one guy , a few days ago.
Didn’ t e ven say anything, just walked up to him, pulled his
gun, and boom! ”
“What for?”
He shrugged, shaking his head.
“I don’ t even know , man. Just … boom,  you know?”
“I kn ow ,” I assured him, holding  on to temper and sanity by
a thr ead. “Look, let’ s not troub le with the horses, then. Let’ s
just go.”  I lurched awkwardly onto one knee, hoping that I
would be able to rise in a few moments, let alone walk. The
big m uscles in my thighs were knotted hard in the spots where
Boble had kicked me; trying to  stand made the muscles jump
and quiver in spasms that ef fectively hamstrung me.
“Shit, no t now!” In his agitation , the young man seized my
arm and  jerked me down beside him. I hit the ground hard on
one hip and let out a cry of pain.
“Y ou all right t here, Donner?” The voice came out of the
darkness somewhere behind me . It was casual—obviously one
of th e men had merely stepped out of camp to relieve himself
—but th e ef fect on the young Indian was galvanizing. He
flung himself full-length upon me, banging my head on the
ground and knocking all the breath out of me.
“Fine … really … great,” he  called to his companion,
gasping in an exaggerated manner , evidently trying to sound
like a man in the throes of half-completed lust. He soundedlike someone dying of asthma , but I wasn’ t complaining. I
couldn’ t.
I’d been  knocked on the head a few times, and generally
saw nothing but blackness as a r esult. This time I honestly did
see colored stars, and lay limp and bemused, feeling as though
I sat  tranquilly some distance a bove my battered body . Then
Donner laid a ha nd on my breas t and I came instantly back to
earth.
“Let go of me this instant!” I h issed. “What do you think
you’re doing?”
“Hey , hey , nothing, nothing, sorry ,” he assured me hastily .
He removed the hand, but didn’ t get of f me. He squirmed a bit,
and I realized t hat he was aro used by the contact, whether
intended or not.
“Get off !” I said, in a furious whisper .
“Hey , I don’ t me an anything, I mean I wouldn’ t hurt you or
nothing. It’ s just I haven’ t had a woman in—”
I grabbed a handful of his hair , lifted my head, and bit his
ear , hard. He shrieked and rolled of f me.
The other man had gone back  toward the fire. At this,
though, he turned and called bac k, “Christ, Donner , is she that
good? I’ ll have to give her a tr y!” This got a laugh from the
men by the fire, but luckily it died away and they returned to
their own concerns. I returned to mine, which was escape.
“Y ou d idn’ t have to do that,” Donner whined in an
undertone, holding his ear . “I wasn’ t going to do  anything!
Christ, y ou got nice tits, but yo u’re like old enough to be my
mother!”
“Shut up !” I said, pushing myse lf to a sitting position. The
ef fort m ade my  head spin; tiny  colored lights flickered like
Christmas-tree bulbs at the edge of my vision. In spite of this,
some part of my mind was actively working again.
He w as at least partly right. W e couldn’ t leave immediately .
After drawing so much attentio n to himself, the others wouldbe e xpecting him to come back  within a few minutes; if he
didn’ t, they’d start looking for h im—and we needed more than
a few minutes’ start.
“W e can’ t go now ,” he whispered, rubbing his ear
reproachfully . “ They’ll notice. W ait ‘til they go to sleep. I’ll
come get you then.”
I hesitated. I was in mortal danger every moment that I
spent within reach of Hodgepil e and his feral gang. If I had
needed any convincing, the encounters of the last two hours
had dem onstrated that. This Donner needed to go back to the
fire and show himself—but I could steal away . W as it worth
the risk that som eone would come and find me gone, before I
had got beyond pursuit? It woul d be more certain to wait until
they slept. But did I dare wait that long?
And then there w as Donner himself. If he wanted to talk to
me, I certainly wanted to talk to him. The chance of stumbling
on another time-traveler …
Donner read my hesitation, but misunderstood it.
“Y ou’re not going without me!” He grabbed my wrist in
sudden a larm, an d before I coul d jerk away , had whipped a bit
of the cut line around it. I fought and pulled away , hissing to
try to make hi m understand, but he was panicked at the
thought that I might slip away without him, and wouldn’ t
listen. Hampered by my injuries, and unwilling to make
enough noise to draw attention, I could only delay but not
prevent his determined ef forts to tie me up again.
“Okay .” He was sweating; a dro p fell warm on my face as
he le aned over m e to check the bindings. At least he hadn’ t put
the noos e round my neck again , instead tethering me to the
tree with a rope around my waist.
“I shoulda known what you are,” he murmured, intent on
his job. “Even before you said ‘Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.’”
“What the hell d o you mean by that?” I snapped, squirming
away from his hand. “Don’ t bloody do that—I’ll suf focate!”
He was trying to put the cloth  strip back in my mouth, butseemed to pick up the note of panic in my voice, because he
hesitated.
“Oh,” he said un certainly . “W ell. I guess—” Once again, he
looked back over his shoulder , b ut then made up his mind and
dropped the gag on the ground . “Okay . But you be quiet, all
right? W hat I meant—you don’ t  act afraid of men. Most of the
women from now do. Y ou oughta act more afraid.”
And wit h that parting shot, he rose and brushed dead leaves
from his clothes before heading back to the fire.
THERE COMES A POINT when the body has simply had
enough. It snatches at sleep, no matter what menace the future
may hol d. I’d seen that happen: the Jacobite soldiers who slept
in th e ditches where they fell, the British pilots who slept in
their planes while mechanics fueled them, only to leap to full
alert again in time to take of f. For that matter , women in long
labor routinely sleep between contractions.
In the same manner , I slept.
That kind of sle ep is neither deep nor peaceful, though. I
came out of it with a hand across my mouth.
The fourth man was neither inco mpetent nor brutal. He was
lar ge an d soft-bodied, and he had loved his dead wife. I knew
that, bec ause he  wept into my hair , and called me by her name
at the end. It was Martha.
I C AME  OUT of sleep again s ometime later . Instantly , fully
conscious, heart pounding. But it wasn’ t my heart—it was a
drum.
Sounds of startlement came fro m the direction of the fire,
men rousing in alarm from sleep.
“Indians!” someone shouted, and the light broke and flared,
as someone kicked at the fire to scatter it.
It wasn’ t an Indian drum. I sat up, listening hard. It was a
drum with a so und like a beating heart, slow and rhythmic,then trip-hammer fast, like the frantic sur ge of a hunted beast.
I c ould have to ld them that In dians never used drums as
weapons; Celts did. It was the sound of a bodhran.
What next?  I thought, a trifle hysterically , bagpipes ?
It was Roger , certainly; only he could make a drum talk like
that. It was Rog er , and Jamie was nearby . I scrambled to my
feet, wanting, needing ur gently  to move.  I je rked at the rope
around m y waist in a frenzy of impatience, but I was going
nowhere.
Another drum began, slower ,  less skilled, but equally
menacing. The sound seemed to move—it was  moving.
Fading, coming back full force. A third drum began, and now
the thumping seemed to come from everywhere, fast, slow ,
mocking.
Someone fired a gun into the forest, panicked.
“Hold, t here!” Hodgepile’ s voice came, loud and furious,
but to no avail; there was a po pcorn rattle of gunfire, nearly
drowned by the sound of the dr ums. I heard a snick  near my
head, and a cluster of needles brushed past me as it fell. It
dawned on me that standing up right while guns were blindly
fired all  round me was a dangerous strategy , and I promptly
fell flat, burrowing into the dea d needles, trying to keep the
trunk of the tree betwixt me and the main body of men.
The drums were weaving, now closer , now farther , the
sound u nnerving even to one w ho knew what it was. They
were cir cling th e camp, or so it seemed. Should I call out, if
they came near enough?
I was saved fro m the agony of decision; the men were
making so much noise round the  campfire that I couldn’ t have
been heard if I’ d screamed myself hoarse. They were calling
out in alarm, s houting questio ns, bellowing orders—which
apparently went ignored, judging from the ongoing sounds of
confusion.
Someone blunde red through the brush nearby , running from
the drum s. One,  two more—the sound of gasping breath andcrunching footsteps. Donner?  Th e thought came to me
suddenly and I sat up, then fell flat again as another shot
whistled past overhead.
The drums stopped abruptly . Chaos reigned around the fire,
though I  could hear Hodgepile trying to get his men in order ,
yelling a nd threatening, nasal voice raised above the rest. Then
the drums began again—much closer .
They were drawing in, drawing together , somewhere out in
the forest on my left, and the mocking tip-tap-tip-tap  beating
had changed. They were thundering now . No skill, just
menace. Coming closer .
Guns fired wildly , close enoug h for me to see the muzzle
flash an d smell the smoke, th ick and hot on the air . The
faggots of the fire had been scattered, but still burned, making
a muted glow through the trees.
“There they are! I see ‘em!” so meone yelled from the fire,
and there was another burst of musket-fire, toward the drums.
Then the most unearthly howl rose out of the dark to my
right. I’d heard Scots scream go ing into battle before, but that
particular Highl and shriek made the hairs on my body prickle
from tailbone to nape. Jamie.  Despite my fears, I sat bolt
upright and peered round my s heltering tree, in time to see
demons boil out of the wood.
I knew them—knew I knew them—but cowered back at
sight of  them, blackened with soot and shrieking with the
madness of hell, firelight red on the blades of knives and axes.
The drums had stopped abruptly , with the first scream, and
now another set of howls broke  out to the left, the drummers
racing in to the kill. I pressed myself flat back against the tree,
heart chokingly huge in my throat, petrified for fear the blades
would strike at any random movement in the shadows.
Someone crash ed toward me, blundering in the dark—
Donner? I croaked his name, hoping to attract his attention,
and the slight fo rm turned toward me, hesitated, then spotted
me and lunged.It wasn’ t Donner , but Hodgepile. He seized my arm,
dragging me up, even as he slas hed at the rope that bound me
to the tree. He was panting hard with exertion, or fear .
I rea lized at onc e what he was about; he knew his chances
of e scape were slight—having  me to hostage was his only
hope. But I was damned  if I’d be his hostage. No more.
I kicked at him, hard, and caught him on the side of the
knee. It didn’ t knock him over , but distracted him for a second.
I c har ged him, h ead down, butted him square in the chest, and
sent him flying.
The imp act hurt  badly , and I staggered, eyes watering from
the pain. He was up, and at me again. I kicked, missed, fell
heavily on my backside.
“Come on,  damn you!” he hissed, jerking hard at my bound
hands. I ducked my head, pulled back, and yanked him down
with me . I rolled and scrabbled in the leaf mold, trying as hard
as I could to wrap my legs arou nd him, meaning to get a grip
on h is ribs and crush the life ou t of the filthy little worm, but
he s quirmed free and rolled at op me, punching at my head,
trying to subdue me.
He struck me i n one ear and I flinched, eyes shutting in
reflex. T hen the weight of him  was suddenly gone, and I
opened m y eyes to see Jamie holding Hodgepile several inches
of f the ground. Hodgepile’ s spi ndly legs churned madly in a
futile ef fort at escape, and I felt an insane desire to laugh.
In fact, I must  actually have laughed, for Jamie’ s head
jerked ro und to look at me; I caught a glimpse of the whites of
his e yes before he turned his att ention to Hodgepile again. He
was silhouetted against a faint glow from the embers; I saw
him in profile for a second, then  his body flexed with ef fort as
he bent his head.
He held Hodgepile close against his chest, one arm bent. I
blinked; my eyes were swollen  half-shut, and I wasn’ t sure
what he was doing. Then I hear d a small grunt of ef fort, and astrangled shriek from Hodgepile, and saw Jamie’ s bent elbow
go sharply down.
The dark curve of Hodgepile’ s head moved back—and
back. I glimpsed the marionette-sharp nose and angled jaw—
angled impossib ly high, the heel of Jamie’ s hand wedged hard
beneath it. There was a muf fled pop!  that I felt in the pit of my
stomach as Hodgepile’ s neckbo nes parted, and the marionette
went limp.
Jamie flung the puppet body down, reached for me, and
pulled me to my feet.
“Y ou are  alive, you are whole, mo nighean donn ?” he said
ur gently in Gaelic. He was groping, hands flying over me,
trying at  the same time to hold m e upright—my knees seemed
suddenly to have turned to wate r—and to locate the rope that
bound my hands.
I was crying and laughing, snuf fing tears and blood,
bumping at him with my bound hands, trying awkwardly to
thrust them at him so that he could cut the rope.
He q uit grappling, and clutched me so hard against him that
I yelped in pain as my face was pressed against his plaid.
He was saying something else, ur gently , but I couldn’ t
manage to translate it. Ener gy pulsed through him, hot and
violent, like the current in a live wire, and I vaguely realized
that he was still almost berserk; he had no English.
“I’m all  right,” I gasped, and he  let me go. The light flared
up in the clearin g beyond the tre es; someone had collected the
scattered embers , and thrown m ore kindling on them. His face
was blac k, his eyes picked out blue in a sudden blaze as he
turned his head and the light struck his face.
There was still some struggle g oing on; no screaming now ,
but I  cou ld hear the grunt and th ud of bodies locked in combat.
Jamie ra ised my hands, drew hi s dirk, and sawed through the
rope; my  hands dropped like lead weights. He stared at me for
an in stant, as tho ugh trying to find words, then shook his head,cupped a hand fo r an instant to my face, and disappeared, back
in the direction of the fight.
I s ank down on the ground, da zed. Hodgepile’ s body lay
nearby , limbs askew . I glanced at it, the picture clear in my
mind of  a necklace Bree had h ad as a child, made of linked
plastic beads that came apart w hen you pulled them. Pop-It
pearls, they were called. I w ished vaguely that I didn’ t
remember that.
The face was la ntern-jawed and  hollow-cheeked; he looked
surprised, eyes wide open to the flickering light. Something
seemed oddly wrong, though, an d I squinted, trying to make it
out. Then I realized that his head was on backward.
It may have been seconds or minutes that I sat there staring
at hi m, a rms rou nd my knees an d my mind a total blank. Then
the sound of soft footsteps made me look up.
Arch Bug came out of the dark, tall and thin and black
against the flicker of a growing  fire. I saw that he had an ax
gripped hard in his left hand; it t oo was black, and the smell of
blood came strong and rich as he leaned near .
“There are some left still alive,” he said, and I felt
something cold and hard touch my hand. “W ill ye have your
vengeance now upon them, a bana-mhaighistear ?”
I l ooked  down and found that he was of fering me a dirk,
hilt-first. I had stood up, but couldn’ t remember rising.
I couldn’ t speak, and couldn’ t move—and yet my fingers
curled without my willing them to, my hand rising up to take
the knif e as I watched it, faintly curious. Then Jamie’ s hand
came down upon the dirk, snatching it away , and I saw as from
a gr eat distance that the light fell on his hand, gleaming wet
with blo od smea red past the wr ist. Random drops shone red,
dark jewels glowing, caught in the curly hairs of his arm.
“There i s an oath upon her ,” he  said to Arch, and I realized
dimly th at he was still speaking in Gaelic, though I understood
him clearly . “She may not kill, save it is for mercy or her life.
It is myself who kills for her .”“And I,” said a tall figure behind him, softly . Ian.
Arch nodded understanding, though his face was still in
darkness. Someone else was there beside him—Fer gus. I knew
him at once, but it took a mom ent’ s struggle for me to put a
name to the streaked pale face and wiry figure.
“Madame,” he said, and his voice was thin with shock.
“Milady .”
Then Ja mie looked at me, and his own face changed,
awareness coming back into his eyes. I saw his nostrils flare,
as he caught the scent of sweat and semen on my clothes.
“Which of them?” he said. “How many?” He spoke in
English now , and his voice was remarkably matter -of-fact, as
it might  be if h e were inquiring as to the number of guests
expected for dinner , and I f ound the simple tone of it
steadying.
“I don’ t know ,” I said. “They—it was dark.”
He nodded, squeezed my arm hard, and turned.
“Kill them all,” he said to Fe r gus, his voice still calm.
Fer gus’ s eyes were huge and dar k, sunk into his head, burning.
He mere ly nodded, and took hold of the hatchet in his belt.
The fron t of his shirt was splas hed, and the end of his hook
looked dark and sticky .
In a  distant sort  of way , I thought I should say something.
But I didn’ t. I s tood up straight with the tree against my back
and said nothing at all.
Jamie gl anced a t the dirk he held as though to ensure that it
was in good order—it was not; he wiped the blade on his
thigh, ignoring the drying blood that gummed the wooden hilt
—and went back to the clearing.
I sto od quite sti ll. There were more sounds, but I paid no
more heed to t hem than to the rush of wind through the
needles overhea d; it was a balsam tree, and the breath of it was
clean and fresh, falling over me  in a wash of fragrant resins,
powerful enough  to taste on my palate, though little penetratedthe c lotted membranes of my no se. Beneath the gentle veil of
the tree’ s perfume, I tasted blo od, and sodden rags, and the
stink of my own weary skin.
Dawn had broken. Birds sang in  the distant wood, and light
lay soft as wood ash on the ground.
I stood quite still, and thought of nothing but how pleasant it
would b e to stand neck-deep in hot water , to scrub the skin
quite away from my flesh, and let the blood run red and clean
down m y legs, billowing out i n soft clouds that would hide
me.2 9
PERFECTL Y FINE
T HEY’D RIDDEN A W A Y then. Left them, without burial or
word of consecration. In a way , that was more shocking than
the killing. Roger had gone wi th the Reverend to more than
one deathbed or scene of accident, helped comfort the
bereaved, stood by as the spirit fled and the old man said the
words of grace. It was what y ou did when someone died;
turned toward God and at least acknowledged the fact.
And yet  … how could you sta nd over the body of a man
you’d killed, and look God in the face?
He c ouldn’ t sit. The tiredness f illed him like wet sand, but
he couldn’ t sit.
He s tood, picked up the poker ,  but stood with it in hand,
staring at the ba nked fire on his hearth. It was perfect, satin-
black embers crusted with ash , the red heat smothered just
beneath. T o touch it would brea k the embers, make the flame
leap up—only to die at once, without fuel. A waste of wood, to
throw more on, so late at night.
He put the poke r down, wandered from one wall to another ,
an exha usted bee in a bottle, still buzzing, though his wings
hung tattered and forlorn.
It hadn’ t troubled Fraser . But then, Fraser had ceased even
to think of the b andits, directly they were dead; all his thought
had been for Claire, and that was surely understandable.
He’d led her through the morning light in that clearing, a
blood-soaked Adam, a batter ed Eve, looking upon the
knowledge of good and evil. And then he had wrapped her in
his plaid, picked her up, and walked away to his horse.
The men had followed, silent, leading the bandits’ horses
behind their own. An hour late r , with the sun warm on theirbacks, Fraser had turned his h orse’ s head downhill, and led
them to  a stream. He had dismounted, helped Claire down,
then vanished with her through the trees.
The men had exchanged puzzled looks, though no one
spoke. Then old Arch Bug had swung down from his mule,
saying matter -of-factly , “W ell, she’ll want to wash then, no?”
A s igh of comprehension went over the group, and the
tension lessened at once, dissolving into the small homely
businesses of dismounting, hob bling, girth-checking, spitting,
having a piss. Slowly , they sought each other , looking for
something to say , searching for relief in commonplace.
He c aught Ian’ s eye, but they were yet too stif f with each
other fo r this; Ian turned, clapped a hand round Fer gus’ s
shoulder , and hugged him, then pushed him away with a small
rude jok e about his stink. The  Frenchman gave him a tiny
smile and lifted the darkened hook in salute.
Kenny Lindsay and old Arch Bu g were sharing out tobacco,
stuf fing their pipes in apparent tranquillity . T om Christie
wandered over to them, pale as a ghost, but pipe in hand. Not
for t he first time , Roger realized the valuable social aspects of
smoking.
Arch had seen him, though, stan ding aimless near his horse,
and come to talk to him, the old man’ s voice calm and
steadying. He had no real idea w hat Arch said, let alone what
he replie d; the simple act of conversation seemed to let him
breathe again and still the tre mors that ran over him like
breaking waves.
Suddenly , the old man broke o f f what he was saying, and
nodded over Roger ’ s shoulder .
“Go on, lad. He needs ye.”
Roger had turned to see Jamie standing at the far side of the
clearing, half-turned away and leaning on a tree, his head
bowed i n thought. Had he ma de some sign to Arch? Then
Jamie glanced round, and met Roger ’ s eye. Y es, he wantedhim, and  Roger found himself standing beside Fraser , with no
clear memory of having crossed the ground between them.
Jamie re ached out and squeezed his hand, hard, and he held
on, squeezing back.
“A word, a cliamhuinn, ” Jamie said, and let go. “I wouldna
speak so  now , but there may be no good time later , and there’ s
little tim e to bide.” He sounded calm, too, but not like Arch.
There w ere broken things in his voice; Roger felt the hairy bite
of the rope, hearing it, and cleared his own throat.
“Say , then.”
Jamie took a de ep breath, and shrugged a bit, as though his
shirt were too tight.
“The bairn. It’ s no right to ask ye, but I must. W ould ye feel
the same for him, and ye kent for sure he wasna your own?”
“What?” Roger simply blinked,  making no sense whatever
of this. “Bai—ye mean Jem?”
Jamie nodded, eyes intent on Roger ’ s.
“W ell, I … I dinna ken, quite,” Roger said, baf fled as to
what this was about. Why? And why now ,  of all times?
“Think.”
He was  thinking, wondering what the hell? Evidently this
thought showe d, for Fraser ducked his head in
acknowledgment of the need to explain himself further .
“I ke n …  it’ s no likely , aye? Bu t it’ s possible. She might be
wi’ child by the night’ s work, d’ye see?”
He did see, with a blow like a fist under the breastbone.
Before he could get breath to speak, Fraser went on.
“There’ s a day or two, perha ps, when I might—” He
glanced away , and a dull flush showed through the streaks of
soot with which he had painted his face. “There could be
doubt, aye? As there is for you. But …” He swallowed, that
“but” hanging eloquent.Jamie g lanced away , involun tarily , and Roger ’ s eyes
followed the direction of his gaze. Beyond a screen of bush
and red-tinged creeper , there w as an eddy pool, and Claire
knelt on the far side, naked, studying her reflection. The blood
thundered in Roger ’ s ears, and he jerked his eyes away , but the
image was seared on his mind.
She did not look  human, was the first thing he thought. Her
body mottled black with bruises, her face unrecognizable, she
looked like something strange and primal, an exotic creature
of the forest po ol. Beyond appearance, though, it was her
attitude that struck him. She was remote, somehow , and still,
in the way that a tree is still, even as the air stirs its leaves.
He g lanced back, unable not to . She bent over the water ,
studying her face. Her hair hun g wet and tangled down her
back, and she skimmed it bac k with the palm of a hand,
holding it out of  the way as she surveyed her battered features
with dispassionate intentness.
She prodded gently here and there, opening and closing her
jaw as her fingertips explored the contours of her face.
T esting, he supposed, for loose teeth and broken bones. She
closed her eyes and traced the lines of brow and nose, jaw and
lip, hand  as sure and delicate as a painter ’ s. Then she seized
the end of her nose with determination and pulled hard.
Roger cringed in reflex, as blood  and tears poured down her
face, but she ma de no sound. His stomach was already knotted
into a small, pa inful ball; it rose up into his throat, pressing
against the rope scar .
She sat back on  her heels, breathing deeply , eyes closed,
hands cupped over the center of her face.
He became suddenly aware that she was  naked, and he was
still staring. He jerked away , blo od hot in his face, and glanced
surreptitiously toward Jamie in hopes that Fraser had not
noticed. He hadn’ t—he was no longer there.
Roger lo oked wildly round, but spotted him almost at once.
His relief at not being caught staring was superseded at onceby a jolt of adrenaline, when he saw what Fraser was doing.
He was standing beside a body on the ground.
Fraser ’ s gaze flicked briefly round, taking note of his men,
and Roger could almost feel the ef fort with which Jamie
suppressed his own feelings. Then Fraser ’ s bright blue eyes
fastened on the m an at his feet, and Roger saw him breathe in,
very slowly .
Lionel Brown.
Quite without meaning to, Roger had found himself striding
across the clearing. He took u p his place at Jamie’ s right
without conscious thought, his attention similarly fixed on the
man on the ground.
Brown’ s eyes were shut, but he wasn’ t asleep. His face was
bruised and swollen, as well a s patched with fever , but the
expression of barely suppressed panic was plain on his
battered feature s. Fully justified, too, so far as Roger could
see.
The sole  survivor of the night’ s work, Brown was still alive
only bec ause Arch Bug had stopped young Ian Murray inches
away from smashing his skull with a tomahawk. Not from any
hesitation about killing an injured man, from cold pragmatism.
“Y our uncle will have questions,” Arch had said, narrowed
eyes on Brown. “Let this one live long enough to answer
them.”
Ian had said no thing, but pulled his arm from Arch Bug’ s
grasp and turned on his heel, dis appearing into the shadows of
the forest like smoke.
Jamie’ s face was much less expressive than his captive’ s,
Roger thought. He himself could tell nothing of Fraser ’ s
thoughts from his expression—but scarcely needed to. The
man wa s still as stone, but seemed nonetheless to throb with
something slow and inexorable. Merely to stand near him was
terrifying.“How s ay you, O, friend?” Fra ser said at last, turning to
Arch, w ho stood  on the far side of the pallet, white-haired and
blood-streaked. “Can he be traveling further , or will the
journey kill him?”
Bug lea ned forward, peering dispassionately at the supine
Brown.
“I say he will live. His face is red, not white, and he is
awake. Y ou wish to take him with us, or ask your questions
now?”
For a brief instant the mask lifted, and Roger , who had been
watching Jamie ’ s face, saw in his eyes precisely what he
wished t o do. Had Lionel Brown seen it, too, he would have
leaped o f f his pallet and run, b roken leg or no. But his eyes
stayed stubbornly shut, and as Jamie and old Arch were
speaking in Gaelic, Brown remained in ignorance.
W ithout answering Arch’ s question, Jamie knelt and put his
hand on  Brown’ s chest. Roger could see the pulse hammering
in Brown’ s neck and the man’ s breathing, quick and shallow .
Still, he kept his  lids squeezed tight shut, though the eyeballs
rolled to and fro, frantic beneath them.
Jamie stayed motionless for what seemed a long time—and
must have been an eternity to B rown. Then he made a small
sound th at might have been eith er a contemptuous laugh or a
snort of disgust, and rose.
“W e tak e him. See that he lives, then,” he said in English.
“For now .”
Brown h ad cont inued to play po ssum through the journey to
the Ridg e, in spite of the bloodthirsty speculations various of
the party  had made within his h earing on the way . Roger had
helped t o unstrap him from the  travois at journey’ s end. His
garments and wrappings were soaked with sweat, the smell of
fear a palpable miasma round him.
Claire had made a movement toward the injured man,
frowning, but Jamie had stopped her with a hand on her arm.
Roger h adn’ t heard what he mu rmured to her , but she noddedand wen t with him into the Big  House. A moment later , Mrs.
Bug had appeared, uncharacteristically silent, and taken char ge
of Lionel Brown.
Murdina Bug was not like Jamie , nor old Arch; her thoughts
were plain to see in the bloodless seam of her mouth and the
thunderous brow . But Lionel Brown took water from her hand
and, open-eyed, watched her as though she were the light of
his salva tion. She would, Roger thought, have been pleased to
kill Brown like one of the cockroaches she ruthlessly
exterminated from her kitchen. But Jamie wished him kept
alive, so alive he would stay .
For now .
A so und at the door jerked Roger ’ s attention back to the
present. Brianna!
It w asn’ t, though, when he open ed the door; only the rattle
of wind- tossed twigs and acorn c aps. He looked down the dark
path, ho ping to see her , but there was no sign of her yet. Of
course, he told himself, Claire would likely need her .
So do I.
He squa shed the thought, but stayed at the door , looking
out, win d whinin g in his ears. She’d gone up to the Big House
at once,  the moment he came t o tell her that her mother was
safe. He hadn’ t said much more , but she had seen something
of how matters stood—there was blood on his clothes—and
had barely paused to assure herself that none of it was his
before rushing out.
He closed the door carefully , looking to see that the draft
hadn’ t w akened Jemmy . He had an immense ur ge to pick the
boy up, and in spite of long-ingrained parental wariness about
disturbing a sleeping child, scooped Jem out of his trundle; he
had to.
Jem was  heavy in his arms, and groggy . He stirred, lifted his
head, and blinked, blue eyes glassy with sleep.
“It’ s okay ,” Roger whispered, patting his back. “Daddy’ s
here.”Jem sighed like a punctured tir e and dropped his head on
Roger ’ s shoulde r with the force of a spent cannonball. He
seemed to inflate again for a moment, but then put his thumb
in his mouth and subsided into that peculiarly boneless state
common to sleeping children. His flesh seemed to melt
comfortably into  Roger ’ s own, his trust so complete that it was
not nece ssary ev en to maintain the boundaries of his body—
Daddy would do that.
Roger closed his eyes against starting tears, and pressed his
mouth against the soft warmth of Jemmy’ s hair .
The fire light made black and re d shadows on the insides of
his l ids; by look ing at them, he could keep the tears at bay . It
didn’ t matter what he saw there . He had a small collection of
grisly moments,  vivid from the dawn, but he could look at
those unmoved— for now . It was the sleeping trust in his arms
that moved him, and the echo of his own whispered words.
W as it even a m emory? Perhaps  it was no more than a wish
—that he had on ce been roused from sleep, only to sleep again
in strong arms, hearing, “Daddy’ s here.”
He took deep breaths, slowin g to the rhythm of Jem’ s
breathing, calming himself. It seemed important not to weep,
even though there was no one to see or care.
Jamie had looked at him, as they moved from Brown’ s
pallet, the question clear in his eyes.
“Y e din na think I mind only for myself, I hope?” he had
said, low-voiced. His eyes had turned toward the gap in the
brush where Claire had gone, half-squinting as though he
could not bear to look, but couldn’ t keep his eyes away .
“For her ,” he said, so low that Roger scarcely heard. “W ould
she rather … have the doubt, d’ye think? If it came to that.”
Roger took a deep breath of his son’ s hair , and hoped to
God he’d said the right thing, there among the trees.
“I don’ t know ,” he’d said. “But for you—if there’ s room for
doubt—I say , take it.”If Ja mie were di sposed to follow that advice, Bree should be
home soon.
“I’M FINE,” I said firmly . “Perfectly fine.”
Bree narrowed her eyes at me.
“Sure you are,” she said. “Y ou look like you’ve been run
over by a locomotive. T wo  locomotives.”
“Y es,” I said, and touched my split lip gingerly . “W ell. Y es.
Other than that, though …”
“Are you hungry? Sit down, Ma ma, I’ll make you some tea,
then maybe a little supper .”
I wasn’ t hungry , didn’ t want tea, and particularly didn’ t
want to sit down —not after a lo ng day on horseback. Brianna
was alre ady taking down the te apot from its shelf above the
sideboard, though, and I couldn’ t find the proper words to stop
her . All of a sud den, I seemed to  have no words at all. I turned
toward Jamie, helpless.
He somehow divined my feeling, though he couldn’ t have
read mu ch of anything on my fa ce, given its current state. He
stepped forward, though, and took the teapot from her ,
murmuring som ething too low for me to catch. She frowned at
him, gla nced at me, then back,  still frowning. Then her face
changed a little, and she came to ward me, looking searchingly
into my face.
“A bath?” she asked quietly . “Shampoo?”
“Oh, yes,” I said, and my shoulders sagged in grateful relief.
“Please.”
I d id sit down t hen, after all, an d let her sponge my hands
and feet , and wash my hair in a basin of warm water drawn
from the cauldron in the hearth . She did it quietly , humming
under her breath, and I began to relax under the soothing scrub
of her long, strong fingers.
I’d slept —from sheer exhaustion—part of the way , leaning
on Jami e’ s chest. There’ s no w ay of achieving real rest onhorseback, thou gh, and I found myself now close to nodding
of f, noticing only in a dreamy , detached sort of way that the
water in the basin had turned a grubby , cloudy red, full of grit
and leaf fragments.
I’d changed to a clean shift; the feel of the worn linen on my
skin was sheer luxury , cool and smooth.
Bree wa s humming softly , under her breath. What was it …
“Mr . T am bourine Man,” I thought. One of those sweetly silly
songs of the sixt—
1968.
I gasped, and Bree’ s hands gripped my head, steadying me.
“Mama? Are you all right? Did I touch something—”
“No! No, I’m fine,” I said, looking down into the swirls of
dirt and blood. I  took a deep breath, heart pounding. “Perfectly
fine. Just—began to doze of f, that’ s all.”
She snorted, but took her hand s away and went to fetch a
pitcher of water for rinsing, lea ving me gripping the edge of
the table and trying not to shudder .
Y ou don’ t act a fraid of men. Y ou oughta act mor e afraid.
That par ticularly ironic echo came to me clearly , along with
the outline of the young man’ s head, leonine hair seen
silhouetted by the firelight. I couldn’ t recall his face clearly—
but surely I would have noticed that hair?
Jamie had taken my arm, afterward, and led me out from
under my sheltering tree, into t he clearing. The fire had been
scattered during the fight; there were blackened rocks and
patches of singed and flattened grass here and there—among
the b odies. He h ad led me slow ly from one to another . At the
last, he had paused, and said quietly , “Y e see that they are
dead?”
I did , an d knew  why he had shown me—so I need not fear
their return, or their vengeance. But I had not thought to count
them. O r to look closely at thei r faces. Even had I been sure
how ma ny there were … anoth er shiver struck me, and Breewrapped a warm towel around my shoulders, murmuring
words I didn’ t hear for the questions clamoring in my head.
W as Do nner among the dead? O r had he heeded me, when
I’d t old him tha t if he were wise, he’d run? He hadn’ t struck
me as a wise young man.
He had  struck me as a coward, though.
W arm water sluiced around my ears, drowning out the
sound of Jamie’ s and Brianna’ s voices overhead; I caught only
a word or two, but when I sat back up, with water dripping
down my neck, clutching a t owel to my hair , Bree was
reluctantly mov ing toward her cloak, hung on the peg by the
door .
“Are you sur e  you ’re all right, Mama?” The worried frown
was back between her brows, but this time I could muster a
few words of reassurance.
“Thank you, darling; that was wonderful,” I said, with
complete sinceri ty . “All I want just now is sleep,” I added with
somewhat less.
I was still terrib ly tired, but now completely wakeful. What
I did  wa nt was … well, I didn’ t know quite what I did  want,
but a general ab sence of solicitous company was on the list.
Besides, I’d caught a glimpse of Roger earlier , bloodstained,
white, an d swaying with weariness; I wasn’ t the only victim of
the recent unpleasantness.
“Go home, lass,” Jamie said s oftly . He swung the cloak
from its peg and  over her shoulders, patting her gently . “Feed
your man. T ake him to bed, and say a prayer for him. I’ll mind
your mother , aye?”
Bree’ s g aze swung between us, blue and troubled, but I put
on what  I hoped was a reassuring expression—it hurt to do it,
rather—and after a moment’ s hesitation, she hugged me tight,
kissed my forehead very gently , and left.
Jamie shut the door and stood with his back against it, hands
behind him. I w as used to the impassive facade he normallyused to shield h is thoughts when troubled or angry; he wasn’ t
using it, and the expression on his face troubled me  no end.
“Y ou mustn’ t worry about me,” I said, as reassuringly as I
could. “I’m not traumatized, or anything of that sort.”
“I mustn’ t?” he asked guardedly . “W ell … perhaps I
wouldna, if I kent what ye meant by it.”
“Oh.” I blotted my damp face gingerly , and patted at my
neck with the towel. “W ell. It means … very much injured—or
dreadfully shock ed. It’ s Greek, I think—the root word, I mean,
‘trauma.’”
“Oh, aye? And you’re not … shocked. Y e say .”
His eyes narrowed, as he exam ined me with the sort of
critical attention usually employed when contemplating the
purchase of expensive bloodstock.
“I’m fine,” I said, backing away a little. “Just—I’m all right.
Only a bit … shaken.”
He took a step toward me, and I backed up abruptly , aware
belatedly that I was clutching  the towel to my bosom as
though i t were a shield. I force d myself to lower it, and felt
blood prickle unpleasantly in patches over face and neck.
He stood very still, regarding me with that same narrow
look. Th en his gaze dropped to the floor between us. He stood
as t hough deep in thought, an d then his big hands flexed.
Once, twice. V ery slowly . And  I heard—heard clearly—the
sound of Arvin Hodgepile’ s vertebrae parting one from
another .
Jamie’ s head jerked up, startled , and I realized that I was
standing on the other side of the chair from him, the towel
wadded and pressed against my mouth. My elbows moved like
rusty hinges, stif f and slow , but I got the towel down. My lips
were nearly as stif f, but I spoke, too.
“I am a little shaken, yes,” I said very clearly . “I’ll be all
right. Don’ t worry . I don’ t want you to worry .”The troubled scrutiny in his eye s wavered suddenly , like the
glass of a window struck by a stone, in the split second before
it shatte rs, and he shut his eyes. He swallowed once, and
opened them again.
“Claire,” he said very softly , and  the smashed and splintered
fragments showed clear , sharp and jagged in his eyes. “I have
been  raped. And ye say I must not worry for ye?”
“Oh, God damn it!” I flung the towel on the floor , and
immediately wis hed I had it back again. I felt naked, standing
in m y sh ift, and  hated the craw ling of my skin with a sudden
passion that made me slap my thigh to kill it.
“Damn, damn, damn it! I don’ t  w ant you to have to think of
that aga in. I don’ t!” And yet I had known from the first that
this would happen.
I t ook hold of th e chairback with both hands and held tight,
and tried to force my own gaze into his, wanting so badly to
throw myself upon those glittering shards, to shield him from
them.
“Look,” I said, steadying my voice. “I don’ t want—I don’ t
want to make you recall things better left for gotten.”
The corner of his mouth actually twitched at that.
“God,” he said, in something like wonder . “Y e think I’d
for got any of it?”
“Maybe not,” I said, surrendering. I looked at him through
swimming eyes. “But—oh, Jamie, I so wanted you to for get!”
He put out a hand, very delicately , and touched the tip of his
index finger to the tip of mine, where I clutched the chair .
“Dinna mind it,” he said softly , and withdrew the finger .
“It’ s no matter now . W ill ye r est a bit, Sassenach? Or eat,
maybe?”
“No. I don’ t wa nt … no.” In fact, I couldn’ t decide what  I
wanted to do. I didn’ t want to do anything at all. Other than
unzip my skin, climb out, an d run—and that didn’ t seemfeasible. I took a  few deep breat hs, hoping to settle myself and
go back to that nice sense of utter exhaustion.
Should I ask him about Donner?  But what was there to ask?
“Did you happen to kill a ma n with long, tangled hair?”
They’d all looked like that, to s ome extent. Donner had been
—or possibly still was—an In dian, but no one would have
noticed that in the dark, in the heat of fighting.
“How—how is Roger?” I asked , for lack of anything better
to say . “And Ian? Fer gus?”
He look ed a little startled, as though he had for gotten their
existence.
“Them? The lads are well enough. No one took any hurt in
the fight. W e had luck.”
He h esitated, then took a careful step toward me, watching
my face . I didn’ t scream or bolt , and he took another , coming
close enough that I could feel the warmth of his body . Not
startled this time, and chilly in my damp shift, I relaxed a little,
swaying toward him, and saw th e tension in his own shoulders
let go slightly , seeing it.
He t ouched my face, very gent ly . The blood throbbed just
below th e surface, tender , and I had to brace myself not to
flinch aw ay from  his touch. He saw it, and drew back his hand
a litt le, s o that it hovered just ab ove my skin—I could feel the
heat of his palm.
“W ill it heal?” h e asked, fingertips moving over the split in
my left brow , then down the minefield of my cheek to the
scrape on my ja w where Harley Boble’ s boot had just missed
making a solid connection that would have broken my neck.
“Of course it w ill. Y ou know that; you’ve seen worse on
battlefields.” I would have smiled in reassurance, but didn’ t
want to open the deep split in m y lip again, and so made a sort
of p outing goldfish mouth, which took him by surprise and
made him  smile.
“A ye, I know .” He ducked his head a little, shy . “It’ s only
…” His hand still hovered near my face, an expression oftroubled anxiety  on his own. “Oh, God, mo nighean donn, ” he
said softly . “Oh, Christ, your lovely face.”
“Can you not bear to look at it?” I asked, turning my own
eyes aw ay and feeling a sharp little pang at the thought, but
trying to  convince myself that it didn’ t matter . It would  heal,
after all.
His fingers touched my chin, ge ntly but firmly , and drew it
up, so that I faced him again. His mouth tightened a little as
his gaze moved slowly over my battered face, taking
inventory . His eyes were soft an d dark in the candlelight, the
corners tight with pain.
“No,” he  said quietly , “I cannot bear it. The sight of ye tears
my heart. And it fills me with such rage I think I must kill
someone or burst. But by the God who made ye, Sassenach,
I’ll not lie with ye and be unable to look ye in the face.”
“Lie with me?” I said blankly . “What … you mean now ?”
His hand  dropped from my chi n, but he looked steadily at
me, not blinking.
“W ell … aye. I do.”
Had my jaw no t been so swollen, my mouth would have
dropped open in pure astonishment.
“Ah … why?”
“Why?” he repeated. He dropped his gaze then, and made
the odd shrugging motion that h e made when embarrassed or
discomposed. “I—well—it seems … necessary .”
I had a thoroughly unsuitable ur ge to laugh.
“Necessary? Do you think it’ s li ke being thrown by a horse?
I ought to get straight back on?”
His head jerked up and he shot me an angry glance.
“No,” he said, between clenched teeth. He swallowed hard
and visibly , obviously reining in strong feelings. “Are ye—are
ye badly damaged, then?”I stared at him as best I could, through my swollen lids.
“Is t hat a joke of some—oh,” I said, it finally dawning on
me what he meant. I felt heat ri se in my face, and my bruises
throbbed.
I took a deep breath, to be sure of being able to speak
steadily .
“I have been be aten to a bloody  pulp, Jamie, and abused in
several nasty ways. But only o ne … there was only the one
who actually … He—he wasn’ t … rough.” I swallowed, but
the hard knot i n my throat didn’ t budge perceptibly . T ears
made the candlelight blur so that I couldn’ t see his face, and I
looked away , blinking.
“No!” I said, my voice sounding rather louder than I
intended. “I’m not … damaged.”
He said something in Gaelic u nder his breath, short and
explosive, and shoved himself a way from the table. His stool
fell over with a loud crash, and he kicked it. Then he kicked it
again, a nd again, and stamped on it with such violence that
bits of wood fle w across the kitchen and struck the pie safe
with little pinging sounds.
I sat  completely still, too shocke d and numb to feel distress.
Should I  not have told him? I wondered vaguely . But he knew ,
surely . He had asked, when he found me. “How many?”  he
had demanded. And then had said, “Kill them all.”
But then … to know something was one thing, and to be
told the details another . I did k now that, and watched with a
dim sense of guilty sorrow as he kicked away the splinters of
the stool  and flung himself at the window . It was shuttered, but
he s tood, hands braced on the s ill and his back turned to me,
shoulders heaving. I couldn’ t tell if he was crying.
The win d was rising; there was a squall coming in from the
west. The shutters rattled, and the night-smoored fire spouted
puf fs of  soot as the wind came down the chimney . Then the
gust passed, and there was no sound but the small sudden
crack!  of an ember in the hearth.“I’m sorry ,” I said at last, in a small voice.
Jamie sw iveled on his heel at once and glared at me. He
wasn’ t crying, but he had been; his cheeks were wet.
“Don’ t you dare be sorry!” he roared. “I willna have it, d’ye
hear?” He took a giant step tow ard the table and crashed his
fist down on it, hard enough to make the saltcellar jump and
fall over . “Don’ t be sorry!”
I had closed my eyes in reflex,  but forced myself to open
them again.
“All right,” I sa id. I felt terribly , terribly tired again, and
very much like crying myself. “I won’ t.”
There w as a char ged silence. I could hear chestnuts falling
in the grove be hind the house, dislodged by the wind. One,
and then another , and another , a  rain of muf fled tiny thumps.
Then Jamie drew a deep, shu ddering breath, and wiped a
sleeve across his face.
I p ut my elbows on the table and leaned my head on my
hands; it seemed much too heavy to hold up anymore.
“Necessary ,” I said, more or l ess calmly to the tabletop.
“What did you mean, necessary?”
“Does it not occur to you that ye might be with child?” He’d
got himself back under control, and said this as calmly as he
might have asked whether I planned to serve bacon with the
breakfast porridge.
Startled, I looked up at him.
“I’m not.” But my hands had gone by reflex to my belly .
“I’m not,” I rep eated more strongly . “I can’ t be.” I could,
though—just possibly . The cha nce was a remote one, but it
existed. I normally used some fo rm of contraception, just to be
certain—but obviously …
“I am not, ” I said. “I’d know .”
He mere ly stared at me, eyebrow s raised. I wouldn’ t; not so
soon. So soon—soon enough t hat if it wer e  so, and if therewere more than one man … there would be doubt. The benefit
of the doubt; that’ s what he of fered me—and himself.
A deep shudde r started in the  depths of my womb and
spread instantly through my body , making goose bumps break
out on my skin, despite the warmth of the room.
“Martha,”  the man had whispered, the weight of him
pressing me into the leaves.
“Bloody , bloody  hell,” I said very quietly . I spread my
hands out flat on the table, trying to think.
“Martha.”  And the stale smell of him, the meaty press of
damp bare thighs, rasping with hair—
“No!” My legs and buttocks pr essed together so tightly in
revulsion that I rose an inch or two on the bench.
“Y ou might—” Jamie began stubbornly .
“I’m not ,” I repeated, just as stubbornly . “But even if—you
can’ t, Jamie.”
He l ooked at me, and I caught the flicker of fear in his eyes.
That, I realized with a jolt, was exactly what he was afraid of.
Or one of the things.
“I mean we can’ t,” I said quickl y . “I’m almost sure that I’m
not preg nant—but I’m not at all sure that I haven’ t been
exposed to some disgusting disease.” That was something else
I h adn’ t thought  of until now , and the goose bumps were back
in full force. Pregnancy was unlikely; gonorrhea or syphilis
weren’ t. “W e— we can’ t. Not until I’ve had a course of
penicillin.”
I was rising from the bench even as I spoke.
“Where are ye going?” he asked, startled.
“The sur gery!”
The hallway was dark, and the  fire out in my sur gery , but
that didn’ t stop me. I flung open the door of the cupboard, and
began g roping hastily about. A light fell over my shoulder ,illuminating the shimmering row of bottles. Jamie had lit a
taper and come after me.
“What in the name of God are ye doing, Sassenach?”
“Penicillin,” I said, seizing one o f the bottles and the leather
pouch in which I kept my snake-fang syringes.
“Now?”
“Y es, bloody now! Light the candle, will you?”
He did, and the light wavered and grew into a globe of
warm yellow , gleaming of f the l eather tubes of my homemade
syringes. I had a good bit of penicillin mixture to hand,
luckily . The liquid in the bo ttle was pink; many of the
Penicillium  c olonies from t his batch had been grown in stale
wine.
“Are ye  sure it will work?” Jamie asked quietly , from the
shadows.
“No,” I said, t ight-lipped. “B ut it’ s what I have.” The
thought of spirochetes, multiplying silently in my bloodstream,
second by second, was making m y hand shake. I choked down
the f ear that the  penicillin might be defective. It had worked
miracles on gross superficial infections. There was no reason
why—
“Let me  do it, Sassenach.” Jami e took the syringe from my
hand; my fingers were slippery a nd fumbling. His were steady ,
his face calm in candlelight as he filled the syringe.
“Do me first, then,” he said, handing it back.
“What—you? But you don’ t need to—I mean—you hate
injections,” I ended feebly .
He snorted briefly and lowered his brows at me.
“Listen, Sassena ch. If I mean to fight my own fears, and
yours—and I do—then I shallna  boggle at pinpricks, aye? Do
it!” He turned his side to me and bent over , one elbow braced
on t he c ounter , and hitched up the side of his kilt, baring one
muscular buttock.I w asn’ t  sure whether to laugh or cry . I might have ar gued
further with him, but a glance at him, standing there bare-arsed
and stubborn as Black Mountain , decided me of the futility of
that. He ’d made  up his mind, and we were both going to live
with the consequences.
Feeling suddenly and oddly calm, I lifted the syringe,
squeezing gently to remove any air bubbles.
“Shift your weight, then,” I said, nudging him rudely .
“Relax this side; I don’ t want to break the needle.”
He d rew in his breath with a his s; the needle was thick, and
there wa s enough alcohol from the wine to make it sting badly ,
as I discovered when I took my own injection a minute later .
“Ouch! Ow! Oh, Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” I exclaimed,
gritting my teeth as I withdrew the needle from my thigh.
“Christ, that hurts!”
Jamie gave me a lopsided smile, still rubbing his backside.
“A ye, well. The rest of it won’ t be worse than this, I
expect.”
The rest  of it. I felt suddenly ho llow , and light-headed with
it, as though I hadn’ t eaten for a week.
“Y ou—you’re sure?” I asked, putting down the syringe.
“No,” he said. “ I’m not.” He to ok a deep breath then, and
looked at me, his face uncertai n in the wavering candlelight.
“But I mean to try . I must.”
I smoot hed the linen night rail down over my punctured
thigh, lo oking a t him as I did i t. He’d dropped all his masks
long since; the doubt, the ange r , and the fear were all there,
etched plain in the desperate l ines of his face. For once, I
thought, my own countenance w as less easy to read, masked
behind its bruises.
Something soft brushed past my leg with a small mirp!  and I
looked d own to see that Adso h ad brought me a dead vole, no
doubt by way of sympathy . I started to smile, felt my lip tingle,and then looked up at Jamie and let it split as I did smile, the
taste of blood warm silver on my tongue.
“W ell …  you’ve come whenever I’ve needed you; I rather
think you’ll do it this time, too.”
He looked completely blank for an instant, not grasping the
feeble joke. Then it struck him, and blood rushed to his face.
His lip twitched , and twitched a gain, unable to decide between
shock and laughter .
I thought he turned his back then to hide his face, but in
fact, he had only  turned to search the cupboard. He found what
he w as l ooking f or , and turned r ound again with a bottle of my
best muscat wine in his hand, shining dark. He held it to his
body with his elbow , and took down another .
“A ye, I will,” he said, reaching o ut his free hand to me. “But
if ye think either one of us is going to do this sober , Sassenach,
ye’re verra much mistaken.”
A GUST  OF WIND from the open door roused Roger from
uneasy sleep. He had fallen a sleep on the settle, his legs
trailing on the floor , Jemmy sn uggled warmly heavy on his
chest.
He looked up, blinking and disoriented, as Brianna stooped
to take the little boy from his arms.
“Is it raining out?” he said, cat ching a whif f of damp and
ozone from her cloak. He sat up and rubbed a hand over his
face to rouse himself, feeling the scruf f of a four -day beard.
“No, bu t it’ s going to.” She laid Jemmy back in his trundle,
covered him, and hung up the c loak before coming to Roger .
She sme lled of the night, and he r hand was cold on his flushed
cheek. He put h is arms round h er waist and leaned his head
against her , sighing.
He wou ld have been happy to stay that way forever—or at
least the  next hour or two. She  stroked his head gently for a
moment, though, then moved away , stooping to light the
candle from the hearth.“Y ou must be starved. Shall I fix you something?”
“No. I mean … yes. Please.” As the last remnants of
grogginess fell away , he realized that he was, in fact, starving.
After th eir stop at the stream in the morning, they hadn’ t
stopped again, Jamie anxious to get home. He couldn’ t recall
when he’d last eaten, but hadn’ t felt any sense of hunger at all
until this minute.
He f ell on the bread and butter and jam she brought him,
ravenous. He ate single-mindedly , and it was several minutes
before he thought to ask, swal lowing a final thick, buttery ,
sweet bite, “How’ s your mother?”
“Fine,” she said, with an excellent imitation of Claire with
her stif fe st English upper lip. “ Perfectly  fine.” She grimaced at
him, and he laug hed, though quietly , with an automatic glance
at the trundle.
“Is she, then?”
Bree raised an eyebrow at him.
“Do you  think so?”
“No,” he  admitt ed, sobering. “But I don’ t think she’ s going
to tell you if she’ s not. She’ll not want ye worrying.”
She ma de a rather rude glotta l noise in response to this
notion, a nd turne d her back on him, lifting the long veil of hair
of f her neck.
“W ill you do my laces?”
“Y ou sound just like your father  when ye make that noise—
only higher -pitched. Have ye been practicing?” He stood up
and pulled the laces loose. Undid her stays as well, then on
impulse, slid his hands inside the opened gown, resting them
on the warm swell of her hips.
“Every d ay . Have you?” She leaned back against him, and
his hands came up, cupping her breasts by reflex.
“No,” he admitted. “It hurts.” It was Claire’ s suggestion—
that he try to sing, pitching his voice both higher and lowerthan nor mal, in  hopes of loose ning his vocal cords, perhaps
restoring a bit of his original resonance.
“Coward,” she said, but her voi ce was nearly as soft as the
hair that brushed his cheek.
“A ye, I am,” he said as softly . I t did hurt, but it wasn’ t the
physical pain that he minded. It was feeling the echo of his old
voice in  his bones—the ease and power of it—and then
hearing the uncouth noises that emer ged with such dif ficulty
now from his throat—croaks and grunts and squeals. Like a
pig choking to death on a crow , he thought disparagingly .
“It’ s them that are cowards,” Br ee said, still speaking softly ,
but with steel in her voice. She t ensed a little in his arms. “Her
face—her poor face! How could they? How could anybody do
something like that?”
He h ad a sudden vision of Claire, naked by the pool, silent
as the rocks, h er breasts streaked with the blood from her
newly set nose. He drew back, nearly jerking his hands away .
“What?” Brianna said, startled. “What’ s the matter?”
“Nothing.” He pulled his hands out of her gown and stepped
back. “I—er , is there maybe a bit of milk?”
She looked at him oddly , but went out to the lean-to at the
back and  brough t in a jug of mi lk. He drank it thirstily , aware
of her eyes on him, watchful as a cat’ s, as she undressed and
changed into her night rail.
She sat down on the bed and began to brush out her hair ,
preparing to plait it for sleep. O n impulse, he reached out and
took the brush from her . W itho ut speaking, he ran one hand
through the thickness of her ha ir , lifting it, smoothing it back
from her face.
“Y ou’re beautiful,” he whispered, and felt tears come to his
eyes again.
“So are  you.” She lifted her hands to his shoulders and
brought him slowly down to his  knees before her . She looked
searchingly into his eyes—he did his best to look back. Shesmiled a little, t hen, and reached to untie the thong that held
his own hair back.
It fe ll around his  shoulders in a dusty black tangle, smelling
of burne d things , stale sweat, a nd horses. He protested when
she took up her hairbrush, but she ignored him, and made him
bend his head over her lap, while she picked pine straw and
sandburs from his head, slowly  working out the snarls. His
head bent lower , and lower still, and he found himself at last
with his  forehead pressed into her lap, breathing in the close
scent of her .
He was reminded of medieval paintings, sinners kneeling,
heads bowed in confession and remorse. Presbyterians did not
confess on their knees—Catholics still did, he thought. In
darkness, like this—in anonymity .
“Y e’ve not asked me what happ ened,” he whispered at last,
to the shadows of her thighs. “Did your father tell ye?”
He heard  her draw breath, but h er voice was calm when she
replied.
“No.”
She said no mo re, and the room was quiet, save for the
sound o f the brush through his hair , and the rising rush of the
wind outside.
How would it be for Jamie? Roger wondered suddenly .
W ould he really do it? T ry to  … He shied away from the
thought, unable to contemplate it. Seeing instead a picture of
Claire, c oming out of the dawn, her face a swollen mask. Still
herself, but remote as a distant planet on an orbit departing for
the o uter reaches of deep space— when might it come in sight
again? Stooping  to touch the dead, at Jamie’ s ur ging, to see for
herself the price of her honor .
It wasn’ t the possibility of a child, he thought suddenly . It
was fear—but not of that. It w as Jamie’ s fear that he would
lose her—that she would go, sw ing out into a dark and solitary
space without him, unless he could somehow bind her to him,keep her with h im. But, Christ, what a risk to take—with a
woman so shocked and brutalized, how could he risk it?
How could he not?
Brianna laid down the brush, th ough she kept a hand gently
on his head, stro king it. He kne w that fear too well himself—
remembered the  gulf that once had lain between them, and the
courage it had taken to leap over it. For both of them.
He was some kind of a coward, maybe—but not that kind.
“Brianna,” he said, and felt the lump in his throat, the scar
of the rope. She heard the need in his voice and looked at him
as he raised his  head, hand lifting toward his face, and he
seized i t hard, pressing the p alm of it against his cheek,
rubbing against it.
“Brianna,” he said again.
“What? What is it?” Her voice was soft, not to wake the
bairn, but full of ur gency .
“Brianna, will ye hear me?”
“Y ou know I will. What is it?” Her body was against him,
wanting to tend him, and he d esired the comfort of her so
badly th at he would have lain do wn there on the rug before the
fire and buried his head between her breasts—but not yet.
“Only—listen to what I must say . And then—please God—
tell me I have done right.” T ell me that you love me, still,  he
meant, but could not say it.
“Y ou don’ t have to tell me any thing,” she whispered. Her
eyes were dark and soft, bottom less with for giveness not yet
earned. And somewhere beyond  them, he saw another pair of
eyes, staring up at him in drunken bewilderment, changing
abruptly into fear as he raised his arm for the killing blow .
“Y es, I do,” he said softly . “Put out the candle, aye?”
NOT THE KITCHEN, still stre wn with emotional wreckage.
Not the sur gery , with all its sharp-edged memories. Jamiehesitated, but then nodded toward the stair , raising one
eyebrow . I nodded, and followed him up to our bedroom.
It seeme d both familiar and stra nge, as places do when one
is away for a tim e. Perhaps it w as only my injured nose that
made it  smell strange, too; pe rhaps I only imagined that I
could smell it—cold and somehow stale, though everything
was sw ept and dusted. Jamie poked up the fire and light
sprang up, wavering in bright swaths over the wooden walls,
the scen ts of smoke and hot res in helping to fill the sense of
emptiness in the room.
Neither of us glanced toward the bed. He lit the candlestick
on the washstand , then set our two stools near the window , and
opened the shutters to the rest less night. He’d brought two
pewter c ups; he filled these an d set them on the broad sill,
along with the bottles.
I stood just inside the doorway , watching his preparations,
feeling thoroughly peculiar .
I wa s suf fering the oddest contr adiction of feelings. On the
one hand , I felt as though he were a complete stranger . I could
not even  imagin e, let alone reca ll, a sense of ease in touching
him. His  body was no longer the comfortable extension of my
own, but something foreign, unapproachable.
At the same tim e, alarming sur ges of lust ripped through me
without warning. It had been happening all day . This was
nothing like the slow burn of accustomed desire, nor yet the
instant spark of passion. Not even that cyclic and mindless
womb-yearning sense of a need to mate that belonged entirely
to the body . This was frightening.
He stooped to p ut another stick on the fire, and I nearly
staggered, as all the blood left m y head. The light shone on the
hair of his arms, the dark hollows of his face—
It was the sheer  impersonal sense of a voracious appetite —
something that possessed me, but was not part of me—that
terrified me. It was fear of it that made me avoid his touch,
more than the feeling of estrangement.“Are ye  all right, Sassenach?” He had caught sight of my
face, an d stepped toward me, frowning. I held up a hand to
stop him.
“Fine,” I said, feeling breathless. I sat down hastily , my
knees w eak, and  picked up one  of the cups he had just filled.
“Um … cheers.”
Both his  brows went up, but he moved to take his own seat
opposite me.
“Cheers,” he said quietly , and t ouched his cup to mine, the
wine heavy and sweet-smelling in my hand.
My fing ers were  cold; so were my toes, and the tip of my
nose. That changed, too, without warning. Another minute,
and I might be suf fused with heat, sweating and flushed. But
for t he moment, I was cold, an d shivered in the rainy breeze
from the window .
The wine’ s aroma was strong e nough to make an impact,
even on my da maged membranes, and the sweetness was a
comfort to nerves and stomach  alike. I drank the first cup
quickly , and poured another , ur gently wanting a small layer of
oblivion between reality and myself.
Jamie drank more slowly , but r efilled his own cup when I
did. The cedar blanket chest, warmed by the fire, was
beginning to spread its own familiar fragrance through the
room. He glanced at me now an d then, but said nothing. The
silence between us was not aw kward, precisely , but it was
char ged.
I s hould  say something, I thoug ht. But what? I sipped the
second cup, racking my brain.
At last, I reache d out slowly a nd touched his nose, where
the t hin line of the long-healed break pressed white against the
skin.
“Do you know ,” I said, “you’v e never told me how you
came to break your nose. Who set it for you?”“Och, that? No one.” He smile d, touching his nose a little
self-consciously . “‘T was only luck that the break was a clean
one, for I didna pay it the slightest heed at the time.”
“I su ppose not. Y ou said—” I broke of f, suddenly recalling
what he had  s aid . When I had found him again, in his printer ’ s
shop in Edinbur gh, I’d asked h im when he’d broken it. He’d
answered, “About thr ee minutes after I last saw ye,
Sassenach.”  On the eve of Culloden, then—on that rocky
Scottish hill, below the ring of standing stones.
“I’m sorry ,” I sa id a little weakly . “Y ou probably don’ t want
to think about that, do you?”
He seized my free hand, hard, and looked down at me.
“Y ou ma y have it,” he said. His  voice was very low , but he
met my eyes st raight on. “All of it. Anything that was ever
done to me. If ye wish it, if it h elps ye, I will live it through
again.”
“Oh, God, Jamie,” I said softly .  “No. I don’ t need to know;
all I need is to know that you did  l ive  through it. That you’re
all r ight. But …” I hesitated. “W ill I tell you ?” W hat was do ne
to m e, I meant,  and he knew it. He did glance away then,
though h e held my hand in both  of his, cradling it and rubbing
his palm gently over my bruised knuckles.
“Must you?”
“I think so. Sometime. But not now—not unless you … you
need to hear .” I swallowed. “First.”
He shook his head, very slightly , but still didn’ t look at me.
“Not now ,” he whispered. “Not now .”
I took my hand away , and swallowed the rest of the wine in
my cup, rough and warm and musky with the tang of grape
skins. I had stopped going hot and cold by turns; now I was
only warm throughout, and grateful for it.
“Y our nose,” I said, and poured another cup. “T ell me, then.
Please.”He shrugged slightly .
“A ye, well. There were two English soldiers, come scouting
up t he hill. I think they didna expect to find anyone—neither
had his musket loaded, or I should ha’ died there.”
He s poke quite casually . A sma ll shiver went over me, but
not from cold.
“They saw me, ken, and then one of them saw you, up
above. He shouted, and made to go after ye, so I threw myself
on him. I didna care at all what  happened, so long as ye were
safe away , so I went for him bald-heided; plunged my dirk into
his s ide. But his  bullet box swu ng into my way and the knife
stuck in  it, and—” He smiled,  lopsided. “And while I was
trying to  get it fr ee and keep fro m bein’ killed, his friend came
up and swung the stock of his musket into my face.”
His free  hand had curled up as he spoke, grasping the hilt of
a remembered dirk.
I flinched, knowing now exactly what that had felt like. Just
hearing about it made my own  nose throb. I snif fed, dabbed
cautiously at it with the back of my hand, and poured more
wine.
“How did you get away?”
“I took the musket from him and clubbed them both to death
with it.”
He spok e quietl y , almost colorlessly , but there was an odd
resonance to his voice that mad e my stomach shift uneasily . It
was too fresh, th at sight of the blood drops gleaming by dawn
light in the hair s of his arm. T oo fresh, that undertone of—
what was it? satisfaction?—in his voice.
I wa s suddenly too restless to sit still. A moment before I
had been  so exhausted that my b ones were melting; now I had
to m ove. I stood  up, leaning ou t over the sill. The storm was
coming; the wind was freshening, blowing back my new-
washed hair , and lightning flickered in the distance.“I’m sorry , Sassenach,” Jamie said, sounding worried. “I
shouldna have told ye. Are ye bothered by it?”
“Bothered? No, not by that.”
I spo ke a little tersely . Why had I asked him about his nose,
of all things? Why now , when I had been content to live in
ignorance for the last several years?
“What bothers ye, then?” he asked quietly .
What w as bothering me was th at the wine had been doing
its job of anesthetizing me nicely; now I had ruined it. All the
images of the night before were back inside my head, thrown
into vivid T echnicolor by that simple statement, that oh-so-
matter -of-fact, “I took the musket fr om him and clubbed them
both to death with it.”  And its unspoke n echo, It is mys elf who
kills for her .
I wa nted to throw up. Instead, I gulped more wine, not even
tasting i t, swallo wing it down as  fast as I could. I dimly heard
Jamie ask again what bothered me, and swung round to glare
at him.
“What b others me—bothers! What a stupid word! What
drives me absolutely mad  is that I might have been anyone,
anything—a convenient warm spot with spongy bits to
squeeze—God, I was no more than a hole  to them!”
I struck the sill with my fist, then, angered by the impotent
little thump of i t, picked up my cup, turned round, and hurled
it against the wall.
“It w asn’ t that way with Blac k Jack Randall, was it?” I
demanded. “He knew you, didn’ t he? He saw you  when he
used you; it wou ldn’ t have been the same if you were anyone
—he wanted you. ”
“My Go d, ye think that was better?” he blurted, and stared
at me, eyes wide.
I stopped, panting for breath and feeling dizzy .
“No.” I dropped onto the stool and closed my eyes, feeling
the room  go round and round me, colored lights like a carouselbehind my eyes. “No. I don’ t. I think Jack Randall was a
bloody sociopathic, grade-A p ervert, and these—these”—I
flipped a hand, u nable to think of a suitable word—”they were
just … men.”
I spo ke the last word with a sen se of loathing evident even
to me.
“Men,” Jamie said, his voice sounding odd.
“Men,” I said. I opened my eyes and looked at him. My
eyes felt hot, and I thought they must glow red, like a
possum’ s in torchlight.
“I ha ve lived thr ough a fucking world war ,” I said, my voice
low and venomous. “I have l ost a child. I have lost two
husbands. I have starved with  an army , been beaten and
wounded, been patronized, betrayed, imprisoned, and attacked.
And I have fuck ing survived!” My voice was rising, but I was
helpless to stop it. “And now should I be shattered because
some wretched, pathetic excuses for men stuck their nasty
little appendage s between my legs and wiggled  them?!” I
stood up, seized the edge of the washstand and heaved it over ,
sending everything flying with a crash—basin, ewer , and
lighted candlestick, which promptly went out.
“W ell, I won’ t,” I said quite calmly .
“Nasty little appendages?” he said, looking rather stunned.
“Not yo urs,” I said. “I didn’ t me an yours. I’m rather fond of
yours.” Then I sat down and burst into tears.
His arms came r ound me, slowly and gently . I didn’ t startle
or jerk away , an d he pressed my  head against him, smoothing
my damp, tangled hair , his fingers catching in the mass of it.
“Christ, ye are a brave wee thing,” he murmured.
“Not,” I said, ey es closed. “I’m not.” I grabbed his hand and
brought it to my lips, closing my eyes as I did so.
I brushed my battered mouth across his knuckles, blind.
They were swollen, as bruised as mine; I touched my tongue
to his flesh, tasted soap and dust and the silver taste of scrapesand gashes—marks left by bones and broken teeth. Pressed my
fingers to the ve ins beneath the skin of wrist and arm, softly
resilient, and the solid lines of  the bones beneath. I felt the
tributaries of his veins, wished to enter into his bloodstream,
travel th ere, dissolved and bodiless, to take refuge in the thick-
walled chambers of his heart. But I couldn’ t.
I r an my hand up his sleeve, exploring, clinging, relearning
his bod y . I touched the hair in his oxter and stroked it,
surprised at the soft, silky feel of it.
“Do you know ,” I said, “I don’ t believe I’ve ever touched
you there before?”
“I dinna believe ye have,” he s aid, with a hint of nervous
laughter in his voice. “I wou ld ha’ remembered. Oh!” A
stipple of gooseflesh burst out over the soft skin there, and I
pressed my forehead to his chest.
“The worst of it is,” I said, into his shirt, “that I knew them.
Each on e of them. And I’ll remember them. And feel guilty
that they’re dead, because of me.”
“No,” he said softly , but ver y firmly . “They are dead
because of me,  Sassenach. And because of their own
wickedness. If there is guilt, let it rest upon them. Or on me.”
“Not on you alone,” I said, my eyes still closed. It was dark
in th ere, and soothing. I could hear my voice, distant but clear ,
and wondered dimly where the words were coming from.
“Y ou’re blood of my blood, bo ne of my bone. Y ou said so.
What you do rests on me, as well.”
“Then may your vow redeem me,” he whispered.
He lifted me to my feet and gath ered me to him, like a tailor
gathering up a length of fragile, heavy silk—slowly , long-
fingered, fold upon fold. He car ried me then across the room,
and laid me gently on the bed, in the light from the flickering
fire.
HE’D M EANT T O be gentle. V ery gentle. Had planned it with
care, worrying each step of th e long way home. She wasbroken; he must go canny , take his time. Be careful in gluing
back her shattered bits.
And the n he came to her and discovered that she wished no
part of gentleness, of courting. She wished directness. Brevity
and viol ence. If she was broken, she would slash him with her
jagged edges, reckless as a drunkard with a shattered bottle.
For a moment, two moments, he struggled, trying to hold
her c lose and ki ss her tenderly . S he squirmed like an eel in his
arms, then rolled over him, wriggling and biting.
He’d thought to ease her—both of them—with the wine.
He’d kn own she lost all sense of restraint when in drink; he
simply hadn’ t realized what she was restraining, he thought
grimly , trying to seize her without hurting.
He, of all peopl e, should have known. Not fear or grief or
pain—but rage.
She raked his b ack; he felt the scrape of broken nails, and
thought dimly that was good—she’d fought. That was the last
of h is th ought; his own fury took him then, rage and a lust that
came on  him like black thunde r on a mountain, a cloud that
hid all from him and him from all, so that kind familiarity was
lost and he was alone, strange in darkness.
It might  be her neck he grasped, or anyone’ s. The feel of
small b ones came to him, kn obbled in the dark, and the
screams of rabbits, killed in his hand. He rose up in a
whirlwind, choked with dirt and the scourings of blood.
W rath boiled and curdled in hi s balls, and he rode to her
spurs. Let his lig htning blaze and sear all trace of the intruder
from he r womb , and if it burnt them both to bone and ash—
then let it be.
WHEN SENSE CAME back to him, he lay with his weight
full on her , crushing her into the bed. Breath sobbed in his
lungs; his hands clenched her arms so hard he felt the bones
like sticks about to snap within his grasp.He h ad lost him self. W as not sure where his body ended.
His mind flailed for a moment, panicked lest it have been
unseated altogether—no. He fel t a drop of cold, sudden on his
shoulder , and the scattered parts of him drew at once together
like sha ttered bits of quicksilver , to leave him quaking and
appalled.
He w as still join ed to her . He wanted to bolt like a startled
quail, but managed to move slo wly , loosening his fingers one
by one from their death grip on her arms, lifting his body
gently away , though the ef fort of it seemed immense, as
though his weight were that of  moons and planets. He half-
expected to see her crushed and flattened, lifeless on the sheet.
But the springy arch of her ribs  rose and fell and rose again,
roundly reassuring.
Another drop struck him in th e back of his neck, and he
hunched his shoulders in surprise. Caught by his movement,
she look ed up, and he met her eyes with shock. She shared it;
the shoc k of strangers meeting one another naked. Her eyes
flicked away from his, up toward the ceiling.
“The roof ’ s leaking,” she whispered. “There’ s a wet patch.”
“Oh.” He had n ot even realized that it was raining. The
room was dark with rainlight, th ough, and the roof thrummed
overhead. The sound of it seem ed inside his blood, like the
beat of the bodhrana inside the night, like the beat of his heart
in the forest.
He shuddered, and for lack of any other notion, kissed her
forehead. Her arms came up sudden as a snare and held him
fiercely , pulling  him down onto her again and he seized her ,
too, crus hing he r to him hard enough to feel the breath go out
of her , unable to let go. He thought vaguely of Brianna’ s talk
of giant orbs t hat whirled through space, the thing called
gravity—and w hat was grave about it? He saw that well
enough just now: a force so great as to balance some body
unthinkably immense in thin air , unsupported—or send two
such bodies crashing into eac h other , in an explosion of
destruction and the smoke of stars.He’d bruised her; there were d ark red marks on her arms
where his fingers had been. Th ey would be black within the
day . The  marks of other men bloomed black and purple, blue
and yellow , clouded petals trapped beneath the whiteness of
her skin.
His thighs and buttocks were strained with ef fort, and a
cramp took him hard, making him groan and twist to ease it.
His skin  was wet; so was hers,  and they slid apart with slow
reluctance.
Eyes puf fed and bruised, clouded like wild honey , inches
from his own.
“How do you feel?” she asked softly .
“T errible,” he replied with complete honesty . He was
hoarse, as though he had been screaming—God, perhaps he
had been. Her mouth had bled again; there was a red smear on
her chin, and the taste of metal from it in his own mouth.
He c leared his t hroat, wanting to look away from her eyes,
but unable to do it. He rubbed a thumb over the smear of
blood, clumsily erasing it.
“Y ou?” he asked, and the wor ds were like a rasp in his
throat. “How do ye feel?”
She had  drawn back a little at his touch, but her eyes were
still fixe d on his. He had the feeling that she was looking far
beyond him, through him—but then the focus of her gaze
came back, and she looked dire ctly at him, for the first time
since he had brought her home.
“Safe,” she whispered, and closed her eyes. She took one
huge breath and her body relaxed all at once, going limp and
heavy like a dying hare.
He held her , both arms wrapped around her as though to
save her from d rowning, but felt her sink away all the same.
He w ished to call out to her not  to go, not to leave him alone.
She vanished into the depths of sleep, and he yearned after her ,
wishing her healed, fearing her flight, and bent his head,
burying his face in her hair and her scent.The wind banged the open shut ters as it passed, and in the
dark outside, one owl hooted and another answered, hiding
from the rain.
Then he  cried, soundless, muscl es strained to aching that he
might not shake with it, that she might not wake to know it. He
wept to emptiness and ragged b reath, the pillow wet beneath
his f ace. Then l ay exhausted beyond the thought of tiredness,
too far from sleep even to reca ll what it was like. His only
comfort was the small, so fragi le weight that lay warm upon
his heart, breathing.
Then he r hands rose and rested o n him, the tears cool on his
face, congealing , the white of her clean as the silent snow that
covers char and blood and breathes peace upon the world.3 0
THE CAPTIVE
I T W AS A STILL, W ARM morning; the last of the Indian
summer . A woodpecker hammered in the wood nearby , and
some insect was making a nois e like rasping metal in the tall
grass beyond the house. I came downstairs slowly , feeling
mildly d isembodied—and wishing I were, since the body I had
hurt almost everywhere.
Mrs. Bug hadn’ t come this morning; perhaps she wasn’ t
feeling w ell. Or  perhaps she wa sn’ t sure yet how to deal with
seeing m e, or what to say to me when she did. My mouth
tightened a little, something I realized only because the
partially healed split in my lip stung when I did it.
I very conscious ly relaxed my face and went about getting
down the cof fee things from th e kitchen shelf. There was a
trail of tiny black ants running along the edge of the shelf, and
a sw arm of them  over the small  tin box in which I kept lump
sugar . I flicked them of f with a few stern swipes of my apron,
and made a mental note to see about finding some avens root
for repellant.
That resolve, small as it was,  made me feel better and
steadier at once. Ever since Hod gepile and his men had turned
up at the malting shed, I had been completely at the mercy of
someone else, prevented from any sort of independent action.
For the first time in days—it seemed much longer—I was able
to decide what I was going to do. It seemed a precious liberty .
V ery well, I tho ught. What would I do, then? I would …
drink some cof fee. Eat a bit of toast? No. I felt gingerly with
my tong ue; seve ral teeth on one  side were loose, and my jaw
muscles so sore that serious che wing was out of the question.
Just cof f ee, then , and while I drank it, I would decide upon the
shape of my day .Feeling pleased with this plan, I  put back the plain wooden
cup, and instead ceremoniously set out my sole china cup and
saucer , a delicate bit of porcelain Jocasta had given me, hand-
painted with violets.
Jamie h ad poked up the fire earlier and the kettle was
boiling; I dipped out enough wa ter to warm the pot, swished it
round, and opened the back door in order to toss it out.
Fortunately , I looked first.
Ian was sitting cross-legged o n the back porch, a small
whetstone in one hand, knife in the other .
“Good m orn to ye, Auntie,” he said cheerfully , and drew the
knife across the stone, making the thin, monotonous rasping
noise I had heard earlier . “Feeling better , then?”
“Y es, fine,” I assured him. He raised one eyebrow
dubiously , looking me over .
“W ell, better than ye look, I hope.”
“Not that  good,” I said tartly , and he laughed. He put down
the knife and stone and got to his feet. He was much taller than
I; nearly Jamie’ s height, though thinner . He’d inherited his
father ’ s whipcor d leanness, as well as the elder Ian’ s sense of
humor—and his toughness.
He took me by the shoulders and turned me into the
sunlight, pursing  his lips a little as he inspected me at close
range. I blinked up at him, imagining what I must look like. I
hadn’ t had the n erve to look int o a mirror yet, but I knew the
bruising must be going from b lacks and reds to a colorful
assortment of blues, greens, and yellows. Add in assorted
knobbly swellings, flecks of crusty black for the split lip and
the scab by bits, and I was undoubtedly quite the picture of
health.
Ian’ s so ft hazel eyes peered int ently into my face with no
apparent surprise or distress, though. At last he let go, and
patted my shoulder gently .
“Y e’ll do, Auntie,” he said. “It’ s still you, isn’ t it?”“Y es,” I said. And with no warning at all, tears welled up
and ove rflowed. I knew exactly what he’d meant, and why
he’d said it—and it was true.
I fel t as though my center had turned unexpectedly to liquid
and was  gushing  out, not from grief, but from relief. I was  still
me. Fragile, battered, sore, and wary—but myself. Only when
I r ecogn ized tha t, did I realize how much I had feared that I
might not be—that I might emer ge from shock and find myself
irrevocably altered, some vital part forever missing.
“I’m all  right,” I assured Ian, hastily wiping my eyes with
the edge of my apron. “Just a bit—”
“A ye, I know ,” he said, and too k the pot from me, tossing
the wate r into the grass by the path. “It’ s a bit strange, aye?
Coming back.”
I t ook the cof fee pot from him, squeezing his hand hard as I
did so. He had come back twice from captivity: rescued from
Geillis Duncan ’ s strange compound on Jamaica, only to
choose l ater exile with the Moha wk. He had come to manhood
on th at journey , and I did wond er what parts of himself might
have been left behind on the way .
“Do you  want breakfast, Ian?” I asked, snif fing and dabbing
gingerly at my swollen nose.
“Of cou rse I do,” he said, grinning. “Come and sit yourself
down, Auntie—I’ll fetch it.”
I fol lowed him inside, filled the cof feepot and set it to brew ,
then sat  at the table, the sun on my back through the open
door , and watched as Ian rumm aged the pantry . My mind felt
soggy and incapable of though t, but a sense of peace crept
over me, gentle as the waveri ng light through the chestnut
trees. Even the small throbbings here and there seemed
pleasant, a sense of healing being quietly accomplished.
Ian spre ad an armload of random  foodstuf fs on the table and
sat down across from me.
“All right, Auntie?” he asked again, raising one of his
father ’ s feathery eyebrows.“Y es. It’ s rather like sitting on a soap bubble, though. Isn’ t
it?” I glanced at him as I poured the cof fee, but he looked
down at the chunk of bread he was buttering. I thought a slight
smile touched his lips, but couldn’ t tell for sure.
“Something like,” he said quietly .
The hea t of the cof fee warmed my hands through the china,
and soot hed the  raw membranes of my nose and palate. I felt
as thoug h I had been screamin g for hours, but didn’ t recall
actually doing any such thing.  Had I, with Jamie the night
before?
I did n’ t quite w ant to think about the night before; it was
part of the soap -bubble feeling.  Jamie had been gone when I
woke, an d I wasn’ t sure whether I was glad or sorry about that.
Ian didn’ t talk, but ate his wa y in a businesslike manner
through half a lo af with butter and honey , three raisin muf fins,
two thick slices of ham, and a ju g of milk. Jamie had done the
milking, I saw; he always us ed the blue jug, while Mr .
W emyss used the white one. I wondered vaguely where Mr .
W emyss was—I  hadn’ t seen him , and the house felt empty—
but didn’ t really care. It occurred to me that perhaps Jamie had
told bot h Mr . W emyss and Mrs. Bug to stay away for a bit,
feeling that I might need a little time alone.
“More cof fee, Auntie?”
At my nod, Ia n rose from th e table, reached down the
decanter from the shelf, and poured a lar ge slug of whisky into
my cup before refilling it.
“Mam always said it’ s good for what ails ye,” he said.
“Y our mother is right. Do you want some?”
He snif fed at the aromatic fumes, but shook his head.
“No, I think no t, Auntie. I must have a clear head this
morning.”
“Really? Why?”  The porridge in the pot wasn’ t nine days
old—quite—but it had been there for three or four . Of course;
no one had been here to eat it. I eyed the cementlike globadhering to my spoon critically , then decided that it was still
soft enough to eat, and doused it with honey .
Ian was dealing with a mouthful of the same substance, and
took a moment to clear it from his palate before replying.
“Uncle Jamie means to ask his questions,” he answered,
giving me a cautious glance as he reached for the bread.
“Does he?” I sai d, rather blankly , but before I could inquire
what he  meant by that, the sound of footsteps on the path
announced the arrival of Fer gus.
He looked as though he had been sleeping in the woods—
well, of course, I thought, he had  been. Or rather , not sleeping;
the men had barely stopped to rest in their pursuit of
Hodgepile’ s ga ng. Fer gus had shaved, but his normally
fastidious grooming was sadly lacking, and his handsome face
was gaunt, the deep eyes shadowed.
“Milady ,” he murmured, and unexpectedly bent to kiss my
cheek, hand on my shoulder . “Comment ca va?”
“T r es bien, mer ci,”  I re plied, smiling gingerly . “How are
Marsali and the children? And our hero, Germain?” I had
asked Jamie about Marsali on the way back, and had been
assured that she was all right. Germain, monkey that he was,
had gone straight up a tree when he heard Hodgepile’ s men
approaching. He  had seen everything from his perch, and as
soon as the men departed, had scrambled down, dragged his
semiconscious mother away from the fire, and run for help.
“Ah, Germain,” Fer gus said, a faint smile momentarily
lifting the shadows of fatigue. “ Nous p’ tit guerrier .  He says
Grandper e  has promised h im a pistol of his own, to shoot bad
people with.”
Grandper e  undoubtedly meant it, I reflected. Germain
couldn’ t manage a musket, being somewhat shorter than the
gun itself—but a pistol would d o. In my present state of mind,
the fact that Ge rmain was only six didn’ t seem particularly
important.“Have you had breakfast, Fer gu s?” I pushed the pot toward
him.
“Non. Mer ci.”  He helped himself to cold biscuit, ham, and
cof fee, though I noticed that he ate without much appetite.
W e all sat quiet ly , sipping cof fee and listening to the birds.
Carolina wrens had built a late  nest under the eaves of the
house an d the parent birds swooped in and out, just above our
heads. I could hear the high-pit ched cheeping of the nestlings
begging, and saw a scatter of tw igs and a bit of empty eggshell
on t he floorboards of the porc h. They were nearly ready to
fledge; just in time, before the real cold weather came.
The sight of the brown-speckled eggshell reminded me of
Monsieur le Oeuf.  Y es , tha t’ s what  I would do, I d ecided, with
a small sense of relief at havin g something firm in mind. I
would go and s ee Marsali later . And perhaps Mrs. Bug, as
well.
“Did you see Mrs. Bug this morning?” I asked, turning to
Ian. His cabin—little more than a brush-roofed lean-to—lay
just beyo nd the Bugs’; he would have passed them on his way
to the house.
“Oh, aye,” he said, looking a  little surprised. “She was
sweeping out as I went by . Of fer ed me breakfast, but I said I’d
eat h ere. I kent Uncle Jamie had a ham, aye?” He grinned,
lifting his fourth ham biscuit in illustration.
“So she ’ s all right? I thought she might be ill; she usually
comes quite early .”
Ian nodded, and took an enormous bite of the biscuit.
“A ye, I expect she’ s busy , minding the ciomach. ”
My frag ile sense of well-being cracked like the wrens’ eggs.
A ciomach  w as a captive. In my soggy-minded euphoria, I had
somehow managed to for get Lionel Brown’ s existence.
Ian’ s remark that Jamie meant to  ask questions this morning
dropped suddenly into context— as did Fer gus’ s presence. And
the knife Ian had been sharpening.“Where is Jamie?” I asked, rath er faintly . “Have you seen
him?”
“Oh, aye,” Ian said, looking surprised. He swallowed, and
gestured toward the door with his chin. “He’ s just out in the
woodshed, maki n’ new shingles. He says the roof ’ s sprung a
leak.”
No soon er had he said this than the sound of hammering
came fr om the roof, far above . Of course, I thought. First
things fi rst. But then, I supposed Lionel Brown wasn’ t going
anywhere, after all.
“Perhaps … I should go and  see Mr . Brown,” I said,
swallowing.
Ian and Fer gus exchanged glances.
“No, Au ntie, ye shouldn’ t,” Ian said quite calmly , but with
an air of authority I wasn’ t accustomed to seeing in him.
“Whatever do you mean?” I st ared at him, but he merely
went on eating, though a trifle more slowly .
“Milord says you should not,” Fer gus amplified, drizzling a
spoonful of honey into his cof fee.
“He says what?” I asked incredulously .
Neither of them would look at m e, but they seemed to draw
together , emana ting a reluctant sort of stubborn resistance.
Either one would do anything I asked, I knew—except defy
Jamie. If Jamie thought I ought not to see Mr . Brown, I wasn’ t
going to do it with the assistance of either Ian or Fer gus.
I dro pped the sp oon back into my bowl of porridge, uneaten
lumps still adhering to it.
“Did he happen to mention why  he thinks I ought not to visit
Mr . Brown?” I asked calmly , under the circumstances.
Both men looked surprised, the n exchanged another look,
this one longer .
“No, milady ,” Fer gus said, his voice carefully neutral.There was a b rief silence, during which both of them
seemed to be considering. Then Fer gus glanced at Ian,
deferring to him with a shrug.
“W ell, d’ye see, Auntie,” Ian said carefully , “we do mean to
question the fellow .”
“And we  will have answers,” Fe r gus said, eyes on the spoon
with which he was stirring his cof fee.
“And when Uncle Jamie is satis fied that he has told us what
he can …”
Ian had laid his  newly sharpened knife on the table beside
his plate. He picked it up, and thoughtfully drew it down the
length o f a cold sausage, which  promptly split open, with an
aromatic burst of sage and garlic. He looked up then, and met
my e yes directly . And I realized that while I might still be me
—Ian was no longer the boy he used to be. Not at all.
“Y ou’ll kill him, then?” I said, m y lips feeling numb in spite
of the hot cof fee.
“Oh, yes ,” Fer gus said very sof tly . “I expect that we shall.”
He met my eyes now , too. There was a bleak, grim look about
him, and his deep-set eyes were hard as stone.
“He—it—I mean … it wasn’ t hi m,” I said. “It couldn’ t have
been. H e’d already broken his leg when—” I didn’ t seem to
have enough air to finish my  sentences. “And Marsali. It
wasn’ t—I don’ t think he …”
Something behind Ian’ s eyes changed, as he grasped my
meaning. His lips pressed tight for a moment, and he nodded.
“As well for him, then,” he said shortly .
“As wel l,” Fer g us echoed, “but I think it will not matter in
the end. W e killed the others —why should he live?” He
pushed back from the table, leaving his cof fee undrunk. “I
think I will go, cousin.”
“A ye? I ’ll come too, then.” Ian shoved his plate away ,
nodding to me. “W ill ye tell Uncle Jamie we’ve gone ahead,
Auntie?”I no dded numbly , and watched t hem go, vanishing one after
the other under the big chestnut tree that overhung the trail
leading to the Bugs’ cabin. Mec hanically , I got up and began
slowly to clear away the remains of the makeshift breakfast.
I really wasn’ t s ure whether I m inded a lot about Mr . Brown
or n ot. On the one hand, I did disapprove on principle of
torture and cold-blooded murde r . On the other … while it was
true eno ugh that Brown had not personally violated or injured
me, and he had  trie d to make Hodgepile relea se me—he’d
been all in favor of killing me, later . And I hadn’ t the slightest
doubt that he would have drown ed me in the gor ge, had T ebbe
not intervened.
No, I thought, c arefully rinsing my cup and drying it on my
apron, perhaps I didn’ t really mind terribly about Mr . Brown.
Still, I felt uneasy and upset. What I did  mind about, I
realized, were Ian and Fer gus . And Jamie. The fact was,
killing someone  in the heat of battle is a quite dif ferent thing
from executing a man, and I knew that. Did they?
W ell, Jamie did.
“And may your vow r edeem me.”  H e had whisper ed that to
me, the night before. It was just  about the last thing I recalled
him saying, in f act. W ell, all right; but I would greatly prefer
that he didn’ t feel in need of redemption to start with. And as
for Ian and Fer gus …
Fer gus had fought in the Battle of Prestonpans, at the age of
ten. I still remembered the face of the small French orphan,
soot-smeared and dazed with shock and exhaustion, looking
down at me from his perch atop a captured cannon. “I killed
an E nglish soldier , madame,”  he’ d said to me. “He fell down
and I stuck him with my knife.”
And Ian, a fifteen-year -old, weeping in remorse because he
thought he had accidentally killed an intruder to Jamie’ s
Edinbur gh print  shop. God knew what he had done, since; he
wasn’ t talking. I had a sudden vision of Fer gus’ s hook, darkwith blo od, and Ian, silhouetted in the dark.  “And I,”  he’d
said, echoing Jamie. “It is myself who kills for her .”
It was 1773. And on the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five
…  t he sho t heard round the world was already being loaded.
The room was w arm, but I shuddered convulsively . What in
the nam e of God did I think I co uld shield them from? Any of
them.
A su dden roar f rom the roof above startled me out of my
thoughts.
I wa lked out int o the dooryard and looked up, shading my
eyes aga inst the morning sun. Jamie was sitting astride the
rooftree, rocking to and fro ov er one hand, which he held
curled into his belly .
“What’ s going on up there?” I called.
“I’ve got a splinter ,” came the terse answer , obviously
spoken through clenched teeth.
I w anted  to laugh, if only as small escape from tension, but
didn’ t.
“W ell, come down, then. I’ll pull it out.”
“I’m no finished!”
“I do n’ t care!” I said, suddenly impatient with him. “Come
down this minute. I want to talk to you.”
A bag of nails hit the grass wit h a sudden clank, followed
instantly by the hammer .
First things first, then.
TECHNICALL Y , I SUPPOSED, it was a splinter . It was a
two-inch sliver of cedarwood, and he’d driven it completely
under the nail of his middle finger , nearly to the first joint.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!”
“A ye,” he agreed, looking a little pale. “Y e might say that.”The protruding stub was too short to grip with my fingers. I
hauled him into the sur gery a nd jerked the sliver out with
forceps, before one could say Jack Robinson. Jamie was
saying a good deal more than Jack Robinson—mostly in
French, which is an excellent language for swearing.
“Y ou’re going to lose that nail,” I observed, submer ging the
of fended digit in a small bowl  of alcohol and water . Blood
bloomed from it like ink from a squid.
“T o hell wi’ the  nail,” he said,  gritting his teeth. “Cut the
whole bloody finger of f and ha’ done with it! Mer de
d’chevr e! ”
“The Chinese used to—well, n o, I suppose they still do,
come to think of it—shove splin ters of bamboo under people’ s
fingernails to make them talk.”
“Christ! T u me casses les couilles! ”
“Obviously a very ef fective technique,” I said, lifting his
hand ou t of the bowl and wrapp ing the finger tightly in a strip
of linen . “W ere you trying it out, before using it on Lionel
Brown?” I tried to speak lightly ,  keeping my eyes on his hand.
I felt his own gaze fix on me, and he snorted.
“What in the na me of saints and archangels was wee Ian
telling ye, Sassenach?”
“That you meant to question the man—and get answers.”
“I do, and I shall,” he said shortly . “So?”
“Fer gus and Ian seemed to think that—you might be moved
to u se any me ans necessary ,”  I said with some delicacy .
“They’re more than willing to help.”
“I imagine they are.” The first a gony had abated somewhat.
He breathed more deeply , and color was beginning to come
back in to his face. “Fer gus has a right. It was his wife
attacked.”
“Ian seemed …” I hesitated, se arching for the right word.
Ian had seemed  so calm as to be terrifying. “Y ou didn’ t call
Roger to help with the—the questioning?”“No. Not yet.” O ne corner of his mouth tucked in. “Roger
Mac’ s a good fig hter , but no the  sort to scare a man, save he’ s
truly roused. He’ s no deceit in him at all.”
“Whereas you, Ian, and Fer gus …”
“Oh, ay e,” he said dryly . “W ily as snakes, the lot of us.
Y e’ve o nly to look at Roger M ac to see how safe their time
must be,  him and the lass. A bit  of a comfort, that,” he added,
the tuck  growing deeper . “T o ken things will get better , I
mean.”
I could see that he was trying to change the subject, which
was not a good sign. I made a s mall snorting noise, but it hurt
my nose.
“And you’r e  not truly roused, is that what you’re telling
me?”
He made a muc h more successful snorting noise, but didn’ t
reply . He tilted his head to one side, watching as I laid out a
square o f gauze and began to rub dried leaves of comfrey into
it. I didn’ t know how to say what was troubling me, but he
plainly saw that something was.
“W ill you kill him?” I asked baldly , keeping my eyes on the
jar of honey . It was made of brown glass, and the light glowed
through it as though it were a huge ball of clear amber .
Jamie sat still, watching me. I could feel his speculative
gaze, though I didn’ t look up.
“I think so,” he said.
My hands had started to tremble, and I pressed them on the
surface of the table to still them.
“Not today ,” he added. “If I kill him, I shall do it properly .”
I wa sn’ t sure I wanted to know what constituted a proper
killing, in his opinion, but he told me anyway .
“If he dies at my hand, it w ill be in the open, before
witnesses who ken the truth of  the matter , and him standingupright. I willna have it said that I killed a helpless man,
whatever his crime.”
“Oh.” I swallowed, feeling mil dly ill, and took a pinch of
powdered blood root to add to the salve I was making. It had a
faint, astringent smell, which seemed to help. “But—you
might let him live?”
“Perhaps. I suppose I might ra nsom him to his brother—
depending.”
“Do you  know , you sound quite  like your uncle Colum. He
would have thought it through like that.”
“Do I?” The corner of his mouth  turned up slightly . “Shall I
take that as compliment, Sassenach?”
“I suppose you might as well.”
“A ye, well,” he said thoughtfully . The stif f fingers tapped on
the table top, and he winced slightly as the movement jarred
the i njured one. “Colum had a c astle. And armed clansmen at
his beck . I should have some dif ficulty in defending this house
against a raid, perhaps.”
“That’ s what you mean by ‘depe nding’?” I felt quite uneasy
at th is; the thou ght of armed raiders attacking the house had
not occurred to me—and I saw that Jamie’ s forethought in
storing Mr . Brown of f our premises had perhaps not been
entirely for the purpose of sparing my sensibilities.
“One of the things.”
I mixed a bit of honey with my powdered herbs, then
scooped a small dollop of purified bear grease into the mortar .
“I suppo se,” I said, eyes on my mixing, “that there’ s no
point in turning Lionel Brown over to the—the authorities?”
“Which authorities did ye have in mind, Sassenach?” he
asked dryly .
A good question . This part of the backcountry had not yet
formed nor joined a county , tho ugh a movement was afoot to
that purp ose. W ere Jamie to deliver Mr . Brown to the sherif f ofthe near est county for trial … well, no, perhaps not a good
idea. Br ownsville lay just within the borders of the nearest
county , and the current sherif f was in fact named Brown.
I bit my lip, considering. In times of stress, I tended still to
respond as what I was—a civilized Englishwoman,
accustomed to rely on the sureties of government and law .
W ell, all  right, Jamie had a poin t; the twentieth century had its
own dangers, but some things had improved. This  was nearly
1774, though, and the colon ial government was already
showing cracks and fault lines, signs of the collapse to come.
“I su ppose we could take him to Cross Creek.” Farquard
Campbell was a justice of the peace there—and a friend to
Jamie’ s aunt, Jocasta Cameron. “Or to New Bern.” Governor
Martin and the b ulk of the Roya l Council were in New Bern—
three hundred miles away . “Ma ybe Hillsborough?” That was
the center of the Circuit Court.
“Mmphm.”
This noise denoted a marked disinclination to lose several
weeks’ work in order to haul M r . Brown before any of these
seats of justice, let alone entrust  a matter of importance to the
highly unreliabl e—and frequently corrupt—judicial system. I
looked u p and met his eye, hum orous but bleak. If I responded
as what I was, so did Jamie.
And Jam ie was a Highland laird, accustomed to follow his
own laws, and fight his own battles.
“But—” I began.
“Sassenach,” he said quite gently . “What of the others?”
The others. I stopped moving, paralyzed by the sudden
memory: a lar ge band of blac k figures, coming out of the
wood with the sun behind them. But that group had split in
two, intending to meet again i n Brownsville, in three days’
time—today , in fact.
For the moment, presumably no one from Brownsville yet
knew what had happened—that Hodgepile and his men were
dead, or that Li onel Brown was now a captive on the Ridge.Given th e speed with which news spread in the mountains,
though, it would be public knowledge within a week.
In the aftermath of shock, I had somehow overlooked the
fact that  there were still a number of bandits at lar ge—and
while I didn’ t know who they were, they knew both who I was
and where I wa s. W ould they realize that I could not identify
them? Or be willing to take that risk?
Obviously , Jami e was not willing to take the risk of leaving
the R idge to esc ort Lionel Brown anywhere, whether or not he
decided to let the man live.
The thought of the others had brought something important
back to me, though. It might not  be the best time to mention it,
but then again, there wasn’ t going to be a good one.
I took a deep breath, squaring myself for it.
“Jamie.”
The tone of my voice jerked him immediately from
whatever he’d been thinking; he looked sharply at me, one
eyebrow raised.
“I—I have to tell you something.”
He paled  a little, but reached ou t at once, grasping my hand.
He took a deep breath of his own, and nodded.
“A ye.”
“Oh,” I said, realizing that he thought I meant that I had
suddenly arrive d at a point where I needed to tell him the
grisly details of my experiences. “Not—not that. Not exactly .”
I squeez ed his hand, though, a nd held on, while I told him
about Donner .
“Another ,” he said. He sounded slightly stunned. “Another
one?”
“Another ,” I confirmed. “The thing is … I, um, I don’ t
remember seeing him … seeing him dead.” The eerie sense of
that daw n returned to me. I had very sharp, distinct memories
—but they were disjointed, so f ractured as to bear no relationto the whole. An ear . I remembered an ear , thick and cup-
shaped as a woodland fungus. It was shaded in the most
exquisite tones of purple, brown , and indigo, shadowed in the
carved whorls of the inner parts , nearly translucent at the rim;
perfect i n the light of a sunbeam  that cut through the fronds of
a hemlock to touch it.
I r ecalled that ea r so perfectly th at I could almost reach into
my m emory and touch it myself —but I had no idea whose ear
it ha d been. W as the hair that lay behind it brown, black,
reddish, straight , wavy , gray? And the face … I didn’ t know . If
I had looked, I hadn’ t seen.
He shot me a sharp look.
“And ye think he’ s maybe not.”
“Maybe not.” I swallowed the taste of dust, pine needles,
and blood, and breathed the comforting fresh scent of
buttermilk. “I warned him, you see. I told him you were
coming, and that he didn’ t want you to find him with me.
When you attacked the camp— he might have run. He struck
me as a coward, certainly . But I don’ t know .”
He nodded, and sighed heavily .
“Can you … r ecall, do you think?” I asked hesitantly .
“When you showed me the dead. Did you look at them?”
“No,” he said softly . “I wasna looking at anything save
you.”
His eyes had bee n on our linked hands. He raised them now ,
and looked at my face, troubled and searching. I lifted his hand
and laid my chee k against his knuckles, closing my eyes for an
instant.
“I’ll be all right,” I said. “The thing is—” I said, and
stopped.
“A ye?”
“If he did  run—where do you suppose he’d go?”
He closed his own eyes and drew a deep breath.“T o Bro wnsville,” he said, in resignation. “And if he did,
Richard Brown kens already what’ s become of Hodgepile and
his men—and likely thinks his brother is dead, as well.”
“Oh.” I swallowed, and changed the subject slightly .
“Why d id you tell Ian I wasn’ t to be allowed to see Mr .
Brown?”
“I di dna say that. But I think it best if ye dinna see him, that
much is true.”
“Because?”
“Because ye’ve an oath upon you,” he said, sounding mildly
surprised that I didn’ t understan d immediately . “Can ye see a
man injured, and leave him to suf fer?”
The oint ment was ready . I unwrapped his finger , which had
stopped bleeding, and tamped as much of the salve under the
damaged nail as I could manage.
“Probably not,” I said, eyes on my work. “But why—”
“If y e mend him , care for him—and then I decide he must
die?” Hi s eyes rested on me, questioning. “How would that be
for ye?”
“W ell, that would  be a bi t awkward,” I said, taki ng a deep
breath to  steady myself. I wrapped a thin strip of linen around
the nail and tied it neatly . “Still, though …”
“Y e wis h to care for him? Why?” He sounded curious, but
not angry . “Is your oath so strong, then?”
“No.” I put both hands on the  table to brace myself; my
knees seemed suddenly weak.
“Because I’m glad they’re de ad,” I whispered, looking
down. My hands were raw , and I fumbled while I worked
because my fingers were still sw ollen; there were deep purple
marks still sunk in the skin of my wrists. “And I am very much
—” Wh at? Afraid; afraid of the men, afraid of myself.
Thrilled, in a horrible sort o f way . “Ashamed,” I said.
“T erribly ashamed.” I glanced up at him. “I hate it.”He h eld out his hand to me, wai ting. He knew better than to
touch me; I cou ldn’ t have borne being touched just then. I
didn’ t take it, not at once, though I longed to. I looked away ,
speaking rapidly to Adso, who had materialized on the
countertop and was regarding me with a bottomless green
gaze.
“If I—I keep thinking … if I were to see him, help him—
Christ, I don’ t  w ant to, I don’ t at all! But if I  could—perhaps
that would … help somehow .” I looked up then, feeling
haunted. “Make … amends.”
“For bei ng glad they are dead—and for wanting him dead,
too?” Jamie suggested gently .
I no dded, feeling as though a sm all, heavy weight had lifted
with the speaking of the words. I didn’ t remember taking his
hand, but it wa s tight on mine. Blood from his finger was
seeping through the fresh bandage, but he paid no attention.
“Do you want  to kill him?” I asked.
He looked at me for a long moment before replying.
“Oh, ay e,” he said very softly . “But for now , his life is
surety for yours. For all of us, perhaps. And so he lives. For
now . But I will ask questions—and I shall have answers.”
I SA T IN MY  SURGER Y for some time after he left.
Emer ging slowly from shock, I had felt safe, surrounded by
home and friends, by Jamie. Now I must come to grips with
the f act that not hing was safe—not I, not home nor friends—
and certainly not Jamie.
“But then, you never are, are you, you bloody Scot?” I said
aloud, and laughed, weakly .
Feeble a s it was, it made me feel better . I rose with sudden
decision and began to tidy my c upboards, lining up bottles in
order of  size, sweeping out bits of scattered herbs, throwing
away solutions gone stale or suspect.I had  me ant to go and visit Mar sali, but Fer gus had told me
during breakfast  that Jamie had sent her with the children and
Lizzie t o stay with the McGillivrays, where she would be
cared fo r , and safe. If there was safety in numbers, the
McGillivrays’ house was certainly the place for it.
Located near W oolam’ s Creek, the McGillivrays’ home
place adjoined Ronnie Sinclair ’ s cooper ’ s shop, and enclosed a
seething mass of cordial humanity , including not only Robin
and Ute McGillivray , their son, Manfred, and their daughter
Senga, but also Ronnie, who b oarded with them. The usual
mob scene was augmented intermittently by Senga
McGillivray’ s fiance, Heinrich Strasse, and his German
relatives from Salem, and by Inga and Hilda, their husbands
and children, and their husbands’ relatives.
Add in the men who congregated daily in Ronnie’ s shop, a
convenient stopping place on the road to and from W oolam’ s
Mill, and likely no one would even notice Marsali and her
family , in the midst of that mob. Surely no one would seek to
harm her there. But for me to go and see her …
Highland tact and delicacy w ere one thing. Highland
hospitality and curiosity were another . If I stayed peacefully at
home, I would likely be left in p eace—at least for a while. If I
were to set foot  near the McGillivrays’ … I blenched at the
thought, and hastily decided that perhaps I would visit Marsali
tomorrow . Or the next day . Jam ie had assured me she was all
right, only shocked and bruised.
The house stood around me in peace. No modern
background of furnace, fans, plumbing, refrigerators. No
whoosh of pilot lights or hu m of compressors. Just the
occasional creak  of beam or floorboard, and the odd muf fled
scrape of a wood wasp building its nest up under the eaves.
I looked round the ordered world of my sur gery—ranks of
shining jars and bottles, linen screens laden with drying
arrowroot and masses of lavender , bunches of nettle and
yarrow and rosemary hanging overhead. The bottle of ether ,
sunlight glowing on it. Adso curled on the countertop, tailneatly tucked around his feet, eyes half-closed in purring
contemplation.
Home.  A  small shiver ran down my spine. I wanted nothing
more than to be alone, safe and alone, in my own home.
Safe. I had a day , perhaps two, i n which home would still be
safe. And then …
I realized that I had been standing still for some moments,
staring blankly into a box of ye llow nightshade berries, round
and shin y as marbles. V ery pois onous, and a slow and painful
death. My eyes r ose to the ether—quick and merciful. If Jamie
did deci de to kill Lionel Brown … But no. In the open, he’d
said, standing on his feet before witnesses. Slowly , I closed the
box and put it back on the shelf.
What then?
THERE WERE AL W A YS cho res that could be done—but
nothing pressing , with no one clamoring to be fed, clothed, or
cared fo r . Feeling quite odd, I wandered round the house for a
bit, and finally w ent into Jamie’ s study , where I poked among
the boo ks on the shelf there , settling at last on Henry
Fielding’ s T om Jones.
I c ouldn ’ t think  how long it had been since I had read a
novel. A nd in the daytime! Feel ing pleasantly wicked, I sat by
the o pen window in my sur gery and resolutely entered a world
far from my own.
I lo st track of time, moving only to brush away roving
insects that came through the w indow , or to absently scratch
Adso’ s head when he nudged against me. Occasional thoughts
of J amie and L ionel Brown drifted through the back of my
mind, bu t I shooed them away like the leafhoppers and midges
who lan ded on my page, drifting in through the window .
Whatever was happening in the Bugs’ cabin had happened, or
would happen—I simply couldn’ t think about it. As I read, the
soap bubble formed around me once more, filled with perfect
stillness.The sun  was halfway down the  sky before faint pangs of
hunger began to stir . It was as I looked up, rubbing my
forehead and wondering vaguely whether there was any ham
left, that I saw a man standing in the doorway to the sur gery .
I s hrieke d, and leaped to my fe et, sending Henry Fielding
flying.
“Y our p ardon, m istress!” Thom as Christie blurted, looking
nearly a s startled  as I felt. “I did na realize that you’d not heard
me.”
“No. I— I—was reading.” I gestured foolishly toward the
book on the floor . My heart was pounding, and blood sur ged to
and fro in my body , seemingly  at random, so that my face
flushed, my ears throbbed, and my hands tingled, all out of
control.
He stoo ped and picked the book up, smoothing its cover
with the careful attitude of one who values books, though the
volume itself was battered, its c over scarred with rings where
wet glas ses or bottles had been  set down upon it. Jamie had
got i t fro m the owner of an ordi nary in Cross Creek, in partial
trade for a load of firewood; some customer had left it, months
before.
“Is t here no one  here to care for you?” he asked, frowning
as h e looked ar ound. “Shall I go and fetch my daughter to
you?”
“No. I mean—I don’ t need anyone. I’m quite all right. What
about you?” I asked quickly , forestalling any further
expressions of concern on his part. He glanced at my face,
then has tily away . Eyes fixed c arefully in the vicinity of my
collarbone, he laid the book on the table and held out his right
hand, wrapped in a cloth.
“I beg your pardon, mistress. I wouldna intrude, save …”
I was already unwrapping the hand. He’d ripped the incision
in his right hand —probably , I realized with a small tightening
of the belly , in the course of the fight with the bandits. The
wound was no great matter , bu t there were bits of dirt anddebris in the wo und, and the edges were red and gaping, raw
surfaces clouded with a film of pus.
“Y ou sh ould have come at onc e,” I said, though with no
tone of rebuke. I knew perfectly well why he hadn’ t—and in
fact, I should have been in no state to deal with him, if he had.
He s hrugged slightly , but didn’ t bother replying. I sat him
down and went to fetch things. L uckily , there was some of the
antiseptic salve left that I’d mad e for Jamie’ s splinter . That, a
quick alcohol wash, clean bandage …
He w as turning the pages of T om Jones  slowly , lips pursed
in c oncentration. Evidently H enry Fielding would do as
anesthetic for the job at hand; I shouldn’ t need to fetch a Bible.
“Do you read n ovels?” I asked, meaning no rudeness, but
merely surprise d that he might countenance anything so
frivolous.
He h esitated. “Y es. I—yes.” He took a very deep breath as I
submer ged his hand in the bow l, but it contained only water ,
soaproot, and a very small amo unt of alcohol, and he let the
breath go with a sigh.
“Have you read T om Jones  before?” I asked, making
conversation to relax him.
“Not precisely , though I know the story . My wife—”
He stopped abruptly . He’d never mentioned his wife before;
I supposed that it was sheer relief at not experiencing agony
yet t hat had made him talkative . He seemed to realize that he
must complete the sentence, though, and went on, reluctantly .
“My wife … read novels.”
“Did she?” I murmured, setting about the job of
debridement. “Did she like them?”
“I suppose that she must have.”
There was something odd in his  voice that made me glance
up f rom the job  at hand. He caught the glance and looked
away , flushing.“I—did not approve of reading novels. Then.”
He was quiet fo r a moment, ho lding his hand steady . Then
he blurted, “I burnt her books.”
That sou nded ra ther more like the response I would have
expected of him.
“She couldn’ t have been please d about that,” I said mildly ,
and he shot me a startled glance , as though the question of his
wife’ s reaction was so irrelevant as to be unworthy of remark.
“Ah … what ca used you to alter your opinion?” I asked,
concentrating on the bits of de bris I was picking out of the
wound w ith my forceps. Splinters and shreds of bark. What
had he been doing? W ielding a club of some kind, I thought—
a tree branch? I breathed deeply , concentrating on the job to
avoid thinking of the bodies in the clearing.
He moved his legs restively; I was hurting him a bit now .
“I—it—in Ardsmuir .”
“What? Y ou read it in prison?”
“No. W e had n o books there.” He took a long breath,
glanced at me, t hen away , and f ixed his eyes on the corner of
the r oom, where an enterprising  spider had taken advantage of
Mrs. Bug’ s temporary absence to set up web-keeping.
“In fact,  I have never actually read it. Mr . Fraser , though,
was accustomed  to recount the story to the other prisoners. He
has a fine memory ,” he added, rather grudgingly .
“Y es, he does,” I murmured. “I ’m not going to stitch it; it
will be better if the wound’ s le ft to heal by itself. I’m afraid
the s car won’ t b e as neat,” I added regretfully , “but I think it
will heal up all right.”
I spr ead salve th ickly over the injury , and pulled the edges
of the wound together as tightly as I could, without cutting of f
the circu lation. Bree had been experimenting with adhesive
bandages, and had produced som ething quite useful in the way
of small butterfly shapes, made of starched linen and pine tar .“So you liked T om Jones, did you?” I said, returning to the
subject. “I shouldn’ t have thought you’d find him an
admirable character . Not much of a moral example, I mean.”
“I d on’ t,” he s aid bluntly . “But I saw that fiction”—he
pronounced the word gingerly , as though it were something
dangerous—”is perhaps not, as I had thought, merely an
inducement to idleness and wicked fancy .”
“Oh, isn’ t it?” I said, amused , but trying not to smile
because of my lip. “What are its redeeming characteristics, do
you think?”
“A ye, well.” His brows drew tog ether in thought “I found it
most remarkable. That what is essentially nothing save a
confection of lies should some wise still contrive to exert a
beneficial ef fect. For it did,” he concluded, sounding still
rather surprised.
“Really? How was that?”
He tilted his head, considering.
“It was distraction, to be sure. In such conditions,
distraction is not evil,” he assured me. “While it is of course
more desirable to escape into prayer …”
“Oh, of course,” I murmured.
“But bey ond tha t consideration … it drew the men together .
Y ou wo uld not think that such men—Highlanders, crofters—
that they would find themselves in particular sympathy with
… s uch situations, such person s.” He waved his free hand at
the book, indicating such persons as Squire Allworthy and
Lady Bellaston, I supposed.
“But the y would  talk it over for hours—whilst we labored
the next  day , they would wonder why Ensign Northerton had
done as  he had with regard to Miss W estern, and ar gue
whether they themselves would or would not have behaved
so.” His face lightened a little, recalling something. “And
invariably , a man would shake his head and say , ‘At least I’ve
never been treated in that  man ner!’ He m ight be starved, cold,
covered in sores, permanently separated from his family andcustomary circumstances—and yet he could take comfort in
never having suf fered such vicissitudes as had befallen these
imaginary beings!”
He a ctually smiled, shaking his  head at the thought, and I
thought the smile much improved him.
I’d finished the job, and laid his hand on the table.
“Thank you,” I said quietly .
He looked startled.
“What? Why?”
“I’m ass uming that that injury w as perhaps the result of b-
battle done on m y behalf,” I sa id. I touched his hand lightly .
“I, er … well.” I took a deep breath. “Thank you.”
“Oh.” He looked thoroughly ta ken aback at this, and quite
embarrassed.
“I …  erm … hmm!” He pushed back the stool and rose,
looking flustered.
I rose, as well.
“Y ou’ll need to have fresh salve put on every day ,” I said,
resuming a businesslike tone. “ I’ll make up some more; you
can come, or send Malva to fetch it.”
He nodded, but said nothing, having evidently exhausted his
supply o f sociab ility for the da y . I saw his eye linger on the
cover of the book, though, and on impulse of fered it to him.
“W ould you like to borrow it? Y ou should really read it for
yourself; I’m sure Jamie can’ t have recalled all the details.”
“Oh!” H e looke d startled, and p ursed his lips, frowning, as
though suspectin g it was a trap of some sort. When I insisted,
though, he took the book, picki ng it up with an expression of
guarded avidity that made me wonder how long it had been
since he had had any book other than the Bible to read.
He nodded thanks to me, and donned his hat, turning to go.
Upon a moment’ s impulse, I a sked, “Did you ever have thechance to apologize to your wife?”
That wa s a mistake. His face tightened into coldness and his
eyes went flat as a snake’ s.
“No,” he said sh ortly . I thought for a moment that he would
put the book d own and refuse to take it. But instead, he
tightened his lips, tucked the vo lume more securely under his
arm, and left, without further farewell.3 1
AND SO T O BED
N O O NE ELSE CAME. By t he time night fell, I was
beginning to feel rather edgy , st arting at noises, searching the
deepening shadows under the chestnut trees for lurking men—
or worse. I thought I should cook something; surely Jamie and
Ian inten ded coming home for s upper? Or perhaps I should go
down to the cabin, join Roger and Bree.
But I flinched from the notion o f being exposed to any kind
of solici tude, no matter how well meant, and while I hadn’ t yet
got up the nerve to look in a mirror , was reasonably sure that
the s ight of me would frighten Jemmy—or at least lead to a lot
of questions. I didn’ t want to have to try to explain to him
what had  happen ed to me. I was fairly sure that Jamie had told
Brianna to stay away for a bit, a nd that was good. I really was
in no shape to pretend to be all right. Not quite yet.
Dithering round the kitchen, I picked things up and put them
down pointlessl y . I opened the drawers of the sideboard and
closed them—then opened the second one again, the one
where Jamie kept his pistols.
Most of  the pistols were gone. Only the gilt-trimmed one
that didn ’ t shoot  straight was le ft, with a few loads and a tiny
powder horn, the sort made for fancy dueling pistols.
Hands shaking only a little, I loaded it, and poured a bit of
powder into the firing pan.
When the back door opened, quite some time later , I was
sitting a t the table, a copy of Don Quixote  l yin g in front of me,
pointing the pistol with both hands at the door .
Ian froze momentarily .
“Y e’d never hit anyone wi’ that gun at this distance,
Auntie,” he said mildly , coming in.“They wouldn’ t  know that, would they?” I set the pistol
down, gingerly . My palms were damp, and my fingers ached.
He nodded, taking the point, and sat down.
“Where’ s Jamie?” I asked.
“W ashing. Are ye well, Auntie? ” His soft hazel eyes took a
casual but careful estimation of my state.
“No, but  I’ll do.” I hesitated. “And … Mr . Brown? Did he—
tell you anything?”
Ian made a derogatory noise.
“Pissed himself when Uncle Jamie took the dirk from his
belt to clean h is fingernails. W e didna touch him, Auntie,
dinna fash yourself.”
Jamie ca me in then, clean-shaven, his skin cold and fresh
from the well w ater , hair damp at his temples. Despite that, he
looked t ired to death, the lines of his face cut deep and his
eyes sha dowed. The shadows lifted a bit, though, when he saw
me and the pistol.
“It’ s all right, a nighean ,” h e said soft ly , touching my
shoulder as he s at down beside m e. “I’ve men set to watch the
house—just in case. Though I dinna expect any trouble for
some days yet.”
My breath went out in a long sigh.
“Y ou could have told me that.”
He glanced at me, surprised.
“I th ought ye’d know . Surely ye  wouldna think I’d leave ye
unprotected, Sassenach?”
I s hook my head , momentarily unable to speak. Had I been
in an y condition to think logica lly , of course I wouldn’ t. As it
was, I had spent most of the afternoon in a state of quiet—and
unnecessary—terror , imagining, remembering… .
“I’m sor ry , lass,” he said softly , and put a lar ge, cold hand
on mine. “I shouldna have left ye alone. I thought—”I sho ok my hea d, but put my other hand over his, pressing
tight.
“No, you were right. I couldn’ t have borne any company ,
beyond Sancho Panza.”
He glanced at Don Quixote,  th en at me, bro ws raised. The
book was in Spanish, which I didn’ t happen to speak.
“W ell, s ome of it was close to French, and I did know the
story ,” I  said. I t ook a deep breat h, taking what comfort I could
in the warmth of the fire, the flicker of the candle, and the
proximity of the two of them, lar ge, solid, pragmatic, and—
outwardly , at least—imperturbable.
“Is there any food, Auntie?” Ian inquired, getting up to look.
Lacking any appetite myself, and too jittery to focus on
anything, I hadn’ t eaten dinner nor made anything for supper
—but there was always food in that house, and without any
particular fuss, Jamie and Ian had equipped themselves in
short order with the remains of  a cold partridge pie, several
hard-cooked egg s, a dish of piccalilli, and half a loaf of bread,
which t hey sliced up and toas ted over the fire on a fork,
buttering the slices and crammi ng them into me in a manner
brooking no ar gument.
Hot, buttered toast is immensely comforting, even nibbled
tentatively with a sore jaw . W ith food in my stomach, I began
to fe el much ca lmer , and capable of inquiring what they had
learned from Lionel Brown.
“He put it all on Hodgepile, ” Jamie told me, loading
piccalilli onto a slice of pie. “He would, of course.”
“Y ou didn’ t meet Arvin Hodgepile,” I said, with a small
shiver . “Er … to talk to, I mean.”
He s hot me a sharp look, but didn’ t address that matter any
further , instead leaving it to Ian to explain Lionel Brown’ s
version of events.
It had started with him and his brother , Richard, establishing
their Co mmittee of Safety . This, he had insisted, was intendedas publi c service, pure and sim ple. Jamie snorted at that, but
didn’ t interrupt.
Most of the male inhabitants of  Brownsville had joined the
committee—most of the homesteaders and small farmers
nearby h ad not. Still, so far , so good. The committee had dealt
with a number o f small matters, meting out justice in cases of
assault, theft, and the like, and if they had appropriated the odd
hog or deer carc ass by way of payment for their trouble, there
hadn’ t been too much complaint.
“There’ s a great deal of feeling still, about the Regulation,”
Ian explained, frowning as he sliced another piece of bread.
“The Br owns didna join the Reg ulation; they’d no need to, as
their cousin was sherif f, and half the courthouse ring are
Browns, or marrit to Browns.” Corruption, in other words, had
been on their side.
Regulator sentiment still ran high in the backcountry , even
though the main leaders of the  movement, such as Hermon
Husband and James Hunter , had left the colony . In the
aftermath of Alamance, most Regulators had grown more
cautious of expressing thems elves—but several Regulator
families who lived near Browns ville had become vocal in their
criticism of the Browns’ influence on local politics and
business.
“T ige O ’Brian was one of those?” I asked, feeling the
buttered toast coalesce into a sm all, hard lump in my stomach.
Jamie had told me what had happened to the O’Brians—and
I’d seen Roger ’ s face when he’d come back.
Jamie nodded, not looking up from his pie.
“Enter Arvin Hodgepile,” he said, and took a ferocious bite.
Hodgepile, having neatly escaped the constraints of the British
army by pretending to die in the warehouse fire at Cross
Creek, had set about making a living in various unsavory
ways. And, water having a strong tendency to seek its own
level, had ended up with a small gang of like-minded thugs.This gang had begun simply enough, by robbing anyone
they cam e acros s, holding up tav erns, and the like. This sort of
behavior tends to attract attention, though, and with various
constables, sherif fs, Committees of Safety , and the like on
their trail, the ga ng had retired from the piedmont where they
began, and moved up into the mountains, where they could
find isolated settlements and homesteads. They had also begun
killing their victims, to avoid the nuisance of identification and
pursuit.
“Or most of them,” Ian murmu red. He regarded the half-
eaten egg in his hand for a moment, then put it down.
In h is career wi th the army in Cross Creek, Hodgepile had
made various contacts with a number of river traders and
coastal smuggle rs. Some dealt in furs, others in anything that
would bring a profit.
“And it occurred to them,” Ja mie said, drawing a deep
breath, “that girls and women  and young boys are more
profitable than almost anything—save whisky , maybe.” The
corner of his mouth twitched, but it wasn’ t a smile.
“Our Mr . Brown insists he’d nothing to do wi’ this,” Ian
added, a cynical note in his voice. “Nor had his brother or their
committee.”
“But how did the Browns get involved with Hodgepile’ s
gang?” I  asked. “And what did  they do with the people they
kidnapped?”
The answer to the first questio n was that it had been the
happy outcome of a botched robbery .
“Y e recall Aaron Beardsley’ s auld place, aye?”
“I do ,” I  said, wrinkling my nose in reflex at the memory of
that wre tched sty , then emitting a small cry and clapping both
hands over my abused appendage.
Jamie g lanced at me, and put another bit of bread on his
toasting fork.“W ell, so,” he went on, ignoring  my protest that I was full,
“the Bro wns took it over , of course, when they adopted the
wee lass . They cleaned it out, stocked it fresh, and went on
using it as a trading post.”
The Cherokee and Catawba had been accustomed to come
to the place—horrid as it was—when Aaron Beardsley had
operated as an Indian trader , and  had continued to do business
with the new management—a very beneficial and profitable
arrangement all round.
“Which is what Hodgepile saw , ” Ian put in. The Hodgepile
gang, with their usual straigh tforward methods of doing
business, had walked in, shot th e couple in char ge, and begun
systematically looting the place. The couple’ s eleven-year -old
daughter , who had fortunately b een in the barn when the gang
arrived, had slipped out, mounte d a mule, and ridden hell-for -
leather for Brownsville and he lp. By good fortune, she had
encountered the  Committee of Safety , returning from some
errand, and brought them back in time to confront the robbers.
There then ensued what in later years would be called a
Mexican standof f. The Browns had the house surrounded.
Hodgepile, how ever , had Alicia Beardsley Brown—the two-
year -old girl who legally owned the trading post, and who had
been ad opted by the Browns u pon the death of her putative
father .
Hodgepile had enough food a nd ammunition inside the
trading post to w ithstand a siege of weeks; the Browns were
disinclined to set fire to their valuable property in order to
drive him  out, or to risk the girl’ s life by storming the place.
After a day or two during which desultory shots were
exchanged, and the members  of the committee became
increasingly edg y at having to camp in the woods surrounding
the t rading post, a flag of truce had been waved from the upper
window , and Richard Brown had gone inside to parley with
Hodgepile.
The resu lt being a wary sort of mer ger . Hodgepile’ s gang
would continue their operations, steering clear of anysettlement under the Browns’ protection, but would bring the
proceeds of their robberies to the trading post, where they
could be disposed of inconspicuously at a good profit, with
Hodgepile’ s gang taking a generous cut.
“The pr oceeds,” I said, accepting a fresh slice of buttered
toast from Jamie. “That—you do mean captives?”
“Sometimes.” His lips pressed tight as he poured a mug of
cider an d handed it to me. “And depending upon where they
were. When they took captives in the mountains, some of them
were sol d to the Indians, throug h the trading post. Those they
took fro m the piedmont, they sold to river pirates, or took to
the coast to sell on to the Indies—that would be the best price,
aye? A fourteen -year -old lad would bring a hundred pound, at
least.”
My lips felt numb, and not only from the cider .
“How long?” I said, appalled . “How many?” Children,
young men, young women, wrenched from their homes and
sold cold-blood edly into slavery . No one to follow . Even if
they were somehow to escape eventually , there would be no
place—no one—to return to.
Jamie sighed. He looked unutterably tired.
“Brown doesna ken,” Ian said q uietly . “He says … He says
he’d nothing to do with it.”
“Like b loody hell he hadn’ t,” I said, a flash of fury
momentarily ecl ipsing horror . “He was with  Hodgepile when
they came here. He knew they m eant to take the whisky . And
he must  have been with them before, when they—did other
things.”
Jamie nodded.
“He claims he tried to stop them from taking you.”
“He did,” I said shortly . “And then he tried to make them
kill me, to stop me telling you he’d been there. And then he
bloody meant to drown me him self! I don’ t suppose he told
you that.”“No, he didn’ t.”  Ian exchanged a brief look with Jamie, and
I saw some unspoken agreement pass between them. It
occurred to me that I might po ssibly just have sealed Lionel
Brown’ s fate. If so, I was not sure I felt guilty about it.
“What—what do you mean to do with him?” I asked.
“I th ink perhaps I will hang h im,” Jamie replied, after a
moment’ s pause. “But I’ve more questions I want answered.
And I must think about how best to manage the matter . Dinna
bother about it, Sassenach; ye’ll not see him again.”
W ith that, he stood and stretched, muscles cracking, then
shifted h is shoulders, settling himself with a sigh. He gave me
a hand and helped me to my feet.
“Go up to bed, Sassenach, and I’ll be up directly . I must just
have a wee word with Ian first.”
HOT BUTTERE D T OAST , cider , and conversation had made
me feel momen tarily better . I found myself so tired, though,
that I could barely drag myself up the stairs, and was obliged
to sit on the bed, swaying blearily , in hopes of getting up the
strength to take of f my clothes. It was a few moments before I
noticed that Jamie was hovering in the doorway .
“Erm … ?” I said vaguely .
“I didna ken, did ye want me to stay with ye tonight?” he
asked dif fidentl y . “If ye’d rest better alone, I could take
Joseph’ s bed. Or if ye’d like, I could sleep beside ye, on the
floor .”
“Oh,” I said blan kly , trying to weigh these alternatives. “No.
Stay . Sle ep with  me, I mean.” From the bottom of a well of
fatigue, I summoned something like a smile. “Y ou can warm
the bed, at least.”
A m ost peculiar expression flitted across his face at that,
and I blinked, not sure I’d seen it. I had, though; his face was
caught between  embarrassment and dismayed amusement—
with somewhere  behind all that the sort of look he might have
worn if going to the stake: heroically resigned.“What on earth  have you been doing?” I asked, suf ficiently
surprised as to be shaken out of my torpor .
Embarrassment was getting the  upper hand; the tips of his
ears were going red, and a flu sh was visible in his cheeks,
even by the dim light of the taper I’d set on the table.
“I wasna  going to tell ye,” he m uttered, avoiding my gaze.
“I swore wee Ian and Roger Mac to silence.”
“Oh, they’ve been silent as t he grave,” I assured him.
Though this statement did perhaps explain the occasional odd
look on Roger ’ s face, of late. “What’ s been going on?”
He sighed, scraping the edge of his boot across the floor .
“A ye, well. It’ s T sisqua, d’ye see? He meant it as hospitality ,
the f irst time, bu t then when Ian  told him … well, it wasna the
best thin g to have said, under the circumstances, only … And
then the  next time we came, and  there they were again, only a
dif ferent pair , and when I tried to make them leave, they said
Bird sai d to say that it was hon or to my vow , for what good
was a vow that c ost nothing to k eep? And I will be damned if I
ken doe s he mean that, or is he only thinking that either I’ll
crack and he’ll have the upper hand of me for good, or that I’ll
get him the gun s he wants to put an end to it one way or the
other—or is he only having a joke at my expense? Even Ian
says he canna tell which it is, and if he—”
“Jamie,” I said. “What are you talking about?”
He stole a quick glance at me, then looked away again.
“Ah … naked w omen,” he blurted, and went red as a piece
of new flannel.
I sta red at him for a moment. M y ears still buzzed slightly ,
but there  wasn’ t anything wrong with my hearing. I pointed a
finger at him—carefully , because all my fingers were swollen
and bruised.
“Y ou,” I said, in  measured tones, “come here right now . Sit
down rig ht there ”—I pointed at the bed beside me—”and tell
me in words of one syllable exactly  what you’ve been doing.”He d id, with the  result that five minutes later I was lying flat
on th e bed, whe ezing with laughter , moaning with the pain to
my cracked ribs, and with hel pless tears running down my
temples and into my ears.
“Oh, Go d, oh, God, oh, God,” I gasped. “I can’ t stand it, I
really ca n’ t. Help me sit up.” I extended a hand, yelped with
pain as his fingers closed on my lacerated wrist, but got
upright a t last, bent over with a pillow clutched to my middle,
and clutched it tighter each tim e a gust of recurrent laughter
struck me.
“I’m glad ye think it’ s sae funny , Sassenach,” Jamie said
very dryly . He’d recovered himself to some extent, though his
face was still flushed. “Y e’re sure ye’re no hysterical?”
“No, no t at all.” I snif fed, dabb ing at my eyes with a damp
linen hankie, then snorted with uncontainable mirth. “Oh! Ow ,
God, that hurts.”
Sighing, he poured a cup of w ater from the flask on the
bedside table, and held it for me  to drink. It was cool, but flat
and rather stale; I thought perhaps it had been standing since
before …
“All rig ht,” I said, waving the cup away and dabbing
moisture very carefully from my lips. “I’m fine.” I breathed
shallowly , feeling my heart begin to slow down. “W ell. So. At
least now I kno w why you’ve been coming back from the
Cherokee villag es in such a state of—of—” I felt an unhinged
giggle rising, and bent over , mo aning as I stifled it. “Oh, Jesus
H. R oosevelt Christ. And here I thought it was thoughts of me,
driving you mad with lust.”
He snorted then himself, thoug h mildly . He put down the
cup, rose , and turned back the c overlet. Then he looked at me,
and his eyes were clear , unguarded.
“Claire,” he said, quite gently , “it was  you. It’ s always been
you, and  it always will be. Get  into bed, and put the candle
out. As soon as I’ve fastened the shutters, smoored the hearth,
and barred the door , I’ll come and keep ye warm.”“KILL ME.” Randall’ s eyes were fever -bright. “Kill me,” he
said. “My heart’ s desire.”
He jerk ed awake, hearing the wor ds echo in his head,
seeing the eyes, seeing the rain-matted hair , Randall’ s face,
wet as that of a dr owned man.
He rubb ed a hand har d over his own face, surprised to feel
his skin dry , his bear d no mor e than a shadow . The sense of
wet, the itching scurf of a month’ s whiskers, was still so str ong
that he got up, moving quietly  by instinct, and went to the
window , wher e moonlight shone thr ough the cracks in the
shutter . He pour ed a little water into the basin, moved the bowl
into a shaft of light, and looked in, to rid himself of that
lingering sense of being someone else, somewher e else.
The face  in the water was no mor e than a featur eless oval,
but smo oth-shaven, and the hair lay loose on his shoulders,
not bound up for battle. And yet it seemed the face of a
stranger .
Unsettled, he left the water in th e bowl, and after a moment,
padded softly back to the bed.
She was asleep. He had not even thought of her when he
woke, b ut now the sight of her steadied him. That face he
knew , even batter ed and swollen as it was.
He set his hand  on the bedste ad, comforted by the solid
wood. Sometimes when he woke, the dr eam stayed with him,
and he felt the r e al world ghostly , faint ar ound him. Sometimes
he fear ed he was a ghost.
But the sheets w er e cool on his skin, and Clair e’ s warmth a
r eassurance. He  r eached for her , and she r olled over , curled
herself backwar d into his arms with a small moan of content,
her bum r oundly solid against him.
She fell asleep a gain at once; she hadn’ t r eally waked. He
had an ur ge to r ouse her , make her talk to him—only to be
quite sur e she could see him, he ar him. He only held her tight,
though, and over her curly he ad he watched the door , asthough it might open and Jack  Randall stand ther e, soaked
and str eaming.
Kill me, he’d said. My heart’ s desir e.
His hear t beat slow , echoing in  the ear he pr essed against
the pillo w . Some nights, he wo uld fall asleep listening to it,
comforted by the fleshy , monotonous thump. Other times, like
now , he would h ear instead the mortal silence in between the
beats—that silence that patiently awaits all men.
He h ad drawn th e quilts up, but  now put them back, so that
Clair e w as cove r ed but his own back lay bar e, open to the chill
of th e r o om, tha t he might not slip warmly into sleep and risk
r eturning to the dr eam. Let sleep struggle for him in the cold,
and at last pull him off the pr ecipice of consciousness, down to
the deeps of black oblivion.
For he did not wish to know what Randall had meant by
what he said.3 2
HANGING’S T OO GOOD
I N THE MORNI NG, Mrs. Bug was back in the kitchen, and
the air was warm  and fragrant w ith the smells of cooking. She
seemed quite as usual, and bey ond a brief glance at my face
and a “tsk!”, not inclined to  fuss. Either she had more
sensitivity than I’d thought, or Jamie had had a word.
“Here, a muirninn,  have it while it ’ s hot.” Mrs. Bug slid a
heap of turkey h ash from the platter onto my plate, and deftly
topped it with a fried egg.
I n odded thanks and picked up my fork, with a certain lack
of en thusiasm. My jaw was still so sore that eating was a slow
and painful business.
The egg  went down all right, but the smell of burned onion
seemed very strong, oily in my  nostrils. I separated a small
bite of potato and mashed it against the roof of my mouth,
squashing it with my tongue in lieu of chewing it, then
washing it down with a sip of cof fee.
More in hopes of distracting myself than because I truly
wanted to know , I asked, “A nd how is Mr . Brown this
morning?”
Her lips tightened, and she smac ked down a spatula of fried
potatoes as though they were Brown’ s brains.
“Nowhere near sae badly of f as  he ought to be,” she said.
“Hanging’ s too good for him, and him nay more than a
wretched dungheap, crawling wi’ maggots.”
I sp it out the bit of potato I’d  been mangling, and took
another hasty gulp of cof fee. It hit bottom and started back up.
I pu shed back th e bench and ra n for the door , reaching it just
in time to throw  up into the blackberry bush, retching cof fee,
bile, and fried egg.I wa s dimly aw are of Mrs. Bug, hovering anxiously in the
doorway , and waved her away with one hand. She hesitated
for a  mo ment, but then went in again, as I stood up and started
toward the well.
The entire inside of my head ta sted of cof fee and bile, and
the back of my nose stung terribly . I felt as though my nose
were bleeding again, but when I touched it gingerly ,
discovered that it wasn’ t. Careful swilling with water cleansed
my mouth, and did a bit to remedy the nasty taste—but
nothing to drown the panic that had come in the wake of the
nausea.
I had the sudden, distinct,  and thoroughly bizarre
impression that my skin was mis sing. My legs felt shaky , and I
sat dow n on the stump where we split kindling, heedless of
splinters.
I can’ t,  I thought. I simply can’ t.
I sat on the chopping block, lacking the will to rise. I could
feel my womb, very distinctly . A small, round weight at the
base of my abdomen, feeling slightly swollen, very tender .
Nothing, I thought, with what determination I could muster .
Entirely normal. It always feels that way , at a particular point
of my cycle. An d after what we had done, Jamie and I … well,
no b loody wonder if I were s till conscious of my interior
workings. Granted, we hadn’ t, the night before; I’d wanted
nothing but to b e held. On the other hand, I’d nearly ruptured
myself, laughi ng. A small laugh escaped me now ,
remembering Jamie’ s confession. It hurt, and I clutched my
ribs, but felt a little better .
“W ell, bloody hell anyway ,” I s aid aloud, and got up. “I’ve
things to do.”
Propelled by this bold statement, I fetched my basket and
foraging knife, told Mrs. Bug I w as of f, and set out toward the
Christies’.
I’d check T om’ s hand, then invite Malva to come out with
me in search of ginseng root, and any other useful things wemight co me across. She was an apt pupil, observant and quick,
with a good me mory for plants. And I’d meant to teach her
how to prepare penicillin colonies. Picking through a
collection of damp, moldy garbage would be soothing. I
ignored a slight tendency of my  gor ge to rise at the thought,
and lifted my battered face to the morning sun.
And I wasn’ t go ing to worry about what Jamie meant to do
with Lionel Brown, either .3 3
IN WHICH MRS. BUG
 T AKES A HAND
B Y T HE NEXT M ORNING, I had recovered quite a bit. My
stomach had settled, and I felt much more resilient,
emotionally; a good thing, as whatever warnings Jamie had
given Mrs. Bug about fussing over me had plainly worn of f.
Everything hurt  less, and my hands had nearly returned to
normal, but I was still desperately tired, and it was in fact
rather comfortin g to put my feet up on the settle and be
brought cups of cof fee—the tea was running very low , and no
chance of more likely for several years—and dishes of rice
pudding with raisins in.
“And ye ’re quite sure as your face will go back to lookin’
like a face, are ye?” Mrs. Bu g handed me a fresh muf fin,
dripping with butter and honey , and peered dubiously at me,
lips pursed.
I wa s tempted to  ask her what the thing on the front of my
head loo ked like  now , but was fairly sure I didn’ t want to hear
the answer . Instead, I contented myself with a brief “Y es” and
a request for more cof fee.
“I kent a wumm an up in Kirkcaldy once, as was kicked in
the face  by a co w ,” she said, st ill eyeing me critically as she
dished up the cof fee. “Lost her front teeth, puir creature, and
ever aft er , her nose pointed of f to the side, like that. ” She
pushed h er own small round nose sharply to the side with an
index finger in illustration, simultaneously tucking her upper
lip under the lower one to simulate toothlessness.
I tou ched the bridge of my own nose carefully , but it was
reassuringly straight, if still puf fy .“And then there was WIlliam McCrea of Balgownie, him
who fought at Sherif fsmuir with my Arch. Got in the way of
an E nglish pike, and cleaved of f  half his jaw , and  t he best  part
of h is no se! Arc h said ye could see straight into his gullet and
his brain-box both—but he lived. On parritch, mostly ,” she
added. “And whisky .”
“What a very go od idea,” I said, putting down the nibbled
muf fin. “I believe I’ll go and get some.”
Carrying my cup, I escaped as quickly as I could down the
hall to my sur gery , followed by shouted reminiscences of
Dominic Mulroney , an Irishman who’d walked face-first into a
church door in Edinbur gh and  him sober as a sheep at the
time… .
I shut the doo r of the sur ger y behind me, opened the
window , and tossed the remain s of the cof fee out, then took
down the bottle from the shelf and filled my cup to the brim.
I ha d intended t o ask Mrs. Bug about Lionel Brown’ s state
of h ealth, but … perhaps that could wait. I found that my
hands w ere trembling again, and had to press them flat on the
table for  a moment to steady th em before I could pick up the
cup.
I took a deep breath, and a swallow of whisky . Another . Y es,
that was better .
Small waves of pointless pani c tended still to seize me
unawares. I hadn’ t had one this morning, and had rather hoped
they’d gone away . Not quite yet, apparently .
I s ipped  whisky , dabbed cold s weat from my temples, and
looked r ound for something useful to do. Malva and I had
started s ome fresh penicillin the day before, and had made up
fresh tinctures of boneset and troutlilly , and some fresh gentian
salve, as well. I ended up thumbing slowly through my big
black casebook, sipping whis ky and dwelling on pages
recounting various horrible complications of childbirth.
I r ealized what I was doing, b ut didn’ t seem able to stop
doing it. I was not  pregnant. I was sure of it. And yet mywomb felt tender , inflamed, and my whole being disturbed.
Oh, ther e was a jolly one; one o f Daniel Rawlings’ s entries,
describing a slave woman of middle age, suf fering from a
recto-vaginal fistula that caused her to leak a constant small
stream of fecal matter through the vagina.
Such fistulas were caused by battering during childbirth,
and were more common in very  young girls, where the strain
of prolonged labor often caused such tears—or in older
women, where the tissues had g rown less elastic. Of course, in
older women, the damage was q uite likely to be accompanied
by comp lete per ineal collapse, allowing uterus, urethra—and
possibly the anus for good meas ure—to sag through the pelvic
floor .
“How e xtremely fortunate that I am not pregnant,” I said
aloud, closing the book firmly . Perhaps I’d have another go at
Don Quixote.
On the whole, it was a consi derable relief when Malva
Christie came and tapped on the door , just before noon.
She gave my face a quick glance, but as she had the day
before, merely accepted my appearance without comment.
“How’ s your father ’ s hand?” I asked.
“Oh, it’ s fine, ma’am,” she replied quickly . “I looked just as
ye said,  but no red streaks, no  pus, and just that tiny bit of
redness near where the skin is cut. I made him wiggle his
fingers like ye s aid,” she added, a dimple showing briefly in
her c heek. “He d idna want to, an d carried on like I was poking
thorns into him—but he did it.”
“Oh, we ll done!” I said, and patted her on the shoulder ,
which made her pinken with pleasure.
“I th ink that des erves a biscuit with honey ,” I added, having
noted the delectable aroma of baking that had been wafting
down the hall from the kitch en for the last hour . “Come
along.”As we entered the hallway and turned toward the kitchen,
though, I heard an odd sort of noise from behind us. A peculiar
kind of thumpin g or dragging outside, as though some lar ge
animal was lumbering across t he hollow boards of the front
stoop.
“What’ s that?” Malva said, looking over her shoulder in
alarm.
A loud groan an swered her , and a thud!  that shook the front
door as something fell against it.
“Mary , Joseph, and Bride!” Mrs. Bug had popped out of the
kitchen, crossing herself. “What’ s that?”
My heart had b egun to race at  the noises, and my mouth
went dry . Something lar ge and dark blocked the line of light
beneath the door , and stertorous breathing was clearly audible,
interspersed with groans.
“W ell, w hatever it is, it’ s sick or injured,” I said. “Stand
back.” I wiped my hands on my apron, swallowed, walked
forward, and pulled open the door .
For a moment, I  didn’ t recognize him; he was no more than
a heap of flesh, wild hair , and disheveled garments smeared
with dir t. But then he struggled  up onto one knee and raised
his h ead, panting, showing me a  dead-white face, marked with
bruises and glossy with sweat.
“Mr . Brown?” I said, incredulous.
His eyes  were glazed; I wasn’ t sure that he saw me at all,
but clearly he r ecognized my voice, for he lunged forward,
nearly knocking  me over . I stepped smartly back, but he
caught me by the foot and held on, crying, “Mercy! Mistress,
have mercy on me, I pray you!”
“What in the name of—let go. Let go, I say!” I shook my
foot, try ing to dislodge him, but he clung like a limpet, and
went on  shouting, “Mercy!” in a sort of hoarse, desperate
chant.“Oh, shut your noise, man,” Mrs. Bug said crossly .
Recovered from the shock of hi s entrance, she appeared not at
all disc omposed by his appearance, though substantially
annoyed by it.
Lionel Brown did not shut up, b ut went on imploring me for
mercy , despite my attempts to placate him. These were
interrupted by Mrs. Bug leaning past me, a lar ge meat-mallet
in her hand, and dotting Mr . Br own smartly on the head with
it. His eyes rolled back in his he ad and he dropped on his face
without another word.
“I’m tha t sorry , Mrs. Fraser ,” Mrs. Bug said, apologetic. “I
canna think how he got out, let alone came all this way!”
I did n’ t know ho w he’d got out,  either , but it was quite clear
how he’d come—he’d crawled, dragging his broken leg. His
hands and legs were scratched and bloody , his breeches in
tatters, and the whole of him covered with smears of mud,
stuck full of grass and leaves.
I l eaned  down and plucked an elm leaf from his hair , trying
to think  what on earth to do with him. The obvious, I
supposed.
“Help me get him into the sur gery ,” I said, sighing as I bent
to get him under the arms.
“Y e canna be doing that, Mr s. Fraser!” Mrs. Bug was
scandalized. “Himself was verra  fierce about it; ye mustna be
troubled by this scoundrel, he sa id, nor even catch sight of the
man!”
“W ell, I’m afraid it’ s a bit late not to catch sight of him,” I
said, tug ging at the inert body . “ W e can’ t just let him lie on the
porch, can we? Help me!”
Mrs. Bug appeared to see no g ood reason why Mr . Brown
ought not  to  continue lying on the porch , but when Malva—
who had been p ressed flat against the wall, wide-eyed, during
the uproar—cam e to help, Mrs. Bug gave in with a sigh,
laying down her weapon and lending a hand.He had recover ed consciousness by the time we got him
man-handled onto the sur gery table, and was moaning, “Don’ t
let him kill me … please don’ t let him kill me!”
“W ould you be quiet?” I said, th oroughly irritated. “Let me
look at your leg.”
No one had imp roved on my original rough splinting job,
and his journey from the Bugs’ cabin hadn’ t done it any good;
blood was seeping through the bandages. I was frankly
amazed that he h ad made it, considering his other injuries. His
flesh was clammy and his breath shallow , but he wasn’ t badly
fevered.
“W ill yo u bring me some hot water , please, Mrs. Bug?” I
asked, gingerly prodding the fractured limb. “And perhaps a
little whisky? He’ll need something for shock.”
“I will not,” M rs. Bug said, giving the patient a look of
intense dislike. “W e should just be saving Mr . Fraser the
trouble of dealing wi’ the go bshite, if he hasna got the
courtesy to die by himself.” She was still holding her mallet,
and raised it in a threatening manner , causing Mr . Brown to
cower and cry out, as the movement hurt his broken wrist.
“I’ll fetch the water ,” Malva said, and disappeared.
Ignoring my attempts to deal w ith his injuries, Mr . Brown
seized my wrist with his one go od hand, his grip surprisingly
strong.
“Don’ t l et him kill me,” he said hoarsely , fixing me with
bloodshot eyes. “Please, I beg you!”
I hesita ted. I hadn’ t exactly for gotten Mr . Brown’ s
existence, but I had more or less suppressed the knowledge of
it over the last day or so. I had b een only too glad not to think
of him.
He saw my hesitation, and licked his lips, trying again.
“Save m e, Mrs.  Fraser—I implore you! Y ou are the only
one he will listen to!”
W ith some dif ficulty , I detached his hand from my wrist.“Why , exactly , do you think an yone wants to kill you?” I
asked carefully .
Brown didn’ t laugh, but his mouth twisted bitterly at that.
“He say s that he will. I don’ t doubt him.” He seemed a little
calmer now , and took a deep, shuddering breath. “Please, Mrs.
Fraser ,” he said more softly . “I beg you—save me.”
I g lance d up at Mrs. Bug, and read the truth in her folded
arms and tight lips. She knew .
At th is p oint, M alva hurried in, a beaker of hot water in one
hand, the whisky jug in the other .
“What shall I do?” she asked breathlessly .
“Er … in the cupboard,” I said, trying to focus my mind.
“Do you  know what comfrey looks like—boneset?” I had hold
of Brown’ s wrist, automatically checking his pulse. It was
galloping.
“A ye, ma’am. Shall I put some to steep, then?” She had set
down the jug an d beaker and was already hunting through the
cupboard.
I met Brown’ s eyes, trying for dispassion.
“Y ou would have killed me, if you could,” I said very
quietly . My own pulse was going nearly as fast as his.
“No,” he said, but his eyes slid away from mine. Only a
fraction, but away . “No, I never would!”
“Y ou told H-Hodgepile to kill m e.” My voice shook on the
name an d a flush of anger bur geoned suddenly inside me.
“Y ou know you did!”
His left wrist was likely broken, and no one had set it; the
flesh was puf fy , dark with bruising. Even so, he pressed his
free hand over m ine, ur gent with the need to convince me. The
smell of him was rank, hot, and feral, like—
I r ipped my han d free, revulsion crawling over my skin like
a swarm of centipedes. I rubbed my palm hard on my apron,
trying not to throw up.It hadn’ t been him. I knew that much. Of all the men, it
couldn’ t have been him; he had broken his leg in the
afternoon. There  was no way in which he could have been that
heavy , inexorable presence in the night, shoving, stinking. And
yet I  felt he was, and swallowed bile, my head going suddenly
light.
“Mrs. Fraser? Mrs. Fraser!” Malva and Mrs. Bug both
spoke to gether , and before I kn ew quite what was happening,
Mrs. Bug had eased me onto a stool, holding me upright, and
Malva was pressing a cup of  whisky ur gently against my
mouth.
I dra nk, eyes closed, trying to lose myself momentarily in
the clean, pungent scent and the searing taste of it.
I remembered Jamie’ s fury , the night he had brought me
home. H ad Brow n been in the room with us then, there was no
doubt he  would have killed the man. W ould he do so now , in
colder blood? I didn’ t know . Brown clearly thought so.
I could  hear Brown crying, a low , hopeless sound. I
swallowed the last of the whisky , pushed the cup away , and sat
up, opening my eyes. T o my vague surprise, I was crying, too.
I stood up, and  wiped my face on my apron. It smelled
comfortingly of butter and cinnamon and fresh applesauce,
and the scent of it calmed my nausea.
“The tea’ s ready , Mrs. Fraser ,” Malva whispered, touching
my sleeve. Her eyes were fixed  on Brown, huddled miserably
on the table. “W ill ye drink it?”
“No,” I said. “Give it to him. Th en fetch me some bandages
—and go home.”
I had no idea wh at Jamie meant to do; I had no idea what I
might do, when I discovered his intent. I didn’ t know what to
think, o r how to feel. The only  thing I did know for certain
was that  I had an  injured man be fore me. For the moment, that
would have to be enough.
FOR A LITTLE  WHILE, I ma naged to for get who he was.
Forbidding him  to speak, I gritted my teeth and became
absorbed in the tasks before me . He sniveled, but kept still. I
cleaned, bandaged, tidied, adm inistering impersonal comfort.
But as the tasks ended, I was st ill left with the man, and was
conscious of increasing distaste each time I touched him.
At last, I was finished, and went to wash, meticulously
wiping my hands with a cloth soaked in turpentine and
alcohol, cleaning under each fingernail despite the soreness. I
was, I realized, behaving as th ough he harbored some vile
contagion. But I couldn’ t stop myself.
Lionel Brown watched me apprehensively .
“What d’ye mean to do?”
“I haven’ t decided yet.” This was more or less true. It hadn’ t
been a process of conscious decision, though my course of
action—or lack  of it—had be en determined. Jamie—damn
him—had been right. I saw no  reason to tell Lionel Brown
that, though. Not yet.
He was  opening his mouth, n o doubt to plead with me
further , but I stopped him with a sharp gesture.
“There was a m an with you named Donner . What do you
know about him?”
Whatever he’d expected, it wasn’ t that. His mouth hung
open a little.
“Donner?” he repeated, looking uncertain.
“Don’ t d are to tell me you don’ t  remember him,” I said, my
agitation making me sound fierce.
“Oh, no, ma’am,” he assured m e hastily . “I recall him fine
—just fine! What”—his tongue  touched the raw corner of his
mouth—”what d’ye want to know about him?”
The mai n thing I wanted to know was whether he was dead
or not, but Brown almost certainly didn’ t know that.“Let’ s s tart with  his full name ,” I proposed, sitting down
gingerly beside him, “and go from there.”
In th e event, Bro wn knew little more for sure about Donner
than  his name—which, he said, was W endigo.
“What?” I said incredulously , but Brown appeared to find
nothing odd in it.
“That’ s what he said it was,” he said, sounding hurt that I
should doubt him. “Indian, in’ t it?”
It w as. It was, to be precise, the name of a monster from the
mythology of some northern tribe—I couldn’ t recall which.
Brianna’ s high-s chool class had once done a unit of Native
American myths, with each child undertaking to explain and
illustrate a particular story . Bree had done the W endigo.
I r ecalled it onl y because of the accompanying picture she
had draw n, whic h had stuck wit h me for some time. Done in a
reverse technique, the basic drawing done in white crayon,
showing through an overlay of charcoal. T rees, lashing to and
fro in a swirl of snow and wind, leaf-stripped and needle-
flying, the spaces between them  part of the night. The picture
had a sense of ur gency about i t, wildness and movement. It
took sev eral moments of looking at it before one glimpsed the
face amid the branches. I had actually yelped and dropped the
paper when I saw it—much to Bree’ s gratification.
“I dares ay ,” I said, firmly suppressing the memory of the
W endigo’ s face.  “Where did he come from? Did he live in
Brownsville?”
He had stayed in Brownsville, but only for a few weeks.
Hodgepile had brought him from somewhere, along with his
other men. Brown had taken no  notice of him; he caused no
trouble.
“He stayed with the widow Baudry ,” Brown said, sounding
suddenly hopeful. “Might be he told her something of himself.
I could find out for you. When I  go home.” He gave me a look
of what I assum ed he meant t o be doglike trust, but which
looked more like a dying newt.“Hmm,” I said, giving him a l ook of extreme skepticism.
“W e’ll see about that.”
He licked his lips, trying to look pitiful.
“Could I maybe have some water , ma’am?”
I d idn’ t suppose I could let him die of thirst, but I had had
quite enough of ministering to the man personally . I wanted
him out of my  sur gery and o ut of my sight, as soon as
possible. I nodded brusquely and stepped into the hall, calling
for Mrs. Bug to bring some water .
The afternoon was warm, and I was feeling unpleasantly
prickly after working on Lionel Brown. W ithout warning, a
flush of heat ros e suddenly upward through my chest and neck
and flowed like hot wax over m y face, so that sweat popped
out b ehind my e ars. Murmuring an excuse, I left the patient to
Mrs. Bug, and hurried out into the welcome air .
There w as a well outside; no mo re than a shallow pit, neatly
edged w ith ston es. A big gourd  dipper was wedged between
two of the ston es; I pulled it out and, kneeling, scooped up
enough water to drink and to splash over my steaming face.
Hot flus hes in themselves were not really unpleasant—
rather interesting , in fact, in the same way that pregnancy was;
that odd feeling as one’ s body did something quite unexpected,
and not within one’ s conscious control. I wondered briefly
whether men felt that way about erections.
At the moment, a hot flush seemed quite welcome. Surely , I
told myself, I c ouldn’ t be experiencing hot flushes if I were
pregnant. Or could I? I had th e uneasy knowledge that the
hormonal sur ges of early pregnancy were quite as capable of
causing all kinds of peculiar thermal phenomena as were those
of the menopa use. I was certainly having the sorts of
emotional conn iptions that went with being pregnant—or
menopausal—or from being raped—
“Don’ t be ridiculous, Beauchamp,” I said out loud. “Y ou
know quite well you’re not pregnant.”Hearing it gave me an odd feeling—nine parts relief, one
part regret. W ell, perhaps nine thousand, nine hundred, and
ninety-nine parts relief, to one of regret—but it was still there.
The flood of sweat that sometimes followed in the wake of a
hot f lush, though, was something  I could do without. The roots
of m y h air were  soaked, and wh ile the cool water on my face
was lov ely , waves of heat were still blooming over me,
spreading like a clinging veil over chest and face and neck and
scalp. Seized by impulse, I tip ped half a dipperful of water
down th e inside of my bodice, exhaling in relief as the wetness
soaked t he cloth, trickling between my breasts and down over
my belly , tickling cool between  my legs and dripping to the
ground.
I loo ked a mes s, but Mrs. Bu g wouldn’ t mind—and the
devil wi th what bloody Lionel Brown thought. Dabbing at my
temples with the end of my apron, I made my way back to the
house.
The door stood ajar , as I’d left it. I pushed it open, and the
strong pure light of the afternoo n shone past me, illuminating
Mrs. Bug in the act of pressing a pillow over Lionel Brown’ s
face with all her strength.
I s tood blinking  for a moment,  so surprised that I simply
couldn’ t translate the sight into realization. Then I darted
forward with an incoherent cry and grabbed her arm.
She was terribly strong, and so  focused on what she was
doing that she d idn’ t budge, veins standing out in her forehead
and her face nearly purple wit h ef fort. I jerked hard on her
arm, fail ed to dislodge her grip,  and in desperation shoved her
as hard as I could.
She staggered, of f-balance, and  I snatched the edge of the
pillow , yanking it sideways, of f Brown’ s face. She lunged
back, intent on c ompleting the job, blunt hands shoving down
into the mass of the pillow and disappearing to the wrists.
I dre w b ack a step and flung my self at her bodily . W e went
over wit h a crash, hitting the table, upsetting the bench, andending in a ta ngle on the floor amid a litter of broken
earthenware and the scents of m int tea and a spilled chamber
pot.
I rolled, gasped for breath, p ain from my cracked ribs
paralyzing me for a moment. Then I gritted my teeth, pushing
her away and trying to extricate myself from a snarl of skirts—
and stumbled to my feet.
His hand hung l imp, trailing from the table, and I grabbed
his jaw , pulling back his head, and pressed my mouth fervently
to his. I blew w hat little breath I had into him, gasped, and
blew ag ain, all the time feeling frantically for some trace of a
pulse in his neck.
He w as warm, the bones of his j aw , his shoulder felt normal
—but hi s flesh had a terrible slackness, the lips under mine
flattening obsce nely as I pressed and blew , blood from my
split lip splattering everywhere, falling somehow away , so that
I w as forced to s uck frantically to keep them sealed, breathing
in hard through the corners of m y mouth, fighting my ribs for
enough air to blow again.
I felt someone behind me—Mrs. Bug—and kicked out at
her . She made a n ef fort to seize my shoulder , but I wrenched
aside an d her fingers slipped o f f. I turned round fast and hit
her , as hard as I could, in the s tomach, and she fell down on
the floor with a loud whoof!  No time to spare for her; I whirled
and flung myself once more on Brown.
The che st under my hand rose reassuringly as I blew—but
fell abru ptly as I stopped. I drew back and pounded hard with
both fists, smacking the hard springiness of the sternum with
enough force to bruise my own hands further—and Brown’ s
flesh, had he been capable of bruising any longer .
He wasn’ t. I blew and thumped and blew , until bloody sweat
ran down my body in streams and my thighs were slick with it
and my ears ran g and black spots swam before my eyes with
hyperventilating. Finally , I stopped. I stood panting in deep,
wheezing gasps , wet hair han ging in my face, my hands
throbbing in time to my pounding heart.The bloody man was dead.
I r ubbed  my hands on my apro n, then used it to wipe my
face. My  mouth  was swollen an d tasted of blood; I spat on the
floor . I felt quite calm; the air had that peculiar sense of
stillness that often accompanies a quiet death. A Carolina wren
called in the wood nearby , “T eakettle, teakettle, teakettle!”
I he ard a small rustling noise and turned round. Mrs. Bug
had righ ted the bench and sat down on it. She sat hunched
forward, hands folded together i n her lap, a small frown on her
wrinkled round face as she stared intently at the body on the
table. Brown’ s hand hung limp, fingers slightly cupped,
holding shadows.
The sheet was stained over his body; that was the source of
the chamber pot smell. So, he’d been dead before I began my
resuscitation ef forts.
Another wave of heat bloomed upward, coating my skin
like hot wax. I could smell my own sweat. I closed my eyes
briefly , then opened them, and turned back to Mrs. Bug.
“Why on earth, ” I asked conversationally , “did you do
that?”
“SHE’S DON E WHA T?” Jamie stared at me
uncomprehendingly , then at Mrs. Bug, who sat at the kitchen
table, head bowed, her hands clasped together in front of her .
Not waiting for me to repeat what I’d said, he strode down
the h all to the sur gery . I heard h is footsteps come to a sudden
stop. There was an instant’ s silen ce, and then a heartfelt Gaelic
oath. Mrs. Bug’ s plump shoulders rose around her ears.
The footsteps came back, mor e slowly . He came in, and
walked to the table where she sat.
“O, wom an, how have you dared to lay hands upon a man
who was mine?” he asked very softly , in Gaelic.
“Oh, sir ,” she whispered. She was afraid to look up; she
cowered under her cap, her face almost invisible. “I—I didnamean to. T ruly , sir!”
Jamie glanced at me.
“She smothered him,” I repeated. “W ith a pillow .”
“I th ink ye do not do such a thing without meaning it,” he
said, with an edge in his voice that could have sharpened
knives. “What were ye about, a boir eannach,  to do it?”
The round shoulders began to quiver with fright.
“Oh, sir , oh, sir! I ken ‘twas wrong—only … only it was the
wicked tongue of him. All the time I had care of him, he’d
cower and tremble, aye, when you or the young one came to
speak to him, ev en Arch—but me—” She swallowed, the flesh
of h er face seem ing suddenly loose. “I’m no but a woman, he
could speak his mind to me, and he did. Threatening, sir , and
cursing most awfully . He said— he said as how his brother
would c ome, him and his m en, to free him, and would
slaughter us all in our blood and burn the houses over our
heids.” Her jowls trembled as she spoke, but she found the
courage to look up and meet Jamie’ s eyes.
“I kent ye’d never let that happen, sir , and did my best to
pay him no mind. And when he did get under my skin enough,
I tol d hi m he’d be deid long bef ore his brother heard where he
was. But then th e wicked wee cur escaped—and I’m sure I’ve
no idea how ‘twas done, for I’d have sworn he was in no
condition even to rise from the bed, let alone come so far , but
he d id, and thre w himself upon your wife’ s mercy , and she
took him up—I would have d ragged his evil carcass away
myself, but she wouldna have i t—” Here she darted a briefly
resentful glance at me, but returned an imploring gaze to Jamie
almost at once.
“And she took him to mend, sweet gracious lady that she is,
sir—and I could see it in her fac e, that having tended him so, it
was com ing to her that she could na bear to see him killed. And
he saw it, too, the gobshite, and when she went out, he jeered
at me, saying now he was safe , he’d fooled her into tending
him and  she’d never let him be killed, and directly he was freeof th e place, he ’d have a scor e of men down upon us like
vengeance itself , and then …” She closed her eyes, swaying
briefly , and pressed a hand to her chest.
“I couldn’ t help it, sir ,” she said very simply . “I really
couldn’ t.”
Jamie ha d been attending to her , a look like thunder on his
brow . At this point, he glanced sharply at me—and evidently
saw cor roborative evidence upon my own battered features.
His lips pressed tight together .
“Go home,” he said to Mrs. Bu g. “T ell your husband what
you have done, and send him to me.”
He turned on hi s heel then, and  headed for his study . Not
looking at me, M rs. Bug rose awkwardly to her feet and went
out, walking like a blind woman.
“YOU WERE RIGHT . I’m sorry .” I stood stif fly in the door of
the study , hand on the jamb.
Jamie was sitting with his elbow s on his desk, head resting
on his hands, but looked up at this, blinking.
“Did I not forbid ye to be sorr y , Sassenach?” he said, and
gave me  a lopsided smile. Then his eyes traveled over me, and
a look of concern came over his face.
“Christ, ye look like ye’re goin g to fall down, Claire,” he
said, getting up hastily . “Come and sit.”
He put me in his chair , and hovered over me.
“I’d call Mrs. Bug to bring ye s omething,” he said, “but as
I’ve sen t her away … shall I bring ye a cup of tea,
Sassenach?”
I’d been feeling like crying, but laughed instead, blinking
back tears.
“W e haven’ t got any . W e have n’ t had for months. I’m all
right. Just rather—rather shocked.”“A ye, I suppos e so. Y e’re ble eding a bit.” He pulled a
crumpled handkerchief from his pocket and, bending over ,
dabbed my mouth, his brows drawn together in an anxious
frown.
I sat  still and let him, fighting a sudden wave of exhaustion.
All at once, I wanted nothing save to lie down, go to sleep, and
never w ake up again. And if I d id wake up, I wanted the dead
man in my sur gery to be gone. I also wanted the house not to
be burned over our heads.
But it isn’ t time,  I thoug ht suddenly , and found that thought
—idiotic as it was—obscurely comforting.
“W ill it make th ings harder for you?” I asked, struggling to
fight of f the weariness and think sensibly . “W ith Richard
Brown?”
“I dinna  ken,” he admitted. “I ’ve been trying to think. I
could w ish we were in Scotland,” he said a little ruefully . “I’d
ken better what Brown might do, were he a Scotsman.”
“Oh, really? Say you were deal ing with your uncle Colum,
for instance,” I suggested. “What would he do, do you think?”
“T ry to kill me and get his brother back,” he replied
promptly . “If he kent I had him. And if your Donner did  go
back to Brownsville—Richard knows by now .”
He was entirely right, and the knowledge made small
fingers of apprehension creep briskly up my back.
The wor ry evidently showed on my face, for he smiled a
little.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenac h,” he said. “The Lindsay
brothers left for Brownsville the morning after we came back.
Kenny’ s keeping an eye on the town, and Evan and Murdo are
waiting at points along the road , with fresh horses. If Richard
Brown a nd his bloody Committ ee of Safety should come this
way , we’ll hear of it in good time.”
That was reassuring, and I sat up a little straighter .“That’ s good. But—even if Donner did go back, he
wouldn’ t know that you had Lionel Brown captive; you might
have killed him d-during the fight.”
He flicked a narrow blue glance at me, but merely nodded.
“I could wish I  had,” he said with a slight grimace. “It
would have saved trouble. But then—I’d not have found out
what the y were doing, and I did need to know that. If Donner ’ s
gone back, though, he’ll ha’ told Richard Brown what
happened, and led them back to claim the bodies. He’ll see his
brother ’ s no among them.”
“Whereupon he ’ll draw the lo gical conclusion and come
here looking for him.”
The sound of th e back door ope ning at this point made me
jump, he art pounding, but it was  succeeded by the soft shuf fle
of mocc asined feet in the hall,  announcing Y oung Ian, who
peered inquiringly into the study .
“I’ve jus t met Mrs. Bug, hurrying of f to her house,” he said,
frowning. “She wouldna stop an d speak to me, and she looked
verra queer indeed. What’ s amiss?”
“What i sn’ t?” I  said, and laugh ed, causing him to glance
sharply at me.
Jamie sighed.
“Sit,” he said, pushing a stool toward Ian with one foot.
“And I’ll tell ye.”
Ian l istened with great attention,  though his mouth fell open
a little when Jamie reached the point about Mrs. Bug putting
the pillow over Brown’ s face.
“Is he still ther e?” he asked, at the end of the tale. He
hunched a little, looking suspiciously back over his shoulder ,
as th ough expecting Brown to c ome through the sur gery door
at any moment.
“W ell, I hardly think he’ s goin g anywhere under his own
steam,” I observed tartly .Ian nodd ed, but  got up to look anyway . He came back in a
moment, looking thoughtful.
“He’ s no marks on him,” he said to Jamie, sitting down.
Jamie nodded. “A ye, and he’ s freshly bandaged. Y our auntie
had just tended him.”
They exchanged  nods, both ob viously thinking the same
thing.
“Y e cann a tell by looking that he’ s been killed, Auntie,” Ian
explained, seeing that I was not  yet on their wavelength. “He
might have died of himself.”
“I su ppose you could say that he did.  I f he h adn’ t tri ed to
terrorize Mrs. Bug …” I rubbed a hand—gently—over my
forehead, where a headache was beginning to throb.
“How do  ye feel—” Ian began, in a worried tone, but I had
quite su ddenly had more than enough of people asking me
how I felt.
“I scarc ely know ,” I said abruptly , dropping my hand. I
looked down at my fists, curled in my lap.
“He—he wasn’ t a wicked  man, I don’ t think,” I said. The re
was a splotch of blood on my apron. I didn’ t know whether it
was his or mine. “Just … terribly weak.”
“Better of f dead then,” said Jamie matter -of-factly , and
without any particular malice. Ian nodded in agreement.
“W ell, s o.” Jamie returned to th e point of the discussion. “I
was just  saying to your auntie, i f Brown were a Scot, I should
better kn ow how to deal with him—but then it struck me, that
while he  isna Scottish, he is  by way  of doing business in a
Scottish manner . Him and his committee. They’re like a
W atch.”
Ian nodded, sketchy brows raised.
“So they  are.” He looked interested. “I’ve never seen one,
but Mam told m e—about the one that arrested you, Uncle
Jamie, a nd how she and Auntie  Claire went after them.” Hegrinned at me, h is gaunt face suddenly transforming to show a
hint of the boy he’d been.
“W ell, I was younger then,” I said. “And braver .”
Jamie m ade a small noise in his  throat that might have been
amusement.
“They’re no verra thrifty about it,” he said. “Killing and
burning, I mean—”
“As opposed to ongoing extorti on.” I was beginning to see
where he was going with this. Ian had been born after
Culloden; he’d never seen a W atch, one of those or ganized
bands of armed men that rode th e country , char ging fees from
the Highland chiefs to protect te nants, land, and cattle—and if
the blac k rent they char ged was not paid, promptly seizing
goods an d cattle  themselves. I h ad. And in all truth, I’d heard
of them burning and killing now and then, too—though
generally only to create an example and improve cooperation.
Jamie nodded. “W ell, Brown’ s no Scot, as I said. But
business is business, isn’ t it?” A contemplative look had come
over his  face, and he leaned back a little, hands linked over
one knee. “How fast can ye get to Anidonau Nuya, Ian?”
AFTER IAN LEFT , we stayed in the study . The situation in
my sur g ery wou ld have to be dealt with, but I was not quite
ready ye t to go and face it. Beyond a minor remark to the
ef fect that it wa s a pity he had not yet had time to build an
icehouse, Jamie made no reference to it, either .
“Poor old Mrs. Bug,” I said, beginning to get a grip. “I’d no
idea he’d been p laying on her that way . He must have thought
she was a soft touch.” I laughed weakly . “ That  was a mistake.
She’ s terribly strong. I was amazed.”
I sh ouldn’ t have been; I’d seen  Mrs. Bug walk for a mile
with a full-grown goat across her shoulders—but somehow
one never translates the strength required for daily farm life
into a capacity for homicidal fury .“So was I,” Ja mie said dryly . “Not that she was strong
enough to do it, but that she dared take matters into her own
hands. Why did she no tell Arch, if not myself?”
“I s uppose it’ s what she said— she thought it wasn’ t her
place to say any thing; you’d given her the job of looking after
him, and she’d move heaven a nd earth to do anything you
asked. I daresay  she thought she  was coping well enough, but
when he showed up that way , she … just snapped. It does
happen; I’ve seen it.”
“So have I,” he muttered. A small frown had formed,
deepening the crease between hi s brows, and I wondered what
violent incidents he might be recalling. “But I shouldna have
thought …”
Arch Bu g came  in so quietly that I didn’ t hear him; I only
realized that he was there w hen I saw Jamie look up,
stif fening. I whirled about, and saw the ax in Arch’ s hand. I
opened my mouth to speak, but he strode toward Jamie, taking
no notic e of his surroundings. C learly , for him, there was no
one in the room save Jamie.
He reached the desk and laid the ax upon it, almost gently .
“My life  for hers, O, chieftain, ” he said quietly in Gaelic.
He s tepped back then, and knelt , head bowed. He had braided
his soft white hair in a narrow pl ait and bound it up, so that the
back of  his neck was left bare. It was walnut-brown and
deeply seamed from weather , but still thick and muscular
above the white band of his collar .
A tiny noise from the door ma de me turn from the scene,
riveting as it was. Mrs. Bug was there, clinging to the jamb for
support, and in obvious need o f it. Her cap was askew , and
sweaty strands of iron-gray hair stuck to a face the color of
cream gone bad.
Her eyes  flickered to me when I moved, but then shot back
to fi x again upon her kneeling husband—and on Jamie, who
was now standing, looking from Arch to his wife, then backagain. He rubbed a finger slow ly up and down the bridge of
his nose, eyeing Arch.
“Oh, ay e,” he said mildly . “I’m  to take your head, am I?
Here in my own room and have  your wife mop up the blood,
or shall I do it in the dooryard, a nd nail ye up by the hair over
my lintel as a warning to Richard Brown? Get up, ye auld
fraudster .”
Everything in the room was frozen for an instant—long
enough for me to notice the tiny black mole in the exact
middle of Arch’ s neck—and then the old man rose, very
slowly .
“It is your right,” he said, in Gaelic. “I am your tacksman, a
ceann-cinnidh,  I sw ear by my iron; it is your r ight.” He stood
very straight, but his eyes were hooded, fixed on the desk
where h is ax lay , the sharpened edge a silver line against the
dull gray metal of the head.
Jamie dr ew breath to reply , but then stopped, eyeing the old
man narrowly . Something changed in him, some awareness
taking hold.
“A ceann-cinnidh?”  he said, and Arch Bug nodded, silent.
The air of the room had thickened in a heartbeat, and the
hairs prickled on the back of my own neck.
“A ceann-cinnidh,”  Arc h had said. O, chieftain. One word,
and we stood in Scotland. It was easy to see the dif ference in
attitude between Jamie’ s new tenants and his Ardsmuir men—
the dif ference of a loyalty of agreement and one of
acknowledgment. This was dif f erent still: an older allegiance,
which h ad ruled the Highlands for a thousand years. The oath
of blood and iron.
I sa w Jamie w eigh the present and the past and realize
where Arch Bug stood betwee n them. I saw it in his face,
exasperation ch anging to realization—and saw his shoulders
drop a little, in acceptance.
“By you r word,  then, it is my r ight,” he said softly , also in
Gaelic. He drew himself up, picked up the ax, and held it out,handle first. “And by that right, I give you back your woman’ s
life—and your own.”
Mrs. Bug let out a small sobbing breath. Arch didn’ t look
round at her , but reached out and took the ax, with a grave
inclination of the head. He turned then, and walked out
without a further word—thou gh I saw the fingers of his
maimed hand brush his wife’ s sleeve, very softly , in passing.
Mrs. B ug strai ghtened herself, hastily tucking up the
straggling bits of hair with trembling fingers. Jamie didn’ t
look at her , but  sat down again, and took up his quill and a
sheet of paper , though I thought he had no intention of writing
anything. Not wanting to embarrass her , I af fected great
interest in the bookshelf, picking up Jamie’ s little cherrywood
snake as though to examine it more closely .
Cap on straight now , she came into the room, and bobbed a
curtsy in front of him.
“W ill I fetch ye a bit to eat, sir? There’ s bannocks made
fresh.” S he spok e with great di gnity , head upright. He raised
his own head from his paper , and smiled at her .
“I s hould like t hat,” he said. “Gun r obh math agaibh, a
nighean.”
She nod ded smartly and turned on her heel. At the door ,
though, she paused, looking back. Jamie raised his brows.
“I was there, ken,” she said, fixing him with a direct look.
“When the Sassenachs killed your grandsire, there on T ower
Hill. There was a lot of blood.” She pursed her lips, examining
him through narrowed, reddened eyes, then relaxed.
“Y e’re a  credit to him,” she said, and was gone in a whisk of
petticoats and apron strings.
Jamie looked at me in surprise, and I shrugged.
“It wasn’ t necessarily a complim ent, you know ,” I said, and
his shoulders began to shake in silent laughter .
“I know ,” he said at last, and swiped a knuckle beneath his
nose. “D’ye ken, Sassenach—sometimes I mourn the auldbastard?” He shook his head. “S ometime I must ask Mrs. Bug
if it’ s true what he said, at the last. What they say he said, I
mean.”
“What’ s that?”
“He gav e the headsman his fee, and told him to do a good
job—’For I shall be very angry indeed if ye don’ t.’”
“W ell, it certainly sounds like something he would  say ,” I
said, smiling a little. “What do  you suppose the Bugs were
doing in London?”
He shook his he ad again, and tu rned his face to me, lifting
his chin  so the sun from the w indow glimmered like water
along his jaw and cheekbone.
“God knows. D’ye think she’ s right, Sassenach? About me
being like him?”
“Not to look at,” I said, smilin g a little. The late Simon,
Lord Lo vat, had  been short and squat, though powerfully built
despite his age. He had also bo rne a strong resemblance to a
malevolent—but very clever—toad.
“No,” Jamie agreed. “Thank God. But otherwise?” The light
of humo r was still in his eyes,  but he was serious; he truly
wanted to know .
I stu died him th oughtfully . There was no trace of the Old
Fox in his bold, clean-cut features—those had come mostly
from his mother ’ s MacKenzie side—nor yet in the broad-
shouldered height of him, but somewhere behind those slanted
dark blu e eyes, I now and then  sensed a faint echo of Lord
Lovat’ s deep-se t gaze, glittering with interest and sardonic
humor .
“Y ou have something of him,”  I admitted. “More than a
little, sometimes . Y ou haven’ t t he overweening ambition, but
…” I squinted a bit, considering. “I was going to say that you
aren’ t as ruthless as him,” I w ent on slowly , “but you are,
really .”“Am I, then?” H e didn’ t seem either surprised or put out to
hear this.
“Y ou ca n be,” I said, and felt somewhere in the marrow of
my bones the popping sound of Arvin Hodgepile’ s neck
breaking. It was a warm afternoon, but gooseflesh rippled
suddenly up my arms, and then was gone.
“Have I the devious nature, d’ye think?” he asked seriously .
“I don’ t know , quite,” I said with some dubiousness.
“Y ou’re not a proper twister like he was—but that may be only
because you’ve a sense of honor that he lacked. Y ou don’ t use
people like he did.”
He smiled at tha t, but with less real humor than he’d shown
before.
“Oh, bu t I do, Sassenach,” he said. “It’ s only I try not to let
it show .”
He sat for a mom ent, his gaze fi xed on the little cherrywood
snake th at I held, but I didn’ t t hink he was looking at it. At
last, he shook his head and look ed up at me, the corner of his
mouth tucking wryly in.
“If there  is a heaven, and my g randsire’ s in it—and I take
leave to doubt that last—he’ s l aughing his wicked auld head
of f now . Or he would be, if it weren’ t tucked underneath his
arm.”3 4
THE EXHIBITS IN THE CASE
A ND SO IT W A S that several days later , we rode into
Brownsville. Jamie, in full Highland regalia, with Hector
Cameron’ s gold- knurled dirk at his waist and a hawk’ s feather
in his bonnet. O n Gideon, who had his ears laid back and
blood in his eye, as usual.
By h is s ide, Bir d-who-sings-in-the-morning, peace chief of
the Snow bird Cherokee. Bird, Ian told me, was from the Long
Hair clan, and looked it. His hair was not only long and
glossily anointed with bear fat, but most resplendently dressed,
with a high tail twisted up fro m the crown of his head and
dropping down  his back, ending in a dozen tiny braids
decorated—like the rest of his costume—with wampum shell
beads, g lass beads, small brass bells, parakeet feathers, and a
Chinese yen; God knew where he’d got that. Slung by his
saddle, his newest and most prized possession—Jamie’ s rifle.
By Jamie’ s other side, me—Exhibit A. On my mule
Clarence, dressed and cloaked in indigo wool—which played
up t he paleness of my skin and beautifully highlighted the
yellow and green of the healing bruises on my face—with my
necklace of freshwater pearls about my neck for moral
support.
Ian rode behind us with the two braves Bird had brought as
retinue, looking more like an Indian than a Scot, with the
semicircles of tattooed dots that swooped across his tanned
cheekbones, and his own long brown hair greased back from
his face and tied in a knot, a single turkey quill thrust through
it. At least he ha dn’ t plucked his scalp in the Mohawk fashion;
he looked suf ficiently menacing without that.
And on a travois behind Ian’ s horse rode Exhibit B—the
corpse o f Lionel Brown. W e’d put him in the springhouse tokeep cool with the butter and e ggs, and Bree and Malva had
done their best, packing the bod y with moss to absorb liquids,
adding as many strongly aromatic herbs as they could find,
then wra pping t he unsavory package in a deer ’ s hide, bound
with rawhide strips in the Indian fashion. Despite this
attention, none of the horses was enthusiastic about being
anywhere near it, but Ian’ s mount was grimly acquiescent,
merely snorting loudly every few minutes and shaking his
head so his har ness rattled, a lugubrious counterpoint to the
soft thump of hooves.
W e didn’ t talk much.
V isitors to any mountain settlement were cause for public
notice and comment. Our little entourage brought folk popping
out of their houses like winkles on pins, mouths agape. By the
time we reached  Richard Brown’ s house, which doubled as the
local tavern, we had a small b and of followers, mostly men
and boys.
The sou nd of our arrival brought a woman—Mrs. Brown, I
recognized her—out onto the crudely built stoop. Her hand
flew to her mouth, and she rushed back into the house.
W e waited in sil ence. It was a cool, bright autumn day , and
the b reeze stirred the hair on my  neck; I’d worn it pulled back,
at Jamie ’ s reque st, and wore no cap. My face was exposed, the
truth written on it.
Did they know?  Feeling strangely remote, as though I
watched from somewhere outside my own body , I looked from
face to face among the crowd.
They couldn’ t know .  Jamie had assured me of it; I knew it,
myself. Unless Donner had escaped, and come to tell them all
that had happened during that fi nal night. But he hadn’ t. If he
had, Richard Brown would have come to us.
All they knew was what showe d on my face. And that was
too much.
Clarence felt the hysteria that qu ivered under my skin like a
pool of mercury ; he stamped, once, and shook his head asthough wanting to dislodge flies in his ears.
The door opened, and Richard B rown came out. There were
several men behind him, all armed.
Brown was pale, unkempt, with a sprouting beard and
greasy hair . His eyes were red and bleared, and a miasma of
beer seemed to surround him. H e’d been drinking heavily , and
was plainly trying to pull himself together enough to deal with
whatever threat we represented.
“Fraser ,” he said, and stopped, blinking.
“Mr . Bro wn.” Jamie nudged Gideon closer , so he was at eye
level wi th the men on the porc h, no more than six feet from
Richard Brown.
“T en days past,” Jamie said lev elly , “a band of men came
upon my  land. They stole my property , assaulted my daughter
who is with chil d, burnt my malting shed, destroyed my grain,
and abducted and abused my wife.”
Half the  men had been staring  at me already; now all of
them were. I he ard the small, metallic click of a pistol being
cocked. I kept my face immob ile, my hands steady on the
reins, my eyes fixed on Richard Brown’ s face.
Brown’ s mouth began to work,  but before he could speak,
Jamie raised a hand, commanding silence.
“I follow ed them, with my men , and killed them,” he said,
in the same level tone. “I found your brother with them. I took
him captive, but did not slay him.”
There w as a general intake of breath, and uneasy murmurs
from the  crowd behind us. Rich ard Brown’ s eyes darted to the
bundle on the travois, and hi s face went white under the
scabby beard.
“Y ou—” he croaked. “Nelly?”
This wa s my cue. I took a deep breath and nudged Clarence
forward.“Y our b rother suf fered an accident before my husband
found us,” I said. My voice was hoarse, but clear enough. I
forced more air into it, to be heard by everyone. “He was
badly injured in a fall. W e tended his injuries. But he died.”
Jamie let a moment of stunned silence pass, before
continuing.
“W e have brought him to you, so that you may bury him.”
He mad e a small gesture, and Ian, who had dismounted, cut
the ropes that held the travois. He and the two Cherokee pulled
it to the porch and left it lying in the rutted road, returning
silently to their horses.
Jamie inclined his head sharply , and swung Gideon’ s head
around. Bird followed him, pleasantly impassive as the
Buddha. I didn’ t know whether he understood enough English
to have  followed Jamie’ s speech, but it didn’ t matter . He
understood his role, and had carried it out perfectly .
The Browns might have had a p rofitable sideline in murder ,
theft, and slavery , but their chie f income lay in trade with the
Indians. By his presence at Jamie’ s side, Bird gave clear
warning that the Cherokee regarded their relationship with the
King of England and his agent  as more important than trade
with the Browns. Harm Jamie or his property again, and that
profitable connection would be broken.
I d idn’ t know ev erything Ian had said to Bird, when asking
him to come—but I thought it quite likely that there was also
an unspoken agreement that no formal inquiry would be made
on b ehalf of the Crown into the fate of any captives who might
have passed into Indian hands.
This was, after all, a matter of business.
I kicked Clarence in the ribs and wheeled into place behind
Bird, keeping my eyes firmly f ixed on the Chinese yen that
glinted in the middle of his back, dangling from his hair on a
scarlet thread. I had an almos t uncontrollable ur ge to look
back, and clenched my hand s on the reins, digging my
fingernails into my palms.W as Donner dead, after all?  He was n’ t amon g the men with
Richard Brown; I’d looked.
I did n’ t know w hether I wanted  him  to be dead . The desire
to find out more about him wa s strong—but the desire to be
done with the m atter , to leave that night on the mountainside
behind once and for all, all witnesses safely consigned to the
silence of the grave—that was stronger .
I heard Ian and the two Cherokee come into line behind us,
and within moments, we were  out of sight of Brownsville,
though the scent of beer and ch imney smoke lingered in my
nostrils. I pushed Clarence up beside Jamie; Bird had fallen
back to ride w ith his men and Ian; they were laughing at
something.
“W ill this be th e end of it?” I asked. My voice felt thin in
the cold  air , and I wasn’ t sure h e’d heard me. But he did. He
shook his head slightly .
“There is never an end to such t hings,” he said quietly . “But
we are alive. And that is good.”P A R T  F I V E
G r e a t  U n e x p e c t a t i o n s3 5
Laminaria
S AFEL Y RETURNED from Brownsville, I took firm steps to
resume normal life. And among these was a visit to Marsali,
who had  returned from her refuge with the McGillivrays. I’d
seen Fer gus, who had assured m e that she was well recovered
from he r injuries and feeling w ell—but I needed to see for
myself.
The hom estead was in good order , I saw , but showing
certain signs of dilapidation; a f ew shingles had blown of f the
roof, one corner of the stoop was sagging, and the oiled
parchment over the single window had split partway up, the
flaw hastily mended with rag stuf fed through the hole. Small
things, b ut things that should b e dealt with before the snow
came—and it was coming; I could feel the touch of it in the
air , the brilliant blue sky of late  autumn fading into the hazy
gray of oncoming winter .
No o ne rushed o ut to meet me, but I knew they were home;
there was a cloud of smoke and sparks from the chimney , and I
thought tartly that at least Fer gus seemed able to provide
enough wood for the hearth. I called out a cheery “hallooo!”
and pushed open the door .
I had the feeling at once. I didn’ t trust most of my feelings
at the moment, but that one we nt bone-deep. It’ s the feeling
you have, as a doctor , when you walk into an examination
room and know  that something’ s very wrong. Before you ask
the first  question, before you’ve taken the first vital sign. It
doesn’ t happen often, and you’d rather it never did—but there
it is. Y ou know , and there’ s no way round it.
It was the children that told me, as much as anything else.
Marsali sat by the window , s ewing, the two girls playing
quietly close by her feet. Germain—uncharacteristicallyindoors—sat swinging his legs  at the table, frowning at a
ragged b ut treas ured picture book Jamie had brought him from
Cross Creek. They knew , too.
Marsali looked up when I came in, and I saw her face
tighten in shock at sight of min e—though it was much better
than it had been.
“I’m fine,” I said briskly , stopping her exclamation. “Only
bruises. How are you, though?”
I s et down my bag and cupped  my hands round her face,
turning it gently to the light. One cheek and ear were badly
bruised, and there was a fading knot on her forehead—but she
wasn’ t cut, and her eyes looked back at me, clear and healthy .
A go od color to  her skin, no jaundice, no faint scent of kidney
dysfunction.
She’ s all right. It’ s the baby ,  I thoug ht, and  dropped my
hands to her m iddle without asking. My heart felt cold as I
cupped the bulge and lifted gently . I nearly bit my tongue in
surprise when a small knee shifted in answer to my touch.
I wa s terribly h eartened at that; I had thought the child
might b e dead. A quick glance  at Marsali’ s face muted my
relief. She was strained betwee n hope and fear , hoping that I
would tell her that what she knew to be true wasn’ t.
“Has the  baby moved very mu ch, these last few days?” I
asked, keeping my voice calm a s I went about fetching out my
stethoscope. I’d  had it made by a pewtersmith in W ilmington
—a small bell with a flat end piece; primitive, but ef fective.
“Not so much as he did,” Marsali answered, leaning back to
let m e listen to her stomach. “But they don’ t, do they , when
they’re nearly ready to come? Joanie lay like the de—like a
millstone, all the night before the waters broke.”
“W ell, yes, often they do do th at,” I agreed, ignoring what
she’d nearly said. “Resting up, I suppose.” She smiled in
response, but the smile vanished  like a snowflake on a griddle
as I leaned close and put my ear to the flattened end of theflared metal tube, the wide, bell-shaped opening over her
stomach.
It took some tim e to pick up the heartbeat, and when I did, it
was unu sually sl ow . It was also skipping beats; the hair on my
arms rippled with gooseflesh when I heard it.
I went on with the examination, asking questions, making
small jokes, pausing to answer questions from the other
children, who were crowding round, stepping on each other ’ s
feet and getting in the way—and all the time, my mind was
racing, envisioning possibilities, all bad.
The child was  mo ving—but wrong. Heartbea t was there—
but w rong. Everything about that belly felt wr ong  t o me. What
was it, though? Umbilical cord around the neck was
thoroughly possible, and quite dangerous.
I pu shed the sm ock further back, trying for a better listen,
and saw the heavy bruising—ugly splotches of healing green
and yellow , a few still with deep red-black centers that
bloomed like deadly roses over the curve of her belly . My
teeth san k into my lip at sight of them; they’d kicked her , the
bastards. A wonder she hadn’ t miscarried on the spot.
Anger swelled suddenly under my breastbone, a huge, solid
thing, pushing hard enough to burst it.
W as she bleeding at all? No. No pain, bar tenderness from
the bruises. No cramping. No contractions. Her blood pressure
seemed normal, so far as I could tell.
A cord accident was still possible—likely , even. But it could
be a partially detached placent a, bleeding into the uterus. A
ruptured uterus ? Or something rarer—a dead twin, an
abnormal growth … The only thing I knew for sure was that
the child needed to be delivere d into the air -breathing world,
and as soon as possible.
“Where’ s Fer gus?” I said, still speaking calmly .
“I di nna ken,” sh e said, matching my tone of absolute calm.
“He’ s no  been home since the day before yesterday . Dinna put
that in your mouth, a chuisle. ” She lifted a hand towardFelicite, who was gnawing a candle stub, but couldn’ t reach
her .
“Hasn’ t he? W ell, we’ll find him.” I removed the candle
stub; Felicite made no protest, aware that something was going
on, but not knowing what. In search of reassurance, she seized
her mot her ’ s leg and began determinedly trying to climb up
into Marsali’ s nonexistent lap.
“No, bebe, ” Germain said, and clasped his sister round the
waist, dragging her backward. “Y ou come with me, a piuthar .
W ant milkie?” he added, coaxing. “W e’ll go to the
springhoose, aye?”
“W ant Mama!” Felicite windmilled arms and legs, trying to
escape, but Germain hoisted her fat little body into his arms.
“Y ou wee lassies come with me,” he said firmly , and
trundled awkwardly out the door , Felicite grunting and
squirming in his grasp, Joanie scampering at his heels—
pausing at the door to look back at Marsali, her big brown eyes
wide and scared.
“Go on then, a muirninn, ” Marsali called, smiling. “T ake
them to see Mrs. Bug. It will be all right.
“He’ s a sweet lad, Germain,” Marsali murmured, folding
her hands across her belly as the smile faded.
“V ery sweet,” I agreed. “Marsali—”
“I know ,” she said simply . “Might this one live, d’ye think?”
She passed a hand gently over her belly , looking down.
I wasn’ t at all sure, but the child was  al ive for the mo ment. I
hesitated, turning over possibilities in my mind. Anything I did
would entail hideous risk—to her , the child, or both.
Why had I not come sooner? I berated myself for taking
Jamie’ s and then Fer gus’ s word that she was all right, but there
was no time for self-reproach—and it might not have
mattered, either .
“Can you walk?” I asked. “W e’ll need to go to the Big
House.”“A ye, of course.” She rose carefully , holding to my arm. She
looked around the cabin, as though memorizing all its homely
details, t hen gav e me a sharp, clear glance. “W e’ll talk on the
way .”
THERE WERE OPTIONS, m ost of them horrifying to
contemplate. If there was danger of a placental abruption, I
could  do an emer genc y cesarean and possibly save the child—
but Ma rsali would die. T o deliver the child slowly , via
induction of labor , was to risk the child, but was much safer
for Marsali. Of course—and I kept this thought to myself—
induction of labor raised the risk of hemorrhage. If that
happened …
I could perhaps stop the bleeding and save Marsali—but
would be unable to help the infant, who would likely also be in
distress. There was  the ether … a tempting thought, but I
reluctantly put it aside. It was  ether—but I’d not used it, had
no clear  idea of its concentrati on or ef fectiveness, nor did I
have anything like an anesthetist’ s training that would allow
me to calculat e its ef fects in  such a dicey situation as
dangerous childbirth. For a minor operation, I could go slowly ,
judge the patient’ s respiration, and simply back of f if things
seemed to be going wrong. If I were in the middle of a
cesarean section and things went pear -shaped, there was no
way out.
Marsali seemed preternaturally calm, as though she were
listening to what was going on inside rather than to my
explanations and speculations. As we came near the Big
House, t hough, we met Y oung Ian, coming down the hillside
with a clutch of  dead rabbits, dangling by their ears, and she
sharpened to attention.
“Ho, cousin! How is it, then?” he asked cheerfully .
“I need Fer gus, Ian,” she said w ithout preliminary . “Can ye
find him?”
The smile faded from his fac e as he took in Marsali’ s
paleness, and my support of her .“Christ, the bairn’ s coming? Bu t why—” He glanced up the
pathway behind us, clearly wondering why we had left
Marsali’ s cabin.
“Go and find Fer gus, Ian,” I cut in. “Now .”
“Oh.” H e swallowed, suddenly looking quite young. “Oh.
A ye. I will. Dir ectly!” He began to bound of f, then whirled
back and  thrust the rabbits into m y hand. Then he leapt of f the
path and  tore down the hillside, rocketing between trees and
vaulting fallen logs. Rollo, not wishing to be left out of
anything, flashed past in a gra y blur and hurtled down the
hillside after his master like a falling rock.
“Don’ t worry ,” I said, patting Marsali’ s arm. “They’ll find
him.”
“Oh, ay e,” she said, looking after them. “If they shouldna
find him in time, though …”
“They will,” I said firmly . “Come on.”
I SENT LIZZIE to find Brianna and Malva Christie—I
thought I might well need more hands—and sent Marsali to
the k itchen to re st with Mrs. Bug, while I readied the sur gery .
Fresh be dding a nd pillows, spread on my examination table. A
bed wou ld be better , but I needed to have my equipment to
hand.
And the  equipment itself: the su r gical instruments, carefully
hidden beneath a clean towel; the ether mask, lined with fresh
thick gauze; the dropping bottle—could I trust Malva to
administer the ether , if I had to perform emer gency sur gery? I
thought perhaps I could; the gi rl was very young, and quite
untrained, but she had a remarkable coolness about her , and I
knew she wasn’ t squeamish. I filled the dropping bottle,
averting my face from the swee t, thick scent that drifted from
the liqui d, and put a small twist  of cotton in the spout, to keep
the ether from evaporating and gassing us all—or catching
fire. I glanced hastily at the hearth, but the fire was out.What if labor was prolonged and then things went wrong—
if I had to do this at night, by candlelight? I couldn’ t; ether
was hideously inflammable. I shoved away the mental picture
of myself performing an emer gency cesarean section in the
pitch-dark, by feel.
“If you have a moment to spa re, this would be a bloody
good tim e to have a look-in,” I muttered, addressing this
remark collectively to Saints Bride, Raymond, and Mar garet
of Antioch, all presumably patrons of childbirth and expectant
mothers, plus any guardian angels—mine, Marsali’ s, or the
child’ s—who might be hovering about in the of fing.
Evidently , some one was listening. When I got Marsali
boosted up onto the table, I wa s terribly relieved to find that
the cervix had begun to dilat e—but there was no sign of
bleeding. It didn’ t remove the risk of hemorrhage, by any
means, but it did mean the probability was much lower .
Her blood pressure seemed all right, so far as I could tell by
looking at her , a nd the baby’ s heartbeat had steadied, though
the baby had stopped moving, refusing to respond to pokes
and shoves.
“Sound asleep, I expect,” I said, smiling at Marsali.
“Resting up.”
She gav e me a ti ny smile in retu rn, and turned onto her side,
grunting like a hog.
“I could  use a bit of a rest, m yself, after that walk.” She
sighed, settling her head into th e pillow . Adso, seconding this
motion, leapt up onto the table, and curled himself into her
breasts, rubbing his face af fectionately against her .
I wo uld have s lung him out, but Marsali seemed to find
some comfort in his presence,  scratching his ears until he
curled u p under her chin, purring madly . W ell, I’d delivered
children in much less sanitary surroundings, cat
notwithstanding, and this was likely to be a slow process;
Adso would have decamped long before his presence became
a hindrance.I w as feeling a bit more reassu red, but not to the point of
confidence. That subtle feeling of wrongness was still there.
On the way , I’d  considered the various options available to
me; given the slight dilatation of the cervix and the now-
steady h eartbeat, I thought we m ight try the most conservative
method of inducing labor , so as not to put undue stress upon
mother or child. If emer gency intervened … well, we’d deal
with that when and if we had to.
I only hoped the contents of the jar were usable; I’d never
had occasion to open it before. Laminaria,  sai d the label,
written i n Daniel Rawlings’ s flowing script. It was a small jar
of d ark green glass, corked ti ght, and very light. When I
opened it, a fain t whif f of iodin e floated out, but no scent of
decay , thank goodness.
Laminaria  is seaweed. Dried, it’ s no more than paper -thin
slips of brownish-green. Unlike many dried seaweeds, though,
Laminaria  doesn’ t crumble easily . And it has a most
astonishing capacity to absorb water .
Inserted into the opening of the cervix, it absorbs moisture
from the mucous membranes—and swells, slowly forcing the
cervix further open as it does so, thus eventually causing labor
to start. I’d seen Laminaria  used, even in my own time, though
in mode rn times it was most frequently employed to assist in
expelling a dead child from the uterus. I shoved that  thought
well to the back of my mind, and selected a good piece.
It was a simple thing to do, and once done, nothing to do but
wait. And hope. The sur gery w as very peaceful, full of light
and the sounds of barn swallows rustling under the eaves.
“I hope Ian finds Fer gus,” Marsali said after a period of
silence.
“I’m sure he will,” I replied, distracted by an attempt to
light my  small brazier using flint and steel. I should have told
Lizzie to have B rianna bring matches. “Y ou said Fer gus hadn’ t
been home?”“No.” H er voice sounded muf fled, and I looked up to see
her head bent o ver Adso, face hidden in his fur . “I’ve scarce
seen him  at all, since … since the men came to the malting
floor .”
“Ah.”
I did n’ t know what to say to this. I hadn’ t realized that
Fer gus had made himself scarce—though knowing what I did
of eighteenth-century men, I supposed I could see why .
“He’ s ashamed,  the wee Fren ch gomerel,” Marsali said
matter -of-factly , confirming my supposition. She turned her
face, one blue eye visible above the curve of Adso’ s head.
“Thinks it was his fault, aye? That I was there, I mean. Thinks
if he  was better able to provide, I shouldna have had to go and
tend the malting.”
“Men,” I said, shaking my head, and she laughed.
“A ye, m en. Not that he’d say  what the trouble is, o’ course.
Much be tter go of f and brood a bout it, and leave me to hame
wi’ three wild bairns!” She rolled her eyes.
“A ye, well, they do that, men, ” said Mrs. Bug tolerantly ,
coming in with a lighted taper . “No sense at all to them, but
they me an weel.  I heard ye clickin’ away with that steel like a
deathwatch, Mrs. Claire; why would ye no just come and fetch
a bit  o’ fire like  a sensible pers on?” She touched the taper to
the kindling in my brazier , which promptly popped into flame.
“Practice,” I said mildly , adding sticks to the infant flame. “I
have ho pes of eventually learnin g to light a fire in less than a
quarter of an hour .”
Marsali and Mrs. Bug snorted in simultaneous derision.
“Bless ye, lamb, a quarter -hour ’ s no time at all! Why , often
I’ve spe nt an hour and more, tr ying to catch a spark in damp
tinder—in Scotland, ‘specially , since nothing’ s ever dry in the
winter t here. Whyever d’ye think folk go to such trouble, a-
smooring the fire?”This cau sed a spirited discussion of the best way in which to
smoor a fire fo r the night, including an ar gument over the
proper b lessing to be said while doing so, and this lasted long
enough for me to have coaxed the brazier into a decent glow
and set a small kettle in it for tea-making. Raspberry-leaf tea
would encourage contractions.
Mention of Scotland seemed to have reminded Marsali of
something, for she raised herself on one elbow .
“Mother Claire—d’ye think D a would mind, if I was to
borrow a sheet of paper and some ink? I’m thinkin’ it would
be as well if I wrote to my mother .”
“I th ink that wo uld be an excellent idea.” I went to fetch
paper and ink, heart beating a little faster . Marsali was entirely
calm; I wasn’ t. I’d seen it before, though; I wasn’ t sure
whether it was fatalism, religious faith, or something purely
physical—but women giving birth seemed very often to lose
any sense of fear or misgiving, turning inward upon
themselves and exhibiting an absorption that amounted to
indif ference—simply because they had no attention to spare
for anything beyond the universe bounded by their bellies.
As i t was, my lingering sense of dread was muted, and two
or t hree hours passed in qu iet peace. Marsali wrote to
Laoghaire, but also brief notes t o each of her children. “Just in
case,” sh e said laconically , handing the folded notes to me to
put awa y . I noticed that she didn’ t write to Fer gus—but her
eyes darted toward the door every time there was a sound.
Lizzie returned to report that B rianna was nowhere to be
found, b ut Malva Christie turned up, looking excited, and was
promptly put to work, reading aloud from T obias Smollett’ s
The Adventur es of Per egrine Pickle.
Jamie came in, covered with road dust, and kissed me on the
lips and Marsali on the forehead. He took in the unorthodox
situation, and gave me the ghost of a raised eyebrow .
“How is it, then, a muirninn ?” he asked Marsali.She made a sm all face and put her tongue out, and he
laughed.
“Y ou haven’ t seen Fer gus anywhere, have you?” I asked.
“A ye, I have,” he said, looking slightly surprised. “D’ye
want him ?” This question was addressed to both Marsali and
myself.
“W e do,” I said firmly . “Where is he?”
“W oolam’ s Mil l. He’ s been interpreting for a French
traveler , an artist come in search of birds.”
“Birds, i s it?” The notion seeme d to af front Mrs. Bug, who
put dow n her knitting and sat up straight. “Our Fer gus speaks
bird-tongue, does he? W ell, ye just go and fetch the mannie
this minute. Y on Frenchman can mind his own birds!”
Looking rather taken aback at this vehemence, Jamie
allowed me to usher him out into the hallway and as far as the
front door . Safely out of earshot, he stopped.
“What’ s to do wi’ the lass?” he demanded, low-voiced, and
darted a glance back toward the  sur gery , where Malva’ s clear ,
high voice had taken up her reading again.
I told him, as well as I could.
“It m ay be noth ing; I hope so. But—she wants Fer gus. She
says he’ s been keeping away , fe eling guilty for what happened
at the malting floor .”
Jamie nodded.
“W ell, aye, he would.”
“He would? Why , for heaven’ s sake?” I demanded in
exasperation. “It wasn’ t his  fault!”
He gave me a look suggesting that I had missed something
patently obvious to the meanest intelligence.
“Y e think that makes a dif ference? And if the lass should die
—or mischief come to the chi ld? Y e think he’d not blame
himself?”“He shouldn’ t, ” I said. “But rather obviously he does. Y ou
don’ t—” I stopped short, because in fact he did.  He’d told me
so, very clearly , the night he brought me back.
He s aw the mem ory cross my f ace, and the hint of a smile,
wry and  painful, showed in h is eyes. He reached out and
traced th e line of my eyebrow , where a healing gash had split
through it.
“Y e think I dinna feel that?” he asked quietly .
I shook my head, not in negation, but in helplessness.
“A man’ s wife is his to protect,” he said simply , and turned
away . “I’ll go fetch Fer gus.”
THE L AMINARIA HAD BE EN accomplishing its slow ,
patient work, and Marsali was beginning to have occasional
contractions, though we had not really got down to it, yet. The
light wa s beginn ing to fade whe n Jamie arrived with Fer gus—
and Ian, met on the way .
Fer gus was unshaven, covered with dust, and plainly hadn’ t
bathed in days, but Marsali’ s face lighted like the sun when
she saw  him. I didn’ t know what Jamie had told him; he
looked grim and worried—but a t sight of Marsali, he went to
her like an arrow to its tar get, gathering her to him with such
fervor that Malva dropped her book on the floor , staring in
astonishment.
I relaxe d a little, for the first time since I had entered
Marsali’ s house that morning.
“W ell,” I said, and took a deep breath. “Perhaps we’ll have a
little food, shall we?”
I left Fer gus and Marsali alone, while the rest of us ate, and
returned to the s ur gery to find them with heads close together ,
talking quietly . I hated to disturb them, but it was necessary .
On the one hand, the cervix ha d dilated very appreciably ,
and there was no sign of abn ormal bleeding, which was atremendous relief. On the other … the baby’ s heartbeat was
skipping again. Almost certainly a cord problem, I thought.
I wa s very consc ious of Marsali’ s eyes, fixed on my face as
I listened through my stethoscope, and I exerted every ounce
of will in order to let nothing show .
“Y ou’re doing very well,” I assured her , smoothing tumbled
hair of f  her forehead and sm iling into her eyes. “I think
perhaps it’ s time to help things along a little.”
There were assorted herbs that could assist labor , but most
of th em were n ot things I’d use, were there any danger of
hemorrhage. At this point, though, I was uneasy enough to
want to get things moving as quickly as possible. Raspberry-
leaf tea might be a help without being so strong as to induce
major or abrupt contractions. Ought I add blue cohosh? I
wondered.
“The babe needs to come quickly ,” Marsali told Fer gus,
with eve ry appe arance of calm. Obviously , I hadn’ t been as
successful in hiding my concern as I’d thought.
She had  her rosary with her , and now wound it round her
hand, the cross dangling. “Help me, mon cher . ”
He lifted the hand with the rosary , and kissed it.
“Oui, cherie.”  He crossed himself then, and set to work.
Fer gus h ad spen t the first ten years of his life in the brothel
where he’d been born. Conseq uently , he knew a great deal
more about women—in some ways—than any other man I’d
ever me t. Even so, I was aston ished to see him reach for the
strings at the neck of Marsal i’ s shift, and draw it down,
exposing her breasts.
Marsali didn’ t seem at all surpr ised, merely lying back and
turning slightly toward him, the hump of her belly nudging
him as she did so.
He knel t on a stool beside the bed, and placing a hand
tenderly but absently on the bulge, bent his head towardMarsali’ s breast, lips slightly pursed. Then he appeared to
notice me gaping at him, and glanced up over her belly .
“Oh.” H e smiled at me. “Y ou have not—well, I suppose you
would perhaps not have seen this, milady?”
“I ca n’ t say that I have.” I was torn between fascination and
a feeling that I should avert my eyes. “What … ?”
“When the birth pangs are s low to start, suckling the
woman’ s breasts  encourages the womb to move, thus to hasten
the child,” he explained, and brushed a thumb unconsciously
over one  dark-brown nipple, so that it rose, round and hard as
a spring cherry . “In the broth el, if one of les filles  had a
dif ficulty , sometimes another w ould do such service for her . I
have done it for ma douce  before—when Felicite came. It
helps; you will see.”
And wit hout more ado, he cupp ed the breast in both hands
and took  the nipple into his mouth, sucking gently , but with
great concentration, his eyes closed.
Marsali sighed, and her body se emed to relax in the flowing
way that a pre gnant woman’ s does, as though she were
suddenly boneless as a stranded jellyfish.
I wa s more than  disconcerted, but I couldn’ t leave, in case
anything drastic should happen.
I hesitat ed for a moment, then  pulled out a stool and sat
down on it, trying to be inconspicuous. In fact, though, neither
of th em appeared to be at all co ncerned with my presence—if
they we re even aware of me anymore. I did, however , turn
away a little, so as not to stare.
I was both astonished and interested by Fer gus’ s technique.
He was entirely  right; suckling by an infant does cause the
uterus to contract. The midwive s I had known at L ’Hopital des
Anges in  Paris had told me that, too; a newly delivered woman
should be handed the child at once to nurse, so that the
bleeding would slow . None of t hem had happened to mention
use of the technique as a means of inducing labor , though.“ In the br othel, if one of  les filles had a difficulty , sometimes
another would do such service for her ,”  he’d said.
His mot her had been one of les filles,  though he had never
known her . I could imagine a Parisian prostitute, dark-haired,
likely young, groaning in labor—and a friend kneeling to
suckle her tenderly , cupping tender , swollen breasts and
whispering encouragement, as the boisterous noises of
satisfied customers echoed through the floors and walls.
Had she died, his mother? In childbirth with him or a
subsequent child ? Throttled by a drunken client, beaten by the
madame’ s enfor cer? Or was it  only that she hadn’ t wanted
him, had n’ t wished to be respo nsible for a bastard child, and
thus she  had left him to the pity of the other women, one of the
nameless sons of the street, a child of no one?
Marsali shifted on the bed, and I  glanced to see that she was
all right. She was. She had only moved in order to put her
arms ab out Fer gus’ s shoulders, bending her head to his. She
had left of f her cap; her yellow  hair was loose, bright against
the sleek darkness of his.
“Fer gus … I think I’m maybe going to die,” she whispered,
her voice barely audible above the wind in the trees.
He released her nipple, but mo ved his lips delicately over
the surfa ce of her breast, murmuring. “Y ou always think you
will die, p’ tite puce,  all women think it.”
“A ye, that’ s because a good many of them do,  t oo, ” sh e said
a lit tle sharply , and opened he r eyes. He smiled, eyes still
closed, the tip of his tongue flicking gently against her nipple.
“Not you,” he said softly , but  with great assurance. He
passed his hand over her stomac h, first gently , then with more
strength. I could see the mound  firm itself, suddenly drawing
up round  and solid. Marsali dre w a deep, sudden breath, and
Fer gus pressed the heel of his hand against the base of the
mound, hard against her pubic bone, holding it there until the
contraction relaxed.
“Oh,” she said, sounding breathless.“T u … non,”  he whispered, still more softly . “Not you. I
will not let you go.”
I curled my hand s in the stuf f of my skirt. That looked like a
nice, solid contraction. Noth ing horrible seemed to be
happening as a result.
Fer gus r esumed his work, pausing now and then to murmur
something ridiculous to Marsali in French. I got up and sidled
cautiously round  toward the foot of the bed table. No, nothing
untoward. I cast a quick look at  the counter , to be sure all was
in readiness, and it was.
Perhaps it would be all right. Th ere was a streak of blood on
the sheet—but it was only a bit of bloody show , quite normal.
There was still the child’ s worrying heartbeat, the possibility
of a  cord accid ent—but I could do nothing about that now .
Marsali had made her decision, and it was the right one.
Fer gus had resumed his suckling. I stepped quietly out into
the hall, and swung the door half-closed, to give them privacy .
If she did hemorrhage, I could be with her in a second.
I stil l ha d the jar of raspberry lea ves in my hand. I supposed
I might as well go ahead and make the tea—if only to make
myself feel useful!
Not find ing his wife at home, ol d Arch Bug had come up to
the hou se with the children. Felicite and Joan were sound
asleep o n the settle, and Arch was smoking his pipe by the
hearth, blowing smoke rings for a rapt Germain. Meanwhile
Jamie, Ian, and Malva Christie  seemed to be engaged in an
amiable literary ar gument regarding the merits of Henry
Fielding, T obias Smollett, and …
“Ovid?” I said, catching the  tail end of one remark.
“Really?”
“So long as you ar e secur e you will count many friends,”
Jamie quoted. “If your life becomes clouded you will be alone.
D’ye not think that’ s the case for poor T om Jones and wee
Perry Pickle?”“But surely true friends wouldnae abandon a man, only
because he’ s in some dif ficulty!” Malva objected. “What sort
of friend is that?”
“Rather the common sort, I’m afraid,” I said. “Luckily , there
ar e  a few of the other kind.”
“A ye, there are,” Jamie agreed. He smiled at Malva.
“Highlanders m ake the truest f riends—if only because they
make the worst enemies.”
She was  slightly  pink in the face, but realized that she was
being teased.
“Hmp,” she said, and lifted her nose in order to look down
it. “My faither says Highlanders are such fierce fighters
because there’ s sae little of any v alue in  the Highlands, and the
worst battles are always fought for the lowest stakes.”
Everyone dissolved in laughter  at that, and Jamie rose to
come to me, leaving Ian and Malva to resume their wrangle.
“How is it wi’ the lass?” he as ked quietly , dipping up hot
water from the kettle for me.
“I’m not sure,” I said. “Fer gus is … er … helping her .”
Jamie’ s eyebrows went up.
“How?” he asked. “I didna ken there was much a man had
to do wi’ that business, once he’ s got it properly begun.”
“Oh, you’d be surprised,” I assured him. “ I  certainly was!”
He looked intrigued by this, but was prevented from asking
further questions by Mrs. Bug’ s demand that everyone leave
of f t alking about wretched folk who get up to no good in the
pages of books, and come sit down to eat.
I sat  down to supper , too, but couldn’ t really eat, distracted
as I was by con cern for Marsali. The raspberry-leaf tea had
finished steeping as we ate; I poured it out and took it to the
sur gery—rapping cautiously on the door before entering.
Fer gus was flushed and breathless, but bright-eyed. He
could n ot be persuaded to com e and eat, insisting that hewould stay with Marsali. His e f forts were showing fruit; she
was having regular contractions now , though still fairly far
apart.
“It will be fast, once the waters break,” Marsali told me. She
was a little flus hed, too, with a look of inward listening. “It
always is.”
I checked the heartbeat again—no great change; still bumpy ,
but not weakening—and excused myself. Jamie was in his
study , across the hall. I went in  and sat with him, so as to be
handy when needed.
He w as writing his usual evenin g note to his sister , pausing
now and  then to rub the cramp from his right hand before
resuming. Upsta irs, Mrs. Bug was putting the children to bed.
I could hear Fel icite whining, and Germain attempting to sing
to her .
Across the hall, small shuf flings and murmurings, the
shifting of weight and the creak of the table. And in the depths
of my inner ear , echoing my own pulse, the soft, rapid beat of
a baby’ s heart.
It could so easily end badly .
“What are ye doing, Sassenach?”
I looked up, startled.
“I’m not doing anything.”
“Y e’re s taring fit to see through the wall, and it doesna seem
that ye like what ye’re looking at.”
“Oh.” I  dropped my gaze, an d realized that I had been
pleating and repleating the fabric of my skirt between my
fingers; there was a lar ge wrinkled patch in the fawn-colored
homespun. “Reliving my failures, I suppose.”
He l ooked at me for a moment, then rose and came behind
me, putting his hands on the b ase of my neck, kneading my
shoulders with a strong, warm touch.
“What failures?” he asked.I closed my eyes and let my head nod forward, trying not to
groan w ith the sensations of pain from knotted muscles and
the simultaneous exquisite relief.
“Oh,” I said, and sighed. “Patients I couldn’ t save.
Mistakes. Disasters. Accidents. Stillbirths.”
That las t word hung in the air , and his hands paused in their
work for a moment, then resumed more strongly .
“There are times, surely , when there’ s nothing ye could do?
Y ou or anyone. Some things are  beyond the power of anyone
to make right, aye?”
“ Y ou  never believe th at, when it’ s yo u,” I said. “Why should
I?”
He paus ed in his kneading, a nd I looked up over my
shoulder at him. He opened his mouth to contradict me, then
realized that he couldn’ t. He shook his head, sighed, and
resumed.
“A ye, w ell. I suppose it’ s true enough,” he said, with
extreme wryness.
“That what the Greeks called hubris,  do you think?”
He gave a small snort, which might have been amusement.
“I do. And ye ken where that  leads.”
“T o a lonely rock under a burning sun, with a vulture
gnawing on your liver ,” I said, and laughed.
So did Jamie.
“A ye, w ell, a lonely rock under a burning sun is a verra
good place to ha ve company , I should think. And I dinna mean
the vulture, either .”
His hands gave a final squeez e to my shoulders, but he
didn’ t take them away . I leaned my head back against him,
eyes closed, taking comfort in his company .
In the momentary silence, we could hear small sounds
across the hall, from the sur gery . A muf fled grunt fromMarsali as a contraction came on, a soft French question from
Fer gus.
I fel t that we really ought not to  be listening—but neither of
us could think of anything to say , to cover the sounds of their
private conversation.
A murmur from Marsali, a pause, then Fer gus said
something hesitant.
“A ye, like we did before Felicite,” came Marsali’ s voice,
muf fled, but quite clear .
“ Oui,  but—”
“Put something against the door , then,” she said, sounding
impatient.
W e h eard footsteps, and the doo r to the sur gery swung open.
Fer gus s tood there, dark hair disheveled, shirt half-buttoned,
and his handsom e face deeply flushed under the shadow of
beard stubble. He saw us, and  the most extraordinary look
flitted across his face. Pride, e mbarrassment, and something
indefinably … French. He gave Jamie a lopsided smile and a
one-shouldered shrug of supreme Gallic insouciance—then
firmly shut the door . W e heard the grating sounds of a small
table being moved, and a small t hump as it was shoved against
the door .
Jamie and I exchanged looks of baf flement.
Giggles came from behind the closed door , accompanied by
a massive creaking and rustling.
“He’ s no going to—” Jamie began, and stopped abruptly ,
looking incredulous. “Is he?”
Evidently so, judging from the faint rhythmic creaks that
began to be heard from the sur gery .
I f elt a s light warmth wash thro ugh me, along with a mild
sense of shock—and a slightly stronger ur ge to laugh.
“W ell … er … I have  heard that … um … it does sometimes
seem to bring on labor . If a child was overdue, the maitr essessage femme  in Paris  would sometimes tell women to get their
husbands drunk and … er -hmm.”
Jamie gave the sur gery door a  look of disbelief, mingled
with grudging respect.
“And hi m with not even a dram taken. W ell, if that’ s what
he’ s up to, the wee bugger ’ s got balls, I’ll say that for him.”
Ian, coming down the hall in time to hear this exchange,
stopped dead. He listened for a moment to the noises
proceeding from  the sur gery , looked from Jamie and me to the
sur gery door , back, then shook his head and turned around,
going back to the kitchen.
Jamie reached out and gently closed the study door .
W ithout comment, he sat down again, picked up his pen,
and began scratching doggedly away . I went over to the small
bookshelf, and stood there staring at the collection of battered
spines, taking nothing in.
Old wives’ tales were sometimes nothing more than old
wives’ tales. Sometimes they weren’ t.
I w as seldom troubled by pe rsonal recollections while
dealing with patients; I had neith er time nor attention to spare.
At the moment, though, I had much too much of both. And a
very vivid memory indeed of the night before Bree’ s birth.
People often say that women fo r get what childbirth is like,
because if they remembered, n o one would ever do it more
than once. Personally , I had no trouble at all remembering.
The sense of massive inertia, particularly . That endless time
toward the end, when it seems that it never will  end, that one is
mired in  some prehistoric tar pi t, every small move a struggle
doomed to futility . Every square centimeter of skin stretched
as thin as one’ s temper .
Y ou don ’ t for get. Y ou simply get to the point where you
don’ t ca re what birth will feel  like; anything is better than
being pregnant for an instant longer .I’d reac hed that point roughly two weeks before my due
date. The date came—and passed. A week later , I was in a
state of chronic hysteria, if one could be simultaneously
hysterical and torpid.
Frank w as phys ically more comfortable than I was, but in
terms of nerves, there wasn’ t much to choose between us.
Both of us were terrified—not merely of the birth, but of what
might come after . Frank being Frank, he reacted to terror by
becoming very quiet, withdrawing into himself, to a place
where he could control what wa s happening, by refusing to let
anything in.
But I was in no mood to respect anyone’ s barriers, and
broke down in te ars of sheer despair , after being informed by a
cheerful obstetri cian that I was not dilated at all, and “it might
be several days—maybe another week.”
T rying to calm me, Frank had r esorted to rubbing my feet.
Then my back, my neck, my shoulders—anything I would let
him touch. And gradually , I had exhausted myself and lain
quiet, le tting him touch me. And … and we were both
terrified, and terribly in need of reassurance, and neither of us
had any words with which to give it.
And he made love to me, slowly and gently , and we fell
asleep in each o ther ’ s arms—and woke up in a state of panic
several hours later when my water broke.
“Claire!” I suppose Jamie had called my name more than
once; I had been so lost in memory that I had for gotten
entirely where I was.
“What?” I swung round, heart pounding. “Has something
happened?”
“No, no t yet.” He studied me for a moment, brow creased,
then got up and came to stand by me.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“Y es. I—I was just thinking.”“A ye, I saw tha t,” he said dryly . He hesitated, then—as a
particularly loud  moan came th rough the door—touched my
elbow .
“Are ye afraid?”  he said softly . “That ye might be wi’ child
yourself, I mean?”
“No,” I said, and heard the note of desolation in my voice as
clearly as he did. “I know I’m not.” I looked up at him; his
face was blurred by a haze of unshed tears. “I’m sad that I’m
not—that I never will be again.”
I bli nked hard, a nd saw the sam e emotions on his face that I
felt—relief and regret, mingled in such proportion that it was
impossible to say which was fo remost. He put his arms round
me and I reste d my forehead on his chest, thinking what
comfort it was to know that I had company on this rock, as
well.
W e stood quietly for some time, just breathing. Then there
came a sudden change in th e surreptitious noises in the
sur gery . There was a small cry of surprise, a louder
exclamation in French, and then the sound of feet landing
heavily on the floor , together w ith the unmistakable splash of
amniotic fluid.
THINGS DID MOVE quickly . W ithin an hour , I saw the
crowning of a black-fuzzed skull.
“He’ s got lots of  hair ,” I reported, easing the perineum with
oil. “Be careful, don’ t push too hard! Not yet.” I spanned the
curve of the em er ging skull with my hand. “He’ s got a really
big head.”
“I wouldna ever have guessed that,” said Marsali, red-faced
and panting. “Thank ye for telling me.”
I barely had time to laugh, before the head eased neatly out
into my  hands, facedown. The cord was  round the neck, but
not t ightly , thank God! I got a finger under it and eased it free,
and didn’ t have to say , “Push!” before Marsali took a breaththat wen t to China and shot the  infant into my middle like a
cannonball.
It w as like bei ng suddenly handed a greased pig, and I
fumbled madly , trying to get the little creature turned upright
and see whether he—or she—was breathing.
Meanwhile, there were shrieks  of excitement from Malva
and Mrs. Bug, and heavy foots teps hastening down the hall
from the kitchen.
I fo und the bab y’ s face, hastily cleared the nostrils and
mouth, blew a short puf f of air into the mouth, snapped a
finger against the sole of one foot. The foot jerked back in
reflex, and the mouth opened wide in a lusty howl.
“Bon soir , Monsieur L ’Oeuf,”  I  said, checking hastily to be
sure that it was indeed Monsieur .
“Monsieur?”  Fer gus’ s face split in an ears-wide grin.
“Monsieur ,”  I confirmed, and hastily wrapping the baby in
a flannel, thrust him into his father ’ s arms while I turned my
attention to tying and cutting the cord, then tending to his
mother .
His mother , thank God, was doing well. Exhausted and
sweat-drenched, but likewise gr inning. So was everyone else
in th e room. Th e floor was puddled, the bedding soaked, and
the atmosphere thick with the fecund scents of birth, but no
one seemed to notice in the general excitement.
I kneaded Marsali’ s belly to encourage the uterus to
contract, while Mrs. Bug brought her an enormous mug of
beer to drink.
“He’ s all right?” she said, emer ging after thirstily engulfing
this. “T ruly all right?”
“W ell, h e’ s got two arms, two l egs, and a head,” I said. “I
hadn’ t time to count the fingers and toes.”
Fer gus laid the baby on the table beside Marsali.“See for  yourse lf, ma cher , ” he said. He folded back the
blanket. And blinked, then leaned closer , frowning.
Ian and Jamie stopped talking, seeing him.
“Is there something amiss, then?” Ian asked, coming over .
Sudden silence struck the room. Malva glanced from one
face to another , bewildered.
“Maman?”
Germain stood in the doorway , swaying sleepily .
“Is he here? C’est Monsieur? ”
W ithout waiting  for answer o r permission, he staggered
forward and leaned on the blood stained bedding, mouth a little
open as he stared at his newborn brother .
“He loo ks funny ,” he said, and frowned a little. “What’ s
wrong with him?”
Fer gus had been standing stock -still, as had we all. At this,
he looke d down at Germain, th en glanced back at the baby ,
then again to his firstborn son.
“Il est un nain,”  he said , almos t casually . He squeezed
Germain’ s shoulder , hard enoug h to elicit a yelp of startlement
from the  boy , then turned suddenly on his heel and went out. I
heard the opening of the front door , and a cold draft swept
down the hall and through the room.
Il est un nain.  He is a dwarf.
Fer gus hadn’ t closed the door , and the wind blew out the
candles, leaving  us in semidarkness, lit only by the glow of the
brazier .3 6
WINTER WOL VES
L ITTLE HENRI -CHRISTIAN appeared to be perfectly
healthy; he was simply a dwarf. He was slightly jaundiced,
though, with a f aint gold cast t o his skin that gave his round
cheeks a delicate glow , like th e petals of a daf fodil. W ith a
slick of black hair across the top of his head, he might have
been a Chinese baby—bar the huge, round blue eyes.
In a way , I supposed I should fe el grateful to him. Nothing
less than  the birth of a dwarf could have deflected the attention
of th e Ridge fro m me and the events of the past month. As it
was, people no longer stared at  my healing face or stumbled
awkwardly to find something to  say to me. They had quite a
lot to say—to me, to each ot her , and not infrequently , to
Marsali, if neither Bree nor I was in time to stop them.
I supposed they must be saying the same things to Fer gus—
if they saw him . He had come back, three days following the
baby’ s birth, silent and dark-faced. He had stayed long enough
to assent to Marsali’ s choice of name, and to have a brief,
private conversation with her . Then he had left again.
If she knew where he was, she wasn’ t saying. For the time
being, she and th e children remained at the Big House with us.
She smiled and paid attention to the other children, as mothers
must, th ough she seemed always to be listening for something
that wasn’ t there. Fer gus’ s footsteps? I wondered.
One good thing: she kept Henri-Christian always close to
her , carr ying him in a sling, or s itting by her feet in his basket
of w oven rushes. I’d seen par ents who had given birth to
children with defects; often, their response was to withdraw ,
unable to deal with the situatio n. Marsali dealt with it in the
other way , becoming fiercely protective of him.V isitors came, ostensibly to speak to Jamie about something
or to get a bit of a tonic or a salve from me—but really in
hopes o f catching a glimpse of Henri-Christian. It was no
surprise, theref ore, that Marsali tensed, clutching Henri-
Christian to her bosom, when the back door opened and a
shadow fell across the threshold.
She relaxed a little, though, s eeing that the visitor was
Y oung Ian.
“Hello, c oz,” he  said, smiling at  her . “Are ye well, then, and
the bairn, too?”
“V erra well,” she said firmly . “Come to visit your new
cousin, have ye?” I could see that she eyed him narrowly .
“I have, aye, and brought him a wee present, too.” He lifted
one big hand, and touched his shirt, which bulged a little with
whatever was inside it. “Y e’re well, too, I hope, Auntie
Claire?”
“Hallo, Ian,” I said, getting to my feet and putting aside the
shirt I’d been h emming. “Y es, I’m fine. Do you want some
beer?” I was gr ateful to see him; I’d been keeping Marsali
company while she sewed—or rather , standing guard over her
to repel the less -welcome sort of visitor , while Mrs. Bug was
tending to the c hickens. But I had a decoction of stinging-
nettle brewing in the sur gery , a nd needed to check on it. Ian
could be trusted to take care of her .
Leaving them with refreshment, I escaped to my sur gery
and spent a plea sant quarter of an hour alone with the herbs,
decanting infusions and separat ing a heap of rosemary to dry ,
surrounded by pungent scent and the peacefulness of plants.
Such so litude was hard to come  by these days, with children
popping up underfoot like mushrooms. Marsali was anxious to
go back to her own home, I kn ew—but I was loath to let her
go without Fer gus there to provide some  help.
“Bloody man,” I muttered under my breath. “Selfish little
beast.”Evidently , I wasn’ t the only one who thought so. As I came
back do wn the hall, reeking of  rosemary and ginseng root, I
overheard Marsali expressing a similar opinion to Ian.
“A ye, I ken he’ s taken back, w ho wouldna be?” she was
saying, h er voic e full of hurt. “But why must he run awa, and
leave u s alone? Did ye spea k to him, Ian? Did he say
anything?”
So that was it. Ian had been gone on one of his mysterious
journeys; he must have encoun tered Fer gus somewhere, and
told Marsali about it.
“A ye,” he said, after a moment ’ s hesitation. “Just a bit.” I
hung back, not wanting to interrupt them, but I could see his
face, the ferocity of his tattoos at odds with the sympathy that
clouded his eyes. He leaned ac ross the table, holding out his
arms. “Can I hold him, coz? Please?”
Marsali’ s back stif fened with surprise, but she handed over
the b aby , who s quirmed and kicked a little in his wrappings,
but quickly settled against Ian’ s shoulder , making little
smacking noises . Ian bent his head, smiling, and brushed his
lips across Henri-Christian’ s big round head.
He said something soft to the b aby , in what I thought was
Mohawk.
“What’ s that ye said?” Marsali asked, curious.
“A sort of blessing, ye’d c all it.” He patted Henri-
Christian’ s back , very softly . “Y e call upon the wind to
welcome him, the sky to give h im shelter , and the water and
the earth to yield him food.”
“Oh.” Marsali’ s  voice was soft. “That’ s so nice, Ian.” But
then she squared her shoulders, unwilling to be distracted. “Y e
spoke wi’ Fer gus, ye said.”
Ian nodded, eyes closed. His cheek rested lightly on the
baby’ s head. He didn’ t speak for a moment, but I saw his
throat move, the big Adam’ s apple bobbing as he swallowed.“I ha d a child, cousin,” he whispered, so softly that I barely
heard him.
Marsali heard him. She froze, th e needle she had picked up
glinting in her h and. Then, moving very slowly , put it down
again.
“Did ye , then?” she said just as softly . And rising, went
round the table in a quiet rustle  of skirts to sit beside him on
the bench, close enough that he could feel her there, and laid a
small hand against his elbow .
He didn’ t open h is eyes, but dre w breath, and with the baby
nestled against his heart, began to talk, in a voice hardly louder
than the crackle of the fire.
HE WOKE OUT OF SLEEP , knowing that something was
deeply wrong. He rolled toward  the back of the bed platform,
where h is weapo ns lay at hand, but before he could seize knife
or spear , he heard again the sound that must have wakened
him. It came from behind him; no more than a slight catch of
breath, but he heard both pain and fear in it.
The fire  burned very low; he saw  no more than the dark top
of W ako ’ teqehsnonhsa’ s head, a red glow outlining it, and the
double mound of shoulder and h ip beneath the furs. She didn’ t
move or  make the sound again , but something in those still
dark curves cleft through his heart like a tomahawk striking
home.
He gripp ed her shoulder fiercely , willing her to be all right.
Her bon es were small and hard  through her flesh. He could
find no proper w ords; all the Kahnyen’kehaka had fled out of
his head, and so he spoke in the first words that came to him.
“Lass—love—are ye all right, then? Blessed Michael
defend us, are ye well?”
She kne w he was there, but didn’ t turn to him. Something—
a str ange ripple, like a stone thrown in water—went through
her , and  the breath caught in her throat again, a small dry
sound.He didn’ t wait, but scrambled n aked from the furs, calling
for h elp. People came tumbling out into the dim light of the
longhouse, bulky shapes hurry ing toward him in a fog of
questions. He couldn’ t speak; didn’ t need to. W ithin moments,
T ewaktenyonh was there, her strong old face set in grim calm,
and the women of the longhouse rushed past him, pushing him
aside as they carried Emily away , wrapped in a deer ’ s hide.
He followed them outside, but they ignored him,
disappearing into the women’ s house at the end of the village.
T wo or three me n came out, loo ked after them, then shrugged,
turned, and went back inside. It was cold, and very late, and
plainly women’ s business.
He w ent inside h imself, after a few moments, but only long
enough to pull on a few clothes. He couldn’ t stay in the
longhouse, not with the bed e mpty of her and smelling of
blood. T here wa s blood on his skin as well, but he didn’ t pause
to wash.
Outside, the stars had faded, but the sky was still black. It
was bone-cold, and very still.
The hide that hu ng over the door of his longhouse moved,
and Rollo slipped through, gray as a ghost. The big dog
extended his paws and stretched , groaning with the stif fness of
the hour  and the cold. Then he shook his heavy ruf f, snorted
out a puf f of white breath, and ambled slowly to his master ’ s
side. He  sat down heavily , wit h a resigned sigh, and leaned
against Ian’ s leg.
Ian s tood a moment longer , look ing toward the house where
his Emi ly was. His face was hot, fevered with ur gency . He
burned h arsh an d bright, like a coal, but he could feel the heat
seeping out of him into the cold sky , and his heart turning
slowly b lack. F inally , he slapped his palm against his thigh
and turned away into the forest,  walking fast, the dog padding
big and soundless by his side.
“Hail M ary , full of grace …” He paid no attention to where
he w as going, praying under h is breath, but aloud, for the
comfort of his own voice in the silent dark.Ought he to be  praying to one  of the Mohawk spirits, he
wondered? W ould they be angry that he spoke to his old God,
to G od’ s mother? Might they tak e revenge for such a slight, on
his wife and child?
The child is dead alr eady .  He  had no notion where that
knowledge came from, but he knew it was so, as surely as if
someone had spoken the words  to him aloud. The knowledge
was dispassionate, not yet food for grief; only a fact he knew
to be true—and was appalled to know it.
On he went into  the woods, walking, then running, slowing
only when he m ust, to draw brea th. The air was knife-cold and
still, smelling of rot and turpen tine, but the trees whispered
just a little as he passed. Emily could hear them talk; she knew
their secret voices.
“A ye, and what good is that?” he muttered, face turned up to
the starless void between the bra nches. “Y e dinna say anything
worth knowing. Y e dinna ken how it is with her now , do ye?”
He c ould hear th e dog’ s feet now and then, rustling among
the dead leaves just behind him, thudding softly on patches of
bare ground. He stumbled now and then, feet lost in the
darkness, fell once bruisingly , stumbled to his feet, and ran
clumsily on. He had stopped praying; his mind wouldn’ t form
words a ny lon ger , couldn’ t choose among the fractured
syllables of his dif ferent tongue s, and his breath burned thick
in his throat as he ran.
He f elt h er body  against him in  the cold, her full breasts in
his hands, her sm all round buttocks thrusting back, heavy and
eager as he rammed her , oh, God, he knew he ought not, he
knew! And yet he’d done it, night after night, mad for the
slippery tight clutch of her , long past the day when he knew he
should stop, selfish, mindless, mad and wicked with lust… .
He ran, and her trees murmured condemnation above him as
he went.
He had to stop, s obbing for breath. The sky had turned from
black to the color that comes before the light. The dog nosed athim, whining softly in his throa t, amber eyes gone blank and
dark in the no-light of the hour .
Sweat poured down his body un der the leather shirt, soaked
the draggled breechclout between his legs. His privates were
chilled, shrivele d against his bod y , and he could smell himself,
a rank, bitter scent of fear and loss.
Rollo’ s ears pricked, and the dog whined again, moving a
step away , back, away again, tail twitching nervously . Come,
he was saying, as clearly as words. Come now!
For himself, Ian could have lain  down on the frozen leaves,
buried his face in the earth, and stayed. But habit pulled at
him; he was accustomed to heed the dog.
“What?” he muttered, dragging a sleeve across his wet face.
“What is it, then?”
Rollo gr owled, deep in his throa t. He was standing rigid, the
hackles slowly rising on his neck. Ian saw it, and some distant
tremor of alarm made itself felt  through the fog of exhausted
despair . His hand went to his belt, found emptiness there, and
slapped at it, unbelieving. Christ, he had not so much as a
skinning knife!
Rollo growled again, louder . A warning, meant to be heard.
Ian turned, looking, but saw only the dark trunks of cedar and
pine, th e ground beneath them a mass of shadows, the air
between them filled with mist.
A Fr ench trader who had come to their fire had called such
a time, such a l ight, l’heur e du loup —the hour of the wolf.
And for  good reason: it was a hunting time, when the night
grows dim, and the faint breez e that comes before the light
begins to rise, carrying the scent of prey .
His hand went to the other side of his belt, where the pouch
of taseng  should hang: bear grease steeped with mint leaves, to
hide a man’ s sce nt while hunting—or hunted. But that side too
was emp ty , and  he felt his heart beat quick and hard, as the
cold wind dried the sweat from his body .Rollo’ s teeth were bared, the growl a continuous rolling
thunder . Ian stooped and seized  a fallen pine branch from the
ground. It was a good length, though flimsier than he would
have liked, and unwieldy , clawed with long twigs.
“Home,” he whispered to the dog. He had no notion where
he w as, or where the village lay , but Rollo did. The dog
backed s lowly , eyes still fixed on the gray shadows—did they
move, those shadows?
He w as walking faster now , still backward, feeling the slope
of the ground through the sol es of his moccasins, sensing
Rollo’ s presence  from the rustle of the dog’ s feet, the faint
whine that came now and the n behind him. There. Y es, a
shadow had  m oved! A gra y shape, far away and seen too
briefly to recognize, but there all the same—and recognizable
by its presence alone.
If there was one , there were more. They did not hunt alone.
They weren’ t near yet, though; he turned, beginning almost to
run. Not in pa nic now , despite the fear in the pit of his
stomach. A quick, steady lope,  the hill-walker ’ s gait that his
uncle had shown him, that wo uld devour the steep, endless
miles o f the Scottish moun tains, steady ef fort without
exhaustion. He must save strength to fight.
He o bserved that thought with  a wry twist of the mouth,
snapping of f the brittle pine twigs from his club as he went. A
moment ago, he had wanted to die, and perhaps he would
again, if Emily— But not now . If Emily … and besides, there
was the dog. Ro llo wouldn’ t leave him; they must defend each
other .
There was water near; he heard  it gur gling under the wind.
But carried on th e wind came another sound, a long, unearthly
howl th at brought the sweat out cold on his face again.
Another answered it, to the west. Still far away , but they were
hunting now , calling to one another . Her blood was on him.
He turned, seeking the water . It was a small creek, no more
than a few feet across. He splas hed into it without hesitation,
splintering the skin of ice that c lung to the banks, feeling thecold bite  into his legs and feet as it soaked his leggings and
filled his  moccasins. He stopped for a split second, pulling of f
the moc casins, lest they be carri ed away in the current; Emily
had made them for him, of moose hide.
Rollo had crossed the stream in two gigantic bounds, and
paused on the op posite bank to s hake a freezing spray of water
from his coat b efore going on. He held to the bank, though;
Ian s tayed in the  water , splashing shin-deep, staying as long as
might be managed. W olves hunted by wind as much as by
ground scent, but no need to make it easy for them.
He had thrust th e wet moccasins down the neck of his shirt,
and icy  trickle s ran down c hest and belly , soaking his
breechclout. His feet were numb; he couldn’ t feel the rounded
stones o f the streambed, but now and then his foot slid on one,
slippery with algae, and he lurc hed and stumbled to keep his
balance.
He could hear the wolves mo re clearly; that was good,
though—the wind had changed, was toward him now , carrying
their voices. Or was it only that they were closer now?
Closer . Rollo was wild, darting to and fro on the far bank,
whining and growling, ur ging him on with brief yips. A deer ’ s
path cam e down  to the stream on that side; he stumbled out of
the water onto i t, panting and s haking. It took several tries to
get t he moccasins on again. The  soaked leather was stif f, and
his hand s and feet refused to w ork. He had to put down his
club and use both hands.
He had just man aged the second one when Rollo suddenly
char ged down the bank, roaring a challenge. He whirled on the
frozen mud, catching up his club, in time to see a gray shape,
nearly Rollo’ s size, on the far side of the water , its pale eyes
startlingly near .
He s creeched and flung the clu b in reflex. It sailed across
the strea m and struck the ground near the wolf ’ s feet, and the
thing va nished as though by ma gic. He stood stock-still for an
instant, staring. He had not imagined it, surely?No, Rol lo was raving, bellowing and teeth bared, flecks of
foam flying from his muzzle. There were stones at the stream’ s
edge; Ian seized one, another , s craped up a handful, another ,
stubbing his fingers in haste o n the rocks and frozen soil,
holding up the front of his shirt to make a bag.
The more-distant wolf howled again; the near one answered,
so close that the hairs rose up st raight on the back of his neck.
He h eaved a roc k in the directio n of the call, turned, and ran,
the bundle of rocks clutched hard against his belly .
The sky had lightened into dawn. Heart and lungs strained
for blood and air , and yet it seem ed as though he ran so slowly
that he floated over the forest floor , passing like a drifting
cloud, unable to go faster . H e could see each tree, each
separate needle of a spruce he  passed, short and thick, soft
silver -green in the light.
His breath came hard, his visi on blurred and cleared, as
tears of ef fort clouded his eyes, were blinked away , welled
back aga in. A tree branch lashed his face and blinded him, the
scent of it sharp in his nose.
“Red C edar , help me!” he gasped, the Kahnyen’kehaka
coming to his lips as though he had never spoken English or
called upon Christ and His mother .
Behind you.  It  was a small voice, quiet, perhaps no more
than the voice of his own inst inct, but he whirled at once,
stone in hand, a nd slung it wi th all his force. Another , and
another , and another , as fast as  he could fling. There was a
crack, a thump, and a yelp, an d Rollo slewed and skidded,
eager to turn and attack.
“Come-come-come!” He seized the big dog’ s ruf f as he ran,
dragging him round, forcing him along.
He c ould hear th em now , or thought he could. The wind that
comes a t dawn rustled through the trees, and they whispered
overhead, calling him this way , then that, guiding him as he
ran. He saw not hing but color , half-blind with ef fort, but felt
their embrace, cool in his mind ; a prickling touch of spruceand fir , the skin  of white aspen , smooth as a woman’ s, sticky
with blood.
Go her e, come this way ,  he thought he heard, and followed
the sound of the wind.
A ho wl came fro m behind them, followed by short yips, and
another of acknowledgment. Close, too close! He flung stones
behind him as he ran, not looking, no time to turn and aim.
Then there were no more stone s and he dropped the empty
flap of shirt, arms pumping as he ran, a harsh panting in his
ears that  might have been his ow n breath, or the dog’ s—or the
sound of the beasts behind him.
How many of th em? How far t o go? He was beginning to
stagger , streaks of black and red  shooting through his vision. If
the village was not nearby , he had no chance.
He lurch ed sideways, hit the yi elding branch of a tree that
bent under his weight, then pushed him upright, setting him
roughly back on his feet. He had  lost his impetus, though, and
his sense of direction.
“Where?” he gasped to the trees. “Which way?”
If there was an answer , he didn ’ t hear it. There was a roar
and a thud beh ind him, a mad scuf fle punctuated with the
growls and yelps of dogs fighting.
“Rollo!” He turned and flung himself through a growth of
dead vin es, to find dog and wolf squirming and biting in a
writhing ball of fur and flashing teeth.
He d ashed forward, kicking and shouting, punching wildly ,
glad at last to ha ve something to hit, to be fighting back, even
if it was  the last fight. Something ripped across his leg, but he
felt only the jar of impact as he rammed his knee hard into the
wolf ’ s side. It squealed and rolled away , rounding on him at
once.
It le aped, and its  paws struck hi m in the chest. He fell back,
struck his head glancingly on something, lost breath for aninstant, and came to himself to  find his hand braced beneath
the slavering jaws, straining to keep them from his throat.
Rollo sprang onto the wolf ’ s b ack, and Ian lost his grip,
collapsing under the weight of reeking fur and squirming
flesh. He flung out a hand, seeking anything—a weapon, a
tool, a grip to pull himself free—and gripped something hard.
He wrenched it from its bed i n the moss and smashed it
against the wolf ’ s head. Fragments of bloody teeth flew
through the air and struck his f ace. He struck again, sobbing,
and again.
Rollo was whining, a high keen ing noise—no, it was him.
He b ashed the ro ck down once more on the battered skull, but
the wolf  had stopped fighting; it lay across his thighs, legs
twitching, eyes glazing as it died. He pushed it of f in a frenzy
of revulsion. Rollo’ s teeth sank into the wolf ’ s outstretched
throat, and ripped it out, in a final spray of blood and warm
flesh.
Ian clos ed his eyes and sat still. It didn’ t seem possible to
move, or to think.
After a time, it seemed possib le to open his eyes, and to
breathe, at least. There was a lar ge tree at his back; he had
fallen against the trunk when the  wolf struck him; it supported
him now . Among the twisted r oots was a muddy hole, from
which he had wrenched the stone.
He was still holding the stone; it felt as though it had grown
to hi s sk in; he couldn’ t open his hand. When he looked he saw
that this  was because the stone had shattered; sharp fragments
had cut his hand, and the pieces  of the stone were glued to his
hand by drying blood. Using th e fingers of his other hand, he
bent back the cl enched fingers, and pushed the broken pieces
of the stone of f his palm. He scraped moss from the tree roots,
made a wad of i t in his hand, then let the curled fingers close
over it again.
A w olf howled, in the middle d istance. Rollo, who had lain
down by Ian, lifted his head with a soft wuff!  The  how l cameagain, and seemed to hold a question, a worried tone.
For the first time, he looked at the body of the wolf. For an
instant, he thought it moved, and shook his head to clear his
vision. Then he looked again.
It was moving. T he distended belly rose gently , subsided. It
was full light now , and he could see the tiny nubs of pink
nipples, showing through the belly fur . Not a pack. A pair . But
a pa ir no  more. The wolf in the distance howled again, and Ian
leaned to one side and vomited.
Eats T u rtles came upon him a  little later , sitting with his
back aga inst the red-cedar tree b y the dead wolf, Rollo’ s bulk
pressed close against him. T urtle squatted down, a short
distance away , balanced on his heels, and watched.
“Good hunting, W olf ’ s Brother ,” he said finally , in greeting.
Ian felt the knot  between his sho ulder blades relax just a little.
T urtle’ s voice held a quiet tone, but no sorrow . She lived, then.
“She whose hearth I share,” he said, careful to avoid
speaking her name. T o speak it aloud might expose her to evil
spirits nearby . “She is well?”
T urtle cl osed his eyes and raised both brows and shoulders.
She was  alive, and not in danger . Still, it was not for a man to
say wha t might happen. Ian didn’ t mention the child. Neither
did T urtle.
T urtle had brought a gun, a bow , and his knife, of course.
He took the knife from his belt and handed it to Ian, matter -of-
factly .
“Y ou will want the skins,” he said. “T o wrap your son, when
he shall be born.”
A shock went through Ian, like the shock of sudden rain on
bare skin. Eats T urtles saw his face, and turned his head aside,
avoiding his eyes.
“This child was a daughter ,” T urtle said matter -of-factly .
“T ewaktenyonh told my wife, when she came for a rabbit skin
to wrap the body .”The mus cles in his belly tightened and quivered; he thought
that perhaps his own skin would burst, but it didn’ t. His throat
was dry , and h e swallowed once, painfully , then shook the
moss away and held out his wo unded hand for the knife. He
bent slowly to skin the wolf.
Eats T urtles was poking with interest at the bloodstained
remnants of the shattered ston e, when the howl of a wolf
brought him upright, staring.
It echoe d through the forest, tha t howl, and the trees moved
above them, murmuring uneas ily at the sound of loss and
desolation. The knife drew swiftly down the pale fur of the
belly , dividing the two rows of pink nipples.
“Her husband will be nearby ,” W olf ’ s Brother said, not
looking up. “Go and kill him.”
MARSALI ST A RED at him, scarcely breathing. The sadness
in her eyes wa s still there, but had somehow diminished,
overwhelmed with compassion. The anger had left her; she
had taken back H enri-Christian, and held the fat bundle of her
baby wi th both arms against he r breast, her cheek against the
bold round curve of his head.
“Ah, Ian,” she said softly . “Mo charaid, mo chridhe.”
He sat looking d own at his hand s, clasped loosely in his lap,
and seem ed not to have heard her . Finally , though, he stirred,
like a statue wa king. W ithout looking up, he reached into his
shirt and drew out a small, rolled bundle, bound with hair
twine, and decorated with a wampum bead.
He u ndid this, a nd leaning over , spread the cured skin of an
unborn wolf over the baby’ s shoulders. His big, bony hand
smoothed the pale fur , cupping  for a moment over Marsali’ s
hand where it held the child.
“Believe me, cousin,” he said, very softly , “your husband
grieves. But he will come back. ” Then he rose and left, silent
as an Indian.3 7
LE MAiTRE DES
 CHAMPIGNONS
T HE SMALL LIMEST ONE CA V E we used for a stable was
home at the moment only to a n anny goat with two brand-new
kids. All  the animals born in the spring were now lar ge enough
to be  tur ned out  to forage in the wood with their mothers. The
goat wa s still getting room se rvice, though, in the form of
kitchen scraps and a little cracked corn.
It ha d been rain ing for several days, and the morning broke
cloudy and damp, every leaf dripping and the air thick with the
scents o f resin and soggy leaf mulch. Luckily , the cloudiness
kept the  birds subdued; the jays and mockingbirds were quick
to learn,  and kept a beady eye on the comings and goings of
people with food—they dive-bombed me regularly as I made
my way up the hill with my basin.
I w as on my guard, but even so , a bold jay dropped from a
branch in a flash of blue and landed in  the basin, startling me.
Before I  could react, it had seized a fragment of corn muf fin
and darted of f, s o quickly that I could scarcely believe I’d seen
it, sa ve for the racing of my he art. Luckily I hadn’ t dropped
the basin; I heard a triumphant screech from the trees, and
hurried to get in side the stable before the jay’ s friends should
try the same tactic.
I was surprised to find that the Dutch door was unbolted at
the top and stoo d an inch or two ajar . There was no danger of
the goats escaping, of course, but foxes and raccoons were
more th an capable of climbing over the lower door , and so
both doors were normally bolted at night. Perhaps Mr .
W emyss had for gotten; it was his job to muck out the used
straw and settle the stock for the night.As soon as I pushed open the door , though, I saw that Mr .
W emyss was not to blame. There was a tremendous rustle of
straw at my feet, and something big moved in the darkness.
I utt ered a sharp  yelp of alarm, and this time did  drop the
basin, which fell with a clang, s cattering food across the floor
and rousing the nanny goat, who started blatting her head of f.
“ Par don,  milady!”
Hand to my thumping heart, I stepped out of the doorway ,
so th e light fell on Fer gus, crouched on the floor , with straws
sticking out of his hair like the Madwoman of Chaillot.
“Oh, so there you are,” I said quite coldly .
He blink ed and swallowed, rubbing his hand over a face
dark with sprouting whiskers.
“I—yes,” he said. He seemed to  have nothing further to add
to th is. I  stood glaring down at him for a moment, then shook
my head  and stooped to retrieve  the potato peelings and other
fragments that had fallen from the basin. He moved as though
to help me, but I stopped him with a shooing gesture.
He sat still, wa tching me, hands around his knees. It was
dim inside the stable, and water dripped steadily from the
plants growing out of the clif fsi de above, making a curtain of
falling drops across the open door .
The goat had stopped making noise, having recognized me,
but was now stre tching her neck through the railing of her pen,
blueberry-colored tongue extended like an anteater ’ s, in an
ef fort to  reach an apple core th at had rolled near the pen. I
picked it up and handed it to her , trying to think where to start,
and what to say when I did.
“Henri-Christian’ s doing well,” I said, for lack of anything
else. “Putting on weight.”
I let the remark trail of f, bending over the rail to pour corn
and scraps into the wooden feed trough.
Dead silence. I waited a mome nt, then turned round, one
hand on my hip.“He’ s a very sweet little baby ,” I said.
I c ould hear him  breathing, but he said nothing. W ith an
audible snort, I went and pushed the bottom half of the door
open wide, so that the cloudy light outside streamed in,
exposing Fer gus. He sat with his face turned stubbornly away .
I c ould smell h im at a goodly distance; he reeked of bitter
sweat and hunger .
I sighed.
“Dwarves of this sort have got quite normal intelligence.
I’ve checked him thoroughly , and he has all the usual reflexes
and resp onses that he should ha ve. There’ s no reason why he
can’ t be educated, be able to work—at something.”
“Something,” Fer gus echoed, th e word holding both despair
and deri sion. “Something.” At last, he turned his face toward
me, and I saw the hollowness of his eyes. “W ith respect,
milady—you have never seen the life of a dwarf.”
“And yo u have?” I asked, no t so much in challenge as
curiosity .
He closed his eyes against the morning light, nodding.
“Y es,” he whispered, and swallowed. “In Paris.”
The brothel where he had grown up in Paris was a lar ge one,
with a varied clientele, famo us for being able to of fer
something for almost any taste.
“The house itself had les filles, natur ellement,  and les
enfants.  T hey are of course the bre ad and butter of the
establishment. But there are always those who desire … the
exotic, and will pay . And so now and then the madame would
send for those who dealt in such things. La Maitr esse des
Scorpions—avec les flagellantes, tu compr ends? Ou Le Maitr e
des Champignons. ”
“The Master of Mushrooms?” I blurted.
“ Oui . The Dwarf Master .”His eyes  had sunk into his head , his gaze turned inward and
his face haggard . He was seeing  in memory sights and people
who had  been absent from his thoughts for many years—and
was not enjoying the recollection.
“ Les chanter elles,  we called them,” he said sof tly . “The
females. The males, they wer e les mor els. ” Exotic fungi,
valued for the rarity of their twisted shapes, the strange savor
of their flesh.
“They were not badly treated, les champignons, ” he said,
abstracted. “They were of value, you see. Le Maitr e  would buy
such infants from their parents —there was one born in the
brothel, once, and the madame was delighted at her good
fortune—or collect them from the streets.”
He look ed down at his hand, the long, delicate fingers
moving restlessly , pleating the cloth of his breeches.
“The streets,” he repeated. “Those who escaped the brothels
—they were beggars. I knew on e of them quite well—Luc, he
was called. W e would sometimes assist each other—” The
shadow of a smi le touched his mouth, and he waved his intact
hand in the deft gesture of one picking pockets.
“But he was alone, Luc,” he continued matter -of-factly . “He
had no protector . I found him one day in the alley , with his
throat cu t. I told the madame, an d she sent the doorkeep out at
once to seize the body , and so ld it to a doctor in the next
ar ondissement. ”
I d idn’ t ask wha t the doctor had wanted with Luc’ s body . I’d
seen the broad, d ried hands of dwarves, sold for divination and
protection. And other parts.
“I begin  to see why a brothel might seem safe,” I said,
swallowing heavily . “But still …”
Fer gus h ad been sitting with hi s head braced on his hand,
staring at the straw . At this, he looked up at me.
“I h ave parted my buttocks for money , milady ,” he said
simply . “And thought nothing of  it, save when it hurt. But then
I m et milord, an d found a wor ld beyond the brothel and thestreets. That my son might return to such places …” He
stopped abruptly , unable to speak. He closed his eyes again,
and shook his head, slowly .
“Fer gus. Fer gus, dear . Y ou can’ t think that Jamie—that we
—would ever let such a thing happen,” I said, distressed
beyond measure.
He drew  a deep, trembling breath, and thumbed away the
tears that hung on his lashes. He opened his eyes and gave me
a smile of infinite sadness.
“No, you would not, milady . Bu t you will not live forever ,
nor will  milord.  Nor I. But the child will be a dwarf forever .
And les petits,  they cannot well defend thems elves. They will
be pluck ed up by those who seek them, taken and consumed.”
He wiped his nose on his sleeve and sat up a little.
“If, that is, they should be so for tunate,” he added, his voice
hardening. “They are not valued, outside the cities. Peasants,
they believe the birth of such a child is at best a judgment on
the s ins of his parents.” A deeper shadow crossed his face, his
lips draw ing tigh t. “It may be so. My sins—” But he broke of f
abruptly , turning away .
“At worst—” His voice was soft, head turned away , as
though h e whispered secrets to the shadows of the cave. “At
worst, they are seen as mons trous, children born of some
demon w ho has lain with the woman. People stone them, burn
them—sometimes the woman, too. In the mountain villages of
France, a dwarf child would be left for the wolves. But do you
not know these things, milady?” he asked, suddenly turning
back to face me.
“I—I su ppose s o,” I said, and put out a hand to the wall,
suddenly feeling the need of some support. I had  known such
things, in the abstract way o ne thinks of the customs of
aborigines and savages—people whom one will never meet,
safely distant in the pages of geography books, of ancient
histories.He was  right; I knew it. Mrs. Bug had crossed herself,
seeing t he child, and then ma de the sign of the horns as
protection from evil, pale horror on her face.
Shocked as we had all been,  and then concerned with
Marsali, and with Fer gus’ s absence, I hadn’ t been away from
the house for a week or more. I had no idea what people might
be saying, on the Ridge. Fer gus plainly did.
“They’ll … get used to him,” I said as bravely as I could.
“People will see that he isn’ t a monster . It may take some time,
but I promise you, they’ll see.”
“W ill they? And if they let him live, what then will he do?”
He rose  to his feet quite suddenly . He stretched out his left
arm, and  with a jerk, freed the leather strip that held his hook.
It fell with a so ft thump into t he straw , and left the narrow
stump of  his wrist bare, the pale  skin creased with red from the
tightness of the wrappings.
“Me, I cannot hunt, cannot do a proper man’ s work. I am fit
for nothing but to pull the plow , like a mule!” His voice shook
with ang er and self-loathing. “If I cannot work as a man does,
how shall a dwarf?”
“Fer gus, it isn’ t—”
“I canno t keep my family! My  wife must labor day and
night to feed the children, must put herself in the way of scum
and filth who m isuse her , who— Even if I was in Paris, I am
too old and crip pled to whore!” He shook the stump at me,
face convulsed, then whirled and swung his maimed arm,
smashing it against the wall, over and over .
“Fer gus!” I seized his other arm, but he jerked away .
“What work will he do?” he cried, tears streaming down his
face. “How shall he live? Mon Di eu! Il est aussi inutile q ue
moi! ”
He bent and seiz ed the hook from the ground, and hurled it
as h ard as he could at the lim estone wall. It made a small
chiming sound as it struck, and fell into the straw , startling the
nanny and her kids.Fer gus w as gon e, the Dutch do or left swinging. The goat
called after him, a long maaaah!  of disapproval.
I he ld o n to the railing of the pen, feeling as though it was
the o nly solid th ing in a slowly  tilting world. When I could, I
bent and  felt carefully in the stra w until I touched the metal of
the hook, still w arm from Fer gus’ s body . I drew it out and
wiped bits of straw and manure carefully of f it with my apron,
still hearing Fer gus’ s last words.
“My God! He is as useless as I am!”3 8
A DE’IL IN THE MILK
H ENRI-CHRISTIAN’S EYES nearly crossed with the ef fort
of focusing on the yarn bobble Brianna dangled over his face.
“I think  his eyes might stay blue,” she said, peering
thoughtfully at him. “What do y ou think he’ s looking at?” He
lay in her lap, k nees drawn up n early to his chin, the soft blue
eyes in question fixed somewhere far beyond her .
“Oh, the wee on es still see heaven, my Mam said.” Marsali
was spinning, trying out Brianna’ s new treadle wheel, but
spared a  quick glance at her newest son, smiling a little.
“Maybe there’ s an angel sitting on your shoulder , aye? Or a
saint who stands behind ye.”
That gave her an odd feeling, as though someone did  stand
behind her . Not creepy , though— more a mild, warm sense of
reassurance. She opened her mouth to say , “Maybe it’ s my
father ,” but caught herself in time.
“Who’ s the patron saint of laundry?” she said instead.
“That’ s who we need.” It was r aining; it had been raining for
days, and small mounds of clothing lay scattered about the
room or draped over the furni ture: damp things in various
states of  drying, filthy things des tined for the wash cauldron as
soon as the we ather broke, less-filthy things that might be
brushed, shaken, or beaten into another few days’ wearing,
and an ever -growing pile of things needing mending.
Marsali laughed, deftly feeding thread to the bobbin.
“Y e’d have to a sk Da about tha t. He kens more saints than
anybody . This is wonderful, this wheel! I’ve not seen this kind
before. However did ye come to think of such a thing?”
“Oh—saw one somewhere.” Bree flicked a hand, dismissing
it. She had—in a folk-art museum. Building it had been time-consuming—she’d first had to make a crude lathe, as well as
soak and bend t he wood for the wheel itself—but not terribly
dif ficult. “Ronnie Sinclair helped a lot; he knows what wood
will do and wha t it won’ t. I can’ t believe how good you are at
that, and this your first time using one like it.”
Marsali snorted, likewise dismissing the compliment.
“I’ve sp un since  I was five, a piuthar .  A ll that’ s dif ferent
here is I can sit while I do it, instead of walking to and fro ‘til I
fall over wi’ tiredness.”
Her stoc kinged feet flickered back and forth under the hem
of her dress, wo rking the treadle. It made a pleasant whish-
whir  s ou nd—though  this was barely audible over the babble at
the other side of the room, where Roger was carving yet
another car for the children.
V rooms were a big hit with the small-fry , and the demand
for them  unceasing. Brianna watched with amusement as
Roger fended of f Jem’ s inquisitiveness with a deft elbow ,
frowning in concentration. The tip of his tongue showed
between his teeth, and wood sh avings littered the hearth and
his cloth es, and—of course—on e was stuck in his hair , a pale
curl against its darkness.
“What’ s that one?” she asked,  raising her voice to reach
him. He looked up, his eyes a mossy green in the dim rainlight
from the window behind him.
“I th ink it’ s a ‘57 Chevrolet pickup truck,” he said, grinning.
“Here, then, a nighean.  Thi s one’ s yours.” He brushed  a last
shaving from his creation and handed the blocky thing to
Felicite, whose mouth and eyes were round with awe.
“Issa vr oom?” she said, clutching it to her bosom. “ My
vroom?”
“It’ s a druck,” Jemmy informed her with kindly
condescension. “Daddy says.”
“A truck is a vroom,” Roger assured Felicite, seeing doubt
begin to pucker her forehead. “It’ s just a bigger kind.”“Issa big  vro om, see!” Felicite kicked J em in the shin. He
yelped a nd grabbed for her h air , only to be butted in the
stomach by Joan, always there to defend her sister .
Brianna tensed, ready to interve ne, but Roger broke up the
incipient riot by holding Jem an d Felicite each at arm’ s length,
glaring Joan into retreat.
“Right, y ou lot. No fighting, or we put the vrooms away ‘til
tomorrow .”
That quelled them instantly , and Brianna felt Marsali relax,
resuming the rhythm of her spinning. The rain hummed on the
roof, solid and steady; it was a good day to be inside, despite
the dif ficulty of entertaining bored children.
“Why don’ t you play something nice and quiet?” she said,
grinning at Roger . “Like … oh … Indianapolis 500?”
“Oh, you’re a great help,” he said, giving her a dirty look,
but he obligingly set the children to work laying out a
racetrack in chalk on the big hearthstone.
“T oo bad Germain’ s not here,” he said casually . “Where’ s
he g one in the rain and all, M arsali?” Germain’ s vroom—
according to Roger , it was a Jaguar X-KE, though so far as
Brianna could tell, it looked exa ctly like the others: a block of
wood w ith a rudimentary cab and wheels—was sitting on the
mantelpiece, awaiting its master ’ s return.
“He’ s with Fer gus,” Marsali ans wered calmly , not faltering
in her rhythm. Her lips pressed together , though, and it was
easy to hear the note of strain in her voice.
“And ho w’ s Fer gus, then?” Roger looked up at her , kindly ,
but intent.
The thread skipped, bounced in Marsali’ s hand, and wound
itself up with a  visible slub in  it. She grimaced, and didn’ t
reply until the thread was running once more smoothly
through her fingers.
“W ell, I will say , for a man wi’ one hand, he’ s a bonny wee
fighter ,” she said at last, eyes on the thread and a wry note inher voice.
Brianna glanced  at Roger , who  raised an eyebrow back at
her .
“Who’ s he been fighting?” she asked, trying to sound
casual.
“He doesna often tell me,” Marsali said evenly . “Though
yesterday it was the husband of a woman who asked him why
he didna just strangle Henri-Christian at birth. He took
of fense,” she added, of fhand, le aving it unclear as to whether
it was Fer gus, the husband, or both who had taken of fense.
Lifting the thread, she bit it sharply of f.
“I should think so,” Roger mur mured. His head was bent,
marking of f the starting line, so his hair fell over his forehead,
obscuring his face. “Not the only one, though, I take it.”
“No.” Marsali began winding the thread onto the niddy-
noddy , a small, seemingly permanent frown showing between
her fair brows. “ I suppose it’ s better than the ones who point
and whisper . Those are the ones who think Henri-Christian’ s
the—the devil’ s seed,” she finished bravely , though her voice
quivered a little. “I think they’d burn the wee man—and me
and the other w eans along with him, if they thought they
could.”
Brianna felt the bottom of her stomach drop, and cuddled
the object of discussion in her lap.
“What s ort of idiots could possibly  think such a thing?” she
demanded. “Let alone say it out loud!”
“Let alone do it, ye mean.” Marsali put aside the yarn and
rose, leaning over to take Henr i-Christian and put him to her
breast. W ith his knees still curl ed up, his body was scarcely
half the size of  a normal baby’ s—and with his lar ge, round
head wit h its sprout of dark hair , Brianna had to admit that he
did look … odd.
“Da had  a word here and there,” Marsali said. Her eyes
were cl osed, and she was rocking slowly back and forth,cradling Henri-C hristian close. “If it weren’ t for that …” Her
slender throat moved as she swallowed.
“Daddy , Daddy , let’ s go !” Jem, impatient with
incomprehensible adult conversation, plucked at Roger ’ s
sleeve.
Roger h ad been  looking at Mar sali, his lean face troubled.
At this remind er , he blinked and glanced down at his
thoroughly normal son, clearing his throat.
“A ye,” he said, and took down Germain’ s car . “W ell, then,
look. Here’ s the starting line… .”
Brianna laid a hand on Mars ali’ s arm. It was thin, but
strongly muscled, the fair skin gold from sun, spattered with
tiny freckles. The sight of it, so small and brave-looking,
clutched at her throat.
“They’ll stop,” she whispered. “They’ll see… .”
“A ye, m aybe.” Marsali cuppe d Henri-Christian’ s small
round bo ttom, holding him closer . Her eyes were still closed.
“Maybe not. But if Germain’ s wi’ Fer gus, he’ll maybe be
more ca reful who he fights. I’ d rather they didna kill him,
aye?”
She bowed her h ead over the baby , settling into the nursing
and plai nly disinclined to talk any further . Brianna patted her
arm, a little awkwardly , then m oved to take the seat by the
spinning wheel.
She’d heard the talk, of course.  Or some of it. Particularly
right after Henri-Christian’ s birth, which had sent shock waves
through the Ridge. Beyond the first overt expressions of
sympathy , there had been a lo t of muttering, about recent
events and what malign influence might have caused them—
from the  assault on Marsali an d the burning of the malting
shed, to  the kidnapping of her  mother , the slaughter in the
woods, and the birth of a dwarf. She’d heard one injudicious
girl murmur within her hearing something about “…
witchcraft, what  would ye expec t?”—but had rounded fiercely
to g lare at the girl, who had pal ed and slunk of f with her twofriends. The girl had glanced b ack once, though, then turned
away , the three of them spitefully sniggering.
But no one had ever treated her or her mother with any lack
of re spect. It wa s clear that a number of the tenants were rather
afraid of Claire—but they were much more afraid of her
father . T ime and habituation had seemed to be working,
though—until the birth of Henri-Christian.
W orking the treadle was soothin g; the whir of the spinning
wheel fa ded into  the sound of the rain and the bickering of the
children.
At least Fer gus had come back. When Henri-Christian was
born, he had left the house and not come back for several days.
Poor Marsali,  s he thought, wi th a mental scowl at Fer gus. Left
alone to deal with the shock. And everyone had been  shocked,
her included. Perhaps she couldn’ t really blame Fer gus.
She swallowed, imagining, as she did whenever she saw
Henri-Christian, what it would be like to have a child born
with some terrible defect. She  saw them now and then—
children with cleft lips, the misshapen features of what her
mother said was congenital syphilis, retarded children—and
every tim e, cros sed herself and thanked God that Jemmy was
normal.
But then , so were Germain and his sisters. Something like
this could come out of the blue, at any time. Despite herself,
she glanced at the small shelf where she kept her personal
things, a nd the dark brown jar of dauco  seeds. She’d been
taking them again, ever since Henri-Christian’ s birth, though
she hadn ’ t mentioned it to Roger . She wondered whether he
knew; he hadn’ t said anything.
Marsali was singing softly under her breath. Did  Marsali
blame Fer gus? she wondered. Or he her? She hadn’ t seen
Fer gus to talk to  in some time. Marsali didn’ t seem critical of
him—and she had said she did n’ t want him killed. Brianna
smiled involuntarily at the memory . Y et there was an
undeniable sense of distance when she mentioned him.The thread thickened suddenly , and she trod faster , trying to
compensate, on ly to have it catch and snap. Muttering to
herself, she stopped and let the wheel run itself down—only
then realizing that someone had  been pounding on the door of
the cabin for so me time, the s ound of it lost in the racket
inside.
She opened the door to find one  of the fisher -folks’ children
dripping on the stoop, small, b ony , and feral as a wild cat.
There w ere several of them amo ng the tenant families, so alike
that she had trouble telling them apart.
“Aidan?” she guessed. “Aidan McCallum?”
“Good d ay , mistress,” the little boy said, bobbing his head
in nervous acknowledgment of identity . “Is meenister to
hame?”
“Mee—oh. Y es, I suppose so. Come in, won’ t you?”
Suppressing a smile, she swung  the door wide, beckoning him
in. The boy looked quite shocked to see Roger , crouched on
the floo r , playin g V room with Jemmy and Joan and Felicite,
all indus triously screeching and roaring to such ef fect that they
hadn’ t noticed the newcomer .
“Y ou have a vis itor ,” she said, raising her voice to interrupt
the b edlam. “He wants the mini ster .” Roger broke of f in mid-
vroom, glancing up in inquiry .
“The wh at?” he said, sitting up, cross-legged, his own car in
hand. Then he spotted the boy , and smiled. “Oh. Aidan, a
charaid ! What is it, then?”
Aidan screwed up his face in concentration. Obviously , he
had been given a specific message, committed to memory .
“Mither says will ye come, plea se,” he recited, “for to drive
out a de’il what’ s got intae the milk.”
THE RA IN W A S F ALLING more lightly now , but they were
still soaked nearly through by  the time they reached the
McCallum resid ence. If it could be dignified by such a term,
Roger thought, slapping rain from his hat as he followedAidan up the n arrow , slippery path to the cabin, which was
perched in a hi gh and inconvenient notch in the side of the
mountain.
Orem M cCallum had managed to erect the walls of his
shakily built cabin, and then had missed his footing and
plunged into a rock-strewn ravine, breaking his neck within a
month of arrival on the Ridge, and leaving his pregnant wife
and young son to its dubious shelter .
The other men had come and hastily put a roof on, but the
cabin as  a whole reminded Roger of nothing so much as a pile
of giant jackstraws, poised precariously on the side of the
mountain and obviously only awaiting the next spring flood to
slide down the mountain after its builder .
Mrs. McCallum was young and pale, and so thin that her
dress fla pped round her like an empty flour sack. Christ,  he
thought, what did they have to eat?
“Oh, sir ,  I do thank ye for coming.” She bobbed an anxious
curtsy to him. “I ’m that sorry to  bring ye out in the rain and all
—but I just didna ken what else I might do!”
“Not a problem,” he assured her . “Er … Aidan said, though,
that ye wanted a minister . I’m not that, ye know .”
She looked disconcerted at that.
“Oh. W ell, maybe not exactly , sir . But they do say as how
your fai ther wa s a minister , an d that ye do ken a great deal
about the Bible and all.”
“Some, yes,” he replied guardedly , wondering what sort of
emer gency might require Bible knowledge. “A … um … devil
in your milk, was it?”
He g lanced discreetly from the b aby in its cradle to the front
of h er dress, un sure at first whether she might mean her own
breast milk, which would be a problem he was definitely not
equipped to deal with. Fortunate ly , the dif ficulty seemed to lie
with a lar ge wo oden pail sitting on the ramshackle table, a
muslin c loth draped across it t o keep flies out, small stones
knotted into the corners as weights.“A ye, si r .” Mrs. McCallum nodded at it, obviously afraid to
go nearer . “Lizzie W emyss, her from the Big House, she
brought that to me last night. S he said Herself said as I must
give it to Aidan,  and drink of it myself.” She looked helplessly
at R oger . He understood her r eservations; even in his own
time, milk was regarded as a b everage only for infants and
invalids; coming from a fishing village on the Scottish coast,
she had quite p ossibly never seen a cow before coming to
America. He was sure she knew what milk was, and that it
technically was edible, but she had likely never tasted any .
“A ye, th at’ s quite all right,” he assured her . “My family all
drink milk; it makes the weans grow tall and strong.” And
wouldn’ t come amiss to a nursing mother on lean rations,
which was undoubtedly what Claire had thought.
She nodded, uncertain.
“W ell …  aye, sir . I wasna qui te sure … but the lad was
hungry , and said he’d drink it. So I went to dip him out a bit,
but it— ” She glanced at the bucket with an expression of
fearful s uspicion. “W eel, if it’ s no a de’il’ s got into it, it’ s
something else. It’ s haunted, sir , I’m sure of it!”
He didn ’ t know what made h im look at Aidan at that
moment, but he surprised a flee ting look of deep interest that
vanished immed iately , leaving the boy with a preternaturally
solemn expression.
So i t was with a certain sense of forewarning that he leaned
forward and gingerly lifted the cloth. Even so, he let out a yelp
and jerk ed back , the weighted cloth flying sideways to clack
against the wall.
The malevolent  green eyes th at glared at him from the
middle o f the bucket disappeared and the milk went gollup!,  a
spray of creamy drops erupt ing from the bucket like a
miniature volcano.
“Shit!” he said. Mrs. McCallum  had backed away as far as
she cou ld get and was staring  at the bucket in terror , both
hands clapped across her mouth. Aidan had one hand pressedover his own mouth, and was similarly wide-eyed—but a faint
fizzing sound was audible from his direction.
Roger ’ s heart was pounding from adrenaline—and a strong
desire to wring Aidan McCallum’ s scrawny neck. He wiped
the splattered cream deliberately from his face, then, gritting
his teeth, reached gingerly into the bucket of milk.
It to ok several tr ies to grab the thing, which felt like nothing
so m uch as a very muscular and animated glob of mucus, but
the fourth try succeeded, and h e triumphantly pulled a very
lar ge an d indign ant bullfrog out of the bucket, showering milk
in every direction.
The frog  dug its back legs ferociously into his slippery palm
and broke his grip, launching itself in a soaring leap that
covered half the distance to the door and made Mrs.
McCallum screa m out loud. The startled baby woke and added
to the uproar , w hile the cream-covered frog plopped its way
rapidly out of the door and i nto the rain, leaving yellow
splotches in its wake.
Aidan prudently followed it out at a high rate of speed.
Mrs. McCallum had sat down on  the floor , thrown her apron
over her head, and was having  hysterics under it. The baby
was shri eking, and milk dripped slowly from the edge of the
table, punctuating the patter of rain outside. The roof was
leaking, he saw; long wet streaks darkened the unbarked logs
behind Mrs. McCallum, and she was sitting in a puddle.
W ith a deep sig h, he plucked the baby out of its cradle,
surprising it suf ficiently that it gulped and quit screaming. It
blinked at him, and stuck its fist in its mouth. He had no idea
of its sex; it was an anonymous bundle of rags, with a pinched
wee face and a wary look.
Holding it in on e arm, he crouc hed and put the other round
Mrs. McCallum’ s shoulders, patting her gingerly in hopes of
getting her to stop.
“It’ s all right,” he said. “It was just a frog, ye know .”She’d been moaning like a banshee and uttering small
intermittent screams, and she kept doing that, though the
screams became  less frequent, and the moaning disintegrated
at last into more  or less normal  crying, though she refused to
come out from under the apron.
His thigh muscles were cramped  from squatting, and he was
wet, anyway . W ith a sigh, he lowered himself into the puddle
beside h er and sat, patting her sh oulder every now and then so
she’d know he was still there.
The bab y seemed happy enough, at least; it was sucking its
fist, undisturbed by its mother ’ s fit.
“How old’ s the wean?” he said conversationally , during a
brief pause for b reath. He knew its age approximately , because
it had been born  a week after Orem McCallum’ s death—but it
was something to say . And for as old as it was, it seemed
terribly small and light, at least by contrast to his memories of
Jemmy at that age.
She mumbled something inaudible, but the crying eased of f
into hiccups and sighs. Then she said something else.
“What’ s that, Mrs. McCallum?”
“Why?” she whispered from under the faded calico. “Why
has God brought me here?”
W ell, th at was a bloody good question; he’d asked that one
fairly often himself, but hadn ’ t got back any really good
answers yet.
“W ell … we trust He’ s got a plan of some sort,” he said a
little awkwardly . “W e just don’ t know what it is.”
“A fine plan,” s he said, and so bbed once. “T o bring us all
this way , to this terrible place, and then take my man from me
and leave me here to starve!”
“Oh … it’ s no such a terrible place,” he said, unable to
refute an ything else in her state ment. “The woods and all …
the streams, the mountains … it’ s … um … very pretty . Whenit’ s not raining.” The inanity of this actually made her laugh,
though it quickly devolved into more weeping.
“What?” He put an arm round  her and pulled her a little
closer , both to o f fer comfort, and in order to make out what
she was saying, under her makeshift refuge.
“I m iss the sea,”  she said very softly , and leaned her calico-
swathed head against his shou lder , as though she was very
tired. “I never shall see it again.”
She was very likely right, and he could find nothing to say
in reply .  They sat for some tim e in a silence broken only by
the baby’ s slobbering over its fist.
“I won’ t  let ye starve,” he said  at last, softly . “That’ s all I
can promise, but I do. Y e won’ t  starve.” Muscles cramped, he
got stif fly to his feet, and reached down to one of the small
rough h ands that lay limply in her lap. “Come on, then. Get
up. Y e can feed the wean, while I tidy up a bit.”
THE RAIN HAD CEASED by the time he left, and the clouds
had begun to dr ift apart, leaving patches of pale blue sky . He
paused at a turn in the steep, muddy path to admire a rainbow
—a com plete on e, that arched f rom one side of the sky to the
other , its misty c olors sinking down into the dark wet green of
the dripping mountainside across from him.
It was quiet, save for the splat and drip of water from the
leaves and the g ur gle of water running down a rocky channel
near the trail.
“A c ovenant,” he said softly , ou t loud. “What’ s the promise,
then? Not a pot  of gold at the end.” He shook his head and
went on, grabbing at branches a nd bushes to keep from sliding
down th e mountainside; he didn’ t want to end up like Orem
McCallum, in a tangle of bones at the bottom.
He’d talk to Ja mie, and also to T om Christie and Hiram
Crombie. Among them, they could put out the word, and
ensure the widow McCallum and her children got enough
food. Folk were generous to share—but someone had to ask.He glanced back over his shoulder; the crooked chimney
was just  visible above the trees , but no smoke came from it.
They could gather enough firewood, she said—but wet as it
was, it would b e days before they had anything that would
burn. They needed a shed for the wood, and logs cut, big
enough to burn for a day , not the twigs and fallen branches
Aidan could carry .
As thoug h the thought had summoned him, Aidan came into
view the n. The boy was fishing, squatting on a rock beside a
pool so me thirty feet below , back turned to the trail. His
shoulder blades stuck out through the worn fabric of his shirt,
distinct as tiny angel wings.
The noise of th e water covered Roger ’ s footsteps as he
made hi s way down the rocks. V ery gently , he fitted his hand
around the skinny , pale neck, and the bony shoulders hunched
in surprise.
“Aidan,” he said. “A word wi’ you, if  ye please.”
THE DA RK CAME DOWN on All Hallows’ Eve. W e went to
sleep to the sound of howling wind and pelting rain, and woke
on t he Feast of All Saints to whiteness and lar ge soft flakes
falling down and down in abso lute silence. There is no more
perfect stillness than the solitude in the heart of a snowstorm.
This is the thin time, when the b eloved dead draw near . The
world turns inward, and the c hilling air grows thick with
dreams and mystery . The sky goes from a sharp clear cold
where a million stars burn bright and close, to the gray-pink
cloud that enfolds the earth with the promise of snow .
I took one of Bree’ s matches from its box and lit it, thrilling
to th e tiny leap  of instant flam e, and bent to put it to the
kindling. Snow was falling, and winter had come; the season
of fi re. Candles and hearth fire , that lovely , leaping paradox,
that destruction contained but never tamed, held at a safe
distance to warm and enchant, b ut always, still, with that small
sense of danger .The smell of roasting pumpkins was thick and sweet in the
air . Having ruled the night with  fire, the jack-o’-lanterns went
now to a more peaceful fate as  pies and compost, to join the
gentle rest of the earth before renewal. I had turned the earth in
my garden the d ay before, planting the winter seeds to sleep
and swell, to dream their buried birth.
Now is the time when we reenter the womb of the world,
dreaming the dreams of snow and silence. W aking to the shock
of f rozen lakes under waning moonlight and the cold sun
burning low and blue in the branches of the ice-cased trees,
returning from our brief and necessary labors to food and
story , to the warmth of firelight in the dark.
Around a fire, in the dark, all truths can be told, and heard,
in safety .
I pulled on my woolen stockings, thick petticoats, my
warmest shawl, and went down to poke up the kitchen fire. I
stood watching wisps of steam r ise from the fragrant cauldron,
and felt myself turn inward. The world could go away , and we
would heal.3 9
I AM THE RESURRECTION
November 1773
A  HAMMERING ON THE DOOR roused Roger just before
dawn. N ext to him, Brianna made an inarticulate noise that
experience inter preted as a statement that if he didn’ t get up
and ans wer the door , she woul d—but he’d regret it, and so
would the unfortunate person on the other side.
Resigned, he flung back the quil t and ran a hand through his
tangled hair . The air struck cold on his bare legs, and there was
an icy breath of snow in the air .
“Next time I ma rry someone, I’ll pick a lass who wakes up
cheerful in the morning,” he sai d to the hunched form beneath
the bedclothes.
“Y ou do  that,” said a muf fled voice from under the pillow—
whose indistinct nature did nothing to disguise its hostile
intonation.
The ham mering was repeated, and Jemmy—who did  wake
up cheerful in the mornings—popped up in his trundle,
looking like a redheaded dandelion gone to seed.
“Somebody’ s knocking,” he informed Roger .
“Oh, are they? Mmphm.” Repressing an ur ge to groan, he
rose and went to unbolt the door .
Hiram Crombie stood outside, looking more dour than usual
in the milky ha lf-light. Evidently not a happy riser , either ,
Roger reflected.
“My wife’ s auld mither ’ s passe d i’ the night,” he informed
Roger without preamble.
“Passed what?” asked Jemmy with interest, poking his
disheveled head out from behind Roger ’ s leg. He rubbed oneeye with  a fist, and yawned widely . “Mr . Stornaway passed a
stone—he showed it to me and Germain.”
“Mr . C rombie’ s mother -in-law has died,” Roger said,
putting a quelling hand on Jem ’ s head, with an apologetic
cough toward Crombie. “I’m sorry to hear that, Mr . Crombie.”
“A ye.” Mr . Crombie appeared indif ferent to condolence.
“Murdo Lindsay says as ye ken a bit of Scripture for the
burying. The wife’ s wonderin’ would ye maybe come and say
a word at the grave?”
“Murdo said … oh!” The Dutc h family , that was it. Jamie
had forced him to speak at the  graves. “A ye, of course.” He
cleared his throat by reflex; his voice was desperately hoarse
—as usual in the mornings, until he’d had a cup of something
hot. No wonder Crombie was looking dubious.
“Of cou rse,” he repeated more strongly . “Is there … er …
anything we can do to help?”
Crombie made a small negative gesture.
“The women will have her laid  out by now , I expect,” he
said, with the briefest of glances at the mound Brianna made
in the bed. “W e ’ll start the digg in’ after breakfast. W ith luck,
we’ll have her under before sno w falls.” He lifted a sharp chin
toward an opaque sky the soft gray of Adso’ s belly fur , then
nodded, turned on his heel, and left without further
congenialities.
“Daddy—look!” Roger looked down to see Jem, fingers
hooked in the corners of his mouth, pulled down to simulate
the inve rted “U” of Hiram Crombie’ s customary expression.
Small red brows wrinkled in a  ferocious scowl, making the
resemblance sta rtling. Surprised  into laughter , Roger gasped
and choked, then coughed until he doubled over , wheezing.
“Are yo u all right?” Brianna had unearthed herself and was
sitting up in bed, squint-eyed with sleep, but looking
concerned.
“A ye, fine.” The words came out in a thready wheeze,
nearly soundless. He took a breath and hawked deeply ,expectorating a repellent glob into his hand, for lack of a
handkerchief.
“Eew!” said the tender wife of his bosom, recoiling.
“Lemme see, Daddy!” said his son and heir , jostling for a
look. “Eeew!”
Roger st epped outside and wiped his hand in the wet grass
by t he door . It  was cold out, so early , but Crombie was
undoubtedly rig ht; snow was on the way again. The air had
that soft, muf fled feel to it.
“So old Mrs. W ilson is dead?” Brianna had come out after
him, a shawl wrapped round her shoulders. “That’ s too bad.
Imagine coming so far , and th en dying in a strange place,
before you’ve even had time to settle.”
“W ell, she had her family with  her , at least. I expect she
wouldna have wanted to be left alone to die in Scotland.”
“Mm.” B ree brushed strands of hair of f her cheeks; she’d
put her hair into a thick plait fo r sleeping, but a good bit of it
had escaped from captivity and was waving up round her face
in the cold, humid air . “Should I go up there, do you think?”
“Pay our respects? He said they’ve laid the old lady out
already .”
She snorted, white wisps of breath from her nostrils
momentarily making him think of dragons.
“It c an’ t be late r than seven A.M. ; i t’ s still bloody  dark out!
And I don’ t believe for a minute that his wife and sister have
been lay ing out the old lady by candlelight. Hiram would balk
at the expense of the extra candle, for one thing. No, he felt
itchy about asking a favor , so he was trying to get under your
skin about your wife being a lazy slattern.”
That was perceptive, Roger thought, amused—particularly
as she hadn’ t see n Crombie’ s eloquent glance at her recumbent
form.
“What’ s a slattern?” Jemmy inq uired, picking up instantly
on anything vaguely improper -sounding.“That’ s a lady who’ s no lady ,” Roger informed him. “And a
bad housekeeper , to boot.”
“That’ s one of the words that Mrs. Bug will wash out your
mouth w ith soap if she hears you say it,” amended his wife
with ungrammatical acuity .
Roger w as still attired in nothi ng but a nightshirt, and his
legs and  feet were freezing. Jem was hopping around barefoot,
too, but without the slightest sign of being cold.
“Mummy is not one,” Roger said firmly , taking Jem’ s hand.
“Come on, chum, let’ s nip up  to the privy while Mummy
makes breakfast.”
“Thanks for the vote of confidence,” Brianna said, yawning.
“I’ll take up a jar of honey o r something to the Crombies
later .”
“I go, too,” Jemmy announced promptly .
Brianna hesitate d for a moment , then looked at Roger and
raised her brows. Jem had never seen a dead person.
Roger lifted one shoulder . It w ould have been a peaceful
death, an d it was, God knew , a f act of life on the mountain. He
didn’ t su ppose that seeing Mrs. W ilson’ s body would give the
child nig htmares—though knowing Jem, it was  quit e lik ely to
lead to a numbe r of loud and embarrassing public questions. A
bit of preparato ry explanation might not be out of place, he
reflected.
“Sure,” he told Jem. “But first we have to go up to the Big
House after breakfast, and borrow a Bible from Grandda.”
HE FOU ND JAMIE at breakfast, the warm oatmeal smell of
fresh parritch wrapping him like a blanket as he stepped into
the k itchen. Before he could exp lain his errand, Mrs. Bug had
sat him down with a bowl of his own, a jug of honey , a plate of
savory fried bacon, hot toast dripping butter , and a fresh cup of
something dark and fragrant tha t looked like cof fee. Jem was
next to him, alr eady smeared with honey and buttered to the
ears. For a traitorous instant, he wondered whether Briannawas per haps a bit of a sluggard, though certainly never a
slattern.
Then he  glanced  across the tab le at Claire, uncombed hair
standing on end as she blinked sleepily at him over the toast,
and generously concluded that it probably wasn’ t a conscious
choice on Bree’ s part, but rather the influence of genetics.
Claire roused at once, though, when he explained his errand,
between bites of bacon and toast.
“Old Mrs. W ilson?” she asked w ith interest. “What did she
die of, did Mr . Crombie say?”
Roger shook his head, swallowing oatmeal.
“Only that she’d passed in the night. I suppose they found
her dead. Her heart, maybe— she must have been at least
eighty .”
“She was about five years older than I am,” Claire said
dryly . “She told me.”
“Oh. Mmphm.” Clearing his throat hurt, and he took a sip of
the hot, dark stuf f in his cup. It was a brew of roasted chicory
and acorns, but not that bad.
“I hope ye didna tell her how old you  are, Sassenach.” Jamie
reached across and snared the last piece of toast. Mrs. Bug,
ever -vigilant, whisked the plate away to refill it.
“I’m not that careless,” Claire said, dabbing a forefinger
delicately into a smear of honey  and licking it. “They already
think I’v e made some sort of pact with the devil; if I told them
my age, they’d be sure of it.”
Roger chuckled, but thought privately that she was right.
The marks of her ordeal had nearly vanished, bruises faded
and the bridge of her nose he aled straight and clean. Even
unkempt and puf fy-eyed from sleep, she was more than
handsome, with lovely skin, lushly thick curly hair , and an
elegance of feature undreamt of among the Highland fisher -
folk. T o say nothing of the eyes, sherry-gold and startling.Add to these natural gifts the twentieth-century practices of
nutrition and hygiene—she had all of her teeth, white and
straight—and she easily appeared a good twenty years
younger than other women of h er own age. He found that a
comforting thought; perhaps Bree had inherited the art of
aging be autifully from her mother , as well. He could always
make his own breakfast, after all.
Jamie had finished his own meal and gone to fetch the
Bible. He came back, laying it beside Roger ’ s plate.
“W e’ll g o up with ye to the burying,” he said, nodding at the
book. “Mrs. Bug—can ye mayb e put up a wee basket for the
Crombies?”
“Done it already ,” she informed him, and plunked a lar ge
basket o n the table before him , covered with a napkin and
bulging with goodies. “Y e’ll tak e it, then? I must go tell Arch
and fetc h my good shawl, and we’ll see ye at the graveside,
aye?”
Brianna came in then, yawning but well-groomed, and set
about making Jem presentable while Claire vanished to find
cap and shawl. R oger picked up the Bible, intending to thumb
through the Psalms for som ething suitably somber but
uplifting.
“Maybe the T wenty-third?” he said, half to himself. “Nice
and sho rt. Always a classic. A nd it does mention death, at
least.”
“Are you going to give a eulogy?” Brianna asked,
interested. “Or a sermon?”
“Oh, Ch rist, I hadn’ t thought of that,” he said in dismay . He
cleared his throat experimentally . “Is there more cof fee?”
He’d been to a great many funerals in Inverness presided
over by  the Reverend, and wa s well aware that the paying
customers considered such an event a dismal failure unless the
preaching went on for at least half an hour . Granted, beggars
couldn’ t be choosers, and the Crombies couldn’ t expect—“Why do  you have a Protestant Bible, Da?” Bree paused in
the act of disen tangling a piece of toast from Jemmy’ s hair ,
peering over Roger ’ s shoulder .
Surprised, he shut the cover , bu t she was right; King James
V ersion,  i t said, the lette rs of the inscription nearly worn away .
“It was given to me,” Jamie said. The reply was casual, but
Roger g lanced u p; there was so mething odd in Jamie’ s voice.
Brianna heard it, too; she shot her father a brief, sharp look,
but his face was  tranquil as he took a final bite of bacon and
wiped his lips.
“D’ye w ant a dram in your cof fee, Roger Mac?” he said,
nodding at Roger ’ s cup, as tho ugh it were the most natural
thing in the world to of fer whisky with breakfast.
In fact, the notion sounded really appealing, given the
immediate prospects, but Roger shook his head.
“No, thanks; I’ll do.”
“Are yo u sure?”  Brianna transferred the sharp look to him.
“Maybe you should. For your throat.”
“It’ll be  fine,” he said shortly .  He was worried about his
voice himself; he didn’ t need solicitude from the redheaded
contingent, all three of whom were giving him thoughtful
looks that he in terpreted as casting extreme doubt upon his
speaking abilities. Whisky might help his throat, but he
doubted it would do much for  his preaching—and the last
thing he  wanted  was to show up at a funeral reeking of strong
drink in front of a lot of strict teetotalers.
“V inegar ,” advised Mrs. Bug, bending to take away his
plate. “Hot vinegar ’ s the thing. Cuts the phlegm, aye?”
“I’ll bet it would,” Roger said, smiling despite his
misgivings. “Bu t I think I won’ t, Mrs. Bug, thanks.” He’d
awakened with a slight sore throat, and hoped the consumption
of breakfast would cure it. It hadn’ t, and the thought of
drinking hot vinegar made his tonsils seize up.He h eld out his cup for more chicory cof fee, instead, and set
his mind to the task ahead.
“Now—does anyone know anything about old Mrs.
W ilson?”
“She’ s dead,” Jemmy piped up confidently . Everybody
laughed, and Jem looked confused, but then joined the
laughter , though plainly having not the slightest idea what was
funny .
“Good start, sport.” Roger reached out and brushed crumbs
from Jemmy’ s shirtfront. “Mig ht be a point, at that. The
Reverend had a decent sermon o n something in the Epistles—
the wages of sin  is death, but the gift of God is eternal life. I
heard hi m give it more than once. What d’ye think?” He raised
a b row at Briann a, who frowned in thought and picked up the
Bible.
“That would probably work. Does this thing have a
concordance?”
“No.” Jamie put down his cof fee cup. “It’ s in Romans,
chapter six, though.” Seeing the looks of surprise turned upon
him, he flushed slightly , and jerked his head toward the Bible.
“I ha d th at book  in prison,” he said. “I read it. Come along,
a bhailach,  are ye ready now?”
THE W EA THER W AS louring , clouds threatening anything
from freezing rain to the fir st snow of the season, and
occasional cold gusts of wind catching cloaks and skirts,
bellying them out like sails. The men held tight to their hats,
and the women huddled deep in their hoods, all walking with
their hea ds down , like sheep pus hing stubbornly into the wind.
“Great w eather for a funeral,” Brianna murmured, pulling
her cloak tight around her after one such gust.
“Mmphm.” Roger responded automatically , obviously
unaware of what she’d said, but registering that she’d spoken.
His brow was furrowed, and he  seemed tight-lipped and pale.She put a hand on his arm, squ eezing in reassurance, and he
glanced at her with a faint smile, his face easing.
An unea rthly w ail cut through the air , and Brianna froze,
clutching Roger ’ s arm. It rose to a shriek, then broke in a
series of  short, jerky gulps, coming down a scale of sobs like a
dead body rolling down a staircase.
Gooseflesh pric kled down her spine and her stomach
clenched. She glanced at Roger; he looked nearly as pale as
she felt, though he pressed her hand reassuringly .
“That will be the ban-tr eim, ” h er father rem arked calmly . “I
didna ken there was one.”
“Neither did I,” said her mothe r . “Who do you suppose it
is?” She  had startled, too, at th e sound of it, but now looked
merely interested.
Roger had been holding his breath, too; he let it out now ,
with a small rattling sound, and cleared his throat.
“A mourning woman,” he said. The words emer ged thickly ,
and he cleared h is throat again, much harder . “They , um, keen.
After the cof fin.”
The voic e rose again out of the wood, this time with a more
deliberate sound. Brianna thought there were words in the
wailing, but couldn’ t make them out. W endigo.  The word came
unbidden into her mind, and she shivered convulsively . Jemmy
whimpered, trying to burrow inside his grandfather ’ s coat.
“It’ s nothing to fear , a bhailach. ” He patted Jemmy on the
back. Je m appeared unconvinced, and put his thumb in his
mouth, huddling round-eyed into Jamie’ s chest as the wailing
faded into moans.
“W ell, come, then, we’ll meet h er , shall we?” Jamie turned
aside and began making his w ay into the forest, toward the
voice.
There was nothing to do but follow . Brianna squeezed
Roger ’ s arm, but left him, wa lking close to her father so
Jemmy could see her and be reassured.“It’ s oka y , pal,”  she said softly . The weather was growing
colder; h er breath puf fed out in  wisps of white. The end of
Jemmy’ s nose was red and his eyes seemed a little pink around
the edges—was he catching a cold, too?
She put out a hand to touch his forehead, but just then the
voice broke out afresh. This time, though, something seemed
to have happened to it. It was a high, thready sound, not the
robust k eening they’d heard before. And uncertain—like an
apprentice ghost, she thought in uneasy jest.
An appr entice it proved to be, though not a ghost. Her father
ducked under a low pine and she followed him, emer ging in a
clearing facing two surprised women. Or rather , a woman and
a teenag ed girl, with shawls wrapped over their heads. She
knew them, but what were their names?
“Maduinn mhath, maighistear ,”  the older woman said,
recovering from  her surprise and dropping into a low curtsy to
Jamie. Good morn to you, sir .
“And to you, my mistresses,” he replied, also in Gaelic.
“Good m orn, Mrs. Gwilty ,” Roger said in his soft, hoarse
voice. “And to you, a nighean, ” he added, bowing courteously
to the girl. Olanna, that was it; Brianna recalled the round face,
just like  the “O” that began her  name. She was Mrs. Gwilty’ s
… daughter? Or her niece?
“Ach, bo nny boy ,” the girl croo ned, reaching out a finger to
touch Jem’ s rounded cheek. He pulled back a little and sucked
harder on his thumb, watching h er suspiciously under the edge
of his blue woolly bonnet.
The women spoke no English, but Brianna’ s Gaelic was
suf ficient by now to allow her to follow the conversation, if
not to join fluently in it. Mrs. Gwilty was, she explained,
showing her niece the way of a proper cor onach.
“And a fine job of work you will make of it between you,
I’m sure,” Jamie said politely .
Mrs. Gwilty snif fed, and gave her niece a disparaging look.“Mmphm,” she said. “A voice like a bat farting, but she is
the o nly woman left of my famil y , and I shall not live forever .”
Roger made a small choking noise, which he hastily
developed into a convincing cough. Olanna’ s pleasant round
face, already flushed from the cold, went a blotchy red, but she
said nothing, merely cast her e yes down and huddled deeper
into her shawl. It was a dark brown homespun, Brianna saw;
Mrs. Gwilty’ s was a fine wool, dyed black—and if it was a
trifle frayed around the edges, sh e wore it still with the dignity
of her profession.
“It is sorrowful we are for you,” Jamie said, in formal
condolence. “Sh e who is gone … ?” He paused in delicate
inquiry .
“My fath er ’ s sis ter ,” answered Mrs. Gwilty promptly . “W oe,
woe, tha t she should be buried  among strangers.” She had a
lean, underfed face, the spare flesh deeply hollowed and
bruised-looking round dark ey es. She turned these deep-set
eyes on Jemmy , who promptly g rabbed the edge of his bonnet
and pull ed it down over his face. Seeing the dark, bottomless
eyes sw ivel in her direction, Brianna was hard-pressed not to
do the same.
“I hope—that her shade will find comfort. W ith—with your
family being here,” Claire said, in her halting Gaelic. It
sounded most peculiar in her mother ’ s English accent, and
Brianna saw her father bite his lower lip in order not to smile.
“She will not lac k company for long.” Olanna blurted it out,
then, catching Jamie’ s eye, went beet-red and buried her nose
in her shawl.
This odd statement seemed to m ake sense to her father , who
nodded.
“Och, so? Who is it ails?” H e looked at her mother in
question, but she shook her head slightly . If anyone was sick,
they hadn’ t sought her help.
Mrs. Gwilty’ s long, seamed upper lip pressed down over
dreadful teeth.“Seaumais Buch an,” she remarked with grim satisfaction.
“He lies  fevered  and his chest will kill him before the week is
out, but we’ve beaten him. A fortunate thing.”
“What?” said Claire, frowning in bewilderment.
Mrs. Gwilty’ s eyes narrowed at her .
“The last person buried in a g raveyard must stand watch
over it, Sassenach,” Jamie explained in English. “Until another
comes to take his place.”
Switching smoothly back to Gaelic, he said, “Fortunate is
she, and the more fortunate, in having such bean-tr eim  to
follow h er .” He put a hand into  his pocket and handed over a
coin, wh ich Mrs. Gwilty glanced at, then blinked and looked
again.
“Ah,” sh e said, gratified. “W ell,  we will do our best, the girl
and I. Come then, a nighean,  let me hear you.”
Olanna, thus pressed to perform before company , looked
terrified. Under her aunt’ s monitory eye, though, there was no
escape. Closing her eyes, she inflated her chest, thrust back her
shoulders, and emitted a piercing,
“EEEEEEEEEEEEEEeeeeeeeeeeeEEEEEEeeeEEE-uh-Ee-uh-
Ee-uh,” before breaking of f, gasping for breath.
Roger flinched as though the sound were bamboo splinters
being shoved under his fingernails and Claire’ s mouth dropped
open. Jemmy’ s shoulders were hunched up round his ears, and
he clung to his grandfather ’ s co at like a small blue bur . Even
Jamie looked a little startled.
“Not bad,” said Mrs. Gwilty judiciously . “Perhaps it will not
be a complete d isgrace. I am he aring that Hiram asked you to
speak a word?” she added with a disparaging glance at Roger .
“He has,” Roger replied, still  hoarse, but as firmly as
possible. “I am honored.”
Mrs. Gwilty did not reply to thi s, but merely looked him up
and down, then, shaking her head, turned her back and raised
her arms.“AaaaaaaaAAAAAAAAaaaaAAAAAAAaaaIIIIeeeeeeee,”
she wailed, in a voice that made Brianna feel ice crystals in her
blood. “ W oe, woe, woooooooooooe!
AAaayaaaAAaayaaaAAhaaaaahaaa! W oe is come to the house
of Crombie—W oe!”
Dutifully turning  her back on them, as well, Olanna joined
in w ith a descant wail of her ow n. Claire rather untactfully but
practically put her fingers in her ears.
“ How  mu ch did you  give them?” she asked Jamie in
English.
Jamie’ s shoulders shook briefly , and he hastily ushered her
away , a firm hand on her elbow .
Beside B rianna, Roger swallowed, the sound just audible
under the noise.
“Y ou should have had that drink,” she said to him.
“I know ,” he said hoarsely , and sneezed.
“HA VE YOU EVEN heard of Seaumais Buchan?” I asked
Jamie, a s we picked our way across the sodden earth of the
Crombie’ s dooryard. “Who is he?”
“Oh, I’ve heard of him, aye,” he replied, putting an arm
round m e to help swing me across a fetid puddle of what
looked l ike goat urine. “Oof. G od, you’re a solid wee thing,
Sassenach.”
“That’ s the basket,” I replied abs ently . “I believe Mrs. Bug’ s
put lead shot in it. Or maybe only fruitcake. Who is he, then?
One of the fisher -folk?”
“A ye. H e’ s great-uncle to Maisie MacArdle, her who’ s
marrit to  him that was a boatbuilder . Y e recall her? Red hair
and a verra long nose, six bairns.”
“V aguely . However do you remember these things?” I
demanded, but he merely smiled, and of fered me his arm. I
took it, and w e strode gravely through the mud and thescattered straw laid down across  it, the laird and his lady come
to the funeral.
The doo r of the cabin was open  despite the cold, to let the
spirit of the dead go out. Fortunately , it also let a little light
come in,  as the c abin was crudely built and had no windows. It
was also completely packed with people, most of whom had
not bathed any time in the preceding four months.
I was no stranger to claustrophobic cabins or unwashed
bodies, though, and since I knew  that one of the bodies present
was probably clean but certain ly dead, I had already begun
breathing through my mouth by the time one of the Crombie
daughters, shawled and red-eyed, invited us in.
Grannie W ilson was laid out on  the table with a candle at
her h ead, wrapped in the shroud she had no doubt woven as a
new bride; the li nen cloth was yellowed and creased with age,
but clean  and soft in the candlelight, embroidered on the edges
with a simple pa ttern of vine leaves. It had been carefully kept,
brought from Scotland at the cost of who knew what pains.
Jamie paused at the door , remo ving his hat, and murmured
formal c ondolences, which the Crombies, male and female,
accepted with nods and grunts, respectively . I handed over the
basket o f food and nodded back, with what I hoped was a
suitable expression of dignified sympathy , keeping an eye on
Jemmy .
Brianna had done her best to e xplain to him, but I had no
idea wh at he might make of the situation—or the corpse. He
had bee n persua ded with some dif ficulty to emer ge from his
bonnet, and was looking round now with interest, his cowlick
standing on end.
“Is that the dea d lady , Grandma?” he whispered loudly to
me, pointing at the body .
“Y es, dear ,” I said, with an u neasy glance at old Mrs.
W ilson. She looked perfectly all right, though, done up
properly in her b est cap with a bandage under her jaw to keep
her mou th closed, dry eyelids sealed against the glimmer ofthe c andle. I did n’ t think Jemmy had ever met the old lady in
life; ther e was no real reason for him to be upset at seeing her
dead—and he’d been taken hunting regularly since he could
walk; he  certainly understood the concept of death. Besides, a
corpse was definitely anticlima ctic, after our encounter with
the bean-tr eim.  Still …
“W e’ll pay our respects now , lad,” Jamie said quietly to
him, and  set him on the floor . I caught Jamie’ s glance at the
door , where Roger and Bree were murmuring condolences in
their turn, and realized he had been waiting for them to catch
up, so that they could watch him, and know what to do next.
He l ed Jemmy t hrough the press of people, who gave way
respectfully , and up to the table, where he laid his hand on the
corpse’ s chest. Oh, so it was that sort of funeral.
At s ome Highland funerals, it was the custom for everyone
to to uch the bo dy , so that the dead person should not haunt
them. I doubted  that Grannie W ilson would have any interest
in ha unting me, but care never hurt—and I did have an uneasy
memory of a skull with silver  fillings in its teeth, and my
encounter with what might hav e been its possessor , seen by
corpse-light on a black mountain night. Despite myself, I
glanced at the candle, but it seemed a perfectly normal thing of
brown beeswax, pleasantly f ragrant and leaning a little
crooked in its pottery candlestick.
Steeling myself, I leaned over a nd laid my own hand gently
on the shroud. An earthenware saucer , holding a piece of bread
and a heap of salt, sat on the dead woman’ s chest, and a small
wooden bowl filled with dark l iquid—wine?—sat beside her
on th e table. What with the good beeswax candle, the salt, and
the bean-tr eim,  it looked as though Hiram Crombie was trying
to do  right by his late mother -in-law—though I wouldn’ t put it
past him to thriftily reuse the salt after the funeral.
Something seemed wrong, though; an air of uneasiness
curled a mong th e cracked boots and rag-wrapped feet of the
crowd like the cold draft from the door . At first I had thought
it might  be due to our presence , but that wasn’ t it; there hadbeen a brief exhalation of approval when Jamie approached
the body .
Jamie whispered to Jemmy , then boosted him up, legs
dangling, to touch the corpse. H e showed no reluctance, and
peered into the dead woman’ s waxen face with interest.
“What’ s that for?” he asked loudly , reaching for the bread.
“Is she going to eat it?”
Jamie grabbed his wrist, and pla nted his hand firmly on the
shroud instead.
“That’ s for the sin-eater , a bhailach.  Leave it, aye?”
“What’ s a—”
“Later .” No one ar gued with Ja mie when he used that tone
of voice, and Jemmy subsided, putting his thumb back in his
mouth a s Jamie set him down. B ree came up and scooped him
into her arms, belatedly remembering to touch the corpse
herself, and murmur , “God rest you.”
Then Roger stepped forward, and there was a stir of interest
among the crowd.
He l ooked pale, but composed. H is face was lean and rather
ascetic, usually saved from sternness by the gentleness of his
eyes and  a mobile mouth, ready to laugh. This was no time for
laughter , though, and his eyes were bleak in the dim light.
He laid a hand on the dead woman’ s chest, and bowed his
head. I wasn’ t sure whether he was praying for the repose of
her soul , or for inspiration, but he stayed that way for more
than minute. The crowd watched respectfully , with no sound
save cou ghs and the clearing of throats. Roger wasn’ t the only
one catching a cold, I thought— and thought suddenly again of
Seaumais Buchan.
“He lies fever ed and his chest w ill kill him befor e the week
is out.”  So Mr s. Gwilty had said. Pneumonia, perhaps—or
bronchitis, or even consumption. And no one had told me.
I felt a slight pang at that, equal parts annoyance, guilt, and
unease. I knew the new tenan ts didn’ t yet trust me; I hadthought that I s hould allow them to get used to me before I
started dropping in on them at random. Many of them would
never have seen an English p erson, before coming to the
colonies—and I  was well aware of their attitude toward both
Sassenachs and Catholics.
But evid ently there was now a man dying virtually on my
doorstep—and I hadn’ t even known of his existence, let alone
his illness.
Should I go to see him, as soon as the funeral was over? But
where in  bloody hell did the man live? It couldn’ t be very
close; I did  k now all the fisher -folk who had settled down the
mountain; the MacArdles must b e up across the ridge. I stole a
look at the door , trying to judge how soon the threatening
clouds would cut loose their burden of snow .
There were shuf flings and the murmurs of low speech
outside; more people had arrived, coming up from the nearby
hollows, crowdi ng round the door . I caught the words, “dean
caithris,”  in a questioning tone, and suddenly realized what
was odd about the present occasion.
There was no wa ke. Customarily , the body would have been
washed and laid out, but then kept on display for a day or two,
to allow  everyone in the area time to come and pay their
regards. Listening intently , I caught a distinct tone of
disgruntlement a nd surprise—th e neighbors thought this haste
unseemly .
“Why isn’ t there a wake?” I wh ispered to Jamie. He lifted
one shoulder a fraction of an inch, but nodded toward the door ,
and the muf fled sky beyond.
“There’ s going to be a great deal of snow by nightfall, a
Sor cha, ” he said. “And likely to go on for days, by the looks of
it. I wouldna want to be havin g to dig a grave and bury a
cof fin in the m idst of that, myself. And should it snow for
days, where are they to put the body in the meantime?”
“That’ s true, Mac Dubh, ” said Kenny Lindsay , overhearing.
He glanced round at the peop le near us, and edged closer ,lowering his voice. “But it’ s tru e, too, as Hiram Crombie’ s no
owerfond of the auld bes—er , h is good-mother .” He raised his
chin a fraction, indicating the c orpse. “Some say as he canna
get the auld w oman under gro und fast enough—before she
changes her mind, aye?” He grin ned briefly , and Jamie hid his
own smile, looking down.
“Saves a  bit on the food, too, I suppose.” Hiram’ s reputation
as a cheapska te was well-known—which was saying
something, among the thrifty but hospitable Highlanders.
A fr esh bustle was taking plac e outside, as new arrivals
came. T here wa s a sort of congestion at the door , as someone
sought t o press inside, though th e house was filled shoulder to
shoulder , with the only bit of o pen floor space left under the
table on which Mrs. W ilson reposed.
The peo ple nea r the door gave  way reluctantly , and Mrs.
Bug sur ged into  the cabin, array ed in her best cap and shawl,
Arch at her shoulder .
“Y e for got the whisky , sir ,” she informed Jamie, handing
him a corked b ottle. Looking round, she at once spotted the
Crombies and bowed to them ceremoniously , murmuring
sympathy . Bobbing upright, she set her cap straight and looked
expectantly round. Clearly , the festivities could now
commence.
Hiram Crombie glanced round, then nodded to Roger .
Roger drew himself up slightly , nodded back, and began. He
spoke simply for a few minutes, generalities about the
preciousness of life, the enormity of death, and the importance
of kin and neigh bors in facing such things. This all seemed to
be goin g over well with the punters, who were nodding
slightly in approval and seemed to be settling down in
expectation of decent entertainment.
Roger p aused to cough and blow  his nose, then shifted into
what ap peared t o be some versi on of the Presbyterian funeral
service—or wh at he recalled of it, from his life with the
Reverend W akefield.This too  seemed to be acceptab le. Bree seemed to relax a
little, and put Jemmy down.
It was going well … and yet I w as still conscious of a faint
sense of  uneasiness. Part of tha t, of course, was that I could
see Roger . The growing warmth  of the cabin was making his
nose ru n; he kept his handkerchief in his hand, dabbing
furtively and now and then s topping to blow his nose as
discreetly as possible.
Phlegm, though, runs downhill. And as the congestion got
worse, it began to af fect his vulnerable throat. The choked note
in his voice, alw ays present, was getting noticeably worse. He
was having to clear his throat repeatedly , in order to speak.
Beside me, Jemmy stirred restively , and from the corner of
my eye, I saw Bree put a hand  on his head to quiet him. He
looked up at her , but her attention was fixed anxiously on
Roger .
“W e giv e thanks  to God for the life of this woman,” he said,
and pau sed to clear his throat— again. I found myself doing it
with him in sheer nervous sympathy .
“She is a servan t of God, faithful and true, and now praises
Him bef ore His throne, with th e sa—” I saw sudden doubt
flicker a cross his face as to whether his present congregation
countenanced th e concept of saints, or would consider such a
mention to be Romish heresy . He coughed, and resumed,
“W ith the angels.”
Evidently angels were innocuous; the faces around me
looked somber ,  but unof fended. Exhaling visibly , Roger
picked up the l ittle green Bible and opened it at a marked
page.
“Let us speak together a psalm in praise of Him who—” He
glanced at the page and, too l ate, realized the dif ficulty of
translating an English psalm into Gaelic on the wing.
He c leared his throat explosively , and half a dozen throats
among t he crowd echoed him in reflex. On my other side,
Jamie murmured, “Oh, God,” in heartfelt prayer .Jemmy tugged at his mother ’ s s kirt, whispering something,
but was peremptorily shushed. I could see Bree yearning
toward Roger , body tensed in the ur gent desire to help
somehow , if only by mental telepathy .
W ith no  alternative in sight, Rog er began to read the psalm,
haltingly . Half the crowd had ta ken him at his word when he
invited them to “speak together ,” and were reciting the psalm
from memory—several times faster than he could read.
I clo sed my eye s, unable to wat ch, but there was no way to
avoid hearing, as the congregation ripped through the psalm
and fell silent, w aiting in dour patience for Roger to stumble
his way to the end. Which he did, doggedly .
“Amen,” said Jamie loudly . And alone. I opened my eyes to
find everyone staring at us, w ith looks ranging from mild
surprise to glowering hostility . Jamie took a deep breath and
let it out, very slowly .
“Jesus. Christ,” he said very softly .
A bead of swea t ran down Roger ’ s cheek, and he wiped it
away with the sleeve of his coat.
“W ould anyone  wish to say a few words regarding the
deceased?” he asked, glancing from face to face. Silence and
the whine of the wind answered him.
He cleared his throat, and someone snickered.
“Grannie—” whispered Jemmy , tugging on my skirt.
“Shh.”
“But Grandma —” The sense of ur gency in his voice made
me turn and look down at him.
“Do you need to go to the privy?” I whispered, bending
down to him. He  shook his head , violently enough to make the
heavy mop of red-gold hair flop to and fro on his forehead.
“O, God , our Heavenly Father , who art leading us through
the c hanges of time to the rest a nd blessedness of eternity , be
Thou near to us now , to comfort and to uphold.”I gla nced up, to see that Roger h ad laid his hand once more
on th e corpse, ev idently deciding to bring the proceedings to a
close. From the relief evident in  his face and voice, I thought
he must  be falling back on some accustomed prayer from the
Book of  Common W orship, familiar enough to him that he
could manage it with fair fluency in Gaelic.
“Make us to know that Thy children are precious in Thy
sight… .” He stopped, visibly struggling; the muscles of his
throat worked, trying vainly to c lear the obstruction in silence,
but it was no good.
“Err … HRRM!” A sound, not  quite laughter , ran through
the room, and B ree made a sm all rumbling noise in her own
throat, like a volcano getting ready to spew lava.
“Grannie!”
“Shh!”
“… thy sight. That they … live evermore with Thee and that
Thy mercy—”
“Grannie!”
Jemmy was wiggling as though a colony of ants had taken
up residence in his breeches, an expression of agonized
ur gency on his face.
“I am  the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord; he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead … rr -hm … yet shall he
live—” W ith the end in sight, Roger was making a gallant
finish, forcing his voice past its  limits, hoarser than ever and
cracking on every other word, but firm and loud.
“Just a minute, ” I hissed. “I’ll take you out in a—”
“No, Grannie! Look! ”
I fol lowed his outthrust finger , and for a moment, thought
he was pointing at his father . But he wasn’ t.
Old Mrs. W ilson had opened her eyes.
THERE W AS AN INST ANT’S silence, as everyone’ s eyes
fastened at once on Mrs. W ilso n. Then there was a collective
gasp, an d an instinctive stepping back, with shrieks of dismay
and crie s of pain as toes were trodden on and people squashed
against the unyielding rough logs of the walls.
Jamie g rabbed Jemmy up of f th e floor in time to save his
being cr ushed, i nflated his lungs, and bellowed, “Sheas!”  at
the t op o f his voice. Such was his volume that the crowd did
indeed freeze momentarily—long enough for him to thrust
Jemmy into Brianna’ s arms and elbow his way toward the
table.
Roger had got hold of the erstwhile corpse, and was lifting
her into a sitting position, her hand feebly flapping at the
bandage round her jaws. I pushed after Jamie, ruthlessly
shoving people out of the way .
“Give her a bit of air , please,” I said, raising my voice. The
stunned silence  was giving w ay to a rising murmur of
excitement, but this quelled as I  fumbled to untie the bandage.
The room waited in quivering expectation as the corpse
worked stif f jaws.
“Where am I?” she said in a quavering voice. Her gaze
passed d isbelievingly round the room, settling at last on her
daughter ’ s face.
“Mairi?” she said dubiously , and Mrs. Crombie rushed
forward and fell on her knee s, bursting into tears as she
gripped her mother ’ s hands.
“A Math air! A Mathair!”  she  cried. The old woman set a
trembling hand on her daughter ’ s hair , looking as though she
were not quite sure she was real.
I, mean while, had been doing my best to check the old
lady’ s vi tal signs, which were no t all that vital, but nonetheless
fairly go od for someone who ha d been dead a moment before.
Respiration ver y shallow , labored, a color like week-old
oatmeal, cold, clammy skin desp ite the heat in the room, and Icouldn’ t find a pulse at all—thou gh plainly she must have one.
Mustn’ t she?
“How do you feel?” I asked.
She put a trembling hand to her belly .
“I do feel that wee bit poorly ,” she whispered.
I pu t my  own hand on her abdo men, and felt it instantly . A
pulse, where no pulse should b e. It was irregular , stumbling,
and bumping—but most assuredly there.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” I said. I didn’ t say it loudly , but
Mrs. Crombie gasped, and I s aw her apron twitch, as she
doubtless made the horns beneath it.
I had n’ t time to bother with apology , but stood and grabbed
Roger by the sleeve, pulling him aside.
“She ha s an aortic aneurysm,” I said to him very softly .
“She must have been bleeding internally for some time,
enough to make her lose consciousness and seem cold. It’ s
going to rupture very  soon, and then she’ll die for real.”
He s wallowed audibly , his face v ery pale, but said only , “Do
you know how long?”
I glanced at Mrs. W ilson; her face was the same gray as the
snow-laden sky , and her eyes were going in and out of focus
like the flickering of a candle in a wind.
“I see,” Roger s aid, though I ha dn’ t spoken. He took a deep
breath and cleared his throat.
The crowd, which had been hissing amongst themselves like
a flock of agitated geese, ceased at once. Every eye in the
place was riveted on the tableau before them.
“This ou r sister has been restored to life, as we all shall be
one day by the g race of God,” R oger said softly . “It is a sign to
us, of hope and faith. She will g o soon again to the arms of the
angels, but has come back to us for a moment, to bring us
assurance of God’ s love.” He paused a moment, obviouslygroping for something further to say . He cleared his throat and
bent his head toward Mrs. W ilson’ s.
“Did you … wish to say a nything, O, mother?” he
whispered in Gaelic.
“A ye, I do.” Mrs. W ilson seemed to be gaining strength—
and with it, indi gnation. A faint pinkness showed in her waxy
cheeks as she glared round at the crowd.
“What sort of wake is this,  Hiram  Crombie?” she
demanded, fixing her son-in-law with a gimlet eye. “I see nay
food laid out, nay drink—and what is this?” Her voice rose in
a furiou s squeak, her eye havin g fallen on the plate of bread
and salt, which Roger had hastily set aside when he lifted her .
“Why—” She looked wildly round at the assembled crowd,
and the truth of it dawned upon her . Her sunken eyes bulged.
“Why …  ye shameless skinflint! This is nay wake at all! Y e’ve
meant to bury m e wi’ nothing b ut a crust o’ bread and a drap
o’ wine for the sin-eater , and a wonder ye spared that ! Nay
doot ye’ ll thieve the winding c laes from my corpse to make
cloots for your snotty-nosed bairns, and where’ s my good
brooch I said I wanted to be buried with?” One scrawny hand
closed on her shrunken bosom, catching a fistful of wilted
linen.
“Mairi! My brooch!”
“Here i t is, Mother , here it is!” Poor Mrs. Crombie,
altogether undone, was fumbling in her pocket, sobbing and
gasping. “I put it away to be safe—I meant to put it on ye
before—before …” She came out with an ugly lump of
garnets, which her mother snatched from her , cradling it
against her breast, and glaring round with jealous suspicion.
Clearly she suspected her neigh bors of waiting the chance to
steal it from her  body; I heard an of fended inhalation from the
woman standing behind me, but had no time to turn and see
who it was.
“Now , now ,” I s aid, using my best soothing bedside manner .
“I’m sur e everything will be all right.” Aside fr om the fact thatyou’r e going to die in the next f ew minutes, that is,  I thought,
suppressing a hysterical ur ge to laugh inappropriately .
Actually , it might be in the next few seconds, if her blood
pressure rose any higher .
I h ad my fingers  on the thumping big pulse in her abdomen
that betr ayed th e fatal weakening of her abdominal aorta. It
had to have begun to leak already , to make her lose
consciousness to  such a degree as to seem dead. Eventually ,
she would simply blow a gasket, and that would be it.
Roger and Jamie were both doi ng their best to soothe her ,
muttering in English and Gaelic and patting her comfortingly .
She seemed to be responding to this treatment, though still
breathing like a steam engine.
Jamie’ s producti on of the bottle of whisky from his pocket
helped still further .
“W ell, that’ s more like it!” Mrs. W ilson said, somewhat
mollified, as he hastily pulled t he cork and waved the bottle
under he r nose so she could app reciate the quality of it. “And
ye’ve brought food, too?” Mrs. B ug had bustled her way to the
front, basket held before her like a battering ram. “Hmph! I
never th ought I should live to see Papists kinder than my ain
kin!” This last was directed at Hiram Crombie, who had so far
been opening and closing his mouth, without finding anything
whatever to say in reply to his mother -in-law’ s tirade.
“Why … why …” he stammer ed in outrage, torn between
shock, obvious fury , and a need  to justify himself before his
neighbors. “Kin der than your ain kin! Why , have I not given
ye a  ham e, these  twenty years p ast? Fed and clothed ye as ye
were my  ain mither? B-borne y our wicked tongue and foul t-
tempers for years,  and never—”
Jamie and Roger both leapt i n to try to stifle him, but
instead interrupted each other , and in the confusion, Hiram
was allowed to go on speaking his mind, which he did. So did
Mrs. W ilson, who was no slouch at invective, either .The pulse in her belly was throbbing under my hand, and I
was hard  put to it to keep her f rom leaping of f the table and
dotting H iram with the bottle of whisky . The neighbors were
agog.
Roger to ok matters—and Mrs. W ilson—firmly into his own
hands, seizing her by her scrawny shoulders.
“Mrs. W ilson,” he said hoarsely , but loudly enough to
drown Hiram’ s indignant rebuttal of Mrs. W ilson’ s most recent
depiction of his character . “Mrs. W ilson!”
“Eh?” She paused for breath , blinking up at him in
momentary confusion.
“Cease. And you, too!” He g lared at Hiram, who was
opening his mouth again. Hiram shut it.
“I’ll no have thi s,” Roger said, and thumped the Bible down
on the table. “It’ s not fitting, a nd I’ll not have it, d’ye hear
me?” He glowered from one to  the other of the combatants,
black brows low and fierce.
The room was silent, bar Hiram’ s heavy breathing, Mrs.
Crombie’ s small sobs, and Mrs. W ilson’ s faint, asthmatic
wheeze.
“Now , then,” Roger said, still g laring round to prevent any
further interruptions. He put a hand over Mrs. W ilson’ s thin,
age-spotted one.
“Mrs. W ilson—d’ye not ken that you stand before God this
minute?” He darted a look at m e, and I nodded; yes, she was
definitely going to die. Her head was wobbling on her neck
and the glow of anger fading from her eyes, even as he spoke.
“God is near to us,” he said, lifting his head to address the
congregation at lar ge. He repeated this in Gaelic, and there
was a sort of collective sigh. He narrowed his eyes at them.
“W e wi ll not profane this holy occasion with anger nor
bitterness. Now —sister .” He squeezed her hand gently .
“Compose your soul. God will—”But Mrs. W ilson was no longer listening. Her withered
mouth dropped open in horror .
“The sin-eater!” she cried, looking wildly round. She
grabbed the dish from the tabl e next to her , showering salt
down the front of her winding-sheet. “Where is the sin-eater?”
Hiram stif fened as though goosed with a red-hot poker , then
whirled and fought his way tow ard the door , the crowd giving
way bef ore him. Murmurs of speculation rose in his wake,
only to stop ab ruptly as a pie rcing wail rose from outside,
another rising behind it as the first one fell.
An awed “oooh!” rose from th e crowd, and Mrs. W ilson
looked gratified, as the bean-tr eim  sta rted in to earn their
money in earnest.
Then th ere was a stirring nea r the door , and the crowd
parted like the Red Sea, leaving a narrow path to the table.
Mrs. W ilson sat bolt upright, dead-white and barely breathing.
The pulse in h er abdomen skittered and jumped under my
fingers. Roger and Jamie had ho ld of her arms, supporting her .
A co mplete hush had fallen ove r the room; the only sounds
were th e howling of the bean-tr eim —and slow , shuf fling
footsteps, soft on the ground ou tside, then suddenly louder on
the boards of the floor . The sin-eater had arrived.
He w as a tall man, or had been , once. It was impossible to
tell his age; either years or illness had eaten away his flesh, so
that his wide sh oulders bowed and his spine had hunched, a
gaunt head poking forward, crowned with a balding straggle of
graying strands.
I gla nced up at Jamie, eyebrows  raised. I had never seen the
man before. He shrugged slight ly; he didn’ t know him, either .
As the sin-eater came closer , I s aw that his body was crooked;
he s eemed caved in on one side, ribs perhaps crushed by some
accident.
Every eye was fixed on the man, but he met none of them,
keeping his gaze focused on the floor . The path to the table
was narrow , but the people shra nk back as he passed, carefulthat he should not touch them. Only when he reached the table
did he lift his head, and I saw  that one eye was missing,
evidently clawed away by a b ear , judging from the welted
mass of scar tissue.
The other one was working; h e halted in surprise, seeing
Mrs. W ilson, and glanced round , obviously unsure what to do
next.
She wig gled one arm free of Roger ’ s grip and pushed the
dish containing the bread and salt toward him.
“Get on, then,” she said, he r voice high and a little
frightened.
“But you’re not dead.” It was a soft, educated voice,
betraying only puzzlement, but the crowd reacted as though it
had been the his sing of a serpent, and recoiled further , if such
a thing were possible.
“W ell, what of it?” Agitation was making Mrs. W ilson
tremble even more; I could feel a small constant vibration
through the table. “Y e’ve been paid to eat my sins—be after
doing it, then!” A thought oc curred to her and she jerked
upright, squintin g at her son-in-l aw . “Y e did  pay  him , Hiram ?”
Hiram was still flushed from the previous exchanges, but
went a sort of puce at this, and clutched his side—clutching at
his purse, I thought, rather than his heart.
“W ell, I ’m no going to pay him  befor e  he’ s done the job,”
he snapped. “What sort of way is that to be carrying on?”
Seeing renewed riot about to break out, Jamie let go his
hold on Mrs. W ilson and fumbled hastily in his sporran,
emer ging with a silver shilling , which he thrust across the
table toward the sin-eater—though careful, I saw , not to touch
the man.
“Now ye’ve been paid,” he sa id gruf fly , nodding to him.
“Best be about your business, sir .”
The man looked slowly round the room, and the intake of
breath from the crowd was audible, even over the wails of“WOOOOOOOOOOOEEEE to the house of
CROMMMMBIIIEEEEEE” going on outside.
He was standing no more than a foot away from me, close
enough that I could smell the sweet-sour odor of him: ancient
sweat a nd dirt in his rags, and something else, some faint
aroma th at spoke of pustulant sores and unhealed wounds. He
turned his head and looked straight at me. It was a soft brown
eye, amber in co lor , and startlingly like my own. Meeting his
gaze ga ve me a queer feeling in the pit of the stomach, as
though I looked for a moment in to a distorting mirror , and saw
that cruelly misshapen face replace my own.
He did not cha nge expression , and yet I felt something
nameless pass between us. Then he turned his head away , and
reached out a lo ng, weathered, very dirty hand to pick up the
piece of bread.
A sort of sigh went through the room as he ate—slowly
gumming the bread, for he had few teeth. I could feel Mrs.
W ilson’ s pulse, much lighter now , and fast, like a
hummingbird’ s. She hung nearl y limp in the men’ s grasp, the
withered lids of her eyes drooping as she watched.
He w rapped both hands around t he cup of wine, as though it
were a chalice, and drank it down, eyes closed. He set the
empty cup down and looked at Mrs. W ilson, curiously . I
supposed he never had met one of his clients alive before, and
wondered how long he had fulfilled this strange of fice.
Mrs. W i lson stared into his eyes, face blank as a child’ s. Her
abdominal pulse was skipping like a stone, a few light beats, a
pause, then a thump that struck my palm like a blow , and back
to its erratic jumps.
The sin- eater bowed to her , very slowly . Then he turned
round, a nd scam pered for the door , with amazing speed for
such an infirm specimen.
Several of the boys and younge r men near the door rushed
out after him, y elling; one or tw o seized sticks of wood from
the fire basket by the hearth. Others were torn; they glancedtoward the open door , where sho uts and the thumps of thrown
stones mingled with the wailing  of the bean-tr eim —but their
eyes were drawn back ineluctably to Mrs. W ilson.
She loo ked … peaceful, was the only word. It was no
surprise whatev er to feel the pulse beneath my hand simply
stop. Somewhere deeper , in my own depths, I felt the dizzying
rush of the hemorrhage begin, a flooding warmth that pulled
me into it, made black spots wh irl before my eyes, and caused
a ringing in my ears. I knew to all intents and purposes she had
now die d for good. I felt her g o. And yet I heard her voice
above the racket, very small but calm and clear .
“I for give ye, Hiram,” she said. “Y e’ve been a good lad.”
My vision had gone dark, but I could still hear and sense
things d imly . So mething graspe d me, pulled me away , and a
moment later I came to mysel f, leaning against Jamie in a
corner , his arms supporting me.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” he was saying ur gently ,
shaking me a little and patting my cheek.
The black-clad bean-tr eim  had come as far as the door . I
could se e them outside, standing  like twin pillars of darkness,
falling snow beginning to whirl round them as the cold wind
came in side, small hard dry flakes skittering and bouncing in
its wake  across the floor . The women’ s voices rose and fell,
blending with the wind. By th e table, Hiram Crombie was
trying to  fix his mother -in-law’ s garnet brooch to her shroud,
though his hands shook and h is narrow face was wet with
tears.
“Y es,” I said fain tly , then “yes” a little stronger . “Everything
is all right now .”P A R T  S I X
O n  t h e  M o u n t a i n4 0
BIRD-SPRING
March 1774
I T W AS SPRING , and the long months of desolation melted
into running water , with streamlets pouring from every hill and
miniature waterfalls leaping from stone to stone to stone.
The air was fille d with the racket of birds, a cacophony of
melody that replaced the lonely calling of geese passing by far
overhead.
Birds go one by  one in the winter , a single raven hunched
brooding in a barren tree, an owl fluf fed against the cold in the
high, dark shadows of a barn. Or they go in flocks, a massed
thunder of wings to bear them u p and away , wheeling through
the sky like handsful of pepper grains thrown aloft, calling
their way in Vs of mournful courage toward the promise of a
distant and problematic survival.
In winter , the raptors draw apart unto themselves; the
songbirds flee away , all the c olor of the feathered world
reduced to the b rutal simplificat ion of predator and prey , gray
shadows passing  overhead, with no more than a small bright
drop of blood fallen back to ea rth here and there to mark the
passing of life, leaving a drift of scattered feathers, borne on
the wind.
But as spring bl ooms, the birds grow drunk with love and
the bushes riot with their songs. Far , far into the night,
darkness mutes but does not silence them, and small
melodious conversations break out at all hours, invisible and
strangely intim ate in the dead of night, as though one
overheard the lovemaking of strangers in the room next door .
I mo ved closer to Jamie, hearin g the clear , sweet song of a
thrush in  the great red spruce that stood behind the house. It
was still  cold at night, but not with the bitter chill of winter;rather w ith the sweet fresh cold of thawing earth and springing
leaves, a cold t hat sent the blood tingling and made warm
bodies seek one another , nesting.
A rumb ling sn ore echoed across the landing—another
harbinger of spring. Major MacDonald, who had arrived mud-
caked an d wind -bitten the night before, bringing unwelcome
news of the outside world.
Jamie stirred briefly at the sound, groaned, farted briefly ,
and lay still. He ’d stayed up late, entertaining the Major—if
entertainment was the word for it.
I could hear Li zzie and Mrs. Bug in the kitchen below ,
talking a s they banged pots an d slammed doors in hopes of
rousing us. Breakfast smells began to rise up the stairs,
enticing, the bitter smell of roasting chicory spicing the thick
warmth of buttered porridge.
The sound of Jamie’ s breathing had changed, and I knew he
was awa ke, though he still lay with his eyes closed. I didn’ t
know whether this denoted an ur ge to continue the physical
pleasure of sleep—or a marked disinclination to get up and
deal with Major MacDonald.
He resolved this doubt at once by rolling over , enveloping
me i n hi s arms, and moving his lower body against mine in a
manner that made it obvious that, while physical pleasure was
what was on his mind, he was quite through sleeping.
He hadn ’ t reached the point of coherent speech yet, though,
and nuz zled my  ear , making sm all interrogatory hums in his
throat. W ell, the Major was still asleep, and the cof fee—such
as it was—wou ldn’ t be ready for a bit. I hummed back,
reached to the b edside table for a bit of almond cream, and
commenced a slow and pleas urable rummage through the
layers of bedclothes and nightshirt to apply it.
Some small while later , snorts and thumps across the hall
denoted the resurrection of Major MacDonald, and the
delectable scent s of frying ham and potatoes with onions hadjoined the throng of olfactory  stimuli. The sweet smell of
almond cream was stronger , though.
“Greased lightning,” Jamie said with a drowsy air of
satisfaction. He was still in bed, lying on his side to watch me
dress.
“What?” I turned from my l ooking glass to eye him.
“Who?”
“Me, I suppose. Or were ye not thunderstruck, there at the
end?” He laughed, almost silently , rustling the bedclothes.
“Oh, you’ve been talking to Bre e again,” I said tolerantly . I
turned b ack to the glass. “That particular figure of speech is a
metaphor for extreme speed, not lubricated brilliance.”
I s miled  at him in the glass as  I brushed knots out of my
hair . He had u nplaited it while I was anointing him, and
subsequent exertions had caused it to explode. Come to think,
it did faintly resemble the ef fects of electrocution.
“W ell, I can be fast, too,” he said judiciously , sitting up and
rubbing a hand through his own hair . “But not first thing in the
morning. There are worse ways to wake up, aye?”
“Y es, much worse.” Sounds of hawking and spitting came
from across the landing, followed by the distinctive sound of
someone with very vigorous bladder function employing a
chamber pot. “Is he staying long, did he say?”
Jamie shook his head. Rising slowly , he stretched himself
like a cat and then came across in his shirt to put his arms
around m e. I hadn’ t yet poked up the fire, and the room was
chilly; his body was pleasantly warm.
He reste d his chin on top of my head, regarding our stacked
reflections in the mirror .
“I’ll have to go,” he said softly . “T omorrow , perhaps.”
I stif fened a little, brush in hand.
“Where? T o the Indians?”
He nodded, eyes on mine.“MacDonald brought newspapers, wi’ the text of letters
from Governor Martin to various people—T ryon in New Y ork,
General Gage—asking help. He’ s losing his grip upon the
colony—insofar as he ever had one—and is seriously thinking
of arming the Indians. Though that  bit of information hasna
made it into the newspapers, and a good thing, too.”
He relea sed me, and reached for  the drawer where his clean
shirts and stockings stayed.
“That is  a  good thing,” I said, bundling  back my hair and
hunting for a rib bon to tie it with. W e’d seen few newspapers
through the winter , but even so, the level of disagreement
between the Governor and the Assembly was clear; he’d
resorted to a practice of continuous proroguing, repeatedly
dismissing the Assembly in order to prevent them passing
legislation at odds with his desires.
I c ould well ima gine what the p ublic response would be to
the revelation that he contemplated arming the Cherokee,
Catawba, and Creek, and inciting them against his own people.
“I’m guessing that he isn’ t actua lly going to do that,” I said,
finding the blue ribbon I was loo king for , “because if he had—
does, I mean—the Revolution would have got going in North
Carolina right now , rather than in Massachusetts or
Philadelphia two years from now . But why on earth is he
publishing these letters in the newspaper?”
Jamie laughed. He shook his head, pushing back the
disheveled hair from his face.
“He’ s n ot. Evidently , the Governor ’ s mail is being
intercepted. He’ s no verra pleased about it, MacDonald says.”
“I daresay not.” Mail was notoriously insecure, and always
had been. In fact, we had originally acquired Fer gus when
Jamie hired him as a pickpock et, in order to steal letters in
Paris. “How is Fer gus doing?” I asked.
Jamie made a small grimace, pulling on his stockings.
“Better , I think. Marsali says he’ s staying more to home,
which is  good. And he’ s earning a wee bit, teaching French toHiram Crombie. But—”
“Hiram? Fr ench? ”
“Oh, ay e.” He grinned at me. “Hiram’ s set upon the idea
that he must go and preach to the Indians, and he thinks he’ll
be b est e quipped to manage if h e’ s got some French as well as
English. Ian’ s teaching him a bi t of the T salagi, too, but there
are so many Indian tongues, he’d never learn them all.”
“W ill wonders never cease,” I murmured. “Do you think—”
I wa s interrupted at this point by Mrs. Bug bellowing up the
stairs, “If Certain Persons are w antin’ to let a good breakfast
be spoilt, I’m sure they’re welcome!”
Like clockwork , Major MacDonald’ s door popped open,
and his feet clattered eagerly down the stairs.
“Ready?” I said to Jamie. He seized my hairbrush and tidied
himself with a few licks, then  came to open the door and
bowed, ushering me ceremoniously out.
“What ye said, S assenach,” he said as he followed me down
the stair . “About it starting in two years. It’ s already well
begun. Y e know that, aye?”
“Oh, ye s,” I said, rather grimly . “But I don’ t want to think
about it on an empty stomach.”
ROGER ST OOD  UP straight, m easuring. The edge of the kiln
pit h e stood in came just under h is chin. Six feet would be just
about at  eye level; only a few more inches, then. That was
heartening. Setti ng the shovel against the dirt wall, he stooped,
grabbed a wooden bucket full of earth, and heaved it up over
the rim.
“Dirt!” he yelled. There was no  response to his shout. He
rose on his toes, peering bale fully round for his so-called
assistants. Jemm y and Germain were meant to be taking it in
turn to empty the buckets and pass them back down to him,
but had a tendency to vanish abruptly .“Dirt!” h e shouted as loudly as he could. The wee buggers
couldn’ t have gone far; it took him less than two minutes to
fill a bucket.
This call was answered, but not by the boys. A cold shadow
fell over him, and he squinted up to see the silhouette of his
father -in-law , stooping to grab the handle of the bucket. Jamie
strode tw o paces and flung the dirt onto the slowly mounting
heap, then came back, hopping down into the pit to return it.
“A t idy wee hole ye have here,” he said, turning round to
survey it. “Y e could barbecue an ox in it.”
“I’ll nee d one. I’m starving.” Roger wiped a sleeve across
his foreh ead; the spring day was cool and crisp, but he was
drenched with sweat.
Jamie h ad picked up his shovel and was examining the
blade with interest.
“I’ve never seen the like. Is it the lass’ s work?”
“W ith a bit of help from Dai Jones, aye.” It had taken
roughly thirty seconds’ work with an eighteenth-century
shovel to convince Brianna that improvements could be made.
It had taken three months to acquire a chunk of iron that could
be shape d to her directions by the blacksmith and to persuade
Dai Jones—who was W elsh and thus by definition stubborn—
into doing it. The normal spade was made of wood, and looked
like nothing so much as a roof shingle attached to a pole.
“May I try?” En chanted, Jamie drove the pointed end of the
new spade into the dirt at his feet.
“Be my guest.”
Roger sc rambled up out of the deep part of the pit into the
shallower end of the kiln. Jami e stood in the part where the
fire would go, according to Br ianna, with a chimney to be
raised over it. Items to be fired would sit in the longer ,
relatively shallow part of the pi t and be covered over . After a
week of shoveling, Roger was le ss inclined to think the distant
possibility of plumbing was worth all the labor involved, butBree wanted it—and like her father , Bree was dif ficult to
resist, though their methods varied.
Jamie shoveled briskly , tossing spadesful of dirt into the
bucket, with small exclamations of delight and admiration at
the ease  and speed with which dirt could be dug. Despite his
dim view  of the occupation, Roger felt a sense of pride in his
wife’ s implement.
“First the wee m atchsticks,” Jamie said, making a joke of it,
“now shovels. What will she think of next?”
“I’m afraid to a sk,” Roger said, with a tinge of rue that
made Jamie laugh.
The bucket filled, Roger picked  it up and took it to empty ,
while Jamie filled the second. And without spoken agreement,
they continued  the job, Jam ie digging, Roger carrying,
finishing in what seemed no time at all.
Jamie climbed out of the pit and joined Roger on the edge,
looking down at their handiwork in satisfaction.
“And if it doesn a work well as a kiln,” Jamie observed, “she
can make a root cellar of it.”
“W aste not, want not,” Roger agreed. They stood looking
down into the ho le, the breeze chilly through their damp shirts
now that they’d stopped moving.
“D’ye think ye might go back , you and the lass?” Jamie
said. He  spoke so casually that  Roger missed his meaning at
first, not catching on until he sa w his father -in-law’ s face, set
in the imperturbable calm that—he’d learned to his cost—
generally covered some strong emotion.
“Back,” he repeated uncertainly . Surely he didn’ t mean—
but of course he did. “Through the stones, do you mean?”
Jamie nodded, seeming to find s ome fascination in the walls
of the pit, where  drying grass rootlets hung in tangles, and the
jagged edges of stones protruded from the patchy damp dirt.
“I’ve thought of it,” Roger said, after a pause. “ W e’ve
thought. But …” He let his voice trail of f, finding no goodway to explain.
Jamie n odded again, though, as if he had. He supposed
Jamie and Claire must have dis cussed it, even as he and Bree
had, playing over the pros an d cons. The dangers of the
passage—and he did not underestimate those dangers, the
more so  in light of what Claire had told him about Donner and
his comrades; what if he made it through—and Bree and Jem
didn’ t? It didn’ t bear thinking.
Beyond that, if they all survived the passage, was the pain
of separ ation—and he would admit that it would be painful for
him, as well. Whatever its limitations or inconveniences, the
Ridge was home.
Against those considerations, th ough, stood the dangers of
the prese nt time, for the four horsemen of the apocalypse rode
widely h ere; it was no trick to catch a glimpse of pestilence or
famine f rom the  corner of your eye. And the pale horse and its
rider were inclined to show up unexpectedly—and often.
But that’ s what Jamie meant, of course, he realized
belatedly .
“Because of the war , ye mean.”
“The O ’Brians,” Jamie said quietly . “That will happen
again, ken? Many times.”
It was spring n ow , not autumn, but the cold wind that
touched his bones was the same as the one that had blown
brown a nd golden leaves across the face of the little girl.
Roger had a sudden vision of  the two of them, Jamie and
himself, standing now at the edge of this cavernous hole, like
bedraggled mourners at a graveside. He turned his back on the
pit, looking instead into the budding green of the chestnut
trees.
“Y e know ,” he said, after a moment’ s silence, “when I first
learned what—w hat Claire is, what we are, all about it—I
thought, ‘How fascinating!’ T o actually see history in the
making, I mean. In all honesty , I  maybe came as much for that
as for Bree. Then, I mean.”Jamie laughed shortly , turning round as well.
“Oh, aye, and is it? Fascinating?”
“More than I ever thought,” Roger assured him, with
extreme dryness. “But why are ye asking now? I told ye a year
ago that we’d stay .”
Jamie nodded, pursing his lips.
“Y e did. The thing is—I am thinking I must sell one or more
of the gemstones.”
That brought Roger up a bit. H e’d not consciously thought
it, o f course—but the knowledg e that the gems were there, in
case of need …  He hadn’ t realized what a sense of security
that knowledge had held, until this moment.
“They’re yours to sell,” he replied, cautious. “Why now ,
though? Are things dif ficult?”
Jamie gave him an exceedingly wry look.
“Dif ficult,” he repeated. “A ye, ye could say that.” And
proceeded to lay out the situation succinctly .
The marauders had destroyed not only a season’ s whisky in
the mak ing, but also the malting shed, only now rebuilding.
That me ant no surplus of the lo vely drink this year to sell or
trade for necessities. There were twenty-two more tenant
families on the Ridge to be  mindful of, most of them
struggling with a place and a profession that they could never
have im agined, trying merely to keep alive long enough to
learn how to stay that way .
“And then,” Jamie added grim ly , “there’ s MacDonald—
speak o’ the devil.”
The Maj or himself had come out onto the stoop, his red coat
bright in the mo rning sun. He was dressed for travel, Roger
saw , boo ted and spurred, and w earing his wig, laced hat in
hand.
“A flying visit, I see.”
Jamie made a small, uncouth noise.“Long e nough t o tell me I must try to arrange the purchase
of thirty muskets, with shot and  powder—at my own expense,
mind—to be repaid by the Crow n, eventually ,” he added, in a
cynic tone that made it obvious how remote he considered this
eventuality to be.
“Thirty muskets .” Roger contemplated that, pursing his own
lips in a soundl ess whistle. Jamie had not been able even to
af ford to replace the rifle he had  given Bird for his help in the
matter of Brownsville.
Jamie shrugged.
“And then there are wee matters like the dowry I’ve
promised Lizzie  W emyss—she ’ll be wed this summer . And
Marsali’ s mothe r , Laoghaire—” He glanced warily at Roger ,
unsure how much he might know regarding Laoghaire. More
than Jamie would be comforta ble knowing, Roger thought,
and tactfully kept his face blank.
“I ow e a  bit to h er , for maintenance. W e can live, aye, with
what we ’ve got —but for the re st … I must sell land, or the
stones. And I w illna give up the land.” His fingers drummed
restlessly against his thigh, then stopped, as he raised his hand
to wave  to the Major , who had just spotted them across the
clearing.
“I see. W ell, then …” Plainly , it had to be done; it was
foolish t o sit on a fortune in gems, merely because they might
one day be need ed for a far -fetched and risky purpose. Still,
the notion made Roger feel slightly hollow , like rappelling
down a clif f and having someone cut your safety line.
Jamie blew out his breath.
“W ell, so. I’ll se nd one wi’ Bobby Higgins to his Lordship
in V ir ginia. He’ll get me a good price, at least.”
“A ye, that’ s a—” Roger halted, his attention deflected by
the scenario unfolding before him.
The Major , obviously well-breakfasted and cheerful, had
come down the steps and was strolling toward them—
oblivious of the white sow , wh o had emer ged from her denbeneath the foundation and was  ambling along the side of the
house, bent on her own breakfast. It would be a matter of
seconds before she spotted the Major .
“Hoy!” Roger bellowed, and felt something tear in his
throat. T he pain  was so sharp that it stopped him cold, and he
clutched at his throat, struck suddenly mute.
“‘W are the pig!” Jamie was shouting, waving and pointing.
The Major thrust his head forward, hand behind his ear—then
caught the repeated bellows of “Pig!” and looked wildly
round, just in time to see the white sow break into a ponderous
trot, scything her tusks from side to side.
He w ould have been best served  by wheeling and sprinting
back to the safety of the stoop,  but instead panic struck him
and he ran—away from the pig,  coming straight for Jamie and
Roger , who promptly ran in dif ferent directions.
Glancing back, Roger saw the Major gaining on the pig with
long-legged leaps, his goal evidently the cabin. Between the
Major and the cabin, though, lay the open hole of the
groundhog kiln,  masked by the heavy growth of long spring
grass through which the Major bounded.
“Pit!” Roger shouted, only the word came out in a strangled
croak. Nonetheless, MacDonald seemed to hear him, for a
bright red face turned in his di rection, eyes bulging. It must
have sounded like “Pig!” for th e Major glanced back over his
shoulder then to see the sow trot faster , small pink eyes fixed
on him with murderous intent.
The distraction proved nearly fatal, for the Major ’ s spurs
caught and tangled, and he spr awled headlong in the grass,
losing his grip on the laced hat—which he had held throughout
the chase—and sending it pinwheeling through the air .
Roger hesitated  for an instant, but then ran back to help,
with a smothered oath. He saw Jamie running back, too, spade
held at the ready—though even a metal shovel seemed
pitifully inadequate to deal with a five-hundred-pound hog.MacDonald was already scrambling to his feet, though;
before either of them could reac h him, he took of f running as
though t he devil  himself were b reathing on his coattails. Arms
pumping and face set in puce de termination, he ran for his life,
bounding like a jackrabbit through the grass—and
disappeared. One instant he was there, and the next he had
vanished, as though by magic.
Jamie looked wide-eyed at Roger , then at the pig, who had
stopped short on the far side of the kiln pit. Then, moving
gingerly , one eye always on the pig, he sidled toward the pit,
glancing sideways, as though afraid to see what lay at the
bottom.
Roger moved to stand at Jamie’ s shoulder , looking down.
Major MacDona ld had fallen into the deeper hole at the end,
where he lay curled up like  a hedgehog, arms clasped
protectively over his wig—which had remained in place by
some mi racle, th ough now much bespattered with dirt and bits
of grass.
“MacDonald?” Jamie called down. “Are ye damaged,
man?”
“Is she there?” quavered the Major , not emer ging from his
ball.
Roger glanced across the pit at the pig, now some distance
away , snout down in the long grass.
“Er … aye, she is.” T o his surpr ise, his voice came easy , if a
little hoarse. He cleared his thr oat and spoke a little louder .
“Y e needna worry , though. She’ s busy eating your hat.”4 1
THE GUN-SMITH
J AMIE A CCOMP ANIED MacDonald as far as Coopersville,
where he set the Major on the road back to Salisbury , equipped
with foo d, a disreputable slouch ed hat against the weather , and
a small bottle o f whisky to for tify his bruised spirits. Then,
with an internal sigh, he turned into the McGillivrays’ place.
Robin was at work in his for ge, surrounded by the smells of
hot meta l, wood shavings, and gun oil. A lanky young man
with a hatchet f ace was working the leather bellows, though
his d reamy expression showed a  certain lack of attention to the
job.
Robin caught the shadow of Jamie’ s entrance and glanced
up, gave a quick nod, and returned to his work.
He was hammering bar iron into flat bands; the iron
cylinder he meant to wrap them round to form a gun barrel
was waiting, propped between  two blocks. Jamie moved
carefully out of range of flying sparks and sat down on a
bucket to wait.
That was Senga’ s betrothed at the bellows … Heinrich.
Heinrich Strasse . He picked the name unerringly out of the
hundreds he carried in his mind, and along with it came
automatically all he knew of young Heinrich’ s history , family ,
and connections, these appearing in his imagination round the
boy’ s lo ng, dreamy face in a constellation of social af finities,
orderly and complex as the pattern of a snowflake.
He a lways saw people in this w ay , but seldom thought of it
consciously . There was something about the shape of Strasse’ s
face, tho ugh, that reinforced the mental imagery—the long
axis of forehead, nose, and ch in, emphasized by a horsey
upper lip , deepl y grooved, the horizontal axis shorter , but noless shar ply defined by long, na rrow eyes and flat dark brows
above them.
He could  see the boy’ s origins—the middle of nine children,
but the eldest bo y , son of an overbearing father and a mother
who dea lt with this by means of subterfuge and quiet malice—
sprouting in a delicate array from the rather pointed top of his
head, his religion—Lutheran, but slack about it—a lacy spray
under an equally pointed chin, his relation with Robin—
cordial, but wary , as befitted a new son-in-law who was also
an apprentice—extending like a fanned spike from his right
ear , that  with Ute—a mix of terror and helpless abashment—
from the left.
This notion entertained him very much, and he was obliged
to lo ok away , af fecting interest i n Robin’ s workbench, in order
to keep from staring and rendering the lad uncomfortable.
The gun smith was not tidy; scr aps of wood and metal lay
among a  jumble  of spikes, scrib es, hammers, blocks of wood,
bits of filthy garnet cloth and st icks of charcoal on the bench.
A fe w papers were weighted d own with a spoiled gunstock
that had split in the making, their dirty edges fluttering in the
hot breath of the for ge. He would have taken no notice, save
that he recogniz ed the style of the drawing, would have known
that boldness and delicacy of line anywhere.
Frowning, he rose and pulled the papers from under the
gunstock. Drawings of a gun, executed from dif ferent angles
—a rifle, there was the cutaw ay interior of the barrel, the
grooves and landings clear—but most peculiar . One drawing
showed it whole, reasonably familiar , bar the odd hornlike
growths on the barrel. But the  next … the gun seemed as
though s omeone had broken it over his knee; it was snapped
through, stock and barrel pointing downward in opposite
directions, joined only by … w hat sort of hinge was that? He
closed one eye, considering.
The cessation of clamor from the for ge and the loud hiss of
hot m etal in the  sump broke his fascination with the drawings
and made him look up.“Did yo ur lass show ye those?” Robin asked, with a nod at
the papers. He pulled the tail of his shirt up from behind his
leather apron, and mopped steam from his sweating face,
looking amused.
“No. W hat is she about? Is she  wanting ye to make her a
gun?” He relinquished the sheets to the gunsmith, who
shuf fled through them, snif fing with interest.
“Oh, she’ s no way of paying for that, Mac Dubh,  unless
Roger Mac’ s discovered a pot o’ fairy gold since last week.
No, she’ s only been telling me her notions of improvement in
the art of riflery , asking what it might cost to make such a
thing.” T he cyni c smile that had  been lurking in the corner of
Robin’ s mouth broadened into a grin, and he shoved the papers
back at Jamie. “I can tell she’ s yours, Mac Dubh.  What other
lass wou ld spend her time think ing of guns, rather than gowns
and bairns?”
There was more than a little imp lied criticism in this remark
—Brianna had undoubtedly been a good deal more forthright
in mann er than was becoming—but he let it pass for the
moment. He needed Robin’ s goodwill.
“W ell, any woman has her fancies,” he observed mildly .
“Even w ee Lizz ie, I suppose—but Manfred will see to that,
I’m sure. He’ll be in Salisbury just now? Or Hillsboro?”
Robin McGillivray was by no means a stupid man. The
abrupt t ransition of subject made him arch one brow , but he
passed no remark. Instead, he se nt Heinrich of f to the house to
fetch the m some beer , waiting f or the lad to disappear before
turning back to Jamie, expectant.
“I need thirty muskets, Robin,” he said without preamble.
“And I’ll need them quickly—within three months.”
The gunsmith’ s face went comically blank with
astonishment, b ut only for a moment. He blinked then, and
closed his mouth with a snap, re suming his usual expression of
sardonic good humor .
“Starting your own army , are ye, Mac Dubh ?”Jamie merely smiled at that wit hout answering. If word got
around that he m eant to arm his tenantry and muster his own
Committee of Safety in answer to Richard Brown’ s banditry ,
that would do nay harm and might do good. Letting word get
out that the Governor was working secretly to arm the savages,
in case he required to suppress an armed rising in the
backcountry , an d that he, Jamie Fraser , was the agent of such
action—that was an excellent way to get himself killed and his
house burnt to th e ground, to say nothing of what other trouble
might ensue.
“How many can ye find for me, Robin? And how fast?”
The gunsmith squinted, thinking, then darted a sideways
glance at him.
“Cash?”
He nodded, seeing Robin’ s lips purse in a soundless whistle
of as tonishment. Robin kent as well as anyone that he had no
money to speak of—let alone the small fortune required to
assemble that many guns.
He c ould see the  speculation in Robin’ s eyes, as to where he
might be planning to acquire that sort of money—but the
gunsmith said nothing aloud. M cGillivray’ s upper teeth sank
into his lower lip in concentration, then relaxed.
“I ca n fi nd six, maybe seven, betwixt Salisbury and Salem.
Brugge”—naming the Moravian gunsmith—”would do one or
two, if he kent it was for you… .” Seeing the infinitesimal
shake of  Jamie’ s head he nodded in resignation. “A ye, well,
maybe seven, then. And Manf red and I can manage maybe
three m ore—it’ s only muske ts you’re wanting, nothing
fancy?” He tilted his head toward Brianna’ s drawing with a
small flash of his earlier humor .
“Nothing fancy ,” Jamie said, smiling. “That’ s ten, then.” He
waited. Robin sighed, settling himself.
“I’ll ask about,” he said. “B ut it’ s no an easy matter .
Particularly if ye dinna mean your name to be heard in
connection—and I gather ye don’ t.”“Y e’re a man o ’ rare wit and  discretion, Robin,” Jamie
assured him gravely , making h im laugh. It was true, for all
that; Robin McGillivray had fought beside him at Culloden,
lived three years with him in Ardsmuir; Jamie would trust him
with his  life—and was. He began to wish the pig had eaten
MacDonald after all, but put the unworthy thought from his
mind and drank the beer Heinrich brought, chatting of
inconsequence and trivia until it was polite to take his leave.
He had ridden G ideon, to bear MacDonald company on his
horse, but meant to leave him in Dai Jones’ s barn. Through a
complex bit of bar gaining, Gideon would cover John
W oolam’ s spott ed mare—to be brought up when W oolam
returned from Bear Creek—and  when the harvest was in come
autumn, Jamie would collect a hundredweight of barley , with a
bottle of whisky to Dai for his assistance.
Exchanging a bit of conversation with Dai—he could never
decide w hether the blacksmith was truly a man of few words,
or was it only that he despaired of making the Scots
understand his W elsh singso ng—Jamie slapped Gideon
encouragingly on the neck and left him to eat grain and fettle
his loins against the coming of the spotted mare.
Dai had  of fered him food, but he declined; he was peckish,
but look ed forward to the peac e of the five-mile walk home.
The day was f ine and pale blue, with the spring leaves
murmuring to themselves overhead, and a bit of solitude
would be welcome.
The dec ision had been made w hen he asked Robin to find
him guns. But the situation bore thought.
There were sixty-four villages of the Cherokee; each with
its o wn headman, its own peace  chief and war chief. Only five
of those villages  were within his power to influence—the three
villages of the Snowbird people, and two that belonged to the
Overhill Cherokee. Those, he thought, would follow the
leaders of the Overhill, regardless of his words.
Roger Mac had known relative ly little of the Cherokee, or
what their role might be in the looming fight. He had been ableto sa y only that the Cherokee had not acted en masse;  some
villages chose to fight, some did not—some fought for one
side, some for another .
W ell, so . It was not likely that anything he said or did would
turn the tide of war , and that wa s a comfort. But he could not
escape t he knowledge that his o wn time to jump was coming.
So far as anyone knew now , h e was a loyal subject to His
Majesty , a T ory beavering away in Geordie’ s interest,
suborning savages and distributing guns with an eye to
suppressing the  riotous passions of Regulators, Whigs, and
would-be republicans.
At some point, this facade must necessarily crumble to
reveal him as a dyed-in-the-w ool rebel and a traitor . But
when? H e wond ered idly whether he might have a price on his
head this time, and how much it would be.
It m ight be not so dif ficult, with the Scots. Grudge-bearing
and hardheaded  as they were, he was one of them, and
personal liking might moderate the sense of outrage at his
turning rebel, when the time came.
No, it was the Indians he wor ried over—for he came to
them as the age nt of the King.  How suddenly to explain his
change of heart? And further , do it in such a way that they
might share it? Surely they w ould see this as treachery at
worst, grossly suspicious behavior at best. He thought they
would not kill him, but how in God’ s name to induce them to
fall in with the cause of rebellion, when they enjoyed a stable
and prosperous relation with His Majesty?
Oh, God, and t here was John. What could he say to his
friend, when the time came? Convince him by logic and
rhetoric to change his coat as well? He hissed through his teeth
and sho ok his head in consternation, trying—and failing
utterly—to env ision John Grey , lifelong soldier , ex-Royal
Governor , that very soul of loyalty and honor , suddenly
declaring himself for rebellion and republic.
He passed on, fretting in this fashion for some time, but
gradually found the walking soo the his mind, and the peace ofthe day lighten h is heart. There would be time before supper to
take wee  Jem fishing, he thought; the sun was bright, but there
was a certain d ampness to the air under the trees that was
promising for a first hatch of flies on the water . He had a
feeling in his bones that the trout would rise near sunset.
In th is m ore plea sant frame of m ind, he was glad to meet his
daughter , some little way below the Ridge. His heart lifted at
sight of her hair , streaming wanton down her back in ruddy
glory .
“Ciamar a tha t hu, a nighean?”  he said , kissing  her cheek
in greeting.
“Tha mi gu math, mo athair ,”  s he  said , and she smiled, but
he noted a smal l frown that tro ubled the smooth flesh of her
forehead like the hatch of mayfly on a trout pond.
“I’ve been waiting for you,” she said, taking his arm. “I
wanted to talk to  you before you go to the Indians tomorrow .”
And there was that in her tone that drove all thought of fish
from his mind upon the instant.
“Oh, aye?”
She nod ded, but seemed to have some dif ficulty in finding
words—an occurrence that alarmed him still further . But he
could not help h er , without some notion what it was about, and
so kept pace wi th her , silent but encouraging. A mockingbird
was busy nearby , practicing its repertoire of calls. It was the
bird wh o lived in the red spruce behind the house; he knew
because it paused now and then in the midst of its chatter and
trilling to give a fine imitation  of Adso the cat’ s midnight
yowl.
“When you talked to Roger abou t the Indians,” Brianna said
finally , and turned her head to look at him, “did he mention
something called the T rail of T ears?”
“No,” he said, curious. “What is that?”
She grim aced, h unching her shoulders in a way that seemed
disconcertingly familiar .“I thoug ht maybe he hadn’ t. He said he’d told you all he
knew about the Indians and the Revolution—not that he knows
all that much, it wasn’ t his specialty—but this happened—will
happen later , after the Revolutio n. So he maybe didn’ t think it
was important. Maybe it’ s not.”
She hes itated, as though wanting him to tell her that it
wasn’ t. He only waited, though, and she sighed, looking at her
feet as she paced along. She was wearing sandals without
stockings, and her long, bare to es were grimed with the soft
dust of the wagon road. The sigh t of her feet always filled him
with an odd mixture of pride at their elegant shape and a faint
sense of shame at their size—but as he was responsible for
both, he supposed he had no grounds for complaint.
“About sixty years from now ,” she said at last, eyes on the
ground, “the American government will take the Cherokee
from the ir land and move them. A long way—to a place called
Oklahoma. It’ s a thousand mile s, at least, and hundreds and
hundreds of them will starve and die on the way . That’ s why
they called it—will call it—the T rail of T ears.”
He was impresse d to hear that there should be a government
capable of doing such a thing, and said so. She shot him an
angry glance.
“They’ll do it by cheating. They’ll talk some of the
Cherokee leaders into agreeing by promising them things and
not keeping their bar gain.”
He shrugged.
“That’ s how most governments behave,” he observed
mildly . “ Why are ye telling me this, lass? I will—thank God—
be safely dead before any of it happens.”
He saw a flicker cross her face at mention of his death, and
was sorr y to have caused her di stress by his levity . Before he
could apologize, though, she squared her shoulders and went
on.
“I’m telling you because I thou ght you should know ,” she
said. “Not all of the Cheroke e went—some of them wentfarther u p into the mountains a nd hid; the army didn’ t find
them.”
“A ye?”
She turn ed her head and gave him a look from those eyes
that were his own, touching in their earnestness.
“Don’ t you see? Mama told you what would happen—about
Culloden. Y ou couldn’ t stop it, b ut you saved Lallybroch. And
your men, your tenants. Because you knew .”
“Oh, Christ,” he said, realizin g with a shock what she
meant. Recollec tion washed through him in a flood, the terror
and des peration and uncertainty of that time—the numb
despair that had carried him th rough that last fatal day . “Y e
want me to tell Bird.”
She rubbed a hand over her face, and shook her head.
“I don’ t know . I don’ t know if you should  te ll him—or if
you do, whether he’ll listen. But Roger and I talked about it,
after you asked him about the Indians. And I kept thinking
about it … and, well, it just didn’ t seem right,  to know and not
do anything. So I thought I’d better tell you.”
“A ye, I see,” he said a little bleakly .
He h ad noticed before the inclin ation of persons with tender
consciences to ease their discomfort by handing the necessity
of taking  action on to someone else, but forbore to mention it.
She could hardly be telling Bird herself, after all.
As though the situation he faced with the Cherokee were not
suf ficiently dif fi cult already , he thought wryly—now he must
deal with saving unknown future generations of savages? The
mockingbird zoo med past his ear , unnervingly close, clucking
like a hen, of all things.
It was so incongruous that he laughed. And then realized
that there was nothing else to do. Not now .
Brianna was looking at him curiously .
“What are you going to do?”He stre tched h imself, slowly , luxuriously , feeling the
muscles of his b ack pull upon h is bones, feeling each of them,
alive and solid. T he sun was com ing down the sky , supper was
beginning to cook, and for now , for this one last night, he need
do nothing. Not yet.
“I’m goi ng fishing,” he said, smiling at his lovely , unlikely ,
problematical daughter . “Fetch the wee lad, aye? I’ll get the
poles.”
James Fraser , Esq. fr om Fraser ’ s Ridge
T o my Lor d John Gr ey , Mount Josiah Plantation,
 this 2nd day of April, Anno Domini 1774
My lor d,
I depart in the morning to visit the Cher okee, and so
leave this with my wife, to be entrusted to Mr . Higgins
when he shall next arrive, to be deliver ed with its
accompanying par cel into your hands.
I pr esume upon your kindness and your solicitude for
my family in asking your favor to help in selling the
object I entrust to you. I suspect that your connexions
might enable you to obtain a better price than I might do
myself—and to do so discr eetly .
I shall hope upon my r eturn to confide in you the
r easons for my action, as well as certain philosophical
r eflections which you may find of inter est. In the
meantime, believe me ever
Y our most affectionate friend and humble
servant,
J. Fraser4 2
DRESS REHEARSAL
B OBBY HIGGINS looked uneas ily at me over his mug of
beer .
“Beg pa rdon, mum,” he said. “But you wouldn’ t be a-
thinking of practicing some type of physic upon me, would
you? The worms are gone, I ’m sure of it. And the—the
other”—he blushed slightly and squirmed upon the bench
—”that’ s quite all right, too. I’ve et so many beans, I fart quite
regular , and not a touch of the fiery knives about it!”
Jamie had frequently remarked upon the transparency of my
features, but this was surprising perspicacity on Bobby’ s part.
“I’m th rilled to hear it,” I said, evading his question
momentarily . “Y ou look quite in the pink of health, Bobby .”
He did; the hollow , wasted look had left him, and his flesh
was firm and so lid, his eyes bright. The blind one hadn’ t gone
milky , nor did it wander perceptibly; he must have some
residual ability to detect light and shape, which strengthened
my original diagnosis of a partially detached retina.
He n odded warily , and took a s ip of beer , still keeping his
eyes fixed on me.
“I’m very well indeed, mum,” he said.
“Splendid. Y ou don’ t happen to know how much you weigh,
do you, Bobby?”
The look of wariness vanished, replaced by modest pride.
“Happen I do, m um. I took some  fleeces to the river port for
his Lord ship last month, and w as a mercer there what had a
scale for weighing out—tobacco  or rice, or blocks of indigo as
it might be. Some of us fellows got to wagering for sport whatthis or that might weigh, and … well, ten stone four it is,
mum.”
“V ery nice,” I s aid with approval. “Lord John’ s cook must
be feedi ng you well.” I thought he couldn’ t have weighed
more tha n a hundred and ten po unds when I first saw him; a
hundred and forty-four was still  on the light side for a man of
nearly six feet, but it was a major improvement. And a real
stroke of luck, that he should have known his weight exactly .
Of cours e, if I d idn’ t act fast, he might easily gain a stone or
two; Mrs. Bug had set herself  to outdo Lord John’ s Indian
cook (o f whom we had heard  much), and to this end was
shoveling eggs, onions, venison , and a slice of leftover pork
pie onto  Bobby’ s plate, to say nothing of the basket of fragrant
muf fins already in front of him.
Lizzie, seated beside me, took one of these and spread it
with but ter . I noted with appro val that she, too, was looking
healthier , delica tely flushed—though I must remember to take
a sa mple to che ck the malarial parasites in her blood. That
would b e an excellent thing to d o while she was out. No way
of getting an exact weight for her , unfortunately—but she
couldn’ t weigh more than seven stone, small and light-boned
as she was.
Now , Br ee and Roger at the oth er end of the scale … Roger
had to weigh at least a hundred and eighty-five; Bree probably
one-fifty . I took a muf fin myself, thinking how best to bring up
my p lan. Roger would do it if I asked, of course, but Bree …
I’d have  to be careful there. She’d had her tonsils out under
ether at the age of ten, and hadn’ t liked the experience. If she
found out what I was up to and began expressing her opinions
freely , she might arouse alarm in the rest of my guinea pigs.
Enthused by my success at making ether , I had seriously
underestimated the dif ficulty of inducing anyone to let me use
it on  them. Mr . Christie might well be an awkward bugger , as
Jamie on occasion called him— but he was not alone in his
resistance to the notion of being rendered suddenly
unconscious.I wo uld have thought that the appeal of painlessness was
universal—but not to people who had never experienced it.
They ha d no context in which  to place such a notion, and
while they presumably didn’ t al l think ether was a Papist plot,
they did  view an of fer to remov e pain from them as being in
some way contrary to the divine vision of the universe.
Bobby and Lizzie, though, were suf ficiently under my sway
that I was fairly sure I could coa x—or bully—them into a brief
trial. If they then  reported the ex perience in a positive light …
but improved public relations was only the half of it.
The real  necess ity was to try my ether out on a variety of
subjects, taking careful note of t he results. The scare of Henri-
Christian’ s birth had shown me how woefully unprepared I
was. I needed to have some ide a of how much to administer
per u nit of body  weight, how long such-and-such a dose might
last, and  how deep the resulting stupor might be. The last thing
I w anted  was to be up to my elbows in someone’ s abdomen,
only to have them come suddenly round with a shriek.
“Y ou’re doing it again, mum.” B obby’ s brow creased as he
chewed slowly , eyes narrowed at me.
“What? What am I doing?” I feigned innocence, helping
myself to a bit of the pork pie.
“W atching me. Same as a sparrer hawk watches a mouse,
just afore she stoops. I’n’ t she?” he appealed to Lizzie.
“A ye, sh e is,” Lizzie agreed, dim pling at me. “But it’ s only
her way ,  ken. Y e’d make a big m ouse, Bobby .” Being Scottish,
she pronounced it “moose,” which made Bobby laugh and
choke over his muf fin.
Mrs. Bug paused to pound him helpfully on the back,
leaving him purple and gasping.
“W ell, wha’ s amiss wi’ him, then?” she asked, coming
round to  squint critically at Bo bby’ s face. “Y e’ve no got the
shits again, have ye, lad?”
“Again?”  I said.“Oh, no, mum,” he croaked. “Perish the thought! ‘T was
only eating green apples, the on ce.” He choked, coughed, and
sat up straight, clearing his throat.
“Can we please not talk about m e bowels, mum?” he asked
plaintively . “Not over breakfast, at least?”
I could feel Lizzie vibrating with amusement next to me, but
she kept her eye s demurely on her plate, not to embarrass him
further .
“Certainly ,” I said, smiling. “I h ope you’ll be staying for a
few days, Bobby?” He’d come the day before, bearing the
usual assortment of letters and newspapers from Lord John—
along with a package containing a marvelous present for
Jemmy: a musical jack-in-the-box, sent specially from London
by the good of fices of Lord John’ s son, W illie.
“Oh, I s’all, mum, yes,” he assured me, mouth full of
muf fin. “His Lordship said I was to see if Mr . Fraser had a
letter for me to carry back, so I must wait for him, mustn’ t I?”
“Of course.” Jamie and Ian ha d gone to the Cherokee a
week before; it was likely to be another week before they
returned. Plenty of time to make my experiments.
“Is t here anything I might do, m um, in the way of service to
you?” B obby asked. “Seeing as I’m here, I mean, and Mr .
Fraser and Mr . Ian not.” There was a small tone of satisfaction
in this; he got on all right with Ian, but there was no doubt that
he preferred to have Lizzie’ s attention to himself.
“Why , y es,” I said, scooping up a bit of porridge. “Now that
you mention it, Bobby …”
By the time I had finished explaining, Bobby still looked
healthy , but a good deal less in bloom.
“Put me asleep,” he repeated uncertainly . He glanced at
Lizzie, who looked a little uncertain, too, but who was much
too used to being told to do unreasonable things to protest.
“Y ou’ll only be asleep for a moment,” I assured him.
“Likely you won’ t even notice.”His face expressed considerable skepticism, and I could see
him shifting about for some e xcuse. I’d foreseen that ploy ,
though, and now played my trump card.
“It’ s not  only me needing to jud ge the dose,” I said. “I can’ t
operate on someone and give the ether at the same time—or
not e asily . Malva Christie will b e assisting me; she’ll need the
practice.”
“Oh,” Bobby said thoughtfully . “Miss Christie.” A sort of
soft, dreamy expression spread across his face. “W ell. I
s’ouldn’ t want to put Miss Christie out, of course.”
Lizzie m ade one  of those econo mical Scottish noises in the
back of her thro at, managing to convey scorn, derision, and
abiding disapproval in the space of two glottal syllables.
Bobby looked up in inquiry , a bit of pie poised on his fork.
“Did you say something?”
“Who, m e?” she said. “O’ cours e not.” She got up abruptly
and, carrying her apron before her , neatly shook crumbs into
the fire, and turned to me.
“When d’ye mean to do it?” she demanded, adding a
belated, “ma’am.”
“T omorrow morning,” I said. “It needs to be done on an
empty stomach, so we’ll do it first thing, before breakfast.”
“Fine!” she said, and stamped out.
Bobby blinked after her , then turned to me, bewildered.
“Did I say something?”
Mrs. Bug’ s eye met mine in perfect understanding.
“Not a thing, lad ,” she said, depositing a fresh spatulaful of
scrambled eggs onto his plate. “Eat up. Y e’ll need your
strength.”
BRIANNA, CLE VER WITH her hands, had made the mask to
my s pecification s, woven of oak  splits. It was simple enough,
a sort of double cage, hinged so that the two halves of it swungapart for the ins ertion of a thick layer of cotton wool between
them, and then back together , the whole thing shaped to fit like
a catcher ’ s mask over the patient’ s nose and mouth.
“Put enough ether on to dampen the cotton wool all
through,” I instructed Malva. “W e’ll want it to take ef fect
quickly .”
“A ye, ma’am. Oh, it does sm ell queer , doesn’ t it?” She
snif fed cautious ly , face turned half away as she dripped ether
onto the mask.
“Y es. Do be careful not to breathe too much of it yourself,”
I s aid. “W e don’ t want you fa lling over in the midst of an
operation.”
She laughed, but dutifully held the mask further away .
Lizzie had bravely of fered to go  first—with the clear intent
of deflecting Bobby’ s attention  from Malva to her . This was
working; she lay in a languid pose on the table, cap of f, and
her soft, pale hair displayed to best advantage on the pillow .
Bobby sat beside her , earnestly holding her hand.
“All righ t, then.” I had a tiny minute-glass to hand, the best
I cou ld d o by way of keeping ac curate time. “Put it gently over
her face. Lizzie, just breathe de eply , and count with me, one
… two … goodness, that didn’ t take long, did it?”
She’d taken one long breath, rib  cage rising high—and then
gone lim p as a d ead flounder as the breath went out. I hastily
flipped the glass, and came to take her pulse. All well there.
“W ait for a bit; you can feel it, when they start to come
round, a sort of  vibration in the flesh,” I instructed Malva,
keeping one eye on Lizzie and  the other on the glass. “Put
your hand on her shoulder… . There, do you feel it?”
Malva nodded, nearly trembling with excitement.
“T wo or  three drops then.” She added these, her own breath
held, and Lizzie relaxed again with a sigh like an escape of air
from a punctured tire.Bobby’ s blue eyes were absolutely round, but he clung
fiercely to Lizzie’ s other hand.
I t imed the peri od to arousal o nce or twice more, then let
Malva p ut her under a little more  deeply . I picked up the lancet
I h ad ready , and  pricked Lizzie’ s finger . Bobby gasped as the
blood welled up, looking back and forth from the crimson drop
to Lizzie’ s angelically peaceful face.
“Why , she don’ t feel it!” he exc laimed. “Look, she’ s never
moved a muscle!”
“Exactly ,” I said, with a profound feeling of satisfaction.
“She won’ t feel anything at all, until she comes round.”
“Mrs. Fraser says we could cut s omeone quite open,” Malva
informed Bobby , self-importantly . “Slice into them, and get at
what’ s ailing—and they’d never feel a thing!”
“W ell, n ot until they woke up,” I said, amused. “They’d feel
it then, I’m afraid. But it really is quite a marvelous thing,” I
added more softly , looking down at Lizzie’ s unconscious face.
I let her stay und er whilst I chec ked the fresh blood sample,
then told Malva to take the mask  of f. W ithin a minute, Lizzie’ s
eyelids began to flutter . She looked curiously round, then
turned to me.
“When are ye going to start it, ma’am?”
Despite assurances from both Bobby and Malva that she had
been to all appearances dead as  a doornail for the last quarter
hour , she refused to believe it, asserting indignantly that she
couldn’ t have been—though at a loss to explain the prick on
her finger and the slide of freshly smeared blood.
“Y ou rem ember the mask on yo ur face?” I asked. “And my
telling you to take a deep breath?”
She nodded uncertainly .
“A ye, I do, then , and it felt for a moment as though I were
choking—but th en ye were all just staring down at me, next
thing!”“W ell, I suppose the only way to convince her is to show
her ,” I said, s miling at the three flushed young faces.
“Bobby?”
Eager to demonstrate the truth of the matter to Lizzie, he
hopped up on the table and laid himself down with a will,
though the pulse in his slender throat was hammering as
Malva dripped ether on the mas k. He drew a deep, convulsive
gasp the  moment she put it on hi s face. Frowning a bit, he took
another—one more—and went limp.
Lizzie clapped both hands to her mouth, staring.
“Jesus, Joseph, and Mary!” she  exclaimed. Malva giggled,
thrilled at the ef fect.
Lizzie looked at me, eyes w ide, then back at Bobby .
Stooping to his ear , she called his name, to no ef fect, then
picked u p his hand and wiggled  it gingerly . His arm waggled
limply , and she made a soft exclamation and set his hand down
again. She looked quite agitated.
“Can he no wake up again?”
“Not until we ta ke away the mask,” Malva told her , rather
smug.
“Y es, but you don’ t want to keep someone under longer than
you nee d to,” I added. “It’ s  not good for them to be
anesthetized too long.”
Malva obediently brought Bobby back to the edge of
consciousness a nd put him back  under several times, while I
made no te of times and dosages. During the last of these notes,
I gla nced up, to see her looking down at Bobby with an intent
sort of express ion, seeming to concentrate on something.
Lizzie had withdrawn to a corne r of the sur gery , plainly made
uneasy by seeing Bobby unco nscious, and sat on a stool,
plaiting her hair and twisting it up under her cap.
I sto od up and took the mask fr om Malva’ s hand, setting it
aside.“Y ou di d a wonderful job,” I told her , speaking quietly .
“Thank you.”
She shook her head, face glowing.
“Oh, ma’am! It was … I’ve never seen the like. It’ s such a
feeling, is it not? Like as we killed him, and brought him alive
again.” She spread her hands out, looking at them half-
unconsciously , as though wondering how she had done such a
marvel, then closed them into small fists, and smiled at me,
conspiratorially .
“I th ink I see why my faither say s it’ s devil’ s work. W ere he
to see what it ’ s like”—she glanced at Bobby , who was
beginning to stir—”he’d say no one but God has a right to do
such things.”
“Really ,” I said, rather dryly . From the gleam in her eye, her
father ’ s likely reaction to what we had been doing was one of
the chief  attractions of the expe riment. For an instant, I rather
pitied T om Christie.
“Um …  perhaps you’d better n ot tell your father , then,” I
suggested. She smiled, showing small, sharp white teeth, and
rolled her eyes.
“Don’ t you think it, ma’am,” she assured me. “He’d stop me
coming, as quick as—”
Bobby o pened his eyes, turned his head to one side, and
threw up, putting a stop to the discussion. Lizzie gave a cry
and hurried to his side, fussing over him, wiping his face and
fetching him brandy to drink. Malva, looking slightly superior ,
stood aside and let her .
“Oh, that’ s queer ,” Bobby repeated, for perhaps the tenth
time, rubbing a h and across his mouth. “I saw the most terrible
thing—just for a moment, there—and then I felt sick, and here
it was all over .”
“What sort of terrible thing?” Malva asked, interested. He
glanced at her , looking wary and uncertain.“I sc arcely know , tell ‘ee true, m iss. Only as it was … dark,
like. A form, as you might say; I thought ‘twas a woman’ s. But
… terrible,” he finished, helpless.
W ell, that was too bad. Hallucination wasn’ t an uncommon
side ef fect, but I hadn’ t expected it with such a brief dose.
“W ell, I  imagine it was just a bit of nightmare,” I said
soothingly . “Y o u know , it’ s a form of sleep, so it’ s not
surprising that you might get the odd bit of dreaming now and
then.”
T o my surprise, Lizzie shook her head at this.
“Oh, no, ma’am,” she said. “It ’ s no sleep at all. When ye
sleep, ken, ye give your soul up to the angels’ keeping, so as
no ghou lies shall come near . Bu t this …” Frowning, she eyed
the bottl e of ether , now safely corked again, then looked at me.
“I did wonder ,” she said, “where does your soul go?”
“Er …” I said. “W ell, I should think it simply stays with
your body . It must. I mean—you aren’ t dead.”
Both Lizzie and Bobby were shaking their heads decidedly .
“No, it doesn’ t,” Lizzie said. “When ye’re sleepin’, ye’re
still ther e.  When ye do that “—she g estured toward the mask, a
faint uneasiness on her small features—”ye’re not.”
“That’ s true, mum,” Bobby assured me. “Y ou’re not.”
“D’ye think maybe ye go to limb o, wi’ the unbaptized babes
and all?” Lizzie asked anxiously .
Malva gave an unladylike snort.
“Limbo’ s no real place,” she said. “It’ s only a notion
thought up by the Pope.”
Lizzie’ s mouth dropped open in shock at this blasphemy ,
but Bob by luckily distracted her by feeling dizzy and requiring
to lie down.
Malva seemed inclined to go on with the ar gument, but
beyond repeatin g, “The Pope …” once or twice, simply stood,swaying to and fro with her m outh open, blinking a little. I
glanced at Lizzie, only to find  her glassy-eyed as well. She
gave an enormous yawn and blinked at me, eyes watering.
It occurred to me that I was beginning to feel a trifle light-
headed myself.
“Goodness!” I snatched the ether mask from Malva’ s hand,
and guided her hastily to a stool. “Let me get rid of this, or
we’ll all be giddy .”
I f lipped  open the mask, pulle d the damp wad of cotton
wool out of it, and carried it outside at arm’ s length. I’d
opened both the sur gery windows, to provide ventilation and
save us all being  gassed, but eth er was insidious. Heavier than
air , it tended to sink toward the floor of a room and
accumulate ther e, unless there was a fan or some other device
to re move it. I might have to operate in the open air , I thought,
were I using it for any length of time.
I lai d th e cotton -wool pad on a  stone to dry out, and came
back, ho ping that they were al l too groggy now to continue
their philosophical speculations. I didn’ t want them following
that  line of though t; let it get around the Ridge that ether
separated people from their souls, and I’d never get anyone to
let me use it on them, no matter how dire the situation.
“W ell, th ank you all for helping,” I said, smiling as I entered
the room, relieved to find them all looking reasonably alert.
“Y ou’ve done something very useful and valuable. Y ou can all
go along about your business now , though—I’ll tidy up.”
Malva and Lizzie hesitated for a moment, neither girl
wanting to leave Bobby to the o ther , but under the impetus of
my shooing, drifted toward the door .
“When are ye to be wed, Miss W emyss?” Malva asked
casually—and lo udly enough for Bobby to hear—though she
certainly knew; everyone on the Ridge did.
“In August,” Lizzie replied coolly , lifting her small nose
half an inch. “Right after the haying— Miss  Christie.” And then
I shall be Mrs. McGillivray ,  her satisfied expression said. Andyou— Miss Christie—without an admir er to your name.  Not
that Malva attracted no notice f rom young men; only that her
father an d brother were assiduous in keeping them away from
her .
“I wish ye great joy of it,” Malva said. She glanced at
Bobby Higgins, then back at Lizzie, and smiled, demure
beneath her starched white cap.
Bobby stayed sitting on the ta ble for a moment, looking
after the girls.
“Bobby ,” I said, struck by the deeply thoughtful expression
on his face, “the figure you saw under the anesthetic—did you
recognize it?”
He looked at m e, then his eyes slid back to the empty
doorway , as though unable to keep away .
“Oh, no, mum,” he said, in such  a tone of earnest conviction
that I knew he lied. “Not at all!”4 3
DISPLACED PERSONS
T HEY HA D ST OPPED to water the horses by the edge of the
small lake the In dians called Thick Rushes. It was a warm day ,
and they hobbled the horses, stripped, and waded into the
water , spring-fed and gloriously cold. Cold enough to shock
the sens es and, for a moment  at least, drive away Jamie’ s
moody contemp lation of the no te MacDonald had delivered
him from John Stuart, the Indian Superintendent of the
Southern Department.
It had been complimentary enough, praising his celerity and
enterprise in drawing the Snowbird Cherokee into the British
sphere o f influe nce—but had gone on to ur ge more vigorous
involvement, pointing out Stuart’ s own coup in directing the
choice o f leaders among the Cho ctaws and the Chickasaw , at a
congress he had himself convened two years before.
… The competition and anxiety of the candidates for
medals and commissions was as gr eat as can be imagined
and equalled the struggles of the most aspiring and
ambitious for honours and pr eferment in gr eat states. I
took every step t o be informed of characters and filled the
vacancies with the most worthy and likely to answer the
purposes of maintaining or der and the attachment of this
nation to the British inter est. I ur ge you to strive for
similar good r esults to be achieved among the Cher okee.
“Oh, aye,” he said aloud, popping up among the rushes and
shaking water from his hair . “I’m  to depose T sisqua, nay doubt
by assassination, and bribe them all to install Pipestone
Carver”—the sm allest and most self-ef facing Indian Jamie had
ever see n—”as peace chief. Heugh!” He sank again, in a rush
of bub bles, entertaining hi mself by cursing Stuart’ s
presumption, watching his w ords rise up in waveringquicksilver balls, to disappear magically at the bright light of
the surface.
He rose again, gasping, then gulped air and held his breath.
“What was that?” said a startled voice nearby . “Is it them?”
“No, no,” said another , low and ur gent. “There are only two;
I see them both, over there, do you see?”
He open ed his mouth and breath ed like a zephyr , striving to
hear over the pounding of his heart.
He h ad understood them, but fo r an instant, could not put a
name to their tongue. Indians, aye, but not Cherokee, they
were … T uscarora, that was it.
He hadn’ t spoken with any T u scarora for years; most of
them ha d gone north in the wake of the measles epidemic that
had destroyed so many—going to join their Mohawk “fathers”
in the lands ruled by the Iroquois League.
These two were ar guing in whi spers, but near enough that
he m ade out mo st of what they said; they were no more than a
few feet from him, hidden by a thick growth of rushes and
cattail plants that stood nearly as high as a man’ s head.
Where was Ian? He could hear distant splashing, at the far
end of the lake , and turning his head gently , saw from the
corner o f his eye that Ian and Rollo were sporting in the water ,
the dog submer ged to his ruf f , paddling to and fro. If one
didn’ t kn ow—and the beast didn’ t sense the intruders and bark
—it looked very much like two men swimming.
The Ind ians had  concluded that this was likely the case—
two horses, thus two men, and b oth safely distant. W ith much
creaking and rustling, they bega n to make their way stealthily
in the direction of the horses.
Jamie was half-inclined to let them try to take Gideon and
see how far they got with such an enterprise. But they might
only make of f w ith Ian’ s horse and the pack mule—and Claire
would be fashit ,  did he let them take Clarence. Feeling himself
very much at a disadvantage, he slithered naked through thereeds, grimacing  at the rasp of them on his skin, and crawled
up among the cattails, into the mud of the shore.
Had they the w it to look back, they must have seen the
cattails s haking—and he hoped Ian would  s ee—but they w ere
intent on  their errand. He could glimpse them now , skulking in
the t all grass at the forest edge, glancing to and fro—but never
in the right direction.
Only tw o, he was sure of that now . Y oung, from the way
they moved, and unsure. He couldn’ t see if they were armed.
Slimed with mud, he crept furth er , sinking onto his belly in
the rank grasses near the lake, squirming rapidly toward the
shelter of a sumac bush. Wha t he wanted was a club, and
quickly .
In such circumstances, of cours e, nothing came to hand but
twigs an d long-rotted branches. For lack of better , he seized a
good-sized stone, but then found what he wanted: a dogwood
branch cracked by wind and han ging in reach, still attached to
the tree. They were approaching the grazing horses now;
Gideon saw them and lifted his head abruptly . He went on
chewing, but his ears lay ha lf back in patent suspicion.
Clarence, the ever -sociable, took  notice and raised his head, as
well, ears twitching to alertness.
Jamie seized the chance, and as Clarence emitted a
welcoming bray , he ripped th e branch from the tree and
char ged the intruders, roaring, “T ulach Ar d!”  at  the to p of his
voice.
W ide ey es met his, and one man bolted, long hair flying.
The other followed, but limping badly , going down on one
knee as something gave way . He was up again at once, but too
slow; Jamie swept the branch at his legs with a two-handed
fury that knocked him flat, and  leapt on his back, driving a
vicious knee into his kidney .
The man made a strangled noi se and froze, paralyzed by
pain. Jamie had dropped his rock—no, there it was. He
snatched it up and thumped the man solidly behind the ear , forluck. Then he w as of f and running after the other , who had
made for the wood but sheered of f, blocked by a rock-bound
streamlet in his path. Now the man was bounding through the
sedges; Jamie saw him cast a terrified look toward the water ,
where Ian and Rollo were making their way toward him,
swimming like beaver .
The Indian might have made it to the sanctuary of the forest,
had one  foot not suddenly sun k in soft mud. He staggered
sideways, and Jamie was on h im, feet sliding in the mud,
grappling.
The man  was young and wiry an d fought like an eel. Jamie,
with the advantage of size and weight, managed to push him
over , an d they fell together and rolled about in the sedges and
mud, clawing and thumping. The Indian caught Jamie’ s long
hair and yanked, bringing tears to his eyes; he punched the
man hard in the ribs to make him let go, and when he did,
butted him in the face.
Their foreheads met with a du ll thunk, and blinding pain
shot through his head. They fell apart, gasping, and Jamie
rolled u p onto his knees, head spinning and eyes watering,
trying to see.
There w as a blur of gray and a shriek of terror . Rollo gave
one deep-chested, snarling bark, then settled into a rumbling,
continuous grow l. Jamie shut one eye, a hand to his throbbing
forehead, and made out his op ponent lying flat in the mud,
Rollo poised over him, black li ps drawn back to show all his
teeth.
The splash of f eet running through the shallows, and Ian
was there, gasping for breath.
“Are ye all right, Uncle Jamie?”
He took  his hand away and looked at his fingers. No blood,
though he would have sworn his head was split open.
“No,” he said, “but better than him. Oh, Jesus.”
“Did ye kill the other one?”“Probably not. Oh, God.”
Lowering himse lf to his hands and knees, he crawled a short
distance away and threw up. Behind him, he could hear Ian
sharply demanding to know who the men were and whether
there were others with them, in Cherokee.
“They’re T uscar ora,” he said. His head still throbbed, but he
felt a little better .
“Oh, ay e?” Ian was surprised, but at once shifted into the
tongue of the Kahnyen’kehaka . The young captive, already
terrorized by Rollo, looked as though he might die of fright,
seeing Ian’ s tattoos and hearing him speak Mohawk.
Kahnyen’kehaka was of the same family as T uscarora, and
plainly the young man could m ake out what Ian said, for he
replied, stammering with fear . They were alone. W as his
brother dead?
Jamie rinsed his mouth with wa ter , splashed it on his face.
That was better , though a lump like a duck’ s egg was swelling
over his left eye.
“Brother?”
Y es, the young man said, his bro ther . If they did not mean to
kill him now , might he go and see? His brother was wounded.
Ian glan ced at Jamie for agreement, then called Rollo of f
with a word. The bedraggled captive struggled painfully to his
feet, staggering,  and set of f back along the shore, followed by
the dog and the two naked Scots.
The other man was indeed wounded; blood was seeping
through a crude bandage round his leg. He had made the
bandage of his shirt, and was bare-chested, scrawny , and
starved-looking. Jamie glanced from one to the other; neither
could be older than twenty , he  thought, and likely younger
than tha t, with their faces pinched by hunger and ill-usage,
their clothes little more than rags.
The hor ses had moved of f a little, nervous of the fighting,
but the clothes the Scots had left hanging from the bushes
were still there. Ian pulled on h is breeches and went to fetchfood and drink from the saddleb ags, while Jamie dressed more
slowly , interrogating the young man as the latter anxiously
examined his brother .
They were T uscarora, the young man confirmed. His name
was a long one, meaning roughly “the gleam of light on water
in a spring”; this was his brother , “the goose that encourages
the leader when they fly ,” more simply known as Goose.
“What happened to him?” Jamie pulled his shirt over his
head and nodded—wincing at the movement—at the gash in
Goose’ s leg, quite obviously made by something like an ax.
Light on  W ater took a deep brea th and closed his eyes for a
moment. He had a substantial knot on his head, as well.
“T salagi,” he said. “W e were tw o score in number; the rest
are dead, or ta ken. Y ou will not give us to them, Lord?
Please?”
“T salagi? Which?”
Light sh ook his head; he could not say . His band had chosen
to stay when his village moved north, but they had not
prospered; there were not enough men to defend a village and
hunt, and without defenders, oth ers stole their crops, took their
women.
Growing poorer , they , too, had taken to stealing and to
begging to survive through the winter . More had died of cold
and sickness, and the remnants  moved from place to place,
now and  then finding a place t o settle for a few weeks, but
then driven out by the much stronger Cherokee.
A fe w days pa st, they had be en set upon by a party of
Cherokee warriors, who had taken them by surprise, killed
most of them, and taken some women.
“They took my wife,” Light sa id, his voice unsteady . “W e
came to—to take her back.”
“They w ill kill us, of course,” said Goose weakly , but with a
fair amount of cheerfulness. “But that doesn’ t signify .”“Of course not,” Jamie said, smiling despite himself. “Do
you know where they took her?”
The bro thers knew the direction taken by the raiders, and
had been following, to track th em to their village. That way ,
they said, pointing toward a notch. Ian glanced at Jamie, and
nodded.
“Bird,” he said. “Or Fox, I sho uld say ,” for Running Fox
was war chief of  the village; a good warrior , though somewhat
lacking in imagination—a trait Bird possessed in quantity .
“Shall we help them, then?” Ian said in English. His
feathery brows arched in question, but Jamie could see that it
was a question in form only .
“Oh, ay e, I expect we will.” He rubbed gingerly at his
forehead; the skin over the lum p was already stretched and
tender . “Let’ s eat first, though.”
IT W AS NOT a  question of wh ether the thing might be done;
only how . Jamie and Ian both dismissed out of hand any
suggestion that the brothers might steal back Light’ s wife.
“They will  kill ye,” Ian assured them.
“W e don’ t mind,” Light said stoutly .
“Of course ye d on’ t,” said Jamie. “But what of your wife?
She’d be left alone, then, and in no better case.”
Goose nodded judiciously .
“He’ s right, you know ,” he said to his glowering brother .
“W e could ask f or her ,” Jamie suggested. “A wife for you,
Ian. Bird thinks well of ye; he’d likely give her to you.”
He was only hal f-joking. If no one had yet taken the young
woman to wife, the person who had her as slave might be
persuaded to give her to Ian, who was deeply respected.
Ian gave a perfunctory smile, but shook his head.
“Nay , we’d best ransom her . Or—” He looked consideringly
at the two India ns, industriously eating their way through theremainder of the food in the saddlebags. “Might we ask Bird
to adopt them?”
That was a thought, to be sure. For once they had got the
young woman back, by whatever means, she and the brothers
would be in the same dire case—wandering and hungry .
The brothers frowned, though, and shook their heads.
“Food is  a good thing,” Goose said, licking his fingers. “But
we s aw them ki ll our family , ou r friends. If we hadn’ t seen it
ourselves, it would be possible. But—”
“A ye, I see,” Ja mie said, and w as struck for an instant by
mild astonishment that he did  see; evidently , he had spent
longer among the Indians than he supposed.
The bro thers exchanged glances , obviously communicating
something. Decision made, Light made a gesture of respect to
Jamie.
“W e are your  slaves,” he pointed out with some dif fidence.
“It is yours to decide what to do with us.” He paused
delicately , waiting.
Jamie rubbed a hand over his fa ce, considering that perhaps
he hadn ’ t spent quite enough ti me with Indians after all. Ian
didn’ t smile, but seemed to emit a low vibration of
amusement.
MacDonald had told him stories of campaigns during the
French and Indian W ar; soldiers who took Indian prisoners
commonly either killed them for scalp money or sold them as
slaves. T hose ca mpaigns lay a s cant ten years in the past; the
peace since had been frequentl y uneasy , and God knew the
various Indians made slaves of their prisoners, unless they
chose—for whatever inscrutable Indian motive—to adopt or
kill them, instead.
Jamie had captured the two T uscarora; er go, by custom,
they were now his slaves.
He understood quite well what Light was suggesting—that
he  adopt the brothers, and doubtl ess the young woman, too,once he ’d rescued her—and how in God’ s name had he
suddenly become responsible for doing that?
“W ell, there’ s nay market for their scalps just now ,” Ian
pointed out. “Though I suppose  ye could sell  the two of them
to B ird. Though they’re no wort h a great deal, scrawny and ill-
feckit as they are.”
The brothers stared at him, impassive, awaiting his decision.
Light belched suddenly , and looked surprised at the sound. Ian
did  laugh at that, a low creaking noise.
“Oh, I couldna do any such thing, and the three of ye ken
that perfectly well,” Jamie said crossly . “I should have hit ye
harder and saved myself troub le,” he said to Goose, who
grinned at him, with gap-toothed good nature.
“Y es, Uncle,” he said, bowing low in deep respect.
Jamie made a d ispleased soun d in response, but the two
Indians took no notice.
It would have to be the med als, then. MacDonald had
brought him a c hest bulging with medals, gilt buttons, cheap
brass compasses, steel knife blades, and other bits of attractive
rubbish. Since the chiefs derived their power from their
popularity , and their popularity increased in direct proportion
to th eir ability t o give gifts, the British Indian agents exerted
influence by distributing lar gesse to those chiefs who indicated
a willingness to ally themselves to the Crown.
He’d bro ught only two small ba gs of such bribery; the rest
left at home for future use. Wh at he had on hand would, he
was sure, be suf ficient to ransom  Mrs. Light, but to expend it
all in such fashion would leave him empty-handed with
respect to the other village chiefs—and that wouldn’ t do.
W ell, an d he supposed he must send Ian back, then, to fetch
more. B ut not until he’d arrange d the ransom; he wanted Ian’ s
help in that matter .
“Fine, then,” he said, standing u p. He fought of f a wave of
dizziness. “But I am not  adopting them.” The last thing he
needed just this minute was three more mouths to feed.4 4
SCOTCHEE
A RRANGING THE RANSOM was, as he had supposed, a
simple m atter of bar gaining. And in the end, Mrs. Light came
fairly cheap, at the price of si x medals, four knives, and a
compass. Grante d, he hadn’ t se en her until the conclusion of
the dealing—if he had, he mig ht have of fered even less; she
was a small, p ockmarked lass of perhaps fourteen, with a
slight walleye.
Still, he  reflected, there was no accounting for taste, and
both Light and Goose had been willing to die for her .
Doubtless she had a kind heart, or some other excellent quality
of character , such as a talent and af finity for bed.
He was quite sh ocked to find hi mself thinking such a thing,
and looked at her more closely . It was in no way obvious—and
yet, now that he did  look—she did radiate that strange appeal,
that remarkable gift, held by a few women, that bypassed such
superficial appreciations as loo ks, age, or wit, and caused a
man simply to wish to seize her and—
He c hoked the s prouting image of f at the root. He’d known
a few such women, most of them French. And had thought
more than once that perhaps it was his own wife’ s French
heritage that was responsible for her possession of that most
desirable but very dangerous gift.
He could see Bird eyeing the girl thoughtfully , quite
obviously regretting that he had let her go for so little.
Fortunately , a distraction occurred to drive the matter from his
attention—the return of a hunting party , bringing with them
guests.
The guests were Cherokee of the Overhill Band, far from
their hom e in the T ennessee mo untains. And with them was aman Jam ie had often heard of, but never met until this day—
one Alex ander Cameron, whom  the Indians called “Scotchee.”
A dark,  weath ered man of middle-age, Cameron was
distinguishable f rom the Indians only by his heavy beard and
the long , inquisitive shape of his nose. He had lived with the
Cherokee since the age of fifte en, had a Cherokee wife, and
was much esteemed among them. He was also an Indian agent,
thick with John Stuart. And hi s presence here, two hundred
miles from home, caused Jamie’ s own long, inquisitive nose to
twitch with interest.
The inte rest was frankly mutual; Cameron examined him
with deep-set eyes in which intelligence and wiliness showed
in equal measure.
“The re dheided Bear -Killer , och, och!” he exclaimed,
shaking Jamie warmly by the ha nd, and then embracing him in
the I ndian fashion. “I’ve heard such tales of ye, ken, and fair
dyin’ to meet ye to see were they true.”
“I doubt  it,” Jamie said. “The last one I heard myself, I’d
done for three b ears at once, ki llin’ the last of them high in a
tree, where he’d chased me after chewin’ of f my foot.”
Despite himself, Cameron looked down at Jamie’ s feet, then
looked up and h ooted with laughter , all the lines of his face
curving in such irresistible merriment that Jamie felt his own
laughter bubble up.
It was not, of co urse, proper to speak of business yet awhile.
The hunting party had brought down one of the woods
buf faloes, and a great feast was preparing: the liver taken away
to be singed an d devoured at once, the strap of tender meat
from the back roasted with whole onions, and the heart—so
Ian told him—to be shared am ong the four of them: Jamie,
Cameron, Bird, and Running Fox, a mark of honor .
After the liver had been eaten, they retired to Bird’ s house
to drink beer for an hour or two, while the women made ready
the rest of the food. And in the course of nature, he found
himself outside, having a comfo rtable piss against a tree, whena quiet footfall came behind him, and Alexander Cameron
stepped up alongside, undoing the fall of his breeches.
It seemed natural—though plainly Cameron had intended it
—to wa lk abou t together for a  bit then, the cool air of the
evening a respite from the smoke inside the house, and speak
of things of common interest—John Stuart, for one, and the
ways and means of the Southern Department. Indians, for
another; compa ring the personalities and means of dealing
with the  various village chiefs, speculating as to who would
make a leader , and whether there might be a great congress
called within the year .
“Y e’ll be wondering, I expect,” Cameron said quite casually ,
“at my presence here?”
Jamie made a slight motion of the shoulders, admitting
interest, but indicating a polite lack of inquisition into
Cameron’ s af fairs.
Cameron chuckled.
“A ye, well. It’ s no secret, to be sure. It’ s James Henderson,
is what it is—ye’ll ken the name, maybe?”
He did. Hender son had been C hief Justice of the Superior
Court in North Carolina—until the Regulation had caused him
to leave , climbing out the window of his courthouse and
fleeing for his life from a mob bent on violence.
A w ealthy man, and one with a  due regard for the value of
his s kin, Henderson had retired from public life and set about
increasing his fortune. T o which end, he proposed now to buy
an enorm ous tract of land from  the Cherokee, this located in
T ennessee, and establish townships there.
Jamie gave Cameron an eye, apprehending at once the
complexity of the situation. For the one thing, the lands in
question lay far , far inside the T reaty Line. For Henderson to
instigate such dealings was an indication—had any been
needed—of just how feeble the grasp of the Crown had grown
of late. Plainly , Henderson thought nothing of flouting HisMajesty’ s treaty , and expected no interference with his af fairs
as a result of doing so.
That was one thing. For anot her , though—the Cherokee
held land in com mon, as all the Indians did. Leaders could and
did sell land to whites, without such legal niceties as clear title,
but were still subject to the ex post facto  approval or
disapproval of their people. Such approval would not af fect
the sale, which would be already accomplished, but could
result in the fall of a leader , and  in a good deal of trouble for
the m an who tri ed to take posse ssion of land paid for in good
faith—or what passed for good faith, in such dealings.
“John Stuart knows of this, o f course,” Jamie said, and
Cameron nodded, with a small air of complacency .
“Not of ficially , mind,” he said.
Naturally not. The Superintendent of Indian Af fairs could
hardly countenance such an arrangement of ficially . At the
same time, it w ould be smiled on unof ficially , as such a
purchase could not help but fu rther the department’ s goal of
bringing the Indians further under the sway of British
influence.
Jamie wondered idly whether Stuart profited in any personal
way from the sa le. Stuart had a  good reputation and was not
known to be cor rupt—but he might well have a silent interest
in the matter . Th en again, he m ight have no financial interest
himself, and be turning an of ficially blind eye to the
arrangement only in furtherance of the department’ s purposes.
Cameron, thoug h … He couldn’ t say , of course, but would
be most surprised if Cameron had no finger in the pie.
He did not know where Cameron’ s natural interest lay ,
whether with the Indians amon g whom he lived or with the
British t o whom he had been born. He doubted that anyone did
—perhaps not even Cameron. Regardless of his abiding
interests, though , Cameron’ s immediate goals were clear . He
wished the sale to be met with approval—or at least
indif ference—by the surrounding Cherokee, thus keeping hisown pet chiefs i n good odor with their followers, and allowing
Henderson to go forward with his plans with no undue
harassment by Indians in the area.
“I shall not, of  course, say anything for a day or two,”
Cameron told him, and he nodde d. There was a natural rhythm
to su ch business. But of course, Cameron had told him now so
that he might be of help when the subject arose in due course.
Cameron took it for granted tha t he would  help . T here wa s
no expli cit prom ise of a bit of H enderson’ s pie for himself, but
no need; it was the sort of opportunity that was a perquisite of
being a n Indian agent—the reason that such appointments
were considered plums.
Given what Jamie knew of the near future, he had neither
expectation nor  interest in He nderson’ s purchase—but the
subject did give him a welcome  opportunity for a useful quid
pr o quo.
He coughed gently .
“Y e ken the wee T uscarora lassie I bought from Bird?”
Cameron laughed.
“A ye. A nd he’ s most perplexed what ye mean to do with
her; he says ye w illna take any of the lasses he sends to warm
your bed. She’ s no so much to look at—but still …”
“Not that,” Jamie assured him. “She’ s marrit, for the one
thing. I brought  two T uscaroran lads with me; she belongs to
one of them.”
“Oh, aye?” Cameron’ s nose twitched with interest, scenting
a s tory . Jamie h ad been waiting for this opportunity since the
sight of Camero n first gave him  the notion, and he told it well,
with the satisfactory outcome that Cameron agreed to take the
three displaced young T uscaroras with him, and sponsor their
adoption into the Overhill Band.
“It’ll no  be the first time,” he told Jamie. “There are more
and more of them—wee scraps of what were villages, evenwhole peoples— wandering ab out the country starved and
wretched. Heard of the Dogash, have ye?”
“No.”
“Nor are ye like to,” Camero n said, shaking his head.
“There’ s no but ten or so of them left. They came to us last
winter; of fered themselves as slaves, only so that they might
survive the cold. No—dinna fash yourself, man,” he assured
Jamie, catching sight of Jamie’ s expression. “Y our wee lads
and the lass won’ t be slaves; my word on it.”
Jamie nodded his thanks, pleased with the business. They
had wandered some distance outside the village, and stood
talking near the edge of a go r ge, where the wood opened
suddenly over a vista of moun tain ranges, rolling away and
away like furrows plowed in so me endless field of the gods,
their backs dark and brooding beneath a starlit sky .
“How can there ever be people enough to settle such a
wilderness?” he said, moved suddenly by the sight of it. And
yet t he smell of  woodsmoke and cooking meat hung heavy in
the air . People did inhabit it, few and scattered as they were.
Cameron shook his head in contemplation.
“They come,” he said, “and the y keep on coming. My ain
folk came from Scotland. Y ou have,” he added, teeth a brief
gleam in  his beard. “And dinna mean to go back, I’ll warrant.”
Jamie sm iled at that, but made  no answer , though a queer
feeling rose in h is wame at the thought. He did not mean to go
back. Had said g oodbye to Scotland at the rail of the Artemis,
knowing full well it was likely his last sight of the place. And
yet, the notion that he would n ever set foot there again had
never fully settled on him ‘til this moment.
Calls of “Scotchee, Scotchee” summoned them, and he
turned to  follow Cameron back t o the village, conscious all the
time of the glorious, terrifying emptiness behind him—and the
more terrifying emptiness within.
THEY SMOKE D THA T night, after feasting, in ceremonious
observance of Jamie’ s bar gain with Bird, in welcome to
Cameron. When  the pipe had gone twice around the fire, they
began to tell stories.
Stories of raids, of battles. Exhausted from the day , head
still thro bbing, m ellowed by food and spruce beer , and slightly
intoxicated by the smoke, Jamie had meant only to listen.
Perhaps it was t he thought of Scotland, so casually evoked by
Cameron’ s remark. But at some point, a memory had stirred,
and when the ne xt expectant silence fell, he was surprised to
hear his own voice, telling them of Culloden.
“And there near a wall I saw a man I knew , named
MacAllister , besieged by a horde of enemies. He fought with
gun and  sword, but both failed him—his blade was broken, his
shield shattered upon his breast.”
The fum e of the pipe reached hi m and he raised it and drew
deep, as  though  he drank the air of the moor , hazed with rain
and the smoke of the day .
“Still the y came , his enemies, to  kill him, and he seized up a
piece of metal, the tongue of a wagon, and with it, killed
six”—he held up both hands, fingers stuck up in illustration
—”six of them, before he was at last brought down.”
Sounds of awe and tongue clicks of approval greeted this
recounting.
“And you yourself, Bear -Killer , how many men did you kill
in this battle?”
The smoke burned in his chest,  behind his eyes, and for an
instant he tasted the bitter smo ke of cannon fire, not sweet
tobacco. He saw—he saw —Alistair MacAllister , dead at his
feet among the r ed-clothed bodies, the side of his head crushed
in a nd the roun d curve of his shoulder shining solid through
the cloth of the shirt, so wetly did it cling to him.
He w as there, on the moor , the wet and cold no more than a
shimmer on his skin, rain slick on his face, his own shirt
sopping and steaming on him with the heat of his rage.And then he no longer stood on Drumossie, and became
aware a second too late of the indrawn breaths around him. He
saw Ro bert T alltree’ s face, the wrinkles all turned up in
astonishment, and only then looked down, to see all ten of his
fingers flex and fold, and the four fingers of the right extend
again, quite without his meaning it. The thumb wavered,
indecisive. He watched this w ith fascination, then, coming
finally to  his wits, balled his right hand as well as he could and
wrapped the left around it, as t hough to throttle the memory
that had  been thrust with such unnerving suddenness into the
palm of his hand.
He looked up to  see T alltree gla nce sharply at his face, and
he s aw the dark old eyes harden, then narrow under a frown—
and then  the old man took the pipe, drank deep, and blew the
smoke across him, bowing forward. T alltree did this twice
more, and a hum  of hushed approval at the honor came from
the clustered men.
He took  the pipe and returned th e honor of the gesture, then
passed it to the next man, refusing to speak further .
They didn’ t push him to, seemi ng to recognize and respect
the shock he felt.
Shock. Not even that. What he felt was the blankest
astonishment. Cautiously , unwilling, he stole a keek at that
picture of Alistair . God, it was there.
He reali zed that he was holding  his breath, not wanting to
breathe the reek of blood and sp illed bowels. He breathed, soft
smoke and a co pper tang of seasoned bodies, and could have
wept, swept with sudden longin g for the cold, sharp air of the
Highlands, pungent with the scents of peat and gorse.
Alexander Cameron said something to him, but he couldn’ t
reply . Ia n, seeing the dif ficulty , leaned forward to answer , and
they all laughed. Ian gave him a  curious look, but then turned
back to the conv ersation, beginn ing a story of a famous game
of lacros se he had played among the Mohawk. Leaving Jamie
to sit still, wreathed in the smoke.Fourteen men. And he did not r emember a single face. And
that random thumb, hovering uncertainly . Whatever did he
mean by that? That he had fought yet another , but not made
certain of the fellow?
He was afraid ev en to think of the memory . Unsure what to
do with it. But at the same time , conscious of a sense of awe.
And despite everything, grateful to have this small thing back.
IT W AS VER Y LA TE, and most of the men had gone to their
own houses, or lay comfortably asleep around the fire. Ian had
left the fire, but  hadn’ t come back. Cameron was still there,
smoking his own pipe now , tho ugh he shared this with Bird,
taking turn and turn about.
“There is a thin g I would tell you,” Jamie said abruptly , in
the mids t of a drowsy silence. “Both of you.” Bird raised his
brows in slow question, drugged with tobacco.
He hadn ’ t known he meant to say it. Had thought to wait,
judge hi s time— if he spoke at all. Perhaps it was the closeness
of the house, the dark intimacy of the fireside, or the
intoxication of tobacco. Perhaps only the kinship of an exile
for t hose who w ould suf fer the same fate. But he’d spoken;
had no choice now but to tell them what he knew .
“The women of my family are … ” He groped, not knowing
the Cherokee word. “Those w ho see in dreams what is to
come.” He darted a look at Ca meron, who appeared to take
this in his stride, for he nodded, and closed his eyes to draw
smoke into his lungs.
“Have they the Sight, then?” he asked, mildly interested.
Jamie nodded; it was as good an explanation as any .
“They h ave seen a thing concerning the T salagi. Both my
wife and my daughter have seen this thing.”
Bird’ s a ttention sharpened, h earing this. Dreams were
important; for more than one person to share a dream was
extraordinary , and therefore most important.“It griev es me to tell you,” Jamie said, and meant it. “Sixty
years fro m this time, the T salagi will be taken from their lands,
removed to a new place. Many will die on this journey , so that
the p ath they tre ad will be calle d …” He groped for the word
for “tears,” did not find it, and  ended, “the trail where they
wept.”
Bird’ s lips pursed, as though to  draw smoke, but the pipe
fumed unnoticed in his hands.
“Who will do this?” he asked. “Who can ?”
Jamie drew a de ep breath; here was the dif ficulty . And yet
—so mu ch less dif ficult than he had thought, now that it came
to the matter .
“It will be white men,” he said . “But it will not be King
Geor ge’ s men.”
“The French?” Cameron spoke with a hint of incredulity ,
but f rowned, nonetheless, trying  to see how this might come to
pass. “Or the Sp anish, do they mean? The Spanish are a good
deal closer—but  none sae many .” Spain still held the country
south of  Geor gia, and parts of the Indies, but the English held
Geor gia firmly; there was little apparent chance of any
northward movement by the Spaniards.
“No. Not Spanish, not French .” He could wish Ian had
stayed, f or more  than one reaso n. But the lad had not, and so
he woul d have to struggle wit h the T salagi, which was an
interesting tongu e, but one in which he could talk fluently only
of solid things—and of a very limited future.
“What they tell me—what my women say—” He struggled
to find sensible words. “A thing that they see in their dreams,
this thing will c ome to pass, if it concerns many people. But
they think it may not  c ome to pass, if it concerns a few , or
one.”
Bird blinked, confused—and no wonder . Grimly , Jamie
tried again to explain.
“There a re lar ge things, and the re are small things. A lar ge
thing is a thing l ike a great battle, or the raising up of a notablechief—though h e is one man, he is raised up by the voices of
many . If my wom en dream of these lar ge things, then they will
happen. But in any lar ge thing, there are many people. Some
say do this; others, do that.” He zigzagged his hand to and fro,
and Bird nodded.
“So. If many people say , ‘Do this ’”—he stabbed his fingers
sharply to the le ft—”then this happens. But what of the people
who said, ‘do th at’?” And he j erked a thumb back the other
way . “These people may choose a dif ferent way .”
Bird made the hm-hm- hm!  sound he used when startled.
“So it may be that some will not go?” Cameron asked
sharply . “They might escape?”
“I hope so,” Jamie said simply .
They sat in silence for a bit, each man staring into the fire,
each seeing his own visions—of the future, or the past.
“This wife you have,” Bird said at last, deeply
contemplative, “did you pay a great deal for her?”
“She cost me al most everything  I had,” he said, with a wry
tone that made the others laugh. “But worth it.”
IT W AS VER Y LA TE when h e went to the guesthouse; the
moon had set, and the sky had that look of deep serenity , the
stars singing to t hemselves in endless night. His body ached in
every muscle, and he was so tired that he stumbled on the
threshold. His instincts were still working, though, and he felt,
rather than saw , someone move in the shadows of the sleeping-
couch.
God, Bird was still at it. W ell, to night it wouldn’ t matter; he
could lie naked with a covey of young women, and sleep
sound. T oo exhausted to be annoyed by her presence, he
struggled for some polite acknowledgment of the woman.
Then she stood up.
The firelight showed him an e lderly woman, her hair in
grizzled plaits, her dress of white buckskin decorated withpaint and porcupine quills. He recognized Calls-in-the-Forest,
dressed in her best. Bird’ s sen se of humor had finally got
completely out of hand; he had sent Jamie his mother .
All gras p of T salagi deserted him . He opened his mouth, but
merely gaped at her . She smiled, very slightly , and held out her
hand.
“Come and lie down, Bear -Killer ,” she said. Her voice was
kind an d gruf f. “I’ve come to  comb the snakes from your
hair .”
She drew him unresisting to the couch, and made him lie
down w ith his head in her lap. Sure enough; she unplaited his
hair and spread it out across he r knees, her touch soothing to
his throbbing head and the painful knot on his brow .
He h ad no idea how old she mi ght be, but her fingers were
muscular and tireless, making small, rhythmic circles in his
scalp, on his temples, behind his ears, near to the bone at the
base of his skull. She had thrown sweet grass and some other
herb on the fire ; the chimney h ole was drawing well and he
could se e white smoke rising up ward in a wavering pillar , very
calm, but a sense of constant movement in it.
She was humming to herself, or rather whispering some
song, the words too indistinct to make out. He watched the
silent sh apes stream upward in the smoke, and felt his body
growing heavy , limbs filled with  wet sand, his body a sandbag
placed in the path of a flood.
“T alk, Bear -Killer ,” she said very softly , breaking of f her
chant. S he had a wooden comb in her hand; he felt the teeth of
it caress his scalp, rounded with wear .
“I cannot call your words to me,” he said, searching for each
word in  T salagi, and thus speak ing very slowly . She made a
small snorting noise in reply .
“The words don’ t matter , nor the tongue in which you
speak,” she said. “Only talk. I will understand.”
And so he began  haltingly to speak—in Gaelic, as it was the
only to ngue th at didn’ t seem to require any ef fort. Heunderstood that he was to speak of what filled his heart, and so
began with Scotland—and Cullo den. Of grief. Of loss. Of fear .
And in the spea king turned from past to future, where he
saw these three specters loom again, cold creatures coming
toward him out of the fog, looking through their empty eyes.
Another stood among them—Ja ck Randall—confusingly on
both sid es of him. Those eyes w ere not empty , but alive, intent
in a misty face. Had he killed t he man, or not? If he had, did
the ghos t follow at his heels? Or if he had not, was it the
thought of vengeance unsatisfi ed that haunted him, taunted
him with its imperfect memory?
But in the speaking, he seemed somehow to rise a little way
above his body , and see hims elf at rest, eyes open, fixed
upward, his hair darkly flaming in a halo round his head,
streaked with the silver of his age. And here he saw that he
merely was,  in  a place between, apart. And quite alone. At
peace.
“I hold to no evil in my heart,” he said, hearing his voice
come slo w , from  a long way of f. “This evil does not touch me.
More may come, but not this. Not here. Not now .”
“I understand,” whispered the old woman, and went on
combing his hair as the white smoke rose silent toward the
hole to the sky .4 5
A T AINT IN THE BLOOD
June 1774
I  SA T BACK ON MY HEELS and stretched, tired but
pleased. My back ached, my k nees creaked like hinges, my
fingernails were  caked with dirt, and strands of hair stuck to
my n eck and che eks—but the new crops of pole beans, onions,
turnips, and radishes were planted, the cabbages weeded and
culled, and a do zen lar ge peanut bushes had been pulled up
and hung to dry on the garden palisades, safe from marauding
squirrels.
I glance d up at the sun; still above the chestnut trees. T ime
enough then before supper for a last chore or two. I stood up
and surv eyed my small kingdom, debating where best to spend
my remaining time. Rooting up  the catmint and lemon balm
that thre atened to engulf the far  corner of the garden? Carting
baskets of nicely rotted manure  up from the heap behind the
barn? No, that was man’ s work.
Herbs? My three French lavender bushes stood knee-high,
thick with deep blue swabs on slender stalks, and the yarrow
was well in blo om, with lacy umbels of white and pink and
yellow . I rubbed a finger unde r my itching nose, trying to
recall w hether th is was the prop er phase of the moon in which
to c ut yarrow . L avender and rosemary should be cut in the
morning, though, when the volatile oils had risen with the sun;
it wasn’ t as potent if taken later in the day .
Down with the mint, then. I reached for the hoe I had left
leaning against the fence, saw  a face leering through the
palisades, and started back, my heart leaping into my throat.
“Oh!” My visitor had jumped back, too, equally startled.
“ Bitte,  ma’am! Didn’ t mean to fright ye.”It was Manfred  McGillivray , peeping shyly through the
drooping vines of morning glory and wild yam. He’d come
earlier in the day , bringing a canvas-wrapped bundle
containing several muskets for Jamie.
“That’ s all right.” I stooped to pick up the hoe I had
dropped. “Are you looking for Lizzie? She’ s in—”
“Ach, no, ma’am. That is, I—d o ye think I might have a
word, ma’am?” he asked abruptly . “Alone, like?”
“Of course. Come along in; we can talk while I hoe.”
He nodd ed, and went round to let himself in by the gate.
What m ight he want with me? I wondered. He had on a coat
and boots, both covered in dust , and his breeches were badly
creased. He’d been riding some  way , then, not just from his
family’ s cabin— and he hadn’ t been into the house yet; Mrs.
Bug would have dusted him of f, forcibly .
“Where have you come from?”  I asked, of fering him the
gourd di pper from my water bucket. He accepted it, drinking
thirstily , then wiped his mouth politely on his sleeve.
“Thank ye, ma’am. I’ve been to  Hillsboro, for to fetch the
… er … the things for Mr . Fraser .”
“Really? That seems a long way ,” I said mildly .
A lo ok of profo und uneasiness crossed his face. He was a
nice-looking boy , tanned and handsome as a young faun under
his c rop of dark , curly hair , but he looked almost furtive now ,
glancing back over his shoulde r toward the house, as though
fearful of interruption.
“I … um … well, ma’am, that ’ s to do, a bit, with what I
meant to speak to ye about.”
“Oh? W ell …” I made a cordial gesture, indicating that he
should f eel free to unburden him self, and turned away to begin
my hoeing, so that he might f eel less self-conscious. I was
beginning to suspect what he wanted to ask me, though I
wasn’ t sure what Hillsboro had to do with it.“It’ s … ah … well, it’ s to do with Mrs. Lizzie,” he began,
folding his hands behind him.
“Y es?” I  said encouragingly , nearly sure that I was right in
my supposition s. I glanced to ward the western end of the
garden, where the bees were bu zzing happily among the tall
yellow umbels of the dauco  plan ts. W ell, it was better than the
eighteenth-century notion of condoms, at least.
“I can’ t marry her ,” he blurted.
“What?” I stopped hoeing and straightened up, staring at
him. His lips were pressed tightl y together , and I saw now that
what I had taken for shyness ha d been his attempt to mask a
deep unhappines s that now showed plainly in the lines of his
face.
“Y ou’d better come and sit dow n.” I led him to the small
bench Jamie had made me, set beneath the shade of a black
gum tree that overhung the north side of the garden.
He s at, h ead dro oping and hands trapped between his knees.
I too k of f my broad-brimmed sun hat, wiped my face on my
apron, and pinned up my hair more neatly , breathing in the
cool fres hness of the spruce and balsam trees that grew on the
slope above.
“What i s it?” I asked gently , seeing that he did not know
how to start. “A re you afraid tha t perhaps you don’ t love her?”
He gave me a startled look, then turned his head back to the
studied contemplation of his knees.
“Oh. No, ma’am. I mean—I don’ t, but that’ s no matter .”
“It isn’ t?”
“No. I mean—I ’m sure we should  g row to be fon d of one
another , meine Mutter  says so. And I like her well enough
now , to be sure,”  he added hastily , as though fearing this might
sound insulting. “Da says she’ s a tidy wee soul, and my sisters
are verra fond of her indeed.”
I ma de a nonco mmittal sound. I had had my doubts about
this mat ch to begin with, and it was beginning to sound asthough they were justified.
“Is there … perhaps someone else?” I asked delicately .
Manfred shook his head slowly , and I heard him swallow
hard.
“No, ma’am,” he said in a low voice.
“Y ou’re sure?”
“A ye, ma’am.” He drew a deep breath. “I mean—there was.
But that’ s all done with now .”
I wa s puzzled b y this. If he had decided to renounce this
mysterious other girl—whether out of fear of his mother , or
for some other reason—then what was stopping him from
going through with the marriage to Lizzie?
“The other girl—is she by chance from Hillsboro?” Things
were com ing a little clearer . When I had first met him and his
family at the Gathering, his sisters had exchanged knowing
glances at mention of Manfred’ s visits to Hillsboro. They had
known about it then, even if Ute had not.
“A ye. Th at’ s why I went to Hillsboro—I mean, I had to go,
for the … er … But I meant to see … Myra … and tell her that
I wo uld be marr ied to Miss W emyss and couldna come to see
her anymore.”
“Myra.” So she had a name, at least. I sat back, tapping my
foot meditativel y . “Y ou meant to—so you didn’ t see her , after
all?”
He shook his head again, and I saw a tear drop and spread
suddenly on the dusty homespun of his breeches.
“No, ma’am,” he said, his voice half-choked. “I couldn’ t.
She was dead.”
“Oh, dea r ,” I said softly . “Oh, I am so sorry .” The tears were
falling on his knees, making spots on the cloth, and his
shoulders shook, but he didn’ t make a sound.
I rea ched out an d gathered him into my arms, holding him
tight against my shoulder . His hair was soft and springy andhis s kin flushed with heat again st my neck. I felt helpless to
deal wit h his grief; he was too old to comfort with mere touch,
too young—perhaps—to find any solace in words. There was
nothing I could do for the moment save hold him.
His arm s went round my waist, though, and he clung to me
for seve ral minutes after his w eeping was spent. I held him
quietly , patting his back and keeping watch through the
flickering green shadows of the vine-twined palisades, lest
anyone else come looking for me in the garden.
At last he sigh ed, let go, an d sat up. I groped for a
handkerchief, and not finding one, pulled of f my apron and
handed it to him to wipe his face.
“Y ou ne edn’ t marry right away ,” I said, when he seemed to
have regained possession of himself. “It’ s only right that you
should take a little time to—to  heal. But we can find some
excuse to put the wedding of f; I’ll speak to Jamie—”
But he was sha king his head, a  look of sad determination
taking the place of tears.
“No, ma’am,” he said, low-voiced but definite. “I can’ t.”
“Why not?”
“Myra was a whore, ma’am. She died of the French
disease.”
He look ed up at me then, and I  saw the terror in his eyes,
behind the grief.
“And I think I’ve got it.”
“YE’RE SURE?” Jamie set down the hoof he had been
trimming, and looked bleakly at Manfred.
“ I’m  sure,” I said tartly . I had oblige d Manfred to show me
the evid ence—in fact, I had take n scrapings from the lesion to
examine micros copically—then took him straight to find
Jamie, barely waiting for the boy to do up his breeches.Jamie looked fixedly at Manfred, plainly trying to decide
what to say . Manfred, purple-fa ced from the double stress of
confession and examination, dropped his own eyes before this
basilisk gaze, staring at a crescent of black hoof paring that lay
on the ground.
“I’m that sorry , sir ,” he murmured. “I—I didna mean to …”
“I shouldna suppose anyone does,” Jamie said. He breathed
deeply and made a sort of subterranean growling noise that
caused Manfred  to hunch his shoulders and try to withdraw his
head, turtlelike, into the safer confines of his clothing.
“He did  do the right thing,” I pointed out, trying to put the
best face possible on the situati on. “Now , I mean—telling the
truth.”
Jamie snorted.
“W ell, he couldna be poxing w ee Lizzie, now , could he?
That’ s worse than only going wi’ a whore.”
“I suppo se some men would ju st keep quiet about it, and
hope for the best.”
“A ye, some would.” He narrowed his eyes at Manfred,
evidently looking for overt indications that Manfred might be
a villain of this description.
Gideon, who disliked having his  feet messed about and was
consequently in bad temper , stamped heavily , narrowly
missing Jamie’ s own foot. He t ossed his head, and emitted a
rumbling noise that I thought was roughly the equivalent of
Jamie’ s growl.
“A ye, well.” Jamie left of f glari ng at Manfred, and grabbed
Gideon’ s halter .  “Go along to the house with him, Sassenach.
I’ll f inish here, a nd then we’ll ha ve Joseph in and see what’ s to
do.”
“All right.” I he sitated, unsure whether to speak in front of
Manfred. I didn’ t want to raise  his hopes too much, until I’d
had a chance to look at the scrapings under the microscope.The spirochetes of syphilis were very distinctive, but I
didn’ t th ink I had a stain that wo uld allow me to see them with
a simple  light microscope such as mine was. And while I
thought my homemade penicil lin could likely eliminate the
infection, I would have no way of knowing for certain, unless I
could  see them, and then see that they had disappeared from
his blood.
I contented myself with saying, “I have got penicillin,
mind.”
“I ken that well enough, Sassenach.” Jamie switched his
baleful look from Manfred to m e. I’d saved his life with the
penicillin—twice—but he hadn’ t enjoyed the process. W ith a
Scottish noise of dismissal, he bent and picked up Gideon’ s
enormous hoof again.
Manfred seemed a bit shell-shocked, and said nothing on
the w ay to the house. He hesitated at the door to the sur gery ,
glancing uneasily from the gleaming microscope to the open
box of sur gical t ools, and then t oward the covered bowls lined
up on the counter , in which I grew my penicillin colonies.
“Come in,” I said, but was obliged to reach out and take him
by the sleeve b efore he would step across the threshold. It
occurred to me that he hadn’ t been to the sur gery before; it
was a good five  miles to the McGillivrays’ place, and Frau
McGillivray was entirely capable of dealing with her family’ s
minor ills.
I wasn’ t feeling terribly charitable toward Manfred at the
moment, but gave him a stool and asked if he would like a cup
of cof fe e. I thought he could pr obably use a stif f drink, if he
was abo ut to have an interview with Jamie and Joseph
W emyss, but supposed I had better keep him clear -headed.
“No, ma’am,” he said, and swallowed, white-faced. “I
mean, thank ye, no.”
He looked extremely young, and very frightened.
“Roll up  your sleeve then, please. I’m going to draw a bit of
blood, b ut it won’ t hurt much. H ow did you come to meet the,er , young lady? Myra, that was her name?”
“A ye, m a’am.” T ears welled in his eyes at her name; I
suppose he really had loved her , poor boy—or thought he had.
He had met Myra in a tavern in Hillsboro. She had seemed
kind, he said, and was very pretty , and when she asked the
young gunsmith  to buy her a gl ass of geneva, he had obliged,
feeling dashing.
“So we drank a bit together , and  she laughed at me, and …”
He seemed rather at a loss to explain how matters had
progressed from there, but he had waked up in her bed. That
had seal ed the matter , so far as he was concerned, and he had
seized every excuse to go to Hillsboro thereafter .
“How long did this af fair go  on?” I asked, interested.
Lacking a decent syringe for drawing blood, I’d merely
pierced the vein inside his elbow  with a fleam, and drained of f
the welling blood into a small vial.
For the better part of two years, apparently .
“I kent I couldn a wed her ,” he explained earnestly . “ Meine
Mutter  w ould never … ” He trailed of f,  assuming the look of a
startled rabbit hearing hounds in its immediate vicinity .
“Gruss Gott!”  he said. “My mother!”
I’d been  wondering about that particular aspect of the af fair
myself. Ute McGillivray wasn’ t going to be at all pleased to
hear tha t her pride and joy , her only son, had contracted a
disreputable disease, and furthermore, one which was about to
lead to the breaking of his carefully engineered engagement
and very likely to a scandal that  the entire backcountry would
hear about. The fact that it was g enerally a fatal disease would
probably be a secondary concern.
“She’ll kill me!” he said, sliding  of f his stool and rolling his
sleeve down hastily .
“Probably not,” I said mildly . “Though I suppose—”
At this fraught moment came the sound of the back door
opening and voices in the kitchen. Manfred stif fened, darkcurls quivering with alarm. Then heavy footsteps started down
the hall toward  the sur gery , an d he dived across the room,
flung a leg across the windowsi ll, and was of f, running like a
deer for the trees.
“Come back here, you ass!” I bellowed through the open
window .
“Which ass is that, Auntie?” I turned to see that the heavy
footsteps belonged to Y oung Ian—heavy , because he was
carrying Lizzie W emyss in his arms.
“Lizzie! What’ s  the matter? Here, put her on the table.” I
could se e at once what the matte r was: a return of the malarial
fever . She was limp, but shiver ed nonetheless with chill, the
contracting muscles shaking her like jelly .
“I found her in the dairy shed,” Ian said, laying her gently
on the table. “The deaf Beardsley came rushin’ out as though
the d evil was chasing him, saw  me, and dragged me in. She
was on the floor , wi’ the churn overturned beside her .”
This wa s very worrying—she ha dn’ t had an attack for some
time, but for a second time, the attack had come upon her too
suddenly for her to go for help, causing almost immediate
collapse.
“T op shelf of the cupboard,” I said to Ian, hastily rolling
Lizzie on her sid e and undoing her laces. “That bluish jar—no,
the big one.”
He grabbed it without question, removing the lid as he
brought it to me.
“Jesus, Auntie! What’ s that?” H e wrinkled his nose at the
smell from the ointment.
“Gallberries and cinchona bark in goose grease, among
other things. T ake some and start rubbing it into her feet.”
Looking bemused, he gingerly scooped up a dollop of the
purplish-gray cream and did as I said, Lizzie’ s small bare foot
nearly disappearing between the lar ge palms of his hands.“W ill she be all  right, d’ye think, Auntie?” He glanced at
her face, looking troubled. Th e look of her was enough to
trouble anyone—the clammy color of whey , and the flesh gone
slack so that her delicate cheeks juddered with the chills.
“Probably . Close your eyes, Ian.” I’d got her clothes
loosened, and now pulled of f her gown, petticoats, pocket, and
stays. I threw a ratty blanket over her before working the shift
of f over  her head—she owned only two, and wouldn’ t want
one spoiled with the reek of the ointment.
Ian had obedien tly closed his ey es, but was still rubbing the
ointment methodically into her feet, a small frown drawing his
brows to gether , the look of conc ern lending him for a moment
a brief but startling resemblance to Jamie.
I drew the jar toward me, scooped up some ointment, and,
reaching under the blanket, began to rub it into the thinner skin
beneath her armpits, then over her back and belly . I could feel
the outlines of her liver distinctly , a lar ge, firm mass beneath
her r ibs. Swollen, and tender fro m the way she grimaced at my
touch; there was some ongoing damage there, certainly .
“Can I open my eyes now?”
“Oh—yes, of course. Rub mor e up her legs, please, Ian.”
Shoving the jar back in his dir ection, I caught a glimpse of
movement in the doorway . One  of the Beardsley twins stood
there, clinging to the jamb, dark  eyes fixed on Lizzie. Kezzie,
it must be; Ian had said “the deaf Beardsley” had come to
fetch help.
“She’ll b e all right,” I said to him, raising my voice, and he
nodded once, then disappeared, with a single burning glance at
Ian.
“Who was it y e were shouting at, Auntie Claire?” Ian
looked up at me , clearly as much to preserve Lizzie’ s modesty
as from courtesy to me; the bla nket was turned back and his
big hands were smoothing ointment into the skin above her
knee, th umbs gently circling the small rounded curves of herpatella, her skin so thin that the pearly bone seemed almost
visible through it.
“Who—oh. Manfred McGillivray ,” I said, suddenly
recollecting. “Damn! The blood!” I leapt up and wiped my
hands hurriedly on my apron. Thank God, I’d corked the vial;
the b lood inside was still liquid.  It wouldn’ t keep long, though.
“Do her hands a nd arms, would you please, Ian? I’ve got to
manage this quickly .”
He m oved obligingly to do as I said, while I hastily spilled a
drop of blood on  each of several slides, dragging a clean slide
across e ach one to make a smear . What sort of stain might
work on spirochetes? No telling; I’d try them all.
I e xplain ed the matter disjointedly to Ian, as I pulled stain
bottles o ut of the cupboard, made up the solutions, and set the
slides to soak.
“The pox? Poor lad; he must be  nearly mad wi’ fright.” He
eased Lizzie’ s arm, gleaming with ointment, under the blanket
and tucked it gently round her .
I was momentar ily surprised at this show of sympathy , but
then remembered. Ian had been exposed to syphilis some years
before, after his abduction by Geillis Duncan; I hadn’ t been
sure that  he had the disease, but had dosed him with the last of
my twentieth-century penicillin, just in case.
“Did ye not tell him ye could cure him, though, Auntie?”
“I ha dn’ t the ch ance. Though I’m not absolutely sure that I
can, to be honest.” I sat down on a stool, and took Lizzie’ s
other hand, feeling for her pulse.
“Y e’re n ot?” His feathery brows went up at that. “Y e told
me I was cured.”
“Y ou are ,” I assured him. “If yo u ever had the disease in the
first place.” I gave him a sharp look. “Y ou’ve never had a sore
on your prick, have you? Or anywhere else?”
He shoo k his head, mute, a dark wave of blood staining his
lean cheeks.“Good. But the penicillin I gav e you—that was some that
I’d brou ght from  … well, from  before. That was purified—
very stro ng and certainly potent. I’m never sure, when I use
this stuf f”—I gestured at the culturing bowls on the counter
—”whether it’ s strong enough to work, or even the right
strain… .” I rub bed the back of  my hand under my nose; the
gallberry ointment, had a most penetrating  smell.
“It d oesn’ t always work.” I had  had more than one patient
with an infection that didn’ t re spond to one of my penicillin
concoctions—though in those cases, I had often succeeded
with another attempt. In a fe w instances, the person had
recovered on his own before th e second brew was ready . In
one instance, the patient had die d, despite applications of two
dif ferent penicillin mixtures.
Ian n odded slowly , his eyes on Lizzie’ s face. The first bout
of c hills had spe nt itself and she lay quiet, the blanket barely
moving over the slight round of her chest.
“If ye’re no su re, then … ye’d not let him marry her ,
surely?”
“I don’ t  know . Jamie said he’d  speak to Mr . W emyss, see
what he thought of the matter .”
I rose and took the first of the slides from its pinkish bath,
shook o f f the clinging drops, a nd, wiping the bottom of the
slide, placed it carefully on the platform of my microscope.
“What are ye looking for , Auntie?”
“Things called spirochetes. Those are the particular kind of
germ that causes syphilis.”
“Oh, aye .” Desp ite the seriousness of the situation, I smiled,
hearing the note of skepticism in his voice. I’d shown him
microor ganisms before, but—like Jamie—like almost
everyone—he s imply couldn’ t  believe that something so
nearly in visible was capable of harm. The only one who had
seemed to accept the notion  wholeheartedly was Malva
Christie, and in her case, I thought the acceptance was due
simply to her faith in me. If I told her  s om ething, she believedme; very  refreshing, after years of assorted Scots looking at
me with varying degrees of squiggle-eyed suspicion.
“Has he gone home, d’ye think? Manfred?”
“I do n’ t know .” I spoke absently , slowly moving the slide to
and fro, searching. I could mak e out the red blood cells, pale
pink dis cs that floated past my field of view , drifting lazily in
the watery stain. No deadly spirals visible—but that didn’ t
mean they weren’ t there, only that the stain I had used might
not reveal them.
Lizzie s tirred and moaned, and I looked round to see her
eyes flutter open.
“There, lass,” Ian said softly , a nd smiled at her . “Better , is
it?”
“Is i t?” she said faintly . Still, the corners of her mouth lifted
slightly , and she put a hand out from under her blanket,
groping. He took it in his, patting it.
“Manfred,” she said, turning her head to and fro, eyes half-
lidded. “Is Manfred here?”
“Um …  no,” I said, exchanging a quick glance of
consternation with Ian. How much had she heard? “No, he was
here, but he’ s—he’ s gone now .”
“Oh.” S eeming to lose interest, she closed her eyes again.
Ian looked down at her , still stroking her hand. His face
showed deep sympathy—with perhaps a tinge of calculation.
“Shall I  maybe carry the lassie  up to her bed?” he asked
softly , a s though she might be sleeping. “And then maybe go
and find … ?” He tilted his he ad toward the open window ,
raising one eyebrow .
“If you would, please, Ian.” I hesitated, and his eyes met
mine, deep hazel and soft wi th worry and the shadow of
remembered pain. “She’ll be all right,” I said, trying to infuse
a sense of certainty into the words.
“A ye, sh e will,” he said firmly , and stooped to gather her up,
tucking the blanket under her . “If I’ve anything to say aboutit.”4 6
IN WHICH THINGS
 GANG AGLEY
M ANFRED M C GILLIVRA Y did not come back. Ian did,
with a blackene d eye, skinned knuckles, and the terse report
that Ma nfred had declared a s et intention of going of f and
hanging himself , and good riddance to the fornicating son of a
bitch, and might his rotten b owels gush forth like Judas
Iscariot’ s, the traitorous, stinking wee turd. He then stamped
upstairs, to stand silent over Lizzie’ s bed for a time.
Hearing this, I hoped that Manfred’ s statement was merely
the counsel of temporary despair—and cursed myself for not
having told him at once and i n the strongest terms that he
could be  cured, whether it was absolutely true or not. Surely
he wouldn’ t …
Lizzie w as hal f-conscious, pr ostrated with the burning
fevers and shaking agues of malaria, and in no fit state to be
told of her betro thed’ s desertion, nor the cause of it. I would
have to make so me delicate inquiries, though, so soon as she
was fit, because there was the po ssibility that she and Manfred
had anticipated their marriage vows, and if so …
“W ell, there’ s the one thing about it,” Jamie observed
grimly . “The Beardsley twins were making ready to track our
poxed la d down and castrate h im, but now they’ve heard he
means to hang himself, they’ve  magnanimously decided that
will do.”
“Thank the Lord for small blessings,” I said, sinking down
at t he table. “ They might really do it.” The Beardsleys,
particularly Josiah, were excellent trackers—and not given to
idle threats.
“Oh, they would,” Jamie assured me. “They were most
seriously sharpening their knives when I found them at it andtold them not to trouble themselves.”
I suppre ssed an involuntary smile at the image of the
Beardsleys, ben t side by side over a grindstone, their lean,
dark faces set in identical scowls of vengeance, but the
momentary flash of humor faded.
“Oh, God. W e’ll have to tell the McGillivrays.”
Jamie no dded, looking pale at the thought, but pushed back
his bench.
“I’d best go straightaway .”
“Not ‘til ye’ve had a bite.” Mrs. Bug put a plate of food
firmly in  front of him. “Y e dinn a want to be dealing wi’ Ute
McGillivray on an empty stomach.”
Jamie hesitated, but evidently found her ar gument to have
merit, for he picked up his fork and addressed himself to the
ragoo’d pork with grim determination.
“Jamie …”
“A ye?”
“Perhaps you should  let  the Beard sleys track Manfred
down. N ot to hurt him, I don’ t mean—but we need to find
him. He will  die of it, if he isn’ t treated.”
He p aused, a fo rkful of ragoo halfway to his mouth, and
regarded me under lowered brows.
“A ye, an d if they find him, he’ll  die of that,  Sassenach.” He
shook hi s head, and the fork completed its journey . He chewed
and swallowed, evidently completing his plan as he did so.
“Joseph’ s in Bethabara, courting . He’ll have to be told, and
by rights, I s hould fetch him to go with me to the
McGillivrays’. But …” He hesitated, clearly envisioning Mr .
W emyss, that mildest and shyes t of men, and no one’ s notion
of a  use ful ally . “No. I’ll go and tell Robin. May be as he’ll
start searching for the lad himself—or Manfred may have
thought better of it and run for home already .”That wa s a cheering thought, and I saw him of f with hope in
mind. But he returned near midnight, grim-faced and silent,
and I knew that Manfred had not come home.
“Y ou told them both?” I asked, t urning back the coverlet for
him to crawl in b eside me. He sm elled of horse and night, cool
and pungent.
“I asked  Robin to walk outsid e wi’ me, and told him. I
hadna the nerve to tell Ute to  her face,” he admitted. He
smiled a t me, snuggling under the quilt. “Y e dinna think me
too much a coward, I hope, Sassenach.”
“No, indeed,” I assured him, and leaned to blow out the
candle. “Discretion is the better part of valor .”
WE WERE ROUSED just before dawn by a thunderous
pounding on the door . Rollo, w ho had been sleeping on the
landing, shot down the stair , roaring threats. He was closely
followed by Ian, who had been sitting up by Lizzie’ s bed,
keeping watch while I slept. Jamie leapt out of bed and,
seizing a  loaded  pistol from the top of the wardrobe, rushed to
join the fray .
Shocked and dazed—I had been  asleep for less than an hour
—I sat up, he art pounding. Rollo stopped barking for a
moment, and I heard Jamie sho ut, “Who is it?” through the
door .
This query was answered by a renewed pounding that
echoed up the stairwell and seemed to shake the house,
accompanied by an upraised feminine voice that would have
done credit to W agner in one o f his more robust moods. Ute
McGillivray .
I began  to struggle out of the bedclothes. Meanwhile, a
confusion of voices, renewed barking, the grate of the bolt
being lifted—and then more confused voices, all much louder .
I ran to the window and looked out; Robin McGillivray was
standing in the dooryard, havi ng evidently just dismounted
from one of a pair of mules.He looked much older , and somehow deflated, as though the
spirit had gone out of him, taking all his strength and leaving
him flabby . He turned his head away from whatever riot was
taking place on the stoop, closi ng his eyes. The sun was just
up now , and the pure clear light showed up all the lines and
hollows of exhaustion and a desperate unhappiness.
As though he se nsed me looking at him, he opened his eyes
and raised his face toward th e window . He was red-eyed,
disheveled. He saw me, but didn’ t respond to my tentative
wave of  greeting. Instead, he turned away , closing his eyes
again, and stood, waiting.
The riot below had moved inside, and appeared to be
progressing up the stairs, borne on a wave of Scottish
expostulations and Germanic shrieks, punctuated by
enthusiastic barking from Rollo, always willing to lend his
ef forts to further the festivities.
I sei zed my wra pper from its peg, but had barely got one
arm into it befor e the door of the bedchamber was flung open,
crashing into the wall so hard th at it rebounded and hit her in
the chest. Nothing daunted, sh e slammed it open again and
advanced on me like a juggernaut, cap awry and eyes blazing.
“Y ou! W eibchen!  H ow you dare, such insult, such lies to say
my son about! Y ou I kill, I te ar of f your hair , nighean na
galladh!  Y ou—”
She lunged at m e and I flung myself sideways, narrowly
avoiding her grab at my arm.
“Ute! Frau  McGillivray! Listen to—”
The second grab was more suc cessful; she got hold of the
sleeve of my night rail and wrenched, dragging the garment
of f m y s houlder with a rending n oise of torn cloth, even as she
clawed at my face with her free hand.
I j erked back, an d screamed with all my strength, my nerves
recalling for one dreadful instant a hand striking at my face,
hands pulling at me… .I str uck at her , the strength of terror flooding through my
limbs, sc reaming, screaming, some tiny remnant of rationality
in my brain watc hing this, bemused, appalled—but completely
unable t o stop the animal panic, the unreasoning rage that
geysered up from some deep and unsuspected well.
I h it out, hammering blindly , screaming—wondering even
as I did so, why , why was I doing this?
An a rm grabbed me round the w aist and I was lifted of f the
ground. A fresh spurt of panic ripped through me, and then I
found myself suddenly alone, untouched. I was standing in the
corner by the w ardrobe, swayi ng drunkenly , panting. Jamie
stood in front of me, shoulde rs braced and elbows raised,
shielding me.
He w as talking, very calmly , bu t I had lost the capacity to
make sense of words. I pressed my hands back against the
wall, and felt some sense of comfort from its solid bulk.
My heart was still hammering i n my ears, the sound of my
own bre athing scaring me, it w as so like the gasping sound
when Harley Boble had broke n my nose. I shut my mouth
hard, try ing to stop. Holding my breath seemed to work,
allowing only small inhalations through my now-functioning
nose.
The movement of Ute’ s mouth caught my eye and I stared at
it, trying to fix myself once more in time and space. I was
hearing words, but couldn’ t quite make the jump of
comprehension. I breathed, letting the words flow over me like
water , taking emotion from t hem—anger , reason, protest,
placation, shrillness, growling—but no explicit meaning.
Then I took a deep breath, wiped my face—I was surprised
to find it wet—and suddenly everything snapped back to
normal. I could hear , and understand.
Ute was staring at me, anger and dislike clear on her face,
but muted by a lurking horror .
“Y ou are mad,” she said, nodding. “I see.” She sounded
almost calm at this point. “W ell, then.”She tur ned to Jamie, automa tically twisting up untidy
handsful of grizzled blond hair , stuf fing them under her
enormous cap. The ribbon had been torn; a loop of it dangled
absurdly over one eye.
“So, she is mad. I will say so, but still, my son—my son!—
is gone. So.” She stood heaving, surveying me, and shook her
head, then turned again to Jamie.
“Salem is closed to you,” she said curtly . “My family , those
who know us—they will not tra de with you. Nor anyone else I
speak to , to tell them the wicked  thing she has done.” Her eye
drifted back to me, a cold, gelid blue, and her lip curled in a
heavy sneer under the loop of torn ribbon.
“Y ou are shunned,” she said. “Y ou do not exist, you.” She
turned on her h eel and walked out, forcing Ian and Rollo to
sidestep hastily out of her way . Her footfalls echoed heavily on
the stair , a ponderous, measured tread, like the tolling of a
passing bell.
I saw  the tensio n in Jamie’ s shoulders relax, little by little.
He w as still wearing his nights hirt—there was a damp patch
between his shoulder blades— and had the pistol still in his
hand.
The front door boomed shut below . Everyone stood still,
struck silent.
“Y ou wouldn’ t really have shot  her , would you?” I asked,
clearing my throat.
“What?” He turned, staring at me. Then he caught the
direction of my glance, and looked at the pistol in his hand as
though wondering where that  had come from.
“Oh,” he said, “no,” and shook his head, reaching up to put
it back on top of the wardrobe. “I for got I had it. Though God
kens well enough that I should like  t o shoo t the besotted auld
besom,” he added. “Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
He stooped to look at me, his eyes soft with worry .“I’m all right. I don’ t know what—but it’ s all right. It’ s gone
now .”
“Ah,” he said softly , and looked away , lashes coming down
to hide his eye s. Had he felt it, too, then? Found himself
suddenly … back? I knew he had sometimes. Remembered
waking from sleep in Paris to see him braced in an open
window , pressin g so hard against the frame that the muscles
stood out in his arms, visible by moonlight.
“It’ s all right,” I  repeated, touching him, and he gave me a
brief, shy smile.
“Y e sho uld have bitten her ,” Ian was saying earnestly to
Rollo. “She’ s got an arse the size of a hogshead of tobacco—
how could ye miss?”
“Probably afraid of being poisoned,” I said, coming out of
my corn er . “Do you suppose she meant it—or no, she meant it,
certainly . But do you suppose  she can do it? Stop anyone
trading with us, I mean.”
“She can stop Robin,” Jamie said, a certain grimness
returning to his expression. “For the rest … we’ll see.”
Ian shoo k his head, frowning, and rubbed his knuckled fist
gingerly against his thigh.
“I ke nt I should  have broken Manfred’ s neck,” he said with
real regret. “W e could ha’ told Frau  Ute  he fell of f a  rock, and
saved a deal of trouble.”
“Manfred?” The  small voice made everyone turn as one, to
see who had spoken.
Lizzie stood in the doorway , thin and pale as a starveling
ghost, her eyes huge and glassy with recent fever .
“What about Manfred?” she said. She swayed dangerously ,
and put out a ha nd to the jamb, to save herself falling. “What’ s
happened to him?”
“Poxed and gone,” Ian said curtly , drawing himself up. “Y e
didna give him your maidenheid, I hope.”
IN THE  EVENT , Ute McGillivray was not quite able to fulfill
her thre at—but she did enough damage. Manfred’ s dramatic
disappearance, the breaking of his engagement to Lizzie, and
the reaso n for it was a fearful scandal, and word of it spread
from Hi llsboro and Salisbury , where he had worked now and
then as an itinerant gunsmith, to Salem and High Point.
But thanks to Ute’ s ef forts, the story was even more
confused than would be normal for such gossip; some said that
he w as poxed, others that I had maliciously and falsely
accused him of being poxed, because of some fancied
disagreement with his parents. Others, more kindly , did not
believe Manfred  was poxed, but said that doubtless I had been
mistaken.
Those w ho believed him to be  poxed were divided as to
how he had ach ieved that condition, half of them convinced
that he had got it from some whore, and a good many of the
rest speculating  that he had got it from poor Lizzie, whose
reputation suf fe red terribly—un til Ian, Jamie, the Beardsley
twins, and even Roger took to defending her honor with their
fists, at which point people did not, of course, stop talking—
but stopped talking where any of her champions might hear
directly .
All of Ute’ s numerous relatives in and around W achovia,
Salem, Bethabara, and Bethania of course believed her version
of th e story , and tongues wagge d busily . All of Salem did not
cease trading with us—but many people did. And more than
once, I had the unnerving experience of greeting Moravians I
knew we ll, only  to have them stare past me in stony silence, or
turn thei r backs upon me. Often enough that I no longer went
to Salem.
Lizzie, beyond a certain initial mortification, seemed not
terribly upset at the rupture of her engagement. Bewildered,
confused, and sorry—she said—for Manfred, but not desolated
by his loss. And  since she seldom left the Ridge anymore, she
didn’ t hear what people said about her . What did  trouble her
was the loss of the McGillivrays—particularly Ute.“D’ye see, ma’am,” she told me  wistfully , “I’d never had a
mother , for my own died when I was born. And then Mutti —
she asked me to call her so when I said I’d marry Manfred—
she said I was her daughter , just like Hilda and Inga and
Senga. She’d fuss over me, and bully me and laugh at me, just
as she did them. And it was … just so nice,  to have all that
family . And now I’ve lost them.”
Robin, who had been sincerely attached to her , had sent her
a short, regretful note, sneaked out through the good of fices of
Ronnie Sinclair . But since Ma nfred’ s disappearance, neither
Ute nor the girls had come to see her , nor sent a single word.
It was Joseph W emyss, though, who was most visibly
af fected by the af fair . He said nothing, plainly not wishing to
make m atters worse for Lizzie—but he drooped, like a flower
deprived of rain. Beyond his pai n for Lizzie, and his distress at
the blackening of her reputation, he, too, missed the
McGillivrays, missed the joy and comfort of suddenly being
part of a lar ge , exuberant family , after so many years of
loneliness.
W orse, though, was that while Ute had not been able to
carry ou t her threat entirely , she had  bee n able to influence her
near re latives—including Pastor Berrisch, and his sister ,
Monika, who, Jamie told me pr ivately , had been forbidden to
see or speak to Joseph again.
“The Pa stor ’ s sent her away to his wife’ s relatives in
Halifax,” he said, shaking his head sadly . “T o for get.”
“Oh, dear .”
And of Manfred, there was no slightest trace. Jamie had sent
word thr ough all his usual avenues, but no one had seen him
since his  flight from the Ridge. I thought of him—and prayed
for him—daily , haunted by pic tures of him skulking in the
woods alone, the deadly spirochetes multiplying in his blood
day by day . Or , much worse, wo rking his way to the Indies on
some sh ip, pausing in every port to drown his sorrows in the
arms of unsuspe cting whores, to whom he would pass on the
silent, fatal infection—and they , in turn …Or some times, t he nightmare image of a bundle of rotting
clothes hanging  from a tree limb, deep in the forest, with no
mourners save the crows who came to pick the flesh from his
bones. A nd desp ite everything, I could not find it in my heart
to hate Ute McGillivray , who  must be thinking the same
thoughts.
The sole bright spot in this ruddy quagmire was that
Thomas Christie, quite contrary to my expectations, had
allowed Malva to continue to come to the sur gery , his sole
stipulation being  that if I proposed to involve his daughter in
any further use of the ether , he was to be told ahead of time.
“There.” I stood back, gesturing  to her to look through the
eyepiece of the microscope. “Do you see them?”
Her lips pursed in silent fascination. It had taken no little
ef fort to find a combination of staining and reflected sunlight
that would reveal the spirochete s, but I had succeeded at last.
They weren’ t strongly visible, b ut you could see them, if you
knew what you were looking for—and despite my complete
conviction in my original diag nosis, I was relieved to see
them.
“Oh, yes! W ee s pirals. I see the m plain!” She looked up at
me, blinking. “D’ye mean serio usly to tell me that these bittie
things are what’ s poxed Manf red?” She was too polite to
express open skepticism, but I could see it in her eyes.
“I do indeed.” I  had explained t he germ theory of disease a
number of times, to a variety of disbelieving eighteenth-
century listeners, and in the light of this experience had little
expectation of finding a favo rable reception. The normal
response was either a blank stare, indulgent laughter , or a snif f
of dismissal, and I was more or less expecting a polite version
of one of these reactions from Malva.
T o m y surprise, though, she see med to grasp the notion at
once—or at least pretended to.
“W ell, s o.” She put both hands  on the counter and peered
again at the spirochetes. “These wee beasties cause thesyphilis, then. However do they do that? And why is it that the
bittie things ye showed me from my teeth don’ t make me ill?”
I ex plained, as best I could, th e notion of “good bugs” or
“indif ferent bugs” versus “bad bugs,” which she seemed to
grasp ea sily—but my explanatio n of cells, and the concept of
the body  being composed of th ese, left her frowning at the
palm of  her hand in confusi on, trying to make out the
individual cells. She shook of f h er doubt, though, and folding
up her hand in her apron, returned to her questions.
Did the bugs ca use all disease? The penicillin—why did it
work on  some of the germs, but not all? And how did the bugs
get from one person to another?
“Some travel by air—that’ s why you must try to avoid
people coughing or sneezing on you—and some by water—
which is why yo u mustn’ t drink from a stream that someone’ s
been using as a privy—and som e … well, by other means.” I
didn’ t k now how much she mig ht know about sex in humans
—she lived on a farm, clearly she knew how pigs, chickens,
and hors es beha ved—and I was wary of enlightening her , lest
her fathe r hear about it. I rather  thought he’d prefer her to be
dealing with ether .
Naturally , she pounced on my evasion.
“Other means? What other means are there?” W ith an
internal sigh, I told her .
“They do what ?” she said, incredulous. “Men, I mean. Like
an a nimal! Whyever would a woman let a man do that to her?”
“W ell, they ar e  animals, you know ,” I said, suppressing an
ur ge to laugh. “So are women. As to why one would let them
…” I rubbed my nose, looking f or a tasteful way of putting it.
She was  moving rapidly ahead o f me, though, putting two and
two together .
“For mo ney ,” sh e said, looking thunderstruck. “ That’ s  what
a whore does! She lets them do such things to her for money .”
“W ell, yes—but women who aren’ t whores—”“The bairns, aye, ye said.” She nodded, but was plainly
thinking of other things; her small, smooth forehead was
wrinkled in concentration.
“How much money do they get? ” she asked. “I should want
a lot, I think, to let a man—”
“I don’ t know ,” I said, somewhat taken aback. “Dif ferent
amounts, I expect. Depending.”
“Depending … oh, if he was ma ybe ugly , ye mean, ye could
make hi m pay more? Or if she  w ere ugly …” She gave me a
quick, interested  look. “Bobby Higgins told me of a whore he
kent in London, that her looks was spoilt by vitriol.” She
looked u p at the cupboard where I kept the sulfuric acid under
lock and key , and shivered, her delicate shoulders quivering
with revulsion at the thought.
“Y es, he  told me about her , too . V itriol is what we call a
caustic—a liquid that burns. That’ s why—”
But her mind had already r eturned to the subject of
fascination.
“T o think of Ma nfred McGillivray doing such a thing!” She
turned r ound gray eyes on me . “W ell, and Bobby . He must
have been, mustn’ t he?”
“I do believe soldiers are inclined—”
“But the Bible,” she said, squint ing thoughtfully . “It says ye
mustna be whoring after idols . Does that mean men went
about sticking their pricks into—did the idols look like
women, d’ye think?”
“I’m sur e that’ s not what it means, no,” I said hastily . “More
a me taphor , you know . Er … lusting after something, I think it
means, not, er …”
“Lust,” she said thoughtfully . “That’ s to want something
sinful bad, is it not?”
“Y es, rather .” Heat was waverin g over my skin, dancing in
tiny veil s. I needed cool air , q uickly , or I’d be flushed as a
tomato and drenched with sweat. I rose to go out, but felt Ireally m ustn’ t le ave her with the  impression that sex had to do
only with money or babies—even though it well might, for
some women.
“There is  another reason for intercourse, you know ,” I said,
speaking over my shoulder as I headed for the door . “When
you love someone, you want to give them pleasure. And they
want to do the same for you.”
“Pleasure?” Her voice rose behind me, incredulous. “Y e
mean some women like  it?”4 7
BEES AND SWITCHES
I  W A S BY NO  MEANS SPYING. One of my hives had
swarmed, and I was looking for the fugitive bees.
New swarms usually didn’ t travel far , and stopped
frequently , often resting for hours in a tree fork or open log,
where t hey formed a ball of humming conference. If they
could be located before making up their collective mind about
where to settle, they could often be persuaded into a
temptingly empty basket hive, and thus hauled back into
captivity .
The trouble with bees is that they don’ t leave footprints.
Now I was cast ing to and fro on the mountainside, nearly a
mile fro m the house, an empty  basket hive slung on a rope
over my shoulder , trying to follow Jamie’ s instructions
regarding hunting, and think like a bee.
There were huge blooming patches of galax, fire-weed, and
other wildflowers on the hillside far above me, but there was a
very attractive dead snag—if o ne was a bee—poking out of
the heavy growth some way below .
The basket hive was heavy , and the slope was steep. It was
easier to  go down than up. I hitched up the rope, which was
beginning to rub the skin of f my shoulder , and began sidling
downward through sumac and hobble-bush, bracing my feet
against rocks and grabbing at branches to keep from slipping.
Concentrating o n my feet, I didn’ t take particular notice of
where I was. I emer ged into a gap in the bushes from which
the roof  of a cabin was visible, some distance below me.
Whose w as that? The Christies’, I thought. I wiped a sleeve
across the sweat dripping from the point of my chin; the day
was warm, and I hadn’ t brough t a canteen. Perhaps I would
stop and ask for water on the way home.Making my way at last to the snag, I was disappointed to
find no sign of t he swarm. I stoo d still, blotting sweat from my
face and listening, in hopes of  picking up the bees’ telltale
deep dr one. I heard the hum and whine of assorted flying
insects, and the genial racket o f a flock of foraging pygmy
nuthatches on the slope above—but no bees.
I sighed  and turned to make my way around the snag, but
then paused, my eye caught by a glimpse of white below .
Thomas Christie  and Malva were in the small clearing at the
back of their ca bin. I had caught the flash of his shirt as he
moved, but now he stood motionless, arms crossed.
His attention appeared to be fixe d on his daughter , who was
cutting branches  from one of the mountain ash trees at the side
of the clearing. What for? I wondered.
There s eemed something very peculiar about the scene,
though I  couldn’ t think exactly what. Some attitude of body?
Some air of tension between them?
Malva turned and walked toward her father , several long,
slender branches in her hand. Her head was bent, her step
dragging, and when she handed him the branches, I understood
abruptly what was going on.
They were too far away for me to hear them, but he
apparently said something to he r , gesturing brusquely toward
the stump they used as a chopping block. She knelt down by it,
bent forward, and lifted up her skirts, exposing her bare
buttocks.
W ithout hesitation, he raised the switches and slashed them
hard across her rump, then wh ipped them back in the other
direction, crissc rossing her flesh with vivid lines that I could
see even at suc h a distance. He repeated this several times,
whipping the springy twigs bac k and forth with a measured
deliberation whose violence was the more shocking for its lack
of apparent emotion.
It hadn’ t even occurred to me to look away . I stood stock-
still in the shrub bery , too stunned even to brush away the gnatsthat swarmed around my face.
Christie had thrown down the switches, turned on his heel,
and gone into t he house before I could do more than blink.
Malva s at back on her heels and shook down her skirts,
smoothing the fabric gingerly over her bottom as she rose. She
was red-faced, but not weeping or distraught.
She’ s use d to it.  T he thought cam e unbidden. I h esitated, not
knowing what to do. Before I could decide, Malva had settled
her cap, turned, and walked in to the woods with an air of
determination—headed straight toward me.
I d ucked  behind a big tulip poplar , before I was even aware
of makin g a decision. She wasn’ t injured, and I was sure she
wouldn’ t like to know that anyone had seen the incident.
Malva passed within a few feet of me, puf fing a little on the
climb, and snorting through her  nose and muttering in a way
that made me think she was very angry , rather than upset.
I pe ered cautiously round the p oplar , but caught no more
than a glimpse of her cap, bob bing through the trees. There
were no  cabins up there, and she  hadn’ t carried a basket or any
tools fo r foraging. Perhaps she only wanted to be alone, to
recover herself. No surprise, if so.
I wa ited until she was safely out of sight, then made my
own wa y slowly down the slope. I didn’ t stop at the Christie
cabin, th irsty as I was, and had quite lost interest in errant
bees.
I M ET JAMIE A T a stiled fen ce, some little distance from
home, in conversation with Hiram Crombie. I nodded in
greeting, and waited in some im patience for Crombie to finish
his business, so I could tell Jamie what I had just witnessed.
Luckily , Hiram showed no incli nation to linger; I made him
nervous.
I told Jamie at once what I had seen, and was annoyed to
find that he didn’ t share my concern. If T om Christie thought it
necessary to whip his daughter , that was his af fair .“But he might be … it might be—perhaps it doesn’ t stop
with a switching. Perhaps he does … other things to her .”
He shot me a look of surprise.
“T om? D’ye have any reason to think so?”
“No,” I admitted reluctantly . The Christie menage gave me
an unco mfortable feeling, but that was likely only because I
didn’ t get on with T om. I wasn’ t so foolish as to think that a
tendency towar d Bible-thumpi ng meant a person wouldn’ t
engage in wickedness—but in all fairness, it didn’ t mean he
did,  eith er . “But sur ely he shouldn’ t be whipping her like that
—at her age?”
He glanced at me in mild exasperation.
“Y e dinna understand a thing, d o ye?” he said, echoing my
thought exactly .
“I was about to say just that, to you, ” I  said, giving h im look
for look . He didn’ t look away , but held my gaze, his own
slowly taking on a wry amusement.
“So it will be d if ferent?” he said. “In your world?” There
was just  enough edge in his voice to remind me forcibly that
we were not i n my world—nor ever would be. Sudden
gooseflesh ran up my arm, lifting the fine blond hairs.
“A m an wouldna beat a woma n, then, in your time? Not
even for good cause?”
And what was I to say to that? I couldn’ t lie, even if I
wanted to; he knew my face much too well.
“Some do,” I admitted. “But it’ s  not the same. There—then,
I mean—a man who beat his wife would be a criminal. But,” I
added in fairness, “a man who beat his wife then would most
often be using his fists.”
A look of astonished disgust crossed his face.
“What sort of man would do that?” he asked incredulously .
“A bad one.”“So I should think, Sassenach. And ye dinna think there’ s a
dif ference?” he asked. “Y e’d see it the same, if I were to
smash your face, rather than only take a tawse to your bum?”
Blood flared abruptly in my cheeks. He once had  taken a
strap to me, and I hadn’ t for gott en it. I had wanted to kill him
at the time—and  didn’ t feel kind ly toward him at the memory .
At the same tim e, I wasn’ t stupi d enough to equate his actions
with those of a modern-day wife-beater .
He glanced at me, raised one eyebrow , then understood
what I was recalling. He grinned.
“Oh,” he said.
“Oh, indeed,” I said very cross.  I had succeeded in putting
that extr emely humiliating episode out of mind, and didn’ t at
all like having it recalled.
He, on the other  hand, was plainly enjoying the recollection.
He eyed  me in a manner I fo und grossly insuf ferable, still
grinning.
“God, ye screamed like a ban-sidhe. ”
I began to feel a distinct throbbing of blood in my temples.
“I bloody well had cause to!”
“Oh, aye ,” he said, and the grin widened. “Y e did. Y our own
fault, mind,” he added.
“ My  f—”
“It was,” he said firmly .
“Y ou apologized !” I said comp letely outraged. “Y ou know
you did!”
“No, I didn’ t. And it was still your fault to begin with,” he
said, with complete lack of logic . “Y e wouldna have got nearly
such a wicked tanning, if ye’d only minded me in the first
place, when I told ye to kneel and—”
“Minded you! Y ou think I woul d have just meekly given in
and let you—”“I’ve never seen ye do anything  meek, Sassenach.” He took
my arm  to help me over the stile, but I jerked free, puf fing
with indignation.
“Y ou beastly Scot !” I dropped the  hive on the ground at his
feet, picked up my skirts, and scrambled over the stile.
“W ell, I havena done it again,” he protested, behind me. “I
promised, aye?”
I whirled round on the other side and glared at him.
“Only because I threatened to cu t your heart out if you ever
tried!”
“W ell, even so. I could  h ave— and ye ken that wel l,
Sassenach. A ye? ” He’d quit gri nning, but there was a distinct
glint in his eye.
I took several deep breaths, trying simultaneously to control
my anno yance and think of som e crushing rejoinder . I failed in
both attempts, and with a briefly  dignified “Hmph!” turned on
my heel.
I heard the rustle  of his kilt as he  picked up the hive, hopped
over the stile, and came after me, catching up within a stride or
two. I didn’ t look at him; my cheeks were still flaming.
The infuriating fact was that I did  know that. I remembered
all too well. He had used his sw ord belt to such ef fect that I
hadn’ t been able to sit comfortab ly for several days—and if he
should ever decide to do it again, there was absolutely nothing
to stop him.
I wa s, for the most part, able t o ignore the fact that I was
legally h is property . That didn’ t alter the fact that it was  a fact
—and he knew it.
“What about Brianna?” I demanded. “W ould you feel the
same way about it, if young Roger suddenly decided to take
his belt or a switch to your daughter?”
He appeared to find something amusing in the notion.“I think he’d ha ve the devil of a fight on his hands if he
tried,” h e said. “That’ s a braw  wee lassie, no? And she has
your notions of what constitutes wifely obedience, I’m afraid.
But then,” he added, swingin g the hive’ s rope across his
shoulder , “ye never ken what goes on in a marriage, do ye?
Perhaps she’d be pleased if he tried.”
“Pleased?!” I gawked at him in astonishment. “How can
you think that any woman would ever —”
“Oh, aye? What about my sister?”
I stopped dead in the middle of the path, staring at him.
“What about  your sister? Surely you aren’ t telling me—”
“I am .” The glin t was back, but I didn’ t think he was joking.
“Ian beat  her?”
“I d o wish ye’d stop calling it that,” he said mildly . “It
sounds as though Ian took his fists to her , or blackened her
eyes. I gave ye a decent skelping, but I didna bloody ye, for
God’ s sake.” His eyes flicked briefly toward my face;
everything had healed, at least outwardly; the only trace left
was a tiny scar through one eyebrow—invisible, unless one
parted the hairs there and looked  closely . “Neither would Ian.”
I wa s completely flabber gasted  to hear this. I had lived in
close pr oximity with Ian and J enny Murray for months at a
time, and had never seen the  slightest indication that he
possessed a violent nature. For that matter , it was impossible
to imagi ne anyone trying such a thing on Jenny Murray , who
had—if such a thing was possible—an even stronger
personality than her brother .
“W ell, what did  he do? And why?”
“W ell, h e’d only  take his belt to her now and then,” he said,
“and only if she made him.”
I took a deep breath.
“If she made  him?” I asked calmly , under the circumstances.“W ell, ye ken Ian,” he said, shrugging. “He’ s no the one to
be doing that sort of thing unless Jenny deviled him into it.”
“I n ever saw anything of that sort going on,” I said, giving
him a hard look.
“W ell, she’d scarcely do it in front of ye, would she?”
“And she would, in front of you ?”
“W ell, n ot precisely , no,” he adm itted. “But I wasna often in
the house, after Culloden. Now  and then, though, I’d come
down for a visit, and I’d see that she was … brewing for
something.” He rubbed his nose and squinted against the sun,
searching for words. “She’d devil him,” he said at last,
shrugging. “Pick at him over nothing, make wee sarcastic
remarks. She’d— ” His face clea red a bit, as he came up with a
suitable descript ion. “She’d act like a spoilt wee lassie in need
of the tawse.”
I found this description completely incredible. Jenny
Murray had a sh arp tongue, and few inhibitions about using it
on a nyone, her h usband included. Ian, the soul of good nature,
merely laughed at her . But I sim ply couldn’ t countenance the
notion of her behaving in the manner described.
“W ell, so. I’d seen that a time or two, as I say . And Ian
would give her a n eye, but held his peace. But then the once, I
was out hunting , near sunset, an d took a small deer on the hill
just behind the broch—ye ken the place?”
I nodded, still feeling stunned.
“It was close e nough to carry the carcass to the house
without help, so I brought it dow n to the smoke shed and hung
it. T here was no  one about—I found out later the children had
all gone to the market in Broch Mhorda, and the servants with
them. So I tho ught the house was empty altogether , and
stepped into the kitchen to find a bite and a cup of buttermilk
before I left.”
Thinking the house empty , he ha d been startled by noises in
the bedchamber overhead.“What sort of noises?” I asked, fascinated.
“W ell … shrieks,” he said, shru gging. “And giggling. A bit
of shovi ng and banging, with a stool or some such falling over .
If it weren’ t for the yaf fling, I should have thought there were
thieves in the house. But I kent it was Jenny’ s voice, and Ian’ s,
and—” He broke of f, his ears going pink at the memory .
“So then  … there was a bit more—raised voices, like—and
then the crack of a belt on a bum, and the sort of skelloch ye
could hear across six fields.”
He took a deep breath, shrugging.
“W ell, I was taken back a bit, and couldna think what to do
at once.”
I nodded, understanding that, at least.
“I ex pect it wou ld be a bit of a n awkward situation, yes. It
… er … went on, though?”
He n odded. His ears were a dee p red by now , and his face
flushed, though that might only be from heat.
“A ye, it did.” H e glanced at me. “Mind, Sassenach, if I’d
thought he meant harm to her , I should have been up the stairs
in a n instant. B ut …” He brushed away an inquisitive bee,
shaking his head. “There was—it felt—I canna even think how
to say it. It wasn a really that Jen ny kept laughing, because she
didna—but that I felt she wanted to. And Ian … well, Ian was
laughing. Not out loud, I dinna mean; it was just … in his
voice.”
He b lew out his  breath, and swiped his knuckles along his
jaw , wiping sweat.
“I stayed quite frozen there, wi’ a bit of pie in my hand,
listening. I came to myself only  when the flies started lighting
in my open mou th, and by that time, they’d … ah … they were
… m mphm.” He hunched his shoulders, as though his shirt
were too tight.
“Making it up, were they?” I asked very dryly .“I ex pect so,” h e replied, rather primly . “I left. W alked all
the way to Foyne, and stay ed the night with Grannie
MacNab.” Foyn e was a tiny hamlet, some fifteen miles from
Lallybroch.
“Why?” I asked.
“W ell, I had to,” he said logically . “I couldna ignore it, after
all. It was either walk about and think of things, or else give in
and abuse myself, and I couldna  verra well do that —it was my
own sister , after all.”
“Y ou mean to say you can’ t think and engage in sexual
activity at the same time?” I asked, laughing.
“Of course not,” he said—thus confirming a long-held
private opinion of mine—and ga ve me a look as though I were
crazy . “Can you?”
“I can,  yes.”
He raised one eyebrow , plainly unconvinced.
“W ell, I’m not saying I do,  alw ays,” I adm itted, “but it’ s
possible. W omen are used to doing more than one thing at
once—they have to, because of the children. Anyway , go back
to Jenny and Ian. Why on earth—”
“W ell, I did wal k about and thin k of it,” Jamie admitted. “I
couldna seem to stop thinking  of it, to be honest. Grannie
MacNab could see I’d something on my mind, and pestered
me over the supper until … ah … well, until I told her about
it.”
“Really . What did she say?” I asked, fascinated. I’d known
Grannie MacNab, a sprightly old person with a highly
forthright mann er—and a lot of experience with human
weakness.
“She cackled like thorns under a pot,” he said, one side of
his mouth turning up. “I thought she’d fall into the fire wi’
merriment.”
Recovered to some extent, thou gh, the old lady had wiped
her eyes and explained matters to him, kindly , as thoughaddressing a simpleton.
“She said it was  because of Ian’ s leg,” Jamie said, glancing
at me to see whether this made sense to me. “She said that
such a thing would make no dif ference to Jenny , but it would
to him.  She said,” he added, his color heightening, “that men
havena got any idea what wom en think about bed, but they
always think they have, so it causes trouble.”
“I knew I liked Grannie MacNab,” I murmured. “What
else?”
“W ell, so. She said it was likely that Jenny was only makin’
it cl ear to Ian— and maybe to herself, as well—that she still
thought he was a man, leg or no.”
“What? Why?”
“Because, Sassenach,” he said, very dryly indeed, “when
ye’re a man, a good bit of wha t ye have to do is to draw up
lines and fight o ther folk who come over them. Y our enemies,
your tenants, your children—your wife. Y e canna always just
strike th em or take a strap to th em, but when ye can, at least
it’ s clear to everyone who’ s in char ge.”
“But that’ s perfectly—” I began, and then broke of f,
frowning as I considered this.
“And if ye’re a man, you’re in char ge. It’ s you that keeps
order , w hether y e like it or not. I t’ s true,” he said, then touched
my elbo w as he nodded toward an opening in the wood. “I’m
thirsty . Shall we stop a bit?”
I follow ed him up a narrow pat h through the wood to what
we called the G reen Spring—a bubbling flow of water over
pale serpentine stone, set in a co ol, shady bowl of surrounding
moss. W e knelt, splashed our faces, and drank, sighing with
grateful relief. Jamie tipped a ha ndful of water down inside his
shirt, clo sing his  eyes in bliss. I laughed at him, but unpinned
my sweat-soaked kerchief and doused it in the spring, using it
to wipe my neck and arms.
The wa lk to the spring had  caused a break in the
conversation, and I wasn’ t sure quite how—or whether—toresume it. Instead, I merely s at quietly in the shade, arms
about my knees, idly wriggling my toes in the moss.
Jamie, too, seemed to feel no need of speech for the
moment. He leaned comfortably back against a rock, the wet
fabric of his shirt plastered to  his chest, and we sat still,
listening to the wood.
I wasn’ t sure what to say , but that didn’ t mean I had stopped
thinking about the conversation. In an odd way , I thought I
understood what Grannie MacNab had meant—though I
wasn’ t quite sure I agreed with it.
I was thinking more about wh at Jamie had said, though,
regarding a man’ s responsibility . W as it true? Perhaps it was,
though I  had never thought of it in that light before. It was  true
that he was a bulwark—not only for me, and for the family ,
but for the tena nts, as well. W as that really how he did it,
though? “Draw u p lines, and fight other folk who come over
them”?  I rather thought it was.
There w ere lines between him a nd me, surely; I could have
drawn th em on the moss. Which was not to say we did not
“come across” each other ’ s lines—we did, frequently , and with
varying results. I had my own defenses—and means of
enforcement. But he had only beaten me once for crossing his
lines, and that was early on. So, had he seen that as a
necessary fight?  I supposed he had; that was what he was
telling me.
But he had been  following his own train of thought, which
was running on a dif ferent track.
“It’ s verra odd,” he said thoughtfully . “Laoghaire drove me
mad wi’  great regularity , but it never once occurred to me to
thrash her .”
“W ell, h ow very  thoughtless of y ou,” I said, drawing myself
up. I  disliked he aring him refer to Laoghaire, no matter what
the context.
“Oh, it was,” h e replied seriously , taking no notice of my
sarcasm. “I think it was that I didna care enough for her tothink of it, let alone do it.”
“Y ou didn’ t care enough to bea t her? W asn’ t she the lucky
one, then?”
He caught the to ne of pique in my voice; his eyes sharpened
and fixed on my face.
“Not to hurt her ,” he said. Some  new thought came to him; I
saw it cross his face.
He smile d a little, got up, and came toward me. He reached
down an d pulled  me to my feet, then took hold of my wrist,
which he lifted gently over my  head and pinned against the
trunk of  the pine I had been sitti ng under , so that I was obliged
to lean back flat against it.
“Not to hurt her ,” he said again, speaking softly . “T o own
her . I didna want to possess her . Y ou, mo nighean donn —you,
I would own.”
“ Own  me?” I said. “And what, exactly , do you mean by
that?”
“What I  say .” There was still a gleam of humor in his eyes,
but his voice was serious. “Y e’re mine, Sassenach. And I
would do anything I thought I must to make that clear .”
“Oh, indeed. Including beating me on a regular basis?”
“No, I wouldna do that.” The corner of his mouth lifted
slightly , and the pressure of h is grip on my trapped wrist
increased. His eyes were deep blue, an inch from mine. “I
dinna need to—because I could,  Sassenach—and ye ken that
well.”
I pulled against his grip, by sheer reflex. I remembered
vividly that night in Doonesbury: the feeling of fighting him
with all my strength—to no avail whatever . The horrifying
feeling o f being  pinned to the bed, defenseless and exposed,
realizing that he could do anyth ing whatever that he liked to
me—and would.
I s quirm ed violently , trying to es cape the grip of memory , as
much as  his grasp on my flesh.  I didn’ t succeed, but did turnmy wrist so as to be able to sink my nails into his hand.
He d idn’ t flinch or look away . His other hand touched me
lightly—no mor e than a brush of my earlobe, but that was
quite enough. He could  touch me anywhere—in any way .
Evidently , women ar e  capable of experiencing rational
thought and sexual arousal simultaneously , because I appeared
to be doing precisely that.
My brain was e ngaged in indignant rebuttal of all kinds of
things, i ncluding at least half o f everything he’d said in the
course of the last few minutes.
At t he s ame tim e, the other end  of my spinal cord was not
merely shamefully aroused a t the thought of physical
possession; it was bloody deliri ously weak-kneed with desire
at the notion, a nd was causing my hips to sway outward,
brushing his.
He w as still ign oring the dig of my nails. His other hand
came up and to ok my free hand before I could do anything
violent with it; he folded his f ingers around mine and held
them captive, down at my side.
“If ye asked me, Sassenach, to free ye—” he whispered,
“d’ye think I’d do so?”
I too k a deep breath; deep enough that my breasts brushed
his c hest, he sto od so close, and  realization welled up in me. I
stood sti ll, breat hing, watching his eyes, and felt my agitation
fade slowly away , mutating into a sense of conviction, heavy
and warm in the pit of my belly .
I had  thought my body swayed in answer to his—and it did.
But his moved unconsciously with mine; the rhythm of the
pulse I saw in hi s throat was the  pounding of the heartbeat that
echoed in my wrist, and the sway of his body followed mine,
barely touching, moving scarcely more than the leaves above,
sighing on the breeze.
“I w ouldn’ t ask,” I whispered. “I’d tell you. And you’d do
it. Y ou’d do as I said.”“W ould I?” His grip on my wris t was still firm, and his face
so close to mine that I felt his smile, rather than saw it.
“Y es,” I said. I  had stopped pulling at my trapped wrist;
instead, I pulled my other hand from his—he made no move to
stop me—and brushed a thumb from the lobe of his ear down
the s ide of his neck. He took a short, sharp breath, and a tiny
shudder ran through him, stippling his skin with goosebumps
in the wake of my touch.
“Y es, you would,” I said again very softly . “Because I own
you, too … man. Don’ t I?”
His hand released its grip abru ptly and slid upward, long
fingers i ntertwining with mine, his palm lar ge and warm and
hard against my own.
“Oh, aye,” he s aid, just as softly . “Y e do.” He lowered his
head the last half-inch and his lips brushed mine, whispering,
so that I felt the words as much as heard them.
“And I ken that verra well indeed, mo nighean donn. ”4 8
WOODEARS
D ESPITE HIS DISMISSAL of her worries, Jamie had
promised his wife to look into the matter , and found
opportunity to speak with Malva Christie a few days later .
Coming back from Kenny Lindsay’ s place, he met a snake
curled u p in the dust of the pat h before him. It was a lar gish
creature, but gaily striped—not one of the venomous vipers.
Still, he couldn’ t help it; snakes gave him the grue, and he did
not wish  to pick it up with his hands, nor yet to step over it. It
might not be dis posed to lunge up his kilt—but then again, it
might. For its part, the snake remained stubbornly curled
among t he leaves, not budging in response to his “Shoo!” or
the stamping of his foot.
He took a step to the side, foun d an alder , and cut a good
stick from it, wi th which he firmly escorted the wee beastie of f
the p ath and into the wood. Af fronted, the snake writhed of f at
a good rate of speed into a hobble-bush, and next thing, a loud
shriek came from the other side of the bush.
He darte d round it to find Malva Christie, making an ur gent,
though unsuccessful, ef fort to squash the agitated snake with a
lar ge basket.
“It’ s all right, lass, let him go.” He seized her arm, causing a
number of mushrooms to casca de out of her basket, and the
snake de camped indignantly in search of quieter surroundings.
He c rouched and scooped up th e mushrooms for her , while
she gasped and fanned herself with the end of her apron.
“Oh, thank ye, sir ,” she said, bosom heaving. “I’m that
terrified o’ snakes.”
“Och, w ell, that’ s no but a wee king snake,” he said,
af fecting nonchalance. “Great ratters—or so I’m told.”“Maybe so, but they’ve a wicked bite.” She shuddered
briefly .
“Y e’ve no been bitten, have ye?”  He stood up and dumped a
final handful of fungus into he r basket, and she curtsied in
thanks.
“No, sir .” She straightened her cap “But Mr . Crombie was.
Gully D ornan brought one of those things in a box, to Sunday
meeting last, just for mischief, for he kent the text was For
they shall take up poisonous se rpents and suffer no harm.  I
think he  meant to let it out in the midst of the prayin’.” She
grinned at the telling, clearly reliving the event.
“But Mr . Crombie saw him with the box, and took it from
him, not  knowing what was in it. W ell, so—Gully was shaking
of th e box, to keep the snake awake, and when Mr . Crombie
opened i t, the snake came out like a jack-i’-the-box and bit Mr .
Crombie on the lip.”
Jamie couldn’ t help smiling in turn.
“Did it, then? I dinna recall hearing about that.”
“W ell, Mr . Crombie was that fu rious,” she said, trying for
tact. “I imagine no one wanted t o spread the story , sir , for fear
he’d maybe pop with rage.”
“A ye, I see,” he  said dryly . “A nd that’ s why he wouldna
come to have my wife see to the wound, I suppose.”
“Oh, he wouldna do that, sir ,” she assured him, shaking her
head. “Not if he was to have cut of f his nose by mistake.”
“No?”
She picked up the basket, glancing shyly up at him.
“W ell …  no. Some say may be  as your wife’ s a witch, did
ye ken that?”
He felt an unple asant tightness in his wame, though he was
not surprised to hear it.
“She is a Sassen ach,” he answered, calm. “Folk will always
say s uch things o f a stranger , especially a woman.” He glancedsideways at her , but her eyes w ere modestly cast down to the
contents of her basket. “Think so yourself, do ye?”
She looked up at that, gray eyes wide.
“Oh, no, sir! Never!”
She spoke with such earnestnes s that he smiled, despite the
seriousness of his errand.
“W ell, I  suppose ye’d have no ticed, so much time as ye
spend in her sur gery .”
“Oh, I should wish nothing but to be just like her , sir!” she
assured him, clutching the hand le of her basket in worshipful
enthusiasm. “She is so kind and  lovely , and she kens so much!
I want to know all she can teach me, sir .”
“A ye, w ell. She ’ s said often ho w good it is to have such a
pupil as yourself, lass. Y e’re a great help to her .” He cleared
his throat, wondering how best to work round from these
cordialities to a rude inquiry a s to whether her father was
interfering with  her . “Ah … your Da doesna mind that ye
spend so much time with my wife?”
A c loud fell up on her countenance at that, and her long
black lashes swept down, hiding the dove-gray eyes.
“Oh. W ell. He … he doesna say I mustna go.”
Jamie made a noncommittal sound in his throat, and
gestured her ahead of him back  to the path, where he strode
along fo r a bit without further question, allowing her to regain
her composure.
“What d ’ye think your father will do,” he inquired, swishing
his stick  casually through a patc h of toadflax, “once ye’ve wed
and left his house? Is there a woman he might consider? He’d
need someone to do for him, I expect.”
Her lips tightened at that, to hi s interest, and a faint flush
rose in her cheeks.
“I d inna mean t o be wed anytime soon, sir . W e’ll manage
well enough.”Her answer was short enough to cause him to probe a bit.
“No? Su rely ye’ ve suitors, lass—the lads swoon after ye in
droves; I’ve seen them.”
The flush on her skin bloomed brighter .
“Please, sir , ye’ll say no such thing to my faither!”
That rang a small alarm bell in him—but then, she might
mean only that T om Christie wa s a strict parent, vigilant of his
daughter ’ s virtu e. And he woul d have been astonished to the
marrow to learn that Christie w as soft, indulgent, or in any
way delinquent in such responsibilities.
“I shall not,” he said mildly . “ I was only teasin’, lass. Is
your father sae fierce, then?”
She did look at him then, very direct.
“Thought ye kent him, sir .”
He burs t out laughing at that, and after a moment’ s
hesitation, she joined him, with a small titter like the sound of
the wee birds in the trees above.
“I do,” he said, r ecovering. “He’ s a good man, T om—if a bit
dour .”
He looked to see the ef fect of this. Her face was still
flushed, but there was a tiny residual smile on her lips. That
was good.
“W ell, s o,” he resumed casually , “have ye enough of the
woodears there? ” He nodded at her basket. “I saw a good
many yesterday , up near the Green Spring.”
“Oh, did ye?” She glanced up, interested. “Where?”
“I’m headed that way ,” he said “Come if ye like, I’ll show
ye.”
They made their way along the Ridge, talking of
inconsequent th ings. He led her now and then back to the
subject of her father , and noted  that she seemed to have noreservations con cerning him—o nly a prudent regard for his
foibles and temper .
“Y our b rother , t hen,” he said th oughtfully , at one point. “Is
he content, d’ye think? Or will he be wanting to leave, maybe
go down  to the c oast? I ken he’ s no really a farmer at heart, is
he?”
She snorted a bit, but shook her head.
“No, sir , that he’ s not.”
“What did he do, then? I mean, he grew up on a plantation,
did he not?”
“Oh, no, sir .” Sh e looked up at him, surprised. “He grew up
in Edinbur gh. W e both did.”
He w as taken back a bit at that. It was true, both she and
Allan had an ed ucated accent, but he had thought it only that
Christie was a schoolmaster , and strict of such things.
“How is that, l ass? T om said he’d married here, in the
Colonies.”
“Oh, so he did, sir ,” she assured him hastily . “But his wife
was not a bond servant; she went back to Scotland.”
“I se e,” he said  mildly , seeing her face grow much pinker
and her lips press tight. T om had  said his wife had died—well,
and he supposed she had, but in  Scotland, after she’d left him.
Proud a s Christie was, he could  hardly wonder that the man
hadn’ t confessed to his wife’ s desertion. But—
“Is it true, sir , that your grand sire was Lord Lovat? Him
they called the Old Fox?”
“Oh, ay e,” he said, smiling. “I  come from a long line of
traitors, thieves, and bastards, ken?”
She laughed at that, and very prettily ur ged him to tell her
more of his sord id family history—quite obviously , as a means
of avoiding his asking more questions regarding hers.
The “but” lingered in his mind, though, even as they talked,
with increasing desultoriness as they climbed through the dark,scented forest.
But. T om Christie had been arre sted two or three days after
the Battle of Culloden, and imprisoned for the next ten years,
before b eing transported to America. He did not know Malva’ s
exact ag e, but he thought she must be eighteen or so—though
she often seemed older , her manner was so poised.
She must have been conceived, then, quite soon after
Christie’ s arrival in the Colonies. No great wonder , if the man
had seized the first chance he had to marry , after living
without a woman for so long. A nd then the wife had thought
better of  her bar gain, and gone . Christie had told Roger Mac
his w ife had died of influenza— well, a man had his pride, and
God knew T om Christie had more than most.
But Alla n Chris tie … where had  he  come from? The young
man was somewhere in his twenties; it was possible that he
had been  concei ved before Culloden. But if so—who was his
mother?
“Y ou an d your brother ,” he said  abruptly , at the next break
in conversation. “Did ye have the same mother?”
“Y es, sir ,” she said, looking startled.
“Ah,” h e said, and let the subject drop. W ell, now . So
Christie had been wed before Culloden. And then the woman,
whoever she was, had come to find him in the Colonies. That
ar gued a high degree of determi nation and devotion, and made
him reg ard Christie with a goo d deal more interest. But that
devotion had not been proof against the hardships of the
Colonies—or el se she found T om so changed by time and
circumstance that the devot ion had been drowned in
disappointment, and she had left again.
He c ould see that, easily—and felt an unexpected bond of
sympathy with T om Christie. He recalled his own feelings, all
too well, when Claire came back to find him. The disbelieving
joy of her presence—and the bone-deep fear that she would
not recognize the man she had known, in the man who stood
before her .W orse, i f she had discovered something that made her flee
—and well as he knew Claire, he still was not sure that she
would h ave stayed, if he’d told her at once about his marriage
to Laogh aire. For that matter , if Laoghaire hadn’ t shot him and
nearly killed him, Claire might well have run away , and been
lost for good. T he thought of it was a black pit, gaping at his
feet.
Of c ourse, had s he gone, he would  have died, he reflected.
And never come to this place and got his land, nor seen his
daughter , nor held his grandson in his arms. Come to think,
perhaps being nearly killed wa sn’ t always a misfortune—so
long as you didn’ t actually die of it.
“Does y our arm trouble ye, sir? ” He was jerked back from
his thoughts to realize that he was standing like a fool, one
hand clutching the spot on his upper arm where Laoghaire’ s
pistol ball had gone through and Malva squinting at him in
concern.
“Ah, no,” he sai d hastily , dropping his hand. “A midgie bite.
The bittie things are out early . T ell me”—he groped for some
neutral topic of conversation—”d’ye like it here in the
mountains?”
Inane as the q uestion was, she appeared to consider it
seriously .
“It’ s lonely , sometimes,” she said, and glanced into the
forest, where falling shafts of su nlight splintered on leaves and
needles, shrubs and rocks, filling the air with a shattered green
light. “B ut it is  …”  she groped for a word. “Pr etty ,” she said,
with a small smile at him, ackn owledging the inadequacy of
the word.
They had reached the small clearing where the water
bubbled out over a ledge of what his daughter said was
serpentine—the rock whose soft green gave the spring its
name; that, and the thick layer o f vivid moss that grew around
it.He g estured to her to kneel and drink first. She did, cupping
her hands to her face and closing her eyes in bliss at the taste
of the cold, swe et water . She g ulped, cupped her hands and
drank again, almost greedily . She was very pretty herself, he
thought in amusement, and the word was much more
appropriate to the wee lassie, w ith that delicate chin and the
lobes of  her tender pink ears pee ping from her cap, than to the
spirit of the mountains. Her mother must have been lovely , he
thought—and it  was fortunate for the lass that she had not
taken much of her father ’ s grim looks, save those gray eyes.
She sat back on her heels, breathing deep, and scooted to the
side, nod ding at him to kneel an d take his turn. The day wasn’ t
hot, but it was a steep climb to the spring, and the cold water
went down gratefully .
“I’ve never seen the Highlands,” Malva said, dabbing the
end of her kerchief over her we t face. “Some say this place is
like it, though. D’ye think so yourself, sir?”
He shoo k the water from his fin gers and wiped the back of
his hand across his mouth.
“Something like. Some parts. The Great Glen, and the forest
—aye, t hat’ s verra like this.” H e pointed his chin up at the
trees surroundin g them, murmurous and resin-scented. “But
there’ s nay bracken here. And nay peat, of course. And nay
heather; that’ s the biggest dif ference.”
“Y e hear the sto ries—of men hiding in the heather . Did ye
ever do so yourself, sir?” She dimpled slightly , and he didn’ t
know w hether she meant to tease, or was only making
conversation.
“Now and then,” he said, and smiled at her as he rose,
brushing pine needles from his kilt. “Stalking the deer , aye?
Here, I’ll show ye the woodears.”
The fungus grew in thick shelves at the foot of an oak, no
more th an ten feet from the spring. Some of the things had
opened their gills already , begun to darken and curl; the
ground nearby was scattered with the spores, a dark brownpowder that lay upon the glos sy crackle of last year ’ s dry
leaves. T he fresher fungi were still bright, though, deep orange
and meaty .
He left her there with a cordial word, and went back down
the narrow trail, wondering abo ut the woman who had loved
and left T om Christie.4 9
THE VENOM OF THE
 NOR TH WIND
July 1774
B RIANNA DROV E THE SHARP end of the spade into the
muddy bank and pulled out a  chunk of clay the color of
chocolate fudge.  She could have done without the reminder of
food, sh e thought, flinging it aside into the current with a
grunt. She hitched up her soggy shift and wiped a forearm
across her brow . She hadn’ t ea ten since mid-morning, and it
was nearly teatime. Not that sh e meant to stop until supper .
Roger was up the mountain, helping Amy McCallum rebuild
her chim ney sta ck, and the little  boys had gone up to the Big
House t o be fed bread and butter and honey and generally
spoiled by Mrs. Bug. She’d wait to eat; there was too much to
do here.
“D’ye need help, lass?”
She squinted, shading her eyes against the sun. Her father
was stan ding on the bank above , viewing her ef forts with what
looked like amusement.
“Do I look  like I need help?” she asked irritably , swiping the
back of a mud-streaked hand across her jaw .
“Y e do, aye.”
He’d be en fishi ng; barefoot and wet to mid-thigh. He laid
his r od against a tree and swun g the creel from his shoulder ,
woven r eeds creaking with the weight of the catch. Then he
grasped a sapling for balance, and started to edge down the
slippery bank, bare toes squelching in the mud.
“W ait—take your shirt of f!” She realized her mistake an
instant t oo late. A startled look flitted across his face, only for
a moment, and then was gone.“I mean … the mud …” she said, knowing it was too late.
“The washing.”
“Oh, aye, to be sure.” W ithout hesitation, he pulled the shirt
over his  head and turned his  back to her , hunting for a
convenient branch from which to hang it.
His scars were not really shocking. She’d glimpsed them
before, imagined  them many times, and the reality was much
less vivid. The scars were old , a faint silvered net, moving
easily ov er the shadows of his r ibs as he reached upward. He
moved naturally . Only the tension in his shoulders suggested
otherwise.
Her hand closed involuntarily , feeling for an absent pencil,
feeling the stroke of the line that would capture that tiny sense
of un ease, the ja rring note that would draw the observer closer ,
closer st ill, wondering what it w as about this scene of pastoral
grace… .
Thou sh alt not uncover thy father ’ s nakedness,  she thought,
and spread her h and flat, pressing it hard against her thigh. But
he had turned b ack and was co ming down the bank, eyes on
the tangled rushes and protruding stones underfoot.
He slid the last two feet and arrived beside her with a
splash, arms flailing to keep his balance. She laughed, as he’d
intended, and he smiled. She’d thought for an instant to speak
of it, make some apology—but he would not meet her eyes.
“So, the n, move it, or go round?” His attention focused on
the boulder embedded in the bank, he leaned his weight
against it and shoved experimentally .
“ Can  we mov e it, do you think?” She  waded up beside him,
retucking the hem of her shift, which she had pulled between
her legs  and fastened with a belt. “Going round would mean
digging another ten feet of ditch.”
“That much?” He glanced at her in surprise.
“Y es. I want to c ut a notch here , to cut through to that bend
—then I  can put a small water -w heel here and get a good fall.”
She lean ed past him, pointing downstream. “The next-bestplace would be down there—see where the banks rise?—but
this is better .”
“A ye, al l right. W ait a bit, then. ” He made his way back to
the bank, scrambled up, and dis appeared into the wood, from
whence he returned with sever al stout lengths of fresh oak
sapling, still sporting the remnants of their glossy leaves.
“W e dinna need to get it out of the creekbed, aye?” he
asked. “ Only m ove it a few feet, so ye can cut through the
bank beyond it?”
“That’ s it.” Rivulets of sweat, trapped by her thick
eyebrows, ran tickling down the sides of her face. She’d been
digging for the best part of an hour; her arms ached from
heaving shovelsful of heavy mud, and her hands were
blistered. W ith a sense of profound gratitude, she surrendered
the spade and s tepped back in the creek, stooping to splash
cold water on her scratched arms and flushed face.
“Heavy work,” her father obser ved, grunting a little as he
briskly finished undermining the boulder . “Could ye not have
asked Roger Mac to do it?”
“He’ s bu sy ,” she  said, perceiving the shortness of her tone,
but not inclined to disguise it.
Her father darted a sharp glanc e at her , but said no more,
merely b usying himself with the proper placement of his oak
staves. A ttracted like iron filings to the magnetism of their
grandfather ’ s pr esence, Jemmy  and Germain appeared like
magic, loudly wanting to help.
She’d a sked them to help, and they’d helped—for a few
minutes, before  being drawn away by the glimpse of a
porcupine high up in the trees. W ith Jamie in char ge, of
course, they leaped to the task, madly scooping dirt from the
bank wi th flat bits of wood, giggling, pushing, getting in the
way , and stuf fing handsful of mud down the back of each
other ’ s breeches.
Jamie being Jamie, he igno red the nuisance, merely
directing their ef forts and finally ordering them out of thecreek, so as not to be crushed.
“All righ t, lass,”  he said, turning  to her . “T ake a grip there.”
The bou lder had  been loosened from the confining clay , and
now protruded from the bank, o ak staves thrust into the mud
beneath, sticking up on either side, and another behind.
She seized the one he indicated, while he took the other two.
“On the count of three … one … two … heave!”
Jem and Germain, perched above, chimed in, chanting “One
… two … heave !” like a small Greek chorus. There was a
splinter in her thumb and th e wood rasped against the
waterlogged creases of her skin, but she felt suddenly like
laughing.
“One … two … hea —” W ith a sudden shift, a swirl of mud,
and a cascade of loose dirt from the bank above, the boulder
gave way , falling into the strea m with a splash that soaked
them bo th to the chest and made both little boys shriek with
joy .
Jamie was grinning ear -to-ear an d so was she, wet shift and
muddy children notwithstanding. The boulder now lay near the
opposite bank of the stream, and —just as she had calculated—
the d iverted current was already  eating into the newly created
hollow in the ne ar bank, a stro ng eddy eating away the fine-
grained clay in streams and spirals.
“See that?” She nodded at it, dabbing her mud-spattered
face on the shoulder of her shift. “I don’ t know how far it will
erode, but if I let it go for a day  or two, there won’ t be much
digging left to do.”
“Y e kent that would happen?” Her father glanced at her ,
face alight, and laughed. “Why , ye clever , bonnie wee thing!”
The glow of re cognized achievement did quite a bit to
dampen her resentment of Roger ’ s absence. The presence of a
bottle of cider in Jamie’ s creel, keeping cold amongst the dead
trout, did a lot more. They sat companionably on the bank,
passing the bottle back and forth , admiring the industry of the
new eddy pool at work.“This looks like good clay ,” she observed, leaning forward
to scoop  a little of the wet stuf f o ut of the crumbling bank. She
squeezed it in h er hand, letting grayish water run down her
arm, and  opened  her hand to show him how it kept its shape,
showing clearly the prints of her fingers.
“Good for your kiln?” he asked, peering dutifully at it.
“W orth a try .” She had made several less-than-successful
experiments wit h the kiln so far , producing a succession of
malformed plates and bowls, most of which had either
exploded in the kiln or shattered immediately upon removal.
One or two survivals, deformed and scorched round the edges,
had been pressed into dubious service, but it was precious little
reward for the ef fort of stoking the kiln and minding it for
days.
What she needed was advice from someone who knew
about kilns and making earthenware. But with the strained
relations now existent between the Ridge and Salem, she
couldn’ t seek it. It had been aw kward enough, her speaking
directly to Brother Mordecai ab out his ceramic processes—a
Popish woman, and speaking to a man she wasn’ t married to,
the scandal!
“Damn wee Manfred,” her f ather agreed, hearing her
complaint. He’d heard it before, but didn’ t mention it. He
hesitated. “W ould it maybe help was I to go and ask? A few o’
the Brethren will still speak to me, and it might be that they’d
let me talk wi’ Mordecai. If ye  were to tell me what it is ye
need to know … ? Y e could maybe write it down.”
“Oh, Da, I love you!” Grateful,  she leaned to kiss him, and
he laughed, clearly gratified to be doing her a service.
Elated, s he took another drink o f cider , and rosy visions of
hardened clay pipes began to dance in her brain. She had a
wooden cistern already built, with a lot of complaint and
obstruction from Ronnie Sinclair . She needed help to heave
that into  place. Then, if she could get only twenty feet of
reliable pipe …“Mama, come look !” Jem’ s impatient voice cut through the
fog of calculation. W ith a ment al sigh, she made a hasty note
of w here she had been, and pushed the process carefully into a
corner of her mind, where it would perhaps helpfully ferment.
She handed the bottle back to her father , and made her way
down the bank to where the b oys squatted, expecting to be
shown frog spawn, a drowned skunk, or some other wonder of
nature appealing to small boys.
“What is it?” she called.
“Look, look!” Jemmy spotted her and popped upright,
pointing to the rock at his feet.
They were standing on the Flat R ock, a prominent feature of
the c reek. As the  name suggested, it was a flat shelf of granite,
lar ge enough for three men to o ccupy at once, undercut by the
water so  that it jutted out over  the boiling stream. It was a
favorite spot for fishing.
Someone had built a small fire; there was a blackened
smudge on the rock, with wha t looked like the remnants of
charred sticks in the center . I t was much too small for a
cooking fire, but still, she wou ld have thought nothing of it.
Her fath er was frowning at the fire site, though, in a way that
made h er walk out onto the rock and stand beside him,
looking.
The objects in the ashes weren’ t sticks.
“Bones,” she said at once, and squatted down to look closer .
“What k ind of animal are those from?” Even as she said it, her
mind w as analy zing and rejecting—squirrel, possum, rabbit,
deer , pig—unable to make sense of the shapes.
“They’re finger bones, lass,” he said, lowering his voice as
he g lanced at J emmy—who had lost interest in the fire and
was now sliding down the muddy bank, to the further
detriment of his breeches. “Dinna touch them,” he added—
unnecessarily , as she had drawn back her hand in instant
revulsion.“From a human, you mean?” Instinctively , she wiped her
hand on the side of her thigh, though she had touched nothing.
He nodded, and squatted beside her , studying the charred
remains. There were blackened lumps there, too—though she
thought these were the remains of some plant material; one
was greenish, maybe a stem of something, incompletely
burned.
Jamie bent low , snif fing at the burned remains. Instinctively ,
Brianna drew a deep breath through her nose in imitation—
then sn orted, trying to get rid of the smell. It was
disconcerting: a reek of char , overlaid with something bitter
and chalky—and that in turn overlaid with a sort of pungent
scent that reminded her of medicine.
“Where could they have come from?” she asked, also low-
voiced—though Jemmy and Germain had begun pelting each
other with mudballs, and wouldn’ t have noticed if she’d
shouted.
“I ha vena noticed anyone missing a hand, have you?” Jamie
glanced up, giving her a half-smile. She didn’ t return it.
“Not walking around, no. But if they aren’ t walking around
—” She  swallow ed, trying to ig nore the half-imagined taste of
bitter herbs and burning. “Whe re’ s the rest? Of the body , I
mean.”
That wo rd, “body ,” seemed to b ring the whole thing into a
new and nasty focus.
“Where’ s the rest of that fing er , I wonder?” Jamie was
frowning at the blackened smudge. He moved a knuckle
toward it, and she saw what he had seen: a paler smudge
within th e circle  of the fire, where part of the ashes had been
swept away . There were three fingers, she saw , still
swallowing repe atedly . T wo were intact, the bones gray-white
and spectral among the ashes. T wo joints of the third were
gone, though; only the slender last phalanx remained.
“An animal?” She glanced roun d for traces, but there were
no pawp rints on the surface of the rock—only the muddysmudges left by the little boys’ bare feet.
V ague visions of cannibalism were beginning to stir
queasily in the pit of her stomach, though she rejected the
notion at once.
“Y ou don’ t think Ian—” She stopped abruptly .
“Ian?” Her father looked up, astonished. “Why should Ian
do such a thing?”
“I don’ t  think he would,” she said, taking hold of common
sense. “Not at all. It was just a thought—I’d heard that the
Iroquois sometimes … sometimes …” She nodded at the
charred bones, unwilling to articulate the thought further . “Um
… maybe a friend of Ian’ s? Uh … visiting?”
Jamie’ s face darkened a little, but he shook his head.
“Nay , there’ s the smell of the Highlands about this. The
Iroquois will burn an enemy . Or cut bits of f him, to be sure.
But not like that.” He pointed at the bones with his chin, in the
Highland way . “This is a privat e business, ken? A witch—or
one of their shamans, maybe—m ight do a thing like that; not a
warrior .”
“I h aven’ t seen any Indians of any kind lately . Not on the
Ridge. Have you?”
He looked at the burned smudge a moment longer ,
frowning, then shook his head.
“No, nor anyone missing a few fingers, either .”
“Y ou’re sur e  they’re human?” She studied the bones, trying
for other possibilities. “Maybe from a small bear? Or a big
coon?”
“Maybe,” he said flatly , but she could tell he said it only for
her sake. He was sure.
“Mama!” The patter of bare feet  on the rock behind her was
succeeded by a tug at her sleeve. “Mama, we’re hungry!”
“Of cou rse you are,” she said, rising to meet the demand,
but still gazing abstractedly at the charred remnants. “Y ouhaven’ t eaten in nearly an hou r . What did you—” Her gaze
drifted s lowly from the fire to her son, then snapped abruptly ,
focusing on the two little boys , who stood grinning at her ,
covered from head to foot in mud.
“ Look  at you!” she said, dismay tempered by resignation.
“How could you possibly get that filthy?”
“Oh, it’ s  easy , lass,” her father assured her , grinning as he
rose to his fee t. “Easy cured, too, though.” He bent, and
seizing Germain by the back of shirt and seat of breeks,
heaved him neatly of f the rock and into the pool below .
“Me, too , me, too! Me, too, Grandda!” Jemmy was dancing
up a nd down in  excitement, spattering clods of mud in all
direction.
“Oh, aye. Y ou, t oo.” Jamie bent and grabbed Jem round the
waist, launching him high into the air in a flutter of shirt
before Brianna could cry out.
“He can’ t swim!”
This protest coincided with a h uge splash, as Jem hit the
water and promptly sank like a rock. She was striding toward
the e dge, prepared to dive in af ter him, when her father put a
hand on her arm to stop her .
“W ait a bit,” he said. “How will ye ken whether he swims or
not, if ye dinna let him try?”
Germain was already arrowing his way toward shore, his
sleek blond head dark with wa ter . Jemmy popped up behind
him, though, splashing and sp luttering, and Germain dived,
turned like an otter , and came up alongside.
“Kick!” he called to Jemmy , churning up a huge spray in
illustration. “Go on your back!”
Jemmy ceased flailing, went on his back, and kicked madly .
His hair  was plastered over his f ace and the spray of his ef forts
must have obscured any remna nts of vision—but he went on
valiantly kickin g, to encouraging whoops from Jamie and
Germain.The pool was no more than ten feet across, and he reached
the shallows on the opposite bank within seconds, beaching
among t he rocks by virtue of crashing headfirst into one. He
stopped, thrashin g feebly in the  shallows, then bounced to his
feet, showering water , and shov ed the wet hair out of his face.
He looked amazed.
“I can swim!” he shouted. “Mama, I can swim !”
“That’ s wonderful!” she called , torn between sharing his
ecstatic pride, the ur ge to rush home and tell Roger about it—
and dire visions of Jemmy now leaping heedlessly into
bottomless ponds and rock-jagged rapids, under the reckless
delusion that he could indeed s wim. But he’d gotten his feet
wet, in no uncertain terms; there was no going back.
“Come here!” She bent toward him, clapping her hands.
“Can you swim back to me? Come on, come here!”
He l ooked blankly at her for an instant, then around him at
the rippling water of the pool. T he blaze of excitement in his
face died.
“I for ge t,” he said, and his mouth curled down, fat with
sudden woe. “I for get how!”
“Fall down and kick!” Germain bellowed helpfully , from his
perch on the rock. “Y ou can do it, cousin !”
Jemmy took one or two blunder ing steps into the water , but
stopped, lip trembling, terror  and confusion starting to
overwhelm him.
“Stay there, a chuisle ! I’m  co ming!” Jamie called, and dove
cleanly into the pool, a long pale streak beneath the water ,
bubbles streamin g from hair and breeks. He popped up in front
of Jemm y in an explosion of  breath and shook his head,
flinging strands of wet red hair out of his face.
“Come along then, man,” he said, scooting round on his
knees in the shallows, so that his back was to Jemmy . He
looked b ack, patting his own sh oulder . “T ake hold of me here,
aye? W e’ll swim back together .”And they did, ki cking and splashing in ungainly dog paddle,
Jemmy’ s shrieks of excitement echoed by Germain, who had
leaped into the water to paddle alongside.
Hauled out onto the rock, the three of them lay puddled,
gasping and laughing at her feet, water spreading in pools
around them.
“W ell, you are cleaner ,” she said judiciously , moving her
foot away from a spreading streamlet. “I’ll admit that much.”
“Of course we a re.” Jamie sat up, wringing out the long tail
of his hair . “It o ccurs to me, la ss, that there’ s maybe a better
way to do what ye want.”
“What I w—oh. Y ou mean the water?”
“A ye, that.” He snif fed, and ru bbed the back of his hand
under hi s nose. “I’ll show ye, if ye come up to the house after
supper .”
“What’ s that, Grandda?” Jemmy  had got to his feet, wet hair
standing up in re d spikes, and was looking curiously at Jamie’ s
back. He  put out a tentative fing er and traced one of the long,
curving scars.
“What? Oh … that.” Jamie’ s f ace went quite blank for a
moment. “It’ s … ah …”
“Some bad people hurt Grandda once,” she interrupted
firmly , bending down to pick Jemmy up. “But that was a long
time ago. He’ s all right now . Y ou weigh a ton!”
“Papa says Grandper e  is perhaps a silkie,” Germain
remarked, viewing Jamie’ s back with interest. “Like his papa
before him. Did the bad people find you in your silkie skin,
Grandper e,  and  try to cut it from you? He would then of
course become a man again,” he explained matter -of-factly ,
looking up at Jemmy , “and could kill them with his sword.”
Jamie was staring at Germain. He blinked, and wiped his
nose again.
“Oh,” he  said. “A ye. Um. A ye, I  expect that was the way of
it. If your papa says so.”“What’ s a silkie?” asked Jemmy , bewildered but interested.
He wigg led in Brianna’ s arms, wanting to be put down, and
she lowered him back to the rock.
“I don’ t know ,” Germain admitted. “But they have fur .
What’ s a silkie, Grandper e ?”
Jamie cl osed his eyes against th e sinking sun, and rubbed a
hand over his face, shaking his head a little. Brianna thought
he was smiling, but couldn’ t tell for sure.
“Ah, we ll,” he said, sitting up straighter , opening his eyes,
and throwing back his wet hair . “A silkie is a creature who is a
man upon the land, but becomes a seal within the sea. And a
seal,” he added, cutting of f Jem my , who had been opening his
mouth to ask, “is a great sleek beastie that barks like a dog, is
as b ig as an ox, and beautiful a s the black of night. They live
in t he sea, but  come out onto the rocks near the shore
sometimes.”
“Have you seen them, Grandper e ?” Germain asked, eager .
“Oh, ma ny a time,” Jamie assu red him. “There are a great
many seals who live on the coasts of Scotland.”
“Scotland,” Jemmy echoed. His eyes were round.
“ Ma mer e  s ays Scotland is a good p lace,” Germain
remarked. “She cries sometimes , when she talks of it. I am not
so sure I would like it, though.”
“Why not?” Brianna asked.
“It’ s full  of giants and water horses and … things,” Germain
replied, frowning. “I don’ t want to meet any of those. And
parritch, Maman  says, but we have parritch here.”
“So we have. And I expect it’ s time we were going home to
eat some .” Jamie got to his feet and stretched, groaning in the
pleasure of it. T he late-afternoon sun washed rock and water
with a golden l ight, gleaming on the boys’ cheeks and the
bright hairs on her father ’ s arms.
Jemmy stretched and groaned, too, in worshipful imitation,
and Jamie laughed.“Come o n, wee fishie. D’ye want a ride home?” He bent so
that Jemmy could scramble onto his back, then straightened
up, s ettling the little boy’ s weight, and put out a hand to take
Germain’ s.
Jamie saw her attention turn momentarily back toward the
blackened smudge at the edge of the rock.
“Leave it, lass,” he said quietly .  “It’ s a charm of some kind.
Y e dinna want to touch it.”
Then he stepped of f the rock and made for the trail, Jemmy
on his back and Germain clutched firmly by the back of the
neck, both boys giggling as the y made their way through the
slippery mud of the path.
Brianna retrieved her spade and Jamie’ s shirt from the
creekbank, and caught the boys up on the trail to the Big
House. A breeze had begun to breathe through the trees, chilly
in the damp cloth of her shift, but the heat of walking was
enough to keep her from being cold.
Germain was singing softly to himself, still hand-in-hand
with his grandfather , his small blond head tilting back and
forth like a metronome.
Jemmy sighed in exhausted bliss, legs wrapped round
Jamie’ s middle,  arms about h is neck, and leaned his sun-
reddened cheek against the scar red back. Then he thought of
something, for he raised his head and kissed his grandfather
with a loud smacking noise, between the shoulder blades.
Her father jerked, nearly dropp ing Jem, and made a high-
pitched noise that made her laugh.
“Is that make it better?” Jem inquired seriously , pulling
himself up and trying to look over Jamie’ s shoulder into his
face.
“Oh. A ye, lad,” his grandfather assured him, face twitching.
“Much better .”
The gnats and midges were ou t in force now . She beat a
cloud of them away from her face, and slapped a mosquito thatlit on Germain’ s neck.
“Ak!” he said, hunching his shoulders, but then resumed
singing “Alouette,” undisturbed.
Jemmy’ s shirt was thin, worn l inen, cut down from one of
Roger ’ s old ones. The cloth had dried to the shape of his body ,
square-rumped and solid, the breadth of his small, tender
shoulders echoing the wide set of the older , firmer ones he
clung to. She glanced from the redheads to Germain, walking
reed-thin and graceful through shadows and light, still singing,
and thought how desperately beautiful men were.
“Who were the bad people, Grandda?” Jemmy asked
drowsily , head nodding with the rhythm of Jamie’ s steps.
“Sassunaich,”  Jamie replied briefly . “English soldiers.”
“English canaille, ” G ermain amplified, breaking  of f his
song. “They are the ones who cut of f my papa’ s hand, too.”
“They were?” Jemmy’ s head lifted in momentary attention,
then fell  back between Jamie’ s shoulder blades with a thump
that made his gr andfather grunt. “Did you kill them with your
sword, Grandda?”
“Some of them.”
“I will kill the rest, when I am big,” Germain declared. “If
there are any left.”
“I suppo se there might be.” Jamie hitched Jem’ s weight a
little higher , letting go Germ ain’ s hand in order to hold
Jemmy’ s slackening legs tight to his body .
“Me, too,” Jemmy murmured, eyelids drooping. “I’ll kill
them, too.”
At t he fork in the trail, Jamie surrendered her son to her ,
sound as leep, and took back his shirt. He pulled it on, brushing
disheveled hair out of his face as his head came through. He
smiled a t her , then leaned forward and kissed her forehead,
gently , putting one hand on Jemmy’ s round, red head where it
lay against her shoulder .“Dinna fash yourself, lass,” he  said softly . “I’ll speak to
Mordecai. And your man. T ake care of this one.”
“THIS I S A PRIV A TE BUSINESS,” her father had said. The
general implication being that she should leave it alone. And
she might have, save for a cou ple of things. One, that Roger
had come home well after dark,  whistling a song he said Amy
McCallum had taught him. And two, that other of fhand remark
her fathe r had made about the fire on the Flat Rock—that there
was a smell of the Highlands about it.
Brianna had a v ery keen nose, and she smelled a rat. She
also had recognized—belatedly —what had made Jamie say
what he had. The odd smell of the fire, that tang of medicine—
it w as iodine; th e smell of burned seaweed. She’d smelled a
fire buil t of sea wrack on the shore near Ullapool, in her own
time, when Roger had taken her up there for a picnic.
There was certainly seaweed on the coast, and it wasn’ t
impossible that someone, somet ime, had brought some inland.
But it also wasn ’ t impossible that some of the fisher -folk had
brought bits of it from Scotland, in the way that some exiles
might b ring earth in jar , or a handful of pebbles to remind
them of the land left behind.
A charm , her father had said.  And the song Roger had
learned from Amy McCallum was called “The Deasil Charm,”
he said.
All of which wa s no particular evidence of anything. Still,
she mentioned the small fire and its contents to Mrs. Bug, just
from curiosity . Mrs. Bug knew a good deal about Highland
charms of all sorts.
Mrs. Bug frowned thoughtfully at her description, lips
pursed.
“Bones, ye say? What sort—the bones of an animal, were
they , or a man?”
Brianna felt as though someone  had dropped a slug down
her back.“A man?”
“Oh, aye. There’ s some charm s that take grave dust, ken,
and som e the dust of bones, or the ashes of a body .” Evidently
reminded by the mention of a shes, Mrs. Bug pulled a big
pottery mixing bowl from the w arm ashes of the hearth, and
peered i nto it. The bread starte r had died a few days before,
and the bowl of flour , water , a nd honey had been set out in
hopes of snaring a wild yeast from the passing air .
The round little Scotswoman frowned at the bowl, shook
her h ead, and pu t it back with a brief muttered verse in Gaelic.
Naturally , Brian na thought, slightly amused, there would  be a
prayer fo r catching yeast. Which patron saint was in char ge of
that?
“What y e said, though,” Mrs. Bug said, returning both to
her chopping of turnips and  to the original subject of
conversation. “About it bein’ on the Flat Rock. Seaweed,
bones, a nd a flat rock. That’ s a love charm, lass. The one they
call the V enom o’ the North W ind.”
“What a really peculiar name f or a love charm,” she said,
staring at Mrs. Bug, who laughed.
“Och, now , do I remember it at all?” she asked rhetorically .
She wiped her hands upon her apron, and folding them at her
waist with a vaguely theatrical air , recited:
“A love charm for thee,
W ater drawn thr ough a straw ,
The warmth of him thou lovest,
W ith love to draw on thee.
“Arise betimes on Lor d’ s day ,
T o the flat r ock of the shor e
T ake with thee the butterburAnd the foxglove.
“A small quantity of embers
In the skirt of thy kirtle,
A special handful of seaweed
In a wooden shovel.
“Thr ee bones of an old man,
Newly torn fr om the grave,
Nine stalks of r oyal fern,
Newly trimmed with an ax.
“Burn them on a fir e of faggots
And make them all into ashes;
Sprinkle in the fleshy br east of thy lover ,
Against the venom of the north wind.
“Go r ound the rath  of pr ocr eation,
The cir cuit of the five turns,
And I will vow and warrant thee
That man shall never leave thee.”
Mrs. Bug unfolded her hands and took another turnip,
quartering it with neat, quick chops and tossing the pieces into
the pot. “Y e’re not wanting such a thing yourself, I hope?”
“No,” Brianna murmured, feeling the small cold feeling
continue down her back. “Do you think—would the fisher -folk
use a charm like that?”“W ell, as to that, I canna say what  they’d do—but surely a
few wou ld ken that charm; it’ s weel enough known, though I
havena kent anyone myself has done it. There are easier ways
to m ake a lad fall in love wi’ ye, lass,” she added, pointing a
stubby f inger at Brianna in adm onition. “Cook him up a nice
plate o’ neeps boiled in milk and served wi’ butter , for one.”
“I’ll remember ,”  Brianna promised, smiling, and excused
herself.
She had meant to go home; th ere were dozens of things
needing to be done, from spinni ng yarn and weaving cloth, to
plucking and drawing the half d ozen dead geese she had shot
and hun g in the lean-to. But instead she found her footsteps
turning up the hill, along the over grown trail that led to the
graveyard.
Surely it wasn’ t Amy McCallum who’d made that charm,
she thought. It w ould have taken her hours to walk down the
mountain from her cabin, and her with a small baby to tend.
But babies could be carried. An d no one would know whether
she had left her cabin, save perh aps Aidan—and Aidan didn’ t
talk to anyone but Roger , whom he worshipped.
The sun was nearly down, and the tiny cemetery had a
melancholy look  to it, long shadows from its sheltering trees
slanting cold and dark across the needle-strewn ground and the
small collection of crude markers, cairns, and wooden crosses.
The pines and hemlocks murmured uneasily overhead in the
rising breeze of evening.
The sen se of cold had spread from her backbone, making a
wide patch between her shoulder blades. Seeing the earth
grubbed up beneath the wooden marker with Ephraim  on it
didn’ t help.5 0
SHARP EDGES
H E SHOU LD HA VE KNOWN better . Did  know better . But
what cou ld he have done? Much  more important, what was he
to do now?
Roger made his way slowly up the mountainside, nearly
oblivious to its beauty . Nearly , but not quite. Desolate in the
bleakness of winter , the secluded notch where Amy
McCallum’ s ramshackle cabin p erched among the laurels was
a bla ze of color and life in sprin g and summer—so vivid that
even his worry couldn’ t stop h is noticing the blaze of pinks
and reds, interrupted by soft pa tches of creamy dogwood and
carpets of bluets, their tiny blue flowers nodding on slender
stems above the torrent of the stream that bounded down
beside the rocky trail.
They must have chosen the si te in summer , he reflected
cynically . It would have seemed charming then. He hadn’ t
known O rem M cCallum, but plainly the man hadn’ t been any
more practical than his wife, or they would have realized the
dangers of their remoteness.
The pre sent si tuation wasn’ t Amy’ s fault, though; he
shouldn’ t blame her for his own lack of judgment.
He didn ’ t precisely blame himself, either—but he should
have noticed sooner what was going on; what was being said.
“Everybody ken s ye spend mor e  time up at the notch wi’ the
widow McCallum than ye do with your own wife.”
That’ s what Malva Christie had said, her little pointed chin
raised in defiance. “T ell my  father ,  and I’ll tell everyone I’ve
seen you kiss Amy McCallum. They’ll all believe me.”
He f elt an echo of the astonishment he’d felt at her words—
an a stonishment  succeeded by anger . At the girl and her sillythreat, but much more at himself.
He’d been working at the whisky clearing and, heading
back to the cabin for dinner , had  rounded a turn in the trail and
surprised the two of them, Malva and Bobby Higgins, locked
in an  embrace. They’d sprung ap art like a pair of startled deer ,
eyes wide, so alarmed as to be funny .
He’d smiled, but before he could either apologize or fade
tactfully into the underbrush, M alva had stepped up to him,
eyes still wide, but blazing with determination.
“T ell my father ,”  she ’d said, “and I’ll tell everyone I’ve
seen you kiss Amy McCallum.”
He’d been so ta ken aback by her words that he’d scarcely
noticed Bobby , until the young soldier had put a hand on her
arm, murmuring something to her , drawing her away . She’d
turned reluctantly , with a last, wary , meaningful glance at
Roger , and a parting shot that left him staggered.
“Everybody ken s ye spend mor e  time up at the notch wi’ the
widow McCallu m than ye do with your own wife. They’ll all
believe me.”
God damn it, th ey would, too, and it was his own bloody
fault. Bar one or two sarcastic remarks, Bree hadn’ t protested
his visits; she’d accepted—or seemed to—that someone  had to
go n ow and then to see the Mc Callums, make sure they had
food and fire, provide a few moments’ company , a small
respite in the monotony of loneliness and labor .
He’d done such things often, g oing with the Reverend to
call on the aged, the widowed, the ill of the congregation; take
them foo d, stop for a bit to talk— to listen. It was just what you
did  for a neighbor , he told himself; a normal kindness.
But he should have taken mor e notice. Now he recalled
Jamie’ s thoughtful glance over the supper table, the breath
taken as though to say somet hing, when Roger had asked
Claire fo r a salve for wee Orri e McCallum’ s rash—and then
Claire’ s glance at Brianna, and Jamie’ s closing his mouth,
whatever he’d thought of saying left unspoken.“They’ll all believe me.”  For the girl to have said that, there
must have been talk already . Likely Jamie had heard it; he
could only hope that Bree hadn’ t.
The cro oked ch imney came in sight above the laurels, the
smoke a nearly transparent wisp  that made the clear air above
the rooftree seem to quiver , as though the cabin were
enchanted, might vanish with a blink.
The wo rst of it was that he knew precisely how it had
happened. He had a weakness for young mothers, a terrible
tenderness towa rd them, a desire  to take care of them. The fact
that he knew exactly why  h e harbored s uch an ur ge—the
memory of his own young mo ther , who had died saving his
life during the Blitz—didn’ t help.
It was a tender ness that had nearly cost him his life at
Alamance, when that bloody-minded fool W illiam Buccleigh
MacKenzie had mistaken Roger ’ s concern for Morag
MacKenzie for … well, all right, he’d kissed her , but only on
the fore head, and for God’ s s ake, she was his own many-
times-great-grannie … and the thundering idiocy of nearly
being k illed by  your own g reat-great-etc.-grandfather for
molesting his wife … it had cos t him his voice, and he should
have learned his lesson, but he hadn’ t, not well enough.
Suddenly furiou s with himself—and with Malva Christie,
the mali cious little chit—he picked up a stone from the trail
and flun g it down the mounta in, into the stream. It struck
another in the w ater , bounced twice, and vanished into the
rushing gur gle.
His visi ts to the McCallums had to stop, at once. He saw
that clea rly . Another way would have to be found for them …
but he had to come once more, to explain. Amy would
understand, he thought—but how to explain to Aidan what
reputation was, and why gossip was a deadly sin, and why
Roger couldn’ t come anymore to fish or show him how to
build things… .
Cursing steadily under his breath, he made the last short,
steep ascent and came into the ragged, over grown littledooryard. Befor e he could call out to announce his presence,
though, the door flew open.
“Roger Mac!” Amy McCallum half-fell down the step and
into his arms, gasping and w eeping. “Oh, you came, you
came! I prayed for someone to come, but I didna think anyone
would, in time, a nd he’d die, but ye’ve come, God be thankit!”
“What i s it? What’ s wrong? Is wee Orrie taken sick?” He
got h old of her arms, steadying her , and she shook her head, so
violently that her cap slid half of f.
“Aidan,” she gasped. “It’ s Aidan.”
AIDAN MCCALLUM lay doubled up on my sur gery table,
white as  a sheet, making little gasping groans. My first hope—
green apples or gooseberries—vanished with a closer look at
him. I was fairly  sure what I had here, but appendicitis shares
symptoms with a number of ot her conditions. A classic case
does, however , have one striking aspect.
“Can you unfold him, just for a moment?” I looked at his
mother , hoverin g over him on the ver ge of tears, but it was
Roger w ho nodded and came to put his hands on Aidan’ s
knees and shoulders, gently persuading him to lie flat.
I put a thumb in his navel, my little finger on his right
hipbone, and pressed his abdomen sharply with my middle
finger , w ondering for a second as I did so whether McBurney
had yet discove red and named this diagnostic spot. Pain in
McBurney’ s Spot was a specific diagnostic symptom for acute
appendicitis. I pressed Aidan’ s stomach there, then I released
the p ressure, he screamed, arche d up of f the table, and doubled
up like a jackknife.
A hot appendix for sure. I’d known I’d encounter one
sometime. And with a mixed sense of dismay and excitement,
I r ealize d that the time had co me for me finally to use the
ether . No doubt about it, and no choice; if the appendix wasn’ t
removed, it would rupture.I glanced up; Roger was supporting little Mrs. McCallum
with a hand under her elbow; s he clutched the baby close to
her chest, wrapped in its bund le. She’d need to stay; Aidan
would need her .
“Roger—get Liz zie to come mind the baby , will you? And
then run as fast as you can to the Christies’; I’ll need Malva to
come and help.”
The most extraordinary expression flitted across his face; I
couldn’ t interpret it, but it was gone in an instant, and I didn’ t
have tim e to worry about it. He nodded and left without a
word, and I turned my attention to Mrs. McCallum, asking her
the questions I needed answere d before I cut into her small
son’ s belly .
IT W AS ALLAN CHRISTIE who opened the door to Roger ’ s
brusque knock. A darker , leaner version of his owl-faced
father , h e blinked slowly at the question as to Malva’ s
whereabouts.
“Why … she’ s gone to the stream,” he said. “Gathering
rushes, she said.” He frowned. “Why do ye want her?”
“Mrs. Fraser needs her to come and help with—with
something.” Something moved inside; the back door opening.
T om Christie came in, a book in his hand, the page he’d been
reading caught between two fingers.
“MacKenzie,” h e said, with a short jerk of the head in
acknowledgment. “Did ye say Mrs. Fraser is wanting Malva?
Why?” H e frow ned as well, the  two Christies looking exactly
like a pair of barn owls contemplating a questionable mouse.
“Only that wee Aidan McCallum’ s taken badly , and she’d be
glad of Malva’ s help. I’ll go and find her .”
Christie’ s frown deepened, and he opened his mouth to
speak, but Roger had already t urned, hurrying into the trees
before either of them could stop him.
He found her fairly quickly , though every moment spent
searching seemed an eternity . How long did it take anappendix to burst? She was knee-deep in the stream, skirts
kirtled h igh and  her rush baske t floating beside her , tethered
by a n apron string. She didn’ t hear him at first, deafened by
the f low of the water . When he called her name more loudly ,
her head jerked up in alarm, a nd she raised the rush knife,
gripped tightly in her hand.
The look  of alarm faded when she saw who it was, though
she kept a wary eye on him—and a good grip on the knife, he
saw . His summons was received with a flash of interest.
“The ether? Really , she’ s goin g to cut him?” she asked
eagerly , wading toward him.
“Y es. Come on; I’ve already to ld your father Mrs. Fraser
needs you. W e needn’ t stop.”
Her face changed at that.
“Y e told  him?” Her brow creas ed for a moment. Then she
bit her lip and shook her head.
“I can’ t, ” she said, raising her voice above the sound of the
stream.
“Y es, ye  can,” he said, as enco uragingly as possible, and
stretched out a h and to help her .  “Come on; I’ll give ye a hand
with your things.”
She shook her head more decidedly , pink lower lip poking
out a bit.
“No. M y father—he’ll no have it.” She glanced in the
direction of the cabin, and he turned to look, but it was all
right; neither Allan nor T om had followed him. Y et.
He kicked of f h is shoes and ste pped into the icy creek, the
stones ro lling, hard and slippery under his feet. Malva’ s eyes
widened and her mouth fell open as he bent and grabbed her
basket, r ipped it from her apron string, and tossed it onto the
bank. Then he took the knife from her hand, thrust it through
his belt, grabbed her round th e waist, and picking her up,
splashed ashore with her , disregarding the kicking and
squealing.“Y ou’re coming with me,” he said, grunting as he set her
down. “Y e want to walk, or do I carry you?”
He thought she seemed more in trigued than horrified at this
proposal, but she shook her head again, backing away from
him.
“I can’ t—truly! He’ll—he’ll beat me if he finds out I’ve
been meddling wi’ the ether .”
That checked him momentarily . W ould he? Perhaps. But
Aidan’ s life was at stake.
“He won’ t find o ut, then,” he sa id. “Or if he does, I’ll see to
it that he does y e no harm. Com e, for God’ s sake—there’ s no
time to be wasting!”
Her small pink mouth compressed itself in stubbornness. No
time for scruples, then. He leane d down to bring his face close
to hers and stared her in the eye.
“Y ou’ll come,” he said, fists cu rling, “or I tell your father
and you r brother about you and  Bobby Higgins. Say what ye
like about me—I don’ t care. Bu t if ye think your father would
beat you  for helping Mrs. Fraser , what’ s he likely to do if he
hears ye’ve been snogging Bobby?”
He didn’ t know what the eighteenth-century equivalent of
snogging was, but plainly she understood him. And if she’d
been anywhere near his own s ize, she would have knocked
him dow n, if he read the dangero us light in those big gray eyes
correctly .
But she wasn’ t, and after an instant’ s consideration, she
bent, dried her legs on her skir ts, and shuf fled hurriedly into
her sandals.
“Leave i t,” she said briefly , seei ng him stoop for the basket.
“And give me back my knife.”
It might  have been simply an ur ge to keep some influence
over her until sh e was safely in the sur gery—surely he wasn’ t
afraid of  her . He put a hand to th e knife at his belt, though, and
said, “Later . When it’ s done.”She didn’ t bother ar guing, but sc ampered up the bank ahead
of h im a nd head ed for the Big House, the soles of her sandals
flapping against her bare heels.
I H AD MY FIN GERS on the br achial pulse in Aidan’ s armpit,
counting. His skin was very hot to the touch, maybe a
temperature of 101, 102. The pulse was strong, though rapid
… s lowing as he went furthe r under . I could feel Malva
counting under her breath, so m any drops of ether , so long a
pause be fore the  next … I lost my own count of the pulse, but
it didn’ t  matter; I was taking it into myself, feeling my own
pulse be gin to beat in the same rhythm, and it was normal,
steady .
He was breathing well. The li ttle abdomen rose and fell
slightly under my hand, and I could feel the muscles relaxing
by the moment, everything except the tense, distended belly ,
the v isible ribs a rching high above it as he breathed. I had the
sudden i llusion that I could push  my hand straight through the
wall of his abdo men and touch the swollen appendix, could
see it in my min d, throbbing malignantly in the dark security
of its sealed world. T ime, then.
Mrs. Mc Callum made a small sound when I took up the
scalpel, a louder one when I p ressed it down into the pale
flesh, sti ll gleaming wet with th e alcohol I’d swabbed it with,
like a fish’ s belly yielding to the gutting knife.
The skin parted easily , blood w elling in that odd, magical
way , see ming to appear from n owhere. He had almost no fat
beneath it; the m uscles were right there, dark red, resilient to
the touch. There were other pe ople in the room; I felt them
vaguely . I had n o attention to sp are, though. Every sense I had
was focused on the small bod y under my hands. Someone
stood at my shoulder , though—Bree?
“Give me a retr actor—yes, that thing.” Y es, it was Bree; a
long-fingered hand, wet with disinfectant, picked up the claw-
shaped thing and put it in my waiting left hand. I missed the
services of a good sur gical nurse, but we’d manage.“Hold that, just there.” I nos ed the blade between the
muscle fibers, splitting them ea sily , and then pinched up the
thick soft gleam of the peritoneum, lifted it and sliced it.
His innards were very warm, sucking wet around two
probing fingers. Soft squish of intestine, small half-firm lumps
of m atter felt thr ough their walls, the brush of bone against my
knuckle—he was so small, there wasn’ t much room to feel
around. I had m y eyes closed, concentrating on touch alone.
The cecum had  to be right un der my fingers, that was the
curve of the lar ge intestine I could feel, inert but live, like a
sleeping snake. Behind? Below? I probed carefully , opened
my eyes, and peered closely into the wound. He wasn’ t
bleeding badly , but the wound was still awash. Ought I take
the t ime to caut erize the small bleeders? I glanced at Malva;
she was frowning in concentration, her lips moving silently ,
counting—and she had one hand on the pulse in his neck,
keeping track.
“Cautery iron—a small one.” A moment’ s pause; with the
flammability of ether in mind, I had doused the hearth and put
the b razier across the hall, in J amie’ s study . Bree was quick,
though; I had it in my hand in seconds. A wisp of smoke rose
from his  belly and the sizzle of seared flesh struck into the
thick wa rm sme ll of blood. I glanced up to hand the iron back
to Bree, and saw Mrs. McCallum’ s face, all eyes, staring.
I blotted  away the blood with a handful of lint, looked again
—my fingers were still holding what I thought … all right.
“All rig ht,” I said out loud, tri umphant. “Got you!” V ery
carefully , I hooked a finger und er the curve of the cecum and
pulled a section of it up through the wound, the inflamed
appendix stickin g out from it like an angry fat worm, purple
with inflammation.
“Ligature.”
I had  it now . I c ould see the mem brane down the side of the
appendix and the blood vessels f eeding it. Those had to be tied
of f first; then I could tie of f the appendix itself and cut it away .Dif ficult only because of the sm all size, but no real problem
…
The room was so still, I could hear the tiny hisses and pops
from the charcoal in the brazie r across the hall. Sweat was
running down behind my ears , between my breasts, and I
became dimly aware that my teeth were sunk in my lower lip.
“Forceps.” I pulled the purse-string stitch tight, and taking
the f orceps, poked the tied-of f st ump of the appendix neatly up
into the cecum. I pressed this f irmly back into his belly and
took a breath.
“How long, Malva?”
“A bit more tha n ten minutes, ma’am. He’ s all right.” She
took her eyes of f the ether mask long enough to dart a quick
smile at  me, then took up the d ropping bottle, lips resuming
her silent count.
Closing up was quick. I painted  the sutured wound with a
thick la yer of honey , wrapped a bandage tightly round his
body , tucked warm blankets over him and breathed.
“T ake of f the m ask,” I said to Malva, straightening up. She
made no reply , and I looked at her . She had raised the mask,
was holding it in both hands before her , like a shield. But she
wasn’ t watching Aidan anymor e; her eyes were fixed on her
father , standing rigid in the doorway .
T OM CHRISTI E looked back and forth from the small naked
body on the table to his daughter . She took an uncertain step
back, still clutching the ether m ask. His head twisted, piercing
me with a fierce gray look.
“What’ s to do h ere?” he demanded. “What are ye doing to
that child?”
“Saving his life,” I replied tartl y . I was still vibrating from
the intensity of the sur gery , and in no mood for rannygazoo.
“Did you want something?”Christie’ s thin lips pressed tight , but before he could reply ,
his son,  Allan, pushed his w ay past into the room, and
reaching his sister in a couple of strides, grabbed her by the
wrist.
“Come away , ye wee gomerel,” he said roughly , jerking at
her . “Y e’ve no business here.”
“Let go of her . ” Roger spoke sharply , and took hold of
Allan’ s shoulder , to pull him aw ay . Allan whirled on his heel
and punched Roger in the stomach, short and sharp. Roger
made a hollow crowing noise, b ut didn’ t crumple. Instead, he
slugged Allan Christie in the jaw . Allan reeled backward,
knocking over the little table of instruments—blades and
retractors clattered over the floor in a swash of falling metal,
and the  jar of catgut ligatures  in alcohol smashed on the
boards, spraying glass and liquid everywhere.
A so ft thump f rom the floor made me look down. Amy
McCallum, overcome by ether fumes and emotion, had passed
out.
I had n’ t time to do anything about that; Allan bounced back
with a wild sw ing, Roger ducked, caught the rush of the
younger Christie’ s body , and the two of them staggered
backward, hit the sill, and fe ll out of the open window ,
entangled.
T om Ch ristie made a low growling noise and hurried toward
the window . Malva, seizing he r chance, ran out the door; I
heard her footsteps pattering hastily down the hall toward the
kitchen—and, presumably , the back door .
“What on earth  … ?” Bree said, looking at me.
“Don’ t look at me,” I said, shaking my head. “I have no
idea.” Which was true; I did, however , have a sinking feeling
that my involvin g Malva in the operation had a lot to do with
it. T om Christie and I had reached something like
rapprochement, following my operation on his hand—but that
didn’ t mean he had altered his views on the ungodliness of
ether .Bree drew herself abruptly upright, stif fening. A certain
amount of grunting, gasping, and incoherent half-insults
outside indicate d that the figh t was continuing—but Allan
Christie’ s raised voice had just called Roger an adulterer .
Brianna glanced sharply at the huddled form of Amy
McCallum, and I said a very ba d word to myself. I’d heard a
few sidelong remarks about Roger ’ s visits to the McCallums
—and J amie had come close to saying something to Roger
about it,  but I had dissuaded him from interfering, telling him
that I’d take up the matter tactfu lly with Bree. I hadn’ t had the
chance, though, and now—
W ith a last unfriendly look at Amy McCallum, Bree strode
out the door , plainly intending to take a hand in the fight. I
clutched my brow and must have moaned, for T om Christie
turned sharply from the window .
“Are ye ill, mistress?”
“No,” I said, a l ittle wanly . “Just … look, T om. I’m sorry if
I’ve cau sed trouble, asking Malva to help me. She has a real
gift for healing, I think—but I di dn’ t mean to persuade her into
doing something you didn’ t approve of.”
He gave  me a bleak look, which he then transferred to
Aidan’ s slack body . The look sharpened suddenly .
“Is that child dead?” he asked.
“No, no,” I said. “I gave him ether; he’ s just gone aslee—”
My voice dried in my throat, a s I noticed that Aidan had
chosen this inconvenient moment to stop breathing.
W ith an  incoherent cry , I shov ed T om Christie out of the
way and fell on Aidan, gluing my mouth over his and pressing
the heel of my hand hard in the center of his chest.
The ethe r in his lungs flowed over my face as I took my
mouth a way , making my head swim. I gripped the edge of the
table har d with my free hand, pu tting my mouth back on his. I
could not  black out, I couldn’ t.My vision swam and the roo m seemed to be revolving
slowly round me. I clung doggedly to consciousness, though,
ur gently blowing into his lungs, feeling the tiny chest under
my hand rise gently , then fall.
It co uldn’ t have been more th an a minute, but a minute
filled with nightmare, everything spinning round me, the feel
of Aidan’ s flesh the only solid anchor in a whirl of chaos. Amy
McCallum stirred on the floor b eside me, rose swaying to her
knees—then fell on me with a shriek, pulling at me, trying to
get me of f her son. I heard T om Christie’ s voice, raised in
command, trying to calm her; he must have pulled her away ,
for suddenly her grip on my leg was gone.
I ble w into Aida n once more—and this time, the chest under
my hand twitched. He coughed, choked, coughed again, and
started simultan eously to breathe and to cry . I stood up, head
spinning, and had to hold on to the table to avoid falling.
I saw a pair of figures before me, black, distorted, with
gaping mouths that opened toward me, filled with sharp fangs.
I bl inked, staggering, and took deep gulps of air . Blinked
again, and the figures resolved themselves into T om Christie
and Amy McCallum. He was holding her round the waist,
keeping her back.
“It’ s all right,” I  said, my own voice sounding strange and
far of f. “He’ s all right. Let her come to him.”
She flun g hersel f at Aidan with  a sob, pulling him into her
arms. T om Christie and I stood  staring at each other over the
wreckage. Outside, everything had gone quiet.
“Did ye just rais e that child fro m the dead?” he asked. His
voice w as almost conversational, though his feathery brows
arched high.
I wi ped a hand  across my mouth, still tasting the sickly
sweetness of the ether .
“I suppose so,” I said.
“Oh.”He stared at me, blank-faced. The room reeked of alcohol,
and it seemed to sear my nasal lining. My eyes were watering
a little; I wiped  them on my apron. Finally , he nodded, as
though to himself, and turned to go.
I had to see to Aidan and his mother . But I couldn’ t let him
go without trying to mend things for Malva, so far as I could.
“T om—Mr . Christie.” I hurried after him, and caught him
by the sleeve. He turned, surprised and frowning.
“Malva. It’ s my fault; I sent Ro ger to bring her . Y ou won’ t
—” I hesitated, but couldn’ t think of any tactful way to put it.
“Y ou won’ t punish her , will you?”
The frown deepened momentarily , then lifted. He shook his
head, ve ry slightly , and with a small bow , detached his sleeve
from my hand.
“Y our se rvant, Mrs. Fraser ,” he said quietly , and with a last
glance at Aidan—presently demanding food—he left.
BRIANNA DABBED THE wet corner of a handkerchief at
Roger ’ s lower lip, split on one s ide, swollen and bleeding from
the impact of some part of Allan Christie.
“It’ s my fault,” he said, for the  third time. “I should have
thought of something sensible to tell them.”
“Shut up ,” she said, beginning to  lose her precarious grip on
her patience. “If you keep talki ng, it won’ t stop bleeding.” It
was the first thing she’d said to him since the fight.
W ith a mumbled apology , he took the handkerchief from her
and pres sed it to his mouth. Unable to keep still, though, he
got up and went to the open door of the cabin, looking out.
“He’ s no t still hanging around, is he? Allan?” She came to
look over his shoulder . “If he is, leave him alone. I’ll go—”
“No, he’ s not,” Roger interrupte d her . Hand still pressed to
his m outh, he no dded toward the Big House, at the far end of
the sloped clearing. “It’ s T om.”Sure enough, T om Christie was  standing on the stoop. Just
standing, apparently deep in thought. As they watched, he
shook his head like a dog she dding water , and set of f with
decision in the direction of his own place.
“I’ll go and talk to him.” Roger tossed the handkerchief at
the table.
“Oh, no, you won’ t.” She grab bed him by the arm as he
turned toward the door . “Y ou stay out of it, Roger!”
“I’m not going to fight him,” h e said, patting her hand in
what he plainly thought a reassu ring manner . “But I’ve got to
talk to him.”
“No, you don’ t.” She tightened her grip on his arm, and
pulled, trying to bring him ba ck to the hearth. “Y ou’ll just
make it worse. Leave them alone.”
“No, I won’ t,” h e said, irritation beginning to show on his
face. “W hat do ye mean, I’ll ma ke it worse? What d’ye think I
am?”
That wasn’ t a question she w anted to answer right this
minute. V ibrating with emotion from the tension of Aidan’ s
sur gery , the explosion of the f ight, and the niggling bur of
Allan’ s shouted insult, she barely trusted herself to speak, let
alone be tactful.
“Don’ t go,” she repeated, forcing herself to lower her voice,
speak calmly . “Everyone’ s upset. At least wait until they’ve
settled down. Better yet, wait ‘til Da comes back. He can—”
“A ye, he  can do everything better than I can, I know that
fine,” Roger replied caustically . “But it’ s me that promised
Malva s he’d come to no harm. I’m going.” He yanked at his
sleeve, hard enough that she felt the underarm seam give way .
“Fine!” She let go, and slapped  him hard on the arm. “Go!
T ake care of everybody in the world but your own family . Go!
Bloody go !”
“What?” He stopped, scowling, caught between anger and
puzzlement.“Y ou heard me! Go!” She stamped her foot, and the jar of
dauco  seeds, left too near the edge of the shelf, fell of f and
smashed on the floor , scattering tiny black seeds like pepper
grains. “Now look what you’ve done!”
“What I’ve —”
“Never mind! Just never mind. Get out of here.” She was
puf fing like a g rampus with the ef fort not to cry . Her cheeks
were hot with blood and her eyeballs felt red, bloodshot, so hot
that she  felt she might sear him with a look—certainly she
wished she could.
He hovered, clearly trying to decide whether to stay and
conciliate his disgruntled wife, or rush of f in chivalrous
protection of Malva Christie. H e took a hesitant step toward
the door , and she dived for the broom, making stupid, high-
pitched squeaks of incoherent rage as she swung it at his head.
He d ucked, but she got him on  the second swing, catching
him across the ribs with a thwack.  He jerked in surprise at the
impact, but recovered fast enou gh to catch the broom on the
next swi ng. He yanked it out of  her hand, and with a grunt of
ef fort, broke it over his knee with a splintering crack.
He threw  the pieces clattering at her feet and glared at her ,
angry but self-possessed.
“What in the name of God is the matter with you?”
She drew up tall and glared back.
“What I  said. If you’re spendin g so much time with Amy
McCallum that it’ s common tal k you’re having an af fair with
her—”
“I’m what ?” His voice bro ke with outrage, but there was a
shifty look in his eyes that gave him away .
“So you’ve heard it, too—haven’ t you?” She didn’ t feel
triumphant at having caught him out; more a sense of sick
fury .
“Y ou can’ t possibly think that’ s true, Bree,” he said, his
voice p itched uncertainly bet ween angry repudiation andpleading.
“I kn ow it isn’ t true,” she said, and was furious to hear her
own voi ce as shaky and cracked as his was. “That’ s not the
ef fing point,  Roger!”
“The point,” he repeated. His black brows were drawn
down, his eyes sharp and dark beneath them.
“The point,” she said, gulping air , “is that you’re always
gone.  Malva Christie, Amy McCallum, Marsali, Lizzie—you
even go help Ute McGillivray , for God’ s sake!”
“Who else is to  do it?” he asked sharply . “Y our father or
your cousin might, aye—but the y’ve to be gone to the Indians.
I’m her e. And I’m not alwa ys gone,” he added, as an
afterthought. “I’m home every night, am I not?”
She closed her e yes and clenched her fists, feeling the nails
dig into her palms.
“Y ou’ll help any woman but m e,” she said, opening her
eyes. “Why is that?”
He gave her a long, hard look, and she wondered for an
instant whether there was such a thing as a black emerald.
“Maybe I didn’ t think ye neede d me,” he said. And turning
on his heel, he left.5 1
THE CALLING
T HE W A TER LA Y CALM as melted silver , the only
movement on it the shadows o f the evening clouds. But the
hatch w as about to rise; you could feel it. Or perhaps, Roger
thought, what he felt was the ex pectation in his father -in-law ,
crouched like a leopard on the bank of the trout pool, pole and
fly at the ready for the first sign of a ripple.
“Like the pool at Bethesda,” he said, amused.
“Oh, ay e?” Jamie answered, but didn’ t look at him, his
attention fixed on the water .
“The on e where  an angel would  go down into the pool and
trouble the water now and then. So everyone sat about waiting,
so as to plunge in the minute the water began to stir .”
Jamie smiled, but still didn’ t turn. Fishing was serious
business.
That was good; he’d rather not h ave Jamie look at him. But
he’d have to hu rry if he meant to say something; Fraser was
already paying out the line to make a practice cast or two.
“I think—” He stopped himself, correcting. “No, I don’ t
think. I know . I want—” His air  ran out in a wheeze, annoying
him; the last thing he wanted  was to sound in any way
doubtful about what he was saying. He took a huge breath, and
the next words shot out as though fired from a pistol. “I mean
to be a minister .”
W ell, then. He’d said it out loud. He glanced upward,
involuntarily , bu t sure enough, the sky hadn’ t fallen. It was
hazed and rif fled with mare’ s tails, but the blue calm of it
showed through  and the ghost of an early moon floated just
above the mountain’ s shoulder .Jamie glanced thoughtfully at him, but didn’ t seem shocked
or taken aback. That was some small comfort, he supposed.
“A minister . A preacher , d’ye mean?”
“W ell … aye. That, too.”
The admission disconcerted him. He supposed he would
have to preach, though the mere notion of it was terrifying.
“That, too ?” Fraser repeated, looking at him sideways.
“A ye. I mean—a minister does preach, of course.” Of
course. What about? How? “Bu t that’ s not—I mean, that’ s not
the main  thing. Not why I—I h ave to do it.” He was getting
flustered, trying  to explain clear ly something that he could not
even explain properly to himself.
He sighed, and rubbed a hand over his face.
“A ye, look. Y e recall Grannie W ilson’ s funeral, of course.
And the McCallums?”
Jamie merely nodded, but Roger thought perhaps a flicker
of understanding showed in his eyes.
“I’ve do ne … a few things. A  bit like that, when it was
needed. And—” He twitched a hand, unsure even how to
begin describing things like his meeting with Hermon
Husband on the banks of the Alamance, or the conversations
had with his dead father , late at night.
He s ighed again, made to toss a  pebble into the water , and
stopped himself , just in time, when he saw Jamie’ s hand tense
round his fishing pole. He coug hed, feeling the familiar choke
and rasp in his throat, and closed his hand around the pebble.
“The preaching , aye, I suppos e I’ll manage. But it’ s the
other things—oh, God, this sounds insane, and I do believe I
may be. But it’ s  the burying and the christening and the—the
—maybe just being able to help,  even if it’ s only by listening
and praying.”
“Y e wan t to take care of them,” Jamie said softly , and it
wasn’ t a question, but rather an acceptance.Roger laughed a little, unhappily , and closed his eyes
against the sparkle of the sun of f the water .
“I don’ t want to  do it,” he said. “It’ s the last thing I thought
of, and me growing up in a minister ’ s house. I mean, I ken
what it’ s  like. But someone has  to do it, and I am thinking it’ s
me.”
Neither of them spoke for a bit.  Roger opened his eyes and
watched the water . Algae coate d the rocks, wavering in the
current like locks of mermaid’ s hair . Fraser stirred a little,
drawing back his rod.
“Do Pre sbyterians believe in the sacraments, would ye
say?”
“Y es,” Roger said, surprised. “Of course we do. Have ye
never—” W ell, no. He suppos ed in fact Fraser never had
spoken t o anyone not a Catholic, regarding such matters. “W e
do,” he repeated. He dipped a hand gently in the water , and
wiped it across his brow , so the coolness ran down his face and
down his neck inside his shirt.
“It’ s Holy Orders I mean, ken?” The drowned fly swam
through the water , a tiny speck o f red. “W ill ye not need to be
ordained?”
“Oh, I see. A ye, I would. There’ s a Presbyterian academy in
Mecklenbur g Co unty . I’ll go the re and speak with them about
it. T hough I’m thinking it will na take such a time; I’ve the
Greek and Latin already , and for what it’ s worth”—he smiled,
despite himself —”I’ve a degree from Oxford University .
Believe it or not, I was once thought an educated man.”
Jamie’ s mouth twitched at the corner as he drew back his
arm and  snapped his wrist. The  line sailed out, a lazy curve,
and the fly settle d. Roger blinked; sure enough—the surface of
the pool was b eginning to pucker and shiver , tiny ripples
spreading out from the rising hatch of mayflies and
damselflies.
“Have ye spoken to your wife about it?”
“No,” he said, staring across the pool.“Why n ot?” T here was no t one of accusation in the
question; more curiosity . Why , a fter all, should he have chosen
to talk to his father -in-law first, rather than his wife?
Because you know what it is to be a man,  h e thought, and
she doesn’ t.  Wh at he said, though, was another version of the
truth.
“I don’ t want her to think me a coward.”
Jamie made a small “hmph” noise, almost surprise, but
didn’ t re ply at once, concentrating on reeling in his line. He
took the  sodden fly from the hook, then hesitated over the
collection on his hat, finally choosing a delicate green thing
with a curving wisp of black feather .
“D’ye th ink she  would?” Not w aiting for an answer , Fraser
stood an d whipp ed the line up and back, sending the fly out to
drift down over the center of the pool, lighting like a leaf on
the water .
Roger watched as he brought it in, playing it over the water
in a jerk y dance . The Reverend had been a fisherman. All at
once, he  saw the Ness and its s parkling rif fles, running clear
brown over the rocks, Dad sta nding in his battered waders,
reeling i n his line. He was choked with longing. For Scotland.
For his father . For one more day—just one—of peace.
The mountains and the green w ood rose up mysterious and
wild aro und them, and the haz y sky unfurled itself over the
hollow l ike ange l’ s wings, silent and sunlit. But not peaceful;
never peace, not here.
“Do you believe us—Claire and Brianna and me—about the
war that’ s coming?”
Jamie laughed shortly , gaze fixed on the water .
“I’ve eyes, man. It doesna take  either prophet or witch to
see it standing on the road.”
“That,” said Roger , giving him a curious look, “is a very
odd way of putting it.”“Is i t, so? Is that no what the Bible says? When ye  shall see
the abomination of desolation, standing wher e it ought not,
then let them in Judaea flee to the mountains? ”
Let him who r eadeth understand.  Me mory supplied the
missing part of the verse, and Roger became aware, with a
small se nse of cold in the bone , that Jamie did indeed see it
standing on the road, and recognized it. Nor was he using
figures of speech; he was descri bing, precisely , what he saw—
because he had seen it before.
The sou nd of small boys yellin g in joy drifted across the
water , and Fraser turned his h ead a little, listening. A faint
smile touched his mouth, then he looked down into the moving
water , seeming to grow still. The ropes of his hair stirred
against the sunburned skin of his neck, in the same way that
the leaves of the mountain ash moved above.
Roger w anted su ddenly to ask J amie whether he was afraid,
but kept silence. He knew the answer , in any case.
It doesn’ t matter .  H e breathed d eep, and felt the same
answer , to the same question, as ked of himself. It didn’ t seem
to come  from anywhere, but w as just there inside him, as
though he had been born with it, always known it.
It doesn’ t matter . Y ou will do it anyway .
They sta yed for some time in silence. Jamie cast twice more
with the green fly , then sho ok his head and muttered
something, reele d it in, changed it for a Dun Fly , and cast
again. T he little boys char ged past on the other bank, naked as
eels, giggling, and disappeared through the bushes.
Really odd, Roger thought. He f elt all right. Still having not
the slightest idea what he meant to do, exactly , still seeing the
drifting cloud coming toward them, and now knowing much
more about what lay within it. But still all right.
Jamie ha d a fish on the line. He brought it in fast, and jerked
it shining and flapping onto the bank, where he killed it with a
sharp blow on a rock before tucking it into his creel.
“D’ye mean to turn Quaker?” Jamie asked seriously .“No.” R oger was startled by the  question. “Why do you ask
that?”
Jamie made the odd little half-shrugging gesture that he
sometimes used  when uncomfortable about something, and
didn’ t speak again until he’d made the new cast.
“Y e said ye didna want Brianna to think ye coward. I’ve
fought by the side of a priest before.” One side of his mouth
turned up, wry . “ Granted, he wasna much of a swordsman, the
Monsignor , and he couldna hit the broad side of a barn wi’ a
pistol—but he was game enough.”
“Oh.” R oger scr atched the side of his jaw . “A ye, I take your
meaning. No, I c an’ t fight with a n army , I don’ t think.” Saying
it, he felt a sharp  pang of regret . “But take up arms in defense
of—of those who need it …  I can square that with my
conscience, aye.”
“That’ s all right, then.”
Jamie reeled in the rest of the line, shook water from the fly ,
and stuc k the hook back into his  hat. Laying the line aside, he
rummaged in the creel and pull ed out a stoneware bottle. He
sat down  with a sigh, pulled the cork with his teeth, spat it into
his hand, and of fered Roger the bottle.
“It’ s a thing C laire says to me, now and again,” he
explained, and quoted: “Malt d oes mor e than Milton c an, to
justify God’ s ways to man.”
Roger lifted an eyebrow .
“Ever read Milton?”
“A bit. She’ s right about it.”
“Y e ken the next lines?” Roger lifted the bottle to his lips.
“Ale, ma n, ale’ s  the stuff to drink, For fellows whom it hurts to
think.”
A subterranean laugh moved through Fraser ’ s eyes.
“This must be w hisky , then,” he said. “It only smells like
beer .”It w as cool and dark and pleasantly bitter , and they passed
the b ottle to and  fro, not saying much of anything, until the ale
was gone. Jamie put the cork thriftily back in, and tucked the
empty bottle away in the creel.
“Y our wife,” he said thoughtfully , rising and hitching the
strap of the creel onto his shoulder .
“A ye?” Roger picked up the battered hat, bestrewn with
flies, and gave it  to him. Jamie nodded thanks, and set it on his
head.
“She has eyes, too.”5 2
M-I-C-
F IREFLIES LIT THE GRASS, the trees, and floated through
the heav y air in a profusion of cool green sparks. One lighted
on Brian na’ s kn ee; she watched it pulse, on-of f, on-of f, and
listened to her husband telling her he meant to be a minister .
They were sitting on the stoop of their cabin as the dusk
thickened into night. Across the big clearing, the whoops of
small children at play sounded in  the bushes, high and cheerful
as hunting bats.
“Y ou … uh … could say something,” Roger suggested. His
head was turned, looking at her .  There was enough light yet to
see his face, expectant, slightly anxious.
“W ell … give me a minute. I so rt of wasn’ t expecting this,
you know?”
That was true, and it wasn’ t. Certainly , she hadn’ t
consciously thought of such a thing, yet now that he’d stated
his i ntentions—and he had, she thought; he wasn’ t asking her
permission—she wasn’ t at all surprised. It was less a change
than a recognitio n of something that had been there for some
time—and in a way , it was a relief to see it and know it for
what it was.
“W ell,” she said, after a long m oment of consideration, “I
think that’ s good.”
“Y e do.” The relief in his voice was palpable.
“Y es. If you’re helping all thes e women because God told
you to, that’ s be tter than doing i t because you’d rather be with
them than with me.”
“Bree! Y e can’ t think that, th at I—” He leaned closer ,
looking anxiously into her face. “Y e don’ t, do you?”“W ell, only sometimes,” she admitted. “In my worse
moments. Not most of the time .” He looked so anxious that
she reac hed up and cupped her hand to the long curve of his
cheek; the stubble of his beard was invisible in this light, but
she could feel it, soft and tickling against her palm.
“Y ou’re sure?” she said softly . He nodded, and she saw his
throat move as he swallowed.
“I’m sure.”
“Are you afraid?”
He smiled a little at that.
“Y eah.”
“I’ll help ,” she said firmly . “Y ou tell me how , and I’ll help.”
He t ook a deep breath, his face lightening, though his smile
was rueful.
“I don’ t know how ,” he said. “How to do it, I mean. Let
alone what you  might do. That’ s what scares me.”
“Maybe not,” she said. “But you’ve been  doin g it , anywa y ,
haven’ t you? Do you need to do anything formal about this,
though? Or can you just announ ce you’re a minister , like those
TV preachers, and start taking up the collection right away?”
He smiled at the joke, but answered seriously .
“Bloody Romanist. Y e always think no one else has any
claim to  sacrame nts. W e do, tho ugh. I’m thinking I’ll go to the
Presbyterian Ac ademy , see what I need to do about ordination.
As for taking up  the collection—I expect this means I’ll never
be rich.”
“I sort of wasn’ t expecting that, anyway ,” she assured him
gravely . “Don’ t worry; I didn’ t marry you for your money . If
we need more, I’ll make it.”
“How?”
“I d on’ t know . Not selling my  body , probably . Not after
what happened to Manfred.”“Don’ t even joke about that,” he  said. His hand came down
over hers, lar ge and warm.
Aidan McCallum’ s high, piercin g voice floated through the
air , and a sudden thought struck her .
“Y our—your , um, flock …” The word struck her funny
bone, and she giggled, despite the seriousness of the question.
“W ill they mind that I’m a C atholic?” She turned to him
suddenly , another thought coming rapidly in its wake. “Y ou
don’ t—you aren’ t asking me to convert?”
“No, I’m  not,” he said quickly , firmly . “Not in a million
years. As for w hat they might think—or say—” His face
twitched, caugh t between dismay and determination. “If
they’re not willing to accept it, w ell … they can just go to hell,
that’ s all.”
She bur st out laughing, and he followed her , his laugh
cracked, but without restraint.
“The Minister ’ s Cat is an irreverent cat,” she teased. “And
how do you say that  in Gaelic?”
“I’ve no idea. B ut the Minister ’ s Cat is a relieved cat,” he
added, still smiling. “I didn’ t kn ow what ye might think about
it.”
“I’m not  totally sure what I do  t hin k about it,” she admitted.
She squeezed his hand lightly . “But I see that you’re happy .”
“It show s?” He smiled, and th e last of the evening light
glowed briefly in his eyes, a deep and lambent green.
“It show s. Y ou’re sort of … lighted up inside.” Her throat
felt tigh t. “Roge r—you won’ t for get about me and Jem, will
you? I don’ t know that I can compete with God.”
He looked thunderstruck at that.
“No,” he said, his hand tightening on hers, hard enough to
make her ring cut into her flesh. “Not ever .”
They sa t silent for a little, the fireflies drifting down like
slow gre en rain, their silent mating song lighting the darkeninggrass and trees. Roger ’ s face was fading as the light failed,
though she still saw the line of his jaw , set in determination.
“I swear  to ye, B ree,” he said. “ Whatever I’m called to now
—and God knows what that is—I was called to be your
husband first. Y our husband a nd the father of your bairns
above all things—and that I alw ays shall be. Whatever I may
do, it will not ever be at the price of my family , I promise
you.”
“All I want,” sh e said softly to the dark, “is for you to love
me. Not because of what I can do or what I look like, or
because I love you—just because I am.”
“Perfect, unconditional love?” he said just as softly . “Some
would tell ye only God can love that way—but I can try .”
“Oh, I have faith in you,” she sa id, and felt the glow of him
reach her own heart.
“I h ope ye alwa ys will,” he said . He raised her hand to his
lips, kissed her knuckles in formal salutation, his breath warm
on her skin.
As though to te st the resolution of his earlier declaration,
Jem’ s voice rose and fell on the evening breeze, a small,
ur gent siren. “DadddeeeDaaaddeeeDAAADDDEEE …”
Roger sighed deeply , leaned over , and kissed her , a
moment’ s soft, deep connection, then rose to deal with the
emer gency of the moment.
She sat for a bit, listening. The sound of male voices came
from the  far end of the clearing, high and low , demand and
question, reassu rance and excitement. No emer gency; Jem
wanted t o be lifted into a tree to o high for him to climb alone.
Then laughter , mad rustling of leaves—oh, good grief, Roger
was in the tree, too. They were all up there, hooting like owls.
“What a re ye laughing at, a nighean ?” Her father loomed
out of the night, smelling of horses.
“Everything,” she said, scooching over to make room for
him to sit beside  her . It was true. Everything seemed suddenlybright, th e candlelight from the w indows of the Big House, the
fireflies in the grass, the glow of Roger ’ s face when he told her
his desire. She could still feel the touch of his mouth on hers;
it fizzed in her blood.
Jamie re ached up and fielded a passing firefly , holding it for
a m oment cupped in the dark hollow of his hand, where it
flashed on and of f, the cool light seeping through his fingers.
Far of f, she heard a brief snatch of her mother ’ s voice, coming
through an open window; Claire was singing “Clementine.”
Now the boys—and Roger—were howling at the moon,
though i t was no more than a pale sickle on the horizon. She
felt her father ’ s body shake with silent laughter , too.
“It reminds me of Disneyland,” she said on impulse.
“Oh, aye? Where’ s that?”
“It’ s an amusement park—for children,” she added,
knowing that while there were such things as amusement parks
in p laces like London and Paris, these were purely adult
places. No one ever thought of entertaining children now ,
beyond their own games and the occasional toy .
“Daddy and Mama took me there every summer ,” she said,
slipping back without ef fort to the hot, bright days and warm
California nights. “The trees all had little sparkling lights in
them—the fireflies reminded me.”
Jamie spread his palm; the firefly , suddenly free, pulsed to
itself on ce or twice, then spread its wings with a tiny whir and
lifted into the air , floating up and away .
“Dwelt a miner , forty-niner , an d his daugh-ter , Clementine
…”
“What was it like, then?” he asked curiously .
“Oh … it was wonderful.” She smiled to herself, seeing the
brilliant lights of Main Street , the music and mirrors and
beautiful, beribboned horses of King Arthur ’ s Carrousel.
“There were … rides, we call ed them. A boat, where youcould float through the jungle on a river , and see crocodiles
and hippopotamuses and headhunters …”
“Headhunters?” he said, intrigued.
“Not real ones,” she assured him. “It’ s all make-believe—
but it’ s … well, it’ s a world to itself. When you’re there, the
real wor ld sort of disappears; nothing bad can happen there.
They call it ‘Th e Happiest Place on Earth’—and for a little
while, it really seems that way .”
“Light she was, and like a fairy ,  and her shoes wer e number
nine, Herring boxes without topses, sandals wer e for
Clementine.”
“And you’d hear music everywh ere, all the time,” she said,
smiling. “Bands—groups of m usicians playing instruments,
horns an d drum s and things—would march up and down the
streets, and play in pavilions… .”
“A ye, that happens in amusemen t parks. Or it did, the once I
was in one.” She could hear a smile in his voice, as well.
“Mm-hm. And there are cartoon characters—I told you
about cartoons—walking around. Y ou can go up and shake
hands with Mickey Mouse, or—”
“W ith what?”
“Mickey Mouse.” She laughed. “A big mouse, life-size—
human-size, I mean. He wears gloves.”
“A g iant rat?” h e said, sounding slightly stunned. “And they
take the weans to play with it?”
“Not a rat, a mo use,” she corrected him. “And it’ s really a
person dressed up like a mouse.”
“Oh, aye?” he said, not sounding terribly reassured.
“Y es. An d an enormous carrouse l with painted horses, and a
railroad train that goes through the Rainbow Caverns, where
there ar e big jewels sticking o ut of the walls, and colored
streams with red and blue water  … and orange-juice bars. Oh,orange-juice bars!” She moaned softly in ecstatic
remembrance of the cold, tart, overwhelming sweetness.
“It was nice, then?” he said softly .
“Thou art lost and gone for ever , Dr eadful sor -ry …
Clementine.”
“Y es,” she said, sighed, and wa s silent for a moment. Then
she leaned her head against h is shoulder , and wrapped her
hand around his arm, big and solid.
“Y ou know what?” she said, and he made a small
interrogatory noise in reply .
“It was  nice—it was great—but what I really , really loved
about it was tha t when we were  there, it was just the three of
us, and everything was perfect. Mama wasn’ t worrying about
her patients, Daddy wasn’ t working on a paper—they weren’ t
ever silent or an gry with each other . Both of them laughed—
we all laughed, all the time … while we were there.”
He mad e no reply , but tilted his head so it rested against
hers. She sighed again, deeply .
“Jemmy won’ t get to go to Disneyland—but he’ll have that.
A family  that laughs—and millions of little lights in the trees.”P A R T  S E V E N
R o l l i n g  D o w n h i l l5 3
PRINCIPLES
Fr om Fraser ’ s Ridge, North Car olina,
 on the Thir d day of July , Anno Domini 1774,
 James Fraser , Esq.
T o his Lor dship, John Gr ey , at Mount Josiah
 Plantation, in the colony of V ir ginia
My Dear Friend,
I cannot begin to expr ess our Gratitude for your kind
Behavior in sending a Draft drawn upon your own Bank,
as advance Payment against the eventual Sale of the
Objects I confided to your disposition. Mr . Higgins, in
delivering this Document, was of course most tactful—
and yet, I gather ed fr om his anxious Demeanor and his
efforts at Discr etion that you may per haps believe us to
be in dir e Straits. I hasten to assur e you that this is not
the Case; we will do well enough, so far as Matters of
V ictuals, Clothes, and the Necessities of Life.
I said that I would tell you the Details of the Affair , and
I see that I must, if only to disabuse you of the V ision of
rampant Starvation among my family and tenants.
Beyond a small legal Obligation r equiring Cash, I
have a Matter of Business in Hand, involving the
acquisition of a Number of Guns. I had been in Hopes of
acquiring these thr ough the good offices of a Friend, but
find that this Arrangement will no longer answer; I must
look further abr oad.I and my Family ar e invited to a Barbecue in honor of
Miss Flora MacDonald, the Her oine of the Rising—you
ar e familiar with the Lady , I believe? I r ecall your telling
me once of your meeting with her in London, whilst she
was imprisoned ther e—to take place next month at my
aunt’ s Plantation, River Run. As this Affair will be
attended by a gr eat many Scots, some coming fr om
considerable Distances, I am in Hopes that with Cash in
Hand, I may make Arrangements to pr ocur e the r equisite
W eapons via other A venues. In r e which, should your own
Connexions suggest any such useful A venues, I should be
grateful to hear of them.
I write quickly , as Mr . Higgins has other Errands, but
my Daughter bids me send her ewith a box of Matchsticks,
her own Invention. She has schooled Mr . Higgins most
car efully in their Use, so if he does not burst
inadvertently into Flame on the way back, he will be able
to demonstrate them to you.
Y our humble and ob’ t. servant,
James Fraser
P .S. I r equir e thirty Muskets, with as much Powder and
Ammunition as may be possible. These need not be of the
latest Manufactur e, but must be well-kept and functional.
“‘OTHER A VENUES?’” I said, watching him sand the letter
before folding it. “Y ou mean smugglers? And if so, are you
sure that Lord John will understand what you mean?”
“I do, and he will,” Jamie assured me. “I ken a few
smugglers myself, who bring things in through the Outer
Banks. He’ll know the ones who come through Roanoke,
though—and th ere’ s more business there, because of the
blockade in Massachusetts. Goo ds come in through V ir ginia,
and go north overland.”He took a half- burned beeswa x taper from the shelf and
held it to the co als in the hearth , then dripped soft brown wax
in a puddle over the seam of the letter . I leaned forward and
pressed the back of my left hand into the warm wax, leaving
the mark of my wedding ring in it.
“Damn Manfred  McGillivray ,” he said, with no particular
heat. “It will be three times the c ost, and I must get them from
a smuggler .”
“W ill you ask about him, though? At the barbecue, I mean?”
Flora MacDonald, the woman who had saved Charles Stuart
from the  English after Culloden, dressing him in her maid’ s
clothes a nd smuggling him to a rendezvous with the French on
the Isle of Skye, was a living legend to the Scottish
Highlanders, an d her recent a rrival in the colony was the
subject of vast excitement, news of it coming even as far as the
Ridge. Every well-known Scot in the Cape Fear valley—and a
good many from farther away—would be present at the
barbecue to be h eld in her honor . No better place to spread the
word for a missing young man.
He glanced up at me, surprised.
“Of course I will, Sassenach. What d’ye think I am?”
“I think you’re very kind,” I said, kissing him on the
forehead. “If a trifle reckless. An d I notice you carefully didn’ t
tell Lord John why you need thirty muskets.”
He gave a sm all snort, and swept the grains of sand
carefully of f the table into the palm of his hand.
“I dinna ken for sure myself, Sassenach.”
“Whatever do you mean by tha t?” I asked, surprised. “Do
you not mean to give them to Bird, after all?”
He d idn’ t answer at once, but the two stif f fingers of his
right hand tapped gently on the tabletop. Then he shrugged,
reached to the s tack of journals and ledgers, and pulled out a
paper , w hich he  handed to me. A letter from John Ashe, who
had been a fello w commander of militia during the W ar of the
Regulation.“The fourth paragraph,” he said, seeing me frown at a
recounting of the latest contretemps between the Governor and
the Assembly . I obligingly ski mmed down the page, to the
indicated spot, and felt a small, premonitory shiver .
“A Continental Congr ess is pr oposed,”  I read, “with
delegates to be sent fr om each c olony . The lower house of the
Connecticut Assembly has moved alr eady to pr opose such
men, acting thr ough Committees of Corr espondence. Some
gentlemen with whom you ar e well-acquainted pr opose that
North Car olina shall do likewise, and will meet to accomplish
the matt er in mid-August. I could wish that you would join us,
friend, f or I am convinced that your heart and mind must lie
with us in the m atter of liberty; sur ely such a man as yourself
is no friend to tyranny .
“Some gentlemen with whom you ar e well-acquainted,”  I
repeated, putting down the letter . “Do you know who he
means?”
“I could guess.”
“Mid-August, he says. Before the barbecue, do you think, or
after?”
“After . O ne of the others sent me the date of the meeting.
It’ s to be in Halifax.”
I put down the letter . The after noon was still and hot, and
the thin linen of my shift was d amp, as were the palms of my
hands.
“One of  the others,” I said. He shot me a quick glance, with
a half-smile, and picked up the letter .
“In the Committee of Correspondence.”
“Oh, naturally ,” I said. “Y ou might have told me.”
Naturally , he would have found a means of inveigling himself
into the North Carolina Committee of Correspondence—the
center of political intrigue, where the seeds of rebellion were
being sown—m eanwhile holdi ng a commission as Indian
agent fo r the British Crown and  ostensibly working to arm the
Indians, in order to suppress precisely those seeds of rebellion.“I am telling ye , Sassenach,” he said. “This is the first time
they’ve asked me to meet wi’ them, even in private.”
“I se e,” I said softly . “W ill you go? Is it—is it time?” T ime
to make the leap, declare himself openly as a Whig, if not yet a
rebel. T i me to change his public  allegiance, and risk the brand
of treason. Again.
He sighe d deeply and rubbed a hand through his hair . He’d
been thinking; the short hairs of several tiny cowlicks were
standing on end.
“I don’ t know ,” he said finally . “It’ s two years yet, no? The
fourth of July , 1776—that’ s what Brianna said.”
“No,” I said. “It’ s two years unti l they declare independence
—but, J amie, the fighting will have started already . That will
be much too late.”
He stared at the letters on the desk, and nodded bleakly .
“A ye, it will have to be soon, then.”
“It would be likely safe enough,” I said hesitantly . “What
you told  me about Henderson b uying land in T ennessee: if no
one’ s stopping him, I can’ t se e anyone in the government
being agitated enough to come up here and try to force us out.
And surely not if you were onl y known to have met  with the
local Whigs?”
He gave me a small, wry smile.
“It’ s no the gov ernment I’m worrit by , Sassenach. It’ s the
folk nearby . It w asna the Governor who hanged the O’Brians
and burnt their house, ken? Nor was it Richard Brown, nor
Indians. That wasna done for the sake of law nor profit; it was
done for hate, and verra likely by someone who knew them.”
That ma de a more pronounced chill skitter down my spine.
There was a certain amount of political disagreement and
discussion on the Ridge, all ri ght, but it hadn’ t reached the
stage of fisticuf fs yet, let alone burning and killing.
But it would.I remembered, all too well. Bomb shelters and ration
coupons, black out wardens and the spirit of cooperation
against a dreadful foe. And the stories from Germany , France.
People reported  on, denounced to the SS, dragged from their
houses—others hidden in attics and barns, smuggled across
borders.
In w ar , government and their a rmies were a threat, but it
was so often the neighbors who damned or saved you.
“Who?” I said baldly .
“I could guess,” he said, with a  shrug. “The McGillivrays?
Richard Brown ? Hodgepile’ s friends—if he had any . The
friends of any of the other men we killed? The Indian ye met
—Donner?—if he’ s still alive. Neil Forbes? He’ s a grudge
against Brianna , and she and Roger Mac would do well to
remember it. Hiram Crombie and his lot?”
“Hiram?” I said dubiously . “Granted, he doesn’ t like you
very much—and as for me—but …”
“W ell, I  do doubt it,” he admitted. “But it’ s possible, aye?
His people didna support the Jacobites at all; they’ll no be
pleased at an ef f ort to overthrow the King from this side of the
water , either .”
I no dded. Crombie and the rest would of necessity have
taken an  oath of loyalty to King Geor ge, before being allowed
to travel to America. Jamie had—of necessity—taken the same
oath, as part of his pardon. And must—of an even greater
necessity—break it. But when?
He’d stopped drumming his fing ers; they rested on the letter
before him.
“I do trust ye’re right, Sassenach,” he said.
“About what? What will happen ? Y ou know I am,” I said, a
little surprised. “Bree and Roger told you, too. Why?”
He rubbed a hand slowly through his hair .
“I’ve never fought for the sa ke of principle,” he said,
reflecting, and shook his head. “Only necessity . I wonder ,would it be any better?”
He didn ’ t sound upset, merely c urious, in a detached sort of
way . Still, I found this vaguely disturbing.
“But the re is principle to it, this time,” I protested. “In fact,
it may be the first war ever fought over principle.”
“Rather than something sordid like trade, or land?” Jamie
suggested, raising one eyebrow .
“I do n’ t say trad e and land have n’ t anything to do with it,” I
replied, wondering precisely how I’d managed to become a
defender of the American Revo lution—an historical period I
knew on ly from Brianna’ s school textbooks. “But it goes well
beyond that, don’ t you think? W e h old these tr uths to be self-
evident, that all men ar e cr eated equal, that they ar e endowed
by their Cr eator with certain unalienable Rights, that among
these ar e Life, Liberty , and the pursuit of Happiness. ”
“Who said that?” he asked, interested.
“Thomas Jef ferson will say it—on behalf of the new
republic. The Declaration of Independence, it’ s called. W ill be
called.”
“All me n,” he repeated. “Does h e mean Indians, as well, do
ye think?”
“I can’ t say ,” I said, rather irritated at being forced into this
position. “I haven’ t met him. If I do, I’ll ask, shall I?”
“Never mind.” He lifted his fin gers in brief dismissal. “I’ll
ask him  myself, and I have the opportunity . Meanwhile, I’ll
ask Brianna.” He glanced at m e. “Though as to principle,
Sassenach—”
He leane d back in his chair , fol ded his arms over his chest,
and closed his eyes.
“As long as bu t a hundr ed of  us r emain alive,”  he said
precisely , “never will we on any conditions be br ought under
English rule. It is in truth not for glory , nor riches, nor
honours that we ar e fighting, but for fr eedom—for that alone,
which no honest man gives up but with life itself.”“The Declaration of Arbroath,” he said, opening his eyes.
He gave me a lopsided smile.  “W ritten some four hundred
years ago. Speaking o’ principles, aye?”
He stood  up then, but still remained standing by the battered
table he used as a desk, looking down at Ashe’ s letter .
“As for  my own principles … ” he said, as though to
himself, but then looked at me,  as though suddenly realizing
that I was still there.
“A ye, I think I mean to give B ird the muskets,” he said.
“Though I may have cause to regret it, and I find them
pointing at me, two or three y ears hence. But he shall have
them, and do with them what seems best, to defend himself
and his people.”
“The price of honor , is it?”
He looked down at me, with the ghost of a smile.
“Call it blood money .”5 4
FLORA MACDONALD’S
 BARBECUE
River Run Plantation
 August 6, 1774
W HA TEVER DID  ONE SA Y t o an icon? Or an icon’ s
husband, for that matter?
“Oh, I shall fai nt, I know I shall.” Rachel Campbell was
fluttering her fan hard enough to create a perceptible breeze.
“Whatever shall I say to her?”
“‘Good day , Mrs. MacDonald’?” suggested her husband, a
faint smile lurking at the corner of his withered mouth.
Rachel hit him s harply with her fan, making him chuckle as
he d odged away . For all he wa s thirty-five years her senior ,
Farquard Camp bell had an eas y , teasing way with his wife,
quite at odds with his usual dignified demeanor .
“I s hall faint,” Rachel declared again, having evidently
decided upon this as a definite social strategy .
“W ell, ye must please yourself, of course, a nighean,  but if
ye do, it will have to be Mr . Fraser picking you up from the
ground; my ancient limbs are scarcely equal to the task.”
“Oh!” Rachel cast a quick glance at Jamie, who smiled at
her , then hid her blushes behind  her fan. While plainly fond of
her own husband, she made no  secret of her admiration for
mine.
“Y our humble servant, madam,”  Jamie gravely assured her ,
bowing.
She tittered. I s houldn’ t like to wrong the woman, but she
definitely tittered. I caught Jamie’ s eye, and hid a smile behind
my own fan.“And what will you  say to her , then, Mr . Fraser?”
Jamie pursed his lips and squinted thoughtfully at the
brilliant sun streaming through the elm trees that edged the
lawn at River Run.
“Oh, I suppose I might say tha t I’m glad the weather has
kept fine for her . It was raining the last time we met.”
Rachel’ s jaw dropped, and so d id her fan, bouncing on the
lawn. Her husband bent to pick it up for her , groaning audibly ,
but she had no attention to spare for him.
“Y ou’ve met  her?” she cried, eyes wide with excitement.
“When? Where? W ith the prin—with him ?”
“Ah, no,” Jamie said, smiling. “On Skye. I’d gone wi’ my
father—a matter of sheep, it wa s. W e chanced to meet Hugh
MacDonald of Armadale in Por tree—Miss Flora’ s stepfather ,
aye?—and he’d brought the lass into the town with him, for a
treat.”
“Oh!” Rachel was enchanted. “And was she beautiful and
gracious as they say?”
Jamie frowned, considering.
“W ell, n o,” he said. “But she’d a terrible grippe at the time,
and no doubt w ould have looked much improved without the
red nose. Gracious? W ell, I wouldna say so, really . She
snatched a bridie right out of my hand and ate it.”
“And ho w old were you both at the time?” I asked, seeing
Rachel’ s mouth sag in horror .
“Oh, six, maybe,” he said cheerfully . “Or seven. I doubt I
should remembe r , save I kicked her in the shin when she stole
my bridie, and she pulled my hair .”
Recovering som ewhat from the shock, Rachel was pressing
Jamie for further reminiscences, a pressure he was laughingly
deflecting with jokes.
Of course, he had come prepared to this occasion; all over
the grounds, there were stories being exchanged—humorous,admiring, longing—of the days before Culloden. Odd, that it
should have been the defeat of Charles Stuart, and his
ignominious flight, that made a heroine of Flora MacDonald
and uni ted these Highland exiles in a way that they could
never have achieved—let alone sustained—had he actually
won.
It st ruck me su ddenly that Charlie was likely still alive,
quietly drinking  himself to death in Rome. In any real way ,
though, he was l ong since dead to these people who had loved
or ha ted him. Th e amber of time  had sealed him forever in that
one defining moment of his life— Bliadha T earlach;  “Charlie’ s
Y ear ,” it meant, and even now , I heard people call it that.
It was Flora’ s coming that w as causing this flood of
sentiment, of course. How stra nge for her , I thought, with a
pang of sympath y—and for the first time, wondered what on
earth I might say to her myself.
I h ad met famou s people before—not the least of them the
Bonnie Prince himself. But always before, I had met them
when they—and I—were in the midst of their normal lives, not
yet past the defining events that would make them famous, and
thus still just people. Bar Louis—but then, he was a king.
There are rules of etiquette for dealing with kings, since after
all, no one ever does approach them as normal people. Not
even when—
I s nappe d my own fan open, hot blood bursting through my
face and  body . I breathed deep ly , trying not to fan quite as
frantically as Rachel, but wanting to.
I had not once, in all the years since it happened, ever
specifically recalled those two or three minutes of physical
intimacy with Louis of France. Not deliberately , God knew ,
and not by accident, either .
Y et sudd enly , the memory of it had touched me, as suddenly
as a hand comin g out of the crowd to seize my arm. Seize my
arm, lift my sk irts, and penetrate me in a way much more
shockingly intrusive than the actual experience had been.The air around me was suf fused  with the scent of roses, and
I heard the creak of the dress cage as Louis’ s weight pressed
upon it, and heard his sigh of pleasure. The room was dark, lit
by one candle; it flickered at the edge of vision, then was
blotted out by the man between my—
“Christ, Claire! Are ye all righ t?” I hadn’ t actually fallen
down, th ank Go d. I had reeled back against the wall of Hector
Cameron’ s mausoleum, and Jamie, seeing me go, had leapt
forward to catch hold of me.
“Let go,” I said, breathless, but imperative. “Let go of me!”
He hear d the note of terror in my voice, and slackened his
grip, but  couldn’ t bring himself to let go altogether , lest I fall.
W ith the ener gy of sheer panic, I pulled myself upright, out of
his grasp.
I s till smelled ro ses. Not the cloy ing scent of rose oil—fresh
roses. Then I came to myself, and realized that I was standing
next to a huge yellow brier ro se, trained to climb over the
white marble of the mausoleum.
Knowing that the roses were rea l was comforting, but I felt
as th ough I sto od still on the edge of a vast abyss, alone,
separate from every other soul in the universe. Jamie was close
enough to touch, and yet it was as though he stood an
immeasurable distance away .
Then he  touched me and spoke my name, insistently , and
just as suddenly  as it had opened, the gap between us closed. I
nearly fell into his arms.
“What i s it, a nighean ?” he whispered, holding me against
his chest. “What’ s frightened ye?” His own heart was
thumping under my ear; I’d scared him, too.
“Nothing,” I said, and an overw helming wave of relief went
over me, at the  realization that I was safely in the present;
Louis had gone back into the  shadows, an unpleasant but
harmless memory once more . The staggering sense of
violation, of loss and grief and i solation, had receded, no more
than a shadow on my mind. Best of all, Jamie was there; solidand phy sical and smelling of sw eat and whisky and horses …
and ther e.  I hadn’ t lost him.
Other people were clustering round, curious, solicitous.
Rachel fanned me earnestly , and the breeze of it felt soothing;
I w as drenched with sweat, wisps of hair clinging damply to
my neck.
“Quite all right,” I murmured , suddenly self-conscious.
“Just a bit faint … hot day …”
A choru s of of fers to fetch me wine, a glass of syllabub,
lemon s hrub, a burned feather ,  were all trumped by Jamie’ s
production of a flask of whisky  from his sporran. It was the
three-year -old stuf f, from the sherry casks, and I felt a qualm
as th e scent of it reached me, remembering the night we had
got drun k toget her after he had  rescued me from Hodgepile
and his men. God, was I about to be hurled back into that  pit?
But I wasn’ t. The whisky was merely hot and consoling,
and I felt better with the first sip.
Flashback.  I’ d heard collea gues talk about it, ar guing as to
whether this was the same phen omenon as shell shock, and if
it was, whether  it truly existe d, or should be dismissed as
simply “nerves.”
I shu ddered briefly , and took an other sip. It most assuredly
existed. I felt m uch better , but I  had been shaken to the core,
and my bones still felt watery . B eyond the faint echoes of the
experience itself  was a much more unsettling thought. It had
happened once before, when Ute McGillivray attacked me.
W as it likely to happen again?
“Shall I  carry ye inside, Sassenach? Perhaps ye should lie
down a bit.”
Jamie ha d shooe d away the wel l-wishers, had a slave fetch
me a stool, and  was now hove ring over me like an anxious
bumblebee.
“No, I’m all right now ,” I assured him. “Jamie …”
“A ye, lass?”“Y ou—when you—do you …”
I took a deep breath—and another sip of whisky—and tried
again.
“Sometimes, I wake up during the night and see you—
struggling—and I think it’ s with Jack Randall. Is it a dream
that you have?”
He stare d down at me for a moment, face blank, but trouble
moving in his ey es. He glanced from side to side, but we were
quite alone now .
“Why?” he asked, low-voiced.
“I need to know .”
He took a breath, swallowed, and nodded.
“A ye. Sometimes it’ s dreams. That’ s … all right. I wake,
and ken where I  am, say a wee p rayer , and … it’ s all right. But
now and  then—” He shut his eyes for a moment, then opened
them. “I am  awake. And yet I am there, with Jack Randall.”
“Ah.” I sighed, feeling at once terribly sad for him, and at
the same time somewhat reassured. “Then I’m not losing my
mind.”
“Y e thin k so?” he said dryly . “W ell, I’m that glad to hear it,
Sassenach.”
He stood  very close, the cloth o f his kilt brushing my arm,
so th at I  should have him for su pport, if I suddenly went faint
again. He looked searchingly a t me, to be sure that I wasn’ t
going to  keel over , then touched my shoulder and with a brief
“Sit still” went of f.
Not far; just to the tables set up  under the trees at the edge
of the lawn. Ignoring the sl aves arranging food for the
barbecue, he leaned across a p latter of boiled crayfish and
picked up something from a tiny bowl. Then he was back,
leaning down to take my hand. He rubbed his fingers together ,
and a pinch of salt sprinkled into my open palm.“There,” he whispered. “Keep it by ye, Sassenach. Whoever
it is, he’ll trouble ye no more.”
I closed  my hand over the damp grains, feeling absurdly
comforted. T rus t a Highlander to know precisely what to do
about a case of daylight haunting! Salt, they said, kept a ghost
in its grave. A nd if Louis was still alive, the other man,
whoever he had been, that pres sing weight in the dark, was
surely dead.
There w as a sudden rush of exci tement, as a call came from
the r iver—the boat had been sig hted. As one, the crowd drew
itself up on tiptoe, breathless with anticipation.
I smiled , but felt the giddy contagion of it touch me
nonetheless. Th en the pipes began to skirl, and my throat at
once was tight with unshed tears.
Jamie’ s hand tightened on my s houlder , unconsciously , and
I loo ked up to see him rub his knuckles hard across his upper
lip, as he, too, turned toward the river .
I loo ked down, b linking to control myself, and as my vision
cleared, I saw the grains of s alt on the ground, carefully
scattered before the gates of the mausoleum.
SHE W AS MUCH SMALLER than I’d thought. Famous
people always are. Everyone—dressed in their best, and an
absolute sea of tartan—pressed close, awed past courtesy . I
caught a  glimpse  of the top of h er head, dark hair dressed high
with white roses, and then it disappeared behind the thronged
backs of well-wishers.
Her husband, Allan, was visible. A stoutly handsome man
with gra y-streaked black hair tied neatly back, he was standing
—I a ssumed—behind her , bowing and smiling,
acknowledging the flood of Gaelic compliment and welcome.
Despite myself,  I felt the ur ge to rush forward and stare,
with eve ryone else. I held firm , though. I was standing with
Jocasta on the terrace; Mrs. MacDonald would come to us.Sure enough; Jamie and Duncan were pushing their way
firmly through the crowd, forming a flying wedge with
Jocasta’ s black butler , Ulysses.
“That’ s really her?” Brianna murmured at my shoulder , eyes
fixed wi th interest on the seething multitude, from which the
men had  now extracted the gues t of honor , escorting her from
the dock , up the lawn, toward the terrace. “She’ s smaller than I
thought. Oh, it’ s too bad Roger isn’ t here—he’d just die to see
her!” Roger was spending a month at the Presbyterian
Academy at Charlotte, having his qualifications for ordination
examined.
“He may get to see her another time,” I murmured back. “I
hear they’ve bought a plantation near Barbecue Creek, by
Mount P leasant.” And they would stay in the colony for at
least ano ther year or two, but I didn’ t say that out loud; so far
as the people here knew , the MacDonalds had immigrated
permanently .
But I had seen  the tall memo rial stone on Skye—where
Flora MacDonald had been born, and would someday die,
disillusioned with America.
It wasn’ t the first time I’d met someone and known their
fate, of course—but it was always unsettling. The crowd
opened and she stepped out, sm all and pretty , laughing up at
Jamie. He had a hand under her elbow , guiding her up onto the
terrace, and made a gesture of introduction toward me.
She looked up, expectant, me t my gaze dead on, and
blinked, her smile momentaril y fading. It was back in an
instant, and she was bowing t o me and I to her , but I did
wonder what she had seen in my face?
But she turned at once to greet  Jocasta, and introduce her
grown daughter s, Anne and Fanny , a son, a son-in-law , her
husband—by the time she had accomplished the confusion of
introduction, she was perfectly in command of herself, and
greeted me with a charming, gentle smile.“Mrs. Fraser! I am so much obliged to meet you at last. I
have heard such stories of your kindness and skill, I confess I
am in awe to be in your presence.”
It w as said with so much warmth and sincerity—she seizing
me by the hands —that I found m yself responding, in spite of a
cynical wonder as to who she’d been talking to about me. My
reputation in Cross Creek and Campbelton was notorious, but
not universally lauded, by any means.
“I h ad the honor of Dr . Fentiman’ s acquaintance at the
subscription ball held for us in W ilmington—so kind, so
amazingly kind of everyone! W e have been so well treated,
since our arrival—and he was q uite in raptures regarding your
—”
I sho uld have lik ed to hear what  had enraptured Fentiman—
our relat ions we re still marked by a certain wariness, though
we had reached a rapprochement—but at this point, her
husband spoke in her ear , desiring her to come and meet
Farquard Campb ell and some other prominent gentlemen, and
with a regretful grimace, she squ eezed my hands and departed,
the brilliant public smile back in place.
“Huh,” B ree rem arked, sotto voce.  “Lucky  for her she’ s still
got most of her teeth.”
That was in fa ct exactly what I’d been thinking, and I
laughed, conver ting it into a hasty coughing fit as I saw
Jocasta’ s head turn sharply toward us.
“So that’ s her .” Y oung Ian had come up on my other side,
and was watching the guest of honor with an expression of
deep interest. He was dressed in kilt, waistcoat, and coat for
the o ccasion, his brown hair done up in a proper queue, and he
looked q uite civ ilized, bar the tattoos that looped across his
cheekbones and over the bridge of his nose.
“That’ s her ,” Jamie agreed. “ Fionnaghal —the Fair One.”
There w as a surprising note of  nostalgia in his voice, and I
glanced at him in surprise.“W ell, it’ s her proper name,” he said mildly . “ Fionnaghal.
It’ s only the English call her Flora.”
“Did you have a crush on her when you were little, Da?”
Brianna asked, laughing.
“A what?”
“A tendr esse, ” I said, batting my eyelashes delicately at him
over my fan.
“Och, dinna be daft!” he said. “I was seven years old, for
God’ s sake!” Nonetheless, the tips of his ears had gone quite
pink.
“I was in love when I was seven,” Ian remarked, rather
dreamily . “W i’ the cook. Did ye hear Ulysses say as she’ s
brought a looking glass, Unc le? Given to her by Prince
T earlach,  w ith his arms upon the back. Ulysses put it in the
parlor , wi’ two of the grooms to stand guard over it.”
Sure enough, those people who weren’ t in the swirling
crowd surroundi ng the MacDonalds were all pressing through
the double doors into the hous e, forming a line of animated
chatter down the hall to the parlor .
“Seaumais!”
Jocasta’ s imperi ous voice put a stop to the teasing. Jamie
gave Brianna an austere look, and went to join her . Duncan
was deta ined in  conversation with a small knot of prominent
men—I recognized Neil Forbes, the lawyer , as well as
Cornelius Harn ett and Colonel Moore—and Ulysses was
nowhere in sight—most likely dealing with the backstage
logistics of a barbecue for two hundred people—thus leaving
Jocasta temporarily marooned. Her hand on Jamie’ s arm, she
sailed of f the terrace, heading for Allan MacDonald, who had
become detache d from his wife by the press of people round
her , and was standing under a tree, looking vaguely af fronted.
I watched them go across the lawn, amused by Jocasta’ s
sense of theatrics. Her body servant, Phaedre, was dutifully
following—and could plainly h ave guided her mistress. That
wouldn’ t have had at all the same ef fect, though. The two ofthem together made heads turn—Jocasta tall and slender ,
graceful despite her age and stri king with her white hair piled
high and her blu e silk gown, Jam ie with his V iking height and
crimson Fraser tartan, both with those bold MacKenzie bones
and catlike grace.
“Colum and Dougal would be p roud of their little sister ,” I
said, shaking my head.
“Oh, ay e?” Ian spoke absently ,  not attending. He was still
watching Flora MacDonald, now accepting a bunch of flowers
from one of Farquard Campbell’ s grandchildren, to general
applause.
“Not jealous, are you, Mama?” Brianna teased, seeing me
glance in the same direction.
“Certainly not,” I said with a certain amount of
complacence. “After all, I have all my  teeth, too.”
I HAD MISSED HIM in t he initial crush, but Major
MacDonald was among the revelers, looking very flash in a
brilliantly scarle t uniform coat and a new hat, lavish with gold
lace. He  removed this object a nd bowed low to me, looking
cheerful—no doubt because I was unaccompanied by
livestock, Adso and the white sow being both safely on
Fraser ’ s Ridge.
“Y our servant, mum,” he said. “I saw that ye had a word
with Miss Flora—so charming, is she not? And a canty ,
handsome woman, as well.”
“Indeed she is,” I agreed. “Do you know her , then?”
“Oh, aye,” he said, a look of profound satisfaction spreading
across his weathered face. “I should not dare to the
presumption of friendship—but believe I may stake a modest
claim to acquaintancy . I accompanied Mrs. MacDonald and
her family from W ilmington, and have had the great honor to
assist in settling them in their present situation.”
“Did yo u really?” I gave him an interested eye. The Major
wasn’ t the type to be awed by celebrity . He was  the type toappreciate its uses. So was Governor Martin, evidently .
The Major was watching Flora MacDonald now with a
proprietary eye, noting with app roval the way in which people
clustered round her .
“She ha s most graciously agree d to speak today ,” he told
me, rocking back a little on his bootheels. “Where would be
the best place, do you think, mum? From the terrace, as being
the p oint of hig hest elevation? Or perhaps near the statue on
the lawn, as be ing more central and allowing the crowd to
surround her , thus increasing the chance of everyone hearing
her remarks?”
“I think  she’ll have a sunstroke, if you put her out on the
lawn in this weather ,” I said, ti lting my own broad-brimmed
straw hat to shade my nose. It was easily in the nineties, in
terms both of temperature and humidity , and my thin petticoats
clung soddenly to my lower limbs. “What sort of remarks is
she going to make?”
“Just a brief add ress upon the s ubject of loyalty , mum,” he
said blandly . “Ah, there is your husband, talking to
Kingsbur gh; if you’ll excuse  me, mum?” Bowing, he
straightened, put his hat back on, and strode down the lawn to
join Jam ie and Jocasta, who were still with Allan MacDonald
—styled “Kingsbur gh,” in the Scottish fashion, for the name
of his estate on Skye.
Food was beginning to be brought out: tureens of
powsowdie and hotchpotch—and an enormous tub of soup a la
Reine, a  clear compliment to the guest of honor—platters of
fried fish, fried chicken, fried rabbit; venison collops in red
wine, smoked sausages, Forfar bridies, inky-pinky , roast
turkeys, pigeon pie; dishes of colcannon, stovies, turnip purry ,
roasted apples stuf fed with dried pumpkin, squash, corn,
mushroom past ies; gigantic baskets overflowing with fresh
baps, rolls, and other breads …  all this, I was well aware,
merely as prelude to the barbecu e whose succulent aroma was
drifting through the air: a nu mber of hogs, three or fourbeeves, two deer , and, the piece de r esistance,  a wood bison,
acquired God knew how or where.
A hum of pleas ant anticipation rose around me, as people
began metaphor ically to loosen their belts, squaring up to the
tables w ith a firm determination to do their duty in honor of
the occasion.
Jamie was still stuck fast to Mrs. MacDonald, I saw; he was
helping her to a  dish of what looked from the distance to be
broccoli salad. He looked up and saw me, beckoned me to join
them—but I shook my head, gesturing with my fan toward the
buf fet t ables, where the guests were setting to in the
businesslike ma nner of grasshoppers in a barley field. I didn’ t
want to lose the opportunity of inquiring about Manfred
McGillivray , before the stupor of satiety settled over the
crowd.
I m ade my way purposefully into the fray , accepting tidbits
of fered t o me by assorted serva nts and slaves, pausing to chat
with any acquaintance I saw , particularly those from Hillsboro.
Manfred had spent a great deal  of time there, I knew , taking
commissions fo r guns, delivering the finished products, and
doing sm all jobs  of repair . That  was the most likely place for
him to go, I thought. But no o ne I talked to had seen him,
though most knew him.
“Nice lad,” one gentleman told me, pausing momentarily in
his potations. “And sore missed, too. Besides Robin, there’ s
few gunsmiths closer than V ir ginia.”
I knew that, and knowing, wondered whether Jamie was
having a ny luck in locating the muskets he needed. Perhaps
Lord John’ s smuggling connections would be necessary .
I accepted a small pie from a passing slave’ s tray , and
wandered on, munching and chatting. There was much talk
about a series of  fiery articles th at had appeared recently in the
Chr onicle,  t he local newspaper , whose pro prietor , one Fogarty
Simms, was spoken of with considerable sympathy .“A r are plucked ‘un, is Simms,”  said Mr . Goodwin, shaking
his head . “But I doubt me he’l l stand. I spoke with him last
week, an d he told me he’ s in some fear of his skin. There’ve
been threats, aye?”
From the tone o f the gathering, I assumed that Mr . Simms
must be a Loyalist, and this appeared to be true, from the
various accounts I was given. T here was talk, apparently , of a
rival paper setting up, this to support the Whiggish agenda,
with its incautious talk of tyra nny and the overthrow of the
King. No one knew quite who was behind the new venture, but
there was talk—and much indignation at the prospect—that a
printer w as to be brought dow n from the north, where folk
were notably given to such perverse sentiments.
The general consensus was that such persons wanted their
backsides kicked, to bring them to their senses.
I ha dn’ t sat down to eat formally , but after an hour of
moving slowly through field s of champing jaws and
wandering herds of hors d’oeuvre trays, I felt as though I’d sat
through a French royal banquet—those occasions lasting so
long that chamber pots were discreetly placed beneath the
guests’ c hairs, and where the occasional guest giving way and
sliding beneath the table was discreetly ignored.
The present occasion was less formal, but not much less
prolonged. After an hour ’ s preliminary eating, the barbecue
was raised steaming from the pits near the stable, and brought
to the lawns on wooden trestles, mounted on the shoulders of
slaves. T he sight of immense sid es of beef, pork, venison, and
buf falo, gleaming with oil and v inegar and surrounded by the
smaller charred carcasses of hundreds of pigeons and quail,
was greeted with applause by the guests, all by this time
drenched with the sweat of their ef forts, but nothing daunted.
Jocasta, seated by her guest, loo ked deeply gratified by the
sound of  her hospitality being so warmly accepted, and leaned
toward D uncan, smiling, putting  a hand on his arm as she said
something to him. Duncan had left of f looking nervous—the
ef fect of a quart or two of beer , followed by most of a bottle ofwhisky—and seemed to be enjoying himself, too. He smiled
broadly at Jocasta, then essayed  a remark to Mrs. MacDonald,
who laughed at whatever he said.
I had to admire her; she was besieged on all sides by people
wanting a word, but she kept he r poise admirably , being kind
and gr acious to everyone— though this meant sitting
sometimes for ten minutes, a forkful of food suspended in air
as she listened to some interminable story . At least she was in
the shade—and  Phaedre, dressed in white muslin, stood
dutifully behind  her with a huge fan made of palmetto fronds,
making a breeze and keeping of f the flies.
“Lemon shrub, ma’am?” A wilting slave, gleaming with
sweat, of fered me yet another tray , and I took a glass. I was
dripping with perspiration, my le gs aching and my throat dried
with talk ing. At this point, I did n’ t care what was in the glass,
provided it was wet.
I c hange d my opinion instantly u pon tasting it; it was lemon
juice and  barley water , and whil e it was  wet , I was much more
inclined to pour it down the nec k of my gown than to drink it.
I edged unobtrusively toward a laburnum bush, intending to
pour the  drink into it, but was forestalled by the appearance of
Neil Forbes, who stepped out from behind it.
He was as startl ed to see me as I was to see him; he jerked
back, and glanced hastily over his shoulder . I looked in the
same direction, and caught sight of Robert Howe and
Cornelius Harnett, making of f in the opposite direction.
Clearly , the three of them had been conferring secretly behind
the laburnum bush.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said, with a short bow . “Y our servant.”
I cu rtsied in ret urn, with a vague murmur of politeness. I
would h ave slithered past him, but he leaned toward me,
preventing my exit.
“I hear that your husband is co llecting guns, Mrs. Fraser ,”
he said, his voice at a low and rather unfriendly pitch.“Oh, rea lly?” I was holding an o pen fan, as was every other
woman there. I waved it lang uidly before my nose, hiding
most of my expression. “Who told you such a thing?”
“One of  the gentlemen whom he approached to that end,”
Forbes said. The lawyer was lar ge and somewhat overweight;
the unhealthy shade of red in his cheeks might be due to that,
rather than to displeasure. Then again …
“If I  might impose so far upon your good nature, ma’am, I
would suggest that you exert you r influence upon him, so as to
suggest that such a course is not the wisest?”
“T o begin with,” I said, taking a deep breath of hot, damp
air , “just what course do you think he’ s embarked upon?”
“An unfortunate one, ma’am,” he said. “Putting the best
complexion upon the matter , I assume that the guns he seeks
are inte nded to arm his own company of militia, which is
legitimate, though disturbing; the desirability of that course
would rest upon his later actio ns. But his relations with the
Cherokee are well-known, and there are rumors about that the
weapons are destined to end in t he hands of the savages, to the
end tha t they may turn upon His Majesty’ s subjects who
presume to of fer objection to the tyranny , abuse, and
corruption so rife among the of f icials who govern—if so loose
a word may be employed to describe their actions—this
colony .”
I gave him a long look over the edge of my fan.
“If I  hadn’ t alrea dy known you were a lawyer ,” I remarked,
“that spe ech wo uld have done it. I think  that you just said that
you suspect my husband of wanting to give guns to the
Indians, and you don’ t like tha t. On the other hand, if he’ s
wanting to arm his own militia, that might be all right—
providing that said militia acts according to your  desi res. Am I
right?”
A flicker of amusement showed in his deep-set eyes, and he
inclined his head toward me in acknowledgment.
“Y our perception astounds me, ma’am,” he said.I nodded, and shut the fan.
“Right. And what ar e  your desires, may I ask? I won’ t ask
why you think Jamie ought to take heed of them.”
He l aughed, his heavy face, alr eady flushed with the heat,
going a deeper shade of red beneath his neat tie-wig.
“I desire justice, ma’am; the d ownfall of tyrants and the
cause of liberty ,” he said. “As must any honest man.”
…  fr eedom alone—which any hon est man surr enders only
with his life.  The line echoed in my head, and must have
shown on my face, for he looked keenly at me.
“I esteem your husband deeply , ma’am,” he said quietly .
“Y ou will tell h im what I have said?” He bowed and turned
away , not waiting for my nod.
He hadn’ t guarded his voice wh en speaking of tyrants and
liberty; I saw heads nearby turn,  and here and there, men drew
together , murmuring as they watched him go.
Distracted, I took a mouthful of  lemon shrub, and was then
obliged to swallow the nasty stuf f. I turned to find Jamie; he
was still near Allan MacDonald, but had moved a little aside,
and was in private conversation with Major MacDonald.
Things w ere moving faster than I had thought. I had thought
republican sentiment was still a minority in this part of the
colony , but for Forbes to speak so openly in a public gathering,
it was obviously gaining ground.
I tur ned back to look after the lawyer , and saw two men
confront him, their faces tight w ith anger and suspicion. I was
too far away to  hear what was said, but their postures and
expressions were eloquent. W ords were exchanged, growing in
heat, and  I glanced toward Jamie; the last time I had attended a
barbecue like this at River Run, in the prelude to the W ar of
the Regulation, there had been a fistfight on the lawn, and I
rather thought such an occurren ce might be about to happen
again. Alcohol, heat, and politics made for explosions of
temper in any g athering, let alone one composed lar gely of
Highlanders.Such an explosion might have happened—more men were
gathering round Forbes and his two opponents, fists curling in
readiness—had the boom of Jocasta’ s lar ge gong not sounded
from the terrace, making everyone look up in startlement.
The Major was standing on an upturned tobacco hogshead,
hands raised in the air , beaming at the multitudes, face shining
red with heat, beer , and enthusiasm.
“Ceud mile failte!”  he called, and was greeted by
enthusiastic applause. “And we wish a hundred thousand
welcomes to our honored guests!” he continued in Gaelic,
sweeping a hand toward the MacDonalds, who were now
standing side by side near him , nodding and smiling at the
applause. From their demeanor , I rather thought they were
accustomed to this sort of reception.
A f ew more in troductory rem arks—half-drowned in the
enthusiastic che ers—and Jamie  and Kingsbur gh lifted Mrs.
MacDonald carefully up onto the barrel, where she swayed a
little, but regained her balance , grabbing the heads of both
men for stability , and smiling at the laughter of the audience.
She beamed at the crowd, who beamed back, en masse,  and
immediately quieted themselves in order to hear her .
She had  a clear , high voice, and  was obviously accustomed
to sp eaking in p ublic—a most unusual attribute in a woman of
the t ime. I was too far away to  hear every word, but had no
trouble picking up the gist of her speech.
After graciously  thanking her ho sts, the Scottish community
who had  welcomed her family so warmly and generously , and
the guests, she commenced an earnest exhortation against what
she called “factionalism,” ur ging her hearers to join in
suppressing this  dangerous movement, which could not but
cause great unrest, threatening the peace and prosperity that so
many o f them had achieved i n this fair land, they having
risked everything to attain it.
And she  was, I realized with a small shock, exactly right.
I’d h eard Bree a nd Roger ar guing the point—why any of theHighlanders, who had suf fered so much under English rule,
should have fought on the En glish side, as many of them
eventually would.
“Because,” Roger had said patiently , “they had something to
lose, and  damn little to gain. A nd—of all people—they knew
exactly what it was like to fight against  the English. Y e think
folk who lived through Cum berland’ s cleansing of the
Highlands, mad e it to America, and rebuilt their lives from
nothing were eager to live through all that again ?”
“But surely they’ll want to fig ht for freedom,” Bree had
protested. He looked at her cynically .
“They have  freedom, a great deal more than they’ve ever
seen in Scotland. They risk losing it in the event of a war—and
they know that very well. And  then, of course,” he’d added,
“nearly all of them have swo rn an oath of loyalty to the
Crown. They’d not break it lightly , surely not for something
that loo ked like one more wild-eyed—and doubtless short-
lived—political upheaval. It’ s li ke—” His brow had furrowed
as he looked for a suitable analogy .
“Like th e Black Panthers, or the civil-rights movement.
Anyone could see the idealisti c point—but a lot of middle-
class people found the whole thing threatening or frightening
and just wished it would go away , so life could be peaceful.”
The trouble, of course, was that life never was  peaceful—
and this particular wild-eyed movement wasn’ t going  to go
away . I could see Brianna on th e far side of the crowd, eyes
narrowed in thoughtful speculation as she listened to Flora
MacDonald’ s high, clear voice, talking of the virtues of
loyalty .
I heard a low sort of “Hmph!” just to the side, behind me,
and turn ing, saw Neil Forbes, his heavy features set in
disapproval. He had reinforcements now , I saw; three or four
other gentlemen stood close beside him, glancing to and fro
but tryin g not to look as though they were. Gauging the mood
of the crowd, I thought they were outnumbered by roughly two
hundred to one, and the two hundred were growing steadilymore entrenched  in their opinions as the drink took hold and
the speech went on.
Looking away , I caught sight ag ain of Brianna, and realized
that she  was now looking at Neil Forbes, too—and he was
looking back. Both taller than the people around them, they
stared at  each other over the heads of the intervening crowd,
he with animosity , she with aloofness. She had rejected his suit
a fe w years be fore, and had done so without tact. Forbes
certainly hadn’ t been in love wi th her—but he was a man with
a fair degree of self-esteem, and not the sort to suf fer such a
public slight with philosophical resignation.
Brianna turned away , coolly , a s though she had taken no
notice of him, and spoke to the woman beside her . I heard him
grunt ag ain, say something in a low tone to his compatriots—
and then the kn ot of them were leaving, rudely turning their
backs on Mrs. MacDonald, who was still speaking.
Gasps and murmurs of indignation followed them, as they
shoved their way through the th ick-packed crowd, but no one
of fered to stop them, and the of fense of their leaving was
drowned by the outburst of prolonged applause that greeted
the con clusion of the speech—this accompanied by the
starting up of bagpipes, the ran dom firing of pistols into the
air , or ga nized c heering of “Hip, hip, huzzay!” led by Major
MacDonald, and such a general hullabaloo that no one would
have not iced the  arrival of an army , let alone the departure of a
few disaf fected Whigs.
I f ound Jamie in  the shade of Hector ’ s mausoleum, combing
out his hair with his fingers, preparatory to retying it.
“That went with a bang, didn’ t it?” I asked.
“Several of them,” he said, keeping a wary eye on one
obviously inebri ated gentleman  in the act of trying to reload
his musket. “W atch that man, Sassenach.”
“He’ s too late to shoot Neil Forbes. Did you see him leave?”
He nodded, deftly knotting the leather thong at his nape.“He couldna have come much c loser to an open declaration,
save he’d got up on the barrel next to Fionnaghal.”
“And that would have made him an excellent  tar get.” I
squinted at the red-faced gentleman, presently spilling
gunpowder on his shoes. “I don’ t think he has any bullets.”
“Oh, well, then.” Jamie dismiss ed him with a wave of the
hand. “Major MacDonald’ s in rare form, no? He told me he’ s
arranged for Mrs. MacDonald to give such speeches here and
there about the colony .”
“W ith himself as impresario, I take it.” I could just catch the
gleam of MacDonald’ s red coat among the press of well-
wishers on the terrace.
“I daresay .” Jamie didn’ t seem pleased at the prospect. In
fact, he seemed rather sober , his face shadowed by dark
thoughts. His mood would not be improved by hearing about
my conversation with Neil Forbes, but I told him anyway .
“W ell, it couldna be helped,” he said with a small shrug.
“I’d hop ed to keep the matter q uiet, but wi’ things as they are
wi’ Rob in McGi llivray , I’ve no real choice save to ask where I
may , tho ugh that lets the matter be known. And talked about.”
He moved again, restless.
“Are ye well, Sassenach?” he asked suddenly , looking at
me.
“Y es. But you  aren’ t. What is it?”
He smiled faintly .
“Och, it’ s nothing. Nothing I didna ken already . But it’ s
dif ferent, no? Y e think ye’re ready , and then ye meet it face to
face, and would give anything to have it otherwise.”
He looked out at the lawn, lifting his chin to point at the
crowd. A sea o f tartan flowed across the grass, the ladies’
parasols raised against the sun , a field of brightly colored
flowers. In the shade of the terrace, a piper played on, the
sound of  his piobr eachd  a thin, piercing descant to the hum of
conversation.“I ke nt I  should have to stand o ne day against a good many
of th em, aye? T o  fight friends an d kin. But then I found myself
standing there, wi’ Fionnaghal’ s hand upon my head like a
blessing, face to face wi’ them a ll, and watching her words fall
upon the m, see the resolve growing in them … and all of a
sudden, it was as though a great blade had come down from
heaven between them and me, to cleave us forever apart. The
day is coming—and I can not stop it.”
He s wallowed, and looked down, away from me. I reached
out to him, wanting to help,  wanting to ease him—and
knowing that I c ouldn’ t. It was, after all, by my doing that he
found himself here, in this small Gethsemane.
Nonetheless, he took my hand, not looking at me, and
squeezed it hard, so the bones pressed together .
“Lor d, that this cup might pass fr om me?”  I whispered.
He nodd ed, his gaze still restin g on the ground, the fallen
petals of  the yellow roses. Then he looked at me, with a small
smile b ut such pain in his eyes that I caught my breath,
stricken to the heart.
Still, he smiled, and wiping hi s hand across his forehead,
examined his wet fingers.
“A ye, well,” he said. “It’ s only water , not blood. I’ll live.”
Per haps you won’ t,  I  thought suddenly , appalled. T o  fight on
the winning side was one thing; to survive, quite another .
He saw the look on my face, and released the pressure on
my hand, thinking he was h urting me. He was, but not
physically .
“But no t my will be done, but Th ine,”  he said very sof tly . “I
chose my way w hen I wed ye, though I kent it not at the time.
But I chose, and cannot now turn back, even if I would.”
“W ould you?” I looked into his eyes as I asked, and read the
answer there. He shook his head.
“W ould you? For you have chosen, as much as I.”I sho ok my head , as well, and felt the small relaxation of his
body as his eyes met mine, clea r now as the brilliant sky . For
the space of a  heartbeat, we stood alone together in the
universe. Then a knot of chatteri ng girls drifted within earshot,
and I changed the subject to something safer .
“Have you heard anything about poor Manfred?”
“Poor Manfred, is it?” he gave me a cynical look.
“W ell, he may be an immora l young hound, and have
caused a ny amount of trouble—but that doesn’ t mean he ought
to die for it.”
He look ed as though he might not be in complete agreement
with this sentiment, but let the matter lie, saying merely that
he’d asked, but so far without result.
“He’ll turn up, though,” he assured me. “Likely in the most
inconvenient place.”
“Oh! Oh! Oh! That I should live to see such a day! I thank
ye, sir , thank ye indeed!” It was  Mrs. Bug, flushed with heat,
beer , and happiness, fanning herself fit to burst. Jamie smiled
at her .
“So, were ye able to hear everything, then, mo chridhe ?”
“Oh, ind eed I was, sir!” she assured him fervently . “Every
word! A rch foun d me a lovely place, just by one of they tubs
o’ w ee flowers, where I could h ear and not be trampled.” She
had near ly died of excitement w hen Jamie had of fered to bring
her down to the  barbecue. Arch was coming, of course, and
would go on to do errands in Cross Creek, but Mrs. Bug
hadn’ t been of f the Ridge sin ce their arrival several years
before.
Despite my disquiet over the profoundly Loyalist
atmosphere tha t surrounded us, her bubbling delight was
infectious, and I found myself smiling, Jamie and myself
taking it in turn s to answer her questions: she hadn’ t seen
black slaves close-to before, and thought them exotically
beautiful—did th ey cost a great deal? And must they be taught
to wear clothes and speak properly? For she had heard thatAfrica was a hea then place where folk went entirely naked and
killed one another with spears,  like as one would do with a
boar , an d if one wanted to spea k of naked, that statue of the
soldier laddie on the lawn was shocking, did we not think?
And him wi’ no t a stitch behind his shield! And whyever was
that wom an’ s he id at his feet? And had I looked—her hair was
made to  look as if ‘twere snakes , of all horrid things! And who
was Hec tor Cam eron, whose tomb this was?—and made all of
white m arble, same as the tombs in Holyrood, imagine! Oh,
Mrs. Inn es’ s late husband? And when had she married Mr .
Duncan, whom she had met, and  such a sweet, kind-eyed man
as he was, such a shame as he had lost his arm, was that in a
battle of some type? And—oh, look! Mrs. MacDonald’ s
husband—and a fine figure of m an he was, too—was going to
talk, as well!
Jamie gave the terrace a bleak look. Sure enough, Allan
MacDonald was stepping up—merely onto a stool; no doubt
the hogshead seemed extreme—and a number of people—far
fewer than had attended his wif e, but a respectable number—
were clustering round attentively .
“W ill ye  no come and hear him ?” Mrs. Bug was already in
flight, hovering above the ground like a hummingbird.
“I’ll hear well enough from her e,” Jamie assured her . “Y ou
go along then, a nighean. ”
She bumbled of f, buzzing with excitement. Jamie gingerly
touched both hands to his ears, testing to be sure they were
still attached.
“It was kind of you to bring her ,” I said, laughing. “The dear
old thing probably hasn’ t had such fun in half a century .”
“No,” he said, grinning. “She likely—”
He stopped abruptly , frowning as he caught sight of
something over my shoulder . I turned to look, but he was
already moving past me, and I hurried to catch up.
It w as Jo casta, w hite as milk, an d disheveled in a way I had
never seen her . She swayed un steadily in the side doorway ,and might have fallen, had Jami e not come up and taken quick
hold of her , one arm about her waist to support her .
“Jesus, Auntie. What’ s amiss?” He spoke quietly , not to
draw attention, and was moving her back inside the house
even as he spoke.
“Oh, God, oh, merciful God, my head,” she whispered, hand
spread o ver her face like a spider , so that her fingers barely
touched the skin, cupping her left eye. “My eye.”
The line n blindfold that she wor e in public was creased and
blotched with moisture; tears were leaking out from under it,
but she wasn’ t crying. Lacrimation: one eye was watering
terribly . Both eyes were tearing , but much worse on the left;
the edge  of the linen was soaked, and wetness shone on that
cheek.
“I need to look at her eye,” I said to Jamie, touching his
elbow , and looking round in vai n for any of the servants. “Get
her to her sitting room.” That w as closest, and all the guests
were either outside or traipsing  through the parlor to see the
Prince’ s looking glass.
“No!” It was almost a scream. “No, not there!”
Jamie glanced at me, one brow  raised in puzzlement, but
spoke soothingly to her .
“Nay , Auntie, it’ s all right. I’ll bring ye to your own
chamber . Come,  then.” He stooped, and lifted her in his arms
as th ough she w ere a child, her silk skirts falling over his arm
with the sound of rushing water .
“T ake her; I’ll b e right there.” I’d spotted the slave named
Angelina passing through the far end of the hall, and hurried to
catch he r up. I gave my orders, then rushed back toward the
stairs—pausing momentarily to glance into the small sitting
room as I did so.
There w as no one there, though the presence of scattered
punch cu ps and the strong scent  of pipe tobacco indicated that
Jocasta had likely been holding court there earlier . Her
workbasket stood open, some half-knitted garment draggedout and left to dangle careless ly down the side like a dead
rabbit.
Children perhaps, I thought; several balls of thread had been
pulled out, too, and lay scattere d on the parquet floor , trailing
their co lors. I hesitated—but in stinct was too much for me,
and I hastily sco oped up the balls of thread and dropped them
back into the wo rkbasket. I stuf fed the knitting in on top, but
jerked my hand back with an exclamation.
A small gash on the side of my thumb was welling blood. I
put it in my mo uth and sucked hard to apply pressure to the
wound; meanwh ile, I groped mo re cautiously in the depths of
the basket with my other hand, to see what had cut me.
A knife, small but businesslike. Likely used to cut
embroidery threads; there was a tooled-leather sheath for it,
loose in the bottom of the baske t. I slipped the knife back into
its sheat h, seized  the needle cas e I’d come for , and closed the
folding tabletop of the workbasket before hurrying for the
stairs.
Allan M acDonald had finished his brief speech; there was a
loud cla tter of applause outside , with shouts and whoops of
Gaelic approval.
“Bloody Scots,” I muttered under my breath. “Don’ t they
ever  learn?”
But I hadn’ t t ime to consider the implications of the
MacDonalds’ rabble-rousing. By the time I reached the top of
the stair , one slave was close behind me, puf fing under the
weight of my m edicine box, and another was at the bottom,
starting more cautiously up with a pan of hot water from the
kitchen.
Jocasta was bent double in he r big chair , moaning, lips
pressed into invisibility . Her cap  had come of f and both hands
moved restlessl y to and fro through her disordered hair , as
though looking helplessly for something to seize. Jamie was
stroking her back, murmuring to her in Gaelic; he looked up
with obvious relief as I came in.I h ad long susp ected that the cause of Jocasta’ s blindness
was glaucoma—rising pressure inside the eyeball that if
untreated eventually damages the optic nerve. Now I was quite
sure of it. More than that, I knew  what form of the disease she
had; she was plainly having an  acute attack of closed-angle
glaucoma, the most dangerous type.
There was no treatment for glaucoma now; the condition
itself wo uldn’ t be recognized for some time. Even if there had
been, it was far too late; her blindness was permanent. There
was, however , something I could do about the immediate
situation—and I was afraid I’d have to.
“Put som e of this to steep,” I said to Angelina, grabbing the
jar of goldensea l from my box and thrusting it into her hands.
“And yo u”—I tu rned to the oth er slave, a man whose name I
didn’ t k now—”set the water to boil again, fetch me some
clean rags, and put them in the water .”
Even as I talked , I’d got out the tiny spirit lamp I carried in
my case. The fire had been allowed to burn down on the
hearth, but there were still live coals; I bent and lit the wick,
then opened the needle case I’ d taken from the sitting room
and abst racted the lar gest needle in it, a three-inch length of
steel, used for mending carpets.
“Y ou aren’ t …” Jamie began, then broke of f, swallowing.
“I h ave to,” I said briefly . “There’ s nothing else. Hold her
hands.”
He w as nearly as pale as Jocasta, but he nodded and took
hold of the clutching fingers, pulling her hands gently away
from her head.
I lifted away the linen bandage. The left eye bulged
noticeably beneath its lid, vividly bloodshot. T ears welled up
round it and ove rflowed in a constant stream. I could feel  the
pressure inside the eyeball, even without touching it, and
clenched my teeth in revulsion.
No help  for it. W ith a quick p rayer to Saint Clare—who
was, afte r all, patroness of sore e yes, as well as my own patronsaint—I ran the needle through the flame of the lamp, poured
pure alcohol onto a rag, and wiped the soot from the needle.
Swallowing a sudden excess of saliva, I spread the eyelids
of the af fected e ye apart with o ne hand, commended my soul
to G od, and sho ved the needle h ard into the sclera of the eye,
near the edge of the iris.
There was a cou gh and a splattering on the floor nearby , and
the s tink of vom it, but I had no attention to spare. I withdrew
the need le carefully , though as fast as I could. Jocasta had
stif fened abruptly , frozen stif f, hands clawed over Jamie’ s. She
didn’ t m ove at all, but made small, shocked panting sounds, as
though afraid to move enough even to breathe.
There was a trickle of fluid from the eye, vitreous humor ,
faintly cloudy , just thick enoug h to be distinguishable as it
flowed sluggishly across the wet surface of the sclera. I was
still holding the eyelids apart ; I plucked a rag from the
goldenseal tea with my free hand, squeezed out the excess
liquid, careless of where it wen t, and touched it gently to her
face. Joc asta gasped at the touc h of the warmth on her skin,
pulled her hands free, and grasped at it.
I let go then, and allowed h er to seize the warm rag,
pressing it against her closed left eye, the heat of it some
relief.
Light feet pounded up the stair s again, and down the hall;
Angelina, pantin g, a handful of salt clutched to her bosom, a
spoon in her other hand. I brushed the salt from her damp palm
into the pan of warm water , and set her to stir it while it
dissolved.
“Did yo u bring laudanum?” I asked her quietly . Jocasta was
lying back in he r chair , eyes closed—but rigid as a statue, her
eyelids squeezing tight, fists clenched in knots on her knees.
“I couldna find the laudanum, missus,” Angelina murmured
to me, with a frightened glance  at Jocasta. “I dinna ken who
could be  takin’ it—hain’ t nobody got the key but Mr . Ulysses
and Miz Cameron herself.”“Ulysses let you into the simple s closet, then—so he knows
that Mrs. Cameron is ill?”
She nodded vigorously , setting  the ribbon on her cap a-
flutter .
“Oh, yes , missu s! He be bleezin ’, if he find out and I hain’ t
told him . He say come fetch him quick, she want him—
otherwise, I tell Miz Cameron she hain’ t to worry none, he
take care every single thing.”
Jocasta let out a long sigh at this , her clenched fists relaxing
a little.
“God bl ess the man,” she murmured, eyes closed. “He will
take care of everything. I should be lost without him. Lost.”
Her white hair w as soaked at the temples, and sweat dripped
from the ends of the tendrils that lay over her shoulder , making
spots on the dark blue silk of her gown.
Angelina unlaced Jocasta’ s gown and stays and got them
of f. Then I had Jamie lay her down on the bed in her shift,
with a thick layer of towels tuck ed round her head. I filled one
of my rattlesnak e syringes with the warm salt water , and with
Jamie gingerly holding the lids of her eye apart, I was able to
gently irrigate the eye, in hopes of perhaps preventing
infection to the puncture wound. The wound itself showed as a
tiny scarlet spot on the sclera, a  small conjunctival bleb above
it. Jamie couldn’ t look at it with out blinking, I saw , and smiled
at him.
“She’ll be all right,” I said. “Y ou can go, if you like.”
Jamie nodded, turning to go, bu t Jocasta’ s hand shot out to
stop him.
“No, be staying, a chuisle —if ye will.” This last was stric tly
for form’ s sake; she had him clutched by the sleeve, hard
enough to turn her fingers white.
“A ye, A untie, of course,” he sa id mildly , and put his hand
over hers, squeezing in reassu rance. Still, she didn’ t let go
until he had sat down beside her .“Who e lse is there?” she asked, turning her head fretfully
from sid e to side, trying to hear the telltale sounds of breathing
and mov ement that would inform her . “Have the slaves gone?”
“Y es, they’ve gone back to help with the serving,” I told her .
“It’ s only me and Jamie left.”
She clos ed her eyes and drew a deep, shuddering breath,
only then beginning to relax a little.
“Good. I must tell ye a thing, Nephew , and no one else must
hear . Niece”—she lifted a long white hand toward me—”go
and be seeing as we’re truly alone.”
I went obedient ly to look out into the hall. No one was
visible, though there were voic es coming from a room down
the hall—laughter , and tremendous rustlings and thumpings,
as young women chattered and rearranged their hair and
clothing. I pulled my head back in and closed the door , and the
sounds f rom the rest of the house receded at once, muf fled into
a distant rumble.
“What is  it, then, Auntie?” Jami e was still holding her hand,
one big thumb gently stroking the back of it, over and over , in
the soothing rhythm I’d seen him use on skittish animals. It
was less ef fective on his aunt than on the average horse or dog,
though.
“It was him. He’ s here!”
“Who’ s here, Auntie?”
“I d on’ t know!” Her eyes rolle d desperately to and fro, as
though i n a vain attempt to see through not only darkness, but
walls, as well.
Jamie raised his brows at me, b ut he could see as well as I
that she wasn’ t r aving, incoherent as she sounded. She realized
what she sounded like; I could see the ef fort in her face as she
pulled herself together .
“He’ s come for the gold,” she said, lowering her voice. “The
Frenchman’ s gold.”“Oh, aye ?” Jamie said cautiously . He darted a glance at me,
one eyeb row raised, but I shook  my head. She wasn’ t having
hallucinations.
Jocasta sighed with impatience and shook her head, then
stopped abruptly , with a muf fled “Och!” of pain, putting both
hands to her head as though to keep it on her shoulders.
She breathed deeply for a mom ent or two, her lips pressed
tight together . Then she slowly lowered her hands.
“It started last night,” she said. “The pain in my eye.”
She’d w aked in  the night to a throbbing in her eye, a dull
pain that spread slowly to the side of her head.
“It’ s come before, ken,” she explained. She had pushed
herself u p to a s itting position now , and was beginning to look
a lit tle b etter , th ough she still h eld the warm cloth to her eye.
“It bega n when I started to lose my sight. Sometimes it would
be one eye, sometimes both. But I kent what was coming.”
But Jocasta MacKenzie Camero n Innes was not a woman to
allow mere bodily indisposition to interfere with her plans, let
alone interrupt what promised to be the most scintillating
social af fair in Cross Creek’ s history .
“I w as that dis gusted,” she said. “And here Miss Flora
MacDonald coming!”
But the arrangements had all been made; the barbecued
carcasses were roasting in their pits, hogsheads of ale and beer
stood ready by the stables, and the air was full of the fragrance
of h ot bread and  beans from the cookhouse. The slaves were
well-trained, and she had full fa ith that Ulysses would manage
everything. All she must do, she ’d thought, was to stay on her
feet.
“I d idna want to take opium or laudanum,” she explained.
“Or I’d fall asleep for sure. So I made do wi’ the whisky .”
She was  a tall woman, and thoroughly accustomed to an
intake of liquor that would have  felled a modern man. By thetime the  MacDonalds arrived, she’d had the better part of a
bottle—but the pain was getting worse.
“And then my e ye began to water so fierce, everyone would
ha’ seen something was wrong , and I didna want that.  So I
came in to my sitting room; I’d taken care to put a wee bottle
of la udanum in my workbasket,  in case the whisky should be
not enough.
“Folk were swarming thick as li ce outside, trying to catch a
glimpse or a word with Miss MacDonald, but the sitting room
was deserted, so far as I could tell, what wi’ my head
pounding and my eye fit to explode.” She said this last quite
casually , but I saw Jamie flinch, the memory of what I’d done
with the needle obviously still f resh. He swallowed and wiped
his knuckles hard across his mouth.
Jocasta had quickly abstracted the bottle of laudanum,
swallowed a few gulps, and then  sat for a moment, waiting for
it to take ef fect.
“I di nna ken if ye’ve ever had th e stuf f, Nephew , but it gives
ye a n od d feelin g, as though ye might be starting to dissolve at
the edge s. T ake  a drop too much, and ye begin to see things
that aren’ t there—blind or not—and hear them, too.”
Between the ef fects of laudanum and liquor and the noise of
the c rowd outside, she hadn’ t noticed footsteps, and when the
voice sp oke nea r her , she’d thou ght for a moment that it was a
hallucination.
“‘So her e ye ar e, lass,’  he said,” she quoted, and her face,
already pale, blanched further at the memory . “‘Remember me,
do ye?’”
“I take it ye did, Aunt?” Jamie asked dryly .
“I did,” she repl ied just as dryly . “I’d heard that voice twice
before. Once at the Gathering w here your daughter was wed—
and once more than twenty years ago, in an inn near Coigach,
in Scotland.”
She lowered the wet cloth f rom her face and put it
unerringly back into the bowl o f warm water . Her eyes werered a nd swollen, raw against the  pale skin, and looking terribly
vulnerable in their blindness—but she had command of herself
once more.
“A ye, I did ken him,” she repeated.
She had recognized the voice at once as one known—but
for a moment, could not place it. Then realization had struck
her , and she had clutched the arm of her chair for support.
“Who are ye?” she’d demanded, with what force she could
summon. Her heart was pounding in time to the throbbing in
her head  and eye, and her senses swimming in whisky and
laudanum. Perhaps it was the laudanum that seemed to
transform the sound of the crowd outside into the sound of a
nearby s ea, the noise of a slave ’ s footsteps in the hall to the
thump of the landlord’ s clogs on the stairs of the inn.
“I w as there. T r uly there.” Despite the sweat that still ran
down her face, I saw goosefles h pebble the pale skin of her
shoulders. “In the inn at Coigach. I smelt the sea, and I heard
the men—Hector and Dougal—I could hear  them! Ar guing
together , somew here behind me. And the man wi’ the mask—I
could see  him,” she said, and a ripple went up the back of my
own neck as she  turned her blin d eyes toward me. She spoke
with such conviction that for an instant, it seemed she did  see.
“Standing at the foot of the stai r , just as he’d been twenty-
five years ago, a knife in his hand and his eyes upon me
through the holes in his mask.”
And, “Y e ken well enough who I am, lass,” he’d said, and
she had seemed to see his smile , though dimly she had known
she only  heard it in his voice; she’d never seen his face, even
when she had her sight.
She was  sitting up, half doubled  over , arms crossed over her
breast a s though in self-defense and her white hair wild and
tangled down her back.
“He’ s come back,” she said, and shook with a sudden
convulsive shudder . “He’ s come for the gold—and when he
finds it, he will kill me.”Jamie laid a hand on her arm, in an attempt to calm her .
“No one  will kill ye while I’m here, Aunt,” he said. “So this
man cam e to ye in your sitting r oom, and ye kent him from his
voice. What else did he say to ye?”
She was  still shivering, but not so badly . I thought it was as
much reaction to massive amounts of laudanum and whisky as
from fear .
She shook her head in the ef fort of recollection.
“He said—he said he had com e to take the gold to its
rightful owner . That we’d held it in trust, and while he didna
grudge m e what we’d spent of  it, Hector and me—it wasna
mine, ha d never  been mine. I should tell him where it was, and
he woul d see to the rest. And the n he put his hand on me.” She
ceased clutching  herself, and held out one arm toward Jamie.
“On my  wrist. D’ye see the marks there? D’ye see them,
Nephew?” She sounded anxious, and it occurred to me
suddenly that she might doub t the existence of the visitor
herself.
“A ye, Auntie,” Jamie said softly , touching her wrist. “There
are marks.”
There were; three purplish sm udges, small ovals where
fingers had gripped.
“He squeezed, and then twisted my wrist so hard I thought it
had snap ped. Th en he let go, but he didna step back. He stayed
over me, and I could feel the hea t of his breath and the stink of
tobacco on my face.”
I had hold of her other wrist, feeling the pulse beat there. It
was stro ng and rapid, but every once in a while would skip a
beat. Hardly surprising. I did wonder how often she took
laudanum—and how much.
“So I reached do wn into my wo rkbasket, took my wee knife
from its sheath, and went for his balls,” she concluded.
T aken by surprise, Jamie laughed.
“Did ye get him?”“Y es, she did,” I said, before Jo casta could answer . “I saw
dried blood on the knife.”
“W ell, that will teach him to  terrorize a helpless blind
woman, won’ t it?” Jamie pat ted her hand. “Y e did well,
Auntie. Did he go, then?”
“He did.” The recounting of her success had steadied her a
lot; she pulled her hand from m y grip, in order to push herself
up straig hter against the pillows. She pulled away the towel
still draped around her neck, and dropped it on the floor with a
brief grimace of distaste.
Seeing that she was plainly feel ing better , Jamie glanced at
me, then rose to his feet.
“I’ll go and see is anyone limpin g about the place, then.” At
the door , he paused, though, turning back to Jocasta.
“Auntie. Y e said ye’d met this fellow twice  b efore?  At the
inn i n Coigach w here the men brought the gold ashore—and at
the Gathering four years ago?”
She nodded, brushing back the damp hair from her face.
“I did. ‘T was on  the last day . He came into my tent, while I
was alone. I ken t someone was t here, though he didna speak at
first, and I aske d who was it? He gave a bit of a laugh, then,
and said, ‘It’ s true what they said, then—you’re blind
entirely?’”
She had stood up, facing the invisible visitor , recognizing
the voice, but not quite knowing yet why .
“‘So ye dinna ken me, Mrs. Cameron? I was a friend to your
husband—though it’ s been a good many years since last we
met. On the coast of Scotland—on a moonlicht nicht.’”
She licked dry lips at the memory .
“So then  it came to me, all on the sudden. And I said, ‘Blind
I may be, but I ken ye well, sir . What d’ye want?’ But he was
gone. And the next instant, I heard Phaedre and Ulysses
talking as they c ame toward the tent; he’d seen them, and fled
away . I asked th em, but they’d b een ta’en up wi’ their ar guing,and hadna seen him leave. I kept someone by me all the time,
then, until we left—and he didna come near me again. Until
now .”
Jamie frowned and rubbed a knu ckle slowly down the long,
straight bridge of his nose.
“Why did ye not tell me then?”
A trace  of humor touched her ravaged face, and she
wrapped her fingers round her injured wrist.
“I thought I was imagining things.”
PHAEDRE HA D FOUND the bottle of laudanum where
Jocasta had dropped it, under her chair in the sitting room.
Likewise, a trail of tiny blood spots that I had missed in my
hurry . These disappeared before reaching the door , though;
whatever wound Jocasta had inflicted on the intruder had been
minor .
Duncan, summoned discreetly , had hurried in to comfort
Jocasta—only to be sent directly out again, with instructions to
see to the guest s; neither injury nor illness was going to mar
such an occasion!
Ulysses met with a slightly more cordial reception. In fact,
Jocasta sent for him. Peering into her room to check on her , I
found him sitting by the bed, ho lding his mistress’ s hand, with
such an expression of gentleness on his usually impassive face
that I was quite moved by it, and stepped quietly back into the
hall, not to disturb them. He saw me, though, and nodded.
They we re talking in low voices, his head in its stif f white
wig bending toward hers. He see med to be ar guing with her , in
a most respectful fashion; she shook her head, and gave a
small cry of pain. His hand tightened on hers, and I saw that he
had take n of f his white gloves ; her hand lay long and frail,
pallid in his powerful dark grasp.
She breathed deeply , steadying herself. Then she said
something defin ite, squeezed his hand, and lay back. He rose,
and stoo d for a moment beside the bed, looking down at her .Then he  drew himself up, and  taking his gloves from his
pocket, came out into the hall.
“If you will fetch your husband, Mrs. Fraser?” he said, low-
voiced. “My mistress wishes me to tell him something.”
THE P AR TY W AS STILL IN f ull swing, but had shifted to a
lower , digestive sort of gear . Peo ple greeted Jamie or me as we
followed Ulysses into the house, but no one stopped us.
He led us downstairs to his butler ’ s pantry , a tiny room that
lay of f the winter kitchen, its shelves crammed with silver
ornaments, bottles of polish, vinegar , blacking, and bluing, a
housewife with needles, pins, and threads, small tools for
mending, and what looked like  a substantial private stock of
brandy , whisky , and assorted cordials.
He remo ved these from their shelf, and reaching back into
the e mpty space where they had  stood, pressed upon the wood
of the wall with both white-gloved hands. Something clicked,
and a small panel slid aside with a soft rasping sound.
He stood  aside, silently inviting Jamie to look. Jamie raised
one eyebrow and leaned forward, peering into the recess. It
was dark and shadowy in the butler ’ s pantry , with only a dim
light filtering in from the high  basement windows that ran
around the top of the kitchen walls.
“It’ s empty ,” he said.
“Y es, sir . It should not be.” Ulysses’ s voice was low and
respectful, but firm.
“What was  there?” I asked, glancing out of the pantry to be
sure we were no t overheard. The kitchen looked as though a
bomb ha d gone of f in it, but on ly a scullion was there, a half-
witted boy who was washing pots, singing softly to himself.
“Part of an ingot of gold,” Ulysses replied softly .
The French gold Hector Cameron had brought away from
Scotland, ten thousand pounds in bullion, cast in ingots and
marked with the royal fleur -de-l is, was the foundation of RiverRun’ s wealth. But it would not d o, of course, for that fact to be
known. First Hector , and then, after Hector ’ s death, Ulysses,
had take n one of the gold bars  and scraped bits of the soft
yellow metal into a small, anon ymous heap. This could then
be taken to the river warehouses—or for additional safety ,
sometimes as far as the coastal t owns of Edenton, W ilmington,
or New Bern—and there carefully changed, in small amounts
that would cause no comment, into cash or warehouse
certificates, which could safely be used anywhere.
“There was about half of the ingot left,” Ulysses said,
nodding toward the cavity in the wall. “I found it gone a few
months ago. Since then, of co urse, I have contrived a new
hiding place.”
Jamie looked into the empty cavity , then turned to Ulysses.
“The rest?”
“Safe enough, last time I checke d, sir .” The bulk of the gold
was concealed inside Hector Ca meron’ s mausoleum, hidden in
a c of fin and gua rded, presumably , by his spirit. One or two of
the slave s besides Ulysses might know about it, but the very
lively fear of g hosts was enough to keep everyone away . I
remembered the line of salt spr ead on the ground in front of
the mausoleum, and shivered a little, in spite of the stifling
heat in the basement.
“I could  not, of course, make sh ift to look today ,” the butler
added.
“No, of course not. Duncan knows?” Jamie nodded toward
the recess, and Ulysses nodded.
“The thief might have been any one. So many people come
to this house… .” The butler ’ s massive shoulders moved in a
small sh rug. “But now that this man from the sea has come
again—it puts a dif ferent face upon the matter , does it not,
sir?”
“A ye, it does.” Jamie contemplated the matter for a moment,
tapping two fingers softly against his leg.“W ell, then. Y e’ll need to stay f or a bit, Sassenach, will ye
not? T o look after my aunt’ s eye?”
I nodded. Provided no infection resulted from my crude
intervention, there was little or nothing I could do for the eye
itself. But it sho uld be watched, kept clean and irrigated, until
I could be sure it was healed.
“W e’ll s tay , then , for a bit,” he s aid, turning to Ulysses. “I’ll
send the Bugs b ack to the Ridge , to mind things and see to the
haying. W e’ll stay , and watch.”
THE HO USE W AS FULL of g uests, but I slept in Jocasta’ s
dressing room, so that I might k eep an eye on her . The easing
of press ure in her eye had relieved the excruciating pain, and
she had fallen soundly asleep, her vital signs reassuring
enough that I felt I could sleep, too.
Knowing I had a patient, thoug h, I slept lightly , waking at
intervals to tiptoe into her room . Duncan was sleeping on a
pallet at the fo ot of her bed, dead to the world from the
exhaustions of the day . I could hear his heavy breathing, as I
lit a taper from the hearth and came to stand by the bed.
Jocasta was still soundly aslee p, lying on her back, arms
crossed graceful ly over the cove rlet and her head thrown back,
sternly l ong-nosed and aristocra tic as the tomb figures in the
chapel of St. Denys. All she wanted was a crown, and a small
dog of some kind crouched at her feet.
I s miled  at the thought, thinking as I did how odd it was:
Jamie slept in exactly that fas hion, lying flat on his back,
hands crossed, straight as an arr ow . Brianna didn’ t; she was a
wild sleeper , and had been from a child. Like me.
The thought gave me a small, unexpected feeling of
pleasure. I knew I had given he r some parts of me, of course,
but she resemble d Jamie so strongly , it was always something
of a surprise to notice one.
I b lew out the taper , but didn’ t at once return to bed. I had
taken Ph aedre’ s cot in the dressing room, but it was a hot,airless little space. The hot day and the consumption of alcohol
had left me cott on-mouthed, with a vague headache; I picked
up the carafe from Jocasta’ s bedside, but it was empty .
No need to rel ight the taper; one of the sconces in the
hallway was still burning, and a dim glow outlined the door . I
pushed i t open quietly and look ed out. The corridor was lined
with bodies—servants sleeping by the doors of the bedrooms
—and the air t hrobbed gently with the snoring and heavy
breathing of a great many people sunk in slumber of varying
degrees.
At the end of t he corridor , though, one pale figure stood
upright, looking out through the tall casement window toward
the river .
She must have h eard me, but d idn’ t turn around. I came to
stand be side her , looking out. Phaedre was undressed to her
shift, her hair fr ee of its cloth and falling in a soft thick mass
around her shoulders. Rare for a slave to have such hair , I
thought; most women kept thei r hair very short under turban
or headc loth, lacking both time and tools for dressing it. But
Phaedre was a body servant; sh e would have some leisure—
and a comb, at least.
“W ould you like your bed back ?” I asked, low-voiced. “I’ll
be up for a while—and can sleep on the divan.”
She glanced at me, and shook her head.
“Oh, no , ma’am ,” she said soft ly . “Thankee kindly; I ain’ t
sleepy .” She saw the carafe I carried, and reached for it. “I
fetch you some water , ma’am?”
“No, no, I’ll do it. I’d like the air .” Still, I stood beside her ,
looking out.
It was a beautifu l night, thick w ith stars that hung low and
bright o ver the river , a faint silver thread that wound its way
through the dark. There was a moon, a slender sickle, riding
low on its way below the curve  of the earth, and one or two
small campfires burned in the trees beside the river .The window was open, and bug s were swarming in; a small
cloud of them d anced around the candle in the sconce behind
us, and tiny win ged things brushed my face and arms. Crickets
sang, so  many of them that their song was a high, constant
sound, like a bow drawn over violin strings.
Phaedre moved to shut it—to sleep with a window open was
considered most unhealthy , and  likely was,  g iven the various
mosquito-borne diseases in this swampish atmosphere.
“I thoug ht I heard something. Out there,” she said, nodding
toward the dark below .
“Oh? Probably my husband,” I said. “Or Ulysses.”
“Ulysses?” she said, looking startled.
Jamie, I an, and Ulysses had or ganized a system of patrol,
and wer e doubtless out somewhere in the night, gliding round
the h ouse and k eeping an eye on Hector ’ s mausoleum, just in
case. Knowing nothing of the disappearing gold nor Jocasta’ s
mysterious visitor , though, Phaedre wouldn’ t be aware of the
increased vigilance, save in the indirect way in which slaves
always knew things—the instinct that had doubtless roused her
to look out the window .
“They’re just keeping an eye ou t,” I said, as reassuringly as
I could . “W ith so many people here, you know .” The
MacDonalds had gone to Farquard Campbell’ s plantation to
spend the night, and a goodly nu mber of guests had gone with
them, but there were still a lot of people on the premises.
She nodded, but looked troubled.
“It j ust feel lik e something ain’ t right,” she said. “Don’ t
know what ‘tis.”
“Y our mistress’ s eye—” I began, but she shook her head.
“No. No . I don’ t know , but ther e something in the air; I be
feelin’ it . Not just tonight, I don’ t mean—something goin’ on.
Something coming.” She looked at me, helpless to express
what she meant, but her mood communicated itself to me.It m ight be in part simply the heightened emotions of the
oncoming conflict. One could in fact feel that in the air . But
there mi ght be something else, too—something subterranean,
barely s ensed, but there, like the dim form of a sea serpent,
glimpsed for only a moment, th en gone, and so put down to
legend.
“My grannie, she taken from Africa,” Phaedre said softly ,
staring o ut at the night. “She ta lk to the bones. Say they tell
her when bad things comin’.”
“Really?” In such an atmosphere, quiet save the night
sounds, so many souls adrift aro und us, there seemed nothing
unreal a bout suc h a statement. “ Did she teach you to … talk to
bones?”
She shoo k her head, but the corn er of her mouth tucked in, a
small, secret expression, and I thought she might know more
about it than she was willing to say .
One unwelcome  thought had occurred to me. I didn’ t see
how Stephen Bonnet could be connected to present events—
surely h e was not the man who  had spoken to Jocasta out of
her p ast, and jus t as surely , steal thy theft was not his style. But
he d id have so me reason to believe there might be gold
somewhere at River Run—and f rom what Roger had told us of
Phaedre’ s encounter with the big Irishman in Cross Creek …
“The Iri shman you met, when y ou were out with Jemmy ,” I
said, changing my grip on the slick surface of the carafe, “have
you ever seen him again?”
She looked surprised at that; cle arly Bonnet was the farthest
thing from her mind.
“No, ma’am,” she said. “Ain’ t seen him again, ever .” She
thought for a moment, big eyes  hooded. She was the color of
strong cof fee with a dash of cr eam, and her hair—there had
been a white man in her family tree at some time, I thought.
“No, ma’am,” she repeated softly , and turned her troubled
gaze bac k to the quiet night and the sinking moon. “All I know
—something ain’ t right.”Out by the stables, a rooster beg an to crow , the sound out of
place and eerie in the dark.5 5
WENDIGO
August 20, 1774
T HE LIGHT IN THE MORNING room was perfect.
“W e be gan with this room,” Jocasta had told her great-
niece, ra ising her face to the sun that poured through the open
double doors to the terrace, lids  closed over her blind eyes. “I
wanted a  room to paint in, and chose this spot, where the light
would co me in, bright as crystal in the morning, like still water
in th e afternoon. And then we built the house around it.” The
old woman’ s hands, still long-fingered and strong, touched the
easel, the pigment pots, the brushes, with af fectionate regret,
as sh e might car ess the statue of a long-dead lover—a passion
recalled, but accepted as forever gone.
And Brianna, sketching block and pencil in hand, had drawn
as quickly , as covertly as she could, to catch that fleeting
expression of grief outlived.
That sketch lay with the others  in the bottom of her box,
against the day when she might try it in more finished form,
try to catch that  merciless light, and the deep-carved lines of
her a unt’ s face, s trong bones stark in the sun she could not see.
For now , though, the painting at hand was a matter of
business, rather than love or art. Nothing suspicious had
happened since Flora MacDonald’ s barbecue, but her parents
meant to  stay for a little longer , just in case. W ith Roger still in
Charlotte—he had written to her; the letter was secreted in the
bottom of her box, with the private sketches—there was no
reason w hy she shouldn’ t stay , too. Hearing of her continued
presence, two or three of Jocasta’ s acquaintances, wealthy
planters, had commissioned po rtraits of themselves or their
families; a welcome source of income.“I w ill never un derstand how ye do that,” Ian said, shaking
his head at the canvas on her easel. “It’ s wonderful.”
In all honesty , she didn’ t understand how she did it, either; it
didn’ t seem necessary . She’d sai d as much in answer to similar
compliments before, though, and realized that such an answer
generally struck  the hearer either as false modesty or as
condescension.
She smi led at him, instead, letti ng the glow of pleasure she
felt show in her face.
“When I was little, my father would take me walking on the
Common, and we’d see an old man there often, painting with
an easel. I used to make Daddy stop so I could watch, and he
and the old man would chat. I mostly just stared, but once I got
up the nerve to a sk him how he did that and he looked down at
me and smiled,  and said, ‘The  only trick, sweetie, is to see
what you’re looking at.’”
Ian looked from her to the picture, then back, as though
comparing the portrait with the hand that had made it.
“Y our father ,” he said, interested. He lowered his voice,
glancing toward the door into the hallway . There were voices,
but not close. “Y e dinna mean Uncle Jamie?”
“No.” She felt the familiar sma ll ache at the thought of her
first father , but put it aside. She  didn’ t mind telling Ian about
him—but not here, with slav es all over the place and a
constant flow of visitors who might pop in at any moment.
“Look.” She glanced over her shoulder to be sure no one
was near , but t he slaves were talking loudly in the foyer ,
ar guing over a misplaced boot s craper . She lifted the cover of
the small compartment that held spare brushes, and reached
under the strip of felt that lined it.
“What d o you think?” She held  the pair of miniatures out
for his inspection, one in either palm.
The look of ex pectation on his face changed to outright
fascination, and  he reached slowly for one of the tiny
paintings.“I will be damned,” he said. It was the one of her mother ,
her hair long an d curling loose on bare shoulders, the small
firm chin raised with an autho rity that belied the generous
curve of the mouth above.
“The eyes—I don’ t think those are quite right,” she said,
peering into his hand. “W orking so small … I couldn’ t get the
color , exactly . Da’ s were much easier .”
Blues just wer e  easier . A tiny dab of cobalt, highlighted with
white and that faint green sha dow that intensified the blue
while vanishing  itself … well, and that was Da, too. Strong,
vivid, and straightforward.
T o get a brown  with true dept h and subtlety , though, let
alone something that even approximated the smoky topaz of
her mother ’ s eyes—always clear , but changing like the light
on a peat-brown trout stream—that needed more underpainting
than was  really possible in the ti ny space of a miniature. She’d
have to try again sometime, with a lar ger portrait.
“Are they like, do you think?”
“They’re wonderful.” Ian looked  from one to the other , then
he p ut the portr ait of Claire gently back into its place. “Have
your parents seen them yet?”
“No. I wanted t o be sure they were right, before I showed
them to anybody . But if they a re—I’m thinking I can show
them to  the people who co me to sit, and maybe get
commissions for more miniatures. Those I could work on at
home, o n the Ridge; all I’d need is my paint box and the little
ivory di scs. I could do the painting from the sketches; I
wouldn’ t need the sitter to keep coming.”
She made a brief, explanatory gesture toward the lar ge
canvas she was working on, which showed Farquard
Campbell, looking rather like a stuf fed ferret in his best suit,
surrounded by numerous childr en and grandchildren, most of
these me re whitish blobs at the  moment. Her strategy was to
have their mothers drag the small ones in one at a time, to
have each child’ s limbs and fea tures hastily sketched into theappropriate blo b before natural wriggliness or tantrums
obtruded.
Ian glan ced at the canvas, but his attention returned to the
miniatures of her parents. He stood looking at them, a slight
smile on his lon g, half-homely face. Then, feeling her eyes on
him, he glanced up, alarmed.
“Oh, no, ye don’ t!”
“Oh, com e on, Ian, let me just sketch you,” she coaxed. “It
won’ t hurt, you know .”
“Och, that’ s what you think,” he countered, backing away as
though the pencil she had taken  up might be a weapon. “The
Kahnyen’kehaka think to have a likeness of someone gives ye
power over them. That’ s why th e medicine society wear false
faces—so the demons causing th e illness willna have their true
likeness and willna ken who to hurt, aye?”
This wa s said in such a serious tone that she squinted at
him, to see whether he was joking. He didn’ t seem to be.
“Mmm. Ian—Mama explained to you about germs, didn’ t
she?”
“A ye, she did, o’ course,” he said, in a tone exhibiting no
conviction at all. “She showed me things swimmin’ about, and
said the y were  livin’ in m y teeth!” His face showed
momentary repu gnance at the notion, but he left the matter to
return to the subject at hand.
“There was a traveling Frenchman came to the village once,
a natural philosopher—he’d drawings he’d made of birds and
animals, and that astonished them—but then he made the
mistake of of fering to make a li keness of the war chief ’ s wife.
I barely got him out in one piece.”
“But you aren’ t a Mohawk,” sh e said patiently , “and if you
were—you’re not afraid of me having power over you, are
you?”
He turne d his head and gave her a sudden queer look that
went through her like a knife through butter .“No,” he said. “ No, of course n ot.” But his voice had little
more conviction than when discussing germs.
Still, he moved to the stool she  kept for sitters, set in good
light fro m the open doors that le d to the terrace, and sat down,
chin lifted and jaw set like one about to be heroically
executed.
Suppressing a smile, she took up the sketching block and
drew as quickly as she could, le st he change his mind. He was
a dif ficult subject; his features lacked the solid, clear -cut bone
structure that both her parents and Roger had. And yet it was
in no way a soft  face, even discounting the stippled tattoos that
curved from the bridge of his nose across his cheeks.
Y oung a nd fresh, and yet the firmness of his mouth—it was
slightly crooked , she saw with interest; how had she never
noticed that before?—belonge d to someone much older ,
bracketed by lines that would c ut much deeper with age, but
were already firmly entrenched.
The eye s … she despaired of getting those right. Lar ge and
hazel, they were his one claim to beauty , and yet, beautiful
was the last thin g you would call them. Like most eyes, they
weren’ t one color at all, but man y—the colors of autumn, dark
wet earth and c rackling oak leaves, and the touch of setting
sun on dry grass.
The color was a challenge, but one she could meet. The
expression, thou gh—it changed  in an instant from something
so guilelessly amiable as to seem almost half-witted to
something you wouldn’ t want to meet in a dark alley .
The expression at present was somewhere between these
two extremes, but shifted sudd enly toward the latter as his
attention focused on the open do ors behind her , and the terrace
beyond.
She glanced over her shoulder , startled. Someone was there;
she saw the edge of his—or her—shadow , but the person who
threw it  was keeping out of sight. Whoever it was began to
whistle, a tentative, breathy sound.For an instant, everything was normal. Then the world
shifted. The intruder was whistling “Y ellow Submarine.”
All the blood rushed from her head, and she swayed,
grabbing the edge of an occasio nal table to keep from falling.
Dimly , she sensed Ian rising like a cat from his stool, seizing
one of her palette knives, and sliding noiselessly out of the
room into the hallway .
Her hands had gone cold and numb; so had her lips. She
tried to whistle a phrase in rep ly , but nothing but a little air
emer ged. Straightening up, she took hold of herself, and sang
the l ast few wor ds instead. She could barely manage the tune,
but there was no doubt of the words.
Dead silence from the terrace; the whistling had stopped.
“Who are you?” she said clearly . “Come in.”
The shadow lengthened slowly , showing a head like a lion’ s,
light shining through the curls, glowing on the terrace stones.
The hea d itself poked cautiously into sight around the corner
of the door . It was an Indian,  she saw , with astonishment,
though his dress was mostly European—and ragged—bar a
wampum necklet. He was lean and dirty , with close-set eyes,
which w ere fixe d on her with eagerness and something like
avidity .
“Y ou alo ne, man?” he asked, in a hoarse whisper . “Thought
I heard voices.”
“Y ou can see I am. Who on earth are you?”
“Ah … W endig o. W endigo Donner . Y our name’ s Fraser ,
right?” He had edged all the w ay into the room now , though
still glancing warily from side to side.
“My ma iden name, yes. Are you—” She stopped, not sure
how to ask.
“Y eah,” he said softly , looking her up and down in a casual
way that no m an of the eighteenth century would have
employed to a lady . “So are you, aren’ t you? Y ou’re herdaughter , you have to be.” He spoke with a certain intensity ,
moving closer .
She did n’ t think he meant he r harm; he was just very
interested. Ian didn’ t wait to s ee, though; there was a brief
darkening of the light from the door , and then he had Donner
from behind, the Indian’ s squaw k of alarm choked of f by the
arm acro ss his throat, the point of the palette knife jabbing him
under the ear .
“Who are ye, arsebite, and what  d’ye want?” Ian demanded,
tightening the arm across Donner ’ s throat. The Indian’ s eyes
bulged, and he made small mewling noises.
“How d o you expect him to answer you, if you’re choking
him?” This appeal to reason cau sed Ian to relax his grip, albeit
reluctantly . Donner coughed, rubbing his throat ostentatiously ,
and shot Ian a resentful look.
“No nee d for that, man, I wasn’ t doin’ nothin’ to her .”
Donner ’ s eyes went from her to  Ian and back. He jerked his
head toward Ian. “Is he … ?”
“No, but he kno ws. Sit down. Y ou met my mother when she
—when she was kidnapped, didn’ t you?”
Ian’ s fea thery brows shot up at this, and he took a firmer
grip on the palet te knife, which was flexible but had a definite
point.
“Y eah.” Donner lowered himse lf gingerly onto the stool,
keeping a wary eye on Ian. “M an, they nearly got me. Y our
mother , she told me her old man was gnarly and I didn’ t want
to b e there when he showed up, but I didn’ t believe her .
Almost, I didn’ t. But when I heard those drums, man, I bugged
out, and  a damn good thing I did, too.” He swallowed, looking
pale. “I went back, in the morning. Jeez, man.”
Ian said something under his breath, in what Brianna
thought was Mohawk. It sounded unfriendly in the extreme,
and Donner evidently discerned enough of the meaning to
make hi m scoot his stool a little farther away , hunching his
shoulders.“Hey , m an, I didn’ t do nothin’  to her , okay?” He looked
pleadingly at Brianna. “I didn’ t! I was gonna help her get away
—ask her , she’ll tell you! Only Fraser and his guys showed up
before I could. Christ, why wo uld I hurt her? She’ s the first
one I found back here—I needed her!”
“The first one?” Ian said, frowning. “The first—”
“The fir st … traveler , he means,” Brianna said. Her heart
was beating fast. “What did you need her for?”
“T o tell me how to get—back.” He swallowed again, his
hand going to th e wampum ornament around his neck. “Y ou—
did you come through, or were you born here? I’m figuring
you came through,” he added , not waiting for an answer .
“They d on’ t gro w ‘em as big as you now . Little bitty girls. Me,
I like a big woman.” He smiled, in what he plainly intended to
be an ingratiating manner .
“I came, ” Brianna said shortly . “ What the hell are you doing
here?”
“T rying to get close enough to  talk to your mother .” He
glanced uneasily  over his shou lder; there were slaves in the
kitchen garden, their voices audible. “I hid out with the
Cherokee for a w hile, then I fig ured to come down and talk to
her at Fraser ’ s Ridge when it w as safe, but the old lady there
told me you wer e all down here . Heck of a long way to walk,”
he added, looking vaguely resentful.
“But the n that big black dude ra n me of f twice, when I tried
to ge t in  before.  Guess I didn’ t meet the dress code.” His face
flickered, not quite managing a smile.
“I b een sneaking around for th e last three days, trying to
catch a glimpse  of her , find her alone outside. But I saw her
talking to you, out on the terrace, and heard you call her
Mama. Seeing how big you are, I figured you must be … well,
I f igured  if you didn’ t pick up  on the song, no harm done,
huh?”
“So ye want to go back where ye came from, do ye?” Ian
asked. Plainly he thought this was an excellent idea.“Oh, yeah,” Donner said fervently . “ Oh,  yeah!”
“Where did you come through?” Brianna asked. The shock
of his appearance was fading, subsumed by curiosity . “In
Scotland?”
“No, is that wh ere you did it?” he asked eagerly . Scarcely
waiting for her nod, he went on. “Y our mother said she came
and then  went back and came a gain. Can you-all go back and
forth, like, you know , a revolving door?”
Brianna shook  her head violently , shuddering in
recollection.
“God, n o. It’ s horrible, and it’ s  so dangerous, even with a
gemstone.”
“Gemstone?” He pounced on that. “Y ou gotta have a
gemstone to do it?”
“Not absolutely ,  but it seems to be some protection. And it
may be that the re’ s some way t o use gemstones to—to steer ,
sort of, but we don’ t really kno w about that.” She hesitated,
wanting to ask more questions, but wanting still more to fetch
Claire. “Ian—could you go get Mama? I think she’ s in the
kitchen garden with Phaedre.”
Her cousin gave the visitor a flat, narrow look, and shook
his head.
“I’ll not  leave ye alone wi’ this fellow . Y ou go; I’ll watch
him.”
She would have ar gued, but long experience with Scottish
males h ad taught her to recognize intractable stubbornness
when sh e saw it. Besides, Donner ’ s eyes were fixed on her in a
way that made her slightly uncomfortable—he was looking at
her hand, she re alized, at the ca bochon ruby in her ring. She
was reasonably sure she could f ight him of f, if necessary , but
still …
“I’ll be right back,” she said, hastily stabbing a neglected
brush into the pot of turps. “Don’ t go anywhere!”
I W A S S HOCKED, but less so than I might have been. I had
felt that Donner was alive. Hoped he was, in spite of
everything. Still , seeing him face to face, sitting in Jocasta’ s
morning room, struck me dumb . He was talking when I came
in, b ut stopped when he saw me. He didn’ t stand up, naturally ,
nor yet of fer an y observations on my survival; just nodded at
me, and resumed what he’d been saying.
“T o stop whitey . Save our lands, save our people.”
“But yo u came to the wrong time,” Brianna pointed out.
“Y ou were too late.”
Donner gave her a blank look.
“No, I didn’ t—1 766, that’ s when I was supposed to come,
and that’ s when I came.” He p ounded the heel of his hand
violently against the side of his head. “Crap! What was wr ong
with me?”
“Congenital stupidity?” I suggested politely , having
regained my voice. “That, or hallucinogenic drugs.”
The blank look flickered a little, and Donner ’ s mouth
twitched.
“Oh. Y eah, man. There was some of that.”
“But if you came to 1766—and meant to”—Bree objected
—”what about Robert Springe r—Otter -T ooth? According to
the story  Mama heard about him, he meant to warn the native
tribes against white men and prevent them colonizing the
place. Only he arrived too late  to  do t hat—and even so, he
must have arrived forty or fifty years before you did!”
“That wasn’ t the plan, man!” Donner burst out. He stood up,
rubbing both hands violently through his hair in agitation,
making it stand out like a bramble bush. “Jeez, no!”
“Oh, it wasn’ t? What the bloody hell was  the plan, then?” I
demanded. “Y ou did have one.”
“Y eah. Y eah, we did.” He dropped his hands, glancing
round as though fearing to be overheard. He licked his lips.“Bob did want to do what you s aid—only the rest said, nah,
that wouldn’ t work. T oo many dif ferent groups, too much
pressure to trade with the whiteys … just no way it would fly ,
you know? W e couldn’ t stop it all, just maybe make it better .”
The of ficial plan of the group had been somewhat less
ambitious in scope. The travele rs would arrive in the 1760s,
and over the course of the next ten years, in the confusion and
reshuf fling, the movement of tribes and villages attendant
upon the end of  the French and Indian W ar , would infiltrate
themselves into various Indian g roups along the T reaty Line in
the Colonies and up into the Canadian territories.
They would then use such pers uasive powers as they had
gained to  sway the Indian nations to fight on the British side in
the onco ming Revolution, with the intent of insuring a British
victory .
“See, th e Englis h, they act like  the Indians are sovereign
nations,” he explained, with a g libness suggesting this was a
theory le arned by rote. “They w on, they’d go on doing trade
and like  that, which is okay , but they wouldn’ t be trying to
push the Indians back and stom p ‘em out. The colonists”—he
waved scornfully toward the open door—”greedy sons o’
bitches been shoving their way into Indian lands for the last
hundred years; they  ain’ t going to stop.”
Bree raised her brows, but I co uld see that she found the
notion intriguin g. Evidently , it wasn’ t quite as insane as it
sounded.
“How could you think you’d succeed?” I demanded. “Only
a few men to—oh, my God,” I  said, seeing his face change.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ—you weren’ t the only ones, were
you?”
Donner shook his head, wordless.
“How m any?” Ian asked. He so unded calm, but I could see
that his hands were clenched on his knees.
“I dunno.” Donner sat down abruptly , slumping into himself
like a bag of gra in. “There were like, two or three hundred inthe group. But m ost of ‘em coul dn’ t hear the stones.” His head
lifted a little, and he glanced at Brianna. “Can you?”
She nodded, ruddy brows drawn together .
“But yo u think there were mor e … travelers … than you
and your friends?”
Donner shrugged, helpless.
“I got the idea there were, yeah. But Raymond said only
five at a time co uld pass through. So we trained in, like, cells
of five. W e kept it secret; nobody in the big group knew who
could tra vel and who couldn’ t, a nd Raymond was the only one
who knew all of ‘em.”
I had to ask.
“What did Raymond look like?” A possibility had been
stirring in the b ack of my mind, ever since I’d heard that
name.
Donner blinked, having not expected that question.
“Jeez, I dunno,” he said helpl essly “Short dude, I think.
White h air . W or e it long, like we all did.” He raked a hand
through his knotted locks in illu stration, brows furrowed in the
search for memory .
“A rath er … wide … forehea d?” I knew I oughtn’ t to
prompt him, but couldn’ t help myself, and drew both index
fingers across my own brow in illustration.
He stared at me in confusion for a moment.
“Man, I don’ t remember ,” he said, shaking his head
helplessly . “It was a long time ago. How would I remember
something like that?”
I sighed.
“W ell, tell me w hat happened, when you came through the
stones.”
Donner licked his lips, blinkin g in the ef fort of recall. It
wasn’ t just native stupidity , I saw; he didn’ t like thinkingabout it.
“Y eah. W ell, there were five of us, like I said. Me, and Rob,
and Jere my and Atta. Oh, and Jojo. W e came through on the
island, and—”
“What island?” Brianna, Ian, and I all chorused together .
“Ocracoke,” he said, looking su rprised. “It’ s the northmost
portal in the Be rmuda T riangle group. W e wanted to be as
close as we could get to—”
“The Ber—” Brianna and I bega n, but broke of f, looking at
each other .
“Y ou kn ow where a number of  these portals are?” I said,
striving for calm.
“How many are there?” Brianna chimed in, not waiting for
his answer .
The answer , in any event, was confused—no surprise there.
Raymond had told them that th ere were many such places in
the w orld, but that they tended to occur in groups. There was
such a group in  the Caribbean, another in the Northeast, near
the Canadian border . Another in the Southwestern desert—
Arizona, he thought, and down through Mexico. Northern
Britain and the c oast of France, as far as the tip of the Iberian
peninsula. Probably more, but that’ s all he’d mentioned.
Not all of the portals were marked with stone circles, though
those in places w here people had lived for a long time tended
to be.
“Raymond said those were safer ,” he said, shrugging. “I
dunno why .”
The spot on Ocracoke hadn’ t been bounded by a full circle
of stones, though it was  mar ked. Four stones, he said. One of
them had marks on it Raymond said were African—maybe
made by slaves.
“It’ s kind of in  the water ,” he said, shrugging. “A little
stream runs through it, I mean. R ay said he didn’ t know about
water , whether that made any dif ference, but he thought itmight. B ut we didn’ t know what kind  of dif ference. Y ou guys
know?”
Brianna and I s hook our heads, round-eyed as a pair of
owls. Ian’ s brow , already furrowed, drew further down at this,
though. Had he heard something, during his time with Geillis
Duncan?
The five of them—and Raymond—had driven as far as they
could; th e road that led down th e Outer Banks was a poor one,
which te nded to wash away in storms, and they were obliged
to leave  the car several miles away from the spot, struggling
through the scrub pines of the coastal forest and patches of
unexpected quicksand. It was late fall—
“Samhain,” Brianna said softl y , but softly enough that
Donner was not distracted from the flow of his story .
Late fall, he sa id, and the weather was bad. It had been
raining for days, and the footin g was uncertain, slippery and
boggy by turns. The wind was high, and the storm sur ge
pounded the beaches; they could hear it, even in the secluded
spot where the portal lay .
“W e we re all scared—maybe a ll but Rob—but it was way
exciting, man,” he said, beginning to show a glimmer of
enthusiasm. “The trees were just about layin’ down flat, and
the sky , it was green. The wind  was so bad, you could taste
salt, all the tim e, because little bits of ocean were flying
through the air , mixed with th e rain. W e were, like, soaked
through to our choners.”
“Y our what?” Ian said, frowning.
“Underpants—you know , drawers. Smallclothes,” Brianna
said, flapping an impatient hand. “Go on.”
Once ar rived at the place, Raymond had checked them all,
to see that they carried the few necessities they might need—
tinderboxes, tobacco, a little money of the time—and then
given each one a  wampum necklet, and a small leather pouch,
which he said was an amulet of ceremonial herbs.“Oh, yo u know about that,” he said, seeing the expression
on my face. “What kind did you use?”
“I didn’ t ,” I said, not wanting hi m to wander from his story .
“Go on. How did you plan to hit the right time?”
“Oh. W ell.” He sighed, hunchin g on his stool. “W e didn’ t.
Ray said it would be just about two hundred years, give or take
a couple . It wasn’ t like we could steer—that’ s what I was
hoping you guys would know . How to get to a specific time.
‘Cuz, boy , I’d sure like to go back and get there befor e  I got
messed up with Ray and them.”
They had, at Raymond’ s direction, walked a pattern among
the stones, chanting words. D onner had no idea what the
words meant, nor even what the language was. At the
conclusion of the pattern, thoug h, they had walked single file
toward the stone with African markings, passing carefully to
the left of it.
“And, li ke—pow!” He smacked  a fist into the palm of his
other ha nd. “Fir st guy in line— he’ s gone,  man! W e were just
freaked out. I mean, that’ s what was s’posed to happen, but …
gone,” he repeated, shaking his head. “Just … gone. ”
Agog at this evidence of ef fectiveness, they had repeated the
pattern and the chant, and at ea ch repetition, the first man to
pass the stone had vanished. Donner had been the fourth.
“Oh, God,” he s aid, going pale at the memory . “Oh, God, I
never felt anything like that before and I hope I never do
again.”
“The amulet—the pouch you had,” Brianna said, ignoring
his pallo r . Her own face was intense, blazing with interest.
“What happened to that?”
“I d unno. I maybe dropped it,  maybe it went someplace
else. I passed ou t, and when I came to, it wasn’ t with me.” The
day was  warm and close, but he began to shiver . “Jojo. He was
with me. Only he was dead.”
That statement struck me like a knife blow , just under the
ribs. Gei llis Duncan’ s notebooks had held lists of people foundnear stone circles—some alive, some dead. I hadn’ t needed
anything to tell me that the journey through the stones was a
perilous passage —but this reminder made me feel weak in the
knees, and I sat down on Jocasta’ s tufted ottoman.
“The others,” I said, trying to k eep my voice steady . “Did
they …”
He shook his head. He was still clammy and shivering, but
sweat glazed his face; he looked very unwell.
“Never saw ‘em again,” he said.
He didn ’ t know what had killed  Jojo; didn’ t pause to look,
though h e had a vague notion that there might have been burn
marks o n his shirt. Finding his friend dead, and none of the
others nearby , he had stumbled of f in a panic through scrub
forest and salt marsh, collapsing after several hours of
wandering, lying in the sand dun es among stif f grass all night.
He had starved for three days, found and eaten a nest of turtle
eggs, eventually  made his way to the mainland on a stolen
canoe, and thereafter had drifted haplessly , working here and
there at menial jobs, seeking re fuge in drink when he could
af ford it, falling into company w ith Hodgepile and his gang a
year or so past.
The wampum necklets, he said, were to allow the
conspirators to identify each other should they meet at some
point—but he had never seen anybody else wearing one.
Brianna wasn’ t paying attention to this rambling part of the
story , though; she had jumped ahead.
“Do you think Otter -T ooth—Springer—screwed up your
group by deliberately trying to go to a dif ferent time?”
He looked at her , mouth hanging open a little.
“I never  thoughta that. He we nt first. He went first,” he
repeated, in a wondering sort of way .
Brianna began to ask another question, but was interrupted
by the sound of voices in the hall, coming toward the morningroom. Donner was on his feet in an instant, eyes wide with
alarm.
“Crap,” he said. “It’ s him. Y ou gotta help me!”
Before I could inquire exactly why he thought so, or who
“him” w as, the austere form of Ulysses appeared in the
doorway .
“Y ou,” h e said to the cowering Donner , in awful tones. “Did
I n ot tell you to  begone, sirrah? How dare you to enter Mrs.
Innes’ s house and pester her relations?”
He stepped aside, then, with a nod to whomever stood
beside him, and a small, round, cross-looking gentleman in a
rumpled suit peered in.
“That’ s him,” he said, pointing an accusatory finger . “That’ s
the b lackguard what stole my p urse at Jacobs’ s ordinary this
morning! T ook it right out my p ocket whilst I was eatin’ ham
for breakfast!”
“It w asn’ t me!” Donner made a  poor attempt at a show of
outrage, but guilt was written all over his face, and when
Ulysses seized him by the scruf f of the neck and
unceremoniously rummaged his clothing, the purse was
discovered, to the outspoken gratification of the owner .
“Thief!” he cried, shaking his fist. “I been a-following of
you all the morning. Damn’ ti ck-bellied, louse-ridden, dog-
eatin’ sa vage—oh, I do beg pard on, ladies,” he added, bowing
to me and Brianna as an afterthought before resuming his
denunciation of Donner .
Brianna glanced at me, eyebrows raised, but I shrugged.
There w as no way of preserving Donner from the righteous
wrath of his victim, even had I really wanted to. At the
gentleman’ s beh est, Ulysses summoned a pair of grooms and a
set of manacles—the sight of which made Brianna grow
somewhat pale— and Donner was marched of f, protesting that
he h adn’ t done it, he’d been f ramed, wasn’ t him, he was a
friend of  the ladies, really , man, ask ‘em! … to be conveyed to
the gaol in Cross Creek.There w as a deep silence in the wake of his removal. At
last, Ian shook his head as though trying to rid himself of flies,
and putting down the palette knife at last, picked up the
sketching block,  where Brianna had made Donner try to draw
the p attern he said the men had walked. A hopeless scrawl of
circles and squiggles, it looked like one of Jemmy’ s drawings.
“What kind of name is W eddigo?” Ian asked, putting it
down.
Brianna had been clutching her pencil so tightly that her
knuckles were white. She unfolded her hand and put it down,
and I saw that her hands were shaking slightly .
“W endigo,” she said. “It’ s an Ojibway cannibal spirit that
lives in the wood. It howls in storms and eats people.”
Ian gave her a long look.
“Nice fellow ,” he said.
“W asn’ t he, just.” I felt more than a little shaken myself.
Apart from the shock of Donner ’ s appearance and revelations,
and then  his arrest, small jolts of memory—vivid images of
my first meeting with him— kept shooting uncontrollably
through my mind, despite my ef forts to shut them out. I could
taste blo od in my mouth, and  the stink of unwashed men
drowned the scent of flowers from the terrace.
“I suppose it’ s what one would call a nom de guerr e, ” I said,
with an attempt at nonchalance. “He can’ t have been
christened that, surely .”
“Are yo u all right, Mama?” Bree was frowning at me.
“Shall I get something? A glass of water?”
“Whisky ,” Ian and I said in unison, and I laughed, despite
the shakiness. By the time it arrived, I was in command of
myself again.
“What d o you think will happen  to him, Ulysses?” I asked,
as h e held the tray for me. The butler ’ s stolidly handsome face
showed nothing beyond a mild d istaste for the recent visitor; Isaw him frown a t the scumbled bits of dirt that Donner ’ s shoes
had left on the parquet floor .
“I su ppose they will hang him,” he said. “Mr . T ownsend—
that was the gen tleman’ s name—had ten pound in the purse he
stole.” More than enough to merit hanging. The eighteenth
century took a dim view of thievery; as little as a pound could
incur a capital sentence.
“Good,” said Ian, with obvious approval.
I fe lt a small lurch of the stomach. I disliked Donner ,
distrusted him, and to be hone st, really didn’ t feel that his
death w ould be a great loss to humanity , by and lar ge. But he
was a fellow tra veler; did that impose any obligation on our
part to help him? More importan tly , perhaps—did he have any
more information that he hadn’ t told us yet?
“Mr . T ownsend has gone to Campbelton,” the butler added,
of fering the tray to Ian. “T o ask Mr . Farquard to attend to the
case pro mptly , a s he is bound for Halifax, and wishes to give
his witn ess at once.” Farquard Campbell was a justice of the
peace—and likely the only thing approaching a judge within
the county , since the Circuit Court had ceased to operate.
“They won’ t hang him before tomorrow , though, I don’ t
suppose,” Brianna said. She didn’ t normally drink whisky , but
had take n a glass now; the encounter had shaken her , too. I
saw she had turned the ring around upon her finger , rubbing
the big ruby absentmindedly with her thumb.
“No,” sa id Ian, looking at her suspiciously . “Y e dinna mean
to—” He glanced at me. “No !” he said in horror at the
indecision he saw on my face. “Y on fellow’ s a thief and a
blackguard, and if ye didna see him burning and killing wi’
your own eyes, Auntie, ye ke n well enough he did it. For
God’ s sake, let them hang him and have done!”
“W ell …” I said, wavering. The sound of footsteps and
voices in the hall saved me answering. Jamie and Duncan had
been in Cross Creek; now they were back. I felt anoverwhelming flood of relief at sight of Jamie, who loomed up
in the doorway , sunburned and ruddy , dusty from riding.
“Hang who?” he inquired cheerfully .
JAMIE’S OPIN ION W AS the same as Ian’ s; let them hang
Donner , and good riddance. He was reluctantly persuaded that
either B rianna o r I must talk to the man at least once more,
though, to be sure there was nothing further he could tell us.
“I’ll speak to the gaoler ,” he said without enthusiasm.
“Mind, though”—he pointed a monitory finger at me
—”neither of ye is to go anywh ere near the man, save Ian or I
am with ye.”
“What do you th ink he’d do?” Brianna was ruf fled, annoyed
at his tone. “He’ s about half my size, for heaven’ s sake!”
“And a rattlesnake is smaller yet,” her father replied. “Y e
wouldna walk into a room with one of those, only because ye
outweigh him, I hope?”
Ian snickered at that, and Brianna gave him an elbow , hard
in the ribs.
“Anyway ,” Jam ie said, ignoring them, “I’ve a bit of news.
And a letter from  Roger Mac,” he said. He pulled it out of his
shirt, smiling at Bree. “If ye’re no too distracted to read it?”
She lit up like a  candle and gra bbed it. Ian made a teasing
snatch at it, and  she slapped his  hand away , laughing, and ran
out of the room to read it in privacy .
“What s ort of news?” I asked. Ulysses had left the tray and
decanter; I poured a tot into my empty glass and gave it to
Jamie.
“Someone’ s se en Manfred McGillivray ,” he replied.
“Slainte.”  He drained the glass, looking contented.
“Oh, ay e? Where?” Ian looked less than pleased at this
news. For myself, I was thrilled.
“In a brothel, where else?”Unfortunately , h is informant had not been able to supply the
exact loc ation of  said brothel—having likely been too drunk at
the time  to know precisely whe re he was, as Jamie cynically
observed—but had been reason ably sure that it was in Cross
Creek or Campbelton. Also un fortunately , the sighting was
several weeks old. Manfred might well have moved on.
“It’ s a start, though,” I said, hopeful. Penicillin was
ef fective, even against more adv anced cases of syphilis, and I
had some brewing in the winte r kitchen, even now . “I’ll go
with you , when you go to the gaol. Then after we’ve spoken
with Donner , we can go look for the brothel.”
Jamie’ s look of contentment lessened appreciably .
“What? Why?”
“I d inna think Manfred would be still there, Auntie,” Ian
said, pat ently amused. “I doubt he’d have the money , for one
thing.”
“Oh, ha  ha,” I said. “He might have said where he was
staying, mightn’ t he? Besides, I want to know whether he was
showing any symptoms.” In my own time, it might be ten,
twenty , or even thirty years afte r the appearance of the initial
chancre before further syphilitic  symptoms developed; in this
time, though, syphilis was a much more fulminant disease—a
victim could die within a year of infection. And Manfred had
been go ne for more than three months; God knew how long
since he had first contracted the infection.
Jamie l ooked distinctly unenthused about the idea of
searching for brothels; Ian seemed rather more interested.
“I’ll hel p look,”  he volunteered. “Fer gus can come, too; he
kens a great deal about whores—they’d likely talk to him.”
“Fer gus? Fer gus is here?”
“He is,” Jamie s aid. “That was the other bit of news. He’ s
payin’ his respects to my aunt at the moment.”
“Why is he here, though?”“W ell, ye heard the talk at the barbecue, aye? About Mr .
Simms, the printer , and his troubles? It seems they’ve got
worse, and he thinks of selling up, before someone burns his
shop to the ground and him in it. It struck me that perhaps it
would suit Fer gus and Marsali,  better than the farming. So I
sent word for him to come down, and maybe have a word wi’
Simms.”
“That’ s a brilliant idea!” I sa id. “Only … what would
Fer gus use for money to buy it?”
Jamie coughed and looked evasive.
“A ye, well. I im agine some sort of bar gain might be struck.
Particularly if Simms is anxious to sell up.”
“All right,” I s aid, resigned. “I don’ t suppose I want to
know th e gory details. But Ian—” I turned to him, fixing him
with a beady eye. “Far be it from me to of fer you moral
advice. But you are not —repeat, not—to be questioning
whores in any deeply personal manner . Do I make myself
clear?”
“Auntie!” he said, pretending shock. “The idea!” But a
broad grin spread across his tattooed face.5 6
T AR AND FEA THERS
I N THE EVENT , I let Jamie go alone to the gaol to make
arrangements for seeing Donner . He had assured me that this
would be simpler without my  presence, and I had several
errands in Cross Creek. Besides the usual salt, sugar , pins, and
other h ousehold goods needin g replenishment, I ur gently
needed more cinchona bark for Lizzie. The gallberry ointment
worked to treat malarial attacks, but was not nearly so
ef fective as Jesuit bark in preventing them.
The Bri tish trade restrictions were having their ef fect,
though. There was, of course, no tea to be found—I had
expected that; there had been none for nearly a year—but
neither w as there any sugar , sa ve at an exorbitant price, and
steel pins were not to be found at all.
Salt, I could get . W ith a pound of this in my basket, I made
my way up from the docks. The day was hot and humid; away
from the slight b reeze of f the riv er , the air was motionless and
thick as treacle. The salt had so lidified in its burlap bags, and
the merchant had had to chip of f lumps of it with a chisel.
I wo ndered how Ian and Fer g us were coming with their
researches; I had a scheme in mind regarding the brothel and
its inhabitants, but first, we had to find it.
I hadn’ t mention ed the idea to Jamie. If anything came of it,
that would be ti me enough. A side street of fered shade, in the
form of a number of lar ge elms  that had been planted so as to
overhang the street. I stepped into the welcome shadow of one
of these , and found myself at  the edge of the fashionable
district—about ten houses, all told—of Cross Creek. From
where I stood, I could see Dr . Fentiman’ s fairly modest abode,
distinguished by a small hanging shingle decorated with a
caduceus. The doctor was not in  when I called, but his servant,a ne at, plain young woman with  badly crossed eyes, admitted
me and showed me to the consulting room.
This wa s a surprisingly cool and pleasant room, with lar ge
windows and a w orn canvas cloth on the floor , painted in blue
and yellow chequers, and furnished with a desk, two
comfortable chairs, and a chaise longue on which patients
might recline for examination. He had a microscope standing
on th e d esk, thro ugh which I pee red with interest. It was a fine
one, tho ugh not quite so good as  my own, I thought with some
complacency .
I w as possessed of a strong cu riosity about the rest of his
equipment, and was debating with myself as to whether it
would be an abuse of the doctor ’ s hospitality to snoop through
his cupb oards, when the doctor himself arrived, borne on the
wings of brandywine.
He w as humming a little tune t o himself, and carrying his
hat u nder one arm, his battered  medical case in the crook of
the o ther . Seeing me, he droppe d these carelessly on the floor
and hastened to grasp me by t he hand, beaming. He bowed
over my  hand and pressed moist ly fervent lips to my knuckles.
“Mrs. Fr aser! M y dear lady , I am so pleased to see you! Y ou
are in no physical distress, I trust?”
I was in some danger of being overwhelmed by the fumes of
alcohol on his breath, but kept as cordial a countenance as
possible, unobtrusively wiping my hand upon my gown, whilst
assuring him that I was entirely well, as were all the members
of my immediate family .
“Oh, splendid, splendid,” he s aid, plumping down quite
suddenly upon a stool and giving me an enormous grin,
revealing tobacco-stained molars. His oversize wig had slid
round sideways, causing him to peer out from under it like a
dormouse under  a tea cozy , but h e seemed not to have noticed.
“Splendid, splendid, splendid.”
I too k his rather vague wave as invitation and sat down, as
well. I had brought a small pr esent in order to sweeten thegood doctor , and now removed this from my basket—though
in all truth, I rather thought he was so well-marinated as to
require little more attention before I broached the subject of
my errand.
He was , however , thrilled with my gift—a gouged-out
eyeball, which Y oung Ian had thoughtfully picked up for me
following a fight in Y anceyville, hastily preserved in spirits of
wine. Having heard something of Doctor Fentiman’ s tastes, I
thought he might appreciate it.  He did, and went on saying,
“Splendid!” at some length.
Eventually trailing of f, he blinked, held the jar up to the
light, and turned it round, viewing it with great admiration.
“Splendid,” he said once more. “It will have a most
particularly honorable place in my collection, I do assure you,
Mrs. Fraser!”
“Y ou have a collection?” I said,  af fecting great interest. I’d
heard about his collection.
“Oh, yes, oh, yes! W ould you care to see it?”
There was no p ossibility of refusal; he was already up and
staggering toward a door at the back of his study . This proved
to lead into a lar ge closet, the shelves of which held thirty or
forty glass containers, filled with alcoholic spirits—and a
number of objects which could indeed be described as
“interesting.”
These ranged from the merely grotesque to the truly
startling. One by one, he brought out a big toe sporting a wart
the size and colo r of an edible mushroom, a preserved tongue
which had been split—apparently during the owner ’ s lifetime,
as th e two halves were quite healed—a cat with six legs, a
grossly malformed brain (“Removed from a hanged
murderer ,” as he proudly inform ed me. “I shouldn’ t wonder ,” I
murmured in reply , thinking of Donner and wondering what
his  brain might look like), and several infants, presumably
stillborn, and exhibiting assorted atrocious deformities.“Now , this, ” he said, lifting  down a lar ge glass cylinder in
trembling hands, “is quite the p rize of my collection. There is
a m ost distinguished physician  in Germany , a Herr Doktor
Blumenbach, who has a world-renowned collection of skulls,
and he has been pursuing me—n ay , absolutely pestering  me, I
assure you!—in an ef fort to persuade me to part with it.”
“This” was the defleshed skulls and spinal column of a
double-headed infant. It was, in fact, fascinating. It was also
something that would cause any woman of childbearing age to
swear of f sex immediately .
Grisly a s the doctor ’ s collection  was, though, it of fered me
an excellent opportunity for approaching my true errand.
“That is  truly amazing,” I said, leaning forward as though to
examine the empty orbits of the floating skulls. They were
separate and complete, I saw; it was the spinal cord that had
divided, so that the skulls hung side by side in the fluid,
ghostly white and leaning toward each other so that the
rounded heads touched gently , as though sharing some secret,
only separating when a movement of the jar caused them
momentarily to  float apart. “I  wonder what causes such a
phenomenon?”
“Oh, doubtless some dreadful shock to the mother ,” Doctor
Fentiman assured me. “W omen in an expectant condition are
fearfully vulnera ble to any sort of excitement or distress, you
know . They must be kept quite sequestered and confined, well
away from any injurious influences.”
“I daresay ,” I murmured. “But you know , some
malformations—that one, for instance?—I believe are the
result of syphilis in the mother .”
It was; I recogn ized the typical malformed jaw , the narrow
skull, and the ca ved-in appearance of the nose. This child had
been pre served with flesh intact, and lay curled placidly in its
bottle. By the size and lack of hair , it had likely been
premature; I hoped for its own sake that it had not been born
alive.“Shiphi—syphilis,” the doctor repeated, swaying a little.
“Oh, ye s. Y es, yes. I got that particular little creature from a,
um …” It occur red to him belat edly that syphilis was perhaps
not a topic suita ble to discuss w ith a lady . Murderer ’ s brains
and two-headed children, yes, but not venereal disease. There
was a jar in the closet that I was reasonably sure contained the
scrotum of a Negro male who had suf fered from elephantiasis;
I noticed he hadn’ t shown me that  one.
“From a prostitute?” I inquired sympathetically . “Y es, I
suppose such misfortunes must be common among such
women.”
T o my annoyance, he slithered away from the desired topic.
“No, no. In fact —” He darted a look over his shoulder , as
though fearing to be overheard, then leaned near me and
whispered hoar sely , “I received that specimen from a
colleague in London, some years ago. It is reputed to be the
child of a foreign nobleman!”
“Oh, dear ,” I said, taken aback. “How … interesting.”
At this rather in convenient point, the servant came in with
tea—or rather , with a revolting concoction of roasted acorns
and chamomile,  stewed in water —and the conversation turned
ineluctably toward social trivia. I was afraid that the tea might
sober him up b efore I could inveigle him back in the right
direction, but luckily the tea tra y also included a decanter of
fine claret, which I dispensed liberally .
I h ad a f resh try at drawing him  back into medical subjects,
by leaning over to admire the jars left out on his desk. The one
nearest me contained the hand of a person who had had such
an advanced case of Dupuytren’ s contracture as to render the
appendage little more than a knot of constricted fingers. I
wished T om Christie could see it. He had avoided me since his
sur gery , but so far as I knew , his hand was still functional.
“Isn’ t it remarkable, the variety of conditions that the
human body displays?” I said.He shook his head. He had discovered the state of his wig
and turned it round; his wizened countenance beneath it
looked like that of a solemn chimpanzee—bar the flush of
broken capillaries that lit his nose like a beacon.
“Remarkable,” he echoed. “And yet, what is quite as
remarkable is the resilience a body may show in the face of
quite terrible injury .”
That was true, but it wasn’ t at a ll the line I wished to work
upon.
“Y es, quite. But—”
“I am  ve ry sorry  not to be able t o show you one specimen—
it would  have been a notable addition to my collection, I
assure you! But alas, the gent leman insisted upon taking it
with him.”
“He—what?” W ell, after all, I had in my time presented
various children  with their appendixes or tonsils in a bottle,
following sur gery . I supposed it wasn’ t entirely unreasonable
for someone to wish to retain an amputated limb.
“Y es, most astonishing.” He too k a meditative sip of claret.
“A testic le, it was—I trust you will pardon my mentioning it,”
he added  belatedly . He hesitated for an instant, but in the end,
simply couldn’ t resist descri bing the occurrence. “The
gentleman had suf fered a wound to the scrotum, a most
unfortunate accident.”
“Most,” I said, feeling a sudde n tingle at the base of my
spine. W as this Jocasta’ s mysterious visitor? I had been
keeping of f the claret, in the int erests of a clear head, but now
poured a tot, feeling it need ed. “Did he say how this
unfortunate incident transpired?”
“Oh, yes. A hunting accident, he said. But they all say that,
don’ t the y?” He  twinkled at me,  the end of his nose bright red.
“I expe ct it was a duello.  Th e work of a jealous rival,
perhaps!”
“Perhaps.” A duello ? I thought. But most duels of the time
were fought with pistols, not swords. It really was good claret,and I felt a little steadier . “Y ou—er—removed the testicle?”
He m ust have, if he had been c ontemplating adding it to his
ghastly collection.
“Y es,” he said, and was not too far gone to give a small
sympathetic shudder at the memory . “The gun-shot had been
seriously neglected; he said it had occurred some days
previous. I was obliged to remove the injured testicle, but
fortunately preserved the other .”
“I’m sur e he was pleased about that.” Gun-shot? Sur ely not,
I was thinking. It can’ t be  … and yet … “Did this happen quite
recently?”
“Mmm, no.” He tilted back in his chair , eyes crossing
slightly with the ef fort of reca ll. “It was in the spring, two
years ago—May? Perhaps May .”
“W as the gentleman named Bonnet, by chance?” I was
surprised that my voice sounded quite casual. “I believe I had
heard th at a Stephen Bonnet w as involved in some such …
accident.”
“W ell, y ou know , he would not give his name. Often
patients will not, if the injury is one that might cause public
embarrassment. I do not insist in such cases.”
“But you do rem ember him.” I found that I was sitting on
the edge  of my chair , claret cu p clenched in my fist. W ith a
little ef fort, I set it down.
“Mm-hmm.” Da mn, he was getting sleepy; I could see his
lids begin to droop. “A tall gentleman, well-dressed. He had a
… a most beautiful horse … .”
“A bit more tea , Doctor Fentiman?” I ur ged a fresh cup
upon him, willing him to stay a wake. “Do tell me more about
it. The sur gery must have been quite delicate?”
In fact, men never like to hear that the removal of testicles is
a simple matter , but it is. Though  I would admit that the fact of
the patient’ s being conscious during the whole procedure had
likely added to the dif ficulty .Fentiman regain ed a bit of his animation, telling me about
it.
“… and the ball had gone straight thr ough  the testicle; it had
left t he m ost per fect hole… . Y o u could look quite through it, I
assure you.” Plainly he regrett ed the loss of this interesting
specimen, and it was with some dif ficulty that I got him to tell
me what had become of the gentleman to whom it belonged.
“W ell, th at was odd. It was the  horse, you see …” he said
vaguely . “Lovel y animal … lo ng hair , like a woman’ s, so
unusual …”
A Friesi an horse. The doctor had recalled that the planter
Phillip W ylie was fond of such horses, and had said as much to
his patie nt, sugg esting that as the man had no money—and
would not be capable of riding comfortably for some time, in
any case —he might think of se lling his animal to W ylie. The
man had  agreed  to this, and had requested the doctor to make
inquiry of W ylie, who was in town for the Court Sessions.
Doctor Fentiman  had obligingly gone out to do so, leaving
his patient cozily tucked up on the chaise with a draught of
tincture of laudanum.
Phillip W ylie had professed himself most interested in the
horse (“Y es, I’ll wager he was, ” I said, but the doctor didn’ t
notice), and had hastened round to see it. The horse was
present, but the patient was not , having absconded on foot in
the doctor ’ s absence—taking with him half a dozen silver
spoons, an enameled snuf fbox, the bottle of laudanum, and six
shillings, which  happened to be all the money the doctor had
in the house.
“I cannot imagine how he mana ged it,” Fentiman said, eyes
quite round at the thought. “In such condition!” T o his credit,
he a ppeared more distressed a t the notion of his patient’ s
condition than his own loss. He was a terrible drunkard,
Fentiman, I thought; I’d never seen him completely sober—
but not a bad doctor .“Still,” he added philosophically , “all’ s well as ends well, is
it not, my dear lady?”
By which he m eant that Phillip W ylie had purchased the
horse fro m him for a price suf ficient to more than compensate
for his losses, and leave him with a tidy profit.
“Quite,” I said, wondering just how Jamie would take this
news. He had won the stallion— for it must of course be Lucas
—from Phillip W ylie in the course of an acrimonious card
game at River R un, only to have the horse stolen by Stephen
Bonnet a few hours later .
On t he whole, I  expected that Jamie would be pleased that
the s tallion was back in good hands, even if they weren’ t his.
As for the news  about Bonnet …  “A bad penny always turns
up,”  had been his cynical opinion, expressed when Bonnet’ s
body had failed to be discovered after Brianna had shot him.
Fentiman was openly yawning by now . He blinked, eyes
watering, patted about his person in search of a handkerchief,
then bent to rummage in his case, which he had dropped on the
floor near his chair .
I h ad pulled out  my own handk erchief and leaned across to
hand it to him, when I saw them in the open case.
“What are those?” I asked, poin ting. I could see what they
were, of course; what I wanted  to know was where he’d got
them. They were syringes, two of them, lovely little syringes,
made of brass. Each one was composed of two bits: a plunger
with curled handles, and a cylin drical barrel, drawn out at the
narrowed end into a very long, blunt-tipped needle.
“I—why—that is … ah …” H e was terribly taken aback,
and stammered like a schoolboy caught sneaking cigarettes
behind t he toile ts. Then something occurred to him, and he
relaxed.
“Ears,” he declared, in ringing tones. “For cleansing ears.
Y es, that is what they are, indubitably . Ear clysters!”
“Oh, are  they really?” I picked one up; he tried to stop me,
but his reflexes were delayed , and he succeeded only ingrabbing at the ruf fle of my sleeve.
“How ingenious ,” I said, working the plunger . It was a little
stif f, but not bad at all—particularly not when the alternative
was a makeshift hypodermic composed of a leather tube with a
rattlesnake’ s fan g attached. Of course a blunt tip wouldn’ t do,
but it would be  a simple matter to cut it to a sharp angle.
“Where did you get them? I sh ould like very much to order
one myself.”
He stared at me in abject horror , jaw agape.
“I—er—I really  do not think …” he protested feebly . Just
then, in a perfect miracle of  bad timing, his housemaid
appeared in the doorway .
“Mr . Brennan’ s come; it’ s his wife’ s time,” she said briefly .
“Oh!” Doctor Fentiman leapt to his feet, slammed shut his
case, and snatched it up.
“My apo logies, dear Mrs. Fraser … must go … matter of
great ur gency— so pleasant to have seen you!” He rushed out,
case clutched to his bosom, stepping on his hat in his haste.
The maid picked up the crush ed chapeau with an air of
resignation, and punched it indif ferently back into shape.
“W ill yo u be wanting to leave n ow , ma’am?” she inquired,
with an intonation making it cl ear that I ought to be leaving,
whether I wanted to or not.
“I will,”  I said, rising. “But tell me”—I held out the brass
syringe on the palm of my hand—”do you know what this is,
and where Doctor Fentiman got it?”
It was dif ficult to tell in which  direction she was looking,
but she bent her head as though  to examine it, with no more
interest than had it been a two-day old smelt of fered her for
sale in the market.
“Oh, tha t. A ye, ma’am, it’ s a penis syringe. I b’lieve he had
it sent him from Philadelphia.”
“A, um, penis syringe. I see,” I said, blinking a little.“Y es, ma’am. It’ s for treating o f the drip, or the clap. The
doctor d oes a deal of business f or the men what goes to Mrs.
Silvie’ s.”
I took a deep breath.
“Mrs. Silvie’ s. Ah. And would you know where Mrs.
Silvie’ s … establishment is?”
“Behind Silas Jameson’ s ordinary ,” she replied, giving me
for t he first time  a faintly curious look, as though wondering
what sor t of blockhead didn’ t know that . “W ill you be needing
anything else, ma’am?”
“Oh, no, ” I said. “That will do nicely , thank you!” I made to
hand he r back the penis syrin ge, but then was struck by
impulse. The doctor had two, after all.
“Give you a shilling for it,” I said, meeting the eye that
seemed most likely to be pointed in my direction.
“Done,” she said promptly . She  paused for a moment, then
added, “ If you’re going to use it on your man, best be sure he’ s
dead drunk first.”
MY PRIMAR Y MISSION was thus accomplished, but now I
had a new possibility to explore, before mounting an assault
on Mrs. Silvie’ s house of ill-repute.
I ha d planned to  visit a glassmaker and attempt to explain
by means of drawings how to make the barrel and plunger for
a hy podermic syringe, leaving up to Bree the problem of
making a hollow needle and attaching it. Unfortunately , while
the single glassblower operating in Cross Creek was capable
of produ cing any manner of eve ryday bottles, jugs, and cups, a
glance at his sto ck had made it obvious that my requirements
were well beyond his capabilities.
But now  I needn’ t worry about that! While metal syringes
lacked some desirable qualitie s of glass, they also had an
undeniable adva ntage, insofar as they wouldn’ t break—and
while a disposab le needle was n ice, I could simply sterilize the
entire item after each use.Doctor Fentiman’ s syringes had very thick, blunt-tipped
needle e nds. It would be necessary to heat them, and draw the
tips out much further in order to narrow them. But any idiot
with a for ge could do that, I thought. Then to cut the brass tip
at an angle and file the point smooth enough to puncture skin
cleanly … child’ s play , I thought blithely , and narrowly
refrained from skipping down the sandy walk. Now , all I
required was a good stock of cinchona bark.
My hopes of obtaining the bark were dashed, though, as
soon as  I turned into the main street and glimpsed Mr .
Bogues’ s apothecary’ s shop. The door stood open, letting in
flies, an d the usually immaculat e stoop was marred with such
a mu ltitude of m uddy footprints as to suggest that some hostile
army had descended upon the shop.
The impression of sacking and looting was furthered by the
scene in side; m ost of the shelv es were empty , scattered with
remnants of dried leaf and broken pottery . The Bogueses’ ten-
year -old daughter , Miranda, st ood mournful watch over a
small collection of jars and bottles and an empty tortoiseshell.
“Miranda!” I said. “Whatever has happened?”
She brightened at sight of me, small pink mouth
momentarily reversing its downward droop.
“Mrs. Fraser! D’you want some horehound? W e’ve nearly a
pound of that left—and it’ s ch eap, only three farthings the
ounce.”
“I’ll have an ou nce,” I said, though in fact I had plenty
growing in my own garden. “Where are your parents?”
The mouth went down again, and the lower lip quivered.
“Mama’ s in the back, packing. A nd Papa’ s gone to sell Jack
to Mr . Raintree.”
Jack was the apothecary’ s wagon horse, and Miranda’ s
particular pet. I bit the inside of my lip.
“Mr . Raintree’ s a very kind ma n,” I said, striving for what
comfort there might be. “And he has a nice pasture for hishorses, a nd a warm stable; I thi nk Jack might be happy there.
He’ll have friends.”
She nod ded, mo uth pinched tight, but two fat tears escaped
to roll down her cheeks.
W ith a quick gl ance behind me, to assure that no one was
coming in, I stepped round the counter , sat down on an
upturned keg, and drew her onto my lap, where she melted at
once, cl inging to me and crying, though making an obvious
ef fort not to be heard in the living quarters behind the shop.
I patted her and made small soothing noises, feeling an
unease beyond mere sympathy for the girl. Clearly the
Bogueses were selling up. Why?
So infre quently as I came down  the mountain, I had no idea
what Ralston Bogues’ s politics might be these days. Not being
Scottish, he hadn’ t come to the barbecue in Flora
MacDonald’ s honor . The shop had always been prosperous,
though, and the family decently of f, judging by the children’ s
clothes—Miranda and her two little brothers always had shoes.
The Bog ueses h ad lived here all  of Miranda’ s life, at least, and
likely longer . For them to be leaving in this manner meant that
something serious had happened—or was about to.
“Do you  know where you’re going?” I asked Miranda, who
was now  sitting on my knee, snif fing and wiping her face on
my apro n. “Perh aps Mr . Raintree can write to you, to tell you
how Jack is faring.”
She looked a little more hopeful at that.
“Can he send a letter to England, do you think? It’ s a
terrible long way .”
England? It was  serious.
“Oh, I should th ink so,” I said, tucking wisps of hair back
under her cap. “ Mr . Fraser writes a letter every night, to his
sister in Scotland—and that’ s much further away even than
England!”“Oh. W ell.” Looking happier , sh e scrambled of f my lap and
smoothed down her dress. “Can I write to Jack, do you think?”
“I’m sur e Mr . Raintree will read the letter to him if you do,”
I assured her . “Can you write well, then?”
“Oh, yes , ma’am,” she said earn estly . “Papa says I read and
write better than he ever did w hen he was my age. And  in
Latin. He taught me to read all the names of the simples, so I
could fetch him what he wanted —see that one?” She pointed
with some pride to a lar ge chi na apothecary’ s jar , elegantly
decorated with blue and gold scrolls. “ Electuary Limonensis.
And that one is Ipecacuanha !”
I admire d her prowess, thinking  that at least I now knew her
father ’ s politics.  The Bogueses m ust be Loyalists, if they were
returning to England. I would be sorry to see them go, but
knowing what I knew of the immediate future, I was glad that
they would be s afe. At least Ralston would likely have got a
decent p rice for his shop; a short time hence, Loyalists would
have their property confiscated,  and be lucky to escape arrest
—or worse.
“Randy? Have you seen Geor gie’ s shoe? I’ve found one
under th e chest,  but—oh, Mrs. F raser! Y our pardon, ma’am, I
didn’ t know anyone was here.” Melanie Bogues’ s sharp glance
took in my position behind the counter , her daughter ’ s pink-
rimmed eyes, and the damp spo ts on my apron, but she said
nothing, merely patting Miranda’ s shoulder as she passed.
“Miranda tells me you’re leaving for England,” I said, rising
and moving unobtrusively out from behind the counter . “W e’ll
be sorry to see you go.”
“That’ s kind of you, Mrs. Fraser .” She smiled unhappily .
“W e’re sorry to go, as well. And I’m not looking forward to
the voyage, I c an tell you!” She spoke with the heartfelt
emotion of someone who had m ade such a voyage before and
would strongly prefer to be boiled alive before doing it again.
I sympathized very much, having done it myself. Doing it
with thr ee children, two of th em boys under five … theimagination boggled.
I w anted  to ask her what had caused them to make such a
drastic decision,  but couldn’ t think how to broach the matter in
front of Miranda. Something had happened; that was clear .
Melanie was jumpy as a rabbit, and somewhat more harried
than even packing up a household containing three children
might ac count for . She kept darting glances over her shoulder ,
as though fearing something sneaking up on her .
“Is Mr . Bogues—” I began, but was interrupted by a shadow
falling across the stoop. Melanie  started, hand to her chest, and
I whirled round to see who had come.
The doo rway w as filled by a short, stocky woman, dressed
in a very odd combination of garments. For an instant, I
thought she was an Indian, for she wore no cap, and her dark
hair was braided—but then she came into the shop, and I saw
that she was wh ite. Or rather , pi nk; her heavy face was flushed
with sunburn and the tip of her pug nose was bright red.
“Which one of you is Claire Fraser?” she demanded,
looking from me to Melanie Bogues.
“I am,” I said, repressing an instinctive ur ge to take a step
backward. Her manner wasn’ t threatening, but she radiated
such an air o f physical power that I found her rather
intimidating. “W ho are you?” I spoke from astonishment,
rather than rudeness, and she did not seem of fended.
“Jezebel Hatfield Morton,” she said, squinting intently at
me. “So me geezer at the docks tellt me that you was headin’
here.” In marked contrast to Melanie Bogue’ s soft English
accent, she had the rough speech I associated with people who
had bee n in the backcountry for three or four generations,
speaking to no one in the mean time save raccoons, possums,
and one another .
“Er … yes,” I said, seeing no point in denying it. “Did you
need help of some kind?”
She didn ’ t look it; had she been any healthier , she would
have bu rst the seams of the man’ s shirt she was wearing.Melanie and Miranda were staring at her , wide-eyed.
Whatever dange r Melanie had been afraid of, it wasn’ t Miss
Morton.
“Not to say hel p,” she said, mo ving further into the shop.
She tilted her head to one side, examining me with what
looked like fascination. “I was thinkin’ you might know
where’bouts that skunk Isaiah Morton be, though.”
My mouth dropped open, and I shut it quickly . Not Miss
Morton, then— Mrs.  Morton. The first  Mrs. Isaiah Morton, that
is. Isaiah Morton had fought wi th Jamie’ s militia company in
the W ar of the Regulation, and he had mentioned his first wife
—breaking out in a cold sweat as he did so.
“I … ah … beli eve he’ s working somewhere upcountry ,” I
said. “Guilford? Or was it Paleyville?”
Actually , it was Hillsboro, but that scarcely mattered, since
at the moment, he wasn’ t in  Hil lsboro. He was, in fact, in
Cross Creek, come to take delivery of a shipment of barrels for
his employer , a brewster . I’d seen him at the cooper ’ s shop
barely an hour earlier , in company with the second  Mrs.
Morton and their infant daughter . Jezebel Hatfield Morton did
not look like the sort of person to be civilized about such
things.
She made a low noise in her throat, indicative of disgust.
“He’ s a dang slippery little weasel. But I’ll kotch up to him
yet, don ’ t you trouble none ab out that.” She spoke with a
casual assurance that boded ill for Isaiah.
I though t silence was the wiser course, but couldn’ t stop
myself asking, “Why do you want him?” Isaiah possessed a
certain u ncouth amiability , but viewed objectively , he scarcely
seemed the sort to inflame one woman, let alone two.
“W ant him?” She looked amused at the thought, and rubbed
a solid fist under her reddened nose. “I don’ t want him. But
ain’ t no man ru ns out on me  for some whey-faced trollop.
Once I kotch up to him, I mean  to stave his head in and nail
his fly-bit hide to my door .”Spoken by another person, this statement might have passed
for rhetoric. As spoken by the lady in question, it was an
unequivocal declaration of intent. Miranda’ s eyes were round
as a frog’ s, and her mother ’ s nearly so.
Jezebel H. Morton squinted  at me, and scratched
thoughtfully beneath one massive breast, leaving the fabric of
her shirt pasted damply to her flesh.
“I heerd tell as how you saved t he little toad-sucker ’ s life at
Alamance. That true?”
“Er … yes.” I e yed her warily , watching for any of fensive
movement. She was blocking the door; if she made for me, I
would dive across the counter a nd dash through the door into
the Bogueses’ living quarters.
She was wearing a lar ge pig-sti cker of a knife, unsheathed.
This was thrust through a knotted wampum belt that was doing
double d uty , holding up a kilted mass of what I thought might
originally have been red flanne l petticoats, hacked of f at the
knee. Her very solid legs were bare, as were her feet. She had
a pistol and po wder horn slung from the belt, as well, but
made no move to reach for any of her weapons, thank God.
“T oo ba d,” she said dispassionately . “But then, if he’d died,
I’d n ot have the fun of killin’ him, so I s’pose it’ s as well.
Don’ t worry me none; if ’n I don’ t find him, one of my
brothers will.”
Business appar ently disposed of for the moment, she
relaxed a bit, and looked around , noticing for the first time the
empty shelves.
“What-all’ s goin’ on here?”  she demanded, looking
interested.
“W e’re s elling up,” Melanie murmured, attempting to shove
Miranda safely behind her . “Going to England.”
“That s o?” Jezebel looked mildly interested. “What
happened? They kill your man? Or tar and feather him?”
Melanie went white.“No,” she whispered. Her throat moved as she swallowed,
and her frighten ed gaze went toward the door . So that was the
threat. I felt suddenly cold, in spite of the sweltering heat.
“Oh? W ell, if you care whether they do, maybe you best
move on down to Center Street,” she suggested helpfully .
“They’re fixin’ to make roast chicken out of somebody ,  sure as
God ma de little green apples. Y ou can smell hot tar all over
town, a nd they’ s a boiling of folks comin’ forth from the
taverns.”
Melanie and Miranda uttered twin shrieks, and ran for the
door , shoving past the unflappable Jezebel. I was moving
rapidly in the same direction, and narrowly avoided a
collision, as Ralston Bogues ste pped through the door , just in
time to catch his hysterical wife.
“Randy , you go mind your brothers,” he said calmly . “Be
still, Mellie, it’ s all right.”
“T ar ,” she panted, clutching him. “She said—she said—”
“Not me,” he said, and I saw that his hair dripped and his
face shone pale through its swe at. “They’re not after me. Not
yet. It’ s the printer .”
Gently , he disengaged his wife’ s hands from his arm, and
stepped round the counter , casting a brief glance of curiosity at
Jezebel.
“T ake the children, go to Fer gus on’ s,” he said, and pulled a
fowling piece from its hiding p lace beneath the counter . “I’ll
come so  soon as I may .” He reached into a drawer for the
powder horn and cartridge box.
“Ralston!” Mel anie spoke in a whisper , glancing after
Miranda’ s retreating back, but the entreaty was no less ur gent
for its lack of volume. “Where are you going?”
One side of his mouth twitched, but he didn’ t reply .
“Go to Fer guson ’ s,” he repeated, eyes fixed on the cartridge
in his hand.“No! No , don’ t go! Come wit h us, come with me!” She
seized his arm, frantic.
He s hook her of f, and went doggedly about the business of
loading the gun.
“Go, Mellie.”
“I will not!” U r gent, she turned to me. “Mrs. Fraser , tell
him! Ple ase, tell him it’ s a waste—a terrible waste! He mustn’ t
go.”
I opened  my mouth, unsure wh at to say to either of them,
but had no chance to decide.
“I d on’ t imagine Mistress Fra ser will think it a waste,
Mellie,” Ralston Bogues said, eyes still on his hands. He slung
the s trap of the cartridge box over his shoulder and cocked the
gun. “Her husband is holding them of f right now—by
himself.”
He looked up at me then, nodded once, and was gone.
JEZEBEL W AS RIGHT : you could  smell tar all over town.
This wa s by no means unusual in the summertime, especially
near the warehouse docks, but the hot thick reek now took on
an atmo sphere of threat, burning in my nostrils. T ar—and fear
—aside, I was gasping from the  ef fort to keep up with Ralston
Bogues, who was not precisely  running, but was moving as
fast as it was possible to go without breaking into a lope.
Jezebel had been right about the people boiling out of
taverns, too; the corner of Center Street was choked with an
excited crowd. Mostly men, I s aw , though there were a few
women of the coarser type amo ng them, fishwives and bond
servants.
The apo thecary hesitated when he saw them. A few faces
turned toward him; one or tw o plucked at their neighbors’
sleeves, pointing—and with no t very friendly expressions on
their faces.“Get away , Bogues!” one man yelled. “It’ s not your
business—not yet!”
Another stooped, picked up a sto ne, and hurled it. It clacked
harmlessly on the wooden walk , a few feet short of Bogues,
but it drew more attention. Bits of the crowd were beginning
to turn, sur ging slowly in our direction.
“Papa!” said a sm all, breathless voice behind me. I turned to
see Mira nda, cap lost and pigtails unraveling down her back,
her face the color of beetroot from running.
There w asn’ t time to think about it. I picked her up and
swung her of f her feet, toward her father . T aken of f guard, he
dropped the gun and caught her under the arms.
A man lunged fo rward, reaching  for the gun, but I swooped
down an d got it first. I backed away from him, clutching it to
my chest, daring him with my eyes.
I did n’ t know him, but he knew me; his eyes flicked over
me, hesitating, then he glanced b ack over his shoulder . I could
hear Jamie’ s voice, and a lot of others, all trying to shout each
other do wn. The breath was s till whistling in my chest; I
couldn’ t make out any words. The tone of it was ar gument,
though; confron tation, not bloodshed. The man wavered,
glanced at me, away—then turned and shoved his way back
into the gathering crowd.
Bogues had had the sense to kee p hold of his daughter , who
had her arms w rapped tightly round his neck, face buried in
his s hirt. He dar ted his eyes at me, and made a small gesture,
as thoug h to take back the gun . I shook my head and held it
tighter . The stock was warm and slick in my hands.
“T ake Miranda home,” I said. “I’ll—do something.”
It was loaded a nd primed. One shot. The best I could do
with that was to create a momentary distraction—but that
might  help.
I pushed my w ay through the crowd, the gun pointed
carefully down not to spill th e powder , half-hidden in my
skirts. The smell of tar was suddenly much stronger . Acauldron of the stuf f lay overtu rned in front of the printer ’ s
shop, a black sticky puddle smoking and reeking in the sun.
Glowing embers and blackene d chunks of charcoal were
scattered across the street, under everyone’ s feet; a solid
citizen w hom I recognized as Mr . T ownsend was kicking the
bejesus out of a hastily built fire, thwarting the attempts of a
couple of young men to rebuild it.
I l ooked for Jam ie and found him precisely where Ralston
Bogues had said he was—in front of the door to the printer ’ s
shop, clutching a tar -smeared broom and with the light of
battle in his eye.
“That yo ur man?” Jezebel Morton had caught up, and was
peering interestedly over my shoulder . “Big ‘un, ain’ t he?”
T ar was spattere d all over the front of the shop—and Jamie.
A lar ge glob was stuck in his ha ir , and I could see the flesh of
his arm reddene d where a long  string of hot tar had struck.
Despite this, he was grinning. T wo more tar -daubed brooms
lay on the ground nearby , one broken—almost certainly over
someone’ s head. At least for the moment, he was having fun.
I didn’ t at once  see the printe r , Fogarty Simms. Then a
frightened face showed briefly at the window , but ducked out
of s ight as a rock flung from the crowd crashed into the
window frame, cracking the glass.
“Come out, Simms, you slinkin’ coward!” bellowed a man
nearby . “Or shall we smoke you out?”
“Smoke him! Smoke him!” Ent husiastic shouts came from
the crow d, and a young man near me bent, scrabbling after a
burning brand scattered from the fire. I stamped viciously on
his hand as he grasped it.
“Jesus God !” He let go and fell to his knees, clutching his
hand between his thighs, open-mouthed and gasping with pain.
“Oh, oh, Jesus!”
I edg ed away , shouldering my w ay through the press. Could
I get  nea r enoug h to give Jamie  the gun? Or would that make
matters worse?“Get aw ay from the door , Fraser! W e’ve no quarrel with
you!”
I recognized that cultivated voice; it was Neil Forbes, the
lawyer . He wasn’ t dressed in h is usual natty suiting, though;
he w ore rough h omespun. So it wasn’ t an impromptu attack—
he’d come prepared for dirty work.
“Hey! Y ou spea k for yourself, Forbes! I’ve  a quarrel with
him!” That was a burly man in a butcher ’ s apron, red-faced
and indignant, sporting a swollen and empurpled eye. “Look
what he did to me!” He waved a  meaty hand at the eye, then at
the front of his clothing, where a tar -clotted broom had quite
evidently caught him square in the chest. He shook a massive
fist at Jamie. “Y ou’ll pay for this, Fraser!”
“A ye, b ut I’ll pay ye in the s ame coin, Buchan!” Jamie
feinted, broom held like a lance . Buchan yelped and skittered
backward, face comically alarmed, and the crowd burst into
laughter .
“Come b ack, ma n! Y e want to play savage, ye’ll need a bit
more paint!” Buchan had turne d to flee, but was blocked by
the c rowd. Jamie lunged with the broom, smudging him neatly
on th e s eat of his breeches. Buchan leaped in panic at the jab,
causing more laughter and hoots of derision as he shoved and
stumbled out of range.
“The re st of ye want to play savage, too, do ye?” Jamie
shouted. He swiped his broom through the steaming puddle
and swu ng it hard in a wide arc before him. Droplets of hot tar
flew thr ough the  air , and men yelled and pushed to get out of
the way , stepping on each oth er and knocking each other
down.
I wa s shoved to one side and fetched up hard against a
barrel s tanding in the street. I  would have fallen, save for
Jezebel, who caught me by the arm and hauled me up, with no
apparent ef fort.
“Y on feller ’ s right rumbustious ,” she said with approval,
eyes fixed on Jamie. “I could admire me a man like that!”“Y es,” I said, nursing a bru ised elbow . “So could I.
Sometimes.”
Such sentiments appeared not to be universal.
“Give him up, F raser , or wear feathers with him! Frigging
T ories!”
The shout came from behind me, and I turned to see that the
speaker had come prepared; he  clutched a feather pillow in
one hand, the end of it already ripped open, so that down
feathers flew in spurts with each gesture.
“T ar and feather ‘em all!”
I t urned again a t the shout fro m above, and looked up in
time to see a yo ung man fling wide the shutters in the upper
story of the hous e on the other side of the street. He was trying
to stuf f a feath er bed through the window but was being
substantially impeded in this endeavor by the housewife
whose property it was. This lady had leaped on his back and
was beating him about the head with a spurtle, uttering shrieks
of condemnation.
A young man near me started clucking like a chicken,
flapping his elbows—to the intense amusement of his friends,
who all began to do it, too, drowning out any attempts at
reason—not that there was much of that.
A chant started up at the far side of the street.
“T ory , T ory , T ory!”
The tenor of th e situation was changing, and not for the
better . I half-lifted the fowling piece, unsure what to do, but
knowing that I must do something.  Another moment, and
they’d rush him.
“Give me the gu n, Auntie,” said a soft voice at my shoulder ,
and I whirled ro und to find Y oung Ian there, breathing hard. I
gave it to him without the slightest hesitation.
“Reste d’r etour!”  Jamie shouted in French. “ Oui, le tout!
Stay back, all o f you!” He mig ht have been shouting at the
crowd, but he was looking at Ian.What the devil did he—then I caught sight of Fer gus,
elbowing viciou sly to keep his place near the front of the
crowd. Y oung Ian, who had b een about to raise the gun,
hesitated, holding it close.
“He’ s right, stay back!” I said ur gently . “Don’ t fire, not yet.”
I saw now that a hasty shot might do more harm than good.
Look at Bobby Higgins and the Boston Massacre. I didn’ t
want any massacres taking place in Cross Creek—particularly
not with Jamie at the center of them.
“I w on’ t—but I’m no going to  let them take him, either ,”
Ian m uttered. “If they go for him —” He broke of f, but his jaw
was set,  and I c ould smell the sharp scent of his sweat, even
above the reek of tar .
A m omentary distraction had intervened, thank God. Y ells
from above made half the c rowd turn to see what was
happening.
Another man—evidently the householder—had popped up
in th e window a bove, jerking the first man back and punching
him. Then the struggling pair disappeared from view , and
within a few sec onds, the sounds of altercation ceased and the
woman’ s shrieks  died away , leav ing the feather bed hanging in
limp anticlimax, half in and half out of the window .
The chant of “T ory T ory T ory!” had died out during the
fascination with the conflict overhead, but was now starting up
again, p unctuated by bellows for the printer to come out and
give himself up.
“Come out, Simms!” Forbes b ellowed. I saw that he had
equipped himself with a fresh br oom, and was edging closer to
the p rint shop’ s door . Jamie saw him, too, and I saw his mouth
twist with derision.
Silas Jam eson, the proprietor of a local ordinary , was behind
Forbes, crouche d like a wrestler , his broad face wreathed in a
vicious grin.
“Come o ut, Sim ms!” he echoed. “What kind of man takes
shelter beneath a Scotsman’ s skirts, eh?”Jameson’ s voice was loud enough that everyone heard that,
and most laughed—including Jamie.
“A wise  one!” Jamie shouted back, and shook the end of his
plaid at Jameson. “This tartan’ s  sheltered many a poor lad in
its time!”
“And many a lassie, too, I’ll wager!” shouted some ribald
soul in the crowd.
“What, d’ye think I’ve your wife under my plaid?” Jamie
was bre athing hard, shirt and h air pasted to him with sweat,
but still grinning  as he seized the hem of his kilt. “Y e want to
come and have a look for her , then?”
“Is there room u nder there for me, too?” called one of the
fishwives promptly .
Laughter rolled through the crow d. Fickle as any mob, their
mood was changing back from t hreat to entertainment. I took a
deep, trembling breath, feeling sweat roll down between my
breasts. He was managing them, but he was walking a razor ’ s
edge.
If he’d made up his mind to protect Simms—and he had—
then no power on earth would m ake him give the printer up. If
the mob wanted Simms—and they did—they’d have to go
through Jamie. And they would,  I thought, any minute.
“Come out, Simms!” yelled a voice from the Scottish
Lowlands. “Y e canny be hidin’ up Fraser ’ s backside all day!”
“Better a printer up my arse than a lawyer!” Jamie shouted
back, waving his broom at Forbes in illustration. “They’re
smaller , aye?”
That made them roar; Forbes w as a beefily substantial sort,
while Fogarty Simms was a p inched starveling of a man.
Forbes w ent ver y red in the face, and I saw sly looks being
cast in his direc tion. Forbes was in his forties, never married,
and there was talk …
“I w ouldna have a lawyer up my  backside at all,” Jamie was
shouting happily , poking at Forbes with his broom. “He’d stealyour shite and char ge ye for a clyster!”
Forbes’ s mouth opened, and his face went purple. He
backed up a step, and seemed to be shouting back, but no one
could hear his response, drowned as it was by the roar of
laughter from the crowd.
“And then he’d sell it back to ye for night soil!” Jamie
bellowed, the instant he could be heard. Neatly reversing his
broom, he jabbed Forbes in the belly with the handle.
The cro wd whooped in glee, and Forbes, no kind of a
fighter , lost his head and char ge d Jamie, his own broom held
like a shovel. Ja mie, who had quite obviously been waiting for
some such injudicious move, stepped aside like a dancer ,
tripped Forbes, and smacked him  across the shoulders with the
tar -smeared broom, sending him sprawling into the cooling tar
puddle, to the raucous delight of the whole street.
“Here, Auntie, hold this!” The fowling piece was thrust
suddenly back into my hands.
“What?” Completely taken aback, I whirled round to see Ian
moving fast behind the crowd, beckoning to Fer gus. In
seconds, unnoticed by the crowd—whose attention was riveted
on the fallen Fo rbes—they had reached the house where the
feather bed hung from the window .
Ian stooped and cupped his hands; as though they had
rehearsed it for years, Fer gus stepped into this improvised
stirrup and launched himself upward, swiping at the feather
bed with his h ook. It caught; he dangled for a moment,
grabbing frantic ally with his sound hand at the hook, to keep it
from coming of f.
Ian sprang upward and seized Fer gus round the waist,
yanking downward. Then the fabric of the bed gave way under
their combined weight, Fer gus and Ian tumbled to the ground,
and a perfect ca scade of goose feathers poured out on top of
them, on ly to be caught at onc e by the thick, damp air and
whirled up into a delirious snow storm that filled the street and
plastered the surprised mob with clumps of sticky down.The air seemed filled with feathers; they were everywhere,
tickling eyes and nose and thro at, sticking to hair and clothes
and lash es. I wiped a bit of down from a watering eye and
stepped hastily  back, away from the half-blind people
staggering near me, yelling and bumping into one another .
I ha d been watching Fer gus and Ian, but when the
featherstorm str uck, I—unlike everyone else in the street—
looked back at the print shop, in time to see Jamie reach
through the door , seize Fogarty Simms by the arm, and snatch
him out of the shop like a winkle on a pin.
Jamie g ave Simms a shove that sent him staggering, then
whirled back to snatch up his broom and cover the printer ’ s
escape. Ralston Bogues, who ha d been lurking in the shadow
of a tree, popped out, a club in his hand, and ran after Simms
to p rotect him, glancing back and brandishing the club to
discourage pursuers.
This act ion had not gone totally unnoticed; though most of
the men were distracted, batting and clawing at the
bewildering clou d of feathers that surrounded them, a few had
seen wh at was going on, and raised a halloo, yelping like
hounds as they tried to push through the crowd in pursuit of
the fleeing printer .
If ev er there wa s a moment … I’d shoot above their heads
and they’d duck, giving Simms  time to get away . I raised the
gun with decision, reaching for the trigger .
The fowling piece was snatched from my grasp so deftly
that I didn’ t realize for an instant that it was gone, but stood
staring i n disbelief at my empt y hands. Then a bellow came
from be hind me, loud enough to stun everyone nearby into
silence.
“Isaiah Morton! Y ou gonna die,  boy!”
The fowling piece went of f by  my ear with a deafening
bwoom!  and  a cloud of soot that blinded me. Choking and
coughing, I scrubbed at my fa ce with my apron, recovering
sight in time to see the short, pudgy figure of Isaiah Morton ablock a way , running as fast a s his legs would carry him.
Jezebel Hatfield  Morton was aft er him in an instant, ruthlessly
flattening anyone in her way . She leapt nimbly over a
besmeared and befeathered Forb es, who was still on his hands
and knees, looking dazed, then pushed through the remnants of
the mob  and hared down the street, short flannel petticoats
flying, m oving a t a surprising ra te of speed for someone of her
build. Morton careened round a corner and disappeared,
implacable Fury close on his tail.
I fel t a trifle daz ed myself. My ears were still ringing, but I
looked up at a touch on my arm.
Jamie was squinting down at m e, one eye closed, as though
unsure he was seeing what he thought he was seeing. He was
saying s omething I couldn’ t make out, but the gestures he was
making toward my face—coupled with a telltale twitching of
the corner of his mouth—made his probable meaning quite
clear .
“Ha,” I said col dly , my own vo ice sounding tinny and far
of f. I swiped at  my face again with the apron. “ Y ou  should
talk!”
He l ooked like a  piebald snowman, with black splotches of
tar on his shirt, and clumps of white goose down clinging to
his brows, his hair , and the stubble of his beard. He said
something else, but I couldn’ t hear him clearly . I shook my
head and twisted a finger in my ear , indicating temporary
deafness.
He smiled, took me by the shoulders, and leaned his head
forward until his forehead met mine with a small thunk!  I
could feel him trembling slight ly , but wasn’ t sure whether it
was laughter or exhaustion. Then he straightened up, kissed
my forehead, and took me by the arm.
Neil Forbes sat in the middle of the street, legs splayed and
careful hair disheveled. He w as black with tar from the
shoulder to the k nee on one side . He’d lost a shoe, and helpful
parties were trying to pick the feathers of f him. Jamie led me
in a wide circle round him, nodding pleasantly as we passed.Forbes looked up, glowering, and said something muf fled,
heavy face twisting in dislike. O n the whole, I thought it was
just as well I couldn’ t hear him.
IAN AND FERGUS HAD gone of f with the majority of the
rioters, no doubt to commit ma yhem elsewhere. Jamie and I
retired to the S ycamore, an inn on River Street, to seek
refreshment and make repairs. Jamie’ s hilarity gradually
subsided as I picked tar and  feathers of f him, but was
significantly quenched by hearing an account of my visit to Dr .
Fentiman.
“Y e do what  with it?” Jamie had flinched slightly during my
recounting of the tale of Stephen Bonnet’ s testicle. When I
reached a description of the penis syringes, he crossed his legs
involuntarily .
“W ell, y ou work the needlelike bit down in, of course, and
then flush a solution of something like mercuric chloride
through the urethra, I suppose.”
“Through the, er …”
“Do you  want me to show you?” I inquired. “I left my
basket at the Bogueses’, but I can get it, and—”
“No.” He leaned forward and p lanted his elbows firmly on
his knees. “D’ye suppose it burns much?”
“I can’ t think it’ s at all pleasant.”
He shuddered briefly .
“No, I shouldna think so.”
“I don’ t think it’ s really ef fective, either ,” I added
thoughtfully . “P ity to go throug h something like that, and not
be cured. Don’ t you think?”
He w as watching me with the apprehensive air of a man
who has just realized that the suspicious-looking parcel sitting
next to him is ticking.
“What—” he began, and I hurried to finish.“So you won’ t mind going round to Mrs. Sylvie’ s and
making the arrangements for me to treat the girls, will you?”
“Who is Mrs. Sylvie?” he asked suspiciously .
“The owner of the local broth el,” I said, taking a deep
breath. “Dr . Fentiman’ s maid told me about her . Now , I realize
that ther e might  be more than one brothel in town, but I think
that Mrs. Sylvie must certainly know the competition, if there
is any , so she can tell you—”
Jamie drew a h and down over his face, pulling down his
lower eyelids so that the bloodshot appearance of his eyes was
particularly emphasized.
“A brothel,” he repeated. “Y e want me to go to a brothel.”
“W ell, I ’ll go with you if you like, of course,” I said.
“Though I think you might m anage better alone. I’d do it
myself,” I added, with some as perity , “but I think they might
not pay any attention to me.”
He c losed one eye, regarding m e through the other , which
looked as though it had been sandpapered.
“Oh, I rather think they would,” he said. “So this is what ye
had in mind when ye insisted o n coming to town with me, is
it?” He sounded a trifle bitter .
“W ell … yes,” I admitted. “ Though I really did need
cinchona bark. Besides,” I adde d logically , “if I hadn’ t come,
you wou ldn’ t have found out ab out Bonnet. Or Lucas, for that
matter .”
He said something in Gaelic, wh ich I interpreted roughly as
an indication that he could have lived quite happily in
ignorance of either party .
“Besides, you’r e quite accustomed to brothels,” I pointed
out. “Y ou had a room in one, in Edinbur gh!”
“A ye, I did,” he agreed. “But I wasna marrit, then—or rather
I was, but I—ay e, well, I mean it quite suited me, at the time,
to have folk think that I—” He  broke of f and looked at mepleadingly . “Sas senach, d’ye honestly want everyone in Cross
Creek to think that I—”
“W ell, they won’ t think that if I go with you, will they?”
“Oh, God.”
At t his point, he dropped his  head into his hands and
massaged his scalp vigorou sly , presumably under the
impression that this would help him figure out some means of
thwarting me.
“Where is your sense of compassion for your fellow man?”
I demanded. “Y ou wouldn’ t want some hapless fellow to be
facing a session with Dr . Fentim an’ s syringe, just because you
—”
“As long as I’m  no required to face it myself,” he assured
me, raisi ng his head, “my fellow man is welcome to the wages
of sin, and serve him just right, too.”
“W ell, I’m rather inclined to agree,” I admitted. “But it isn’ t
only them. It’ s the women. Not just the whores; what about all
the wives— and  th e children—of the men who get infected?
Y ou can’ t let all of them die of the pox, if they can be saved,
surely?”
He had by this t ime assumed the aspect of a hunted animal,
and this line of reasoning did not improve it.
“But—the penic illin doesna always work,” he pointed out.
“What if it doesna work on the whores?”
“It’ s a possibi lity ,” I admitted. “But between trying
something that might not wor k—and not trying at all …”
Seeing h im still looking squiggle-eyed, I dropped the appeal to
reason and resorted to my best weapon.
“What about Y oung Ian?”
“What a bout him?” he replied warily , but I could see that
my words had caused an insta nt vision to spring up in his
mind. Ian was not a stranger to brothels—thanks to Jamie,
inadvertent and involuntary as the introduction had been.“He’ s a good lad, Ian,” he said, stoutly . “He wouldna …”
“He might,” I said. “And you know it.”
I had  no  idea of the shape of Y oung Ian’ s private life—if he
had one . But he was twenty-on e, unattached, and so far as I
could se e, a completely healthy young male of the species.
Hence …
I could see Jamie coming reluctantly to the same
conclusions. He had been a vir g in when I married him, at the
age of twenty-three. Y oung Ian, owing to factors beyond
everyone’ s control, had been introduced to the ways of the
flesh at a substantially earlier age. And that particular
innocence could not be regained.
“Mmphm,” he said.
He picke d up the towel, rubbed  his hair ferociously with it,
then flung it as ide, and gathered back the thick, damp tail,
reaching for a thong to bind it.
“If i t were done  when ‘tis done, ‘twere well it were done
quickly ,” I said, watching wit h approval. “I think I’d best
come, too, though. Let me fetch my box.”
He made no response to this, merely setting grimly about
the task of maki ng himself presentable. Luckily he hadn’ t been
wearing his coat or waistcoat during the contretemps in the
street, s o was able to cover th e worst of the damage to his
shirt.
“Sassenach,” he said, and I turn ed to find him regarding me
with a bloodshot glint.
“Y es?”
“Y e’ll pay for this.”
MRS. SYL VIE’S EST ABLISHMENT was a perfectly
ordinary-looking two-storied house, small and rather shabby .
Its s hingles were curling up at the ends, giving it a slight air of
disheveled surprise, like a woman taken unawares with her
hair just out of rollers.Jamie made disapproving Scottish noises in his throat at
sight of the sagg ing stoop and o ver grown yard, but I assumed
that this was merely his way of covering discomfiture.
I was not quite sure what I had been expecting Mrs. Sylvie
to b e—the only madam of my acquaintance having been a
rather el egant French emigre in Edinbur gh—but the proprietor
of C ross Creek’ s most popular bawdy house was a woman of
about twenty-fi ve, with a face as plain as piecrust, and
extremely prominent ears.
In fa ct, I had momentarily assumed her to be the maid, and
only Jamie’ s greeting her politely as “Mrs. Sylvie” informed
me that the ma dam herself had answered the door . I gave
Jamie a sideways look, wonde ring just how he came to be
acquainted with her , but then loo ked again and realized that he
had note d the good quality of her gown and the lar ge brooch
upon her bosom.
She looked from him to me, and frowned.
“May we come in?” I said, and did so, not waiting for an
answer .
“I’m Mrs. Fraser , and this is my husband,” I said, gesturing
toward Jamie, who was looking pink around the ears already .
“Oh?” Mrs. Sylvie said warily . “W ell, it’ll be a pound extra,
if it’ s the two of you.”
“I be g your—oh!” Hot blood flo oded my face as I belatedly
grasped her meaning. Jamie ha d got it instantly , and was the
color of beetroot.
“It’ s quite all right,” she assured me. “Not the usual, to be
sure, bu t Dottie wouldn’ t mind a  bit, she being summat partial
to women, you see.”
Jamie m ade a low growling noise, indicating that this was
my idea and it was up to me to be carrying it out.
“I’m af raid we didn’ t make ourselves clear ,” I said, as
charmingly as possible. “W e … er … we merely wish tointerview your—” I stopped, groping for an appropriate word.
Not “employees,” surely .
“Girls,” Jamie put in tersely .
“Um, yes. Girls.”
“Oh, you do.” Her small bright eyes darted back and forth
between us. “Methody , are you? Or Bright Light Baptists?
W ell, that’ll be two  pound, then. For the nuisance.”
Jamie laughed.
“Cheap at the price,” he observed. “Or is that per girl?”
Mrs. Sylvie’ s mouth twitched a little.
“Oh, per girl, to be sure.”
“T wo pound per soul? A ye, wel l, who would put a price on
salvation?” He was openly teasing now , and she—having
plainly made out that we were neither potential clients nor
door -to-door mi ssionaries—was amused, but taking care not to
seem so.
“I would,” she replied dryly . “A whore knows the price of
everything but the value of nothing—or so I’ve been told.”
Jamie nodded at this.
“A ye. What’ s the price of one of  your girls’ lives, then, Mrs.
Sylvie?”
The look of amusement vanished from her eyes, leaving
them just as bright, but fiercely wary .
“Do you threaten me, sir?” She drew herself up tall, and put
her hand  on a be ll that stood on the table near the door . “I have
protection, sir , I assure you. Y ou would be well-advised to
leave at once.”
“If I  wished to damage ye, woman, I should scarcely bring
my wife  along to watch,” Jamie said mildly . “I’m no so much
a pervert as all that.”
Her hand, tight on the bell’ s handle, relaxed a bit.“Y ou’d b e surpr ised,” she said. “Mind,” she said, pointing a
finger at  him, “I don’ t deal in su ch things—never think it—but
I’ve seen them.”
“So have I,” sa id Jamie, the teasing tone gone from his
voice. “ T ell me, have ye mayb e heard of a Scotsman called
Mac Dubh ?”
Her face  changed at that; clearly  she had. I was bewildered,
but had the sense to keep quiet.
“I have,” she said. Her gaze had sharpened. “That was you,
was it?”
He bowed gravely .
Mrs. Sylvie’ s mouth pursed briefly , then she seemed to
notice me again.
“Did he tell you?” she asked.
“I doub t it,” I said, giving him an eye. He sedulously
avoided my glance.
Mrs. Sylvie uttered a short laugh.
“One of my girl s went with a man to the T oad”—naming a
low sort of div e near the river , called the T oad and Spoon
—”and he dealt badly with her . Then dragged her out to the
taproom and of fered her to the men there. She said she knew
she was dead—you know it is p ossible to be raped to death?”
This last  was addressed to me, in a tone that mingled aloofness
with challenge.
“I d o,” I said, very shortly . A b rief qualm ran through me
and my palms began to sweat.
“A b ig Scotchman was there, tho ugh, and he took issue with
the prop osal, ap parently . It was him alone, though, against a
mob—”
“Y our sp ecialty ,” I said to Jami e, under my breath, and he
coughed.
“—but h e suggested that they de al cards for the girl. Played
a game of brag, and won.”“Really?” I said politely . Cheat ing at cards was another of
his specialties, but one I tri ed to discourage his using,
convinced that it would get him killed one day . No wonder he
hadn’ t told me about this particular adventure.
“So he picked up Alice, wrapped her in his plaid, and
brought her home—left her at the door .”
She looked at Jamie with grudging admiration.
“So. Ha ve you come to claim a debt, then? Y ou have my
thanks, for what they may be worth.”
“A great deal, madam,” he sa id quietly . “But no. W e’ve
come to try to  save your girls from worse than drunken
raparees.”
Her thin brows arched high in question.
“From the pox,” I said baldly . Her mouth fell open.
For all her relati ve youth, Mrs. Sylvie was a hard customer ,
and no easy sell.  While fear of the pox was a constant factor in
the life of a whore, talk of spiro chetes cut no ice with her , and
my proposition that I inject her staf f—there were only three
girls, it appeared—with penicillin met with a firm refusal.
Jamie allowed the wrangling to  go on until it became clear
we had reached  a stone wall. Then he came in on a dif ferent
tack.
“My wife isna proposing such a course only from the
goodness of her heart, ken?” he said. By now , we had been
invited to sit, in a neat little parlor adorned with gingham
curtains, and he leaned forward gingerly , so as not to strain the
joints of the delicate chair he was sitting on.
“The so n of a friend came to my wife, saying he’d
contracted the syphilis from a whore in Hillsboro. She saw the
sore; there is n o question but that the lad is poxed. He
panicked, though, before she was able to treat him, and ran.
W e have been looking for him ever since—and heard just
yesterday that he had been seen here, in your establishment.”Mrs. Sylvie lost control of her face for an instant. It was
back in a mom ent, but there was no mistaking the look of
horror .
“Who?” she said hoarsely . “A S cotch lad? What did he look
like?”
Jamie exchanged a brief, quizzical glance with me, and
described Manfred McGillivray . By the time he had finished,
the young madam’ s face was white as a sheet.
“I had him,” she said. “T wice. Oh, Jesus.” She took a couple
of deep breaths, though, and rallied.
“He wa s clean, though! I made him show me—I always
do.”
I explained that while the chancre healed, the disease
remained in the blood, only to e mer ge later . After all, had she
not known of whores who contracted syphilis, without any
exhibition of a previous sore?
“Y es, of  course—but they can’ t have taken proper care,” she
said, jaw set stubbornly . “I always do, and my girls, too. I
insist upon it.”
I cou ld see denial setting in. Rather than admit she might be
harboring a deadly infection, she would insist it was not
possible, and within moments would have talked herself into
believing it and would throw us out.
Jamie could see it, too.
“Mrs. Sylvie,” he said, interrupting her flow of
justifications. She looked at him, blinking.
“Have ye a deck of cards in the house?”
“What? I—yes, of course.”
“Bring them, then,” he said wi th a smile. “Gleek, loo, or
brag, your choice.”
She gav e him a long, hard look, her mouth pressed tight.
Then it relaxed a little.“Honest cards?” she asked, and a small gleam showed in her
eye. “And for what stakes?”
“Honest cards,” he assured her . “If I win, my wife injects
the lot of ye.”
“And if you lose?”
“A cask of my best whisky .”
She hesitated a moment long er , eyeing him narrowly ,
estimating the odds. There was still a blob of tar in his hair ,
and feat hers on his coat, but his eyes were deep blue and
guileless. She sighed, and put out a hand.
“Done,” she said.
“DID Y OU CHEA T?” I asked, grasping his arm to keep from
stumbling. It was well after da rk by now , and the streets of
Cross Creek were not lighted, save by starlight.
“Didna h ave to,” he said, and yawned hugely . “She may be
a go od whore, but she’ s no hand at cards. She should have
chosen loo; that’ s mostly luck, while brag takes skill. Easier to
cheat at loo, though,” he added, blinking.
“What, exactly , constitutes a good whore?” I asked
curiously . I had never considered the question of qualifications
anent that profession, but supposed there must be some,
beyond possession of the requisite anatomy and a willingness
to make it available.
He laughed at that, but scratched his head, considering.
“W ell, it helps if she has a genuine liking for men, but
doesna t ake them  verra serious. And if she likes to go to bed,
that’ s as  well, too. Ouch.” I had stepped on a rock, and
tightening my grip on his arm, had got him on the patch of
skin burned by tar earlier in the day .
“Oh, sorry . Is it  bad? I have a bit of balm I can put on it,
when we get to the inn.”“Och, no. Just blisters; it will bide.” He rubbed his arm
gingerly , but shrugged of f the discomfort, and taking me by
the elbow , led m e round the corn er , toward the main street. W e
had decided earlier that since we might be late, we would stay
at McLa nahan’ s King’ s Inn, rather than make the long drive
back to River Run.
The sme ll of hot tar still permea ted this end of town, and the
evening breeze swirled feathers  into small drifts at the side of
the road; now and then, a down feather floated past my ear like
a slow-moving moth.
“I w onder , are they still picking the feathers of f Neil
Forbes?” Jamie said, a grin in his voice.
“Maybe his wife will just put a bolster cover on him and use
him as a pillow ,” I suggested. “ No, wait, he hasn’ t got a wife.
They’ll have to—”
“Call him a rooster , and put him out in the yard to serve the
hens,” Jamie suggested, giggling. “He’ s a fine cock-a-doodle,
if no much in the way of a cock.”
He wasn’ t drunk—we had drunk weak cof fee with Mrs.
Sylvie, after the injections—but he was desperately tired; we
both were, and suddenly in the state of exhaustion where the
lamest joke seems immensely  funny , and we staggered,
bumping togethe r and laughing at worse and worse jokes until
our eyes teared.
“What’ s that?” Jamie said suddenly , drawing a deep, startled
breath through his nose. “What’ s burning?”
Something substantial; there was a glow in the sky , visible
over the roofs of the nearby houses, and the sharp scent of
burning wood suddenly overlai d the thicker smell of hot tar .
Jamie ra n towar d the corner of the street, with me hot on his
heels.
It was Mr . Simm s’ s print shop; well ablaze. Evidently his
political enemies, balked of their prey , had decided to vent
their animosity on his premises.A kn ot o f men was milling in t he street, much as they had
earlier in  the day . Again, there w ere calls of “T ory!” and a few
were brandishing torches. More men were running down the
street toward the scene of the fire, shouting. I caught a bellow
of “ Goddamn Whigs!” and then  the two groups collided in a
flurry of shoving and punching.
Jamie grabbed my arm and pro pelled me back the way we
had com e, out of sight aroun d the corner . My heart was
pounding, and I was short of b reath; we ducked under a tree
and stood panting.
“W ell,” I said, after a short silence, filled with the shouts of
the riot, “I sup pose Fer gus will have to find a dif ferent
occupation. There’ s an apothecary’ s shop going cheap, I
know .”
Jamie made a small sound, not quite a laugh.
“He’d do better to go into partn ership wi’ Mrs. Sylvie,” he
said. “There’ s a business not subject to politics. Come on,
Sassenach—we’ll go the long way round.”
When at length we reached the  inn, we found Y oung Ian
fidgeting on the porch, watching out for us.
“Where in the name of Bride have you been ?” he demanded
severely , in a m anner that made me think suddenly of his
mother . “W e’ve been combin’ the town for ye, Uncle Jamie,
and Fer gus sure ye’d been caught up in the collieshangie
yonder and maimed or killed.” He nodded toward the print
shop; th e blaze was beginning to die, though there was still
enough light from it to see his face, set in a disapproving
frown.
“W e’ve been doing good deeds,” Jamie assured him piously .
“V isiting the sick, as Christ commands us.”
“Oh, aye?” Ian responded, with considerable cynicism. “He
said ye should visit those in pris on, too. T oo bad ye didna start
wi’ that.”
“What? Why?”“Y on b ugger D onner ’ s escaped, that’ s for why ,” Ian
informed him, seeming to take a grim pleasure in imparting
bad new s. “During the fight this  afternoon. The gaoler came to
join in the fun, and left the doo r on the latch; the bugger just
walked out and awa’.”
Jamie inhaled deeply , then let his breath out slowly ,
coughing slightly from the smoke.
“A ye, well,” he said. “So we’re down by one print shop and
one thie f—but f our whores to th e good. D’ye think that a fair
exchange, Sassenach?”
“Whores?” Ian exclaimed, startled. “What whores?”
“Mrs. Sylvie’ s,”  I said, peering at him. He looked shifty ,
though perhaps it was only the light. “Ian! Y ou didn’ t!”
“W ell, of course he did, Sassenach,” Jamie said, resigned.
“Look a t him.” A guilty expression was spreading over Ian’ s
features like an oil slick on wat er , easy to make out, even by
the flickering, ruddy light of the dying fire.
“I fo und out about Manfred,” Ia n of fered hastily . “He went
downriver , meaning to find a ship in W ilmington.”
“Y es, w e found that out, too,” I said a little testily . “Who
was it? Mrs. Sylvie or one of the girls?”
His lar ge Adam’ s apple bobbed nervously .
“Mrs. Sylvie,” he said in a low voice.
“Right,” I said. “Fortunately , I have some penicillin left—
and a nice, dull syringe. Inside with you, Ian, you abandoned
wretch, and down with your breeks.”
Mrs. McLanahan, emer ging o nto the porch to inquire
whether we would like a bit of late supper , overheard this and
gave me a startled look, but I was well past caring.
Sometime later , we lay at last in the haven of a clean bed,
safe from the upheavals and tu rmoils of the day . I had pried
the window open, and the faintest of breezes disturbed the
heaviness of the thick, hot air . S everal soft gray flecks driftedin, feath ers or bits of ash, spiraling like snowflakes toward the
floor .
Jamie’ s arm lay across me, and  I could make out the soft,
glaucous shapes of the blisters that covered most of his
forearm. The air was harsh with burning, but the smell of tar
lay l ike an abid ing threat beneath. The men who had burned
Simms’ s shop—and come so close to burning Simms, and
likely Jamie, as well—were rebels in the making, men who
would be called patriots.
“I can hear ye thinking, Sassenach,” he said. He sounded
peaceful, on the ver ge of sleep. “What is it?”
“I w as thinking of tar and feath ers,” I said softly , and very
gently touched his arm. “Jamie—it’ s time.”
“I know ,” he answered just as softly .
Some men went by in the street  outside, singing drunkenly ,
with torches; the flickering light flowed across the ceiling and
was gon e. I could feel Jamie watch it go, listening to the
raucous voices as they faded down the street, but he said
nothing, and after a bit, the big body that cradled me began to
relax, sinking once again toward sleep.
“What a re you thinking?” I whispered, not sure whether he
could still hear me. He could.
“I w as thinking that ye’d m ake a really good whore,
Sassenach, were ye at all promiscuous,” he replied drowsily .
“What?” I said, quite startled.
“But I’m glad ye’re not,” he added, and began to snore.5 7
THE MINISTER’S RETURN
September 4, 1774
R OGER STEERE D CLEAR OF Coopersville on his way
home. It wasn’ t that he feared Ute McGillivray’ s wrath, but he
didn’ t want to t arnish the happiness of his homecoming with
coldness nor confrontation. Instead, he took the long way
round, winding his way gradually up the steep slope toward
the Ridge, pushing through over grown parts where the forest
had taken back the path, and fording small streams.
His mule splashed out of the las t of these at the base of the
trail, shaking itself and scattering droplets from its belly .
Pausing to wipe sweat from his  face, he spotted a movement
on a  lar ge stone  by the bank. Aidan, fishing, af fecting not to
have seen him.
Roger reined Clarence up alongside and watched for a
moment, saying nothing. Then he asked, “Are they biting
well?”
“T olerable,” Aidan replied, squinting hard at his line. Then
he looke d up, a huge grin splittin g his face from ear to ear , and
flinging down his pole, sprang up, reaching with both hands,
so th at Roger co uld grasp his skinny wrists and swing him up
onto the saddle in front of him.
“Y e’re back!” he exclaimed, throwing his arms about Roger
and bury ing his face happily in Roger ’ s chest. “I waited for ye.
Are ye a real minister now , then?”
“Amost. How’d ye know I’d be along today?”
Aidan shrugged . “I’ve been waitin’ the best part of a week,
have I no?” He looked up into Roger ’ s face, round-eyed and
quizzical. “Y e dinna look any dif ferent.”
“I’m not,” Roger assured him, smiling. “How’ s the belly?”“Prime. Y e want to see my sca r?” He leaned back, pulling
up h is ratty shirttail to display a neat red four -inch weal across
the pallid skin.
“W ell done,” Roger approved. “T aking care of your Mam
and wee Orrie, then, now ye’re mended, I suppose.”
“Oh, aye.” Aidan puf fed his nar row chest. “I brought home
six  t rou t fo r suppe r last night, and  the biggest one the size of
me arm!” He stuck out a forearm in illustration.
“Ah, get on wi’ ye.”
“I did,  then!” Aidan said indignantly , then twigged that he
was being teased, and grinned.
Clarence was becoming restive, wanting home, and turned
in little circles, stamping his feet and twitching at the reins.
“Best go. Y e want to ride up wi’ me?”
Aidan looked tempted, but shook his head.
“Nah, then. I pr omised Mrs. Ogilvie as I should come tell
her , the minute ye came.”
Roger was surprised at that.
“Oh, aye? Why’ s that?”
“She’ s h ad a wean last week, wh at she wants ye to baptize.”
“Oh?” His heart rose a little at that, and the bubble of
happiness he carried inside him  seemed to expand a little. His
first christening ! Or rather—his first of ficial baptism, he
thought, with a small pang at the memory of the small O’Brian
girl he had burie d without a nam e. He wouldn’ t be able to do it
until after his ordination, but it was something to look forward
to.
“T ell her I’ll be glad to christen the wean,” he said, lowering
Aidan to  the ground. “Have he r send to tell me when. And
dinna for get your wee fish!” he called.
Aidan g rabbed up his pole and  the string of silvery fish—
none of them lo nger than the length of a hand—and plungedof f into the wood, leaving Roger to turn Clarence’ s head
toward home.
He s melled smoke from a good way down the trail. Stronger
than chi mney smoke. W ith all the talk he had heard on his
way , regarding the recent events in Cross Creek, he couldn’ t
help a small feel ing of uneasiness, and ur ged Clarence on with
a nudge of the heels. Clarence, scenting home even through
the smoke, took the hint with a lacrity , and trotted briskly up
the steep incline.
The smell of s moke grew stronger , mixed with an odd
musty s ort of scent that seemed vaguely familiar . A visible
haze grew among the trees, an d when they burst out of the
under growth into the clearing, he was nearly standing in his
stirrups with agitation.
The cabin stood, weathered and solid, and relief dropped
him back in the saddle with a f orce that made Clarence grunt
in protest. Smoke rose aroun d the house in thick swirls,
though, and the figure of Briann a, swathed like a Muslim with
a scarf around her head and f ace, was dimly visible in the
midst of it. He dismounted, took a breath to call out to her , and
immediately suf fered a coughin g fit. The damned groundhog
kiln was open, belching smoke like hell’ s chimney , and now
he recognized the musty scent—scorched earth.
“Roger! Roger!” She’d seen him, and came running, skirts
and scarf ends flying, leaping a stack of cut turves like a
mountain goat to hurl herself into his arms.
He grab bed her and held on, thinking that nothing in life
had ever  felt better lid weight o f her against him and the taste
of her mouth, in spite of the fact that she’d plainly eaten
onions for lunch.
She emer ged beaming and wet-eyed from the embrace, long
enough to say , “ I love you!” the n grabbed his face and kissed
him aga in. “I missed you. Wh en did you shave last? I love
you.”“Four days ago, when I left C harlotte. I love you, too. Is
everything all right?”
“Sure. W ell, actually no. Jem my fell out of a tree and
knocked out a t ooth, but it was  a baby tooth and Mama says
she doesn’ t think it will hurt t he permanent one coming in.
And Ian  got exposed to syphilis, maybe, and we’re all
disgusted with him, and Da was  nearly tarred and feathered in
Cross Creek, and we met Flora M acDonald, and Mama stuck a
needle in Aunt Jocasta’ s eye, and—”
“Eugh!” Roger said in instinctive revulsion. “Why?”
“So it wouldn’ t burst. And I got  paid six pounds in painting
commissions!” she concluded triumphantly . “I bought some
fine wire and silk to make paper screens with, and enough
wool for  a winter cloak for you . It’ s green. The biggest thing,
though, is we met another—well, I’ll tell you about that later;
it’ s c omplicated. How did it go with the Presbyterians? Is it all
right? Are you a minister?”
He shook his h ead, trying to decide which part of this
cataract to respond to, and ended  up choosing the last bit, only
because he could remember it.
“Sort of. Have y ou been taking lessons in incoherence from
Mrs. Bug?”
“How c an you be sort of a minister? W ait—tell me in a
minute, I have to open it up some more.”
W ith that, she w as flitting back across the broken ground
toward t he gaping hole of the kiln. The tall clay-brick chimney
stack rose at on e end, looking like a headstone. The scorched
turves that had c overed it in operation were scattered round it,
and the general impression was that of an enormous, smoking
grave from which something lar ge, hot, and doubtless demonic
had just arisen. Had he been Catholic, he would have crossed
himself.
As it was, he a dvanced carefu lly toward the edge, where
Brianna was kneeling, reaching across with her shovel toremove another layer of turves from the willow-work frame
that arched across the top of the pit.
Looking down through a roilin g haze of smoke, he could
see irregularly shaped objects, lying on the earthen shelves
that lined the pit. A few he cou ld make out as being bowls or
platters. Most of them, though, were vaguely tubular objects,
two or three feet long, tapered and rounded at one end, the
other sli ghtly fla red. They were a dark pinkish color , streaked
and darkened with smoke, and l ooked like nothing so much as
a collection of giant barbecued phalluses, a notion that he
found nearly as disturbing as the story of Jocasta’ s eyeball.
“Pipes,” Brianna said proudly , pointing her shovel at one of
these objects. “For water . Look—they’re perfect! Or they will
be, if they don’ t crack while they’re cooling.”
“T errific,” Roger said, with a decent show of enthusiasm.
“Hey—I brough t ye a present.” Reaching into the side pocket
of h is co at, he brought out an or ange, which she seized with a
cry o f delight, th ough she paused for an instant before digging
her thumb into the peel.
“No, you eat it; I’ve got another for Jem,” he assured her .
“I love you,” sh e said again, fervently , juice running down
her chin. “What about the Presbyterians? What did they say?”
“Oh. W e ll, basically , it’ s all rig ht. I have got the university
degree, and enough Greek and Latin to impress them. The
Hebrew was a b it lacking, but if I mug that up in the meantime
—Reverend Caldwell gave me a book.” He patted the side of
his coat.
“Y es, I can just see you preaching in Hebrew to the
Crombies and Buchanans,” she said grinning. “So? What
else?”
There w as a fleck of orange pu lp stuck to her lip, and he
bent on impulse and kissed it of f, the tiny burst of sweetness
rich and tart on his tongue.
“W ell, they examined me as to doctrine and understanding,
and we talked a  great deal; prayed together for discernment.”He felt somewh at shy talking to her about it. It had been a
remarkable experience, like returning to a home he’d never
known he’d missed. T o confess his calling had been joyful; to
do it among people who understood and shared it …
“So I’m  provisionally a minister of the W ord,” he said,
looking down at the toes of his boots. “I’ll need to be ordained
before I can administer sacraments like marriage and baptism,
but that will hav e to wait until there’a Presbytery Session held
somewhere. In the meantime, I can preach, teach, and bury .”
She was looking at him, smiling, but a little wistfully .
“Y ou’re happy?” she said, and he nodded, unable to speak
for a moment.
“V ery happy ,” he said at last, his voice hardly audible.
“Good,” she said softly , and sm iled a little more genuinely .
“I under stand. So now you’re sort of handfast with God, is that
it?”
He laughed, and felt his throat ease. God, he’d have to do
something about that; he couldn’ t be preaching drunk every
Sunday . T alk of giving scandal to the faithful …
“A ye, that’ s it. But I’m properly married to you —I’ll not
for get it.”
“See that you don’ t.” Her smile now was wholehearted.
“Since we ar e  mar ried …” She gave him a v ery direct look,
one that  went through him like a  mild electric shock. “Jem’ s at
Marsali’ s, playing with Germain . And I’ve never made love to
a mi nister before. It seems kind of wicked and depraved, don’ t
you think?”
He t ook a deep breath, but it di dn’ t help; he still felt giddy
and light-headed, doubtless from the smoke.
“Behold, thou art fair , my belov ed, yea, pleasant,”  he said,
“and ou r bed is gr een. The join ts of thy thighs ar e like jewels,
the w ork of the hands of a cunni ng workman. Thy navel is like
a r o und goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy belly is like anheap of wheat set about with lilies.”  He reached out and
touched her , gently .
“Thy two br easts ar e like two young r oes that ar e twins.”
“They are?”
“It’ s in the Bible,” he assured her gravely . “It must be so,
aye?”
“T ell m e more about my nave l,” she said, but before he
could, he saw a  small form bo unding out of the woods and
haring toward them. Aidan, now fishless and panting.
“Mrs. Ogil … vie says … co me now !” he blurted. He
gasped a little, recovering enou gh breath for the rest of the
message. “The wean—she’ s poorly , and they want her
christened, in case she should die.”
Roger clapped a hand to his other side; The Book of
Common W orship  that they’d given him in Charlotte was a
small, reassuring weight in his pocket.
“Can y ou?” Brianna was looking at him worriedly .
“Catholics can— I mean, a lay person can baptize somebody if
it’ s an emer gency .”
“Y es, in that case—yes,” he said, more breathless than he’d
been a moment before. He glanced at Brianna, smudged with
soot and  dirt, her garments reek ing of smoke and baked clay
rather than myrrh and aloes.
“D’ye want to come?” He ur gently wanted her to say yes.
“W ouldn’ t miss  it for the world,” she assured him, and
discarding the filthy scarf, sh ook out her hair , bright as
banners on the wind.
IT W AS THE OGIL VIES’ first child, a tiny girl whom
Brianna—with the experience of long motherhood—diagnosed
as su f fering from a vicious colic , but basically in good health.
The frighteningly young parents—they both looked about
fifteen—were p athetically grateful for everything: Brianna’ s
reassurances and advice, her of fer to have Claire visit (for theywere mu ch too scared to think of approaching the laird’ s wife
themselves, leav e alone the stories they had heard of her) with
medicine and food, and most of all, for Roger ’ s coming to
baptize the baby .
That a real minister—for they could not be convinced
otherwise—should appear in th is wilderness, and condescend
to come  confer the blessing of God upon their child—they
were overwhelmed by their good fortune.
Roger an d Brian na stayed for so me time, and left as the sun
was going down, glowing wi th the faintly self-conscious
pleasure of doing good.
“Poor things,” Brianna said, voice trembling between
sympathy and amusement.
“Poor wee things,” Roger agre ed, sharing her sentiments.
The christening  had gone bea utifully; even the screaming,
purple-faced inf ant had suspended operations long enough for
him to pour the  water on her bald head and claim heaven’ s
protection for her soul. He fe lt the greatest joy in it, and
immense humility at having been allowed to perform the
ceremony . There was only the one thing—and his feelings
were still confused between embarrassed pride and deep
dismay .
“Her name—” Brianna said, and stopped, shaking her head.
“I tried to stop them,” he said, trying to control his voice. “I
did try —you’re my witness. Elizabeth, I said. Mairi. Elspeth,
perhaps. Y ou heard me!”
“Oh, now ,” she said, and her voice trembled. “I think
Rogerina is a perfectly beautiful  name.” Then sh e lost control,
sat down in the grass, and laughed like a hyena.
“Oh, God, the poor wee lassie,”  he said, trying—and failing
—not to  laugh himself. “I’ve heard of Thomasina, and even
Jamesina, but … oh, God.”
“Maybe they’ll call her Ina for short,” Brianna suggested,
snuf fling and wiping her face on her apron. “Or they can spell
it backward—Aniregor—and call her Annie.”“Oh, you’r e  a great comfort,” Roger said dryly , and reached
down to haul her to her feet.
She lean ed against him and pu t her arms round him, still
vibrating with laughter . She smelled of oranges and burning,
and the light of the setting sun rippled in her hair .
Finally , she stopped, and lifted her head from his shoulder .
“I am my beloved’ s, and my beloved is mine,”  s he  said , and
kissed him. “Y ou did good, Reverend. Let’ s go home.”P A R T  E I G H T
T h e  C a l l5 8
LOVE ONE ANOTHER
R OGER T OOK THE DEEPEST breath he could, and shouted
as loudly  as he could. Which was not very damn loud. Again.
And again.
It hu rt. It was aggravating, too; the feeble, choked sound of
it m ade him wan t to shut up and never open his mouth again.
He breat hed, shu t his eyes, and screamed with all his might, or
tried to.
A se aring flash of pain shot down inside his throat on the
right, and he broke of f, gasp ing. All right. He breathed
gingerly for a moment, swallowing, then did it again.
Jesus, that hurt.
He rubbed a sleeve across his  watering eyes and braced
himself for another go. As he inflated his chest, fists curling,
he heard voices, and let the breath out.
The voices were calling to each other , not far from him, but
the wind was a way and he couldn’ t make out the words.
Likely h unters, t hough. It was a fine fall day , with air like blue
wine and the forest restless with dappled light.
The leaves had just begun to t urn, but some were already
falling, a silent, constant flicker at the edge of vision. Any
movement could look like game in such surroundings, he
knew that well. He drew breath to call out, hesitated, and said,
“Shit,” under his breath. Great. He’d rather be shot in mistake
for a deer than embarrass himself by calling out.
“Ass,” he said to himself, drew breath, and shouted,
“Halloooo!” at the top of his voice—reedy and without
volume as it was. Again. Again . And yet again. By the fifth
time, he was beginning to think he’d rather be shot than go ontrying to make t hem hear him, but at last a faint “Halloooo!”
drifted back to him on the crisp, light air .
He stopped, relieved, and coughed, surprised not to be
bringing up blood; his throat felt like raw meat. But he essayed
a quick hum, th en, cautiously , a rising arpeggio. An octave.
Just barely , and it was a strain th at sent shooting pains through
his l arynx—but a full octave. Th e first time he’d managed that
much of a range in pitch since the injury .
Encouraged by this small evidence of progress, he greeted
the hunters cheerfully when they  came in view: Allan Christie
and Ian Murray , both with long rifles in hand.
“Preacher MacK enzie!” Allan greeted him, grinning, like an
incongruously fr iendly owl. “What are you doing out here all
on your owney-o? Rehearsing your first sermon?”
“As a matter of fact, yes,” Roger  said pleasantly . It was true,
in a way—and there was no other good explanation for what
he was doing ou t in the woods  by himself, lacking weapons,
snare, or fishing pole.
“W ell, best make it good,” All an said, wagging his head.
“Everyone will be coming. Da’ s had Malva hard at it from
dawn to dusk, sweeping and cleaning.”
“Ah? W ell, do tell her I apprecia te it, will ye?” After a good
deal of thought, he’d asked Thomas Christie whether the
Sunday services might be held in the schoolmaster ’ s home. It
was no more than a rude cabin , like most on the Ridge, but
since les sons w ere held there, t he main room was somewhat
more commodious than the average. And while Jamie Fraser
would c ertainly have allowed the use of the Big House, Roger
felt that his cong regation—what a daunting word—might well
be unea sy at holding their services in the house of a Papist,
accommodating and tolerant though said Papist might be.
“Y e’re coming,  are ye not?” Allan was asking Ian. Ian
looked surprised at the invitation, and rubbed an uncertain
knuckle beneath his nose.
“Och, well, but I was baptized Romish, eh?”“W ell, y e’re a Christian, at least?” Allan said with some
impatience. “Or no? Some folk do say as how ye turned pagan,
with the Indians, and didna turn back.”
“Do they ?” Ian spoke mildly , bu t Roger saw his face tighten
a little at that. H e noticed with interest that Ian didn’ t answer
the question, though, instead asking him, “W ill your wife
come to hear ye, cousin?”
“She wi ll,” he said, mentally crossing his fingers against the
day , “and wee Jem, too.”
“How’ s this?”  B ree had asked  him, fixing him with a look
of rapt intensity , chin slightly lifted, lips just a fraction of an
inch apart. “Jackie Kennedy . That about right, do you think, or
shall I aim for Queen Elizabeth r eviewing the tr oops?”  Her
lips com pressed, the chin drew in a bit, and her mobile face
altered from rapt attention to dignified approbation.
“Oh, M rs. Kennedy , by all mea ns,”  he’d assured her . He’d
be pleased if she kept a straight face, let alone anyone else’ s.
“A ye, well, I’ll come along then —if ye dinna think anyone
would t ake it amiss,” Ian added formally to Allan, who
dismissed the notion with a hospitable flap of the hand.
“Oh, everyone will be there,” he  repeated. The notion made
Roger ’ s stomach contract slightly .
“Out after deer , are ye?” he as ked with a nod toward the
rifles, in hopes of turning the conversation toward something
other than his own impending debut as a preacher .
“A ye,” Allan answered, “but then we heard a painter
screech, of f this way .” He nod ded, indicating the wood just
around them. “Ian said if there’ s a painter about, the deer will
be long gone.”
Roger sh ot a narrow glance at Ian, whose unnaturally blank
expression told him more than  he wanted to know . Allan
Christie, born and raised in Edinbur gh, might  not  know a
panther ’ s scream from a man’ s, but Ian most assuredly did.“T oo ba d if it’ s frightened away  the game,” he said, lifting
one brow at Ian. “Come on, then; I’ll walk back with ye.”
HE’D CHOSEN  “Love thy neighbor as thyself” as the text for
his f irst sermon. “An oldie but a  goodie,” as he’d told Brianna,
causing her to fizz slightly . And having heard at least a
hundred variatio ns on that theme, he was reasonably sure of
having s uf ficient material to go on for the requisite thirty or
forty minutes.
A standard church service was a great deal longer—several
readings of psalms, discussion of the lesson of the day ,
intercessions for  members of th e congregation—but his voice
wouldn’ t take that yet. He was going to have to work up to the
full-bore service, which could easily run three hours. He’d
arrange with T om Christie, w ho was an elder , to do the
readings and the earliest paraye rs, to start with. Then they’d
see how things went.
Brianna was sitting modestly of f to one side now , watching
him—not like Jackie Kennedy , thank God, but with a hidden
smile that warmed her eyes whenever he met her gaze.
He’d brought notes, in case he should dry up or inspiration
fail, but found th at he didn’ t need them. He’d had a moment’ s
breathlessness, when T om Christie, who had read the lesson,
snapped shut his Bible and looked significantly at him—but
once launched, he felt quite at home; it was a lot like lecturing
at university , though God knew the congregation was more
attentive by far t han his university students usually were. They
didn’ t interrupt with questions or ar gue with him, either—at
least not while he was talking.
He w as intensely conscious for the first few moments of his
surroundings: the faint fug of bodies and last night’ s fried
onions in the air , the scuf fed boards of the floor , scrubbed and
smelling of lye soap, and the cl ose press of people, ranged on
benches, but so many that they crammed into every bit of
standing space, as well. W ithin a few minutes, though, he lost
all sense of anything beyond the faces in front of him.Allan Christie hadn’ t exaggerated; everyone had come. It
was nearly as c rowded as it had been during his last public
appearance, presiding at old Mrs. W ilson’ s untimely
resurrection.
He wondered how much that occasion had to do with his
present popularity . A few people were watching him covertly ,
with a faint air of expectation, as though he might turn water
into wine for an  encore, but for the most part, they appeared
satisfied with the preaching. H is voice was hoarse, but loud
enough, thank God.
He belie ved in what he was say ing; after the start he found
himself talking more easily , and without the need of
concentrating on his speech was able to glance from one
person to another , making it seem he spoke to each one
personally—meanwhile making  fleeting observations in the
back of his mind.
Marsali and Fer gus hadn’ t com e—no surprise there—but
Germain was present; he sat w ith Jem and Aidan McCallum
next to Brianna. All three boys h ad poked each other excitedly
and poin ted at him when he began to speak, but Brianna had
quelled this behavior with some muttered threat of suf ficient
force to reduce them to simple squirming. Aidan’ s mother sat
on his other side, looking at Roger with a sort of open
adoration that made him uneasy .
The Chr isties ha d the place of honor in the center of the first
bench: Malva Christie, demure in a lacy cap, her brother
sitting protectiv ely on one si de, her father on the other ,
apparently unaware of the occasional looks shot her way by
some of the young men.
Rather t o Roger ’ s surprise, Jamie and Claire had come, as
well, tho ugh they stood at the very back. His father -in-law was
calmly impassiv e, but Claire’ s face was an open book; she
clearly found the proceedings amusing.
“… and if we ar e truly considering the love of Christ as it is
…” It was instinct, honed by innumerable lectures, that made
him awa re that something was amiss. There was some slightdisturbance in the far corner , where several half-grown lads
had cong regated. A couple of th e numerous McAfee boys, and
Jacky Lachlan, widely known as a limb of Satan.
No more than a nudge, the glint of an eye, some sense of
subterranean excitement. But he sensed it, and kept glancing
back at that cor ner with a narrowed eye, in hopes of keeping
them subdued. And so happe ned to be looking when the
serpent slithered out between Mrs. Crombie’ s shoes. It was a
lar gish king snake, brightly striped with red, yellow , and black,
and it seemed fairly calm, all things considered.
“Now , ye may s ay , ‘Who’ s my neighbor , then?’ And a good
question, comin g to live in a pla ce where half the folk ye meet
are strangers—a nd plenty of th em more than a bit strange,
too.”
A tit ter o f appre ciation ran through the congregation at that.
The sna ke was casting about in  a leisurely sort of way , head
raised an d tongue flickering with interest as it tested the air . It
must be  a tame snake; it wasn’ t bothered by the crush of
people.
The reverse was not true; snakes were rare in Scotland, and
most of the im migrants were nervous of them. Beyond the
natural association with the devil, most folk couldn’ t or
wouldn’ t distinguish a poison snake from any other , since the
only Scottish snake, the adder ,  was  v enomo us. The y’d have
fits, Roger thought grimly , wer e they to look down and see
what was gliding silently along the floorboards by their feet.
A st rangled giggle, cut short, ro se from the corner of guilty
parties, and several heads in the congregation turned, uttering
a censorious “Shoosh!” in unison.
“… when I was hungry , ye gave me to eat; when I was
thirsty , ye gave me to drink. And who d’ye ken here who
would ever turn away even …  even a Sassenach, say , who
came to your door hungry?”
A ripple of amusement, and slightly scandalized glances at
Claire, w ho was  rather pink, bu t with suppressed laughter , hethought, not of fense.
A quick  glance down; the snak e, having paused for a rest,
was on the move again, snoovin g its way gently round the end
of a bench. A sudden movement caught Roger ’ s eye; Jamie
had seen  the snake, and jerked . Now he was standing rigid,
eyeing it as though it were a bomb.
Roger h ad been sending up brief prayers, in the interstices
of his sermon, suggesting that heavenly benevolence might see
fit to shoo the sn ake quietly out the open door at the back. He
intensified these prayers, at the same time unobtrusively
unbuttoning his coat to allow for freer action.
If the damned thing came toward the front of the room
instead of the back, he’d have to dive forward and try to catch
it before it got out in full sight of everyone. That would cause
a disturbance, but nothing to what might happen if …
“… now ye’ll ha ve noticed what Jesus said, when He spoke
to the Samaritan woman at the well …”
The snake was still wrapped ha lfway round the bench leg,
making up its m ind. It was no more than three feet from his
father -in-law . Ja mie was watching it like a hawk, and a visible
gloss of sweat had appeared o n his brow . Roger was aware
that his father -in-law had a fix ed dislike of snakes—and no
wonder , given that a big rattle r had nearly killed him three
years before.
T oo far now for  Roger to reach the thing; there were three
benches of bodies between hi m and the snake. Bree, who
could ha ve dealt  with it, was right away on the far side of the
room. No help for it, he decided, with an inward sigh of
resignation. He’ d have to stop the proceedings, and in a very
calm vo ice, call upon someone dependable—who? He cast
hastily round, and spotted Ian M urray , who was within reach,
thank God, to grasp the thing and take it out.
He was opening his mouth to do just this, in fact, when the
snake, b ored with the scenery in its view , slid rapidly round
the bench and headed straight along the back row .Roger ’ s eye was on the snake,  so he was as surprised as
anyone—including the snake, no doubt—when Jamie
suddenly stooped and snatched it from the floor , whipping the
startled serpent under his plaid.
Jamie was a lar ge man, and the stir of his movement made
several people look over their  shoulders to see what had
happened. He shifted, coughe d, and endeavored to look
passionately int erested in Roger ’ s sermon. Seeing that there
was nothing to look at, everyone turned back, settling
themselves more comfortably .
“… Now , we co me across the Samaritans again, do we not,
in th e st ory of the Good Samaritan? Y e’ll most of ye ken that
one, but  for the weans who may not have heard it yet—”
Roger smiled at Jem, Germain, and Aidan, who all wriggled
like wor ms and made small, ec static squeaks at the thrill of
being singled out.
From the corner of his eye, he could see Jamie, standing
frozen a nd pale as his best linen sark. Something was moving
about in side said sark, and the  barest hint of bright scales
showed in his clenched hand—the snake was evidently trying
to escap e up his arm, being res trained from popping through
the neck of the shirt only by Jamie’ s desperate grip on its tail.
Jamie w as swea ting badly; so w as Roger . He saw Brianna
frown a little at him.
“… and  so the Samaritan told  the innkeeper to mind the
poor fel low , bin d up his wound s, and feed him, and he’d stop
to se ttle the acco unt on his way back from his business. So …”
Roger saw Claire lean close to Jamie, whispering
something. His father -in-law shook his head. At a guess,
Claire had noticed the snake—she could scarcely fail to—and
was ur g ing Jamie to go outside  with it, but Jamie was nobly
refusing, not wanting to further disrupt the sermon, as he
couldn’ t go out without pushing past a number of other
standees.Roger paused to wipe his face with the lar ge handkerchief
Brianna had provided for the pu rpose, and under cover of this,
saw Cla ire reach  into the slit of her skirt and draw out a lar ge
calico pocket.
She app eared to  be ar guing with  Jamie in a whisper; he was
shaking his head, looking like t he Spartan with the fox at his
vitals.
Then the snake’ s head appear ed suddenly under Jamie’ s
chin, tongue flicking, and Jamie’ s eyes went wide. Claire
stood instantly on tiptoe, seized  it by the neck, and whipping
the aston ished reptile out of her husband’ s shirt like a length of
rope, crammed the writhing ball headfirst into her pocket and
jerked shut the drawstring.
“Praise the Lord!” Roger blurted, to which the congregation
obligingly chorused “Amen!” th ough looking a little puzzled
at the interjection.
The man next to Claire, who  had witnessed this rapid
sequence of events, stared at her bug-eyed. She stuf fed the
pocket—now heaving with marked agitation—back into her
skirt, dropped her shawl over it, and giving the gentleman
beside h er a “What are you  looking at, mate?” sort of stare,
faced front and adopted a look of pious concentration.
Roger made it s omehow to the end, suf ficiently relieved at
having the snake in custody tha t even leading the final hymn
—an in terminable back-and-forth “line hymn” in which he
was obliged to chant each line, this echoed by the
congregation—didn’ t disconcert him too much, though he had
almost no voice left and wha t there was creaked like an
unoiled hinge.
His shirt  was clinging to him an d the cool air outside was a
balm as he stoo d shaking hands, bowing, accepting the kind
words of his flock.
“A grand sermon, Mr . MacKe nzie, grand!” Mrs. Gwilty
assured him. She nudged th e wizened gentleman whoaccompanied her , who might be either her husband or her
father -in-law . “W as it no the grand sermon, then, Mr . Gwilty?”
“Mmphm,” said the wizened gentleman judiciously . “No
bad, no bad. Bit  short, and ye left out the fine story aboot the
harlot, but nay doot ye’ll get the way of it in time.”
“Nay doubt,” Roger said, noddi ng and smiling, wondering,
What harlot?  “Thank ye for coming.”
“Oh, wouldna have missed it fo r the world,” the next lady
informed him. “Though the singing wasna quite what one
might have hoped for , was it?”
“No, I’m afraid not. Perhaps next time—”
“I never  did care for Psalm 109 , it’ s that dreary . Next time,
perhaps ye’ll give us one o’ the mair sprightly ones, aye?”
“A ye, I expect—”
“DaddyDaddyDaddy!” Jem cannoned into his legs,
clutching him af fectionately round the thighs and nearly
knocking him over .
“Nice job,” said Brianna, looking amused. “What was going
on in  the back of the room? Y ou  kept looking back there, but I
couldn’ t see anything, and—”
“Fine sermon, sir , fine sermon!” The older Mr . Ogilvie
bowed to him, then walked of f , his wife’ s hand in his arm,
saying to  her , “The puir lad canna carry a tune in his shoe, but
the preaching wasna sae bad, all things considered.”
Germain and Aidan joined Jem my , all trying to hug him at
once, a nd he did his best to encompass them, smile at
everyone, and nod agreeably to suggestions that he speak
louder , preach in the Gaelic, ref rain from Latin (what Latin?)
and Popish references, try to look more sober , try to look
happier , try not to twitch, and put in more stories.
Jamie came out, and gravely shook his hand.
“V erra nice,” he said.“Thanks.” Roge r struggled to find words. “Y ou—well.
Thanks,” he repeated.
“Gr eater love hath no man,”  Claire observed, smiling at
him from behind Jamie’ s elbow . The wind lifted her shawl,
and he could see the side of her skirt moving oddly .
Jamie made a small amused sound.
“Mmphm. Y e might drop by , m aybe, and have a word wi’
Rab McAfee and Isaiah Lachlan—perhaps a short sermon on
the text, ‘He who loveth his son chasteneth him betimes?’”
“McAfee and Lachlan. A ye, I’ll do that.” Or perhaps he’d
just get the McAfees and Jacky Lachlan alone and see to the
chastening himself.
He saw of f the last of the cong regation, took his leave of
T om Christie and his family wit h thanks, and headed for home
and luncheon, his own family i n tow . Normally , there would
be anoth er service in the aftern oon, but he wasn’ t up to that
yet.
Old Mrs . Abernathy was a litt le way before them on the
path, being assisted by her friend, the slightly less-ancient
Mrs. Coinneach.
“A nice-looking lad,” Mrs. Abernathy was remarking, her
cracked old voice floating bac k on the crisp fall air . “But
nervous, och! Sweating rivers, did ye see?”
“A ye, well, shy , I suppose,” Mrs. Coinneach replied
comfortably . “I expect he’ll settle, though, in time.”
ROGER LA Y IN BED, savoring the lingering sense of the
day’ s accomplishments, the relief of disasters averted, and the
sight of his wife, the light from the embers glowing through
the t hin linen of  her shift as she knelt by the hearth, touching
her skin and the  ends of her hair with light, so that she looked
illuminated from within.
The fire banked for the night, sh e rose and peered at Jemmy ,
curled up in his trundle and looking deceptively angelic,before coming to bed.
“Y ou look contemplative,” she said, smiling as she climbed
onto the mattress. “What are you thinking about?”
“T rying to think what on earth I might have said that Mr .
MacNeill could possibly have t hought was Latin, let alone a
Catholic referen ce,” he replied, companionably making room
for her .
“Y ou didn’ t start singing ‘A ve Maria’ or anything,” she
assured him. “I would have noticed.”
“Mm,” he said, and coughed. “Don’ t mention the singing,
aye?”
“It’ll ge t better ,” she said firmly , and turned, pushing and
squirming, to make a nest for herself. The mattress was stuf fed
with wo ol, much more comfortable—and a hell of a lot quieter
—than corn shucks, but very prone to lumps and odd hollows.
“A ye, m aybe,” h e said, though thinking, Maybe. But it w ill
never be what it was.  N o point in thinking of that, though;
he’d grie ved as much as he mea nt to. It was time to make the
best of things and get on.
Comfortable at last, she turned to him, sighing in
contentment as her body seemed to melt momentarily and
remold itself around him—one of her many small, miraculous
talents. She had put her hair in a thick plait for sleeping, and
he ran his hand down its leng th, recalling the snake with a
brief shudder . He wondered what Claire had done with it.
Likely set it free in her garden to eat mice, pragmatist that she
was.
“Did yo u figure out which harlot story it was you left out?”
Brianna murmured, moving her hips against his in a casual but
definitely nonaccidental sort of way .
“No. There are a terrible lot of harlots in the Bible.” He took
the tip of her ear very gently be tween his teeth and she drew a
deep, sudden breath.“Whassa harlot?” said a small, sleepy voice from the
trundle.
“Go to sleep, mate—I’ll tell y e in the morning,” Roger
called, a nd slid a hand down over Brianna’ s very round, very
solid, very warm hip.
Jemmy would almost certainly be asleep in seconds, but
they con tented t hemselves with small, secret touches beneath
the bedclothes, waiting to be sure he was soundly  asleep. He
slept like the de ad, once firmly in dreamland, but had more
than once roused from the drow sy foreshore at very awkward
moments, disturbed by his parents’ unseemly noises.
“Is it like you thought it would be?” Bree asked, putting a
thoughtful thumb on his nipple and rotating it.
“Is what—oh, the preaching. W ell, bar the snake …”
“Not jus t that—the whole thing. Do you think …” Her eyes
searched his, and he tried to keep his mind on what she was
saying, rather than what she was doing.
“Ah …”  His hand clamped ove r hers, and he took a deep
breath. “Y eah. Y e mean am I still sure? I am; I wouldna have
done such a thing if I weren’ t.”
“Dad—Daddy—always said it was a great blessing to have
a calling , to know  that you were meant to be something in
particular . Do you think you’ve always had a—a calling?”
“W ell, for a time , I had the fixed notion that I was meant to
be a  deep-sea diver ,” he said. “Don’ t laugh; I mean it. What
about you?”
“Me?” She looked surprised, then pursed her lips, thinking.
“W ell, I  went to a Catholic sch ool, so we were all ur ged to
think ab out becoming priests or nuns—but I was pretty sure I
didn’ t have a religious vocation.”
“Thank God,” he said, with a fervency that made her laugh.
“And then for quite a while, I thought I should be a historian
—that I wanted to be one. And it was  interesting,” she said
slowly . “I could do it. But—what I really wanted was to buildthings. T o make things.” She pu lled her hand out from under
his and waggled  her fingers, lo ng and graceful. “But I don’ t
know that that’ s a calling, really .”
“Do ye not think motherhood is  a calling, of sorts?” He was
on delic ate ground here. She wa s several days late, but neither
of them had mentioned it—or was going to, yet.
She cast  a quick glance over her  shoulder at the trundle bed,
and made a small grimace, whose import he couldn’ t read.
“Can you call so mething that’ s accidental for most people a
calling?” she asked. “I don’ t mean it isn’ t important—but
shouldn’ t there be some choice involved?”
Choice. W ell, Jem had been thor oughly an accident, but this
one—if there was one—they’d chosen, all right.
“I don’ t know .” He smoothed the long rope of her braid
against her spine, and she pressed closer in reflex. He thought
she felt somehow riper than usu al; something about the feel of
her breasts. Softer . Bigger .
“Jem’ s a sleep,” she said softly , and he heard the surprisingly
deep, slow breathing from the t rundle. She put her hand back
on his chest, the other somewhat lower .
A little later , drifting toward dreamland himself, he heard
her say something, and tried to rouse enough to ask her what it
was, but managed only a small interrogative “Mm?”
“I’ve always thought I do  hav e a calling ,” she repeated,
looking upward at the shadows in the beamed ceiling.
“Something I was meant to do. But I don’ t know yet what it
is.”
“W ell, ye definitely weren’ t meant to be a nun,” he said
drowsily . “Beyond that—I couldna say .”
THE M AN’S F ACE was in darkness. He saw an eye, a wet
shine, and his heart beat in fear . The bodhrana wer e talking.
Ther e was wood in his hand, a tipper , a club—it seemed to
change in size, immense, yet he handled it lightly , part of hishand, it beat the drumhead, beat in the head of the man whose
eyes turned towar d him, shining with terr or .
Some animal was with him, something lar ge and half-seen,
brushing eager past his thighs into the dark, ur gent for blood,
and he after it, hunting.
The club came down, and down, and upanddown,
upanddown, upanddown with the waggle of his wrist, the
bodhran live and talking in his  bones, the thud that shiver ed
thr ough his arm, a skull br ea king inwar d with a wet, soft
sound.
Joined f or that instant, joined closer than man and wife,
hearts one, terr or and bloodlust  both yielding to that soft, wet
thud and  the empty night. The body fell, and he felt it go away
fr om him, a r en ding loss, felt earth and pine needles r ough
against his cheek as he fell.
The eyes  shone wet and empty , and the face slack-lipped in
fir elight, one he knew , but he knew not the name of the dead,
and the animal was br eathing in the night behind him, hot
br eath on his nape. Everything was burning: grass, tr ees, sky .
The bod hrana wer e talking in his bones, but he could not
make it out what they said, and  he beat the gr ound, the soft
limp bod y , the burning tr ee in a  rage that made sparks fly , to
make the drums leave his blood, speak clearly . Then the tipper
flew fr ee, his hand struck the tr ee and burst into flame.
He woke with his hand on fir e, gasping. He brought his
knuckles to his mouth by inst inct, tasting silver blood. His
heart was hammering so that he could scarcely breathe, and he
fought the notion, trying to slow his heart, keep breathing,
keep panic at b ay , stop his throat closing up and strangling
him.
The pain in his hand helped,  distracting him from the
thought of suf focation. He’d thr own a punch in his sleep, and
hit t he log wal l of the cabin square. Jesus, it felt like his
knuckles had burst. He presse d the heel of his other hand
against them, hard, gritting his teeth.Rolled o nto his side and saw th e wet shine of eyes in the
ghost of  firelight and would ha ve screamed, if he’d had any
breath.
“Are yo u all right, Roger?” Brianna whispered, voice
ur gent. Her hand touched his sh oulder , his back, the curve of
his brow , quickly seeking injury .
“Y eah,” he said, fighting for b reath. “Bad … dream.” He
wasn’ t dreaming of suf focation; his chest was tight, every
breath a conscious ef fort.
She threw back the covers and  rose in a rustle of sheets,
pulling him up.
“Sit up,” she said, low-voiced. “W ake all the way up.
Breathe slow; I’ll make you some tea—well, something hot, at
least.”
He hadn’ t any breath to protest. The scar on his throat was a
vise. Th e first agony in his hand  had subsided; now it began to
throb in time to  his heart—fine, that was all he needed. He
fought b ack the dream, the se nse of drums beating in his
bones, and in the struggle, foun d his breath start to ease. By
the time Brianna brought him a mug of hot water poured over
something foul-smelling, he was breathing almost normally .
He declined to drink whatever it was, whereupon she
thriftily used it to bathe his scraped knuckles instead.
“Do you  want to tell me about the dream?” She was heavy-
eyed, still yearning for sleep, but willing to listen.
He h esitated, but he could feel  the dream hovering in the
night-still air , just behind him; to keep silent and lie back in
the d ark was to invite its return. And perhaps she should know
what the dream had told him.
“It was a muddl e, but to do with the fight—when we went
to bring  Claire back. The man— the one I killed—” The word
stuck in his thro at like a bur , but he got it out. “I was smashing
in his head, and he fell, and I saw his face again. And suddenly
I realize d I’d seen him before; I—I know who he was.” Thefaint hor ror of knowing the man showed in his voice, and her
heavy lashes rose, her eyes suddenly alert.
Her hand covered his injured knuckles, lightly , questioning.
“Do ye recall a wretched little thieftaker named Harley
Boble? W e met him, just the on ce, at the Gathering at Mount
Helicon.”
“I remem ber . Him? Y ou’re sure? It was dark, you said, and
all confused—”
“I’m sur e. I didn’ t know , when I hit him, but I saw his face
when he  fell—the grass was on fire, I saw it clearly—and I
saw it again, jus t now , in the dream, and the name was in my
mind wh en I woke up.” He flexed his hand slowly , grimacing.
“It seem s a lot worse, somehow , to kill someone ye know .”
And the  knowledge of having k illed a stranger was quite bad
enough. It obliged him to think  of himself as one capable of
murder .
“W ell, you didn’ t  know him, at the time,” she pointed out.
“Didn’ t recognize him, I mean.”
“No, th at’ s true.” It was, but didn’ t help. The fire was
smoored for the night, and the r oom was chilly; he noticed the
gooseflesh on her bare forearms, the gold hairs rising. “Y ou’re
cold; let’ s go back to bed.”
The bed  still held a faint warmth, and it was unutterable
comfort to have her curl close to his back, the heat of her body
penetrating his bone-deep chill. His hand still throbbed, but the
pain had  dulled to a negligible  ache. Her arm settled firmly
round hi m, a loose fist curled un der his chin. He bent his head
to kiss her own knuckles, smooth and hard and round, felt her
warm breath on his neck, and  had the oddest momentary
recollection of the animal in his dream.
“Bree … I did mean  to kill him.”
“I know ,” she said softly , and tightened her arm around him,
as though to save him falling.5 9
FROGGY GOES A-COUR TING
Fr om Lor d John Gr ey
Mount Josiah Plantation
My dear Friend,
I write in some Perturbation of Spirit.
Y ou will r ecall Mr . Josiah Quincy , I am sur e. I should
not have pr ovided him with a Letter of Intr oduction to
you, had I had any Notion of the eventual Outcome of his
Efforts. For I am sur e that it is by his Action that your
Name is associated with the so-called Committee of
Corr espondence in North Car olina. A Friend, knowing of
my Acquaintance with you, showed me a Missive
yester day , purporting to originate fr om this Body , and
containing a List of its pr esumed Recipients. Y our Name
was among these, and the Sight of it in such Company
caused me such Concern as to compel me to write at once
to inform you of the Matter .
I should have burned the Missive at once, was it not
appar ent that it was only one of several Copies. The
Others ar e doubtless in transit thr ough various of the
Colonies. Y ou must move at once to disassociate yourself
fr om any such Body , and take Pains that your Name does
not appear in Futur e in such Contexts.
For be warned: the Mail is not safe. I have r eceived
mor e than one official Document—even some bearing
r oyal Seals!—that not only show Signs of having beenopened, but that in some Cases ar e blatantly marked with
the Initials or Signatur es of those Men who have
inter cepted and inspected them. Such Inspection may be
imposed either by Whig or T ory , ther e is no telling, and I
hear that Governor Martin himself is now having his
Mail dir ected to his Br other in New Y ork, thus to be
br ought to him by private Messenger—one of these was a
r ecent Guest at my table—as he cannot trust its secur e
Delivery within North Car olina.
I can only hope that no incriminating Document
containing your Name falls into the Hands of Persons
with the Power to arr est or instigate other Pr oceedings
against the Speakers of such Sedition as appears in it. I
apologize most sincer ely , if my Inadvertence in
intr oducing Mr . Quincy should in any way have
endanger ed or inconvenienced you, and I will, I assur e
you, lend my every Effort to corr ect the Situation so far as
may be in my Power .
Meanwhile, I offer you the Services of Mr . Higgins,
should you r equir e secur e Delivery of any Document, not
mer ely Letters addr essed to myself. He is completely
trustworthy , and I will send him r egularly to you, in case
you may r equir e him.
Still, I am in Hopes that the Situation overall may yet
be r etrieved. I think those Hotheads who ur ge Rebellion
must be for the most Part ignorant of the Natur e of W ar ,
or sur ely they would not risk its T err ors and Har dships,
nor yet think lightly of shedding Blood or the Sacrifice of
their own Lives for the sake of so Small a Disagr eement
with their Par ent.
Feeling in London at pr esent is that the Matter will
amount to no mor e than “a few bloody Noses,” as Lor d
North puts it, and I trust it may be so.This News has also a personal Aspect; my son W illiam
has pur chased a Lieutenant’ s Commission, and will join
his Regiment almost immediately . I am of course pr oud of
him—and yet, knowing the Dangers and Har dships of a
Soldier ’ s Life, I confess that I should have pr eferr ed him
to adopt another Course, either devoting himself to the
Conduct of his considerable Estates, or , if he felt this too
tame a Life, per haps entering the Realm of Politics or
Commer ce—for he has much natural Ability to add to the
Power of his Resour ces, and might well achieve some
Influence in such Spher es.
Those Resour ces ar e of course still within my Contr ol,
until W illiam shall attain his Majority . But I could not
gainsay him, so exigent was his Desir e—and so vivid my
Memories of myself at that Age, and my Determination to
serve. It may be that he will have his Fill of Soldiering
quickly , and adopt another Course. And I will admit that
the military Life has many V irtues to r ecommend it, stern
as these V irtues may sometimes be.
On a less alarming Note—
I find myself r eturned unexpectedly to the Role of
Diplomat. Not, I hasten to add, on behalf of His Majesty ,
but rather on behalf of Robert Higgins, who begs that I
will employ what small Influence I possess in advancing
his Pr ospects for Marriage.
I have found Mr . Higgins a good and faithful Servant,
and am pleased to offer what Assistance I may; I hope
you will find yourself similarly disposed, for as you will
see, your Advice and Counsel is most ur gently desir ed
and, in fact, quite indispensable.
Ther e is some small Delicacy involved in this Matter ,
and upon this Point, I would beg your Consideration;
your Discr etion I of course trust implicitly . It would
appear that Mr . Higgins has formed some Attachment totwo young Ladies, both r esident on Fraser ’ s Ridge. I have
pointed out to him the Difficulty of fighting on two
Fr onts, as it wer e, and advised him to concentrate his
For ces so as to pr ovide the best chance of Success in his
Attack upon a single Object—with, per haps, the
Possibility of falling back to r egr oup, should his initial
Essay fail.
The two Ladies in question ar e Miss W emyss and Miss
Christie, both possessed of Beauty and Charm in
Abundance, accor ding to Mr . Higgins, who is most
eloquent in their Praises. Pr essed to choose between
them, Mr . Higgins pr otested that he could not—but after
some little Discussion on the matter , has at length settled
upon Miss W emyss as his first Choice.
This is a practical Decision, and the Reasons for his
Choice concern not only the Lady’ s undoubted
Attractions, but a mor e mundane Consideration: viz,  that
the Lady and her Father ar e both Bond Servants,
indentur ed to you. I am, by Reason of Mr . Higgins’ s
devoted Service, offering to pur chase both Indentur es,
should this be agr eeable to you, upon Miss W emyss’ s
Agr eement to wed Mr . Higgins.
I should not wish to deprive you thus of two valued
Servants, but Mr . Higgins feels that Miss W emyss will not
wish to leave her Father . By the same T oken, he hopes
that my offering to fr ee Father and Daughter fr om
Servitude (for I have agr eed that I would do so, pr ovided
that Mr . Higgins’ s Employment with me shall continue)
would be sufficient Inducement to over come any
Objections which Mr . W emyss might pr esent on Account
of Mr . Higgins’ s lack of Connexions and personal
Pr operty , or such other small Impediments to the
Marriage as might pr esent themselves.
I collect that Miss Christie, while equally attractive,
has a Father who may be somewhat mor e difficult ofPersuasion, and her social Situation is somewhat higher
than that of Miss W emyss. Still, should Miss W emyss or
her father decline Mr . Higgins’ s Offer , I will do my Best,
with your Assistance, to devise some Inducement that
might appeal to Mr . Christie.
What think you of this Plan of Attack? I beg you to
consider the Pr ospects car efully , and if you feel that the
Pr oposal might be r eceived favorably , to br oach the
Matter to Mr . W emyss and his Daughter—if possible, with
such Discr etion as not to pr ejudice a secondary
Expedition, should that pr ove necessary .
Mr . Higgins is most sensible of his inferior Position,
viewed as a potential Gr oom, and thus most conscious of
the Favor he seeks, as is
Y our most humble and obedient Servant,
John Gr ey
“… such  other small Impedimen ts to the Marriage as might
pr esent themselves,”  I read, over Jamie’ s shoulder . “Like
being a convicted murderer with a brand on his cheek, no
family , and no money , do you think he means?”
“A ye, like that,” Jamie agreed, straightening out the sheets
of paper and tapping the edges straight. He was clearly amused
by L ord John’ s letter , but his  brows had drawn together ,
though I didn’ t know whether th is was a sign of concern over
Lord John’ s news about W illie, or merely concentration on the
delicate question of Bobby Higgins’ s proposal.
The latter , evidently , for he glanced upward, toward the
room that Lizzie and her father s hared. No sound of movement
came through the ceiling, thoug h I’d seen Joseph go upstairs a
little earlier .
“Asleep?” Jamie asked, eye brows raised. He looked
involuntarily at the window . It was mid-afternoon, and the
yard was cheerfully awash in mellow light.“Common symptom of depression,” I said, with a small
shrug. Mr . W emyss had taken the dissolution of Lizzie’ s
betrothal hard—much more so than had his daughter . Frail-
looking to begin with, he had n oticeably lost weight, and had
withdrawn into himself, speaking only when spoken to, and
becoming increasingly hard to rouse from sleep in the
mornings.
Jamie struggled momentarily with the concept of
depression, then dismissed it with a brief shake of the head. He
tapped the stif f fingers of his r ight hand thoughtfully on the
table.
“What d’ye think, Sassenach?”
“Bobby’ s a lovely young man,” I said dubiously . “And
Lizzie obviously likes him.”
“And if the W emysses were still indentured, Bobby’ s
proposal would likely have some appeal,” Jamie agreed. “But
they’re not.” He had given Joseph W emyss his papers of
indenture some years earlier , and Brianna had hastily freed
Lizzie fr om her own bond nearly as soon as it was made. That
was not a matter of public knowledge, though, since Joseph’ s
presumed status  as a bondsman  protected him from service in
the militia. Likewise, as a bondmaid, Lizzie benefited from
Jamie’ s overt protection, as she was considered his property;
no one would dare to trouble her or treat her with open
disrespect.
“Perhaps he’d be willing to enga ge them as paid servants,” I
suggested. “Their combined salary would likely be a good deal
less than the pri ce of two indent ures.” W e paid Joseph, but his
salary was only three pounds a y ear , though with room, board,
and clothing supplied.
“I w ill suggest as much,” Jam ie said, but with an air of
dubiousness. “B ut I’ll have to speak with Joseph.” He glanced
upward once more, and shook his head.
“Speaking of Malva …” I said, glancing across the hall and
lowering my voice. She was in the sur gery , straining liquidfrom the  bowls of mold that provided our supply of penicillin.
I had  pr omised to send more to  Mrs. Sylvie, with a syringe; I
hoped she would use it.
“Do you think T om Christie wo uld be receptive, if Joseph
isn’ t? I think both girls are rather partial to Bobby .”
Jamie made a mildly derisive noise at the thought.
“T om Christie marry his daughter to a murderer , and a
penniless murderer at that? John Grey doesna ken the man at
all, o r he wouldn a be suggesting such a thing. Christie’ s proud
as Nebuchadnezzar , if not more so.”
“Oh, as  proud as all that, is he?” I said, amused despite
myself. “Who do you think he would  find suitable, here in the
wilderness?”
Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug.
“He hasna honored me with his  confidences in the matter ,”
he said dryly . “T hough he doesna let his daughter walk out wi’
any of the you ng lads hereabouts; I imagine none seems
worthy to him. I shouldna be surprised at all, if he were to
contrive some means of sending  her to Edenton or New Bern
to m ake a match, and he can contrive a way to do it. Roger
Mac says he’ s mentioned such a course.”
“Really? He’ s getting quite thick with Roger these days,
isn’ t he?”
A reluctant smile crossed his face at that.
“A ye, w ell. Roger Mac takes the welfare of his flock to
heart—with an eye to his own, nay doubt.”
“Whatever do you mean by that?”
He eyed  me for a moment, evi dently judging my capacity
for keeping secrets.
“Mmphm. W ell,  ye mustna men tion it to Brianna, but Roger
Mac has it in mind to make a match between T om Christie and
Amy McCallum.”I bli nked, but th en considered. It wasn’ t really a bad idea,
though not one t hat would have occurred to me. Granted, T om
was likely more than twenty-five years older than Amy
McCallum, but he was still healthy and strong enough to
provide for her and her sons . And she plainly needed a
provider . Wheth er she and Ma lva could share a house was
another question; Malva had had the running of her father ’ s
house si nce she could manage it. She was amiable, certainly ,
but I rather thought she had as much pride as her father , and
wouldn’ t take kindly to being supplanted.
“Mmm,” I said dubiously . “Perhaps. What do you mean
about Roger ’ s own welfare, though?”
Jamie raised one thick eyebrow .
“Have ye not se en the way the widow McCallum looks at
him?”
“No,” I said, taken aback. “Have you?”
He nodded.
“I h ave, and so has Brianna. She bides her time for the
moment—but m ark my words, Sassenach: if wee Roger
doesna s ee the widow safely m arrit soon, he’ll find hell nay
hotter than his own hearth.”
“Oh, now . Roger isn’ t looking back  at Mrs. McCallum, is
he?” I demanded.
“No, he is not,” Jamie said judiciously , “and that’ s why he’ s
still in possession of his balls. But if ye think my daughter is
one to stand—”
W e h ad been spe aking in low vo ices and, at the sound of the
sur gery door opening, stopped abruptly . Malva poked her head
into the study , h er cheeks flushed and wispy tendrils of dark
hair floating round her face. She looked like a Dresden
figurine, despite  the stains on her apron, and I saw Jamie smile
at her look of eager freshness.
“Please, Mrs. Fraser , I’ve strained of f all the liquid and
bottled i t—ye d id say that we must feed the slops left over tothe pig at once … did ye mean  the big white sow that lives
under th e house ?” She looked r ather doubtful at the prospect,
and no wonder .
“I’ll come and d o it,” I said, rising. “Thank you, dear . Y ou
go along  to the k itchen and ask Mrs. Bug for a bit of bread and
honey before you go home, why don’ t you?”
She curtsied and went of f towa rd the kitchen; I could hear
Y oung Ian’ s voice, teasing Mrs. Bug, and saw Malva stop for
an in stant to pat her cap, twirl a wisp of hair around her finger
to m ake it curl against her cheek, and straighten her slender
back before going in.
“W ell, T om Christie may propose all he likes,” I murmured
to Ja mie, who had come out into the hall with me and seen her
go, “ but yours is n’ t the only dau ghter with a mind of her own
and strong opinions.”
He gave a small, dismissive grunt and went back to his
study , while I continued across the hall, to find a lar ge basin of
soggy garbage, the remnants of  the latest batch of penicillin-
making, neatly collected and standing on the counter .
Opening the window at the side of the house, I peered out
and down. Four feet below was the mound of dirt that marked
the white sow’ s den beneath the foundation.
“Pig?” I said, leaning out. “ Are you at home?” The
chestnuts were ripe and falling from the trees; she might well
be o ut in the wood, gor ging herself on chestnut mast. But no;
there we re hoofmarks in the soft soil, leading in, and the sound
of stertorous breathing was audible below .
“Pig!” I said, louder and more peremptorily . Hearing the
stirring and scraping of an enormous bulk beneath the
floorboards, I leaned out and dro pped the wooden basin neatly
into the soft dirt, spilling only a little of its contents.
The thu mp of its landing was  followed at once by the
protrusion of an immense white-bristled head, equipped with a
lar ge an d snuf fl ing pink nose, a nd followed by shoulders the
width of  a hogshead of tobacco. W ith eager grunts, the rest ofthe s ow’ s great body followed, and she fell upon the treat at
once, curly tail coiled tightly with delight.
“Y es, well, just you remember w ho’ s the source from whom
all bless ing flows,” I told her , and withdrew , taking pains to
shut the window . The sill showed considerable splintering and
gouging—the re sult of leaving the slop basin too long on the
counter; the sow was an impatient sort, who was quite willing
to tr y to come into the house a nd claim her due, if it wasn’ t
forthcoming promptly enough to suit.
While partly occupied with the  pig, my mind had not yet
left the questio n of Bobby Higgins’ s proposal, with all its
potential complications. T o say nothing of Malva. Granted, she
was undoubtedly  sensible of Bobby’ s blue eyes; he was a very
handsome young man. But she wasn’ t insensible to Y oung
Ian’ s charms, either , less striking as they might be.
And wh at would T om Christie’ s opinion of Ian as a son-in-
law be, I wond ered. He wasn’ t quite  penniless; he had ten
acres of mostly uncleared land, though no income to speak of.
W ere tribal tattoos more socially acceptable than a murderer ’ s
brand? Probably—but then, Bobby was a Protestant, while Ian
was at least nominally Catholic.
Still, he  was Jamie’ s nephew— a fact that might cut both
ways. Christie was intensely jealous of Jamie; I knew that.
W ould h e see an alliance betw een his family and ours as a
benefit, or as something to be avoided at all costs?
Of cours e, if Roger succeeded in  getting him to marry Amy
McCallum, that might distract h is mind a bit. Brianna hadn’ t
said anything to me about the w idow—but now that I thought
back, I realized  that the fact that she hadn’ t said anything
might be an indication of suppressed feeling.
I could hear voices and laughter from the kitchen;
obviously , everyone was having  fun. I thought to go and join
them, b ut glancing into Jamie’ s study , saw that he was
standing by his desk, hands clas ped behind him, looking down
at Lord John’ s letter , a small frown of abstraction on his face.His thoughts weren’ t with his daughter , I thought, with a
small, queer pang—but with his son.
I came into the  study and put my arm round his back,
leaning my head against his shoulder .
“Have you thought, perhaps, of trying to convince Lord
John?” I said, a little hesitantly . “That the Americans may
possibly have a point, I mean— convert him to your way of
thinking.” Lord John himself would not be fighting in the
coming conflict; W illie well might, and on the wrong side.
Granted, fightin g on either side was likely to be as dangerous
—but the fact re mained that the Americans would win, and the
only conceivable way of swaying W illie was through his
putative father , whose opinions he respected.
Jamie snorted, but put an arm around me.
“John? D’ye recall what I told ye about Highlanders, when
Arch Bug came to me wi’ his wee ax?”
“They live by their oath; they will die by it, too.”
I shivere d a little, and pressed closer , finding some comfort
in hi s so lidness. He was right; I  had seen it myself, that brutal
tribal fea lty—and yet it was so hard to grasp, even when I saw
it right under my nose.
“I remember ,” I said.
He nodded at the letter , his eyes still fixed on it.
“He is the same . Not all Englishmen are—but he is.” He
looked down at me, ruefulness tinged with begrudging respect.
“He is the King’ s man. It wouldna matter if the Angel Gabriel
appeared before  him and told him what will pass; he wouldna
abandon his oath.”
“Do you think so?” I said, emboldened. “I’m not so sure.”
His brow s went up in surprise, a nd I went on, hesitating as I
groped for words.
“It’ s—I do know what you mean; he’ s an honorable man.
But that’ s just it. I don’ t think he is  sworn to the Ki ng—not inthe s ame way Colum’ s men sw ore to him, nor the way your
men from Lallybroch swore to you. What matters to him—
what he’d sell his life for—it’ s honor .”
“W ell, aye—it is,” he said slowly , brows knit in
concentration. “But for a soldier , such as he is, honor lies in
his duty , no? And that comes from his fealty to the King,
surely?”
I straigh tened and rubbed a finger beneath my nose, trying
to put into words what I thought.
“Y es, but that’ s not quite what I mean. It’ s the idea  that
matters to him. He follows an ideal, not a man. Of all the
people you know , he may b e the only one who would
understand—this will be a war fought about ideals; maybe the
first.”
He c losed one e ye and regarded me quizzically out of the
other .
“Y e’ve b een talk ing to Roger M ac. Y e’ll never have thought
that on your own, Sassenach.”
“I gather you ha ve, too,” I said , not bothering to refute the
implied insult. Besides, he was right. “So you understand?”
He mad e a small Scottish noise, indicating dubious
agreement.
“I did ask him what about the Crusades, did he not think
that was fought for an ideal? And he was obliged to admit that
ideals were involved, at least—though even there he said it
was mon ey and politics, and I sa id it always was, and surely it
would be now , as well. But, aye, I understand,” he added
hastily , s eeing my nostrils flare. “But with regard to John Grey
—”
“W ith regard to John Grey ,” I s aid, “you do have a chance
of convincing him, because he’ s both rational and idealistic.
Y ou’d have to convince him that honor doesn’ t lie in following
the King—but in the ideal of freedom. But it’ s possible.”He made another Scottish noise, this one deep-chested and
filled with uneasy doubt. And finally , I realized.
“ Y ou  aren’ t doing it for the sake of ideals, are you? Not for
the sake of—of liberty . Freedom, self-determination, all that.”
He shook his head.
“No,” he said softly . “Nor yet for the sake of being on the
winning side—f or once. Though I expect that will be a novel
experience.” He gave me a sudden rueful smile, and, caught by
surprise, I laughed.
“Why , then?” I asked, more gently .
“For you,” he sa id without hesitation. “For Brianna and the
wee lad.  For my family . For th e future. And if that is not an
ideal, I’ve never heard of one.”
JAMIE DID HIS BEST in the of fice of ambassador , but the
ef fect of Bobby’ s brand proved insuperable. While admitting
that Bobby was a nice young m an, Mr . W emyss was unable to
countenance the notion of marrying his daughter to a
murderer , no matter what the cir cumstances that had led to his
conviction.
“Folk would take against him, s ir , ye ken that fine,” he said,
shaking his head in response to Jamie’ s ar guments. “They
dinna s top to ask the why and wherefore, if a man’ s
condemned. His eye—he did nothing, I am sure, to provoke
such a savage attack. How could I expose my dear Elizabeth to
the poss ibility of such reprisals? Even if she should escape
herself, what of her fate—and that of her children—if he is
knocked over in the street one day?” He wrung his hands at
the thought.
“And if he should one day lose his Lordship’ s patronage, he
could not look fo r decent employment elsewhere, not with yon
mark of shame upon his face. They would be beggared. I have
been lef t in such straits mysel f, sir—and would not for the
world risk my daughter ’ s sharing such a fate again.”
Jamie rubbed a hand over his face.“A ye. I understand, Joseph. A p ity , but I canna say as ye’re
wrong. For what the observation be worth, I dinna believe that
Lord John would cast him of f, though.”
Mr . W emyss merely shook his head, looking pale and
unhappy .
“W ell, then.” Jamie pushed hims elf back from his desk. “I’ll
have him  in, and ye can give him your decision.” I rose, as
well, and Mr . W emyss sprang up in panic.
“Oh, sir! Y e will not leave me alone with him!”
“W ell, I scarcely think he’ll try  to knock ye down or pull
your nose, Joseph,” Jamie said mildly .
“No,” Mr . W emyss said dubious ly . “Nooo … I suppose not.
But still , I should take it very  kindly if you would—would
remain while I speak with him ? And you, Mrs. Fraser?” He
turned pleading eyes upon me. I  looked at Jamie, who nodded
in resignation.
“All right,” he said. “I’ll go and fetch him, then.”
“I AM SORR Y , SIR.” Joseph W emyss was nearly as unhappy
as B obby Higgins. Small in stat ure and shy in manner , he was
unaccustomed to  conducting interviews, and kept glancing at
Jamie fo r moral  support, before returning his attention to his
daughter ’ s importunate suitor .
“I am  s orry ,” he repea ted, meeting Bobby’ s eyes with a sort
of h elpless sincerity . “I like y e, young man, and so does
Elizabeth, I am sure. But her welfare, her happiness, is my
responsibility . A nd I cannot think … I really do not suppose
…”
“I sh ould be kin d to her ,” Bobby said anxiously . “Y ou know
I s hould, zur . She should have a new gown once a year , and I
should sell anything I have to keep her in shoes!” He, too,
glanced at Jamie, presumably in hopes of reinforcement.
“I’m su re Mr . W emyss has the highest regard for your
intentions, Bobb y ,” Jamie said as gently as possible. “But he’ sright, aye? It is his duty to make  the best match he can for wee
Lizzie. And perhaps …”
Bobby swallowed hard. He had groomed himself to the
nines for this in terview , and wore a starched neckcloth that
threatened to choke him, with h is livery coat, a pair of clean
woolen breeches, and a pair of carefully preserved silk
stockings, neatly darned in only a few places.
“I k now I ha’n’ t got a great deal of money ,” he said. “Nor
property . But I have got a good situation, zur! Lord John pays
me ten pound a year , and has been so kind as to say I may
build a small cottage on his grounds, and ‘til it is ready , we
might have quarters in his house.”
“A ye, so ye said.” Mr . W e myss looked increasingly
wretched. He kept looking awa y from Bobby , perhaps in part
from natural shyness and unwillingness to refuse him eye-to-
eye—but also, I was sure, to avoid seeming to look at the
brand upon his cheek.
The disc ussion went on for a bit, but to no ef fect, as Mr .
W emyss could not bring himsel f to tell Bobby the real reason
for his refusal.
“I—I—well, I will think further .” Mr . W emyss, unable to
bear the tension any longer , got abruptly to his feet and nearly
ran out of the room—forcing himself to a stop at the door ,
though, to turn and say , “Mind, I do not think I shall change
my mind!” before disappearing.
Bobby looked after him, nonplused, then turned to Jamie.
“Have I hopes, zur? I know you will be honest.”
It was a pathetic  plea, and Jamie  himself glanced away from
those lar ge blue eyes.
“I do not think so,” he said . It was said kindly , but
definitely , and Bobby sagged a little. He had slicked down his
wavy hair with water; now dried, tiny curls were popping up
from the thick m ass, and he looked absurdly like a newborn
lamb that has just had its tail docked, shocked and dismayed.“Does she—do ye know , zur , or ma’am”—turning to me
—”are Miss Elizabeth’ s af fections given elsewhere? For if that
was to be the case, sure I wo uld bide. But if not …” He
hesitated, glancing toward the door where Joseph had so
abruptly disappeared.
“D’ye think I might have some  chance of overcoming her
father ’ s objections? Perhaps—perhaps if I was to find some
way of coming  by a bit o’ money … or if it was to be a
question of religion …” He looked a little pale at this, but
squared his shoulders resolutely . “I—I think I should be
willing to be baptized Romish and he required it. I meant to
tell him so, but for got. W ould ye maybe say so to him, zur?”
“A ye … aye, I will,” Jamie said reluctantly . “Y e’ve quite
made up your mind as it’ s Lizzie, then, have ye? Not Malva?”
Bobby was taken back by that.
“W ell, to be honest, zur—I’m that fond of them both, I’m
sure I should be happy with eith er one. But—well, truth to tell,
I b e mortal feared of Mr . Chri stie,” he confessed, blushing.
“And I think he don’ t like you, zur , while Mr . W emyss does. If
you could … speak for me, zur? Please?”
In the end, even Jamie was not proof against this guileless
begging.
“I’ll try , ” he conceded. “But I p romise ye nothing, Bobby .
How long will ye stay now , before ye go back to Lord John?”
“His Lordship’ s given me a week for my wooing, zur ,”
Bobby s aid, looking much happier . “But I suppose ye’ll be
going yourself tomorrow or next day?”
Jamie looked surprised.
“Going where?”
Bobby looked surprised in turn.
“Why … I don’ t  rightly know , zur . But I thought you  must.”
After a bit more cross-talk, we succeeded in disentangling
the tale.  He had, it seemed, fa llen in with a small group oftravelers on the road, farmers dr iving a herd of pigs to market.
Given the nature of pigs as traveling companions, he hadn’ t
stayed w ith them  for more than  one night, but over supper , in
the c ourse of casual talk, had heard them make reference to a
meeting of sorts and speculate as to who might come to it.
“Y our na me was mentioned, zur—’James Fraser ,’ they said,
and they  mentio ned the Ridge, t oo, so as I was sure ‘twas you
they meant.”
“What sort of meeting was it? ” I asked curiously . “And
where?”
He shrugged, helpless.
“T ook no notice, ma’am. Only they said ‘twas Monday
next.”
Neither did he recall the names of his hosts, having been too
much oc cupied in trying to eat without being overcome by the
presence of the pigs. He was  plainly too occupied at the
moment with the results of his unsuccessful courtship to give
much m ind to the details, an d after a few questions and
confused answers, Jamie sent him of f.
“Have you any idea—” I began,  but then saw that his brows
were furrowed; he obviously did.
“The meeting to choose delegates for a Continental
Congress,” he said. “It must be that.”
He h ad had word after Flora MacDonald’ s barbecue that the
initial meeting place and time  were to be abandoned, the
or ganizers fearing interference. A new place and time would
be established, John Ashe had told him—word would be sent.
But that was before the contretemps in downtown Cross
Creek.
“I su ppose a not e might have gone astray ,” I suggested, but
the suggestion was a feeble one.
“One might,” he agreed. “Not six.”
“Six?”“When I heard nothing, I wrot e myself, to the six men I
know pe rsonally within the Committee of Correspondence. No
answer from any of them.” His s tif f finger tapped once against
his leg, but he noticed, and stilled it.
“They don’ t trust you,” I said, a fter a moment’ s silence, and
he shook his head.
“Little w onder , I suppose, after I rescued Simms and tarred
Neil Forbes in the public street.” Despite himself, a small
smile flitted across his face at the memory . “And poor wee
Bobby didna help, I expect; h e would have told them he
carried letters betwixt me and Lord John.”
That was probably true. Friendly and garrulous, Bobby was
capable of keeping a confidence—but only if you told him
explicitly which  confidence to keep. Otherwise, anyone who
shared a meal with him would know all his business by the
time the pudding came.
“Can yo u do anything else to find out? Where the meeting
is, I mean?”
He blew out his breath in mild frustration.
“A ye, m aybe. But if I did, and went there—there’ s a great
chance they would put me out. If not worse. I think the risk of
such a breach isna worth it.” H e glanced at me, with a wry
expression. “I suppose I should have let them roast the
printer .”
I disregarded that, and came to stand beside him.
“Y ou’ll think of something else,” I said, trying to be
encouraging.
The big hour candle stood on his desk, half-burned, and he
touched it. No o ne seemed ever to notice that the candle was
never consumed.
“Perhaps …” he said meditat ively . “I may find a way .
Though I should hate to take another for the purpose.”
Another gem, he meant.I sw allowed a small lump in my throat at the thought. There
were tw o left. One each, if Roger , or Bree, and Jemmy—but I
choked that thought of f firmly .
“What does it profit a man to gain the world,” I quoted, “if
he lo se h is soul? It won’ t do us any good to be secretly rich, if
you  g et tarred and feathered.” I di dn’ t like that thought any
better , but it wasn’ t one I could avoid.
He glanced at h is forearm; he h ad rolled up his sleeves for
writing, and the fading burn st ill showed, a faint pink track
among the sunbleached hairs. H e sighed, went round his desk,
and picked a quill from the jar .
“A ye. Perhaps I’d best write a few more letters.”6 0
THE P ALE HORSEMAN RIDES
O N T HE TWENTIETH OF SEPTEMBER, Roger preached a
sermon on the text, God hat h chose n the weak things of the
world to confound the things which ar e mighty .  On the twenty-
first of Septemb er , one of those weak things set out to prove
the point.
Padraic and Hortense MacNeil l and their children hadn’ t
come to church. They always d id, and their absence aroused
comment—enough that Roger asked Brianna next morning if
she might walk round and visit, to see that there was nothing
wrong.
“I’d go myself,” he said, scrapin g the bottom of his porridge
bowl, “b ut I’ve promised to rid e with John MacAfee and his
father to Brownsville; he means to of fer for a girl there.”
“Does he mean you to make th em handfast on the spot if
she says  yes?” I asked. “Or are you just there to keep assorted
Browns from assassinating him?” There had been no open
violence since we had returned Lionel Brown’ s body , but there
were occasional small clashes, when a party from Brownsville
happened to meet men from the Ridge now and then in public.
“The latter ,” Roger said with a small grimace. “Though I’ve
some ho pes that a marriage o r two betwixt the Ridge and
Brownsville might help to mend matters, over time.”
Jamie, reading a newspaper from the most recent batch,
looked up at that.
“Oh, aye ? W ell, it’ s a thought. Doesna always work out just
so, thou gh.” He  smiled. “My u ncle Colum thought to mend
just such a matt er wi’ the Grants, by marrying my mother to
the Grant. Unfortunately ,” he added, turning over a page, “my
mother wasna inclined to cooperate. She snubbed MalcolmGrant, s tabbed my uncle Dougal, and eloped wi’ my father ,
instead.”
“Really?” Brian na hadn’ t heard that particular story; she
looked enchanted. Roger gave her a sidelong glance, and
coughed, ostenta tiously removin g the sharp knife with which
she’d been cutting up sausages.
“W ell, b e that as it may ,” he said, pushing back from the
table, kn ife in hand. “If ye wouldn’ t mind having a look-in on
Padraic’ s family , just to see they’re all right?”
In the event, Lizzie and I came along with Brianna, meaning
to call on Mars ali and Fer gus, whose cabin was a little way
beyond the MacNeills’. W e met Marsali on the way , though,
coming back from the whisky spring, and so there were four of
us when we came to the MacNeills’ cabin.
“Why are there so many flies, of a sudden?” Lizzie slapped
at a lar g e bluebo ttle that had lan ded on her arm, then waved at
two more, circling round her face.
“Something’ s dead nearby ,” Marsali said, lifting her nose to
snif f the air . “In the wood, maybe. Hear the crows?”
There were crows, cawing in the treetops nearby; looking
up, I saw more circling, black spots against the brilliant sky .
“Not in the wood,” Bree said, her voice suddenly strained.
She was looking toward the cabin. The door was tightly shut,
and a mass of flies milled over the hide-covered window .
“Hurry .”
The smell in the  cabin was unspeakable. I saw the girls gasp
and clam p their mouths tight s hut, as the door swung open.
Unfortunately , it was necessary to breathe. I did so, very
shallowly , as I m oved across the dark room and ripped down
the hide that had been tightly nailed across the window .
“Leave the door open,” I said, ignoring a faint moan of
complaint from the bed at the influx of light. “Lizzie—go and
start a smudge fire near the door and another outside the
window . Start it with grass and kindling, then add something
—damp wood, moss, wet leaves—to make it smoke.”Flies ha d begun to come in within seconds of my opening
the window , and were whizz ing past my face—deerflies,
bluebottles, gnats. Drawn by the smell, they had been
clustered on the sun-warmed logs outside, seeking entrance,
avid for food, desperate to lay their eggs.
The room would be a buzzing  hell in minutes—but we
needed l ight and  air , and would just have to deal with the flies
as best we might. I pulled of f my kerchief and folded it into a
makeshift flysw atter , slapping to and fro with it as I turned to
the bed.
Hortense and the two children were there. All naked, their
pallid limbs glimmering with the sweat of the sealed cabin.
They were clammy white where the sunlight struck, legs and
bodies streaked with reddish-br own. I hoped that it was only
diarrhea, and not blood.
Someone had moaned; someone moved. Not dead then,
thank Go d. The bedcoverings had been thrown to the floor in a
tangled heap—that was fortunate, as they were still mostly
clean. I thought we had better burn the straw mattress, as soon
as we got them of f it.
“Do not  put  your fingers in your mouth,” I murmured to
Bree, as we beg an to work, sorting the feebly twitching heap
of humanity into its component parts.
“Y ou have got  to be k idding,” she said, spea king through
her t eeth while s miling at a pale -faced child of five or six, who
lay half-curled in the exhausted aftermath of a diarrhetic
attack. She worked her hands under the little girl’ s armpits.
“Come on, lovey , let me lift you.”
The child was too weak to m ake any protest at being
moved; her arms and legs hun g limp as string. Her sister ’ s
state wa s even more alarming; no more than a year old, the
baby did n’ t move at all, and her eyes were sunk deep, a sign of
severe d ehydration. I picked up the tiny hand and gently
pinched the skin between thumb and forefinger . It stayed for a
moment, a tiny peak of grayi sh skin, then slowly , slowly ,
began to disappear .“Bloody fucking hell,” I said softly to myself and bent
swiftly to listen, hand on the child’ s chest. She wasn’ t dead—I
could ba rely feel the bump of her heart—but wasn’ t far from
it. If she were to o far gone to suck or drink, there was nothing
that would save her .
Even as the thou ght passed through my mind, I was rising,
looking about the cabin. No water; a hollowed gourd lay on its
side by the bed, empty . How lon g had they been like this, with
nothing to drink?
“Bree,” I said, m y voice level bu t ur gent. “Go and get some
water—quickly .”
She had laid the older child on the floor , and was wiping the
filth from  her body; she glanced up, though, and the sight of
my face made h er drop the rag she was using and stand up at
once. S he grabbed the kettle I thrust into her hand and
vanished; I heard her footsteps, running across the dooryard.
The flies were settling on Hor tense’ s face; I flapped the
kerchief close to shoo them away . The cloth skimmed her
nose, but her slack features barely twitched. She was
breathing; I could see her belly , distended with gas, moving
slightly .
Where was Padraic? Hunting, perhaps.
I caught a whif f of something under the overwhelming
stench o f voided bowels and leaned over , snif fing. A sweet,
pungently fermented scent, lik e rotted apples. I put a hand
under Hortense’ s shoulder and pulled, rolling her toward me.
There was a bott le—empty—under her body . A whif f of it was
enough to tell me what it had contained.
“Bloody , bloody fucking hell,” I said, under my breath.
Desperately ill and with no w ater to hand, she had drunk
applejack, either to quench her thirst or to soothe the pain of
the cram ps. A logical thing to  do—save that alcohol was a
diuretic. It would leach even more water from a body that was
already seriously dehydrated, to say nothing of further
irritating a gastrointestinal tract that scarcely needed it.Bloody Christ, had she given it to the children, too?
I sto oped to the elder child. She was limp as a ragdoll, head
lolling on her sh oulders, but there was still some resilience to
her flesh . A pinch of the hand; the skin stayed peaked, but
returned to normal faster than the baby’ s had.
Her eye s had opened when I pinched her hand. That was
good. I smiled at her , and bru shed the gathering flies away
from her  half-open mouth. The soft pink membranes were dry
and sticky-looking.
“Hallo, darling,” I said softly . “D on’ t worry now . I’m here.”
And was  that going to help? I wondered. Damn it all; if only
I had been a day earlier!
I heard Bree’ s hurrying steps and met her at the door .
“I need—” I began, but she interrupted me.
“Mr . Ma cNeill’ s in the woods!” she said. “I found him on
the way to the spring. He’ s—”
The kettle in her hands was still empty . I seized it with a cry
of exasperation.
“W ater! I need water!”
“But I—Mr . MacNeill, he’ s—”
I thrust the kettle back into her hands and shoved past her .
“I’ll find him,” I said. “Get w ater! Give it to them—the
baby first! Make Lizzie help you—the fires can wait! Run!”
I h eard the flies  first, a buzzin g noise that made my skin
crawl with revulsion. Out in the open, they had found him
quickly , attracted by the smell. I took a hasty gulp of air and
shoved through the buckbrush to where Padraic lay , collapsed
in the grass beneath a sycamore.
He wasn’ t dead. I saw that at once; the flies were a cloud,
not a blanket—hovering, lighting, flicking away again as he
twitched.He lay curled o n the ground, wearing only a shirt, a water
jug lyin g near his head. I knelt  by him, peering as I touched
him. His  shirt and legs were stai ned, as was the grass where he
lay . The excrement was very watery—most had soaked into
the s oil by now— but there was some solid matter . He’d been
stricken later than Hortense an d the children, then; his guts
hadn’ t b een griping long, or there would be mostly water ,
tinged with blood.
“Padraic?”
“Mrs. Claire, thank the Lord ye’ve come.” His voice was so
hoarse I  could scarcely make out words. “My bairnies. Have
ye got my bairnies safe?”
He raised himself on one elbow , shaking, sweat plastering
strands of gray hair to his cheeks. His eyes cracked open,
trying to  see me, but they were  swelled to mere slits by the
bites of deerflies.
“I have them.” I put a hand on him at once, squeezing to
force reassurance into him. “Lie down, Padraic. W ait a
moment while I tend them, then I’ll see to you.” He was very
ill, but not in immediate danger; the children were.
“Dinna mind me,” Padraic muttered. “Dinna … mind …”
He sway ed, brushed at the flies  that crawled on his face and
chest, th en groa ned as cramp se ized his belly again, doubling
as though some massive hand had crushed him in its grip.
I w as already running back to the house. There were
splashes of water in the dust of  the path—good, Brianna had
come this way , hurrying.
Amoebic dysen tery? Food poisoning? T yphoid? T yphus?
Cholera—please God, not that.  All of those, and a lot more,
were cur rently lu mped together simply as “the bloody flux” in
this time , and for obvious reasons. Not that it mattered in the
short term.
The immediate danger of all the diarrhetic diseases was
simple dehydration. In the ef fort to expel whatever microbial
invader was irritating the gut, the gastrointestinal tract simplyflushed itself repeatedly , depleting the body of the water
necessary to circulate blood, to  eliminate wastes, to cool the
body by means o f sweat, to maintain the brain and membranes
—the water necessary to maintain life.
If one could kee p a patient suf ficiently hydrated by means
of intravenous saline and glucose infusions, then the gut
would, most likely , heal itself ev entually and the patient would
recover . W ithou t intravenous intervention, the only possibility
was to administer fluids by mou th, or rectum as quickly and as
constantly as possible, for as long as it took. If one could.
If the patient cou ldn’ t keep down even water—I didn’ t think
the Mac Neills w ere vomiting; I didn’ t recall that  smell among
the others in the cabin. Probably not cholera, then; that was
something.
Brianna sat on the floor by the elder child, the little girl’ s
head in her lap, pressing a cup against her mouth. Lizzie knelt
by the hearth, f ace red with ex ertion as she kindled the fire.
The flies were settling on the motionless body of the woman
on t he bed, and  Marsali crouched over the limp form of the
baby on her lap, frantically trying to rouse it to drink.
Spilled water streaked her skirt . I could see the tiny head
lolled back on her lap, water dribbling down a slack and
horribly flattened cheek.
“She can ’ t,” Marsali was saying, over and over . “She can’ t,
she can’ t!”
Disregarding m y own advice about fingers, I ruthlessly
thrust an index finger into the baby’ s mouth, prodding the
palate for a gag reflex. It was there; the baby choked on the
water in  its mouth and gasped, a nd I felt the tongue close hard
against my finger for an instant.
Sucking. She was an infant, still breastfed—and suckling is
the first of the instincts for survival. I whirled to look at the
woman, but a gl ance at her flat breasts and sunken nipples was
enough; even so, I grabbed one breast, squeezing my fingers
toward the nipple. Again, again—no, no droplets of milkshowed on the brownish nippl es, and the breast tissue was
flabby in my hand. No water , no milk.
Marsali, graspin g what I was about, seized the neck of her
blouse and ripped it down, press ing the child to her own bared
breast. T he tiny legs were limp against her dress, toes bruised
and curled like wilted petals.
I was tipping back Hortense’ s face, dribbling water into her
open m outh. From the corner of my eye, I saw Marsali
rhythmically squeezing her breast with one hand, an ur gent
massage to make the milk let down, even as my own fingers
moved in an echo of the motion, massaging the unconscious
woman’ s throat, ur ging her to swallow .
Her fles h was slick with sweat , but most of it was mine.
T rickles of perspiration were running down my back, tickling
between my buttocks. I could smell myself, a strange metallic
scent, like hot copper .
The throat moved in sudden peristalsis, and I took my hand
away . Hortense choked and coughed, then her head rolled to
the s ide and her stomach heave d, sending its meager contents
rocketing back up. I wiped the  trace of vomit from her lips,
and pressed the cup to her mouth again. Her lips didn’ t move;
the water filled her mouth and  dribbled down her face and
neck.
Among the buzzing of the flies, I heard Lizzie’ s voice
behind m e, calm but abstracted, as though she spoke from a
long way of f.
“Can ye stop cursing, ma’am? It’ s only that the weans can
hear ye.”
I j erked round at her , only then  realizing that I had in fact
been repeating “Bloody fucking hell !” out loud, over  and over
as I worked.
“Y es,” I said. “Sorry .” And turned back to Hortense.
I g ot some wate r down her now and then, but not enough.
Not nea rly enough, given that h er bowels were still trying to
rid themselves of whatever troubled them. Bloody flux.Lizzie was praying.
“Hail Mary , full of grace, the Lord is with thee …”
Brianna was murmuring something under her breath, ur gent
sounds of maternal encouragement.
“Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus …”
My thumb was on the pulse of the carotid artery . I felt it
bump, sk ip, and  go on, jerking along like a cart with a missing
wheel. Her heart was beginning to fail, arrhythmic.
“Holy Mary , Mother of God …”
I sla mmed my fi st down on the center of her chest, and then
again, and again, hard enough that the bed and the pale
splayed body quivered under the blows. Flies rose in alarm
from the soaked straw , buzzing.
“Oh, no,” said Marsali softly behind me. “Oh, no, no,
please.” I had heard that tone of disbelief before, of protest and
appeal denied—and knew what had happened.
“Pray for us sinners …”
As though she, too, had heard, Hortense’ s head rolled
suddenly to one side, and her ey es sprang open, staring toward
the p lace where Marsali sat, tho ugh I thought she saw nothing.
Then the eyes closed and she doubled suddenly , onto one side,
legs drawn up n early to her chin. Her head wrenched back,
body tight in spa sm, and then she suddenly relaxed. She would
not let her child go alone. Bloody flux.
‘Now and at the hour of our death, amen. Hail Mary , full of
grace …”
Lizzie’ s soft voice went on mechanically , repeating her
words o f prayer as mindlessly as I had said mine earlier . I held
Hortense’ s wrist, checking for the pulse, but it was mere
formality . Marsa li curled over the tiny body in grief, rocking it
against her breast. Milk dripped from the swollen nipple,
coming slowly , then faster , fallin g like white rain on the small
still face, futilely eager to nourish and sustain.The air was stil l stifling, still thick with odor and flies and
the sound of Lizzie’ s prayers—but the cabin seemed empty ,
and curiously silent.
There w as a shuf fling noise outside; the sound of something
being dr agged, a grunt of pain and dreadful exertion. Then the
soft sou nd of falling, a gasp of breath. Padraic had made it
back to his own  doorstep. Brianna looked to the door , but she
still held the older girl in her arms, still alive.
I set  dow n the limp hand that I held, carefully , and went to
help.6 1
A NOISOME PESTILENCE
T HE DA YS WERE GROWING  SHOR TER, but light still
came ea rly . The  windows at the  front of the house faced east,
and the rising s un glowed on the scrubbed white oak of my
sur gery floor . I could see the brilliant bar of light advancing
across th e hand-hewn boards; had I had an actual timepiece, I
could have calibrated the floo r like a sundial, marking the
seams between the boards in minutes.
As it was, I marked them in heartbeats, waiting through the
moments until the sun should h ave reached the counter where
my microscope stood ready , slides and beaker beside it.
I he ard soft foot steps in the corridor , and Jamie pushed the
door ope n with his shoulder , a pewter mug of something hot
held in each hand, wrapped with rags against the heat.
“Ciamar a tha thu, mo chridhe, ”  he said softly , a nd handed
one to me, brushing a kiss across my forehead. “How is it,
then?”
“It could  be worse.” I gave him a smile of gratitude, though
it was interrupt ed by a yawn. I didn’ t need to tell him that
Padraic and his elder daughter still lived; he would have
known at once by my face if a nything dire had happened. In
fact, bar any complications, I thought both would recover; I
had stayed with them all night, rousing them hourly to drink a
concoction of honeyed water , mixed with a little salt,
alternating with a strong infusion of peppermint leaf and
dogwood bark to calm the bowels.
I lifted the mug—goosefoot tea—closing my eyes as I
inhaled the faint, bitter perfume , and feeling the tight muscles
of my neck and shoulders relax in anticipation.
He had seen m e twist my head  to ease my neck; Jamie’ s
hand came down on my nape,  lar ge and wonderfully warmfrom holding the hot tea. I gave a small moan of ecstasy at the
touch, and he laughed low in his throat, massaging my sore
muscles.
“Should ye not be abed, Sassen ach? Y e’ll not have slept at
all the night.”
“Oh, I did … a bit.” I had dozed fitfully , sitting up by the
open window , roused periodical ly by the startling touch on my
face of the moths that flew in, d rawn to the light of my candle.
Mrs. Bug had co me at dawn, though, fresh and starched, ready
to take over the heavy nursing.
“I’ll go lie down  in a bit,” I prom ised. “But I wanted to have
a quick look first.” I waved va guely toward my microscope,
which stood assembled and read y on the table. Next to it were
several small glass bottles, plug ged with twists of cloth, each
containing a brownish liquid. Jamie frowned at them.
“Look? At what?” he said. He l ifted his long, straight nose,
snif fing suspiciously . “Is that shit?”
“Y es, it is,” I s aid, not bothering to stifle a jaw-cracking
yawn. I had—as discreetly as  possible—collected samples
from Hortense and the baby and, later , from my living
patients, as well. Jamie eyed them.
“Exactly what, ” he inquired cautiously , “are ye looking
for?”
“W ell, I don’ t k now ,” I admitted. “And in fact, I may not
find anything—or anything I can recognize. But it’ s possible
that it was eith er an amoeba or a bacillus that made the
MacNeills sick—and I think I would  recognize an amoeba;
they’re quite big. Relatively speaking,” I added hastily .
“Oh, aye?” His ruddy brows drew together , then lifted.
“Why?”
That was a better question than he knew .
“W ell, partly for the sake of curiosity ,” I admitted. “But
also, if I do find  a causative or g anism that I can recognize, I’ll
know a bit mo re about the di sease—how long it lasts, forinstance, and whether there are any complications to look out
for specially . And how contagious it is.”
He glanced at me, cup half-raised to his mouth.
“Is it one you  can catch?”
“I don’ t  know ,” I admitted. “T hough I’m fairly sure it is.
I’ve been vaccinated against t yphus and typhoid—but this
doesn’ t look like either one of those. And there are no vaccines
for dysentery or Giar dia  poisoning.”
The brow s drew together and st ayed that way , knotted as he
sipped his tea. H is fingers gave my neck a final squeeze and
dropped away .
I sip ped cautiously at my own tea, sighing in pleasure as it
gently s calded my throat and ran hot and comforting down
into my stomach. Jamie lounged on his stool, long legs thrust
out. He glanced down into th e steaming cup between his
hands.
“D’ye think this tea is hot, Sassenach?” he asked.
I raised my own brows at that. Both cups were still wrapped
in rags, and I could feel the heat seeping through to my palms.
“I do,” I said. “Why?”
He l ifted the mu g and took a mouthful of tea, which he held
for a moment be fore swallowing ; I could see the long muscles
move in his throat.
“Brianna came into the kitchen  whilst I was brewing the
pot,” he  said. “She took down the basin, and the pannikin of
soap—and then she took a dipp er of water steaming from the
kettle, a nd poured it over her hands, one and then the other .”
He paused a moment. “The water was boiling when I took it
of f the fire a moment before.”
The mou thful of  tea I had taken went down crooked, and I
coughed.
“Did she burn h erself?” I said, when I had got my breath
back.“She did,” he said, rather grimly . “She scrubbed herself
from fin gertips to elbows, and I  saw the blister on the side of
her h and where the water fell.” He paused for a moment, and
his eyes met mine over the mugs, dark blue with worry .
I took another sip of my un-honeyed tea. The room was cool
enough, just past dawn, that my hot breath made tiny wisps of
steam as I sighed.
“Padraic’ s baby died in Marsali’ s arms,” I said quietly . “She
held the other child. She knows it’ s contagious.” And
knowing, could not touch or p ick up her own child without
doing her best to wash away her fear .
Jamie moved uneasily .
“A ye,” he began. “But still …”
“It’ s dif ferent,” I said, and put a hand on his wrist, as much
for my own comfort as his.
The tran sient co olness of the m orning air touched face and
mind alike, dispelling the warm  tangle of dreams. The grass
and trees were s till lit with a chilly dawn glow , blue-shadowed
and mys terious, and Jamie seemed a solid point of reference,
fixed in the shifting light.
“Dif ferent,” I repeated. “For her , I mean.” I took a breath of
the swe et morning air , smelling of wet grass and morning
glories.
“I w as b orn at the end of a war—the Great W ar , they called
it, be cause the w orld had never s een anything like it. I told you
about it. ” My voice held a slight question, and he nodded, eyes
fixed on mine, listening.
“The year after I was born,” I said, “there was a great
epidemic of influenza. All over the world. People died in
hundreds and thousands; whole villages disappeared in the
space of a week. And then came the other , my war .”
The words were quite unconscious, but hearing them, I felt
the corner of my mouth twitch with irony . Jamie saw it and a
faint smile touched his own lips . He knew what I meant—thatodd sense of pride that comes of living through a terrible
conflict, leaving  one with a peculiar feeling of possession. His
wrist turned, his fingers wrapping tight around my own.
“And she has ne ver seen plague or war ,” he said, beginning
to understand. “Never?” His voice held something odd. Nearly
incomprehensible, to a man born a warrior , brought up to fight
as soon as he co uld lift a sword; born to the idea that he must
—he would—defend himself and his family by violence. An
incomprehensible notion—but a rather wonderful one.
“Only a s pictures. Films, I mean. T elevision.” That one he
would n ever understand, and I could not explain. The way in
which such pictures focused on  war itself; bombs and planes
and submarines , and the thrilling ur gency of blood shed on
purpose; a sense of nobility in deliberate death.
He knew what battlefields we re really like—battlefields,
and what came after them.
“The men who fought in those wars—and the women—they
didn’ t die of the killing, most of them. They died like this—”
A lift of my mug toward th e open window , toward the
peaceful mountains, the dis tant hollow where Padraic
MacNeill’ s cabin lay hidden. “They died of illness and neglect,
because there wasn’ t any way to stop it.”
“I h ave seen that,” he said softly , with a glance at the
stoppered bottles. “Plague and ague run rampant in a city , half
a regiment dead of flux.”
“Of course you have.”
Butterflies were rising among the flowers in the dooryard,
cabbage whites and sulfur yellows, here and there the great,
lazy sail  of a la te tiger swallowtail out of the shadow of the
wood. M y thumb still rested on his wrist, feeling his heartbeat,
slow and powerful.
“Brianna was born seven years after penicillin came into
common use. She was born in America—not this one”—I
nodded toward the window again—”but that  one, that will be.
There, it isn’ t usual for lots of people to die of contagiousillness.” I glanced at him. The li ght had reached his waist, and
glowed on the metal cup in his hand.
“Do you  remember the first pe rson you knew of who had
died?”
His face went blank with surprise, then sharpened, thinking.
After a moment, he shook his head.
“My bro ther was the first who  was important, but I kent
others before him, surely .”
“I can’ t remember , either .” My parents, of course; their
deaths had been personal—but b orn in England, I had lived in
the shadow of cenotaphs and memorials, and people just
beyond the bounds of my own family died regularly; I had a
sudden vivid memory , of my fa ther putting on a hombur g and
dark coa t to go to the baker ’ s wife’ s funeral. Mrs. Briggs, her
name had been. But she hadn’ t been the first; I knew already
about d eath and funerals. How old had I been then—four ,
perhaps?
I wa s ve ry tired.  My eyes felt grainy from lack of sleep, and
the delicate early light was brightening to full sun.
“I think Frank’ s was the first death Brianna ever
experienced personally . Maybe there were others; I can’ t be
sure. But the point is—”
“I se e th e point.”  He reached to take the empty cup from my
hand, an d set it on the counter , t hen drained his own and set it
down, too.
“But it’ s  no herself she fears for , aye?” he asked, his eyes
penetrating. “It’ s the wean.”
I n odded . She would have know n, of course, in an academic
sort of way , that such things wer e possible. But to have a child
die s uddenly before you, from s omething like a simple case of
diarrhea …
“She’ s a  good mother ,” I said, and yawned suddenly . She
was. But it would never have struck her in any visceral waythat something so negligible as a germ could suddenly snatch
away her child. Not until yesterday .
Jamie stood up suddenly , and pulled me to my feet.
“Go to bed, Sa ssenach,” he said. “That will wait.” He
nodded at the m icroscope. “I’v e never known shit spoil with
keeping.”
I laughed, and collapsed slowly against him, my cheek
pressed against his chest.
“Maybe you’re right.” Still, I did n’ t push away . He held me,
and we watched the sunlight g row , creeping slowly up the
wall.6 2
AMOEBA
I  T URNED THE MIRROR OF the microscope a fraction of
an inch further , to get as much light as I could.
“There.” I stepped back, motioning Malva to come and
look. “D o you see it? The big, clear thing in the middle, lobed,
with the little flecks in it?”
She frowned, squinting one-eyed into the ocular , then drew
in her breath in a gasp of triumph.
“I se e it plain! Like a currant p udding someone’ s dropped
on the floor , no?”
“That’ s it,” I sai d, smiling at he r description in spite of the
general seriousness of our investigation. “It’ s an amoeba—one
of the bigger so rts of microor ganisms. And I very much think
it’ s our villain.”
W e wer e looking at slides mad e from the stool samples I
had retr ieved from all the sick so far—for Padraic’ s family
was not the only one af fected. There were three families with
at least one person ill with a vicious bloody flux—and in all of
the samp les I had looked at so far , I had found this amoebic
stranger .
“Is i t really?” Malva had looked  up when I spoke, but now
returned to the eyepiece, absorbed. “However can something
so small cause such a stramash  in som ething so big as a
person?”
“W ell, there is  an explanation,” I said, swishing another
slide gen tly thro ugh the dye bat h and setting it to dry . “But it
would take me a bit of time to tell you, all about cells—you
remember , I showed you the c ells from the lining of your
mouth?”She nodded, frowning slightly , and ran her tongue along
inside her cheek.
“W ell, the body makes all kinds  of dif ferent cells, and there
are s pecial kinds of cells whose  business it is to fight bacteria
—the small, roundish sorts of th ings, you remember those?” I
gestured at the slide, which bei ng fecal matter , had the usual
vast quantities of Escherichia coli  and the like.
“But the re are millions of dif ferent sorts, and sometimes a
microor ganism c omes along that the special cells aren’ t able to
deal with. Y ou know—I showed you the Plasmodium  in
Lizzie’ s blood?” I nodded toward the stoppered vial on the
counter; I had taken blood fro m Lizzie only a day or two
before, and shown the malarial parasites in the cells to Malva.
“And I do think that this amoeb a of ours may well be one like
that.”
“Oh, we ll. W ill we give the sick  folk the penicillin, then?” I
smiled a little at the eager “we,” though there was little enough
to smile at in the situation overall.
“No, I’m afraid penicillin isn’ t ef fective against amoebic
dysentery—that’ s what you call a very bad flux, a dysentery .
No, I’m afraid w e’ve nothing much to be going on with save
herbs.” I opened the cupboard and ran an eye over the ranks of
bottles and gauze-wrapped bundles, puzzling.
“W ormwood, for a start.” I took the jar down and handed it
to M alva, who had come to s tand beside me, looking with
interest into the mysteries of the cupboard. “Garlic, that’ s
generally useful for infections of the digestive tract—but it
makes quite a good poultice for skin things, as well.”
“What about onions? My grannie would steam an onion,
and put it to my ear , when I was a wee bairn and had the
earache. It smelt something dreadful, but it did work!”
“It c an’ t hurt. R un out to the pantry , then, and fetch … oh,
three big ones, and several heads of garlic.”
“Oh, at once, ma’am!” She se t down the wormwood and
dashed out, sandals flapping. I turned back to the shelves,trying to calm my own sense of ur gency .
I wa s torn betw een the ur ge to be with the sick, nursing
them, and the need to make medicines that might  be of help.
But ther e were other people who could do the nursing, and no
one but  me who knew enou gh to try to compound an
antiparasitic remedy .
W ormwood, garlic … agrimony . And gentian. Anything
with a very high  content of copp er or sulfur—oh, rhubarb. W e
were pas t the growing season, but I’d had a fine crop and had
put up several d ozen bottles of the boiled pulp and syrup, as
Mrs. Bu g liked it for pies, and it provided some vitamin C for
the winter months. That would make a splendid base for the
medicine. Add perhaps slippery elm, for its soothing ef fects on
the intes tinal tra ct—though suc h ef fects were likely to be so
slight as  to be unnoticeable a gainst the ravages of such a
virulent onslaught.
I began pounding wormwood and agrimony in my mortar ,
meanwhile wondering where the bloody hell the thing had
come fro m. Amoebic dysentery was normally a disease of the
tropics, though God knew , I’d seen any number of peculiar
tropical diseases on the coast, brought in with the slave and
sugar trade from the Indies—an d not a few further inland, too,
since any such disease that wasn’ t instantly fatal tended to
become chronic and move along with its victim.
It wasn’ t impossible that one of the fisher -folk had
contracted it during the journey from the coast, and while
being one of th e fortunate persons who suf fered only a mild
infection, was now carrying the  encysted form of the amoeba
around in his or  her digestive tr act, all ready to shed infective
cysts right and left.
Why this sudden outbreak? Dysentery was almost always
spread via contaminated food or water . What—
“Here, ma’am.” Malva was back, breathless from her hurry ,
several l ar ge bro wn onions in h and, crackling and glossy , and
a do zen garlic h eads bundled in her apron. I set her to slicing
them up, and had the happy inspiration of telling her to stewthem in honey . I didn’ t know w hether the antibacterial ef fect
of h oney would be likewise ef fe ctive against an amoeba, but it
couldn’ t hurt— and might conceivably make the mixture a
little mo re palata ble; it was shap ing up to be more than a trifle
eye-watering, between the onions, the garlic, and the rhubarb.
“Phew! What are you guys doing  i n here? ” I looked up from
my macerating to see Brianna in the door , looking deeply
suspicious, nose wrinkled against the smell.
“Oh. W ell …” I’d become hab ituated to it myself, but in
fact, the air in the sur gery was fairly thick with the smell of
fecal samples, now augmented by waves of onion fumes.
Malva lo oked up , eyes streaming, and snif fed, wiping her nose
on her apron.
“W e’re magking bedicine,” she informed Bree, with
considerable dignity .
“Is anyo ne else fallen sick?” I asked anxiously , but she
shook he r head and edged into t he room, fastidiously avoiding
the counter where I had been making slides of fecal material.
“No, not that I ’ve heard. I took some food over to the
McLachlans’ th is morning, and they said only the two little
ones had  it. Mrs. Coinneach sai d she’d had diarrhea a couple
of days ago, but not bad, and she’ s all right now .”
“They’re giving the little ones honey water?”
She nodded, a small frown between her eyebrows.
“I s aw them. T hey look pretty sick, but nothing like the
MacNeills.” She looked rather sick herself, at the memory , but
shook it of f, turning to the high cupboard.
“Can I borrow a  little sulfuric acid, Mama?” She’d brought
an earth enware cup with her , and the sight of it made me
laugh.
“Ordinary peop le borrow a c up of sugar ,” I told her ,
nodding at it. “ Of course. Be careful with it, though—you’d
best put it in one  of those vials with a waxed cork. Y ou do not
want to chance tripping and spilling it.”“I defin itely don’ t,” she assured me. “I only need a few
drops, though; I’m going to d ilute it down pretty far . I’m
making paper .”
“Paper?” Malva blinked, red-eyed, and snif fed. “How?”
“W ell, you squish up anything  fibrous you can get your
hands on ,” Bree told her , making squishing motions with both
hands in  illustrations. “Old bits of used paper , old rags of
cloth, bi ts of yarn or thread, som e of the softer sorts of leaves
or flowers. Then you soak the mash for days and days in water
and—if you happen to have some—dilute sulfuric acid.” One
long finger tapped the square bottle af fectionately .
“Then o nce the mash is all dige sted down to a sort of pulp,
you can spread a thin layer of  it on screens, press out the
water , let it dry , and hey-presto, paper!”
I could see Malva mouthing “hey-presto” to herself, and
turned a way a little, so she couldn’ t see me smile. Brianna
uncorked the big square bottle  of acid and, very carefully ,
poured a few drops into her cup. Immediately , the hot smell of
sulfur rose like a demon amidst the miasma of feces and
onions.
Malva stif fened, eyes still streaming but wide.
“What is that?” she said.
“Sulfuric acid,” Bree said, looking at her curiously .
“V itriol,” I amended. “Have you seen—er , smelled it
before?”
She nod ded, put  the sliced onion s into a pot, and put the lid
neatly on.
“A ye, I have.” She came to loo k at the green glass bottle,
dabbing at her e yes. “My mother—she died when I was young
—she had some of that. I remember the smell of it, and how
she’d sa y as I m ustn’ t touch it, e ver . Brimstone, folk called the
smell—a whif f o’ brimstone.”
“Really? I wonder what she used it for .” I did  wonder , and
with a certain se nse of unease. A n alchemist or an apothecarymight have the stuf f; the only reason that I knew of for a
common citizen  to keep it was as a means of aggression—to
throw at someone.
But Malva only shook her head , and turning, went back to
the onions and garlic. I’d caught the look on her face, though;
a qu eer expression of hostility and longing that rang a small,
unsuspected bell somewhere inside me.
Longing for a m other long dead—and the fury of a small
girl, abandoned. Bewildered and alone.
“What?” Brianna was watching my  face, frowning slightly .
“What’ s wrong?”
“Nothing,” I said, and put a hand on her arm, just to feel the
strength and joy of her presence, the years of her growth. T ears
stung my eyes, b ut that could be  put down to onions. “Nothing
at all.”
I W A S GETTING TERRIBL Y tired of funerals. This was the
third, in  as many days. W e had buried Hortense and the baby
together , then the older Mrs. Ogilvie. Now it was another
child, one of Mrs. MacAfee’ s twins. The other twin, a boy ,
stood by his sis ter ’ s grave, in a shock so profound that he
looked like a walking ghost him self, though the disease hadn’ t
touched him.
W e were later than intended—the cof fin hadn’ t been quite
ready—and the night was rising  around us. All the gold of the
autumn leaves had faded into as h, and white mist was curling
through the dark wet trunks of  the pines. One could hardly
imagine a more desolate scene—and yet it was in a way more
fitting than the bright sunshine and fresh breeze that had
blown when we buried Hortense and little Angelica.
“The Lor d is my shepher d. He leadeth me beside—”
Roger ’ s voice cracked painfully , but no one seemed to notice.
He struggled for a moment, sw allowing hard, and went on,
doggedly . He held the little g reen Bible in his hands, but
wasn’ t l ooking at it; he was speaking from memory , and hiseyes we nt from Mr . MacDuf f, s tanding alone, for his wife and
his siste r were both sick, to the  little boy beside him—a little
boy about Jemmy’ s age.
“Though I walk … though I walk thr ough the valley of
death, I shall …  shall fear no evil—”  His voice was trembling
audibly , and I saw that tears were running down his face. I
looked for Bree; she was standing a little way behind the
mourners, Jem half-swaddled in the folds of her dark cloak.
The hoo d of it was drawn up, b ut her face was visible, pale in
the gloaming, Our Lady of Sorrows.
Even Major MacDonald’ s red coat was muted, charcoal-
gray in the las t vestiges of light. He had arrived in the
afternoon, and helped to carry up the little cof fin; he stood
now , hat somberly tucked beneath his arm, wigged head
bowed, his face invisible. He, too, had a child—a daughter ,
somewhere back in Scotland with her mother .
I sw ayed a little, and felt Jamie’ s hand under my elbow . I
had been  withou t sleep for most  of the last three days, and had
taken precious little food. I did n’ t feel either hungry or tired,
though; I felt remote and unreal, as though the wind blew
through me.
The fath er uttered a cry of inconsolable grief, and sank
suddenly down upon the heap of dirt thrown up by the grave. I
felt Jamie’ s muscles contract in instinctive compassion toward
him, and pulled away a little, murmuring, “Go.”
I saw him cross swiftly to Mr . MacAfee, bend to whisper to
him, put an arm around him. Roger had stopped talking.
My thou ghts wo uld not obey me . T ry as I might to fix them
on t he proceedings, they strayed  away . My arms ached; I had
been po unding herbs, lifting patients, carrying water … I felt
as th ough I were doing all these things over and over , could
feel the repetitiv e thud of pestle in mortar , the dragging weight
of fainti ng bodie s. I was seeing  in vivid memory the slides of
Entameba,  greedy  pseudopodia flowin g in slow-motion
appetite. W ater , I heard water flo wing; it lived in water , thoughonly the  cystic form was infective. It was passed on by means
of water . I thought that very clearly .
Then I was lying on the ground,  with no memory of falling,
no memory of e ver being upright, the smell of fresh, damp dirt
and fres h, damp  wood strong in  my nose, and a vague thought
of worms. There was a flutter of motion before my eyes; the
small gr een Bible had fallen and  lay on the dirt in front of my
face, the  wind turning over its p ages, one by one by one in a
ghostly game of sortes V ir gilianae —where would it stop? I
wondered dimly .
There were hands and voices, b ut I could not pay attention.
A great amoeba floated majestically in darkness before me,
pseudopodia flowing slowly , slowly , in welcoming embrace.6 3
MOMENT OF DECISION
F EVER ROLLED ACROSS MY MIND like a thunderstorm,
jagged f orks of pain crackling through my body in bursts of
brilliance, each a lightning bolt that glowed for a vivid
moment along some nerve or plexus, lighting up the hidden
hollows of my joints, burning down the length of muscle
fibers. A merciless brilliance, i t struck again, and again, the
fiery sword of a destroying angel who gave no quarter .
I sel dom knew whether my eye s were open or closed, nor
whether I woke or slept. I saw nothing but a roiling gray ,
turbulent and shot with red. Th e redness pulsed in veins and
patches, shrouded in the cloud. I  seized upon one crimson vein
and followed its path, clinging to the track of its sullen glow
amid the buf feting of thunder . The thunder grew louder as I
penetrated deepe r and deeper into the murk that boiled around
me, becoming hideously regular , like the beating of a
kettledrum, so that my ears rang with it, and I felt myself a
hollow skin, tight-stretched, v ibrating with each crash of
sound.
The source of i t was now before me, throbbing so loudly
that I felt I must shout, only to  hear some other sound—but
though I felt my lips draw back and my throat swell with
ef fort, I heard nothing but the  pounding. In desperation, I
thrust my hands—if they were my hands—through the misty
gray and seized some warm, m oist object, very slippery , that
throbbed, convulsing in my hands.
I looked down and knew it all at once to be my own heart.
I dr opped it in horror , and it crawled away in a trail of
reddish slime, shuddering with ef fort, the valves all opening
and closing like the mouths of suf focating fish, each poppingopen with a hol low click, closing again with a small, meaty
thud.
Faces sometime s appeared in the clouds. Some seemed
familiar , though  I could put no name to them. Others were the
faces of strangers, the half-seen, unknown faces that flit
sometimes throu gh the mind on the ver ge of sleep. These
looked at me with curiosity or indif ference—then turned away .
The others, the ones I knew , bore looks of sympathy or
worry; t hey would seek to fix my gaze with theirs, but my
glance s lid guilt ily of f, giddily away , unable to gain traction.
Their lip s move d, and I knew they spoke to me, but I heard
nothing, their words drowned by the silent thunder of my
storm.
I FE L T QUITE ODD— but, fo r the first time in uncountable
days, not ill. Th e fever clouds had rolled back; still grumbling
softly so mewhere near , but for the moment, gone from sight.
My eyes  were clear; I could se e the raw wood in the beams
overhead.
In fact, I saw th e wood with su ch clarity that I was struck
with awe at the  beauty of it. The loops and whorls of the
polished grain seemed at once static and alive with grace, the
colors of it shim mering with smoke and the essence of the
earth, so  that I could see how the beam was transformed and
yet held still the spirit of the tree.
I w as so entranced by this that  I reached out my hand to
touch it—and did. My fingers brushed the wood with delight
at th e cool surf ace and the grooves of the axmarks, wing-
shaped a nd regu lar as a flight of geese along the beam. I could
hear the beating of powerful wings, and at the same time, feel
the flex and swing of my shoulders, the vibration of joy
through my forearms as the ax fell on the wood. As I explored
this fasc inating sensation, it occurred to me, dimly , that the
beam was eight feet above the bed.
I tur ned—with no sense whatev er of ef fort—and saw that I
lay upon the bed below .I lay on my b ack, the quilts rumpled and scattered, as
though I  had tried at some poin t to throw them of f but lacked
the s trength to d o so. The air in the room was strangely still,
and the blocks of color in the fabric glowed through it like
jewels at the bottom of the sea, rich but muted.
By c ontrast, my skin was the co lor of pearls, bloodless pale
and shimmering. And then I saw that this was because I was so
thin that the skin of face and limb pressed hard upon the bone,
and it was the gleam of bone and cartilage below that gave that
luster to my face, smooth hardness shining through transparent
skin.
And such bones as they were! I was filled with wonder at
the marv el of their shaping. My  eyes followed the delicacy of
the arching ribs, the heartbreaking beauty of the sculptured
skull with a sense of awed astonishment.
My hair was tumbled, matted, a nd snarled … and yet I felt
myself d rawn to  it, tracing its curves with eye and … finger?
For I had no consciousness of moving, and yet I felt the
softness of the strands, the c ool silk of brown and the
springing vibrancy of silver , heard the hairs chime softly past
each other , a rustle of notes cascading like a harp’ s.
My God,  I said, and heard the words,  though no sound
stirred the air , you ar e so lovely!
My eyes were open. I looked deep and met a gaze of amber
and soft gold. T he eyes looked through me, to something far
beyond—and ye t they saw me, too. I saw the pupils dilate
slightly , and felt the warmth of their darkness embrace me
with knowledge and acceptance. Y es,  said those knowing eyes.
I kno w you. Let us go.  I fe lt a sense of great peace, an d the air
around me stirred, like wind rushing through feathers.
Then so me sound turned me tow ard the window and I saw
the man  who stood there. I had no name for him, and yet I
loved him. He stood with his back turned to the bed, arms
braced o n the sill, and his head sunk on his chest, so the dawn
light glowed red on his hair and traced his arms with gold. Aspasm of grief shook him; I f elt it, like the temblors of a
distant quake.
Someone moved near him. A dark-haired woman, a girl.
She came close, touched his back, murmuring something to
him. I saw the w ay she looked a t him, the tender inclination of
her head, the intimacy of her body swaying toward him.
No,  I thought, with great calm. That won’ t do.
I loo ked once m ore at myself ly ing on the bed, and with a
feeling that was at once firm dec ision and incalculable regret, I
took another breath.6 4
I AM THE RESURRECTION,
 P AR T 2
I  STILL SLEPT FOR LONG PERIODS, waking only briefly
to take nourishment. Now the fever dreams were gone, though,
and sleep was a  lake of deep black water , where I breathed
oblivion and drifted past the wa ving waterweed, mindless as a
fish.
I wo uld float sometimes just b elow the surface, aware of
people a nd thing s in the air -bre athing world, but incapable of
joining them. V oices spoke near me, muf fled and meaningless.
Now an d then some phrase would penetrate the clear liquid
around me and float into my head, where it would hang like a
tiny jellyfish, round and transparent, yet pulsating with some
mysterious inner meaning, its words a drifting net.
Each ph rase hung for a time in my purview , folding and
unfolding in its curious rhythms, and then drifted quietly up
and away , leaving silence.
And in between the small jell yfish came open spaces of
clear water , some filled with radiant light, some the darkness
of utter peace. I drifted upward and downward, suspended
between the surface and the depths, at the whim of unknown
currents.
“Physician, look.” Fizz. A stirring there, some dormant
spore of consciousness, disturbed by carbonation, splits and
blooms. Then a stab as sharp as metal, Who is calling me?
“Physician, look.”
I opened my eyes.
It was no great shock, for the ro om was filled with twilight,
still light, like being underwater , and I had no sense of
disruption.“O L or d Jesus Christ, Thou gr e at Physician: Look with Thy
gracious favor upon this Thy servant; give wisdom and
discr etion to those who minister to her in her sickness; bless
all the means used for her r ecovery …”
The words flowed past me in a  whispering stream, cool on
my skin. There was a man before me, dark head bent over a
book. Th e light in the room emb raced him and he seemed part
of it.
“Stretch forth Thy hand,” he w hispered to the pages, in a
voice th at cracked and broke, “and according to Thy will,
restore her to health and strength, that she may live to praise
Thee for Thy goodness and Th y grace; to the glory of Thy
holy name. Amen.”
“Roger?” I said, groping for his  name. My own voice was
hoarse from disuse; speaking was an intolerable ef fort.
His eyes were closed in prayer; they sprang open,
unbelieving, and  I thought how vivid they were, the green of
wet serpentine and summer leaves.
“Claire?” His voice cracked lik e a teenaged boy’ s, and he
dropped the book.
“I don’ t know ,” I said, feelin g the dreamlike sense of
submer gence threatening to engulf me again. “Am I?”
I CO ULD LIFT A HAND for a  moment or two, but was too
weak ev en to lift my head, let alone sit up. Roger helpfully
dragged me semi-upright against piled pillows, and put his
hand at the back of my head to  prevent wobbling, holding a
cup of water to my dry lips. It w as the odd feel of his hand on
the bare skin of my neck that began a dim process of
realization. The n I felt the warmth of his hand, vivid and
immediate, at the back of my h ead, and jerked like a gaf fed
salmon, sending the cup flying.
“What? What? ” I spluttered, clutching my head, too
shocked to formulate a complete sentence, and oblivious to the
cold water soaking through the sheets. “WHA T?!”Roger lo oked nearly as shocked as I felt. He swallowed,
searching for words. “I … I … I thought you knew ,” he
stammered, voice breaking. “D idn’ t you … ? I mean … I
thought … look, it’ll grow!”
I could feel my mouth working, vainly trying dif ferent
shapes that might approximate words, but there was no
connection between tongue and brain—there was room for
nothing but the realization that the accustomed soft, heavy
weight of my hair was gone, replaced by a fuzz of bristles.
“Malva and Mrs. Bug cut it of f, day before yesterday ,”
Roger sa id, all in a rush. “They—we weren’ t here, Bree nor I,
we wouldn’ t have let them, of course we wouldn’ t—but they
thought it’ s what you do for som eone with a terrible fever , it is
what pe ople do now . Bree was  furious with them, but they
thought—they truly thought they were helping save your life
—oh, God, Claire, don’ t look like that, please!”
His face had disappeared in a starburst of light, a curtain of
shimmering water suddenly coming down to protect me from
the gaze of the world.
I w asn’ t  conscious of crying, at all. Grief simply burst from
me, like wine sp raying from a wineskin stabbed with a knife.
Purple-red as bone marrow , splattering and dripping
everywhere.
“I’ll fetch Jamie!” he croaked.
“NO!” I  seized him by the sleev e, with more strength than I
would h ave imagined I possessed. “God, no! I don’ t want him
to see me like this!”
His momentary silence told me,  but I kept stubborn hold of
his s leeve, unable to think how e lse to prevent the unthinkable.
I bli nked, water sliding over my  face like a stream over rock,
and Roger wavered once more into visibility , blurred around
the edges.
“He’ s … er …  he’ s seen you,” Roger said gruf fly . He
looked down, not wanting to m eet my eyes. “It. Already . Imean—” He waved a hand vaguely in the vicinity of his own
black locks. “He saw it.”
“He did?” This was nearly as much a shock as the initial
discovery . “What—what did he say?”
He took  a deep breath and looked back up, like someone
fearing to see a Gor gon. Or the anti-Gor gon, I thought bitterly .
“He didn’ t say a nything,” Roger said quite gently , and put a
hand on my arm. “He—he just cried.”
I was still crying, too, but in a m ore orthodox fashion now .
Less of the gas ping note. The sense of bone-deep cold had
passed, and my limbs felt warm now , though I still felt a
disconcertingly chilly breeze on my scalp. My heart was
slowing again, and a faint sense that I was standing outside my
body came over me.
Shock? I thought, dimly surprised as the word formed itself
in m y mind, rub bery and melting. I supposed that one could
suf fer true physical shock as the  result of emotional wounds—
of course one could, I knew that… .
“Claire!” I became aware that Roger was calling my name
with increasing ur gency , and shaking my arm. W ith immense
ef fort, I  brought my eyes to focus on him. He was looking
truly alarmed, and I wondered, vaguely , whether I had started
to die again. But no—it was too late for that.
“What?”
He sighed—with relief, I thought.
“Y ou lo oked fun ny for a mome nt.” His voice was cracked
and husky; he sounded as though it hurt him to talk. “I thought
—d’ye want another drink of water?”
The suggestion seemed so incongruous that I nearly
laughed. But I was  terribly thirsty—and all at once, a cup of
cold water seemed the most desirable thing in the world.
“Y es.” The tears continued to fl ow down my face, but now
seemed almost soothing. I made  no attempt to stop them—thatseemed much too dif ficult—but blotted my face with a corner
of the damp sheet.
It w as b eginning to dawn on me  that I might not have made
the w isest—or at least not the easiest—choice, when I decided
not to die. Thin gs outside the li mits and concerns of my own
body w ere sta rting to come back. T roubles, dif ficulties,
dangers … sorrow . Dark, fright ening things, like a swarm of
bats. I didn’ t wa nt to look too closely at the images that lay in
a di sorderly pile at the bottom  of my brain—things I had
jettisoned in the struggle to stay afloat.
But if I had come back, I had come back to be what I was—
and I was a doctor .
“The … sickness.” I blotted the last of the tears and let
Roger wrap his hands around mine, helping me to hold the
new cup. “Is it still—?”
“No.” H e spoke  gently , and guid ed the rim of the cup to my
lips. What was it? I wondered vaguely . W ater , but with
something in it—mint and something stronger , more bitter …
angelica?
“It’ s stopped.” Roger held the cup, letting me sip slowly .
“No one’ s fallen sick in the last week.”
“A w eek?” I bob bled the cup, spilling a little down my chin.
“How long have I—”
“Just about that.” He cleared his throat. Roger ’ s eyes were
intent on the cup; he skimmed a thumb lightly along my chin,
removing the drops I had spilled. “Y ou were among the last to
fall sick.”
I too k a long breath, then drank a bit more. The liquid had a
soft, sweet taste, too, floating over the bitter tang … honey .
My min d located the word and I felt a sense of relief at having
located this small missing piece of reality .
I kn ew f rom his  manner that so me of the sick had died, but
asked no more for the moment. Deciding to live was one thing.
Rejoining the world of the livi ng was a struggle that would
take strength I didn’ t have right now . I had pulled up my roots,and lay like a wilted plant; sinking them back into the earth
was beyond me for the moment.
The kno wledge that people I knew—perhaps had loved—
had died seemed an equal grief to the loss of my hair—and
either was more than I could cope with.
I drank two further cups of honey-sweetened water , despite
the und erlying bitterness, then lay back with a sigh, my
stomach feeling like a small, cold balloon.
“Y e wan t to take a bit of rest,”  Roger advised me, putting
down th e cup on the table. “I’ll fetch Brianna, aye? But you
sleep if ye want to.”
I ha dn’ t strength to nod, but m anaged a twitch of the lips
that seem ed to pass muster as a smile. I reached up a trembling
hand an d brushed it gingerly ov er the top of my shorn head.
Roger flinched, very slightly .
He r ose, and I saw how thin and strained he looked—he
would have been helping tend the sick all week, I supposed,
not only me. And bury the dead. He was licensed to conduct
funerals.
“Roger?” It was a terrible ef fort  to speak; so terribly hard to
find the  words, separate them from the tangle in my head.
“Have you eaten anything recently?”
His face changed then, a look o f relief lightening the lines
of strain and worry .
“No,” he said, cleared his thro at again, and smiled. “Not
since last night.”
“Oh. W ell,” I said, and lifted one hand, heavy as lead. “Do.
Get something. W on’ t you?”
“Y es,” h e said. “I will.” Instead of leaving, though, he
hesitated, then took several rapid strides back, bent over the
bed, and  seizing my face between his palms, kissed me on the
forehead.
“Y ou’re beautifu l,” he said fiercely , and with a final squeeze
of my cheeks, left.“What?” I said faintly , but the only answer was the bellying
of the curtain as the breeze came in, scented with apples.
IN POINT OF F ACT , I looked like a skeleton with a
particularly unfl attering crew cut, as I learned when I finally
gained suf ficien t strength as to force Jamie to bring me a
looking glass.
“I dinn a suppo se ye’d think of wearing a cap?” he
suggested, dif f idently fingerin g a muslin specimen that
Marsali had brought me. “Only until it grows out a bit?”
“I don’ t suppose I bloody would.”
I had  so me dif fi culty in saying t his, shocked as I was by the
horrifying vision  in the glass. In fact, I had a strong impulse to
seize the cap from his hands, put it on and pull it down to my
shoulders.
I ha d rejected e arlier of fers of a cap from Mrs. Bug—who
had been volubly congratulating  herself on my survival as the
obvious result of her fever treatment—and from Marsali,
Malva, and every other woman who’d come to visit me.
This was simple contrariness on my part; the sight of my
unrestrained hair outraged their Scottish sense of what was
proper in a woman, and they’d been trying—with varying
degrees of subtlety—to force m e into a cap for years. I was
damned if I’d let circumstance accomplish it for them.
Having now seen myself in a mirror , I felt somewhat less
adamant about it. And my scal ped head did feel a bit chilly .
On t he o ther hand, I realized that if I were to give in, Jamie
would be terribly alarmed—and I thought I’d frightened him
quite enough, judging by the hollow look of his face and the
deep smudges under his eyes.
As it was, his face had lightened considerably when I
rejected the cap he was holding, and he tossed it aside.
I carefully turned the looking glass over and set it on the
counterpane, repressing a sigh.“Always good for a laugh, I sup pose, seeing the expressions
on people’ s faces when they catch sight of me.”
Jamie glanced at me, the corner of his mouth twitching.
“Y e’re verra beautiful, Sassenach,” he said gently . Then he
burst out laughing, snorting through his nose and wheezing. I
raised o ne eyebrow at him, pic ked up the glass and looked
again—which made him laugh harder .
I l eaned  back against the pillow s, feeling a bit better . The
fever had quite gone, but I still felt wraithlike and weak, barely
able to sit up unassisted, and I fell asleep almost without
warning, after the least exertion.
Jamie, s till snorting, took my h and, raised it to his mouth,
and kissed it. The sudden warm immediacy of the touch
rippled the fair hairs of my forearm, and my fingers closed
involuntarily on his.
“I love you,” he said very softly , his shoulders still
trembling with laughter .
“Oh,” I said, sud denly feeling quite a lot better . “W ell, then.
I love you, too. And it will  grow , after all.”
“So it will.” He kissed my hand  again, and set it gently on
the quilt. “Have ye eaten?”
“A b it,” I said, with what forbearance I could muster . “I’ll
have more later .”
I h ad realized m any years before why “patients” are called
that; it’ s  because  a sick person is generally incapacitated, and
thus obliged to put up with any amount of harassment and
annoyance from persons who are not  sick.
The feve r had broken and I had regained consciousness two
days before; since then, the invariable response of everyone
who saw  me was to gasp at my appearance, ur ge me to wear a
cap—and then try to force food  down my throat. Jamie, more
sensitive to my tones of voice  than were Mrs. Bug, Malva,
Brianna, or Marsali, wisely desi sted after a quick glance at the
tray by the bed to see that I actually had  eaten something.“T ell me what’ s happened,” I said, settling and bracing
myself. “Who’ s been ill? How a re they? And who—” I cleared
my throat. “Who’ s died?”
He narrowed his eyes at me, obviously trying to guess
whether I would faint, die, or leap out of bed if he told me.
“Y e’re sure ye feel well enough, Sassenach?” he asked
dubiously . “It’ s news that wilna spoil with keeping.”
“No, bu t I have to hear sooner or later , don’ t I? And
knowing is better than worrying about what I don’ t  know .”
He nodded, taking the point, and took a deep breath.
“A ye, then. Padraic and his daughter are well on the mend.
Evan—he’ s lost his youngest, w ee Bobby , and Grace is still ill,
but H ugh and Ca itlin didna fall sick at all.” He swallowed, and
went on . “Three of the fisher -fo lk have died; there’ s maybe a
dozen still ailing, but most are on the mend.” He knit his
brows, considering. “And then there’ s T om Christie. He’ s still
bad, I hear .”
“Is he? Malva didn’ t mention  it.” But then, Malva had
refused to tell m e anything when I’d asked earlier , insisting
that I must just rest, and not worry myself.
“What about Allan?”
“No, he’ s fine,” Jamie assured me.
“How long has T om been sick?”
“I dinna ken. The lass can tell ye.”
I nodded—a mistake, as the light-headedness had not left
me yet, and I wa s obliged to shut my eyes and let my head fall
back, illuminated patterns flashing behind my lids.
“That’ s very odd,” I said, a little  breathlessly , hearing Jamie
start up in respo nse to my sma ll collapse. “When I close my
eyes, oft en I see stars—but not l ike stars in the sky . They look
just like the s tars on the lining of a doll’ s suitcase—a
portmanteau, I mean—that I had as a child. Why do you
suppose that is?”“I havena got the slightest idea.” There was a rustle as he sat
back down on the stool. “Y e’re no still delirious, are ye?” he
asked dryly .
“Shouldn’ t think  so. W as  I  delirio us?” Br eathing deeply and
carefully , I opened my eyes and gave him my best attempt at a
smile.
“Y e were.”
“Do I want to know what I said?”
The corner of his mouth twitched.
“Probably not, but I may tell ye sometime, anyway .”
I considered closing my eyes and floating of f to sleep, rather
than contemplate future embarrassments, but rallied. If I was
going to live—and I was—I nee ded to gather up the strands of
life that tethered me to the earth, and reattach them.
“Bree’ s family , and Marsali’ s—they’re all right?” I asked
only for form’ s s ake; both Bree and Marsali had come to hover
anxiously over my prostrate form, and while neither one
would tell me anything they thought might upset me in my
weakened condition, I was reasonably sure that neither one
could have kept it secret if the children were seriously ill.
“A ye,” he said slowly , “aye, they’re fine.”
“What?” I said, picking up the hesitation in his voice.
“They’re fine,” he repeated quickly . “None of them has
fallen ill at all.”
I gave him a cold look, thoug h careful not to move too
much while doing it.
“Y ou may as w ell tell me,” I said. “I’ll get it out of Mrs.
Bug if you don’ t.”
As t hough mention of her name had invoked her , I heard the
distinctive thump of Mrs. Bug’ s clogs on the stair ,
approaching. She was moving more slowly than usual, and
with a care suggesting that she was laden with something.This proved to b e true; she negotiated sideways through the
door , beaming, a loaded tray in  one hand, the other wrapped
round Henri-Christian, who clung to her , monkeylike.
“I’ve brought ye a wee bit to eat, a leannan, ” she said
briskly , nudging the barely touched bowl of parritch and plate
of cold toast as ide to make ro om for the fresh provisions.
“Y e’re no catching, are ye?”
Barely waiting for my shake o f the head, she leaned over
the bed and gently decanted Henri-Christian into my arms.
Undiscriminatingly friendly as always, he butted his head
under my chin, nuzzled into my chest, and began mouthing my
knuckles, his sharp little baby te eth making small dents in my
skin.
“Hallo, what’ s happened here?” I frowned, smoothing the
soft brown licks of baby hair of f his rounded brow , where the
yellowing stain of an ugly bruise showed at his hairline.
“The spawn of the de’il tried to kill the poor wean,” Mrs.
Bug info rmed m e, mouth pulled tight. “And would have done,
too, save for Roger Mac, bless him.”
“Oh? Which spawn was this?” I asked, familiar with Mrs.
Bug’ s methods of description.
“Some of the fishers’ weans,” Jamie said. He put out a
finger and touched Henri-Christian’ s nose, snatched it away as
the baby grabbed for it, then to uched his nose again. Henri-
Christian giggle d and grabbed his own nose, entranced by the
game.
“The wicked creatures tried to drown him,” Mrs. Bug
amplified. “Stol e the puir wee laddie in his basket and set him
adrift in the creek!”
“I shoul dna think they meant to drown him,” Jamie said
mildly , s till absorbed in the gam e. “If so, they wouldna have
troubled wi’ the basket, surely .”
“Hmph!” was Mrs. Bug’ s response to this piece of logic.
“They didna mean to do him any good,” she added darkly .I had been taking a quick inventory of Henri-Christian’ s
physique, findi ng several more healing bruises, a small
scabbed cut on one heel, and a scraped knee.
“W ell, you’ve been bumped about a bit, haven’ t you?” I said
to him.
“Ump. Heeheeh ee!” said Henri-Christian, vastly entertained
by my explorations.
“Roger saved him?” I asked, glancing up at Jamie.
He nodded, one side of his mouth turning up a little.
“A ye. I didna ken what was goin g on, ‘til wee Joanie rushed
up to me, shouting as they’d tak en her brother—but I got there
in time to see the end of the matter .”
The boy s had set the baby’ s bask et afloat in the trout pool, a
wide, deep spot in the creek, wh ere the water was fairly quiet.
Made of stoutly woven reeds, the basket had floated—long
enough for the current to push it toward the outfall from the
pool, where the water ran swif tly through a stretch of rocks,
before p lunging over a three-foot fall, down into a tumbling
churn of water and boulders.
Roger had been building a rail fence, within earshot of the
creek. Hearing boys shouting and Felicite’ s steam-whistle
shrieks, he had dropped the rail he was holding and rushed
down the hill, thinking that she was being tormented.
Instead, he had burst from the trees just in time to see Henri-
Christian, in his basket, tip slowly over the edge of the outfall
and start bumping crazily from  rock to rock, spinning in the
current and taking on water .
Running down the bank and launching himself in a flat dive,
Roger ha d landed full-length in the creek just below the fall, in
time for Henri-Christian, bawlin g with terror , to drop from his
sodden basket, plummet down the fall, and land on Roger ,
who grabbed him.
“I was just in time to see it,” Jamie informed me, grinning at
the m emory . “And then to see R oger Mac rise out o’ the waterlike a triton, w i’ duckweed streaming from his hair , blood
runnin’ from his nose, and the wee lad clutched tight in his
arms. A terrible sight, he was.”
The miscreant boys had followed the basket’ s career , yelling
along the banks, but were now  struck dumb. One of them
moved to flee, t he others starting up like a flight of pigeons,
but Rog er had pointed an awful  finger at them and bellowed,
“Sheas!”  i n a voice loud enough to be heard over the racket of
the creek.
Such was the force of his presence, they did  s tay , fro zen in
terror .
Holding them with his glare, Ro ger had waded almost to the
shore. There, he squatted and  cupped a handful of water ,
which h e poure d over the head  of the shrieking baby—who
promptly quit shrieking.
“I bapti ze thee, Henri-Christian,” Roger had bellowed, in
his h oarse, cracked voice. “In th e name of the Father , and the
Son, and  the Holy Ghost! D’ye  hear me, wee bastards? His
name is Christian ! He belongs to the Lord! T rouble him again,
ye lot of scabs, and Satan will pop up and drag ye straight
down screaming—T O HELL!”
He s tabbed an a ccusing finger once more at the boys, who
this time did bre ak and run, scampering wildly into the brush,
pushing and falling in their ur ge to escape.
“Oh, dear ,” I s aid, torn between laughter and dismay . I
looked down at Henri-Christian, who had lately discovered the
joys of thumb-sucking and was absorbed in further study of
the art. “That must have been impressive.”
“It impressed me,  to be sure,” Jamie said, still grinning. “I’d
no notion Roger Mac had it in him to preach hellfire and
damnation like that. The lad’ s a great roar to him, cracked
voice and all. H e’d have a goo d audience, did he do it for a
Gathering, aye?”
“W ell, that explains what happe ned to his voice,” I said. “I
wondered. Do you think it was  only mischief, though? Themputting the baby in the creek?”
“Oh, it was mis chief, sure enough,” he said, and cupped a
big hand gently round Henri-Christian’ s head. “Not just boys’
mischief, though.”
Jamie had caught one of the fleeing boys as they hurtled
past him , grabbing him by the neck and quite literally scaring
the p iss out of the lad. W alking the boy firmly into the wood,
he’d pinned him hard against a t ree and demanded to know the
meaning of this attempted murder .
T rembling and blubbering, the boy had tried to excuse it,
saying t hat they hadn’ t meant any harm to the wean, truly!
They’d only wanted to see him float—for their parents all said
he was demon-born, and everyone kent that those born of
Satan floated, because the water would reject their
wickedness. The y’d taken the baby in his basket and put that
into the water , b ecause they were afraid to touch him, fearing
his flesh would burn them.
“I told him I’d b urn him myself,” Jamie said with a certain
grimness, “and did.” He’d then dismissed the smarting lad,
with instruction s to go home, change his breeks, and inform
his confederates that they were expected in Jamie’ s study
before supper to receive their own share of retribution—or else
Himself would be coming round to their houses after supper ,
to thrash them before their parents’ eyes.
“Did they come?” I asked, fascinated.
He gave me a look of surprise.
“Of course. They took their medicine, and then we went to
the k itchen and had bread and h oney . I’d told Marsali to bring
the wee lad, and after we’d eate n, I took him on my knee, and
had them all come and touch him, just to see.”
He smiled lopsidedly .
“One of  the lads asked me was it true, what Mr . Roger said,
about the wean belonging to the Lord? I told him I certainly
wouldna ar gue with Mr . Roger about that—but whoever elsehe belonged to, Henri-Christian  belongs to me, as well, and
best they should remember it.”
His finger trailed slowly dow n Henri-Christian’ s round,
smooth cheek. The baby was ne arly asleep now , heavy eyelids
closing, a tiny , glistening thumb half in, half out of his mouth.
“I’m sor ry I missed that,” I sai d softly , so as not to wake
him. He’d grown much warme r , as sleeping babies did, and
heavy in  the curve of my arm.  Jamie saw that I was having
dif ficulty holdin g him, and took him from me, handing him
back to Mrs. B ug, who had be en bustling quietly round the
room, ti dying, a ll the while liste ning with approval to Jamie’ s
account.
“Oh, ‘tw as something to see,” s he assured me in a whisper ,
patting H enri-Christian’ s back a s she took him. “And the lads
all pokin g their fingers out to touch the bairnie’ s wee belly ,
gingerlike, as if they meant to  prod a hot potato, and him
squirmin’ and giggling like a worm wi’ the fits. The wicked
little gomerels’ eyes were big as sixpences!”
“I imagine they were,” I said, amused.
“On the  other hand,” I remarked sotto voce  to Jamie as she
left with the baby , “if their parents think he’ s demon-born, and
you’re his grandfather …”
“W ell, you’re his grannie, Sassenach,” Jamie said dryly . “It
might b e you. But aye, I’d pref er not to have them dwell on
that aspect of the matter .”
“No,” I agreed.  “Though—do any of them know , do you
think, th at Marsali isn’ t your daughter by blood? They must
know about Fer gus.”
“It w ouldna much matter ,” he said. “They think wee Henri’ s
a changeling, in any case.”
“How do you know that?”
“People talk,” he said briefly . “Are ye feeling well in
yourself, Sassenach?”Relieved of the baby’ s weight, I had put back the covers a
bit to let in air . Jamie stared at me in disapproval.
“Christ, I can count all your ribs! Right through your shift!”
“Enjoy the experience while yo u can,” I advised him tartly ,
though I felt a sharp pang of hur t. He seemed to sense this, for
he to ok my han d, tracing the lin es of the deep blue veins that
ran across the back of it.
“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” he said, more gently . “I
didna mean it that way . He re, Mrs. Bug’ s brought ye
something tasty ,  I expect.” He lifted the lid of f a small covered
dish, frowned at the substance  in it, then stuck a cautious
finger in and licked it.
“Maple pudding,” he announced, looking happy .
“Oh?” I had n o appetite at all yet, but maple pudding
sounded at least innocuous, an d I made no objection as he
scooped up a sp oonful, guiding it toward my mouth with the
concentration of a man flying an airliner .
“I can  feed myself, you kn—” He slipped the spoon
between my lips, and I resignedly sucked the pudding of f it.
Amazing revel ations of creamy sweetness immediately
exploded in my mouth, and I closed my eyes in minor ecstasy ,
recalling.
“Oh, Go d,” I said. “I’d for gotten what good food tastes
like.”
“I knew  ye hadn’ t been eating,” he said with satisfaction.
“Here, have more.”
I insisted upon taking the spoon myself, and managed half
the dish; Jamie ate the other half, at my ur ging.
“Y ou may not b e as thin as I am,” I said, turning my hand
over and  grimacing at the sight of my protruding wrist bones,
“but you haven’ t been eating a lot, either .”
“I suppo se not.”  He scraped th e spoon carefully round the
bowl, re trieving the last bits of pudding, and sucked the spoon
clean. “It’ s been … busy .”I watched him narrowly . He was being patently cheerful, but
my rusty sensibilities were beginning to come back. For some
unknowable span of time, I’d had neither ener gy nor attention
for anything that lay outside the fever -racked shell of my
body; now I was  seeing the small familiarities of Jamie’ s body ,
voice and manner , and becoming  reattuned to him, like a slack
violin string being tightened in the presence of a tuning fork.
I c ould feel the vibration of som e strain in him, and I was
beginning to think it wasn’ t all due to my recent near -demise.
“What?” I said.
“What?” He raised his eyebrows in question, but I knew
him too well for  that. The quest ion alone gave me confidence
that I was right.
“What a ren’ t you telling me?” I  asked, with what patience I
could muster . “Is it Brown again? Have you got news of
Stephen Bonnet ? Or Donner? Or has the white sow eaten one
of the children and choked to death?”
That made him smile, at least, though only for a moment.
“Not that,” he said. “She wen t for MacDonald, when he
called a few days ago, but he m ade it onto the porch in time.
V erra agile the Major is, for a man of his age.”
“He’ s younger than you are,” I objected.
“W ell, I’ m agile, too,” he said logically . “The sow hasna got
me yet, has she?”
I f elt a qualm of unease at his mention of the Major , but it
wasn’ t n ews of political unrest or military rumblings that was
troubling Jamie; he would have told me that at once. I
narrowed my eyes at him again, but didn’ t speak.
He sighed deeply .
“I am thinking I must send them  away ,” he said quietly , and
took my hand again.
“Send who away?”
“Fer gus and Marsali and the weans.”I fel t a sharp, sudden jolt, as tho ugh someone had struck me
just below the breastbone, and found it suddenly dif ficult to
draw breath.
“What? Why? And—and wher e ?” I managed to ask.
He rubb ed his thumb lightly over my knuckles, back and
forth, his eyes focused on the small motion.
“Fer gus tried to kill himself, th ree days ago,” he said very
quietly .
My hand gripped his convulsively .
“Holy God,” I whispered. He no dded, and I saw that he was
unable t o speak for the moment; his teeth were set in his lower
lip.
Now it was I who took his hand in both of mine, feeling
coldness seep through my flesh. I wanted to deny it, reject the
notion u tterly—but couldn’ t. It sat there between us, an ugly
thing like a poisonous toad that neither of us wished to touch.
“How?” I said a t last. My voice seemed to echo in the room.
I wanted to say , “Are you sur e ?” but I knew he was.
“W ith a knife,” he replied litera lly . The corner of his mouth
twitched again, but not with hu mor . “He said he would have
hanged himself,  but he couldna tie the rope with one hand.
Lucky , that.”
The pud ding had formed a smal l, hard ball, like rubber , that
lay in the bottom of my stomach.
“Y ou … found him? Or was it Marsali?”
He shook his head.
“She doesna ken. Or rather , I expect she does, but she’ s no
admitting it—to either of them.”
“He can ’ t have been badly wou nded, then, or she’d have to
know fo r sure.” My chest still hurt, but the words were coming
more easily .“No. I saw him go past, whilst I was scraping a deer ’ s hide
up on the hill. He didna see me, and I didna call out—I dinna
ken what it was that struck me queer about him … but
something did. I went on wi’ my  work for a bit—I didna want
to go far from the house, in case —but it niggled at me.” He let
go of my hand and rubbed his knuckles underneath his nose.
“I could na seem  to let go of the  thought that something was
amiss, a nd finally I put down my work and went after him,
thinking myself all kinds of a fool for it.”
Fer gus had headed over the end  of the Ridge, and down the
wooded slope that led to the White Spring. This was the most
remote and secluded of the thre e springs on the Ridge, called
“white” because of the lar ge pa le boulder that stood near the
head of the pool.
Jamie had come down through the trees in time to see
Fer gus lie down by the spring, s leeve rolled up and coat folded
beneath his head, and submer ge his handless left arm in the
water .
“I should maybe ha’ shouted then,” he said, rubbing a
distracted hand through his hair . “But I couldna really believe
it, ken?”
Then Fe r gus had taken a smal l boning knife in his right
hand, reached down into the poo l, and neatly opened the veins
of h is left elbow , blood blooming in a soft, dark cloud around
the whiteness of his arm.
“I shouted then, ” Jamie said. He closed his eyes, and
scrubbed his hands hard over his face, as though trying to
erase the memory of it.
He had run down the hill, grabb ed Fer gus, jerked him to his
feet, and hit him.
“Y ou hit  him?”
“I di d,” he said shortly . “He’ s lucky I didna break his neck,
the wee  bastard .” Color had be gun to rise in his face as he
talked, and he pressed his lips tight together .“W as this after t he boys took Henri-Christian?” I asked, my
memory of the conversation in the stable with Fer gus vividly
in mind. “I mean—”
“A ye, I ken wha t ye mean,” he interrupted. “And it was the
day afte r the lads put Henri-C hristian in the creek, aye. It
wasna only that, though—not on ly all the trouble over the wee
laddie being a dwarf, I mean.”  He glanced at me, his face
troubled.
“W e talk ed. After I’d bound up  his arm and brought him
round. He said he’d been thinking of it for some time; the
thing wi’ the bairn only pushed him into it.”
“But … how could  he?” I said, distressed. “T o leave
Marsali, and the children—how?”
Jamie looked down, hands braced on his knees, and sighed.
The win dow was open, and a soft breeze came in, lifting the
hairs on the crown of his head like tiny flames.
“He thought they would do better without him,” he said
flatly . “If he wa s dead, Marsali could wed again—find a man
who could care for her and the weans. Provide for them.
Protect wee Henri.”
“He thinks—thought—he couldn’ t?”
Jamie glanced sharply at me.
“Sassenach,” he said, “he kens damn well he can’ t.”
I dre w breath to protest this, but bit my lip instead, finding
no immediate rebuttal.
Jamie stood up and moved restlessly about the room,
picking things up and putting them down.
“W ould you do such a thing?” I asked, after a bit. “In the
same circumstances, I mean.”
He paused for a moment, his back to me, hand on my
hairbrush.
“No,” he  said softly . “But it’ s a hard thing for a man to live
with.”“W ell, I see that …” I began, slowly , but he swung round to
face me. His ow n face was strained, filled with a weariness
that had little to do with lack of sleep.
“No, Sassenach,” he said. “Y e d on’ t.” He spoke gently , but
with suc h a tone of despair in h is voice that tears came to my
eyes.
It was as much sheer physical weakness as emotional
distress, but I knew that if I gav e way to it, the end would be
complete soggy disintegration, and no one needed that just
now . I bit my lip  hard and wiped my eyes with the edge of the
sheet.
I heard the thump as he knelt down beside me, and I reached
out b lindly for him, pulling his head against my breast. He put
his arms round m e and sighed d eeply , his breath warm on my
skin thro ugh the  linen of my shift. I stroked his hair with one
trembling hand, and felt him give way suddenly , all the tension
going out of him like water running from a jug.
I ha d the oddest feeling, then— as though the strength he
had clung to had  now been let go … and was flowing into me.
My tenu ous grip  on my own body firmed as I held his, and my
heart ceased wavering, taking up instead its normal solid,
tireless beating.
The tears had retreated, though they were precariously near
the surface. I traced the lines of his face with my fingers,
ruddy bronze and lined with su n and care; the high forehead
with its thick auburn brows, and the broad planes of his cheek,
the long straight nose, straight  as a blade. The closed eyes,
slanted and mysterious with those odd lashes of his, blond at
the root, so deep an auburn at the tips as to seem almost black.
“Don’ t y ou know?” I said very softly , tracing the small, neat
line of his ear . T iny , stif f blond hairs sprouted in a tiny whorl
from the  tagus, tickling my fing er . “Don’ t any  o f you know?
That it’ s you.  Not  what you can give, or do, or provide. Just
you.”He took a deep, shuddering breath, and nodded, though he
didn’ t open his eyes.
“I know . I said that to him, to Fer gus,” he said very softly .
“Or at least I think I did. I said a terrible lot of things.”
They had knelt together by the spring, embracing, wet with
blood and water , locked toget her as though he could hold
Fer gus t o the earth, to his family , by force of will alone, and he
had no notion at  all what he had said, lost in the passion of the
moment—until the end.
“Y ou must continue, for their sakes—though you would not
for your  own,” he had whispered, Fer gus’ s face pressed into
his shou lder , the black hair we t with sweat and water , cold
against his cheek. “T u compr ends , mon enfant, mon fils?
Compr ends-tu?”
I felt his throat move as he swallowed.
“See, I kent ye w ere dying,” he said very softly . “I was sure
ye’d be gone when I came back to the house, and I should be
alone. I wasna speaking to Fer gus then, I think, so much as to
myself.”
He r aised his he ad then, and loo ked at me through a blur of
tears and laughter .
“Oh, God, Claire,” he said, “I w ould have been so angry , if
ye’d died and left me!”
I wanted to laugh or cry , or both, myself—and had I still
harbored regrets  regarding the loss of eternal peace, I would
have surrendered them now without hesitation.
“I d idn’ t,” I said , and touched h is lip. “I won’ t. Or at least
I’ll try not.” I slid my hand behind his head and drew him back
to me. He was a good deal lar ger and heavier than Henri-
Christian, but I felt I could hold him forever , if necessary .
It was early afternoon, and the light just beginning to shift,
slanting in through the tops of th e west-facing windows so that
the room filled with a clean, bright light that glowed on
Jamie’ s hair and the worn creamy linen of his shirt. I couldfeel the knobs a t the top of his s pine, and the yielding flesh in
the narrow channel between shoulder blade and backbone.
“Where will you send them?” I asked, and tried to smooth
the whorled hair of the cowlick on his crown.
“T o Cro ss Creek, maybe—or to W ilmington,” he replied.
His eyes were half-closed, watching the shadows of leaves
flicker on the side of the armoire he had built me. “Wherever
seems best for the printing trade.”
He shift ed a little, tightening hi s grip on my buttocks, then
frowned.
“Christ, Sassenach, ye havena got any bum left at all!”
“W ell, never mind,” I said with resignation. “I’m sure that
will grow back soon enough.”6 5
MOMENT OF DECLARA TION
J AMIE MET THEM near W oolam’ s Mill, five men on
horseback. T wo were strangers; two were men from Salisbury
that he knew—e x-Regulators named Green and Wherry; avid
Whigs. The last was Richard Brown, whose face was cold,
save for his eyes.
He s ilently cursed his love of c onversation. If not for that,
he would have parted from MacDonald as usual, at
Coopersville. But they had been talking of poetry—poetry , for
God’ s sake!—and amusing each other in declamation. Now
here he stood in  the empty road, holding two horses, while
MacDonald, whose guts were  in disagreement with him,
busied himself deep in the wood.
Amos G reen tipped him a nod, and would have passed, but
Kitman Wherry reined up; the strangers did likewise, staring
curiously .
“Where are Thou bound, friend James?” Wherry , a Quaker ,
asked pl easantly . “Does Thee come to the meeting at Halifax?
For Thee are welcome to ride with us, and that be so.”
Halifax. He felt a trickle of swea t run down the crease of his
back. The meeting of the Committee of Correspondence to
elect delegates to the Continental Congress.
“I am seeing a fr iend upon his ro ad,” he replied courteously ,
with a nod towa rd MacDonald’ s horse. “I will follow , though;
perhaps I shall catch ye up along the way .” Fat chan ce of that,
he thought, carefully not looking at Brown.
“I’d not be so sure of your welcome, Mr . Fraser .” Green
spoke civilly enough, but with a  certain coldness in his manner
that made Wherry glance at him  in surprise. “Not after what
happened in Cross Creek.”“Oh? And would ye see an in nocent man burnt alive, or
tarred and feathered?” The la st thing he wished was an
ar gument, but something must be said.
One of the strangers spat in the road.
“Not so innocent, if that’ s Fogarty Simms you’re speakin’
of. Little T ory pissant,” he added as an afterthought.
“That’ s the fellow ,” Green said, and spat in agreement. “The
committee in Cross Creek set ou t to teach him a lesson; seems
Mr . Fraser here was in disagre ement. Quite a scene it was,
from wh at I hear ,” he drawled , leaning back a little in his
saddle to survey Jamie from his  superior height. “Like I said,
Mr . Fraser—you ain’ t all that popular , right this minute.”
Wherry was frowning, glancing to and fro between Jamie
and Green. “T o save a man fro m tar and feathers, no matter
what his  politics , seems no mor e than common humanity ,” he
said sharply .
Brown laughed unpleasantly .
“Might seem so to you, I reckon. Not to other folk. Y ou
know a man b y the company he keeps. And beyond that,
there’ s your auntie, eh?” he s aid, redirecting his speech to
Jamie. “ And the famous Mrs. MacDonald. I read that speech
she gave—in the final edition of Simms’ s newspaper ,” he
added, repeating the unpleasant laugh.
“My aun t’ s guests have naught to do wi’ me,” Jamie said,
striving for simple matter -of-factness.
“No? H ow ‘bou t your aunt’ s husband—your uncle, would
he be?”
“Duncan?” His incredulity plainly showed in his voice, for
the strangers exchanged glances, and their manner relaxed a
little. “No, he’ s my aunt’ s fourth husband—and a friend. Why
d’ye speak of him?”
“Why , Duncan  Innes is che ek-by-jowl with Farquard
Campbell, and a good many ot her Loyalists. The two of ‘em
have been putting money enough  to float a ship into pamphletspreachin’ reconc iliation with Mother England. Surprised you
didn’ t know that, Mr . Fraser .”
Jamie was not merely surprised but thunderstruck at this
revelation, but hid it.
“A man ’ s opinions are his ow n,” he said with a shrug.
“Duncan must do as he likes, and I shall do the same.”
Wherry was nodding agreement with this, but the others
were regarding him with expres sions ranging from skepticism
to hostility .
Wherry was not unaware of his companions’ responses.
“What is  thy opinion, then, friend?” he asked politely .
W ell, he ’d know n it was coming . Had now and then tried to
imagine the circumstances of his declaration, in situations
ranging from the vaingloriously heroic to the openly
dangerous, but as usual in such matters, God’ s sense of humor
trumped all imagination. And s o he found himself taking that
final ste p into irrevocable and public commitment to the rebel
cause—just incidentally being required to ally himself with a
deadly enemy in the process—standing alone in a dusty road,
with a uniformed of ficer of the Crown squatting in the bushes
directly behind him, breeches round his ankles.
“I am for liberty ,” he said, in a tone indicating mild
astonishment that there could be any question regarding his
position.
“Are you  so?” Green looked hard at him, then lifted his chin
in the direction  of MacDonald’ s horse, where MacDonald’ s
regimental sword hung from the saddle, gilt and tassels
gleaming in the sun. “How come you to be in company with a
redcoat, then?”
“He is a friend,” Jamie replied evenly .
“A redcoat?” One of the strangers reared back in his saddle
as th ough stung by a bee. “How come redcoats her e ?” The
man sounded flabber gasted, and  looked hastily to and fro, asthough e xpecting a company of the creatures to burst from the
wood, muskets firing.
“Only the one, so far as I kn ow ,” Brown assured him.
“Name’ s MacDonald. He’ s not a real soldier; retired on half-
pay , works for the Governor .”
His companion didn’ t seem noticeably reassured.
“What are you doing with this MacDonald?” he demanded
of Jamie.
“As I said—he is a friend.” T he attitude of the men had
changed in an i nstant, from skepticism and mild hostility to
open of fense.
“He’ s the Governor ’ s spy , is w hat he is,” Green declared
flatly .
This wa s no more than the truth, and Jamie was reasonably
sure tha t half the backcountry knew it; MacDonald made no
ef fort to  hide either his appeara nce nor his errands. T o deny
the f act was to ask them to belie ve Jamie a dunce, duplicitous,
or both.
There was a stirring among the men now , glances
exchanged, and the smallest of motions, hands touching knife
hilts and pistol grips.
V ery fin e, Jamie thought. Not sa tisfied with the irony of the
situation, God had now decide d that he should fight to the
death against the allies he had declared himself to moments
earlier , in defense of an of fice r of the Crown he had just
declared himself against.
As his son-in-law was fond of remarking—great.
“Bring him out,” Brown ordered, nudging his horse to the
forefront. “W e’l l see what he has to say for himself, this friend
of yours.”
“And then might be we’ll learn  him a lesson he can carry
back to the Governor , eh?” One of the strangers took of f his
hat and tucked it carefully beneath the edge of his saddle,
preparing.“W ait!” Wherry drew himself up, trying to quell them with
a ha nd, though Jamie could h ave told him he was several
minutes past the point where su ch an attempt might have had
any ef fect. “Y ou cannot lay violent hands upon—”
“Can’ t we, though?” Brown grinned like a death’ s head,
eyes fixe d on Jamie, and began to undo the leather quirt coiled
and fast ened to his saddle. “No tar to hand, alas. But a good
beating, say , and send ‘em both squealing home to the
Governor stark naked—that’d answer .”
The second stranger laughed, and spat again, so the gob
landed juicily at Jamie’ s feet.
“A ye, th at’ll do. Hear you held  of f a mob by yourself in
Cross Creek, Fraser—only five t o two now , how you like them
odds?”
Jamie liked them fine. Dropping  the reins he held, he turned
and flung himself between the two horses, screeching and
slapping hard at their flanks, then dived headlong into the
brush at  the roadside, scrabbling through roots and stones on
hands and knees as fast as he could.
Behind him, the horses were rearing and wheeling,
whinnying loudl y and spreading confusion and fright through
the other men’ s mounts; he c ould hear cries of anger and
alarm, as they tried to gain control of the plunging horses.
He slid  down a short slope, dirt and uprooted plants
spraying up around his feet, lo st his balance and fell at the
bottom, bounded up and dashed into an oak copse, where he
plastered himself behind a screen of saplings, breathing hard.
Someone had had wit—or fury—enough to jump of f his
horse and follow on foot; he co uld hear crashing and cursing
near at hand, ov er the fainter c ries of the commotion on the
road. Glancing cautiously through the leaves, he saw Richard
Brown, disheveled and hatless, looking wildly round, pistol in
hand.
Any thought he might have had of confrontation vanished;
he w as u narmed, save a small k nife in his stocking, and it wasclear to him that Brown would  shoot him instantly , claiming
self-defense when the others eventually caught up.
Up the slope, to ward the road, he caught a glimpse of red.
Brown, turning in the same dir ection, saw it, too, and fired.
Whereupon Don ald MacDonald , having thoughtfully hung up
his coat in a tree, stepped out o f cover behind Richard Brown
in h is shirtsleeves, and hit Brow n over the head with a solid
length of tree branch.
Brown fell on his knees, momentarily stunned, and Jamie
slipped out of the copse, beckoning to MacDonald, who ran
heavily to meet him. T ogether th ey made their way deeper into
the f orest, waiting by a stream u ntil prolonged silence from the
road indicated that it might be safe to go back for a look.
The men were gone. So was MacDonald’ s horse. Gideon,
the whites of his eyes showing and ears laid flat, rolled back
his u pper lip an d squealed fiercely at them, big yellow teeth
bared and slobber flying. Brown and company had wisely
thought twice about stealing a ra bid horse, but had tied him up
to a tree  and managed to spoil h is harness, which hung in bits
around h is neck. MacDonald’ s sword lay in the dust, torn from
its scabbard, blade broken in two.
MacDonald picked up the pieces, viewed them for a
moment, then, shaking his head, tucked them through his belt.
“D’ye th ink Jones could mend it?” he asked. “Or better to
go down to Salisbury?”
“W ilmington or New Bern,” Jamie said, wiping a hand
across his mouth. “Dai Jones hasna the skill to mend a sword,
but ye’l l find few friends in Salisbury , from what I hear .”
Salisbury had been at the h eart of the Regulation, and
antigovernment sentiment still ran high there. His own heart
had gon e back to its usual wa y of beating, but he still felt
weak-kneed in the aftermath of flight and anger .
MacDonald nodded bleakly , then glanced at Gideon.
“Is yon thing safe to ride?”
“No.”In Gideon’ s present state of agitation, Jamie wouldn’ t risk
riding him alone, let alone doub le-mounted and with no bridle.
They’d left the r ope on his saddle, at least. He got a loop over
the stallion’ s head without be ing bitten, and they set of f
without comment, returning to the Ridge on foot.
“V erra u nfortunate,” MacDonald observed thoughtfully at
one point. “That they should have met us together . D’ye think
it’ s dished your chances of w orming your way into their
councils? I should give my left ball to have an eye and an ear
in that meeting they spoke of, I’ll tell ye that for nothing!”
W ith a dim sen se of wonder , Jamie realized that having
made his momentous declaration, overheard by the man whose
cause he sought to betray , and then nearly killed by the new
allies whose side he sought to uphold—neither side had
believed him.
“D’ye e ver wonder what it sounds like when God laughs,
Donald?” he asked thoughtfully .
MacDonald pursed his lips and glanced at the horizon,
where dark clouds swelled just beyond the shoulder of the
mountain.
“Like thunder , I imagine,” he said. “D’ye not think so?”
Jamie shook his head.
“No. I think it’ s a verra small, wee sound indeed.”6 6
THE DARK RISES
I  HEARD ALL THE SOUNDS OF the household below , and
the r umble of Ja mie’ s voice outside, and felt entirely peaceful.
I was watching  the sun shift and glow on the yellowing
chestnut trees outside, when the  sound of feet came marching
up the stairs, steady and determined.
The door flung o pen and Brianna came in, wind-tousled and
bright-faced, wearing a steely expression. She halted at the
foot of my bed, leveled a long forefinger at me, and said, “Y ou
are not allowed to die.”
“Oh?” I said, blinking. “I didn’ t think I was going to.”
“Y ou tried!” she said, accusing. “Y ou know you did!”
“W ell, not to sa y tried, exactly …” I began weakly . If I
hadn’ t exactly tried to die, tho ugh, it was true that I hadn’ t
quite tri ed not to, and I must have looked guilty , for her eyes
narrowed into blue slits.
“Don’ t you dare do that again!” she said, and wheeling in a
sweep o f blue cloak, stomped out, pausing at the door to say ,
“BecauseIloveyouandIcan’ tdowithoutyou,” in a strangled
voice, before running down the stairs.
“I love you too , darling!” I called, the always-ready tears
coming to my e yes, but there w as no reply , save the sound of
the front door closing.
Adso, drowsing in a puddle of s un on the counterpane at my
feet, ope ned his  eyes a fraction  of an inch at the noise, then
sank his head back into his shoulders, purring louder .
I l ay back on th e pillow , feeling a good deal less peaceful,
but som ewhat more alive. A moment later , I sat up, put back
the quilt s, and swung my legs out of bed. Adso abruptly quit
purring. “Don’ t worry ,” I told him. “I’m not going to keelover; yo ur supply of milk and scraps is perfectly safe. Keep
the bed warm for me.”
I had been up , of course, an d even allowed on short,
intensely superv ised excursions outside. But no one had let me
try t o go anyw here alone since before I fell ill, and I was
reasonably sure they wouldn’ t let me do it now .
I therefore stole downstairs in stockinged feet, shoes in
hand, and instead of going th rough the front door , whose
hinges s queaked, or through the kitchen, where Mrs. Bug was
working, I slipped into my sur ge ry , opened the window , and—
having checked to be sure the white sow was not hanging
about below—climbed carefully out.
I felt quite gid dy at my escape, a rush of spirits that
sustained me for a little way do wn the path. Thereafter , I was
obliged to stop every few hundred feet, sit down, and gasp a
bit while my legs recovered their strength. I persevered,
though, and at last came to the Christie cabin.
No one was in sight, nor was  there any response to my
tentative “Hallo!”, but when I knocked at the door , I heard
T om Christie’ s voice, gruf f and dispirited, bid me enter .
He was at the table, writing, b ut from the looks of him,
ought st ill to have been in bed. His eyes widened in surprise at
sight of me, and he hastily tried to straighten the grubby shawl
round his shoulders.
“Mrs. Fraser! Are you—that is— what in the name of God
…” Deprived of speech, he p ointed at me, eyes round as
saucers. I had ta ken of f my broad-brimmed hat when I entered,
for getting momentarily that I looked like nothing so much as
an excited bottle brush.
“Oh,” I said, passing a self-con scious hand over my head.
“That. Y ou ought to be pleased; I’m not going about outraging
the public by a wanton display of my flowing locks.”
“Y ou look like a convict,” he said bluntly . “Sit down.”
I did , be ing rath er in need of the stool he of fered me, owing
to the exertions of the walk.“How are you?” I inquired, pee ring at him. The light in the
cabin was very bad; he had be en writing with a candle, and
had put it out upon my appearance.
“How am  I?” He seemed both astonished and rather put out
at th e inquiry . “Y ou have wa lked all the way here, in a
dangerously enfeebled condition, to ask after my health?”
“If y ou care to put it that way ,”  I replied, rather nettled by
that “dangerously enfeebled.” “I don’ t suppose you would care
to st ep out into the light, so that I can get a decent look at you,
would you?”
He drew the ends of the shawl protectively across his chest.
“Why?” He frowned at me, peaked brows drawing together
so that he looked like an irritable owl.
“Because I want to know a few  things regarding your state
of h ealth,” I repl ied patiently , “and examining you is likely the
best way of finding them out, since you don’ t seem able to tell
me anything.”
“Y ou are most unaccountable, madam!”
“No, I am a doctor ,” I countered. “And I want to know—”
A br ief wave of  giddiness came over me, and I leaned on the
table, holding on ‘til it passed.
“Y ou are insane,” he stated, having scrutinized me for a
moment. “Y ou are also still ill, I  believe. Stay there; I shall call
my son to go and fetch your husband.”
I f lappe d a hand at him and took a deep breath. My heart
was raci ng, and  I was a trifle p ale and sweaty , but essentially
all right.
“The fa ct of the matter , Mr . Christie, is that while I’ve
certainly been  ill, I w asn’ t ill with the same  sickness that’ s
been af flicting people on the Ridge—and from what Malva
was able to tell me, I don’ t think you were, either .”
He had risen to g o and call Allan; at this, he froze, staring at
me w ith his mou th open. Then he slowly lowered himself back
into his chair .“What do you mean?”
Having finally got his attention,  I was pleased to lay out the
facts bef ore him; I had them neatly to hand, having given them
considerable thought over the last few days.
While several families on the Ridge had suf fered the
depredations of  amoebic dysentery , I hadn’ t. I had had a
dangerously hig h fever , accompanied by dreadful headache
and—so far as I could tell fro m Malva’ s excited account—
convulsions. But it certainly wasn’ t dysentery .
“Are you certain of this?” He was twiddling his discarded
quill, frowning.
“It’ s rather hard to mistake blo ody flux for headache and
fever ,” I said tartly . “Now—did you have flux?”
He hesitated a moment, but curiosity got the better of him.
“No,” he said. “It was as you say—a headache fit to split the
skull, and fever . A terrible weakness, and … and
extraordinarily unpleasant dreams. I had no notion that it was
not the same illness af flicting the others.”
“No reason you should, I supp ose. Y ou didn’ t see any of
them. U nless—did Malva descri be the illness to you?” I asked
only from curiosity , but he shook his head.
“I do  not wish to hear of such things; she does not tell me.
Still, why have you come?” He tilted his head to one side,
narrowing his eyes. “What dif ference does it make whether
you and I suf fered an ague, rather than a flux? Or anyone else,
for that matter?” He seemed rather agitated, and got up,
moving about the cabin in an unfocused, bumbling sort of
way , quite unlike his usual decisive movements.
I sig hed, rubbing a hand over my forehead. I’d got the basic
information I came for; explaining why I’d wanted it was
going to  be uphill work. I had enough trouble getting Jamie,
Y oung Ian, and Malva to accep t the germ theory of disease,
and that was wit h the evidence visible through a microscope to
hand.“Disease is catching,” I said a little tiredly . “It passes from
one person to another—sometimes directly , sometimes by
means of food or water shared between a sick person and a
healthy one. All of the people who had the flux lived near a
particular small spring; I have so me reason to think that it was
the water of tha t spring that carried the amoeba—that made
them ill.
“Y ou and I, thou gh—I haven’ t seen you in weeks. Nor have
I been near anyo ne else who’ s had the ague. How is it that we
should both fall ill of the same thing?”
He stared at me, baf fled and still frowning.
“I do not see why two persons c annot fall ill without seeing
each other . Certainly I have known such illnesses as you
describe: gaol fever , for instance, spreads in close quarters—
but surely not all illnesses behave in the same fashion?”
“No, the y don’ t,” I admitted. I wasn’ t in a fit state to try to
get a cross the basic notions of epidemiology or public health,
either . “ It’ s possible, for instance, for some diseases to be
spread b y mosq uitoes. Malaria, for one.” Some forms of viral
meningitis, for another—my best guess as to the illness I’d just
recovered from.
“Do you recall being bitten by a mosquito any time
recently?”
He s tared at me , then uttered a brief sort of bark I took for
laughter .
“My dear woman, everyone in this festering climate is
bitten repeatedly  during the hot weather .” He scratched at his
beard, as though by reflex.
That was true. Everyone but me and Roger . Now and then,
some de sperate insect would have a go, but for the most part,
we escaped unbitten, even when there were absolute plagues
of th e creatures and everyone a round us was scratching. As a
theory , I suspected that blo od-drinking mosquitoes had
evolved so closely with mankind through the years that Roger
and I simply did n’ t smell right t o them, having come from toofar away in time. Brianna and Jemmy , who shared my genetic
material but also Jamie’ s, were bitten, but not as frequently as
most people.
I did n’ t recall h aving been bitten any time recently , but it
was pos sible tha t I had been and had simply been too busy to
notice.
“Why does it matter?” Christie asked, seeming now merely
baf fled.
“I d on’ t know . I just—need to  find things out.” I’d also
needed both to get away from the house and to make some
move to reclaim my life by the most direct means I knew—the
practice of medicine. But that w asn’ t anything I meant to share
with T om Christie.
“Hmph,” he said. He stood looking down at me, frowning
and und ecided, then suddenly extended a hand—the one I had
operated on, I saw; the “Z” of the incision had faded to a
healthy pale pink, and the fingers lay straight.
“Come outside, then,” he said, resigned. “I will see you
home, and if ye insist upon asking intrusive and bothersome
questions regarding my health  along the way , I suppose I
cannot stop you.”
Startled, I took his hand, and  found his grip solid and
steady , despite the haggard look of his face and the slump of
his shoulders.
“Y ou needn’ t walk me home,” I  protested. “Y ou ought to be
in bed, by the looks of you!”
“So should you,” he said, lead ing me to the door with a
hand be neath m y elbow . “But if  ye choose to risk your health
and your life b y undertaking such inappropriate exertion—
why , so can I. Though you must,” he added sternly , “put on
your hat before we go.”
WE MADE IT BACK to the h ouse, stopping frequently for
rest, and arrived panting, dripping with sweat, and generally
exhilarated by the adventure. N o one had missed me, but Mr .Christie insisted upon delivering me inside, which meant that
everyone observed my absence ex post facto,  and in the
irrational way of people, at once became very annoyed.
I w as scolded b y everyone in sight, including Y oung Ian,
frog-marched upstairs virtually by the scruf f of the neck, and
thrust f orcibly back into bed, where, I was given to
understand, I should be lucky to be given bread and milk for
my supper . The most annoying aspect of the whole situation
was Thomas Christie, standing at the foot of the stairs with a
mug of beer in his hand, watching as I was led of f, and
wearing the only grin I had ever seen on his hairy face.
“What in the name of God possessed ye, Sassenach?” Jamie
jerked back the quilt and gestured peremptorily at the sheets.
“W ell, I felt quite well, and—”
“W ell! Y e’re the color of bad buttermilk, and trembling so
ye can scarcely—here, let me do that.” Making snorting
noises, he pushed my hands away from the laces of my
petticoats, and had them of f me in a trice.
“Have y e lost your mind?” he demanded. “And to sneak of f
like that without telling anyon e, too! What if ye’d fallen?
What if ye got ill again?”
“If I’d told any one, they wouldn’ t have let me go out,” I
said mildly . “And I am  a physician, you know . Surely I can
judge my own state of health.”
He gave  me a look, strongly s uggesting that he wouldn’ t
trust me  to judge a flower show ,  but merely gave a louder than
usual snort in reply .
He then  picked me up bodily , carried me to the bed, and
placed me gently into it—but with enough demonstration of
restrained stren gth as to let me know that he would have
preferred to drop me from a height.
He then straightened up, giving me a baleful look.
“If ye didna l ook as though ye were about to faint,
Sassenach, I swear I would turn ye over and smack your bumfor ye.”
“Y ou ca n’ t,” I said, rather faintly . “I haven’ t got one.” I was
in fa ct a  little tired … well, to be honest, my heart was beating
like a kettledrum, my ears were ringing, and if I didn’ t lie
down flat at once, I likely would  f aint. I did lie down, and lay
with my eyes closed, feeling the room spin gently round me,
like a merry-go-round, complete with flashing lights and
hurdy-gurdy music.
Through this confusion of sensations, I dimly sensed hands
on m y legs, then a pleasant coolness on my heated body . Then
something warm and cloudlike enveloped my head, and I
flailed my hands about wildly , trying to get it of f before I
smothered.
I em er ged, blinking and panti ng, to discover that I was
naked. I glanced at my pallid, sagging, skeletal remains, and
snatched the sheet up over myself. Jamie was bending to
collect my discarded gown, petticoat, and jacket from the
floor , ad ding the se to the shift he had folded over his arm. He
picked up my shoes and stockings and added these to his bag.
“Y ou,” h e said, pointing a long accusatory finger at me, “are
going nowhere. Y ou are not allo wed to kill yourself, do I make
myself clear?”
“Oh, so  that’ s where Bree gets  it,” I murmured, trying to
stop my head from swimming. I closed my eyes again.
“I seem to recall,” I said, “a certain abbey in France. And a
very stu bborn young man in ill health. And his friend
Murtagh, who took his clothes in order to prevent his getting
up and wandering of f before he was fit.”
Silence. I opened one eye. He w as standing stock still, the
fading light from the window striking sparks in his hair .
“Whereupon,” I said conversationally , “if memory serves,
you promptly climbed out a win dow and decamped. Naked. In
the middle of winter .”
The stif f  fingers of his right hand tapped twice against his
leg.“I was four -and -twenty ,” he said at last, sounding gruf f. “I
wasna meant to have any sense.”
“I wouldn’ t ar gue with that  for an instant,”  I assured him. I
opened the other eye and fixed him with both. “But you do
know why I did it. I had to.”
He drew a ver y deep breath, sighed, and set down my
clothes. He came and sat down on the bed beside me, making
the wooden frame creak and groan beneath his weight.
He pick ed up my hand, and held it as though it were
something precious and fragile . It was, too—or at least it
looked  fragile, a delicate construct of transparent skin and the
shadow of the bones within it. He ran his thumb gently down
the b ack of my hand, tracing the bones from phalange to ulna,
and I felt an odd , small tingle of  distant memory; the vision of
my own bones, glowing blue through the skin, and Master
Raymond’ s hands, cupping my  inflamed and empty womb,
saying to me through the mists of fever , “Call him. Call the red
man.”
“Jamie,” I said very softly . Sunlight flashed on the metal of
my s ilver wedding ring. He took  hold of it between thumb and
forefinger , and slid the little me tal circlet gently up and down
my fing er , so loose that it didn’ t even catch on the bony
knuckle.
“Be careful,” I said. “I don’ t want to lose it.”
“Y e won’ t.” He folded my fin gers closed, his own hand
closing lar ge and warm around mine.
He sat silent for a time, and we w atched the bar of sun creep
slowly across the counterpane. Adso had moved with it, to
stay in its warmt h, and the light tipped his fur with a soft silver
glow , the fine hairs that edged his ears tiny and distinct.
“It’ s a great comfort,” he said a t last, “to see the sun come
up a nd go down. When I dwelt in the cave, when I was in
prison, i t gave me hope, to se e the light come and go, and
know that the world went about its business.”He was looking  out the window , toward the blue distance
where the sky d arkened toward infinity . His throat moved a
little as he swallowed.
“It gives me the same feeling, Sassenach,” he said, “to hear
ye r ustling about in your sur gery , rattling things and swearin’
to y ourself.” He turned his head, then, to look at me, and his
eyes held the depths of the coming night.
“If y e were no longer there—or somewhere—” he said very
softly , “then the sun would no longer come up or go down.”
He l ifted my han d and kissed it,  very gently . He laid it, closed
around my ring, upon my chest, rose, and left.
I SLEPT  LIGHTL Y NOW , no longer flung into the agitated
world of fever dreams, nor sucked down into the deep well of
oblivion as my b ody sought the healing of sleep. I didn’ t know
what had wakened me, but I was  awake, quite suddenly , alert
and fresh-eyed, with no interval of drowsiness.
The shutters were closed, but the moon was full; soft light
striped t he bed. I ran a hand over the sheet beside me, lifted
my hand far above my head. My arm was a slender pale stem,
bloodless and fragile as a toads tool’ s stalk; my fingers flexed
gently and spread, a web, a net to catch the dark.
I cou ld hear Jam ie breathing, in his accustomed spot on the
floor beside the bed.
I b rough t my arm down, stroked  my body lightly with both
hands, assessing . A tiny swell of breast, ribs I could count,
one, two, three, four , five, and the smooth concavity of my
stomach, slung like a hammock between the uprights of my
hipbones. Skin, and bones. Not much else.
“Claire?” There was a stirring in the dark beside the bed,
and Jamie’ s head rose up, a pre sence more sensed than seen,
so dark was the shadow there by contrast with the moonlight.
A lar ge dark hand groped across the quilt, touched my hip.
“Are ye well, a nighean ?” he whispered. “D’ye need
anything?”He was tired; his head lay on the bed beside me, his breath
warm through my shift. If he ha dn’ t been warm, his touch, his
breath, p erhaps I wouldn’ t have had the courage, but I felt cold
and bod iless as the moonlight itself, and so I closed my
spectral hand on his and whispered, “I need you.”
He w as quite st ill for a moment, slowly making sense of
what I’d said.
“I’ll not trouble your sleep?” h e said, sounding doubtful. I
pulled o n his wrist in answer , an d he came, rising up from the
pool of dark on the floor , the th in lines of moonlight rippling
over him like water .
“Kelpie,” I said softly .
He snorted briefly in answer , and awkwardly , gingerly ,
eased himself beneath the quilt,  the mattress giving under his
weight.
W e lay very shyly together , barely touching. He was
breathing shallowly , clearly trying to make as little obtrusion
of h is presence as possible. A side from a faint rustling of
sheets, the house was silent.
Finally , I felt one lar ge finger  nudge gently against my
thigh.
“I missed ye, Sassenach,” he whispered.
I rolled onto my side facing h im, and kissed his arm in
answer . I wanted to move closer , lay my head in the curve of
his shoulder , and lie in the circle of his arm—but the idea of
my short, bristly hair against his skin kept me from it.
“I missed you, too,” I said, int o the dark solidness of his
arm.
“W ill I take ye, then?” he said s oftly . “D’ye want it, truly?”
One hand caressed my arm; the other went downward, starting
the slow , steady rhythm to ready himself.
“Let me ,” I whispered, stilling h is hand with my own. “Lie
still.”I ma de l ove to him at first like a sneak thief, hasty strokes
and tiny kisses, stealing scent an d touch and warmth and salty
taste. Then he p ut a hand on the back of my neck, pressing me
closer , deeper .
“Dinna hurry yourself, lass,” h e said in a hoarse whisper .
“I’m no going anywhere.”
I l et a q uiver of silent amuseme nt pass through me and he
drew in a deep, deep breath as I closed my teeth very gently
round hi m and slid my hand up under the warm, musky weight
of his balls.
Then I rose up over him, li ght-headed at the sudden
movement, needing ur gently . W e both sighed deeply as it
happened, and I felt the breath of his laughter on my breasts as
I bent over him.
“I missed ye, Sassenach,” he whispered again.
I was shy of his touching me, changed as I was, and leaned
with my  hands on his shoulders , keeping him from pulling me
down to  him. He didn’ t try , but slid his hand curled between
us.
I fel t a brief pang at the thought  that the hair on my privates
was longer than that on my hea d—but the thought was driven
out by the slow  pressure of the big knuckle pressing deep
between my legs, rocking gently back and forth.
I seized his other hand and brou ght it to my mouth, sucked
his f ingers hard, one by one, and  shuddered, gripping his hand
with all my strength.
I wa s sti ll grippi ng it sometime later , as I lay beside him. Or
rather , h olding i t, admiring the unseen shapes of it, complex
and graceful in the dark, and th e hard, smooth layer of callus
on palms and knuckles.
“I’ve the hands of a bricklayer ,”  he said, laughing a little as
I pa ssed my lips  lightly over the roughened knuckles and the
still-sensitive tips of his long fingers.“Calluses on a man’ s hands are deeply erotic,” I assured
him.
“Are the y , so?” His free hand passed lightly over my shorn
head and down the length of my back. I shivered and pressed
closer to  him, self-consciousness beginning to be for gotten.
My own  free hand roamed down the length of his body , toying
with the  soft, wiry bush of his hair , and the damply tender ,
half-hard cock.
He arched his back a little, then relaxed.
“W ell, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach,”  he said. “If I havena got
calluses ther e,  it’ s no fault of yours, believe me.”6 7
THE LAST LAUGH
I T W AS AN OLD MUSKET , made perhaps twenty years
before, but well-kept. The stock was polished with wear , the
wood beautiful to the touch, and the metal of the barrel
mellow and clean.
Standing Bear clutched it in ecstasy , running awed fingers
up and down the gleaming barrel, bringing them to his nose to
snif f the intoxicating perfume of oil and powder , then
beckoning his friends to come and smell it, too.
Five gen tlemen had received muskets from the beneficent
hand of Bird-wh o-sings-in-the-morning, and a sense of delight
ran through the h ouse, spreading in ripples through the village.
Bird him self, wi th twenty-five muskets still to give, was drunk
with the sense o f inestimable wealth and power , and thus in a
mood to welcome anyone and anything.
“This is Hiram Crombie,” Jam ie said to Bird, in T salagi,
indicating Mr . Crombie, who had stood by him, white-faced
with nerves, throughout the preliminary talk, the presentation
of th e muskets, the summoning  of the braves, and the general
rejoicing over the guns. “He has come to of fer his friendship,
and to tell you stories of the Christ.”
“Oh, your Christ? The one who went to the lower world and
came back? I always wondered, did he meet Sky-woman there,
or Mole? I am fond of Mole; I  would like to know what he
said.” Bird touched the stone pe ndant at his neck, a small red
carving of Mole, the guide to the underworld.
Mr . Crombie’ s brow was furrowed, but luckily he had not
yet d eveloped any sense of ease in T salagi; he was still in the
stage of mentall y translating each word into English, and Bird
was a rapid spe aker . And Ian had found no occasion to teach
Hiram the word for Mole.Jamie coughed.
“I am sure he w ill be happy to tell you all the stories he
knows,” he said. “Mr . Crombie,” he said, switching
momentarily to English, “T sisqua of fers you welcome.”
Bird’ s w ife Pens temon’ s nostril s flared delicately; Crombie
was swe ating with nervousness, and smelled like a goat. He
bowed earnestly , and presented Bird with the good knife he
had brought as a present, slowly reciting the complimentary
speech he had committed to memory . Reasonably well, too,
Jamie thought; he’d mispronounced only a couple of words.
“I co me to b-bri ng you great jo y ,” he finished, stammering
and sweating.
Bird looked at C rombie—small, stringy , and dripping wet—
for a long, inscrutable moment, then back at Jamie.
“Y ou’re a funny man, Bear -Killer ,” he said with resignation.
“Let us eat!”
It was autumn; t he harvest was in and the hunting was good.
And so the Feast of the Guns was a notable occasion, with
wapiti a nd venison and wild pig  raised steaming from pits and
roasted over roaring fires, with overflowing platters of maize
and roasted squash and dishes o f beans spiced with onion and
coriander , dishe s of pottage, and dozen upon dozen of small
fish rolled in cornmeal, fried in bear grease, their flesh crisp
and sweet.
Mr . Cro mbie, very stif f to begin with, began to unbend
under the influence of food, spruce beer , and the flattering
attention paid him. A certain amount of the attention, Jamie
thought, was due to the fact that Ian, a wide grin on his face,
stayed by his pupil for a time, prompting and correcting, ‘til
Hiram s hould feel more at eas e in the tongue, and able to
manage on his own. Ian was extremely popular , particularly
with the young women of the village.
For him self, he enjoyed the feasting very much; relieved of
responsibility , th ere was nothing to do save to talk and listen
and eat—and in the morning he would go.It w as a n odd feeling, and one he was not sure he had ever
had before. He had had many leavetakings, most regretful—a
few taken with a sense of relief—some that wrenched the heart
from his chest and left him aching. Not tonight. Everything
seemed strangel y ceremonious, something consciously done
for the last time, and yet there was no sadness in it.
Completion, he supposed, was t he sense of it. He had done
what he  could do, and now mu st leave Bird and the others to
make their own way . He might c ome again, but never again by
duty , in his role as the agent of the King.
That was a peculiar thought in itself. He had never lived
without the consciousness of a llegiance—whether willing or
not, witting or not—to a kin g, whether that be German
Geordie’ s house or the Stuarts. And now he did.
For the  first time, he had some glimmer of what his
daughter and his wife had tried to tell him.
Hiram w as trying to recite one  of the psalms, he realized.
He was doing a good job of it , because he had asked Ian to
translate it, and had then carefully committed it to memory .
However …
“Oil runs down over the head and the bear d …”
Penstemon cast a wary glance at the small pot of melted
bear gre ase that they were using  as a condiment, and narrowed
her eyes at Hira m, plainly intending to snatch the dish from
him if he tried to pour it over his head.
“It’ s a story of h is ancestors,” Jamie said to her , with a brief
shrug. “Not his own custom.”
“Oh. Hm.” She relaxed a little, though continuing to keep a
close eye on Hiram. He was a guest, but not all guests could be
trusted to behave well.
Hiram did nothing untoward,  though, and with many
protests of suf ficiency , and awkward compliments toward his
hosts, was persuaded to eat u ntil his eyes bulged, which
pleased them.Ian wou ld stay for a few days,  to be sure that Hiram and
Bird’ s p eople were in some sor t of mutual accord. Jamie was
not quite sure that Ian’ s sense of responsibility would
overcome his sense of humor , though—in some ways, Ian’ s
sense of humor tended toward the Indians’. A word from
Jamie might therefore not come amiss, just by way of
precaution.
“He has a wife ,” Jamie said to Bird, with a nod toward
Hiram, n ow engaged in close d iscourse with two of the older
men. “I think h e would not we lcome a young woman in his
bed. He  migh t be rude to her , not understanding the
compliment.”
“Don’ t worry ,”  said Penstemon, overhearing this. She
glanced at Hiram, and her lip curled with scorn. “Nobody
would want a c hild from him.  N ow , a child f rom you,  Bear -
Killer … ” She gave him a long look beneath her lashes, and he
laughed, saluting her with a gesture of respect.
It w as a  perfect night, cold and crisp, and the door was left
open that the air might come in. The smoke from the fire rose
straight and white, streaming toward the hole above, its
moving wraiths like spirits ascending in joy .
Everyone had eaten and drunk  to the point of a pleasant
stupor , and there was momentary silence and a pervading
sense of peace and happiness.
“It i s good for men to eat as brothers,” Hiram observed to
Standing Bear , in his halting T s alagi. Or rather , tried to. And
after all, Jamie reflected, feeling his ribs creak under the strain,
it w as really a very minor dif ference between “as brothers”
and “their brothers.”
Standing Bear gave Hiram a thoughtful look, and edged
slightly farther away from him.
Bird obs erved this, and after a moment’ s silence, turned to
Jamie.
“Y ou’re a very funny man, Bear -Killer ,” he repeated,
shaking his head. “Y ou win.”T o Mr . John Stuart,
 Superintendent of the Southern
 Department of Indian Affairs
Fr om Fraser ’ s Ridge,
 on the First Day of November ,
 Anno Domini 1774,
 James Fraser , Esq.
My dear sir ,
This is to notify you of my Resignation as Indian Agent,
as I find that my personal Convictions will no longer
allow me to perform my Office on behalf of the Cr own in
good Conscience.
In thanks for your kind Attention and many Favors,
and wishing you well in futur e, I r emain
Y our most humble Servant,
J. FraserP A R T  N I N E
T h e  B o n e s  o f  T i m e6 8
SA V AGES
O NL Y TWO LEFT . The pool of liquid wax glowed with the
light of the flaming wick above it, and the jewels slowly came
into view , one green, one black,  glowing with their own inner
fire. Jamie dipped the feather end of a quill gently into the
melted w ax and scooped the e merald up, raising it into the
light.
He dropped the hot stone into the handkerchief I held
waiting, and I r ubbed it quickly , to get of f the wax before it
should harden.
“Our res erves are getting rather low ,” I said, in uneasy jest.
“Let’ s hope there aren’ t any more expensive emer gencies.”
“I shallna touch the black diamond, regardless,” he said
definitely , and blew out the wick. “That one is for you.”
I stared at him.
“What do you mean by that?”
He shrugged a l ittle, and reached to take the emerald in its
handkerchief from me.
“If I  sho uld be killed,” he said very matter -of-factly . “Y e’ll
take it and go. Back through the stones.”
“Oh? I don’ t know that I would, ” I said. I didn’ t like talking
about any contingency that involved Jamie’ s death, but there
was no point in ignoring the possibilities. Battle, disease,
imprisonment, accident, assassination …
“Y ou an d Bree were going abo ut forbidding me  to die,” I
said. “I’d do the  same thing, if I had the faintest hope of your
paying the least attention.”
He smiled at that.“I always mind your words, Sassenach,” he assured me
gravely . “But ye do tell me that man proposes and God
disposes, and should He see fit to dispose of me —ye’ll go
back.”
“Why would I?” I said, nettled—and unsettled. The
memories of his sending me back through the stones on the
eve of Culloden were not ones I ever wished to recall, and here
he w as, prying o pen the door to that tightly sealed chamber of
my mind. “I’d stay with Bree and Roger , wouldn’ t I? Jem,
Marsali and Fer gus, Germain and Henri-Christian and the girls
—everyone’ s here. What is there to go back to, after all?”
He took  the stone from its cloth , turning it over between his
fingers, and looked thoughtfully at me, as though making up
his mind  whether to tell me something. Small hairs began to
prickle on the back of my neck.
“I dinna ken,” h e said at last, shaking his head. “But I’ve
seen ye there.”
The prickling ran straight down the back of my neck and
down both arms.
“Seen me wher e ?”
“There.” He waved a hand in a vague gesture. “I dreamt of
ye there . I dinna ken where it w as; I only know it was ther e —
in your proper time.”
“How do you know that?” I demanded, my flesh creeping
briskly . “What was I doing?”
His brow furrowed in the ef fort of recollection.
“I dinna  recall, exactly ,” he said slowly . “But I knew it was
then,  by the light.” H is brow cleared suddenly . “That’ s it. Y e
were sit ting at a desk, with something in your hand, maybe
writing. And there was light all round ye, shining on your face,
on your  hair . But it wasna candlelight, nor yet firelight or
sunlight. And I recall thinking to myself as I saw ye, Oh, so
that’ s what electric light is like.”
I stared at him, open-mouthed.“How can you recognize something in a dream that you’ve
never seen in real life?”
He seemed to find that funny .
“I dream  of things I’ve not seen all the time, Sassenach—
don’ t you?”
“W ell,” I said uncertainly . “Y es. Sometimes. Monsters, odd
plants, I suppose. Peculiar land scapes. And certainly people
that I don’ t know . But surely that’ s dif ferent? T o see something
you know about, but haven’ t seen?”
“W ell, what I saw may not be what electric light does  look
like,” he admitted, “but that’ s what I said to myself when I saw
it. And I was quite sure that ye were in your own time.
“And after all,” he added logic ally , “I dream of the past;
why would I not dream of the future?”
There w as no good answer to a thoroughly Celtic remark of
that nature.
“W ell, you  would, I suppose,” I said. I rub bed dubiously at
my lower lip. “How old was I, in this dream of yours?”
He looked surprised, then uncertain, and peered closely at
my face , as though trying to compare it with some mental
vision.
“W ell … I dinn a ken,” he said,  sounding for the first time
unsure. “I didna think anything a bout it—I didna notice that ye
had white hair , or anything of the sort—it was just … you.” He
shrugged, baf fled, then looked down at the stone in my hand.
“Does i t feel warm to your touch, Sassenach?” he asked
curiously .
“Of course it do es,” I said, rathe r crossly . “It’ s just come out
of h ot wax, for heaven’ s sake.” And yet the emerald did  seem
to p ulse gently in my hand, warm as my own blood and
beating like a m iniature heart. And when I handed it to him, I
felt a small, peculiar reluctance—as though it did not want to
leave me.“Give it to Mac Donald,” I said, rubbing my palm against
the s ide of my skirt. “I hear him  outside, talking to Arch; he’ll
be wanting to be of f.”
MACDONALD HAD COME pelting up to the Ridge in the
midst of a rain storm the day before, weathered face nearly
purple with cold, exertion, and excitement, to inform us that he
had found a printing establishment for sale in New Bern.
“The ow ner has  already left—somewhat involuntarily ,” he
told us, dripping and steaming b y the fire. “His friends seek to
sell the premises and equipment promptly , before they might
be s eized or de stroyed, and thus provide him with funds to
reestablish himself in England.”
By “somewhat involuntarily ,” it turned out, he meant that
the print shop’ s owner was a Loyalist, who had been
kidnapped of f the street by the local Committee of Safety and
shoved willy-nilly onto a ship departing for England. This
form of impromptu deportation was becoming popular , and
while it was more humane than tar and feathers, it did mean
that the printer would arrive penniless in England, and owing
money for his passage, to boot.
“I h appened to meet wi’ some  of his friends in a tavern,
tearin’ their hair over his sad fa te and drinking to his welfare
—whereupon I told them that I might be able to put them in
the way of an advantage,” th e Major said, swelling with
satisfaction. “They were all ears, when I said that ye might—
just might, mind—have ready cash.”
“What makes ye think I do, D onald?” Jamie asked, one
eyebrow cocked.
MacDonald look ed surprised, then knowing. He winked and
laid a finger beside his nose.
“I hear the odd bit, here and there. W ord has it that ye’ve
got a wee cache of gems—or so I hear , from a merchant in
Edenton whose bank dealt wi’ one.”
Jamie and I exchanged looks.“Bobby ,” I said, and he nodded in resignation.
“W ell, as for me, mum’ s the word,” MacDonald said,
observing this. “Y e can rely up on my discretion, to be sure.
And I doubt the matter ’ s widely known. But then—a poor man
doesna go about buying muskets by the dozen, now , does he?”
“Oh, he might,” Jamie said, resigned. “Y e’d be surprised,
Donald. But as it is … I imagine a bar gain might be struck.
What are the printer ’ s friends asking—and will they of fer
insurance, in case of fire?”
MACDONALD HAD BEEN empowered to negotiate on
behalf of the pr inter ’ s friends—they being anxious to get the
problematical real estate sold before some patriotic soul came
and burned it do wn—and so the bar gain was concluded on the
spot. MacDonald  was sent hurtling back down the mountain to
change the emerald into money , conclude payment on the
printer ’ s shop, leaving the residue of the money with Fer gus
for ongoing expenses—and le t it be known as quickly as
possible in New Bern that the  premises were shortly to be
under new management.
“And if anyone asks about the p olitics of the new owner …”
Jamie said. T o which MacDonald merely nodded wisely , and
laid his finger alongside his red-veined nose once more.
I w as reasonably  sure that Fer gu s had no personal politics to
speak of; beyond his family , his  sole allegiance was to Jamie.
Once the bar gain was made, tho ugh, and the frenzy of packing
begun—Marsali and Fer gus would have to leave at once, to
have any  chance  of making it to New Bern before winter set in
in earnest—Jamie had had a serious talk with Fer gus.
“Now , it’ll no be like it was in  Edinbur gh. There’ s no but
one other printer in the town, an d from what MacDonald says,
he’ s an  elderly  gentleman, and sae much afraid o’ the
committee and the Governor both, he willna print a thing but
books of sermons and handbills advertising horseraces.”“T r es bon,”  said Fer gus, looking even happier , if such a
thing w as possible. He’d been going about lit up like a
Chinese lantern since hearing the news. “W e will have all of
the new spaper and broadsheet business, to say nothing of the
printing of scandalous plays and pamphlets—there is nothing
like sedition and unrest for the printing business, milord, you
know that yourself.”
“I do know that,” Jamie said v ery dryly . “Which is why I
mean to  beat the need for care  into your thick skull. I dinna
wish to hear that  ye’ve been hanged for treason, nor yet tarred-
and-feathered for no being treasonous enough.”
“Oh, la. ” Fer gus waved an airy hook. “I know well enough
how this game is played, milord.”
Jamie nodded, still looking dubious.
“A ye, ye  do. But it’ s been som e years; ye may be out of
practice. And ye’ll not know who’ s who in New Bern; ye
dinna want to fi nd yourself buying meat from the man ye’ve
savaged in the morning’ s paper , aye?”
“I’ll mind that, Da.” Marsali sat by the fire, nursing Henri-
Christian, and taking close heed. If anything, she looked
happier than Fer gus, upon whom she looked adoringly . She
switched the look of adoration  to Jamie, and smiled. “W e’ll
take good care, I promise.”
Jamie’ s frown softened as he looked at her .
“I’ll miss ye, lass,” he said softly . Her look of happiness
dimmed, but didn’ t go out entirely .
“I’ll mis s ye, too, Da. All of us will. And Germain doesna
want to leave Jem, o’ course. Bu t …” Her eyes drifted back to
Fer gus, who was making a list of supplies, whistling
“Alouette” unde r his breath, an d she hugged Henri-Christian
closer , making him kick his legs in protest.
“A ye, I know .” Jamie coughed,  to cover his emotion, and
wiped a knuckle  underneath his nose. “Now then, wee Fer gus.
Y e’ll ha ve a bit of money over;  be sure to bribe the constable
and the watch first of all. MacDonald’ s given me the names o’the Royal Council, and the chief Assemblymen—he’ll be of
help wi’  the council, as he’ s the Governor ’ s man. Be tactful,
aye? But see he ’ s taken care of; he’ s been a great help in the
matter .”
Fer gus nodded, head bent over his paper .
“Paper , ink, lead, bribes, shammy leather , brushes,” he said,
writing busily , and resumed absently singing, “Alouette, gentil
alouette …”
IT W AS  IMPOSSIBLE T O get a wagon up to the Ridge; the
only approach was by the narrow  trail that wound up the slope
from Coopersvi lle—one of the factors that had led to the
development of that minor crossroads into a small hamlet, as
itinerant peddlers and other travelers tended to stop there,
making brief forays on foot upward into the mountain.
“Which is all very well for discouraging hostile invasion
onto the  Ridge, ” I told Bree, panting as I set down a lar ge
canvas-wrapped bundle of can dlesticks, chamber pots, and
other sm all household belonging s at the side of the trail. “But
it unfortunately makes it rather dif ficult to get off  the bloody
Ridge, too.”
“I su ppose it ne ver occurred to Da that anyone would want
to leave ,” Bree said, grunting a s she lowered her own burden
—Marsali’ s cauldron, packed with cheeses, sacks of flour ,
beans, a nd rice,  plus a wooden  box full of dried fish and a
string bag of apples. “This thing weighs a ton. ”
She turned and bellowed, “GERMAIN!” up the trail behind
us. Dea d silence. Germain and Jemmy were meant to be
shepherding Mirabel the goat down to the wagon. They had
left the cabin with us, but had been dropping steadily behind.
Neither a call n or a mehhhh  came from the trail, but Mrs.
Bug came into view , trundling  slowly under the weight of
Marsali’ s spinning wheel, which she bore on her back, and
holding Mirabel ’ s halter in one hand. Mirabel, a small, neat
white goat with gray markings, blatted happily at sight of us.“I found  the puir wee lassie tethered to a bush,” Mrs. Bug
said, setting down the spinning wheel with a wheeze and
wiping her face with her apron. “No sign o’ the lads, the
wicked wee creatures.”
Brianna made a low growling noise that boded ill for either
Jemmy or Germain, if she ca ught them. Before she could
stomp b ack up the trail, though , Roger and Y oung Ian came
down, each carrying one end of  Marsali’ s loom, collapsed for
the occa sion into a lar ge bundle  of heavy timbers. Seeing the
traf fic jam in the road, though , they stopped, setting down
their burden with sighs of relief.
“What’ s amiss, then?” Roger asked, glancing from face to
face, an d settling on the goat with a frown. “Where are Jem
and Germain?”
“Dollars to donuts the little fiends are hiding somewhere,”
Bree sai d, smoothing tumbled red hair out of her face. Her
plait had come undone, and s traggling wisps of hair were
sticking damply  to her face. I was momentarily grateful for my
short thicket of curls; no matter what it looked like, it was
certainly convenient.
“Shall I go an d look?” Ian asked, emer ging from the
wooden pudding basin he’d been carrying upside down on his
head. “They’ll no have gone far .”
Sounds of hasty feet from below made everyone turn
expectantly in that direction—but it was not the boys, but
Marsali, breathless and wide-eyed.
“Henri-Christian,” she gasped, her eyes flicking rapidly
round the group. “Have ye got him, Mother Claire? Bree?”
“I thought you  had him,” Bree said, catching Marsali’ s sense
of ur gency .
“I d id. W ee Ai dan McCallum was minding him for me,
whilst I loaded things into the wagon. But then I stopped to
feed him”—a hand went briefly to her bosom—”and they were
both vanished! I thought perhaps …” Her words died away asshe began scanning the bushes along the trail, her cheeks
flushed with exertion and annoyance.
“I’ll strangle him,” she said through gritted teeth. “And
where’ s Germain, then?” she cried, catching sight of Mirabel,
who had  taken advantage of the stop to nibble tasty thistles by
the path.
“This is beginning to have the  look of a plan about it,”
Roger observed, obviously amused. Ian, too, seemed to be
finding something funny in the situation, but vicious glares
from the  frazzled females present wiped the smirks of f their
faces.
“Y es, do  go and find them, please,” I said, seeing that
Marsali was about to either burst into tears or go berserk and
throw things.
“A ye, do ,” she said tersely . “An d beat them, while ye’re at
it.”
“YE KEN WHERE THEY ARE?” Ian asked, shading his eyes
to look up a trough of tumbled rock.
“A ye, lik ely . Th is way .” Roger pushed through a tangle of
yaupon and redbud, with Ian after him, and emer ged onto the
bank of the sma ll creek that para lleled the trail here. Below , he
caught a glimpse of Aidan’ s favorite fishing place near the
ford, but there was no sign of life down there.
Instead, he turned upward, making his way through thick
dry grass and lo ose rocks along the creekbank. Most of the
leaves had fallen from the ches tnuts and poplars, and lay in
slippery mats of brown and gold underfoot.
Aidan had shown him the secr et place some time ago; a
shallow cave, barely three feet  high, hidden at the top of a
steep slo pe over grown by a thic ket of oak saplings. The oaks
were ba re now , and the cave’ s opening easily visible, if you
knew to look for it. It was particularly noticeable at the
moment, because smoke was coming out of it, slipping veil-like up the face of the rock abov e, leaving a sharp scent in the
cold, dry air .
Ian raised one eyebrow . Roger nodded, and made his way
up the slope, ma king no ef fort to be quiet about it. There was a
mad scuf fle of noises inside t he cave, thumpings and low
cries, an d the veil of smoke wavered and stopped, replaced by
a loud hiss and a puf f of dark gray from the cave mouth as
someone threw water on the fire.
Ian, mea nwhile, had made his way silently up the side of the
rockface above the cave, seeing  a small crevice from which a
tiny plume of smoke issued. Clinging one-handed to a
dogwood that grew out of the r ock, he leaned perilously out,
and cupping a ha nd near his mouth, let out a frightful Mohawk
scream, directed into the crevice.
T error -stricken shrieks, much h igher -pitched, issued from
the cave , followed in short order by a tumble of little boys,
pushing and tripping over each other in their haste.
“Ho, there!” Roger snagged his own of fspring neatly by the
collar as he rushed past. “The jig’ s up, mate.”
Germain, with Henri-Christian’ s  sturdy form clutched to his
midsection, was attempting to escape down the slope, but Ian
leapt past him, springing pantherlike down the rocks, and
grabbed the baby from him, bringing him to a reluctant stop.
Only Aidan remained at lar ge. Seeing his comrades in
captivity , he hesitated at the edge of the slope, obviously
wanting to flee, but nobly gave in, coming back with dragging
step to share their fate.
“Right, lads; sorry , it’ s not on .” Roger spoke with some
sympathy; Jemm y had been upset for days at the prospect of
Germain’ s leaving.
“But we  do not want to go, U ncle Roger ,” Germain said,
employing his most ef fective look of wide-eyed pleading. “W e
will stay here; we can live in the cave, and hunt for our food.”
“A ye, sir , and me and Jem, we’ll share our dinners wi’
them,” Aidan piped up in anxious support.“I br ought some of Mama’ s mat ches, so they’ve got a fire to
keep warm,” Jem chipped in eagerly , “and a loaf of bread,
too!”
“So ye see, Uncle—” Germain spread his hands gracefully
in demonstration, “we shall be no trouble to anyone!”
“Oh, nay trouble, is it?” Ian sa id, with no less sympathy .
“T ell your mother that, aye?”
Germain put his hands behind him, clutching his buttocks
protectively by reflex.
“And wh at were ye thinking, dragging your wee brother up
here?” Roger said a little more severely . “He can barely walk
yet! T wo steps out of there”— he nodded at the cave—”and
he’d be tumbling down the burn and his neck broken.”
“Oh, no, sir!” G ermain said, shocked. He fumbled in his
pocket a nd drew  out a piece of string. “I should tie him up,
when I was not there, so he shouldna wander or fall. But I
couldna be leaving him; I promised Maman,  wh en he was
born, I said I would never leave him.”
T ears were beginning to trickle down Aidan’ s thin cheeks.
Henri-Christian, totally confused, began to howl in sympathy ,
which m ade Jem’ s lower lip trem ble, as well. He wriggled out
of Roger ’ s grasp, ran to Germain, and clutched him
passionately about the middle.
“Germain can’ t go, Daddy , please don’ t make him go!”
Roger rubbed his nose, exchanged brief looks with Ian, and
sighed.
He sat down o n a rock, and motioned to Ian, who was
having a  certain  amount of dif f iculty in deciding which way
up t o hold Hen ri-Christian. Ian gave him the baby with a
noticeable air of relief, and Henri-Christian, feeling the need
of security , seized Roger ’ s nose with one hand and his hair
with the other .
“Look, a bhailach, ” he said, detaching Henri-Christian’ s
grasp with some dif ficulty . “W ee Henri-Christian needs hismother to feed him. He’ s barely got teeth, for God’ s sake—he
canna be  living up here in the wild, eating raw meat wi’ you
savages.”
“He has too go t teeth!” Aidan said stoutly , extending a
bitten forefinger in proof. “Look!”
“He eats  pap,” Germain said, but with some uncertainty to
his tone. “W e would mash up biscuits for him with milk.”
“Henri-Christian needs his moth er ,” Roger repeated firmly ,
“and your mother needs you.  Y e dinna expect her to manage  a
wagon and two mules and  you r sisters, all the way to N ew
Bern alone, do ye?”
“But Papa can help,” Germain protested. “The girls mind
him, when they mind no one else!”
“Y our papa’ s gone already ,” Ian informed him. “He’ s ridden
ahead, to find a  place for ye all to live, once ye’ve got there.
Y our mo ther ’ s to follow on, wi ’ all your things. Roger Mac’ s
right, a bhailach —your mother needs ye.”
Germain’ s small face paled a little. He looked helplessly
down at Jemmy , still clinging to him, then up the hill at Aidan,
and gulped. The wind had come  up, and blew his blond fringe
back from his face, making him look very small and fragile.
“W ell, then,” he said, and stopped, swallowing. V ery gently ,
he put his arms round Jemmy’ s shoulders and kissed the top of
his round red head.
“I’ll come back, cousin,” he sai d. “And you will come and
visit me by the sea. Y ou’ll come, too,” he assured Aidan,
looking up. Aidan snif fed, nodd ing, and made his way slowly
down the slope.
Roger reached out a free hand and gently detached Jemmy .
“Get on my back, mo chuisle, ” he said. “It’ s a steep slope; I’ll
take ye down pick-a-back.”
Not waiting to be asked, Ian leaned down and picked up
Aidan, w ho wrapped his legs round Ian’ s middle, hiding his
tear -streaked face in Ian’ s buckskin shirt.“D’ye want to ride, too?” Roger asked Germain, standing up
carefully under the weight of his  double burden. “Ian can carry
ye, if ye like.”
Ian nod ded and held out a hand, but Germain shook his
head, blond hair flying.
“ Non,  Uncle Roger ,” he said, almost too softly to hear . “I’ll
walk.” A nd turn ing round, began to make his way gingerly
down the precipitous slope.6 9
A ST AMPEDE OF BEA VERS
October 25, 1774
T HEY HAD BEEN W ALKING for an hour before Brianna
began to realize that they weren ’ t after game. They’d cut the
trail of a small herd of deer , with droppings so fresh that the
pellets were still patchy with moisture, but Ian ignored the
sign, pushing up the slope in single-minded determination.
Rollo had come with them, but after several fruitless
attempts to draw his master ’ s attention to promising scents,
abandoned them in disgust and bounded of f through the
flurrying leaves to do his own hunting.
The clim b was too steep to per mit conversation, even had
Ian seem ed incl ined. W ith a m ental shrug, she followed, but
kept gun in hand and an eye on the brush, just in case.
They had left the Ridge at dawn; it was well past noon when
they paused at l ast, on the bank  of some small and nameless
stream. A wild grapevine wrapped itself round the trunk of a
persimmon that overhung the bank; animals had taken most of
the grapes, but a few bunches still hung out over the water , out
of reach for an y but the most daring of squirrels—or a tall
woman.
She shucked her moccasins and waded into the stream,
gasping at the icy shock of the water on her calves. The grapes
were ripe to bu rsting, so purple as to be nearly black, and
sticky with juice. The squirrels  hadn’ t got to them, but the
wasps had, and she kept a caut ious eye on the dagger -bellied
foragers as she twisted the t ough stem of a particularly
succulent bunch.
“So, do you wan t to tell me what we’re really looking for?”
she asked, back turned to her cousin.“No,” he said, a smile in his voice.
“Oh, a surprise, is it?” She pop ped the stem, and turned to
toss the grapes to him.
He c aught the bu nch one-handed, and set them down on the
bank beside the ragged knapsack in which he carried
provisions.
“Something o’ the sort.”
“As long  as we aren’ t just out for a walk, then.” She twisted
of f another bunch, and sloshed ashore, to sit down beside him.
“No, not that.” He flipped tw o grapes into his mouth,
crushed them, and spat the skins and pips with the ease of long
custom. She nibbled hers more daintily , biting one in half and
flicking the seeds out with a fingernail.
“Y ou ought to eat the skins, Ian; they have vitamins.”
He raised one sh oulder in skepticism, but said nothing. Both
she and her mother had explain ed the concept of vitamins—
numerous times —to little or n o ef fect. Jamie and Ian had
reluctantly been obliged to admit the existence of germs,
because Claire could show  them teeming seas of
microor ganisms in her microsc ope. V itamins, however , were
unfortunately invisible and thus could be safely ignored.
“Is it much farth er , this surprise?” The grape skins were, in
fact, ver y bitter .  Her mouth puc kered involuntarily as she bit
into one. Ian, industriously eating and spitting, noticed and
grinned at her .
“A ye, a bit farther .”
She cast  an eye at the horizon; the sun was coming down
the s ky . If they were to turn bac k now , it would be dark before
they reached home.
“How much  farther?” She spit the mangled grape skin into
her palm and flicked it away into the grass.
Ian glanced at the sun, too, and pursed his lips.
“W ell … I should think we’ll reach it by midday tomorrow .”“W e’ll what ? Ian!” He looked abashed, a nd ducked his
head.
“I’m sorry , coz. I ken I should have told ye before—but I
thought ye maybe wouldn’ t come, if I said how far .”
A w asp lighted on the bunch of  grapes in her hand, and she
slapped it irritably away .
“Y ou know  I wouldn’ t. Ian, what were you thinking? Roger
will have a fit!”
Her cousin seemed to find th e notion funny; his mouth
turned up at the corner .
“A fit? Roger Mac? I shouldna think so.”
“W ell, all right, he won’ t throw  a fit—but he’ll be worried.
And Jemmy will miss me!”
“No, they’ll be all right,” Ian assured her . “I told Uncle
Jamie we’d be gone three days, and he said he’d bring the
wean up  to the Big House. W ith your Mam and Lizzie and
Mrs. Bug to fu ss him, wee Jem won’ t even notice you’re
gone.”
This was likely true, but di d nothing to assuage her
annoyance.
“Y ou told Da ? A nd he just said fine, and both of you
thought it was perfectly all righ t to—to—lug me of f into the
woods for three days, without t elling me what was going on?
Y ou—you—”
“High-handed, i nsuf ferable, bea stly Scots, ” Ian said, in such
a pe rfect imitation of her mot her ’ s English accent that she
burst out laughing, despite her annoyance.
“Y es,” she said, wiping spluttered grape juice of f her chin.
“Exactly!”
He was still smiling, but his expression had changed; he
wasn’ t teasing anymore.
“Brianna,” he said softly , with that Highland lilt that made
of her name something strange and graceful. “It’ s important,aye?”
He wasn’ t smiling at all now . H is eyes were fixed on hers,
warm, but serious. His hazel eye s were the only feature of any
beauty a bout Ian Murray’ s face, but they held a gaze of such
frank, sweet openness that you felt he had let you look inside
his soul , just for an instant. She had had occasion before to
wonder whether he was aware of this particular ef fect—but
even if he was, it was dif ficult to resist.
“All right,” she said, and waved away a circling wasp, still
cross but resigned. “All right . B ut you still s hould have told
me. And you won’ t tell me, even now?”
He shoo k his head, looking d own at the grape he was
thumbing loose from its stem.
“I can’ t ,” he said simply . He flipped the grape into his
mouth and turned to open his bag—which, now that she
noticed, bulged suspiciously . “D’ye want some bread, coz, or a
bit of cheese?”
“No. Let’ s go.” She stood up and brushed dead leaves from
her breeches. “The sooner we get there, the sooner we’ll be
back.”
THEY ST OPPED AN HOUR before sunset, while enough
light remained to gather wood. The bulging knapsack had
proved t o conta in two blankets, as well as food and a jug of
beer—welcome, after the day’ s walking, which had been
mostly uphill.
“Oh, thi s is a good batch,” she said approvingly , snif fing at
the neck of the jug after a long, aromatic, hop-edged swallow .
“Who made it?”
“Lizzie. She caught the knack of it from Frau  Ute. Before
the … er … mphm.” A delicate Scottish noise encompassed
the pain ful cir cumstances sur rounding the dissolution of
Lizzie’ s betrothal.
“Mmm. That was too bad, wasn’ t it?” She lowered her
lashes, w atching him covertly to see whether he would sayanything further  about Lizzie. L izzie and Ian had seemed fond
of each other on ce—but first he had gone to the Iroquois, and
then she had be en engaged to Manfred McGillivray when he
returned. Now that both of them were free once more …
He dismissed her comment about Lizzie with nothing more
than a shrug of agreement, though, concentrating on the
tedious process of fire-making. T he day had been warm and an
hour of dayligh t remained, but the shadows under the trees
were already blue; the night would be chilly .
“I’m going to h ave a look at the stream,” she announced,
plucking a coiled line and hook  from the small pile of ef fects
Ian had unloaded from his bag.  “It looked like there’ s a trout
pool just below the bend, and the flies will be rising.”
“Oh, aye.” He nodded, but paid her little attention, patiently
scraping the pile of kindling a l ittle higher before striking the
next shower of sparks from his flint.
As s he m ade her  way around the  bend of the little creek, she
saw that it wasn’ t merely a trout pool—it was a beaver pond.
The hum ped mound of the lodg e was reflected in still water ,
and on the far b ank she could s ee the agitated judderings of a
couple o f willow saplings, evidently in the process of being
consumed.
She moved slowly , a wary eye out. Beavers wouldn’ t
trouble her , but they would  make a dash for the water if they
saw her , not onl y splashing, but smacking the water with their
tails in alarm. She’d heard it before; it was amazingly loud,
sounding like a fusillade of gunshots, and guaranteed to scare
every fish within miles into hiding.
Gnawed sticks littered the near bank, the white inner wood
chiseled as neatly as any carpe nter could do, but none was
fresh, an d she heard nothing nearby but the sigh of wind in the
trees. Beavers were not stealthy; none was close.
W ith a cautious  eye on the far bank, she baited the hook
with a small chunk of cheese , whirled it slowly overhead,
picked u p speed  as she let the line out, then let it fly . The hooklanded with a small plop!  in the middle of the pond, but the
noise wasn’ t suf ficient to alarm the beavers; the willow
saplings on the far bank contin ued to shake and heave under
the assault of industrious teeth.
The eve ning hat ch was rising, ju st as she’d told Ian. The air
was soft, cool on her face, and the surface of the water
dimpled and glimmered like gr ay silk shaken in light. Small
clouds o f gnats drifted in the st ill air under the trees, prey for
the risin g of the carnivorous caddis flies, stone flies, and
damselflies breaking free of the surface, new-hatched and
ravenous.
It was a pity that she hadn’ t a casting rod or tied flies—but
still wor th a try . Caddis flies we ren’ t the only things that rose
hungry at twilight, and voracious trout had been known to
strike at  almost anything that floated in front of them—her
father had once taken one with  a hook adorned with nothing
more than a few knotted strands of his own bright hair .
That wa s a thought. She smiled  to herself, brushing back a
wisp of hair that had escaped from its plait, and began to draw
the l ine slowly b ack toward shore. But there were likely more
than trout here, and cheese was—
A strong tug came on the line, and she jerked in surprise. A
snag? The line jerked back, and a thrill from the depths shot up
her arm like electricity .
The next half ho ur passed without conscious thought, in the
single-minded p ursuit of finny prey . She was wet to mid-thigh,
rashed with mosquito bites, and  her wrist and shoulder ached,
but she had thre e fat fish gleaming in the grass at her feet, a
hunter ’ s sense of profound sa tisfaction—and a few more
crumbs of cheese left in her pocket.
She was drawing back her arm  to throw the hook again,
when a sudden  chorus of squeaks and hisses shattered the
evening calm, and a stampede of beavers broke from cover ,
trundling down the opposite ban k of the pond like a platoon of
small, furry tanks. She stared at  them open-mouthed, and took
a step back in reflex.Then something big and dark appeared among the trees
behind the beavers, and further reflex shot adrenaline through
her limbs as she whirled to flee. She would have been into the
trees and  away in an instant, had she not stepped on one of her
fish, wh ich slid under her foot like greased butter and dumped
her unce remoniously on her backside. From which position
she was ideally placed to see Rollo race from the trees in a
long, low streak and launch himself in an arching parabola
from the top of the bank. Graceful as a comet, he soared
through the air and landed in the pond among the beavers,
with a splash like a fallen meteor .
IAN LOOKED UP A T HER, open-mouthed. Slowly , his eyes
traveled from her dripping hair , over her sopping, mud-
smeared clothes, and down to the fish—one slightly squashed
—that dangled from a leather string in her hand.
“The fis h put up a good fight, did they?” he asked, nodding
at the string. The corners of his mouth began to twitch.
“Y es,” s he said, and dropped them on the ground in front of
him. “But not nearly as good a fight as the beavers.”
“Beavers,” he said. He rubbed a knuckle meditatively down
the bridge of his  long, bony nose . “A ye, I heard them slapping.
Y e’ve been fighting beavers?”
“I’ve be en rescuing your wretched dog  from beavers,” she
said, and sneezed. She sank to her knees in front of the new-
made fire and closed her eyes in momentary bliss at the touch
of heat on her shivering body .
“Oh, Ro llo’ s bac k, then? Rollo! Where are ye, hound?” The
big dog slunk reluctantly out of the shrubbery , tail barely
twitching in response to his master ’ s call.
“What’ s this I hear about beavers, then, a madadh ?” Ian
said sternly . In response, Rollo s hook himself, though no more
than a fine mis t of water droplets rose from his coat. He
sighed, d ropped to his belly , and put his nose morosely on his
paws.“Maybe he was only after fish, but the beavers didn’ t see it
that way . They ran from him on shore, but once he was in the
water—” Briann a shook her head, and wrung out the soggy
tail o f her hunting shirt. “I tell y ou what, Ian— you  clean those
damn fish.”
He was already doing so, gutting one with a single neat slice
up t he b elly and  a scoop of the thumb. He tossed the entrails
toward Rollo, who merely let ou t another sigh, and seemed to
flatten against the dead leaves, ignoring the treat.
“He’ s no hurt, is he?” Ian asked, frowning at his dog.
She glared at him.
“No, he isn’ t. I  expect he’ s embarrassed. Y ou could ask
whether I’m  h urt. Do you h ave any idea w hat kind of teeth
beavers have?”
The ligh t was nearly gone, b ut she could see his lean
shoulders shaking.
“A ye,” he said, sounding rather strangled. “I have. They ,
um, didna bite y e, did they? I mean—I should think it would
be n oticeable, if ye’d been gnawed.” A small wheeze of
amusement escaped him, and he tried to cover it with a cough.
“No,” sh e said, rather coldly . T he fire was going well, but
not near ly well enough. The eve ning breeze had come up, and
was reaching through the soake d fabric of shirt and breeches
to fondle her backside with ice-cold fingers.
“It w asn’ t so much the teeth as t he tails,” she said, shuf fling
round on her knees to present her back to the fire. She rubbed
a h and gingerly over her right a rm, where one of the muscular
paddles had struck flat on her forearm, leaving a reddened
bruise that stretched from wrist to elbow . For a few moments,
she’d thought the bone was broken.
“It was like being hit with a baseball bat—er … with a club,
I mean,” she amended. The beavers hadn’ t attacked her
directly , of course, but being in the water with a panicked
wolf-dog and half a dozen sixt y-pound rodents in a state of
extreme agitation had been rather like walking through anautomated car wash on foot—a maelstrom of blinding spray
and thrashing objects. A chill struck her and she wrapped both
arms around herself, shivering.
“Here, coz.” Ian stood up and skinned the buckskin shirt of f
over his head. “Put this on.”
She was much too cold and b attered to refuse the of fer .
Retiring modest ly behind a bush, she stripped of f the wet
things and emer ged a moment later , clad in Ian’ s buckskin, one
of the blankets wrapped around her waist sarong-style.
“Y ou do n’ t eat enough, Ian,” sh e said, sitting down by the
fire again, and eyeing him critically . “All your ribs show .”
They di d. He’d always been le an to the point of thinness,
but i n hi s young er years, his tee nage scrawniness had seemed
quite no rmal, merely the result of his bones outstripping the
growth of the rest of him.
Now he had reached his full growth and had had a year or
two to let his m uscles catch up. They had—she could see
every si new in his arms and shoulders—but the knobs of his
spine bulged against the tanned skin of his back, and she could
see the shadows of his ribs like rippled sand underwater .
He raised a shoulder , but made no reply , intent on skewering
the cleaned fish on peeled willow twigs for broiling.
“And yo u don’ t sleep very well, either .” She narrowed her
eyes at him across the fire. Even  in this light, the shadows and
hollows in his face were obvious, despite the distraction of the
Mohawk tattoo s that looped across his cheekbones. The
shadows had been obvious to ev eryone for months; her mother
had wan ted to say something to Ian, but Jamie had told her to
let the lad be; he would speak when he was ready .
“Oh, well enough,” he murmured, not looking up.
Whether he was ready now or  not, she couldn’ t say . But
he’d brought her here. If he wasn’ t ready , he could bloody well
get that way fast.She had—of course—wondered all day about the
mysterious goa l of their jour ney , and why she  was his
necessary companion. For a matter of hunting, Ian would have
taken one of the  men; good as she was with a gun, several of
the men on the Ridge were better , including her father . And
any one of them  would be better suited than she to something
like digging out a bear ’ s den or packing home meat or hides.
They were in th e Cherokee lands at the moment; she knew
Ian v isited the In dians frequently , and was on good terms with
several villages.  But if it had been a matter of some formal
arrangement to be made, surely he would have asked Jamie to
accompany him, or Peter Bewlie, with his Cherokee wife to
interpret.
“Ian,” she said, with the tone in her voice that could bring
almost any man up short. “Look at me.”
His head jerked up, and he blinked at her .
“Ian,” sh e said, a little more gen tly , “is this to do with your
wife?”
He stayed frozen for a moment, eyes dark and
unfathomable. R ollo, in the sh adows behind him, suddenly
raised his head and let out a small whine of inquiry . That
seemed to rouse Ian; he blinked and looked down.
“A ye,” he said, sounding quite matter -of-fact. “It is.”
He a djusted the angle of the stick he had driven into the
earth by  the fire; the pale flesh of the fish curled and sizzled,
browning on the green wood.
She wai ted for him to say more, but he didn’ t speak—just
broke of f the edge of a piece of half-cooked fish and held it
out to the dog, clicking his tongue in invitation. Rollo rose and
snif fed Ian’ s ear in concern, but  then deigned to take the fish,
and lay down again, licking th e hot tidbit delicately before
scooping it up with his tongue, gathering enough spirit then to
engulf the discarded heads and fish guts as well.
Ian purs ed his lips a little, and she could see the thoughts
flickering half-formed across his face, before he made up hismind to speak.
“I did once think of marrying you, ye ken.”
He gave her a quick, direct glance, and she felt an odd little
jolt of realization. He’d thought  about it, all right. And while
she had no doubt that his of fer then had been made from the
purest of  motive s … he was a yo ung man. She hadn’ t until this
moment realized that he would of course have contemplated
every detail of what that of fer entailed.
His eyes held h ers in wry acknowledgment of the fact that
he h ad indeed im agined the physical details of sharing her bed
—and had not found the prospect in any way objectionable.
She resisted the impulse to blush and look away; that would
discredit them both.
She was suddenly—and for the first time—aware of him as
a man, rather than as an endearing young cousin. And aware of
the heat  of his body that had lingered in the soft buckskin
when she pulled it on.
“It w ouldn’ t have been the wo rst thing in the world,” she
said, stri ving to match his matter -of-fact tone. He laughed, and
the stippled lines of his tattoos lost their grimness.
“No,” he said. “Maybe not the best—that would be Roger
Mac, aye? But I’m glad to hear I wouldna have been the worst,
either . Better than Ronnie Sinclair , d’ye think? Or worse than
Forbes the lawyer?”
“Ha, bloody ha.” She refused to be discomposed by his
teasing. “Y ou would have been at least third on the list.”
“Third?” That got his attention. “What? Who was second?”
He a ctually seemed mif fed at t he notion that someone might
precede him, and she laughed.
“Lord John Grey .”
“Oh? Oh, well. A ye, I suppo se he’d do,” Ian admitted
grudgingly . “Though of course, he—” He stopped abruptly ,
and darted a cautious look in her direction.She felt an answering stab of caution. Did Ian know about
John Gr ey’ s private tastes? She thought he must, from the odd
expression on his face—but if not, it was no place of hers to be
revealing Lord John’ s secrets.
“Have you met him?” she asked curiously . Ian had gone
with her parents to rescue Roger from the Iroquois, before
Lord John had appeared at her aunt’ s plantation, where she had
met the nobleman herself.
“Oh, aye .” He was still looking wary , though he had relaxed
a little. “Some years ago. Him and his … son. Stepson, I mean.
They came to the Ridge, traveling through to V ir ginia, and
stopped a bit. I gave him the  measle.” He grinned, quite
suddenly . “Or at least he had  th e measle. Aun tie Claire nursed
him through it. Y e’ve met the man yourself, though?”
“Y es, at River Run. Ian, the fish is on fire.”
It was, and he snatched the sti ck from the flames with a
small G aelic exclamation, waving scorched fingers to cool
them. E xtinguished in the grass, the fish proved to be quite
edible, if a little  crispy round th e edges, and a tolerably good
supper , with the addition of bread and beer .
“Did ye  meet Lord John’ s son , then, at River Run?” he
asked, resuming their conversation. “W illie, his name is. A
nice wee lad. He fell into the privy ,” he added thoughtfully .
“Fell in the priv y?” she said, laughing. “He sounds like an
idiot. Or was he just quite small?”
“No, a decent size for his age. And sensible enough, for an
Englishman. Se e, it wasna qu ite his fault, ken. W e were
looking at a snake, and it came up the branch toward us, and
… well , it was an accident,” he concluded, handing Rollo
another piece of fish. “Y e’ve  not seen the lad yourself,
though?”
“No, and I think you are deliberately changing the subject.”
“A ye, I am. D’ye want a bit more beer?”She raised an e yebrow at him—he needn’ t think he was
going to escape that easily—but nodded, accepting the jug.
They we re quiet for a bit, drinking beer and watching the
last of the light fade into darkn ess as the stars came out. The
scent of the pine  trees strengthened, their sap warmed from the
day , and in the distance she heard the occasional gunshot
warning slap of a beaver ’ s tai l on the pond—evidently the
beavers had posted sentries, in case she or Rollo should sneak
back after dark, she thought wryly .
Ian had wrapped his own blanket round his shoulders
against the growing chill, and was lying flat in the grass,
staring upward into the vault of heaven overhead.
She didn ’ t make any pretense of  not watching him, and was
quite sure he w as aware of it . His face was quiet for the
moment, minus its usual animation—but not guarded. He was
thinking, and she was content to let him take his time; it was
autumn now and night would be long enough for many things.
She wished she had thought to ask her mother more about
the girl Ian called Emily—the Mohawk name was something
multisyllabic and unpronounceable. Small, her mother had
said. Pretty , in a neat, small-b oned sort of way , and very
clever .
W as she dead, E mily the small and clever? She thought not.
She’d be en in this time long enough to have seen many men
deal with the de ath of wives. They showed loss and grief—but
they didn’ t do what Ian had been doing.
Could he be taking her to meet  Emily? That was a
staggering thought, but one she rejected almost immediately . It
would b e a month’ s journey , at  least, to reach the Mohawks’
territory—probably more. But then …
“I w ondered, ken?” he said sudd enly , still looking up at the
sky . “D’ye feel sometimes … wrong?” He glanced at her
helplessly , not sure whether he’d  said what he meant—but she
understood him perfectly .“Y es, al l the time.” She felt a s ense of instant, unexpected
relief at the adm ission. He saw the slump of her shoulders, and
smiled a little, crookedly .
“W ell … maybe not all  the time,” she amended. “When I’m
out in the woods , alone, it’ s fine . Or with Roger , by ourselves.
Though even then …” She saw Ian’ s eyebrow lift, and hurried
to ex plain. “Not that. Not being with him. It’ s just that we …
we talk about what was.”
He g ave her a look in which sympathy was mingled with
interest. Plainly ,  he would like to know about “what was,” but
put that aside for the moment.
“The woods, aye?” he said. “I s ee that. When I’m awake, at
least. Sleeping, though …” He turned his face back toward the
empty sky and the brightening stars.
“Are you afraid—when the dark comes on?” She’d felt that
now and  then; a moment of deep fear at twilight—a sense of
abandonment and elemental loneliness as night rose from the
earth. A feeling that sometimes remained, even when she had
gone inside the cabin, the bolted door secure behind her .
“No,” he said, frowning a little at her . “Y ou are?”
“Just a little,” she said, waving it away . “Not all the time.
Not now . But what is it about sleeping in the woods?”
He sat up, and r ocked back a little, big hands linked around
one knee, thinking.
“A ye, well …” he said slowly .  “Sometimes I think of the
auld tale s— from Scotland, aye? And ones I’ve heard now and
then, living wi’ the Kahnyen’kehaka. About … things that
may com e upon  a man while he sleeps. T o lure away his soul.”
“Things?” Despite the beauty of the stars and the peace of
the e vening, she felt something small and cold slide down her
back. “ What  things?”
He took a deep breath and blew it out, brows puckered.
“Y e call them sidhe  in the Gaelic. The Cherokee call them
the Nunnahee. And the Mohaw k have names for them, too—more tha n one. But when I hea rd Eats T urtles tell of them, I
kent at once what they were. It’ s the same—the Old Folk.”
“Fairies?” she said, and her incredulity must have been clear
in h er voice, fo r he glanced up sharply at her , a glint of
irritation in his eyes.
“No, I ken what you  mean by that—Roger Mac showed me
the wee  picture ye drew fo r Jem, all tiny things like
dragonflies, prinking in the flowers… .” He made an uncouth
noise in the back of his throat. “Nay . These things are …” He
made a helpless gesture with o ne big hand, frowning at the
grass.
“V itamins,” he said suddenly , looking up.
“V itamins,” she said, and rubbed  a hand between her brows.
It had been a long day; they had likely walked fifteen or
twenty m iles and fatigue had settled like water in her legs and
back. The bruises from her battle with the beavers were
beginning to throb.
“I see. Ian … are you sure that your head isn’ t still a bit
cracked?” She said it lightly , but her real anxiety lest it be true
must have shown in her voic e, for he gave a low , rueful
chuckle.
“No. Or at least —I dinna think so. I was only—well, d’ye
see, it’ s like th at. Y e canna see the vitamins, but you and
Auntie Claire ken weel that they ’re there, and Uncle Jamie and
I mu st take it on faith that ye’re  right about it. I ken as much
about the—the Old Ones. Can ye no believe me about that ?”
“W ell, I —” She had begun to agree, for the sake of peace
between them— but a feeling swept over her , sudden and cold
as a  cloud-shadow , that she wished to say nothing to
acknowledge the notion. Not out loud. And not here.
“Oh,” he said, catching sight of her face. “So ye do  know .”
“I don’ t know ,  no,” she said. “But I don’ t know it’ s not,
either . A nd I don’ t think it’ s a good idea to talk about things
like that, in a wood at night, a million miles away from
civilization. All right?”He smiled a little at that, and nodded in acceptance.
“A ye. And it’ s no what I meant to say , really . It’ s more …”
His feathery brows knitted in c oncentration. “When I was a
bairn, I’d wake in my bed, and  I’d ken at once where I was,
aye? There was the window”—he flung out a hand—”and
there was the basin and ewer on the table, wi’ a blue band
round the top, and ther e “—he p ointed toward a laurel bush
—”was the big bed where Jane t and Michael were sleepin’,
and Jock y the dog at the bed fit, farting like a beetle, and the
smell of  peat smoke from the fire and … well, even if I should
wake at midnig ht and the hous e all still around me, I should
ken at once where I was.”
She nodded, the memory of her  own old room in the house
on F urey Street rising around her , vivid as a vision in the
smoke. The striped wool blanke t, itchy under her chin, and the
mattress with the indentation of her body in the middle,
cupping her like a huge, warm hand. Angus, the stuf fed Scottie
with the  ragged tam-o-shanter who shared her bed, and the
comforting hum of her parents’ conversation from the living
room below , punctuated by the baritone sax of the theme
music from Perry Mason.
Most of all, the sense of absolute security .
She had to close her eyes, and swallow twice before
answering.
“Y es. I know what you mean.”
“A ye. W ell. For some time afte r I left home, I might find
myself s leeping rough, wi’ Uncle Jamie in the heather , or here
and there in inns and pothouses.  I’d wake wi’ no notion where
I was—and still, I’d ken I was in Scotland. It was all right.”
He paus ed, lower lip caught bet ween his teeth as he struggled
to find the right words.
“Then … things happened. I wa sna in Scotland any longer ,
and home was … gone.” His voice was soft, but she could
hear the echo of loss in it.
“I would wake, with no idea where I might be—or who.”He was hunched over now , big hands hanging loose
between his thighs as he gazed into the fire.
“But wh en I lay wi’ Emily—f rom the first time. I knew .
Kent wh o I was again.” He loo ked up at her then, eyes dark
and shad owed by loss. “My sou l didna wander while I slept—
when I slept wi’ her .”
“And now it does?” she asked quietly , after a moment.
He nodded, wordless. The wind whispered in the trees
above. She tried to ignore it,  obscurely afraid that if she
listened closely , she might hear words.
“Ian,” sh e said, and touched his  arm, very lightly . “Is Emily
dead?”
He sat quite still for a minute, then took a deep, shuddering
breath, and shook his head.
“I dinna  think so.” He sounded very doubtful, though, and
she could see the trouble in his face.
“Ian,” she said very softly . “Come here.”
He didn ’ t move, but when she  scooted close and put her
arms around him, he didn’ t resi st. She pulled him down with
her , insisting that he lie beside  her , his head pillowed in the
curve between shoulder and breast, her arm around him.
Mother instinct , she thought, wryly amused. Whatever ’ s
wrong, the first thing you do is pick them up and cuddle them.
And if they’re to o big to lift … a nd if his warm weight and the
sound of his bre athing in her ear  kept the voices in the wind at
bay , so much the better .
She had a fragmentary memory , a brief vivid image of her
mother standing behind her father in the kitchen of their house
in B oston. He la y back in a straight chair , his head against her
mother ’ s stomac h, eyes closed in pain or exhaustion, as she
rubbed his temples. What had it been? A headache? But her
mother ’ s face had been gentle, the lines of her own day’ s stress
smoothed away by what she was doing.
“I feel a fool,” Ian said, sounding shy—but didn’ t pull away .“No, you don’ t.”
He took  a deep breath, squirmed a little, and settled
cautiously into the grass, his body barely touching hers.
“A ye, w ell. I suppose not, then,” he murmured. He relaxed
by wary  degrees, his head growing heavier on her shoulder ,
the muscles of his back yielding slowly , their tension
subsiding under her hand. V ery tentatively , as though
expecting her to slap him away , he lifted one arm and laid it
over her .
It seeme d the wind had died. The firelight shone on his face,
the dark dotted lines of his tat toos standing out against the
young skin. His hair smelled of woodsmoke and dust, soft
against her cheek.
“T ell me,” she said.
He sighed, deeply .
“Not yet,” he said. “When we get there, aye?”
He w ould not sa y more, and they lay together , quiet in the
grass, and safe.
Brianna felt sleep come, the waves of it gentle, lifting her
toward peace, and did not resis t. The last thing she recalled
was Ian’ s face, cheek heavy o n her shoulder , his eyes still
open, watching the fire.
W ALKING ELK  W AS telling a story . It was one of his best
stories, but Ian wasn’ t paying pr oper attention. He sat acr oss
the fir e fr om W alking Elk, but it was the flames he was
watching, not his friend’ s face.
V ery odd , he thought. He’d bee n watching fir es all his life,
and never seen the woman in th em, until these winter months.
Of cour se, peat fir es had no gr eat flame to speak of, though
they had a good  heat and a lovely smell . . . oh. A ye,  so she
was ther e, after all, the woman. He nodded slightly , smiling.
W alking Elk took this as an e xpr ession of appr oval at his
performance and became even mor e dramatic in his gestur es,scowling horr endously and lur ching to and fr o with bar ed
teeth, gr owling in illustration of the glutton he had car efully
tracked to its lair .
The nois e distra cted Ian fr om th e fir e, drawing his attention
to the story aga in. Just in time, for W alking Elk had r eached
the climax, and the young men nudged each other in
anticipation. W alking Elk was short and heavily built—not so
much un like a glutton himself, which made his imitations that
much mor e entertaining.
He turned his h ead, wrinkling  up his nose and gr owling
thr ough his teeth, as the glutt on caught the hunter ’ s scent.
Then he changed in a flash, became the hunter , cr eeping
car efully thr oug h the brush, pausing, squatting low—and
springing upwar d with a sharp yelp, as his buttock
encounter ed a thorny plant.
The men ar ound the fir e whoop ed as W alking Elk became
the glutton, who looked at first  astonished at the noise, and
then thrilled to have seen its pr ey . It leaped fr om its lair ,
uttering gr owls and sharp yips of rage. The hunter fell back,
horrified, and turned to run. W alking Elk’ s stubby legs churned
the p ounded earth of the longho use, running in place. Then he
thr ew up his ar ms and sprawled forwar d with a despairing
“A y-YIIIIII!” as the glutton struck him in the back.
The men shouted encouragement, slapping their palms on
their thighs, as the beleaguer ed hunter managed to r oll onto
his back, thrashing and cursing, grappling with the glutton
that sought to tear out his thr oat.
The fir elight gleamed on the scars that decorated W alking
Elk’ s ch est and shoulders—thick white gouges that showed
briefly at the gaping neck of his shirt as he writhed
pictur esquely , a rms straining upwar d against his invisible
enemy . Ian found himself leaning forwar d, his br eath short and
his own shoulders knotted with  effort, though he knew what
was coming next.
W alking Elk had done it many ti mes, but it never failed. Ian
had tried it himself, but couldn’ t do it at all. The hunter dug hisheels an d should ers into the dirt , his body ar ched like a bow at
full str etch. His legs tr embled, his arms shook—sur ely they
would g ive way at any moment. The men by the fir e held their
br eath.
Then it came: a soft, sudden  click. Distinct and somehow
muffled, it was exactly the soun d made by the br eaking of a
neck. The snap of bone and ligament, muffled in flesh and fur .
The hunter stayed ar ched a moment, unbelieving, and then
slowly , slowly , lower ed himself to the gr ound and sat up,
staring at the body of his enemy , clutched limp in his hands.
He cast up his  eyes in praye rful thanks, then stopped,
wrinkling his nose. He glanced down, face scr ewed into a
grimace, and rubbed fastidiousl y at his leggings, soiled by the
odor ous voidings of the glutton. The hearth r ocked with
laughter .
A sm all bucket of spruce beer was making the r ounds;
W alking Elk beamed, his face shining with sweat, and
accepted it. His short, thick thr oat worked industriously ,
sucking the sharp drink down  as though it was water . He
lower ed the bucket at last and looked about in dr eamy
satisfaction.
“Y ou, W olf ’ s Br other . T ell us a story!” He thr ew the half-
empty b ucket acr oss the fir e; I an caught it, only sloshing a
little over his w rist. He sucked the liquid fr om his sleeve,
laughed, and shook his head. He took a quick mouthful of beer
and passed the bucket to Sleeps with Snakes, beside him.
Eats T urtles, on his other side, poked Ian in the ribs,
wanting him to talk, but he shook his head again and
shrugged, jerking his chin towar d Snake.
Snake, n othing loath, set the bu cket neatly befor e him and
leaned f orwar d, the fir elight dancing on his face as he began
to talk. He was no actor like W a lking Elk, but he was an older
man—per haps thirty—and had traveled much in his youth. He
had live d with the Assiniboin an d the Cayuga, and had many
stories fr om them, which he told with gr eat skill—if less sweat.“W ill yo u talk later , then?” T urtle said in Ian’ s ear . “I want
to hear mor e tales of the gr eat sea and the woman with gr een
eyes.”
Ian nodded, a l ittle r eluctant. He had been very drunk the
first time , or he would never have spoken of Geillis Abernathy .
It was only that they had been drinking trader ’ s rum, and the
spinning sensation it caused in his head was very like that
caused b y the stuff  she’d given hi m to drink, though the taste
was differ ent. That caused a giddiness that made his eyes blur ,
so ca ndle flames str eaked and ra n like water , and the flames of
the fir e seemed to overflow and leap the hearthstones,
glimmering all r ound her lavish r oom, small separate blazes
springing up in all the r ounded  surfaces of silver and glass,
gems and polished wood—flickering brightest behind gr een
eyes.
He glanced ar ound. Ther e wer e no shining surfaces her e.
Clay po ts, r ough fir ewood, and the smooth poles of bed
frames, grinding  stones and wov en baskets; even the cloth and
furs of their clothes wer e soft dull colors that dr owned the
light. It must h ave been only the memory of those times of
light-glazed dizziness that had br ought her to mind.
He s eldom thought of the Mistr e ss—that was how the slaves
and the other b oys spoke of her; she needed no mor e name
than tha t, for no one could imag ine another of her sort. He did
not value his memories of her , but Uncle Jamie had told him
not to hide fr om them, and he obeyed, finding it good counsel.
He star ed intently into the fir e, only half-hearing Snake’ s
r ecounting of the story about Goose and how he had outwitted
the Evil One to  bring tobacco to the People and save Old
Man’ s li fe. W as it her , then, the w itch Geillis, that he saw in the
fir e?
He thou ght it was not. The wo man in the fir e gave him a
warm feeling when he saw her that ran fr om his heated face
down th r ough hi s chest and curl ed up low and hot in his belly .
The woman in the fir e had no face; he saw her limbs, her
curving back, a sweep of long, smooth hair , twisting towar dhim, gone in a flicker; he hear d her laugh, soft and br eathy ,
far away—and it was not Geillis Abernathy’ s laugh.
Still, T u rtle’ s wor ds had br ought her to his mind, and he
could see her th er e. He sighed to himself and thought what
story he  might tell, when it came his turn. Per haps he would
tell abou t Mrs. Abernathy’ s twin slaves, the huge black men
who did  her every bidding; he had once seen them kill a
cr ocodile, and carry it up fr om t he river between them to lay it
at her feet.
He didn’ t mind so much. He had found—after that first
drunken telling—that to speak of her in such a way caused him
to think of her in the same way—as though she was a story ,
inter esting but unr eal. Per haps she had happened, as per haps
Goose had br ought tobacco to Old Man—but it did not seem
so much as though she had happened to  him.
And after all, he had no scars, like W alking Elk’ s, that would
r emind either his hear ers or himself that he spoke truth.
In truth, he was gr owing bor ed with drinking and stories.
The r ea l truth was that he lon ged to escape to the furs and
cool dar kness of his bed platfo rm, shed his clothes, and curl
his hot nakedne ss ar ound his wife. Her name meant “W orks
with Her Hands,” but in the p rivacy of bed, he called her
Emily .
Their time was gr owing short ; in two moons mor e, she
would le ave, to go to the women ’ s house, and he would not see
her . Another moon befor e the ch ild came, one mor e after that
for clea nsing … The thought o f two months spent cold and
alone, without her next to him at night, was enough to make
him r each for the beer as it came ar ound, and drink deep.
Only the bucket was empty . His friends giggled as he held it
upside d own above his open mouth, a single amber dr op
splattering on his surprised nose.
A small hand r eached over his shoulder and took the bucket
fr om his grasp, as its partner r e ached over his other shoulder ,
holding a full one.He took the bucket and twisted, smiling up at her . W orks
with He r Hands smiled smugly back; it gave her gr eat
pleasur e to anticipate his wan ts. She knelt behind him, the
curve of her belly pr essing warm against his back, and swatted
away T urtle’ s hand as he r eached for the beer .
“No, let  my husband have it! He tells much better stories
when he’ s drunk.”
T urtle closed one eye, fixing her with the other . He was
swaying slightly .
“Is it that he tells better stories when he’ s drunk?” he
asked. “Or do we just  think they’r e better , because  we’re
drunk?”
W orks with Her Hands ignor ed this philosophical inquiry
and pr o ceeded to make r oom for herself at the hearth,
swinging her solid little bum deftly back and forth like a
battering ram. She settled comfo rtably next to Ian, folding her
arms atop her mound.
Other yo ung women had come in with her , bringing mor e
beer . They nudged their way in among the young men,
murmuring, poking, and laughing. He’d been wr ong, Ian
thought, watching them. The fir elight shone on their faces,
glanced fr om their teeth, caught the moist shine of eyes and
the soft dark fles h inside their mouths as they laughed. The fir e
gleamed on their faces mor e than it had ever shone fr om the
crystal and silver of Rose Hall.
“So, husband,” Emily said, lowering her eyelids demur ely .
“T ell us about this woman with gr een eyes.”
He took a thoughtful swallow of beer , then another .
“Oh,” he said. “ She was a witch , and a very wicked woman
—but she did make good beer .”
Emily’ s eyes flew open wide, and everyone laughed. He
looked i nto her eyes and saw it , clearly; the image of the fir e
behind him, tiny and perfect—welcoming him in.“But no t as good as yours,” he said. He lifted the bucket in
salute, and drank deep.7 0
EMIL Y
B RIANNA WOKE IN THE MORNING stif f and sore, but
with one clear thought in mind. Okay . I know who I am.  She
had no clear idea wher e  she was, but that didn’ t matter . She lay
still for a mome nt, feeling oddly peaceful, despite the ur ge to
get up and pee.
How long had it been, she wondered, since she had
wakened alone and peaceful, w ith no company but her own
thoughts? Really , not since she had stepped through the stones,
she thought, in search of her family . And found them.
“In spa des,” she murmured,  stretching gingerly . She
groaned, staggered to her feet, and shuf fled into the brush to
pee and change back into her o wn clothes before returning to
the blackened fire ring.
She unplaited her draggled hair , and began groggily
combing her fingers through it. There was no sign of Ian or the
dog nearby , but she wasn’ t con cerned. The wood around her
was filled with the racket of birds, but not alarm calls, just the
daily business of flutter and fe eding, a cheerful chatter that
didn’ t al ter when she rose. The  birds had been watching her
for hours; they weren’ t concerned, either .
She never woke easily , but the simple pleasure of not being
dragged from sleep by the insist ent demands of those who did
made the morning air seem particularly sweet, in spite of the
bitter tang of ashes from the dead fire.
Mostly awake, she wiped a handful of dew-wet poplar
leaves over her face by way  of a morning toilette, then
squatted by the fire ring and began the chore of fire-starting.
They had no cof fee to boil, but Ian would be hunting. W ith
luck, there’d be something to co ok; they’d eaten everything in
the knapsack, save a heel of bread.“Heck with this,” she muttered, whacking flint and steel
together for the dozenth time, a nd seeing the spatter of sparks
wink out without catching. If Ia n had only told her they were
camping, she would have brought her fire-striker , or some
matches—though on second thought, she was not sure that
would b e safe. The things could easily burst into flame in her
pocket.
“How di d the Greeks do it?” she  said aloud, scowling at the
tiny mat of charr ed cloth on which she was attempting to catch
a spark. “They must have had a way .”
“The Greeks had what?”
Ian and Rollo were back, having captured, respectively , half
a dozen  yams and a blue-gray waterbird of some kind—a
small heron? Rollo refused to allow her to look at it, and took
his prey of f to devour under a bush, its long, limp yellow legs
dragging on the ground.
“The Greeks had what?” Ian rep eated, turning out a pocket
full of chestnuts, red-brown skins gleaming from the remnants
of their prickly hulls.
“Had stuf f called phosphorus. Y ou ever heard of it?”
Ian looked blank, and shook his head.
“No. What is it?”
“Stuf f,” she said, finding no better word to hand. “Lord
John sent me some, so I could make matches.”
“Matches betwe en whom?” Ian inquired, regarding her
warily .
She stared at hi m for a moment, her morning-sodden mind
making slow sense of the conversation.
“Oh,” she said, having at last discovered the dif ficulty . “Not
that kind of match. Those fire-starters I made. Phosphorus
burns by itself. I’ll show you , when we get home.” She
yawned, and gestured vaguely  at the small pile of unlit
kindling in the fire ring.Ian m ade a toler ant Scottish noise and took up the flint and
steel himself.
“I’ll do it. Do the nuts, aye?”
“Okay . H ere, you should put yo ur shirt back on.” Her own
clothes had dried, and while sh e missed the comfort of Ian’ s
buckskin, the worn thick wool o f her fringed hunting shirt was
warm and soft on her skin. It w as a bright day , but chilly so
early in the morning. Ian had  discarded his blanket while
starting the fire, and his bare shoulders were pebbled with
gooseflesh.
He s hook his he ad slightly , though, indicating that he’d put
on h is shirt in a bit. For now … his tongue stuck out of the
corner of his mouth in concentration as he struck flint and steel
again, then disappeared as he muttered something under his
breath.
“What did you say?” She paus ed, a half-hulled nut in her
fingers.
“Oh, it’ s no but  a—” He’d stru ck once more and caught a
spark, glowing like a tiny star on the square of char . Hastily , he
touched a wisp of dry grass to it, then another , and as a tendril
of smoke rose up, added a bark chip, more grass, a handful of
chips, and finally a careful crisscross of pine twigs.
“No but a fire charm,” he finished, grinning at her over the
infant blaze that had sprung up before him.
She applauded briefly , then proceeded to cut the skin of the
chestnut she was holding, crosswise, so it wouldn’ t burst in the
fire.
“I haven’ t heard that one,” she said. “T ell me the words.”
“Oh.” H e didn’ t blush easily , but the skin of his throat
darkened a little. “It’ s … it’ s no  the Gaelic, that one. It’ s the
Kahnyen’kehaka.”
Her brow s went  up, as much at the easy sound of the word
on his tongue as at what he’d said.
“Do you ever think in Mohawk, Ian?” she asked curiously .He shot her a glance of surprise, almost, she thought, of
fright.
“No,” he  said tersely , and rose o f f his heels. “I’ll fetch a bit
of wood.”
“I have some,”  she said, hold ing him with a stare. She
reached behind her and thrust a fallen pine bough into the
kindling fire. The dry needles burst in a puf f of sparks and
were gone, but the ragged bark began to catch and burn at the
edges.
“What is it?” s he said. “What I said, about thinking in
Mohawk?”
His lips pressed tight together , not wanting to answer .
“Y ou asked me to come,” she said, not sharp with him, but
firm.
“So I did.” He t ook a deep brea th, then looked down at the
yams he was burying in the heating ashes to bake.
She worked on the nuts slowly ,  watching him make up his
mind. Loud chewing sounds and intermittent puf fs of blue-
gray feathers drifted out from under Rollo’ s bush, behind him.
“Did ye dream last night, Brian na?” he asked suddenly , his
eyes still on what he was doing.
She wish ed he had brought something cof feelike to boil, but
still, she  was suf ficiently awake  by now as to be able to think
and respond coherently .
“Y es,” she said. “I dream a lot.”
“A ye, I ken that. Roger Mac to ld me ye write them down
sometimes.”
“He did ?” That  was a jolt, and one bigger than a cup of
cof fee. S he’d n ever hidden  her dreambook from Roger , but
they did n’ t really discuss it, ei ther . How much of it had he
read?
“He didna tell m e anything about them,” Ian assured her ,
catching the tone of her voice. “Only that ye wrote thingsdown, sometimes. So I thought, maybe, those would be
important.”
“Only to me,” she said, but cautiously . “Why … ?”
“W ell, d ’ye see—the Kahnyen’kehaka set great store by
dreams. More even than Highla nders.” He glanced up with a
brief sm ile, then back at the ashes where he had buried the
yams. “What did ye dream of last night, then?”
“Birds,” she said, trying to recall. “Lots of birds.”
Reasonable enough, she thought. The forest around her had
been live with b irdsong since well before dawn; of course it
would seep into her dreams.
“A ye?” Ian seemed interested. “W ere the birds alive, then?”
“Y es,” she said, puzzled. “Why?”
He nodded, and picked up a chestnut to help her .
“That’ s good, to dream of live b irds, especially if they sing.
Dead birds are a bad thing, in a dream.”
“They were definitely alive, and singing,” she assured him,
with a glance u p at the branch above him, where some bird
with a bright y ellow breast and black wings had lighted,
viewing their breakfast preparations with interest.
“Did any of them talk to ye?”
She stared at him , but he was clearly serious. And after all,
she thought, why wouldn’ t  a bird talk to you, in a dream?
She shook her head, though.
“No. Th ey were —oh.” She laughed, unexpectedly recalling.
“They were building a nest out  of toilet paper . I dream about
toilet pa per all the time. That’ s a thin, soft kind of paper that
you use to wipe  your , er , behin d with,” she explained, seeing
his incomprehension.
“Y e wip e your arse with paper ?” He stared a t her , jaw
dropped in horror . “Jesus God, Brianna!”“W ell.” She rubbed a hand under her nose, trying not to
laugh at his expr ession. He might well be horrified; there were
no p aper mills in the Colonies, and aside from tiny amounts of
handmade paper such as she made herself, every sheet had to
be imported from England. Paper was hoarded and treasured;
her father , who wrote frequently to his sister in Scotland,
would w rite a letter in the nor mal fashion—but then would
turn the paper sideways, and write additional lines
perpendicularly , to save space. Little wonder that Ian was
shocked!
“It’ s very cheap then,” she assured him. “Really .”
“Not as  cheap as a cob o’ ma ize, I’ll warrant,” he said,
narrow-eyed with suspicion.
“Believe it or not, most people then won’ t have cornfields to
hand,” she said, still amused. “A nd I tell you what, Ian—toilet
paper is much  nicer than a dry corncob.”
“‘Nicer ,’” he muttered, obviously still shaken to the core.
“Nicer . Jesus, Mary , and Bride!”
“Y ou were asking me about dreams,” she reminded him.
“Did you dream last night?”
“Oh. Ah … no.” He turne d his attention from the
scandalous notion of toilet paper with some dif ficulty . “Or at
least if I did, I dinna recall it.”
It ca me to her suddenly , looking at his hollowed face, that
one reas on for his sleeplessness might be that he was afraid of
what dreams might come to him.
In fact, he seemed afraid now that she might press him on
the subje ct. Not meeting her eye, he picked up the empty beer
jug a nd clicked his tongue for R ollo, who followed him, blue-
gray feathers sticking to his jaws.
She had cut the  last of the chestnut skins and buried the
gleaming marrons in the ashes to bake with the yams, by the
time he came back.“Just in time,” she called, se eing him. “The yams are
ready .”
“Just in time, forbye,” he answe red, smiling. “See what I’ve
got?”
What he had was a chunk of honeycomb, thieved from a bee
tree and  still chilled enough that the honey ran slow and thick,
drizzled over the hot yams in glo rious blobs of gold sweetness.
Garnished with roasted, peeled, sweet chestnuts and washed
down w ith cold creek water , sh e thought it was possibly the
best breakfast she’d eaten since leaving her own time.
She said as mu ch, and Ian lifted one feathery brow in
derision.
“Oh, aye? And what would ye eat then that’ s better?”
“Oooh … chocolate donuts, maybe. Or hot chocolate, with
marshmallows in it. I really miss chocolate.” Though it was
hard to miss it much at the moment, licking honey of f her
fingers.
“Och, get on wi ’ ye! I’ve had chocolate.” He squinched his
eyes and pinched his lips in exag gerated distaste. “Bitter , nasty
stuf f. Th ough th ey did char ge a terrible lot of money just for a
wee cup of it, in Edinbur gh,” he added practically ,
unsquinching.
She laughed.
“They put sugar in it, where I co me from,” she assured him.
“It’ s sweet.”
“Sugar in your chocolate? That’ s the most decadent thing
I’ve ever heard of,” he said severely . “Even worse than the
arse-wiping paper , aye?” She saw the teasing glint in his eye,
though, and merely snorted, nibbling the last shreds of orange
yam flesh from the blackened skin.
“Someday I’ll get hold of some chocolate, Ian,” she said,
discarding the limp peel and lick ing her fingers like a cat. “I’ll
put sugar in it and feed it to you, and see what you think then!”It w as his turn to snort, good-naturedly , but he made no
further remarks , concentrating  instead on licking his own
hands clean.
Rollo h ad appropriated the remnants of honeycomb, and
was noisily gnawing and slurpi ng at the wax, with complete
enjoyment.
“That do g must have the digestion of a crocodile,” Brianna
said, shaking her head. “Is there anything he won’ t eat?”
“W ell, I’ve no t ried him on nails, yet.” Ian smiled briefly ,
but didn ’ t take up the conversa tion. The unease that had lain
upon him when he talked of dreams had disappeared over
breakfast, but seemed now to ha ve returned. The sun was well
up, b ut h e made  no move to rise. He merely sat, arms wrapped
about his knees, gazing thought fully into the fire as the rising
sun stole the light from the flames.
In n o great hurry to start moving herself, Brianna waited
patiently , eyes fixed on him.
“And what would you eat for br eakfast when you lived with
the Mohawk, Ian?”
He looked at h er then, and his mouth tucked in at one
corner . N ot a smile, but a wry  acknowledgment. He sighed,
and laid his hea d on his knees,  face hidden. He sat slumped
that way for a bit, then slowly straightened up.
“W ell,” he said, in a matter -of-fact tone of voice. “It was to
do wi’ my brother -in-law . At least to start.”
IAN MU RRA Y THOUGHT tha t before too long, he would be
obliged to do something about his brother -in-law . Not that
“brother -in-law” was precisely the word for it. Still, Sun Elk
was the husband  of Looking at  the Sky , who was in turn the
sister of his own  wife. By the notions of the Kahnyen’kehaka
this implied no relation betwe en the men beyond that of
clansmen, but Ian still thought o f Sun Elk with the white part
of his mind.That was the secret part. His wife had English, but they did
not spea k it, even when most private. He spoke no word of
Scots or  English aloud, had h eard not a syllable of either
tongue in the y ear since he had chosen to stay , to become
Kahnyen’kehaka. It was assumed he had for gotten what he had
been. But each day he found some moment to himself, and,
lest he lose the words, would silently name the objects around
him, hea ring their English names echo in the hidden white part
of his mind.
Pot,  he thought to himself, squinting at the blackened
earthenware warming in the ashes. In fact he was not alone at
the moment. He was, however , feeling distinctly alien.
Corn,  he thought, leaning back against the polished tree
trunk that formed one upright of the longhouse. Several
clusters of dried maize hung ab ove him, festively colored by
comparison with the sacks of grain sold in Edinbur gh—and
yet corn  nonetheless. Onions,  h e thought, eye s passing down
the braided chain of yellow globes. Bed. Furs. Fir e.
His wife leaned toward him, s miling, and the words ran
suddenly together in his mind.
Blackravenblackhairshiningbr eastbudsthighssor oundohyesohy
esohEmily …
She set a warm bowl in his hand, and the rich aroma of
rabbit and corn and onion ros e up into his nose. Stew ,  he
thought, the slippery flow of wo rds coming to a sudden halt as
his m ind focused on food. He s miled at her , and laid his hand
over hers, holding it for a moment, small and sturdy under his,
curved a round the wooden bowl. Her smile deepened; then she
pulled away , rising up to go and fetch more food.
He watc hed her go, appreciating the sway of her walk. Then
his eye caught S un Elk—watching, too, from the doorway of
his own apartment.
Bastar d,  Ian thought, very clearly .
“SEE, WE GOT ON WELL en ough to start,” Ian explained.
“He’ s a bonny man, for the most part, Sun Elk.”
“For the most part,” Brianna echoed. She sat still, watching
him. “And which part was that?”
Ian rubbed a hand through his hair , making it stand up like
the bushy quills on a porcupine.
“W ell … the friend part. W e wer e  friends, to begin with,
aye? Brothers, in fact; we were of the same clan.”
“And you stopped being friends because of—of your wife?”
Ian sighed deeply .
“W ell, ye see … the Kahnyen’ kehaka, they’ve a notion of
marriage that—it’ s like what ye see in the Highlands, often
enough. That is, the parents have a good deal to do wi’
arranging it. Often enough, they’ve watched the weans as they
grew , and seen if maybe there was a lad and a lassie that
seemed well-matched. And if they were—and if they came
from the proper clans—now , that bit’ s dif ferent, see?” he
added, breaking of f.
“The clans?”
“A ye. In  the Highlands, ye’d mostly marry within your own
clan, save it wa s to make an alliance wi’ another . Among the
Iroquois nations, though, ye canna ever marry someone from
your own clan, and ye can only marry someone from particular
clans, not just any other .”
“Mama said the Iroquois reminded her a lot of
Highlanders,” Brianna said, mildly amused. “Ruthless, but
entertaining, was how she put it, I think. Bar some of the
torturing, maybe, and the burning your enemies alive.”
“Y our mother ’ s no heard some of Uncle Jamie’ s stories
about his grandsire, then,” he replied with a wry smile.
“What, Lord Lovat?”
“No, the other— Seaumais Ruaidh —Red J acob, h im Uncle
Jamie’ s named for . A wicked a uld bugger , my Mam alwayssaid; he’ d put any Iroquois to shame for pure cruelty , from all
I’ve hea rd of him.” He dismissed this tangent with a wave of
the hand, though, returning to his explanation.
“W ell, so, when the Kahnyen’kehaka took me, and named
me, I was adopted to the W olf  clan, aye?” he said, with an
explanatory nod at Rollo, who had consumed the honeycomb,
dead bees and all, and was now meditatively licking his paws.
“V ery appropriate,” she murmured. “What clan was Sun
Elk?”
“W olf, of course. And Emily’ s mother and grandmother and
sisters were T urtle. But what I was saying—if a lad and lassie
from properly dif ferent clans seemed maybe suited to each
other , then the m others would speak—they call all the aunties
‘mother ,’ too,” he added. “So there might be a good many
mothers involve d in the matter . But if all the mothers and
grandmothers and aunties were  to agree that it would be a
good match …” He shrugged. “They’d marry .”
Brianna rocked back a little, arms around her knees.
“But you didn’ t have a mother to speak for you.”
“W ell, I did wonder what my Mam would ha’ said, if she’d
been there,” he said, and smiled, despite his seriousness.
Brianna, having met Ian’ s mother , laughed at the thought.
“Aunt J enny would be a match  for any Mohawk, male or
female,” she assured him. “But what happened, then?”
“I loved Emily ,” he said very simply . “And she loved me.”
This state of af fairs, which rapidly became apparent to
everyone in the village, caused considerable public comment.
W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa, W orks with Her Hands, the girl Ian
called Emily , had been widely expected to marry Sun Elk, who
had been a visitor to her family’ s hearth since childhood.
“But the re it was.” Ian spread his hands and shrugged. “She
loved me, and she said so.”When Ian had been taken into the W olf clan, he had been
given to foster parents, as well—the parents of the dead man
in w hose stead he had been ad opted. His foster mother had
been somewhat taken aback by the situation, but after
discussing the matter with the o ther women of the W olf clan,
had gone to speak formally with T ewaktenyonh, Emily’ s
grandmother—and the most influential woman in the village.
“And so we married.” Dressed in their best, and
accompanied by their parents, the two young people had sat
together on a bench before the assembled people of the village,
and exchanged baskets—his containing the furs of sable and
beaver , and a good knife, symb olizing his willingness to hunt
for her and pro tect her; hers f illed with grain and fruit and
vegetables, symbolizing her willingness to plant, gather , and
provide for him.
“And four moons later ,” Ian add ed, “Sun Elk wed Looking
at the Sky , Emily’ s sister .”
Brianna raised one eyebrow .
“But … ?”
“A ye, but.”
IAN HAD THE GUN Jamie h ad left with him, a rare and
valued item among the Indians, and he knew how to use it. He
also knew how to track, to lie  in ambush, to think like an
animal—other t hings of value that Uncle Jamie had left with
him.
In c onsequence, he was a good  hunter , and rapidly gained
respect f or his ability to bring i n meat. Sun Elk was a decent
hunter—not the best, but capable. Many of the young men
would joke and make remarks, denigrating each other ’ s skills
and mak ing fun ; he did it himself. Still, there was a tone to
Sun Elk’ s jests to Ian that now a nd then made one of the other
men glance sharply at him, th en away with the faintest of
shrugs.He h ad been inc lined to ignore the man. Then he had seen
Sun Elk look at W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa, and everything became
at once clear to him.
She had been go ing to the forest with some other girls, one
day in late summer . They carried baskets for gathering;
W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa had an ax through her belt. One of the
other girls had asked her wheth er she meant to find wood for
another bowl like the one she had made for her mother; W orks
W ith He r Hands had said—with a quick, warm look toward
Ian, who  lounge d nearby with t he other young men—that no,
she wished to f ind a good red  cedar , for wood to make a
cradleboard.
The girl s had giggled and embraced W akyo’ teyehsnonhsa;
the young men had grinned and prodded Ian knowingly in the
ribs. An d Ian had caught a glim pse of Sun Elk’ s face, hot eyes
fixed on Emily’ s straight back as she walked away .
W ithin one moon, Sun Elk had  moved into the longhouse,
husband to his w ife’ s sister , Looking at the Sky . The sisters’
compartments were across from each other; they shared a
hearth. Ian had seldom seen Sun Elk look at Emily again—but
he had seen him look carefully away , too many times.
“There is a pers on who desires you,” he said to Emily one
night. It was lon g past the hour of the wolf, deep night, and the
longhouse slept around them. The child she carried obliged her
to rise and make water; she had come back to their furs skin-
chilled and with the fresh smell of pines in her hair .
“Oh? W ell, why not? Everyon e else is asleep.” She had
stretched luxuriously and kissed him, the small bulge of her
belly smooth and hard against his.
“Not me . I mean—of course this person desires you, too!”
he’d said  hastily , as she drew back a bit, of fended. He wrapped
his arm s about her in quick illustration. “I mean—there is
someone else.”
“Hmf.” Her voice was muf fled, her breath warm against his
chest. “There are many who desire me. I am very , very goodwith my hands.” She gave him a brief demonstration, and he
gasped, causing her to chuckle with satisfaction.
Rollo, who had accompanied her outside, crawled under the
bed plat form an d curled up in his accustomed spot, chewing
noisily at an itching spot near his tail.
A li ttle later , the y lay with the furs thrown back. The hide
that hun g over their doorway was pulled back, so the heat of
the f ire could come in, and he could see the shine of light on
the moist gold s kin of her should er , where she lay turned away
from him. She r eached back and put one of her clever hands
on his, took his palm, and pre ssed it against her belly . The
child inside had begun to stir;  he felt a soft, sudden push
against his palm, and his breath stilled in his throat.
“Y ou shouldn’ t worry ,” Emily said very softly . “This person
desires only you.”
He had slept well.
In the morning , though, he ha d sat by the hearth eating
cornmeal mush, and Sun Elk, who had already eaten, walked
by . He stopped and looked down at Ian.
“This person dreamed about you, W olf ’ s Brother .”
“Did you?” Ian said pleasantly .  He felt the warmth rise up
his throat, but k ept his face relaxed. The Kahyen’kehaka set
great sto re by dreams. A good dream would have everyone in
the longhouse discussing it for days. The look on Sun Elk’ s
face didn’ t indicate that his drea m about Ian had been a good
one.
“That dog—” He nodded at Rollo, who lay sprawled
inconveniently in the doorway of Ian’ s compartment, snoring.
“I dreamed that it rose up over your couch, and seized you by
the throat.”
That was a menacing dream. A Kahnyen’kehaka who
believed such a dream might de cide to kill the dog, lest it be a
foretelling of ill fortune. But Ian was not—not quite—
Kahnyen’kehaka.Ian raise d both brows, and wen t on eating. Sun Elk waited
for a moment, but as Ian said nothing, eventually nodded and
turned away .
“Ahkote’ohskennonton,” Ian said, calling his name. The
man turned back, expectant.
“This person dreamed of you, to o.” Sun Elk glanced sharply
at hi m. Ian didn ’ t speak further , but let a slow and evil smile
grow upon his face.
Sun Elk  stared at him. He kept smiling. The other man
turned a way with a snort of disgust, but not before Ian had
seen the faint look of unease in Sun Elk’ s eyes.
“WELL, SO.” Ian took a deep breath. He closed his eyes
briefly , then opened them. “Y e ken the child died, aye?”
He spok e with no emotion at all  in his voice. It was that dry ,
controlled tone that seared her heart, and choked her so that
she could do no more than nod in reply .
He coul dn’ t keep it up, though . He opened his mouth as
though t o speak, but the big, bony hands clenched suddenly on
his knees, and instead, he rose abruptly to his feet.
“A ye,” he said. “Let’ s go. I’ll—I’ll tell ye the rest, walking.”
And he did, his back resolutely turned, as he led her higher
up t he mountain, then across a  narrow ridge, and down the
path of a strea m that fell in a series of small, enchanting
waterfalls, each encircled with a mist of miniature rainbows.
W orks with Her Hands had conc eived again. That child was
lost just after her belly began to swell with life.
“They s ay , the Kahnyen’kehaka ,” Ian explained, his voice
muf fled as he shoved his way through a screen of brilliant red
creeper , “that for a woman to conceive, her husband’ s spirit
does battle with hers, and must overcome it. If his spirit isna
strong e nough”—his voice came clear as he ripped a handful
of creep er down, breaking the branch it hung from, and cast it
viciously away—”then the child canna take root in the womb.”After this second loss, the Med icine Society had taken the
two of them to a  private hut, the re to sing and beat drums and
to d ance in huge painted ma sks, meant to frighten away
whatever evil entities might be hampering Ian’ s spirit—or
unduly strengthening Emily’ s.
“I wante d to laugh, seeing the masks,” Ian said. He didn’ t
turn round; yellow leaves spangled the shoulders of his
buckskin and stuck in his hair . “They call it the Funny-Face
Society , too—and for a reason. Didna do it, though.”
“I don’ t  … suppose Em-Emily laughed.” He was going so
fast that  she was pressed to keep  up with him, though her legs
were nearly as long as his own.
“No,” he  said, and uttered a short, bitter laugh himself. “She
didna.”
She had  gone into the medicin e hut beside him silent and
gray , but had come out with a peaceful face, and reached for
him in their bed  that night with  love. For three months, they
had made love with tenderness  and ardor . For another three,
they had made love with a sense of increasing desperation.
“And then she missed her courses again.”
He had at once ceased his attentions, terrified of causing a
further mishap. Emily had moved slowly and carefully , no
longer g oing into the fields to work, but staying in the
longhouse, working, always working, with her hands.
W eaving, grinding, carving, boring beads of shell for
wampum, hands moving cease lessly , to compensate for the
waiting stillness of her body .
“Her sister went to the fields. It’ s the women who do, ken?”
He paus ed to slash an outreachi ng brier with his knife, tossing
the s evered branch out of the wa y so it wouldn’ t snap back and
hit Brianna in the face.
“Looking at the Sky brought u s food. All the women did,
but her most of all. She was a sweet lass, Karonya.”
There was a slig ht catch in his voice at this, the first in his
harsh recitation of facts.“What h appened to her?” Brianna hastened her step a little
as they came out onto the top of a grass-covered bank, so that
she drew up ne arly even with him. He slowed a little, but
didn’ t tu rn to look at her—kept his face forward, chin raised as
though confronting enemies.
“T aken.” Looking at the Sky had been in the habit of
staying later in the fields than the other women, gathering
extra corn or squash for her sister and Ian, though she had a
child of her own by then. One evening, she did not return to
the long house, and when the vi llagers had gone out to search
for h er , neither she nor the child was anywhere to be found.
They had vanished, leaving only one pale moccasin behind,
tangled in the squash vines at the edge of a field.
“Abenaki,” Ian said tersely . “W e found the sign next day; it
was full dark before we began to search in earnest.”
It had been a long night searching, followed by a week of
the same—a week of growing fear and emptiness—and Ian
had returned to his wife’ s hearth at dawn on the seventh day , to
learn that she had miscarried once more.
He paused. He was sweating f reely from walking so fast,
and wip ed a sleeve across his  chin. Brianna could feel the
sweat trickling down her own back, dampening the hunting
shirt, but disregarded it. She touched his back, very gently , but
said nothing.
He heaved a deep sigh, almo st of relief, she thought—
perhaps that the dreadful tale was nearly done.
“W e tried a bit longer ,” he said, back to the matter -of-fact
tone. “E mily an d I. But the heart had gone out of her . She
didna trust me any longer . And … Ahkote’ohskennonton was
there. H e ate at our hearth. And  he watched her . She began to
look back.”
Ian had been shaping wood for a bow one day ,
concentrating on the flow of the  grain beneath his knife, trying
to see those things in the swirls that Emily saw , to hear thevoice of  the tree, as she had told him. It wasn’ t the tree that
spoke behind him, though.
“Grandson,” said a dry old voice, lightly ironic.
He d ropped the knife, narrowly missing his own foot, and
swung round, bow in hand. T ew aktenyonh stood six feet away ,
one eyebrow lifted in amusemen t at having sneaked up on him
unheard.
“Grandmother ,” he said, and nodded in wry
acknowledgment of her skill. Ancient she might be, but no one
moved more softly . Hence her reputation; the children of the
village lived in respectful dread  of her , having heard that she
could vanish into air , only to rematerialize in some distant
spot, right before the guilty eyes of evil-doers.
“Come with me, W olf ’ s Brother ,” she said, and turned away ,
not waiting for his response. None was expected.
She was  already  out of sight by the time he had laid the
half-made bow under a bush, taken up his fallen knife, and
whistled for Rollo, but he caught her up with no dif ficulty .
She had  led him away from the village, through the forest,
to th e head of a deer trail. Ther e she had given him a bag of
salt and an armlet of wampum and bade him go.
“And you went?” Brianna asked, after a long moment of
silence. “Just—like that?”
“Just lik e that,” he said, and loo ked at her for the first time
since they had l eft their campsite that morning. His face was
gaunt, hollow with memories. Sweat gleamed on his
cheekbones, but  he was so pale that the dotted lines of his
tattoos stood out sharp—perforations, lines along which his
face might come apart.
She swa llowed a few times before she could speak, but
managed a tone much like his own when she did.
“Is it much farther?” she asked. “Where we’re going?”
“No,” h e said softly . “W e’re nearly there.” And turned to
walk again before her .HALF AN HOUR LA TER, they had reached a place where the
stream cut deep between its b anks, widening into a small
gor ge. Silver birch and hobblebush grew thick, sprouting from
the rocky walls, smooth-skinned roots twisting through the
stones like fingers clawing at the earth.
The notion gave Brianna a slight prickle at the neck. The
waterfalls were far above them now , and the noise of the water
had lessened, the creek talking to itself as it purled over rocks
and shushed through mats of cress and duckweed.
She thou ght the going might be easier above, on the lip of
the gor ge, but Ia n led her down  into it without hesitation, and
she followed likewise, scrambling over the tumble of boulders
and tree  roots, hampered by her  long gun. Rollo, scorning this
clumsy exertion, plunged into the creek, which was several
feet dee p, and swam, ears clam ped back against his head so
that he looked like a giant otter .
Ian had recovered his self-possession in the concentration of
navigating the rough ground. He paused now and then,
reaching back to help her dow n a particularly tricky fall of
rock, or over a  tree uprooted in some recent flood—but he
didn’ t meet her eyes, and the sh uttered planes of his face gave
nothing away .
Her cur iosity had reached fever pitch, but clearly he had
done speaking for the moment. It was just past midday , but the
light under the birches was a shadowed gold that made
everything seem  somehow hushed, almost enchanted. She
could m ake no sensible guess as to the purpose of this
expedition, in light of what Ian  had told her—but the place
was one where almost anything seemed possible.
She thought suddenly of her first father—of Frank Randall
—and felt a small, remembered warmth at the thought. She
would like so much to show him this place.
They had taken holidays often in the Adirondacks; dif ferent
mountains, dif fe rent trees—but  something of the same hush
and mys tery in the shadowed glades and rushing water . Hermother had come sometimes, but more often it was just the
two of them, hiking far up into the trees, not talking much, but
sharing a deep content in the company of the sky .
Suddenly , the sound of the w ater rose again; there was
another fall nearby .
“Just he re, coz,” Ian said softly ,  and beckoned her to follow
with a turn of the head.
They stepped out from under the trees and she saw that the
gor ge dropped suddenly away , the water falling twenty feet or
more into a poo l below . Ian led  her past the head of the falls;
she could hear the water rushing past below , but the top of the
bank was thick with sedges, and they had to push their way
through, tramping down the yellowing stems of goldenrod and
dodging the panicked whir o f grasshoppers rocketing up
underfoot.
“Look,” Ian said, glancing bac k, and reached to part the
screen of laurel in front of her .
“W ow!”
She recognized it immediately . There was no mistaking it,
in spite of the fact that much of it was invisible, still buried in
the crumbling bank on the far s ide of the gor ge. Some recent
flood had raised the level of the  creek, undercutting the bank
so that a huge  block of stone and dirt had fallen away ,
revealing its buried mystery .
The rak ed arches of ribs rose huge from the dirt, and she
had the impression of a scatte r of things half-buried in the
rubble at the foo t of the bank: enormous things, knobbed and
twisted. They might be bones o r simply boulders—but it was
the t usk that cau ght her eye, jutt ing from the bank in a massive
curve, in tensely familiar , and the more startling for its very
familiarity .
“Y e ken it?” Ian  asked eagerly , watching her face. “Y e’ve
seen something like it?”
“Oh, yes,” she said, and though  the sun was warm on her
back, she shivered, gooseflesh pebbling her forearms. Notfrom fear , but sheer awe at sight of it, and a kind of
incredulous joy . “Oh, yes. I have.”
“What?” Ian’ s voice was still pitched low , as though the
creature might hear them. “What is it?”
“A mammoth,” she said, and found that she was whispering,
too. The sun ha d passed its zenith; already the bottom of the
creekbed lay in shadow . Ligh t struck the stained curve of
ancient ivory , and threw the vault of the high-crowned skull
that held it into sharp relief. The skull was fixed in the soil at a
slight an gle, the single visible tu sk rising high, the eye socket
black as mystery .
The shiver came again, and she hunched her shoulders. Easy
to feel that it m ight at any mom ent wrench itself free of the
clay and turn that massive head toward them, empty-eyed,
clods of dirt raining from tusks and bony shoulders as it shook
itself and began to walk, the g round vibrating as long toes
struck and sank in the muddy soil.
“That’ s what it’ s called—mammoth? A ye, well … it is  verra
big.” Ian’ s voice dispelled the illusion of incipient movement,
and she was ab le finally to take her eyes of f it—though she
felt she must glance back, every  second or so, to be sure it was
still there.
“The Latin name is Mammuthus, ” she said, clearing her
throat. “There’ s a complete skeleton in a museum in New
Y ork. I’ ve seen it often. And I’ve seen pictures of them in
books.” She glanced back at the creature in the bank.
“A museum? So it’ s not a thing ye’ve got where—when”—
he stumbled a bit—”where ye come from? Not alive then, I
mean?” He seemed rather disappointed.
She wanted to l augh at the picture of mammoths roaming
Boston Common, or wallowing on the bank of the Cambridge
River . In  fact, she had a moment’ s pang of disappointment that
they hadn’ t  bee n there; it would have been so wonderful to see
them.“No,” she said regretfully . “They all died thousands and
thousands of years ago. When the ice came.”
“Ice?” Ia n was glancing back an d forth between her and the
mammoth, as though afraid one or the other might do
something untoward.
“The Ic e Age. The world got  colder , and sheets of ice
spread d own from the north. A lot of animals went extinct—I
mean, they couldn’ t find food, and all died.”
Ian was pale with excitement.
“A ye. A ye, I’ve heard such stories.”
“Y ou have?” She was surprised at that.
“A ye. B ut ye say it’ s real.” He swung his head to look at the
mammoth’ s bones once more. “An animal, aye, like a bear or a
possum?”
“Y es,” she said, puzzled by his  attitude, which seemed to
alternate between eagerness and dismay . “Bigger , but yes.
What else would it be?”
“Ah,” he said, and took a deep breath. “W ell, d’ye see, that’ s
what I needed y e to tell me, coz. See, the Kahnyen’kehaka—
they hav e stories of … things. Animals that are really spirits.
And if ever I saw a thing that might be  a spirit— ” He was still
looking at the s keleton, as though it might walk out of the
earth, and she saw a slight shiver pass through him.
She coul dn’ t prevent a similar shiver , looking at the massive
creature. It towered above them , grim and awful, and only her
knowledge of what it was kept h er from wanting to cower and
run.
“It’ s rea l,” she repeated, as muc h to reassure herself as him.
“And it’ s dead. Really  dead.”
“How d’ye know these things?” he asked, intently curious.
“It’ s aul d, ye say . Y ou’d be much further away from—that”—
he j erked his ch in at the giant skeleton—”in your own time
than we are now . How can ye k en more about it than folk do
now?”She shook her head, smiling a little, and helpless to explain.
“When did you find this, Ian?”
“Last month. I came up the gor ge”—he gestured with his
chin—”and there it was. I near beshit myself.”
“I can imagine,” she said, stifling an ur ge to laugh.
“A ye,” he said, not noticing her  amusement in his desire to
explain. “I should have been sure that it was Rawenniyo—a
spirit, a god—save for the dog.”
Rollo had climbed out of the str eam, and having shaken the
water from his fur , was squirming on his back in a patch of
crushed turtlehe ad, tail wagging in pleasure, and clearly
oblivious to the silent giant in the clif f above.
“What do you mean? That Rollo wasn’ t afraid of it?”
Ian nodded.
“A ye. He didna behave as though there were anything there
at a ll. And yet …” He hesitated, darting a glance at her .
“Sometimes, in the wood. He—he sees  things. Things I canna
see. Ken?”
“I ke n,” she said, a ripple of une ase returning. “Dogs do see
… things.” She remembered her own dogs; in particular ,
Smoky , the big Newfoundland, who would sometimes in the
evening suddenly raise his head, listening, hackles rising as his
eyes fol lowed … something … that passed through the room
and disappeared.
He nodd ed, relieved that she knew what he was talking
about.
“They do. I ran, when I saw th at”—he nodded at the clif f
—”and ducked behind a tree. B ut the dog went on about his
business, paying it no mind. And so I thought, well, just
maybe it’ s no what I think, after all.”
“And what did you think?” she  asked. “A Rawenniyo, you
said?” As the e xcitement of seeing the mammoth began to
recede, she remembered what they were theoretically doinghere. “Ian—you  said what you wanted to show me had to do
with your wife. Is this—” She gestured toward the clif f, brows
raised.
He didn ’ t answer directly , but tilted his head back, studying
the jut of the giant tusks.
“I heard stories, now and the n. Among the Mohawk, I
mean. They’d speak of strange things that someone found,
hunting. Spirits trapped in the r ock, and how they came to be
there. Evil things, for the most part. And I thought to myself, if
that should be what this is …”
He broke of f and turned to her , serious and intent.
“I needed ye to tell me, aye? Wh ether that’ s what it is or no.
Because if it was, then perhap s what I’ve been thinking is
wrong.”
“It’ s not,” she a ssured him. “But what on earth have you
been thinking?”
“About God,” he said, surprising her again. He licked his
lips, unsure how to go on.
“Y eksa’a—the child. I didna have her christened,” he said.
“I co uldna. Or perhaps I could— ye can do it yourself, ken, if
there’ s n o priest. But I hadna the courage to try . I—never saw
her . The y’d wra pped her already… . They wouldna have liked
it, if I’d tried to …” His voice died away .
“Y eksa’a,” she said softly . “W as  that your—your daughter ’ s
name?”
He shook his head, his mouth twisting wryly .
“It only means ‘wee girl.’ The Kahnyen’kehaka dinna give
a name to a child when it’ s born. Not until later . If …” His
voice trailed of f, and he cleared his throat. “If it lives. They
wouldna think of naming a child unborn.”
“But you did?” she asked gently .
He raised his head and took a breath that had a damp sound
to it, like wet bandages pulled from a fresh wound.“Iseabail,” he said, and she knew it was the first—perhaps
would b e the only—time he’d spoken it aloud. “Had it been a
son, I would ha’ called him Jamie.” He glanced at her , with the
shadow of a smile. “Only in my head, ken.”
He l et o ut all his breath then with a sigh and put his face
down upon his knees, back hunched.
“What I  am thinking,” he said  after a moment, his voice
much too controlled, “is this. W as it me?”
“Ian! Y ou mean your fault that t he baby died? How could it
be?”
“I left,” he said simply , straightening up. “T urned away .
Stopped being a Christian, being Scots. They took me to the
stream, scrubbe d me wi’ sand to take away the white blood.
They ga ve me my name—Okwaho’kenha—and said I was
Mohawk. But I wasna, not really .”
He sigh ed deeply again, and sh e put a hand on his back,
feeling the bumps of his backbo ne press through the leather of
his shirt. He didn’ t eat nearly enough, she thought.
“But I wasna wh at I had been, either ,” he went on, sounding
almost matter -of -fact. “I tried to be what they wanted, ken? So
I l eft of f praying to God or the V ir gin Mother , or Saint Bride. I
listened to what Emily said, w hen she’d tell me about her
gods, th e spirits  that dwell in the trees and all. And when I
went to the swe at lodge wi’ the men, or sat by the hearth and
heard th e stories  … they seeme d as real to me as Christ and
His saints ever had.”
He turn ed his head and looked  up at her suddenly , half-
bewildered, half-defiant.
“I am the Lor d thy God,”  he said. “Thou shalt have no
other gods befor e me.  But I did, no? That’ s mortal sin, is it
not?”
She wan ted to say no, of course not. Or to protest weakly
that she  was not a priest, how could she say? But neither of
those would do; he was not looking for easy reassurance, and aweak-minded a bnegation of responsibility would not serve
him.
She took a deep  breath and blew  it out. It had been a good
many years since she’d been taught the Baltimore Catechism,
but it wasn’ t the sort of thing you for get.
“The conditions  of mortal sin are these,” she said, reciting
the words precisely from memory . “First, that the action be
grievously wrong. Secondly , that you know the action is
wrong. And thirdly—that you give full consent to it.”
He was watching her intently .
“W ell, it was w rong, and I suppose I kent that—aye, I did
ken that. Especially—” His face darkened further , and she
wondered what he was recalling.
“But …  how should I serve a God who would take a child
for her father ’ s sins?” W ithout waiting for an answer , he
glanced toward the clif f face, where the remains of the
mammoth lay frozen in time. “Or was it them? W as it not my
God at all, but th e Iroquois spirits? Did they ken I wasna really
Mohawk—that I held back a part of myself from them?”
He looked back at her , dead serious.
“Gods are jealous, are they no?”
“Ian …” She swallowed, help less. But she had to say
something.
“What you did—or didn’ t do—that wasn’ t wrong, Ian,” she
said firmly . “Y our daughter … she was half-Mohawk. It
wasn’ t wrong to let her be bur ied according to her mother ’ s
ways. Y our wife—Emily—she would have been terribly upset,
wouldn’ t she, if you’d insisted on baptizing the baby?”
“A ye, maybe. But …” He close d his eyes, hands clenched
hard into fists on his thighs . “Where is she, then?” he
whispered, and she could see tears trembling on his lashes.
“The others—they were never born; God will have them in
His hand . But wee Iseabail—she’ll not be in heaven, will she?I can na bear the  thought that she—that she might be … lost,
somewhere. W andering.”
“Ian …”
“I h ear her , gree ting. In the night.” His breath was coming
in deep, sobbing gasps. “I canna help, I canna find her!”
“Ian!” T he tears were running down her own cheeks. She
gripped his wrists fiercely , squeezed as hard as she could. “Ian,
listen to me!”
He drew  a deep, trembling breath, head bent. Then he
nodded, very slightly .
She rose  onto her knees and gathered him tight against her ,
his h ead cradled on her breasts.  Her cheek pressed against the
top of his head, his hair warm and springy against her mouth.
“Listen to me,” she said softly .  “I had another father . The
man wh o raised me. He’ s dead n ow .” For a long time now , the
sense of desolation at his loss had been muted, softened by
new lov e, distra cted by new ob ligations. Now it swept over
her , new ly fresh , and sharp as a stab wound in its agony . “I
know—I know he’ s in heaven.”
W as he?  Could he be dead and  in heaven, if not yet born?
And yet  he was dead to her , and  surely heaven took no heed of
time.
She lifte d her face toward the  clif f, but spoke to neither
bones nor God.
“Daddy ,” she said, and her voice  broke on the word, but she
held her  cousin hard. “Daddy , I need you.” Her voice sounded
small, and pathetically unsure. But there was no other help to
be had.
“I need you to find Ian’ s little girl,” she said, as firmly as
she coul d, trying  to summon her  father ’ s face, to see him there
among t he shifting leaves at the clif ftop. “Find her , please.
Hold her in your arms, and make sure that she’ s safe. T ake—
please take care of her .”She stopped, feeling obscurely that she should say
something else, something mor e ceremonious. Make the sign
of the cross? Say “amen”?
“Thank you, Daddy ,” she said softly , and cried as though
her fathe r were newly dead, and  she bereft, orphaned, lost, and
crying in  the night. Ian’ s arms were wrapped around her , and
they clung tight together , squeezing hard, the warmth of the
late sun heavy on their heads.
She stood still w ithin his arms when she stopped crying, her
head res ting on his shoulder . H e patted her back, very gently ,
but didn’ t push her away .
“Thank you,” he whispered in her ear . “Are ye all right,
Brianna?”
“Uh-huh.” She straightened and stood away from him,
swaying a little, as though she w ere drunk. She felt drunk, too,
her bones gone soft and malleable, everything around her
faintly out of foc us, save for certain things that caught her eye:
a brillian t patch  of pink lady’ s slipper , a stone fallen from the
clif f fac e, its surface streaked red with iron. Rollo, almost
sitting on Ian’ s foot, big head pressed anxiously against his
master ’ s thigh.
“Are you  all right, Ian?” she asked.
“I will be.” His  hand sought R ollo’ s head, and gave the
pointed ears a cursory rub of reassurance. “Maybe. Just …”
“What?”
“Are ye … are ye sure, Brianna?”
She kne w what he was asking; it was a question of faith.
She drew  hersel f up to her full h eight, wiping her nose on her
sleeve.
“I’m a Roman Catholic and I  believe in vitamins,” she
declared stoutly . “And I knew my father . Of course I’m sure.”
He took  a deep, sighing breath and his shoulders slumped as
he let it out. He nodded then, and the lines of his face relaxed a
little.She left him sitting on a rock, and made her way down to
the s tream to spl ash cold water o n her face. The shadow of the
clif f fell across the creek and the air was cold with the scents
of ea rth and pine  trees. In spite of the chill, she remained there
for a while, on her knees.
She cou ld still hear the voices murmuring in trees and
water , but paid n o attention to them. Whoever they were, they
were no  threat to her or hers—and not at odds with the
presence that she felt so strongly nearby .
“I lo ve you, Daddy ,” she whisp ered, closing her eyes, and
felt at peace.
Ian must  be better , too, she thought, when she made her way
at le ngth back th rough the rocks to where he sat. Rollo had left
him to investiga te a promising hole at the foot of a tree, and
she knew  the dog wouldn’ t have left Ian, had he considered his
master to be in distress.
She was about t o ask him whether their business here was
complete, when he stood up, and she saw that it wasn’ t.
“Why I brought ye here,” he said abruptly . “I wanted to
know about that—” He nodded at the mammoth. “But I meant
to ask ye a question. Advice, like.”
“Advice? Ian, I can’ t give you any advice! How could I tell
you what to do?”
“I th ink ye’re m aybe the only o ne who can,” he said with a
lopsided smile. “Y ou’re my family , you’re a woman—and ye
care for me. Y et  ye ken more even than Uncle Jamie, perhaps,
because of who—or what”—hi s mouth twisted a little—”ye
are.”
“I d on’ t know m ore,” she said, and looked up at the bones
in the rock. “Only—dif ferent things.”
“A ye,” he said, and took a deep breath.
“Brianna,” he said very softly . “W e’re no wed—we never
shall be.” He looked away for an instant, then back. “But if we
had  b een marrit, I s hould have loved ye and cared for ye, sowell as I could. I trust you, that ye’d have done the same by
me. Am I right?”
“Oh, Ian .” Her throat was still thick, raspy with grief; the
words came out in a whisper . She touched his face, cool-
skinned and bony , and traced th e line of tattooed dots with a
thumb. “I love you now .”
“A ye, w ell,” he said still softly . “I ken that.” He lifted a
hand and put it over her own, big and hard. He pressed her
palm against his cheek for a m oment, then his fingers closed
over hers and he brought their linked hands down, but didn’ t
let go.
“So tell me,” he said, his eyes not leaving hers. “If ye love
me, tell me what I shall do. Shall I go back?”
“Back,” she repeated, searching his face. “Back to the
Mohawk, you mean?”
He nodded.
“Back to Emily . She loved me,”  he said quietly . “I ken that.
Did I do wrong, to let the old w oman send me away? Ought I
to go back, maybe fight for her ,  if I had to? Perhaps see if she
would come away wi’ me, back to the Ridge.”
“Oh, Ian .” She felt the same sense of helplessness as before,
though this time it came withou t the burden of her own grief.
But who  was she to tell him anything? How could she be
responsible for making that decision for him—for saying to
him, stay , or go?
His eyes stayed steady on her fa ce, though, and it came over
her—she was his family . And s o the responsibility lay in her
hands, whether she felt adequate to it or not.
Her che st felt tight, as though s he might burst if she took a
deep breath. She took it anyway .
“Stay ,” she said.
He s tood looking into her eyes f or a long time, his own deep
hazel, gold-flecked and serious.“Y ou could fight him—Ahk …” She fumbled for the
syllables of the Mohawk name. “Sun Elk. But you can’ t fight
her . If she’ s made up her mind th at she doesn’ t want to be with
you anymore … Ian, you can’ t change it.”
He blink ed, dark lashes cutting of f his gaze, and kept his
eyes closed, whether in acknowledgement or denial of what
she’d said, she didn’ t know .
“But it’ s more than that,” she said, her voice growing firmer .
“It isn’ t only her , or  him. Is it?”
“No,” he said. His voice sounded distant, almost uncaring,
but she knew it wasn’ t that.
“It’ s them,” she said more sof tly . “All the mothers. The
grandmothers. T he women. The—the children.” Clan and
family and tribe and nation; custom, spirit, tradition—the
strands that wrapped W orks wi th Her Hands and held her to
the earth, secure. And above a ll, children. Those loud small
voices that drowned the voices of the wood, and kept a soul
from wandering through the night.
No one knew the strength of such bonds better than one who
had walked the earth without them, outcast and alone. She had,
and he had, and they both knew the truth.
“It’ s the m,” he echoed softly , and opened his eyes. They
were dark with l oss, the color of  shadows in the deepest wood.
“And them.” He turned his head , to look upward, into the trees
beyond the creek, above the bo nes of the mammoth that lay
trapped in the ea rth, stripped to the sky and mute to all prayer .
He turned back, raised a hand, and touched her cheek.
“I’ll stay , then.”
THEY C AMPED FOR the night on the far side of the beaver
pond. The litter of wood chips  and debarked saplings made
good kindling for their fire.
There w as little  to eat; no more than a hatful of bitter fox-
grapes and the h eel of bread, so  hard by now that it had to bedunked in water to chew . It didn’ t matter; neither one of them
was hungry , and Rollo had disappeared to hunt for himself.
They sat  silently , watching the f ire die down. There was no
need to keep it g oing; the night was not cold, and they would
not linger in the morning—home was too near .
At last, Ian stirred a bit, and Brianna glanced at him.
“What was your father ’ s name?” he asked very formally .
“Frank—er … Franklin. Franklin W olverton Randall.”
“An Englishman, then?”
“V ery ,” she said, smiling in spite of herself.
He nodded, murmuring “Franklin W olverton Randall” to
himself, as though to commit it to memory , then looked at her
seriously .
“If ever I find myself in a church again, then, I shall light a
candle to his memory .”
“I expect … he’d like that.”
He n odded, and leaned back, back braced against a longleaf
pine. Th e ground nearby was litt ered with the cones; he picked
up a handful and tossed them, one by one, into the fire.
“What a bout Lizzie?” she asked after a little while. “She’ s
always b een fon d of you.” T o put it mildly: Lizzie had wilted
and pine d for weeks, when he had been lost to the Iroquois.
“And now that she’ s not marrying Manfred …”
He tilted  back his head, eyes closed, and rested it against the
trunk of the pine.
“I’ve thought of it,” he admitted.
“But … ?”
“A ye, bu t.” He opened his eyes and gave her a wry look.
“I’d ken  where I was, if I woke beside her . But where I’d be is
in bed wi’ my wee sister . I think I’m maybe not so desperate
as that. Y et,” he added as an obvious afterthought.7 1
BLACK PUDDING
I  W A S IN THE MIDDLE OF a black pudding when Ronnie
Sinclair appeared in the yard, carrying two small whisky
casks. Several more were bound in a neatly corrugated cascade
down hi s back, which made him look like some exotic form of
caterpillar , balanced precariously upright in mid-pupation. It
was a chilly day , but he was s weating freely from the long
walk uphill—and cursing in similar vein.
“Why in  the name of Bride did Himself build the frigging
house up here in the godforsaken clouds?” he demanded
without ceremony . “Why not where a bloody wagon could
reach the yard?” He set the cask s down carefully , then ducked
his head  through  the straps of the harness to shed his wooden
carapace. He sighed in relief, rubbing at his shoulders where
the straps had dug.
I ignored the rhetorical questions, and kept stirring, tilting
my head toward the house in invitation.
“There’ s fresh cof fee made,” I said. “And bannocks with
honey , too.” My own stomach r ecoiled slightly at the thought
of eating. Once spiced, stuf fed, boiled, and fried, black
pudding was delicious. The earlier stages, involving as they
did arm -deep manipulations in a barrel of semi-coagulated
pig’ s blood, were substantially less appetizing.
Sinclair , though, looked happier at mention of food. He
wiped a sleeve across his sweating forehead and nodded to me,
turning toward the house. Then he stopped and turned back.
“Ah. I’d  for got, missus. I’ve a wee message for yourself, as
well.” He patted gingerly at his chest, then lower , probing
around his ribs until he at leng th found what he was looking
for and  extracted it from the layers of his sweat-soaked
clothing. He pulled out a damp w ad of paper and held it out tome in expectation, ignoring the fact that my right arm was
coated w ith blood nearly to t he shoulder , and the left in
scarcely better case.
“Put it in the kitchen, why don’ t you?” I suggested.
“Himself ’ s insid e. I’ll come as soon as I’ve got this lot sorted.
Who—” I started to ask who m the letter was from, but
tactfully altered this to, “Who gave it to you?” Ronnie couldn’ t
read—though I saw no marks on the outside of the note, in any
case.
“A t inker on his  way to Belem’ s  Creek handed it to me,” he
said. “H e didna say who gave it  him—only that it was for the
healer .”
He frowned at t he wadded paper , but I saw his eyes slide
sideways toward my legs. In sp ite of the chill, I was barefoot
and stripped to my chemise and  stays, no more than a smeared
apron w rapped around my waist. Ronnie had been looking for
a wi fe for some little time, and i n consequence had formed the
unconscious habit of appraising the physical attributes of
every woman he encountered, without regard to age or
availability . He noticed my noticing, and hastily jerked his
gaze away .
“That was all?” I asked. “The healer? He didn’ t give my
name?”
Sinclair rubbed a hand through thinning ginger hair , so two
spikes stood up over his reddened ears, increasing his naturally
sly , foxy look.
“Didna have to, did he?” W ithout further attempts at
conversation, he  disappeared into the house, in search of food
and Jamie, leaving me to my sanguinary labors.
The wo rst part was cleaning the blood: swishing an arm
through the dark, reeking depth s of the barrel to collect the
threads o f fibrin that formed as the blood began to clot. These
clung to my arm and could then be pulled out and rinsed away
—repeatedly . At that, it was slightly less nasty than the job ofwashing out the intestines to be  used for the sausage casings;
Brianna and Lizzie were doing that, down at the creek.
I pee red at the latest results; no f ibers visible in the clear red
liquid that dripped from my fing ers. I dunked my arm again in
the wate r cask that stood beside  the blood barrel, balanced on
boards laid across a pair of trestles under the big chestnut tree.
Jamie and Roger and Arch Bug had dragged the pig—not the
white sow , but o ne of her many  of fspring from a prior year—
into the yard, clubbed it between the eyes with a maul, then
swung it  up into the branches, s lit the throat, and let the blood
drain into the barrel.
Roger and Arch had then taken the disemboweled carcass
away to  be scalded and the bristles scraped of f; Jamie’ s
presence was required to deal with Major MacDonald, who
had appeared suddenly , puf fing and wheezing from the climb
up to the Ridg e. Between the two, I thought Jamie would
much have preferred to deal with the pig.
I finished washing my hands and arms—wasted labor , but
necessary to my peace of mind—and dried of f with a linen
towel. I  shoveled double handsful into the barrel from the
waiting bowls of barley , oatmeal, and boiled rice, smiling
slightly at memory of the Majo r ’ s plum-red face, and Ronnie
Sinclair ’ s complaints. Himself had picked his building site on
the Ridge with a great deal of forethought—precisely because
of the dif ficulties involved in reaching it.
I ran  my fingers through my hair , then took a deep breath
and plunged my clean arm back  into the barrel. The blood was
cooling rapidly .  Doused by the cereal, the smell was less
immediate now than the metalli c reek of fresh, hot blood. The
mixture was still warm to the touch, though, and the grains
made graceful swirls of white and brown, pale whirlpools
drawn down into the blood as I stirred.
Ronnie was right; it hadn’ t been necessary to identify me
further than “the healer .” There wasn’ t another closer than
Cross Creek, unless one counted the shamans among the
Indians—which most Europeans wouldn’ t.I wo ndered who had sent the n ote, and whether the matter
was ur g ent. Probably not—at least it was not likely to be a
matter of imminent childbirth or serious accident. W ord of
such eve nts was likely to arrive  in person, carried ur gently by
a friend  or relative. A written message entrusted to a tinker
couldn’ t be counted on to be  delivered with any sort of
promptitude; tin kers wandered or stayed, depending on what
work they found.
For that  matter , tinkers and tram ps seldom came so far as
the Ridg e, though we had seen three within the last month. I
didn’ t know whether that was the result of our growing
population—Fraser ’ s Ridge boasted nearly sixty families now ,
though the cabins were scatter ed over ten miles of forested
mountain slopes—or something more sinister .
“It’ s one of th e signs, Sassenach,” Jamie had told me,
frowning after the departing form of the last such temporary
guest. “When there is war in the air , men take to the roads.”
I thought he was right; I remembered wanderers on the
Highland roads, carrying rumors  of the Stuart Rising. It was as
though t he tremors of unrest jar red loose those who were not
firmly attached to a place by love of land or family , and the
swirling currents of dissension bore them onward, the first
premonitory frag ments of a slow-motion explosion that would
shatter everything. I shivered, the light breeze touching cold
through my shift.
The mass of gruel had reached the necessary consistency ,
something like a very thick, dark -red cream. I shook clumps of
clotted g rain from my fingers a nd reached with my clean left
hand for the w ooden bowl of minced and sauteed onions,
standing ready . The strong smell of the onions overlaid the
scent of butchery , pleasantly domestic.
The salt  was ground, so was the pepper . All I needed now
… as if on cue, Roger appeared around the corner of the
house, a  lar ge basin in his hands, filled with fine-chopped pork
fat.“Just in time!” I said, and nodd ed toward the barrel. “No,
don’ t dump it in , it has to be measured—roughly .” I’d used ten
double handsful of oatmeal, ten of rice, ten of barley . Half that
total, then—fifte en. I shook back the hair from my eyes again,
and car efully scooped up a double handful of the basin’ s
content, dropping it into the barrel with a splat.
“All righ t, are you?” I asked. I gestured toward a stool with
my chin , beginning to work the fat into the mixture with my
fingers. Roger was still a trif le pale and tight around the
mouth, but he gave me a wry smile as he sat.
“Fine.”
“Y ou didn’ t have to do it, you know .”
“Y es, I did.” Th e note of wryne ss in his voice deepened. “I
only wish I’d done it better .”
I shrugged, one-shouldered, and reached into the basin he
held out for me.
“It takes practice.”
Roger had volunteered to kill the pig. Jamie had simply
handed him the maul and stoo d back. I had seen Jamie kill
pigs bef ore; he said a brief prayer , blessed the pig, then
crushed the skull with one tremendous blow . It had taken
Roger f ive tries, and the memory of the squealing raised
gooseflesh on my shoulders even now . Afterward, he had set
down the maul, gone behind a tree, and been violently sick.
I scoop ed ano ther handful. The mix was thickening,
developing a greasy feel.
“He should have shown you how .”
“I shouldn’ t think there’ s anything technically dif ficult
about it,” Roger said dryly . “Straightforward enough, after all,
to bash an animal on the head.”
“Physically , perhaps,” I agreed. I scooped more fat, working
with both hands now . “There’ s a prayer for it, you know . For
slaughtering an animal, I mean. Jamie should have told you.”He looked faintly startled.
“No, I didn’ t kn ow .” He smiled, a little better now . “Last
rites for the pig, aye?”
“I don’ t  think it’ s for the pig’ s benefit,” I said tartly . W e
lapsed in to silen ce for a few moments, as I creamed the rest of
the f at into the grain mixture, pausing to flick away occasional
bits of gristle. I could feel Roger ’ s eyes on the barrel, watching
the curi ous alch emy of cookery , that process of making the
transfer of life from one being to another palatable.
“Highland drovers sometimes d rain a cup or two of blood
from one of thei r beasts, and mix it with oatmeal to eat on the
road,” I said. “Nutritious, I suppose, but less tasty .”
Roger nodded, abstracted. He had set down the nearly
empty b asin and was cleaning dr ied blood from under his nails
with the point of his dirk.
“Is it the same as the one for deer?” he asked. “The prayer .
I’ve seen Jamie say that one, though I didn’ t catch all of the
words.”
“The gralloch prayer? I don’ t know . Why don’ t you ask
him?”
Roger worked industriously on a thumbnail, eyes fixed on
his hand.
“I wasn’ t sure if he thought it right for me to know it. Me
not being a Catholic, I mean.”
I looked down into the mixture, hiding a smile.
“I don’ t think i t would make a dif ference. That particular
prayer is a lot older than the Church of Rome, if I’m not
mistaken.”
A flicke r of interest lit Roger ’ s face, the buried scholar
coming to the surface.
“I did think the  Gaelic was a very old form—even older
than what you hear these days— I mean … now .” He flushed alittle, realizing what he had sa id. I nodded, but didn’ t say
anything.
I rem embered what it was like , that feeling that one was
living in an elaborate make-believe. The feeling that reality
existed in another time, another place. I remembered, and with
a small shock, realized that it was  now only memory—for me,
time had shifted, as though my illness had pushed me through
some final barrier .
Now  w as my time, reality the scrape of wood and slick of
grease b eneath my fingers, the arc of the sun that set the
rhythm of my days, the nearne ss of Jamie. It was the other
world, of cars and ringing tele phones, of alarm clocks and
mortgages, that seemed unreal a nd remote, the stuf f of dreams.
Neither Roger nor Bree had ma de that transition, though. I
could see it in the way they beh aved, hear it in the echoes of
their private conversations. Likely it was because they had
each other; they could keep the other time alive, a small shared
world between them. For me, the change was easier . I had
lived he re before, had come thi s time on purpose, after all—
and I had Jamie. No matter wh at I told him of the future, he
could ne ver see it as other than  a fairy tale. Our small shared
world was built of dif ferent things.
I wo rried now a nd then about Bree and Roger , though. It
was dangerous to treat the pas t as they sometimes did—as
picturesque or curious, a temporary condition that could be
escaped. There was no escape f or them—whether it was love
or d uty , Jemmy held them both , a small redheaded anchor to
the present. Better—or safer , at least—if they could wholly
accept this time as theirs.
“The Indians have it, too,” I said to Roger . “The gralloch
prayer , or something like it. That’ s why I said I thought it older
than the Church.”
He nodded, interested.
“I think  that kind of thing is common to all primitive
cultures—anyplace where men kill to eat.”Primitive cultures. I caught my lower lip between my teeth,
forbearing to point out that primitive or not, if his family were
to su rvive, he p ersonally would very likely be obliged to kill
for t hem. But th en I caught sigh t of his hand, idly rubbing at
the dried blood between his fingers. He knew that already .
“Y es, I did,”  he’d said, when I’d told him he need not.
He l ooked up then, caught my  eye, and gave me a faint,
tired smile. He understood.
“I th ink maybe … it’ s that killing without ceremony seems
like mu rder ,” he said slowly . “If you have the ceremony—
some sort of ritual that acknowledges your necessity …”
“Necessity—and also sacrifice.” Jamie’ s voice came softly
from behind me, startling me. I turned my head sharply . He
was standing in the shadow of t he big red spruce; I wondered
how long he’d been there.
“Didn’ t hear you come out,” I sa id, turning up my face to be
kissed as he came to me. “Has the Major gone?”
“No,” he said, a nd kissed my brow , one of the few clean
spots left. “I’ve left him wi’ Sin clair for a bit. He’ s exercised
about the Committee of Safety , aye?” He grimaced, then
turned to Roger .
“A ye, y e’ve the right of it,” he said. “Killing’ s never a
pleasant business, but it’ s needful. If ye must spill blood,
though, it’ s right to take it wi’ thanks.”
Roger n odded, glancing at the m ixture I was working, up to
my elbows in spilled blood.
“Y e’ll tell me the proper words for the next time, then?”
“Not too  late for this time, is it?” I said. Both men looked
slightly startled. I raised an eyebrow at Jamie, then Roger . “I
did say it wasn’ t for the pig.”
Jamie’ s eyes met mine with a gl int of humor , but he nodded
gravely .
“W ell enough.”At my direction , he took up the heavy jar of spices: the
ground mixture of mace and marjoram, sage and pepper ,
parsley and thyme. Roger held  out his hands, cupped, and
Jamie poured them full. Then Roger rubbed the herbs slowly
between his palms, showering the dusty , greenish crumbs into
the barrel, their pungent scent mingling with the smell of the
blood, a s Jamie spoke the word s slowly , in an ancient tongue
come down from the days of the Norsemen.
“Say it in Engl ish,” I said, seeing from Roger ’ s face that
while he spoke the words, he did not recognize them all.
“O Lor d , bless the blood and the flesh of this the cr eatur e
that Y ou gave me,”  Jamie said softly . He scooped a pinch of
the herbs himself, and rubbed them between thumb and
forefinger , in a rain of fragrant dust.
“Cr eated by Y our hand as Y ou cr eated man,
Life given for life.
That me and mine may eat with thanks for the gift,
That me and mine may give thanks for Y our own sacrifice
of blood and flesh,
Life given for life.”
The last crumbs of green and gray disappeared into the
mixture under my hands, and the ritual of the sausage was
complete.
“THA T W AS GOOD OF YE, Sassenach,” Jamie said, drying
my clean, wet h ands and arms with the towel afterward. He
nodded toward the corner of the house, where Roger had
disappeared to help with the re st of the butchering, looking
somewhat more peaceful. “I did think to tell him before, but I
couldna see how to do it.”
I sm iled and mo ved close to him . It was a cold, windy day ,
and now that I had stopped working, the chill drove me closerto se ek h is warm th. He wrapped his arms around me, and I felt
both the  reassuri ng heat of his embrace, and the soft crackle of
paper inside his shirt.
“What’ s that?”
“Oh, a bittie letter Sinclair ’ s brought,” he said, drawing
back a bit to reach into his shirt.  “I didna want to open it while
Donald was there, and didna trust him not to be reading it
when I went out.”
“It’ s not your letter , anyway ,” I said, taking the smudged
wad of paper from him. “It’ s mine.”
“Oh, is it? Sinclair didna say , just handed it to me.”
“He would!” Not unusually , Ronnie Sinclair viewed me—
all wom en, for that matter—as s imply a minor appendage of a
husband. I rather pitied the wom an he might eventually induce
to marry him.
I u nfold ed the note with some dif ficulty; it had been worn
so lo ng n ext to sweaty skin that the edges had frayed and stuck
together .
The message inside was brief a nd cryptic, but unsettling. It
had been scratched into the paper with something like a
sharpened stick, using an ink that looked disturbingly like
dried blood, though it was more likely berry juice.
“What does it say , Sassenach?” Seeing me frowning at the
paper , Jamie moved to the side to look. I held it out to him.
Far dow n, in one corner , scratch ed in faint and tiny letters,
as though the sender had hoped by this means to escape notice,
was the word “Faydree.” Above, in bolder scratchings, the
message read
YU
CUM
“IT MUST BE HER,” I said, shivering as I drew my shawl
closer . I t was cold in the sur gery , despite the small brazierglowing in the corner , but Ronnie Sinclair and MacDonald
were in the kit chen, drinking cider and waiting while the
sausages boiled. I spread the note open on my sur gery table, its
minatory summons dark and peremptory above the timid
signature. “Look. Who else could it be?”
“She canna write, surely?” J amie objected. “Though I
suppose it might be that someone wrote it for her ,” he
amended, frowning.
“No, she could have written this, I think.” Brianna and
Roger had come into the sur ge ry , too; Bree reached out and
touched the ragged paper , one long finger gently tracing the
staggered letters. “I taught her .”
“Y ou did?” Jamie looked surprised. “When?”
“When I stayed at River Run. When you and Mama went to
find Roger .” Her wide mouth pressed thin for a moment; it
wasn’ t an occasion she wished much to remember .
“I taught her the alphabet; I meant to teach her to read and
write. W e did al l the letters—she knew how they sounded, and
she coul d draw them. But then one day she said she couldn’ t
anymore, and she wouldn’ t sit down with me.” She glanced
up, a troubled fr own between her thick, red brows. “I thought
maybe Aunt Jocasta found out, and stopped her .”
“More l ikely Ulysses. Jocasta would have stopped you,
lass.” Jamie’ s frown matched hers as he glanced at me. “Y e do
think it’ s Phaedre, then? My aunt’ s body slave?”
I shook my head, and bit one corner of my lip in doubt.
“The sl aves at River Run do say her name like that—
Faydree. And I certainly don’ t know anyone else by that
name.”
Jamie ha d quest ioned Ronnie Sinclair—casually , to give no
occasion for alarm or gossip— but the cooper knew no more
than he had told  me: the note had been handed to him by a
tinker , with the simple direction that it was “for the healer .”I l eaned  over the table, lifting a  candle high to look at the
note once more. The “F” of the signature had been made with
a hesitant, repeated stroke—more than one try before the
writer had committed herself to signing it. The more evidence,
I tho ught, of its origin. I didn’ t know whether it was against
the law in North Carolina to teach a slave to read or write, but
it was certainly discouraged. While there were marked
exceptions—slaves educated to their owners’ ends, like
Ulysses himself—it was on the whole a dangerous skill, and
one a slave would go some way to conceal.
“She wouldn’ t have risked sending word like this, unless it
was a serious matter ,” Roger said. He stood behind Bree, one
hand on  her shoulder , looking down at the note she held
flattened on the table. “But what?”
“Have y ou heard from your aun t lately?” I asked Jamie, but
I kn ew the answ er before he shook his head. Any word from
River Run that reached the Ridg e would have been a matter of
public knowledge within hours.
W e had not gone to the Gatheri ng at Mt. Helicon this year;
there wa s too much to do on the Ridge and Jamie wished to
avoid the heated politics involved. Still, Jocasta and Duncan
had meant to b e there. Anything wrong would surely have
been a matter of  general gossip, which would have reached us
long since.
“So it is not onl y serious, but a  private matter to the slave,
too,” Jamie said. “Otherwise, my aunt would have written, or
Duncan sent word.” His two st if f fingers tapped once, softly ,
against his thigh.
W e stood around the table, staring at the note as though it
were a small white slab of dynamite. The scent of boiling
sausages filled the cold air , warm and comforting.
“Why you?” Roger asked, looking up at me. “Do you think
it migh t be a medical matte r? If she were ill, say—or
pregnant?”“Not illn ess,” I said. “T oo ur gent.” It was a week’ s ride to
River Run at least—in good weather , and barring accident.
Heaven knew how long it had t aken the note to make its way
up to Fraser ’ s Ridge.
“But if she was pregnant? Maybe.” Brianna pursed her lips,
still frow ning at  the paper . “I think she thinks of Mama as a
friend. She’d tell you before she’d tell Aunt Jocasta, I think.”
I no dded, but re luctantly . Friend ship was too strong a word;
people situated as Phaedre and I could not be friends. Liking
was con strained by too many things—suspicion, mistrust, the
vast chasm of dif ference that slavery imposed.
And yet  there was a certain feeling of sympathy between us,
that much was true. I had worked with her , side by side,
planting herbs and harvesting them, making simples for the
stillroom, explaining their uses . W e had buried a dead girl
together and plotted to protect a  runaway slave accused of her
murder . She had a certain talent with the sick, did Phaedre, and
some knowledge of herbs. Any minor matter , she could deal
with herself. But something like an unexpected pregnancy …
“What does she think I could do , though, I wonder?” I was
thinking out loud, and my fingertips felt cold in contemplation.
An u nexpected child born to a sl ave would be of no concern to
an owner—to the contrary , it wo uld be welcomed as additional
property; but I h ad heard stories of slave women who killed a
child at birth, ra ther than have the babe brought up in slavery .
Phaedre was a house slave, though, well-treated, and Jocasta
did not separate slave families, I knew that. If it were that,
Phaedre’ s situation was surely not so dire—and yet, who was I
to judge?
I blew out a cloud of smoky breath, uncertain.
“I just can’ t see why—I mean, she couldn’ t possibly expect
that I’d help her  to get rid of a child. And for anything else …
why me? There are midwives and healers much closer . It just
doesn’ t make sense.”“What i f—” Bri anna said, and s topped. She pursed her lips
in sp eculation, looking from me  to Jamie and back. “What if,”
she said  carefully , “she was pr egnant, but the father was …
someone it shouldn’ t be?”
A wary but humorous speculation sprang up in Jamie’ s
eyes, increasing the resemblance between him and Brianna.
“Who, lass?” he said. “Farquard Campbell?”
I l aughe d out loud at the thought, and Brianna snorted with
mirth, w hite wisps of breath floating round her head. The
notion of the very upright— and quite elderly—Farquard
Campbell seducing a house slave was …
“W ell, no,” Brianna said. “Though he does  have all those
children. But I just thought suddenly—what if it was
Duncan?”
Jamie cleared his throat, and av oided catching my eye. I bit
my l ip, feeling m y face start to go red. Duncan had confessed
his chronic impotence to Jamie before Duncan’ s wedding to
Jocasta—but Brianna didn’ t know .
“Oh, I shouldna think it likely ,” Jamie said, sounding a trifle
choked. He coughed, and fanned smoke from the brazier away
from his face. “What gives ye that notion, lass?”
“Nothing about  Duncan,” she assured him. “But Aunt
Jocasta is —well, old. And you know what men can be like.”
“No, what?” asked Roger blandly , making me cough with
the ef fort to suppress a laugh.
Jamie eyed her with a certain amount of cynicism.
“A good deal better than you do, a nighean.  And while I
wouldna wager much on some men, I think I should feel safe
in laying  odds that Duncan Innes isna the man to be breaking
his marriage vows with his wife’ s black slave.”
I made a small noise, and Roger lifted one eyebrow at me.
“Are you all right?”“Fine,” I said, sounding strangled. “Just—fine.” I put a
corner of the sha wl over my no-doubt purple face and coughed
ostentatiously . “It’ s … smoky in here, isn’ t it?”
“Maybe so,” Brianna conceded, addressing Jamie. “It might
not be that at all. It’ s just that Phaedre sent the note to ‘the
healer ,’ probably because she didn’ t want to use Mama’ s
name, in  case anybody saw the note before it got here. I just
thought, maybe it wasn’ t really Mama she wants—maybe it’ s
you.”
That sobered both Jamie and me, and we glanced at each
other . It was a definite possibility , and one that hadn’ t occurred
to either of us.
“She co uldn’ t send a note direc t to you without rousing all
kinds of curiosity ,” Bree went o n, frowning at the note. “But
she could say ‘t he healer ’ without putting a name on it. And
she’d know that if Mama came, you’d probably come with her ,
at this time of year . Or if you didn’ t, Mama could send for you
openly .”
“It’ s a thought,” Jamie said slow ly . “But why in God’ s name
might she want me ?”
“Only one way to find out,”  said Roger , practical. He
looked at Jamie. “Most of the o utside work is done; the crops
and the hay are in, the slaughtering’ s finished. W e can manage
here, if you want to go.”
Jamie stood still for a moment, frowning in thought, then
crossed to the window and raise d the sash. A cold wind blew
into the room, a nd Bree pinned the fluttering note to the table
to keep it from taking wing. T he coals in the small brazier
smoked and flamed higher , an d the bunches of dried herbs
rustled uneasily overhead.
Jamie thrust his head out the  window and breathed in
deeply , e yes closed like one savo ring the bouquet of fine wine.
“Cold and clear ,” he announce d, drawing in his head and
closing the window . “Clear weat her for three days, at least. W e
could be  of f the mountain by that time, and we ride briskly .”He smiled at me ; the tip of his n ose was red with the cold. “In
the meantime, d’ye think those sausages are ready yet?”7 2
BETRA Y ALS
A  S LA VE  I DIDN’T RECOGNIZE opened the door to us, a
broad-built wom an in a yellow turban. She eyed us severely ,
but Jamie gave her no chance to speak, pushing rudely past her
into the hall.
“He’ s M rs. Cam eron’ s nephew ,”  I felt obliged to explain to
her , as I followed him.
“I can see that, ” she muttered, in a lilt that came from
Barbados. She glared after him, making it evident that she
detected a family resemblance in terms of high-handedness, as
well as physique.
“I’m his  wife,” I added, overcoming the reflexive ur ge to
shake her hand, and bowing slightly instead. “Claire Fraser .
Nice to meet you.”
She blin ked, disconcerted, but before she could reply , I had
whisked past her , following Jamie toward the small drawing
room where Jocasta was inclined to sit in the afternoons.
The doo r to the drawing room was closed, and as Jamie set
his hand  on the knob, a sharp yelp came from inside—the
prelude to a barrage of frenzie d barking as the door swung
wide.
Stopped in his tracks, Jamie paused, hand on the door ,
frowning at the small brown bundle of fur that leaped to and
fro at his feet, ey es bulging in hy steria as it barked its head of f.
“What is that ?” h e said, edgin g his way into the room as the
creature made abortive dashes at his boots, still yapping.
“It’ s a wee dog, what d’ye think?” Jocasta said acerbically .
She lifte d herself from her chai r , frowning in the direction of
the noise. “ Sheas,  Samson.”“Samson? Oh, to be sure. The hair .” Smiling despite
himself, Jamie squatted and ext ended a closed fist toward the
dog. Throttling back to a low  growl, the dog extended a
suspicious nose toward his knuckles.
“Where’ s Delilah?” I asked, edging into the room behind
him.
“Ah, ye’ve come, as well, Claire?” Jocasta’ s face swiveled
in m y direction, lit by a smile. “A rare treat, to have the both
of y e. I dinna suppose Brianna or the bittie lad have come
along—no, I would have heard them.” Dismissing that, she sat
down again, and waved toward the hearth.
“As for Delilah, the lazy creature’ s asleep by the fire; I can
hear her snoring.”
Delilah was a lar ge whitish hound of indeterminate breed
but plen tiful skin; it drooped aro und her in folds of relaxation
as s he lay on her back, paws curled over a freckled belly .
Hearing her name, she snorted b riefly , opened one eye a crack,
then closed it again.
“I se e ye ’ve had  a few changes since I was last here,” Jamie
observed, rising to his feet. “Wh ere is Duncan? And Ulysses?”
“Gone. Looking for Phaedre.” Jocasta had lost weight; the
high MacKenzie cheekbones stood out sharp, and her skin
looked thin and creased.
“Looking for her?” Jamie glanced sharply at her . “What’ s
become of the lass?”
“Run away .” She spoke with her usual self-possession, but
her voice was bleak.
“Run away? But—are you sure?” Her workbox had been
upset, th e contents spilled on the floor . I knelt and began to
tidy the confusion, picking up the scattered reels of thread.
“W eel, she’ s gone,” Jocasta said with some acerbity . “Either
she’ s run, or so meone’ s stolen her . And I canna think who
would h ave the gall or the skill  to snatch her from my house,
and no one seeing.”I exc hanged a qu ick glance with Jamie, who shook his head,
frowning. Jocasta was rubbing a fold of her skirt between
thumb and forefinger; I could se e small worn spots in the nap
of th e fabric near her hand, where she had done it repeatedly .
Jamie saw it, too.
“When did she go, Auntie?” he asked quietly .
“Four w eeks pa st. Duncan and Ulysses have been gone for
two.”
That fitted well enough with the arrival of the note. No
telling how long before her disappearance the note had
actually been written, given the vagaries of delivery .
“I see Duncan to ok pains to leav e ye some company ,” Jamie
observed. Samson had abandoned his watchdog role, and was
snif fing assiduously at Jamie’ s boots. Delilah rolled onto her
side with a luxu rious groan and opened two luminous brown
eyes, through which she regarded me with utmost tranquillity .
“Oh, aye, they’re that.” Half-gru dgingly , Jocasta leaned out
from her  chair and located the hound’ s head, scratching behind
the long, floppy ears. “Though  Duncan meant them for my
protection, or so he said.”
“A sensible precaution,” Jamie said mildly . It was; we had
had no further w ord of Stephen Bonnet, nor had Jocasta heard
the voic e of the masked man again. But lacking the concrete
reassurance of a corpse, either o ne could presumably pop up at
any time.
“Why w ould th e lassie run, Au nt?” Jamie asked. His tone
was still mild, but persistent.
Jocasta shook her head, lips compressed.
“I dinna ken at all, Nephew .”
“Nothing’ s happened of late? Nothing out of the ordinary?”
he pressed.
“Do ye not think I should have said at once?” she asked
sharply . “No. I woke late one m orning, and couldna hear her
about m y room. There was nay t ea by my bed, and the fire hadgone ou t; I could smell the ash es. I called for her , and there
was no answer . Gone, she was—vanished without a trace.”
She tilte d her head toward him with a grim sort of “so there”
expression.
I r aised a brow at Jamie and touched the pocket I wore at
my waist, containing the note. Ought we to tell her?
He nodd ed, and I drew the note from my pocket, unfolding
it on the arm of her chair , as he explained.
Jocasta’ s look of displeasure faded into one of puzzled
astonishment.
“Whyever should she send for you, a nighean ?” she asked,
turning to me.
“I don’ t know—perhaps she was with child?” I suggested.
“Or had contracted a—disease o f some sort?” I didn’ t want to
suggest syphilis  openly , but it was a possibility . If Manfred
had infected Mrs. Sylvie, and she had then passed the infection
on to  on e or more of her custom ers in Cross Creek, who then
had visi ted River Run … but that would mean, perhaps, that
Phaedre had had some kind of relationship with a white man.
That  was  something a slave woman would go to great lengths
to keep secret.
Jocasta, no fool, was rapidly coming to similar conclusions,
though her thoughts ran parallel to mine.
“A child, that w ould be no great  matter ,” she said, flicking a
hand. “But if she had a lover …  aye,” she said thoughtfully .
“She mi ght have  gone of f with a lover . But then, why send for
you?”
Jamie was growing restive, impatient with so much
unprovable speculation.
“Perhaps she might think ye m eant to sell her , Aunt, if ye
discovered such a thing?”
“T o sell  her?”
Jocasta broke out laughing. Not her usual social laughter ,
nor even the sound of genuine amusement; this was shocking—loud and crude, almost vicious in its hilarity . It was her
brother Dougal’ s laugh, and the blood ran momentarily cold in
my veins.
I glanced at Jamie, to find him looking down at her , face
gone blank. Not in puzzlement ; it was the mask he wore to
hide strong feeling. So he’d heard that grisly echo, too.
She seemed unable to stop. He r hands clutched the carved
arms of her cha ir and she leaned forward, face turning red,
gasping for breath between those unnerving deep guf faws.
Delilah rolled onto her belly and uttered a low “wuff”  of
unease, looking anxiously round, unsure what the matter was,
but convinced that something wasn’ t right. Samson had
backed under the settee, growling.
Jamie re ached o ut and took her by the shoulder—not gently .
“Be still, Aunt,” he said. “Y e’re frightening your wee dogs.”
She stopped, abruptly . There was no sound but the faint
wheeze of her breathing, nearly as unnerving as the laughter .
She sat still, bolt upright in her chair , hands on the arms, the
blood ebbing slowly from her fa ce and her eyes gone dark and
bright, fixed as though on something that only she could see.
“Sell he r ,” she murmured, and her mouth creased as though
the laug hter were about to break out of her again. She didn’ t
laugh, though, but stood up sudd enly . Samson yapped once, in
astonishment.
“Come with me.”
She was  through the door bef ore either of us could say
anything. Jamie  lifted an eyeb row at me, but motioned me
through the door before him.
She knew the ho use intimately; she made her way down the
hall tow ard the door to the stables with no more than an
occasional touch of the wall to keep her bearings, walking as
fast as though she could see. Outside, though, she paused,
feeling with one extended foot for the edge of the brick-laid
path.Jamie stepped up beside her a nd took her firmly by the
elbow .
“Where d’ye wish to go?” he as ked, a certain resignation in
his tone.
“T o the carriage barn.” The pe culiar laughter had left her ,
but h er f ace was  still flushed, he r strong chin lifted with an air
of defiance. Who was she defying? I wondered.
The carriage barn was shadowed and tranquil, dust motes
drifting gold in t he stir of air from the opened doors. A wagon,
a ca rriage, a sle dge, and the elegant two-wheeled trap sat like
lar ge, pl acid be asts on the stra w-covered floor . I glanced at
Jamie, w hose mouth curled slightly as he looked at me; we
had take n temporary refuge in that carriage, during the chaos
of Jocasta’ s wedding to Duncan, almost four years before.
Jocasta p aused in the doorway , o ne hand braced on the jamb
and brea thing deeply , as though orienting herself. She made no
move to enter t he barn herself, though, but instead nodded
toward the depths of the building.
“Along the back wall, an mhic mo peather .  There are boxes
there; I want the  lar ge chest made of wickerwork, the one as
high as your knee, with a rope tied round it.”
I had  not really noticed during our earlier excursion into the
carriage barn, but the back wall  was stacked high with boxes,
crates, and bundles, piled two and three deep. W ith such
explicit direction, though, Jamie made short work of finding
the desir ed container , and dragged it out into the light, covered
with dust and bits of straw .
“Shall I carry it  into the house  for ye, Auntie?” he asked,
rubbing a finger under a twitching nose.
She shook her head, stooping an d feeling for the knot of the
rope that bound it.
“No. I shallna have it the house. I swore I should not.”
“Let me .” I laid a hand on hers to still her fumbling, then
took cha r ge of the knot myself. Whoever had tied it had beenthorough, but not skilled; I had  it loose within a minute, and
the catch undone.
The wicker chest was filled wit h pictures. Bundles of loose
drawings, done in pencil, ink, and charcoal, neatly tied with
faded ribbons of colored silk. Several bound sketchbooks. And
a number of paintings: a few lar ge unframed squares, and two
smaller boxes of miniatures, all framed, stacked on edge like a
deck of cards.
I he ard Jocasta sigh, above me , and looked up. She stood
still, eye s closed , and I could tell that she was inhaling deeply ,
breathing in the smell of the p ictures—the smell of oils and
charcoal, gesso, paper , canvas, linseed and turpentine, a full-
bodied g host that floated out of its wicker casket, transparently
vivid against the background scents of straw and dust, wood
and wicker .
Her fingers curled, thumb rubb ing against the tips of her
other fingers, unconsciously rolling a brush between them. I
had seen  Bree do that, now and then, looking at something she
wanted to paint. Jocasta sighed  again, then opened her eyes
and kne lt down beside me, re aching in to run her fingers
lightly over the cache of buried art, searching.
“The oils,” she said. “Fetch those out.”
I had already t aken out the boxes of miniatures. Jamie
squatted on the other side of the casket, lifting the bundles of
loose drawings and the sketchb ooks, so that I could pull out
the lar ger oils, laid on edge along the side of the container .
“A portrait,” she said, head on one side to listen to the flat,
hollow s ound as  I laid each one against the side of the wicker
box. “An old man.”
It was plain whi ch one she meant. T wo of the lar ge canvases
were la ndscapes, three, portr aits. I recognized Farquard
Campbell, much  younger than h is present age, and what must
be a  self -portrait of Jocasta herself, done perhaps twenty years
before. I  had no time to look a t these, though, interesting as
they were.The third portrait looked to have been done much more
recently than the others, and showed the ef fects of Jocasta’ s
failing eyesight.
The edges were blurred, the colors muddy , shapes just
slightly distorted, so that the elderly gentleman who looked
out of the clouded oil seemed somehow disturbing, as though
he belonged to some race not quite human, in spite of the
orthodoxy of his wig and high white stock.
He w ore a black coat and waistcoat, old-fashioned in style,
with the  folds of a tartan plaid draped over his shoulder ,
caught up with a brooch whose  golden gleam was echoed by
the ornamental knurl atop the dirk the old man held, his
fingers bent and gnarled with arthritis. I recognized that dirk.
“So that is Hect or Cameron.” Jamie recognized it, too. He
looked at the painting with fascination.
Jocasta r eached out a hand, touc hing the surface of the paint
as though to identify it by touch.
“A ye, that’ s him,” she said dry ly . “Never saw him in life,
did ye, Nephew?”
Jamie shook his head.
“Once p erhaps—but I was nay more than a babe at the
time.” H is gaze traced the old man’ s features with deep
interest, as though looking for clues to Hector Cameron’ s
character . Such clues were evident; the man’ s force of
personality fairly vibrated from the canvas.
He had strong bones, the man in the portrait, though the
flesh hu ng from them in the infirmity of age. The eyes were
still sharp, but o ne was half-closed—it might have been only a
drooping eyelid  caused by a small stroke, but the impression
was that of an habitual manner of looking at the world; one
eye always narrowed in cynical appraisal.
Jocasta was searching through the contents of the chest,
fingers d arting l ightly here and there, like hunting moths. She
touched one box of miniatures, and lifted it with a small grunt
of satisfaction.She ran a finge r slowly along the edge of each miniature,
and I saw that t he frames were patterned dif ferently; squares
and oval s, smooth gilded wood, tarnished silver laid in a rope
border , another studded with tin y rosettes. She found one she
recognized, and plucked it from the box, handing it absently to
me as she went back to her search.
The miniature was also of H ector Cameron—but this
portrait done many years before  the other . Dark wavy hair lay
loose on his shoulders, a small ornamental braid down one
side sporting two grouse’ s feathers, in the ancient Highland
style. The same solid bones wer e there, but the flesh was firm;
he had been handsome, Hector Cameron.
It was  an habitual expression; whether by inclination or
accident of birth, the right eye  was narrowed here, as well,
though not as much as in the older portrait.
My scrutiny was interrupted by Jocasta, who laid a hand on
my arm.
“Is this the la ss?” she asked, thrusting another of the
miniatures at me.
I too k it , puzzle d, and gasped w hen I turned it over . It was
Phaedre, done when the girl was in her early teens. Her usual
cap was  missing; she wore a simple kerchief bound over her
hair that threw the bones of her face into bold relief. Hector
Cameron’ s bones.
Jocasta nudged the box of paintings with her foot.
“Give those to your daughter , Nephew . T ell her to paint
them over—it would be shame to waste the canvas.” W ithout
waiting for response, she set of f  back toward the house alone,
hesitating only briefly at the fork in the path, steering by scent
and memory .
THERE W AS A PROFOUND silence in the wake of Jocasta’ s
departure, broken only by the s inging of a mockingbird in a
nearby pine.“I will be damned,” Jamie said at last, taking his eyes of f
the f igure of his  aunt as she vanished into the house, alone. He
didn’ t lo ok shocked, so much as  deeply bemused. “Did the girl
know , d’ye think?”
“Almost certainly ,” I said. “The slaves would surely have
known; some must have been h ere when she was born; they’d
have told  her , if she wasn’ t quick  enough to have worked it out
herself—and I certainly think she is.”
He nodd ed, and leaned back aga inst the wall of the carriage
house, looking meditatively dow n his long nose at the wicker
chest of paintings. I felt a strong reluctance to go back to the
house, m yself. The buildings were beautiful, a mellow gold in
the late-fall sun, and the grounds were peaceful, well-ordered.
The sou nd of cheerful voices came from the kitchen garden,
several horses grazed contentedly in the paddock nearby , and
far awa y down the distant sil ver river , a small boat came
down, a four -oared piretta, its o ars stroking the surface, brisk
and graceful as a water strider .
“Where every prospect pleases , and only man is vile,” I
remarked. Jamie gave me a brief glance of incomprehension,
then returned to his thoughts.
So J ocasta would by no means  sell Phaedre, and thought
Phaedre knew it. I wondered e xactly why . Because she felt
some duty to the girl, as the child of her husband? Or as a
subtle form of revenge on that long-dead husband, keeping his
illegitimate dau ghter as a slave , a body servant? I supposed
that the two were not entirely exclusive, come to that—I had
known J ocasta long enough to realize that her motives were
rarely simple.
There was a chi ll in the air , with the sun low in the sky . I
leaned against the carriage house beside Jamie, feeling the
stored warmth of the sun soak from its bricks into my body ,
and wished that we could step into the old farm wagon and
drive po sthaste back to the Rid ge, leaving River Run to deal
with its own legacies of bitterness.But the note was  in my pocket, crackling when I moved. YU
CUM.  Not an appeal I could dismiss. But I had  come—and
now what?
Jamie straighten ed suddenly , looking toward the river . I
looked, too, and saw that the boat had drawn into the dock
there. A tall figure sprang up onto the dock, then turned to
help another out of the boat. Th e second man was shorter , and
moved in an odd fashion, of f-kilter and out of rhythm.
“Duncan,” I said at once, seeing this. “And Ulysses. They’re
back!”
“A ye,” J amie said, taking my arm and starting toward the
house. “But they havena found her .”
RUNA W A Y or ST OLEN on the 31st of October , a Negr o
W ench, twenty-t wo years of Age , above middling Height
and comely in Appearance, w ith a Scar on the left
For earm in the shape of an O val, caused by a Burn.
Dr essed in an indigo Gown, with a gr een-striped Apr on,
white Cap, br own Stockings, and leather Shoes. No
missing T eeth. Known by the Name of “F A YDREE.”
Communicate Particulars to D. Innes, River Run
Plantation, in the vicinity of C r oss Cr eek. Substantial
Rewar d will be paid for good Information.
I smoothed the crumpled broadsheet, which also sported a
crude d rawing of Phaedre, looking vaguely cross-eyed.
Duncan had emptied his pocke ts and dropped a handful of
these sheets on the table in the hall when he had come in the
afternoon before, exhausted and dispirited. They had, he said,
posted t he bills in every tavern and public house between
Campbelton and  W ilmington, making inquiries as they went—
but to no avail. Phaedre had vanished like the dew .
“May I have th e marmalade, please?” Jamie and I were
taking b reakfast alone, neither Jocasta nor Duncan having
appeared this morning. I was e njoying it, despite the gloomy
atmosphere. Breakfast at River Run was normally a lavishaf fair , extending even to a pot of real tea—Jocasta must be
paying her pet s muggler an absolute fortune for it; there was
none to be found between V ir ginia and Geor gia, to the best of
my knowledge.
Jamie was frowning at another of the broadsheets, deep in
thought. He didn’ t take his eyes of f it, but his hand roamed
vaguely over the table, settled o n the cream jug, and passed it
across to me.
Ulysses, showin g little sign of his long journey beyond a
certain heaviness of the eyes, stepped silently forward, took
the cream jug, re placed it neatly , and set the pot of marmalade
beside my plate.
“Thank you,” I said, and he graciously inclined his head.
“W ill yo u require further bloaters, madam?” he inquired.
“Or more ham?”
I shook  my head, my mouth being full of toast, and he
glided of f, picking up a loa ded tray by the door , this
presumably intended for Jocasta, Duncan, or both.
Jamie watched him go, with a sort of abstracted expression.
“I have been thinking, Sassenach,” he said.
“I w ould never have guessed it,” I assured him. “About
what?”
He looked momentarily surprised, but then smiled,
realizing.
“Y e kent what I  told ye, Sassenach, about Brianna and the
widow McCallu m? That she wouldna scruple long to act, if
Roger Mac were to be taking heed where he shouldn’ t?”
“I do,” I said.
He nodded, as though verifying something to himself.
“W ell, the lass comes by it honestly enough. The
MacKenzies of Leoch are proud as Lucifer , all of them, and
black jea lous with it. Y e dinna want to cross one—still less to
betray one.”I reg arded him w arily over my cup of tea, wondering where
this was leading.
“I thought their defining trait was charm, allied with
cunning. And as for betrayal, both your uncles were past hands
at it.”
“The tw o go together , do they not?” he asked, reaching
across to dip a spoon in the marmalade. “Y e must beguile
someone before ye can betray them, no? And I am inclined to
think that a man who would betray is all the quicker to resent
betrayal himself. Or a woman,” he added delicately .
“Oh, really ,” I said, sipping with pleasure. “Jocasta, you
mean.” P ut in those terms, I co uld see it. The MacKenzies of
Leoch h ad powe rful personalities—I did wonder what Jamie’ s
maternal grandfather , the notorious Red Jacob, had been like
—and I’d noted small commonalities of behavior between
Jocasta and her elder brothers before.
Colum and Dougal had had an  unshakable loyalty to each
other—but to no one else. And Jocasta was essentially alone,
separated from her family since her first marriage at fifteen.
Being a woman, it was natural t hat the charm should be more
apparent in her—but that didn’ t mean the cunning wasn’ t
there. Nor yet the jealousy , I supposed.
“W ell, plainly she knew that Hector betrayed her—and I do
wonder whether she painted that portrait of Phaedre as a
means o f indica ting to the worl d at lar ge that she knew it, or
merely as a priv ate message to Hector—but what has that got
to do with the present situation?”
He shook his head.
“Not Hector ,” he said. “Duncan.”
I stared at hi m, absolutely open-mouthed. All other
considerations aside, Duncan was impotent; he had told Jamie
so, on the eve  of his weddi ng to Jocasta. Jamie smiled
crookedly , and reaching across  the table, put a thumb under
my chin and pushed my mouth gently shut.“It’ s a thought, Sassenach, is all I’m saying. But I think I
must go and have a word wi’ the man. W ill ye come?”
DUNCAN W AS  IN the small room he used as a private of fice,
tucked a way above the stables, along with the tiny rooms that
housed t he grooms and stable-lads. He was slumped in a chair ,
looking hopelessly at the untidy stacks of papers and undusted
ledgers that had accumulated on every horizontal surface.
He looked desperately tired, a nd a great deal older than
when I had last seen him, at Flora MacDonald’ s barbecue. His
gray hair was th inning, and when he turned to greet us, the
light of the sun s hone across his face, and I saw the thin line of
the h arelip scar Roger had men tioned, hidden in the luxuriant
growth of his mustache.
Something vital seemed to have gone out of him, and when
Jamie delicately broached the subject upon which we had
come, h e made no attempt at all to deny it. In fact, he seemed
glad, rather than otherwise, to have it out.
“Y e did lie wi ’ the lass, the n, Duncan?” Jamie asked
directly , wanting to have the fact established.
“W ell, n o,” he said vaguely . “ I should have liked to, o’
course—but wh at wi’ her sleeping in Jo’ s dressing room …”
At this reference  to his wife, his face flushed a deep, unhealthy
red.
“I m ean, ye’ve had carnal know ledge of the woman, have
ye not?” Jamie said, keeping a grip on his patience.
“Oh, aye.” He gulped. “A ye. I did.”
“How?” I asked bluntly .
The flush deepened, to such a degree that I feared he might
have an apoplexy on the spot. He breathed like a grampus for a
bit, though, and finally , his com plexion began to fade back to
something like normal.
“She fed me,” he said at last, ru bbing a hand tiredly across
his eyes. “Every day .”Jocasta rose late and breakfasted in her sitting room,
attended by Ulysses, to make p lans for the day . Duncan, who
had rise n before dawn every day of his life, usually in the
expectation of a dry crust or at most, a bit of drammach—
oatmeal mixed with water—wo ke now to find a steaming pot
of t ea beside h is bed, accompanied by a bowl of creamy
parritch, liberally garnished w ith honey and cream, toast
drenched in butter , eggs fried with ham.
“Sometimes a wee fish, rolled in cornmeal, crisp and
sweet,” he added, with mournful reminiscence.
“W ell, that’ s verra seductive, to be sure, Duncan,” Jamie
said, not without sympathy . “A man’ s vulnerable when he’ s
hungry .” He gave me a wry glance. “But still …”
Duncan had been grateful to Ph aedre for her kindness, and
had—being a man, after all—admired her beauty , though in a
purely disinterested sort of way , he assured us.
“T o be sure,” Jamie said with marked skepticism. “What
happened?”
Duncan had dropped the butter , was the answer , whilst
struggling to butter his toast one-handed. Phaedre had
hastened to retrieve the pieces of the fallen dish, and then
hurried t o fetch a cloth and wipe  the streaks of butter from the
floor—and then from Duncan’ s chest.
“W ell, I was in my nightshirt,” he murmured, starting to go
red agai n. “And she was—she h ad—” His hand rose and made
vague m otions in the vicinity of his chest, which I took to
indicate that Phaedre’ s bodice had displayed her bosom to
particular advantage while in such close proximity to him.
“And?” Jamie prompted ruthlessly .
And, it appeared, Duncan’ s ana tomy had taken note of the
fact—a circumst ance admitted with such strangulated modesty
that we could barely hear him.
“But I thought you couldn’ t—” I began.“Oh, I couldna,”  he assured me hastily . “Only at night, like,
dreaming. But not waking, not since I had the accident.
Perhaps it was b eing so early i’ the morning; my cock thought
I was still asleep.”
Jamie m ade a low Scottish noise expressing considerable
doubt as  to this supposition, but ur ged Duncan to continue,
with a certain amount of impatience.
Phaedre had taken notice in her turn, it transpired.
“She was only sorry for me,” Duncan said frankly . “I could
tell as much. Bu t she put her hand on me, soft. So soft,” he
repeated, almost inaudibly .
He h ad been si tting on his bed—and had gone on sitting
there in dumb am azement, as she took away the breakfast tray ,
lifted his nightshirt, climbed on  the bed with her skirts neatly
tucked above her round brown thighs, and with great
tenderness and gentleness, had welcomed back his manhood.
“Once?” Jamie demanded. “Or did ye keep doing it?”
Duncan put his head in his hand, a fairly eloquent
admission, under the circumstances.
“How long did this … er … liaison go on?” I asked more
gently .
T wo months, perhaps three. Not every day , he hastened to
add—only now and then. And they had been very careful.
“I woul dna ever have wanted to shame Jo, ken,” he said
very earnestly . “And I kent wee l I shouldna be doing it, ‘twas
a gr eat sin, and  yet I couldna keep from—” He broke, of f,
swallowing. “It’ s all my fault, what’ s happened, let the sin be
on me! Och, my puir darling lass …”
He f ell silent, sh aking his head like an old, sad, flea-ridden
dog. I felt terribly sorry for him , regardless of the morality of
the situation. The collar of his  shirt was turned awkwardly
under , s trands of his grizzled h air trapped beneath his coat; I
gently pulled them out and stra ightened it, though he took no
heed.“D’ye think she’ s dead, Duncan?” Jamie asked quietly , and
Duncan blanched, his skin going the same gray as his hair .
“I canna bring m yself to think i t, Mac Dubh, ” he said, and
his eyes filled with tears. “And—and yet …”
Jamie and I exchanged uneasy glances. And yet. Phaedre
had taken no money when sh e disappeared. How could a
female slave travel very far without detection, advertised and
hunted, lacking a horse, money , or anything beyond a pair of
leather s hoes? A man might pos sibly make it to the mountains,
and manage to survive in the woods, if he were tough and
resourceful—but a girl? A house slave?
Someone had taken her—or else she was dead.
None of us wa nted to voice t hat thought, though. Jamie
heaved a great s igh, and taking a clean handkerchief from his
sleeve, put it in Duncan’ s hand.
“I sh all pray for her , Duncan— wherever she may be. And
for you, a charaid  … and for you.”
Duncan nodded , not looking up, the handkerchief clutched
tight. It was clea r that any attempt at comfort would be futile,
and so at last we left him sitting there, in his tiny , landlocked
room, so far from the sea.
W e made our way back slowly , not speaking, but holding
hands, feeling the strong need to touch each other . The day
was brig ht, but there was a storm coming up; ragged clouds
were str eaming in from the east, and the breeze came in gusts
that whirled my skirts about like a twirling parasol.
The wind was less on the back terrace, sheltered as it was by
its waist-high wall. Looking up from here, I could just see the
window that Phaedre had been looking out of when I’d found
her there, the night of the barbecue.
“She told me t hat something wasn’ t right,” I said. “The
night o f Mrs. MacDonald’ s  barbecue. Something was
troubling her then.”
Jamie shot me an interested glance.“Oh, aye? But she didna mean Duncan, surely?” he
objected.
“I know .” I shru gged helplessly . “She didn’ t seem to know
what was wrong herself—she just kept saying, ‘Something
ain’ t right.’”
Jamie to ok a deep breath and blew it out again, shaking his
head.
“In a way , I suppose I hope that whatever it was, it had to do
with her  going. For if it wasna t o do with her and Duncan …”
He trailed of f, but I had no dif ficulty in finishing the thought.
“Then it  wasn’ t to do with your aunt, either ,” I said. “Jamie
—do you really think Jocasta might have had her killed?”
It should have sounded ridiculous, spoken aloud like that.
The horrible thing was that it didn’ t.
Jamie made that small, shrugging gesture he used when
very uncomfortable about something, as though his coat was
too tight.
“Had she her sight, I should think it—possible, at least,” he
said. “T o be betr ayed by Hector—and she blamed him already ,
for t he d eath of her girls. So he r daughters are dead, but there
is Phaed re, alive, every day , a constant reminder of insult. And
then to be betrayed yet again, by Duncan, with  Hector ’ s
daughter?”
He r ubbed a kn uckle under his nose. “I should think any
woman of spirit might be … moved.”
“Y es,” I said, im agining what I m ight think or feel under the
same cir cumstances. “Certainly . But to murder—that is  what
we’re talking about, isn’ t it? Cou ldn’ t she simply have sold the
girl?”
“No,” h e said  thoughtfully . “She couldn’ t. W e made
provision to safeguard her mone y when she wed—but not the
property . Duncan is the owner o f River Run—and all that goes
with it.”
“Including Phaedre.” I felt hollow , and a little sick.“As I said. Had she her sight, I s houldna be astonished at all
by the thought. As it is …”
“Ulysses,” I said, with certainty , and he nodded reluctantly .
Ulysses was not only Jocasta’ s eyes, but her hands, as well. I
didn’ t think he would have ki lled Phaedre at his mistress’ s
command—but if Jocasta had poisoned the girl, for instance,
Ulysses might certainly have helped to dispose of the body .
I fel t an odd air of unreality—even with what I knew of the
MacKenzie fam ily , calmly discussing the possibility of
Jamie’ s aged aunt having murdered someone … and yet … I
did  know the MacKenzies.
“ If  my aunt had any hand at all in the matter ,” Jamie said.
“After a ll, Dunc an said they we re discreet. And it may be the
lass was taken of f—perhaps by the man my aunt recalls from
Coigach. It could be he’d think Phaedre might help him to the
gold, no?”
That was a somewhat happier thought. And it did  fit with
Phaedre’ s premonition—if that’ s what it was—which had
occurred the same day that the man from Coigach came.
“I suppose all we can  do is pray for h er , poor thing,” I said.
“I don’ t suppose  there’ s a patro n saint of abducted persons, is
there?”
“Saint Dagobert,” he replied promptly , causing me to stare
at him.
“Y ou’re making that up.”
“Indeed I am no t,” he said with dignity . “Saint Athelais is
another one—and perhaps better , now I think. She was a
young Roman lass, who was abducted by the Emperor
Justinian, who wished to have his way wi’ her , and she vowed
to ch astity . But s he escaped and went of f to live with her uncle
in Benevento.”
“Good for her . And Saint Dagobert?”
“A king of some sort—Frankish? Anyway , his guardian
took aga inst him as a child, and had him kidnapped away toEngland, so the guardian’ s son might reign instead.”
“Where do you learn these things?” I demanded.
“From Brother Polycarp, at the A bbey of St. Anne,” he said,
the corner of his mouth tuckin g back in a smile. “When I
couldna sleep, he’d come and tell me stories of the saints,
hours on end. It didna always put me to sleep, but after an hour
or so of hearin g about holy martyrs having their breasts
amputated or being flogged wi’ iron hooks, I’d close my eyes
and make a decent pretense of it.”
Jamie took my c ap of f and set it on the ledge. The air blew
through my inch of hair , ruf fling it like meadow grass, and he
smiled as he looked at me.
“Y e look  like a boy , Sassenach,” he said. “Though damned
if I’ve ever seen a lad with an arse like yours.”
“Thanks so much,” I said, absurdly pleased. I had eaten like
a h orse in the last two months, slept well and deeply through
the nights, and knew I was much improved in looks, hair
notwithstanding. Never hurt to hear it, though.
“I want ye verr a much, mo nighean donn, ” he said softly ,
and curl ed his fingers round m y wrist, letting the pads rest
gently on my pulse.
“So the MacKenzies of Leoc h are all prone to black
jealousy ,” I said. I could feel  my pulse, steady under his
fingers. “Charming, cunning, and given to betrayal.” I touched
his lip, ran my thumb lightly along it, the tiny prickles of beard
pleasant to the touch. “All of them?”
He look ed down, fixing me sud denly with a dark blue gaze
in which humor and ruefulnes s were mingled with a good
many other things I couldn’ t read.
“Y e think I am not?” he said, and smiled a little sadly . “God
and Mary bless ye, Sassenach.” And bent to kiss me.
WE COULD NOT T ARR Y at River Run. The fields down
here on the piedmont had long since been harvested and turnedunder , the remnants of dried s talks flecking the fresh dark
earth; snow would fly soon in the mountains.
W e had discussed the matter rou nd and round—but came to
no useful conclusion. There was nothing further we could do
to he lp Phaedre—except to pray . Beyond that, though … there
was Duncan to think of.
For it had occur red to both of us that if Jocasta had  found
out a bout his lia ison with Phaedre, her wrath was not likely to
be li mited to the slave girl. She might bide her time—but she
would not for get the injury . I’d never met a Scot who would.
W e took  our leave of Jocasta after breakfast the next day ,
finding her in h er private parlor , embroidering a table runner .
The basket of silk threads sat in her lap, the colors carefully
arrayed in a spiral, so that she could choose the one she
wanted by touch, and the finished linen fell to one side, five
feet of cloth edged with an intricate design of apples, leaves,
and vine s—or n o, I realized, wh en I picked up the end of the
cloth to admire it. Not vines. Black-eyed serpents, coiling
slyly , sli thering, green and scaly . Here and there one gaped to
show its fangs, guarding scattered red fruit.
“Garden of Eden,” she explaine d to me, rubbing the design
lightly betwixt her fingers.
“How beautiful,” I said, wondering how long she’d been
working on it. Had she begun it before Phaedre’ s
disappearance?
A bit of casual talk, and then Josh the groom appeared to
say that our horses were ready . J amie nodded, dismissing him,
and stood.
“Aunt,” he said to Jocasta matter -of-factly , “I should take it
verra much amiss were any harm to come to Duncan.”
She stif fened, fingers halting in their work.
“Why should any harm come to  him?” she asked, lifting her
chin.Jamie d idn’ t reply at once, but stood regarding her , not
without sympath y . Then he leaned down, so that she could feel
his presence close, his mouth near her ear .
“I know , Aunt,” he said softly . “And if ye dinna wish
anyone e lse to share that knowledge … then I think I shall find
Duncan in good health when I return.”
She sat as though turned to salt. Jamie stood up, nodding
toward the door , and we took our leave. I glanced back from
the hallway , and saw her still sitting like a statue, face as white
as the linen in her hands and the little balls of colored thread
all fallen from her lap, unraveling across the polished floor .7 3
DOUBLE-DEALING
W ITH MA RSALI GONE, the whisky-making became more
dif ficult. Among  us, Bree and Mrs. Bug and I had managed to
get o f f one mor e malting before the weather became too cold
and rainy , but it  was a near thing, and it was with great relief
that I saw the la st of the malted  grain safely decanted into the
still. Once set to ferment, the stuf f became Jamie’ s
responsibility , as  he trusted no one else with the delicate job of
judging taste and proof.
The fire  beneath  the still had to be kept at exactly the right
level, though, to keep fermentation going without killing the
mash, then raised for the distillings once fermentation was
complete. This meant that he lived—and slept—beside the still
for the few days necessary fo r each batch to come of f. I
generally brough t him supper a nd stayed until the dark came,
but it was lonely  without him in  my bed, and I was more than
pleased when we poured the last of the new making into casks.
“Oh, that smells good.” I snif fed  beatifically at the inside of
an e mpty cask; it was one of  the special casks Jamie had
obtained throug h one of Lor d John’ s shipping friends—
charred inside like a normal wh isky cask, but previously used
to store sherry . The sweet mellow ghost of the sherry mingled
with the faint sc ent of char and the hot, raw reek of the new
whisky were together enough to make my head spin
pleasantly .
“A ye, it’ s a small batch, but no bad,” Jamie agreed, inhaling
the aroma like a perfume connoisseur . He lifted his head and
eyed the sky ov erhead; the wind was coming up strong, and
thick clouds were racing past, dark-bellied and threatening.
“There’ s only the three casks,” he said. “If ye think ye might
manage one, Sassenach, I’ll take the others. I should like tohave the m safe, rather than dig them out of a snowbank next
week.”
A half-mile walk in a roaring wind, carrying or rolling a six-
gallon c ask, was  no joke, but he was right about the snow . It
wasn’ t q uite col d enough for sno w yet, but it would be soon. I
sighed, but nodded, and betwee n us, we managed to lug the
casks slowly up to the whisky c ache, hidden among rocks and
ragged grapevines.
I h ad quite regai ned my strength, but even so, every muscle
I had was trembling and jerking in protest by the time we had
finished, and I m ade no objection at all when Jamie made me
sit down to rest before heading back to the house.
“What do you pl an to do with these?” I asked, nodding back
toward the cache. “Keep, or sell?”
He wipe d a flying strand of hair out of his face, squinting
against a blast of flying dust and dead leaves.
“I’ll have to sell one, for the spring seed. W e’ll keep one to
age—and I think perhaps I can put the last to good purpose. If
Bobby H iggins comes again before the snow , I shall send a
half-dozen bottles to Ashe, Harnett, Howe, and a few others—
a w ee token of m y abiding esteem, aye?” He grinned wryly at
me.
“W ell, I’ve heard of worse bon a fides,” I said, amused. It
had taken him a good deal of w ork to worm his way back into
the good graces of the North Carolina Committee of
Correspondence, but several members had begun answering
his letters again—cautiously , but with respect.
“I shouldna think anything important will happen over the
winter ,” he said thoughtfully , rubbing his cold-reddened nose.
“Likely not.” Massachusetts, where most of the uproar had
been taking place, was now occ upied by a General Gage, and
the latest we had  heard was that  he had fortified Boston Neck,
the narrow spit of land that connects the city to the mainland—
which m eant tha t Boston was n ow cut of f from the rest of the
colony , and under seige.I fel t a small pang, thinking of it; I had lived in Boston for
nearly twenty years, and was fond of the city—though I knew
I would not recognize it now .
“John Hancock —he’ s a merchant there—is heading the
Committee of Safety , Ashe says. They’ve voted to recruit
twelve thousand militia, and are looking to purchase five
thousand  mu skets—with the trouble I ha d to find thirty , good
luck to them, is all I can say .”
I laughed, but before I could reply , Jamie stif fened.
“What’ s that?” His head turned sharply , and he laid a hand
on my arm. Sile nced abruptly , I held my breath, listening. The
wind stirred the drying leaves of wild grapevines with a
papery r ustle behind me, and in the distance a murder of crows
passed, squabbling in shrill cries.
Then I heard it , too: a small, desolate, and very human
sound. Jamie was already on his feet, making his way with
care bet ween th e fallen rocks. He ducked beneath the lintel
made by a leaning slab of granite, and I made to follow him.
He stopped abruptly , nearly making me run into him.
“Joseph?” he said incredulously .
I peere d around him as bes t I could. T o my equal
astonishment, it was  Mr . W emyss, sitting hunched on a
boulder , a stone jug between his bony knees. He’d been
crying; his nose and eyes were red, making him look even
more like a white mouse than usual. He was also extremely
drunk.
“Oh,” he said, blinking in dismay at us. “Oh.”
“Are ye … quite well, Joseph?” Jamie came closer ,
extending a hand gingerly , as though afraid that Mr . W emyss
might crack into pieces if touched.
This instinct was sound; when h e touched the little man, Mr .
W emyss’ s face crumpled like paper , and his thin shoulders
began to shake uncontrollably .“I am  so sorry , sir ,” he kept saying, quite dissolved in tears.
“I’m so  sorry!”
Jamie gave me a “do something , Sassenach” look of appeal,
and I knelt sw iftly , putting my arms round Mr . W emyss’ s
shoulders, patting his slender back.
“Now , now ,” I said, giving Jamie a “now what ?” sort of
look over Mr . W emyss’ s matchstick shoulder in return. “I’m
sure it will be all right.”
“Oh, no,” he said, hiccuping. “O h, no, it can’ t.” He turned a
face streaming with woe towar d Jamie. “I can’ t bear it, sir ,
truly I can’ t.”
Mr . W emyss’ s bones felt thin  and brittle, and he was
shivering. He was wearing only a thin shirt and breeches, and
the wind  was beginning to whine through the rocks. Clouds
thickened overh ead, and the lig ht went from the little hollow ,
suddenly , as though a blackout curtain had been dropped.
Jamie unfastened his own cloak and wrapped it rather
awkwardly round Mr . W emyss, then lowered himself carefully
onto another boulder .
“T ell m e the trouble, Joseph,” he said quite gently . “Is
someone dead, then?”
Mr . W emyss sank his face into  his hands, head shaking to
and fro like a metronome. He muttered something, which I
understood to be “Better if she were.”
“Lizzie?” I asked, exchanging a puzzled glance with Jamie.
“Is it Lizzie yo u mean?” She’d been perfectly all right at
breakfast; what on earth—
“First M anfred McGillivray ,” Mr . W emyss said, raising his
face from his hands, “and then Higgins. As though a
degenerate and a murderer were not bad enough—now this!”
Jamie’ s brows shot up and he  looked at me. I shrugged
slightly . The gravel was jabbing sharply into my knees; I rose
stif fly and brushed it away .“Are yo u saying  that Lizzie is, er … in love with someone
… unsuitable?” I asked carefully .
Mr . W emyss shuddered.
“Unsuitable,” he said, in a hollow tone. “Jesus Christ.
Unsuitable!”
I’d never heard Mr . W emyss blaspheme before; it was
unsettling.
He t urned wild eyes on me, loo king like a crazed sparrow ,
huddled in the depths of Jamie’ s cloak.
“I gave up every thing for her!” h e said. “I sold myself—and
gladly!—to save her from dishonor . I left home, left Scotland,
knowing I should never see it more, that I should leave my
bones in  the soil of the stranger s. And yet I’ve said nay word
of reproach to her , my dear wee lassie, for how should it be
her fault ? And now …” He turn ed a hollow , haunted gaze on
Jamie.
“My God, my God. What shall I do?” he whispered. A blast
of wind thundered through the rocks and whipped the cloak
around h im, momentarily obliterating him in a shroud of gray ,
as though distress had quite engulfed him.
I ke pt ti ght hold  of my own cloak, to prevent it being torn
of f me; the wind was strong enough that I nearly lost my
footing. Jamie squinted against the spray of dust and fine
gravel that blasted us, setting his teeth in discomfort. He
wrapped his arms around himself, shivering.
“Is the lass with child, then, J oseph?” he said, obviously
wanting to get to the bottom of things and go home.
Mr . W emyss’ s head popped out of the folds of cloak, fair
hair tou sled into broomstraw . Blinking reddened eyes, he
nodded, then excavated the jug  and, raising it in trembling
hands, took several gulps. I saw the single “X” marked on the
jug; with  his characteristic mod esty , he had taken a jug of the
raw new whisky , not the cask-aged higher quality .Jamie si ghed, reached out a han d, and taking the jug from
him, took a healthy gulp himself.
“Who?” he said, handing it back. “Is it my nephew?”
Mr . W emyss stared at him, owl-eyed.
“Y our nephew?”
“Ian Murray ,” I put in helpfully . “T all brown-haired lad?
T attoos?”
Jamie gave me a look suggesting that I was perhaps not
being qu ite so helpful as I thought, but Mr . W emyss went on
looking blank.
“Ian Murray?” Then the name appeared to penetrate through
the alcoholic fog. “Oh. No. Christ, if it were! I should bless the
lad,” he said fervently .
I exchanged another look with Jamie. This looked like being
serious.
“Joseph,” he said with just a touch of menace. “It’ s cold.”
He w iped his nose on the back o f his hand. “Who’ s debauched
your dau ghter? G ive me his nam e, and I’ll see him wed to her
in th e m orning o r dead at her feet, whichever ye like. But let’ s
do it inside by the fire, aye?”
“Beardsley ,” Mr . W emyss said, in a tone suggesting visions
of utter despair .
“Beardsley?” Jamie repeated. He raised one eyebrow at me.
It w asn’ t what I  would have expected—but hearing it came as
no great shock, either .
“Which Beardsley was it?” he asked, with relative patience.
“Jo? Or Kezzie?”
Mr . W em yss heaved a sigh that  came from the bottoms of
his feet.
“She doesn’ t know ,” he said flatly .
“Christ,” said Jamie involunt arily . He reached for the
whisky again, and drank heavily .“Ahem,” I said, giving him a me aningful look as he lowered
the jug. He su rrendered it to me without comment, and
straightened himself on his boulder , shirt plastered against his
chest by the wind, his hair whipped loose behind him.
“W ell, then,” he said firmly . “W e’ll have the two of them in,
and find out the truth of it.”
“No,” said Mr . W emyss, “we won’ t. They don’ t know ,
either .”
I had just taken a mouthful of raw spirit. At this, I choked,
spluttering whisky down my chin.
“They what ?” I croaked, wiping my face w ith a corner of
my cloak. “Y ou mean … both  of them?”
Mr . W emyss looked at me. Inst ead of replying, though, he
blinked once. Then his eyes rolled up into his head and he fell
headlong of f the boulder , poleaxed.
I MANAGED  T O REST ORE Mr . W emyss to
semiconsciousness, but not to the point of his being able to
walk. Jamie was therefore obliged to carry the little man slung
across h is shou lders like a d eer carcass; no mean feat,
considering the broken ground that lay between the whisky
cache an d the new malting floor , and the wind that pelted us
with bit s of gravel, leaves, and flying pinecones. Clouds had
boiled u p over the shoulder of the mountain, dark and dirty as
laundry suds, and were spreadi ng rapidly across the sky . W e
were going to get drenched, if we didn’ t hurry .
The going became easier once we reached the trail to the
house, but Jamie’ s temper was n ot improved by Mr . W emyss’ s
suddenly coming to at this poin t and vomiting down the front
of hi s sh irt. Afte r a hasty attemp t at swabbing of f the mess, we
reor ganized our strategy , and made our way with Mr . W emyss
precariously balanced between us, each firmly gripping one
elbow as he slipped and stumb led, his spindly knees giving
way at unexpected moments, like Pinocchio with his strings
cut.Jamie w as talki ng to himself v olubly in Gaelic under his
breath during this phase of the journey , but desisted abruptly
when we came into the dooryard. One of the Beardsley twins
was there, catching chickens for  Mrs. Bug before the storm; he
had two of them, held upsid e down by the legs like an
ungainly bouquet of brown and yellow . He stopped when he
saw us, and stared curiously at Mr . W emyss.
“What—” began the boy . He go t no further . Jamie dropped
Mr . W emyss’ s arm, took two strides, and punched the
Beardsley twin in the stomach with suf ficient force that he
doubled over , dropped the chickens, staggered back, and fell
down. The chickens flapped of f in a cloud of scattered
feathers, squawking.
The boy writhed about on the ground, mouth opening and
closing in a vain search for air , but Jamie paid no attention. He
stooped, seized the lad by the  hair , and spoke loudly and
directly into his ear—in case it was Kezzie, I supposed.
“Fetch your brother . T o my study . Now .”
Mr . W emyss had been watching this interesting tableau, one
arm dra ped across my shoulders for support and his mouth
hanging open. It continued to hang open as he turned his head,
following Jamie as he strode back toward us. He blinked,
though, and shut it, as Jamie  seized his other arm and,
removing him neatly from me, propelled him into the house
without a backward glance.
I gazed reproachfully at the Beardsley on the ground.
“How could  you?” I said.
He made soundless goldfish mouths at me, his eyes
completely roun d, then managed a long heeeeee  sound of
inhalation, his face dark purple.
“Jo? What’ s the matter , are ye hurt?” Lizzie came out of the
trees, a pair of chickens clutched by the legs in either hand.
She was frowning worriedly at—well, I supposed it was  Jo; if
anyone could tell the dif ference, it would surely be Lizzie.“No, he’ s not hurt,” I assure d her . “Y et.” I pointed a
monitory finger at her . “Y ou, y oung lady , go and put those
chickens in their coop and then— ” I hesitated, glancing at the
boy on the ground, who had recovered enough breath to gasp
and was  gingerl y sitting up. I didn’ t want to bring her into my
sur gery , not if Jamie and Mr . W emyss were going to be
eviscerating the Beardsleys right across the hall.
“I’ll go with yo u,” I decided hastily , gesturing her away
from Jo. “Shoo.”
“But—” She cast a bewildered g lance at Jo—yes, it was Jo;
he ran a hand through his hair to get it out of his face, and I
saw the scarred thumb.
“He’ s fine,” I said, turning her toward the chicken coop with
a firm hand on her shoulder . “Go.”
I gla nced back, to see that Jo Beardsley had made it to his
feet and, with a hand pressed to his tender middle, was making
of f toward the stable, presumably to fetch his twin as ordered.
I glance d back at Lizzie, givin g her a narrow eye. If Mr .
W emyss had the right end of the stick and she was  pregnant,
she was evidently one of those fortunate persons who doesn’ t
suf fer from morning sickness or the usual digestive symptoms
of early pregnancy; she was, in fact, very healthy-looking.
That in itself sh ould have alerted me, I supposed, pale and
green-stick as she normally was. Now that I looked carefully ,
there se emed to  be a soft pink glow about her , and her pale
blond hair was shiny where it peeped out under her cap.
“How far along are you?” I asked, holding back a branch for
her . She gave m e a quick look, gulped visibly , then ducked
under the branch.
“About four months gone, I think,” she said meekly , not
looking at me. “Um … Da told ye, did he?”
“Y es. Y our poor father ,” I said severely . “Is he right? Both
of the Beardsleys?”She hunched her shoulders a litt le, head bowed, but nodded,
almost imperceptibly .
“What—what will Himself do to them?” she asked, her
voice small and tremulous.
“I really don’ t know .” I doubt ed that Jamie himself had
formed any specific notions— though he had  mentioned
having the miscreant responsible for Lizzie’ s pregnancy dead
at her feet if her father wished it.
Now that I thought, the alternative—having her wed by
morning—was l ikely to be som ewhat more problematic than
simply killing the twins would be.
“I d on’ t know ,” I repeated. W e had reached the coop, a
stoutly built edifice that sheltered under a spreading maple.
Several of the hens, slightly less  stupid than their sisters, were
roosting like huge, ripe fruits in the lower branches, heads
buried in their feathers.
I p ulled  open the door , releasi ng a gust of ripe ammonia
from the  dark interior , and holdi ng my breath against the stink,
pulled the hens from the tree and tossed them brusquely inside.
Lizzie ran into t he woods nearby , snatching chickens out from
under bushes and rushing back to shove them in. Lar ge drops
were beg inning to plummet from the clouds, heavy as pebbles,
making small, audible splats as they struck the leaves above.
“Hurry!” I slammed the door behind the last of the
squawking chick ens, threw the latch, and seized Lizzie by the
arm. Borne on a whoosh of wind, we ran for the house, skirts
whirling up round us like pigeons’ wings.
The summer kitchen was nearest; we burst through the door
just as the rain c ame down with a roar , a solid sheet of water
that struck the tin roof with a sound like anvils falling.
W e stoo d panting inside. Lizzie’ s cap had come of f in flight,
and her plait had  come undone, so that her hair straggled over
her s houlders in strands of shini ng, creamy blond; a noticeable
change from the wispy , flyaway  look she usually shared with
her fath er . If I had seen her without her cap, I should haveknown at once. I took time to  recover my breath, trying to
decide what on earth to say to her .
She was making a great to-do o ver tidying herself, panting
and pulling at her bodice, smoo thing her skirts—all the while
trying not to meet my eye.
W ell, th ere was one question th at had been niggling at me
since M r . W emy ss’ s shocking revelation; best to get that one
out of the way  at once. The  initial roar of the rain had
slackened to a regular drumbeat; it was loud, but conversation
was at least possible.
“Lizzie.” She looked up from her skirt-settling, slightly
startled. “T ell me the truth,” I said. I put my hands on either
side of her face , looking earnestly into her pale blue eyes.
“W as it rape?”
She blinked, the look of absolute amazement that suf fused
her featu res more eloquent than any spoken denial could have
been.
“Oh, no, ma’am!” she said jus t as earnestly . “Y e couldna
think Jo or Kezzie would do suc h a thing?” Her small pink lips
twitched slightly . “What, did ye think they maybe took it in
turns to hold me down?”
“No,” I said tart ly , releasing her . “But I thought I’d best ask,
just in case.”
I h adn’ t really th ought so. But t he Beardsleys were such an
odd mix of the civil and the feral that it was impossible to say
definitely what  they might or might not do.
“But it was  … er …  both of them? That’ s what your father
said. Poor man,” I added, with a tone of some reproach.
“Oh.” S he cast down her pale lashes, pretending to find a
loose thread on her skirt. “Ummm … well, aye, it was. I do
feel som ething terrible about shaming Da so. And it wasna
really that we did it a-purpose …”
“Elizabeth W emyss,” I said, with no little asperity , “rape
aside—and we’v e ruled that out—it is not possible to engagein sexua l relations with two men without meaning to. One,
maybe, but not two. Come to that …” I hesitated, but vulgar
curiosity was simply too much. “Both at once ?”
She did look shocked at that, which was something of a
relief.
“Oh, no, ma’am! It was … I mean, I didna ken that it …”
She trailed of f, quite pink in the face.
I p ulled two stoo ls out from und er the table and pushed one
toward her .
“Sit down,” I sa id, “and tell m e about it. W e aren’ t going
anywhere for a bit,” I added, glancing through the half-open
door at the downpour outside. A silver haze rose knee-high
over the yard, as the raindro ps struck the grass in small
explosions of mist, and the sha rp smell of it washed through
the room.
Lizzie hesitated,  but took the stool; I could see her making
up her mind to it that there was  really nothing to do now but
explain—assuming that the situation could  be explained.
“Y ou, um , said you didn’ t know ,” I said, trying to of fer her
an open ing. “Y ou mean—you thought it was only one twin,
but they , er , fooled you?”
“W ell, aye,” she said, and took  a huge breath of the chilly
air . “Som ething like that. See, ‘twas when you and Himself
went to Bethaba ra for the new goat. Mrs. Bug was down wi’
the lumbago, and it was only m e and Da in the house—but
then he went down to W oolam’ s  for to fetch the flour , and so it
was just me.”
“T o Bethabara? That was six m onths ago! And you’re four
months gone—you mean all this time you’ve been—well,
never mind. What happened, then?”
“The fever ,” she said simply . “It came back.”
She had been gathering firewood when the first malarial
chill struck her . Recognizing it for what it was, she haddropped the wood and tried to  reach the house, only to fall
halfway there, her muscles going slack as string.
“I la y upon the ground,” she explained, “and I could feel the
fever comin’ for me. It’ s like a great beast, aye? I can feel it
seize me in its jaws and bite—’ tis like my blood runs hot and
then cold, and t he teeth of it sink into my bones. I can feel it
set in then, to tr y to break them in twa, and suck the marrow .”
She shuddered in memory .
One of the Beardsleys—she tho ught it was Kezzie, but had
been in no state of mind to ask—had discovered her lying in a
disheveled heap in the dooryard. He’d run to fetch his brother ,
and the two of them had raised her , carried her between them
into the house, and fetched her upstairs to her bed.
“My teeth were clackin’ so har d together I thought they’d
break, s urely , but I told them to fetch the ointment, wi’ the
gallberries, the ointment ye’d made.”
They had rummaged through the sur gery cupboard until
they fou nd it, and then, frantic a s she burned hotter and hotter ,
had stripped of f her shoes and s tockings and begun to rub the
ointment into her hands and feet.
“I to ld them—I told them they  must rub it all over ,” she
said, he r cheeks going a deep peony . She looked down,
fiddling with a s trand of hair . “I was—well, I was quite oot my
mind wi’ the fev er , ma’am, truly I was. But I kent I needed my
medicine bad.”
I no dded, beginning to understand. I didn’ t blame her; I’d
seen the malaria overpower her . And so far as that went, she’d
done the right th ing; she did need the medicine, and couldn’ t
have managed to apply it herself.
Frantic, the two boys had done a s she’d said, got her clothes
awkwardly of f, and rubbed the ointment thoroughly into every
inch of her naked body .
“I w as g oin’ in and oot a bit,” she explained, “wi’ the fever
dreams walkin’ oot my heid and about the room, so it’ s all a
bit mixed, what I recall. But I do think one o’ the lads said tothe o ther as he was getting the ointment all over , and would
spoil his shirt, best take it of f.”
“I see,” I said, seeing vividly . “And then …”
And then she h ad quite lost track of what was happening,
save tha t whene ver she drifted to the surface of the fever , the
boys were still th ere, talking to her and each other , the murmur
of their voices a small anchor to  reality and their hands never
leaving her , stroking and smoothing and the sharp smell of
gallberries cutti ng through the woodsmoke from the hearth
and the scent of beeswax from the candle.
“I felt … safe,”  she said, strugg ling to express it. “I dinna
remember much in particular , only opening my eyes once and
seein’ his chest right before my face, and the dark curlies all
round h is paps, and them wee and brown and wrinkled, like
raisins.” She turned her face to  me, eyes still rounded at the
memory . “I can still see that, like as it was right in front o’ me
this minute. That’ s queer , no?”
“Y es,” I agreed, though in fa ct it was not; there was
something about  high fever that blurred reality but at the same
time could sear certain images  so deeply into the mind that
they never left. “And then … ?”
Then she had b egun to shake violently with chills, which
neither more quilts nor a hot stone at her feet had helped. And
so one of the boys, in desperation, had crawled under the quilts
beside h er and held her agains t him, trying to drive out the
cold fro m her bones with his own heat—which, I thought
cynically , must have been considerable, at that point.
“I dinna  ken which it was, or if it was the same one all
night, or  if they changed now and then, but whenever I woke,
he was there, wi’ his arms about me. And sometimes he’d put
back the blanket and rub more ointment down my back and,
and, round …” She stumbled, b lushing. “But when I woke in
the morning, the fever was go ne, like it always is on the
second day .”
She looked at me, pleading for understanding.“D’ye k en how that is, ma’am, when a great fever ’ s broken?
‘T is the  same every time, so I ’m thinking it may be so for
everyone. But it’ s … peaceful. Y our limbs are sae heavy ye
canna think of moving, but ye dinna much care. And
everything ye see—all the wee things ye take nay notice of
day by day—ye notice, and they ’re beautiful,” she said simply .
“I think sometimes that will be how it is when I’m dead. I
shall just wake, and everything will be like that, peaceful and
beautiful—save I shall be able to move.”
“But yo u woke this time, and couldn’ t,” I said. “And the
boy—whichever it was—he was still there, with you?”
“It was Jo,” she said, nodding. “He spoke to me, but I didna
pay much mind to what he sa id, and I dinna think he did,
either .”
She bit her lowe r lip momentarily , the small teeth sharp and
white.
“I—I hadna done it before, ma’a m. But I came close, a time
or two wi’ Man fred. And closer still wi’ Bobby Higgins. But
Jo h adna ever ev en kissed a lass , nor his brother had, either . So
ye s ee, ‘ twas rea lly my fault, fo r I kent well enough what was
happening, but … we were both slippery wi’ the ointment,
still, and naked under the quilts, and it … happened.”
I nodded, understanding precisely and in detail.
“Y es, I can see how it happened, all right. But then it … er
… went on happening, I suppose?”
Her lips pursed up and she went very pink again.
“W ell … aye. It did. It—it feels sae nice,  ma’am,” she
whispered, leaning a little toward me as though imparting an
important secret.
I rubbed a knuckle hard across my lips.
“Um, yes. Quite. But—”
The Beardsleys had washed the sheets at her direction, and
there we re no incriminating traces left by the time her father
returned, two days later . The ga llberries had done their work,and while she was still weak and tired, she told Mr . W emyss
only that she had had a mild attack.
Meanwhile, she  met with Jo at every opportunity , in the
deep summer grass behind the d airy shed, in the fresh straw in
the s table—and when it rained, now and then on the porch of
the Beardsleys’ cabin.
“I woul dna do it inside, for the stink o’ the hides,” she
explained. “But  we put an old quilt on the porch, so as I
shouldna have splinters in my backside, and the rain comin’
down ju st a foot away …” She looked wistfully through the
open door , where the rain had softened into a steady whisper ,
the needles trembling on the pine trees as it fell.
“And what about Kezzie? Wher e was he, while all this was
going on?” I asked.
“Ah. W ell, Kezzie,” she said, taking a deep breath.
They ha d made love in the stab le, and Jo had left her lying
on her cloak in  the straw , watching as he rose and dressed
himself. Then he had kissed her  and turned to the door . Seeing
that he had for gotten his canteen, she called softly after him.
“And he didna answer , nor turn  round,” she said. “And it
came to me sudden, as he didna hear me.”
“Oh, I see,” I said softly . “Y ou, um, couldn’ t tell the
dif ference?”
She gave me a direct blue look.
“I can now , ” she said.
In th e beginning, though, sex wa s so new—and the brothers
both suf ficiently inexperienced—that she hadn’ t noticed any
dif ferences.
“How lo ng … ?” I asked. “I mean, do you have any idea
when they , er … ?”
“Not for certain,” she admitted. “But if I was to guess about
it, I thin k the first time it was Jo—no, I ken for sure that wasJo, for I saw his thumb—but t he second time, it was likely
Kezzie. They share, ken?”
They did  share—everything. And so it was the most natural
thing in the world—to all thre e of them, evidently—that Jo
should wish his brother to share in this new marvel.
“I k en it seems  … strange,” she said, shrugging a little.
“And I suppose  I ought to have said something, or done
something—but I couldna think what. And really”—she raised
her e yes to me, helpless—”it did na seem wr ong  at all. They’re
dif ferent, aye, but at the same time, they’re sae close to each
other … well, i t’ s just as if I was touching the one lad, and
talking to him—only he’ s got the twa bodies.”
“T wa bo dies,” I said, a little bleakly . “W ell, yes. There’ s just
the d if ficulty , you see, the two bodies part.” I eyed her closely .
Despite the history of malaria and her fine-boned build, she
had defi nitely filled out; she had  a plump little bosom swelling
over the edge of  her bodice, and , while she was sitting on it so
I cou ldn’ t tell fo r sure, very like ly a bottom to match. The only
real wonder was that it had taken her three months to fall
pregnant.
As thou gh reading my mind, s he said, “I took the seeds,
aye? Th e ones you and Miss B ree take. I had a store put by ,
from when I was betrothed to Manfred; Miss Bree gave me
them. I meant to gather more, but I didna always remember ,
and—” She shrugged again, putt ing her hands across her belly .
“Whereupon you proceeded to say nothing,” I observed.
“Did your father find out by accident?”
“No, I told him,” she said. “I thought I best had, before I
began to show . Jo and Kezzie came with me.”
This explained Mr . W emyss’ s resort to strong drink, all
right. Perhaps we should have brought the jug back with us.
“Y our p oor fath er ,” I said again , but abstractedly . “Had the
three of you worked out any sort of plan?”
“W ell, n o,” she admitted. “I hadna told the lads I was in a
family way ‘til t his morning, either . They seemed taken back abit,” she added, biting her lip again.
“I d aresay .” I g lanced outside; it was still raining, but the
downpour had slackened momentarily , dimpling the puddles
on the path. I rubbed a hand over my face, feeling suddenly
rather tired.
“Which one will you choose?” I asked.
She gave me a sudden, startle d look, the blood draining
from her cheeks.
“Y ou can’ t have them both, you know ,” I said gently . “It
doesn’ t work that way .”
“Why?” she said, trying for  boldness—but her voice
trembled. “It’ s no harming anyo ne. And it’ s no one’ s business
but ours.”
I began to feel the need of a stif f drink myself.
“Hoho,” I said. “T ry telling you r father that. Or Mr . Fraser .
In a big city , perhaps you could get away with it. But here?
Everything that happens is everybody’ s business, and you
know it.  Hiram Crombie would stone you for fornication as
soon as look at y ou, if he found  out about it.” W ithout waiting
for a reply , I got to my feet.
“Now , then. W e’ll go back to the house and see whether
they’re both still alive. Mr . Fraser may have taken matters into
his own hands, and solved the problem for you.”
THE TW INS WERE STILL ALIVE, but didn’ t look as though
they were particularly glad of the fact. They sat shoulder to
shoulder in the center of Jamie’ s study , pressed together as
though trying to reunite into a single being.
Their heads jerked toward the door in unison, looks of alarm
and concern mingling with joy at seeing Lizzie. I had her by
the arm, but wh en she saw the twins, she pulled loose and
hurried to them with a small exclamation, putting an arm about
each boy’ s neck to draw him to her bosom.I saw that one of the boys had a fresh black eye, just
beginning to puf f and swell; I  supposed it must be Kezzie,
though I didn’ t know whether this was Jamie’ s notion of
fairness, or merely a convenie nt means of ensuring that he
could tell which twin was which while talking to them.
Mr . W emyss was also alive, thou gh he didn’ t look any more
pleased about it than the Beard sleys. He was red-eyed, pale,
and still  slightly green about the gills, but was at least upright
and reasonably sober , seated beside Jamie’ s table. There was a
cup of chicory c of fee in front of him—I could smell it—but it
seemed so far untouched.
Lizzie knelt on t he floor , still clinging to the boys, the three
heads drawn together like the lobes of a clover leaf as they
murmured to one another .
“Are ye hurt?” s he was saying, and “Are ye all right?” they
were ask ing, an absolute tangle of hands and arms meanwhile
searching, patting, stroking, and embracing. They reminded
me of nothing so much as a tenderly solicitous octopus.
I gla nced at Jam ie, who was viewing this behavior with a
jaundiced eye. Mr . W emyss em itted a low moan, and buried
his head in his hands.
Jamie cleared his throat with a low Scottish noise of infinite
menace, and the proceedings in the middle of the room
stopped as though hit with som e sort of paralyzing death ray .
V ery slowly , Lizzie turned her h ead to look at him, chin held
high, her arms still locked protectively about the Beardsleys’
necks.
“Sit down, lass,” Jamie said with relative mildness, nodding
toward an empty stool.
Lizzie r ose, and turned, her ey es still fixed on him. She
made no  move to take the of fered stool, though. Instead, she
walked deliberately round behind the twins and stood between
them, putting her hands upon their shoulders.
“I’ll stand, sir ,” she said, her voice high and thin with fear ,
but filled with determination.  Like clockwork, each twinreached up and g rasped the hand upon his shoulder , their faces
assuming simila r expressions of mingled apprehension and
steadfastness.
Jamie wisely decided not to m ake an issue of it, instead
nodding to me in an of fhand way . I took the stool myself,
surprisingly glad to sit down.
“The lad s and I have been talking wi’ your father ,” he said,
addressing Lizzi e. “I take it it’ s true, what ye told your Da? Y e
are with child, and ye dinna ken which is the father?”
Lizzie opened her mouth, but n o words came out. Instead,
she bobbed her head in an awkward nod.
“A ye. W ell, then, ye’ll need to be wed, and the sooner the
better ,” he said, in a matter -of- fact tone of voice. “The lads
couldna quite decide which of them it should be, so it’ s up to
you, lass. Which one?”
All six hands tightened in a flash of white knuckles. It was
really quite fascinating—and I couldn’ t help feeling sorry for
the three of them.
“I can’ t,” Lizzie whispered. The n she cleared her throat and
tried aga in. “I can’ t,” she repeated more strongly . “I don’ t—I
don’ t want to choose. I love them both.”
Jamie lo oked down at his claspe d hands for a moment, lips
pursing as he thought. Then he raised his head and looked at
her , very  levelly . I saw her draw herself upright, lips pressed
together , trembling but resolute, determined to defy him.
Then, with truly diabolical timing, Jamie turned to Mr .
W emyss.
“Joseph?” he said mildly .
Mr . W emyss had been sitting transfixed, eyes on his
daughter , pale hands wrapped ro und his cof fee cup. He didn’ t
hesitate, though, or even blink.
“Elizabeth,” he said, his voice very soft, “do you love me ?”Her facade of defiance broke like a dropped egg, tears
welling from her eyes.
“Oh, Da!” she said. She let g o the twins and ran to her
father , w ho stoo d up in time to clasp her tightly in his arms,
cheek p ressed to her hair . She clung to him, sobbing, and I
heard a brief sigh from one of the twins, though I couldn’ t tell
which one.
Mr . W emyss swayed gently with her , patting and soothing
her , his murmured words indistinguishable from her sobs and
broken utterances.
Jamie was watching the twins—not without sympathy .
Their hands were knotted together , and Kezzie’ s teeth were
fixed in his lower lip.
Lizzie separate d herself from her father , snif fling and
groping vaguely  for a handker chief. I pulled one from my
pocket, got up, a nd gave it to her . She blew her nose hard, and
wiped her eyes, trying not to look at Jamie; she knew very
well where the danger lay .
It w as, however , a fairly small room, and Jamie was not a
person who could be easily ignored, even in a lar ge one.
Unlike my sur gery , the window s of the study were small and
placed h igh in the wall, which  gave the room under normal
circumstances a pleasant dim coziness. At the moment, with
the rain still coming down outside, a gray light filled the room
and the air was chill.
“It’ s no a matter of whom ye love, now , lass,” Jamie said
very gently . “Not even your fa ther .” He nodded toward her
stomach. “Y e’ve a child in your belly . Nothing else matters,
but t o do  right by it. And that doesna mean painting its mother
a whore, aye?”
Her cheeks flamed, a patchy crimson.
“I’m not a whore!”
“I didna say ye  were,” Jamie replied calmly . “But others
will, and it gets around what ye’ve been up to, lass. Spreadingyour leg s for two men, and married to neither of them? And
now with a wean, and ye canna name its father?”
She looked angrily away from him—and saw her own
father , h ead bowed, his own cheeks darkening in shame. She
made a small, h eartbroken sound, and buried her face in her
hands.
The twins stirred uneasily , glanc ing at each other , and Jo got
his feet under h im to rise—then caught a look of wounded
reproach from Mr . W emyss, and changed his mind.
Jamie sighed heavily and rubbed a knuckle down the bridge
of his nose. He stood then, stoo ped to the hearth, and pulled
two straws from the basket of kindling. Holding these in his
fist, he held them out to the twins.
“Short straw weds her ,” he said with resignation.
The twins gaped at him, op en-mouthed. Then Kezzie
swallowed visibly , closed his eyes, and plucked a straw ,
gingerly , as though it might be attached to something
explosive. Jo kept his eyes open, but didn’ t look at the straw
he’d drawn; his eyes were fixed on Lizzie.
Everyone seemed to exhale at once, looking at the straws.
“V erra well, then. Stand up,” Jamie said to Kezzie, who held
the short one. Looking dazed, he did so.
“T ake her hand,” Jamie told him patiently . “Now , d’ye
swear before these witnesses”—he nodded at me and Mr .
W emyss—”that ye take Elizabeth W emyss as your wife?”
Kezzie nodded, then cleared his throat and drew himself up.
“I do, so,” he said firmly .
“And do you, ye wee besom, accept Keziah—ye ar e
Keziah?” he asked, squinting dubiously at the twin. “A ye, all
right, Keziah. Y e’ll take him as your husband?”
“A ye,” Lizzie said, sounding hopelessly confused.
“Good,” Jamie said briskly . “Y ou’re handfast. Directly we
find a priest, we’ll have it properly blessed, but ye’re married.”He looked at Jo, who had risen to his feet.
“And you,” he said firmly , “ye ’ll leave. T onight. Y e’ll not
come back ‘til the child is born.”
Jo w as white to the lips, but n odded. He had both hands
pressed to his body—not where Jamie had hit him, but higher ,
over his  heart. I felt a sharp answering pain in the same place,
seeing his face.
“W ell, then.” Jamie took a deep breath, his shoulders
slumping a little. “Joseph—have ye still got the marriage
contract ye drew for your daughter and young McGillivray?
Fetch it out, aye, and we’ll change the name.”
Looking like a snail poking its head out after a
thunderstorm, Mr . W emyss nod ded cautiously . He looked at
Lizzie, still standing hand-in-ha nd with her new bridegroom,
the two of them resembling Lot and Mrs. Lot, respectively .
Mr . W emyss patted her softly on  the shoulder , and hurried out,
his feet tapping on the stairs.
“Y ou’ll need a fresh candle, w on’ t you?” I said to Jamie,
tilting my head meaningfully toward Lizzie and the twins. The
stub in his cand lestick had half an inch to go, but I thought it
only decent to give them a few moments of privacy .
“Oh? Oh, aye,” he said, catching  my meaning. He coughed.
“I’ll, ah, come and get it.”
The mo ment we entered my sur gery , he closed the door ,
leaned against it, and let his head fall, shaking it.
“Oh, God,” he said.
“Poor things,” I said, with some sympathy . “I mean—you
do have to feel sorry for them.”
“I do ?” He snif f ed at his shirt, which had dried but still had
a dis tinct stain o f vomit down the front, then straightened up,
stretching ‘til his back creaked. “A ye, I suppose I do,” he
admitted. “But—oh, God! Did she tell ye how it happened?”
“Y es. I’ll tell you the gory details later .” I heard Mr .
W emyss’ s feet coming down the stairs. I took down a freshpair of candles from the array t hat hung near the ceiling and
held them out, s tretching the long wick that joined them. “Do
you have a knife handy?”
His hand went automatically t o his waist, but he wasn’ t
wearing his dirk.
“No. There’ s a penknife on my desk, though.”
He open ed the door just as Mr . W emyss reached the of fice.
Mr . W emyss’ s  exclamation  of shock reached me
simultaneously with the smell of blood.
Jamie pushed Mr . W emyss unceremoniously aside, and I
rushed in after him, heart in my throat.
The three of the m were standing by the desk, close together .
A s pray of fre sh blood stained the desk, and Kezzie was
holding my bloodied handkerchief wrapped round his hand.
He l ooked up at Jamie, his face ghostly in the guttering light.
His teeth were gritted tight together , but he managed a smile.
A small movement caught my eye, and I saw Jo, carefully
holding the blade of Jamie’ s penknife over the candle flame.
Acting a s though  no one was there, he took his brother ’ s hand,
pulled of f the handkerchief, and pressed the hot metal against
the raw oval of the wound on Kezzie’ s thumb.
Mr . W em yss made a small chok ing noise, and the smell of
seared flesh mixed with the scent of rain. Kezzie drew breath
deeply , then let it out, and smiled crookedly at Jo.
“Godspeed, Brother ,” he said, his voice a little loud and flat.
“Much happiness to you, Brother ,” Jo said—in the same
voice.
Lizzie stood between them, small and disheveled, her
reddened eyes fixed on Jamie. And smiled.7 4
SO ROMANTIC
B RIANNA DROVE THE LITTLE CAR slowly up the slope
of the quilt over  Roger ’ s leg, ac ross his stomach, and into the
center of his chest, where he captured both the car and her
hand, giving her a wry grin.
“That’ s a really good car ,” she said, pulling her hand loose
and rolling comfortably onto her side beside him. “All four
wheels turn. What kind is it? A  Morris Minor , like that little
orange thing you had in Scotland? That was the cutest thing I
ever saw , but I never understood how you managed to squeeze
into it.”
“W ith talcum powder ,” he assur ed her . He lifted the toy and
set a  front whee l spinning with a  flick of his thumb. “A ye, it is
a good one, isn’ t it? It isn’ t really meant to be a particular
model, but I sup pose I was remembering that Ford Mustang of
yours. Remember driving down out of the mountains that
time?” H is eyes softened with memory , the green of them
nearly black in the dim light of the banked fire.
“I do. I nearly drove of f the road when you kissed me at
eighty-five miles per hour .”
She mo ved closer to him by reflex, nudging him with a
knee. H e rolled obligingly to f ace her , and kissed her again,
meanwhile running the car swiftly backward down the length
of her spine and over the curve of her buttocks. She yelped and
squirmed against him, trying to escape the tickling wheels,
then punched him in the ribs.
“Cut that out!”
“I thought ye found speed erotic. V room,” he murmured,
steering the toy up her arm—and suddenly down the neck of
her s hift. She gr abbed for the ca r , but he snatched it away , thenplunged his hand under the covers, running the wheels down
her thigh—then madly up again.
A furiou s wrestling match for possession of the car ensued,
which e nded w ith both of them  on the floor in a tangle of
bedding and nightclothes, gasping for breath and helpless with
giggling.
“Ssh! Y ou’ll wake up Jemmy!” She heaved and wriggled,
trying to get out  from under Roger ’ s weight. Secure in his fifty
pounds’ advantage, he merely relaxed on top of her , pinning
her to the floor .
“Y ou couldn’ t wake him with ca nnon fire,” Roger said, with
a c ertain ty born of experience. It was true; once past the stage
of w aking to be fed every few ho urs, Jem had always slept like
a particularly comatose log.
She subsided, puf fing hair out of her eyes and biding her
time.
“Do you  think you’ll ever go anywhere at eighty-five miles
per hour again?”
“Only if I fall of f the edge of  a very deep gor ge. Y e’re
naked, did ye know that?”
“W ell, so are you!”
“A ye, but I started out that way . Where’ s the car?”
“I have no idea,” she lied. It wa s, in fact, under the small of
her b ack, and ve ry uncomfortable, but she wasn’ t about to give
him any further advantages. “What do you want it for?”
“Oh, I was goi ng to explore the terrain a bit,” he said,
raising himself on one elbow a nd walking his fingers slowly
across th e upper  slope of one breast. “I suppose I could do it
on f oot, though. T akes more tim e, but ye do enjoy the scenery
more. They say .”
“Mmm.” He could hold her down with his weight, but
couldn’ t restrain her arms. She extended one index finger , and
placed the nail of it precisely  on his nipple, making him
breathe in deeply . “Did you have  a long journey in mind?” Sheglanced at the small shelf near  the bed, where she kept her
contraceptive materials.
“Long enough.” He followed her glance, then looked back
to meet her eyes, a question in his own.
She wriggled to make he rself more comfortable,
unobtrusively dislodging the miniature car .
“They say a journey of a thousand miles begins with a
single st ep,” she  said, and raisin g her head, put her mouth on
his nipp le, and closed her teeth gently . A moment later , she let
go.
“Be quiet,” she said reproachfully . “Y ou’ll wake up
Jemmy .”
“WHERE ARE YOUR SCISSORS? I’m cutting it of f.”
“I’m not  telling you. I like it long.” She pushed the soft dark
hair bac k from his face and kiss ed the end of his nose, which
appeared to disconcert him slightly . He smiled, though, and
kissed h er briefly back before s itting up, swiping the hair out
of his face with one hand.
“That can’ t be comfortable,” he said, eyeing the cradle.
“Surely I should move him to his own bed?”
Brianna glanced up at the crad le from her position on the
floor . Jemmy , aged four , had long since graduated to a trundle
bed, but now an d then insisted upon sleeping in his cradle for
old time s’ sake, wedging himself stubbornly into it, despite the
fact that  he couldn’ t get all fou r limbs and his head inside at
once. He was in visible at the moment, save for two chubby
bare legs sticking straight up in the air at one end.
He w as getting so big, she thou ght. He couldn’ t quite read
yet, but knew all his letters, and could count to a hundred and
write his name. And he knew how to load a gun; his
grandfather had taught him.
“Do we tell him?” she asked suddenly . “And if so, when?”Roger must have been thinking something along the same
lines, for he appeared to understand exactly what she meant.
“Christ, how do you tell a kid so mething like that?” he said.
He rose and pi cked up a handful of bedding, shaking it in
apparent hopes of finding the leather string with which he
bound his hair .
“W ouldn’ t you tell a kid if he w ere adopted?” she objected,
sitting u p and running both hands through her own bountiful
hair . “Or if there’ s some family scandal, like his father ’ s not
dead, he ’ s in prison? If you tell them early , it doesn’ t mean all
that much to the m, I don’ t think ; they’re comfortable with it as
they get older . If they find out later , it’ s a shock.”
He gave her a wry , sidelong look. “Y ou’d know .”
“So wou ld you.”  She spoke dryl y , but she felt the echo of it,
even now . Disbelief, anger , denial—and then the sudden
collapse of her w orld as she began, against her will, to believe.
The sense of hollowness and abandonment—and the sense of
black rage and betrayal at discovering how much of what she
had taken for granted was a lie.
“At leas t for you, it wasn’ t a c hoice,” she said, squirming
into a more com fortable position against the edge of the bed.
“Nobody knew about you; nobody could  have told you what
you were—but didn’ t.”
“Oh, and ye think they should have told you about the time
travel early on? Y our parents? ” He lifted one black brow ,
cynically amused. “I can see the notes coming home from your
school— Brianna has a m ost cr eative imagination, but should
be encouraged to r ecognize situations wher e it is not
appr opriate to employ it. ”
“Ha.” She kicked away the rem aining tangle of clothes and
bedding. “I went to a Catholic school. The nuns would have
called it  lying, and put a stop to it, period. Where’ s my shift?”
She had wriggled completely out of it in the struggle, and
while she was still warm fr om their struggle, she felt
uncomfortably exposed, even in the dim shadows of the room.“Here it is.” He plucked a wad of linen from the mess and
shook it out. “D o you?” he repeated, looking up at her with
one brow raised.
“Think they should have told me? Y es. And no,” she
admitted reluctantly . She reached for the shift and pulled it
over her  head. “I mean—I see why they didn’ t. Daddy didn’ t
believe it, to start with. And what he did  bel ieve … well,
whatever it was, he did ask Ma ma to let me think he was my
real fath er . She gave him her w ord; I guess I don’ t think she
should h ave bro ken it, no.” T o the best of her knowledge, her
mother had broken her word only once—unwillingly , but to
staggering ef fect.
She smoothed the worn linen o ver her body and fished for
the ends of the drawstring that gathered the neck. She was
covered now , but felt just as mu ch exposed as if she were still
naked. Roger was sitting on the mattress, methodically
shaking out the blankets, but his eyes were still fixed on her ,
green and questioning.
“It was still a lie,” she burst out. “I had a right to know!”
He nodded slowly .
“Mmphm.” He picked up a rope of twisted sheet and began
unwinding it. “A ye, well. I can see telling a kid he’ s adopted or
his dad’ s in pri son. This is maybe more along the lines of
telling a kid his father murdered  his mother when he found her
screwing the postie and six good friends in the kitchen,
though. Maybe it doesn’ t mean that much to him if you tell
him early on—but it’ s definitely going to get the attention of
his friends when he starts telling them. ”
She bit her lip, feeling unexpec tedly cross and prickly . She
hadn’ t thought her own feelings  were still so near the surface,
and didn’ t like either the fact t hat they were—or that Roger
could see that they were.
“W ell …  yes.” She glanced at the cradle. Jem had moved;
he w as c urled up  like a hedgeho g now , with his face pressed to
his k nees, and nothing visible save the curve of his bottomunder his nightshirt, rising over the edge of the cradle like the
moon ri sing above the horizon. “Y ou’re right. W e’d have to
wait until he’ s o ld enough to realize that he can’ t tell people;
that it’ s a secret.”
The leat her thon g fell out of a s haken quilt. He bent to pick
it up, dark hair falling round his face.
“W ould ye want to tell Jem someday that I’m not his real
father?” he asked quietly , not looking at her .
“Roger!” All her crossness disa ppeared in a flood of panic.
“I woul dn’ t do that in a hundred million years! Even if I
thought it was t rue,” she added hastily , “and I don’ t. Roger , I
don’ t! I know y ou’re his father .” She sat down beside him,
gripping his arm ur gently . He smiled, a little crookedly , and
patted her hand—but he wouldn ’ t meet her eyes. He waited a
moment, then moved, gently disengaging himself in order to
tie up his hair .
“What y e said, though. Has he n ot got a right to know who
he is?”
“That’ s not—it’ s dif ferent.” It was; and yet it wasn’ t. The
act that had resu lted in her own conception hadn’ t been rape—
but it had been just as unintended. On the other hand, there
had been no doubt, either: both—well, all three—of her
parents had known that she was  Jamie Fraser ’ s child, beyond
doubt.
W ith Jem … she looked again  at the cradle, instinctively
wanting to find some stamp, some undeniable clue to his
paternity . But he looked like her , and like her father , in terms
both of coloring  and feature. H e was big for his age, long-
limbed a nd broad-backed—but so were both of the men who
might have fathered him. And both, damn them, had green
eyes.
“I’m not telling him that,” she said firmly . “Not ever , and
neither are you. Y ou ar e  h is father , in any way that ma tters.
And there wouldn’ t be any good reason for him to even know
that Stephen Bonnet exists.”“Save that he does  exist,” Roger pointed out. “And he
thinks the wean is his. What if they should meet someday?
When Jem’ s older , I mean.”
She had not grown up with the habit of crossing herself at
moments of stress as her father and cousin did—but she did it
now , making him laugh.
“I am not being funny ,” she said , sitting up straight. “It’ s not
happening. And  if it did—if I ever saw Stephen Bonnet
anywhere near my child, I’d … well, next time, I’ll aim
higher , that’ s all.”
“Y e’re d etermined to give the lad a good story for his
classmates, aren’ t you?” He spoke lightly , teasing, and she
relaxed a little, hoping that she  had succeeded in easing any
doubt h e might have about what she might tell Jemmy
regarding his paternity .
“Okay , but he does have to know the rest, sooner or later . I
don’ t want him to find out by accident.”
“Y ou didna find out by accident. Y our mother did  tell you.”
And look  wher e we ar e now .  That bit went unspoken, but rang
loud inside her head, as he gave her a long, straight look.
If sh e hadn’ t fe lt compelled to come back, go through the
stones to find h er real father—none of them would be here
now . They’d be safe in the t wentieth century , perhaps in
Scotland, perhaps in America—but in a place where children
didn’ t die of diarrhea and sudden fevers.
In a place where sudden danger didn’ t lurk behind every
tree and  war wasn’ t hiding und er the bushes. A place where
Roger ’ s voice still sang pure and strong.
But maybe—just maybe—she wouldn’ t have Jem.
“I’m sorry ,” she said, feeling ch oked. “I know it’ s my fault
—all of  it. If I hadn’ t come back …” She reached out,
tentatively , and touched the ragged scar that circled his throat.
He caught her hand and pulled it down.“Christ,” he said softly , “if I could have gone anywhere to
find either of my parents—including hell—Brianna, I would
have done it.” He looked up, his eyes bright green, and
squeezed her hand hard. “If the re’ s anyone in this world who
understands that, hen, it’ s me.”
She squ eezed back with both hands, hard. Relief that he
didn’ t b lame her loosened the c ords of her body , but sorrow
for his own losses—and hers—still filled throat and chest,
heavy as wet feathers, and it hurt to breathe.
Jemmy stirred, rose suddenly upright, then fell back, still
sound as leep, so that one arm flopped out of the cradle, limp
as a noodle. Sh e’d frozen at hi s sudden movement, but now
relaxed and rose to try to tuck  the arm back in. Before she
could reach the cradle, though, a knock came at the door .
Roger g rabbed hastily for his sh irt with one hand, his knife
with the other .
“Who is it?” she called, heart thumping. People didn’ t pay
calls after dark, save in emer gency .
“It’ s me , Miss Bree,” said Lizzie’ s voice through the wood.
“Can w e come in, please?” She sounded excited, but not
alarmed. Brianna waited to be sure that Roger was decently
covered, then lifted the heavy bolt.
Her first thought was that Lizz ie looked excited, too; the
little bondmaid’ s cheeks were flushed as apples, the color
visible even in the darkness of the stoop.
“W e” w as herself and the two Beardsleys, who bowed and
nodded, murmuring apologies for the lateness of the hour .
“Not at all,” Brianna said automatically , glancing around for
a s hawl. Not only was her linen shift thin and ratty , it had an
incriminating stain on the front. “Er , come in!”
Roger c ame fo rward to greet the unexpected guests,
magnificently disregarding the fact that he was wearing
nothing but a shirt, and she scuttled hastily into the dark corner
behind h er loom, groping for th e ancient shawl she kept there
as comfort for her legs while working.Safely w rapped in this, she kic ked a log to break the fire,
and stooped to light a candle from the fiery coals. In the
wavering glow of the candlelight, she could see that the
Beardsleys were  dressed with unaccustomed neatness, their
hair combed and firmly plaited,  each with a clean shirt and a
leather v est; they didn’ t own co ats. Lizzie was dressed in her
best, too—in fact, she was we aring the pale peach woolen
dress they had made for her wedding.
Something was up, and it was fairly obvious what, as Lizzie
buzzed earnestly into Roger ’ s ear .
“Y e want me to marry  you ?” Roger said, in tones of
astonishment. H e glanced from one twin to the other . “Er … to
whom?”
“A ye, sir .” Lizzie bobbed a resp ectful curtsey . “It’ s me and
Jo, sir , if ye’d be sae kind. Kezzie’ s come to be witness.”
Roger rubbed a hand over his face, looking baf fled.
“W ell … but …” He gave Brianna a pleading look.
“Are yo u in trouble, Lizzie? ” Brianna asked directly ,
lighting a second candle and p utting it in the sconce by the
door . W ith more light, she could  see that Lizzie’ s eyelids were
reddened and swollen, as though she had been crying—though
her attitude was one of excited determination, rather than fear .
“Not to say tro uble, exactly . But I—I’m wi’ child, aye.”
Lizzie crossed her hands on her belly , protective. “W e—we
wanted to be marrit, before I tell anyone.”
“Oh. W ell …” Roger gave Jo a disapproving look, but
appeared no more than half-convinced. “But your father—
won’ t he—”
“Da would want us to be marrit by a priest,” Lizzie
explained earnestly . “And so we will be. But ye ken, sir , it’ll
be months—maybe years—before we can find one.” She cast
down her eyes, blushing. “I—I should like to be marrit, with
proper words, ken, before the babe comes.”“Y es,” he said, eyes drawn ineluctably to Lizzie’ s
midsection. “I grasp that. But I dinna quite understand the
rush, if ye take my meaning. I mean, ye won’ t be noticeably
more pregnant tomorrow than ye are tonight. Or next week.”
Jo and Kezzie exchanged glances over Lizzie’ s head. Then
Jo put his hand on Lizzie’ s waist and drew her gently to him.
“Sir . It’ s only—we want to do right by each other . But we’d
like it to be private, see? Just me and Lizzie, and my brother .”
“Just u s,” Kez zie echoed, drawing close. He looked
earnestly at Roger . “Please, sir? ” He seemed to have injured
his hand somehow; there was a handkerchief wound round it.
Brianna found the three of them touching almost beyond
bearing; they were so innocent, and so young, the three
scrubbed faces turned earnestly up to Roger in supplication.
She moved closer and touched R oger ’ s arm, warm through the
cloth of his sleeve.
“Do it for the m,” she said softly . “Please? It’ s not a
marriage, exactly—but you can make them handfast”
“A ye, w ell, but they ought to be  counseled … her father …”
His protests trailed of f as he glanced from her toward the trio,
and she could see that he was as much touched by their
innocence as she was. And, she  thought, privately amused, he
was also very m uch drawn by the thought of performing his
first wedding, unorthodox as it might be. The circumstances
would be romantic and memorable, here in the quiet of the
night, vo ws exch anged by the li ght of fire and candle, with the
memory of their own lovemaking warm in the shadows and
the sleep ing child a silent witness, both blessing and promise
for the new marriage to be made.
Roger si ghed de eply , then smiled at her in resignation, and
turned away .
“A ye, all right, then. Let me p ut my breeches on, though;
I’m not conducting my first wedding bare-arsed.”
ROGER HELD A SPOON of marmalade over his slice of
toast, staring at me.
“They what ?” he said, in a strangled tone.
“Oh, she didn’ t !” Bree clapped a hand to her mouth, eyes
wide above it, removing it at once to ask, “ Both  of them?”
“Evidently so,” I said, suppressing a most disgraceful ur ge
to laugh. “Y ou really married her to Jo last night?”
“God help me, I did,” Roger muttered. Looking thoroughly
rattled, he put the spoon in his cof fee cup and stirred
mechanically . “But she’ s handfast with Kezzie, too?”
“Before witnesses,” I assured him, with a wary glance at
Mr . W em yss, who was sitting across the breakfast table, mouth
open and apparently turned to stone.
“Do you think—” Bree said to me, “I mean—both of them
at once ?”
“Er , she  said not,” I replied, cutting my eyes toward Mr .
W emyss as an indication that p erhaps this was not a suitable
question to be considering in his presence, fascinating as it
was.
“Oh, Go d,” Mr . W emyss said, in  a voice from the sepulchre.
“She is damned.”
“Holy Mary , Mother of God .” Mrs. Bug, saucer -eyed,
crossed herself. “May Christ have mercy!”
Roger took a gulp of his cof fee, choked, and put it down,
spluttering. Bria nna pounded him helpfully on the back, but he
motioned her away , eyes watering, and pulled himself
together .
“Now , i t’ s mayb e not so bad as it seems,” he said to Mr .
W emyss, trying to find a bright side to look on. “I mean, one
could m aybe make a case tha t the twins are one soul that
God’ s put into two bodies for purposes of His own.”
“A ye, but—two bodies!” Mrs. Bug said. “Do ye think—
both at once ?”“I d on’ t know ,” I said, giving  up. “But I imagine—” I
glanced at the window , where the snow whispered at the
closed shutter . It had begun to sn ow heavily the night before, a
thick, w et snow; by now , there was nearly a foot of it on the
ground, and I was reasonably sure that everyone at the table
was imagining exactly what I w as: a vision of Lizzie and the
Beardsley twins , tucked up cozi ly in a warm bed of furs by a
blazing fire, enjoying their honeymoon.
“W ell, I don’ t suppose there’ s actually much anybody can
do  abo ut it,” Bre e said practically . “If we say anything in
public, the Presbyterians will probably stone Lizzie as a Papist
whore, and—”
Mr . W emyss made a sound like a stepped-on pig’ s bladder .
“Certainly no one will say anyth ing.” Roger fixed Mrs. Bug
with a hard look. “W ill they?”
“W ell, I’ll have to tell Arch, m ind, or I’ll burst,” she said
frankly . “But no one else. Silent as the grave, I swear it, de’il
take me if I lie.” She put both hands over her mouth in
illustration, and Roger nodded.
“I suppose,” he said dubiously , “that the marriage I
performed isna actually valid as such. But then—”
“It’ s certainly as valid as the ha ndfasting Jamie did,” I said.
“And be sides, I think it’ s too lat e to force her to choose. Once
Kezzie’ s thumb heals, no one will be able to tell …”
“Except Lizzie, probably ,” Bree said. She licked a smear of
honey from the corner of her mouth, regarding Roger
thoughtfully . “I wonder what it w ould be like if there were two
of you?”
“W e’d both of us be thoroughly bamboozled,” he assured
her . “Mrs. Bug—is there any more cof fee?”
“Who’ s bamboozled?” The kitchen door opened in a swirl
of sn ow and frig id air , and Jami e came in with Jem, both fresh
from a visit to the privy , ruddy-faced, their hair and lashes
thick with melting snowflakes.“Y ou, for one. Y ou’ve just been done in the eye by a
nineteen-year -old bigamist,” I informed him.
“What’ s a bigamiss?” Jem inquired.
“A very lar ge young lady ,” Roger said, taking a piece of
buttered toast and thrusting it into Jem’ s mouth. “Here. Why
don’ t ye  take that, and …” His voice died away as he realized
that he couldn’ t send Jem outside.
“Lizzie and the twins came roun d to Roger ’ s last night, and
he m arried her t o Jo,” I told Jamie. He blinked, water from the
melting snow on his lashes running down his face.
“I w ill be damned,” he said. He took a long breath, then
realized he was still covered w ith snow , and went to shake
himself at the h earth, bits of sn ow falling into the fire with a
sputter and hiss.
“W ell,” he said, coming back to  the table and sitting down
beside me, “at l east your grandson will have a name, Joseph.
It’ s Beardsley , either way .”
This ridiculous observation seem ed actually to comfort Mr .
W emyss a bit; a  small bit of color came back to his cheeks,
and he allowed Mrs. Bug to put a fresh bannock on his plate.
“A ye, I suppose that’ s something,” he said. “And I really
cannot see—”
“Come look, ” Jemm y was saying, tugging impatiently on
Bree’ s arm. “Come see, Mama!”
“See what?”
“I wrote my name! Grandda showed me!”
“Oh, you did? W ell, good for you!” Brianna beamed at him,
then her brow furrowed. “What—just now?”
“Y es! Come see afore it’ s covered up!”
She looked at Jamie under lowered brows.
“Da, you didn’ t. ”He took a piece of fresh toast from the platter , and spread it
neatly with butter .
“A ye, well,” he said, “there’ s got to be some  advantage still
to b eing a man, even if no one pays a bit of heed to what ye
say . W ill ye pass the marmalade, Roger Mac?”7 5
LICE
J EM PUT HIS ELBOWS on t he table, chin on his fists,
following the path of the spoo n through the batter with the
intent expression of a lion watching an appetizing wildebeest
on its way to the water hole.
“Don’ t even think about it,” I  said, with a glance at his
grubby fingers. “They’ll be do ne in a few minutes; you can
have one then.”
“But I like ‘em raw , Grandma,” he protested. He widened
his dark-blue eyes in wordless pleading.
“Y ou oughtn’ t to eat raw things ,” I said sternly . “They can
make you sick.”
“Y ou do, Grandma.” He poked a  finger at my mouth, where
a s mudg e of brownish batter rem ained. I cleared my throat and
wiped the incriminating evidence on a towel.
“Y ou’ll spoil your supper ,” I sai d, but with the acuity of any
jungle beast, he sensed the weakening of his prey .
“Promise I won’ t. I’ll eat everything!” he said, already
reaching for the spoon.
“Y es, th at’ s what I’m afraid of,”  I said, relinquishing it with
some reluctance. “Just a taste, now—leave some for your
daddy and grandda.”
He nodded, wordless, and licked the spoon with a long,
slow swipe of the tongue, closing his eyes in ecstasy .
I f ound another spoon and set about dropping the cookies
onto the tin sheets I used for bak ing. W e ended in a dead heat,
the shee ts full and the bowl quite empty , just as footsteps came
down the hallway toward the door . Recognizing Brianna’ stread, I snatched the empty spo on from Jemmy and rubbed a
quick towel across his smudgy mouth.
Bree stopped in the doorway , he r smile turning to a look of
suspicion.
“What are you guys doing?”
“Making molasses cookies,” I said, lifting the sheets in
evidence, before sliding them into the brick oven set in the
wall of the fireplace. “Jemmy’ s been helping me.”
One nea t red brow arched upwa rd. She glanced from me to
Jemmy , who was wearing a look of sublimely unnatural
innocence. I gathered my own expression was no more
convincing.
“So I see,” she said dryly . “How much batter did you eat,
Jem?”
“Who, me?” Jemmy said, eyes going wide.
“Mmm.” She leaned forward, and picked a speck out of his
wavy red hair . “What’ s this, then?”
He frowned at it , crossing his ey es slightly in the attempt to
focus.
“A real big lous e?” he suggested brightly . “Reckon I got it
from Rabbie McLeod.”
“Rabbie McLeod?” I said, uneasily aware that Rabbie had
been curled up on the kitchen settle a few days ago, his unruly
black cu rls flowing into Jemmy’ s bright locks as the boys
slept, waiting for their fathers. I recalled thinking at the time
how charming the little boys looked, curled up head to head,
their faces soft with dreaming.
“Has Ra bbie go t lice?” Bree de manded, flicking the bit of
batter away from her as thoug h it were indeed a loathsome
insect.
“Oh, aye, he’ s crawlin’,” Jemmy assured her cheerfully .
“His Ma m says she’ s gonna ge t his daddy’ s razor and shave
of f e ver bit of his hair , him and his brothers and his daddy andhis u ncle Rufe to o. She says they  got lice hoppin’ all over their
bed. She ’ s tired of bein’ ate up alive.” Quite casually , he lifted
a ha nd to his head and scratched, fingers raking through his
hair in a characteristic gesture I had seen all too often before.
Bree and  I exchanged a brief loo k of horror , then she seized
Jemmy by the shoulders, dragging him over to the window .
“Come here!”
Sure eno ugh. Exposed to the brilliant light bouncing of f the
snow , the tender skin behind his ears and on the back of his
neck sho wed th e characteristic pinkness caused by scratching
for lice, and a quick inspection of his head revealed the worst:
tiny nits  clingin g to the base of the hairs, and a few reddish-
brown adult lice, half the size of rice grains, who scrambled
madly a way into the thickets. B ree caught one and cracked it
between her thumbnails, tossing the remains into the fire.
“Eugh!” She rubbed her hands on her skirt, then pulled of f
the ribbon that ti ed back her hair , scratching vigorously . “Have
I g ot them?” sh e asked anxiously , thrusting the crown of her
head toward me.
I ru f fled quickly through the thick mass of auburn and
cinnamon, looking for the telltale whitish nits, then stepped
back, bending my own head.
“No, have I?”
The backdoor opened, and Jamie stepped in, looking only
mildly surprised to find Brianna picking through my hair like a
crazed baboon. Then his head jerked up, snif fing the air .
“Is something burning?”
“I got ‘em, Grandda!”
The exclamation reached me together with the scent of
singeing molass es. I jerked upright and banged my head on the
edge of the dish shelf, hard enough to make me see stars.
These cleared just in time for me to see Jemmy , standing on
tiptoe as  he reached into the sm oking oven in the wall of the
hearth, well over his head. His e yes were squinched shut withconcentration, his face turned away from the waves of heat
coming of f the brick, and he had a towel wound clumsily
round the groping hand.
Jamie re ached the boy with two strides, jerking him back by
the collar . He re ached into the oven bare-handed and yanked
out a  tin sheet of smoking cookies, flinging the hot sheet away
with such force that it struck the  wall. Small brown disks flew
of f and scattered over the floor .
Adso, w ho had been perched in the window , helping with
the louse hunt, saw what looked like prey and pounced fiercely
on a  flee ing coo kie, which promptly burned his paws. Uttering
a startled yowl, he dropped it and raced under the settle.
Jamie, shaking his scorched fingers and making extremely
vulgar remarks in Gaelic, had seized a stick of kindling in his
other ha nd and was poking into the oven, trying to extract the
remaining cookie-sheet amid clouds of smoke.
“What’ s going—hey!”
“Jemmy!”
Roger ’ s cry coincided with Bree’ s. Coming in on Jamie’ s
heels, Roger ’ s expression of bewilderment had changed at
once to alarm a t sight of his of fspring crouched on the floor ,
industriously collecting cookies, and oblivious of the fact that
his trailing towel was smoldering in the ashes of the cookfire.
Roger lu nged fo r Jemmy , colliding with Bree on the same
course. The two of them canno ned into Jamie, who had just
maneuvered the  second sheet of cookies to the edge of the
oven. H e reeled, staggering of f balance, and the sheet clanged
into the hearth, s cattering lumps  of smoking, molasses-scented
charcoal. The cauldron, knocked askew , swung and shifted
perilously on its hook, splash ing soup into the coals and
sending up clouds of hissing, savory steam.
I d idn’ t know whether to laugh or run out of the door , but
settled for snatching up the towe l, which had burst into flames,
and beating it out on the stone-flagged hearth.I st ood up, pa nting, to find that my family had now
managed to extricate itself fro m the fireplace. Roger had a
squirming Jemmy in a death gri p against his chest, while Bree
frisked t he child  for burns, flam es, and broken bones. Jamie,
looking rather annoyed, was sucking on a blistered finger ,
waving smoke away from his face with his free hand.
“Cold water ,” I said, addressing the most immediate
exigency . I grasped Jamie by th e arm, pulled the finger out of
his mouth, and stabbed it into the washbowl.
“Is J emmy all ri ght?” I asked, turning to the Happy Families
tableau by the w indow . “Y es, I see he is. Do put him down,
Roger , the child has lice.”
Roger d ropped Jemmy like a hot potato, and—in the usual
adult reaction to hearing the wo rd “lice”—scratched himself.
Jemmy , unaf fected by the recent commotion, sat down on the
floor and began to eat one of the cookies he had kept clutched
in his hand throughout.
“Y ou’ll spoil your—” Brianna began automatically , then
caught s ight of the spilled cauldron and the puddled hearth,
glanced at me, and shrugged. “Got any more cookies?” she
asked Je mmy . Mouth full, he nodded, reached into his shirt,
and handed her one. She viewed it critically , but took a bite
anyway .
“Not bad,” she said, through cr umbs. “Hm?” She held the
remnant out to Roger , who wolfed it one-handed, using the
other to poke through Jemmy’ s hair .
“It’ s going round,” he said. “At  least, we saw half a dozen
lads nea r Sinclair ’ s, all shaved l ike convicts. Shall we have to
shave your head, then?” he a sked, smiling at Jemmy and
ruf fling the boy’ s hair .
The boy’ s face lighted up at the suggestion.
“W ill I be bald like Grandma?”
“Y es, ev en bald er ,” I assured hi m tartly . I had in fact got a
good two-inch crop at the moment, though the curliness madeit lo ok shorter , little waves and  swirls hugging the curves of
my skull.
“Shave his head ?” Brianna looked aghast. She turned to me.
“Isn’ t there any other good way to get rid of lice?”
I l ooked  consid eringly at Jemmy’ s head. He had the same
thick, slightly wavy hair as h is mother and grandfather . I
glanced at Jamie, who grinn ed at me, one hand in the
washbowl. He knew from experience just how long it took to
nit-comb that sort of hair; I’d done it for him many times. He
shook his head.
“Shave him,” he said. “Y e’ll not  get a lad that size to sit still
long enough to comb.”
“W e could  use lard,” I suggested dubiously . “Y ou plaster his
head with lard or bear grease and leave it for a few days. It
suf focates the lice. Or at least you hope so.”
“Ack.” Brianna viewed her son’ s head with disfavor ,
obviously envisioning the havoc he could wreak on clothes
and linens, if al lowed to roam at lar ge while plastered with
lard.
“V inegar and a fine-comb will get out the big ones,” I said,
coming to peer down at the f ine white line of the parting
through Jemmy’ s ruddy hair . “I t doesn’ t get the nits, though;
you have to scr ape those of f with your fingernails—or else
wait ‘til they hatch and comb them out.”
“Shave him,” Roger said, shaking his head. “Y e never get
all the nits; you have to do it ov er again every few days, and if
ye miss a few that grow big enough to hop …” He grinned and
flicked a cookie crumb of f his thumbnail; it bounced of f Bree’ s
skirt and she slapped it away , glowering at Roger .
“Y ou’re a big help!” She bit her lip, frowning, then nodded
reluctantly . “All right, then, I suppose there’ s no help for it.”
“It will grow back,” I assured her .
Jamie went upstairs to fetch his razor; I went to the sur gery
to get my sur gical scissors and a bottle of oil of lavender forJamie’ s burned finger . By the time I came back, Bree and
Roger had their heads togeth er over what looked like a
newspaper .
“What’ s that?” I asked, coming to peer over Brianna’ s
shoulder .
“Fer gus’ s maiden ef fort.” Roger smiled up at me, and
moved the paper so I could see. “He sent it up with a trader
who left it at Sinclair ’ s for Jamie.”
“Really? That’ s wonderful!”
I cra ned my nec k to see, and a s mall thrill went through me
at sight of the bold headline across the top of the page:
THE NEW BERN UNION
Then I looked closer .
“Onion?” I said, blinking. “ The Onion ?”
“W ell, h e explai ns that,” Roger said, pointing to an ornately
embellished Remarks by the Pr oprietor  in the center of the
page, the legend upheld by a cou ple of floating cherubim. “It’ s
to d o with onions having layer s—complexity , you see—and
the … er”—his finger ran down  the line— “the Pungency and
Savor of the Reasoned Discourse always to be exer cised
her ein for the compleat Information and Amusement of our
Pur chasers and Readers.”
“I notice he makes a distinction between purchasers and
readers,” I remarked. “V ery French of him!”
“W ell, yes,” Roger agreed. “There’ s a distinctly Gallic tone
to so me of the pieces, but you c an see that Marsali must have
had a hand in it—and, of course, most of the advertisements
were wr itten by the people who  placed them.” He pointed to
one small item, headed, Lost, a hat. If fo und in good condition,
please r eturn to the subscriber , S. Gowdy , New Bern. If not in
good condition, wear it yourself.
Jamie ar rived with his razor in time to hear this, and joined
in the laughter . He poked a fin ger down the page, at another
item.“A ye, th at’ s good, but I think the ‘Poet’ s Corner ’ is maybe
my favo rite. Fer gus couldna have done it, I dinna think; he’ s
no ear for rhyme at all—was it Marsali, d’ye think, or
someone else?”
“Read it  out loud,” Brianna said, reluctantly relinquishing
the p aper to Rog er . “I’d better clip Jemmy before he gets away
and spreads lice all over Fraser ’ s Ridge.”
Once resigned to the prospect, Brianna didn’ t hesitate, but
tied a dishcloth round Jemmy’ s neck and set to with the
scissors in a det ermined fashion  that sent strands of red-gold
and auburn falling to the floor like shimmering rain.
Meanwhile, Roger read out, with dramatic flourishes,
“On the late Act against r etailing
Spirituous Liquors, etc.—
T ell me—can it be understood,
This Act intends the Publick Good?
No truly; I deny it:
For if, as all allow , ‘tis best,
Of Evils T wo, to chose the least,
Then my Opinion’ s right.
Suppose on Sear ch—it should appear ,
T en Bunters dy’d in every year—
“—By drinking to Excess
Should thousands innocent be led
Into Despair , and lose their Br ead,
Such folly to r edr ess?I’d not be thought t’encourage sin,
Or be an Advocate of Gin;
But humbly do conceive,
This scheme, tho’ drawn with nicest car e
Don’ t with Almighty Justice squar e
If Scriptur es we believe
When Sodom’ s Sin for V engeance call’d
T en righteous had its Doom for estall’d
And mov’d e’en God to Pity .
But now T en bar e-fac’d Debauchees
Some private Epicur es displease,
And ruin half a City .”
“I’d not be thought t’encourage sin/Or be an Advocate of
Gin,”  Bree repeated, giggling. “Y ou notice he—or she—
doesn’ t mention whisky . What’ s a Bunter , though? Oops, hold
still, baby!”
“A harlot,” Jamie said absently , stropping his razor while
still reading over Roger ’ s shoulder .
“What’ s a harlot?” Jemmy asked, his radar naturally picking
up the single indelicate word in the conversation. “Is it
Richie’ s sister?”
Richard W oolam’ s sister Charlotte was a most attractive
young person; she was also a  most devout Quaker . Jamie
exchanged glances with Roger , and coughed.
“No, I shouldna think it, lad,” he said. “And for God’ s sake,
don’ t sa y so, either! Here, are ye ready to be shaved?” Not
waiting for an answer , he pick ed up the shaving brush andlathered Jemmy ’ s polled head, to the accompaniment of
delighted squeals.
“Barber , barber , shave a pig,” Bree said, watching. “How
many hairs to make a wig?”
“Lots,” I replied, sweeping up the drifts of fallen hair and
throwing them into the fire, hop efully to the destruction of all
resident lice. It was  ra ther a pity; Jemmy’ s hair was beautiful.
Still, it would grow again—and  the clipping showed of f the
lovely shape of his head, roundly pleasing as a cantaloupe.
Jamie hummed tunelessly und er his breath, drawing the
razor over the skin of his gr andson’ s head with as much
delicacy as if he had been shaving a honeybee.
Jemmy turned his head slightly , and I caught my breath,
struck by a fleeting memory—Jamie, his hair clipped short
against his skull in Paris, readying himself to meet Jack
Randall; readying himself to kill—or be killed. Then Jemmy
turned again, squirming on his stool, and the vision vanished
—to be replaced by something else.
“Whatever is that?” I leaned forward to look, as Jamie drew
his razor  down with a flourish a nd flicked away the last dollop
of lather into the fire.
“What?” Bree leaned in beside m e, and her eyes widened at
sight of  the small brown blotch. It was about the size of a
farthing, quite round, just abov e the hairline toward the back
of his head, behind the left ear .
“What is it?” she  asked, frowning. She touched it gently , but
Jemmy scarcely noticed; he was squirming even more,
wanting to get down.
“I’m fairly sure it’ s all right,” I assured her , after a quick
inspection. “It looks like what’ s called a nevus—it’ s something
like a flat mole, usually quite harmless.”
“But where did it come from? He wasn’ t born with it, I
know!” she protested.“Babies very seldom have any sort of mole,” I explained,
untying my dishcloth from round Jemmy’ s neck. “All right,
yes, you’re done! Go and be good now—we’ll have supper as
soon as I can manage. No,” I added, turning back to Bree,
“moles usually start to develop  around three years of age—
though of course people can get more as they grow older .”
Freed from restraint, Jemmy was rubbing his naked head
with both hands, looking pleased and chanting, “Char -lotte the
Har -lot, Char -lotte the Har -lot,” quietly under his breath.
“Y ou’re sure it’ s all right?” Brianna was still frowning,
worried. “It isn’ t dangerous?”
“Oh, aye , it’ s nothing,” Roger assured her , glancing up from
the n ewspaper . “I’ve had one jus t like that myself, ever since I
was a kid. Just … here.” His face changed abruptly as he
spoke, a nd his hand rose, very slowly , to rest on the back of
his head—just above the hairline, behind the left ear .
He looked at me, and I saw  his throat move as he
swallowed, the jagged rope scar dark against the sudden
paleness of his skin. The down hairs rose silently on my arms.
“Y es,” I said, a nswering the look, and hoping my voice
didn’ t shake too noticeably . “T hat sort of mark is … often
hereditary .”
Jamie said nothing, but his hand  closed on mine, squeezing
tight.
Jemmy was on his hands and knees now , trying to coax
Adso out from under the settle. His neck was small and fragile,
and his shaven head looked unearthly white and shockingly
naked, l ike a mushroom poking out of the earth. Roger ’ s eyes
rested on it for a moment; then he turned to Bree.
“I do believe pe rhaps I’ve picked up a few lice myself,” he
said, his voice just a tiny bit too loud. He reached up, pulled
of f the thong that bound his thic k black hair , and scratched his
head vigorously  with both hands. Then he picked up the
scissors, smiling, and held them out to her . “Like father , like
son, I suppose. Give us a hand here, aye?”P A R T  T E N
W h e r e ’ s  P e r r y  M a s o n
 W h e n  Y o u  N e e d  H i m ?7 6
DANGEROUS
 CORRESPONDENCE
Fr om Mount Josiah Plantation in the Colony of V ir ginia,
 Lor d John Gr ey to Mr . James Fraser , Esq.,
 Fraser ’ s Ridge, North Car olina,
 upon the Sixth of Mar ch, Anno Domini 1775
Dear Mr . Fraser—
What in the Name of God ar e you about? I have known
you in the course of our long Acquaintance to be many
Things—Intemperate and Stubborn being two of them—
but have always known you for a Man of Intelligence and
Honor .
Y et despite explicit W arnings, I find your Name upon
mor e than one List of suspected T raitors and Seditionists,
associated with illegal Assemblies, and thus subject to
Arr est. The Fact that you ar e still at Liberty , my Friend,
r eflects nothing mor e than the Lack of T r oops at pr esent
available in North Car olina—and that may change
rapidly . Josiah Martin has implor ed London for Help,
and it will be forthcoming, I assur e you.
W as Gage not mor e than sufficiently occupied in
Boston, and Lor d Dunsmor e’ s V ir ginia tr oops still in
pr ocess of Assembly , the Army would be upon you within
a few Months. Do not delude yourself; the King may be
misguided in his Actions, but the Government per ceives—
if belatedly—the Level of T urmoil in the Colonies, and is
moving as rapidly as may be to suppr ess it, befor e gr eater
Harm can ensue.Whatever else you may be, you ar e no Fool, and so I
must assume you r ealize the Consequences of your
Actions. But I would be less than a Friend did I not put
the Case to you bluntly: you expose your Family to the
utmost Danger by your Actions, and you put your own
Head in a Noose.
For the Sake of whatever Affection you may yet bear
me, and for the Sake of those dear Connexions between
your Family and myself—I beg you to r enounce these
most danger ous Associations while ther e is still T ime.
John
I read the letter through, then l ooked up at Jamie. He was
sitting a t his desk, papers strewn in every direction, scattered
with the small brown fragments of broken sealing wax. Bobby
Higgins had brought a good many letters, newspapers, and
packages—Jamie had put of f reading Lord John’ s letter ‘til the
last.
“He’ s ve ry much afraid for you ,” I said, putting the single
sheet of paper down on top of the rest.
Jamie nodded.
“For a man of his parts to refer to the King’ s actions as
possibly ‘misguided’ is verra close to treason, Sassenach,” he
observed, though I thought  he was joking.
“These lists he mentions—do you know anything about
that?”
He shru gged at that, and poked  through one of the untidy
piles with a forefinger , pulling out a smeared sheet that had
obviously been dropped in a puddle at some point.
“Like that, I suppose,” he said, handing it over . It was
unsigned, and nearly illegib le, a misspelt and vicious
denunciation of  various Outrages and Debached Persons —
here listed—whose speech, action, and appearance was a
threat to  all who valued peace and prosperity . These, the writer
felt, should be shown whats what,  pre sumably by beingbeaten, s kinned alive, r old in bolling T ar and plac’d on a Rail,
or in  particularly pernicious case s, Hanged outright  fr om ther e
own Rooftr ees.
“Where did you pick that  up? ” I dropped it on the desk ,
using two fingers.
“In C ampbelton. Someone sent it to Farquard, as Justice of
the Peace. He gave it to me, because my name is on it.”
“It is?” I squinted at the stragg ling letters. “Oh, so it is. J.
Frayzer .  Y ou ’re sure it’ s  you? There are quite a few Frasers,
after all, and not a few named John, James, Jacob, or Joseph.”
“Relatively few who could be described as a Red-hair ed
dejenerate Pox- ridden Usuring Son of a Bitch who skulks in
Br othels when not drunk and comitting Riot in the Str eet,  I
imagine.”
“Oh, I missed that part.”
“It’ s in the expo sition at the bottom.” He gave the paper a
brief, in dif ferent glance. “I think Buchan the butcher wrote it,
myself.”
“Always assum ing that ‘usuring’ is a word, I don’ t see
where he gets that bit; you haven’ t any money to lend.”
“I w ouldna suppose a basis in truth is strictly required,
under the circumstances, Sassenach,” he said very dryly . “And
thanks t o MacDonald and wee Bobby , there are a good many
folk who think I do  have money—and if I am not inclined to
lend it to them, why then, plain ly it’ s a matter of my having
put my fortune a ll in the hands of Jews and Whig speculators,
as I am intent upon ruining trade for my own profit.”
“What?”
“That was a somewhat more literary ef fort,” he said,
shuf fling through the pile and pulling out an elegant
parchment sheet, done in a copperplate hand. This one had
been sent to a newspaper in Hillsboro, and was signed, A
Friend to Justice;  and while it did n’ t name Jamie, it was clear
who the subject of the denunciation was.“It’ s the hair ,” I said, looking critically at him. “If you wore
a wig, they’d have a much harder time of it.”
He lifted one shoulder in a sardonic shrug. The commonly
held view of re d hair as an indicator of low character and
moral coarseness, if not outright demonic possession, was by
no means limited to anonymous ill-wishers. The knowledge of
that view —together with person al disinclination—had quite a
bit to do with t he fact that he never did  wear either wig or
powder , even in situations where a proper gentleman would.
W ithout asking, I reached for a stack of the papers and
began to leaf through them. He made no move to stop me, but
sat quietly watching, listening to the thrum of the rain.
A he avy spring storm was was hing down outside, and the
air was cold and damp, thick with the green scents of the forest
insinuating them selves through the crevices of door and
window . I sometimes had the su dden feeling, hearing the wind
coming through the trees, that the wilderness outside meant to
come in, march through the hou se, and obliterate it, erasing all
trace of us.
The lette rs were a mixed bag. Some were from the members
of the North Carolina Committee of Correspondence, with bits
of n ews, most of it from the n orth. Continental Association
Committees had sprung up in New Hampshire and New
Jersey , t hese bo dies now beginning to virtually take over the
functions of government, as the royal governors lost their grip
on assemblies,  courts, and Customs, the remnants of
or ganization falling ever deeper into disarray .
Boston w as still occupied by Ga ge’ s troops, and some of the
letters co ntinued the appeals for food and supplies to be sent to
the succor of her citizens—we had sent two hundredweight of
barley d uring the winter , which one of the W oolams had
undertaken to get into the city , a long with three wagonloads of
other foodstuf fs contributed by the inhabitants of the Ridge.
Jamie had picked up his quill, and was writing something,
slowly , to accommodate the stif fness of his hand.Next up was a note from Daniel Putnam, circulated through
Massachusetts, noting the rising of militia companies in the
countryside, and asking for arms and powder . It was signed by
a dozen other men, each one bearing witness to the truth of the
situation in his own township.
A Second Continental Congress was proposed, to meet in
Philadelphia, the date yet undecided.
Geor gia had formed a Provincial Congress, but as the
Loyalist letter -writer—plainly assuming Jamie to be like-
minded—triumphantly noted, Ther e is no Sense of Grievance
towar d Gr eat Britain her e, as elsewher e; Loyalist Sentiment is
so str ong  that only five Parishes of twelve have sent anyone to
this upstart and illegal Congr ess.
A much -bedraggled copy of the Massachusetts Gazette,
dated February 6, containing a letter , circled in ink and titled
The Rule of Law and the Rule of Men.  It was signed Novanglus
—which I took to be a s ort of hog-Latin for “new
Englishman”—and to be a response to previous letters by a
T ory who signed himself Massachusettensis,  of all things.
I ha d no idea who Massachu settensis might be, but I
recognized a few phrases from Novanglus’ s letter , from long-
ago bits of Bree’ s schoolwork—John Adams, in good form.
“A government of laws, not of men,”  I murmured. “What
sort of pen name would you us e, if you were going to write
this sort  of thing?” Glancing up, I caught sight of him, looking
sheepish to a degree.
“Y ou’ve been doing it alr eady ?”
“W ell, j ust the odd bittie lett er here or there,” he said
defensively . “No pamphlets.”
“Who are you?”
He shrugged, deprecating.
“ Scotus Americanus,  but  only ‘til I think of som ething
better . There are a few others using that name, that I ken.”“W ell, t hat’ s som ething. The King will have a harder time
picking you out of the crowd.” Muttering “Massachusettensis”
to myself, I picked up the next document.
A no te from John Stuart, much af fronted by Jamie’ s abrupt
resignation, noting that the most illegal and pr odigal
Congr ess, as they call it  of Massachuset ts had formally i nvited
the Stockbridge Indians to enlist in the service of the colony ,
and informing Jamie that should any of the Cherokee follow
suit, he, John Stuart, would take the greatest pleasure in
personally ensuring that he, Jamie Fraser , was hanged for
treason.
“And I don’ t sup pose John Stuart even knows you have red
hair ,” I observed , laying it aside. I felt a trifle shaky , in spite of
my a ttempts to j oke about it. Se eing it all laid out in black and
white so lidified the clouds that had been gathering round us,
and I felt the fir st chilling drop of icy rain on my skin, despite
the woolen shawl around my shoulders.
There was no h earth in the study; only a small brazier that
we used for heat. It was burning now in the corner , and Jamie
rose, pic ked up a stack of letters, and began to feed them to the
fire, one by one.
I had  a sudden rush of deja vu, and saw him standing by the
hearth i n the drawing room o f his cousin Jared’ s house in
Paris, fe eding letters to the fire.  The stolen letters of Jacobite
conspirators, rising in white puf fs of smoke, the gathering
clouds of a storm long past.
I remem bered what Fer gus had said, in answer to Jamie’ s
instructions: “I r emember how this game is played.”  So did I,
and spicules of ice began to form in my blood.
Jamie dropped the last flaming fragment into the brazier ,
then san ded the page he had been writing, shook the sand of f,
and handed it to me. He had u sed one of the sheets of the
special paper Bree had made by pressing a digested pulp of
rags and plant m atter between silk screens. It was thicker than
the usua l, with a soft, glossy texture, and she had mixed
berries and tiny leaves into the pulp, so that here and there asmall re d stain spread like blo od beneath the shadow of a
leaf ’ s silhouette.
Fr om Fraser ’ s Ridge, in the Colony of North Car olina,
this 16th day of Mar ch, Anno Domini 1775,
James Fraser to Lor d John Gr ey , of Mount Josiah
Plantation,
in the Colony of V ir ginia
My dear John—
It is too late.
Our continued Corr espondence cannot but pr ove a
Danger to you, but it is with the gr eatest Regr et that I
sever this Link between us.
Believe me ever
Y our most humble and affectionate Friend,
Jamie
I read it in silenc e, and handed it  back. As he poked about in
search o f the sealing wax, I noti ced a small wrapped parcel on
the corn er of his desk that had  been hidden by the drifts of
paper .
“What’ s this?” I picked it up; it was amazingly heavy for its
size.
“A p resent from his Lordship, for wee Jemmy .” He lit the
beeswax taper from the brazier and held it over the seam of the
folded letter . “A set of lead soldiers, Bobby says.”7 7
THE EIGHTEENTH OF APRIL
R OGER CAME A W AKE QUITE SUDDENL Y , with no
notion w hat had  wakened him. I t was full dark, but the air had
the still, inward feel of the sma ll hours; the world holding its
breath, before dawn comes on a rising wind.
He turned his he ad on the pillow  and saw that Brianna was
awake, t oo; she lay looking up ward, and he caught the brief
flicker of her eyelids as she blinked.
He m oved a han d to touch her , and hers closed over it. An
adjuration to silence? He lay very still, listening, but heard
nothing. An ember broke in th e hearth with a muf fled crack
and her hand tig htened. Jemmy flung himself over in bed with
a rus tle of quilts , let out a small yelp, and fell silent. The night
was undisturbed.
“What is it?” he said, low-voiced.
She didn ’ t turn to look at him; her eyes were fixed now on
the window , a dark gray rectangle, barely visible.
“Y esterday was the eighteenth of April,” she said. “It’ s
here.” Her voice was calm, but there was something in it that
made hi m move  closer , so they lay side by side, touching from
shoulder to foot.
Somewhere to the north of them , men were gathering in the
cold spring night. Eight hundred British troops, groaning and
cursing as they d ressed by candlelight. Those who had gone to
bed rous ing to the beat of the drum passing by the houses and
warehouses and churches where they quartered, those who
hadn’ t, stumbling from dice and drink, the warm hearths of
taverns, the warm arms of women, hunting lost boots and
seizing weapons, turning out by twos and threes and fours,
clanking and mumbling through  the streets of frozen mud to
the muster point.“I grew  up in Boston,” she said, her voice softly
conversational. “Every kid in Boston learned that poem,
somewhere along the line. I learned it in fifth grade.”
“Listen, my childr en, and you shall hear/Of the midnight
ride of Paul Rever e.”  Ro ger smiled, envisioning he r in the
uniform of Saint Finbar ’ s parochial school, blue overall
jumper , white blouse, and kne e socks. He’d seen her fifth-
grade sc hool photograph once; she looked like a small, fierce,
disheveled tiger that some maniac had dressed in doll’ s
clothes.
“That’ s the one. On the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-
five/Har dly a man is now alive/Who r emembers that famous
day and year . ”
“Hardly a man,” Roger echoed softly . Someone—who? A
householder , eavesdropping on the British commanders
quartered in his house? A barmaid, bringing mugs of pokered
hot rum  to a couple of ser geants? There was no keeping of
secrets, not with eight hundred men on the move. It was all a
matter of time. Someone had sent word from the occupied city ,
word that the British meant t o seize the stored arms and
powder in Concord, and at the s ame time, arrest Hancock and
Samuel Adams—the founder of the Committee of Safety , the
inflammatory sp eaker , the leaders of this tr easonous r ebellion
—reported to be in Lexington.
Eight hundred men to capture  two? Good odds. And a
silversmith and his friends, alarmed at the news, had set out
into that cold night. Bree continued:
“He said to his friend, ‘If the British mar ch
By land or sea fr om the town tonight,
Hang a lantern aloft in the belfry ar ch
Of the North Chur ch tower as a signal light—
One if by land, and two if by sea;And I on the opposite shor e will be,
Ready to ride and spr ead the alarm
Thr ough every Middlesex village and farm,
For the country folk to be up and to arm.’”
“They don’ t write poems like that  a nymor e,” Rog er said.
But in spite of h is cynicism, he couldn’ t bloody help seeing it:
the steam of a horse’ s breath, white in darkness, and across the
black water , the tiny star of a la ntern, high above the sleeping
town. And then another .
“What happened next?” he said.
“Then he said ‘Good-night!’ and with muffled oar
Silently r owed to the Charlestown shor e,
Just as the moon r ose over the bay ,
Wher e swinging wide at her moorings lay
The Somerset,  British man-of-war;
A phantom ship, with each mast and spar
Acr oss the moon like a prison bar ,
And a huge black hulk, that was magnified
By its own r eflection in the tide.”
“W ell, that’ s not too bad,” he said judiciously . “I like the bit
about the Somerset.  Rather a painterly description.”
“Shut up.” She kicked him, though without real violence. “It
goes on about his friend, who wanders and watches, with
eager ears —” Roger snorted, and she kicked him again. “T ill
in the silence ar ound him he he ars/The muster of men at the
barrack door/Th e sound of arms, and the tramp of feet/And themeasur ed tr ead of the gr enadiers/Mar ching down to their
boats on the shor e.”
He h ad visited her in Boston in the spring. In mid-April, the
trees would have no more than a  haze of green, their branches
still mos tly bare against pale ski es. The nights were still frigid,
but the cold was somehow touched with life, a freshness
moving through the icy air .
“Then there’ s a boring part ab out the friend climbing the
stairs of  the church tower , but I like the next verse.” Her voice,
already soft, dropped a little, whispering.
“Beneath, in the chur chyar d, lay the dead,
In their night encampment on the hill,
W rapped in silence so deep and still
That he could hear , like a sentinel’ s tr ead,
The watchful night-wind, as it went
Cr eeping along fr om tent to tent,
And seeming to whisper , ‘All is well!’
A moment only he feels the spell
Of the place and the hour , and the secr et dr ead
Of the lonely belfry and the dead;
For suddenly all his thoughts ar e bent
On a shadowy something far away ,
Wher e the river widens to meet the bay—
A line of black that bends and floats
On the rising tide like a bridge of boats.”“Then there’ s a lot of stuf f w ith old Paul killing time
waiting for the signal,” she said, abandoning the dramatic
whisper for a more normal tone of voice. “But it finally shows
up, and then …
“A hurry of hoofs in a village str eet,
A shape in the moonlight, a bulk in the dark,
And beneath, fr om the pebbles, in passing, a spark
Struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet;
That was all! And yet, thr ough the gloom and the light,
The fate of a nation was riding that night;
And the spark struck out by that steed, in his flight,
Kindled the land into flame with its heat.”
“That’ s actually pretty good.” His hand curved over her
thigh, just above the knee, in case she might kick him again,
but she didn’ t. “Do you remember the rest?”
“So he goes al ong by the Mystic River ,” Brianna said,
ignoring him, “and then there are three verses, as he passes
through the townships:
“It was twelve by the village clock
When he cr ossed the bridge into Medfor d town.
He hear d the cr owing of the cock,
“And the barking of the farmer ’ s dog,
And felt the damp of the river fog,
That rises after the sun goes down.
“It was one by the village clock,When he galloped into Lexington.
He saw the gilded weather cock
Swim in the moonlight as he passed,
And the meeting-house windows, blank and bar e,
Gaze at him with a spectral glar e,
As if they alr eady stood aghast
At the bloody work they would look upon.
” It w as tw o by the village clock —and y es, I hear the clock
chiming in the first lines, be quiet!” He had in fact drawn
breath, but not to interrupt, only because he’d suddenly
realized he’d been holding it. “ It was two by the village
clock,”  she repeated,
“When he came to the bridge in Concor d town.
He hear d the bleating of the flock,
And the twitter of bir ds among the tr ees,
And felt the br eath of the morning br eeze
Blowing over the meadow br own.
And one was safe and asleep in his bed
Who at the bridge would be first to fall,
Who that day would be lying dead,
Pier ced by a British musket ball.
“Y ou kn ow the r est.”  S he stopped abruptly , her hand tight
on his.
From on e mome nt to the next, the character of the night had
changed. The stillness of the s mall hours had ceased, and abreath of wind moved through the trees outside. All of a
sudden, the night was alive again, but dying now , rushing
toward dawn.
If not actively twittering, the birds were wakeful; something
called, over and over , in the n earby wood, high and sweet.
And abo ve the stale, heavy sce nt of the fire, he breathed the
wild clean air of morning, and felt his heart beat with sudden
ur gency .
“T ell me the rest,” he whispered.
He saw the sh adows of men in the trees, the stealthy
knocking on doors, the low-voiced, excited conferences—and
all the while, the light growing in the east. The lap of water
and creak of oars, the sound of restless kine lowing to be
milked, and on the rising breeze the smell of men, stale with
sleep and empty of food, hars h with black powder and the
scent of steel.
And wit hout thinking, pulled his hand from his wife’ s grasp,
rolled ov er her , and pulling up the shift from her thighs, took
her h ard and fas t, in vicarious sharing of that mindless ur ge to
spawn that attended the imminent presence of death.
Lay on her trembling, the swea t drying on his back in the
breeze from the window , heart thumping in his ears. For the
one, he thought. The one who would be the first to fall. The
poor sod who maybe hadn’ t sw ived his wife in the dark and
taken the chance to leave her w ith child, because he had no
notion what was coming with the dawn. This dawn.
Brianna lay still under him; he could feel the rise and fall of
her breath, powerful ribs that lifted even under his weight.
“Y ou know the rest,” she whispered.
“Bree,” he said v ery softly . “I w ould sell my soul to be there
now .”
“Shh,” s he said, but her hand ros e, and settled on his back in
what might be benediction. They lay still, watching the light
grow by degrees, keeping silence.
THIS SILENCE  W AS broken a quarter of an hour later , by the
sound of  rushing footsteps and a  pounding at the door . Jemmy
popped out of h is blankets like a cuckoo from a clock, eyes
round, and Roger heaved himself up, hurriedly brushing down
his nightshirt.
It was one of the Beardsleys, face pinched and white in the
gray light. He paid no attentio n to Roger , but cried out to
Brianna, “Lizzie’ s having the baby , come quick!”, before
dashing of f in the direction of the Big House, where the figure
of his brother could be seen gesticulating wildly on the porch.
Brianna flung on her clothes a nd burst out of the cabin,
leaving Roger to deal with J emmy . She met her mother ,
similarly disheveled but with a neatly packed medical kit slung
over her shoulder , hurrying toward the narrow path that led
past spring house and stable, int o the distant woods where the
Beardsleys’ cabin lay .
“She should have come down la st week,” Claire gasped. “I
told her …”
“So did I. She said …” Brianna gave up the attempt to
speak. The Beardsley twins h ad long outdistanced them,
sprinting through the wood like deer , whooping and yelling—
whether from sheer excitement at their impending fatherhood,
or to let Lizzie know help was on the way , she couldn’ t tell.
Claire had worried about Lizzie’ s malaria, she knew . And
yet the yellow s hadow that so often hung over her erstwhile
bondmaid had all but disappeared during her pregnancy;
Lizzie bloomed.
Nonetheless, Brianna felt her stomach clench in fear as they
came into sight of the Beardsle ys’ cabin. The hides had been
moved o utside, stacked round the tiny house like a barricade,
and the smell of them gave her a moment’ s terrible vision of
the MacNeills’ cabin, filled with death.
The door hung open, though, and there were no flies. She
forced herself to hang back an instant, to let Claire go in first,
but hurried in on her heels—to find that they were too late.Lizzie s at up in a blood-smeared bower of furs, blinking
with amazed stupefaction at a  small, round, blood-smeared
baby , who was regarding her w ith the exact same expression
of open-mouthed astonishment.
Jo and Kezzie were clutching each other , too excited and
afraid to  speak. From the corner of her eye, Brianna saw their
mouths opening and closing in syncopation, and wanted to
laugh, but instead followed her mother to the bedside.
“He just popped out!” Lizzie was saying, glancing
momentarily at Claire, but then jerking her fascinated gaze
back to the bab y , as though she  expected him—yes, it was a
him, Brianna saw—to disappear  as suddenly as he had arrived.
“My back hurt something dre adful, all last night, so I
couldna sleep, and the lads took it in turns to rub me, but it
didna really help, and then when I got up to go to the privy this
morning, all the water burst for th from betwixt my legs—just
as y e said it would, ma’am!” she said to Claire. “And so I said
to Jo and Kezzie  they must run fetch ye, but I didna ken quite
what to do next . So I set about to mix up batter for to make
hoecake for breakfast”—she waved at the table, where a bowl
of fl our sat with  a jug of milk a nd two eggs—”and next thing,
I had this terrible ur ge to— to—” She blushed, a deep,
becoming peony color .
“W ell, I couldna even reach the chamber -pot. I just squatted
there by  the table, and—and—pop! There he was, right on the
ground beneath me!”
Claire had picked the new ar rival up, and was cooing
reassurances to him, while deftly checking whatever it was
one checked about new babies.  Lizzie had made a blanket in
preparation, car efully knitted of lamb’ s wool, dyed with
indigo. Claire glanced at the pristine blanket, then pulled a
length o f stained, soft flannel fr om her kit. W rapping the baby
in it, she handed him to Brianna.
“Hold him a mo ment while I deal with the cord, will you,
darling?” she said, pulling scis sors and thread from her kit.
“Then y ou can clean him of f a  bit—there’ s a bottle of oil inhere—while I take care of Liz zie. And you lot,” she added,
glancing sternly at the Beardsleys, “go outside.”
The baby moved suddenly inside his wrappings, startling
Brianna with the sudden vivid recollection of tiny , solid limbs
pushing from inside: a kick to the liver , the liquid swell and
shift as head or buttocks presse d up in a hard, smooth curve
beneath her ribs.
“Hallo, little guy ,” she said soft ly , cuddling him against her
shoulder . He smelled strongly and strangely of the sea, she
thought, and oddly fresh again st the acrid pungency of the
hides outside.
“Ooh!” Lizzie gave a startled sq ueal, as Claire kneaded her
belly , and there was a juicy , slithering sort of sound. Brianna
remembered th at vividly , too; the placenta, that liverish,
slippery afterthought of birth, almost soothing as it passed
over the much-abused tissues with a sense of peaceful
completion. All over , and the stunned mind began to
comprehend survival.
There was a gas p from the doorway , and she looked up to
see the Beardsleys, side by side and saucer -eyed.
“Shoo!” she said firmly , and fli pped a hand at them. They
promptly disappeared, leaving her to the entertaining task of
cleaning and oiling the flailing  limbs and creased body . He
was a small baby , but round: round-faced, very round-eyed for
a ne wborn—he hadn’ t cried at a ll, but was plainly awake and
alert—and with a round little b elly , from which the stump of
his umbilical cord protruded, dark purple and fresh.
His look  of astonishment had n ot faded; he goggled up at
her , sole mn as a fish, though sh e could feel the huge smile on
her own face.
“Y ou ar e so cute!” she told him . He smacked his lips in a
thoughtful sort of way , and crinkled his brow .
“He’ s hungry!” she called over her shoulder . “Are you
ready?”“Ready?” Lizzie  croaked. “Mother of God, how can ye be
ready for something like this ?”, which made Claire and
Brianna both laugh like loons.
Nonetheless, Lizzie reached for the little blue-wrapped
bundle and put it uncertainly to her breast. There was a certain
amount of fumbling and increasingly anxious grunts from the
baby , but at last a suitable connection was established, making
Lizzie u tter a brief shriek of surprise, and everyone breathed a
sigh of relief.
At this point, Brianna became aware that there had been
conversation going on outside for some time—a mutter of
male voices, deliberately pitched low , in a confusion of
speculation and puzzlement.
“I im agine you c an let them in now . Then put the griddle in
the f ire, if you would.” Claire, beaming fondly at mother and
child, was mixing the neglected batter .
Brianna poked her head out of the cabin door , to find Jo,
Kezzie, her own father , Roger , a nd Jemmy , clustered in a knot
a little distance away . They all glanced up when they saw her ,
with expression s ranging from vaguely shamefaced pride to
simple excitement.
“Mama! Is the b aby here?” Jem rushed up, pushing to get
past her into the cabin, and she grabbed him by the collar .
“Y es. Y o u can come see him, bu t you have to be quiet. He’ s
very new , and you don’ t want to scare him, all right?”
“Him?” one of the Beardsleys asked, excited. “It’ s a boy?”
“I to ld y e so!” his brother said, nudging him in the ribs. “I
said I saw a wee prick!”
“Y ou do n’ t say things like ‘pri ck’ in front of ladies,” Jem
informed him severely , turning to frown at him. “And Mama
says be quiet!”
“Oh,” said the Beardsley twin, abashed. “Oh, aye, to be
sure.”Moving with an exaggerated caution that made her want to
laugh, t he twins tiptoed into the cabin, followed by Jem,
Jamie’ s hand firm on his shoulder , and Roger .
“Is Lizz ie all right?” he asked  softly , pausing to kiss her
briefly in passing.
“A little overwhelmed, I think, but fine.”
Lizzie was in fa ct sitting up, soft blond hair now combed
and shining around her shoulders, glowing with happiness at
Jo and Kezzie, who knelt at her bedside, grinning like apes.
“May the blessing of Bride and of Columba be on you,
young woman,”  Jamie said formally in Gaelic, bowing to her ,
“and may the love of Christ sustain you always in your
motherhood. May milk spring from your breasts like water
from the  rock and may you rest  secure in the arms of your”—
he coughed briefly , glancing at the Beardsleys—”husband.”
“If you can’ t s ay ‘prick,’ why can you say ‘breasts’?”
Jemmy inquired, interested.
“Y e can’ t, unless it’ s a prayer , ” his father informed him.
“Grandda was giving Lizzie a blessing.”
“Oh. Are there any prayers with pricks in them?”
“I’m su re there are,” Roger replied, carefully avoiding
Brianna’ s eye, “but ye don’ t say  them out loud. Why don’ t ye
go and help Grannie with the breakfast?”
The iron griddle was sizzling with fat, and the fragrant smell
of fresh  batter filled the roo m as Claire began to pour
spoonfuls onto the hot metal.
Jamie a nd Roger , having presented their compliments to
Lizzie, had stepped back a bi t, to give the little family a
moment to themselves—though the cabin was so small, there
was barely room for everyone to fit inside.
“Y ou are  so beautiful,” Jo—or possibly Kezzie—whispered,
touching her hair with an awed  forefinger . “Y e look like the
new moon, Lizzie.”“Did it hurt ye very much, sweetheart?” murmured Kezzie
—or maybe Jo—stroking the back of her hand.
“Not so much,” she said, stroking Kezzie’ s hand, then
lifting he r palm to cup Jo’ s chee k. “Look. Is he no the bonniest
wee creature ye’ve ever seen?” The baby had drunk his fill and
fallen as leep; he let go the nipple with an audible pop!  and
rolled back in his mother ’ s arm like a dormouse, mouth a little
open.
The twi ns made  identical soft sounds of awe, and looked
doe-eyed at their—well, what else could one say? Brianna
thought—their son.
“Oh, such dear wee fingers!”  Kezzie—or Jo—breathed,
touching the little pink fist with a dirty forefinger .
“Is he all there?” Jo—or Kezzie—asked. “Y e’ve looked?”
“I have,” Lizzie assured him. “Here—d’ye want to hold
him?” Not pausing for assent, sh e put the bundle into his arms.
Whichever twin it was looked at once thrilled and terrified,
and glanced wildly at his brother for support.
Brianna, enjoying the tableau, felt Roger close behind her .
“Aren’ t they sweet?” she whispered, reaching back for his
hand.
“Oh, aye,” he said, a smile in his voice. “Enough to make ye
want another , isn’ t it?”
It was an innoc ent remark; she could tell he had meant
nothing by it—but he heard the echo, even as she did, and
coughed, letting go her hand.
“Here—that’ s for Lizzie.” Claire was handing a plate of
fragrant cakes, drizzled with b utter and honey , to Jem. “Is
anyone else hungry?”
The gen eral stam pede in response to this enabled Brianna to
hide her feelings, but they were still there—and painfully
clear , if still tangled.Y es, she did  want another baby , thank you, she thought
fiercely at Roger ’ s oblivious back. In the instant of holding the
newborn child, she wanted it with a yearning of flesh that
surpassed hunge r or thirst. And she would have loved to blame
him for the fact that it hadn’ t happened yet.
It ha d taken a true leap of faith, across the vertiginous abyss
of knowledge, for her to put aside her dauco  seeds, those
fragile pellets of protection. Bu t she’d done it. And nothing.
Lately , she’d been thinking une asily of what Ian had told her
about his wife a nd their struggles to conceive. T rue, she had
suf fered no miscarriage, and was profoundly grateful for that.
But the part he had told her , where their lovemaking became
more mechanical and desperate— that  was beginning to loom
like a specter in the distance. It hadn’ t gotten that bad yet—but
more often than not, she turned  into Roger ’ s arms, thinking,
Now? W ill it be this time?  But it never was.
The twins were becoming mo re comfortable with their
of fspring, their dark heads pressed close together , tracing the
chubby outlines of his sleeping features and wondering aloud
who he most resembled, of all idiotic things.
Lizzie was single-mindedly devouring her second plate of
hoecakes, accom panied by grilled sausages. The smell was
wonderful, but Brianna wasn’ t hungry .
It w as a good th ing that they kne w for sure, she told herself,
watching Roger take his turn to hold the baby , his dark, lean
face softening. If there had still been any doubt that Jemmy
was Rog er ’ s child, he would ha ve blamed himself as Ian did,
thought there was something wrong with him. As it was …
Had something happened to her ? she wondered uneasily .
Had Jemmy’ s birth damaged something?
Jamie w as holding the new baby  now , one big hand cradling
the roun d little head, smiling down with that look of soft
af fection so peculiar—and endearing—to men. She did long to
see that look on Roger ’ s face, holding his own newborn child.“Mr . Fraser .” Lizzie, filled at la st with sausages, put aside
her emp ty plate and leaned forward, looking earnestly up at
Jamie. “My father . Does—does he know?” She couldn’ t help
glancing at the empty doorway behind him.
Jamie looked momentarily disconcerted.
“Ah,” he said, and handed th e baby carefully to Roger ,
clearly taking advantage of the pause to try to think of some
less-hurtful way to phrase the truth.
“A ye, he kens th e babe was on the way ,” he said carefully .
“I told him.”
And he had not  come. Lizzie’ s lips pressed together , and a
shadow of unhappiness crossed the new-moon glow of her
face.
“Had we—had I—one of us—be st go and tell him, sir?” one
of the twins asked hesitantly . “That the child’ s here, I mean,
and … and that Lizzie’ s all right.”
Jamie hesitated, clearly uncertain whether that would be a
good ide a or not. Mr . W emyss,  pale and ill-looking, had not
referred to his daughter , his putative sons-in-law , or his
theoretical grandchild since the imbroglio surrounding Lizzie’ s
multiple weddings. Now that the grandchild was a concrete
fact, though …
“Whatever he thinks he ought  to  do,” Claire s aid, her face
slightly troubled , “he’ll want  to  know that t hey’re all right,
surely .”
“Oh, aye ,” Jami e agreed. He gla nced dubiously at the twins.
“I’m jus t no entirely sure it should be Jo or Kezzie to tell him,
though.”
The twins exchanged a long gla nce, in which some decision
seemed to be reached.
“It s hould, sir ,” one of them sa id firmly , turning to Jamie.
“The baby’ s ourn, but it’ s his blood, too. That’ s a link between
us; he’ll know that.”“W e don’ t want him to be cros swise with Lizzie, sir ,” his
brother said, more soft-spoken. “It hurts her . Might be the
baby would … ease things, d’ye think?”
Jamie’ s face betrayed nothing other than a studied attention
to th e m atter at hand, but Brianna saw him dart a quick glance
at R oger before returning his g aze to the bundle in Roger ’ s
arm, and she hi d a smile. He had certainly not for gotten his
own acrimoniou s first response to Roger , but it had been
Roger ’ s claiming of Jem that had established the first—and
very fra gile—link in the chain o f acceptance that she thought
now bound Roger nearly as close to Jamie’ s heart as she
herself.
“A ye, then,” Jamie said, still reluctant. He very much
disliked being involved in this situation, she could tell—but
hadn’ t y et succeeded in figuring out any way of dealing with
it. “G o and tell him. Just the one  of ye, though! And should he
come, t’other of ye keep well out of his sight, d’ye hear me?”
“Oh, aye, sir ,” b oth of them assured him in unison. Jo—or
Kezzie—frowned a little at the bundle, and hesitantly extended
his arms. “Should I—”
“No, don ’ t.” Liz zie was sitting b olt upright, her arms braced
to keep her wei ght of f her tender nether parts. Her small fair
brow was set in  a frown of determination. “T ell him we’re
well, aye. But i f he wants to see the bairn—he’ll come, and
welcome. But if he’ll no set foot upon my threshold … well,
then, he’ s no welcome to see his grandson. T ell him,” she
repeated, easing herself back upon her pillows.
“Now give my bairnie to me.” She held out her arms, and
clutched the sleeping baby to he r , closing her eyes against any
possibility of ar gument or reproach.7 8
THE UNIVERSAL
 BROTHERHOOD OF MAN
B RIANNA LIFTED THE W AXE D CLOTH covering one of
the big earthenware basins, and  snif fed, taking pleasure in the
musty , turned-e arth smell. She stirred the pale mess with a
stick, lif ting it out periodically in order to assess the texture of
the pulp that dripped from it.
Not bad. Another day , and it wo uld be dissolved enough to
press. She considered whether to add more of the dilute
sulfuric acid solution, but decided against it, and instead
reached into the bowl at her side , filled with the limp petals of
dogwood and redbud flowers ga thered for her by Jemmy and
Aidan. She scattered a handfu l of these delicately over the
grayish pulp, stirred them in, then covered the bowl again. By
tomorrow , they’ d be no more  than faint outlines, but still
visible as shadows in the finished sheets of paper .
“I’d alw ays hea rd that paper m ills stank.” Roger made his
way through the bushes toward her . “Perhaps they use
something else in the making?”
“Be glad I’m no t tanning hides,” she advised him. “Ian says
the Indian women use dog turds for that.”
“So do European tanners; they just call the stuf f ‘pure.’”
“Pure what?”
“Pure do g turds,  I suppose,” he said with a shrug. “How’ s it
going?”
Coming up beside her , he look ed with interest at her own
small paper factory: a dozen big , fired-clay basins, each filled
with scraps of u sed paper , worn-out scraps of silk and cotton,
flax fibers, the s oft pith of cattail reeds, and anything else she
could get her hands on that might be useful, torn to shreds orground s mall in  a quern. She’d dug out a small seep, and laid
one of her broken water pipes as a catch basin, to provide a
convenient water supply; nearby , she’d built a platform of
stone an d wood, on which sto od the framed silk screens in
which she pressed the pulp.
There was a de ad moth floating in the next bowl, and he
reached to take it out, but she waved him away .
“Bugs drown in it all the time, but as long as they’re soft-
bodied, it’ s okay . Enough sulfuric acid”—she nodded at the
bottle, stoppered with a bit of rag—”and they all just become
part of the pulp: moths, butterf lies, ants, gnats, lacewings …
wings are the only things that won’ t dissolve all the way .
Lacewings look sort of pretty e mbedded in the paper , but not
roaches.” She fished one of these out of a bowl and flicked it
away into the bushes, then adde d a little more water from the
gourd dipper , stirring.
“I’m not  surprised. I stamped on  one of them this morning;
he flattened out, then popped back up and strolled of f,
smirking.” He paused a moment; he wanted to ask her
something, she could tell, and s he made an interrogative hum
to encourage him.
“I was only wondering—would ye mind taking Jem up to
the Big House a fter supper? Perhaps the two of ye spending
the night?”
She looked at him in astonishment.
“What are you planning to do? Throw a stag party for
Gordon Lindsay ?” Gordon, a shy boy of about seventeen, was
betrothed to a Quaker girl fro m W oolam’ s Mill; he’d been
round th e day before to “thig”—beg small bits of household
goods in preparation for his marriage.
“No girl s popping out of cakes ,” he assured her , “but it’ s
definitely men only . It’ s the first meeting of the Fraser ’ s Ridge
Lodge.”
“Lodge … what, Freemasons?” She squinted dubiously at
him, but he nodded. The breeze  had come up, and it whippedhis black hair up on end; he smoothed it back with one hand.
“Neutral ground,” he explained. “I didna want to suggest
holding meetings in either the Big House or T om Christie’ s
place—not wanting to favor either side, ye might say .”
She nodded, seeing that.
“Okay . But why Freemasons?” She knew nothing whatever
about Freemasons, save that they were some sort of secret
society and that Catholics weren’ t allowed to join.
She mentioned this particular point to Roger , who laughed.
“T rue,” he said “The Pope forba de it about forty years ago.”
“Why? What does the Pope have against Freemasons?” she
asked, interested.
“It’ s rather a po werful body . A good many men of power
and influence belong—and it crosses international lines. I
imagine the Pope’ s actual conc ern is competition in terms of
power -broking—though if I recall aright, his stated reason was
that Freemasonr y is too much like a religion itself. Oh, that,
and they worship the Devil.”
He laughed.
“Y e did know y our father started a Lodge at Ardsmuir , in
the prison there?”
“Maybe he mentioned it; I don’ t remember .”
“I di d br ing up the Catholic thing with him. He gave me one
of those looks of his and said, ‘A ye, well, the Pope wasna in
Ardsmuir Prison, and I was.’”
“Sounds reasonable to me,” she said, amused. “But then,
I’m not the Pope. Did he say why? Da, I mean, not the Pope.”
“Sure—as a means of uniting the Catholics and Protestants
imprisoned together . One of the principles of Freemasonry
being the universal brotherhood of man, aye? And another
being that ye don’ t talk religion or politics in Lodge.”
“Oh, you don’ t? What do you do in Lodge, then?”“I can’ t tell you. Not worshipping the Devil, though.”
She raised her eyebrows at him, and he shrugged.
“I can’ t, ” he repeated. “When ye join, you take an oath not
to talk outside the Lodge about what’ s done there.”
She was mildly mif fed at that, but dismissed it, going back
to ad d more wa ter to one bowl. It looked as though someone
had thrown up in it, she thought critically , and reached for the
acid bottle.
“Sounds pretty fishy to me,” s he remarked. “And kind of
silly . Isn’ t there something about secret handshakes, that sort
of thing?”
He merely smiled, not bothered by her tone.
“I’m no t saying there isn’ t a bit of stage business involved.
It’ s more  or less medieval in ori gin, and it’ s kept quite a bit of
the original trappings—rather like the Catholic Church.”
“Point taken,” she said dryly , p icking up a ready bowl of
pulp. “Okay . So, is it Da’ s idea to start a Lodge here?”
“No, m ine.” His voice lost its humorous tone, and she
looked at him sharply .
“I ne ed a way to give them com mon ground, Bree,” he said.
“The wo men have it—the fishers’ wives sew and spin and knit
and quilt wi’ the others, and if they privately think you or your
mother or Mrs. Bug are heretics damned to hell, or goddamned
Whigs, or whatever , it seems to make no great dif ference. But
not the men.”
She thought of saying something about the relative
intelligence and  common sense of the two sexes, but feeling
that this might be counterproductive just at the moment,
nodded understanding. Besides, he obviously had no notion of
the kind of gossip that went on in sewing circles.
“Hold that screen steady , will you?”
He obligingly grasped the wooden frame, pulling taut the
edges of the finely drawn w ire threaded through it, asinstructed.
“So,” sh e said, spooning the thin gruel of the pulp onto the
silk, “do you want me to provide milk and cookies for this
af fair tonight?”
She spoke with considerable irony , and he smiled across the
screen at her .
“That’d be nice, aye.”
“I was joking!”
“I wasn’ t.” He was still smiling, but with complete
seriousness behind his eyes, and she realized suddenly that this
wasn’ t a whim. W ith an odd small twist of the heart, she saw
her father standing there.
One had  known the care of other men from his earliest
years, a part of t he duty of his birthright; the other had come to
it later , but both felt that burden  to be the will of God, she had
no doubt at all—both accepted that duty without question,
would honor it, or die in trying . She only hoped it wouldn’ t
come to that—for either of them.
“Give me one of  your hairs,” sh e said, looking down to hide
what she felt.
“Why?” he asked, but was plucking a strand from his head
even as he spoke.
“The paper . The pulp shouldn’ t be spread any thicker than a
hair .” Sh e laid the black thread at the edge of the silk screen,
then spr ead the creamy liquid thin and thinner , so it flowed
past the hair but did not cover it. It flowed with the liquid, a
sinuous dark line through the white, like the tiny crack on the
surface of her heart.7 9
ALARMS
l’oignon-INTELLIGENCER
A M ARRIAGE IS ANNOUNCED. The NEW BERN
INTELLIGENCER, founded by Jno. Robinson, has ceased
publication with the r emoval of its founder to Gr eat
Britain, but we assur e its Customers that this Newspaper
shall not vanish altogether , as its Pr emises, Stock, and
Subscription Lis ts have been ac quir ed by the Pr oprietors
of THE ONION, that esteemed,  popular , and Pr eeminent
Journal. The New Periodical, Much Impr oved and
Expanded, will henceforth appear as the L ’OIGNON-
INTELLIGENCER, distributed upon a W eekly Basis, with
Extra Editions as events demand, these pr ovided at a
modest cost of One Penny… .
T o Mr . and Mrs. James Fraser , of the Ridge,
North Car olina, fr om Mr . and Mrs. Fer gus Fraser ,
Thorpe Str eet, New Bern
Dear Father and Mother Clair e:
I write to acquaint you with the latest Change in our
Fortunes. Mr . Robinson, who had owned the other
Newspaper in the town, found himself r emoved to Gr eat
Britain. Literally r emoved, as some Persons unknown,
disguised as Savages, invaded his Shop in the early
Hours of the Morning, and pulled him fr om his Bed,
hurrying him to the Harbor and ther e thrusting him
aboar d a Ship, clad only in his Nightclothes and Cap.
The Captain pr omptly cast off his T ethers and made
Sail, leaving the T own in some Upr oar , as you mayimagine.
W ithin a Day of Mr . Robinson’ s abrupt Departur e,
though, we wer e visited by two separate Parties (I cannot
write their Names, being discr eet as you will appr eciate).
One of these was a Member of the local Committee of
Safety—which everyone knows was behind Mr .
Robinson’ s Removal, but no one says so. He was civil in
his Speech, but his manner was not so much. He wished,
he said, to assur e himself that Fer gus did not shar e the
W illfully W r ongheaded Sentiments so oft expr essed by Mr .
Robinson, r egar ding r ecent Events and Particulars.
Fer gus told him with a very straight face that he would
not chuse to shar e so much as a Glass of W ine with Mr .
Robinson (which he could not, Mr . Robinson being
Methody and against Drink), and the Gentleman took this
to mean what he wished, and went away satisfied, and
gave Fer gus a Purse of Money .
Next thing comes another Gentleman, fat and most
Important in the Affairs of the T own, and a Member of the
Royal Council, though I did not know it at the time. His
Errand was the Same—or rather , the Opposite: he wished
to inquir e whether Fer gus was inclined to acquir e Mr .
Robinson’ s Assets, so to continue his work on behalf of
the King—that being the printing of some Letters, and the
Suppr ession of Others.
Fer gus says to this Gentleman, most grave, that he has
always found Much to admir e in Mr . Robinson (chiefly his
horse, which is gray and very amiable, and the curious
Buckles on his Shoes), but adding that we have bar ely
Means to buy Ink and Paper , and so he fear ed we must
r esign ourselves to the Acquisition of Mr . Robinson’ s
Shop by a Person of no gr eat Sensitivity in Politickal
Matters.I was myself in T err or , a State not impr oved when the
Gentleman utter ed a Laugh and took a fat Purse fr om his
Pocket, r emarking that one must not “spoil the ship for a
happeny’ s worth of tar .” He seemed to think this most
amusing, and laughed quite immoderate, then patted
Henri-Christian on the Head and went away .
So our Pr ospects ar e at once enlar ged and alarming. I
am fair sleepless, thinking on the Futur e, but Fer gus is so
much Impr oved in Spirits that I cannot r egr et it.
Pray for us, as we pray for you always, my Dear
Par ents.
Y our Obedient and Loving Daughter ,
Marsali
“Y ou tau ght him well,” I remark ed, trying to keep my voice
casual.
“Evidently so.”  Jamie looked slightly worried, but much
more amused. “Dinna fash yourself over it, Sassenach. Fer gus
has some skill at this game.”
“It is not a game,” I said, with enough vehemence that he
looked at me in surprise.
“It’ s not,” I repeated, a little more calmly .
He raised his b rows at me, and pulling a small sheaf of
papers from the mess on his desk, handed them across.
WEDNESDA Y MORNING
 NEAR 10 OF THE CLOCK—W A TER T OWN
T o all the friends of American liberty be it known that
this morning befor e br eak of day , a brigade, consisting of
about 1,000 to 1,200 men landed at Phip’ s Farm at
Cambridge and mar ched to Lexington, wher e they found
a company of our colony militia in arms, upon whom they
fir ed without any pr ovocation and killed six men and
wounded four others. By an expr ess fr om Boston, we findanother brigade ar e now upon their mar ch fr om Boston
supposed to be about 1,000. The Bear er , Israel Bissell, is
char ged to alarm the country quite to Connecticut and all
persons ar e desir ed to furnish him with fr esh horses as
they may be needed. I have spoken with several persons
who have seen the dead and wounded. Pray let the
delegates fr om this colony to Connecticut see this.
J. Palmer , one of the Committee of Safety .
They know Col. Foster of Br ookfield one of the
Delegates.
Beneath this message was a list  of signatures, though most
were done in the  same handwriting. The first read A true copy
taken fr om the  original per or der of the Committee of
Corr espondence for W or cester—April 19, 1775. Attest. Nathan
Baldwin, T own Clerk.  All the others w ere preceded by similar
statements.
“I will be damned,” I said. “It’ s the Lexington Alarm.” I
glanced up at Jamie, wide-eyed. “Where did you get it?”
“One of  Colonel Ashe’ s men br ought it.” He shuf fled to the
end of the last sheet, pointing out John Ashe’ s endorsement.
“What is the Lexington Alarm?”
“That.” I looked at it with fasc ination. “After the battle at
Lexington, Gene ral Palmer—he ’ s a general of militia—wrote
this and sent it t hrough the countryside by an express rider , to
bear witness to what had hap pened; to notify the militias
nearby that the war had started.
“Men along the way took copies of it, endorsed them to
swear that they were true copies, and sent the message along
to other townships and villages; there were probably hundreds
of c opies made at the time, an d quite a few survived. Frank
had one that someone gave him  as a present. He kept it in a
frame, in the front hall of our house in Boston.”
Then a quite ex traordinary shudder went through me, as I
realized that the familiar letter I was looking at had in factbeen written only a week or two before—not two hundred
years.
Jamie was looking a little pale, too.
“This—it’ s what  Brianna told m e would happen,” he said, a
tone of wonder in his voice. “Upon the nineteenth of April, a
fight in Lexington—the start of the war .” He looked straight at
me, and  I saw th at his eyes wer e dark, with a combination of
awe and excitement.
“I did believe ye, Sassenach,” he said. “But …”
He didn ’ t finish the sentence, bu t sat down, reaching for his
quill. W ith slow deliberation, he signed his name at the foot of
the page.
“Y e’ll make me a fair copy , Sas senach?” he said. “I’ll send
it on.”8 0
THE WORLD TURNED
 UPSIDE DOWN
C OLONEL ASHE’S MAN HAD also brought word of a
congress to be h eld in Mecklenber g County , to take place in
mid-May , with the intent to declare the county’ s of ficial
independence from the King of England.
A ware o f the fact that he was s till viewed with skepticism
by not a few leaders of what had now suddenly become “the
rebellion,” despi te the stout personal support of John Ashe and
a few other frie nds, Jamie made up his mind to attend this
congress and speak openly in support of the measure.
Roger , absolute ly blazing with suppressed excitement at
this, his first cha nce to witness recorded history in the making,
was to go with him.
A f ew days before their sch eduled departure, though,
everyone’ s attention was distracted from the prospect of
history by the more immediate present: the entire Christie
family arrived suddenly at the front door , soon after breakfast.
Something had happened; Allan  Christie was flushed with
agitation, T om grim and gray as an old wolf. Malva had
clearly been crying, and her face went red and white by turns.
I gre eted her , bu t she looked away from me, lips trembling, as
Jamie invited them into his study , gesturing them to sit.
“What is it, T om?” He glanced briefly at Malva—plainly
she was the foc us of this fam ily emer gency—but gave his
attention to T om, as patriarch.
T om Ch ristie’ s mouth was pressed so tight that it was barely
visible in the depths of his neatly clipped beard.
“My daughter finds herself with child,” he said abruptly .“Oh?” Jamie cast another brief glance at Malva—who stood
with cap ped head bowed, looking down at her clasped hands
—then looked at me with a r aised eyebrow . “Ah. W ell …
there’ s a  good bit of it going ab out, to be sure,” he said, and
smiled k indly , in an ef fort to ease the Christies, all of whom
were quivering like beads on a tight-pulled wire.
I w as myself le ss than startled to hear the news, though
naturally concerned. Malva had always attracted a great deal
of a ttention from young men, a nd while both her brother and
father had been vigilant in prev enting any open courting, the
only way of kee ping young men away altogether would have
been to lock her in a dungeon.
Who had the successful suitor been? I wondered. Obadiah
Henderson? Bobby , perhaps? On e of the McMurchie brothers?
Not—please God—both of them, I hoped. All of these—and
not a few others—had been obvious in their admiration.
T om Christie received Jamie’ s attempt at pleasantry with
stony silence, though Allan mad e a poor attempt at a smile. He
was nearly as pale as his sister .
Jamie coughed.
“W ell, s o. Is there some way in which I might help, then,
T om?”
“She says,” Christie began gruf fly , with a piercing look at
his d aughter , “that she will not  name the man, save in your
presence.” He turned the look on Jamie, thick with dislike.
“In my presence?” Jamie coughed again, clearly
embarrassed at the obvious imp lication—that Malva thought
her mal e relatives would either beat her or proceed to do
violence upon her lover , unless  the presence of the landlord
constrained them. Personally , I thought that particular fear was
probably well founded, and gav e T om Christie a narrow look
of m y o wn. Had  he already trie d, and failed, to beat the truth
out of her?
Malva w as not making any attem pt at divulging the name of
the father of her child, Jamie’ s presence notwithstanding. Shemerely pleated her apron between her fingers, over and over ,
eyes fixed on her hands.
I cleared my throat delicately .
“How—um—how far gone are you, my dear?”
She didn’ t answer directly , but pressed both hands, shaking,
against h er apron front, smoothing down the cloth so that the
round bulge of her pregnancy was suddenly visible, smooth
and melonlike, surprisingly lar ge. Six months, perhaps; I was
startled. Clearly , she’d delayed telling her father for as long as
she possibly could—and hidden it well.
The silence was well beyond  awkward. Allan shifted
uncomfortably on his stool, and leaned forward to murmur
reassuringly to his sister .
“It’ll be all right, Mallie,” he whispered. “Y e’ve got to say ,
though.”
She took a huge gulp of air at that, and raised her head. Her
eyes were reddened, but still very beautiful, and wide with
apprehension.
“Oh, sir ,” she said, but then stopped dead.
Jamie was by now looking nea rly as uncomfortable as the
Christies, but did his best to keep his air of kindness.
“W ill ye not tell me, then, lass?” he said, as gently as
possible. “I promise ye’ll not suf fer for it.”
T om Ch ristie made an irritable noise, like some beast of
prey disturbed at its meal, and Malva went very pale indeed,
but her eyes stayed fixed on Jamie.
“Oh, sir ,” she said, and her voice was small but clear as a
bell, ringing with reproach. “O h, sir , how can ye say that to
me, whe n ye ken the truth as well as I do?” Before anyone
could re act to that, she turned to  her father , and lifting a hand,
pointed directly at Jamie.
“It was him,” she said.
I H A VE NEVER BEEN SO grateful for anything in life as for
the f act that I was looking at Jam ie’ s face when she said it. He
had no warning, no chance to  control his features—and he
didn’ t. His face showed neither anger nor fear , denial or
surprise; nothing  save the open- mouthed blankness of absolute
incomprehension.
“What?” he said, and blinke d, once. Then realization
flooded into his face.
“WHA T?” he said, in a tone that should have knocked the
little trollop flat on her lying little bottom.
She  blinked then, and cast down her eyes, the very picture
of virtue shamed. She turned, as though unable to bear his
gaze, and stretched out a tremulous hand toward me.
“I’m so  sorry , Mrs. Fraser ,” she whispered, tears trembling
becomingly on her lashes. “He—we—we didna mean to hurt
ye.”
I watched with interest from somewhere outside my body ,
as my arm lifted and drew back, and felt a sense of vague
approval as my hand struck her  cheek with enough force that
she stum bled backward, tripped over a stool, and fell, her
petticoats tumbled up to her waist in a froth of linen, wool-
stockinged legs sticking absurdly up in the air .
“Can’ t s ay the same, I’m afraid .” I hadn’ t even thought of
saying anything , and was surprised to feel the words in my
mouth, cool and round as river stones.
Suddenly , I was back in my bod y . I felt as though my stays
had tightened during my temporary absence; my ribs ached
with the  ef fort to breathe. Liquid sur ged in every direction;
blood an d lymph, sweat and te ars—if I did draw breath, my
skin would give way and let it all spurt out, like the contents of
a ripe tomato, thrown against a wall.
I ha d no  bones. But I had will. That alone held me upright
and saw  me out the door . I didn’ t see the corridor or realize
that I had pushed open the fron t door of the house; all I saw
was a sudden blaze of light and a blur of green in the dooryardand then  I was running, running as though all the demons of
hell coursed at my heels.
In fa ct, no one pursued me. And yet I ran, plunging of f the
trail and into th e wood, feet sli ding in the layers of slippery
needles down the runnels betw een stones, half-falling down
the slope of th e hill, caroming painfully of f fallen logs,
wrenching free of thorns and brush.
I arr ived breathless at the bottom  of a hill and found myself
in a dark , small hollow walled by the towering black-green of
rhododendrons. I paused, gasping for breath, then sat down
abruptly . I felt myself wobble, a nd let go, ending on my back
among the dusty layers of leathery mountain laurel leaves.
A fa int thought echoed in my m ind, under the sound of my
gasping breath. The guil ty flee, wher e no man p ursues.  But I
surely wasn’ t guilty . Nor was Jamie; I knew that. Knew it.
But Malva was certainly pregnant. Someone was guilty .
My eyes  were blurred from running and the sunlight starred
into frac tured sla bs and streaks o f color—dark blue, light blue,
white an d gray , pinwheels of green and gold as the cloudy sky
and the mountainside spun round and round above me.
I blinked hard, unshed tears sliding down my temples.
“Bloody , bloody , fucking hell,” I said very softly . “Now
what?”
JAMIE ST OOPED WITHOUT thought, seized the girl by the
elbows, and hauled her unceremoniously to her feet. Her one
cheek bo re a crimson patch wh ere Claire had struck her , and
for an instant, he  had a strong ur ge to give her one to match on
the other side.
He hadn’ t the ch ance either to q uell that desire or to execute
it; a hand seized his shoulder to yank him round, and it was
reflex al one that made him dodg e aside as Allan Christie’ s fist
glanced of f the s ide of his head, catching him painfully on the
tip o f th e ear . He pushed the young man hard in the chest with
both hands, then hooked a heel b ehind his calf as he staggered,and Alla n dropp ed on his backs ide with a thud that shook the
room.
Jamie st epped back, a hand to his throbbing ear , and glared
at T om Christie, who was stan ding staring at him like Lot’ s
wife.
Jamie’ s free left hand was clenched in a fist, and he raised it
a little, in invitation. Christie’ s eyes narrowed further , but he
made no move toward Jamie.
“Get up,” Christie said to his s on. “And keep your fists to
yourself. There’ s nay need for that now .”
“Isn’ t th ere?” cried the lad, scrambling to his feet. “He’ s
made a whore of your daught er , and you’ll let him stand?
W ell, and ye’ll play coward, auld man, I’ll not!”
He lunged at Jamie, wild-eyed, hands grabbing for his
throat. J amie stepped to the sid e, shifted weight back on one
leg, and  hooked  the lad in the liver with a vicious left that
drove his wame into his backbo ne and doubled him over with
a whoof.  Allan stared up  at him, open-mouthed and the whites
of h is eyes show ing all round, then subsided onto his knees
with a thud, mouth opening and closing like a fish’ s.
It might have been comical under other circumstances, but
Jamie felt no dis position to laugh. He wasted no more time on
either of the men, but swung round on Malva.
“So, what mischief is this ye’re about, nighean na galladh ?”
he said to her . It was a serious insult, and T om Christie knew
what it meant, Gaelic or not; Jamie could see Christie stif fen,
in the corner of his eye.
The girl  herself was already in tears, and burst into sobs at
this.
“How ca n ye speak to me so?” she wailed, and clutched her
apron to her face. “How can ye be so cruel?”
“Oh, for God’ s sake,” he said crossly . He shoved a stool in
her dire ction. “Sit, ye wee loo n, and we’ll hear the truth of
whatever ye think ye’re up to. Mr . Christie?” He glanced atT om, nodded toward another stool, and went to take his own
chair , ignoring Allan, who had collapsed onto the floor and
was curled up on his side like a kitten, holding his belly .
“Sir?”
Mrs. Bu g, hearing the racket, had come out from her
kitchen, and was standing in the  doorway , eyes wide under her
cap.
“W ill ye  … be needin’ anything , sir?” she asked, making no
pretense of not staring from Ma lva, red-faced and sobbing on
her stool, to Allan, white and gasping on the floor .
Jamie th ought th at he needed a strong dram—or maybe two
—but that would have to wait.
“I thank  ye, Mrs. Bug,” he said politely , “but no. W e’ll
bide.” He lifted his fingers in dismissal, and she faded
reluctantly from  view . She hadn’ t gone far , though, he knew ,
just round the edge of the door .
He rubbed a ha nd over his face, wondering what it was
about young girls these days. It was a full moon tonight;
perhaps they truly did run lunatic.
On the other h and, the wee b itch had undoubtedly been
playing the loon with someone;  with her apron u p like that, the
bairn was showing plainly , a ha rd round swell like a calabash
under her thin petticoat.
“How long?” he asked Christie, with a nod toward her .
“Six months gone,” Christie said, and sank reluctantly onto
the o f fered stool. He was dour a s Jamie had ever seen him, but
in control of himself, that was something.
“It w as when th e sickness came late last summer; when I
was here, helping to nurse h is wife!” Malva burst out,
lowering her apron and staring reproachfully at her father , full
lip a-tre mble. “ And not just th e once, either!” She switched
her gaze  back to Jamie, wet-eye d and pleading. “T ell them, sir ,
please—tell them the truth!”“Oh, I mean to,” he said, giving her a black look. “And ye’ll
do the same, lass, I assure ye.”
The sho ck of it was beginning to fade, and while his sense
of irritation remained—in fact, it was growing by the moment
—he was beginning to think, and furiously .
She was pregnant by someone grossly unsuitable; that much
was clear . Who? Christ, he w ished Claire had stayed; she
listened to the gossip on the Ridge and she took interest in the
lass; she’d know which young men were likely prospects.
He’d seldom noticed young Ma lva particularly himself, save
she was always about, helping Claire.
“The first time was when Herse lf was so ill as we despaired
of her life,” Malva said, snapping him back to attention. “I told
ye, Faith er . It wasna rape—only Himself being of f his heid wi’
the sorro w of it, and me, as well.” She blinked, a pearly tear
sliding down the unmarked ch eek. “I came down from her
room late at nig ht, to find him in here, sitting in the dark, and
grieving. I felt s o sorry for him…  .” Her voice shook, and she
stopped, swallowing.
“I asked  could I fetch him a wee bite, maybe something to
drink—but he’d drink taken already , there was whisky in a
glass before him… .”
“And I said no , thank ye kindly , and that I’d be alone,”
Jamie br oke in, feeling the blood begin to sur ge in his temples
at her recounting. “Y e left.”
“No, I didn’ t.” S he shook her head; the cap had come half
of f w hen she fell and she hadn’ t settled it again; dark tendrils
of hair hung down, framing her face. “Or rather , ye did say
that to me, that ye’d be alone. B ut I couldn’ t bear to see ye in
such straits, and—I know ‘twas forward and unseemly , but I
did pity ye so much!” she burst out, looking up and then
immediately dropping her gaze again.
“I …  I came and touched him,” she whispered, so low that
he had trouble hearing her . “Put my hand on his shoulder , like,
only to comfort him. But he turned then, and put his armsround m e, all of a sudden and grasped me to him. And—and
then …” She gulped, audibly .
“He … he took me. Just … there.” The toe of one small
buskin stretched  out, pointing delicately at the rag rug just in
front of the table. Where there w as, in fact, a small and ancient
brown stain, which might have been blood. It was  blood—
Jemmy’ s, left when the wee la d had tripped on the rug and
bumped his nose so it bled.
He opened his mouth to spea k, but was so choked by
outraged amazement that nothing emer ged but a sort of gasp.
“So ye’v e not the balls to deny it, eh?” Y oung Allan had
recovered his breath; he was swaying on his knees, hair
hanging in his face, and glar ing. “Balls enough to do it,
though!”
Jamie gave Allan a quelling loo k, but didn’ t bother replying
to him. He turned his attention instead to T om Christie.
“Is she mad?” he inquired. “Or only clever?”
Christie’ s face might have been carved in stone, save for the
pouchy flesh quivering beneath his eyes, and the eyes
themselves, bloodshot and narrowed.
“She’ s not mad,” Christie said.
“A c lever liar , t hen.” Jamie narrowed his own eyes at her .
“Clever enough to ken no one would believe a tale of rape.”
Her mouth opened in horror .
“Oh, no , sir ,” she said, and shoo k her head so hard the dark
curls da nced by  her ears. “I should never  say such a thing of
ye, never!” She swallowed, and timidly raised her eyes to meet
his—swollen with weeping, but a soft dove gray , guileless
with innocence.
“Y e nee ded comfort,” she said, softly but clearly . “I gave it
ye.”
He pinched the bridge of his nose hard betwixt thumb and
forefinger , hoping the sensation would wake him from whatwas pla inly nightmare. This failing to occur , he sighed and
looked at T om Christie.
“She’ s w ith child by someone, and not by me,” he said
bluntly . “Who might it have been?”
“It was  you !” the girl protested, letting her apron fall as she
sat bolt upright on her stool. “There’ s no one else!”
Christie’ s eyes slid reluctantly toward his daughter , then
came ba ck to meet Jamie’ s. They were the same dove gray , but
they’d never possessed any trace of either guilelessness or
innocence.
“I know of no one,” he said. He took a deep breath, squaring
his stocky shoulders. “She says it wasn’ t just the once. That ye
had her a doz en times or more.” His voice was nearly
colorless, but not from lack of f eeling, rather , from the grip he
had upon his feelings.
“Then s he’ s lied a dozen times or more,” Jamie said,
keeping his own voice under as much control as Christie’ s.
“Y e know I hav e not! Y our wife believes me,” Malva said,
and a steely note had entered h er voice. She lifted a hand to
her chee k, where the flaming co lor had subsided but where the
print of Claire’ s fingers was still clear , livid in outline.
“My wife has better sense,” he said coldly , but was
conscious all the same of a sinking sensation at the mention of
Claire. Any woman might find such an accusation shock
enough to make her flee—but h e did wish that she’d stayed.
Her presence, stoutly denying any misbehavior by him and
personally rebuking Malva’ s lies, would have helped.
“Does she?” The vivid color ha d faded from the girl’ s face
altogether , but she had stopped weeping. She was white-faced,
her eyes huge and brilliant. “W ell, I’ve sense, as well, sir .
Sense enough to prove what I say .”
“Oh, aye?” he said skeptically . “How?”
“I’ve se en the scars on your naked body; I can describe
them.”That declaration brought ever yone up short. There was
silence for a moment, broken by Allan Christie’ s grunt of
satisfaction. He rose to his feet , one hand still pressed to his
middle, but an unpleasant smile upon his face.
“So, then?” he said. “Nay answer to that one, have ye?”
Irritation had long since given way to a monstrous anger .
Under that, though, was the barest thread of something he
would not—not yet—call fear .
“I dinna  put my scars on display ,” he said mildly , “but there
are a  number of  folk who’ve seen them, nonetheless. I havena
lain with any of them,  either .”
“A ye, folk speak sometimes of the scars on your back,”
Malva shot back. “And everyone kens the great ugly one up
your leg, that ye  took at Cullod en. But what of the crescent-
shaped one across your ribs? Or the wee one on your left
hurdie?” She reached a hand behind her , cupping her own
buttock in illustration.
“Not in the center , quite—a bit down, on the outer side.
About th e size of a farthing.” She didn’ t smile, but something
like triumph blazed in her eyes.
“I havena got—” he began, but then stopped, appalled.
Christ, he did. A  spider ’ s bite, ta ken in the Indies, that festered
for a week, made an abscess, then burst, to his great relief.
Once healed, he’d never thought of it again—but it was there.
T oo late. They’d seen the realization cross his face.
T om Christie closed his eyes, ja w working under his beard.
Allan grunted again with satisfaction, and crossed his arms.
“W ant to show us she’ s wrong ?” the young man inquired
sarcastically . “T ake down your breeks, and gie us a look at
your backside, then!”
W ith a good de al of ef fort, he kept himself from telling
Allan C hristie what he could d o with his own backside. He
took a long, slo w breath, hoping that by the time he let it out
again, some useful thought would have come to him.It didn’ t. T om Christie opened his eyes with a sigh.
“So,” he said fla tly . “I suppose ye’ll not intend to put aside
your wife and marry her?”
“I sh ould never do such a thing! ” The suggestion filled him
with fury—and something like panic at the mere notion of
being without Claire.
“Then w e’ll draw a contract.” Christie rubbed a hand over
his face, shoulders slumped w ith exhaustion and distaste.
“Maintenance fo r her and the bairn. Formal acknowledgment
of th e child’ s r ights as one of  your heirs. Y e can decide, I
suppose, if ye wish to take it for your wife to rear , but that—”
“Get ou t.” He rose, very slowly , and leaned forward, hands
on the table, eyes fixed on Christie’ s. “T ake your daughter and
leave my house.”
Christie stopped speaking and looked at him, black-browed.
The girl had started grieving again, making whimpering noises
into her apron. He’d the odd f eeling that time had stopped,
somehow; they would all just be trapped here forever , himself
and Christie staring each other d own like dogs, unable to look
down bu t knowing that the flo or of the room had vanished
beneath their feet and they hung suspended over some dreadful
abyss, in the endless moment before the fall.
It was Allan Christie who broke it, of course. The
movement of the young man’ s hand going to his knife freed
Jamie’ s gaze from Christie’ s, and his fingers tightened,
digging into the wood of the tab le. An instant before, he’d felt
bodiless; now blood hammered in his temples and pulsed
through his limbs and his muscles trembled with an ur gent
need to damage Allan Christie. And wring his sister ’ s neck to
stop her noise, as well.
Allan Christie’ s face was black with anger , but he’d sense
enough—barely , Jamie thought—not to draw the knife.
“I shoul d like nothing better , wee man, than to gie ye your
heid in your han ds to play with,” he said softly . “Leave now ,
before I do it.”Y oung Christie licked his lips and tensed himself,
knucklebones going white on the hilt—but his eyes wavered.
He g lanced at his father , who sat like a stone, grim-jowled and
square. The light had changed ; it shone from the side and
through the grizzled tufts of Ch ristie’ s beard, so his own scar
showed, a thin pink rope that curled like a snake above his
jaw .
Christie straightened slowly , pushing himself up with his
hands on  his thighs, then shook his head suddenly like a dog
shaking of f water and stood up. He gripped Malva by the arm,
lifted he r from her stool, and pushed her before him, weeping
and stumbling on the way out.
Allan fo llowed them, making occasion to brush so near to
Jamie as he lef t that Jamie could smell the younger man’ s
stink, ripe with f ury . Y oung Christie cast a single angry glance
back over his sh oulder , hand still on his knife—but left. Their
tread in the hall made the floorboards tremble under Jamie’ s
feet, and then came the heavy slam of the door .
He l ooked down, then, vaguely surprised to see the battered
surface of his table and his own hands still flattened there as if
they’d g rown to it. He straighte ned up and his fingers curled,
the s tif f joints p ainful as they made themselves into fists. He
was drenched with sweat.
Lighter footsteps came down the hall then, and Mrs. Bug
came in  with a tray . She set it down before him, curtsied to
him, and went out. The single crystal goblet that he owned was
stood on it, and the decanter that held the good whisky .
He felt obscurel y that he wanted  to laugh, but couldn’ t quite
remember how it was done. The  light touched the decanter and
the drink within glowed like a  chrysoberyl. He touched the
glass gently in a cknowledgment of Mrs. Bug’ s loyalty , but that
would have to wait. The Devi l was loose in the world and
there’d b e hell to pay , surely . Be fore he did aught else, he must
find Claire.
AFTER A TIME, the drifting clouds boiled up into
thunderheads, and a cold breeze moved over the top of the
hollow , shaking the laurels overhead with a rattling like dry
bones. V ery slowly , I got to my feet and began to climb.
I had no sure destination in m ind; didn’ t care, really , if I
were we t or not. I only knew t hat I couldn’ t go back to the
house. As it wa s, I came to the trail that led to the White
Spring, just as rain began to fall. Huge drops splattered on the
leaves of pokeweed and burdock, and the firs and pines let go
their long-held breath in a fragrant sigh.
The patter of drops on leaves and branches was punctuated
by the muf fled thud of heavier drops striking deep into soft
earth—hail was coming with the  rain, and suddenly there were
tiny wh ite particles of ice bouncing crazily on the packed
needles, peppering my face and neck with stinging cold.
I ran , th en, and took shelter beneath the drooping branches
of a  balsam fir that overhung the spring. The hail pocked the
water an d made it dance, but melted on impact, disappearing
at o nce into the  dark water . I sat still, arms wrapped around
myself against the chill, shivering.
Y ou could almost understand,  s aid the part of  my mind that
had begun talking somewhere on the journey up the hill.
Everyone thoug ht you wer e dyi ng—including you. Y ou know
what happens … you’ve seen it.  People under the terrible strain
of grief, those dealing with the presence of overwhelming
death—I’d seen  it. It was a natural seeking of solace; an
attempt to hide, only for a mom ent, to deny death’ s coldness
by taking comfort in the simple warmth of bodily contact.
“But he didn’ t,” I said stubborn ly , out loud. “If he had,  and
that was it—I could for give him. But God damn it, he didn’ t !”
My subconscious subsided in the face of this certainty , but I
was awa re of subterranean stirr ings—not suspicions, nothing
strong enough to be called doubts. Only small, cool
observations tha t poked their heads above the surface of my
own dark well like spring peepers, high, thin pipings that werebarely a udible i ndividually but that together might eventually
form a racket of sound to shake the night.
Y ou’r e an old woman.
See how the veins stand out on your hands.
The fles h has fallen away fr om your bones; your br easts
sag.
If he wer e desperate, needing comfort …
He m ight r eject her , but could n ever turn away fr om a child
of his blood.
I c losed my eye s and fought a rising sense of nausea. The
hail had  passed, succeeded by heavy rain, and cold steam
began to rise from the ground, vapor drifting upward,
disappearing like ghosts into the downpour .
“No,” I said aloud. “No!”
I felt as though I had swallowed several lar ge rocks, jagged
and dirt-covered. It wasn’ t just t he thought that Jamie might—
but t hat Malva had  mo st ce rtainly betrayed me. Had betrayed
me if it were true—and still more, if it were not.
My apprentice. My daughter of the heart.
I was safe from the rain, but the air was thick with water;
my garments grew damp and h ung heavy on me, clammy on
my s kin. Through the rain, I cou ld see the big white stone that
stood at  the head of the spring , that gave the pool its name.
Here it was that Jamie had sh ed his blood in sacrifice, and
dashed i t on that rock, asking th e help of the kinsman he had
slain. And here it was that Fer gus had lain down, opening his
veins in despair for his son, his blood blooming dark in the
silent water .
And I began to realize why I had come here, why the place
had called me. It was a place to meet oneself, and find truth.
The rain passed, and the clou ds broke. Slowly , the light
began to fade.
IT W AS  NEARL Y DARK when he came. The trees were
moving, restless with twilig ht and whispering among
themselves; I didn’ t hear his foo tsteps on the sodden trail. He
was just there, suddenly , at the edge of the clearing.
He s tood searching; I saw his he ad lift when he saw me, and
then he strode round the p ool and ducked under the
overhanging bra nches of my shelter . He’d been out for some
time, I saw; his coat was wet and the cloth of his shirt
plastered to his chest with rain and sweat. He’d brought a
cloak w ith him, bundled under his arm, and he unfolded this
and wrapped it round my shoulders. I let him.
He sat quite cl ose to me then , arms wrapped about his
knees, and stared into the dark ening pool of the spring. The
light had reached that point of  beauty , just before all color
fades, and the hairs of his eyebrows arched auburn and perfect
over the solid ridges of his brows, each hair distinct, like the
shorter , darker hairs of his sprouting beard.
He brea thed long and deep, as though he had been walking
for some time, and rubbed away a drop of moisture that
dripped from the end of his nose. Once or twice, he took a
shorter breath, as though about to say something, but didn’ t.
The bird s had come out briefl y after the rain. Now they
were going to their rest, cheeping softly in the trees.
“I do  hop e you were  planning to s ay something,” I said
finally , politely . “Because if you don’ t, I’ll probably start
screaming, and I might not be able to stop.”
He made a sound somewhere between amusement and
dismay , and sank his face into  the palms of his hands. He
stayed th at way for a moment, then rubbed his hands hard over
his face and sat up, sighing.
“I have been th inking all the ti me I was searching for ye,
Sassenach, what in God’ s name I should say when I found ye.
I thought of on e thing and another—and … there seemed
nothing whatever I could  say .” He sounded helpless.“How is  that?” I asked, a distinc t edge in my voice. “I could
think of a few things to say , I daresay .”
He sighed, and made a brief gesture of frustration.
“What? T o say I  was sorry—that’ s not right. I am  sorry , but
to say so—it sou nds as though I’ve done something to be sorry
for , and that I have not. But I thought to start of f so would
make ye  maybe  think …” He glanced at me. I was keeping a
tight gri p on both my face and my emotions, but he knew me
very well. The instant he’d said, “I’m sorry ,” my stomach had
plunged toward my feet.
He looked away .
“There’ s naught  I can say ,” he said quietly , “that doesna
sound as  though  I try to defend or excuse myself. And I willna
do that.”
I made a small sound, as though someone had punched me
in the stomach, and he glanced sharply at me.
“I won’ t do it!” he said fiercely . “There is no way to deny
such a char ge that doesna carr y the stink of doubt about it.
And nothing I can say to you that doesna sound like some
groveling apolo gy for—for—w ell, I willna apologize for
something I havena done, and if I did, ye’d only doubt me
more.”
I was beginning to breathe a little easier .
“Y ou don’ t seem to have a lot of faith in my faith in you .”
He gave me a wary look.
“If I hadna got quite a lot of i t, Sassenach, I wouldna be
here.”
He watc hed me for a moment, then reached out and touched
my hand. My fingers turned at once and curved to meet his,
and our hands clasped tight. His  fingers were big and cold and
he held mine so tightly that I thought my bones would break.
He took a deep breath, almost a sob, and his shoulders, tight
in his sodden coat, relaxed all at once.“Y e didna think it true?” he asked. “Y e ran away .”
“It was  a shock,” I said. And I’d thought, dimly , that if I
stayed, I might just kill her .
“A ye, it was,” he said very dryly . “I expect I might have run
away myself—if I could.”
A small  twinge of guilt was added to the overload of
emotions; I supposed my hasty  exit couldn’ t have helped the
situation. He didn’ t reproach me, though, but merely said
again, “Y e didna think it true, though?”
“I don’ t.”
“Y e don’ t.” His eyes searched mine. “But ye did?”
“No.” I pulled t he cloak closer round me, settling it on my
shoulders. “I didn’ t. But I didn’ t know why .”
“And now ye do.”
I t ook a deep, d eep breath of my own and let it go, then
turned to face him, straight on.
“Jamie Fraser ,” I said, with grea t deliberation. “If you could
do s uch a thing as that—and I do n’ t mean lying with a woman,
I me an d oing it and lying to me  about it—then everything I’ve
done and everything I’ve been—my whole life—has been a
lie. And I am not prepared to admit such a thing.”
That surprised him a little; it was nearly dark now , but I saw
his eyebrows rise.
“What d’ye mean by that, Sassenach?”
I wa ved a hand up the trail, wh ere the house lay invisible
above us, then to ward the spring, where the white stone stood,
a blur in the dark.
“I do n’ t belong here,” I said sof tly . “Brianna, Roger … they
don’ t belong here. Jemmy shouldn’ t be here; he should be
watching cartoons on television, drawing pictures of cars and
airplanes with crayons—not lea rning to shoot a gun as big as
he is and cut the entrails from a deer .”I lift ed my face and closed my eyes, feeling the damp settle
on my skin, heavy on my lashes.
“But we ar e  here, all of us. And we’re here because I loved
you, more than the life that was mine. Because I believed you
loved me the same way .”
I too k a deep breath, so that my voice wouldn’ t tremble,
opened my eyes and turned to him.
“W ill you tell me that’ s not true?”
“No,” he said after a moment, so softly I could barely hear
him. His hand tightened harder on mine. “No, I willna tell ye
that. Not ever , Claire.”
“W ell, th en,” I said, and felt the anxiety and fury and fear of
the a fternoon run out of me like  water . I rested my head on his
shoulder , and breathed the rain  and sweat on his skin. He
smelled acrid, pungent with th e musk of fear and curdled
anger .
It w as entirely dark by now . I could hear sounds in the
distance, Mrs. Bug calling to Ar ch from the stable where she’d
been milking the goats, and hi s cracked old voice hallooing
back. A bat flittered past, silent and hunting.
“Claire?” Jamie said softly .
“Hm?”
“I’ve got to tell ye something.”
I fro ze. After a moment, I carefully detached myself from
him and sat upright.
“Don’ t do that,” I said. “It ma kes me feel as though I’ve
been punched in the stomach.”
“I’m sorry .”
I w rapp ed my arms around myself, trying to swallow the
sudden feeling of nausea.
“Y ou said you w ouldn’ t start of f by saying you were sorry ,
because it felt a s though there must be something to be sorryfor .”
“I did,” he said, and sighed.
I fel t the movement between u s as the two stif f fingers of
his right hand thrummed against his leg.
“There i sna any good way ,” he said finally , “of telling your
wife ye’ve lain wi’ someone else. No matter what the
circumstances. There’ s just not.”
I felt suddenly dizzy , and short of breath. I closed my eyes
momentarily . He didn’ t mean Malva; he’d made that clear .
“Who?” I said as evenly as possible. “And when?”
He stirred uneasily .
“Oh. W ell … when ye … whe n ye were … gone, to be
sure.”
I managed to take a short breath.
“Who?” I said.
“Just the once,” he said. “I m ean—I hadna the slightest
intention of—”
“Who?”
He sighed, and rubbed hard at the back of his neck.
“Christ. The last thing I want is  to upset ye, Sassenach, by
sounding as though it—but I dinna want to malign the puir
woman by makin’ it seem that she was—”
“WHO?” I roared, seizing him by the arm.
“Jesus!” he said, thoroughly startled. “Mary MacNab.”
“Who?” I said again, blankly this time.
“Mary MacNab,” he repeated, and sighed. “Can ye let go,
Sassenach? I think ye’ve drawn blood.”
I ha d, my finger nails digging hard enough into his wrist as
to p ierce the ski n. I flung his hand away , and folded my own
into fists, wrapping my arms around my body by way of
stopping myself from strangling him.“Who. The. Hell. Is. Mary . MacNab?” I said, through my
teeth. My face w as hot, but cold sweat prickled along my jaw
and rolled down my ribs.
“Y e ken her , Sa ssenach. She was wife to Rab—him that
died when his house was bur nt. They had the one bairn,
Rabbie; he was stable-lad at Lallybroch when—”
“Mary MacNab. Her? ” I could hear th e astonishment in my
own voice. I did recall Mary MacNab—barely . She’d come to
be a  mai d at Lallybroch after the death of her nasty husband; a
small, wiry woman, worn with work and hardship, who
seldom spoke, but went about her business like a shadow ,
never more than half-noticed i n the rowdy chaos of life at
Lallybroch.
“I scarc ely noticed her ,” I said, trying—and failing—to
remember wheth er she had been  there on my last visit. “But I
gather you did? ”
“No,” he said, and sighed. “Not like ye mean, Sassenach.”
“Don’ t c all me that,” I said, my voice sounding low and
venomous to my own ears.
He mad e a Scottish noise in his throat, of frustrated
resignation, rubbing his wrist.
“A ye. W ell, see, ‘twas the night  before I gave myself up to
the English—”
“Y ou never told me that!”
“Never told ye what?” He sounded confused.
“That you gave yourself up to  the English. W e thought
you’d been captured.”
“I was,” he said briefly . “But by arrangement, for the price
on m y head.” H e flipped a hand, dismissing the matter . “It
wasna important.”
“They might have hanged you!”  And a good thing, too,  said
the small, furiously hurt voice inside.“No, the y would n’ t.” A faint tin ge of amusement showed in
his voice. “Y e’d told me so, S ass—mmphm. I didna really
care, though, if they did.”
I had  no  idea what he meant by saying I’d told him so, but I
certainly didn’ t care at the moment.
“For get that,” I said tersely . “I want to know—”
“About Mary . A ye, I ken.” He ru bbed a hand slowly through
his h air . “A ye, well. She came  to me, the night before I—I
went. I was in th e cave, ken, nea r Lallybroch, and she brought
me supper . And then she … stayed.”
I b it my tongue,  not to interrupt . I could feel him gathering
his thoughts, searching for words.
“I tried to send her away ,” he said at last. “She … well,
what she said to me …” He  glanced at me; I saw the
movement of his head. “She said she’d seen me with ye, Claire
—and that she k ent the look of a true love when she saw it, for
all she’d  not had one herself. An d that it wasna in her mind to
make me betray that. But she would give me … some small
thing. T hat’ s wh at she said to me,” he said, and his voice had
grown husky , “‘some small thing, that maybe ye can use.’”
“It was—I mean, it wasna …” He stopped, and made that
odd shrugging motion of his, a s though his shirt were tight
across his shoulders. He bowed his head for a moment on his
knees, hands linked round them.
“She ga ve me tenderness,” he said finally , so softly that I
barely heard him. “I—I hope I gave her the same.”
My throat and chest were too  tight to speak, and tears
prickled behind my eyes. I remembered, quite suddenly , what
he had said to me the night I mended T om Christie’ s hand,
about th e Sacre d Heart— “so wanting—a nd no one to touch
him.”  And he had lived in a cave for seven years, alone.
There w as no more than a foot of space between us, but it
seemed an unbridgeable gulf.I r eached across it and laid my hand on his, the tips of my
fingers on his b ig, weathered knuckles. I took a breath, then
two, try ing to steady my voic e, but it cracked and broke,
nonetheless.
“Y ou gave her … tenderness. I know you did.”
He turne d to me, suddenly , and my face was pressed into his
coat, the  cloth of it damp and  rough on my skin, my tears
blooming in tiny warm patches that vanished at once into the
chill of the fabric.
“Oh, Cl aire,” he whispered into my hair . I reached up, and
could feel wetness on his chee ks. “She said—she wished to
keep ye alive for  me. And she meant it; she didna mean to take
anything for herself.”
I cried then, holding nothing back. For empty years,
yearning for the touch of a hand. Hollow years, lying beside a
man I had betra yed, for whom I had no tenderness. For the
terrors a nd doub ts and griefs of the day . Cried for him and me
and for Mary MacNab, who knew what loneliness was—and
what love was, as well.
“I would have t old ye, before,” he whispered, patting my
back as though I were a small c hild. “But it was … it was the
once.” H e shrugged a little, helpless. “And I couldna think
how . How to say it, that ye’d understand.”
I so bbed, gulped air , and final ly sat up, wiping my face
carelessly on a fold of my skirt.
“I un derstand,” I said. My voice  was thick and clogged, but
fairly steady now . “I do.”
And I did. Not o nly about Mary MacNab and what she had
done—but why he’d told me now . There was no need; I would
never have known. No need but  the need for absolute honesty
between us—and that I must know it was there.
I h ad believed h im, about Malva. But now I had not only
certainty of mind—but peace of heart.W e sat close to gether , the folds of my cloak and skirts
flowing over his legs, his simple presence a comfort.
Somewhere nearby , a very early cricket began to chirp.
“The rain’ s past, then,” I said, h earing it. He nodded, with a
small sound of assent.
“What shall we do?” I said at last. My voice sounded calm.
“Find out the truth—if I can.”
Neither of us mentioned the possibility that he might not. I
shifted, gathering the folds of my cloak.
“W ill we go home, then?”
It was too dark to see now , but I felt him nod as he got to his
feet, putting down a hand to help me.
“A ye, we will.”
THE HOUSE W AS EMPTY when we returned, though Mrs.
Bug had  left a c overed dish of s hepherd’ s pie on the table, the
floor swept, and the fire neatly smoored. I took of f my wet
cloak an d hung it on the peg, but then stood, unsure quite what
to do next, as though I stood in a stranger ’ s house, in a country
where I did not know the custom.
Jamie seemed to feel the same way—though after a
moment, he stirred, fetched down the candlestick from the
shelf ov er the hearth, and lit it with a spill from the fire. The
wavering glow seemed only to emphasize the odd, echoing
quality o f the room, and he stoo d holding it for a minute, at a
loss, bef ore finally setting it down with a thump in the middle
of the table.
“Are ye  hungry , S … Sassenac h?” He had begun to speak
by habit , but then interrupted h imself, looking up to be sure
the nam e was once more allowed. I did my best to smile at
him, though I could feel the corners of my mouth tremble.
“No. Are you?”He s hook his h ead, silent, and dropped his hand from the
dish. Looking round for someth ing else to do, he took up the
poker an d stirred the coals, breaking up the blackened embers
and send ing a swirl of sparks an d soot up the chimney and out
onto the  hearth. It would ruin th e fire, which would need to be
rebuilt before bed, but I said nothing—he knew that.
“It feels like a d eath in the famil y ,” I said at last. “As though
something terrible has happene d, and this is the shocked bit,
before you begin to send round and tell all the neighbors.”
He gave a small, rueful laugh, and put the poker down.
“W e’ll not need to. They’ll all k en well enough by daybreak
what’ s happened.”
Rousing at last from my immob ility , I shook out my damp
skirts an d came to stand beside him by the fire. The heat of it
seared at once through the wet cloth; it should have been
comforting, but there was an ic y weight in my abdomen that
wouldn’ t melt. I put a hand on his arm, needing the touch of
him.
“No one will believe it,” I said. He put a hand over mine,
and smiled a little, his eyes closed, but shook his head.
“They’ll all believe it, Claire,” he said softly . “I’m sorry .”8 1
BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT
I T ISN’T FREAKING TRUE!”
“No, of course not.” Roger wa tched his wife warily; she
was exhibiting the general symptoms of a lar ge explosive
device w ith an unstable timing mechanism, and he had the
distinct feeling that it was dangerous to be in her vicinity .
“That little bitch ! I want to just grab her and choke the truth
out of her!” Her  hand closed convulsively on the neck of the
syrup bottle, and he reached to  take it from her before she
should break it.
“I u nderstand the impulse,” he said, “but on the whole—
better not.”
She glared at him, but relinquished the bottle.
“Can’ t you  do something?” she said.
He’d been asking himself that s ince he’d heard the news of
Malva’ s accusation.
“I don’ t know ,” he said. “But I thought I’d go and talk to the
Christies, at least. And if I can get Malva alone, I will.”
Thinking of his last tete-a-tete w ith Malva Christie, though, he
had an uneasy fe eling that she w ouldn’ t be easily shaken from
her story .
Brianna sat down, scowling at her plate of buckwheat cakes,
and began slathering them with butter . Her fury was beginning
to g ive way to rational thought; he could see ideas darting
behind her eyes.
“If y ou can get  her to admit that it’ s not true,” she said
slowly , “that’ s good. If not, though—the next best thing is to
find out who’ s been with her . If some guy will admit in publicthat he could  be the father—that would cast a lot of doubt on
her story , at least.”
“T rue.” Roger poured syrup sparingly over his own cakes,
even in the mids t of uncertainty and anxiety enjoying the thick
dark smell of it and the anticipation of rare sweetness.
“Though there would still be those who’d be convinced
Jamie’ s guilty . Here.”
“I sa w h er kissin g Obadiah Henderson in the woods,” Bree
said, accepting the bottle. “Late last fall.” She shuddered
fastidiously . “If it was him, no  wonder she doesn’ t want to
say .”
Roger eyed her curiously . He kn ew Obadiah, who was lar ge
and uncouth, but not at all bad looking and not stupid. Some
women would consider him a decent match; he had fifteen
acres, which he farmed competently , and was a good hunter .
He’d never seen Bree so much as speak to the man, though.
“Can you think of anybody else?” she asked, still frowning.
“W ell … Bobby Higgins,” he replied, still wary . “The
Beardsley twins  used to eye her now and then, but of course
…” He had a na sty feeling that this line of inquiry was going
to culm inate in her adjuring him  t o go and ask  awkward
questions of any putative fathers—a process that struck him as
likely being both pointless and dangerous.
“Why?” she demanded, cutting viciously into her stack of
pancakes. “Why would she do  i t? Mam a’ s alw ays been so kind
to her!”
“One of two re asons,” Roger replied, and paused for a
moment, closing  his eyes, the better to savor the decadence of
melted butter and velvet-smooth maple syrup on fresh, hot
buckwheat. He swallowed, and reluctantly opened his eyes.
“Either the real father is someon e she doesn’ t want to marry
—for w hatever reason—or she’ s decided to try to get hold of
your father ’ s money or property , by getting him to settle a sum
on her or , failing that, on the child.”“Or both . I mean, she doesn’ t w ant to marry whoever it is,
and  wants Da’ s money—not that he has any .”
“Or both,” he agreed.
They ate  in silence for a few minutes, forks scraping on the
wooden plates, each absorbed in thought. Jem had spent the
night at the Bi g House; in the wake of Lizzie’ s marriage,
Roger had suggested that Amy McCallum take over Lizzie’ s
work as  housemaid, and since she and Aidan had moved in,
Jem spent even more time over there, finding solace for the
loss of Germain in Aidan’ s companionship.
“It isn’ t true,” she repeated stubbornly . “Da simply wouldn’ t
…” But he saw the faint doubt at the back of her eyes—and a
slight glaze of panic at the thought.
“No, he wouldn’ t,” he said firmly . “Brianna—you can’ t
possibly think there’ s any truth to it?”
“No, of course not!” But s he spoke too loudly , too
definitely . He laid down his fork and looked at her levelly .
“What’ s the matter? Do ye know something?”
“Nothing.” She chased the last  bite of pancake round her
plate, speared and ate it.
He m ade a skep tical sound, and she frowned at the sticky
puddle left on he r plate. She always poured too much honey or
syrup; he, more sparing, always ended with a clean plate.
“I do n’ t,” she sa id. She bit her lower lip, though, and put the
tip of her finger into the puddle of syrup. “It’ s only …”
“What?”
“Not Da ,” she said slowly . She put the tip of her finger in
her mouth and sucked the syru p of f. “And I don’ t know  for
sure about Daddy . It’ s only—looking back at things I didn’ t
understand at the time—now I see—” She stopped abruptly ,
and closed her eyes, then opened them, fixing him directly .
“I was looking through his wa llet one day . Not snooping,
just having fun, taking all the ca rds and things out and puttingthem back. There was a note tu cked away , between the dollar
bills. It was asking him to meet somebody for lunch—”
“Innocent enough.”
“It started out with Darling—,  and  it wasn’ t my mother ’ s
handwriting,” she said tersely .
“Ah,” he said, and after a moment, “how old were you?”
“Eleven.” She drew small patterns on the plate with the tip
of he r fi nger . “I just put the note  back and kind of blotted it out
of my mind. I di dn’ t want to thin k about it—and I don’ t think I
ever did , from that day to this. There were a few other things,
things I saw an d didn’ t understand—it was mostly the way
things were between them, my p arents … Every now and then,
something  would happen, and I never knew what, but I always
knew something was really wrong.”
She trailed of f, sighed deeply , and wiped her finger on her
napkin.
“Bree,” he said gently . “Jamie’ s an honorable man, and he
loves your mother deeply .”
“W ell, see, that’ s the thing,” sh e said softly . “I would have
sworn Daddy was, too. And did.”
IT W ASN’T IMPOSSIBLE. The thought kept returning, to
niggle Roger uncomfortably , lik e a pebble in his shoe. Jamie
Fraser was  an honorable man, he was  deeply uxorious—and
he had been in the depths of despair and exhaustion during
Claire’ s illness. Roger had fear ed for him nearly as much as
for Claire; he’d gone hollow-eyed and grim-jawed through the
hot, endless days of reeking de ath, not eating, not sleeping,
held together by nothing more than will.
Roger h ad tried to speak to him then, of God and eternity ,
reconcile him with what seem ed the inevitable, only to be
repulsed with a hot-eyed fury at the mere idea that God might
think to take his wife—this fol lowed by complete despair as
Claire lapsed into a stupor near death. It wasn’ t impossible thatthe o f fer of a moment’ s physica l comfort, made in that void of
desolation, had gone further than either party intended.
But it was earl y May now , and Malva Christie was six
months gone with child. Which meant that she’d got that way
in N ovember . The crisis of Cla ire’ s illness had been in late
September; he remembered vividly the smell of burnt-over
fields in  the room when she’d wakened from what looked like
certain death, her eyes huge and lambent, startlingly beautiful
in a face like an androgynous angel’ s.
Right, then, it frigging was  impossi ble. No man was perfec t,
and any man might yield in extremis—once. But not
repeatedly . And not Jamie Fraser . Malva Christie was a liar .
Feeling more settled in mind, Ro ger made his way down the
creekside toward the Christies’ cabin.
Can’ t you do something?  Brianna had asked him, anguished.
Damn li ttle, he thought, but he had to try . It was Friday; he
could—and would—preach an ear -blistering sermon on the
evils of gossip, c ome Sunday . Knowing what he did of human
nature, though, any benefit derived from that was likely to be
short-lived.
Beyond that—w ell, Lodge meeting was W ednesday night. It
had bee n going really well, an d he hated to jeopardize the
fragile amity of the newborn Lodge by risking unpleasantness
at a meeting … but if there was a chance of it helping …
would i t be useful to encoura ge both Jamie and the two
Christie men to attend? It would get the matter out in the open,
and no matter how bad, open p ublic knowledge was always
better than the festering weed of whispered scandal. He
thought T om Christie would observe the proprieties and be
civil, notwithstanding the delicacy of the situation—but he
wasn’ t a ll that sure of Allan. The son shared his father ’ s
features and his sense of self-righteousness, but lacked T om’ s
iron will and self-control.
But now he was at the cabin, which seemed deserted. He
heard th e sound  of an ax, though, the slow klop!  of kindling
being split, and went round to the back.It w as Malva, w ho turned at his greeting, her face wary .
There w ere lave nder smudges beneath her eyes, he saw , and
the bloo m of her skin was clouded. Guilty conscience, he
hoped, as he greeted her cordially .
“If y e’ve come to try to get me to take it back, I won’ t,” she
said flatly , ignoring his greeting.
“I came  to ask if ye wanted someone to talk to,” he said.
That surprised her; she set down the ax, and wiped her face
with her apron.
“T o talk to?” she said slowly , eyeing him. “What about?”
He shrugged and of fered her a very slight smile.
“Anything ye like.” He let his accent relax, broadening
toward h er own Edinbur gh tinge. “I doubt ye’ve been able to
talk to anyone of late, save your Da and brother—and they
might not be able to listen just the noo.”
A matching small smile flitted across her features, and
disappeared.
“No, they don’ t listen,” she sa id. “But it’ s all right; I’ve
naught much to say , ken? I’m a hoor; what else is there?”
“I dinna think ye’re a hoor ,” Roger said quietly .
“Oh, ye  don’ t?” She rocked b ack a little on her heels,
surveying him mockingly . “Wha t else would ye call a woman
that spre ads her legs for a marrit man? Adulteress, of course—
but hoor , as well, or so I’m told.”
He thought she meant to shock him with deliberate
coarseness. She did, rather , but he kept it to himself.
“Mistaken, maybe. Jesus didna speak harshly to the woman
who was  a  harlot; it’ s no my busines s to be doing it to
someone who isn’ t.”
“And if ye’ve c ome to quote t he Bible to me, save your
breath to cool your parritch wit h,” she said, a look of distaste
pulling down the delicate corners of her mouth. “I’ve heard a
deal more of it than I care to.”That, he reflected, was probably  true. T om Christie was the
sort who  knew a verse—or ten— for every occasion, and if he
didn’ t beat his daughter physically , had almost certainly been
doing it verbally .
Not sure what to say next, he held out his hand.
“If ye’ll give me the hatchet, I’ll do the rest.”
One eye brow raised, she put it  into his hand and stepped
back. He put up  a chunk of kindling and split it clean in two,
stooped for another . She watched for a moment, then sat down,
slowly , on a smaller stump.
The mountain spring was still cool, touched with the last
winter breath of the high snows,  but the work warmed him. He
didn’ t by any means for get she was there, but he kept his eyes
on the wood, the bright grain of the fresh-split stick, the tug of
it as  he pulled th e ax blade free , and found his thoughts move
back to his conversation with Bree.
So Frank Randall had been— perhaps—unfaithful to his
wife, on occasion. In all justice, Roger wasn’ t sure he could be
blamed, knowing the circumstances of the case. Claire had
disappeared com pletely , without trace, leaving Frank to hunt
desperately , to mourn, and then , at last, to begin to put the
pieces of his lif e back together and move on. Whereupon the
missing wife pops back up,  distraught, mistreated—and
pregnant by another man.
Whereupon Frank Randall, whether from a sense of honor ,
of love, or simply of—what? curiosity?—had taken her back.
He r ecalled Claire’ s telling them  the story , and it was clear that
she hadn ’ t partic ularly wanted  t o be ta ken bac k. It must have
been damned clear to Frank Randall, too.
Little w onder , then, if outrage and rejection had led him
occasionally—and little wonder , too, that the echoes of the
hidden conflicts between her parents had reached Brianna, like
seismic disturbances that travel through miles of earth and
stone, jolts from an upwelling o f magma, miles deep beneath
the crust.And litt le wond er , he realized with a sense of revelation,
that she’d been so upset by  his friendship with Amy
McCallum.
He realized, quite suddenly , that Malva Christie was crying.
Silently , without  covering her fa ce. T ears ran down her cheeks
and her shoulders quivered, but  her lower lip was caught hard
between her teeth; she made no sound.
He cast down the ax and went  to her . Put an arm gently
round her shoulders, and cradled her capped head, patting her .
“Hey ,” he said softly . “Don’ t wo rry , aye? It’ s going to be all
right.”
She shook her head, and the tears washed down her face.
“Can’ t be,” she whispered. “Can’ t be.”
Beneath his pity for her , Roger was aware of a sense of
growing hope. Whatever reluctance he might have to exploit
her desp eration was well overcome by a determination to get
to the bottom of her trouble. Mostly for the sake of Jamie and
his family—but for her own, as well.
He m ustn’ t push too hard, thoug h, mustn’ t rush. She had to
trust him.
So he patted her , rubbed her bac k as he did for Jem when he
woke with nightmare, said small soothing things, all
meaningless, an d felt her begin to yield. Y ield, but in a
strangely physical fashion, as though her flesh were somehow
opening, blossoming slowly under his touch.
Strange, and at the same time, oddly familiar . He’d felt it
now and  then with Bree, when he’d turned to her in the dark,
when sh e hadn’ t time to think but responded to him with her
body alone. The physical recollection jarred him, and he drew
back a little. H e meant to say something to Malva, but the
sound of a foot fall interrupted him, and he looked up to see
Allan Ch ristie co ming toward him out of the trees, fast, with a
face like black thunder .
“Get away from her!”He stra ightened, heart pounding as he realized quite
suddenly what this might look like.
“What d’ye mean, slinkin’ roun d like a rat after a rind o’
cheese?” Allan cried. “D’ye think since she’ s shamed, she’ s
meat for any whoreson bastard that cares to take her?”
“I came  to of fer counsel,” Roger said as coolly as he could
manage. “And comfort, if I might.”
“Oh, aye.” Allan Christie’ s face was flushed, the tufts of his
hair stan ding on  end like the bristles on a hog about to char ge.
“Comfort me with apples and s tay me with raisins, is it? Y e
can stick your comfort straight up your arse, MacKenzie, and
your goddamned stif f prick, too!”
Allan’ s hands were clenched at his sides, trembling with
rage.
“Y e’re no better than your wicked good-father—or
perhaps”—he ro unded suddenly on Malva, who had stopped
crying, but was sitting white-faced and frozen on her stump
—”perhaps it was him, too? Is that it, ye wee bitch, did ye take
them both? Answer me!” His h and shot out to slap her , and
Roger caught his wrist by reflex.
Roger w as so angry that he could barely speak. Christie was
strong, but Roger was bigger; he  would have broken the young
man’ s wrist, if h e could. As it was, he dug his fingers hard into
the space between the bones , and was gratified to see
Christie’ s eyes pop and water from the pain of it.
“Y e’ll no t speak  to your sister that way ,” he said, not loudly ,
but v ery clearly . “Nor to me.” H e shifted his grip suddenly and
bent Christie’ s wrist sharply backward. “D’ye hear me?”
Allan’ s face went white and the breath hissed out of him. He
didn’ t answer , but managed to nod. Roger released his hold,
almost flinging the younger man’ s wrist away , with a sudden
feeling of revulsion.
“I d o no t wish to hear that ye’v e abused your sister in any
way ,” he  said, as evenly as he could. “If I do—ye’ll regret it.
Good day , Mr . C hristie. Miss Christie,” he added, with a briefbow to Malva. She didn’ t respond, only stared at him from
eyes gray as sto rm clouds, huge with shock. The memory of
them fol lowed him as he strode from the clearing and plunged
into the darknes s of the wood, wondering whether he’d made
things better , or much, much worse.
THE NEXT MEETING of the Fraser ’ s Ridge Lodge was on
W ednesday . Brianna went as usual to the Big House, taking
Jemmy and her workbasket, and  was surprised to find Bobby
Higgins seated at the table, finishing his supper .
“Miss B rianna!” He half-rose at sight of her , beaming, but
she waved him back to his seat, and slid into the bench
opposite.
“Bobby! How nice to see you ag ain! W e thought—well, we
thought you wouldn’ t come again.”
He nodded, looking rueful.
“A ye, happen I might not, at least not for a bit. But his
Lordship had some things, thing s come in from England, and
he says to me as I shall bring ‘em.” He ran a piece of bread
carefully round the inside of his bowl, sopping up the last of
Mrs. Bug’ s chicken gravy .
“And th en … well, I did wish to come on my own account.
For to see Miss Christie, aye?”
“Oh.” She glanced up and caugh t Mrs. Bug’ s eye. The older
woman rolled her eyes, helples s, and shook her head. “Um.
Y es, Malva. Er … is my mother upstairs, Mrs. Bug?”
“Nay , a nighean.  She was called to Mr . MacNeill; he’ s bad
wi’ the pleurisy .” Barely pausing for breath, she whipped of f
her a pron and h ung it on its hook, reaching for her cloak with
the other hand. “I’ll be along, then, a leannan;  A rch will be
wanting his supper . If there’ s aught wanting, Amy’ s about.”
And with the briefest of farewells, she vanished, leaving
Bobby staring after her in puzzlement at this uncharacteristic
behavior .“Is something amiss?” he asked, turning back to Brianna
with a small frown.
“Ahh … well.” W ith a few uncharitable thoughts toward
Mrs. Bu g, Brianna girded up her  loins and told him, grimacing
inwardly at the s ight of his swee t young face as it turned white
and rigid in the firelight.
She cou ldn’ t bring herself to mention Malva’ s accusation,
only told him that the girl was with child. He’d hear about
Jamie, soon enough, but please God, not from her .
“I see, miss. A ye … I see.” He sat for a moment, staring at
the bit of bread in his hand. Then he dropped it into his bowl,
rose sud denly , a nd rushed outside; she heard him retching into
the blac kberry b ushes outside the back door . He didn’ t come
back.
It w as a long evening. Her mother was plainly spending the
night with Mr . MacNeill and his pleurisy . Amy McCallum
came d own fo r a little whil e, and they made awkward
conversation over their sewing, but then the maid escaped
upstairs. Aidan and Jemmy , allo wed to stay up late and play ,
wore themselves out and fell asleep on the settle.
She fidgeted, abandoned her sewing, and paced up and
down, w aiting for Lodge to fin ish. She wanted her own bed,
her own house; her parents’ kitchen, normally so welcoming,
seemed strange and uncomfortable, and she a stranger in it.
At l ong, long la st, she heard footsteps and the creak of the
door , and Roger came in, looking bothered.
“There you are,” she said with relief. “How was Lodge? Did
the Christies come?”
He shook his head.
“No. It … went all right, I supp ose. A bit of awkwardness,
of course, but your father carried it of f as well as anyone
might, in the circumstances.”
She grimaced, imagining it.
“Where is he?”“He said  he thought he’d go and  walk by himself for a bit—
maybe do a little night fishing.” Roger put his arms round her
and hugged her close, sighing. “Did ye hear the ruckus?”
“No! What happened?”
“W ell, we’d just had a wee blether on the universal nature of
brotherly love, when a clishmac laver broke out, over by your
kiln. W e ll, so, everyone streamed out to see what was to do,
and here ’ s your cousin Ian and wee Bobby Higgins, rolling in
the dirt and trying to kill each other .”
“Oh, dea r .” She felt a spasm of g uilt. Probably someone had
told Bobby everything, and he had gone in search of Jamie,
meeting Ian instead, and thrown Malva’ s accusations of Jamie
at him. If she’d told him herself …
“What happened?”
“W ell, Ian’ s bloody dog took a h and, for the one thing—or a
paw . Y our father barely stopped him tearing out Bobby’ s
throat, but it did  stop the fight. W e dragged them apart, then,
and Ian tore free and loped of f  into the woods, with the dog
beside h im. Bob by’ s … well, I cleaned him up a bit, then gave
him Jemmy’ s trundle for the night,” he said apologetically .
“He said he cou ldna stay up here—” He looked round at the
shadowed kitchen; she’d already smoored the fire and carried
the little  boys up to bed; the ro om was empty , lit only by a
faint hearth glow .
“I’m sorry . W ill ye sleep here, then?”
She shook her head emphatically .
“Bobby or no Bobby , I want to go home.”
“A ye, all right. Y ou go on, then; I’ll fetch Amy down to bar
the door .”
“No, th at’ s okay ,” she said quickly . “I’ll get her .” And
before h e could protest, she was down the hall and up the stair ,
the empty house strange and silent below .8 2
NOT THE END OF
 THE WORLD
T HERE IS A GREA T DEAL of satisfaction in wresting
weeds out of the  earth. Backbreaking and endless as the chore
may be, there is a tiny but unassailable sense of triumph in it,
feeling the soil give suddenly , y ielding the stubborn root, and
the foe lying defeated in your hand.
It ha d rained recently and the earth was soft. I ripped and
tore with ferocious concentr ation; dandelions, fireweed,
rhododendron sp routs, bunchgra ss, muhly , smartweed, and the
creeping mallow known locally as “cheese.” Paused for an
instant, narrow-eyed at a bull thistle, and prised it from the
ground with a vicious stab of my pruning knife.
The grapevines that ran up the palisades had just begun their
spring rush, and sprouts and ruf fles of a delicate green tinged
with rust cascaded from the woody stems, eager tendrils
curling like my own new-grown hair—God damn her , she’d
taken my hair on purpose to disfigure me! The shade they cast
provided refuge for immense bushy growths of the pernicious
thing I called “jewelweed,” not knowing its real name, for the
tiny white flowers that winked  like diamond clusters in the
feathery green fronds. It was lik ely a fennel of some sort, but
formed neither a useful bulb nor edible seeds; pretty , but
useless—and thus the sort of thing that spreads like wildfire.
There was a small swishing sou nd, and a ball of rags came
to re st by my foot. This was foll owed immediately by the rush
of a much lar ger body , and Roll o swept past me, snatching the
ball adroitly and galloping away , the wind of his passage
stirring my skirts. Startled, I lo oked up, to see him bounding
toward Ian, who’d come soft-footed into the garden.He mad e a small gesture of apo logy , but I sat back on my
heels an d smiled  at him, making  an ef fort to quell the vicious
sentiments sur ging to and fro in my bosom.
Evidently , the quelling wasn’ t all that successful, for I saw
him frown a little, and hesitate, looking at my face.
“Did you want something, Ian?” I said shortly , dropping the
facade of welcome. “If that houn d of yours knocks over one of
my hives, I’ll make a rug of him.”
“Rollo!” Ian snapped his fingers at the dog, who leapt
gracefully over the row of bee g ums and basket hives that sat
at th e fa r end of the garden, tro tted up to his master , dropped
the ball at his f eet, and stood g enially panting, yellow wolf-
eyes fixed with apparent interest on me.
Ian s cooped up t he ball, and turning, flung it out through the
open gate, Rollo after it like the tail of a comet.
“I did want to a sk ye something, Auntie,” he said, turning
back to me. “It would wait, though.”
“No, that’ s all ri ght. Now’ s as g ood a time as any .” Getting
awkwardly to my feet, I waved  him to the little bench Jamie
had made for me in a shady nook beneath a flowering
dogwood that overhung the corner of the garden.
“So?” I settled myself beside him, brushing crumbs of dirt
from the bottom of my skirt.
“Mmphm. W ell …” He stared a t his hands, linked over his
knee, big-knuckled and bony . “I … ah …”
“Y ou ha ven’ t been exposed to syphilis again, have you?” I
asked, w ith a vivid memory o f my last interview with an
awkward young man in this gard en. “Because if you have, Ian,
I sw ear I will use Dr . Fentiman’ s syringe on you and I won’ t
be gentle with it. Y ou—”
“No, no!” he said hastily . “No, of course not, Auntie. It’ s
about—about M alva Christie.” He tensed as he said it, in case
I sho uld lunge f or the pruning k nife, but I merely drew a deep
breath and let it out again, slowly .“What about her?” I said, my voice deliberately even.
“W ell … no rea lly her , exactly . More what she said—about
Uncle Jamie.” He stopped, swallowing, and I drew another
slow bre ath. Disturbed as I wa s by the situation myself, I’d
scarcely thought about its impact on anyone else. But Ian had
idolized Jamie from the time he was a tiny boy; I could well
imagine that the widespread suggestions that Jamie might have
feet of clay were deeply upsetting to him.
“Ian, you mustn’ t worry yourself.” I put a consoling hand—
dirt-stained as it was—on his ar m. “It will … work itself out,
somehow . Such things always do.” They did—generally with
the maximum of uproar and catastrophe. And if Malva’ s child
should by some horrid cosmic joke be born with red hair … I
closed my eyes for a moment, feeling a wave of dizziness.
“A ye, I suppose they will,” Ian said, sounding uncertain in
the extreme. “It’ s only—what they’re sayin’, about Uncle
Jamie. E ven his  own Ardsmuir men, folk that should know
better! That he must have—w ell, I’ll no repeat any of it,
Auntie—but … I canna bear to hear it!”
His long , homely face was twisted with unhappiness, and it
suddenly occurr ed to me that he might be having his own
doubts about the matter .
“Ian,” I said, with as much firmness as I could muster ,
“Malva’ s child could not possib ly be Jamie’ s. Y ou do believe
that, don’ t you?”
He nodded, very slowly , but wouldn’ t meet my eyes.
“I d o,” he said softly , and then swallowed hard. “But,
Auntie … it could be mine.”
A bee had lighted on my arm. I stared at it, seeing the veins
in it s gla ssy win gs, the dust of yellow pollen that clung to the
minuscule hairs of its legs and abdomen, the gentle pulsing of
its body as it breathed.
“Oh, Ian,” I sa id as softly as he’d spoken himself. “Oh,
Ian.”He was strung tight as a mario nette, but when I spoke, a
little of the tension left the arm under my hand, and I saw that
he had closed his eyes.
“I’m sorry , Auntie,” he whispered.
W ordless, I patted his arm. The bee flew of f, and I wished
passionately tha t I could exchange places with it. It would be
so w onderful, simply to be abo ut the business of gathering,
single-minded in the sun.
Another bee lighted on Ian’ s collar , and he brushed it
absently away .
“W ell, so,” he said, taking a d eep breath and turning his
head to look at me. “What must I do, Auntie?”
His eyes were dark with misery and worry—and something
very like fear , I thought.
“Do?” I said, sounding as blank as I felt. “Jesus H.
Roosevelt Christ, Ian.”
I had n’ t meant t o make him smi le, and he didn’ t, but he did
seem to relax very slightly .
“A ye, I’ve done it already ,” he said, very rueful. “But—it’ s
done, Auntie. How can I mend it?”
I rub bed my bro w , trying to think. Rollo had brought back
his b all, but seei ng that Ian was in no mood to play , dropped it
by his feet and leaned against his leg, panting.
“Malva,” I said finally . “Did she tell you? Before, I mean.”
“Y e think I sco rned her , and that’ s what made her accuse
Uncle Jamie?” He gave me a wry look, absently scratching
Rollo’ s ruf f. “W ell, I wouldna b lame ye if ye did, Auntie, but
no. S he said not a word to me about the matter . If she had, I
should ha’ marrit her at once.”
The hurdle of confession overcome, he was talking more
easily now .
“Y ou didn’ t think of marryin g her first ?” I  said, with
perhaps a slight tinge of acerbity .“Ah … no,” he said, very sheepish. “It wasna precisely a
matter of—well , I wasna thinking at all, Auntie. I was drunk.
The first time, anyway ,” he added as an afterthought.
“The first—? How many— No,  don’ t tell me. I don’ t want
to know the go ry details.” I shut him up with a brusque
gesture, and sat up straight, struck by a thought. “Bobby
Higgins. W as that—”
He n odded, lowering his lashes  so I couldn’ t see his eyes.
The blood had come up under his tan.
“A ye. That was why—I mean, I  didna really wish to marry
her , to begin with, but still, I would have asked, after we …
but I put it of f a bit, and—” H e scrubbed a hand across his
face, helpless. “W ell, I didna w ant her to wife, but I couldna
keep fro m want ing her , nonetheless, and I ken well enough
how awf ul it must seem—but I’ve got to tell the truth, Auntie,
and that’ s it.” He took a gulp of air , and continued.
“I’d—wait for her . In the woods, when she came to gather .
She’d not speak when she saw me, only smile, and raise her
skirts a bit, then turn quick and  run and … God, I should be
after her  like a d og after a bitch in heat,” he said bitterly . “But
then one day I  came late, and she wasna there where we
usually met. But I heard her laughing, far of f, and when I went
to see …”
He twisted his hands hard en ough to dislocate a finger ,
grimacing, and Rollo whined softly .
“Let us just sa y that yon bairn might well be Bobby
Higgins’ s, too,” he said, biting of f the words.
I f elt suddenly exhausted, as I had when recovering from
my i llness, as th ough it was too  much ef fort even to breathe. I
leaned back against the palisades, feeling the cool papery
rustle of grape le aves against my neck, fanning softly over my
heated cheeks.
Ian bent forward, head in his hands, the dappled green
shadows playing over him.“What shall I d o?” he asked at last, voice muf fled. He
sounded as tired as I felt. “I dinna mind saying that I—that the
child might be mine. But would it help, d’ye think?”
“No,” I said bleakly . “It wouldn’ t.” Public opinion would
not be changed in the slightest; everyone would simply assume
that Ian  was lying for his unc le’ s sake. Even if he were to
marry the girl, it wouldn’ t—
A thought struck me and I pulled myself upright again.
“Y ou sa id you didn’ t want to marry her , even before you
knew about Bobby . Why?” I asked curiously .
He lifted his head from his hands with a helpless gesture.
“I dinna  ken how to say it. She was—well, she was bonnie
enough, aye, and a proper spiri t to her , as well. But she … I
dinna ken, Auntie. It was only that I always had the feeling,
lying wi’ her—that I dare not fall asleep.”
I stared at him.
“W ell, that would be of f-putting, I imagine.”
He had dismissed that, though, and was frowning, digging
the heel of his moccasin into the soil.
“There’ s no means of telling which of two men has fathered
a bairn, is there ?” he asked ab ruptly . “Only—if it’ s mine, I
should w ant it. I would wed her  for the child’ s sake, no matter
what else. If it’ s mine.”
Bree had  told me the bare bones  of his history; I knew about
his M ohawk wife, Emily , and th e death of his daughter , and I
felt the small pr esence of my o wn first child, Faith, stillborn
but always with me.
“Oh, Ian,” I said softly , and touched his hair . “Y ou might be
able to tell, by t he way the child looked—but probably not, or
not right away .”
He nodd ed, and sighed. After a moment, he said, “If I say
it’ s m ine, and I wed her—folk might still talk, but after a time
…” His  voice died away . T rue, talk might eventually diedown. But there would still b e those who thought Jamie
responsible, others who would call Malva a whore, a liar , or
both—which she bloody well was,  I re minded mys elf, but not
a nice thing to hear about one’ s wife. And what might Ian’ s
life be like, mar ried under such circumstances, to a woman he
could not trust and—I thought—did not especially like?
“W ell,” I said, rising to my fee t and stretching, “don’ t do
anything drastic  just yet awhile. Let me talk with Jamie; you
don’ t mind if I tell him?”
“I wish ye wou ld, Auntie. I din na think I could face him,
myself.” He still sat on the be nch, bony shoulders slumped.
Rollo la y on the ground at his feet, the big wolf head resting
on Ian’ s moccasined foot. Moved with pity , I put my arms
round Ian, and he leaned his head against me, simply , like a
child.
“It isn’ t the end of the world,” I said.
The sun was touching the edge of the mountain, and the sky
burned red and gold, the light  of it falling in blazing bars
through the palisades.
“No,” he said, but there was no conviction in his voice.8 3
DECLARA TIONS
Charlotte, Mecklenberg County
 May 20, 1775
T HE ONE THING ROGER HAD NOT envisioned about the
making of history was the sheer amount of alcohol involved.
He shou ld have,  he thought; if there was anything a career in
academia had taught him, it w as that almost all worthwhile
business was conducted in the pub.
The public houses, taverns, or dinaries, and pothouses in
Charlotte were  doing a roa ring business, as delegates,
spectators, and hangers-on seethed through them, men of
Loyalist sentiments collecting in the King’ s Arms, those of
rabidly o pposing views in the Blue Boar , with shifting currents
of t he unallied and undecided  eddying to and fro, purling
through the Goose and Oyster , Thomas’ s ordinary , the Groats,
Simon’ s, Buchanan’ s, Mueller ’ s, and two or three nameless
places that barely qualified as shebeens.
Jamie vi sited all of them. And drank in all of them, sharing
beer , ale, rum punch, shandy , cordial, porter , stout, cider ,
brandywine, per simmon beer , rhubarb wine, blackberry wine,
cherry bounce, perry , merry brew , and scrumpy . Not all of
them were alcoholic, but the great majority were.
Roger confined himself lar gely to beer , and found himself
glad of his rest raint, when he happened to meet with Davy
Caldwell in the street, turning from a fruiterer ’ s stall with a
handful of early apricots.
“Mr . MacKenzi e!” Caldwell cried, his face lighting with
welcome. “I had nay thought to meet you here, but what
blessing that I have!”
“Blessing indeed ,” Roger said, shaking the minister ’ s hand
with cordial fervor . Caldwell had married him and Brianna,and had examined him at the Presbyterian Academy regarding
his own calling, some months  before. “How d’ye do, Mr .
Caldwell?”
“Och, for myself, well enough—but my heart misgives me
for the fate of my poor brethren!” Caldwell shook his head in
dismay , gesturin g at a group of men crowding into Simon’ s
ordinary , laughing and talking. “What is to come of this, I ask
ye, Mr . MacKenzie—what’ s to come?”
Roger w as, for an unbalanced instant, tempted to tell him
what wa s to come of it, exactly . As it was, though, he gestured
to Ja mie—who had been stopped by an acquaintance in the
street—to go along without him , and turned away to walk a bit
with Caldwell.
“Have ye come for the conference, then, Mr . Caldwell?” he
asked.
“I have that, Mr . MacKenzie, I have that. Little hope have I
that my words will make the sl ightest dif ference, but it is my
duty to speak as I find, and so I shall.”
What Davy Caldwell found was a shocking condition of
human slothfulness, for which he blamed the entire current
situation, convinced that unref lective apathy and “a stupid
concern with personal comfort” on the part of the colonists
both tempted and provoked the exercise of tyrannical powers
on the part of Crown and Parliament.
“It’ s a point, sure,” Roger said, aware that Caldwell’ s
impassioned gestures were attracting a certain amount of
notice, even amongst the crowd s in the street, most of them
reasonably ar gumentative themselves.
“A point!” Caldwell cried. “A ye, it is, and the  point entirely .
The ignorance, disregard of moral obligation, and the supreme
love of ease of the groveling sluggard corresponds exactly—
exactly!—with a tyrant’ s appetite and cynicism.”
He glow ered at one gentleman who had subsided against the
side of a house,  taking a brief respite from the noonday heat
with his hat over his face.“The spi rit of God must redeem  the slothful, fill the human
frame with activity , poise, and libertarian consciousness!”
Roger wondered , rather , whether Caldwell would view the
escalating war as the result of God’ s intervention—but upon
reflection, thought that he likely would. Caldwell was a
thinker , but a s taunch Presbyterian, and thus a believer in
predestination.
“The slothful encourage and facilitate oppression,” Caldwell
explained, with a scornful gestu re toward a family of tinkers
enjoying an alfresco luncheon i n the yard of a house. “Their
own shame and sinking spirits, their own pitiful compliance
and submission—these become self-made chains of slavery!”
“Oh, aye ,” Roger said, and coughed. Caldwell was a famous
preacher , and rather inclined to want to keep in practice. “W ill
ye take a whet , Mr . Caldwell?” It was a warm day , and
Caldwell’ s rather round, cherubic face was becoming very red.
They went into Thomas’ s ord inary , a fairly respectable
house, a nd sat down with tankards of the house beer—for
Caldwell, like most, did not regard beer as being in any way
“drink,” like rum or whisky . W hat else, after all, would one
drink? Milk?
Out of the sun, and with a coo ling draught to hand, Davy
Caldwell becam e less heated in his expressions, as well as his
countenance.
“Praise God for the fortune of meeting ye here, Mr .
MacKenzie,” he said, breathing deep after lowering his
tankard. “I had sent a letter , but doubtless ye will have left
home before it could come. I  wished to inform ye of the
gladsome news—there is to be a Presbytery .”
Roger felt a sudden leap of the heart.
“When? And where?”
“Edenton, early next month . The Reverend Doctor
McCorkle is coming from Philadelphia. He’ll remain for a
time, before departing on his fu rther journey—he is going to
the Indie s, to encourage the ef forts of the church there. I am,of course, presuming to know y our mind—I apologize for the
forwardness of my address, Mr . MacKenzie—but is it still
your desire to seek ordination?”
“W ith all my heart.”
Caldwell beamed, and grasped him strongly by the hand.
“Give ye joy of it, dear man—great joy .”
He then plunged into a close description of McCorkle,
whom h e had met in Scotland, and speculations regarding the
state of religion  in the colony— he spoke of Methodism with
some r espect, but considered the New Light Baptists
“somewhat unre gulated” in their ef fusions of worship, though
doubtless well-meaning—and surely sincere belief was an
improvement over unbelief, whatever the form it might take.
In d ue course, though, he cam e back round to their present
circumstances.
“Y e’ve c ome with your father -in-law , have ye?” he asked. “I
thought I saw him, in the road.”
“I have,  and ye did,” Roger assured him, fumbling in his
pocket for a c oin. The pocket itself was full of coiled
horsehair; with his academic experience as guide, he had made
provision against possible boredom by bringing the makings
of a new fishing line.
“Ah.” C aldwell looked at him k eenly . “I’ve heard things of
late—is it true, he’ s turned Whig?”
“He is a firm friend to liberty ,” Roger said, cautious, and
took a breath. “ As am I.” He’d not had occasion to say it out
loud before; it gave him a small, breathless feeling, just under
the breastbone.
“Aha, ah a, very  good! I had heard of it, as I say—and yet
there are  a great many who say  otherwise: that he is a T ory , a
Loyalist like his relations, and that this protestation of support
for the independency moveme nt is but a ruse.” It wasn’ t
phrased as a question, but Caldwell’ s bushy eyebrow , cocked
like a swell’ s hat, made it clear that it was.“Jamie F raser is an honest man,” Roger said, and drained
his tankard. “And an honorable one,” he added, setting it
down. “ And spe aking of the sam e, I think I must go and find
him.”
Caldwell glanced around; there was an air of restlessness
around them, of men calling th eir accounts and settling up.
The of ficial meeting of the con vention was to begin at two
o’clock, at MacIntyre’ s farmhouse. It was past noon now ,
delegates, speak ers, and spectators would be slowly gathering,
girding themselves for an afternoon of conflict and decision.
The breathless feeling came back.
“A ye, then. Give him my regards, if ye will—though
perhaps I may see him mysel f. And may the Holy Spirit
penetrate the encrustations of habit and lethar gy , and convert
the s ouls and ro use the consciences of those who gather here
today!”
“Amen,” said Roger , smiling in spite of the glances from the
men—and not a few women—around them.
He found Jamie in the Blue B oar , in the company of a
number of men i n whom the Holy Spirit had already been hard
at work on the encrustations, judging from the volume. The
chatter n ear the door died away , though, as he made his way
through the room—not in cause of his own presence, but
because there was something more interesting going on near
the center .
T o wit: Jamie F raser and Neil Forbes, both red with heat,
passion, and a gallon or two of mixed spirits, head to head
over a table, and hissing like snakes in the Gaelic.
Only a few of the spectators w ere Gaelic speakers; these
were hastily translating the high  points of the dialogue for the
rest of the crowd.
Gaelic i nsult was an art, and one at which his father -in-law
excelled, though Roger was obliged to admit that the lawyer
was no slouch a t it, himself. Th e translations rendered by the
onlookers fell far short of the original; nonetheless, thetaproom was rapt, with occa sional admiring whistles or
whoops from the spectators, or laughter as a particularly
pungent point was made.
Having missed the beginning, Roger had no idea how the
conflict had begun, but so fa r into it as they were, the
exchange was focused on cow ardice and arrogance, Jamie’ s
remarks aimed at Forbes’ s leading the attack on Fogarty
Simms as a low-minded and cowardly attempt to make himself
look the big man at the price of a defenseless man’ s life,
Forbes—shifting into English here, as he realized that they had
become the cynosure of the room—taking the view that
Jamie’ s presence here was an unwarrantable af front to those
who tru ly held the ideals of liberty and justice, as everyone
knew he was in truth the King’ s man, but he, the puf fed-up
cock o’ the wa lk, thought that he could pull the wool over
everyone’ s eyes long enough to betray the whole boiling, but if
he, Fraser , thought he, Forbes, was fool enough to be gulled by
antic tric ks in the public street and a lot of talk with nay more
substance than the shrieking of g ulls, he, Fraser , had best think
again!
Jamie sl apped a hand flat on the table, making it boom like
a drum, and rattling the cups. He  rose, glaring down at Forbes.
“Do ye libel my honor , sir?” he cried, also shifting to
English. “For if ye do, let us g o out, and we shall settle the
matter at once, yea or nay!”
Sweat was streaming down Forbes’ s broad, flushed face,
and his eyes wer e gleaming with anger , but even overheated as
he was, Roger s aw belated caution pluck at his sleeve. Roger
hadn’ t s een the fight in Cross C reek, but Ian had told him the
details, meanwh ile laughing his head of f. The last thing Neil
Forbes could desire was a duel.
“Have ye honor to libel, sir?” Forbes demanded, standing in
turn, and drawing himself up a s though about to address the
jury . “Y e come here acting the great one, carousing and
showing away like a sailor come ashore with prize money inhis pocket—but have we any evidence that your words are
more than puf fery? Puf fery , I say , sir!”
Jamie stood, both hands braced on the tabletop, surveying
Forbes through narrowed eyes. Roger had once seen that
expression focused on himself. It had been followed rapidly by
the sort of mayhem customary in a Glasgow pub on Saturday
night—only mo re so. The only thing to be thankful for was
that Forbes had clearly not heard  any whif f of Malva Christie’ s
accusation, or there would be blood on the floor already .
Jamie st raightened slowly , and his left hand went toward his
waist. There were gasps, and Forbes paled. But Jamie had
reached for his sporran, not hi s dirk, and plunged his hand
inside.
“As to that … sir  …” he said in a low , even v oice that
carried t hrough the room, “I have made myself clear . I am for
liberty , and to that end, I pledge my name, my fortune”—here
he withdrew his hand from his sporran and slammed it on the
table; a small p urse, two golden guineas, and a jewel—”and
my sacred honor .”
The room was si lent, all eyes focused on the black diamond,
which s himmered with a baleful light. Jamie paused for the
space of three heartbeats, then drew breath.
“Is there  any man here who gi ves me the lie?” he said. It
was oste nsibly addressed to the room at lar ge, but his eyes
were fix ed on Forbes. The lawyer had gone a mottled red and
gray , like a bad oyster , but said nothing.
Jamie paused again, looked once round the room, then
picked up purse, money , and je wel, and stalked out the door .
Outside, the town clock chime d two, the strokes slow and
heavy in the humid air .
L ’OIGNON-INTELLIGENCER
Upon the 20th of this month, a Congr ess met in
Charlotte, com posed of Delegates fr om Mecklenber g
County , for the purpose of discussion upon the issue ofcurr ent Relations with Gr eat Britain. After due
Deliberation, a Declaration was pr oposed and accepted,
whose Pr ovisions ar e Her ewith Shown:
1. That whosoever dir ectly or in dir ectly abetted or in any
way , form or manner countenanced to uncharter ed &
danger ous invas ion of our rights as claimed by G. Britain
is an enemy to this County—to America & to the inher ent
& inaliable rights of man.
2. W e the Citizens of Mecklenbur g County do her eby
desolve the political bands which have connected us to
the Mother Country & her eby absolve ourselves fr om all
allegiance to the British cr own & abjur e all political
connection, contract or associa tion with that nation who
have wantonly trampled on our rights & liberties &
inhumanely shed  the innocent b lood of American patriots
at Lexington.
3. W e do her eby declar e ourselv es a fr ee and independent
people—ar e & of right ought t o be a sover eign & self-
governing association, under the contr oul of no power
other th an that of our God & th e general government of
the congr ess, to the maintainenc e of which independence
civil & r eligious we solemnly p ledge to each other our
mutual cooperation, our lives, our fortunes & our most
sacr ed honor .
4. A s we now acknowledge the existence & contr oul of no
law or legal offi cers, civil or military , within this County ,
we do her eby or dain & adopt as a rule of life, all, each &
every o f our former laws—w her ein nevertheless the
cr own of Gr eat Britain never can be consider ed as
holding rights, privileges, im munities, or authority
ther ein.
5. It is also further decr eed that all, each & every military
officer in this C ounty is her eby r einstated in his former
command & authority , he acting conformably to theser egulations. An d that every member pr esent of this
delegation shall henceforth be a civil officer , viz. a Justice
of the peace in the character o f a “Committee-man” to
issue pr ocess, hear & determine all matters of
contr oversy acc or ding to sd. ad opted laws—to pr eserve
peace, u nion & harmony in sd . County & to use every
exertion to spr ead the love of country & fir e of fr eedom
thr oughout America until a mor e general & or ganized
government be established in this pr ovince. A selection
fr om the members pr esent shall constitute a Committee of
public safety for sd. County .
6. That a copy of these r esol utions be transmitted by
expr ess to the Pr esident of th e Continental Congr ess
assembled in Philadelphia, to be laid befor e that body .8 4
AMONG THE LETTUCES
S OME ID IOT—OR CHILD— ha d left the gate of my garden
open. I hurried up the path, hopi ng that it hadn’ t been that way
for l ong. If it had been open o vernight, the deer would have
eaten every lettuce, onion, and bulb plant in the plot, to say
nothing of ruining the—
I jer ked, letting out a small cry . Something like a red-hot hat
pin had stabbed me in the neck, and I smacked the place by
reflex. An electric jab in the tem ple made my vision go white,
then blur with water , and a fiery stab in the crook of my elbow
—bees.
I blu ndered of f t he path, suddenly aware that the air was full
of them, frenzied and stinging. I plunged through the brush,
barely able to see for the watering of my eyes, aware too late
of the low-pitched thrum of a hive at war .
Bear! God damn it, a bear had  got in! In the half-second
between the first sting and the n ext, I had glimpsed one of the
bee gums lying on its side in the dirt just inside the gate,
combs and honey spilling out of it like entrails.
I d ucked  under branches and fl ung myself into a patch of
pokeweed, gasping and cursing incoherently . The sting on my
neck throbbed viciously , and the one on my temple was
already puf fing up, pulling at the eyelid on that side. I felt
something crawling on my ankle, and batted it away by reflex
before it could sting.
I w iped tears aw ay , blinking. A few bees sailed past through
the yellow-flowered stems above me, aggressive as Spitfires. I
crawled a little farther , trying at once to get away , slap at my
hair , and  shake out my skirts, les t any more of them be trapped
in my clothes.I was breathing like a steam eng ine, shaking with adrenaline
and fury .
“Bloody hell … frigging bear … God damn it …”
My stro ng impu lse was to rush  in screaming and flapping
my skirt s, in hopes of panickin g the bear . An equally strong
impulse of self-preservation overcame it.
I s cramb led to my feet, and keeping low in case of enraged
bees, thrust my way through the brush uphill, meaning to
circle the garden and come dow n on the other side, away from
the ravaged hives. I could get back to the path that way and
down to the house, where I could recruit help—preferably
armed—to drive away the monster before it destroyed the rest
of the hives.
No poin t in keeping quiet, and I crashed through bushes and
stumbled over logs, panting wit h rage. I tried to see the bear ,
but the growth of grapevines over the palisades was too thick
to sh ow me anyt hing but rustling leaves and sun shadows. The
side of my face felt as though it  were on fire, and jolts of pain
shot through the trigeminal nerve with each heartbeat, making
the muscles twitch and the eye water terribly .
I reached the path just below the spot where the first bee
had stun g me—my gardening basket lay where I’d dropped it,
tools sp illed out. I grabbed the  knife I used for everything
from pru ning to  digging roots; i t was a stout thing, with a six-
inch blad e, and while it might no t impress the bear , I felt better
for having it.
I glanced at the open gate, ready to run—but saw nothing.
The ruin ed hive  lay just as I’d s een it, the wax combs broken
and squ ashed, the smell of ho ney thick in the air . But the
combs were not scattered; shatte red pillars of wax still stuck to
the exposed wooden base of the hive.
A bee zoomed menacingly past my ear and I ducked, but
didn’ t ru n. It was quiet. I tried to stop panting, trying to hear
over the  thunder of my own racing pulse. Bears weren’ t quiet;
they didn’ t need to be. I shoul d hear snuf flings and gulpingnoises, a t least—rustlings of broken foliage, the lap of a long
tongue. I didn’ t.
Cautiously , I moved sideways up the path, a step at a time,
ready to run. T here was a good-size oak, about twenty feet
away . Could I make that, if the bear popped out?
I l istene d as hard as I could, but heard nothing beyond the
soft rustle of the  grapevines and the sound of angry bees, now
dropped to a w hining hum as they gathered thick on the
remnants of their combs.
It was gone. Had to be. Still wary , I edged closer , knife in
hand.
I smelled the blood and saw her in the same instant. She was
lying in the salad bed, her skirt  flown out like some gigantic,
rusty flower blooming amid the young lettuces.
I was kneeling by her , with no memory of reaching her , and
the f lesh of her arm was warm when I grasped her wrist—such
small, f ragile b ones—but slack, there was no pulse— Of
course not,  said the cold small watcher in side, her thr oat is
cut, ther e’ s blood everywher e, but you can see the artery isn’ t
pumping; she’ s dead.
Malva’ s gray eyes were open, blank with surprise, and her
cap had fallen of f. I clutched her  wrist harder , as though I must
be able to find the buried pulse , to find some trace of life …
and did. The bulge of her belly moved, very slightly , and I
dropped the flaccid arm at once and seized my knife,
scrabbling for the hem of her skirt.
I act ed without thought, without fear , without doubt—there
wasn’ t anything  but the knife  and the pressure, the flesh
parting and the faint possibility , the panic of absolute need  …
I s lit the belly from navel to pubis, pushing hard through
slack muscle, nicked the womb  but no matter , cut quick but
careful t hrough the wall of the womb, dropped the knife, and
thrust my hands into the depths  of Malva Christie, still blood-
warm, and seized the child, cupping, turning, wrenching hard
in my frenzy to pull it free, bring it out from sure death, bringit into the air , h elp it breathe… . Malva’ s body flopped and
heaved as I jerked, limp limbs flailing with the force of my
yanking.
It came free with the suddenness of birth, and I was swiping
blood and mucus from the tiny sealed face, blowing into its
lungs, gently , gently , you have to blow gently , the alveoli of
the lungs are like cobwebs, so small, compressing its chest, no
more than a han d’ s span, two fingers pressing, no more, and
felt the tiny spring of it, delica te as a watch spring, felt the
movement, small squirms, a faint instinctive struggling—and
felt it fade, that flicker , that ti ny spark of life, cried out in
anguish and clutched the tiny , doll-like body to my breast, still
warm, still warm.
“Don’ t g o,” I said, “don’ t go, don’ t go, please don’ t go.”
But the vibrancy faded, a small blue glow that seemed to light
the palms of my hands for an instant, then dwindle like a
candle f lame, to  the coal of a sm oldering wick, to the faintest
trace of brightness—then everything was dark.
I was still sittin g in the brillia nt sun, crying and blood-
soaked, the body of the little boy in my lap, the butchered
corpse of my Malva beside me, when they found me.8 5
THE ST OLEN BRIDE
A  WE EK P ASSED AFTER MAL V A ’S DEA TH, and there
was no slightest hint of who had killed her . Whispering,
sidelong glances, and a palpable fog of suspicion hung about
the Ridge, but d espite Jamie’ s every ef fort, no one could be
located who knew—or would say—anything at all useful.
I could see the tension and frustration building up in Jamie,
day by day , and knew it must find an outlet. I had no idea what
he might do, though.
After breakfast on the W ednesday , Jamie stood glowering at
the window in h is study , then s lammed down his fist on the
table, with a suddenness that made me jump.
“I ha ve reached the mortal limit  of endurance,” he informed
me. “One moment more of this, and I shall run mad. I must do
something, and I will.” W ithout waiting for any response to
this state ment, h e strode to the of fice door , flung it open, and
bellowed, “Joseph!” into the hall.
Mr . W em yss appeared out of the  kitchen, where he had been
sweeping the chimney at M rs. Bug’ s direction, looking
startled, pale, soot-smudged, and generally unkempt.
Jamie ignored the black footprints on the study floor—he
had burned the rug—and fixed Mr . W emyss with a
commanding gaze.
“D’ye want that woman?” he demanded.
“W oman?” Mr . W emyss was understandably bewildered.
“What—oh. Are you—might you be referring to Fraulein
Berrisch?”
“Who else? D’ye want her?” Jamie repeated.It had plainly be en a long time since anyone had asked Mr .
W emyss what he wanted, and it took him some time to gather
his wits from the shock of it.
Brutal prodding by Jamie forced him past deprecating
murmurs about the Fraulein’ s fr iends no doubt being the best
judge of her happiness, his own unsuitability , poverty , and
general unworthiness as a husband, and into—at long last—a
reckless admiss ion that, well, if the Fraulein should not be
terribly averse to the prospect, perhaps … well … in a word …
“A ye, si r ,” he said, looking terri fied at his own boldness. “I
do. V ery much!” he blurted.
“Good.” Jamie nodded, pleased. “W e’ll go and get her ,
then.”
Mr . W emyss was open-mouthed with astonishment; so was
I. Jami e swung round to me, issuing orders with the
confidence and joie de vivr e  of a sea-captain with a fat prize in
view .
“Go and find Y oung Ian for me, will ye, Sassenach? And
tell Mrs. Bug to put up food, enough for a week’ s travel for
four men. And then fetch Roger Mac; we’ll need a minister .”
He rubbed his hands together in satisfaction, then clapped
Mr . W emyss on the shoulder , causing a small puf f of soot to
rise from his clothes.
“Go fettle yourself, Joseph,” he  said. “And comb your hair .
W e’re going to go and steal ye a bride.”
“… AN D PUT A PIST OL T O his breest, his breest,” Y oung
Ian chanted, “Marry me, marry  me, minister , or else I’ll be
your priest, your priest—or else I’ll be your priest!”
“Of course,” Roger said, droppin g the song, in which a bold
young m an named W illie rides with his friends to abduct and
forcibly marry a young woman who proves bolder yet, “we’ll
hope ye  prove a wee bit more capable than W illie upon the
night, aye, Joseph?”Mr . W em yss, scrubbed, dressed, and fairly vibrating with
excitement, gave him a glance of complete incomprehension.
Roger grinned, tightening the strap of his saddlebag.
“Y oung W illie obliges a minister to marry him to the young
woman at gunpoint,” he explain ed to Mr . W emyss, “but then,
when he  takes his stolen bride t o bed, she’ll have none of him
—and his best ef forts will not avail to force her .”
“And so  return me, W illie, to m y hame, as vir gin as I came,
I came—as vir gin as I came!” Ian caroled.
“Now , mind,” Roger said warningly to Jamie, who was
heaving his own saddlebags over Gideon’ s back. “If the
Fraulein is at all unwilling …”
“What, unwilling to be wed to Joseph?” Jamie clapped Mr .
W emyss on the b ack, then bent to give him a foot up and fairly
heaved the smaller man into the saddle. “I canna see any
woman of sense turning from su ch an opportunity , can you, a
charaid ?”
He t ook a quick  look round the clearing, to see all was well,
then ran up the steps and kissed me in quick farewell, before
running down again to mount Gideon, who for once seemed
amenable and made no ef fort to bite him.
“Keep well, mo nighean donn, ” he said, smili ng into my
eyes. And then they were gone, thundering out of the clearing
like a gang of Highland raiders, Ian’ s ear -splitting whoops
ringing from the trees.
ODDL Y ENOUGH, the departure of the men seemed to ease
things slightly . The talk, of course, went merrily on—but
without Jamie or Ian there to serve as a lightning-rod, it
merely crackled to and fro like St. Elmo’ s fire; spitting,
fizzing, and making everyone’ s hair stand on end, but
essentially a harmless phenomenon, unless touched directly .
The house felt less an embattled fortress, and more the eye
of a storm.Also, with Mr . W emyss out of the house, Lizzie came to
visit, bri nging li ttle Rodney Joseph, as the baby was called—
Roger h aving set his face firmly against the young fathers’
enthusiastic sug gestions of T ilgath-pileser and Ichabod. W ee
Rogerina had come out of it all right, being now commonly
known as Rory , but Roger decli ned entirely to hear of a child
being christened anything that might result in his being known
to the world at lar ge as Icky .
Rodney seemed  a very congeni al child, in part because he
had never quite lost that air of round-eyed astonishment that
made him seem agog to hear what you had to say . Lizzie’ s
astonishment at his birth had mutated into an enchantment that
might have completely eclipsed Jo and Kezzie, were it not for
the fact that they shared it.
Either o ne of them would—unle ss forcibly stopped—spend
half an hour discussing Rodney’ s bowel habits with the
intensity heretofore reserved for new snares and the peculiar
things found inside the stomach s of animals they had killed.
Pigs, it seemed, really would eat anything; so would Rodney .
A few days afte r the men’ s departure on their bride-stealing
expedition, Brianna had come up from her cabin with Jemmy
to v isit, and Liz zie likewise had brought Rodney . The two of
them joined Amy McCallum and me in the kitchen, where we
were sp ending a pleasant evening sewing by the light of the
fire, adm iring Rodney , keeping a negligent eye on Jemmy and
Aidan—and after a certain amount of cautious exploration,
devoting ourselves wholeheartedly to a rundown of the male
population of the Ridge, viewed in the light of suspects.
I, of  course, had  a more personal and painful interest in the
topic, but all th ree of the young women were solidly on the
side of justice— i.e., the side tha t refused even to contemplate
the n otion that e ither Jamie or I might have had anything to do
with the murder of Malva Christie.
For myself, I found such open speculation rather a comfort.
I h ad, of course , been engaging in private conjecture nonstop
—and a n exhausting business it was, too. Not only was itunpleasant to visualize every m an I knew in the role of cold-
blooded murder er—the process  obliged me continuously to
reimagine the murder itself, and  relive the moment when I had
found her .
“I’d really hate to think it might have been Bobby ,” Bree
said, frowning as she pushed a  wooden darning egg into the
heel of a sock. “He seems just such a nice boy .”
Lizzie drew down her chin at this, pursing her lips.
“Oh, aye, he’ s a sweet lad,” she said. “But what ye might
call warm-blooded.”
All of us looked at her .
“W ell,” she said mildly , “I didna let him, but he tried hard
enough. And when I said no, he did go of f and kick a tree.”
“My husband would do that so metimes, if I refused him,”
Amy sai d, thoughtful. “But I’m sure he wouldna have cut my
throat.”
“W ell, but Malva didn’ t refuse whoever it was,” Bree
pointed out, squinting as she threaded her darning needle.
“That w as the problem. He killed her because she was
pregnant, and he was afraid she’d tell everyone.”
“Ho!” L izzie sa id, triumphant. “W ell, then—it canna have
been Bobby at all, can it? For when my Da turned him
awa’—” A brief shadow crossed her face at mention of her
father , who still had not spoken a word to her nor
acknowledged th e birth of little Rodney . “Did he not think of
speiring for Malva Christie? Ian  said he meant to. And if she
were with child by him—well, then, her father would be
obliged to agree, would he not?”
Amy nodded, finding this convincing, but Bree had
objections.
“Y es—but she was insisting tha t it wasn’ t  his baby . And he
threw up in the  blackberry bushes when he heard that she
was”—her lips compressed m omentarily—”well, he wasn’ thappy at all. So he might have killed her out of jealousy , don’ t
you think?”
Lizzie and Amy hmm’d dubiously at this—both of them
were fond of Bobby—but were obliged to admit the
possibility .
“What I wonder about,” I said a little hesitantly , “is the
older men. The married ones. Everyone knows about the
young men who were interested in her—but I’ve certainly seen
more than one married man glance at her in passing.”
“I nominate Hiram Crombie,” Bree said at once, stabbing
her needle into t he heel of the sock. Everyone laughed, but she
shook her head.
“No, I’m serious. It’ s always the really religious, very
uptight ones that turn out to have secret drawers full of
women’ s underwear , and slink around molesting choirboys.”
Amy’ s jaw dropped.
“Drawers full of women’ s underwear?” she said. “What …
shifts and stays? Whatever would he do wi’ them?”
Brianna flushed at that, having for gotten her audience. She
coughed, but there was no good way out.
“Er … well. I was thinking more of French women’ s
underwear ,” she said weakly . “Um … lacy sorts of things.”
“Oh, Fre nch,” L izzie said, nodding wisely . Everyone knew
about th e notorious reputation of French ladies—though I
doubted that any woman on Fraser ’ s Ridge save myself had
ever see n one. In the interests of covering Bree’ s lapse,
though, I obligingly told them about La Nestle, the King of
France’ s mistress, who had had her nipples pierced and
appeared at court with her breasts exposed, sporting gold
hoops through them.
“Another few months o’ this,” Lizzie said darkly , looking
down at Rodney , who was nurs ing fiercely at her breast, tiny
fists clenched with ef fort, “and I shall be able to do the same.I’ll t ell J o and Kezzie to fetch m e back some hoops when they
sell their hides, aye?”
In th e m idst of the laughter at this, the sound of a knock at
the fron t door passed unnoticed—or would have, if not for
Jemmy and Aidan, who had been playing in Jamie’ s study ,
rushing into the kitchen to tell us about it.
“I’ll get it.” Bree set down her darning, but I was already on
my feet.
“No, I’ll go.” I waved her back, picked up a candlestick, and
went down the dark hallway , heart beating fast. V isitors after
dark we re almost always an eme r gency of one kind or another .
So w as this one,  though not any kind I might have expected.
For a moment, I didn’ t even r ecognize the tall woman who
stood swaying on the stoop, wh ite-faced and gaunt. Then she
whispered, “Frau Fraser? I may—may I komm?” and fell into
my arms.
The noi se of it brought all the young women rushing to
help, and we h ad Monika Berrisch—for it was indeed Mr .
W emyss’ s putative bride—laid on the settle, covered with
quilts, and plied with hot toddy in nothing flat.
She recovered quickly—there was nothing wrong with her ,
really , save exhaustion and hunger—she said she hadn’ t eaten
in th ree days—and within a s hort time, was able to sit up
eating soup, and explain her astonishing presence.
“It wass my husband’ s sister ,” she said, closing her eyes in
momentary bliss  at the aroma of split-pea soup with ham. “She
did not want m e, ef fer , and when her husband had the bad
accident and lost his wagon, so there was not so much money
to keep us all, she did not want me more.”
She had,  she said, yearned for Joseph, but had not had either
the strength nor yet the means to withstand her family’ s
opposition and insist upon returning to him.
“Oh?” Lizzie was examining  her in a close, but not
unfriendly manner . “What happpened, then?”Fraulein Berrisch turned lar ge, gentle eyes on her .
“I could not bear it more,” she said simply . “I wish so much
to be with Jose ph. My husband’ s sister , she wish me to be
gone, so  she will give a small b it of money . So I came,” she
concluded, with a shrug, and took another small, greedy
spoonful of soup.
“Y ou … walked?” Brianna said. “From Halifax?”
Fraulein Berrisc h nodded, licking the spoon, and put out a
foot fro m under the quilts. Her shoes had worn entirely
through at the sole; she had wrapped them with random scraps
of leather and strips of fabric torn from her shift, so her feet
looked like bundles of filthy rags.
“Elizabeth,” she said, looking earnestly at Lizzie. “I hope
you do not mind I komm. Y our father—he is hier? I hope so
much he does not mind, too.”
“Umm, no,” I said, exchanging a glance with Lizzie. “He
isn’ t here—but I’m sure that he’ll be delighted to see you!”
“Oh?” H er gaunt face, which had shown alarm at hearing
that Mr . W emyss was not here, grew radiant when we told her
where he was.
“Oh,” she breathed, clasping t he spoon to her bosom as
though it were Mr . W emyss’ s head. “Oh, mein Kavalier !”
Beaming with joy , she looked round at all of us—and for the
first time, noticed Rodney , snoozing in his basket at Lizzie’ s
feet.
“But who is this?” she cried, and leaned forward to look at
him. Not quite asleep, Rodney opened round, dark eyes and
regarded her with a solemn, sleepy interest.
“This is my wee bairnie. Rodney Joseph, he’ s called—for
my Da, ken?” Lizzie hoisted him out of his basket, chubby
knees pulled up under his chin, and laid him gently in
Monika’ s arms.
She cooed over him in German, face alight.“Granny lust,” Bree muttered to me, out of the side of her
mouth, a nd I felt laughter bubble up under my stays. I hadn’ t
laughed since before Malva’ s death, and found it balm to the
spirit.
Lizzie w as explaining earnestly to Monika the estrangement
resulting from her unorthodox marriage, to which Monika was
nodding, clickin g her tongue in  sympathetic understanding—
and I did wond er how much of it she grasped—and talking
baby-talk to Rodney all at once.
“Fat cha nce of Mr . W emyss stay ing estranged,” I said out of
the s ide of my own mouth. “Keep his new wife from her new
grandson? Ha!”
“Y es, what’ s a little matter of dual sons-in-law?” Bree
agreed.
Amy was regarding the tender scene with a slight sense of
wistfulness. She  reached out and put an arm round Aidan’ s
skinny shoulders.
“W ell, they do say , the more, the merrier ,” she said.8 6
PRIORITIES
T HREE SHIR TS, AN EXTRA P AIR of decent breeches, two
pair of stockings, one lisle, one s ilk—wait, where were the silk
ones?
Brianna stepped to the door and called to her husband, who
was indu striously laying segments of clay pipe into the trench
he had dug, assisted by Jemmy and Aidan.
“Roger! What have you done with your silk stockings?”
He paused, frowning, and rubbed his head. Then, handing
the s hovel to Aidan, he came across to the house, leaping over
the open trench.
“I w ore them las t Sunday to preach, no?” he asked, reaching
her . “What did I … oh.”
“Oh?” she said suspiciously , seeing his face change from
puzzlement to guilt. “What’ s ‘oh’?”
“Ahh … well, you’d stayed t o home with Jem and his
stomachache”—a tactically helpful ailment, greatly
exaggerated in order to keep h er from having to sit through
two hours of staring and whispering—”so when Jocky
Abernathy asked me would I care to go fishing with him …”
“Roger MacKenzie,” she said, fixing him with a look of
wrath, “ if you put your good si lk stockings in a creel full of
smelly fish and for got them—”
“I’ll just  nip up to the house and borrow a pair from your
Da, shal l I?” he said hurriedly . “I’m sure mine will turn up,
somewhere.”
“So will your head,” she said. “Probably under a rock!”
That made him laugh, which was not what she had intended,
but which had the ef fect of easing her temper .“I’m sorry ,” he said, leaning fo rward to kiss her forehead.
“It’ s probably Freudian.”
“Oh? A nd wha t does leaving your stockings wrapped
around a dead trout symbolize?” she demanded.
“Generalized guilt and divided loyalties, I imagine,” he said,
still joking, but not so much. “Bree—I’ve been thinking. I
really don’ t think I should go. I don’ t need to—”
“Y es, yo u do,” she said, as firm ly as possible. “Da says so,
Mama says so, and so do I. ”
“Oh, well, then.” He smiled, but she could see the
uneasiness under his humor—the more so because she shared
it. M alva Christie’ s murder had caused an uproar on the Ridge
—alarm, hyster ia, suspicion, and finger -pointing in every
direction. Several young men—Bobby Higgins among them—
had simply disappeared from the Ridge, whether from a sense
of guilt, or merely from a sense of self-preservation.
There had been accusations enough to go around; even she
herself had come in for her sh are of gossip and suspicion,
some of her unguarded remarks about Malva Christie having
been repeated. But by far the greatest weight of suspicion
rested squarely on her parents.
Both of them w ere doing their best to go about their daily
business, grimly ignoring the gossip and the pointed looks—
but it was getting harder; anyone could see that.
Roger h ad gone at once to visit the Christies—had gone
every da y since Malva’ s death s ave for his hasty expedition to
Halifax—had bu ried the girl w ith simplicity and tears—and
had since worn himself out with being reasonable and soothing
and firm  to everyone else on the Ridge. He had immediately
put aside his pla n to go to Edenton for ordination, but Jamie,
hearing of it, had insisted.
“Y ou’ve done everything here you could possibly do,”
Brianna said, for the hundredth time. “There’ s nothing else
you can do to help—and it might be years before you have
another chance.”She knew how ur gently he w ished to be ordained, and
would have done anything to fur ther that wish. For herself, she
wished that she could see it; but without a great deal of talk,
they had  agreed that it was best for her and Jem to go to River
Run, and wait there for Roger to make the trip to Edenton and
then return. It co uldn’ t do a candidate for ordination any good
to turn up with a Catholic wife and child.
The gui lt of leaving, though, with her parents standing in
the eye of the whirlwind …
“Y ou have to go,” she repeated. “But maybe I—”
He stopped her with a look.
“No, we ’ve done that.” His ar gument was that her presence
couldn’ t af fect public opinion, which was probably true. She
realized that his real reason—shared by her parents—was a
desire to  get her and Jem away from the situation on the
Ridge, out of the uproar and  safe, preferably before Jem
realized that a good many of the neighbors thought that one, if
not both, of his grandparents was a cold-blooded murderer .
And, to her private shame, she was eager to go.
Someone had killed Malva—and her baby . Every time she
thought of it, the possibilities s wam before her , the litany of
names. And every time, she w as forced to see her cousin’ s
name am ong them. Ian had not  run away , and she couldn’ t—
could not —think that it had been him. And yet every day she
was obliged to see Ian, and to contemplate the possibility .
She stood staring into the bag she was packing, folding and
refolding the shirt in her hand s, looking for reasons to go,
reasons to stay—and knowing th at no reason had any power at
all, not now .
A dull thunk!  from outside jerked her from her mire of
indecision.
“What—” She reached the door  in two steps, fast enough to
see Jem and Aidan disappearing into the woods like a pair of
rabbits. On the e dge of the trenc h lay the cracked pieces of the
pipe segment they had just dropped.“Y ou little snot -rags!” she bellowed, and grabbed for a
broom—intending what she didn’ t know , but violence seemed
the only  outlet for the frustratio n that had just erupted like a
volcano, searing through her .
“Bree,” Roger said softly , and put a hand on her back. “It’ s
not important.”
She jerked away and rounded o n him, the blood roaring in
her ears.
“Do you  have any idea how lo ng it takes to make one of
those? How many firings it take s to get one that’ s not cracked?
How—”
“Y es, I do know ,” he said, his voice level. “And it’ s still not
important.”
She stood trembling, breathing hard. V ery gently , he reached
out and took the broom from her , standing it neatly back in its
place.
“I n eed—to go,” she said, when she could form words
again, an d he nodded, his eyes tinged with the sadness he had
carried ever since the day of Malva’ s death.
“A ye, ye do,” he said quietly .
He came behind her , put his arms around her , his chin
resting on her shoulder , and gradually she stopped shaking.
Across the clearing, she saw Mrs. Bug come down the path
from the garden with an apron full of cabbages and carrots;
Claire had not set foot in her garden since …
“W ill they be all right?”
“W e’ll pray that they will,” he said, and tightened his arms
around h er . She was comforted by his touch, and didn’ t notice
until later that he had not in fact reassured her that they would.8 7
JUSTICE IS MINE,
 SA YETH THE LORD
I  POKED A T THE LAST P ACKAGE from Lord John, trying
to work up eno ugh enthusiasm to open it. It was a small
wooden crate; perhaps more vitriol. I supposed I should make
a fresh batch of  ether—but then, what was the point? People
had stopped coming to my sur g ery , even for the treatment of
minor cuts and bruises, let alone the odd appendectomy .
I ran a finger through the dust on the counter , and thought
that I should at least take care of that; Mrs. Bug kept the rest of
the h ouse spotless, but wouldn’ t  come into the sur gery . I added
dusting to the lo ng list of things that I should do, but made no
move to go and find a dust cloth.
Sighing, I got up and went across the hall. Jamie was sitting
at h is desk, twi ddling a quill and staring at a half-finished
letter . He put down the quill when he saw me, smiling.
“How is it, Sassenach?”
“All righ t,” I said, and he nodde d, accepting it at face value.
His face  showed  the lines of strain, and I knew that he was no
more all right than I was. “I haven’ t seen Ian all day . Did he
say he was going?” T o the Cher okee, I meant. Little wonder if
he wanted to get away from the Ridge; I thought it had taken a
good deal of fo rtitude for him to stay as long as he had,
bearing the stares and murmurs—and the outright accusations.
Jamie nodded again, and dropped the quill back into its jar .
“A ye, I told hi m to go. No purpose to him staying any
longer; there’d only be more fi ghts.” Ian didn’ t say anything
about the fights, but had more than once turned up to supper
with the marks of battle on him.“Right. W ell, I’d better tell Mrs. Bug before she starts the
supper .” Still, I made no motion to get up, finding some small
sense of  comfor t in Jamie’ s pre sence, some surcease from the
constant memory of the small, bloody weight in my lap, inert
as a  lump of meat—and the sight of Malva’ s eyes, so
surprised.
I h eard horses in the yard, sev eral of them. I glanced at
Jamie, who shook his head, bro ws raised, then rose to go and
meet the  visitors, whoever they were. I followed him down the
hall, wip ing my hands on my apron and mentally revising the
supper menu to accommodate what sounded like at least a
dozen guests, from the whickering and murmuring I heard in
the dooryard.
Jamie opened the door , and stop ped dead. I looked over his
shoulder , and felt terror seize me. Horsemen, black against the
sinking sun, and in that mome nt, I was back in the whisky
clearing, damp with sweat and clad in nothing but my shift.
Jamie heard my gasp, and put back a hand, to keep me away .
“What d’ye want, Brown?” he said, sounding most
unfriendly .
“W e’ve come for your wife,” said Richard Brown. There
was an unmistakable note of gloating in his voice, and hearing
it, the down ha irs on my body  rippled with cold, and black
spots flo ated in my field of vision. I stepped back, hardly
feeling my feet, and took hold of the doorjamb to my sur gery ,
clinging to it for support.
“W ell, ye can just be on your way , then,” Jamie replied,
with the  same unfriendly tone. “Y e’ve nothing to do with my
wife, nor she with you.”
“Ah, now , there you’re wrong,  Mister  F raser .”  My vision
had clea red, an d I saw him ur ge his horse up closer to the
stoop. He leaned down, peering through the door , and
evidently saw me, for he smiled, in a most unpleasant fashion.
“W e’ve come to arrest your wi fe, for the dastard crime of
murder .”Jamie’ s hand tensed where he gr ipped the door , and he drew
himself slowly to his fullest he ight, seeming to expand as he
did so.
“Y e’ll leave my land, sir ,” h e said, and his voice had
dropped to a l evel just above the rustlings of horses and
harness. “And ye’ll go now .”
I fel t, rather th an heard, footsteps behind me. Mrs. Bug,
coming to see what was afoot.
“Bride save us,” she whispered, seeing the men. Then she
was gon e, running back through the house, light-footed as a
deer . I should f ollow her , I kn ew , escape through the back
door , run  up into the forest, hide . But my limbs were frozen. I
could barely breathe, let alone move.
And Richard Brown was looking at me over Jamie’ s
shoulder , open dislike mingling with triumph.
“Oh, we ’ll leave,” he said, straightening up. “Hand her over ,
and we’ll be go ne. V anished like the morning dew ,” he said,
and laughed. Dimly , I wondered whether he was drunk.
“By wh at right do you come h ere?” Jamie demanded. His
left hand rose, re sted on the hilt of his dirk in plain threat. The
sight of  it galvanized me, fina lly , and I stumbled down the
hall, toward the kitchen where the guns were kept.
“… Committee of Safety .” I cau ght those words in Brown’ s
voice, raised in threat, and then was through into the kitchen. I
grabbed the fowling piece from its hooks above the hearth, and
wrenching open the drawer of the sideboard, hastily bundled
the three pistols there into the lar ge pockets of my sur gical
apron, made to hold instruments while I worked.
My hands were shaking. I hesitated—the pistols were
primed and loaded; Jamie checked them every night—should I
take the shot p ouch, the powder horn? No time. I heard
Jamie’ s voice and Richard Brown’ s, shouting now at the front
of the house.
The sou nd of the back door open ing jerked my head up, and
I s aw an unfami liar man pause i n the doorway , looking round.He saw me and started toward me, grinning, hand out to seize
my arm.
I l ifted a pistol from my apron  and shot him, point-blank.
The grin  didn’ t leave his face, but took on a slightly puzzled
air . He blinked once or twice, then put a hand to his side,
where a reddening spot was be ginning to spread on his shirt.
He looked at his blood-smeared fingers, and his jaw dropped.
“W ell, goddamn!” he said. “Y ou shot me!”
“I d id,” I said, breathless. “And I’ll bloody do it again, if
you don’ t get out of here!” I dropped the empty pistol on the
floor wi th a crash, and scrabbled one-handed in my apron
pocket for another , still holding  the fowling piece in a death
grip.
He didn’ t wait to see if I meant it, but whirled and crashed
into the door fra me, then stumbled through it, leaving a smear
of blood on the wood.
W isps of black-powder smoke floated in the air , mingling
oddly w ith the scent of roastin g fish, and I thought for an
instant t hat I might throw up, but managed despite my nausea
to se t do wn the fowling piece for a moment and bar the door ,
my hands shaking so that it took several tries.
Sudden sounds from the front of  the house drove nerves and
everything else from my mind, and I was running down the
hall, gun in han d, before I had made a conscious decision to
move, the heavy pistols in m y apron banging against my
thighs.
They’d dragged  Jamie of f th e porch; I caught a brief
glimpse of him in the midst of a sur ging melee of bodies.
They’d stopped shouting. There  wasn’ t any noise at all, save
for sma ll grunts and the impa ct of flesh, the scuf fling of
myriad feet in the dust. It was deadly earnest, that struggle,
and I knew at once that they meant to kill him.
I lev eled the fow ling piece at the edge of the crowd farthest
from Jamie, and pulled the trigger . The crash of the gun and
the start led screams seemed to come together , and the scenebefore me flew apart, the knot  of men dissolving, peppered
with bir d shot. Jamie had kept hold of his dirk; with a little
room aro und him  now , I saw him drive it into one man’ s side,
wrench it back a nd lash sideways in the same motion, scoring
a blo ody furrow across the fore head of a man who had fallen
back a little.
Then I caught a glimpse of metal to one side and by reflex
shrieked “DUCK!” an instant before Brown’ s pistol fired.
There was a small tchoong  past my ear , and I realized, in a
very calm sort of way , that Brown had fired at me, not Jamie.
Jamie had, however , ducked. S o had everyone else in the
yard, and men were now scrambling to their feet, confused, the
impetus of the attack dispersed. Jamie had dived toward the
porch; h e was up and stumbling toward me, striking viciously
with the  hilt of h is dirk at a man who grabbed at his sleeve, so
the man fell back with a cry .
W e might have r ehearsed it a do zen times. He took the steps
of th e po rch in one leap and flun g himself into me, carrying us
both thro ugh the door , then spun on his heel and slammed the
door , throwing himself against it and holding it against the
frenzied impact of bodies for the instant it took me to drop the
fowling piece, seize the bolt, and lift it into place.
It fell into its hooks with a thunk.
The door vibrated to the blows  of fists and shoulders, and
the s houting had started up aga in, but with a dif ferent sound.
No gloa ting, no taunting. Cursing still, but with a set, malign
intent.
Neither of us paused to listen.
“I barre d the kitchen door ,” I gasped, and Jamie nodded,
diving in to my sur gery to secure the bolts of the inside shutters
there. I heard the crash of breaking glass in the sur gery behind
me as I ran into his study; the windows there were smaller , and
not glass, placed high in the w all. I slammed the shutters to
and bolt ed them, then ran back into the suddenly darkened
hallway to find the gun.Jamie had it already; he was in the kitchen, grabbing things,
and as I started toward the kit chen door , he came out of it,
hung about with shot pouches,  powder horns, and the like,
fowling piece in his hand, and with a jerk of the head,
motioned me before him up the stairs.
The rooms above were still filled with light; it was like
bursting up from underwater , and I gulped the light as though
it were air , dazzled and eyes w atering as I rushed to bolt the
shutters in the b oxroom and Amy McCallum’ s room. I didn’ t
know where Amy and her sons were; I could only be grateful
that they weren’ t in the house at the moment.
I r an into the be droom, gasping . Jamie was kneeling by the
window , metho dically loading guns and saying something
under his breath in Gaelic—prayer or cursing, I couldn’ t tell.
I did n’ t ask if he was hurt. His face was bruised, his lip was
split, an d blood had run down h is chin onto his shirt, he was
covered with dirt and what I assumed to be smears of other
peoples’ blood, and the ear on the side closest me was swollen.
But he was stea dy in his movem ents, and anything short of a
fractured skull would have to wait.
“They mean to kill us,” I said, and didn’ t mean it as a
question.
He n odded, eyes on his work, then handed me a spare pistol
to load.
“A ye, th ey do. Good job the weans are all safe away , isn’ t
it?” He smiled at me suddenly , bloody-toothed and fierce, and
I felt steadier than I had for a long time.
He’d left one sid e of the shutter ajar . I moved carefully back
behind him and peered out, the l oaded pistol primed and in my
hand.
“No bodies lying in the doorya rd,” I reported. “I suppose
you didn’ t kill any of them.”
“Not for want of  trying,” he replied. “God, what I’d give for
a rifle!”  He rose cautiously to  his knees, the barrel of thefowling piece protruding over the sill, and surveyed the state
of the attack.
They ha d withdrawn for the moment; a small group was
visible u nder the  chestnut trees at the far side of the clearing,
and they’d taken the horses do wn toward Bree and Roger ’ s
cabin, s afely out of range of flying bullets. Brown and his
minions were clearly planning what to do next.
“What d o you suppose they wo uld have done, if I’d agreed
to go with them?” I could feel m y heart again, at least. It was
going a mile a m inute, but I could breathe, and some feeling
was coming back into my extremities.
“I should never ha’ let ye go,” he replied shortly .
“And qu ite possibly Richard Brown knows that,” I said. He
nodded; he’d been thinking along the same lines. Brown had
never intended actually to arr est me; only to provoke an
incident in which we could both  be killed under circumstances
dubious enough as to prevent wholesale retaliation by Jamie’ s
tenants.
“Mrs. Bug got out, did she?” he asked.
“Y es. If they did n’ t catch her outside the house.” I narrowed
my eyes against the brilliant afternoon sun, searching for a
short, broad figure in skirts am ong the group by the chestnut
trees, but I saw only men.
Jamie nodded again, hissing gently through his back teeth as
he s wiveled the gun barrel slow ly through an arc that covered
the dooryard.
“W e’ll s ee, then ” was all he said. “Come that wee bit closer ,
man,” he murmured, as one ma n started cautiously across the
yard toward the house. “One shot; that’ s all I ask. Here,
Sassenach, take this.” He pushed the fowling piece into my
hands, and selected his favorite of the pistols, a long-barreled
Highland dag with a scroll butt.
The man—it was Richard Bro wn, I saw—stopped some
distance away , pulled a handk erchief from the waist of hisbreeches, and waved it slowly overhead. Jamie snorted briefly ,
but let him come on.
“Fraser!” he called, coming to a stop at a distance of forty
yards or so. “Fraser! D’ye hear me?”
Jamie si ghted carefully and fired. The ball struck the ground
a few feet in front of Brown, raising a sudden puf f of dust
from the path, and Brown leapt in the air as though stung by a
bee.
“What’ s the matter with you?” he yelled indignantly . “Have
ye never  heard of a flag o’ truce , you horse-stealin’ Scotcher?”
“If I  wanted ye dead, Brown, ye’d be coolin’ this minute!”
Jamie shouted back. “Speak your piece.” What he did want
was plain: he wanted them wary of coming closer to the house;
it was impossib le to hit anythi ng accurately with a pistol at
forty yards, and not that easy with a musket.
“Y ou know what I want!” Brow n called. He took of f his hat,
wiping sweat and dirt from his  face. “I want that goddamn
murderous witch of yours.”
The answer to t hat was another carefully aimed pistol ball.
Brown jumped again, but not so high.
“Look you,” he tried again, wit h a conciliating note in his
voice. “ W e ain’ t going to hurt her . W e mean to take her to
Hillsboro for trial. A fair trial. That’ s all.”
Jamie handed me the second pi stol to reload, took another ,
and fired.
Y ou had  to give Brown credit for persistence, I thought. Of
course, it had probably dawn ed on him that Jamie either
couldn’ t or wouldn’ t actually hit him, and he doggedly stood
his g round through two more sh ots, yelling that they meant to
take me to Hill sboro, and surely to God if I were innocent,
Jamie should want  a trial, shouldn’ t he?
It was hot upsta irs, and sweat was trickling down between
my breasts. I blotted the fabric of my shift against my chest.W ith no answer save the whine of pistol balls, Brown threw
up h is hands in exaggerated pa ntomime of a reasonable man
tried bey ond endurance, and stamped back to his men beneath
the chestnut trees. Nothing had c hanged, but seeing the narrow
back of him made me breathe a little easier .
Jamie was still c rouched in the window , pistol at the ready ,
but seeing Brown go back, he  relaxed and sat back on his
heels, sighing.
“Is there water , Sassenach?”
“Y es.” T he bedroom ewer was full; I poured him a cup and
he d rank it thirs tily . W e had foo d, water , and a fair amount of
shot and powder . I did not, h owever , foresee a long siege
ahead.
“What do you suppose they’ll do?” I didn’ t go near the
window , but by standing to one side, I could see them clearly ,
gathered in conference under the trees. The air was still and
heavy , and the leaves above them hung like damp rags.
Jamie came to stand behind me , dabbing at his lip with the
tail of his shirt.
“Fire th e house as soon as it’ s dark, I suppose,” he said
matter -of-factly . “I would. Though I suppose they might try
draggin’ Gideon out and threatening to put a ball through his
head, and I didn a give ye up.” He seemed to think this last was
a joke, but I failed to see the humor in it.
He saw my face and put a hand behind my back, drawing
me clos e for a moment. The ai r was hot and sticky , and we
were bo th wringing wet, but the nearness of him was a
comfort, nonetheless.
“So,” I said, t aking a deep breath. “It all depends on
whether Mrs. Bug got away—and who she’ s told.”
“She’ll ha’ gone for Arch, fir st thing.” Jamie patted me
gently , and sat d own on the bed.  “If he’ s to home, he’ll run for
Kenny Lindsay;  he’ s nearest. After that …” He shrugged, and
closed his eyes, and I saw that his face was pale under the
sunburn and the smears of dirt and blood.“Jamie—are you hurt?”
He opened his eyes and gave me a small, one-sided smile,
trying not to stretch his torn lip.
“No, I’v e broken my bloody fin ger again, is all.” He raised
a sho ulder in de precation, but let me lift his right hand to look.
It was a clean b reak; that was all that could be said for it.
The fourth finger was stif f, th e joints fused from being so
badly broken long ago, in W entw orth Prison. He couldn’ t bend
it, a nd it therefo re stuck out awkwardly; this wasn’ t the first
time he’d snapped it.
He s wallowed as I felt gently f or the break, and closed his
eyes again, sweating.
“There’ s laudan um in the sur gery ,” I said. “Or whisky .” I
knew he would refuse, though, and he did.
“I’ll want a clear head,” he said, “whatever happens.” He
opened his eyes and gave me th e ghost of a smile. The room
was sweltering and airless, despite the open shutter . The sun
was more than halfway down t he sky , and the first shadows
were gathering in the corners of the room.
I we nt d own to the sur gery to fe tch a splint and bandage; it
wouldn’ t help a lot, but it was something to do.
The sur g ery was dark, with the shutters closed, but with the
windows broken, air came through them, making the room
seem od dly exposed and vulnerable. I walked in like a mouse,
quiet, s topping abruptly , list ening for danger , whiskers
twitching. Everything was quiet, though.
“ T oo  quiet,” I said aloud, and laughed. Moving with purpose
and ignoring the noise, I set my feet down firmly and opened
cupboard doors  with abandon, banging instruments and
rattling bottles as I looked out what I needed.
I stopped  into the kitchen before returning upstairs. Partly to
reassure myself that the back door was  firmly bolted, and
partly to  see what bits of food Mrs. Bug might have left out.
He hadn ’ t said so, but I knew the  pain of the broken finger wasmaking Jamie mildly nauseated —and in him, food generally
quelled that sort of disturbanc e, and made him feel more
settled.
The cauldron was still over the coals, but the fire, untended,
had burned down so far that the soup had luckily not boiled
away . I poked up the embers a nd put on three sticks of fat
pine, as much by way of thumbing my nose at the besiegers
outside as from the long-ingrained habit of never letting a fire
die. Let them see the spray of sparks from the chimney , I
thought, and imagine us sitting peacefully down to eat by our
hearth. Or better yet, imagine us sitting by the blazing fire,
melting lead and molding bullets.
In this defiant frame of mind, I went back upstairs, equipped
with medical supplies, an alfres co lunch, and a lar ge bottle of
black al e. I couldn’ t help but notice, though, the echo of my
footsteps on the stair , and the silence that settled quickly back
into place behind me, like water when one steps out of it.
I hea rd a shot, just as I approach ed the head of the stair , and
took the last steps so fast that I tripped and would have fallen
headlong, save for reeling into the wall.
Jamie appeared from Mr . W emyss’ s room, fowling piece in
hand, looking startled.
“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”
“Y es,” I said cro ssly , wiping spilled soup of f my hand with
my apron. “What in the name of God are you shooting at?”
“Nothing. I only wanted to mak e the point that the back of
the hou se is nay safer than the front, if they thought of
creeping up that way . Just to ensure that they do  wait for dark
to fall.”
I bound  up his finger , which seemed to help a little. The
food, as  I’d hoped, helped con siderably more. He ate like a
wolf, and rather to my surprise, so did I.
“The condemned ate a hearty meal,” I observed, picking up
crumbs of bread and cheese. “I’d always thought being indanger of death would make one too nervous to eat, but
apparently not.”
He shook his head, took a swallow of ale, and passed me the
bottle.
“A f riend once told me, ‘The b ody has nay conscience.’ I
dinna ken that that’ s entirely so —but it is true that the body
doesna generally admit the possibility of nonexistence. And if
ye e xist—well, ye need food, that’ s all.” He grinned one-sided
at m e, and tearin g the last of the sweet rolls in half, gave one
to me.
I took it, but did n’ t eat it immed iately . There was no sound
outside, save the buzzing of c icadas, though the air had a
sultry th ickness to it that often presaged rain. It was early in
the summer for storms, but one could only hope.
“Y ou’ve thought of it, too, haven’ t you?” I said quietly .
He made no pretense of misunderstanding me.
“W ell, it is  the twenty-first o’ the month,” he said.
“It’ s June,  for heaven’ s sa ke! And the wrong year , as well.
That newspaper clipping said January , of 1776!” I was
absurdly indignant, as though I had somehow been cheated.
He found that funny .
“I was a printer myself, Sassenach,” he said, laughing
through a mouthful of sweet ro ll. “Y e dinna want to believe
everything ye read in the newspapers, aye?”
When I looked out again, only a few men were visible under
the ches tnut trees. One of them saw my movement; he waved
his a rm slowly t o and fro above his head—then drew the edge
of his hand flat across his throat.
The sun  was just above the treetops; two hours, perhaps, to
nightfall. T wo hours surely was enough time for Mrs. Bug to
have summone d help, though—always assuming she had
found a nyone who would come. Arch might have gone to
Cross Creek—he went once a month; Kenny might be hunting.
As f or the newe r tenants … without Roger to keep them inorder , their suspicion and dislike of me had become blatant. I
had the feeling that they might come if summoned—but only
to cheer as I was dragged away .
If anyone did  come—what then? I didn’ t want to be dragged
away , m uch less  shot or burnt alive in the ashes of my house—
but I didn’ t want anyone else injured or killed in an ef fort to
prevent it, either .
“Come away from the window , Sassenach,” Jamie said. He
held out a hand  to me, and I w ent, sitting on the bed beside
him. I felt all at once exhausted, the adrenaline of emer gency
having burned away , leaving my muscles feeling like heat-
softened rubber .
“Lie down, a Sor cha, ” he said softly . “Lay your head in my
lap.”
Hot as it was, I did so, finding  it a comfort to stretch out,
even mo re to hear his heart, thumping slow and solid above
my ear , and feel his hand, light on my head.
All the weapons were laid out,  ranged on the floor beside
the window , all loaded, primed, and ready for use. He’d taken
his s word down from the armoire; it stood by the door , a last
resort.
“There’ s nothin g we can do now , is there?” I said after a
little. “Nothing but wait.”
His fing ers moved idly through the damp curls of my hair; it
fell to just above my shoulders now , long enough—barely—to
tie back or pin up.
“W ell, we might say an Act of C ontrition,” he said. “W e did
that, alw ays, the night before a battle. Just in case,” he added,
smiling down at me.
“All right,” I said after a pause. “Just in case.”
I reached up and his good hand closed round mine.
“Mon Dieu, je r egr ette …”  he bega n, and I remembered that
he s aid this pray er in French, h arking back to those days as a
mercenary in France; how often had he said it then, anecessary precaution, cleansing the soul at night in expectation
of the possibility of death in the morning?
I sai d it,  too, in English, and we  fell silent. The cicadas had
stopped. Far , far away , I thought I heard a sound that might be
thunder .
“Do you know ,” I said after a long while, “I’m sorry for a
great many things and people. Rupert, Murtagh, Dougal …
Frank. M alva,” I added softly , with a catch in my throat. “But
speaking only for myself …” I cleared my throat.
“I don’ t regret anything,” I said, watching the shadows
creep in from th e corners of the room. “Not one bloody thing.”
“Nor do I, mo nighean donn, ” he  said, and his fingers
stilled, warm against my skin. “Nor do I.”
I WOKE  FROM A DOZE with the smell of smoke in my
nostrils. Being in a state of grace  is all very well, but I imagine
even Joa n of Arc had qualms when they lit the first brand. I sat
bolt upright, heart pounding, to see Jamie at the window .
It w asn’ t quite dark yet; streaks of orange and gold and rose
lit the sky to the  west, and touched his face with a fiery light.
He looked long-nosed and fierce, the lines of strain cut deep.
“Folk are coming,” he said. His voice was matter -of-fact,
but his good ha nd was clenched hard round the edge of the
shutter , as though he would have liked to slam and bolt it.
I came to stand by him, combing my fingers hastily through
my hair .  I could still make out figures under the chestnut trees,
though t hey now were no more than silhouettes. They’d built a
bonfire there, at the far edge of  the dooryard; that’ s what I’d
smelled. There were more people coming into the dooryard,
though; I was s ure I made out the squat figure of Mrs. Bug
among t hem. The sound of voic es floated up, but they weren’ t
talking loudly enough to make out words.
“W ill ye plait m y hair , Sassenach? I canna manage, wi’
this.” He gave his broken finger a cursory glance.I l it a candle, and he moved a stool to the window , so he
could keep watch while I combed his hair and braided it into a
tight, thi ck queu e, which I clubb ed at the base of his neck and
tied with a neat black ribbon.
I kn ew his reaso ns were twofold: not only to appear well-
groomed and gentlemanly , but to  be ready to fight if he had to.
I wa s le ss worri ed about someone seizing me by the hair as I
attempted to cleave them in ha lf with a sword, but supposed
that if this were my last appeara nce as the lady of the Ridge, I
should not appear unkempt.
I hea rd him mut ter something under his breath, as I brushed
my o wn hair by  candlelight, and turned on my stool to look at
him.
“Hiram’ s come, ” he informed me. “I hear his voice. That’ s
good.”
“If you say so,” I said dubiously , recollecting Hiram
Crombie’ s denu nciations in church a week before—thinly
veiled remarks clearly aimed at us. Roger hadn’ t mentioned
them; Amy McCallum had told me.
Jamie turned his head to look at me, and smiled, an
expression of extraordinary sweetness coming over his face.
“Y e’re verra lovely , Sassenach,” he said as though surprised.
“But, aye, it’ s good. Whatever he thinks, he wouldna
countenance Brown hanging us in the dooryard, nor yet setting
the house afire to drive us out.”
There were more voices outside; the crowd was growing
quickly .
“Mr . Fraser!”
He took  a deep breath, took the candle from the table, and
threw op en the shutter , holding the candle near his face so they
could see him.
It was almost full dark, but s everal of the crowd were
holding torches, which gave me uneasy visions of the mob
coming to burn Dr . Frankenstein’ s monster—but did at leastallow me to ma ke out the faces below . There were at least
thirty men—and not a few women—there, in addition to
Brown and his thugs. Hiram Crombie was indeed there,
standing beside Richard Brown , and looking like something
out of the Old T estament.
“W e require ye to come down, M r . Fraser ,” he called. “And
your wife—if ye please.”
I cau ght sight o f Mrs. Bug, plump and clearly terrified, her
face streaked with tears. Then Jamie closed the shutters,
gently , and of fered me his arm.
JAMIE HAD WORN BOTH dirk and sword, and had not
changed his clothes. He stood on the porch, bloodstained and
battered, and dared them to harm us further .
“Y e’ll take my w ife over my dead body ,” he said, raising his
powerful voice enough to be heard across the clearing. I was
rather afraid they would. He’ d been right—so far—about
Hiram not countenancing lynchi ng, but it was clear that public
opinion was not in our favor .
“Thou shalt not suf fer a witch  to live!” someone shouted
from the  back of the crowd, and  a stone whistled through the
air , bouncing of f the front of the house with a sharp report, like
a g unshot. It struck no more than a foot from my head, and I
flinched, instantly regretting it.
Angry murmurs had risen from the moment Jamie had
opened the door , and this encou raged them. There were shouts
of “Murderers!” and “Heartless! Heartless!” and a number of
Gaelic insults that I didn’ t try to understand.
“If she didn’ t do it, br eugair e,  w ho did?” someone
bellowed. “Liar” it meant.
The man Jamie had slashed across the face with his dirk was
in th e forefront of the crowd; the open wound gaped, still
oozing, and his face was a mask of dried blood.
“If ‘ twasn’ t her , ‘twas him!” he  shouted, pointing at Jamie.
“Fear -siursachd!” Lecher .There was an u gly rumble of a greement at that, and I saw
Jamie shift his weight and set his hand to his sword, ready to
draw if they char ged him.
“Be still!” Hiram’ s voice was rather shrill, but penetrating.
“Be still, I tell ye!” He pushed Brown aside and came up the
steps, v ery deliberately . At the top, he gave me a look of
revulsion, but then turned to the crowd.
“Justice!” one of Brown’ s men yelled, before he could
speak. “W e want justice!”
“A ye, we do!” Hiram shouted b ack. “And justice we shall
have, for the puir raped lass and her bairn unborn!”
A sa tisfied growl greeted this, a nd icy terror ran down my
legs, so that I feared my knees would give way .
“Justice! Justice!” V arious people were taking up the chant,
but H iram stopped them, raising  both hands as though he were
bloody Moses parting the Red Sea.
“ Justice is mine,  s ayeth the Lor d,” Jamie remarked, in a
voice just loud enough to be generally heard. Hiram, who had
evidently been about to say the same thing, gave him a furious
look, but couldn’ t very well contradict him.
“And justice you’ll have, Mister Fraser!” Brown said very
loudly . He lifted his face, narrow-eyed and malicious with
triumph. “I wish to take her for trial. Anyone accused is
entitled to that, nay? If she is innocent—if you  are innocent—
how can you refuse?”
“Certainly a point,” Hiram observed, very dry . “If your wife
be clean o’ the crime, she’ s naught to fear . How say ye, sir?”
“I sa y th at shou ld I surrender h er to the hands of this man,
she willna live t o stand a trial,” Jamie replied hotly . “He holds
me to blame for the death of his brother—and some of ye here
will ken  well enough the truth o’ that  af fair!” he added, lifting
his chin to the crowd.
Here and there, heads nodded—but they were few . No more
than a dozen of his Ardsmuir m en had been on the expeditionthat rescued me; in the wake o f gossip following it, many of
the new tenants would have known only that I had been
abducted, assaulted in some scandalous fashion, and that men
had died  on my account. The m ind of the times being what it
was, I was well aware that an obscure sense of blame attached
to the victim of any sexual crim e—unless the woman died, in
which case she became at once a spotless angel.
“He wil l slaugh ter her out of hand, for the sake of revenge
upon me ,” Jami e said, raising h is voice. He changed abruptly
to Gaelic, pointing at Brown. “Look at yon man, and see the
truth of the matter writ upon hi s face! He has no more to do
with justice than with honor , and he would not recognize
honor by the smell of its arse!”
That made a few  of them laugh, in sheer surprise. Brown,
disconcerted, looked round to see what they were laughing at,
which made more of them laugh.
The mo od of the assembly wa s still against us, but they
were not yet w ith Brown—wh o was, after all, a stranger .
Hiram’ s narrow brow creased in consideration.
“What w ould ye of fer by way of guarantee for the woman’ s
safety?” Hiram asked Brown.
“A d ozen hogsheads of beer and three dozen prime hides,”
Brown replied promptly . “Four dozen!” His eagerness
gleamed in his eyes, and it was all he could do to keep his
voice from shaking with the lust to take me. I had a sudden,
unpleasant conviction that while my death was his ultimate
goal, he  didn’ t intend that it should be a quick one, unless
circumstances demanded it.
“It would be worth far more than that to ye, br eugair e,  to
have your revenge upon me with her death,” Jamie said
evenly .
Hiram glanced from one to the  other , unsure what to do. I
looked out into the crowd, keeping my face impassive. In
truth, it was not dif ficult to do; I felt completely numb.There were a few friendly faces, glancing anxiously to
Jamie, to  see what to do. Kenny  and his brothers, Murdo and
Evan, st ood in a tight group, han ds on their dirks and faces set.
I did n’ t know whether Richard Brown had chosen his timing,
or merely been lucky . Ian was gone, hunting with his
Cherokee friends. Arch was plainly gone, as well, or he would
be v isible—Arch and his ax wou ld be uncommonly handy just
now , I thought.
Fer gus and Marsali were gon e—they , too, would have
helped to stem the tide. But the  most important absence was
Roger ’ s. He alone had been kee ping the Presbyterians more or
less under control since the day  of Malva’ s accusation, or at
least ke eping a lid on the simmering pot of gossip and
animosity . He might have cowed them now—had he been
here.
The conversation had devolved from high drama to a three-
way wrangle among Jamie, Brow n, and Hiram, the former two
adamant in their positions, and poor Hiram, quite unsuited to
the t ask, trying t o adjudicate. Insofar as I had feelings to spare,
I felt rather sorry for him.
“T ake him!” a voice called suddenly . Allan Christie pushed
his way to the front of the crowd, and pointed at Jamie. His
voice trembled and broke with emotion. “It’ s him debauched
my siste r , him that kilt her! If ye’ll put someone to the trial,
take him!”
There was a sub terranean rumble of agreement at that, and I
saw John MacNeill and young Hugh Abernathy draw close
together , glancing uneasily from Jamie to the three Lindsay
brothers, and back again.
“Nay , it’ s her!” a woman’ s voice called in contradiction,
high and shrill. O ne of the fishe rs’ wives; she stabbed a finger
at me, face pinc hed with malevolence. “A man might kill a
lass he’d  got wi’ child—but no man would do sich wickedness
as to steal a babe unborn frae the womb! No but a witch would
do that—and she found wi’ the puir wee corpse in her hands!”A higher susurrus of condemnation greeted that. The men
might possibly give me the benefit of doubt—no woman
would.
“By the name of the Almighty!” Hiram was losing his grip
on the situation, and becoming panicky . The situation was
perilously close to degenerating into riot; anyone could feel
the c urrents of h ysteria and violence in the air . He cast his eyes
up to heaven, looking for inspiration—and found some.
“T ake them both!” he said sudd enly . He looked at Brown,
then Jamie. “T ake them both,” he repeated, testing the notion
and find ing it good. “Y e’ll go  along, to see that nay harm
comes to your w ife,” he said re asonably to Jamie. “And if it
should be proved that she is innocent …” His voice died away
on that, as it dawned on him that what he was saying was that
if I wer e proven  innocent, Jamie must be guilty , and what a
good idea it wo uld be to have him on the spot to be hanged
instead.
“She is innocent; so am I.” Jamie spoke without heat,
doggedly repea ting it. He had  no real hope of convincing
anyone; the only doubt among the crowd was whether he or I
was the guilty p arty—or whether we had plotted together to
destroy Malva Christie.
He t urned suddenly to face the crowd, and cried out to them
in Gaelic.
“If y ou will de liver us into the stranger ’ s hand, then our
blood be  upon your heads, and you will answer for our lives
upon the Day of Judgment!”
A s udden hush fell on the cr owd at that. Men glanced
uncertainly at their neighbors, measured Brown and his cohort
with doubtful eyes.
They were known to the community , but strangers—
Sassenachs—in the Scottish sense. So was I, and a witch, to
boot. Lecher , rapist, and Papist murderer he might be—but
Jamie at least was not a stranger .The man I had shot was grinning at me evilly over Brown’ s
shoulder; eviden tly , I had no more than grazed him, worse
luck. I gave him  stare for stare , sweat gathering between my
breasts, moisture slick and hot beneath the veil of my hair .
A murmur was rising among the crowd; ar gument and
disputation, and  I could see the Ardsmuir men begin to make
their wa y slowly  toward the po rch, pushing through the mob.
Kenny L indsay’ s eyes were fixed on Jamie’ s face, and I felt
Jamie take a deep breath beside me.
They wo uld fight for him, if he called them. But there were
too few of them, and poorly armed, by contrast with Brown’ s
mob. They would not win—and there were women and
children in the crowd. T o call his men would provoke only
bloody riot, and leave the d eaths of innocents upon his
conscience. That was not a burden he could bear; not now .
I saw him come to this conclusion, and his mouth tighten. I
had no idea what he might be about to do, but he was
forestalled. There was a disturbance at the edge of the crowd;
people turned to look, then froze, stricken silent.
Thomas Christie  came through the crowd; in spite of the
darkness and wavering torchligh t, I knew at once it was him.
He w alked like a n old man, hunched and halting, looking at no
one. The crowd gave way before him at once, deeply
respectful of his grief.
The grie f was plainly marked on his face. He had let his
beard and hair go untrimmed, uncombed, and both were
matted. His eyes were pouched  and bloodshot, the lines from
nose to mouth b lack furrows through his beard. His eyes were
alive, though, alert and intelligent. He walked through the
crowd, p ast his son, as though h e were alone, and came up the
steps onto the porch.
“I w ill go with them to Hillsboro,” he said quietly to Hiram
Crombie. “Let them both be tak en, if ye will—but I will travel
with them, as su rety that no further evil may be done. Surely
justice is mine, if it be anyone’ s.”Brown looked much taken aback by this declaration; plainly
it wasn’ t what he’d had in mind at all. But the crowd was in
instant sympathy , murmuring agreement at the proposed
solution. Everyone had the greatest compassion and respect for
T om Ch ristie in the wake of his daughter ’ s murder , and the
general feeling seemed to be that this gesture was one of the
greatest magnanimity .
It was, too, as he had in all likelihood just saved our lives—
at least for the moment. From the look in his eye, Jamie would
strongly have preferred simply to take his chances on killing
Richard Brown, but realized that beggars could not be
choosers, and acquiesced as gracefully as possible, with a nod
of the head.
Christie’ s gaze rested on me for a moment, then turned to
Jamie.
“If it will suit your convenience, Mr . Fraser , perhaps we will
leave in  the morning? There is  no reason why you and your
wife should not rest in your own beds.”
Jamie bowed to him.
“I thank  ye, sir ,” he said with great formality . Christie
nodded back, then turned and went back down the steps,
completely ignoring Richard Brown, who was looking at once
irritated and confounded.
I saw  K enny Lin dsay close his eyes, shoulders slumping in
relief. Then Jamie put his han d under my elbow , and we
turned, going into our house for  what might be the final night
spent under its roof.8 8
IN THE W AKE OF SCANDAL
T HE RAIN THA T HAD THREA TENED arrived in the night,
and the day dawned gray , bleak, and wet. Mrs. Bug was in a
similar state, snif fling into her apron and repeating over and
over , “O h, if only Arch had been here! But I couldna find
anyone save Kenny Lindsay , and by the time he’d run for
MacNeill and Abernathy—”
“Dinna fash yourself for it, a leannan, ” Jamie said, and
kissed her af fectionately on the brow . “It may be for the best.
No one was dam aged, the house is still standing”—he cast a
wistful eye toward the rafters, e very beam shaped by his own
hand—”and it may be we’ll hav e this wretched matter settled
soon, God willing.”
“God w illing,” she echoed fervently , crossing herself. She
snif fed a nd wiped her eyes. “A nd I’ve packed a wee bit of
food, that ye shouldna starve on the way , sir .”
Richard Brown and his men had sheltered under the trees as
best they could; no one had of fered them hospitality , which
was as damning  an indication of  their unpopularity as could be
imagined, Highland standards being what they were in such
matters. And as clear an indica tion of our own unpopularity ,
that Brown should be permitted to take us into custody .
In consequence, Brown’ s men were soaking wet, ill-fed,
sleepless, and short-tempered. I hadn’ t slept, either , but I was
at least full of breakfast, warm, and—for the moment—dry ,
which m ade me feel a little bette r , though my heart felt hollow
and my bones filled with lead as we reached the head of the
trail and I looke d back across t he clearing at the house, with
Mrs. Bu g standing waving on the porch. I waved back, and
then my horse plunged into the darkness of the dripping trees.It was a grim journey , and silent for the most part. Jamie
and I rode close together , but couldn’ t speak of anything
important, in hearing of Brown’ s men. As for Richard Brown,
he was seriously out of countenance.
It w as reasonably clear that he had never intended to take
me anyw here for trial, but had merely seized upon the pretext
as a means of re venging himself  on Jamie for Lionel’ s death—
and God knew what he would have done, I reflected, had he
known what had really happened to his brother , and Mrs. Bug
there wi thin arm ’ s length of hi m. W ith T om Christie along,
though, there was nothing he co uld do; he was obliged to take
us to Hillsboro, and he did so with bad grace.
T om Christie rode like a man in a dream—a bad dream—his
face closed and inward-looking, speaking to no one.
The man  Jamie had slashed wa s not there; I supposed he
had gone home to Brownsville. The gentleman I had shot was
still with us, though.
I cou ldn’ t tell ho w bad the wound was, nor yet whether the
bullet ha d gone into him or merely grazed his side. He wasn’ t
incapacitated, bu t it was plain from the way he hunched to one
side, his face contorting now and then, that he was in pain.
I hesitated for some time. I had brought a small medical kit
with me, as w ell as saddlebags and bedroll. Under the
circumstances, I felt relatively little sense of compassion for
the man . On the other hand, inst inct was strong—and as I said
to Jamie in an undertone when we stopped to make camp for
the evening, it wouldn’ t help matters if he died of infection.
I ste eled myself to of fer to examine and dress the wound, as
soon as the opportunity should occur . The man—his name
seemed to be Ez ra, though under the circumstances, no formal
introductions ha d been made—was in char ge of distributing
bowls o f food at supper , and I waited under the pine where
Jamie and I had taken shelter , intending to speak kindly to him
when he brought our food.He came over , a bowl in each hand, shoulders hunched
under a leather coat against th e rain. Before I could speak,
though, he grinned nastily , sp at thickly in one bowl, and
handed it to me. The other he dropped at Jamie’ s feet,
spattering his legs with dried-venison stew .
“Oops,” he said mildly , and turned on his heel.
Jamie contracted  sharply , like a big snake coiling, but I got
hold of his arm before he could strike.
“Never m ind,” I  said, and raisin g my voice just a little, said,
“Let him rot.”
The man’ s head snapped round, wide-eyed.
“Let him rot,” I  repeated, staring at him. I’d seen the flush
of fe ver in his face when he cam e near , and smelled the faint
sweet scent of pus.
Ezra loo ked com pletely taken back. He hurried back to the
sputtering fire, and refused to look in my direction.
I w as still holdin g the bowl he’d  given me, and was startled
to h ave it take n from my hand. T om Christie threw the
contents of the bowl into a bush, and handed me his own, then
turned away without speaking.
“But—” I started after him, m eaning to give it back. W e
wouldn’ t starve, thanks to Mrs. Bug’ s “wee bit of food,” which
filled one entire saddlebag. Jam ie’ s hand on my arm stopped
me, though.
“Eat it, Sassenach,” he said softly . “It’ s kindly meant.”
More th an kind,  I thought. I was aware of hostile eyes upon
me, from  the group around the f ire. My throat was tight, and I
had no appetite, but I took my spoon from my pocket and ate.
Beneath a nearby hemlock tree, T om Christie had wrapped
himself in a blanket and lain down alone, his hat pulled down
over his face.
IT RAIN ED ALL THE W A Y to  Salisbury . W e found shelter in
an in n there, and seldom had a f ire seemed so welcome. Jamie
had brou ght what cash we had, and in consequence, we could
af ford a room to  ourselves. Brown posted a guard on the stair ,
but that was merely for show; after all, where would we go?
I stood in front of the fire in m y shift, my wet cloak and
gown spread over a bench to dry .
“Y ou know ,” I observed, “Richard Brown hasn’ t thought
this out at all.” Not surprising, that, since he hadn’ t actually
intended to take me or us to trial. “Who, exactly , does he mean
to hand us over to?”
“The sh erif f of the county ,” Jamie replied, untying his hair
and shak ing it out over the hearth, so that droplets of water
sizzled and popped in the fire. “Or failing that, a justice of the
peace, perhaps.”
“Y es, but what then? He’ s got no evidence—no witnesses.
How can there be any semblance of a trial?”
Jamie looked at me curiously .
“Y e’ve never been tried for anything, have ye, Sassenach?”
“Y ou know I haven’ t.”
He nodded.
“I have. For treason.”
“Y es? And what happened?”
He ran a hand through his damp hair , considering.
“They made me stand up, and asked my name. I gave it, the
judge m uttered to his friend for a bit, and then he said,
‘Condemned. Imprisonment for life. Put him in irons.’ And
they took me out to the cou rtyard and had a blacksmith
hammer fetters onto my wris ts. The next day we began
walking to Ardsmuir .”
“They made you walk  there? From Inverness?”
“I wasna in any great hurry , Sassenach.”I too k a deep bre ath, trying to st em the sinking feeling in the
pit of my stomach.
“I see. W ell … but surely—wo uldn’ t m-murder”—I could
just about say it without stammering, but not quite, yet—”be a
matter for a jury trial?”
“It migh t, and certainly I shall insist upon it—if things go so
far . M r . Brown s eems to think they may; he’ s telling everyone
in the taproom the story , making us out to be monsters of
depravity . Whic h I must say is no great feat,” he added
ruefully , “considering the circumstances.”
I pressed my lips tight together , to avoid giving a hasty
answer . I knew he knew that I had had no choice—he knew
that I knew he had had nothing  to do with Malva in the first
place—but I could not help but feel a sense of blame in both
directions, for this desperate muddle in which we found
ourselves. Both for what had happened afterward, and for
Malva’ s death itself—though God knew I would give anything
to have her alive again.
He was right ab out Brown, I realized. Cold and wet, I’d
paid littl e attenti on to the noises  from the taproom below , but I
could he ar Brown’ s voice, echoing up the chimney , and from
the r andom words that came th rough, it was apparent that he
was do ing exactly what Jamie said—blackening our
characters, maki ng it out that he and his Committee of Safety
had undertaken the ignoble but necessary job of apprehending
us and committing us to justice. And, just incidentally ,
carefully prejud icing any potential jury members by making
sure the story spread abroad in all its scandalous detail.
“Is t here anything to be done?”  I asked, having listened to
as much of this nonsense as I could stomach.
He nodded, and pulled a clean shirt from his saddlebag.
“Go down for supper , and look as little like depraved
murderers as possible, a nighean. ”
“Right,” I said, and with a sigh, withdrew the ribbon-
trimmed cap I had packed.I SHOULDN’T HA VE been surprised. I had lived long
enough to have a fairly cynica l view of human nature—and
lived long enough in this time to know how directly public
opinion expressed itself. And yet I was still shocked, when the
first stone hit me in the thigh.
W e were some distance south of Hillsboro. The weather
continued wet, the roads muddy , and the travel dif ficult. I
think Richard Brown would hav e been pleased to relinquish us
to the sherif f of  Rowan county—if such a person had been
available. The of fice, he was informed, was currently unfilled,
the last occupant having decamped hurriedly overnight and no
one yet found willing to replace him.
A matte r of politics, I gathered, the recent sherif f having
leaned toward independency , whilst the majority of persons in
the county were still strongly  Loyalist. I didn’ t learn the
specifics of the incident that ha d triggered the recent sherif f ’ s
hasty departure, but the taverns and inns near Hillsboro were
buzzing like hornets’ nests in the wake of it.
The Circuit Court had ceased to  meet some months before,
Brown was informed, the justice s who attended it feeling it too
dangerous to appear in the pre sent unsettled state of things.
The sol e justice of the peace he was able to discover felt
similarly , and declined point-blank to take custody of us,
informing Brow n that it was more than his life was worth, to
be involved in anything even faintly controversial at the
moment.
“But it’ s nothing to do with poli tics!” Brown had shouted at
him, frustrated. “It’ s murder , for God’ s sake—black murder!”
“Anything and everything’ s political these days, sir ,” the JP ,
one Har vey Mickelgrass, informed him sadly , shaking his
head. “I  should not venture to address even a case of drunk
and disorderly , for fear of having my house pulled down
around my ears and my wif e left widowed. The sherif f
attempted to sell his of fice, but  could find no one willing to
purchase it. No, sir—you will have to go elsewhere.”Brown would by no means t ake us to Cross Creek or
Campbelton, where Jocasta Cameron’ s influence was strong,
and where the local justice was her good friend, Farquard
Campbell. And so we headed south, toward W ilmington.
Brown’ s men were disedified; they had expected a simple
lynching and house-burning, perhaps the odd bit of looting—
not this long-drawn-out and tedious plodding from place to
place. Their spirits were further lowered when Ezra, who had
been clinging to his horse in a dogged daze of fever , fell
suddenly into the road and was picked up dead.
I did n’ t ask to examine the body—and wouldn’ t have been
given leave in a ny case—but I rather thought from the lolling
looks of him that he had simply lost consciousness, tumbled
of f, and broken his neck.
Not a few of the others cast look s of open fear toward me in
the wake of th is occurrence, though, and their sense of
enthusiasm for the venture diminished visibly .
Richard Brown was not deterred ; he would, I was sure, have
shot us without  mercy long since, had it not been for T om
Christie, silent and gray as the morning fog on the roads. He
said little, and th at little confined to necessities. I should have
thought him moving mechanically , in the numb haze of grief
—had I not turned one evening as we camped by the road, to
see his eyes fixed upon me, with a look of such naked anguish
in them that I g lanced hastily away , only to see Jamie, sitting
beside me, watching T om Christie with a very thoughtful
expression.
For the most part, though, he ke pt his face impassive—what
could be seen of it, under the shade of his leather slouch hat.
And Richard Brown, prevented by Christie’ s presence from
doing us active harm, took ev ery opportunity to spread his
version of the t ale of Malva’ s murder—perhaps as much to
harrow T om Christie in the hearing of it, over and over again,
as for its ef fect on our reputations.
At a ny rate, I should not have been surprised when they
stoned u s, in a s mall, nameless hamlet south of Hillsboro—butI was. A young boy had seen us on the road, stared as we rode
by—then vanish ed like a fox, scampering down a bank with
the n ews. And t en minutes later , we rode around a bend in the
road and into a fusillade of stones and shrieks.
One struck my m are on the shoulder and she shied violently .
I kep t my seat narrowly , but was of f-balance; another hit me in
the thigh, and another high in the chest, knocking the breath
from me , and when one more bounced painfully of f my head, I
lost my grip on the reins, and as  the horse, panicked, curvetted
and spun, I fle w of f, landing on the ground with a bone-
shaking thud.
I s hould  have been terrified; in fact, I was furious. The stone
that had hit me  in the head had glanced of f—thanks to the
thickness of my hair and the  cap I wore—but with the
infuriating sting  of a slap or a pinch, rather than true impact. I
was on my feet by reflex, stag gering, but caught sight of a
jeering boy on the bank above me, hooting and dancing in
triumph. I lunged, caught him by the foot and jerked.
He yelped, slipped, and fell on top of me. W e crashed to the
ground together , and rolled in a tangle of skirts and cloak. I
was older , heavier , and completely berserk. All the fear ,
misery , and uncertainty of the last weeks came to an instant
boil, and  I punched his sneering face, twice, as hard as I could.
I felt something crack in my hand, and pain shot up my arm.
He bellowed, and wriggled to escape—he was smaller than
I wa s, but strong  with panic. I struggled to keep a grip on him,
got him by the h air—he struck out at me, flailing, and knocked
of f my cap, getting one hand in my hair and yanking hard.
The pain reignited my fury and  I jammed a knee into him,
anywhere I could, again, and once more, blindly seeking his
soft parts. His mouth opened in  a soundless “O” and his eyes
bulged; his fingers relaxed and let go of my hair , and I reared
up over him and slapped him as hard as I possibly could.
A bi g rock struc k my shoulder with a numbing blow and I
was knocked sideways by the impact. I tried to hit him again,
but coul dn’ t lift my arm. Pantin g and sobbing, he writhed freeof my cloak an d scrambled away on hands and knees, nose
bleeding. I whirled on my knees to look after him, and looked
straight into the eyes of a young man, his face intent and
blazing with excitement, rock at the ready .
It hit me in the  cheekbone and I swayed, my vision gone
blurry . T hen something very lar ge hit me from behind, and I
found myself flat on my face,  pressed into the ground, the
weight of a body on top of mine . It was Jamie; I could tell by
the breathless “Holy Mother .” His body jerked as the stones hit
him; I could hear the horrifying thud of them into his flesh.
There was a lot of shouting going on. I heard T om Christie’ s
hoarse voice, then the firing of a single shot. More yelling, but
of a dif ferent character . One or two soft thumps, stones
striking earth nearby , a last grun t from Jamie as one slammed
into him.
W e lay pressed flat for a few moments, and I became aware
of the uncomfortably spiky plant squashed under my cheek,
the scent of its leaves harsh and bitter in my nose.
Then Jamie sat up, slowly , dra wing in his breath with a
catch, an d I rose in turn on a s haky arm, nearly falling. My
cheek was puf fed and my hand  and shoulder throbbed, but I
had no attention to spare for that.
“Are you all right?” Jamie had got halfway to his feet, then
sat down  again, suddenly . He was pale, and a trickle of blood
ran dow n the side of his face f rom a cut in his scalp, but he
nodded, a hand pressed to his side.
“A ye, fi ne,” he said, but with a breathlessness that told me
he likely had cracked ribs. “Y e’re all right, Sassenach?”
“Fine.” I managed to get to my feet, trembling. Brown’ s
men were scattered, some chasi ng the horses who had fled in
the melee, others cursing, gathering up scattered bits of
belongings from the road. T om Christie was vomiting into the
bushes by the road. Richard Brown stood under a tree,
watching, his face white. He gla nced at me sharply , then away .
W e stopped at no more taverns on the way .8 9
A MOONLICHT FLICHT
W HEN YE GO T O HIT SOMEO NE, Sassenach, ye want to
do it in the soft  parts. Faces ha ve too many bones. And then
there’ s the teeth to be thinkin’ of.”
Jamie s pread h er fingers, gently pressing the scraped,
swollen knuckles, and air hissed between her own teeth.
“Thanks so much for the advic e. And you’ve broken your
hand how  many times, hitting people?”
He wanted to laugh; the vision of her pounding that wee boy
in a fury  of berserk rage, hair fl ying in the wind and a look of
blood in  her eye, was one he would treasure. He didn’ t,
though.
“Y our hand’ s not broken, a nighean. ” He curled her fingers,
cupping her loose fist with both of his.
“How would you know?” she  snapped. “ I’m  the doctor
here.”
He stopped trying to hide his smile.
“If i t were broke n,” he said, “ye’d be white and puking, not
red-faced and crankit.”
“Crankit, my arse!” She pulled her hand free, glaring at him
as she nursed it against her b osom. She was in fact only
slightly flushed, and most attractive, with her hair curling out
in a  wild mass  round her head. One of Brown’ s men had
picked u p her fallen cap after th e attack, timidly of fering it to
her . Enr aged, she had snatched it from him and stuf fed it
violently into a saddlebag.
“Are ye hungry , lass?”
“Y es,” she admitted grudgingly , as aware as he was that folk
with broken bones generally had little appetite immediately ,though they ate amazingly , once the pain had backed a bit.
He rummaged in the saddlebag , blessing Mrs. Bug as he
came out with a  handful of dried apricots and a lar ge wrapped
wedge of goat’ s cheese. Brown’ s men were cooking something
over their fire, but he and Claire had not touched any food but
their own, not since the first night.
How much longer might this farce go on? he wondered,
breaking of f a bit of cheese and handing it to his wife. They
had food for per haps a week, with care. Long enough, maybe,
to reach the coast, and the weather held good. And what then?
It had been plain to him from the first that Brown had no
plan, and was attempting to deal  with a situation that had been
out of his control since the first moment. Brown had ambition,
greed, a nd a respectable sense of revenge, but almost no
capacity of forethought, that much was clear .
Now , he re he was, saddled with the two of them, forced to
travel on and on, the unwelcome  responsibility dragging like a
worn-out shoe tied to a dog’ s tail. And Brown the hindered
dog, sna rling and turning in circ les, snapping at the thing that
hampered him, and biting his own tail in consequence. Half
his men  had been wounded by the flung stones. Jamie
thoughtfully touched a lar ge, painful bruise on the point of his
elbow .
He himself had had no choice; now Brown hadn’ t, either .
His men  were growing restive; they had crops to tend, and
hadn’ t bar gaine d for what they must see now as a fool’ s
errand.
It would  be a si mple matter to escape by himself. But then
what? He could not leave Clair e in Brown’ s hands, and even
were he able to get her safe away , they could not return to the
Ridge w ith mat ters as they we re; to do so would be to find
themselves straight back in the pot.
He s ighed, then caught his breat h and let it out gingerly . He
didn’ t think his ribs were cracked, but they hurt.“Y e’ve a bit of ointment, I expect?” he said, nodding at the
bag that held her bits of medicine.
“Y es, of course.” She swallowed her bite of cheese,
reaching for the bag. “I’ll put some on that cut on your head.”
He l et her do that, but then insis ted upon anointing her hand
in tu rn. She objected, insisting that she was perfectly fine,
needed no such thing, they shou ld save the ointment in case of
future need—an d yet she let him take her hand and smooth the
sweet-smelling cream into her knuckles, the small fine bones
of her hand hard under his fingers.
She so hated be ing helpless in any way—but the armor of
righteous fury was wearing of f , and while she kept a fierce
face for Brown and the rest, he knew she was afraid. Not
without reason, either .
Brown w as uneasy , unable to s ettle. He moved to and fro,
talking aimless ly with one man or another , needlessly
checking the hobbled horses, po uring a cup of chicory cof fee
and hold ing it undrunk until it g rew cold, then flinging it into
the weeds. And all the time, his restless gaze returned to them.
Brown was hasty , impetuous, and half-baked. He was not
entirely stupid, Jamie thought. A nd clearly he had realized that
his strategy of spreading gossip and scandal concerning his
prisoners in order to endanger them had severe defects, so long
as he was hims elf obliged to c ontinue in close proximity to
said prisoners.
Their simple meal finished, Jamie lay down, carefully , and
Claire curled herself into him spoonwise, wanting comfort.
Fighting was an exhausting bus iness, and so was fear; she
was asle ep in moments. Jamie felt the pull of sleep, but would
not yield to it yet. He occupied himself instead in reciting
some of the poe ms Brianna had told him—he quite liked the
one about the silversmith in Boston, riding to spread the alarm
to Lexington, which he considered a handsome piece.
The company was beginning to settle for the night. Brown
was still a-fidget, sitting staring darkly at the ground, thenleaping to his fe et to stride up and down. By contrast, Christie
had bare ly stirre d, though he m ade no move to go to bed. He
sat on a rock, his supper barely touched.
A flicke r of movement near Christie’ s boot; a wee small
mouse, making feints toward the  neglected plate that sat on the
ground, filled with bounty .
It had occurred  to Jamie a couple of days before, in the
vague w ay that one recognizes a fact unconsciously known for
some time, that T om Christie was in love with his wife.
Poor bugger ,  he thought. Surely Christie did not believe that
Claire had had aught to do with the death of his daughter; if
so, he would not be here. Did he think that Jamie, though … ?
He lay in the sh elter of the darkness, watching the fire play
across Christie’ s haggard features, his eyes half-hooded,
giving no hint of his thoughts. There were men who could be
read like books; T om Christie w asn’ t one of them. But if ever
he had seen a man being eaten alive before his eyes …
W as it the fate of his daughter , alone—or also the desperate
need of a woman? He’d seen that need before, that gnawing at
the soul, and knew it personally . Or did  Christie think that
Claire had killed wee Malva, o r been in some way involved?
There would be a quandary for an honorable man.
The need of a woman … the thought brought him back to
the moment, and the awareness  that the sounds he had been
listening for in the wood behind  him were now there. He had
known for the past two days that they were followed, but last
night they had c amped in an open meadow , with no cover at
all.
Moving slowly , but with no atte mpt at furtiveness, he rose,
covered Claire with his cloak, and stepped into the wood, like
one called by nature.
The moon was pale and hunchbacked and there was little
light beneath the trees. He clo sed his eyes to damp the fire
shadow and opened them again to the dark world, that place of
shapes that lacked dimension and air that held spirits.It was no spirit that stepped ou t from behind the blur of a
pine tree, though.
“Blessed Michael defend us,” he said softly .
“The blessed host of angels a nd archangels be with ye,
Uncle,” said Ian, in the same soft tone. “Though I am thinking
that a few thrones and dominations wouldna come amiss,
either .”
“W ell, I wouldna ar gue, if Divin e Intervention chose to take
a hand,” Jamie said, heartened most amazingly by his
nephew’ s presence. “I’m sure I’ve no notion how else we shall
escape this foolish coil.”
Ian grunted at that; Jamie saw his nephew’ s head turn,
checking the faint glow of the camp. W ithout discussion, they
moved further into the wood.
“I ca nna be gon e for long, without they come after me,” he
said. “First, then—is all well wi’ the Ridge?”
Ian lifted a shoulder .
“There’ s talk,” he said, the tone  of his voice indicating that
“talk” co vered e verything from auld wives’ gossip to the sort
of insult that mu st be settled by  violence. “No one killed yet,
though. What shall I do, Uncle Jamie?”
“Richard Brown. He’ s thinking, and God only kens what
that  will lead to.”
“He thinks too much; such me n are dangerous,” Ian said,
and laug hed. Jamie, who had ne ver known his nephew to read
a bo ok willingly , gave him a lo ok of disbelief, but dismissed
questions in favor of the pressing concerns of the moment.
“A ye, he is,” he said dryly . “He’ s been spreading the story in
pothouses and inns as we go—a t a guess, in hopes of rousing
public indignati on to the point that some poor fool of a
constable can be pushed into taking us of f his hands, or better
yet, that a mob might be stirred up to seize us and hang us out
of hand, thus resolving his dif ficulty .”“Oh, aye? W ell, if that’ s what he had in mind, Uncle, it’ s
working. Y e wouldna countenance some of the things I’ve
heard, following in your tracks.”
“I know .” Jamie stretched gentl y , easing his painful ribs. It
was only the mercy of God that it hadn’ t been worse—that,
and Claire’ s rage, which had interrupted the attack, as
everyone stopped to watch the engrossing spectacle of her
hatcheling her assailant like a bundle of flax.
“It’ s come home to him, though, that if ye mean to pin a
tar get on someone, it’ s wise to step away smartly thereafter .
He’ s thinking, as I say . Shou ld he go of f, then, or send
someone …”
“I’ll follow , aye, and see what’ s to do.”
He sensed rather than saw Ian’ s nod; they stood in black
shadow , the faint haze of moo nlight like fog in the space
between the trees. The lad m oved, as though to go, then
hesitated.
“Y e’re s ure, Unc le, as it wouldn a be better to wait a bit, then
creep aw ay? There’ s nay bracken, but there’ s decent cover in
the hills nearby; we could be safe hidden by dawn.”
It was a great temptation. He felt the pull of the dark wild
forest, above all, the lure of fr eedom. If he could but walk
away in to the greenwood, and stay there … But he shook his
head.
“It w ouldna do, Ian,” he said, t hough he let regret show in
his voice. “W e s hould be fugitives, then—and doubtless wi’ a
price on our heads. W ith the countryside already roused
against us—broadsides, posted bills? The public would do
Brown’ s work for him, promptly . And then, to run would seem
an admission of guilt, forbye.”
Ian sighed, but nodded agreement.
“W ell, then,” he said. He stepped forward and embraced
Jamie, squeezing hard for an instant, and then was gone.Jamie let out a long, tentative breath against the pain of his
injured ribs.
“God go with ye, Ian,” he said to the dark, and turned back.
When h e lay down again besi de his wife, the camp was
silent. The men lay like logs, wrapped in their blankets. T wo
figures, though,  remained by t he embers of the dying fire:
Richard Brown and Thomas Christie, each alone on a rock
with his thoughts.
Ought h e to wake Claire, tell  her? He considered for a
moment, his cheek against the w arm softness of her hair , and
reluctantly decided no. It might hearten her a little to know of
Ian’ s p resence—but he dare not risk rousing Brown’ s
suspicion; and if Brown were to perceive by any change in
Claire’ s mood or face that somet hing had happened … no, best
not. At least not yet.
He glan ced along the ground at  Christie’ s feet, and saw the
faint pa le scurry of movement in the dark; the mouse had
brought friends to share her feast.9 0
FOR TY -SIX BEANS
 T O THE GOOD
A T DA WN, RICHARD BROWN W AS GONE. The rest of
the men seemed grim, but resigned, and under the command of
a s quatty , morose sort of fellow named Oakes, we resumed our
push south.
Something had changed in the n ight; Jamie had lost a little
of the tension that had infused him since our departure from
the Ridge. Stif f, sore, and disheartened as I was, I found this
change some comfort, though wondering what had caused it.
W as it the same  thing that had caused Richard Brown to leave
on his mysterious errand?
Jamie said nothing, though, beyond inquiring after my hand
—which was tender , and so stif f that I couldn’ t immediately
flex my fingers. He continued t o keep a watchful eye on our
companions, but the lessening of tension had af fected them,
too; I began to lose my fear that they might suddenly lose
patience and string us up, T om Christie’ s dour presence
notwithstanding.
As though in ac cord with this more relaxed atmosphere, the
weather suddenl y cleared, which heartened everyone further . It
would have been stretching thi ngs to say that there was any
sense of rapprochement, but without Richard Brown’ s constant
malevolence, the other men at least became occasionally civil.
And as it alway s did, the tedium  and hardships of travel wore
everyone down, so that we rolled down the rutted roads like a
pack of marbles, occasionally caroming of f one another , dusty ,
silent, and united in exhaustion, if nothing else, by the end of
each day .
This neutral state of af fairs changed abruptly in Brunswick.
For a day or two before, Oakes had been plainly anticipatingsomething, and when we reache d the first houses, I could see
him beginning to draw great breaths of relief.
It w as therefore no surprise w hen we stopped to refresh
ourselves at a po thouse on the edge of the tiny , half-abandoned
settlement, to find Richard Brown awaiting us. It was  a
surprise when, without more than a murmured word from
Brown, Oakes and two others suddenly seized Jamie,
knocking the cup of water from  his hand and slamming him
against the wall of the building.
I d roppe d my own cup and flung myself toward them, but
Richard Brown grabbed my arm  in a viselike grip and dragged
me toward the horses.
“Let go!  What are you doing? L et go, I say!” I kicked him,
and had a good go at scratching out his eyes, but he got hold of
both my  wrists, and shouted for one of the other men to help.
Between the two of them, they got me—still screaming at the
top of my lungs —on a horse in front of another of Brown’ s
men. There was a deal of shouti ng from Jamie’ s direction, and
general hubbub,  as a few people came out of the pothouse,
staring. None of them seemed  disposed to interfere with a
lar ge group of armed men, though.
T om C hristie was shouting protests; I glimpsed him
hammering on the back of one man, but to no avail. The man
behind me wrapped an arm ro und my middle and jerked it
tight, knocking out what breath I had left.
Then we  were thundering down  the road, Brunswick—and
Jamie—disappearing in the dust.
My furious protests, demands, and questions brought no
response, of course, beyond an order to be quiet, this
accompanied by another warning squeeze of the restraining
arm around me.
Shaking with rage and terror , I subsided, and at that point,
saw that T om C hristie was still with us, looking shaken and
disturbed.“T om!” I shouted. “T om, go bac k! Don’ t let them kill him!
Please!”
He looked in my direction, startled, rose in his stirrups, and
looked back toward Brunswick, then turned toward Richard
Brown, shouting something.
Brown shook his head, reined his mount in so that Christie
could come up alongside, and leaning over , yelled something
at hi m t hat mus t have passed fo r explanation. Christie clearly
didn’ t like the situation, but after a few impassioned
exchanges, he subsided, scowling, and dropped back. He
pulled his horse’ s head aside and circled back to come within
speaking distance of me.
“They will not kill nor harm him,” he said, raising his voice
to be heard over the rumble of  hooves and rattle of harness.
“Brown’ s word of honor upon it, he says.”
“And you believe  him, for God’ s sake?”
He looked disconcerted at that, glanced again at Brown,
who had spurred up to ride ahead, then back at Brunswick.
Indecision playe d across his features, but then his lips firmed
and he shook his head.
“It will be all r ight,” he said. B ut he would not meet my
eyes, and in sp ite of my continued entreaties to him to go
back, to stop them, he slackened his pace, falling back so that I
couldn’ t see him anymore.
My throat was r aw from screaming, and my stomach hurt,
bruised and clenched in a knot of fear . Our speed had slowed,
now tha t we had left Brunswick  behind, and I concentrated on
breathing; I wouldn’ t speak until I was sure I could do so
without my voice trembling.
“Where are you taking me?” I a sked finally . I sat stif f in the
saddle, enduring an unwanted intimacy with the man behind
me.
“New Bern,” he said, with a not e of grim satisfaction. “And
then, thank God, we’ll be shut of you at last.”
THE JO URNEY T O NEW BERN passed in a blur of fear ,
agitation, and physical discomfort. While I did wonder what
was abo ut to happen to me, all such speculations were
drowned by my anxiety about Jamie.
T om Ch ristie was plainly my only hope of finding out
anything, but he avoided me, keeping his distance—and I
found that  as alarming as anything else. He was clearly
troubled, even more so than he had been since Malva’ s death,
but h e n o longer  bore a look of dull suf fering; he was actively
agitated. I was terribly afraid that he knew or suspected Jamie
was dead, but would not admit it—either to me, or to himself.
All of the men c learly shared my captor ’ s ur ge to be rid of
me as soon as possible; we stopped only briefly , when
absolutely neces sary for the horses to rest. I was of fered food,
but coul d not eat. By the time we reached New Bern, I was
completely drained from the sheer physical exertion of the
ride, but much more so fr om the constant strain of
apprehension.
Most of the men remained at a tavern on the outskirts of the
town; Brown and one of the other men took me through the
streets, a ccompanied by a silent T om Christie, arriving at last
at a lar g e house  of whitewashed brick. The home, as Brown
informed me with a sense of lively pleasure, of Sherif f T olliver
—also, the town gaol.
The sherif f, a da rkly handsome sort, viewed me with a sort
of interested speculation, mingled with a growing disgust as he
heard th e crime of which I was accused. I made no attempt at
rebuttal or defense; the room w as going in and out of focus,
and all my atte ntion was required to keep my knees from
giving way .
I bar ely heard m ost of the exchange between Brown and the
sherif f. A t the last, though, just before I was led away into the
house, I found T om Christie suddenly beside me.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said, very low . “Believe me, he is safe. I
would not have his death on my conscience—nor yours.” He
was looking at me directly , fo r the first time in … days?weeks? … and I found the intensity of his gray eyes both
disconcerting and oddly comforting.
“T rust in  God,” he whispered. “He will deliver the righteous
out of all his  dangers.” And with a sudden hard and
unexpected squeeze of my hand, he was gone.
AS EIG HTEENTH-CENTUR Y gaols went, it could have been
worse. The women’ s quarters consisted of a small room at the
back of the sher if f ’ s house, which had likely been a storeroom
of sorts originally . The walls were roughly plastered, though
some escape-m inded former occupant had chipped away a
lar ge chunk of the plaster , befo re discovering that beneath it
lay a layer of lath, and beneath that  an impenetrable wall of
baked-clay brick , which confronted me at once with its bland
impenetrability when the door was opened.
There w as no window , but an o il dip burned on a ledge by
the door , casting a faint circle  of light that illuminated the
daunting bare patch of brick, but left the corners of the room in
deep sha dow . I couldn’ t see the night-soil bucket, but knew
there wa s one; the thick, acrid t ang of it stung my nose, and I
automatically began breathing through my mouth as the sherif f
pushed me into the room.
The door closed firmly behind me, and a key grated in the
lock.
There was a single, narrow bedstead in the shadows,
occupied by a lar ge lump under a threadbare blanket. The
lump too k its time, but eventual ly stirred and sat up, resolving
itself into a sm all, plump woman, capless and frowsy with
sleep, who sat blinking at me like a dormouse.
“Ermp,” she said, and rubbed her eyes with her fists, like a
small child.
“So sor ry to disturb you,” I said politely . My heart had
slowed a bit by  now , though I was still shaking and short of
breath. I pressed my hands flat against the door to stop them
trembling.“Think nothing of it,” she said, and yawned suddenly , like a
hippopotamus, showing me a set of worn but serviceable
molars. Blinking and smacking her lips absently , she reached
down be side her , pulled out a battered pair of spectacles, and
set them firmly on her nose.
Her eye s were blue, and hugely magnified by the lenses,
enormous with curiosity .
“What’ s your name?” she asked.
“Claire Fraser ,” I said, watching her narrowly , in case she
too might already have heard a ll about my supposed crime.
The bru ise on my breast left by  the stone that had struck me
was still  visible, beginning to yellow above the edge of my
gown.
“Oh?” S he squinted, as though trying to place me, but
evidently failed, for she shrugged away the ef fort. “Got any
money?”
“A bit.” Jamie h ad forced me to  take almost all the money
—not a great deal, but there wa s a small weight of coin at the
bottom of each of the pockets tied around my waist, and a
couple of proclamation notes tucked inside my stays.
The woman was a good deal sh orter than I, and pillowy in
aspect, with lar ge, drooping breasts and several comfortable
rolls cor rugating her uncorseted middle; she was in her shift,
with her  gown and stays hung from a nail in the wall. She
seemed harmless—and I began to breathe a little more easily ,
beginning to grasp the fact that at least I was safe for the
moment, no longer in danger of sudden, random violence.
The other prisoner made no of fe nsive moves toward me, but
hopped down of f the bed, bare feet thumping softly in what I
realized now was a matted layer of moldy straw .
“W ell, call the o ld bizzom and send for some Holland, then,
why don’ t you?” she suggested cheerfully .
“The . . who?”Instead of answering, she trund led to the door and banged
on it, shouting, “Mrs. T olliver! Mrs. T olliver!”
The door opened almost immediately , revealing a tall, thin
woman, looking like an annoyed stork.
“Really , Mrs. Fer guson,” she said. “Y ou are the most
dreadful nuisanc e. I was just coming to pay my respects to
Mrs. Fraser , in any case.” Sh e turned her back on Mrs.
Fer guson with magisterial dignit y and inclined her head a bare
inch toward me.
“Mrs. Fraser . I am Mrs. T olliver .”
I h ad a split sec ond in which t o decide how to react, and
chose th e prude nt—if galling— course of genteel submission,
bowing to her as though she were the Governor ’ s lady .
“Mrs. T olliver ,” I murmured, careful not to meet her eyes.
“How kind of you.”
She twitched, sharp-eyed, like a bird spotting the stealthy
progress of a worm through the grass—but I had firm control
of my features by now , and she relaxed, detecting no sarcasm.
“Y ou are welcome,” she said w ith chilly courtesy . “I am to
see to your wel fare, and acquaint you with our custom. Y ou
will receive one meal each day , unless you wish to send to the
ordinary for more—at your ow n expense. I will bring you a
basin fo r washing once each day . Y ou’ll carry your own slops.
And—”
“Oh, stuf f your custom, Maisie,” said Mrs. Fer guson,
butting into Mrs. T olliver ’ s set speech with the comfortable
assumption of long acquaintan ce. “She’ s got some money .
Fetch us a bottle of geneva, there’ s a good girl, and then if you
must, you can tell her what’ s what.”
Mrs. T olliver ’ s narrow face tightened in disapproval, but her
eyes twi tched toward me, bright in the dim light of the rush
dip. I ventured a hesitant gesture toward my pocket, and her
lower lip sucked in. She glanced  over her shoulder , then took a
quick step toward me.“A shilling, then,” she whispered, hand held open between
us. I  dro pped the  coin into her palm, and it disappeared at once
beneath her apron.
“Y ou’ve missed supper ,” she announced in her normal
disapproving ton es, stepping backward. “However , as you’ve
just come, I shall make an  allowance and bring you
something.”
“How kind of you,” I said again.
The door closed firmly behind h er , shutting out light and air ,
and the key turned in the lock.
The sound of it set of f a tiny spark of panic, and I stamped
on i t hard. I felt like a dried skin, stuf fed to the eyeballs with
the tinder of fear , uncertainty , and loss. It would take no more
than a spark to i gnite that and bu rn me to ashes—and neither I
nor Jamie could af ford that.
“She drinks?” I asked, turning back to my new roommate
with an assumption of coolness.
“Do you know anyone who doesn’ t, given the chance?”
Mrs. Fer guson asked reasonably . She scratched her ribs.
“Fraser , she said. Y ou aren’ t the—”
“I am,” I said, rather rudely . “I don’ t want to talk about it.”
Her eyebrows shot up, but she nodded equably .
“Just as you like,” she said. “Any good at cards?”
“Loo or whist?” I asked warily .
“Know a game called brag?”
“No.” Ja mie and  Brianna played it now and then, but I had
never acquainted myself with the rules.
“That’ s all right; I’ll teach you.” Reaching under the
mattress, she pulled out a rather  limp deck of pasteboards and
fanned them expertly , waving them gently under her nose as
she smiled at me.“Don’ t tell me,” I said. “Y ou’ re in here for cheating at
cards?”
“Cheat? Me? Not a bit of it,” she said, evidently
unof fended. “For gery .”
Rather to my o wn surprise, I laughed. I was still feeling
shaky , but Mrs. Fer guson was definitely proving a welcome
distraction.
“How long have you been in here?” I asked.
She scratched at her head, realized that she wasn’ t wearing a
cap, and turned to pull one out of the rumpled bedding.
“Oh—a month, just about.” Putting on the crumpled cap,
she nodded at the doorpost besi de me. T urning to look, I saw
that it was cross hatched with dozens of small nicks, some old
and dark with dirt, some freshly scratched, showing raw
yellow wood. The sight of the m arks made my stomach plunge
again, but I took a deep breath and turned my back on them.
“Have you had a trial yet?”
She shook her head, light glinting of f her spectacles.
“No, pra ise God. I hear from Maisie that the court’ s shut
down; a ll the justices gone into hiding. Hasn’ t been anybody
tried in the last two months.”
This wa s not good news. Evidently the thought showed on
my fac e, for she leaned forward and patted my arm
sympathetically .
“I w ouldn’ t be in a hurry , dearie. Not in your shoes, I
wouldn’ t. If they’ve not tried you, they can’ t hang you. And
while I have met those as say the waiting’ s like to kill them,
I’ve not seen anybody die of it. And I have  seen them die at
the end of a rope. Nasty business, that is.”
She spoke almost negligently , but her own hand rose, as
though by itself, and touched the soft white flesh of her neck.
She swallowed, the tiny bump of her Adam’ s apple bobbing.I swallowed, too, an unpleasantly constricted feeling in my
own throat.
“But I’m innocent,” I said, wondering even as I said it how I
could sound so uncertain.
“‘Course you are,” she said stoutly , giving my arm a
squeeze. “Y ou stick to it, dear ie—don’ t you let ‘em bully-
whack you into admitting the least little thing!”
“I won’ t,” I assured her dryly .
“One of these days, a mob’ s like to come her e, ” she said,
nodding. “String up the sherif f, if he don’ t look sharp. He’ s not
popular , T olliver .”
“I can’ t imagine  why not—a ch arming fellow like that.” I
wasn’ t sure how I felt about the prospect of a mob storming
the hous e. Stringing up Sherif f T olliver was all very well, so
far a s that went— but with the memory of the hostile crowds in
Salisbury and Hillsboro fresh in mind, I wasn’ t sure at all that
they’d s top with  the sherif f. Dyi ng at the hands of a lynch mob
wasn’ t at all preferable to the slower sort of judicial murder I
likely faced. Though I supposed there was always a possibility
of escaping in the riot.
And go wher e, if you did?  I wondered.
W ith no good a nswer to that q uestion, I shoved it to the
back of  my mind and turned  my attention back to Mrs.
Fer guson, who was still holding out the cards invitingly .
“All right,” I said. “But not for money .”
“Oh, no,” Mrs. Fer guson assured me. “Perish the thought.
But we must ha ve some sort of stake to make it interesting.
W e’ll pl ay for beans, shall we?” She set down the cards, and
digging under the pillow , withdrew a small pouch, from which
she poured a handful of small white beans.
“Splendid,” I said. “And when we’re finished, we’ll plant
them, sh all we, and hope for a giant beanstalk to spring up and
burst through the roof, so we can escape up it.”She burs t into giggles at that, which somehow made me feel
very slightly better .
“From y our mouth to God’ s ear , dearie!” she said. “I’ll deal
first, shall I?”
BRAG A PPEARED T O BE a form of poker . And while I had
lived wi th a cardsharp long enough to know one when I saw
one, Mrs. Fer guson appeared to be playing honestly—for the
moment. I was forty-six beans to the good, by the time Mrs.
T olliver returned.
The door opened without ceremony , and she came in,
holding a three-legged stool and  a chunk of bread. This latter
appeared to be b oth my supper and her ostensible excuse for
visiting the cell, for she shoved it at me with a loud, “This will
have to keep you ‘til tomorrow , Mrs. Fraser!”
“Thank you,” I said mildly . It was fresh, and appeared to
have been hastily dragged through bacon drippings, in lieu of
butter . I bit into it without hesitation, having suf ficiently
recovered from shock now as to feel very hungry indeed.
Mrs. T o lliver , glancing over her shoulder to be sure the
coast was clear , shut the door q uietly , put down the stool, and
drew a squat bo ttle from her pocket, blue glass and filled with
some clear liquid.
She pulled the c ork from it, tilted it, and drank deeply , her
long, lean throat moving convulsively .
Mrs. Fer guson said nothing, but watched the process with a
sort of analytic attention, light glinting from her spectacles, as
though compar ing Mrs. T olliver ’ s behavior with that of
previous occasions.
Mrs. T o lliver lowered the bottle and stood for a moment
grasping it, then handed it ab ruptly to me and sat down
suddenly on the stool, breathing heavily .
I wip ed the neck  of the bottle as inconspicuously as possible
on my sleeve, then took a toke n sip. It was gin, all right—heavily flavored with juniper berries to hide the poor quality ,
but powerfully alcoholic.
Mrs. Fer guson took a healthy guzzle in her turn, and so we
continued, passing the bottle from hand to hand, exchanging
small cordialitie s with it. Her first thirst slaked, Mrs. T olliver
became almos t af fable, her frosty manner thawing
substantially . Ev en so, I waited until the bottle was nearly
empty before asking the question foremost in my mind.
“Mrs. T olliver , the men who brought me—did you happen
to hear them say anything about my husband?”
She put a fist to her mouth to stifle a belch.
“Say anything?”
“About where he is,” I amended.
She blinked a little, looking blank.
“I di dn’ t hear ,” s he said. “But I suppose they may have told
T olly .”
Mrs. Fer guson handed down the bottle to her—we were
sitting s ide by side on the bed, that being the only place to sit
in the small room—nearly falling of f the bed in the process.
“S’pose you could ask him, could you, Maisie?” she said.
An uneasy look came into Mrs. T olliver ’ s eyes, glazed as
they were.
“Oh, no,” she sa id, shaking her head. “He doesn’ t talk to me
about such things. Not my business.”
I exc hanged a gl ance with Mrs. Fer guson, and she shook her
head slightly; best not to press the matter now .
W orried as I wa s, I found it dif ficult to abandon the subject,
but plainly there was nothing to be done. I gathered what
shreds o f patience I had, estimating how many bottles of gin I
could af ford before my money  ran out—and what I might
accomplish with them.
I LA Y STILL THA T NIGHT , breathing the damp, thick air
with its scents o f mold and urine. I could smell Sadie Fer guson
next to me, too: a faint miasma of stale sweat, overlaid with a
strong perfume of gin. I tried to close my eyes, but every time
I d id, small wav es of claustrophobia washed over me; I could
feel the sweating plaster walls draw closer , and gripped my
fists in the cloth  of the mattress ticking, to keep from throwing
myself at the locked door . I had a nasty vision of myself,
pounding and shrieking, my nails torn and bloody from
clawing at the unyielding wood, my cries unheard in the
darkness—and no one ever coming.
I tho ught it a distinct possibility . I had heard more from
Mrs. Fer guson regarding Sherif f T olliver ’ s unpopularity . If he
were to be attac ked and dragged from his home by a mob—or
to lose his nerv e and run—the chances of him or his wife
remembering the prisoners were remote.
A m ob might fi nd us—and kill us, in the madness of the
moment. Or not find us, and fire the house. The storeroom was
clay brick, but the adjoining kitchen was timber; damp or not,
the place would burn like a to rch, leaving nothing but that
bloody brick wall standing.
I to ok an especially deep bre ath, smell notwithstanding,
exhaled, and shut my eyes with decision.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil ther eof.  That had been one
of F rank’ s favorite expressions, and by and lar ge, a good
sentiment.
Depends a bit on the day , though, doesn’ t it?  I thought in his
direction.
Does it? Y ou tell me.  T he thought was there, vivid e nough
that I might have heard it—o r only imagined it. If I had
imagined it, though, I had imagined also a tone of dry
amusement that was particularly Frank’ s.
Fine,  I  though t. Reduced to having philosophical ar guments
with a ghost. It’ s been a worse day than I thought.Imagination or not, the thought had succeeded in wrenching
my atte ntion of f the single-minded track of worry . I felt a
sense of  invitation—or temptation, perhaps. The ur ge to talk to
him. The need t o escape into conversation, even if one-sided
… and imaginary .
No. I won’ t use you that way ,  I thought, a little sadly . Not
right that I should only think of you when I need distraction,
and not for your own sake.
And do you ne ver think of m e, for my own sake?  The
question floated in the darkness of my eyelids. I could see his
face, qu ite clearly , the lines of it curved in humor , one dark
eyebrow raised.  I was dimly surprised; it had been so long
since I thought of him in any focused way that I should have
long since for gotten exactly what he looked like. But I hadn’ t.
And I suppose that’ s the answe r to your question, then,  I
thought silently to him. Good night, Frank.
I tur ned onto m y side, facing th e door . I felt a little calmer
now . I could just make out the outlines of the door , and being
able to see it lessened that feeling of being buried alive.
I closed my eyes again, and tried to concentrate on the
processes of my own body . That often helped, bringing me a
sense of  quiet, listening to the purling of blood through my
vessels and the subterranean gur glings of or gans all carrying
peacefully on without the slightest need of my conscious
direction. Rather  like sitting in the garden, listening to the bees
hum in their hives—
I stopped that  t ho ught in its tracks, feeling my heart jolt in
memory , electric as a bee sting.
I tho ught quite fiercely about m y heart, the physical or gan,
its thick soft ch ambers and delicate valves—but what I felt
was a soreness there. There were hollow places in my heart.
Jamie. A gaping, echoing hollow , cold and deep as the
crevasse of a glacier . Bree. Jem my . Roger . And Malva, like a
tiny , deep-drilled sore, an ulcer that wouldn’ t heal.I had managed so far to ignore the rustlings and heavy
breathings of my companion. I couldn’ t ignore the hand that
brushed my neck, then slipped  down my chest and rested
lightly , cupped around my breast.
I s topped breathing. Then, ver y slowly , exhaled. Entirely
without my intent, my breast s ettled into her cupped palm. I
felt a touch on my back; a thumb, gently tracing the groove of
my spine through my shift.
I u nderstood the need of human  comfort, the sheer hunger
for touch . I had taken it, often, a nd given it, part of the fragile
web of humanity , constantly torn, constantly made new . But
there wa s that in Sadie Fer guso n’ s touch that spoke of more
than simple warmth, or the need of company in the dark.
I to ok hold of her hand, and lifting it from my breast,
squeezed the fingers gently shu t, and put it firmly away from
me, folded back against her own bosom.
“No,” I said softly .
She hesitated, moved her hips  so that her body curved
behind me, thighs warm and round against mine, of fering
encompassment and refuge.
“No one would know ,” she whispered, still hopeful. “I could
make you for get—for a bit.” He r hand stroked my hip, gentle,
insinuating.
If she could, I t hought wryly , I might be tempted. But that
pathway was not one I could take.
“No,” I said mo re firmly , and sh ifted, rolling onto my back,
as far away as I could get—which was roughly an inch and a
half. “I’m sorry—but no.”
She was silent for a moment, then sighed heavily .
“Oh, well. Perhaps a bit later .”
“No!”
The noises from the kitchen h ad ceased, and the house
settled into silence. It wasn’ t the silence of the mountains,though, that cradle of boughs and whispering winds and the
vast deep of the starry sky . It was the silence of a town,
disturbed by smoke and the fo gged dim glow of hearth and
candle; filled with slumbering thoughts unleashed from
waking reason, roaming and uneasy in the dark.
“Could I hold you?” she asked wistfully , and her fingers
brushed my cheek. “Only that.”
“No,” I said again. But I reache d for her hand, and held it.
And so we fell asleep, hands chastely—and firmly—linked
between us.
WE WERE ROUSED BY what I thought at first was the wind,
moaning in the chimney whose back bulged into our
cubbyhole. The moaning grew louder , though, broke into a
full-throated scream, then stopped abruptly .
“Y e gods and l ittle fishes!” Sadie Fer guson sat up, eyes
wide and blinking, groping for her spectacles. “What was
that?”
“A woman in l abor ,” I said, having heard that particular
pattern o f sound s fairly often. The moaning was starting up
again. “And very  n ear her time.”  I slid of f the b ed and shook
my shoes, dislodging a small ro ach and a couple of silverfish
who had taken shelter in the toes.
W e sat for nearly an hour , listening to the alternate moaning
and screaming.
“Shouldn’ t it stop?” Sadie said, swallowing nervously .
“Shouldn’ t the child be birthed by now?”
“Perhaps,” I said absently . “Some babies take longer than
others.” I had m y ear pressed to  the door , trying to make out
what wa s going on on the other side. The woman, whoever she
was, wa s in the kitchen, and no  more than ten feet away from
me. I heard Maisie T olliver ’ s voice now and then, muf fled and
sounding doubtf ul. But for the  most part, only the rhythmic
panting, moaning, and screaming.Another hour of it, and my ner ves were becoming frayed.
Sadie was on th e bed, the pillow  pressed down hard over her
head, in hopes of blocking the noise.
Enough of this, I thought, an d when next I heard Mrs.
T olliver ’ s voice, I banged on the door with the heel of my
shoe, shouting, “Mrs. T olliver! ” as loudly as I could, to be
heard over the noise.
She did hear me, and after a moment, the key grated in the
lock and  a wave of light and  air fell into the cell. I was
momentarily blinded by the daylight, but blinked and made
out the shape of a woman on her hands and knees by the
hearth, f acing me. She was black , bathed in sweat, and, raising
her head, howled like a wolf. M rs. T olliver started as though
someone had run a pin into her from behind.
“Excuse me,” I s aid, pushing past her . She made no move to
stop me, and I caught a strong blast of juniper -scented gin
fumes as I brushed by her .
The black woman sank down on her elbows, panting, her
uncovered rear in the air . Her belly hung like a ripe guava,
pale in the sweat-soaked shift that clung to it.
I asked sharp questions in the brief interval before the next
howl, an d ascertained that this was her fourth child and that
she had been la boring since her water had broken the night
before. Mrs. T olliver contributed the information that she was
also a prisoner , and a slave. I m ight have guessed that, from
the purplish weals on her back and buttocks.
Mrs. T olliver was of little other use, swaying glassy-eyed
over me , but had managed to provide a small pile of rags and a
basin of water , which I used t o mop the woman’ s sweating
face. Sadie Fer guson poked her bespectacled nose cautiously
out of the cell, but drew back hastily when the next howl broke
forth.
It was a breech b irth, which accounted for the dif ficulty , and
the next quarter -hour was hair -raising for all concerned. Atlength, though, I eased a small baby into the world, feet first,
slimy , motionless, and the most unearthly shade of pale blue.
“Oh,” s aid Mr s. T olliver , sounding disappointed. “It’ s
dead.”
“Good,” said the mother , in a hoarse, deep voice, and closed
her eyes.
“Damned if he is,” I said, and turned the child hastily
facedown, tapping its back. No movement, and I brought the
sealed, w axy face to my own, covered nose and mouth with
my own  mouth,  and sucked har d, then turned my head to spit
away the  mucus  and fluid. Face slimy and the taste of silver in
my mouth, I ble w gently into him, paused, holding him, limp
and slippery as a fresh fish, ble w—and saw his eyes open, a
deeper blue than his skin, vaguely interested.
He t ook a startl ed, gasping breath and I laughed, a sudden
wellspring of joy bubbling up from my depths. The nightmare
memory of another child, a flick er of life blinking out between
my hand, faded away . This child was well and truly lit,
burning like a candle with a soft, clear flame.
“Oh!” said Mrs. T olliver , again. She leaned forward to look,
and an enormous smile spread across her face. “Oh, oh!”
The baby started crying. I cut  the cord, wrapped him in
some of  the rags, and with some reservation, handed him to
Mrs. T olliver , hoping she would n’ t drop him in the fire. Then I
turned my attention to the moth er , who was drinking thirstily
from the basin, water spilling down her front and soaking the
already wet shift further .
She lay back a nd allowed me to tend her , but without
speaking, rolling her eyes occasionally toward the child with a
brooding, hostile look.
I hea rd footsteps coming through the house, and the sherif f
appeared, looking surprised.
“Oh, T olly!” Mrs. T olliver , smeared with birth fluids and
reeking of gin, t urned to him ha ppily , holding out the baby to
him. “Look, T olly , it’ s alive!”The sher if f looked quite taken aback, and his brow furrowed
as he looked at his wife, but the n he seemed to catch the scent
of her happiness, above the gin. He leaned forward and
touched the little bundle gently , his stern face relaxing.
“That’ s good, Maisie,” he said. “Hallo, little fellow .” He
caught sight of me, then, kneeling on the hearth, doing my best
to clean up with a rag and what was left of the water .
“Mrs. Fraser brought the child,” Mrs. T olliver explained
eagerly . “It was laid catty-wumpus, but she brought it so
cleverly , and made it breathe—we thought ‘twas dead, it was
so still, but it wasn’ t! Isn’ t that wonderful, T olly?”
“W onderful,” the sherif f repeated a little bleakly . He gave
me a hard look , then transferred the same look to the new
mother , who gazed back with a sullen indif ference. He
beckoned me to my feet, then, and with a curt bow , gestured
me back into the cell and shut the door .
Only the n did I r ecall what it wa s he thought I’d done. Little
wonder if my juxtaposition with a newborn child made him a
trifle nervous, I supposed. I wa s wet and filthy , and the cell
seemed particul arly hot and airless. Nonetheless, the miracle
of b irth was still tingling throug h my synapses, and I sat down
on the bed, still smiling, a wet rag in my hand.
Sadie was regarding me with re spect, mingled with a slight
revulsion.
“That’ s the messiest business I ever did see,” she said.
“Heavens above, is it always like that?”
“More or less. H aven’ t you ever seen a child born? Y ou’ve
never had one yourself?” I as ked curiously . She shook her
head vigorously , and made the sign of the horns, which made
me laugh, giddy as I was.
“Had I ever been disposed to let  a man near me, the thought
of that  would dissuade me,” she assured me fervently .
“Oh, yes?” I sa id, belatedly recalling her overtures of the
night before. It wasn’ t  me rely comfort she’d been of fering,
then. “And what about Mister  Fer guson?”She gave me a demure look, blinking through her
spectacles.
“Oh, he was a farmer— much  older than I. Dead of the
pleurisy , these five years gone.”
And tota lly fictitious, I was inc lined to think. But a widow
had a great deal more freedom than did a maid or a wife, and if
ever I saw a woman capable of taking care of herself …
I h ad been payin g no attention to the sounds in the kitchen,
but at this poin t, there was a heavy crash and the sherif f ’ s
voice, cursing. No sound of the child or Mrs. T olliver .
“T aking the black bitch back t o her quarters,” Sadie said,
with such a hostile intonation that I glanced at her in
amazement.
“Didn’ t you know?” she said, seeing my surprise. “She’ s
killed her babies. They can ha ng her , now she’ s borne this
one.”
“Oh,” I said a lit tle blankly . “No. I didn’ t know .” The noises
in the kitchen receded, and I s at staring at the rush dip, the
sense of life still moving in my hands.9 1
A REASONABL Y
 NEA T SCHEME
W A TER LAPPED  JUST UNDER JAMIE’S EAR, Jamie’ s
ear , the mere sound of it making  him feel queasy . The reek of
decaying mud and dead fish didn’ t help, nor did the dunt he’d
taken when he fell against the wall.
He shifted, trying to find som e position that would ease
head, sto mach, or both. They’d trussed him like a boiled fowl,
but h e m anaged with some ef fort to roll onto his side and bring
his knees up, which helped a bit.
He was in a dilapidated boat shed of some sort; he’d seen it
in the last of the twilight, when  they’d brought him down to
the shore—he’d thought at first they meant to drown him—
and carried him inside, droppin g him on the floor like a sack
of flour .
“Hurry up, Ian,” he muttered, shifting again, in increasing
discomfort. “I’m a great deal too old for this sort of nonsense.”
He could only hope his nephew had been close enough
when Brown moved to have been able to follow , and to have
some notion where he was now; certainly the lad would be
looking. The shore where the sh ed stood was open, no cover ,
but there was plenty among th e brush below Fort Johnston,
standing on the headland a little way above him.
The back of his  head throbbed dully , giving him a nasty
taste in the back of the mouth, and a disquieting echo of the
shattering heada ches he used to suf fer in the wake of an ax
wound that had cracked his skull, many years before. He was
shocked at how easily the recollection of those headaches
came back; it had happened a lifetime ago, and he had thought
even the memory of it dead and buried. His skull clearly had a
much m ore vivid memory of its own, though, and wasdetermined to make him sick by way of revenge for his
for getfulness.
The moon was up, and bright; the light shone soft through
the cracks between the crude boards of the wall. Dim as it was,
it seemed to shift, wavering in a disturbingly qualmish fashion,
and he shut his eyes, concentrating grimly on what he might
do to Richard Brown, and he got the man alone someday .
Where in the name of Michael and all the saints had he
taken Claire, and why? Jamie’ s only comfort was that T om
Christie had gone with them. H e was fairly sure that Christie
wouldn’ t let them kill her—and  if Jamie could find him, he
would lead him to her .
A sound reached him above th e nauseating lapping of the
tide. Fai nt whistling—then singing. He could just make out the
words, a nd smil ed a little, in spite of everything. “Marry me,
marry me, minister—or else I’ll be your priest, your priest—or
else I’ll be your priest.”
He shouted, though it hurt his head, and within a few
moments, Ian, the dear wee lad, was beside him, cutting
through the ropes. He rolled o ver , unable for a moment to
make hi s cramped muscles work, then managed to get his
hands under him and rise enough to vomit.
“All right, Uncle Jamie?” Ian sounded vaguely amused,
damn him.
“I’ll do.  D’ye ken where Clai re is?” He got to his feet,
swaying, and was fumbling at hi s breeches; his fingers felt like
sausages, and the broken one was throbbing, the pins and
needles of returning circulation stabbing through the jagged
ends of bone. All discomfort was for gotten for an instant,
though, in the rush of overwhelming relief.
“Jesus, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, impressed. “A ye, I do.
They’ve taken her to New Ber n. There’ s a sherif f there that
Forbes says might take her .”
“Forbes?” He swung round in his astonishment, and nearly
fell, saving himself with a hand on the creaking wood wall.“Neil Forbes?”
“The very same.” Ian caught him with a hand beneath his
elbow to steady him; the flimsy  board had cracked under his
weight. “Brown went here and t here and talked to this one and
that—but it was Forbes he did business with at last, in Cross
Creek.”
“Y e heard what they said?”
“I h eard.” Ian’ s voice was casu al, but with an underlying
excitement—and no little pride in his accomplishment.
Brown’ s aim was simple at this point—to rid himself of the
encumbrance the Frasers had become. He knew of Forbes and
his r elations with Jamie, owing to all the gossip after the tar
incident in the summer of last year , and the confrontation at
Mecklenber g in May . And so he of fered to hand the two of
them over to Fo rbes, for what use the lawyer might make of
the situation.
“So he strode to  and fro a bit, t hinking—Forbes, I mean—
they were in his warehouse, ken, by the river , and me hiding
behind the barrels o’ tar . And t hen he laughs, as though he’ s
just thought of something clever .”
Forbes’ s suggestion was that Brown’ s men should take
Jamie, suitably bound, to a small landing that he owned, near
Brunswick. From  there, he would be taken onto a ship headed
for Engl and, and thus safely removed from interference in the
af fairs of either Forbes or Brown—and, incidentally , rendered
unable to defend his wife.
Claire, meanwhile, should be committed to the mercies of
the law . If she were to be found  guilty , well, that would be the
end of her . If no t, the scandal att endant upon a trial would both
occupy the attention of anyone connected to her and destroy
any influence they might have— thus leaving Fraser ’ s Ridge
ripe for the pickings, and Neil Forbes a clear field toward
claiming leadership of the Scottish Whigs in the colony .
Jamie listened to this in silence , torn between anger and a
reluctant admiration.“A reasonably neat scheme,” he said. He was feeling
steadier now , the queasiness disappearing with the cleansing
flow of anger through his blood.
“Oh, it gets bet ter , Uncle,” Ian assured him. “Y e recall a
gentleman named Stephen Bonnet?”
“I do. What about him?”
“It’ s Mr .  Bonnet’ s ship, Uncle, t hat’ s to take ye to England.”
Amusement was beginning to show in his nephew’ s voice
again. “It seems Lawyer Forbe s has had a verra profitable
partnership with Bonnet for some time—him and some
merchant friends in W ilmington. They’ve shares in both the
ship and its car goes. And sin ce the English blockade, the
profits h ave been greater still; I take it that our Mr . Bonnet is a
most experienced smuggler .”
Jamie said something extremely foul in French, and went
quickly to look out of the shed. The water lay calm and
beautiful, a moon path stretching  silver out to sea. There was a
ship out  there; small and black and perfect as a spider on a
sheet of paper . Bonnet’ s?
“Christ,” he said. “When will they come in, d’ye think?”
“I dinna  ken,” Ian said, soundin g unsure for the first time.
“Is the tide coming in, would ye say , Uncle? Or going out?”
Jamie glanced down at the water rippling under the
boathouse, as though it might of fer some clue.
“How w ould I know , for God’ s sake? And what dif ference
would it make?” He rubbed a hand hard over his face, trying to
think. They’d taken his dirk, of  course. He had a sgian dhu,
carried i n his stocking, but somehow doubted that its three-
inch blade would of fer much help in the present situation.
“What h ave ye got by way of weapons, Ian? Y e dinna have
your bow with ye, I don’ t suppose?”
Ian shoo k his head regretfully . He had joined Jamie in the
door of the boathouse, and the m oon showed the hunger in his
face as he eyed the ship.“I’ve two decent knives, a dirk, and a pistol. There’ s my
rifle, but I left it with the horse.” He jerked his head toward the
dark line  of the distant wood. “S hall I fetch it? They might see
me.”
Jamie thought for a moment, tapping his fingers against the
jamb of  the door , ‘til the pain of the broken one made him
stop. The ur ge to lie in wait fo r Bonnet and take him was a
physical thing; he understood Ian’ s hunger , and shared it. But
his rational mind was busy reckoning the odds, and would
insist upon presenting them, little as the vengefully animal part
of him wished to know them.
There w as not yet any sign of a boat coming from the ship.
Always assuming that the ship out there was indeed Bonnet’ s
—and th at, they didn’ t know fo r sure—it might still be hours
before a nyone came to fetch hi m away . And when they did,
what od ds that Bonnet himself w ould come? He was the ship’ s
captain; would he come on such an errand, or send minions?
W ith a rifle, if B onnet wer e  in the boat, Jamie would wager
any amount that he could shoo t the man from ambush. If he
were in the boa t. If he were recognizable in the dark. And
while he could hit him, he might not kill him.
If B onnet were n ot in the boat, though … then it would be a
matter o f waiting ‘til the boat came close enough, leaping
aboard, and overpowering whoever was aboard—how many
would c ome on such an errand?  T wo, three, four? They must
all b e killed or  disabled, and then it would be a matter of
rowing the damn boat back out to the ship—where all aboard
would doubtless have noticed the stramash taking place on
shore, an d be prepared either to drop a cannonball through the
bottom of the boat or to wait for them to haul alongside and
then pick them of f from the r ail with small-arms fire, like
sitting ducks.
And if they should somehow succeed in getting aboard
without notice— then searching the goddamn ship for Bonnet
himself, hunting him down, and killing him, without attracting
undue notice from the crew …This laborious analysis ran thro ugh his mind in the time it
took to breathe, and was as quic kly dismissed. If they were to
be captu red or killed, Claire would be alone and defenseless.
He could not risk it. Still, he thought, trying to comfort
himself, he could find Forbes—and would, when the time
came.
“A ye, well, then,” he said, and turned away with a sigh.
“Have ye but the one horse, Ian?”
“A ye,” I an said with a matching sigh. “But I ken where we
can maybe steal another .”9 2
AMANUENSIS
T WO DA YS P ASSED. Hot, damp days in the sweltering
dark, and I coul d feel various kinds of mold, fungus, and rot
trying to take h old in my crevices—to say nothing of the
omnivorous, omnipresent cockroaches, who seemed
determined to nibble my eyebro ws the moment the light was
put out. The lea ther of my sho es was clammy and limp, my
hair hun g lank and dirty , and—like Sadie Fer guson—I took to
spending most of my time in my shift.
When Mrs. T olliver appeared and ordered us to come assist
with the washing, therefore, we abandoned the latest game of
loo—she was winning—and nearly pushed each other over in
our haste to oblige.
It was much hot ter in the yard, with the laundry fire roaring,
and quite as da mp as it had been in the cell, with the thick
clouds of moisture boiling of f the big kettle of clothes and
plastering strands of hair to our faces. Our shifts already clung
to our bodies, th e grubby linen almost transparent with sweat
—laundry was heavy work. There were, however , no bugs,
and if the sun shone blinding, and fierce enough to redden my
nose and arms—well, it shone, and that was something to be
grateful for .
I asked Mrs. T olliver about m y erstwhile patient and her
child, bu t she merely pressed her lips tight and shook her head,
looking pinched  and severe. The sherif f had been absent the
night be fore; the re had been no sound of his booming voice in
the kitchen. And from the green-gilled looks of Maisie
T olliver herself, I diagnosed a long and solitary night with the
gin bottle, followed by a fairly ghastly dawn.
“Y ou’ll feel much better if you sit in the shade and sip …
water ,” I said. “Lots of water .” T ea or cof fee would be better ,but t hese substances were more costly than gold in the colony ,
and I doubted a sherif f ’ s wife would have any . “If you have
any ipecacuanha … or perhaps some mint …”
“I thank  you for your valuable opinion, Mrs. Fraser!” she
snapped, though she swayed, rather , and her cheeks were pale
and glossy with sweat.
I shrugged, and bent my attention to the task of levering a
wad of sopping, steaming cloth es from the filthy suds with a
five-foot wooden laundry spoon, so worn with use that my
sweaty hands slipped on the smooth wood.
W e got the lot laboriously washed, rinsed, scaldingly wrung,
and hun g upon a line to dry , then sank gasping into the thin
line of shade af forded by the sid e of the house, and took turns
passing a tin dipper back and forth, gulping lukewarm water
from the well bucket. Mrs. T olliver , disregarding her elevated
social position, sat down, too, very suddenly .
I turned to of fer her the dipper , only to see her eyes roll
back into her head. She didn ’ t so much fall as dissolve
backward, subsiding slowly into a heap of damp, checked
gingham.
“Is she dead?” Sadie Fer guson inquired with interest. She
glanced to and fro, obviously estimating the chances of
making a run for it.
“No. Ba d hango ver , possibly aggravated by a slight case of
sunstroke.” I’d got hold of her pulse, which was light and fast,
but quite steady . I was mys elf debating the wisdom of
abandoning Mrs. T olliver to the dangers of aspirating her own
vomit and absconding, even bar efoot and in my shift, but was
forestalled by male voices com ing round the corner of the
house.
T wo men—one  was T olliver ’ s constable, whom I’d seen
briefly w hen Brown’ s men had delivered me to the gaol. The
other w as a stranger , very well dressed, with silver coat
buttons and a silk waistcoat, rather the worse for sweat stains.This gen tleman, a heavyset sort of about forty , frowned at the
scene of dissipation before him.
“Are these the prisoners?” he asked in tones of distaste.
“A ye, sir ,” the constable said. “ Leastwise, the two in their
shifts is. ‘T other one’ s the sherif f ’ s wife.”
Silver B uttons’ s nostrils pinched in briefly in receipt of this
intelligence, then flared.
“Which is the midwife?”
“That would be me,” I said, stra ightening up and trying for
an air of dignity . “I am Mrs. Fraser .”
“Are you,” he said, his tone indicating that I might have said
I was Queen Charlotte, for all it mattered to him. He looked
me u p and down  in a disparaging fashion, shook his head, then
turned to the sweating constable.
“What is she char ged with?”
The con stable, a rather dim yo ung man, pursed his lips at
this, looking dubiously back and forth between us.
“Ahh … well, one of ‘em’ s a fo r ger ,” he said, “and ‘tother ’ s
a murderess. But as to which bein’ which …”
“I’m the murderess,” Sadie sa id bravely , adding loyally ,
“She’ s a  very fine midwife!” I looked at her in surprise, but
she shoo k her head slightly and compressed her lips, adjuring
me to keep quiet.
“Oh. Hmm. All right, then. Hav e you a gown … madam?”
At my nod, he said briefly , “G et dressed,” and turned to the
constable, taking out a vast silk handkerchief from his pocket,
with wh ich to wipe his broad pink face. “I’ll take her , then.
Y ou’ll tell Mr . T olliver .”
“I w ill, sir ,” the constable assured him, more or less bowing
and scra ping. He glanced down at the unconscious form of
Mrs. T olliver , then frowned at Sadie.
“Y ou, there. T ake her inside and see to her . Hop!”“Oh, yes , sir ,” Sadie said, and gravely pushed up her sweat-
fogged spectacles with one forefinger . “Right away , sir!”
I had no opportunity to speak with Sadie, and barely time
enough to struggle into my bedraggled gown and stays and
seize m y small bag before being escorted into a carriage—
rather bedraggled itself, but once of good quality .
“W ould you mind telling me wh o you are, and where you’re
taking me?” I inquired, after we had rattled through two or
three cross streets, my companion gazing out the window with
an abstracted sort of frown.
My que stion roused him, and h e blinked at me, only then
seeming to realize that I was not in fact an inanimate object.
“Oh. Beg pardon, madam. W e are going to the Governor ’ s
Palace. Have you not a cap?”
“No.”
He grimaced, as though he’d expected nothing else, and
resumed his private thoughts.
They’d finished the place, and very nicely , too. W illiam
T ryon, the previous governor , had built the Governor ’ s Palace,
but had been se nt to New Y ork before construction had been
finished. Now the enormous brick edifice with its graceful
spreading wings  was complete, even to the lawns and ivy beds
that lined the drive, though the stately trees that would
eventually surround it were mere saplings. The carriage pulled
up o n the drive , but we did not—of course—enter by the
imposing front entrance, but rather scuttled round the back and
down the stairs to the servants’ quarters in the basement.
Here I was has tily shoved into a maid’ s room, handed a
comb, b asin, and ewer , and a borrowed cap, and ur ged to make
myself look less like a slattern, as quickly as possible.
My guide—Mr . W ebb was his name, as I learned from the
cook’ s respectf ul greeting to him—waited with obvious
impatience while I made my hasty ablutions, then grasped my
arm and ur ged me upstairs. W e ascended by a narrow backstair to the second floor , where a very young and frightened-
looking maidservant was waiting.
“Oh, yo u’ve com e, sir , at last!” She bobbed a curtsy to Mr .
W ebb, giving me a curious glance. “Is this the midwife?”
“Y es. Mrs. Fraser—Dilman.” He nodded at the girl, giving
only her surname, the English f ashion for house servants. She
curtsied to me in turn, then beckoned me toward a door that
stood ajar .
The room was la r ge and gracious, furnished with a canopied
bed, a walnut commode, armoir e, and armchair , though the air
of e legant refinement was somewhat impaired by a heap of
mending, a ratty sewing basket overturned and spilling its
threads, and a basket of children’ s toys. In the bed was a lar ge
mound, which—given the e vidence to hand—I rather
supposed must be Mrs. Martin, the Governor ’ s wife.
This proved to be the case when Dilman curtsied again,
murmuring my name to her . She was round—very round,
given her advanced state of pregnancy—with a small, sharp
nose an d a nearsighted way of peering that reminded me
irresistibly of Beatrix Potter ’ s Mrs. T iggy-W inkle. In terms of
personality , not quite so much.
“Who th e devil  is this?” she demanded, poking a frowsy ,
capped head out of the bedclothes.
“Midwife, mum ,” Dilman said, bobbing again. “Have you
slept well, mum?”
“Of course not,” Mrs. Martin said crossly . “This beastly
child’ s k icked my liver black a nd blue, I’ve puked all night,
I’ve sweated through my sheets, and I have a shaking ague. I
was told there was no midwife to be found within the county .”
She gav e me a dyspeptic look. “Where did you discover this
person, the local prison?”
“Actually , yes,” I said, unslinging my bag from my
shoulder . “How far gone are you, how long have you been ill,
and when’ s the last time you moved your bowels?”She looked mar ginally more interested, and waved Dilman
out of the room.
“What did she say your name was?”
“Fraser . Are you experiencing any symptoms of early labor?
Cramping? Bleeding? Intermittent pain in the back?”
She gav e me a sideways look, but did begin to answer my
questions. From which, in the fullness of time, I eventually
was able to diagnose an acute case of food poisoning, likely
caused b y a leftover slice of oys ter pie, consumed—with quite
a lot  of other edibles—in a fit of pregnancy-induced greed the
day before.
“I h ave not an ague?” She withdrew the tongue she had
allowed me to inspect, frowning.
“Y ou ha ve not. Not yet, anyway ,” honesty compelled me to
add. It was no w onder she thought she had; I had learned in
the course of th e examination that a particularly virulent sort
of fever was abroad in the town—and in the palace. The
Governor ’ s secretary had died of it two days before, and
Dilman was the only upstairs servant still on her feet.
I go t he r out of bed, and helped  her to the armchair , where
she subs ided, lo oking like a sq uashed cream cake. The room
was hot and stuf fy , and I opened the window in hopes of a
breeze.
“God’ s teeth, Mrs. Fraser , do you mean to kill me?” She
clutched her wrapper tight around her belly , hunching her
shoulders as though I had admitted a howling blizzard.
“Probably not.”
“But the miasma!” She waved a hand at the window ,
scandalized. In all truth, mosquitoes wer e  a danger . But it was
still several hours ‘til sunset, when they would begin to rise.
“W e’ll c lose it in a bit. For the moment, you need air . And
possibly someth ing light. Could you stomach a bit of dry toast,
do you think?”She thought that one over , tasting the corners of her mouth
with a tentative tongue tip.
“Perhaps,” she decided. “And a cup of tea. Dilman!”
Dilman dismissed to fetch the tea and toast—how long was
it sin ce I had even seen real tea ? I wondered—I settled down
to take a more complete medical history .
How many earlier pregnancies? Six, but a shadow crossed
her face, and I  saw her glance involuntarily at a wooden
puppet, lying near the hearth.
“Are yo ur children in the palac e?” I asked, curious. I had
heard no sign of  any children, a nd even in a place the size of
the palace, it would be dif ficult to hide six of them.
“No,” sh e said with a sigh, and  put her hands on her belly ,
holding it almost absently . “W e sent the girls to my sister in
New Jersey , a few weeks ago.”
A few more que stions, and the tea and toast arrived. I left
her to eat it in peace, and went to shake out the damp,
crumpled bedclothes.
“Is it true?” Mrs. Martin asked suddenly , startling me.
“Is what true?”
“They say you murdered your  husband’ s pregnant young
mistress, and cut the baby from her womb. Did you?”
I p ut the heel of my hand aga inst my brow and pressed,
closing my eyes. How on earth had she heard that? When I
thought I could speak, I lower ed my hands and opened my
eyes.
“She wa sn’ t his mistress, and I d idn’ t kill her . As for the rest
—yes, I did,” I said as calmly as I could.
She stared at me for a moment, her mouth hanging open.
Then sh e shut it with a snap and crossed her forearms over her
belly .
“T rust G eor ge W ebb to choose me a proper midwife!” she
said—and much  to my surprise , began to laugh. “He doesn’ tknow , does he?”
“I would  assume not,” I said with extreme dryness. “I didn’ t
tell him. Who told you?”
“Oh, yo u are quite notorious, Mrs. Fraser ,” she assured me.
“Everyone has been talking of it. Geor ge has no time for
gossip, b ut even  he must have heard of it. He has no memory
for names, though. I do.”
A little color w as coming back into her face. She took
another nibble of toast, chewed, and swallowed gingerly .
“I was not sure that it was you, though,” she admitted. “Not
until I asked.” S he closed her eyes, grimacing doubtfully , but
evidently the toast hit bottom, for she opened them and
resumed her nibbling.
“So now that you do  know … ?” I asked delicately .
“I don’ t  know . I’ve never known a murderess before.” She
swallowed the last of the toas t and licked the tips of her
fingers before wiping them on the napkin.
“I am not  a murderess,” I said.
“W ell, o f course you’d say so,” she agreed. She took up the
cup of tea, surve ying me over it  with interest. “Y ou don’ t look
depraved—though I must say , you don’ t look quite
respectable, either .” She raised the fragrant cup and drank,
with a look of b liss that made m e conscious that I hadn’ t eaten
anything since the rather meager bowl of unsalted, unbuttered
porridge provided for breakfast by Mrs. T olliver .
“I’ll have to thin k about it,” Mrs. Martin said, setting down
her cup with a clink. “T ake that back to the kitchen,” she said,
waving at the tra y , “and have the m send me up some soup, and
perhaps a few sandwiches. I do  believe my appetite has come
back!”
WELL, NOW BLOODY WHA T? I had been whisked so
abruptly from gaol to palace that I felt like a sailor decanted
onto land after months at sea, staggering and of f-balance. Iwent ob ediently down to the kitchen, as instructed, obtained a
tray—with a most delectable-smelling bowl of soup—and took
it ba ck to Mrs. Martin, walking like an automaton. By the time
she d ismissed me, my brain had  begun to function again, if not
yet at full capacity .
I wa s in New Bern. And, thanks be to God and Sadie
Fer guson, out of Sherif f T olliver ’ s noisome gaol. Fer gus and
Marsali were in New Bern. Er go, the obvious—in fact, the
only—thing to do was plainly t o escape and find my way to
them. They could help me to find Jamie. I clung firmly to T om
Christie’ s promise that Jamie wasn’ t dead and to the notion
that he was  findable, because nothing else was tolerable.
Escaping from the Governor ’ s P alace, though, proved more
dif ficult than I had anticipated. T here were guards posted at all
the door s, and my attempt to t alk my way past one of them
failed utterly , leading to the ab rupt appearance of Mr . W ebb,
who took me by the arm and escorted me firmly up the stairs
to a hot, stuf fy little garret, where he locked me in.
It was better than the gaol, but that was all that could be said
for i t. There was  a cot, a chamber pot, a basin, ewer , and chest
of drawe rs, the latter containing meager bits of clothing. The
room sh owed signs of recent occ upancy—but not immediately
recent. A  film of fine summer dust lay over everything, and
while th e ewer was full of water , it had obviously been there
for some time; a number of moths and other small insects had
drowned in it, a nd a film of the same fine dust floated on the
surface.
There was also a small window , painted shut, but
determined bang ing and heaving got it open, and I breathed a
heady lungful of hot, muggy air .
I s trippe d of f, removed the dead  moths from the pitcher , and
washed, a blissful experience that made me feel immensely
better , after the last week of una lloyed grime, sweat, and filth.
After a moment ’ s hesitation, I h elped myself to a worn linen
shift from the ch est of drawers, unable to bear the thought of
putting my own filthy , sweat-soaked chemise back on.I cou ld do only so much without soap or shampoo, but even
so, felt much im proved, and stood by the window , combing
out m y wet hair—there had been  a wooden comb on the chest,
though n o looking glass—and surveying what I could see from
my perch.
There were more guards, post ed round the edge of the
property . W as that usual? I wondered. I thought perhaps it was
not; they  seemed  uneasy , and ve ry alert; I saw one challenge a
man who approached the gate, p resenting his weapon in rather
belligerent fashion. The man seemed startled and backed up,
then turned and walked away f ast, glancing backward as he
went.
There were a number of uniformed guards—I thought they
were pe rhaps Marines, though I wasn’ t suf ficiently familiar
with uniforms as to be sure of it—clustered round six cannon,
these situated on a slight rise before the palace, commanding
the town and the harbor ’ s edge.
There w ere two nonuniformed men among them; leaning
out a  bit, I made out the tall, heavyset figure of Mr . W ebb, and
a shorter man beside him. The shorter man was strolling along
the line of canno n, hands folded beneath his coattails, and the
Marines, or whatever they were, were saluting him. At a
guess, this was the Governor , then: Josiah Martin.
I w atched for a little while , but nothing of interest
happened, and I found myself overwhelmed with sudden
sleepiness, born e down by the strains of the last month and the
hot, still air that seemed to press upon me like a hand.
I la y down on the cot in my  borrowed shift, and fell
instantly asleep.
I SLEPT  UNTIL  THE middle o f the night, when I was again
called to attend Mrs. Martin, who seemed to be having a
relapse of her digestive dif ficulties. A slightly pudgy , long-
nosed man in ni ghtshirt and cap lurked in the doorway with a
candle, looking worried; I took this to be the Governor . He
looked hard at me, but made no move to interfere, and I had notime to take much notice of hi m. By the time the crisis had
passed, the Governor—if indeed it was he—had disappeared.
The pati ent now safely asleep, I lay down like a dog on the rug
beside h er bed, with a rolled-up  petticoat as pillow , and went
thankfully back to sleep.
It wa s fu ll daylig ht when I woke  again, and the fire was out.
Mrs. Ma rtin was out of bed, calling fretfully into the passage
for Dilman.
“W retched girl,”  she said, turnin g back as I got awkwardly
to m y feet. “Go t the ague, I suppose, like the rest. Or run
away .”
I g ather ed that while several servants were down with the
fever , a good m any of the other s had simply decamped out of
fear of contagion.
“Y ou’re quite sure I have not got the tertian ague, Mrs.
Fraser?” Mrs. Martin squinted a t herself in her looking glass,
putting out her tongue and surveying it critically . “I do believe
I look yellow .”
In f act, her complexion was a  soft English pink, though
rather pale from throwing up.
“Keep o f f the cream cakes and  oyster pie in hot weather ,
don’ t eat anything lar ger than yo ur head at one sitting, and you
should b e quite all right,” I said, suppressing a yawn. I caught
a l ook at myself  in the glass, over her shoulder , and shuddered.
I was nearly as pale as she was, with dark circles under my
eyes, and my hair … well, it was almost clean, that was all that
could be said for it.
“I should be let blood,” Mrs. Martin declared. “That is the
proper treatment for a plethory; dear Dr . Sibelius always says
so. T hree or fou r ounces, perhaps, to be followed by the black
draught. Dr . Sibelius says he finds the black-draught answer
very we ll in such cases.” She  moved to an armchair and
reclined, her belly bulging under her wrapper . She pulled up
the sleeve of th e wrapper , extending her arm in languorousfashion. “There  is a fleam and bowl in the top left drawer ,
Mrs. Fraser . If you would oblige me?”
The mer e thought of letting bloo d first thing in the morning
was enough to make me  want to vomit. As for Dr . Sibe lius’ s
black draught, that was laudan um—an alcoholic tincture of
opium, and not my  treatment of choice for a pregnant woman.
The subsequent acrimonious discussion over the virtues of
blood-letting—and I began to think, from the anticipatory
gleam in her eye, that the thrill of having a vein opened by a
murderess was what she actually desired—was interrupted by
the unceremonious entry of Mr . W ebb.
“Do I disturb you, mum? My apologies.” He bowed
perfunctorily to Mrs. Martin, the n turned to me. “Y ou—put on
your cap and come with me.”
I did so without protest, leaving Mrs. Martin indignantly
unperforated.
W ebb ushered me down the gleamingly polished front stair
this time, and i nto a lar ge, gra cious, book-lined room. The
Governor , now properly wigged, powdered, and elegantly
suited, was seated behind a desk overflowing with papers,
dockets, scattere d quills, blotters, sand-shakers, sealing wax,
and all the ot her impedimen ta of an eighteenth-century
bureaucrat. He looked hot, bothered, and quite as indignant as
his wife.
“What, W ebb?”  he demanded, scowling at me. “I need a
secretary , and you bring me a midwife?”
“She’ s a for ger ,” W ebb said baldly . That stopped whatever
complaint the Governor had been going to bring forth. He
paused, mouth slightly open, still frowning at me.
“Oh,” he said in an altered tone. “Indeed.”
“ Accused  of for gery ,” I said politely . “I haven’ t been tried,
let alone convicted, you know .”
The Governor ’ s eyebrows wen t up, hearing my educated
accent.“Indeed,” he said again, more sl owly . He looked me up and
down, s quinting dubiously . “W here on earth did you get her ,
W ebb?”
“From the gaol.” W ebb cast me an indif ferent glance, as
though I might be some unpr epossessing yet useful bit of
furniture, like a chamber pot. “ When I made inquiries for a
midwife, someone told me that this woman had done prodigies
with a slave, another prisoner , having a dif ficult lying-in. And
as the matter wa s ur gent, and no other cunning woman to be
found …” He shrugged, with a faint grimace.
“Hmmmm.” The Governor pull ed a handkerchief from his
sleeve a nd dabbed thoughtfully at the plump flesh beneath his
chin. “Can you write a fair hand?”
I suppo sed it would be a poor for ger who couldn’ t, but
contented myself with saying, “Y es.” Fortunately , it was true;
in my own time, I had scribbled ball-point prescriptions with
the b est of them , but now I had trained myself to write clearly
with a quill, so that my medical records and case notes should
be legib le, for the benefit of whoever should read them after
me. Once again, I felt a sharp pang at the thought of Malva—
but there was no time to think of her .
Still eyeing me speculatively , the Governor nodded toward a
straight-backed chair and a smaller desk at the side of the
room.
“Sit.” He rose, s crabbled among the papers on his desk, and
deposited one in front of me. “Let me see you make a fair
copy of that, if you please.”
It w as a brief letter to the Royal Council, outlining the
Governor ’ s concerns regarding recent threats to that body , and
postponing the next scheduled meeting of the council. I chose
a quill from the  cut-glass holder on the desk, found a silver
penknife by it, trimmed the qu ill to my liking, uncorked the
inkwell, and set about the business, deeply aware of the
scrutiny of the two men.I did n’ t know ho w long my imp osture might hold up—Mrs.
Governor could blow the gaf f at any time—but for the nonce, I
thought I probably had a better c hance of escape as an accused
for ger than as an accused murderer .
The Governor took my finished copy , surveyed it, and laid it
on the desk with a small grunt of satisfaction.
“Good e nough,” he said. “Make eight further copies of that,
and then you can go on with these.” T urning back to his own
desk, he shuf fled together a lar ge sheaf of correspondence,
which he deposited in front of me.
The two  men—I  had no notion of W ebb’ s of fice, but he was
obviously the Governor ’ s close friend—returned to a
discussion of current business, ignoring me completely .
I went about my assigned task mechanically , finding the
scratch of the quill, the ritual of sanding, blotting, shaking,
soothing. Copying occupied a very small part of my mind; the
rest was  free to worry about Ja mie, and to think how best to
engineer an escape.
I could—and doubtless should—make an excuse after a bit
to go and see ho w Mrs. Martin did. If I could make shift to do
so unaccompanied, I would have a few moments of
unobserved free dom, during which to make a surreptitious
dash for the nea rest exit. So fa r , though, every door I’d seen
had bee n guarded. The Governor ’ s Palace had a very well-
stocked simples closet, alas; it would be hard to invent a need
for anything from an apothecary—and even then, unlikely that
they’d let me go alone to fetch it.
W aiting for nightfall seemed the  best notion; at least if I did
get out of the palace, I would have several hours before my
absence was noted. If they locked me in again, though …
I scratched away assiduously , turning over various
unsatisfactory plans, and trying very hard not to envision
Jamie’ s body turning slowly in the wind, hanging from a tree
in some lonely hollow . Christie had given me his word; I clung
to that, having nothing else to cling to.W ebb and the Governor murmured together , but their talk
was of things I had no notion of, and for the most part, it
washed over me like the sound  of the sea, meaningless and
soothing. After some time, though, W ebb came over to instruct
me in the sealing and direction of those letters to be sent. I
thought of asking why he didn’ t lend a hand himself in this
clerical emer gency , but then saw his hands—both badly
twisted with arthritis.
“Y ou write a ver y fair hand, Mrs. Fraser ,” he unbent enough
to say , at one point, and gave me a brief, wintry smile. “It is
unfortunate that  you should have been the for ger , rather than
the murderess.”
“Why?” I asked, rather astonished at that.
“Why , y ou are plainly literate,” he said, surprised in turn at
my astonishment. “If convicted of murder , you could plead
benefit o f cler gy , and be let of f with a public whipping and
branding in the face. For gery , t hough—” He shook his head,
pursing his lips. “Capital crime, no pardon possible. If
convicted of for gery , Mrs. Fra ser , I am afraid you must be
hanged.”
My feelings of g ratitude toward  Sadie Fer guson underwent
an abrupt reappraisal.
“Indeed,” I said as coolly as possible, though my heart had
given a convulsive leap and was now trying to burrow out of
my chest. “W ell, we’ll hope tha t justice is served then, and I
am released, won’ t we?”
He made a choked sound that I thought passed for a laugh.
“T o be sure. If only for the Governor ’ s sake.”
After that, we resumed work silently . The gilded clock
behind me struck noon, and as though summoned by the
sound, a servant whom I took to be the butler came in, to
inquire whether the Governor would receive a delegation of
the town’ s citizens?
The Governor ’ s mouth compressed a bit, but he nodded in
resignation, and  a group of six or seven men came in, allattired in their b est coats, but plainly tradesmen, rather than
merchants or lawyers. None I recognized, thank God.
“W e have come, sir ,” said one,  who introduced himself as
Geor ge Herbert,  “to ask the meaning of this movement of the
cannon.”
W ebb, s itting next to me, stif fen ed a little, but the Governor
seemed to have been prepared for this.
“The cannon?” he said with every evidence of innocent
surprise. “Why—the mountings are being repaired. W e shall
fire a royal salute—as usual—in honor of the Queen’ s
birthday , later in the month. Upon inspecting the cannon in
anticipation of this, though, it was discovered that the wood of
the caiss ons had  rotted away in  spots. Firing the cannon is of
course impossible until repairs shall be ef fected. W ould you
wish to inspect the mountings for yourself, sir?”
He half -rose from his seat a s he said this, as though
personally to escort them outside, but spoke with such a tinge
of irony  to his courtesy that they flushed and muttered
refusals.
There w as a bit more back and forth, in the name of
courtesy , but the delegation then left, exhibiting only
mar ginally less suspicion than that with which they’d come in.
W ebb closed his eyes and exhaled audibly , as the door closed
behind them.
“God da mn them,” said the Governor very softly . I didn’ t
think he  meant it to be heard, and pretended I hadn’ t, busying
myself with the papers and keeping my head lowered.
W ebb got up an d went to the window that overlooked the
lawn, presumably to assure himself that the cannon were
where he thought they should be. By craning a bit, I could see
past him ; sure enough, the six cannon had been removed from
their mountings and lay on the grass, harmless logs of bronze.
From the subsequent convers ation—salted with strong
remarks regardin g rebellious dogs who had the temerity to put
the question to a Royal Governor as though he were abootblack, by God!—I gathered that in fact, the cannon had
been removed because of a very  real fear that the townspeople
might seize them and turn them upon the palace itself.
It dawne d on me, listening to all this, that things had gone
further a nd moved faster than I had expected. It was mid-July ,
but of 1775—nearly a year before a lar ger and more forceful
version of the Mecklenber g Declaration would flower into an
of ficial declaration of independence for the united colonies.
And yet here was a Royal Governor , in obvious fear of open
revolt.
If w hat we had seen on our jou rney south from the Ridge
had not been en ough to convince me that war was now upon
us, a day spent with Governor Martin left no doubt.
I d id go up in th e afternoon—accompanied by the watchful
W ebb, alas—to check my patient, and to make inquiries
regarding anyone else who might be ill. Mrs. Martin was
torpid and low in spirits, com plaining of the heat and the
pestilential, wretched climate, missing her daughters, and
suf fering severe ly from a lack of personal service, having been
obliged to brush her own hair i n the absence of Dilman, who
had vanished. She was, howeve r , in good health, as I was able
to report to the Governor , who asked me of it upon my return.
“W ould she stand a journey , do you think?” he asked,
frowning a bit.
I considered for a moment, then nodded.
“I think so. She’ s a bit wobbly , still, from the digestive upset
—but she should be quite well again by tomorrow . I see no
dif ficulties with the pregnancy—tell me, had she any trouble
with previous confinements?”
The Governor ’ s face flushed rosily at that, but he shook his
head.
“I th ank you, M rs. Fraser ,” he said with a slight inclination
of th e head. “Y ou will excuse me, Geor ge—I must go and
speak to Betsy .”“Is he thinking of sending his w ife away?” I asked W ebb, in
the wake of the Governor ’ s departure. Despite the heat, a small
qualm of uneasiness stirred beneath my skin.
For once , W ebb seemed quite human; he was frowning after
the Governor , and nodded absently .
“He has  family in New Y ork an d New Jersey . She’ll be safe
there, with the girls. Her three daughters,” he explained,
catching my eye.
“Three? She said she’d had six—ah.” I stopped abruptly .
She said she had borne six children, not that she had six living
children.
“They have lost three small son s to the fevers here,” W ebb
said, stil l looking after his frien d. He shook his head, sighing.
“It hasn’ t been a fortunate place for them.”
He seemed then to recover himself, and the man
disappeared bac k behind the ma sk of the chilly bureaucrat. He
handed me another sheaf of papers, and went out, not
bothering to bow .9 3
IN WHICH I IMPERSONA TE
 A LADY
I  A TE SUPPER ALONE IN M Y ROOM; the cook seemed
still to be functioning, at leas t, though the atmosphere of
disorder in the house was a palpable thing. I could feel the
uneasiness, bordering on panic—and had the thought that it
wasn’ t fear of f ever or ague that had caused the servants to
leave, but more likely that sense of self-preservation that
causes rats to flee a sinking ship.
From m y tiny window , I could see a small portion of the
town, apparently serene in the gathering twilight. The light
was ver y dif ferent here from that in the mountains—a flat,
dimensionless light that limned the houses and the fishing
boats in the harbor with a hard-edged clarity , but faded into a
haze that hid the farther shore completely , so that I looked
beyond the immediate prospect into featureless infinity .
I s hook of f the notion, and too k from my pocket the ink,
quill, and paper I had abstracted from the library earlier . I had
no idea whether  or how I might get a note out of the palace—
but I did have a little money ,  still, and if the opportunity
of fered …
I wrote quickly to Fer gus and Marsali, telling them briefly
what had happened, ur ging Fer gus to make inquiries for Jamie
in Brunswick and W ilmington.
I t hough t mysel f that if Jamie was  aliv e, that he was most
likely in the W ilmington gaol. Brunswick was a tiny
settlement, dominated by the looming presence of the log-built
Fort Joh nston, but the fort was a militia garrison; there would
be no good reason to take Jamie there—though if they had  …
the fort was und er the command of a Captain Collet, a Swiss
emigrant who knew him. At least he would be safe there.Who else did he  know? He had a good many acquaintances
on the coast, from the days of the Regulation. John Ashe, for
one; they had m arched side by side to Alamance, and Ashe’ s
company had camped next to ours every night; we had
entertained him at our campfire many times. And Ashe was
from W ilmington.
I ha d ju st finish ed a brief plea to John Ashe, when I heard
footsteps coming down the hallway toward my room. I folded
it ha stily , not w orrying about smearing, and thrust it with the
other note into m y pocket. There was no time to do anything
with the contraband ink and paper , save push it under the bed.
It was W ebb, o f course, my customary jailer . Evidently , I
was now considered the general dogsbody of the
establishment; I was escorted to Mrs. Martin’ s room and
desired to pack her things.
I might have expected complaint or hysteria, but in fact, she
was not only dressed but pale-faced and composed, directing
and eve n assisti ng the process with a sense of clear -minded
order .
The reason for her self-possession was the Governor , who
came in midway through the packing, his face drawn with
worry . She went at once to  him, and put her hands
af fectionately on his shoulders.
“Poor Jo,” she said softly . “Have you had any supper?”
“No. It doesn’ t matter . I’ll have  a bite later .” He kissed her
briefly o n the forehead, his look of worry lightening a little as
he lo oked at her . “Y ou’re quite well now , Betsy? Y ou’re sure
of it ?” I realized suddenly that he was Irish—Anglo-Irish, at
least; he  had no hint of an acc ent, but his unguarded speech
held a faint lilt.
“Entirely recovered,” she assured him. She took his hand
and pressed it to her bulge, smiling. “See how he kicks?”
He smiled back, raised her hand to his lips, and kissed it.
“I’ll miss you, darling,” she said very softly . “Y ou will take
very great care?”He blinked rapidly , and looked down, swallowing.
“Of course,” he said gruf fly . “D ear Betsy . Y ou know I could
not bear to part with you, unless—”
“I do know . That’ s why I fear so greatly for you. I—” At
this point, she looked up, and realized suddenly that I was
there. “Mrs. Fraser ,” she said in quite a dif ferent tone. “Go
down to the kitchen, please, and have a tray prepared for the
Governor . Y ou may take it to the library .”
I bobbed slightly , and went. W as this the chance I had been
waiting for?
The halls and stairway were de serted, lit only by flickering
tin sconces—burning fish oil, by the smell. The brick-walled
kitchen was, course, in the base ment, and the eerie silence in
what should ordinarily be a hive  of activity made the unlighted
kitchen stairway seem like the descent into a dungeon.
There was no li ght in the kitche n now save the hearth fire,
burning low—bu t it was  bur ning, three s ervants clustered near
it despit e the smothering heat. They turned at my footsteps,
startled and faceless in silhouet te. W ith steam rising from the
cauldron behind them, I had the momentary delusion that I
was facing Macbeth’ s three witches, met in dreadful prophecy .
“Double, double, toil and trouble,” I said pleasantly , though
my heart beat a little faster as I  approached them. “Fire burn,
and cauldron bubble.”
“T oil an d troubl e, that  be right,” said a soft female v oice,
and laughed. Closer now , I could see that they had appeared
faceless in the shadows because they were all black; slaves,
likely , and thus unable to flee the house.
Unable a lso to carry a message for me. Still, it never hurt to
be friendly , and I smiled at them.
They smiled shyly back, looking  at me with curiosity . I had
not seen any of them before—nor they me, though
“downstairs” being what it was, I thought it likely they knew
who I was.“Governor be sendin’ his lady away?” asked the one who
had laughed, moving to fetch down a tray from a shelf in
response to my request for something light.
“Y es,” I said. I realized the value of gossip as currency , and
related e verything that I decently could, as the three of them
moved ef ficiently about, dark as shadows, their darting hands
slicing, spreading, arranging.
Molly , the cook, shook her head , her white cap like a sunset
cloud in the fire’ s glow .
“Bad times, bad times,” she sa id, clicking her tongue, and
the o ther two murmured assent. I thought, from their attitude,
that they liked the Governor—but then, as slaves, their fate
was inextricably linked with his, regardless of their feelings.
It oc curred to m e, as we chatted , that even if they could not
reasonably flee the house altogether , they might at least leave
the p remises now and again; som eone had to do the marketing,
and there seemed to be no one else left. In fact, this proved to
be th e c ase; Suk ie, the one who  had laughed, went out to buy
fish and fresh vegetables in the mornings, and tactfully
approached, was not averse to delivering my notes to the
printshop—she said she knew where it was, the place with all
the books in the window—for a small consideration.
She tucked away the paper and money in her bosom, giving
me a knowing lo ok, and winked. God knew what she thought
it w as, but I winked back, and hefting the loaded tray , made
my way back up into the fishy-smelling realms of light.
I f ound the Gov ernor alone in the library , burning papers.
He nodd ed abse ntly at the tray I set on the desk, but did not
touch it. I was n’ t sure what to do, and after a moment’ s
awkward standing about, sat down at my accustomed place.
The Gov ernor thrust a final shea f of documents into the fire,
then sto od looking bleakly after them, as they blackened and
curled. The room had cooled a little, with the setting sun, but
the win dows were tightly shut—of course—and rivulets of
condensing moisture rolled down the ornamental panes ofglass. Blotting a similar condensation from my cheeks and
nose, I got up and threw ope n the window closest to me,
drawing in a deep gulp of the ev ening air , cloyingly warm, but
fresh, an d sweet  with honeysuckle and roses from the garden,
undercut with dankness from the distant shore.
W oodsmoke, too; there were fires burning outside. The
soldiers who guarded the palace had watch fires burning,
evenly s paced a round the perimeter of the grounds. W ell, that
would help with the mosquitoes—and we would not be
completely surprised, if an attack should come.
The Governor came to stand be hind me. I expected him to
tell me to shut t he window , but he merely stood, looking out
across his lawns and the long, graveled drive. The moon had
risen, and the di smounted cannon were dimly visible, lying in
the shadows like dead men in a row .
After a moment, the Governor moved back to his desk, and
calling m e over , handed me a sheaf of of ficial correspondence
for copy ing, another for sorting and filing. He left the window
open; I thought  that he wishe d to hear , if anything should
happen.
I w ondered where the omniprese nt W ebb was. There was no
sound from elsewhere in the Palace; presumably Mrs. Martin
had finished her packing alone, and gone to bed.
W e worked on, through the intermittent chiming of the
clock, the Governor getting u p now and then to commit
another batch of papers to the  fire, taking my copies and
bundling them into lar ge leathe r folders that he bound with
tape, sta cking th em on his desk.  He had taken of f his wig; his
hair was brown, short but curly— rather like my own had been,
after th e fever . Now and th en he paused, head turned,
listening.
I h ad faced a m ob, and knew w hat he was listening for . I
didn’ t kn ow what to hope for , at this point, or to fear . And so I
worked on, welcoming the work  for the numbing distraction it
was, though my hand had grow n desperately cramped, and I
had to pause every few moments to rub it.The Governor was writing no w; he shifted in his chair ,
grimacing with discomfort in sp ite of the cushion. Mrs. Martin
had told me tha t he suf fered from a fistula. I doubted very
much that he’d let me treat it.
He e ased himself onto one butto ck, and rubbed a hand down
his face. It was  late, and he was plainly tired, as well as
uncomfortable. I was tired, too, stifling yawns that threatened
to d islocate my jaw and left my eyes watering. He kept
doggedly worki ng, though, with occasional glances at the
door . Who was he expecting?
The window at my back was still open, and the soft air
caressed me, warm as blood, b ut moving enough to stir the
wisps of hair on  my neck and make the candle flame waver
wildly . I t bent to one side and flickered, as though it would go
out, and  the Governor reached quickly to shelter it with a
cupped hand.
The breeze passed and the air fell still again, save for the
sound of crickets outside. The Governor ’ s attention seemed
focused on the p aper before him, but suddenly his head turned
sharply , as though he had seen  something dart past the open
door .
He l ooked for a moment, then blinked, rubbed his eyes, and
returned his attention to the p aper . But he couldn’ t keep it
there. He glanced again at the empty doorway—I couldn’ t help
looking, too—then back, blinking.
“Did you … see someone pass, Mrs. Fraser?” he asked.
“No, sir ,” I said, nobly swallowing a yawn.
“Ah.” Seeming somehow disappointed, he took up his quill,
but didn’ t write anything, just h eld it between his fingers, as
though he had for gotten it was there.
“W ere you expecting anyone, Y our Excellency?” I asked
politely , and his head jerked up, surprised to be directly
addressed.
“Oh. No . That is …” His voice died away as he glanced
once more at the doorway that led to the back of the house.“My son ,” he said. “Our darling Sam. He—died here, you
know—late last year . Only eight years old. Sometimes …
sometimes I think I see him,” he ended quietly , and bent his
head once more over his paper , lips pressed tight.
I moved  impulsively , meaning to touch his hand, but his
tight-lipped air prevented me.
“I a m sorry ,” I said quietly , instead. He didn’ t speak, but
gave on e quick,  short nod of acknowledgment, not raising his
head. His lips tightened furth er , and he went back to his
writing, as did I.
A little later , the clock struck t he hour , then two. It had a
soft, swe et chime, and the Gove rnor stopped to listen, a distant
look in his eyes.
“So late ,” he said, as the last chime died away . “I have kept
you into lerably l ate, Mrs. Fraser . For give me.” He motioned to
me to leave the papers I was wo rking on, and I rose, stif f and
aching from sitting so long.
I shook my skirts into some order and turned to go, realizing
only the n that he had made no move to put away his ink and
quills.
“Y ou should go to bed, too, y ou know ,” I said to him,
turning and pausing at the door .
The pala ce was still. Even the crickets had ceased, and only
the soft snore o f a sleeping so ldier in the hall disturbed the
quiet.
“Y es,” h e said, and gave me a small, tired smile. “Soon.” He
shifted h is weigh t to the other buttock, and picked up his quill,
bending his head once more over the papers.
NO ONE  WOK E ME in the morning, and the sun was well up
when I stirred on my own. Lis tening to the silence, I had a
momentary fear that everyone had decamped in the night,
leaving me locked in to starve . I rose hastily , though, and
looked out. The red-coated soldiers were still patrolling the
grounds, just as usual. I could see small groups of citizensoutside the perimeter , mostly st rolling past in twos or threes,
but sometimes stopping to stare at the palace.
Then I began to  hear small thu mps and homely noises on
the floor below , and felt re lieved; I was not entirely
abandoned. I was, however , ext remely hungry by the time the
butler came to let me out.
He brought me to Mrs. Martin ’ s bedchamber , but to my
surprise it was empty . He left me there, and within a few
moments, Meril ee, one of the kitchen slaves, came in, looking
apprehensive at being in this unfamiliar part of the house.
“Whatever is going on?” I asked her . “Where is Mrs.
Martin, do you know?”
“W ell, I know that, ” she said, in a dubious tone indicating
that it was the only thing she did  know for certain. “She lef ’
just afo re dawn this mornin’. That Mr . W ebb, he took her
away , secret-like, in a wagon with her boxes.”
I nodded, perplexed. It was reasonable that she should have
left quietly; I im agined the Governor didn’ t want to give any
indication that he felt threatened, for fear of provoking exactly
the violence he feared.
“But if Mrs. Martin is gone,” I said, “why am I here? Why
are you  here?”
“Oh. W ell, I know that, too,” Merilee said, gaining a bit of
confidence. “I s’posed to hep you dress, ma’am.”
“But I don’ t n eed any …” I began, and then saw the
garments laid out on the bed: one of Mrs. Martin’ s day gowns,
a pr etty printed floral cotton,  done in the newly popular
“polonaise” fash ion, complete with voluminous petticoats, silk
stockings, and a lar ge straw hat to shade the face.
Evidently , I was meant to impersonate the Governor ’ s wife.
There was no real point in protesting; I could hear the
Governor and the butler talking  in the hall, and after all—if it
got me out of the palace, so much the better .I wa s only two or three inches taller than Mrs. Martin, and
my l ack of a bulge made the go wn hang lower . There was no
hope of my fittin g into any of her shoes, but my own were not
completely disreputable, in spite of all my adventures since
leaving home. Merilee cleaned them and rubbed them with a
bit o f gr ease to make the leather shine; they were at least not
so crude as to draw attention immediately .
W ith the broad-brimmed hat slanting forward to hide my
face, an d my hair twisted up and firmly pinned under a cap
beneath it, I was probably a reasonable approximation, at least
to peopl e who did not know Mrs. Martin well. The Governor
frowned when he saw me, and walked slowly round me,
tugging here and there to adjust the fit, but then nodded, and
with a small bow , of fered me his arm.
“Y our servant, mum,” he said politely . And with me
slumping slightly to disguise my height, we went out the front
door , to find the Governor ’ s carriage waiting in the drive.9 4
ABSQUA TULA TION
J AMIE FRASER observed the quantity and quality of books
in the window of the printshop— F . Fraser , Pr oprietor —and
allowed himself a momentary sense of pride in Fer gus; the
establishment, t hough small, was apparently thriving. T ime,
however , was pressing, and he pushed through the door
without stopping to read the titles.
A small bell over the door rang at his entrance, and Germain
popped up behind the counter like an ink-smeared jack-in-the-
box, emitting a whoop of joy at sight of his grandfather and his
uncle Ian.
“Grandper e, Grandper e!”  he shouted, then dived under the
flap in the coun ter , clutching Jamie about the hips in ecstasy .
He’d gr own; the top of his head now reached Jamie’ s lower
ribs. Jamie ruf fled the shiny blo nd hair gently , then detached
Germain and told him to fetch his father .
No need ; arouse d by the shout ing, the whole family came
boiling out from the living quarters behind the shop,
exclaiming, yelling, squealing, and generally carrying on like a
pack of wolves,  as Ian pointed  out to them, Henri-Christian
riding o n his shoulders in red-faced triumph, clinging to his
hair .
“What has happened, milord? Why are you here?” Fer gus
disengaged Jamie easily from the riot and drew him aside, into
the alcove where the more expensive books were kept—and
those not suitable for public display .
He could see fro m the look on Fer gus’ s face that some news
had come down from the mou ntains; while surprised to see
him, Fer gus was not astonished, and his pleasure covered a
worried mind. He explained the matter as quickly as he could,
stumbling now and then over  his words from haste andweariness; one of the horses had broken down some forty
miles fro m town, and unable to find another , they had walked
for t wo nights a nd a day , takin g it in turns to ride, the other
trotting alongside, clinging to the stirrup leathers.
Fer gus listened with attention, wiping his mouth with the
handkerchief he had taken from his collar; they had arrived in
the middle of dinner .
“The she rif f—that would be Mr . T olliver ,” he said. “I know
him. Shall we—”
Jamie made an abrupt gesture, cutting him short.
“W e went there to begin with,” he said. They had found the
sherif f gone, and no one in the house save a very drunken
woman with a face like a discontented bird, collapsed and
snoring on the settle with a small Negro baby clutched in her
arms.
He had taken th e baby and thrust it into Ian’ s arms, bidding
him grimly to m ind it while he sobered the woman enough to
talk. He  had then dragged her out into the yard and poured
buckets of well water over her until she gasped and blinked,
then dragged her dripping and s tumbling back into the house,
where he obliged her to drink water poured over the black,
burned d regs of chicory cof fee he had found in the pot. She
had vomited profusely and dis gustingly , but regained some
vague sense of language.
“At first, all sh e could say was that all of the female
prisoners were gone—run of f or hanged.” He said nothing of
the f right that ha d lanced through his belly at that last. He had
shaken t he wom an thoroughly , though, demanding particulars,
and eventually , after further applications of water and vile
cof fee, got them.
“A m an came, t he day before yesterday , and took her away .
That was all she  knew—or all she remembered. I made her tell
me wha t she could of how he looked—it wasna Brown, nor
yet Neil Forbes.”“I see.” Fer gus glanced behind  him; his family were all
gathered round Ian, pestering and caressing him. Marsali,
though, was looking toward th e alcove, worry on her face,
obviously wanting to come and join the conversation, but
detained by Joan, who was tugging on her skirt.
“Who would take her , I wonder?”
“Joanie, a chuisle,  wil l ye not leave go? Help Fel icite for a
moment, aye?”
“But, Mama—”
“Not now .  In a moment, aye?”
“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, the frustration of helplessness
welling up like black bile at the  back of his throat. A sudden,
more ho rrible th ought struck him. “God, d’ye suppose it might
have been Stephen Bonnet?”
The woman’ s slurred description had not sounded like the
pirate—but she had been far from certain in it. Could Forbes
have learned of his own escap e, and determined simply to
reverse the roles in the drama he had conceived—deport Claire
forcibly to England, and try to pin the guilt of Malva Christie’ s
death to Jamie’ s coat?
He found it hard to breathe, and had to force air into his
chest. If Forbes had given Clair e to Bonnet, he would slit the
lawyer from wishbone to cock, r ip the guts from his belly , and
strangle him with them. And th e same for the Irishman, once
he laid hands upon him.
“Papi, P a-pee …” Joan’ s singsong voice penetrated dimly
through the red cloud that filled his head.
“What, cherie ?” Fer gus lifted her with the ease of long
practice, balancing her fat little bottom on his left arm, to leave
his right hand free.
She put her arm s round his neck  and hissed something into
his ear .
“Oh, did you?” he said, plain ly abstracted. “ T r es bien.
Where did you put it, cherie ?”“W ith the naughty-lady pictures.”
She pointed at t he upper shelf, where several volumes lay ,
leather -bound bu t discreetly untitled. Glancing in the direction
she indi cated, J amie saw a smu dged paper sticking out from
between two of the books.
Fer gus clicked his tongue in displeasure, and smacked her
lightly on the bottom with his good hand.
“Y ou know you are not to climb up there!”
Jamie re ached over and pulled the paper out. And felt all the
blood leave his head, at sight of the familiar writing on it.
“What?” Fer gus, alarmed at his appearance, set Joanie
down. “Sit, milord! Run, cherie,  get the smelling bottle.”
Jamie waved a hand, speechless, trying to indicate that he
was all right, and succeeded at last in finding his tongue.
“She’ s in the Governor ’ s Palace,” he said. “Christ be
thanked, she’ s safe.”
Seeing a stool pushed under the shelf, he pulled it out and
sat on it, feeling exhaustion pulse through the quivering
muscles of thigh and calf, ignoring the confusion of question
and expl anation, how Joanie had found the note pushed under
the door—anon ymous submiss ions to the newspaper often
were delivered in this fashion, and the children knew they
were to bring such things to their father ’ s attention… .
Fer gus read the note, his dark ey es assuming the expression
of in terested intent that he alway s had when contemplating the
abstraction of something dif ficult and valuable.
“W ell, th at is good,” he said. “W e will go and fetch her . But
I think first you must eat a little, milord.”
He w ished to re fuse, to say that  there was not a moment to
be lost, that he could eat nothing in any case; his wame was
knotted, hurting him.
But Ma rsali was already hurrying the girls back to the
kitchen, calling out things about  hot cof fee and bread, and Ianfollowing her , Henri-Christian s till wrapped lovingly about his
ears, Germain yapping eagerly at his heels. And he knew that
should i t come to a fight, he had nothing left to fight with.
Then the succulent sizzle and scent of eggs frying in butter
reached him, and he was up and moving toward the back, like
iron drawn by a magnet.
Over their hasty meal, various plans were of fered and
rejected. At length, he reluctantly accepted Fer gus’ s
suggestion that either Fer gus o r Ian should go openly to the
palace, asking to see Claire, sa ying that he was a kinsman,
wishing to assure himself of her welfare.
“They have no reason to deny her presence, after all,”
Fer gus s aid, shru gging. “If we c an see her , so much the better;
but even if not, we will learn whether she is still there, and
perhaps where she is likely to be within the palace.”
Fer gus clearly wished to undertake the errand, but yielded
when Ia n pointed out that Fer g us was widely known in New
Bern, and it mi ght be suspected that he was merely hunting
scandal for the newspaper .
“For I am pained  to say , milord,” Fer gus said apologetically ,
“that the matter—the crime—is known here already . There are
broadsheets … the usual nonse nse. L ’Oignon  w as obliged to
print som ething regarding the matter , of course, to keep our
countenance, but we did so in a most repressive fashion,
mentioning only the bald facts o f the matter .” His long, mobile
mouth c ompressed briefly , in illustration of the repressive
nature of his article, and Jamie smiled faintly .
“A ye, I see,” h e said. He pu shed back from the table,
pleased to feel some strength returned to his limbs, and
heartened anew by food, cof fee, and the comforting
knowledge of Claire’ s whereab outs. “W ell, then, Ian, comb
your hair . Y e dinna want the Governor to think ye a savage.”
JAMIE INSISTED UPON going with Ian, despite the danger
of being recognized. His nephew eyed him narrowly .“Y e’re no going to do anything foolish, Uncle Jamie?”
“When was the last time ye  kent me to do anything
foolish?”
Ian gave him an old-fashioned look, held up one hand, and
began to fold the fingers down, one by one.
“Oh, well, let me reckon, th en … Simms the printer?
T arring Forbes? Roger Mac told me what ye did in
Mecklenber g. And then there was—”
“Y e would have let them kill wee Fogarty?” Jamie inquired.
“And if we’re mentioning fools, who was it got his arse
pricked for wallowing in mortal sin with—”
“What I mean is ,” Ian said severely , “ye’re no going to walk
into the Governor ’ s Palace and try to take her by force, no
matter what happens. Y e’ll wait  quietly wi’ your hat on until I
come back, and then we’ll see, aye?”
Jamie pulled down the brim of his hat, a floppy , weathered
felt a f fair such a s a pig farmer might wear , with his hair tucked
up beneath it.
“What makes ye think I wouldn ’ t?” he asked, as much from
curiosity as natural contention.
“The lo ok on your face,” Ian replied briefly . “I want her
back as much as you do, Uncl e Jamie—well,” he amended,
with a wry grin, “perhaps not quite  sae much—but  I mean to
have he r back , nonetheless. Y ou”—he poked his uncle
emphatically in the chest—”bide your time.”
And leaving Jamie standing under a heat-stricken elm, he
strode purposefully toward the gates of the palace.
Jamie to ok seve ral deep breaths, trying to maintain a sense
of anno yance with Ian as an antidote to the anxiety that
wrapped itself round his chest l ike a snake. As the annoyance
had been purely manufactured, it evaporated like steam from a
kettle, leaving the anxiety squirming and writhing.
Ian had reached  the gate, and was in palaver with the guard
who stoo d there , musket at the ready . Jamie could see the manshaking his head emphatically .
This was nonsense, he though t. The need of her was a
physical thing, like the thirst of a sailor becalmed for weeks on
the sea. He’d felt that need befo re, often, often, in their years
apart. B ut why now? She was safe; he knew where she was—
was it only the exhaustion of the past weeks and days, or
perhaps the weakness of creeping age that made his bones
ache, as  though  she had in fact been torn from his body , as
God had made Eve from Adam’ s rib?
Ian was ar guing, making pers uasive gestures toward the
guard. The sound of wheels on gravel drew his attention from
them; a carriage was coming d own the drive, a small open
conveyance with two people and a driver , drawn by a team of
nice dark bays.
The gua rd had pushed Ian ba ck with the barrel of his
musket, gesturin g him to keep away while the guard and his
fellow opened the gates. The carriage rattled through without
stopping, turned into the street, and came past him.
He h ad never seen Josiah Mar tin, but thought the plump,
self-important-looking gentlema n must surely be the— His
eye caught the merest glimpse of the woman, and his heart
clenched like a fist. W ithout an instant’ s thought, he was
pelting after the carriage, as hard as he could run.
In h is prime, he could not have outrun a team of horses.
Even so,  he came within a few feet of the carriage, would have
called, b ut had no breath, no si ght, and then his foot struck a
misplaced cobble and he fell headlong.
He lay stunned and breathless, vision dark and his lungs
afire, hearing only the receding clatter of hooves and carriage
wheels, until a strong hand seized his arm and jerked.
“W e’ll a void no tice, he says,” I an muttered, bending to get
his s houlder under Jamie’ s arm.  “Y our hat’ s flown of f, did ye
notice that ? N ay , of course  not, nor the whole street staring, ye
crack-brained gomerel. God, ye weigh as much as a three-year
bullock!”“Ian,” he said, and paused to gulp for breath.
“A ye?”
“Y e sound like your mother . S top.” Another gulp of air .
“And let go my arm; I can walk.”
Ian gave  a snort that sounded even more like Jenny , but did
stop, and did let go. Jamie picked up his fallen hat and limped
toward the printshop, Ian following in ur gent silence through
the staring streets.
SAFEL Y A W A Y FROM the palace, we trotted sedately
through the streets of New Bern, provoking only mild interest
from the citizenry , some of w hom waved, a few of whom
called ou t vague ly hostile things, most of whom simply stared.
At th e e dge of town, the groom turned the team onto the main
road, an d we bowled pleasantly along, apparently bound for an
outing in  the countryside, an illusion bolstered by the wicker
picnic hamper visible behind us.
Once past the congestion of heavy wagons, cattle, sheep,
and the other traf fic of commerce, though, the groom whipped
up, and we were flying again.
“Where are we going?” I shouted over the noise of the team,
holding on to my hat to prevent it blowing of f. I had thought
we w ere merely providing a di version, so that no one would
notice Mrs. Martin’ s quiet remo val until she was safely out of
the colo ny . Evid ently , though, we were not  merely out for a
picnic.
“Brunswick!” the Governor shouted back.
“Wher e?”
“Brunswick,” h e repeated. He looked grim, and grimmer
still as he cast a  last look back toward New Bern. “God damn
them,” h e said, though I was sure he meant this observation
only for himself. He turned ro und then, and settled himself,
leaning slightly forward, as tho ugh to speed the carriage, and
said no more.9 5
THE CRUIZER
I  WOKE EVER Y MORNING, just before dawn. W orn out
from wo rry and the Governor ’ s late hours, I slept like the
dead, through all the thumps and rattlings and bell-ringings of
the watch, shouts from boats n earby , occasional musket-fire
from the  shore, and the whine of  the of fshore wind as it passed
through the rigging. But in that  moment before the light, the
silence woke me.
T oday?  was  the single thought in my mind, and I seemed to
hang bodiless for a moment, jus t above my pallet beneath the
forecastle. Then I drew breath, heard my heart beating, and felt
the gent le heave  of the deck beneath me. W ould turn my face
to the shore, wa tching, as the light began to touch the waves
and reach toward land. W e had first gone to Fort Johnston, but
had stayed there barely long eno ugh for the Governor to meet
with loc al Loyalists who had as sured him how unsafe it was,
before retreating further .
W e had been aboard His Majesty’ s sloop Cruizer  for nearly
a w eek, anchored of f Brunswick . Lacking any troops save the
Marines aboard the sloop, Governor Martin was unable to
seize back control of his colony , and was reduced to writing
frenzied letters, attempting to k eep up some semblance of a
government in exile.
Lacking anyone  else to fill the o f fice, I remained in my role
as ad hoc  s ecr etary , though I had moved u p from mere copyist
to amanuensis, taking down some letters by dictation when
Martin grew too tired to write himself. And cut of f from land
and information alike, I spent every spare moment watching
the shore.
T oday , a boat was coming, out of the fading dark.One of the watc h hailed it, and an answering “halloo” came
up, i n to nes of such agitation that I sat up abruptly , groping for
my stays.
T oday , there would be news.
The messenger was already in the Governor ’ s cabin, and
one of the Mari nes barred my way—but the door was open,
and the man’ s voice clearly audible.
“Ashe’ s done it, sir , he’ s moving against the fort!”
“W ell, God damn him for a treasonous dog!”
There was a so und of footsteps, and the Marine stepped
hastily o ut of the way , just in time to avoid the Governor , who
came popping out of his cabin l ike a jack out of the box, still
attired in a billo wing nightshirt and minus his wig. He seized
the l adder and scampered up it like a monkey , af fording me an
unwanted view from below of his chubby bare buttocks. The
Marine caught my eye and quickly averted his own gaze.
“What are they doing? Do you see them?”
“Not yet.” The messenger , a middle-aged man in the dress
of a  farmer , had  followed the Governor up the ladder; their
voices floated down from the rail.
“Colonel Ashe ordered all the ships in W ilmington Harbor
to take on troops  yesterday and f loat them down to Brunswick.
They were mustering just outside the town this morning; I
heard the roll calls whilst I was doing the morning milking—
nigh onto five hundred men, the y must have. When I saw that,
sir , I slipped a way down to the shore and found a boat.
Thought you ought to know , Y our Excellence.” The man’ s
voice had lost its agitation now , and taken on a rather self-
righteous tone.
“Oh, yes ? And what do you exp ect me to do about it?” The
Governor sounded distinctly cranky .
“How sh ould I know?” said the messenger , replying in like
vein. “ I  ain’ t the Governor , now , am I?”The Governor ’ s response to this was drowned out by the
striking of the s hip’ s bell. As it  died away , he strode past the
companionway , and looking down, saw me below .
“Oh, M rs. Fraser . W ill you fe tch me some tea from the
galley?”
I had n’ t much ch oice, though I would have preferred to stay
and eavesdrop. The galley fire had been banked for the night
in it s sm all iron pot, and the coo k was still abed. By the time I
had poked up the fire, boiled water , brewed a pot of tea, and
assembled a tray with teapot, cup, saucer , milk, and toast,
butter , biscuits, and jam, the Go vernor ’ s informant had gone; I
saw his boat he ading for the shore, a dark arrowhead against
the slowly brightening surface of the sea.
I paused  for a moment on deck a nd rested my tea tray on the
rail, looking inland. It was just  light now , and Fort Johnston
was visible, a bl ocky log building that stood exposed on top of
a low rise, surrounded by a cluster of houses and outbuildings.
There w as a fair amount of activity around it; men were
coming and going like a trail of ants. Nothing that looked like
an imminent invasion, though. Either the commander , Captain
Collet, had decided to evacuate —or Ashe’ s men had not yet
begun their march from Brunswick.
Had John Ashe received my m essage? If he had … would
he have acted? It wouldn’ t have been a popular thing to do; I
couldn’ t blame him if he had de cided that he simply couldn’ t
af ford to be see n aiding a man  widely suspected of being a
Loyalist—let alone one accused of such a hideous crime.
He migh t have, though. W ith the Governor marooned at sea,
the Council disbanded, and the court system evaporated, there
was no ef fective  law in the colony now—save for the militias.
If Ashe chose to  storm the W ilm ington jail and remove Jamie,
he would have faced precious little opposition.
And if he had … if Jamie were free, he would be looking
for m e. A nd sure ly he would hea r quickly where I was. If John
Ashe came to Br unswick and Jamie were free, he would surely
come with Ashe’ s men. I looked toward shore, seekingmovement, but saw only a boy d riving a cow desultorily along
the r oad to Brun swick. But the shadows of the night were still
cold around my feet; it was barely dawn.
I t ook a deep br eath, and noticed the aromatic scent of the
tea, mix ed with the shore’ s morning breath—the smell of tide
flats and piney scrub. I hadn’ t  drunk tea in months, if not
years. Thoughtfully , I poured a cup, and sipped it slowly ,
watching the shore.
WHEN I ARRIVED IN the sur geon’ s cabin, which the
Governor had taken for his of fice, he was dressed, and alone.
“Mrs. Fraser .” He nodded briefly to me, scarcely looking
up. “I am obliged. W ill you write, please?”
He had been writing himself, already; quills and sand and
blotter w ere sca ttered about the desk, and the inkwell stood
open. I picked out a decent qu ill and a sheet of paper , and
began to  write as per his dictation, with a sense of growing
curiosity .
The note—dictated between bites of toast—was to a
General Hugh MacDonald, and referred to the General’ s safe
arrival u pon the mainland with a Colonel McLeod. Receipt of
the General’ s report was acknowledged, and request made for
continuing info rmation. Mention was also made of the
Governor ’ s requ est for support—which I knew about—and
assurances he had received regarding the arrival of that
support, which I didn’ t.
“Enclosure, a letter of credit—no, wait.” The Governor
darted a  look in the direction of the shore—to no particular
avail, as the sur geon’ s cabin  boasted no porthole—and
scowled in concentration. Evidently , it had occurred to him
that in light of recent events, a  letter of credit issued by the
Governor ’ s of fice was possibly  worth less than one of Mrs.
Fer guson’ s for geries.
“Enclosure, twenty shillings,” he amended with a sigh. “If
you will  make the fair copy at once, Mrs. Fraser? These, youmay do at your leisure.” He pushed across an untidy stack of
notes, done in his own crabbed hand.
He got up then,  groaning as he  stretched, and went up, no
doubt to peer over the railing at the fort again.
I ma de the copy , sanded it, and set it aside, wondering who
on earth this  MacDonald was, and what he was doing? Unless
Major M acDonald had under go ne a change of name and an
extraordinary pr omotion of late, it couldn’ t be he. And from
the t one of the Governor ’ s rem arks, it appeared that General
MacDonald and  his friend McL eod were traveling alone—and
on some particular mission.
I f lipped  quickly through the wa iting stack of notes, but saw
nothing else of interest; just the usual administrative trivia.
The Gov ernor h ad left his writin g desk on the table, but it was
closed. I debated trying to pick the lock and rummage through
his private correspondence, but there were too many people
about: seamen, Marines, ship’ s boys, visitors—the place was
seething.
There w as a sense of nervous tension aboard, as well. I’d
noticed many times before how a sense of danger
communicates itself among p eople in a confined setting:
hospital emer ge ncy room, sur gical suite, train car , ship;
ur gency flashes from one perso n to the next without speech,
like the impulse down a neuro n’ s axon to the dendrites of
another . I didn’ t know whether anyone beyond the Governor
and myself knew about John Ashe’ s movements yet—but the
Cruizer  knew that something was up.
The sense of nervous anticipation was af fecting me, too. I
was fidg eting, t oe tapping absently , fingers moving restlessly
up a nd down t he shaft of the quill, unable to concentrate
enough to write with it.
I sto od up, with  no idea what I meant to do; only the fixed
notion th at I would suf focate wi th impatience if I stayed below
any longer .On the shelf be side the door to  the cabin stood the usual
half-tidy clutter of shipboard, jammed behind a rail: a
candlestick, extr a candles, a tinderbox, a broken pipe, a bottle
with a twist of flax stopping it, a bit of wood that someone had
tried to carve and made a mess of. And a box.
The Cruizer  had no sur geon aboard. And sur geons tended to
take their personal implements with them, unless they died.
This must be a kit belonging to the ship itself.
I gla nced out the door; there were voices nearby , but no one
in sight.  I hastily flipped open the box, wrinkling my nose at
the s cent of drie d blood and stale tobacco. There wasn’ t much
there, and what there was was thrown in higgledy-piggledy ,
rusted, crusted, and of little use. A tin of Blue Pills, so labeled,
and a bottle, not labeled, but recognizable, of black draught—
laudanum, that is. A dried-up sp onge and a sticky cloth stained
with som ething yellow . And the one thing certain to be in any
sur geon’ s kit of the times—blades.
There w ere foot steps coming down the companionway , and
I heard the Governor ’ s voice, talking to someone. W ithout
pausing to consider the wisdom  of my conduct, I grabbed a
small jointing knife and thrust it down the front of my stays.
I sla mmed shut the lid of the box. There was no time to sit
down again, though, before the Governor arrived, with another
visitor in tow .
My hear t was hammering in my  throat. I pressed my palms,
damp with sweat, against my skirt, and nodded to the new
arrival, who was regarding me, open-mouthed, behind the
Governor .
“Major MacDonald,” I said, hoping that my voice wouldn’ t
tremble. “Fancy meeting you  here!”
MACDONALD’S MOUTH snapped shut and he drew himself
more firmly upright.
“Mrs. Fraser ,” he said, bowing warily . “Y our servant,
mum.”“Y ou know her?” Governor Martin glanced from
MacDonald to me and back, frowning.
“W e’ve met,” I said, nodding politely . It had occurred to me
that it might not profit either o f us for the Governor to think
there was some connection between us—if indeed there was
one.
The same thought had clearly struck MacDonald; his face
betrayed nothing  beyond faint c ourtesy , though I could see the
thoughts darting to and fro behind his eyes like a swarm of
gnats. I was entertaining a similar swarm, myself—and
knowing that my own face w as naturally revealing, I cast
down my eyes demurely , and murmuring an excuse about
refreshment, made of f toward the galley .
I threaded my way through clumps of seamen and Marines,
mechanically a cknowledging their salutes, mind working
furiously .
How? How was I going to speak to MacDonald alone? I had
to find out what he knew about Jamie—if anything. W ould he
tell m e, if he did know anything? But yes, I thought, he would;
soldier he might be, but MacD onald was also a confirmed
gossip—and he was plainly dying of curiosity at the sight of
me.
The cook, a chu bby young free black named T insdale, who
wore his  hair in three stubby br aids that stuck out of his head
like the horns of a triceratops , was at work in the galley ,
dreamily toasting bread over the fire.
“Oh, hullo,” he said amiably , seeing me. He waved the
toasting fork. “W ant a bit of toa st, Mrs. Fraser? Or is it the hot
water , again?”
“Love some toast,” I said, seiz ed by inspiration. “But the
Governor has company; he wan ts cof fee sent. And if you have
a few of those nice almond biscuits to go with it …”
Armed with a lo aded cof fee tray , I made my way toward the
sur geon’ s cabin a few minutes later , heart pounding. The door
was open for air; evidently it wasn’ t a secret meeting.They were huddled together over the small desk, the
Governor frown ing at a wad of papers, these clearly having
traveled some distance in MacDonald’ s dispatch case, judging
from the creases and stains upo n them. They appeared to be
letters, written in a variety of hands and inks.
“Oh, cof fee,” the Governor said, looking up. He seemed
vaguely pleased, plainly not recalling that he hadn’ t ordered
any . “Splendid. Thank you, Mrs. Fraser .”
MacDonald hastily picked up the papers, making room for
me to set the tra y down on the desk. The Governor had one in
his hand ; he kept hold of this, a nd I caught a quick glimpse of
it as I bent to place the tray in front of him. It was a list of
some sort—names on one side, numbers beside them.
I m anag ed to knock a spoon to the floor , enabling a better
look as I stooped for it. H. Beth une, Cook’ s Cr eek, 14. Jno.
McManus, Boone, 3. F . Campbell, Campbelton, 24?
I da rted a look at MacDonald, who had his eyes fixed on
me. I dropped the spoon on the  desk, then took a hasty step
back, so that I stood directly behind the Governor . I pointed a
finger at MacDonald, then in rapid succession clutched my
throat, t ongue protruding, grabbed my stomach with crossed
forearms, then jabbed the finger  again at him, then at myself,
all the while giving him a monitory stare.
MacDonald viewed this p antomime with subdued
fascination, but—with a veiled glance at the Governor , who
was stirr ing his cof fee with one hand, frowning at the paper he
held in the other—gave me a tiny nod.
“How many can you be quite s ure of?” the Governor was
saying, as I curtsied and backed out.
“Oh, at least fiv e hundred men, sir , even now ,” MacDonald
replied confiden tly . “A great m any more to come, as word
spreads. Y e should see the enthusiasm with which the General
has been received so far! I can not speak for the Germans, of
course, but depend upon it, sir , we shall have all theHighlanders of the backcountry , and not a few of the Scotch-
Irish, too.”
“God knows I hope you are right,” the Governor said,
sounding hopeful, but still dubious. “Where is the General
now?”
I w ould have lik ed to hear the answer to that—and a good
many other things—but the drum was beating overhead for
mess, and thundering feet were already pounding down the
decks and companionways.  I couldn’ t lurk about
eavesdropping in  plain sight of the mess, so was obliged to go
back up top, hoping that Ma cDonald had indeed got my
message.
The captain of the Cruizer  w as standing by  the rail, his first
mate beside him, both scanning the shore with their telescopes.
“Is anything happening?” I could see more activity near the
fort, peo ple coming and going—but the shore road was still
empty .
“Can’ t say , ma’am.” Captain Follard shook his head, then
lowered the telescope and shut it, reluctantly , as though afraid
something might happen if he didn’ t keep his eyes fixed on the
shore. The first mate didn’ t move, still squinting fixedly
toward the fort on its bluf f.
I remained there by his side, staring silently toward the
shore. T he tide shifted; I had be en on the ship long enough to
feel it, a barely perceptible paus e, the sea taking breath as the
invisible moon yielded its pull.
Ther e is a tide in the affairs of men.  … Surely Shakespeare
had stood upon a deck, at least once, and felt that same faint
shift, de ep in the flesh. A professor had told me once, in
medical school, that the Polynesian seafarers dared their vast
journeys through  the trackless sea because they had learned to
sense the currents of the ocean, the shifts of wind and tide,
registering these changes w ith that most delicate of
instruments—their testicles.It didn’ t take a scrotum to feel the currents that were
swirling round us now , I reflected, with a sideways glance at
the first mate’ s securely fastene d white breeches. I could feel
them in the pit of my stomach, in the damp of my palms, in the
tenseness of the muscles at the back of my neck. The mate had
lowered his telescope, but still looked toward the shore, almost
absently , his hands resting on the rail.
It occurr ed to me suddenly that if something drastic were to
happen on land, the Cruizer  wo uld at once lift sail and hea d
out to sea, carrying the Governor to safety—and me farther
from Jamie. Where on earth might we end up? Charlestown?
Boston? Either was as likely . And no one on that seething
shore would have any notion where we had gone.
I’d met displaced persons during the war—my war . Driven
or taken from th eir homes, their families scattered, their cities
destroyed, they  thronged refugee camps, stood in lines
besieging embassies and aid stations, asking, always asking
for the names of the vanished , describing the faces of the
loved and lost, grasping at any scrap of information that might
lead them back to whatever might be left. Or , failing that,
preserve for a moment longer what they had once been.
The day was wa rm, even on the water , and my clothes clung
to me with hum id damp, but m y muscles convulsed and my
hands on the rail shook with sudden chill.
I mi ght have see n them all for the last time, not knowing it:
Jamie, B ree, Jemmy , Roger , Ian. That’ s how it happened: I had
not even said goodbye to Frank, had had no faintest inkling
when he left that last night that I would never see him alive
again. What if—
But no, I thoug ht, steadying myself with a tighter grip on
the woo den rail. W e would find each other again. W e had a
place to  return to. Home. And if I remained alive—as I most
firmly intended to do—I would  go back home.
The mat e had shut his telescop e and left; I hadn’ t noticed
his departure, absorbed in morbid thoughts, and was quite
startled when Major MacDonald hove to alongside me.“T oo bad the Cruizer  has nay long-range guns,” he said with
a nod at the for t. “‘T would put a crimp in the plans o’ those
wee heathen, eh?”
“Whatever those plans might be,” I replied. “And speaking
of plans—”
“I’ve a kind of  a griping in the wame,” he interrupted
blandly . “The Governor suggested that ye might possibly have
some sort of medicine to soothe it.”
“Did he indeed?” I said. “W ell , come down to the galley;
I’ll brew you a  cup of someth ing that will set you right, I
expect.”
“DID Y E KEN , he thought ye  were a for ger?” MacDonald,
hands wrapped around a mug of tea, jerked his head in the
direction of the main cabin. The Governor was nowhere in
sight, and the cabin’ s door closed.
“I di d, y es. Does  he know better  now?” I asked with a sense
of resignation.
“W ell, aye.” MacDonald looked  apologetic. “I supposed he
knew alr eady , or I wouldna have said. Though if I hadn’ t,” he
added, “ he would have kent i t sooner or later . The story’ s
spread all the wa y to Edenton by  now , and the broadsheets …”
I flapped a hand, dismissing this.
“Have you seen Jamie?”
“I h ave not.” He glanced at me, curiosity warring with
wariness. “I’d heard … aye, w ell, I’ve heard a great many
things, and all dif ferent. But t he meat of the matter is that
ye’ve b oth been arrested, aye? For the murder of Miss
Christie.”
I n odded  briefly . I wondered wh ether one day I would grow
used to that wor d. The sound of  it was still like a punch in the
stomach, short and brutal.
“Need I tell you that there is no truth to it?” I said bluntly .“Not the slightest need, mum,”  he assured me, with a fair
assumption of confidence. But I sensed the hesitation in him,
and saw the sideways glance, curious and somehow avid.
Perhaps one day I’d get used to that, too.
My hand s were cold; I wrapped  them round my own mug,
taking what comfort I could in its heat.
“I ne ed to get word to my husb and,” I said. “Do you know
where he is?”
MacDonald’ s pale blue eyes were fixed on my face, his own
showing no more now than courteous attention.
“No, mum. But you do, I assume?”
I gave him a sharp look.
“Don’ t be coy ,” I advised him sh ortly . “Y ou know as well as
I do what’ s going on on shore—probably much better .”
“Coy .” His thin lips pursed in brief amusement. “I dinna
believe anyone’ s called me that before. A ye, I know . And so?”
“I think that he may  be in W ilmington. I tried to send word
to Jo hn Ashe, and asked him to get Jamie out of the gaol in
W ilmington, if possible—if he was there—and to tell him
where I was. But I don’ t know—” I waved a hand in
frustration toward the shore.
He nodd ed, native caution at odd s with his obvious desire to
ask me for the gory details of Malva’ s death.
“I shall be goin g back through W ilmington. I’ll make such
inquiries as may be possible. If I find Mr . Fraser—shall I tell
him anything, beyond your present situation?”
I hesitated, thinking. I had been holding a constant
conversation wi th Jamie, ever s ince they took him away from
me. But none of  what I said to h im in the wide black nights or
the lonely dawns seemed appropriate to confide to
MacDonald. And yet … I couldn’ t for go the opportunity; God
knew when I might have another .“T ell him  that I love him,” I said softly , my eyes on the
tabletop. “I always will.”
MacDonald mad e a small sound that made me look up at
him.
“Even though he—” he began, then stopped himself.
“He didn ’ t kill her ,” I said sharp ly . “And neither did I. I told
you so.”
“Of cou rse not,” he said hurriedly . “No one could imagine
… I only meant  … but of course, a man’ s but a man, and …
mmphm.” He broke of f and looked away , the color high in his
face.
“He didn’ t do that, either ,” I said through my teeth.
There w as a marked silence, during which we avoided each
other ’ s gaze.
“Is General MacDonald a kinsman of yours?” I asked
abruptly , needing either to change the course of the
conversation or to leave.
The Major glanced up, surprised—and relieved.
“A ye, a distant cousin. The Governor ’ s mentioned him?”
“Y es,” I said. It was the truth, af ter all; Martin simply hadn’ t
mentioned the General to me.  “Y ou’re , um, assisting him, are
you? It sounded as though you’ve been having some success.”
Relieved to have escaped the social awkwardness of dealing
with the question as to whether I were a murderess, and Jamie
only a philanderer , or he a mu rderer and I his scorned and
deluded dupe, MacDonald wa s only too eager to take the
of fered bait.
“Great success, indeed,” he said heartily . “I’ve gathered
pledges from many of the most prominent men in the colony;
they stand ready to do the Gove rnor ’ s bidding at the slightest
word!”
Jno. McManus, Boone, 3.  P romin ent men. I happened t o
know J onathan McManus, whose gangrenous toes I hadremoved the winter before. He likely was  t he mos t promi nent
man in Boone, if by that, Mac Donald meant that the other
twenty inhabitants all knew him for a drunkard and a thief. It
was also  probab ly true that he had three men who would go to
fight wi th him if called: his one-legged brother and his two
feeble-minded s ons. I took a sip of tea to hide my expression.
Still, MacDonald had Farquard Campbell on his list; had
Farquard really made a formal commitment?
“I gather the General is not presently anywhere near
Brunswick, though,” I said, “given the, er , present
circumstances?” If he was, the Governor would be much less
nervous than he was.
MacDonald shook his head.
“No. Bu t he is not ready to muster his forces yet; he and
McLeod do but discover the re adiness of the Highlanders to
rise. They will not call muster until the ships come.”
“Ships?” I blurted. “What ships?”
He k new he oug htn’ t to speak further , but couldn’ t resist. I
saw it in his eyes; after all, w hat danger could there be in
telling me?
“The Governor  has asked for aid from the Crown in
subduing the factionalism and u nrest that runs rampant in the
colony . And has received assurances that it will be
forthcoming—should he be able to raise enough support on the
ground to reinforce the government troops who will arrive by
ship.
“That is  the plan, ye see,” he went on, warming to it. “W e
are notified”— Oh, “we” indeed,  I thought—”that my Lord
Cornwallis begins to gather troops in Ireland, who will take
ship shortly . They should arrive  in the early autumn, and join
wi’ the General’ s militia. Betwe en Cornwallis on the coast and
the General comin’ doon frae the hills—” He closed thumb
and fingers in a pinching movement. “They’ll crush the
Whiggish whoresons like a pack o’ lice!”“W ill th ey?” I  said, endeavoring to sound impressed.
Possibly they would; I had no id ea, nor did I much care, being
in no position to see far beyond the present moment. If I ever
got o f f this frigg ing boat and ou t of the shadow of a noose, I’d
worry about it.
The sound of th e main cabin’ s door opening made me look
up. The Govern or was closing i t behind him. T urning, he saw
us, and came to inquire as to MacDonald’ s presumed
indisposition.
“Oh, I am a great deal better ,” the Major assured him, hand
pressed to the waistcoat of his uniform. He belched in
illustration. “M rs. Fraser is a capital hand at such things.
Capital!”
“Oh, go od,” Martin said. He seemed a trifle less harassed
than he had earlier . “Y ou will be  wanting to go back, then.” He
signaled to the Marine standing at the foot of the
companionway , who knuckled his forehead in
acknowledgment and disappeared up the ladder .
“The bo at will be ready for you in a few minutes’ time.”
W ith a nod at MacDonald’ s half-drunk tea, and a punctilious
bow to me, the Governor turned and went into the sur geon’ s
cabin, where I could see him  standing beside the desk,
frowning at the heap of crumpled papers.
MacDonald hast ily swallowed the rest of his tea, and with a
lift of the eyebrows, invited me to accompany him to the upper
deck. W e were standing on de ck, waiting as a local fishing
boat made its way out to the Cruizer  from shore, when he
suddenly laid a hand on my arm.
This startled me; MacDonald was not a casual toucher .
“I will do my utmost to discover your husband’ s
whereabouts, m um,” he said. “It occurs to me, though—” He
hesitated, eyes on my face.
“What?” I said cautiously .
“I said I had heard considerable speculation?” he said
delicately . “Regarding … erm … the unfortunate demise ofMiss Ch ristie. W ould it not be … desirable … that I know the
truth of the mat ter , so that I might put any ill-natured rumors
firmly to rest, should I encounter them?”
I w as torn betwe en anger and la ughter . I should have known
that curi osity would be too mu ch for him. But he was right;
given th e rumors I had heard— and I knew they were but a
fraction of those circulating— the truth was certainly more
desirable. On the other hand, I was entirely sure that the telling
of the truth would do nothing to quell the rumors.
And still. The ur ge to be justified was a strong one; I
understood those poor wretche s who cried their innocence
from the gallows—and I blood y hoped I wasn’ t going to be
one.
“Fine,” I said crisply . The first mate was back by the rail,
keeping an eye on the fort, and within earshot, but I supposed
it didn’ t matter whether he heard.
“The tru th is this: Malva Chri stie was got with child by
someone,  b ut rather than  name the real father , insisted that it
was my husband. I know this to be false,” I added, fixing him
with a gimlet stare. He nodded, mouth a little open.
“A few days later , I went out to tend my garden and found
the little—Miss Christie lying in my lettuce patch with her
throat freshly cut. I thought … there was some chance that I
might save her unborn child… .” Despite my assumption of
bravado, my voice trembled a little. I stopped, clearing my
throat. “I couldn’ t. The child was born dead.”
Much better not to say how  it  was born; t hat weltering
image of severed flesh and dirt -smeared blade was not one I
wished t he Majo r to have in mind, if it could be prevented. I
had told  no one—not even Jamie—about the faint flicker of
life, that  tingle that I still held se cret in the palms of my hands.
T o say that the  child had been born alive was to arouse
immediate suspicion that I had killed it, and I knew as much.
Some would think that anyway; Mrs. Martin plainly had.MacDonald’ s ha nd was still resting on my arm, his gaze on
my fac e. For once, I blessed the transparency of my
countenance; no  one watching my face ever doubted what I
said.
“I see,” he said quietly , and gently squeezed my arm.
I took a deep breath, and told him the rest—circumstantial
details might convince some hearers.
“Y ou kn ow that there were bee gums at the edge of my
garden? The murderer kicked tw o of them over in fleeing; he
must have been stung several tim es—I was, when I came into
the gard en. Jamie—Jamie had no stings. It wasn’ t him.” And
under th e circum stances, I had n ot been able to find out which
man—or woman ? For the first time, it occurred to me that it
could have been a woman— had  been stung.
At this, he gave a deep “hum!”  of interest. He stood for a
moment in contemplation, then shook his head, as though
waking from a dream, and let go my arm.
“I th ank ye, mu m, for telling me,” he said formally , and
bowed to me. “Be assured, I will speak in your behalf,
whenever the occasion shall arise.”
“I appreciate that, Major .” M y voice was husky , and I
swallowed. I hadn’ t realized how much it would hurt to speak
of.
The wind stirred around us, and the reefed sails rustled in
their ropes overhead. A shout from below announced the
presence of the boat that would  carry MacDonald back to the
shore.
He b owed low o ver my hand, breath warm on my knuckles.
For an instant, m y fingers tightened on his; I was surprisingly
reluctant to let him go. But let h im go I did, and watched him
all the way to the shore; a diminishing silhouette against the
brightness of the water , back straight with resolution. He
didn’ t look back.
The mate moved at the rail, sighing, and I glanced at him,
then at the fort.“What are they doing?” I asked. Some of the antlike forms
seemed to be dr opping lines from the walls to their fellows on
the grou nd; I saw the ropes, fine as spiderwebs from this
distance.
“I do believe th e fort’ s commander is preparing to remove
the cannon, madam,” he said, snapping shut his brass
telescope with a click. “If you will excuse me, I need to go
inform the captain.”9 6
GUNPOWDER, TREASON,
 AND PLOT
I F TH E GOVERNOR’S A TTIT UDE toward me was altered
by the news that I was not in fact a for ger but rather a
notorious—if merely accused—murderess, I had no
opportunity to find out. He, like the rest of the of ficers and
half the men aboard, rushed to the rail, and the rest of the day
passed in a flurry of observation, speculation, and lar gely
fruitless activity .
The loo kout at the masthead called down periodic
observations—men were leaving the fort, carrying things …
the fort’ s weaponry , it looked like.
“Are the y Colle t’ s men?” the Governor bellowed, shading
his eyes to look aloft.
“Can’ t say , sir ,” came the unhelpful reply from above.
At last, the Cruizer ‘s two launches  were sent asho re, with
orders to collect what informatio n they could. They came back
several hours later , with the ne ws that Collet had abandoned
the f ort, in the face of threats, b ut had taken pains to remove
the guns and powder , lest these fall into rebel hands.
No, sir , they had  not spoken wi th Colonel Collet, who was
—by rum or—on his way upriver with his militia forces. They
had sent two men down the road toward W ilmington; it was
true that  a lar ge force was gathering in the fields outside the
town, u nder Colonels Robert Howe and John Ashe, but no
word of what was planned.
“No word of what’ s planned, God’ s ballocks!” muttered the
Governor , havin g been ceremoniously informed of this by
Captain Follard.  “They mean to burn the fort, what else would
Ashe be planning, for the love of Jesus?”His insti ncts we re quite sound; just before sunset, the scent
of smok e came across the water , and we could just make out
the a ntlike scurrying of men, piling heaps of flammable debris
around the base of the fort. It was a simple, square building,
made of logs. And despite the dampness of the humid air , it
would  burn, eventually .
It took them no little time to get the fire going, though, with
neither powder nor oil to hasten  its burning; as night fell, we
could clearly see flaming torches, streaming in the breeze as
they we re carried to and fro,  passed from hand to hand,
dipping to touch of f a pile of kindling, coming back a few
minutes later , as the kindling went out.
Around nine o’clock, someone found a few barrels of
turpentine, and the blaze took a sudden, lethal hold of the
fort’ s log walls. Sheets of wa vering flame rose pure and
brilliant, orange and crimson billows against the night-black
sky , and we hea rd scraps of cheering and snatches of ribald
song, bo rne with  the smell of smoke and the tang of turpentine
on the of fshore breeze.
“At least we needn’ t worry about the mosquitoes,” I
observed, waving a cloud of whitish smoke away from my
face.
“Thank you, Mrs. Fraser ,” said the Governor . “I had not
considered that particular positive aspect of the matter .” He
spoke with some bitterness, his fists resting impotently on the
rail.
I took the hint, and said no more. For myself, the leaping
flames and the c olumn of smoke that rose wavering toward the
stars were cause for celebration. Not for any benefit that the
burning of Fort Johnston might be to the rebel cause—but
because Jamie might be there, by one of the campfires that had
sprung up on the shore below the fort.
And if he was … he would come tomorrow .
HE DID. I was awake well before dawn—in fact, I had not
slept—and standing at the rail. There was little of the usual
boat traf fic this morning, in the wake of the fort’ s burning; the
bitter sm ell of wood ash mingled with the marshy smell of the
nearby mud flats, and the water  was still and oily-looking. It
was a gray day , heavily overcast, and a deep bank of haze
hung over the water , hiding the shore.
I kep t watching, though, and wh en a small boat came out of
the haze, I knew at once that it was Jamie. He was alone.
I wa tched the lo ng, smooth reach of his arms and the pull of
the oars , and felt a sudden deep, calm happiness. I had no
notion what might happen—and all the horror and anger
connected with Malva’ s death still lurked at the back of my
mind, a great dark shape under v ery thin ice. But he was ther e.
Near en ough no w to see his face, as he looked back over his
shoulder toward the ship.
I lift ed a  hand to wave; his eyes  were already fixed on me.
He didn’ t stop r owing, but turned round and came on. I stood
clinging to the rail, waiting.
The rowboat passed out of sight  for a moment, under the lee
of the Cruizer ,  and I h eard the watch hail him, the deep half-
audible answer , and felt something that had been knotted
inside me for a long time let go at the sound of his voice.
I sto od rooted, though, not able  to move. Then there were
footsteps on deck, and a murmu r of voices—someone going to
fetch the Governor—and I turned blindly , into Jamie’ s arms.
“Knew you’d come,” I whispere d into the linen of his shirt.
He reeke d of fire: smoke and pinesap and scorched cloth, and
the bitte r tang of turpentine. Ree ked of stale sweat and horses,
the w eariness of a man who has  not slept, who has labored all
night, the faint yeasty smell of long hunger .
He held  me close, ribs and breath and warmth and muscle,
then put me away from him a little and looked down into my
face. He had bee n smiling since I saw him. It lit his eyes, and
without a word, he pulled the cap of f my head and threw itover the  rail. He ran his hands through my hair , fluf fing it out
into abandon, then cupped my head in his hands and kissed
me, fingers digging into my scalp. He had a three-day beard,
which rasped my skin like sandpaper , and his mouth was home
and safety .
Somewhere behind him, one of the Marines coughed, and
said loudly , “Y ou wished to see the Governor , I believe, sir?”
He let go, slowly , and turned.
“I do indeed,”  he said, and put out a hand to me.
“Sassenach?”
I took it, and  followed the Marine, heading for the
companionway . I glanced back over the rail, to see my cap
bobbing in the swell, puf fed with air and tranquil as a jellyfish.
The momentary  illusion of peac e vanished directly , though,
once we were below .
The Governor had been up mos t of the night, as well, and
didn’ t lo ok much better than J amie, though he was not, of
course, besmear ed with soot. He was, however , unshaven,
bloodshot, and in no mood to be trifled with.
“Mr . Fraser ,” he said with a s hort nod. “Y ou are James
Fraser , I collect? And you dwell in the mountain
backcountry?”
“I am  th e Fraser , of Fraser ’ s Rid ge,” Jamie said courteously .
“And I have come for my wife.”
“Oh, have you.” The Governor gave him a sour look and sat
down, g esturing indif ferently at a stool. “I regret to inform
you, sir , that your wife is a pr isoner of the Crown. Though
perhaps you were aware of this?”
Jamie ignored this bit of sarca sm and took the prof fered
seat.
“In fact,  she is not,” he said. “ It is true, is it not, that you
have declared martial law upon the colony of North Carolina?”“It i s,” Martin said shortly . Th is was rather a sore point,
since wh ile he had  declared martial law , he was in no position
actually to enforce it, but wa s obliged to float impotently
of fshore, fuming, until and unless England chose to send him
reinforcements.
“Then in fact, all customary legal usage is suspended,”
Jamie po inted o ut. “Y ou alone have control over the custody
and disposition of any prisone rs—and my wife has in fact
been in your cu stody for some little time. Y e therefore have
also the power to release her .”
“Hm,” said the Governor . Plainl y he hadn’ t thought of that,
and was n’ t sure of its ramifica tions. At the same time, the
notion th at he was in control of  anything at all at the moment
was likely soothing to his inflamed spirits.
“She has not bee n committed for trial, and in fact, there has
been no evidence whatever adduced against her ,” Jamie said
firmly .
I found myself uttering a silent prayer of thanks that I had
told Ma cDonald the gory details after  his visit with the
Governor—it might not be what a modern court called
evidence, but being found with a knife in my hand and two
warm, bloody corpses was very damned circumstantial.
“She is accused, but there is no  merit to the char ge. Surely ,
having h ad her acquaintance for even so short a time as you
have, ye will h ave drawn your own conclusions as to her
character?” Not waiting for an answer to this, he pressed on.
“When accusation was made, we did not resist the attempt
to bring  my wife—or myself, for I also have been accused in
the matter—to trial. What better indication is there that we
should hold such conviction of her innocence as to wish for a
speedy trial to establish it?”
The Gov ernor had narrowed his eyes, and appeared to be
thinking intently .
“Y our ar gument s are not entirely lacking in virtue, sir ,” he
said at last, with formal courtesy . “However , I understand thatthe crime of which your wife stands accused was a most
heinous one. For me to release her must necessarily cause
public o utcry—and I have had rather enough of public unrest,”
he a dded, with a bleak look at the scorched cuf fs of Jamie’ s
coat.
Jamie took a deep breath and had another go.
“I q uite understand Y our Exc ellency’ s reservations,” he
said. “Pe rhaps s ome … surety m ight be of fered, which would
overcome them?”
Martin sat bolt upright in his chair , receding jaw thrust out.
“What do you suggest, sir? Hav e you the impertinence, the
—the—unspeakable bloody face to try to bribe  me?” He
slapped both hands down on the desk and glared from Jamie to
me and back. “God damn it, I sh ould hang the two of you, out
of hand!”
“V ery nice, Mr . Ohnat,” I mu ttered to Jamie under my
breath. “At least we’re already married.”
“Oh, ah ,” he replied, giving me a brief glance of
incomprehension before returning his attention to the
Governor , who was muttering “Swing them from the bloody
yardarm … the infernal cheek of it, the creatures!”
“I had no such intent, sir .” Jamie kept his voice level, his
eyes dir ect. “What I of fer is  a bond, against my wife’ s
appearance in court to answer the char ge against her . When
she does so appear , it would be returned to me.”
Before t he Gove rnor could respond to this, he reached into
his p ocket and w ithdrew someth ing small and dark, which he
set on the desk. The black diamond.
The sigh t of it stopped Martin in mid-sentence. He blinked,
once, his long-nosed face going almost comically blank. He
rubbed a finger slowly across his upper lip, considering.
Having seen a great deal of the Governor ’ s private
correspondence and accounts by  now , I was well aware that he
had few private means, and was  obliged to live far beyond hismodest income in order to maintain the appearances necessary
for a Royal Governor .
The Governor in turn was wel l aware that in the current
state of unrest, there was little c hance of my being brought to
trial in any sort  of timely man ner . It could be months—and
possibly years— before the court system was restored to
anything like routine function. And for however long it took,
he w ould have t he diamond. He couldn’ t in honor simply sell
the thing—but could most assuredly borrow a substantial sum
against i t, in the reasonable expectation that he might redeem
it later .
I saw  his eyes flicker toward the sooty marks on Jamie’ s
coat, narrowing in speculation. There was also a good
possibility of Jamie’ s being killed or arrested for treason—and
I s aw the impu lse to do just that pop momentarily into his
mind—which would leave the diamond perhaps in legal limbo,
but certa inly in Martin’ s possession. I had to force myself to
keep on breathing.
But he wasn’ t stupid, Martin— nor was he venal. W ith a
small sigh, he pushed the stone back toward Jamie.
“No, sir ,” he said, though his v oice had now lost its earlier
outrage. “I will not accept this a s bond for your wife. But the
notion o f surety  …” His gaze went to the stack of papers on
his desk, and returned to Jamie.
“I will make you a proposition, sir ,” he said abruptly . “I
have an action in  train, an opera tion by which I hope to raise a
considerable body of the Scottish Highlanders, who will march
from the backcountry to the co ast, there to meet with troops
sent from England, and in the process, to subdue the
countryside on behalf of the King.”
He paus ed for breath, eyeing Jamie closely to assess the
ef fect of  his speech. I was standing close behind Jamie, and
couldn’ t see his face, but didn’ t need to. Bree, joking, called it
his “brag face”; no one looking at him would ever know
whether he held four aces, a fu ll house, or a pair of threes. Iwas bett ing on the pair of threes, myself—but Martin didn’ t
know him nearly as well as I did.
“General Hugh MacDonald and  a Colonel Donald McLeod
came into the co lony some time ago, and have been traversing
the coun tryside, rallying support—which they have gained in
gratifying numbers, I am pleased to say .” His fingers drummed
briefly on the letters, then stopped abruptly as he leaned
forward.
“What I propose, then, sir , is this: you will return to the
backcountry , and gather such men as you can. Y ou will then
report to General MacDonald and commit your troops to his
campaign. When I receive word from MacDonald that you
have arrived—w ith, let us say , two hundred men—then, sir , I
will release your wife to you.”
My pulse was b eating fast, and so was Major ’ s; I could see
it th robbing in h is neck. Definitely a pair of threes. Obviously ,
MacDonald hadn’ t had time to tell the Governor—or hadn’ t
known—just ho w widespread and acrimonious the response
had been to Ma lva Christie’ s death. There were still men on
the Ridge who would follow J amie, I was sure—but many
more who would not, or who would, but only if he repudiated
me.
I wa s trying to  think logically about the situation, as a
means of distracting myself from the crushing disappointment
of realiz ing that the Governor was not going to let me go.
Jamie m ust go without me, leave me here. For an
overwhelming instant, I though t I could not bear it; I would
run mad, scream and leap across the desk to claw Josiah
Martin’ s eyes out.
He g lanced up, caught a glimp se of my face, and started
back, half-rising from his chair .
Jamie put back a hand and gripped my forearm, hard.
“Be still, a nighean, ” he said softly .
I had been holding my breath w ithout realizing it. Now I let
it out in a gasp, and made myself breathe slowly .Just as slowly , th e Governor—a  wary gaze still fixed on me
—lowered himself back into his seat. Clearly , the accusation
against me had just become a lot more likely , in his mind.
Fine,  I thought fiercely , to keep from crying. See how easily
you sleep, with me never mor e than a few feet away fr om you.
Jamie drew a lo ng, deep breath, and his shoulders squared
beneath his tattered coat.
“Y ou will give me leave, sir , to consider your proposal,” he
said formally , and letting go of my arm, rose to his feet.
“Do not  despair , mo chridhe, ” he said to me  in Gaelic. “I
will see you when the morning comes.”
He lifted  my hand to his lips and kissed it, then, with the
barest o f nods to the Governor , strode out, without looking
back.
There was an in stant’ s silence in the cabin, and I heard his
feet goin g away , climbing the ladder of the companionway . I
didn’ t pause to consider , but rea ched down into my stays and
withdrew the small knife I had taken from the sur geon’ s kit.
I jabbed  it down with all my str ength, so that it stuck in the
wood of the desk and stood  there, quivering before the
Governor ’ s astonished eyes.
“Y ou fucking bastar d, ” I said evenly , and left.9 7
FOR THE SAKE OF
 ONE WHO IS
I  W A S W AITING A T THE RAIL  again before dawn the next
day . The  smell of ashes was stro ng and acrid on the wind, but
the smoke had g one. An early-morning haze still shrouded the
shore, though, and I felt a small thrill of deja vu,  mingled with
hope, as  I saw the small boat come out of the mist, pulling
slowly toward the ship.
As i t grew close r , though, my hands tightened on the rail. It
wasn’ t Jamie. For a few momen ts, I tried to convince myself
that it was, that he had merely changed his coat—but with
each str oke of the oars, it became more certain. I closed my
eyes, stinging with tears, all the while telling myself that it was
absurd to be so upset; it meant nothing.
Jamie would be here; he’d said  so. The fact that someone
else was  coming  early to the ship had nothing to do with him
or me.
It di d, though. O pening my eyes and wiping them on my
wrist, I looked again at the rowboat, and felt a start of
disbelief. It couldn’ t be. It was , though. He looked up at the
watch’ s hail, and saw me at t he rail. Our eyes met for an
instant, then he bowed his head, reaching to the oars. T om
Christie.
The Governor was not amused a t being roused from his bed
at dawn  for the third day running; I could hear him below ,
ordering one of the Marines to te ll the fellow , whoever he was,
to wait to a more reasonabl e hour—this followed by a
peremptory slam of the cabin door .
I was not amus ed, either , and in no mood to wait. The
Marine at the he ad of the companionway refused to allow me
below , t hough. Heart pounding, then, I turned and made myway to the ster n, where they had put Christie to wait the
Governor ’ s pleasure.
The Marine there hesitated, but after all, there were no
orders to prevent me speaking with visitors; he let me pass.
“Mr . Christie.” He was standing  at the rail, staring back at
the coast, but turned at my words.
“Mrs. F raser .” He was very pale; his grizzled beard stood
out nearly black. He had trimmed it, though, and his hair , as
well. W hile he still looked like a lightning-blasted tree, there
was life in his eyes once more when he looked at me.
“My husband—” I began, but he cut me of f.
“He is well. He awaits you on the shore; you will see him
presently .”
“Oh?” The boil of fear and fu ry inside me reduced itself
slightly , as though someone had  turned down the flame, but a
sense of  impatie nce was still ste aming. “W ell, what in bloody
hell is going on, will you tell me that?”
He l ooked at m e for a long moment in silence, then licked
his l ips briefly , and turned to lo ok over the rail at the smooth
gray sw ell. He glanced back at me and drew a deep breath,
obviously bracing himself for something.
“I have come to confess to the murder of my daughter .”
I s imply  stared at him, unable to make sense of his words.
Then I assembled them into a sentence, read it from the tablet
of my mind, and finally grasped it.
“No, you haven’ t,” I said.
The faintest shadow of a smile seemed to stir in his beard,
though it vanished almost before I had seen it.
“Y ou remain contrary , I see,” he said dryly .
“Never m ind what I remain,” I said, rather rudely . “Are you
insane? Or is this Jamie’ s latest plan? Because if so—”He stop ped me with a hand on  my wrist; I started at the
touch, not expecting it.
“It i s the truth,”  he said very softly . “And I will swear to it
by the Holy Scriptures.”
I st ood looking at him, not moving. He looked back,
directly , and I re alized suddenly how seldom he had ever met
my eyes ; all through our acquaintance, he had glanced away ,
avoided my gaze, as though h e sought to escape any real
acknowledgment of me, even when obliged to speak to me.
Now that was gone, and the look in his eyes was nothing I
had ever  seen before. The lines of pain and suf fering cut deep
around them, and the lids were  heavy with sorrow—but the
eyes themselves  were deep and calm as the sea beneath us.
That sense he had carried through our nightmare journey
south, that atmosphere of mute  horror , numb pain, had left
him, replaced by resolve and so mething else—something that
burned, far down in his depths.
“Why?” I said at last, and he let go his grip on my wrist,
stepping back a pace.
“D’ye re member once”—from the reminiscent tone of his
voice, it might h ave been decades before—”ye asked me, did I
think ye a witch?”
“I remember ,” I replied guardedly . “Y ou said—” Now I
remembered that conversation, all right, and something small
and icy fluttered  at the base of my spine. “Y ou said that you
believed in witches, all right—but you didn’ t think I was one.”
He nodded, dark gray eyes fixed on me. I wondered whether
he was about to revise that opinion, but apparently not.
“I believe in witches,” he said with complete matter -of-fact
seriousness. “Fo r I’ve kent them . The girl was one, as was her
mother before her .” The icy flutter grew stronger .
“The girl,” I said. “Y ou mean your daughter? Malva?”
He shook his head a little, and his eyes took on a darker hue.
“No daughter of mine,” he said.“Not—not yours? But—her eyes. She had your eyes.” I
heard m yself say  it, and could have bitten my tongue. He only
smiled, though, grimly .
“And my brother ’ s.” He turned to the rail, put his hands on
it, a nd looked a cross the stretch of sea, toward land. “Edgar
was his name. W hen the Rising came, and I declared for the
Stuarts, he would have none of it, saying ‘twas folly . He
begged me not to go.” He shook his head slowly , seeing
something in memory , that I knew was not the wooded shore.
“I th ought—we ll, it doesna m atter what I thought, but I
went. And asked him, would h e mind my wife, and the wee
lad.” He drew a deep breath, let it slowly out. “And he did.”
“I see,” I said very quietly . He turned his head sharply at the
tone of my voice, gray eyes piercing.
“It was not his fault! Mona was a witch—an enchantress.”
His lips compre ssed at the expr ession on my face. “Y e don’ t
believe me, I see. It is the truth; more than once, I caught her
at it—working her charms, observing times—I came once to
the roof o’ the house at midnight, searching for her . I saw her
there, stark naked and staring at the stars, standing in the
center of a pent acle she’d drawn wi’ the blood of a strangled
dove, and her hair flying loose, mad in the wind.”
“Her ha ir ,” I said, looking for s ome thread to grasp in this,
and suddenly realizing. “She had hair like mine, didn’ t she?”
He nodded, looking away , and I saw his throat move as he
swallowed.
“She wa s … what she was,” he  said softly . “I tried to save
her—by prayer , by love. I could not.”
“What happened  to her?” I asked, keeping my voice as low
as h is. W ith the  wind as it was, there was little chance of our
being o verheard here, but this was not the sort of thing I
thought anyone should hear .
He sighed, and swallowed again.“She wa s hangit,” he said, sounding almost matter -of-fact
about it. “For the murder of my brother .”
This, it seemed, had happened w hile T om was imprisoned at
Ardsmuir; she had sent him wor d, before her execution, telling
him of Malva’ s birth, and that she was confiding care of the
children to Edgar ’ s wife.
“I suppose she thought that funny ,” he said, sounding
abstracted. “She’d the oddest sense of humor , Mona had.”
I fel t cold, beyon d the chill of the early-morning breeze, and
hugged my elbows.
“But you got them back—Allan and Malva.”
He nodded; he had been tran sported, but had the good
fortune to have his indenture b ought by a kind and wealthy
man, who had g iven him the money for the children’ s passage
to th e Colonies. But then both his employer and the wife he
had taken here had died in an epidemic of the yellow fever ,
and casting about for some new opportunity , he had heard of
Jamie Fraser ’ s settling in North Carolina and that he would
help those men he had known in Ardsmuir to land of their
own.
“I w ould to God I had cut my own throat before I came,” he
said, turning back abruptly to me. “Believe me in that.”
He seem ed entirely sincere. I d idn’ t know what to say in
response, but he seemed to require none, and went on.
“The gir l … she was nay more  than five years old when I
first saw  her , but already she had it—the same slyness, the
charm—the same darkness of soul.”
He had tried to the best of his ability to save Malva, as well
—to beat the wi ckedness out of her , to constrain the streak of
wildness, above all, to keep her from working her wiles upon
men.
“Her mither had that, too.” His l ips tightened at the thought.
“Any man. It wa s the curse of Lilith that they had, the both of
them.”I f elt a hollowness in the pit of my stomach, as he came
back now to the matter of Malva.
“But she was with child …” I said.
His face paled further , but his voice was firm.
“A ye, sh e was. I do not think it w rong to prevent yet another
witch from entering the world.”
Seeing my face, he went on before I could interrupt.
“Y e ken she tried to kill ye? Y ou and me, both.”
“What do you mean? T ried to kill me, how?”
“When ye told her about the invisible things, the—the
germs. S he took great interest in that. She told me, when I
caught her wi’ the bones.”
“What bones?” I asked, a sliver of ice running down my
back.
“The bones she took from Ep hraim’ s grave, to work her
charms upon your husband. She didna use them all, and I
found them in her workbasket l ater . I beat her , badly , and she
told me then.”
Accustomed to wander alone in the woods in search of food
plants and herbs, she had been doing so during the height of
the dysentery epidemic. And in her wanderings, had come
upon the  isolated cabin of the sin-eater , that strange, damaged
man. Sh e had found him near death, burning with fever and
sunk in coma, an d while she sto od there undecided whether to
run for help, or only run, he had in fact died.
Whereupon, seiz ed by inspiration—and bearing my careful
teachings in mind—she had taken mucus and blood from the
body an d put it into a little bott le with a bit of broth from the
kettle o n the hearth, nurturing it inside her stays with the
warmth of her own body .
And had  slipped  a few drops of this deadly infusion into my
food, an d that of her father , in th e hope that if we fell sick, ourdeaths w ould be  seen as no more than a part of the sickness
that plagued the Ridge.
My lips felt stif f and bloodless.
“Y ou’re sure of this?” I whispered. He nodded, making no
ef fort to convince me, and that alone gave me conviction that
he spoke the truth.
“She wanted—Jamie?” I asked.
He closed his e yes for a mome nt; the sun was coming up,
and whi le the brilliance of it wa s behind us, the gleam of f the
water was bright as silver plate.
“She … wanted,” he said at la st. “She lusted. Lusted for
wealth, for position, for what sh e saw as freedom, not seeing it
as li cense—never seeing!” He spoke with sudden violence,
and I thought i t was not Malva alone who had never seen
things as he did.
But she had wan ted Jamie, whether for himself or only for
his prop erty . And when her love charm failed, and the
epidemic of sickness came, had taken a more direct way
toward w hat she  wanted. I coul d not yet find a way to grasp
that—and yet I knew it was true.
And then, finding herself inconveniently with child, she had
come up with a new scheme.
“Do you know who the father  really was?” I asked, my
throat tightening again—I thought it always would—at the
memory of the sunlit garden an d the two neat, small bodies,
ruined and wasted. Such a waste.
He shoo k his head, but would not look at me, and I knew
that he had some idea, at least. He would not tell me, though,
and I supposed it didn’ t matter just now . And the Governor
would be up soon, ready to receive him.
He, too,  heard the stirrings dow n below , and took a deep
breath.
“I co uld not let her destroy so m any lives; could not let her
go on. For she was a witch, make no mistake; that she failed tokill eithe r you or me was no more than luck. She would have
killed someone, before she finished. Perhaps you, if your
husband clung to you. Perhaps him, in the hope of inheriting
his property for the child.” He took a ragged, painful breath.
“She was not born of my loins, and yet—she was my
daughter , my blood. I could not … could not allow … I was
responsible.” He  stopped, unable to finish. In this, I thought,
he told the truth. And yet …
“Thomas,” I said firmly , “this is twaddle, and you know it.”
He l ooked at me , surprised, and I saw that tears stood in his
eyes. He blinked them back and answered fiercely .
“Say you so? Y ou know nothing, nothing!”
He saw me flinc h, and looked down. Then, awkwardly , he
reached out and took my hand. I felt the scars of the sur gery I
had done, the flexible strength of his gripping fingers.
“I have waited a ll my life, in a s earch …” He waved his free
hand va guely , then closed his fingers, as though grasping the
thought, and continued more sur ely , “No. In hope. In hope of a
thing I could not name, but that I knew must exist.”
His eyes searched my face, inte nt, as though he memorized
my features. I raised a hand, uncomfortable under this
scrutiny , intendi ng, I suppose, to tidy my mad hair—but he
caught my hand and held it, surprising me.
“Leave it,” he said.
Standing with both hands in his, I had no choice.
“Thomas,” I said, uncertain. “Mr . Christie …”
“I became convinced that it was God I sought. Perhaps it
was. Bu t God is not flesh and bl ood, and the love of God alone
could not sustain me.
“I ha ve written d own my confession.” He let go, and poked
a hand into his  pocket, fumbling a little, and pulled out a
folded paper , which he clutched in his short, solid fingers.“I have sworn here that it was I who killed my daughter , for
the s hame she h ad brought upon me by her wantonness.” He
spoke firmly enough, but I coul d see the working of his throat
above the wilted stock.
“Y ou didn’ t,” I said positively . “I know you didn’ t.”
He blinked, gazing at me.
“No,” he said, quite matter -of-fact. “But perhaps I should
have.
“I h ave written a copy of this c onfession,” he said, tucking
the document back into his co at, “and have left it with the
newspaper in New Bern. They will publish it. The Governor
will accept it—how can he not?—and you will go free.”
Those last four words struck me dumb. He was still gripping
my right hand; his thumb stroked gently over my knuckles. I
wanted t o pull away , but forced myself to keep still, compelled
by the look in his eyes, clear gray and naked now , without
disguise.
“I have yearned  always,” he sai d softly , “for love given and
returned; have spent my life in the attempt to give my love to
those who were not worthy of it. Allow me this: to give my
life for the sake of one who is.”
I fel t as though someone had knocked the wind from me. I
hadn’ t any breath, but struggled to form words.
“Mr . Chr—T om,” I said. “Y ou mustn’ t. Y our life has—has
value. Y ou can’ t throw it away like this!”
He nodded, patient.
“I know that. If it did not, this would not matter .”
Feet were coming up the comp anionway , and I heard the
Governor ’ s voic e below , in ch eerful conversation with the
Captain of Marines.
“Thomas! Don’ t do this!”
He only looked at me, and sm iled—had I ever seen him
smile?—but did  not speak. He raised my hand and bent overit; I felt the pric kle of his beard and the warmth of his breath,
the softness of his lips.
“I a m your servant, madam,” he said very softly . He
squeezed my hand and released it, then turned and glanced
toward the shore. A small boat was coming, dark against the
glitter of the si lver sea. “Y our husband is coming for you.
Adieu,  Mrs. Fraser .”
He turned and walked away , b ack steady in spite of the
swell that rose and fell beneath us.P A R T  E L E V E N
I n  t h e  D a y  o f  V e n g e a n c e9 8
T O KEEP A GHOST A T BA Y
J AMIE GROANED, STRETCHED, and sat down heavily on
the bed.
“I feel as though someone’ s stepped on my cock.”
“Oh?” I opened one eye to look at him. “Who?”
He gave me a bloodshot look.
“I dinna ken, but it feels as though it was someone heavy .”
“Lie dow n,” I said, yawning. “W e haven’ t got to leave right
away; you can rest a bit more.”
He shook his head.
“Nay , I want to be home. W e’ve been gone too long as it is.”
Nonetheless, he didn’ t get up and finish dressing, but
continued to sit on the swayba cked inn bed in his shirt, big
hands hanging idle between his thighs.
He looked tired to death, in spite of just having risen, and no
wonder . I didn’ t think he could  have slept at all for several
days, what with his search for me, the burning of Fort
Johnston, and the events attending my release from the
Cruizer .  R emem bering, I felt a pall settle over my own spirits,
in sp ite of the joy in which I had wakened, realizing that I was
free, on land, and with Jamie.
“Lie down,” I re peated. I rolled toward him, and put a hand
on his back. “It’ s barely dawn. A t least wait for breakfast; you
can’ t travel without rest or  food.”
He glanced at t he window , still shuttered; the cracks had
begun to  pale with the growing l ight, but I was right; there was
no s ound below of fires bein g stoked or pots banged in
preparation. Capitulating suddenly , he collapsed slowlysideways, unable to repress a si gh as his head settled back on
the pillow .
He d idn’ t protest when I flung the ratty quilt over him, nor
yet when I curved my body to fit round him, wrapping an arm
about hi s waist and laying my cheek against his back. He still
smelled of smoke, though both  of us had washed hastily the
night before, before falling in to bed and a dearly bought
oblivion.
I co uld feel how tired he was. My own joints still ached
with fatigue—and from the lumps in the flattened, wool-
stuf fed mattress. Ian had been waiting with horses when we
came ashore, and we had ridden as far as we could before
darkness fell, finally fetching up at a ramshackle inn in the
middle of nowhere, a crude roadside accommodation for
wagoneers on their way to the coast.
“Malcolm,” he’d said, with the slightest of hesitations, when
the innkeeper had asked his name. “Alexander Malcolm.”
“And Murray ,” Ian had said, yawning and scratching his
ribs. “John Murray .”
The inn keeper had nodded, not particularly caring. There
was no reason why he should associate three nondescript,
bedraggled travelers with a notorious case of murder—and yet
I had  felt panic well up under my diaphragm when he glanced
at me.
I ha d sensed Jamie’ s hesitation in giving the name, his
distaste for reassuming one of the many aliases he had once
lived un der . More than most me n, he valued his name—I only
hoped that given time, it would once more have  value.
Roger m ight he lp. He would b e a full-fledged minister by
now , I thought, smiling at the t hought. He had a true gift for
soothing the divisions among the inhabitants of the Ridge,
easing acrimony —and having the additional authority of being
an ordained minister , his influence would be increased.
It would  be good to have him back. And to see Bree and
Jemmy again—I  had a moment’ s longing for them, though wewould s ee them soon; we mea nt to go through Cross Creek
and coll ect them on the way . But of course, neither Bree nor
Roger had any notion what had happened in the last three
weeks—nor what life might now be like, in the wake of it.
The birds were in full voice in  the trees outside; after the
constant screeching of gulls and terns that formed the
background of life on the Cruizer ,  th e sound of them was
tender , a homely conversation that made me long suddenly for
the R idge. I understood Jamie’ s strong ur ge to be home—even
knowing that what we would fi nd there was not the same life
we had left. The Christies would be gone, for one thing.
I hadn’ t had the chance to ask Jamie about the
circumstances of my rescue; I had finally been put ashore just
before s unset, an d we had ridden  of f at once, Jamie wanting to
put as much dis tance as possible between me and Governor
Martin—and, perhaps, T om Christie.
“Jamie,” I said softly , my brea th warm in the folds of his
shirt. “Did you make him do it? T om?”
“No.” His voice was soft, to o. “He came to Fer gus’ s
printshop, the day after ye left t he palace. He’d heard that the
gaol had burned—”
I sat up in bed, shocked.
“What? Sherif f T olliver ’ s house? No one told me that!”
He rolled onto his back, looking up at me.
“I dinna  suppose  anyone ye’ve s poken to in the last week or
two would know ,” he said mildly . “No one was killed,
Sassenach—I asked.”
“Y ou’re sure of it?” I asked wit h uneasy thoughts of Sadie
Fer guson. “How did it happen? A mob?”
“No,” h e said, yawning. “From what I hear , Mrs. T olliver
got stinking drunk, stoked her l aundry fire too high, then lay
down in the sha de and fell asleep. The wood collapsed, the
embers s et fire to the grass, it sp read to the house, and …” He
flipped a hand in dismissal. “The neighbor smelt smoke,though, and rushed over in time to drag Mrs. T olliver and the
bairn safe away . He said there was no one else in the place.”
“Oh. W e ll …” I let him persuad e me to lie down again, my
head resting in the hollow of his shoulder . I couldn’ t feel
strange with him, not after spe nding the night pressed close
against h im in the narrow bed, e ach of us aware of the other ’ s
every small movement. Still, I was very conscious of him.
And he of m e; his arm was round me, his fingers
unconsciously exploring the length of my back, lightly reading
the shapes of me like braille as he talked.
“So, the n, T om.  He kent about L ’Onion,  of course, and so
went there, when he found ye’d disappeared from the gaol. By
then, of course, ye’d gone from  the palace, as well—it had
taken him some time to part c ompany wi’ Richard Brown,
without rousing their suspicions.
“But he found us there, and he told me what he meant to
do.” His  fingers  stroked the ba ck of my neck, and I felt the
tightness there begin to relax. “I told him to bide; I should
have a go at getting ye back on  my own—but if I could not
…”
“So you  know he didn’ t do it.” I spoke with certainty . “Did
he tell you he had?”
“He only said t hat he had kept  silent while there was any
chance o f ye being tried and acquitted—but that had ye ever
seemed in ur gent danger , then he’d meant to speak up at once;
that’ s why he insisted upon com ing with us. I, ah, didna wish
to ask him questions,” he said delicately .
“But he didn’ t d o it.” I prodded, insistent. “Jamie, you know
he didn’ t!”
I felt the rise of his chest under my cheek as he breathed.
“I know ,” he said softly .
W e wer e silent for a bit. There was a sudden, muf fled
rapping outside,  and I jerked—but it was only a woodpecker ,
hunting insects in the wormy timbers of the inn.“W ill they hang him, do you th ink?” I asked at last, staring
up at the splintered beams above.
“I expect they will, aye.” His fingers had resumed their half-
unconscious motion, smoothing strands of my hair behind my
ear . I lay still, listening to the slow thump of his heart, not
wanting to ask what came next. But I had to.
“Jamie—tell me that he didn’ t do it—that he didn’ t make
that con fession—for me. Please.” I didn’ t think I could bear
that, not on top of everything else.
His fingers stilled, just touching my ear .
“He loves you. Y e ken that, aye?” He spoke very quietly; I
heard th e reverberation of the words in his chest, as much as
the words themselves.
“He said  he did.” I felt a tightness in the throat, recalling
that very direct gray look. T om Christie was a man who said
what he meant, and meant what  he said—a man like Jamie, in
that regard at least.
Jamie was quiet for what seemed a long time. Then he
sighed, and turned his head so  his cheek rested against my
hair; I heard the faint rasp of his whiskers.
“Sassenach—I would have done the same, and counted my
life well lost, if  it saved ye. If he feels the same, then ye’ve
done nay wrong to him, to take your life from his hand.”
“Oh, dea r ,” I said. “Oh, dear .” I  didn’ t want to think of any
of it—n ot T om’ s clear gray look and the calling of gulls, not
the lines of af fliction that carved his face into pieces, not the
thought of what he had suf fered, in loss, in guilt, in suspicion
—in fea r . Nor did I want to think of Malva, going unwitting to
that dea th among the lettuces, h er son heavy and peaceful in
her wom b. Nor the dark rusty  blood drying in gouts and
splashes among the leaves of the grapevines.
Above all, I didn’ t want to think that I had had any part in
this tragedy—but that was inescapable.
I swallowed, hard.“Jamie—can it ever be made right?”
He h eld my hand now , in his oth er hand, stroking his thumb
gently back and forth under my fingers.
“The lass is dead, mo chridhe. ”
I closed my hand on his thumb, stilling it.
“Y es, and someone killed her—a nd it wasn’ t T om. Oh, God,
Jamie—who? Who was it?”
“I dinna  ken,” he said, and his eyes grew deep with sadness.
“She wa s a lass who craved love , I think—and took it. But she
didna ken how to give it back again.”
I too k a deep breath and asked the question that had lain
unspoken between us since the murder .
“Y ou don’ t think it was Ian?”
He nearly smiled at that.
“If it had been, a nighean,  w e’d know . Ian could kill; he
couldna let you or me suf fer for it.”
I sighed, shifting my shoulders to ease the knot between
them. H e was right, and I felt c omforted, on Ian’ s account—
and still more guilty , on T om Christie’ s.
“The ma n who fathered her chil d—if that wasn’ t Ian, and I
so hope it wasn’ t—or someone who wanted her and killed her
from jealousy when he found she was pregnant—”
“Or someone already wed. Or a woman, Sassenach.”
That stopped me cold. “A woman?”
“She too k love, ” he repeated, and shook his head. “What
makes ye think it was only the young men she took it from?”
I closed  my eyes, envisioning the possibilities. If she had
had an af fair with a married man —and they had looked at her ,
too, onl y more discreetly—yes, he might have killed her to
keep it undisco vered. Or a scorned wife … I had a brief,
shocking glimpse of Murdina Bug, face contorted with ef fort
as she pressed the pillow over  Lionel Brown’ s face. Arch?God, no. Once again, with a s ense of utter hopelessness, I
turned away from the question, seeing in mind the myriad
faces of Fraser ’ s Ridge—one of them hiding a murderer ’ s
soul.
“No, I know it can’ t be fixed for  them—not Malva, or T om.
Or—or even Allan.” For the first time, I spared a thought for
T om’ s s on, so suddenly bereft of his family and in such
dreadful circumstances. “But the rest …” The Ridge, I meant.
Home. The life we had had. Us.
It had grown warm under the quilt, lying together—too
warm, and I felt the heat of a hot flush wash over me. I sat up
abruptly , throwing of f the quilt, and leaned forward, lifting the
hair of f my neck in hopes of an instant’ s coolness.
“Stand up, Sassenach.”
Jamie ro lled out  of bed, stood up, and took me by the hand,
pulling me to my feet. Sweat had already broken out on my
body like dew , and my cheeks  were flushed. He bent and,
taking the hem of my shift in both hands, stripped it of f over
my head.
He smiled faintly , looking at me, then bent and blew softly
over my breasts. The coolness was a tiny but blessed relief,
and my nipples rose in silent gratitude.
He opened the shutters for more air , then stepped back and
pulled of f his o wn shirt. Day had broken fully now , and the
flood of pure mo rning light glimmered on the lines of his pale
torso, on the sil ver web of his scars, the red-gold dusting of
hair on his arm s and legs, the  rust and silver hairs of his
sprouting beard. Likewise on the darkly suf fused flesh of his
genitals in their morning state, standing stif f against his belly
and gone the deep, soft color one would find in the heart of a
shadowed rose.
“As to putting th ings right,” he s aid, “I canna say—though I
mean to try .” H is eyes moved over me—stark naked, slightly
salt-encrusted, and noticeably grimy about the feet and ankles.
He smiled. “Shall we make a start, Sassenach?”“Y ou’re so tired you can barely stand up,” I protested. “Um
—with certain exceptions,” I added, glancing down. It was
true; the re were dark hollows u nder his eyes, and while the
lines of his body were still long and graceful, they were also
eloquent of deep fatigue. I felt as though I’d been run over by
a steamroller myself, and I  hadn’ t been up all night burning
down forts.
“W ell, s eeing as  we’ve a bed to hand, I didna plan to stand
up for it,” he replied. “Mind, I may never get back on my feet
again, bu t I think I might be able  to stay awake for the next ten
minutes or so, at least. Y e can pinch me if I fall asleep,” he
suggested, smiling.
I rol led my eyes  at him, but didn’ t ar gue. I lay down upon
the grub by but now-cool sheets,  and with a small tremor in the
pit of my stomach, opened my legs for him.
W e mad e love like people underwater , heavy-limbed and
slow . Mute, able to speak only through crude pantomime. W e
had barely touched one another in this way since Malva’ s
death—and the thought of her was still with us.
And not  only her . For a time, I tried to focus only on Jamie,
fixing my attention on the small intimacies of his body , so well
known—the tin y white cicatrice of the triangular scar at his
throat, the whorls of auburn hair and the sunburned skin
beneath—but I was so tired that my mind refused to cooperate,
and persisted in showing me in stead random bits of memory
or , even more disturbing, imagination.
“It’ s no good,” I said. My eyes  were shut tight, and I was
clinging to the b edclothes with both hands, sheets knotted in
my fingers. “I can’ t.”
He made a smal l sound of surpr ise, but at once rolled away ,
leaving me damp and trembling.
“What is it, a nighean ?” he said softly . He didn’ t touch me,
but lay close.
“I don’ t  know ,” I said, close to panic. “I keep seeing—I’m
sorry , I’m  sorry ,  Jamie. I see other people; it’ s like I’m makinglove to other m-men.”
“Oh, aye?” He s ounded cautious, but not upset. There was a
whish of fabric, and he drew the sheet up over me. That helped
a little, but not  much. My heart was pounding hard in my
chest, I felt dizzy and couldn’ t seem to take a full breath; my
throat kept closing.
Bolus hystericus,  I thought, quite calmly . Do stop,
Beauchamp.  Easier said than done, but I did stop worrying that
I was having a heart attack.
“Ah …” Jamie’ s voice was cautious. “Who? Hodgepile and
—”
“No!” M y stom ach clenched in revulsion at the thought. I
swallowed. “No, I—I hadn’ t even thought of that.”
He lay quietly b eside me, breathing. I felt as though I were
literally coming apart.
“Who is it that ye see, Claire?” he whispered. “Can ye tell
me?”
“Frank,” I said, fast, before I co uld change my mind. “And
T om. And—and  Malva.” My chest heaved, and I felt that I
would never have air enough to breathe again.
“I could—all of a sudden, I cou ld feel them all,” I blurted.
“T ouching me. W anting to come in.” I rolled over , burying my
face in the pillow , as though I could seal out everything.
Jamie was silent for a long time. Had I hurt him? I was
sorry that I’d t old him—but I had no defenses anymore. I
could no t lie, even for the best of reasons; there was simply no
place to go, nowhere to hide. I felt beset by whispering ghosts,
their los s, their need, their desperate love pulling me apart.
Apart from Jamie, apart from myself.
My entir e body was clenched an d rigid, trying to keep from
dissolution, and my face was pushed so deep into the pillow ,
trying to escape, that I felt I mig ht suf focate, and was obliged
to turn my head, gasping for breath.“Claire.” Jamie’ s voice was soft, but I felt his breath on my
face and my e yes popped open. His eyes were soft, too,
shadowed with sorrow . V ery s lowly , he lifted a hand and
touched my lips.
“T om,” I blurted. “I feel as though he’ s already dead,
because of me, and it’ s so terr ible. I can’ t bear it, Jamie, I
really can’ t!”
“I kn ow .” He m oved his hand, h esitated. “Can ye bear it if I
touch ye?”
“I do n’ t know .” I swallowed the  lump in my throat. “T ry it
and see.”
That made him smile, though I’d spoken with complete
seriousness. He put his hand gen tly on my shoulder and turned
me, then  gathered me against h im, moving slowly , so that I
might pull back. I didn’ t.
I sank into him, and clung to him as though he was a
floating spar , the only thing keeping me from drowning. He
was.
He held me close and stroked my hair for a long time.
“Can ye weep f or them, mo nighean donn ?” he whispered
into my hair at last. “Let them come in.”
The mere idea m ade me go rigid  with panic again. “I can’ t.”
“W eep for them,” he whispered , and his voice opened me
deeper than his cock. “Y e canna hold a ghost at bay .”
“I ca n’ t. I’m afraid,” I said, but I was already shaking with
grief, tears wet on my face. “I can’ t!”
And yet  I did. Gave up the struggle and opened myself, to
memory and sorrow . Sobbed as though my heart would break
—and let it break, for them, and all I could not save.
“Let them come, and grieve them, Claire,” he whispered.
“And when they’ve gone, I’ll take ye home.”9 9
OLD MASTER
River Run
I T HAD RAINED HARD THE NIGHT BEFORE, and while
the sun had com e out bright and hot, the ground was soggy
and steam seemed to rise from it, adding to the thickness of the
air . Bria nna had put her hair up, to keep it of f her neck, but
wisps escaped constantly , clinging damply to forehead and
cheeks, always in her eyes. She  wiped a strand away crossly
with the back of  her hand; her fingers were smeared with the
pigment she was grinding—and the humidity wasn’ t doing
that  any good, maki ng the powder clump and cling to the sides
of the mortar .
She nee ded it, though; she had  a new commission, due to
start this afternoon.
Jem was  hangin g round, too, b ored and poking his fingers
into eve rything. He was singing to himself, half under his
breath; s he paid no attention, until she happened to catch a few
words.
“ What  did you say?” she asked, rounding on him
incredulously . H e couldn’ t have been singing “Folsom Prison
Blues”—could he?
He blinked at he r , lowered his c hin to his chest, and said—
in the deepest voice he could produce—”Hello. I’m Johnny
Cash.”
She narrowly stopped herself laughing out loud, feeling her
cheeks go pink with the ef fort of containment.
“Where did you get that?” sh e asked, though she knew
perfectly well. There was only one place he could  have gotten
it, and her heart rose up at the thought.
“Daddy ,” he said logically .“Has Daddy been singing?” she asked, trying to sound
casual. H e had to have been. And, just as obviously , had to
have been trying Claire’ s advic e, to shift the register of his
voice so as to loosen his frozen vocal cords.
“Uh-huh. Daddy sings a lot. He teached me the song about
Sunday morning, and the one a bout T om Dooley , and … and
lots,” he ended, rather at a loss.
“Did he? W ell, that’ s—put that down!” she said, as he idly
picked up an open pouch of rose madder .
“Oops.” He looked guiltily at the blob of paint that had
erupted from the leather pouch and landed on his shirt, then at
her , and made a tentative move toward the door .
“Oops, he says,” she said darkly . “Don’ t you move!”
Snaking out a hand, she grabbed  him by the collar and applied
a turpen tine-soaked rag vigorously to the front of his shirt,
succeeding only  in producing a lar ge pink blotch rather than a
vivid red line.
Jem was silent during this or deal, head bobbing as she
pulled him to and fro, swabbing.
“What are you doing in here, anyway?” she demanded
crossly . “Didn’ t I tell you to go  find something to do?” There
was no shortage of things to do at River Run, after all.
He hung his head and muttered something, in which she
made out the word “scared.”
“Scared? Of what?” A little mor e gently , she pulled the shirt
of f over his head.
“The ghost.”
“What g host?” she asked warily , not sure yet how to handle
this. She  was aware that all of the slaves at River Run believed
implicitly in ghosts, simply as a fact of life. So did virtually all
of the Scottish settlers in Cross Creek, Campbelton, and the
Ridge. And the Germans from Salem and Bethania. So, for
that matter , did her own father .She could not s imply inform Jem that there was no such
thing as a ghost—particularly as she was not entirely
convinced of that herself.
“ Maighistear arsaidh ‘s ghost,” he said, looking up at her for
the first time, hi s dark blue eyes  troubled. “Josh says he’ s been
walkin’.”
Something skittered down he r back like a centipede.
Maighistear arsaidh  was Old Master—Hector Cameron.
Involuntarily , she glanced toward the window . They were in
the small room above the sta ble block where she did the
messier bits of paint preparation, and Hector Cameron’ s white
marble mausole um was clearly visible from here, gleaming
like a tooth at the side of the lawn below .
“What makes Josh say that, I wo nder?” she said, stalling for
time. He r first impulse was to observe that ghosts didn’ t walk
in broad  dayligh t—but the obvious corollary to that was that
they did  wal k by  night, and the last thing  she wanted to do was
give Jem nightmares.
“He says Angelina saw him, night before last. A big  ol’
ghost,” he said, stretching up, h ands clawed, and widening his
eyes in obvious imitation of Josh’ s account.
“Y eah? What was he doing?” S he kept her tone light, only
mildly interested , and it seemed to be working; Jem was more
interested than scared, for the moment.
“W alkin’,” Jem  said with a small shrug. What else did
ghosts do, after all?
“W as he  smoking a pipe?” Sh e’d caught sight of a tall
gentleman strolling under the trees on the lawn below , and had
an idea.
Jem looked somewhat taken aback at the notion of a pipe-
smoking ghost.
“I dunno,” he said dubiously . “Do ghosts smoke pipes?”
“I so rt of doubt it,” she said. “B ut Mr . Buchanan does. See
him down there on the lawn?”  She moved aside, gesturingtoward t he wind ow with her chi n, and Jem rose up on his toes
to look out over the sill. Mr . Buchanan, an acquaintance of
Duncan’ s who was staying at th e house, was in fact smoking a
pipe at this ve ry moment; the faint aroma of his tobacco
reached them through the open window .
“I t hink probably Angelina saw Mr . Buchanan walking
around in the dark,” she said. “Maybe he was in his nightshirt,
going out to the necessary , and she just saw the white and
thought  he was a ghost.”
Jem giggled at the thought. He seemed willing to be
reassured, but hunched his skinny shoulders, peering closely at
Mr . Buchanan.
“Josh says Angelina says the ghost was comin’ out of old
Mr . Hector ’ s tomb,” he said.
“I expec t Mr . Buchanan just wa lked round it, and she saw
him com ing alon g the side, and thought  he was coming out of
it,” she said, c arefully avoidin g any question as to why a
middle-aged Sc ottish gentlema n should be walking round
tombs in his ni ghtshirt; obviously , that wasn’ t a notion that
struck Jemmy as odd.
It di d occur to her to ask just what Angelina was doing
outside in the middle of the night seeing ghosts, but on second
thought, better not. The most likely reason for a maid’ s
stealing out at n ight wasn’ t something a boy of Jemmy’ s age
needed to hear about, either .
Her lips tightened a little at the thought of Malva Christie,
who had  perhap s gone to a rendezvous of her own in Claire’ s
garden. Who? she wondered fo r the thousandth time, even as
she auto matically crossed herse lf, with a brief prayer for the
repose of Malva’ s soul. Who had it been? If ever there were a
ghost that should walk …
A small shiver passed over her , but that in turn gave her a
new idea.
“I think it was  Mr . Buchanan Angelina saw ,” she said
firmly . “But if you ever should  be afraid of ghosts—oranything else—y ou just make the Sign of the Cross, and say a
quick prayer to your guardian angel.”
The words gave her a slight sen se of dizziness—perhaps it
was deja vu.  She thought that someone—her mother? her
father?—had said exactly that to her , sometime in the distant
past of her child hood. What she had been afraid of? She no
longer remembered that, but did remember the sense of
security that the prayer had given her .
Jem frowned uncertainly at tha t; he knew the Sign of the
Cross, but wasn’ t so sure about t he angel prayer . She rehearsed
it with him, feeling slightly guilty as she did so.
It was only a matter of time befo re he did something overtly
Catholic—like make the Sign of the Cross—in front of
someone who mattered to Roger . For the most part, people
either as sumed that the minister ’ s wife was Protestant, as well
—or knew the truth, but were in no position to make a fuss
about it. She w as aware of a certain amount of muttering
amongst Roger ’ s flock, particularly in the wake of Malva’ s
death and the ta lk about her parents—she felt her lips press
tight ag ain, and consciously  relaxed them—but Roger
steadfastly refused to hear any such remarks.
She felt a deep pang of longing for Roger , even with the
worrying thought of potential religious complications fresh in
her mind. He’d w ritten; Elder McCorkle had been delayed, but
should be in Ed enton within the week. A week more, maybe,
before the Presbytery Session convened—and then he’d be
coming to River Run for her and Jem.
He was so happ y at the thoug ht of his ordination; surely
once he was  ord ained, they couldn’ t defroc k him—if that’ s
what ha ppened to miscreant ministers—for having a Catholic
wife, could they?
W ould s he convert, if she had to, for Roger to be what he so
clearly w anted—and needed—to be? The thought made her
feel hollow , and she put h er arms round Jemmy for
reassurance. His  skin was dam p and still baby-soft, but she
could fe el the hardness of his bones pressing through, givingpromise of a size that would likely one day match his father
and grandfather . His father—there was a small, glowing
thought that calmed all her anxieties, and even soothed the
ache of missing Roger .
Jemmy’ s hair had long since gro wn again, but she kissed the
spot beh ind his left ear where the hidden mark was, making
him hun ch his shoulders and giggle at the tickle of her breath
on his neck.
She sent him o f f then, to take the paint-stained shirt to
Matilda the laundress to see what might be done, and went
back to her grinding.
The mineral smell of the mala chite in her mortar seemed
vaguely wrong;  she lifted it and snif fed, even as she did so
aware that that was ridiculous: ground stone couldn’ t go bad.
Maybe the mixture of turpentine and the fumes from Mr .
Buchanan’ s pipe was af fecting her sense of smell. She shook
her head, and scraped the soft green powder carefully out into
a via l, to be mixed with walnut oil or used in an egg tempera
later .
She cast an appraising eye over the selection of boxes and
pouches—some supplied by Au nt Jocasta, others courtesy of
John Grey , sent specially from London—and the vials and
drying trays of the pigments she’d ground herself, to see what
else might be needed.
This afternoon, she’d only be making preliminary sketches
—the co mmission was for a portrait of Mr . Forbes’ s ancient
mother—but she might have only a week or two to finish the
job before Roger ’ s return; she couldn’ t waste—
A wave of dizzi ness made her s it down suddenly , and black
spots flickered through her visi on. She put her head between
her knees, breathing deep. Tha t didn’ t help; the air was raw
with turps, and thick with the m eaty , decaying animal smells
of the stables below .
She lifted her h ead, and grabbed for the edge of the table.
Her insides seemed to have turned abruptly to a liquidsubstance that shifted with her m ovement like water in a bowl,
sloshing from belly to throat and back, leaving the bitter
yellow smell of bile at the back of her nose.
“Oh, God.”
The liquid in h er belly rushed up her throat, and she had
barely time to seize the washbasin from the table and dump the
water on the flo or before her sto mach turned inside out in the
frantic ef fort to empty itself.
She set the basin down, very carefully , and sat panting,
staring at the wet blotch on the floor , as the world beneath her
shifted on its axis and settled at a new , uneasy angle.
“Congratulations, Roger ,” she said out loud, her voice
sounding faint and uncertain in the close, damp air . “I think
you’re going to be a daddy . Again.”
SHE SA T STILL for some time, cautiously exploring the
sensations of her body , looking for certainty . She hadn’ t been
sick with Jemmy—but she re membered the oddly altered
quality of her se nses; that odd state called synesthesia, where
sight, smell, taste, and even so metimes hearing occasionally
and weirdly took on characteristics of each other .
It ha d go ne awa y as abruptly as it had happened; the tang of
Mr . Buc hanan’ s tobacco was much stronger , but now it was
only the mellow burning of cured leaves, not a mottled green-
brown t hing that writhed through her sinuses and rattled the
membranes of her brain like a tin roof in a hailstorm.
She had been co ncentrating so hard on her bodily sensations
and what they might or might not mean that she hadn’ t really
noticed the voices in the next room. That was Duncan’ s
modest lair , where he kept the  ledgers and accounts of the
estate and—she thought—went to hide, when the grandeur of
the house became too much for him.
Mr . Buc hanan was in there with  Duncan now , and what had
started out as a genial thrum of conversation was now showing
signs of strain. She got up, relieved to feel only a slightresidual clammi ness now , and picked up the basin. She had the
natural h uman i nclinations tow ard eavesdropping, but lately ,
she had been careful not to hear anything but what she must.
Duncan and her aunt Jocasta were stout Loyalists, and
nothing she could say by way  of tactful ur ging or logical
ar gument would sway them. She had overheard more than one
of Duncan’ s private conversations with local T ories that made
her h eart go sma ll with apprehension, knowing as she did what
would be the outcome of the present events.
Here in the pied mont, in the hea rt of the Cape Fear country ,
most of the soli d citizens wer e  Loyalists, convinced that the
violence taking place to the no rth was an overblown rumpus
that might be unnecessary , and if it was not, had little to do
with them—and  that what was most needed here was a firm
hand to rein in the wild-eyed Whigs, before their excesses
provoked a ruinous retaliation. Knowing that exactly such a
ruinous retaliation was coming—and to people she liked, or
even loved—ga ve her what her father called the grue: a cold
sense of oppressive horror , coiling through the blood.
“When, then?” Buchanan’ s v oice came clearly as she
opened the door , sounding impatient. “They will not wait,
Duncan. I must have the money by W ednesday week, or
Dunkling will sell the arms els ewhere; ye ken it’ s a seller ’ s
market the noo. For gold, he’ll wait—but not for long.”
“A ye, I ken that fine, Sawny .” Duncan sounded impatient—
and very uneasy , Brianna thoug ht. “If it can be done, it will
be.”
“IF?” Buchanan  cried. “What is this ‘if ’? ‘T il now , it’ s been,
oh, aye, Sawny , nay dif ficulty , to be sure, Sawny , tell Dunkling
it’ s on, oh, of course,  Sawny—”
“I said, Alexander , that if it can  be done, it will.” Duncan’ s
voice w as low , but suddenly ha d a note of steel in it that she
had never heard before.
Buchanan said something rude in the Gaelic, and suddenly
the door  of Duncan’ s of fice bu rst open and the man himselfpopped out, in so great a huf f th at he barely saw her , and gave
her no more than a brusque nod in passing.
Which was just as well, she thou ght, since she was standing
there holding a bowl full of vomit.
Before she could move to dispo se of it, Duncan came out in
turn. He looked hot, cross—and extremely worried. He did,
however , notice her .
“How d’ye fare, lass?” he aske d, squinting at her . “Y e’re
that bit green; have ye eaten aught amiss?”
“I th ink so. But I’m all right now ,” she said, hastily turning
to pu t the basin back in the room  behind her . She set it on the
floor and closed the door on it. “Are you, er , all right,
Duncan?”
He hesitated for an instant, but w hatever was bothering him
was too overwhe lming to keep i t bottled up. He glanced about,
but none of the slaves was up here at this time of day . He
leaned close, nonetheless, and lowered his voice.
“Have ye by chance … seen anything peculiar , a nighean ?”
“Peculiar , how?”
He rubbed a knuckle under his drooping mustache, and
glanced round once more.
“Near Hector Cameron’ s tomb, say?” he asked, his voice
pitched only just above a whisper .
Her diaphragm, still sore from vomiting, contracted sharply
at that, and she put a hand to her middle.
“Y e have, then?” Duncan’ s expression sharpened.
“Not me,” she said, and explained about Jemmy , Angelina,
and the supposed ghost.
“I thought perhaps it was Mr . Buchanan,” she finished,
nodding toward  the stair down  which Alexander Buchanan
had vanished.“Now , there’ s a thought,” D uncan muttered, rubbing
distractedly at his grizzled temp le. “But no … surely not. He
couldna—but it’ s a thought.” Brianna thought that he looked
very slightly more hopeful.
“Duncan—can you tell me what’ s wrong?”
He took a deep breath, shaking his head—not in refusal, but
in perplexity—and let it out again, his shoulders slumping.
“The gold,” he said simply . “It’ s gone.”
SEVEN THOUSAND POUNDS in gold bullion was a
substantial amou nt, in all senses of the word. She had no idea
how mu ch such a sum might weigh, but it had completely
lined Jocasta’ s cof fin, standing chastely next to Hector
Cameron’ s in the family mausoleum.
“What do you mean ‘gone’?” she blurted. “ All  of it?”
Duncan clutched her arm, features contorted in the ur ge to
shush her .
“A ye, al l of it,” he said, looking round yet again. “For God’ s
sake, lass, keep your voice down!”
“When did it go? Or rather ,” she amended, “when you did
find it gone?”
“Last ni ght.” He looked round y et again, and jerked his chin
toward his of fice. “Come in, lass; I’ll tell ye about it.”
Duncan’ s agitati on subsided a little as he told her the story;
by the time he h ad finished, he had regained a certain amount
of outward calm.
The sev en thousand pounds was what was left of the
original ten thousand, which in turn was one-third of the thirty
thousand sent— too late, but sent nonetheless—from Louis of
France in support of Charles S tuart’ s doomed attempt on the
thrones of England and Scotland.
“Hector was careful, aye?” Duncan explained. “He lived as
a rich man, bu t always within such means as a place likethis”—he waved his one hand around, indicating the grounds
and messuages of River Run—”might provide. He spent a
thousand pound acquiring the land and building the house,
then over the years, another thousand in slaves, cattle, and the
like. And a thou sand pound he put to the bankers—Jo said he
couldna bear the thought of all t hat money sitting, earning nay
interest”—he gave her a small, wry smile—”though he was
too clever to attract attention by putting it all out. I suppose he
meant, m aybe, t o invest the res t, a bit at a time—but he died
before that was done.”
Leaving Jocasta as a very wealthy widow—but even more
cautious than her husband had been about attracting undue
attention. And so the gold had sa t, safe in its hiding place, save
for t he o ne ingo t being gradually whittled away and disposed
of by Ulysses. W hich had disappeared, she remembered with a
qualm. Someone  knew there was gold here.
Perhaps whoeve r had taken that ingot had guessed that there
was more—and hunted, quietly , patiently , until they found it.
But now—
“Y e’ll have heard about General MacDonald?”
She’d heard the name frequently of late, in conversation—
he was a Scottish general, more or less retired, she’d assumed
—who had been staying here and there, the guest of various
prominent families. She hadn’ t  heard of his purpose, though.
“He means to ra ise men—three  thousand, four—among the
Highlanders, to march to the coast. The Governor ’ s sent for
aid; troo pships are coming. So the General’ s men will come
down through the Cape Fear valley”—he made a graceful
swooping gesture with his hand—”meet the Governor and his
troops—and pincer the rebel militias that are a-building.”
“And you meant to give him the gold—or no,” she corrected
herself. “Y ou meant to give him arms and powder .”
He nodded and chewed his mustaches, looking unhappy .
“A man named Dunkling; Al exander knows him. Lord
Dunsmore is gathering a great store of powder and arms inV ir ginia, and Dunkling is one of his lieutenants—and willing
to give up some of that store, in return for gold.”
“Which is now g one.” She took a deep breath, feeling sweat
trickle down between her breasts, further dampening her shift.
“Which is now gone,” he agree d bleakly . “And I’m left to
wonder what about this ghost of wee Jem’ s, aye?”
Ghost, indeed. For someone to have entered a place like
River Run, teeming with peopl e, and to have moved several
hundred pounds by weight of gold, completely unnoticed …
The sound of fe et on the stairs caused Duncan to jerk his
head sha rply tow ard the door , b ut it was only Josh, one of the
black grooms, his hat in his hand.
“Best we be going, Miss Bree,” he said, bowing
respectfully . “If ye be wanting the light, like?”
For her drawing s, he meant. It was a good hour ’ s trip into
Cross Creek to lawyer Forbes’ s  house, and the sun was rising
fast toward noon.
She glanced at her green-smeared fingers, and recalled the
hair straggling untidily down from its makeshift bun; she’d
have to tidy herself a bit first.
“Go, las s.” Duncan waved her to ward the door , his lean face
still creased with worry but ligh tened a little by having shared
it.
She kissed him af fectionately on the forehead and went
down after Josh. She was  wor ried, and no t only about mi ssing
gold and prowling ghosts. General MacDonald, indeed. For if
he m eant to rais e fighting men among the Highlanders, one of
the natural places for him to go was to her father .
As Roger had noted to her sometime earlier , “Jamie can
walk the  tightr ope between Whigs and T ories better than any
man I know—but when push co mes to shove … he’ll have to
jump.”
The push  had come at Mecklenber g. But shove, she thought,
was named MacDonald.1 0 0
A TRIP T O THE SEASIDE
N EIL FORBES, thinking it prudent to be absent from his
usual haunts for a time, had r emoved to Edenton, with the
excuse of taking his aged mother to visit her even more aged
sister . He had enjoyed the long journey , in spite of his
mother ’ s compla ints about the clouds of dust raised by another
carriage that preceded them.
He h ad been loa th to sacrifice his sight of that carriage—a
small, well-spru ng af fair , whose windows were sealed and
heavily curtained. But he had al ways been a devoted son, and
at the next post stop, he went to speak to the driver . The other
coach obligingly dropped back, following them at a
convenient distance.
“Whatever are ye lookin’ at, Neil?” his mother demanded,
looking up from fastening her favorite garnet brooch. “That’ s
the third time ye’ve had a peek out thon window .”
“Not a thing, Mam,” he said, in haling deeply . “Only taking
pleasure in the day . Such beautiful weather , is it not?”
Mrs. Forbes snif fed, but obligingly settled her spectacles on
her nose and leaned to peer out.
“A ye, weel, it’ s fair enough,” she admitted dubiously . “Hot,
though, and damp enough to wring buckets from your shirt.”
“Never mind, a leannan, ” he said, patting her black-clad
shoulder . “W e’ll  be in Edenton afore ye know . It’ll be cooler
there. N othing li ke a sea-breeze, so they say , to put the roses in
your cheeks!”1 0 1
NIGHTW A TCH
Edenton
T HE REVEREND MCMILLAN’S HOUSE was on the water .
A bl essing in th e hot, muggy weather . The of fshore breeze in
the evening swept everything away—heat, hearth smoke,
mosquitoes. Th e men sat on the big porch after supper ,
smoking their pipes and enjoying the respite.
Roger ’ s enjoyment was spiced by the guilty awareness that
Mrs. Reverend  McMillan and her three daughters were
sweating to and fro, washing dishes, clearing away , sweeping
floors, boiling up the leftover ham bones from supper with
lentils for tomorrow’ s soup, putting children to bed, and
generally slaving  away in the stuf fy , sweltering confines of the
house. At home, he would have  felt obliged to help with such
work, or face Brianna’ s wrath; here, such an of fer would have
been received with drop-jawed incredulity , followed by deep
suspicion. Instead, he sat peacefully in the cool evening
breeze, w atching fishing boats come in across the water of the
sound and sipping something that passed for cof fee, engaged
in pleasant male conversation.
There was, he thought, occasionally something to be said
for the eighteenth-century model of sexual roles.
They we re talking over the new s from the south: the flight
of Gove rnor Martin from New Bern, the burning of Fort
Johnston. The political climate of Edenton was strongly
Whiggish, and the company  was lar gely clerical—the
Reverend Doctor McCorkle, h is secretary W arren Lee, the
Reverend Jay McMillan, Reverend Patrick Dugan, and four
“inquirers” awai ting ordination besides Roger—but there were
still currents of political disag reement flowing beneath the
outwardly cordial surface of the conversation.Roger himself said little; he didn’ t wish to of fend
McMillan’ s hosp itality by contributing to any ar gument—and
something insid e him wished for quiet, to contemplate
tomorrow .
Then the conversation took a new turn, though, and he
found hi mself paying rapt attention. The Continental Congress
had met in Philadelphia two mo nths before, and given General
W ashington command of the Continental army . W arren Lee
had bee n in Philadelphia at th e time, and was giving the
company a vivid account of the battle at Breed’ s Hill, at which
he had been present.
“General Putnam, he brought up wagonloads of dirt and
brush, to  the neck of the Charlestown peninsula—you said you
knew it, sir?” he asked, courteously turning toward Roger .
“W ell, Colonel Prescott, he’ s there already , with two militia
comp’nies from  Massachusetts , and parts of another from
Connecticut—was mebbe a thousand men in all, and dear
Lord, was they a stench from the camps!”
His soft Southern accent—Lee was a V ir ginian—held a
slight touch of amusement, but this faded as he went on.
“General W ard,  he’d give orders to fortify this one hill,
Bunker Hill, they call it, for an old redoubt atop. But Colonel
Prescott, he goes up it and don ’ t care so much for the looks,
him and Mr . Gridley , the engineer . So they leave a detachment
there, and go o n to Breed’ s Hill, what they think is maybe
better to the purpose, bein’ closer to the harbor .
“Now , this is a ll at night, min d. I was with one of the
Massachusetts companies, and we marched right smart, then
spent the whole night through, ‘twixt midnight and dawn,
diggin’ trenches and raising up six-foot walls about the
perimeter .
“Come the dawn, and we skulked down behind our
fortifications, an d just in time, too, for there’ s a British ship in
the harbor—the Lively ,  the y said—and she opens fire the
minute the sun’ s up. Looked right pretty , for the fog was still
on the water and the cannon li t it up in red flashes. Did noharm, though; most all the balls  fell short into the harbor—did
see one  whaleboat at the doc ks hit, though; stove it like
kindling. The crew , they’d hop ped out like fleas when the
Lively  t oo k to  firing. From where I w as, I could just see ‘em,
hoppin’ up and down on the dock, a-shakin’ their fists—then
the Lively  l et of f a nother broadside, and they all fell flat or run
like rabbits.”
The ligh t was nearly gone, and Lee’ s young face invisible in
the shad ows, but the amusement in his voice made a small
rumble of laughter run among the other men.
“They was some firin’ from a little battery up on Copp’ s
Hill, and  one or two of the oth er ships, they let of f a pop or
two, bu t they could see ‘twan ’ t no earthly use and ceased.
Then co me in some fellows fro m New Hampshire to join up
with us,  and that was purely he artening. But General Putnam,
he s ends a good many men back to work on the fortifications
at B unker , and th e New Hampshire folk, they’re crouched way
down on the left, where they’ s got no cover beyond rail fences
stuf fed with mown grass. Look in’ at ‘em down there, I was
pleased as punch to have four feet of solid earthwork in front
of me, I tell you, gentlemen.”
The Brit ish troops had set out across the Charles River , bold
as brass under th e midday sun, w ith the warships behind them
and the batteries on shore all providing covering fire.
“W e didn’ t fire back, of course . Had no cannon,” Lee said
with an audible shrug.
Roger , listening intently , coul dn’ t keep from asking a
question at this point.
“Is it true that C olonel Stark said, ‘Don’ t fire until you see
the whites of their eyes’?”
Lee coughed discreetly .
“W ell, s ir . I couldn’ t say for su re as no one said that, but I
didn’ t h ear it myself. Mind, I did  h ear one colon el call out,
‘Any whoreson fool wastes his powder afore the bastards areclose en ough to kill is gonna get  his musket shoved up his arse
butt-first!’”
The assembly erupted into laughter . An inquiry from Mrs.
McMillan, who had come out to of fer further refreshment, as
to th e source of this merriment shut them all up sharp, though,
and they listened with a fair assumption of sober attention to
the rest of Lee’ s account.
“W ell, so, then, on they com e, and I will say ‘twas a
daunting sight. They’d several regiments, and all in their
dif ferent colors, fusiliers and grenadiers, Royal Marines, and a
proper b oiling of light infantry , all comin’ on over the ground
like a horde of ants, and just as mean.
“I wouldn’ t make great claim to bravery myself, gentlemen,
but I would say the fellows stan din’ with me had some nerve.
W e d id l et ‘em come, and the fi rst ranks weren’ t no more than
ten feet away when our volley cut into them.
“They rallied, came back on, an d we cut them down again
—like ninepins.  And the of ficers—there was a powerful lot of
the of fic ers wen t; they were on their horses, see? I—I shot one
such. He keeled over , but he did n’ t fall of f—his horse carried
him away . Kind of lolling, with  his head loose. But he didn’ t
fall.”
Lee’ s vo ice had lost some of its color , and Roger saw the
burly fo rm of the Reverend Doctor McCorkle lean toward his
secretary , touching his shoulder .
“They r allied a third time, and came on. And … we were
most of us ou t of ammunition. They came on over the
earthworks and through the fences. W ith their bayonets fixed.”
Roger w as sittin g on the steps of the porch, Lee above him
and several feet away , but could hear the young man swallow .
“W e fell  back. That’ s how they say it. W e ran, is what we
did. So’d they .”
He swallowed again.“A bayo net—it makes a terrible sound, goin’ into a man.
Just—terrible. I can’ t say how it  is, describe it properly . Heard
it, though, and more’n once. W as a good many run straight
through the body that day—skewered and then the steel pulled
out, and they left to die on the ground, floppin’ like fish.”
Roger had seen—handled—eighteenth-century bayonets,
often. A seventeen-inch triangular blade, heavy and brutal,
with a blood groove down one side. He thought, quite
suddenly , of the furrowed scar that ran up Jamie Fraser ’ s thigh,
and rose  to his feet. Murmuring a brief excuse, he left the
porch, and walked down the shore, pausing only for a moment
to shed his shoes and stockings.
The tide was going out; sand and shingle were wet and cool
under hi s bare feet. The breeze rattled faintly among palmetto
leaves behind him, and a line of pelicans flew down the shore,
solemn a gainst t he last of the light. He walked a little way into
the surf,  small rippling waves th at tugged at his heels, sucking
the sand away beneath him, m aking him shift and sway to
keep his balance.
Far out on the water of Albem arle Sound, he could see
lights; fishing boats, with small fires built in sandboxes
aboard, to light the torches the fishermen swung over the side.
These seemed to float in the a ir , swinging to and fro, their
reflections in the water winking slowly in and out like fireflies.
The stars were c oming out. He stood looking up, trying to
empty his mind, his heart, open himself to the love of God.
T omorrow , he would be a minister . Thou art a priest for ever ,
said the ordination service, quoting from the Bible, after the
or der of Melchizedek.
“Ar e you afraid?”  Brianna had asked him, when he’d told
her .
“Y eah,” he said softly , aloud.
He stoo d until the tide left him, then followed it, walking
into the water , wanting the rhythmic touch of the waves.
“W ill you do it anyway?”“Y eah,” he said, more softly sti ll. He had no idea what he
was agr eeing to, but said it, anyway . Far down the beach
behind h im, the breeze brought him now and then a snatch of
laughter , a few words from the Reverend McMillan’ s porch.
They had moved on, then, from the talk of war and death.
Had any of them ever killed a man? Lee, perhaps. The
Reverend Doctor McCorkle? He  snorted a little at the thought,
but did not dism iss it. He turned and walked a little further ,
until the only sounds were those  of the waves and the of fshore
wind.
Soul-searching. It was what squires used to do, he thought,
smiling a little wryly at the thought. The night before he
became a knight, a young man would keep vigil in church or
chapel, watching through the dark hours, lighted only by the
glow of a sanctuary lamp, praying.
For what? he wondered. Purity of mind, singleness of
purpose. Courage? Or perhaps for giveness?
He hadn ’ t mean t to kill Randa ll Lillington; that had been
almost accident, and what wasn’ t had been self-defense. But
he h ad b een hun ting when he d id it, had gone out looking for
Stephen Bonnet, meaning to kill him in cold blood. And
Harley Boble; he could still se e the shine of the thieftaker ’ s
eyes, feel the echo of the blow , the shards of the man’ s skull
reverberating th rough the bones of his own arm. He’d meant
that, yes. Could have stopped. Didn’ t.
T omorrow , he would swear before God that he believed in
the doctrine of predestination, that he had been meant to do
what he had done. Perhaps.
Maybe I don’ t believe that, so much,  he tho ught, doubt
stealing in. But maybe I do. Christ—oh, sorry —he apologized
mentally— can I be a pr oper minister , with doubts? I think
everyone’ s got them, but if I’ve got too many—maybe ye’d best
let me know now , befor e it’ s too late.
His feet had go ne numb, and the sky was ablaze with a
glory of stars, thick in the black velvet night. He heard thecrunch of footsteps among th e shingle and the sea wrack
nearby .
It was W arren Lee—tall and gangly by starlight, the
Reverend Doctor McCorkle’ s secretary , erstwhile militiaman.
“Thought I’d take a bit of air ,”  Lee said, his voice hardly
audible above the hiss of the sea.
“A ye, w ell, ther e’ s a lot of it, a nd it’ s free,” Roger said as
amiably as he c ould. Lee chuckled briefly in response, but
luckily didn’ t seem disposed to talk.
They stood for s ome time, watching the fishing boats. Then,
by unsp oken consent, turned to go back. The house was dark,
the porch deserted. A single c andle burned in the window ,
though, lighting them home.
“That of ficer , the one I shot,” L ee blurted suddenly . “I pray
for him. Every night.”
Lee shut up abruptly , embarrassed. Roger breathed slow and
deep, fee ling the  jerk of his own heart. Had he ever prayed for
Lillington, or Boble?
“I will, too,” he said.
“Thank you,” said Lee very so ftly , and side by side, they
made th eir way back up the beach, pausing to pick up their
shoes, going back barefooted, sand drying on their feet.
They ha d sat down on the steps  to brush it of f before going
in, when the door behind them opened.
“Mr . MacKenzie?” said the Reverend McMillan, and
something in his voice pulled Roger to his feet, heart
pounding. “Y ou have a visitor .”
He s aw the tall silhouette behind  McMillan, and knew , even
before Jamie Fraser ’ s pale, fierce face appeared, eyes black in
the candlelight.
“He’ s taken Brianna,” Jamie sa id without preamble. “Y e’ll
come.”1 0 2
Anemone
F EET TRAMPLED BACK AND FOR TH OVERHEAD, and
she could hear voices, but most of the words were too muf fled
to make  out. There was a choru s of jovial shouts on the side
nearest shore, and cordial feminine shrieks in reply .
The cab in had a wide, paned window—did you call it a
window on a ship, she wond ered, or had it some special
nautical name?— that ran behind the bunk, raked back with the
angle of  the stern. It was made  in small, thick panes, set in
leading. No hope there of e scape, but it did of fer the
possibility of air , and perhaps information regarding their
whereabouts.
Repressing a qualm of nauseated distaste, she clambered
across the stained and rumpled sheets of the bed. She pressed
close to the window and pushed her face into one of the open
panes, taking deep breaths to d ispel the aromas of the cabin,
though t he smell of the harbor was no great improvement, rife
as it was with the smell of dead fish, sewage, and baking mud.
She cou ld see a small dock, and  moving figures on it. A fire
was burning on the shore outsid e a low , whitewashed building
roofed with palmetto leaves. It  was too dark to see what, if
anything, lay beyond the build ing. There must be at least a
small town, though, judging from the noise of the people on
the dock.
There were voices outside the cabin door , coming closer .
“… mee t him on Ocracoke, the d ark o’ the moon,” said one, to
which th e other replied in an indistinct mumble, before the
door flew open.
“Care to join t he party , sweetheart? Or have ye started
without me?”She whirled on her knees, hea rt hammering in her throat.
Stephen Bonnet stood inside the door to the cabin, a bottle in
one hand and a slight smile on his face. She took a deep breath
to qu ell the shoc k, and nearly ga gged on the stale scent of sex
that wafted from the sheets unde r her knees. She scrambled of f
the bed,  heedless of her clothes , and felt a rip at the waist as
her knee caught in her skirt.
“Where are we?” she demanded. Her voice sounded shrill,
panicked to her own ears.
“On the Anemone, ” he said patiently , still smiling.
“Y ou know that isn’ t what I me an!” The neck of her gown
and chem ise had torn in the struggle when the men pulled her
from he r horse, and most of one breast was exposed; she put
up a hand, pushing the fabric back in place.
“Do I?” He se t the bottle on the desk, and reached to
unfasten the stock from his neck. “Ah, that’ s better .” He
rubbed a t the dark red line acr oss his throat, and she had a
sudden, piercing vision of Roger ’ s throat, with its ragged scar .
“I wish to know what this town is called,” she said,
deepening her voice and fixing him with a gimlet eye. She
didn’ t expect that what worked on her father ’ s tenants would
work on him, but the assumptio n of an air of command helped
to steady her a bit.
“W ell, th at’ s an easily gratified wish, to be sure.” He waved
a casual hand toward the shore. “Roanoke.” He shucked his
coat, tossing it c arelessly over the stool. The linen of his shirt
was crumpled, and clung damply to his chest and shoulders.
“Y e’d best take of f the gown, darlin’; it’ s hot.”
He r eached for t he strings that tied his shirt, and she moved
abruptly away from the bed, glancing round the cabin,
searching the shadows for something that could be used as a
weapon. Stool, lamp, logbook, bottle … there. A piece of
wood showed among the rubble on the desk, the blunt end of a
marlinespike.He frow ned, attention fastened momentarily on a knot in the
string. S he took two long steps and seized the marlinespike,
yanking it of f the desk in a shower of rubbish and clanging
oddments.
“Stand back.” She held the thing  like a baseball bat, gripped
in b oth hands. S weat streamed down the hollow of her back,
but her hands fe lt cold and her face went hot and cold and hot
again, ripples of heat and terror rolling down her skin.
Bonnet looked at her as though she had gone mad.
“Whatever will ye be after doing with that, woman?” He left
of f f iddling with his shirt and to ok a step toward her . She took
one back, raising the club.
“Don’ t fucking touch me!”
He stared at her , eyes fixed wide, pale green and unblinking
above a small, o dd smile. Still smiling, he took another step
toward h er . The n another , and th e fear boiled of f in a sur ge of
rage. Her shoulders bunched and lifted, ready .
“I mean it! Stand back or I’ll kill you. I’ll know who this
baby’ s father is, if I die for it!”
He h ad raised a hand, as though to grasp the club and jerk it
away from her , but at this, he stopped abruptly .
“Baby? Y ou are with child?”
She swallowed, her breath still thick in her throat. The
blood hammered  in her ears, and the smooth wood was slick
with sweat from her palms. Sh e tightened her grip, trying to
keep the rage alive, but it was already dying.
“Y es. I think so. I’ll know for sure in two weeks.”
His sandy eyebrows lifted.
“Hm!” W ith a short grunt, he stepped back, surveying her
with interest. Slowly , his eyes tr aveled over her , appraising her
one bared breast.
The sudden spurt of rage had drained away , leaving her
breathless and empty-bellied. She kept hold of themarlinespike, but her wrists quivered, and she lowered it.
“Is that the way of it, then?”
He leaned forward and reached out, quite without lascivious
intent now . Startled, she froze for an instant, and he weighed
the breast in one hand, kneadi ng thoughtfully , as though it
were a grapefruit he meant to b uy at market. She gasped and
hit at him one- handed with the club, but she had lost what
readiness she had, and the blow bounced of f his shoulder ,
rocking him but having little other ef fect. He grunted and
stepped back, rubbing at his shoulder .
“Could be. W ell, then.” He frow ned, and tugged at the front
of his breeche s, adjusting himself without the slightest
embarrassment. “Lucky we’re in port, I suppose.”
She made no sen se whatever of this remark, but didn’ t care;
apparently he had changed his mind upon hearing her
revelation, and the feeling of relief made her knees go weak
and her skin pric kle with sweat. She sat down, quite suddenly ,
upon the stool, the club clanking to the floor beside her .
Bonnet had put his head out into the corridor , and was
bellowing for someone named Orden. Whoever Orden was, he
didn’ t come into the cabin, but w ithin a few moments, a voice
mumbled interrogatively outside.
“Fetch me down a whore from the docks,” Bonnet said, in
the c asual tone of one ordering  a fresh pint of bitter . “Clean,
mind, and fairly young.”
He shut the door then, and turned to the table, scrabbling
through the debris until he unea rthed a pewter cup. He poured
a dr ink, quaf fed half of it, and then—seeming belatedly to
realize that she was still there— of fered her the bottle with a
vague “Eh?” of invitation.
She shook her h ead, wordless. A faint hope had sprung up
in th e back of her mind. He d id have some faint streak of
gallantry , or at l east decency; he had come back to rescue her
from the  burnin g warehouse, and he had left her the stone for
what he assumed to be his chil d. Now he had abandoned hisadvances, upon hearing that she  was with child again. Perhaps
he w ould let her go, then, particularly if she was of no
immediate use to him.
“So … you don’ t want me?” she  said, edging her feet under
her , ready to leap up and run, a s soon as the door opened to
admit her replacement. She hoped she could  run; her knees
were still trembling with reaction.
Bonnet glanced at her , surprised.
“I’ve split your q uim once already , sweetheart,” he said, and
grinned. “I recall the red hair— a lovely sight, sure—but it
wasn’ t so memorable an experi ence otherwise that I can’ t be
waitin’ to repeat it. T ime enough, darlin’, time enough.” He
chucked her negligently under the chin, and gulped more of
his drink. “For now , though, LeRoi’ s needing a bit of a
gallop.”
“Why am I here?” she demanded.
Distracted, he pulled once more at the crotch of his
breeches, quite unself-conscious of her presence.
“Here? Why , because a gentleman paid me to take ye to
London-town, darlin’. Didn’ t ye know?”
She felt as thoug h someone had hit her in the stomach, and
sat d own on the  bed, folding her arms protectively across her
midsection.
“What gentleman? And for God’ s sake—why?”
He considered for a moment, but evidently concluded that
there was no reason not to tell her .
“A man named Forbes,” he said , and threw back the rest of
his drink. “Know him, do you?”
“I most certainly  do,” she said, amazement vying with fury .
“That bloody bastar d !” S o they we re Forbes’ s men, the
masked bandits that had stoppe d her and Josh, dragged them
from the ir horses, and shoved th em both into a sealed carriage,
bumping over unseen roads for d ays on end, until they reachedthe coas t, and then been pulled out, disheveled and reeking,
and bundled aboard the ship.
“Where’ s Joshu a?” she asked a bruptly . “The young black
man who was with me?”
“W as there?” Bonnet looked quizzical. “If they brought him
aboard, I imagine they’ve put h im in the hold with the other
car go. A bonus, I suppose,” he added, and laughed.
Her fury at Forbes had been tinged with relief at finding out
he w as the mot ive behind her abduction; Forbes might be a
low-down, snea king scoundrel, but he wouldn’ t be intending
to m urder her . T hat laugh of Stephen Bonnet’ s, though, made a
cold qualm run through her , and she felt suddenly light-
headed.
“What do you mean, a bonus?”
Bonnet scratche d his cheek, gooseberry eyes roaming over
her in approval.
“Oh, well, then. Mr . Forbes only wanted ye out of the way ,
he said. Whatever did ye do to the man, darlin’? But he’ s paid
your fare already , and I’ve the impression that he’ s no great
interest in where ye end up.”
“Where I end up ?” Her mouth had been dry; now saliva was
pouring from her membranes, and she had to swallow
repeatedly .
“W ell, after all, darlin’, why bother takin’ ye all the way to
London, where ye’d be of n o particular use to anyone?
Besides, it rains quite a bit in L ondon; I’m sure ye wouldn’ t
like it.”
Before s he could draw breath to  ask any more questions, the
door opened, and a young woman slid through, closing it
behind her .
She was likely i n her twenties, though with a missing molar
that showed when she smiled. S he was plump and plain-faced,
brown-haired, and clean by local standards, though the scent
of her sweat a nd waves of freshly applied cheap colognewafted across the cabin, makin g Brianna want to throw up
again.
“Hallo, Stephen,” the newcomer said, standing on tiptoe to
kiss Bonnet’ s cheek. “Give us a drink to be starting with, eh?”
Bonnet grabbed her , gave her a d eep and lingering kiss, then
let her go and reached for the bottle.
Coming down onto her heels, she looked at Brianna with
detached professional interest, then back at Bonnet, and
scratched at her neck.
“Y ou’ll have the two of us, Stephen, or shall it be me and
her to start? It’ s a quid more, either way .”
Bonnet didn’ t bother answering, but thrust the bottle into
her hand , whipped of f the kerchief that hid the swell of her
heavy breasts, and began at once  to undo his flies. He dropped
the breeches on the floor , and without ado, seized the woman
by the hips and pressed her against the door .
Guzzling from the bottle she h eld in one hand, the young
woman snatched up her skirts with the other , whisking skirt
and petticoat out of the way with  a practiced motion that bared
her to the waist. Brianna caught a glimpse of sturdy thighs and
a patch of dark hair , before the y were obscured by Bonnet’ s
buttocks, blond-furred and clenched with ef fort.
She turned her head away , cheeks burning, but morbid
fascination compelled her to glance back. The whore was
standing balanced on her toes, squatting slightly to
accommodate him, gazing placidly over his shoulder as he
thrust and grunted. One hand s till held the bottle; the other
stroked Bonnet’ s shoulders in a practiced way . She caught
Brianna’ s eye on her , and winked, still saying, “Ooh, yes …
oh, YES! That’ s good, love, so good …” in her client’ s ear .
The cabin door quivered with each meaty thump of the
whore’ s backside, and Brianna could hear laughter in the
corridor outside, both male and female; evidently Orden had
brought back enough to supply crew as well as captain.Bonnet heaved and grunted for a  minute or two, then gave a
loud gro an, his movements sudd enly jerky and uncoordinated.
The whore put a helpful hand on his buttocks and pulled him
close, th en relaxed her grip as  his body went limp, leaning
heavily against her . She suppor ted him for a moment, patting
his back matter -of-factly , like a  mother burping a baby , then
pushed him of f.
His face and n eck were flushed dark red, and he was
breathing heavily . He nodded to the whore, and stooped,
fumbling for his breeches. He s tood up with them and waved
toward the littered desk.
“Help y ourself to your pay , da rlin’, but give me back the
bottle, aye?”
The whore pouted slightly , but t ook a final deep gulp of the
liquor and handed him the bottle, now no more than a quarter
full. She pulled a wadded cloth  from the pocket at her waist
and clapped it b etween her thighs, then shook down her skirts
and min ced across to the desk, poking delicately among the
litter for scattered coins, whi ch she picked out with two
fingers, droppin g them one by one into the depths of her
pocket.
Bonnet, clothed once more, went out without a backward
glance at the two women. The air in the cabin was hot and
thick with the scent of sex, a nd Brianna felt her stomach
clench. Not with revulsion, but with panic. The strong male
reek had  triggered an instinctive flush of response that tingled
across her breasts and grippe d her inwardly; for a brief,
disorienting moment, she felt Roger ’ s skin, slick with sweat
against her own, and her breasts tingled, swollen and wanting.
She pres sed both lips and legs tight together , and curled her
hands in to fists,  breathing shallowly . The last thing she could
stand right now , she thought— the very  las t thing—was to
think of Roger and sex, whil e anywhere within miles of
Stephen Bonnet. She resolutely pushed the thought aside, and
edged c loser to the whore, searching for some remark with
which to open conversation.The whore sensed the movement, and glanced at Brianna,
taking in both the torn dress and its quality , but then dismissed
her in favor of finding more coins. Once she had her pay , the
woman would leave, going back to the docks. It was a chance
to ge t w ord to Roger and her par ents. Not much, perhaps, but a
chance.
“Y ou … um … know him well?” she said.
The whore glanced at her , eyebrows lifted.
“Who? Oh, Stephen? A ye, he’ s a good ‘un, Stephen.” She
shrugged. “Don ’ t take more th an two or three minutes, no
bones about the money , never wants nothin’ but a simple
swive. He’ s rough now and the n, but he don’ t hit unless you
cross him, and no one’ s fool enough to do that. Not more than
once, an yroad.” Her gaze lingered for a moment on Brianna’ s
torn dress, one brow lifting sardonically .
“I’ll remember that,” Brianna said dryly , and pulled the
edge of her ripp ed chemise up higher . She glimpsed a glass
bottle amid the rubble on the d esk, filled with a clear liquid,
containing a small round object. She leaned closer to look at it,
frowning. It couldn’ t be … but it was. A round, fleshy object,
rather li ke a hard-boiled egg, a pinkish-gray in color—with a
neat round hole drilled completely through it.
She crossed herself, feeling faint.
“I was that surprised,” the whore went on, eyeing Brianna
with ope n curiosity . “He’ s never had two girls together , so far
as I know , and he’ s not one as wants someone to watch while
he’ s at his pleasure.”
“I’m not—” Brianna began, but then stopped, not wanting
to of fend the woman.
“Not a whore?” The young woman grinned broadly ,
exposing the black gap of her  missing tooth. “I might ha’
guessed as much, chickie. Not as it would make no never mind
to Steph en. He sows as he likes,  and I can see as how he might
like you. Most men would.” She looked at Brianna withdispassionate assessment, nodding at her disheveled hair ,
flushed face, and tidy figure.
“I expec t they like you, too,” Brianna said politely , with a
faint feeling of surreality . “Er … what’ s your name?”
“Hepzibah,” the woman said with an air of pride. “Or Eppie,
for short, like.” There were coins still on the desk, but the
whore left them alone. Bonnet might be generous, but
evidently the whore didn’ t want to take advantage of him—
more likely a sig n of fear than of friendship, Brianna thought.
She took a deep breath and pressed on.
“What a lovely name. Pleased to meet you, Eppie.” She held
out a hand. “M y name is Bria nna Fraser MacKenzie.” She
gave all  three names, hoping the whore would remember at
least one of them.
The woman glanced at the extended hand in puzzlement,
then gin gerly shook it, dropping it like a dead fish. She pulled
up her skirt, a nd began to clean herself with the rag,
fastidiously wiping away all trace of the recent encounter .
Brianna leaned closer , bracing herself against the odors of
the stained rag, the woman’ s body , and the hot smell of liquor
on her breath.
“Stephen Bonnet kidnapped me,” she said.
“Oh, aye ?” said the whore, indif ferent. “W ell, he takes as he
likes, does Stephen.”
“I w ant to get away ,” Brianna said, keeping her voice low ,
with a glance at the cabin door . She could hear the sound of
feet on the deck overhead, and hoped voices wouldn’ t carry
through the heavy planks.
Eppie w added up the rag and dropped it on the desk. She
rummaged in her pocket, com ing out with a small bottle
stoppered with a plug of wax. She still held her skirts up, and
Brianna could see the silvery s treaks of stretch marks across
her plump belly .“W ell, give him what he wants , then,” the whore advised,
taking out the plug and pouring a bit of the bottle’ s contents—
a surprisingly mild scent of  rosewater—into her hand.
“Chances are he’ll tire of ye in a  few days and put ye ashore.”
She wiped the rosewater lavishly over her pubic hair , then
snif fed critically at her hand and made a face.
“No. I mean, that’ s not what he  kidnapped me for . I don’ t
think,” she added.
Eppie re corked the bottle, and dropped both it and the rag
into her pocket.
“Oh, he means t o ransom you?” Eppie eyed her with a little
more interest. “Still, I’ve never known scruples interfere with
the m an’ s appetite. He’d take a  vir gin’ s maidenhead and sell
her back  to her father before her belly started swelling.” She
pursed her lips, a belated thought coming to her .
“So how did you talk him out of havin’ you, then?”
Brianna put a hand on her stomach.
“I to ld him I was pregnant. That stopped him. I wouldn’ t
have thought—a man like that—but it did. Perhaps he’ s better
than you think?” she asked with a wisp of hope.
Eppie laughed at that, small eyes squeezing half-shut with
hilarity at the thought.
“Stephen? God , no!” She sni f fed with amusement, and
smoothed down her skirts.
“No,” she went on, more matter -of-factly , “best story you
could te ll, thoug h, if you don’ t want him at you. He called me
down to  him once, then put me of f when he saw I’d a cake in
the oven —when I joked him about it, he said he’d once taken
a whore  with her belly the size  of a cannonball, and right in
the m idst of it, she give a groan  and the blood come spurting
out of her fit to drench the roo m. Put him right of f, he said,
and no wonder . Left our Stephen  with a horror of swiving girls
what are up the spout. He’ s takin’ no chances, see.”“I see.” A trickle of sweat ran down Brianna’ s cheek, and
she wiped it away with the back of her hand. Her mouth felt
dry , and she suc ked the inside of her cheek for moisture. “The
woman—what happened to her?”
Hepzibah looked blank for a moment.
“Oh, th e whore? Why , she died, of course, poor cow .
Stephen said as how he was struggling to get into his wet
breeches, all soused with blood  like they were, and he looked
up and saw her layin’ still as stone on the floor , but with her
belly sti ll wriggling and twitching like a bag full o’ snakes.
Said it come to him sudden tha t the babe meant to come out
and take  its revenge on him, and he fled the house right then in
his shirt, leavin’ his breeches behind.”
She chortled at this amusing vis ion, then snorted and settled
herself, brushing down her skirts. “But then, Stephen’ s Irish,”
she added tolerantly . “They take morbid fancies, the Irish,
especially when they’re gone in drink.” The tip of her tongue
came ou t and passed reminiscen tly over her lower lip, tasting
the lingering traces of Bonnet’ s liquor .
Brianna leaned closer , holding out her hand.
“Look.”
Hepzibah glanced into her hand, then looked again, riveted.
The thic k gold band with its big cabochon ruby winked and
glowed in the lantern light.
“I’ll give it to you,” Brianna said, lowering her voice, “if
you’ll do something for me.”
The whore licked her lips again , a sudden look of alertness
coming into her heavy face.
“A ye? Do what?”
“Get word to my  husband. He’ s in Edenton, at the Reverend
McMillan’ s house—anyone will know where it is. T ell him
where I am, and  tell him—” She hesitated. What should she
say? There was no telling how long the Anemone  would stay
here, or where Bonnet would ch oose to go next. The only clueshe had was wh at she had over heard in his conversation with
his mate, just before he came in.
“T ell the m I think he has a hid ing place on Ocracoke. He
means to rendezvous with someone there at the dark of the
moon. T ell him that.”
Hepzibah cast an uneasy glance at the cabin door , but it
stayed s hut. She  looked back at the ring, longing for it warring
in her face with an obvious fear of Bonnet.
“He won ’ t know ,” Brianna ur ged. “He won’ t find out. And
my father will reward you.”
“He’ s a rich man, then, your father?” Brianna saw the look
of c alculation in the whore’ s eyes, and felt a moment’ s
misgiving—what if she should simply take the ring and betray
her to Bonnet? Still, she hadn’ t taken more money than her
due; perhaps she was honest. A nd there was no choice, after
all.
“V ery rich,” she said firmly . “H is name is Jamie Fraser . My
aunt is rich, too . She has a plantation called River Run, just
above C ross Creek in North Carolina. Ask for Mrs. Innes—
Jocasta Cameron Innes. Y es, if you don’ t find Ro—my
husband, send word there.”
“River Run.” Hepzibah repeated it obediently , eyes still
fixed on the ring.
Brianna twisted it of f and dropped it into the whore’ s palm
before she could change her mi nd. The woman’ s hand closed
tight around it.
“My father ’ s name is Jamie Fr aser; my husband is Roger
MacKenzie,” sh e repeated. “At the Reverend McMillan’ s
house. Can you remember?”
“Fraser and MacKenzie,” Hep zibah repeated uncertainly .
“Oh, aye, to be  sure.” She was already moving toward the
door .
“Please,” Brianna said ur gently .The whore nodded but without  looking at her , then sidled
through the door , shutting it behind her .
The ship  creaked and swayed underfoot, and she heard the
rattle of wind through the trees o n the shore, over the shouts of
drunken men. Her knees gave way then and she sat down on
the bed, careless of the sheets.
THEY LEFT WITH the tide; she heard the anchor chain
rumble a nd felt the ship quicken, taking life as her sails took
wind. Glued to the window , she watched the dark green mass
of Roan oke recede. A hundred years before, the first English
colony had landed here—and disappeared without trace. The
governor of the colony , returning from England with supplies,
had found everyone gone, leaving no clue save the word
“Croatan” carved into the trunk of a tree.
She wasn’ t even leaving that much. Heartsick, she watched
until the island sank into the sea.
No one came for some hours. Empty-bellied, she grew
nauseated, and threw up in the  chamber pot. She could not
bear the  thought of lying down  on those revolting sheets, but
instead p ulled them of f, remade the bed with only the quilts,
and lay down.
The windows were open, and the fresh air of the sea stirred
her hair and lifted the clamminess from her skin, making her
feel a little bette r . She was unbearably conscious of her womb,
a sm all, heavy , tender weight, a nd what was likely happening
inside it: that ord erly dance of dividing cells, a sort of peaceful
violence, implacably wresting lives and wrenching hearts.
When h ad it happened? She tried to think back, remember .
It m ight have been the night before Roger left for Edenton. He
had been excited, almost exalted , and they had made love with
lingering joy , spiced by longi ng, for they both knew the
morrow would bring separation. She had fallen asleep in his
arms, feeling loved.But then  she had waked alone, i n the middle of the night, to
find him sitting by the window , bathed in the light of a gibbous
moon. She had been reluctant to disturb his private
contemplation, b ut he had turned, feeling her eyes on him, and
something in his look had made  her get out of bed and go to
him, taking his head against her bosom, holding him.
He h ad risen the n, laid her on the floor , and had her again,
wordless and ur gent.
Catholic that she was, she had found it terribly erotic, the
notion o f seducing a priest o n the eve of his ordination,
stealing him—if only for a moment—from God.
She swallowed, hands clasped over her belly . Be car eful
what yo u pray for .  The nuns at school had always told the
children that.
The wind was growing cold, chilling her , and she pulled the
edge of one quilt—the cleanest— over her . Then, concentrating
fiercely , she began very carefully to pray .1 0 3
PUT T O THE QUESTION
N EIL FOR BES sa t in the parlor of the King’ s Inn, enjoying a
glass of hard cider and the feel ing that all was right with the
world. He had had a most fruitful meeting with Samuel Iredell
and his friend, two of the most prominent rebel leaders in
Edenton—and an even more fruitful meeting with Gilbert
Butler and W illiam L yons, local smugglers.
He had a gre at fondness for jewels, and in private
celebration of his elegant disp osal of the threat of Jamie
Fraser , h e had bought a new stickpin, topped with a beautiful
ruby . He contemplated this with quiet satisfaction, noting the
lovely shadows that the stone cast on the silk of his ruf fle.
His mot her was safely planted a t her sister ’ s house, he had
an a ppointment for luncheon wi th a local lady , and an hour to
spare beforehand. Perhaps a stroll to stimulate appetite; it was
a beautiful day .
He h ad i n fact pushed back his c hair and begun to rise when
a lar ge hand planted itself in the center of his chest and shoved
him back into it.
“What—?” He looked up in in dignation—and took great
care to keep that expression on his face, despite a sudden deep
qualm. A tall, d ark man was standing over him, wearing a
most unfriendly expression. MacKenzie, the chit’ s husband.
“How dare you, sir?” he said, b elligerent. “I must demand
apology!”
“Y ou demand what ye like,” M acKenzie said. He was pale
under his tan, and grim. “Where is my wife?”
“How sh ould I know?” Forbes’ s  heart was beating fast, but
with glee as much as trepidation . He lifted his chin and made
to rise. “Y ou will excuse me, sir .”A hand on his a rm stopped him, and he turned, looking into
the face  of Fraser ’ s nephew , Ian Murray . Murray smiled, and
Forbes’ s sense of self-satisfaction diminished slightly . They
said the boy had  lived with the Mohawk, become one of them
—that he dwelt with a vicious wolf who spoke to him and
obeyed his commands, that he had cut a man’ s heart out and
eaten it in some heathen ritual.
Looking at the lad’ s homely face and disheveled dress,
though, Forbes was not impressed.
“Remove your hand from my person, sir ,” he said with
dignity , straightening in his chair .
“No, I think I won’ t,” Murray said. The hand tightened on
his arm like the bite of a horse, and Forbes’ s mouth opened,
though he made no sound.
“What have ye done with my cousin?” Murray said.
“I? Why , I—I have nothing whatever to do with Mrs.
MacKenzie. Let go, God damn you!”
The grip relaxed, and he sat breathing heavily . MacKenzie
had pulled up a chair to face him and sat down.
Forbes smoothed the sleeve  of his coat, avoiding
MacKenzie’ s stare and thinking rapidly . How had they found
out? Or had the y? Perhaps they were only trying a venture,
with no sure knowledge.
“I a m grieved to hear that a ny misfortune might have
befallen Mrs. MacKenzie,” he said politely . “Am I to take it
that you have somehow misplaced her?”
MacKenzie looked him up and down for a moment without
answering, then made a small sound of contempt.
“I h eard ye speak in Meckle nber g,” he said, his tone
conversational. “V ery glib ye were. A great deal about justice,
I heard,  and protection of our wives and children. Such
eloquence.”
“Fine talk,” Ian Murray put in, “for a man who would
abduct a  helpless woman.” He w as still crouching on the floorlike a savage, b ut had moved round a little, so as to stare
directly into Forbes’ s face. The lawyer found it slightly
unnerving, and chose instead to meet MacKenzie’ s eyes, man
to man.
“I regret your misfortune extremely , sir ,” he said, striving
for a  tone of concern. “I should be pleased to help, in any way
possible, of course. But I do not—”
“Where is Stephen Bonnet?”
The question struck Forbes like a blow to the liver . He
gaped for a mom ent, thinking that he had made a mistake in
choosing MacKenzie to look at; that flat green gaze was like a
snake’ s.
“Who is  Stephen Bonnet?” he asked, licking his lips. His
lips were dry , but the rest of h im was heavily bedewed; he
could fe el sweat pooling in the creases of his neck, soaking the
cambric of his shirt beneath his oxters.
“I heard ye, ken,” Murray remarked pleasantly . “When ye
made th e bar gain wi’ Richard Brown. In your warehouse, it
was.”
Forbes’ s head snapped round. He was so shocked that it was
a moment before he realized that Murray was holding a knife,
laid casually across his knee.
“What? Y ou say—what? I tell y ou, sir , you are mistaken—
mistaken!” He half-rose, stammering. MacKenzie shot to his
feet and seized him by the shirtfront, twisting.
“No, sir ,” he said very softly , his face so close that Forbes
felt the heat of his breath. “It is yourself has been mistaken.
Most grievously mistaken, in choosing my wife to serve your
wicked ends.”
There w as a ripping sound as the fine cambric tore.
MacKenzie shoved him back violently into the chair , then
leaned forward, seizing his neck cloth in a grip that threatened
to choke him on the spot. His mouth opened, gasping, and
black spots flickered in his visi on—but not suf ficiently as to
obscure those brilliant, cold green eyes.“Where has he taken her?”
Forbes gripped the arms of his chair , breathing heavily .
“I kn ow nothing about your wife ,” he said, his voice pitched
low and venomous. “And as for grievous error , sir , you are in
the process of committing one. How dare you assault me? I
shall prefer char ges, I do assure you!”
“Oh, ass ault, forbye,” Murray said, scof fing. “W e havena
done an y such thing. Y et.” H e sat back on his haunches,
tapping the knife thoughtfully against his thumbnail and
regarding Forbes with an air of estimation, like one planning
to carve a suckling pig on a platter .
Forbes set his jaw and glared up at MacKenzie, who was
still standing, looming over him.
“This is  a public place,” he pointed out. “Y ou cannot harm
me without notice being taken.” He glanced behind
MacKenzie, hoping that someone would come into the parlor
and interrupt this grossly uncomfortable tete-a-tete, but it was
a quiet morning, and all the chambermaids and ostlers
inconveniently about their duties elsewhere.
“Do we  care if anyone notices, a charaid ?” Murray
inquired, glancing up at MacKenzie.
“Not really .” Nonetheless, MacKenzie resumed his seat and
resumed his stare. “W e can wait a bit, though.” He glanced at
the case clock by the mantel, its pendulum moving with a
serene tick-tock. “It won’ t be long.”
Belatedly , it occurred to Forbes to wonder where Jamie
Fraser was.
ELSPETH FOR BES was rocking gently on the veranda of her
sister ’ s house, enjoying the coo lness of the morning air , when
a visitor was announced.
“Why , Mr . Fraser!” she exclaimed, sitting up. “What brings
ye to Edenton? Is it Neil ye’re in search of? He’ s gone to—”“Ah, no , Mistress Forbes.” He swept her a low bow , the
morning sun gleaming of f his hair as though it were bronze
metal. “It is yourself I’ve come for .”
“Oh? Oh!” She sat up in her c hair , hastily brushing away
crumbs of toast on her sleeve, and hoping her cap was on
straight. “Why , sir , what could ye possibly want with an old
woman?”
He s miled—suc h a nice-looking lad he was, so fine in his
gray coatie, and that look of mi schief in his eyes—and leaned
close to whisper in her ear .
“I’ve come to steal ye away , Mistress.”
“Och, awa’ with ye!” She flapped a hand at him, laughing,
and he took it, kissing her knuckles.
“I shalln a take ‘no’ for answer , now ,” he assured her , and
gestured toward the edge of th e porch, where he had left a
lar ge, promising-looking basket, covered with a checkered
cloth. “I’ve a mind to eat my luncheon in the country , under a
tree. I’v e the very tree in mind—a braw , fine tree—but it’ s a
poor meal, taken without company .”
“Surely to goodness ye could find better company than
mine, lad,” she said, thoroughly charmed. “And where’ s your
dear wife, then?”
“Ah, she’ s left m e,” he said, af fecting sorrow . “Here’ s me,
with a wonderful picnic planned, and her of f to a birthing. So I
said to myself, well, Jamie, it’ s shame to waste such a feast—
who might be at  liberty to share  it with ye? And what should I
see next but yo ur most elegant self, taking your ease. An
answer to prayer , it was; surely ye wouldna go against
heavenly guidance, Mistress Forbes?”
“Hmph,” she said, trying not to laugh at him. “Och, well. If
it’ s a matter of wasting …”
Before she could say more, h e had stooped down and
plucked her from her chair , lifting her in his arms. She
whooped with surprise.“If it’ s a proper abduction, I must carry ye away , aye?” he
said, smiling down at her .
T o h er mortification, the sound she made could be called
nothing but a g iggle. He seemed not to mind, though, and
bending to sweep up the basket in one strong hand, carried her
like a bit of thistledown out to his carriage.
“YOU CANNO T KEEP ME prisoner here! Let me pass, or I
will shout for help!”
They ha d, in fact, held him for more than an hour , blocking
all a ttempts on h is part to rise and leave. He was right, though,
Roger thought; traf fic was begi nning to pick up in the street
outside, and he could hear—as could Forbes—the noises of a
maid setting out the tables for dinner in the next room.
He glan ced at Ian. They had discussed it; if word hadn’ t
come within an hour , they would  have to try to remove Forbes
from the inn, take him to a more  private place. That could be a
dicey business; the lawyer was intimidated, but stubborn as a
ball bearing. And he would  call for help.
Ian pursed his l ips thoughtfully , and drew the knife he had
been playing with down the side  of his breeches, polishing the
blade.
“Mr . Ma cKenzie?” A small boy had popped up beside him
like a mushroom, dirt-smeared and round-faced.
“I a m,” he said, a wave of tha nkfulness washing through
him. “Have ye got something for me?”
“A ye, sir .” The urchin handed over a small twist of paper ,
accepted a coin in return, and was gone, in spite of Forbes’ s
call of “W ait, boy!”
The lawyer had half-risen from  his seat in agitation. Roger
made a sharp m ove toward him, though, and he sank back at
once, no t waiting to be pushed. Good, Roger thought grimly ,
he was learning.Undoing the twist of paper , he fo und himself holding a lar ge
brooch in the shape of a bunch of flowers, done in garnets and
silver . It was a good piece of wo rkmanship, but rather ugly . Its
impression on Forbes, though, was substantial.
“Y ou wouldn’ t. He wouldn’ t.” T he lawyer was staring at the
brooch in Roger ’ s hand, his heavy face gone pale.
“Oh, I expect he would, if ye mean Uncle Jamie,” Ian
Murray said. “He’ s fond of his daughter , aye?”
“Nonsense.” The lawyer was making a game attempt to
bluf f it out, bu t he couldn’ t keep his eyes of f the brooch.
“Fraser is a gentleman.”
“He’ s a Highlander ,” Roger said brutally . “Like your father ,
aye?” He’d heard stories about the elder Forbes, who by all
accounts had escaped Scotland just ahead of the hangsman.
Forbes chewed his lower lip.
“He would not harm an old woman,” he said, with as much
bravado as he could summon.
“W ould he not?” Ian’ s sketchy brows lifted. “A ye, perhaps
not. He might just send her awa ’, though—to Canada, maybe?
Y e seem to ken him fair weel, Mr . Forbes. What d’ye think?”
The law yer drummed his fingers on the arm of the chair ,
breathing through his teeth, evidently reviewing what he knew
of Jamie Fraser ’ s character and reputation.
“All right,” he said suddenly . “All right!”
Roger felt the te nsion running through him snap like a cut
wire. He ’d been strung like a puppet since Jamie had come to
fetch him last night.
“Where?” he said, feeling breathless. “Where is she?”
“She’ s safe,” Forbes said hoarsely . “I wouldn’ t have her
harmed.” He looked up, wild-eyed. “For God’ s sake, I
wouldn’ t harm her!”
“Where?” Roger clamped the brooch tight, not caring that
its edges cut into his hand. “Where is she?”The lawyer sagged like a half-filled bag of meal.
“Aboard a ship called Anemone , Captain Bonnet . ” He
swallowed hard, unable to keep his eyes away from the
brooch. “She—I told—they are bound for England. But she is
safe, I tell you!”
Shock tightened Roger ’ s grip, and he felt the sudden slick of
blood o n his fingers. He flun g the brooch onto the floor ,
wiping his hand on his breech es, struggling for words. The
shock had tightened his throat,  as well; he felt as though he
were strangling.
Seeing his trouble, Ian stood ab ruptly and pressed his knife
against the lawyer ’ s throat.
“When did they sail?”
“I—I—” The lawyer ’ s mouth opened and closed at random,
and he looked helplessly from Ian to Roger , eyes bulging.
“Wher e?”  Roger forced the word past the blockage in his
throat, and Forbes flinched at the sound.
“She—she was put aboard he re. In Edenton. T wo—two
days ago.”
Roger nodded abruptly . Safe, he said. In Bonnet’ s hands.
T wo day s, in Bonnet’ s hands. B ut he had sailed with Bonnet,
he thou ght, trying to steady himself, keep a grip on his
rationality . He knew how the man worked. Bonnet was a
smuggler; he would not sail for  England without a full car go.
He might— might —be go ing dow n the coast, picking up small
shipments befor e turning to the open sea and the long voyage
for England.
And if not—he might still be caught, with a fast ship.
No t ime to be lost; people on th e docks might know where
the Anemone  was headed next. He turned and took a step
toward t he door . Then a red wave washed through him and he
whirled back, smashing his fist into Forbes’ s face with the full
weight of his body behind it.The lawyer gave a high-pitched scream, and clutched both
hands to his no se. All noises in the inn and in the street
seemed to stop; the world hung suspended. Roger took a short,
deep breath, rubbing his knuckles, and nodded once more.
“Come on,” he said to Ian.
“Oh, aye.”
Roger w as halfway to the door  when he realized that Ian
was not with him. He looked ba ck, and was just in time to see
his c ousin-by-m arriage take Forbes gently by one ear and cut
it of f.1 0 4
SLEEPING WITH A SHARK
S TEPHEN BONN ET was as good as his word—if that’ s how
one would describe it. He mad e no sexual advances toward
her , but did insist that she share his bed.
“I li ke a warm body in the nigh t,” he said. “And I think ye
might prefer my bed to the car go hold, sweetheart.”
She would most emphatically have preferred the car go hold,
though her explorations—once free of land, she was allowed
out of the cab in—had reveal ed the hold as a dark and
comfortless hole, in which several hapless slaves were chained
among a  collection of boxes and  barrels, in constant danger of
being crushed should the car go shift.
“Where are we going, miss? And what will happen when we
get there ?” Josh spoke in Gaelic , his handsome face small and
frightened in the shadows of the hold.
“I th ink we’re going to Ocrac oke,” she said in the same
language. “Beyo nd that—I don’ t know . Do you still have your
rosary?”
“Oh, yes, miss.” He touched his chest, where the crucifix
hung. “It’ s the only thing that keeps me from despair .”
“Good. Keep praying.” She glan ced at the other slaves: two
women, two men, all with slender bodies and delicate, fine-
boned faces. She had brought food for Josh from her own
supper , but had nothing to of fer them, and was troubled.
“Do they feed you down here?”
“Y es, miss. Fairly well,” he assured her .
“Do they”—she moved her chin a little, delicately
indicating the other slaves—”know anything? About where
we’re going?”“I do n’ t know , m iss. I can’ t talk to them. They’re African—
Fulani, I can see that from the way they look, but that’ s all I
know .”
“I see. W ell …” She hesitated, eager to be out of the dark,
clammy hold, but reluctant to leave the young groom there.
“Y ou go  along, miss,” he said quietly in English, seeing her
doubt. “I be fine. W e all be fine.” He touched his rosary , and
did his best to g ive her a smile , though it wavered round the
edges. “Holy Mother see us safe.”
Having no words of comfort t o impart, she nodded, and
climbed the ladder into the sun light, feeling five sets of eyes
upon her .
Bonnet, thank God, spent most  of his time on deck during
the day . She could see him now ,  coming down the rigging like
a nimble ape.
She stood very still, no mov ement save the brush of
windblown hair , of skirts against her frozen limbs. He was as
sensitive to the movements of h er body as was Roger—but in
his own way . Th e way of a shark, signaled to and drawn by the
flappings of its prey .
She had  spent one night in his bed so far , sleepless. He had
pulled her casually against himself, said, “Good night,
darlin’,” and fallen instantly asleep. Whenever she had tried to
move, t o extricate herself from his grip, though, he had
shifted, moving with her , to keep her firmly by him.
She was  obliged to an unwelcome intimacy with his body ,
an acquaintance that awoke memories she had with great
dif ficulty put away—the feel of his knee pushing her thighs
apart, the rough joviality of hi s touch between her legs, the
sun-bleached blond hairs that curled crisply on his thighs and
forearms, the unwashed, musky male smell of him. The
mocking presence of LeRoi, rising at intervals during the
night, pressed in firm and mindless hunger against her
buttocks.She had a mom ent of intense thankfulness, both for her
present pregnan cy—for she was in no doubt of it now—and
for her certain knowledge that Stephen Bonnet had not
fathered Jemmy .
He dropped from the rigging with a thud, saw her , and
smiled. H e said nothing, but squeezed her bottom familiarly as
he passed, making her clench her teeth and cling to the rail.
Ocracoke, at the dark of the moon. She looked up into the
brilliant sky , wheeling with clouds of terns and gulls; they
could not be far of fshore. How  long, for God’ s sake, ‘til the
dark of the moon?1 0 5
THE PRODIGAL
T HEY HAD NO TROUBLE IN FINDING persons familiar
with Anemone  and  her captain. Stephen Bo nnet was well-
known on the Edenton docks, though his reputation varied,
depending on his associations. An honest captain was the
usual op inion, but hard in his dealings. A blockade runner , a
smuggler , said others—and whether that was good or bad
depended on the politics of the person saying it. He’d get you
anything, they said—for a price.
Pirate, s aid a few . But those few spoke in low tones, looking
frequently over their shoulders, and strongly desired not to be
quoted.
The Anemone  had left quite openly , with a homely car go of
rice and fifty barrels of smoked fish. Roger had found one man
who rec alled seeing the young woman go aboard with one of
Bonnet’ s hands: “Great huge doxy , with flaming hair a-loose,
flowing down to her arse,” the  man had said, smacking his
lips. “Mr . Bonnet’ s a good-size man himself, though; expect
he can handle her .”
Only Ia n’ s hand on his arm had stopped him hitting the
man.
What they had n ot yet found wa s anyone who knew for sure
where Anemone  was headed.
“London, I think,” said the harbormaster , dubious. “But not
directly; he’ s not yet got a full  car go. Likely he’ll be going
down the coast, trading here and there—perhaps sail for
Europe from Charlestown. But then again,” the man added,
rubbing his chin, “could be h e’ s bound for New England.
T errible risky business, getting  anything into Boston these
days—but well worth it if you do. Rice and smoked fish like tobe worth their weight in gold up there, if you can get it ashore
without the navy’ s warships blowing you out of the water .”
Jamie, looking a little pale, thanked the man. Roger , unable
to s peak for th e knot in his throat, merely nodded, and
followed his father -in-law out of the harbormaster ’ s of fice,
back into the sun of the docks.
“Now w hat?” Ian asked, stifling a belch. He had been
trawling through the dockside taverns, buying beer for casual
laborers who might have helped  load Anemone,  or who might
have spoken with her hands regarding her destination.
“The best I can think of is mayb e for you and Roger Mac to
take ship  down the coast,” Jamie said, frowning at the masts of
the sloops and packet boats roc king at anchor . “Claire and I
could go up, toward Boston.”
Roger n odded, still unable to speak. It was far from being a
good pla n, particularly in light of the disruption the undeclared
war was  having on shipping—bu t the need of doing something
was acu te. He felt as though the marrow of his bones was
burning; only movement would quench it.
T o hire a small ship—even a fishing smack—or take
passage on a packet boat, though, was expensive business.
“A ye, w ell.” Jamie curled his ha nd in his pocket, where the
black diamond still lay . “I’ll go and see Judge Iredell; he can
maybe p ut me in touch with an honest banker who’ll advance
me m oney against the sale of the  stone. Let’ s go and tell Claire
what’ s to do, first.”
As they turned of f the docks, though, a voice hailed Roger .
“Mr . MacKenzie!”
He turned, to find the Reverend Doctor McCorkle, his
secretary , and the Reverend McMillan, carrying bags, all
staring at him.
There was a brief scuf fle of introduction—they had of
course met Jamie when he came to fetch Roger , but not Ian—
and then a slightly awkward pause.“Y ou—” Roger  cleared his th roat, addressing the elder .
“Y ou are leaving, then, sir? For the Indies?”
McCorkle nodded, his lar ge, kindly face set in concern.
“I am, sir . I regret so much that I must go—and that you
were not able to—well.” Both McCorkle and the Reverend
McMillan had tried to persuade  him to return to them the day
before, t o take his place at the service of ordination. But he
could not. Could not spare hours to such a thing, could not
possibly engage himself to undertake the commitment with
anything less than a single min d—and while his mind was in
fact sing le just now , it was not toward God. There was room in
his heart just now for only one thing—Brianna.
“W ell, doubtles s it is God’ s will,” McCorkle said with a
sigh. “Y our wife, Mr . MacKenzie? There is no word of her?”
He shook his head, and muttered acknowledgment of their
concern, their promises to pray for him and for the safe return
of h is wife.He was too much worried to find this much solace,
yet still,  he was touched by their kindness, and parted from
them with many good wishes in both directions.
Roger , Jamie, and Ian walked s ilently back toward the inn
where they had left Claire.
“Just by way of curiosity , Ian, what did ye do with Forbes’ s
ear?” Ja mie asked, breaking the silence as they turned into the
wide street where the inn was.
“Oh, I have it safe, Uncle,” Ian assured him, patting the
small leather pouch at his belt.
“What i n the name of G—” Roger stopped abruptly , then
resumed. “What d’ye mean to do with it?”
“Keep it with me until we f ind my cousin,” Ian said,
seeming surprised that this was not obvious. “It will help.”
“It will?”
Ian nodded, serious.“When ye set about a dif ficult quest—if ye’re
Kahnyen’kehaka, I mean—ye g enerally go aside for a time, to
fast and pray for guidance. W e  havena time to be doing that
now , of course. But often, while  ye’re doing that, ye choose a
talisman—or to  be right abou t it, it chooses you—” He
sounded comple tely matter -of-fa ct about this procedure, Roger
noted.
“And ye carry it with ye through the quest, to keep the
attention of the spirits upon your desire and ensure your
success.”
“I see.” Jamie rubbed the bridge of his nose. He appeared—
like Roger—to be wondering what the Mohawk spirits might
make of Neil F orbes’ s ear . It would, probably , ensure their
attention, at least. “The ear … did ye pack it in salt, I hope?”
Ian shook his head.
“Nay , I smoked it over the kitch en fire at the inn last night.
Dinna fash yourself, Uncle Jamie; it will keep.”
Roger fo und a perverse sort of c omfort in this conversation.
Between the prayers of the Presb yterian cler gy and the support
of th e Mohawk spirits, perhaps they had a chance—but it was
the presence of his two kinsme n, stalwart and determined on
either si de of him, that kept him  in hope. They would not give
up until Brianna was found, no matter what it took.
He swal lowed the lump in his throat for the thousandth time
since hearing the news, thinking  of Jemmy . The little boy was
safe at River Ru n—but how could he tell Jem that his mother
was gone? W ell … he wouldn’ t, that was all. They’d find her .
In this mood of resolution, he le d the way through the door
of the Brewster , only to be hailed again.
“Roger!”
This time, it wa s Claire’ s voice, sharp with excitement. He
turned a t once, to see her rising  from a bench in the taproom.
Seated across the table from he r were a plump young woman
and a slightly built young man with a cap of tightly curled
black hair . Manfred McGillivray .“I SA W YE BEF ORE, sir , two d ays ago.” Manfred bobbed his
head apologetic ally toward Jamie. “I … er … well, I hid
myself, sir , and I do regret it. But of course, I’d no way of
knowing, until Eppie came back from Roanoke and showed
me the ring… .”
The ring  lay on the table, its cabochon ruby casting a tiny ,
calm po ol of ruddy light on the boards. Roger picked it up and
turned it in his fingers. He barely heard the explanations—that
Manfred lived with the whore, who made periodic expeditions
to the ports ne ar Edenton, and upon seeing the ring had
overcome his sense of shame and come to find Jamie—too
much overcome by this small, hard, tangible evidence of
Brianna.
Roger closed his fingers over it, finding the warmth of it a
comfort, and came to himself in time to hear Hepzibah say
earnestly , “Ocracoke, sir . At the dark of the moon.” She
coughed modest ly , ducking her head. “The lady did say , sir , as
you mi ght feel some gratitude for the news of her
whereabouts… .”
“Y e’ll be paid, a nd paid well,” Jamie assured her , though he
was clearly giving her no more than a fraction of his attention.
“The dark of the moon,” he said, turning to Ian. “T en days?”
Ian nodded, his face shining with excitement.
“A ye, about that. She didna ken whereabouts on Ocracoke
Island this was?” he asked the whore.
Eppie shook her head.
“Nay , sir . I ken Stephen’ s got a house there, a lar ge one,
hidden in the trees, but that’ s all.”
“W e’ll find it.” Roger ’ s own voice surprised him; he hadn’ t
meant to speak aloud.
Manfred had been looking uneasy throughout. He leaned
forward, putting his hand on top of Eppie’ s.“Sir—when ye do find it … ye ’ll not say to anybody , will
ye, abou t Eppie telling ye? Mr . Bonnet’ s a dangerous man, and
I wo uldna have her imperiled f rom him.” He glanced at the
young woman, who blushed and smiled at him.
“No, we won’ t s ay anything about her ,” Claire assured him.
She had  been scrutinizing b oth Manfred and Hepzibah
carefully while they talked, and now leaned across the table to
touch Manfred’ s forehead, which showed a stippling of some
sort of rash. “Speaking of peril … she’ s in a great deal more
danger from you,  you ng man, than from Stephen  Bonnet. Did
you tell her?”
Manfred went a little paler , an d for the first time, Roger
noticed that the young man looked truly ill, his face thin and
deeply lined.
“I did, Frau  Fraser . From the first.”
“Oh, about the pox?” Hepzibah af fected nonchalance,
though Roger could see her han d tighten on Manfred’ s. “A ye,
he d id tell me. But I says to him as it makes no dif ference. I
daresay I’ve had a few men what are poxed before, not
knowing. If I should get it … well. God’ s will, innit?”
“No,” Roger said to her quite ge ntly . “It isn’ t. But you’ll go
with Mrs. Claire, you and Manf red both, and do exactly what
she tells you. Y e ’ll be all right, and so will he. W on’ t they?” he
asked, turning to Claire, suddenly a little uncertain.
“Y es, they will,” she said dryly .  “Fortunately , I have quite a
bit of penicillin with me.”
Manfred’ s face was a study in confusion.
“But—do ye mean, meine Frau,  that ye can—can cur e  it?”
“That is  exactly what I mean,”  Claire assured him, “as I
tried to tell you before you ran away .”
His mou th hung open, and he blinked. Then he turned to
Hepzibah, who was staring at him in puzzlement.
“ Liebchen!  I ca n g o home! W e  can go home,” he amended
quickly , seeing her face change. “W e will be married. W e willgo home ,” he repeated, in the tones of one seeing a beatific
vision but not quite trusting in its reality yet.
Eppie was frowning in uncertainty .
“I’m a whore, Freddie,” she pointed out. “And from the
stories you tell about your mother …”
“I rather think that Frau  Ute will be so happy to have
Manfred back that she won’ t be disposed to ask too many
questions,” Claire said, with a g lance at Jamie. “The Prodigal
Son, you know?”
“Y e won’ t need to be a whore any longer ,” Manfred assured
her . “I’m a gunsmith; I’ll earn a good living. Now that I know
I shall  be living!” His thin face was suddenly suf fused with
joy , and he flung his arms around Eppie and kissed her .
“Oh,” she said, flustered, but looking pleased. “W ell. Hm.
This … er … this penny—?” She looked inquiringly at Claire.
“The sooner , the better ,” Claire said, standing up. “Come
with me.” Her o wn face was a little flushed, Roger saw , and
she put out a qu ick hand to Jamie, who took it and pressed it
hard.
“W e’ll go and s ee to things,” h e said, glancing at Ian and
Roger in turn. “W ith luck, we’ll sail this evening.”
“Oh!” Eppie had already stood  up to follow Claire, but at
this reminder of their business, she turned to Jamie, a hand to
her mouth. “Oh. I’ve thought of the one more thing.” Her
pleasant round face was puckered in concentration. “There are
wild horses that run near the house. On Ocracoke. I heard
Stephen speak o’ them once.” S he looked from one man to the
other . “Might that help?”
“It might,” Roger said. “Thank you—and God bless you.”
It wasn’ t until they were outside, heading for the docks
again, that he realized the ring was still clutched tight in his
hand. What was it Ian had said?
“Y e choose a ta lisman—or to be right about it, it chooses
you.”His hands were slightly bigger than Brianna’ s, but he
pushed the ring onto his finger , and closed his hand around it.
SHE WOKE FROM a damp and restless sleep, mother -sense
at once aroused . She was half way out of bed, moving by
instinct toward Jemmy’ s trundle, when a hand grabbed her
wrist, a convulsive grip like the bite of a crocodile.
She jerked back, groggy and alarmed. The sound of
footsteps came to her from the d eck overhead and she realized
belatedly that the sound of distr ess that had wakened her had
not come from Jemmy , but from the darkness at her side.
“Don’ t g o,” he whispered, and t he fingers dug deep into the
soft flesh of her inner wrist.
Unable t o wrench free, she reac hed out with the other hand,
to p ush him aw ay . She touched damp hair , hot skin—and a
trickle of wetness, cool and surprising on her fingers.
“What is it?” she  whispered back, and leaned toward him by
instinct. She reached again, touched his head, smoothed his
hair—all the things she had wak ed prepared to do. She felt her
hand rest on him and thought to stop, but did not. It was as
though the spurt of maternal co mfort, once called forth, could
not b e p ressed b ack into her , no  more than the spurt of breast
milk summoned by an infant’ s cry could be recalled to its
source.
“Are yo u all right?” She ke pt her voice low , and as
impersonal as the words allowed. She lifted her hand, and he
moved, rolling toward her , pressing his head hard against the
curve of her thigh.
“Don’ t go,” he said again, and  caught his breath in what
might ha ve been  a sob. His voice was low and rough, but not
as she had ever heard it before.
“I’m her e.” Her  trapped wrist w as growing numb. She laid
her free  hand on his shoulder , hoping he would let go if she
seemed willing to stay .He did relax his grip, but only t o reach out and seize her by
the w aist, pulling her back into  bed. She went, because there
was no choice, and lay in silence, Bonnet’ s breathing harsh
and warm on the back of her neck.
At length, he let go and rolled onto his back with a sigh,
allowing her to move. She rolled  onto her own back, cautious,
trying to  keep a few inches be tween them. Moonlight came
through the stern windows in a silver flood, and she could see
the silho uette of  his face, catch the glint of light from forehead
and cheek as he turned his head.
“Bad dream?” she ventured. She’d meant to sound sarcastic,
but h er o wn hea rt was still tripp ing fast from the alarm of the
awakening, and the words had a tentative sound.
“A ye, aye,” he said with a shud dering sigh. “The same. It
comes t o me over and over again, see? Y e’d think I’d know
what it was abou t and wake, but  I never do. Not ‘til the waters
close over my head.” He rub bed a hand under his nose,
snif fing like a child.
“Oh.” She didn’ t want to ask for details, didn’ t want to
encourage any further sense of intimacy . What she wanted,
though, had nothing much to do with things anymore.
“Since I  was a l ad, I’ve dreamed of drowning,” he said, and
his voice , normally so assured, was unsteady . “The sea comes
in, a nd I  cannot move—not at all. The tide’ s risin’, and I know
it will kill me, but there’ s no way to move.” His hand clutched
the sheet convulsively , pulling it away from her .
“It’ s gra y water , full of mud, and there are blind things
swimmin’ in it. They’re waitin’ on the sea to finish its
business wit’ me, see—and then they’ve business of their
own.”
She cou ld hear the horror of it  in his voice, and was torn
between wantin g to edge farther away from him and the
ingrained habit of of fering comfort.
“It was only a dream,” she said at last, staring up at the
boards o f the deck, no more tha n three feet above her head. Ifonly this  were a dream!
“Ah, no ,” he said, and his voice  had dropped to little more
than a whisper in the darkness beside her . “Ah, no. It’ s the sea
herself. Callin’ me, see?”
Quite suddenly , he rolled toward her , seizing her and
pressing her hard against him. She gasped, stif fening, and he
pressed harder , responding, sharklike, to her struggles.
T o h er own horr or , she felt LeRoi rising, and forced herself
to be still. Panic and the need to escape his dream might all too
easily make him for get his a version to having sex with
pregnant women, and that was the very last thing, the very  last
thing …
“Sshh,” she said firmly , and clutched him round the head,
forcing his face down into her shoulder , patting him, stroking
his back. “Shh. I t will be all right. It was only a dream. I won’ t
let i t hurt you— I won’ t let anything hurt you. Hush, hush
now .”
She went on pat ting him, her eyes closed, trying to imagine
herself h olding Jemmy after such a nightmare, quiet in their
cabin, the hearth fire low , Jem’ s little body relaxing in trust,
the sweet little-boy smell of his hair near her face… .
“I w on’ t let you  drown,” she whispered. “I promise. I won’ t
let you drown.”
She said it over and over , and slowly , slowly , his breathing
eased, and his grip on her slackened as sleep overcame him.
Still she repeated it, a soft, hyp notic murmur , her words half-
lost in the sound of water , hissing past the side of the ship, and
she spo ke no longer to the man beside her , but to the
slumbering child within.
“I won’ t let anything hurt you. Nothing  will hurt you. I
promise.”1 0 6
RENDEZVOUS
R OGER P AUSED T O WIPE the sweat out of his eyes. He’d
tied a folded ke rchief round his head, but the humidity in the
thick growth of the tidal forest w as so high that sweat formed
in his eye sockets, stinging and blurring his vision.
From a taproom in Edenton, the  knowledge that Bonnet was
—or would be—on Ocracoke had seemed all heady
conviction; the search narrowed suddenly to one tiny sandbar ,
versus the millions of other places the pirate could have been;
how dif ficult could it be? Once on  the bloody sandbar , the
perspective had altered. The frigging island was narrow , but
several miles long, with lar ge pa tches of scrub forest, and most
of its coastline fraught with hidden bars and dangerous eddies.
The skip per of the fishing boat  they’d hired had got them
there in good time; then they’d spent two days sailing up and
down the length of the damn  thing, looking for possible
landing spots, likely pirate hideouts, and herds of wild horses.
So far , none of these had appeared.
Having spent long enough retching over the side—Claire
hadn’ t brought her acupuncture needles, having not foreseen
the need  of them—Jamie had insisted upon being put ashore.
He w ould walk the length of th e island, he said, keeping an
eye out for any thing untoward . They could pick him up at
sundown.
“And what if y ou run smack into Stephen Bonnet, all on
your own?” Claire had demand ed, when he refused to allow
her to accompany him.
“I’d rather be ru n through than puke to death,” was Jamie’ s
elegant reply , “and besides, Sassenach, I need ye to stay here
and make sure y on misbegotten son of a—of a captain doesna
sail away without us, aye?”So they had rowed him ashore and left him, watching as he
strode a way , sta ggering only slightly , into the thicket of scrub
pines and palmetto.
Another day of frustration, spent sailing slowly up and
down the coast, seeing nothing but the occasional ramshackle
fishing shack, and Roger and Ian  had begun to see the wisdom
of Jamie’ s approach, as well.
“See yon houses?” Ian pointed a t a tiny cluster of shacks on
the shore.
“If ye want to c all them that, yes.” Roger shaded his hand
over his eyes to look, but the shacks looked deserted.
“If they can get boats of f there, we can get one on. Let’ s go
ashore and see will the folk there tell us anything.”
Leaving Claire glowering behind them, they had rowed
ashore to  make inquiries—to no avail. The only inhabitants of
the tiny settlement were a few  women and children, all of
whom heard the name “Bonnet”  and scuttled into their homes
like clams digging into the sand.
Still, having felt solid ground under their feet, they were
less than eager to admit defea t and go back to the fishing
shack. “Let’ s have a look, then,” Ian had said, gazing
thoughtfully into the sun-striped forest. “W e’ll crisscross,
aye?” He drew a quick series of X’ s in the sand in illustration.
“W e’ll cover more ground, and meet up every so often.
Whoever reache s the shore first each time will wait on the
other .”
Roger h ad nodded agreement, and with a cheery wave at the
fishing boat and the small, ind ignant figure on its bow , had
turned inland.
It was hot and still under the pines, and his progress was
impaired by all sorts of low bushes, creepers, patches of
sandburs and other stickery th ings. The going was a little
easier n ear the shore, as the forest thinned and gave way to
stretches of coarse sea oats, w ith dozens of tiny crabs thatscuttled out of his way—or occasionally crunched under his
feet.
Still, it was a re lief to move, to  feel that somehow he was
doing so mething, was making progress toward finding Bree—
though h e admitted to himself th at he wasn’ t sure exactly what
they were looking for . W as she  here? Had Bonnet arrived on
the island already? Or would he  be coming in a day or two, at
the dark of the moon, as Hepzibah had said?
Despite the worry , the heat, an d the millions of gnats and
mosquitoes—they didn’ t bite, for the most part, but insisted
upon cra wling in to his ears, eye s, nose, and mouth—he smiled
at the thought of  Manfred. He’d been praying for the boy ever
since his disappearance from the Ridge, that he might be
restored to his family . Granted, to find him firmly attached to
an ex-prostitute was likely not quite the answer to prayer that
Ute McGillivray  had been hoping for , but he’d learned before
that God had His own methods.
Lor d, let her be safe.  He didn’ t care how that prayer was
answered, provi ded only that i t was. Let me have her back,
please.
It was well past mid-afternoon, and his clothes stuck to him
with sw eat, whe n he came to one of the dozens of small tidal
inlets th at cut into the island lik e the holes in Swiss cheese. It
was too  wide to leap across, s o he made his way down the
sandy ba nk and into the water . I t was deeper than he’d thought
—he was up to his neck by mid-channel, and had to swim a
few strokes before he found solid footing on the other side.
The wat er pulled at him, rushi ng toward the sea; the tide
had begun to tu rn. Likely the inlet would be much shallower
when th e tide was out—but he th ought a boat could make it up
the inlet easily , with the tide coming in.
That was promising. Encourage d, he crawled out on the far
side and began to follow the channel inland. W ithin minutes,
he heard a sound in the distance and stopped dead, listening.Horses. He would swear it was the sound of neighing,
though so far aw ay he couldn’ t be sure of it. He turned in a
circle, tr ying to locate it, but the sound had vanished. Still, it
seemed a sign, and he pushed on with renewed vigor ,
frightening a family of raccoons washing their meal in the
water of the channel.
But then  the inlet began to narrow , the water level dropping
to no more than a foot—and th en less, only a few inches of
water ru nning clear over dusky sand. He was loath to give up,
though, and shoved his way under a low canopy of pine and
twisted scrub oak. Then he sto pped dead, skin tingling from
scalp to sole.
Four of them. C rude stone pillars, pale in the shadow of the
trees. One stood actually in the channel itself, tilted drunkenly
by the action of  the water . Another , on the bank, had carvings
on its face, abstr act symbols that he didn’ t recognize. He stood
frozen, as though they were live things that might see him if he
moved.
It seemed abnormally silent; even the insects seemed
temporarily to have deserted hi m. He had no doubt that this
was the circle th e man Donner h ad described to Brianna. Here,
the five men ha d chanted, walked their pattern, and turned,
passing to the le ft of the inscribe d stone. And here at least one
of them had die d. A profound s hiver ran through him, despite
the oppressive heat.
He m oved at last, very carefull y , backing away , as though
the s tones might wake, but did n ot turn his back on them until
he w as a good distance away—so far away that the stones
were lost to sight, buried in the heavy growth. Then he turned
and wal ked back toward the sea, fast, and then faster , ‘til the
breath burned in his throat, fee ling as though invisible eyes
bored into his back.
I SA T IN THE SHADE of the forecastle, sipping cool beer and
watching the shore. Just like blo ody men, I thought, frowning
at the tranquil stretch of sand. Char ge in pigheaded, leavingthe w omen to mind the store. Still … I wasn’ t so sure that I
would h ave wan ted to slog the length of the beastly island on
foot myself. By repute, Black beard and a number of his
confederates had  used the place as a lair , and the reason why
was obvious. A less hospitable shore I’d seldom seen.
The chance of finding anything in that secretive, wooded
place by randomly poking into holes was low . Still, sitting on
my bum  in a boat while Brianna was dealing with Stephen
Bonnet was making me twitch  with anxiety and the ur gent
desire to do  something.
But there was nothing to  do, and the afternoon wore slowly
away . I watched  the shore steadily; now and then, I would see
Roger o r Ian pop out of the under growth, then the two of them
would confer briefly before pop ping back in. Now and then, I
looked to the north—but there was no sign of Jamie.
Captain Roarke , who was  in fact a misbegotten son of a
poxed whore, as he cheerfully ad mitted himself, sat down with
me for a time a nd accepted a bottle of beer . I congratulated
myself on my f orethought in having brought a few dozen, a
few of which I’ d put over the side in a net to keep cool; the
beer was doing a lot to sooth e my impatience, though my
stomach was still knotted with worry .
“None o ’ your men are what ye  might call sailing men, are
they?” Captain Roarke observed, after a thoughtful silence.
“W ell, M r . MacKenzie’ s spent a bit of time on fishing boats
in Scotland,” I said, dropping an empty bottle into the net.
“But I wouldn’ t say he’ s an able seaman, no.”
“Ah.” He drank a bit more.
“All right,” I said finally . “Why?”
He lowered his bottle and belched loudly , then blinked.
“Oh. W ell, ma’am—I believe I did hear one o’ the young
men say as how there was a rondayvooz to occur , at dark o’
moon?”“Y es,” I said a little guardedly .  W e had told the captain as
little as possible , not knowing whether he might have some
association with Bonnet. “The dark of the moon is tomorrow
night, isn’ t it?”
“It is,” he agree d. “But what I mean to say is—when one
says ‘dark o’ m oon,’ most likely one does  mean nighttime,
aye?” H e peered  into the empty neck of his bottle, then lifted it
and blew thoughtfully across it, making a deep woooog  sound.
I took the hint and handed him another .
“Thank you kindly , ma’am,” he said, looking happy . “See,
the tide turns ab out half-eleven, this time o’ month—and it’ s
going out, ” he added with emphasis.
I gave him a blank look.
“W ell, if  you look careful, ma’am, you’ll see the tide is half
out now”—he pointed toward the south—”yet there’ s middling
deep water close to shore all along o’ here. Come the
nighttime, though, it won’ t be.”
“Y es?” I was still missing his point, but he was patient.
“W ell, with the tide out, it’ s easier to see the bars and inlets,
sure—and were you coming in with a boat with a shallow
draft, th at would be the tim e to choose. But was the
rondayvooz to be with something bigger , maybe anything that
draws m ore than  four feet … well, then.” He took a gulp, and
pointed the bottom of his bottle toward a spot far down the
shore. “ The water there is deep , ma’am—see the color of it?
W as I a ship of any size, that would be the safest place to
anchor , when the tide is on the ebb.”
I regarded the spot he’d indicated. The water was  distinctly
darker th ere, a deeper blue-gray  than the waves surrounding it.
“Y ou could have told us that ea rlier ,” I said with a certain
note of reproach.
“So I could, ma’am,” he agre ed cordially , “save for not
knowin’ as you’d like to hear it.” He got up then and wanderedtoward the stern, an empty bo ttle in hand, absently going
woog-woog-woog,  like a distant foghorn.
As t he s un sank into the sea, Ro ger and Ian appeared on the
shore, and Captain Roarke’ s hand, Moses, rowed ashore to
fetch them of f. Then we hoisted  sail and made our way slowly
up the coast of O cracoke, until we found Jamie, waving from a
tiny spit of sand.
Anchored of fsho re for the night , we exchanged notes of our
findings—or lack of them. All the men were drained,
exhausted from heat and searching and with little appetite for
supper , despite their exertions. Roger , in particular , looked
drawn and pale, and said almost nothing.
The last  sliver of the waning m oon rose in the sky . W ith a
minimum of conversation, the m en took their blankets and lay
down on deck, asleep within minutes.
Quantities of beer notwithstandi ng, I was wide awake. I sat
beside Jamie, my own blanket wrapped about my shoulders
against the coolness of the night  wind, watching the low black
mystery of the island. The anchorage Captain Roarke had
pointed out to me was invisibl e in the darkness. W ould we
know , I wondered, if a ship were to come tomorrow night?
IN F ACT , it came that night. I woke in the very early morning,
dreaming of corpses. I sat up, h eart pounding, to see Roarke
and Mos es at the rail, and a drea dful smell in the air . It wasn’ t
a s mell one would ever for get, and when I got to my feet and
went to the rail to look, I was not at all surprised to hear
Roarke murmur , “Slaver ,” nodding toward the south.
The ship  was anchored half a mile or so away , its masts
black against the paling sky . Not a huge ship, but definitely too
big to make its way into the small channels of the island. I
watched a long time, joined by Jamie, Roger , and Ian as they
woke—but no boats were lowered.
“What d’ye suppose it’ s doing th ere?” Ian said. He spoke in
a low voice; the slave ship made everyone nervous.Roarke shook his head; he didn’ t like it, either .
“Damned if I know ,” he said. “W ouldn’ t expect such a thing
in such a place. Not at all.”
Jamie rubbed a hand across his unshaven chin. He hadn’ t
shaved in days, and, green-faced and hollow-eyed beneath the
stubble—he’d vomited over the rail within minutes of rising,
though the swell was very gentle—looked even more
disreputable than Roarke himself.
“Can ye lay us alongside her , Mr . Roarke?” he said, eyes on
the slave ship. Roger glanced at him sharply .
“Y e don’ t suppose Brianna’ s aboard?”
“If she is, we’ll find out. If she’ s not—we’ll maybe find out
who yon ship has come to see.”
It was full daylight by the time we came along the ship, and
there were a nu mber of hands on deck, all of whom peered
curiously down over the rail at us.
Roarke hallooed  up, asking p ermission to come aboard.
There w as no immediate response to this, but after a few
minutes, a lar ge man with an air of authority and an ill-
tempered face appeared.
“What d’ye want?” he called down.
“T o come aboard,” Roarke bellowed back.
“No. Shove of f.”
“W e are  in search of a young woman!” Roger called up.
“W e should like to ask you a few questions!”
“Any yo ung wo men on this shi p are mine,” the captain—if
that’ s what he was—said definitely . “Bugger of f, I said.” He
turned and gestured to his ha nds, who scattered at once,
reappearing in moments with muskets.
Roger cupped his hands to his mouth.
“BRIANNA!” he bellowed. “BRIANNAAAA!”One ma n raised his gun and fired, the ball whistling safely
over our heads, and ripping through the mainsail.
“Oi!” shouted Roarke, incensed. “What’ s the matter of
you?”
The only answer to this was a  fusillade of further shots,
followed by the opening of the  port lids nearest us, and the
sudden a ppearance of the long b lack noses of several cannon,
along with a more intense gust of stink.
“Jesus God,” said Roarke, astonished. “W ell, if that’ s how
you feel about—well, God damn you!” he shouted,
brandishing a fist. “God damn you, I say!”
Moses, less interested in rhetoric, had made sail with the
first sho t and was already at th e tiller; we slid past the slave
ship and into clean water within moments.
“W ell, something’ s  goi ng on,” I remarked, looking  back at
the ship. “Whether it’ s to do with Bonnet or not.”
Roger was clinging to the rail, his knuckles white.
“It is,” Jamie sa id. He wiped a hand across his mouth, and
grimaced. “Can ye keep in sight of her , but out of range, Mr .
Roarke?” A fresh wave of the smell of sewage, corruption, and
hopelessness hit  us, and he turned the color of rancid suet.
“And maybe upwind, too?”
W e were  obliged  to sail well out into the ocean and tack to
and fro in order to meet these various conditions, but at length
had beaten our way back and a nchored a safe distance away ,
the s lave ship b arely visible. Here we lay through the rest of
the day , taking it in turns to ke ep an eye on the strange ship
through Captain Roarke’ s telescope.
Nothing happened, though; no boats came from the ship,
nor from  the shore. And as we all sat silent on deck, watching
the stars come o ut in a moonles s sky , the ship was swallowed
by the dark.1 0 7
THE DARK OF THE MOON
T HEY ANCHOR ED LONG BEFORE DA WN, and a small
boat took them ashore.
“Where is this ?” she asked, voice rusty with disuse—
Bonnet had wakened her in th e dark. They had made three
stops alo ng the way , at nameless coves where mysterious men
came ou t of the shrubbery , rolling barrels or carrying bales,
but she had not been taken of f a t any of them. This was a long,
low island, thick with scrub forest and hazy with mist, looking
haunted under a dying moon.
“Ocracoke,” he answered, leaning forward to peer into the
fog. “A bit farther to port, Denys.” The seaman at the oars
leaned harder to the side, and the nose of the boat turned
slowly , drawing nearer to the shore.
It wa s co ld on the water; she wa s grateful for the thick cloak
he h ad wrapped around her bef ore handing her into the boat.
Even so, the chi ll of the night and the open sea had little to do
with the small, constant shiver  that made her hands tremble
and numbed her feet and fingers.
Soft mu rmurs be tween the pirates, further direction. Bonnet
jumped of f into waist-deep, muddy water , and waded into the
shadows, pushin g aside the heavy growth so that the water of
the h idden inlet showed suddenly , a smooth dark gleam before
them. T he boat nosed its way under the overhanging trees,
then paused, so that Bonnet could pull himself over the
gunwales, splashing and dripping.
A s hattering cry sounded near them, so close that she
jerked, heart pounding, before r ealizing that it was only a bird
somewhere in the swamp around them. Otherwise, the night
was quiet, save for the muted, regular splash of the oars.They had put Josh and the Fulani men into the boat, too;
Josh sat at her feet, a hunched black form. He was shivering;
she coul d feel it. Disengaging a fold of the cloak, she put it
over him, and put a hand on his shoulder under it, meaning to
give him what encouragement she could. A hand rose and
settled softly over hers, squeezing, and thus linked, they sailed
slowly into the dark unknown beneath the dripping trees.
The sky was lightening by the time the boat reached a small
landing, and streaks of rose-tinted cloud reached across the
horizon. Bonnet hopped out, and reached down to take her
hand. Reluctantly , she let go of Josh, and stood up.
There was a ho use, half-hidden in the trees. Made of gray
clapboards, it seemed to sink into the remnants of fog, as
though it weren’ t quite real and might disappear at any
moment.
The wind-borne stink, though, was real enough. She’d never
smelled it before herself, but had heard her mother ’ s vivid
description of it, and recognized it instantly—the smell of a
slaver , anchored of fshore. Josh recognized it, too; she heard
his sudd en gasp, and then a hasty murmur—he was saying the
Hail Mary in Gaelic, as fast as he could.
“T ake these to the barracoon,” Bonnet said to the seaman,
pushing Josh in his direction an d waving at the Fulani. “Then
go back to the ship. T ell Mr . Ord en we sail for England in four
days’ time; he’ll see to the rest of the provisioning. Come for
me Saturday , an hour before high tide.”
“Josh!” She called after him, and he looked back, eyes
white with fear , but the seaman hustled him along, and Bonnet
dragged her in the other direc tion, up the path toward the
house.
“W ait! Where is he taking him? What are you going to do
with him?” She dug her feet into the mud, and grabbed hold of
a mangrove, refusing to move.
“Sell him, what else?” Bonnet was matter -of-fact about that,
and also  about her refusal to move. “Come along, darlin’. Y eknow I can mak e ye, and ye know ye won’ t like it if I do.” He
reached out, flipped back the e dge of her cloak, and pinched
her nipple, hard, in illustration.
Burning with anger , she snatched the cloak back and
wrapped it tight around her , as  though that might soothe the
pain. He had already turned, and was making his way up the
path, quite certain that she wo uld follow . T o her everlasting
shame, she did.
THE DO OR W AS OPENED by a black man, nearly as tall as
Bonnet himself, and even wider through the chest and
shoulder . A thick vertical scar  between his eyes ran nearly
from his hairline to the bridge o f his nose, but it had the clean
look of a deliberate tribal scar , not the result of accident.
“Emmanuel, me man!” Bonnet greeted the man cheerfully ,
and pushed Brianna ahead of hi m into the house. “Look what
the cat dragged in, will ya?”
The blac k man looked her up and down with an expression
of doubt.
“She damn tall,” he said, in a voice that held an African lilt.
He t ook her by the shoulder and turned her round, running a
hand down her b ack and cupping her buttocks briefly through
the cloak. “Nice fat arse, though,” he admitted grudgingly .
“Isn’ t it, though? W ell, be seeing to her , then come tell me
how it is here. The hold’ s near full—oh, and I’ve picked up
four—no, five—more blacks. The men can go to Captain
Jackson, but the women—ah , now , those are somethin’
special.” He winked at Emmanuel. “T wins.”
The black man’ s face went rigid.
“T wins?” he said in a tone of horror . “Y ou bring them in the
house?”
“I will,” Bonnet said firmly . “Fulani, and gor geous things
they are, too. N o English, no training—but they’ll go for
fancies, sure. Speakin’ of whic h, have we word from Signor
Ricasoli?”Emmanuel nodded, though his brow was furrowed; the scar
pulled the frown lines into a deep “V .”
“He be here on Thursday . Monsieur  Houvener comes then,
too. Mister Howard be here tomorrow , though.”
“Splendid. I’m wanting me bre akfast now—and I imagine
you’re hungry as well, aren’ t ye , darlin’?” he asked, turning to
Brianna.
She nodded, torn between fear , outrage, and morning
sickness. She had to eat something, and fast.
“Fine, then. T ake her somewhere”—he flipped a hand
toward the ceiling, indicating ro oms upstairs—”and feed her .
I’ll eat in me of fice; come find me there.”
W ithout acknow ledgment of the order , Emmanuel clamped
a hand like a v ise on the back of her neck, and shoved her
toward the stairs.
THE BUTLER —if one could describe something like
Emmanuel with such a domestic term—pushed her into a
small ro om and shut the door be hind her . It was furnished, but
sparsely: a bed frame with a bare mattress, one woolen
blanket, and a chamber pot. She  made use of the latter object
with relief, then made a rapid reconnaissance of the room
itself.
There was only one window , a  small one, set with metal
bars. There was no glass, only inside shutters, and the breath
of sea and scrub forest filled the room, vying with dust and the
stale smell of the stained mat tress. Emmanuel might be a
factotum, but he wasn’ t much of a housekeeper , she thought,
trying to keep her spirits up.
A famil iar sound came to her , and she craned her neck to
see. Not much was visible from the window—only the white
crushed shells and sandy mud t hat surrounded the house, and
the tops of stunt ed pines. If she pressed her face to the side of
the wind ow , though, she could see a small slice of a distant
beach, w ith white breakers rolling in. As she watched, threehorses g alloped across it, vanishing out of her view—but with
the wind -borne sound of neighing, then came five more, and
then an other g roup of seven or eight. W ild horses, the
descendants of Spanish ponies left here a century ago.
The sight of the m charmed her , and she watched for a long
time, hoping they would come  back, but they didn’ t; only a
flight of pelicans passed by , and a few gulls, diving for fish.
The sigh t of the horses had ma de her feel less alone for a
few mom ents, b ut no less empty . She had been in the room for
half an hour , at least, and there were no sounds of footsteps in
the h all outside, bringing food. Cautiously , she tried the door ,
and was surprised to find it unlocked.
There wer e  sou nds downstairs; someone was here. And the
warm, g rainy ar omas of porridge and baking bread were faint
in the air .
Swallowing to keep her stomach down, she moved soft-
footed through the house and do wn the stairs. There were male
voices in a room at the front of the house—Bonnet and
Emmanuel. The sound of them made her diaphragm tighten,
but the door was closed, and she tiptoed past.
The kitchen was a cookshack, a separate small building
outside, connected to the house by a short breezeway and
surrounded by a fenced yard tha t also enclosed the back of the
house. She gave the fence—very tall, and spiked—a glance,
but first things first: she had to have food.
There was someone in the ki tchen; she could hear the
movements of pots, and a woman’ s voice, muttering
something. The smell of food was strong enough to lean
against. She pushed open the door and went in, pausing to let
the cook see her . Then she saw the cook.
She was so battered by circumstance at this point that she
only blinked, certain she was seeing things.
“Phaedre?” she said uncertainly .
The girl  swung around, wide-ey ed and open-mouthed with
shock.“Oh, sweet Jesus!” She glanced wildly behind Brianna,
then, seeing that she was alone , grabbed Brianna’ s arm and
pulled her out into the yard.
“What you doing here?” she d emanded, sounding fierce.
“How do you come to be her e ?”
“Stephen Bonnet,” Brianna said briefly . “How on earth did
you—did he kidnap you? From River Run?” She couldn’ t
think how—or why—but everything from the moment she had
learned she was pregnant had had the surreal feel of
hallucination, an d how much of this was due to pregnancy
alone she had no real idea.
Phaedre was shaking her head, though.
“No, miss. That Bonnet, he go t me a month ago. From a
man name Butler ,” she added, m outh twisting in an expression
that made clear her loathing of Butler .
The name seemed vaguely familiar to Brianna. She thought
it was the name of a smuggler; s he had never met him, but had
heard the name now and then. He wasn’ t the smuggler who
provided her aunt with tea and other contraband luxuries,
though—she had  me t that man, a disconcerting ly ef fete and
dainty gentleman named W ilbraham Jones.
“I don’ t understand. But—wait, is there anything to eat?”
she asked, the floor of her stomach dropping suddenly .
“Oh. Su rely . Y ou wait here.” Phaedre vanished back into the
kitchen, light-footed, and was back in an instant with half a
loaf of bread and a crock of butter .
“Thank you.” She grabbed the bread and ate some hastily ,
not b othering to butter it, then p ut down her head between her
knees and breathed for a few  minutes, until the nausea
subsided.
“Sorry ,” she said, raising her head at last. “I’m pregnant.”
Phaedre nodded, plainly unsurprised.
“Who by?” she asked.“My husband,” Brianna answered. She’d spoken tartly , but
then realized, with a small lurch of her unsettled innards, that
it co uld so easil y be otherwise. Phaedre had been gone from
River Ru n for months—God on ly knew what had happened to
her in that span of time.
“He’ s n ot had you long, then.” Phaedre glanced at the
house.
“No. Y ou said a month—have you tried to get away?”
“Once.” The girl’ s mouth twisted again. “Y ou see that man
Emmanuel?”
Brianna nodded.
“He an Ibo. T ra ck a haunt through a cypress swamp, and
make it sorry when he catch it.” She wrapped her arms around
herself, though the day was warm.
The yard was fenced with eight-foot pointed pine stakes,
laced with rope. She might get over them, with a foot up from
Phaedre … but then she saw the shadow of a man pass by on
the other side, a gun across his shoulder .
She would have guessed as mu ch, had she been capable of
or ganized thought. This was Bonnet’ s hideaway—and judging
from the piles of boxes, bundles, and casks stacked
haphazardly in the yard, it was  also where he kept valuable
car go before selling it. Naturally , it would be guarded.
A fa int breeze wafted through the pickets of the fence,
carrying the same vile stench sh e had smelled when they came
ashore. S he took another quick bite of bread, forcing it down
as ballast for her queasy stomach.
Phaedre’ s nostrils flared, then pinched at the reek.
“Be a slave ship , anchored past the breakers,” she said very
quietly , and swallowed. “Captai n come in yesterday , see if Mr .
Bonnet have something for him,  but he ain’ t back yet. Captain
Jackson say he come again tomorrow .”
Brianna could feel Phaedre’ s fear , like a pale yellow miasma
wavering over her skin, and took another bite of bread.“He won’ t—he wouldn’ t sell you to this Jackson?” She
wouldn’ t put anything at all pas t Bonnet. But she did by now
understand things about slavery . Phaedre was a prime item:
light-skinned, y oung, and pretty—and trained as a body
servant. Bonnet  could get a very good price for her almost
anywhere, and from what little s he knew of slavers, they dealt
in raw slaves from Africa.
Phaedre shook her head, her lips gone pale.
“I do n’ t think so . He say I’m what he call a ‘fancy .’ That’ s
why he’ s kept me so long; he go t some men he know , come up
from the Indies this week. Planters.” She swallowed again,
looking ill. “They buy pretty women.”
The brea d Brian na had eaten m elted suddenly into a soggy ,
slimy m ass in her stomach, a nd with a certain feeling of
fatality , she got up and took a few steps away before throwing
up over a bale of raw cotton.
Stephen Bonnet’ s voice echoed in her head, cheerfully
jovial.
“Why bother takin’ ye all the way to London, wher e ye’d be
of no  pa rticular use to anyone? Besides, it rains quite a bit in
London; I’m sur e ye wouldn’ t like it.”
“They buy pretty women,” she whispered, leaning against
the p alisades, waiting for the sen se of clamminess to fade. But
white  women?
Why not? said t he coldly logical part of her brain. W omen
are p roperty , black or white. If y ou can be owned, you can be
sold. She herself had owned Lizzie, for a time.
She wip ed her sleeve over her  mouth, and went back to
Phaedre, who was sitting on a roll of copper , her fine-boned
face thin and drawn with worry .
“Josh—he took Josh, too. Whe n we came ashore, he told
them to take Josh to the barracoon.”
“Joshua?” Phaedre sat up straight, eyes huge. “Joshua, Miss
Jo’ s groom? He’ s her e ?”“Y es. Where’ s the barracoon, do you know?”
Phaedre had hopped to her feet and was striding to and fro,
agitated.
“I ain’ t knowing for sure. I cook up food for the slaves
there, but be one  of the seamen takes it. Can’ t be far from the
house, though.”
“Is it a big one?”
Phaedre shook her head emphatically at that.
“No’m. Mr . Bonnet, he ain’ t really in the slaving business.
He pick up a few , here and there—and then he got his
‘fancies’”—she grimaced at th at—”but can’ t be more’n a
dozen here, amount of food the y eat. Three girls in the house
—five, counting they Fulani he say he’ s bringing.”
Feeling better , Brianna began to cast about the yard,
searching for anything that m ight be of use. It was a
hodgepodge of valuable things—everything from bolts of
Chinese silk, wrapped in linen and oiled cloth, and crates of
porcelain dishes, to rolls of copper , casks of brandy , bottles of
wine packed in straw , and ches ts of tea. She opened one of
these, breathing in the soft perfu me of the leaves and finding it
wonderfully soothing to her internal distress. She’d give
almost anything for a hot cup of tea just now .
Even more interesting, though, were a number of small
barrels, thick-wa lled and tightly sealed, containing gunpowder .
“If only I had a few matches,” she muttered to herself,
looking at them longingly . “Or even a striker .” But fire was
fire, and  there was certainly one in the kitchen. She looked at
the h ouse carefully , thinking exactly where to place the barrels
—but sh e couldn ’ t blow the plac e up, not with the other slaves
inside, and not without knowing what she’d do next.
The sound of th e door opening galvanized her; by the time
Emmanuel looked out, she had jumped away from the
gunpowder , and was examining an enormous box enclosing a
grandfather clo ck, the gilded face—decorated with threeanimated sailing ships on a sea of silver—peeping out behind
the protective laths nailed over it.
“Y ou, girl,” he said to Brianna , and jerked his chin. “Y ou
come wash yourself.” He gave Phaedre a hard look—Brianna
saw that she wouldn’ t meet his eyes, but hastily began to pick
up sticks of kindling from the ground.
The han d clamped hard on he r neck again, and she was
marched ignominiously back into the house.
THIS TI ME, Em manuel did  loc k the door . He brought her a
basin an d ewer , a towel, and a clean shift. Much, much later ,
he came  back, bringing a tray  of food. But he ignored all
questions, and locked the door again upon leaving.
She pul led the bed over to the window and knelt on it,
elbows wedged between the bar s. There was nothing to do but
think—and that was something  she would as soon put of f a
little longer . She watched the fo rest and the distant beach, the
shadows of the scrub pines cree ping over the sand, the oldest
of sundials, marking the snaillike progress of the hours.
After a long time, her knees grew numb and her elbows
hurt, and she spread the cloak over the nasty mattress, trying
not t o co nsider t he various stains on it, nor the smell. L ying on
her side, she watched the sky through the window , the
infinitesimal ch anges of the light from one moment to the
next, and considered in detail the specific pigments and the
exact br ushstrokes she would use to paint it. Then she got up
and beg an pacin g to and fro, counting her steps, estimating
distance.
The roo m was about eight feet by ten; 5,280 feet in a mile.
Five hundred and twenty-eight laps. She really hoped Bonnet’ s
of fice was underneath her .
Nothing, though, was enough, and as the room darkened
and she reached two miles, she  found Roger in her mind—
where he had been all along, unacknowledged.She san k down on the bed, hot from the exercise, and
watched the last of the flaming color fade from the sky .
Had he been ord ained, as he wanted so much? He had been
worried about the question of predestination, not sure that he
could ta ke the Holy Orders he desired, if he were not able to
subscribe wholeheartedly to tha t notion—well, she  called it a
notion; to Presbyterians, it was dogma. She smiled wryly ,
thinking of Hiram Crombie.
Ian had told her about Crombie earnestly attempting to
explain t he doctrine of predestination to the Cherokee. Most of
them had listened politely , then ignored him. Bird’ s wife,
Penstemon, though, had been interested by the ar gument, and
followed Crombie about durin g the day , playfully pushing
him, then crying out, ‘Did you r God know I would do that ?
How could he know that— I  d idn’ t know I would do that!’, or
in more thought ful mood, trying to get him to explain how the
idea of predestination might work in terms of gambling—like
most of the Indians, Penstemon would bet on almost anything.
She thought Penstemon had pro bably had a lot to do with
the shor tness of Crombie’ s initial visit to the Indians. She had
to g ive him cred it, though: he’d gone back. And back again.
He believed in what he was doing.
As did Roger . Damn, she tho ught wearily , there he was
again, those soft moss-green e yes of his dark with thought,
running a finger slowly down the bridge of his nose.
“Does i t really matter?” she’d said at last, tiring of the
discussion of predestination, and privately pleased that
Catholics weren’ t required to believe any such thing and were
content to let Go d work in mysterious ways. “Doesn’ t it matter
more that you can help people, that you can of fer comfort?”
They’d been in bed, the candle extinguished, talking by the
glow of the hea rth. She could feel the shift of his body as he
moved, his hand playing with a strand of her hair as he
considered.“I don’ t know ,” he’d said at last. He’d smiled a little then,
looking up at her .
“Do ye not thi nk any time-traveler must be a bit of a
theologian, though?”
She’d taken a deep, martyred br eath, and he’d laughed then,
and let it go, kissing her instead and descending to far earthier
matters.
He’d be en right , though. No on e who had traveled through
the stones could help asking i t: why me? And who would
answer that question, if not God?
Why me?  And the ones w ho didn’ t make it—why them? She
felt a small chil l, thinking of those. The anonymous bodies,
listed in Geillis Duncan’ s note book; Donner ’ s companions,
dead on  arrival. And speaking of Geillis Duncan … the
thought came to her suddenly; t he witch had died her e,  out of
her own time.
Putting metaphysics aside and looking at the matter purely
in terms of science—and it must  have a scientific basis, she
ar gued stubbornly , it wasn’ t magic, no matter what Geilie
Duncan had thought—the laws of thermodynamics held that
neither mass nor ener gy could b e created nor destroyed. Only
changed.
Changed how , though? Did movement through time
constitute change? A mosquito whined past her ear , and she
flapped her hand to drive it away .
Y ou could go both ways; they knew that for a fact. The
obvious implication—which neither Roger nor her mother had
mentioned, so perhaps they hadn’ t seen it—was that one could
go into the futu re from a startin g point, rather than only into
the past and back.
So perha ps if someone traveled to the past and died there, as
Geillis Duncan and Otter -T ooth had both demonstrably done
… p erhaps that must be balance d by someone traveling to the
future and dying ther e ?She closed her eyes, unable—or unwilling—to follow that
train of thought any further . Far in the distance, she heard the
sound o f the surf, pounding on the sand, and thought of the
slave ship. Then she realized that the smell of it was her e,  and
rising suddenly , went to the win dow . She could just see the far
end of the path that led to the house; as she watched, a big man
in a dar k-blue coat and hat stumped rapidly out of the trees,
followed by two others, shabbily  dressed. Sailors,  she thought,
seeing the roll of their gait.
This must be Captain Jackson, then, come to conduct his
business with Bonnet.
“Oh, Jos h,” she  said out loud, and had to sit down on the
bed, a wave of faintness washing over her .
Who had it been? One of the Saint Theresas—Theresa of
A vila? Who’d said in exasperation to God, “W ell, if this is how
Y ou tr eat Y our friends, no wonder Y ou have so few of them!”
SHE HAD F ALLEN asleep hin king of Roger . She waked in
the morning thinking of the baby .
For once, the nausea and the odd sense of dislocation were
absent. All she felt was a dee p peace, and a sense of …
curiosity?
Ar e you ther e?  she thought, hands across her womb.
Nothing so definite as an answe r; but knowledge was there, as
sure as the beating of her own heart.
Good,  she thought, and fell asleep again.
Noises from below awakened he r sometime later . She sat up
suddenly , hearing loud voices raised, then swayed, feeling
faint, and lay down again. The nausea had returned, but if she
closed her eyes and kept very  still, it lay dormant, like a
sleeping snake.
The voices continued, rising and falling, with the occasional
loud thud for punctuation, as though a fist had struck a wall or
table. After a fe w minutes, though, the voices ceased, and sheheard no thing f urther until light footsteps came to her door .
The lock rattled, and Phaedre came in, with a tray of food.
She sat up, trying not to breathe ; the smell of anything fried
…
“What’ s going on down there?” she asked.
Phaedre pulled a face.
“That Emmanuel, he’ s not best pleased with they Fulani
women. Ibo, they think twins a re bad, bad luck—any woman
bear twi ns, she take them out in  the forest, leave them there to
die. Emmanuel want to send the Fulani of f with Captain
Jackson first thing, get them out  the house, but Mr . Bonnet, he
say he waiting on the gentlemen from the Indies, get a lots
better price.”
“Gentlemen from the Indies—what gentlemen?”
Phaedre lifted her shoulders.
“I a in’ t knowing. Gentlemen he think he sell things to.
Sugar planters, I reckon. Y ou eat that; I be back later .”
Phaedre turned to go, but Brianna suddenly called after her .
“W ait! Y ou didn’ t tell me yesterday—who took you from
River Run?”
The girl turned back, looking reluctant.
“Mr . Ulysses.”
“Ulysses?” Bria nna said, disbelieving. Phaedre heard the
doubt in her voice, and gave her a flat, angry look.
“What, you don’ t believe me?”
“No, no ,” Brian na hastily assured her . “I do believe you.
Only—why?”
Phaedre breathed in deeply through her nose.
“Because I am one damn stupid nigger ,” she said bitterly .
“My ma ma told me, she say nev er , ever cross Ulysses. But did
I listen?”“Cross him,” Brianna said warily . “How did you cross
him?” S he gestured to the bed,  inviting Phaedre to sit down.
The girl  hesitated for a mome nt, but then did, smoothing a
hand over the white cloth tied round her head, over and over ,
while she searched for words.
“Mr . Du ncan,” s he said at last, and her face softened a little.
“He a nice, nice man. Y ou know  he never been with a woman?
He g ot k icked b y a horse when he young, hurt his balls, think
he can’ t do nothing that way .”
Brianna nodded;  she’d heard som ething of Duncan’ s trouble
from her mother .
“W ell,” Phaedre said with a sigh. “He wrong about that.”
She glanced at Brianna, to s ee how she might take this
admission. “He wasn’ t meaning no harm, and nor was I. It just
—happened.” She shrugged. “B ut Ulysses, he find it out; he
find out every s ingle thing goes on at River Run, sooner or
later . Maybe one of the girls told  him, maybe some other way ,
but he knew . And he told me th at ain’ t right, I put a stop to it
this minute.”
“But you didn’ t?” Brianna guessed.
Phaedre shook her head slowly , lips pushed out.
“T old him I’d stop when Mr . Duncan didn’ t want to no more
—not his  bus iness. See, I thought Mr . Duncan, he the master .
Ain’ t true, though; Ulysses be the master at River Run.”
“So he—he took you away—sold you?—to stop you
sleeping with Duncan?” Why would he care? she wondered.
W as he afraid Jocasta would discover the af fair and be hurt?
“No, he sell me because I told h im if he don’ t leave me and
Mr . Duncan be, then I tell about him and Miss Jo.”
“Him an d …” Brianna blinked, not believing what she was
hearing. Phaedre looked at her , and gave a small, ironic smile.
“He share Miss Jo’ s bed these tw enty years and more. Since
before O ld Master die, my mama said. Every slave thereknows i t; ain’ t one stupid enough to say so to his face, ‘cept
me.”
Brianna knew she was gaping like a goldfish, but couldn’ t
help it. A hundred tiny things she’d seen at River Run, myriad
small intimacies between her aunt and the butler , suddenly
took on new si gnificance. No wonder her aunt had gone to
such lengths to get him back after the death of Lieutenant
W olf f. And no wonder , either , that Ulysses had taken instant
action. Phaedre might have be en believed, or not; the mere
accusation would have destroyed him.
Phaedre sighed, and rubbed a hand over her face.
“He ain’ t waste no time. That very night, he and Mr . Jones
come take me fr om my bed, wrap me up tight in a blanket, and
carry me away in a wagon. M r . Jones, he say he ain’ t no
slaver , b ut he do it as a favor for Mr . Ulysses. So he don’ t keep
me; he take me way downriver , though, sell me in W ilmington
to a man  what owns an ordinary . That’ s not too bad, but then a
couple months later , Mr . Jones comes and takes me back—
W ilmington’ s not far enough away to suit Ulysses. So he give
me to Mr . Butler , and Mr . Butler , he take me to Edenton.”
She looked down, pleating the quilt between long, graceful
fingers. Her lips were tight, and her face slightly flushed.
Brianna forbore to ask what she had done for Butler in
Edenton, thinking that she had likely been employed in a
brothel.
“And … er …  Stephen Bonnet found you there?” she
hazarded.
Phaedre nodded, not looking up.
“W on m e in a card game,” she said succinctly . She stood up.
“I g ot to go; I h ad me enough of crossing black men—ain’ t
risking no more beatings from that Emmanuel.”
Brianna was beginning to emer ge from the shock of hearing
about U lysses and her aunt. A sudden thought occurred to her ,
and she jumped out of bed, hur rying to catch Phaedre before
she reached the door .“W ait, wait! Just one more thing —do you—do the slaves at
River Run—know anything about the gold?”
“What, in Old Master ’ s tomb ? Surely .” Phaedre’ s face
expressed a cynical surprise th at there could be any doubt
about it. “Ain’ t nobody touch it, though. Everybody know
there a curse on it.”
“Do you know anything about its disappearing?”
Phaedre’ s face went blank.
“Disappearing?”
“Oh, wait—no, you wouldn’ t kn ow; you … left, long before
it disappeared. I just wondered, you know , whether maybe
Ulysses had something to do with that.”
Phaedre shook her head.
“I d on’ t know n othing about that. But I ain’ t put one thing
past Ulysses, curse or no.” T here was a sound of heavy
footsteps on the stair , and she paled. W ithout a word or gesture
of fa rewell, she slipped out the  door and closed it; Brianna
heard th e frantic fumbling of the key on the other side, and
then the click of the closing lock.
EMMANUEL, silent as a lizard, brought her a dress in the
afternoon. It was too short by a  good bit, and too tight in the
bosom, but a heavy blue watere d silk, and well-made. It had
plainly been worn before; there were sweat stains on it and it
smelled—of fear , she thought, repressing a shudder as she
struggled into it.
She was sweating herself as Emmanuel led her downstairs,
though a pleasant breeze swept through the open windows,
stirring the curtains. The house was very simple, for the most
part, wit h bare wooden floors a nd little more than stools and
bed fram es by way of furniture. The room downstairs to which
Emmanuel show ed her was such a contrast that it might have
belonged to a dif ferent house entirely .Rich T urkey rugs covered the fl oor in a overlapping riot of
color , and the furniture, while of several dif ferent styles, was
all heavy and elaborate, carved wood and silk upholstery .
Silver and crystal glittered from  every available surface, and a
chandelier—much too lar ge for  the room—hung with crystal
pendants sprayed the room with tiny rainbows. It was a
pirate’ s idea of a rich man’ s room—lavish abundance,
displayed with no sense of style or taste.
The rich man seated by the window appeared not to mind
his surr oundings, though. A thin man in a wig, with a
prominent Adam ’ s apple, he looked to be in his thirties,
though his skin was lined and yellowed by some tropical
disease. He glanced sharply at the door as she entered, then
rose to his feet.
Bonnet had been entertaining his guest; there were glasses
and a decanter on the table, and the smell of brandy was sweet
and heavy in the air . Brianna felt her stomach shift queasily ,
and wondered what they’d do if she were to vomit on the
T urkey rug.
“There ye are, d arlin’,” Bonnet said, coming to take her by
the hand. She pulled it away from him, but he af fected not to
notice, and instead pushed her toward the thin man, a hand in
the small of he r back. “Come and make your bob to Mr .
Howard, sweetheart.”
She drew herself to her full he ight—she was a good four
inches taller than Mr . Howard, w hose eyes widened at sight of
her—and glowered down at him.
“I am being held against my will, Mr . Howard. My husband
and my father w ill—ow!” Bonnet had gripped her wrist and
twisted it, hard.
“Lovely , is she not?” he said conversationally , as though she
had not spoken.
“Oh, yes. Y es, indeed. V ery tall,  though …” Howard walked
round her , examining her dubiously . “And red hair , Mr .
Bonnet? I do really prefer blond.”“Oh, do you indeed, you little pissant!” she snapped, in spite
of Bonnet’ s grip on her arm. “W here do you get of f, preferring
things?” W ith a wrench, she pulled away from Bonnet and
rounded on Howard.
“Now , look,” she said, trying to sound reasonable—he was
blinking at her in a faintly bewildered fashion— “I am a
woman of good—of excellent —family , and I have been
kidnapped. My father ’ s name is James Fraser , my husband is
Roger MacKenz ie, and my aunt is Mrs. Hector Cameron, of
River Run Plantation.”
“Is she really of good family?” Howard addressed this
question to Bonnet, appearing to be more interested.
Bonnet bowed slightly in af firmation.
“Oh, indeed she is, sir . The finest blood!”
“Hmmm. And good health, I see.” Howard had resumed his
examination, le aning close to peer at her . “Has she bred
before?”
“A ye, sir , a healthy son.”
“Good teeth?” Howard rose on his toes, looking inquisitive,
and Bonnet obligingly yanked one arm behind her back to
hold her  still, then took a hand ful of her hair and jerked her
head back, making her gasp.
Howard took her chin in one han d and pried at the corner of
her m outh with the other , poking experimentally at her molars.
“V ery nice,” he said approvingly . “And I will say the skin is
very fine. But—”
She jerked her c hin out of his grasp, and bit down as hard as
she could on Ho ward’ s thumb, feeling the meat of it shift and
tear between her molars with a sudden copper taste of blood.
He shrieked and struck at he r; she let go and dodged,
enough so his hand glanced of f  her cheek. Bonnet let go, and
she took  two fast steps back and fetched up hard against the
wall.“She’ s bitten me thumb of f, th e bitch!” Eyes watering in
agony , M r . Howard swayed to and fro, cradling his wounded
hand ag ainst his chest. Fury flo oded his face and he lunged
toward h er , free hand drawn ba ck, but Bonnet seized him by
the wrist and pulled him aside.
“Now then, sir ,” he said. “I can not allow ye to damage her ,
sure. She’ s not yours yet, is she?”
“I don’ t  care if she’ s mine or not,” Howard cried, face
suf fused with blood. “I’ll beat her to death!”
“Oh, no , surely ye don’ t mean that, Mr . Howard,” Bonnet
said, his  voice jovially soothing. “A cruel waste that would be.
Leave her to me, will ye, then?” Not waiting for an answer , he
pulled Brianna after him, dragging her stumbling across the
room, and thrust her toward t he silent factotum, who had
waited motionless by the door through the conversation.
“T ake h er out, Manny , and teac h her her manners, will ye?
And gag her before ye bring her back.”
Emmanuel didn’ t smile, but a f aint light seemed to burn in
the black  depths of his pupilless  eyes. His fingers dug between
the bones of her wrist and she gasped with pain, jerking in a
vain attempt to free herself. W ith a single quick movement, the
Ibo whir led her round and twisted up her arm behind her back,
bending her half forward. Sharp pain shot up her arm as she
felt her shoulder tendons begin to part. He pulled harder and a
dark wave passed over her vision. Through it, she heard
Bonnet’ s voice calling out behind them as Emmanuel
propelled her through the door .
“Not in the face, mind, Manny , and no permanent marks.”
HOW ARD’S VOICE had quite lost its choked note of fury . It
was still choked, but with something more like awe.
“My God,” he said. “Oh, my God.”
“A charmin’ sight, is it not?” Bonnet agreed cordially .“Charming,” Howard echoed. “Oh—the most charming
thing I believe I have ever seen. Such a shade! Might I—” The
hunger in his vo ice was evident, and Brianna felt the vibration
of h is footstep on the carpet, a split second before his hands
clamped tight on her buttocks. She screamed behind the gag,
but she was ben t hard across th e table, with the edge cutting
into her diaphrag m, and the sou nd came out as no more than a
grunt. Howard laughed joyfully , and let go.
“Oh, look,” he said, sounding enchanted. “Look, do you
see? The most perfect print of  my hands—so white on the
crimson … she is so hot  … oh, it’ s fading. Let me just—”
She clen ched her legs tight together and stif fened as he
fondled her naked privates, but then his touch was gone, and
Bonnet had taken his hand of f her neck, and was pulling his
customer away from her .
“Ah, now , that’ s enough, sir . After all, she’ s not your
property—not yet.” Bonnet’ s tone was jovial, but firm.
Howard’ s respon se was immediately to of fer a sum that made
her gasp behind the gag, but Bonnet only laughed.
“That’ s generou s, sir , so it is, but ‘twouldn’ t be fair on my
other customers, would it, to be takin’ your of fer without
letting th em ma ke their own? N o, sir , I do appreciate it, but I
mean to  auction this one; I’m afraid ye’ll needs be waiting on
the day .”
Howard was disposed to protest, to of fer more—he was
most ur g ently in earnest, he pro tested that he could not wait,
was ravished by desire, a great deal too warm to abide delay
… but Bonnet only demurred,  and in a few moments had
ushered him out of the room. Brianna heard his voice
protesting, dying away as Emmanuel removed him.
She had stood up as soon as Bonnet took his hand of f her
neck, wriggling madly to shake her skirts down. Emmanuel
had tied  her hands behind her b ack, as well as gagging her . If
he h adn’ t, she w ould have tried to kill Stephen Bonnet with
her bare hands.This thought must have been visible on her face, for Bonnet
glanced at her , looked again, and laughed.
“Y e did amazin g well, darlin’,” he said, and leaning over ,
negligently pull ed the gag dow n from her mouth. “That man
will empty his purse for the chance to get his hands on your
arse again.”
“Y ou Go d damn … you—” She  shook with rage, and with
the futility of finding any epithet that came close to being
strong enough. “I will fucking kill  you!”
He laughed again.
“Oh, now , sweetheart. For a sore arse? Consider it a
repayment—in part—for my left ball.” He chucked her under
the chin, and w ent toward the table where the tray with the
decanters stood. “Y e’ve earned a drink. Brandy or porter?”
She ignored the of fer , trying to keep her rage in check. Her
cheeks flamed with furious blo od, and so did her outraged
bottom.
“What do you mean, ‘auction’?” she demanded.
“I should think that clear enough, sweetheart. Y e’ve heard
the word, sure.” Bonnet gave her a glance of mild amusement,
and pou ring himself a tot of brandy , drank it of f in two
swallows. “Hah.” He exhaled, blinking, and shook his head.
“Hoo. I’ ve two more customers in the market for someone
like you , darlin’. They’ll be here tomorrow or next day to be
having a  look. Then I’ll ask for bids, and ye’ll be of f to the
Indies by Friday , I expect.”
He spoke casually , without the slightest hint of jeering.
That, more than anything, made her insides waver . She was a
matter o f business, a piece of merchandise. T o him, and to his
goddamned blo ody customers, too—Mr . Howard had made
that clear . It didn’ t matter what she said; they weren’ t at all
interested in who she was or what she might want.
Bonnet was watching her face, his pale green eyes
assessing. He  wa s interested, she realized, and her insidescurled up into a knot.
“What did ye use on her , Manny?” he asked.
“A wood en spoo n,” the manservant said indif ferently . “Y ou
said no marks.”
Bonnet nodded, thoughtful.
“Nothing permanent, I said,” he corrected. “W e’ll leave her
as she is for Mr . Ricasoli, I think, but Mr . Houvener … well,
we’ll wait and see.”
Emmanuel merely nodded, but his eyes rested on Brianna
with sudden interest. Her stomach everted itself neatly and she
vomited, absolutely ruining the fine silk dress.
THE SOUND OF high-pitched whinnying reached her; wild
horses, rioting down the beach.  If this were a romance novel,
she thought grimly , she’d make a rope from the bedclothes, let
herself down from the window , find the horse herd, and, by
exercising her mystical skills with horses, persuade one of
them to carry her to safety .
As it was, there were no bedclothes—only a ratty mattress
made of ticking stuf fed with sea grass—and as for getting
within a  mile of wild horses … She would have given a lot for
Gideon, and felt tears prickle at thought of him.
“Oh, now you ar e  l osing your mind,” she said alou d, wiping
her eyes . “Crying over a horse.” Especially that  horse. That
was so much be tter than thinking of Roger , though—or Jem.
No, she absolutely could not  think about Jemmy , nor the
possibility of his growing up without her , without knowing
why she  had abandoned him. Or the new one … and what life
might be like for the child of a slave.
But she was thinking of them, and the thought was enough
to overcome her momentary despair .
All right, then. She was getti ng out of here. Preferably
before Mr . Ricasoli and Mr . Houvener , whoever they were,
turned up. For the thousandth time, she moved restlesslyaround the room, forcing hersel f to move slowly , look at what
was there.
Damn l ittle, and what there was, stoutly built, was the
discouraging answer . She’d b een given food, water for
washing, a linen towel, and a hairbrush with which to tidy
herself. She picked it up, assessing its potential as a weapon,
then threw it down again.
The chimney stack rose through this room, but there was no
open hearth. She thumped the bricks experimentally , and pried
at the mortar with the end of the  spoon they’d given her to eat
with. She found one place where the mortar was cracked
enough to pry , but a quarter of an hour ’ s trying managed to
dislodge only a few inches of mortar; the brick itself stayed
firmly in  place. Given a month or so, that might be worth a try
—though the chances of someone her size managing to
squeeze up an eighteenth-century flue …
It was getting up to rain; she heard the excited rattle of the
palmetto leaves as the wind came through, sharp with the
smell of rain. I t was not quite sunset, but the clouds had
darkened the sky so the room se emed dim. She had no candle;
no one expected her to read or sew .
She threw her weight against the  bars of the window for the
dozenth time, and for the dozen th time found them solidly set
and unyielding.  Again, in a month, she might contrive to
sharpen the spoon’ s end by gr inding it against the chimney
bricks, then use it as a chisel to c hip away enough of the frame
to dislodge one or two bars. But she didn’ t have a month.
They’d t aken aw ay the fouled dr ess, and left her in shift and
stays. W ell, that was something. She pulled of f the stays, and
by picking at the ends of the stitching, extracted the busk—a
flat, twelve-inch  strip of ivory that ran from sternum to navel.
A b etter weapon than a hairbr ush, she thought. She took it
over to the chim ney , and began to rasp the end against the
brick, sharpening its point.
Could she stab someone with  it? Oh, yes,  she thought
fiercely . And please let it be Emmanuel.1 0 8
DAMN T ALL
R OGER W AITED IN THE COVER of the thick bayberry
bushes near the shore; a little w ay beyond, Ian and Jamie lay
likewise in wait.
The sec ond ship had arrived in the morning, coming to
anchor a fastidious distance beyond the slaver . Sloshing nets
over the  side of Roarke’ s ship i n the guise of fishermen, they
had been  able to watch as first the captain of the slaver went
ashore, and then, an hour later , a boat from the second ship
was lowered and rowed ashore, with two men—and a small
chest—in it.
“A gentl eman,” Claire had reported, scanning them through
the teles cope. “W ig, nicely dressed. The other man’ s a servant
of some kind—i s the gentleman one of Bonnet’ s customers, do
you think?”
“I do ,” Jamie had said, watchin g the boat pull to the shore.
“T ake us  a bit to the north, if ye please, Mr . Roarke; we’ll go
ashore.”
The three of them had landed half a mile from the beach and
worked their way down through the wood, then took up their
positions in the shrubbery and settled down to wait. The sun
was hot, but so close to the shore, there was a fresh breeze,
and it was not uncomfortable in the shade, bar the insects. For
the hundredth time, Roger brus hed away something crawling
on his neck.
The wai ting was making him jumpy . His skin itched with
salt, and the scent of the tidal forest, with its peculiar mix of
aromatic pine and distant seaw eed, the crunch of shell and
needle beneath his feet, brought back to him in vivid detail the
day he had killed Lillington.He had gone then—as now—with the intent of killing
Stephen Bonnet. But the elusive pirate had been warned, and
an ambush laid. It had been by the will of God—and the skill
of Jamie Fraser—that he hadn’ t left his own carcass in a
similar forest, bones scattered by wild pigs, bleaching among
the gleam of dry needles and the white of empty shells.
His throat was t ight again, but he couldn’ t shout or sing to
loosen it.
He s hould pray , he thought, but could not. Even the constant
litany that had e choed through his heart since the night he had
learned she was gone— Lor d, that she might be safe —even
that small petition had somehow  dried up. His present thought
— Lor d, that I mig ht kill him —he couldn’ t voice that, even t o
himself.
The deliberate intent and desire to murder—surely he
couldn’ t expect such a prayer to be heard.
For a moment, he envied Jamie and Ian their faith in gods of
wrath and vengeance. While Roarke and Moses had brought
the fishi ng boat in, he had hear d Jamie murmur to Claire and
take her hands in his. And heard her then bless him in the
Gaelic, with the invocation to M ichael of the red domain, the
blessing of a warrior on his way to battle.
Ian had merely sat, cross-legged and silent, watching the
shore dr aw nearer , his face remote. If he prayed, there was no
telling to whom. When they lan ded, though, he had paused on
the b ank of one  of the myriad inlets, and scooping up mud in
his finge rs, had carefully painted his face, drawing a line from
forehead to chin, then four parallel streaks across his left
cheek, a thick dark circle ar ound his right eye. It was
remarkably unsettling.
Quite obviously , neither of them had the slightest qualms
about the business, nor the least hesitation in asking God to aid
their ef forts. He envied them.
And sat in stub born silence, the gates of heaven closed
against him, his hand on the h ilt of his knife and a loadedpistol in his belt, planning murder .
A little past noo n, the burly capt ain of the slaver came back,
footsteps crunching indif ferently on the layer of dried pine
needles. They let him pass, waiting.
Late in the afternoon, it began to rain.
SHE HA D DOZED of f again, fr om sheer boredom. It began to
rain; the sound roused her briefly , then drove her more deeply
into slumber , drops pattering softly on the palmetto thatch
above. S he wok e abruptly when one of the drops fell cold on
her face, followed quickly by a few of its fellows.
She jerked upright, blinking with momentary disorientation.
She rubb ed a hand over her fac e and looked up; there was a
small wet patch on the plaster c eiling, surrounded by a much
lar ger stain from previous leaks,  and drops were forming in its
center li ke magic, each perfect bead falling one after another
after another to splat on the mattress ticking.
She got up to pu sh the bed out from under the leak, and then
stopped. Slowly  she straightened up, and put up a hand to the
wet patc h. The ceiling was a nor mal one for the time, less than
seven feet; she could reach it easily .
“She damn tall,” she said aloud. “Damn right she is.”
She put her hand  flat on the wet patch and pushed as hard as
she could. The wet plaster gave way at once, and so did the
rotten laths behind it. She jerked back her hand, scratching her
arm on the jagged edges of lath, and a small cascade of dirty
water , centipedes, mouse dr oppings, and fragments of
palmetto leaf poured in through the hole she’d made.
She wip ed her hand on her shift, reached up, seized the edge
of t he hole, an d pulled, ripping down chunks of lath and
plaster , until she’d made a hole that would accommodate her
head and shoulders.
“Okay ,” she whispered to the baby , or herself. She glanced
around the room, put on her stays over her shift, then tucked
the sharpened busk down the front.Then, st anding on the bed, she took a deep breath, shoved
her steepled hands upward as  though about to dive, and
grabbed for anything solid enough to provide leverage. Little
by little, she hauled herself, sweating and grunting, up into the
steaming thatch of sharp-edged leaves, teeth gritted and eyes
closed against the dirt and dead insects.
Her head thrust into moist op en air and she gasped for
breath. She had an elbow hooked over a beam and, using that
for leverage, pulled farther up. Her legs kicked vainly in
empty a ir , trying  to propel her upward, and she felt the wrench
of shoulder muscles, but she er desperation propelled her
upward—that, a nd the nightmare vision of Emmanuel coming
into the room and seeing the bottom half of her hanging out of
the ceiling.
W ith a rending shower of leaves, she hauled herself out, to
lie flat on the r ain-wet thatch of the roof. The rain was still
coming down heavily , and she was soaked in moments. A little
way away , she saw some sort of structure sticking up amid the
palmetto leaves of the thatch, an d wriggled her way cautiously
toward it, constantly fearful lest  the roof give way beneath her
weight, probing with hands and elbows for the firmness of the
roof beams below the thatched leaves.
The structure proved to be a small platform, firmly set on
the beam s, with a railing on one side. She scrambled onto this
and crou ched, panting. It was s till raining onshore, but out to
sea, the sky was  mostly clear , and the setting sun behind her
spilled a burnt, bloody orange over sky and water through
black str eaks of shattered cloud. It looked like the end of the
world, she thought, her ribs hea ving against the lacing of her
stays.
From the vantage point of the roof, she could see over the
scrub fo rest; the slice of beach  she had glimpsed from her
window was clearly visible—and beyond it, two ships, lying
close of fshore.
T wo boa ts were pulled up on shore, though well separated
from each other—probably one from each ship, she thought.One of the ships must be the sla ver , the other likely Howard’ s.
A wash of humiliated rage ran over her—she was surprised
that the rain didn’ t steam of f h er skin. There was no time to
dwell on that, though.
V oices came faintly through t he patter of rain, and she
ducked down, then realized that  no one was likely to look up
and see her . Rai sing her head to peer through the railing, she
saw figures come out of the trees onto the beach—a single file
of chained men, with two or three guards.
“Josh!” She strained her eyes to see, but in the eerie
twilight, the figures were no more than silhouettes. She
thought she made out the tall, sl ender figures of the two Fulani
men—perhaps t he shorter one behind them was Josh, but she
couldn’ t tell.
Her fingers curled tight around the railing, impotent. She
couldn’ t help, she knew it, but to be obliged simply to watch
… As she watched, a thin scream came from the beach, and a
smaller figure ran out of the w ood, skirts flying. The guards
turned, startled; one of them sei zed Phaedre—it had to be her;
Brianna could hear her screaming “Josh! Josh!”, the sound of
it harsh as the cry of a distant gull.
She was struggling with the guard—some of the chained
men turned abruptly , lunging at the other . A struggling knot of
men fell to the sand. Someone was running toward them from
the boat, something in his hand …
The vibr ation in her feet jerked her attention from the scene
on the beach.
“Crap!” she said involuntarily . Emmanuel’ s head poked up
over the edge o f the roof, staring in disbelief. Then his face
contorted, and he heaved himself up—there must be a ladder
attached to the side of the house, she thought, well, of course
there wo uld be, you wouldn’ t h ave a lookout platform and no
way to get up to it… .
While h er mind  was busying itself with that  nonsense, her
body was taking more concre te steps. She had drawn thesharpened busk and was crouched against the platform, hand
low as Ian had taught her .
Emmanuel made a derisive face at the thing in her hand and
grabbed at her .
THEY COULD HEAR the gentleman coming well before they
saw him. He w as singing softly to himself, a French air of
some kin d. He was alone; the servant must have gone back to
the ship while they were making their way through the woods.
Roger got softly to his feet, c rouched behind his chosen
bush. His limbs were stif f, and he stretched inconspicuously .
As the gentleman drew even with him, Jamie stepped out
into the  path in front of him. The man—a small, foppish-
looking sort—uttered a girlish shriek of alarm. Before he
could flee, though, Jamie had st epped forward and grasped his
arm, smiling pleasantly .
“Y our servant, sir ,” he said courteously . “Have ye been
calling upon Mr . Bonnet, by chance?”
The man blinked at him, confused.
“Bonnet? Why , why … yes.”
Roger f elt a tightness in his chest ease suddenly . Thank
God.  They’d found the right place.
“Who are you, sir?” the small man was demanding, trying
to draw his forearm out of Jamie’ s grip, to no avail.
There w as no need to keep hidden now; Roger and Ian
stepped out of the bushes, and the gentleman gasped at sight of
Ian in his war  paint, then gl anced wildly back and forth
between Jamie and Roger .
Evidently settling on Roger as the most civilized-looking
person present, the gentleman appealed to him.
“I beg you, sir—who are you, and what do you want?”
“W e are in sear ch of an abducted young woman,” Roger
said. “A  very tall young woma n with red hair . Have you—”Before he could finish, he saw  the man’ s eyes dilate with
panic. Jamie saw it, too, and tw isted the man’ s wrist, sending
him to his knees, mouth awry with pain.
“I think, sir ,” Jamie said, with impeccable courtesy , holding
tight, “we must oblige you to tell us what ye know .”
SHE CO ULDN’T LET him get hold of her . That was her only
conscious thought. He grabbed at her weaponless arm and she
yanked free, skin slippery with rain, and struck at him in the
same motion. The point of th e busk skidded up his arm,
leaving a reddening furrow , but he ignored this and lunged at
her . She  fell backward over the railing, landing awkwardly on
her h ands and k nees in the leav es, but he hadn’ t got her; he’d
fallen on his own knees on the platform, with a thud that shook
the whole roof.
She scrabbled madly to the edge of the roof, hands and
knees poking randomly through the thatch, and threw her legs
over the edge into space, kicking frantically for the rungs of
the ladder .
He was after her , had her wrist  in a grip like an eel’ s bite,
was hau ling her back onto the roof. She drew back her free
hand and lashed him hard across the face with the busk. He
roared and his grip loosened; she wrenched free and dropped.
She hit the sand flat on her back with a bone-shaking
thump!  and  lay paralyzed, unable to breathe, the rain pelting
down on  her face. A hoot of triumph came from the roof, and
then a growl of exasperated di smay . He thought he’d killed
her .
Gr eat,  she thought muzzily . Keep thinking that.  The shock
of impa ct was beginning to wear of f, her diaphragm lurched
into mot ion, and glorious air rus hed into her lungs. Could she
move?
She didn ’ t know , and didn’ t dare to try . Through rain-clotted
lashes, she saw Emmanuel’ s bu lk ease over the edge of theroof, foot groping for the crude ladder rungs she could now
see, nailed to the wall.
She’d lost the bu sk when she fel l, but saw it gleaming dully ,
a foot from her head. W ith Emmanuel’ s back momentarily
turned, s he whipped her hand up and grabbed it, then lay still,
playing possum.
THEY HAD NEARL Y reached the house when sounds from
the nearby forest stopped them. Roger froze, then ducked of f
the p ath. Jamie and Ian had already melted into the wood. The
sounds weren’ t coming from the path, though, but from
somewhere of f to the left—vo ices, men’ s voices, shouting
orders, and the shuf fling of feet, the clink of chains.
A thrill of pani c shot through him. W ere they taking her
away? He was a lready soaked with rain, but felt the bloom of
cold sweat over his body , colder than the rain.
Howard, the man they’d apprehended in the wood, had
assured them Brianna was safe in the house, but what would
he know ? He listened, straining his ears for the sound of a
woman’ s voice, and heard it, a high, thin scream.
He jerked toward it, only to find Jamie beside him, gripping
his arm.
“That’ s not Brianna,” his father -in-law said ur gently . “Ian
will go. Y ou and I—for the house!”
There w as no time for ar gument . The sounds of violence on
the beac h came faintly—shouts and cries—but Jamie was
right, th at voice wasn’ t Brianna’ s. Ian was running toward the
beach, making no ef fort now to be silent.
An insta nt’ s hes itation, instinct ur ging him to go after Ian,
then Roger was on the path, following Jamie toward the house
at the run.
EMMANUEL BENT OVER HER; she felt his bulk and
lunged u pward like a striking snake, sharpened busk like a
fang. She’d aimed for his head , hoping for eye or throat, butcounting at least on his jerking reflexively back, putting him at
a disadvantage.
He jerked, all ri ght, up and awa y , but was much faster than
she’d thought. She struck with all her force, and the sharpened
busk drove under his arm with a rubbery shock. He froze for a
moment, mouth  open in incred ulity , looking at the ivory rod
that stuck out o f his armpit. Then he wrenched it out, and
lunged for her with an outraged bellow .
She was already on her feet, though, and running for the
woods. From somewhere ahead , she heard more yelling—and
a bloodcurdling scream. Another , and then more, these coming
from the front of the house.
Dazed a nd terrif ied, she kept run ning, her mind only slowly
grasping that some of the screams had words.
“Casteal DHUUUUUUUIN!”
Da,  she thought, in absolute astonishment, then tripped over
a branch on the ground and fell arse over teakettle, landing in a
disheveled heap.
She struggled to her feet, thinking absurdly , This  can’ t be
good for the baby ,  and groping for another weapon.
Her fingers were trembling, wouldn’ t work. She scrabbled
the g round, vainly . Then Emman uel popped up beside her like
the Demon King, grabbing her arm with a gloating, “HA!”
The shock made her sway , he r vision going gray at the
edges. She could still hear bloodcurdling screams on the
distant b each, but no more yelling at the house. Emmanuel
was say ing som ething, full of s atisfaction and threat, but she
wasn’ t listening.
There seemed to be something w rong with his face; it went
in and out of focus, and she blinked hard, shaking her head to
clear he r sight. It wasn’ t her eyes, though—it was him. His
face melted slowly from bare-toothed menace to a look of
faint ast onishment. He frowned, lips pursing so she saw the
pink lining of his mouth, and blinked two or three times. Thenhe made  a small choked noise, put a hand to his chest, and
dropped to his knees, still gripping her arm.
He f ell o ver , and  she landed on top of him. She pulled away
—his fingers came away easily , all their strength suddenly
gone—and stumbled to her feet, panting and shaking.
Emmanuel was lying on his ba ck, legs bent under him at
what wo uld have been an excruciating angle, had he been
alive. She gulped for air , trembl ing, afraid to believe it. But he
was  dead; there was no mistaking the look of it.
Her bre ath was coming better now , and she began to be
conscious of the cuts and bruises on her bare feet. She still felt
stunned, unable to decide what to do next.
The decision was made for h er in the next instant, as
Stephen Bonnet came dashing toward her through the wood.
SHE JE RKED T O instant alertness, and spun on her heel to
flee. She  made it no more than six paces before he had an arm
about her throat, dragging her of f her feet.
“Hush, now , darlin’,” he said in her ear , sounding
breathless. He was hot, and his stubble rasped her cheek. “I
mean ye no harm . I’ll leave ye safe on the shore. But ye’re the
only thin g I’ve got right now w ill keep your men from killin’
me.”
He ignored the body of Emmanuel entirely . The heavy
forearm left her throat and he g rabbed her arm, trying to drag
her i n the direction away from the beach—evidently , he meant
to m ake for the hidden inlet on the opposite side of the island,
where they had landed the day before. “Move, darlin’. Now .”
“Let go!” She dug her feet in h ard, yanking on her trapped
arm. “I’m  not going anywhere with you. HELP!” she shrieked
as loudly as she could. “HELP! ROGER!”
He look ed startled, and raised his free arm to wipe the
streaming rain out of his eyes.  There was something in his
hand; th e last of the light gleame d orange on glass. Holy Lord,
he’d brought his testicle.“Bree! Brianna! Where are you?” Roger ’ s voice, frantic,
and a jolt of adr enaline shot through her at the sound, giving
her the strength to jerk her arm from Bonnet’ s grasp.
“Here! Here I am! Roger!” she  shouted at the top of her
voice.
Bonnet glanced over his shoulder; the bushes were shaking,
two men at least  coming through them. He wasted no time, but
darted into the forest, bending low to avoid a branch, and was
gone.
In t he next ins tant, Roger crashed out of the brush and
seized her , crushing her against him.
“Y ou’re all right? Has he hurt you?” He’d dropped his
knife, a nd held her by the arms, eyes trying to look
everywhere at once—her face, her body , into her eyes… .
“I’m fine,” she said, feeling dizzy . “Roger , I’m—”
“Where has he gone?” It was her father , soaking wet and
grim as death, dirk in his hand.
“That—” She turned to point, but he was already gone,
running wolflike . She saw the marks of Bonnet’ s passage now ,
the scuf fed footmarks clear in the muddy sand. Before she
could turn round again, Roger was after him.
“W ait!” she shrieked, but no answer came save the rapidly
receding rustle of brush as heavy bodies flung themselves
heedlessly through.
She stood still fo r a moment, head hanging as she breathed.
The rain was pooling in the sockets of Emmanuel’ s open eyes;
the orange light glowed in them, making them look like the
eyes of a Japanese movie monster .
That random thought passed across her mind, then vanished,
leaving her blank and numb. She wasn’ t sure what to do at this
point. There were no sounds from the beach anymore; the
noises of Bonnet’ s flight had long since faded.
The rain  was still falling, but the last of the sun shone
through the wood, the long rays nearly horizontal, filling thespace between the shadows wi th an odd, shifting light that
seemed to waver as she watche d, as though the world around
her were about to disappear .
In the midst of it, dreamlike, she saw the women appear , the
Fulani twins. They turned the i dentical faces of fawns to her ,
huge eyes black with fear , and ran into the wood. She called
out to them, but they disappeared. Feeling unutterably tired,
she trudged after them.
She didn’ t find them. Nor was there a sign of anyone else.
The ligh t began to die, and she turned back, limping, toward
the hous e. She ached everywhere, and began to suf fer from the
illusion that there was no one lef t in the world but her . Nothing
but the burning light, fading to ashes moment by moment.
Then sh e remembered the baby in her womb, and felt better .
No matter what, she wasn’ t alone. Nonetheless, she gave a
wide be rth to the place where s he thought Emmanuel’ s body
lay . She had me ant to circle back toward the house, but went
too far . As she turned to go back, she caught a glimpse of
them, standing together in the shelter of the trees on the other
side of a stream.
The wil d horses, tranquil as the trees around them, flanks
gleaming bay and chestnut and b lack with the wet. They raised
their heads, scenting her , but di dn’ t run, only stood regarding
her with big, gentle eyes.
THE RAIN HAD stopped when she reached the house. Ian sat
on the stoop, wringing water out of his long hair .
“Y ou ha ve mud on your face, Ian,” she said, sinking down
beside him.
“Oh, have I?” h e said, giving her a half-smile. “How is it,
then, coz?”
“Oh. I’m … I think I’m fine. What—?” She gestured at his
shirt, sta ined with watery blood. Something seemed to have hit
him in the face; besides the smudges of mud, his nose waspuf fed, there was a swelling just above his brow , and his
clothes were torn, as well as wet.
He drew a deep, deep breath and sighed, as though he were
as tired as she was.
“I got back the wee black lass,” he said. “Phaedre.”
That pierced the dreamlike fug ue that filled her mind, but
only a little.
“Phaedre,” she said, the name feeling like that of someone
she had once known, long ago. “Is she all right? Where—”
“In there.” Ian nodded back toward the house, and she
became aware that what she had  thought the sound of the sea
was in fact some one weeping, the small sobs of someone who
has already wept herself to exhaustion, but cannot stop.
“Nay , leave her to herself, coz.” Ian’ s hand on her arm
stopped her from rising. “Y e canna help.”
“But—”
He stopped her , reaching into his shirt. From around his
neck, he took a battered wooden rosary , and handed it to her .
“She’ll maybe want this—later . I picked it up from the sand,
after the ship … left.”
For the first tim e since her escape, the nausea was back, a
sense o f vertigo that threatened to pull her down into
blackness.
“Josh,” she whispered. Ian nodded silently , though it hadn’ t
been a question.
“I’m sorry , coz,” he said very softly .
IT W AS NEARL Y DARK when Roger appeared at the edge of
the woo d. She hadn’ t been worr ying, only because she was in
a state of shock too deep even to think of what was happening.
At s ight of him,  though, she was  on her feet and flying toward
him, all the fears she had suppre ssed erupting at last into tears,
running down her face like the rain.“Da,” she said, choking and snif fling into his wet shirt.
“He’ s—is he—”
“He’ s all right. B ree—can ye come with me? Are ye strong
enough—just for a bit?”
Gulping and wiping her nose on the soggy arm of her shift,
she nodded, and leaning on his arm, limped into the darkness
under the trees.
Bonnet was lying against a tre e, head lolling to one side.
There was blood on his face, run ning down onto his shirt. She
felt no sense o f victory at sight of him, only an infinitely
weary distaste.
Her father was s tanding silently under the same tree. When
he saw her , he s tepped forward and folded her wordlessly into
his arms. She closed her eye s for one blissful moment,
wanting nothing more than to abandon everything, let him
pick her up lik e a child and carry her home. But they had
brought her here for a reason; with immense ef fort, she lifted
her head and looked at Bonnet.
Did they  want congratulations?  she wondered fuzzily . But
then she  remem bered what Roger had told her , describing her
father leading her mother through the scene of butchery ,
making her look, so that she wo uld know her tormentors were
dead.
“Okay ,” she said, swaying a lit tle. “All right, I mean. I—I
see. He’ s dead.”
“W ell …  no. Actually , he isn’ t.”  Roger ’ s voice held an odd
note of strain, and he coughed, w ith a look that shot daggers at
her father .
“D’ye want him dead, lass?” Her father touched her
shoulder , gently . “It is your right.”
“Do I—” She l ooked wildly from one to the other of the
grave, shadowed faces, then at Bonnet, realizing for the first
time tha t blood was  running down his face. Dead men, as her
mother had often explained, don’ t bleed.They had found Bonnet, Jamie said, run him to earth like a
fox, and  set about him. It had been an ugly fight, close-to, with
knives, as their pistols were use less in the wet. Knowing that
he fough t for his life, Bonnet had struck viciously—there was
a re d-stained gash in the shoul der of Jamie’ s coat, a scratch
high on Roger ’ s throat, where a  knife blade had passed within
a fra ction of sla shing his jugular . But Bonnet had fought to
escape, and not to kill—retreating into a space between trees
where only one could come at him, he had grappled with
Jamie, thrown him of f, then bolted.
Roger had given chase, and boiling with adrenaline, had
thrown himself at Bonnet bodily , knocking the pirate headfirst
into the tree he now lay against.
“So there he lies,” Jamie said, giving Bonnet a bleak eye. “I
had hoped he’d broken his neck, but no such thing, alas.”
“But he is unconscious,” Roger said, and swallowed.
She understood, and in her present mood, this particular
male qu irk of honor seemed reasonable. T o kill a man in fair
fight—or even an unfair fight— was one thing; to cut his throat
while he lay unconscious at your feet was another .
But she hadn’ t u nderstood at all. Her father wiped his dirk
on his breeches and handed it to her , hilt first.
“What … me?” She was too shocked even to feel
astonishment. The knife was heavy in her hand.
“If ye wish it,” her father said, w ith grave courtesy . “If not,
Roger Mac or I will do it. But it is your choice, a nighean. ”
Now she  unders tood Roger ’ s look—they had been ar guing
about it,  before he had come to fetch her . And she understood
exactly why her father of fered her the choice. Whether it was
vengeance or for giveness, she held the man’ s life in her hand.
She too k a deep breath, the awareness that it would not be
vengeance coming over her with something like relief.
“Brianna,” Roger said softly , touching her arm. “Say the
word if ye’ll have him dead; I’ll do it.”She nodded, and took a deep breath. She could hear the
savage longing in his voice—he did. She could hear the
choked sound of his voice in memory , too, when he had told
her of killing Boble—when h e woke from dreams of it,
drenched in sweat.
She glan ced at her father ’ s face, nearly drowned in shadow .
Her mother had said only a lit tle of the violent dreams that
haunted him since Culloden—but that little was enough. She
could hardly ask her father to do this—to spare Roger what he
suf fered himself.
Jamie ra ised his head, feeling her eyes on him, and met her
gaze, straight on. Jamie Fraser had never turned from a fight
he saw as his— but this was not his fight, and he knew it. She
had a sudden f lash of awareness; it wasn’ t Roger ’ s fight,
either , though he would take  the weight of it from her
shoulders, and gladly .
“If you—if we —if we don’ t kill him here and now—” Her
chest was tight, and she stopped  for breath. “What will we do
with him?”
“T ake him to W ilmington,” her father said matter -of-factly .
“The Committee  of Safety there is strong, and they know him
for a pirate; they’ll deal with hi m by law—or what passes for
it now .”
They’d hang him; he would be just as dead—but his blood
wouldn’ t be on Roger ’ s hands, or in his heart.
The ligh t was gone. Bonnet w as no more than a lumpen
shape, dark against the sandy ground. He might die of his
wounds, she thought, and dimly hoped so—it would save
trouble. But if they took him to her mother , Claire would be
compelled to try to save him. She  n ever turned fr om a fight
that was hers, ei ther , Brianna thought wryly , and was surprised
to feel a small lightening of spirit at the thought.
“Let him live to be hanged, then,” she said quietly , and
touched Roger ’ s arm. “Not for his sake. For yours and mine.
For your baby .”For an instant, she was sorry tha t she’d told him now , in the
night-dark wood. She would so much have liked to see his
face.1 0 9
ALL THE NEWS THA T’S
 FIT T O PRINT
FROM L ’Oignon-Intelligencer , September 25, 1775
A ROY AL PROCLAMA TION—
A Proclamation was issued in London upon the 23rd of
August, in which His Majesty Geor ge III proclaims the
American Colonies to be “in a State of open and avowed
Rebellion.”
“NOTHING BUT OUR OW N EXERTIONS MA Y
DEFEA T THE MINISTERIAL SENTENCE OF DEA TH
OR ABJECT SUBMISSION”—The Continental Congr ess
in Phila delphia has now r ejected the Objectionable
Pr oposals put forth by Lor d North, intended to pr omote
the Object of Reconciliation. The Delegates to this
Congr ess state unequivocally the Right of the American
Colonies to raise Appr opriation s and to have a say in the
Disbursement o f Same. The Sta tement of the Delegates
r eads in Part: “ As the British Ministry has pursued its
Ends and pr osecuted Hostilities with gr eat Armaments
and Cru elty , can the W orld be deceived into an Opinion
that we ar e Unr easonable, or can it hesitate to believe
with us that No thing but our own Exertions may defeat
the Ministerial Sentence of Death or Abject Submission?”
A F ALCON ST OOPS BUT IS DEPRIVED OF HER
PREY—Upon the 9th of August, HMS Falcon,
commanded by Captain John Linzee, gave Chase to two
American Schoo ners, r eturning  fr om the W est Indies to
Salem, Massachusetts. One Schooner was captur ed by
Captain Linzee, who then pursued the other into
Gloucester Harbor . T r oops upon the Shor e fir ed upon the
Falcon,  w hich did r etur n this Fir e, but was then for ced towithdraw , losing  both Schooners, two Bar ges, and Thirty-
Five Men.
A NOT ORIOUS PIRA TE CONDEM’D—One Stephen
Bonnet, known as a Pirate and Infamous Smuggler , was
tryed be for e the W ilmington Committee of Safety , and
upon T estimony of his Crimes ha ving been pr esented by a
Number of Persons, was convicted of them and sentenced
to Death by Dr owning.
AN ALA RM is raised r egar ding pr owling Bands of
Negr oes, who have despoiled a number of Farms near
W ilmington and Brunswick. Unarmed save for Clubs, the
Ruffians have stolen Livest ock, Food, and four
Hogsheads of Rum.
CONGRESS CONCEIVES A PLAN FOR CURRENCY
REDEMPTION—T wo Million Spanish Dollars in Bills of
Cr edit n ow issue  forth fr om the Pr esses, with One Million
Dollars mor e authorized by Congr ess, which now
announces a Plan for the Redemption of this Curr ency ,
viz.,  that each Colony must assume Responsibility for its
Portion of the Debt and must r edeem the Same in four
Installments, these to be paid upon the last Day of
November in the Y ears 1779, 1780, 1781, and 1782… .1 1 0
THE SMELL OF LIGHT
October 2, 1775
I T W AS NOT THINKABLE T O RETURN Phaedre to River
Run, even though she technically remained the property of
Duncan Cameron. W e had discussed the matter at some length,
and finally decided not to tell J ocasta that her slave had been
recovered, though we did send brief word with Ian, when he
went to collect Jemmy , telling  of Brianna’ s safe return and
regretting the loss of Joshua—omitting a good bit of detail
regarding the whole af fair .
“Should we tell them about Neil Forbes?” I’d asked, but
Jamie had shaken his head.
“Forbes willna trouble any member of my family again,” he
said def initely . “ And to tell my  aunt or Duncan about it … I
think D uncan has suf ficient trouble on his hands; he’d feel
obliged to take issue wi’ Forb es, and that’ s a stramash he
doesna n eed to start just now . A s for my aunt …” He didn’ t
complete the statement, but the bleakness of his countenance
spoke well enough. The MacKenzies of Leoch were a
vengeful lot, and neither he nor I would put it past Jocasta to
invite Neil Forbes to dinner and poison him.
“Always assuming that Mr . Forbes is accepting dinner
invitations these  days,” I joked uneasily . “Do you know what
Ian did with the … er …”
“He said  he was going to feed it to his dog,” Jamie replied
thoughtfully . “But I dinna ken was he serious or not.”
Phaedre had been a good deal shocked, both by her
experiences and by the loss of Josh, and Brianna insisted that
we bring  her back to the Ridge  with us to recover , until we
could find a reasonable place for her .“W e have to get Aunt Jocasta to free her ,” Bree had ar gued.
“I th ink that wil lna be dif ficult,” Jamie had assured her with
a certain  grimness. “Not knowing what we know . But wait a
bit, until we find a place for the lass—then I’ll see to it.”
As i t was, that  particular matter took care of itself with
stunning abruptness.
I o pened the do or to a knock one afternoon in October , to
find three weary horses and a pack mule in the dooryard, and
Jocasta, Duncan , and the black butler Ulysses standing on the
stoop.
The sight of the m was so utterly incongruous that I merely
stood there gaping at them, until Jocasta said acerbically ,
“W eel, lass, d’ye mean us to stand here until we’re melted
away like sugar in a dish o’ tea?”
It was in fact raining quite ha rd, and I stepped back so
quickly to let th em in that I trod on Adso’ s paw . He uttered a
piercing yowl, which brought Jamie out of his study , Mrs. Bug
and Amy from the kitchen—an d Phaedre out of the sur gery ,
where she had been grinding herbs for me.
“Phaedre!” Duncan’ s jaw dropped, and he took two steps
toward her . He s topped abruptly , just before taking her into his
arms, but his face suf fused with joy .
“Phaedre?” said Jocasta, sounding utterly astounded. Her
face had gone quite blank with shock.
Ulysses said nothing, but the look on his  face was one of
unalloyed horror . W ithin a second, it was gone, replaced by his
usual austere expression of dignity , but I’d seen it—and kept a
narrow eye on him during the ensuing confusion of
exclamations and embarrassments.
Finally , I got them all out of the front hall. Jocasta suf fered a
diplomatic head ache—though seeing her drawn face, I thought
it wasn’ t entirely feigned—and was escorted upstairs by Amy ,
who put  her to b ed with a cold compress. Mrs. Bug went back
to the kitchen, excitedly revising the supper menu. Phaedre,
looking frighten ed, disappeared , doubtless to take refuge inBrianna’ s cabin and tell her all a bout the unexpected arrival—
which meant there would be another three for supper .
Ulysses went to deal with the horses, leaving Duncan at last
alone to explain matters to Jamie in the study .
“W e are emigrating to Canada,” he said, closing his eyes
and inha ling the  aroma of the glass of whisky in his hand as
though it were s melling salts. He looked like he needed them;
he was gaunt, and his face was nearly as gray as his hair .
“Canada?” Jamie said, as surprised as I was. “For God’ s
sake, Duncan, what have ye been doing?”
Duncan smiled wearily , opening his eyes.
“More what I d idna do, Mac Dubh, ” he said. Brianna had
told us about th e disappearance  of the secret hoard of gold,
and had  mentioned something about Duncan’ s dealings with
Lord Dunsmore in V ir ginia, but had been vague about it—
understandably so, as she had been kidnapped a few hours
afterward, and had no details.
“I should never ha’ believed matters could come to such a
pass—nor sae quickly ,” he said, shaking his head. Loyalists
had gon e suddenly from being a majority in the piedmont to
being a threatened and frightened minority . Some folk had
been literally chased from their homes, to take refuge skulking
in swamps and woods; others  had been beaten and badly
injured.
“Even F arquard Campbell,” Duncan said, and rubbed a
hand tiredly over his face. “The Committee of Safety called
him befo re them, on char ges of being loyal to the Crown, and
threatened to confiscate his plantation. He put up a great deal
of m oney , pledged as surety for his good behavior , and they let
him go—but it was a near thing.”
Near enough to have frightened Duncan badly . The debacle
of the promised  guns and pow der had deprived him of any
influence with the local Loyalists and left him completely
isolated, vulnerable to the next wave of hostilities—which any
fool could see would not be long in coming.He had therefore moved swift ly to sell River Run at a
decent price, before it was sei zed. He had kept one or two
warehouses on the river and a few other assets, but had
disposed of the plantation, slaves, and livestock, and proposed
to remo ve at once with his wife to Canada, as many other
Loyalists were doing.
“Hamish MacKenzie is there, ken,” he explained. “He and
some others from Leoch settled in Nova Scotia, when they left
Scotland in the wake of Culloden. He’ s Jocasta’ s nephew , and
we’ve money enough—” He glanced vaguely toward the hall,
where Ulysses had dumped the  saddlebags. “He’ll help us to
find a place.”
He smiled crookedly .
“And if things shouldna turn o ut well … they do say the
fishing’ s good.”
Jamie smiled at the feeble jo ke, and poured him more
whisky , but he shook his head when he came to join me in the
sur gery , before dinner .
“They mean to travel overland to V ir ginia, and with luck
take ship there for Nova Scotia . They can perhaps get out of
Newport News; it’ s a small port , and the British blockade isna
tight there—or so Duncan hopes.”
“Oh, dear .” It would be a grueling journey—and Jocasta
was not a young  woman. And th e state of her eye … I was not
fond of Jocasta , in light of what we had learned about her
recently , but to think of her rip ped from her home, forced to
emigrate while suf fering excruciating pain—well, it caused
one to think there might be such a thing as divine retribution,
after all.
I low ered my v oice, looking over my shoulder to be sure
Duncan had in f act gone upstairs. “What about Ulysses? And
Phaedre?”
Jamie’ s lips pressed tight.
“Ah. W ell, as to the lass—I asked Duncan to sell her to me.
I s hall set her free as quickly as I can; perhaps send her toFer gus, in New Bern. He agreed at once, and wrote out a bill
of sale on the s pot.” He nodded toward his of fice. “As for
Ulysses …” His face was grim. “I think that matter will adjust
itself, Sassenach.”
Mrs. Bu g came bustling down t he hall to announce that the
supper w as serv ed, and I had no chance to ask him what he
meant by that remark.
I SQUE EZED OUT the poultice of witch hazel and Carolina
allspice, and laid it gently over Jocasta’ s eyes. I’d already
given her willow-bark tea for th e pain, and the poultice would
do nothing for the underlying glaucoma—but it would be
soothing, at least, and it was a relief to both patient and
physician to be able to of fer something, even though that
might be the merest palliative.
“W ill ye have a  keek in my saddlebags, lass?” she asked,
stretching a little to ease hersel f on the bed. “There’ s a bittie
parcel in there of an herb ye might find of interest.”
I found it immediately—by smell.
“Where on earth did you ge t that?” I asked, halfway
amused.
“Farquard Camp bell,” she replied matter -of-factly . “When
ye t old me wh at the dif ficulty was with my eyes, I asked
Fentiman if he kent anything that might be of help, and he told
me that he’d he ard somewhere that hemp might be of use.
Farquard Camp bell has a field of it under cultivation, so I
thought I might as well try it. It does seem to help. W ould ye
put it in my hand, please, niece?”
Fascinated, I put the parcel of hemp and the little stack of
papers d own on the table beside her , and guided her hand to it.
Rolling carefully onto her side to prevent the poultice falling
of f, she took a good pinch of aromatic herb, sprinkled it down
the cente r of the paper , and roll ed as tidy a joint as I had ever
seen in Boston.W ithout comment, I held the can dle flame for her to light it,
and she eased he rself back on th e pillow , nostrils flaring as she
took a deep lungful of smoke.
She smoked in s ilence for some time, and I busied myself in
putting things away , not wanti ng to leave her lest she fall
asleep and set th e bed on fire—she was clearly exhausted, and
relaxing further by the moment.
The pungent, heady smell of the smoke brought back
instant, though fragmentary memories. Several of the younger
medical students  had smoked it on weekends, and would come
to th e hospital w ith the scent of it in their clothes. Some of the
people brought into the emer gency room had reeked of it. Now
and then, I’d smelled the faintest hint of it on Brianna—but
never inquired.
I had n’ t ever trie d it, myself, bu t now found the smell of the
fragrant smoke rather soothing. Rather too  soothing, and I
went and  sat down by the windo w , open a crack to admit fresh
air .
It had been raini ng of f and on all day , and the air was sharp
with ozone and tree resins, welcomely cold against my face.
“Y e know , don’ t you?” Jocasta’ s voice came softly from
behind me. I looked round; she  hadn’ t moved, but lay like a
tomb figure on the bed, straight as a die. The poultice bandage
over her  eyes made her look like the image of Justice—ironic,
that, I thought.
“I k now ,” I said , matching her own calm tone. “Not very
fair to Duncan, was it?”
“No.” The word drifted out with the smoke, almost
soundless. She lifted the cigaret te lazily and drew air through
it, m aking the end glow red. I kept a narrow eye, but she
seemed to have a feel for the ash, tapping it now and then into
the saucer base of the candlestick.
“He knows, too,” she said, almost casually . “About Phaedre.
I t old him, finally , to stop him s earching for her . I am sure he
knows about Ulysses, too—but he doesna speak of it.”She reached out, unerring, and tapped the ash neatly from
the joint.
“I told him I w ouldna blame him if he left me, ken.” Her
voice was very soft, nearly wi thout emotion. “He wept, but
then he stopped, and said to me that he had said, ‘For better or
for w orse’—and so had I, had I not? I said I had, and he said,
‘W ell, then.’ And here we are.”  She shrugged a little, settling
herself more comfortably , and fell silent, smoking.
I tu rned my fa ce again to the window and leaned my
forehead against the frame. Below , I saw a sudden spill of light
as th e door ope ned, and a dark figure came quickly out. The
door closed, and I lost sight of him in the darkness for an
instant; then my eyes adapted and I saw him again, just before
he vanished on the path to the barn.
“He’ s go ne, isn’ t he?” Startled, I turned round to look at her ,
realizing that she must have h eard the closing of the door
below .
“Ulysses? Y es, I think so.”
She wa s still for quite a while, the cigarette burning
unregarded in her hand. Just before I thought I must rise and
take it from her , she lifted it again to her lips.
“His tru e name was Joseph,” she said softly , releasing the
smoke. W isps of it swirled slowly in a cloud around her head.
“So appropriate, I always thought—for he was sold into
slavery by his own people.”
“Have y ou ever seen his face?” I asked suddenly . She shook
her head, and ground out the last of the cigarette.
“Nay , but I ken t him always,” she said very softly . “He
smelled of light.”
JAMIE FRASER sat patiently in the darkness of his barn. It
was a small one, with stallage for only half a dozen animals,
but soun dly built. Rain beat s olidly on the roof, and wind
whined like a ban-sidhe  round the corners, but not a drip came
through the shingled roof, and the air inside was warm withthe heat of somn olent beasts. Even Gideon was a-nod over his
manger , half-chewed hay hanging from the corner of his
mouth.
It w as past midnight now , and he had been waiting for more
than two hours, the pistol loaded and primed, resting on his
knee.
There it was; above the rain, he heard the soft grunt of
someone pushin g at the door , and the rumble as it slid open,
admitting a breath of cold rain to mingle with the warmer
scents of hay and manure.
He sat still, not moving.
He c ould see a tall form pause against the lighter black of
the rain- drenched night, waitin g for his eyes to adapt to the
dark wit hin, then throw his wei ght against the heavy door to
open it enough to slip inside.
The man had brought a dark-lantern, not trusting that he
could fin d the necessary bits of harness and apply them in the
dark. He drew back the slide a nd turned the lantern slowly ,
letting th e shaft of light travel o ver the stalls, one by one. The
three horses Jocasta had brought were here, but done in. Jamie
heard th e man click his tongue softly in consideration, turning
the light back and forth between the mare, Jerusha, and
Gideon.
Making up his mind, Ulysses s et the lantern on the floor ,
and made to pull the pin fastening the door to Gideon’ s stall.
“It would serve ye right, and I let ye take him,” Jamie said
conversationally .
The butler let o ut a sharp yelp and whirled round, glaring,
his f ists clenched. He couldn’ t see Jamie in the dark, but the
evidence of his ears caught up with him a second later , and he
breathed deeply and lowered his fists, realizing who it was.
“Mr . Fra ser ,” he  said. His eyes were live in the lantern light,
and watchful. “Y ou took me by surprise.”“W ell, I  did intend to,” Jamie replied equably . “Y e mean to
be of f, I suppose.”
He could see thoughts flit through the butler ’ s eyes, quick as
dragonflies, won dering, calculat ing. But Ulysses was no fool,
and came to the correct conclusion.
“The girl’ s told you, then,” he said, quite calmly . “Shall you
kill me—for your aunt’ s honor?” Had that last been said with
any trace of a sneer , Jamie might have killed him indeed—
he’d bee n of two minds on the matter while he waited. But it
was said simply , and Jamie’ s finger eased on the trigger .
“If I were a yo unger man, I would,” he said, matching
Ulysses’ s tone. And if I did not have a wife and daughter who
once called a black man friend.
“As it is,” he went on, lowering the pistol, “I try not to kill
these da ys unless I must.” Or until  I must.  “Do ye of fer me
denial? For I think there can be nay defense.”
The butler shook his head slightly . The light gleamed on his
skin, dark, with a reddish unde rtone that made him look as
though carved from aged cinnabar .
“I loved her ,” he said softly , and spread his hands. “Kill
me.” He was dr essed for traveling, in cloak and hat, with a
pouch and canteen hung at his belt, but no knife. Slaves, even
trusted ones, dared not go armed.
Curiosity warred with distast e, and—as usual in such
warfare—curiosity won.
“Phaedre said ye lay with my au nt, even before her husband
died. Is that true?”
“It is,” Ulysses said softly , his e xpression unreadable. “I do
not justi fy it. I cannot. But I lo ved her , and if I must die for
that …”
Jamie believed the man; his sin cerity was evident in voice
and gesture. And knowing his aunt as he did, he was less
inclined to blame Ulysses than t he world at lar ge would be. At
the s ame time, he was not letting down his guard; Ulysses wasgood-size, and quick. And a ma n who thought he had nothing
to lose was very dangerous indeed.
“Where did ye m ean to go?” he asked with a nod toward the
horses.
“V ir ginia,” the black man replied with a barely perceptible
hesitation. “Lord Dunsmore has of fered freedom to any slave
who will join his army .”
He hadn ’ t meant to ask, though  it was a question that had
raised it self in his mind from the moment he heard Phaedre’ s
story . W ith this opening, though, he could not resist.
“Why did she not free you?” he asked. “After Hector
Cameron died?”
“She did” was the surprising ans wer . The butler touched the
breast of his coat. “She wrote  the papers of manumission
nearly tw enty years ago—she said she could not bear to think
that I came to her bed only bec ause I must. But a request for
manumission must be approved by the Assembly , you know .
And if I had be en openly freed, I could not have stayed to
serve he r as I d id.” That was tr ue enough; a freed slave was
compelled to leave the colony within ten days or risk being
enslaved again, by anyone who chose to take him; the vision
of lar ge gangs of free Negroes roaming the countryside was
one that made th e Council and Assembly shit themselves with
fear .
The butler looked down for a moment, eyes hooded against
the light.
“I could choose Jo—or freedom. I chose her .”
“A ye, verra romantic,” Jamie said with extreme dryness—
though in fact, he was not unaf fected by the statement. Jocasta
MacKenzie had married for duty , and duty again—and he
thought she had had little happ iness in any of her marriages
until finding some measure of contentment with Duncan. He
was sho cked at her choice, disapproving of her adultery , and
very angry indeed at her deception of Duncan, but some partof him—the MacKenzie part, do ubtless—could not but admire
her boldness in taking happiness where she could.
He sighed deeply . The rain was  easing now; the thundering
on the roof had dwindled to a soft pattering.
“W ell, then. I have one question more.”
Ulysses inclined  his head grav ely , in a gesture Jamie had
seen a thousand times. At your service,  sir ,  it  said—and that
was done with more irony than there was in anything the man
had said.
“Where is the gold?”
Ulysses’ s head jerked up, eyes wide with startlement. For
the first time, Jamie felt a shred of doubt.
“Y ou think I  took it?” the butler said incredulously . But then
his mouth twisted to one side. “I suppose you would, after all.”
He rubbed a h and under his nose, looking worried and
unhappy—as well he might, Jamie reflected.
They stood regarding each other  in silence for some time, at
an impasse. Jamie did not have the feeling that the other was
attempting to deceive him—and God knew the man was good
at that,  he thought cynically .
At last, Ulysses  heaved his wide shoulders, and let them
drop in helplessness.
“I cannot prove that I did not,” he said. “I can of fer nothing
save my word of honor—and I am not entitled to have such a
thing.” For the first time, bitterness rang in his voice.
Jamie suddenly felt very tired. The horses and mules had
long since gone back to their drowse, and he wanted nothing
so much  as his own bed, and his wife beside him. He also
wanted Ulysses to be gone, long  before Duncan discovered his
perfidy . And while Ulysses was patently the most obvious
person t o have taken the gold, the fact remained that he could
have tak en it anytime in the last twenty years, with a good deal
less danger . Why now?“W ill ye swear on my aunt’ s head?” he asked abruptly .
Ulysses’ s eyes were sharp, shining in the lantern light, but
steady .
“Y es,” he said at last, quietly . “I do so swear .”
Jamie was about to dismiss him, when one last thought
occurred to him.
“Do you have children?” he asked.
Indecision crossed the chiseled face; surprise and wariness,
mingled with something else.
“None I  would claim,” he said a t last, and Jamie saw what it
was—scorn, mixed with shame. His jaw tensed, and his chin
rose slightly . “Why do you ask me that?”
Jamie met his gaze for a moment, thinking of Brianna
growing heavy with child.
“Because,” he said at last, “it is only the hope of betterment
for my children , and theirs, that gives me the courage to do
what mu st be done here.” Ulys ses’ s face had gone blank; it
gleamed black and impassive in the light.
“If you have no stake in the future, you have no reason to
suf fer for it. Such children as you may have—”
“They are slaves, born of slave  women. What can they be,
to me?” Ulysses’ s hands were clenched, pressed against his
thighs.
“Then go,” Jamie said softly , and stood aside, gesturing
toward the door with the barr el of his pistol. “Die free, at
least.”1 1 1
JANUAR Y TWENTY -FIRST
January 21, 1776
J ANUAR Y 21 W AS THE COLD EST DA Y of the year . Snow
had fall en a few days before, but now the air was like cut
crystal, the dawn sky so pale it  looked white, and the packed
snow chirped like crickets under our boots. Snow , snow-
shrouded trees, the icicles that  hung from the eaves of the
house—the whole world seemed blue with cold. All of the
stock ha d been put up the night  before in stable or barn, with
the exception of the white sow , who appeared to be
hibernating under the house.
I p eered dubiously at the small, melted hole in the crust of
snow that marked the sow’ s entrance; long, stertorous snores
were audible inside, and a fain t warmth emanated from the
hole.
“Come along, mo nighean.  Y on  creature w ouldna notice if
the hous e fell down atop her .”  Jamie had come down from
feeding the animals in the stable, and was hovering
impatiently behind me, chafing his hands in the big blue
mittens Bree had knitted for him.
“What, not even if it was on fire?” I said, thinking of
Lamb’ s “Essay on Roast Pork .” But I turned obligingly to
follow h im down the trampled path past the side of the house,
then slowly , slipping on the icy patches, across the wide
clearing toward Bree and Roger ’ s cabin.
“Y e’re s ure the hearth fire’ s out? ” Jamie asked, for the third
time. His breath wreathed roun d his head like a veil as he
looked o ver his shoulder at me. He had lost his woolen cap
hunting, and instead had a woolly white muf fler wrapped
around his ears and tied on to p of his head, the long endsflopping, which made him look absurdly like an enormous
rabbit.
“It i s,” I assured him, suppressi ng an ur ge to laugh at sight
of him. His lo ng nose was p ink with cold, and twitched
suspiciously , and I buried my fa ce in my own muf fler , making
small snorting noises that emer ged as puf fs of white, like a
steam engine.
“And the bedroom candle? The wee lamp in your sur gery?”
“Y es,” I  assured him, emer ging from the depths of the
muf fler . My eyes were watering and I would have liked to
wipe the m, but I had a huge bu ndle in one arm and a covered
basket h ung on the other . This contained Adso, who had been
forcibly removed from the house, and wasn’ t pleased about it;
small growls emer ged from the basket, and it swayed and
thumped against my leg.
“And th e rush dip in the pantry , and the candle in the wall
sconce i n the hall, and the brazi er in your of fice, and the fish-
oil l antern you u se in the stables . I went over the whole house
with a nit comb. Not a spark anywhere.”
“W ell enough, then,” he said—but couldn’ t help an uneasy
glance backward  at the house. I looked, too; it looked cold and
forlorn, the white of its boards ra ther grimy against the pristine
snow .
“It won’ t be an accident,” I said. “Not unless the white sow
is playing with matches in her den.”
That ma de him smile, in spite of the circumstances. Frankly ,
at th e moment, the circumstances struck me as slightly absurd;
the whole world seemed deserted, frozen solid and immobile
under a winter sky . Nothing seemed less likely than that
cataclysm could  descend to destroy the house by fire. Still …
better safe than sorry . And as Jamie had remarked more than
once during the years since Rog er and Bree had brought word
of that sinister newspaper clipping, “If ye ken the house is
meant to burn down on a certain day , why would ye be
standing in it?”So w e w eren’ t s tanding in it. Mr s. Bug had been told to stay
at h ome, and A my McCallum and her two little boys were
already at Brianna’ s cabin—puzzled, but obliging. If Himself
said that no one was to set foot in the house until dawn
tomorrow … well, then, there was nothing more to be said,
was there?
Ian had been up  since before dawn, chopping kindling and
hauling in firewood from the shed; everyone would be snug
and warm.
Jamie himself had been up all night, tending stock,
dispersing his armory—there was not a grain of gunpowder
anywhere in the house, eith er—and prowling restlessly
upstairs and down, alert to ever y cracking ember on a hearth,
every burning candle flame, any faint noise without that might
portend the approach of an ene my . The only thing he hadn’ t
done was to si t on the roof with a wet sack, keeping a
suspicious eye out for lightning—and that, only because it had
been a cloudless night, the stars immense and bright overhead,
burning in the frozen void.
I hadn’ t slept a great deal, either , disturbed equally by
Jamie’ s prowling and by vivid dreams of conflagration.
The only conflagration visible, though, was the one sending
a welcome shower of smoke and sparks from Brianna’ s
chimney , and we opened the do or to the grateful warmth of a
roaring hearth and a number of bodies.
Aidan and Orrie, roused in the d ark and dragged through the
cold, had promptly crawled into Jemmy’ s trundle, and the
three little boys were sound asleep, curled up like hedgehogs
beneath their quilt. Amy was he lping Bree with the breakfast;
savory smells of porridge and bacon rose from the hearth.
“Is all well, ma ’am?” Amy hurried over to take the big
bundle I had brought—this contained my medical chest, the
more scarce and valuable herbs from my sur gery—and the
sealed ja r with the latest shipment of white phosphorus that
Lord John had sent as a farewell present to Brianna.“It i s,” I assure d her , setting Adso’ s basket on the floor . I
yawned, and eyed the bed wistf ully , but set about to stow my
chest in  the lean-to pantry , where the children wouldn’ t get
into it. I put the phosphorus on the highest shelf, well back
from the edge, and moved a lar ge cheese in front of it, just in
case.
Jamie had divested himself of cloak and rabbit ears, and
handing Roger the fowling piece, shot pouch, and powder horn
he’d car ried, was stamping snow from his boots. I saw him
glance r ound the cabin, counting heads, then, at last, draw a
small breath, nodding to himself. All safe, so far .
The morning passed peacefully . Breakfast eaten and cleared
away , Amy , Bree, and I settled down by the fire with an
enormous heap of mending. Adso, tail still twitching with
indignation, had  taken up a place on a high shelf, from whence
he glare d at Rollo, who had taken over the trundle bed when
the boys got out of it.
Aidan and Jemmy , each now the proud possessor of two
vrooms, drove them over hearthstones, under the bed, and
through our feet, but for the  most part, refrained from
punching each other or stepping on Orrie, who was sitting
placidly under the table gnawing on a piece of toast. Jamie,
Roger , and Ian took turns going outside to pace back and forth
and stare  at the B ig House, deserted in the shelter of the snow-
dusted spruce.
As Roger came back from one o f these expeditions, Brianna
looked up suddenly from the sock she was darning.
“What?” he said, seeing her face.
“Oh.” She had paused, needle halfway through the sock,
and now looked down, completing her stitch. “Nothing. Just a
—just a thought.”
The tone of her voice made Jamie, who had been frowning
his way through a battered copy of Evelina,  look up.
“What s ort of thought was that, a nighean ?” he asked, his
radar quite as good as Roger ’ s.“Er … well.” She bit her lower lip, but then blurted, “What
if it’ s this  house?”
That froze everyone except the little boys, who continued
crawling industriously around the room and over bed and
table, screeching and vrooming.
“It could be, couldn’ t it?” Bree looked round, from rooftree
to h earth. “All the—the prophecy said”—with an awkward
nod toward Amy McCallum—”was the home of James Fraser
would burn. But this was your home, to start with. And it’ s not
like there’ s a street address. It just said, On Fraser ’ s Ridge. ”
Everyone stared  at her , and she flushed deeply , dropping her
eyes to the sock.
“I mean … it’ s not like they—er , prophecies—like they’re
always accurate,  is it? They might have got the details wrong.”
Amy nodded seriously; evidently , vagueness in the matter of
detail was an accepted characteristic of prophecies.
Roger cleared his throat explosively; Jamie and Ian
exchanged glances, then looked at the fire, leaping on the
hearth a nd the towering stack o f bone-dry firewood next to it,
the overflowing  kindling basket … Everyone’ s eyes turned
expectantly to Jamie, whose fa ce was a study in conflicting
emotions.
“I su ppose,” he said slowly , “w e could remove to Arch’ s
place.”
I beg an to count on my fingers: “Y ou, me, Roger , Bree, Ian,
Amy , Aidan, Orrie, Jemmy— plus Mr . and Mrs. Bug—is
eleven p eople. In a one-room ca bin that measures eight feet by
ten?” I closed my fists and stared at him. “No one would have
to set the place o n fire; half of us would be sitting in the hearth
already , well alight.”
“Mmphm. W ell, then … the Christie place is empty .”
Amy’ s eyes went round with horror , and everyone looked
automatically away from everyone else. Jamie took a deep
breath and let it out, audibly .“Perhaps we’ll just be … very careful,” I suggested.
Everyone exhale d slightly , and we resumed our occupations,
though without our former sense of snug safety .
Dinner passed without incident, but in midafternoon, a
knock came on the door . Amy screamed, and Brianna dropped
the s hirt she wa s mending into the fire. Ian leaped to his feet
and jerked the door open, and Rollo, jerked out of a doze,
char ged past him, roaring.
Jamie and Roger struck the doorway—and each other—
simultaneously , stuck for an instant, and fell through. All the
little bo ys shrieked and ran to their respective mothers, who
were frantically beating at the smoldering shirt as though it
were a live snake.
I had leaped to my feet, but was pressed against the wall,
unable to get pa st Bree and Am y . Adso, startled by the racket
and by my popping up beside h im, hissed and took a swipe at
me, narrowly missing my eye.
A numb er of oaths in a mixture of languages were coming
from the dooryard, accompanied by a series of sharp barks
from Rollo. Everyone sounded thoroughly annoyed, but there
were no sounds of conflict. I edged my way delicately past the
knot of mothers and sons, and peered out.
Major MacDonald, wet to the eyebrows and covered in
clumps of snow and dirty slush, was gesticulating with some
ener gy at Jamie, while Ian rebuked Rollo, and Roger—from
the look on his  face—was trying very hard not to burst out
laughing.
Jamie, compelle d by his own sense of propriety , but eyeing
the Major with deep suspicion, invited him in. The inside of
the cabin smelled of burned fa bric, but at least the riot had
calmed down, and the Major  greeted us all with a fair
assumption of cordiality . There was a lot of fuss, getting him
stripped of his soaking-wet clothes, dried of f, and—for lack of
any bett er altern ative—temporarily swathed in Roger ’ s spare
shirt and breeches, in which he a ppeared to be drowning, as he
was a good six inches shorter than Roger .Food and whisky having been ceremonially of fered and
accepted, the household fixed the Major with a collective eye
and waited to hear what had brought him to the mountains in
the dead of winter .
Jamie ex changed a brief glance with me, indicating that he
could hazard a guess. So could I.
“I have come, sir ,” MacDonald said formally , hitching up
the shirt  to keep it from sliding  of f his shoulder , “to of fer ye
command of a company of milit ia, under the orders of General
Hugh MacDonald. The General’ s troops are gathering, even as
we speak, and will undertake their march to W ilmington at the
end of the month.”
I fe lt a deep qualm of apprehension at that. I was
accustomed to MacDonald’ s chronic optimism and tendency to
overstatement, but there was nothing of exaggeration in this
statement. Did that mean that the help Governor Martin had
requested, the troops from Irela nd, would be landing soon, to
meet General MacDonald’ s troops at the coast?
“The Ge neral’ s troops,” Jamie said, poking up the fire. He
and Mac Donald had taken over the fireside, with Roger and
Ian rang ed on either side of them, like firedogs. Bree, Amy ,
and I repaired to the bed, where we perched like a row of
roosting hens, watching the conversation with a mingling of
interest and alarm, while the little boys retired under the table.
“How many men does he have, would ye say , Donald?”
I saw MacDonald hesitate, torn between truth and desire. He
coughed, though, and said matter -of-factly , “He had a few
more tha n a thousand when I left him. Y e ken weel, though—
once we  begin to move, others  will come to join us. Many
others. The more particularly ,” he added pointedly , “if such
gentlemen as yourself are in command.”
Jamie didn’ t reply to that at onc e. Meditatively , he shoved a
burning wood fragment back into the fire with his foot.
“Powder and shot?” he asked. “Arms?”“A ye, well; we’d a bit of a disappointment there.”
MacDonald took a sip of his whisky . “Duncan Innes had
promised us a g reat deal in that  way—but in the end, he was
obliged to renege upon his promise.” The Major ’ s lips pressed
tight, and I tho ught from the expression on his face that
perhaps Duncan had not been o verreacting in his decision to
move to Canada.
“Still,” MacDon ald continued more cheerfully , “we are not
destitute in that regard. And tho se gallant gentlemen who have
flocked to our cause—and who will  come to join us—bring
with them both their own weap ons and their courage. Y ou, of
all people, must appreciate the force of the Hieland char ge!”
Jamie lo oked up at that, and regarded MacDonald for a long
moment before replying.
“A ye, w ell. Y e were behind the cannon at Culloden, Donald.
I w as in front of them. W ith a sword in my hand.” He took up
his own  glass and drained it, th en got up and moved to pour
another , leaving MacDonald to recover his countenance.
“ T ouche,  Major ,” Brianna murmured u nder her breath. I
didn’ t th ink Jamie had ever before referred to the fact that the
Major had fought with the government forces during the
Rising—but I wasn’ t surprised that he hadn’ t for gotten.
W ith a brief nod to the compan y , Jamie stepped outside—
ostensibly to visit the privy , more likely to check on the well-
being of the hou se. Still more likely to give MacDonald a little
breathing room.
Roger , with the courtesy of a host—and the suppressed
keenness of a historian—was asking MacDonald questions
regarding the General and his activities. Ian, impassive and
watchful, sat by his feet, one hand toying with Rollo’ s ruf f.
“The General’ s rather elderly for such a campaign, surely?”
Roger to ok another stick of wood and pushed it into the fire.
“Especially a winter campaign.”
“He has the odd  wee spell of catarrh,” MacDonald admitted,
of fhand. “But who doesna, in this climate? And DonaldMcLeod, his lieutenant, is a man of vigor . I assure ye, sir ,
should the General be at any point indisposed, Colonel
McLeod is more than capable of leading the troops to
victory!”
He w ent on at some length about the virtues—both personal
and mil itary—of Donald McLeod. I ceased listening, my
attention distracted by a stealthy movement on the shelf above
his head. Adso.
MacDonald’ s red coat was spread over the back of a chair to
dry , stea ming in the heat. His wig, damp and disheveled from
Rollo’ s a ttack, h ung on the cloa k peg above it. I got up hastily
and possessed myself of the wig, receiving a look of
puzzlement from the Major , and one of green-eyed hostility
from Adso, who plainly consid ered it low of me to hog this
desirable prey for myself.
“Er … I’ll just … um … put i t somewhere safe, shall I?”
Clutching the damp mass of ho rsehair to my bosom, I sidled
outside a nd round to the pantry , where I tucked the wig safely
away behind the cheese with the phosphorus.
Coming out, I met Jamie, red-no sed with cold, coming back
from a reconnaissance of the Big House.
“All’ s w ell,” he assured me. He  glanced up at the chimney
above u s, spuming clouds of thick gray smoke. “Y e dinna
suppose the lass might be right, do ye?” He sounded as though
he were joking, but he wasn’ t.
“God knows. How  l ong ‘til tom orrow’ s dawn? ” The
shadows were already falling lo ng, violet and chill across the
snow .
“T oo lon g.” He had violet shad ows in his face, too, from
one sleepless night; this would be another . He hugged me
against himself for a moment, though, warm in spite of the fact
that he wore no thing over his shirt but the rough jacket in
which he did chores.
“Y e dinna suppose MacDonald will come back and fire the
house, i f I refuse him, do ye?” he asked, releasing me with afair attempt at a smile.
“What do you mean ‘if ’ ?” I dem anded, but he was alre ady
on his way back in.
MacDonald stood up in respect when Jamie came in,
waiting until he was seated again before taking his own stool.
“Have ye had a moment, then,  to think on my of fer , Mr .
Fraser?” he asked formally . “Y our presence would be of the
greatest value—and valued greatly by General MacDonald and
the Governor , as well as myself.”
Jamie sat silent for a moment, looking into the fire.
“It griev es me, Donald, that we should find ourselves so
opposed,” he said at last, lo oking up. “Y e canna be in
ignorance, thou gh, of my position in this matter . I have
declared myself.”
MacDonald nodded, lips tightening a little.
“I ken what ye’ve done. But it is not too late for remedy .
Y e’ve d one nothing yet that is irrevocable—and a man may
surely admit mistake.”
Jamie’ s mouth twitched a little.
“Oh, aye, Donald. Might you ad mit your own mistake, then,
and join the cause of liberty?”
MacDonald drew himself up.
“It may please y e to tease, Mr .  Fraser ,” he said, obviously
keeping a grip on his temper , “but my of fer is made in
earnest.”
“I k now that, Major . My apolo gies for undue levity . And
also for the fact  that I must make ye a poor reward of your
ef forts, coming so far in bitter weather .”
“Y e refuse, then?” Red smudges burned on MacDonald’ s
cheeks, and his p ale blue eyes h ad gone the color of the winter
sky . “Y e will abandon your k in, your ain folk? Y e would
betray your blood, as well as your oath?”Jamie had opened his mouth to reply , but stopped at this. I
could fe el something going on i nside him. Shock, at this blunt
—and v ery acc urate—accusation? Hesitation? He had never
discussed the situation in tho se terms, but he must have
grasped them. Most of the Hig hlanders in the colony either
had joined the Loyalist side already—like Duncan and Jocasta
—or likely would.
His decl aration had cut him of f from a great many friends—
and might well cut him of f from the remnants of his family in
the N ew W orld, as well. Now M acDonald was holding out the
apple of temptation, the call of clan and blood.
But he had had years to think of it, to ready himself.
“I have said what I must, Dona ld,” he said quietly . “I have
pledged myself and my house to what I believe is right. I
cannot do otherwise.”
MacDonald sat for a moment, looking at him narrowly .
Then, without a word, he stood and pulled Roger ’ s shirt of f
over his  head. His torso was pa le and lean, but with a slight
middle-aged softness round the waist, and bore several white
scars, the marks of bullet wounds and sabre cuts.
“Y ou do n’ t mean to go, surely , Major? It’ s freezing out, and
nearly d ark!” I came to stand by Jamie, and Roger and Bree
rose, too, adding their protest ations to mine. MacDonald,
though, was obdurate, merely sh aking his head as he pulled on
his own damp clothing, fastening his coat with dif ficulty , as
the buttonholes were stif f with damp.
“I will not take h ospitality from the hand of a traitor , mum,”
he s aid very qui etly , and bowed to me. He straightened then,
and met Jamie’ s eye, man to man.
“W e shall not m eet again as friends, Mr . Fraser ,” he said. “I
regret it.”
“Then let us hope we do not meet again at all, Major ,”
Jamie said. “I too regret it.”
MacDonald bowed again, to the rest of the company , and
clapped his hat on his head. His expression changed as he didso and felt the damp coldness of it on his bare head.
“Oh, your wig! Just a momen t, Major—I’ll fetch it.” I
rushed o ut and round to the pantry—just in time to hear a
crash as  something fell inside. I jerked open the door , left ajar
from my  last visit, and Adso streaked past me, the Major ’ s wig
in his mouth. Inside, the lean-to was in brilliant blue flames.
I H AD INITIA LL Y wondered how I would keep awake all
night. In  the event, it wasn’ t dif f icult at all. In the aftermath of
the blaze, I wasn’ t sure I’d ever sleep again.
It could have be en much worse; Major MacDonald, in spite
of n ow being a sworn enemy ,  had come nobly to our aid,
rushing out and flinging his still -wet cloak over the blaze, thus
preventing the total destruction of the pantry—and, doubtless,
the cabin. The c loak had not pu t out the fire entirely , though,
and quenching the flames that sprang up here and there had
entailed a great deal of excitem ent and rushing about, in the
course of which Orrie McCallum was misplaced, toddled of f,
and fell into the  groundhog kiln, where he was found—many
frantic minutes later—by Rollo.
He was fished out undamaged, but the hullabaloo caused
Brianna to have what she thought was premature labor .
Fortunately , this  proved to be merely a bad case of hiccups,
caused by the combination of nervous strain and eating
excessive quantities of sauerkraut and dried-apple pie, for
which she had conceived a recent craving.
“Flammable, she said.” Jamie looked at the charred remains
of the pantry floor , then at Bria nna, who had, in spite of my
recommendation that she lie down, come out to see what could
be salva ged fro m the smoking remains. He shook his head.
“It’ s a miracle that ye’ve not burnt the place to ashes long
since, lass.”
She emi tted a smothered “hic!” and glowered at him, one
hand on her bulging stomach.“ Me?  Y ou ’d better not be try—hic!— ing to make out that
this is my —hic!—fault. Did I  put the Major ’ s—hic!—wig next
to the—”
“BOO!” Roger bellowed, darting a hand at her face.
She shri eked, and hit him. Jemm y and Aidan, running out to
see w hat the com motion was about, started dancing round her ,
ecstatically shouting, “Boo! Boo!” like a gang of miniature
lunatic ghosts.
Bree, her eyes g leaming dangerously , bent and scooped up a
handful of snow . In an instant, she had molded it into a ball,
which sh e flung at her husband’ s head with deadly accuracy . It
struck h im right between the ey es, exploding in a shower that
left whit e granul es clinging to h is eyebrows and melting globs
of snow running down his cheeks.
“What?” he said incredulously . “What’ s that for? I was only
trying to—hey!”  He ducked the next one, only to be pelted
round the knees and waist by handsful of snow lobbed at short
range by Jemmy and Aidan, quite berserk by now .
Modestly accepting thanks for his action earlier , the Major
had been persuaded—not least by the fact that it was now full
dark and beginning to snow aga in—to accept the hospitality of
the c abin, with t he understanding that it was Roger , not Jamie,
who was of fering it. W atching h is hosts whooping and hiccing
as they plastered one another with snow , he looked as though
he m ight be having second thou ghts about being so fine as to
refuse to dine w ith a traitor , but he rather stif fly bowed in
response when Jamie and I bad e him farewell, then trudged
into the cabin, the muddy shreds that Adso had left of his wig
clasped in his hand.
It se emed extremely—and most gratefully—quiet as we
made ou r way through the fallin g snow toward our own house,
alone. T he sky had gone a pinkish lavender , and the flakes
floated down around us, supernatural in their silence.
The house loomed before us, its quiet bulk somehow
welcoming, in spite of the darkened windows. Snow wasswirling across the porch in little eddies, piling in drifts on the
sills.
“I s uppose it w ould be harder for a fire to start if it’ s
snowing—wouldn’ t you think?”
Jamie bent to unlock the front door .
“I d inna much mind if the p lace bursts into flame by
spontaneous co mbustion, Sass enach, provided I have my
supper first.”
“A cold supper , were you thinking?” I asked dubiously .
“I w as n ot,” he said firmly . “I mean to light a roaring fire in
the k itchen hearth, fry up a doze n eggs in butter , and eat them
all, t hen lay ye down on the hearth rug and roger ye ‘til you—
is that all right?” he inquired, noticing my look.
“‘T il I what?” I  asked, fascinated by his description of the
evening’ s program.
“‘T il ye burst into flame and tak e me with ye, I suppose,” he
said, and stooping, swooped me  up into his arms and carried
me across the darkened threshold.1 1 2
OA THBREAKER
February 2, 1776
H E CALLED THEM ALL T OGETHER, and they came. The
Jacobites of Ardsmuir , the fishermen from Thurso, the outcasts
and opportunists who had come to settle on the Ridge over the
last six years. He had called for the men, and most came alone,
making their way through the dripping woods, slipping on
mossy r ocks and muddy trails. Some of the wives came, as
well, though, curious, wary , though they hung modestly back
and allowed Claire to shepherd them into the house one by
one.
The men stood in the dooryard, and he regretted that; the
memory of the last time they had gathered here was much too
fresh in everyon e’ s mind. But there was no choice about it;
there were too m any to fit in the house. And it was broad day ,
now , not night—though he saw more than one man turn his
head sha rply to glance at the ch estnut trees, as though he saw
the ghos t of Thomas Christie th ere, poised once more to walk
through the crowd.
He cros sed himself, and said a  hasty prayer , as he always
did when he tho ught of T om Ch ristie, then stepped out on the
porch. They had been talking together—awkwardly , but with a
fair assu mption of ease—but the talk died abruptly when he
appeared.
“I have received word summoning me to W ilmington,” he
said to them wit hout preamble. “I go to join the militias there,
and I will take with me such men as will come willingly .”
They gaped at him like sheep disturbed at grazing. He had a
moment’ s unsettling impulse to laugh, but it passed at once.
“W e will go as militia, but I do not command your service.”
Privately , he doubted that he could  command more than ahandful of them now , but as well to put a good face on it.
Most were still blinking at him, but one or two had got a
grip on themselves.
“Y ou declare yourself a rebe l, Mac Dubh ?” That was
Murdo, bless him. Loyal as a dog, but slow of thought. He
needed things to be put in the simplest of terms, but once
grasped, he would deal with them tenaciously .
“A ye, M urdo, I do. I am a rebe l. So will any man be who
marches with me.”
That caused a f air degree of murmuring, glances of doubt.
Here an d there in the crowd, he heard the word “oath,” and
steeled himself for the obvious question.
He was taken ab ack by the man who asked it, though. Arch
Bug drew himself up, tall and stern.
“Y e swore an oath to the King, Seaumais mac Brian, ” he
said, his voice unexpectedly sharp. “So did we all.”
There was a mu rmur of agreement at this, and faces turned
to him, frownin g, uneasy . He took a deep breath, and felt his
stomach knot. Even now , knowing what he knew , and
knowing too the immorality o f a forced oath, to break his
sworn word openly made him feel that he had stepped on a
step that wasn’ t there.
“So did we all,” he agreed. “Bu t it was an oath forced upon
us as captives, not one given as men of honor .”
This was patently true; still, it was an oath, and Highlanders
did not take any oath lightly . May I die and be buried far fr om
my k in …  Oath or no, he thought grimly , that fate would likely
be theirs.
“But an oath nonetheless, sir ,” said Hiram Crombie, lips
drawn ti ght. “W e have sworn be fore God. Do you ask us to put
aside such a thing?” Several of the Presbyterians murmured
acquiescence, drawing closer to Crombie in show of support.
He took another deep breath, feeling his belly tighten.“I a sk nothing.” And knowing full well what he did,
despising himse lf in a way for doing it—he fell back upon the
ancient weapons of rhetoric and idealism.
“I said that the oath of loyalty to the King was an oath
extorted, not given. Such an oath is without power , for no man
swears freely , save he is free himself.”
No one shouted disagreement, s o he went on, voice pitched
to carry , but not shouting.
“Y e’ll ken the Declaration of Arbroath, will ye? Four
hundred years since, it was our sires, our grandsires, who put
their han ds to these words: … for as long as but a hundr ed of
us r ema in alive, never will we on any conditions be br ought
under English rule.”  He stopped to steady his voice, then went
on. “It is in truth not for glory , nor riches, nor honours that we
ar e fighting, but for fr eedom—fo r that alone, which no honest
man gives up but with life itself.”
He stopped dead then. Not for its ef fect on the men to whom
he spoke, but because of the words themselves—for in
speaking them, he had found himself unexpectedly face to face
with his own conscience.
T o th is point, he  had been dubious about the justifications of
the revo lution, a nd more so of its ends; he had been compelled
to th e rebel stan d because of what Claire, Brianna, and Roger
Mac had  told him. But in the speaking of the ancient words, he
found the conviction he thought he pretended—and was
stricken by the thought that he did indeed go to fight for
something more than the welfare of his own people.
And ye’ll end up just as dea d in the end,  he thought,
resigned. I din na expect it hurts less, to ke n it’ s for good cause
—but maybe so.
“I shall leave in a week,” he said quietly , and left them
staring after him.
HE HAD  EXPE CTED his Ardsmuir men to come: the three
Lindsay brother s, Hugh Abernathy , Padraic MacNeill, and therest. Not expected, but gladly welcomed, were Robin
McGillivray and his son, Manfred.
Ute McGillivray had for given him, he saw , with a certain
sense of amusement. Besides Robin and Freddie, fifteen men
from near Salem had come, all relatives of the redoubtable
frau.
A gr eat surprise, though, was H iram Crombie, who alone of
the fisher -folk had decided to join him.
“I have prayed on the matter ,” Hiram informed him,
managing to look more piously sour than usual, “and I believe
ye’re rig ht abou t the oath. I expect ye’ll have us all hangit and
burned oot of our homes—but I’ll come, nonetheless.”
The rest —with great muttering s and agitated debate—had
not. He didn’ t b lame them. Having survived the aftermath of
Culloden, the perilous voyage to the colonies, and the hardship
of exile, the very last thing a sensible person could wish was to
take up arms against the King.
The greatest surprise, though, awaited him as his small
company rode out of Cooperville and turned into the road that
led south.
A company of men, some forty strong, was waiting at the
crossroad. He drew near warily , and a single man spurred out
of the crowd and drew up with  him—Richard Brown, pale-
faced and grim.
“I hear you go to W ilmington,” Brown said without
preamble. “If so be as it’ s agre eable, my men and I will ride
with you.” He c oughed, and added, “Under your command, to
be sure.”
Behind him, he heard a small “hmph!” from Claire, and
suppressed a smile. He was q uite aware of the phalanx of
narrowed eyes at his back. He caught Roger Mac’ s eye, and
his son-in-law gave a small nod. W ar made strange
bedfellows; Rog er Mac knew that as well as he did—and for
himself, he had fought with w orse than Brown, during the
Rising.“Be wel come, then,” he said, and bowed from his saddle.
“Y ou and your men.”
WE MET ANOTHER militia company near a place called
Moore’ s Creek, and camped with them under the longleaf
pines. There had been a bad ice storm the day before, and the
ground w as thic k with fallen br anches, some as lar ge around
as my waist. It made the goin g more dif ficult, but had its
advantages, so far as making campfires went.
I was throwing a hastily assembled bucket of ingredients
into the kettle for stew—scraps of ham, with bones, beans,
rice, onions, carrots, crumbled stale biscuit—and listening to
the other militia commander , Robert Borthy , who was telling
Jamie—with co nsiderable lev ity—about the state of the
Emigrant Highla nd Regiment, as our opponents were formally
known.
“There c an’ t be more than five or six hundred, all told,” he
was saying with amused derision. “Old MacDonald and his
aides have been tryin’ to scoop  ‘em up from the countryside
for months, and I gather the ef fort has been akin to scoopin’
water with a sieve.”
On one occasion, Alexander McLean, one of the general’ s
aides, h ad set up a rendezvou s point, calling upon all the
Highlanders and  Scotch-Irish in the neighborhood to assemble
—cannily providing a hogshead of liquor as inducement.
Some fiv e hundred men had in fact shown up—but as soon as
the liqu or was drunk, they had melted away again, leaving
McLean alone, and completely lost.
“The poor man wandered about for nearly two days, lookin’
for the road, before someone took pity on him and led him
back to civilization.” Borthy , a hearty backwoods soul with a
thick bro wn beard, grinned widely at the tale, and accepted a
cup of ale with due thanks before going on.
“God kn ows wh ere the rest of ‘em are now . I hear tell that
what troops Old MacDonald has are mostly brand-new
emigrants—the Governor made ‘em swear to take up arms todefend the colony before he’d g rant them land. Most of them
poor sods are fresh of f the boat from Scotland—they don’ t
know north from south, let alone just where they are.”
“Oh, I ken whe re they are, even if they don’ t.” Ian came
into the  firelight, grubby but cheerful. He had been riding
dispatches back and forth among the various militia companies
conver ging on W ilmington, and his statement caused a rush of
general interest.
“Where?” Richard Brown leane d forward into the firelight,
narrow face keen and foxy .
“They’re comin ’ down Negro H ead Point Road, marching
like a proper reg iment,” Ian said, sinking onto a hastily of fered
log with  a small groan. “Is there anything hot to drink, Auntie?
I’m frozen and parched, both.”
There w as a nasty sort of dark liquid, called “cof fee” for
courtesy’ s sake, and made from boiling burned acorns. I rather
dubiously poured him a cup, but he consumed it with every
evidence of enjoyment, meanwhile recounting the results of
his expeditions.
“They m eant to circle round to the west, but Colonel
Howe’ s men got there first, an d cut them of f. So then they
went across, meaning to take the  ford—but Colonel Moore put
his m en to the quick-step and marched all night to forestall
them.”
“They made no move to engag e either Howe or Moore?”
Jamie as ked, frowning. Ian shook his head, and gulped the rest
of his acorn cof fee.
“W ouldna come close. Colonel Moore says they dinna mean
to e ngage until they reach W ilmington—they’re expecting
reinforcement there.”
I exchanged a glance with Jamie. The expected
reinforcement w as presumably  the British regular troops,
promised by General Gage. Bu t a rider from Brunswick we
had met the day before had told us that no ships had arrived
when he  lef t the coast, four days before. If there wasreinforcement aw aiting them, it would have to come from the
local Loyalists—and from the various rumors and reports we’d
heard so  far , the local Loyalists were a weak reed on which to
lean.
“W ell, s o. They’re cut of f on either side, aye? Straight down
the r oad is where they’re headed —they might reach the bridge
late tomorrow .”
“How far is it, Ian?” Jamie asked, squinting through the
vista of longleaf pines. The trees were very tall, and the
grassland under them wide open—very reasonable for riding.
“Maybe half a day on horseback.”
“A ye, th en.” Jamie relaxed a lit tle, and reached for his own
cup of the vile brew . “W e’ve time to sleep first, then.”
WE REACHED  the bridge at Moore’ s Creek by midday the
next day , and joined the company commanded by Richard
Caswell, who greeted Jamie with pleasure.
The Hig hland re giment was nowhere in sight—but dispatch
riders arrived regularly , reporting their steady movement down
Negro Head Point Road—a wide wagon thoroughfare that led
directly to the solid plank bri dge that crossed the W idow
Moore’ s Creek.
Jamie, Caswell, and several of the other commanders were
walking up and down the bank, pointing at the bridge and up
and dow n the shore. The cre ek ran through a stretch of
treacherous, swa mpy ground, with cypress trees stretching up
from water and mud. The creek itself deepened as it narrowed,
though—a plumb line that some curious soul dropped into the
water of f the bridge said it was fifteen feet deep at that point—
and the bridge was the only fea sible place for an army of any
size to cross.
Which did a great deal to explain Jamie’ s silence over
supper . He had helped to throw up a small earthwork on the far
side of the creek , and his hands were smeared with dirt—and
grease.“They’ve cannon,” he said quietly , seeing me eye the
smudges on his hands. He wiped them absently on his breeks,
much th e worse for wear . “T wo  small guns from the town—
but cannon, nonetheless.” He looked toward the bridge, and
grimaced slightly .
I knew what he was thinking—and why .
Y e wer e behind the cannon at Cu lloden, Donald,  he had said
to th e M ajor . I w as in fr ont of  them. W ith a swor d in my hand.
Swords were the Highlanders’ natural weapons—and for most,
likely their only weapons. Fro m all we had heard, General
MacDonald had managed to assemble only a small quantity of
muskets and powder; most of his troops were armed with
broadswords and tar ges. And they were marching straight into
ambush.
“Oh, Christ,” Jamie said, so softly I could barely hear him.
“The poor wee fools. The poor gallant wee fools.”
MA TTERS BEC AME still worse—or much better , depending
on your viewpoint—as dusk fell. The temperature had risen
since the  ice storm, but the ground was sodden; moisture rose
from it during t he day , but then as night came on, condensed
into a fog so thi ck that even the  campfires were barely visible,
each one glowing like a sullen coal in the mist.
Excitement was passing through the militia like a mosquito-
borne fever , as the new conditions gave rise to new plans.
“Now ,” Ian said softly , appearin g like a ghost out of the fog
beside Jamie. “Caswell’ s ready .”
Such supplies as we had were already packed; carrying
guns, po wder , and food, eight hundred men, together with an
uncounted quan tity of camp-followers like myself, stole
quietly through the mist toward the bridge, leaving the
campfires burning behind us.
I wasn’ t sure exactly where MacDonald’ s troops were just
now—they mig ht be still on the wagon road, or might have
cautiously detoured, coming dow n to the edge of the swamp toreconnoiter . Go od luck to them  in that  case, I thought. My
own insides were tight with tension as I stepped carefully
across the bridge; it was silly to tiptoe, but I felt a reluctance to
put my feet down firmly—the fog and silence compelled a
sense of secrecy and furtiveness.
I stubbe d a toe against an uneven plank and lurched
forward, but Roger , walking bes ide me, caught me by the arm
and set me upright. I squeezed his arm, and he smiled a little,
his face  barely visible through the mist, though he was no
more than a foot away .
He knew  quite as well as Jamie  and the rest did what was
coming. Nonetheless, I sensed a strong excitement in him,
mingled with dread. It was, after all, to be his first battle.
On t he other sid e, we dispersed to make fresh camps on the
hill above the circular earthwork the men had thrown up a
hundred yards from the creek. I passed close enough to the
guns to see th eir elongated snouts, poking inquisitively
through the mist: Mother Coving ton and her daughter , the men
called the two cannon—I wondered idly which was which, and
who the original Mother Covington might have been. A
redoubtable lady , I assumed—or possibly the proprietor of the
local brothel.
Firewood was easy to find; the  ice storm had extended to
the p ines near t he creek, too. It was, however , bloody damp,
and damned if I was going to sp end an hour on my knees with
a tinderb ox. Luc kily , no one could see what  I  was do ing in this
pea-soup fog, and I stealthily removed a small tin of Brianna’ s
matches from my pocket.
As I was blowing on the kindli ng, I heard a series of odd,
rending screech es from the dire ction of the bridge, and knelt
upright, staring down the hill.  I couldn’ t see anything, of
course, but realized almost at o nce that it was the sound of
nails giving way as planks were pried up—they were
dismantling the bridge.
It seeme d a long time before Jamie came to find me. He
refused food, but sat against a tree and beckoned to me. I satdown be tween h is knees and lea ned back against him, grateful
for h is w armth; the night was co ld, with a damp that crept into
every crevice and chilled the marrow .
“Surely they’ll see that the bri dge is out?” I said, after a
long sile nce filled with the myr iad noises of the men working
below .
“Not if the fog lasts ‘til morning—and it will.” Jamie
sounded resigne d, but he seemed more peaceful than he had
earlier . W e sat quietly together for some time, watching the
play of flames on the fog—an eerie sight, as the fire seemed to
shimmer and mer ge with the mist, the flames stretching
strangely up and up, disappearing into the swirl of white.
“D’ye b elieve in ghosts, Sassenach?” Jamie asked suddenly .
“Er … well, not to put too fine a  point on it, yes,” I said. He
knew I did, because I’d told hi m about my meeting with the
Indian w hose face was painted black. I knew he did, too—he
was a Highlander . “Why , have you seen one?”
He shoo k his head, wrapping his arms more securely around
me.
“Not to say ‘seen,’” he said, s ounding thoughtful. “But I
will be damned if he’ s no there.”
“Who?” I said, rather startled at this.
“Murtagh,” he said, surprising me further . He shifted more
comfortably , resettling me against him. “Ever since the fog
came in, I’ve had the most peculiar sense of him, just by me.”
“Really?” This was fascinating, but made me thoroughly
uneasy . Murtagh, Jamie’ s godfather , had died at Culloden, and
—so far as I knew—hadn’ t been going about manifesting
himself since. I didn’ t doubt his presence; Murtagh’ s had been
an extremely strong—if dour—personality , and if Jamie said
he was there, he  very likely was. What made me uneasy was
the contemplation of just why  he might be there.
I con centrated for a time, but go t no sense of the tough little
Scotsman myself. Evidently , he was only interested in Jamie.That  frightened me.
While th e conclu sion of the mor row’ s battle was a foregone
one, a battle w as a battle, and  men might be killed on the
winning side, as well. Murtagh had been Jamie’ s godfather ,
and took his du ty to Jamie seriously . I sincerely hoped he
hadn’ t had word that Jamie was about to be killed, and shown
up to conduct h im to heaven—visions on the eve of battle
were a fairly common occurren ce in Highland lore, but Jamie
did say he hadn’ t seen  Mu rtagh. That was somethin g, I
supposed.
“He, um, hasn’ t said  anything to you, has he?”
Jamie shook his head, seeming unfazed by this ghostly
visitation.
“Nay , he’ s just … there.” He seemed, in fact, to find this
“thereness” a comfort, and so I  didn’ t voice my own doubts
and fear s. I had them, nonetheless, and spent the rest of the
short night pressed close against my husband, as though daring
Murtagh or anyone else to take him from me.1 1 3
THE GHOSTS OF CULLODEN
C OME D A WN, ROGER ST O OD BEHIND the low
earthwork by his father -in-law , musket in hand, straining his
eyes to peer into  the mist. The sounds of an army came to him
clearly; sound carried through fog. The measured tramp of
feet, tho ugh they  were not marc hing in any sort of unison. The
clank o f metal and rustle of cloth. V oices—the shouts of
of ficers, he thought, beginning to rally their troops.
They would by now have found the deserted campfires;
they’d know that the enemy now lay across the creek.
The smell of tallow was stro ng in the air; Alexander
Lillington’ s men had greased the support timbers, after the
planks had been removed. He’ d been grasping his gun for
hours, it seemed, and yet the metal was still cold in his hand—
his fingers were stif f.
“D’ye hear the shouting?” Jamie nodded toward the mist
that hid the far bank. The wind had changed; no more than
disconnected G aelic phrases came from beyond the ghostly
cypress trunks, and I made no sense of them. Jamie did.
“Whoever ’ s leading them—I think it’ s McLeod, by the
voice—he means to char ge the creek,” he said.
“But that’ s suicide!” Roger blu rted. “Surely they know—
surely someone’ s seen the bridge?”
“They a re Highlanders,” Jamie said, still softly , eyes on the
ramrod he pulled from its rest. “They will follow the man to
whom they vow loyalty , even though he leads them to their
death.”
Ian w as nearby; he glanced quickly toward Roger , then over
his shoulder , where Kenny and Murdo Lindsay stood with
Ronnie Sinclair and the McGill ivrays. They stood in a casualknot, but every hand touched a musket or rifle, and their eyes
darted toward Jamie every few seconds.
They had joined Colonel Lilling ton’ s men on this side of the
creek; Lillington was passing to and fro through the men, eyes
darting back and forth, assessing readiness.
Lillington stopped abruptly at sight of Jamie, and Roger felt
a n ervou s qualm in the pit of h is stomach. Randall Lillington
had been a second cousin of the Colonel’ s.
Alexander Lillin gton wasn’ t a m an to hide his thoughts; it
had quit e evidently dawned on him that his own men were
forty feet away and that Jamie’ s men stood between him and
them. His eyes darted toward the mist, where Donald
McLeod’ s bello wing was being answered by increasing roars
from the Highlanders with him, then back at Jamie.
“What does he say?” Lillington demanded, rising on his
toes and frowning toward the far bank, as though
concentration might yield him meaning.
“He says to the m that courage will carry the day .” Jamie
glanced toward  the crest of the rise behind them. Mother
Covington’ s long black snout was just visible through the mist.
“W ould that it could,”  he added quietly in Gaelic.
Alexander Lilli ngton reached out suddenly and grabbed
Jamie’ s wrist.
“And you, sir?” he said, suspicion open in eyes and voice.
“Are you not a Highlander , as well?”
Lillington’ s other hand was on the pistol in his belt. Roger
felt the casual talk among the men behind him stop, and
glanced back. All Jamie’ s men were watching, with
expressions of great interest but no particular alarm. Evidently ,
they felt Jamie could deal with Lillington by himself.
“I ask you, sir—to whom is your loyalty?”
“Where do I stand, sir?” Jamie said with elaborate
politeness. “On this side of the creek, or on that?”A f ew men gr inned at that, but forbore to laugh; the
question of loyalty was a raw on e still, and no man would risk
it unnecessarily .
Lillington’ s grip on his wrist relaxed, but did not yet let go,
though he acknowledged Jamie’ s statement with a nod.
“W ell en ough. But how are we to know that you do not
mean to turn and fall upon us in battle? For you ar e  a
Highlander , are you not? And your men?”
“I am  a Highlander ,” Jamie sai d bleakly . He glanced once
more at the far  bank, where occasional glimpses of tartan
showed through the mist, and then back. The shouting echoed
from the  fog. “And I am the sire of Americans.” He pulled his
wrist from Lillington’ s grasp.
“And I give ye leave, sir ,” he continued evenly , lifting his
rifle and  standin g it on its butt, “ to stand behind me and thrust
your sword through my heart if I fire amiss.”
W ith that, he tu rned his back on Lillington and loaded his
gun, ramming ball, powder , and patch with great precision.
A voice bellowed from the fog, and a hundred other throats
took up  the cry in Gaeli c. “KING GEORGE AND
BROADSWORDS!”
The last Highland char ge had begun.
THEY B URST OUT OF the m ist a hundred feet from the
bridge, howling , and his heart jumped in his chest. For an
instant—an instant only—he felt he ran with them, and the
wind of it snapped in his shirt, cold on his body .
But he stood stock-still, Mur tagh beside him, looking
cynically on. Roger Mac coughed, and Jamie raised the rifle to
his shoulder , waiting.
“Fir e!”  The  vol ley stru ck them just bef ore they reached the
gutted b ridge; ha lf a dozen fell in the road, but the others came
on. Then  the cannon fired from  the hill above, one and thenthe othe r , and the concussion of their dischar ge was like a
shove against his back.
He had fired wit h the volley , aim ing above their heads. Now
swung the rifle down and pu lled the ramrod. There was
screaming on both sides, the shriek of wounded and the
stronger bellowing of battle.
“A righ! A righ!”  The King! The King!
McLeod was at the bridge; he’ d been hit, there was blood
on his coat, but  he brandished sword and tar ge, and ran onto
the bridge, stabbing his swor d into the wood to anchor
himself.
The cannon spoke again, but were aimed too high; most of
the H ighlanders  had crowded down to the banks of the creek
—some were in the water , cli nging to the bridge supports,
inching across. More were on the timbers, slipping, using their
swords like McLeod to keep their balance.
“Fir e!”  and  he fired, powder smoke blending with the fog.
The can non had  the range, they spoke one-two, and he felt the
blast pus h against him, felt as though the shot had torn through
him. Mo st of those on the bridg e were in the water now , more
threw th emselves flat upon the timbers, trying to wriggle their
way acr oss, only to be picked of f by the muskets, every man
firing at will from the redoubt.
He loaded, and fired.
Ther e he is,  said a voice, dispassionate; he had no notion
was it his, or Murtagh’ s.
McLeod was dead, his body f loating in the creek for an
instant b efore the weight of the black water pulled him down.
Many m en were  struggling in th at water—the creek was deep
here, and mortal cold. Few Highlanders could swim.
He glim psed Al lan MacDonald, Flora’ s husband, pale and
staring in the crowd on the shore.
Major D onald M acDonald floundered, rising halfway in the
water . His wig was gone and  his head showed bare andwounded, blood running from his scalp down over his face.
His teeth were bared, clenched in agony or ferocity , there was
no t elling which. Another shot struck him and he fell with a
splash—but rose again, slow , slow , and then pitched forward
into water too deep to stand, but rose yet again, splashing
frantically , spraying blood from his shattered mouth in the
ef fort to breathe.
Let it be you, then, lad,  said the dispassionate voice. He
raised his rifle a nd shot MacDonald cleanly through the throat.
He fell backward and sank at once.
IT W AS OVER in minutes, the fog thick with powder smoke,
the black creek choked with the dying and dead.
“King Geor ge and broadswords, eh?” said Caswell, bleakly
surveying the damage. “Broadswords against cannon. Poor
buggers.”
On the other side, all was confusion. Those who had not
fallen at the bridge were in flight. Already , men on this side of
the creek were carrying the timbers down to repair the bridge.
Those who were running wouldn’ t get far .
He s hould go, too, summon his  men to help in pursuit. But
he stood as though turned to stone, the cold wind singing in his
ears.
JACK RANDALL stood still. His swor d was in his hand, but
he m ade no effo rt to raise it. Only stood ther e, that odd smile
on his lips, dark eyes burning in Jamie’ s own.
If he had been able to br eak that gaze … but he couldn’ t,
and so caught the blur of movement behind Randall. Murtagh,
running, bounding tussocks like  a sheep. And the glint of his
godfather ’ s blad e—had he seen that, or only imagined it? No
matter; he’d known without dou bt fr om the cock of Murtagh’ s
arm, an d seen befor e it happened the mur der ous strike come
upwar d towar d the Captain’ s r ed-clad back.But Ran dall spun, warned maybe by some change in his
eyes, the sob o f Murtagh’ s br eath—or only by a soldier ’ s
instinct. T oo late to avoid the thrust, but soon enough that the
dirk missed its fatal aim into the kidney . Randall had grunted
with the blow—Christ, he could hear it—and jerked aside
staggering, but turning as he fell, grasping Murtagh’ s wrist,
dragging him down in a showe r of spray fr om the wet gorse
they fell thr ough.
They had r olled away into a hollow , locked together ,
struggling, and he had flung himself thr ough the clinging
plants in pursuit, some weapon—what, what had he held?—in
his fist.
But the feel of it  faded against his skin; he felt the weight of
the thing in his hand, but ther e was no shape of hilt or trigger
to r emind him, and it was gone again.
Leaving him with that one image: Murtagh. Murtagh, teeth
clenched and bar ed as he struck . Murtagh, running, coming to
save him.
HE BEC AME SLOWL Y aware again of where he was. There
was a hand on his arm—Roger Mac, white-faced, but steady .
“I am going to see to them,” Roger Mac said, with a brief
nod toward the creek. “Y ou’re all right, yourself?”
“A ye, o f course,” he said, tho ugh with the feeling he so
often had in waking from a dream—as though he were not in
fact quite real.
Roger M ac nodd ed and turned to  walk away . Then suddenly
turned back, and laying his hand once more on Jamie’ s arm,
said ver y quietl y , “Ego te absolvo.”  Then turned again and
went resolutely to tend the dying and bless the dead.1 1 4
AMANDA
FROM L ’Oignon-Intelligencer , May 15, 1776
INDEPENDENCE!!
In the W ake of the famous V ictory at Moor e’ s Cr eek
Bridge, the Fourth Pr ovinci al Congr ess of North
Car olina has voted to adopt the Halifax Resolves. These
Resolutions authorize Delegates to the Continental
Congr ess to concur with the other Delegates of the other
Colonies in declaring Independency and forming for eign
Alliances, r eserving to this Colony the sole and exclusive
Right of forming a Constitution and Laws for this Colony ,
and by Passage of the Halifax Resolves, North Car olina
thus becomes the first Colony officially to indorse
Independency .
THE FIR ST SHIP of a Fleet commanded by Sir Peter
Parker h as arrived at the Mouth  of the Cape Fear River ,
upon the  eighteenth of April. The Fleet consists of nine
Ships in  total, and is bringing British T r oops to pacify
and uni te the Colony , by the W or d of Governor Josiah
Martin.
ST OLEN: Goods amounting to twenty-six Pounds, ten
Shillings and Fourpence in T otal, abstracted fr om the
W ar ehouse of Mr . Neil Forbes on W ater Str eet. Thieves
br oke a Hole in  the Back of the W ar ehouse during the
Night of May t welfth, and carried the Goods away by
means of a W ag on. T wo Men, one White, one Black, wer e
seen driving a W agon away with a T eam of bay Mules.
Any W or d pertaining to this atr ocious Crime will be
gener ously Rew ar ded. Apply to W . Jones, in car e of the
Gull and Oyster on the Market Squar e.BORN, t o Captain Roger MacKenzie of Fraser ’ s Ridge
and his lady , a girl, on the twenty-first of April. Child and
Mother ar e r eported in good Health, the Child’ s name
given as Amanda Clair e Hope MacKenzie.
Roger ha d never felt so terrified as he did when his newborn
daughter was placed in his arms  for the first time. Minutes old,
skin tender and perfect as an or chid’ s, she was so delicate he
feared he would leave fingerprints on her—but so alluring that
he h ad t o touch her , drawing the back of his knuckle gently , so
gently , down the perfect curve of her fat little cheek, stroking
the black cobweb silk of he r hair with an unbelieving
forefinger .
“She looks like you.” Brianna, sweaty , disheveled, deflated
—and so  beautiful he could sca rcely bear to look at her—lay
back against the pillows with a grin that came and went like
the Cheshire Cat’ s—never entirely absent, even though it
faded now and then from tiredness.
“Does she?” He studied the tiny face with complete
absorption. Not for any sign of himself—only because he
couldn’ t take his eyes of f her .
He h ad come to know her intimately , through the months of
being roused suddenly by pokes and kicks, of watching the
liquid heave of Brianna’ s belly , of feeling the little one swell
and retreat under his hands as he lay behind his wife, cupping
her stomach and making jokes.
But he’d known her as Little Otto, the private name they’d
used for the unb orn child. Otto had had a distinct personality
—and for a mom ent, he felt a ridiculous pang of loss, realizing
that Otto  was gone. This tiny , exquisite being was someone
entirely new .
“Is she Marjorie, do you think?” Bree was lifting her head,
peering at the blanket-wrapped bundle. They’d discussed
names for months, making lists, ar guing, making fun of each
other ’ s c hoices, choosing ridicu lous things like Montgomery
or Agath a. At last, tentatively , they’d decided that if it was aboy , the name might be Mich ael; if a girl, Marjorie, after
Roger ’ s mother .
His daughter opened her eyes q uite suddenly and looked at
him. Her eyes were slanted; he wondered if they would stay
that way , like her mother ’ s. A so rt of soft, middle blue, like the
sky in mid-morning—nothing remarkable, at a glance, but
when you looked straight into it … vast, illimitable.
“No,” he  said softly , staring int o those eyes. Could she see
him yet? he wondered.
“No,” he said again. “Her name’ s Amanda.”
I H ADN ’T SAID anything to begin with. It was a common
thing in newborns—especially babies born a bit early , as
Amanda had been—nothing to worry about.
The ductus arteriosus is a small blood vessel that in the fetus
joins the  aorta to the pulmonary  artery . Babies have lungs, of
course, but prior to birth don’ t use them; all their oxygen
comes fr om the placenta, via the  umbilical cord. Er go, no need
for blood to be circulated to the lungs, save to nourish the
developing tissue—and so the ductus arteriosus bypasses the
pulmonary circulation.
At birth , though, the baby takes  its first breath, and oxygen
sensors in this small vessel cause it to contract—and close
permanently . W ith the ductus arteriosus closed, blood heads
out from  the heart to the lungs, picks up oxygen, and comes
back to be pumped out to the rest of the body . A neat and
elegant system—save that it doesn’ t always work properly .
The ductus arteriosus doesn’ t always close. If it doesn’ t,
blood still does go to the lungs, of course—but the bypass is
still there. T oo m uch blood goes to the lungs, in some cases,
and floods them. The lungs swel l, become congested, and with
diverted blood flow to the body , there are problems with
oxygenation—which can become acute.
I m oved  my stethoscope over th e tiny chest, ear pressed to
it, listen ing intently . It was my best stethoscope, a model fromthe nine teenth century called a Pinard—a bell with a flattened
disc at one end, to which I pressed my ear . I had one carved of
wood; th is one was made of pewter; Brianna had sand-cast it
for me.
In fact, though, the murmur was so distinct that I felt as
though I barely needed a stethoscope. Not a click or a
misplaced beat, not a too-long pause or a leaky swish—there
were any number of unusual so unds a heart could make, and
auscultation was the first step of diagnosis. Atrial defects,
ventral d efects, m alformed valve s—all have specific murmurs,
some occurring between beats, some blending with the heart
sounds.
When the ductus arteriosus fails to close, it’ s said to be
“patent”—open. A patent d uctus arteriosus makes a
continuous shushing murmur , soft, but audible with a little
concentration, p articularly in the supraclavicular and cervical
regions.
For the hundredth time in two da ys, I bent close, ear pressed
to th e Pinard as I moved it ov er Amanda’ s neck and chest,
hoping against hope that the sound would have disappeared.
It hadn’ t.
“T urn your head, lovey , yes, t hat’ s right… .” I breathed,
delicately turning her head away from me, Pinard pressed to
the s ide of her neck. It was hard to get the stethoscope close to
her fat little neck … there. Th e murmur increased. Amanda
made a little b reathy noise that sounded like a giggle. I
brought her head back the other way—the sound decreased.
“Oh, bloody hell,” I said softly ,  so as not to scare her . I put
down th e Pinard and picked he r up, cradling her against my
shoulder . W e were alone; Brianna had gone up to my room for
a nap, and everyone else was out.
I car ried her to the sur gery window and looked out; it was a
beautiful day in the mountain s pring. The wrens were nesting
under th e eaves again; I could hear them above me, rustling
round with sticks, conversing in small, clear chirps.“Bird,” I said, my lips close to her tiny seashell of an ear .
“Noisy bird.” She squirmed lazily , and farted in reply .
“Right,” I said, smiling despite myself. I held her out a little,
so I could look into her face—lovely , perfect—but not as fat as
it had been when she was born a week before.
It was perfectly normal for babies to lose a little weight at
first, I told myself. It was.
A patent ductus arteriosus may have no symptoms, beyond
that odd, continuous murmur . But it may . A bad one deprives
the child of needed oxygen; the main symptoms are pulmonary
—wheezing; rapid, shallow breathing; bad color—and failure
to th rive, because of the ener gy burned up in the ef fort to get
enough oxygen.
“Just let Grannie have a little lis ten again,” I said, laying her
down on the quilt I’d spread over the sur gery table. She
gur gled and kicked as I picked up the Pinard and placed it on
her chest again, moving it over neck, shoulder , arm …
“Oh, Jes us,” I whispered, closing my eyes. “Don’ t let it be
bad.” B ut the sound of the murmur seemed to grow louder ,
drowning my prayers.
I opened my eyes to see Brianna, standing in the doorway .
“I KNEW THERE was something  wrong,” she said steadily ,
wiping Mandy’ s bottom with a damp rag before rediapering
her . “She doesn’ t nurse like Jem my did. She acts hungry , but
she’ll only nurse for a few mi nutes before she falls asleep.
Then she wakes up and fusses again a few minutes later .”
She sat down a nd of fered Mandy a breast, as though in
illustration of the dif ficulty . Sur e enough, the baby latched on
with every evidence of starvatio n. As she nursed, I picked up
one of the tiny fists, unfolding her fingers. The minute nails
were faintly tinged with blue.
“So,” Brianna said calmly , “what happens now?”“I don’ t  know .” This was the usual answer in most cases,
truth be told—but it was always  unsatisfactory , and clearly not
less so now . “So metimes there are no symptoms, or only very
minor ones,” I s aid, trying for amendment. “If the opening is
very lar ge, and you have pulmonary symptoms—and we have
—then … she might  be all right, only not thrivi ng—not
growing properl y , because of th e feeding dif ficulties. Or”—I
took a deep breath, steeling myself—”she could develop heart
failure. Or pulmonary hypertension—that’ s a very high blood
pressure in the lungs—”
“I know what it is,” Bree said, her voice tight. “Or?”
“Or infective endocarditis. Or—not.”
“W ill sh e die?” she asked bluntly , looking up at me. Her jaw
was set, but I saw  the way she held Amanda closer , waiting for
an answer . I could give her nothing but the truth.
“Probably .” The word hung in the air between us, hideous.
“I can’ t say for sure, but—”
“Probably ,” Brianna echoed, and I nodded, turning away ,
unable to look at her face. W ithout such modern assistances as
an e chocardiogr am, I of course couldn’ t judge the extent of the
problem. But I h ad not only the evidence of my eyes and ears,
but what I had felt passing from her skin to mine—that sense
of not-rightness, that eerie conviction that comes now and
then.
“Can you fix it? ” I heard the tremor in Brianna’ s voice, and
went at once to put my arms around her . Her head was bent
over Am anda, and I saw the tears fall, one, then another ,
darkening the wispy curls on top of the baby’ s head.
“No,” I whispered, holding them both. Despair washed over
me, but I tightened my hold, as  though I could keep time and
blood both at bay . “No, I can’ t.”
“WELL, THERE’S NO choice, is there?” Roger felt
preternaturally calm, recognizing it as the artificial calmproduced by shock but wishin g to cling to it as long as
possible. “Y ou’ve got to go.”
Brianna leveled a look at him,  but didn’ t reply . Her hand
roamed over the baby , sleepin g in her lap, smoothing the
woolly blanket over and over again.
Claire had explained it all to him , more than once, patiently ,
seeing that he co uld not take it in. He still did not believe it—
but the sight of those tiny finger nails, turning blue as Amanda
strove to suck, had sunk into him like an owl’ s talons.
It was, she had said, a simpl e operation—in a modern
operating room.
“Y ou can’ t … ?” he’d asked, with a vague motion toward
her sur gery . “W ith the ether?”
She’d cl osed her eyes and shaken her head, looking nearly
as ill as he felt.
“No. I can do very simple th ings—hernias, appendixes,
tonsils—and even those are a risk. But something so invasive,
on such  a tiny body … no,” she repeated, and he saw
resignation in her face when she met his eyes. “No. If she’ s to
live—you have to take her back.”
And so they had  begun to discuss the unthinkable. Because
there wer e  ch oices—and decisions to be made. But the
unalterable basic  fact was clear .  Amanda must go through the
stones—if she could.
JAMIE FRASER took his father ’ s ruby ring, and held it over
the face of his granddaughter . Amanda’ s eyes fixed on it at
once, an d she stuck out her tongue with interest. He smiled,
despite t he heav iness of his hear t, and lowered the ring for her
to grab at.
“She lik es that well enough,” he said, skillfully removing it
from her grip before she could get it into her mouth. “Let’ s try
the other .”The other was Claire’ s amulet—the tiny , battered leather
pouch given to her by an India n wisewoman years before. It
contained assorted bits and bobs, herbs, he thought, and
feathers, perhaps the tiny bones of a bat. But in among them
was a lump of stone—nothing  much to look at, but a true
gemstone, a raw sapphire.
Amanda turned her head at on ce, more interested in the
pouch than she had been in the  shiny ring. She made cooing
noises and batted wildly with both hands, trying to reach it.
Brianna took a deep, half-strangled breath.
“Maybe,” she said, in the voice of one who fears as much as
hopes. “But we can’ t tell for sure. What if I—take her , and I
go through, but she can’ t?”
They all looked at one another in silence, envisioning the
possibility .
“Y ou’d come back,” Roger said  gruf fly , and put a hand on
Bree’ s shoulder . “Y ou’d come right back.”
The tens ion in her body eased a  little at his touch. “I’d try ,”
she said, and attempted a smile.
Jamie cleared his throat.
“Is wee Jem about?”
Of c ourse he wa s; he never went far from home or Brianna
these days, seeming to sense that something was wrong. He
was retrieved from Jamie’ s study , where he had been spelling
out words in—
“Jesus Christ on a piece of toas t!” his grandmother blurted,
snatching the book from him. “Jamie! How could  you?”
Jamie felt a de ep blush rise over him. How could he,
indeed? He’d taken the battered  copy of Fanny Hill  in trade,
part of a parcel of used books bought from a tinker . He hadn’ t
looked at the books before buying them, and when he did
come to look them over … W ell, it was quite against his
instincts to throw away a book—any book.“What’ s P-H-A-L-L-U-S?” Jemmy was asking his father .
“Another word for prick,” Roger said briefly . “Don’ t bloody
use it. Listen—can ye hear anything, when ye listen to that
stone?” He indicated Jamie’ s ring lying on the table. Jem’ s
face lighted at sight of it.
“Sure,” he said.
“What, from there?” Brianna said, incredulous. Jem looked
around the circle of parents and grandparents, surprised at
their interest. “Sure,” he repeated. “It sings.”
“Do ye think wee Mandy can hear it sing, too?” Jamie asked
carefully . His heart was beating heavily , afraid to know , either
way .
Jemmy picked up the ring and leaned over Mandy’ s basket,
holding it directly over her face. She kicked ener getically and
made no ises—but whether because of the ring, or merely at
the sight of her brother …
“She can hear it,” Jem said, smiling into his sister ’ s face.
“How do  you know?” Claire asked, curious. Jem looked up
at her , surprised.
“She says so.”
NOTHING W A S SETTLED. At the same time, everything
was sett led. I was in no doubt  as to what my ears and my
fingers t old me— Amanda’ s con dition was slowly worsening.
V ery slowly—it  might take a year , two years, before serious
damage began to show—but it was coming.
Jem mig ht be right; he might no t be. But we had to proceed
on the assumption that he was.
There were ar guments, discussions—tears. Not yet any
decision as to who should atte mpt the journey through the
stones. Brianna and Amanda must go; that was certain. But
ought Roger to go with them? Or Jemmy?“I will not let y ou go without me,” Roger said through his
teeth.
“I don’ t want  to go without  you!” Bree c ried, looking
exasperated. “But how can we leave Jemmy here, without us?
And how can w e make him go? A baby—we think that can
work, be cause of the legends, b ut Jem—how will he make it?
W e can’ t let him risk being killed!”
I looked at the stones on the table—Jamie’ s ring, my pouch
with the sapphire.
“I th ink,” I said carefully , “that  we need to find two more
stones. Just in case.”
And so, in late J une, we came down from the mountain, into
turmoil.P A R T  T W E L V E
T i m e  W i l l  N o t  B e
 O u r s  F o r e v e r1 1 5
NOSEPICKER
July 4, 1776
I T W AS CLOSE AND HOT I N THE INN ROOM, but I
couldn’ t go out; little Amanda had finally fussed herself to
sleep—she had a rash on her bottom, poor thing—and was
curled in  her basket, tiny thumb in her mouth and a frown on
her face.
I unfolded the gauze mosquito netting and draped it
carefully over the basket, then opened the window . The air
outside was hot, too, but fresh,  and moving. I pulled of f my
cap—without it,  Mandy was fond of clutching my hair in both
her hands and yanking; she had an amazing amount of
strength, for a ch ild with a heart  defect. For the millionth time,
I wondered whether I could have been wrong.
But I wasn’ t. S he was asleep now , with the delicate rose
bloom of a healthy baby on her cheeks; awake and kicking,
that soft flush faded, and an equally beautiful but unearthly
blue ting e showed now and then  in her lips, in the beds of her
tiny nails. She w as still lively—but tiny . Bree and Roger were
both lar ge people; Jemmy had put on weight like a small
hippopotamus through his first several years of life. Mandy
weighed scarcely more than she had at birth.
No, I wasn’ t wr ong. I moved he r basket to the table, where
the w arm breeze could play ove r her , and sat down beside it,
laying my fingers gently on her chest.
I c ould feel it. J ust as I had in the beginning, but stronger
now tha t I knew what it was. If  I had had a proper operating
suite, the blood transfusions, the calibrated and carefully
administered anesthesia, the ox ygen mask, the swift, trained
nurses … No sur gery on the heart is a minor thing, and sur gery
on a n in fant is always a great r isk—but I could have done it.Could fe el in the tips of my fingers exactly what needed to be
done, could see in the back of my eyes the heart, smaller than
my fist, the slip pery , pumping, rubbery muscle and the blood
washing through the ductus arteriosus, a small vessel, no
bigger t han an eighth of an inch in circumference. A small
nick in the axill ary vessel, a quick ligation of the ductus itself
with a number -8 silk ligature. Done.
I knew . But knowledge is not, alas, always power . Nor is
desire. It wouldn’ t be me who would save this precious
granddaughter .
W ould anyone? I wondered, giving way momentarily to the
dark tho ughts I fought to keep at bay when anyone else was
near . Jemmy might not be right. Any baby might grab at a
brightly colored  shiny thing l ike a ruby ring—but then I
remembered her cooing, batting at my decrepit leather amulet
pouch with the raw sapphire inside.
Perhaps. I didn’ t want to think  about the dangers of the
passage—or the certainty of permanent separation, no matter
whether the journey through the stones was successful or not.
There were noises outside; I loo ked toward the harbor , and
saw the  masts of a lar ge ship,  far out to sea. Another , still
farther out. My heart skipped a beat.
They were oceangoing ships, no t the little packet boats and
fishing smacks that sailed up an d down the coast. Could they
be p art of the fleet, sent in answer to Governor Martin’ s plea
for h elp to suppr ess, subdue, and reclaim the colony? The first
ship of that flee t had arrived at  Cape Fear in late April—but
the troops it carried had been lying low , waiting for the rest.
I w atche d for some time, but the ships didn’ t come in closer .
Perhaps they were hanging of f, waiting for the rest of the
fleet? Perhaps they weren’ t British ships at all, but Americans,
escaping the British blockade of New England by sailing
south.
I was distracted from my thoughts by the clumping of male
feet on the stair s, accompanied by snorts and that peculiarlyScottish sort of giggling usually depicted in print—but by no
means adequately—as “Heuch, heuch, heuch!”
It was clearly Ja mie and Ian, though I couldn’ t understand
what was giving rise to so much  hilarity , since when last seen
they had been bo und for the docks, char ged with dispatching a
shipment of tobacco leaves, obtaining pepper , salt, sugar ,
cinnamon—if findable—and pins—somewhat rarer than
cinnamon—for Mrs. Bug, and procuring a lar ge fish of some
edible sort for our supper .
They’d got the fish, at least: a lar ge king mackerel. Jamie
was carrying it by the tail, wha tever it had been wrapped in
having e vidently been lost in s ome accident. His queue had
come undone, so that long red strands frayed out over the
shoulder of his c oat, which in turn had a sleeve half wrenched
of f, a fold of white shirt protruding through the torn seam. He
was cov ered with dust, as was the fish, and while the latter ’ s
eyes both bulged accusingly , one of his own was swollen
nearly shut.
“Oh, Go d,” I said, burying my f ace in one hand. I looked up
at him through splayed fingers. “Don’ t tell me. Neil Forbes?”
“Ach, no,” he said, dropping t he fish with a splat on the
table in front o f me. “A wee dif ference of opinion wi’ the
W ilmington Chowder and Marching Society .”
“A dif ference of opinion,” I repeated.
“A ye, they thought they’d throw  us in the harbor , and we
thought they wouldn’ t.” He slung a chair round with his boot
and sat down o n it backward, arms crossed on its back. He
looked indecently cheerful, face flushed with sun and laughter .
“I don’ t  want to know ,” I said , though of course I did. I
glanced at Ian, who was still sniggering quietly to himself, and
observed that while he was slig htly less battered than Jamie,
he had one forefinger lodged in his nose up to the knuckle.
“Have you got a bloody nose, Ian?”
He s hook his he ad, still giggling. “No, Auntie. Some o’ the
Society do, though.”“W ell, why have you got your finger up your nose, then?
Have you picked up a tick or something?”
“No, he’ s keepin’ his brains fro m falling out,” Jamie said,
and wen t of f into another fit. I glanced at the basket, but
Mandy slept peacefully on, quite used to racket.
“W ell, maybe you’d best stick both your own fingers up
your nose, then,” I suggested. “ Keep you out of trouble for a
moment or two, at least.” I tilted up Jamie’ s chin to get a better
look at the eye. “Y ou hit someone with that fish, didn’ t you?”
The giggling had died down to a subterranean vibration
between them, but threatened at this to break out anew .
“Gilbert Butler ,” Jamie said with a masterful ef fort at self-
control. “Smack  across the face . Sent him straight across the
quay and into the water .”
Ian’ s shoulders shook with remembered ecstasy .
“Bride, what a splash! Oh, it w as a braw fight, Auntie! I
thought I’d broke my hand on a  fellow’ s jaw , but it’ s all right
now the deadness has worn of f. Just a bit numb and tingly .” He
wiggled the free fingers of hi s hand at me in illustration,
wincing only slightly as he did so.
“Do take your finger out of your nose, Ian,” I said, anxiety
over the ir condition fading into annoyance at how they’d got
that way . “Y ou look like a half-wit.”
For some reason, they both found that hysterically funny
and laughed like loons. Ian did, however , eventually withdraw
the finge r , with an expression of wary cautiousness, as though
he tr uly expected his brains to f ollow in its wake. Nothing did
emer ge, though,  not even the ordinary bits of unsavory excreta
one might expect from such a maneuver .
Ian looked puzzled, then mildly alarmed. He snif fed,
prodding experimentally at his nose, then stuck the finger back
into his nostril, rooting vigorously .
Jamie w ent on grinning, but his amusement began to fade as
Ian’ s explorations became more frantic.“What? Y e’ve not lost it, have ye, lad?”
Ian shook his head, frowning.
“Nay , I feel it. It’ s …” He stopped, giving Jamie a panic-
stricken look over the embedded finger . “It’ s stuck, Uncle
Jamie! I canna get it out!”
Jamie w as on his feet at once. He pulled the finger from its
resting-place with a moist, sucking noise, then tilted back Ian’ s
head, peering ur gently up his nose with his one good eye.
“Bring a light, Sassenach, will ye?”
There was a candlestick on the table, but I knew from
experience that the only likely ef fect of using a candle to look
up someone’ s nose was to set their nose hairs on fire. Instead, I
bent and  pulled my medical kit out from under the settle where
I had stowed it.
“I’ll get it,” I said, with the c onfidence of one who has
removed everything from cherr y pits to live insects from the
nasal cavities of small children.  I drew out my longest pair of
thin forc eps, and clicked the slender blades together in token
of assurance. “Whatever it is. Just keep quite still, Ian.”
The whites of Ian’ s eyes show ed briefly in alarm as he
looked at the s hining metal of the forceps, and he looked
pleadingly at Jamie.
“W ait. I’ve a be tter idea.” Jamie laid a quelling hand on my
arm for  an instant, then disappeared out the door . He
thundered down stairs, and I heard a sudden burst of laughter
from bel ow , as the door to the taproom opened. The sound was
as suddenly cut of f as the door closed, like the valve on a
faucet.
“Are you all right, Ian?” There was a smear of red on his
upper lip; his nose was  beg inning to bl eed, aggravated  by his
jabbings and pokings.
“W ell, I do hop e so, Auntie.” His original jubilation was
beginning to be replaced by a certain expression of worry . “Y e
dinna think I can have pushed it into my brain, do ye?”“I think it very unlikely . What on earth—”
But the door be low had opened and closed again, spilling
another brief spurt of talk and laughter into the stairwell. Jamie
took the  stairs two at a time and popped back into the room,
smelling of hot bread and ale, and holding a small, battered
snuf fbox in his hand.
Ian seized on this with gratitu de and, sprinkling a quick
pinch of black, dusty grains on  the back of his hand, hastily
inhaled it.
For an instant, a ll three of us held breathless—and then it
came, a sneeze of gar gantuan proportions that rocked Ian’ s
body back on its stool, even as his head flew forward—and a
small, hard object struck the table with a ping!  and bounced
of f into the hearth.
Ian went on sneezing, in a fusillade of hapless snorts and
explosions, but Jamie and I were  both on our knees, scrabbling
in the ashes, heedless of filth.
“I’ve go t it! I th ink,” I added, s itting back on my heels and
peering at the h andful of ashes I held, in the midst of which
was a small, round, dust-covered object.
“A ye, that’ s it.” Jamie seized my  neglected forceps from the
table, plucked the object delicately from my hand, and
dropped it into m y glass of wate r . A delicate plume of ash and
soot floated up through the water to form a dusty gray film on
the surface. Below , the object glittered up at us, serene and
glowing, its beauty at last revea led. A faceted clear stone, the
color of golden sherry , half the size of my thumbnail.
“Chrysoberyl,” Jamie said softl y , a hand on my back. He
looked at Mandy’ s basket, the silky black curls lifting gently in
the breeze. “D’ye think it will serve?”
Ian, still wheezing and watery-eyed, and with a red-stained
handkerchief pr essed to his much-abused proboscis, came to
look over my other shoulder .
“Half-wit, is it?” he said in tone s of deep satisfaction. “Ha!”“Wherever did you get that? Or rather ,” I corrected myself,
“who did you steal it from?”
“Neil Forbes.” Jamie picked th e gem up, turning it gently
over in his fing ers. “There were a good deal more o’ the
Chowder Society than there were of us, so we ran down the
street and round the corner , down between the warehouses
there.”
“I ke nt Forbes’ s place, aye, bec ause I’d been there before,”
Ian put in. One of Mandy’ s feet was sticking up out of the
basket; h e touch ed the sole of it with a fingertip, and smiled to
see her toes extend in reflex. “ There was a great hole in the
back wh ere someone had broken down the wall, just covered
over wit h a sheet of canvas, nailed over it, like. So we pulled it
loose and ducked inside.”
Where they had found themselv es standing next to the small
enclosed space Forbes used for an of fice—and for the
moment, deserted.
“It was sitting in a bittie wee box on the desk,” Ian said,
coming to look proprietorially at the chrysoberyl. “Just sitting
there! I’d just picked it up to  look at, when we hear the
watchman coming. So—” He shrugged and smiled at me,
happiness momentarily transforming his homely features.
“And you think the watchman  won’ t tell him you were
there?” I  asked skeptically . The two of them could scarcely be
more conspicuous.
“Oh, I imagine he will.” Jamie bent over Mandy’ s basket,
holding the chrysoberyl between  thumb and forefinger . “Look
what Grandda and Uncle Ian have brought ye, a muirninn, ” he
said softly .
“W e decided that it was a small enough ransom to pay for
what he did to Brianna,” Ian said, sobering somewhat. “I
expect M r . Forbes may feel it reasonable, too. And if not—”
He smile d again, though not wi th happiness, and put his hand
to his knife. “He’ s got another ear , after all.”V ery slowly , a tiny fist rose t hrough the netting, fingers
flexing as they grasped at the stone.
“Is she still asleep?” I whispered. Jamie nodded, and gently
withdrew the stone.
On t he f ar side of the table, the  fish stared austerely at the
ceiling, ignoring everything.1 1 6
THE NINTH EARL
 OF ELLESMERE
July 9, 1776
T HE W A TER WON’T BE COLD.”
She’d spoken automatically , without thinking.
“I shouldn’ t think that will matter much.” A nerve jumped
in Roge r ’ s cheek, and he turned away abruptly . She reached
out, touc hing him delicately , as though he were a bomb that
might explode if jarred. He glanced at her , hesitated, then took
the hand she of fered him, with a small, crooked smile.
“Sorry ,” he said.
“I’m sorry , too,” she said softly . They stood close together ,
fingers knotted, watching the tide recede across the narrow
beach, a fraction of an inch uncovered with each lap of the tiny
waves.
The flat s were gray and bleak in the evening light, pebble-
strewn and rust-stained from t he peaty waters of the river .
W ith th e tide going out, the harbor water was brown and
feculent, the stain reaching past the ships at anchor , nearly to
the o pen sea. W hen it turned, th e clear gray water of the ocean
would f low in, sweeping up the Cape Fear , obliterating the
mudflats and everything on them.
“Over th ere,” she said, still soft ly , though there was no one
near eno ugh to hear them. She  tilted her head, indicating a
group of weathered mooring pos ts driven deep into the mud. A
skif f was tied to one; two of  the pirettas, the four -oared
“dragonflies” that plied the harbor , to another .
“Y ou’re sure?” He shifted his w eight, glancing up and down
the shore.The narr ow beach fell away into cold pebbles, exposed and
gleaming with the leaving of t he tide. Small crabs skittered
hastily among them, not to waste a moment’ s gleaning.
“I’m sure. People in the Blue B oar were talking about it. A
traveler asked where, and Mrs . Smoots said it was the old
mooring posts, near the warehou ses.” A torn flounder lay dead
among t he rocks , white flesh wa shed clean and bloodless. The
small bu sy claws picked and shredded, tiny maws gaped and
gulped, pinching at morsels. She felt her gor ge rise at the
sight, and swallowed hard. It wo uldn’ t matter what came after;
she knew that. But still …
Roger nodded absently . His e yes narrowed against the
harbor wind, calculating distances.
“There’ll be quite a crowd, I expect.”
There already was one; the turn  of the tide wouldn’ t be for
an h our or more, but people were drifting down to the harbor
in t wos and threes and fours , standing in the lee of the
chandlery to smoke their pipes , sitting on the barrels of salt
fish to talk and gesture. Mrs. S moots had been right; several
were pointing out the mooring posts to their less
knowledgeable companions.
Roger shook his head.
“It’ll hav e to be from that side; the best view is from there.”
He nodded across the inner arc of the harbor toward the three
ships that rocked at the main q uay . “From one of the ships?
What do you think?”
Brianna fumbled in the pocket tied at her waist, and pulled
out her small brass telescope. She frowned in concentration,
lips pur sed as she surveyed the ships—a fishing ketch, Mr .
Chester ’ s brig, and a lar ger ship, part of the British fleet, that
had come in in the early afternoon.
“Whoa, Nellie,” she murmured, arresting the sweep of her
gaze as the pale blotch of a head  filled the lens. “Is that who I
think …  hot dog, it is!” A tiny  flame of delight flared in her
bosom, warming her .“Is who?” Roger squinted, straining to see unaided.
“It’ s John! Lord John!”
“Lord John Grey? Y ou’re sure?”
“Y es! On the bri g—he must have come down from V ir ginia.
W oops, he’ s gone now—but he’ s there, I saw him!” She turned
to Roger , excited, folding her telescope as she gripped him by
the arm.
“Come on! Let’ s go and find him. He’ll help.”
Roger followed, though with considerably less enthusiasm.
“Y ou’re going to tell him? Do you think that’ s wise?”
“No, but it doesn’ t matter . He knows me.”
Roger looked sharply at her , but the dark look on his face
thawed into a reluctant smile.
“Y ou me an he knows better tha n to try stopping you doing
whatever you’ve made up your bloody-minded mind to do?”
She smi led back at him, thank ing him with her eyes. He
didn’ t like it—in fact, he hated it, and she didn’ t blame him—
but he wouldn’ t try to stop her , either . He knew her , too.
“Y es. Come on, before he disappears!”
It was a slow slog round the c urve of the harbor , pushing
through the knots of gathering sightseers. Outside The
Breakers, the crowd grew abruptly thicker . A cluster of red-
coated s oldiers stood and sat in disarray on the pavement,
seabags and chests scattered round them, their number too
great to fit inside the tavern. Al e pots and pints of cider were
being passed from hand to hand  from the interior of the public
house, slopping freely on the h eads of those over whom they
passed.
A ser geant, harrassed but competent, was leaning against
the timb ered wa ll of the inn, rif fling through a sheaf of papers,
issuing orders and eating a meat pie, simultaneously . Brianna
wrinkled her nose as they stepped carefully through theobstacle course of scattered men and luggage; a reek of
seasickness and unclean flesh rose from the serried ranks.
A fe w onlookers muttered unde r their breath at sight of the
soldiers; several more cheered and waved as they passed, to
receive genial shouts in return. Newly liberated from the
bowels of the Scorpion,  the soldiers were too thrilled with
their fre edom an d the taste of fresh food and drink to care who
did or said anything whatever .
Roger stepped in front of her , t hrusting a way through the
crowd with shoulders and elbo ws. Appreciative shouts and
whistles rose from the soldiers as they saw her , but she kept
her head down, eyes fixed on Ro ger ’ s feet as he shoved ahead.
She hea ved a sigh of relief as they emer ged from the press
at th e head of the quay . The soldiers’ equipment was being
unloaded from the Scorpion  at the far side of the dock, but
there wa s little foot traf fic near  the brig. She paused, looking
to and fro for a glimpse of Lord John’ s distinctive fair head.
“There he is!” R oger tugged at her arm, and she swung in
the d irection he was pointing, on ly to collide heavily with him
as he stepped abruptly back.
“What—” she began crossly , but then stopped, feeling as
though she had been punched in the chest.
“Who in God’ s holy name is that ?” Roger spoke softly ,
echoing her thoughts.
Lord John Grey stood near th e far end of the quay , in
animated conversation with one of the red-coated soldiers. An
of ficer; gold braid gleamed on his shoulder and he carried a
laced tri corne beneath one arm. It wasn’ t the man’ s uniform
that caught her attention, though.
“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” she whispered, feeling numb
around the lips.
He w as tall—very tall—with a breadth of shoulder and a
stretch o f white -stockinged calf that were attracting admiring
glances from a cluster of oyster girls. It was something more
than height or build that made  gooseflesh ripple down thelength of her spine, though; it was the fact of his carriage, his
outline, a cock of the head and an air of physical self-
confidence that drew eyes like a magnet.
“It’ s Da,” she said, knowing eve n as she spoke that this was
ridiculous. Even  had Jamie F raser for some unimaginable
reason c hosen t o disguise himself in a soldier ’ s uniform and
come do wn to the docks, this man was dif ferent. As he turned
to look at some thing across the harbor , she saw that he was
dif ferent—lean, like her father , and muscular , but still with the
slenderness of boyishness. Graceful—like Jamie—but with the
slight hesitancy of teenaged awkwardness not long past.
He turned further , backlit by the glow of light of f the water ,
and she felt her knees go weak. A long, straight nose, rising to
a hi gh forehead … the sudd en curve of a broad V iking
cheekbone … Roger gripped her tightly by the arm, but his
attention was as riveted on the young man as hers was.
“I … will … be … damned,” he said.
She gulped air , trying to get enough breath.
“Y ou and me both. And  him.”
“Him?”
“Him, him, and  him !” Lord Jo hn, the mysterious young
soldier—and mo st of all, her father . “Come on.” She pulled
free and strode down the quay , feeling oddly disembodied, as
though she watched herself from a distance.
It was like watching herself come toward a fun-house
mirror , seeing herself—her face, her height, her gestures—
suddenly transposed inside a red coat and doeskin breeches.
His hair was da rk, chestnut-brown, not red, but it was thick
like hers, with the same slight wave to it, the same cowlick
that lifted it of f his brow .
Lord John turned his head slightly , and caught sight of her .
His eyes bulged and a look of absolute horror blanched his
features. He made a feeble flapping motion with one hand,
trying to stop her coming nearer , but he might as well have
tried to stop the Cornish Express.“Hello there!” she said brightly . “Fancy meeting you  here,
Lord John!”
Lord John made a faint quacking noise, like a stepped-on
duck, but she wasn’ t paying att ention. The young man turned
to face her , smiling cordially .
Holy God, he had her father ’ s eyes, too.  Dar k-lashed, and so
young the skin near them was fresh and clear , completely
unlined—but the same slanted blue Fraser cat eyes. Just like
hers.
Her heart was hammering so hard in her chest she was sure
they could hear it. The young man seemed to find nothing
amiss, though; he bowed to her , smiling, but very correct.
“Y our servant, ma’am,” he said. He glanced at Lord John,
plainly expecting an introduction.
Lord John pulled himself together with an obvious ef fort,
and made her a leg.
“My dear . How … delightful to encounter you again. I had
no idea… .”
Y eah, I bet you didn’ t,  she thought, but went on smiling
pleasantly . She could feel Roger beside her , nodding and
saying something in response to his Lordship’ s greeting, trying
his best not to stare.
“My son,” Lord John was saying. “W illiam, Lord
Ellesmere.” He eyed her narrowly , as though daring her to say
anything. “Might I present Mr . Roger MacKenzie, W illiam?
And his wife.”
“Sir . Mrs. MacKenzie.” The young man took her hand
before she realized what he meant to do, and bowed low over
it, planting a small formal kiss upon her knuckles.
She nearly gasped at the unexpected touch of his breath on
her skin , but instead gripped his  hand, much harder than she’d
meant to. He looked momentarily disconcerted, but extricated
himself with reasonable grace. He was much younger than
she’d th ought at  first glance; it was the uniform and the air ofself-possession that made him seem older . He was looking at
her with a sligh t frown on his clear -cut features, as though
trying to place her .
“I t hink …” h e began, hesitant. “Have we met, Mrs.
MacKenzie?”
“No,” she said, astonished to hear her voice emer ge
sounding normal. “No, I’m afraid not. I would have
remembered.” She darted a daggerlike glance at Lord John,
who had gone slightly green around the gills.
Lord Jo hn had been a soldier , too, though. He pulled
himself together with a visible ef fort, putting a hand on
W illiam’ s arm.
“Y ou’d best go and see to yo ur men, W illiam,” he said.
“Shall we dine together later?”
“I am engaged to the Colonel f or supper , Father ,” W illiam
said. “But I am sure he would no t object, was you to join us. It
may be quite lat e, though,” he added. “I understand there is to
be a n ex ecution in the morning, and my troops are asked to be
at the ready , in case of disturb ance in the town. It will take
some time to settle and or ganize everything.”
“Disturbance.” Lord John was eyeing her over W illiam’ s
shoulder . “Is a disturbance expected, then?”
W illiam shrugged.
“I canno t say , Papa. Apparently it is not a political matter ,
though, but only a pirate. I shou ldn’ t think there would be any
trouble.”
“These days everything is a political matter , W illie,” his
father sa id, rathe r sharply . “Never for get that. And it’ s always
wiser to expect trouble than to meet it unprepared.”
The young man flushed slightly , but kept his countenance.
“Quite,” he said in clipped ton es. “I am sure you have a
familiarity with the local conditions which I lack. I am obliged
to you for your a dvice, Father .” He relaxed slightly , and turned
to bow to Brianna.“Pleased to have your acquaintance, Mrs. MacKenzie. Y our
servant, sir .” He nodded to Roge r , turned, and strode of f down
the q uay , adjusting his tricorne t o the proper angle of authority .
Brianna inhaled deeply , hoping that by the time she let her
breath out, she would have words to go with it. Lord John beat
her to it.
“Y es,” he said simply . “Of course he is.”
Amid the logjam of thoughts, reactions, and emotions that
clogged her brain, she seized on the one that seemed
momentarily most important.
“Does my mother know?”
“Does Jamie know?” Roger asked at the same instant. She
looked a t him in surprise, and he raised one eyebrow at her .
Y es, a man could certainly father a child without realizing it.
He had.
Lord John sighed. W ith W illiam’ s departure, he had relaxed
somewhat, and the natural color was coming back to his face.
He had been a soldier long enough to recognize the inevitable
when he saw it.
“They both know , yes.”
“How old is he?” Roger asked abruptly . Lord John shot him
a sharp glance.
“Eighteen. And to save your counting backward, it was
1758. In a place called Helwater , in the Lake District.”
Brianna took another breath, finding this one came a little
easier .
“Okay . S o it—h e—it was before my mother … came back.”
“Y es. From France, supposedly . Where, I gather , you were
born and raised.” He gave her  a gimlet look; he knew she
spoke no more than bastard French.
She could feel the blood rushing to her face.“This is no time for secrets,” she  said. “If you want to know
about my mother and me, I’ll tell you—but you’r e  going to tell
me about him. ” She jerked her head angrily backward, toward
the tavern. “About my brother!”
Lord John pursed his lips, regarding her through narrowed
eyes as he thought. Finally he nodded.
“I se e no help for it. One thing, though—are your parents
here, in W ilmington?”
“Y es. In fact …” She looked upward, trying to make out the
position of the s un through the thin coastal haze. It hung just
above the horizon, a disc of burning gold. “W e were going to
meet them for supper .”
“Here?”
“Y es.”
Lord John swung round to Roger .
“Mr . MacKenzie . Y ou will very much oblige me, sir , if you
will go at once to find your father -in-law , and apprise him of
the presence of the ninth Earl of Ellesmere. T ell him that I
trust his good judgment will dictate an immediate removal
from W ilmington upon receipt of this news.”
Roger stared at him for a moment, brows quirked in interest.
“The Earl of Ellesmere? How the hell did he manage that?”
Lord Jo hn had recovered all h is natural color , and a bit
more. He was distinctly pink in the face.
“Never mind! W ill you go? Jam ie must leave the town, at
once, before they meet by inadvertence—or before someone
sees the two of them separately and begins to speculate aloud.”
“I do ubt Jamie w ill leave,” Roger said, looking at Lord John
with a certain degree of speculation himself. “Not before
tomorrow , in any case.”
“Why not?” Lord John demand ed, looking from one to the
other . “Why are you all here in the first place? It isn’ t the exe
—oh, go od Lord, don’ t tell me.” He clapped a hand to hisface, and dragged it slowly dow n, glaring through his fingers
with the expression of a man tried beyond bearing.
Brianna bit her lower lip. When  she spotted Lord John, she
had bee n not only pleased but relieved of a small bit of her
burden o f worry , counting on him  to help in her plan. W ith this
new complicatio n, though, she felt torn in two, unable to cope
with eith er situa tion, or even to  think about them coherently .
She looked over at Roger , seeking advice.
He met her eye s in one of those long, unspoken marital
exchanges. Then he nodded, making the decision for her .
“I’ll go find Jamie. Y ou have a bit of a chat with his
Lordship, eh?”
He bent  and kissed her , hard, then turned and strode away
down th e dock, walking in a way that made people draw
unconsciously aside, avoiding the touch of his garments.
Lord Joh n had closed his eyes, and appeared to be praying
—presumably for strength. She gripped him by the arm and
his eyes sprang open, startled as though he had been bitten by
a horse.
“Is i t as  striking  as I think?” she said. “Him and me?” The
word felt funny on her tongue. Him.
Lord John looked at her , fair brow furrowed in troubled
concentration as he searched her face, feature by feature.
“I think so,” he said slowly . “T o me, certainly . T o a casual
observer , perhaps much less so. There is the dif ference of
coloring, to be s ure, and of sex ; his uniform … but, my dear ,
you know that your own app earance is so striking—” So
freakish, he meant. She sighed, taking his meaning.
“People stare at me anyway ,” she finished for him. She
pulled down the brim of her hat, drawing it far enough forward
to hide not only hair but face, as well, and glowered at him
from its shadow . “Then we’d better go where no one who
knows him will see me, hadn’ t we?”
THE QUA Y AND THE market streets were thronged. Every
public house in town—and not a few private ones—would
soon be full of quartered soldiers. Her father and Jem were
with Alexander Lillington, her mother and Mandy at Dr .
Fentiman’ s, both places centers of business and gossip, and
she had declared  that she posses sed no intention of going near
either parent in any case—not u ntil she knew all there was to
know . L ord John thought that might be rather more than he
was him self pre pared to tell he r , but this was not a time for
quibbles.
Still, th e exigencies of privacy left them a choice of
graveyard or the deserted racetrack, and Brianna said—a
marked edge in her voice—that under the circumstances, she
wanted no heavy-handed reminders of mortality .
“These m ortal circumstances,” h e said carefully , leading her
around a  lar ge puddle. “Y ou refer to tomorrow’ s execution? It
is  Stephen Bonnet, I collect?”
“Y es,” she said, distracted. “That can wait, though. Y ou
aren’ t engaged for supper , are you?”
“No. But—”
“W illiam,” she said, eyes on her  shoes as they paced slowly
round the sandy oval. “W illiam, ninth Earl of Ellesmere, you
said?”
“W illiam Clare nce Henry Geor ge,” Lord John agreed.
“V iscount Ashn ess, Master of H elwater , Baron Derwent, and,
yes, ninth Earl of Ellesmere.”
She pursed her lips.
“Which would sort of indicate t hat the world at lar ge thinks
his father is somebody else. Not Jamie Fraser , I mean.”
“ W as  somebody else,” he corrected.  “One Ludovic, eighth
Earl of Ellesmere, to be precise. I understand that the eighth
earl unf ortunately died on the day his … er … his heir was
born.”“Died o f what? Shock?” She was clearly in a dangerous
mood; h e was interested to not e both her father ’ s manner of
controlled ferocity and her mother ’ s sharp tongue at work—
the combination was both fascinating and alarming. He hadn’ t
any intention of allowing her to run this interview on her own
terms, though.
“Gunshot,” he said with af fecte d cheerfulness. “Y our father
shot him.”
She made a small choking noise and stopped dead.
“That is not, by the way , common knowledge,” he said,
af fecting not to notice her reaction. “The coroner ’ s court
returned a verdict of death by misadventure—which was not
incorrect, I believe.”
“Not incorrect,” she murmured, sounding a trifle dazed. “I
guess being shot is pretty misadventurous, all right.”
“Of course there was talk,” he said, of fhanded, taking her
arm and  ur ging her forward agai n. “But the only witness, aside
from W illiam’ s grandparents, was an Irish coachman, who was
rather quickly pensioned of f to County Sligo, following the
incident. The child’ s mother having also died that day , gossip
was inclined to consider his lordship’ s death as—”
“His mother ’ s dead, too?” She didn’ t stop this time, but
turned to  give him a penetrating  glance from those deep blue
eyes. Lord John had had suf ficient practice in withstanding
Fraser cat looks, though, and was not discomposed.
“Her name was Geneva Dunsany . She died shortly after
W illiam’ s birth —of an entirely natural hemorrhage,” he
assured her .
“Entirely natural,” she muttered, half under her breath. She
shot him another look. “This Geneva—she was married to the
earl? W hen she and Da …” The  words seemed to stick in her
throat; h e could see doubt and repugnance struggling with her
memories of W illiam’ s undeniable face—and her knowledge
of her father ’ s character .“He has not tol d me, and I would in no circumstance ask
him,” he said f irmly . She gave him another of those looks,
which he returned with interest. “Whatever the nature of
Jamie’ s relations with Geneva Dunsany , I cannot conceive of
his committing an act of such dishonor as to deceive another
man in his marriage.”
She relaxed fractionally , though her grip on his arm
remained.
“Neither can I,” she said, rather grudgingly . “But—” Her
lips compressed, relaxed. “W as he in love with her , do you
think?” she blurted.
What startled him was not the question, but the realization
that it had never  once occurred to him to ask it—certainly not
of Jamie, but not even of himself. Why not? he wondered. He
had no right to jealousy , and if h e was fool enough to suf fer it,
it w ould have b een considerably ex post facto  in the case of
Geneva Dunsany; he had had no inkling of W illiam’ s origins
until several years after the girl’ s death.
“I have no idea,” he said shortly .
Brianna’ s fingers drummed restlessly on his arm; she would
have pulled free, but he put a hand on hers to still her .
“Damn,” she muttered, but ceased fidgeting, and walked on,
matching the length of his shorter stride. W eeds had sprung up
in th e oval, were sprouting thro ugh the sand of the track. She
kicked at a clump of wild rye grass, sending a spray of dry
seeds flying.
“If they were in love, why didn ’ t he marry her?” she asked
at last.
He laughed, in sheer incredulity at the notion.
“Marry her! My dear girl, he was the family groom!”
A look of puzzlement flashed in her eye—he would have
sworn that if she had spoken, the word would have been
“So?”“Where in the name of God were you raised?” he
demanded, stopping dead.
He coul d see things moving in  her eyes; she had Jamie’ s
trick of keeping her face a mask, but her mother ’ s
transparency sti ll shone from within. He saw the decision in
her eyes, a moment before the slow smile touched her lips.
“Boston,” she said. “I’m an Am erican. But you knew I was
a barbarian already , didn’ t you?”
He grunted in response.
“That does go some distance toward explaining your
remarkably rep ublican attitud es,” he replied very dryly .
“Though I would strongly suggest that you disguise these
dangerous sentiments, for the sake of your family . Y our father
is in suf ficient tr ouble on his ow n account. However , you may
accept my assurance that it w ould not be possible for the
daughter of a baronet to marry a groom, no matter how exigent
the nature of their emotions.”
Her turn  to grunt at that; a h ighly expressive, if totally
unfeminine sound. He sighed, and took her hand again,
tucking it in the curve of his elbow for safekeeping.
“He was a paroled prisoner , too—a Jacobite, a traitor .
Believe me, marriage would not have occurred to either of
them.”
The damp air w as misting on he r skin, clinging to the down
hairs on her cheeks.
“But tha t was in another countr y ,”  she quoted softly . “And
besides, the wench is dead.”
“V ery true,” he said quietly .
They scuf fed silently through the damp sand for a few
moments, each alone in thought. At last Brianna heaved a sigh,
deep enough that he felt as well as heard it.
“W ell, s he’ s dead, anyway , and the earl—do you know why
Da killed him? Did he tell you that?”“Y our fa ther has  never spoken o f the matter—of Geneva, of
the e arl, or even  directly of W il liam’ s parentage—to me.” He
spoke precisely , eyes fixed on a pair of gulls probing the sand
near a clump of saw grass. “But I know , yes.”
He glanced at her .
“W illiam is my  s on , aft er all. In the sense of common usage,
at le ast.” In a great deal more than that, but that was not a
matter he chose to discuss with Jamie’ s daughter .
Her eyebrows rose.
“Y es. How did that happen?”
“As I told you, both of W illiam’ s parents—his putative
parents—died o n the day of his birth. His father—the earl, I
mean—had no close kin, so  the boy was left to the
guardianship of  his grandfather , Lord Dunsany . Geneva’ s
sister , Isobel, became W illiam’ s  mother in all but fact. And I
—” He shrugged, nonchalant. “I married Isobel. I became
W illiam’ s guardian, with Dunsany’ s consent, and he has
regarded me as h is stepfather since he was six years old—he is
my son.”
“Y ou? Y ou married ?” S he was goggling down at him, with
an air of incredulity that he found of fensive.
“Y ou have the most peculiar no tions concerning marriage,”
he said crossly . “It was an eminently suitable match.”
One red  eyebrow  went up in a g esture that was Jamie to the
life.
“Did your wife think so?” she a sked, in an uncanny echo of
her mother ’ s voice, asking the same question. When her
mother had asked it, he had been nonplussed. This time, he
was prepared.
“That,” he said tersely , “was in another country . And Isobel
…” As he had hoped, that silenced her .
A fi re w as burn ing at the far end of the sandy oval, where
travelers had made a rough camp. People come downriver to
see the execution, he wondered ? Men seeking to enlist in therebel mi litias? A figure moved, dimly seen through the haze of
smoke, and he turned, leading Brianna back along the way
they had  come. This conversati on was suf ficiently awkward,
without the risk of interruption.
“Y ou asked about Ellesmere,” h e said, taking control of the
conversation once more. “The story given to the coroner ’ s
court by Lord Dunsany was tha t Ellesmere had been showing
him a new pistol , which dischar ged by accident. It was the sort
of story that is told in order to be disbelieved—giving the
impression that in reality the earl had shot himself, doubtless
from gr ief at the death of his wife, but that the Dunsanys
wished t o avoid the stigma of su icide, for the sake of the child.
The coroner naturally perceived both the falsity of the story
and the wisdom of allowing it to stand.”
“That’ s not what I asked,” she said, a noticeable edge in her
voice. “I asked why my father shot him.”
He sighed. She could have found gainful employment with
the Spanish Inquisition, he thought ruefully; no chance of
escape or evasion.
“I u nderstand that his Lordship, apprehending that the
newborn infant was in fact n ot of his blood, intended to
expunge the stain upon his honor by dropping the child out of
the w indow , onto the slates in th e courtyard thirty feet below ,”
he said bluntly .
Her face had paled perceptibly .
“How d id he find out?” she demanded. “And if Da was a
groom, why was he there? Did the earl know he was—
responsible?” S he shuddered, plainly envisioning a scene in
which Jamie was summoned to the earl’ s presence, to witness
the d eath of his illegitimate of f spring before facing a similar
fate himself. John had no dif ficulty in discerning her
imagination; he had envisioned such a scene himself, more
than once.
“An acute choice of words,” he replied dryly . “Jamie Fraser
is ‘responsible’ for more than an y man I know . As to the rest, Ihave no idea. I know the essentials of what happened, because
Isobel k new; he r mother was pr esent and presumably told her
only the briefest outline of the incident.”
“Huh.” She kicked a small stone, deliberately . It skittered
across th e packe d sand in front of her , ending a few feet away .
“And you never asked Da about it?”
The stone lay in his line of march; he kicked it neatly as he
walked, rolling it back into her path.
“I have never spoken to your father regarding Geneva,
Ellesmere, or W illiam himself—save to inform him of my
marriage to Isobel and to assur e him that I would fulfill my
responsibilities as W illiam’ s guardian to the best of my
ability .”
She set her foot on the stone, driving it into the soft sand,
and stopped.
“Y ou ne ver said  anything  to him? What did he say to you?”
she demanded.
“Nothing.” He returned her stare.
“Why did you marry Isobel?”
He sighed, but there was no point in evasion.
“In order to take care of W illiam.”
The thick red brows nearly touched her hairline.
“So you got ma rried, in spite of—I mean, you turned your
whole life upside down, just t o take care of Jamie Fraser ’ s
illegitimate son? And neither one of you ever talked  about it?”
“No,” he said, baf fled. “Of course not.”
Slowly , the brows came down  again, and she shook her
head.
“Men,” she said cryptically . She glanced back toward the
town. The air w as calm, and a haze from the chimneys of
W ilmington lay  heavy above t he trees. No roofs showed; it
might ha ve been  a dragon that lay sleeping on the shore, for allthat could be see n. The low , rum bling noise was not a reptilian
snore, though; a small but const ant stream of people had been
passing by the track, headed for the town, and the
reverberations o f an increasing crowd were clearly audible,
whenever the wind was right.
“It’ s nea rly dark. I have to go back.” She turned toward the
lane that led into town, and he followed, relieved for the
moment, but under no illusion that the inquisition was over .
She had only one more question, though.
“When are you going to tell him?” she asked, turning to
look at him as she reached the edge of the trees.
“T ell who what?” he replied, startled.
“Him.”  Sh e frowned at him, irrita ted. “W illiam. My
brother .” The irritation faded as she tasted the word. She was
still pale, but a sort of excitement had begun to glow beneath
her skin . Lord John felt as thoug h he had eaten something that
violently disagreed with him. A cold sweat broke out along his
jaw , and his guts  clenched into fistlike knots. His knees turned
to water .
“Are you quite mad?” He grasped at her arm, as much to
keep from stumbling as to prevent her going of f.
“I ga ther he doesn’ t know who his father really is,” she said
with a bit of asp erity . “Given that you and Da never talked to
each oth er about it, you probab ly didn’ t see any point talking
to him,  eith er . But he’ s grown up now—he has a right to know ,
surely .”
Lord John closed his eyes with a low moan.
“Are you all right?” she asked. He felt her bending close to
inspect him. “Y ou don’ t look very good.”
“Sit.” He sat himself, back to a tree, and pulled her down
beside h im on the ground. He breathed deeply , keeping his
eyes clo sed while his mind raced. Surely she was joking?
Surely not, his cynically observant self assured him. She had amarked sense of humor , but it wasn’ t in evidence at the
moment.
She cou ldn’ t. H e couldn’ t let he r . It was inconceivable that
she—but how could he stop her ? If she wouldn’ t listen to him,
perhaps Jamie or her mother …
A hand touched his shoulder .
“I’m sorry ,” she said softly . “I didn’ t stop to think.”
Relief filled him. He felt his bo wels begin to uncramp, and
opened his eyes to see her gazin g at him with a peculiar sort of
limpid sympathy that he didn’ t understand at all. His bowels
promptly convulsed again, making him fear that he was about
to suf fer an embarrassing attack of flatulence on the spot.
His bowels had read her better than he had.
“I should have thought,” she reproached herself. “I should
have known how you’d feel ab out it. Y ou said it yourself—
he’ s your  son. Y ou’ve rai sed him all this time, I can see how
much yo u love him. It must ma ke you feel terrible to think of
W illiam finding out about Da an d maybe blaming you for not
telling him sooner .” Her hand w as massaging his collarbone in
what he assumed was meant to be a soothing gesture. If that
was her intent, the movement had singularly failed.
“But—” he began, but she had taken his hand in both hers
and was  squeezi ng it earnestly , h er blue eyes shimmering with
tears.
“He won’ t,” she assured him. “W illiam would never stop
loving you. Believe me. It was the same for me—when I found
out about Da. I didn’ t want to believe it at first; I had  a father ,
and I loved him,  and I didn’ t want another one. But then I met
Da, and it was —he was … who he is—” She shrugged
slightly , and lifted one hand to wipe her eyes on the lace at her
wrist.
“But I haven’ t for gotten my other father ,” she said very
softly . “I never will. Never .”T ouched despite the general seriousness of the situation,
Lord John cleared his throat.
“Y es. W ell. I am sure your sentiments do you great credit,
my dear . And while I hope that I likewise enjoy W illiam’ s
af fectionate reg ard at present and will continue to do so in
future, that is really not the point I was endeavoring to make.”
“It’ s not?” She looked up, wide-eyed, tears clumping her
lashes into dark spikes. She was really a lovely young woman,
and he felt a small twinge of tenderness.
“No,” he said, quite gently under the circumstances. “Look,
my love. I told you who W illiam is—or who he thinks he is.”
“V iscount Whatnot, you mean?”
He sighed deeply .
“Quite. The five people who k now of his true parentage
have expended considerable ef fort for the last eighteeen years,
to the end that no one—W illiam included—should ever have
cause to doubt that he is  the ninth Earl of Ellesmere.”
She looked down at that, her thick brows knitted, lips
compressed. Christ, he hoped that her husband had succeeded
in lo cating Jamie Fraser in tim e. Jamie Fraser was the only
person who had a hope of bei ng more ef fectually stubborn
than his daughter .
“Y ou don’ t understand,” she said  finally . She looked up, and
he saw that she had come to some decision.
“W e’re leaving,” she said abruptly . “Roger and I and the—
the children.”
“Oh?” he said cautiously . This might be good news—on
several counts. “Where do yo u propose to go? W ill you
remove to England? Or Scotland? If England or Canada, I
have several social connexions who might be of—”
“No. Not there. Not anywhere you have ‘connexions.’” She
smiled painfully at him, then swallowed before continuing.“But you see—we’ll be gone. For—for good. I won’ t—I
don’ t think I’ll ever see you ag ain.” That realization had just
dawned on her; he saw it on her face, and despite the strength
of th e pa ng it gave him, he was  deeply moved by her obvious
distress at the thought.
“I w ill miss you  very much, Brianna,” he said gently . He
had bee n a soldier most of his life, and then a diplomat. He
had learned to live with separation and absence, with the
occasional death of friends left b ehind. But the notion of never
seeing this odd girl again caused him a most unexpected
degree of grief. Almost, he thought with surprise, as though
she were his own daughter .
But he had a so n, as well, and her next words snapped him
back to full alertness.
“So you see,” she said, lean ing toward him with an
intentness that he would otherwise have found charming, “I
have to talk to W illiam, and tell him. W e’ll never have another
chance.” Then her face changed, and she put a hand to her
bosom.
“I have to go,” she said abruptly . “Mandy—Amanda, my
daughter—she needs to be fed.”
And wit h that, she was up and gone, scudding across the
sand of the race track like a stor m cloud, leaving the threat of
destruction and upheaval in her wake.1 1 7
SUREL Y JUSTICE AND MERCY
 SHALL FOLLOW ME
July 10, 1776
T HE TIDE TURNED FROM THE EBB just before five
o’clock in the morning. The sk y was fully light, a clear pale
color without clouds, and the mudflats beyond the quay
stretched gray and shining, their smoothness marred here and
there by  weed and stubborn sea grass, sprouting from the mud
like clumps of hair .
Everyone rose with the dawn; there were plenty of people
on t he quay to see the small procession go out, two of ficers
from the  W ilmington Committee of Safety , a representative
from the Merchants Association, a minister carrying a Bible,
and the prisoner , a tall, wide-shouldered figure, walking bare-
headed across the stinking mud.  Behind them all came a slave,
carrying the ropes.
“I do n’ t want to  watch this,” Brianna said under her breath.
She was  very pale, her arms folded over her middle as though
she had a stomachache.
“Let’ s go, then.” Roger took her arm, but she pulled back.
“No. I have to.”
She dropped her arms and stood straight, watching. People
around them were jostling fo r a better view , jeering and
catcalling so loudly that whatever was said out there was
inaudible. It didn’ t take long. T he slave, a big man, grabbed
the m ooring post and shook it, testing for steadfastness. Then
stood ba ck, whi le the two of fice rs backed Stephen Bonnet up
to the stake and  wrapped his b ody with rope from chest to
knees. The bastard wasn’ t going anywhere.Roger thought he should be searching his heart for
compassion, praying for the man. He couldn’ t. T ried to ask
for giveness, and couldn’ t do that, either . Something like a ball
of worm s churned in his belly . He felt as though he were
himself tied to a stake, waiting to drown.
The black-coated minister leaned close, his hair whipping in
the early morning breeze, mouth moving. Roger didn’ t think
that Bon net mad e any reply , bu t couldn’ t tell for sure. After a
few moments, the men dof fed their hats, stood while the
minister prayed , then put them  on again and headed back
toward shore, their boots squelching, ankle-deep in the sandy
mud.
The moment the of ficials had disappeared, a stream of
people poured out onto the mud: sightseers, hopping children
—and a  man with a notebook and pencil, who Roger
recognized as Amos Crupp, the current proprietor of the
W ilmington Gazette.
“W ell, t hat’ll be a scoop, won’ t it?” Roger muttered. No
matter what Bonnet actually s aid—or didn’ t—there would
undoubtedly be a broadsheet hawked through the streets
tomorrow , containing either a lurid confession or mawkish
reports of remorse—perhaps both.
“Okay , I r eally  can’ t watch this.” Abruptly , Brianna turned,
taking his arm.
She made it past the row of warehouses before turning
abruptly to him, burying her fac e in his chest and bursting into
tears.
“Ssh. It’ s okay—it’ s going to b e all right.” He patted her ,
tried to infuse s ome conviction into the words, but his own
throat had a lum p in it the size o f a lemon. He finally took her
by the shoulders and held her away from him, so that he could
look into her eyes.
“Y e don’ t have to do it,” he said.
She stop ped crying and snif fed, wiping her nose on her
sleeve like Jemmy—but wouldn’ t meet his eyes.“It’ s—I’m okay It’ s not even him.  I t’ s just —just e verything.
M-Mandy”—her voice wavered on the word—”and meeting
my brother—Oh , Roger , if I can’ t tell him, he’ll never know ,
and I’ll never se e him or Lord John again. Or Mama—” Fresh
tears overwhelmed her , welling up in her eyes, but she gulped
and swallowed, forcing them back.
“It’ s not him,” she said in a choked, exhausted voice.
“Maybe it’ s not,” he said softly . “But ye still don’ t have to
do it .” His stom ach still churned, and his hands felt shaky , but
resolution filled him.
“I shoul d have killed him on O cracoke,” she said, closing
her eyes and bru shing back strands of loosened hair . The sun
was higher now , and bright. “I was a coward. I th-thought it
would b e easier to let—let the la w do it.” She opened her eyes,
and now did meet his gaze, her eyes reddened but clear . “I
can’ t let it happen this way , even if I hadn’ t given my word.”
Roger understoo d that; he felt the terror of the tide coming
in, that inexorable creep of water , rising in his bones. It would
be nearl y nine hours before the water reached Bonnet’ s chin;
he was a tall man.
“I’ll do it,” he said very firmly .
She made a small attempt at a smile, but abandoned it.
“No,” she said. “Y ou won’ t.” S he looked—and sounded—
absolutely drained; neither of them had slept much the night
before. But she also sounded determined, and he recognized
Jamie Fraser ’ s stubborn blood.
W ell, what the hell—he had some of that blood, too.
“I told ye,” he s aid. “What your father said, that time. ‘It is
myself who kills for her .’  If it has to be done”—and he was
obliged to agree with her; he couldn’ t stand it, either—”then
I’ll do it.”
She was  getting a grip on hersel f. She wiped her face with a
fold of her skir t, and took a deep breath before meeting hiseyes aga in. Hers were deep and  vivid blue, much darker than
the sky .
“Y ou told me. A nd you told me why he said that, too—what
he said to Arch Bug: ‘Ther e is a vow upon her .’  She ’ s a doctor;
she doesn’ t kill people.”
The hell she doesn’ t,  Ro ger thought, but better judgment
prevented his saying so. Before he could think of something
more tactful, she went on, placing her hands flat on his chest.
“Y ou have one, too,” she said. That stopped him cold.
“No, I haven’ t.”
“Oh, ye s, you do.” She was quietly emphatic. “Maybe it
isn’ t of ficial yet—but it doesn’ t need to be. Maybe it doesn’ t
even hav e words , the vow that you took—but you did it, and I
know it.”
He couldn’ t deny it, and was moved that she did  know it.
“A ye, well …” He put his han ds over hers, clasping her
long, strong fingers. “And I made one to you, too, when I told
ye. I said I would never put God before my—my love for
you.” Lo ve. He couldn’ t believe that he was discussing such a
thing in  terms of love. And yet, he had the queerest feeling
that that was exactly how she saw it.
“I don’ t have th at sort of vow ,”  she said firmly , and pulled
her hands out of his. “And I gave my word.”
She had gone with Jamie after dark the night before, to the
place wh ere the pirate was being held. Roger had no idea what
sort of bribery o r force of personality had been employed, but
they had been admitted. Jamie had brought her back to their
room very late, white-faced, w ith a sheaf of papers that she
handed over to her father . Af fidavits, she said; sworn
statements of Stephen Bonnet’ s business dealings with various
merchants up and down the coast.
Roger had given Jamie a murde rous look, and got the same
back, w ith inter est. This is war ,  Fraser ’ s narrowed eyes had
said. And I will use an y weapon I can .  But  all he had said was,“Good night, then, a nighean, ” an d touched her hair with
tenderness before departing.
Brianna had sat down with M andy and nursed her , eyes
closed, refusing to speak. After a time, her face eased from its
white, strained lines, and she burped the baby and laid her
sleeping in her basket. Then sh e came to bed, and made love
to him with a silent fierceness that surprised him. But not as
much as she surprised him now .
“And there’ s one other thing,” she said, sober and slightly
sad. “I’m  the only person in the world for whom this isn’ t
murder .”
W ith that, she tu rned and walked away fast, toward the inn
where Mandy waited to be fed. Out on the mudflats, he could
still hear the sound of excited voices, raucous as gulls.
A T TWO O’CLOCK in the afternoon, Roger helped his wife
into a small ro wboat, tied to the quay near the row of
warehouses. The tide had been coming in all day; the water
was mor e than five feet deep. O ut in the midst of the shining
gray stood the c luster of mooring posts—and the small dark
head of the pirate.
Brianna was remote as a pagan statue, her face
expressionless. S he lifted her skirts to step into the boat, and
sat dow n, the weight in her pocket clunking against the
wooden slat as she did so.
Roger took up the oars and rowed, heading toward the
posts. They would arouse no particular interest; boats had been
going out ever s ince noon, carrying sightseers who wished to
look upon the condemned man’ s face, shout taunts, or clip a
strand of his hair for a souvenir .
He couldn’ t see where he was g oing; Brianna directed him
left or right with  a silent tilt of h er head. She could see; she sat
straight and tall, her right hand hidden in her skirt.
Then she lifted her left hand suddenly , and Roger lay on the
oars, digging with one to slew the tiny craft around.Bonnet’ s lips were cracked, his face chapped and crusted
with sal t, his lids so reddened that he could barely open his
eyes. But his head lifted as they drew near , and Roger saw a
man ravished, helpless and dreading a coming embrace—so
much that he half welcomes its  seductive touch, yielding his
flesh to cold fin gers and the ove rwhelming kiss that steals his
breath.
“Y e’ve l eft it late enough, darli n’,” he said to Brianna, and
the c racked lips parted in a grin  that split them and left blood
on his teeth. “I knew ye’d come, though.”
Roger paddled with one oar , working the boat close, then
closer . He was looking over his shoulder when Brianna drew
the gilt-handled pistol from her pocket, and put the barrel to
Stephen Bonnet’ s ear .
“Go with God, Stephen,” she said clearly , in Gaelic, and
pulled th e trigger . Then she dropped the gun into the water and
turned round to face her husband.
“T ake us home,” she said.1 1 8
REGRET
L ORD JOHN STEPPED INT O HIS ROOM at the inn, and
was surprised—astonished, in fact—to discover that he had a
visitor .
“John.” Jamie Fraser turned from  the window , and gave him
a small smile.
“Jamie.” He returned it, trying to control the sudden sense
of elatio n he felt. He had used Jamie Fraser ’ s Christian name
perhaps three times in the last t wenty-five years; the intimacy
of it was exhilarating, but he mustn’ t let it show .
“W ill I order us  refreshment?” he asked politely . Jamie had
not moved from the window; he glanced out, then back at John
and shook his head, still smiling faintly .
“I thank ye, no. W e are enemies, are we not?”
“W e find ourselves regrettably upon opposing sides of what
I trust will be a short-lived conflict,” Lord John corrected.
Fraser looked down at him, with an odd, regretful sort of
expression.
“Not short,” he said. “But regrettable, aye.”
“Indeed.” Lord John cleared hi s throat, and moved to the
window , careful not to brush aga inst his visitor . He looked out,
and saw the likely reason for Fraser ’ s visit.
“Ah,” he said, seeing Brianna Fraser MacKenzie on the
wooden sidewalk below . “Oh!” he said, in a dif ferent tone. For
W illiam Claren ce Henry Geor ge Ransom, ninth Earl of
Ellesmere, had just come out of the inn and bowed to her .
“Sweet Jesus,” he said, apprehension making his scalp
prickle. “W ill she tell him?”Fraser shook his head, his eye s on the two young people
below .
“She will not,” he said quietly . “She gave me her word.”
Relief coursed through his veins like water .
“Thank you,” he said. Fraser sh rugged slightly , dismissing
it. It  wa s, after all, what he desi red, as well—or so Lord John
assumed.
The two  of them were talking together—W illiam said
something and Brianna laughed, throwing back her hair . Jamie
watched in fascination. Dear God, they were alike! The small
tricks o f expression, of posture, of gesture … It must be
apparent to the m ost casual observer . In fact, he saw a couple
pass them and the woman smile, pleased at the sight of the
handsome matched pair .
“She will not tell him,” Lord John repeated, somewhat
dismayed by the sight. “But she  displays herself to him. W ill
he not—but no. I don’ t suppose he will.”
“I hope not,” Jamie said, eyes still fixed on them. “But if he
does—he still will not know .  A nd she insisted she must see
him once more—that was the price of her silence.”
John no dded, silent. Brianna’ s husband was coming now ,
their little boy held by one h and, his hair as vivid as his
mother ’ s in the bright summer sun. He held a baby in the
crook of  his arm—Brianna took it from him, turning back the
blanket to display the child to W illiam, who inspected it with
every indication of politeness.
He realized suddenly that every fragment of Fraser ’ s being
was focused on the scene outsid e. Of course; he had not seen
W illie since the boy was twelve. And to see the two together—
his daughter and the son he could never speak to or
acknowledge. He would have touched Fraser , put a hand on
his arm in symp athy , but knowing the probable ef fect of his
touch, forbore to do it.
“I have come,”  Fraser said su ddenly , “to ask a favor of
you.”“I am your serv ant, sir ,” Lord John said, terribly pleased,
but taking refuge in formality .
“Not fo r myself,” Fraser said with a glance at him. “For
Brianna.”
“My pleasure will be the greate r ,” John assured him. “I am
exceeding fond of your daughter , her temperamental
resemblances to her sire notwithstanding.”
The corner of Fraser ’ s mouth lifted, and he returned his
gaze to the scene below .
“Indeed,” he said. “W ell, then. I canna tell ye why I require
this—but I need a jewel.”
“A jewel?” Lord John’ s voice sounded blank, even to his
own ears. “What sort of jewel?”
“Any so rt.” Fras er shrugged, impatient. “It doesna matter—
so long as it sh ould be some p recious gem. I once gave ye
such a stone—” His mouth twitched at that; he had handed
over the stone, a sapphire, und er duress, as a prisoner of the
Crown. “Though I dinna suppose ye’d have that by ye, still.”
In po int of fact, he did. That particular sapphire had traveled
with him for the last twenty-five years, and was at this
moment in the pocket of his waistcoat.
He g lanced at his left hand, which bore a broad gold band,
set with  a brilliant, faceted sapphire. Hector ’ s ring. Given to
him by his first lover at the age of sixteen. Hector had died at
Culloden—the day after John had met James Fraser , in the
dark of a Scottish mountain pass.
W ithout hesitati on, but with so me dif ficulty—the ring had
been worn a lon g time, and had sunk a little way into the flesh
of h is finger—he twisted it of f and dropped it into Jamie’ s
hand.
Fraser ’ s brows rose in astonishment.
“This? Are ye sur—”“T ake it .” He reached out then, and closed Jamie’ s fingers
around it with his own. The contact was fleeting, but his hand
tingled, and he closed his ow n fist, hoping to keep the
sensation.
“Thank you,” Jamie said again, quietly .
“It is—my very great pleasure.” The party below was
breaking up—Brianna was taking her leave, the baby held in
her arms, her husband and son already halfway down the walk.
W illiam bowed, hat of f, the s hape of his chestnut head so
perfectly echoing that of the red—
Suddenly , Lord John could not  bear to see them part. He
wished to keep that, too—the sight of them together . He closed
his eyes  and stood, hands on the sill, feeling the movement of
the breeze past h is face. Something touched his shoulder , very
briefly , and he felt a sense of movement in the air beside him.
When h e opened his eyes aga in, all three of them were
gone.1 1 9
LOTH T O DEP AR T
September 1776
R OGER W AS LA YING THE LAST OF the water pipes
when A idan and Jemmy popped up beside him, sudden as a
pair of jack-in-the-boxes.
“Daddy , Daddy , Bobby’ s here!”
“What, Bobby Higgins?” Roger straightened up, feeling his
back mu scles pr otest, and looked toward the Big House, but
saw no sign of a horse. “Where is he?”
“He went up to the graveyard,” Aidan said, looking
important. “D’ye think he’ s gone to look for the ghost?”
“I doubt it,” Roger said calmly . “What ghost?”
“Malva Christi e’ s,” Aidan said promptly . “She walks.
Everybody says  so.” He spoke bravely , but wrapped his arms
about himself. Jemmy , who plainly hadn’ t heard that bit of
news before, looked wide-eyed.
“Why does she walk? Where’ s she going?”
“Because she was murrrrderrred, silly ,” Aidan said. “Folk
what are murdered always walk. They’re lookin’ for the one
who killed them.”
“Nonsense,” Roger said firmly , seeing the uneasy look on
Jemmy’ s face. Jem had known  Malva Christie was dead, of
course; he’d gone to her fune ral, along with all the other
children on the R idge. But he an d Brianna had simply told the
boy that Malva had died, not that she had been murdered.
W ell, R oger thought grimly , little hope of keeping
something like that secret. He hoped Jem wouldn’ t have
nightmares.“Malva’ s not walking about looking for anyone,” he said,
with as much c onviction as he could infuse into his voice.
“Her so ul is in heaven with Jesus, where she’ s happy and
peaceful—and h er body … well, when people die, they don’ t
need the ir bodies anymore, and so we bury them, and there
they stay , all tidy in their graves, until the Last Day .”
Aidan looked patently unconvinced by this.
“Joey McLaughlin saw her , two weeks ago Friday ,” he said,
bobbing up and down on his  toes. “A-flittin’ through the
wood, he said, all dressed in black—and howlin’ most
mournful!”
Jemmy was beginning to look t ruly upset. Roger laid down
the spade, and picked Jem up in his arms.
“I ex pect Joey M cLaughlin was a bit the worse for a dram
too much,” he said. Both boys were entirely familiar with the
concept of drunkenness. “If it was flitting through the wood
howling, it was most likely Ro llo he saw . Come on, though,
we’ll go find Bobby , and y e’ll see Malva’ s grave for
yourselves.”
He put out a hand to Aidan, who took it happily and
chattered like a magpie all the way up the hill.
And wh at was Aidan going to do, when he left? he
wondered. The idea of leaving, at first so abrupt as to seem
completely unreal, unthinkable, had been filtering into his
consciousness, day by day . As he worked at the chores, dug
the trenches for Brianna’ s water pipes, carried hay , chopped
wood, he would try to think: “ Not much longer .” And yet it
seemed impossible that one day he would not be on the Ridge,
would not push open the door to the cabin and find Brianna
involved in some fiendish experiment on the kitchen table,
Jem and Aidan madly vrooming around her feet.
The feeling of unreality was even more pronounced when
he preac hed of a Sunday or went round as minister—if yet
without portfolio—to visit the sick or counsel the troubled.
Looking into all those faces—a ttentive, excited, bored, dour ,or preoccupied—he simply couldn’ t believe that he meant to
go, callously to abandon them all. How would he tell them? he
wondered, with a sort of anguish at the thought. Especially the
ones he felt most responsible for—Aidan and his mother .
He’d prayed about it, looking for strength, for guidance.
And yet … an d yet the vision of Amanda’ s tiny blue
fingernails, the faint wheeze of her breathing, never left him.
And the looming stones by the creek on Ocracoke seemed to
grow nearer , more solid, day by day .
Bobby Higgins was indeed in the graveyard, his horse
tethered under the pines. He w as sitting by Malva’ s grave,
head bowed in contemplation, though he looked up at once
when Roger and the boys ap peared. He looked pale and
somber , but scrambled to his feet and shook Roger ’ s hand.
“I’m gla d to see ye back, Bobby . Here, you lot go and play ,
aye?” He set Je mmy down, and was pleased to see that after
one suspicious glance at Malva’ s grave—adorned with a
wilted bunch of wildflowers—Jemmy went of f quite happily
with Aidan to hunt for squirrels and chipmunks in the wood.
“I—er—wasn’ t expecting to see you again,” he added a
little aw kwardly . Bobby looked down, slowly dusting pine
needles from his breeches.
“W ell, z ur … the fact of the matter is, I’ve come to stay . If
so be as that’ s agreeable,” he added hastily .
“T o stay? But—of course it’ s fine,” Roger said, recovering
from his surprise. “Have you—that is—you’ve not had a
falling-out with his Lordship, I hope?”
Bobby looked astonished at the thought, and shook his head
decidedly .
“Oh, no, zur! H is Lordship’ s been proper kind to me, ever
since he took m e on.” He hesitated, biting his lower lip. “It’ s
only—well, ye see, zur , there’ s a deal of folk what come to
stay with his Lordship these days. Politicals, and—and army
folk.”Despite himself, he touched the brand on his cheek, which
had fade d now to a pinkish scar but was still apparent—and
always would be. Roger understood.
“Y ou weren’ t comfortable there any longer , I suppose?”
“That’ s it, zur .” Bobby gave him  a grateful look. “T ime was,
‘twas just his Lordship and me and Manoke the cook.
Sometimes a guest would come for dinner or to stay a few
days, bu t ‘twas all easy and wha t ye might call simple. When I
went fo r to run messages or errands for his Lordship, folk
would stare, but only for the first time or two; after that, they’d
be u sed to this” —he touched his face again—”and it was all
right. But now …” He trailed of f unhappily , leaving Roger to
imagine the probable response of British army of ficers,
starched, polished, and either openly disapproving of this blot
on the service—or painfully polite.
“His Lordship saw the dif ficulty; he’ s good that way . And
he said as how he would miss me, but if I chose to seek my
fortune elsewhere, he would give me ten pounds and his best
wishes.”
Roger whistled  respectfully . T en pounds was a very
respectable sum . Not a fortune, but quite enough to set Bobby
on his road.
“V ery nice,” he said. “Did he  know ye meant to come
here?”
Bobby shook his head.
“I wasn’ t sure m yself,” he admitted. “Once, I should—” He
cut hims elf of f abruptly , with a glance at Malva’ s grave, then
turned back to Roger , clearing his throat.
“I th ought I best talk to Mr . Fraser , before I was to make up
my mind. Could be there’ s na ught for me here any longer ,
either .” This was phrased as a s tatement, but the question was
clear . Everyone on the Ridge kn ew Bobby and accepted him;
that wasn’ t the dif ficulty . But with Lizzie married and Malva
gone … Bobby wanted a wife.“Oh … I think y e might find you rself welcome,” Roger said
with a thoughtfu l look at Aidan , hanging upside down by his
knees from a tree branch, while  Jemmy pegged pinecones at
him. A most peculiar feeling w ent through him—something
between gratitude and jealousy—but he pushed the latter
feeling firmly down.
“Aidan!” he shouted. “Jem! T ime to go!” And turned
casually back to Bobby , saying,  “I think ye’ll maybe not have
met Aidan’ s mother , Amy McCallum—a young widow , aye,
with a house an d a bit of land. S he’ s come to work at the Big
House; if ye’ll come sit down to supper there …”
“I’VE THOUGHT OF IT now and then,” Jamie admitted.
“W ondered, ye ken? What if I could? How would it be?”
He glan ced at Brianna, smiling, but a little helpless, and
shrugged.
“What d’ye think, lass? What sh ould I do there? How would
it be?”
“W ell, it—” she began, and stop ped, trying to envision him
in th at world—behind the wheel of a car? Going to an of fice,
in a three-piece suit? That idea was so ludicrous, she laughed.
Or s itting in a darkened theater ,  watching Godzilla films with
Jem and Roger?
“What’ s Jamie spelled backward?” she asked.
“Eimaj, I suppose,” he replied, bewildered. “Why?”
“I think you’d do fine,” she s aid, smiling. “Never mind.
Y ou’d—well, I suppose you could … publish newspapers. The
printing presses are bigger and faster , and it takes a lot more
people to gather the news, but otherwise—I don’ t think it’ s so
dif ferent then from what it is now . Y ou know how to do that.”
He nodded, a crease of concentration forming between the
thick brows that were so like hers.
“I s uppose so,” he said a little  dubiously . “Could I be a
farmer , d’ye think? Surely folk  still eat; someone must feedthem.”
“Y ou co uld.” She looked round, taking fresh note of all the
homely details of the place: the chickens scratching peaceably
in the dirt; the soft, weathered boards of the stable; the thrown-
up dirt near the  foundation of t he house where the white pig
had burrowed in. “There are people then who still farm just
this way; small places, way up in the mountains. It’ s a hard life
—” She  saw him smile, and lau ghed in return. “All right, it’ s
not any harder than it is now —but it’ s a lot easier in the
cities.”
She paused, thinking.
“Y ou wouldn’ t have to fight,” she said finally .
He seemed surprised at that.
“No? But ye did say there are wars.”
“There c ertainly are,” she said, needles of ice piercing her
belly , as the ima ges pierced her mind: fields of poppies, fields
of white crosses—a man on fire, a naked child running with
burned s kin, the  contorted face of a man in the instant before
the b ullet entered his brain. “Bu t—but then it’ s only the young
men who fight. And not all of them; only some.”
“Mmphm.” He thought for a bit, his brow furrowed, then
looked up searching her face.
“This w orld of yours, this America,” he said finally , matter -
of-factly . “The freedom that ye go to. There will be a fearful
price to be paid. W ill it be worth it, do ye think?”
It wa s he r turn then to be silent and think. At last she put her
hand on his arm—solid, warm, steady as iron.
“Almost nothin g would be worth losing you,” she
whispered. “But maybe that comes close.”
AS THE WORLD turns toward winter and the nights grow
long, pe ople beg in to wake in the dark. L ying in bed too long
cramps t he limbs, and dreams d reamt too long turn inward on
themselves, grotesque as a Mandarin’ s fingernails. By andlar ge, th e human body isn’ t ad apted for more than seven or
eight hours’ sleep—but what happens when the nights are
longer than that?
What happens is the second s leep. Y ou fall asleep from
tiredness, soon after dark—but then wake again, rising toward
the s urface of yo ur dreams like a  trout coming up to feed. And
should your sleeping partner also wake then—and people who
have sle pt together for a good many years know at once when
each oth er wakes—you have a small, private place to share,
deep in the night. A place in which to rise, to stretch, to bring a
juicy ap ple back to bed, to share slice by slice, fingers
brushing lips. T o have the luxury of conversation,
uninterrupted by  the business of the day . T o make love slowly
in the light of an autumn moon.
And the n, to lie close, and let a lover ’ s dreams caress your
skin as you begin to sink once more beneath the waves of
consciousness, b lissful in the kn owledge that dawn is far of f—
that’ s second sleep.
I came very slowly to the surface of my first sleep, to find
that the highly e rotic dream I had been having had some basis
in reality .
“I’d never thought myself the s ort who’d molest a corpse,
Sassenach.” Jamie’ s voice tickled the tender flesh below my
ear , mur muring. “But I will sa y the notion has more appeal
than I’d thought.”
I wa sn’ t suf ficiently coherent as to respond to this, but
thrust m y hips back toward him in a fashion that he seemed to
find as eloquent an invitation as  one written in calligraphy on
parchment. He took a deep brea th, a firm grip on my buttocks,
and brou ght me to an awakening that could be called rude in
several senses of the word.
I s quirmed like a worm impal ed on a fish-hook, making
small ur gent noises that he interpreted correctly , rolling me
onto my  face and proceeding to leave me in no doubt that I
was not merely alive and awake, but functioning.I emer ged at length from a nest of flattened pillows, damp,
gasping, quiver ing in every e ngor ged and slippery nerve-
ending, and thoroughly awake.
“What brought that on?” I inqui red. He hadn’ t pulled away;
we lay still joined, washed in t he light of a big golden half-
moon, riding low in the sky above the chestnut trees. He made
a small sound, partly amusement, partly dismay .
“I c anna look a t ye asleep without wanting to wake ye,
Sassenach.” His hand cupped my breast, gently now . “I
suppose I find myself lonely without ye.”
There w as an odd note in his voice, and I turned my head
toward him, but couldn’ t see him in the dark behind me.
Instead, I put back a hand and touched the leg still wrapped
halfway over mine. Even relaxe d, it was hard, the long groove
of the muscle graceful under my fingers.
“I’m he re,” I said, and his arm  tightened suddenly round
me.
I HE ARD THE BREA TH catc h in his throat, and my hand
tightened on his thigh.
“What is it?” I said.
He d rew breath, but didn’ t answ er at once. I felt him draw
back a little, and fumble under the pillow . Then his hand came
round m e again,  but this time seeking the hand that lay on his
leg. His  fingers curled into m ine, and I felt a small, hard,
roundish object thrust into my hand.
I heard him swallow .
The ston e, whatever it was, seemed slightly warm to the
touch. I ran a th umb slowly over it; a raw stone of some kind,
but big, the size of one of my finger -joints.
“Jamie …” I said, feeling my throat close.
“I love you,” he said, so softly that I barely heard him, close
as we were.I lay still for a moment, feeling  the stone grow warmer in
the palm of my  hand. Surely it  was imagination that made it
seem to throb in time with my heart. Where on earth had he
gotten it?
Then I moved—not suddenly , but with deliberation, my
body sli ding slo wly free of his . I rose, feeling light-headed,
and crossed the room. Pushed open the window to feel the
sharp to uch of the autumn wind  on my naked bed-warm skin,
and drawing back my arm, hurled the tiny object into the
night.
Then I came ba ck to bed, saw his hair a dark mass on the
pillow , and the shine of his eyes in the moonlight.
“I love you,” I whispered, and slid under the sheet beside
him, putting my arms around hi m, hugging him close, warmer
than the stone—so much warmer—and his heart beat with
mine.
“I’m none so b rave as I was before, ken?” he said very
softly . “Not brave enough to live without ye anymore.”
But brave enough to try .
I dre w h is head down to me, str oking the tumble of his hair ,
coarse and smooth at once, live beneath my fingers.
“Lay your head, man,” I said softly . “It’ s a long time ‘til
dawn.”1 2 0
IF ONL Y FOR MYSELF
T HE SKY W AS A FLA T , LEADEN COLOR, threatening
rain, and  the wind gusted through the palmettos, rattling the
leaves like sabers. Down in the depths of the tidal forest, the
four stones loomed beside the creek.
“I am  the wife of the laird of Balnain,” Brianna whispered,
next to me. “Th e faeries have stolen me over again.” She was
white to the lips, Amanda clutched close to her breast.
W e had made ou r farewells—we had been saying farewell, I
thought, since the day I presse d the stethoscope to Mandy’ s
heart. But Brianna turned and flung herself—baby and all—at
Jamie, who pressed her so tight against his heart, I thought one
of them must break.
Then sh e was flying at me, a c loud of cloak and loosened
hair , and her face was cold against mine, her tears and mine
mingling on my skin.
“I lo ve you, Ma ma! I love you!” she said in desperation,
then turned and, without looking back, began to walk the
pattern Donner had described, quietly chanting under her
breath. A  circle right, between two stones, a circle left, and
back thr ough the center—and then to the left of the lar gest
stone.
I had  been expecting it; when she began to walk the pattern,
I ha d ru n away from the stones, stopping at what I thought a
safe distance. It wasn’ t. The sou nd of them—a roar , this time,
instead of a shriek—thundere d through me, stopping my
breath and nearly my heart. Pa in froze in a band round my
chest and I dropped to my knees, swaying and helpless.
They we re gone. I could see Jamie and Roger running to
check—terrified of finding bodies, at once desolate and elated
to find none. I couldn’ t see well—my vision swam, flickeringin and out—but didn’ t need to. I knew they were gone, from
the hole in my heart.
“TWO DOWN,” Roger whispered. His voice was no more
than a faint rasp, and he cleared his throat, hard. “Jeremiah.”
He look ed down at Jem, who blinked and snif fed, and drew
himself up tall at the sound of his formal name.
“Y e ken what we’re about now , aye?” Jemmy nodded,
though h e flicke d a scared glan ce toward the towering stone
where his mother and his baby sister had just vanished. He
swallowed hard, and wiped the tears of f his cheeks.
“W ell, th en.” Roger reached out a hand and rested it gently
on Jemm y’ s head. “Know this, mo mac —I shall love ye  all my
life, and never for get ye. But this is a terrible thing we’re
doing, and ye need not come with me. Y e can stay with your
grandda and grannie Claire; it will be all right.”
“W on’ t I—won’ t I see Mama again?” Jemmy’ s eyes were
huge, and he couldn’ t keep from looking at the stone.
“I don’ t know ,” Roger said, and I could see the tears he was
fighting himself, and hear them in his thickened voice. He
didn’ t kn ow whe ther he would e ver see Brianna again himself,
or baby Mandy . “Probably … probably not.”
Jamie lo oked down at Jem, wh o was clinging to his hand,
looking back and forth betw een father and grandfather ,
confusion, fright, and longing in his face.
“If one day , a bhailach, ” Jamie said conversationally , “ye
should meet a verra lar ge mouse named Michael—ye’ll tell
him your grandsire sends his r egards.” He opened his hand,
then, letting go, and nodded toward Roger .
Jem stood staring for a momen t, then dug in his feet and
sprinted toward Roger , sand spurting from under his shoes. He
leaped into his father ’ s arms, c lutching him around the neck,
and with a final  glance backward, Roger turned and stepped
behind the stone, and the inside of my head exploded in fire.Unimaginable time later , I came slowly back, coming down
from the clouds in fragments, like hailstones. And found
myself lying with my head in Jamie’ s lap. And heard him
saying s oftly , to himself or to  me, “For your sake, I will
continue—though for mine alone … I would not.”1 2 1
ACROSS THE ABYSS
T HREE NIGHTS LA TER, I WOKE FROM a restless sleep in
an inn in W ilmi ngton, my throat parched as the salt bacon I
had eate n in the dinner stew . Si tting up to find water , I found
that I was alone—the moonlight through the window shone
white on the vacant pillow beside me.
I found Jamie outside, behind the inn, his nightshirt a pale
blotch in the darkness of the innyard. He was sitting on the
ground with his back against a chopping block, arms wrapped
about his knees.
He d idn’ t speak as I came towa rd him, but turned his head,
body shifting in a silent welcome. I sat down on the chopping
block behind him, and he lean ed his head back against my
thigh, with a long, deep sigh.
“Couldn’ t sleep?” I touched him gently , smoothing back the
hair from his face. He slept with it unbound, and it fell thick
and wild about his shoulders, tangled from bed.
“Nay , I slept,” h e said quietly . H is eyes were open, looking
up at the great g old moon, three-quarters full over the aspens
near the inn. “I had a dream.”
“A nightmare?” He had them se ldom anymore, but they did
come sometimes: the bloody memories of Culloden, of futile
death and slaughter; prison dreams of hunger and confinement
—and so metimes, very rarely , Jack Randall returned to him in
sleep, with loving cruelty . Such dreams would always drive
him from  his bed to walk to and fro for hours, until exhaustion
cleansed him of their visions. But he had not dreamed that way
since Moore’ s Creek Bridge.
“No,” he said, sounding half-surprised. “Not at all. I
dreamed of her—of our lassie—and the bairns.”My heart gave an odd little hop, the consequence of
startlement and what might almost have been envy .
“Y ou dreamed about Brianna and the children? What
happened?”
He smiled, face tranquil and abstracted in the moonlight, as
though he still saw some part of the dream before him.
“It i s all right,” he said. “They are safe. I saw them in a
town—it seemed like Inverness, but it was dif ferent, somehow .
They walked up the step of a house—Roger Mac was with
them,” h e added, of fhand. “They knocked at the door , and a
wee brown-haired woman opened to them. She laughed wi’
joy to see them, and brought th em in, and they went down a
hallway , wi’ strange things like bowls hanging from the
ceiling.
“Then th ey were in a room, wi’ sofas and chairs, and the
room had great windows all dow n one wall, from the floor to
the ceiling, and the afternoon sun was streaming in, setting
Brianna’ s hair to fire, and makin’ wee Mandy cry when it got
in her eyes.”
“Did … did any of them call the brown-haired woman by
name?” I asked, my heart beating in a queer , fast way .
He frowned, moonlight making a cross of light over nose
and brows.
“A ye, they did,” he said. “I canna just—oh, aye; Roger Mac
called her Fiona.”
“Did he?” I said. My hands rested on his shoulder , and my
mouth w as a hundred times drier than it had been when I woke
up. The night w as chilly , but n ot enough to account for the
temperature of my hands.
I had told Jamie any amount of things about my own time
over the years of our marriage. About trains and planes and
automobiles and  wars and indoor plumbing. But I was nearly
sure that  I had n ever told him what the study looked like in the
manse where Roger had grown up with his adoptive father .The room  with the window wall, made to accommodate the
Reverend’ s painting hobby . The manse with its long hallway ,
furnished with old-fashioned light fixtures, shaped like
hanging bowls. And I knew I had never told him about the
Reverend’ s last housekeeper , a girl with dark, curly hair , called
Fiona.
“W ere they happy?” I asked at last, very quietly .
“A ye. B rianna a nd the lad—they had some shadows to their
faces, bu t I could see they were glad nonetheless. They all sat
down to  eat—B rianna and her lad close together , leaning on
each other—and  wee Jem stu f fed his face wi’ cakes and
cream.” He smiled at the picture, teeth a brief gleam in the
darkness.
“Oh—at the last, just before I woke … wee Jem was
messin’ about, picking things up and putting them down as he
does. There was a … thing . . on  the table. I couldna say what
it was; I’ve never seen the like.”
He held his hands about six inches apart, frowning at them.
“It w as maybe th is wide, and just a bit longer—something like
a box, maybe, only sort of … humped.”
“Humped?” I said, puzzled as to what this could be.
“A ye, an d it had a thing on top  like a wee club, only wi’ a
knob to each end, and the club was tied to the box wi’ a sort of
black co rd, curl ed up on itself like a piggie’ s tail. Jem saw it,
and he reached out his hand, and said, ‘I want to talk to
Grandda.’ And then I woke.”
He leaned his head back farther , so as to look up into my
face.
“W ould ye ken what a thing like that might be, Sassenach?
It was like nothing I’ve ever seen.”
The autumn wind came rustlin g down from the hill, dry
leaves hurrying in its wake, quic k and light as the footsteps of
a ghost, and I felt the hair rise on nape and forearms.“Y es, I know ,” I said. “I’ve told you about them, I know .” I
didn’ t th ink, though, that I had ever described one to him, in
more than general terms. I cleared my throat.
“It’ s called a telephone.”1 2 2
THE GUARDIAN
I T W AS NOVEMBER; THERE WERE NO FLOWERS. But
the holly bushes gleamed dark green, and the berries had
begun to  ripen. I cut a small b unch, careful of the prickles,
added a tender b ranch of spruce for fragrance, and climbed the
steep trail to the tiny graveyard.
I went every week, to leave some small token on Malva’ s
grave, an d say a prayer . She and  her child had not been buried
with a cairn—he r father hadn’ t w anted such a pagan custom—
but people came and left pebbles there by way of
remembrance. It gave me some small comfort to see them;
there were others who remembered her .
I sto pped abruptly at the head  of the trail; someone was
kneeling by her grave—a young man. I caught the murmur of
his voice, low and conversational, and would have turned
about to go, save that he raised his head, and the wind caught
his hair , short an d tufted, like an  owl’ s feathers. Allan Christie.
He saw me, too,  and stif fened. There was nothing to do but
go and speak to him, though, and so I went.
“Mr . Ch ristie,” I said, the words feeling strange in my
mouth. That was what I had called his father . “I’m sorry for
your loss.”
He s tared up at  me blankly; then some sort of awareness
seemed to stir in his eyes. Gray eyes, rimmed with black
lashes, s o much like those of his father and sister . Bloodshot
with we eping and lack of sleep, judging from the shocking
smudges under them.
“A ye,” he said. “My loss. A ye.”
I stepped around him to lay down my ever green bouquet,
and with  a small spurt of alarm,  saw that there was a pistol onthe ground beside him, cocked and primed.
“Where have you been?” I said as casually as possible,
under the circumstances. “W e’ve missed you.”
He shru gged, as though it really didn’ t matter where he’d
been—perhaps it didn’ t. He wasn’ t looking at me anymore,
but at the stone we’d placed at the head of her grave.
“Places,” he said vaguely . “But I had to come back.” He
turned away a l ittle, plainly indicating that he wanted me to
leave. In stead, I pulled up my skirts and knelt gingerly beside
him. I didn’ t think  h e’d blow his brains out in front of me. I
had no idea wha t to do, other than to try to make him talk to
me and hope that someone else would come along.
“W e’re glad to have you home,” I said, trying for an easy ,
conversational note.
“A ye,” he said vaguely . And again, his eyes going to the
headstone, “I had to come back .” His hand wandered toward
the pistol, and I seized it, startling him.
“I k now you lo ved your sister very much,” I said. “It—it
was a terrible shock to you, I know .” What, what did one say?
There were things one might s ay to a person contemplating
suicide, I knew , but what?
“Y our li fe has value.”  I’ d said that to T om Christie, who
had only replied, “If it did not, this would not matter .”  But
how should I convince his son of that?
“Y our fa ther lov ed you both,” I  said, wondering as I said it
whether he knew what his fath er had done. His fingers were
very cold, and I  wrapped both my hands round his, trying to
of fer him a little  warmth, hoping that the human contact would
help.
“Not as I loved her ,” he said softly , not looking at me. “I
loved he r all her life, from the  time she was born and they
gave he r me to hold. There wa s nay other , for either of us.
Faither w as gone to prison, and then my mither—ah, Mither .”
His lips pulled back, as thoug h to laugh, but there was no
sound.“I know about your mother ,” I said. “Y our father told me.”
“Did he?” His head jerked up to look at me, eyes clear and
hard. “Did he tell ye they took me and Malva to her
execution?”
“I—no. I don’ t think he kne w , did he?” My stomach
clenched.
“He did . I told him, later , when  he sent for us, brought us
here. He  said that was good, we ’d seen with our own eyes the
ends of wickedn ess. He bade me remember the lesson—and so
I did,” he added more quietly .
“How—how old were you?” I asked, horrified.
“T en. M alva was nay more tha n two; she’d no idea what
was happening. She cried out fo r her Mam when they brought
Mither out to the hangsman, and kicked and screamed,
reaching out for her .”
He swallowed, and turned his head away .
“I tried to take her , to push her head into my bosom, so she
shouldna see—but they wouldna let me have her . They held
her wee head an d made her wat ch, and Auntie Darla saying in
her ear that this  was what happened to witches, and pinching
her legs ‘til she shrieked. W e lived with Auntie Darla for six
years after that,” he said, his face remote.
“She wasna best pleased about it, but she said she kent her
Christian duty . The auld besom  barely fed us, and ‘twas me
took care of Malva.”
He w as silent fo r a bit, and so w as I, thinking the best—the
only—thing I could of fer him n ow was the chance to speak.
He pulle d his hand from mine,  leaned over , and touched the
gravestone. It was no more than a lump of granite, but
someone had gone to the trouble to carve her name on it—only
the o ne word, MAL V A , in crude block letters. It reminded me
of the memorials that dotted Culloden, the clanstones, each
with a single name.“She wa s perfect,” he whispered. His finger traced its way
over the stone, delicate, as thou gh he touched her flesh. “So
perfect. Her wee privates looked like a flower ’ s bud, and her
skin sae fresh and soft… .”
A se nse of cold ness grew in the  pit of my stomach. Did he
mean … yes, of  course he did.  A sense of inevitable despair
began to grow within me.
“She was mine,” he said, and looking up to see my eye upon
him, repeated it more loudly . “She was mine!”
He l ooked down, then, at the grave, and his mouth turned in
upon itself, in grief and anger .
“The auld man never knew—never guessed what we were
to each other .”
Didn’ t he?  I thought. T om Christie might have confessed to
the crim e to save one he loved— but he loved more than one.
Having lost a d aughter—or rather , a niece—would he not do
all he could to save the son wh o was the last remnant of his
blood?
“Y ou ki lled her , ” I said quietly . I was in no doubt, and he
showed no surprise.
“He would ha’ sold her away , given her to some clod of a
farmer .” Allan’ s  fist clenched on his thigh. “I thought of that,
as sh e g rew olde r , and sometimes when I would lie with her , I
couldna bear the thought, and w ould slap her face, only from
the rage of thinking of it.”
He drew a deep, ragged breath.
“It wasna her fault, none of it. But I thought it was. And
then I caught h er wi’ that soldier , and again, wi’ filthy wee
Henderson. I beat her for it, but  she cried out that she couldna
help it—she was with child.”
“Y ours?”
He nodded, slowly .“I never thought of it. I should, of course. But I never did.
She was  always  wee Malva, se e, a bittie wee lass. I saw her
breasts swell, aye, and the hair come out to mar her sweet
flesh—but I just never thought …
He s hook his h ead, unable to deal with the thought, even
now .
“She sai d she must marry—and there must be reason for her
husband to think the child his, whoever she wed. If she
couldna make the soldier wed h er , then it must be another . So
she took as many lovers as she might, quickly .
“I p ut a stop to that, though,” he assured me, a faintly
nauseating tone of self-righteous ness in his voice. “I told her I
wouldna have it—I would think of another way .”
“And so you pu t her up to saying the child was Jamie’ s.”
My horr or at the story and my a nger at what he had done to us
was subsumed by a flood of sorrow . Oh, Malva,  I th ought in
despair . Oh, my darling Malva. Why didn’ t you tell me?  But of
course she wouldn’ t have told  me. Her only confidant was
Allan.
He nodded, and reached out to t ouch the stone again. A gust
of wind quivered through the holly , stirring the stif f leaves.
“It w ould explain the bairn, se e, but she wouldna have to
wed anyone. I th ought—Himself would give her money to go
away , a nd I would go with her . W e could go to Canada,
perhaps, or to the Indies.” His voice sounded dreamy , as
though he envisioned some idyllic life, where no one knew .
“But wh y did you kill her?” I burst out. “What made you do
that?” The sorrow and the senselessness were overwhelming; I
clenched my hands in my apron, not to batter him.
“I h ad to,” he said heavily . “She said she couldna go
through with it.” He blinked, looking down, and I saw that his
eyes were heavy with tears.
“She said—she loved you,” he said, low-voiced and thick.
“She couldna hurt ye so. She meant to tell the truth. No matterwhat I said to he r , she just kept saying that—she loved ye, and
she’d tell.”
He closed his ey es, shoulders slumping. T wo tears ran down
his cheeks.
“Why , h inny?” he cried, crossing his arms over his belly in
a spasm of grief. “Why did ye make me do it? Y e shouldna
have loved anyone but me.”
He sobbed then, like a child , and curled into himself,
weeping. I was weeping, too, for the loss and the
pointlessness, f or the utter , terrible waste  of it all. But I
reached out and took the gun from the ground. Hands shaking,
I dumpe d out the priming pan,  and shook the ball from the
barrel, then put the pistol in the pocket of my apron.
“Leave,” I said, my voice half-choked. “Go away again,
Allan. There are too many people dead.”
He was too grie f-stricken to hear me; I shook him by the
shoulder and said it again, more strongly .
“Y ou can’ t kill yourself. I forbid it, do you hear?”
“And who are you to say?” he cried, turning on me. His face
was contorted with anguish. “I cannot live, I cannot!”
But T om Christie had given up his life for his son, as well as
for me; I couldn’ t let that sacrifice go for naught.
“Y ou must,” I said, and stood up, feeling light-headed,
unsure whether my knees would hold me. “Do you hear me?
Y ou must!”
He look ed up, eyes burning through the tears, but didn’ t
speak. There was a keening whi ne like the hum of a mosquito,
and a soft, sudde n thump. He did n’ t change expression, but his
eyes slowly died. He stayed on his knees for a moment, but
bowed then forward, like a flo wer nodding on its stem, so I
saw the arrow protruding from the center of his back. He
coughed, once, sputtering blood, and fell sideways, curled on
his sister ’ s grave. His legs jerked spasmodically , grotesquely
froglike. Then he lay still.I s tood stupidly staring at him f or some immeasurable span
of ti me, becoming only gradually aware that Ian had walked
out of the wood  and stood beside me, bow over his shoulder .
Rollo nosed curiously at the body , whining.
“He’ s right, Auntie,” Ian said quietly . “He can’ t.”1 2 3
RETURN OF THE NA TIVE
O LD GRANNIE ABERNA THY  looked at least a hundred
and two . She admitted—under pressure—to ninety-one. She
was nea rly blind  and nearly dea f, curled up like a pretzel from
osteoporosis, and with skin gone so fragile that the merest
scrape tore it like paper .
“I’m nay  more than a bag o’ bones,” she said every time I
saw her , shaking a head that trem bled with palsy . “But at least
I’ve still got maist o’ my teeth!”
For a wonder , she had; I thought that was the only reason
she had made it this far—unlike  many people half her age, she
wasn’ t reduced to living on por ridge, but could still stomach
meat an d greens. Perhaps it was improved nutrition that kept
her going—perhaps it was mere stubbornness. Her married
name was Abernathy , but she h ad, she confided, been born a
Fraser .
Smiling at the thought, I finished wrapping the bandage
about her sticklike shin. Her legs and feet had almost no flesh
upon the m, and felt hard and col d as wood. She’d knocked her
shin aga inst the leg of the table a nd taken of f a strip of skin the
width of  a finger; such a minor injury that a younger person
would think nothing of it—but  her family worried over her ,
and had sent for me.
“It will be slow healing, but if you keep it clean—for God’ s
sake, do not  le t her put hog  fat on it!—I think it will be all
right.” The younger Mrs. Abernathy , known as Y oung Grannie
—herself about seventy—gave m e a sharp eye at that; like her
mother -in-law , she put a good deal of faith in hog fat and
turpentine as cure-alls, but nodded grudgingly . Her daughter ,
whose h igh-flown name of Arabella had been shortened to the
cozier Grannie Belly , grinned at me behind Y oung Grannie’ sback. She had been less fortun ate in the way of teeth—her
smile showed significant gaps—but was cheerful and good-
natured.
“W illie B.,” she instructed a teenaged grandson, “just be
steppin’ doon to the root cellar , and bringing up a wee sack of
turnips for Herself.”
I made the usual protestations, but all parties concerned
were comfortably aware of the proper protocol in such
matters, and within a few minutes, I was on my way home, the
richer by five pounds of turnips.
They were welcome. I had forc ed myself to go back to my
garden in the sp ring after Malva’ s death—I had to; sentiment
was all  very well, but we had to eat. The subsequent
disturbances of life and my prolonged absences, though, had
resulted in dreadful neglect of t he autumn crop. Despite Mrs.
Bug’ s best ef forts, the turnips had all succumbed to thrips and
black rot.
Our supplies in general were sadly depleted. W ith Jamie and
Ian gone so fr equently , not there to harvest or hunt, and
without Bree and Roger , the gra in crops had been half of their
usual yield, and only a pitiful single haunch of venison hung in
the smok ing shed. W e needed nearly all the grain for our own
use; there was n one to trade or sell, and only a scant few bags
of barleycorn sat under canvas near the malting shed—where
they we re likely  to rot, I thought grimly , as no one had had
time to see to the malting of a fresh batch before the cold
weather set in.
Mrs. Bug was sl owly rebuilding her flock of chickens, after
a d isastrous attack by a fox that  got into the henhouse—but it
was slow going, and we got only the occasional egg for
breakfast, grudgingly spared.
On the other han d, I reflected more cheerfully , we did  have
ham. Lots of ham. Likewise, immense quantities of bacon,
headcheese, pork chops, tender loin … to say nothing of suet
and rendered fat.The thought led me back to ho g fat, and to the crowded,
overflowingly fa miliar coziness of the Abernathys’ cluster of
cabins—and by contrast, to thought of the dreadful emptiness
at the Big House.
In a plac e with so many people, how could the loss of only
four be so important? I had to s top and lean against a tree, let
the sorrow wash through me, making no attempt to stop it. I’d
learned. “Y e canna hold a ghost at bay ,”  Jamie had told me.
“Let them in.”
I let them in—I could never kee p them out. And took what
small comfort I could in hoping—no, I didn’ t hope, I told
myself f iercely , I knew —that they were not ghosts in f act. Not
dead, but only … elsewhere.
After a few moments, the overwhelming grief began to
recede, going slowly as the ebbing tide. Sometimes it
uncovered treasure: small for go tten images of Jemmy’ s face,
smeared with honey , Brianna’ s laughter , Roger ’ s hands, deft
with a knife, car ving one of the little cars—the house was still
littered with them—then leaning to spear a muf fin from a
passing plate. And if to look at these caused fresh pain, at least
I had  the m, and could keep them in my heart, knowing that in
the fullness of time, they would bring consolation.
I b reathe d, and felt the tightness in my chest and throat ease.
Amanda was not the only one who might benefit from modern
sur gery , I thought. I couldn’ t tell what might be done for
Roger ’ s vocal cords, but maybe … and yet, his voice now was
good. Fu ll and resonant, if roug h. Perhaps he would choose to
keep it as it was—he’d fought for it, and earned it.
The tree I leane d against was a pine; the needles swayed
softly above me, then settled, as though in agreement. I had to
go; it was late in the day and the air was growing colder .
W iping my eyes, I settled the hood of my cloak and went
on. It was a long walk from the Abernathys’—I should really
have rid den Clarence, but he’d come up lame the day before,
and I’d let him rest. I’d have to hurry , though, if I was to reach
home before dark.I cast a wary eye upward, judging the clouds, which had that
soft, uniform gray of coming sn ow . The air was cold and thick
with moisture; when the temperature dropped at nightfall,
snow would fall.
The sky  was still light, but only  just, as I came down past
the sprin ghouse and into the bac kyard. Light enough to tell me
that something was wrong, though—the back door stood open.
That set  of f alarm bells, and I turned to run back into the
woods. I turned, and ran smack into a man who had come out
of the trees behind me.
“Who the hell are you?” I demanded, stepping hastily back.
“Don’ t worry about that, Mrs.,” he said, and grabbing me by
the arm, yelled toward the house, “Hey , Donner! I got her!”
WHA TEVER WENDIGO DONNER been doing for the last
year , it hadn’ t b een profitable, by the looks of him. Never a
natty dre sser at the best of time s, he was now so ragged that
his coat was li terally falling apart, and a slice of stringy
buttock showed through a rent in his breeches. His mane of
hair was greasy and matted, and he stank.
“Where are they?” he demanded hoarsely .
“Where are what?” I swung ro und to face his companion,
who see med in slightly better condition. “And where are my
housemaid and her sons?” W e were standing in the kitchen,
and the  hearth fire was out; Mrs. Bug hadn’ t come that
morning, and wherever Amy an d the boys were, they’d been
gone for some time.
“Dunno.” The man shrugged, i ndif ferent. “W asn’ t nobody
to home when we came.”
“Where are the j ewels?” Donner  grabbed at my arm, jerking
me roun d to face him. His eyes were sunk in his head, and his
grip was hot; he was burning with fever .
“I haven ’ t got any ,” I said shortly . “Y ou’re ill. Y ou should
—”“Y ou do! I know you do! Everybody knows!”
That gave me momentary pause. Gossip being what it was,
everybody likely thought  th ey knew tha t Jamie had a small
cache o f jewels. Small wonder if word of this hypothetical
treasure had reached Donner—and little likelihood that I could
convince him otherwise. I had no choice but to try , though.
“They’re gone,” I said simply .
Something flickered in his eyes at that.
“How?” he said.
I raised an eyebrow in the direction of his accomplice. Did
he want the man to know?
“Go find Richie and Jed,” Don ner said briefly to the thug,
who shr ugged and went out. R ichie and Jed? How on earth
many people had he brought? Past the first shock of seeing
him, I now became aware th at there were thumping feet
upstairs, and the sound of cupboard doors being banged
impatiently down the hall.
“My sur gery! Get them out of there!” I dove for the door to
the hallway , intending to perform this of fice myself, but
Donner grabbed at my cloak to stop me.
I wa s bloody tire d of being manhandled, and I wasn’ t afraid
of this miserable excuse for a human being.
“Let go! ” I snapped, and kicked  him briskly in the kneecap
to em phasize the point. He yelped, but let go; I could hear him
cursing behind me as I rushed t hrough the door and down the
hall.
Papers a nd books had been flun g out into the hallway from
Jamie’ s of fice, and a puddle of ink had been poured over them.
The explanation of the ink was apparent when I saw the thug
rifling my sur gery—he had a big blot of ink on the front of his
shirt, where he had apparently sequestered the stolen pewter
inkwell.
“What are you doing,  you nitwit?” I said. The thug, a boy of
sixteen o r so, blinked at me, m outh open. He had one of Mr .Blogweather ’ s perfect glass globes in his hand; at this, he
grinned maliciously and let it drop to the floor , where it
shattered into a spray of fragm ents. One of the flying shards
lanced through his cheek, slicing  it open; he didn’ t feel it, until
the blood began to well. Then he put a hand to the wound,
frowning in puzzlement, and bellowed in fright at the blood on
his hand.
“Crap,” said Donner , behind me. He put his arms around
me, and dragged me after him back to the kitchen.
“Look,” he said ur gently , releas ing me. “All I want is two.
Y ou can keep the rest. I gotta have one to pay these guys, and
one to—to travel with.”
“But it’ s true,” I  insisted, knowing that he wouldn’ t believe
me. “W e haven’ t got any . My daughter and her family—
they’ve gone. Gone back. They used all we had. There aren’ t
any more.”
He stared at me, disbelief plain in his burning eyes.
“Y es, there are,” he said positively . “There have to be. I
gotta get out of here!”
“Why?”
“Never you mind. I gotta go, and quick.” He swallowed,
eyes darting around the kitchen , as though the gems might be
sitting casually on the sideboard. “Where are they?”
A hi deous crash from the sur ge ry , followed by an outbreak
of s houted curses, prevented an y reply I might have made. I
moved b y reflex toward the doo r , but Donner moved in front
of me.
I was infuriated at this invas ion, and beginning to be
alarmed. While I’d never seen any indication of violence from
Donner , I wasn’ t so sure about th e men he’d brought with him.
They might  eventually give up and leave, when it became
apparent that there were in fact  no gems on the premises—or
they might try to beat the location of said gems out of me.I pulled my cloak more tightly around myself and sat down
on a bench, trying to think calmly .
“Look,” I said to  Donner . “Y ou’ve taken the house apart—”
A crash from upstairs shook the house, and I jumped. My God,
it sound ed as though they’d tipped over the wardrobe. “Y ou’ve
taken the house apart,” I repeat ed, through gritted teeth, “and
you haven’ t found anything. W o uldn’ t I give them to you, if I
had any , to save you wrecking the place?”
“No, I don’ t reckon you would. I wouldn’ t, if I was you.”
He rubb ed a hand across his m outh. “ Y ou  kno w w hat’ s go ing
on—the war and all.” He shook his head in confusion. “I
didn’ t k now it would be this way . Swear to God, half the
people I meet don’ t know which  way is up anymore. I thought
it’d be like, you know , redcoats and all, and you just keep
away from anybody in a uniform, keep away from the battles,
and it’d be fine . But I haven’ t seen a redcoat anywher e,  and
people—you know , just plain old people —they’re shooting
each other and running around burning up each other ’ s
houses… .”
He close d his eyes for a minute . His cheeks went from red
one moment to white the next; I could see he was very ill. I
could hear him, too; the breath rattled wetly in his chest, and
he whee zed fain tly . If he fainte d, how would I get rid of his
companions?
“Anyway ,” he said, opening his eyes. “I’m going. Going
back. I don’ t car e what things a re like then; it’ s a hell of a lot
better ’n here.”
“What about the Indians?” I inq uired, with no more than a
touch of sarcasm. “Leaving th em to their own devices, are
you?”
“Y eah,” he said, missing the sarcasm. “T ell you the truth,
I’m not so keen on Indians anymore, either .” He rubbed
absently at his upper chest, and  I saw a lar ge, puckered scar
through a rent in his shirt.“Man,” he said, longing clear in  his voice, “what I wouldn’ t
give for  a cold Bud and a baseball game on TV .” Then his
wandering attention snapped ba ck to me. “So,” he said in a
halfway reasonable tone, “I need those diamonds. Or
whatever . Hand ‘em over and we’ll leave.”
I ha d been turni ng over various schemes for getting rid of
them, to no part icular avail, and was getting more uneasy by
the moment. W e had very little  worth stealing, and from the
looks of  the rifled sideboard, they’d already got what there
was—including, I realized, with a fresh stab of alarm, the
pistols and powder . Before too much longer , they’d grow
impatient.
Someone might come—Amy and the boys were likely at
Brianna’ s cabin, which they were in process of moving into;
they cou ld com e back at any moment. Someone could come
looking for Jamie or myself—though the chances of that
receded by the m oment, with the dying light. Even if someone
did, though, the ef fect was likely to be disastrous.
Then I heard vo ices on the front porch, and the stamping of
feet, and leapt to my own feet, my heart in my mouth.
“W ould you quit doin’ that?” Donner said irritably . “Y ou’re
the jumpiest twat I ever saw .”
I ign ored him, having recognized one of the voices. Sure
enough, in the next moment, two of the thugs, brandishing
pistols, shoved Jamie into the kitchen.
He was wary an d disheveled, but his eyes went immediately
to m e, r unning u p and down my  body to assure himself that I
was all right.
“I’m fine,” I said briefly . “T hese idiots think we have
gemstones, and they want them.”
“So they said.” He straightened himself, shrugging to settle
the coat on hi s shoulders, and glanced at the cupboards,
hanging open, and the despoiled sideboard. Even the pie hutch
had been overturned, and the remains of a raisin pie laysquashed on the floor , marked w ith a lar ge heelprint. “I gather
they’ve looked.”
“Look, mate,” said one of the  thugs, reasonably , “all we
want’ s t he swag . Just tell us where it is, and we go, no ‘arm
done, eh?”
Jamie ru bbed the bridge of his nose, eyeing the man who’d
spoken.
“I imagine my wife has told ye that we have no gems?”
“W ell, she would, wouldn’ t she?” the thug said tolerantly .
“W omen, you know .” He seemed to feel that now Jamie had
showed up, they could get on with things in a more
businesslike fashion, man-to-man.
Jamie sighed and sat down.
“Why d’ye think I’ve got any?” he inquired, rather mildly .
“I have had, I admit—but no longer . They’ve been sold.”
“Where’ s the money , then?” The second thug was obviously
quite willing to settle for that, no matter what Donner thought.
“Spent,” Jamie said briefly . “I’m a colonel of militia—
surely ye ken that much? It’ s an expensive business,
provisioning a militia company . Food, guns, powder , shoes—it
adds up, aye? W hy , the cost in shoe leather alone—and then,
to say nothing of shoon for the horses! W agons, too; ye
wouldna believe the scandalous cost of wagons… .”
One of the thugs was frowning, but half-nodding, following
this reasonable exegesis. Donner and his other companion
were noticeably agitated, though.
“Shut up  about the damn wagons,” Donner said rudely , and
bending, he snatched up one o f Mrs. Bug’ s butcher knives
from the  floor . “Now , look,” he  said, scowling and trying to
look me nacing. “I’ve had  it  with the stalling around. Y ou tell
me where they a re, or—or I’ll—I’ll cut her! Y eah, I’ll cut her
throat. S wear I will.” W ith t his, he clutched me by the
shoulder and put the knife to my throat.It ha d become clear to me some little time ago that Jamie
was  stal ling for time, which meant that he expected something
to happe n. Which in turn meant  he was expecting someone to
come. T hat was reassuring, but I did think the apparent
nonchalance of his demeanor in  the face of my theoretically
impending demise was perhaps carrying things a trifle too far .
“Oh,” h e said, scratching at the side of his neck. “W ell, I
wouldna do that, if I were you. She’ s the one who kens where
the gems are, aye?”
“I what ?” I cried indignantly .
“She is?” One of the other thugs brightened at that.
“Oh, aye,” Jamie assured him. “ Last time I went out wi’ the
militia, she hid them. W ouldna tell me where she’d put them.”
“W ait—I thought you said you sold ‘em and spent the
money ,” Donner said, plainly confused.
“I was lying,” Jamie explained, patient.
“Oh.”
“But if ye’re going to kill my wife, well, then, of course that
alters the case.”
“Oh,” said Donner , looking somewhat happier . “Y eah.
Exactly!”
“I believe we havena been introduced, sir ,” Jamie said
politely , extendi ng a hand. “I am James Fraser . And you are …
?”
Donner hesitated for a minute, unsure what to do with the
knife in his right hand, but then shifted it awkwardly to his left
and leaned forward to shake Jamie’ s hand briefly .
“W endigo Donner ,” he said. “Okay , now we’re getting
somewhere.”
I made a rude noise, but it was drowned by a series of
crashes and the sound of breaking glass from the sur gery . The
lout in there mu st be clearing the shelves wholesale, flinging
bottles and jars on the floor . I  grasped Donner ’ s hand andpulled th e knife away from my throat, then sprang to my feet,
in much  the same state of insa ne fury in which I had once
torched a field full of grasshoppers.
This tim e, it was Jamie who seiz ed me around the middle as
I darted toward the door , swinging me half of f my feet.
“Let go! I’ll frigging kill  him!” I said, kicking madly .
“W ell, w ait just a bit about that, Sassenach,” he said, low-
voiced, and lugged me back to  the table, where he sat down
with his arms wrapped around me, holding me firmly pinned
on his lap. Further sounds of depredation came down the hall
—the splinterin g of wood and crunch of glass under a
bootheel. Evidently , the young lout had given up searching for
anything and was simply destroying for the fun of it.
I too k a deep breath, preparatory to emitting a scream of
frustration, but stopped.
“Jeez,” Donner said, wrinkling his nose. “What’ s that smell?
Somebody cut one?” He looked  accusingly at me, but I paid
no attention. It was ether , heavy and sickly sweet.
Jamie stif fened slightly . He kn ew what it was, too, and
essentially what it did.
Then he  took a deep breath and carefully moved me of f his
lap, setti ng me on the bench beside him. I saw his eyes go to
the k nife sagging in Donner ’ s ha nd, and heard what his keener
ears had already picked up. Someone was coming.
He mov ed a little forward, ge tting his feet under him to
spring, and flicked his eyes tow ard the cold hearth, where a
heavy Dutch oven was sitting in the ashes. I nodded, very
briefly , and as th e back door op ened, made a lunge across the
kitchen.
Donner , with unexpected swiftness, stuck out a leg and
tripped me. I fell headlong and  slid, fetching up against the
settle wi th a head-ringing thum p. I groaned and lay still for a
few mom ents, eyes closed, feeling all at once that I was much
too old for this s ort of carry-on. I opened my eyes reluctantly ,and very  stif fly got to my feet, to find the kitchen now full of
people.
Donner ’ s original sidekick had  returned with two others,
presumably Richie and Jed, and with them, the Bugs, Murdina
looking alarmed, and Arch, coldly furious.
“A leannan!”  Mrs. Bug cried, rushing toward me. “Are ye
hurt, then?”
“No, no,” I said, still rather dazed. “Just let me … sit down
for a  mo ment.” I looked at Don ner , but he no longer held his
knife. H e had been frowning at the floor—evidently he had
dropped it when he tripped me—but his head jerked up at sight
of the newcomers.
“What? Did you find anything?” he asked eagerly , for both
Richie and Jed were beaming with self-importance.
“Sure did,” one of them assured  him. “Looka here!” He was
holding Mrs. Bug’ s workbag, a nd at this, he upended it and
shook the contents out onto the table, where a mass of woolly
knitting landed with a massive thunk!  Eager hands pawed the
wool away , revealing an eight-inch-long ingot of gold, the
metal sh aved away at one end, and stamped in the center with
the royal French fleur -de-lis.
Stunned silence followed the appearance of this apparition.
Even Jamie looked completely nonplussed.
Mrs. Bug had been pale when they came in; now she had
gone the color o f chalk, and her lips had disappeared. Arch’ s
eyes went straight to Jamie’ s, dark and defiant.
The only  person unimpressed by sight of the glowing metal
was Donner .
“W ell, neato-mo squito,” he said. “What about the jewels?
Keep your eye on the goal here, people!”
His accomplices, however , had lost interest in theoretical
jewels, with solid gold actually in hand, and were
simultaneously discussing the possibility of more and
squabbling over  who should hav e custody of the present ingot.My own  head was spinning: from  the blow , from the sudden
appearance of the ingot and its revelations regarding the Bugs
—and particular ly from the fumes of ether , which were getting
notably stronger . No one in the kitchen had noticed, but all
sound fr om the sur gery had ceased; the young lout in there had
undoubtedly passed out.
The bo ttle of ether had been nearly full; enough to
anesthetize a dozen elephants, I thought dizzily—or a houseful
of peopl e. Already , I could see Donner struggling to keep his
head up right. A few minutes m ore, and all the thugs would
likely have subsided into a state of innocuous desuetude—but
so would we.
Ether is  heavier than air; the stuf f would sink to the floor ,
where it would gradually rise in a pool around our knees. I
stood up , taking a quick breath from the presumably purer air
higher up. I had to get the window open.
Jamie and Arch were speaking Gaelic to each other , much
too fast for me to follow , even  had my head been in normal
working order . Donner was frow ning at them, mouth open as
though he meant to tell them to stop but couldn’ t quite find the
words.
I f umble d with the catch of the inside shutters, having to
concentrate ver y hard in order to make my fingers work.
Finally , the latch flipped free an d I swung the shutter open—
revealing the leering face of an unfamiliar Indian in the
twilight outside the window .
I s hriek ed and staggered back.  Next thing, the back door
sprang o pen and a squat bearded  figure rushed in, bellowing in
some incomprehensible tongue, followed by Ian, who was
followed by yet another strange Indian, screaming and laying
about hi mself w ith something— tomahawk? club? I couldn’ t
get my eyes to focus well enough to tell.
All was pandemonium, seen through glazed eyes. I clutched
the windowsill to keep from sinking to the floor , but couldn’ t
summon the presence of mind  to open the damn window .
Everyone was struggling and fighting, but the inhabitants ofthe kitchen were doing it in slow motion, yelling and
staggering like drunks. As I watched, my mouth hanging
unbecomingly o pen, Jamie painstakingly drew Donner ’ s knife
out from under his buttocks, brought it up in a slow , graceful
arc, and buried it under Donner ’ s breastbone.
Something flew past my ear and crashed through the
window , destroy ing what was probably the only intact pane of
glass left in the house.
I breathed in deep gulps of fresh air , trying to clear my head,
and made frantic waving motions with my hands, shouting—
or trying to shout—”Get out! Get out!”
Mrs. Bu g was trying to do just that, crawling on hands and
knees toward the half-open doo r . Arch hit the wall and slid
slowly down beside her , face g one blank. Donner had fallen
face forward over the table, his blood dripping nastily onto the
floorboards, and  another thug was lying in the extinct hearth,
his skul l crushed. Jamie was still upright, swaying, and the
squat bearded figure was standing beside him, shaking his
head and looking confused as the fumes began to af fect him.
“What’ s going on?” I heard him ask.
The kitchen was nearly dark now , the figures swaying like
fronds of kelp in some underwater forest.
I clo sed my eyes for a second. When I opened them again,
Ian was  saying, “W ait, I’ll lig ht a candle.” He had one of
Brianna’ s matches in his hand, the tin in the other .
“IAN!” I shrieked, and then he struck the match.
There was a soft whoof!  noise, then a louder whoomp!  as the
ether in the sur g ery ignited, and suddenly we were standing in
a po ol of fire. For a fraction of  a second, I felt nothing, and
then a burst of searing heat. Jamie seized my arm and hurled
me toward the d oor; I staggered out, fell into the blackberry
bushes, and rolled through them , thrashing and flailing at my
smoking skirts.
Panicked and still uncoordinated from the ether , I struggled
with the strings of my apron, fin ally managing to rip loose thestrings a nd wriggle out of it. My linen petticoats were singed,
but not charred. I crouched panting in the dead weeds of the
dooryard, unabl e to do anything  for the moment but breathe.
The smell of smoke was strong and pungent.
Mrs. Bug was o n the back porch on her knees, jerking of f
her cap, which was on fire.
Men erupted through the back d oor , beating at their clothes
and hair . Rollo was in the yard, barking hysterically , and on
the other side of the house, I could hear the screams of
frightened horses. Someone had got Arch Bug out—he was
stretched at full length in the de ad grass, most of his hair and
eyebrows gone, but evidently still alive.
My legs  were red and blistered, but I wasn’ t badly burned—
thank G od for layers of linen and cotton, which burn slowly , I
thought groggily . Had I been wearing something modern like
rayon, I should have gone up like a torch.
The thought made me look bac k toward the house. It was
full dark  by now , and all the windows on the lower floor were
alight. Flame danced in the open door . The place looked like
an immense jack-o’-lantern.
“Y e’re Mistress Fraser , I suppose?” The squat, bearded
person bent over me, speaking in a soft Scottish burr .
“Y es,” I  said, coming gradually to myself. “Who are you,
and where’ s Jamie?”
“Here, S assenach.” Jamie stumbled out of the dark and sat
down heavily beside me. He w aved a hand at the Scotsman.
“May I present Mr . Alexander Cameron, known more
generally as Scotchee?”
“Y our servant, ma’am,” he said politely .
I wa s feeling gingerly at my hair . Clumps of it had been
singed to crispy thread, but at least I still had some.
I felt, rather than saw , Jamie look up at the house. I followed
the direction of his glance, and saw a dark figure at the
window upstairs, framed in the dim glow from the burningdownstairs. He shouted something in the incomprehensible
tongue, and began throwing things out of the window .
“Who’ s that ?” I asked, feeling more than slightly surreal.
“Oh.” Jamie rubbed at his face. “That would be Goose.”
“Of cou rse it would,” I said, nodding. “He’ll be a cooked
goose, if he stays in there.” This struck me as wildly hilarious,
and I doubled up in laughter .
Evidently , it wasn’ t quite as witty as I’d thought; no one else
seemed to think it funny . Jamie stood up and shouted
something at the dark figure, who waved nonchalantly and
turned back into the room.
“There’ s a ladder in the bar n,” Jamie said calmly to
Scotchee, and they moved of f into the darkness.
The hou se burned fairly slowly for a while; there weren’ t a
lot o f easily flam mable objects down below , bar the books and
papers i n Jamie’ s study . A tall figure belted out of the back
door , sh irt pulle d up over his nose with one hand, the tail of
his shirt held up with the other to form a bag.
Ian came  to a stop beside me, dropped to his knees, gasping,
and let down his shirttail, releasing a pile of small objects.
“That’ s all I cou ld get, I’m afraid, Auntie.” He coughed a
few tim es, waving his hand in  front of his face. “D’ye ken
what happened?”
“It’ s not important,” I said. Th e heat was becoming more
intense, and I struggled to my knees. “Come on; we’ll need to
get Arch further away .”
The ef fe cts of the ether had mo stly worn of f, but I was still
conscious of a strong sense of unreality . I hadn’ t anything but
cold well water with which to treat burns, but bathed Arch’ s
neck an d hands , which had bee n badly blistered. Mrs. Bug’ s
hair had been singed, but she , like me, had been lar gely
protected by her heavy skirts.
Neither she nor Arch said a word.Amy McCallum came running  up, face pale in the fiery
glow; I told her to take the Bugs  to Brianna’ s cabin—hers now
—and for God’ s sake, keep th e little boys safe away . She
nodded and went, she and Mrs. Bug supporting Arch’ s tall
form between them.
No one made an y ef fort to bring out the bodies of Donner
and his companions.
I c ould see whe n the fire took hold in the stairwell; there
was a sudden str ong glow in the upstairs windows, and shortly
thereafter , I could see flames in the heart of the house.
Snow began to fall, in thick, heavy , silent flakes. W ithin half
an hour ,  the ground, trees, and bushes were dusted with white.
The flames glowed red and gold , and the white snow reflected
a so ft reddish gl ow; the whole clearing seemed filled with the
light of the fire.
Somewhere arou nd midnight, the roof fell in, with a crash
of g lowing timbers and a trem endous shower of sparks that
fountained high into the night. T he sight was so beautiful that
everyone watching went “Oooooh!” in involuntary awe.
Jamie’ s arm tightened round me. W e could not look away .
“What’ s the date today?” I asked suddenly .
He frowned for a moment, thinking, then said, “December
twenty-first.”
“And we aren’ t dead, either . Bloody newspapers,” I said.
“They never get anything  right.”
For som e reason, he thought that  was very funny indeed,
and laughed until he had to sit down on the ground.1 2 4
PROPER TY OF THE KING
W E SPENT THE REMAINDER OF the night sleeping—or
at le ast horizontal—on the floo r of the cabin, with the Bugs,
Goose and his brother , Light—who confused me initially by
referring to themselves as Jamie ’ s “sons”—Scotchee, and Ian.
On their way to visit Bird’ s village, the Indians—for
Alexander Cam eron was as much an Indian as the others, I
thought—had met Jamie and Ian, hunting, and accepted
Jamie’ s hospitality .
“Though it was a warmer welcome than we expected, Bear -
Killer!” Goose said, laughing.
They did  not ask who Donner was, nor make any reference
to the men who se bodies burned in the funeral pyre of the
house—only asked awed questions about the ether , and shook
their heads in amazement, watching the fire.
For Jam ie’ s part , I noticed that he did not ask why they were
going to Bird’ s village—and concluded that he did not want to
hear that some of the Cheroke e had decided to support the
King. He listened to the talk, bu t said little, spending his time
fingering through the pile of obj ects saved from the fire. There
was little of value there—a few scorched, loose pages from my
casebook, some pewter spoons, a bullet mold. But when he fell
asleep a t last next to me, I saw that his fist was closed around
something, and peering closel y in the dark, made out the
protruding head of the little cherrywood snake.
I w oke just pas t dawn to find Aidan peering down at me,
Adso in his arms.
“I fo und your wee cheetie in my bed,” Aidan whispered.
“D’ye want him?”
I was about to refuse, but then saw the look in Adso’ s eye.
He was very tolerant of small children normally , but Aidanwas holding him round the mid dle like a bag of laundry , his
back legs dangling ludicrously .
“Y es,” I said, my  voice hoarse from smoke. “Here—I’ll take
him.”
I sat up, but having accepted the cat, saw that most of the
household was still asleep, rolled in blankets on the floor . T wo
notable exceptions: Jamie and Arch Bug were missing. I got
up, and borrowing Amy’ s cloak from beside the door , went
out.
The sno w had stopped during th e night, but there were two
or three inches on the ground. I put Adso down under the
eaves, where the ground was clear , and then—with a deep
breath to steady myself—turned to look at the house.
Steam rose from the charred remains, which stood inkblot
black an d stark against the white-furred trees behind it. Only
about ha lf the house had burned  completely; the west wall was
still standing, as were the stone chimney stacks. The rest was a
mass of charred timbers and mounded ash, already turning
gray . The upper story was completely gone, and as for my
sur gery …
I turned  away , hearing voices behind the house. Jamie and
Arch we re in the woodshed, but the door was open; I could see
them inside, face to face. Jamie saw me hovering, and
beckoned me in with a nod.
“Good morning, Arch,” I said, peering at our erstwhile
factor . “How are you?”
“I’ve be en bette r , a nighean,  t han k y e kindly ,” he said, and
coughed. His voice was little more than a harsh whisper ,
damaged by smoke, and there were enormous, fluid-filled
blisters on both hands and face. Bar the loss of his hair and
eyebrows, though, I thought he was otherwise all right.
“Arch was just about to explain this to me, Sassenach.”
Jamie p ointed a toe at the gleaming metal of the gold ingot
lying in the sawdust and wood c hips at his feet. “W ere ye not,
Arch?”His voice was outwardly pleasant, but I heard the steel in it
as c learly as Ar ch did. Arch Bug was no pushover , though,
eyebrows or no eyebrows.
“I o we ye nay explanations o f anything, Seaumais mac
Brian, ” he said with equal pleasantness.
“I give ye the chance of explanation, man, not the choice.”
He’d dro pped the pleasant tone. Jamie was smudged with soot,
and scorched round the edges, but his eyebrows were intact
and bein g put to good use. He turned to me, gesturing to the
gold.
“Y e’ve seen it before, aye?”
“Of cou rse.” The last time I’d seen it, it had been gleaming
in the lantern light, packed solid with its fellows in the bottom
of a  cof fin in Hector Cameron’ s mausoleum, but the shape of
the ingots and the fleur -de-lis stamp were unmistakable.
“Unless Louis of France has been sending someone else vast
quantities of gold, it’ s part of Jocasta’ s hoard.”
“That it is not, and never was,” Arch corrected me firmly .
“A ye?” Jamie cocked a thick brow at him. “T o whom does it
belong, then, if not to Jocasta C ameron? D’ye claim it as your
own?”
“I do not.” He h esitated, but the ur ge to speak was powerful.
“It is the property of the King ,” he said, and his old mouth
closed tight on the last word.
“What, the King of—oh,” I said, realizing at long last. “ That
king.”
“Le r oi,  c’est mort,”  Jamie said softl y , as though to himself,
but Arch turned fiercely to him.
“Is Scotland dead?”
Jamie drew breath, but didn’ t speak at once. Instead, he
gestured me to a  seat on the stack of chopped cordwood, and
nodded at Arch to take another , before sitting down beside me.“Scotland will die when her last son does, a charaid, ” he
said, an d waved a hand tow ard the door , taking in the
mountains and hollows around us—and all the people therein.
“How many are here? How man y will be? Scotland lives—but
not in Italy .” In  Rome, he mea nt, where Charles Stuart eked
out what remained to him of a life, drowning his disappointed
dreams of a crown in drink.
Arch narrowed his eyes at this, but kept a stubborn silence.
“Y e we re the third man, were ye not?” Jamie asked,
disregarding this. “When the gold was brought ashore from
France. Dougal MacKenzie took one-third, and Hector
Cameron another . I couldna say what Dougal did with his—
gave it to Char les Stuart, most likely , and may God have
mercy on his soul for that. Y ou were tacksman to Malcolm
Grant; h e sent ye, did he not? Y ou took one-third of the gold
on his behalf. Did ye give it to him?”
Arch nodded, slowly .
“It was given in trust,” he said , and his voice cracked. He
cleared his throat and spat, the mucus tinged with black. “T o
me, and then to the Grant—who should have given it in turn to
the King’ s son.”
“Did he?” Jamie asked, interes ted. “Or did he think, like
Hector Cameron, that it was too late?”
It had been; the  cause was alr eady lost at that point—no
gold co uld have made a dif ference. Arch’ s lips pressed so
tightly together as almost to be invisible.
“He did  what he did,” he said shortly . “What he thought
right. Th at money was spent fo r the welfare of the clan. But
Hector Cameron was a traitor , and his wife with him.”
“It was you w ho spoke to Jocasta in her tent,” I said
suddenly , realizing. “At the Gathering where you met Jamie.
Y ou’d come there to find her , hadn’ t you?”
Arch se emed surprised that I had spoken, but inclined his
head an inch or so in acknowled gment. I wondered whether hehad accepted—had sought?—a place with Jamie on account of
his relationship with Jocasta.
“And that”—I poked a toe at the  shaved ingot—”you found
in Jocas ta’ s house, when you w ent with Roger and Duncan to
bring back the fisher -folk.” Proof—if he had needed it—that
Jocasta d id indeed still have Hec tor ’ s share of the French gold.
“What I am wondering, myself,” Jamie said, rubbing a
finger d own the  long, straight b ridge of his nose, “is how the
devil ye found the rest of it, and then got it away .”
Arch’ s lips pursed for a moment, then reluctantly unsealed
themselves.
“‘T was no great feat. I saw the  salt at Hector ’ s tomb—the
way the  black slaves kept awa’. If he didna rest easy , it was
nay won der—but where would the gold better be, save wi’
him?” A wintry light shone in his faded eyes. “I kent Hector
Cameron, a bit. He wasna the m an to give up anything, only
by reason of bein’ dead.”
Arch ma de frequent trips to Cr oss Creek as factor , to buy
and trade. He was not usually a guest at River Run, but had
been there often enough to be familiar with the property . If
anyone saw a figure near the mausoleum at night—well,
everyone knew that Hector Cameron’ s ghost “walked,”
confined to one spot only by the lines of salt; no one would
ever go close enough to investigate.
And so he had simply abstracted one ingot on each trip—
and not on every trip—eventually removing the whole hoard,
before Duncan Innes discovered the loss.
“I shouldna have kept out that first ingot, I see that,” he
said, ruefully nodding at it. “At the first, though, I thought we
might have need of it—Murdin a and I. And then, when she
was obliged to kill yon Brown—”
Jamie’ s head jerked up, and w e both stared at him. He
coughed.
“The wi cked cre ature grew well enough to poke about the
cabin when she was oot; he fou nd that”—he nodded again atthe ingot—”in her workbag, where she’d hidden it. He couldna
ken, of course, what it was—b ut he kent well enough that
ragged f olk suc h as we ought not to have such a thing.” His
thin mouth pressed tight again, and I remembered that he had
been ch ief tacksman for the G rant of clan Grant—a man of
worth. Once.
“He asked about it, and she wo uldna tell him anything, of
course. But then, when he mad e his way to your house, she
feared he would tell what he’d seen. And so she made an end
to him.”
It wa s sa id calm ly; after all, wha t else could she do? Not for
the first time, I wondered just w hat other things the Bugs had
done—or been forced to do—in the years after Culloden.
“W ell, ye kept the gold out of King Geor ge’ s hands, at
least,” J amie said, a certain not e of bleakness in his voice. I
thought he was thinking of the battle at Moore’ s Creek Bridge.
If H ugh MacDonald had had that gold, with which to buy
powder and arms, the victory t here would not have been so
easily won. Nor would the Highlanders have been slaughtered
—again—char ging sword in hand into the mouths of cannon.
“Arch,” I said, when the silence threatened to become
oppressive, “ what,  exactly , did you plan to do with it?”
He blinked at that, and looked down at the ingot.
“I … I m eant at first only to see if it was true what I’d heard
—that Hector Cameron had tak en his part of the gold away
with him , used it for his own ends. Then I found Hector dead,
but ‘ twas clear f rom the way his  wife lived that he had indeed
taken it. So I wondered—was there any left?”
One hand crept up, massaging his withered throat.
“T o tell ye the truth, mistress—I wished mostly to take it
back from Jocasta Cameron. Ha ving done that, though …” His
voice died away , but then he shook himself.
“I am  a man of my word, Seaumais mac Brian.  I  swore  an
oath to my chief—and kept it, ‘til he died. I swore my oath to
the King across the water”—James Stuart, he meant—”but heis dead, now , too. And then—I swore loyalty to Geor ge of
England when I came upon this shore. So tell me now where
my duty lies?”
“Y e swore an oath to me, too, Ar chibald mac Donagh, ”
Jamie said.
Arch smiled at that, a wry  expression, but a smile
nonetheless.
“And by reason of that oath, ye’ re still alive, Seaumais mac
Brian, ” he  said . “I could have killed y e last night in your sleep
and been well awa’.”
Jamie’ s mouth twisted in a look that expressed considerable
doubt of this statement, but he forbore to contradict.
“Y ou ar e free of your oath to me,” he said formally in
Gaelic. “ T ake your life from my  hand.” And inclining his head
toward the ingot, said, “T ake that—and go.”
Arch regarded him for a moment, unblinking. Then stooped,
picked up the ingot, and went.
“Y ou didn’ t ask him where the gold is now ,” I observed,
watching the tall old man make his way round the cabin to
rouse his wife.
“Y e think he w ould ha’ told m e?” He stood up then, and
stretched himself. Then he shook himself like a dog, and went
to stand  in the d oorway of the shed, arms braced in the door
frame, looking out. It was beginning to snow again.
“I see it’ s not only the Frasers who are stubborn as rocks,” I
said, com ing to  stand beside hi m. “Scotland lives, all right.”
That made him laugh.
He put one arm around me, an d I rested my head on his
shoulder .
“Y our hair smells of smoke, Sassenach,” he said softly .
“Everything smells of smoke,” I replied just as softly .
The burn ed ruins of the house were still too warm for snow
to stick , but that would pass.  If it went on snowing, bytomorrow the house would be obliterated, white as the rocks
and trees. W e, too—eventually .
I though t of Jocasta and Dun can, gone to the safety of
Canada, the welcome of kinfolk. Where would the Bugs go—
back to Scotlan d? For an instant, I longed to go, too. A way
from loss and desolation. Home.
But then I remembered.
“So long as one hundr ed of us r emain alive … ,”  I quoted.
Jamie tilted his h ead against mine for a moment, then raised
it and turned to look down at me.
“And when ye go to a sick m an’ s bed, Sassenach—to a
wounding or a birth—how is i t, then, that ye can rise from
your own bed, e ven from mortal weariness, and go in the dark,
alone? W hy is it that ye willn a wait, that ye dinna say no,
ever? W hy is it that ye willna forbear , even when ye know the
case to be hopeless?”
“I can’ t. ” I kept my gaze on the  ruin of the house, its ashes
growing cold before my eyes. I knew what he meant, the
unwelcome truth he would force me to speak—but the truth
lay between us, and must be t old. “I cannot … can not  …
admit … that there is anything to do but win.”
He c upped my c hin and tilted m y face upward, so that I was
obliged to meet his eyes. Hi s own face was worn with
tiredness, the lines cut deep by eyes and mouth, but the eyes
themselves were clear , cool, and fathomless as the waters of a
hidden spring.
“Nor can I,” he said.
“I know .”
“Y e can at least promise me the victory ,” he said, but his
voice held the whisper of a question.
“Y es,” I said, and touched his face. I sounded choked, and
my vision blurred. “Y es, I can promise that. This time.” No
mention made of what that pr omise spared, of the things Icould n ot guarantee. Not life, not safety . Not home, nor
family; not law nor legacy . Just the one thing—or maybe two.
“The vic tory ,” I  said. “And tha t I will be with you ‘til the
end.”
He c losed his ey es for a momen t. Snowflakes pelted down,
melting as they struck his face,  sticking for an instant, white
on his lashes. Then he opened his eyes and looked at me.
“That is enough,” he said softly . “I ask no more.”
He r eached forward then and to ok me in his arms, held me
close for  a moment, the breath of snow and ashes cold around
us. T hen he kiss ed me, released me, and I took a deep breath
of cold air , harsh with the scent of burning. I brushed a
floating smut of f my arm.
“W ell …  good. Bloody  good. Er …” I hesitated. “What do
you suggest we do next?”
He stood looking at the charred  ruin, eyes narrowed, then
lifted his shoulders and let them fall.
“I think,” he s aid slowly , “we shall go—” He stopped
suddenly , frowning. “What in God’ s name … ?”
Something was moving at the side of the house. I blinked
away the snowflakes, standing on tiptoe to see better .
“Oh, it can’ t  be!” I said—but it was. W ith a tremendous
upheaval of snow , dirt, and char red wood, the white sow thrust
her way  into daylight. Fully emer ged, she shook her massive
shoulders, then, pink snout twitching irritably , moved
purposefully of f toward the wood. A moment later , a smaller
version likewise emer ged—and another , and another … and
eight hal f-grown piglets, some white, some spotted, and one as
black a s the timbers of the house, trotted of f in a line,
following their mother .
“Scotland lives,” I said again, g iggling uncontrollably . “Er
—where did you say we were going?”
“T o Sco tland,” he said as though this were obvious. “T o
fetch my printing press.”He was still looking at the hou se, but his eyes were fixed
somewhere beyond the ashes, far beyond the present moment.
An owl  hooted deep in the distant wood, startled from its
sleep. He stood silent for a bit, then shook of f his reverie, and
smiled at me, snow melting in his hair .
“And then,” he said simply , “we shall come back to fight.”
He t ook my han d and turned away from the house, toward
the barn where the horses stood waiting, patient in the cold.EPILOGUE I
 LALL YBROCH
T HE PENLIGHT’S BEAM MOVED SLOWL Y across the
heavy oak rafter , paused at a su spicious hole, then passed on.
The heavyset man wore a frown of scrupulous concentration,
lips pursed like one momentarily expecting some unpleasant
surprise.
Brianna stood beside him, looking up at the shadowed
recesses of the ceiling in the entry hall, wearing a similar
frown of concentration. She would not recognize woodworm
or termites unless a rafter actually fell on her , she thought, but
it seemed polite to behave as though she were paying
attention.
In fact, only hal f her attention w as focused on the heavyset
gentleman’ s murmured remarks to his helot, a small young
woman in an overall too big for her , with pink streaks in her
hair . Th e other half was focuse d on the noises from upstairs,
where the children were theoretically playing hide ‘n seek
among t he jumb le of packing b oxes. Fiona had brought over
her broo d of three small fiends, and then craftily abandoned
them, ru nning of f to do an errand of some sort, promising to
return by teatime.
Brianna glanced at her wristwatch, still surprised at seeing it
there. Half an h our yet to go. If they could avoid bloodshed
until—
A piercing scream from upstairs made her grimace. The
helot, less hardened, dropped her clipboard with a yelp.
“MAMA!” Jem, in tattling mode.
“WHA T?” she roared in answer . “I’m BUSY!”
“But Ma ma! Ma ndy hit  me! ” ca me an indignant report from
the top of the stairs. Looking up, she could see the top of his
head, the light from the window glowing on his hair .“She did? W ell—”
“W ith a stick !”
“What sort of—”
“On purpose !”
“W ell, I don’ t think—”
“AND …”—a pause before the damning denouement
—”SHE DIDN’T SA Y SHE W AS SORR Y!”
The bu ilder and his helot had given up looking for
woodworm, in favor of following this gripping narrative, and
now bot h of them looked at Bri anna, doubtless in expectation
of some Solomonic decree.
Brianna closed her eyes momentarily .
“MANDY ,” she bellowed. “Say you’re sorry!”
“Non’ t!” came a high-pitched refusal from above.
“A ye, ye will!” came Jem’ s voice, followed by scuf fling.
Brianna headed for the stair , blood in her eye. Just as she set
her foot on the tread, Jem uttered a piercing squeal.
“She BIT me!”
“Jeremiah MacKenzie, don’ t you dar e  bite her back!” she
shouted. “Both of you stop it this instant!”
Jem thrust a disheveled head through the banister , hair
sticking up on e nd. He was wearing bright blue eye shadow ,
and someone had applied pink l ipstick in a crude mouth-shape
from one ear to the other .
“She’ s a feisty wee baggage,” he ferociously informed the
fascinated spectators below . “My grandda said so.”
Brianna wasn’ t sure whether to  laugh, cry , or utter a loud
shriek, b ut with a hasty wave at the builder and his assistant,
she ran up the stairs to sort them out.
The sorting took rather more tim e than expected, since she
discovered in the process that Fiona’ s three little girls, so
notably quiet during the latest squabble, had been quietbecause—having decorated Jem, Mandy , and themselves—
they were busily engaged in painting faces on the bathroom
walls with Brianna’ s new makeup.
Coming back down a quarter of an hour later , she
discovered the builder sitting peaceably on an upturned coal
scuttle, having his tea break, w hile the helot wandered open-
mouthed about the entry hall, a half-eaten scone in one hand.
“All those kids yours?” she asked Brianna, with a
sympathetic quirk of one pierced brow .
“No, tha nk God. Does everything look all right down here?”
“T ouch o’ damp,” the builder s aid cheerfully . “Only to be
expected, thoug h, old place like this. When’ s it built, then,
hen, d’ye know?”
“1721, thickie,” the helot said, with comfortable scorn. “Did
ye not see it carved in the lintel, there, where we came in?”
“Nah, th en, is it?” The builder looked interested, but not
enough to get u p and look for himself. “Cost a fortune to put
back in shape, won’ t it?” He no dded at the wall, where one of
the oak  panels showed the damage of boots and sabers,
crisscrossed with slashes whose rawness had darkened with
the years, but still showed clear .
“No, we  won’ t fix that,” Brianna said, a lump in her throat.
“That was done right after the ‘45. It’ll stay that way .” W e keep
it so,  h er uncle had told her , to r emember always what the
English ar e.
“Oh, historic-like. Right you are, then,” the builder said,
nodding wisely . “Americans don’ t often mind about the
history so much, do they? W anting all mod cons, electric
cookers, ef fing automatic thisses and thats. Central heating!”
“I’ll settle for to ilets that flush,” she assured him. “That, and
hot water . Speaking of which, will you have a look at the
boiler? It’ s in a shed in the yard, and it’ s fifty years old if it’ s a
day . And we’ll want to replace the geyser in the upstairs bath,
too.”“Oh, aye.” The builder brushed crumbs from his shirt,
corked his Thermos flask, and rose ponderously to his feet.
“Come on, Angie, let’ s have a look, then.”
Brianna hovered suspiciously at the foot of the stair ,
listening for any sounds of riot  before following, but all was
well above; she could hear t he crash of building blocks,
evidently being thrown at the w alls, but no yells of outrage.
She turn ed to follow , just in tim e to see the builder , who had
paused to look up at the lintel.
“The ‘45, eh? Ever think what it’d be like?” he was saying.
“If Bonnie Prince Charlie had won, I mean.”
“Oh, in your dreams, Stan! He ’d never a chance, bloody
Eyetalian ponce.”
“Naw , n aw , he’d  have done it, sure, was it no for the ef fing
Campbells. T rai tors, aye? T o a man. And a woman, too, I
expect,” he added, laughing—from which Brianna gathered
that the helot’ s last name was very likely Campbell.
They passed on toward the shed, their ar gument growing
more heated, but she stopped, not wanting to go after them
until she had herself under control.
Oh, God,  she prayed passionately , oh, G od—that they might
be s afe! Please, please, let them  be safe.  It didn’ t matter how
ridiculous it might be to pray fo r the safety of people who had
been—who had to be—dead for more than two hundred years.
It was the only thing she could  do, and did it several times
each day , whenever she though t of them. Much more often,
now that they had come to Lallybroch.
She blinked back tears, and saw  Roger ’ s Mini Cooper come
down th e winding drive. The backseat was piled high with
boxes; he was fi nally clearing out the last bits of rubbish from
the Reverend’ s garage, salvaging those items that might have
value to someone—a dismayingly high proportion of the
contents.
“Just in time,” she said, a little  shaky , as he came up the
walk smiling, a lar ge box unde r his arm. She still found himstartling with short hair . “T en  minutes more, and I’d kill
somebody , for sure. Probably Fiona, for starters.”
“Oh, aye?” He bent and kissed her with particular
enthusiasm, indicating that he probably hadn’ t heard what
she’d said. “I’ve got something.”
“So I see. What—”
“Damned if I know .”
The box he laid  on the ancient  dining table was wood, as
well; a sizable c asket made of m aple, darkened by years, soot,
and han dling, b ut with the wor kmanship still apparent to her
practiced eye. It was beautifully made, the joints perfectly
dovetailed, with  a sliding top—but the top didn’ t slide, having
been at some p oint sealed with a thick bead of what looked
like melted beeswax, gone black with age.
The most striking thing abou t it, though, was the top.
Burned into the wood was a n ame: Jer emiah Alexander Ian
Fraser MacKenzie.
She felt a clenching in her lowe r belly at the sight of it, and
glanced up at R oger , who was tense with some suppressed
feeling; she could feel it vibrating through him.
“What?” she whispered. “Who is  that?”
Roger shook his head, and pulle d a filthy envelope from his
pocket.
“This w as with it, taped to the side. It’ s the Reverend’ s
handwriting, one of the little notes he’d sometimes put with
something to explain its significance, just in case. But I can’ t
say this is an explanation, exactly .”
The note was brief, stating merely that the box had come
from a defunct banking house in Edinbur gh. Instructions had
been stored with the box, stating that it was not to be opened,
save by the person whose nam e was inscribed thereon. The
original instructions had perished, but were passed on verbally
by the person from whom he obtained the box.
“And who was that ?” she asked.“No idea. Do you have a knife?”
“Do I have a knife,” she muttered, digging in the pocket of
her jeans. “Do I ever not  have a knife?”
“That w as a rhetorical question,” he said, kissing her hand
and taking the bright red Swiss Army knife she of fered him.
The bee swax cracked and split away easily; the lid of the
box, tho ugh, was unwilling to yield after so many years. It
took both of the m—one clutching the box, the other pushing
and pulling on t he lid—but finally , it came free with a small
squealing noise.
The ghost of a scent floated out; something
indistinguishable, but plantlike in origin.
“Mama,” she said involuntarily . Roger glanced at her ,
startled, but she gestured at him ur gently to go on. He reached
carefully into the box and rem oved its contents: a stack of
letters, folded and sealed with wax, two books—and a small
snake made of cherrywood, heavily polished by long handling.
She made a sm all, inarticulate  sound and seized the top
letter , pressing it so hard aga inst her chest that the paper
crackled and the wax seal split and fell away . The thick, soft
paper , whose fibers showed the  faint stains of what had once
been flowers.
T ears were falling down her face, and Roger was saying
something, but she didn’ t attend the words, and the children
were making an uproar upstairs, the builders were still ar guing
outside, and the only thing in th e world she could see were the
faded words on the page, written  in a sprawling, dif ficult hand.
December 31, 1776
My dear daughter ,
As you will see if ever you r eceive this, we ar e alive… .EPILOGUE II
 THE DEVIL IS IN THE DET AILS
W HA T’S THIS, THEN?” Amos Crupp squinted at the page
laid out in the bed of the press, reading it backward with the
ease of long experience.
“It is with grief that the news is r eceived of the deaths by
fir e … Where’d that come from?”
“Note from a subscriber ,” said Sampson, his new printer ’ s
devil, sh rugging as he inked the  plate. “Good for a bit of filler ,
there, I thought; General W ashington’ s address to the troops
run short of the page.”
“Hmph. I s’pose. V ery old news, though,” Crupp said,
glancing at the date. “January?”
“W ell, no,” the devil admitted, heaving down on the lever
that low ered the page onto the plate of inked type. The press
sprang u p again,  the letters wet and black on the paper , and he
picked the sheet of f with nimb le fingertips, hanging it up to
dry . “‘T was December , by the notice. But I’d set the page in
Baskerville twelve-point, and the slugs for November and
December are missing in that font. Not room to do it in
separate letters, and not worth the labor to reset the whole
page.”
“T o be sure,” sa id Amos, losing interest in the matter , as he
perused the last paragraphs of W ashington’ s speech. “Scarcely
signifies, anyway . After all, they’re all dead, aren’ t they?”Also by Diana Gabaldon
 (in order of publication)
  
OUTLANDER
DRAGONFL Y IN AMBER
VOY AGER
DRUMS OF AUTUMN
THE OUTLANDISH COMP ANION
 (non-fiction)
THE FIER Y CROSS
and
LORD JOHN AND THE PRIV A TE MA TTER